Aalborg Universitet Participatory Design with Dyslectics Vangeli , Panagiota ; Stage , Jan Published in : Interactive Mobile Communication Technologies and Learning DOI ( link to publication from Publisher ) : 10 . 1007 / 978 - 3 - 319 - 75175 - 7 Creative Commons License Unspecified Publication date : 2017 Document Version Accepted author manuscript , peer reviewed version Link to publication from Aalborg University Citation for published version ( APA ) : Vangeli , P . , & Stage , J . ( 2017 ) . Participatory Design with Dyslectics : Design and Evaluation of an Enhancing Reading Skills Tool . In M . E . Auer , & T . Tsiatsos ( Eds . ) , Interactive Mobile Communication Technologies and Learning : Proceedings of the 11th IMCL Conference ( pp . 317 - 330 ) . Springer . Advances in Intelligent Systems and Computing , Vol . . 725 https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1007 / 978 - 3 - 319 - 75175 - 7 General rights Copyright and moral rights for the publications made accessible in the public portal are retained by the authors and / or other copyright owners and it is a condition of accessing publications that users recognise and abide by the legal requirements associated with these rights . ? Users may download and print one copy of any publication from the public portal for the purpose of private study or research . ? You may not further distribute the material or use it for any profit - making activity or commercial gain ? You may freely distribute the URL identifying the publication in the public portal ? Take down policy If you believe that this document breaches copyright please contact us at vbn @ aub . aau . dk providing details , and we will remove access to the work immediately and investigate your claim . Downloaded from vbn . aau . dk on : november 24 , 2018 adfa , p . 1 , 2011 . © Springer - Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2011 Participatory Design with Dyslectics : Design and Evaluation of an Enhancing Reading Skills Tool Panagiota Vangeli , panvangeli @ gmail . com - Jan Stage , jans @ cs . aau . dk Aalborg University of Computer Science , Aalborg , Denmark ABSTRACT . Participatory Design ( PD ) was used successfully in many projects but the question is how participatory design works with people with a cognitive disorder like dyslexia . In this study , we analyzed observations on PD sessions with dys - lectic participants for developing designs of a reading software application by applying two participatory design methods : the IDEAS and CI methods . Further - more , we conducted online surveys to gather information on dyslectics partici - pants’ and their special - education teachers’ opinion regarding the participatory design process , methods and final designs . The results indicate that participatory design works effectively with dyslectic people provided the participation of Proxy Users to represent dyslectics , when it is necessary , the participation of an experienced on dyslexia facilitator who has the knowledge to address incidents caused due to dyslexia , and a proper allocation of the groups in proportion to the required tasks to prevent biases . Keywords : Design Techniques ; Cooperative design ; Participatory Design ; Par - ticipatory Design ( PD ) methods ; Dyslexia ; Interactive Design ; Cooperative In - quiry method ; IDEAS method ; Grounded Theory ; 1 INTRODUCTION To begin with the PD ( or alternatively cooperative - design , or brugerinddragende de - sign ) , it has its origins in Scandinavia [ 1 ] . PD is an approach that requires the involve - ment of products’ potential users as participants to the design process . It has been char - acterized as an innovative co - design methodology , since participants are focused on finding a solution through investigating a problem . The participants finally evaluate the solution in order to validate that the final solution meets their expectations [ 2 ] . PD methodology is being applied , to a large extent , in pedagogical experiments of Human - Computer Interaction ( HCI ) research [ 2 ] . Based on participatory design theory , this approach is an iterative process of ‘making’ things tangible by using verbal and visual tools , ‘saying’ ( discussing ) about existing related techniques - tools - practices , and ‘act - ing’ or alternatively ‘developing through practicing’ [ 3 ] . The usefulness of participatory design is that it increases the chance of the final de - sign to meet the expectations of the product’s users [ 4 ] . Moreover , by using participa - tory design method developers can avoid a common mistake of designing an applica - tion for themselves instead of designing it for the product’s users [ 5 ] . Throughout par - ticipatory design , participants express their thoughts and perspectives on a design prob - lem , and by cooperating with each other , they have the chance to build a design , which will finally correspond to their expectations and aims [ 6 ] . Dyslexia , as a learning disa - bility , prevents dyslectics to read or write fluently . This situation can deeply affect dys - lectics’ life by making often their adoption to the community difficult ; the result is for dyslectic to isolate themselves and lose the interest of living a normal life [ 7 ] . Studies have proved that assistive technology has helped dyslectics improve their reading skills [ 8 ] , [ 9 ] . However , the majority of studies and experiments have been focused on chil - dren , even though cognitive impairments , like dyslexia , last for a lifetime and a high number of adults struggle with reading or writing due to dyslexia [ 10 ] . The above fac - tors and the academic contribution of a research on participatory design with dyslectic participants were the mainspring of this empirical study . After a systematic research , we realized that studies on participatory design with dyslectic participants are very lim - ited , even though dyslexia is a cognitive impairment , which strongly affects dyslectics’ daily routine . With this study , we aim at contributing future studies on participatory design with dyslectic participants . 2 RELATED WORK For the purpose of this study , we have searched for methods that have been applied for participatory design involving people with other cognitive impairments than dyslexia , because of the fact that we were not able to find any method of participatory design with dyslectics . We selected two methods , namely IDEAS and CI methods , already used on participatory design for people with a certain cognitive impairment of Autism Spectrum Disorders ( ASD ) . Both selected methods consist of specific features appro - priate for people with cognitive impairments , such as ASD . At this point , it is important to make clear that there are many similarities between Dyslexia and Autism , since Dys - lexia and Autism are relative cognitive impairments . That means that people suffered by autism often are diagnosed with dyslexia [ 11 ] , [ 12 ] . To begin with , the two selected participatory design methods consist of the four steps of an Introduction , Discussion , Brainstorming and Design . The main difference between each other is that the IDEAS method makes use of High - tech materials , while the CI method is more traditional than the former and it focuses strictly on Low - tech materials . The presence of a facilitator is required in both methods . Below there is a thorough analysis of both participatory design methods , applied to autistic participants . In the IDEAS ( Interface Design Experience for the Autistic Spectrum ) method [ 13 ] , initially the facilitator makes an Introduction of the participatory design study to the participants by using High - tech materials , e . g . videos , to inform them about the concept of the study , its goals and the process . On the Discussion step based on the content of the Introduction , the participants have to discuss and criticize the existing technologies for users with ASD that they watched on the video and talk about the presented tech - nologies’ designs . Afterwards , in the Brainstorming step , the participants generate , write as many design ideas as possible for a new technology for them , which they grade then . The final step , based on the previous brainstorming step , is the Development of the top design idea , which has been rated by the participants as the most efficient design idea for the autistic participants . In this step , the participants can use High - tech materi - als , e . g . computers , internet , videos , smartphones etc . in order for them to be inspired to generate as much efficient paper designs as they can . For developing paper designs , facilitators provide the participants supportive Low - tech materials e . g . post - it notes , color pens , markers , and pre - printed plastic icons . Regarding the CI ( Cooperative Inquiry ) participatory design method [ 14 ] , the whole process is taking place without any use of High - tech materials . To be more precise , at the Introduction step the facilitator presents verbally one or two existing software ap - plications for users with ASD . The Discussion step is this , where the participants dis - cuss about the presented , by the facilitator , existing software applications for users with ASD . Then , at the Brainstorming step , they write their thoughts about the previously presented pieces of software for autistic users , and they notice likes , dislikes or possible improvements . The goal of this step is for the participants to generate a variety of design ideas through combining their likes , dislikes and proposals for improvements . After ending this step , participants write grade their ideas . On the final step of the Develop - ment of the design top rated design ideas , they create design paper prototypes for a new technology addressing to them . In this method , they are not allowed to use any High - tech material to get inspired . For developing paper designs , facilitators provide the par - ticipants supportive Low - tech materials e . g . post - it notes , color pens , markers , and pre - printed plastic icons . As we can see on the below table , the differences between the two participatory designs methods focus not only on the steps that they consist of , but also on the required Low - and High - tech materials on a case - by - case basis . 3 EMPIRICAL STUDY 3 . 1 Participants , Setting and Materials Participants . Three AOF dyslexia organizations agreed to participate in the empirical study by allowing us to observe how the two selected participatory design methods work with dyslectic participants . On observations three groups participated , which consisted of dyslectic adults aged from 20 to 57 years old . It is important to point out that the par - ticipants of Group _ 1 have been diagnosed with a high - level of dyslexia , which prevents them to read and / or write in comparison to the participants of other two groups . Groups’ special education teachers – Maria Hyttel and Rita Cassøe - played a crucial role , as peo - ple with knowledge of dyslexia impairment . They contributed the study by translating parts of the process both in Danish and in English , or even representing dyslectic par - ticipants , when it was necessary . Setting . All the sessions took place at participants’ schools of AOF - Vendsyssel of Hjallerup ( Group1 ) , AOF - Brønderslev ( Group2 ) , and AOF - Hjørring ( Group3 ) . AOF Danmark is a Danish educational organization , which provides free teaching to dyslectic adults to help them reduce their reading and / or writing difficulties , and improve their skills on reading - understanding , using and writing texts [ 15 ] . Materials . The materials used in participatory design process were of two kinds : ( 1 ) Low - tech materials , e . g . Post - it Notes , Plastic Icons , Highlighters , Colored Pens and Pre - Printed Graphical Design Elements , and ( 2 ) High - tech materials , e . g . a webcam software ‘CyberLink YouCam 5’ in order to record the development - sessions , laptops and mo - bile phones . The whole process took place by respecting the rules of the signed agree - ment between us and AOF organization regarding ethical considerations , in order for any participant not to be stigmatized by the process . 3 . 2 Procedure The sessions were conducted twice per week for a period of four weeks with Group _ 1 and Group _ 3 , and for a period of three weeks with Group _ 2 . All the sessions focused on applying the selected participatory design methods and observing participants in order for us to find out , how participatory design works with the dyslectic participants through the selected PD methods . The whole process took place with the dyslectic par - ticipants to create a range of designs for a reading software application , with the goal for the generated designs that will finally correspond to the dyslectic participants’ ex - pectations . The sessions were divided into two categories of the IDEAS - method ses - sions and CI - method sessions , and each category was separated into two parts of the Development part and Evaluation part . IDEAS - Method Sessions . The Development Part : As it was mentioned earlier , the IDEAS participatory design method consists of the four steps of Introduction , Discussion , Brainstorming and Design . We applied the IDEAS participatory design method based on the method’s guidelines [ 18 ] . In this par - ticipatory design method , all the three groups took part . First step : At the Introduction step , the facilitator introduced the research to the par - ticipants by explaining them , in parallel , the process that they had to follow and the purpose of the research . A visual timetable presented the parts , rules and duration of each step . Regarding the video , we selected a video in Danish language , which video presented seven software applications for dyslectic users , as the most popular software applications tailor - made to dyslectic users’ needs [ 19 ] . Regarding the video selection , we based on two main criteria of the language , which was the first and most serious criterion ; the audience of the video consisted only of Danish people , who might face difficulties on understanding a foreign language . The second criterion was the descrip - tiveness of the video regarding the seven software applications . Second step : At the Discussion step , the participants discussed with each other about what they liked or disliked on the software programs that they previously watched on the video . This discussion step was a preparation for the third step , since the discussion among the participants gave them the chance to think design ideas inspired by the pre - viously presented software programs that they watched . Third step : At the Brainstorming step , the participants received a pre - printed form ( a Low - tech material ) , where they had to write a design ‘Topic’ for a reading software application . Then they should generate and write a number of eight design ideas related to the topic . This task was based on the previous ‘Introduction’ and ‘Discussion’ steps . Afterwards , the participants should rate their design ideas in order for them to find the special one that they should use on the Design step . All the ‘Ideas Generation’ pre - printed forms included rating boxes , where participants had to write a grade from 1 ( ‘Terrible’ ) to 10 ( ‘Perfect’ ) . The top rated design idea ( s ) should be built in the final Design step of the process . In case that someone of the participants faced difficulties in generating ideas , the facilitator was allowed to support them by giving them an extra pre - printed form ( a Low - tech material ) with a design topic and four , instead of eight , design ideas boxes . The pre - written design topic and the less number of design - ideas boxes , could facilitate and encourage dyslectic participants to generate design ideas . Below you can see a sample of the pre - printed form as an extra support . If the situation became more difficult and some of the participants were not able to think any idea , the facilitator was allowed to provide them a stronger support by giving more detailed pre - printed form ( a Low - tech material ) . On this form , there were four pre - written design ideas of a specific design topic of a reading software application for dyslectic users . In this case , the participants had only to rate the design ideas , in order for them to draw it on the last step . Below you can see a sample of the extra supportive pre - printed form . Fourth step : At the Design step , the participants received Low - tech materials , like Post - it Notes , Plastic Icons , Highlighters , Colored Pens and Pre - Printed Graphical De - sign Elements and a pre - printed Interface Design Template ( See ) . With these Low - tech materials , they should build the best design idea ( s ) that came first among the total num - ber of the design ideas after the rating process . At this step , it was allowed for the par - ticipants to use High - tech materials , e . g . internet , videos , mobile phones , etc . in order for them to be inspired to generate as much efficient design paper prototypes as they could . CI - Method Sessions . The Development process : Based on the literature , the CI ( Cooperative Inquiry ) participatory design method consists of the four parts of Introduction , Discussion , Brainstorming and Design . As this is a more traditional participatory design method , there was neither visual support to the participants , nor any type of help provided by the facilitator or any High - tech source [ 13 ] , [ 14 ] . We applied the CI participatory design method based on the method’s guideline [ 18 ] . In the development - part of the CI - method participated only Group _ 1 and Group _ 3 . First step : At the Introduction step , the facilitator presented verbally two software programs for dyslectic users : The ‘IntoWords’ [ 20 ] and ‘CD - ORD’ programs [ 21 ] . We chose these two programs based on two criteria from our perspective . The experience was the first criterion , since the participants were experienced with one of the programs , the CD - ORD , since it is systematically being used by the AOF organization . The fact , that the participants already knew and were familiar with the design of the CD - ORD program , would facilitate them on the process of criticizing and finding its pros and cons . Regarding the ‘IntoWords’ software program is similar to the first one , but it was available only to iPhones . It is a fancy program but with less functions in comparison to the ‘CD - ORD’ . In our perspective , this selection could make the comparison between the two selected programs and , in parallel , the inspiration of design ideas easier for our dyslectic participants . Second step : At the Discussion step and before participants start discussing design ideas with each other , they received colored Post - it notes and a pre - printed form , namely ‘Sticky - notes’ ( Low - tech materials ) . On the pre - printed forms and by using the Sticky - notes , the participants should individually write likes , dislikes and / or any possi - ble improvements regarding the presented by the facilitator software programs / appli - cations for dyslectic users . Below you can see one participant’s Stick - notes form with his / her likes , dislikes and improvement ideas . We decided to give an individual character to this task to ‘protect’ the participants from any influence by their fellow - participants . Once they had finished this first part of the Discussion step , we came back to the cooperative character of the process , and the discussion among participants started . Participants discussed about the two presented programs and they expressed their opinions on them . Below we can see the dyslectic participants of a group to have started discussing on the presented software applica - tions . The purpose of this step was to prepare dyslectic participants for the next step of Brainstorming . When ending the Discussion step , the participants would have already in their mind a general picture about what they like , dislike or suggested improvements on the already presented software programs . Third step : In the Brainstorming step , the participants received a pre - printed form ( a Low - tech material ) and colored pens . The purpose of this step was to make participants think and write design ideas about a design for a new software application based on data from the former step of the Discussion . Below we can see participants while think - ing and writing design ideas on the given pre - printed form . Once participants completed the Brainstorming step , they rated their design ideas in order for them to find , which one or what kind of combinations among their design ideas could lead them to a final design of a reading software application for dyslectic users . Fourth step : At the Development step , the participants received Low - tech materials , like Post - it Notes , Plastic Icons , Highlighters , Colored Pens and Pre - Printed Graphical Design materials and a pre - printed Interface Design Template , where and with which they should make a design paper - prototype based on the design idea that came first after the grading process . In both participatory design methods , once the participants completed their design - prototypes put their prototypes on a mobile paper - prototype in order for them to present their work to their fellow - participants and us . In this way , we would be informed about how their designs work , and what kind of help could a specific design offer to dyslectic users . The Evaluation Part of IDEAS & CI methods : Based on literature , once both IDEAS and CI participatory design processes were completed by all the groups , the final designs should be evaluated by the participating groups [ 13 ] , [ 14 ] , [ 18 ] . Specifically , each group should evaluate another group’s gen - erated designs . All the three groups took part in the evaluation process . Below you can see an evaluation map for each group and a sample of the evaluation process . The av - erage grade of each final design was on a scale from 1 to 10 . These numbers reflect the level of the efficiency of the final designs for the participants . Based on results we cannot talk about one ideal final design , because the differences among the grades are barely noticeable , especially among the designs that got a high grade ( from 7 ‘Very Good’ to 10 ‘Perfect’ ) . Based on the designs’ grades and participants comments , the final designs being full of words and providing many choices got a low grade ( from 5 ‘OK’ to 6 ‘Good Idea’ ) , since dyslectics evaluated them as impractical or hard to use . Additionally , any foreign language feature was a strong reason for a final design to be graded low , since for in - stance an English logo might make difficult for dyslectics to find a useful app . Final designs’ simplicity proved crucial for the dyslectic participants considering those final designs’ grades with less functions , which got a grade from ‘8’ ( ‘Great Idea’ ) to ‘9’ ( ‘Excellent Idea’ ) . Final designs that explained distinctly their functions got a grade of ‘9’ ( ‘Excellent Idea’ ) . This made us clear that descriptiveness of designs’ func - tions was an important feature for the participants , since in other case the application may be distracting for them , as they said . Final Designs’ Evaluation by Greek participants : Based on a previous literature research [ 22 ] the difficulty - level of a language depends also on the language - type . The difference between opaque and transparent types of lan - guages affects the dyslectic peoples’ reading performance [ 23 ] , [ 24 ] . Therefore , we translated the Danish participants’ final designs from the opaque Danish language into a transparent one ( the Greek language in our case ) and asked a number of nine dyslectic participants from Greece to evaluate them . Based on the evaluation we would be able to see , if there is any difference on the designs grading by participants taking a trans - parent language . The evaluation took place through online surveys . We cannot talk about one top - ideal final design , since the differences between the grades are barely noticeable , especially among the majority of the high graded final designs ( from 7 ‘Very Good’ to 10 ‘Perfect’ ) . Designs with variable functions and colors got a higher grade in Greek language than in Danish one . The only design characterized as ‘Complete’ by the Greek dyslectic participants and taken the highest grade of ‘8 . 5’ ( higher than ‘Great Idea’ and lower than ‘Excellent Idea’ ) provided users variable functions and choices . On the other hand , Greek dyslectic participants did not show any preference on designs that were simple or with a small number of functions and colors . Conversely , a large number of them pointed out that such designs needed to become more attractive and they commented that 6 out of 8 designs need improvement . Similarly , to the Danish evaluation of the final designs , the designs explaining distinctly their functions got a better grade of ‘8’ ( ‘Great Idea’ ) . This made us clear that descriptiveness of designs’ functions was very crucial for the Greek participants – as it was for the Danish - since in other case the application may be distracting for them , as they claimed . 3 . 3 DATA COLLECTION Throughout the empirical study , we collected data from sessions with the three groups of AOF regarding the collaboration of the dyslectic participants , problems that partici - pants faced during the process , strengths of the empirical study during the process , and biases that may affect the evaluation of the final designs . We collected the participatory design data over a period of approximately one month . The data sources that we used were both qualitative ( observations , video recordings , notes ) and quantitative ( online surveys ) . As we have already mentioned , the participatory sessions were divided into two main categories of ( i ) Development and ( ii ) Evaluation . All the groups took part in both categories of sessions except of the Group _ 2 , which did not take part on the de - velopment session of the CI method due to the participants’ dyslexia level . When pos - sible , we collected data of the discussions and informal conversations among partici - pants , facilitator and special education teachers though both video - records ( in total 5h 47min ) and notes ( 18 hand - written pages ) . We also gathered data through notes of par - ticipants’ conversations on the final sessions for the design - evaluation and took photos of the final designs’ rating . The table below is an overview of the total hours of the development process video records transcribed by evaluation session by group . Fur - thermore , we used two online surveys to gather information from both the participants and their special - education teachers . The online surveys were open - ended and they helped us gather information related to our areas of attention . Below is an overview of the three online surveys’ focus : Online Survey 1 : with a focus on the participants’ opin - ion on the participatory design methods used and process . Online Survey 2 : with a focus on the teachers’ opinion on the participatory design , methods used and process . 4 DATA ANALYSIS Video recordings’ analysis was conducted in three phases inspired by the study of Nørgaard et al [ 25 ] . Initially , we transcribed the video recordings and partially trans - lated them from Danish to English . Then , we segmented the recordings based on four areas of attention : Collaboration , Problems , Strengths , and Biases . Finally , we analyzed the transcriptions by trying to find among them parts related to our areas of attention . We also kept notes and conducted surveys during the sessions , which we observed . The whole process of data analysis was based on the Grounded Theory and Chi’s proposals on analyses of verbal data [ 26 ] [ 27 ] . On the Findings section , we describe data aspects , which are important for the future studies to know when working on participatory de - sign with dyslectic participants . 5 FINDINGS As we mentioned on the previous section , we observed statements for the participants based on the four areas of attention : Collaboration , Problems , Strengths , and Biases . The areas of attention are described below with a focus on aspects that have been men - tioned as important for the future studies on participatory design with dyslectic partic - ipants . Abbreviations have been used instead of the whole words in the following terms : Participant ( P ) , Facilitator ( F ) , and Teacher ( T ) . 5 . 1 Collaboration After observing the dyslectic participants’ statements with a focus on the Collabora - tion area of attention , we found out that all the participants preferred to work as pairs or teams : GROUP _ 1 – IDEAS : P3 : “Can we work together ? ” ( P3 means as pairs ) F : “Of course you can . Why do you prefer to work together ? ” P2 : “Because it is easier for us when we work together . " GROUP _ 2 – IDEAS : F : “Would it be possible for you to work as pairs ? ” P10 : “I’m not sure…” T : “It is difficult for them to write anything . ” F : “Then…we could do that as workshop . All together . ” T : “Let’s do it all together ! ” To investigate the dyslectic participants’ preference on collaboration we conducted the Online Survey 1 , where all the participants answered that if they could choose how to work – with their fellow - participants or individually - they answered “with their fel - low - participants” . Furthermore , at the Online Survey 2 the special - education teachers corroborated the positive impact of collaboration for dyslectics . “They have been chal - lenged to think creatively in terms of design . And they learned to collaborate and to accept a new way of collaboration . ” The results indicate that participatory design with dyslectics works more effectively , when participants collaborating between each other than working individually . 5 . 2 Problems Throughout sessions , dyslectics seemed to enjoy the process to a large extent . How - ever , after observing their statements , we found out that in some cases participatory design can become stressful for dyslectic participants or even make them have light tantrums . P3 , P1 and P6 expressed the above statements under stress and even P6 had a light tantrum trying to ‘translate’ his / her design ideas into paper design prototype . These feelings may have been due to the difficulties facing dyslectics often on the writ - ing conceptual area [ 22 ] . On the other hand , they may have been because of the lack of High - tech materials , which enhanced their creativity on the IDEAS developing process . GROUP _ 1 - CI : P3 : " We have all the ideas in our mind but we cannot get it down on the paper ! ! ! ” P1 : " What we have to do is to draw the first page of an app , and write how it works and design it ? How could we also use this to get help from dyslectics ? I can’t draw it ! " GROUP _ 3 – CI : P6 : “I think that it is more important to come up with ideas that could become real . I cannot draw them , but is more important for me to give you my ideas . ” These results indicate that participatory design together with dyslectic people re - quires a facilitator experienced on dyslectics’ emotional tantrums in order to conduct the process smoothly . In other case , dyslectics may feel frustrated and or even stop taking part to the process . 5 . 3 Strengths On Strengths topic , which concerns the benefits of the participatory design for the participants , our findings focused on : Teachers as Proxy Users , and Facilitator experi - enced on dyslexia . From the beginning of the sessions the special - education teachers had a vital role on the participatory design process as Proxy Users . Especially for the group where the participants had a high level of dyslexia the presence of their teacher as a Proxy User was necessary in order to represent them , when they were not able to express their thoughts . GROUP _ 2 - IDEAS T : “First Idea : " One application with one function , text to speech and reader and a scanner that modify the text to speech” , “Fourth Idea : " A translation function would be a nice idea” , “Fifth Idea : Suggestions of words ' dictation and grammatical marks like comma , full stop etc . ” It was an advantage for the efficiency of the process the fact that teachers voluntarily took this role without even asking for this . The findings indicate that when dyslectic participants are diagnosed with a high - levelled dyslexia then participation of special - education teachers ( or person from their close environment ) as Proxy Users presence is deemed necessary , as they can contribute significantly the participatory design process . Similarly , it was advantageous for the smooth progress of the process the presence of an experienced facilitator , who was able to keep calm dyslectic people when being un - der stress , e . g . in a previous case , when participants got stressed or even they had light tantrums because they felt unable to carry through with design development . An experienced facilitator has the knowledge to maintain a friendly and cozy atmos - phere during the participatory design processes , and enhanced dyslectics’ productivity by making them feel always an important and crucial part of the process : GROUP _ 1 - CI F : “I don’t want to make you feel stressed or what else . It is ok for us to have your ideas . We can draw them for you ! We are here to enjoy the process ! ” GROUP _ 3 - IDEAS F : “Don’t worry , it’s a game ! Believe me ! " Don ' t worry , it ' s a game ! Believe me ! You don’t need to feel stressed . Just relax and enjoy the process . You just need to sketch and play with papers and pencils” Finding indicates that there is a requirement of a highly experienced person to ad - dress potential incidents in a way that will boost the process by encouraging dyslectics . 5 . 4 Biases On Biases area of attention , our findings focused on : - Dyslectics’ repetitive behaviors - Same participants on bot design and evaluation parts After observing the dyslectic participants’ statements with a focus on the biases area of attention , we found that some participants’ thoughts were affected by their fellow - participants’ repetitive behavior : GROUP _ 3 - IDEAS P6 : “I think that this has to be very very simple…” , “I have written here simple . Because that is like the essence that it has to be simple . ” , “This is a very very simple and actually it would help to be simple…” ( P6’s words during all the four steps of PD ) Repetitive behavior is a typical symptom that appears on dyslectics sometimes . Find - ing indicates that in such cases facilitators have to be prepared to address such repetitive behaviors in order to avoid biases . It is important to make dyslectic participants clear , when a participatory design step starts and ends , what includes each step and that in case that a step does not include a discussion then the discussion is not allowed in order for avoiding distractive factors . A strong bias caused by a ‘bad’ allocation of the tasks that each group should take . This ‘bad’ allocation biased the final designs’ evaluation process , since some of the participants , who took part in the evaluation process , had already taken part on development process . Under such a circumstance , it was difficult for them to be fair and impartial . Findings indicate that regardless the limited number of dyslectic participants , there should be a clear allocation of the tasks that each group of participants takes , in order for the process to be unbiased . 6 DISCUSSION In this section , we compare the results to related work , in regards to how participa - tory design works with autistics and dyslectic . Furthermore , we discuss a dyslectics’ preference on the IDEAS method . We also discuss the different expectations of dyslec - tics based on their language’s type . Finally , we discuss the implication that might have the involvement of dyslectic participants in designing technologies for dyslectic users . 6 . 1 Comparison of findings with related work . Participatory design proved as promising as it was with children with ASD [ 18 ] . However , in the case of participatory design with dyslectic people , the process showed a more smooth progress than in the case of participatory design with autistics , since in our case there was not any need for an extra support on the collaboration among dys - lectic participants . Additionally , even though dyslectics struggled sometimes on gener - ating design ideas , they did not make use of any extra pre - printed supportive form . Conversely , children with ASD received a support on both collaboration and generation of IDEAS method steps of participatory design [ 18 ] . 6 . 2 Comparison between IDEAS and CI methods . Regarding the selected participatory design methods ( IDEAS and CI ) , the IDEAS method seemed to be preferable to the dyslectic participants , since it worked better with them . Even though both participatory design methods gave the participants the chance to cooperate with each other , IDEAS method was proved that it enhanced dyslectics productiveness and creativity by providing them High - tech materials , in contrast to the CI method which made them struggle with generating ideas and developing of designs processes . 6 . 3 Participatory Design in Opaque and Transparent Languages . After comparing the final designs’ evaluations’ from Danish and Greek dyslectic participants , we realized that the Greek language , as a transparent and simpler than the Danish language , gives dyslectics the opportunity to use designs that are more complex . Conversely , opaque languages , like the Danish one , increase the level of the simplicity on designs , in order for them to be efficient and useful to Danish dyslectic users . 7 IMPLICATIONS The current research indicates that involvement of dyslectic people in designing soft - ware applications results in a tailor - made design of software applications guided by dyslectics’ expectations . Of course , participation of dyslectic users in participatory de - sign may have some implications for it . Any potential problems on collaboration , emo - tional tantrums , difficulties on expressing thoughts , limited imagination , and maybe a distracting focus on unnecessary details , may have implications on participatory design . 8 CONCLUSION In this paper , we have described an empirical study on participatory design with dyslectic participants . The main goal of this study was to examine how participatory design works with dyslectic participants . Overall and considering the findings , partici - patory design was beneficial for the dyslectic participants and worked effectively with them . Through participatory design , dyslectics had the chance to express their design ideas on a software application focused on dyslexia , and work on designing an applica - tion based on their expectations . Based on findings participatory design can work efficiently with dyslectics only un - der certain conditions : ( i ) collaboration among dyslectic participants is very important , since , in this way , dyslectics are more creative and productive , ( ii ) a Proxy User participation is also important , since a Proxy User can represent participants with a high level of dyslexia , when it is necessary , ( iii ) an experienced on dyslexia facilitator is necessary to take part to the process for avoiding incidences caused by dyslexia , and ( iv ) a proper allocation of the groups by tasks is required for preventing biases . Furthermore , based on dyslectics’ special education teachers , through participatory design dyslectics managed to increase their attention on a task though cooperation and participating to this empirical study was a great motivation for collaboration among them . In this study , one limitation that we faced was , in some cases , the language , which prevented us to communicate our thoughts efficiently and immediately to the partici - pants . Language , in some cases , was a problem , since the majority of the Danish par - ticipants did not speak English and we were not native speakers of the Danish language . This limitation had as result the delay of the process sometimes . A second limitation was our skills on participatory design , since it was the first time that we worked on such a study . This limitation may have skewed to some extent some of the results Regarding the future work , our dyslectic participants showed an interest in a future participation on a real software application’s development based on the current study , and the special - education teachers corroborated this suggestion as beneficial for their students . Based on this , future studies might focus on Participatory Development of the product with Dyslectics . Furthermore , it might be beneficial for a future research on participatory design with dyslectics to take into account factors like dyslectic partici - pants’ age groups , the participants’ level of dyslexia , and the other four conceptual ar - eas . In this way the results might generalized , something that is missed from this study . 9 ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS We would like to thank the AOF - Vendsyssel of Hjallerup , Brønderslev and Hjørring for agreeing to take part in this empirical study , the special - education teachers for their time , and all the dyslectic participants for sharing their valuable ideas with us . Finally , I would personally like to extend my gratitude to my supervisor Jan Stage for his valu - able feedback and guidance throughout the study period . 10 REFERENCES 1 . F . N . Stein , " Den Store Danske , " 10 . april 2017 . [ Online ] . Available : http : / / den - storedanske . dk / index . php ? sideId = 255134 . 2 . C . Spinuzzi , " The Methodology of Participatory Design , " Technical Communication , pp . 163 - 174 , 2005 . 3 . E . B . a . T . B . Elizabeth B . - N . Sanders , " A Framework for Organizing the Tools and Tech - niques , " 2010 . 4 . T . R . A . M . R . S . & . C . P . Val Mitchell , " Empirical investigation of the impact of using co - design methods when generating proposals for sustainable travel solutions , " in International Journal of CoCreation in Design and the Arts , UK , 2015 . 5 . I . Anić , " UX Passion , " Sunday November 2015 . [ Online ] . Available : http : / / www . uxpas - sion . com / blog / participatory - design - what - makes - it - great / . [ Accessed Thursday April 2017 ] . 6 . F . Labs , " Usability First , " Foraker Labs , 2002 - 2015 . [ Online ] . Available : http : / / www . usa - bilityfirst . com / usability - methods / participatory - design / . [ Accessed Thursday April 2017 ] . 7 . Asha , " National Joint Committee on Learning Disabilities , " Learning disabilities : Issues on definition , vol . 33 , no . Suppl . 5 , 1991 . 8 . L . Outhred , " Word Processing : Its Impact on Children’s Writing , " Journal of Learning Dis - abilities , vol . 22 , pp . 262 - 264 , 1989 . 9 . B . W . W . R . K . Olson , " Reading on the Computer with Orthographic and Speech Feedback : an Overview of the Colorado Remediation Project , " Reading and Writing : An Interdiscipli - nary Journal , vol . 4 , pp . 107 - 144 , 1992 . 10 . J . Lerner , Learning Disabilities : Theories , Diagnosis , and Teaching Strategies ( 7th ed . ) , Bos - ton : Boston : Houghton Mifflin Company , 1997 . 11 . Σ . Ν . D . Κ . ΨΥΧΟΛΟΓΟΣ , " ΤΟ ΦΑΣΜΑ ΤΟΥ ΑΥΤΙΣΜΟΥ : ΔΙΑΧΥΤΕΣ ΑΝΑΠΤΥΞΙΑΚΕΣ ΔΙΑΤΑΡΑΧΕΣ ΕΝΑΣ ΟΔΗΓΟΣ ΓΙΑ ΤΗΝ ΟΙΚΟΓΕΝΕΙΑ , " ΣΥΛΛΟΓΟΣ ΓΟΝΕΩΝ ΚΗΔΕΜΟΝΩΝ ΚΑΙ ΦΙΛΩΝ ΑΥΤΙΣΤΙΚΩΝ ΑΤΟΜΩΝ , ΛΑΡΙΣΑ , 2006 . 12 . J . M . O . J . S . Stella Tsermentseli , " Comparison of Form and Motion Coherence Processing in Autistic Spectrum Disorders and Dyslexia , " J Autism Dev Disord , vol . 38 , p . 1201 – 1210 , 2008 . 13 . L . Benton , " Participatory Design and Autism : Supporting the participation , contribution and collaboration of children with ASD during the technology design process , " University of Bath , Bath , 2013 . 14 . A . Druin , " Cooperative Inquiry : Developing New Technologies for Children with Children , " 1999 . 15 . " AOF , " AOF Danmark , [ Online ] . Available : https : / / aftenskole . aof . dk / temaer / ordblindeun - dervisning / . 16 . M . J . Muller , " PICTIVE - An Exploration in Participatory Design , " pp . 225 - 231 , 1991 . 17 . " CyberLink , " 2017 . [ Online ] . Available : https : / / www . cyberlink . com / in - dex _ en _ EU . html ? r = 1 . 18 . H . J . E . A . M . B . a . B . G . Laura Benton , " Developing IDEAS : Supporting children with autism within a participatory design team , " in CHI ' 12 , Texas , 2012 . 19 . K . Svendsen , " Youtube - Top 7 apps til ordblinde , " 2012 . [ Online ] . Available : https : / / www . youtube . com / watch ? v = 9fqf4MpyFj8 . 20 . " MV - NORDIC , " MV - NORDIC , [ Online ] . Available : https : / / www . mv - nor - dic . com / dk / produkter / intowords . 21 . " MV - NORDIC , " [ Online ] . Available : https : / / www . mv - nordic . com / dk / produkter / cd - ord / vejledninger . 22 . P . Vangeli , " Literature Research on Interaction Design of Systems for Dyslectic Users , " Aalborg University , Aalborg , 2017 . 23 . Giovanna , " Italo Bimbi , " Italo Bimbi , 22 November 2011 . [ Online ] . Available : http : / / www . italobimbi . it / en / blog / 57 - lingue - opache - e - lingue - trasparenti . html . [ Accessed 02 May 2017 ] . 24 . J . S . C . M . L . F . P . Madeira , " Assistive Mobile Applications for Dyslexia , " Procedia Com - puter Science , pp . 417 - 424 , 2015 . 25 . K . H . Mie Nørgaard , " What Do Usability Evaluators Do in Practice ? An Explorative Study of Think - Aloud Testing , " in Proceedings of the 6th conference on Designing Interactive systems , University Park , PA , USA , 2006 . 26 . S . Pace , " A Grounded Theory of the Flow Experiences of Web Users , " International Journal of HumanComputer Studies , vol . 60 , pp . 347 - 363 , 2004 . 27 . C . M . T . H . , " Quantifying Qualitative Analyses of , " The Journal of the Learning Sciences , vol . 6 , no . 3 , pp . 271 - 315 , 1997 . 28 . J . R . Judith Good , " CARSS : A Framework for Learner - Centred Design with Children , " 2006 . 29 . J . Nielsen , " TEACHING EXPERIENCED DEVELOPERS TO DESIGN GRAPHICAL USER INTERFACES , " CHI ' 92 , pp . 557 - 564 , 1992 . 30 . V . N . J . B . a . L . B . A . Large , " Bonded Design : A novel approach to intergenerational infor - mation technology design , " Library & Information Science Research , vol . 28 , pp . 64 - 82 , 2006 . 31 . K . H . Mie Nørgaard , " What Do Usability Evaluators Do in Practice ? An Explorative Study of Think - Aloud Testing , " vol . DIS , p . 9 , 26 - 28 June 2006 .