VERTEBRAL COLUMN AND THE SPINAL CORD 143 VERTEBRALCOLUMN AND THE SPINAL CORD VERTEBRAL COLUMN ( Fig . 5 . 1a ) The vertebral column consists of : seven cervical vertebrae , 12 thoracic , five lumbar , the sacrum consisting of five fused vertebrae and the coccyx formed by the fusion of four or more rudimentary vertebrae . The vertebral column transmits the body Fig . 5 . 1a Sagittal section of the vertebral column viewed from the side . Intervertebralforamina Fig . 5 . 1b Thoracic vertebra : ( i ) lateral view ; ( ii ) superior view . Pedicle weight on to the lower limbs through the sacroiliac joints . The spinal cord and its coverings and the spinal nerves are contained inside the vertebral canal . Curvatures The sinusoidal shape of the vertebral column is developed after birth . In the fetus the vertebral column is C shaped with the concavity facing anteriorly . After birth secondary curvatures with convexity develop in the cervical region when the child holds up its head and also in the lumbar region when the legs start weight bearing . INDIVIDUAL VERTEBRAE ( Fig . 5 . 1a , b , c , d ) Each individual vertebra consists of a body and a neural arch surrounding the vertebral foramen . The neural arch consists of a pedicle and a lamina on either side . The two laminae fuse to form the spinous process . The arch also has two transverse processes and a pair Cervicalvertebrae Thoracicvertebrae Lumbar vertebrae Sacrum Superiorarticularprocess Facetsfor ribs Transverseprocess Pedicle Inferiorarticularprocess Body Spinousprocess Facet for tubercleof rib Transverseprocess Superior articularprocess Lamina Spinousprocess Lamina Superior articular process Transverseprocess Body Vertebralforamen Intervertebraldiscs Spinousprocesses ( i ) ( ii ) 144 ATLAS OF HUMAN ANATOMY of superior and inferior articular processes for articulation with the adjacent vertebrae . The cervical vertebrae can be distinguished from lumbar and thoracic vertebrae as they have small bodies , small and bifid spines ( except C7 ) and the foramen transversarium in their transverse processes . The atlas ( C1 ) has no body but has two lateral masses connected by the anterior and posterior arches . The atlas articulates above with the occipital bone and below with the axis ( C2 ) . Nodding and lateral flexion movements take place at the atlantooccipital joints . Projecting upwards from the body of axis is the odontoid process ( dens ) which articulates with the anterior arch of the atlas . Rotation of the head occurs in the atlantoaxial joints . An individual thoracic vertebra can be identified by noting the presence of articular facets on the body and on transverse processes ( except T11 and T12 ) . Lumbar vertebrae are massive to withstand body weight . The lumbar vertebrae and the intervening discs contribute 25 % of the total length of the column . Surface anatomy The uppermost spinous process which is palpable is that of the seventh cervical vertebra known as the vertebra prominent as it has a long and non - bifid spine . The highest point of the iliac crest is in line with the interval between L3 and L4 spines . JOINTS BETWEEN THE VERTEBRAE ( Fig . 5 . 1e , f , g ) The bodies of the adjoining vertebrae are joined by the intervertebral disc whereas the facet joints ( zygopophyseal joints ) which are synovial joints link the articular processes . The major longitudinal ligaments connecting the vertebrae are the anterior and posterior ligaments connecting the bodies of the vertebrae , ligamentum flavum in between the adjacent laminae and supraspinous and interspinous ligaments connecting the spines . These joints , ligaments , as well as the muscles of the back , stabilise the vertebral column . Movements of the vertebral column are forward flexion ( 40° ) , extension ( 15° ) , lateral flexion ( 30° ) and rotation ( 40° ) . Rotation is maximum at the thoracic region whereas it is very limited in the lumbar spine . Flexion and extension on the other hand is limited in the thoracic region due to the presence of the rib cage . The intervertebral discs are fibrocartilagenous Fig . 5 . 1c Superior views : ( i ) lumbar vertebra ; ( ii ) cervical vertebra . Vertebralforamen Transverse process Transverseprocess Spinous process Body Pedicle Superior articular processes Lamina Body Superior articular facet Lamina Spinous process Vertebral foramen Pedicle Foramen transversarium ( i ) ( ii ) VERTEBRAL COLUMN AND THE SPINAL CORD 145 Posterior arch of atlas Fig . 5 . 1d Atlas , axis and the occipital bone — viewed from behind . Fig . 5 . 1e Sagittal section through lumbar vertebrae — lateral view . Dura mater Atlantooccipital joint Atlantoaxial joint Spinous process of axis Lamina of axis Occipital bone Foramen magnum Anterior arch of atlas Odontoid process ( of axis ) Foramentransversariumof atlas Groove for vertebral artery Supraspinous ligament Spinous process Interspinous ligament Intervertebral disc Anterior longitudinal ligament Body of lumbar vertebra Posterior longitudinal ligament Intervertebral foramen 146 ATLAS OF HUMAN ANATOMY structures which are strong to withstand compression forces but are also flexible to allow movements between the vertebrae . Each disc has two parts , a nucleus pulposus surrounded by annulus fibrosus . The former is a well - hydrated gel having proteoglycan collagen and cartilage cells . The annulus fibrosus is made of 10 – 12 concentric layers of collagen whose obliquity alters in successive layers . Peripherally the annulus fibrosus is attached to the vertebral bodies as well as to the posterior longitudinal ligament . The annulus resists the expansion of the nucleus pulposus . However when the nucleus degenerates it can bulge through and even break through the annulus to produce nerve compression . As the nucleus is situated more towards the posterior aspect of the disc it herniates posterolaterally into the intervertebral foramen causing nerve compression . A straight posterior herniation is often prevented by the firm attachment of the disc to the posterior longitudinal ligament . More commonly this happens in the lumbar part of the vertebral column and can cause back pain or pain radiating to the leg ( sciatica ) by compression of the nerve roots . The intervertebral foramina which transmit the spinal nerves and the accompanying radicular arteries ( which supply the spinal cord ) are on the lateral aspect of the vertebral column . Each foramen lying between Fig . 5 . 1f Anteroposterior radiograph of the lumbar spine and the sacroiliac joint . Sacroiliac joint Fig . 5 . 1g Lateral view of the lumbar spine . Body of 12th thoracic vertebra Right 12th rib Pedicles Spinous processes Transverse processes Lateral border of psoas major Facet joints Ala of sacrum Intervertebral foramen Pedicle L3 / L4 disc space Superiorarticular process Inferior articular process Facet joint Body of 5th lumbar vertebra L5 / S1 disc space Sacral promontory VERTEBRAL COLUMN AND THE SPINAL CORD 147 Fig . 5 . 1h Deep muscles of the back . Erector spinae and its three parts ( spinalis longissimus and iliocostalis ) exposed after removal of superficial muscles of the back . Erector spinae Fig . 5 . 2a Vertebral canal and the sacral canal opened up from the back to show the cauda equina . the pedicles of the adjoining vertebrae are bounded anteriorly by the vertebral bodies and the disc and posteriorly by the facet joints . Herniation of the disc , arthritis of the facet joints as well as bony irregularities in the pedicle or vertebral body can narrow the intervertebral foramen and cause nerve root compression . As there are eight cervical nerves and only seven cervical vertebrae the spinal nerves emerge through the intervertebral foramen in the following order . C1 – C7 spinal nerves exit above their corresponding vertebrae . C8 nerve passes through the foramen between C7 and T1 vertebrae . All subsequent nerves emerge below their corresponding vertebrae . THE SACROILIAC JOINT The sacroiliac joint is a synovial joint through which the body weight is transmitted from the sacrum to the hip bone . The articular surface of the sacrum and the corresponding surface on the ilium are irregular and they fit together closely . The reciprocal irregularities of the joint surfaces and the strong ligaments of the joint make this a stable joint . However strain and arthritis of the joint causes back pain as one gets older . SPINAL CORD AND MENINGES ( Fig . 5 . 2 ) The spinal cord extends from the lower end of the medulla oblongata at the level of the foramen magnum to the lower border of the first or the upper border of the second lumbar vertebra . The lower part of the cord is tapered to form the conus medullaris from which a prolongation of pia mater , the filum terminale , extends downwards to be attached to the coccyx . In the third Splenius capitis Longissimus Iliocostalis Spinalis Caudaequina Spinal cord Dura mater Roots of spinal nerves Dorsal ganglia on spinal nerves 148 ATLAS OF HUMAN ANATOMY month of intrauterine life , the spinal cord fills the whole length of the vertebral canal but from then on the vertebral column grows more rapidly than the cord . At birth the cord extends as far as the third lumbar vertebra and eventually reaches its adult level gradually . The three layers of the meninges envelop the spinal cord . The dura mater which is continuous with that of the brain extends up to the second sacral vertebra . The arachnoid mater lines the inner surface of the dura and pia mater is adherent to the surface of the cord . The subarachnoid space with the cerebrospinal fluid extends up to the level of the second sacral vertebra . The epidural space outside the dura contains fat and the components of the vertebral venous plexus . The spinal cord is suspended in the dural sheath by the denticulate ligaments . This ligament which has a serrated lateral edge forms a shelf between the dorsal and ventral roots of the spinal nerves . The cord has on its surface a deep anterior median fissure and a shallower posterior median sulcus . It also has , on either side , a posterolateral sulcus along which the dorsal roots of the spinal nerves are attached . The area of the spinal cord from which a pair of spinal nerves are given off is defined as a spinal cord Fig . 5 . 2b Spinal cord and meninges . Subarachnoidseptum Dura Ligamentumdenticulatum Subarachnoidspace Ventralroot Spinal nerve Dorsal root ganglion Dorsalroot Spinal pia mater Arachnoid Epiduralspace Adult cord Dural sheath Subarachnoidspace Filum terminale C1 2 3 4 5 S5 S4 S3 S2 S1 L5 L4 L3 L2 L1 T12 Fig . 5 . 2c The termination of the spinal cord in the adult , showing its variation . This also shows the termination of the dural sheath . segment . The cord has 31 pairs of spinal nerves and hence 31 segments — eight cervical , 12 thoracic , five lumbar , five sacral and one coccygeal . The dorsal root of the spinal nerve which carries sensory fibres has a dorsal root ganglion which has the cells of origin of the dorsal root fibres . The ventral ( anterior ) root which is motor emerges on the anterolateral aspect of the cord on either side . The anterior and posterior roots join together at the intervertebral foramen to form the spinal nerve , which on emerging from the foramen divides immediately into the anterior and posterior rami , each containing both motor and sensory fibres . The length of the nerve roots increases progressively from above downwards . The lumbar and sacral nerve roots below the termination of the cord form the cauda equina . VERTEBRAL COLUMN AND THE SPINAL CORD 149 Fig . 5 . 2d Sagittal MRI scan of the thoracic spine . Fig . 5 . 2e Sagittal MRI Subarachnoid space Spinal cord Anterior longitudinal ligament Dura mater and posterior longitudinal ligament Dura mater Body of vertebra Intervertebral disc Epidural space Ligamentumflavum Spinous process Supraspinous ligament Ligamentum flavum Dura mater Conus medullaris Intervertebral disc Body of L1 vertebra Subarachnoid space Dura mater and posterior longitudinal ligament Anterior longitudinal ligament Cauda equina Epiduralspace Spinous process Supraspinous ligament Sacral promontory 150 ATLAS OF HUMAN ANATOMY Blood supply of the spinal cord The blood supply of the spinal cord is derived from the anterior and posterior spinal arteries . The anterior spinal artery is a midline vessel lying in the anterior median fissure and is formed by the union of a branch from each vertebral artery . It supplies the whole of the cord in front of the posterior grey column . The posterior spinal arteries , usually one on either side posteriorly , are branches of the posterior inferior cerebellar arteries or arise directly from the vertebral arteries . They supply the posterior grey columns and the dorsal columns on either side . The spinal arteries are reinforced at segmental levels by radicular arteries from the vertebral , ascending cervical , posterior intercostal , lumbar and sacral arteries . The radicular arteries enter the vertebral canal through the intervertebral foramina accompanying the spinal nerves and their ventral and dorsal roots . These arteries may be compromised in resection of segments of the aorta in surgery of aneurysms . Internal structure of the spinal cord The grey matter containing the sensory and motor nerve cells are surrounded by the white matter with the ascending and descending tracts . In a transverse section the grey matter is seen as an H - shaped area containing in its middle the central canal . The central canal is continuous above with the fourth ventricle . The posterior ( dorsal ) horn of the grey matter has the termination of the sensory fibres of the posterior ( dorsal ) root . The larger anterior ( ventral ) horn contains motor cells which give rise to fibres of the anterior ( ventral ) roots . In the thoracic and upper lumbar regions there are lateral horns which have the cells of origin of the preganglionic sympathetic fibres . The epidural space is the interval between the vertebrae and the dura mater of the spinal cord . It contains the small arteries which supply the spinal cord and the vertebral venous plexuses . Veins in these plexuses ( Bateson’s veins ) contain no valves . Metastases from malignant tumours in the breast and the prostate can reach the vertebrae through the vertebral venous plexuses which are connected to the veins draining these organs . Introduction of analgesic solutions into the epidural space in the lumbar region ( epidural anaesthesia ) is commonly performed to relieve pain during childbirth . A sample of cerebrospinal fluid can be obtained by introducing a trochar and cannula into the subarachnoid space between the spinous processes of L3 and L4 , which is at the level of the highest point of the iliac crest . As the spinal cord ends higher up this procedure will not damage the cord .