 Abstract — Recent years have seen robust advancements in robotic platforms for multiple users , while HRI research is increasingly examining small group interactions . However , there has been little consideration of appropriate methodologies for design or development of human - robot interactions to foster and enhance context - specific shared goals , interactions , and experiences within larger communities . This paper presents a preliminary study using a community - centered approach to collective perceptions about shared social robots in a retirement village . It reveals novel aspects regarding people’s sense of community , community roles and purposes of robots . Findings indicate need of a framework for community robotics and further studies using a community perspective to bring rich insight into goal oriented and context specific multi - user experiences and interactions in HRI . I . I NTRODUCTION New developments in Social Robotics envision “family robots” ( e . g . Jibo , Buddy ) [ 1 ] [ 2 ] or robots for use by groups ( e . g . Baxter ) [ 3 ] , rather than individuals . Research in Human - Robot Interaction ( HRI ) has similarly started incorporating inter - group interactions , mostly in the context of small groups such as teams or task groups [ 4 ] [ 5 ] . As technology advances , multi - user robots could assist in social and public spaces [ 6 ] yet , current research does not exploit social robots to create engaging or empowering community interactions . Literature in sociology , anthropology and social psychology displays the importance of larger groups or ‘communities , ’ to human social experience . Communities are described in terms of scale , such as Dunbar’s [ 7 ] limitation of communities to 150 social ties based on the cognitive constraints of social networking , or Caporael’s [ 8 ] demes or communities of 50 - 200 based on a shared reality that allows for movement and co - ordination within , and maintenance of , the collective . The advent of remote communication has caused the numerical definition of community to become fuzzier , emphasizing the meaning of community as a group of members with shared characteristics , such as goals , space , or values [ 9 ] . The mention of community as a ‘social unit for collective interactions’ is rare in HRI studies , and often limited to the notion of community as a ‘field site’ for the recruitment of participants with certain commonalities [ 10 ] [ 11 ] or in the context of the HRI researchers [ 12 ] [ 13 ] . The small number of studies that have covered some aspects of the community , such as social interactions [ 14 ] [ 15 ] , mostly aim to inform the creation and advancement of robots for a particular task or effect . HRI research has yet to include discussion of Swapna Joshi is a PhD . candidate in the Informatics and Computer Science Department , Indiana University , Indiana , IN 47408 ( phone : 303 - 660 - 7874 ; e - mail : swapna @ indiana . edu ) . S . Šabanović is an Associate Professor in the Informatics and Computer Science Department , Indiana University , Indiana , IN 47408 ( e - mail : selmas @ . indiana . edu ) . communities as groups with shared values and norms , sense of identity and belonging , needs , commitment , emotional connection , and mutual support [ 9 ] . Addressing such communal aspects of social organization and experience in HRI would require context specific study and design of community interactions . Despite rising interest in group interactions , the community perspective has been largely ignored in HRI , outside of a few exceptions [ 16 ] [ 17 ] [ 18 ] [ 19 ] . Human - Computer Interaction ( HCI ) , includes the study of the design and use of collaborative and collective systems [ 20 ] that foster and enhance shared experiences , in particular through Community Informatics ( CI ) [ 21 ] , and can serve as a resource for bringing the community perspective to HRI . Studying multi - user robotics for communities would raise challenges that address social processes within the community such as mergers and divisions , issues related to community engagement and cohesion , changes in social structure over time , or struggles and conflicts . To be beneficially deployed in community settings for collective purposes , robots have to be not only technically robust but also aware of such community - level interactions . For example , to intensify interactions in a community , a robot design would need to consider community - level culture , values , trends and issues that could affect their social interactions . Such insight could expand HRI research contributions to collective behavior , action , and efforts to achieving larger goals in communities . This paper aims to bring HRI researchers’ attention to our need to engage with communities as a social unit for study and analysis of interactions using a community perspective . To begin exploring and gain insight into collective perceptions towards shared social robots , we conducted semi - structured interviews in a retirement village . We used a community centered approach to encourage participants to respond on behalf of their community . First , we gathered the meanings they associated with their community and its social life . Second , we queried their perceptions of shared social robots for their collective needs and analyzed them through a grounded theory approach . Here , we discuss the ways in which collective perceptions on behalf of the community reveal the context - specific community use of robots for collective goals . Our findings suggest several ways in which this retirement community , which turned out to be a strongly visual social network , could benefit from using shared robots to catalyze , support , and strengthen its social fabric . We also discuss the insights gained from collective perceptions of members using a community centered methodology . II . R ELATED W ORK – C OMMUNITY P ERSPECTIVE IN HRI A review of the literature [ 22 ] on socially assistive robots reveals that most studies were conducted in elder care contexts , primarily observing voluntary group interactions . These studies measured metrics such as psychological A Communal Perspective on Shared Robots as Social Catalysts Swapna Joshi , Member , IEEE and Selma Šabanović , Member , IEEE 2017 26th IEEE International Symposium on Robot and Human Interactive Communication ( RO - MAN ) Lisbon , Portugal , Aug 28 - Sept 1 , 2017 . 978 - 1 - 5386 - 3518 - 6 / 17 / $ 31 . 00 ©2017 IEEE 732 effects , behavioral changes , clinical recovery , rehabilitative healing , and stress relief as a result of interactions and communication of elderly with each other and with their caregivers , [ 22 ] mainly addressing individual outcomes . Surveys of metrics in HRI also confirm that studies are focused on individuals metrics , robot design or functioning of the technology [ 27 ] . There is less consideration for community needs and goals , or the kind of impact achieved on the collective , even in studies conducted in community settings . For example , one study observed social interactions and change in density of social networks [ 16 ] from robotic intervention , yet it was limited to measuring consequences for individuals resulting from increased social ties , rather than the impact or benefit to the community from such increased density in social networks . Thus , community - level metrics , such as collective efficacy , social cohesiveness , community conflict , feelings of belonging , or collective achievement or actions , are rarely discussed . Closer to the community perspective is a study of the mutual shaping of the personal robot PaPeRo and the community in an educational context [ 23 ] . It suggested how robot design could evolve while bringing community members together through a participatory robot customization process to address local needs . In another study [ 24 ] , researchers examined metrics such as community engagement and emphasized familiarizing non - experts for their everyday use of robotic and sensing technologies through a participatory co - design methodology . In this study , the participants worked to best address their collective concerns for improving conditions in the neighborhood through co - designing robots . These studies emphasize social and cultural factors in use , design , and evaluation of robots , by moving away from merely considering their acceptability or adaptation , and incorporating mutual shaping and co - production [ 25 ] . We aim to extend such understanding of mutual shaping to community goals , actions , and purposes . Finally , another study [ 26 ] in an eldercare setting examined the impact of social interactions at the organizational level using Paro , a seal robot , in a social context which gave participants a sense of sharing a social experience worthy of conversation with each other . It came to a unique conclusion that social robots were most effective when used as ‘shared artifacts , ' rather than as personal possessions [ 26 ] . We incorporate this into our understanding of robots as ‘shared social artifacts’ for the community . Since there has been some relevant research in the past that touched upon collective interactions in elder care community settings , for this exploratory study we conducted our research in a retirement village community . Our community - centered approach encouraged members to think on behalf of the entire community and revealed context - specific aspects to the sense of community and communalizing robots for collective purposes . Collective responses also indicated the acceptability of shared robots and gave insight into methodologies for conducting further research with a community perspective . III . M ETHOD - C OMMUNITY C ENTERED A PPROACH A . Context and Study Setting Social robots for the elderly are most commonly considered in caregiving settings [ 22 ] for their effects on health , well - being , and interactions as they provide physical assistance , companionship , and monitoring of health and safety for individuals . Our study , instead of looking at such individual metrics [ 27 ] , aimed to explore collective goals and interactions in the community , and robot roles and purposes to aid them . We performed our study in a retirement village in the Midwestern USA , a locally owned and operated not - for - profit organization . Being a place - based organizational community , it gave us convenience in reaching out to members and understanding their interactions outside the facility . With over 300 residents , staff and care providers , the facility offered nursing home , assisted and independent living , ample scheduled social events and activities within and outside the facility , and amenities such as a walking area , convenience store , library , and social center . B . Research Design This qualitative study involved one on one semi - structured interviews with community members . To familiarize the community with social robots , a flyer was posted at the facility and an introductory talk on ‘social robots’ was conducted in one of its ‘coffee’ events , showing pictures and videos of existing social robots doing different tasks in individual and group settings . For participants who did not attend the talk , the presentation was repeated before their interview . Interviews were conducted at participants’ convenience in their apartments or a conference room . Interviews lasted for about 30 minutes and included demographic and technology familiarity surveys at the end . Participation was open to all community members including residents and their friends and family , staff , and employees . 24 residents , age 80 - 104 ( 14 F , 10 M ) , 4 staff ( F ) , and 1 care provider ( M ) volunteered to participate . 8 participants were from assisted living , 13 from independent living and 3 from the nursing home . C . Community Centered Approach and Interview Tool While user - centered approaches focus on individuals as end - recipients , a community - centered approach [ 28 ] adapts this model to the collective . Communities offer an ideal site for analyzing overlaps between individuals and their collective perspectives . We believed this method suitable for retirement communities , as their members often face problems related to social disconnect . We followed this approach by including all willing social actors in the community in the study ; framing the interview questions to encourage thinking for the collective and focusing on community life and its goals while designing , conducting and analyzing the interviews . We provided a new vantage point to members as they discussed possible solutions to resolve community issues or achieve collective goals using robots . Questions were phrased as “Do you think most people here…” to make participants think for the collective , followed by mentioning “shared’ robots” for the member to think of shared uses of robots rather than personal needs . Interviews included some elements from Sense of Community [ 9 ] and Collective efficacy Questionnaires [ 29 ] , 733 modified for our context . E . g . do most people here know each other ? What does community mean to most people here ? OR How would most people here think of shared robots in the context of events or social meetings within the village ? We also asked participants to imagine roles and purposes their community would want for shared robots . C . Data Analysis We followed a grounded theory approach [ 30 ] to analyze data from interviews . Responses were sorted into codes , using a ‘line by line’ open coding method [ 31 ] , paying attention to repeating patterns for building ‘concepts , ' and were further grouped into ‘categories . ' We focused on themes related to social life and roles of shared robots in the community . IV . R ESULT AND M AIN T HEMES Our ‘technology familiarity survey , ' indicated that most participants had minimal to no prior familiarity with robots . All participants preferred face - to - face over technologically mediated communication in their everyday life and used landline phones . 11 participants either had a smartphone or iPad that they used for taking pictures or making video calls . None used any social media . Below are the main themes that emerged from our interview data , reflecting a communal perspective to shared social robots and novel meaning to a sense of community . A . Community Structure , Interactions and Goals Retirement villages are often looked upon merely as a place for older adults to live , get care and facilities . Participants suggested that , over time , this community nurtured a strong visual relationship based on co - presence . “ ( Community is ) When people smile and recognize you… Sometimes the person will disappear , and you do not know why . Because of confidentiality , nobody can say that , unless someone is a friend and knows , but when they come back , everybody joyfully greets them . ” ( P12 , F , 86 ) Many ( 16 ) participants mentioned experiencing and valuing a recent increase in the sociality in the community . “We have been here for 16 years , my wife and me . There were never too many people sitting in the ' social center . ' All of a sudden we got this new director and people are sitting out in the social center and chatting and talking… Moreover , there’s more sociability going on here than there was previously . ” ( P7 , M , 94 ) The village’s expansion was bringing in a significant number of new residents , which also disrupted participants’ sense of community . Most ( 18 ) participants expressed concerns about upcoming changes . “We are getting quite a bit of turnover , more than the last seven years . 40 % of our people are in their 90s . About once a week , somebody is passing away , and someone leaves… A lot of new people are coming in , and if they are not sociable in the beginning , you do not really get to know them very well . Moreover , you don’t know their names because of turnover . The community is about 150 people… they want to increase the population to 500 . That’s a lot to ask . ” ( P23 , F , 92 ) Participants ( 9 ) also described how living with people of diverse interests results in non - intimate social interactions and a large network of weak ties or less intense relationships with acquaintances . “We cross each other , and sometimes we just ask “Did you read this ? ” “Well here , read it” and “ok , ” and it could be something they have a common interest in and so forth , that might not be very interesting to you or me or anybody else here , but to them , yeah . And they would form a subgroup , but their reactions to one another would be a relatively narrow topic they are dealing with . ” ( P6 , F , 92 ) . Although participants were satisfied with the facilities and ample social opportunities offered by the village , they discussed other collective needs and goals to foster their community , such as : facilitating social interactions by knowing other people , especially new residents ( 22 nos . ) ; encouraging participation in community events by overcoming physical or health limitations , cognitive decline and forgetfulness from aging and low motivation ( 16 ) ; staying mutually connected to the world outside ( 14 ) ; being of use and value to the wider community ( 13 ) ; overcoming fluidity in community structure from rapid turnover of people ( 12 ) ; better managing clubs and committees ( 11 ) ; being informed and oriented to everyday community activities ( 11 ) ; staying in contact with family and friends outside of the facility ( 8 ) ; having intergenerational contact ( 4 ) . These goals were also reflected in their suggestions for ways in which robots could support the community . . B . Communal Roles for Shared Robots We encouraged participants to imagine shared robots for the community , and although most were skeptical about the additional cost that personal robots would entail , it seemed they had difficulty imagining sharing of robots and desired one for themselves . This often meant borrowing robots for personal use . While participants ( 6 ) mentioned that , besides events and activities , they enjoyed privacy in their apartment and did not appreciate people visiting them , they did not mind having robot’s presence in their personal space and time . Social roles outline expectations about behavior , actions , and interactions of individuals in a community [ 32 ] . Earlier studies discuss robot roles in group interactions [ 33 ] , yet , to our knowledge none have looked at community roles , such as bringing about social change or driving an initiative . Participant responses suggested some roles for shared robots , such as change agents or social workers [ 34 ] . For the scope of this study , we limit our discussion of shared roles of robots to those that do not present roles of a personal nature , such as personal assistant , or ‘servant . ' Most community members ( 23 ) imagined shared robots as ‘Social enablers’ helping cope with difficulties in achieving collective goals , enabling them to become active community members . They imagined robots as working with individuals and groups to overcome obstacles and serve diverse purposes , ranging from enabling the use of technology , to reaching out to the wider community . 734 “People out in the church , they have no idea of what’s going on here . It could help in this context too . . . . it’s just like advertising on the TV . . . ” ( P 8 , M , 86 ) . One particular community role envisioned by participants ( 17 ) was a robot as ‘visibility enabler , ' reminding them of people’s names , and helping them to overcome their hesitation to meet and leading to a stronger sense of community . “They ( robots ) recognize faces and one of our problems is that we can’t recognize who is a new resident or not and I am not sure that new residents will be comfortable among robot , but if the robot will pass by a resident who has been here longer and saw someone who’s face he didn’t recognize it would be able to introduce the older person . ” ( P 14 , F , 79 ) . “I could see a robot introducing people to their walking path . . . and some trees on campus that they have not figured out yet what they are . I think we can go back to what we were earlier , bond with nature , bond with other people , but using different technological tools . ” ( P 12 , F , 86 ) . Another role participants ( 13 ) desired for shared robots was as an ‘activity enabler’ as they perceived robots enabling of social activities by assisting them to overcome physical and cognitive limitations that come along with aging . “I do know from experience that meetings are something people forget as they are busy doing other things . The robot can certainly remind you “don’t forget you have a meeting at 2 o’clock this afternoon with whoever whatever” . I think it would be very useful in that respect . ” ( P 29 , M , 72 – Care provider ) . Finally , shared robots were also thought of as ‘networking enablers’ connecting people outside of and within the facility . “I was just thinking that might be a really neat thing . You know that ( name ) goes across the street and he reads to a group of children . . . . not all of us can do that . . . but . . . that might be a bridge and kids respond very well to this kind of thing . . I hope it will get them to respect and value elderly more . ” ( P26 , M , 84 ) . “There is a potential there . We got a lot of people here who come back from injuries from wars , lot of them have head injuries and psychological injuries , there are needs . . . and these robots could fit into those , … They can work with people that are shut up , they don’t communicate , those that are tied up within themselves …to open up . ” ( P 18 , M , 90 ) . Participants ( 18 ) imagined shared robots as ‘resourceful facilitators’ creating lines of communication , channeling activities and resources towards the resolution of community issues by facilitating to transform social life and its structures of power , authority , and hierarchy . “They could use it like web . . . telling them what’s going on there and what source to do it . ” ( P 13 , M , 86 ) . “I think robot might actually help improve conversations . There are hardly 10 instances of conversations in 1 hour . They are sitting there , but not talking . They might interact with him just like a real human being . ” ( P 16 , M , 94 ) . “So many people have a lot to offer , and they don’t realize it . But if you could stimulate them… Coz they all have experience . If you could have somebody ( robot ) that could spur things , or even on the spot go and make people talk , maybe they will respond . ” ( P 18 , M , 90 ) . “When seniors come together for a meeting , many times they get distracted , and nobody tells the background , in a concise and realistic way . There are a lot of people who try to speak , and they don’t remember half the facts . You can give them a pre - meeting written report , which nobody reads . If robots are programmed for particularly complex meetings… . So is there any way in which a robot can be pre - programmed such as there is no personal bias and can then interrupt and tell that this not what is up for discussion today ? ” ( P 29 , M , 72 – Care provider ) . While such robots in leadership roles were a common imagination , some ( 5 ) thought of them like fellow residents facilitating social interaction and activities through mere participation . “People in the lounge , you know , they work on jigsaw puzzles . I don’t know if the robot can better than human mind at picking them . They would love to have somebody helping them for the jigsaw puzzle . ” ( P 23 , F , 92 ) . Expectations from robots for facilitating community level activities also included unique perspectives ; one participant imagined a robot to advocate for intra - community issues by conveying or carrying complaints to the organization and expected it to be more efficient than reaching out personally . Often participants ( 16 ) i magined shared robots as ‘community organizer’ responsible for building and strengthening the community towards their goals by organizing and initiating collective actions . “I could see a robot , … this is something I always wanted to do but I have never found a way to do it , is start a history club . And we have people very interested in history … so if you can let the robot come up with specific topics and then it would be simply starting the topic and then continue the conversation with whoever is in the club as to whatever that historically was . I can see that as being kind of a neat thing . ” ( P 27 , F , 55 – Staff ) Others ( 4 ) imagined robots bringing the community together to work towards shared goals of increasing intergenerational or inter - community contacts , encouraging community members for volunteering activities or events . Unlike enabler robots that provide support from behind the scenes to mobilize actions , these robots were imagined as the ‘face’ of the community . Participants ( 2 ) thought this would be a result of the robot’s knowledge and ability to reach out to and understand every community member , similar to some of the staff in the village . “They would be able to bring us together in ways that we haven’t before . But also because they would broaden our horizons and anytime your horizons are broadened that gives you something new to talk about , so you are not the same rot all the time , ” ( P 14 , F , 79 ) . 735 One participant also thought it could provide the visibility that is required to keep the community together . Most commonly people ( 12 ) imagined shared robots building the community by expanding their sense of visual membership , organizing and initiating collective actions . “Yes , it would increase the intergenerational contact , and I do think the director of this place , she has changed this place subtly , she is so visible . … She ' s out all of the time , and if she sees somebody who needs coffee , she will say I will get you a cup of coffee . People are really startled with that , and I think she’s helping a great deal . Now maybe if a robot could pick up some of those duties , it would make the place seem very attractive . ” ( P 19 , F , 94 ) . Two participants imagined robots as ‘relentless social workers’ reaching out to otherwise difficult people , thus benefiting from current technological shortcomings of robots emotional intelligence . “I don’t know if there is any way that the person who is dealing with robots can tell it that I am not interested and I want you out ( smiles ) . . . yes that’s going to be a while for being developed . They don’t quit . They don’t get discouraged . They can continue with it coz they are relentless . ” ( P 24 , M , 81 ) . Other community roles included robots as ‘inanimate taskmasters’ working in the community spaces , freeing up the existing staff from ‘mundane’ repetitive work devoid of social interactions . “Let’s take the dining room . I would never want to see the robot take the place of the waitress , because . . there is a personality in a human being . However we have been short on bus boys and girls , a robot could come up to the table and pick up your plate . There is not much interaction there . There is a plate there . And they go pick it up . ” ( P 26 , M , 84 ) . Apart from such “menial jobs that do not require a human touch , ” they imagined robots as ‘social enthusiasts’ especially for spreading information across the community . “ I see robots ; it is doing primarily routine things… if I say write something that I want to be distributed to everyone in this group here , the robot can do that very nicely and will do it well and accurately , other kinds of things that might be a waste of time . ” ( P 7 , M , 94 ) . A few additional roles included robots as ‘community experts’ or intelligent and informed beings in the community with expertise and authority to guide them about varied topics from religion to technology . “You talk to it and ask questions , and it looks things up for you . . . . but like we have a Bible study in this space . . . and frequently there are questions that " oh I have got a reference room in the home , but I don’t have it here . . . . or for new people coming in . Wanting to know or understand about or ask about procedures or whatever and it could be . . . some of the questions . . . I would want to ask . . . That a robot could answer . . . I would be embarrassed asking the competent adults because I would feel so incompetent . . ” ( P 14 , F , 79 ) . “We could set the robot down to help the residents fix when they get stuck with their computers or technology . If the robot could answer these questions for people and instead be a partner with human beings . . . ” ( P7 , M , 94 ) Finally , our data revealed two kinds of responses , robots in mundane , repetitive jobs requiring no social interaction , and those that are prominently social . Most often participants imagined robots in different community spaces and scenarios in both sociable and inanimate machinelike like roles . For dining time or space they thought of shared robots serving or doing dishes , doing machine - like repetitive work , but for the social center , they imagined shared robots as facilitating or initiating social interactions . These multi - tasking roles resembled those of some staff members . From all the roles discussed above , the social roles of enabler , facilitator , and organizer especially reflected the community’s positive outlook towards robots as potential catalysts of a sense of community and social change . C . Insights into Community Centered Methodology and Design Our community - centered approach allowed us to reflect on efficient ways of developing robots for and conducting research in this community , as well as the challenges and limitations associated . Older participants in assisted living had particular difficulty imagining how robots might help their community . Six of our participants requested skipping one or another part of the interview due to not being able to ‘think . ' “I can’t think of any right now . . . But if you leave and when you get outside the hall… maybe I can think of some…It’s a lot… it’s a lot to take in… and to process…” ( P3 , F , 84 ) . Other responses suggested ways to conduct research and familiarize the community with robots . “Because we all want to bring in something that would be successful , we would have to give a thought as to how slowly we would roll it out , so the news would slowly flow through the residents because they talk and if we could get them started in some fashion that was very successful , that would move from there . ” ( P 27 , F , 55 – Staff ) Sabanovic [ 25 ] earlier discussed several participatory and contextually grounded methods including ‘understanding the social context early before designing the robot , through close observation of the environment and social relationships . ' We suggest our community - centered approach as a way of gaining an initial understanding of the social context . Our approach also encouraged participants to imagine robotic interventions or design to resolve most issues in the social life of their community they discussed . We view this as their ‘ active participation in conceptualization’ of shared robots for their community . “Well . . . I think it ( robot ) would get them ( new people ) to get acclimated much faster , you know . I suppose they can show pictures of people that are already here . I don’t know . . . that could be . ” ( P 26 , M , 84 ) . “If the robot , very discreetly is able to remind them about the names of people and places and things like that it will actually facilitate participation quite well . Lot of the times , people feel embarrassed and don ' t participate 736 because they forgot what the name of the person is and how to address . Yes , there have to be very innovative ways , studying the life of aging community and then program the robot according with a purpose . ” ( P 29 , M 72 - Care Provider ) . “Robots can create situations where interaction among each other is easier , you know , they can , because you need somebody to introduce a topic , subject or give background information and then people start reacting . ” ( P7 , M , 94 ) Responses also revealed indicators of acceptability of shared social robots for the community . Participants were not very open to the notion of robots for social interactions , yet frequently described fellow residents as “like a robot” or wondered if robots can perform some of the tasks of current social actors in the community . It implies that , despite some negativity , it was not unusual for them to imagine “real” experiences as sociality with robots . “Well she ( technical helper staff ) has only so many hours in the day , and so many days she works , so she is getting caught in lots of directions , okay . . . . . A robot could easily do ( her work ) you know . ” ( P28 , F , 51 - staff ) Even though many participants acknowledged their unfamiliarity with robots , most imagined verbal interactions with the robot like human - human interactions . Often they imagined themselves interacting with the robot with an element of comfort and humor . " Robot , can you get me that coffee please ? " " Robot , don’t drink my coffee on the way " “If a robot calls my name in the social spaces , well yeah , I would stop to see what it wanted . : ) hahaha . . . . or I will say , I am late for my meeting , I will talk to you later . . . . hahaha , I am usually late . ” ( P24 , M , 81 ) We discuss further , how these findings and responses reflect the strength of community perspective towards robot design , understanding community roles for shared social robots and research design and implementation . V . D ISCUSSION - I NSIGHTS FROM C OMMUNITY P ERSPECTIVE Social characteristics , structures , and purposes could vary within organizational and context based communities . Our study shows that robots could be used to achieve community goals , but further research will be needed to understand how robots can support different community contexts , such as place - based , interest based , practice - based , action based or circumstance based communities . Researchers can also study ways in which robots can help community members perceive and pursue community initiatives and goals , to understand its implications for robot design for the collective . While our method incorporated one - on - one interviews , other approaches such as conducting community discussions or experiments utilizing robots for collective purposes in different and scenarios could address various aspects of community life . Regarding robot design , the community perspective suggests that the evaluation of an individual’s interaction with the robot cannot be the primary measure of success in a community context . Rather , contribution to community goals might be more appropriate . For example , a robot may not be central to any community member , but might still provide information or affect community dynamics in such a way that it fulfills its role . This may point design away from focusing on the individual social characteristics of a robot or improving one - on - one human - robot interaction , towards more communally appropriate design factors and improvements in community level interactions . Also , with different contexts and scales of communities , it could be appropriate to consider multiple robots addressing to different subgroups or even different aspects in the community . Many of our participant responses provide clear design guidelines for this specific community . Since this retirement community was held together by visual relationships , robots in the social spaces could enhance visual bonds by discreetly reminding people of each others’ names , sharing information and assisting members in knowing each other and having a greater sense of belonging . The stated expansion plans of the organization could , in particular , provide a fertile environment for the use of shared robots by its members . The community perspective also helped in understanding the robot’s shared position in the community structure , as we discussed social roles . For this community , shared robots conceptually meant individuals are sharing its possession or having personal ties with the robot , alongside seeing it as a community belonging . We speculate this will affect the way people organize , act upon common issues , or engage with the robot and see it as a future direction for research on the effect of robots on community structures . This community seemed a vast network of weak ties with close - knit subgroups that held a higher sense of belonging . Based on our participant’s responses , robots could become an integral part of this network , often acting as social catalysts . These indications of social acceptability suggest shared robots could be close to individuals or sub - groups , while also bringing them together to strengthen the network and accommodate future changes . Acceptability of any new technology might require careful implementation for the community to absorb it , especially in our context of aging and elderly . Responses approve the suitability of ‘shared’ or community owned robots , since personal robots may bring in additional unwanted costs for the retired residents . Apart from this , since shared social robots would be in the social spaces of the community , people’s contact with the robot will be limited , and fear of losing the human element that participants often discussed may subside . Participants suggested that getting familiar with robots will become easier with a shared technology , so members can help each other to get familiarized with it . They thought that , for the community to accept a robot , it would be best to introduce it to a small group and let them spread the word or let few people talk about their experience with the robot . This also resembles findings from an earlier implementation of the therapeutic robot Paro in a nursing home , where positive interactions with the robot were mostly brought on by hearing about or viewing others interact positively with the technology [ 17 ] . Our study presented the first step towards shared robots for community purposes . Whether and how this new community - centered approach generalizes to other 737 communities beyond the discussions in this study , opens up potential areas for future research and points to need for a framework of community robotics that will provide guidelines to practicing the approach . VI . C ONCLUSIONS We presented how our community - centered approach encouraged participants to think about shared robots on behalf of the community and gave insights into community life and collective perceptions . By understanding the community as the end user and social unit for analysis , we explored community - level metrics that revealed novel meanings to sense of community and community roles for shared robots . We expect this paper to serve as a starting point for research to move beyond individuals and groups to the notion of community , realize and explore the community perspective , engage it into study and design of shared social robots , and discover affordances to support community goals and actions . A CKNOWLEDGMENT Our thanks to Westminster Village ( WV ) Retirement Community , Bloomington , IL , especially Barbara Nathan , CEO and Susan Andresen , Director , for their support and enthusiasm , and to our participants for sharing their unique perspectives . Special thanks to Dr . Uday Deoskar , MD for his insights and introducing us to WV . R EFERENCES [ 1 ] Breazeal , Cynthia . “JIBO , The World ' s First Social Robot for the Home . ” Jibo , Inc . Indiegogo , n . d . Web . 27 Feb . 2016 . [ 2 ] " BUDDY : THE COMPANION ROBOT ACCESSIBLE TO EVERYONE - " , Bluefrogrobotics . com , 2017 . [ Online ] . Available : http : / / www . bluefrogrobotics . com / en / buddy - your - companion - robot / . [ Accessed : 19 - Mar - 2017 ] . [ 3 ] Anon . Baxter | Redefining Robotics and Manufacturing | Rethink Robotics . Retrieved December 5 , 2016 , from http : / / www . rethinkrobotics . com / baxter / [ 4 ] Jung , Malte F . , et al . " Robots in Groups and Teams . " Companion of the 2017 ACM Conference on Computer Supported Cooperative Work and Social Computing . ACM , 2017 . [ 5 ] Robert , Lionel P . , and Sangseok You . " Human - Robot Interaction in Groups : Theory , Method , and Design for Robots in Groups . " Proceedings of the 18th International Conference on Supporting Group Work . ACM , 2014 . [ 6 ] Vaquero , T . , Mohamed , S . C . , Nejat , G . , and Beck , J . C . , 2015 . The Implementation of a Planning and Scheduling Architecture for Multiple Robots Assisting Multiple Users in a Retirement Home Setting . In Workshops at the Twenty - Ninth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence . [ 7 ] Dunbar R . I . M . , Evolutionary Anthropology , 6 ( 1998 ) 178 . [ 8 ] Caporael , Linnda R . " The evolution of truly social cognition : The core configurations model . " Personality and Social Psychology Review 1 . 4 ( 1997 ) : 276 - 298 . [ 9 ] McMillan , David W . , and David M . Chavis . " Sense of community : A definition and theory . " Journal of community psychology 14 . 1 ( 1986 ) : 6 - 23 . [ 10 ] Tobis , Sławomir , et al . " Occupational Therapy Students’ Perceptions of the Role of Robots in the Care for Older People Living in the Community . " Occupational Therapy International 2017 ( 2017 ) . [ 11 ] Valentí Soler , Meritxell et al . “Social Robots in Advanced Dementia . ” Frontiers in Aging Neuroscience 7 ( 2015 ) : 133 . PMC . Web . 19 Mar . 2017 . [ 12 ] Margheri , Laura , and Cecilia Laschi . " The Soft Robotics Week : A New Yearly Event for the Community of Soft Robotics . " ( 2015 ) : 88 - 90 . [ 13 ] Madhavan , Raj , et al . " Draft standards development of two working groups . " IEEE Robotics and automation magazine ( 2014 ) . [ 14 ] Sehili , M . , Yang , F . , Leynaert , V . , and Devillers , L . , 2014 . A corpus of social interaction between nao and elderly people . In 5th International Workshop on Emotion , Social Signals , Sentiment & Linked Open Data ( ES3LOD2014 ) . LREC . [ 15 ] Kanda , T . , Hirano , T . , Eaton , D . , and Ishiguro , H . , 2004 . Interactive robots as social partners and peer tutors for children : A field trial . Human - computer interaction 19 , 1 , 61 - 84 . [ 16 ] Wada , K . and Shibata , T . , 2009 . Social Effects of Robot Therapy in a Care House - Change of Social Network of the Residents for One Year . JACIII 13 , 4 , 386 - 392 . [ 17 ] Šabanović , S . , Bennett , C . C . , Chang , W . - L . , and Huber , L . , 2013 . PARO robot affects diverse interaction modalities in group sensory therapy for older adults with dementia . In Rehabilitation Robotics ( ICORR ) , 2013 IEEE International Conference on IEEE , 1 - 6 . [ 18 ] Mutlu , B . and Forlizzi , J . , 2008 . Robots in organizations : the role of workflow , social , and environmental factors in human - robot interaction . In Human - Robot Interaction ( HRI ) , 2008 3rd ACM / IEEE International Conference on IEEE , 287 - 294 . [ 19 ] Nourbakhsh , I . , Acedo , C . , Sargent , R . , Strebel , C . , Tomokiyo , L . , and Belalcazar , C . , 2010 . GigaPan conversations : Diversity and inclusion in the community . In Proceedings of International Scientific Conference on Technology for Development , United Nations , Lausanne , Switzerland [ 20 ] Peters , Anicia N . , et al . " Community centered collaborative HCI design / research in developing countries . " CHI ' 14 Extended Abstracts on Human Factors in Computing Systems . ACM , 2014 . [ 21 ] Gurstein , M . , 2007 . What is community informatics ( and why does it matter ) ? Polimetrica sas . [ 22 ] Kachouie , R . , Sedighadeli , S . , Khosla , R . , and Chu , M . - T . , 2014 . Socially Assistive Robots in Elderly Care : A Mixed - Method Systematic Literature Review . International Journal of Human - Computer Interaction 30 , 5 , 369 - 393 . DOI = http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1080 / 10447318 . 2013 . 873278 . [ 23 ] Koike , S . , Sugawara , M . , Kutsukake , Y . , Yamanouchi , S . , Sato , K . , Fujita , Y . , and Osada , J . , 2009 . Social Robot Design . In International Conference on Human Centered Design Springer , 462 - 467 . [ 24 ] DiSalvo , Carl , et al . " The Neighborhood Networks project : a case study of critical engagement and creative expression through participatory design . " Proceedings of the Tenth Anniversary Conference on Participatory Design 2008 . Indiana University , 2008 . [ 25 ] Šabanović , S . , 2010 . Robots in society , society in robots . International Journal of Social Robotics 2 , 4 , 439 - 450 . [ 26 ] Kidd , C . D . , Taggart , W . , and Turkle , S . , 2006 . A sociable robot to encourage social interaction among the elderly . In Proceedings 2006 IEEE International Conference on Robotics and Automation , 2006 . ICRA 2006 . IEEE , 3972 - 3976 . [ 27 ] Murphy , R . R . and Schreckenghost , D . , 2013 . Survey of metrics for human - robot interaction . In 2013 8th ACM / IEEE International Conference on Human - Robot Interaction ( HRI ) IEEE , 197 - 198 . [ 28 ] Magee , L . , Scerri , A . , and James , P . , 2012 . Measuring social sustainability : A community - centred approach . Applied Research in Quality of Life 7 , 3 , 239 - 261 . [ 29 ] Carroll , John M . , et al . " Community collective efficacy . " Handbook of Research on Socio - Technical Design and Social Networking Systems . IGI Global , 2009 . 608 - 619 . [ 30 ] Strauss , A . and Corbin , J . M . , 1997 . Grounded theory in practice . Sage . [ 31 ] Khandkar , S . H . , 2009 . Open coding . University of Calgary 23 . [ 32 ] Sarbin , T . R . and Allen , V . L . , 1954 . Role theory . Handbook of social psychology 1 , 223 - 258 . [ 33 ] Dautenhahn , K . , 2003 . Roles and functions of robots in human society : implications from research in autism therapy . Robotica 21 , 4 , 443 - 452 . DOI = http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1017 / s0263574703004922 . [ 34 ] Parton , Nigel . Social theory , social change and social work . Psychology Press , 1996 . 738