White - matter functional networks changes in patients with schizophrenia Yuchao Jiang a , Cheng Luo a , * , Xuan Li a , Yingjia Li a , Hang Yang a , Jianfu Li a , Xin Chang a , Hechun Li a , Huanghao Yang a , Jijun Wang b , Mingjun Duan a , c , Dezhong Yao a , * * a The Clinical Hospital of Chengdu Brain Science Institute , MOE Key Lab for Neuroinformation , Center for Information in Medicine , School of Life Science and Technology , University of Electronic Science and Technology of China , Chengdu , 610054 , China b Shanghai Key Laboratory of Psychotic Disorders , Shanghai Mental Health Center , Shanghai Jiaotong University School of Medicine , Shanghai , 200030 , China c Department of Psychiatry , Chengdu Mental Health Center , Chengdu , 610054 , China A R T I C L E I N F O Keywords : White - matter functional network Schizophrenia Resting - state functional connectivity fMRI A B S T R A C T Resting - state functional MRI ( rsfMRI ) is a useful technique for investigating the functional organization of human gray - matter in neuroscience and neuropsychiatry . Nevertheless , most studies have demonstrated the functional connectivity and / or task - related functional activity in the gray - matter . White - matter functional networks have been investigated in healthy subjects . Schizophrenia has been hypothesized to be a brain disorder involving insuf ﬁ cient or ineffective communication associated with white - matter abnormalities . However , previous studies have mainly examined the structural architecture of white - matter using MRI or diffusion tensor imaging and failed to uncover any dysfunctional connectivity within the white - matter on rsfMRI . The current study used rsfMRI to evaluate white - matter functional connectivity in a large cohort of ninety - seven schizophrenia patients and 126 healthy controls . Ten large - scale white - matter networks were identi ﬁ ed by a cluster analysis of voxel - based white - matter functional connectivity and classi ﬁ ed into super ﬁ cial , middle and deep layers of networks . Evaluation of the spontaneous oscillation of white - matter networks and the functional connectivity between them showed that patients with schizophrenia had decreased amplitudes of low - frequency oscillation and increased functional connectivity in the super ﬁ cial perception - motor networks . Additionally , we examined the interactions between white - matter and gray - matter networks . The super ﬁ cial perception - motor white - matter network had decreased functional connectivity with the cortical perception - motor gray - matter networks . In contrast , the middle and deep white - matter networks had increased functional connectivity with the super ﬁ cial perception - motor white - matter network and the cortical perception - motor gray - matter network . Thus , we presumed that the disrupted association between the gray - matter and white - matter networks in the perception - motor system may be compensated for through the middle - deep white - matter networks , which may be the foundation of the extensively disrupted connections in schizophrenia . Introduction Although traditional structural techniques , such as diffusion - tensor imaging ( DTI ) , can successfully explore the details of white - matter structural architecture , they fail to uncover neural activity and relevant functions that occur inside white - matter . Over the past two decades , resting - state functional MRI ( fMRI ) , which is based on blood oxygen level - dependent ( BOLD ) signals , has been a useful technique for inves - tigating the functional organization of human gray - matter in cognitive neuroscience and clinical neuropsychiatry ( Biswal et al . , 1995 ; Meda et al . , 2014 ) . However , it has limited use for evaluating the functional organization of the cerebral white - matter since white - matter has very few postsynaptic potentials that give rise to BOLD signals ( Logothetis et al . , 2001 ) . Recently , accumulated works have found that the functional activity in white - matter corresponds to related demands in multiple tasks , including perceptual , language and motor tasks ( Fabri and Polo - nara , 2013 ; Fabri et al . , 2011 ; Gawryluk et al . , 2011 , 2014 ) . These studies demonstrated the existence of functional brain activity in the white - matter , and suggested that the functional information from white - matter can be detected by fMRI . Recently , the functional organization of white - matter in resting - state has received greater attention ( Ding et al . , 2018 ; Ji et al . , 2017 ; * Corresponding author . University of Electronic Science and Technology of China , Second North Jianshe Road , Chengdu , 610054 , China . * * Corresponding author . University of Electronic Science and Technology of China , Second North Jianshe Road , Chengdu , 610054 , China . E - mail addresses : chengluo @ uestc . edu . cn ( C . Luo ) , dyao @ uestc . edu . cn ( D . Yao ) . Contents lists available at ScienceDirect NeuroImage journal homepage : www . elsevier . com / locate / neuroimage https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . neuroimage . 2018 . 04 . 018 Received 21 November 2017 ; Received in revised form 26 March 2018 ; Accepted 9 April 2018 Available online 13 April 2018 1053 - 8119 / © 2018 Elsevier Inc . All rights reserved . NeuroImage 190 ( 2019 ) 172 – 181 Marussich et al . , 2017 ; Mezer et al . , 2009 ) . For example , Ji and col - leagues observed the power of resting - state BOLD signals associated with white - matter density and fractional anisotropy ( Ji et al . , 2017 ) . Mar - ussich and colleagues evaluated white - matter functional connectivity and found that fMRI carried functional information about white - matter activity and connectivity at rest ( Marussich et al . , 2017 ) . In addition , Peer and colleagues clustered all the white - matter voxels into several functional networks in a cluster analysis and found a correspondence between white - matter and gray - matter functional networks as well as DTI tracts ( Peer et al . , 2017 ) , further suggesting the intrinsic functional organization of white - matter . Previous studies provided evidences of the existence of white - matter functional networks , and examined their reli - ability and reproducibility in healthy controls . However , most impor - tantly , few study investigated white - matter functional networks in patients with brain disorders . Many brain disorders , including schizo - phrenia , epilepsy , Alzheimer ' s and Parkinson ' s disease , are characterized by white - matter abnormalities ( Bohnen and Albin , 2011 ; Caso et al . , 2015 ; Dong et al . , 2017a ; Xue et al . , 2014 ) . Therefore , it is important to explore the altered white - matter functional networks in these disorders , and this also contributes to the understanding of psychiatric pathological mechanisms on neuroimage ( Kressel , 2017 ; Lui et al . , 2016 ) . Schizophrenia has been hypothesized to be a psychiatry disorder involving insuf ﬁ cient or ineffective communication between large - scale functional networks and cortical - subcortical pathways ( Chen et al . , 2017 ; Dong et al . , 2017b ; Duan et al . , 2015 ; Friston , 1998 ; Huang et al . , 2017 ; Jiang et al . , 2017 ) . Morphometric studies have revealed gray - matter volume atrophy in the cortices and subcortical regions in schizophrenia ( Jiang et al . , 2018 ) . As white - matter is composed of densely myelinated axons interconnecting gray - matter regions , abnor - malities of white - matter have long been proposed to be possible factors in the pathophysiology of schizophrenia ( Burns et al . , 2003 ) . Accumulated studies have frequently implicated alterations in white - matter tracts in schizophrenia using DTI ( Holleran et al . , 2014 ; Karlsgodt et al . , 2008 ; Smith et al . , 2006 ) . In the functional aspect , previous PET studies showed relatively increased glucose metabolic rate in white - matter in schizo - phrenia ( Buchsbaum et al . , 2007 ) . However , few functional study in schizophrenia uncovered dysfunctional connectivity within the white - matter . In this study , large - scale white - matter functional networks were characterized by applying a cluster analysis to the resting - state fMRI data of white - matter in a large cohort of patients with schizo - phrenia ( N ¼ 97 ) and healthy controls ( N ¼ 126 ) . We estimated the functional connectivity within the resulting white - matter functional networks and their relationship to the known gray - matter functional networks . In addition , we investigated the spontaneous activity within the white - matter functional networks . By comparing the differences in the white - matter functional networks between patients with schizo - phrenia and healthy controls , this study linked the white - matter func - tional abnormalities with the pathophysiology of schizophrenia . Material and methods Participants This study included ninety - seven patients with schizophrenia ( gender : 68 males and 29 females ; age : 41 (cid:2) 11 . 5 years ) and 126 healthy controls ( gender : 84 males and 42 females ; age : 38 (cid:2) 14 . 9 years ) matched to the patient group by age and gender . According to the Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders , Fourth Edition ( DSM - IV ) , each patient was diagnosed at the Clinical Hospital of Chengdu Brain Science Institute . Subjects with a history of brain injuries , substance - related disorders , and major medical or neurological disorders were excluded . All schizophrenia patients were taking antipsychotics medication . The chlorpromazine equivalent dose of the antipsychotics was 324 . 5 (cid:2) 157 . 1 mg / day . Positive and Negative Syndrome Scale ( PANSS ) was used to assess the symptom severity . Healthy controls with a history of psychiatric disorder in a ﬁ rst - or second - degree relative were also excluded due to the potential genetic effects . The study was approved by the Ethics Committee of the Clinical Hospital of Chengdu Brain Science Institute , and written informed consent was obtained from all the subjects . Image acquisition Imaging data were collected using a 3 - T MRI scanner ( GE DISCOVERY MR 750 , USA ) at the University of Electronic Science and Technology of China . High - resolution T1 - weighted images were acquired by a three - dimensional fast spoiled gradient - echo ( T1 - 3D FSPGR ) sequence . The main scanning parameters were as follows : repetition time ( TR ) , 6 . 008 ms ; echo time ( TE ) , 1 . 984 ms ; ﬂ ip angle , 90 (cid:3) ; ﬁ eld of view , 25 . 6 cm (cid:4) 25 . 6 cm ; matrix size , 256 (cid:4) 256 ; and slice thickness , 1 mm ( no gap ) . Resting - state functional images were acquired using a gradient - echo echo - planar imaging ( EPI ) sequence . The main scanning parame - ters were as follows : TR , 2s ; TE , 30 ms ; ﬂ ip angle , 90 (cid:3) ; ﬁ eld of view , 24 cm (cid:4) 24 cm ; matrix size , 64 (cid:4) 64 ; slice thickness , 4 mm ( no gap ) , slice number , 35 ; and scanning time , 510 s ( 255 vol ) . Participants were instructed to remain awake , close their eyes , and try not to think of anything . All the subjects con ﬁ rmed that they did not fall asleep during scans . Data preprocessing T1 images were segmented into white - matter , gray - matter and cere - brospinal ﬂ uid ( CSF ) using SPM8 ' s New Segment algorithm and then normalized to the MNI template . The functional image preprocessing steps included the following . ( 1 ) The ﬁ rst ﬁ ve time points were removed for signal equilibrium and to allow the participants to adapt at to the scanning noise . ( 2 ) Slice - time correction . ( 3 ) Realignment to the mean functional image was performed using a trilinear interpolation with de - grees of freedom and coregistered with the anatomical image . Subjects with maximum motion > 2 mm or 2 (cid:3) were excluded . ( 4 ) Removal of linear trends to correct for signal drift . ( 5 ) Nuisance signal ( including 24 - parameter motion correction and the mean CSF signals ) was regressed out . The 24 motion parameters included six rigid - body motion parame - ters ( x , y and z translations and rotations ) and their values at the previous time point and the 12 corresponding squared values . The white - matter and global brain signals were not regressed out because this could have eliminated signals of interest . ( 6 ) Temporal scrubbing using motion “ spikes ” ( framewise displacement ( FD ) > 1 ) as separate repressors was performed . The scrubbing effectively censored the data at the spike without further changing the correlation values . ( 7 ) Band - pass ﬁ ltering ( 0 . 01 – 0 . 15 Hz ) was performed to reduce non - neuronal contributions to BOLD ﬂ uctuations . ( 8 ) To avoid mixing white - matter and gray - matter signals , spatial smoothing was performed separately on the white - matter or gray - matter masks . In detail , the individual T1 segmentation images were coregistered to the functional space for each participant for the identi ﬁ cation of white - matter or gray - matter masks ( the threshold was set at 0 . 5 ) . The individual functional images were smoothed ( FWHM ¼ 4 mm ) separately on the two masks . Finally , we used only the smoothed data from the white - matter mask . ( 9 ) Normalization to the standard EPI template and resampling to 3 mm 3 voxels were performed . Steps 1 – 8 were performed on each subject ' s original sampling space in order to distinguish white - matter and gray - matter signals at the indi - vidual level . Preprocessing was performed using SPM12 ( www . ﬁ l . ion . ucl . ac . uk / spm ) , DPABI ( http : / / rfmri . org / dpabi ) and open MATLAB scripts ( http : / / mind . huji . ac . il / white - matter . aspx ) . After motion - correction , 93 schizophrenia patients and 125 healthy controls were included in this study . As a previous study reported that even slight head - motion could lead to increased long - range connectivity , we examined group - level head - motion differences between the schizophrenia patient group and healthy control group using the two - sample t - test . In addition , group - level statistical analysis showed no difference ( Supplementary 1 ) . Y . Jiang et al . NeuroImage 190 ( 2019 ) 172 – 181 173 Clustering white - matter networks in the white - matter mask The analysis pipeline was similar to the original study by Peer and colleagues ( Peer et al . , 2017 ) and is brie ﬂ y described here . To obtain uni ﬁ ed white - matter and gray - matter masks at the group - level , we used the T1 image segmentation results . For each subject , we identi ﬁ ed each voxel as white - matter , gray - matter or CSF based on its maximum prob - ability from the segmentation results . This resulted in individual white - matter , gray - matter and CSF masks . These masks were averaged across all the subjects , and the percentage of subjects that were classi ﬁ ed as white - matter or gray - matter were obtained . For white - matter , the voxels with a percentage > 60 % were identi ﬁ ed as the group - level white - matter mask . We also applied two stricter masks ( percent - ages > 70 % and 80 % ) to obtain the group - level white - matter mask ( Supplementary 2 ) . Then , the subcortical areas based on the Harvard - Oxford Atlas ( Desikan et al . , 2006 ) were removed from the white - matter mask to correctly classify the deep brain structures ( Lorio et al . , 2016 ) . Finally , the T1 white - matter mask was coregistered to the functional space and resampled for functional image processing . In addition , for gray - matter , a loose threshold of percentage > 20 % was used to identify as white - matter mask containing almost all the gray - matter voxels . Considering the computational complexity , an interchanging grid strategy was used to subsample 18 , 591 voxels in the white - matter mask to 4 , 623 nodes ( Craddock et al . , 2012 ) . In detail , any second voxels along the rows and columns were taken and then shifted by 1 between the two slices . Pearson ' s correlation coef ﬁ cients between each white - matter voxel and subsampled node were computed and resulted in a correlation pattern ( 18 , 591 (cid:4) 4 , 623 matrix ) for each subject . An identi ﬁ ed clustering approach was used to determine the white - matter networks . K - means clustering ( distance metric - correlation , 10 replicates ) was performed on the averaged correlation matrices . As the clustering was performed on the whole group of unequal numbers of patients and controls , the clus - tering results may be more heavily weighted to the controls and lead to bias . The correlation matrix was ﬁ rst averaged across each group of subjects and then averaged again across the two groups . To obtain the most stable number of networks , the numbers of clusters ranging from 2 to 22 and the stability were measured for each cluster number according to previously described methods ( Buckner et al . , 2011 ) . We randomly divided the whole connectivity matrix ( 18 , 591 (cid:4) 4 , 623 ) into four folds ( 18 , 591 (cid:4) 1 , 155 ) . For each number of clusters , the same clustering computation was performed on each fold separately . To measure the similarity between the clustering in different folds , an adjacency matrix was calculated and then compared using Dice ' s coef ﬁ cient . The averaged Dice ' s coef ﬁ cient was used to assess the stability of the number of clusters . Functional connectivity of white - matter networks To measure the functional connectivity between individual white - matter networks , we extracted the average time courses from all ten white - matter networks by averaging across all voxels belonging to one network for each subject . The Pearson ' s correlation between the average time courses of any two white - matter networks was computed for each subject and transformed to the Fisher z score for the statistical analysis . In addition , to measure the relationship between white - matter and gray - matter networks , we also calculated the Pearson ' s correlation coef ﬁ - cient between each white - matter network and gray - matter network . These correlation coef ﬁ cients were averaged across subjects to obtain the group - level matrix that represented the relationship between white - matter and gray - matter networks . Considering that many studies showed reliable and reproducible clustering results using gray - matter signals ( Power et al . , 2011 ; Shirer et al . , 2012 ) , this study did not clus - ter the gray - matter networks but used a previously obtained gray - matter network atlas that was generated by the same clustering procedure for the gray - matter voxels . The gray - matter network atlas closely corresponded to the cortical network subdivisions ( Buckner et al . , 2011 ; Power et al . , 2011 ; Yeo et al . , 2011 ) . The two - sample t - test was per - formed on the z - score of Pearson ' s correlation coef ﬁ cient to show the differences between the schizophrenia and healthy control groups ( P < 0 . 05 , Bonferroni corrected ) . Spontaneous activity of white - matter networks The spontaneous low frequency ﬂ uctuations of BOLD signal in the resting state have been identi ﬁ ed as biological measures of baseline spontaneous activity ( Fox and Raichle , 2007 ) . In this study , signal am - plitudes in each frequency were calculated using the Fourier transform ( MATLAB ' s FFT function ) for each white - matter network of each subject ( Supplementary 3 ) . The resulting frequency graphs were separately averaged across subjects in the schizophrenia and healthy control groups for each network . Considering that the spontaneous oscillatory ampli - tudes in the different frequency bands may re ﬂ ect distinct neural activ - ities and physiological states ( Meda et al . , 2015 ; Yu et al . , 2014 ) , we further divided the whole band ( band A : 0 . 01 – 0 . 15 Hz ) into two sub - bands ( band B : 0 . 08 – 0 . 15 Hz ; band C : 0 . 01 – 0 . 08 Hz ) . For each white - matter network and sub - band , the averaged amplitude was ob - tained in each subject and then used to compare the differences between the schizophrenia and healthy control groups using ANOVA . Correlations between altered white - matter networks and clinical variables We further investigated the relationships between clinical variables ( disease duration and PANSS scores ) and altered functional connectivity as well as low frequency spontaneous ﬂ uctuations . The Pearson ' s corre - lation analyses were performed for the schizophrenia group controlling for the effect of antipsychotic medications ( chlorpromazine equivalent dose of the antipsychotics ) . In addition , we also investigated the rela - tionship between the effect of antipsychotic medications and white - matter network functional indices . Analysis for the potential in ﬂ uence of gray - matter signals Although this study was cautious in its data analysis , such as smoothing the white - matter and gray - matter separately and preprocess - ing in individual spaces , it is still of concern whether the correlation or clustering pattern of the white - matter fMRI signals were simply due to the leakage of the gray - matter fMRI signal , particularly with regard to the partial volume effect . We provided several ways to evaluate the potential in ﬂ uence of gray - matter signals as much as possible and re - examined the consistency of the results . First , a relatively stricter mask was applied to identify white - matter voxels ( Supplementary 2 ) . Second , the correlations between the different white - matter clusters after regressing out the gray - matter signals were examined ( Supplementary 4 ) . Finally , we also eval - uated the effects of spatial distance between the white - matter and gray - matter networks ( Supplementary 5 ) . Results White - matter functional networks To identify white - matter functional networks with distinct connec - tivity pro ﬁ les , we adopted a clustering approach based on white - matter resting - state voxel - wise correlation matrices . Dice ' s coef ﬁ cient showed that the most stable segregation number was ten ( Supplementary 6 ) ; thus , we applied ten networks to conduct following analyses . Consistent with the previous study ( Peer et al . , 2017 ) , the K - means clustering method identi ﬁ ed a symmetrical , interlaced pattern of functional net - works inside the white - matter areas that was divided into three layers ( super ﬁ cial , middle and deep ) ( Fig . 1 ) . The detailed information regarding the ten networks is presented in Table 1 . Y . Jiang et al . NeuroImage 190 ( 2019 ) 172 – 181 174 Functional connectivity within white - matter networks To investigate the relationship among individual white - matter networks , we measured the functional connectivity between any two white - matter networks ( Fig . 2a ) . Two sample t - tests revealed that compared with the healthy control group , the schizophrenia group showed increased functional connectivity between the occipital network and the cerebellar , anterior corona radiate , posterior cal - losum and deep networks ( Table 2 and Fig . 2b ) . In addition , the schizophrenia group exhibited increased functional connectivity be - tween the pre / post - central network and the anterior corona radiate , posterior callosum , superior corona radiate and deep networks ( Table 2 and Fig . 2b ) . Functional connectivity between white - matter networks and gray - matter networks To examine the relationship between white - matter and gray - matter networks , we also quanti ﬁ ed the correlation using the functional con - nectivity between each white - matter network and all the gray - matter networks ( Fig . 2c ) . Speci ﬁ c white - matter networks exhibited highly functional connectivity ( r > 0 . 8 ) with gray - matter networks ( Table 1 ) . In particular , some super ﬁ cial networks , such as the occipital , cere - bellar , orbitofrontal , pre / post - central and tempofrontal networks , were mostly correlated to their overlying gray - matter networks , which may suggest a role of close - range communications within these networks . The correlation between two distant networks was considered to be long - range communication . In addition , the deep networks were weakly correlated to all the gray - matter networks . Comparisons be - tween the schizophrenia and healthy control groups showed decreased functional connectivity between the white - matter occipital network and the gray - matter visual network , the white - matter orbitofrontal network and the gray - matter temporal - orbitofrontal network , and the white - matter superior temporal network and the gray - matter ventral attention network in the schizophrenia group ( Table 3 and Fig . 2d ) . There was some increase in functional connectivity between the oc - cipital , pre / post - central and cerebellar networks in the schizophrenia group ( Table 3 and Fig . 2d ) . Spontaneous activity in white - matter networks To further investigate the spontaneous activity of white - matter Fig . 1 . White - matter functional networks . 1 . Occipital network ; 2 . Cerebellar network ; 3 . Anterior corona radiate network ; 4 . Orbitofrontal network ; 5 . Pre / post - central network ; 6 . Posterior callosum network ; 7 . Tempofrontal network ; 8 . Deep network ; 9 . Superior corona radiate network ; 10 . Superior temporal network . Table 1 White - matter functional networks . Number White - matter network Layer Correlation with gray - matter network ( r value ) 1 Occipital network Super ﬁ cial Visual network ( 0 . 94 ) 2 Cerebellar network Super ﬁ cial Cerebellum anterior network ( 0 . 83 ) 3 Anterior corona radiate network Middle Dorsal attention network ( 0 . 79 ) 4 Orbitofrontal network Super ﬁ cial Ventral attention network ( 0 . 61 ) 5 Pre / post - central network Super ﬁ cial Sensori - motor network ( 0 . 90 ) 6 Posterior callosum network Middle Default - mode network ( 0 . 70 ) 7 Tempofrontal network Super ﬁ cial Default - mode network ( 0 . 90 ) 8 Deep network Deep Cerebellum posterior network ( 0 . 49 ) 9 Superior corona radiate network Middle Dorsal attention network ( 0 . 62 ) 10 Superior temporal network Super ﬁ cial Sensori - motor network ( 0 . 73 ) Y . Jiang et al . NeuroImage 190 ( 2019 ) 172 – 181 175 networks , Fourier transform was performed on the signals from white - matter networks . All the white - matter networks showed a gradual decrease in amplitude with increased frequency , which indicated greater Fig . 2 . Functional connectivity of white - matter networks in the resting - state . ( A ) Average functional connectivity strength between the different white - matter net - works . The color bar shows the correlation coef ﬁ cient ( i . e . , R value ) . ( B ) Differences in functional connectivity within the white - matter networks between schizo - phrenia patients and healthy controls . The color bar shows the T value from the two - sample t - tests . * represents signi ﬁ cant differences after Bonferroni correction . ( C ) Average functional connectivity strength between white - matter networks and gray - matter networks . The color bar shows the correlation coef ﬁ cient ( i . e . , R value ) . ( D ) Differences in the functional connectivity of white - matter and gray - matter networks between schizophrenia patients and healthy controls . The color bar shows the T value from the two - sample t - tests . * represents signi ﬁ cant differences after Bonferroni correction . Table 2 Increased functional connectivity between distinct white - matter networks in patients with schizophrenia . White - matter network White - matter network T value P value Occipital network Cerebellar network 5 . 51 1 . 0 (cid:4) 10 (cid:5) 7 Anterior corona radiate network 5 . 11 7 . 1 (cid:4) 10 (cid:5) 7 Posterior callosum network 4 . 98 1 . 3 (cid:4) 10 (cid:5) 6 Deep network 4 . 59 7 . 4 (cid:4) 10 (cid:5) 6 Pre / post - central network Anterior corona radiate network 5 . 07 8 . 6 (cid:4) 10 (cid:5) 7 Posterior callosum network 3 . 82 1 . 7 (cid:4) 10 (cid:5) 4 Deep network 4 . 89 2 . 0 (cid:4) 10 (cid:5) 6 Superior corona radiate network 5 . 38 1 . 9 (cid:4) 10 (cid:5) 7 Table 3 Altered functional connectivity between white - matter and gray - matter networks in patients with schizophrenia . White - matter network Gray - matter network T value P value Occipital network Cerebellum posterior network 4 . 49 1 . 2 (cid:4) 10 (cid:5) 5 Cerebellum anterior network 4 . 09 6 . 0 (cid:4) 10 (cid:5) 5 Visual network (cid:5) 3 . 65 3 . 3 (cid:4) 10 (cid:5) 4 Cerebellar network Visual network 4 . 95 1 . 5 (cid:4) 10 (cid:5) 6 Anterior corona radiate network Sensori - motor network 4 . 01 8 . 5 (cid:4) 10 (cid:5) 5 Visual network 5 . 11 7 . 3 (cid:4) 10 (cid:5) 7 Orbitofrontal network Temporal - orbitofrontal network (cid:5) 4 . 38 1 . 9 (cid:4) 10 (cid:5) 5 Pre / post - central network Dorsal attention network 4 . 80 2 . 9 (cid:4) 10 (cid:5) 6 Posterior callosum network Visual network 6 . 18 3 . 2 (cid:4) 10 (cid:5) 9 Deep network Sensori - motor network 4 . 00 8 . 6 (cid:4) 10 (cid:5) 5 Superior temporal network Ventral attention network (cid:5) 3 . 64 3 . 4 (cid:4) 10 (cid:5) 4 Y . Jiang et al . NeuroImage 190 ( 2019 ) 172 – 181 176 activity at low frequencies ( Fig . 3a ) . Our ﬁ ndings supported a prior opinion that BOLD signals at low frequencies re ﬂ ect spontaneous neural activity . In addition , we found distinct spontaneous activity patterns between the super ﬁ cial and deep white - matter networks . In particular , the super ﬁ cial white - matter networks exhibited maximal activity at the lowest frequency 0 . 01 Hz , whereas the deep networks showed a maximal amplitude at 0 . 07 Hz ( Fig . 3a ) . To examine the differences in spontaneous white - matter neural activity between the schizophrenia and healthy control groups , we did compari - sons using ANOVA . Comparisons showed that the amplitudes at the low frequency ( band C ) were decreased in white - matter 1 , 5 , 6 , 8 and 10 in the schizophrenia group ( Fig . 3b ) . The amplitudes at the high frequency ( band B ) were decreased in white - matter 1 , 2 , 3 , 5 and 6 in the schizophrenia group ( Fig . 3b ) . The details are provided in Supplementary 7 . Correlations between altered white - matter networks and clinical variables Correlation analyses found that three white - matter functional connections ( white - matter networks 1 and 8 , 5 and 8 , and 5 and 9 ) were positively associated with disease duration . Moreover , one white - matter and gray - matter functional connection ( white - matter network 8 and gray - matter sensori - motor network ) was positively correlated with disease duration . In addition , the low frequency spontaneous ﬂ uctuations of white - matter networks 6 , 8 and 10 were negatively associated with disease duration . The results can be seen in Fig . 4 and Supplementary 8 . In addition , the PANSS score and anti - psychotic medications showed no association with white - matter functional index . Fig . 3 . Spontaneous activity of white - matter networks in the resting - state . Power spectral analysis was performed on signals in the white - matter networks . ( A ) Power - frequency graphs for the ten white - matter networks . WM , white - matter ; HC , healthy controls ; SZ , schizophrenia . ( B ) Differences in the average amplitude in different frequency bands between schizophrenia patients and healthy controls . Band A : 0 . 01 – 0 . 15 Hz ; band B : 0 . 08 – 0 . 15 Hz ; band C : 0 . 01 – 0 . 08 Hz * represents the signi ﬁ cant differences by ANOVA . Y . Jiang et al . NeuroImage 190 ( 2019 ) 172 – 181 177 Fig . 4 . Correlations between altered white - matter networks and disease duration . Three white - matter functional connections ( white - matter network 1 and 8 , 5 and 8 , and 5 and 9 ) were positively associated with disease duration . One white - matter and gray - matter functional connection ( white - matter network 8 and gray - matter sensori - motor network ) was positively correlated with disease duration . The low frequency spontaneous ﬂ uctuations of white - matter networks 6 , 8 and 10 were negatively associated with disease duration . The star represents that outliers ( > mean (cid:2) 2 * SD ) dots were removed from these scatter diagrams ( two dots in WM6 , one dots inWM8 , and three dots in WM10 ) . Y . Jiang et al . NeuroImage 190 ( 2019 ) 172 – 181 178 Potential in ﬂ uences of gray - matter signals To eliminate potential interference from neighboring gray - matter , we applied two stricter masks ( percentages > 70 % and > 80 % ) for white - matter . We found that the results from 70 % to 80 % masks were consis - tent with the results of the 60 % mask , and the high correlation coef ﬁ cient between the results using the 60 % mask and that of the stricter masks indicated that the results remained stable even with a stricter mask ( Supplementary 2 ) . In addition , gray - matter signal regression reduced the correlation between white - matter clusters and induced a negative correlation , but it did not alter the relative connectivity strength or in - ﬂ uence the comparisons between the patients and healthy controls ( Supplementary 4 ) . Finally , in most of the white - matter networks , the signi ﬁ cant correlations with the gray - matter network were not associated with their spatial distance ( Supplementary 5 ) . Discussion Consistent with a previous study ( Peer et al . , 2017 ) , this study showed that distinct white - matter functional networks could be identi ﬁ ed using correlation analysis of resting - state fMRI signals . By evaluating the spontaneous activities and functional connectivity within the white - matter , schizophrenia patients illustrated the decreased amplitude of low - frequency oscillation and increased functional connectivity in super ﬁ cial perception - motor white - matter networks , suggesting the ab - normality of perception - motor system in schizophrenia from the perspective of white - matter functional networks . Additionally , the su - per ﬁ cial perception - motor white - matter networks had decreased func - tional connectivity with cortical perception - motor gray - matter networks ( close - range communication ) . In contrast , the middle and deep white - matter networks had increased functional connectivity with the super ﬁ cial perception - motor white - matter networks and cortical perception - motor gray - matter networks ( long - range communication ) . The disrupted association between the gray - matter and white - matter networks in the perception - motor system might be compensated through the middle - deep white - matter networks . This may be the foun - dation of extensive disrupted connections among brain regions in schizophrenia . Finally , the deep white - matter network representing the primary ﬁ ber tracts exhibited some signi ﬁ cant alterations that were associated with illness duration in schizophrenia . In general , the BOLD signals observed in the gray - matter re ﬂ ect the activity of the neurons . Task - related fMRI , however , has illustrated activation inside the white - matter ( Fabri and Polonara , 2013 ; Gawryluk et al . , 2014 ; Mazerolle et al . , 2008 ) . A recent study has reported that using fMRI signals , white - matter voxels can be clustered into several networks according to their functional connectivity pattern ( Peer et al . , 2017 ) . Here , we identi ﬁ ed ten white - matter functional networks con - sisting of three layers ( super ﬁ cial , middle and deep ) . Most of the super - ﬁ cial white - matter networks were correlated with their overlying gray - matter networks , whereas the deep network had a relatively weak association with all the gray - matter networks . Similar to the gray - matter networks , the major amplitudes of low frequency ﬂ uctuations in the white - matter networks were located in the range of less than 0 . 1 Hz . These features of white - matter networks can provide additional infor - mation for investigating the differences between health and disease . Previous studies have reported the decreased BOLD signal amplitude at low - frequency in perception - motor gray - matter networks in schizo - phrenia ( Alonso - Solis et al . , 2017 ; Hoptman et al . , 2010 ; Meda et al . , 2015 ) . The current study also observed a decreased BOLD amplitude at low frequencies in three super ﬁ cial white - matter networks ( visual , temporal and sensori - motor ) . In addition , previous studies have indi - cated that a mismatch between visual and sensori - motor signals is suf - ﬁ cient to induce self - related disturbances in patients with schizophrenia ( Ehrsson , 2007 ) . We also observed increased functional connectivity between the super ﬁ cial white - matter networks ( visual and sensori - motor ) and the middle / deep white - matter networks . This enhanced functional connectivity may suggest an insuf ﬁ cient or inef - fective communication in the white - matter and may be a possible fundamental mechanism that explains the perception - motor processing de ﬁ cits in patients with schizophrenia . Furthermore , these increases in functional connection were also associated with disease duration , which provided evidence that progressive abnormality of functional in - tegrations occurred within white - matter networks . In addition , the informational interaction between white - matter and gray - matter networks may have two transmission pathways : close - range and long - range communications . Both of these are altered in schizo - phrenia patients : close - range communication is decreased , but long - range communication is increased . In detail , the white - matter visual , orbitofrontal and temporal networks had decreased functional connec - tivity with their overlying gray - matter networks ( close - range communi - cation ) . In contrast , the middle and deep white - matter networks had increased functional connectivity with the visual and motor gray - matter networks ( long - range communication ) . Therefore , it can be hypothesized that the disrupted association between the gray - matter and white - matter networks in the perception - motor system may be compensated for through the middle - deep white - matter networks ( Fig . 5 ) . In this study , the deep white - matter network covered the major as - sociation ﬁ ber tracts , including the superior longitudinal fasciculus and the inferior longitudinal fasciculus , which are considered to be the fundamental link between lobes within hemispheres . Different from the other white - matter networks , the deep network exhibited some unique features . Compared to the other white - matter networks , the deep Fig . 5 . A possible compensatory mechanism in schizophrenia . The disrupted association between cortical gray - matter and super ﬁ cial white - matter networks in the perception - motor system may be compensated for through the middle - deep white - matter networks . Y . Jiang et al . NeuroImage 190 ( 2019 ) 172 – 181 179 network had weaker correlations with all the gray - matter networks . In addition , it showed a maximal resting state activity at a relatively high frequency of 0 . 07 Hz . To explain this phenomenon , Peer et al . suggested that the deep network might have speci ﬁ c functions other than the typical functions of gray - matter networks ( Peer et al . , 2017 ) . Moreover , compared with healthy controls , we observed decreased amplitude of low - frequency oscillation in the deep network in schizophrenia . Furthermore , the greater decrease in amplitude in the deep network was linked to longer disease duration . In addition , we observed reduced amplitude of low - frequency oscillation in the middle white - matter network , the posterior callosum network , which is mainly composed of posterior callosum , posterior cingulate and precuneus regions . The reduced amplitude of low - frequency oscillations in these regions has been widely reported ( Meda et al . , 2015 ) . These ﬁ ndings provided additional evidence that there is an abnormality of the primary ﬁ bers that are part of the deep white - matter network in schizophrenia . These changes were consistent with previous DTI studies ( Dong et al . , 2017a ; Lener et al . , 2015 ; Park et al . , 2004 ) . This study should be interpreted with caution because of several limitations . First , there is doubt as to whether the observed white - matter signals re ﬂ ect neuron - related activity , since the white - matter had very few postsynaptic potentials that gave rise to BOLD signals ( Logothetis et al . , 2001 ) . Previous studies put forward two possible sources for white - matter BOLD signals : spiking - related metabolic demands and as - trocytes and NO - producing neurons activity ( Gawryluk et al . , 2014 ) . The contribution of blood vessels across the white - matter may also be a reason ( Gawryluk et al . , 2014 ) . In addition , as white - matter tracts cross each other , the same white - matter locations may mix signals from different functional systems . Therefore , it is dif ﬁ cult to say where the precise source of the fMRI signals is in the white - matter . Although we cannot clarify the source of white - matter functional activity , we found that the signals from white - matter share common and typical charac - teristics with those of gray - matter . These signals of white - matter can add an additional layer of information regarding differences between health and diseases . Another issue is the possible attribution of gray - matter signals to white - matter due to partial - volume effects . This problem can be exacerbated by spatial smoothing . By smoothing the white - matter and gray - matter separately and using only the voxels that were identi ﬁ ed as white - matter from each subject , we took measures as early as possible to ensure that the gray - matter signals did not interfere with the white - matter signals . These measures , together with the ﬁ nding of an association between disease duration and the amplitude of low frequency oscillation in the deep network , might re ﬂ ect an alteration related with the white - matter in schizophrenia . However , this partial volume effect is only partially addressed by segmentation of the white - matter and gray - matter . The fMRI signal within a voxel is not independent from that of its neighbors due to BOLD - image reconstruction and the underlying physiological ( vascular ) and physical ( MRI ) effects . It is thus always of concern whether or not the correlation or clustering pattern of white - matter fMRI signals are simply due to the leakage of the gray - matter fMRI signals . To our knowledge , it is dif ﬁ cult to eliminate this problem by using the standard data acquisition sequence / para - meters . In addition , some artifacts , such as respiration , head motion and scanner noise , may contaminate the white - matter signals . In general , the foundations of white - matter fMRI are not established at this stage , and future work should address these methodological issues . Most of the schizophrenia patients in this study had chronic schizophrenia and received antipsychotic medications . Their clinical symptoms were in stable condition and appeared to be under control , which may be the reason why no correlation was observed between the white - matter functional connectivity and the clinical symptoms . Thus , ﬁ rst - episode , drug - naive schizophrenia patients would need to be included to further assess the correlation between white - matter functional connectivity and clinical symptoms in the future . In addition , neuropsychological tests and cognitive measures were not included in this study ; thus , we could not assess the association between cognitive and brain changes . Finally , it was impossible to exclude random bias in this observational study . Conclusions The present study demonstrated the perception - motor system changes in schizophrenia from the viewpoint of white - matter functional networks . In addition , this study uncovered aberrant interactions be - tween the super ﬁ cial white - matter networks and cortical gray - matter networks . The disrupted association between the gray - matter and su - per ﬁ cial white - matter networks in perception - motor system might be compensated for through the middle - deep white - matter networks , sug - gesting a possible fundamental mechanism that underlies the extensive disrupted connections among brain regions in schizophrenia . Finally , the deep white - matter network exhibited some speci ﬁ c alterations that provided additional information for understanding the abnormalities in primary ﬁ bers in schizophrenia . Declarations of interest None . Acknowledgements This study was supported by the National Nature Science Foundation of China ( No . 81330032 , 81471638 , 81571759 , 81771822 ) , Sichuan Province Science and Technology Support Project ( No . 2017SZ0004 ) , the ‘‘ 111 ’’ Project ( B12027 ) and the Chinese Fundamental Research Funding for Central Universities in UESTC ( ZYGX2016J121 , ZYGX2016J124 ) . Appendix A . Supplementary data Supplementary data related to this article can be found at https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . neuroimage . 2018 . 04 . 018 . References Alonso - Solis , A . , Vives - Gilabert , Y . , Portella , M . J . , Rabella , M . , Grasa , E . M . , Roldan , A . , Keymer - Gausset , A . , Molins , C . , Nunez - Marin , F . , Gomez - Anson , B . , Alvarez , E . , Corripio , I . , 2017 . Altered amplitude of low frequency ﬂ uctuations in schizophrenia patients with persistent auditory verbal hallucinations . Schizophr . Res . Biswal , B . , Yetkin , F . Z . , Haughton , V . M . , Hyde , J . S . , 1995 . Functional connectivity in the motor cortex of resting human brain using echo - planar MRI . Magn . Reson Med . 34 , 537 – 541 . Bohnen , N . I . , Albin , R . L . , 2011 . White matter lesions in Parkinson disease . Nat . Rev . Neurol . 7 , 229 – 236 . Buchsbaum , M . S . , Buchsbaum , B . R . , Hazlett , E . A . , Haznedar , M . M . , Newmark , R . , Tang , C . Y . , Hof , P . R . , 2007 . Relative glucose metabolic rate higher in white matter in patients with schizophrenia . Am . J . Psychiatry 164 , 1072 – 1081 . Buckner , R . L . , Krienen , F . M . , Castellanos , A . , Diaz , J . C . , Yeo , B . T . , 2011 . The organization of the human cerebellum estimated by intrinsic functional connectivity . J . Neurophysiol . 106 , 2322 – 2345 . Burns , J . , Job , D . , Bastin , M . E . , Whalley , H . , Macgillivray , T . , Johnstone , E . C . , Lawrie , S . M . , 2003 . Structural disconnectivity in schizophrenia : a diffusion tensor magnetic resonance imaging study . Br . J . Psychiatry 182 , 439 – 443 . Caso , F . , Agosta , F . , Mattavelli , D . , Migliaccio , R . , Canu , E . , Magnani , G . , Marcone , A . , Copetti , M . , Falautano , M . , Comi , G . , Falini , A . , Filippi , M . , 2015 . White matter degeneration in atypical alzheimer disease . Radiology 277 , 162 – 172 . Chen , X . , Jiang , Y . , Chen , L . , He , H . , Dong , L . , Hou , C . , Duan , M . , Yang , M . , Yao , D . , Luo , C . , 2017 . Altered hippocampo - cerebello - cortical circuit in schizophrenia by a spatiotemporal consistency and causal connectivity analysis . Front . Neurosci . 11 , 25 . Craddock , R . C . , James , G . A . , Holtzheimer , P . E . , Hu , X . P . P . , Mayberg , H . S . , 2012 . A whole brain fMRI atlas generated via spatially constrained spectral clustering . Hum . Brain Mapp . 33 , 1914 – 1928 . Desikan , R . S . , Segonne , F . , Fischl , B . , Quinn , B . T . , Dickerson , B . C . , Blacker , D . , Buckner , R . L . , Dale , A . M . , Maguire , R . P . , Hyman , B . T . , Albert , M . S . , Killiany , R . J . , 2006 . An automated labeling system for subdividing the human cerebral cortex on MRI scans into gyral based regions of interest . Neuroimage 31 , 968 – 980 . Ding , Z . H . , Huang , Y . L . , Bailey , S . K . , Gao , Y . R . , Cutting , L . E . , Rogers , B . P . , Newton , A . T . , Gore , J . C . , 2018 . Detection of synchronous brain activity in white matter tracts at rest and under functional loading . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . U . S . A . 115 , 595 – 600 . Dong , D . , Wang , Y . , Chang , X . , Jiang , Y . , Klugah - Brown , B . , Luo , C . , Yao , D . , 2017a . Shared abnormality of white matter integrity in schizophrenia and bipolar disorder : a comparative voxel - based meta - analysis . Schizophr . Res . Y . Jiang et al . NeuroImage 190 ( 2019 ) 172 – 181 180 Dong , D . , Wang , Y . , Chang , X . , Luo , C . , Yao , D . , 2017b . Dysfunction of large - scale brain networks in schizophrenia : a meta - analysis of resting - state functional connectivity . Schizophr . Bull . Duan , M . , Chen , X . , He , H . , Jiang , Y . , Jiang , S . , Xie , Q . , Lai , Y . , Luo , C . , Yao , D . , 2015 . Altered basal ganglia network integration in schizophrenia . Front . Hum . Neurosci . 9 , 561 . Ehrsson , H . H . , 2007 . Theexperimental induction of out - of - body experiences . Science317 , 1048 . Fabri , M . , Polonara , G . , 2013 . Functional topography of human corpus callosum : an FMRI mapping study . Neural Plast . 2013 , 251308 . Fabri , M . , Polonara , G . , Mascioli , G . , Salvolini , U . , Manzoni , T . , 2011 . Topographical organization of human corpus callosum : an fMRI mapping study . Brain Res . 1370 , 99 – 111 . Fox , M . D . , Raichle , M . E . , 2007 . Spontaneous ﬂ uctuations in brain activity observed with functional magnetic resonance imaging . Nat . Rev . Neurosci . 8 , 700 – 711 . Friston , K . J . , 1998 . The disconnection hypothesis . Schizophr . Res . 30 , 115 – 125 . Gawryluk , J . R . , Mazerolle , E . L . , Brewer , K . D . , Beyea , S . D . , D ' Arcy , R . C . , 2011 . Investigation of fMRI activation in the internal capsule . BMC Neurosci . 12 , 56 . Gawryluk , J . R . , Mazerolle , E . L . , D ' Arcy , R . C . , 2014 . Does functional MRI detect activation in white matter ? A review of emerging evidence , issues , and future directions . Front . Neurosci . 8 , 239 . Holleran , L . , Ahmed , M . , Anderson - Schmidt , H . , McFarland , J . , Emsell , L . , Leemans , A . , Scanlon , C . , Dockery , P . , McCarthy , P . , Barker , G . J . , McDonald , C . , Cannon , D . M . , 2014 . Altered interhemispheric and temporal lobe white matter microstructural organization in severe chronic schizophrenia . Neuropsychopharmacology 39 , 944 – 954 . Hoptman , M . J . , Zuo , X . N . , Butler , P . D . , Javitt , D . C . , D ' Angelo , D . , Mauro , C . J . , Milham , M . P . , 2010 . Amplitude of low - frequency oscillations in schizophrenia : a resting state fMRI study . Schizophr . Res . 117 , 13 – 20 . Huang , H . , Jiang , Y . , Xia , M . , Tang , Y . , Zhang , T . , Cui , H . , Wang , J . , Li , Y . , Xu , L . , Curtin , A . , Sheng , J . , Jia , Y . , Yao , D . , Li , C . , Luo , C . , Wang , J . , 2017 . Increased resting - state global functional connectivity density of default mode network in schizophrenia subjects treated with electroconvulsive therapy . Schizophr . Res . Ji , G . J . , Liao , W . , Chen , F . F . , Zhang , L . , Wang , K . , 2017 . Low - frequency blood oxygen level - dependent ﬂ uctuations in the brain whitematter : more than just noise . Sci . Bull . 62 , 656 – 657 . Jiang , Y . , Duan , M . , Chen , X . , Chang , X . , He , H . , Li , Y . , Luo , C . , Yao , D . , 2017 . Common and distinct dysfunctional patterns contribute to triple network model in schizophrenia and depression : a preliminary study . Prog . Neuropsychopharmacol . Biol . Psychiatry 79 , 302 – 310 . Jiang , Y . , Luo , C . , Li , X . , Duan , M . , He , H . , Chen , X . , Yang , H . , Gong , J . , Chang , X . , Woelfer , M . , Biswal , B . B . , Yao , D . , 2018 . Progressive reduction in gray matter in patients with schizophrenia assessed with MR imaging by using causal network analysis . Radiology 0 , 171832 . Karlsgodt , K . H . , van Erp , T . G . , Poldrack , R . A . , Bearden , C . E . , Nuechterlein , K . H . , Cannon , T . D . , 2008 . Diffusion tensor imaging of the superior longitudinal fasciculus and working memory in recent - onset schizophrenia . Biol . Psychiatry 63 , 512 – 518 . Kressel , H . Y . , 2017 . Setting sail : 2017 . Radiology 282 , 4 – 6 . Lener , M . S . , Wong , E . , Tang , C . Y . , Byne , W . , Goldstein , K . E . , Blair , N . J . , Haznedar , M . M . , New , A . S . , Chemerinski , E . , Chu , K . W . , Rimsky , L . S . , Siever , L . J . , Koenigsberg , H . W . , Hazlett , E . A . , 2015 . White matter abnormalities in schizophrenia and schizotypal personality disorder . Schizophr . Bull . 41 , 300 – 310 . Logothetis , N . K . , Pauls , J . , Augath , M . , Trinath , T . , Oeltermann , A . , 2001 . Neurophysiological investigation of the basis of the fMRI signal . Nature 412 , 150 – 157 . Lorio , S . , Fresard , S . , Adaszewski , S . , Kherif , F . , Chowdhury , R . , Frackowiak , R . S . , Ashburner , J . , Helms , G . , Weiskopf , N . , Lutti , A . , Draganski , B . , 2016 . New tissue priors for improved automated classi ﬁ cation of subcortical brain structures on MRI . Neuroimage 130 , 157 – 166 . Lui , S . , Zhou , X . J . , Sweeney , J . A . , Gong , Q . , 2016 . Psychoradiology : the frontier of neuroimaging in psychiatry . Radiology 281 , 357 – 372 . Marussich , L . , Lu , K . H . , Wen , H . , Liu , Z . , 2017 . Mapping white - matter functional organization at rest and during naturalistic visual perception . Neuroimage 146 , 1128 – 1141 . Mazerolle , E . L . , D ' Arcy , R . C . , Beyea , S . D . , 2008 . Detecting functional magnetic resonance imaging activation in white matter : interhemispheric transfer across the corpus callosum . BMC Neurosci . 9 , 84 . Meda , S . A . , Ruano , G . , Windemuth , A . , O ' Neil , K . , Berwise , C . , Dunn , S . M . , Boccaccio , L . E . , Narayanan , B . , Kocherla , M . , Sprooten , E . , Keshavan , M . S . , Tamminga , C . A . , Sweeney , J . A . , Clementz , B . A . , Calhoun , V . D . , Pearlson , G . D . , 2014 . Multivariate analysis reveals genetic associations of the resting default mode network in psychotic bipolar disorder and schizophrenia . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . U . S . A . 111 , E2066 – E2075 . Meda , S . A . , Wang , Z . , Ivleva , E . I . , Poudyal , G . , Keshavan , M . S . , Tamminga , C . A . , Sweeney , J . A . , Clementz , B . A . , Schretlen , D . J . , Calhoun , V . D . , Lui , S . , Damaraju , E . , Pearlson , G . D . , 2015 . Frequency - speci ﬁ c neural signatures of spontaneous low - frequency resting state ﬂ uctuations in psychosis : evidence from bipolar - schizophrenia network on intermediate phenotypes ( B - SNIP ) consortium . Schizophr . Bull . 41 , 1336 – 1348 . Mezer , A . , Yovel , Y . , Pasternak , O . , Gor ﬁ ne , T . , Assaf , Y . , 2009 . Cluster analysis of resting - state fMRI time series . Neuroimage 45 , 1117 – 1125 . Park , H . J . , Westin , C . F . , Kubicki , M . , Maier , S . E . , Niznikiewicz , M . , Baer , A . , Frumin , M . , Kikinis , R . , Jolesz , F . A . , McCarley , R . W . , Shenton , M . E . , 2004 . White matter hemisphere asymmetries in healthy subjects and in schizophrenia : a diffusion tensor MRI study . Neuroimage 23 , 213 – 223 . Peer , M . , Nitzan , M . , Bick , A . S . , Levin , N . , Arzyt , S . , 2017 . Evidence for functional networks within the human Brain ' s white matter . J . Neurosci . 37 , 6394 – 6407 . Power , J . D . , Cohen , A . L . , Nelson , S . M . , Wig , G . S . , Barnes , K . A . , Church , J . A . , Vogel , A . C . , Laumann , T . O . , Miezin , F . M . , Schlaggar , B . L . , Petersen , S . E . , 2011 . Functional network organization of the human brain . Neuron 72 , 665 – 678 . Shirer , W . R . , Ryali , S . , Rykhlevskaia , E . , Menon , V . , Greicius , M . D . , 2012 . Decoding subject - driven cognitive states with whole - brain connectivity patterns . Cereb . Cortex 22 , 158 – 165 . Smith , S . M . , Jenkinson , M . , Johansen - Berg , H . , Rueckert , D . , Nichols , T . E . , Mackay , C . E . , Watkins , K . E . , Ciccarelli , O . , Cader , M . Z . , Matthews , P . M . , Behrens , T . E . , 2006 . Tract - based spatial statistics : voxelwise analysis of multi - subject diffusion data . Neuroimage 31 , 1487 – 1505 . Xue , K . , Luo , C . , Zhang , D . , Yang , T . , Li , J . , Gong , D . , Chen , L . , Medina , Y . I . , Gotman , J . , Zhou , D . , Yao , D . , 2014 . Diffusion tensor tractography reveals disrupted structural connectivity in childhood absence epilepsy . Epilepsy Res . 108 , 125 – 138 . Yeo , B . T . T . , Krienen , F . M . , Sepulcre , J . , Sabuncu , M . R . , Lashkari , D . , Hollinshead , M . , Roffman , J . L . , Smoller , J . W . , Zoller , L . , Polimeni , J . R . , Fischl , B . , Liu , H . S . , Buckner , R . L . , 2011 . The organization of the human cerebral cortex estimated by intrinsic functional connectivity . J . Neurophysiol . 106 , 1125 – 1165 . Yu , R . , Chien , Y . L . , Wang , H . L . , Liu , C . M . , Liu , C . C . , Hwang , T . J . , Hsieh , M . H . , Hwu , H . G . , Tseng , W . Y . , 2014 . Frequency - speci ﬁ c alternations in the amplitude of low - frequency ﬂ uctuations in schizophrenia . Hum . Brain Mapp . 35 , 627 – 637 . Y . Jiang et al . NeuroImage 190 ( 2019 ) 172 – 181 181