2022 - 05051 - PhD Position F / M Exploring Human - AI Collaboration and Explainability for Sustainable ML Type de contrat : CDD Niveau de diplôme exigé : Bac + 5 ou équivalent Fonction : Doctorant A propos du centre ou de la direction fonctionnelle Located at the heart of the main national research and higher education cluster , member of the Université Paris Saclay , a major actor in the French Investments for the Future Programme ( Idex , LabEx , IRT , Equipex ) and partner of the main establishments present on the plateau , the centre is particularly active in three major areas : data and knowledge ; safety , security and reliability ; modelling , simulation and optimisation ( with priority given to energy ) . The 450 researchers and engineers from Inria and its partners who work in the research centre ' s 28 teams , the 60 research support staﬀ members , the high - level equipment at their disposal ( image walls , high - performance computing clusters , sensor networks ) , and the privileged relationships with prestigious industrial partners , all make Inria Saclay Île - de - France a key research centre in the local landscape and one that is oriented towards Europe and the world . Contexte et atouts du poste The 3 - year doctoral position is funded by a European Union’s Horizon 2020 grant for SustainML : Application Aware , Life - Cycle Oriented Model - Hardware Co - Design Framework for Sustainable , Energy Efficient ML Systems . The chosen candidate will be supervised by Prof . Wendy Mackay and Dr . Janin Koch . The work will be in close collaboration with the DFKI ( German Institute of Artiﬁcial Intelligence ) and other partners . Mission confiée Context Recent generational leaps in the complexity and capabilities of Machine Learning ( ML ) models have made Artiﬁcial Intelligence ( AI ) able to tackle challenges ranging from vision and graphics to natural language , and even creative tasks . These improvements , along with the growing availability and maturity of AI technologies , also helped democratizing AI as a tool for a broad audience of researchers , industries , artists , and more . However this expansion also revealed the environmental and economic impacts of AI technologies when used at very large scales [ 5 , 7 ] . The adoption of greener , less energy consuming models by ML practitioners is a signiﬁcant aspect in successfully improving AI impact in the future . However , there can exist hundreds of candidate algorithms to address a single category of problems , and the choice of a ML model for a given task is often driven by previous experience , domain understanding , or expertise availability . Adopting new technologies and approaches typically requires additional learning eﬀorts in order to fully understand their purpose , strength , features , and adequacy to a task . However “AI waste” , or the environmental cost of using these tools in terms of hardware and energy resources , is seldom taken into consideration . The goal of this PhD is to help ML practitioners better understand and address these issues , using collaborative algorithmic agents able to work together with users and in particular to inquire and understand their needs and to suggest the best and “greener” algorithms to address them . It will contribute to a larger Sustainable AI project which aims to develop a design framework and an associated toolkit to foster energy efficiency throughout the whole life cycle of ML applications : from the training and testing iterations of the design and exploration phases , to the ﬁnal training of the production systems , and the continuous online retraining during and after deployment . The candidate will be part of the ExSitu team , a France - based research group that investigates alternate approaches to traditional human computer roles in order to establish true human - computer partnerships and to leverage machine learning while keeping the user in control . We build on the principles of instrumental interaction [ 1 , 2 ] and co - adaptation [ 6 ] to create interactive systems that are discoverable , appropriable [ 3 ] , and expressive [ 4 ] , growing with their users to augment rather than replace their skills . Objective The goal of this doctoral position is to explore new directions of Human - AI interactions . This includes new interaction and explainability approaches that will allow users to interactively explore the trade - oﬀs of competing ML models with the help of intelligent agents . Exploring ML model alternatives during the development process , before the models enter their full training cycles , requires users to express potentially ambiguous project objectives and to understand the trade - oﬀs of ML model alternatives , e . g . time , computing hardware , or estimated CO2 footprint for a particular task . This requires the development of new design and evaluation methods to ensure eﬀective interaction with intelligent systems , and specifically to : Develop a better understanding of how users plan , search for , and select ML models . Identify the relevant characteristics of a ML project in terms of constraints and context . Develop new interactive methods for users to express and reﬁne these characteristics using a human - computer partnership approach . Develop new explainability approaches that intelligent systems can use to suggest and expose the trade - offs of alternative ML models in a context - dependent manner . Design new interactive visualizations to explore the design space of ML models with multiple competing objectives , including AI - waste minimization . - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - [ 1 ] Michel Beaudouin - Lafon . Instrumental interaction : An interaction model for designing post - wimp user interfaces . In Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems , CHI ’00 , page 446 – 453 , New York , NY , USA , 2000 . Association for Computing Machinery . ISBN 1581132166 . doi : 10 . 1145 / 332040 . 332473 . URL https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 332040 . 332473 . Informations générales Thème / Domaine : Interaction et visualisation Systèmes d ' information ( BAP E ) Ville : Palaiseau Centre Inria : CRI Saclay - Île - de - France Date de prise de fonction souhaitée : 2022 - 11 - 01 Durée de contrat : 3 ans Date limite pour postuler : 2022 - 07 - 02 Contacts Equipe Inria : EX - SITU Directeur de thèse : Koch Janin / janin . koch @ inria . fr A propos d ' Inria Inria est l’institut national de recherche dédié aux sciences et technologies du numérique . Il emploie 2600 personnes . Ses 200 équipes - projets agiles , en général communes avec des partenaires académiques , impliquent plus de 3500 scientiﬁques pour relever les déﬁs du numérique , souvent à l’interface d’autres disciplines . L’institut fait appel à de nombreux talents dans plus d’une quarantaine de métiers diﬀérents . 900 personnels d’appui à la recherche et à l’innovation contribuent à faire émerger et grandir des projets scientiﬁques ou entrepreneuriaux qui impactent le monde . Inria travaille avec de nombreuses entreprises et a accompagné la création de plus de 180 start - up . L ' institut s ' eﬀorce ainsi de répondre aux enjeux de la transformation numérique de la science , de la société et de l ' économie . Consignes pour postuler Sécurité défense : Ce poste est susceptible d’être affecté dans une zone à régime restrictif ( ZRR ) , telle que déﬁnie dans le décret n°2011 - 1425 relatif à la protection du potentiel scientiﬁque et technique de la nation ( PPST ) . L’autorisation d’accès à une zone est délivrée par le chef d’établissement , après avis ministériel favorable , tel que déﬁni dans l’arrêté du 03 juillet 2012 , relatif à la PPST . Un avis ministériel défavorable pour un poste aﬀecté dans une ZRR aurait pour conséquence l’annulation du recrutement . Politique de recrutement : Dans le cadre de sa politique diversité , tous les postes Inria sont accessibles aux personnes en situation de handicap . Attention : Les candidatures doivent être déposées en ligne sur le site Inria . Le traitement des candidatures adressées par d ' autres canaux n ' est pas garanti . [ 2 ] Michel Beaudouin - Lafon and Wendy E . Mackay . Reiﬁcation , polymorphism and reuse : Three principles for designing visual interfaces . In Proceedings of the Working Conference on Advanced Visual Interfaces , AVI ’00 , page 102 – 109 , New York , NY , USA , 2000 . Association for Computing Machinery . ISBN 1581132522 . doi : 10 . 1145 / 345513 . 345267 . URL https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 345513 . 345267 . [ 3 ] Janin Koch , Andrés Lucero , Lena Hegemann , and Antti Oulasvirta . May ai ? design ideation with cooperative contextual bandits . In Proceedings of the 2019 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems , CHI ’19 , page 1 – 12 , New York , NY , USA , 2019 . Association for Computing Machinery . ISBN 9781450359702 . doi : 10 . 1145 / 3290605 . 3300863 . URL https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3290605 . 3300863 . [ 4 ] Janin Koch , Nicolas Taﬃn , Michel Beaudouin - Lafon , Markku Laine , Andrés Lucero , and Wendy Mackay . ImageSense : An Intelligent Collaborative Ideation Tool to Support Diverse Human - Computer Partnerships . Proceedings of the ACM on Human - Computer Interaction , 4 ( CSCW1 ) : 1 – 27 , May 2020 . doi : 10 . 1145 / 3392850 . URL https : / / hal . archives - ouvertes . fr / hal - 02867303 . [ 5 ] Alexandre Lacoste , Alexandra Luccioni , Victor Schmidt , and Thomas Dandres . Quantifying the carbon emissions of machine learning . arXiv preprint arXiv : 1910 . 09700 , 2019 . [ 6 ] Wendy Mackay . Responding to cognitive overload : Co - adaptation between users and technology . Intellectica , 30 , 07 2000 . doi : 10 . 3406 / intel . 2000 . 1597 . [ 7 ] Roy Schwartz , Jesse Dodge , Noah A Smith , and Oren Etzioni . Green ai . Communications of the ACM , 63 ( 12 ) : 54 – 63 , 2020 . Principales activités Specific Activities The doctoral candidate will be expected to : Conduct empirical studies and workshops , e . g . participatory design workshops . Prototype , design and develop novel interactive systems . Design , run , and analyze controlled and ﬁeld experiments to evaluate interaction and explainability techniques . Write research reports and scientific papers . Expected Results Advance knowledge about what drives ML practitioners to select models and what it takes to make them experiment with new ones . Novel methods to identify and suggest ecology - friendly ML models that do not diminish performance . Full interactive system ( s ) that demonstrate new communication methodology and explainability approaches for exploring Ml - model alternatives in early stage projects . Compétences Required Skills We are looking for motivated students who are excited about creating human - centered exploratory tools and are interested in applying Human - Computer Interaction research methods to Machine Learning problems . Suitable candidates should have past experience and skills in Human - Computer Interaction methods and strong programming skills , preferably Python , are required . Background knowledge in Machine Learning and experience in web technologies is a plus . The doctoral position will be in English . Avantages Subsidized meals Partial reimbursement of public transport costs Leave : 7 weeks of annual leave + 10 extra days off due to RTT ( statutory reduction in working hours ) + possibility of exceptional leave ( sick children , moving home , etc . ) Possibility of teleworking ( a(cid:91)er 6 months of employment ) and ﬂexible organization of working hours Professional equipment available ( videoconferencing , loan of computer equipment , etc . ) Social , cultural and sports events and activities Access to vocational training Social security coverage