Department of Accounting and Information Systems 2016 Seminar Series Erskine Seminar The Department of ACIS is delighted to invite everyone to participate in the following Erskine Seminar presented by : Professor David Schwartz ( Bar - Ilan University , Israel ) News Censorship in Online Social Networks : A Study of Circumvention in the Commentsphere Wednesday , 10 th August 2016 Venue : LAW 411 Time : 11 : 00am Abstract : We investigates the interplay between online news , reader comments , and social networks , to detect and characterize comments leading to the revelation of censored information . Censorship of identity occurs in different contexts - for example , the military censors the identity of personnel and the judiciary censors the identity of minors and victims . We address three questions : ( 1 ) assessing the relevance of identity censorship in the presence of user - generated comments , ( 2 ) understanding the fashion of censorship circumvention – what people say and how , and ( 3 ) determining how comment analysis can aid in identifying de - censorship and information leakage through comments . Examining 3582 comments made on 48 articles containing censored identities , we find that a systematic examination of comments can seriously compromise identity censorship . Presenter’s Bio : Prof . David G . Schwartz’s career spans both academia and business . David is professor of information systems , and former vice - chairman , at the Graduate School of Business Administration of Bar - Ilan University , Israel . His research has appeared in publications such as Information Systems Research , IEEE Intelligent Systems , International Journal of Human - Computer Studies , IEEE Transactions on Professional Communications , JASIST , Review of Marketing Science , Kybernetes , and the Journal of Organizational Behavior . His books include Cooperating Heterogeneous Systems ; Internet - Based Knowledge Management and Organizational Memory ; and the Encyclopedia of Knowledge Management , now in its second edition . David has been a visiting scholar at Columbia University , Department of Biomedical Informatics ( 2004 ) and Monash University , Faculty of Information Technology ( 2007 - 8 ) . In 2016 he been awarded a Visiting Erskine Fellowship at the University of Canterbury , Christchurch , New Zealand as well as a Visiting Scholar position at Victoria University , Melbourne , Australia . From 1998 to 2011 he served as editor - in - chief of the journal Internet Research and is currently an Associate Editor of the European Journal of Information Systems . His main research interests are Cybersecurity , mHealth , Knowledge Management , Social Network Analysis , and Computer - mediated Communications . David has served on the Board of Directors of multiple public companies including Psagot Investment House , Israel ' s leading investment house with over $ 35B assets under management ( Acquired by APAX Partners , 2010 ) ; Cham Foods Ltd . ( TASE ) , a multinational producer of ingredients for the food and nutriceutical industries ; C . I . Systems ( TASE ) a producer of electro - optic systems for the military and semiconductor industries ; and Copernic ( NASDAQ : CNIC ) , an Internet search innovator ( Acquired by DecisionPoint Systems / DPNI , 2010 ) . For the past two decades David has been active in Israel’s world - class venture capital industry first identifying potential investments for a number of leading VC funds and then founding Apropos IT Ventures , an early - stage technology investment fund , serving as managing member of the partnership and chief investment officer . Prof . Schwartz received his Ph . D . in Computer Science from Case Western Reserve University , USA ; MBA from McMaster University , Canada ; and B . Sc . from the University of Toronto , Canada .