2456 | J . Y . Sim , J . Moeller , et al . Molecular Biology of the Cell MBoC | ARTICLE Spatial distribution of cell – cell and cell – ECM adhesions regulates force balance while main taining E - cadherin molecular tension in cell pairs Joo Yong Sim a , * , † , Jens Moeller a , * , Kevin C . Hart b , Diego Ramallo c , Viola Vogel d , Alex R . Dunn c , W . James Nelson b , e , and Beth L . Pruitt a , e a Department of Mechanical Engineering , b Department of Biology , c Department of Chemical Engineering , and e Department of Molecular and Cellular Physiology , Stanford University , Stanford , CA 94305 ; d Department of Health Sciences and Technology , ETH Zurich , CH - 8093 Zurich , Switzerland ABSTRACT Mechanical linkage between cell – cell and cell – extracellular matrix ( ECM ) adhe - sions regulates cell shape changes during embryonic development and tissue homoeostasis . We examined how the force balance between cell – cell and cell – ECM adhesions changes with cell spread area and aspect ratio in pairs of MDCK cells . We used ECM micropatterning to drive different cytoskeleton strain energy states and cell - generated traction forces and used a Förster resonance energy transfer tension biosensor to ask whether changes in forces across cell – cell junctions correlated with E - cadherin molecular tension . We found that con - tinuous peripheral ECM adhesions resulted in increased cell – cell and cell – ECM forces with increasing spread area . In contrast , confining ECM adhesions to the distal ends of cell – cell pairs resulted in shorter junction lengths and constant cell – cell forces . Of interest , each cell within a cell pair generated higher strain energies than isolated single cells of the same spread area . Surprisingly , E - cadherin molecular tension remained constant regardless of changes in cell – cell forces and was evenly distributed along cell – cell junctions independent of cell spread area and total traction forces . Taken together , our results showed that cell pairs maintained constant E - cadherin molecular tension and regulated total forces relative to cell spread area and shape but independently of total focal adhesion area . INTRODUCTION Studies in single cells have revealed that key proteins of integrin - based adhesions act as mechanotransducers between the extracel - lular matrix ( ECM ) and the actomyosin cytoskeleton ( Schoen et al . , 2013 ) . Conversely , how multicellular tissues respond to mechanical forces transmitted through cadherin - based cell – cell junctions is poorly understood and represents a critical knowledge gap . This balance of mechanical interactions at cell – cell junctions and cell – ECM adhesions governs basic processes in development and dis - ease . For example , changes in mechanical forces at cell – cell and cell – ECM adhesions coordinate the collective migration of epithelial sheets during development ( Cai et al . , 2014 ) , folding of epithelial sheets into tubes , and maintenance of tissue and organ homeosta - sis ( Halbleib and Nelson , 2006 ; Friedl and Gilmour , 2009 ) . Cellular forces are regulated by actomyosin - generated tension , which depends on cell size and shape ( Vogel and Sheetz , 2006 ) . Tan et al . ( 2003 ) showed that single cells generate higher traction forces on larger patterns on micropost arrays Although substrate rigidity affects cell spreading and force generation ( Ghibaudo et al . , 2008 ) , Tee et al . ( 2011 ) showed that the shape and size of human mesenchy - mal stem cells can also control stem cell differentiation . Rape et al . ( 2011 ) found that traction stresses on the ECM are increased in larger Monitoring Editor Margaret Gardel University of Chicago Received : Dec 15 , 2014 Revised : May 5 , 2015 Accepted : May 5 , 2015 This article was published online ahead of print in MBoC in Press ( http : / / www . molbiolcell . org / cgi / doi / 10 . 1091 / mbc . E14 - 12 - 1618 ) on May 13 , 2015 . * These authors contributed equally and should be regarded as joint first authors . † Present address : Bio - Medical IT Convergence Research Department , Electronics and Telecommunications Research Institute , Daejeon , 305 - 700 , Republic of Korea . Address correspondence to : Beth L . Pruitt ( pruitt @ stanford . edu ) . © 2015 Sim , Moeller , et al . This article is distributed by The American Society for Cell Biology under license from the author ( s ) . Two months after publication it is available to the public under an Attribution – Noncommercial – Share Alike 3 . 0 Unported Cre - ative Commons License ( http : / / creativecommons . org / licenses / by - nc - sa / 3 . 0 ) . “ASCB ® , ” “The American Society for Cell Biology ® , ” and “Molecular Biology of the Cell ® ” are registered trademarks of The American Society for Cell Biology . Abbreviations used : EcadTSMod , E - cadherin tension sensor module ; ECM , extra - cellular matrix ; FBS , fetal bovine serum ; FLIM , fluorescence lifetime imaging mi - croscopy ; FRET , Förster resonance energy transfer ; GFP , green fluorescent pro - tein ; MDCK , Madin – Darby canine kidney ; PAA , polyacrylamide ; PDMS , polydimethylsiloxane . Volume 26 July 1 , 2015 Force balance in cell pairs | 2457 Based on the orientation of the traction force components , forces perpendicular to the cell – cell junction were defined as intercellular forces , whereas forces parallel to the junction served as proxy for cell – ECM forces . Similarly , Maruthamuthu et al . ( 2011 ) calculated en - dogenous “cell – cell forces” at cell – cell junctions as the vector sum of all traction forces under each cell using TFM . “Cell – ECM forces” in those unrestricted cell pairs were calculated as the sum of traction force magnitudes perpendicular to the cell – cell force vectors . To analyze mechanical stresses between a cell and its neighbors in mul - ticellular epithelial cell sheet monolayers , monolayer stress micros - copy was developed ( Tambe et al . , 2011 ) . To calculate intercellular stress between cells , a cell sheet was assumed to have certain elastic material properties , heights , and mechanical boundary conditions that were valid for commonly used in vitro monolayer systems and were in agreement with a theoretical model based on molecular dy - namics simulations ( Tambe et al . , 2013 ; Zimmermann et al . , 2014 ) . In this work , we asked whether cell spread area and shape regu - late the force balance in cell pairs and whether changes in the force directed across cell – cell junctions modulated E - cadherin load bear - ing . We observed pairs of Madin – Darby canine kidney ( MDCK ) cells adhered to micropatterned ECM proteins in rectangles and I - shapes of increasing size and aspect ratio . We asked whether 1 ) total trac - tion forces and strain energies increase as a function of increased spread area in cell pairs , 2 ) the spatial distribution of cell – ECM and cell – cell adhesion modulates the force balance , and 3 ) molecular tension on E - cadherin increases as force directed across cell – cell junctions increases . We calculated the total force exerted by the cell pair as sum of all traction force magnitudes under both cells . Total strain energies are derived from the total forces as described by Oakes et al . ( 2014 ) . We define cell – cell forces as the vector sum of all traction forces under each cell in a cell pair and cell – ECM forces as the sum of traction force magnitudes perpendicular to cell – cell force vector as described by Maruthamuthu et al . ( 2011 ) . We observed that total forces and strain energies strongly cor - related with the spread area of cell pairs . The strength of this trend depended on the spatial pattern of ECM but was independent of the focal adhesion area . We also found that molecular - scale tension on E - cadherin remained constant independent of cell spread area , total traction forces , or the force balance at cell – ECM and cell – cell adhesions . Our results indicate that the spatial pattern of cell – ECM adhesions controls the force balance in multicellular interactions . Related to these shape changes , cell pairs regulate junction length and E - cadherin density along the junction as the force balance per - pendicular and parallel to the junction is varied . RESULTS Constraining the shape of cell pairs and deriving cell - generated traction forces We constrained the spatial distribution of cell – ECM adhesions and resulting cell – cell junction lengths in pairs of MDCK epithelial cells by patterning ECM on PAA hydrogels with micrometer resolution ( Supplemental Figure S1A ; see Materials and Methods ) . Pairs of MDCK cells attached and formed focal adhesions at the pattern edges . We observed focal adhesions via the distribution of green fluorescent protein ( GFP ) – paxillin , which localized to cell – ECM ad - hesions ( Supplemental Figure S1B ) . Cell – cell junctions , observed by the distribution of E - cadherin – DsRed , formed across the space be - tween the adhesive regions of the pattern ( Supplemental Figure S1B ) . To quantify cell - generated traction forces , we used cell - gener - ated substrate deformations by tracking fluorescent beads mixed into the PAA gels ( see Materials and Methods ; Butler et al . , 2002 ; Maruthamuthu et al . , 2011 ; Tseng et al . , 2012 ) . Substrate patterning and more elongated cells . Recently , Oakes et al . ( 2014 ) proposed a mechanical model of adherent cells as contractile gels from experi - mental observations that cell spread area regulated cell - generated strain energy ; further , this strain energy was independent of substrate stiffness , the number of focal adhesions , or cell aspect ratio . In contrast to these studies of single cells , few studies have exam - ined the force balance between cell – cell and cell – ECM adhesions in pairs of cells . Maruthamuthu et al . ( 2011 ) reported that cell – ECM forces correlated positively with cell – cell adhesion forces using unpat - terned epithelial cell pairs on flat , deformable polyacrylamide ( PAA ) gel substrates with embedded fiducial markers for traction force mi - croscopy ( TFM ) . Studies of endothelial cell pairs patterned in bowtie shapes on micropost arrays by Liu et al . ( 2010 ) found that cell – cell forces correlated with cell – cell contact length but not with cell – ECM forces . Finally , Tseng et al . ( 2012 ) patterned epithelial cell pairs on TFM gels using I - shapes and squares and found that cell pairs posi - tioned cell – cell junctions across the I - shapes in the ECM - deprived regions to achieve stable , low - energy configurations that minimized cell – cell and cell – ECM forces . However , different cell types , TFM sub - strates , and spatial constrains of cell spread area and cell – ECM adhe - sions were used in these studies , and thus it is difficult to compare the interdependence of cell – cell and cell – ECM forces in cell pairs . Cell – cell junctions in most epithelial cells are formed by cadher - ins ( Takeichi , 2014 ) . Cadherins facilitate homotypic cell – cell adhe - sion through trans interactions of the extracellular domain ( Chu et al . , 2004 ) and regulate mechanical interactions between cells through intracellular interaction with the actin cytoskeleton via α - catenin and associated actin - binding proteins ( Takeichi , 2014 ) . A variety of experimental approaches have suggested mechanoregu - lation of E - cadherin at epithelial cell – cell junctions . A Förster reso - nance energy transfer ( FRET ) – based tension biosensor has been used to show that E - cadherin is under actomyosin - generated ten - sion at cell – cell junctions ( Borghi et al . , 2012 ; Engl et al . , 2014 ; re - viewed in Barry et al . , 2014 ) , and this tension transiently increased with applied external force ( le Duc et al . , 2010 ; Borghi et al . , 2012 ) . Disrupting calcium - dependent E - cadherin binding with low - calcium media reduced cell – cell forces ( Maruthamuthu et al . , 2011 ) . Twisting force cytometry of E - cadherin – coated beads bound to E - cadherin on the surface of epithelial cells resulted in cell stiffening correlated with the recruitment of vinculin to the plasma membrane at the site of bead attachment ( le Duc et al . , 2010 ; Twiss et al . , 2012 ) and also depended on actomyosin activity and accessibility of a cryptic bind - ing site in α - catenin ( Yonemura et al . , 2010 ) . Although the cadherin complex is linked to actin via α - catenin , the affinity of the cadherin ternary complex with actin is weak , based on in vitro cosedimenta - tion assays ( Drees et al . , 2005 ; Yamada and Nelson , 2007 ) . Of importance , linkage of the cadherin – catenin complex to the actin cytoskeleton requires actomyosin - dependent forces ( reviewed in Barry et al . , 2014 ) , and piconewton forces stabilize α - catenin – actin filament bonds via a catch - bond mechanism ( Buckley et al . , 2014 ) . In single cells , substrate deformations can be readily linked to forces transmitted through cell – ECM adhesions using traction force microscopy methods ( Schoen et al . , 2013 ) . In cell pairs , different concepts have been suggested to deconvolve the force balance be - tween cell – ECM and cell – cell junctions . Liu et al . ( 2010 ) first inferred forces across cell – cell junctions using polydimethylsiloxane ( PDMS ) micropost arrays . In the absence of inertia , all cellular mechanical forces were in static balance at all times . Thus , within cell pairs , the net traction force exerted on the substrate , as measured by micro - post deflection , defined an “intercellular tugging force . ” Tseng et al . ( 2012 ) later defined “intercellular” and “intracellular” forces as esti - mates of cell – cell and cell – ECM forces using TFM on PAA gels . 2458 | J . Y . Sim , J . Moeller , et al . Molecular Biology of the Cell for cell pairs on square micropatterns ( ρ = − 0 . 24 for 35 × 35 μm squares , 0 . 37 for 45 × 45 μm squares , and − 0 . 14 for pooled data ) . Cell – cell and cell – ECM forces increase on elongated rectangular frame patterns We next tested whether elongating square patterns into rectangles with increased area ( from 35 × 35 , to 35 × 45 , to 35 × 60 μm ) in - creased cell – cell and cell – ECM forces ( Figure 2A ) . When the aspect ratio was increased from 1 : 1 ( 35 × 35 μm ) to 1 : 1 . 3 ( 35 × 45 μm ) , we observed no significant increase in either cell – cell or cell – ECM force ( Figure 2B ) . However , both forces increased on rectangles with an aspect ratio of 1 : 1 . 7 ( 35 × 60 μm ) : cell – ECM forces increased almost 1 . 4 - fold ( 625 ± 293 to 846 ± 167 nN ) , and cell – cell forces increased 2 . 5 - fold ( 372 ± 180 to 935 ± 260 nN ; Figure 2B ) . For comparison , the 35 × 60 μm rectangles had about the same area as the 45 - μm squares , and cell – cell and cell – ECM forces on both patterns were almost identical . These data support the idea that traction forces scale with spread area not only in single cells ( Oakes et al . , 2014 ) but also in cell pairs . As expected in these peripherally anchored cell pairs , junction length did not change significantly with increasing aspect ratio ( Figure 2C ) . We then asked whether these increases in cell – cell force resulted in increased recruitment of E - cadherin to the cell – cell junction . We measured the average and integrated E - cadherin – DsRed fluores - cence intensity along the cell – cell junction of cell pairs on large rect - angles and squares ( average intensities normalize for junction length differences ) . The average and integrated E - cadherin – DsRed intensity did not vary between cell pairs on large and small squares ( Supplemental Figure S4 ) . Surprisingly , the average intensity de - creased by > 50 % in cell pairs on 1 : 1 . 7 rectangles relative to small squares ( Figure 2D ) . These data indicate that cell pairs do not recruit more E - cadherin in response to chronic elevation of cell – cell forces . Cell – cell force increases but cell – ECM force is constant on isometrically larger I - shapes On rectangles , the edges of cell – cell junctions were anchored by cell – ECM adhesions at the pattern periphery . To test whether enabled comparison across multiple cell pairs with similar shape , spread area , and junction orientations . We defined a local coordi - nate system for each cell pair relative to the orientation of the cell – cell junction ( Figure 1A ) . To compare similar geometries , we limited our analysis to cell pairs with x - axes consistently oriented ± 30º from the frame coordinates . We summed the magnitude of traction forces across cell pairs , F i (cid:31)(cid:30) ∑ , to derive the total in - plane traction force generated by both cells . For each cell in a pair , we calculated the forces balanced across cell pairs , that is , the cell – cell force , as the vector sum of all traction forces for each cell , F i (cid:31)(cid:30) ∑ ( Figure 1A ) . This cell – cell force on average was oriented perpendicular to the cell – cell junction ( Supplemental Figure S2 ) . We integrated the force magnitudes perpendicular to the cell – cell force vector , F i , ∑ ⊥ , to estimate cell – ECM force exerted at the focal adhesions . For all forces , the mean and SEM are provided . Cell – cell and cell – ECM forces increase with isometric dilation of spread area on square frames We tested whether pairs of MDCK cells attached to square mi - cropatterns exerted larger tractions , as in single cells , when the edge dimension of square patterns was increased from 35 μm ( small ) to 45 μm ( large ; Figure 1B ) . MDCK cell pairs did not reliably fill patterns > 45 μm . As expected , traction stresses localized mainly at the corners of cell pairs , and cell pairs on large patterns exerted larger traction stresses ( Figure 1B ) . The traction fields overlapped the distributions of integrin - based focal adhesions ( Supplemental Figure S1B ) . When cell spread area increased 1 . 7 - fold , cell pairs exerted higher cell – ECM and cell – cell forces ( Figure 1C ) : cell – ECM forces increased 1 . 5 - fold ( 573 ± 218 to 848 ± 319 nN ) , and cell – cell forces almost doubled ( 372 ± 180 to 696 ± 386 nN ) . This behavior is consistent with increased traction stresses observed in single fi - broblasts on ECM patterns of different sizes ( Oakes et al . , 2014 ) . To test whether the cell – cell force correlated with the fluorescence intensity of E - cadherin – DsRed at the cell – cell junction , we calcu - lated the Pearson’s ρ for a scatter plot of cell – cell force and the average E - cadherin – DsRed fluorescence intensity ( Supplemental Figure S3 ) . Cell - cell force correlated weakly with E - cadherin levels FIGURE 1 : Cell – cell and cell – ECM forces in cell pairs increased with increased spread area on square patterns . ( A ) To compare across patterned cell pairs , we defined an x - y coordinate system relative to the cell – cell junction and only analyzed pairs having x - axes within α ± 30º . To estimate the cell – cell force balanced across cell pairs , we integrated the traction force vectors under each cell , (cid:31)(cid:30) ∑ F i ( A ) . To estimate cell – ECM forces that are least dependent on cell – cell forces , we integrated the force magnitudes perpendicular to the cell – cell force vector , ∑ ⊥ F i , . ( B ) Pairs of E - cadherin – DsRed MDCK cells spread fully on squares containing collagen I and gelatin – Alexa Fluor 488 ( green ) . Cell pairs on larger squares generated larger total forces . ( C ) Cell - cell and cell – ECM forces for MDCK cell pairs on 35 - and 45 - μm patterns . Scale bar , 20 μm . Volume 26 July 1 , 2015 Force balance in cell pairs | 2459 Cell – cell and cell – ECM forces remain constant on elongated I - shapes Both cell – cell and cell – ECM forces increased in cell pairs on 1 : 1 . 7 – aspect ratio rectangles relative to small squares ( Figure 2B ) . In con - trast , cell – cell and cell – ECM forces remained constant on elongated I - shapes ( Figure 4B ) . On elongated I - shapes , the cell – cell junction length decreased ∼ 50 % ( Figure 4C ) , and although the average E - cadherin – DsRed intensity did not change significantly ( Figure 4D ) , the integrated E - cadherin intensity decreased by ∼ 50 % . These re - sults indicate that cell – ECM adhesions at the distal ends of cell – cell junctions , as in the rectangle patterns , are required to maintain cell – cell junction length and support proportional increases in cell – cell and cell – ECM forces . These results are in agreement with the ele - vated tension observed in nonadhesive bridge regions for single cells on ECM stripes ( Rossier et al . , 2010 ) . Total forces and strain energies are regulated by the spread area of cell pairs and cell – ECM constraints The increase in cell – cell forces on elongated rectangle patterns com - pared with elongated I - shapes supports the idea that spread area ( with increases supported by cell – ECM adhesions at the distal ends removing ECM anchorage at the ends of the cell – cell junctions changed the balance of cell – cell and cell – ECM forces , we patterned cell pairs on I - shapes ( Tseng et al . , 2012 ) of different sizes ( Figure 3A ) . As expected , focal adhesions to the ECM localized predominantly at the bar ends of the I - shapes away from the cell – cell junction ( Figure 3B ) . Both cell – cell and cell – ECM forces increased in 35 × 35 μm ( small ) I - shape patterns relative to the small squares ( Figures 1 and 3 ) : cell – ECM forces increased 1 . 2 - fold ( 573 ± 218 nN [ square ] to 705 ± 336 nN [ I - shape ] ) , and cell – cell forces increased 1 . 6 - fold ( 372 ± 180 nN [ square ] to 611 ± 314 nN [ I - shape ] ) , while the cell – cell junc - tion length decreased from 31 to 22 μm . As with the square pat - terns , we also increased the edge length of the I - shapes 1 . 3 - fold from 35 to 45 μm ( Figure 3A ) : cell – ECM forces increased a signifi - cant 1 . 4 - fold ( 705 ± 336 to 968 ± 464 nN ) ; however cell – cell forces did not increase significantly ( 611 ± 314 to 742 ± 438 nN ; Figure 3C ) . Cell – cell junction length also increased 1 . 3 - fold on the isometrically larger I - shapes ( Figure 3D ) . The average E - cadherin intensity along the cell – cell junction decreased by ∼ 50 % ( Figure 3E ) , but the inte - grated E - cadherin intensity remained constant . These results indi - cate that E - cadherin recruitment and cell – cell junction length are independent of changes in endogenous forces . FIGURE 2 : Cell - cell and cell – ECM forces increased in cell pairs on elongated rectangles . ( A ) E - cadherin – DsRed MDCK cell pairs on rectangles with varied aspect ratios ( dotted outline ) . ( B ) Cell - cell and cell – ECM forces increased as the aspect ratio changed from 1 : 1 : to 1 : 1 . 7 . ( C ) Cell - cell junction length remained constant for cell pairs on elongated rectangles . ( D ) Average E - cadherin intensity in cell – cell junctions decreased as the aspect ratio of rectangular patterns increased . FIGURE 3 : Cell – ECM force increases but cell – cell force remains constant on dilated I - shapes . ( A ) Pairs of E - cadherin - DsRed MDCK cells fully spread on I - shapes of different aspect ratios ( green ) . Traction stress heat maps are estimated from bead displacements . ( B ) Focal adhesions localized to the corners of I - shapes under paxillin - GFP MDCK cells and were excluded under the cell – cell junction ( scale bar , 20 μm ) . ( C ) Cell pairs on the larger I - shapes generate larger cell – ECM force but not cell – cell force . ( D , E ) Cell - cell junction length increased but average E - cadherin intensity along cell – cell junction decreased with increasing pattern sized . 2460 | J . Y . Sim , J . Moeller , et al . Molecular Biology of the Cell increased cell – cell forces correlated with increased molecular tension in E - cadherin . We used a FRET - based tension biosensor engineered in the cytoplasmic domain of E - cadherin ( EcadTSMod ; Figure 6A ) , which we described and characterized previously ( Grashoff et al . , 2010 ; Borghi et al . , 2012 ) . FRET efficiency was calculated from fluo - rescence lifetime measurements of the FRET donor mTFP1 ( see Materials and Methods ) . The baseline FRET efficiency for full - length EcadTSMod was ∼ 18 % in MDCK cells on adhesive , unpatterned gels ( Figure 6A ) . We confirmed that EcadTSMod was sensitive to actomy - osin - generated cellular tension : 1 ) EcadTSMod ( Δ cyto ) , lacking the β - catenin – binding domain and linkage to α - catenin and F - actin , caused a ∼ 4 % increase in FRET ( Figure 6A ) , as in Borghi et al . ( 2012 ) ; and 2 ) addition of cytochalasin D ( CD ; 0 . 5 μM ) to disrupt the actin cytoskeleton resulted in a ∼ 4 % increase in FRET . A 4 % change repre - sents a per - molecule force decrease of ∼ 0 . 7 pN based on a previ - ously reported calibration of TSMod ( Grashoff et al . , 2010 ) . We expected an increase in EcadTSMod molecular tension in all cases because on elongated rectangles , the average fluorescence intensity of E - cadherin – DsRed at cell – cell junctions decreased , while spread area and cell – cell forces increased ( Figure 2 ) , and on I - shapes , the junction length decreased , while cell – cell force and E - cadherin intensity remained constant ( Figure 4 ) . Surprisingly , EcadTSMod FRET efficiency remained constant in cell pairs cultured on rectangles and I - shapes of all aspect ratios ( Figure 6B ) . EcadTS - Mod FRET efficiency was independent of cell – cell force , cell – cell junction length , and E - cadherin levels at cell – cell junctions . A parsi - monious explanation is that E - cadherin is maintained under a con - stant tension required for cytoskeletal engagement , and this mole - cular tension is independent of overall cell forces ( Borghi et al . , 2012 ; Buckley et al . , 2014 ) . Thus we asked whether desmosomes , another load - bearing cell – cell adhesion complex , were recruited with increasing cell – cell forces . We used indirect immunofluores - cence of desmoplakin , a protein found in desmosomes , in cell pairs on elongated I - shapes having constant cell – cell forces but decreas - ing junction lengths ( see Materials and Methods ) . The average and integrated fluorescence intensity of desmoplakin decreased in elon - gated cell pairs on I - shapes ( Supplemental Figure S5 ) . We then tested whether there was a correlation between E - cadherin fluorescence intensity and E - cadherinTSMod FRET efficiency . We generated a scatter plot of average E - cadherin intensity versus E - cadherinTSMod FRET efficiency of all shapes and aspect ratios ( Supplemental Figure S6 ) but found a weak correlation ( ρ = − 0 . 29 ) . of cell – cell junction ) plays an important role in determining the force balance in cell pairs . We next tested whether increased cell – cell forces also correlated with increased strain energies and total forces with increasing spread area in cell pairs . The total force of both cells in a cell pair is the integral of force magnitudes , F i (cid:31)(cid:30) ∑ , and strain energy is calculated as described by Oakes et al . ( 2014 ) ( see Materials and Methods ) . Total force , strain energy , and spread area of cell pairs increased proportionally as the pattern size increased in squares and rectangles . As expected , total force , strain energy , and spread area of cell pairs remained constant on I - shapes of all aspect ratios ( Figure 5 ) . Of note , total forces on all sizes of I - shapes were as high as forces on the largest 1 : 1 . 7 rectangles , even though cell spread areas were significantly larger on rectangles ( Figure 5 , A and C ) . These data in - dicate that total forces and strain energies in cell pairs are deter - mined not only by cell spread area but also by the spatial constraints placed on cell – ECM interactions , especially under the cell – cell junc - tion . Although external ECM patterns drove increased cell spread area accompanied by proportional increases in total force and strain energy , the integrated focal adhesion area remained constant for patterns of cell pairs ( Figure 5D ) , similar to observations on elon - gated single cells ( Oakes et al . , 2014 ) . Cells in pairs exert larger forces than single cells of the same size To examine the role of cell – cell junctions in regulating total forces and strain energy , we compared the total force in single cells and cell pairs confined to the same spread area on 35 - μm - square patterns ( 1225 μm 2 ) . Single MDCK cells could not fill larger patterns . We found 2 . 5 - fold higher total forces and 5 - fold higher strain energies for cell pairs than with single cells ( Figure 5 , E and F ) . Total force and strain energy for each cell in a pair of cells on 35 × 60 μm rectangles ( 1050 μm 2 / cell ) were also larger ( 2 . 2 - and 5 . 7 - fold , respectively ) than in single cells of comparable spread area . These data indicate that the presence of a cell – cell contact coordinates increased cell gener - ated traction forces and endogenous strain energies . E - cadherin maintains molecular tension homeostasis under a wide range of endogenous cell – cell and cell – ECM forces We observed that the spatial distribution of cell – ECM adhesions and cell spread area controlled cell – cell and cell – ECM forces in cell pairs . However , increasing cell – cell forces did not recruit increased amounts of E - cadherin to the cell – cell junction . Thus we asked whether FIGURE 4 : Cell - cell force remains constant with elongation of I - shapes . ( A ) E - cadherin – DsRed MDCK cell pairs patterned on I - shapes with increasing aspect ratio ( dotted outline ) . ( B ) Cell – cell and cell – ECM forces did not vary significantly with variation of I - shape aspect ratio . ( C ) Cell – cell junction length decreased with elongation of I - shapes . ( D ) Average E - cadherin intensity remained constant on I - shapes with different aspect ratio . Volume 26 July 1 , 2015 Force balance in cell pairs | 2461 FIGURE 5 : Total cell forces regulated by cell spread area and spatial pattern of cell – ECM adhesions . ( A ) Total force per cell increased with increasing aspect ratio from 1 : 1 to 1 : 1 . 7 on rectangles but remained constant for I - shapes . ( B ) Strain energy of each cell in MDCK cell pairs on rectangle and I - shape patterns with varied aspect ratio . ( C ) Spread area on rectangles increased proportionally to aspect ratio but remained constant on I - shapes . ( D ) The integrated area of focal adhesions ( from fluorescently labeled paxillin ) remained constant regardless of aspect ratio and the shape of the ECM pattern . ( E , F ) Total forces and strain energies for single cells and cell pairs on the 35 - μm - square patterns and for each cell in a cell pair on 35 × 60 μm rectangles . FIGURE 6 : Direct measurements of E - cadherin cytoplasmic tension and actin organization on different patterns . ( A ) FRET sensor ( TSMod ) engineered into the cytoplasmic domain of E - cadherin . FRET efficiency increased from 18 % for the full - length EcadTSMod to 23 % for the control construct lacking the cytoplasmic domain . The FRET efficiency increased by the same amount when cells were treated with cytochalasin D , confirming that the EcadTSMod was sensitive to actomyosin - generated tension . ( B ) EcadTSMod FRET efficiency at cell – cell junctions in cell pairs cultured on rectangular and I - shapes with different aspect ratios . FRET signal was not significantly different between these samples . 2462 | J . Y . Sim , J . Moeller , et al . Molecular Biology of the Cell retracted from the junction ( Figure 7D ) . Retraction velocities away from the junction were similar for actin - GFP and E - cadherin – DsRed ( Figure 7 , B and E ) . Thirteen minutes after CD treatment , cortical actin bundles had dissolved , and foci of actin were localized to the corners of the cell – ECM adhesions ( Figure 7A ) . During this time , the cell – cell junctions shortened significantly , but the contact remained intact . To test whether the recoil dynamics of actin bundles was con - trolled by myosin activity , we treated cells with ML - 7 , which inhibits myosin light chain kinase and thus myosin activation . Adding ML - 7 for 20 min had little or no detectable effect on the distribution of actin bundles or E - cadherin ( Supplemental Figure S7 ) . When CD was added in the presence of ML - 7 , the retraction rates of actin bundles and E - cadherin were similar to those in cells treated with only CD ( Supplemental Figure S7 ) . These results indicate that cortical actin bundles are under constitutive ( nonmyosin ) tension The actin cytoskeleton is under elevated tension at the distal ends of cell – cell junctions Higher intensities of E - cadherin – DsRed at the distal ends of cell – cell junctions indicated a nonuniform “stress” distribution at the junc - tion . Thus we postulated that E - cadherin might distribute molecular tensions over more molecules in regions where cell – cell forces were higher . To identify sites of high actin contractility , we added low con - centrations of CD ( 0 . 5 μM ) to cap the barbed ends of actin fila - ments . This treatment results in displacement of actin bundles from putative anchorage points on the membrane ( Yamada and Nelson , 2007 ) . To exclude effects of cell – ECM adhesions on actin bundle dynamics at the distal edges of cell – cell junctions , we first analyzed actin - GFP in cell pairs on elongated ( 1 : 1 . 7 ) I - shapes ( Figure 7 , A – C ) . Two minutes after CD addition , cell – cell junctions began to shorten , actin bundles started to recoil from the distal edges of cell – cell con - tacts ( Figure 7A ) , and a large fraction of E - cadherin simultaneously FIGURE 7 : E - cadherin localized at the distal ends of cell – cell junctions with a uniform distribution of EcadTSMod tension . ( A , D , G ) Actin and E - cadherin dynamics in the presence of 0 . 5 μM CD on I - shape and rectangular patterns . ( B , E , H ) Kymographs of actin and E - cadherin show shrinkage of stress fibers and the junction upon CD treatment . ( C , F , I ) Kymographs of actin and E - cadherin asters show retraction after CD treatment . ( J – L ) ECM , differential interference contrast , and E - cadherin images of MDCK cell pair on I - shape ( scale bar , 15 μm ) . ( M ) Average E - cadherin – DsRed intensities on I - shape ( n = 7 ) were highest at the ends of the junction . ( N ) The average lifetime mTFP1 ( donor ) in EcadTSMod cells spreading on the I - shapes was evenly distributed along the cell – cell junction ( n = 6 ) . Volume 26 July 1 , 2015 Force balance in cell pairs | 2463 Our findings of increased cell – cell and cell – ECM forces with iso - metric dilation of rectangular patterns is consistent with observa - tions of unpatterned epithelial cell pairs having a range of spread areas ( Maruthamuthu et al . , 2011 ) . Increased total force with increas - ing area of patterned cell pairs was also consistent with prior obser - vations that total traction forces increased in single patterned fibro - blasts with increasing cell spread area and aspect ratio ( Tan et al . , 2003 ; Oakes et al . , 2014 ) . We further showed that changes in cell – cell and cell – ECM forces and overall strain energy in epithelial cell pairs were independent of the focal adhesion area , consistent with prior work using single patterned fibroblasts ( Maruthamuthu et al . , 2011 ) . Liu et al . ( 2010 ) observed that cell – cell force correlated with cell – cell junction length in endothelial cell pairs , but this trend was not observed in studies using unpatterned epithelial cell pairs ( Maruthamuthu et al . , 2011 ) . In our study of patterned epithelial cell pairs , we found that the cell – cell junction length decreased on I - shapes with sustained cell – cell forces and remained constant on rectangles with increasing cell – cell forces , presumably because rect - angle patterns allowed cell – ECM adhesion at the distal edges of the cell – cell junctions ( Figures 2 and 4 ) . However , epithelial and endo - thelial cells also exhibit differences in their actin cytoskeleton that may contribute to the observed differences between these studies ; for example , endothelial cells generate actin stress fibers , whereas epithelial cells form cortical bundles of actin ( Stapleton et al . , 2014 ) . Differences in the stiffness and porosity of PDMS micropost arrays ( Liu et al . , 2010 ) versus continuous PAA hydrogels ( Maruthamuthu et al . , 2011 ) may also affect the results ( Schoen et al . , 2013 ) . Of importance , we found that cell – cell force was uncoupled from cell – ECM force when cell – ECM adhesions were absent from the dis - tal edges of the cell – cell junctions . On I - shapes , cell – ECM focal ad - hesions formed exclusively on the distal bars and did not constrain cell – cell junction length ( Figure 3 ) , whereas they formed around the entire periphery of cell pairs on rectangles ( Supplemental Figure S1B ) . Previous studies on the dynamics of epithelial cell – cell contact formation showed that localized Rho and Rac activity controls acto - myosin - driven expansion of the E - cadherin junctions and that integ - rin - based adhesions are excluded beneath the center of E - cadherin junctions and localized to the edges of cell – cell contacts ( Yamada and Nelson , 2007 ) . Cell pairs on rectangles reproduced this organi - zation of cell – cell and cell – ECM adhesions at cell – cell junctions and stabilized the junction length , whereas both cell – cell and cell – ECM forces increased as spread area increased . To test whether cell – cell force was correlated with molecular ten - sion on E - cadherin , we used a genetically encoded tension sensor , EcadTSMod . Previous EcadTSMod FRET measurements revealed that membrane - bound E - cadherin is under constitutive actomyosin - mediated tension and that molecular tension on E - cadherin at a cell – cell contact is transiently elevated by applying acute external elongations > 200 % of the initial length of cell pairs ( Grashoff et al . , 2010 ; Borghi et al . , 2012 ) . In this study , we used EcadTSMod to de - termine whether cell – cell junctions in cell pairs that were chronically “elongated” on adhesive rectangles or I - shapes experienced changes in the resting tension of E - cadherin while modulating the endogenous force balance of cell – cell and cell – ECM forces . Surpris - ingly , EcadTSMod FRET efficiency remained constant at 20 % on 1 : 1 . 7 rectangles , and junction length remained constant and cell – cell force increased 2 . 5 - fold compared with that on a 1 : 1 square ( Figure 6 ) . EcadTSMod FRET efficiency did not change in cell pairs over a range of elongated I - shapes , whereas junction length decreased and cell – cell force remained constant ( Figure 6 ) . The FRET efficiency of 20 % was within the dynamic range of the TSMod tension sensor to detect molecular forces of 1 – 5 pN ( Figure 6 ; Grashoff et al . , 2010 ) . and recoil in the presence of CD . This built - in tension develops dur - ing maturation of cell – cell junctions and cell spreading . Next we added CD to cells cultured on rectangle patterns to test whether cell – ECM adhesion underneath cell – cell junctions changed the contractility of cortical actin bundles . CD addition still caused actin bundle retraction to the distal end of cell – ECM adhesions ( Figure 7 , G and I ) , similar to that in CD - treated cells on the I - shape patterns . However , the constrained cell – cell junction did not shorten as much as that in cells on I - shapes ( Figure 7H ) . These results further support the idea that cortical actin bundles are embedded proximal to the plasma membrane at the edges of cell – cell junctions and have a tight association with the E - cadherin complex . We conclude that cell – cell force is highly localized at the ends of cell – cell junctions and is distributed nonuniformly along the cell – cell junction . E - cadherin localizes to the high stress regions at the ends of cell – cell junctions We next asked whether E - cadherin plays a role in the spatial local - ization of tension at the distal ends of cell – cell junctions . We over - lapped E - cadherin – DsRed fluorescence intensity micrographs of fluorescence lifetime imaging microscopy ( FLIM ) - FRET data from cell pairs patterned on 35 - μm I - shapes ( Figure 7 ) . Cell pairs on I - shapes exhibited less variation in cell – cell junction angle and size than on rectangular patterns ( Tseng et al . , 2012 ) . Consistent with the CD experiments , we observed more E - cadherin localized at the dis - tal ends of cell – cell junctions ( Figure 7M ) . These results are similar to observations in suspended cell pairs ( Engl et al . , 2014 ) . Not surpris - ingly , the average lifetime of EcadTSMod donor fluorophore ( mTFP1 ) was evenly distributed along the junction ( Figure 7N ) . E - cadherin at distal ends of cell – cell junctions anchored to the ac - tin cortex is believed to play a major role in the force propagation across the cell – cell junction ( Maruthamuthu et al . , 2011 ) and may be recruited to the junction in a force - dependent manner . Thus we tested whether E - cadherin intensity along the entire junction or just the distal ends correlated with cell – cell forces . The distal ends of the cell – cell junction were defined by the ∼ 3 - μm width of actin bundles normal to the edges of cell – cell junctions . Cell – cell forces correlated poorly with E - cadherin intensity along the entire cell – cell junction and distal ends ( ρ = − 0 . 14 for the entire cell – cell junction [ Supplemental Figure S3 ] , and ρ = 0 . 15 for the distal ends [ Supplemental Figure S8A ] ) . A scatter plot of EcadTSMod FRET versus average E - cadherin – DsRed intensity at the distal ends on rectangles ( Supplemental Figure S8B ) revealed no significant correlation ( ρ = 0 . 08 ) . These data indicate that E - cad - herin molecular tension is constant along the length of cell – cell junc - tions but that locally increased levels of E - cadherin support increased intercellular forces at the distal ends of cell – cell junction , as suggested by the CD - induced actin disassembly experiments ( Figure 7 ) . DISCUSSION Mechanotransduction at integrin - based focal adhesions has been well studied in single cells . In contrast , little is known about the mechanical interplay between cell – ECM and cell – cell adhesions in multicell conditions . In our reductionist model system , we examine pairs of MDCK epithelial cells adhering to rectangular and I - shaped ECM patterns designed to manipulate the force balance within cell pairs by varying the spatial distribution of cell – ECM adhesions and cell shape and size ( Figures 1 – 4 ) . We leveraged the findings of Tseng et al . ( 2012 ) that cell pairs preferentially align cell – cell junc - tions over areas with minimal ECM to engineer conditions in which cell – cell forces increased ( isometric area dilation on rectangles ) or remained constant ( varying aspect ratio on I - shapes versus rectan - gles ) with increasing cell – ECM forces . 2464 | J . Y . Sim , J . Moeller , et al . Molecular Biology of the Cell and E - cadherin molecular tension homeostasis , the mechanisms of reinforcement , whether by recruitment or activation of accessory proteins by conformational changes under load , remain unclear . It will be important in future investigations to leverage quantitative engineering and biological tools to explore the underlying mecha - nisms and mechanobiological set points . MATERIALS AND METHODS Cell culture and epifluorescence microscopy MDCK type II G cells stably expressing fluorescently tagged proteins were maintained in low - glucose DMEM ( 11885 ; Invitrogen , Carlsbad , CA ) containing 1 g / l sodium bicarbonate and supplemented with 10 % ( vol / vol ) fetal bovine serum ( FBS ) and antibiotics as described previously ( Borghi et al . , 2012 ) . MDCK cells were transfected with the EcadTSMod FRET construct using Lipofectamine 2000 ( 11668027 ; Invitrogen ) according to the manufacturer’s instructions . Transfected cells were selected in 0 . 5g / l G418 . Cells were washed and trypsinized in phosphate - buffered saline ( PBS ; pH 7 . 4 ) , seeded , and incubated on the patterned gels for 16 h before live - cell imaging or fixation in 4 % paraformaldehyde . For pharmacological perturbation , 0 . 5 μM cytochalasin D or 25 μM ML - 7 was added ( Yamada and Nelson , 2007 ) . Cells were imaged on a Leica DMI 6000B inverted microscope with a xenon arc lamp ( DG4 300W ; Sutter Instruments , Novato , CA ) and a 63 × / numerical aperture 1 . 4 oil immersion objective ( Leica ) . To reduce background fluorescence , phenol red – free Leibovitz’s L - 15 medium supplemented with 10 % ( vol / vol ) FBS was used . Micropatterning of polyacrylamide gels A mixture of collagen I and fluorescently labeled gelatin was pat - terned on glass coverslips using a photoresist - assisted - liftoff tech - nique ( Möller et al . , 2013 ) . Standard contact photolithography of S1818 photoresist ( Microchem , Newton , MA ) was used to fabricate photoresist - patterned glass coverslips . Coverslips were incubated with 0 . 1 mg / ml poly ( l - lysine ) - graft - poly ( ethylene glycol ) ( PLL - g [ 3 . 5 ] - PEG ( 2 kDa ) ; Surface Solutions , Zurich , Switzerland ) for 1 h before 1 - methylpyrrolidone – assisted photoresist lift - off . PLL - g - PEG pat - terns were backfilled with a mixture of 10 μg / ml Alexa Fluor 488 – la - beled gelatin ( A - 20173 , Invitrogen ; G1393 , Sigma - Aldrich , St . Louis , MO ) and 50 μg / ml collagen I ( A1048301 ; Life Technologies , Gaith - ersburg , MD ) . Labeled gelatin was used instead of collagen because the low pH of the collagen solution was incompatible with the label - ing protocol . To transfer the protein pattern , a 25 - kPa PAA gel ( 0 . 5 g / ml acrylamide , 0 . 025 g / ml Bis - acrylamide ) was polymerized be - tween a protein - patterned glass coverslip and glass - bottom dish ( MatTek , Ashland , MA ) silanized with 3 - ( trimethoxysilyl ) propyl meth - acrylate ( M6514 , Sigma - Aldrich ; Supplemental Figure S1 ) . Fluorescence lifetime imaging microscopy FLIM measurements of the FRET donor mTFP1 were performed with a Leica SP5 multiphoton microscope and Simple - Tau 152 single - photon counting system ( Becker & Hickl , Berlin , Germany ) consist - ing of Spectra Physics MaiTai , DeepSee ultrafast two - photon pulsed laser , and an external HPM - 100 - 40 high - speed hybrid PMT / GaAsP detector . An HCX APO L20 × / 1 . 00 water immersion objective with 870 - nm multiphoton excitation at 400 MHz and 512 × 512 pixel win - dow was used for data acquisition . Photons were accumulated for up to 150 frames ( 3 min ; Becker et al . , 2014 ) . Time - domain FLIM experiments and FLIM data analysis were performed as described previously ( Grashoff et al . , 2010 ) using SPCImage software ( Becker & Hickl ) and Matlab ( MathWorks , Natick , MA ) . Fluorescence lifetimes were determined by fitting a double - exponential decay model . FRET efficiency was calculated from the equation FRET Molecular - scale tension on E - cadherin was distributed evenly along the cell – cell junction ; however , E - cadherin intensity levels were high - est at the distal ends of cell – cell contacts ( Figure 7M ; Yamada and Nelson , 2007 ; Engl et al . , 2014 ) . These results indicate that MDCK cells can maintain molecular tension homeostasis on E - cadherin over a range of cellular forces . Elevated forces acting across the cell – cell contact did not lead to an increase of force per molecule but shifted the spatial distribution of E - cadherin along the cell – cell junc - tion to higher levels at the distal ends . This result agrees with recent work showing that E - cadherin does not affect the magnitude of cell – cell forces but the rate that cells within epithelial microtissues build up cell – cell forces ( Bazellières et al . , 2015 ) . Comparing traction forces between cell pairs and single cells constrained to the same pattern size , we found that the cell pairs exerted 2 . 5 - fold - larger trac - tions than single cells ( Figure 5 ) . Surprisingly , the traction forces for each cell within cell pairs were also 2 . 2 - fold higher than for single cells of comparable size , indicating that the presence of a cell – cell contact critically enhances cell traction forces . We hypothesize that E - cadherin tension homeostasis could be facilitated through 1 ) recruitment of more E - cadherin to distribute the cell – cell force across more molecules , 2 ) recruitment of other classes of cell adhesion proteins such as desmosomes , or 3 ) variable interactions and spatial engagement of adhesion proteins with the cytoskeleton . We reject the first hypothesis because the average intensity of fluorescently tagged E - cadherin correlated weakly ( and negatively in most cases ) with increased cell – cell force or force per junction length when we varied the aspect ratio of the rectangle patterns and I - shapes ( Figures 2D , 3E , and 4D and Supplemental Figures S3 and S8 ) . We also reject the second hypothesis , since we observed a negative correlation between the staining intensity of desmoplakin , a component of desmosomes , and cell – cell force ( Supplemental Figure S5 ) . However , it is important to note that al - though these data do not support protein recruitment mechanisms , they do not rule them out conclusively . Fluorescence intensity mea - surements are not a quantitative proxy for protein density , and we only evaluated the fluorescence intensities of E - cadherin and des - moplakin . Lacking knowledge of the E - cadherin density , we also cannot use the molecular FRET signal of cytoplasmic EcadTSMod to estimate junctional forces . A more detailed analysis of additional adhesion proteins , their cytoplasmic adaptor proteins , and binding dynamics is needed to test the first two hypotheses completely , but this is beyond the scope of the present analysis . Although E - cadherin molecular FRET homeostasis under large variations in cell – cell forces was unexpected , it also remains unex - plained . Thus we considered the third hypothesis and examined the dynamic organization of E - cadherin and the actin cytoskeleton at the cell – cell junction using low concentrations of CD and ML - 7 ( Supplemental Figure S7 ) . Similar retraction rates of actin filaments and E - cadherin plaques localized at the ends of the cell – cell junc - tions on both rectangles and I - shapes indicated force localization and tight association of actin filament bundles and E - cadherin ( Figure 7 ) . This tight association of E - cadherin and actin filaments is consistent with work showing that actin dynamics and myosin II con - tractility modulate E - cadherin immobilization to cell – cell contacts in suspended epithelial cell pairs ( Engl et al . , 2014 ) . During maturation of E - cadherin cell – cell contacts , remodeling of the actin cytoskeleton controls the reorganization of mobile E - cadherin puncta into compacted , less mobile cell – cell contacts and E - cadherin plaques at the margins of the cell – cell junction ( Adams et al . , 1998 ) . Although we conclude that variable interactions and spatial engagement of adhesion proteins with the cytoskeleton do play a role in the endogenous cell – cell and cell – ECM force balance Volume 26 July 1 , 2015 Force balance in cell pairs | 2465 adhesion strengthened by actin cytoskeleton remodeling through Rac and Cdc42 . J Cell Biol 167 , 1183 – 1194 . Drees F , Pokutta S , Yamada S , Nelson WJ , Weis WI ( 2005 ) . α - Catenin is a molecular switch that binds E - cadherin - β - catenin and regulates actin - filament assembly . Cell 123 , 903 – 915 . Engl W , Arasi B , Yap LL , Thiery JP , Viasnoff V ( 2014 ) . Actin dynamics modulate mechanosensitive immobilization of E - cadherin at adherens junctions . Nat Cell Biol 16 , 587 – 594 . Friedl P , Gilmour D ( 2009 ) . Collective cell migration in morphogenesis , regeneration and cancer . Nat Rev Mol Cell Biol 10 , 445 – 457 . Ghibaudo M , Saez A , Trichet L , Xayaphoummine A , Browaeys J , Silberzan P , Buguin A , Ladoux B ( 2008 ) . Traction forces and rigidity sensing regulate cell functions . Soft Matter 4 , 1836 – 1843 . Grashoff C , Hoffman BD , Brenner MD , Zhou R , Parsons M , Yang MT , McLean MA , Sligar SG , Chen CS , Ha T , et al . ( 2010 ) . Measuring me - chanical tension across vinculin reveals regulation of focal adhesion dynamics . Nature 466 , 263 – 266 . Halbleib JM , Nelson WJ ( 2006 ) . Cadherins in development : cell adhesion , sorting , and tissue morphogenesis . Genes Dev 20 , 3199 – 3214 . le Duc Q , Shi Q , Blonk I , Sonnenberg A , Wang N , Leckband D , Rooij J de ( 2010 ) . Vinculin potentiates E - cadherin mechanosensing and is recruited to actin - anchored sites within adherens junctions in a myosin II – depen - dent manner . J Cell Biol 189 , 1107 – 1115 . Liu Z , Tan JL , Cohen DM , Yang MT , Sniadecki NJ , Ruiz SA , Nelson CM , Chen CS ( 2010 ) . Mechanical tugging force regulates the size of cell – cell junctions . Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 107 , 9944 – 9949 . Maruthamuthu V , Sabass B , Schwarz US , Gardel ML ( 2011 ) . Cell - ECM trac - tion force modulates endogenous tension at cell – cell contacts . Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 108 , 4708 – 4713 . Möller J , Emge P , Vizcarra IA , Kollmannsberger P , Vogel V ( 2013 ) . Bacterial filamentation accelerates colonization of adhesive spots embedded in biopassive surfaces . New J Phys 15 , 125016 . Oakes PW , Banerjee S , Marchetti MC , Gardel ML ( 2014 ) . Geometry regulates traction stresses in adherent cells . Biophys J 107 , 825 – 833 . Rape AD , Guo W , Wang Y ( 2011 ) . The regulation of traction force in relation to cell shape and focal adhesions . Biomaterials 32 , 2043 – 2051 . Rossier OM , Gauthier N , Biais N , Vonnegut W , Fardin MA , Avigan P , Heller ER , Mathur A , Ghassemi S , Koeckert MS , et al . ( 2010 ) . Force generated by actomyosin contraction builds bridges between adhesive contacts . EMBO J 29 , 1055 – 1068 . Schoen I , Pruitt BL , Vogel V ( 2013 ) . The yin - yang of rigidity sensing : how forces and mechanical properties regulate the cellular response to materials . Annu Rev Mater Res 43 , 589 – 618 . Stapleton SC , Chopra A , Chen CS ( 2014 ) . Force measurement tools to explore cadherin mechanotransduction . Cell Commun Adhes 21 , 193 – 205 . Takeichi M ( 2014 ) . Dynamic contacts : rearranging adherens junctions to drive epithelial remodelling . Nat Rev Mol Cell Biol 15 , 397 – 410 . Tambe DT , Croutelle U , Trepat X , Park CY , Kim JH , Millet E , Butler JP , Fredberg JJ ( 2013 ) . Monolayer stress microscopy : limitations , artifacts , and accuracy of recovered intercellular stresses . PLoS One 8 , e55172 . Tambe DT , Hardin CC , Angelini TE , Rajendran K , Park CY , Serra - Picamal X , Zhou EH , Zaman MH , Butler JP , Weitz DA , et al . ( 2011 ) . Collective cell guidance by cooperative intercellular forces . Nat Mater 10 , 469 – 475 . Tan JL , Tien J , Pirone DM , Gray DS , Bhadriraju K , Chen CS ( 2003 ) . Cells lying on a bed of microneedles : an approach to isolate mechanical force . Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 100 , 1484 – 1489 . Tee S - Y , Fu J , Chen CS , Janmey PA ( 2011 ) . Cell shape and substrate rigidity both regulate cell stiffness . Biophys J 100 , L25 – L27 . Tseng Q , Duchemin - Pelletier E , Deshiere A , Balland M , Guillou H , Filhol O , Théry M ( 2012 ) . Spatial organization of the extracellular matrix regulates cell – cell junction positioning . Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 109 , 1506 – 1511 . Twiss F , Duc QL , Horst SVD , Tabdili H , Krogt GVD , Wang N , Rehmann H , Huveneers S , Leckband DE , Rooij JD ( 2012 ) . Vinculin - dependent Cad - herin mechanosensing regulates efficient epithelial barrier formation . Biol Open 1 , 1128 – 1140 . Vogel V , Sheetz M ( 2006 ) . Local force and geometry sensing regulate cell functions . Nat Rev Mol Cell Biol 7 , 265 – 275 . Yamada S , Nelson WJ ( 2007 ) . Localized zones of Rho and Rac activities drive initiation and expansion of epithelial cell – cell adhesion . J Cell Biol 178 , 517 – 527 . Yonemura S , Wada Y , Watanabe T , Nagafuchi A , Shibata M ( 2010 ) . α - Catenin as a tension transducer that induces adherens junction develop - ment . Nat Cell Biol 12 , 533 – 542 . Zimmermann J , Hayes RL , Basan M , Onuchic JN , Rappel W - J , Levine H ( 2014 ) . Intercellular stress reconstitution from traction force data . Bio - phys J 107 , 548 – 554 . efficiency = 1 − τ / τ dono r , where τ is the lifetime of mTFP1 in the E - cadherin FRET sensor as a weighted - average lifetime from SPCIm - age software and τ donor is the lifetime of mTFP1 alone , as described previously ( Grashoff et al . , 2010 ) . Traction force microscopy Fluorescent beads of size 0 . 2 μm were mixed in the 25 - kPa PAA gels at 3 % ( vol / vol ) from a stock solution ( 0 . 2 μm blue fluorescent , F - 8805 ; Invitrogen ) . Images of fluorescent beads were taken with and without adherent cells and registered to correct stage drift us - ing the ImageJ plug - in Template Matching and Slice Alignment ( Tseng et al . , 2012 ) . Cells were removed with 0 . 05 % ( wt / vol ) trypsin for 10 min , followed by PBS wash . Bead displacements were de - tected using the Particle image velocimetry ImageJ plug - in ( Tseng et al . , 2012 ) based on the cross - correlation algorithm with the final window size of 1 . 63 μm × 1 . 63 μm . For each cell in the cell pair , cell – cell force was calculated as the vector sum of all tractions , and cell – ECM force was calculated by integrating the magnitude of forces parallel to the cell – cell junction using the Fourier transform traction cytometry ImageJ plug - in ( Tseng et al . , 2012 ) with a regularization parameter of 1 × 10 − 9 . The strain energy was calculated over the entire cell pair as U T udA F u 12 12 (cid:31)(cid:30) (cid:30) (cid:31)(cid:30) (cid:30) ∫ ∑ = ⋅ = ⋅ , where T (cid:31)(cid:30) is the traction stress and u (cid:31) is the bead displacement . ACKNOWLEDGMENTS We thank lab members and our joint mechanobiology group for in - sightful discussions . This material is based on work supported in part by Stanford Bio - X , the National Science Foundation ( EFRI - 1136790 ) , the National Institutes of Health ( EB - 006745 , GM - 35527 , 1DP2OD007078 - 01 , T32 GM007276 ) , European Research Council Advanced Grant 231157 , the Burroughs - Wellcome CASI , and grad - uate research fellowships from the National Science Foundation , Stanford BioX , and the Ilju Foundation . REFERENCES Adams CL , Chen Y - T , Smith SJ , James Nelson W ( 1998 ) . Mechanisms of epithelial cell – cell adhesion and cell compaction revealed by high - resolution tracking of E - cadherin - green fluorescent protein . J Cell Biol 142 , 1105 – 1119 . Barry AK , Tabdili H , Muhamed I , Wu J , Shashikanth N , Gomez GA , Yap AS , Gottardi CJ , de Rooij J , Wang N , et al . ( 2014 ) . α - Catenin cytomechan - ics—role in cadherin - dependent adhesion and mechanotransduction . J Cell Sci 127 , 1779 – 1791 . Bazellières E , Conte V , Elosegui - Artola A , Serra - Picamal X , Bintanel - Morcillo M , Roca - Cusachs P , Muñoz JJ , Sales - Pardo M , Guimerà R , Trepat X ( 2015 ) . Control of cell – cell forces and collective cell dynamics by the intercellular adhesome . Nat Cell Biol 17 , 409 – 420 . Becker W , Shcheslavkiy V , Frere S , Slutsky I ( 2014 ) . Spatially resolved record - ing of transient fluorescence - lifetime effects by line - scanning TCSPC . Microsc Res Tech 77 , 216 – 224 . Borghi N , Sorokina M , Shcherbakova OG , Weis WI , Pruitt BL , Nelson WJ , Dunn AR ( 2012 ) . E - cadherin is under constitutive actomyosin - generated tension that is increased at cell – cell contacts upon externally applied stretch . Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 109 , 12568 – 12573 . Buckley CD , Tan J , Anderson KL , Hanein D , Volkmann N , Weis WI , Nelson WJ , Dunn AR ( 2014 ) . The minimal cadherin - catenin complex binds to actin filaments under force . Science 346 , 1254211 . Butler JP , Tolic´ - Nørrelykke IM , Fabry B , Fredberg JJ ( 2002 ) . Traction fields , moments , and strain energy that cells exert on their surroundings . Am J Physiol Cell Physiol 282 , C595 – C605 . Cai D , Chen S - C , Prasad M , He L , Wang X , Choesmel - Cadamuro V , Sawyer JK , Danuser G , Montell DJ ( 2014 ) . Mechanical feedback through E - cadherin promotes direction sensing during collective cell migration . Cell 157 , 1146 – 1159 . Chu Y - S , Thomas WA , Eder O , Pincet F , Perez E , Thiery JP , Dufour S ( 2004 ) . Force measurements in E - cadherin - mediated cell doublets reveal rapid