Research in Engineering Design ( 1998 ) 10 : 141 - 149 © 1998 Springer - Verlag London Limited Research in Expertise in Engineering Design Nigel Cross and Anita Clayburn Cross Department of Design and Innovation , The Open University , Milton Keynes , UK Abstract . Most studies of designer behavior are limited to studies of novice or average - ability designers . We have studied two outstanding , expert designers , and are able to draw some parallels between their design strategies . We note that they both take a systemic view of the design situation , choose to frame their view of the problem in a challenging way , and draw upon first principles to guide both their overall concept and detailed design . Studying expert designers should enable us to identify the seeds of ' best practice ' . This should be useful in design practice and in education , for guiding the development of better - than - average designers . Keywords : Expertise ; Engineering design ; Problem framing 1 . Introduction Most studies of designer behavior have been based on novices ( e . g . students ) or , at best , designers of relatively modest talents ; it is easier to obtain such people as subjects for study . However , if studies of designer behavior are limited to studies of rather inexpert designers , then our understanding of design ability will also be limited . Studying expert designers , instead , may give us different , and more appropriate , insights and understanding of design activity , on which to develop models and methods of design . The reality of design practice seems to be that some individuals have outstanding design abilities , but there have been only a few studies of outstanding designers , such as Lawson ' s [ 1 ] studies of successful architects . In this paper , we report briefly on our own study of an outstanding designer - the racing car designer , Gordon Murray - and we make some comparisons with the strategies of another expert engineering designer , ' Dan ' , who was a subject of a protocol analysis study . In this comparison , we develop parallels between Dan ' s design strategies Correspondence and offprint requests to : N . Cross , Department of Design and Innovation , Faculty of Technology , The Open University , Milton Keynes MK7 6AA , UK . and those of Gordon Murray . We find several striking similarities , which suggest that general lessons may be constructed about the nature of expertise in engineering design . We find three aspects of design strategy that appear to be used by both Gordon and Dan : ( 1 ) taking a ' systemic ' approach to the problem ; ( 2 ) ' framing ' the problem in a distinctive way ; and ( 3 ) designing from ' first principles ' . These are all aspects that have been ( separately ) recommended by design theorists or methodologists from time to time . For instance , Jones [ 2 ] recommends a systemic approach ; Schrn [ 3 ] has identified the importance of ' problem framing ' ; and authors such as French [ 4 ] and Pahl and Beitz [ 5 ] have stressed the values of ' first principles ' as design guides . However , these rather personal insights and recommendations have not , in general , been based on much apparent evidence or empirical study . Our studies therefore lend some credence to such insights , and perhaps offer more confidence about the goals to be attained in skilled , expert design behavior . From such studies and insights , we might attempt to build some general - izable findings about the nature of expertise in design . 2 . An Outstanding Designer Our first study is of an engineering designer who has established a long record as a highly successful and highly innovative designer in a highly competitive environment ; that of Formula One racing car design . Gordon Murray became chief designer for the Brabham racing car team as a young man , in 1973 . Brabham cars designed by him were driven by Nelson Picquet to win World Championships in 1981 and 1983 . In 1987 , Gordon Murray moved to the McLaren Formula One team as technical director , and again his car designs , driven by Alain Prost and Ayrton Senna , won World Championships in 1989 and 1990 . In some 20 years as a Formula One designer , he established an outstanding reputation not only as a 142 N . Cross and A . Clayburn Cross successful designer ( over 50 race wins ) , but also as a consistently radical innovator . Gordon Murray then became technical director of an off - shoot company from the racing team , McLaren Cars Limited , and became responsible for the design and development of a completely new , road - going ' super car ' - the McLaren F1 , which attracted immense attention for its radical design features . Although not originally designed for racing ( but designed to racing principles ) , GTR versions of the new McLaren F1 were entered in the 1995 Le Mans 24 - hour race and crone first , third , fourth and fifth . They have continued to have considerable success in GT racing . Gordon Murray is an example of an ' outstanding ' designer - a designer who has achieved extraordinary success throughout a long career . In his case , the measures of his success as a designer are absolute - his achievements have been in a competition field where absolute performance standards are the criteria . We have been able to gain some insight into Gordon Murray ' s design strategies and approaches through discussion and informal interviews with him . We have reported this in more depth elsewhere [ 6 ] . Here , we will refer to the three aspects of his design strategy that we have suggested may offer keys to his design successes : systemic design , framing the problem , and designing from first principles . 2 . 1 . Systemic Design An example of Gordon ' s radical design approach was the Brabham team ' s introduction of planned pit stops during a race , in the 1982 season . This was not a radical innovation in car design per se , but reflected a total systems approach to the overall goal of winning each race . At that time , it was not normal to have pit stops as regular , planned parts of the race routine . Pit stops were for emergencies such as changing a punctured or badly - worn tyre . In 1982 , as part of his thinking about how to make a car lighter in weight , Gordon conceived of running the car with only half the normal , full - race fuel load , and including a pit stop for re - fuelling . Nowadays , Formula One pit stops have been refined down to an incredibly quick norm of about seven seconds actual stopped time , in which time all four wheels are changed and some 100 litres of fuel taken on . The total racing time lost is about 20 seconds . In 1982 , a quick pit stop for tyre changes took about 15 seconds of actual stopped time . Gordon calculated that to preserve the advantage gained from from the lighter car he had to get the stopped time in the pit down to about ten seconds , and to reduce the lost racing time to under 26 seconds . To achieve this , an extraordinary development programme had to be undertaken , under the pressures of Formula One racing . For example , within three weeks , Gordon and his team had thought of , designed , made and tested a high - pressure re - fuelling system . To improve pit - stop procedures , he hired a film crew to film the team practising pit stops , and then played back the film , stopping it to identify difficulties and errors , and devising ways to improve the procedures . Such improvements included details such as re - designing the wheel - nut gun to improve its engage - ment with the nut . The new systems , the improve - ments , and the training of the pit team got the actual stopped - time down to under the target of ten seconds . However , one ' big killer ' remained , Gordon told us : ' When you put new tyres on they were cold , and it always took two laps to get back up to speed , and the time you lost in those two laps killed the whole thing . So then I thought , well I know the tyres start working at 70 degrees temperature . . . so we designed an oven , a wooden oven with a gas - fired heater , and we heated the tyres up - and ten seconds before the car was coming in we opened the oven door , whipped the tyres out , put them on , and the guy was instantly quick . Now every Grand Prix team has tyre heating ; that ' s where it started ' . The example of the introduction of planned pit stops illustrates how Gordon adopted a total systems approach to the design task : the goal was winning a race over some 60 or 70 laps , which could include bringing the car into the pits during the race if that could be used to convey sufficient advantage . The systemic view of the design task led to a long series of detailed developments and innovations . 2 . 2 . Framing the Problem At the start of the 1981 season , the Formula One governing body , FISA , had introduced new regula - tions intended to reduce the ' ground effect ' on racing cars . This effect had been pioneered on Lotus cars some three seasons earlier ; smooth underbodies , flexible side - skirts and careful aerodynamic design provided a ground - effect downforce which increased the car ' s grip on the track surface . This meant much higher cornering speeds were possible , and by the 1980 season , people were worried about safety and the g - force effects that were being imposed on the drivers . In 1981 , FISA set a minimum ground clearance of 6 cm , which they hoped would thereby eliminate or substantially reduce ' ground effect ' . But