1 SUPPLEMENTAL DATA Aggressiveness of HNSCC tumors depends on expression levels of cortactin , a gene in the 11q13 amplicon . Emily S . Clark , Brandee Brown , Amy S . Whigham , Avtandyl Kochaishvili , Wendell G . Yarbrough , and Alissa M . Weaver Supplemental Methods Matrigel Transwell Invasion Assay This assay was adapted from a protocol by Brabek et al . { Brabek , 2004 # 203 } . Cells were serum - starved overnight prior to plating in the transwell chambers . The invasion chambers ( Matrigel - BD Biocoat , 6 . 5 mm diameter , 0 . 33 cm 2 surface area , 24 - well plates , pore size 8 . 0 µ m ) were incubated for 2 - 3 hours in serum - free DMEM , washed with PBS then 650 µ l of DMEM supplemented with 20 % FetalClone III ( Hyclone ) and 10 % Nu - Serum ( Invitrogen ) was added to the lower chamber to act as the attractant . 100 µ l of 2 x 10 5 cells / ml were prepared in serum - free media and added to the top of each chamber . The chambers were incubated for 48 hrs , washed with PBS , and the non - invaded cells were removed with a sterile swab . The chambers were placed in 3 . 7 % paraformaldehyde for 1 hour , washed and stained with crystal violet for 45 minutes . Duplicate chambers were prepared for each cell line and cells from five randomly chosen fields from each membrane were counted . Cell transfection and FACS analysis Cells ( 5 x 10 5 ) were transfected in 100 - mm tissue culture plates with 2 µ g MT1 - MMP - GFP DNA in 7 ml medium or mock transfected using Effectene ( 60 µ l ( Qiagen ) ) . The media was changed following an overnight incubation with the Effectene / DNA mixture and the cells were incubated an additional 24 hrs . The cells were then scraped in PBS + 5 mM EGTA , followed by surface staining with an antibody against MT1 - MMP ( Chemicon MAB3328 ) and the appropriate AlexaFluor - 633 ( APC ) - conjugated secondary antibody plus 1 : 1000 dilution of propidium iodide ( PI ; Sigma ) . All staining and washing was done in 4 % FBS in PBS . All solutions were kept ice - cold and the cells were kept on ice to ensure surface labeling . FACS was performed using an LSRII Flow Cytometer ( BD Biosciences ) at the VUMC Flow Cytometry Core Facility and analysis was performed using FlowJo ( Tree Star ) . Only PI - negative cells were analyzed . Figure Legends Supplement Figure 1 . Cortactin expression correlates with tumor size in SCC25 cells . Immunohistochemistry analysis of tumor size indicates that cortactin expression levels regulate the size of SCC25 non - 11q13 amplified HNSCC tumors grown in rat tracheas . A . Representative Western blot and densitometry of cortactin expression in SCC25 cells expressing either scrambled cortactin siRNA oligo ( scrambled oligo ) , cortactin knockdown cells ( pRS - KD1 ) , overexpression vector control ( LZRS ) and cortactin overexpressing cells ( LZRS - CortFL ) . B . Tumor area measured from IHC - stained tumor sections . Data are represented as mean + SEM . N = number of trachea implanted for each cell line and is shown for each cell line . Data are from one trial for each cell line with three mice used for each cell line . Asterisks indicates p < 0 . 05 . C . In vivo invasion was quantitated by measuring the area of tumor invaded beyond the tracheal cartilaginous ring in Ku70 - stained slides of SCC25 tumor sections . Data are represented as mean + SEM . D . Representative images from tumors derived from cortactin - manipulated SCC25 cells . Tumor cells were grown in rat tracheas implanted into the flanks of nude mice . Tracheas were left for one month , removed , fixed and sagitally sectioned and stained . Shown are the hematoxylin and eosin ( H & E ) , Ku70 2 ( identifies human cells ) and cytokeratin ( identifies cells of epithelial origin ) . Positive staining for Ku70 and cytokeratin is brown . Scale bar = 1 mm . Supplement Figure 2 . Cortactin promotes in vitro and in vivo tumor cell invasiveness . A . In vitro invasion of SCC61 - and FaDu - cortactin manipulated cells through Matrigel - coated transwells demonstrates that cortactin expression profoundly affects the ability of HNSCC cells to degrade and migrate through extracellular matrix . Data are represented as mean + SEM percent of cells invaded relative to scrambled oligo ( set to 100 % ) . Shown is the combined data for three independent experiments with duplicate transwells for each transwell per cell line per experiment . Five randomly chosen 10x fields per transwell were analyzed . B . In vivo invasion was quantitated by using the tracheal ring as a fiduciary marker of tissue boundaries that would need to be degraded to prevent tumor crossing . Thus , the area of tumor invaded beyond the tracheal cartilaginous ring was quantitated from Ku70 - stained slides of SCC61 tumor sections and plotted in the bar graph . As with in vitro invasion , cortactin expression profoundly affects in vivo invasion , although this effect may be confounded by effects of cortactin on tumor size . FaDu tumors could not be quantitated due to higher in vivo aggressiveness with full degradation and loss of the tracheal ring fiduciary marker . Data are represented as mean + SEM . Asterisks indicate p < 0 . 05 compared with scrambled oligo control . Supplement Figure 3 . Cortactin levels have no effect on growth in “fluid” Matrigel culture . SCC61 and FaDu scrambled cortactin oligo ( scrambled oligo ) and cortactin - knockdown ( pRS - KD1 ) cell lines were cultured for 16 days under “fluid” conditions in growth media with 2 % Matrigel , sitting on top of a 100 % Matrigel bed . Duplicate wells were used for each cell line and the experiment was performed twice . Cells were imaged every two days . For each , eight randomly chosen 10x fields were imaged and the diameter of the “in - focus” structures were measured using Metamorph software . A . Representative images from Day 12 . Scale bar = 100 µ m . B . Combined data from two independent experiments for SCC61 and FaDu cells . Data are represented as mean + SEM . Supplement Figure 4 . Cortactin affects the cell - surface expression of MT1 - MMP in FaDu and SCC61 cells . FACS analysis of cell surface expression of MT1 - MMP from three independent experiments for SCC61 ( A ) or FaDu ( B ) cells . Control ( scrambled oligo ) or cortactin knockdown ( pRS - KD1 ) cells were either transfected ( trx ) or mock transfected ( mock ) with MT1 - MMP - GFP and then surface stained for MT1 - MMP . Cells were gated for negative propidium iodine staining and analysis for transfected cells was performed on GFP - positive cells ( transfection efficiency ~ 70 % ; data not shown ) . A representative histogram from three independent experiments is shown . Note that in the FaDu cortactin - KD ( pRS - KD1 - mock and pRS - KD1 - trx ) cells , there are two peaks of MT1 - MMP fluorescence . One of the peaks has approximately the same level of MT1 - MMP surface expression as control cells and likely represents cells with incomplete knockdown ( note incomplete knockdown by Western blot analysis in Fig 2A ) . The other peak has essentially no MT1 - MMP surface expression and there is no shift with transfection of MT1 - MMP - GFP ( compare lower peaks of pRS - KD1 - mock and pRS - KD1 - trx ) , which would be consistent with an inability of MT1 - MMP to traffick to the cell surface in cells with complete cortactin knockdown . 3 4 Supplemental Figure 2 5 Supplemental Figure 3 6 Supplemental Figure 4