Cell , Vol . 116 , 167 – 179 , January 23 , 2004 , Copyright  2004 by Cell Press Review Rho and Rac Take Center Stage progression through the cell cycle , differentiation , onco - Keith Burridge * and Krister Wennerberg Department of Cell and Developmental Biology genesis , andgene transcription ( Etienne - Mannevilleand Hall , 2002 ) . Indeed , it now seems that there are few and Lineberger Comprehensive Cancer Center University of North Carolina cellular activities that are not directly or indirectly af - fected by Rho family proteins . The two Cell papers trig - Chapel Hill , North Carolina 27599 gered a search for downstream effectors of Rho , Rac , and other family members . This work also initiated the exploration of upstream signaling pathways that regu - Many features of cell behavior are regulated by Rho familyGTPases , butthemostprofoundeffectsofthese late the activity of these proteins . In this review , we will concentrate primarily on Rho and Rac , discussing both proteins are on the actin cytoskeleton and it was these that first drew attention to this family of signaling pro - their upstream regulation and their downstream ef - fectors . Wewillconfineourdiscussiontothemammalian teins . Focusing on Rho and Rac , we will discuss how their effectors regulate the actin cytoskeleton . We will proteins , althoughmanylessonshavebeenlearnedfrom family members expressed in other organisms . In their describe how the activity of Rho proteins is regulated downstream from growth factor receptors and cell original papers , Ridley and Hall revealed for the first time that there is crosstalk between Rac and Rho , as adhesion molecules by guanine nucleotide exchange factors and GTPase activating proteins . Additionally , well as between Ras and Rho family GTPases . At the time , most signaling pathways were portrayed as strictly we will discuss how there is signaling crosstalk be - tween family members and how various bacterial linear , but today crosstalk and feedback loops have become an expectation among those who study signal pathogens have developed strategies to manipulate Rho protein activity so as to enhance their own sur - transduction . We will discuss several of the pathways by which Rho family proteins interact with each other , vival . as well as with other members of the Ras superfamily . All research has its antecedents , but occasionally pa - pers are published that erupt on the scientific landscape The Rho Family of Proteins seemingly without warning . So it was with the two pa - TheRidleyandHallarticlesin Cell dealwithtwoproteins , pers by Ridley and Hall and their coworkers , published Rho and Rac . To date , 20 genes encoding proteins with in Cell in August 1992 ( Ridley and Hall , 1992 ; Ridley et a small GTPase domain of the Rho consensus type have al . , 1992 ) . This work brought the members of the Rho been described in humans ( Figure 1 ) . With the human family of GTPases to center stage and out from under genome being almost completely characterized , this is the shadow of their cousins in the Ras family . In reality , likely to be the final number ( Wherlock and Mellor , 2002 ) . there had been several papers on Rho GTPases that Itis interestingtonote thatalreadyin1992 , 8mammalian laid the groundwork forthese two seminal contributions , Rho proteins had been described . Today , based on pri - but most of us in the field date our interest in , if not our mary sequence and known functions , the 20 Rho pro - awareness of , Rho GTPases back to these two publica - teins can roughly be divided into 5 groups , the Rho - like , tions . This work caught the eyes ( literally ) of researchers Rac - like , Cdc42 - like , Rnd , and RhoBTB subfamilies . in the cytoskeletal field , because two of the most promi - Three of the Rho proteins , RhoD , Rif , and RhoH / TTF do nent cytoskeletal structures in cells in culture are stress not fall into any obvious grouping and , because little is fibers and membrane ruffles . At the time , however , little known about them , they will not be discussed further . was known about what governs the assembly of these Recently , two additional GTPases , MIRO - 1 and MIRO - 2 , structures . Ridley and Hall established that , not only are weredescribedasbelongingtotheRhofamily ( Fransson they regulated by Rho and Rac respectively , but that et al . , 2003 ) . However , due to their very low homology these GTPases act in signaling pathways downstream to the other Rho GTPases and their lack of the Rho - from growth factors and other agents that act on recep - specific insert loop in their GTPase domains , discussion torsatthecellsurface . Thisworkwasimportantbecause of these will not be included in this review . it revealed that there are signaling pathways beyond The Rho - like subfamily are all very similar in sequence those that regulate intracellular calcium , PIP 2 and cyclic and when overexpressed as activated proteins , they AMP , which were then the focus of those studying cy - each contribute to contractility and formation of stress toskeletal regulation . In addition , these papers caught fibers and focal adhesions . Few differences in binding the attention of those working on cell adhesion . The to either effectors or upstream regulatory proteins are most prominent cell - matrix adhesions in tissue culture known , althoughRhoChasbeensuggestedtobindmore are focal adhesions , and the first of the Ridley and Hall efficiently to Rho kinase ( Sahai and Marshall , 2002 ) and papers revealed that assembly of these structures de - certain Rhoguanine nucleotideexchange factors ( GEFs ) pends on Rho activity . that exchange nucleotide well on RhoA and RhoB , ex - Rho proteins have been found to regulate many cellu - change ineffectively on RhoC ( Arthur et al . , 2002 ) . How - lar activities besides the cytoskeleton and cell adhesion , ever , functional differences are suggested by several such as cell polarity , endocytosis , vesicle trafficking , observations . While RhoA and RhoC are growth - pro - moting , RhoB is in many cases growth - inhibiting ( Du et al . , 1999 ; Chen et al . , 2000 ) and has been shown to * Correspondence : keith _ burridge @ med . unc . edu Cell168 Figure 1 . The Rho Family of Proteins A dendrogram representing the relationships betweenthe20Rhofamilymembers . TheRho domains of the family members were aligned and a dendrogram was calculated by the Bon - sai application ( http : / / calliope . gs . washington . edu / software / _ ) . The five subfamilies , Rho - like , Rnd , Cdc42 - like , Rac - like , and RhoBTB , are highlighted by circles . be downregulated in cancer cells ( Adnane et al . , 2002 ) . for Rac1 ( Ridley et al . , 1992 ) . While Rac1 and RhoG are widespread , Rac2 and 3 are largely restricted to RhoB functions in vesicle trafficking and is localized both on the plasma membrane and on the outer mem - hematopoietic and neural tissues respectively . ( As for the Rho - like subfamily , we will not distinguish between brane of multivesicular bodies , a late endosomal com - partment . Internalized EGF receptor activates RhoB at Rac1 , 2 , and 3 in subsequent discussions . ) Expression of RhoG is elevated during the G1 phase of the cell this site ( Gampel and Mellor , 2002 ) and activated RhoB inhibits transport of the EGF receptor to lysosomes cycle , and it has been implicated in cell growth ( Vincent et al . , 1992 ) . RhoG interacts with some but not all of the ( Gampel et al . , 1999 ) . RhoB , in addition , is a short - lived protein that is highly transcriptionally regulated ( Zalc - same effectors as Rac1 ( Wennerberg et al . , 2002 ; Prieto - Sanchez and Bustelo , 2003 ) , but it has also been shown manet al . , 1995 ) . It isupregulatedduringthe G1 / Stransi - tion of the cell cycle and is also known to be upregulated to activate Rac1 and Cdc42 ( Gauthier - Rouviere et al . , 1998 ) . How important this is for RhoG’s function is a during apoptosis ( Zalcman et al . , 1995 ; Liu et al . , 2000 ) . RhoC expression , on the other hand , has been shown matter of controversy ( see below ) . The Cdc42 - like GTPases all stimulate the formation to promote metastatic behavior in a way that the two other subfamily members do not and its expression is of filopodia , as originally described for Cdc42 ( Kozma et al . , 1995 ; Nobes and Hall , 1995 ) , and they all bind to elevated inmany invasivecarcinomas ( Suwa etal . , 1998 ; Clark et al . , 2000 ) . The region that is most unique for WASP or N - WASP , which are primary effectors mediat - ing filopodia formation . Cdc42 is also important in cell these proteins is in their most C - terminal sequence resi - dues . The interactions of these regions with distinct polarization , but it is unknown if the other subfamily members share this function . TC10 and TCL are both proteins probably is responsible for many of their differ - ent properties . In support of this idea , Zheng and col - involved in insulin - mediated metabolic events ( Chiang et al . , 2002 ) . Wrch1 and Chp / Wrch2 are closely related , leagues have recently been able to suppress selectively the RhoA , B , or C phenotypes by expressing chimeric withone cleardifference . Chp / Wrch2 isthe onlyconven - tional Rho protein that lacks a prenylation signal in the constructs in which the C termini of the respective Rho proteins have been fused to the GTPase activating pro - C terminus , but it still localizes to membranes through its C - terminal tail ( Aronheim et al . , 1998 ) . Wrch1 has tein ( GAP ) domain of p190RhoGAP ( Wang et al . , 2003 ) . For simplicity , from here on , we will not distinguish be - been shown to be involved in Wnt signaling ( Tao et al . , 2001 ) , while the signaling role of Chp / Wrch2 remains un - tween RhoA , B , and C , but refer to them collectively as “Rho” , because in most experiments the distinction has certain . The Rnd subfamily all have amino acid substitutions not been made . The Rac - like subfamily all stimulate the formation of rendering them GTPase inactive , indicating that they exist in cells as constitutively active , GTP bound pro - lamellipodia and membrane ruffles , as described first Review169 teins ( Foster et al . , 1996 ; Nobes et al . , 1998 ) . This sug - gests that these proteins are regulated in ways other than by nucleotide binding , and at least with Rnd3 / RhoE it seems that this protein is regulated by expression ( Hansen et al . , 2000 ; Riento et al . , 2003 ) . Rnd1 and Rnd2 are highly expressed in brain and have both been impli - cated in neurite outgrowth and branching . In contrast , Rnd3 / RhoE seems to be widely expressed at low levels and its expression is upregulated by Ras - Raf signaling ( Hansen et al . , 2000 ) . Interestingly , even though they are most closely related to the Rho subfamily , they antago - nize the signaling from Rho ( Guasch et al . , 1998 ; Nobes et al . , 1998 ) . Mechanisms for how this is accomplished are discussed below . The most unconventional members of the Rho family are the RhoBTB proteins . These have a large C - terminal extension containing two BTB domains . In the case of RhoBTB1 and RhoBTB2 , the GTPase domain is Rho - like , whereas the GTPase domain in RhoBTB3 is not andshouldthereforenotbeconsideredasaRhoprotein . The function of the RhoBTB proteins and their signaling is completely unknown . Of note , however , RhoBTB2 , Figure 2 . Signaling from Rho to the Cytoskeleton also known as DBC2 ( deleted in breast cancer 2 ) , is The pathways from Rho to the formation of stress fibers are de - downregulated or mutated in many breast cancers , and scribed in the text . Direct activating signals are presented by solid its reexpression in T47D breast cancer cells inhibits cell arrows . Inhibitory signals are depicted as red bars . Double - lined growth ( Hamaguchi et al . , 2002 ) . arrows and bars represent the net result of a signaling pathway . Abbreviations used : LIMK , LIM kinase ; MLC - P , phosphorylated my - osin II regulatory light chain ; MLC phosphatase , myosin light Downstream Effectors chain phosphatase . Rho , Stress Fibers , and Tension In their first paper , Ridley and Hall concluded that stress fibers formed as a result of actin polymerization that stimulated very prominent stress fibers , but their stellate arrangement was abnormal and they were much thicker was nucleated in focal adhesions . However , previously an alternative had been proposed that stress fibers as - than the stress fibers induced by active Rho . In contrast , more normal stress fibers could be induced by coex - semble as a result of myosin - based contractility . Explor - ing whether Rho might act to induce stress fibers and pression of activated forms of the mammalian homolog of diaphanous ( mDia ) , another Rho effector ( Watanabe focal adhesions by stimulating contractility confirmed that this was indeed the case and revealed that active et al . , 1999 ) . Expression of activated forms of mDia pro - mote assembly of fine arrays of thin stress fibers that Rho elevated myosin light chain ( MLC ) phosphorylation ( Chrzanowska - Wodnicka and Burridge , 1996 ) . Simulta - appear to be less bundled than the stress fibers induced by Rho activation or expression of constitutively active neously , it was shown that one of the downstream Rho effectors , Rho - kinase ( ROCK , ROK ) elevates MLC phos - Rho - kinase . Thedensity and appearance ofstress fibers could be experimentally varied by titrating different lev - phorylation by inhibiting the MLC phosphatase ( Kimura et al . , 1996 ) . Subsequent work established that Rho - els of active Rho - kinase and mDia ( Watanabe et al . , 1999 ) . Significantly , mDia , a member of the formin family kinase can also take the place of the MLC kinase ( MLCK ) directly phosphorylating the regulatory MLC and thereby of proteins , stimulates actin polymerization ( Li and Higgs , 2003 ) , but whether it is the actin polymerizing enhancing myosin activation ( Amano et al . , 1996 ) . To - gether these studies established that Rho promotes my - activity of mDia that contributes to stress fiber organiza - tion or some other activity has not been determined . In osincontractilityandthatthe resultingtensiondrivesthe formation of stress fibers and focal adhesions ( Figure the study in which external force was applied to cells and promoted focal adhesion formation and growth , 2 ) . Perhaps the best evidence that tension itself can promote assembly of these structures comes from stud - mDia was found to be a critical factor . External force did not induce focal adhesion formation if Rho activity ies in which mechanical force was applied to single cells in which myosin activity was inhibited . In such cells , was inhibited by C3 exotransferase , but could be res - cued by expression of constitutively active mDia ( Rive - extrinsically applied force could take the place of the intrinsic tension , promoting assembly of stress fibers line et al . , 2001 ) . This study identified at least two com - ponents in stress fiber and focal adhesion assembly , and focal adhesions ( Riveline et al . , 2001 ) . Does Rho - induced actin polymerization contribute to the generationof tension , which couldbe eitherintrinsic , i . e . , generated by myosin activity , or extrinsic , i . e . , ap - stress fiber development ? Somewhat surprisingly , when this was examined directly , the level of polymerization plied from the outside , and an activity supplied by acti - vation of mDia ( Figure 2 ) . in response to Rho activation was found to be relatively small ( Machesky and Hall , 1997 ) . Nevertheless , some Several other targets for Rho have been identified that are relevant in the context of the actin cytoskeleton actin polymerization may be important . Several groups noted that constitutively active forms of Rho - kinase ( Bishop and Hall , 2000 ) . These include citron kinase , Cell170 which , like Rho - kinase , stimulates MLCphosphorylation this idea , a similar phenotype is generated by disrupting the actin cytoskeleton with drugs that promote actin and myosin activity . However , citron kinase appears to function primarily following mitosis in the cleavage fur - depolymerization . Focal complexes , the integrinclusters induced by Rac row of dividing cells ( Madaule et al . , 1998 ) . Several cy - toskeletal targets have also been identified downstream are smaller than focal adhesions , but little is known about how these assemble . Although it does not directly of Rho - kinase . These include LIM kinase and adducin . LIM kinase phosphorylates the actin depolymerizing affect integrin affinity , Rac can recruit high - affinity integ - rins to regions where new membrane protrusion is oc - protein , cofilin / ADF , inhibiting its function ( Maekawa et al . , 1999 ) . Theinhibitionofcofilinstabilizesactinfilament curring . This was demonstrated with the integrin (cid:1) v (cid:2) 3 inmigratingendothelialcells , but islikelytobeimportant arrays such as stress fibers and the cell cortex . Phos - phorylation ofadducin byRho - kinase increasesits bind - for many migrating cells where lamellipodia are stabi - lized by new adhesions ( Kiosses et al . , 2001 ) . ing to F - actin ( Kimura et al . , 1998 ) . Members of the ERM family were also reported to be substrates for Rho - In leukocytes , which lack both stress fibers and focal adhesions , the role of Rho in adhesion appears quite kinase and to be activated by this phosphorylation . However , subsequent work has argued that although different . Indeed , inhibiting Rho elevates integrin - medi - ated adhesion ( Worthylake et al . , 2001 ) . Here , it has this phosphorylation is driven by Rho , it is mediated by PIP 2 and another kinase downstream from Rho that been suggested that in the resting state , such as with suspendedcells , theintegrinsaredispersedoverthecell remains to be identified ( Matsui et al . , 1999 ) . When cells round up , either when entering mitosis or surface and prevented from being clustered by being tethered to the relatively rigid cortical actin network . duetoexperimentalmanipulation , theylosestressfibers and focal adhesions . Intuitively , a decrease in Rho activ - Again , the stability of the cortical actin has been attrib - uted to active Rho and the LIM kinase pathway main - ity would be expected . Somewhat surprisingly , the re - verse occurs ( Ren et al . , 1999 ; Maddox and Burridge , taining the actin filament - severing protein , cofilin , in an inactive conformation . In this model , upon inhibition of 2003 ) . This indicates that there are mechanisms to dis - assemble stress fibers in the presence of high Rho activ - Rho , cofilin becomes activated , disrupting the cortical actin network , thereby allowing integrins to be clustered ity . With mitotic cells , evidence was presented that high Rho activity contributed to rounding and a more rigid either by binding multivalent extracellular ligands or by intracellular factors ( Worthylake and Burridge , 2003 ) . In - cell cortex . Arguments have been presented previously for the advantages to a mitotic cell being rounded ( Mad - terestingly , activated Rac promotes adhesion when in - troducedintolymphocytes . Theincreasedadhesionwas dox and Burridge , 2003 ) , but why do cells rounded up in other situations have high Rho activity ? We speculate shown to be due to cell spreading , which was accompa - nied by a reorganization of the actin cytoskeleton and that the elevation of Rho activity results in a rigid cortex , in part due to the suppression of cofilin activity by the clustering of integrins adhering to ECM ( D’Souza - Schorey et al . , 1998 ) . Again , we envisage a similar mech - Rho - kinase / LIM kinase pathway , in part through en - hanced myosin activity , but possibly also due to other anism , but here one must invoke a mechanism to acti - vate cofilin in the presence of active Rac , which via the activities stimulated by Rho . The rigid cortex of a rounded cell provides resistance to mechanical forces p21 - activated kinase ( PAK ) / LIM kinase pathway should be inhibiting cofilin activity ( see below ) . Alternatively , and perhaps , therefore , protectionagainst damage . This may be important for leukocytes within the circulation , there may be other ways to activate cofilin or other actin severing proteins . Severing proteins such as gelsolin but , other than in mitosis , the advantage for other cells is not clear . The decrease in Rho activity observed when are activated by elevated calcium and this should occur downstream from Rac’s stimulation of phospholipase C suspended cells adhere to matrix ( Ren et al . , 1999 ) , may be largely to facilitate the change from a rigid to a more ( Snyder et al . , 2003 ) . As leukocytes spread , the initial engagement of integrins would be expected to lead to dynamic actin cortex that allows spreading and cell mi - gration ( Arthur and Burridge , 2001 ) . a positive feedback loop , arising from the integrins acti - vating Rac and inhibiting Rho activity . Rho , Rac and Adhesion to the Matrix Ever since Ridley and Hall demonstrated that Rho regu - Migrating leukocytes are very responsive to chemo - tactic gradients . Recent work has shown that the polar - lates focal adhesions , there has been much interest in Rho proteins and cell adhesion . Regarding adhesion to ity of these cells is regulated by different G protein - coupled receptors signaling to Rac and Rho ( Xu et al . , extracellular matrix ( ECM ) , neither Rho nor Rac affect the affinity of integrins . However , in cells like fibroblasts , 2003 ) . Within the cell , high Rac activity regulates behav - ior at the front , whereas Rho activity is critical at the both induce integrin clustering and may thereby in - creasethestrengthofadhesion . WithRho , theclustering rear . Theantagonism between thesesignaling pathways determinesthedirectionalresponsivenesstochemotac - isverypronouncedandresultsfromtensionaggregatingdispersedintegrins , such that they align through their tic signals . The activities of Rho and myosin at the rear inhibit protrusive activity in this region and confine pro - attachment with the ends of stress fibers in focal adhe - sions ( Chrzanowska - Wodnicka andBurridge , 1996 ) . The trusion to the front of the cell ( Xu et al . , 2003 ; Worthylake and Burridge , 2003 ) . inhibition of Rho in cells like fibroblasts decreases adhe - sion , causing a retraction of lamellae and rounding of Rac and Membrane Protrusion In their second paper , Ridley , Hall , and coworkers ob - the cell body . This cannot be due just to a loss of focal adhesions because many cells without these structures served that expression of constitutively activated Rac induced the formation of membrane ruffles and that adhere well and have a spread morphology . The reason for decreased adhesion may be indirect and reflect a ruffle formation induced by growth factors was sup - pressed by expression of a dominant - negative form of collapse of the cortical actin organization . Supporting Review171 Figure 3 . Signaling from Rac to the Cy - toskeleton The pathways leading from Rac activation to the formation of lamellipodia and membrane ruffles , and the loss of stress fibers , are de - scribed in the text . Direct activating signals are presented by solid arrows . Inhibitory sig - nals are depicted as red bars . Double - lined arrows and bars represent the net result of a signaling pathway . Abbreviations used : PAK , p21 - activated kinase ; LIMK , LIM kinase ; MLCK , myosin light chain kinase . Rac ( Ridley et al . , 1992 ) . Membrane ruffles are closely been described . In the first , interactions between IRSp53 and both Rac and WAVE / Scar were identified related to lamellipodia , and the terms are often used ( Miki et al . , 2000 ) , such that IRSp53 links Rac activity to interchangeably . Lamellipodia are the thin protrusive WAVE / Scaractivation . Others , however , havefoundthat structures generated at the leading edge of migrating IRSp53 preferentially binds Cdc42 rather than Rac , rais - cells . Frequently , lamellipodia evolve into ruffles , when ing the possibility that IRSp53 may be downstream from these membrane protrusions fail to adhere and are Cdc42 activation ( Krugmann et al . , 2001 ; Govind et al . , swept backward on the dorsal surface . In other situa - 2001 ) . An alternative pathway from Rac to WAVE activa - tions , however , ruffles can be induced de novo on the tion of the Arp2 / 3 complex was suggested by the work dorsal surfaces of cells . The significance of these struc - of Eden et al . who found that WAVE existed in cells tures is uncertain but may relate more to macropino - in an inactive complex , together with two Rac binding cytosis than cell migration . In this regard , Ridley and proteins , Nap125 and PIR121 , along with HSPC300 and coworkers observed that expression of activated Rac Abi2 ( Eden et al . , 2002 ) . Activated Rac was found to caused subconfluent cells to accumulate large vesicles cause dissociation of the Nap125 , PIR121 , and Abi2 containing material from the extracellular environment . complex from WAVE and HSPC300 , leaving WAVE ac - Similar membrane ruffling and macropinocytosis had tive with respect to stimulating Arp2 / 3 - actin polymeriza - previously been observed in response to activated Ras tion activity ( Eden et al . , 2002 ) . Interestingly , the adaptor ( Bar - Sagi and Feramisco , 1986 ) and Ridley and col - protein Nck also binds Nap125 and similarly promotes leagues showed that this Ras - induced ruffling was dissociation of the complex and WAVE activation . Both blocked by dominant - negative Rac ( Ridley et al . , 1992 ) . Rac and Nck are activated downstream from a variety Whereas the role of Rho in actin polymerization has of receptors and provide alternative or synergistic ways been controversial , Rac is a potent activator of polymer - of coupling extracellular signals to actin polymerization . ization . When Ridleyetal . identifiedRacas drivingmem - Another downstream effector of Rac that has been brane protrusion at the leading edge , the dominant idea implicated in cytoskeletal rearrangements and mem - was that actin polymerization at such sites was driven brane ruffling is PAK . Here , however , the observations by the uncapping of actin filaments , particularly by lipids with PAK are complex and sometimes cell type specific such as PIP 2 . The finding that Rac activates PI 5 - kinase ( Bokoch , 2003 ) . This kinase is activated by both Rac ( Tolias et al . , 1995 ) is consistent with earlier models and Cdc42 and expression can promote formation of and the generation of PIP 2 may , indeed , contribute to lamellipodia ( Sells et al . , 1997 ) and lead to the loss of exposure of the barbed ends of actin filaments at the stress fibers and focal adhesions ( Manser et al . , 1997 ) . leading edge . However , with the discovery of the Arp2 / 3 Some of these effects occur with expression of PAK complex and its role in nucleating actin polymerization , mutants that cannot bind Rac or Cdc42 , and , somewhat the focus turned to identifying how Rac can activate surprisingly , some of the effects are induced by expres - Arp2 / 3 . First , a critical component between Rac and sion of kinase - dead forms of the enzyme . Whereas loss Arp2 / 3 was found to be the WAVE / Scar protein that of stress fibers and focal adhesions requires active PAK belongs to the WASP family ( Figure 3 ) ( Miki et al . , 1998 ; ( Manser et al . , 1997 ) , the development of lamellipodia Machesky and Insall , 1998 ) . Whereas Cdc42 binds does not , although the morphology and polarized devel - WASP and N - WASP inducing a conformational change opment of lamellipodia is affected by PAK activity ( Sells that activates these proteins such that they stimulate et al . , 1999 ) . Several PAK substrates or binding partners Arp2 / 3 to nucleate actin polymerization , the WAVE / Scar have been implicated in the effects of PAK , including proteins do not bind Rac directly . Two different ways the actin binding protein filamin , LIM kinase , myosin , the paxillin / Pix / PKL complex , and the adaptor protein Nck . of activating WAVE / Scar downstream from Rac have Cell172 Filamin is the major actin binding protein of the cell Another interesting association occurs between Nck cortex and is enriched in membrane ruffles and found and PAK . Nck is an adaptor protein that recruits PAK in many other sites where F actin is concentrated . It was to receptor tyrosine kinases ( Bokoch , 2003 ) , but it is identified in a screen for PAK binding proteins and was also implicated in activation of both WASP and WAVE / shown to be a substrate for PAK ( Vadlamudi et al . , 2002 ) . Scar , thereby stimulating Arp2 / 3 complex nucleation of Using cells lacking filamin or in which filamin had been actinpolymerization . WhethertheinteractionofNckwith reexpressed revealed that filamin was essential for PAK serves mainly to recruit PAK to receptor tyrosine membrane ruffling induced by growth factors or by PAK kinases or whether it also provides a link between PAK expression ( Figure 3 ) . Membrane ruffling induced by and actin polymerization has not been determined . growth factors was blocked by expression of an autoin - Ridley and colleagues noted that expression of active hibitory domain of PAK , although this did not block ruf - Rac stimulated formation of stress fibers in serum - fling induced by PMA , indicating the existence of more starved quiescent cells . They showed that this was due than one pathway to ruffle formation ( Vadlamudi et al . , to a downstream activation of Rho and was slower and 2002 ) . PAK and filamin interact via the C - terminal repeat never so robust an effect as activation by serum or LPA . domain of filamin , which is also involved in dimerization , Subsequent work has more commonly observed that and by the domain of PAK that binds Rac and Cdc42 . growth factor stimulation of Rac activity antagonizes Interestingly , the binding of filamin to PAK was shown Rho resulting in disassembly of stress fibers and focal to activate PAK . Filamin is likely to have multiple roles adhesions ( Sander et al . , 1999 ) . The potential explana - in lamellipodia and ruffles , serving both to crosslink F tion for these different findings and how Rac may antag - actin , thereby stabilizing the actin networks that support onize Rho activity are discussed below . It is worth men - these membrane protrusions , but also serving as a scaf - tioning here , however , that active PAK may contribute fold for PAK as well as many other signaling proteins to the loss of stress fibers and focal adhesions by phos - ( Stossel et al . , 2001 ) . As a footnote on filamin , it also phorylating and inhibiting MLCK activity , thereby lead - binds Rho , Rac , and Cdc42 , but does not discriminate ing to a decrease in MLC phosphorylation ( Figure 3 ) between the GTP and GDP loaded forms ( Ohta et al . , ( Sanders et al . , 1999 ) . The effect of PAK on MLC phos - 1999 ) . Given filamin’s prominent role in the actin cortex , phorylation is particularly controversial , with some we speculate that this binding may restrict diffusion of groups reporting enhanced phosphorylation but others Rac and Rho and confine their activity to local regions reporting a decrease ( Bokoch , 2003 ) . Additionally , phos - of the plasma membrane . phorylation of the myosin heavy chain by PAK has also LIM kinase is activated by phosphorylation by both beenreportedasamechanismtoinhibitmyosinfunction PAK ( Edwards et al . , 1999 ) and by Rho - kinase ( Maekawa and cause the disassembly of actomyosin structures et al . , 1999 ) . In turn , LIM kinase phosphorylates and ( van Leeuwen et al . , 1999 ) . inactivates cofilin , a protein that promotes depolymeri - zation of F - actin . The net result of PAK activation of LIM Regulating Rho and Rac Activity kinase is to stabilize actin filaments and filament arrays . At the time of the two Ridley and Hall papers in Cell , it This is somewhat paradoxical , because although de - waswellknown thattheseproteinsexisted intwostates , creasing the turnover of actin filaments in lamellipodia an inactive state with GDP bound and an active state or ruffles should increase their stability , the induction of in which the GDP was replaced by GTP . Already , exam - actin polymerization at these sites has been associated ples of the three major classes of regulators , GAPs , with active cofilin and rapid subunit cycling between GEFs , and guanine nucleotide dissociation inhibitors polymer and monomer states ( Blanchoin et al . , 2000 ; ( GDIs ) , had been identified , but there was little under - Zebda et al . , 2000 ) . A possible explanation for this para - standing of the signaling pathways that modulate dox would be if there is a spatial or temporal separation their activity . of active and inactive cofilin , with active cofilin being Several Rho GAPs were already known in 1992 , but found more distally in a lamellipodium or ruffle , but with since then the number of known genes encoding a Rho cofilin activity being inhibited further back as a result of GAP domain has increased to about 80 ( Moon and PAK / LIM kinase phosphorylation . Such a scheme would Zheng , 2003 ) . The function of most of these are still allow cofilin to promote polymerization in cooperation unknown , but the variations in additional domains found with the Arp2 / 3 complex at the front of a protrusion , but in these proteins indicate that they act in a wide variety wouldallowstabilizationofthe resultingnetworkofactin of signaling pathways in different tissues . In addition , filaments further back in the body of the lamellipodium there is evidence that some of these Rho GAP domain - or ruffle . containing proteins act as Rho effectors and transmit The association of PAK with the Pkl / paxillin / Pix com - signals downstream from Rho protein activation rather plex potentially provides multiple downstream signaling than just turning off the Rho signal . One example is possibilities . Pkl is an Arf GAP , thereby suggesting a the p85 subunit of phosphatidylinositol 3 - kinase ( PI point of convergence between Rac and the Arf family 3 - kinase ) . ItlacksRhoGAPactivity , butusesthisdomain of GTPases ( see below ) , whereas Pix is itself a Rac and to bind Rho proteins and this binding regulates its activ - Cdc42 GEF ( Turner et al . , 2001 ) . The association of a ity ( Zheng et al . , 1994 ) . Another example is N - chimaerin , downstream Rac effector with an upstream regulator where the actual binding to GTP - loaded Rac rather than of Rac activity suggests signaling feedback loops . The its GAP activity is thedetermining factor for its biological pairing of downstream effectors with GEFs also raises activity ( Kozma et al . , 1996 ) . the intriguing possibility that this provides a mechanism The only known GEF for Rac and Rho in 1992 was whereby a particular GEF activates preferentially one out of many possible downstream pathways . Smg - GDS , which is an unusual GEF in that , at least in Review173 vitro , it exchanges nucleotides on a wide variety of small all been shown to be activated by heterotrimeric G pro - teins ( Fukuhara et al . , 2001 ) . In addition , LPA signals to GTPases of different families ( Hiraoka et al . , 1992 ) . At this time , Dbl , the prototype GEF containing the Dbl - Rac , even though this was not discovered in the original papers . Rho activation is followed by a Rac activation , homology ( DH ) / Pleckstrin homology ( PH ) domain tan - dem repeat , common to all Dbl family members , had which seems to be dependent on phospholipase activa - tion , calcium / calmodulin - dependent kinase and Tiam1 been characterized as a Cdc42 GEF ( Hart et al . , 1991 ) . Since then , the Dbl family of exchange factors has been ( Fleming et al . , 1998 ) . Bombesin is likely to signal to Rho in a similar way as LPA , but has also been reported to established as primarily responsible for GEF activity on Rho proteins and around 60 members have been found activate Arf6 . In turn , Arf6 can stimulate Rac and inhibit Rho signaling ( Boshans et al . , 2000 ) . PMA stimulates in mammalian genomes ( Schmidt and Hall , 2002 ) . More recently , an additional family of Rho GEFs lacking the Rac through a PKC - dependent phosphorylation and ac - tivation of Tiam1 ( Mertens et al . , 2003 ) . In their original DH - PH tandem domains has been identified . The found - ing member of this family was DOCK180 and about 10 study , Ridley and coworkers observed that PMA was unique in not subsequently leading to Rho activation . members have been found ( Meller et al . , 2002 ; Cote and Vuori , 2002 ) . In the case of DOCK180 , it requires a TheysuggestedthatthismightbeduetootherpathwaysactivatedbyPKCthatantagonizedRhoortheassembly cofactor protein ( ELMO ) to exchange nucleotide on Rac ( Brugnera et al . , 2002 ) . Other members of this family offocal adhesionsandstress fibers . Recently , theinacti - vation of Rho by PKC has been ascribed to stimulation seem to be capable of nucleotide exchange without the help of additional proteins ( Cote and Vuori , 2002 ) . of p190RhoGAP activity by c - Src ( Brandt et al . , 2002 ) . Exploring the pathways from growth factor receptors At the time of the Ridley and Hall papers , RhoGDI had already been discovered . Today , three RhoGDIs are to Rac activation revealed that the induction of mem - brane ruffles by various growth factors was blocked by known , and a few other molecules have been suggested to have RhoGDI activity . RhoGDI binds to a subset of inhibitors of PI 3 - kinase activity ( Nobes et al . , 1995 ) . These inhibitors , however , did not block ruffling induced Rho proteins , inhibits nucleotide exchange and seques - ters these proteins away from membranes , where nor - by expression of activated Rac , indicating that the prod - ucts of PI 3 - kinase were acting upstream of Rac and mally they would be active . It has been established that the concentration of RhoGDIs is roughly equal to the suggesting that either directly or indirectly they were stimulating Rac GEFs . Subsequent studies have con - concentration of the Rho proteins being bound by them ( Michaelson et al . , 2001 ) , indicating that at a given time , firmed that many Rac GEFs are activated by PIP 2 or PIP 3 ( Schmidt and Hall , 2002 ; Mertens et al . , 2003 ) . For a large fraction of the Rho proteins in the cell is likely to be bound to GDIs . With this in mind , it is clear that example , the Rac GEF Tiam1 is recruited to membranes andthereby activatedbyPIP 3 bindingto itsamino - termi - the regulation of the binding between GDIs and their target Rho proteins is an important factor in Rho signal - nal PH domain ( Mertens et al . , 2003 ) . Another mecha - nism involves the activation of a Rac GEF complex con - ing . Several of the RhoGDIs have been shown to bind to other molecules , which stimulate release of the Rho taining Sos1 , Eps8 , and Abi1 / E3B1 ( Nimnual et al . , 1998 ; Scita et al . , 1999 ) , which localizes to membranes and protein . Inthisway , aRhoproteincanbedeliveredbythe GDI to a particular site of action in the cell in response to the sites of PI - 3 kinase activation by direct binding to the p85 subunit of PI 3 - kinase ( Innocenti et al . , 2003 ) . a signal . Overall , however , these mechanisms are poorly understood but currently receiving increased attention . Several other GEFs are also activated by interactions with PI 3 - kinase or its products ( Schmidt and Hall , 2002 ) . Signaling from Growth Factor Receptors to Rho Proteins There are also PI - 3 kinase independent pathways by which Rac GEFs can be activated . Tiam1 contains a The Ridley and Hall Cell papers were the first to describe signaling from the cell surface to Rho proteins . LPA was Rasbindingdomain , similartotheoneinRaf . GTPbound Ras binds to this domain thereby stimulating Tiam1’s established as a Rho activator , whereas bombesin was shown to independently activate both Rho and Rac . Rac GEF activity ( Lambert et al . , 2002 ) . Furthermore , PDGF stimulation of Swiss 3T3 fibroblasts causes a Growth factors , like PDGF , EGF , and insulin , were ob - served to stimulate Rac , leading to a subsequent Rho Phospholipase C - and calcium / calmodulin - dependent protein kinase II - dependent threonine phosphorylation activation , and PKC agonists such as PMA were found to activate Rac without activating Rho . At that time , the of Tiam1 , leading to its localization to membranes and activation ( Mertens et al . , 2003 ) . function of the Dbl family of proteins as Rho exchange factors was not known , so the involvement of these The relationship between Rac activation and phos - phoinositides is complex , because not only are many proteins was not implied . Since then , the molecular pathways for several of these signals have been eluci - Rac GEFs stimulated by PIP 2 and PIP 3 , but Rac ( and Cdc42 ) bind to and activate both PI 4 , 5 - kinase and PI dated and many additional pathways from the cell sur - face to Rho proteins have been described ( Figure 4 ) . 3 - kinase ( Tolias et al . , 1995 ) . This has led to the idea of positive feedback loops between Rac activity and PIP 2 The activation of Rho by LPA has been worked out . The receptors for LPA , Edg / LPA receptors are seven and PIP 3 synthesis , which may be important for a rapid response to extracellular signals , such as chemotactic transmembrane receptors that couple to heterotrimeric G proteins . The signal to Rho is mediated by the activa - factors . Consistent with this idea , in migrating cells , acti - vated Rac as well as PIP 2 and PIP 3 are concentrated in tion of G (cid:1) 12 / 13 subunits , which in turn bind to the RGS domain of particular Rho GEFs , bringing them to the the leading lamellipodium or in membrane ruffles ( Kray - nov et al . , 2000 ) . Phosphoinositides have also been im - membrane and activating them ( Hartet al . , 1998 ; Kozasa et al . , 1998 ) . Rho GEFs containing an RGS domain are plicated inthe downstream pathways fromRac , promot - ing Arp2 / 3 driven actin polymerization ( Rohatgi et al . , p115RhoGEF , PDZ - RhoGEF , and LARG , and they have Cell174 Figure 4 . RegulationofRacandRhobySolu - ble Factors Depiction of signaling pathways from serum components leading to regulationof Rho and Rac , as decribed in the text . Abbreviations : GF , growth factor such as PDGF , EGF , or insulin ; RTK , receptor tyrosine kinase ; PLC , phospholipase C ; PKC , protein kinase C ; PI 3 - K , phosphatidylinositol 3 - kinase . 2001 ) . It is interesting that Rac also binds and activates tions delineated a signaling pathway whereby Ras acti - vated Rac , which in its turn activated Rho . Later on , it phospholipase C - (cid:2) , which suggests a way that Rac may terminate these positive feedback loops ( Snyder et was found that Cdc42 could also feed in to the same pathway by activating Rac ( Kozma et al . , 1995 ; Nobes al . , 2003 ) . Signaling from Adhesion Receptors and Hall , 1995 ) . More recently , many examples of cross - talk between members of the Rho family , as well as to Rho Proteins During the past several years , increasingly it has been with other members of the Ras superfamily have been identified . Thereareexampleswhereonefamilymember recognized that not only are Rho proteins regulated downstream from G protein - coupled receptors and re - depresses the activity of another by stimulating a GAP , or elevates activity by stimulating a GEF . In addition , ceptor tyrosine kinases , but that many cell adhesion molecules also affect Rho protein activity . This is not there are proteins , like Bcr and Abr , that contain both GAP and GEF domains for different Rho members surprising , given the pronounced effect that many adhe - sion molecules have on cytoskeletal organization . Sev - ( Schmidt and Hall , 2002 ) . The interplay between family members is also mediated by interactions between their eral of the classes of cell adhesion molecules have been shown to affect Rho , Rac , or Cdc42 activity , including respective downstream signaling pathways . With respect to the activation of Rho by Rac , more integrins ( DeMali et al . , 2003 ) , cadherins ( Braga , 2002 ) and Ig superfamily members ( Thompson et al . , 2002 ) . recently , the dogma has turned toward an inverse rela - tionship , where activation of Rac leads to the inactiva - Upon cadherin engagement , there is an elevation in the activities of Rac and Cdc42 , which may contribute to tion of Rho and vice versa ( Sander et al . , 1999 ) . In fact , Ridley and Hall pointed out in their first paper that the enhanced cadherin function in a positive feedback path - way . Cadherin engagement , however , drastically sup - effect of growth factors or Rac in stimulating stress fibers was something seen only in serum - starved cells presses Rho activity , in part by increased p190RhoGAP activity ( Noren et al . , 2003 ) . Identifying the GEFs and ( Ridley and Hall , 1992 ) . This suggests that there is a serum component that is modulating the response of GAPs downstream from various adhesion molecules and the pathways involved has become a major pursuit . cells to Rac activation . One mechanism for how Rac can inhibit Rho was identified recently ( Figure 5 ) . Rac - mediated production of oxygen radicals causes an Crosstalk Currently , one of the exciting aspects of this field con - inhibition of the low molecular weight protein tyrosine phosphatase ( LMW - PTP ) , leading to increased phos - cerns the interactions between Rho family proteins . The foundation for this area was also laid in the Ridley and phorylation and activation of p190RhoGAP . In turn , this results in the inactivation of Rho ( Nimnual et al . , 2003 ) . Hall Cell papers . In their second paper , they demon - strated that the induction of membrane ruffling by Ras Signaling events downstream from Rac may also inhibit Rho signaling pathways . For example , as mentioned was due to activation of Rac , and that this led subse - quently toformation ofstress fibers , in aRho - dependent earlier , constitutively active PAK promotes loss of stress fibers and focal adhesions . This may occur via inhibition fashion ( Ridley et al . , 1992 ) . Together , these observa - Review175 Figure 6 . Crosstalk between the Rho Family and Other Ras Super - family GTPases Signals between Rho GTPases and other small GTPases are de - picted , as well as signaling intermediates where these are known . Activating signals are shown as black arrows , inhibitory signals as red bars , direct signals as solid lines , and indirect as dashed lines . Figure 5 . Crosstalk between Rho GTPases Abbreviations used : RalGDS , Ral guanine nucleotide dissociation Activating signals are shown as black arrows , inactivating as red . stimulator ; RalBP1 , Ral - binding protein 1 . Direct signals are drawn as solid lines , whereas signals with un - knownsignalingintermediatesaredrawnasdashedlines . Abbrevia - tions used : O 2 (cid:127) (cid:3) , Superoxide anion ; LMW - PTP , low molecular pathway forthe signalingto Racwas recentlydescribed . weight protein tyrosine phosphatase . Activated RhoG binds ELMO1 , which in turn binds and activates the unconventional Rac GEF Dock180 ( Katoh and Negishi , 2003 ) . The importance for RhoG’s signaling of the MLCK ( Sanders et al . , 1999 ) , or by direct phos - phorylationof myosinIIheavy chainbyPAK , bothevents to Rac remains controversial , however . While some re - ports indicate that this pathway is needed for RhoG leading to inhibition of myosin function ( van Leeuwen et al . , 1999 ) . signaling and its biological effects ( Gauthier - Rouviere et al . , 1998 ) , others argue against this ( Wennerberg et Several studies indicate that Ras can also activate Rho , but here the signaling pathways appear to be com - al . , 2002 ; Prieto - Sanchez and Bustelo , 2003 ) . Some of the examples of crosstalk between Rho pro - plex . In MDCK cells , Ras transformation causes an acti - vation of Rho , mediating the epithelial - mesenchymal teins and other small GTPases are illustrated in Figure 6 . The activation of a Rac GEF , Tiam1 , by Ras binding transition ( Sander et al . , 1999 ) . This activation , however , occurs independent of Rac activation , since Rac is inac - was discussed earlier . Rac also feeds into the mitogenic signals of Ras by causing a coactivating phosphoryla - tivated at the same time . In some cells , the signaling from Ras to Rho has been reported to be positive , in tion of the Ras effector Raf ( King et al . , 1998 ) . Rac , in addition , cooperates with Arf6 in regulating membrane others negative ( Sahai et al . , 2001 ) . A particularly interesting example of crosstalk occurs protrusions ( Radhakrishna et al . , 1999 ) and there are several proteins and protein complexes that contain between the Rnd family and Rho ( Figure 5 ) ( Chardin , 2003 ) . This was recently shown to be accomplished protein domains regulating both Rac and Arf6 activities . A particularly interesting link is the Arf and Rac binding through several different signals . All three Rnd proteins bind and activate p190RhoGAP , leading to an inactiva - protein Arfaptin 2 / POR1 ( Van Aelst et al . , 1996 ; Kanoh et al . , 1997 ) . This protein binds Rac in either a nucleo - tion of Rho ( Wennerberg et al . , 2003 ) . In addition , Rnd3 / RhoE , but not Rnd1 and Rnd2 , was shown to bind and tide - free manner or in a GDP - dependent manner ( Shin and Exton , 2001 ; Tarricone et al . , 2001 ) . Interestingly , inactivate Rho Kinase , leading to loss of Rho signaling ( Riento et al . , 2003 ) . This exemplifies a common theme the Rac binding site , which is made up of an Arfaptin 2 dimer , has structural similarities to a Dbl domain and in Rho signaling where an upstream - signaling protein can act at several levels downstream , thereby generat - binds Rac in a similar manner as Tiam1 binds Rac ( Cher - fils , 2001 ) . In addition , Arfaptin 2 binds Arf proteins of ing a more potent effect . It is significant that GEM , an - other small G protein of the Ras superfamily , also ap - all three classes in a GTP - dependent manner and this has been shown to release the Rac molecule ( Tarricone pears to use this strategy to inhibit Rho action by targeting both downstream effectors and a GAP . Like et al . , 2001 ) . Therefore , this protein could create a link between Arf activation , Rac activity , and membrane ruf - the Rnd proteins , GEM inhibits Rho - kinase and it inter - acts with another Rho GAP , GMIP ( Chardin , 2003 ) . fling , where it can release Rac at sites of Arf activation in a RacGDI - like manner . Truncated mutants of Arfaptin RhoG was reported to signal to and activate Rac and Cdc42 ( Gauthier - Rouviere et al . , 1998 ) and a signaling 2 lacking either the Arf or the Rac binding site block Cell176 membrane ruffling caused by Arf6 ( D’Souza - Schorey et thatinactivatesRho , Rac , andCdc42 . YopTisaprotease that specifically cleaves the C terminus of Rho , Rac , and al . , 1997 ) . Several other intriguing links between Rac and Arf proteins include the ARAP family , which contain Cdc42 , such that the resulting proteins are effectively deprenylated and dissociated from cell membranes , GAP domains for both proteins , and the complex be - tween the Rac GEF PIX and the Arf GAP PKL / Git / Cat where their normal sites of action would occur . YopO is a serine - threonine protein kinase that binds both Rho ( Figure 6 ) ( Turner et al . , 2001 ) . and Rac , but its role has not been fully elucidated . Fi - nally , YopH is a potent tyrosine phosphatase . Several Pathogens that Target Rho Proteins tyrosine phosphorylated proteins in focal adhesions A wide range of bacterial pathogens have developed have been identified as substrates ( Bliska , 2000 ) , but strategies to subvert host cell function by regulating this tyrosine phosphatase may also contribute to down - Rho proteins . Some pathogenic bacteria manipulate regulationofRhofamilyGTPaseactivitybydephosphor - Rho proteins to prevent their uptake and death by ylating GEFs that are normally stimulated by tyrosine phagocytosis , whereasotherspromotephagocytosisby phosphorylation , such as members of the Vav family . host cells so as to occupy immunologically inaccessible intracellular locations . The bacterial proteinsthat modify Rho family members are powerful tools that have been Physiological Relevance The induction of stress fibers and focal adhesions by used since the earliest studies on these GTPases . The prototypical agent is the C3 exotransferase produced Rho and the induction of membrane ruffles by Rac are striking observations , but these structures are to a de - by Clostridium botulinum . This protein ADP - ribosylates RhoA , B , and C on Asn41 , inhibiting nucleotide ex - gree artifacts of tissue culture . Stress fibers and focal adhesions are rarely seen in cells in organisms and ap - change catalyzed by GEFs , and rapidly leading to inac - tive proteins ( Barbieri et al . , 2002 ) . C3 has been a valu - pear to be a “wound” response to the tissue culture environment . Similarly , the ruffling phenotype induced able reagent for identifying roles for Rho in many situations , although at high concentrations C3 has some by Rac is particularly pronounced due to the two - dimen - sional nature of tissue culture surfaces . Nevertheless , activity toward Rac ( Ridley et al . , 1992 ) . Many clostridial species produce toxins that glucosylate Rho proteins these cytoskeletal structures point to the roles of Rho and Rac in generating contractile force and membrane ( Barbieri et al . , 2002 ) . Examples are the A and B toxins of C . difficile , which glucosylate Rho , Rac , and Cdc42 , protrusion , respectively . Rho and Rac are often antago - nistic in their effects but their coordinated activities are and the lethal toxin of C . sordellii , which not only gluco - sylates Rho , Rac , and Cdc42 , but also Ras . With Rho , critical for effective cell migration ( Nobes and Hall , 1999 ; Xu et al . , 2003 ) . In itself , migration is of fundamental the glucose is transferred to Thr37 . This blocks GTP exchange , GAP activity , as well as the interaction of importance to our own biology . Cell migration underlies muchofourembryologyanddevelopment , anditcontin - Rho with effectors . Whereas the above toxins inhibit signaling by Rho proteins , cytotoxic - necrotizing factor ues to play essential roles in the adult organism , ranging from normal physiological activities , such as wound ( CNF ) produced by several pathogenic strains of E . coli activates Rho by deamidation of Gln63 ( Barbieri et al . , healing and the recruitment of leukocytes to sites of inflammation , to pathological situations such as rheu - 2002 ) . This blocks the intrinsic and GAP - activated GTPase activity , rendering Rho constitutively active . matoid arthritis and tumor invasion . Additionally , many related activities , such as phagocytosis , smooth muscle Salmonella promotes its own uptake by host epithelial cells lining the intestine by injecting two proteins , SopE contraction , cell shape determination , and the develop - ment of cell - cell junctions depend on the actions of Rho and SopE2 , into the host cells ( Stebbins and Galan , 2001 ) . These proteins are potent GEFs for Rac and and Rac through their regulation of the actin cytoskele - ton ( Etienne - Manneville and Hall , 2002 ) . Cdc42 , that induce very active membrane ruffling at the sites of bacterial adhesion , thereby leading to phagocy - The Ridley and Hall papers in Cell in 1992 were not alone in the launch of this field , but their impact was tosis of the bacterium . Having achieved entry into the host cell , the Salmonella secretes a second protein , unique in the momentum they gave to this area . Did the authors have any inkling that Rho and Rac would be SptP that is both a tyrosine phosphatase as well as a GAP for Rac and Cdc42 ( Stebbins and Galan , 2001 ) . found to regulate so many activities and would expand to touch almost every area of cell biology ? Presumably , once entry into the host cell has been ac - complished , it is advantageous forthe bacterium to sup - Acknowledgments press Rac and Cdc42 activity and so restore a more quiescent cytoskeletal state . Enteropathic Yersinia also We apologize to the many whose work we have not been able to express several proteins that modulate Rho protein ac - cite due to space constraints . We thank James Bear , Sarita Sastry , tivity ( Finlay and Cossart , 1997 ; Bliska , 2000 ) . To get out and John Sondek for valuable comments on the manuscript . The of the intestine , these bacteria adhere to M cells in the authors gratefully acknowledge support from grants from the NIH and a Kenan Distinguished Professorship ( K . B . ) . intestinalepithelium , stimulatingtheirownphagocytosis and subsequent passage across the epithelial barrier References into the body ( Finlay and Cossart , 1997 ) . Yersinia then adhere strongly to immune cells within Peyer’s patches Adnane , J . , Seijo , E . , Chen , Z . , Bizouarn , F . , Leal , M . , Sebti , S . M . , but now inhibit their own phagocytosis and potential and Munoz - Antonia , T . ( 2002 ) . RhoB , not RhoA , represses the tran - destruction by the immune cells by introducing into scription of the transforming growth factor beta type II receptor by these cells several proteins ( Yops ) that inhibit Rho family amechanism involvingactivator protein1 . J . Biol . Chem . 277 , 8500 – 8507 . GTPases ( Bliska , 2000 ) . YopE is a broad specificity GAP Review177 Amano , M . , Ito , M . , Kimura , K . , Fukata , Y . , Chihara , K . , Nakano , T . , and VanAelst , L . ( 1997 ) . Arole for POR1 , aRac1 - interacting protein , in ARF6 - mediated cytoskeletal rearrangements . EMBO J . 16 , 5445 – Matsuura , Y . , and Kaibuchi , K . ( 1996 ) . Phosphorylation and activa - tionofmyosinbyRho - associatedkinase ( Rho - kinase ) . J . Biol . Chem . 5454 . 271 , 20246 – 20249 . DeMali , K . A . , Wennerberg , K . , and Burridge , K . ( 2003 ) . Integrin sig - Aronheim , A . , Broder , Y . C . , Cohen , A . , Fritsch , A . , Belisle , B . , and naling to the actin cytoskeleton . Curr . Opin . Cell Biol . 15 , 572 – 582 . Abo , A . ( 1998 ) . Chp , ahomologueoftheGTPaseCdc42Hs , activates Du , W . , Lebowitz , P . F . , and Prendergast , G . C . ( 1999 ) . Cell growth the JNK pathway and is implicated in reorganizing the actin cy - inhibition by farnesyltransferase inhibitors is mediated by gain of toskeleton . Curr . Biol . 8 , 1125 – 1128 . geranylgeranylated RhoB . Mol . Cell . Biol . 19 , 1831 – 1840 . Arthur , W . T . , andBurridge , K . ( 2001 ) . RhoAinactivationbyp190Rho - Eden , S . , Rohatgi , R . , Podtelejnikov , A . V . , Mann , M . , and Kirschner , GAP regulates cell spreading and migration by promoting mem - M . W . ( 2002 ) . Mechanism of regulation of WAVE1 - induced actin nu - brane protrusion and polarity . Mol . Biol . Cell 12 , 2711 – 2720 . cleation by Rac1 and Nck . Nature 418 , 790 – 793 . Arthur , W . T . , Ellerbroek , S . M . , Der , C . J . , Burridge , K . , and Wennerb - Edwards , D . C . , Sanders , L . C . , Bokoch , G . M . , and Gill , G . N . ( 1999 ) . erg , K . ( 2002 ) . XPLN , aguaninenucleotideexchangefactorforRhoA Activation of LIM - kinase by Pak1 couples Rac / Cdc42 GTPase sig - and RhoB , but not RhoC . J . Biol . Chem . 277 , 42964 – 42972 . nalling to actin cytoskeletal dynamics . Nat . Cell Biol . 1 , 253 – 259 . Barbieri , J . T . , Riese , M . J . , and Aktories , K . ( 2002 ) . Bacterial toxins Etienne - Manneville , S . , and Hall , A . ( 2002 ) . Rho GTPases in cell that modify the actin cytoskeleton . Annu . Rev . Cell Dev . Biol . 18 , biology . Nature 420 , 629 – 635 . 315 – 344 . Finlay , B . B . , and Cossart , P . ( 1997 ) . Exploitation of mammalian host Bar - Sagi , D . , and Feramisco , J . R . ( 1986 ) . Induction of membrane cell functions by bacterial pathogens . Science 276 , 718 – 725 . ruffling and fluid - phase pinocytosis in quiescent fibroblasts by ras Fleming , I . N . , Elliott , C . M . , and Exton , J . H . ( 1998 ) . Phospholipase proteins . Science 233 , 1061 – 1068 . C - gamma , protein kinase C and Ca2 (cid:4) / calmodulin - dependent pro - Bishop , A . L . , and Hall , A . ( 2000 ) . Rho GTPases and their effector tein kinase II are involved in platelet - derived growth factor - induced proteins . Biochem . J . 348 , 241 – 255 . phosphorylation of Tiam1 . FEBS Lett . 429 , 229 – 233 . Blanchoin , L . , Pollard , T . D . , and Mullins , R . D . ( 2000 ) . Interactions of Foster , R . , Hu , K . Q . , Lu , Y . , Nolan , K . M . , Thissen , J . A . , andSettleman , ADF / cofilin , Arp2 / 3 complex , capping protein and profilin in remod - J . ( 1996 ) . Identification of a novel human Rho protein with unusual elingofbranched actinfilamentnetworks . Curr . Biol . 10 , 1273 – 1282 . properties : GTPase deficiency and in vivo farnesylation . Mol . Cell . Bliska , J . B . ( 2000 ) . Yop effectors of Yersinia spp . , and actin re - Biol . 16 , 2689 – 2699 . arrangements . Trends Microbiol . 8 , 205 – 208 . Fransson , A . , Ruusala , A . , and Aspenstrom , P . ( 2003 ) . Atypical Rho Bokoch , G . M . ( 2003 ) . Biology of the p21 - activated kinases . Annu . GTPases have roles in mitochondrial homeostasis and apoptosis . Rev . Biochem . 72 , 743 – 781 . J . Biol . Chem . 278 , 6495 – 6502 . Boshans , R . L . , Szanto , S . , Van Aelst , L . , and D’Souza - Schorey , C . Fukuhara , S . , Chikumi , H . , and Gutkind , J . S . ( 2001 ) . RGS - containing ( 2000 ) . ADP - ribosylation factor 6 regulates actin cytoskeleton re - RhoGEFs : the missing link between transforming G proteins and modeling in coordination with Rac1 and RhoA . Mol . Cell . Biol . 20 , Rho ? Oncogene 20 , 1661 – 1668 . 3685 – 3694 . Gampel , A . , and Mellor , H . ( 2002 ) . Small interfering RNAs as a tool Braga , V . M . ( 2002 ) . Cell - cell adhesion and signalling . Curr . Opin . to assign Rho GTPase exchange - factor function in vivo . Biochem . Cell Biol . 14 , 546 – 556 . J . 366 , 393 – 398 . Brandt , D . , Gimona , M . , Hillmann , M . , Haller , H . , and Mischak , H . Gampel , A . , Parker , P . J . , and Mellor , H . ( 1999 ) . Regulation of epider - ( 2002 ) . Protein kinase C induces actin reorganization via a Src - and mal growth factor receptor traffic by the small GTPase rhoB . Curr . Rho - dependent pathway . J . Biol . Chem . 277 , 20903 – 20910 . Biol . 9 , 955 – 958 . Brugnera , E . , Haney , L . , Grimsley , C . , Lu , M . , Walk , S . F . , Tosello - Gauthier - Rouviere , C . , Vignal , E . , Meriane , M . , Roux , P . , Montcour - Trampont , A . C . , Macara , I . G . , Madhani , H . , Fink , G . R . , andRavichan - ier , P . , and Fort , P . ( 1998 ) . RhoG GTPase controls a pathway that dran , K . S . ( 2002 ) . Unconventional Rac - GEF activity is mediated independently activates Rac1 and Cdc42Hs . Mol . Biol . Cell 9 , 1379 – through the Dock180 - ELMO complex . Nat . Cell Biol . 4 , 574 – 582 . 1394 . Chardin , P . ( 2003 ) . GTPase regulation : getting aRnd Rock and Rho Govind , S . , Kozma , R . , Monfries , C . , Lim , L . , and Ahmed , S . ( 2001 ) . inhibition . Curr . Biol . 13 , R702 – R704 . Cdc42Hs facilitates cytoskeletal reorganization and neurite out - Chen , Z . , Sun , J . , Pradines , A . , Favre , G . , Adnane , J . , and Sebti , growth by localizing the 58 - kDinsulin receptor substrate to filamen - S . M . ( 2000 ) . Both farnesylated and geranylgeranylated RhoB inhibit tous actin . J . Cell Biol . 152 , 579 – 594 . malignant transformation and suppress human tumor growth in Guasch , R . M . , Scambler , P . , Jones , G . E . , and Ridley , A . J . ( 1998 ) . nude mice . J . Biol . Chem . 275 , 17974 – 17978 . RhoE regulates actin cytoskeleton organization and cell migration . Cherfils , J . ( 2001 ) . Structural mimicry of DH domains by Arfaptin Mol . Cell . Biol . 18 , 4761 – 4771 . suggests a model for the recognition of Rac - GDP by its guanine Hamaguchi , M . , Meth , J . L . , von Klitzing , C . , Wei , W . , Esposito , D . , nucleotide exchange factors . FEBS Lett . 507 , 280 – 284 . Rodgers , L . , Walsh , T . , Welcsh , P . , King , M . C . , and Wigler , M . H . Chiang , S . H . , Hou , J . C . , Hwang , J . , Pessin , J . E . , and Saltiel , A . R . ( 2002 ) . DBC2 , a candidate for a tumor suppressor gene involved in ( 2002 ) . Cloning and functional characterization of related TC10 iso - breast cancer . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA 99 , 13647 – 13652 . forms , a subfamily of Rho proteins involved in insulin - stimulated Hansen , S . H . , Zegers , M . M . , Woodrow , M . , Rodriguez - Viciana , P . , glucose transport . J . Biol . Chem . 277 , 13067 – 13073 . Chardin , P . , Mostov , K . E . , andMcMahon , M . ( 2000 ) . Inducedexpres - Chrzanowska - Wodnicka , M . , and Burridge , K . ( 1996 ) . Rho - stimu - sionofRnd3isassociatedwithtransformationofpolarizedepithelial lated contractility drives the formation of stress fibers and focal cellsbytheRaf - MEK - extracellularsignal - regulatedkinasepathway . adhesions . J . Cell Biol . 133 , 1403 – 1415 . Mol . Cell . Biol . 20 , 9364 – 9375 . Clark , E . A . , Golub , T . R . , Lander , E . S . , and Hynes , R . O . ( 2000 ) . Geno - Hart , M . J . , Eva , A . , Evans , T . , Aaronson , S . A . , and Cerione , R . A . micanalysisofmetastasisrevealsanessentialroleforRhoC . Nature ( 1991 ) . Catalysis of guanine nucleotide exchange on the CDC42Hs 406 , 532 – 535 . protein by the dbl oncogene product . Nature 354 , 311 – 314 . Cote , J . F . , and Vuori , K . ( 2002 ) . Identification of an evolutionarily Hart , M . J . , Jiang , X . , Kozasa , T . , Roscoe , W . , Singer , W . D . , Gilman , conserved superfamily of DOCK180 - related proteins with guanine A . G . , Sternweis , P . C . , and Bollag , G . ( 1998 ) . Direct stimulation of the nucleotide exchange activity . J . Cell Sci . 115 , 4901 – 4913 . guaninenucleotideexchangeactivityofp115RhoGEFbyGalpha13 . Science 280 , 2112 – 2114 . D’Souza - Schorey , C . , Boettner , B . , and Van Aelst , L . ( 1998 ) . Rac regulates integrin - mediated spreading and increased adhesion of Hiraoka , K . , Kaibuchi , K . , Ando , S . , Musha , T . , Takaishi , K . , Mizuno , T lymphocytes . Mol . Cell . Biol . 18 , 3936 – 3946 . T . , Asada , M . , Menard , L . , Tomhave , E . , Didsbury , J . , et al . ( 1992 ) . Both stimulatory and inhibitory GDP / GTP exchange proteins , Smg D’Souza - Schorey , C . , Boshans , R . L . , McDonough , M . , Stahl , P . D . , Cell178 GDS and Rho GDI , are active on multiple small GTP - binding pro - retraction and rigidity during mitotic cell rounding . J . Cell Biol . 160 , 255 – 265 . teins . Biochem . Biophys . Res . Commun . 182 , 921 – 930 . Maekawa , M . , Ishizaki , T . , Boku , S . , Watanabe , N . , Fujita , A . , Iwa - Innocenti , M . , Frittoli , E . , Ponzanelli , I . , Falck , J . R . , Brachmann , S . M . , matsu , A . , Obinata , T . , Ohashi , K . , Mizuno , K . , and Narumiya , S . Difiore , P . P . , and Scita , G . ( 2003 ) . Phosphoinositide 3 - kinase acti - ( 1999 ) . Signaling from rho to the actin cytoskeleton through protein vates Rac by entering in a complex with Eps8 , Abi1 , and Sos - 1 . J . kinases ROCK and LIM - kinase . Science 285 , 895 – 898 . Cell Biol . 160 , 17 – 23 . Manser , E . , Huang , H . Y . , Loo , T . H . , Chen , X . Q . , Dong , J . M . , Leung , Kanoh , H . , Williger , B . T . , andExton , J . H . ( 1997 ) . Arfaptin 1 , aputative T . , and Lim , L . ( 1997 ) . Expression of constitutively active alpha - PAK cytosolic target protein of ADP - ribosylation factor , is recruited to reveals effects of the kinase on actin and focal complexes . Mol . Golgi membranes . J . Biol . Chem . 272 , 5421 – 5429 . Cell . Biol . 17 , 1129 – 1143 . Katoh , H . , and Negishi , M . ( 2003 ) . RhoG activates Rac1 by direct Matsui , T . , Yonemura , S . , Tsukita , S . , and Tsukita , S . ( 1999 ) . Activa - interaction with the Dock180 - binding protein Elmo . Nature 424 , tion of ERM proteins in vivo by Rho involves phosphatidyl - inositol 461 – 464 . 4 - phosphate 5 - kinase and not ROCK kinases . Curr . Biol . 9 , 1259 – Kimura , K . , Ito , M . , Amano , M . , Chihara , K . , Fukata , Y . , Nakafuku , 1262 . M . , Yamamori , B . , Feng , J . H . , Nakano , T . , Okawa , K . , et al . ( 1996 ) . Meller , N . , Irani - Tehrani , M . , Kiosses , W . B . , Del Pozo , M . A . , and Regulation of myosin phosphatase by Rho and Rho - Associated ki - Schwartz , M . A . ( 2002 ) . Zizimin1 , a novel Cdc42 activator , reveals a nase ( Rho - kinase ) . Science 273 , 245 – 248 . new GEF domain for Rho proteins . Nat . Cell Biol . 4 , 639 – 647 . Kimura , K . , Fukata , Y . , Matsuoka , Y . , Bennett , V . , Matsuura , Y . , Mertens , A . E . , Roovers , R . C . , and Collard , J . G . ( 2003 ) . Regulation Okawa , K . , Iwamatsu , A . , and Kaibuchi , K . ( 1998 ) . Regulation of of Tiam1 - Rac signalling . FEBS Lett . 546 , 11 – 16 . the association of adducin with actin filaments by Rho - associated Michaelson , D . , Silletti , J . , Murphy , G . , D’Eustachio , P . , Rush , M . , kinase ( Rho - kinase ) and myosin phosphatase . J . Biol . Chem . 273 , and Philips , M . R . ( 2001 ) . Differential localization of Rho GTPases in 5542 – 5548 . live cells : regulation by hypervariable regions and RhoGDI binding . King , A . J . , Sun , H . , Diaz , B . , Barnard , D . , Miao , W . , Bagrodia , S . , J . Cell Biol . 152 , 111 – 126 . and Marshall , M . S . ( 1998 ) . The protein kinase Pak3 positively regu - Miki , H . , Suetsugu , S . , and Takenawa , T . ( 1998 ) . WAVE , a novel lates Raf - 1 activity through phosphorylation of serine 338 . Nature WASP - family protein involved in actin reorganization induced by 396 , 180 – 183 . Rac . EMBO J . 17 , 6932 – 6941 . Kiosses , W . B . , Shattil , S . J . , Pampori , N . , and Schwartz , M . A . ( 2001 ) . Miki , H . , Yamaguchi , H . , Suetsugu , S . , and Takenawa , T . ( 2000 ) . Rac recruits high - affinity integrin (cid:1) v (cid:2) 3 to lamellipodia in endothelial IRSp53 is an essential intermediate between Rac and WAVE in the cell migration . Nat . Cell Biol . 3 , 316 – 320 . regulation of membrane ruffling . Nature 408 , 732 – 735 . Kozasa , T . , Jiang , X . , Hart , M . J . , Sternweis , P . M . , Singer , W . D . , Gil - Moon , S . Y . , and Zheng , Y . ( 2003 ) . Rho GTPase - activating proteins man , A . G . , Bollag , G . , and Sternweis , P . C . ( 1998 ) . p115 RhoGEF , in cell regulation . Trends Cell Biol . 13 , 13 – 22 . a GTPase activating protein for Galpha12 and Galpha13 . Science Nimnual , A . S . , Yatsula , B . A . , and Bar - Sagi , D . ( 1998 ) . Coupling of 280 , 2109 – 2111 . RasandRacguanosinetriphosphatasesthroughtheRasexchanger Kozma , R . , Ahmed , S . , Best , A . , and Lim , L . ( 1995 ) . The Ras - related Sos . Science 279 , 560 – 563 . protein Cdc42Hs and bradykinin promote formation of peripheral Nimnual , A . S . , Yatsula , B . A . , and Bar - Sagi , D . ( 2003 ) . Redox - depen - actin microspikes and filopodia in Swiss 3T3 fibroblasts . Mol . Cell . dent downregulation of Rho by Rac . Nat . Cell Biol . 5 , 236 – 241 . Biol . 15 , 1942 – 1952 . Nobes , C . D . , and Hall , A . ( 1995 ) . Rho , Rac , and Cdc42 GTPases Kozma , R . , Ahmed , S . , Best , A . , and Lim , L . ( 1996 ) . The GTPase - regulatetheassemblyofmultimolecularfocalcomplexesassociated activating protein n - chimaerin cooperates with Rac1 and Cdc42Hs with actin stress fibers , lamellipodia , and filopodia . Cell 81 , 53 – 62 . to induce the formation of lamellipodia and filopodia . Mol . Cell . Biol . Nobes , C . D . , and Hall , A . ( 1999 ) . Rho GTPases control polarity , pro - 16 , 5069 – 5080 . trusion , and adhesion during cell movement . J . Cell Biol . 144 , 1235 – Kraynov , V . S . , Chamberlain , C . , Bokoch , G . M . , Schwartz , M . A . , Sla - 1244 . baugh , S . , andHahn , K . M . ( 2000 ) . LocalizedRacactivationdynamics Nobes , C . D . , Hawkins , P . , Stephens , L . , and Hall , A . ( 1995 ) . Activa - visualized in living cells . Science 290 , 333 – 337 . tion of the small GTP - binding proteins rho and rac by growth factor Krugmann , S . , Jordens , I . , Gevaert , K . , Driessens , M . , Vandekerck - receptors . J . Cell Sci . 108 , 225 – 233 . hove , J . , and Hall , A . ( 2001 ) . Cdc42 induces filopodia by promoting Nobes , C . D . , Lauritzen , I . , Mattei , M . G . , Paris , S . , Hall , A . , and Char - theformationofanIRSp53 : Menacomplex . Curr . Biol . 11 , 1645 – 1655 . din , P . ( 1998 ) . A new member of the Rho family , Rnd1 , promotes Lambert , J . M . , Lambert , Q . T . , Reuther , G . W . , Malliri , A . , Siderovski , disassembly of actin filament structures and loss of cell adhesion . D . P . , Sondek , J . , Collard , J . G . , and Der , C . J . ( 2002 ) . Tiam1 mediates J . Cell Biol . 141 , 187 – 197 . Ras activationof Racby aPI ( 3 ) K - independent mechanism . Nat . Cell Noren , N . K . , Arthur , W . T . , and Burridge , K . ( 2003 ) . Cadherinengage - Biol . 4 , 621 – 625 . ment inhibits RhoA via p190RhoGAP . J . Biol . Chem . 278 , 13615 – Li , F . , and Higgs , H . N . ( 2003 ) . The mouse formin mDia1 is a potent 13618 . actin nucleation factor regulated by autoinhibition . Curr . Biol . 13 , Ohta , Y . , Suzuki , N . , Nakamura , S . , Hartwig , J . H . , and Stossel , T . P . 1335 – 1340 . ( 1999 ) . The small GTPase RalA targets filamin to induce filopodia . Liu , A . , Du , W . , Liu , J . P . , Jessell , T . M . , and Prendergast , G . C . ( 2000 ) . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA 96 , 2122 – 2128 . RhoB alteration is necessary for apoptotic and antineoplastic re - Prieto - Sanchez , R . M . , and Bustelo , X . R . ( 2003 ) . Structural basis for sponses to farnesyltransferase inhibitors . Mol . Cell . Biol . 20 , 6105 – the signaling specificity of RhoG and Rac1 GTPases . J . Biol . Chem . 6113 . 278 , 37916 – 37925 Published online June 12 , 2003 . 10 . 1074 / Machesky , L . M . , and Hall , A . ( 1997 ) . Role of actin polymerization jbc . M301437200 . and adhesion to extracellular matrix in Rac - and Rho - induced cy - Radhakrishna , H . , AlAwar , O . , Khachikian , Z . , and Donaldson , J . G . toskeletal reorganization . J . Cell Biol . 138 , 913 – 926 . ( 1999 ) . ARF6 requirement for Rac ruffling suggests a role for mem - Machesky , L . M . , and Insall , R . H . ( 1998 ) . Scar1 and the related brane trafficking in cortical actin rearrangements . J . Cell Sci . 112 , Wiskott - Aldrich syndrome protein , WASP , regulate the actin cy - 855 – 866 . toskeleton through the Arp2 / 3 complex . Curr . Biol . 8 , 1347 – 1356 . Ren , X . D . , Kiosses , W . B . , and Schwartz , M . A . ( 1999 ) . Regulation Madaule , P . , Eda , M . , Watanabe , N . , Fujisawa , K . , Matsuoka , T . , of the small GTP - binding protein Rho by cell adhesion and the Bito , H . , Ishizaki , T . , and Narumiya , S . ( 1998 ) . Role of citron kinase cytoskeleton . EMBO J . 18 , 578 – 585 . as a target of the small GTPase Rho in cytokinesis . Nature 394 , Ridley , A . J . , and Hall , A . ( 1992 ) . The small GTP - binding protein Rho 491 – 494 . regulates the assembly of focal adhesions and actin stress fibers in response to growth - factors . Cell 70 , 389 – 399 . Maddox , A . S . , and Burridge , K . ( 2003 ) . RhoA is required for cortical Review179 Ridley , A . J . , Paterson , H . F . , Johnston , C . L . , Diekmann , D . , and Hall , Turner , C . E . , West , K . A . , and Brown , M . C . ( 2001 ) . Paxillin - ARF GAP signaling and the cytoskeleton . Curr . Opin . Cell Biol . 13 , 593 – 599 . A . ( 1992 ) . The small GTP - binding protein Rac regulates growth - factor induced membrane ruffling . Cell 70 , 401 – 410 . Vadlamudi , R . K . , Li , F . , Adam , L . , Nguyen , D . , Ohta , Y . , Stossel , T . P . , and Kumar , R . ( 2002 ) . Filamin is essential in actin cytoskeletal Riento , K . , Guasch , R . M . , Garg , R . , Jin , B . , and Ridley , A . J . ( 2003 ) . assembly mediated by p21 - activated kinase 1 . Nat . Cell Biol . 4 , RhoEbinds toROCK1and inhibitsdownstreamsignaling . Mol . Cell . 681 – 690 . Biol . 23 , 4219 – 4229 . Van Aelst , L . , Joneson , T . , and Bar - Sagi , D . ( 1996 ) . Identification Riveline , D . , Zamir , E . , Balaban , N . Q . , Schwarz , U . S . , Ishizaki , T . , of a novel Rac1 - interacting protein involved in membrane ruffling . Narumiya , S . , Kam , Z . , Geiger , B . , andBershadsky , A . D . ( 2001 ) . Focal EMBO J . 15 , 3778 – 3786 . contacts as mechanosensors : externally applied local mechanical force induces growth of focal contacts by an mDia1 - dependent and van Leeuwen , F . N . , van Delft , S . , Kain , H . E . , van der Kammen , R . A . , ROCK - independent mechanism . J . Cell Biol . 153 , 1175 – 1186 . and Collard , J . G . ( 1999 ) . Rac regulates phosphorylation of the myo - sin - II heavy chain , actinomyosin disassembly and cell spreading . Rohatgi , R . , Nollau , P . , Ho , H . Y . , Kirschner , M . W . , and Mayer , B . J . Nat . Cell Biol . 1 , 242 – 248 . ( 2001 ) . Nck and phosphatidylinositol 4 , 5 - bisphosphate synergisti - cally activate actin polymerization through the N - WASP - Arp2 / 3 Vincent , S . , Jeanteur , P . , and Fort , P . ( 1992 ) . Growth - regulated ex - pathway . J . Biol . Chem . 276 , 26448 – 26452 . pression of rhoG , a new member of the ras homolog gene family . Mol . Cell . Biol . 12 , 3138 – 3148 . Sahai , E . , and Marshall , C . J . ( 2002 ) . ROCK and Dia have opposing effects on adherens junctions downstream of Rho . Nat . Cell Biol . Wang , Y . , Lang , L . , Luo , Y . , and Zheng , Y . ( 2003 ) . A novel strategy 4 , 408 – 415 . for specifically downregulating individual Rho GTPase activity in tumor cells . J . Biol . Chem . 278 , 44617 – 44625 Published online June Sahai , E . , Olson , M . F . , and Marshall , C . J . ( 2001 ) . Cross - talkbetween 25 , 2003 . 10 . 1074 / jbc . M308929200 . RasandRhosignallingpathwaysintransformationfavoursprolifera - tion and increased motility . EMBO J . 20 , 755 – 766 . Watanabe , N . , Kato , T . , Fujita , A . , Ishizaki , T . , and Narumiya , S . ( 1999 ) . CooperationbetweenmDia1andROCKinRho - inducedactin Sander , E . E . , tenKlooster , J . P . , van Delft , S . , vander Kammen , R . A . , reorganization . Nat . Cell Biol . 1 , 136 – 143 . and Collard , J . G . ( 1999 ) . Rac downregulates Rho activity : reciprocal balance between both GTPases determines cellular morphology Wennerberg , K . , Ellerbroek , S . M . , Liu , R . Y . , Karnoub , A . E . , Burridge , and migratory behavior . J . Cell Biol . 147 , 1009 – 1022 . K . , and Der , C . J . ( 2002 ) . RhoG signals in parallel with Rac1 and Cdc42 . J . Biol . Chem . 277 , 47810 – 47817 . Sanders , L . C . , Matsumura , F . , Bokoch , G . M . , and de Lanerolle , P . ( 1999 ) . Inhibition of myosin light chain kinase by p21 - activated ki - Wennerberg , K . , Forget , M . A . , Ellerbroek , S . M . , Arthur , W . T . , Bur - nase . Science 283 , 2083 – 2085 . ridge , K . , Setoyama , M . , Der , C . J . , and Hansen , S . H . ( 2003 ) . Rnd proteins function as RhoA antagonists by activating p190 RhoGAP . Schmidt , A . , and Hall , A . ( 2002 ) . Guanine nucleotide exchange fac - Curr . Biol . 13 , 1106 – 1115 . tors for Rho GTPases : turning on the switch . Genes Dev . 16 , 1587 – 1609 . Wherlock , M . , and Mellor , H . ( 2002 ) . The Rho GTPase family : a Racs to Wrchs story . J . Cell Sci . 115 , 2 – 4 . Scita , G . , Nordstrom , J . , Carbone , R . , Tenca , P . , Giardina , G . , Gut - kind , S . , Bjarnegard , M . , Betsholtz , C . , andDiFiore , P . P . ( 1999 ) . EPS8 Worthylake , R . A . , and Burridge , K . ( 2003 ) . RhoA and ROCK promote and E3B1 transduce signals from Ras to Rac . Nature 401 , 290 – 293 . migration by limiting membrane protrusions . J . Biol . Chem . 278 , 13578 – 13584 . Sells , M . A . , Knaus , U . G . , Bagrodia , S . , Ambrose , D . M . , Bokoch , G . M . , and Chernoff , J . ( 1997 ) . Human p21 - activated kinase ( Pak1 ) regu - Worthylake , R . A . , Lemoine , S . , Watson , J . M . , andBurridge , K . ( 2001 ) . lates actin organization in mammalian cells . Curr . Biol . 7 , 202 – 210 . RhoAisrequiredformonocytetailretractionduringtransendothelialmigration . J . Cell Biol . 154 , 147 – 160 . Sells , M . A . , Boyd , J . T . , and Chernoff , J . ( 1999 ) . p21 - activated kinase 1 ( Pak1 ) regulates cellmotility in mammalianfibroblasts . J . Cell Biol . Xu , J . , Wang , F . , VanKeymeulen , A . , Herzmark , P . , Straight , A . , Kelly , 145 , 837 – 849 . K . , Takuwa , Y . , Sugimoto , N . , Mitchison , T . , andBourne , H . R . ( 2003 ) . Divergentsignalsandcytoskeletalassembliesregulateself - organiz - Shin , O . H . , and Exton , J . H . ( 2001 ) . Differential binding of arfaptin ing polarity in neutrophils . Cell 114 , 201 – 214 . 2 / POR1 to ADP - ribosylation factors and Rac1 . Biochem . Biophys . Res . Commun . 285 , 1267 – 1273 . Zalcman , G . , Closson , V . , Linares - Cruz , G . , Lerebours , F . , Honore , N . , Tavitian , A . , and Olofsson , B . ( 1995 ) . Regulation of Ras - related Snyder , J . T . , Singer , A . U . , Wing , M . R . , Harden , T . K . , and Sondek , J . RhoB protein expression during the cell cycle . Oncogene 10 , 1935 – ( 2003 ) . The pleckstrin homology domain of phospholipase C - beta2 1945 . as an effector site for Rac . J . Biol . Chem . 278 , 21099 – 21104 . Zebda , N . , Bernard , O . , Bailly , M . , Welti , S . , Lawrence , D . S . , and Stebbins , C . E . , andGalan , J . E . ( 2001 ) . Structuralmimicryinbacterial Condeelis , J . S . ( 2000 ) . Phosphorylation of ADF / cofilin abolishes virulence . Nature 412 , 701 – 705 . EGF - induced actin nucleation at the leading edge and subsequent Stossel , T . P . , Condeelis , J . , Cooley , L . , Hartwig , J . H . , Noegel , A . , lamellipod extension . J . Cell Biol . 151 , 1119 – 1127 . Schleicher , M . , and Shapiro , S . S . ( 2001 ) . Filamins as integrators of Zheng , Y . , Bagrodia , S . , andCerione , R . A . ( 1994 ) . Activationofphos - cell mechanics and signalling . Nat . Rev . Mol . Cell Biol . 2 , 138 – 145 . phoinositide 3 - kinase activity by Cdc42Hs binding to p85 . J . Biol . Suwa , H . , Ohshio , G . , Imamura , T . , Watanabe , G . , Arii , S . , Imamura , Chem . 269 , 18727 – 18730 . M . , Narumiya , S . , Hiai , H . , and Fukumoto , M . ( 1998 ) . Overexpression of the rhoC gene correlates with progression of ductal adenocarci - noma of the pancreas . Br . J . Cancer 77 , 147 – 152 . Tao , W . , Pennica , D . , Xu , L . , Kalejta , R . F . , and Levine , A . J . ( 2001 ) . Wrch - 1 , a novel member of the Rho gene family that is regulated by Wnt - 1 . Genes Dev . 15 , 1796 – 1807 . Tarricone , C . , Xiao , B . , Justin , N . , Walker , P . A . , Rittinger , K . , Gamblin , S . J . , and Smerdon , S . J . ( 2001 ) . The structural basis of Arfaptin - mediated cross - talk between Rac and Arf signalling pathways . Na - ture 411 , 215 – 219 . Thompson , P . W . , Randi , A . M . , and Ridley , A . J . ( 2002 ) . Intercellular adhesion molecule ( ICAM ) - 1 , but not ICAM - 2 , activates RhoA and stimulatesc - fosandrhoAtranscriptioninendothelialcells . J . Immu - nol . 169 , 1007 – 1013 . Tolias , K . F . , Cantley , L . C . , and Carpenter , C . L . ( 1995 ) . Rho family GTPases bind to phosphoinositide kinases . J . Biol . Chem . 270 , 17656 – 17659 .