Association for Information Systems AIS Electronic Library ( AISeL ) Wirtschaftsinformatik Proceedings 1999 Wirtschaftsinformatik February 1999 Academic Journals on the Internet Alexander Hars University of Southern California , Los Angeles , USA , Marshall School of Business , hars @ bus . usc . edu Follow this and additional works at : http : / / aisel . aisnet . org / wi1999 This material is brought to you by the Wirtschaftsinformatik at AIS Electronic Library ( AISeL ) . It has been accepted for inclusion in Wirtschaftsinformatik Proceedings 1999 by an authorized administrator of AIS Electronic Library ( AISeL ) . For more information , please contact elibrary @ aisnet . org . Recommended Citation Hars , Alexander , " Academic Journals on the Internet " ( 1999 ) . Wirtschaftsinformatik Proceedings 1999 . 6 . http : / / aisel . aisnet . org / wi1999 / 6 Electronic Business Engineering / 4 . Internationale Tagung Wirtschaftsinformatik 1999 . Hrsg . : August - Wilhelm Scheer ; Markus Nüttgens . – Heidelberg : Physica - Verlag , 1999 Academic Journals on the Internet Alexander Hars Marshall School of Business USC , Los Angeles , USA ( hars @ bus . usc . edu ) Contents 1 Introduction 2 Traditional electronic journals 2 . 1 Hybrid ele ctronic journals 2 . 2 Journal of Artificial Intelligence Research ( JAIR ) 2 . 3 MISQ Discovery 2 . 4 Evaluation of characteristics 3 Encyclopedia / Knowledge Repository 3 . 1 GenBank 3 . 2 Foldoc 3 . 3 Evaluation of characteristics 4 Collaboratory 4 . 1 Upper Atmospheri c Collaboratory ( UARC ) 4 . 2 Information Systems Cybrarium 4 . 3 Evaluation of characteristics 5 Other types of sites 5 . 1 Preprint archive 5 . 2 Ontolingua Server 5 . 3 JSTOR 5 . 4 Evaluation of characteristics 6 Synthesis : Characteristics of electronic journals 84 A . Hars Abstract While much research examines the internet ' s impact on ' electronic business ' information technology may have an equally profound impact on what mightbe called ' electronic science ' . Although the internet has the potential of revo - lu tionizing resea rch , it is not clear in which ways the structure of journals and the associated research processes will be affected . The purpose of this article is to provide a better foundation for the engineering of scientific knowledge infrastructures on the internet . Alternative models of academic sites which are dedicated to the creation and dissemination of scientific knowledge are studied . Characteristics of different categories of electronic jour nals , e . g . traditional electronic journals , knowledge repositories , c ollabo - raties etc . are examined and synthesized into a list of key characteristics which then can be used as basis for the design and investigation into the evolution of such systems . 1 Introduction The internet challenges traditional models of scholarly communication . Although it is possible to replicate the structure of current journals on the world wide web , many researchers argue that research processes need to be fundamentally re - thought : ” The new electronic medium gives us the opportunity to reconsider many aspects of our current research communication , and researchers should take advantage of this opportunity to map out the ideal research communication medium of the fu ture . " … " In particular , we need to dislodge definitively the curiously prevalent notion that the future electronic medium will strictly duplicate , inadequacy for inadequacy , the current print medium . ” ( Ginsparg , 1996 ) The new medium presents several opportunities for reinventing scholarly commu nication . On the internet , the costs of pu blishing are dramatically reduced . Some authors ( e . g . Odlyzko 1997 ) argue that they are practically zero . This has signifi cant implications for the role of reviewed journals and scholarly associations . In contrast to paper , electronic knowledge can be modified easily . Links , indexes and meta structures can be created on existing knowledge . The presentation of know ledge can be tuned to the needs of the reader and there may be many additional innovations which are enabled by information technology . The new medium therefore invites the reengineering of scientific processes . Many scientific associations , research institutes and individual researchers have begun to leverage information technology for the creation and dissemination of scientific knowledge . In most of the cases , however , familiar journal structures are being replicated ( Hars & Malhotra , 1997 ) . A recent example is the Academic Journals on the Internet 85 introduction of two new electronic journals by the Association of Information Systems ( AIS ) . Adhe rence to traditional structures m ay have several reasons : 1 ) there is un certainty about alternative models and 2 ) a lack of experience about their feasibility . 3 ) In addition , current research processes and the reward system have been optimized for the traditional structure . Therefore the replication of these structures may be the least risky strategy . The purpose of this article is to provide a better foundation for the engineering of scientific processes on the Internet . Alternative models of academic sites which are dedicated to the creation and dissemination of scientific knowledge will be studied . While it may be too early to determine whether the evolution of elec - tronic journals will converge to any of these prototypes , this research will show the breadth of change that is possible in comparison to the traditional journal model . The article is structured as follows : To identify the spectrum of possible know - ledge - related sites , characteristics of current sites are identified . Characteristics are elicited by comparing electronic sites with traditional media and by comparing different electronic sites . The characteristics are then prioritized and organized into groups of key characteristics . This allows to extrapolate the full spectrum of possible knowledge related sites by considering all combinations of independent characteristics . In the following , sites will be examined by categoriestypically mentioned in the literature such as : electronic journal , knowledge repository , collaboratory . Then sites will be examined which do not easily fit into these cate gories . 2 Traditional electronic journals Traditional electronic journals are scholarly sites on the World Wide Web which closely replicate the structure of paper journals . The qualifier ' traditional ' is used to distinguish the concept from the broader vision of electronic journals as " scho - larly IT based infrastructures " ( Watson 1994 ) which will eventually replace paper journals . Many traditional electronic journals now exist on the WWW . 2 . 1 Hybrid electronic journals Most publishers of paper journals have begun to make online versions available . Examples are the Association for Computing Machinery , IEEE , Elsevier and Springer . These sites are hybrid sites ; journals are published both on the internet and in paper . In most cases access is restricted to subscribers of the electronic journal ( or an electronic library ) ; ACM also provides pay - per - view access to indi - vidual articles . The presentation of the journals on the web resembles the traditio - nal structure . The electronic journals are organized by volume and issues : tables of contents provide access to individual articles . In most cases , access to abstracts 86 A . Hars and keywords is free . Articles typically have an index page which shows title , abstract and keywords and provides a link to the full text . Full text is mostly available in PDF or Postscript format . Full text in html is rare . As an alternative form of accessing articles , most sites provide a search engine . Search technology is advancing rapidly and the range of capabilities varies considerably . Most search engines provide full - text search ; some provide context - based search or searches by article attributes such as publishing date , keywords etc . Hybrid sites are necessarily very close to paper journals . Most elements of the publishing process remain essentially unchanged . In the case of the above men - tioned journals , for example , accepted papers can not be changed . The review process remains essentially the same ( peer review ) although some of the journals now accept online submissions and some of the sites are moving toward online support for the review process . 2 . 2 Journal of Artificial Intelligence Research ( JAIR ) Interesting innovations have been provided by some electronic journals . The Journal of Artificial Intelligence Research , founded in 1993 , describes itself as one of the first electronic journals . It is a hybrid journal because each of its volu - mes is published in paper form . However , no issues are published . Similar to traditional journals , the table of contents is organized by volume and author . Re - cently an innovative subject area index has been added : readers can browse a JAVA appplet which graphically clusters articles by subject area . Another inno - vation is that articles are published online as soon as they are accepted - rather than to wait for the official publishing date of the journal . This approach is taken by an increasing number of traditional electronic journals , including ACM and MISQ . 2 . 3 MISQ Discovery MISQ Discovery is a venture of MISQ , one of the leading information systems research journals . It was announced in 1994 as " an adventuresome and experi - mental electronic production " ( Ives , 1994 ) which , among others was intented to " challenge the foundations of paper - based scholarship " ( Ives , 1994 ) . The first article was published in September 1996 ( Ytterstad , 1996 ) . Although very few articles have been published so far , the journal has introduced some innovations : It pioneered the distinction of living vs . archival articles . Archival articles can only be subsequently edited to correct typing , spelling , grammar , or to update links ( http : / / www . misq . org / discovery / about . html # living , 3 / 28 / 1998 ) . In contrast , living publications are kept up - to date by the authors . In addition , for the first article a listserver - based bulletin board was added to allow discussion of the papers . This feature was discontinued , however , because of apparent lack of interest . MISQ Discovery uses a traditional peer - review system . To improve the Academic Journals on the Internet 87 acceptance of the journal , an abstract of each accepted article is published in MISQ and the article becomes part of the MISQ index . 2 . 4 Evaluation of characteristics The preceeding analysis of traditional electronic journals has shown several characteristics which need to be distinguished : hybrid * vs . electronic - only site ; fee structure ( free , subscription * , pay - per view ) organization of knowledge ( vol . / issue * , subject tree / diagram ) , search mechanisms , format for articles ( PDF * , PS * , HTML ) , online submission * , online review * , pre - publishing of accepted articles , archival / static * vs . living / updateable articles . The degree of innovation vs . replication of traditional structures can be analyzed in each of these characteristics . A * indicates close correspondence to the traditio nal model . Online submission and online review as w ell as PDF and PostScript formats are included in this category because they replicate the traditional process in the electronic environment rather than being fundamentally rethought . A characteristic which merits a closer look is the practice of pre - publishing accepted articles . This practice indicates a breakdown of the traditional paradigm . Traditional electronic journals have introduced this feature , because it became obvious that there is no need to wait for publishing an accepted article until all articles have been reviewed . This does not address the fundamental issue , howe ver : the obsolescence of the issue metaphor . The economics of paper prohibit publishing individual articles - therefore issues were needed . In the electronic environment , this need does not persist . The characteristic is not an innovation but a work - around . As a consequence , it will not persist in mature electronic journals which will cease to be organized by issue . 3 Encyclopedia / Knowledge Repository An important alternative to paper journals are encyclopedias - " works that claim to provide in an orderly arrangement the essence of " all that is known " on a sub - ject or a group of subjects " ( Brittannica Online 1998 http : / / www . eb . com : 180 / cgi - bin / g ? DocF = macro / 5002 / 11 / 0 . html ( 9 / 14 / 1998 ) ) . On the World Wide Web , several scientific sites with such a goal have emerged . To differentiate such sites from traditional electronic journals we propose the term ' knowledge repository ' . This term alludes to the goal of storing knowledge in a large , dynamic and well - structured knowledge base . Examples of such sites are : 88 A . Hars 3 . 1 GenBank GenBank is an electronic database maintained by the National Center for Bio - technology Information ( US ) . It contains more than one billion annotated and cross - referenced DNA sequences . Data is regularly exchanged with other DNA databases located in Europe and Japan . Scientists can submit their DNA sequences to GenBank free of charge on the web . Before a submitted sequence is published , it is reviewed and indexed by GenBank staff . Not all GenBank submissions are accessible by the public . On demand by the author , access to a sequence can be blocked ( GenBank , http : / / www . ncbi . nlm . nih . gov / Web / Newsltr / feb98 . html # GenBank , 6 / 23 / 98 ) . GenBank incorporates a revision mechanism to allow authors to update their sequences . An important functionality for gene researchers is the ability to perform similarity searches between DNA and protein sequences using software which was specifically developed for this purpose . Many scientific journals require a submission to GenBank as a prerequisite for publishing an article . While GenBank was not intended as a competitor to academic journals , it has improved the ability of the research community for gathering high - quality data . Although no systematic studies have been executed yet , it may have shifted the focus of research efforts more towards data . Cinkosky et al . ( 1991 ) concluded : " Our experience indicates that electronic data publishing has actually resulted in a higher level of quality for data in GenBank and therefore also in journals " . 3 . 2 Foldoc Another example of a knowledge repository is the Free Online Dictionary of Computing ( Foldoc ) ( http : / / wombat . doc . ic . ac . uk ) . It has been available on the World - Wide Web since 1994 and contains more than ten thousand short but inten sively cross - referenced entries . The dictionary has a single editor who maintains tight control of its content ; contributions of other authors are solicited and a mechanism for guest editors has been set up , but entries do not list the author . A main page , however , lists more than 800 individual contributors . An interesting feature of the dictionary is a list of missing entries which is is based on a log of reader ' s unsuccessful searches . 3 . 3 Evaluation of characteristics Most of the characteristics identified for traditional electronic journals also apply for encyclopedias . One main difference is the emphasis on the organization of knowledge which leads to an organization by subject area rather than an organization by volume / issue . Another characteristic are algorithms for the detec - tion of similarities between different units of knowledge . They can be viewed as specific types of search algorithms . Another characteristic is the ability to add private contributions which can only be viewed by the author . In contrast to most Academic Journals on the Internet 89 of the traditional electronic journals , which use static hypertext , knowledge repo - sitories often dynamically generate html pages . Thus the following additional characteristics may be relevant : technology ( static hypertext * vs . dynamic ( database ) ) , absence * vs . existence of different levels of access restrictions to articles , absence * vs . existence of similarity search algo - rithms , . 4 Collaboratory The origins of the term collaboratory can be traced back to a 1989 NSF workshop ( Lederberg & Uncapher 1989 ; Finholt & Olson 1997 ) . In 1993 the National Rese arch Council defined the term collaboratory as : " A center without walls , in which the nation ' s researchers can perform their research without regard to geographical locations - interacting with colleagues , accessing instrumentation , sharing data and computational resources [ and ] accessing information in digital libraries " ( National Research Council 1993 , p . 7 ) . Barua et al . ( 1995 ) defined it as " an open electronic platform for individuals or groups with common interests to effi ciently exchange , disseminate and create issues , ideas and knowledge " ( 1995 , p . 418 ) . 4 . 1 Upper Atmospheric Collaboratory ( UARC ) After the need for collaboratories had been identified space physics was one of the first areas where the concept was implemented . With funds from the National Science Foundation , the Upper Atmospherice Collaboratory was started in 1992 at the University of Michigan in collaboration with several other research institutes around the world . The first step consisted in tying together instruments operated in various sites and allowing uniform access to the stream of data which they generate . The infrastructure subsequently was extended to include chat capabili ties and Java - based applets f or the visualization of data . In addition , access to computer models was provided . In addition , UARC provides the ability to con duct ' research campaigns ' during which researchers from several institutes across the world and usually from several disciplines pool their resources to perform joint research . Based on a coordinated research plan , a campaign allows online discussion of data as it becomes available and adjustment of instruments . Part of the data is archived via UARC and accessible for subsequent analysis . 4 . 2 Information Systems Cybrarium The Information Systems Cybrarium is a web - based collaboratory which has been developed at the University of Southern California by the author . Its goal is to investigate new ways for the creation , synthesis and application of information 90 A . Hars systems knowledge . The current Cybrarium prototype is used to explore different alternatives on the path towards more advanced web - based knowledge infra - structure and to increase our understanding of the impact of information technology on research processes . While many current academic internet sites related to IS knowledge are modeled on traditional journals and thereby are focused on the dissemination of knowledge , the Cybrarium is focused on the whole life - cycle of knowledge from creation through synthesis to dissemination . Information is stored in the Cybrarium as a collection of typed nodes and typed relationships between nodes . Nodes and relationships are stored in a database which is linked to the Web . The use of a database has the advantage that the presentation of the knowledge on the web can be separated from the storage of knowledge . It becomes possible to assemble knowledge for the reader from parts of the network of nodes and relationships . In contrast to the World Wide Web , where links can only be traversed in one direction , the utilization of a database also has the advantage , that links can be traversed in both directions . Similar to the web , nodes can represent multimedia information . The Cybrarium currently is accessible at http : / / cybrarium . usc . edu . A screen shot of the main menu is shown in figure 1 . As this is a collaborative infrastructure , users are encouraged to identify themselves through registration . Consistent with the node & relationship approach a node is created for each registered user . All submissions , evaluations etc . are subsequently linked to that node . Registration is not required , however , for read access . Currently email feedback is used to authenticate the user . With approximately 1200 nodes , the knowledge content of the Cybrarium is small but its growth rate has accelerated over recent months . Academic Journals on the Internet 91 Figure 1 : Information Systems Cybrarium In the following , some of the key features of the Cybrarium are briefly discussed : Instant publishing : All contributions to the Cybrarium are instantly published on submission without review . This is not a disadvantage for the reader as she has the ability to suppress un - reviewed articles through a filter ( see below on collabora tive filte ring ) . Instant publishing eliminates publishing delays and increases the collaborative nature of the system . Collaborative filtering : Each reader is encouraged to rate a paper along three dimensions : relevance , rigor , and level of detail . It takes only three mouse clicks to assign the 3 ratings . The ratings can be used to set a filter . A practitioner , for example , may elect to view articles which are highly relevant - independent of the rigor rating while a PhD student may elect to view primarily papers with high levels of rigor etc . Annotation & notification : Every reader can add comments to an article . Rea - ders are automatically informed via email if a comment is posted . Open architecture : Contributions to the Cybrarium need not be physically stored on the Cybrarium site . Articles may be stored anywhere on the world wide web . When an article is requested that is stored externally , the Cybrarium displays its content in a frame . A second frame provides access to Cybrarium functionality such as annotation , related topics , ratings etc . for the article . The Cybrarium thus adds a layer of hypertext functionality on top of the World Wide Web . 92 A . Hars Meta journal : New articles appearing in the top journals in Information Systems are systematically incorporated in the Cybrarium - either via an external link to an abstract on the journal site or via an abstract . Currently 8 Ph . D . students and faculty are working on this task of adding ' seed knowledge ' to the Cybrarium . Identification of research problems : Traditional journals focus on the result of the research process - the dissemination of knowledge . The Cybrarium focuses onthe whole process from creation to synthesis and dissemination . An example is a functionality which allows reseachers to identify and discuss promising research problems in an area . 4 . 3 Evaluation of characteristics Collaboratories add a wealth of additional characteristics : conditional * vs . instant publication of contributions , absence * vs . existence of custom filters , closed * vs . open knowledge infrastructure , unidirectional * vs . bidirectional cross - references , absence vs . existence of reader - based review / rating of articles . 5 Other types of sites 5 . 1 Preprint archive Another variant of web - based academic journals are preprint archives . The first preprint archive was started by Ginsparg to simplify the distribution of preprints among high energy nuclear physicists ( Ginsparg 1994 ) . The site has expanded to more than 30 subject areas including sections for economics and mathematics and now receives more than 400 . 000 requests per week ( cf . http : / / xxx . lanl . gov / cgi - bin / show _ weekly _ graph ( 9 / 12 / 1998 ) . Preprints are submitted to one of the subject areas and instantly published without review . Mechanisms for cross - listing a preprint in several sections exists . Readers are presented with daily lists of new submissions which show title , authors and abstract for each preprint and which contain a link to the text file . The system has search capabilities . The archive supports multiple versions of a document . It is possible to change preprints after submission ; new versions receive a new identifier . However , preprints can not be linked to one another . This has led to first changes for academic journals in physics : Several scientific physics journals have started to accept preprints from the archive for submission . To submit a paper to one of the American Physical Society Journals ( http : / / publish . aps . org / esub / xxxsub . html ) or to the Journal of High Energy Physics , for example , an author can electronically submit the identi fier of his preprint ( http : / / jhep . cern . ch / JOURNAL / xxx . html ) . The editor , then downloads the document from the archive . The concept has been applied in other areas . Academic Journals on the Internet 93 Preprint archives have been established , for example , for engineering ( http : / / www . eevl . ac . uk ) and mathematics ( http : / / www . ams . org ) . 5 . 2 Ontolingua Server Ontolingua server is a collaborative modeling environment which allows the development and reuse of ontologies . Ontologies are formal knowledge represen - tations for specific subject areas . Ontolingua server provides a customized onto - logy editor for the creation and maintenance of ontologies . It contains analysis routines to check the consistency of ontologies and allows incorporating existing ontologies such as an ontology about space and time . This reduces the effort of building an ontology . Ontolingua server is an interesting system because it provi - des a custom interface for the specification of ( admittedly very formal ) know - ledge . It identifies dependencies between different units of knowledge and allows reusing knowledge created by others - a simple form of collaboration . 5 . 3 JSTOR JSTOR is an archive of digitized ( bitmapped ) articles from print journals which are older than three years . More recent articles have been excluded to minimize effect on the revenue stream of publishers while improving access to older articles . JSTOR was founded in 1995 with initial funding from the Mellon foun - dation . In 1998 , JSTOR listed more than 300 participant libraries and is nearing its goal of providing access to the content of 100 journals in 15 disciplines . 5 . 4 Evaluation of characteristics This review has led to the identification of the following additional characteristics : Absence * vs . existence of consistency checking algorithms ; Absence * vs . Existence of possibility to reuse / integrate other units of knowledge , Absence * vs . existence of versioning mechanisms . 6 Synthesis : Characteristics of electronic journals The previous analysis has lead to the identification of a significant number of characteristics of electronic journals . They can be aggregated into five main groups which are shown in Table 1 . The first group contains characteristics which refer to the mode of interaction . While traditional electronic journals focus prima rily on read / brows e , collaboratories add the dimension of authoring and evalua tion . Additional characteristics are the existence or absence of online annotation , review and submission of texts . The second group refers to the organization of knowledge . Key issues are the organizing principles : The traditional journal is organized temporally by volume and issue . Other sites may 94 A . Hars provide category networks such as subject trees etc . or provide active mechanismsto ensure the consistency of contributions ( e . g . Ontolingua server ) . Another characteristic is the number and type of indexes provided ( e . g . by author , by subject area , by institu tion , by research problem , by theory etc . ) . ' Link semantics ' refers to the types of relationships and cross - references which can be distinguished . On the world wide web and in the print medium , for example , references are unidirectional . Two additional characteristics in this group are consistency mechanisms and versio ning . The third group refers to the presentation of knowledge . Navigation aids ( e . g . knowledge maps ) and filtering mechanisms which allow a reader to custo mize the journal need to be distinguished . User models and internationalization are issues which are currently not present in the electronic journals reviewed above ; they may become increasingly important in the future . The fourth group refers to the underlying technology . Many advances are currently being made in search technology ; a distinction needs to be made between journals which use static hypertext and those which rely on database technology . Only Ontolingua server has an inference engine . Additional features in this group are the utilization of a state protocol which allows sessions between reader and electronic journals and support for multi - media . The final group relates to governance . The target audience of a journal , revenue model ( e . g . subscription , pay - per view , free ) as well as authentication mechanism need to be distinguished . Additional critical issues are review and reward mechanisms . Interaction Organization ofknowledge Presentation Technology Governance Interactiontypes Organizingprinciple Navigation aids Search engine Audience Onlineannotation Indexes Filteringmechanisms Database Revenue model Online review Link semantics Internationali - zation Inferenceengine Authentication Electronicsubmission Consistencymechanisms User models State / sessionprotocol Rewardmechanisms Emailnotification Versioning Media types Reviewmechanisms Table 1 : Characteristics of electronic journals These characteristics can be utilized as guideline for the design of electronic journals . The table shows that the variety of possible approaches is very high . Electronic journals of the future will not replicate traditional paper journals . As a consequence , scientific processes and reward systems are likely to changed . It is time to experiment with better alternatives for scientific knowledge management infrastructures and to reengineer traditional research processes . Academic Journals on the Internet 95 References Barua , A . / Chellappa , R . / Whinston , A . B ( 1995 ) . Creating a collaboratory in cyberspace : Theoretical foundation and implementation . In : Journal of Organizational Computing , ( 5 : 4 ) , pp . 417 - 442 . Brittanica Online ( 1998 ) : Version 98 . 2 . http : / / www . eb . com ( 9 / 14 / 1998 ) . Cinkosky , J . / Fickett , J . W . / Gilna , P . / Burks , C . ( 1991 ) : Electronic data publishing and GenBank . Science 252 : 1273 - 1277 . Finholt , T . A . / Olson , G . M . ( 1997 ) : From laboratories to collaboratories - a new organizational form for scientific collaboration . Psychological Science , ( 8 : 1 ) , pp . 28 - 36 . Ginsparg , P . ( 1996 ) : Winners and losers in the global research village . Presen ted at UNESCO conference , Electronic publishing in science , February , 1996 , http : / / xxx . lanl . gov / blurb / pg96unesco . html ( 4 / 26 / 1998 ) . Hars , A . / Malhotra , A . ( 1997 ) : Emerging web - based knowledge bases : Categories , trends and implications for the IS research community . http : / / cybrarium . usc . edu / cyb . dll / ? object = 1000610 . Ives , B . ( 1994 ) : MISQ Central : Creating a new intellectual infrastructure . Editors Comments , MISQ Vol . 18 , No . 3 , pp . xxxv - xxxix . Lederberg , J . / Uncapher , K . ( 1989 ) : Towars a national collaboratory : Report of an invitational workshop at the Rockefeller University . Washington , D . C . : NSF , Directorate for Computer and Information Science and Engineering . National Research Council ( 1993 ) : National collaboratories - Applying informa - tion technology for scientific research . Washington ( National Academy Press ) . Odlyzko , A . ( 1997 ) : The Economics of Electronic Journals . Proceedings of the conference on Scholarly Communication and Technologies . http : / / arl . cni . org / scomm / scat / odlyzko . html ( 8 / 20 / 1998 ) Watson , R . ( 1994 ) : Creating and sustaining a global community of scholars . MISQ , Vol . 18 , No . 3 , 228 - 231 . http : / / www . misq . org / archivist / vol / no18 / issue3 / vol18n3art1watson . html Ytterstad , P . / Akselsen , S . / Svendsen , G . / Watson , R . T . ( 1996 ) : Teledemocracy : Using Information Technology to Enhance Political Work . MISQ Discovery , 9 / 1996 , http : / / www . misq . org / discovery / articles96 / article1 / ( 9 / 10 / 1998 ) .