Normal Bone Anatomy and Physiology Bart Clarke Division of Endocrinology , Diabetes , Metabolism , and Nutrition , Mayo Clinic , Rochester , Minnesota This review describes normal bone anatomy and physiology as an introduction to the subsequent articles in this section that discuss clinical applications of iliac crest bone biopsy . The normal anatomy and functions of the skeleton are reviewed first , followed by a general description of the processes of bone modeling and remodeling . The bone remodeling process regulates the gain and loss of bone mineral density in the adult skeleton and directly influences bone strength . Thorough understanding of the bone remodeling process is critical to appreciation of the value of and interpretation of the results of iliac crest bone histomorphometry . Osteoclast recruitment , activation , and bone resorption is discussed in some detail , followed by a review of osteoblast recruitment and the process of new bone formation . Next , the collagenous and noncollagenous protein components and function of bone extracellular matrix are summarized , followed by a description of the process of mineral - ization of newly formed bone matrix . The actions of biomechanical forces on bone are sensed by the osteocyte syncytium within bone via the canalicular network and intercellular gap junctions . Finally , concepts regarding bone remodeling , osteoclast and osteoblast function , extracellular matrix , matrix mineralization , and osteocyte function are synthesized in a summary of the currently understood functional determinants of bone strength . This information lays the groundwork for understanding the utility and clinical applications of iliac crest bone biopsy . Clin J Am Soc Nephrol 3 : S131 – S139 , 2008 . doi : 10 . 2215 / CJN . 04151206 The Skeleton The adult human skeleton has a total of 213 bones , excluding the sesamoid bones ( 1 ) . The appendicular skeleton has 126 bones , axial skeleton 74 bones , and auditory ossicles six bones . Each bone constantly undergoes modeling during life to help it adapt to changing biomechanical forces , as well as remodeling to remove old , microdamaged bone and replace it with new , mechanically stronger bone to help preserve bone strength . The four general categories of bones are long bones , short bones , flat bones , and irregular bones . Long bones include the clavicles , humeri , radii , ulnae , metacarpals , femurs , tibiae , fib - ulae , metatarsals , and phalanges . Short bones include the car - pal and tarsal bones , patellae , and sesamoid bones . Flat bones include the skull , mandible , scapulae , sternum , and ribs . Irreg - ular bones include the vertebrae , sacrum , coccyx , and hyoid bone . Flat bones form by membranous bone formation , whereas long bones are formed by a combination of endochon - dral and membranous bone formation . The skeleton serves a variety of functions . The bones of the skeleton provide structural support for the rest of the body , permit movement and locomotion by providing levers for the muscles , protect vital internal organs and structures , provide maintenance of mineral homeostasis and acid - base balance , serve as a reservoir of growth factors and cytokines , and pro - vide the environment for hematopoiesis within the marrow spaces ( 2 ) . The long bones are composed of a hollow shaft , or diaphysis ; flared , cone - shaped metaphyses below the growth plates ; and rounded epiphyses above the growth plates . The diaphysis is composed primarily of dense cortical bone , whereas the me - taphysis and epiphysis are composed of trabecular meshwork bone surrounded by a relatively thin shell of dense cortical bone . The adult human skeleton is composed of 80 % cortical bone and 20 % trabecular bone overall ( 3 ) . Different bones and skel - etal sites within bones have different ratios of cortical to tra - becular bone . The vertebra is composed of cortical to trabecular bone in a ratio of 25 : 75 . This ratio is 50 : 50 in the femoral head and 95 : 5 in the radial diaphysis . Cortical bone is dense and solid and surrounds the marrow space , whereas trabecular bone is composed of a honeycomb - like network of trabecular plates and rods interspersed in the bone marrow compartment . Both cortical and trabecular bone are composed of osteons . Cortical osteons are called Haversian systems . Haversian systems are cylindrical in shape , are approximately 400 mm long and 200 mm wide at their base , and form a branching network within the cortical bone ( 3 ) . The walls of Haversian systems are formed of concentric lamellae . Cortical bone is typically less metabolically active than trabecular bone , but this depends on the species . There are an estimated 21 (cid:1) 10 6 cortical osteons in healthy human adults , with a total Haversian remod - eling area of approximately 3 . 5 m 2 . Cortical bone porosity is usually (cid:2) 5 % , but this depends on the proportion of actively remodeling Haversian systems to inactive cortical osteons . In - creased cortical remodeling causes an increase in cortical po - rosity and decrease in cortical bone mass . Healthy aging adults normally experience thinning of the cortex and increased cor - tical porosity . Cortical bone has an outer periosteal surface and inner en - dosteal surface . Periosteal surface activity is important for ap - positional growth and fracture repair . Bone formation typically Address correspondence to : Dr . Bart Clarke , Division of Endocrinology , Diabetes , Metabolism , and Nutrition , Mayo Clinic , W18 - A , 200 1st Street SW , Rochester , MN 55905 ; Phone : 507 - 266 - 4322 ; Fax : 507 - 284 - 5745 ; E - mail clarke . bart @ mayo . edu Copyright © 2008 by the American Society of Nephrology ISSN : 1555 - 9041 / 303 – 0131 exceeds bone resorption on the periosteal surface , so bones normally increase in diameter with aging . The endosteal sur - face has a total area of approximately 0 . 5 m 2 , with higher remodeling activity than the periosteal surface , likely as a result of greater biomechanical strain or greater cytokine exposure from the adjacent bone marrow compartment . Bone resorption typically exceeds bone formation on the endosteal surface , so the marrow space normally expands with aging . Trabecular osteons are called packets . Trabecular bone is composed of plates and rods averaging 50 to 400 mm in thick - ness ( 3 ) . Trabecular osteons are semilunar in shape , normally approximately 35 mm thick , and composed of concentric lamel - lae . It is estimated that there are 14 (cid:1) 10 6 trabecular osteons in healthy human adults , with a total trabecular area of approxi - mately 7 m 2 . Cortical bone and trabecular bone are normally formed in a lamellar pattern , in which collagen fibrils are laid down in alternating orientations ( 3 ) . Lamellar bone is best seen during microscopic examination with polarized light , during which the lamellar pattern is evident as a result of birefringence . The mechanism by which osteoblasts lay down collagen fibrils in a lamellar pattern is not known , but lamellar bone has significant strength as a result of the alternating orientations of collagen fibrils , similar to plywood . The normal lamellar pattern is ab - sent in woven bone , in which the collagen fibrils are laid down in a disorganized manner . Woven bone is weaker than lamellar bone . Woven bone is normally produced during formation of primary bone and may also be seen in high bone turnover states such as osteitis fibrosa cystica , as a result of hyperparathyroid - ism , and Paget’s disease or during high bone formation during early treatment with fluoride . The periosteum is a fibrous connective tissue sheath that surrounds the outer cortical surface of bone , except at joints where bone is lined by articular cartilage , which contains blood vessels , nerve fibers , and osteoblasts and osteoclasts . The peri - osteum is tightly attached to the outer cortical surface of bone by thick collagenous fibers , called Sharpeys’ fibers , which ex - tend into underlying bone tissue . The endosteum is a membra - nous structure covering the inner surface of cortical bone , tra - becular bone , and the blood vessel canals ( Volkman’s canals ) present in bone . The endosteum is in contact with the bone marrow space , trabecular bone , and blood vessel canals and contains blood vessels , osteoblasts , and osteoclasts . Bone Growth , Modeling , and Remodeling Bone undergoes longitudinal and radial growth , modeling , and remodeling during life . Longitudinal and radial growth during growth and development occurs during childhood and adolescence . Longitudinal growth occurs at the growth plates , where cartilage proliferates in the epiphyseal and metaphyseal areas of long bones , before subsequently undergoing mineral - ization to form primary new bone . Modeling is the process by which bones change their overall shape in response to physiologic influences or mechanical forces , leading to gradual adjustment of the skeleton to the forces that it encounters . Bones may widen or change axis by removal or addition of bone to the appropriate surfaces by independent action of osteoblasts and osteoclasts in response to biomechanical forces . Bones normally widen with aging in response to periosteal apposition of new bone and endosteal resorption of old bone . Wolff’s law describes the observation that long bones change shape to accommodate stresses placed on them . During bone modeling , bone formation and resorp - tion are not tightly coupled . Bone modeling is less frequent than remodeling in adults ( 4 ) . Modeling may be increased in hypoparathyroidism ( 5 ) , renal osteodystrophy ( 6 ) , or treatment with anabolic agents ( 7 ) . Bone remodeling is the process by which bone is renewed to maintain bone strength and mineral homeostasis . Remodeling involves continuous removal of discrete packets of old bone , replacement of these packets with newly synthesized protein - aceous matrix , and subsequent mineralization of the matrix to form new bone . The remodeling process resorbs old bone and forms new bone to prevent accumulation of bone microdam - age . Remodeling begins before birth and continues until death . The bone remodeling unit is composed of a tightly coupled group of osteoclasts and osteoblasts that sequentially carry out resorption of old bone and formation of new bone . Bone re - modeling increases in perimenopausal and early postmeno - pausal women and then slows with further aging , but contin - ues at a faster rate than in premenopausal women . Bone remodeling is thought to increase mildly in aging men . The remodeling cycle is composed of four sequential phases . Activation precedes resorption , which precedes reversal , which precedes formation . Remodeling sites may develop randomly but also are targeted to areas that require repair ( 8 , 9 ) . Remod - eling sites are thought to develop mostly in a random manner . Activation involves recruitment and activation of mononu - clear monocyte - macrophage osteoclast precursors from the cir - culation ( 10 ) , lifting of the endosteum that contains the lining cells off the bone surface , and fusion of multiple mononuclear cells to form multinucleated preosteoclasts . Preosteoclasts bind to bone matrix via interactions between integrin receptors in their cell membranes and RGD ( arginine , glycine , and asparag - ine ) - containing peptides in matrix proteins , to form annular sealing zones around bone - resorbing compartments beneath multinucleated osteoclasts . Osteoclast - mediated bone resorption takes only approxi - mately 2 to 4 wk during each remodeling cycle . Osteoclast formation , activation , and resorption are regulated by the ratio of receptor activator of NF - (cid:1) B ligand ( RANKL ) to osteoprote - gerin ( OPG ; Figure 1 ) , IL - 1 and IL - 6 , colony - stimulating factor ( CSF ) , parathyroid hormone , 1 , 25 - dihydroxyvitamin D , and calcitonin ( 11 , 12 ) . Resorbing osteoclasts secrete hydrogen ions via H (cid:3) - ATPase proton pumps and chloride channels in their cell membranes into the resorbing compartment to lower the pH within the bone - resorbing compartment to as low as 4 . 5 , which helps mobilize bone mineral ( 13 ) . Resorbing osteoclasts secrete tartrate - resistant acid phosphatase , cathepsin K , matrix metalloproteinase 9 , and gelatinase from cytoplasmic lyso - somes ( 14 ) to digest the organic matrix , resulting in formation of saucer - shaped Howship’s lacunae on the surface of trabec - ular bone ( Figure 2 ) and Haversian canals in cortical bone . The S132 Clinical Journal of the American Society of Nephrology Clin J Am Soc Nephrol 3 : S131 – S139 , 2008 resorption phase is completed by mononuclear cells after the multinucleated osteoclasts undergo apoptosis ( 15 , 16 ) . During the reversal phase , bone resorption transitions to bone formation . At the completion of bone resorption , resorp - tion cavities contain a variety of mononuclear cells , including monocytes , osteocytes released from bone matrix , and preos - teoblasts recruited to begin new bone formation . The coupling signals linking the end of bone resorption to the beginning of bone formation are as yet unknown . Proposed coupling signal candidates include bone matrix—derived factors such as TGF - (cid:2) , IGF - 1 , IGF - 2 , bone morphogenetic proteins , PDGF , or fibroblast growth factor ( 17 – 19 ) . TGF - (cid:2) concentration in bone matrix correlates with histomorphometric indices of bone turn - over and with serum osteocalcin and bone - specific alkaline phosphatase . TGF - (cid:2) released from bone matrix decreases oste - oclast resorption by inhibiting RANKL production by osteo - blasts . The reversal phase has also been proposed to be medi - ated by the strain gradient in the lacunae ( 20 , 21 ) . As osteoclasts resorb cortical bone in a cutting cone , strain is reduced in front and increased behind , and in Howship’s lacunae , strain is highest at the base and less in surrounding bone at the edges of the lacunae . The strain gradient may lead to sequential activa - tion of osteoclasts and osteoblasts , with osteoclasts activated by reduced strain and osteoblasts by increased strain . The oste - oclast itself has also been proposed to play a role during rever - sal ( 22 ) . Bone formation takes approximately 4 to 6 mo to complete . Osteoblasts synthesize new collagenous organic matrix ( Figure 3 ) and regulate mineralization of matrix by releasing small , membrane - bound matrix vesicles that concentrate calcium and phosphate and enzymatically destroy mineralization inhibitors such as pyrophosphate or proteoglycans ( 23 ) . Osteoblasts sur - rounded by and buried within matrix become osteocytes with an extensive canalicular network connecting them to bone sur - face lining cells , osteoblasts , and other osteocytes , maintained by gap junctions between the cytoplasmic processes extending from the osteocytes ( 24 ) . The osteocyte network within bone serves as a functional syncytium . At the completion of bone formation , approximately 50 to 70 % of osteoblasts undergo apoptosis , with the balance becoming osteocytes or bone - lining cells . Bone - lining cells may regulate influx and efflux of mineral ions into and out of bone extracellular fluid , thereby serving as a blood - bone barrier , but retain the ability to redifferentiate into osteoblasts upon exposure to parathyroid hormone or mechan - ical forces ( 25 ) . Bone - lining cells within the endosteum lift off Figure 2 . Multinucleated osteoclasts resorb bone to form resorp - tion pits known as Howship’s lacunae . Figure 1 . Regulation of osteoclastogenesis by receptor activator of NF - (cid:1) B ligand ( RANKL ) and osteoprotegerin ( OPG ) : Colony - stimulating factor 1 ( CSF - 1 ) normally stimulates osteoclast re - cruitment . Two forms of RANKL are produced by osteoblasts and osteoblast precursors to stimulate osteoclast recruitment and activation . The membrane - bound form directly interacts with membrane - bound RANK molecules on adjacent osteoclast precursors . The soluble form is released from osteoblasts or osteoblast precursors to diffuse through the intercellular space and interact with membrane - bound RANK molecules on nearby osteoclast precursors . OPG acts as a decoy receptor to prevent RANKL or sRANKL from interacting with RANK . The ratio between RANKL and OPG produced by osteoblasts and osteoblast precursors controls RANKL - stimulated osteoclasto - genesis . Figure 3 . Osteoblasts synthesize proteinaceous matrix , com - posed mostly of type I collagen , to fill in resorption pits . The proteinaceous matrix is gradually mineralized to form new bone . Clin J Am Soc Nephrol 3 : S131 – S139 , 2008 Normal Bone Anatomy and Physiology S133 the surface of bone before bone resorption to form discrete bone remodeling compartments with a specialized microenviron - ment ( 26 ) . In patients with multiple myeloma , lining cells may be induced to express tartrate - resistant acid phosphatase and other classical osteoclast markers . The end result of each bone remodeling cycle is production of a new osteon . The remodeling process is essentially the same in cortical and trabecular bone , with bone remodeling units in trabecular bone equivalent to cortical bone remodeling units divided in half longitudinally ( 27 ) . Bone balance is the differ - ence between the old bone resorbed and new bone formed . Periosteal bone balance is mildly positive , whereas endosteal and trabecular bone balances are mildly negative , leading to cortical and trabecular thinning with aging . These relative changes occur with endosteal resorption outstripping perios - teal formation . The main recognized functions of bone remodeling include preservation of bone mechanical strength by replacing older , microdamaged bone with newer , healthier bone and calcium and phosphate homeostasis . The relatively low adult cortical bone turnover rate of 2 to 3 % / yr is adequate to maintain biomechanical strength of bone . The rate of trabecular bone turnover is higher , more than required for maintenance of mechanical strength , indicating that trabecular bone turnover is more important for mineral metabolism . Increased demand for calcium or phosphorus may require increased bone remodeling units , but , in many cases , this demand may be met by increased activity of existing osteoclasts . Increased demand for skeletal calcium and phosphorus is met partially by osteoclastic resorp - tion and partly by nonosteoclastic calcium influx and efflux . Ongoing bone remodeling activity ensures a continuous supply of newly formed bone that has relatively low mineral content and is able to exchange ions more easily with the extracellular fluid . Bone remodeling units seem to be mostly randomly distributed throughout the skeleton but may be triggered by microcrack formation or osteocyte apoptosis . The bone remod - eling space represents the sum of all of the active bone remod - eling units in the skeleton at a given time . Osteoclasts Osteoclasts are the only cells that are known to be capable of resorbing bone ( Figure 2 ) . Activated multinucleated osteoclasts are derived from mononuclear precursor cells of the monocyte - macrophage lineage ( 11 ) . Mononuclear monocyte - macrophage precursor cells have been identified in various tissues , but bone marrow monocyte - macrophage precursor cells are thought to give rise to most osteoclasts . RANKL and macrophage CSF ( M - CSF ) are two cytokines that are critical for osteoclast formation . Both RANKL and M - CSF are produced mainly by marrow stromal cells and osteoblasts in membrane - bound and soluble forms , and oste - oclastogenesis requires the presence of stromal cells and osteo - blasts in bone marrow ( 28 ) . RANKL belongs to the TNF super - family and is critical for osteoclast formation . M - CSF is required for the proliferation , survival , and differentiation of osteoclast precursors , as well as osteoclast survival and cy - toskeletal rearrangement required for bone resorption . OPG is a membrane - bound and secreted protein that binds RANKL with high affinity to inhibit its action at the RANK receptor ( 29 ) . Bone resorption depends on osteoclast secretion of hydrogen ions and cathepsin K enzyme . H (cid:3) ions acidify the resorption compartment beneath osteoclasts to dissolve the mineral com - ponent of bone matrix , whereas cathepsin K digests the pro - teinaceous matrix , which is mostly composed of type I collagen ( 11 ) . Osteoclasts bind to bone matrix via integrin receptors in the osteoclast membrane linking to bone matrix peptides . The (cid:2) 1 family of integrin receptors in osteoclasts binds to collagen , fibronectin , and laminin , but the main integrin receptor facili - tating bone resorption is the (cid:3) v (cid:2) 3 integrin , which binds to osteopontin and bone sialoprotein ( 30 ) . Binding of osteoclasts to bone matrix causes them to become polarized , with the bone resorbing surface developing a ruffled border that forms when acidified vesicles that contain matrix metalloproteinases and cathepsin K are transported via micro - tubules to fuse with the membrane . The ruffled border secretes H (cid:3) ions via H (cid:3) - ATPase and chloride channels and causes exocytosis of cathepsin K and other enzymes in the acidified vesicles ( 31 ) . Upon contact with bone matrix , the fibrillar actin cytoskele - ton of the osteoclast organizes into an actin ring , which pro - motes formation of the sealing zone around the periphery of osteoclast attachment to the matrix . The sealing zone surrounds and isolates the acidified resorption compartment from the surrounding bone surface ( 32 ) . Disruption of either the ruffled border or actin ring blocks bone resorption . Actively resorbing osteoclasts form podosomes , which attach to bone matrix , rather than focal adhesions as formed by most cells . Podosomes are composed of an actin core surrounded by (cid:3) v (cid:2) 3 integrins and associated cytoskeletal proteins . Osteoblasts Osteoprogenitor cells give rise to and maintain the osteo - blasts that synthesize new bone matrix on bone - forming sur - faces ( Figure 3 ) , the osteocytes within bone matrix that support bone structure , and the protective lining cells that cover the surface of quiescent bone . Within the osteoblast lineage , sub - populations of cells respond differently to various hormonal , mechanical , or cytokine signals . Osteoblasts from axial and appendicular bone have been shown to respond differently to these signals . Self - renewing , pluripotent stem cells give rise to osteopro - genitor cells in various tissues under the right environmental conditions . Bone marrow contains a small population of mes - enchymal stem cells that are capable of giving rise to bone , cartilage , fat , or fibrous connective tissue , distinct from the hematopoietic stem cell population that gives rise to blood cell lineages ( 33 ) . Cells with properties that are characteristic of adult bone marrow mesenchymal stem cells have been isolated from adult peripheral blood and tooth pulp and fetal cord blood , liver , blood , and bone marrow . Multipotential myogenic cells that are capable of differentiating into bone , muscle , or adipocytes have also been identified . Mesenchymal cells that are committed to one phenotype may dedifferentiate during S134 Clinical Journal of the American Society of Nephrology Clin J Am Soc Nephrol 3 : S131 – S139 , 2008 proliferation and develop another phenotype , depending on the local tissue environment . Blood vessel pericytes may de - velop an osteoblastic phenotype during dedifferentiation under the right circumstances ( 34 ) . Commitment of mesenchymal stem cells to the osteoblast lineage requires the canonical Wnt / (cid:2) - catenin pathway and associated proteins ( 35 ) . Identification of a high bone mass phenotype associated with activating mutations of LDL recep - tor – related protein 5 highlighted the importance of the canon - ical Wnt / (cid:2) - catenin pathway in embryonic skeletal patterning , fetal skeletal development , and adult skeletal remodeling ( 36 , 37 ) . The Wnt system is also important in chondrogenesis and hematopoiesis and may be stimulatory or inhibitory at different stages of osteoblast differentiation . Flattened bone - lining cells are thought to be quiescent osteo - blasts that form the endosteum on trabecular and endosteal surfaces and underlie the periosteum on the mineralized sur - face . Osteoblasts and lining cells are found in close proximity and joined by adherens junctions . Cadherins are calcium - de - pendent transmembrane proteins that are integral parts of ad - herens junctions and together with tight junctions and desmo - somes join cells together by linking their cytoskeletons ( 38 ) . Osteoblast precursors change shape from spindle - shaped os - teoprogenitors to large cuboidal differentiated osteoblasts on bone matrix surfaces after preosteoblasts stop proliferating . Preosteoblasts that are found near functioning osteoblasts in the bone remodeling unit are usually recognizable because of their expression of alkaline phosphatase . Active mature osteo - blasts that synthesize bone matrix have large nuclei , enlarged Golgi structures , and extensive endoplasmic reticulum . These osteoblasts secrete type I collagen and other matrix proteins vectorially toward the bone formation surface . Populations of osteoblasts are heterogeneous , with different osteoblasts expressing different gene repertoires that may ex - plain the heterogeneity of trabecular microarchitecture at dif - ferent skeletal sites , anatomic site - specific differences in disease states , and regional variation in the ability of osteoblasts to respond to agents used to treat bone disease . Bone Extracellular Matrix Bone protein is composed of 85 to 90 % collagenous proteins ( Table 1 ) . Bone matrix is mostly composed of type I collagen ( 39 ) , with trace amounts of types III and V and FACIT collagens at certain stages of bone formation that may help determine collagen fibril diameter . FACIT collagens are members of the family of Fibril - Associated Collagens with Interrupted Triple Helices , a group of nonfibrillar collagens that serve as molec - ular bridges that are important for the organization and stabil - ity of extracellular matrices . Members of this family include collagens IX , XII , XIV , XIX , XX , and XXI . Noncollagenous pro - teins compose 10 to 15 % of total bone protein . Approximately 25 % of noncollagenous protein is exogenously derived , includ - ing serum albumin and (cid:3) 2 - HS - glycoprotein , which bind to hydroxyapatite because of their acidic properties . Serum - de - rived noncollagenous proteins may help regulate matrix min - eralization , and (cid:3) 2 - HS - glycoprotein , which is the human ana - logue of fetuin , may regulate bone cell proliferation . The remaining exogenously derived noncollagenous proteins are composed of growth factors and a large variety of other mole - cules in trace amounts that may affect bone cell activity . Osteoblasts synthesize and secrete as much noncollagenous protein as collagen on a molar basis . The noncollagenous pro - teins are divided broadly into several categories , including proteoglycans , glycosylated proteins , glycosylated proteins with potential cell - attachment activities , and (cid:4) - carboxylated ( gla ) proteins . The roles of each of the bone proteins are not well defined at present , and many seem to serve multiple functions , including regulation of bone mineral deposition and turnover and regulation of bone cell activity . Serum osteocalcin synthesized by osteoblasts was previously thought to function as a promoter or initiator of calcium deposition at the nidus between the ends of collagen fibrils and therefore regarded as a marker of bone formation . The observation that the osteocal - cin knockout mouse has a high bone mass phenotype suggests that osteocalcin normally inhibits bone formation . Because se - rum osteocalcin is derived from both matrix release by oste - oclast activity and osteoblast synthesis , it is currently regarded as a marker of bone turnover rather than a specific marker of bone formation . The main glycosylated protein present in bone is alkaline phosphatase . Alkaline phosphatase in bone is bound to osteo - blast cell surfaces via a phosphoinositol linkage and also is found free within mineralized matrix . Alkaline phosphatase plays an as - yet - undefined role in mineralization of bone ( 40 ) . The most prevalent noncollagenous protein in bone is osteonec - tin , accounting for approximately 2 % of total protein in devel - oping bone . Osteonectin is thought to affect osteoblast growth and / or proliferation and matrix mineralization . Bone Matrix Mineralization Bone is composed of 50 to 70 % mineral , 20 to 40 % organic matrix , 5 to 10 % water , and (cid:2) 3 % lipids . The mineral content of bone is mostly hydroxyapatite [ Ca 10 ( PO 4 ) 6 ( OH ) 2 ] , with small amounts of carbonate , magnesium , and acid phosphate , with missing hydroxyl groups that are normally present . Compared with geologic hydroxyapatite crystals , bone hydroxyapatite crystals are very small , measuring only approximately 200 Å in their largest dimension . These small , poorly crystalline , carbon - ate - substituted crystals are more soluble than geologic hy - droxyapatite crystals , thereby allowing them to support min - eral metabolism . Matrix maturation is associated with expression of alkaline phosphatase and several noncollagenous proteins , including osteocalcin , osteopontin , and bone sialoprotein . It is thought that these calcium - and phosphate - binding proteins help regu - late ordered deposition of mineral by regulating the amount and size of hydroxyapatite crystals formed . Bone mineral provides mechanical rigidity and load - bearing strength to bone , whereas the organic matrix provides elasticity and flexibility . Bone mineral is initially deposited in “hole” zones between the ends of collagen fibrils ( 41 ) . This process may be facilitated by extracellular matrix vesicles in bone , as it Clin J Am Soc Nephrol 3 : S131 – S139 , 2008 Normal Bone Anatomy and Physiology S135 is in calcifying cartilage and mineralizing turkey tendon ( 23 ) . Matrix extracellular vesicles are synthesized by chondrocytes and osteoblasts and serve as protected microenvironments in which calcium and phosphate concentrations can increase suf - ficiently to precipitate crystal formation . The extracellular fluid is not normally supersaturated with hydroxyapatite , so hy - droxyapatite does not spontaneously precipitate . Matrix extra - cellular vesicles contain a nucleational core that is composed of proteins and a complex of acidic phospholipids , calcium , and inorganic phosphate that is sufficient to precipitate hydroxyap - Table 1 . Extracellular matrix proteins a Protein ( Chromosome Location ) Function Human Disease Collagen - related proteins type I ( 17q21 . 23 , 7q22 . 1 ) Most abundant bone matrix protein Osteogenesis imperfecta type X ( 6q21 ) Found in hypertrophic cartilage None known type III ( 2q31 ) Trace amounts in bone ; may regulate collagen fibril diameter Ehlers - Danlos syndrome type V ( 9q34 . 2 - 34 . 3 ; 2q24 . 3 - 31 ; 19q13 . 2 ) Trace amounts in bone ; may regulate collagen fibril diameter Serum proteins in bone matrix albumin ( 4q11 - 13 ) Decreases hydroxyapatite crystal growth None (cid:3) 2 - HS glycoprotein ( 3q27 ) Bovine analog is fetuin None Glycoaminoglycan - containing proteins and leucine - rich repeat proteins aggrecan ( 15q26 . 1 ) Matrix organization , retention of calcium / phosphorus None versican ( 5q14 . 3 ) Defines space destined to become bone None decorin ( 12q21 . 3 ) Regulates collagen fibril diameter ; binds TGF - (cid:2) Progeroid form of Ehlers - Danlos syndrome with decorin / biglycan double knockout biglycan ( Xq28 ) Binds collagen ; binds TGF - (cid:2) ; genetic determinant of peak bone mass hyaluronan ( multigene complex ) May work with versican to define space destined to become bone None Glycoproteinsalkalinephosphatase ( 1p36 . 1 - p34 ) Hydrolyzes mineral deposition inhibitors Hypophosphatasia osteonectin ( 5q31 . 3 - 32 ) Regulates collagen fibril diameter None SIBLING proteins osteopontin ( 4q21 ) Inhibits mineralization and remodeling None bone sialoprotein ( 4q21 ) Initiates mineralization None MEPE ( 4q21 . 1 ) Regulator of phosphate metabolism Tumor - induced osteomalacia RGD - containing glycoproteins thrombospondins ( 15q15 , 6q27 , 1q21 , 5q13 , 19p13 . 1 ) Cell attachment None fibronectin ( 2q34 ) Binds to cells None vitronectin ( 17q11 ) Cell attachment None fibrillin 1 and 2 ( 15q21 . 1 , 5q23 - 31 ) Regulates elastic fiber formation Fibrillin 1 : Marfan syndrome (cid:4) - Carboxy glutamic acid – containing proteinsmatrixGla protein ( 12p13 . 1 - p12 . 3 ) Inhibits mineralization None osteocalcin ( 1q25 - q31 ) Regulates osteoclasts ; inhibits mineralization None protein S ( 3p11 . 2 ) Liver product , may be made by osteoblasts Osteopenia a SIBLING proteins , Small Integrin - Binding Ligand , N - glycosylated proteins . S136 Clinical Journal of the American Society of Nephrology Clin J Am Soc Nephrol 3 : S131 – S139 , 2008 atite crystals . It is not yet certain how matrix extracellular vesicles contribute to mineralization at specific sites at the ends of collagen fibrils , because the vesicles apparently are not di - rectly targeted to the ends of fibrils ( 23 ) . There is no evidence that noncrystalline calcium phosphate clusters ( amorphous calcium phosphate ) forms in bone before it is converted to hydroxyapatite ( 42 ) . As bone matures , hydroxy - apatite crystals enlarge and reduce their level of impurities . Crystal enlargement occurs both by crystal growth and by aggregation . Bone matrix macromolecules may facilitate initial crystal nucleation , sequester mineral ions to increase local con - centrations of calcium and / or phosphorus , or facilitate hetero - geneous nucleation . Macromolecules also bind to growing crys - tal surfaces to determine the size , shape , and number of crystals formed . Confirmed mineralization promoters ( nucleators ) include dentin matrix protein 1 and bone sialoprotein . Type I collagen is not a bone mineralization promoter . Phosphoprotein kinases and alkaline phosphatase regulate the mineralization process . Bone alkaline phosphatase may increase local phosphorus con - centrations , remove phosphate - containing inhibitors of hy - droxyapatite crystal growth , or modify phosphoproteins to control their ability to act as nucleators . Vitamin D plays an indirect role in stimulating mineraliza - tion of unmineralized bone matrix . After absorption or skin production of vitamin D , the liver synthesizes 25 - hydroxyvita - min D and the kidneys subsequently produce biologically ac - tive 1 , 25 - dihydroxyvitamin D [ 1 , 25 - ( OH ) 2 D ] . Serum 1 , 25 - ( OH ) 2 D is responsible for maintaining serum calcium and phosphorus in adequate concentrations to allow passive min - eralization of unmineralized bone matrix . Serum 1 , 25 - ( OH ) 2 D does this primarily by stimulating intestinal absorption of cal - cium and phosphorus . Serum 1 , 25 - ( OH ) 2 D also promotes dif - ferentiation of osteoblasts and stimulates osteoblast expression of bone - specific alkaline phosphatase , osteocalcin , osteonectin , OPG , and a variety of other cytokines . Serum 1 , 25 - ( OH ) 2 D also influences proliferation and apoptosis of other skeletal cells , including hypertrophic chondrocytes . Osteocytes Osteocytes represent terminally differentiated osteoblasts and function within syncytial networks to support bone struc - ture and metabolism . Osteocytes lie within lacunae within min - eralized bone ( Figure 3 ) and have extensive filipodial processes that lie within the canaliculi in mineralized bone ( 43 ) . Osteo - cytes do not normally express alkaline phosphatase but do express osteocalcin , galectin 3 , and CD44 , a cell adhesion re - ceptor for hyaluronate , as well as several other bone matrix proteins . Osteocytes express several matrix proteins that sup - port intercellular adhesion and regulate exchange of mineral in the bone fluid within lacunae and the canalicular network . Osteocytes are active during osteolysis and may function as phagocytic cells because they contain lysosomes . Osteocytes maintain connection with each other and the bone surface via their multiple filipodial cellular processes . Connex - ins are integral cellular proteins that maintain gap junctions between cells to allow direct communication through intercel - lular channels . Osteocytes are linked metabolically and electri - cally through gap junctions composed primarily of connexin 43 ( 44 ) . Gap junctions are required for osteocyte maturation , ac - tivity , and survival . The primary function of the osteocyte - osteoblast / lining cell syncytium is mechanosensation ( 45 ) . Osteocytes transduce stress signals from bending or stretching of bone into biologic activity . Flow of canalicular fluid in response to external forces induces a variety of responses within osteocytes . Rapid fluxes of bone calcium across filipodial gap junctions are believed to stimulate transmission of information between osteoblasts on the bone surface and osteocytes within the bone ( 46 ) . Signaling mechanisms involved in mechanotransduction include prosta - glandin E2 , cyclo - oxygenase 2 , various kinases , Runx2 , and nitrous oxide . Osteocytes may live for decades in human bone that is not turned over . The presence of empty lacunae in aging bone suggests that osteocytes may undergo apoptosis , probably caused by disruption of their intercellular gap junctions or cell – matrix interactions ( 47 ) . Osteocyte apoptosis in response to estrogen deficiency or glucocorticoid treatment is harmful to bone structure . Estrogen and bisphosphonate therapy and physiologic loading of bone may help prevent osteoblast and osteocyte apoptosis ( 48 ) . Determinants of Bone Strength Bone mass accounts for 50 to 70 % of bone strength ( 49 ) . Bone geometry and composition are important , however , because larger bones are stronger than smaller bones , even with equiv - alent bone mineral density . As bone diameter expands radially , the strength of bone increases by the radius of the involved bone raised to the fourth power . The amount and proportion of trabecular and cortical bone at a given skeletal site affect bone strength independently . Bone material properties are important for bone strength . Some patients with osteoporosis have abnor - mal bone matrix . Mutations in certain proteins may cause bone weakness ( e . g . , collagen defects cause decreased bone strength in osteogenesis imperfecta , impaired (cid:4) - carboxylation of Gla proteins ) . Bone strength can be affected by osteomalacia , fluo - ride therapy , or hypermineralization states . Bone microstruc - ture affects bone strength also . Low bone turnover leads to accumulation of microfractures . High bone turnover , with bone resorption greater than bone formation , is the main cause of microarchitectural deterioration . Conclusions The skeleton serves multiple functions . Bone modeling and remodeling preserve skeletal function throughout life . The bone remodeling unit normally couples bone resorption and formation . Bone matrix regulates bone mineralization . Bone strength depends on bone mass , geometry and composition , material properties , and microstructure . Disclosures None . Clin J Am Soc Nephrol 3 : S131 – S139 , 2008 Normal Bone Anatomy and Physiology S137 References 1 . Musculoskeletal system . In : Gray’s Anatomy , 39th Ed . , ed - ited by Standring S , New York , Elsevier , 2004 , pp 83 – 135 2 . Taichman RS : Blood and bone : Two tissues whose fates are intertwined to create the hematopoietic stem cell niche . Blood 105 : 2631 – 2639 , 2005 3 . Eriksen EF , Axelrod DW , Melsen F . Bone Histomorphometry , New York , Raven Press , 1994 , pp 1 – 12 4 . Kobayashi S , Takahashi HE , Ito A , Saito N , Nawata M , Horiuchi H , Ohta H , Ito A , Iorio R , Yamamoto N , Takaoka K : Trabecular minimodeling in human iliac bone . Bone 32 : 163 – 169 , 2003 5 . Ubara Y , Tagami T , Nakanishi S , Sawa N , Hoshino J , Suwabe T , Kaitori H , Takemoto F , Hara S , Takaichi K : Significance of minimodeling in dialysis patients with ady - namic bone disease . Kidney Int 68 : 833 – 839 , 2005 6 . Ubara Y , Fushimi T , Tagami T , Sawa N , Hoshino J , Yokota M , Kaitori H , Takemoto F , Hara S : Histomorphometric features of bone in patients with primary and secondary hyperparathyroidism . Kidney Int 63 : 1809 – 1816 , 2003 7 . Lindsay R , Cosman F , Zhou H , Bostrom M , Shen V , Cruz J , Nieves JW , Dempster DW : A novel tetracycline labeling schedule for longitudinal evaluation of the short - term ef - fects of anabolic therapy with a single iliac crest biopsy : Early actions of teriparatide . J Bone Miner Res 21 : 366 – 373 , 2006 8 . Burr DB : Targeted and nontargeted remodeling . Bone 30 : 2 – 4 , 2002 9 . Parfitt AM : Targeted and nontargeted bone remodeling : Relationship to basic multicellular unit origination and progression . Bone 30 : 5 – 7 , 2002 10 . Roodman GD : Cell biology of the osteoclast . Exp Hematol 27 : 1229 – 1241 , 1999 11 . Boyle WJ , Simonet WS , Lacey DL : Osteoclast differentia - tion and activation . Nature 423 : 337 – 342 , 2003 12 . Blair HC , Athanasou NA : Recent advances in osteoclast biology and pathological bone resorption . Histol His - topathol 19 : 189 – 199 , 2004 13 . Silver IA , Murrills RJ , Etherington DJ : Microelectrode stud - ies on the acid microenvironment beneath adherent mac - rophages and osteoclasts . Exp Cell Res 175 : 266 – 276 , 1988 14 . Delaisse JM , Andersen TL , Engsig MT , Henriksen K , Troen T , Blavier L : Matrix metalloproteinases ( MMP ) and cathep - sin K contribute differently to osteoclast activities . Microsc Res Tech 61 : 504 – 513 , 2003 15 . Eriksen EF : Normal and pathological remodeling of hu - man trabecular bone : Three - dimensional reconstruction of the remodeling sequence in normals and metabolic bone disease . Endocr Rev 7 : 379 – 408 , 1986 16 . Reddy SV : Regulatory mechanisms operative in oste - oclasts . Crit Rev Eukaryot Gene Expr 14 : 255 – 270 , 2004 17 . Bonewald L , Mundy GR : Role of transforming growth factor beta in bone remodeling . Clin Orthop Rel Res 2S : 35 – 40 , 1990 18 . Hock JM , Centrella M , Canalis E : Insulin - like growth factor I ( IGF - I ) has independent effects on bone matrix formation and cell replication . Endocrinology 122 : 254 – 260 , 2004 19 . Locklin RM , Oreffo RO , Triffitt JT : Effects of TGFbeta and bFGF on the differentiation of human bone marrow stro - mal fibroblasts . Cell Biol Int 23 : 185 – 194 , 1999 20 . Smit TH , Burger EH , Huyghe JM : Is BMU - coupling a strain - regulated phenomenon ? A finite element analysis . J Bone Miner Res 15 : 301 – 307 , 2002 21 . Smit TH , Burger EH , Huyghe JM : A case for strain - induced fluid flow as a regulator of BMU - coupling and osteonal alignment . J Bone Miner Res 17 : 2021 – 2029 , 2002 22 . Martin TJ , Sims NA : Osteoclast - derived activity in the coupling of bone formation to resorption . Trends Mol Med 11 : 76 – 81 , 2005 23 . Anderson HC : Matrix vesicles and calcification . Curr Rheu - matol Rep 5 : 222 – 226 , 2003 24 . Burger EH , Klein - Nuland J , Smit TH : Strain - derived cana - licular fluid flow regulates osteoclast activity in a remod - eling osteon : A proposal . J Biomech 36 : 1452 – 1459 , 2003 25 . Dobnig H , Turner RT : Evidence that intermittent treatment with parathyroid hormone increases bone formation in adult rats by activation of bone lining cells . Endocrinology 136 : 3632 – 3638 , 1995 26 . Hauge EM , Qvesel D , Eriksen EF , Mosekilde L , Melsen F : Cancellous bone remodeling occurs in specialized com - partments lined by cells expressing osteoblastic markers . J Bone Miner Res 16 : 1575 – 1582 , 2001 27 . Parfitt AM : Osteonal and hemiosteonal remodeling : The spatial and temporal framework for signal traffic in adult bone . J Cell Biochem 55 : 273 – 276 , 1994 28 . Teitelbaum SL , Ross FP : Genetic regulation of osteoclast development and function . Nat Rev Genet 4 : 638 – 649 , 2003 29 . Cohen MM Jr : The new bone biology : Pathologic , molecular , clinical correlates . Am J Med Genet A 140 : 2646 – 2706 , 2006 30 . Ross FP , Teitelbaum SL : (cid:3) v (cid:2) 3 and macrophage colony - stimulating factor : Partners in osteoclast biology . Immunol Rev 208 : 88 – 105 , 2005 31 . Teitelbaum SL , Abu - Amer Y , Ross FP : Molecular mecha - nisms of bone resorption . J Cell Biochem 59 : 1 – 10 , 1995 32 . Vaananen HK , Zhao H , Mulari M , Halleen JM : The cell biology of osteoclast function . J Cell Sci 113 : 377 – 381 , 2000 33 . Pittenger MF , Mackay AM , Beck SC , Jaiswal RK , Douglas R , Mosca JD , Moorman MA , Simonetti DW , Craig S , Mar - shak DR : Multilineage potential of adult human mesen - chymal stem cells . Science 284 : 143 – 147 , 1990 34 . Doherty MJ , Ashton BA , Walsh S , Beresford JN , Grant ME , Canfield AE : Vascular pericytes express osteogenic poten - tial in vitro and in vivo . J Bone Miner Res 13 : 828 – 838 , 1998 35 . Logan CY , Nusse R : The Wnt signaling pathway in devel - opment and disease . Annu Rev Cell Dev Biol 20 : 781 – 810 , 2004 36 . Boyden LM , Mao J , Belsky J , Mitzner L , Farhi A , Mitnick MA , Wu D , Insogna K , Lifton RP : High bone density due to a mutation in LDL receptor - related protein 5 . N Engl J Med 346 : 1513 – 1521 , 2002 37 . Little RD , Recker RR , Johnson ML : High bone density due to a mutation in LDL receptor - related protein 5 . N Engl J Med 347 : 943 – 944 , 2002 38 . Shin CS , Lecanda F , Sheikh S , Weitzmann L , Cheng SL , Civitelli R : Relative abundance of different cadherins de - fines differentiation of mesenchymal precursors into osteo - genic , myogenic , or adipogenic pathways . J Cell Biochem 78 : 566 – 577 , 2000 39 . Brodsky B , Persikov AV : Molecular structure of the colla - gen triple helix . Adv Protein Chem 70 : 301 – 339 , 2005 40 . Whyte MP : Hypophosphatasia and the role of alkaline phosphatase in skeletal mineralization . Endocr Rev 15 : 439 – 461 , 1994 S138 Clinical Journal of the American Society of Nephrology Clin J Am Soc Nephrol 3 : S131 – S139 , 2008 41 . Landis WJ : The strength of a calcified tissue depends in part on the molecular structure and organization of its constituent mineral crystals in their organic matrix . Bone 16 : 533 – 544 , 1995 42 . Weiner S , Sagi I , Addadi L : Structural biology : Choosing the crystallization path less traveled . Science 309 : 1027 – 1028 43 . Bonewald LF : Establishment and characterization of an osteocyte - like cell line , MLO - Y4 . J Bone Miner Metab 17 : 61 – 65 , 1999 44 . Plotkin LI , Manolagas SC , Bellido T : Transduction of cell survival signals by connexin - 43 hemichannels . J Biol Chem 277 : 8648 – 8657 , 2002 45 . Rubin CT , Lanyon LE : Osteoregulatory nature of mechan - ical stimuli : Function as a determinant for adaptive bone remodeling . J Orthop Res 5 : 300 – 310 , 1987 46 . Jorgensen NR , Teilmann SC , Henriksen Z , Civitelli R , So - rensen OH , Steinberg TH : Activation of L - type calcium channels is required for gap junction - mediated intercellu - lar calcium signaling in osteoblastic cells . J Biol Chem 278 : 4082 – 4086 , 2003 47 . Xing L , Boyce BF : Regulation of apoptosis in osteoclasts and osteoblastic cells . Biochem Biophys Res Commun 328 : 709 – 720 , 2005 48 . Plotkin LI , Aguirre JI , Kousteni S , Manolagas SC , Bellido T : Bisphosphonates and estrogens inhibit osteocyte apoptosis via distinct molecular mechanisms downstream of extra - cellular signal - regulated kinase activation . J Biol Chem 280 : 7317 – 7325 , 2005 49 . Pocock NA , Eisman JA , Hopper JL , Yeates MG , Sambrook PH , Eberl S : Genetic determinants of bone mass in adults : A twin study . J Clin Invest 80 : 706 – 710 , 1987 Clin J Am Soc Nephrol 3 : S131 – S139 , 2008 Normal Bone Anatomy and Physiology S139