Amphiphiles formed from synthetic DNA - nanomotifs mimic the step - wise dispersal of transcriptional clusters in the cell nucleus Xenia Tschurikow , † , ‡ , # Aaron Gadzekpo , † , ‡ , # Mai P . Tran , ¶ , § Rakesh Chatterjee , (cid:107) , ⊥ Marcel Sobucki , † Vasily Zaburdaev , (cid:107) , ⊥ Kerstin G¨opfrich , ¶ , § and Lennart Hilbert ∗ , † , ‡ † Institute of Biological and Chemical Systems , Karlsruhe Institute of Technology ‡ Zoological Institute , Karlsruhe Institute of Technology ¶ Center for Molecular Biology of Heidelberg University ( ZMBH ) § Max Planck Institute for Medical Research (cid:107) Max Planck Zentrum f¨ur Physik und Medizin ⊥ Chair of Mathematics in Life Sciences , Friedrich - Alexander Universit¨at Erlangen - N¨urnberg # These authors contributed equally E - mail : lennart . hilbert @ kit . edu Abstract Stem cells exhibit prominent clusters controlling the transcription of genes into RNA . These clusters form by a phase - separation mechanism , and their size and shape are controlled via an amphiphilic eﬀect of transcribed genes . Here , we construct amphiphile - nanomotifs purely from DNA , and achieve similar size and shape control for phase - separated droplets formed from fully synthetic , self - interacting DNA - nanomotifs . 1 Low amphiphile concentrations induce rounding of droplets , followed by splitting and , ultimately , full dispersal at higher concentrations . Super - resolution microscopy data obtained from zebraﬁsh embryo stem cells reveal a comparable transition for transcrip - tional clusters with increasing transcription levels . Brownian dynamics and lattice simulations further conﬁrm that addition of amphiphilic particles is suﬃcient to ex - plain the observed changes in shape and size . Our work reproduces key aspects of the complex organization of transcription in biological cells using relatively simple , DNA sequence - programmable nanostructures , opening novel ways to control mesoscopic or - ganization of synthetic nanomaterials . Graphical Abstract 2 Introduction Biological cells need to compartmentalize their molecular components to ensure proper func - tion . Conventionally , such compartmentalization is attributed to cellular organelles that are enclosed by membranes . More recently , processes based on liquid - liquid phase separation ( LLPS ) resulting from transient interactions were implicated in subcellular compartmental - ization in biomolecular condensates . 1 – 3 The transfer of biologically inspired compartmen - talization via LLPS into biomimetic and synthetic systems yields remarkable design pos - sibilities and performance increase . 4 One example , a recently developed platform for fully programmable , multi - species phase separation is now available via DNA - nanomotifs , whose interactions are based on homology of “sticky ends” of exposed , self - complementary single - stranded DNA . 5 , 6 This platform has enabled the construction of a synthetic DNA segrega - tion module that mimics chromosome separation during mitosis . 7 Embedding into DNA - nanomotif condensates has also allowed the combinatorial detection of tumor biomarkers and up to 20 - fold acceleration of DNA - based logic gates . 8 , 9 Condensates formed by canonical LLPS , commonly referred to as droplets , coarsen into increasingly larger droplets over time , whereas intra - cellular condensates are typically size - limited , or , in a state of microphase separation . 3 , 10 , 11 Size - limited condensates can be es - tablished and maintained by diﬀerent physical mechanisms , including active reaction pro - cesses , 12 , 13 targeted removal of aged condensates , 14 or by provision of pinning centers at which condensates are localized . 15 , 16 Most commonly , however , microphase separation is attained by the addition of amphiphilic particles characterized by a dual aﬃnity for two separating particle species . 17 Size - control by amphiphiles can be seen in several biological example cases . 18 – 20 A particularly well - studied case is the compartmentalization of tran - scription inside the cell nucleus . One prominent example is RNA polymerase II ( Pol II ) , the enzyme complex responsible for transcribing most eukaryotic genes , which acts as a bi - valent connecting particle between microphase - separated domains enriched in either DNA or RNA . 21 – 26 An amphiphilic eﬀect of ongoing transcription can also be seen by super - 3 resolution microscopy of clusters of transcriptional machinery in stem cells . 27 These clusters form by a phase - separation mechanism 28 – 35 and unfold or even split into smaller clusters when they are engaged by genes that undergo transcriptional activation . 27 , 36 This eﬀect can be reproduced in detail by a polymer model , in which transcribed genes are described as amphiphiles that associate with transcriptional clusters that , in turn , form by a liquid con - densation mechanism . 27 Here , we extend the synthetic DNA - nanomotif droplet platform by amphiphile - motifs and show that the eﬀect of these amphiphile - motifs closely resembles the dispersal of embryonic transcriptional clusters . Results & Discussion Dispersal of RNA polymerase II clusters by an amphiphilic eﬀect of transcribed genes To allow for the comparison of the eﬀect of DNA - based amphiphiles against a biological model system , we ﬁrst characterize how transcriptional clusters are aﬀected by the am - phiphilic eﬀects exerted by transcribed genes . In the zebraﬁsh embryo , for a number of genes , transient visits to especially long - lived and prominent transcriptional clusters oc - cur , which are tightly coupled with the transcriptional control of these genes by so - called “super - enhancers” . 27 , 36 As genes engage with transcriptional clusters and transcript elon - gation begins , transcriptional clusters unfold or even split into multiple parts ( Figure 1A ) . This eﬀect has been attributed to an amphiphilic property of genes that undergo activa - tion in association with these prominent transcriptional clusters : while these genes exhibit an increased tendency to associate with transcriptional clusters , the beginning of transcript elongation additionally drives the exclusion of these genes from the transcriptional cluster . 36 To obtain a ﬁne - grained assessment of how increasing transcription levels relate to the dispersal of transcriptional clusters in zebraﬁsh embryos , we labeled diﬀerent regulatory 4 states of Pol II by immunoﬂuorescence . Recruited RNA polymerase II , which serves as a label for transcriptional clusters , can be detected via a speciﬁc phosphorylation mark of the RNA polymerase II C - terminal domain ( Pol II S5P , Figure 1B ) . A diﬀerent phosphorylation mark ( Pol II S2P ) , can be used to detect currently elongating Pol II , which serves as an indicator of ongoing transcript elongation ( Figure 1B ) . Fluorescence images recorded by instant - SIM super - resolution confocal microscopy 37 revealed that the prominent Pol II S5P clusters were more unfolded and dispersed with higher levels of ongoing transcript elongation ( Figure 1C ) . Assessing the fraction of large clusters at a given Pol II S2P level substantiates the impression that more large clusters occur at intermediate levels of transcript elongation , and clusters disperse at high levels of transcript elongation ( Figure 1D ) . Quantifying the degree of unfolding via the sphericity of the Pol II S5P clusters also suggests the impression that higher Pol II S2P levels correlate with a less spherical shape of the Pol II S5P clusters ( Figure 1C ) . Indeed , a comprehensive overview of Pol II S5P cluster shape was via sphericity - volume scatter plots revealed that a population of large ( volume ≥ 0 . 08 µ m 3 ) and round ( sphericity ≥ 0 . 1 ) clusters is present speciﬁcally for intermediate levels of elongation activity ( Figure 1E ) . At high levels of transcription , this population is reduced . Taken together , these analyses characterize how the amphiphilic eﬀect of transcript elongation correlates with unfolding of transcriptional clusters , and , at the highest levels of transcript elongation , loss of large clusters . 5 Figure 1 : Transcribed genes act as amphiphile - like complexes that mediate the dis - persal of RNA polymerase II clusters in nuclei of pluripotent zebraﬁsh embryos . A ) Illustration of the formation of clusters of recruited RNA polymerase II at super - enhancer regions of the genome and dispersal of clusters by an amphiphilic eﬀect of transcribed genes . B ) Representative three - color micrograph of an optical section through the middle of a cell nucleus in a pluripotent zebraﬁsh embryo ( sphere stage of development ) . Image data ob - tained by instant - SIM microscopy , color channels show DNA ( Hoechst 33342 ) , recruited RNA polymerase II ( Pol II S5P , labeled by indirect immunoﬂuorescence ) , and elongating RNA polymerase II ( Pol II S2P , indirect immunoﬂuorescence ) . C ) Detail views of clusters of recruited RNA polymerase II , showing only the Pol II S5P and Pol II S2P channels . Seg - mentation was carried out in the Pol II S5P channel , as indicated in the top row . Sphericity was obtained from threshold - based segmentation of Pol II S5P clusters , S2P Int . refers to the mean intensity in the Pol II S2P channel , normalized by the median intensity of the nucleus that the cluster is contained in . D ) Per - bin calculation of the percentage of large clusters in a given bin ( volumes of 0 . 08 µ m 3 or more , mean with 95 % bootstrap conﬁdence interval , data obtained from 99 nuclei pooled from 8 embryos ) . E ) Segmented clusters were binned according to Pol II S2P intensity to generate sphericity - volume distributions . The percentage in red indicates binned clusters with volume ≥ 0 . 08 µ m 3 and sphericity ≥ 0 . 1 ( red box ) . 6 Amphiphile - motifs formed purely from DNA can disperse droplets of self - interacting DNA - nanomotifs After having characterized the dispersal of transcriptional clusters as a biological reference for the desired amphiphilic eﬀects , we proceeded to develop amphiphiles that disperse droplets formed from DNA - nanomotifs . The previously developed phase - separating DNA - nanomotifs , called Y - motifs due their three - ended shape , self - interact via sequence - programmed sticky ends . 5 Corresponding amphiphile - nanomotifs should also exhibit an aﬃnity for the droplet - forming Y - motifs via sticky ends and , additionally , repulsion from the droplet phase ( Figure 2A ) . Such a repulsion can be introduced , for example , by attaching negative charges via 5’ - conjugation of a phosphate group , which resulted in a visually apparent reduction of droplet diameter , as is expected upon addition of an amphiphile ( Figure 2B ) . An alternative approach to add negative charges for repulsion from the droplet phase , the extension by 102 thymines ( poly - T extension ) , equally resulted in a visually apparent reduction of droplet diameter ( Figure 2B ) . We theorized that the poly - T - based dispersal was due to a generic charge - based exclusion of the added DNA from the phase - separated droplets , which can only be overcome when nanomotif - nanomotif interactions , i . e . , complementary base pairing , facilitate the retention within droplets . In line with this reasoning , the apparent dispersal of droplets by these amphiphile - motifs was abolished by the addition of 10 nt - long poly - adenine ( poly - A ) blocker oligomers , which can facilitate transient poly - T - poly - T cross - linking by complementary base pairing , similar to the sticky ends ( Figure 2C ) . We used the poly - T - based amphiphile - motifs in the following steps of our study , as these amphiphile - motifs appeared to result in smaller droplets , and rely entirely on DNA - sequence eﬀects , without chemical functionalization . To better understand the dispersal of Y - motif droplets , we added amphiphile - motifs to a suspension containing preformed Y - motif droplets , and visualized both species by time - lapse ﬂuorescence microscopy ( Figure 2D ) . Initially , amphiphile - motifs are homogeneously distributed throughout the volume not occupied by Y - motif droplets and excluded from Y - motif droplets ( Figure 2E , 0 min inset ) . Amphiphile - motifs successively 7 redistribute from outside to within the Y - motif droplets . Upon closer inspection , amphiphile - motifs exhibit a tendency to accumulate more strongly at the surface of Y - motif droplets relative to the inside of the Y - motif droplets , and a higher number of rounder droplets becomes apparent ( Figure 2E , 30 min inset ) . Over time , the redistribution of amphiphile - motifs into the Y - motif droplets becomes yet more pronounced . Also , droplets are surrounded by a more clearly distinguishable layer of amphiphile - motifs and appear generally smaller , as would be expected after further splitting events ( Figure 2E , 90 min inset ) . These observations suggest that amphiphile - motifs are successively redistributed into the Y - motif droplets and become incorporated into droplet surfaces . Over time , large droplets become increasingly energetically unfavourable and split into smaller droplets . 8 Figure 2 : Amphiphiles for the dispersal of droplets formed from synthetic DNA - nanomotifs . A ) Illustration of nanomotifs obtained by annealing of single DNA - oligomers , which consist of a 34 nt long core - structure , binding their neighboring strands , and a 8 nt long palindromic sticky end sequence . Amphiphile - motifs are generated by adding a repul - sive extension to one vacant end of of a six - ended star motif . Y - motifs form phase - separated droplets due to the self - aﬃnity established by sticky ends , which become dispersed upon the addition of amphiphile - motifs . B ) Representative micrographs of Y - motif droplets in the presence of amphiphile - motifs . The negative charge is added via phosphate conjugation or the extension of one vacant end of the star - motif by 102 thymines ( poly - T extension ) . Images are single confocal sections . C ) Illustration of the charge - canceling eﬀect from adding 10 nt long poly - A blockers . Micrographs show single confocal sections of Y - motif droplets in the presence of star - motifs without ( control - motif ) or with poly - T extension ( amphiphile - motif ) , without or with addition of poly - A blockers . D ) Y - motif droplets and amphiphile - motif solu - tion were prepared in separate reaction tubes and subsequently mixed together for time - lapse imaging of the subsequent reorganization processes . E ) Representative two - color time - lapse showing single confocal sections obtained from volumetric image stacks originally acquired with a 3 - min time interval . Images 3D - deconvolved ( Lucy - Richardson ) , Y - motif channel were corrected for photo - bleaching ( histogram matching method ) , insets were contrast - adjusted to emphasize local details . Results were comparable over three independent repeats with two consecutive time - lapse recordings per repeat . 9 Our initial results suggest that amphiphile - motifs are recruited to Y - motif droplets before they exert their dispersing eﬀect . In a time - course experiment with more precise temper - ature control ( 50 ◦ C ) , indeed , Y - motif droplets initially took on rounder shapes , became increasingly smaller only over time until , ultimately , most droplets vanished ( Figure 3A ) . The addition of control - motifs that lack the poly - T extension also induced rounding of Y - motif droplets , while , instead of becoming smaller , droplets continued to grow over time ( Figure 3A ) . We wanted to test whether attractive interactions between Y - motifs and amphiphile - motifs combined with a repulsive domain on the amphiphile - motifs are suﬃcient to explain these observations . We therefore implemented simulations based on Brownian dynamics , where Y - motifs were represented as spherical particles , which interact with other particles of the same kind via a harmonic well potential ( Figure 3B , additional graphical summary see Figure S1 ) . Amphiphile - motifs are represented as composite particles comprising one “Y - motif - particle” and one “tail particle” , which experiences harmonic repulsion from all other particles . The interaction potentials were adjusted so as to to recapitulate an experimentally observed transient increase in the number of droplets with increasing amphiphile - motif con - centrations ( Figure S2 ) . We initialized a simulation with only Y - motifs , which we allowed to proceed until two diﬀerently sized droplets were formed , and subsequently added equal numbers of either amphiphile - motifs or control - motifs . The addition of amphiphile - motifs led to full dispersal of the smaller preformed droplet and prevented further growth of the larger droplet , whereas the addition of control - motifs resulted in continued growth for both droplets ( Figure 3B ) . These observations already strongly indicated that , indeed , droplet dispersal can be attributed speciﬁcally to the repulsive poly - T tail . To consolidate these ob - servations , we carried out a quantitative analysis of droplet number , volume , and sphericity for time - courses obtained experimentally and by simulation ( Figure S3A - C and Figure S4A - C , respectively ) . In line with expectation , in both cases , addition of amphiphile - motifs to preformed Y - motif droplets induces a transient increase in volume and sphericity , followed by 10 full droplet dispersal . Adding control - motifs also leads to an increase in droplet volume and sphericity , and , as expected , the subsequent volume reduction and dispersal do not occur . 11 Figure 3 : Time course of droplet dispersal upon addition of amphiphile - motifs A ) Representative confocal microscopy sections showing the distribution of Y - motifs in ﬂow cells prepared at 10 - min time intervals after amphiphile - motifs were added to preformed Y - motif droplets ( 0 min ) . Several tubes prepared in this manner were maintained at a stable temperature of 50 ◦ C , control - motif samples were processed alongside amphiphile - motif experiments . B ) To simulate the time - lapse experiment , either amphiphile - motifs or control - motifs were added to a simulation in a 1x1x1 µ m box containing preformed Y - motif droplets . Preformed droplets were generated by simulation with 450 Y - motifs for 10 6 steps at 60 ◦ C . 450 amphiphiles or control motifs ( implemented as Y - motifs , displayed in blue ) serving as control were then added and 5 · 10 6 simulation steps at 40 ◦ C were carried out . Images are 200 nm thick z - slices . Both simulations started from the same initial conﬁguration . 12 Addition of increasing amphiphile concentrations mimics the dis - persal of RNA polymerase II clusters Having veriﬁed that amphiphile - motifs induce the expected droplet dispersal , we investi - gated whether they could be used to mimic the dispersal of transcriptional clusters with increasing levels of transcript elongation in zebraﬁsh embryos . To imitate increasing levels of transcript elongation , we prepared mixtures of Y - motifs with increasing concentrations of amphiphile - motifs ( Figure 4A ) . In line with our previous observations , at all concentrations , amphiphile - motifs colocalized with Y - motif droplets and higher amphiphile concentrations were associated with smaller droplets ( Figure 4B ) . In close agreement with observations made for Pol II clusters , also the droplet number transiently increases , then drops below the corresponding value without addition of amphiphile - motifs ( Figure 4C ) . Also , the volume - sphericity distribution undergoes changes similar to Pol II clusters in zebraﬁsh embryos for increasing levels of transcription ( Figure 4D ) . In particular , the transient increase in the percentage of droplets with high volume and high sphericity mirrors the results for Pol II clusters . All observations were also visible in a second repeat of the titration experiment , indicating their reproducibility ( Figure S5 ) . Taken together , the changes in Y - motif droplets with increasing amphiphile - motif concentration resemble the changes in Pol II clusters in zebraﬁsh embryos for increasing levels of transcript elongation . 13 Figure 4 : Increased amphiphile concentration leads to dispersal of phase - separated droplets . A ) Y - motifs , control - motifs ( no poly - T extension ) , and amphiphile - motifs were separately prepared , mixed at diﬀerent percentages of amphiphile - motif , transiently heated ( 60 ◦ C ) , and injected into ﬂow cells for microscopy ( ambient temperature 40 ◦ C ) . B ) Repre - sentative two - color micrographs of Y - motif and amphiphile - motif distributions at diﬀerent amphiphile - motif concentrations . Micrographs are single confocal sections . C ) Changes with amphiphile concentration of the number of droplets per ﬁeld of view ( mean ± SEM , n = 14 , 14 , 13 , 13 , 14 , 14 ﬁelds of view ) . D ) Sphericity - volume distributions obtained from the analysis of confocal image stacks ( image stacks were acquired at up to ﬁve ﬁelds of view per sample , n = 15323 , 22091 , 18177 , 7793 , 8477 , 6663 droplets , data pooled from N = 14 , 14 , 13 , 13 , 14 , 14 total ﬁelds of view pooled from three independent experimental repeats ) . Small droplets ( volume ≤ 0 . 125 µ m 3 ) were excluded in calculation of percentages . 14 Finally , to assess whether our theoretical model can reproduce the dispersal of Y - motif droplets with increasing amphiphile - motif concentration , we simulated a titration experiment with increasing concentrations of amphiphile - motifs ( Figure 5A ) . The volume fractions in the experiments with DNA - nanomotifs can be directly mapped to the particle number fractions in these simulations and the simulations are assigned physical length scales , so that results from simulations can be thoroughly compared to the experiments ( Figure 5B ) . Visually , an increase in amphiphile - motif concentration leads to smaller Y - motif droplets and a more prominent accumulation of amphiphile - motifs on the surface of Y - motif droplets ( Figure 5B ) . The number of detected droplets ﬁrst rises and then drops , as seen in the experiments ( Figure 5C ) . Sphericity - volume scatter plots show an increased fraction of large droplets with high sphericity , followed by a decrease of this fraction for even higher amphiphile - motif concentrations ( Figure 5D ) . Taken together , our theoretical model largely captures the experimental observations for increasing concentrations of amphiphile - motifs , and , by extension , for transcriptional clusters with increasing levels of transcription . To test the generality and robustness of our theoretical results , we implemented phe - nomenological lattice - based simulations including self - interacting particles and amphiphilic particles , thereby focusing on essential interaction rules ( Figure 5E ) . The simulation is ac - complished on a 2 - dimensional square lattice with diﬀerent types of particles representing the diﬀerent types nanomotifs . Particles could not overlap and moved according to a dy - namic Monte - Carlo algorithm . Diﬀerent aﬃnities were assigned to the tips of the particles to represent the diﬀerent nanomotifs . We consider three types of particles : three - armed particles with self - aﬃnity analogous to the DNA Y - motifs ; amphiphilic particles with an additional , repulsive arm ; and control particles similar to the amphiphiles , except that the additional arm is neutral ( Figure 5E ) . Aﬃnities and the particle density were adjusted so that self - interacting particles behave as a phase - separating liquid . 38 – 40 When we simulate the titration of amphiphile particles , large phase - separated domains are dispersed as the fraction of amphiphile particles is increased , as seen in the interacting - particle simulations 15 ( Figure 5F ) . Further , a transient increase in droplet number and in the fraction of large , round droplets is observed , in line with the interacting - particle simulations and experiments ( Figure 5G , H ) . This agreement between lattice simulation and interacting - particle simulation results further supports that , indeed , the dispersal of phase - separated droplets by increasing amphiphile concentrations can be attributed to the same essential set of interaction rules . The robustness of our theoretical results is further supported by a quantitative analysis of number of droplets , particle number per droplet , and circularity for time - lapse simulations , which matches experimental and interacting - particle simulation results ( Figure S6 ) . 16 Figure 5 : Amphiphile titration in interacting - particle and lattice simulations . A ) To - scale drawing of Y - motifs and amphiphile - motifs used in the interacting - particle simua - tions . B ) Particle - based simulations with 450 particles in total were used to represent the titration experiment . The fraction of amphiphile was increased from 0 % to 100 % in steps of 10 % , the remaining fraction comprising of Y - motifs . Initially , all particles were distributed in a spherical volume of 200 nm inside a simulation box of 1x1x1 µ m . 10 6 simulation steps were then carried out and the ﬁnal conﬁguration was evaluated . Due to the diﬀerent methods of assigning percentages ( number fractions in the simulation , volume fractions in the experi - ment ) , we provide corresponding percentages from the experiment in grey . One example of a z - slice ( thickness 200 nm ) of the ﬁnal conﬁguration is shown for each case . C ) Number of droplets per simulation , grey regions correspond to the range investigated in the experiment , mean ± SEM ( n = 20 simulations ) . D ) Distributions of sphericity against particle number per droplet from 20 simulations . The blue box contains a percentage of droplets with sphericity higher than 0 . 4 and more than 25 particles per droplet . E ) Lattice - based simulations with three diﬀerent particles types were used to represent the titration experiment . T - shaped and cross - shaped DNA motifs perform diﬀusion and undergo stochastic rotation . Amphiphiles have one repulsive interacting arm ( red ) , which is replaced by a neutral arm ( white dot ) for controls . F ) Images show representative conﬁgurations of simulations carried out on 64 × 64 two - dimensional lattice . G ) Number of droplets per simulation , mean ± SEM ( n = 25 simulations ) . H ) Distributions of circularity against particle number per droplet from 25 simulations . The percentage is for droplets with circularity higher than 0 . 40 and more than 35 particles per droplet . 17 Conclusion Taken together , in all experimental and theoretical systems examined in this study , a stereo - typical dispersal process was observed with increasing amphiphile concentrations . An in - crease in the fraction of large , round droplets and the total number of droplets can be observed at low amphiphile concentrations . At suﬃciently high amphiphile concentrations , splitting of droplets leads to a dispersal beyond the detection limit . In our understanding , this stereotypical behavior can be traced back to the similarity in the underlying amphiphile - mediated dispersal process . For low amphiphile levels , droplets grow as amphiphile particles are incorporated . Round , convex shapes become energetically favourable , as they maximise the distance between the repulsive , surface - attached parts of the amphiphile . 41 For increasing amphiphile concentrations , the requirement for increased droplet surface area to accomodate the additional amphiphile particles leads to splitting and , ultimately , dispersal of droplets . 17 In summary , our results show how an amphiphilic DNA - nanomotif constructed solely on the basis of sequence interactions , without chemical functionalization , can be used to control the size of phase - separated droplet compartments or even induce complete dispersal of these compartments , similar to what is observed for transcriptional clusters in stem cells . Several additional features not reﬂected in the synthetic DNA - motifs used in our study could be considered in future to achieve more realistic synthetic reimplementations of transcriptional clusters . Transcription in eukaryotes proceeds via several adjacent compartments at the scale of a few 100 nm , which harbor the consecutive steps of transcription control , transcript elongation , and splicing of the resulting transcripts . 42 – 46 The ability to implement several , orthogonally interacting DNA - motifs based on diﬀerent sticky end sequences allows a similar formation of distinct droplet species , whose fusion and separation can be controlled by addi - tional connector motifs . 5 , 7 The formation of transcriptional clusters in pluripotent cells in - volves super - enhancers as condensation surfaces , 27 – 31 , 43 , 47 – 51 whereas the Y - motif droplets in our study form without such condensation surfaces . Such surfaces could be provided by long 18 DNA strands produced with the rolling circle ampliﬁcation ( RCA ) method , which was previ - ously used to generate DNA - only liquid droplets . 52 Lastly , the amphiphilic DNA - nanomotifs in our synthetic system are catalytically inactive , while the ongoing synthesis and trans - port of RNA can distinctly change the stability of transcriptional clusters 27 , 53 as well as the mesoscopic organization of diﬀerent steps of the transcription process and chromatin . 21 , 54 , 55 In conclusion , our work illustrates how principles of intracellular compartmentalization can be translated into novel , biomimetic concepts for the control of synthetic biological systems and materials . Acknowledgements X . T . , A . G . , M . S . , and L . H . are supported by the Helmholtz Program Natural , Artiﬁcial , and Cognitive Information Processing ( NACIP ) . X . T . and L . H . received seed funding from the KIT Center Materials for Technology and Life Sciences ( MaTeLiS ) . M . P . T and K . G received funding by the Hector Fellow Academy , the Federal Ministry of Education and Research ( BMBF ) , and the Ministry of Science Baden - W¨urttemberg within the framework of the Excellence Strategy of the Federal , and State Governments of Germany and the Max Planck Society . R . C . and V . Z . were supported by the ”Life ? ” initiative of the Volkswagen Stiftung . References ( 1 ) Bergeron - Sandoval , L . - P . ; Safaee , N . ; Michnick , S . Mechanisms and Consequences of Macromolecular Phase Separation . Cell 2016 , 165 , 1067 – 1079 . ( 2 ) Shin , Y . ; Brangwynne , C . P . Liquid phase condensation in cell physiology and disease . Science 2017 , 357 , eaaf4382 . ( 3 ) Lyon , A . S . ; Peeples , W . B . ; Rosen , M . K . A framework for understanding the functions 19 of biomolecular condensates across scales . Nature Reviews Molecular Cell Biology 2021 , 22 , 215 – 235 . ( 4 ) Udono , H . ; Gong , J . ; Sato , Y . ; Takinoue , M . DNA Droplets : Intelligent , Dynamic Fluid . Advanced Biology 2022 , 7 , 2200180 . ( 5 ) Sato , Y . ; Sakamoto , T . ; Takinoue , M . Sequence - based engineering of dynamic functions of micrometer - sized DNA droplets . Science Advances 2020 , 6 , eaba3471 . ( 6 ) Jeon , B . J . ; Nguyen , D . T . ; Saleh , O . A . Sequence - Controlled Adhesion and Microemul - siﬁcation in a Two - Phase System of DNA Liquid Droplets . Journal of Physical Chem - istry B 2020 , 124 , 8888 – 8895 . ( 7 ) Tran , M . P . ; Chatterjee , R . ; Dreher , Y . ; Fichtler , J . ; Jahnke , K . ; Hilbert , L . ; Zabur - daev , V . ; G¨opfrich , K . A DNA Segregation Module for Synthetic Cells . Small 2022 , 2202711 , 2202711 . ( 8 ) Gong , J . ; Tsumura , N . ; Sato , Y . ; Takinoue , M . Computational DNA Droplets Recog - nizing miRNA Sequence Inputs Based on Liquid – Liquid Phase Separation . Advanced Functional Materials 2022 , 32 , 2202322 . ( 9 ) Do , S . ; Lee , C . ; Lee , T . ; Kim , D . N . ; Shin , Y . Engineering DNA - based synthetic conden - sates with programmable material properties , compositions , and functionalities . Science Advances 2022 , 8 , eabj1771 . ( 10 ) Klier , J . ; Tucker , C . J . ; Kalantar , T . H . ; Green , D . P . Properties and Applications of Microemulsions . Advanced Materials 2000 , 12 , 1751 – 1757 . ( 11 ) Hildebrand , E . M . ; Dekker , J . Mechanisms and Functions of Chromosome Compart - mentalization . Trends in Biochemical Sciences 2020 , 45 , 385 – 396 . ( 12 ) Zwicker , D . ; Hyman , A . A . ; J¨ulicher , F . Suppression of Ostwald ripening in active emulsions . Physical Review E 2015 , 92 , 012317 . 20 ( 13 ) Michieletto , D . ; Col ` ı , D . ; Marenduzzo , D . ; Orlandini , E . Nonequilibrium theory of epigenomic microphase separation in the cell nucleus . Physical Review Letters 2019 , 123 , 228101 . ( 14 ) Narayanan , A . ; Meriin , A . ; Owen Andrews , J . ; Spille , J . H . ; Sherman , M . Y . ; Cisse , I . I . A ﬁrst order phase transition mechanism underlies protein aggregation in mammalian cells . eLife 2019 , 8 , e39695 . ( 15 ) Berry , J . ; Weber , S . C . ; Vaidya , N . ; Haataja , M . ; Brangwynne , C . P . RNA transcription modulates phase transition - driven nuclear body assembly . Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences USA 2015 , 112 , E5237 – E5245 . ( 16 ) Zwicker , D . ; Decker , M . ; Jaensch , S . ; Hyman , A . A . ; Julicher , F . Centrosomes are autocatalytic droplets of pericentriolar material organized by centrioles . Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences USA 2014 , 111 , E2636 – E2645 . ( 17 ) Larson , R . G . ; Scriven , L . E . ; Davis , H . T . Monte Carlo simulation of model amphiphile - oil – water systems . Journal of Chemical Physics 1985 , 83 , 2411 – 2420 . ( 18 ) Kelley , F . M . ; Favetta , B . ; Regy , R . M . ; Mittal , J . ; Schuster , B . S . Amphiphilic proteins coassemble into multiphasic condensates and act as biomolecular surfactants . Proceed - ings of the National Academy of Sciences USA 2021 , 118 , e2109967118 . ( 19 ) Samanta , N . ; Ribeiro , S . S . ; Becker , M . ; Laborie , E . ; Pollak , R . ; Timr , S . ; Sterpone , F . ; Ebbinghaus , S . Sequestration of Proteins in Stress Granules Relies on the In - Cell but Not the In Vitro Folding Stability . Journal of the American Chemical Society 2021 , ( 20 ) Cuylen , S . ; Blaukopf , C . ; Politi , A . Z . ; M¨uller - Reichert , T . ; Neumann , B . ; Poser , I . ; Ellenberg , J . ; Hyman , A . A . ; Gerlich , D . W . Ki - 67 acts as a biological surfactant to disperse mitotic chromosomes . Nature 2016 , 535 , 308 – 312 . 21 ( 21 ) Hilbert , L . ; Sato , Y . ; Kuznetsova , K . ; Bianucci , T . ; Kimura , H . ; J¨ulicher , F . ; Honig - mann , A . ; Zaburdaev , V . ; Vastenhouw , N . L . Transcription organizes euchromatin via microphase separation . Nature Communications 2021 , 12 , 1360 . ( 22 ) Ricci , M . ; Manzo , C . ; Garc´ıa - Parajo , M . F . ; Lakadamyali , M . ; Cosma , M . Chromatin Fibers Are Formed by Heterogeneous Groups of Nucleosomes In Vivo . Cell 2015 , 160 , 1145 – 1158 . ( 23 ) Nozaki , T . ; Imai , R . ; Tanbo , M . ; Nagashima , R . ; Tamura , S . ; Tani , T . ; Joti , Y . ; Tomita , M . ; Hibino , K . ; Kanemaki , M . T . ; Wendt , K . S . ; Okada , Y . ; Nagai , T . ; Maeshima , K . Dynamic Organization of Chromatin Domains Revealed by Super - Resolution Live - Cell Imaging . Molecular Cell 2017 , 67 , 282 – 293 . e7 . ( 24 ) Ashwin , S . S . ; Nozaki , T . ; Maeshima , K . ; Sasai , M . Organization of fast and slow chro - matin revealed by single - nucleosome dynamics . Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences USA 2019 , 116 , 19939 – 19944 . ( 25 ) Bintu , B . ; Mateo , L . J . ; Su , J . H . ; Sinnott - Armstrong , N . A . ; Parker , M . ; Kinrot , S . ; Yamaya , K . ; Boettiger , A . N . ; Zhuang , X . Super - resolution chromatin tracing reveals domains and cooperative interactions in single cells . Science 2018 , 362 , eaau1783 . ( 26 ) Szabo , Q . ; Jost , D . ; Chang , J . M . ; Cattoni , D . I . ; Papadopoulos , G . L . ; Bonev , B . ; Sexton , T . ; Gurgo , J . ; Jacquier , C . ; Nollmann , M . ; Bantignies , F . ; Cavalli , G . TADs are 3D structural units of higher - order chromosome organization in Drosophila . Science Advances 2018 , 4 , eaar8082 . ( 27 ) Pancholi , A . ; Klingberg , T . ; Zhang , W . ; Prizak , R . ; Mamontova , I . ; Noa , A . ; Sobucki , M . ; Kobitski , A . Y . ; Ulrich Nienhaus , G . ; Zaburdaev , V . ; Hilbert , L . RNA polymerase II clusters form in line with surface condensation on regulatory chromatin . Molecular Systems Biology 2021 , 17 , e10272 . 22 ( 28 ) Cho , W . - K . ; Spille , J . - H . ; Hecht , M . ; Lee , C . ; Li , C . ; Grube , V . ; Cisse , I . I . Mediator and RNA polymerase II clusters associate in transcription - dependent condensates . Science 2018 , 361 , 412 – 415 . ( 29 ) Guo , Y . E . et al . Pol II phosphorylation regulates a switch between transcriptional and splicing condensates . Nature 2019 , 572 , 543 – 548 . ( 30 ) Sabari , B . R . et al . Coactivator condensation at super - enhancers links phase separation and gene control . Science 2018 , 361 , eaar3958 . ( 31 ) Gibson , B . A . ; Doolittle , L . K . ; Schneider , M . W . ; Jensen , L . E . ; Gamarra , N . ; Henry , L . ; Gerlich , D . W . ; Redding , S . ; Rosen , M . K . Organization of Chromatin by Intrinsic and Regulated Phase Separation . Cell 2019 , 179 , 470 – 484 . e21 . ( 32 ) Shrinivas , K . ; Sabari , B . R . ; Coﬀey , E . L . ; Klein , I . A . ; Boija , A . ; Zamudio , A . V . ; Schuijers , J . ; Hannett , N . M . ; Sharp , P . A . ; Young , R . A . ; Chakraborty , A . K . Enhancer Features that Drive Formation of Transcriptional Condensates . Molecular Cell 2019 , 75 , 549 – 561 . ( 33 ) Boehning , M . ; Dugast - Darzacq , C . ; Rankovic , M . ; Hansen , A . S . ; Yu , T . - K . T . ; Marie - Nelly , H . ; McSwiggen , D . T . ; Kokic , G . ; Dailey , G . M . ; Cramer , P . ; Darzacq , X . ; Zweckstetter , M . RNA polymerase II clustering through carboxy - terminal domain phase separation . Nature Structural and Molecular Biology 2018 , 25 , 833 – 840 . ( 34 ) Shao , W . et al . Phase separation of RNA - binding protein promotes polymerase binding and transcription . Nature Chemical Biology 2022 , 18 , 70 – 80 . ( 35 ) Lyons , H . ; Veettil , R . T . ; Pradhan , P . ; Fornero , C . ; De La Cruz , N . ; Ito , K . ; Eppert , M . ; Roeder , R . G . ; Sabari , B . R . Functional partitioning of transcriptional regulators by patterned charge blocks . Cell 2023 , 186 , 327 – 345 . 23 ( 36 ) Hajiabadi , H . ; Mamontova , I . ; Prizak , R . ; Pancholi , A . ; Koziolek , A . ; Hilbert , L . Deep - learning microscopy image reconstruction with quality control reveals second - scale re - arrangements in RNA polymerase II clusters . PNAS Nexus 2022 , 1 , pgac065 . ( 37 ) York , A . G . ; Chandris , P . ; Nogare , D . D . ; Head , J . ; Wawrzusin , P . ; Fischer , R . S . ; Chitnis , A . ; Shroﬀ , H . Instant super - resolution imaging in live cells and embryos via analog image processing . Nature Methods 2013 , 10 , 1122 – 1126 . ( 38 ) Rotman , Z . ; Eisenberg , E . Ideal glass transition in a simple two - dimensional lattice model . Physical Review E 2009 , 80 , 060104 . ( 39 ) Chatterjee , R . ; Segall , N . ; Merrigan , C . ; Ramola , K . ; Chakraborty , B . ; Shokef , Y . Motion of active tracer in a lattice gas with cross - shaped particles . Journal of Chemical Physics 2019 , 150 , 144508 . ( 40 ) Merrigan , C . ; Ramola , K . ; Chatterjee , R . ; Segall , N . ; Shokef , Y . ; Chakraborty , B . Ar - rested states in persistent active matter : Gelation without attraction . Physical Review Research 2020 , 2 , 013260 . ( 41 ) Klaiber , A . ; Lanz , C . ; Landsmann , S . ; Gehring , J . ; Drechsler , M . ; Polarz , S . Maximizing Headgroup Repulsion : Hybrid Surfactants with Ultrahighly Charged Inorganic Heads and Their Unusual Self - Assembly . Langmuir 2016 , 32 , 10920 – 10927 . ( 42 ) Li , J . ; Dong , A . ; Saydaminova , K . ; Chang , H . ; Wang , G . ; Ochiai , H . ; Yamamoto , T . ; Pertsinidis , A . Single - Molecule Nanoscopy Elucidates RNA Polymerase II Transcription at Single Genes in Live Cells . Cell 2019 , 178 , 491 – 506 . e28 . ( 43 ) Li , J . ; Hsu , A . ; Hua , Y . ; Wang , G . ; Cheng , L . ; Ochiai , H . ; Yamamoto , T . ; Pertsinidis , A . Single - gene imaging links genome topology , promoter – enhancer communication and transcription control . Nature Structural and Molecular Biology 2020 , 27 , 1032 – 1040 . 24 ( 44 ) Forero - Quintero , L . S . ; Raymond , W . ; Handa , T . ; Saxton , M . N . ; Morisaki , T . ; Kimura , H . ; Bertrand , E . ; Munsky , B . ; Stasevich , T . J . Live - cell imaging reveals the spatiotemporal organization of endogenous RNA polymerase II phosphorylation at a single gene . Nature Communications 2021 , 12 , 3158 . ( 45 ) Ohishi , H . ; Shimada , S . ; Uchino , S . ; Li , J . ; Sato , Y . ; Shintani , M . ; Owada , H . ; Ohkawa , Y . ; Pertsinidis , A . ; Yamamoto , T . ; Kimura , H . ; Ochiai , H . STREAMING - tag system reveals spatiotemporal relationships between transcriptional regulatory factors and transcriptional activity . Nature Communications 2022 , 13 , 7672 . ( 46 ) Cramer , P . Organization and regulation of gene transcription . Nature 2019 , 573 , 45 – 54 . ( 47 ) Morin , J . A . ; Wittmann , S . ; Choubey , S . ; Klosin , A . ; Golﬁer , S . ; Hyman , A . A . ; J¨ulicher , F . ; Grill , S . W . Sequence - dependent surface condensation of a pioneer tran - scription factor on DNA . Nature Physics 2022 , 18 , 271 – 276 . ( 48 ) Quail , T . ; Golﬁer , S . ; Elsner , M . ; Ishihara , K . ; Murugesan , V . ; Renger , R . ; J¨ulicher , F . ; Brugu´es , J . Force generation by protein – DNA co - condensation . Nature Physics 2021 , 17 , 1007 – 1012 . ( 49 ) Chong , S . ; Dugast - Darzacq , C . ; Liu , Z . ; Dong , P . ; Dailey , G . M . ; Cattoglio , C . ; Heck - ert , A . ; Banala , S . ; Lavis , L . ; Darzacq , X . , et al . Imaging dynamic and selective low - complexity domain interactions that control gene transcription . Science 2018 , 361 , eaar2555 . ( 50 ) McSwiggen , D . ; Hansen , A . ; Teves , S . ; Marie - Nelly , H . ; Hao , Y . ; Heckert , A . ; Umem - oto , K . ; Dugast - Darzacq , C . ; Tjian , R . ; Darzacq , X . Evidence for DNA - mediated nu - clear compartmentalization distinct from phase separation . eLife 2019 , 8 , e47098 . ( 51 ) Trojanowski , J . ; Frank , L . ; Rademacher , A . ; M¨ucke , N . ; Grigaitis , P . ; Rippe , K . Tran - scription activation is enhanced by multivalent interactions independent of phase sep - aration . Molecular Cell 2022 , 82 , 1878 – 1893 . 25 ( 52 ) Liu , W . ; Samanta , A . ; Deng , J . ; Akintayo , C . O . ; Walther , A . Mechanistic Insights into the Phase Separation Behavior and Pathway - Directed Information Exchange in all - DNA Droplets . Angewandte Chemie - International Edition 2022 , 61 , e202208951 . ( 53 ) Henninger , J . E . ; Oksuz , O . ; Shrinivas , K . ; Sagi , I . ; LeRoy , G . ; Zheng , M . M . ; An - drews , J . O . ; Zamudio , A . V . ; Lazaris , C . ; Hannett , N . M . , et al . RNA - mediated feed - back control of transcriptional condensates . Cell 2021 , 184 , 207 – 225 . ( 54 ) Nagashima , R . ; Hibino , K . ; Ashwin , S . ; Babokhov , M . ; Fujishiro , S . ; Imai , R . ; Nozaki , T . ; Tamura , S . ; Tani , T . ; Kimura , H . ; Shribak , M . ; Kanemaki , M . T . ; Sasai , M . ; Maeshima , K . Single nucleosome imaging reveals loose genome chromatin networks via active RNA polymerase II . The Journal of Cell Biology 2019 , 218 , jcb . 201811090 . ( 55 ) Feric , M . ; Sarfallah , A . ; Dar , F . ; Temiakov , D . ; Pappu , R . V . ; Misteli , T . Mesoscale structure - function relationships in mitochondrial transcriptional condensates . Proceed - ings of the National Academy of Sciences USA 2022 , 119 , e2207303119 . ( 56 ) Sato , Y . ; Hilbert , L . ; Oda , H . ; Wan , Y . ; Heddleston , J . M . J . ; Chew , T . - L . T . L . ; Zaburdaev , V . ; Keller , P . ; Lionnet , T . ; Vastenhouw , N . ; Kimura , H . Histone H3K27 acetylation precedes active transcription during zebraﬁsh zygotic genome activation as revealed by live - cell analysis . Development 2019 , 146 , dev179127 . ( 57 ) Chan , S . H . ; Tang , Y . ; Miao , L . ; Darwich - Codore , H . ; Vejnar , C . E . ; Beaudoin , J . D . ; Musaev , D . ; Fernandez , J . P . ; Benitez , M . D . ; Bazzini , A . A . ; Moreno - Mateos , M . A . ; Giraldez , A . J . Brd4 and P300 Confer Transcriptional Competency during Zygotic Genome Activation . Developmental Cell 2019 , 49 , 867 – 881 . e8 . ( 58 ) Hadzhiev , Y . et al . A cell cycle - coordinated Polymerase II transcription compartment encompasses gene expression before global genome activation . Nature Communications 2019 , 10 , 691 . 26 ( 59 ) Goldberg , I . G . ; Allan , C . ; Burel , J . - M . ; Creager , D . ; Falconi , A . ; Hochheiser , H . ; John - ston , J . ; Mellen , J . ; Sorger , P . K . ; Swedlow , J . R . The Open Microscopy Environment ( OME ) Data Model and XML ﬁle : open tools for informatics and quantitative analysis in biological imaging . Genome Biology 2005 , 6 , R47 . ( 60 ) Schindelin , J . et al . Fiji : an open - source platform for biological - image analysis . Nature Methods 2012 , 9 , 676 – 682 . ( 61 ) Legland , D . ; Arganda - Carreras , I . ; Andrey , P . MorphoLibJ : integrated library and plu - gins for mathematical morphology with ImageJ . Bioinformatics 2016 , 32 , 3532 – 3534 . ( 62 ) Hoﬀmann , M . ; Fr¨ohner , C . ; No´e , F . ReaDDy 2 : Fast and ﬂexible software frame - work for interacting - particle reaction dynamics . PLoS Computational Biology 2019 , 15 , e1006830 . Supporting Information Available Methods and Materials Zebraﬁsh husbandry and collection of embryos All zebraﬁsh husbandry was performed in accordance with the EU directive 2010 / 63 / EU and German animal protection standards ( Tierschutzgesetz § 11 , Abs . 1 , No . 1 ) and is un - der supervision of the government of Baden - W¨urttemberg , Regierungspr¨asidium Karlsruhe , Germany ( Aktenzeichen35 - 9185 . 64 / BH KIT ) . Immunoﬂuorescence staining of zebraﬁsh embryo animal caps Zebraﬁsh embryos in the sphere stage were collected as previously explained . 27 In particular , wild - type adult ﬁsh ( AB strain from the Zebraﬁsh International Resource Center , maintained 27 at the European Zebraﬁsh Resource Center ) were set up for spontaneous mating , eggs were collected and chorions removed by treatment with pronase . Embryos were maintained in 0 . 3X Danieau’s solution , and transferred into 0 . 3X Danieau’s supplemented with 2 % formaldehyde and 0 . 2 % Tween - 20 for ﬁxation . Permeabilization was carried out by 15 min exposure to 0 . 5 % Triton X - 100 in phosphate - buﬀered saline ( PBS , Dulbeccos’s formulation ) at room temperature . After two washes in PBS with 0 . 1 % Tween - 20 ( PBST ) , 30 min of blocking with 4 % Bovine Serume Albumin ( BSA ) in PBST followed . Samples were then incubated at 4 ◦ C overnight with primary antibodies against Pol II S2P ( Abcam ab193468 , rabbit IgG monoclonal , clone EPR18855 , dilution 1 : 300 ) and Pol II S5P ( Active Motif , rat IgG monoclonal , clone 3E8 , dilution 1 : 300 ) in 4 % BSA - PBST . After 3 washes in PBST , the samples were again incubated overnight with secondary antibodies ( ThermoFisher , anti - rat polyclonal conjugated with Alexa 594 , dilution 1 : 300 ; ThermoFisher anti - rabbit polyclonal conjugated with STAR RED , dilution 1 : 300 ) in 4 % BSA - PBST . Samples were washed 3 times in PBST , post - ﬁxed in 2 % formaldehyde in PBS for 15 min at room temperature , again washed 3 times in PBST . Mounting was carried out by placing animal caps immersed in non - setting mounting media ( VectaShield H - 1000 ) supplemented with 1 . 6 µ M Hoechst 33342 between adhesive strips spaced 2 - 4 mm apart , which were covered with thickness - selected # 1 . 5 glass cover - slips . The assembled sample was then sealed with nail polish . Preparation of ﬂow cells on microscope slides Flow cells were prepared by placing strips of double - sided tape on glass microscope slides to form several channels . To block surfaces for binding , the ﬂow cells were incubated with 2 % bovine serum albumin ( BSA ) for 5 min . After removing the remaining solution with a chemical wipe , the microscope slides were air - dried . Then cover slips were placed on the microscope slides . For imaging , the ﬂow cell channels were ﬁlled with sample solution and sealed with silicone grease . 28 Preparation of DNA - nanomotif suspensions Oligonucleotide preparation . Oligonucleotides were purchased from biomers . net and Integrated DNA Technologies ( IDT ) with puriﬁcation by standard desalting ( unmodiﬁed strands ) or HPLC ( ﬂuorophore - tagged strands ) . The individual strand sequences were taken from previous work 5 and adapted as detailed in Supplementary Table S1 . Individual oligonucleotide preparations were dissolved in 1X TE at 200 µ M and stored at - 20 ° C up until preparation of mixtures needed for a given experiment . Nanomotif formation . To produce the diﬀerent nanomotifs ( Figure 2A , B ) , the corresponding DNA - oligomers were separately mixed together in 25 µ l of 2X TE with 700 mM NaCl . The solutions were then heated up with a thermocycler ( Eppendorf Mastercycler X50 ) to 85 ° C for 3 min , before decreasing the temperature at a rate of - 1 ° C / min to 40 ° C . How the diﬀerent star - motifs aﬀect the Y - motif droplets was investigated by ﬁrst preparing all components separately ( 5 . 0 µ M Y - motif and 1 . 65 µ M star - motif ) , then mixing both parts in equal proportions and heating up to 60 ° C before decreasing the temperature at a rate of - 1 ° C / min . Annealed nanomotifs were used immediately . Inhibition of amphiphile with poly - A blocker elements . Nanomotifs were prepared separately , ( 10 . 0 µ M Y - motif and 5 . 0 µ M amphiphile - motif ) . Then , 4 . 44 µ M Y - motif and 2 . 22 µ M amphiphile - motif were mixed together with 22 . 2 µ M of a 10 - nt poly - A blocker ( for sequences see Supplementary Table S1 ) . Control solutions were prepared by the substitution of the poly - A blocker solution with an equivalent amount of water . The samples were heated up to 60 ° C , then the temperature was decreased at a rate of - 1 ° C / min to 40 ° C before imaging the samples . Time - lapse of amphiphile - droplet interaction . Time - lapse experiments were performed by ﬁrst preparing 20 . 0 µ M Y - motif and 15 . 0 µ M of amphiphile - motif in separate tubes , then mixing 10 . 0 µ M of the Y - motif solution with 29 7 . 5 µ M of the amphiphile - motif solution ( concentrations in ﬁnal mixture ) . The mixture was then added to preheated ( 40 ° C ) ﬂow cells and imaged at 40 ° C for up to 4 h . Time - course of amphiphile - droplet interaction with incubation in a thermo - cycler . The time - lapse experiments were repeated at 50 ° C , assuming that the nanomotifs reor - ganize faster at elevated temperature . Here , 10 . 0 µ M of Y - motif and 15 . 0 µ M of amphiphile - motif and control - motif were prepared separately , before mixing 5 . 0 µ M Y - motif and 7 . 5 µ M amphiphile - motif or control - motif together ( concentrations in ﬁnal mixture ) . Several tubes were prepared and incubated at 50 ° C in a thermocycler . Every 10 min , an amphiphile - motif and a control - motif sample were retrieved from the thermocycler and injected into preheated ﬂow cells ( 40 ° C ) for imaging ( ambient temperature 40 ° C ) . Titration of amphiphile - motifs . Titration experiments were conducted by preparing 30 . 0 µ M of Y - motifs and 22 . 5 µ M of amphiphile - motifs and control - motifs in 3 separate tubes . Then , 6 tubes of 15 µ M Y - motif and 11 . 25 µ M amphiphile and control - motif were mixed together . In the ﬁrst tube , only 11 . 25 µ M of control - motif were added . In the following tubes , the control - motif was replaced with amphiphile - motifs in 20 % - steps , so that the last tube only contained amphiphile - motifs and Y - motifs . These tubes were then heated up to 60 ° C and cooled down at a rate of - 1 ° C / min to 40 ° C . For imaging , the diﬀerent samples were injected in prewarmed ﬂow cells ( 40 ° C ) and imaged at 40 ° C . Imaging procedure . Samples were visualized using an instant structured illumination microscope ( iSIM ) from VisiTech . Before injection , ﬂow cells were heated up to 40 ° C . Microscopy of the samples was carried out in a heated microscope stage enclosure at a temperature of 40 ° C . 30 Microscopy and image analysis Zebraﬁsh embryos Confocal microscopy images were obtained using a VisiTech iSIM microscope , which is a commercial implementation of a microscope based on the the instant - SIM principle . 37 The microscope is based on a Nikon Eclipse Ti2 microsope body . A motorized correction collar oil immersion objective ( CFI SR HP Apo TIRF 100XAC Oil , NA 1 . 49 ) was used . Images were acquired with a single ORCA - Flash4 . 0 V3 camera with sequential acquisition of color channels for maximal positional accuracy and minimal cross - talk . To limit the analysis to conventional gene and enhancer loci , nuclei with visible miR - 430 - associated foci were excluded from the data set . 56 – 58 The analysis of ﬂuorescence intensities and shapes of Pol II clusters was carried out following our previous work , 27 using MatLab for analysis and the Open Microscopy Envi - ronment bioformats plugin for data import . 59 In brief , a two - step segmentation pipeline was applied , ﬁrst segmenting cell nuclei by Otsu - thresholding of the DNA - channel , followed by robust background threshold segmentation of Pol II clusters from the Pol II Figure channel in each detected nucleus . For each detected cluster , the geometric characteristics volume and sphericity and the mean intensities in the Pol II S5P and the Pol II S2P channel were calculated under consideration of the 3D - shape segmentation mask . Mean intensities were normalized against the median intensity of the containing nucleus to compensate for variabil - ity in sample staining and image acquisition between diﬀerent nuclei and samples . Sphericity was calculated as 36 πV 2 / S 3 , where V is the volume and S the surface area of a given 3D object The raw data and the image analysis code for Figure 1 is deposited on Zenodo : https : / / doi . org / 10 . 5281 / zenodo . 5242771 31 Nanomotif suspensions Nanomotifs were imaged using a water immersion objective ( Apo LWD 40x WI λ S DIC N2 , NA 1 . 15 ) . Images were recorded using dual ORCA - Flash4 . 0 V3 cameras with simultaneous two - channel acquisition to avoid displacement of objects due to consecutive acqusition of color channels . The images were further processed with the software Fiji . 60 Raw images containing the droplets formed by Y - motifs were resliced in the z - axis to generate cubic voxels and then ﬁltered using Gaussian Blur 3D with the parameters σ = 2 , 2 , 2 pixels for x , y , and z , re - spectively . To obtain image data for the volume , sphericity , and elongation of the detected droplets , the plugin MorphoLibJ was used . 61 Images were processed with the ”Morpholog - ical Segmentation” tool as object images with the gradient type “Morphological” , gradient radius = 2 and a tolerance = 100 . Images were displayed in the “Catchment basins” format . The background was removed by using the command “Remove Largest Object” . Images were further analyzed using the tools “Analyse Regions 3D” for the volume and sphericity ( surface area method = Crofton ( 13 dirs . ) , Euler connectivity = 6 ) . The raw data and the image analysis code is deposited on Zenodo . Comparison of diﬀerent amphiphiles ( Figure 2B ) : https : / / doi . org / 10 . 5281 / zenodo . 7572656 Blocking of poly - T amphiphiles ( Figure 2C ) : https : / / doi . org / 10 . 5281 / zenodo . 7572624 Continuous time - lapse on the microscope , 40 ◦ ( Figure 2E ) : https : / / doi . org / 10 . 5281 / zenodo . 7572182 Manual time - lapse , 50 ◦ ( Figure 3A and Figure S3A - C ) : https : / / doi . org / 10 . 5281 / zenodo . 7572230 Titration poly - T amphiphile ( Figure 4B - D and Figure S5A , B ) https : / / doi . org / 10 . 5281 / zenodo . 7573452 32 Interacting - particle model Interacting - particle dynamics in ReaDDy Brownian dynamics is a common approach to describe particles subject to both deterministic forces in a Newtonian sense and stochastic forces that result in Brownian motion . Particle motion is determined by an overdamped version of a stochastic diﬀerential equation called Langevin equation : d(cid:126)x dt = − D ∇ V ( (cid:126)x ) k B T + √ D(cid:126)η ( t ) , (cid:104) (cid:126)η ( t ) (cid:105) = 0 , (cid:104) (cid:126)η ( t ) (cid:126)η ( t (cid:48) ) (cid:105) = 2 δ ( t − t (cid:48) ) . ( 1 ) The particle position is denoted by (cid:126)x , the diﬀusion constant by D , the Boltzmann con - stant times temperature by k B T and a delta - correlated Gaussian noise term by (cid:126)η . Interac - tions are summed up in the potential V . The ﬂuctuation - dissipation theorem ( σ 2 = ξk B T ) and speciﬁcally the Einstein relation (cid:16) D = k B Tξ (cid:17) were applied to relate the friction coeﬃ - cient ξ , the noise amplitude σ , and the diﬀusion constant . The noise contribution is drawn from a Gaussian with zero mean and variance of one (cid:126)η i ∼ N ( 0 , 1 ) 2 . ReaDDy ( short for Reaction Diﬀusion Dynamics ) is a software package capable of nu - merically integrating the Langevin equation ( 1 ) for individual particles . Importantly , it also allows the user to include various potentials for interactions between the particles and chem - ical reactions that can convert , create , or delete particles . This kind of simulation is often referred to as interacting - particle reaction dynamics ( iPRD ) and has proven versatile enough to model and simulate a variety of biochemical systems . ReaDDy , in version 2 . 0 . 12 , was used for all simulations based on Brownian dynamics . A more in - depth introduction to ReaDDy can be found in . 62 The Euler - Maruyama method is used to integrate the Langevin equation . The evolution from a position (cid:126)x ( t ) to (cid:126)x ( t + dt ) can be written as : 33 (cid:126)x i ( t + dt ) = (cid:126)x i ( t ) + D k B T (cid:126)F i ( t ) dt + √ 2 Ddt N ( 0 , 1 ) , ( 2 ) where the eﬀects of external forces and interaction forces with other particles are summed up in (cid:126)F : (cid:126)F = −∇ (cid:32) (cid:88) external U ext + (cid:88) interactions U int (cid:33) . ( 3 ) A variety of potentials can be used to model inclusion or exclusion eﬀects and attraction or repulsion between particles . Examples include Lennard - Jones or harmonic pair potentials , spherical barriers or inclusion potentials . A detailed summary can be found on the website of ReaDDy ( https : / / readdy . github . io / system . html # potentials ) . ReaDDy is accessible via a Python interface , however , the core functionality is written in C + + . This way , the user beneﬁts from Python’s accessibility without sacriﬁcing optimisation for speed . Parameters of simulation The droplet simulation is a coarse - scale , eﬀective model of the DNA - nanomotif system . Our aim was to ﬁnd a parameter space for particle interaction that reproduces the experimental results . Particle concentrations and sizes are thus not directly comparable to the DNA - system . Our model for the Y - motif is a spherical particle with diﬀusion constant D y = 0 . 0352 nm 2 / ns obtained from the Einstein relation . Interaction with other Y - motifs is deﬁned by a harmonic well potential : 34 V =   12 k wp ( d − r 0 ) 2 − e , if d < r 0 , e 2 (cid:0) r c − r 0 2 (cid:1) − 2 ( d − r 0 ) 2 − e , if r 0 ≤ d < r 0 + r c − r 0 2 , − e 2 (cid:0) r c − r 0 2 (cid:1) − 2 ( d − r c ) 2 , if r 0 + r c − r 0 2 ≤ d < r c , 0 , otherwise , d = (cid:113) (cid:126)x 1 1 2 − (cid:126)x 22 . ( 4 ) After testing various parameter settings , we decided to use the following for our simula - tions : • spring constant of repulsive part : k wp = 10 − 20 J / nm 2 • depth of well : e = 2 · k B T • position of minimum : r 0 = 20 nm • cut - oﬀ distance : r c = 30 nm The amphiphile particle comprises of one particle identical to the Y - motif model and one ”tail particle” that is repulsed by all other particles via a harmonic potential : V =    12 k hr ( d − r c ) 2 , if d < r 0 , 0 , otherwise , d = (cid:113) (cid:126)x 12 − (cid:126)x 22 . ( 5 ) The following parameters were used : • spring constant : k hr = 10 − 20 J / nm 2 • cut - oﬀ distance : r c = 30 nm The diﬀusion constant of the ”tail particle” was set to D y = 0 . 0175 nm 2 / ns to model a larger eﬀective volume . 35 A bond potential deﬁnes the interaction between the two sub - particles of our amphiphile model : V = k b ( d − r 0 ) 2 , d = (cid:113) (cid:126)x 12 − (cid:126)x 22 . ( 6 ) Here , we used the following parameters : • spring constant : k hr = 10 − 20 J / nm 2 • minimum distance : r 0 = 31 nm All particles are also subject to an inclusion potential deﬁned by : V =   (cid:80) di = 1 12 k bp d ( (cid:126)x i , C i ) 2 , if (cid:126)x i ∈ C i , 0 , otherwise . ( 7 ) The term d ( (cid:126)x i , C i ) 2 represents the shortest distance between the particle position (cid:126)x i and the boundary of a cube C i = [ origin i , origin i + extent i ] . We used the following parameters : • spring constant : k bp = 10 − 20 J / nm 2 • extent of box = 800 nm The box was centered in a simulation volume of extension 1x1x1 µ m . Simulation of time series Simulations for the time series comprised of two steps : In the ﬁrst step , 450 Y - motif particles were randomly placed in a spherical volume of radius 200 nm and simulated for 10 6 time steps of 0 . 5 ns and 60 ◦ C . The ﬁnal conﬁguration containing preformed droplets was used for the second step . Here , 450 additional Y - motifs ( as control case ) or amphiphile - motifs were 36 randomly added into a volume of 0 . 8x0 . 8x0 . 8 µ m , without creating particle overlaps . The system was then simulated for 5 · 10 6 steps of 0 . 5 ns and a reduced temperature of 40 ◦ C . This process was repeated for 10 independent simulations , using the standard interaction parameters deﬁned above . Simulation of titration Simulations for the titration split 450 particles between the models for Y - motif and amphiphile - motif . The amphiphile percentage was increased from 0 % to 100 % in steps of 10 % . 20 independent simulations for each case were produced containing 10 6 time steps of 0 . 5 ns at a temperature of 60 ◦ C . Initially , particles were randomly distributed in a spherical volume of radius 200 nm . Interaction parameters were identical to the ones discussed earlier . Detection and evaluation of simulated droplets Droplets in the simulations were detected by using the DB scan algorithm as implemented in the python package scikit - learn ( version 1 . 1 . 2 ) . If not speciﬁed otherwise , a minimum sample number of 10 and a maximum distance of 40 nm between particles were used . As a proxy for the volume of each droplet , the number of particles per droplet was calculated . Alternatively , we discretized the simulation box into cubes of 10 nm edge length and counted the number of ﬁlled boxes for each droplet . This approach introduces a limited resolution , as one voxel can contain multiple particles and structure is not resolved for scales smaller than the box length . Sphericity was calculated by using the python package jakteristics in version 0 . 5 . 0 ( see https : / / github . com / jakarto3d / jakteristics ) which calculates the sphericity of a point cloud as ratio between the largest and the smallest eigenvector . 37 Lattice model The dispersal of Y - motif droplets by an addition of amphiphile - motifs was also studied by numerical simulation in a square lattice system with speciﬁc particle - particle interaction and excluded volume eﬀects . The dynamic Monte - Carlo simulation is performed on a 64 × 64 two - dimensional lattice with periodic boundary conditions . Y - motifs are represented by T - shaped particles which occupy four sites in the lattice while amphiphiles and controls are denoted by cross shaped particles which occupy ﬁve lattice sites . The negative arm ( red ) of the amphiphiles is replaced by neutral arm ( arm with a white dot in Figure 5E ) for controls . We start from a random initial conﬁguration with T - shaped particle concentration of 0 . 020 and amphiphilic concentration of 0 . 030 . Due to the arrest eﬀect of the particles resulting from their shape , a higher concentration of cross shaped motifs compared to the T - shaped motifs is needed to observe the amphiphilic eﬀect in the system . The attractive interaction between any two arms except the negative arm is given by 3 . 0 k B T while the repulsive interaction between the negative arm and other is 6 . 5 k B T , where T is the explicit system temperature and the Boltzmann constant ( k B ) is taken as unity . The neutral arm is non - interacting , it only occupies a lattice site . A single Monte Carlo sweep ( MCS ) is deﬁned when on average each DNA motif is attempted to move to any of its four directions with equal probability representing translational diﬀusion and attempted to rotate by π / 4 angle in either direction with equal probability as rotational diﬀusion . We have simulated the system for maximum of 10 8 MCS . All the movements and rotations took place using standard Metropolis algorithm , which involved change in interaction energy ∆ E and the temperature T of the system . We have kept T = 0 . 45 ﬁxed while increasing T would more likely randomize the system by thermal moves . We have measured area and circularity of the droplets from the snapshots of the system conﬁguration using connected components function in MATLAB . To compare the results with experiment and with the Brownian dynamics simulation , we measured circularity which is analogous to sphericity in 3 - dimensional system . The number of DNA motifs present in a given droplet was directly obtained via the droplet area in the unit of pixels , with each 38 pixel representing one lattice site . 39 Figure S1 : Summary of sizes and interaction parameters used for interacting - particle simulations . A ) To - scale drawing of the two types of particles used in the simula - tion . B ) Overview of attractive and repulsive particle interactions , displayed with interaction potentials that implement these interactions in the ReaDDy framework . For better visuali - sation , the energy axis uses arbitrary units and is not drawn to scale . 40 Table S1 : Strand names and sequences of nanomotifs Strand name Sequence ( 5’ - 3’ ) Y - 1 8 GCTCGAGCCAGTGAGGACGGAAGT TT GTCG TAGCATCGCACC Y - 2 8 GCTCGAGCCAACCACGCCTGTCCA TT ACTTC CGTCCTCACTG Y - 3 8 GCTCGAGCGGTGCGATGCTACGAC TT TGGA CAGGCGTGGTTG Y - 2 Atto488 [ Atto488 ] - CAACCACGCCTGTCCA TT ACTTCCGT CCTCACTG S - 1 0 GCTGGACTAACGGAACGG TT AGTCAGGTATG CCAGCAC S - 2 0 CTCAGAGAGGTGACAGCA TT CCGTTCCGTTA GTCCAGC S - 3 0 CCATGGTCCCAAGTGATG TT TGCTGTCACCT CTCTGAG S - 4 8 GCTCGAGCCGGCGCTGTAAATTTGCG TT CAT CACTTGGGACCATGG S - 5 8 GCTCGAGCCAGACGTCACTCTCCAAC TT CGC AAATTTACAGCGCCG S - 6 8 GCTCGAGCGTGCTGGCATACCTGACT TT GTT GGAGAGTGACGTCTG S - 2 Atto647N [ Atto647N ] - CTCAGAGAGGTGACAGCA TT CCGTT CCGTTAGTCCAGC S - 1 Phosphate [ Phosphate ] - GCTGGACTAACGGAACGG TT AGTC AGGTATGCCAGCAC S - 1 Poly - T TTTTTTTTTTTTTTTTTTTTTTTTTTTTTTTTTTTT TTTTTTTTTTTTTTTTTTTTTTTTTTTTTTTTTTTT TTTTTTTTTTTTTTTTTTTTTTTTTTTTTT GCTGG ACTAACGGAACGG TT AGTCAGGTATGCCAGC AC Poly - A blocker AAAAAAAAAA 41 Figure S2 : The number of detected droplets in the Brownian dynamics simulation for diﬀerent simulation and evaluation parameters A ) To select the parameters of the Brownian dynamics simulation , we carried out out a simulated titration experiment that places 450 particles split between Y - motif and amphiphile in a spherical volume of radius 200 nm inside a simulation box of 1 µm edge length . We then examined the ﬁnal number of droplets after 10 6 time steps . As the depth of the harmonic well potential introducing attraction between simulated Y - motifs increases , the peak number of detected droplets shifts towards higher amphiphile concentrations . We selected a value of 2 k b T as the resulting curve resembles the experimental observation . B ) Keeping the depth of the well potential ﬁxed at 2 k b T and decreasing the repulsion between ampihpihle and all other particles resulted in a continuous increase of droplet number , conﬁrming that the ration of attractive to repulsive interactions determines the shape of the curve . C ) Droplets were detected with the DB - scan algorithm using a minimum number of 10 particles for classiﬁcation as cluster / droplet . Changing this value by 5 particles inﬂuences the shape of the curve but not the qualitative behaviour . D ) In a similar fashion , the maximum distance between particles of one cluster can be varied from the 40 nm we settled on , without changing the qualitative behaviour of the curve . Panel A averages over 3 independent simulation runs , panels B , C , and D use 20 simulation runs with well potential depth of 2 k b T . 42 Figure S3 : Time - course of droplet dispersal upon addition of amphiphile - motifs . A ) Representative confocal microscopy sections showing the distribution of Y - motifs in ﬂow cells prepared at 10 - min time intervals after amphiphile - motifs were added to preformed Y - motif droplets ( 0 min ) . Several tubes prepared in this manner were maintained at a stable temperature of 50 ◦ C , control - motif samples were processed alongside amphiphile - motifs ex - periments . B ) Sphericity - volume distributions obtained from the analysis of confocal images . Three - dimensional analysis was carried out in image stacks ( image stacks were acquired at 7 ﬁelds of view per sample and time point , data pooled from one experiment . Number of droplets , amphiphile - motif addition : n = 21123 , 4110 , 1044 , 437 , 239 ; control - motif addition : n = 6191 , 5775 , 2707 , 1890 , 1969 . C ) Time courses of the number of droplets per ﬁeld of view ( mean ± SEM , n = 7 ﬁelds of view per time point ) , volume of droplets ( standard boxplots , all droplet volumes included ) , and the sphericity of large droplets ( volumes ≥ 0 . 125 µ m 3 included ) . 43 Figure S4 : Time series of amphiphile - mediated droplet dispersal obtained from interacting - particle simulations A ) To simulate the time - lapse experiment , either amphiphile - motifs or control - motifs were added to a simulation containing preformed Y - motif droplets . The preformed droplets were generated by adding 450 Y - motifs to a simulation box of 1x1x1 µ m and simulating for 10 6 steps at a temperature of 60 ◦ C . Following this step , 450 additional amphiphiles or Y - motifs serving as control were added at random positions in a way that particle overlaps are prevented . 5 · 10 6 additional steps at a temperature of 40 ◦ C were then carried out . Representative z - slices of 200 nm thickness from both simulation cases are shown . Both simulations started from the same initial conﬁguration . Control motifs were implemented identically to Y - motifs and are also displayed in blue color . B ) 10 simulations for each case were used to generate distributions of sphericity versus particle number per droplet . C ) The number of droplets per simulation ( mean ± SEM , n = 10 simulations ) and boxplots for particle number per droplet and sphericity are shown for diﬀerent time points . 44 Figure S5 : Repeat of the amphiphile titration experiment . A repeat of the titra - tion experiment described in ﬁgure 4 resulted in similar behaviour . Y - motifs , control motifs ( no poly - T extension ) , and amphiphile - motifs were separately prepared , mixed at diﬀerent percentages of amphiphile motif , transiently heated ( 60 ◦ C ) , and injected into ﬂow cells for microscopy ( ambient temperature 40 ◦ C ) . As the volume fraction of amphiphile increases , the number of droplets and the percentage of larger droplets with high sphericity transiently increases . A ) Changes of the number of droplets per ﬁeld of view with amphiphile concen - tration ( mean ± SEM , n = 14 , 13 , 14 , 14 , 14 , 14 ﬁelds of view ) . B ) Sphericity - volume distri - butions obtained from the analysis of confocal image stacks ( image stacks were acquired at up to ﬁve ﬁelds of view per sample , n = 11206 , 14718 , 11207 , 8609 , 12740 , 5708 droplets , data pooled from N = 14 , 14 , 13 , 13 , 14 , 14 total ﬁelds of view pooled from three independent experimental repeats ) . Small droplets ( volume ≤ 0 . 125 µ m 3 ) were excluded in calculation of percentages . 45 Figure S6 : Analysis of lattice simulation A ) Time - lapse snapshots for lattice simulation are illustrated when amphiphile and control motifs are introduced in the system of T - shaped DNA motifs separately . The simulations has been carried out on a 64 X 64 lattice system . B ) Mean number of droplets per simulation ( mean ± SEM , n = 25 simulations ) is shown as time progresses and C , D ) Boxplots for time - lapse simulation are presented for particle number per droplet and circularity respectively . 46