Current Biology 19 , 1389 – 1395 , August 25 , 2009 ª 2009 Elsevier Ltd All rights reserved DOI 10 . 1016 / j . cub . 2009 . 06 . 044 Report Integration of Single and Multicellular Wound Responses Andrew G . Clark , 1 , 4 Ann L . Miller , 1 Emily Vaughan , 2 Hoi - Ying E . Yu , 2 Rhiannon Penkert , 2 and William M . Bement 1 , 2 , 3 , * 1 Department of Zoology 2 Program in Cellular and Molecular Biology 3 Laboratory of Molecular Biology University of Wisconsin - Madison , Madison , WI 53706 , USA Summary Single cells and multicellular tissues rapidly heal wounds . These processes are considered distinct , but one mode of healing—Rho GTPase - dependent formation and closure of a purse string of actin ﬁlaments ( F - actin ) and myosin - 2 around wounds—occurs in single cells [ 1 , 2 ] and in epithelia [ 3 – 10 ] . Here , we show that wounding of one cell in Xenopus embryos elicits Rho GTPase activation around the wound and at the nearest cell - cell junctions in the neighbor cells . F - actin and myosin - 2 accumulate at the junctions and around the wound itself , and as the resultant actomyosin array closes over the wound site , junctional F - actin and myosin - 2 become mechanically integrated with the actin and myosin - 2 around the wound , forming a hybrid purse string . When cells are ablated rather than wounded , Rho GTPase activation and F - actin accumulation occur at cell - cell junctions surrounding the ablated cell , and the purse string closes the hole in the epithelium . Elevation of in - tracellular free calcium , an essential upstream signal for the single - cell wound response [ 2 , 11 ] , also occurs at the cell - cell contacts and in neighbor cells . Thus , the single and multicellular purse string wound responses represent points on a signaling and mechanical continuum that are integrated by cell - cell junctions . Results Single and multicellular wound repair are generally considered separately , the former being viewed in terms of plasma membrane resealing [ 11 ] and the latter being viewed in terms of cell migration [ 12 ] . However , there is one area of striking overlap : wounds [ 3 – 10 , 13 ] or apoptosis [ 14 ] in simple epithelia of a variety of systems trigger formation and closure of rings of actin ﬁlaments ( F - actin ) and myosin - 2 ( actomyosin ‘‘purse strings’’ ) that close the hole in the epithelium , similar to the formation and closure of a ring of F - actin and myosin - 2 over woundsmadein Xenopus oocytes [ 1 , 15 , 16 ] . Whetherthesimi - larity of the two responses is anything more than superﬁcial is unknown , although in both cases the small GTPases Rho and Cdc42 are essential for the wound response [ 2 , 5 , 8 , 9 , 13 , 14 ] . To explore the relationship between the single and the multi - cellular purse string wound response , we utilized Xenopus embryos , whichprogress from large , relatively undifferentiated cells ( blastomeres ) to much smaller , relatively differentiated cells ( embryonic epithelia ) within several hours . Embryos were labeled with eGFP - rGBD , a probe for active Rho [ 2 ] , and then laser wounded . When blastomeres were wounded near the cell center , a zone of active Rho rapidly formed and closed around the wounds ( Figure 1A ) , consistent with results from oocytes [ 2 ] . Strikingly , when wounds were made near cell - cell boundaries , Rho was activated not only around the wound itself , but also at the nearest cell - cell contacts ( Figure 1B ) . After Rho activation , the cell - cell contact moved inward , eventually merging with the zone of active Rho around the wound ( Figure 1B ) . For conﬁrmation that the apparent Rho activation in neighboring cells did not simply reﬂect high levels of signal concentrating at the site of cell - cell contact in wounded cells , embryos were mosaically labeled with eGFP - rGBD and lightly labeled cells adjacent to heavily labeled cells were wounded . Neighbor cells clearly activated Rho at the nearest cell - cell contact , and , again , the region of high Rho activity moved inward toward the zone of Rho activity around the wound ( Figure 1C ; Movie S1 , available online ) . By varying the position or size of the wound , it was possible to elicit Rho activation at two ( Figure 1D ; Movie S2 ) , three ( Figure S1 ) , four ( Figure S2 ) , or more cell - cell contacts . Rho activation at cell - cellcontactsappearedtooccuratleastasquicklyasactivationaroundthewoundsthemselves ( Figure 1B ) , suggesting that cell - cellcontactRhoactivationworksinparallelwiththewound edge response rather than being downstream of wound edge signaling . Consistent with this notion , the onset of Rho activity at contacts began at 12 . 4 6 1 . 4 s after wounding , whereas the rise at the wound edge began at 20 . 5 6 1 . 7 s ( mean 6 SEM ; p < 0 . 001 , n = 14 ) . The relative autonomy of cell - cell contact Rho activation was underscored by experiments in which the contacts themselves were subjected to laser wounding : Rho activation clearly ensued at the contact remnants beyond the wound before the rest of the cortex responded ( Figure S3 ) . The ingression of the cell - cell contacts toward the wound implied the involvement of F - actin , an essential component of contractile arrays . For testing of this point , embryos were microinjected with both eGFP - rGBD and mCherry - UtrCH , a probe for F - actin [ 12 ] . In mosaically labeled embryos , F - actin accumulated at cell - cell contacts shortly after Rho accumula - tion and moved inward ( Figure 2A ; Movie S3 ) , conﬁrming the involvement of F - actin . Double - label z - movies revealed that Rho activation and F - actin accumulation ﬁrst occur at the ad - herens junctions and then spread basally as the response develops ( Figure S4 ) . More detailed analysis of the movements of cell - cell junctions revealed that initially responding junc - tions ingressed quickly toward the wound edge purse string and then slowed as the two started to overlap , forming the hybrid purse string ( Figure S5 ) . From that point onward , the two display mechanical continuity , such that the edges of the wound purse string move toward the cell - cell contacts , re - sulting in a ﬁnal center point of the purse string that is shifted relative to the original center point ( Figure S5 ) . In contrast , in the absence of a junctional response , the closing purse string remains focused on the original wound site ( Figure S5 ) . The above observations suggested that the junctional wound response could maintain epithelial integrity after * Correspondence : wmbement @ wisc . edu 4 Currentaddress : MaxPlanckInstitute - CBG , Pfotenhauerstraße108 , 01307 Dresden , Germany wounding and that it could integrate the single and multicel - lular wound responses . We initially sought to test the ﬁrst idea by microinjecting blastomeres with C3 exotransferase to inhibit Rho . However , upon wounding , junctions in C3 - in - jected cells dissolved ( not shown ) , presumably because Rho activity is needed for proper junction formation [ 17 ] . Instead , we compared the Rho activation response of different em - bryos to wounding . In 44 / 48 cases , the neighbor cell re - sponded to wounding via Rho activation , and in all of these , tight contact between the neighbor cell and the wounded cell was maintained throughout healing ( e . g . , Figures 1B – 1D and Figure 2A ) . In the remaining four cases , wherein the neighbor cell failed to activate Rho , the edge of the wounded cell was pulled away from the neighbor cell ( Figure S6 ) . Thus , there is a tight correlation between the junctional response andmaintenance of cell - cell contacts during healing . The second idea was tested by completely ablating cells rather than wounding them . This resulted in active Rho and F - actin accumulating at cell - cell junctions around the hole in the epithelium created by ablation , forming a multicellular purse string that then closed over the hole , resealing the epithelium ( Figure 2B ; Movie S4 ) . Thus , the single - cell purse string , the hybrid purse string , and the multicellular purse string repre - sent points on a continuum that are integrated by the junc - tional response . Single - cell wounds also elicit local Cdc42 activation [ 2 ] , and multicellular purse string healing in embryos is Cdc42 - depen - dent [ 8 , 9 ] . We therefore examined Cdc42 activity by using a probe for active Cdc42 ( eGFP - wGBD ) [ 2 ] . Active Cdc42 concentrated both around the wounded cell and at cell - cell junctions ( Figures 2C and 2D ) . Because myosin - 2 is the motor that drives closure of single - cell [ 15 ] and multicellular [ 13 ] wound purse strings , the distribution of phosphorylated myosin - 2 regulatory light chain ( P - RMLC ) was also analyzed , Figure 1 . Rho Activity around Wounds in Embryos ( A ) Wound made near center of blastomere elicits activation of Rho in zone ( arrowheads ) around wound but no Rho activation in neighbor cell ( asterisk ) . As the Rho zone closes , the edge of the wounded cell is pulled away from the neighbor ( compare bar in 2 00 : 06 and 00 : 12 ) and surface - tension folds ( arrows ) form . Red dot indicates site of wound . ( B ) When wound is made near cell - cell contact , Rho is activated at cell - cell junction ( double arrows ) and then around wound itself ( arrowheads ) . By 01 : 06 , active Rho at the junction and around wound forms continuous ‘‘hybrid’’ zone ( arrowheads ) . The ragged ring of material evident around wound at 00 : 06 forms from cytoplasm that is released from the wound and sticks to the coverslip , outside the cell . ( C ) Wounding of lightly labeled cell in mosaically labeled embryo ( red dot ) shows unequivocal Rho activation at cell - cell junction in neighbor cell ( double arrows ) . By 00 : 30 , Rho zone around wound can be visualized ; by 01 : 18 , junctional Rho and wound edge Rho are spatially continuous . ( D ) Wounding of lightly labeled cell ( red dot ) in mosaically labeled embryo near two cell - cell boundaries elicits Rho activation at junctions in two neighbor cells ( doublearrows ) . By00 : 42 , activeRho atoneofthejunctionsiscontinuouswithzonearoundwound ( arrowheads ) . By1 : 24 , activeRhoatbothjunctions is continuous with the zone around wound . Time in min : s ; wounding occurred at 00 : 00 . Current Biology Vol 19 No 16 1390 with the use of a phosphospeciﬁc antibody . In wounds made distal to neighbor cells , active myosin - 2 is conﬁned to the wound purse string , whereas in those made near neighbor cells , active myosin - 2 accumulated not only around the wound but also at nearby cell - cell contacts ( Figure 2E ) . Curiously , comparison of the distribution of F - actin and active myosin - 2 at the ingressing junctions showed that although a large degree of overlap between the two was evident , active myosin - 2 was more abundant at the leading edge of the array than at the trailing edge ( Figure 2F ) . Similarly , active Rho is en - riched at the leading edge , whereas Cdc42 is enriched at the trailing edge ( Figure 2F ) , patterns which mimic those around the wound itself ( not shown , but see Benink et al . [ 2 ] ) . Analysis of ﬁxed samples also conﬁrmed that F - actin and active Figure 2 . Single , Hybrid , and Multicellular Purse Strings Containing Active Rho , Cdc42 , F - actin , and Myosin - 2 in Xenopus Embryos ( A ) Active Rho ( green ; eGFP - rGBD ) and F - actin ( red ; mCherry - UtrCH ) accumulate around wound ( red dot ) and at two nearest cell - cell junctions ( double arrows ) in mosaically labeled embryo . Junctions ingress toward wound edge Rho and F - actin ( arrowheads ) , pulling cell edges with them and eventually merging with purse string , forming hybrid purse string ( 01 : 24 ) . ( B ) As in A , but cells now distinctly epithelial and target cell ( red dot ) ablated rather than wounded . Junctions of all visible neighbor cells respond within by 00 : 12 ( double arrows ) ; junctions on right are obscured by material expelled from wound . Rho and F - actin also accumulate at junction not immediately bordering wound ( arrow ) . The resultant multicellular purse string closes over hole in epithelium . ( C ) Active Cdc42 ( green ; eGFP - wGBD ) and F - actin ( red ; mRFP - UtrCH ) in mosaically labeled embryo accumulate at junctions in neighbor cells ( double arrows ) , which then ingress toward the wound ( red dot ) . ( D ) Active Cdc42 accumulates around both wound arrowheads and nearby junction ( double arrows ) , forming hybrid purse string . Time in min : s ; wounding occurred at 00 : 00 . ( E ) SampleswoundedandthenﬁxedandstainedforF - actin ( red ; Alexa568phalloidin ) andactivemyosin - 2 ( green ; a - p - RMLC ) . Leftmostpanelshowsaccu - mulation of F - actin and myosin - 2 aroundwound made distal fromnearestneighbor ( arrowheads ) , with no accumulation atcell - celljunction ( double arrows ; 120 s after wounding ) . Middle panel shows accumulation of F - actin and active myosin - 2 at cell - cell junction ( double arrows ) near wound ( arrowheads ; 60 s after wounding ) . Rightmost panel shows junctions ( double arrows ) responding in two neighbor cells and bending inward toward wound ( arrowheads ; 60 s after wounding ) . Below each are single - channel images showing F - actin ( FA ) and myosin - 2 ( M2 ) separately . ( F ) Enlargements of responding junctions showing that active Rho ( R , green ) is relatively concentrated ahead of F - actin ( FA , red ) , active Cdc42 ( C , green ) is relatively concentrated behind F - actin ( FA , red ) , and active myosin - 2 ( M2 , green ) is relatively concentrated ahead of F - actin . Arrows indicate direction of junction movement . Samples were ﬁxed 60 s after wounding . Integration of Wound Responses 1391 myosin - 2 accumulate at the adherens junction and spread basally ( Figure S7 ) . The results suggested that the major determinant of neighbor cell response was distance between the wound and the nearest neighbor . Consistent withthis hypothesis , quantiﬁ - cation of the frequency of neighbor cell Rho activation relative to time after fertilization and distance to the wound showed that there is little correlation between time after fertilization and the likelihood of neighbor cell response , but there is a clear distance dependence ( Figure 3A ) . Speciﬁcally , wounds made within 50 – 60 m m of a cell - cell boundary often result in Rho acti - vation in the neighboring cell at that boundary , whereas wounds made more distal to cell - cell boundaries typically fail to elicit Rho activation at the boundary . Furthermore , when individual cells were subjected to multiple wounds , either near or far from cell - cell boundaries , wounds placed near cell - cell boundaries elicit Rho activation in neighbors , whereas wounds in the same cell distal from cell - cell boundaries do not Figure 3 . Distance is the Primary Determinant of the Neighbor Cell Response to Wounding ( A ) Plot of neighbor cell junctional Rho activation versus distance from wound to neighbor cell and time after fertilization . Closed circles indicate junctional Rho activation occurred , and open triangles indicate that it did not . ( B ) Wound - rewound experiment : The ﬁrst wound ( red dot , 1 ) , is close to neighbor and elicits Rho activation at junction ( double arrows , 00 : 54 ) ; the second wound ( reddot , 2 ) isnotnearaneighboranddoesnotelicitRhoactivationatnearestcell - celljunction ( doubleasterisks ) ; thethirdwound ( reddot , 3 ) isclose to neighbor and elicits Rho activation ( double arrows , 06 : 48 ) . ( C ) Rhoactivity ( detectedwitheGFP - rGBD ) accumulatesatcell - celljunctions ( doublearrows ) incellsnotimmediatelyborderingwoundedepithelialcell ( red dot ) . Dark area in middle of ﬁeld caused by material oozing out of wound . Time in min : s ; wounding occurred at 00 : 00 . Current Biology Vol 19 No 16 1392 ( Figure 3B ) . Finally , as development proceeded , and cells be - come progressively smaller as a result of cleavage , cells not immediately bordering the wounded cell displayed Rho activa - tion at their junctions ( Figure 3C ) . The single - cell resealing [ 18 , 19 ] and purse string [ 1 , 2 ] repair responsesaredependentontheinﬂuxofcalciumintowounded cells from the extracellular medium . For determining whether calcium inrush is also required for the healing response in embryos , blastomeres were wounded in calcium - free medium . This manipulation prevented Rho activation around the wound and reduced , but did not prevent , Rho activation at cell - cell borders ( Figure 4A ) . However , these results should be inter - preted with caution , given that extracellular calcium is required for proper junction function . For determining whether changes in intracellular free calcium might be associated with junctional signaling after wounding , embryos were injected with Fluo - 3 , Figure 4 . Calcium and the Embryo Wound Response ( A ) Rhoactivity ( detectedwitheGFP - rGBD ) inembryoswoundedincalcium - freemedium . Rhoactivityfailstoaccumulatearoundwound ( reddot ) , butsome weak transient Rho activation is observed at cell - cell junctions ( double arrows ) . Release of cytoplasmic contents ( asterisks ) as a result of failed resealing obscures the wound site . ( B ) Intracellular free calcium ( detected with Fluo - 3 ) increases very rapidly in neighbor cells upon wounding ( double arrows ) . ( C ) Mosaic labeling conﬁrms elevation of calcium in neighbor cells ( double arrows ) . ( D ) Calcium elevation detected with mRFP - C2 ; immediately after wounding , calcium is elevated at plasma membrane around wound ( arrowheads ) and nearby cell - cell junctions ( arrows ) . Calcium remains elevated at ingressing cell - cell junctions . ( E ) Calcium elevation detected with mRFP - C2 and mosaic labeling . Lightly labeled cell is wounded ( red dot ) , resulting in instant elevation of calcium at nearby junctions with more heavily labeled bordering cells ( arrows ) . Junctions with elevated calcium ingress toward wound . ( F ) Detection of calcium elevation with the use of mRFP - C2 ; immediately upon wounding , calcium is elevated not only at cell - cell junctions around wound site ( arrows ) but also at junctions in cells that do not immediately border the wound ( double arrows ) . ( G ) DoublelabelingofcalciumandactiveCdc42withmRFP - C2 ( red ) andeGFP - wGBD ( green ) . Spatialpatternofcalciumelevationalongjunctions ( arrows ) is followed by Cdc42 activation in the same pattern ( arrowheads ) . Time in min : s ; wounds made at 00 : 00 . Integration of Wound Responses 1393 a calcium reporter [ 20 ] . Wounding triggered an increase in intracellular free calcium around the wound site , as well as in neighboring cells , as quickly as could be imaged ( within 1 s of wounding ) ( Figures 4B and 4C ; Movies S5 and S6 ) . In contrast to Rho and Cdc42 , the pattern of increased calcium detected with Fluo - 3 was relatively variable : in some cases , calcium elevation in the neighbor cells was not obviously focused at the cell - cell contacts ( Figures 4B and 4C ; Figure S8 ) , whereas in other cases , it was focused at cell - contacts ( Figures S9 and S10 ; see also below ) . In those cases in which a clear increase in calcium was evident at cell - cell contacts ( e . g . , Figures S9 and S10 ) , it occurred just as quickly as it did around the wound itself , consistent with the junctions acting as local platforms for calcium signaling . Much of the difﬁculty in interpretation of the experiments performed with Fluo - 3 stemmed from some of the features of this probe in this system . Speciﬁcally , the extremely intense cytoplasmic signal increase after wounding often obscured any potential details of increased calcium in the region of the plasma membrane and cell - cell junctions ( e . g . , Figure 4B ) . In addition , the dye progressively accumulated in organelles , which prevented imaging after several hours and , even prior to that , resulted in the artifactual appearance of calcium move - ment as organelles were swept to the wound via cortical ﬂow ( e . g . , Movie S5 ) . Finally , the emission properties of Fluo - 3 pre - vented its use in double - labeling experiments with eGFP - rGBD or eGFP - wGBD . Tocircumvent these problems , weexpressed theC2 domain of Xenopus protein kinase C - b fused to mRFP ( mRFP - C2 ) . This C2domainbindstotheplasmamembranephospholipid , phos - phatidylserine , but only in the presence of elevated calcium , and has thus been employed as a protein - based probe for calcium elevation in cultured mammalian cells in vivo [ 21 ] . These results have been conﬁrmed in the Xenopus system , where mRFP - C2 was shown to target to the plasma membrane in response to elevation of intracellular calcium [ 22 ] . Consistent with the results obtained with Fluo - 3 , mRFP - C2 was recruited as quickly as could be imaged to the plasma membrane immediately around the wound ( Figure 4D ) . More importantly , mRFP - C2 consistently displayed recruitment to nearby cell - cell contacts ( Figures 4D and 4E ; Movie S7 ) at least as quickly as the recruitment to the wound edge itself ( wound : 0 . 51 s 6 1 . 7 s ; mean 6 SD ; n = 35 ; junctions : 0 . 26 s 6 1 . 45 s , mean 6 SD , n = 113 ; p = . 19 ) . Furthermore , as with active Rho and Cdc42 , mRFP - C2 accumulated at cell - cell contacts that did not immediately border the wounded cell ( Figure 4F ; Figure S11 ) . Unlike the accumulation of active Rho and Cdc42 , which occurs w 10 s after wounding , the appearance of mRFP - C2 at distal cell - cell contacts was detectable imme - diately upon wounding . The accumulation of mRFP - C2 along cell - cell contacts was typically very precise , spreading only a limited distance along the cell contacts ( Figures 4D and 4E ) . The potential importance of this observation was revealed by the fact that the regions of cell - cell contacts that ingressed toward the wound site were heavily labeled with mRFP - C2 ( 73 / 74 ingressing cell contacts showed elevated mRFP - C2 recruitment prior to ingression ) ( Figures 4D and 4E ; Movie S7 ) , as observed ( above ) for active Rho and Cdc42 . Indeed , direct comparison between the distribution of mRFP - C2 and the active GTPases revealed a striking correlation : the lateral pattern of accumulation of mRFP - C2 at cell - cell contacts almost exactly predicted the subsequent pattern of active Cdc42 and Rho accumulation , ascertained on the basis of both inspection ( Figure 4G ; Figure S12 ) and measurements of line - scan intensity ( Figures S13 and S14 ) . Discussion The results show that the response of single cells to damage is linked to the epithelial response to damage via actomyosin purse strings as a continuum , going from a strict single - cell purse string , to a hybrid purse string composed of both the wounded cell and junctions contributed by one or more neigh - bors , to a multicellular purse string closing a hole in the epithe - lium . The results also show that cell - cell junctions serve as signaling platforms for Rho , Cdc42 , and calcium and appar - ently do so in parallel with the signaling machinery around the wound , rather than being directly dependent on it . This asser - tionisbasedonthefactthatelevationofcalciumandactivationofRhoandCdc42canoccuratjunctionsthatdonotdirectly border the wound , as well as the fact that stimulation of these signaling players at the junctions occurs as fast or faster than it does around the wound . The immediate implication of these ﬁndings is that evolution could have very simply converted the single - cell wound repairresponse to themulticellular response by endowing the cell - cell junctions with the ability to generate the same signals triggered by plasma membrane damage : calcium elevation , Rho activation , and Cdc42 activation . We assume that some of the intermediate players will differ , but it is nevertheless striking that the same temporal pattern holds : an immediate calcium increase both around the wound and at the junctions , followed by activation of Rho and Cdc42 10 – 20 s later . It is also striking that the same spatial pattern holds : Rho and active myosin - 2 concentrate on the leading edge of the wound and the ingressing junction , and active Cdc42 concen - trates on the trailing edge ( see also [ 1 ] , [ 2 ] , and [ 15 ] ) . Although this represents , to the best of our knowledge , the ﬁrst demonstration of Rho and Cdc42 activation at cell - cell junctions in response to a speciﬁc signal , there is good reason to believe that the Rho GTPases are subject to local regulation at adherens junctions in a variety of systems [ 24 ] ; we therefore think it likely that the wound - induced signaling observed here will prove to be a conserved feature of epithelia . Indeed , given the evidence that Rho activation is a feature of junction assembly [ 17 ] , it is plausible that further elevation of Rho activity ‘‘beefs up’’ not only F - actin and myosin - 2 at the junc - tion but also other components , allowing it to resist the forces exerted upon it by the healing process . It remains to be determined how the signal is sent from the site of damage to the neighbor cells and beyond . One can imagine three general mechanisms : transmission of the signal from the wound site via gap junctions , paracellular signaling via release of cytoplasm from the wound , and activation of membrane channels via tension changes . We think it unlikely that gap junctions are essential ( although they could con - tribute ) , because it is hard to imagine how a signal ( calcium elevation ) could travel w 40 um from the wound site through gap junctions and then travel another 40 um into a neighbor cell in the space of a second or less ( e . g . , Figures 4A and 4F ; Figure S11 ) . Furthermore , gap - junctional transmission cannot explain why junctional Rho activation is observed when wounds are made in the absence of external calcium . In addi - tion , treatment with two different gap - junction inhibitors failed to prevent either calcium elevation or Rho activation in neighbor cells , except at concentrations that were obviously toxic ( unpublished results ) . Paracellular signaling also seems unlikely ( although , again , it could contribute ) , given that the Current Biology Vol 19 No 16 1394 pattern of calcium elevation frequently appears noncircular ( e . g . , Figure 4F ; Figures S9 and S10 ) , which is not what would be expected for a signal diffusing from the wound outside the embryo . Thus , a mechanism based on wound - induced tension changes appears the most plausible . It has the virtue of ex - plaining the remarkable speed of the initial response , the distance dependence , and the fact that the junctions can apparently function autonomously of the signals around the wound . Testing this hypothesis will require development of the means to speciﬁcally prevent tension changes during wounding and / or the means to generate a local change in tension without wounding . Experimental Procedures Embryos and Microinjections Fertilizedalbinoorwild - type Xenopus eggsweredejelliedandstoredat16 (cid:2) C until the two - cell zygote stage . For labeling of active Rho alone , either both blastomeres ( for uniform labeling ) or one blastomere ( for mosaic labeling ) of two - cell zygotes were microinjected with 5 nl of in vitro transcribed mRNA encoding eGFP - rGBD at a needle concentration of 0 . 25 mg / ml [ 2 ] . The same approach was used for labeling of active Cdc42 alone , except thatmRNAencodingeGFP - wGBDwasemployed [ 2 ] . FormRFP - C2 , thenee - dleconcentrationwas1mg / ml . ForsimultaneousimagingofbothactiveRho and F - actin , both blastomeres of two - cell zygotes were injected with 5 nl of mRNAs encoding eGFP - rGBD and mCherry - UtrCH [ 23 ] , each at a needle concentrationof0 . 25mg / ml . Thesameapproachwasusedforsimultaneous labeling of active Cdc42 and F - actin , except that eGFP - wGBD was em - ployed . For imaging intracellular free calcium , embryos were injected at the four - cell stage with 2 . 5 nl ( per blastomere ) of 2 . 5 mM Fluo - 3 ( Invitrogen ) ormRNAencodingmRFP - C2 [ 22 ] , eitheralone ( at1mg / ml ) orinconjunction witheGFP - rGBDoreGFP - wGBD ( at0 . 75mg / ml ) . Themicroinjectionwasde - layed until the four - cell stage as the Fluo - 3 accumulated within intracellular organelles within 2 – 3 hr after injection , preventing calcium imaging at later stages of development . Imaging and Wounding Embryos were mounted between slides and coverslips sealed by rings of silicon grease . Imaging was performed with a Biorad 1024 laser scanning confocal system mounted on a Zeiss axiovert microscope . Early embryos ( 3 – 5 hr after fertilization ) were imaged with a 25X , 0 . 8 NA objective ; later embryos ( 5 – 12 hr after fertilization ) were imaged with a 63X , 1 . 4 NA objec - tive . Each time point represents six optical planes separated by 1 um . Wounding was accomplished as previously described [ 2 ] , by ﬁring a laser pulse of 440 nm into the sample from a nitrogen pump laser ( Laser Sciences ) . All wounds were made in the animal hemisphere of the embryo . After collection , four - dimensional data sets were analyzed in Volocity ( Im - provision ) ; this program was also used for generating Quicktime movies . Supplemental Data Supplemental Data include 14 ﬁgures and seven movies and can be found withthisarticleonlineathttp : / / www . cell . com / current - biology / supplemental / S0960 - 9822 ( 09 ) 01321 - 9 . Acknowledgments This work was supported by NIH grant GM52932 to W . M . B . The authors would like to thank the members of our lab for reagents and advice . This work is dedicated to the memory of David Carradine , along - standing inspi - ration to so many of us . Received : March 24 , 2009 Revised : June 9 , 2009 Accepted : June 19 , 2009 Published online : July 23 , 2009 References 1 . Bement , W . M . , Mandato , C . A . , andKirsch , M . N . ( 1999 ) . Wound - induced assembly and closure of an actomyosin purse string in Xenopus oocytes . Curr . Biol . 9 , 579 – 587 . 2 . Benink , H . A . , and Bement , W . M . ( 2005 ) . Concentric zones of active RhoA and Cdc42 around single cell wounds . J . Cell Biol . 168 , 429 – 439 . 3 . Martin , P . , andLewis , J . ( 1992 ) . Actincablesandepidermalmovementin embryonic wound healing . Nature 360 , 179 – 183 . 4 . Bement , W . M . , Forscher , P . , and Mooseker , M . S . ( 1993 ) . A novel cyto - skeletal structure involved in purse string wound closure and cell polarity maintenance . J . Cell Biol . 121 , 565 – 578 . 5 . Brock , J . , Midwinter , K . , Lewis , J . , and Martin , P . ( 1996 ) . Healing of inci - sional wounds in the embryonic chick wing bud : characterization of the actin purse - string and demonstration of a requirement for Rho activa - tion . J . Cell Biol . 135 , 1097 – 1107 . 6 . Davidson , L . A . , Ezin , A . M . , andKeller , R . ( 2002 ) . Embryonicwoundheal - ing by apical contraction and ingression in Xenopus laevis . Cell Motil . Cytoskeleton 53 , 163 – 176 . 7 . Florian , P . , Scho¨neberg , T . , Schulzke , J . D . , Fromm , M . , and Gitter , A . H . ( 2002 ) . Single - cell epithelial defects close rapidly by an actinomyosin purse string mechanism with functional tight junctions . J . Physiol . 545 , 485 – 499 . 8 . Kofron , M . , Heasman , J . , Lang , S . A . , andWylie , C . C . ( 2002 ) . Plakoglobin is required for maintenance of the cortical actin skeleton in early Xeno - pus embryos and for cdc42 - mediated wound healing . J . Cell Biol . 158 , 695 – 708 . 9 . Wood , W . , Jacinto , A . , Grose , R . , Woolner , S . , Gale , J . , Wilson , C . , and Martin , P . ( 2002 ) . Wound healing recapitulates morphogenesis in Drosophila embryos . Nat . Cell Biol . 4 , 907 – 912 . 10 . Russo , J . M . , Florian , P . , Shen , L . , Graham , W . V . , Tretiakova , M . S . , Gitter , A . H . , Mrsny , R . J . , andTurner , J . R . ( 2005 ) . Distincttemporal - spatialroles for rho kinase and myosin light chain kinase in epithelial purse - string wound closure . Gastroenterology 128 , 987 – 1001 . 11 . McNeil , P . L . , and Steinhardt , R . A . ( 2003 ) . Plasma membrane disruption : repair , prevention , adaptation . Annu . Rev . Cell Dev . Biol . 19 , 697 – 731 . 12 . Fukata , M . , Nakagawa , M . , and Kaibuchi , K . ( 2003 ) . Roles of Rho - family GTPases in cell polarisation and directional migration . Curr . Opin . Cell Biol . 15 , 590 – 597 . 13 . Tamada , M . , Perez , T . D . , Nelson , W . J . , and Sheetz , M . P . ( 2007 ) . Two distinct modes of myosin assembly and dynamics during epithelial wound closure . J . Cell Biol . 176 , 27 – 33 . 14 . Rosenblatt , J . , Raff , M . C . , and Cramer , L . P . ( 2001 ) . An epithelial cell destined for apoptosis signals its neighbors to extrude it by an actin - and myosin - dependent mechanism . Curr . Biol . 11 , 1847 – 1857 . 15 . Mandato , C . A . , and Bement , W . M . ( 2001 ) . Contraction and polymeriza - tion cooperate to assemble and close actomyosin rings around Xeno - pus oocyte wounds . J . Cell Biol . 154 , 785 – 797 . 16 . Bement , W . M . , Yu , H . Y . , Burkel , B . M . , Vaughan , E . M . , and Clark , A . G . ( 2007 ) . Rehabilitation and the single cell . Curr . Opin . Cell Biol . 19 , 95 – 100 . 17 . Yamada , S . , and Nelson , W . J . ( 2007 ) . Localized zones of Rho and Rac activities drive initiation and expansion of epithelial cell - cell adhesion . J . Cell Biol . 178 , 517 – 527 . 18 . Steinhardt , R . A . , Bi , G . , and Alderton , J . M . ( 1994 ) . Cell membrane resealing by a vesicular mechanism similar to neurotransmitter release . Science 263 , 390 – 393 . 19 . Terasaki , M . , Miyake , K . , and McNeil , P . L . ( 1997 ) . Large plasma membrane disruptions are rapidly resealed by Ca2 + - dependent vesicle - vesicle fusion events . J . Cell Biol . 139 , 63 – 74 . 20 . Minta , A . , Kao , J . P . , and Tsien , R . Y . ( 1989 ) . Fluorescent indicators for cytosolic calcium based on rhodamine and ﬂuorescein chromophores . J . Biol . Chem . 264 , 8171 – 8178 . 21 . Oancea , E . , and Meyer , T . ( 1998 ) . Protein kinase C as a molecular machine for decoding calcium and diacylglycerol signals . Cell 95 , 307 – 318 . 22 . Yu , H . - Y . E . , andBement , W . M . ( 2007 ) . Controloflocalactinassemblyby membrane fusion - dependent compartment mixing . Nat . Cell Biol . 9 , 149 – 159 . 23 . Burkel , B . M . , von Dassow , G . , and Bement , W . M . ( 2007 ) . Versatile ﬂuo - rescentprobesforactinﬁlamentsbased on theactin - binding domainof utrophin . Cell Motil . Cytoskeleton 64 , 822 – 832 . 24 . Braga , V . M . , andYap , A . S . ( 2005 ) . Thechallengesofabundance : epithe - lial junctions and small GTPase signalling . Curr . Opin . Cell Biol . 17 , 466 – 474 . Integration of Wound Responses 1395