Biophysical Journal Volume 67 September 1994 1260 - 1273 Transient State Kinetics Tutorial Using the Kinetics Simulation Program , KINSIM Daniel H . Wachsstock and Thomas D . Pollard Department of Cell Biology and Anatomy , The Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine , Baltimore , Maryland 21205 USA ABSTRACT This artile provides an introduction to a computer tutorial on tansient state kinetics . The tutorial uses our Macintosh version of the computer program , KINSIM , that calculates the time course of reactions . KINSIM is also available for other popular computers . This program allows even those investgators not matmatically inclined to evaluate the rate constants for the transitions between the intermediates in any reaction mechanism . These rate constants are one of the insights that are essential for understanding how biochemical processes work at the molecular level . The approach is applicable not only to enzyme reacbons but also to any other type of process of interest to biophysiists , cell biologists , and molecular biologists in which concentratons change with time . In principle , the same methods could be used to characterize time - dependent , large - scale processes in ecology and evolution . Completion of the tutorial takes students 6 - 10 h . This investment is rewarded by a deep understanding of the principles of chemical kinetics and familiarity with the tools of kinetics simulation as an approach to solve everyday problems in the laboratory . INTRODUCTION Knowledge of kinetic constants frequently provides some of the most penetrating insights about most molecular mecha - nisms in biology and chemistry , but many molecular biolo - gists are reluctant to take on the task of evaluating these constants ( Maddox , 1993 ) . Instead , most focus on the other information required to establish mechanisms : 1 ) a complete inventory of the molecular components of the system ; 2 ) a list of the intermediates in the reactions ofthese components ; and 3 ) the atomic structures of these components . A variety of biochemical , molecular biological , genetic , and biophysi - cal methods are available to complete these tasks - but ki - netic analysis is the only way to obtain the information about the rates of the transitions between the various possible in - termediates . These rate constants are the key to understand - ing how things work , because a full set of rate constants allows one to decide which of the possible intermediates are used in a reaction mechanism , to appreciate the rates of the various steps , and to evaluate the free energy changes at each step . Johnson ( 1992 ) provides a particularly clear explana - tion of the strategy and methods used in transient kinetics analysis of enzyme mechanisms . Given their fundamental importance , why do we generally know less about the kinetic constants than other features of our systems ? Although everyone learns in biochemistry classes about the traditional tools used to evaluate the initial rates of enzyme reactions , this steady - state approach is often inadequate for detailed understanding of even simple enzyme mechanisms and is not applicable to a wide variety of pro - Receivedfor publication 7 September 1993 and in finalform 24 May 1994 . Address reprint requests to Thomas D . Pollard , Department of Cell Biology and Anatomy , Johns Hopkins Medical School , 725 N . Wolfe St , Baltimore , MD 21205 . Tel . : 410 - 955 - 5664 ; Fax : 410 - 955 - 4129 ; E - mail : pollardC jhuigf . med jhu . edu . c 1994 by the Biophysical Society 0006 - 3495 / 94 / 09 / 1260 / 14 $ 2 . 00 cesses in which enzyme reactions play little or no part . Ex - amples of largely nonenzymatic processes include the as - sembly of cellular organelles , the cytoskeleton , and the extracellular matrix ; the binding of cells to each other and the extracellular matrix ; and the activities of most ion channels . Just like enzyme reactions , none of these processes will be understood until we work out their molecular mechanisms , including the evaluation of the rates of the transitions be - tween the various intermediate states . Transient kinetics The goal of an analysis by transient kinetics is to understand the mechanism of a reaction . This approach can provide an inventory of the reactants , intermediates , and products along a reaction pathway together with the kinetic rate constants that determine the transitions between these chemical spe - cies . Both the identity of the intermediates and the values of the rate constants are important and interdependent in ap - preciating the mechanism . You can view the reactants , in - termediates , and products as the roster of players in the game . The rate constants reveal not only the rate of the transitions between these intermediates , but also the pathway through the various possible intermediates between reactants and products . As a bonus , if one knows the forward and reverse rate constants for any step , their ratio gives the equilibrium constant for the reaction . This provides a powerful connec - tion between kinetics and thermodynamics . From the equi - librium constant , one can calculate the free energy change , which provides valuable thermodynamic information about processes that may be inaccessible to evaluation by equi - librium methods . The strategy is simple : just change the conditions of the system and watch the time course as it approaches a new equilibrium or steady state . This is called transient state or pre - steady - state kinetics , because one observes the transition from one equilibrium to another equilibrium or steady state , 1260 Transient State Kinetcs Tutorial rather than the rate of a biochemical reaction running at a steady rate . Steady - state data are also useful , but transient data are frequently more informative . One frequently does steady - state experiments before transient experiments . First , the steady - state experiments generally require less material , particularly for an enzyme reaction . Second , the steady - state parameters will provide important clues required to design transient experiments . One has many options when changing conditions to ini - tiate a transient . Changing the concentration is a method for systems with two reactants or products , since mass action will drive it toward a new equilibrium . For example , one can simply dilute such an equilibrium system and watch what happens . Or one can mix two reactants and watch for the disappearance of reactants or the formation of products . An - other strategy is to change the environment of the system , for example , by changing the solution conditions ( pH , ionic strength , etc . ) , the temperature , or the pressure . Slow reac - tions taking seconds can be initiated by hand . Fast reactions on a millisecond time scale require rapid mixing equipment to change the conditions . " Stopped - flow " devices mix two solutions and inject them into a spectroscopic cuvette in - 2 ms for measurement of the time course of changes in ab - sorption , light scattering , or fluorescence . In each case , you learn about the system from watching it approach a new equilibrium or steady state , so you need some way to observe what is happening . Fortunately , one can usu - ally find a good assay for the concentrations of reactants , intermediates , and / or products - the more assays the better . Since many reactions are fast , spectroscopic assays are particularly useful . For example , one can follow absorbance , light scattering , fluorescence , fluorescence polarization , and ( recently ) even circular dichroism , electron spin resonance , or x - ray diffraction . If the system does not have an intrinsic optical signal , you can add one . For example , fluorescent probes can be covalently attached to the reactants or products to monitor their behavior , or an indicator dye can be added to the solution to measure pH or ion concentrations . With optical probes , one can usually follow concentration changes continuously during the reaction . If optical signals are not available , virtually any chemical assay will work , but one is forced to stop a series of identical reactions at various time points to measure the change in concentrations . Reactions can be stopped chemically with acid or a denaturant or physically by freezing . Slow reactions can be stopped by hand , but fast reactions require rapid mix - ing and quenching that can be achieved mechanically in a " quenched - flow " device . Even complicated chemical assays like electron microscopy and gel electrophoresis are useful , providing that the reaction can be stopped and the various chemical species are stable over the time course of the assay . For example , the products of a single step in DNA synthesis have been followed on a millisecond time scale by gel elec - trophoresis ( Johnson , 1992 ) . Having set up an assay system and watched what happens when the system approaches a new equilhbrium , one needs tools to extract the kinetic constants from the observed time courses . The strategy at this point depends on the complexity of the mechanism . If things are really simple , one can get the answer with a pencil and paper . If the mechanism is com - plicated with one or more intermediates between reactants and products , more robust methods are required to calculate the rate constants . The traditional approach seeks an ana - lytical solution , an equation with all of the rate constants . Formulation of these equations requires a good working knowledge of calculus and algebra . This approach is elegant but limited , because simplifying assumptions are usually re - quired to complete the analysis . The Michaelis - Menten analysis of enzyme mechanisms is an example of an ana - lytical solution using simplifying assumptions ( rapid equi - librium binding of substrate to enzyme , no enzyme product complex , and no back reactions ) . The required simplifying assumptions are rarely all valid . Furthermore , the mathemati - cal requirements of the analytical approach have limited the number of biologists capable of using transient kinetics to analyze the mechanisms of their favorite processes . An alternative approach is to use numerical integration by computer to simulate the kinetic data and calculate the rate constants . In principle , numerical integration can solve any mechanism without simplifying assumptions , being limited only by computer speed . Fortunately , powerful computer programs can now run on readily available computers to take almost all of the work out of the analysis . One can now decipher mechanisms on a lap top computer , a feat which a decade ago was not possible . The purpose of this tutorial is to show you how to do it without knowledge of calculus . Before working on the methods of analyzing kinetic pro - cesses , we need a word about the data required to analyze a mechanism . If your reaction is simple , perhaps only one step , you will be able to solve the puzzle with a minimum of measurements . For example , knowledge of the equilibrium constants and a single transient experiment showing the time course of the concentration change of either the reactant or product as the system approaches a new equilibrium may be enough . On the other hand , if the mechanism includes two or more intermediates or competing side reactions , you will need to measure the time course of the concentration change of several species ( as many as possible ) . Even complicated mechanisms can be solved with incomplete knowledge ofthe internal steps , providing the full time course of the reaction for those accessible species can be measured over a range of initial concentrations . This is possible because you can use a computer to find a unique set of rate constants that simulate these kinetic curves . A final point deals with the range of processes accessible to analysis by transient kinetics . Most of our examples in - volve relatively rapid molecular interactions , processes tak - ing place on a milisecond to second time scale . On the other hand , exactly the same strategy can be used to study pro - cesses on much slower time scales . One of our examples is from clinical medicine : a childhood cancer which develops over a period of months . Wachsock and Polhard 1261 VoluTe 67 Septe er 1994 KINETICS TUTORIAL You will learn how to use transient kinetics by doing some problems . You will use a kinetics simulation progam origi - nally written by Barshop et al . ( 1983 ) for use on a VAX computer . Their KINSIM program has been ported to desk top computers . The PC version was written by G . Hua and B . V . Plapp of the University of Iowa . D . Wachsstock wrote the Macintosh version called HopKDNSIME Carl Frieden maintains a pubLic domain archive of the latest versions of the KINSIM family of programs , including an automatic fit - ing program called FrTSIM , at Washington University in St Louis . FlTSIM is not yet available for Macintosh . See Frieden ( 1993 , 1994 ) for directions on how to log on to WUARCHIVE by anonymous FTP . This tutorial is available from his resource . This tutorial , HopKINSIM , and the Hop - KINSIM manual are also available on diskette from T . D . Pollard at The Johns Hopkins Universiy School of Medi - cine , Bale , MD ( please include $ 5 for production and handling ) and on the BJ Interet server at the University of Minnesota . See directions for access by anonymous FTP or Gopher in the BJ . To use the Macintosh version of KINSIM , you will need a Macintosh computer with a math coprocessor ( IlCi Pow - erbook 170 , SE30 , or more powerful recent models ) and a text editor ( Apple ' s TeachText , or you can use any word processor as long as you remember to save your file as a text file ) . To do the problems you will need either a gaphing program like Cricket Graph or graph paper and pencil . To get printouts , you can either open the output files in your graph - ing program and print them there , or get a screen dump of the HopKINSIM screen by setting the screen up the way you like it and pressing ( commandXshiftX3 ) and then printing the file named Picture 1 with the Finder . To get quick estimates of half - times , a ruler to place on the screen is helpful . To do the following problems you must know the definitions of rate constants and the relation of rate constants to equilibrium constants . Appendix 1 will provide you with these reaionships as well as the physical basis for rate constants . You will also need to know how to run the HopKINSIM program You will acquire most of these skills during the Tutorial . For details , consult the Manual provided with each version of the program . The problems start easy and become more difficult . If you are not challenged by the fit problems , skip ahead to the later problems . Open up the KINSIM Tutorial on the disk . You can either follow the tutorial on the screen or print out the tutorial , leaving the screen free for displaying kinetic data . A of the answers are given in Appendix 2 . Problem 1 : KINSIM pce and p of first - order reactons In this problem we will examine an artificial situation to get a feel for both KINSIM and rate constants . The reactio is a simple first - order change in a protein molecule , A , to a conformation with a higher intrinsk fluorescence , A ' . Reaction 1 . A - - - > A ' In real life an equihlnim would exist between states A and A ' , but for our intrduction we will pretend that the transition from A to A ' is rersible . This is a frst - order reaction , because there is only one reactant . In a it - order trasition like this , the rate of change of the concentration of reactants and products at any point in time is simply the product of the first - order rate constant ( k ) and the concentation . Rate = k + ( A ) Tasks 1 . 1 . Open up your text editor and write out the mechanism of Reaction 1 . Your mechanism should look like this : A = = A ' ( return ) * Output ( retur ) A ( return ) A ' ( retun ) Note : In KINSIM a double equal ( = = ) represents a re - versbe kinetic reaction . A single equal ( = ) is a rapid equi - hlbrium , used where the rate constants are not known . Gen - erally KINSIM runs faster with a reversible kinetic reaction . * Output signals that the concentraions of the following spe - cies will be graphed vs . time . We have decided to view the concentrations of both A and A ' . 1 . 2 . Name and save the mechanism as a text file and then close the word processor . 13 . Next , open up the HopKINSIM prgam . Inside Hop - KINSIM , open up your reaction mechanism . The computer will quickly ampile the mechanism into the mathematical equations required to calculate the time course of the reac - 1 . 4 . Under RUN , select CHANGE followed by the vari - ous parameters that you need to adjust Start with RATES . For k + 1 ( the forward rate constant ) select 10 . The units for a fit - order rate constant are s - 5 . Leave k _ ( the reverse rate constant ) at 0 , the default value . Under CONCENTRA - TIONS set Ato 1 ( the units are pM ) and leave A ' at 0 . Under TlME CONSTANIT select 1 ( second ) for the total time and 0 . 01 ( second ) for the interval between time points ( called A time ) . Optional : Under TIME CONSTANTS you can also modify the size of the time steps and other parameters that affect the rate ofthe simulation . For purposes ofthis tutorial , use the default parameters . If you need to speed up a simu - lation , read the section on TIME CONSTANTS in the manual . Optional : Under AXES , set the y axis ( concentra - tion ) to 1 FM and leave the x axis ( time ) at 1 s . The default settings will automatically adjust the axes for each simulation if you do not set them ahead of time . 1 . 5 . Under PREFERENCES under the FILE menu set the Response time to 1000 ms . This will speed up the 1262 By ~ Jua Transient State Kinetcs Tutorial calculations at the cost of having to wait 1 s to interrupt the program while running . 1 . 6 . Also under PREFERENCES , uncheck the Save Out - put Data check box . If this is checked , the output from each simulation will be saved as a tab - delimited text file that your graphing program can read , and you will be asked to name the file each time . For the problems here , that may not be necessary , but you can recheck it at any time . If your graphing program is Cricket Graph 1 . 3 , check that box in PREFERENCES . If your graphing program is something else , use your text editor to remove the first line of the sample data files ( it contains an asterisk that Cricket Graph 13 re - quires ) . Eventually you will want read the entire Manual to learn the details of how HopKINSIM works , but the brief instructions in this tutorial should be sufficient for now . 1 . 7 . Under RUN select GO to start the reaction . In a few seconds , the computer will display the time course of the reaction . ( Note : Te slope of the curve is the rate of the reaction . The slope is maximal early in the reaction when the concentration of A is highest and then declines steadily as A is depleted in favor of A ' . As explained in Appendix 1 , the curve is an exponential function . ) 1 . 8 . What is half - time for the reaction ? It is the time when half of A is converted to A ' . It may be helpful to change the axes ( under the CHANGE menu in the RUN menu ) to see the time precisely . Divide 0 . 693 by this half - time to estimate the observed rate constant ( kobs ) . 1 . 9 . What is the value of kb . ? It should be the same as the k + 1 that you entered , 10 s - ' . 1 . 10 . Note the half - time for the reaction starting from the first half - time , the time for the reaction to proceed from 0 . 5 to 0 . 75 fLMA ' . What do you find ? What is the half - time for the reaction from 0 . 75 p . M to 0 . 875 jiM ? Why do you get the same answer for every part of the reaction ? 1 . 11 . Return to the CHANGE dialogue box and vary the value of k + 1 . Change it to values between 5 and 25 s - ' . For each value selected , estimate the half - time and calculate the k0b , to reinforce the important relationship between the half - time and the rate constant . 1 . 12 . Try a simulation with a lower concentration of A , like 0 . 2 pLM . What happens to the half - time for the reaction ? Why ? ( Note : If the screen become cluttered , you can delete or hide any of the data with the EDIT CURVES command under the RUN menu . Holding down the option key lets you delete all the data curves at once . If you need to take a break from KINSIM , select QUIT to exit HopKINSIM . ) P l 2 : Rate constants for a reversible first - order raction Now that you are familiar with the properties of a fist - order reaction , we will try a simple reversible reaction . We will start with a simple imaginary reaction : a reversible confor - mational change . Protein A exists in two states , A and A ' , with an equilibrium between these two species Reaction 2 : A = = A ' . The reaction is characterized by two first - order rate con - stants k + 1 for the forward reaction and k - 1 for the reverse reaction . The equilibrium constant is K , q . K , = kjlk _ l . = ( A ' , ) / ( A ) where A ' c and A * , are the concentrations at equilibrium . If these relationships are not clear to you , consult Appendix 1 . Tasks 2 . 1 . Write out and compile this reaction in KINSIM . 2 . 2 . Observe the time course of the reaction using the following parameters : A = 1 FM ; k + = 10 s - 1 ; k _ = 5 s - l . At equilibrium , what are the concentrations of A and A ' ? Calculate the equilibrium constant from these concentrations and confirm that it matches the ratio of the rate constants . 23 . By checking the successive half - times , confirm that the time course of this reaction follows a single exponential , even though there are two reactions ( forward and reverse ) . 2 . 4 . Estimate the value of the apparent first - order rate constant ( kj ) from the half - time of the reaction and confirm its value by running a simulation with a first - order reaction and single rate constant ( k + = k , * 6 and k _ = 0 ) . From the value of kb , can you guess how kb . is related to the two rate constants for this reversible reaction ? 2 . 5 . To test your idea , run several more simulations ofthe reversible reaction , each time varying k 1 by a factor of 2 . Each time observe the shape of the curve and estimate the values of kob from the half - times . What is the relationship of kob , to the rate constants ? As a hint , when k _ 1 is reduced to 2 . 5 s - 1 , what happens to k , b ? 2 . 6 . Note the effect of changing k on the equilibrium concentrations of A and A ' . Verify that all the equilibrium concentrations of A and A ' agree with the equation given above . 2 . 7 . Also vary the value of k , . What are the conse - quences ? By now you should be confident about how kb , is related to the two rate constants . It is the sum of the two rate constants , as expected from the analysis in Appendix 1 . Problm 3 : Calculation of the rate and equilibrium constants for a c formational change We have a protein that can exist in two conformations . A ' has a higher fluorescence than A , so that we can measure its concentration spectroscopically . Our first experiment is to measure the equilibrium constant by measuring the concen - trations of A and A ' in samples containing a total of 100 p . M A + A ' . We collect the following data : Conditions pH 7 pH 8 pH 9 ( A ) 10 p . M 99 pM 99 . 9 p . M ( A ' ) 90 p . M 1 . 0 pLM 0 . 1 p . M Wahsock and PoNr 1 263 Vd1 - V me 67 September 1994 Tasks 3 . 1 . From the data in the table calculate the equilibrium constants at the three pH values . 3 . 2 . At pH 7 , what happens to the concentrations of A and A ' when the sample is diluted 100 - fold , giving a total of the these two species of 1 pM ? What has dlution done to the ratio of the two species in equilbrium ? Our experiment wfll be to mix an equiibrium mixture of A and A ' at pH 9 with some acid to lower the pH to a physi - ological value of 7 . The equilibrium shifts in the direction of A ' , so that A ' is produced at the expense of A . The total concentation of A + A ' is 100 pM . 33 . Write out and compile the reaction descnibed in the experiment in KINSIM . 3 . 4 . Display in KINSIM the data for this experiment filed on this disk under " Datafle3 . " Do this by selecting DATA in the OPEN submenu in the FILE menu . 3 . 5 . Use the half - time to estimate k , b and confirm the value with KINSIM . 3 . 6 . Select values for the rate constants k + 1 and k - 1 that fit the equilibrium and kinetic data . Remember that the ratio of the rate costants must be equal to the equilibrium con - stant . The challenge is to select the two rate constants con - sistent with the equilbrium constant that best fit the data . Your estimates should be very close to the actual values if you understand the principle . To be sure , confim the values by running a simulation . Prolm 4 : A ser . . d , reaction with an excess of one eactant - a rst - order reaction We will now consider a bimolecular reaction where two mol - ecules bind togethr to form a complex . We will use the binding of molecule A to molecule B as our example . We will use an excess of one of the reactants , B . This simplifies the analysis , because the concentrati of B remains more or less constant , so that only the concentration of A changes during the reactio This will make a second - order reaction look like a first - order reaction . 4 . 6 . What is kz , b6 when k + = 0 . 5 or 0 . 75 or 2 or 4 or 5 . , M ' s ' ? How does ki , , depend on k + ? 4 . 7 . Now set k + to 0 . 5 AM - s - ' and vary B in the range of 10 - 40 p . M and observe what happens to kt . Confirm that ids = k + B . 4 . 8 . Now vary k _ in the range of 1 to 10 s - ' with k + set at 1 pi , M - Is - I and B at 10 pM . What happens to the equi - librium concentration of AB and to kb ? How does ko depend on k _ ? 4 . 9 . What is the general expression for k . , as a function of k + and k _ ? 4 . 10 . Vary B = 10 , 20 , 30 , 40 pM withk + = 1 . M - 1s - ' and k _ = 10 s - ' . Make a plot of k . , vs . B . What is the equation of the line ? Confirm that the slope is k + and the y intercept is k . 4 . 11 . Unknown . - Now load Datafile4 . In this experiment A binds to B to form complex AB . A = 0 . 1 p . M andB B 2 , 4 , 6 , 8 , and 10 pM What are k + andk ? Problem 5 : A second - wder reaction wfth limifing co aons of both recan Again we wl examine a bimolecular association reaction of two molecules A and B . The m nism is the same as Problem 4 , but this time we will use similar concentations of the reactants . Tasks 5 . 1 . Load and run the reaction with the following param - eters : A = 1 gLM , B = 1 pM , k = 4 pM - s - ' , k _ = 0 . 2 s - ' . Under TIME CONSTANTS , set the total time to 5 s and the A time to 0 . 05 s . 5 . 2 . What is the shape of the curve ? Is it a single expo - nential ? Can one spea of k , b ? 53 . How can you analyze the reaction and obtain the rate constants under these e ? 5 . 4 . Unbnown . Now load Datafile5 . In this experiment A binds to B to form complex AB . A = 1 M and B = 0 . 5 , 1 , and 2 . M What are k + and k _ ? Reaction 4 : A + B = = AB Tasks 4 . 1 . Write out and compile the mechanism in KINSIM . Output only the concentration of AB . 42 . Set the parameters as follows : A = 1 KM , B = 10 PJM k , = 1 p . - Ms - ' , k = 0 . 43 . Run the reaction . 4 . 4 . What is the shape of the curve ? Set the y axis to 1 to see the curve well . Is it a single exponential ? Verify this in the usual way by checking the half - times along the curve and by simulating the curve with a first - order reaction . 4 . 5 . What is kb , ? How is it related to the rate constants that you used for the simulation ? Probkm 6 : A two - step a on m han - s bing folloed by a conormational change This is an example of a very common reaction in biology . Two molecules bind together and then undergo a confor - mational change . This is simply a second - order bimolecular reaction ( like Problems 4 and 5 ) followed by a first - order reaction ( like Problems 1 - 3 ) . Few new concepts are needed to understand the mechanism , but some interesting and im - portant new properties emerge from coupling the reactions . One is that the two reactions can be separated by choosing approriate conditions . Anotier is how the overall equilb - rium depends on the properties of the two reactions . Reaction : A + B = = AB = = AB ' 1264 IYOR * d Joumal Transient State Kinetcs Tutorial Note that we now must deal with four rate constants : k + 1 , a second - order rate constant with units of M ' s - 1 , and three first - order rate constants k - , , k + , and k _ 2with units of s - 1 . Tasks 6 . 1 . Load and run the reaction with the following param - eters : A = A p1 M , B = 10 ZM , k + j = 2 ±M - ' s - , k - , = 5 s - 1 , k + 2 = 100 s - ' , k2 = 50 s - 1 . Total time should be 0 . 25 s ; A time should be 0 . 001 s . 6 . 2 . Fxamine the shape of the AB ' curve . Is it a first - order reaction ? Why is there a lag at the outset ? Which reaction is rate limiting during the lag phase ? After the lag phase ? Test your hypothesis by varying the concentration of B . 6 . 3 . What happens if we vary the rate of the second re - action ? Try k + 2 = 1 or 10 s - ' . What happens to the equi - librium concentrations of reactants and products ? What hap - pens if we change the values of the rate constants for the second reaction while maintaining their ratio at 2 : 1 ? For ex - ample , try k + 2 = 10 s - 1 , k2 = 5 s - 5 . 6 . 4 . In the example in which you varied k , 2 , what hap - pened to the equilibrium concentrations of AB and AB ' ? From the equilibrium concentrations of A , B , and AB ' cal - culate the overall equilibrium constants under the two con - ditions ( k + 2 = 10 or 100 s - 1 ) . Also use the rate constants to calculate the equilibrium constants for both of the reactions under the two conditions . What is the relationship between the equilnirium constants for each ofthe pair of the reactions and the overall reaction ? Verify your hypothesis with a third set of rate constants ( k + 1 = 1 pM1s - 1 , k1 = i1 , k + 2 = 10 s ' , k - 2 = 1 s - ) and the resulting equilibrium concen - trations of reactants and products . 6 . 5 . With the set of rate constants from 6 . 1 , experiment with varying B = 4 through 5000 pM , doubling it each time . You will need to change the time constants over several or - ders of magnitude to get the data and measure accurate half - times . Estimate the values of the rate constant for the ap - proximately first - order reaction after the lag phase . ( To estimate the half - times for these very fast reactions , it may be helpful to save the output data . Use the PREFERENCES item in the FILE menu and look at the data in a graphing program . Look at the data in your graphing program and estimate kb , from the half - time . ) Plot kb . vs . B . Where on this plot can you find k + 1 and k _ 1 ? What is the relationship of the rate on the plateau to the rate constants ? ( See Appendix 1 . ) Knowing the rate on the plateau , k + 1 and k - , ( from the slope and intercept ) and the overall equihibrium constant ( from the equilibrium concentrations of reactants and prod - ucts ) , how can you calculate the values of k + 2 and k - 2 ? 6 . 6 . Now load Datafile6 . In this experiment A binds to B to form complex AB that undergoes a conformational change toAB ' . A = 0 . 1 . M andB = 1 , 2 , 4 , 8 , 16 , and32 p . M . What are the four rate constants ? First note equilibrium concen - tration of AB ' and then try plotting k b vs . B to estimate the values . Then simulate the curves with KINSIM to determine them more accurately . Pr 7 : A two - hit eacton - dissociation of the actomyosin complex This is a more complex set of paired reactions , three in total . Two have the same rate constants , making things relatively simple . This is a real example from biochemistry . The motor enzyme myosin ( M ) binds to an actin filament ( A ) by each of its two heads . Both heads must bind ATP ( T ) for the complex to dissociate . The ATP binding reactions are inde - pendent and have the same rate constants . Exactly the same mechanism explains the development of retinoblastoma in children . Two tumor suppressor genes need to be inactivated before the tumor develops . You may be able to think of other two hit reactions like these examples . Reaction : AM + T = = AMT AMT + T = = AMTT AM1T = = A + MTT k + l1k - l k + 21k 2 k + 31k _ 3 Tasks 7 . 1 . Load and run the reaction with the following param - eters : AM = 1 KM , other protein species = 0 pM , T = 10 p . M , k , j = k + 2 = 0 - 3 . M - ' s - 1 , k - , = k 2 = 0 . 001 s - ' , k + 3 = 500 s - ' , k - 3 = 10 pM - ls - . Follow the concentrations of AM , AMT , AMTI7 , and MTT . 7 . 2 . Why is there a lag ? What happens to the lag as T is varied ? 7 . 3 . If faced with these rate constants , how could you design the experiment to observe directly the dissociation reaction and evaluate its rate constants ? Simulate your ex - periment and confirm that you can evaluate the constants . 7 . 4 . Unkaown : Now load Dataset 7 . 1 . This in Knudsen ' s ( 1971 ) classic analysis of the development ofretinoblastoma . Patients with a family history of retinoblastoma develop their cancer earlier than thoe with no family history . We now know that mutations in both of the retinoblastoma genes are required for a tumor to develop . Postulate a mechanism that might explain the difference in the kinetics of tumor devel - opment in these two patient populations . Write out and com - pile your mechanism in KINSIM . In this case , you will need to define the time interval as a month rather than a second as we have done with our other examples . You will also need to define the concentration units arbitrarily , such as 100 pa - tient units . Other than that , the same reasoning is involved . Do you think that you are dealing with first - order or second - order reactions ? Are any of the reactions reversible ? Use KINSIM to find rate constants that can account for the time course of the onset of the tumor . Problem 8 : A simple enzyme reaction Here we will see how to evaluate a simple enzyme mecha - nism in which the enzyme ( E ) binds the substrate ( S ) , con - verts substrate to product ( P ) , and the product dissociates . This is a minimal mechanism , since most enzymatic reac - tions involve at least one additional conformational change of the enzyme - substrate or enzyme - product complex . Wc - h * sshx : k and Poad 1265 Voume 67 Septen * e 1994 Nevertheless , this mechanism is more realistic than the clas - sic Michaelis - Menten mechanism in which the EP interme - diate is omitted to simplify the analysis . Although the mecha - nism has three steps , you will see that it can be dissected rather easily with a few transient experiments . Although this is an imaginary enzyme , the biochemical literature is full of examples of enzymes with mechanisms similar to this . Reaction : E + S = = ES = = EP = = E + P Note that we now must deal with six rate constants : k + I and k _ 3are second - order rate constants with units of LM - ' s - ' ; the other four rate constants k - 1 , k + , k - 2 , and k + 3 are first order with units of s - ' . Also note that our task may seem complex at first , but you should be able to appreciate its simplicity when you see the reaction broken down into in - dividual steps that can be analyzed using the principles that you have leamed to dissect first - and second - order reactions . This mechanism is nothing more than first - and second - order reactions linked together . The experiments will isolate the individual reactions for your analysis . Tasks 8 . 1 . Write out the mechanism and compile it in KINSIM . 8 . 2 . If you were provided with assays for P , ES , and EP as well as a supply of E , S , and P , consider what experiments might reveal the rate constants for the various steps . Where would you begin ? Once you have designed a strategy , you will be able to call up data for the most common experiments . 83 . Choose from the following list the data file that you find most useful . Use analysis of exponentials or KINSIM to learn about the reaction . Then choose additional data files and continue until you have solved the mchanism . You should be able to determine all ofthe rate cnstants with only three experiments . The additional experiments will allow you to confirm your results . a . Steady - state rate of conversion of S to P as a function of S . b . Time course of conversion of S to P upon mixing S with E c . Time course of S bining to E as a function of S . d . Time course of Pbig to E as a function of P . e . Intrrupt steady - se production of radive P from radioactive S by adding excess cold S ; observe the time course of the release of radioactive P from E . The details of each of these sorts of experiments follow ; you may wish to think about how to do them and how to get the rate constants out of the results before looking ahead . a . This is the classic steady - state experiment . We mix a large amount of S with a tiny concentration of E ( 0 . 1 p . M ) , observe the accumulation of P over short period of time , and repeat this experiment for many different concentrations of S . The data fom such an experiment is in Datafile8a . It may help to look at the data in your gaphing pam rather than P , vs . time for S = 03 , 0 . 5 , 0 . 7 , 1 , 2 , 3 , 6 , 9 , 12 p . M . Note that there is a short lag before the slope reaches its steady - state value . Where does the lag come from ? For this steady - state experiment , we ignore the lag . Calculate the rates ( the slopes ) and plot the rates as a function of S . Note the hy - perbolic shape ofthe curve . Then plot the 1 / rate vs . 1 / S . This is the Lineweaver - Burk transformation of the data . The y intercept is called the V . and the x intercept the Michaelis constant , K . As you will recall from biochemistry , given certain assumptions ( rapid binding , slow turnover , no reverse reactions ) the K . is related to the affinity of the enzyme for its subsrte . We will see whether these values really tell us anything useful about the actual mechanism . b . This is a burst experiment that allows us to follow the time course of the first two steps in the reaction . It is ac - complished by mixing E and S and then stopping the reaction at intervals with acid in a quench flow machine . We measure and display the total P , that is EP + P as a function of time . Note that P does not need to dissociate from E to be detected . However , P must dissociate fom E before another S can bind and initiate another round of the reaction . For the experiment in Datafile8b , we mixed 100 1 , M S with 1 pM E . We observe that almost 1 mol of P is formed rapidIly before the reaction rate slows down considerably . What does the fast phase rep - resent ? ( Hint : this fast phase corresponds to the lag in ex - periment ( a ) above , when we only looked at free P ) . What rate constants control this phase ? Given the concentrations of E and S , whih reaction is rate limiting ? What can you conclude about the rate constants for the rate limiting reac - tion ? Why is there less than one mole of P released at the end of the fast phase ? What does the slow phase represent ? What rate constants control the slow phase ? Wat can you con - clude about the rate constants for the rate limiting reactions for this phase ? c . This is a simple bimolecular binding reaction , just like those we have examine above . It might be done with fluo - rescent analogue of S which gives a signal when complexed with the enzyme or if one is lucky , the fluorescence of the enzyme itself may change when S binds . In our experiments in Datafile8c , we have mixed 0 . 1 pM E with several con - centations of S ( = 1 , 2 , 4 , 8 , 12 p . M ) and followed the concentration of E with S bound . This is equivalent to fol - lowing ES + EP , since the two can rapidly interconvert From the raw data estimate the values of k + 1 and k _ , by analysis of exponentials . These will only be estimates in the absence of infoion about the second and third reactions . d . This is a simple bimolecular binding reaction , just like reaction ( c ) , except that we look at the the binding of the product , P , to the enzyme . As before , we follw the total ES + EP , but this time start with free P and no free S . All chemical reactions are reversible at some rate , and we can take advantage of this to " run the enzyme backwards . " This simple experiment can be very revealing as we shall see . Again , the experiment might be done with fluorescent ana - logue of P , which gives a signal when complexed with the enzyme or if one is lucky , the fluorescence of the enzyme loading it into HopKINSIM . lhe plot displays free product , 1266 BoWs ~ Jja itself may change when P binds . In our expefiments in Transient State Kinetcs Tutorial Datafile8d , we have mixed 0 . 1 pLM E with several concen - trations of P ( = 1 , 2 , 4 , 8 , 12 pM ) and followed the con - centration of E with P bound . From the raw data calculate the values of k + 3 and k3 by analysis of exponentials or by KNSIM . Note that since we read the reaction from left to right , k _ 3 is the association reaction , and k + 3 is the disso - ciation reaction . e . This is a chase experiment that reveals directly the rate of product dissociation . We start by mixing 1 pM E with 20 pM radioactive S and wait just long enough for the reaction to achieve a steady - state rate . Then we add 1000 FM cold S . Thereafter , essentially all ofthe S binding to E will be cold , so all radioactive P that we observe from this time point will have come from radioactive S or P bound to E at the time of the addition of the cold S . In Datafile8e we see the time course of the dissociation of radioactive P . Which reactions are being observed in this experiment ? What can this data tell you about the rate constants of these reactions ? To simulate this sort of experiment , start with zero concentrations of ev - erything except 1 pM EP , to simulate the fact that the enzyme is fully saturated with substrate at the beginning of the chase part of the experiment and all the free radioactive substrate has been competed away . Assuming EP = 1 pM is not really valid . Why not ? Nevertheless , to get started set the reasso - ciation rate for the product ( k - 3 ) to 0 , to simulate the fact that the radioactive product will not bind the enzyme again ( why not ? ) . Set the association rate for the substrate ( k , 1 ) to 0 , to simulate the fact that new radioactive substrate will not bind ( why not ? ) . Then follow the concentration of free P . You will learn that it is necessary to modify your initial assumptions to get a reasonable fit to the data . 8 . 4 . Once you have esfimates of all six rate constants , go back to the key experiments and simulate the time courses with a full set of rate constants . You should be able to fit the data exactly after making a few modifications of your initial assumptions . Now that you know all six rate constants , do you understand intuitively why the various experiments pro - duced the observed data ? Think about which reactions are rate limiting in each experiment . 8 . 5 . Calculate the equilibrium constants for each of the reactions and compare these values with the Km . In this case , is the K , , m a reliable indicator of the affinity of the enzyme for its substrate ? 8 . 6 . Compare the steady - state V . . with the rate constants for the individual steps . What does the V tell us about the mechanism ? Does it conrespond to any particular step in the reaction ? Problm 9 : Multiple iteracting components : actin , ATP , and profilin For your final exam , you can try a reaction that involves multiple interacting components . As far as we know , mecha - nisms of this complexity cannot be solved analytically . Ki - netic simulation is the only available approach . Fortunately , by building up our knowledge of the reactions one step at a time , we will be able to understand the whole process in detail . We will look at the exchange of nucleotide bound to actin and how the actin binding protein profilin promotes this reaction ( Goldschmidt - Clermont et al . , 1991 ) . The guanine nucleotide exchange proteins that promote exchange of GTP for GDP on small G - proteins probably work the same way , but the decisive experiments have not yet been done . Here is the background . Actin ( A ) is the major subunit of microfilaments . The actin monomer is stabilized by ATP ( T ) bound in a deep cleft in the middle of the molecule . This bound nucleotide can exchange slowly with free ATP in the medium . The actin monomer binding protein , profilin ( P ) , accelerates the exchange reaction and may be used in the cell to recycle ADP - actin to ATP - actin . We will measure exchange by adding the fluorescent ATP analogue , etheno - ATP ( eT ) , to actin . eT has the convenient property of being much more fluorescent when it binds to actin than when it is free , so we can easily measure the concentration of AeT and PAeT ( profilin binding does not affect the eT fluorescence ) . Reactions : A + T = = AT A + eT = = AeT P + AT = = PAT P + AeT = = PAeT PA + T = = PAT PA + eT = = PAeT P + A = = PA ( 1 ) ( 2 ) ( 3 ) ( 4 ) ( 5 ) ( 6 ) ( 7 ) Even the most enthusiastic kinetic simulator would have trouble with all of these reactions without some simplifying assumptions and your computer would get bogged down as well . Therefore : I . We will eliminate Reaction 7 , since the concentration offree A is vanishingly small . ( Actually one should leave this reaction in the mechanism to make the mechanism thermo - dynamically legitimate , but it will have little effect on the simulation . ) H . We will assume that the association rate constants for nucleotide binding to actin ( Reactions 1 , 2 , 5 , and 6 ) are the same with a value of 1 pM - ls - . ( Ihis approximate value is known from the literature and its absolute value + lOx will not affect the time course of the reaction significantly . ) HI . To keep things simple , we will assume that k , 3 = k + 4 ; k - 3 = k - 4 and k - 5 = k - 6 . Tasks 9 . 1 . First we note that profilin is involved in all but the first two reactions , so when the profilin concentration is 0 , we can look at the first two reactions alone . Write out and compile Reactions 1 and 2 . Display the data in Datafile 9 . 1 . We mix 2 pM AT with three different concentrations of eT ( 2 , 20 , or 200 pM ) . We follow the time course of the change in the fluorescence as eT replaces T bound to the actin by a fluorescence change . 9 . 2 . Search for values of k 1 and k 2 that fit the data . Assume that the initial concentration of A is 0 . Think about which experiment is most sensitive to the relative values of Wacskck and Poar 1 267 Volume 67 September 1994 these rate constants . Remember that the rate constants de - termine both the rate of the reaction and the equilibrium concentrations of the products . First look for a ratio of rate constants that gives the observed equilibrium concentrations . Start with the curve most sensitive to the values of k - 1 and k _ 2 . Then confirm the value of the equilibrium constant with other curves . Finally , maintaining the ratio of the rate con - stants , vary there absolute values to achieve a fit of the curves . Now you can proceed to the experiments with pro - filin , using the four rate constants from P = 0 as givens . 9 . 3 . In the next series of experiments , we mix 200 pLM eT with 2 jIM AT in the presence of various concentrations of profilin ( P = 0 , 0 . 02 , 0 . 2 , or 2 . 0 pIM ) . Display Datafile 9 . 2 showing the concentration of AeT + PAeT ( determined by fluorescence ) as a function of time . 9 . 4 . Search for values of k + 3 = k + 4 k _ 3 = k _ 4and k = k - 6 that simulate the experimental data . Hint : Start with dif - fusion limited association rate constants and vary the dis - sociation rate constants to bring the curves into approximate agreement with the data . You may be suspicious that the data will not sufficiently constrain the simulations for you to solve for so many unknowns . Never fear , only one set of these numbers will actualy work . Let us know if you find a so - lution significantly different from ours . How tightly con - strained are the values of the unknown rate constants ? 9 . 5 . Examine the rate constants . Why does profilin in - crease the rate of nucleotide exchange ? Note that low con - centrations of profilin can effect the nucleotide exchange of all of the actin even if the actin is present at a much higher concentration . What features of the rates of these reactions accounts for this " catalytic " effect of profilin ? This work was supported by NIH Research Grants GM - 26132 and GM - 26338 to T . D . P . and by Medical Scientist Traiing Program Grant GM - 07309 that supported DIH . W . We are grateful to Enrique De La Cruz and the participants in the 1993 Physiology Course at the Marine Biological Laboratory , Woods Hole , MA , for field testing this tutoriaL APPENDIX 1 : RATE CONSTANTS AND EQUIUBRIUM CONSTANTS The concepts in this section form the basis for understanding all of the molecular interactions m chemistry and biology . Most molecular interac - tions are driven by the diffusion ofthe reactants that simply collide with each other on a random basis . Similarly , the dissociation ofmolecular complexes is a random process with a probability determined by the affinity of the molecules for each other . Many other reactions ocur within molecules or molecular complexes . Together these casses of molecular interactions are responsible for all life processes . We will review the physical basis for reaction rate constants and their relation to the thermodynamic parameter , the equilibrium constant These simple but powerful principles are essential to appreciate the molecular interactions in cells . In many cases in biology , rate constants are even more important the equilibrium constants , since the rates of reactios govern the dynamics of the cell . Definitions Rate constants , designaed by lower case k ' s , are constants that relate the concentations of reactants to the rate of a reaction . Equilibrium constants are given as upper case K ' s . A very t and useful concept is that the equilibrium onstant for a reaction is related di - recdy to the rate constants for the forward and reverse reactions as well as the equilibrium concentaions of reactants and products . The rate of a reaction is the rate of change of concentration of a ratnt ( R ) or product ( P ) with time . As reaants disappear , products are formed so that the rate of reactant loss is directly related to the rate of product formation in a manner determined by the stoichiometry of the mechanism . The arrows in all of the reacion mechanism in this tutorial indicate the direction of the reaction . As a preview , here are the the relationships in the general case : Reaction mechanis R < = = > P Reaction rates Forward rate k k + [ RI Reverse rate - k [ PI Net rate = k + [ RI - k [ PI At equiibrium the net rate is 0 , so k , [ R , J = k _ [ Pj lThe equilibrium constant K is defined as K , = k + = In specific cases , these relationhips depend on the reaction mechanism , partiularly on whether one or more than one chemical species constitutes the reactants and products . We will derive the equilibrim constant fom a consideration of the reacton rates . We will begin with the simplest case where there is one reactant First - order reactions Fist - order reactions have one reactant The general case is simply R - - > P A common example of a first - order reaction is a conformational change in a protein , where A and A ' are the two conformatons Another example is the dissociation of a molecular complex such as AB - - > A + B where A and B could be two proteins or an enzyme and a product The rate of a first - order reaction is direcdy proportional to the concen - traion of the reactant ( R , A , or AB in our examples ) . The numerical values of the rate of a first - order reaction expressed as a differential equation ( rate of change of reaant or product as a function of time , t ) is simply the concentration of the reactant tmles a constant , the rate constant k with units of s - . - dR dP Rate = = - = kR dt dt The rate of the reaction has units of M s - ' where M is moles per liter and s is seconds . This is verbalized as " molar per second . . As the reactant is depleted , the rate slows . A first - rder rate constant can be viewed as a probability . For the con - formational change , it is the probability per unit time than any A will change to Al in a unit of time . For the dissociation of complex AB , the first - order rate constant is determined by the strength of the bonds hokling the complex together . This " dissociation rate constant " can be viewed as the probability that the complex will full apart in a unitof time . Note also that the probabiliy ofthe conformational change ofeach A to A * or of the dissociation of each AB is independent of its concentraion Each A or AB does its own thing . The concentrations of A and AB are only important in determining the rate of the reaction observed in a bulk sample . When thinking about a first - order reaction , it is sometimes useful to refer to the " half - time " ofthe reaction . The half - time , tuI2 ? is the time for one - half of the existing reaant to be converted to product . Tis time depends only on the rate constant and threfore is the same regardless of the startming 1 268 B $ yia Jomal Transiet Stas Kinics Tutxil rnnr _ ation of reant . The relationship is derived as folows dR = - kR dt dR so - = - kdt . R In R , - n R = - k , where R , is the initial con and R , is the concentatio at time t nlR , = hIR . - kt or R , = Re - Whcn the initial concention Ro is reduced by half 0 . 5 = - or 2 = ec tus In2 = kt so , ranIg 0 . 693 tL2 = k 0 . 693 or k = tii Themefore you can a first - rder rate comstat simply by dividing 0 . 7 by the half - time . Obviously , a similr cakllatio yields the half - time hrom a firs orcu rate consant This rets is ver handy , since one frequentl can estimate the extent of a reactioa wiht even kowing the absolute concentraions and since this reltionship is indepndent of the cxtent of the reaion at the outse of the observations To review , the rate of a fit - ordr reactio is simply the product of a constant ( k ) that is rctristic ofthe reactio and the concenatatio ofthe single reLant The constant can be obtined from the half - time of a reaW Second - order reactions have two reactants . The geneal case is RI + R2 - - > Proch A very amon example is a bimolecula association reaction , suh as A + B - - > AB , where A and B are two moleculs that bid togetdhr . Such associto reactions are very common in biology . Some examples are the binding of sdstrates to enzymes , the binding of Li to recqLos , and the binding of proteins to othe proteins or nuceic acids The rate of a second - order reactio is the product of the coar of the two reactnts , R , and R2 , and the sec ad - or rate wastant , k : dP Reaction rafte = - = kRjR2 - The units for reaioe rate are M s - ' , just like a first - order reaction . The units for RI ad R2 are M , so the second - orde rate constan , has u of M - ' s - ' . It cannot , te , be direcdy compared with a fis - order rat cousam Soving the differential equation for a second - order reaction is generaly not so simple as tha for a fist - order react It is mA just a simple ex - ponential functki except under special conditions caSled " pseudo - fir - orderreaonS . " Whenonereactant , R1 , isgratly inexcess , de tol amount of produc that can be formed is limted by the amount ofthe other reactat lherefore , little R1 will be consumed durg the reacon and its concen - taton changes negligby with time . lf R1 is constant , then the differntial - a becomes dP = kRjR2 = ( kR , ) R2 = kR2 where k , is the effecdive , or obseved , rate coistanL This is just the fir - or equaton , so the result is an exptl with a half - time of 0 . 693 / k . The value of the assotion rate cosmAa - , k + , is detmined mainly by the rate that the moeules collide ( Berg and von fipped , 1984 This col - lision rate depends on the rate of diffusion of the molecule , whidfi is de - termined by the size and shape ofthe mokcuk , the viscosity of the medium , and the - emperature . These factors are u ma d in ap r called the diff ] Sion c , with ntof cm2s - . The rate constan frollisions is desalbedby the Debeye - me quatin , simple lahip that depends only on the diffusion coefficient and the ar of interactio be - tween the molecI _ s : k = 4whA + DS ) Nel03 where b is the interacion rndius of the two particles ( mi centimeters ) , the D ' s are the diffusion coeficits of the reactants , and N . is Avogadro ' s nmber . The fxac of 10 - 3 convets the value into Mis of M - ' s - ' . For partcis the size of proteins , D is - i10 ' an - s ' and b - 2 X i0 - ' cm , so the rate constants for collisions of two proes are in the range of 3 x 10 ' M - s - ' . For small molculks like sugars , D is - 10 - 5 cms - and b is _ 10 - 7 cm , so the rate constants for coision of a protein and small molcules are - 20 times argr , in the rage of 7 x l0 ' M ' s - 1 . Onthe othf hamd , the ay observed ora constnts are on the order of 10 ' to 107 M - ' s - 1 . The differ e of 20 to 1000 is tatrbe to a steric fator that accounts for the fac that m be corcly oriented retive to each othr to actuy bind together . Thus the cople - mentary binding sites are aligned correcty only 0 . 1 - 5 % of the times that the moecules colide . Many binding reactions between two protins , between enzymes and s - sraes , and between proeins and lar molcules like DNA are " dif - fusion limhed " in the sene dtt the rate of correcdy orintd , diffon - driven collisions em the rate costL This many rate consants are in the range of 10 ' to 107 M - ' s - 1 . ( Interested readers can consl the article by Northrup and Erickson ( 1992 ) tha explains how the pIN orientation for maromolcular bining is achieved mor rendily dtn expected fom random colliam ) To review , the rate of a second - oder reactio is simply the product of a conant that is chaacteistic ofthe reaction and the concentadons of the two reactants . In biology , the rate of many bimoculr ion racons depends simply on the rate of d di n collisions between the Ire . ant Most reactions are reversible , so the net rate of a reaction wiIl be equal to the differce ofthe fo d and rvers reactions . The forward and reverse reactiis can be any obinati of first or seand - orcr realios We will stat with a pair of simple first - order , such as the conformational change : A ± A * The forwad reaction rate is k + A with units of M s - ' and the revers remacin rate is k - A ' with the same units . At eq Ak A ' Note that this equilibrium constant is unitess , since the units of con - centrabon and the rate coustant cancel out . The same r ing with respect to the equlriuM constant applies to a simple bimolclar binding reactiow A + B i± AB , where A and B are any molecule incding an enzyme , recep , s , cofacto , drug , etc . The forward ( binding reaction ) is a second - order reac - tion , while the reverse ( dissociation ) reaion is firt order . lTe opposing reactions ae Rate of associatio = + [ AIJBJ nits ; M - s Rate of dissodatin = k4 [ AB ] nits : M s - ' Mo - bock and Polmd 1269 Vdlme 67 Septe 1994 The overall rate ofthe reaction is the fonwd rate minus the revers rate : Net rate = Assoa rate - D i o rate = k + [ A ] [ B ] - k [ AB Note caefuD y at this point , de d on the vales of the rate coustants and the concentrations of A , B , and AB the raction can go for - ward , or nowhere . At eq uim the forward and revrse rates are ( by definition ) the same . Thus k + [ AJ [ BJ = k [ [ AB ] so k - [ A ] [ BJ = R , the di a constant ! k - [ AB ] These reai sunmnanarze how reaction rate constants and equi - librim arcentratuons of reactant and produs are related to each odher . The equilI riu contat for such a bimoleaular reacio can be written in two ways : Am _ n - qrium conant K [ AB ] k units : M xM D [ AJ [ BJk MXM Dissoimtion - u consant [ AIB ] = k uis : M x M [ AB ] k , M What is the half - time of a vrsible reaction ? For a simple reaction , A - Al that starts with a given concentratio of A = Av the rate of the reacion is rate = forward rate - b wad te dA * - = k + [ Al - k [ A * J - But the tobal nal is cantat , so [ AJ + [ A * ] = A , or [ A * J = A . - [ A ] anl r ke k + [ Al - k _ ( A . - [ 1AD - ( k + k _ ) [ AJ - kA = k , JAJ - kA , . This is just the first - order equation with an extra amsant on the end , which does not affect the half - time ( see your inhuctory differetial equa - tions textbook ) What maes is the coefficient ofthe reactan concentratio , so the half - time is 0 . 693 / kJ , , = 0 . 693 / ( k + + k ) IThe effective rate constant isthe smm of the rate counts . This may seem counteintutve ; why should the revere rate contant have anything to do with the time for the forward reaction ? The reaso is that the time corse of the reaction is not the time to convert a of the A into A * , but isthetime to rca equllbrium . The larger the reverse rate co , tant , the lem A * wll be present at equilibrium , and the faster the reacion winl go fr 100 % A to the equlibrium mixhtre . For the bimolular reaction A + B - AB , the diffe l equ is rate = k AI [ B ] A - k - [ AB ] as above . The geneal solubion of this equation i complcated , which is why nu - meil it ng prgrams ( like HopKINSIM ) are so useful for real - life reactions . However , the pseud - first - order apprato above can be use - ful in this case . lf B is in great excess , then [ AB ] will be limited by the conacnAtion of A and the a o n of B will be effectively costant , and rate = k + [ AJ [ B ] - k [ AB ] = ( k + [ BIlAJ - k _ ( A . - [ A ] ) = ( k + [ B ] + k _ ) [ AJ + aconstant and the apparn rate constan is k , [ B ] + k - . Thus , pltting [ B ] vs . apparent rate constant ( which can be estimated from the half - time of the reaction ) gives a line with a y inteept of k - and slope of k + . Remember , the con - cen < ra of B must be much higher than dtat of A to use the pseudo - fi - order oximaion . Actually stimating an the rate cougats by fit - ting to simlatahasthe anage of being applicabk to all coandiions Unked recfions Many imporant p sses in the cell coist simply of a single reaon , but most of cellula biochemistry involves series of linked reactions For ex - ample , when two macromleculs bind together the compkx will often undego some type of ineral or cnformational change , linkg a fir - order reacion to a second - order reacfio A + B AB AB ±AB * . One of thouanJds of examples is G ( f binding to a G - protein , causing it to undergo a conformatInal change fm the inactive to the active state upon biding G O Similarly , the simple enzyme reactio considered in most biochemistry books is simply a series of rersible second - and first - order react u E + S ± ES ES ±EP EP EE + P , where E is enzyme , S is substate , and P is products . These and much more complicated reactions can be descibed rigorously by a seies of rate equa - tions like those explained above . For example , simple enzyme reactios neary always involve one ormore akditional first - order reactious where the molecules undergo conformatiwuad changes linking reactons togeher is the secret of how the cell carres out un - favorable reactions An unfble reaion can be driven forward by a favorAbl reacion up - or dow ns All that matters if thetotal free energ change for al of the coupled recstionS is negafive . For example , the un - favorable reaction poding AT fm ADP is driven by being coupld to an nerg source in the form of a proton gradient acrs the mitchondri emane that is derived in tumrn fom the oxidation of chemical bonids of M tr APPENDDI 2 : ANSWERS TO THE PROBLEMS Problem 1 1 . 8 . The half - time is 0 . 07 s . 1 . 9 . k , , b , is 0 . 69310 . 07 = 10 s - ' . 1 . 10 . The time to 0 . 75 pM is 0 . 14 s , so the time rm 0 . 5 to 0 . 75 pM is 0 . 14 - 0 . 07 = 0 . 07 s , the same half - time as the first half of the reclion . From 0 . 75 to 0 . 875 pM it is also 0 . 07 s . It is always the same because the reaction is a simple exponetia whhout a " memory . " The reaction rom any point onwd is the same as the reactio from time zro , and the time to use up half of what is eft is always the same . 1 . 12 . Cnging the conenttion changes the rate by the same propor - tion ( the rate is k [ AD so it takes just as log to use up half of the reactants . Problem 2 22 Equilibrium concentration of A = 033 p , A ' = 0 . 67 IK , , = k , k = 10 / 5 = 2 = A ' IA = 0 . 67 / 033 = 2 . 23 . 50 % m imum at 0 . 05 s , 75 % at 0 . 1 s , 87 . 5 % at 0 . 15 s . Each half - time is 0 . 05 s . 2 . 4 . kb , = 0 . 693i0 . 05 = 14 s - 1 . ( Quite cloe to k + + k _ = 15 s - 1 . ) Part of the problem with n rical i ation d estimating half - times fom 1270 B . . Transirt Se 3eIC Tuorial diseete time points is that rounding enrors occur . Dividing by a sligly ernroous nmber ma fies the erro . The mere acrate way to sti kw is by ruming a si ati f an irreeveibaction with a final con - cetraton - to the equiIri concentration in the unknown reaction and adjusting the fist - oder rate constant until the simlbtion matches the da . 2 . 5 . Se oc vhs wec tried : k half - time kh 10 0 . 035 19 . 8 2 . 5 0 . 055 12 . 6 1 0 . 065 10 . 7 k + + k - 125 11 Thus k . 6 is the smm of the forward and revers rate crAstants 2 . 6 . k - A A ' A ' / A k , fk - 10 0 . 5 0 . 5 1 2 . 5 0 . 67 . 033 0 . 5 1 0 . 83 0 . 17 02 27 . Thi is left as an exerse for the reader . Problm 3 3 . 1 . pH K 7 9 1 0 . 5 02 8 . 01 9 . 001 32 Dilation does not change the ratio ; both are dduitd equaly . 3 . 5 . Half - time is 0 . 07 s ; ka is 10 s - ' . 3 . 6 . Weneed kk = K = 9andk _ + _ k = k = 10s - ' , sok = 9 s - ' and k . = 1 s - ' . 53 . You can either solve the di erntial equatioexacy ( impos - siIl but vry diffut ) or use the simlalion program to generate theoeical curves until you fid a siglepair of rate c uants that match the eper - mental data . This is sa d sice the raio of the rate costants is consdtaied to fit the equilbrim data fm the ong time scale part of the experimets , so tee is only oe variable . The higher the rae comna - ts , , the faster the reacio , so you ca i diae tell if you valus are too higb or too low . 5 . 4 . k + is 1 LM - ' s - ' and k - is 03 s . Problem1 6 62 The apparent rate constant for the first reaction is k , B + k - lv as in Problem 5 , or 25 s - L The apparent rate constant for the second reaction is k + 2 + k2 , as in Problem 2 . It is pseudo - first - order , because the first reaction is slower than the second , so it behaves like the one step reaction in the previous problem . The second reaction is invisible because it is so fast ; AB is rapidly converted into AB ' and the time course of AB ' formation in this experiment is the same as that of AB in the previous experiment . 63 . Ihe second reaction becomes slower , relatve to the first , so the second reactio becomes rate limitin latng the actual k , b and com - paring them to the predicd k . . . for each ron is left as an exercise for thereader . Keeping the ratiothe same leaves the equilbri vaes the same but lengte the lag , eaough to be able to observe an overshoot in the value of [ AB ] . 6 . 4 . kBA = k + 2 A B ' ' / A * B 1 0 . 2102 921 0 . 016 0 . 008 10 0 . 1849 9 . 185 0 . 136 0 . 08 100 0 . 0840 9 . 084 0 . 611 0 . 8 K , 0 . 4 0 . 4 0 . 4 K2 0 . 02 0 . 2 2 K = K1 * K2 0 . 008 0 . 08 0 . 8 PRoblem 4 4 . 4 . It is exponetiamL Half - time is 0 . 07 all along the curve , and k . , is 10 s - ' . 4 . 5 . kb is not obviously related to the rate constansuntil you do the next parts of the prblea 4 . 6 . k + 0 . 5 0 . 75 1 2 4 ka 5 7 . 5 10 20 40 k . . is proorional to k + . 4 . 7 . B 10 20 30 40 k . b . 5 10 15 20 k , is prptioal to B . kd . = k + B . 4 . & k - 1 3 5 8 10 k . 6 11 13 15 18 20 AB 0 . 09 0 . 8 0 . 67 0 . 56 0 . 50 The equilbri constant for the overall reactio A + B = = AB ' is the product of the qu conants for the two coupled reactions . 6 . 5 . B half time 4 . 078 8 . 046 16 . 0284 32 . 018 64 . 01215 128 . 00875 8 . 88 15 . 1 24 . 4 38 . 5 57 . 0 792 B 256 512 1024 2048 4096 5000 half tme . 00666 . 00579 . 00505 . 00478 . 00465 . 00463 104 . 0 119 . 7 1372145 . 0 149 . 0 149 . 7 You could keep going , but you see that the plateau is at k . . = 150 s - 1 and it should be equal to k , 2 + k - 2 - It does not get quite lnear at the kl end , but takig the first three points as linear , the best fit is k . . = 4 . 23 + 13 B , or you would estimate k + j as 13 JLM - s - ' and k - , as 4 . 23 s - ' . The overall equihlium constant is 0 . 8 jM - ' , from the data in Problem 6 . 4 , and this is equal to the product of the indivdual equi - librium constants , 4 . 9 . k , 1 = k , B + k _ 4 . 10 . B 10 20 30 40 k , * . 20 30 40 50 Slope is iM - ' s ' andy intercept is 10 s - ' . 4 . 11 . k + is25 LMs - ' and k is 1 s - ' . Probll 5 5 ; It is not an exponential ( ahbougb it is close ) Sucessive half - times are 0 . 20 , 028 , and 0 . 30 s . It is fster at the begining than at the ed - , it is actually a hypebolic curve . - + 1 k2 k - 1k - 2 or 2 = 0 . 8 . 4 - 23k - 2 T ' he plateau is k + 2 + k - 2 = 150 , and you can solve for k + 2 and k - 2 You would estimate k + 2 as 108 . 1 s - ' and k - 2 as 41 . 9 s - ' . This is not perfect , because we cannot get a clean line at the low end of the scale ( see Problem 6 . 6 ) but it is certainly close . To get a more accurate answer , you would need to start with these estimates , simulate the whole set of reactions , and adjust the rate constants until the simulation fits the time courses over the whole range ofreaction rates . This is somewhat tedious and has been t ted in some systems . 6 . 7 . The answer is kt + = 15 M - ls - ' , k = 2 s , k + 2 = 20 s , k - 2 = Ss - ' . WWoncm - d Poard 1271 Voumfe 67 Septenter 1994 Problem 7 72 . There is a lag because two rs need to bind befioe MIT , the final product , can be generaedl . One Tbinds with single alkinetics , but it may come off before the second one can bid , sothe proailt of getting both Ts on ss low , and it tas some time befoe tis hap - pens . Once AMIT form , it fIlls apat very quickly intoAand MTF . Higher conetration of T reduce the lag . 73 . The key to this game is to reduce the number of unknwns as much as poss a en experimet then va the unknow that are left to best fit the experimental data . One idea : Based on the biology , it is rea - sonable to assume that the rate consants for the first two reacton ae the same . This cuts the number of unknowns to four . - you could mix the acfin - myosin complex with ATP and observe the time course of the decrease in ligt sring a spoed - flow machine as the myosi dissocd fro the actin fil By tesig a range of ATP ai you would have enough data to fid a unique solution of the kinetic mecranism by knetic sutionwith KINSDM . 7 . 4 . One simple mechaism is the foblwing . RB = = RB ' ; RB ' = = RB " ; where RB represents the pair of Rb tumor suopressr gemne and the prime repesent muoti in one or both of the gene Patiens with mu - tations in both genes ( RB ) develop cancer . Patients who inberit one mu - tatio ( ial concentraio of RB ' = 1 . 0 ) develop cacer with a fir - oder time course and a rate contant of 0 . 075 month ` for the second reactio The fit to this curve is excellenL TIhe rvee rate contants are 0 for both ret Paients bom with two nofmal genes develop cancerwith an initial lag . You wll beable to get an ate fittothe data with k + , = 0 . 05 onth - l ' , k - I = 0 , k - 2 = 0075 Smonth - ' , k2 = 0 . Considering that the data are very limited and based on referrals of patients to a canc hosptl , the fit is nt so bad . In fact , are much more conmpicated than this simple two - hit model , given that addiional steps are required for the tumors to develop . We should also take into acont that the retina contins about 2 , 000 , 000 cells , any one of which can develop c r . In addition , we have not taken into account that the number of dividing nemoblasts deaes to 0 during the first few yeas of f , changing the number ofcells in the etina th are susceptible to develpment of thse tmnos Mutt that occur after the cells stop dividing p b are sklent Let us know if you de - velp a more realstc model that gives a better fit to the data . PiobClem 8 83 . The answer is k + 1 is 10 ' M - ls - ' andk k - is 1 s - . k + 2is 5 s - 1 and k - 2 is 1 s1 ' . k + 3 is 03 s - ' d kis 1 M ` s - ' . 83a . K . is a t 0 . 2 p4 ; V , is 0 . 024 1M s - ' It is very difficult to etimate because ofthe scatter in the points . The data are perfect The scatter in the Ineweaver - Burk plot is the ma to all the clasical methodaof aalyzing kieticdata Before c _ xnpes , the only kind of crve tht was convenient to fit was a shtaight line . The clacal ohes ( ineweaver - Burk , Satchard , etc . ) were designd to transform nonlinear data into stag lines . These ls , divisiom ) may exagge e errors ( in this cse , roundig errors ) to the poi tht a lks - squres linear fit is ip riate and misi 83b . The fast phase is the fiust rnover of S into P , as E binds its frst S . This involves only the reactiom E + S 4 ES E ; P , and it is contald by k , 1 and k _ . With higb S , the ES * : EP reaction is rate - limiting . The hast phase has an initial rate of 42 pM s - ' , which will be appoximately the rate of the reacin ES - EP , ork + 2 ES . What is ES during fast phase ? Durig this phase , almost all of theE has bound S ahrady ( the second step is rate lmiting because it is sower than the first step ) , but has not relased it , so ES is ately equal to the initial aonetration of E , or 1 p1L Thus k + 2ES = 42 p . Ms - 1 = k + 2 1 M , ork + 2 is - 4 - 2 s - ' , not faroffthe real answer of 5 s - ' . The slow phase begins whenEP starts dissoc ing intoE and P , alwing E to react with another S and continue at a steady Thus the fast pase catues until all the E is satat Why is this not when EP is equal to the iniial of E ? The answer is that EP is in euiliumwith ES , and this equilibri the stady - state concentration of E . Fron the graph , ths is when EP is - 0 . 83 pLM ( the slow ad fas plass do not fm a sharp angle , so you have to extrapolat ) Sinc the enzyme is satated , ES = 1 pM - EP = 0 . 17 1k This tells us theq brium coan { t for Reacto 2 ; k , + 2k - 2 = 0SA . 17 = 5 . Using the estimate for k2 abave , we get k2 = 0 - 84 s - 1 . The slow phase is the reaction EP - E + P , and its rate is ro ately k + 3 EP , where EP is the steady - st concentato ofEP . This phas iswha was s ien the steadytte experimet min part ( a ) , and the lag in pr of P there is the fast phase here ( production ofEP rathfer than P ) , which has told us so muchd The slow rate fir the graph is 0 . 27 p1 s - ' which should be k + 3 EP = k + 3 0 . 8 p or + 3 = 03 s ' . 83c . Thisisjustthebimolcularbindignreactif Problem 4 above , and we have a vast excuss of S , so the pseudo - first - order analysis applies . A heratvely , just use HEpqCEN Tlhis is a two - unknown system ( k . . . ) and we can measure the time comse all the way to equi so it would be easy . Doing it the analytical way , S 1 2 4 8 12 k . 6 . 924 19 . 8 34 . 65 693 99 Leastsquaresfit gives k + , = 8 - 2 - ls - and k = 2 . 4 s - ' . This is wihin an order of magn ofthe correct answer , but not acurate . The problem again is dividing by a number sujct to mruning and othe errom This is the advantage of simulating the fu time caurse of a reaction , which gves exacty the right answer and uses all the data . The general rule is fit the data , not the so , whenever possible . 83d _ Same problem as ( 83c ) , but starting with P rather than S . k ' s are given above . 8 - 3e . If we assume that the reverwse reaction is negligble ( a common asumion in this sort of problm ) , then this experiment is hlke Problem 1 , a first - order , irversible reaction , EP - . E + P . Staring with all the enzyme as EP is wrong , because it wil be eqi um with ES , but without doing the other pimets , we do not know what that e i will be . If you knew the iir constant from the bus exper t , then you could set ES to 0 . 17 pM and EP to 0 . 83 p1M at the stat Still , rnning KINSIM would provide a resonable estimate of k , 3 . Doing it anaytically , assumng dat the recton EP - E + P is irre - vesible , vs a half - time of1 . 7 s and a k + 3 of . 4 s - ' . lTis is doce to the actal value of 03 s - ' , largely because we have been able to ignoe the revers reactions ( EP ES - . E + ) The association ractions do not our because of the presece of the large execss of _ nadiocive sub - stte . Any free ezyme is immedial bound to a " bla molecule and thus will not be sem m our experimeal results . 8 . 5 . The equimc statsare K , = 10 p , K 2 = 5 , K3 = 03 14 - 1 . Do you u d the units nvolved ? K ( which we found above to be0 . 2 itM ) does not represent any of tese eqlibri consa ts , so it is not really an affiity for anything . Itrpresents the concentation of substrat needed to produce a half - maximal steady - state rate , so an enzyme with a lower 4 , will requir kss substrte to saturate , so in that sense it has a higher affinity . It can be rlated to the Ps if certain sim assumpons awe made ( ES to EP equilibrium is infiniely fast , ireversible pmduct release ) as you have karned in biochemistry , but it cannot be simply allated for a more re - alistic model such as this one . 8 . 6 . V . , is the maximum rate of prduc of P in the pesence of infinite subsntate . Under thse conditions , the third step ( product release ) is limiting . so the rate of produci of P is k + 3 [ EPI or 03 s - ' 0 . 083 p1M = 0 . 025 pms - ' , ckose to the observed value of 0 . 02363 pMs - ' . ( Where did the 0 . 083 pLMo4 e fron ? ) ht is an overstimate because the rate of pro - ducion is really limited by two reactons , the second and the third . In our case , the third is much slwer , so it domiiated the clation Fr the mincined , the correct effective rate consta to use is Tlis numnber gives some informtion about the rate constat in the mecha - nis , but only ifwe know the equiihbrim anratio of EP , or asme that it is negligibe and that the reactin is limied by the concentatio of ES , as is assumed in the Mic iMenten analysis 1272 lm . . a ioumai Wahsskock and Polard Transient State Kniet Tutorial 1273 Prbem 9 k + 1 = k + 2 = 1 LM - Ms - ' ; k - 1 = 0 . 01 s - ; k - 2 = 0 . 03 s - 1 ; k + 3 = k + 4 = 2 IM - , S - ' ; k _ 3 = k - 4 = 4 s - 1 ; k + 5 = k + 6 = 1 LM - s - ' ; k5 = k - = 6 s - ' . The profilin catalyzes the nucleotide exchange by hopping frm one actin molecule to another on a subsecond time scale . The half - life of the complex ofprofilin with actin is 175 ms . During this time , the nucleotide highly is likely to dissociate from the PAT complex , since its half - life is 117 ms . REFERENCES Barshop , B . A - , R . F . Wrenn , and C . Frieden . 1983 . Analysis of nu - merical methods for computer simulation of kinetic processes : de - velopment of KINSIM - a flexible portable system . Anal . B , ocheIL 130 : 134 - 145 . Bez & 0 . G , md P . HI von HippeL 1985 . D idld _ o aCios . Amui Rev . Biops Biophys . COcm . 14 : 131 - 160 . Frieden , C . 1993 . Numerical integration of rate equaio by . Trends BiochenL Sci . 18 : 58 - 60 . Frieden , C . 1994 . Numerical integration of rate equation by computer an update . Trends BiochIeL Sci . 19 : 181 - 182 . Goldchmidt - Clemont , P , L N Machesky , S . KI Dobersein , and T . D . Pdolard - 1991 . Mecnism of inteact of human platelet prflin with actin J . CeU BioL 113 : 1081 - 1089 . Johnson , K . A . 1992 . Transient - state ietic analysis of enzyme reactio pathways Enzyse 20 - 1 - 61 . Knudsen , A . G . 1971 . Mutation and cancer : staistical study of retinoblas - toa - Proc . NatL Acad Sci USA . 68 : 820 - 824 . Maddox , J . 1993 . The dark side of moklcula biology . Nature . 363 : 13 . Northrup , S . H , and H . P . Erickson - 1992 . Kintics of protein - ptein as - sociation expiained by Brownian dynamic cm er simlati Proc . NamL Acad ScL USA . 893338 - 3342 .