FEATURE ARTICLE Research - Technology Management • January—February 2022 | 29 Mapping the Benefits from Innovation Contests The framework highlights an innovation contest’s various nonsolution benefits and shows how practitioners can benefit from all contest stages . Ademir Vrolijk , Monsi C . Roman , and Zoe Szajnfarber OVERVIEW : An innovation contest is an effective way to address an organization’s technical needs . With its pay - for - success and winner ( s ) - take - all format , organizations have received novel and high - quality solutions to their problems at lower costs than solving them internally . These successes have driven researchers to focus on strategies that further enhance the resulting solutions . This narrow focus , however , might ignore benefits that are also important to these organizations . Our work lever - ages an in - depth case study of NASA’s highly successful 3D Printed Habitat Challenge ; we analyzed how it benefited the relevant NASA subject matter experts . Our resulting framework characterizes the range , and sources , of potential benefits across different stages of an innovation contest , some of which we found to be more valuable than the solutions . These findings emphasize the need to broaden the existing focus on solutions and highlight new opportunities for practitioners to address their needs through innovation contests . KEYWORDS : Innovation contest , Crowdsourcing , Open innovation , NASA , Additive construction Organizations , both public and private , use innovation con - tests to help solve their complex problems ( Chesbrough and Bogers 2014 ; Randhawa , Wilden , and West 2019 ) . Since the Longitude Prize of 1714 ( Spencer 2012 ) , companies have created numerous novel solutions by competitively outsourc - ing their development through these contests ( Afuah and Tucci 2012 ; Jeppesen and Lakhani 2010 ; Terwiesch and Xu 2008 ) . Government agencies like the National Aeronautics and Space Administration ( NASA ) and companies such as Siemens have embedded innovation contests in their inno - vation processes , regularly challenging complex problems , even in times of crisis ( Lakhani et al . 2013 ; Lifshitz - Assaf 2018 ; Vermicelli , Cricelli , and Grimaldi 2021 ) . Their increased use of innovation contests has also invited scrutiny . In particular , researchers question the value of innovation contests when solutions do not benefit the orga - nization . For example , after the Deepwater Horizon disaster in 2010 , BP’s call for ideas yielded 43 , 000 submissions from the crowd . This effort was deemed a failure because it “yielded relatively little in the way of results” for BP ( Goldenberg 2011 ) , and no solution made it to implemen - tation ( Alexy , Criscuolo , and Salter 2012 ) . Similarly , while Ademir Vrolijk is a PhD candidate in systems engineering at The George Washington University’s Engineering Management and Systems Engineering department . He was also a Visiting Researcher at Harvard University’s Laboratory for Innovation Science . He researches how technical organizations , such as NASA , can leverage crowdsourcing to solve complex problems . He has a bachelor’s degree in aerospace engineering from Carleton University and is an alumnus of the International Space University’s Space Studies Program . He has worked as a project management professional in the defense and medical technology industry . He also sat on the national board of the Canadian Space Society . avrolijk @ email . gwu . edu Monsi C . Roman has been the NASA Centennial Challenges program manager since 2015 . She manages the day - to - day operations of the Agency Flagship Prizes and Competition program that currently includes seven active challenges and several challenges in formulation with a total prize purse of over $ 15 million . The program supports technology developments for the agency under the Space Technology Mission Directorate ( STMD ) at NASA Headquarters in Washington , DC . She joined NASA’s Marshall Space Flight Center in 1989 as the chief microbiologist of the International Space Station ( ISS ) Environmental Control Life Support Systems ( ECLSS ) and later became the Agency project manager for the Advanced Life Support Systems . She has a bachelor of science in biology with a major in microbiology from the University of Puerto Rico in Rio Piedras and a master of science in microbiology with a minor in chemistry from the University of Alabama in Huntsville . monsi . roman @ nasa . gov Zoe Szajnfarber is a professor and chair of Engineering Management and Systems Engineering at The George Washington University . Her research focuses on the design and development of complex systems—primarily in the aerospace and defense sectors—considering both the organization and technical system architectures to “design - in” an ability to achieve performance goals across extended and highly uncertain operational lifetimes . Recent projects examine the nature and function of scientific and technical expertise in the design process , particularly in the context of open innovation . She has a bachelor’s degree in engineering science from the University of Toronto , dual master’s degrees in aeronautics and astronautics and technology policy , and a PhD in engineering systems from the Massachusetts Institute of Technology . She has worked as a systems engineer and researcher at both space contractors and government agencies in Canada , Europe , and the United States . zszajnfa @ gwu . edu DOI : 10 . 1080 / 08956308 . 2022 . 1993683 Copyright © 2022 , Innovation Research Interchange . Published by Taylor & Francis . All rights reserved . 30 | Research - Technology Management Innovation Contest Benefits the crowd’s solutions successfully solved NASA’s Asteroid Data Hunter ( ADH ) Challenge ( Paik et al . 2020 ) , NASA never used any of the crowd’s solutions to detect asteroids ( Gustetic et al . 2018 ) . Considering the literature’s focus on the knowl - edge contained in innovation contests’ solutions ( Afuah and Tucci 2012 ) , lackluster performance or failure to adopt solu - tions raises concerns about their use ( McCausland 2020 ) . Researchers have studied these kinds of failures and called for approaches to mitigate them ( Chesbrough and Brunswicker 2014 ; Piezunka and Dahlander 2015 ) . We contend that this focus is too narrow : solutions are merely one benefit of innovation contests . NASA’s efforts to defend the Earth from large asteroid strikes date back to the mid - 1990s , but its partnership with Planetary Resources Inc . to support the ADH Challenge marked its first collaboration with private industry to address this threat . Their partnership also showed the planetary defense subject matter experts ( SMEs ) how to collaborate with other nontraditional part - ners such as Verizon Wireless and Nvidia Corporation on this topic . Notably , these partnership benefits were independent of the solutions received from the ADH solvers . These and other examples highlight why we should be wary of a narrow focus on solutions : an innovation contest’s value does not solely equal the performance or adoption of the winning solution . Our work clarifies the broad range of benefits inno - vation contests can provide . These insights can help practi - tioners take advantage of an innovation contest’s other benefits when those opportunities arise . We adopted an empirical approach to clarify who provides what benefits and when . Over five years , we gathered qual - itative data on how an organization benefited from challeng - ing one of its key problems . Using these data , we constructed a framework that describes how these benefits are distributed and who provides them across an innovation contest’s dif - ferent stages . Our findings emphasize the importance of the nonsolution benefits of innovation contests . In our study , they proved to be at least as valuable as the solutions , appeared throughout the contest process , and did not only stem from the solvers . We discuss how researchers should consider a broader perspective on the benefits of these con - tests and provide guidance for practitioners to gear their future innovation contests accordingly . Literature Review In innovation contests , problem - solvers compete for a prize set by a solution - seeker ( Chesbrough and Bogers 2014 ; Howe 2006 ; Jeppesen and Lakhani 2010 ) . Each contest has four stages ( Kiran and Sharma 2021 ; Paik et al . 2020 ; Ruiz , Brion , and Parmentier 2020 ; Szajnfarber and Vrolijk 2018 ; Zobel 2017 ) : formulate , solve , review , and absorb . First , the seeker picks a relevant topic that they deem suitable for a contest and describes the problem that will be challenged . Second , the seeker broadcasts the problem and promotes it widely . People in the crowd self - select to participate and begin cre - ating their solution ( s ) . Third , the seeker receives the solvers’ submissions , reviews them , and selects a winner based on prespecified performance metrics . Lastly , the seeker decides whether and how to absorb the ( set of ) solutions , and the associated knowledge , into their organization ( Figure 1 ) . These contests are “designed to produce important inno - vations” ( Morgan and Wang 2010 , p . 77 ) . They address the seeker’s need by solving their problem and have often deliv - ered both novel and high - performing solutions ( Hitt 2007 ; Howe 2006 ; Johnston 2012 ; Spencer 2012 ) . The literature has focused on gathering solutions and their associated knowledge more efficiently ( Afuah and Tucci 2012 ; Piezunka and Dahlander 2015 ) or measuring when and how outsiders can outperform the ( seeker’s ) insiders ( Jeppesen and Lakhani 2010 ; Poetz and Schreier 2012 ) . With this focus in mind , researchers have explored different ways to improve a con - test’s yield by asking , “How does it benefit the solutions ? ” Examples include connecting to diverse participants and stimulating outsiders to invest in the problem’s industry . With a focus on solutions , researchers consider connecting to diverse participants a benefit because these individuals increase the chances of novel solutions ( Franke , Poetz , and Schreier 2013 ; Jeppesen and Lakhani 2010 ) . Innovation con - tests might attract experts and reveal previously unknown kinds of expertise ( Piller and Walcher 2006 ; Szajnfarber et al . 2020 ) . Their diversity is their strength . Differences in domain expertise between the seeker and the solvers can lead to design choices familiar to solvers but not to the seeker ( Afuah and Tucci 2012 ) . The result is a diverse set of ( novel ) solu - tions—some outperforming internal ones ( Poetz and Schreier 2012 ) —and a broader understanding of the design space ( Franke , Poetz , and Schreier 2013 ; Kay 2011 ) . Researchers also consider investment from outsiders a benefit because it lowers the seeker’s costs of solving its problem . Even in their earliest descriptions , researchers considered innovation contests a “means to obtain a given quality of [ innovation ] at as low a cost possible under var - ious market conditions” ( Fullerton et al . 1999 , p . 635 ) . Innovation contests outsource these costs by shifting who solves the problem ( Afuah and Tucci 2012 ; Lakhani , Lifshitz - Assaf , and Tushman 2013 ) and then only reward - ing their success , not compensating their effort ( Fullerton et al . 2002 ; Taylor 1995 ; Terwiesch and Xu 2008 ) . For example , Paik et al . ( 2020 ) showed a lower cost of the FIGURE 1 . Summary of the innovation contest process Innovation Contest Benefits January—February 2022 | 31 knowledge obtained through a contest compared to an equivalent internal ( or contracted ) exploration . Furthermore , the seeker reduces its burden if , and when , the solvers commercialize their solution ( Kay 2011 ; Murray et al . 2012 ) , where they mature the technology to provide it as a service or product for the seeker ( Gustetic et al . 2015 ) . However , the focus on solutions risks ignoring the inherent benefits of the aforementioned strategies and other important benefits . Currently , only a few studies have asked the broader question , “How do innovation contests benefit the seeker ? , ” thereby taking a more com - prehensive view of benefits ( Chesbrough and Di Minin 2014 ; Murray et al . 2012 ; Schmidthuber et al . 2019 ; Terwiesch and Xu 2008 ) . For example , Murray et al . ( 2012 , p . 1780 ) captured how “education , attention and community building [ were ] as important as the technical solutions themselves” in the Progressive Automotive XPRIZE . Practitioners have also echoed this sentiment . For example , broadcasting the problem raises the visibility of the seeker and its need . The contest can serve as a “north star” ( Gustetic et al . 2018 , p . 2 ) , drawing the attention of the public and those in their own industry . It also pushes the seeker’s message to audiences that traditionally do not interact with the seeker’s organization and industry ( Gustetic et al . 2015 ) . The current literature lacks a study that systematically examines the full range of benefits of innovation contests , who they stem from , and where they arise in the process . Our study fills this gap . Case Study Our study explored how a seeker benefits from its innovation contest across its different stages . Researchers have given less attention to other benefits despite their importance to prac - titioners ( Gustetic et al . 2015 ; Gustetic et al . 2018 ; Murray et al . 2012 ) . We used inductive research methods to under - stand them better and create grounded and actionable NASA’s 3D Printed Habitat ( 3DPH ) Challenge Missions to the Moon or Mars are incredibly expensive , and reduc - ing their costs can enable NASA to do more science and explora - tion . For the upcoming crewed missions to those planets , NASA SMEs have proposed using resources that are available locally , as bringing them from Earth would be impractical due to the costs of launch . Planetary additive construction follows this approach : it combines in - situ materials with 3D printing approaches to con - struct habitats and other civil infrastructure needed for long - du - ration stays . Currently , teams of SMEs at both NASA’s Kennedy Space Center ( KSC ) and NASA’s Marshall Space Flight Center ( MSFC ) are actively studying and developing different approaches to make this technology viable for future missions . The 3D Printed Habitat ( 3DPH ) Challenge innovation contest supported NASA’s work , inviting solvers to develop additive con - struction systems for the Martian surface . SMEs recognized that an innovation contest could draw input from industries and individu - als with whom they usually did not collaborate , potentially having a meaningful impact on their work . SMEs tailored the contest to “push the boundaries” of the problem and complement their current efforts . They formulated what problem ( s ) solvers would tackle , fielded solvers’ questions , and judged the submitted solu - tions . The NASA SMEs received significant input from SMEs from Bechtel , Brick and Mortar Ventures , Caterpillar Inc . , and US Army Corps of Engineers ( USACE ) , who lent their expertise despite their lack of a footprint in the space industry . 3DPH consisted of four independent challenges . Each chal - lenge focused on different technical areas , each with its own requirements and prize awards ( Vrolijk and Szajnfarber 2021 ) . 1 . The Design Challenge asked solvers to design architectural concepts for future habitats . 2 . In the Structural Member Challenge , solvers developed and demonstrated the performance of their printer feedstocks— equivalent to a desktop printer’s ink—for the Martian surface . 3 . The Virtual Construction Challenge asked solvers to provide detailed analyses of their habitat designs . 4 . In the Construction Challenge , solvers autonomously printed one - third scale models of their designs , with a footprint of at least 10 . 33 m 2 . NASA launched these four challenges across three sequential phases and offered solvers approximately $ 2 . 5 million in prizes . Participants came from design , architecture , 3D printing , addi - tive manufacturing , construction , as well as the space industry . Many formed a team to participate , and many teams were associ - ated with universities or companies . The architecture - and design - themed challenges ( Design and Virtual Construction ) saw more participation than the hardware - focused ones ( Structural Member and Construction ) . Summary of NASA’s 3DPH Contest Phase Challenge Total Solvers a Winner b 1 Design 167 Team of architecture professionals 2 Structural Member 8 Industry collaboration 3 Virtual Construction 18 Space architecture startup 3 Construction 7 Construction technology company a Number of solvers , be it a team or individual , that submitted a solution to at least one part of this challenge . b Affiliation of solver who took home the largest prize in that challenge . 32 | Research - Technology Management Innovation Contest Benefits insights ( Edmondson and Mcmanus 2007 ; Eisenhardt , Graebner , and Sonenshein 2016 ) , employing qualitative data and analysis techniques to gather and analyze rich , real - world data ( Miles and Huberman 1994 ) . Our setting for this study was NASA’s 3D Printed Habitat ( 3DPH ) Challenge , one of several contests in the NASA’s Centennial Challenges Program ( CCP ) portfolio ( see “NASA’s 3D Printed Habitat ( 3DPH ) Challenge” on page 31 ) . At the time , NASA regarded the 3DPH Challenge as a model contest and subsequently an important success across the agency . Method We conducted an in - depth study of the 3DPH Challenge ( Siggelkow 2007 ; Yin 2009 ) . Because of its success , we expected our study to reveal the range of benefits that inno - vation contests can provide its seeker . We engaged with the 3DPH team from the contest’s inception in 2015 and collected data until a year after its final prize award in 2020 . We interviewed 49 individuals involved with 3DPH Challenge in a semi - structured manner ( Converse and Presser 1986 ) . Our questions were wide - ranging and included asking whether and how the contest benefited them ( and NASA ) , if they did not bring it up themselves . Interviewees included all NASA SMEs involved with formulating the problem and run - ning the contest ; the scientists and engineers tasked with developing additive construction systems for NASA at KSC and MSFC ; and all CCP personnel involved with the 3DPH , both past and present . We also interviewed the external experts who assisted the NASA SMEs and various solvers across the different phases of the 3DPH Challenge . In addition , we collected project documents that described the contest’s goals and outcomes in detail . Finally , we drew on our firsthand observations at various 3DPH Challenge events to corroborate the picture painted by our interviewees and archival data . We analyzed our data for the benefit to the seeker . We open - coded the transcribed interviews and other documen - tation for advantages that the contest provided to the NASA SMEs involved with planetary additive construction ( Strauss and Corbin 1990 ) . In each case , we noted the stage in the innovation contest process and who drove that benefit . Next , we inductively formed common categories from these instances , consulting the available literature and iterating until no new categories formed ( Miles and Huberman 1994 ; Strauss and Corbin 1990 ) . Finally , we arranged our categories into a framework , summarizing the who , what , and when questions we described earlier . We chose to examine the breadth of benefits—instead of the frequency with which they were men - tioned—to avoid obscuring potential benefits to the seeker . Results We identified benefits to the seeker in all four stages of the innovation contest and who they stemmed from . We describe them below . Formulation Stage Benefits Benefits from the first stage include connections built , reduced resource burden , and acknowledged capabilities . Connections Built – – Both the SMEs and the CCP team praised the connections they made with experts in other industries during the formulation stage . As one NASA SME explained , the contest gave them a platform to “get outside the known group of people and companies that we deal with . ” By reaching out through their contacts—and having those individuals reach out to contacts of their own—the 3DPH team connected with companies and academics in the additive manufacturing , architecture , and construction industries . Participation in formulating the contest proved mutually ben - eficial . It offered external entities the opportunity to be a part of an emerging community , shape the trajectory of a new technology , and gauge future market opportunities . In turn , the 3DPH Challenge created a platform for NASA SMEs to connect with outsiders and explore overlaps between their respective industries . SMEs also noted that these connections , and the ensuing conversations , are much harder to forge via grants or other innovation funding mechanisms in NASA’s toolbox . According one of NASA’s technical observers of the 3DPH Challenge , “a challenge breaks that paradigm somewhat . ” Reduced Resource Burden – – Unlike other innovation mechanisms in its portfolio , NASA could accept external sponsorship for the challenge via their contest partner . The 3DPH team attracted several non - space sponsors through a common interest in additive construction . External sponsors volunteered their civil engineering , construction , and archi - tectural expertise , assigning their technical staff to serve on the problem formulation team and as judges . The external experts also provided the infrastructure required to host the events and test printed samples ; guided the seeker towards the appropriate testing and evaluation standards ; and made the problem more comprehensive than initially budgeted . In total , they invested approximately $ 2 million . Their help likely shortened the problem’s total formulation time and improved the quality of the contest’s results . Acknowledged Capabilities – – With the help of the external experts , the NASA SMEs gauged the state - of - the - art across different industries to respond to their needs . While formulating the 3DPH Challenge problem , the combined formulation team surveyed how various entities within their industries could respond to NASA’s additive construction needs . The external experts offered their assessment of the current capabilities of their respective industries and what would advance the state - of - the - art . This information helped the NASA SMEs shape the performance criteria for the 3DPH Challenge problem : striking a balance between what NASA needed but was not yet developed and what could already be done ( either by NASA or others ) . One NASA SME We identified benefits to the seeker in all four stages of the innovation contest and who they stemmed from . Innovation Contest Benefits January—February 2022 | 33 expressed this balancing act as follows : “If [ a problem is ] completely feasible , then there’s no point in having the com - petition . You have to get to something that you’re 90 percent sure can be done , but you’re 10 percent not sure . ” Solving Process Benefits Benefits from the solving process include increased technol - ogy visibility , reduced resource burden , acknowledged capa - bilities , and spurred relevant development . Increased Technology Visibility – – Once NASA released the 3DPH Challenge , its SMEs had a conduit to broadly com - municate their needs and goals . According to CCP staff , the contest promoted their work in additive construction to audi - ences that they “probably wouldn’t have considered before . ” Outlets ranged from additive manufacturing conferences , construction tradeshows to Reddit , and other niche technol - ogy blogs . NASA SMEs were happy that the contest drummed up broad excitement . One SME said , “ [ a contest ] needs to be really inspiring and this one was . Everybody understood it and people were very excited about it . ” The innovation contest also placed NASA , and its planetary additive con - struction SMEs in particular , as leaders in this emerging field . Reduced Resource Burden – – This innovation contest asked solvers to design and demonstrate their solutions , shift - ing costs and risks away from the seeker . The solvers had to balance this burden against their strengths , drawing on their ( team’s ) expertise , infrastructure , and funds to create a solu - tion that worked . As each team found its own balance , they invested considerable funds and attention in an area import - ant to NASA . The CCP estimated that solvers spent approx - imately $ 5 million on developing their submissions . Acknowledged Capabilities – – The formulation team received solution information through feedback from potential solvers before their submission . This information came through public requests for information during the formulation stages . NASA SMEs also received feedback through public webinars and direct and private questions to the formulation team . Some of this feedback questioned the feasibility of the rules , indicating that potential solvers could not comply with the problem as posed . Other solver feedback would include detailed design choices and asking for the formulation team’s blessing on a proposed solving approach . The volume of these interactions equated to doz - ens per week during each phase of the contest , giving the formulation team a detailed understanding of the crowd’s solving capabilities . In turn , the team clarified or changed the rules accordingly . Spurred Relevant Development – – The 3DPH Challenge’s formulation team encouraged solvers to explore solutions that matched NASA’s aims . The SMEs were very familiar with the NASA context and the Martian environment , and they knew that some solutions would be more feasible than others . As such , the rules favored certain design families over others . These rules drove teams to explore different per - mutations of possible solutions within those families in the hopes of finding the best solution . For example , some SMEs were interested in using thermoplastics as a binder in their feedstocks because they would potentially perform better than those that used a water - based cement . Still , it would be expen - sive to explore all possible solutions to find the best one : dif - ferent combinations of thermoplastic binder material , aggregate , and printing processes deliver different perfor - mance results . Here , solvers chipped away at this issue by exploring various permutations in this class of materials : sev - eral industry teams designed and tested thermoplastic feed - stocks with different binders for their printers . One NASA SME considered the material exploration carried out by these and other teams “a really good outcome . ” Benefits During Solution Review During the review of solutions , the noticeable benefits were connections built and acknowledged designs and capabilities . Connections Built – – NASA SMEs benefited from the breadth of the solvers who participated and the strength of the ties the contest created . Teams from the design , architec - ture , and construction industries participated in all phases of the 3DPH Challenge—industries that do not typically interact with NASA . Of the 60 teams that participated , fewer than half came from the space industry . These solvers also repre - sented a range of academic , hobbyist , and industry back - grounds . The innovation contest’s connections to non - space , commercial entities—Bechtel , Brick and Mortar Ventures , Caterpillar Inc . —appealed to solvers with commercial aims . The involvement of these non - space entities signaled to those solvers that the technology was not just limited to space . As one NASA SME noted , 3DPH “really represent [ ed ] a great way to bring in garage maker innovators , who probably aren’t out there applying for government contracts or even thinking about government work in any capacity . ” The contest also provided a platform to interact meaning - fully on a shared interest : the NASA 3DPH team , sponsors , and solvers made lasting connections that have endured since the contest ended . These connections formed during informal networking during the competition , at in - person face - offs , and at social events . One participant described the long - term impacts of building this community , even outside of the con - test : “I would say that the friendships and business contacts that our team made came heavily from [ the 3DPH social event ] . . . Even when knowing that both [ our teams ] were considering starting businesses around [ the same topic ] , we had explored ways to work together , and . . . kept in routine NASA subject matter experts benefited from the breadth of the solvers who participated and the strength of the ties the contest created . 34 | Research - Technology Management Innovation Contest Benefits contact with each other about both ideas and from a business standpoint . ” Acknowledged Designs and Capabilities – – The solv - ers’ solutions exposed NASA staff to new designs and capa - bilities in additive construction . The solutions presented new design choices and how those choices performed against the contest’s criteria . Examples include a recipe for a thermo - plastic - basalt fiber feedstock with a material strength 20 + times higher than concrete . Another team designed and demonstrated a feedstock that could wholly be produced on Mars using synthetic biology and in - situ resources . Overall , SMEs appreciated the variety of solutions presented by the solvers , acknowledging new designs in printing automation , robotic coordination , and configurations of the habitats . The solutions also revealed new capabilities that the NASA SMEs considered huge breakthroughs . The rules of the Structural Member Challenge asked participants to autono - mously remove supports used to print a dome . Instead , one team’s printing system and feedstock configuration allowed them to print horizontally , in midair—completing the dome without using any supports . An SME developing NASA’s planetary additive construction infrastructure acknowledged this “absolutely revolutionary” capability as “the holy grail in 3D printing , ” and it informed subsequent internal development . Benefits After the Prize Award Benefits after awarding the innovation contest prize include collaboration on related projects , increased technology visi - bility , absorbed designs , and spurred relevant development . Collaboration on Related Projects – – After the contest , the NASA SMEs stayed in contact with several solvers and invited them to participate in new internal projects . The 3DPH Challenge allowed solvers to demonstrate their exper - tise and showed SMEs how those solvers could bolster new projects in their pipeline . When relevant internal projects arose , SMEs formed new partnerships with these solvers , adding external capabilities . In a few cases , the SMEs also referred solvers to other NASA offices with relevant projects . The multi - year follow - on projects—ranging from $ 20 thou - sand to $ 14 . 5 million—asked the 3DPH Challenge solvers to perform trade studies and develop hardware that NASA would test in its facilities and with its equipment . While most follow - on projects tackled different problems outside the 3DPH Challenge , all were broadly related to additive con - struction on other planets . In total , NASA directed upwards of $ 15 million in funding—much more than the 3DPH Challenge’s prize purse—to the solvers and their NASA part - ners directly following the contest . The NASA partnerships transformed the solvers from ad hoc contributors to stable partners , providing their expertise on a more traditional basis . Increased Technology Visibility – – Both solvers and their contest solutions increased the visibility of additive con - struction technology after the contest ended . For solvers , participating in—and , for some , winning—the 3DPH Challenge was a source of pride and further opportunity . Teams actively promoted their efforts and leveraged these towards new funding and commercial opportunities : one team praised the “avalanche of press , international museum exhibitions , and speaking engagements that [ 3DPH ] ” gener - ated for them after the contest . These activities spread the word about NASA’s goals and current efforts long after the contest was over . The solutions also helped NASA communicate its efforts to internal and external audiences . For example , CCP staff said the visual components of the Design Challenge solutions were “beautiful . ” Their use in promotional material helped the public visualize a complicated problem and helped com - municate what the 3DPH Challenge asked solvers to do in subsequent phases . More broadly , the printing demonstra - tions in the Construction Challenge sparked serious interest in deploying this technology in the disaster relief and afford - able housing sectors . The CCP , the US Department of Housing and Urban Development , and the United Nations’ UN - Habitat began exploring demonstration prints in relevant locations with 3DPH solvers . Thus , because of their solutions , solvers became strong advocates for NASA’s goals and additive con - struction technology both inside and outside the space domain . Absorbed Designs – – After reviewing the results , NASA SMEs absorbed several solutions into their systems and processes . Absorbing ( part of ) these solutions went further than recognizing that a particular solution was novel and useful . It meant directly adopting a solution to the chal - lenge into NASA’s processes , with the hope of directly improving the SMEs’ existing capabilities . For example , the stellar performance of the ( Phase 2 ) winner’s feedstock prompted the NASA SMEs to procure a batch and use it in their in - house printers . Other instances included adopt - ing one team’s material processing techniques and flying samples of solvers’ feedstocks to space on NASA missions ( see “3DPH Challenge Solutions Absorbed by NASA” on page 35 ) . Spurred Relevant Development – – Some former solv - ers continued developing their additive construction capa - bilities after the innovation contest . They secured hundreds of millions of dollars in venture capital plus millions of dollars in grants from the US Department of Defense . One team successfully advocated for building code changes to accommodate additively constructed houses in their local jurisdiction . While these developments happened outside the space context and independent of NASA’s direction , the The NASA partnerships transformed the solvers from ad hoc contributors to stable partners , providing their expertise on a more traditional basis . Innovation Contest Benefits January—February 2022 | 35 seeker receives spillover benefits . Considering that ( parts of ) the solvers’ designs were favorable to NASA’s aims , fur - ther development might address uncertainties that the con - test could not . For example , the winners of the Structural Member and Construction Challenges went on to use their thermoplastic and basalt feedstock in their terrestrial work , despite their Mars - focused origin . Exposing their material to various use cases on Earth will build an understanding of how it behaves under many printing conditions . Similarly , solvers’ advances in printer teleoperations and printhead path planning are equally relevant to space applications of this technology and will inform NASA’s planetary additive construction efforts . As one interviewee noted , until NASA was ready to launch the technology in the 2030s , the teams will “keep it alive” in their home domain . Framework We created a framework that summarizes the benefits of an innovation contest to its seeker ( Figure 2 ) . We built this framework by aligning the coded benefits to their place in the four - stage process and highlighting who drove them . The framework summarizes what benefits occurred and when and who they stemmed from . It highlights that net - work - and technology - related benefits—of which solutions were one part—appeared across all stages . Sometimes the same kinds of benefits appeared in different parts of the FIGURE 2 . Summary of network - and technology - related benefits across the different stages of the innovation contest 3DPH Challenge Solutions Absorbed by NASA The planetary additive construction teams at NASA integrated several solver solutions into their processes . Challenge How the seeker absorbed the solvers’ solutions Design CCP created a taxonomy of 98 final solutions as a reference document . Structural Member The KSC team used a thermoplastic - based feedstock in their in - house printer and adopted the solvers’ feedstock manufacturing approach . The MSFC team and astronauts tested a cement - based feedstock on the International Space Station ( ISS ) . Virtual Construction NASA press releases and other media products used solvers’ habitat designs . Construction The MSFC team tested samples of a thermoplastic - based feedstock in orbit . The MSFC team and astronauts will once again test a cement - based feedstock on the ISS . 36 | Research - Technology Management Innovation Contest Benefits process . For example , information on potential solutions flowed to the seeker in the Formulation stage in addition to the Solve and Review stages , where this would be expected . This information helped the seeker understand better the state - of - the - art and thus the bounds of what they could ask solvers to do ( for the prize provided ) . The seeker meaning - fully expanded its network in both the Formulate and Review stages , first to organizations interested in the same subject matter and then to solvers . The framework also highlights that the solvers were not always the source of these benefits . In the Formulation stage , the seeker received solution information from external SMEs . These companies and organizations connected with the seeker as sponsors or experts in distant , but relevant , domains . They meaningfully connected and expanded their respective networks through the contest . Notably , the exter - nal experts did not become solvers in later stages—rather they continued their support through , for example , facilitat - ing the contest or judging its solutions . Discussion The literature has long touted solutions as the most import - ant and most valuable benefit stemming from innovation contests , capturing the focus of both researchers and practi - tioners . Researchers have focused on increasing the quality of the received solutions through selecting for specific solvers ( Acar 2019 ; Frey , Lüthje , and Haag 2011 ; Jeppesen and Lakhani 2010 ; Szajnfarber et al . 2020 ) , selecting for specific solving behavior ( Acar and van den Ende 2016 ; Bayus 2012 ; Natalicchio , Messeni Petruzzelli , and Garavelli 2017 ) , or adjusting the judging processes ( Alexy , Criscuolo , and Salter 2012 ; Piezunka and Dahlander 2015 ) . In turn , practitioners have focused on impacting the solutions ; efforts during stages other than the Review stage are seen as supportive at best or a burden at worst . For example , though Paik et al . ( 2020 , p . 45 ) described the Formulation stage’s importance in “clearly [ defining ] the desired outcomes and metrics” required for the solutions , they do not address any benefits during this stage despite incurring most of the contest’s costs . We caution against a narrow focus . Contest benefits do not only support the solutions , like connecting to diverse individuals to increase the likelihood of good solutions . Our research emphasized that innovation contests provide a range of benefits that are inherently important to the seeker . Some stages can even be more valuable to the seeker than the Review stage . In our case , the post - contest technology development projects—where the former solvers became NASA partners—were worth many more times the prize awards . Most of these projects have been funded directly by NASA’s wider technology efforts to sustain human presence on the Moon , which has brought additional attention across the agency and resulted in a defined pipeline to move the solvers’ current technologies to flight demonstrations . This example , and others from our case study , offer a counterpoint to the narrow focus on solely obtaining solutions from solv - ers . Approaches and models that maintain this focus may overlook these important benefits to the seeker . A broader view of the solutions also might be warranted . In line with the innovation contest focus , solvers demon - strated new materials , habitat , and printer designs that mean - ingfully impacted the SMEs working on planetary additive construction . However , the solutions also acted as catalysts for other , more valuable benefits . Many 3DPH Challenge solvers had no footprint or future in the space industry until they participated in the contest—they only engaged with NASA because they wanted to solve the contest’s problem . The solutions’ performance criteria also allowed the SMEs to vet the solvers’ capabilities and potential fit for upcoming projects . These and other benefits in our framework would not have been possible without the contest’s call for these solutions . Our work also sheds light on how seekers can leverage the various benefits across the innovation contest process . Two enablers stand out . First , a strong community around the contest enables network - related benefits . In our case , the CCP worked hard to foster the emerging community that shared an interest in planetary additive construction . CCP organized opportunities where the solvers , sponsors , and NASA SMEs could connect informally—like in - person finals and networking socials . The connections were more than a brief exchange of information across domain or organiza - tional boundaries . The meaningful interactions among these individuals built strong professional and personal connec - tions . It also helped form the collaborations between solvers and follow - on activities with the seeker . As the CCP program manager explained , the individuals involved in the 3DPH Challenge formed a network of people who are “a name and a phone number , [ even ] sort of a family . ” Second , getting diverse and early input on the problem’s requirements enables the later technology - related benefits . Afuah and Tucci ( 2012 ) argue that diverse input received through crowdsourcing can reduce the risk of entrenched , non - optimal solutions . We argue that diverse input might also reduce the risk of an entrenched problem—namely , avoiding requirements that might limit valuable solutions . The 3DPH Challenge’s problems were both internally mean - ingful and externally feasible : the formulation team included external SMEs and elicited external feedback on its require - ments . Striking a balance between these two increased the likelihood of successful development by solvers and useful solutions for the NASA SMEs . These early interactions between the seeker and the outsiders also allowed for The solutions’ performance criteria also allowed the subject matter experts to vet the solvers’ capabilities and potential fit for other upcoming projects . Innovation Contest Benefits January—February 2022 | 37 informal conversations about future needs , technological and market directions , and collaboration opportunities—all under the guise of the contest . Finally , two features of our context might impact how our insights apply to others . Our case study focused on a gov - ernment program that specializes in running complex inno - vation contests . First , a government context can better facilitate information sharing because of a reduced emphasis on intellectual property and competitive advantages . In our case , NASA SMEs readily shared information with solvers and external experts when it did not adversely affect the contest . In addition , the complex nature of the 3DPH Challenge’s problem likely attracted more large teams , whose members had more applicable experience ( Kay 2011 ) . In contrast , seekers in the private sector will be more reluctant to share their information in these contexts ( Afuah and Tucci 2012 ; Alexy , Criscuolo , and Salter 2009 ) . And contests chal - lenging simpler problems will predominantly attract individ - uals who are much more diverse and see their efforts as part of their hobby ( Blohm , Leimeister , and Krcmar 2013 ; Lakhani , Garvin , and Lonstein 2010 ; Szajnfarber et al . 2020 ) . The uniqueness of our context is a double - edged sword : it enables us to capture the range of potential benefits that could be realized , but its specific insights might not apply to more common applications of innovation contests . However , this uniqueness does not affect the existence of the observed benefits in other contexts , only their relative importance . For example , the follow - on projects emerged as an important and valuable benefit in our contest . While their occurrence is likely more prevalent in complex contests , it is certainly a factor in others . Thus , we contend that our framework covers the benefit - space and provides a structure that others can modify to their specific context . Conclusion Innovation contests have become a popular tool to help organizations solve problems . Practitioners , as seekers , play a crucial role in their success and need better frameworks to use them effectively . Our framework highlights an inno - vation contest’s various nonsolution benefits , who drove them , and when they occurred in the process . This work can help practitioners decide whether a contest is right for their needs and highlights how they can benefit from all contest stages . With our insights , practitioners may be better positioned to capture all benefits that innovation contests can provide . References Acar , O . A . 2019 . Motivations and solution appropriateness in crowdsourcing challenges for innovation . Research Policy 48 ( 8 ) : 103716 . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . respol . 2018 . 11 . 010 Acar , O . A . , and van den Ende , J . 2016 . Knowledge distance , cognitive - search processes , and creativity : The making of winning solutions in science contests . Psychological Science 27 ( 5 ) : 692 – 699 . doi : 10 . 1177 / 0956797616634665 Afuah , A . , and Tucci , C . L . 2012 . Crowdsourcing as a solution to distant search . Academy of Management Review 37 ( 3 ) : 355 – 375 . doi : 10 . 5465 / amr . 2010 . 0146 Alexy , O . , Criscuolo , P . , and Salter , A . 2009 . Does IP strategy have to cripple open innovation ? MIT Sloan Management Review , October 1 . https : / / sloanreview . mit . edu / article / does - ip - strategy - have - to - cripple - open - innovation / Alexy , O . , Criscuolo , P . , and Salter , A . 2012 . Managing unsolic - ited ideas for R & D . California Management Review 54 ( 3 ) : 116 – 139 . doi : 10 . 1525 / cmr . 2012 . 54 . 3 . 116 Bayus , B . 2012 . Crowdsourcing new product ideas over time : An analysis of the Dell IdeaStorm community . Management Science 59 ( 1 ) : 226 – 244 . doi : 10 . 1287 / mnsc . 1120 . 1599 Blohm , I . , Leimeister , J . M . , and Krcmar , H . 2013 . Crowdsourcing : How to benefit from ( too ) many great ideas . MIS Quarterly Executive 12 : 199 – 211 . Chesbrough , H . , and Bogers , M . 2014 . Explicating open inno - vation : Clarifying an emerging paradigm for understanding innovation . Chapter 1 in New Frontiers in Open Innovation , edited by Henry Chesbrough , Wim Vanhaverbeke , and Joel West . Oxford Scholarship Online . doi : 10 . 1093 / acprof : oso / 9780199682461 . 003 . 0001 Chesbrough , H . , and Brunswicker , S . 2014 . A fad or a phenom - enon ? : The adoption of open innovation practices in large firms . Research - Technology Management 57 ( 2 ) : 16 – 25 . doi : 10 . 5437 / 08956308X5702196 Chesbrough , H . , and Di Minin , A . 2014 . Open social innovation . In New Frontiers in Open Innovation , edited by H . Chesbrough , W . Vanhaverbeke , and J . West , 301 – 315 . Oxford : Oxford University Press . Converse , J . M . , and Presser , S . 1986 . Survey Questions : Handcrafting the Standardized Questionnaire . Thousand Oaks , CA : Sage Publications . Edmondson , A . C . , and Mcmanus , S . E . 2007 . Methodological fit in management field research . Academy of Management Review 32 ( 4 ) : 1246 – 1264 . doi : 10 . 5465 / amr . 2007 . 26586086 Eisenhardt , K . M . , Graebner , M . E . , and Sonenshein , S . 2016 . Grand challenges and inductive methods : Rigor without rigor mortis . Academy of Management Journal 59 ( 4 ) : 1113 – 1123 . doi : 10 . 5465 / amj . 2016 . 4004 Franke , N . , Poetz , M . K . , and Schreier , M . 2013 . Integrating problem solvers from analogous markets in new product ide - ation . Management Science 60 ( 4 ) : 1063 – 1081 . doi : 10 . 1287 / mnsc . 2013 . 1805 Frey , K . , Lüthje , C . , and Haag , S . 2011 . Whom should firms attract to open innovation platforms ? The role of knowledge diversity and motivation . Long Range Planning 44 ( 5 - 6 ) : 397 – 420 . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . lrp . 2011 . 09 . 006 Fullerton , R . , Linster , B . , McKee , M . , and Slate , S . 2002 . Using auctions to reward tournament winners : Theory and exper - imental investigations . The RAND Journal of Economics 33 ( 1 ) : 62 – 84 . doi : 10 . 2307 / 2696375 Fullerton , R . , Linster , B . G . , McKee , M . , and Slate , S . 1999 . An Experimental Investigation of Research Tournaments . Economic Inquiry 37 ( 4 ) : 624 – 636 . doi : 10 . 1111 / j . 1465 - 7295 . 1999 . tb01452 . x Goldenberg , S . 2011 . BP’s oil spill crowdsourcing exercise : ‘a lot of effort for little result’ . The Guardian , July 12 . https : / / www . theguardian . com / environment / 2011 / jul / 12 / bp - deepwater - horizon - oil - spill - crowdsourcing Gustetic , J . L . , Crusan , J . , Rader , S . , and Ortega , S . 2015 . Outcome - driven open innovation at NASA . Space Policy 34 ( Supplement C ) : 11 – 17 . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . spacepol . 2015 . 06 . 002 Gustetic , J . L . , Friedensen , V . , Kessler , J . L . , Jackson , S . , and Parr , J . 2018 . NASA’s asteroid grand challenge : Strategy , results , 38 | Research - Technology Management Innovation Contest Benefits and lessons learned . Space Policy 44 – 45 : 1 – 13 . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . spacepol . 2018 . 02 . 003 Hitt , J . 2007 . The amateur future of space travel . The New York Times . June 30 . https : / / www . nytimes . com / 2007 / 07 / 01 / mag - azine / 01nasa - t . html Howe , J . 2006 . The rise of crowdsourcing . Wired , June 1 . https : / / www . wired . com / 2006 / 06 / crowds / Jeppesen , L . B . , and Lakhani , K . R . 2010 . Marginality and prob - lem - solving effectiveness in broadcast search . Organization Science 21 ( 5 ) : 1016 – 1033 . doi : 10 . 1287 / orsc . 1090 . 0491 Johnston , C . 2012 . Netflix never used its $ 1 million algorithm due to engineering costs . Wired , April 14 . https : / / www . wired . com / 2012 / 04 / netflix - prize - costs / Kay , L . 2011 . The effect of inducement prizes on innovation : Evidence from the Ansari XPrize and the Northrop Grumman Lunar Lander Challenge . R & D Management 41 ( 4 ) : 360 – 377 . doi : 10 . 1111 / j . 1467 - 9310 . 2011 . 00653 . x Kiran , B . S . , and Sharma , R . 2021 . Designing and driving crowd - sourcing contests in large public service organizations . Research - Technology Management 64 ( 3 ) : 48 – 57 . doi : 10 . 1080 / 08956308 . 2021 . 1891821 Lakhani , K . R . , Garvin , D . A . , and Lonstein , E . 2010 . TopCoder ( A ) : Developing Software through Crowdsourcing . Harvard Business School Case 610 - 032 . Boston , MA : Harvard Business School Publishing . Lakhani , K . R . , Hutter , K . , Pokrywa , S . H . , and Fuller , J . 2013 . Open innovation at Siemens . Harvard Business School Case 613 - 100 . Boston , MA : Harvard Business School Publishing . Lakhani , K . R . , Lifshitz - Assaf , H . , and Tushman , M . 2013 . Open Innovation and Organizational Boundaries : Task Decomposition , Knowledge Distribution and the Locus of Innovation . In Handbook of Economic Organization : Integrating Economic and Organization Theory , 355 – 382 . Edited by Grandori , A . Edward Elgar Publishing . Lifshitz - Assaf , H . 2018 . Dismantling knowledge boundaries at NASA : The critical role of professional identity in open inno - vation . Administrative Science Quarterly 63 ( 4 ) : 746 – 782 . doi : 10 . 1177 / 0001839217747876 McCausland , T . 2020 . Innovating with the crowd . Research - Technology Management 63 ( 3 ) : 59 – 63 . doi : 10 . 1080 / 08956308 . 2020 . 1733899 Miles , M . B . , and Huberman , A . M . 1994 . Qualitative Data Analysis : An Expanded Sourcebook . Thousand Oaks , CA : Sage Publications . Morgan , J . , and Wang , R . 2010 . Tournaments for Ideas . California Management Review 52 ( 2 ) : 77 – 97 . doi : 10 . 1525 / cmr . 2010 . 52 . 2 . 77 Murray , F . , Stern , S . , Campbell , G . , and MacCormack , A . 2012 . Grand innovation prizes : A theoretical , normative , and empirical evaluation . Research Policy 41 ( 10 ) : 1779 – 1792 . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . respol . 2012 . 06 . 013 Natalicchio , A . , Messeni Petruzzelli , A . , and Garavelli , A . C . 2017 . Innovation problems and search for solutions in crowdsourcing platforms – A simulation approach . Technovation 64 - 65 : 28 – 42 . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . technovation . 2017 . 05 . 002 Paik , J . H . , Scholl , M . , Sergeev , R . , Randazzo , S . , and Lakhani , K . R . 2020 . Innovation contests for high - tech procurement . Research - Technology Management 63 ( 2 ) : 36 – 45 . doi : 10 . 1080 / 08956308 . 2020 . 1707007 Piezunka , H . , and Dahlander , L . 2015 . Distant search , narrow attention : How crowding alters organizations’ filtering of suggestions in crowdsourcing . Academy of Management Journal 58 ( 3 ) : 856 – 880 . doi : 10 . 5465 / amj . 2012 . 0458 Piller , F . T . , and Walcher , D . 2006 . Toolkits for idea competitions : A novel method to integrate users in new product develop - ment . R & D Management 36 ( 3 ) : 307 – 318 . doi : 10 . 1111 / j . 1467 - 9310 . 2006 . 00432 . x Poetz , M . , and Schreier , M . 2012 . The value of crowdsourcing : Can users really compete with professionals in generating new product ideas ? Journal of Product Innovation Management 29 ( 2 ) : 245 – 256 . doi : 10 . 1111 / j . 1540 - 5885 . 2011 . 00893 . x Randhawa , K . , Wilden , R . , and West , J . 2019 . Crowdsourcing without profit : The role of the seeker in open social innovation . R & D Management 49 ( 3 ) : 298 – 317 . doi : 10 . 1111 / radm . 12357 Ruiz , E . , Brion , S . , and Parmentier , G . 2020 . Absorbing knowl - edge in the digital age : The key role of integration mecha - nisms in the context of crowdsourcing for innovation . R & D Management 50 ( 1 ) : 63 – 74 . doi : 10 . 1111 / radm . 12349 Schmidthuber , L . , Piller , F . , Bogers , M . , and Hilgers , D . 2019 . Citizen participation in public administration : Investigating open government for social innovation . R & D Management 49 ( 3 ) : 343 – 355 . doi : 10 . 1111 / radm . 12365 Siggelkow , N . 2007 . Persuasion with case studies . Academy of Management Journal 50 ( 1 ) : 20 – 24 . doi : 10 . 5465 / amj . 2007 . 24160882 Spencer , R . W . 2012 . Open innovation in the eighteenth century . Research - Technology Management 55 ( 4 ) : 39 – 43 . doi : 10 . 5437 / 08956308X5504074 Strauss , A . , and Corbin , J . M . 1990 . Basics of Qualitative Research : Grounded Theory Procedures and Techniques . Thousand Oaks , CA : Sage Publications . Szajnfarber , Z . , and Vrolijk , A . 2018 . A facilitated expert - based approach to architecting “openable” complex systems . Systems Engineering 21 ( 1 ) : 47 – 58 . doi : 10 . 1002 / sys . 21419 Szajnfarber , Z . , Zhang , L . , Mukherjee , S . , Crusan , J . , Hennig , A . , and Vrolijk , A . 2020 . Who is in the Crowd ? Characterizing the capabilities of prize competition competitors . IEEE Transactions on Engineering Management 1 – 15 . doi : 10 . 1109 / TEM . 2020 . 2991370 Taylor , C . R . 1995 . Digging for golden carrots : An analysis of research tournaments . The American Economic Review 85 ( 4 ) : 872 – 890 . Terwiesch , C . , and Xu , Y . 2008 . Innovation contests , open inno - vation , and multiagent problem solving . Management Science 54 ( 9 ) : 1529 – 1543 . doi : 10 . 1287 / mnsc . 1080 . 0884 Vermicelli , S . , Cricelli , L . , and Grimaldi , M . 2021 . How can crowdsourcing help tackle the COVID - 19 pandemic ? An explorative overview of innovative collaborative practices . R & D Management 51 ( 2 ) : 183 – 194 . doi : 10 . 1111 / radm . 12443 Vrolijk , A . , and Szajnfarber , Z . 2021 . Exploring how prize chal - lenges complement an organization’s innovation efforts . Paper presented at CESUN 2020 Engineering Systems Symposium . doi : 10 . 5703 / 1288284317288 Yin , R . K . 2009 . Case Study Research : Design and Methods . Thousand Oaks , CA : Sage Publications . Zobel , A . - K . 2017 . Benefiting from open innovation : A multi - dimensional model of absorptive capacity . Journal of Product Innovation Management 34 ( 3 ) : 269 – 288 . doi : 10 . 1111 / jpim . 12361 < BI >