Review Animal models of acute lung injury Gustavo Matute - Bello , 1 , 2 Charles W . Frevert , 1 , 3 and Thomas R . Martin 1 1 Medical Research Service of the Veterans Affairs / Puget Sound Health Care System and 2 Center for Lung Biology , Division of Pulmonary and Critical Care Medicine , Department of Medicine , and 3 Department of Comparative Medicine , University of Washington School of Medicine , Seattle , Washington Matute - Bello G , Frevert CW , Martin TR . Animal models of acute lung injury . Am J Physiol Lung Cell Mol Physiol 295 : L379 – L399 , 2008 . First published July 11 , 2008 ; doi : 10 . 1152 / ajplung . 00010 . 2008 . —Acute lung injury in humans is char - acterized histopathologically by neutrophilic alveolitis , injury of the alveolar epithelium and endothelium , hyaline membrane formation , and microvascular thrombi . Different animal models of experimental lung injury have been used to investigate mechanisms of lung injury . Most are based on reproducing in animals known risk factors for ARDS , such as sepsis , lipid embolism secondary to bone fracture , acid aspiration , ischemia - reperfusion of pulmonary or distal vascular beds , and other clinical risks . However , none of these models fully reproduces the features of human lung injury . The goal of this review is to summarize the strengths and weaknesses of existing models of lung injury . We review the speciﬁc features of human ARDS that should be modeled in experimental lung injury and then discuss speciﬁc characteristics of animal species that may affect the pulmonary host response to noxious stimuli . We emphasize those models of lung injury that are based on reproducing risk factors for human ARDS in animals and discuss the advantages and disadvantages of each model and the extent to which each model reproduces human ARDS . The present review will help guide investigators in the design and interpretation of animal studies of acute lung injury . acute respiratory distress syndrome ; human lung injury THE CHALLENGE OF MODELING HUMAN LUNG INJURY Acute lung injury ( ALI ) and its most severe manifestation , the acute respiratory distress syndrome ( ARDS ) , is a clinical syndrome deﬁned by acute hypoxemic respiratory failure , bilateral pulmonary inﬁltrates consistent with edema , and nor - mal cardiac ﬁlling pressures ( 5 , 235 ) . The fundamental mech - anisms that initiate and propagate the lung injury have not been deﬁned completely , despite almost 35 years of intense inves - tigation . Human studies have provided important descriptive information about the onset and evolution of the physiological and inﬂammatory changes in the lungs . This information has led to hypotheses about mechanisms of injury , but for the most part , these hypotheses have been difﬁcult to test in humans because of the many clinical variables that are difﬁcult to control in critically ill patients . Animal models provide a bridge between patients and the laboratory bench . Hypotheses generated in human studies can be tested directly in animal models , and the results of studies in more simple in vitro systems can be tested in animal models to assess their relevance in intact living systems . Mechanistic studies can be performed either by treating normal animals with inhibitors that block key steps in speciﬁc pathways or by creating animals with speciﬁc gene alterations to test the importance of single gene products or pathways . Without animal models there would be no way to test clinical hypoth - eses generated in patients using intact biological systems , and there would be no way to validate the importance of funda - mental laboratory ﬁndings without going directly to human experimentation . Animal model studies are most helpful if the characteristics of the model are directly relevant to humans . Animal model studies are also valuable if they show that a concept proven in cellular or subcellular systems is relevant in a complex animal , even if the human relevance of the speciﬁc animal model is uncertain . This is often the case when basic laboratory observations are tested in mice . For example , showing that an inhibitor of a speciﬁc cellular pathway protects mice from sepsis or oxidant - induced lung injury suggests that the pathway is important in living animals , but the ﬁndings need to be tested further in models closer to humans . Animal studies are hierarchical , as studies with mice or lower animals are relatively simple and rapid to do , but the relevance for humans is limited . On the other hand , studies in primates are relevant for humans , but are complex to organize , require scarce resources , and are expensive . The purpose of this review is to summarize the strengths and weaknesses of different types of animal models that have been used to study the mechanisms and treatment of ALI . We will review the characteristics of human lung injury that need to be modeled in animal systems and then discuss the characteristics of different animals that need to be considered in designing experi - mental studies . We will summarize model systems that have been used and the major experimental ﬁndings . Last , we will suggest new directions that need to be considered in reﬁning the use of animal models for the study of ALI in humans . What Should A Model Model ? Ideally , animal models of ALI should reproduce the mech - anisms and consequences of ALI in humans , including the Address for reprint requests and other correspondence : G . Matute - Bello , 815 Mercer St . , Seattle , WA 98109 . Am J Physiol Lung Cell Mol Physiol 295 : L379 – L399 , 2008 . First published July 11 , 2008 ; doi : 10 . 1152 / ajplung . 00010 . 2008 . http : / / www . ajplung . org L379 b y 10 . 220 . 32 . 246 on M a y 2 9 , 2017 h tt p : / / a j p l ung . ph ys i o l og y . o r g / D o w n l oaded f r o m physiological and pathological changes that occur ( Table 1 ) . Because the responses of the lungs to injury change with time , the evolution of the injury and repair should also be reproduced in the model , even if speciﬁc studies focus on a narrow time frame . In humans , the intrapulmonary inﬂammatory response begins before the onset of clinically deﬁned ALI and is most intense in the ﬁrst 3 days after the onset of ALI / ARDS ( 78 , 158 ) . The acute inﬂammatory phase is followed by a chronic ﬁbroproliferative phase in patients who remain intubated and mechanically ventilated . In patients who survive , pulmonary function tests often show restriction , consistent with the paren - chymal ﬁbrosis seen in lung biopsies or autopsy specimens ( 137 , 173 ) . The acute physiological changes at the onset of ALI / ARDS in humans include severe hypoxemia that is usually responsive to positive end - expiratory pressure ( PEEP ) and a fall in total thoracic compliance caused by reduced lung compliance . A marked increase in extravascular lung water is caused by an increase in endothelial and epithelial permeability , associated with an impairment in the ability of the alveolar epithelium to actively clear alveolar ﬂuid ( 37 , 134 , 193 , 234 ) . These changes cause severe ventilation / perfusion mismatching and an in - crease in shunt fraction . Studies that have sampled lung alveolar ﬂuids either by bronchoalveolar lavage ( BAL ) or by direct aspiration of edema ﬂuid using deep airway suction have shown that the hallmark is an acute neutrophilic inﬂammatory response with ﬁbrin - rich proteinaceous exudates containing an array of pro - and anti - inﬂammatory cytokines ( reviewed in Ref . 165 ) . ALI / ARDS also occurs in neutropenic patients , when alveolar structures are damaged by ionizing radiation or chemotherapeutic agents ( 156 ) . Markers of the ﬁbrotic re - sponse such as procollagen peptide III are evident as soon as the lung injury begins ( 29 , 130 ) and are greatest in patients who die ( 29 , 130 ) . Surfactant abnormalities were suspected when ALI / ARDS was ﬁrst described , and abnormalities of surfactant composition and function have been described in a number of studies ( 80 , 81 , 164 ) . Detailed studies of lung pathology in patients at the onset and during the course of ALI / ARDS are limited , and informa - tion is derived from the study of the lungs of patients who died or underwent late open lung biopsy ( 6 , 10 ) . These studies conﬁrm the severe epithelial and endothelial injury and the late ﬁbroproliferative response ( Fig . 1 ) . The injury to the epithe - lium tends to be more pronounced than the endothelial injury ( 10 ) , but endothelial injury and microvascular thrombi are detectable , supporting angiographic ﬁndings in humans with ALI / ARDS ( 218 ) . The hallmark of the late ﬁbroproliferative response is injury of the alveolar basement membrane , with ﬁbroblast proliferation and increases in types I and III collagen in the alveolar walls and the alveolar spaces ( 173 ) . To simulate human ALI / ARDS , animal models should re - produce the acute injury to the epithelial and endothelial barriers in the lungs and the acute inﬂammatory response in the air spaces . Ideally , the injury should evolve over time if the animals are supported for prolonged periods . One of the most difﬁcult aspects of modeling human ALI in humans is that the lungs of humans can be affected by the mechanisms involved in the primary illness ( e . g . , sepsis ) and / or they can be affected by therapeutic modalities used for supportive care ( e . g . , me - chanical ventilation ) ( 224 ) . This increases the complexity of the ideal animal model of lung injury , as it requires the incorporation of speciﬁc treatment modalities into experimen - tal protocols , adding additional variables to the experimental design . No single animal model reproduces all of the characteristics of ALI / ARDS in humans , and most of the existing animal models are relevant for only limited aspects of human ALI / ARDS . Nevertheless , if the characteristics of an animal model are well understood , and the results are interpreted within the limits of the speciﬁc model , animal studies can provide focused tests of key elements of the lung injury response in humans . UNIQUE CHARACTERISTICS OF ANIMAL SPECIES IN MODELING HUMAN LUNG INJURY A number of different animal species have been used to study lung injury , yet there are important and sometimes major differences among animal species in responses to injury , par - ticularly injury in response to microbial products . This section highlights some of the critical species differences that should be considered when modeling human lung injury . In addition , special considerations such as size , availability of species - speciﬁc reagents , and the use of genetically modiﬁed animals are discussed . Species Differences in the Innate Immune Response Species differences in Toll - like receptors . Early investigators studying the physiological consequences of endotoxin recog - nized that differences existed between animal species in the development of ALI ( 123 ) . Because humans and mice diverged as separate species millions of years ago , they have adapted to pathogens that are speciﬁc to their unique environmental niches , so it is not surprising that differences exist in the innate immune response of humans and mice to microbes and microbial prod - ucts . Leukocytes and some mesenchymal cells of humans and lower animals recognize microbial products via a group of specialized pattern recognition receptors called Toll - like recep - tors . The work of Hajjar and colleagues ( 83 ) suggested evolu - tionary divergence in these receptors by showing that Toll - like receptor 4 ( TLR4 ) from humans and mice recognize different lipopolysaccharide structures . Other examples include species differences in TLR2 ( 133 , 146 ) , TRL3 ( 89 ) , TLR7 , TLR8 ( 248 ) , and TLR9 ( 100 ) ( reviewed in Ref . 175 ) . Species differ - ences in innate immune responses need to be taken into Table 1 . Characteristics of human lung injury Clinical features Acute onset Diffuse bilateral alveolar injury Acute exudative phase Repair with ﬁbrosis Physiological changes V / Q abnormalities Severe hypoxemia Decreased compliance Impaired alveolar ﬂuid clearance Biological changes Increased endothelial and epithelial permeability Increase in cytokine concentrations in the lungs Protease activation Coagulation abnormalities Pathological changes Neutrophilic alveolar inﬁltrates Intra - alveolar coagulation and ﬁbrin deposition Injury of the alveolar epithelium with denudation of the basement membrane Review L380 ANIMAL MODELS OF ACUTE LUNG INJURY AJP - Lung Cell Mol Physiol (cid:127) VOL 295 (cid:127) SEPTEMBER 2008 (cid:127) www . ajplung . org b y 10 . 220 . 32 . 246 on M a y 2 9 , 2017 h tt p : / / a j p l ung . ph ys i o l og y . o r g / D o w n l oaded f r o m account in selecting animal models of ALI for speciﬁc exper - imental protocols . Species differences in the mononuclear phagocyte system . The mononuclear phagocyte system ( MPS ) is composed of macrophages and macrophage precursors such as blood mono - cytes . Intravascular macrophages directly face the circulation where they can bind to and ingest microorganisms , endotoxin , and particles circulating in blood . The distribution of intravas - cular macrophages varies across species . In many species , intravascular macrophages are restricted to the spleen and liver , e . g . , splenic macrophages and Kupffer cells . But in some species , the lungs contain pulmonary intravascular macro - phages ( PIM ) , a resident population of mature macrophages that adhere to endothelial cells in pulmonary capillaries . The PIM are found in the lungs of many species including sheep , cattle , pigs , cats , goats , horses , and cetaceans . In species that have PIM , particulate matter and LPS in blood are local - ized to the lungs . In contrast , species that lack PIM such as the dog , rat , mouse , rabbit , and non - human primates , localize particulate matter in blood to the liver and spleen ( 24 ) . Most evidence suggests that PIM are not part of the MPS in normal humans ( 236 ) . The role of PIMs in the development of lung injury was investigated in studies through depletion of these macrophages in sheep , which decreased endotoxin - induced lung injury ( 206 ) . Therefore , the presence of PIM increases the susceptibility of a species to lung injury ( Table 2 ) , which should be taken into account when developing animal models of human lung injury ( 236 ) . Species differences in nitric oxide . Clinical studies and animal models suggest that nitric oxide ( NO ) is involved in the pathogenesis of lung injury ( 202 , 232 ) , and important species - dependent differences in NO pathways have been described . For example , the production of NO during the TLR - mediated antimicrobial response to Mycobacterium tuberculosis varies among species . In humans , macrophages kill M . tuberculosis through a vitamin D - dependent response ( 127 ) . In contrast , mice , nocturnal animals with minimal exposure to sunlight , have developed a TLR - mediated pathway in macrophages , which kills M . tuberculosis through NO - dependent mecha - nisms ( 216 ) . Additional studies show that human and rodent macrophages differ signiﬁcantly in their ability to produce NO . Rodent macrophages produce large amounts of NO , whereas normal nonactivated human macrophages make very little NO ( 187 , 188 ) . Macrophages of cattle produce NO , whereas mac - rophages of hamsters , monkeys , goats , and pigs are more like human macrophages and generate very little NO ( 48 , 104 , 106 , 188 ) . Variability in the production of NO by macrophages of different species must be taken into consideration when ex - trapolating results from animal studies to humans ( Table 2 ) . Species differences in chemokines and chemokine receptors . CXCL8 / interleukin - 8 is a potent neutrophil chemotactic factor that has been implicated in the pathogenesis of ALI ( 15 , 139 ) . Fig . 1 . Human ARDS . Photomicrographs from the lungs of 2 different patients with ARDS stained with H & E . The alveolar spaces are ﬁlled with a mixed mononuclear / neutrophilic inﬁltrate , the alveolar walls are thickened , and the septae are edematous . Note the presence of cellular debris and proteinaceous material in the air spaces ( A , magniﬁcation (cid:1) 200 ; B , (cid:1) 400 ) . In later stages , there is a ﬁbroproliferative response with collagen deposition in the alveolar walls ( arrows ) . Note that the alveolar epithelium has been replaced with cuboidal cells ( arrow - heads ) . Magniﬁcation in C , (cid:1) 200 ; D , (cid:1) 400 . Table 2 . Unique characteristics of animal species relevant to modeling lung injury Animal % Identity with Human TLR4 HVR Pulmonary Intravascular Macrophages LPS Sensitivity NitricOxide Production Human 100 % No Intermediate (cid:2) NHP 95 % No Intermediate (cid:2) Pig ND Yes High (cid:2)(cid:2) Dog ND No Low (cid:2)(cid:2) Sheep ND Yes High (cid:2)(cid:2) Rabbit 57 % No Intermediate (cid:2)(cid:2) Rat 48 % No Low (cid:2)(cid:2)(cid:2) Mouse 48 % No Low (cid:2)(cid:2)(cid:2) HVR , hypervariable region of TLR4 ; NH , nonhuman primate ; ND , not determined . Review L381 ANIMAL MODELS OF ACUTE LUNG INJURY AJP - Lung Cell Mol Physiol (cid:127) VOL 295 (cid:127) SEPTEMBER 2008 (cid:127) www . ajplung . org b y 10 . 220 . 32 . 246 on M a y 2 9 , 2017 h tt p : / / a j p l ung . ph ys i o l og y . o r g / D o w n l oaded f r o m CXCL8 and related CXC - chemokines are produced by all species in response to bacterial products . Mice and rats lack the gene for CXCL8 but produce two related CXC chemokines , KC and macrophage inﬂammatory protein - 2 ( MIP - 2 ) . KC and MIP - 2 share more sequence identity with human CXCL1 - 3 / GRO (cid:3) , (cid:4) , and (cid:5) than they do with CXCL8 ( 253 ) but are considered the functional homologs of human CXCL8 because of their critical role in the recruitment of neutrophils into lungs ( 219 ) . Recent work by Fan and colleagues ( 58 ) demonstrated that mice express two CXC - receptors , CXCR1 and CXCR2 , similar to humans , and that human CXCL8 and mouse GCP - 2 / CXCL6 bind murine CXCR1 . In contrast , murine MIP - 2 and KC activate neutrophils by binding to murine CXCR2 and do not bind to murine CXCR1 . Additional work is needed to determine the role of murine GCP - 2 / CXCL6 in the develop - ment of ALI in mice . Special Considerations Animal size . Animal size is an important consideration in selecting animal models of ALI . This is especially true when physiological parameters such as arterial oxygen tension and mean arterial pressure are monitored ( 135 ) . Until recently , body size has prohibited the measurement of physiological parameters in mice . With the development of small implant - able radiotelemetry transmitters , the measurement of systemic blood pressure , heart rate , and temperature is now possible in unrestrained mice , although it remains difﬁcult and expensive ( 27 ) . Size is also an important consideration for the collection of blood . It is easier to obtain sufﬁcient quantities of blood or to obtain multiple blood samples in larger species such as the rabbit or nonhuman primates . The ability to obtain multiple blood samples is important when the study design requires monitoring of physiological parameters , such as blood gases , plasma cytokines , and leukocyte counts over time . Conversely , cost constraints , the amount of reagent required , and availabil - ity can limit the use of larger species . Species - speciﬁc reagents . Investigators are often faced with a lack of species - speciﬁc reagents to measure inﬂammatory mediators , receptors , or other proteins , which are involved in the pathogenesis of ALI . To circumvent this problem , cross - species reagents have been used . In several studies in which comparisons were made between species - speciﬁc and cross - species ELISAs , species - speciﬁc ELISAs produced more sen - sitive and speciﬁc results ( 107 , 108 ) . While this does not exclude their use , cross - species ELISA may underestimate the amount of a speciﬁc protein in a biological sample . The Mouse as a Tool to Study the Biology of ALI Mouse models of human disease are widely used because of the availability of speciﬁc reagents and the development of genetically modiﬁed mice that can be used to evaluate the physiological function of speciﬁc genes . Genetically modiﬁed mice have been used extensively in the study of inﬂammatory processes in the lungs . A number of excellent reviews of the production of genetically modiﬁed mice are available ( 56 , 97 , 203 ) ( reviewed in Refs . 22 , 41 , 91 , 252 ) . An important con - sideration when using genetically modiﬁed mice is the selec - tion of appropriate controls to eliminate genetic and environ - mental background effects ( 200 ) . The best controls are con - genic mice , which are essentially isogenic with an inbred strain of mice except for the gene of interest . Another option is to use the offspring of heterozygous breeding pairs , so that age - and sex - matched littermates can be used to minimize environmen - tal and genetic variability . From a practical standpoint it is often difﬁcult to use congenic mice or the offspring of het - erozygous breeding pairs because of the number of animals involved . However , it is important to understand how to select appropriate controls for experiments using transgenic mice so that robust conclusions can be drawn about the function of speciﬁc genes . ALI has many etiologies , suggesting that numerous genetic , environmental , and developmental factors are involved in the progression of this clinical syndrome . In recent years , genomic , proteomic , statistical , and computational resources have been applied to developing animal models that can be used to investigate complex genetic traits . Speciﬁc examples include association mapping in classic inbred mouse strains ( 32 , 160 ) . By taking full advantage of the genetic power of mice , inves - tigators will be able to better understand complex disease processes such as ALI . However , it is also important to remember that mice and humans have evolved under different evolutionary pressures , so caution is needed when extrapolat - ing ﬁndings in mouse models to human disease . AGENTS TO INDUCE LUNG INJURY / MODEL SYSTEMS Most animal models of ALI are based on clinical disorders that are associated with ALI / ARDS in humans . These include sepsis , multiple transfusions , multiple trauma , aspiration of gastric contents , and reperfusion of ischemic tissues ( 95 , 163 ) . Exposure to high concentrations of oxygen is another factor associated with ALI , but the data linking exposure to high concentrations of oxygen with the development of human lung injury are limited ( 12 ) . Investigators have tried to reproduce each of these risk factors in a variety of animals , and the frequency with which each model has been reported in the English literature within the past 5 years is shown in Table 3 . In this section , we will review models of lung injury that target primarily the vascular endothelium , the alveolar epithelium , or more than one site . We will emphasize the similarities and differences between each model and human lung injury , comment on species variability within each model , and identify the major advantages and disadvantages of each model ( Table 4 ) . Particular emphasis has been placed on models that attempt to reproduce an acute neutrophilic alveolitis similar to that seen in ARDS . Table 3 . Number of papers indexed in PubMed using animal models of acute lung injury in the English literature from 2003 – 2007 n % Mechanical ventilation 436 30 % LPS 279 19 % Live bacteria 224 16 % Hyperoxia 175 12 % Bleomycin 149 10 % Oleic acid 79 5 % Cecal ligation and puncture 61 4 % Acid aspiration 38 3 % Total 1 , 441 100 % Review L382 ANIMAL MODELS OF ACUTE LUNG INJURY AJP - Lung Cell Mol Physiol (cid:127) VOL 295 (cid:127) SEPTEMBER 2008 (cid:127) www . ajplung . org b y 10 . 220 . 32 . 246 on M a y 2 9 , 2017 h tt p : / / a j p l ung . ph ys i o l og y . o r g / D o w n l oaded f r o m Models That Target Primarily the Capillary Endothelium Oleic acid . Basis for the model : oleic acid ( cis - 9 - octadece - noic acid ) is the most common free fatty acid in mammals , representing 60 % of the free fatty acid pool ( 61 ) . Oleic acid also represents (cid:6) 50 % of the total fatty acids present in pul - monary emboli in patients with long bone trauma ( 198 ) . The oleic acid model was developed as an attempt to reproduce ALI due to lipid embolism ( 191 ) . Mechanism : oleic acid is directly toxic to endothelial cells at concentrations of 5 (cid:1) 10 (cid:7) 4 M in vitro ( 17 ) . Within 1 min of intravenous oleic acid administration ( 0 . 04 ml / kg in dogs ) , electron microscopy reveals severe vacuolation of endothelial cells , and passage of an intravascular marker , Evans blue dye , into the subendothelial space ( 144 ) . The damage to the endo - thelium appears to be due to necrosis , rather than apoptosis ( 96 ) . Endothelial injury is followed by epithelial injury , with swelling and necrosis of type I cells , but no evidence of apoptosis ( 96 ) . Within 30 min , oleic acid becomes detectable in the air spaces . Oleic acid is not detected intracellularly and remains in the extracellular space and the air spaces ( 17 ) . The actual mechanism whereby oleic acid induces cell death is not clear , but direct membrane damage is likely to be an important event . Technical issues : oleic acid is insoluble in water and must be dissolved in ethanol or emulsiﬁed in blood before administra - tion . It can be administered via a peripheral vein , a central vein , or directly into the right atrium or the pulmonary artery . Because of the need for intravenous administration , oleic acid has been used more extensively in rats and larger animals than in mice . Regardless of the route of intravenous administration ( peripheral vs . central ) , the effects of oleic acid are evident almost immediately ( 247 ) . Single doses of oleic acid lead to ALI that is greatest at 12 h and decreases towards 24 h , whereas repeated doses result in pulmonary ﬁbrosis ( 44 ) . Characteristics of the lung injury : oleic - acid lung injury is characterized by an early phase of necrosis and microvascular thrombosis , followed by a repair stage with proliferation of type 2 cells and ﬁbrotic foci in subpleural areas ( 44 ) . Micro - scopically , the injury is multifocal and heterogeneous , with some areas showing only minimal changes ; other areas show interstitial edema and varying degrees of air space edema , and some areas show extensive hemorrhagic inﬁltration with ﬁbrin deposition ( 74 , 221 ) ( Fig . 2 ) . There is neutrophilic inﬁltration , but the injury is not dependent on PMN , suggesting that a direct effect of oleic acid on the endothelium is the critical event ( 105 ) . Electron microscopic examination reveals necro - sis and detachment of alveolar epithelial cells , necrosis of endothelial cells , and exposure of the basement membrane on both the epithelial and the endothelial sides ( 221 ) . On macro - scopic examination , the lungs show patchy areas of hemor - rhage and edema , which become conﬂuent in dependent areas . Nondependent areas are usually spared ( 44 , 46 ) . Table 4 . Animal models of lung injury Model ( Ref . ) Similarities with ARDS Differences with ARDS Technical Issues Oleic acid ( 191 ) Acute and repair phases with similar histopathological and physiological features to human ARDS Only a fraction of human ARDS is caused by fat embolism Does not model the physiopathology of septic ARDS Good reproducibility Requires intravenous injection of oleic acid , which can be difﬁcult in small animals LPS ( 239 ) Neutrophilic inﬂammatory response with increase in intrapulmonary cytokines The changes in alveolar - capillary permeability are mild Very reproducible Acid aspiration ( 141 ) Disruption of the alveolar / capillary barrier with neutrophilic inﬁltration Humans aspirate gastric contents , not pure acid Very reproducible Narrow difference between injurious and noninjurious doses Hyperoxia ( 67 ) Acute phase of epithelial injury and neutrophilic inﬁltration followed by type II cell proliferation and scarring In normal human lungs , 100 % oxygen has not induced lung injury ; it is unclear whether hyperoxia is involved in the pathogenesis of ARDS Good reproducibility Requires special equipment to administer and monitor the desired gas concentrations Bleomycin ( 143 ) Acute inﬂammatory injury followed by reversible ﬁbrosis No formation of hyaline membranes . Physiopathological relevance unclear Good reproducibility Saline lavage ( 49 , 124 ) Depletion of surfactant Decreased lung compliance Impaired gas exchange Without an additional stimulus , there is minimal impairment of permeability and little PMN recruitment Animals must be anesthetized , intubated , and ventilated throughout the procedure and afterwards Pulmonary ischemia / reperfusion ( 186 ) Increase in pulmonary vascular permeability PMN inﬁltration The injury is usually hemorrhagic Requires complex animal surgery Nonpulmonaryischemia / reperfusion ( 120 ) Increased microvascular permeability and PMN sequestration in the lungs The injury is mild , and the inﬂammatory component mostly limited to the interstitium Requires complex surgery Intravenous bacteria ( 39 ) Interstitial edema , intravascular congestion , PMN sequestration Minimal neutrophilic alveolitis ; no hyaline membrane formation Important biological variability Intrapulmonary bacteria ( 64 ) Increased permeability , interstitial edema , neutrophilic alveolitis Positive cultures rare in early ARDS ( 14 ) Important biological variability Peritonitis ( 135 ) Increased permeability , variable degrees of neutrophilic alveolitis Minimal hyaline membrane formation Biological variability Lethal dose close to injury dose Cecal ligation and puncture ( 223 ) Increased permeability , variable neutrophilic alveolitis Minimal hyaline membrane formation Biological variability Surgery required Review L383 ANIMAL MODELS OF ACUTE LUNG INJURY AJP - Lung Cell Mol Physiol (cid:127) VOL 295 (cid:127) SEPTEMBER 2008 (cid:127) www . ajplung . org b y 10 . 220 . 32 . 246 on M a y 2 9 , 2017 h tt p : / / a j p l ung . ph ys i o l og y . o r g / D o w n l oaded f r o m The histological changes of oleic acid lung injury are asso - ciated with marked functional changes . Pulmonary microvas - cular permeability is markedly increased , with elevation of extravascular lung water and leakage of protein - rich ﬂuid into the interstitium and the air spaces ( 46 , 247 ) . These changes in alveolar permeability are proportional to the dose of oleic acid , develop withi n 1 h ofadministration , and are rapidly revers - ible , with the alveolar ﬂuid clearance normalizing within 8 h ( 54 ) . There are also severe alterations in gas exchange , with respiratory acidosis , hypoxemia , and increased alveolar - arterial oxygen difference within 90 min of intravenous administration ( 40 , 46 , 170 , 221 ) . The gas exchange alterations result from severe ventilation / perfusion ( V / Q ) mismatching , increased in - trapulmonary shunt , and increased dead space ventilation ( 170 ) . The static lung compliance and functional residual capacity ( FRC ) fall rapidly , and mean airway pressure rises ( 40 , 125 ) . Systemically , the cellular damage induced by oleic acid becomes evident rapidly , and increases in circulating angiotensin converting enzyme ( ACE ) can be detected within 2 . 5 min after intravenous administration of 0 . 1 ml / kg to dogs ( 151 ) . The hemodynamic responses are dose dependent and are characterized by myocardial depression , early systemic hypo - tension , and pulmonary hypertension ( 40 , 46 , 125 , 190 , 231 ) . Combination with other models : the intravenous administra - tion of small doses of endotoxin markedly worsens gas ex - change in the canine oleic acid model , primarily by increasing the distribution of blood ﬂow towards injured areas ( 192 ) . Advantages and disadvantages : the oleic acid model pro - duces the basic characteristics of ALI , early and rapidly re - versible patchy inﬂammatory lung injury with permeability changes and impairment in gas exchange and lung mechanics . A major advantage of this model is its reproducibility ; the administration of the same dose of oleic acid by the same route to different animals is followed by a reasonably reproducible pulmonary injury . Oleic acid instillation provides an excellent model to study ventilatory strategies , lung mechanics , and V / Q distribution during lung injury in large and small animals . One disadvantage is the requirement for intravenous administration , which requires expertise in small animals like mice . One question is the extent to which this type of injury actually occurs in humans , because few cases of ARDS are associated with long bone trauma or lipid injury ( 95 ) , and there is no evidence that the pathophysiology of the injury caused by oleic acid ( direct toxicity to endothelial cells ) is similar to that underlying ARDS associated with sepsis and aspiration . There - fore , the oleic acid model is probably not as appropriate for studying the pathophysiology of ALI due to sepsis , or thera - peutic strategies aimed at modifying host inﬂammatory re - sponses to reduce the severity of lung injury . Endotoxin . Basis for the model : LPS is a glycolipid present in the outer membrane of gram - negative bacteria that is com - posed of a polar lipid head group ( lipid A ) and a chain of repeating disaccharides ( 171 ) . Most of the biological effects of LPS are reproduced by lipid A ( 189 ) , although the presence or absence of the repeating oligosaccharide O antigen inﬂuences the magnitude of the response ( 112 ) . In serum , LPS binds to a speciﬁc LPS binding protein ( LBP ) ( 131 , 217 ) , forming an LPS : LBP complex that activates the CD14 / TLR4 receptor structure on monocytes , macrophages , and other cells , trigger - ing the production of inﬂammatory mediators ( 211 , 244 , 249 ) ( Fig . 3 , C and D ) . LPS is an important mediator of sepsis in response to gram - negative bacteria , and systemic administra - tion of LPS was one of the earliest approaches used to model the consequences of bacterial sepsis . Mechanism : following intravenous administration of LPS , the capillary endothelium is the initial site of injury . The cellular injury induced by LPS appears to be related to apop - tosis , in contrast to the oleic acid model , in which the injury is due to a direct toxic effect resulting in necrosis . Apoptosis of endothelial cells develops rapidly following administration of LPS and precedes other tissue damage ( 72 , 230 ) . Sys - temic treatment with the broad - spectrum caspase inhibitor Z - VAD . fmk blocks apoptosis and improves survival in mice treated with intravenous LPS ( 111 ) . The hemodynamic response to intravenous LPS is charac - terized by an initial phase of leukopenia , decreased cardiac output , and a fall in arterial pressure . There is an increase in pulmonary arterial pressure , which is due mainly to an increase in the resistance of postcapillary veins ( 123 ) . This initial phase is followed by slow improvement in leukocyte counts and the hemodynamic proﬁle , over 4 – 6 h . Changes in the lungs be - come evident within 2 – 4 h and include hypoxemia with an increase in the alveolar - arterial oxygen difference ( A - a O 2 difference ) . In the lungs , the administration of LPS , either by intravenous or intra - alveolar routes , is followed by changes in PMN deformability and the entrapment of PMN in the pulmo - nary capillaries ( 176 ) . However , only small numbers of PMN migrate into the air spaces . PMN entrapment occurs before epithelial permeability changes or disruption of the alveolar / epithelial barrier ( 9 , 239 , 241 ) . In contrast , intratracheal LPS is followed by large increases in PMN in the air spaces . Fig . 2 . Oleic acid model . Rabbit lungs 6 h after the onset of intravenous infusion of saline ( A ) or 0 . 1 ml (cid:1) kg (cid:7) 1 (cid:1) h (cid:7) 1 oleic acid over 2 h ( B ) . Note the presence of hemorrhage , hyaline membrane formation , and inﬂammatory inﬁl - trates in the lungs of the rabbit treated with oleic acid . Both rabbits were mechanically ventilated for the duration of the experiment ( F I O 2 (cid:8) 0 . 8 , respiratory rate (cid:8) 30 bpm , PEEP (cid:8) 2 cmH 2 O , tidal volume (cid:8) 10 cc / kg ) . [ From Furue et al . ( 74 ) . ] Review L384 ANIMAL MODELS OF ACUTE LUNG INJURY AJP - Lung Cell Mol Physiol (cid:127) VOL 295 (cid:127) SEPTEMBER 2008 (cid:127) www . ajplung . org b y 10 . 220 . 32 . 246 on M a y 2 9 , 2017 h tt p : / / a j p l ung . ph ys i o l og y . o r g / D o w n l oaded f r o m Fig . 3 . Comparison of selected models of acute lung injury ( ALI ) . A and B : normal mouse lungs . The alveolar walls are very thin , and the majority of the alveoli contain no cells ( magniﬁcation in A , (cid:1) 100 ; B , (cid:1) 400 ) . C and D : lungs from a mouse euthanized 18 h after intratracheal instil - lation of 5 ng / g LPS . Note the patchy nature of the injury ( C , (cid:1) 100 ) and the presence of inﬂam - matory inﬁltrates and vascular congestion ( D , (cid:1) 400 ) . E and F : lungs from a rabbit euthanized 2 h after exposure to mechanical ventilation with Tv (cid:8) 25 cc / kg , PEEP (cid:8) 2 . 5 cmH 2 O , F I O 2 (cid:8) 0 . 5 , and RR (cid:8) 20 bpm . Note the presence of intra - alveolar neutrophilic inﬁltrates and the deposi - tion of hyaline membranes ( E , (cid:1) 200 ; F , (cid:1) 630 ) . G and H : lungs from a mouse euthanized 21 days after the administration of intratracheal bleomy - cin . Note the presence of ﬁbrotic areas ( arrows ) ( G , (cid:1) 200 ; H , (cid:1) 400 ) . I and J : lungs from a mouse euthanized 12 h after aerosolization of Escherichia coli , 1 (cid:1) 10 8 cfu / ml . Note diffuse thickening of the alveolar spaces and intra - alveolar neutrophilic inﬁltrates ( I , (cid:1) 200 ; J , (cid:1) 400 ) . Hematox - ylin and eosin . Review L385 ANIMAL MODELS OF ACUTE LUNG INJURY AJP - Lung Cell Mol Physiol (cid:127) VOL 295 (cid:127) SEPTEMBER 2008 (cid:127) www . ajplung . org b y 10 . 220 . 32 . 246 on M a y 2 9 , 2017 h tt p : / / a j p l ung . ph ys i o l og y . o r g / D o w n l oaded f r o m LPS has been administered to humans via the intravenous and the intratracheal routes . Intravenous doses ranging from 2 to 4 ng / kg are associated with evidence of systemic inﬂamma - tion and priming of alveolar macrophages ( 92 , 169 , 205 ) . The ability of intravenous LPS to cause septic shock was evident when a research technician self - administered 1 mg of Salmo - nella LPS intravenously , and within 3 h developed high - cardiac output shock requiring intravenous pressors , dissemi - nated intravascular coagulation , abnormalities of hepatic and renal function , and noncardiogenic pulmonary edema ( 213 ) . The intratracheal instillation of LPS at doses ranging from 1 to 4 ng / kg is followed by an early phase characterized by in - creases in BAL ﬂuid PMN , albumin , and proinﬂammatory cytokines ( TNF - (cid:3) , IL - 1 (cid:4) , IL - 6 , G - CSF , IL - 8 , ENA - 78 , MCP - 1 , MIP - 1 (cid:3) , and MIP - 1 (cid:4) ) and a later phase 24 – 48 h after instillation characterized by normalization of the BAL ﬂuid cytokine concentrations and increases in the BAL ﬂuid PMN , monocyte , macrophage , and lymphocyte counts ( 153 ) ( Fig . 3 , C and D ) . Technical issues : as discussed in UNIQUE CHARACTERISTICS OF ANIMAL SPECIES IN MODELING HUMAN LUNG INJURY , species re - sponses to LPS are highly variable and differ in animals with and without PIM . Following treatment with small amounts of LPS , pulmonary inﬂammation occurs in sheep , calves , pigs , and cats , but not in rodents or dogs ( 242 ) . Animals with PIM develop manifestations of sepsis and lung injury with very small doses of LPS , e . g . , in the (cid:9) g / kg range . In contrast , animals without PIM require much higher doses , in the range of mg / kg . In addition to species susceptibility , there are also differences in LPS responses between different strains of the same species . For example , BALB / c mice are very sensitive to LPS , whereas C57BL / 6 mice are more resistant . In addition to differences in the susceptibility of different species to LPS , the response of LPS depends on the type of LPS used . LPS from bacteria - forming smooth colonies have the O - chain , consisting of variable numbers of repeating dis - accharides , and are less pyrogenic . LPS produced by bacteria growing in rough colonies lacks the O - chain and tends to be more pyrogenic ( 121 ) . LPS preparations often contain contam - inants , such as bacterial lipoproteins , which may inﬂuence the biological effects of LPS by interacting with TLRs other than TLR4 , which is the primary LPS receptor ( 211 ) . Advantages and disadvantages : the use of bacterial LPS has a number of advantages as a method to model the effects of gram - negative bacteria in animals and humans . LPS is easy to administer , and the results tend to be reproducible within experiments . LPS is a potent activator of the innate immune responses via TLR4 pathways and has little direct toxicity to cells in vitro . Thus , the use of LPS provides information about the effects of host inﬂammatory responses , which occur in bacterial infections . LPS has some signiﬁcant disadvantages , however . LPS preparations vary in purity and can be contam - inated with bacterial lipoproteins and other bacterial materials ( 211 ) . In general , LPS treatment does not cause the severe endothelial and epithelial injury that occurs in humans with ARDS ( 239 ) . Bacteria produce exotoxins that are potent cel - lular toxins ( 122 ) and use effector systems such as the type III systems that cause direct cellular lysis ( 183 ) . Thus , LPS by itself provides an incomplete picture of the effects of live bacteria in the lungs . Models That Target Primarily the Alveolar Epithelium Acid aspiration . Basis for the model : the development of acute respiratory failure following aspiration of gastric con - tents was ﬁrst described in 1946 by Mendelson ( 138 ) , and aspiration of gastric contents is now recognized as an important risk factor for ARDS ( 50 , 95 , 163 ) . One of the main charac - teristics of gastric contents is a low pH , so investigators have used hydrochloric acid ( HCl ) to simulate lung injury due to gastric acid aspiration in animals . However , it is important to keep in mind that in addition to low pH , gastric contents contain several other products such as food particles , bacterial cell wall products , and cytokines such as IL - 1 (cid:4) , and also have a very high osmolarity . All of these factors may contribute to the pathogenesis of aspiration - induced lung injury ( 118 , 172 ) . An important consideration is that a very low pH is required to produce lung injury in animals , e . g . , pH 1 . 5 , lower than is typically measured in human gastric contents , but the low pH model remains widely used . Mechanism : low pH acid aspiration is a neutrophil - depen - dent form of lung injury that is characterized by injury of the airway and alveolar epithelium , including type I alveolar epi - thelial cells , followed by a repair process that involves prolif - eration of alveolar type II cells ( 60 , 117 ) . The evidence supporting the alveolar epithelium as a key target site of acid aspiration includes studies showing that acid aspiration causes an impairment in the alveolar epithelial ﬂuid transport func - tion , resulting in changes in alveolar ﬂuid clearance indepen - dently of pulmonary blood ﬂow or vascular ﬁltration ( 136 , 141 ) . However , acid aspiration also results in injury to the capillary endothelium , by a mechanism that appears to require circulating neutrophils ( 60 , 117 ) . Although the exact mecha - nism of cellular injury is unclear , it is unclear whether the acid itself causes direct injury because it is rapidly neutralized in biological ﬂuids that are buffered by proteins and the bicar - bonate system ( 7 ) . Technical issues : acid injury is produced by instilling HCl directly into the trachea or bronchi while an animal is mechan - ically ventilated . Although HCl is rapidly neutralized in the lungs , the concentration of HCl affects the severity of injury . Most studies use 0 . 1 N HCl , although higher concentrations ( up to 0 . 5 N ) have been used . Because this results in a pH that is generally lower than that of gastric juice [ most ICU patients have gastric juice pH in the range of 3 . 0 – 4 . 0 ( 23 ) ] , an alter - native method is to use 0 . 3 % NaCl titrated with HCl to a pH of 1 . 2 – 1 . 5 . This results in a solution with pH and osmolarity approaching the gastric juice of some patients . Characteristics of the injury : the lung injury is characterized histologically by an acute inﬂammatory response with patchy areas of neutrophilic inﬂammation , alveolar hemorrhage , intra - alveolar and interstitial edema , and impairment in the alveolar ﬂuid clearance ( Fig . 4 ) ( 136 , 251 ) . The acute inﬂammatory response is followed by a ﬁbrotic response that is evident (cid:6) 1 wk after instillation ( 250 ) . The main physiological features are an immediate increase in airway resistance and peak pressures , a fall in lung compliance , and a decrease in the FRC . The vascular response includes elevation of the pulmonary vascular resistance and pulmonary arterial pressure , with an increase in the shunt fraction and dead space . The pulmonary capillary wedge pressure and heart rate remain unchanged , whereas the cardiac output and mean arterial pressure either decrease or Review L386 ANIMAL MODELS OF ACUTE LUNG INJURY AJP - Lung Cell Mol Physiol (cid:127) VOL 295 (cid:127) SEPTEMBER 2008 (cid:127) www . ajplung . org b y 10 . 220 . 32 . 246 on M a y 2 9 , 2017 h tt p : / / a j p l ung . ph ys i o l og y . o r g / D o w n l oaded f r o m remain unchanged ( 159 ) . The main systemic consequences are leukopenia and thrombocytopenia . Interestingly , the endobron - chial administration of 0 . 1 N HCl is followed by an increase in microvascular permeability in the ileum , which can be blocked with antibodies targeting neutrophil adhesion molecules ( anti - CD18 ) ( 207 ) , showing that acid aspiration in the lungs is linked to neutrophil - dependent injury to distant organs . Advantages / disadvantages : the acid aspiration model is par - ticularly useful for studying hemodynamic and physiological changes of ALI , ventilatory strategies , and mechanisms of neutrophil recruitment . Acid aspiration can also be used in conjunction with other techniques , such as mechanical venti - lation , to further reproduce clinically relevant scenarios ( 60 ) . A limitation of the acid aspiration method is that the difference between injurious and noninjurious acid concentrations is very narrow . Another limitation is that humans do not aspirate HCl , but instead aspirate complex gastric contents , which is a suspension of particulate matter , bacterial products , cytokines , and a pH that is usually higher than 1 . 5 . Further studies are needed to determine whether these differences between gastric ﬂuid and HCl result in a difference between this model and the injury seen in humans following the aspiration of gastric contents . Hyperoxia . Basis for the model : in most mammalian species , exposure to 100 % O 2 eventually results in respiratory distress and death ( 67 ) . However , the same ﬁndings have not been reproduced in humans with normal lungs , who develop only mild increases in alveolar capillary permeability after 24 h of exposure to 100 % oxygen , and no clinical or pathological evidence of lung injury when the exposure is extended to several days ( 12 , 42 ) . Many clinicians suspect that oxygen may exacerbate and even cause ALI in critically ill patients , al - though there still is no conclusive evidence that oxygen either produces or exacerbates ARDS in humans ( 42 ) . Hyperoxia has been used as a direct cause of injury in animal studies , and as a secondary injury in animals with another underlying injury process , such as cecal ligation and puncture ( 75 ) . Mechanism : although the molecular basis of oxygen toxicity is still unclear , it is generally agreed that oxygen damage is mediated by reactive oxygen species ( free radicals ) derived directly from molecular oxygen , or from interactions with other species , such as NO . Oxygen radicals have an unpaired orbital electron and act chemically as either reductants ( electron donors ) or oxidants ( electron acceptors ) ( 181 ) . During normal cellular respiration in the mitochondria , a small fraction of oxygen undergoes the addition of a single electron to form the superoxide anion ( O 2(cid:127) (cid:7) ) . Superoxide anions can be protonated to perhydroxy radicals ( HO 2 (cid:1) ) or can react further to form hydrogen peroxide ( H 2 O 2 ) . Hydrogen peroxide and superoxide , in the presence of divalent metals , can react together to form hydroxyl radicals ( OH (cid:1) ) , which are extremely reactive . Normally , the small amounts of superoxide and hydrogen peroxide produced during cellular respiration are scavenged by antioxidant enzymes , such as superoxide dismutase , catalase , and glutathione perox - idase ( 69 ) . In the presence of hyperoxia , the mitochondria and other organelles produce increased amounts of superoxide anions ( 68 ) , which may exceed the capacity of antioxidant enzymes and consume cellular glutathione . Furthermore , su - peroxide anions react with NO to form peroxynitrite , a potent oxidizing molecule . There is evidence that peroxynitrite is formed in the lungs of hyperoxic humans ( 202 ) and animals and that induction of NO synthesis worsens hyperoxic lung injury ( 90 ) . The accumulation of free hydroxyl radicals and peroxynitrite results in oxidation of proteins and peroxidation of membrane lipids and nucleic acids ( 68 ) . The mechanism of cellular injury appears to be a combination of necrosis and apoptosis ( 11 , 93 ) , but the importance of apoptosis in the pathogenesis of oxygen - induced injury remains unclear . The lung epithelial cell line A549 becomes apoptotic in vitro when exposed to oxidants such as H 2 O 2 ( 65 ) . However , preexposure to oxygen inhibits the apoptotic response to H 2 O 2 , and this is mediated by activation of NF - (cid:10) B ( 65 ) . In mice exposed to hyperoxia , neither the number of apoptotic cells nor the severity of injury is attenuated by caspase inhibitors , and Fas - null ( lpr ) mice and p53 knockout mice are not protected from hyperoxic lung injury ( 11 ) . However , disruption of the proapoptotic CD40 - CD40 ligand system and overexpression of IL - 6 each reduce the number of apoptotic cells and prevent hyperoxic lung injury ( 2 , 233 ) . Hyperoxia increases NF - (cid:10) B translocation in lung mononu - clear cells and the production of proinﬂammatory mediators such as TNF - (cid:3) , IFN - (cid:5) , and IL - 1 (cid:4) ( 152 , 196 ) . However , the role of inﬂammatory cells such as PMN in hyperoxic injury is controversial . Although PMN accumulate in hyperoxic injury ( 63 ) , neutrophil depletion does not prevent either oxygen - induced lung injury or mortality in a rats , rabbits , mice , or lambs ( 174 , 204 ) . Furthermore , hyperoxia enhances ventila - tion - induced lung injury by a mechanism independent of cytokine production and lipid peroxidation but involving changes in focal adhesion proteins ( 45 , 201 ) . Fig . 4 . Acid aspiration model . Lung tissue sections from a normal mouse ( left ) and a mouse euthanized 2 h after intratracheal instil - lation of 1 M HCl , 2 (cid:9) l / g ( pH (cid:8) 1 . 5 ) ( right ) . Notethepresenceofintra - alveolarproteinaceous deposits ( arrow ) . [ From Zarbock et al . ( 251 ) . ] Review L387 ANIMAL MODELS OF ACUTE LUNG INJURY AJP - Lung Cell Mol Physiol (cid:127) VOL 295 (cid:127) SEPTEMBER 2008 (cid:127) www . ajplung . org b y 10 . 220 . 32 . 246 on M a y 2 9 , 2017 h tt p : / / a j p l ung . ph ys i o l og y . o r g / D o w n l oaded f r o m Technique : to create hyperoxia as a cause of ALI , the animals are housed in a sealed cage , with an inﬂow of O 2 sufﬁcient to keep the ambient P O 2 at or above the desired level ( as measured by an oximeter ) and CO 2 at ambient levels . The ideal cage allows the investigator to introduce food and remove waste through airlocks without altering the composition of gas in the cage . Characteristics of the injury : the exposure to normobaric oxygen is followed within 3 – 4 days by an exudative phase in the lungs , characterized by death of alveolar type I cells , swelling , and necrosis of endothelial cells , interstitial edema , and ﬁlling of alveoli with an exudative ﬂuid ( 38 , 109 ) . The initial event appears to be damage to the capillary endothelium , followed by platelet adhesion and PMN accumulation in the capillary vessels and interstitium ( 13 , 82 ) . Eventually , alveolar epithelial injury occurs , with an increase in microvascular permeability measured as wet - to - dry ( W / D ) ratios and migra - tion of neutrophils into the air spaces , as evidenced by increase in total numbers in BAL ﬂuid ( 18 , 20 , 102 , 148 ) . The pulmo - nary architecture is preserved during this early phase ( 82 ) . The initial exudative phase is followed by a proliferative phase , characterized by proliferation of endothelial cells and type 2 pneumocytes , which cover the denuded alveolar basement membrane . Fibroblast proliferation occurs while the endothe - lial damage persists . Recovery from oxygen injury is charac - terized by a normal - appearing endothelium and epithelium , with only some areas of interstitial scarring ( 109 ) . Interest - ingly , there is synergism between hyperoxia and infection , and the presence of bacterial pneumonia increases the morpholog - ical and physiological changes associated with hyperoxia ( 33 ) . In rats and mice , exposure to 100 % O 2 for 40 – 50 h results in ALI , and longer exposure ( 60 – 70 h ) results in death ( 13 , 18 , 63 , 148 ) . Survival after exposure to O 2 is age dependent , as neonates are more tolerant to hyperoxia and survive for up to 7 days ( 67 ) . Older rats ( 24 mo ) are also more tolerant to O 2 toxicity ( 31 ) . Interestingly , exposure to lower levels of O 2 ( F I O 2 (cid:8) 0 . 8 or less ) is associated with minimal mortality ( 13 ) . Rats exposed to 85 % O 2 for 5 – 7 days can survive subsequent exposures to 100 % O 2 ( 13 ) . This tolerance is not due to a decrease in the production of oxygen radicals ( 68 ) but is associated with an increase in the pulmonary concentration of antioxidant enzymes , such as manganese superoxide dismutase and glutathione reductase ( 67 ) . Studies in rodents have shown important strain - dependent dif - ferences in susceptibility to hyperoxia . Exposure to (cid:11) 95 % O 2 for 48 and 60 h results in larger pleural effusions with higher total protein content in Fischer rats compared with Sprague - Dawley rats ( 209 ) . Similarly , C57BL / 6 mice are more susceptible to hyperoxia than C3H / HeJ mice . This difference in susceptibility has recently been linked to the Nrf2I gene ( 30 ) . Advantages / disadvantages : the overall relevance of the hy - peroxia injury model to human disease is a matter of contro - versy because exposure of humans to 100 % oxygen for up to 3 days does not result in lung injury ( 12 ) . Furthermore , some studies suggest that BAL ﬂuid from patients with ARDS has antioxidant activity and inhibits lipid peroxidation in vitro ( 129 ) , whereas other studies report the opposite effect ( 36 ) . Despite these limitations , the hyperoxic model , with its well - deﬁned exudative and proliferative phases , provides an excel - lent model to study lung repair following lung injury . This model is reproducible but requires specialized equipment and expertise to ensure the delivery of the appropriate concentra - tion of oxygen . Surfactant depletion by saline lavage . Basis for the model : the saline lavage model was developed by Lachmann et al . ( 124 ) in 1979 based on the observation that ARDS is associ - ated with depletion of surfactant from the air spaces and reduced concentrations of surfactant - associated proteins in BAL ﬂuid . In this model , warmed isotonic saline solution is instilled into the lungs and then removed by aspiration . The lavage is repeated until a target degree of hypoxemia is reached . Many groups have combined saline lavage with me - chanical ventilation , and in many studies it is difﬁcult to determine the extent to which the lung injury is caused by the saline lavage , by the mechanical ventilation , or both . Mechanism : repeated lavage with saline reduces the surfac - tant lipid concentration in alveolar lining ﬂuids , altering alveolar surface tension . Pulmonary surfactant is a complex mixture of phospholipids and proteins that has several impor - tant functions ( 88 ) . Surfactant decreases surface tension and prevents collapse of the alveolar spaces at low lung volumes . Surfactant proteins stabilize surfactant and modulate host de - fenses in the lungs ( 243 ) . Depletion of surfactant may be associated with lung injury by two mechanisms : ﬁrst , by facilitating alveolar collapse and increasing the likelihood of mechanical injury to the alveolar walls during repeated cycles of opening / closure during mechanical ventilation , and second , by impairing alveolar host defenses . The administration of bovine surfactant and / or synthetic surfactant - related peptides attenuates the injury produced by saline lavage ( 35 , 229 ) . Characteristics of the model : saline lavage ( 0 . 9 % NaCl ) leads to almost immediate hypoxemia and widening of the A - a O 2 difference . These ﬁndings are rapidly reversible by recruitment maneuvers such as sustained inﬂation , suggesting that the gas exchange abnormalities reﬂect collapsed alveoli with otherwise intact alveolar walls ( 99 , 182 ) . The saline lavage by itself has little consequence in terms of permeability changes or inﬂam - mation ( 71 , 182 ) , although TNF - (cid:3) is detectable in lavage ﬂuid ( 98 ) . When saline lavage is followed by mechanical ventilation with high volumes and no PEEP , a type of lung injury results that is very similar to ARDS in humans . The lung injury is dependent on PMN and is characterized by increased protein permeability , PMN inﬁltration into the air spaces and intersti - tium , increased cytokine production , and hyaline membrane formation ( 99 , 110 , 124 ) . Mechanical ventilation alone , with - out previous saline lavage , can induce similar ﬁndings ( 53 , 145 , 220 ) . Instilling LPS into the air spaces intensiﬁes the injury response to surfactant depletion ( 34 ) . Rabbits subjected to lung lavage with 0 . 9 % NaCl , ﬁve aliquots of 30 ml / kg each , followed immediately by instillation of 0 . 25 (cid:9) g / kg LPS , and then mechanical ventilation with 100 % F I O 2 , develop minimal inﬂammation at 4 h but progress to signiﬁcant neutrophilic alveolitis and protein - rich alveolar edema at later times ( 34 ) . Comparisons with human ALI / ARDS : surfactant depletion is an important feature of ALI / ARDS in humans , but unlike newborns , surfactant depletion in adults is usually a conse - quence rather than a primary cause of lung injury ( 164 ) . In ALI / ARDS , surfactant abnormalities occur because of injury of the alveolar epithelium and exudation of protein - rich edema ﬂuid into the alveolar spaces . Saline lavage of the lungs results in surfactant depletion in the absence of major alveolar epithe - lial damage . Epithelial damage occurs only when the saline Review L388 ANIMAL MODELS OF ACUTE LUNG INJURY AJP - Lung Cell Mol Physiol (cid:127) VOL 295 (cid:127) SEPTEMBER 2008 (cid:127) www . ajplung . org b y 10 . 220 . 32 . 246 on M a y 2 9 , 2017 h tt p : / / a j p l ung . ph ys i o l og y . o r g / D o w n l oaded f r o m lavage is followed by an injurious ventilatory strategy . There - fore , surfactant depletion followed by mechanical ventilation simulates established ALI / ARDS and provides information about the consequences of surfactant depletion , but it is less useful in modeling the initial pathophysiological mechanisms that lead to ALI / ARDS . Advantages and disadvantages : the main technical disadvan - tage of the saline lavage model is that the animals require intubation , mechanical ventilation , and general anesthesia . The major advantage is that this model provides an ideal way to test the effects of different ventilatory strategies on the develop - ment of tissue injury because the tissue injury results more from the ventilatory strategy than from the saline lavage . Mechanical ventilation . During the 1980s and 1990s , several studies showed that mechanical ventilation can produce lung inﬂammation and injury in animals , termed ventilator - induced lung injury ( VILI ) ( 49 , 52 ) . These studies provided the basis for a large multicenter study comparing different ventilatory strategies in patients with ALI / ARDS , which changed the clinical management of patients in intensive care units ( 215 ) . The mechanical ventilation model is the only model of lung injury that has affected clinical practice and improved survival in humans . Most animal models of lung injury were developed by reproducing known risk factors for human ARDS . In contrast , VILI results from applying a treatment , mechanical ventilation . In humans with clinical risk factors for ARDS , mechanical ventilation is superimposed on an ongoing inﬂammatory pro - cess in the lungs . It is necessary to distinguish between venti - lator - induced lung injury , in which mechanical ventilation is the sole method used to generate injury , and ventilator - associ - ated lung injury , in which mechanical ventilation modiﬁes lung injury due to a clinically relevant cause , such as acid aspiration or sepsis ( 66 ) . Mechanism : the mechanism of VILI involves direct tissue damage due to mechanical stretch and activation of speciﬁc intracellular pathways involved in “mechanotransduction” ( re - viewed in Ref . 224 ) . Overstretching of alveolar walls results in endothelial and epithelial breaks and interstitial edema ( 70 ) . Detachment of endothelial cells from the basement membrane and death of epithelial cell with denuding of the epithelial basement membrane become obvious after 20 min of mechan - ical ventilation with very high tidal volumes ( produced by peak pressures of 45 cmH 2 O in rats ) ( 51 ) . However , the develop - ment of hyaline membranes and increased permeability require the presence of PMN , suggesting that in addition to mechanical damage , inﬂammatory damage is also necessary for mechani - cal ventilation to induce injury ( 110 ) . Mechanical cell defor - mation can be converted to biochemical changes , including production of proinﬂammatory cytokines ( 168 , 225 ) and changes in lipid trafﬁcking ( 226 ) . The inﬂammatory compo - nent of VILI remains controversial , as studies by Tremblay et al . ( 218a ) showed increased production of inﬂammatory cytokines in lungs ventilated without PEEP , by a mechanism different from that of LPS ( 19 ) , whereas studies by Ricard et al . ( 178 ) have reported no association between VILI and produc - tion of proinﬂammatory cytokines in the same animal model . One important aspect of mechanical ventilation - associated lung injury is that the role of stretch appears to be different in normal vs . inﬂamed lungs . For example , it is clear that in patients with ARDS , the use of high tidal volumes is associated with higher mortality ( 215 ) . However , patients requiring chronic ventilation for neuromuscular disease and normal lungs are routinely ventilated with large tidal volumes , e . g . , 10 ml / kg or larger , yet they do not develop ALI . Recent studies have demonstrated that the combination of noninjurious me - chanical ventilatory strategies with small doses of LPS or bacteria that cause minimal inﬂammation results in the devel - opment of a form of lung injury characterized by cytokine release , neutrophilic alveolitis , and protein leakage into the air spaces , showing that mechanical ventilation and bacterial prod - ucts are synergistic in causing lung injury ( 4 , 47 , 154 ) . The signal transduction pathways activated by mechanical stretch and innate immunity that leads to lung injury need to be clariﬁed . Technical issues : mechanical ventilation models are chal - lenging , particularly in small animals like mice . Several vari - ables must be taken into account , including technical issues like the method of intubation ( endotracheal vs . tracheostomy ) , the type of ventilator , the appropriate physiological monitor - ing , and the amount of ﬂuid support . Endotracheal intubation avoids inﬂammatory responses associated with tracheostomy and can be achieved with practice . The animals must be anesthetized throughout the ventilation protocol , and this may make it difﬁcult to determine whether the mice are alive or dead unless other variables such as blood pressure , heart rate , or end - dial CO 2 are monitored . Airway pressures should be monitored , as lung compliance can change as injury develops . Body temperature must be monitored and maintained within a narrow range because mice are extremely sensitive to temper - ature changes . PEEP can be generated with a PEEP valve attached to the end of the ventilator . Fluids can be delivered intraperitoneally either by injection or using an infusion pump . With adequate monitoring and support , mice can be ventilated for 8 h orlonger ( 47 ) . Characteristics of the lung injury : the severity of lung injury depends on the ventilatory strategy , in particular the tidal volume delivered and the presence or absence of PEEP . Large tidal volume ventilation results in alveolar hemorrhage , hyaline membrane formation , neutrophilic inﬁltration , decreased com - pliance , and gas - exchange abnormalities ( Fig . 3 , E and F ) . Mechanical ventilation at tidal volumes of 10 ml / kg and F I O 2 (cid:8) 0 . 21 is not injurious , but mechanical ventilation combined with low doses of LPS has a synergistic effect , resulting in neutro - philic alveolitis and increased alveolar permeability ( 3 ) . Advantages and disadvantages : the main advantage of the mechanical ventilation model is its clinical relevance , which is highlighted by the fact that this is the only model that has led to changes in clinical practice . The main disadvantage is the complexity of the model . Furthermore , animals such as mice can only be ventilated for relatively short periods of time , whereas patients require mechanical ventilation for days or weeks . Intratracheal bleomycin . The bleomycin model is usually considered a model of pulmonary ﬁbrosis , but its administra - tion is also associated with features of ALI , and thus we will brieﬂy review it here . The bleomycin model has been reviewed in more detail elsewhere in this series ( 143 ) . Bleomycin is an antineoplastic antibiotic drug isolated in 1966 from the actino - mycete Streptomyces verticillus ( 222 ) . Bleomycin forms a complex with oxygen and metals such as Fe 2 (cid:2) , leading to the production of oxygen radicals , DNA breaks , and ultimately cell Review L389 ANIMAL MODELS OF ACUTE LUNG INJURY AJP - Lung Cell Mol Physiol (cid:127) VOL 295 (cid:127) SEPTEMBER 2008 (cid:127) www . ajplung . org b y 10 . 220 . 32 . 246 on M a y 2 9 , 2017 h tt p : / / a j p l ung . ph ys i o l og y . o r g / D o w n l oaded f r o m death ( 26 ) . Bleomycin can be inactivated by bleomycin hydro - lase , a cysteine protease that shows variable levels of expres - sion in the lungs ( 194 ) . The susceptibility of the lungs to bleomycin - induced toxicity is largely dependent on the levels of expression of bleomycin hydrolase in the lungs ; species with high levels of expression , such as rabbits , are relatively resis - tant to bleomycin - induced toxicity , whereas species with low levels of expression , such as C57BL / 6 mice , are sensitive ( 126 ) . In addition to species - related differences in bleomycin susceptibility , there are also differences in strain susceptibility , with C57BL / 6 mice being highly sensitive and Balb / c and C3H mice being resistant ; however , the differences in strain suscep - tibility to bleomycin appear to be related more to differential expression of genes involved in apoptosis regulation or oxida - tive stress than to differences in the expression of bleomycin reductase ( 87 ) . Bleomycin can be administered intravenously , intratra - cheally , intraperitoneally , or subcutaneously ( 143 ) . The in - travenous model mimics the human clinical scenario but requires the administration of the drug twice per week for 4 – 8 wk ( 1 ) . In contrast , the intratracheal model requires the administration of one single dose of bleomycin ( 143 ) . It is important to emphasize that although both models result in lung injury and ﬁbrosis , the site of initial injury is different : the endothelium is the primary target of intravenous bleomycin , and the epithelium is the primary target of intratracheal bleomycin . The dose response and pathological changes of the lung to intravenous bleomycin were ﬁrst described in 1974 , and we refer readers to the original Adamson and Bowden report ( 1 ) . Here we will focus on the intratracheal model , which is the most widely used due to its lower complexity and high reproducibility . The administration of intratracheal bleomycin is followed by a well - described sequence of events . Within 24 h of bleomycin administration , there is an increase in BAL neutrophils , which then normalize towards day 11 . The lymphocytic response follows , beginning around day 7 and persisting on day 11 . The ﬁbrotic response becomes detectable in tissues by day 11 and persists by day 20 . As for cytokines , IL - 1 (cid:4) , KC , IL - 6 , TNF , and IL - 1R1 peak between 6 and 63 h , TGF - (cid:4) R1 and R2 peak towards day 7 , and G - CF , GM - CSF , IFN - (cid:5) , and IL - 4 peak towards day 14 ( 28 , 76 , 180 , 246 ) . At the tissue level , the early phase is characterized by patchy neutrophilic alveolitis and the late phase by patchy areas of ﬁbrosis , but there is no formation of hyaline membranes ( Fig . 3 , G and H ) . The extent of ﬁbrosis is proportional to the severity of the initial injury ( 197 ) . Thus , the bleomycin model is relatively technically easy , very repro - ducible , well standardized , and reproduces the pattern of ALI , with early inﬂammation that heals with ﬁbrosis . The main disadvantage is that the physiological relevance of bleomycin is often questioned , with the argument that intratracheal instil - lation of bleomycin is an “overwhelming stimulus” that bears little relevance to the clinical setting . Despite these caveats , the bleomycin model remains one of the most commonly used models of ALI in mice . Models Targeting the Epithelium and Endothelium Ischemia / reperfusion models . Ischemia followed by reper - fusion ( I / R ) , either in the lungs or in distant vascular beds , can lead to lung injury . A classic form of injury secondary to lung I / R is the “reimplantation response , ” a form of lung injury following lung transplantation . The reimplantation response is characterized by non - cardiogenic pulmonary edema , inﬂam - matory inﬁltrates , and hypoxia , and is unrelated to rejection ( 167 , 199 ) . Lung injury is also associated with ischemia / reperfusion at distant , nonpulmonary sites . For example , a 20 – 40 % incidence of ALI has been reported following repair of thoracoabdominal aortic aneurysms , which involves visceral ischemia and reperfusion ( 237 ) . This type of injury affects the alveolar epithelium and the capillary endothelium . It is unclear whether the epithelium and the endothelium are both injured simultaneously or whether the injury occurs primarily in en - dothelial or epithelial cells . Studies in humans and rabbits show that both types of cells have features compatible with apoptosis and necrosis ( 59 , 186 , 208 ) . Pulmonary models of ischemia reperfusion : in pulmonary models of I / R , the lung is subjected to ischemia for varying periods of time before circulation is reestablished . The lungs are perfused by two separate vascular systems , the pulmonary circulation and the bronchial circulation . Ischemia can be produced by clamping the pulmonary artery , which preserves the bronchial circulation , or by clamping the hilum , which stops all circulation . In a variant of the lung I / R model , ischemia is achieved by lung collapse , followed by reexpan - sion ( 101 ) . Electron microscopic examination of cat lungs treated wit h 2 h ofischemia ( inﬂated lungs ) and 2 h of reperfusion shows structural damage of the alveolar endothe - lium and epithelium , with separation of type II cells from the basement membrane , thickened vascular endothelium , and dis - ruption of the septal capillary wall ( 149 ) . An interesting feature of this model is that I / R of one lung results in inﬂammatory changes not only in the occluded lung but also in the contralat - eral lung ( 185 ) . The injury to the contralateral side , when present , is milder and characterized by permeability changes and PMN inﬁltration ( 84 , 157 ) . Five main variables must be considered in pulmonary I / R models : the inﬂation state of the lung ( deﬂated vs . inﬂated ) , the extent of the ischemic bed ( pulmonary , bronchial circulation , venous return ) , the duration of ischemia and reperfusion , the experimental preparation ( in vivo vs . isolated perfused lungs ) , and the animal species . Lung inﬂation : the extent of lung inﬂation during the ische - mic period affects the severity of the injury . Occlusion of the pulmonary circulation for as long as 7 days results in minimal permeability changes and no macroscopic injury as long as the lungs are kept inﬂated ( 16 , 94 , 162 ) . In contrast , if the lungs are kept deﬂated during the ischemic period , the resulting injury is severe and characterized by hemorrhage , edema , and inﬂam - mation , and there is a marked decrease in bronchial blood ﬂow ( 21 ) . Persistent lung inﬂation can also prevent reperfusion injury after interruption of both the pulmonary and bronchial circulation with a hilar clamp ( 85 , 186 ) . When lung ischemia is followed by reperfusion , inﬂation of the lung also is an important factor . Sakuma et al . ( 186 ) showed that in rabbits , 4 h of unilateral hilar occlusion with lung deﬂation followed b y 1 h ofreperfusion resulted in fulminant pulmonary edema and death . The development of injury in this model was prevented by inﬂation of the lungs , either with oxygen or nitrogen . Similar effects have been shown in dogs and rats ( 85 , 227 ) . Review L390 ANIMAL MODELS OF ACUTE LUNG INJURY AJP - Lung Cell Mol Physiol (cid:127) VOL 295 (cid:127) SEPTEMBER 2008 (cid:127) www . ajplung . org b y 10 . 220 . 32 . 246 on M a y 2 9 , 2017 h tt p : / / a j p l ung . ph ys i o l og y . o r g / D o w n l oaded f r o m Extent of the ischemic bed : because the lungs are perfused by two separate systems , the pulmonary circulation and the bronchial circulation , occlusion of the pulmonary artery alone results in milder injury than occlusion of both the pulmonary artery and the bronchial circulation ( 85 , 161 ) . Reverse pulmo - nary venous ﬂow from the left atrium can occur if the hilum is not clamped , leading to less injury than complete occlusion of the hilum ( 43 , 84 , 155 ) . The extent of ischemia is also affected by whether oxygenated air continues to ventilate the lungs while the circulation is blocked . Duration of ischemic and reperfusion periods : although the effect of the duration of the ischemia and reperfusion periods is difﬁcult to evaluate because of the many different protocols used , some generalizations can be made . Ischemia alone , in the absence of reperfusion , may or may not result in injury , depending on the extent of inﬂation of the ischemic bed ( 21 , 94 ) . When ischemic time is varied ( 45 min to 4 h ) and the reperfusion time remains constant , longer ischemic times result in worse lung injury ( 186 , 227 ) . When the ischemic time is kept constant and the reperfusion time is varied ( 30 min to 2 h ) , the severity of injury increases with longer reperfusion times ( 113 , 149 ) . Thus , ischemia and reperfusion times each affect the severity of the subsequent injury . Experimental preparation : I / R can be performed either in vivo or in isolated lung preparations , and the experimental method does not seem to affect the development of injury . in vivo models allow the study of secondary changes in the contralateral lung . Species variability : the results of I / R injury vary among species . Rabbits have been most widely used in pulmonary I / R models , followed by rats and dogs ; sheep , pigs , cats , and ferrets have also been used . In the dog , the major change after lung reperfusion is a large increase in pulmonary postcapillary resistance ( 101 ) . In rats , pulmonary edema is due mostly to an increase in the permeability of the postalveolar venules ( 114 ) . Rabbits seem to be more sensitive than dogs to I / R . In summary , lung ischemia followed by reperfusion results in lung injury characterized by increased pulmonary vascular permeability and edema , PMN inﬁltration , and sometimes hemorrhage . The severity of injury is worse when the lungs remain deﬂated during the ischemic period and when the pulmonary and bronchial circulations are occluded together . Nonpulmonary I / R : the nonpulmonary I / R model has been used mainly in rats and mice , although there are some studies in rabbits ( 8 , 150 ) and sheep ( 116 , 195 ) . Models differ in terms of the anatomic area subjected to ischemia , e . g . , gut , liver , kidneys , lower torso , the duration of the ischemic period , and the duration of reperfusion . In general , the severity of lung injury is more closely related to the volume of ischemic tissue than to the duration of ischemia . Furthermore , the lung injury is mild and temporary unless a second intrapulmonary stimulus such as intratracheal LPS is added ( 120 ) . Technical considerations : I / R in nonpulmonary vascular beds is generally achieved by isolating and clamping a speciﬁc artery for a period of time and then removing the clamp and restoring perfusion . The most commonly used vascular bed in large animals is the superior mesenteric artery , whereas in mice hindlimb ischemia has been achieved either by surgical occlu - sion of the supraceliac aorta or without surgery by applying tourniquets to the extremities ( 57 , 73 , 103 , 116 , 119 , 237 ) . These methods require that the animal be anesthetized . In abdominal I / R , the abdominal cavity is left open during the ischemic period and covered by a plastic wrap . At the end of the ischemic period , the clamp is removed , and reperfusion is initiated . Surgery can be avoided by applying tourniquets to the extremities to create variable periods of tissue ischemia . Speciﬁc models : in nonpulmonary I / R models in rats , mice , sheep , and other species , reperfusion following ischemic peri - ods ranging from 30 to 120 min is associated with a systemic response characterized by decreased cardiac output and hypo - tension , metabolic acidosis , and PMN activation ( 73 , 119 ) ( 245 ) . In the lungs , PMN sequestration begins within 90 min of reperfusion ( 245 ) and is followed 1 h later by increases in pulmonary microvascular permeability , which peak after 4 – 6 h ( 119 , 212 ) . After 12 – 18 h , lung permeability returns to baseline levels ( 120 , 212 ) . Lung histology shows microvascu - lar sequestration of PMN and proteinaceous alveolar exudates ( 116 ) . The lung injury in this model depends on circulating PMN ( 132 ) . The administration of 2 . 5 mg / kg iv LPS to rats 6 h after 45 min of mesenteric ischemia results in a more severe form of injury , with a sustained increase in alveolar permeability for up to 18 h following reperfusion , and the development of alveolar edema , alveolar hemorrhage , and ﬁbrinous exudates ( 120 , 212 ) . As in models of VILI , nonpulmonary ischemia and circulating LPS appear to have synergistic effects on the development of lung injury . Advantages and disadvantages : the main advantage of the nonpulmonary ischemia reperfusion models is that they repro - duce a known clinical phenomenon , the development of lung injury after intestinal or peripheral ischemia and reperfusion in humans . I / R can be performed in a variety of large and small animal species , including mice . However , when I / R of nonpul - monary beds is the only stimulus , the lung injury is mild , and secondary stimuli ( such as LPS ) are required to cause signiﬁ - cant lung injury . Abdominal surgery is required in the intesti - nal I / R model , which induces an inﬂammatory response that must be controlled for in the experimental design . Models of lung injury due to sepsis . Sepsis is one of the main risk factors for ARDS ( 95 ) , and many animal models of sepsis have been developed to study ALI . Three main strategies have been used to induce sepsis : 1 ) the administration of live bacteria , 2 ) the creation of an endogenous infection , e . g . , cecal ligation and puncture , and 3 ) the administration of bacterial products , such as endotoxin . The following sections address models that use live bacteria , because LPS models have been discussed in Endotoxin . Important variables in live bacteria models of ALI include : the route of administration , the size of the bacterial inoculum , the bacterial species , and the animal species . In general , more severe responses are seen in species with PIM than in those without PIM . Intravenous bacteria : intravenous bacteria can be adminis - tered as a bolus or as a continuous infusion . The administration of an intravenous bolus of bacteria is followed within an hour by an initial phase of hypotension and leukopenia , which can progress to septic shock , intravascular coagulation , and death if the inoculum is high . If the animals survive , the initial phase is followed between 1 and 3 h later by a brief period of hemo - dynamic stabilization and then by a phase of microvascular injury with PMN sequestration in the lungs , an increase in pulmonary microvascular permeability , interstitial edema , an increase in shunt fraction and pulmonary arterial pressure , and Review L391 ANIMAL MODELS OF ACUTE LUNG INJURY AJP - Lung Cell Mol Physiol (cid:127) VOL 295 (cid:127) SEPTEMBER 2008 (cid:127) www . ajplung . org b y 10 . 220 . 32 . 246 on M a y 2 9 , 2017 h tt p : / / a j p l ung . ph ys i o l og y . o r g / D o w n l oaded f r o m intravascular thrombosis ( 238 ) . However , the alveolar epithe - lium is relatively resistant to intravenous bacteria , and unless the inoculum is very high , there is little neutrophilic alveolitis or intra - alveolar edema formation ( 166 , 239 ) . Thus , experi - mental bacteremia is not associated with the full histopatho - logical picture of ARDS , including epithelial damage and hyaline membrane formation . In humans , the relationship be - tween bacteremia , sepsis , and ARDS is not clear . Although sepsis is a major risk factor for ARDS , less than 50 % of patients with clinically deﬁned sepsis syndrome have detect - able bacteremia , and when present , the bacteremia is usually less severe than that seen in most animal models ( 142 ) . Fur - thermore , bacteremia alone ( in the absence of sepsis syndrome ) is associated with an extremely low risk of ARDS ( 62 ) . Thus , the relevance of bacteremia models for human lung injury is unclear . Investigators have tried to address these concerns by inducing primary infections that lead to sepsis and lung injury . Models of lung injury secondary to peritonitis : cecal ligation and puncture . Because many cases of human sepsis follow intraperitoneal infections ( 25 ) , animal models have been de - veloped in which peritonitis is followed by sepsis and lung injury . Experimental peritonitis can be induced surgically by ligating and perforating the cecum ( cecal ligation and puncture ; CLP ) , or , alternatively , the bacteria can be incorporated into a carrier vehicle such as a ﬁbrin clot or a sponge placed in the peritoneum ( 55 , 135 ) . The inoculation of live bacteria directly into the peritoneal cavity is seldom used because the bacteria are either cleared rapidly by local host defense systems , or , if the inoculum is high , cause rapid death by sepsis ( 115 ) . In either case , there is very little lung injury . CLP is the most widely used model of peritonitis . In CLP , the cecum is ligated and punctured three to ﬁve times with a needle . The severity of the injury depends on the number of holes in the cecum and on the size of the needle used to make the holes ( 228 ) . In contrast to models using LPS and live bacteria , in which the effects are almost immediate , the effects of CLP develop over days , and the onset is less abrupt . Leukopenia develops within 24 – 30 h of surgery ; pulmonary hypertension develops within 24 – 30 h ; and lung injury devel - ops within 18 – 72 h ( 79 ) . The main features of CLP - associated lung injury are hypoxemia , neutrophilic inﬂammation , and interstitial and alveolar edema ( 77 , 128 , 223 ) ( Fig . 5 ) . Blood cultures are usually positive for multiple organisms , the most common being enteric gram - negative rods such as serratia , enterobacter , and bacteroides species ( 77 ) . Mortality is high , ranging from 25 % at 18 h to 70 – 90 % within 30 h of the operation ( 79 , 223 ) . Thus , CLP results in mild lung injury similar to ALI / ARDS , although with less impressive intra - alveolar inﬂammation and hyaline membrane formation . It is probably the single best animal model of sepsis and organ injury , but the main disad - vantage is the requirement for major surgery . In addition , the actual bacterial inoculum in CLP is unknown , and the model could be affected by differences in colonic ﬂora among ani - mals , resulting in signiﬁcant variability . Local administration of live bacteria into the lungs : pulmo - nary infections are the main risk factor of ALI / ARDS in 46 – 51 % of patients ( 184 ) . In animals , local administration of bacteria into the lungs can be achieved by using an intratra - cheal catheter , by transtracheal instillation , by direct intrabron - chial instillation using a bronchoscope , or by aerosolization ( 64 , 86 , 147 ) . Intratracheal instillation of bacteria results in a localized area of pneumonia , whereas aerosolization results in diffuse infection ( Fig . 3 , E and F ) . Aerosolization has two main advantages : there is no need to anesthetize the animal , and a large number of animals can be treated simultaneously in an aerosol chamber ( 179 ) . A recent article in this series has extensively reviewed animal models of pneumonia ( 140 ) , and , therefore , here we will only present a very succinct commen - tary of some key features of this model . The local administration of bacteria results in pneumonia , and , depending on the size of the bacterial inoculum , systemic manifestations of sepsis . In rabbits , the intrapulmonary instil - lation of Escherichia coli at doses ranging from 1 (cid:1) 10 7 to 1 (cid:1) 10 10 CFU / ml into the right lower lobe via a catheter produced local and systemic inﬂammatory responses ( 64 ) . At low bac - terial doses , the systemic changes were minimal . At high bacterial doses , the animals developed severe localized pneu - monia with epithelial injury and empyema and severe systemic manifestations including shock ( 64 , 240 ) . Interestingly , bacte - rial pneumonia due to Pseudomonas aeruginosa and also to E . coli is associated with an increase in alveolar ﬂuid clearance , indicating that alveolar epithelial function is partly preserved ( 177 , 210 ) . Histologically , the intratracheal administration of bacteria results in localized pneumonia ( rather than ARDS ) in the instilled lung . However , unilateral administration of bacte - ria can result in lung injury in the contralateral lung , depending on the bacterial dose . In rats , the administration of 1 (cid:1) 10 6 CFU / ml P . aeruginosa to the right lung results 4 h later in an ipsilateral increase in inﬂammatory cytokines ( TNF - (cid:3) and CINC ) but not in neutrophil sequestration or permeability changes ( 214 ) . A higher dose , 1 (cid:1) 10 7 CFU / ml , results in bilateral increases in permeability and PMN sequestration as well as an increase in plasma cytokines . Fig . 5 . Cecal ligation and puncture ( CLP ) . Lungs from mice following sham surgery ( left ) or from mice subjected to 90 min of hemor - rhagic shock ( MAP (cid:8) 30 mmHg ) followed 24 h later by CLP ( right ) . The lungs were stained for neutrophil - speciﬁc esterase ( red ) . [ From Lomas - Neira et al . ( 128 ) . ] Review L392 ANIMAL MODELS OF ACUTE LUNG INJURY AJP - Lung Cell Mol Physiol (cid:127) VOL 295 (cid:127) SEPTEMBER 2008 (cid:127) www . ajplung . org b y 10 . 220 . 32 . 246 on M a y 2 9 , 2017 h tt p : / / a j p l ung . ph ys i o l og y . o r g / D o w n l oaded f r o m SUMMARY AND CONCLUSIONS In summary , this review discusses several animal models of ALI with the goal of helping investigators choose the model best suited to speciﬁc scientiﬁc questions . Important informa - tion has been derived from each of these animal models . However , none of these models of ALI adequately reproduces the full characteristics of human ALI / ARDS , namely an acute neutrophilic alveolitis with hyaline membrane formation and intravascular microthrombi , and , therefore , the choice of a particular model should be made after considering the speciﬁc features of each model . Several limitations are common to all models of ALI . Most models are based on one , or , at most , two methods to cause injury . However , human ALI / ARDS is seldom caused by any single event . More often , ARDS in humans is associated with complex interactions between primary risk factors such as sepsis and oropharyngeal aspiration ; comorbidities , such as diabetes , alcoholism , and underlying lung disease ; and addi - tional factors inherent to the host , such as genetic determinants . Another shortcoming of animal models is that interspecies variability in innate immunity and other responses may affect the relevance of animal data for humans . Finally , most models target a primary tissue , the alveolar epithelium , the alveolar endothelium , or both , but the primary target tissue in human ALI / ARDS remains unknown . These shortcomings , alone or in combination , are probably responsible for the fact that animal models have often yielded different or even contradictory results and that therapeutic approaches effective in animals are not always successful in humans . However , despite these limitations , studies using animal models of ALI / ARDS remain essential because at the present time there is no substitute for animal models as tools to generate information about the pathophysiology of lung injury and to test novel therapeutic interventions in complex biological systems . To overcome these shortcomings , investigators must pay special attention to choosing the model best suited to test their hypothesis and should be aware of the differences between the model used and human ALI / ARDS . Of the models discussed in this review , the models that most consistently approach the features of human ARDS , at least those observed during the acute phase , include oleic acid instillation , acid aspiration , and hyperoxia . Unfortunately , only a fraction of cases of ARDS is caused by long bone trauma ( modeled by oleic acid instilla - tion ) , humans seldom aspirate gastric juice with pH 1 . 5 or less , and hyperoxia has not been shown to cause ALI / ARDS in humans ( 42 ) . Surfactant depletion by saline lavage results in a decrease in lung compliance and hypoxemia , but not in alveo - lar epithelial injury or neutrophilic alveolitis unless a second injury , such as bacterial endotoxin or mechanical ventilation , is added . Sepsis is one of the most common causes of ARDS in humans , but attempts at modeling sepsis by treating animals with bacteria or bacterial products systemically is usually associated with only mild alveolar neutrophilia and minimal changes in alveolar - capillary permeability . Because of the difﬁculties in modeling human ALI / ARDS in animals , and because of differences among species , extrapo - lating the results of animal studies to humans must be done with a great deal of care . Ideally , ﬁndings from animal models should be reproduced in more than one mammalian species before human experimentation . This is particularly relevant for studies in mice , which differ in important ways from humans , as described in UNIQUE CHARACTERISTICS OF ANIMAL SPECIES IN MODELING HUMAN LUNG INJURY . In addition , scientiﬁc reports should pay special attention to describing the actual features of the “lung injury” observed in the model , including measure - ments of alveolar - capillary permeability and the inﬂammatory response . In conclusion , studies in animal models are essential to our understanding of the pathophysiology of ALI and the devel - opment of novel therapeutic strategies for human ALI / ARDS even though none of the animal models available fully repro - duces the ﬁndings of human disease . Further attempts to develop standardized criteria for deﬁning lung injury in ani - mals would help in the selection of animal models for speciﬁc experimental protocols and improve the usefulness of data generated in different animal models of lung injury . ACKNOWLEDGMENTS We thank Drs . Michael Matthay and Robb Glenny for useful suggestions and comments in the preparation of this manuscript . GRANTS This work was supported by National Heart , Lung , and Blood Institute Grants HL - 083044 ( G . Matute - Bello ) and HL - 081764 ( T . R . Martin ) and the Research Service of the Veterans Administration Puget Sound Healthcare System . REFERENCES 1 . Adamson IY , Bowden DH . The pathogenesis of bloemycin - induced pulmonary ﬁbrosis in mice . Am J Pathol 77 : 185 – 197 , 1974 . 2 . Adawi A , Zhang Y , Baggs R , Finkelstein J , Phipps RP . Disruption of the CD40 - CD40 ligand system prevents an oxygen - induced respiratory distress syndrome . Am J Pathol 152 : 651 – 657 , 1998 . 3 . Altemeier WA , Matute - Bello G , Frevert CW , Kawata Y , Kajikawa O , Martin TR , Glenny RW . Mechanical ventilation with moderate tidal volumes synergistically increases lung cytokine response to systemic endotoxin . Am J Physiol Lung Cell Mol Physiol 287 : L533 – L542 , 2004 . 4 . Altemeier WA , Matute - Bello G , Gharib SA , Glenny RW , Martin TR , Liles WC . Modulation of lipopolysaccharide - induced gene transcription and promotion of lung injury by mechanical ventilation . J Immunol 175 : 4069 – 4075 , 2005 . 5 . Ashbaugh DG , Bigelow DB , Petty TL , Levine BE . Acute respiratory distress in adults . Lancet 2 : 319 – 323 , 1967 . 6 . Ashbaugh DG , Maier RV . Idiopathic pulmonary ﬁbrosis in adult respiratory distress syndrome . Diagnosis and treatment . Arch Surg 120 : 530 – 535 , 1985 . 7 . Awe WC , Fletcher WS , Jacob SW . The pathophysiology of aspiration pneumonitis . Surgery 60 : 232 – 239 , 1966 . 8 . Axon RN , Baird MS , Lang JD , Brix AE , Nielsen VG . PentaLyte decreases lung injury after aortic occlusion - reperfusion . Am J Respir Crit Care Med 157 : 1982 – 1990 , 1998 . 9 . Azghani AO , Miller EJ , Peterson BT . Virulence factors from Pseudo - monas aeruginosa increase lung epithelial permeability . Lung 178 : 261 – 269 , 2000 . 10 . Bachofen M , Weibel ER . Structural alterations of lung parenchyma in the adult respiratory distress syndrome . Clin Chest Med 3 : 35 – 56 , 1982 . 11 . Barazzone C , Horowitz S , Donati YR , Rodriguez I , Piguet PF . Oxygen toxicity in mouse lungs : pathways to cell death . Am J Respir Cell Mol Biol 19 : 573 – 581 , 1998 . 12 . Barber RE , Hamilton WK . Oxygen toxicity in man . A prospective study in patients with irreversible brain damage . N Engl J Med 283 : 1478 – 1484 , 1970 . 13 . Barry BE , Crapo JD . Patterns of accumulation of platelets and neutro - phils in rat lungs during exposure to 100 % and 85 % oxygen . Am Rev Respir Dis 132 : 548 – 555 , 1985 . 14 . Bauer TT , Valencia M , Badia JR , Ewig S , Gonzalez J , Ferrer M , Torres A . Respiratory microbiology patterns within the ﬁrst 24 h of ARDS diagnosis : inﬂuence on outcome . Chest 128 : 273 – 279 , 2005 . Review L393 ANIMAL MODELS OF ACUTE LUNG INJURY AJP - Lung Cell Mol Physiol (cid:127) VOL 295 (cid:127) SEPTEMBER 2008 (cid:127) www . ajplung . org b y 10 . 220 . 32 . 246 on M a y 2 9 , 2017 h tt p : / / a j p l ung . ph ys i o l og y . o r g / D o w n l oaded f r o m 15 . Baughman RP , Gunther KL , Rashkin MC , Keeton DA , Pattishall EN . Changes in the inﬂammatory response of the lung during acute respiratory distress syndrome : prognostic indicators . Am J Respir Crit Care Med 154 : 76 – 81 , 1996 . 16 . Becker PM , Pearse DB , Permutt S , Sylvester JT . Separate effects of ischemia and reperfusion on vascular permeability in ventilated ferret lungs . J Appl Physiol 73 : 2616 – 2622 , 1992 . 17 . Beilman G . Pathogenesis of oleic acid - induced lung injury in the rat : distribution of oleic acid during injury and early endothelial cell changes . Lipids 30 : 817 – 823 , 1995 . 18 . Bellmeyer A , Martino JM , Chandel NS , Scott Budinger GR , Dean DA , Mutlu GM . Leptin resistance protects mice from hyperoxia - induced acute lung injury . Am J Respir Crit Care Med 175 : 587 – 594 , 2007 . 19 . Belperio JA , Keane MP , Burdick MD , Londhe V , Xue YY , Li K , Phillips RJ , Strieter RM . Critical role for CXCR2 and CXCR2 ligands during the pathogenesis of ventilator - induced lung injury . J Clin Invest 110 : 1703 – 1716 , 2002 . 20 . Bhandari V , Choo - Wing R , Homer RJ , Elias JA . Increased hyperoxia - induced mortality and acute lung injury in IL - 13 null mice . J Immunol 178 : 4993 – 5000 , 2007 . 21 . Bishop MJ , Holman RG , Guidotti SM , Alberts MK , Chi EY . Pulmo - nary artery occlusion and lung collapse depletes rabbit lung adenosine triphosphate . Anesthesiology 80 : 611 – 617 , 1994 . 22 . Bockamp E , Maringer M , Spangenberg C , Fees S , Fraser S , Eshkind L , Oesch F , Zabel B . Of mice and models : improved animal models for biomedical research . Physiol Genomics 11 : 115 – 132 , 2002 . 23 . Bonten MJ , Gaillard CA , van der Geest S , van Tiel FH , Beysens AJ , Smeets HG , Stobberingh EE . The role of intragastric acidity and stress ulcus prophylaxis on colonization and infection in mechanically venti - lated ICU patients . A stratiﬁed , randomized , double - blind study of sucralfate versus antacids . Am J Respir Crit Care Med 152 : 1825 – 1834 , 1995 . 24 . Brain JD , Molina RM , DeCamp MM , Warner AE . Pulmonary intra - vascular macrophages : their contribution to the mononuclear phagocyte system in 13 species . Am J Physiol Lung Cell Mol Physiol 276 : L146 – L154 , 1999 . 25 . Brun - Buisson C , Doyon J , Carlet P , Dellamonica F , Gouin A , Lepoutre J , Mercier C , Offenstadt G , Regnier B . Incidence , risk factors and outcome of severe sepsis and septic shock in adults . A multicenter prospective study in intensive care units . JAMA 274 : 968 – 974 , 1995 . 26 . Burger RM , Peisach J , Horwitz SB . Activated bleomycin . A transient complex of drug , iron , and oxygen that degrades DNA . J Biol Chem 256 : 11636 – 11644 , 1981 . 27 . Butz GM , Davisson RL . Long - term telemetric measurement of cardio - vascular parameters in awake mice : a physiological genomics tool . Physiol Genomics 5 : 89 – 97 , 2001 . 28 . Cavarra E , Carraro F , Fineschi S , Naldini A , Bartalesi B , Pucci A , Lungarella G . Early response to bleomycin is characterized by different cytokine and cytokine receptor proﬁles in lungs . Am J Physiol Lung Cell Mol Physiol 287 : L1186 – L1192 , 2004 . 29 . Chesnutt AN , Matthay MA , Tibayan FA , Clark JG . Early detection of type III procollagen peptide in acute lung injury . Pathogenetic and prognostic signiﬁcance . Am J Respir Crit Care Med 156 : 840 – 845 , 1997 . 30 . Cho HY , Jedlicka AE , Reddy SPM , Zhang LY , Kensler TW , Klee - berger SR . Linkage analysis of susceptibility to hyperoxia . Nrf2 is a candidate gene . Am J Respir Cell Mol Biol 26 : 42 – 51 , 2002 . 31 . Choi AM , Sylvester S , Otterbein L , Holbrook NJ . Molecular re - sponses to hyperoxia in vivo : relationship to increased tolerance in aged rats . Am J Respir Cell Mol Biol 13 : 74 – 82 , 1995 . 32 . Churchill GA , Airey DC , Allayee H , Angel JM , Attie AD , Beatty J , Beavis WD , Belknap JK , Bennett B , Berrettini W , Bleich A , Bogue M , Broman KW , Buck KJ , Buckler E , Burmeister M , Chesler EJ , Cheverud JM , Clapcote S , Cook MN , Cox RD , Crabbe JC , Crusio WE , Darvasi A , Deschepper CF , Doerge RW , Farber CR , Forejt J , Gaile D , Garlow SJ , Geiger H , Gershenfeld H , Gordon T , Gu J , Gu W , de Haan G , Hayes NL , Heller C , Himmelbauer H , Hitzemann R , Hunter K , Hsu HC , Iraqi FA , Ivandic B , Jacob HJ , Jansen RC , Jepsen KJ , Johnson DK , Johnson TE , Kempermann G , Kendziorski C , Kotb M , Kooy RF , Llamas B , Lammert F , Lassalle JM , Lowenstein PR , Lu L , Lusis A , Manly KF , Marcucio R , Matthews D , Medrano JF , Miller DR , Mittleman G , Mock BA , Mogil JS , Montagutelli X , Morahan G , Morris DG , Mott R , Nadeau JH , Nagase H , Nowakowski RS , O’Hara BF , Osadchuk AV , Page GP , Paigen B , Paigen K , Palmer AA , Pan HJ , Peltonen - Palotie L , Peirce J , Pomp D , Pravenec M , Prows DR , Qi Z , Reeves RH , Roder J , Rosen GD , Schadt EE , Schalkwyk LC , Seltzer Z , Shimomura K , Shou S , Sillanpaa MJ , Siracusa LD , Snoeck HW , Spearow JL , Svenson K , Tarantino LM , Threadgill D , Toth LA , Valdar W , de Villena FP , Warden C , Whatley S , Williams RW , Wiltshire T , Yi N , Zhang D , Zhang M , Zou F ; Complex Trait Consortium . The Collaborative Cross , a community resource for the genetic analysis of complex traits . Nat Genet 36 : 1133 – 1137 , 2004 . 33 . Coalson JJ , King RJ , Winter VT , Prihoda TJ , Anzueto AR , Peters JI , Johanson WG Jr . O 2 - and pneumonia - induced lung injury . I . Pathological and morphometric studies . J Appl Physiol 67 : 346 – 356 , 1989 . 34 . Cochrane CG , Revak SD . Surfactant lavage treatment in a model of respiratory distress syndrome . Chest 116 : 85S – 86S , 1999 . 35 . Cochrane CG , Revak SD , Merritt TA , Schraufstatter IU , Hoch RC , Henderson C , Andersson S , Takamori H , Oades ZG . Bronchoalveolar lavage with KL4 - surfactant in models of meconium aspiration syndrome . Pediatr Res 44 : 705 – 715 , 1998 . 36 . Cochrane CG , Spragg R , Revak SD . Pathogenesis of the adult respi - ratory distress syndrome : evidence of oxidant activity in bronchoalveolar lavage ﬂuid . J Clin Invest 71 : 754 – 761 , 1983 . 37 . Constantin JM , Cayot - Constantin S , Roszyk L , Futier E , Sapin V , Dastugue B , Bazin JE , Rouby JJ . Response to recruitment maneuver inﬂuences net alveolar ﬂuid clearance in acute respiratory distress syn - drome . Anesthesiology 106 : 944 – 951 , 2007 . 38 . Crapo JD , Barry BE , Foscue HA , Shelburne J . Structural and bio - chemical changes in rat lungs occurring during exposures to lethal and adaptive doses of oxygen . Am Rev Respir Dis 122 : 123 – 143 , 1980 . 39 . Cross AS , Opal SM , Sadoff JC , Gemski P . Choice of bacteria in animal models of sepsis . Infect Immun 61 : 2741 – 2747 , 1993 . 40 . Curtis SE , Peek JT . Effects of progressive intratracheal administration of perﬂubron during conventional gas ventilation in anesthetized dogs with oleic acid injury . Adv Exp Med Biol 345 : 51 – 58 , 1994 . 41 . Davey RA , MacLean HE . Current and future approaches using genet - ically modiﬁed mice in endocrine research . Am J Physiol Endocrinol Metab 291 : E429 – E438 , 2006 . 42 . Davis WB , Rennard SI , Bitterman PB , Crystal RG . Pulmonary oxygen toxicity . Early reversible changes in human alveolar structures induced by hyperoxia . N Engl J Med 309 : 878 – 883 , 1983 . 43 . Deffebach ME , Lakshminarayan S , Kirk W , Butler J . Bronchial circulation and cyclooxygenase products in acute lung injury . J Appl Physiol 63 : 1083 – 1088 , 1987 . 44 . Derks CM , Jacobovitz - Derks D . Embolic pneumopathy induced by oleic acid A systematic morphologic study . Am J Pathol 87 : 143 – 158 , 1977 . 45 . Desai LP , Sinclair SE , Chapman KE , Hassid A , Waters CM . High tidal volume mechanical ventilation with hyperoxia alters alveolar type II cell adhesion . Am J Physiol Lung Cell Mol Physiol 293 : L769 – L778 , 2007 . 46 . Devitt H , Burka J , Jones R , Amy R , King E . Hemodynamic and pathologic effects of prostacyclin on oleic acid - induced pulmonary in - jury . Surgery 103 : 213 – 220 , 1988 . 47 . Dhanireddy S , Altemeier WA , Matute - Bello G , O’Mahony DS , Glenny RW , Martin TR , Liles WC . Mechanical ventilation induces inﬂammation , lung injury , and extra - pulmonary organ dysfunction in experimental pneumonia . Lab Invest 86 : 790 – 799 , 2006 . 48 . Dorger M , Jesch NK , Rieder G , Hirvonen MR , Savolainen K , Krombach F , Messmer K . Species differences in NO formation by rat and hamster alveolar macrophages in vitro . Am J Respir Cell Mol Biol 16 : 413 – 420 , 1997 . 49 . Dos Santos CC , Slutsky AS . Cellular responses to mechanical stress : invited review . Mechanisms of ventilator - induced lung injury : a perspec - tive . J Appl Physiol 89 : 1645 – 1655 , 2000 . 50 . Doyle RL , Szaﬂarski N , Modin GW , Wiener - Kronish JP , Matthay MA . Identiﬁcation of patients with acute lung injury . Predictors of mortality . Am J Respir Crit Care Med 152 : 1818 – 1824 , 1995 . 51 . Dreyfuss D , Basset G , Soler P , Saumon G . Intermittent positive - pressure hyperventilation with high inﬂation pressures produces pulmo - nary microvascular injury in rats . Am Rev Respir Dis 132 : 880 – 884 , 1985 . 52 . Dreyfuss D , Saumon G . Ventilator - induced Lung Injury . Lessons from experimental studies . Am J Respir Crit Care Med 157 : 294 – 323 , 1998 . 53 . Dreyfuss D , Soler P , Basset G , Saumon G . High inﬂation pressure pulmonary edema . Respective effects of high airway pressure , high tidal Review L394 ANIMAL MODELS OF ACUTE LUNG INJURY AJP - Lung Cell Mol Physiol (cid:127) VOL 295 (cid:127) SEPTEMBER 2008 (cid:127) www . ajplung . org b y 10 . 220 . 32 . 246 on M a y 2 9 , 2017 h tt p : / / a j p l ung . ph ys i o l og y . o r g / D o w n l oaded f r o m volume , and positive end - expiratory pressure . Am Rev Respir Dis 137 : 1159 – 1164 , 1988 . 54 . Ehrhart IC , Hofman WF . Oleic acid dose - related edema in isolated canine lung perfused at constant pressure . J Appl Physiol 50 : 1115 – 1120 , 1981 . 55 . Eichacker PQ , Waisman Y , Natanson C , Farese A , Hoffman WD , Banks SM , MacVittie TJ . Cardiopulmonary effects of granulocyte colony - stimulating factor in a canine model of bacterial sepsis . J Appl Physiol 77 : 2366 – 2373 , 1994 . 56 . Elias JA , Zheng T , Lee CG , Homer RJ , Chen Q , Ma B , Blackburn M , Zhu Z . Transgenic modeling of interleukin - 13 in the lung . Chest 123 : 339S – 345S , 2003 . 57 . Engles RE , Huber TS , Zander DS , Hess PJ , Welborn MB , Moldawer LL , Seeger JM . Exogenous human recombinant interleukin - 10 attenu - ates hindlimb ischemia - reperfusion injury . J Surg Res 69 : 425 – 428 , 1997 . 58 . Fan X , Patera AC , Pong - Kennedy A , Deno G , Gonsiorek W , Manfra DJ , Vassileva G , Zeng M , Jackson C , Sullivan L , Sharif - Rodriguez W , Opdenakker G , Van Damme J , Hedrick JA , Lundell D , Lira SA , Hipkin RW . Murine CXCR1 is a functional receptor for GCP - 2 / CXCL6 AND IL - 8 / CXCL8 . J Biol Chem 282 : 11658 – 11666 , 2007 . 59 . Fischer S , Cassivi SD , Xavier AM , Cardella JA , Cutz E , Edwards V , Liu M , Keshavjee S . Cell death in human lung transplantation : apoptosis induction in human lungs during ischemia and after transplantation . Ann Surg 231 : 424 – 431 , 2000 . 60 . Folkesson HG , Matthay MA , Hebert CA , Broaddus VC . Acid aspi - ration induced lung injury in rabbits is mediated by interleukin - 8 - dependent mechanisms . J Clin Invest 96 : 107 – 116 , 1995 . 61 . Fonte DA , Hausberger FX . Pulmonary free fatty acids in experimental fat embolism . J Trauma 11 : 668 – 672 , 1971 . 62 . Fowler AA , Hamman RF , Good JT , Benson KN , Baird M , Eberle DJ , Petty TL , Hyers TM . Adult respiratory distress syndrome : risk with common predispositions . Ann Intern Med 98 : 593 – 597 , 1983 . 63 . Fox RB , Hoidal JR , Brown DM , Repine JE . Pulmonary inﬂammation due to oxygen toxicity : involvement of chemotactic factors and poly - morphonuclear leukocytes . Am Rev Respir Dis 123 : 521 – 523 , 1981 . 64 . Fox - Dewhurst R , Alberts M , Kajikawa O , Caldwell E , Johnson MC II , Skerrett SJ , Goodman RB , Ruzinski JT , Wong VA , Chi EY , Martin TR . Pulmonary and systemic inﬂammatory responses in rabbits with gram - negative pneumonia . Am J Respir Crit Care Med 155 : 2030 – 2040 , 1997 . 65 . Franek WR , Horowitz S , Stansberry L , Kazzaz JA , Koo HC , Li Y , Arita Y , Davis JM , Mantell AS , Scott W , Mantell LL . Hyperoxia inhibits oxidant - induced apoptosis in lung epithelial cells . J Biol Chem 276 : 569 – 575 , 2001 . 66 . Frank JA , Gutierrez JA , Jones KD , Allen L , Dobbs L , Matthay MA . Low tidal volume reduces epithelial and endothelial injury in acid - injured rat lungs . Am J Respir Crit Care Med 165 : 242 – 249 , 2002 . 67 . Frank L , Bucher JR , Roberts RJ . Oxygen toxicity in neonatal and adult animals of various species . J Appl Physiol 45 : 699 – 704 , 1978 . 68 . Freeman BA , Crapo JD . Biology of disease : free radicals and tissue injury . Lab Invest 47 : 412 – 426 , 1982 . 69 . Fridovich I . The biology of oxygen radicals . Science 201 : 875 – 880 , 1978 . 70 . Fu Z , Costello ML , Tsukimoto K , Prediletto R , Elliott AR , Mathieu - Costello O , West JB . High lung volume increases stress failure in pulmonary capillaries . J Appl Physiol 73 : 123 – 133 , 1992 . 71 . Fujino Y , Goddon S , Dolhnikoff M , Hess D , Amato MB , Kacmarek RM . Repetitive high - pressure recruitment maneuvers required to maxi - mally recruit lung in a sheep model of acute respiratory distress syn - drome . Crit Care Med 29 : 1579 – 1586 , 2001 . 72 . Fujita M , Kuwano K , Kunitake R , Hagimoto N , Miyazaki H , Kaneko Y , Kawasaki M , Maeyama T , Hara N . Endothelial cell apoptosis in lipopolysaccharide - induced lung injury in mice . Int Arch Allergy Immu - nol 117 : 202 – 208 , 1998 . 73 . Fullerton DA , Eisenach JH , Friese RS , Agrafojo J , Sheridan BC , McIntyre RC Jr . Impairment of endothelial - dependent pulmonary va - sorelaxation after mesenteric ischemia / reperfusion . Surgery 120 : 879 – 884 , 1996 . 74 . Furue S , Kuwabara K , Mikawa K , Nishina K , Shiga M , Maekawa N , Ueno M , Chikazawa Y , Ono T , Hori Y , Matsukawa A , Yoshinaga M , Obara H . Crucial role of group IIA phospholipase A 2 in oleic acid - induced acute lung injury in rabbits . Am J Respir Crit Care Med 160 : 1292 – 1302 , 1999 . 75 . Garner WL , Downs JB , Reilley TE , Frolicher D , Kargi A , Fabri PJ . The effects of hyperoxia during fulminant sepsis . Surgery 105 : 747 – 751 , 1989 . 76 . Gasse P , Mary C , Guenon I , Noulin N , Charron S , Schnyder - Candrian S , Schnyder B , Akira S , Quesniaux VF , Lagente V , Ryffel B , Couillin I . IL - 1R1 / MyD88 signaling and the inﬂammasome are essential in pulmonary inﬂammation and ﬁbrosis in mice . J Clin Invest 117 : 3786 – 3799 , 2007 . 77 . Gnidec AG , Sibbald WJ , Cheung H , Craig A . Ibuprofen reduces the progression of permeability edema in an animal model of hyperdynamic sepsis . J Appl Physiol 65 : 1024 – 1032 , 1988 . 78 . Goodman RB , Strieter RM , Martin DP , Steinberg KP , Milberg JA , Maunder RJ , Kunkel SL , Walz A , Hudson LD , Martin TR . Inﬂam - matory cytokines in patients with persistence of the acute respiratory distress syndrome . Am J Respir Crit Care Med 154 : 602 – 611 , 1996 . 79 . Goya T , Abe M , Shimura H , Torisu M . Characteristics of alveolar macrophages in experimental septic lung . J Leukoc Biol 52 : 236 – 243 , 1992 . 80 . Greene KE , Wright JR , Steinberg KP , Ruzinski JT , Caldwell E , Wong WB , Hull W , Whitsett JA , Akino T , Kuroki Y , Hagae H , Hudson LD , Martin TR . Serial changes in surfactant - associated pro - teins in lung and serum before and after the onset of ARDS . Am J Respir Crit Care Med 160 : 1843 – 1850 , 1999 . 81 . Gunther A , Siebert C , Schmidt R , Ziegler S , Grimminger F , Yabut M , Temmesfeld B , Walmrath D , Morr H , Seeger W . Surfactant alterations in severe pneumonia , acute respiratory distress syndrome , and cardiogenic lung edema . Am J Respir Crit Care Med 153 : 176 – 184 , 1996 . 82 . Haddad IY , Crow JP , Hu P , Ye Y , Beckman J , Matalon S . Concurrent generation of nitric oxide and superoxide damages surfactant protein A . Am J Physiol Lung Cell Mol Physiol 267 : L242 – L249 , 1994 . 83 . Hajjar AM , Ernst RK , Tsai JH , Wilson CB , Miller SI . Human Toll - like receptor 4 recognizes host - speciﬁc LPS modiﬁcations . Nat Immunol 3 : 354 – 359 , 2002 . 84 . Hamvas A , Park CK , Palazzo R , Liptay M , Cooper J , Schuster DP . Modifying pulmonary ischemia - reperfusion injury by altering ventilatory strategies during ischemia . J Appl Physiol 73 : 2112 – 2119 , 1992 . 85 . Hamvas A , Schuster DP . Bronchial and reverse pulmonary venous blood ﬂow protect the lung from ischemia - reperfusion injury . J Appl Physiol 77 : 731 – 736 , 1994 . 86 . Hashimoto S , Pittet JF , Hong K , Folkesson H , Bagby G , Kobzik L , Frevert C , Watanabe K , Tsurufuji S , Wiener - Kronish J . Depletion of alveolar macrophages decreases neutrophil chemotaxis to Pseudomonas air space infections . Am J Physiol Lung Cell Mol Physiol 270 : L819 – L828 , 1996 . 87 . Haston CK , Tomko TG , Godin N , Kerckhoff L , Hallett MT . Murine candidate bleomycin induced pulmonary ﬁbrosis susceptibility genes identiﬁed by gene expression and sequence analysis of linkage regions . J Med Genet 42 : 464 – 473 , 2005 . 88 . Hawgood S , Clements JA . Pulmonary surfactant and its apoproteins . J Clin Invest 86 : 1 – 6 , 1990 . 89 . Heinz S , Haehnel V , Karaghiosoff M , Schwarzﬁscher L , Muller M , Krause SW , Rehli M . Species - speciﬁc regulation of Toll - like receptor 3 genes in men and mice . J Biol Chem 278 : 21502 – 21509 , 2003 . 90 . Heremans H , Dillen C , Groenen M , Matthys P , Billiau A . Role of interferon - gamma and nitric oxide in pulmonary edema and death in - duced by lipopolysaccharide . Am J Respir Crit Care Med 161 : 110 – 117 , 2000 . 91 . Hoebe K , Beutler B . Unraveling innate immunity using large scale N - ethyl - N - nitrosourea mutagenesis . Tissue Antigens 65 : 395 – 401 , 2005 . 92 . Hollenstein U , Homoncik M , Stohlawetz PJ , Marsik C , Sieder A , Eichler HG , Jilma B . Endotoxin down - modulates granulocyte colony - stimulating factor receptor ( CD114 ) on human neutrophils . J Infect Dis 182 : 343 – 346 , 2000 . 93 . Howlett CE , Hutchison JS , Veinot JP , Chiu A , Merchant P , Fliss H . Inhaled nitric oxide protects against hyperoxia - induced apoptosis in rat lungs . Am J Physiol Lung Cell Mol Physiol 277 : L596 – L605 , 1999 . 94 . Huber GL , Edmunds LH Jr . Pulmonary artery occlusion . II . Morpho - logic studies . J Appl Physiol 22 : 1002 – 1011 , 1967 . 95 . Hudson LD , Milberg JA , Anardi D , Maunder RJ . Clinical risks for development of the acute respiratory distress syndrome . Am J Respir Crit Care Med 151 : 293 – 301 , 1995 . Review L395 ANIMAL MODELS OF ACUTE LUNG INJURY AJP - Lung Cell Mol Physiol (cid:127) VOL 295 (cid:127) SEPTEMBER 2008 (cid:127) www . ajplung . org b y 10 . 220 . 32 . 246 on M a y 2 9 , 2017 h tt p : / / a j p l ung . ph ys i o l og y . o r g / D o w n l oaded f r o m 96 . Hussain N , Wu F , Zhu L , Thrall RS , Kresch MJ . Neutrophil apoptosis during the development and resolution of oleic acid - induced acute lung injury in the rat . Am J Respir Cell Mol Biol 19 : 867 – 874 , 1998 . 97 . Ikegami M , Scoville EA , Grant S , Korfhagen T , Brondyk W , Scheule RK , Whitsett JA . Surfactant protein - D and surfactant inhibit endotoxin - induced pulmonary inﬂammation . Chest 132 : 1447 – 1454 , 2007 . 98 . Imai T , Fujita T . Unilateral lung injury caused by ischemia without hypoxia in isolated rat lungs perfused with buffer solution . J Lab Clin Med 123 : 830 – 836 , 1994 . 99 . Imai Y , Nakagawa S , Ito Y , Kawano T , Slutsky AS , Miyasaka K . Comparison of lung protection strategies using conventional and high - frequency oscillatory ventilation . J Appl Physiol 91 : 1836 – 1844 , 2001 . 100 . Iwasaki A , Medzhitov R . Toll - like receptor control of the adaptive immune responses . Nat Immunol 5 : 987 – 995 , 2004 . 101 . Jackson RM , Russell WJ , Veal CF . Endogenous and exogenous cata - lase in reoxygenation lung injury . J Appl Physiol 72 : 858 – 864 , 1992 . 102 . Jain D , Atochina - Vasserman E , Kadire H , Tomer Y , Inch A , Scott P , Savani RC , Gow AJ , Beers MF . SP - D - deﬁcient mice are resistant to hyperoxia . Am J Physiol Lung Cell Mol Physiol 292 : L861 – L871 , 2007 . 103 . Javadpour M , Kelly CJ , Chen G , Stokes K , Leahy A , Bouchier - Hayes DJ . Thermotolerance induces heat shock protein 72 expression and protects against ischaemia - reperfusion - induced lung injury . Br J Surg 85 : 943 – 946 , 1998 . 104 . Jesch NK , Dorger M , Enders G , Rieder G , Vogelmeier C , Messmer K , Krombach F . Expression of inducible nitric oxide synthase and formation of nitric oxide by alveolar macrophages : an interspecies comparison . Environ Health Perspect 105 , Suppl 5 : 1297 – 1300 , 1997 . 105 . Julien M , Hoeffel JM , Flick MR . Oleic acid lung injury in sheep . J Appl Physiol 60 : 433 – 440 , 1986 . 106 . Jungi TW , Adler H , Adler B , Thony M , Krampe M , Peterhans E . Inducible nitric oxide synthase of macrophages . Present knowledge and evidence for species - speciﬁc regulation . Vet Immunol Immunopathol 54 : 323 – 330 , 1996 . 107 . Kajikawa O , Goodman RB , Johnson MC II , Martin TR . Sensitive and speciﬁc immunoassays for rabbit IL - 8 and MCP - 1 : two important cytokines that regulate leukocyte migration in the lungs . J Immunol Methods 197 : 19 – 29 , 1996 . 108 . Kajikawa O , Johnson MC II , Goodman RB , Frevert CW , Martin TR . A sensitive immunoassay to detect the alpha - chemokine GRO in rabbit blood and lung ﬂuids . J Immunol Methods 205 : 135 – 143 , 1997 . 109 . Kapanci Y , Weibel ER , Kaplan HP , Robinson FR . Pathogenesis and reversibility of the pulmonary lesions of oxygen toxicity in monkeys . II . Ultrastructural and morphometric studies . Lab Invest 20 : 101 – 118 , 1969 . 110 . Kawano T , Mori S , Cybulsky M , Burger R , Ballin A , Cutz E , Bryan AC . Effect of granulocyte depletion in a ventilated surfactant - depleted lung . J Appl Physiol 62 : 27 – 33 , 1987 . 111 . Kawasaki M , Kuwano K , Hagimoto N , Matsuba T , Kunitake R , Tanaka T , Maeyama T , Hara N . Protection from lethal apoptosis in lipopolysaccharide - induced acute lung injury in mice by a caspase inhibitor . Am J Pathol 157 : 597 – 603 , 2000 . 112 . Kelly NM , Young L , Cross AS . Differential induction of tumor necrosis factor by bacteria expressing rough and smooth lipopolysaccharide phe - notypes . Infect Immun 59 : 4491 – 4496 , 1991 . 113 . Khimenko PL , Moore TM , Taylor AE . Blocked ETA receptors prevent ischemia and reperfusion injury in rat lungs . J Appl Physiol 80 : 203 – 207 , 1996 . 114 . Khimenko PL , Taylor AE . Segmental microvascular permeability in ischemia - reperfusion injury in rat lung . Am J Physiol Lung Cell Mol Physiol 276 : L958 – L960 , 1999 . 115 . Kim YM , Hong SJ , Billiar TR , Simmons RL . Counterprotective effect of erythrocytes in experimental bacterial peritonitis is due to scavenging of nitric oxide and reactive oxygen intermediates . Infect Immun 64 : 3074 – 3080 , 1996 . 116 . Klausner JM , Anner H , Paterson IS , Kobzik L , Valeri CR , Shepro D , Hechtman HB . Lower torso ischemia - induced lung injury is leukocyte dependent . Ann Surg 208 : 761 – 767 , 1988 . 117 . Knight PR , Druskovich G , Tait AR , Johnson KJ . The role of neutro - phils , oxidants , and proteases in the pathogenesis of acid pulmonary injury . Anesthesiology 77 : 772 – 778 , 1992 . 118 . Knight PR , Rutter T , Tait AR , Coleman E , Johnson K . Pathogenesis of gastric particulate lung injury : a comparison and interaction with acidic pneumonitis . Anesth Analg 77 : 754 – 760 , 1993 . 119 . Koike K , Moore EE , Moore FA , Kim FJW , Carl VS , Banerjee A . Gut phospholipase A 2 mediates neutrophil priming and lung injury after mesenteric ischemia - reperfusion . Am J Physiol Gastrointest Liver Physiol 268 : G397 – G403 , 1995 . 120 . Koike K , Moore FA , Moore EE , Poggetti RS , Tuder RM , Benarjee A . Endotoxin after gut ischemia / reperfusion causes irreversible lung injury . J Surg Res 52 : 656 – 662 , 1992 . 121 . Komuro T , Yomota C , Kimura T , Galanos C . Comparison of R - and S - form lipopolysaccharides fractionated from Escherichia coli UKT - B lipopolysaccharide in pyrogen and Limulus tests . FEMS Microbiol Lett 51 : 79 – 83 , 1989 . 122 . Kudoh I , Wiener - Kronish JP , Hashimoto S , Pittet JF , Frank D . Exoproduct secretions of Pseudomonas aeruginosa strains inﬂuence severity of alveolar epithelial injury . Am J Physiol Lung Cell Mol Physiol 267 : L551 – L556 , 1994 . 123 . Kuida H , Hinshaw LB , Gilbert RP , Visscher MB . Effect of gram - negative endotoxin on pulmonary circulation . Am J Physiol 192 : 335 – 344 , 1958 . 124 . Lachmann B , Robertson B , Vogel J . in vivo lung lavage as an experimental model of the respiratory distress syndrome . Acta Anaesthe - siol Scand 24 : 231 – 236 , 1980 . 125 . Lamm WJ , Graham MM , Albert RK . Mechanism by which the prone position improves oxygenation in acute lung injury . Am J Respir Crit Care Med 150 : 184 – 193 , 1994 . 126 . Lazo JS , Humphreys CJ . Lack of metabolism as the biochemical basis of bleomycin - induced pulmonary toxicity . Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 80 : 3064 – 3068 , 1983 . 127 . Liu PT , Stenger S , Li H , Wenzel L , Tan BH , Krutzik SR , Ochoa MT , Schauber J , Wu K , Meinken C , Kamen DL , Wagner M , Bals R , Steinmeyer A , Zugel U , Gallo RL , Eisenberg D , Hewison M , Hollis BW , Adams JS , Bloom BR , Modlin RL . Toll - like receptor triggering of a vitamin D - mediated human antimicrobial response . Science 311 : 1770 – 1773 , 2006 . 128 . Lomas - Neira JL , Chung CS , Wesche DE , Perl M , Ayala A . in vivo gene silencing ( with siRNA ) of pulmonary expression of MIP - 2 versus KC results in divergent effects on hemorrhage - induced , neutrophil - mediated septic acute lung injury . J Leukoc Biol 77 : 846 – 853 , 2005 . 129 . Lykens MG , Davis WB , Pacht ER . Antioxidant activity of broncho - alveolar lavage ﬂuid in the adult respiratory distress syndrome . Am J Physiol Lung Cell Mol Physiol 262 : L169 – L175 , 1992 . 130 . Marshall RP , Bellingan G , Webb S , Puddicombe A , Goldsack N , McAnulty RJ , Laurent GJ . Fibroproliferation occurs early in the acute respiratory distress syndrome and impacts on outcome . Am J Respir Crit Care Med 162 : 1783 – 1788 , 2000 . 131 . Martin TR , Mathison JC , Tobias PS , Leturcq DJ , Moriarty AM , Maunder RJ , Ulevitch RJ . Lipopolysaccharide binding protein en - hances the responsiveness of alveolar macrophages to bacterial lipopoly - saccharide . Implications for cytokine production in normal and injured lungs . J Clin Invest 90 : 2209 – 2219 , 1992 . 132 . Martinez - Mier G , Toledo - Pereyra LH , McDufﬁe JE , Warner RL , Ward PA . Neutrophil depletion and chemokine response after liver ischemia and reperfusion . J Invest Surg 14 : 99 – 107 , 2001 . 133 . Matsuguchi T , Takagi K , Musikacharoen T , Yoshikai Y . Gene ex - pressions of lipopolysaccharide receptors , toll - like receptors 2 and 4 , are differently regulated in mouse T lymphocytes . Blood 95 : 1378 – 1385 , 2000 . 134 . Matthay MA , Wiener - Kronish JP . Intact epithelial barrier function is critical for the resolution of alveolar edema in humans . Am Rev Respir Dis 142 : 1250 – 1257 , 1990 . 135 . Matute - Bello G , Frevert CW , Kajikawa O , Skerrett SJ , Goodman RB , Park DR , Martin TR . Septic shock and acute lung injury in rabbits with peritonitis : failure of the neutrophil response to localized infection . Am J Respir Crit Care Med 163 : 234 – 243 , 2001 . 136 . McAuley DF , Frank JA , Fang X , Matthay MA . Clinically relevant concentrations of beta2 - adrenergic agonists stimulate maximal cyclic adenosine monophosphate - dependent airspace ﬂuid clearance and de - crease pulmonary edema in experimental acid - induced lung injury . Crit Care Med 32 : 1470 – 1476 , 2004 . 137 . McHugh LG , Milberg JA , Whitcomb ME , Schoene RB , Maunder RJ , Hudson LD . Recovery of function in survivors of the acute respi - ratory distress syndrome . Am J Respir Crit Care Med 150 : 90 – 94 , 1994 . 138 . Mendelson CL . The aspiration of stomach contents into the lungs during obstetric anesthesia . Am J Obstet Gynecol 52 : 191 , 1946 . 139 . Miller EJ , Cohen AB , Matthay MA . Increased interleukin - 8 concen - trations in the pulmonary edema ﬂuid of patients with acute respiratory distress syndrome from sepsis . Crit Care Med 24 : 1448 – 1454 , 1996 . Review L396 ANIMAL MODELS OF ACUTE LUNG INJURY AJP - Lung Cell Mol Physiol (cid:127) VOL 295 (cid:127) SEPTEMBER 2008 (cid:127) www . ajplung . org b y 10 . 220 . 32 . 246 on M a y 2 9 , 2017 h tt p : / / a j p l ung . ph ys i o l og y . o r g / D o w n l oaded f r o m 140 . Mizgerd JP , Skerrett SJ . Animal models of human pneumonia . Am J Physiol Lung Cell Mol Physiol 294 : L387 – L398 , 2008 . 141 . Modelska K , Pittet JF , Folkesson HG , Courtney Broaddus V , Matthay MA . Acid - induced lung injury . Protective effect of anti - inter - leukin - 8 pretreatment on alveolar epithelial barrier function in rabbits . Am J Respir Crit Care Med 160 : 1450 – 1456 , 1999 . 142 . Montgomery AB , Stager MA , Carrico CJ , Hudson LD . Causes of mortality in patients with the adult respiratory distress syndrome . Am Rev Respir Dis 132 : 485 – 489 , 1985 . 143 . Moore BB , Hogaboam CM . Murine models of pulmonary ﬁbrosis . Am J Physiol Lung Cell Mol Physiol 294 : L152 – L160 , 2008 . 144 . Motohiro A , Furukawa T , Yasumoto K , Inokuchi K . Mechanisms involved in acute lung edema induced in dogs by oleic acid . Eur Surg Res 18 : 50 – 57 , 1986 . 145 . Muscedere JG , Mullen JB , Gan K , Slutsky AS . Tidal ventilation at low airway pressures can augment lung injury . Am J Respir Crit Care Med 149 : 1327 – 1334 , 1994 . 146 . Muzio M , Bosisio D , Polentarutti N , D’Amico G , Stoppacciaro A , Mancinelli R , van’t Veer C , Penton - Rol G , Ruco LP , Allavena P , Mantovani A . Differential expression and regulation of toll - like recep - tors ( TLR ) in human leukocytes : selective expression of TLR3 in dendritic cells . J Immunol 164 : 5998 – 6004 , 2000 . 147 . Narita M , Kawashima K , Morozumi T , Takashima H . Effect of physical defenses of the respiratory tract on the development of pneu - monia in pigs inoculated endobronchially with Actinobacillus pleuro - pneumoniae . J Vet Med Sci 57 : 839 – 844 , 1995 . 148 . Naureckas ET , Factor P , Benjaminov O , Hoffer E , Sriram V , Sznajder JI . Pentoxifylline does not protect against hyperoxic lung injury in rats . Eur Respir J 7 : 1397 – 1402 , 1994 . 149 . Neely CF , Keith IM . A1 adenosine receptor antagonists block ischemia - reperfusion injury of the lung . Am J Physiol Lung Cell Mol Physiol 268 : L1036 – L1046 , 1995 . 150 . Nielsen VG , Baird MS , McAdams ML , Freeman BA . Desﬂurane increases pulmonary alveolar - capillary membrane permeability after aortic occlusion - reperfusion in rabbits : evidence of oxidant - mediated lung injury . Anesthesiology 88 : 1524 – 1534 , 1998 . 151 . Nukiwa T , Matsuoka R , Takagi H , Ishii Y , Arai T , Kira S . Responses of serum and lung angiotensin - converting enzyme activities in the early phase of pulmonary damage induced by oleic acid in dogs . Am Rev Respir Dis 126 : 1080 – 1086 , 1982 . 152 . O’Brien - Ladner AR , Nelson ME , Cowley BD Jr , Bailey K , Wesselius LJ . Hyperoxia ampliﬁes TNF - alpha production in LPS - stimulated hu - man alveolar macrophages . Am J Respir Cell Mol Biol 12 : 275 – 279 , 1995 . 153 . O’Grady NP , Preas HL , Pugin J , Fiuza C , Tropea M , Reda D , Banks SM , Suffredini AF . Local inﬂammatory responses following bronchial endotoxin instillation in humans . Am J Respir Crit Care Med 163 : 1591 – 1598 , 2001 . 154 . O’Mahony DS , Liles WC , Altemeier W , Dhanireddy S , Frevert C , Liggitt D , Martin T , Matute - Bello G . Mechanical ventilation interacts with endotoxemia to induce extrapulmonary organ dysfunction . Critical Care 10 : R136 , 2006 . 155 . Obermiller T , Lakshminarayan S , Willoughby S , Mendenhall J , Butler J . Inﬂuence of lung volume and left atrial pressure on reverse pulmonary venous blood ﬂow . J Appl Physiol 70 : 447 – 453 , 1991 . 156 . Ognibene FP , Martin SE , Parker MM , Schlesinger T , Roach P , Burch C , Shelhamer JH , Parrillo JE . Adult respiratory distress syn - drome in patients with severe neutropenia . N Engl J Med 315 : 547 – 551 , 1986 . 157 . Okada M , Yamashita C , Okada K . Contribution of endothelin - 1 to warm ischemia / reperfusion injury of the rat lung . Am J Respir Crit Care Med 152 : 2105 – 2110 , 1995 . 158 . Park WY , Goodman RB , Steinberg KP , Ruzinski JT , Radella F 2nd , Park DR , Pugin J , Skerrett SJ , Hudson LD , Martin TR . Cytokine balance in the lungs of patients with acute respiratory distress syndrome . Am J Respir Crit Care Med 164 : 1896 – 1903 , 2001 . 159 . Pawlik MT , Schreyer AG , Ittner KP , Selig C , Gruber M , Feuerbach S , Taeger K . Early treatment with pentoxifylline reduces lung injury induced by acid aspiration in rats . Chest 127 : 613 – 621 , 2005 . 160 . Payseur BA , Place M . Prospects for association mapping in classical inbred mouse strains . Genetics 175 : 1999 – 2008 , 2007 . 161 . Pearse DB , Wagner EM . Role of the bronchial circulation in ischemia - reperfusion lung injury . J Appl Physiol 76 : 259 – 265 , 1994 . 162 . Pearse DB , Wagner EM , Permutt S . Effect of ventilation on vascular permeability and cyclic nucleotide concentrations in ischemic sheep lungs . J Appl Physiol 86 : 123 – 132 , 1999 . 163 . Pepe PE , Potkin RT , Reus DH , Hudson LD , Carrico CJ . Clinical predictors of the adult respiratory distress syndrome . Am J Surg 144 : 124 – 130 , 1982 . 164 . Petty TL , Reiss OK , Paul GW , Silvers GW , Elkins ND . Characteris - tics of pulmonary surfactant in adult respiratory distress syndrome associated with trauma and shock . Am Rev Respir Dis 115 : 531 – 536 , 1977 . 165 . Pittet JF , Mackersie RC , Martin TR , Matthay MA . Biological mark - ers of acute lung injury : prognostic and pathogenic signiﬁcance . Am J Respir Crit Care Med 155 : 1187 – 1205 , 1997 . 166 . Pittet JF , Wiener - Kronish JP , Serikov V , Matthay MA . Resistance of the alveolar epithelium to injury from septic shock in sheep . Am J Respir Crit Care Med 151 : 1093 – 1100 , 1995 . 167 . Prop J , Ehrie MG , Crapo JD , Nieuwenhuis P , Wildevuur CR . Reimplantation response in isografted rat lungs . J Thorac Cardiovasc Surg 87 : 702 – 711 , 1984 . 168 . Pugin J , Dunn I , Jolliet P , Tassaux D , Magnenat JL , Nicod LP , Chevrolet JC . Activation of human macrophages by mechanical venti - lation in vitro . Am J Physiol Lung Cell Mol Physiol 275 : L1040 – L1050 , 1998 . 169 . Pugin J , Widmer MC , Kossodo S , Liang CM , Preas HL II , Suffredini AF . Human neutrophils secrete gelatinase B in vitro and in vivo in response to endotoxin and proinﬂammatory mediators . Am J Respir Cell Mol Biol 20 : 458 – 464 , 1999 . 170 . Putensen C , Rasanen J , Dows JB . Effect of endogenous and inhaled nitric oxide on the ventilation - perfusion relationships in oleic - acid lung injury . Am J Respir Crit Care Med 150 : 330 – 336 , 1994 . 171 . Raetz CR , Ulevitch RJ , Wright SD , Sibley CH , Ding A , Nathan CF . Gram - negative endotoxin : an extraordinary lipid with profound effects on eukaryotic signal transduction . FASEB J 5 : 2652 – 2660 , 1991 . 172 . Raghavendran K , Davidson BA , Mullan BA , Hutson AD , Russo TA , Manderscheid PA , Woytash JA , Holm BA , Notter RH , Knight PR . Acid and particulate - induced aspiration lung injury in mice : importance of MCP - 1 . Am J Physiol Lung Cell Mol Physiol 289 : L134 – L143 , 2005 . 173 . Raghu G , Striker LJ , Hudson LD , Striker GE . Extracellular matrix in normal and ﬁbrotic human lungs . Am Rev Respir Dis 131 : 281 – 289 , 1985 . 174 . Raj JU , Hazinski TA , Bland RD . Oxygen - induced lung microvascular injury in neutropenic rabbits and lambs . J Appl Physiol 58 : 921 – 927 , 1985 . 175 . Rehli M . Of mice and men : species variations of Toll - like receptor expression . Trends Immunol 23 : 375 – 378 , 2002 . 176 . Reutershan J , Cagnina RE , Chang D , Linden J , Ley K . Therapeutic anti - inﬂammatory effects of myeloid cell adenosine receptor A2a stim - ulation in lipopolysaccharide - induced lung injury . J Immunol 179 : 1254 – 1263 , 2007 . 177 . Rezaiguia S , Garat C , Delclaux C , Meignan M , Fleury J , Legrand P , Matthay MA , Jayr C . Acute bacterial pneumonia in rats increases alveolar epithelial ﬂuid clearance by a tumor necrosis factor - alpha - dependent mechanism . J Clin Invest 99 : 325 – 335 , 1997 . 178 . Ricard JD , Dreyfuss D , Saumon G . Production of inﬂammatory cyto - kines in ventilator - induced lung injury : a reappraisal . Am J Respir Crit Care Med 163 : 1176 – 1180 , 2001 . 179 . Richardson JD , Woods D , Johanson WG Jr , Trinkle JK . Lung bacterial clearance following pulmonary contusion . Surgery 86 : 730 – 735 , 1979 . 180 . Rojas M , Xu J , Woods CR , Mora AL , Spears W , Roman J , Brigham KL . Bone marrow - derived mesenchymal stem cells in repair of the injured lung . Am J Respir Cell Mol Biol 33 : 145 – 152 , 2005 . 181 . Rosen H , Klebanoff SJ . Bactericidal activity of a superoxide anion - generating system . A model for the polymorphonuclear leukocyte . J Exp Med 149 : 27 – 39 , 1979 . 182 . Rotta AT , Gunnarsson B , Fuhrman BP , Hernan LJ , Steinhorn DM . Comparison of lung protective ventilation strategies in a rabbit model of acute lung injury . Crit Care Med 29 : 2176 – 2184 , 2001 . 183 . Roy - Burman A , Savel RH , Racine S , Swanson BL , Revadigar NS , Fujimoto J , Sawa T , Frank DW , Wiener - Kronish JP . Type III protein secretion is associated with death in lower respiratory and systemic Pseudomonas aeruginosa infections . J Infect Dis 183 : 1767 – 1774 , 2001 . Review L397 ANIMAL MODELS OF ACUTE LUNG INJURY AJP - Lung Cell Mol Physiol (cid:127) VOL 295 (cid:127) SEPTEMBER 2008 (cid:127) www . ajplung . org b y 10 . 220 . 32 . 246 on M a y 2 9 , 2017 h tt p : / / a j p l ung . ph ys i o l og y . o r g / D o w n l oaded f r o m 184 . Rubenfeld GD , Caldwell E , Peabody E , Weaver J , Martin DP , Neff M , Stern EJ , Hudson LD . Incidence and outcomes of acute lung injury . N Engl J Med 353 : 1685 – 1693 , 2005 . 185 . Sakao Y , Kajikawa O , Martin TR , Nakahara Y , Hadden I , Will A , Harmon CL , Miller EJ . Association of IL - 8 and MCP - 1 with the development of reexpansion pulmonary edema in rabbits . Ann Thoracic Surg 71 : 1825 – 1832 , 2001 . 186 . Sakuma T , Takahashi K , Ohya N , Kajikawa O , Martin TR , Alber - tine KH , Matthay MA . Ischemia - reperfusion lung injury in rabbits : mechanisms of injury and protection . Am J Physiol Lung Cell Mol Physiol 276 : L137 – L145 , 1999 . 187 . Schneemann M , Schoedon G . Species differences in macrophage NO production are important . Nat Immunol 3 : 102 , 2002 . 188 . Schneemann M , Schoedon G , Hofer S , Blau N , Guerrero L , Schaffner A . Nitric oxide synthase is not a constituent of the antimicro - bial armature of human mononuclear phagocytes . J Infect Dis 167 : 1358 – 1363 , 1993 . 189 . Schromm AB , Brandenburg K , Loppnow H , Moran AP , Koch MH , Rietschel ET , Seydel U . Biological activities of lipopolysaccharides are determined by the shape of their lipid A portion . Eur J Biochem 267 : 2008 – 2013 , 2000 . 190 . Schuster DP , Perez JE , Trulock EP , Williamson JR , Biello DR , Kenzora JL , Amundsen T , Lange LG . Cardiac dysfunction during acute lung injury induced by oleic acid in dogs . Am Rev Respir Dis 133 : 519 – 525 , 1986 . 191 . Schuster DP . ARDS : clinical lessons from the oleic acid model of acute lung injury . Am J Respir Crit Care Med 149 : 245 – 260 , 1994 . 192 . Schuster DP , Kozlowski JK , McCarthy T , Morrow J , Stephenson A . Effect of endotoxin on oleic acid lung injury does not depend on priming . J Appl Physiol 91 : 2047 – 2054 , 2001 . 193 . Schuster DP , Marklin GF . The effect of regional lung injury or alveolar hypoxia on pulmonary blood ﬂow and lung water measured by positron emission tomography . Am Rev Respir Dis 133 : 1037 – 1042 , 1986 . 194 . Sebti SM , Mignano JE , Jani JP , Srimatkandada S , Lazo JS . Bleomycin hydrolase : molecular cloning , sequencing , and biochemical studies reveal membership in the cysteine proteinase family . Biochem - istry 28 : 6544 – 6548 , 1989 . 195 . Seekamp A , Regel G , Rother K , Jutila M . The effect of anti - L - selectin ( EL - 246 ) on remote lung injury after infrarenal ischemia / reperfusion . Shock 7 : 447 – 454 , 1997 . 196 . Shea LM , Beehler C , Schwartz M , Shenkar R , Tuder R , Abraham E . Hyperoxia activates NF - kappaB and increases TNF - alpha and IFN - gamma gene expression in mouse pulmonary lymphocytes . J Immunol 157 : 3902 – 3908 , 1996 . 197 . Shen AS , Haslett C , Feldsien DC , Henson PM , Cherniack RM . The intensity of chronic lung inﬂammation and ﬁbrosis after bleomycin is directly related to the severity of acute injury . Am Rev Respir Dis 137 : 564 – 571 , 1988 . 198 . Sherr S , Montemurno R , Raffer P . Lipids of recovered pulmonary fat emboli following trauma . J Trauma 14 : 242 – 246 , 1974 . 199 . Siegelman S , Sinha SBP , Veith FJ . Pulmonary reimplantation response . Ann Surg 177 : 30 – 36 , 1973 . 200 . Sigmund CD . Viewpoint : are studies in genetically altered mice out of control ? Arterioscler Thromb Vasc Biol 20 : 1425 – 1429 , 2000 . 201 . Sinclair SE , Altemeier WA , Matute - Bello G , Chi EY . Augmented lung injury due to interaction between hyperoxia and mechanical ventilation . Crit Care Med 32 : 2496 – 2501 , 2004 . 202 . Sittipunt C , Steinberg KP , Ruzinski JT , Myles C , Zhu S , Goodman RB , Hudson LD , Matalon S , Martin TR . Nitric oxide and nitrotyrosine in the lungs of patients with acute respiratory distress syndrome . Am J Respir Crit Care Med 163 : 503 – 510 , 2001 . 203 . Skerrett SJ , Liggitt HD , Hajjar AM , Ernst RK , Miller SI , Wilson CB . Respiratory epithelial cells regulate lung inﬂammation in response to inhaled endotoxin . Am J Physiol Lung Cell Mol Physiol 287 : L143 – L152 , 2004 . 204 . Smith LJ , Friedman H , Anderson J . Hyperoxic lung injury in mice : effect of neutrophil depletion and food deprivation . J Lab Clin Med 111 : 449 – 458 , 1988 . 205 . Smith PD , Suffredini AF , Allen JB , Wahl LM , Parrillo JE , Wahl SM . Endotoxin administration to humans primes alveolar macrophages for increased production of inﬂammatory mediators . J Clin Immunol 14 : 141 – 148 , 1994 . 206 . Sone Y , Serikov VB , Staub NC , Sr . Intravascular macrophage depletion attenuates endotoxin lung injury in anesthetized sheep . J Appl Physiol 87 : 1354 – 1359 , 1999 . 207 . St . John RC , Mizer LA , Kindt GC , Weisbrode SE , Moore SA , Dorinsky PM . Acid aspiration - induced acute lung injury causes leuko - cyte - dependent systemic organ injury . J Appl Physiol 74 : 1994 – 2003 , 1993 . 208 . Stammberger U , Gaspert A , Hillinger S , Vogt P , Odermatt B , Weder W , Schmid RA . Apoptosis induced by ischemia and reperfusion in experimental lung transplantation . Ann Thorac Surg 69 : 1532 – 1536 , 2000 . 209 . Stenzel JD , Welty SE , Benzick AE , Smith EO , Smith CV , Hansen TN . Hyperoxic lung injury in Fischer - 344 and Sprague - Dawley rats in vivo . Free Radic Biol Med 14 : 531 – 539 , 1993 . 210 . Su X , Robriquet L , Folkesson HG , Matthay MA . Protective effect of endogenous beta - adrenergic tone on lung ﬂuid balance in acute bacterial pneumonia in mice . Am J Physiol Lung Cell Mol Physiol 290 : L769 – L776 , 2006 . 211 . Tapping RI , Akashi S , Miyake K , Godowski PJ , Tobias PS . Toll - like receptor 4 , but not Toll - like receptor 2 , is a signaling receptor for Escherichia and Salmonella lipopolysaccharides . J Immunol 165 : 5780 – 5787 , 2000 . 212 . Tavaf - Motamen H , Miner TJ , Starnes BW , Shea - Donohue T . Nitric oxide mediates acute lung injury by modulation of inﬂammation . J Surg Res 78 : 137 – 142 , 1998 . 213 . Taveira da Silva AM , Kaulbach HC , Chiudian FS , Lambert DR , Suffredini AF , Danner RL . Brief report : shock and multiple - organ dysfunction after self - administration of Salmonella endotoxin . N Engl J Med 328 : 1457 – 1460 , 1993 . 214 . Terashima T , Matsubara H , Nakamura M , Sakamaki F , Waki Y , Soejima K , Tasaka S , Nakamura H , Sayama K , Ishizaka A , Kanazawa M . Local Pseudomonas instillation induces contralateral lung injury and plasma cytokines . Am J Respir Crit Care Med 153 : 1600 – 1605 , 1996 . 215 . The Acute Respiratory Distress Syndrome Network . Ventilation with lower tidal volumes as compared with traditional tidal volumes for acute lung injury and the acute respiratory distress syndrome . N Engl J Med 342 : 1301 – 1308 , 2000 . 216 . Thoma - Uszynski S , Stenger S , Takeuchi O , Ochoa MT , Engele M , Sieling PA , Barnes PF , Rollinghoff M , Bolcskei PL , Wagner M , Akira S , Norgard MV , Belisle JT , Godowski PJ , Bloom BR , Modlin RL . Induction of direct antimicrobial activity through mammalian toll - like receptors . Science 291 : 1544 – 1547 , 2001 . 217 . Tobias PS , Soldau K , Ulevitch RJ . Isolation of a lipopolysaccharide - binding acute phase reactant from rabbit serum . J Exp Med 164 : 777 – 793 , 1986 . 218 . Tomashefski JF Jr , Davies P , Boggis C , Greene R , Zapol WM , Reid LM . The pulmonary vascular lesions of the adult respiratory distress syndrome . Am J Pathol 112 : 112 – 126 , 1983 . 218a . Tremblay L , Valenza F , Ribeiro SP , Li J , Slutsky AS . Injurious ventilatory strategies increase cytokines and c - fos m - RNA expression in an isolated rat lung model . J Clin Invest 99 : 944 – 952 , 1997 . 219 . Tsai WC , Strieter RM , Mehrad B , Newstead MW , Zeng X , Standi - ford TJ . CXC chemokine receptor CXCR2 is essential for protective innate host response in murine Pseudomonas aeruginosa pneumonia . Infect Immun 68 : 4289 – 4296 , 2000 . 220 . Tsuno K , Miura K , Takeya M , Kolobow T , Morioka T . Histopatho - logic pulmonary changes from mechanical ventilation at high peak airway pressures . Am Rev Respir Dis 143 : 1115 – 1120 , 1991 . 221 . Ulrich K , Stern M , Goddard ME , Williams J , Zhu J , Dewar A , Painter HA , Jeffery PK , Gill DR , Hyde SC , Geddes DM , Takata M , Alton EWFW . Keratinocyte growth factor therapy in murine oleic acid - induced acute lung injury . Am J Physiol Lung Cell Mol Physiol 288 : L1179 – L1192 , 2005 . 222 . Umezawa H . Bleomycin and other antitumor antibiotics of high molec - ular weight . Antimicrob Agents Chemother 5 : 1079 – 1085 , 1965 . 223 . Villar J , Ribeiro SP , Mullen JB , Kuliszewski M , Post M , Slutsky AS . Induction of the heat shock response reduces mortality rate and organ damage in a sepsis - induced acute lung injury model . Crit Care Med 22 : 914 – 921 , 1994 . 224 . Vlahakis NE , Hubmayr RD . Cellular stress failure in ventilator - injured lungs . Am J Respir Crit Care Med 171 : 1328 – 1342 , 2005 . Review L398 ANIMAL MODELS OF ACUTE LUNG INJURY AJP - Lung Cell Mol Physiol (cid:127) VOL 295 (cid:127) SEPTEMBER 2008 (cid:127) www . ajplung . org b y 10 . 220 . 32 . 246 on M a y 2 9 , 2017 h tt p : / / a j p l ung . ph ys i o l og y . o r g / D o w n l oaded f r o m 225 . Vlahakis NE , Schroeder MA , Limper AH , Hubmayr RD . Stretch induces cytokine release by alveolar epithelial cells in vitro . Am J Physiol Lung Cell Mol Physiol 277 : L167 – L173 , 1999 . 226 . Vlahakis NE , Schroeder MA , Pagano RE , Hubmayr RD . Deforma - tion - induced lipid trafﬁcking in alveolar epithelial cells . Am J Physiol Lung Cell Mol Physiol 280 : L938 – L946 , 2001 . 227 . Waddell TK , Gorczynski RM , DeCampos KN , Patterson GA , Slutsky AS . Major histocompatibility complex expression and lung ischemia - reperfusion in rats . Ann Thorac Surg 62 : 866 – 872 , 1996 . 228 . Walley KR , Lukacs NW , Standiford TJ , Strieter RM , Kunkel SL . Balance of inﬂammatory cytokines related to severity and mortality of murine sepsis . Infect Immun 64 : 4733 – 4738 , 1996 . 229 . Walther FJ , Hernandez - Juviel J , Bruni R , Waring AJ . Spiking Survanta with synthetic surfactant peptides improves oxygenation in surfactant - deﬁ - cient rats . Am J Respir Crit Care Med 156 : 855 – 861 , 1997 . 230 . Wang HL , Akinci IO , Baker CM , Urich D , Bellmeyer A , Jain M , Chandel NS , Mutlu GM , Budinger GR . The intrinsic apoptotic path - way is required for lipopolysaccharide - induced lung endothelial cell death . J Immunol 179 : 1834 – 1841 , 2007 . 231 . Wang L , Zhu DM , Su X , Bai CX , Ware LB , Matthay MA . Acute cardiopulmonary effects of a dual - endothelin receptor antagonist on oleic acid - induced pulmonary arterial hypertension in dogs . Exp Lung Res 30 : 31 – 42 , 2004 . 232 . Wang LF , Patel M , Razavi HM , Weicker S , Joseph MG , McCor - mack DG , Mehta S . Role of inducible nitric oxide synthase in pulmo - nary microvascular protein leak in murine sepsis . Am J Respir Crit Care Med 165 : 1634 – 1639 , 2002 . 233 . Ward NS , Waxman AB , Homer RJ , Mantell LL , Einarsson O , Du Y , Elias JA . Interleukin - 6 - induced protection in hyperoxic acute lung in - jury . Am J Respir Cell Mol Biol 22 : 535 – 542 , 2000 . 234 . Ware LB , Matthay MA . Alveolar ﬂuid clearance is impaired in the majority of patients with acute lung injury and the acute respiratory distress syndrome . Am J Respir Crit Care Med 163 : 1376 – 1383 , 2001 . 235 . Ware LB , Matthay MA . The acute respiratory distress syndrome . N Engl J Med 342 : 1334 – 1349 , 2000 . 236 . Warner AE . Pulmonary intravascular macrophages . Role in acute lung injury . Clin Chest Med 17 : 125 – 135 , 1996 . 237 . Welborn MB 3rd , Douglas WG , Abouhamze Z , Auffenburg T , Abouhamze AS , Baumhofer J , Seeger JM , Pruitt JH , Edwards PD , Chizzonite R , Martin D , Moldawer LL , Harward TR . Visceral ische - mia - reperfusion injury promotes tumor necrosis factor ( TNF ) and inter - leukin - 1 ( IL - 1 ) dependent organ injury in the mouse . Shock 6 : 171 – 176 , 1996 . 238 . Welty - Wolf KE , Carraway MS , Ortel TL , Ghio AJ , Idell S , Egan J , Zhu X , Jiao Ja Wong HC , Piantadosi CA . Blockade of tissue factor - factor X binding attenuates sepsis - induced respiratory and renal failure . Am J Physiol Lung Cell Mol Physiol 290 : L21 – L31 , 2006 . 239 . Wiener - Kronish JP , Albertine KH , Matthay MA . Differential re - sponses of the endothelial and epithelial barriers of the lung in sheep to Escherichia coli endotoxin . J Clin Invest 88 : 864 – 875 , 1991 . 240 . Wiener - Kronish JP , Sakuma T , Kudoh I , Pittet JF , Frank D , Dobbs L , Vasil ML , Matthay MA . Alveolar epithelial injury and pleural empyema in acute P . aeruginosa pneumonia in anesthetized rabbits . J Appl Physiol 75 : 1661 – 1669 , 1993 . 241 . Wiggs BR , English D , Quinlan WM , Doyle NA , Hogg JC , Doerschuk CM . Contributions of capillary pathway size and neutrophil deformabil - ity to neutrophil transit through rabbit lungs . J Appl Physiol 77 : 463 – 470 , 1994 . 242 . Winkler GC . Review of the signiﬁcance of pulmonary intravascular macrophages with respect to animal species and age . Exp Cell Biol 57 : 281 – 286 , 1989 . 243 . Wright JR . Immunomodulatory functions of surfactant . Physiol Rev 77 : 931 – 962 , 1997 . 244 . Wright SD , Ramos RA , Tobias PS , Ulevitch RJ , Mathison JC . CD14 , a receptor for complexes of lipopolysaccharide ( LPS ) and LPS binding protein . Science 249 : 1431 – 1433 , 1990 . 245 . Xiao F , Eppihimer MJ , Young JA , Nguyen K , Carden DL . Lung neutrophil retention and injury after intestinal ischemia / reperfusion . Mi - crocirculation 4 : 359 – 367 , 1997 . 246 . Xu J , Mora A , Shim H , Stecenko A , Brigham KL , Rojas M . Role of the SDF - 1 / CXCR4 axis in the pathogenesis of lung injury and ﬁbrosis . Am J Respir Cell Mol Biol 37 : 291 – 299 , 2007 . 247 . Yamaguchi K , Mori M , Kawai A , Asano K , Takasugi T , Umeda A , Yokoyama T . Attenuation of hypoxic pulmonary vasoconstriction in acute oleic acid lung injury—signiﬁcance of vasodilator prostanoids . Adv Exp Med Biol 316 : 299 – 309 , 1992 . 248 . Yamaguchi T , Kawabata K , Koizumi N , Sakurai F , Nakashima K , Sakurai H , Sasaki T , Okada N , Yamanishi K , Mizuguchi H . Role of MyD88 and TLR9 in the innate immune response elicited by serotype 5 adenoviral vectors . Hum Gene Ther 18 : 753 – 762 , 2007 . 249 . Yang RB , Mark MR , Gray A , Huang A , Xie MH , Zhang M , Goddard A , Wood WI , Gurney AL , Godowski PJ . Toll - like receptor - 2 mediates lipopolysaccharide - induced cellular signalling . Nature 395 : 284 – 288 , 1998 . 250 . Yano T , Deterding RR , Simonet WS , Shannon JM , Mason RJ . Keratinocyte growth factor reduces lung damage due to acid instillation in rats . Am J Respir Cell Mol Biol 15 : 433 – 442 , 1996 . 251 . Zarbock A , Singbartl K , Ley K . Complete reversal of acid - induced acute lung injury by blocking of platelet - neutrophil aggregation . J Clin Invest 116 : 3211 – 3219 , 2006 . 252 . Zhu Z , Zheng T , Lee CG , Homer RJ , Elias JA . Tetracycline - con - trolled transcriptional regulation systems : advances and application in transgenic animal modeling . Semin Cell Dev Biol 13 : 121 – 128 , 2002 . 253 . Zlotnik A , Yoshie O . Chemokines : a new classiﬁcation system and their role in immunity . Immunity 12 : 121 – 127 , 2000 . Review L399 ANIMAL MODELS OF ACUTE LUNG INJURY AJP - Lung Cell Mol Physiol (cid:127) VOL 295 (cid:127) SEPTEMBER 2008 (cid:127) www . ajplung . org b y 10 . 220 . 32 . 246 on M a y 2 9 , 2017 h tt p : / / a j p l ung . ph ys i o l og y . o r g / D o w n l oaded f r o m