Veeraraghavan * , Engmann * et al . 2023 ( preprint ) 1 Dynamic subtype - and context - specific subcellular RNA regulation in growth cones of developing neurons of the cerebral cortex Priya Veeraraghavan * , a , Anne K . Engmann * , a , John J . Hatch a , Yasuhiro Itoh a , Duane Nguyen a , Thomas Addison a , and Jeffrey D . Macklis a , # a Department of Stem Cell and Regenerative Biology , and Center for Brain Science , Harvard University , Cambridge , MA , USA * these authors contributed equally # Correspondence should be addressed to J . D . M . ( jeffrey _ macklis @ harvard . edu ) Molecular mechanisms that cells employ to compartmentalize function via localization of function - specific RNA and translation are only partially elucidated . We investigate long - range projection neurons of the cerebral cortex as highly polarized exemplars to elucidate dynamic regulation of RNA localization , stability , and translation within growth cones ( GCs ) , leading tips of growing axons . Comparison of GC - localized transcriptomes between two distinct subtypes of projection neurons – interhemispheric - callosal and corticothalamic – across developmental stages identifies both distinct and shared subcellular machinery , and intriguingly highlights enrichment of genes associated with neurodevelopmental and neuropsychiatric disorders . Developmental context - specific components of GC - localized transcriptomes identify known and novel potential regulators of distinct phases of circuit formation : long - distance growth , target area innervation , and synapse formation . Further , we investigate mechanisms by which transcripts are enriched and dynamically regulated in GCs , and identify GC - enriched motifs in 3’ untranslated regions . As one example , we identify cytoplasmic adenylation element binding protein 4 ( CPEB4 ) , an RNA binding protein regulating localization and translation of mRNAs encoding molecular machinery important for axonal branching and complexity . We also identify RNA binding motif single stranded interacting protein 1 ( RBMS1 ) as a dynamically expressed regulator of RNA stabilization that enables successful callosal circuit formation . Subtly aberrant associative and integrative cortical circuitry can profoundly affect cortical function , often causing neurodevelopmental and neuropsychiatric disorders . Elucidation of context - specific subcellular RNA regulation for GC - and soma - localized molecular controls over precise circuit development , maintenance , and function offers generalizable insights for other polarized cells , and might contribute substantially to understanding neurodevelopmental and behavioral - cognitive disorders and toward targeted therapeutics . Introduction Neurons are extreme examples of polarized cells , with highly specialized subcellular compartments 3 - 8 . The spatial enrich - ment of specific transcripts to distal compartments , such as ax - ons and dendrites , is likely linked to targeted RNA trafficking based on a combination of specific motifs 9 - 15 and differential expression of RNA binding proteins ( RBPs ) 16 - 20 , reviewed in 22 , as well as adjustments of RNA stability and local turnover me - diated by RBPs and miRNAs 23 , 24 , reviewed in 25 . During develop - ment , axonal GCs navigate complex extracellular environ - ments by responding to diverse substrate - bound and diffusible guidance cues . Each subtype - specific GC sequentially alters and refines its trajectory and growth rate , under control of such attractant and repellent cues , bypassing and rejecting in - appropriate targets , until it reaches its correct distant target area , where it ultimately matures into a subtype - specific syn - apse ( reviewed in 26 ) . Axonal GCs typically function in guidance 10 2 - 10 4 cell body diameters away from their parent somata , then function in target selection and synapse for - mation / maintenance 10 3 – 10 5 cell body diameters away . Thus , signaling to and from the nucleus via fast axonal transport would typically take hours to days 27 , while GC responses are known to occur in seconds to minutes 28 . It is known that local translation of at least some transcripts within the axon com - partment is critically involved in axon guidance 29 - 31 , synapse formation 32 , 33 , maintenance 34 , 35 , plasticity 36 , 37 , and regeneration 38 - 43 . Further , research from our laboratory and others has identified striking spatial segregation of RNA and protein molecular machinery into distinct local subcellular do - mains in projection neurons ( e . g . , GCs and axons vs . parent so - mata ) . Due to technical challenges , molecular compositions of GCs have been mostly studied in vitro ( e . g . , 6 , 44 - 46 ) , and in vivo data have been limited 5 , 47 - 49 . Our laboratory recently devel - oped a set of experimental and analytic approaches enabling direct quantitative comparison of GC and soma RNA and pro - tein molecular machinery in a subtype - and stage - specific man - ner directly from projection neurons in mouse brain 7 , 50 . Immensely diverse subtypes of cortical projection neurons form connections with similarly diverse target areas through - out the central nervous system ( CNS ) , establishing exquisitely precise functional circuitry that enables sensory integration , motor processing , associative behaviors , and advanced cogni - tion . Callosal projection neurons ( CPN ) connect across the cor - pus callosum to the contralateral cortical hemisphere , while subcerebral ( SCPN ) and corticothalamic projection neurons ( CThPN ) extend their axons out of cortex , through the internal capsule , and beyond to innervate diverse subcerebral struc - tures in the midbrain , brainstem , and spinal cord ( for SCPN ) or thalamus ( for CThPN ) 51 - 55 . Work from many labs over the past two decades provides an increasingly detailed understanding how a few best - studied subtypes of cortical projection neurons are specified by combinatorial transcriptional regulators Dynamic regulation of subcellular transcriptomes in cortical projection neurons Veeraraghavan * , Engmann * et al . 2023 ( preprint ) 2 through early steps of corticogenesis 53 , 55 , 56 . In sharp contrast , it is not well understood how distinct subtypes of projection neurons establish precise function - specific circuitry during de - velopment . Beyond axon guidance and establishment of ana - tomical connectivity , it is also poorly understood how subtype - specific synapses emerge from these processes to support spe - cific functions . These questions are particularly relevant in the context of miswiring of cortical circuitry . Thus , they are closely associated with the etiology of neurodevelopmental and neu - ropsychiatric diseases , including autism spectrum disorders ( ASD ) 57 , 58 and schizophrenia 59 , 60 . Here , we employ our recently developed subcellular ap - proaches to investigate whether and how spatial distribution of transcripts between GCs and their parent somata might dif - fer between distinct subtypes of projection neurons , and how it is dynamically regulated across distinct stages of axon devel - opment . First , we identify that a large set of shared GC - local - ized molecular machinery is common between subtypes of cortical projection neurons , and that GC - localized transcrip - tomes are enriched for genes associated with neurodevelop - mental and neuropsychiatric disorders . For example , we iden - tify that transcripts of several core components and regulatory elements of the wave regulatory complex ( WRC ) are locally en - riched in GCs of CPN and CThPN . Previous reports have linked this complex to axonal fasciculation , growth , and guidance in projection neurons 61 - 64 . Localization of a pool of WRC - associ - ated transcripts to PN GCs raises the intriguing possibility of targeted local translation , assembly , and activity - dependent fine - tuning of this multimeric regulatory system for actin nu - cleation , assembly , and branching . Second , subtype - specific transcripts that are differentially abundant in GCs of either CPN or CThPN at postnatal day 3 ( P3 ) are functionally enriched for classes of genes involved in either axonal growth , guidance , and synapse formation ( for CPN ) or translation ( for CThPN ) . Third , intriguingly , we identify many genes with no substantial transcriptional distinction between CPN and CThPN somata , but for which GC enrichment differs sharply between subtypes at P3 . Investigation of 3’ untranslated regions ( UTRs ) , known to be involved with RNA trafficking and stability , identifies a set of motifs that are enriched in GC - localized transcripts of both subtypes . In particular , we identify that cytoplasmic polyad - enylation elements ( CPEs ) are enriched in 3’UTRs in GCs . We further identify the RBP CPEB4 as an exemplar that likely me - diates aspects of subcellular RNA localization , stability , and translation , and that dysregulates axonal branching and com - plexity when perturbed . Lastly , we extend this work to investi - gate dynamic changes of subcellular RNA localization during development within CPN , and identify motifs in 3’UTRs of GC - localized transcripts that are enriched in GCs during early ( axon elongation and branching / collateralization ) or later stages ( early synapse formation ) of development . These differentially enriched motifs , coupled with evidence of differential GC - lo - calization of transcripts , strongly suggest stage - specific devel - opmental programs for anterograde RNA trafficking , subcellu - lar localization , and stability . We identify the RBP RBMS1 as an exemplar that regulates developmental stage - specific , dy - namic changes in composition of the CPN - specific GC - localized transcriptome , required for proper CPN circuit formation . Results Cortical projection neurons contain distinct local transcrip - tomes in spatially segregated and functionally specialized subcellular compartments To investigate subcellular molecular machinery that might be critical for subtype - specific circuit generation , we directly compared subcellular transcriptomes of CPN and CThPN . We isolated somata and GCs in parallel from these two distinct subtypes of cortical projection neurons directly from the early postnatal mouse brain ( Figure 1a ) . These cortical projection neuron subtypes have their somata in distinct cortical layers , and they generate distinct circuitry ( Figure 1a ) . CPN are central for sensory - motor integration , and for integrative and associa - tive behavior and cognition . Their projections are predomi - nantly intratelencephalic , extending their axons across the midline via the corpus callosum to innervate distinct bimodal homotopic target regions in the contralateral hemisphere 65 - 69 . CThPN are central for multi - modal sensory and motor integra - tion and modulation between cortex and thalamus . They re - spect the midline , and project their axons into the internal cap - sule to form precise and modality - specific reciprocal circuitry with thalamocortical projection neurons in the various tha - lamic nuclei ( reviewed in 70 ) . We targeted layer II / III CPN ( the dominant CPN popula - tion ) for parallel GC and soma isolation using unilateral in utero electroporation at E14 . 5 with a multi - cistronic DNA construct encoding membrane - targeted ( for GCs ) and nuclear - localized ( for somata ) fluorescent reporters , resulting in reproducible la - beling of SatB2 - positive neurons in layers II / III of lateral soma - tosensory cortex ( Figure 1b , Supplementary Figure 1a - c ) . CThPN were targeted specifically using an intersectional transgenic approach ( Emx1 : : FlpO , Ntsr1 : : Cre , Ai65 ) , resulting in selective labeling of neurons in cortical layer VI ( Figure 1c ) , colocalized with the widely utilized CThPN marker TBR1 , and negative for the CPN marker SatB2 ( Supplementary Figure 1d ) . Specificity of each labeling approach for the two distinct neu - ronal subtypes is confirmed by transcriptomic expression data of well - established marker genes ( Supplementary Figure 1e ) . Importantly , tissue containing GCs of interest did not contain any labeled cell bodies or dendrites , which might otherwise potentially contaminate the purified GC samples ( Figure 1b ) . Subcellular - specific GCs and somata were isolated in parallel directly from the mouse brain , using subcellular fractionation coupled with fluorescent small particle sorting ( FSPS ; Supple - mentary Figure 2a - e , 7 , 50 ) and established fluorescence acti - vated cell sorting ( FACS ) techniques 51 , 71 , respectively . Subcel - lular fractionation resulted in enrichment of GCs and distal axon particles ( growth cone fraction , GCF ) , which contained sealed membranous spheres protecting RNA and protein con - tent in RNase and protease hydrolysis protection assays , and showed enrichment for distal axon markers ( e . g . GAP43 ) and de - enrichment of somatic and dendritic markers ( e . g . Gm130 , Map2 ) in western blot analysis ( Supplementary Figure 2f - h ) . Libraries were prepared from the extracted polyA + mRNA us - ing SMART - Seq v4 chemistry and sequenced to a depth of > 40M reads per sample ( workflow outlined in Supplementary Dynamic regulation of subcellular transcriptomes in cortical projection neurons Veeraraghavan * , Engmann * et al . 2023 ( preprint ) 3 Figure 3 ) . Most reads mapped to coding sequences within the nuclear genome ( Supplementary Figure 3c / d ) . In GC samples , in particular , reads displayed higher bias to 3’ end coverage than in somata ( Supplementary Figure 3e ) . To account for po - tential ambient contaminating RNAs that originate from the environment around GCs , we compared transcriptomes ob - tained from sorted GCs to those obtained from the GCF input and identified 865 CPN GC and 624 CThPN GC genes enriched in the FSPS - purified GCs over the GCF input , which we term “GC genes” ( Supplementary Figure 4a & b ) . This bioinformatic filter removes reads that can be attributed to non - neuronal cell types or functions ( Supplementary Figure 4c & d ) . We first focused on transcriptome comparisons between GC and soma subcellular compartments at P3 . At the level of the whole transcriptome , samples from distinct subtypes and subcellular locations clearly separate via principal component analysis , with the subcellular axis dominating the variance ob - served ( Figure 1d ) . We next compared GC genes found in ei - ther subtype by their relative abundance in GCs compared to somata ( Figure 1e ) and identify that genes most significantly enriched in GCs are enriched for gene ontology ( GO ) terms as - sociated with cytoplasmic translation and synapse biology ( Fig - ure 1f , Supplementary Table 1 ) . Subtypes of cortical projection neurons show functionally distinct GC transcriptomes , which are enriched for tran - scripts associated with neurodevelopmental and neuropsy - chiatric disorders We next asked whether and to what extent GC transcrip - tomes differ between subtypes . To optimize rigor , we excluded genes that significantly differ between the unpurified GCFs of the two subtypes , thus retaining 509 comparable genes . We find that 99 ( 16 % ) are enriched in CPN GCs and 185 ( 31 % ) are enriched in CThPN GCs ( Figure 2a , Supplementary Table 2 ) . GC - localized transcriptomes might arise from a combination of transcriptional distinctions between the subtypes of parent so - mata , or by subtype - specific differences in RNA trafficking and stability . Intriguingly , we identify that , while indeed GC - local - ized abundances of many genes are transcription - associated , a large proportion of GC - distinct genes appear to be driven by differences in RNA trafficking and stability ( Figure 2 b - d ) . Some genes can be classified as transcriptionally regulated ( “tran - scription” , class VI / VII ) , while others are clearly linked to traf - ficking phenotypes ( “trafficking” , class IV / V and “trafficking in - verted” , class VIII / IX ) . For these trafficking - related classes IV / V and VIII / IX , there are clear distinctions in GC transcriptomes Figure 1 : Subtypes of cortical projection neurons contain spatially segregated transcriptomes poised for subcellular , compartment - spe - cific function . ( a ) Somata and GCs of callosal projection neurons ( CPN , orange ) and corticothalamic projection neurons ( CThPN / CTh , blue ) were isolated from mouse brains , and purified in parallel by fluorescence - based cell and small particle sorting , respectively . Subcellular RNA was isolated , and transcriptomes were quantitatively assessed , from subtype - specific GCs and somata to investigate spatial distribution of transcripts . ( b ) CPN in cortical layer II / III were labeled by E14 . 5 unilateral in utero electroporation . At P3 , labeled CPN axons cross the midline and innervate homotopic targets in the contralateral cortex ( inset i ) . ( c ) CThPN of cortical layer VI were labeled using intersectional mouse genetics ( Ntsr1 : : Cre , Emx1 : : FlpO , Ai65 ) . At P3 , labeled CThPN axons have traversed the internal capsule and are innervating the thalamus ( inset ii ) . ( d ) Principal component analysis reveals tight clustering and distinction of data points for the same subcellular compartment of either subtype ( CPN ; CThPN ) and separation between compartments ( GCs vs . somata ) by the first component . The second component further separates samples according to subtypes . ( e ) Within the union of ambient corrected , GC - enriched transcripts across subtypes , the majority of transcripts are preferentially GC - localized ( green ) , with smaller fractions showing no preferential subcellular localization ( light grey ) , or preferential localization to the somata ( dark grey ) . ( f ) Distribution of biological function assessed by GO term enrichment across GC and soma compartments . Size corresponds to the proportion of genes in the gene set ( x axis ) that are also in the GO term set ( y axis ) ; color corresponds to adjusted FDR . Dynamic regulation of subcellular transcriptomes in cortical projection neurons Veeraraghavan * , Engmann * et al . 2023 ( preprint ) 4 between subtypes . In contrast , these trafficking - related clas - ses do not show differences between transcriptomes in so - mata . Many neurodevelopmental and neuropsychiatric disor - ders , e . g . autism spectrum disorder ( ASD ) and schizophrenia , respectively , are linked with aberrant cortical circuit for - mation . Recent efforts by several groups have identified hu - man genetic variants associated with these and other disor - ders , e . g . bipolar disorder . We cross - referenced our subcellu - lar data with disease - associated gene sets , and identify highly significant enrichment , in both GCs and somata of both sub - types , for ASD - associated genes as defined by both coding var - iants enriched in whole exome sequencing 72 and curated by SFARI 73 . We also identify significant enrichment for schizophrenia - associated genes 74 , 75 in CThPN soma and GC transcriptomes ( Figure 2e , Supplementary Table 3 ) . We next investigated whether and which functionally co - ordinated groups of genes are subtype - specifically present in GCs . We identify that GO terms associated with ribosome biol - ogy and cytoplasmic translation are highly enriched with CThPN GC , whereas CPN GC display significant enrichment for terms of actin nucleation and synaptic biology , likely reflecting differential developmental states and the corresponding stage - specific loads of RNA for local translation for the two subtypes ( Figure 2f and Supplementary Table 4 ) . We analyzed which differentially abundant genes contribute most signifi - cantly to the enriched GO terms associated with these Figure 2 : Distinct subtype - specific , GC - specific , local transcriptomes of CPN and CThPN are enriched with potential regulators of distinct axon guidance decisions . ( a ) Volcano plot indicating subtype - specific , GC - localized transcripts as colored dots ( FDR . < 0 . 05 ) . Venn diagram shows distribution of shared and distinct GC - specific molecular machinery between subtypes . ( b ) Transcriptomic differences between CPN and CThPN across subcellular compartments ( somata vs . GCs ) . ( c ) Comparison of subtype - specific , GC - localized transcriptomes reveals molecular machinery that is shared between CPN and CThPN ( classes I - III ) and distinct between subtypes ( IV - IX ) . Importantly , differences between GCs of distinct subtype are often not captured by comparing subtype - specific somata alone ; we denote these as “trafficking” distinctions between subtypes ( classes IV , V , VIII , IX ) , as opposed to those driven by “transcription” ( classes VI , VII ) . ( d ) Normalized transcript abundances of exemplar genes for classes IV / V ( “trafficking” , Tdrd3 ) , classes VI / VII ( “transcription” , Ybx1 ) , and classes VIII / IX ( “trafficking inverted” , Dlg3 ) , across subcellular compartments and subtypes . ( e ) ASD and schizophrenia disease - associated genes are enriched ( 95 % confidence interval ) in soma - and GC - enriched transcriptomes . Both CPN and CThPN soma - localized and GC - localized transcriptomes show enrichment for ASD - associated genes , based on comparison with two independent data sets . Cross - referencing with two independent GWAS studies for schizophrenia additionally revealed that CThPN soma - and GC - localized transcriptomes are also enriched for schizophrenia - associated genes . There is no enrichment detected with genes associated with bipolar disorder in either CPN or CThPN transcriptomes , serving as a neuropsychiatric disease control , highlighting specificity in ASD and schizophrenia . ( f ) GO term enrichment in the GC - localized , subtype - distinct genes of each subtype . Color indicates - log10 ( P - value ) . ( g ) Subset of GO terms significantly enriched in either CPN or CThPN GCs connected with genes in GCs that are most frequently represented by those GO terms . Color of block proximal to each gene name denotes its subtype enrichment at P3 . Bolded genes are core components / interactors of the WRC ( Fig . 3 ) . Dynamic regulation of subcellular transcriptomes in cortical projection neurons Veeraraghavan * , Engmann * et al . 2023 ( preprint ) 5 categories . Intriguingly , we identify a number of core compo - nents and associated regulatory elements of the WAVE regula - tory complex ( WRC ) , e . g . Wave1 , Wave2 , Actr2 , and Abi1 , as GC - localized and , in some cases , subtype - distinct at P3 ( Figure 2g ) . Transcripts of multiple WRC components and interacting receptors are enriched in GCs , some in a subtype - specific manner The WRC is a pentameric complex consisting of WAVE1 ( or its paralogs WAVE2 or WAVE3 ) , CYFIP1 ( or its paralog CYFIP2 ) , HEM2 ( or its paralog HEM1 ) , ABI2 ( or its paralogs ABI1 or ABI3 ) and BRICK . In its basal state , the WRC is autoinhibited in the cytosol , and gets recruited to the plasma membrane and acti - vated , through cooperative action of GTPases ( such as RAC1 , ARF1 , or ARF6 ) , phospholipids ( such as PIP3 ) , kinases ( such as ABL , SRC , and CDK5 ) , and WRC interacting receptor sequence ( WIRS ) containing membrane receptors . Upon recruitment to the plasma membrane and activation , the activating subdo - main WCA is released , which in turn stimulates the ARP2 / 3 complex to polymerize actin , thus mediating actin nucleation and branching ( Figure 3a , schematic adapted from 1 ) . We identify that both CPN and CThPN somata express all the necessary core components of the WRC ( though Abi3 and Hem1 are detected at very low abundance ) , along with several secondary regulatory WRC interactors ( Figure 3b and Supple - mentary Figure 5a - c ) . Investigation of GC - localized transcrip - tomes identifies only a subset of WRC - associated transcripts as locally enriched , some of them with intriguing , subtype - spe - cific differential localization across neuronal subcompartments ( Figure 3c , e - g and Supplementary Figure 4a / b / e ) . For six mem - bers of the Wiskott - Aldrich syndrome protein ( WASP ) family , i . e . the three Wave paralogs ( Wave1 , Wave2 , and Wave3 ) , N - Figure 3 : Core components and regulatory elements of the WAVE regulatory complex are subcellularly enriched in GCs of CPN and CThPN , suggesting local assembly and subtype - specificity of the machinery regulating actin branching . ( a ) Schematic of the composition , regulation , and function of the WRC ( also termed SCAR complex ) , which is activated upon association with WRC - interacting regulatory sequence ( WIRS ) - containing receptors and is important for actin nucleation and branching . Adapted from Rottner 2021 1 . ( b ) WRC core genes and regulators : transcript abundances and subtype - specific expression in CPN and CThPN somata . ( c ) WRC core genes and regulators : transcript abundances and subtype - specific expression in CPN and CThPN GCs . ( d ) Localization plot showing subtype - specific localization of transcripts encoding high confidence WIRS - containing proteins . ( e - g ) Normalized transcript abundances of Wave1 , Wave2 , and Wave3 , indicating their subtype - specificity and subcellular transcript localization . ( h - j ) Normalized transcript abundances of select WIRS - containing transcripts , showing their subtype - specificity and subcellular localization . ( k ) Maximum intensity projection ( 10 µ m total z depth ) of representative RNAscope confocal images of Wave1 in GFP - positive cultured CPN . Localization of the magenta Wave1 - positive puncta in the tip of the neurite is confirmed by respective orthogonal z - axis views along the sides . ( l ) Maximum intensity projection ( 10 µ m total z depth ) of representative immunocytochemistry for GFP ( top panels ) and WAVE1 ( bottom panels ) in GCs of cultured CPN . WAVE1 protein is detected as focal puncta at the tip of CPN GCs . ( m ) Quantification of WAVE1 immunocytochemical signal intensity ( mean grey value , mgv ± sem , n = 11 ) in the longest neurite of cultured CPN ( n = 11 ) , from proximal ( bottom ) to distal ( top ) end of the neurite . Grey box indicates localization of GC as assessed by parallel immunolabeling for actin . Dynamic regulation of subcellular transcriptomes in cortical projection neurons Veeraraghavan * , Engmann * et al . 2023 ( preprint ) 6 Wasp , Jmy , and Whamm , expression is detected in both CPN and CThPN somata . Notably however , within this protein fam - ily , transcripts of only the three Wave paralogs ( Wave1 , Wave2 , and Wave3 ) display differential subcellular localization between soma and GC compartments ( Figure 3e - g and Supple - mentary Figure 5d ) . Of the three Wave paralogs , Wave1 dis - plays the highest expression levels and the largest difference in subcellular localization between subtypes ( Figure 3e ) . We confirmed the presence of Wave1 transcripts in neurites of cul - tured CPN ( Figure 3k and Supplementary Figure 7 ) , and enrich - ment of the WAVE1 protein product toward the distal end of the longest neurite of cultured CPN ( Figure 3l & m ) . The WRC is particularly relevant to axon guidance and circuit formation because it links extracellular cues sensed by trans - membrane receptors to actin cytoskeletal regulation via WIRS - containing proteins . Transcripts encoding WIRS - containing proteins are differentially localized to GCs of both CPN or CThPN ( Figure 3d , h - j and Supplementary Figure 6 ) , though there is likely modest subtype - specific difference in localiza - tion of WRC - associated transcripts to GCs . Intriguingly , many of the WIRS - containing transmembrane receptors are report - edly associated with multiple neurodevelopmental disorders ( e . g . Dcc 75 , 76 ; Shank1 77 ) . UTRs of GC mRNAs are longer and enriched for translation - ally repressive cytoplasmic polyadenylation elements ( CPEs ) We next investigated how mRNAs might be transported to and / or locally regulated in GCs . Since 3’UTRs are known to af - fect RNA trafficking and stability , we focused on comparison of distinct 3’UTRs between mRNAs . ( Supplementary Figure 8 ) . We identified that 3’UTRs of GC - localized transcripts are significantly longer than those in somata , most significantly in CPN ( Figure 4a ) . We scanned 3’UTRs identified as preferen - tially enriched in GCs for known motifs using the tool Trans - ite 78 . We identified strikingly correlated motif enrichment in both CPN and CThPN GCs . Most strikingly , we identify U - rich sequences associated with the RBP families CPEB , RALY , and TIA1 ( Figure 4b ) . To account for incomplete motif databases , we also searched for ungapped motifs de novo using STREME 79 . The top five logos identified by de novo motif anal - ysis represent U - rich sequences , in agreement with results we obtained by motif scanning alone ( Supplement Figure 8e ) . We next compared expression profiles of annotated RBPs between CPN and CThPN somata ( Figure 4c ) . We find that all three families of RBPs with motifs enriched in GC transcripts are expressed by both subtypes ( Figure 4c ) , with Cpeb4 being more abundant in CThPN somata than in CPN somata at P3 ( Figure 4c & d ) . Since CThPN and CPN are born several days apart during corticogenesis , and thus undergo hetereochronic development , differential abundances of RBP transcripts are likely due to differences both across subtype and across growth state . CPE - binding protein 4 ( CPEB4 ) is enriched in distal neu - rites , suggesting function as a regulator of local translation CPEBs are multifunctional RNA binding proteins that are reported to be involved in localization ( CPEB1 and CPEB3 80 - 83 ) , translational regulation 81 , 84 - 89 , and regulation of RNA stability 90 , 91 . With respect to translation , CPEBs bind 3’UTRs of mRNAs in complex with other factors in an RNP that represses transla - tion of the RNA until the CPEB is phosphorylated , which changes the RNP composition and ultimately enables transla - tion ( Supplementary Figure 9a ) . Cpeb4 is the most highly ex - pressed paralog of this family in CPN somata ( Figure 4d and Supplementary Figure 9b ) . Its mis - splicing has been associated with ASD 2 , suggesting that it might function in regulating cir - cuit formation in developing neocortex . Since we observed strong enrichment for CPEs in 3’UTRs of GC - localized mRNAs , we hypothesized that CPEB4 might perform subcompartment - specific regulatory function in developing cortical projection neurons . Since motifs are a proxy for potential binding , we re - ana - lyzed CPEB4 RNA - IP data published previously by Parras et al 2 . We find that experimentally identified RNAs bound by CPEB4 in the subcortical striatum are overrepresented in GC tran - scriptomes compared to soma transcriptomes ( Figure 4i ) . Building on the result that transcripts with CPEs in their 3’UTRs are enriched in GCs , we further investigated potential involve - ment of CPEB4 in subcellular transcript regulation via immuno - cytochemistry for CPEB4 in primary cultured CPN . We identify that CPEB4 protein is enriched at the distal ends of neurites ( Figure 4e - h ) . These data were further supported by western blot results comparing CPEB4 protein levels in forebrain over - all , micro - dissected cortex , and CPN axon bundles micro - dis - sected from the corpus callosum . CPEB4 and its isoforms are detected in the axon compartment ( Supplementary Figure 9c ) . We functionally investigated the effects of depletion of Cpeb4 via shRNA - mediated knockdown in primary cultured CPN . We find that branching complexity of the longest neurite is severely reduced when Cpeb4 is knocked down , compared to scrambled control ( Figure 4j / k , Supplementary Figure 10a / b ) . We next assessed the effects of Cpeb4 knockdown in CPN in vivo , by selectively targeting CPN via E14 . 5 IUE of respective shRNA constructs ( Supplementary Figure 10c / d ) , and saw a re - duction in fibers innervating the contralateral grey matter , compared to scrambled control ( Figure 4l ) . It is known that the spatial characteristics of CPE place - ment in the 3’ UTR determines the proximity of potential bind - ing partners ( Supplementary Figure 9a ) and subsequent effects of CPEB binding on translational output ( Supplementary Figure 9d ) . These spatial characteristics include the polyadenylation signal , the hexamer binding site of cleavage and polyadenyla - tion specificity factor ( CPSF ) , and the distance between CPEs . Therefore , we profiled the location of CPEs in 3’UTRs of GC transcripts to investigate potential mechanisms by which CPEBs might regulate transcripts in GCs . The presence of a CPE spaced 6 - 25 nt from the CPSF hexamer binding site at the 3’ end of a transcript enables translational activation 92 , 93 , and the presence of a CPE in the 3’UTRs of several mRNAs has been associated with localization to neurites 94 , 95 . We identify that the location of CPEs is within 120 nt of the most distal polyadenylation signal for > 80 % of GC tran - script 3’UTRs . This suggests that CPEB4 binding in general can activate translation of these transcripts and might also facili - tate transcript GC localization . In addition to activation , CPEBs can also mediate translational repression ; shorter distances between CPEs results in translational repression . Such CPEB - Dynamic regulation of subcellular transcriptomes in cortical projection neurons Veeraraghavan * , Engmann * et al . 2023 ( preprint ) 7 mediated translational repression can facilitate cue - depend - ent regulation of local protein abundance ( reviewed in 96 ) . In 3’UTRs of GC transcripts , CPEs are longer and more evenly dis - tributed than in soma transcripts ( Supplementary Figure 9e ) . Further , 3’UTRs in > 80 % of GC transcripts have CPE motifs spaced 10 - 50nt apart , a distance compatible with baseline translational repression ( lower panel , Supplementary Figure 9e , 93 ) . We identify that a variety of versions of U - rich motifs are present in GC transcripts and soma - restricted transcripts of both subtypes , with a tendency for preferential usage of the most U - rich versions ( TTTTTT , TTTTTG , ( G / C / ATTTTT ) in GC transcript 3’UTRs ( Supplementary Figure 9f ) . GC transcripts exhibit dynamic , developmental stage - de - pendent changes in local machinery CPN establish their subtype - specific circuitry in several dis - tinct phases during late development . After exiting the ipsilat - eral cortical plate , their axons cross the midline via the corpus callosum in a highly fasciculated bundle and elongate through the more lateral subcortical white matter . Once axons have reached their appropriate homotopic target regions in the con - tralateral hemisphere , they defasciculate and innervate the cortical grey matter via branching and collateralization . They ultimately form synapses with appropriate target neurons ( Fig - ure 5a , Supplementary Figure 11 , reviewed in 97 . During these distinct phases , overall gene expression shifts substantially , as CPN progress from elongating axon growth at P1 to grey mat - ter innervation and initiation of synapse formation at P3 . Gene set enrichment analysis of somata transcriptomes reflects this developmental progression ( Supplementary Figure 12a ) . We investigated the dynamics of subcellular CPN tran - scriptomes by comparing their GC transcriptomes at P1 and P3 . We identify increased 3’UTR length for P3 CPN GC when com - pared to P1 CPN GC ( Supplementary Figure 12d ) . Assessment of functional categories of transcripts that dynamically change in CPN GCs through development ( Figure 5b and Supplementary Figure 12b & c ) reveal that gene sets associated with excitatory synapse formation , transmembrane cation transport , and cell adhesion are enriched in P3 CPN GCs over P1 CPN GCs ( Figure 5d ) . For example , we identify GC - specific changes in transcript abundances of C2cd5 , Ankrd50 , Syn2 , and Nrxn3 , which are all involved in formation and maintenance of excitatory synapses ( Figure 5c , 98 - 101 ) . Figure 4 : GC - localized mRNAs of both subtypes exhibit shared 3’UTR and motif characteristics , and are enriched for motifs associated with CPEB4 . ( a ) 3’UTRs are on average longer in GCs than in somata . ( b ) Motif enrichment in GCs vs . somata is highly correlated between CPN and CThPN GCs ; the most GC - enriched poly - U motifs are associated with CPEB4 , RALY , and TIA1 . ( c ) Comparison of CPN and CThPN soma - localized RNA expression of RBPs , annotated by GO term 0003729 . Subtype - specific RBPs are highlighted in red ( CPN ) and blue ( CThPN ) , FDR < 0 . 05 and fold change > 2 . ( d ) RNA expression in CPN ( red ) and CThPN somata ( blue ) for Cpeb4 and Elavl4 . ( e & f ) Cultured mouse CPN expressing myristoylated GFP , with distal axon ( longest neurite ) magnified in ( e’ ) ; immunolabeling for CPEB4 is shown in ( f ) with magnification showing distal axon enrichment of CPEB4 in ( f’ ) . ( g ) Quantification of mean gray value of Cpeb4 immunolabeling in somata of primary cultured CPN ( n = 6 ) . ( h ) Analysis of same gray value scale of CPEB4 immunolabeling intensity binned from proximal axon ( bottom ) to distal GC ( top ) for the longest neurite ( n = 6 ) . ( i ) CPEB4 - bound mRNAs identified by RIP - seq 2 are highly enriched in GCs of both subtypes as compared to their somata . ( j ) Cultured CPN fixed at 3 days in vitro ( DIV3 ) display decreased axon branching complexity following Cpeb4 shRNA - mediated knockdown . ( k ) Sholl analysis of branching complexity of longest neurite of cultured CPN , comparing neurons treated with Cpeb4 shRNA ( n = 15 ) or scrambled control shRNA ( n = 15 ) . Intersections ( mean ± sem ) with concentric spheres spaced every 10 µ m around the cell body are quantified . ( l ) Constitutive shRNA knockdown of Cpeb4 in CPN ( red , n = 3 ) by in utero electroporation does not nonspecifically affect axons elongating into the corpus callosum , but it significantly reduces innervation of the contralateral gray matter compared to CPN treated with a scrambled shRNA control ( scrb , teal , n = 4 ) . Dynamic regulation of subcellular transcriptomes in cortical projection neurons Veeraraghavan * , Engmann * et al . 2023 ( preprint ) 8 Dynamic changes highlight potential regulatory roles for RBPs such as RBMS1 We investigated RBPs in CPN whose expression levels change over time , highlighting them as potential regulators lo - cally mediating subcellular transcriptomic changes . We identi - fied Rbms1 , Celf4 , and Pcbp3 as increasing significantly over developmental time ( Figure 5e - g ) . Integrating previously pub - lished microarray data 51 , Rbms1 expression is found to peak at ~ P3 , suggesting that it might likely function specifically in de - velopment of CPN at this crucial transition from elongation growth to collateralization / synapse formation ( Supplementary Figure 13a ) . Rbms1 paralogs Rbms2 and Rbms3 have very low transcript abundances at both P1 and P3 ( Supplementary Fig - ure 13b ) , suggesting that Rbms1 is the dominant paralog in this system . RBMS1 protein product is present in the somata of pri - mary cultured CPN at P1 and P3 ( Figure 5h ) . Intriguingly , tran - scripts that are enriched in GCs have an increased number of Rbms1 motifs in their 3’ UTRs , an effect most pronounced for GC transcripts at developmental stage P1 ( Figure 5i ) . We analyzed the GO terms of CPN soma and CPN GC tran - scripts that contain RBMS1 motifs , revealing enrichment for terms associated with ion transport and membrane biology ( Supplementary Figure 13c ) . We cross - referenced previously published data identifying putatively RBMS1 - bound transcripts in developing cortex 21 with our CPN - specific , subcellular data . Again intriguingly , transcripts bound by RBMS1 are more likely to be GC - localized at P1 compared with P3 ( Figure 5j , lower panel ) . Further , RBMS1 - bound transcripts display higher over - all abundance in somata at P3 compared with P1 ( Figure 5j , middle panel ) . Together , these dynamic data suggest that RBMS1 functions in part to stabilize transcripts . Since RBMS1 has been previously reported to be im - portant for CPN radial migration 21 , and for regulation of tissue invasion and metastasis in various forms of cancer 102 - 104 , we Figure 5 : GC - localized transcripts change dynamically across developmental stages . ( a ) Schematic of CPN GC locations and growth state at P1 ( fasciculated , just past midline crossing ) and P3 ( defasciculated , innervating contralateral gray matter containing target neurons ) . ( b ) Quadrant plot displaying changes in 3’UTR isoform usage ( differential exon usage , DEU ) from P1 to P3 in CPN somata ( x - axis ) and GCs ( y - axis ) , respectively . The most significant changes in transcript isoform usage are found in GCs , resulting in a predominantly vertical distribution . ( c ) Boxplots highlighting examples of temporally shifting candidate transcript isoforms , displaying TPM across compartments ( GCs pink , somata brown ) and developmental stages ( P1 vs . P3 ) . ( d ) Gene set enrichment analysis comparing functional sets of transcripts changing from P1 to P3 in GCs reveals an increase in GC - local transcripts associated with cation transport and excitatory synapse formation . ( e ) Differential RNA expression comparing CPN somata at P3 vs . P1 of RBPs annotated by the GO term 0003729 ; orange dots indicate RBPs ; grey dots indicate non - RBP transcripts . Labeled dots highlight genes that are associated with motifs enriched in GCs over somata ( see Fig 4 ) . ( f & g ) Boxplots highlighting RNA expression changes of Rbms1 and Celf4 , the two RBPs for which expression by CPN increases the most from P1 to P3 , and which likely have GC - localized functions . ( h ) Mean gray value of RBMS1 protein labeling in somata of primary CPN plated at P1 ( pink ) or P3 ( brown ) . ( i ) Motif scanning for RBMS1 - associated motifs in 3’UTRs detected as GC - localized at P1 , P3 , or at both developmental stages ( shared ) . Lighter and darker shades of red indicate the proportion of RBMS1 - associated motifs detected in respective 3’ - UTRs . ( j ) Cross - referencing of subcellular transcriptomes identified here with previously published RBMS1 RIP - seq data from homogenized embryonic cortex 21 reveals higher abundances of RBMS1 - bound transcripts at P3 vs . P1 in CPN somata ( middle panel ) , but de - enrichment of RBMS1 - bound transcripts in CPN GCs at P3 vs . P1 ( lower panel ) . ( k ) Constitutive shRNA knockdown of Rbms1 ( red , n = 4 ) in CPN by in utero electroporation results in fewer axons elongating into the corpus callosum ( cc ) and innervating the contralateral gray matter when compared to CPN treated with a scrambled control shRNA ( scrb , teal , n = 5 ) , quantified in ( l ) as mean gray value ( mgv , mean ± sem ) . Dynamic regulation of subcellular transcriptomes in cortical projection neurons Veeraraghavan * , Engmann * et al . 2023 ( preprint ) 9 hypothesized that manipulation of Rbms1 specifically in CPN in vivo might cause deficits in the ability of the manipulated CPN GCs to innervate gray matter on the contralateral hemisphere . We performed shRNA mediated knockdown of Rbms1 via uni - lateral IUE at E14 . 5 ( Supplementary Figure 13d - g ) . This results in pronounced reduction in the number of CPN axons crossing the corpus callosum , CPN axons innervating the contralateral grey matter , and CPN axon fiber density across all layers of contralateral cortex , compared to scrambled control ( Figure 5k & l ) . Together , these results support an important and dynamic role for GC - localized RBMS1 in CPN contralateral axon connec - tivity and innervation , critical for circuit formation . Discussion The work presented here has implications well beyond the specifics of brain circuitry development , maintenance , and function . Most differentiated cell types , whether highly polar - ized or not , contain multiple subcellular compartments with highly specialized local functions – e . g . apical vs . basal domains in epithelia ; extending processes and sites of intercellular en - gagement in fibroblasts , oligodendroglia , and many immune populations . Neurons , and in particular cortical projection neu - rons , are extreme examples of highly polarized and subcellu - larly compartmentalized cells , with critical need to distribute function - and location - specific molecular machinery across vast spatial expanse . This subcellular localization enables ax - ons , dendrites , GCs , and synapses to function and dynamically adapt in a semi - autonomous fashion far from the cell body and nucleus . Especially during development , when the distance be - tween axon and respective parent soma is growing increas - ingly larger , GCs must be locally equipped with all the molecu - lar machinery required to navigate selective guidance cues and to successfully establish subtype - specific circuitry . In the most extreme examples , peripheral dorsal root ganglion sensory neurons and select subtypes of cortical projection neurons , e . g . many subtypes of CPN 105 , corticostriatal PN 106 , and SCPN 107 , extend multiple separate axons that originate from the same parent soma , in parallel , to distinct target areas . In addition to the high complexity in subtypes of cortical projec - tion neurons , cortical circuitry is additionally characterized by pronounced point - to - point connectivity , thereby enabling highly advanced sensory , motor , and cognitive function . The diversity and function - specificity of these selectively “wired” circuits , plus the critical nature of precise and subtle associa - tive and cognitive function , makes cortical connectivity specif - ically vulnerable to effects of mis - wiring . Even subtle variations and / or abnormalities can lead to aberrant function – from mild to severe phenotypes of neurodevelopmental and neuropsy - chiatric disorders , e . g . autism spectrum disorders , intellectual disabilities , or schizophrenia . In this work , we investigate in vivo GC and soma transcrip - tomes from two sharply distinct subtypes of cortical projection neurons over developmental time . CPN and CThPN , while highly related subtypes with regard to their pallial progenitor origin and general capabilities as cortical projection neurons , set up vastly different axonal trajectories over development , leading to dramatically distinct functions . Comparative transcriptomics of cell bodies and GCs , isolated in parallel from the developing mouse brain , enables investi - gation of subcellular molecular machinery Our work extends upon studies that investigated local transcriptomes and translation in the context of for - mation 29 , 36 , 108 - 112 , maintenance 113 - 115 , and plasticity of synap - ses 116 - 119 . These studies have established the need for subcel - lularly distinct transcriptomes and local translation for pre - and post - synaptic function ( reviewed in 120 ) . In contrast , little is known about spatial segregation of molecular machinery in the context of development and circuit formation in vivo . A rare exception is the work of Shigoeka et al . employing TRAP to investigate axonal changes in translated RNAs over the time course of RGC circuit formation . They found that the RGC - axonal translatome is dynamically regu - lated during development , and that targets of mTORC1 , FMRP , and APC display translational co - regulation in a stage - specific manner 121 . Our lab has combined biochemical fractionation of GCs , originally established by Karl Pfenninger and colleagues for forebrain GC isolation 122 , with subtype - specific fluorescent labeling and purification of GCs by newly developed fluores - cent small particle sorting . This enables parallel investigation of soma - vs . GC - localized transcriptomes 7 , 50 . In the first appli - cation of these new experimental and analytic approaches , Poulopoulos * , Murphy * et al . provide a first global delineation of the P3 developing mouse CPN GC transcriptome and prote - ome . This work identified and validated by multiple standard methods preferential localization and function of 5’TOP motif mTOR hyper - sensitive transcripts to the GC compartment dur - ing axonal projection in vivo 7 . GC - transcriptomes of different subtypes of cortical projection neurons are dynamically regulated and contain core , shared aspects , as well as context - specific machinery Here we utilize the same set of experimental approaches to selectively investigate and map the GC vs . soma transcrip - tomes of CPN and CThPN across distinct stages of circuit for - mation . Within the GC - localized transcriptomes , we identify a core set of genes involved with cytoplasmic translation and synapse formation that are shared between subtypes . Addi - tionally , we identify subtype - and stage - specific specializations of the transcriptomes , indicating and elucidating context - de - pendent regulation of mRNA content in GCs . As examples , we identify known and novel regulators of GC Rac1 - associated sig - nal transduction , actin cytoskeletal regulators including ele - ments of the WRC , and genes involved in early selection and development of synapses . Consistent with our lab’s prior work , we identify dynamic expression of ribosomal mRNAs , which decrease over time in the GC compartments of both subtypes . This is consistent with the reduced required load of protein synthesis in later development that has been reported previ - ously 121 , as GCs transition from rapid growth in fasciculated bundles to slowed growth and innervation of gray matter with subsequent synapse formation . We also identify an increase in gene sets associated with membrane biology , cell adhesion , and early synaptogenesis , as well as select candidates that pre - viously have been associated with neuronal migration and tu - mor invasiveness ( e . g . Dcx 123 ) , likely reflecting a molecular shift Dynamic regulation of subcellular transcriptomes in cortical projection neurons Veeraraghavan * , Engmann * et al . 2023 ( preprint ) 10 important for target tissue innervation , e . g . extension through complex interstitial spaces . Directed transport as well as tight regulation of RNA stability and translation are crucial for establishing distinct subcellular transcriptomes Intriguingly , we identify – both by comparing subtypes of projection neurons and by investigating across distinct devel - opmental stages – that the soma - localized transcriptome is not fully predictive of the GC transcriptome at the same time . Sev - eral known levels of regulation are likely to contribute to this striking result . These include long - range directed transport 11 , 13 - 20 , 95 , 124 , 125 and RNA stability 23 , 24 ( reviewed in 25 ) , which influence both the rate at which RNAs arrive at GCs and the duration of time they are available within the GC - localized transcriptome , respectively . We identify multiple characteristics of GC - local - ized RNAs that likely contribute to subcellular localization and translational regulation in the context of developmental dy - namics . First , we identify that the length of 3’UTRs positively correlates with developmental stage , consistent with previous observations 126 - 128 . The lengthened 3’UTRs represent ex - panded spatial extent of associated sequences , which likely fa - cilitate tighter control over subcellular localization , stability , and local translation by a suite of RNA binding proteins and miRNAs . Second , we identify a set of poly - U / CPE motifs en - riched in 3’UTR sequences of GC transcripts , which are known to be regulated by several RBPs , including CPEB4 . CPEB4 as potential integrative player in translational repres - sion of GC - trafficked transcripts ; dysregulation results in ab - errant circuit formation and might be linked to ASD We identify that Cpeb4 mRNA and CPEB4 protein are en - riched at distal neurites , emphasizing its likely role in local reg - ulation of transcript abundance and translational output in the GC compartment . CPEB family members have been shown to establish polarity of RNAs in oocytes ( reviewed in 92 ) as well as to facilitate neurite - directed mRNA transport in neurons 82 , 84 , 87 . CPEBs also modulate local translation by transducing a phos - phorylation cue into increased transcript polyadenylation , with subsequent increase in translation initiation 81 , 85 , 86 , 88 , 89 . CPEB4 specifically has been shown to disproportionately bind identified Simons Foundation “SFARI” ASD risk genes , and mi - sexpression of non - neuronal isoforms of Cpeb4 in idiopathic ASD brains leads to decreased poly - A tail length of SFARI risk genes 2 . This is in line with the observation that SFARI risk genes are in general less efficiently translated compared to the rest of the transcriptome 129 . We find that the overall composition of CPE motifs within the 3’UTR of GC - enriched transcripts seem to favor baseline translational repression , but that the general features enabling CPEB4 - mediated translational activation are also present in these UTRs . This suggests the hypothesis that CPEB4 and related RBPs might likely ensure overall transla - tional repression of transcripts being trafficked to and stored at projection neuron GCs , locally poising them to be transla - tionally activated in a likely coordinated fashion upon appro - priate guidance cue signaling , via phosphorylation of CPEB4 . Such translational repression in long - range RNA transport has been observed previously 130 ; intriguingly , TIA1 , which also binds poly - U motifs , has been related to stress granules 131 . Taken together , the combination of prior work with our results that ASD - associated genes are enriched in GCs leads to the in - triguing hypothesis that CPEB4 - mediated , cue - dependent translation specifically in developing GCs is compromised in ASD , and that this leads to developmental GC navigational ab - normalities and aberrant circuit formation . RBMS1 regulated stability of GC - transcripts dynamically across developmental stages , and is likely a key player for successful tissue invasion Our results further highlight that GC RNA regulation is dy - namic , modulating transport and local stability of transcripts in a developmental stage - specific manner . As an example , we identify that the RBP Rbms1 is upregulated as CPN GCs enter the specific phase of grey matter innervation and subsequent synapse formation . Intriguingly , we identify a decrease in RBMS1 - bound RNAs in GCs from P1 to P3 , while abundances of the same transcripts increase in somata . AU - rich sequences have been described as strong axon - targeting elements in UTRs 95 , raising the question of whether RBMS1 might act not only by stabilizing distinct sets of transcripts at specific times , as previously described 21 , 103 , 104 , but also by sequestering these transcripts to the cell body . Since RBMS1 is known to regulate stability of mRNAs in the context of metastasis and tissue inva - sion by several cancer types 102 - 104 , and since we find that knockdown of this RBP specifically in CPN results in decreased competency of projections to innervate gray matter and estab - lish circuitry , we hypothesize that RBMS1 is a key regulator in - volved in tissue invasion by CPN . Conclusions Understanding the neuronal subtype - specific composition of subcellular molecular machinery of axon and GC compart - ments , and its dynamic local regulation across subtypes and stages of circuit development , enables mechanistic dissection of regulatory switches between crucial growth states , whose mis - regulation results in aberrant circuit formation . Our work highlights the importance of investigating spatial distribution of subtype - and circuit - specific RNA and protein molecular ma - chinery , and its likely location - dependent function , across sub - cellular compartments in vivo . Investigation in vivo enables ac - cess to and delineation of developmental stages and physio - logical complexity . This biology is missed both in vitro and when restricting investigation to somata in vivo . Increasingly deep mechanistic knowledge of these local regulatory mecha - nisms will contribute importantly to understanding connec - tions between diverse and precise circuit development , dis - ease risk genes , and neurodevelopmental and neuropsychiat - ric disorders . Dynamic regulation of subcellular transcriptomes in cortical projection neurons Veeraraghavan * , Engmann * et al . 2023 ( preprint ) 11 References 1 Rottner , K . , Stradal , T . E . B . & Chen , B . WAVE regulatory complex . Curr Biol 31 , R512 - R517 ( 2021 ) . https : / / doi . org : 10 . 1016 / j . cub . 2021 . 01 . 086 2 Parras , A . et al . Autism - like phenotype and risk gene mRNA deadenylation by CPEB4 mis - splicing . Nature 560 , 441 - 446 ( 2018 ) . https : / / doi . org : 10 . 1038 / s41586 - 018 - 0423 - 5 3 Cagnetta , R . , Frese , C . K . , Shigeoka , T . , Krijgsveld , J . & Holt , C . E . Rapid Cue - Specific Remodeling of the Nascent Axonal Proteome . Neuron 99 , 29 - 46 e24 ( 2018 ) . https : / / doi . org : 10 . 1016 / j . neuron . 2018 . 06 . 004 4 Farias , J . , Holt , C . E . , Sotelo , J . R . & Sotelo - Silveira , J . R . Axon microdissection and transcriptome profiling reveals the in vivo RNA content of fully differentiated myelinated motor axons . RNA 26 , 595 - 612 ( 2020 ) . https : / / doi . org : 10 . 1261 / rna . 073700 . 119 5 Glock , C . et al . The translatome of neuronal cell bodies , dendrites , and axons . Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 118 ( 2021 ) . https : / / doi . org : 10 . 1073 / pnas . 2113929118 6 Perez , J . D . , Dieck , S . T . , Alvarez - Castelao , B . , Tushev , G . , Chan , I . C . & Schuman , E . M . Subcellular sequencing of single neurons reveals the dendritic transcriptome of GABAergic interneurons . Elife 10 ( 2021 ) . https : / / doi . org : 10 . 7554 / eLife . 63092 7 Poulopoulos , A . et al . Subcellular transcriptomes and proteomes of developing axon projections in the cerebral cortex . Nature 565 , 356 - 360 ( 2019 ) . https : / / doi . org : 10 . 1038 / s41586 - 018 - 0847 - y 8 Zivraj , K . H . et al . Subcellular profiling reveals distinct and developmentally regulated repertoire of growth cone mRNAs . J Neurosci 30 , 15464 - 15478 ( 2010 ) . https : / / doi . org : 10 . 1523 / JNEUROSCI . 1800 - 10 . 2010 9 Arora , A . et al . High - throughput identification of RNA localization elements in neuronal cells . Nucleic Acids Res 50 , 10626 - 10642 ( 2022 ) . https : / / doi . org : 10 . 1093 / nar / gkac763 10 Dalla Costa , I . et al . The functional organization of axonal mRNA transport and translation . Nat Rev Neurosci 22 , 77 - 91 ( 2021 ) . https : / / doi . org : 10 . 1038 / s41583 - 020 - 00407 - 7 11 Kislauskis , E . H . , Zhu , X . & Singer , R . H . Sequences responsible for intracellular localization of beta - actin messenger RNA also affect cell phenotype . J Cell Biol 127 , 441 - 451 ( 1994 ) . https : / / doi . org : 10 . 1083 / jcb . 127 . 2 . 441 12 Mendonsa , S . et al . Massively parallel identification of mRNA localization elements in primary cortical neurons . Nat Neurosci 26 , 394 - 405 ( 2023 ) . https : / / doi . org : 10 . 1038 / s41593 - 022 - 01243 - x 13 Perry , R . B . et al . Nucleolin - Mediated RNA Localization Regulates Neuron Growth and Cycling Cell Size . Cell Rep 16 , 1664 - 1676 ( 2016 ) . https : / / doi . org : 10 . 1016 / j . celrep . 2016 . 07 . 005 14 Terenzio , M . et al . Locally translated mTOR controls axonal local translation in nerve injury . Science 359 , 1416 - 1421 ( 2018 ) . https : / / doi . org : 10 . 1126 / science . aan1053 15 Yoo , S . et al . A HuD - ZBP1 ribonucleoprotein complex localizes GAP - 43 mRNA into axons through its 3 ' untranslated region AU - rich regulatory element . J Neurochem 126 , 792 - 804 ( 2013 ) . https : / / doi . org : 10 . 1111 / jnc . 12266 16 Aranda - Abreu , G . E . , Behar , L . , Chung , S . , Furneaux , H . & Ginzburg , I . Embryonic lethal abnormal vision - like RNA - binding proteins regulate neurite outgrowth and tau expression in PC12 cells . J Neurosci 19 , 6907 - 6917 ( 1999 ) . https : / / doi . org : 10 . 1523 / JNEUROSCI . 19 - 16 - 06907 . 1999 17 Fukuda , N . et al . Axonal mRNA binding of hnRNP A / B is crucial for axon targeting and maturation of olfactory sensory neurons . Cell Rep 42 , 112398 ( 2023 ) . https : / / doi . org : 10 . 1016 / j . celrep . 2023 . 112398 18 Kanai , Y . , Dohmae , N . & Hirokawa , N . Kinesin transports RNA : isolation and characterization of an RNA - transporting granule . Neuron 43 , 513 - 525 ( 2004 ) . https : / / doi . org : 10 . 1016 / j . neuron . 2004 . 07 . 022 19 Lee , S . J . et al . hnRNPs Interacting with mRNA Localization Motifs Define Axonal RNA Regulons . Mol Cell Proteomics 17 , 2091 - 2106 ( 2018 ) . https : / / doi . org : 10 . 1074 / mcp . RA118 . 000603 20 Ross , A . F . , Oleynikov , Y . , Kislauskis , E . H . , Taneja , K . L . & Singer , R . H . Characterization of a beta - actin mRNA zipcode - binding protein . Mol Cell Biol 17 , 2158 - 2165 ( 1997 ) . https : / / doi . org : 10 . 1128 / MCB . 17 . 4 . 2158 21 Habib , K . , Bishayee , K . , Kang , J . , Sadra , A . & Huh , S . O . RNA Binding Protein Rbms1 Enables Neuronal Differentiation and Radial Migration during Neocortical Development by Binding and Stabilizing the RNA Message for Efr3a . Mol Cells 45 , 588 - 602 ( 2022 ) . https : / / doi . org : 10 . 14348 / molcells . 2022 . 0044 22 Gerstberger , S . , Hafner , M . & Tuschl , T . A census of human RNA - binding proteins . Nat Rev Genet 15 , 829 - 845 ( 2014 ) . https : / / doi . org : 10 . 1038 / nrg3813 23 Aronov , S . , Marx , R . & Ginzburg , I . Identification of 3 ' UTR region implicated in tau mRNA stabilization in neuronal cells . J Mol Neurosci 12 , 131 - 145 ( 1999 ) . https : / / doi . org : 10 . 1007 / BF02736927 24 Shaw , G . & Kamen , R . A conserved AU sequence from the 3 ' untranslated region of GM - CSF mRNA mediates selective mRNA degradation . Cell 46 , 659 - 667 ( 1986 ) . https : / / doi . org : 10 . 1016 / 0092 - 8674 ( 86 ) 90341 - 7 25 Gardiner , A . S . , Twiss , J . L . & Perrone - Bizzozero , N . I . Competing Interactions of RNA - Binding Proteins , MicroRNAs , and Their Targets Control Neuronal Development and Function . Biomolecules 5 , 2903 - 2918 ( 2015 ) . https : / / doi . org : 10 . 3390 / biom5042903 26 Stoeckli , E . T . Understanding axon guidance : are we nearly there yet ? Development 145 ( 2018 ) . https : / / doi . org : 10 . 1242 / dev . 151415 27 Maday , S . , Twelvetrees , A . E . , Moughamian , A . J . & Holzbaur , E . L . Axonal transport : cargo - specific mechanisms of motility and regulation . Neuron 84 , 292 - 309 ( 2014 ) . https : / / doi . org : 10 . 1016 / j . neuron . 2014 . 10 . 019 28 Holt , C . E . , Martin , K . C . & Schuman , E . M . Local translation in neurons : visualization and function . Nat Struct Mol Biol 26 , 557 - 566 ( 2019 ) . https : / / doi . org : 10 . 1038 / s41594 - 019 - 0263 - 5 29 Campbell , D . S . & Holt , C . E . Chemotropic responses of retinal growth cones mediated by rapid local protein synthesis and degradation . Neuron 32 , 1013 - 1026 ( 2001 ) . https : / / doi . org : 10 . 1016 / s0896 - 6273 ( 01 ) 00551 - 7 30 Davis , L . , Dou , P . , DeWit , M . & Kater , S . B . Protein synthesis within neuronal growth cones . J Neurosci 12 , 4867 - 4877 ( 1992 ) . https : / / doi . org : 10 . 1523 / JNEUROSCI . 12 - 12 - 04867 . 1992 31 Ming , G . L . et al . Adaptation in the chemotactic guidance of nerve growth cones . Nature 417 , 411 - 418 ( 2002 ) . https : / / doi . org : 10 . 1038 / nature745 32 Lyles , V . , Zhao , Y . & Martin , K . C . Synapse formation and mRNA localization in cultured Aplysia neurons . Neuron 49 , 349 - 356 ( 2006 ) . https : / / doi . org : 10 . 1016 / j . neuron . 2005 . 12 . 029 33 Sebeo , J . et al . Requirement for protein synthesis at developing synapses . J Neurosci 29 , 9778 - 9793 ( 2009 ) . https : / / doi . org : 10 . 1523 / JNEUROSCI . 2613 - 09 . 2009 34 Andreassi , C . et al . An NGF - responsive element targets myo - inositol monophosphatase - 1 mRNA to sympathetic neuron axons . Nat Neurosci 13 , 291 - 301 ( 2010 ) . https : / / doi . org : 10 . 1038 / nn . 2486 35 Cox , L . J . , Hengst , U . , Gurskaya , N . G . , Lukyanov , K . A . & Jaffrey , S . R . Intra - axonal translation and retrograde trafficking of CREB promotes neuronal survival . Nat Cell Biol 10 , 149 - 159 ( 2008 ) . https : / / doi . org : 10 . 1038 / ncb1677 36 Aakalu , G . , Smith , W . B . , Nguyen , N . , Jiang , C . & Schuman , E . M . Dynamic visualization of local protein synthesis in hippocampal neurons . Neuron 30 , 489 - 502 ( 2001 ) . 37 Kang , H . & Schuman , E . M . A requirement for local protein synthesis in neurotrophin - induced hippocampal synaptic plasticity . Science 273 , 1402 - 1406 ( 1996 ) . https : / / doi . org : 10 . 1126 / science . 273 . 5280 . 1402 38 Ben - Yaakov , K . et al . Axonal transcription factors signal retrogradely in lesioned peripheral nerve . EMBO J 31 , 1350 - 1363 ( 2012 ) . https : / / doi . org : 10 . 1038 / emboj . 2011 . 494 39 Donnelly , C . J . et al . Limited availability of ZBP1 restricts axonal mRNA localization and nerve regeneration capacity . EMBO J 30 , 4665 - 4677 ( 2011 ) . https : / / doi . org : 10 . 1038 / emboj . 2011 . 347 40 Hanz , S . et al . Axoplasmic importins enable retrograde injury signaling in lesioned nerve . Neuron 40 , 1095 - 1104 ( 2003 ) . https : / / doi . org : 10 . 1016 / s0896 - 6273 ( 03 ) 00770 - 0 41 Perlson , E . , Hanz , S . , Ben - Yaakov , K . , Segal - Ruder , Y . , Seger , R . & Fainzilber , M . Vimentin - dependent spatial translocation of an activated MAP kinase in injured nerve . Neuron 45 , 715 - 726 ( 2005 ) . https : / / doi . org : 10 . 1016 / j . neuron . 2005 . 01 . 023 42 Verma , P . et al . Axonal protein synthesis and degradation are necessary for efficient growth cone regeneration . J Neurosci 25 , 331 - 342 ( 2005 ) . https : / / doi . org : 10 . 1523 / JNEUROSCI . 3073 - 04 . 2005 43 Yudin , D . et al . Localized regulation of axonal RanGTPase controls retrograde injury signaling in peripheral nerve . Neuron 59 , 241 - 252 ( 2008 ) . https : / / doi . org : 10 . 1016 / j . neuron . 2008 . 05 . 029 44 Rotem , N . et al . ALS Along the Axons - Expression of Coding and Noncoding RNA Differs in Axons of ALS models . Sci Rep 7 , 44500 ( 2017 ) . https : / / doi . org : 10 . 1038 / srep44500 45 Wang , D . O . et al . Synapse - and stimulus - specific local translation during long - term neuronal plasticity . Science 324 , 1536 - 1540 ( 2009 ) . https : / / doi . org : 10 . 1126 / science . 1173205 46 Zappulo , A . et al . RNA localization is a key determinant of neurite - enriched proteome . Nat Commun 8 , 583 ( 2017 ) . https : / / doi . org : 10 . 1038 / s41467 - 017 - 00690 - 6 47 Biever , A . et al . Monosomes actively translate synaptic mRNAs in neuronal processes . Science 367 ( 2020 ) . https : / / doi . org : 10 . 1126 / science . aay4991 48 Hafner , A . S . , Donlin - Asp , P . G . , Leitch , B . , Herzog , E . & Schuman , E . M . Local protein synthesis is a ubiquitous feature of neuronal pre - and postsynaptic compartments . Science 364 ( 2019 ) . https : / / doi . org : 10 . 1126 / science . aau3644 49 Ostroff , L . E . et al . Axon TRAP reveals learning - associated alterations in cortical axonal mRNAs in the lateral amgydala . Elife 8 ( 2019 ) . https : / / doi . org : 10 . 7554 / eLife . 51607 50 Engmann , A . K . et al . Neuronal subtype - specific growth cone and soma purification from mammalian CNS via fractionation and fluorescent sorting for subcellular analyses and spatial mapping of local transcriptomes and proteomes . Nat Protoc 17 , 222 - 251 ( 2022 ) . https : / / doi . org : 10 . 1038 / s41596 - 021 - 00638 - 7 51 Arlotta , P . , Molyneaux , B . J . , Chen , J . , Inoue , J . , Kominami , R . & Macklis , J . D . Neuronal subtype - specific genes that control corticospinal motor neuron development in vivo . Neuron 45 , 207 - 221 ( 2005 ) . https : / / doi . org : 10 . 1016 / j . neuron . 2004 . 12 . 036 Dynamic regulation of subcellular transcriptomes in cortical projection neurons Veeraraghavan * , Engmann * et al . 2023 ( preprint ) 12 52 Fame , R . M . , MacDonald , J . L . & Macklis , J . D . Development , specification , and diversity of callosal projection neurons . Trends Neurosci 34 , 41 - 50 ( 2011 ) . https : / / doi . org : 10 . 1016 / j . tins . 2010 . 10 . 002 53 Greig , L . C . , Woodworth , M . B . , Galazo , M . J . , Padmanabhan , H . & Macklis , J . D . Molecular logic of neocortical projection neuron specification , development and diversity . Nat Rev Neurosci 14 , 755 - 769 ( 2013 ) . https : / / doi . org : 10 . 1038 / nrn3586 54 McKenna , W . L . et al . Tbr1 and Fezf2 regulate alternate corticofugal neuronal identities during neocortical development . J Neurosci 31 , 549 - 564 ( 2011 ) . https : / / doi . org : 10 . 1523 / JNEUROSCI . 4131 - 10 . 2011 55 Woodworth , M . B . , Greig , L . C . , Kriegstein , A . R . & Macklis , J . D . SnapShot : cortical development . Cell 151 , 918 - 918 e911 ( 2012 ) . https : / / doi . org : 10 . 1016 / j . cell . 2012 . 10 . 004 56 Paolino , A . , Fenlon , L . R . , Suarez , R . & Richards , L . J . Transcriptional control of long - range cortical projections . Curr Opin Neurobiol 53 , 57 - 65 ( 2018 ) . https : / / doi . org : 10 . 1016 / j . conb . 2018 . 05 . 005 57 Paul , L . K . et al . Agenesis of the corpus callosum : genetic , developmental and functional aspects of connectivity . Nat Rev Neurosci 8 , 287 - 299 ( 2007 ) . https : / / doi . org : 10 . 1038 / nrn2107 58 Paul , L . K . , Corsello , C . , Kennedy , D . P . & Adolphs , R . Agenesis of the corpus callosum and autism : a comprehensive comparison . Brain 137 , 1813 - 1829 ( 2014 ) . https : / / doi . org : 10 . 1093 / brain / awu070 59 Dienel , S . J . , Schoonover , K . E . & Lewis , D . A . Cognitive Dysfunction and Prefrontal Cortical Circuit Alterations in Schizophrenia : Developmental Trajectories . Biol Psychiatry 92 , 450 - 459 ( 2022 ) . https : / / doi . org : 10 . 1016 / j . biopsych . 2022 . 03 . 002 60 Sohal , V . S . Transforming Discoveries About Cortical Microcircuits and Gamma Oscillations Into New Treatments for Cognitive Deficits in Schizophrenia . Am J Psychiatry 179 , 267 - 276 ( 2022 ) . https : / / doi . org : 10 . 1176 / appi . ajp . 20220147 61 Chaudhari , K . , Gorla , M . , Chang , C . , Kania , A . & Bashaw , G . J . Robo recruitment of the Wave regulatory complex plays an essential and conserved role in midline repulsion . Elife 10 ( 2021 ) . https : / / doi . org : 10 . 7554 / eLife . 64474 62 Chia , P . H . , Chen , B . , Li , P . , Rosen , M . K . & Shen , K . Local F - actin network links synapse formation and axon branching . Cell 156 , 208 - 220 ( 2014 ) . https : / / doi . org : 10 . 1016 / j . cell . 2013 . 12 . 009 63 Cioni , J . M . et al . Late Endosomes Act as mRNA Translation Platforms and Sustain Mitochondria in Axons . Cell 176 , 56 - 72 e15 ( 2019 ) . https : / / doi . org : 10 . 1016 / j . cell . 2018 . 11 . 030 64 Shi , R . , Kramer , D . A . , Chen , B . & Shen , K . A two - step actin polymerization mechanism drives dendrite branching . Neural Dev 16 , 3 ( 2021 ) . https : / / doi . org : 10 . 1186 / s13064 - 021 - 00154 - 0 65 De Leon Reyes , N . S . , Bragg - Gonzalo , L . & Nieto , M . Development and plasticity of the corpus callosum . Development 147 ( 2020 ) . https : / / doi . org : 10 . 1242 / dev . 189738 66 De Leon Reyes , N . S . et al . Transient callosal projections of L4 neurons are eliminated for the acquisition of local connectivity . Nat Commun 10 , 4549 ( 2019 ) . https : / / doi . org : 10 . 1038 / s41467 - 019 - 12495 - w 67 Durak , O . et al . ASD gene < em > Bcl11a < / em > regulates subcellular RNA localization , associative circuitry , and social behavior . bioRxiv , 2022 . 2010 . 2006 . 511159 ( 2022 ) . https : / / doi . org : 10 . 1101 / 2022 . 10 . 06 . 511159 68 Fenlon , L . R . , Suarez , R . & Richards , L . J . The anatomy , organisation and development of contralateral callosal projections of the mouse somatosensory cortex . Brain Neurosci Adv 1 , 2398212817694888 ( 2017 ) . https : / / doi . org : 10 . 1177 / 2398212817694888 69 Greig , L . C . , Woodworth , M . B . , Greppi , C . & Macklis , J . D . Ctip1 Controls Acquisition of Sensory Area Identity and Establishment of Sensory Input Fields in the Developing Neocortex . Neuron 90 , 261 - 277 ( 2016 ) . https : / / doi . org : 10 . 1016 / j . neuron . 2016 . 03 . 008 70 Leyva - Diaz , E . & Lopez - Bendito , G . In and out from the cortex : development of major forebrain connections . Neuroscience 254 , 26 - 44 ( 2013 ) . https : / / doi . org : 10 . 1016 / j . neuroscience . 2013 . 08 . 070 71 Catapano , L . A . , Arnold , M . W . , Perez , F . A . & Macklis , J . D . Specific neurotrophic factors support the survival of cortical projection neurons at distinct stages of development . J Neurosci 21 , 8863 - 8872 ( 2001 ) . https : / / doi . org : 10 . 1523 / JNEUROSCI . 21 - 22 - 08863 . 2001 72 Satterstrom , F . K . et al . Large - Scale Exome Sequencing Study Implicates Both Developmental and Functional Changes in the Neurobiology of Autism . Cell 180 , 568 - 584 . e523 ( 2020 ) . https : / / doi . org : 10 . 1016 / j . cell . 2019 . 12 . 036 73 ( Q3 2022 ) . 74 Singh , T . et al . Rare coding variants in ten genes confer substantial risk for schizophrenia . Nature 604 , 509 - 516 ( 2022 ) . https : / / doi . org : 10 . 1038 / s41586 - 022 - 04556 - w 75 Trubetskoy , V . et al . Mapping genomic loci implicates genes and synaptic biology in schizophrenia . Nature 604 , 502 - 508 ( 2022 ) . https : / / doi . org : 10 . 1038 / s41586 - 022 - 04434 - 5 76 Wu , Y . et al . Multi - trait analysis for genome - wide association study of five psychiatric disorders . Transl Psychiatry 10 , 209 ( 2020 ) . https : / / doi . org : 10 . 1038 / s41398 - 020 - 00902 - 6 77 Sato , D . et al . SHANK1 Deletions in Males with Autism Spectrum Disorder . Am J Hum Genet 90 , 879 - 887 ( 2012 ) . https : / / doi . org : 10 . 1016 / j . ajhg . 2012 . 03 . 017 78 Krismer , K . et al . Transite : A Computational Motif - Based Analysis Platform That Identifies RNA - Binding Proteins Modulating Changes in Gene Expression . Cell Rep 32 , 108064 ( 2020 ) . https : / / doi . org : 10 . 1016 / j . celrep . 2020 . 108064 79 Bailey , T . L . STREME : accurate and versatile sequence motif discovery . Bioinformatics 37 , 2834 - 2840 ( 2021 ) . https : / / doi . org : 10 . 1093 / bioinformatics / btab203 80 Ford , L . et al . CPEB3 low - complexity motif regulates local protein synthesis via protein - protein interactions in neuronal ribonucleoprotein granules . Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 120 , e2114747120 ( 2023 ) . https : / / doi . org : 10 . 1073 / pnas . 2114747120 81 Huang , Y . S . , Jung , M . Y . , Sarkissian , M . & Richter , J . D . N - methyl - D - aspartate receptor signaling results in Aurora kinase - catalyzed CPEB phosphorylation and alpha CaMKII mRNA polyadenylation at synapses . EMBO J 21 , 2139 - 2148 ( 2002 ) . https : / / doi . org : 10 . 1093 / emboj / 21 . 9 . 2139 82 Kundel , M . , Jones , K . J . , Shin , C . Y . & Wells , D . G . Cytoplasmic polyadenylation element - binding protein regulates neurotrophin - 3 - dependent beta - catenin mRNA translation in developing hippocampal neurons . J Neurosci 29 , 13630 - 13639 ( 2009 ) . https : / / doi . org : 10 . 1523 / JNEUROSCI . 2910 - 08 . 2009 83 Santana , E . & Casas - Tinto , S . Orb2 as modulator of Brat and their role at the neuromuscular junction . J Neurogenet 31 , 181 - 188 ( 2017 ) . https : / / doi . org : 10 . 1080 / 01677063 . 2017 . 1393539 84 Alves - Sampaio , A . , Troca - Marin , J . A . & Montesinos , M . L . NMDA - mediated regulation of DSCAM dendritic local translation is lost in a mouse model of Down ' s syndrome . J Neurosci 30 , 13537 - 13548 ( 2010 ) . https : / / doi . org : 10 . 1523 / JNEUROSCI . 3457 - 10 . 2010 85 Chao , H . W . et al . Deletion of CPEB3 enhances hippocampus - dependent memory via increasing expressions of PSD95 and NMDA receptors . J Neurosci 33 , 17008 - 17022 ( 2013 ) . https : / / doi . org : 10 . 1523 / JNEUROSCI . 3043 - 13 . 2013 86 Lu , R . , Zhou , Z . , Yu , W . , Xia , Y . & Zhi , X . CPEB4 promotes cell migration and invasion via upregulating Vimentin expression in breast cancer . Biochem Biophys Res Commun 489 , 135 - 141 ( 2017 ) . https : / / doi . org : 10 . 1016 / j . bbrc . 2017 . 05 . 112 87 Oruganty - Das , A . , Ng , T . , Udagawa , T . , Goh , E . L . & Richter , J . D . Translational control of mitochondrial energy production mediates neuron morphogenesis . Cell Metab 16 , 789 - 800 ( 2012 ) . https : / / doi . org : 10 . 1016 / j . cmet . 2012 . 11 . 002 88 Pavlopoulos , E . et al . Neuralized1 activates CPEB3 : a function for nonproteolytic ubiquitin in synaptic plasticity and memory storage . Cell 147 , 1369 - 1383 ( 2011 ) . https : / / doi . org : 10 . 1016 / j . cell . 2011 . 09 . 056 89 Savtchouk , I . et al . Topological Regulation of Synaptic AMPA Receptor Expression by the RNA - Binding Protein CPEB3 . Cell Rep 17 , 86 - 103 ( 2016 ) . https : / / doi . org : 10 . 1016 / j . celrep . 2016 . 08 . 094 90 Poetz , F . , Lebedeva , S . , Schott , J . , Lindner , D . , Ohler , U . & Stoecklin , G . Control of immediate early gene expression by CPEB4 - repressor complex - mediated mRNA degradation . Genome Biol 23 , 193 ( 2022 ) . https : / / doi . org : 10 . 1186 / s13059 - 022 - 02760 - 5 91 Suner , C . et al . Macrophage inflammation resolution requires CPEB4 - directed offsetting of mRNA degradation . Elife 11 ( 2022 ) . https : / / doi . org : 10 . 7554 / eLife . 75873 92 Mendez , R . & Richter , J . D . Translational control by CPEB : a means to the end . Nat Rev Mol Cell Biol 2 , 521 - 529 ( 2001 ) . https : / / doi . org : 10 . 1038 / 35080081 93 Pique , M . , Lopez , J . M . , Foissac , S . , Guigo , R . & Mendez , R . A combinatorial code for CPE - mediated translational control . Cell 132 , 434 - 448 ( 2008 ) . https : / / doi . org : 10 . 1016 / j . cell . 2007 . 12 . 038 94 Huang , Y . S . , Carson , J . H . , Barbarese , E . & Richter , J . D . Facilitation of dendritic mRNA transport by CPEB . Genes Dev 17 , 638 - 653 ( 2003 ) . https : / / doi . org : 10 . 1101 / gad . 1053003 95 Mendonsa , S . et al . Massively parallel identification of mRNA localization elements in primary cortical neurons . Nature Neuroscience 26 , 394 - 405 ( 2023 ) . https : / / doi . org : 10 . 1038 / s41593 - 022 - 01243 - x 96 Kozlov , E . , Shidlovskii , Y . V . , Gilmutdinov , R . , Schedl , P . & Zhukova , M . The role of CPEB family proteins in the nervous system function in the norm and pathology . Cell & Bioscience 11 , 64 ( 2021 ) . https : / / doi . org : 10 . 1186 / s13578 - 021 - 00577 - 6 97 De León Reyes , N . S . , Bragg - Gonzalo , L . & Nieto , M . Development and plasticity of the corpus callosum . Development 147 ( 2020 ) . https : / / doi . org : 10 . 1242 / dev . 189738 98 Kvainickas , A . , Jimenez - Orgaz , A . , Nagele , H . , Hu , Z . , Dengjel , J . & Steinberg , F . Cargo - selective SNX - BAR proteins mediate retromer trimer independent retrograde transport . J Cell Biol 216 , 3677 - 3693 ( 2017 ) . https : / / doi . org : 10 . 1083 / jcb . 201702137 99 Sudhof , T . C . et al . Synapsins : mosaics of shared and individual domains in a family of synaptic vesicle phosphoproteins . Science 245 , 1474 - 1480 ( 1989 ) . https : / / doi . org : 10 . 1126 / science . 2506642 100 Ushkaryov , Y . A . & Sudhof , T . C . Neurexin III alpha : extensive alternative splicing generates membrane - bound and soluble forms . Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 90 , 6410 - 6414 ( 1993 ) . https : / / doi . org : 10 . 1073 / pnas . 90 . 14 . 6410 Dynamic regulation of subcellular transcriptomes in cortical projection neurons Veeraraghavan * , Engmann * et al . 2023 ( preprint ) 13 101 Xie , X . et al . C2 domain - containing phosphoprotein CDP138 regulates GLUT4 insertion into the plasma membrane . Cell Metab 14 , 378 - 389 ( 2011 ) . https : / / doi . org : 10 . 1016 / j . cmet . 2011 . 06 . 015 102 Dankert , J . T . , Wiesehofer , M . , Wach , S . , Czyrnik , E . D . & Wennemuth , G . Loss of RBMS1 as a regulatory target of miR - 106b influences cell growth , gap closing and colony forming in prostate carcinoma . Sci Rep 10 , 18022 ( 2020 ) . https : / / doi . org : 10 . 1038 / s41598 - 020 - 75083 - 9 103 Liu , M . et al . RBMS1 promotes gastric cancer metastasis through autocrine IL - 6 / JAK2 / STAT3 signaling . Cell Death Dis 13 , 287 ( 2022 ) . https : / / doi . org : 10 . 1038 / s41419 - 022 - 04747 - 3 104 Yu , J . et al . RBMS1 Suppresses Colon Cancer Metastasis through Targeted Stabilization of Its mRNA Regulon . Cancer Discov 10 , 1410 - 1423 ( 2020 ) . https : / / doi . org : 10 . 1158 / 2159 - 8290 . CD - 19 - 1375 105 Mitchell , B . D . & Macklis , J . D . Large - scale maintenance of dual projections by callosal and frontal cortical projection neurons in adult mice . J Comp Neurol 482 , 17 - 32 ( 2005 ) . https : / / doi . org : 10 . 1002 / cne . 20428 106 Sohur , U . S . , Padmanabhan , H . K . , Kotchetkov , I . S . , Menezes , J . R . & Macklis , J . D . Anatomic and molecular development of corticostriatal projection neurons in mice . Cereb Cortex 24 , 293 - 303 ( 2014 ) . https : / / doi . org : 10 . 1093 / cercor / bhs342 107 Cederquist , G . Y . , Azim , E . , Shnider , S . J . , Padmanabhan , H . & Macklis , J . D . Lmo4 establishes rostral motor cortex projection neuron subtype diversity . J Neurosci 33 , 6321 - 6332 ( 2013 ) . https : / / doi . org : 10 . 1523 / JNEUROSCI . 5140 - 12 . 2013 108 Bassell , G . J . et al . Sorting of β - Actin mRNA and Protein to Neurites and Growth Cones in Culture . The Journal of Neuroscience 18 , 251 - 265 ( 1998 ) . https : / / doi . org : 10 . 1523 / jneurosci . 18 - 01 - 00251 . 1998 109 Cagnetta , R . , Frese , C . K . , Shigeoka , T . , Krijgsveld , J . & Holt , C . E . Rapid cue - specific remodeling of the nascent axonal proteome . Neuron 99 , 29 - 46 . e24 ( 2018 ) . 110 Davis , L . , Dou , P . , DeWit , M . & Kater , S . B . Protein synthesis within neuronal growth cones . Journal of Neuroscience 12 , 4867 - 4877 ( 1992 ) . 111 Leung , K . M . , van Horck , F . P . , Lin , A . C . , Allison , R . , Standart , N . & Holt , C . E . Asymmetrical beta - actin mRNA translation in growth cones mediates attractive turning to netrin - 1 . Nat Neurosci 9 , 1247 - 1256 ( 2006 ) . https : / / doi . org : 10 . 1038 / nn1775 112 Ströhl , F . et al . Single Molecule Translation Imaging Visualizes the Dynamics of Local β - Actin Synthesis in Retinal Axons . Scientific Reports 7 , 709 ( 2017 ) . https : / / doi . org : 10 . 1038 / s41598 - 017 - 00695 - 7 113 Cajigas , I . J . , Tushev , G . , Will , T . J . , tom Dieck , S . , Fuerst , N . & Schuman , E . M . The local transcriptome in the synaptic neuropil revealed by deep sequencing and high - resolution imaging . Neuron 74 , 453 - 466 ( 2012 ) . https : / / doi . org : 10 . 1016 / j . neuron . 2012 . 02 . 036 114 Hafner , A . - S . , Donlin - Asp , P . G . , Leitch , B . , Herzog , E . & Schuman , E . M . Local protein synthesis is a ubiquitous feature of neuronal pre - and postsynaptic compartments . Science 364 , eaau3644 ( 2019 ) . https : / / doi . org : doi : 10 . 1126 / science . aau3644 115 Yoon , B . C . , Jung , H . , Dwivedy , A . , O ' Hare , C . M . , Zivraj , K . H . & Holt , C . E . Local translation of extranuclear lamin B promotes axon maintenance . Cell 148 , 752 - 764 ( 2012 ) . 116 Huber , K . M . , Kayser , M . S . & Bear , M . F . Role for rapid dendritic protein synthesis in hippocampal mGluR - dependent long - term depression . Science 288 , 1254 - 1256 ( 2000 ) . 117 Kang , H . & Schuman , E . M . A requirement for local protein synthesis in neurotrophin - induced hippocampal synaptic plasticity . Science 273 , 1402 - 1406 ( 1996 ) . 118 Vickers , C . A . , Dickson , K . S . & Wyllie , D . J . A . Induction and maintenance of late ‐ phase long ‐ term potentiation in isolated dendrites of rat hippocampal CA1 pyramidal neurones . The Journal of Physiology 568 , 803 - 813 ( 2005 ) . 119 Wang , D . O . et al . Synapse - and stimulus - specific local translation during long - term neuronal plasticity . Science 324 , 1536 - 1540 ( 2009 ) . 120 Sun , C . & Schuman , E . A multi - omics view of neuronal subcellular protein synthesis . Curr Opin Neurobiol 80 , 102705 ( 2023 ) . https : / / doi . org : 10 . 1016 / j . conb . 2023 . 102705 121 Shigeoka , T . et al . Dynamic Axonal Translation in Developing and Mature Visual Circuits . Cell 166 , 181 - 192 ( 2016 ) . https : / / doi . org : 10 . 1016 / j . cell . 2016 . 05 . 029 122 Pfenninger , K . H . , Ellis , L . , Johnson , M . P . , Friedman , L . B . & Somlo , S . Nerve growth cones isolated from fetal rat brain : subcellular fractionation and characterization . Cell 35 , 573 - 584 ( 1983 ) . https : / / doi . org : 10 . 1016 / 0092 - 8674 ( 83 ) 90191 - 5 123 Ayanlaja , A . A . et al . Distinct Features of Doublecortin as a Marker of Neuronal Migration and Its Implications in Cancer Cell Mobility . Front Mol Neurosci 10 , 199 ( 2017 ) . https : / / doi . org : 10 . 3389 / fnmol . 2017 . 00199 124 Arora , A . et al . High - throughput identification of RNA localization elements in neuronal cells . Nucleic Acids Research 50 , 10626 - 10642 ( 2022 ) . https : / / doi . org : 10 . 1093 / nar / gkac763 125 Dalla Costa , I . et al . The functional organization of axonal mRNA transport and translation . Nature Reviews Neuroscience 22 , 77 - 91 ( 2021 ) . 126 Hilgers , V . , Perry , M . W . , Hendrix , D . , Stark , A . , Levine , M . & Haley , B . Neural - specific elongation of 3 ' UTRs during Drosophila development . Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 108 , 15864 - 15869 ( 2011 ) . https : / / doi . org : 10 . 1073 / pnas . 1112672108 127 Miura , P . , Shenker , S . , Andreu - Agullo , C . , Westholm , J . O . & Lai , E . C . Widespread and extensive lengthening of 3 ' UTRs in the mammalian brain . Genome Res 23 , 812 - 825 ( 2013 ) . https : / / doi . org : 10 . 1101 / gr . 146886 . 112 128 Tushev , G . , Glock , C . , Heumuller , M . , Biever , A . , Jovanovic , M . & Schuman , E . M . Alternative 3 ' UTRs Modify the Localization , Regulatory Potential , Stability , and Plasticity of mRNAs in Neuronal Compartments . Neuron 98 , 495 - 511 . e496 ( 2018 ) . https : / / doi . org : 10 . 1016 / j . neuron . 2018 . 03 . 030 129 Glock , C . et al . The translatome of neuronal cell bodies , dendrites , and axons . Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 118 , e2113929118 ( 2021 ) . 130 Sahoo , P . K . et al . Axonal G3BP1 stress granule protein limits axonal mRNA translation and nerve regeneration . Nature Communications 9 , 3358 ( 2018 ) . https : / / doi . org : 10 . 1038 / s41467 - 018 - 05647 - x 131 Gilks , N . et al . Stress granule assembly is mediated by prion - like aggregation of TIA - 1 . Mol Biol Cell 15 , 5383 - 5398 ( 2004 ) . https : / / doi . org : 10 . 1091 / mbc . e04 - 08 - 0715 132 Saito , T . & Nakatsuji , N . Efficient gene transfer into the embryonic mouse brain using in vivo electroporation . Dev Biol 240 , 237 - 246 ( 2001 ) . https : / / doi . org : 10 . 1006 / dbio . 2001 . 0439 133 Palmer , D . S . et al . Exome sequencing in bipolar disorder identifies AKAP11 as a risk gene shared with schizophrenia . Nat Genet 54 , 541 - 547 ( 2022 ) . https : / / doi . org : 10 . 1038 / s41588 - 022 - 01034 - x 134 Chen , B . et al . The WAVE regulatory complex links diverse receptors to the actin cytoskeleton . Cell 156 , 195 - 207 ( 2014 ) . https : / / doi . org : 10 . 1016 / j . cell . 2013 . 11 . 048 135 Arshadi , C . , Gunther , U . , Eddison , M . , Harrington , K . I . S . & Ferreira , T . A . SNT : a unifying toolbox for quantification of neuronal anatomy . Nat Methods 18 , 374 - 377 ( 2021 ) . https : / / doi . org : 10 . 1038 / s41592 - 021 - 01105 - 7 Acknowledgements We thank J . LaVecchio and N . Kheradmand of HSCRB - HSCI Flow Cytometry Core ; the Bauer RNA sequencing core ; Harvard Center for Biological Imaging for infrastructure and support ; and T . Sackton for statistical advice . This work was supported by grants to J . D . M . : Allen Distinguished Investigator Award ADI 11855 from the Paul G . Allen Frontiers Group ; NIH Pioneer Award DP1 NS106665 ; and the Max and Anne Wien Professor of Life Sciences fund ; with additional infrastructure support from NIH grants NS045523 and NS104055 . A . K . E . was supported by a Jean - Jacques et Felicia Lopez - Loreta Foundation Award and a Swiss National Science Foundation Postdoctoral Fellowship . P . V . was partially supported by NSF GRFP 280932 , The NSF - Simons Center for Mathematical and Statistical Analysis of Biology at Harvard award number # 1764269 , and NIH Training Grant T32 GM007306 - 43 . J . J . H . was partially sup - ported by NIH NRSA F31 NS103262 and NIH Training Grant T32 GM007226 . This paper was typeset with the bioRxiv word template by @ Chrelli : www . github . com / chrelli / bioRxiv - word - template Author contributions J . J . H . and J . D . M initiated the study . J . J . H . and A . K . E . constructed mouse lines . T . A . A . and P . V . designed constructs . P . V . and J . J . H . performed in utero electro - porations . A . K . E . and J . J . H . carried out GC preps and GC and soma sorts . Y . I . performed soma preps . P . V . , A . K . E . , and D . N . designed and executed cellular and histological validation studies . P . V . performed all bioinformatic analyses . P . V . , A . K . E . , and J . D . M . interpreted the data and iteratively designed further analyses and experiments . P . V . and A . K . E . drafted the manuscript . P . V . , A . K . E . , and J . D . M . edited the manuscript with input from the other authors . Competing interest statement The authors declare no competing interests . Dynamic regulation of subcellular transcriptomes in cortical projection neurons Veeraraghavan * , Engmann * et al . 2023 ( preprint ) 14 Materials and Methods Mice Experiments involving mice were performed with approval of the Harvard Uni - versity Institutional Animal Care and Use Committee . All CPN were isolated and purified from wildtype CD1 mouse pups of both sexes ( Charles River La - boratories ) , enabling subtype - specific expression of fluorescent proteins using unilateral in utero electroporation at embryonic day 14 . 5 ( E14 . 5 ) , targeting CPN of cortical layers II / III . Experiments isolating and purifying CThPN were performed on BAC transgenic Ntsr1 : : Cre mice ( MMRRC , 030648 - UCD ) back - crossed to CD1 for > 10 generations . Ntsr1 : : Cre mice were bred with CD1 Emx1 : : FlpO + / + / Ai65 ( RCFL - tdT ) mice , resulting in highly selective expression of tdTomato in CThPN of cortical layer VI , while eliminating off - target labeling of rare neurons in multiple midbrain structures ( labeled in simpler non - intersec - tional crosses of Ntsr1 : : Cre with TdTomflox / flox ) . For maximal consistency , breeding pairs were co - caged for < 12 hours , and postnatal times were defined as “postnatal day” ( P ) with most pups being born at P 0 . In utero electroporation Subtype - specific labeling of CPN was achieved using unilateral in utero elec - troporation of a genetic construct of interest at E14 . 5 , as previously de - scribed 132 . Briefly , a pregnant dam was anesthetized using 1 . 5 - 2 % isoflurane , and prepared for surgery by applying eye ointment ( # 2444062 , Systane ) and administering buprenorphine ( # 60969 , Par Pharmaceutical ) . The hair on the lower abdomen was removed using hair removal cream , and the skin was lo - cally disinfected using ethanol . An incision was made through skin and ab - dominal musculature , and the uterine horns were exposed , gently lifted out of the intraperitoneal cavity , and placed on a sterile gauze pad where they were continuously kept moist using sterile , pre - warmed PBS . Embryos were individ - ually positioned and injected unilaterally into one lateral ventricle ( roughly al - ternating left and right ) with 0 . 7 - 1 µ l DNA solution ( 5 µ g / µ l ) , supplemented with Fast Green FCF ( # AAA16520 - 06 , Thermo Scientific Chemicals ) for visuali - zation , using a pulled and beveled glass micropipette ( # 22 - 260 - 943 , Fisher ) . DNA was electroporated into neural progenitors lining the ventricles by apply - ing current to the injected side of the cortex ( 5 pulses , 50 ms ON / 950 ms OFF , 34 V ) , targeting lateral sensorimotor areas of the cortical plate . Following elec - troporation , embryos within their uterine horn were gently placed back into the intraperitoneal cavity , and the wound was closed using sutures ( # 39010 , Covetrus ) . The dam was allowed to fully recover from anesthesia on a regu - lated heat mat before being returned to the mouse housing room . Postopera - tive care following surgery included daily checks of the mouse’s overall well - being and its wound healing , and administration of buprenorphine ( # 60969 , Par Pharmaceutical ) every 12 hours for the first 3 days post - surgery . After term birth , mouse pups were screened for unilateral cortical fluorescence using a fluorescence stereoscope ; successfully electroporated mice were marked with a tail clip . DNA constructs Fluorescent labeling : We modified addgene plasmid # 26771 to incorporate myr - tdTomato - 2A - H2B - GFP ( pCAG - myr - tdTomato - 2A - H2B - GFP ) . This enabled neuronal projections in red and the nuclei in green . For culture experiments we instead incorporated myrmClover into addgene plasmid # 26771 ( pCAG - myrmClover ) . shRNA : MISSION shRNA plasmids ( Sigma - Aldrich ; see Table 1 ) at 2 . 5 µ g / µ L were mixed with pCAG - myr - mClover or pCAG - myr - TdTomato plasmids at 2 . 5 µ g / µ L and electroporated at E14 . 5 to target CPN , or at E11 . 5 to target CThPN . Over - expression constructs : Cpeb4 isoforms were cloned out of oligo - dT primed cDNA using gene - specific primers that included a 5’ HA tag sequence . These were inserted into a pCAG - [ MCS ] - IRES - GFP construct ( CBIG ) , generated by C . Lois . Constructs were electroporated at 1 µ g / µ L in conjunction with pCAG - myr - TdTomato at E14 . 5 to target CPN or at E11 . 5 to target CThPN . DNA constructs were prepared using the endotoxin - free Maxiprep kit ( Qiagen , # 12362 ) , following the manufacturer’s instructions . Quality was verified using restriction enzyme digests , and by Sanger sequencing ( Eton Biosciences ) . Table 1 : shRNA constructs Assessment of shRNA knockdown efficiency In vitro : Constructs were transfected into N2a cells using Lipofectamine 3000 ( # L3000008 , Thermo ) , following the manufacturer’s instructions . For assess - ment via ICC , cells were re - plated on PDL - coated glass coverslips for an addi - tional 24h , then fixed and stained according to the immunocytochemistry ap - proaches detailed below . For knockdown assessment via qPCR , cells were sorted after 48 hours . In vivo : Constructs were mixed with fluorescent reporter constructs ( pCAG - myr - tdTomato - 2A - H2B - GFP ) and in utero electroporated at E14 . 5 , targeting CPN of cortical layers II / III . On the day of birth ( P0 ) , fluorescence - positive neu - rons were purified using soma preparation and FACS approaches described below . For both in vivo and in vitro applications , knockdown efficiency was calculated via qPCR : RNA was extracted with the Zymo Direct - Zol RNA microprep kit ( # R2062 , Zymo ) ; cDNA synthesis was performed with the SuperScript IV First Strand Synthesis System using oligo - dT priming ( # 18091050 , Thermo ) ; and qPCR was performed with PowerUp SYBR Green Master Mix ( Thermo , # A25918 ) using primers listed in table 2 . Table 2 : qPCR primers primer name sequence PV862 _ Cpeb4 _ qPCR _ F GAAAGTTCTGTTCAGGCTCTCATT PV862 _ Cpeb4 _ qPCR _ R GGATCTGCACTGGTTTATCCTTG PV874 _ Rbms1 _ qPCR _ F ACAGTATACACACATGCAGACC PV875 _ Rbms1 _ qPCR _ R CCTTCGGTACATCTCACAGTTAC PV858 _ Gapdh _ qPCR _ F TGGGTGTGAACCACGAGAAATA PV859 _ Gapdh _ qPCR _ R ACTGTGGTCATGAGCCCTTC GC fractionation & fluorescent small particale sorting ( FSPS ) Isolation of GC fractions was performed using modifications of methods origi - nally described by Pfenninger and colleagues 122 ; these modifications are de - scribed in detail elsewhere 50 . Briefly , 8 - 10 brains per sample of mouse pups at selected developmental stages P1 or P3 were rapidly removed from the skull , and micro - dissected on ice in 0 . 32 M sucrose buffer supplemented with 4mM HEPES , HALT protease and phosphatase inhibitors ( # 78442 , Thermo ) , and 1U / mL RNAse inhibitor ( # N2515 , Promega ) . CPN GCs at P1 were collected from the corpus callosum in the ipsilateral cortical hemisphere , just before midline crossing , where the main tract is located at this stage . Micro - dissections were performed on coronal sections under a fluorescence stereomicroscope at high magnification , carefully excluding any labeled somata from the micro - dis - sected area . CPN GCs at P3 were collected from the contralateral corpus callo - sum and cortical hemisphere . CThPN GCs at P1 and P3 were collected from the micro - dissected ipsilateral thalamus . For both subtypes of cortical projection neurons , micro - dissected tissue was supplemented with non - labeled forebrain tissue obtained from P3 mouse pups to achieve total tissue mass of 0 . 4 – 0 . 5 g . Tissue was homogenized using a variable speed motor drive homogenizer ( Glas - col , # 099C K54 ) with 11 strokes at 900 rpm in a glass - Teflon potter . Post - nuclear homogenate ( PNH ) was obtained as supernatant after centrifugation at 1 , 600 g for 15min . PNH ( in 0 . 32 M sucrose ) was layered onto a 0 . 83 M / 2 . 5 M sucrose cushion , and spun at 4 ° C in a fixed vertical rotor ( VTi50 , Beckman ) at 242 , 000 g for 47 min to achieve subcellular fractionation . Following ultracentrifugation , the GC fraction ( GCF ) was extracted from the 0 . 32 M – 0 . 83 M interface , and pre - labeled , subtype - specific , fluorescent GCs were purified using fluorescent small particle sorting ( FSPS ) on a customized SORP FACSAriaII ( BD Instruments ) equipped with a 70 µ m nozzle running at 70 psi and a 0 . 1 µ m filter for the sheath fluid to remove potential dust particles . The instrument is additionally customized to include an extra photomultiplier tube ( PMT ) to detect forward scatter signal , and a 300 MW 488 nm laser with reduced beam height ( 6 ± 3 µ m ) , as well as a custom lens assembly with noise - reducing filter and pico - motor focus . Scatter measurements were based on signal peak height , and plotted in log mode . To optimally adjust drop delay settings and check alignment of optics , sub - micron polystyrene size - standard beads ( BDSORP beads , Spherotech , # NPPS - 4K ) were used to calibrate before each sorting experiment . Due to high sucrose content with high viscosity , GCFs were diluted in pre - cooled PBS before FSPS , and particles were gated for size and aggregation ( based on SSC over FSC - PMT ) , and for fluorescence intensity ( GFP or tdTom over FSC - PMT ) . A minimum of 500 , 000 to 1 million subtype - specific , fluorescently labeled GC particles were collected in RLT ( Allprep DNA / RNA Micro Kit # 80284 , Qiagen ) supplemented with 10 % b - Mercaptoeth - anol . Western blot analysis and quantification Western blots were performed using standard tris - glycine SDS - PAGE proto - cols . Samples had normalized protein concentration assessed using a Bradford shRNA catalog number ( Sigma ) target TRCN0000096783 ms - Rbms1 TRCN0000096781 ms - Rbms1 TRCN0000197915 ms - Cpeb4 TRCN0000435567 ms - Cpeb4 SHC016 non - target control ( scrb ) Dynamic regulation of subcellular transcriptomes in cortical projection neurons Veeraraghavan * , Engmann * et al . 2023 ( preprint ) 15 assay ( # 23246 , Thermo ) . Resolved proteins were electroblotted onto PVDF membranes using semi - dry transfer , blocked for 30 min in TBS supplemented with 0 . 1 % Tween - 20 and 5 % skim milk , and incubated with primary antibodies ( GAP43 # MAB347 Millipore ; Actb # A5441 Sigma ; Gm130 # 610823 BD Biosci - ences ; MAP2 # M1406 Sigma ; WAVE1 # ab272916 abcam ; WAVE2 # 3659T Cell Signaling Technologies ; WAVE3 # 2806S Cell Signaling Technologies ; Cpeb4 # ab224162 abcam ; Rbms1 # ab150353 abcam ; Tau # AF3494 RR & D ) in TBS sup - plemented with 0 . 1 % Tween - 20 and 3 % BSA over night at 4 ° C . The next day , the membrane was washed three times in TBS supplemented with 0 . 1 % Tween - 20 , incubated for 2 hours at room temperature with secondary anti - bodies that were isotype - specific , HRP - conjugated , and cross - absorbed ( Life Technologies ) , then washed again three times with TBS supplemented with 0 . 1 % Tween - 20 . Immunoreactive bands were visualized through detection of chemiluminescence using a CCD camera imager ( FluoroChemM , Protein Sim - ple ) . Quantification of signal intensity in the various bands was performed us - ing the standard Fiji software package . Hydrolysis ( RNase or protease ) protection assay on GCF Membrane sealing and thus protection of GC - specific molecular contents was assessed using either an RNase or protease protection assay , as described in detail elsewhere 50 . In brief , isolated GCF samples were treated in parallel with either nothing ( control ; ctrl ) , 0 . 1 % TritonX - 100 detergent ( D - ctrl ) , RNAse / pro - tease only ( R / P - ctrl ) , or a combination of 0 . 1 % TritonX - 100 and either RNase or protease ( D + R / P ) and incubated for 2 hours at 4 ° C . For RNase protection assays , samples were processed for RNA extraction , and quality of extracted RNA was assessed using an Agilent Tapestation 2100 with a High Sensitivity RNA kit , using the manufacturer’s standard protocol . For protease protection assays , samples were processed for western blotting as described above , and probed with primary antibodies against the subcellular markers GAP43 ( # MAB347 Millipore ) , Actb ( # A5441 Sigma ) , Gm130 ( # 610823 BD Biosciences ) , and MAP2 ( # M1406 Sigma ) , followed by secondary antibodies that were iso - type - specific , HRP - conjugated , and cross - absorbed ( Life Technologies ) . Subtype - specific soma isolation and purification by FACS Dissociation of neuronal somata followed by subtype - specific purification by FACS was performed as previously described 50 , 71 . In short , mouse pups of the selected developmental age ( P1 or P3 ) – either electroporated at E14 . 5 to label CPN or labeled by transgenes Ntsr1 + / - , EmxFlpO + / - , Ai64 + / - to label CThPN – were deeply anesthetized in ice , decapitated , and brains were extracted from the skull . Fluorescently labeled neurons in layer II / III ( CPN ) or layer VI ( CThPN ) were quickly micro - dissected in ice - cold HBSS under a fluorescence stereo - scope , and transferred to a falcon tube containing dissociation solution . Tissue pieces were washed twice with 3 - 5 ml DS , then enzymatically dissociated by incubating twice with 5 ml enzyme solution , supplemented with DNAseI ) for 15 min per incubation . ES was removed , and the tissue was washed twice with washing solution , followed by mechanical dissociation using gentle trituration with a fire polished Pasteur pipet . Dissociated CPN or CThPN were washed in 10 ml WS , and pelleted at 80g for 5 min at 4 ° C . The supernatant was removed , and neurons were resuspended in 500 µ l WS using a fire polished Pasteur pi - pet . Subtype - specific , labeled CPN or CThPN somata were sorted into RLT buffer ( Qiagen ) supplemented with 10 % b - Mercaptoethanol using a custom - ized SORP FACSAriaII ( BD Instruments ) equipped with a 300 MW 488 nm laser set to 100 MW with large beam height and an 85 µ m nozzle run at 45 psi . RNA isolation , quality control , library preparation , and RNA sequencing Subtype - specific GCs or somata were collected in RLT buffer supplemented with 10 % b - Mercaptoethanol , then lysed by vortexing for 30 - 60 sec . RNA was extracted using an Allprep kit ( Qiagen ) , following the manufacturer’s protocol . Elution was performed in 13 µ l RNase - free water , and samples were stored at - 80 ° C . Quality and concentration of extracted RNA was assessed using a Tapes - tation 2100 with the High Sensitivity RNA kit ( Agilent ) for samples extracted form sorted somata and using a 2100 Bioanalyzer with the RNA 6000 Pico kit ( Agilent ) for samples extracted from sorted GCs . Only samples that met quality control ( QC ) standards were submitted for library preparation and RNA se - quencing ( RNA - seq ) . Libraries were prepared from < = 2 . 5ng input RNA using ¼ volume SmartSeqv4 technology ( Takara Bio ) and sequenced on NextSeq High Output flow cells . Each library resulted in > = 40M fragments sequenced ( see Supplementary Figure 3a ) . RNAseq data processing and differential expression analysis The full RN - seq data processing pipeline is available at https : / / github . com / pri - yaveeraraghavan / amalgam , schematized in Supplementary Figure 3b . Briefly , adapters were trimmed and low - quality reads were filtered using the Trim - Galore ! wrapper for Cutadapt and FastQC . Sequences aligning to rRNA , rodent repeat elements , 7SL or SRP ( the RNA component of the signal recognition particle ) , or the mitochondrial genome were removed using bbsplit . sh from the BBTools suite ( Supplementary Figure 3c ) . Reads were aligned to the GRCm38 genome and to the corresponding Ensembl transcriptome version 101 using STAR ( version 2 . 7 . 9a ) with default parameters . Gene level differential expression : Transcript abundances were estimated us - ing Salmon ( version 1 . 7 . 0 ) alignment mode with [ – posBias – numBootstraps 100 ] flags set . Gene - level differential expression analysis was performed using DESeq2 ( version 1 . 26 . 0 ) . GC genes were defined as those that were signifi - cantly more abundant in GC samples compared to input / GCF samples using a one - sided Wald test with an FDR cutoff of < 0 . 05 . When comparing between two GC sample groups , we compare the union of genes that are enriched above GCF . For both GC and soma comparisons , genes were considered signif - icant using an FDR < 0 . 05 and fold change of > 2 for somata and > 0 for GCs , unless otherwise stated . Isoform level differential expression : For 3’UTR isoform analysis , only the last 250bp of a transcript are counted and compared between samples , due to 3’ sequence coverage bias in the data . A custom gtf was prepared containing these last 250bp ( available on github ) , collapsing transcripts that have over - lapping regions . A “UTR group” is defined by the longest UTR represented by the group that has the same / overlapping 3’ end . Reads falling within these re - gions are counted using the featureCounts tool from the subread package . GC 3’UTRs are defined as having a log2 fold change > 0 . 5 of GC / GCF with an FDR cutoff at 0 . 05 , more stringently than in the gene level analysis . Output of differential expression analysis on gene and transcript level is pro - vided in Supplementary Table 2 . GO term mapping across subcellular compartments and subtypes GO term enrichment was computed for each GO term and gene set using Fisher’s Exact Test , using ClusterProfiler ( version 4 . 2 . 0 ) . For details , see https : / / github . com / priyaveeraraghavan / amalgam . For GO term dotplots , the compareCluster function was used . For genes differentially abundant between CPN and CThPN GCs , all significantly overrepresented GO terms ( FDR < 0 . 05 ) in either group were retained . GO terms were simplified with the Wang simi - larity measure , using a similarity threshold of 0 . 7 . Then , for each group , the - log10 ( p - value ) for each simplified GO term was calculated and displayed in the dotplot . The full list of all enriched GO terms across compartments and sub - types can be found in Supplementary Tables 1 and 4 . GO - term chordplot ( Fig 2f ) : For select GO terms identified as enriched in CPN or CThPN GCs , the dif - ferentially enriched genes associated with that GO term are connected to the GO term . Representation of genes associated with neurodevelopmental diseases in GC - localized transcriptomes Enrichment of disease - associated genes in each subtype / subcompartment was calculated using Fisher’s Exact Test , and the resultant odds ratios and 95 % confidence intervals plotted . A tabular version of the results can be found in Supplementary Table 3 . The following gene sets were used as references : - Disease - associated genes : ( 1 ) Schizophrenia - associated rare coding variants identified via whole exome sequencing ( WES ) with FDR < 0 . 05 from Singh , et al . 2022 74 ; ( 2 ) Prioritized / fine - mapped schizophrenia - associated genes defined in Extended Data Table 1 of Trubetskoy , et al . 2022 75 ; ( 3 ) ASD - associated genes associated with variants that reached exome - wide significance in Satterstrom , et al . 2021 72 ; ( 4 ) Bipolar - associated protein truncating variants with a Fisher p - value < 0 . 05 from Palmer , et al . 2022 133 ( NB : for this BipEx dataset , no variant reached exome - wide significance ) . - Subcellular / subtype sets : For each of CPN and CThPN subtypes , GC genes were defined as being present in GCs above experimental background . Soma genes were defined as the remaining set of expressed but non - GC genes in the respective subtype . Subcellular mapping of WIRS - containing transmembrane and mem - brane associated proteins WIRS - containing transmembrane and membrane associated proteins are the set defined by Chen et al . 134 Supplementary Figure 2 . 3’UTR motif analysis De Novo : GC - enriched 3’UTR sequences were compared to all expressed 3’UTR sequences using STREME ( 5 . 4 . 1 ) in the - de mode . Scanning / enrichment of known motifs : The Transite tool 78 was used to scan for a curated set of 174 RBP - associated , matrix - defined motifs across 3’UTRs , and to subsequently calculate enrichment or depletion of motifs in a subset of 3’UTRs ( e . g . GC - enriched UTRs vs soma ) . Individual sequence k - mers were counted per UTR using the str _ locate _ all function from stringr ( 1 . 5 . 0 ) . Dynamic regulation of subcellular transcriptomes in cortical projection neurons Veeraraghavan * , Engmann * et al . 2023 ( preprint ) 16 Transcardial perfusion , tissue processing , and immunocytochemistry Postnatal mice were deeply anesthetized using hypothermia , and transcardi - ally perfused with 3 - 5 ml of pre - cooled PBS followed by 5 ml pre - cooled 4 % paraformaldehyde . Brains were carefully extracted from the skull and post - fixed in 4 % PFA overnight . The following day , brains were washed in PBS and cryoprotected with 30 % sucrose in PBS . Tissue was embedded in O . C . T ( # 25608 - 930 , Sakura Finetek USA Inc ) , sectioned using a cryostat ( Leica , 50 µ m thick coronal sections for ICC ) , and collected in PBS supplemented with 0 . 025 % Azide . For immunocytochemical labeling , tissue was blocked in PBS supple - mented with 0 . 3 % TritonX100 , 0 . 3 % BSA , and 2 % donkey serum ( blockperm ) for 1 hour at room temperature , then incubated with primary antibodies ( RFP # 600 - 401 - 379 Rockland ; GFP # A - 11122 Invitrogen ; SatB2 # ab51502 abcam ; Tbr1 # ab31940 ) in blocking buffer on a rocker over night at 4 ° C . The following day , sections were washed three times in PBS on an orbital shaker , incubated for 2 - 3 hours at room temperature with isotype - specific , fluorescently - conju - gated secondary antibodies ( Life Technologies ) and DAPI ( 1 : 10 , 000 , # D1306 Thermo ) , washed again three times with PBS , mounted on glass slides ( Supe - frost , # 48311 - 702 VWR ) , coverslipped with fluoromount ( # 0100 - 01 VWR / Southern Biotech ) , and sealed with nail polish . Fluorescence images were acquired using an epifluorescence microscope equipped with a motorized stage and a 10x objective ( Nikon NiE ) . Whole brain sections were imaged using EDF z - stack projections and mosaic image stitching through NIS Elements software ( Nikon ) . Quantification of CPN IUE targeting Images were processed using Fiji software ( ImageJ 1 . 53t ) . For each mouse , the coronal section closest to the fused anterior commissure was identified . Fluo - rescently labeled cell bodies in the ipsilateral cortical hemisphere were identi - fied manually , and coordinates were extracted . To account for curvature of the brain surface , respective coordinates were projected onto the dorsal sur - face and plotted relative to the media - lateral extent of the cortex using Matlab ( R2022b Update 5 , Mathworks ) . Quantification of CPN midline crossing and contralateral grey matter innervation Epifluorescence images were processed using Fiji software ( ImageJ 1 . 53t ) . For each mouse , the coronal section closest to the fused anterior commissure was identified . For quantification of CPN elongation in the corpus callosum and lat - eral white matter , innervation into the cortical grey matter , and fiber abun - dance in cortical layer V and II / III , respective regions of interest ( ROI , line of 200 pts width ) were manually traced as shown by outlines in the schematic insets in Supplementary Figure 11b - e . Briefly , ROIs for “elongation in CC and lateral white matter” started at the midline of the corpus callosum and fol - lowed the lateral white matter to its lateral extent . ROIs for “innervation into cortical grey matter” were positioned just dorsal to the lateral white matter . ROIs for “fiber abundance in layers V and II / III” were positioned on the ventral side of layer V and II / III , respectively , as identified in the DAPI channel . The GFP channel of the ROIs was straightened using Fiji’s standard straightening tool , binarized by applying respective thresholds , binned , and analyzed for mean grey value . Data from individual mice was averaged across groups and reported as mean ± sem using R studio ( RStudio 2023 . 03 . 0 , Posit Software , PBC ) . Primary neuronal cultures CPN were fluorescently labeled and / or targeted for shRNA - mediated knock - down using ipsilateral in utero electroporation of respective DNA constructs outlined above at E14 . 5 . At birth ( P 0 ) , cortical projection neurons were col - lected using the soma preparation protocol outlined above . For experiments in the context of developmental stages , cortical projection neurons were iso - lated at P1 or P3 to reflect respective gene expression states , using the same protocol . Instead of sorting fluorescence - positive neuronal somata using FACS , the final cell suspension was cultured on pre - coated glass coverslips ( 50 µ g / ml PDL # P0899 Sigma , in ddH2O over night at 37 ° C , followed by five thorough washes in ddH2O and incubation with 10 ug / ml mouse laminin ( # 23017015 , Thermo ) in magnesium - and calcium - free DPBS ( # 14190 - 144 , Gibco ) for 1 - 2 hours at 37 ° C ) in 24 - well plates at standard conditions ( 37 ° C , 5 % CO2 ) . For immunocytochemistry , cultured primary neurons were washed with PBS 24 hours post isolation and fixed with 4 % PFA for 10 min , followed by final washes and storage in PBS supplemented with 0 . 025 % azide . For RNAscope , cultured primary neurons were washed with PBS 24 hours post isolation and fixed with 4 % PFA 30 min , followed by two washes in PBS , dehydration in 50 % , 70 % , and 100 % ethanol , and stored in 100 % ethanol at - 20 ° C . Immunocytochemistry Coverslips with fixed primary neurons were transferred to 4 - well slides and recovered in PBS for 10 min . Cells were permeabilized with 0 . 2 % Triton - X100 in PBS for 5 minutes and washed 3 times over 6 minutes with PBS - T ( PBS + 0 . 02 % Tween - 20 ; one quick wash followed by 2x3 min ) . Samples were blocked in PBS - T supplemented with 3 % BSA and 2 % donkey serum ( blocking buffer ) for 30 min before incubation with primary antibodies ( GFP # A - 11122 Invitro - gen ; RFP # 600 - 401 - 379 Rockland ; Actin # A5441 Sigma ; WAVE1 # ab272916 abcam ; Cpeb4 # ab224162 abcam ; Rbms1 # ab150353 abcam ) in PBS - T + 3 % BSA overnight at 4 ° C . The next day , coverslips were washed three times in PBS - T ( 1x fast wash , 2x 5min ) , incubated with isotype - specific secondary antibodies ( Life Technologies ) and DAPI ( 1 : 10 , 000 , # D1306 ThermoFisher ) for 2 - 3 hours at room temperature in PBS - T + 3 % BSA on an orbital shaker , followed by three final washes in PBS - T as described above , mounting on a glass slide using fluo - romount ( # 0100 - 01 , VWR / Southern Biotech ) , and sealing with nail polish . Flu - orescence images were acquired using an epifluorescence microscope equipped with a motorized stage and a 40x oil objective ( Nikon NiE , EDF z - stack projections through NIS Elements software ( Nikon ) ) , as well as a confocal microscope equipped with a 40x oil objective ( LSM880 , Zeiss , maximum inten - sity projections of 10 µ m z stack ) . Quantification of protein abundance along longest neurite Confocal images were processed using Fiji software ( ImageJ 1 . 53t ) . Only neu - rons that had a clearly visible and uncrossed primary neurite were included for analysis . Each neuron was manually traced across the maximum extent of the cell body and along the longest neurite , and respective line profiles were plot - ted using the standard Fiji “plot profile” tool for the GFP , DAPI , Actin , and pro - tein of interest channels . Respective data were averaged across groups and reported as mean ± sem using R studio ( RStudio 2023 . 03 . 0 , Posit Software , PBC ) . Sholl analysis of branching complexity of cultured neurons Confocal images were processed using Fiji software ( ImageJ 1 . 53t ) . Only neu - rons that had a clearly visible and uncrossed primary neurite were included for analysis . The GFP channel of each image was binarized using respective thresh - olds , and a line ROI was drawn from the center of the cell body to the distal tip of the longest neurite . Sholl analysis ( 10 µ m step size ) of the longest neurite was performed using the respective plug - in from Fiji’s SNT framework 135 . Data were averaged across groups and reported as mean # ( intersections ) ± sem us - ing Excel . RNAscope in cultured neurons Coverslips with fixed , and dehydrated primary neurons were stored at - 20 ° C . Coverslips were transferred to 4 - well slides and rehydrated in a stepwise fash - ion using 100 % , 70 % , 50 % ethanol for 1 min each , followed by two washes with PBS for 1 min each . For single candidate RNAscope experiments ( WAVE1 ) , the ACD Bio chromogenic RNAscope RED kit was used ( ACDbio , # 322350 ) , follow - ing the manufacturer’s instructions . For multiple candidate RNAscope experi - ments ( WAVE2 / 3 or Pcdh17 / Robo1 ) , the ACD Bio multiplex V2 RNAscope kit was used ( ACDbio , # 323100 ) , following the manufacturer’s instructions . After single candidate or multiple candidate RNAscope detection , coverslips were subjected to subsequent immunocytochemistry to enhance the GFP sig - nal . Briefly , following the final RNAscope wash , coverslips were blocked and permeabilized in PBS supplemented with 0 . 03 % TritonX100 , 0 . 3 % BSA , and 2 % donkey serum ( block / perm ) for 30 min , and subsequently incubated with pri - mary antibody ( GFP , # A - 11122 Invitrogen ) in block / perm buffer overnight at 4 ° C . The next day , coverslips were washed three times for 10 min each in PBS , incubated with isotype - specific secondary antibodies ( Life Technologies ) and DAPI ( 1 : 10 , 000 , # D1306 ThermoFisher ) for 2 - 3 hours at room temperature on an orbital shaker , followed by three final washes in PBS for 10 min each , mounting on a glass slide using Fluoromount ( # 0100 - 01 , VWR / Southern Bio - tech ) , and sealing with nail polish . Fluorescence images were acquired using a confocal microscope equipped with a 63x oil objective ( LSM880 , Zeiss , maxi - mum intensity projections of 10 µ m z - stack ) . Dynamic regulation of subcellular transcriptomes in cortical projection neurons Veeraraghavan * , Engmann * et al . 2023 ( preprint ) 17 Supplementary Table 1 : List of GO terms differentially enriched in either soma or GC compartments for union of CPN and CThPN Supplementary Table 2 : Results of differential expression analysis at gene and transcript level , comparing expression across subtypes of cortical projection neurons , compartments , and across developmental stages for CPN . Supplementary Table 3 : Cross - referencing subcellular differential gene expression data of this report for CPN and CThPN with previously published , data sets of genes associated with neurodevelopmental and neuropsychiatric disorders . Supplementary Table 4 : List of GO terms differentially enriched in GC compartments of distinct subtypes of cortical projection neurons . Dynamic regulation of subcellular transcriptomes in cortical projection neurons Veeraraghavan * , Engmann * et al . 2023 ( preprint ) 18 Figure S1 : Subtype - specific labeling of CPN and CThPN . ( a ) In utero electroporation at embryonic day E14 . 5 in mice specifically labels CPN of cortical layer II / III . GFP - positive nuclei of CPN are localized mainly to cortical layer II , with limited labeling present in layer III , and are colocalized with the superficial layer marker SatB2 ( inset ) . The multi - cistronically expressed , membrane - targeted tdTomato reveals the entire extent of CPN dendritic processes and axonal projections spanning all cortical layers , as well as across the corpus callosum . ( b ) Unilateral in utero electroporation at embry - onic day E14 . 5 results in highly reproducible targeting of CPN in cortical layer II / III in the lateral somatosensory cortex . ( c ) Total number of labeled CPN in a single 40 µ m coronal brain section is comparable across mice . ( d ) Intersectional mouse genetics ( Ntsr1 : : Cre + / - , Emx1 : : FlpO + / - , Ai65 ( TdTom ) FRT / wt , flox / wt ) specifically labels CThPN of cortical layer VI . Labeled CThPN projections transverse the internal capsule and innervate the thalamus . TdTom - positive CThPN are colocalized with CThPN marker TBR1 but are negative for superficial layer marker SatB2 ( inset ) . ( e ) RNA expression levels of subtype marker genes from flow cytometry sorted CPN and CThPN somata at developmental ages P1 and P3 . CPN have markedly higher expression levels in superficial layer markers , whereas CThPN have appropriate enrichment for layer VI marker genes , as expected . Genes common to both subtypes are expressed at similar levels . Dynamic regulation of subcellular transcriptomes in cortical projection neurons Veeraraghavan * , Engmann * et al . 2023 ( preprint ) 19 Figure S2 : Parallel isolation of subtype - specific somata and GCs from the mouse neocortex . ( a ) Workflow enabling parallel extraction and subtype - specific sorting of CPN - or CThPN - specific somata and GCs . RNA isolated from respective samples sorter - purified by flow cytometry is then used for subcellular mapping of subtype - specific transcriptomes . A detailed description of this protocol can be found in 50 . ( b ) Side scatter over forward scatter data for size - calibrated BD SORP beads run on a flow cytometer in fluorescent small particle sorting ( FSPS ) configuration . FSPS enables detection , analysis , and efficient sorting of particles in the 100nm - 1 µ m diameter range . ( c ) Analysis of CPN GCs overlaid on top of BD SORP beads depicted in detail in panel ( b ) . CPN GCs have diameters of ~ 200 - 800 nm , predominantly ~ 300 - 500 nm . ( d / e ) FSPS enables purification of subtype - specifically labeled GCs of CPN ( d ) and CThPN ( f ) from respective GCF samples . ( f ) Hydrolysis protection assays are used to assess the presence of intact GC particles with intact membranes , thereby protecting their specific molecular contents from RNase or proteinase digestion in the absence of detergents . ( g ) Western blot of representative proteinase protection assay of CPN GCF detected for multiple subcellular markers . Likely ambient contaminations like GM130 or Map2 are degraded in the absence of detergents ( - / + ) , while GC markers such as GAP43 or Actin are preserved in the absence of detergents ( - / + ) , and are only degraded once GC membranes are permeabilized by detergent ( + / + ) . ( h ) Tape station results of representative RNase protection assay of CPN GC . When the sample is treated with RNase , RNA quality is preserved in the absence of detergents ( - / + ) , and only upon permeabilization of membranes does pronounced RNA degradation occur ( + / + ) . Dynamic regulation of subcellular transcriptomes in cortical projection neurons Veeraraghavan * , Engmann * et al . 2023 ( preprint ) 20 Figure S3 : Subcellular RNA sequencing passes quality metrics and samples are highly correlated within compartments and subtypes . ( a ) Schematic of bioinformatics workflow to process transcriptomic data from reads to differential expression between samples . ( b ) Sequencing depth is > 40M fragments for all libraries across subtypes and stages , as well as for background samples ( GC fraction pre - sort , GCF ) . ( c ) Alignment of reads to contaminating features and the nuclear genome indicates that most reads , as expected , originate from the nuclear genome and that the sorted GC samples have a higher proportion of reads aligning to rRNAs . ( d ) Distribution of reads to genomic features shows that most reads align to UTRs and coding sequences ( CDSs ) , and not genomic regions downstream of transcription end site ( TES ) or upstream of transcription start site ( TSS ) , as expected ; GC and GCF samples have higher representation in 3’UTRs . ( e ) The coverage over 3’ ends is higher in GC and GCF samples relative to somata . ( f ) A cutoff of 2 counts per million ( CPM ) was used for soma samples , since this is the inflection point between signal and noise CPM distributions . ( g ) A CPM cutoff for sorted GC and GCF samples was defined as the 95 th quantile of the distribution of CPMs of non - expressed genes ( dotted lines ) , which were determined by the soma cutoff in panel ( f ) . ( h ) Heatmap showing correlation between normalized transcript counts of all pairs of samples . Dynamic regulation of subcellular transcriptomes in cortical projection neurons Veeraraghavan * , Engmann * et al . 2023 ( preprint ) 21 Figure S4 : Transcriptome obtained from GC samples is corrected to minimize effect of potential ambient contamination . ( a ) To minimize effects of potential ambient contamination in the GC preparation , transcriptomes obtained from sorted GC samples are corrected for their respective input material , i . e . RNA extracted from the unsorted GCF . ( b ) GC transcripts for CPN and CThPN are defined as those having a higher abundance in sorted GCs than in GCF . ( c ) Correction for input material results in exclusion of likely ambient contaminants , e . g . marker genes for various non - neuronal cell types ( grey ) , while preserving a class of robustly GC transcripts ( red ) . ( d ) GO term enrichment comparing GC genes to likely contami - nants from the GCF . Dynamic regulation of subcellular transcriptomes in cortical projection neurons Veeraraghavan * , Engmann * et al . 2023 ( preprint ) 22 Figure S5 : Expression and subcellular transcript localization of WRC core components in CPN and CThPN . ( a ) Volcano plot indicating CPN - specific subcellular transcript localization of core components of the WRC as orange dots ( FDR < 0 . 05 ) . ( b ) Volcano plot indicating CThPN - specific subcellular transcript localization of core components of the WRC as blue dots ( FDR < 0 . 05 ) . ( c ) 95 % confidence intervals of log2 fold change GC / GCF for each of the WRC - associated transcripts . ( d ) Transcript abundance ( transcripts per million , TPM ) of the non - WRC associated members of the Wasp gene family N - Wasp , Jmy , and Whamm in somata and GCs of CPN ( pink / brown ) and CThPN ( light / dark blue ) . ( e ) Transcript abundance ( TPM ) of WRC core components in somata and GCs of CPN ( pink / brown ) and CThPN ( light / dark blue ) . ( f ) Representative western blot images and quantification of triplicates for each protein’s abundance of WAVE paralogs WAVE1 , WAVE2 , WAVE3 , and ACTIN in the post nuclear homogenate ( PNH ) and growth cone fraction ( GCF ) of CPN . All three paralogs are enriched in the GCF when compared to the PNH . Dynamic regulation of subcellular transcriptomes in cortical projection neurons Veeraraghavan * , Engmann * et al . 2023 ( preprint ) 23 Figure S6 : Expression and subcellular transcript localization of WIRS - containing receptors in CPN and CThPN . ( a ) Volcano plot indicating CPN - specific subcellular transcript localization of WIRS - containing receptors as orange dots ( FDR < 0 . 05 ) . ( b ) Volcano plot indicating CThPN - specific subcellular transcript localization of WIRS - containing receptors as blue dots ( FDR < 0 . 05 ) . ( c ) 95 % confidence intervals of log2 fold change GC / GCF for each of the WIRS - containing transcripts . ( d ) Differential expression levels ( FDR < 0 . 05 , dark grey ) of WIRS - containing genes in CPN ( orange ) vs . CThPN ( blue ) somata . WIRS - containing genes that are not differentially expressed between subtypes are shown in green . ( e ) Transcript abundance ( transcripts per million , TPM ) of examples of WIRS - containing receptors with GC - enriched transcript localization in GCs and somata of CPN ( pink / brown ) and CThPN ( light / dark blue ) . Dynamic regulation of subcellular transcriptomes in cortical projection neurons Veeraraghavan * , Engmann * et al . 2023 ( preprint ) 24 Figure S7 : Single molecule FISH of Wave1 and the WIRS containing receptors Robo1 and Pcdh17 in primary cultured CPN . ( a ) Maximum intensity projection ( 10 µ m ) of representative RNAscope confocal image of Wave1 , the respective positive control ( posCtrl , targeting Ppib ) , or negative control ( negCtrl , targeting DapB ) in GFP - positive cultured CPN . Solid arrowheads indicate RNAscope puncta localized to proximal or more distal neurites . ( b ) Maximum intensity projection ( 10 µ m ) of representative RNAscope confocal image of the Wave paralogs Wave2 ( magenta ) and Wave3 ( red ) in GFP - positive cultured CPN . Solid arrowheads indicate Wave3 RNAscope puncta , while open arrow heads indicate Wave2 RNAscope puncta localized to proximal or more distal neurites . ( c ) Maximum intensity projection ( 10 µ m ) of representative RNAscope confocal image of the WIRS receptors Pcdh17 ( magenta ) and Robo1 ( red ) in GFP - positive cultured CPN . Solid arrowhead indicates Robo1 RNAscope puncta localized to proxi - mal CPN neurite . Similar distribution of puncta were observed for 6 - 7 neurons per condition . Dynamic regulation of subcellular transcriptomes in cortical projection neurons Veeraraghavan * , Engmann * et al . 2023 ( preprint ) 25 Figure S8 : 3’UTR isoform analysis identifies enrichment of poly - U motifs in GC transcriptomes over those of somata . ( a ) Number of genes called by the gene - level approach for quantifying GC genes , last - 250bp approach for quantifying GC 3’UTRs , or both . ( b ) MA plots depicting the log2 fold change and abundance of GC transcripts identified by the last - 250bp approach . Each plot represents a subset of all transcripts : genes that are enriched in the last - 250bp ( purple ) , genes that were previously identified ( black ) , isoforms of genes that were identified by both approaches ( green ) , and as a control , isoforms of genes that were identified in neither approach ( grey ) . Genes identified by only the gene - level approach ( black ) are generally of lower abundance . Last - 250bp approach ( purple ) enables identification of GC - specific isoform variants of higher abundance genes . ( c ) GC 3’UTRs identified only in the last - 250bp approach are on average longer ( cdf – cumulative distribution function ) ( d ) As an example , Mapt has one long 3’UTR enriched in GCs , but a shorter isoform not enriched in GCs , as seen by the read pileups ; quantified in ( e ) . ( f ) De novo motif analysis of GC - enriched 3’UTRs identifies multiple distinct versions of poly - U rich motifs preferentially detected in the GC compartment . Dynamic regulation of subcellular transcriptomes in cortical projection neurons Veeraraghavan * , Engmann * et al . 2023 ( preprint ) 26 Figure S9 : CPE location and spacing in GC 3’UTRs is consistent with baseline translational repression of targets . ( a ) CPEBs bind to the cytoplasmic polyadenylation element ( CPE ) located in the ‘3 - UTR of transcripts and complex with factors that control polyA tail length and translation . Cue - induced CPEB phosphorylation mediates polyA polymerase - mediated lengthening of the poly - A tail in the cytosol , enabling eiF4E interaction with PABP , and thereby initiation of translational activation of the respective transcripts [ adapted from 96 ] . ( b ) Boxplots of expression levels in TPM of the three other Cpeb paralogs in CPN ( pink / orange ) and CThPN ( light / dark blue ) somata at P1 ( brown , dark blue ) and P3 ( pink , light blue ) . ( c ) Representative western blot of protein samples obtained from whole forebrain ( FB ) , micro - dissected cortex ( Cx ) , and micro - dissected CPN axon bundles at corpus callosum ( Ax ) , labeled for CPEB4 , ACTIN , and TAU . Labeling for CPEB4 reveals 3 distinct bands , which are labeled as b1 ( highest MW ) , b2 ( middle MW ) , and b3 ( lowest MW ) . Quantification of signal intensity in Cpeb4 b1 - b3 from triplicates reveals relative enrichment of signal for micro - dissected axons to the middle band ( b2 ) . ( d ) Depending on the exact number and relative positioning of CPE motifs within the 3’ - UTR , CPEBs can mediate either translational activation ( as schematized in ( a ) ) or translational repression [ adapted from 96 ] . ( e ) Quantification of length ( top left ) , number ( bottom left ) , density ( top right ) , distance from the polyadenylation signal ( PAS ) ( bottom middle ) , and minimum distance ( bottom right ) be - tween starts of CPE motifs in 3’ - UTRs enriched in GCs ( orange , light blue ) and somata ( brown , dark blue ) of CPN ( orange / brown ) and CThPN ( light / dark blue ) , cdf – cumulative distribution function . ( f ) Relative proportions of distinct variations of Cpeb4 motif , detected in 3’UTRs enriched in GCs ( orange , light blue ) and somata ( brown , dark blue ) of CThPN ( light / dark blue ) and CPN ( orange / brown ) . Dynamic regulation of subcellular transcriptomes in cortical projection neurons Veeraraghavan * , Engmann * et al . 2023 ( preprint ) 27 Figure S10 : Validation of shRNA - mediated Cpeb4 knockdown . ( a / b ) Efficiency of shRNA - mediated knockdown of Cpeb4 . ( a ) Knockdown effi - ciency quantified via qPCR in transfected N2a cells and in in utero electroporated and FACS - purified CPN . ( b ) Knockdown efficiency assessed via immunohistochemistry in transfected N2a cells . ( c ) Total number of labeled CPN in a single 40 µ m coronal brain section of mice in utero electroporated with a scrambled control construct ( ctrl ) or an shRNA targeting Cpeb4 for knockdown ( KD ) . ( d ) Unilateral in utero electroporation at E14 . 5 with a scrambled control construct ( ctrl , upper panel , n = 4 ) , or shRNA targeting Cpeb4 ( KD , lower panel , n = 3 ) results in reproducible targeting of CPN in cortical layer II / III in the lateral somatosensory cortex . Dynamic regulation of subcellular transcriptomes in cortical projection neurons Veeraraghavan * , Engmann * et al . 2023 ( preprint ) 28 Figure S11 : CPN circuit formation occurs during the first postnatal week . ( a ) Somatosensory area CPN extend their axons across the midline around P1 , innervate their homotopic target area in the contralateral cortex around P3 , and collateralize within the cortical grey matter and likely start formation of synapses around P7 . ( b - e ) Quantification of labeled axons / collaterals in progressively entered regions of interest ( highlighted in sche - matic insets to the right , n = 3 for each developmental time ) , focusing on ( b ) CPN axon / collateral elongation in the subcortical white matter , ( c ) innervations into cortical grey matter ( GM ) , ( d ) axon / collateral density in layer V or ( e ) in layers II / III at P1 ( light pink ) , P3 ( dark pink ) , and P7 ( red ) . Dynamic regulation of subcellular transcriptomes in cortical projection neurons Veeraraghavan * , Engmann * et al . 2023 ( preprint ) 29 Figure S12 : Localized transcriptomes change dynamically from P1 to P3 , as CPN switch from axon elongation to grey matter innervation and synapse formation . ( a ) Gene set enrichment analysis for CPN somata comparing P1 and P3 . ( b ) Quadrant plot of differential gene expression by CPN at P3 vs . P1 , and transcript localization by subcellular compartments : in somata ( x axis ) and GCs ( y - axis ) . ( c ) Scaled transcript abundance of most significantly regulated CPN GC genes comparing P1 and P3 , analyzed at gene level ( left ) and transcript level ( right ) . ( d ) Median length of 3’UTR for transcripts detected in CPN and enriched at P1 or P3 . Color ribbons indicate 50 % , 75 % , and 95 % confidence intervals ( CI ) . ( e ) Length of 3’UTRs of CPN GC genes increases from developmental stage P1 to P3 . Dynamic regulation of subcellular transcriptomes in cortical projection neurons Veeraraghavan * , Engmann * et al . 2023 ( preprint ) 30 Figure S13 : The RBP Rbms1 increases transcript levels from P0 to P5 , and is likely involved in localization and stabilization of CPN GC transcripts . ( a ) Micro array data for RBPs Rbms1 , Celf4 , Pcbp3 , and Tia1 at P0 , P5 , and P10 , analyzed for CPN ( red ) and CThPN ( blue ) , from Arlotta et al . 2005 51 . ( b ) Boxplots highlighting RNA expression changes for the paralogs Rbms1 , Rbms2 , and Rbms3 in CPN somata at P1 ( pink ) and P3 ( brown ) . ( c ) GO term enrichment for subset of CPN GC transcripts containing RBMS1 binding motifs at developmental stage P3 . ( d / e ) Efficiency of shRNA - mediated knockdown of Rbms1 , assessed via ( d ) qPCR in transfected N2a cells and in utero electroporated and FACS - purified CPN , as well as ( e ) via immunocytochemistry in transfected N2a cells ( e ) . ( f ) Total number of labeled CPN in the cortex of a single 40 µ m coronal brain section of mice electroporated with a scrambled control construct ( ctrl ) or a shRNA targeting Rbms1 ( KD ) . ( g ) Unilateral in utero electroporation at E14 . 5 with a scrambled control construct ( ctrl , left panel , n = 5 ) , or shRNA targeting Rbms1 ( KD , right panel , n = 4 ) results in comparable positioning of targeted CPN in cortical layer II / III in the lateral somatosensory cortex . The number of labeled CPN was higher in control mice , compared to KD mice .