an already highly adapted E . coli would be difﬁcult . For example , beneﬁcial mutations occur relatively rarely in quantitative long - term invitro evolutionexperimentsin E . coli [ 10 ] . In this regard , we think there are two important caveats to this observation . One issue is that because the experiment measures relative ( normalized ) frequency changes in competitive growth conditions , the change in frequency of a sequence depends on its growth rate relative to every other random sequence in the pool . Even assuming that drift is negligible , as Neme et al . [ 2 ] argue , sequence enrichment does not mean that a sequence is beneﬁcial relative to wild - type E . coli , only that it was better than other random sequence competitors . It could be that all the random sequences are deleterious to E . coli , but some are less deleterious than others , and these would rise to higher relative frequencies . Neme et al . [ 2 ] address this issue by choosing three individual beneﬁcial sequences and showing that all three individually outcompete the ‘empty vector’ . This raises a second issue : the vector without insert is neither empty nor innocuous . The vector ( pFLAG - CTC ) carries strong transcription and translation signals . It drives IPTG - inducible expression across its multiple cloning site , producing a (cid:1) 350 nucleotide RNA and a 38 amino - acid open reading frame at high levels . Neme et al . [ 2 ] do not observe these products because they assay expression by western blot with an anti - FLAG - tag antibody , but the FLAG tag in the vector without insert is out of frame by design . Because high - level expression of any exogenous plasmid - encoded sequence is detrimental to the E . coli host , under these conditions a beneﬁcial random sequence could include anything that decreases RNA or protein expression levels relative to the vector without insert , for instance by base - pairing complementarity to the translation initiation site . Indeed , all three beneﬁcial clones seem to show strongly reduced protein expression relative to the population average of the library . Although we have reservations about the correctness of the conclusion of Neme et al . [ 2 ] that 25 % of their random sequences have beneﬁcial effects on E . coli growth rate , a body of work from these and other authors does suggest that each of the three terms in the protogene equation are high enough to be measurable in laboratory experiments , and thus could easily be relevant on evolutionary timescales . Franc¸ois Jacob was correct that gene duplication and divergence is a dominant force in gene evolution , but his personal intuition about the odds of new genes arising de novo may have been simply wrong . Experiments studying the transcription , translation , and functionality of random sequences are proving to be fruitful territory , replacing Jacob’s intuition with experimental data . REFERENCES 1 . Jacob , F . ( 1977 ) . Evolution and tinkering . Science 196 , 1161 – 1166 . 2 . Neme , R . , Amador , C . , Yildirim , B . , McConnell , E . , and Tautz , D . ( 2017 ) . Random sequences are an abundant source of bioactive RNAs or peptides . Nat . Ecol . Evol . 1 , 0127 . 3 . Keefe , A . D . , and Szostak , J . W . ( 2001 ) . Functional proteins from a random - sequence library . Nature 410 , 715 – 718 . 4 . Tuerk , C . , and Gold , L . ( 1990 ) . Systematic evolution of ligands by exponential enrichment : RNA ligands to bacteriophage T4 DNA polymerase . Science 249 , 505 – 510 . 5 . Okazaki , Y . , Furuno , M . , Kasukawa , T . , Adachi , J . , Bono , H . , Kondo , S . , Nikaido , I . , Osato , N . , Saito , R . , Suzuki , H . , et al . ( 2002 ) . Analysis of the mouse transcriptome based on functional annotationof60 , 770full - lengthcDNAs . Nature 420 , 563 – 573 . 6 . Ji , Z . , Song , R . , Regev , A . , and Struhl , K . ( 2015 ) . Many lncRNAs , 5’UTRs , and pseudogenes are translated and some are likely to express functional proteins . eLife 4 , e08890 . 7 . Carvunis , A . R . , Rolland , T . , Wapinski , I . , Calderwood , M . A . , Yildirim , M . A . , Simonis , N . , Charloteaux , B . , Hidalgo , C . A . , Barbette , J . , Santhanam , B . , et al . ( 2012 ) . Proto - genes and de novo gene birth . Nature 487 , 370 – 374 . 8 . Eddy , S . R . ( 2013 ) . The ENCODE project : Missteps overshadowing a success . Curr . Biol . 23 , R259 – R261 . 9 . Struhl , K . ( 2007 ) . Transcriptional noise and the ﬁdelity of initiation by RNA polymerase II . Nat . Struct . Mol . Biol . 14 , 103 – 105 . 10 . Woods , R . , Schneider , D . , Winkworth , C . L . , Riley , M . A . , and Lenski , R . E . ( 2006 ) . Tests of parallel molecular evolution in a long - term experiment with Escherichia coli . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA 103 , 9107 – 9112 . Endocytosis : Remote Control from Deep Inside Ludger Johannes Institut Curie , PSL Research University , Chemical Biology of Membranes and Therapeutic Delivery unit , INSERM U 1143 , CNRS UMR 3666 , 26 rue d’Ulm , 75248 Paris Cedex 05 , France Correspondence : ludger . johannes @ curie . fr http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . cub . 2017 . 05 . 018 The endoplasmic reticulum communicates directly through membrane contacts with other cellular organelles . A new study reports that the formation and detachment of endocytic uptake carriers for the clathrin - independent internalization of the epidermal growth factor receptor is dependent on such contact sites . Endocytosis is the process by which the plasma membrane invaginates to form membrane - bound uptake carriers that then fuse with the early endosomal membrane system for further trafﬁcking within the cell . Endocytosis is at the heart of a multitude of cellular and pathological functions , ranging from nutrient uptake and growth factor signaling to tumor Current Biology 27 , R642 – R666 , July 10 , 2017 ª 2017 Elsevier Ltd . R663 Current Biology Dispatches metastasis and the cellular entry of pathogens and pathogenic factors , such as protein toxins [ 1 ] . One type of regular - shapedmembraneinvaginationhaslargely monopolized the attention of researchers intheendocytosisﬁeld : theclathrin - coated pit [ 2 ] . It was noticed more than 30 years ago , however , that someendocytic uptake events continue to operate even when the clathrin pathway is inhibited ( for a review , see [ 3 ] ) . The experimental exploration of these events has been hampered by the fact that clathrin - independent uptake carriers appeared to be pleomorphic in structure , and therefore difﬁcult to classify , and that no element of molecular machinery could be identiﬁed that was common to all non - clathrin - dependent uptake processes without also being used in the clathrin pathway , which made it difﬁcult to inhibit them speciﬁcally . Another type of regular - shaped membrane invagination — the caveola — was initially described as a bona ﬁde endocytic structure that was thought to be key to the clathrin - independent component of endocytic uptake ( see discussion in [ 4 ] ) . However , it turned out to be exceedingly difﬁcult to identify cargoes whose internalization into cells was truly dependent on caveolae , and according to a recent shift in paradigm caveolae are now often considered as mechanosensing , signaling and transduction devices [ 5 ] . Thus , much remains to be learned about the nuts and bolts of clathrin - independent uptake into cells . The internalization of the epidermal growth factor receptor ( EGFR ) has been extensively studied . At low EGF concentrations ( (cid:1) 1 ng / ml ) most EGFR uptake is clathrin dependent , while at high concentrations ( 20 – 100 ng / ml ) a substantial fraction is internalized by clathrin - independent endocytosis [ 6 ] . The appearance of this clathrin - independent fraction is paralleled by increased lysosomal degradation of the receptor , suggesting that non - clathrin - mediated endocytosis might be a negative regulator of EGF signaling and a potential tumor suppressor mechanism , given the established role of EGFR in oncogenesis . A new study by Sigismund , Di Fiore and colleagues [ 7 ] now describes the discovery of membrane contact sites between the endoplasmic reticulum ( ER ) and plasma membrane as being of critical importance for the clathrin - independent formation of EGFR uptake carriers . The capacity of the ER to directly interact with intracellular organelles has become a recent focus of interest in cellular membrane biology research [ 8 ] . Such ER contact sites have been observed at mitochondria , the trans - Golgi network , and endosomes and have been implicated in lipid exchange and local calcium release from ER stores . In the current study , the authors have discovered that an ER protein , reticulon 3 ( RTN3 ) , is required for the formation of tubular invaginations via which EGFR is internalized in a clathrin - independent manner , speciﬁcally at high EGF concentrations ( Figure 1 ) . RTN3 was identiﬁed as a hit in a proteomics approach that was designed to enrich for clathrin - independent endocytic carriers , based on subcellular fractionation , plasma membrane depletion , and EGFR carrier immunopuriﬁcation . Concomitant interference with the clathrin pathway and with RTN3 expression led to an additive inhibitory effect on EGFR uptake , which was a strong argument that clathrin and RTN3 indeed function in parallel . The authors then used an electron microscopy protocol to visualize plasma membrane invaginations in which EGFR ( and other cargoes , see below ; Figure 1 ) was localized under different experimental conditions . EGFR - speciﬁc immunogold labeling was detected in clathrin - coated pits and in tubular invaginations . The latter structures persisted in cells in which clathrin MVB Endosome TI Ca 2 + Ca 2 + Ca 2 + Ca 2 + Ca 2 + Ca 2 + C a 2 + Ca 2 + 1 2 3 Tubularvesicle NCE progression Contact site formation Elongation Fission 4 Vesicle release PM EGFR High EGF ER Current Biology Figure 1 . Mechanism of non - clathrin - mediated endocytosis of EGFR observed at high EGF concentrations . At the plasma membrane ( PM ) , non - clathrin - mediated endocytosis ( NCE ) is triggered by the formation of tubular invaginations ( TI ) that require the establishment of RTN3 - dependent ER – PM contact sites such that uptake can progress in a stepwise process : 1 ) contact site formation between the ER and TI ; 2 ) TI maturation / elongation ; 3 ) Ca 2 + release at the ER – PM interface , which is required for the ﬁssion of TIs ; 4 ) release by scission of tubular endocytic carriers . Dynamin ( yellow ovals ) is also needed to execute this latter step . The ER is depicted in grey and RTN3 - enriched ER is in green . Representative EM images of the different steps are displayed at the top ( courtesy of Andrea Raimondi ) , showing the ER as electron - dense staining and cargoes ( here CD147 ; see text ) labeled with gold particles in cells stimulated with high - dose EGF . Note that a fraction of active EGFR is also internalized via clathrin - mediated endocytosis ( not shown here ) . R664 Current Biology 27 , R642 – R666 , July 10 , 2017 Current Biology Dispatches expression was inhibited and decreased in number upon depletion of RTN3 . It was concluded that these tubular invaginations most likely operate clathrin - independent uptake of EGFR . By which mechanism ( s ) RTN3 favors their formation still remains to be determined . Of note , the authors’ proteomics list also contained transmembrane proteins that are likely to be cargoes . One of these , CD147 , was further analyzed in the current study . Interestingly , upon high - dose EGF stimulation CD147 almost exclusively entered cells by non - clathrin - mediated endocytosis and was found in short tubular invaginations at the plasma membrane ( Figure 1 ) that were similar to the ones described above for EGFR . Short tubular invaginations have previously already been seen for other clathrin - independent uptake processes , notably of bacterial protein toxins and cellular proteins such as the adhesion factor CD44 [ 9 – 12 ] . Such tubular invaginations might be hallmarks of sites at which endocytic carriers are forming in non - clathrin - dependent pathways , most likely because in these cases the detachment from the plasma membrane by scission is less tightly linked to the membrane invagination process than during endocytic pathways involving the highly ordered clathrin coat [ 13 ] . In some cases of clathrin - independent uptake , the GTPase dynamin participates in the scission reaction [ 14 , 15 ] , as in the current study for EGFR . In other cases , such as the formation of clathrin - independent carriers required for the internalization of glycophosphatidylinositol - anchored proteins , CD44 , and cellular galectins [ 11 , 12 , 16 ] , the reliance on dynamin is much reduced , or even unmeasurable . What might RTN3 be doing in relation to the cellular uptake of EGFR ? The authors of the current paper provide evidence by ﬂuorescence resonance energy transfer , proximity ligation , super - resolution microscopy and electron microscopy that RTN3 is localized close to EGFR at the plasma membrane , and that RTN3 is required for the formation of contact sites between the ER and the plasma membrane . Importantly , most EGFR / CD147 - containing tubular membrane invaginations were found to be in close proximity to peripheral ER ( Figure 1 ) , a phenotype that was lost upon RTN3 depletion . Whether RTN3 is directly involved in the establishment of these contact sites remains to be analyzed . Importantly , however , depletion experiments demonstrated that the observed phenotypes are speciﬁc to RTN3 and that other types of ER – plasma membrane contact sites , i . e . those controlled by STIM1 [ 17 ] or E - Syt1 [ 18 ] , were not involved , which is in agreement with the current view on contact site speciﬁcity . A ﬁnal set of data concerns the ﬁnding that interfering with calcium release from ER stores affects the EGFR uptake process in a manner that depends on RTN3 expression , suggesting that RTN3 - dependent contact sites might be required for localized calcium release in the direct proximity of EGFR / CD147 - containing tubular invaginations ( Figure 1 ) . Surprisingly , the lowering of this local calcium metabolism did not reduce the frequency of invaginations , but rather increased their average length , suggesting that calcium somehow participates in the scission process . The exact mechanism by which this occurs remains to be determined . In conclusion , the study by Sigismund , Di Fiore and colleagues [ 7 ] has brought the ER into the limelight for the clathrin - independent construction and maturation of endocytic sites at the plasma membrane . This groundbreaking study provides endocytosis research with a fresh perspective and is expected to stimulate further analyses of the mechanistic aspects of the process described here . The current colocalization and depletion data suggest that the previously described endophilin - based and clathrin - independent mechanism for fast EGFR uptake [ 19 ] may not apply to the RNT3 - dependent internalization process of EGFR / CD147 . Yet , EGFR is notorious for the many facets of its endocytic uptake into cells , and further work will help to put together all the pieces of the puzzle . REFERENCES 1 . Doherty , G . J . , and McMahon , H . T . ( 2009 ) . Mechanisms of endocytosis . Annu . Rev . Biochem . 78 , 857 – 902 . 2 . Robinson , M . S . ( 2015 ) . Forty years of clathrin - coated vesicles . Trafﬁc 16 , 1210 – 1238 . 3 . Johannes , L . , Parton , R . G . , Bassereau , P . , and Mayor , S . ( 2015 ) . Building endocytic pits without clathrin . Nat . Rev . Mol . Cell Biol . 16 , 311 – 321 . 4 . Parton , R . G . , and del Pozo , M . A . ( 2013 ) . Caveolae as plasma membrane sensors , protectors and organizers . Nat . Rev . Mol . Cell Biol . 14 , 98 – 112 . 5 . Nassoy , P . , and Lamaze , C . ( 2012 ) . Stressing caveolae new role in cell mechanics . Trends Cell Biol . 22 , 381 – 389 . 6 . Sigismund , S . , Argenzio , E . , Tosoni , D . , Cavallaro , E . , Polo , S . , and Di Fiore , P . P . ( 2008 ) . Clathrin - mediated internalization is essential for sustained EGFR signaling but dispensable for degradation . Dev . Cell 15 , 209 – 219 . 7 . Caldieri , G . , Barbieri , E . , Nappo , G . , Raimondi , A . , Bonora , M . , Conte , A . , Verhoef , L . G . , Confalonieri , S . , Malabara , M . G . , Bianchi , F . , et al . ( 2017 ) . Reticulon3 - dependent ER - PM contact sites control EGFR non - clathrin endocytosis . Science 356 , 617 – 624 . 8 . Phillips , M . J . , and Voeltz , G . K . ( 2016 ) . Structure and function of ER membrane contact sites with other organelles . Nat . Rev . Mol . Cell Biol . 17 , 69 – 82 . 9 . Kirkham , M . , Fujita , A . , Chadda , R . , Nixon , S . J . , Kurzchalia , T . V . , Sharma , D . K . , Pagano , R . E . , Hancock , J . F . , Mayor , S . , and Parton , R . G . ( 2005 ) . Ultrastructural identiﬁcation of uncoated caveolin - independent early endocytic vehicles . J . Cell Biol . 168 , 465 – 476 . 10 . Ro¨mer , W . , Berland , L . , Chambon , V . , Gaus , K . , Windschiegl , B . , Tenza , D . , Aly , M . R . , Fraisier , V . , Florent , J . - C . , Perrais , D . , et al . ( 2007 ) . Shiga toxin induces tubular membrane invaginations for its uptake into cells . Nature 450 , 670 – 675 . 11 . Howes , M . T . , Kirkham , M . , Riches , J . , Cortese , K . , Walser , P . J . , Simpson , F . , Hill , M . M . , Jones , A . , Lundmark , R . , Lindsay , M . R . , et al . ( 2010 ) . Clathrin - independent carriers form a high capacity endocytic sorting system at the leading edge of migrating cells . J . Cell Biol . 190 , 675 – 691 . 12 . Lakshminarayan , R . , Wunder , C . , Becken , U . , Howes , M . T . , Benzing , C . , Arumugam , S . , Sales , S . , Ariotti , N . , Chambon , V . , Lamaze , C . , et al . ( 2014 ) . Galectin - 3 drives glycosphingolipid - dependent biogenesis of clathrin - independent carriers . Nat . Cell Biol . 16 , 595 – 606 . 13 . Johannes , L . , Wunder , C . , and Bassereau , P . ( 2014 ) . Bending ‘‘on the rocks’’ — a cocktail of biophysical modules to build endocytic pathways . Cold Spring Harb . Perspect . Biol . 6 , a016741 . 14 . Lamaze , C . , Dujeancourt , A . , Baba , T . , Lo , C . G . , Benmerah , A . , and Dautry - Varsat , A . ( 2001 ) . Interleukin 2 receptors and detergent - resistant membrane domains deﬁneaclathrin - independent endocytic pathway . Mol . Cell 7 , 661 – 671 . Current Biology 27 , R642 – R666 , July 10 , 2017 R665 Current Biology Dispatches 15 . Renard , H . - F . , Simunovic , M . , Lemie ` re , J . , Boucrot , E . , Garcia - Castillo , M . D . , Arumugam , S . , Chambon , V . , Lamaze , C . , Wunder , C . , Kenworthy , A . K . , et al . ( 2015 ) . Endophilin - A2 functions in membrane scission in clathrin - independentendocytosis . Nature 517 , 493 – 496 . 16 . Kumari , S . , and Mayor , S . ( 2008 ) . ARF1 is directly involved in dynamin - independent endocytosis . Nat . Cell Biol . 10 , 30 – 41 . 17 . Carrasco , S . , and Meyer , T . ( 2011 ) . STIM proteins and the endoplasmic reticulum - plasma membrane junctions . Annu . Rev . Biochem . 80 , 973 – 1000 . 18 . Giordano , F . , Saheki , Y . , Idevall - Hagren , O . , Colombo , S . F . , Pirruccello , M . , Milosevic , I . , Gracheva , E . O . , Bagriantsev , S . N . , Borgese , N . , and De Camilli , P . ( 2013 ) . PI ( 4 , 5 ) P ( 2 ) - dependent and Ca ( 2 + ) - regulated ER - PM interactions mediated by the extended synaptotagmins . Cell 153 , 1494 – 1509 . 19 . Boucrot , E . , Ferreira , A . P . , Almeida - Souza , L . , Debard , S . , Vallis , Y . , Howard , G . , Bertot , L . , Sauvonnet , N . , and McMahon , H . T . ( 2015 ) . Endophilin marks and controls a clathrin - independent endocytic pathway . Nature 517 , 460 – 465 . R666 Current Biology 27 , R642 – R666 , July 10 , 2017 Current Biology Dispatches