A Ibidovainpsinoc A I A HO G A I Aoccthmid Iid Agoidid Ppn bos C C A Re Find ABSTRACT Idea pipelines but require the deas . To help often included voting rarely al address this pro ncreasing the pipelines . In th subset of the id ndividual scor on an authentic chosen by an ev Author Keywo Idea pipeline ; in ACM Classific H . 5 . 3 [ Informa Organization In General Terms Algorithms ; De NTRODUCTIO An idea pipelin organizations [ community ide community is he public . Ide managed via a dea proposes Ideation may re deas in a short A key challeng generation , but organizations fo deas . We use deas initially Permission to mak personal or classro not made or distrib bear this notice an or republish , to po specific permission CSCW’12 , Februa Copyright 2012 AC eferenc ability enable open in evaluation tea filter promisin as part of the p ligns with the oblem , we intro findability of he model , each deas , ideas are res can be agg c data set and valuation team ords nnovation ; refe ation Keyword ation Interface nterfaces – Eva s esign ; Human F ON ne enables a mo 2 , 8 ] . Each cy eation on a b formed from a proposals , o collaborative a new produc esult in a few h time , which n ge of open inn t idea selectio form dedicated the phrase pr selected by a ke digital or hard oom use is granted buted for profit or nd the full citation ost on servers or n and / or a fee . ary 11 – 15 , 2012 , S CM 978 - 1 - 4503 - 1 ce - Base of Prom A D nnovation with ams to assess l ng ideas , comm pipeline but the ideas selected oduce a new sc f promising id h participant ne scored indepe gregated . We t found our mo m better than co erence - based s ds and Presentat aluation / metho Factors . odel of open in cle of the pipe business prob employees , co or just ideas , a idea managem ct or service a hundred to tens eed to be evalu novation is th on . To address teams charged romising ideas an evaluation copies of all or p d without fee prov commercial advan on the first page . to redistribute to Seattle , Washington 1086 - 4 / 12 / 02 . . . $ 10 ed Scor mising Anbang Xu Department o UniverUrba { xu26 , bpba hin organizatio arge numbers munity voting e outcome of th by the team . T coring model f deas within id eed only score endently , and th tested the mod odel filters ide ommunity votes coring . ion ] : Group an dology . nnovation with eline begins wi lem , where th onsumers and / are collected an ment system . A and its rational s of thousands uated efficientl erefore not id s this challeng d with evaluatin s to refer to th team to receiv part of this work f vided that copies a ntage and that copi To copy otherwi lists , requires pri n , USA . 0 . 00 . ring Mo Ideas i and Brian P of Computer rsity of Illino ana , IL 6180 ailey } @ illin ns of is he To for dea e a he del eas s . nd hin ith he / or nd An le . of ly . dea ge , ng he ve considbe refi to imp very la One co commuThe rat input t many adoptioideas in For exa users m vote on Unfortmodelinstanc [ 10 , 16 makes algorithare pus report proces In thi s increas Figure MyStarepresegreen overlapaligned for are ies se , ior odel for n Innov P . Bailey r Science ois 1 nois . edu eration at the f ined and furthe plementation [ arge set of idea ommon solutio unity voting w tionale is that t to help identify votes for an i on . The typica ndependently ample in one p may cast a " th n each idea wit tunately , the th make it unrel ce , user votes a 6 ] , users typic aggregation l hm can disadv shed out of vie dismissing com s [ 1 ] . Figure 1 s paper , we i sing the findab 1 . The distr rBucksIdea . com ents ideas sele ( light ) line de p demonstrate d with the idea s r Increa vation P front end of a p er filtered with [ 1 ] . However , as is impractica on has been to within idea m the evaluation y ideas that de idea could sig al voting mode and displays th popular system humbs - up " ( + 1 th the sum disp heory and impl iable for filter are susceptible cally vote for less reliable [ 1 vantage ideas ew [ 1 , 13 ] . As a mmunity votes shows this mi introduce a n bility of promis ribution of vot m ( see Data S cted by the ev enotes the uns es that comm selections of the asing th Pipelin pipeline . These h a few ideas p manually con al for an evalua o include inte management sy team can use c eserve consider gnal potential el allows users he sum with th m , MyStarBuck ) or “thumbs - d played near eac ementation of ring promising e to informatio only a few id 11 ] , and the p submitted ear a result , evalua s in their decisi smatch for one novel scoring sing ideas at th tes for 10 , 000 Set ) . The red ( valuation team selected ideas . munity votes a e team . he es e ideas will progressing nsidering a ation team . raction for ystems [ 1 ] . community ration , e . g . , for market to rate the he idea [ 4 ] . ksIdea . com , down” ( - 1 ) ch one . this voting ideas . For on cascades deas , which resentation rly as they ation teams ion making e pipeline . model for he front end 0 ideas on ( dark ) line m while the The large are poorly Session : Tools for Analysis February 11 - 15 , 2012 , Seattle , WA , USA 1183 onlao ( mr Taprca R TvsthM“indreeAiiu C tw of idea pipeline need only scor arger data sets others , removin ( iii ) the individ model works by rated by partici The model wa authentic idea p promising idea realized with lo can therefore se addition to othe RELEVANT TH There are two value judgmen scoring [ 14 ] . In heir degree of Many example “thumbs up / nclude that it decisions and i respondents ca especially wh evaluation ( e . g Also , the aggre f each respond s problematic user typically s Comparison sc wo or more it Figure 2 . T es . The key ele re a subset of s ; ( ii ) each ide ng the cognitiv dual scores ca y inserting a re pants and adju as evaluated u pipeline . Resu as better than ow cost and ti erve as useful er indicators or HEORY categories of nts of items : ndependent sc favor or disfav s appear in soc down” . Advan t makes few a it is straightfor an become inc en there is . is a book with egation of indiv dent does not ra for idea man cores only a fr coring asks res tems . Advanta he scalable refe ements are ( i ) f the ideas , the a is scored ind ve burden of c an be reliably eference idea in usts all scores r using ideas co ults show that o community vo ime delay . Ou input to an eva r criteria they m scoring metho independent a oring asks res vor with attribu cial media , e . g ntages of inde assumptions a rward to imple consistent in insufficient i h a torn cover vidual ratings c ate all of the ite nagement syste raction of the id spondents to d ges include th erence - based sc each participa ereby scaling dependent of th comparison ; an aggregated . Th nto each idea s elative to it . ollected from a our model filte otes and can b ur scoring mod aluation team , may consider . ods for elicitin and compariso pondents to ra utes of items [ 5 . , with ratings ependent scorin about behavior ement . Howeve their response information f worth $ 20 ? ) [ 9 can be unreliab ems [ 7 , 17 ] . Th ems where ea deas [ 1 ] . directly compa he results can b oring model . ant to he nd he set an ers be del in ng on ate 5 ] . of ng ral er , es , for 9 ] . ble his ch are be aggregevaluathave in have a in onli increasobjectiresponmaking18 ] . A with th for larg system In this of ind results A SCA We int of prom model yet req is achi group a Figure random { { I 11 , … is then is prese at leas group unawarof othe the refe (cid:1845) where (cid:1835) (cid:3036)(cid:3037) and The ad or wor EVALU To test accessisystemindepeagainstthe pro coffee ( + 1 ) or idea . A reviewfor con given t Data S We col in Dec gated to form te items by we nsufficient eva advocated using ine communiti ses cognitive d ively better th ndents use cog g and may bec As the number he number of ge data sets . Th ms in which tho work , our res ependent scor of comparison ALABLE REFE troduce a scori mising ideas a allows global quires each use ieved by inser and adjusting a 2 shows the p mly divide all i … , I 1 n } , … , { I m 1 , n replicated and ented to a grou st ten users sh in order to con re of the refer er users . The sc ference idea in (cid:1845)(cid:3435)(cid:1835) (cid:3036)(cid:3037) (cid:3439) (cid:3404) (cid:2020)(cid:3435)(cid:1835) (cid:3036)(cid:3037) (cid:3439) (cid:3398) (cid:2020)(cid:3435)(cid:1835) (cid:3036)(cid:3037) (cid:3439) and (cid:2020)(cid:4666)(cid:2038) d the reference djusted scores rse each idea is UATION t our scoring m ible ideas colle m , MyStarbuck endent scoring t ideas via inte oducts or serv and related p r thumbs dow An evaluation t ws ideas from t nsideration in that every categ Set llected 10 , 000 c . 2010 spanni a global ranki eighing attribu aluability infor g comparison s ies [ 17 ] . Howe demands especi han the others gnitive heurist come inconsist of comparison items , this me his is problema ousands of idea earch goal is t ring with the n scoring and s ERENCE - BASE ing model for i at the front en aggregation o er to rate only a rting a refere all scores relati process of the ideas into m gr … , I mn } } . A pr d inserted into up of users for hould rate the nsider the ratin rence idea and core for each id the correspond (cid:3398) (cid:2020)(cid:4666)(cid:2038) (cid:3036) (cid:4667) , (cid:1861) (cid:3404) (cid:2038) (cid:3036) (cid:4667) denote the a e idea (cid:2038) (cid:3036) in th can be interpr s relative to the model , we appl ected from a p sIdea . com . Th g model where eraction . Ideas p vices of Starbu products . A vo wn ( - 1 ) and the team from the the categories the pipeline . gory receives m recent ideas o ing all produc ing and respon utes that would rmation [ 9 ] . R scoring for ran ever , comparis ially when no o [ 14 ] . In such tics to simplif tent in their res ns can grow n ethod does not atic for idea m as may be contr to combine the ability to agg scale to large d ED SCORING improving the nd of idea pipe of individual id a subset of the nce idea into ive to it . scoring model roups of n idea re - selected refe o each group . E rating . In the e ideas in thei ngs stable [ 13 ] d cannot view dea is normaliz ding group as f 1 , … , (cid:1865) , (cid:1862) (cid:3404) 1 , average score he i th group re reted as how m e reference idea lied it to a set popular idea m his system imp e users can v propose ways ucks , a global ote is cast as e sum is show organization p and selects a This task is c many thousand on MyStarBuck t and service ndents can d otherwise Researchers nking items son scoring one item is situations , fy decision sponses [ 6 , on - linearly scale well management ributed . e simplicity gregate the data sets . MODEL findability elines . Our dea scores , ideas . This each idea l . First , we s obtaining erence idea Each group first phase , ir assigned . Users are the ratings zed against follows : , … , (cid:1866) , of the idea espectively . much better a . of publicly management lements an vote for or to improve retailer of thumbs up wn with the periodically a few ideas challenging ds of ideas . ksIdea . com categories . Session : Tools for Analysis February 11 - 15 , 2012 , Seattle , WA , USA 1184 Tthora‘sv‘sa R Tt awthwwin fo eidTsidr w w FoTo N u m b er o f I d e a s The community hree months la or selected . Th review by the and we include in the works’ selected by the votes on the selected’ ideas set , we sample and 6 ( 3 % ) from Realization of The 200 ideas w en ideas . Sinc assumptions ab was equal to th he reference an was conducted were paid $ 0 . 1 nterface includ for ( + 1 ) and ea external effects deas to be acc To increase rob scored by fiftee deas in a group reduce order e were asked for with Starbucks , ( Figure 3 . The d of our experime The key outcom our model than y ratings and ater . We catego e latter set wer evaluation tea ed the status o , and ‘launch evaluation tea site . The prop s was 97 % an ed 200 ideas ; 1 m the ‘selected Scoring Mode were randomly ce the scoring bout the referen he median leng nd inserted int on Amazon’s 5 for scoring ded two option ach idea was r s , we did not p cessed within bustness of the en participants p was randomi effects . After s r demographic , and frequency ( a ) Community istributions of s ent without the me is that the id with communit status of ideas orized the idea re the ideas de am ( i . e . , the p of ‘under revie hed’ in this se am , it cannot re portion of ‘no nd 3 % respecti 194 ( 97 % ) from d’ set for testing el y divided into t model does n nce idea , an id gth ( 61 words to each group . Mechanical T a group of ide ns : vote agains rated independ provide interact the idea mana e ratings [ 13 ] , . The presenta ized each time scoring the id c information , y of purchases y Votes scores for our s e adjustment an eas selected by ty votes or inde s were collect as as not select eemed worthy promising idea ew’ , ‘reviewed et . If an idea eceive addition ot selected’ an ively . From th m ‘not selecte g our model . twenty groups not have specif dea whose leng ) was chosen The experime Turk . Participan eas . The scorin st ( - 1 ) , and vo dently . To avo tion to allow th agement system each group w ation order of th it was shown eas , participa n their familiari at Starbucks . ( b ) I sample of ideas nd ( c ) reference the evaluation ependent scorin ed ed of as ) d’ , is nal nd his ed’ of fic gth as ent nts ng ote oid he m . was he to nts ity The g ( 50 . 4 % Other FamiliaUnfamof purc ( 26 . 8 % majoritStarbuc Result The ex particip [ - 0 . 6 , 0 referen 0 . 12 re and SD 3b ) and interes‘selecte17 % o ranked ( Fig . 3 be mis wouldscoringidea im In sum model shown promis Independent Sc based on ( a ) C e - based scoring team ( the red / d ng . geographic dis % ) , India ( 28 . 1 ( 17 . 8 % ) . Fam ar ( 43 . 5 % ) , So miliar ( 19 . 9 % ) , chases was Da % ) , Quarterly ( 2 ty of participa cks and purcha ts xperiment was pants . The ran 0 . 6 ] . The mea nce idea score espectively and D of all idea sc d , after the adj sting outcome ed’ ideas recei of the sample ( d these same id 3a ) , thereby inc ssed by evalua not have been g ( Fig . 3b ) . Ap mproved separa m , results show to narrow the in Fig . 3c , thi sing ideas tha coring Community Vote g — the results dark rectangles stribution of 1 % ) , UK ( 2 . 9 amiliarity with omewhat Fam and Unfamilia aily ( 11 . 8 % ) , W 22 . 8 % ) , and N ants in our st ased items at le s completed w nge of all score an and standar es in the twen d ranged from ores were . 08 a ustment , were of our scoring ived scores tha ( Fig . 3c ) . In co deas only in th creasing the li ators . Also , fo n ranked in the pplying the adj ation of the sel w that an evalu eir focus to a s is set has a hig an the set pro ( es , ( b ) Independ s of our experim s ) received a mo participants % ) , Canada ( h Starbucks miliar ( 35 . 4 % ) , ar ( 1 . 2 % ) . The Weekly ( 29 . 3 % Never ( 9 . 3 % ) . O tudy were fam east once a mo within 24 hou es in our exper rd deviation ( S nty groups wer - 0 . 17 to 0 . 23 . and . 19 respect . 04 and . 22 ( F g model is that at placed them ontrast , commu he top 74 % of ikelihood that our of the sele top 17 % via in ustment for the ected / unselec ation team cou smaller pool of gher concentra oduced with c ( c ) Our Model dent Scoring — ment with the a ore favorable ra was USA ( 0 . 8 % ) and was Very Somewhat e frequency % ) , Monthly Overall , the miliar with nth . urs by 267 riment was SD ) of the re . 04 and The mean tively ( Fig . Fig . 3c ) . An t all of the m in the top unity votes the sample they could ected ideas ndependent e reference cted ideas . uld use our f ideas . As ation of the community — the results adjustment . anking with Session : Tools for Analysis February 11 - 15 , 2012 , Seattle , WA , USA 1185 voting . The other ideas that appeared in this top cluster may also represent a missed opportunity by the evaluation team , but testing the veracity of this claim is left for future work . DISCUSSION AND FUTURE WORK Our realization of the scoring model utilized Mechanical Turk to recruit participants for rating ideas . However , the model could be easily realized using any user community , e . g . , contributors to an idea management system or the employee base of a large organization . The community voting model used within idea management systems typically allows for a rolling vote , i . e . , votes can be cast at any time . In contrast , our model separates the collection of ideas from the scoring of ideas . We believe this separation is beneficial because it better aligns the idea workflow with recommended brainstorming practices [ 12 ] and the scoring model can be performed by evaluators with minimal cost or time delay . In addition , the evaluation team need not rely solely on the results of our model . For example , the outcome of our model could be imported into a visualization tool ( e . g . see [ 15 ] ) that allows evaluators to visually explore ideas based on this and other attributes such as topic similarity , comments , and community votes . Our model ranks ideas based on how they compare to a reference idea , but how the choice of a different reference idea affects the outcome is not currently known . It would also be interesting to test how the use of multiple reference ideas affects the outcome . Comparing the outcomes of the model with different and / or multiple reference ideas offers interesting opportunities for further research . In realizing our scoring model , we chose a single criterion for evaluating ideas ( vote for / against ) as this mimics the criterion used for community voting on the existing site , thereby supporting comparison of the results . However , the literature on idea evaluation indicates that specifying multiple criteria such as ‘strategic fit’ and ‘feasibility’ may allow ideas to be judged more effectively [ 3 ] . It would be interesting to study how the use of multiple criteria affects the results of the scoring model . Future work should also offer a more thorough theoretical and empirical comparison of reference - based , independent , and comparison scoring . Finally , the purpose of our scoring model is to assist an evaluator team in quickly narrowing a large space of ideas to a smaller subset for closer scrutiny . The use of our model cannot guarantee that the best ideas are identified , as this choice remains a human and inherently uncertain decision . CONCLUSION The large number of ideas funneled into idea pipelines has created the challenge of knowing which ideas to pursue . Evidence shows the commonly used method of community voting is ineffective for identifying promising ideas . This paper has introduced a scalable referenced - based scoring model for quickly filtering promising ideas . In the model , each user only needs to score a subset of the ideas ; each idea is scored independent of the others ; and the scores can be reliably aggregated for comparison . A test of the model using ideas collected from an authentic pipeline shows that our model filters promising ideas better than community votes . We believe this work offers a useful tool for helping evaluators identify quality ideas in innovation pipelines . ACKNOWLEDGENT This work was supported in part by the National Science Foundation under award no . IIS 06 - 43512 . REFERENCES 1 . Bailey , B . P . and Horvitz , E . , What ' s Your Idea ? A Case Study of a Grassroots . Innovation Pipeline within a Large Software Company . In CHI , ( 2010 ) , 2065 - 2074 . 2 . Chesbrough , H . Open Innovation : The New Imperative for Creating and Profiting from Technology . Harvard Business School Press , 2003 . 3 . Cooper , R . G . and Brentan , U . d . Criteria for Screening New Industrial Products . Industrial Marketing Management , 13 , 3 , ( 1984 ) , 149 - 156 . 4 . Cosley , D . , Lam , S . K . , Albert , I . , Konstan , J . A . , & Riedl , J . , Is Seeing Believing ? How Recommender Interfaces Affect Users ' Opinions . In CHI , ( 2003 ) , 585 - 592 . 5 . Eagly , A . H . and Chaiken , S . Attitude Structure and Function . In Gilbert , D . , Fiske , S . T . & Lindzey , G . eds . Handbook of Social Psychology , New York , 269 - 322 . 6 . Fischhoff , B . Value Elicitation : Is There Anything in There ? American Psychologist , 46 , 8 , ( 1991 ) , 835 - 847 . 7 . Hacker , S . and Ahn , L . v . , Matchin : Eliciting User Preferences with an Online Game . In CHI , ( 2009 ) , 1207 - 1216 . 8 . Holtzblatt , L . and Tierney , M , Measuring the Effectiveness of Social Media on an Innovation Process . CHI , 2011 , 697 - 712 . 9 . Hsee , C . K . The Evaluability Hypothesis : An Explanation for Preference Reversals between Joint and Separate Evaluations of Alternatives . Organizational Behavior and Human Decision Processes , 67 , 3 , ( 1996 ) , 247 - 257 . 10 . Hullman , J . , Adar , E . , & Shah , P . , The Impact of Social Information on Visual Judgments . In CHI , ( 2011 ) , 1461 - 1470 . 11 . Kostakos , V . , Is the Crowd ' s Wisdom Biased ? A Quantitative Analysis of Three Online Communities . In Intl Conf on Computational Science and Engineering , ( 2009 ) , 251 - 255 . 12 . Osborn , A . F . Applied Imagination : Principles and Procedures of Creative Problem Solving . Charles Scribner ' s Sons , New York , NY , 1963 . 13 . Otterbacher , J . , Helpfulness ' in online communities : a measure of message quality . In CHI , ( 2009 ) , 955 - 964 . 14 . Phillips , K . A . , Johnson , F . R . , & Maddala , T . Measuring What People Value : A Comparison of “Attitude” and “Preference” Surveys . Health Services Research , 36 , 7 , ( 2002 ) , 1659 – 1679 . 15 . Riedl , C . , S , W . , JM , L . , & H . , K . , Exploring Large Collections of Ideas in Collaborative Settings through Visualization . In Proceedings of 20th Annual Workshop on Information Technologies and Systems , ( 2010 ) . 16 . Salganik , M . J . and Watts , D . J . Web - Based Experiments for the Study of Collective Social Dynamics in Cultural Markets . Topics in Cognitive Science , 1 , ( 2009 ) , 439 - 468 . 17 . Sarma , A . D . , Sarma , A . D . , Gollapudi , S . , & Panigrahy . , R . , Ranking Mechanisms in Twitter - like Forums . In Proc . ACM Conference on Web Search and Data Mining , ( 2010 ) , 21 - 30 . 18 . Slovic , P . The Construction of Preference . American Psychologist , 50 , 5 , ( 1995 ) , 364 – 371 . Session : Tools for Analysis February 11 - 15 , 2012 , Seattle , WA , USA 1186