PERSONNEL PSYCHOLOGY 1994 , 47 PAY PREFERENCES AND JOB SEARCH DECISIONS : A PERSON - ORGANIZATION FIT PERSPECTIVE DANIEL M . CABLE , TIMOTHY A . JUDGE Department of Human Resource Studies Cornell University The present study investigated the degree to which pay preferences in - fluenced job search decisions in both hypothetical and actual organi - zations , and the degree to which preferences for particular compensa - tion attributes depended on job seekers ' dispositional characteristics . Based on prior theory and research , we hypothesized that certain pay systems generally would be preferred by job seekers , that these pay systems would affect applicant attraction to organizations , and that dif - ferent types of job seekers would be attracted to different types of pay systems . The sample comprised 171 college students who were seek - ing jobs during the study , and who represented six majors , three de - gree types , and two degree levels . Experimental policy - capturing re - sults and results obtained about actual companies with which the job seekers would potentially interview supported hypotheses that organi - zations perceived to offer high pay levels , flexible benefits , individual - based pay , and fixed pay policies were more attractive to job seekers . Results fiirther suggested that the attractiveness of these pay policies may be heightened by greater levels of fit between individual person - ality traits and compensation system characteristics . Pay is an important job attribute ( Jurgensen , 1978 ) and has a sig - nificant influence on job attractiveness and subsequent job choice deci - sions ( Rynes , 1987 ; Rynes , Schwab , & Heneman , 1983 ) . Research on the relationship between compensation systems and job attractiveness typically has examined the effects of pay level ( Barber , 1991 ; Gerhart & Milkovich , 1992 ) . However , components of pay systems other than pay This article is based on the first author ' s master ' s thesis completed under the super - vision of the second author . This study was funded by the Center for Advanced Human Resource Studies , Cornell University . An earlier version of this paper was presented at the Ninth Annual Conference of the Society for Industrial and Organizational Psychology , Nashville , TN , April , 1994 . The authors thank Bob Bretz , Barry Gerhart , Rick Jacobs , Theresa Welbourne , and three anonymous reviewers for comments made on earlier drafts of this paper . We also thank Mark Savage and Fred Antil for assistance with administration of the study and Ibve Hammer and Martin Wells for their help throughout the study . Correspondence and requests for reprints should be addressed to Timothy A . Judge , Department of Human Resource Studies , School of Industrial and Labor Relations , 393 Ives Hall , Cornell University , Ithaca , NY 14853 - 3901 . COPYRIGHT ©1994 PERSONNEL PSYCHOLOGY , INC . 318 PERSONNEL PSYCHOLOGY level may affect the value job seekers place on organizational induce - ments . For instance , an incentive plan based on individual achievement may be more attractive to job seekers than a seniority - based plan , even if the expected level of pay is the same ( Lawler , 1966 ) . Although sev - eral studies have examined individuals ' preferences for merit pay versus seniority - based pay ( e . g . , Beer & Gery , 1972 ; Heneman , 1990 ; Lawler , 1966 ) , no research has investigated general pay preferences in total com - pensation packages . This appears to be an important omission because pay policies are commonly thought to be malleable , allowing organiza - tions to implement pay systems that have a positive influence on orga - nizational effectiveness ( Lawler , 1981 ) . If organizations knew the pay preferences of their ideal applicants , it might be possible to increase their attractiveness without affecting labor costs . Furthermore , compensation systems may act as signaling devices to job seekers , affecting job and organizational attractiveness by provid - ing information about less visible organizational attributes ( Gerhart & Milkovich , 1992 ; Rynes & Miller , 1983 ) . Rynes ( 1987 ) suggested that " compensation systems are capable of attracting ( or repelling ) the right kinds of people because they communicate so much about an organiza - tion ' s philosophy , values , and practices " ( p . 190 ) . Thus , while some pay system characteristics may affect attraction directly , such that the ma - jority of job seekers in a targeted selection pool interpret them similarly , certain types of individuals may attach different meanings and values to pay policies . Because business and human resource strategies appear to require certain types of employees , organizations may increase their ef - fectiveness by designing pay systems that attract the right kinds of people ( Rynes , 1987 ) . Self - selection based on compensation policies is consistent with the tenets of person - organization fit . It has been widely claimed that job seekers make search and choice decisions based on their perception of the match between their dispositions and organizational culture ( Bretz , Ash , & Dreher , 1989 ; Judge & Bretz , 1992 ; Schneider , 1987 ; Turban & Keon , 1993 ) . Although job seekers can acquire information about an or - ganization ' s culture through a number of subtle sources ( e . g . , interview - ers , product reputation ) , human resource systems are often directly ob - servable ( Bretz & Judge , in press ) . Furthermore , Judge and Bretz ( 1992 ) suggested that job choices based on fit may operate only when informa - tion about organizational values is salient to job seekers . Because pay systems are important and observable ( Lawler , 1981 ) , they are likely to be salient and may be especially important in job search decisions based on fit ( Rynes , 1987 ) . However , although certain relationships between dispositions and compensation attributes have been examined ( Bretz & Judge , in press ; Bretz et al . , 1989 ; Turban & Keon , 1993 ) , there is a CABLE AND JUDGE 319 lack of systematic empirical research on the relationship between total compensation systems , pay preferences , and job attractiveness . Total compensation systems can be conceptualized along a number of dimensions ( Gomez - Mejia & Balkin , 1992 ) , some of which are more strategic or central to the goals of organizations than others . Milkovich and Newman ( 1990 ) asserted that only those pay system decisions af - fecting the success of a business are considered strategic . Accordingly , although other researchers have assembled more exhaustive lists of com - pensation decisions , the pay attributes chosen for investigation in the present study are based on the strategic compensation dimensions cited by Gerhart and Milkovich ( 1992 ) and Milkovich and Newman ( 1990 ) . These include external competitiveness ( e . g . , pay level ) , internal pay structure ( e . g . , pay hierarchy ) , employee contributions ( e . g . , individual vs . group contribution ) , benefits ( e . g . , flexible vs . fixed ) , and alternatives to traditional systems ( e . g . , pay - at - risk , skill - based pay ) . Thus , in response to a void in the research literature , the present study presents an exploratory attempt to answer three research questions about pay and job attractiveness . First , Are certain types of pay systems generally preferred by job seekers in a targeted selection pool ? Second , Do different types of pay systems affect attraction to actual organiza - tions ? Finally , Are different types of job seekers attracted to different types of pay systems ? Hypotheses An effort was made to include at least one pay attribute from each of the strategic choices cited by Gerhart and Milkovich ( 1992 ) because it appears appropriate to begin systematic research on the effects of pay systems on job search with the most consequential pay decisions . However , the possibility existed that job seekers would not be familiar enough with the pay policies to distinguish between them . For instance , pay structure , concerning the number of pay levels and the rate of pro - gression through a pay hierarchy ( Milkovich & Newman , 1990 ) , was not considered relevant to the purposes of this study because the target pop - ulation had very little full - time work experience . Pay structure is more pertinent to job seekers who have held full - time positions and have had the opportunity to work within a pay structure ( e . g . , receive promotions ) . A pilot study ( AT = 29 ) conducted to assess job seekers ' familiarity with the pay policies suggested that respondents were familiar with the different pay policies and could distinguish between them . The study asked individuals about five different pay attributes ( e . g . , " How familiar are you with contingent pay systems ? " ) , and responses were to a graphic 320 PERSONNEL PSYCHOLOGY rating scale which ranged from 1 = " very familiar " to 4 = " no knowl - edge . " The average familiarity to the pay attributes was as follows : flex - ible benefits , M = 1 . 66 { SD = . 67 ) ; group - based pay , M = 1 . 69 { SD = . 66 ) ; contingent pay , M = 1 . 90 { SD = . 62 ) ; knowledge - based pay , M = 1 . 93 { SD = . 75 ) ; pay structure , M = 2 . 07 { SD = . 66 ) . Analyses con - firmed that respondents were significantly less familiar with pay struc - ture and rated it as significantly less important to them ( p < . 01 ) than the other attributes included in this study . The pay attributes used in this study appear in Tkble 1 . Each attribute is considered in turn . In general , it is expected that certain compensa - tion system attributes will be preferred by job seekers , that these pay attributes will positively affect job search decisions , and that the attrac - tiveness of different pay policies will vary based on individuals ' disposi - tional characteristics . Pay Level It is generally accepted that individuals prefer high levels of pay , and that high pay levels will attract greater quantities of higher quality applicants ( Lakhani , 1988 ; Yellen , 1984 ) . Rynes et al . ( 1983 ) found that pay level acted as a hurdle in job choice decisions , where nonpecuniary job factors affected decisions only if a predetermined level of pay was offered . Jurgensen ( 1978 ) found pay to be the most important job factor when respondents were asked what employees other than themselves looked for in a job , a question that may have reduced social desirability effects . Similarly , Gerhart and Milkovich ( 1990 ) suggested that pay levels might have their most direct effects on employee attraction . Thus , Hypothesis 1 : Job seekers will be more attracted to organizations that offer high pay levels . Pay is probably attractive to most individuals because it offers them a corresponding level of purchasing power . However , pay level may be more important to some job seekers than to others ( Bretz & Judge , in press ) . A personality dimension that may infiuence the relationship be - tween pay level and applicant attraction is materialism , or the impor - tance one attaches to worldly possessions . Richins and Dawson ( 1992 ) proposed that materialistic individuals place high value on material ac - quisitions and the means to acquire possessions , and Wachtel and Blatt ( 1990 ) found that materialists required a higher income to live what they perceived as a comfortable life . Because level of pay directly affects an CABLE AND JUDGE 321 individual ' s wealth and ability to acquire worldly possessions , more ma - terialistic job seekers would be expected to place greater importance on level of pay than would those low in materialism . Thus , Hypothesis 2 : Materialistic job seekers will prefer a higher pay level than will less materialistic job seekers . Flexible Benefits Flexible benefits plans , allowing choice among different types of ben - efits , may be beneficial to employees because they can choose less ex - pensive benefits with greater personal value . McLaughlin and Anderson { \ 99V ) suggested that fiexible benefits are more attractive to employees because they reduce tax liability and increase take - home cash . Barber , Dunham , and Formisano ( 1992 ) found that the implementation of a fiex - ible benefits plan positively affected benefits satisfaction and , to a lesser degree , job satisfaction . In accordance with past theory and research , it is expected that individuals will prefer fiexible benefits , and that flexible benefits will positively infiuence individuals ' job search decisions . Thus , Hypothesis 3 : Job seekers will prefer organizations that offer flexible ver - sus rigid benefits plans . Although a large number of organizations are turning to flexible ben - efits , some employees may view them more positively than others . Em - ployees may react negatively to the responsibility of choosing between benefits alternatives as well as the time investment required to learn about the benefits offered . Some support for this claim is derived from the fact that organizations are employing computerized expert systems to aid employees in choosing their benefits package ( Sturman & Milkovich , 1992 ) . Locus of control is a personality characteristic that appears re - lated to job seekers ' evaluations of fiexible benefits . Locus of control concerns the degree to which individuals believe that they control events in their lives ( internal locus of control ) or believe that the environment or chance controls events ( external locus of control ) ( Rotter , 1966 ) . Job seekers with an internal locus of control might be more attracted to sit - uations in which they have an opportunity to control their outcomes and may be more willing to invest the time and energy required to make ben - efits choices ; those who feel control is beyond their ability may consider the investment a needless aggravation . Accordingly , Miceli and Lane ( 1991 ) suggested that individuals ' control perceptions may affect their preferences for fiexible benefits . Thus , 322 PERSON > fEL PSYCHOLOGY Hypothesis 4 : Job seekers with an internal locus of control will be more attracted to flexible versus rigid benefits plans than will those with an external locus of control . Evaluative Focus : Individual - Versus Group - Based Pay Whether an organization evaluates and rewards individual or group performance presumably sends signals to job seekers concerning team - work expectations and organizational culture . Individuals may use these signals to compare organizations and to assess their desire to be eval - uated either as an individual or as part of a team . Expectancy the - ory suggests that , in general , job seekers will prefer individual - based pay plans because the attractiveness of an alternative is expected to in - crease as the links between personal efforts , results , and outcomes be - come more direct . Individual - oriented pay systems appear to create this motivating state more than group - based pay systems because job per - formance and subsequent rewards are more associated with individual contributions , leading to higher contingencies between individual con - tributions and rewards . Furthermore , when studying U . S . job seekers , this hypothesis is consistent with international research ( e . g . , Hofstede , 1980 ) which has suggested that the U . S . is the most individualistic so - ciety in the world . Concordant with predictions based on expectancy theory , Bretz and Judge ( in press ) found that job applicants preferred individual - based incentive systems . Similarly , a national random sample of employed adults indicated that of those respondents who preferred an incentive system , 22 % preferred an individual incentive system , while only 12 % preferred a company - wide system ( Bureau of National Affairs , 1988 ) . Thus , Hypothesis 5 : Job seekers will prefer organizations that offer individual - versus group - based pay systems . Just as cultures place different values on individualism and collec - tivism , intracultural variance is expected to exist among job seekers . In fact , individualism versus collectivism has been viewed as a dispo - sitional construct . Individualists prefer to work alone and place value on personal goals , autonomy , and privacy ( Wagner & Moch , 1986 ) , whereas collectivists desire high levels of interaction , have a high degree of reliance on others , and have a cooperative disposition ( Bretz et al . , 1989 ) . Furthermore , collectivists derive satisfaction from group accom - plishment ( Earley , 1989 ) , and they feel individuals should be willing to make sacrifices for the sake of the group ( Wagner & Moch , 1986 ) . This personality characteristic is directly related to a pay system ' s evaluative CABLE AND JUDGE 323 focus . Pay systems that emphasize results produced through group in - terdependence demand a cooperative work effort , whereas those that reward individuals for their performance tend to demand individual ef - fort . Collectivists should prefer evaluation on group achievement and fit best in a group - based reward environment , whereas individualists should desire rewards for their individual performance , such as those provided through individual merit pay . Bretz et al . ( 1989 ) and Bretz and Judge ( in press ) offered empirical support for the relationship between collectivism and group - based pay . Bretz et al . tested the hypothesis that individuals with greater needs for affiliation would be more attracted to group - based reward systems , find - ing limited support . The authors suggested that need for affiliation may not have been the construct best suited to explain individuals ' propensity toward group - based reward systems . Based on this suggestion , Bretz and Judge developed a two - item team - orientation scale which measured de - sire for a group - based pay system ( e . g . , " members of a team should get the same rewards " ) . Although scores on this measure were related to the attractiveness of organizations with team - based pay systems , there is some question whether the authors examined the relationship between team orientation and desire for organizations with group - based pay , or whether they simply correlated two measures of desire for group - based pay . The present paper extends Bretz and Judge ' s findings with a gen - eral personality scale , providing a fuller examination of the relationship between personality and the attractiveness of organizations ' pay systems . Hypothesis 6a : Highly individualistic job seekers will be more attracted to individual - versus group - based pay plans than will highly collectivistic job seekers . The characteristic of self - efficacy also appears relevant to individu - als ' proclivity toward individual - versus group - based pay systems . Per - ceived self - efficacy is concerned with judgments of how well one can execute courses of action ( Bandura , 1982 ) . Bandura proposed that self - efficacy judgments influence choice of activities and envirorunental set - tings since people avoid activities they believe exceed their capabilities , but they undertake those activities that they judge themselves capable of completing successfully . Expectancy theory predicts that situations will have higher expected value as the expectancy ( the link between action and accomplishment ) increases . Accordingly , individuals with more confidence in their personal ability ( high self - efficacy ) may per - ceive greater expectancy in their actions , and they may be more attracted to pay systems that link their individual behavior to rewards . Thus , 324 PERSONNEL PSYCHOLOGY Hypothesis 6b : Job seekers with high self - efficacy will be more attracted to an individual - versus a group - based pay plan than will those with low self - efficacy . Pay Stability In the context of agency theory , making employees ' pay contingent on organizational outcomes aligns agents ' interests with Uiose of princi - pals . However , agents are typically more averse to financial risks than are principals because agents are less able to diversify their risks ( Eisen - hardt , 1989 ) . Furthermore , while contingent pay systems make rewards partly dependent upon employees ' performance , pay also maybe subject to unstable factors beyond employees ' control , such as economic climate . Consistent with research that has found negative relationships between risk perceptions and attractiveness judgments ( e . g . , Weber , Anderson , & Birnbaum , 1992 ) , it is expected that job seekers generally will prefer fixed over variable pay . This prediction is also consistent with findings indicating that 63 % of a large national sample preferred a fixed wage or salary ( Bureau of National Affairs , 1988 ) . Thus , Hypothesis 7 : Job seekers will be more attracted to organizations that offer fixed versus contingent pay . The possibility of losing a portion of pay is expected to be undesir - able to most individuals . However , it is not expected that all individuals are equally averse to the risk inherent in contingent pay systems . Rynes ( 1987 ) and Olian and Rynes ( 1984 ) asserted that while little research is available , contingent pay systems probably attract certain types of appli - cants . Weber et al . ( 1992 ) suggested that while ratings of risk and at - tractiveness were inversely related , the two judgment tasks also showed systematic differences , and that risk evaluation is subject to individual differences . Three characteristics that are theoretically related to con - tingent pay are risk aversion , self - efficacy , and locus of control , discussed in turn below . Gomez - Mejia and Balkin ( 1989 ) found that employees with a low willingness to take risks were more likely to experience withdrawal cog - nitions if they worked for a firm utilizing variable compensation . Maehr and Videbeck ( 1968 ) suggested that risk and uncertainty actually may be motivating to a risk - inclined individual and that a risk - taker can be ex - pected to respond to unpredictable incentives differently from a low - risk person . Thus , risk aversion is expected to infiuence individuals ' prefer - ences for a fixed versus contingent pay system . CABLE AND JUDGE 325 Hypothesis 8a : Job seekers with high risk aversion will be more attracted to a fixed versus a contingent pay system than will those with low risk aversion . Because self - efficacy is concerned with judgments of how well one can execute courses of action ( Bandura , 1982 ) , individuals with high self - efficacy should be more attracted to pay systems that link their high performance to rewards . Contingent pay systems specify outcomes that must be achieved to activate a payout . Thus , it is expected that those individuals with higher self - efficacy will be more attracted to a contin - gent pay system in which they can maximize their outcomes . Consistent with this logic , Miceli and Lane ( 1991 ) noted that workers with high self - confidence may prefer more of their pay be contingent on performance . Thus , Hypothesis 8b : Job seekers with high self - efficacy will be more attracted to a contingent versus a fixed pay system than will those with low self - efficacy . Locus of control concerns the degree to which individuals believe that they ( vs . the environment ) control events . If individuals perceive that outcomes are contingent upon their behavior ( internal locus of con - trol ) , they should be more attracted to pay systems that base rewards on their behavior than if they believed rewards were based on chance . Ac - cordingly , Miceli and Lane ( 1991 ) suggested that employees with an ex - ternal locus of control may prefer a seniority - based system because they may perceive that their performance is not within their control . Thus , Hypothesis 8c : Job seekers with an internal locus of control will be more attracted to a contingent versus a fixed pay system than will those with an external locus of control . Pay Base In some organizations where fiexibilify is valued , employees are cross - trained to develop their knowledge of different positions . To promote learning , skill - based pay may be adopted . Contrasted with traditional job - based pay systems , where employees are compensated according to the value of the position they occupy , skill - based pay systems reward employees for gaining proficiency in different positions within the or - ganization . Ledford ( 1991 ) suggested that skill - based pay encourages a high - commitment work force and tends to be used in organizations with high levels of employee involvement . It is anticipated that job - based pay will be more desirable to most job seekers than skill - based pay due to the uncertainfy and additional 326 PERSONNEL PSYCHOLOGY investment skill - based pay is likely to represent . Although skill - based pay is an increasingly popular pay choice among employers , it is a rela - tively new pay program with little exposure among white - collar jobs and service organizations ( for an exception see Ledford , 1991 ) . In a pilot study it was found that understanding of skill - based pay systems was the lowest of the pay policies examined in the present study . Furthermore , it is not likely that job seekers would have worked under a skill - based pay system in the past , although they probably have had considerable expe - rience with job - based pay . Skill - based pay , then , is likely to represent a more uncertain situation to most job seekers . Ambiguity , like risk , is generally avoided because it adds to the total uncertainty of the situa - tion ( Einhorn & Hogarth , 1985 ) . Also , as described above , skill - based pay plans demand greater employee commitment and energy . Employ - ees who are successful in the position into which they were hired may not receive additional rewards because they are expected to learn new skills . The conditions of a less certain but more demanding environment are expected to be undesirable to most job seekers . Thus , Hypothesis 9 : Job seekers will be more attracted to organizations that offer job - based versus skill - based pay . Although job seekers generally are expected to prefer job - based over skill - based pay , individuals ' preferences may vary , and those organiza - tions with skili - based pay might attract different types of applicants than those with a traditional pay system . Self - efficacy appears to be a relevant construct in understanding individuals ' attractions to skill - based pay sys - tems . Employees working under skill - based pay systems are rewarded for skills tiiey are capable of using , and pay raises follow new skill ac - quisitions . While job - based pay plans often make pay increases depen - dent on performance , skill - based pay places significance on continuous personal improvement and maintained proficiency . These reward char - acteristics appear more suitable for individuals who have high belief in their abilities . Skill - based pay plans generally are thought to create a more challenging work environment for individuals , and a large body of self - efficacy literature suggests that those with a strong sense of efficacy exert greater effort to master challenges ( Bandura , 1982 ) . In fact , Tosi and Tosi ( 1986 ) suggested that employees with low ability levels will be less satisfied with skill - based pay than will those with higher ability levels . Thus , Hypothesis 10 : Job seekers with high self - efficacy will be more attracted to a skill - based versus a job - based pay plan than will those with low self - efficacy . CABLE AND JUDGE 327 Method Setting , Subjects , and Procedure Subjects were engineering students and hotel administration students approaching graduation at a large northeastern university . Eighty - eight percent of respondents were interviewing for jobs at the time of survey distribution , 2 % were interviewing " this semester , " 4 % were interview - ing " next semester , " and 5 % were interviewing " next year . " Data were collected with surveys which took approximately 45 minutes to complete . The target sample included 360 students from two schools ( engineer - ing and hotel administration ) consisting of six majors ( electrical engi - neering , chemical engineering , operations research , computer science , materials engineering , and hotel administration ) and three degree types ( bachelor of arts , bachelor of science , and master of science ) . Differ - ent surveys were given to the subjects depending on the specific com - panies with which they were eligible to interview , which depended on their school , major , and degree . The study was conducted with the sup - port of the colleges ' placement centers , and all respondents completed informed consent forms . Confidentiality of individuals ' responses was assured , and participation was voluntary . All participants received $ 10 , and as an incentive participants completing the survey 1 week after distri - bution were entered into a lottery worth $ 100 . One hundred seventy - one usable surveys were returned ( 48 % ) . Available data on nonrespondents ( major , degree , gender , and college ) were collected and . compared to respondents , and no significant differences were found . Although vari - ables more central to this study ( e . g . , ratings of pay systems ) would have been more relevant to such a comparison , respondents appeared rea - sonably representative of the target sample , at least among the charac - teristics being compared . Respondents ' ages ranged from 19 - 29 years with an average of 21 . 2 years ( 5I > = 1 . 25 years ) . Seventy - one percent of respondents were men , and 77 % were Caucasian . Degree - related work experience ranged from 0 - llyears , with an average of 1 . 17years ( 5D = 1 . 65 years ) . Grade - point erages ranged from 2 . 0 - 4 . 0 , with a mean of 3 . 11 ( SD = 0 . 45 ) ; in the analyses , grade - point averages were standardized within major and de - gree level to provide an estimate of academic achievement controlling for difficulty of program . Seventy - seven percent of the respondents were senior undergraduates , and 14 % were graduate students . Twenty - four percent of respondents majored in electrical engineering , 22 % in hotel administration , 22 % in mechanical engineering , 15 % in operations re - search , 13 % in chemical engineering , and 4 % in computer science . 328 PERSONNEL PSYCHOLOGY Research Design and Measures We employed multiple methods to test the hypotheses , complement - ing results from an experimental design with job seekers ' percepfions of and attraction to actual companies . While each of these methods has inherent weaknesses ( see limitations section ) , each also offers unique information about pay preferences and the effects of pay systems on job search decisions . Specifically , policy capturing was employed to assess general pay preferences , as well as the relative effect of each pay char - acterisfic on job attractiveness . The experimental design permits strong causal inferences by eliminating the possibility that a company ' s image or reputation could infiuence job seekers ' perceptions of its pay systems . However , all factors known to be relevant to job search decisions ( e . g . , location ) cannot be included in a policy - capturing design . To assess the effects of pay systems on organizational pursuit when any job factors could infiuence job search decisions , we assessed pursuit intentions and pay system perceptions about relevant companies with which job seek - ers would potentially interview . Thus , these organization pursuit data support the generalizability of the policy - capturing results . Policy capturing . Participants studied a series of positions defined by their compensation system attributes then indicated their attraction to positions with those characteristics . The importance of each pay system attribute was assessed with regression equations , where the magnitude of the standardized beta weights represented the policy decisions used to evaluate the stimuli . This design is known as policy capturing and has been used to study job search and choice decisions ( Judge & Bretz , 1992 ; Rynes & Lawler , 1983 ; Rynes et al . , 1983 ; Zedeck , 1977 ) . Policy cap - turing is an alternative to direct estimation techniques , which give little indication of how rankings are used in actual decision making , demand greater self - insight than is likely to be possessed by decision makers , and are frequently criticized for eliciting responses subject to social desirabil - ity ( Jurgensen , 1978 ; Schwab , Rynes , & Aldag , 1987 ) . Policy capturing obviates these problems because individuals are placed more fully into the decision - making role , where subjects evaluate positions rather than directly state preferences for specific position factors . Also , the level of experimental control in policy - capturing designs facilitates causal in - ferences , enabling researchers to better assess the effects of the within - subjects factors . When conducting research on job attractiveness , level of pay must be realistic if correct interpretations of independent variables ' effects are to be drawn ( Judge & Bretz , 1992 ; Rynes et al . , 1983 ) . In the present study , average starting pay levels and standard deviations were calculated for each individual ( by major and degree ; e . g . , electrical engineers with CABLE AND JUDGE 329 bachelor ' s degrees ) on the basis of placement office records of recent salary offers . The standard deviation was added to and subtracted from each individual ' s mean to calculate the respective high and low pay level manipulations seen in Table 1 . This corresponded roughly to the 25th and 75th percentiles of job offers within each major and degree . Dichotomous conditions were used to define the compensation sys - tem variables ( Hoffman , Slovic , & Rorer , 1968 ) , and each of the manip - ulations are listed in Tkble 1 . The manipulations were derived from Ger - hart and Milkovich ( 1992 ) , Milkovich and Newman ( 1990 ) , and Gomez - Mejia and Balkin ( 1992 ) . The gains - to - loss ratio in the contingent pay condition was based on evidence that employees charge organizations ( in the form of pay premiums ) to accept a portion of the risk that the organi - zation would otherwise bear ( Gerhart & Milkovich , 1992 ) . The percent - age of variability was adapted from research conducted by Drankoski and Judge ( 1992 ) which suggested that variable pay plans affecting lower to middle management contained 15 % below - base loss and 25 % above - base gain . The pay system variables were completely crossed , creating every possible combination and permitting assessment of the relative impor - tance placed on each factor by respondents ( Hoffman et al . , 1968 ) . This created 32 discrete scenarios ( 2 ^ ) . To assess respondents ' reliability be - tween the scenarios , 4 random scenarios were replicated . To minimize order effects , the resulting 36 scenarios were presented in random or - der and each pay variable was presented randomly within each scenario . The dependent variable indicated respondents ' attraction to organiza - tions based on pay system characteristics ( e . g . , " How likely is it that you would actively pursue interviewing with this organization ? " ) . Subjects responded using a 7 - point graphic rating scale anchored by 1 = " highly unlikely " to 7 = " highly likely . " Reliability between the scenarios was as - sessed by computing the correlation between the response to each of the 4 duplicated scenarios ( e . g . , computing the correlation between the re - sponse to Scenario 1 and its duplicate . Scenario 33 ) , and then averaging these 4 correlations . This reliability analysis indicated that individuals responded consistently to the scenarios ( r = . 82 ) . A sample question from the policy - capturing study appears below . Assume that a position for which you interviewed possessed the follow - ing characteristics : • Pay increases in this organization are based on evaluations of individual achievement . • The starting annual salary for this position is $ 38 , 570 . • Employees ' pay is fixed at the assigned level . • Employees ' pay reflects the value of their position to the company and raises are based on job performance . • Employees in this company are given an amount of cash to spend on benefits options . 330 PERSONNEL PSYCHOLOGY o •a II rs § I ^ • ^ •Sb X o XI T3 ' Eb 3T3 i £ 6 I I i as 3 O . T3 3 •5 O B e n e II T ^ T3 O •If II li H CM CABLE AND JUDGE 331 Organization pursuit data . Rynes ( 1991 ) has lamented that previous studies on job search and choice have concentrated on contrived situ - ations . In the present study , individuals indicated their willingness to pursue the organizations with which they were eligible to interview and reported their beliefs about those organizations ' pay systems . Surveys were created to ensure that each respondent answered questions ordy about those organizations relevant to his or her interviewing possibili - ties . Number of companies rated ranged from 9 - 18 per respondent , and there were 11 different versions of the survey ( e . g . . Chemical Engineer - ing , B . S . , N = 41 ; Computer Science , B . S . , N = 13 ) . Consistent with Rynes ( 1991 ) and Rynes et al . ( 1983 ) , information obtained about rel - evant organizations might be expected to have greater external validity than experimental data where characteristics are assigned to fictitious organizations . Respondents provided their perceptions of how each company paid their employees ( e . g . , employees responded to statements about each pay attribute for each organization such as , " I believe Air Product ' s pay ievel is very high " ) . Perceived pay systems ( from the job seeker ' s per - spective ) were assessed instead of actual pay policies ( from the com - pany ' s perspective ) because presumably it is job seekers ' perceptions that are used when they make decisions . Responses were anchored by a 5 - point graphic rating scale where 1 = " strongly disagree " and 5 = " strongly agree . " Because companies ' perceived pay systems and job seekers ' pursuit decisions were assessed with a survey , self - report bias could have af - fected the responses . In the present study , average pay perceptions were calculated and utilized for each organization . Consistent with Mowday and Sutton ( 1993 ) , perceptions about organizational contexts are more convincing when they are examined across a set of respondents . Since numerous individuals reported their perceptions of each organization ' s pay systems , the average perception for each organization represented a generalized cognizance across job seekers , reducing the possibility of self - report bias . To assess the reliability of the pay system perceptions for each orga - nization , an interrater reliability was calculated for each pay attribute . In this reliability analysis , individuals ' perceptions about a given organi - zation ' s pay systems were compared . Because interviewing companies specified certain types and levels of degrees which were eligible for in - terview assignments , different companies ' pay policies were reported by different numbers of respondents ( e . g . , 25 job seekers reported the poli - cies of Advanced Micro Devices , while only 6 reported for Intel Software 332 PERSONNEL PSYCHOLOGY Division ) . Consistent with Little and Rubin ( 1987 ) , a complete case anal - ysis was performed whereby the available data was maximized to calcu - late an unbiased reliability estimate . Specifically , an interrater reliability was calculated based on individuals ' reports for each pay variable across the organizations with enough responses to permit a reliability analy - sis . In this case , companies with at least 36 responses were included . After 36 responses per company , the number of responses diminished quickly , and further analyses could not be conducted . This sudden de - crease occurred because some organizations were so specific in their re - quirements that few responses were possible in our sample ( e . g . . Mo - torola Corporate was only interested in interviewing M . S . and Ph . D . can - didates in Mechanical and Electrical Engineering ) . The number of re - sponses after 36 per company also decreased because respondents were permitted to " write in " information about organizations which they were pursuing but which were not listed on their survey . This led to cases of only 1 or 2 reports for some companies ( e . g . , only 2 respondents were interviewing with Lockheed ) . Also consistent with Little and Rubin ( 1987 ) , we performed two sep - arate reliability analyses for each pay variable to assess whether trends or wide variations in reliability existed between companies with many responses compared to those with fewer responses . Specifically , we performed reliability analyses for those companies with at least 58 re - sponses , then for companies with at least 36 responses . We found only extremely minor differences between the analyses ( e . g . , the reliabilities within a given pay attribute were within . 04 ) . To account for any variation that did exist , we averaged the reliabilities to arrive at a final interrater reliability for each pay attribute . The final reliability analysis included a total of 38 companies , or 73 % of the organizations in this study . In - terrater reliabilities of the pay system attributes ranged from . 66 to . 76 with an average of . 71 . The reliability for each pay attribute appears in Table 1 . Thus , it appears that respondents had relatively consistent perceptions of how the organizations in the present study paid their em - ployees . Individuals also indicated their desire to pursue each organization ( e . g . , " rate the degree to which you would actively pursue obtaining a position with Air Products " ) on a graphic rating scale where 1 = " very little " and 5 = " very much . " Desire to actively pursue an organization was chosen over job choice as a dependent variable because most par - ticipants were currently involved in the interviewing , or job search , pro - cess , while few had yet made actual job choice decisions . Thus , using job search as a dependent variable was thought to enhance the validity of the study . Although more specific pursuit intentions ( e . g . , willingness CABLE AND JUDGE 333 to send a resume ) might have been used , general attraction to the orga - nization appeared appropriate in this initial investigation . Salancik and Pfeffer ( 1978 ) argued that the order of information presented in a survey may prime respondents and distort the results ob - tained in later survey sections . In this study , presentation of the policy - capturing and company assessment sections were systematically varied . This information was then used to construct a control variable repre - senting survey presentation order to reduce the possibility that priming would influence the effects of other variables in the analyses . Between - Subjects Measures Measures for each personality characteristic were chosen based on past research . In two cases , namely the constructs of individualism and risk - aversion , few options were available because the available scales had very few items ( e . g . , 4 ) and were relatively unestablished ( e . g . , em - ployed in one past study ) . To maximize the probability that the person - ality traits would be captured accurately , in some cases ( i . e . , for indi - vidualism / collectivism , locus of control , and risk aversion ) we combined questions that were not redundant from the best available scales . The resultant scales can be obtained from the authors . Materialism . Materialism was assessed using Richins and Dawson ' s ( 1992 ) 17 - item measure which assesses the importance a person places on possessions ( e . g . , " Some of the important achievements in life include acquiring material possessions " ) . The measure has exhibited high reli - abilities in past research , and in the present study the coefficient alpha internal consistency estimate was . 85 . Individualism / collectivism . The construct of individualism / collectiv - ism was assessed with a combination of scales . Erez and Earley ( 1987 ) created a four - item measure of collectivism based on Hofstede ( 1980 ) , and Earley ( 1989 ) later modified the scale . Items from the scales were utilized in the current study ( e . g . , " Only those who depend on themselves get ahead in life " ) . Items also were adapted from Steers and Braun - stein ' s ( 1976 ) Manifest Needs Ouestionnaire , a measure with specific reference to work settings ( e . g . , " I prefer to do my own work and let others do theirs " ) . Finally , items were slightly adapted from Wagner and Moch ' s ( 1986 ) work - based measure of collectivism ( e . g . , " Given the choice , I would rather do a job where I can work alone rather than do a job where I have to work with others in a work group " ) . The resulting internal consistency estimate of the 11 - item composite scale created for this study was . 74 . Self - efficacy . Self - efficacy was assessed with Sherer et al . ' s ( 1982 ) self - efficacy scale , which measures general self - efficacy ( e . g . , " When I 334 PERSONNEL PSYCHOLOGfY make plans , I am certain that I can make them work " ) with acceptable reliability and construct validity . The internal consistency estimate for this 17 - item scale was . 84 . Locus of control . To measure the extent to which individuals believe that they or their environment " control " their lives , many researchers have employed Rotter ' s locus of control scale ( Rotter , 1966 ) . However , other researchers have found methodological and psychometric prob - lems with this scale ( Collins , 1974 ) . In the current study , two scales were combined to measure locus of control . Levenson ' s ( 1981 ) inter - nality scale , like Rotter ' s scale , assesses individuals ' convictions in their ability to control events ( internal locus of control ) . This measure ex - hibits moderate reliabilities and has been used in a wide variety of sam - ples ( an extensive description of samples and norms can be found in Levenson , 1981 ) . The present study also utilized the personal efficacy scale of Paulhus ' ( 1983 ) spheres of control measure . Both scales ap - pear to demonstrate better psychometric properties than Rotter ' s scale ( Lefcourt , 1991 ) . The internal consistency estimate for this combined 17 - item scale was . 72 . Risk aversion . Risk aversion was measured in the present study with a scale developed by Slovic ( 1972 ) ( e . g . , " I am not willing to take risks when choosing a job or a company to work for " ) . The measure has exhibited high reliability in organizational research ( Gomez - Mejia & Balkin , 1989 ) . This four - item scale was combined with two risk aversion items developed by Drankoski and Judge ( 1992 ) ( e . g . , " I view risk of a job as a situation to be avoided at all costs " ) . The resulting internal consistency estimate of this six - item scale was . 72 . Other characteristics . Each respondent ' s major , education , age , years of relevant work experience , sex , race , and grade - point average were assessed with specific questions on the survey . Respondents also indi - cated when they were interviewing for jobs , and they estimated their job opportunities in the present job market . Results Policy - Capturing Analyses The means , standard deviations , and correlations among the vari - ables used in the policy - capturing analysis appear above the diagonal in Tkble 2 . Multiple regression analysis was used to estimate individuals ' general pay preferences , and the relative importance of each compen - sation system attribute . With each of the 171 respondents making 36 job pursuit decisions , 6 , 156 observations were available for the analysis ( actual number of observations was smaller due to listwise deletion of CABLE AND JUDGE 335 } a ' " ' 09 3 1 8 8 00 8 o 1 8 8 8 8 S § S 1 888 888 888 888 oo 10 0 00 1 88 88 88 88 49 42 0 02 0 8 8 00 8 ^ o S ? 1 88 88 88 88 ? 20 0 8 8 8 1 55 0 15 0 8 8 1 . 05 50 0 00 - . 09 0 1 1 55 0 83 1 o • * 1 8 1 18888888 gss 1 ^ p vq r f i ' r g S g8 gS f ss S8 I I I gsgs I I I S - J S ^ S5 ' ^ * * ^ r i ' • f r t - l ^ ^ H ^ H . . H o o o o o 00 g f f I I s s s sg ; g I I I I O \ ( N O \ ON O \ ' \ \ ' \ ' CO Tf m ^ o r ^ p p p p p l ' • l ' • • S8 p * - ; " - ; ' r 8 op i " r I I I s s g ss I I • r S o m o ^ in . . - ^ - ^ fiP I I S t 336 PERSONNEL PSYCHOLOGY missing values ; post hoc analyses revealed that removing the four repli - cated scenarios had no effect on the results ) . Because pay preferences were assessed in the context of job search , relevant control variables were used to better esfimate the true effects of the pay system attributes . Consistent with past research ( e . g . . Judge & Bretz , 1992 ) , individuals ' academic achievement and levels of job experi - ence were expected to negatively influence the probability of pursuing an organization and were controlled for in the analysis . Academic achieve - ment was represented by subjects ' grade - point average , standardized within their major and degree type . Because job seekers might be more attracted to a posifion in a fight labor market , respondents ' perceived labor market alternatives were controlled . Consistent with Judge and Bretz ( 1992 ) , demographic characterisfics including gender , race , and age were also entered in to the equation as controls . Because individ - uals in different degree programs ( bachelor ' s vs . master ' s ) might face somewhat different labor markets , a dummy variable was created and entered into the equation . In order to control for the possibility that indi - viduals may be less likely to pursue posifions as they draw closer to their job search , interviewing proximity also was controlled ( ranging from 1 = " currently interviewing " to 5 = " more than a year " ) . Finally , the or - der of survey presentation was controlled by including a dummy variable represenfing the order of the survey . To assess the effects of the between - subjects factors ( e . g . , gender ) on job pursuit in the policy - capturing design , these factors were appended to each judgment situation made by respondents ( 36 for each individ - ual ) . As Judge and Bretz ( 1992 ) noted , this is stafistically appropriate because each scenario judgment represents an independent observation and is used as a dependent variable . This process is also conceptually valid because each between - subject variable may influence individuals ' judgments in each scenario . For instance , labor market alternatives may influence each job pursuit decision in each hypothefical job scenario . Because between - subjects variables have been duplicated with each sce - nario , however , they are no longer independent observations and there is a consequent positive correlafion between error terms . This autocor - relation violates an assumpfion of ordinary least squares regression , and can result in biased standard errors and t - values ( Dielman , 1991 ) . In the present study , the degree of autocorrelation was assessed with the Durbin - Watson statistic ( d ) . The null hypothesis of no autocorrelafion was rejected ( d = 1 . 12 ) , indicating that the disturbances were signifi - cantly correlated ( je = - 44 , p < . 01 ) , and that ordinary least squares regression was not appropriate . To provide unbiased estimates of the er - ror terms , generalized least squares was used . Generalized least squares regression produces unbiased estimates of regression parameters and CABLE AND JUDGE TABLE 3 Regression Estimates Predicting Desire to Pursue Position ( Generalized Least Squares ) Variable Control variables Grade - point average Work experience MaleWhiteAgeMaster ' s vs . bachelor ' s student Semesters before interviewing Order of survey presentation Labor market alternatives HvDothesized main effects High ( vs . low ) pay level Individual ( vs . group ) focus Fixed ( vs . contingent ) pay Rigid ( vs . flexible ) benefits Job - based ( vs . skill - based ) pay Policv - capturina results / 3 - . 125 * - . 139 * + . 067 * - . 063 * + . 025 * + . 092 * + . 033 * + . 025 * - . 021 + . 500 * + . 198 * + . 141 * " - . 091 * ' + . 128 * " SB . 011 • . 012 ' . 011 • . 011 • . 012 ' . 011 . 011 . 011 . 011 • . 011 ' . 011 . 011 . 011 . 011 337 Organization pursuit results P - . 008 + . 038 - . 009 - . 022 - . 053 * + . 045 * + . 007 - . 015 + . 071 * * + . 169 * * + . 041 * + . 131 * * - . 132 * * + . 009 SB . 025 . 027 . 024 . 024 . 029 . 028 . 025 . 024 . 025 . 033 . 024 . 025 . 034 . 025 * p < . 05 ; * * p < . oi error terms and is thus well - suited to deal with autocorrelated errors ( Hanushek & Jackson , 1977 ) . The first columns of Tkble 3 provide the regression results from the policy - capturing analysis . The main effects of the pay system variables were all significant and in the predicted direction . As a group , individ - uals were significantly more attracted to positions with high pay level , individual - based pay , fixed pay , fiexible benefits , and job - based pay . The standardized beta weights for the compensafion characteristics also pro - vide an indication of the relafive importance of each variable to the re - spondents . Pay level was the most consequential pay system characteris - fic , followed by individual - based pay , fixed pay , job - based pay , and flex - ible benefits . Consistent with past research , individuals with higher grade - point av - erages and more work experience were less attracted to a given job , pre - sumably because these job seekers perceived they had more job opportu - nities than did individuals with lower grade - point averages and less work experience . Three demographic variables ( gender , race , & age ) also sig - nificantly affected job attractiveness such that males , non - whites , and older respondents were more likely to pursue a posifion . Bachelor ' s stu - dents and individuals closer to the process of job search and choice ( e . g . , interviewing respondents ) were less likely to pursue a posifion . Finally , the order of survey presentafion had a significant effect , suggesfing that individuals were more likely to pursue a posifion if they responded to the 338 PERSOlSnSfEL PSYCHOLOGY personality scales before stating pursuit intentions . While the effect is not large , this finding supports Salancik and Pfeffer ' s ( 1978 ) arguments that priming may be a factor to control for in experimental research . Be - cause the influence of this variable was accounted for in the equation , however , the effects of the other variables on job search should be unbi - ased by priming effects . Organization Pursuit Analyses The means , standard deviations , and correlations among the com - pany variables appear below the diagonal in Table 2 . To assess the effects of actual companies ' perceived pay policies on the attractiveness of those organizations , individuals ' pursuit of a particular organization ( e . g . , " I would very much like to pursue a position with Air Products " ) was pre - dicted with the average perception of that organization ' s pay policies ( e . g . , the average response to , " I believe Air Products has a group - based pay plan " across all respondents ) . The decision to analyze individual pursuit decisions rather than the mean pursuit of each organization ( e . g . , an organizational - level analysis ) was consistent with research suggesting that results obtained from an organizational level of analysis , but inter - preted as individual - level decisions , are subject to the ecological fallacy ( e . g . , Sackett & Larson , 1992 ) . Also , an organizational - level analysis would not have permitted controlling for many individual differences known to be important in job search decisions ( e . g . , grade - point average , major , work experience ) . However , results from an organizational - level analysis were entirely consistent with the results reported in this paper ( e . g . , the beta coefficients for high pay level , individual focus , fixed pay , rigid benefits , and job - based pay are . 36 , . 08 , . 29 , . 33 , and - . 01 , respec - tively ; the first four variables were significant at the . 01 level . ) The data set used in this analysis was created with a procedure simi - lar to that described in the policy - capturing design , where each respon - dent ' s between - subjects variables ( e . g . , gender ) were duplicated for each organizational pursuit decision ( average number of company pursuit de - cisions was 12 ) . The degree of autocorrelation was again assessed with the Durbin - Watson statistic , yielding an average serial correlation be - tween the errors of . 18 . While this correlation is substantially lower than the policy - capturing results , the Durbin - Watson statistic ( d = 1 . 64 ) fell within the range of values for which the test is said to be inconclusive . One alternative is to treat inconclusive values as if they suggested auto - correlation ( Dielman , 1991 ) . To ensure conservative and unbiased es - timates of the regression parameters and error terms , generalized least squares regression again was used . CABLE AND JUDGE 339 The second columns of Thble 3 provide the results fi - om the organi - zafion pursuit analysis . The results offer further support for four of five hypotheses , generally reinforcing the policy - capturing results . Pay level again was the most important pay variable in relafion to organizafional attractiveness , and individuals again were more attracted to organiza - fions that were perceived to offer flexible benefits , individual - based pay , and fixed pay . The significance of these results , as well as the relafive in - fluence of each pay variable on organizafional attracfiveness , replicates the results from the experimental policy - capturing analysis . Contrary to the results of the policy - capturing data , however , whether companies were perceived as basing pay on skills rather than merit had no signif - icant effect on their job search intenfions . The control variables were less prcdicfive in this analysis : Individuals who perceived more job op - portunifies were more likely to pursue an organizafion , as were younger job seekers and master ' s students . Person - Organization Fit Analysis To test whether different types of people prefer certain pay systems , individuals ' pay preferences were predicted by their dispositional char - acterisfics . First , mulfiple regression analysis was used to esfimate each respondent ' s pay preferences from the policy - capturing data . One re - gression equafion was calculated for each parficipant ( Cohen & Cohen , 1983 ) . Because the judgment situafion ( e . g . , attracfion to a job ) created in the present study was objectively structured , each individual ' s beta co - efficients represented the meaning of the different pay variables to that person . In a structured judgment situafion , all judges have the same informafion at their disposal ( Hoffman , 1960 ) . In the 171 regression equafions , large beta coefficients meant that the corresponding predic - tors ( e . g . , pay level ) accounted for large proporfions of the judgment variance ( job attractiveness ) , indicafing a preference for that pay char - acteristic . The R " ^ coefficient from each individual regression equation represents the degree to which each attractiveness estimate was accu - rately modeled . Although a wide range inR ' ^ coefficients existed among respondents in the present analysis ( . 01 to . 99 ) , the average for the 171 parficipants was . 68 , indicafing that respondents ' pay preferences were accurately captured . Multiple regression analysis then was used to esfimate the effect of personality characteristics on individuals ' preferences for particular compensafion systems ( beta coefficients ) . In addifion to the personality characterisfics , it is possible that nonpersonality based individual differ - ences may be related to pay preferences ( e . g . , grade - point average , age , gender ) . However , the between - subject variables appear more relevant 340 PERSONNEL PSYCHOLOGY TABLE4 Multiple Regression Estimates Predicting Pay Preferences with Personality Characteristics Predictor Collectivism Materialism Risk aversion Self - efficacy Order of survey External locus of control Rigidbenefits P SE - . O33 ( . O85 ) - . 006 ( . 089 ) - . 036 ( . 087 ) . 062 ( . 102 ) - . 030 ( . 086 ) . 160f . 096 ) * Job - based pay p SE . 043 ( . 080 ) . 014 ( . 083 ) . 029 ( . 085 ) - . 200 ( . 093 ^ * . 009 ( . 082 ) . 119 ( . 088 ) CriterionHighlevel P SE . 086 ( . 078 ) . 194 ( . 08ir ' - . 165 ( . O83 ) * • . 026 ( . 092 ) - . 031 ( . 080 ) . 036 ( . 086 ) Fixed Day P SE . 071 ( . 078 ) . 032 ( . 081 ) . 265 ( . 083 ) " . 003 ( . 09n . 000 ( . 080 ) - . 078 ( . 085 ) Individual Day P SE - . 377 ( . 074r * - . 100 ( . 077 ) - . 078 ( . 078 ) i65 ( . Q86 ) * . 085 ( . 075 ) - . 022 ( . 081 ) Note : Underlined entries represent hypothesized relationships . * p < . 05 ; * * p < . 01 ; ( one - tailed test ) ; n = 159 . to job search decisions than to pay preferences . For example , there is lit - tle theorefical reason to expect job seekers with a higher grade - point av - erage to prefer rigid benefits more than a job seeker with a lower grade - point average . To determine if excluding these controls changed the re - sults , we esfimated a regression which included all of the control vari - ables in Table 3 . The effect of the control variables on the fit hypotheses was insignificant . Of the 45 possible relafionships between the nine con - trol variables ( in Thble 3 ) and the five pay preferences , only 4 of the 45 were significant at the . 05 level . Thus , due to the lack of theorefical and empirical support for the control variables , nonpersonality based vari - ables were not entered into the fit analysis . However , the order of the survey presentafion was controlled to remove potenfial priming effects . Individuals ' beta weights from the organizafion pursuit analysis could not be utilized as dependent variables because pursuit decisions about actual organizafions represent an unstructured judgment situafion . The factors affecfing individuals ' pursuit decisions could not be controlled ( e . g . , job seekers knew different informafion about the same compa - nies ) , and respondents made judgments on different sfimuli ( e . g . , job seekers were pursuing different organizafions ) . Since the amount , type , and clarity of information available to respondents was uncontrolled , the judgment situafion is ambiguous and inconsistent , making analysis of the beta weights from the organization pursuit data inadvisable ( Hoffman , 1960 ) . Tkble 4 provides the results from the person - organizafion fit analy - sis . Six of the eight fit hypotheses were supported . More materialisficjob seekers placed greater emphasis on pay level when deciding whether or not to pursue an organizafion than did less materialisficjob seekers . Job CABLE AND JUDGE 341 seekers with an internal locus of control were more attracted to organi - zafions offering fiexible benefits than were those with an external locus of control . Individualists were more attracted to individual - based pay plans than were coUectivists . Job seekers with high self - efficacy were more likely to pursue an organizafion with individual - based pay than were those with low self - efficacy . Risk - averse job seekers were more at - tracted to organizafions with nonconfingent pay systems than were risk takers . Job seekers with high self - efficacy were more attracted to organi - zafions with skill - based pay systems than were those with lower efficacy . Contrary to the hypotheses , job seekers with high self - efficacy did not prefer confingent pay systems more than did those with low self - efficacy , and job seekers with an internal locus of control were not more attracted to organizafions with confingent pay systems than were those with an ex - ternal locus of control . Finally , an interesfing but unhypothesized effect resulted from the analysis . Risk - averse individuals placed less emphasis on pay level as a criterion in their job pursuit process . Discussion These findings suggest that individuals have relatively established pay preferences , and that pay system characterisfics other than pay level are important in the job search process . Results indicated that high pay level , fiexible benefits , individual - based pay , fixed pay , and job - based pay were the preferred means of pay when other factors were held constant , be - cause these pay systems significantly infiuenced job attractiveness in the experimental design . Most of these pay attributes , as perceived by a rel - evant group of respondents , also influenced job seekers ' attracfion to companies with which they would potenfially interview . Thus , the results from the experimental method generally were confirmed by the results from actual , relevant companies , lending support to the robustness of the model . Furthermore , the importance placed on several pay system attributes in job search decisions was substanfial relative to pay level . For instance , flexible benefits , fixed pay , and individual - based pay had significant effects on the attractiveness of organizafions when pay level was held constant . This suggests that if pay levels between comparable posifions are relafively equal ( which may often be the case ) , other pay system attributes may have important effects on individuals ' job search decisions . The results from this study also suggested that while pay plans may have direct effects on job search decisions , these effects are strength - ened by fit between individual personality traits and compensafion sys - tem characterisfics . Most of the fit hypotheses were supported , im - plying that disposifional characterisfics can potentially serve as reliable 342 PERSONNEL PSYCHOLOGY indicators of individuals ' fit with certain pay systems , and that pay sys - tems may cause consistent self - selection behavior in job seekers . TTiis lends further support to the dispositional perspective in organizations , particularly when these dispositions are aligned with environmental char - acteristics ( Judge , 1992 ) . Also , if pay systems are structured according to organizations ' values , goals , and cultures , individuals ' fit with pay sys - tems may provide an indication of their fit with organizations as a whole ( Rynes , 1987 ) . Interestingly , risk - averse job seekers placed less emphasis on pay level as a criterion in their job pursuit decisions . This may indicate that individuals who evaluate risk very negatively may be willing to sacrifice pay level to achieve fixed pay , and that employees who are willing to take on more risks may demand pay premiums to do so ( Gerhart & Milkovich , 1992 ) . Limitations and Strengths This study has a number of limitations that should be acknowledged . First , data were reported by respondents , so self - report bias may have influenced the results . For example , this study predicted organizational pursuit with perceived pay systems rather than actual pay systems , and it is possible that perceptions about organizations ( e . g . , reputation ) in - fluenced perceptions about those organizations ' pay policies . Some ev - idence for this interpretation may be provided by the fact that organi - zations ' attractiveness levels were relatively consistent across applicants ( r = . 82 ) . Thus , job seekers may have assigned certain pay attributes to companies that they preferred . Following this reasoning , it is even possi - ble to reinterpret these results as an internal analysis of a survey , rather than assessing the effects of perceived pay systems on job search deci - sions . To address this potential bias , an experimental design also was em - ployed to assess pay preferences ( where company image was not possi - ble ) and to replicate the results from the organization pursuit data . Also with respect to the organization pursuit data , pay perceptions were aver - aged across all individuals ' responses . Nevertheless , the results should be interpreted cautiously in this respect . Due to the fact that the data in this study were reported in response to a survey , common method variance also represents a potential alter - native explanation of the results . Although the order of the survey pre - sentation was systematically controlled , it is still possible that problems with priming and consistency effects exist . For example , it is possible that collecting data about certain pay policies infiuenced the effects of those pay policies on job search decisions . Thus , future research ( e . g . , with CABLE AND JUDGE 343 behavioral measures of job search ) is needed to further substantiate these preliminary findings . It also is possible that respondents perceived some of the pay at - tributes to be related to pay level , confounding the true effects of the pay variables on job search decisions . For instance , rigid benefits and pay level were strongly negatively correlated , implying that job seekers believed that companies with high pay levels were more likely to offer flexible benefits . Notwithstanding the facts that most of the preferred pay system attributes were either unrelated or oppositely related to pay level , and that the regression coefficients should be net the effects of the other pay variables , it may be difficult to separate the unique effect for each in the analysis . Although policy capturing was utilized to avoid several of the prob - lems discussed above , this method also has been criticized . Researchers argue that the mathematical representation of decision making may be inappropriate and that unrealistically large decision alternatives may be given to respondents ( Schwab et al . , 1987 ) . Similarly , Soelberg ( 1967 ) has described a sequential model of job search and choice decisions where jobs are evaluated based upon other available alternatives , which is divergent from the assumptions of policy capturing ( also see Schwab et al . , 1987 ) . Thus , policy capturing may not offer a realistic simulation of how job seekers make decisions . In the present study , the average R " ^ coefficient for the policy - capturing analysis was . 68 , and the results were largely supported by the organization pursuit data , providing some evidence that the experimental design accurately captured respondents ' decision - making processes . The use of policy capturing also revealed some more specific limi - tations in the present investigation . For instance , the policy - capturing study did not investigate several variables known to be important to the job search process ( e . g . , job location , company image ) . Therefore , the effects of these variables could not be computed relative to the pay sys - tem variables . It is also true that job seekers may not have the direct ac - cess to total pay systems found in the policy - capturing part of this study . Although the possibility that organizations may not inform applicants of their pay policies does not negate the possibility that these policies could affect job seekers if they were revealed , it would have been interesting to examine the means through which job seekers learn about organiza - tional pay policies . Although there are weaknesses in all studies , the limitations in the present study appear to be offset by a number of strengths . Because multiple research methods increase the confidence placed in the results , an experimental design was supported by pursuit intentions about rel - evant companies , and the role of individual differences in pay system 344 PERSONNEL PSYCHOLOGY preferences was examined . Although each of these methods may have specific limitations , together they provide a rigorous test of the hypothe - ses . The experimental design and structured judgment situation permit stronger causal inferences while the organization pursuit data support the generalizability of the findings . This study also gains credibility through the fact that most respon - dents were behaving in role because they were interviewing for positions at the time of the study and were in the process of making job search decisions . Thus , the sample is prototypic ( Sackett & Larson , 1990 ) be - cause respondents possessed the essential characteristics defining mem - bership in the intended target population . Furthermore , because the sample comprised six majors in two schools , at three degree types and two degree levels , the respondents should be reasonably representative of interviewing college graduates , who now constitute a large percentage of new job entrants ( Bishop & Carter , 1991 ) . This study also was designed to be as realistic as possible . Job search was chosen over job choice as a dependent variable because while most of the participants were involved in the interviewing—or job search— ^ process , few had made job choice decisions . Consistent with Rynes et al . ( 1983 ) , relevant average pay levels and pay variability be - tween jobs were calculated based on placement office records of recent salary offers . Also , when responding to questions about organizations , participants only answered questions about companies for which they were eligible to interview . Each of these procedures is expected to in - crease the external validity of the results . Contributions and Implications for Practice First , this study adds to the existing literature on general pay pref - erences . Although some research has examined preferences for merit versus seniority pay and individual - versus group - based pay ( Beer & Gery , 1972 ; Heneman , 1990 ; Lawler , 1966 ) , very little emphasis has been placed on other important pay system considerations . To our knowledge , no studies have directly examined preferences for knowledge - based pay or flexible benefits . Furthermore , no research was available on the rel - ative importance of different components in a total compensation plan . This study also adds to the existing literature concerning the effects of pay systems on job search decisions . As Gerhart and Milkovich ( 1992 ) recently suggested , research to date on the staffing implications of com - pensation systems has focused on relative pay level at the neglect of other pay system attributes . While this literature recently has been expanding ( Bretz & Judge , in press ; Turban & Keon , 1993 ; Williams & Dreher , 1992 ) , the present study offers the first comprehensive examination of CABLE AND JUDGE 345 five strategic compensation decisions as they affect the job search pro - cess . Furthermore , this is the first study to examine the implications of contingent pay and skill - based pay on job search decisions . Building on Bretz et al . ( 1989 ) and Judge and Bretz ( 1992 ) , the present study offers the first integral test of the theoretical relationships between dispositional influences and pay preferences . Specifically , this study addresses and supports the notion that individuals may prefer orga - nizations that better fit their dispositional orientations and may be more or less attracted to organizations based on the match between their dis - positions and organizations ' pay systems ( e . g . , Schneider , 1987 ) . Thus , the present study provides an important addition to a research deficiency cited by compensation researchers ( Gerhart & Milkovich , 1992 ; Rynes , 1987 ) and offers support for existing dispositional research ( Judge , 1992 ) and the attraction component of Schneider ' s ( 1987 ) attraction - selection - attrition model . While this study makes several contributions to the research litera - ture , it also has substantive implications for practice . Because the results suggested that certain pay policies may affect both the quantity and the types of applicants attracted , it adds to the already - established impor - tance of aligning compensation systems and organizational goals , cul - ture , and business objectives . Organizations probably know what types of applicants they wish to attract , and it may be possible to tailor pay policies for target groups around an organization ' s compensation strat - egy . Those companies that desire innovative , entrepreneurial employees may be wasting resources on a fixed salary if their ideal employees de - sire commission and flexible hours . The fit analysis demonstrated that even within a relatively homogeneous sample ( e . g . , graduating college students fi - om a large , prestigious university ) , there was enough vari - ance in dispositional characteristics to predict pay preferences . Thus , organizations may be able to maximize the utility of their pay systems and compensation dollars by establishing and communicating pay poli - cies ( e . g . , variable compensation , group - based pay ) that are attractive to their ideal applicants . Future Research Although the present study provided an examination of pay prefer - ences and job search , several related relationships merit further investi - gation . Besides knowing that job search is affected by pay policies other than pay level , it would be useful to know the effects of total pay sys - tems relative to other organizational attributes ( e . g . , location and finan - cial condition ) . Further research is also necessary to establish whether 346 PERSONlSfEL PSYCHOLOGY Other groups of job seekers have widely different pay preferences , per - haps based on demographics ( e . g . , number of children ) and culture . Fi - nally , it is unlikely that the effects of pay system fit discontinue after in - dividuals are hired ; defining the relationship between pay systems , pay preferences , and such outcomes as pay satisfaction , job satisfaction , and career success would represent substantial research contributions . REFERENCES Bandura A . ( 1982 ) . Self - efficacy mechanism in human agency . American Psychologist , 37 , 122 - 147 . Barber AE . ( 1991 ) . Pay as a signal in job choice . Unpublished manuscript , Michigan State University , East Lansing . Barber A , Dunham RB , Formisano RA . ( 1992 ) . The impact of flexible benefits on em - ployee satisfaction : A field study . PERSONNEL PSYCHOLOGY , 45 , 55 - 75 . Beer M , Gery GJ . ( 1972 ) . Individual and organizational correlates of pay system prefer - ences . In Tosi H , Howe R , Dunnette MD ( Eds . ) , Managerial motivation and com - pensation ( pp . 325 - 349 ) . East Lansing , MI : Michigan State University . Bishop JH , Carter S . ( 1991 ) . The worsening shortage of college - graduate workers . Edu - cational Evaluation and Policy Analysis , 13 , 221 - 246 . Bretz RD , Ash RA , Dreher GE ( 1989 ) . Do the people make the place ? An examination of the attraction - selection - attrition hypothesis , PERSONNEL PSYCHOLOGY , 42 , 561 - 580 . Bretz RD , Judge TA . ( in press ) . The role of human resource systems in job applicant decision processes . Journal of Management . Bureau of National Affairs . ( 1988 ) . Changing pay practices : New developments in em - ployee compensation . Labor Relations Week , 2 , 575 - 588 . Cohen J , Cohen P . ( 1983 ) . Applied multiple regression / correlation analysis for the behavioral sciences . Hillsdale , NJ : Eribaum . Collins BE . ( 1974 ) . Four components of the Rotter Internal - External Scale : Belief in a difficult world , a just world , a predictable world , and a politically responsive world . Journal of Personality and Social Psychology , 29 , 381 - 391 . Dielman TE . ( 1991 ) . Applied regression analysis for business and economics . Boston , MA : PWS - Kent . Drankoski R , Judge TA . ( 1992 ) . Employee pay satisfaction , pay attitudes , and pay prefer - ences . ( Tfechnical Report ) . McLean , VA : Xerox Corporation . Earley PC . ( 1989 ) . Social loafing and collectivism : A comparison of the United States and the People ' s Republic of China . Administrative Science Quarter ^ , 34 , 565 - 581 . Einhom HJ , Hogarth RM . ( 1985 ) . Ambiguity and uncertainty in probabilistic inference . Psychological Review , 92 , 433 - 461 . Eisenhardt KM . ( 1989 ) . Agency theory : An assessment and review . Academy of Manage - ment Review , 14 , 51 - 74 . Erez M , Early PM . ( 1987 ) . Comparative analysis of goal - setting strategies across cultures . Journal of Applied Psychology , 72 , 658 - 665 . Gerhart B , Milkovich GT . ( 1990 ) . Organizational differences in managerial compensation and financial performance . Academy of Management Jourruil , 8 , 663 - 691 . Gerhart B , Milkovich GT . ( 1992 ) . Employee compensation : Research and practice . In Dunnette MD , Hough LM ( Eds . ) , Handbook of industrial and organizational psy - chology ( 2nd ed . . Vol . 3 , pp . 481 - 569 ) . Palo Alto , CA : Consulting Psychologists Press . Gomez - Mejia LR , Balkin DB . ( 1989 ) . Effectiveness of individual and aggregate compen - sation strategies . Industrial Relations , 28 , 431 - 445 . CABLE AND JUDGE 347 Gomez - Mejia LR , Balkin DB . ( 1992 ) . Compensation , organizational strategy , and firm performance . Cincinnati , OH : South - Western Publishing Co . Hanusheck EA , Jackson JE . ( 1977 ) . Statistical methods for social scientists . San Diego , CA ; Academic Press . Heneman RL . ( 1990 ) . Merit pay research . In Ferris GR , Rowland KM ( Eds . ) , Research in personnel and human resource management ( Vol . 8 , pp . 203 - 263 ) . Greenwich , CT : JAI Press . Hoffman PJ . ( 1960 ) . The paramorphic representation of clinical judgment . Psychological BuUetin , 57 , 116 - 131 . Hoffman PJ , Slovic P , Rorer LG . ( 1968 ) . An analysis - of - variance model for the assessment of configural cue utilization in clinical judgment . Psychological BuUetin , 69 , 338 - 349 . Hofstede G . ( 1980 ) . Culture ' s consequences . Beverly Hills , CA : Sage Publications . Judge TA . ( 1992 ) . The dispositional perspective in human resource management . In Ferris GR , Rowland KM ( Eds . ) , Research in personnel and human resource management ( Vol . 10 , pp . 31 - 72 ) . Greenwich , CT : JAI Press . Judge TA , Bretz RD . ( 1992 ) . Effects of work values on job choice decisions . Journal of Applied Psychology , 77 , 261 - 271 . Jurgensen CE . ( 1978 ) . Job preferences ( What makes a job good or bad ? ) . Journal of Applied Psychology , 63 , 267 - 276 . Lakhani H . ( 1988 ) . The effect of pay and retention bonuses on quit rates in the U . S . Army . Industrial and Labor Relations Review , 41 , 430 - 438 . Lawler EE . ( 1966 ) . Managers ' attitude toward how their pay is and should be determined . Journal of Applied Psychology , 50 , 273 - 279 . Lawler EE . ( 1981 ) . Pay and organizational development . Reading , MA : Addison - Wesley . LedfordGEJr . ( 1991 ) . Three case studies on skill - based pay : An overview . Compensation and Benefits Review , 23 , 11 - 23 . Lefcourt HM . ( 1991 ) . Locus of control . In Robinson JP , Shaver PR , Wrightsman LS ( Eds . ) , Measures of personality and social psychological attitudes ( Vol . 1 , pp . 413 - 499 ) . San Diego , CA : Academic Press . Levenson H . ( 1981 ) . Differentiating between internality , powerful others , and chance . In Lefcourt HM ( Ed . ) , Research with the locus of control construct ( Vol . 1 , pp . 15 - 63 ) . New York : Academic Press . Little RJ , Rubin DB . ( 1987 ) . Statistical analysis with missing data . New York : Wiley . Maehr ML , Videbeck R . ( 1968 ) . Predisposition to risk and persistence under varying reinforcement - success schedules . Journal of Personality and Social Psychology , 9 , 96 - 100 . McLaughlin JR , Anderson PE . ( 1991 ) . Flexible benefits plans . Association Management , 43 , 53 - 62 . Miceli MP , Lane MC . ( 1991 ) . Antecedents of pay satisfaction : A review and extension . In Ferris GR , Rowland KM ( Eds . ) , Research in personnel and human resource man - agement ( Vol . 9 , pp . 235 - 309 ) . Greenwich , CV : JAI Press . Milkovich GT , Newman JM . ( 1990 ) . Compensation . Boston : Richard Irwin , Inc . Mowday RT , Sutton RI . ( 1993 ) . Organizational behavior : Linking individuals and groups to organizational contexts . Annual Review of Psychology , 44 , 195 - 229 . Olian JD , Rynes SL . ( 1984 ) . Organizational staffing : Integrating practice with strategy . Industrial Relations , 23 , 170 - 183 . Paulhus D . ( 1983 ) . Sphere - specific measures of perceived control . Journal of Personality and Social Psychology , 44 , 1253 - 1265 . Richins ML , Dawson S . ( 1992 ) . Materialism as a consumer value : Measure development and validation . Journal of Consumer Research , 19 , 303 - 316 . Rotter JB . ( 1966 ) . Generalized expectancies for internal versus external control of rein - forcement . Psychological Monographs : General and Applied , 80 , 1 - 28 . 348 PERSONNEL PSYCHOLOGfY Rynes SL . ( 1987 ) . Compensation strategies for recruiting . Topics in Total Compensation , 2 , 185 - 196 . Rynes SL . ( 1991 ) . Recruitment , job choice , and post - hire consequences : A call for new research directions . In Dunnette MD , Hough LM ( Eds . ) , Handbook of industrial and organizational psychology ( Vol . 2 , pp . 399 - 444 ) . Palo Alto , CA : Consulting Psychologists Press . Rynes SL , Lawler J . ( 1983 ) . A policy - capturing investigation of the role of expectancies in decisions to pursue job alternatives . Journal of Applied Psychology , 68 , 620 - 631 . Rynes SL , Miller HE . ( 1983 ) . Recruiter and job influences on candidates for employment . Journal of Applied Psychology , 68 , 147 - 154 . Rynes SL , Schwab DP , Heneman HG . ( 1983 ) . The role of pay and market pay variability in job application decisions . Organizational Behavior and Human Performance , 31 , 353 - 364 . Sackett PR , Larson JR . ( 1990 ) . Research strategies and tactics in industrial and organiza - tional psychology . In Dunnette MD , Hough LM ( Eds . ) , Handbook of industrial and organizational psychology ( 2nd ed . . Vol . 1 , pp . 419 - 489 ) . Palo Alto , CA : Consulting Psychologists Press . Salancik GR , Pfeffer J . ( 1978 ) . A social information processing approach to job attitudes and task design . Administrative Science Quarterly , 23 , 224 - 252 . Schneider B . ( 1987 ) . The people make the place . PERSONNEL PSYCHOLOGY , 40 , 437 - 453 . Schwab DP , Rynes SL , Aldag RJ . ( 1987 ) . Theories and research on job search and choice . In Rowland KM , Ferris GR ( Eds . ) , Research in personnel and human resource man - agement ( Vol . 5 , pp . 126 - 166 ) . Greenwich , CT : JAI Press . Sherer M , Maddux JE , Mercandante B , Prentice - Dunn S , Jacobs B , Rogers RW . ( 1982 ) . The self - efficacy scale : Construction and validation . Psychological Reports , 51 , 663 - 671 . Slovic P . ( 1972 ) . Information processing , situation specificity , and the generality of risk taking behavior . Journal of Personality and Social Psychology , 22 , 128 - 134 . Soelberg PO . ( 1967 ) . Unprogrammed decision making . Industrial Management Review , 8 , 19 - 29 . Steers RM , Braunstein DN . ( 1976 ) . A behaviorally - based measure of manifest needs in work settings . Journal of Vocational Behavior , 9 , 251 - 266 . Sturman MC , Milkovich GM . ( 1992 ) . Validation of expert systems : Personal choice expert - a flexible emphyee benefit system . ( Working paper # 92 - 32 ) . Ithaca , NY : Cornell University , Center for Advanced Human Resource Studies . Tbsi H , Tbsi L . ( 1986 ) . What managers need to know about knowledge - based pay . Orga - nizational Dynamics , 14 , 52 - 64 . TUrban DB , Keon TL . ( 1993 ) . Organization attractiveness : An interactionist perspective . Journal of Applied Psychology , 78 , 184 - 193 . Wachtel PL , Blatt SJ . ( 1990 ) . Perceptions of economic needs and of anticipated future income . Journal of Economic Psychology , 11 , 403 - 415 . Wagner JA , Moch MK . ( 1986 ) . Individualism - collectivism : Concept and measure . Group and Organization Studies , 11 , 280 - 303 . Weber EU , Anderson CJ , Birnbaum MH . ( 1992 ) . A theory of perceived risk and attrac - tiveness . Organizational Behavior and Human Decision Processes , 52 , 492 - 523 . Williams ML , Dreher GF . ( 1992 ) . Compensation systems attributes and applicant pool characteristics . Academy of Management Journal , 35 , 571 - 595 . Yellen JL ( 1984 ) . Efficiency wage models of unemployment . American Economic Review , 74 , 200 - 205 . Zedeck S . ( 1977 ) . An information processing model and approach to the study of motiva - tion . Organizational Behavior and Human Performance , 18 , 47 - 77 .