Journal of . Applied Psychology Copyright 1991 by the American Psychological Association , Inc . 1991 . Vol . 76 . No . 5 , 675 - 689 0021 - 9010 / 91 / $ 3 . 00 Some Differences Make a Difference : Individual Dissimilarity and Group Heterogeneity as Correlates of Recruitment , Promotions , and Turnover Susan E . Jackson , Joan F Brett , Valerie I . Sessa , Dawn M . Cooper , Johan A . Julin , and Karl Peyronnin New York University Schneider ' s ( 1987 ) attraction - selection - attrition model and Pfeffer ' s ( 1983 ) organization demogra - phy model were used to generate individual - level and group - level hypotheses relating interpersonal context to recruitment , promotion , and turnover patterns . Interpersonal context was operational - ized as personal dissimilarity and group heterogeneity with respect to age , tenure , education level , curriculum , alma mater , military service , and career experiences . For 93 top management teams in bank holding companies examined over a 4 - yr period , turnover rate was predicted by group hetero - geneity . For individuals , turnover was predicted by dissimilarity to other group members , but promotion was not . Team heterogeneity was a relatively strong predictor of team turnover rates . Furthermore , reliance on internal recruitment predicted subsequent team homogeneity . Currently ; several changes in the nature of work organiza - tions in the United States are highlighting the relative paucity of available knowledge about work group functioning . Relevant changes include new manufacturing technologies designed around work teams ( see Majchrzak , 1988 ; Piore & Sabel , 1984 ) , increasing acceptance of and experimentation with manage - ment styles that emphasize the collective over the individual ( Walton & Hackman , 1986 ) , and a slow shift toward competi - tive strategies that are best implemented by redesigning jobs to take advantage of the benefits of group interaction ( Banas , 1 988 : M . E . Porter , 1990 ; Schuler & Jackson , 1987 ) . Changes such as these seem to be increasing the proportion of workers whose jobs require teamwork ( Sundstrom , DeMeuse , & Futrell , 1 990 ) . At the same time , the work force population has become more diverse ( Johnston & Packer , 1987 ) . As organizations have begun to realize , this diversity may change patterns of behavior established during an era when work groups were relatively ho - mogeneous ( Jackson , 199 1 ) . Psychologists have traditionally approached the study of be - havior in organizations from a perspective that emphasizes indi - vidual - level constructs and processes . Contrasting sharply with the psychological approach is the more sociologically oriented research of organization theorists , who attempt to explain macro patterns of organizational behavior through consider - ation of organization - level constructs , such as structure and technology Research on work groups , which is relatively rare in comparison with research conducted at the levels of individuals and organizations , falls midway between these two extremes Dawn M . Cooper . Johan A . Julin , and Karl Peyronnin contributed equally to this study . Joan F Brett is now at the Edwin L . Cox School of Business , South - ern Methodist University . Correspondence concerning this article should be addressed to Su - san E . Jackson , Department of Psychology , New York University , 6 Washington Place , Room 550 . New York . New York 10003 . 675 and often draws on research conducted at both the individual and organization levels of analysis . Two recently developed theoretical perspectives - Schneider ' s ( 1987 ) attraction - selection - attrition ( ASA ) model and Pfeffer ' s ( 1983 ) organizational demography model - illus - trate the differences that characterize the psychological and sociological approaches . In this article , we demonstrate the complementarity of these two theoretical perspectives and show how an integration of the two can be used to improve understanding of groups in organizational settings . In particu - lar , we used these two perspectives to derive hypotheses that relate individual similarity versus dissimilarity and group ho - mogeneity versus heterogeneity to patterns of promotion , turn - over , and recruitment . Theoretical Overview The ASA and organizational demography models reflect dif - ferences between psychological and sociological theory . yet they share many features . Both assert that the personal attrib - utes of the individuals who constitute an organization ' s work force , and the interpersonal context created by the mix of per - sonal attributes represented in the work force , are key determi - nants of behavior . Furthermore , both models build on the fact that similarity is one of the most important determinants of interpersonal attraction ( see Berscheid , 1985 ; Byrne , 1971 : Le - vine & Moreland , 1990 ; Lott & Lott , 1965 ; Sears , Freedman , & Peplau , 1985 ) , which in turn creates a social context for rela - tionships among organizational members . Finally , both models address the way in which interpersonal context affects organiza - tional behavior . Attraction - Selection Attrition Model The ASA model is drawn from the perspective of interac - tional psychology and emphasizes the role of " person effects " as determinants of behavior in organizations . It was presented by 676 (cid:9) JACKSON , BRETT , SESSA , COOPER , JULIN , PEYRONNIN Schneider ( 1983 ) as an antidote to " the overwhelming tendency in contemporary I / O [ industrial / organizational ] psychology to assume that situational variables ( groups , technology , structure , environment ) determine organizational behavior " ( p . 439 ) . Schneider ( 1983 ) argued that , through the processes ofattrac - tion , selection , and attrition , organizations evolve toward a state of interpersonal homogeneity . Early in the process , a similar - ity - + attraction effect results in people being attracted to orga - nizations whose members they believe are similar to them - selves . Their attraction to such organizations leads people to seek organizational membership . When current members screen potential new members , they too are attracted to similar others , so they are more likely to admit new members like themselves . After entering the organization , the new member and the more tenured members become better acquainted , and the similarity - - ~ attraction effect can again affect the feelings and behaviors of both parties . The arrangement is likely to be judged satisfactory to the extent that perceived similarity is maintained ( Tsui & O ' Reilly , 1989 ) . If a match is judged unsatis - factory , pressures form to encourage dissimilar members to leave the organization . Over time , these processes create psy - chologically homogeneous work groups ( George , 1990 ) . In the ASA model , personality , interests , and values are the dimensions of similarity assumed to influence attraction to or - ganizations and the people in them . Research on such topics as vocational choice ( Holland , 1976 ; 1985 ) , organizational choice ( Tom , 1971 ) , the use of biodata survey questions to predict job - related behaviors ( Neiner & Owens , 1985 ; Owens & Schoenfeldt , 1979 ) , and the use of realistic job previews as tools for recruitment and socialization ( Premack & Wanous , 1985 ) supports this assumption . Such research seems to refute the often - made assumption that people ( and their personal attrib - utes ) are randomly distributed across organizations ; it suggests instead that a restriction of range occurs within organizations , with similar kinds of people who exhibit similar kinds of behav - ior being clustered together . According to Schneider ( 1987 ) , the homogeneity of personalities , values , and interests that charac - terize members within an organization are what account for the organization ' s apparent unique quality . Thus , the ASA model reflects a psychological perspective . The emphasis is on using an understanding of individuals as a route to explaining phe - nomena that other theorists might conceptualize at the level of the group or organization . Organizational Demography Model Closely related to Schneider ' s ( 1987 ) ASA model is Pfeffer ' s ( 1983 ) model of organizational demography . Pfeffer used the term organizational demography to refer to the demographic composition of formal organizations . According to Pfeffer , the demographic compositions of organizations influence many be - havioral patterns , including communications , job transfers , promotions , and turnover . Included among the dimensions of demographic composition Pfeffer considered important were age , tenure , sex , race , socioeconomic background , and religion . Sociological studies and marketing research have both shown that differences in people ' s attitudes and values are reliably as - sociated with differences in their standing on demographic characteristics such as these . Given this evidence , the similarity effect provides a rationale for how and why demographic com - positions of organizations are likely to be related to organiza - tional phenomena . The focus on organizations as the unit of analysis clearly distinguishes Pfeffer ' s sociological perspective from Schneider ' s psychological perspective . Thus , in place of Schneider ' s discussion of the individual - level constructs of simi - larity and attraction , Pfeffer provided a discussion of the organi - zation - level constructs of homogeneity and cohesiveness . And , in place of Schneider ' s discussion of the individual feelings and behaviors that shape the selection of new members and attrition from organizations , Pfeffer emphasized communication net - works and patterns of employee flow . Hypotheses Despite the similarity of the phenomena and processes im - plicated in Schneider ' s ( 1987 ) ASA model and Pfeffer ' s ( 1983 ) organizational demography model , research to date has not in - tegrated the two perspectives . In this study , we drew on each model to develop a series of hypotheses about how interper - sonal context relates to organizational behavior . Our hypothe - ses were stated at both the individual and the group level of analysis . By including both levels of analysis and explanation , we illustrate the complementarity of these two emerging streams of research ; we do not intend to demonstrate the superi - ority of one over the other . For the conceptual logic that led to our hypotheses , we relied most heavily on the theoretical propositions of Schneider ( 1987 ) . However , in a departure from Schneider ' s emphasis on psychological attributes , such as personality and values , we as - sumed that demographic attributes are powerful determinants of both perceptions of similarity and perceptions of person - en - vironment fit . This assumption is consistent with the organiza - tional demography perspective and with research on social cog - nition , intergroup relations , self - categorization , and social identity theory ( e . g . , see Hastie et al . , 1980 ; Hogg & Abrams , 1988 ; Sorrentino & Higgins , 1986 ; Taylor & Moghaddam , 1987 ; Turner , 1987 ) , all of which supports the assertion that informa - tion about a person ' s demographic characteristics influences both attributions regarding the person ' s psychological charac - ter and behavior toward the person . In the following sections , we present our hypotheses and re - lated rationale . Hypotheses about group - level phenomena are presented first , followed by hypotheses about individual - level phenomena . We use the term personal attribute as a generic reference to individual characteristics . Our hypotheses are stated with specific reference to the population we studied : exec - utives who were members of top management teams . Groups as the Units of Analysis Hypothesis 1 . Top level executives are not randomly distributed across management teams . Instead , they are grouped into teams characterized by greater homogeneity of personal attributes than would be expected by chance . Schneider ( 1987 ) argued that , because the similarity effect operates on attraction , selection , and attrition processes , organi - zations evolve to have unique compositions of organizational members who are relatively similar to each other . Therefore , the demographic differences between people who are members of different organizations should be greater than the differences between people within organizations . The ASA model postulates several processes that cause groups to evolve toward homogeneity . The attraction process has been well documented elsewhere and was not addressed in this study . Hypotheses 2 and 3 address the attrition process . Hypothesis 4 addresses the selection process . Hypothesis 2 . Demographically heterogeneous teams have higher turnover rates than demographically homogeneous teams . Hypothesis 2 follows from the ASA model if one assumes that demographic attributes are associated with differences in some attitudes , values , and beliefs that have the potential to create conflict among team members , and thus influence group outcomes and behavior ( Daft & Weick , 1984 ; Hambrick & Mason , 1984 ; Pfeffer , 1983 ) . For some personal attributes , there is direct empirical evidence showing a link between the attribute and associated attitudes , values , and beliefs . Evidence of age - related differences is abundant . Age has been shown to be negatively correlated with risk - taking propensity ( Vroom & Pahl , 1971 ) and the cognitive processes adults use for problem solving ( Datan , Rodeheaver , & Hughes , 1987 ) ; such differences could easily create conflicts among members of high - level deci - sion - making teams . There is also evidence suggesting that so - cietal conditions ( e . g . . economic depressions vs . booms and pe - riods of war vs . peace ) associated with different age cohorts influence attitudes and values ( see Elder , 1974 , 1975 ; Thern - strom , 1973 ) . Regarding tenure , several researchers have argued that , as tenure accrues , executives become increasingly com - mitted to the status quo ( see Hofer , 1980 ; Starbuck , Greve , & Hedberg . 1978 ) , and recent empirical evidence provides some support for this assertion ( Finkelstein & Hambrick . 1990 ; Hambrick . Geletkanycz , & Fredrickson . 1990 ) . Regarding edu - cation experiences , evidence indicates that curriculum choices are associated with personality ; attitudes , and cognitive styles ( Holland . 1976 ) . as well as with subsequent job experiences ( National Science Foundation , 1963 ) . In comparison with the abundance of empirical evidence relating age , tenure , and education to personality , values , and cognitive and interpersonal styles , evidence relating attitudes and values to specific job and industry experiences is scarce and inconsistent ( see Dearborn & Simon , 1958 , Walsh , 1988 ) . Nevertheless , the assumption that differences in such experi - ences are associated with cognitive variables is widely accepted in the management literature . Similarly , direct evidence about differences in leadership styles among executives with and without military experience is scarce , but because the US . mili - tary invests heavily in designing and delivering leadership training , it is likely that military experience affects leadership style ( see Bass , 1981 ) . Hypothesis 3 . Subgroup status interacts with team heterogeneity to affect turnover rate . The relationship between heterogeneity and turnover is weaker for the subgroup of elite top executives than for the subgroup of nonelite executives . We examined and compared the relationship between hetero - geneity and turnover for ( a ) executives who were members of the uppermost echelon , whom we refer to as the elite subgroup and SOME DIFFERENCES MAKE A DIFFERENCE (cid:9) 677 ( b ) executives just below this level , whom we refer to as the nonelite subgroup . There are several reasons for expecting the relationship between heterogeneity and turnover to be different for these two subgroups of executives . One reason is that members of the uppermost echelon ought to be more homoge - neous than members of the team as a whole ; this restriction in range at the top ought to attenuate any relationship between group composition and turnover rate . The expectation of range restriction follows from published studies showing that , in the United States , top - level executives in large organizations come from similar backgrounds and do not represent the broader population of employees ( e . g . , Useem & Karabel , 1986 ) . An - other reason for predicting different effects for the elite and nonelite subgroups is that these differences in status are likely to be related to differences in the rewards offered for effective organizational performance ( see Gomez - Mejia & Welbourne , 1989 ) . If rewards for effective performance are greater for execu - tives at the higher status level , tolerance of disagreements and conflicts may be greater also ; this should weaken the relation - ship between team composition and turnover rates . Hypothesis 4 . Top management teams that rely on internal ( within - firm ) sources when recruiting new team members are more homogeneous than teams that rely more on external sources . The ASA model postulates that selection processes create homogeneity by limiting the types of people admitted into the group . One way that selection bias can occur is if some types of people are excluded from the pool of applicants considered for a position . Such a situation would be likely if a homogeneous organization relied mostly on applications from its own work force as the source of candidates for job openings ( cf . Rynes & Barber , 1990 ) . If managers within an organization are more similar to each other than they are to managers in other organi - zations , then a reliance on internal recruitment for top team members should be associated with greater homogeneity within the top management team . Individuals as the Units of Analysis Hypothesis 5 . Executives who are dissimilar to their teammates are more likely to leave the firm than executives who are similar to their teammates . The relationship between group heterogeneity and turnover rates predicted by Hypothesis 2 could arise as a result of at least two different processes . On the one hand , a relationship be - tween group heterogeneity and turnover rates could arise be - cause dissimilar group members in particular are more likely to leave the group . Dissimilar members might leave because they feel uncomfortable in the group , because their dissimilarity may limit how well they are integrated into the group , or be - cause they are perceived as poor performers and other group members pressure them to leave ( O ' Reilly , Caldwell , & Barnett . 1 989 ; Schneider , 1987 ; Tsui & O ' Reilly , 1989 , Wagner , Pfeffer . & O ' Reilly , 1984 ) . On the other hand , an association between group heterogeneity and group turnover rates could occur even if the more dissimilar group members were no more likely to leave the group than their less dissimilar peers . Heterogeneity may create equal levels of discomfort for all group members . It may limit integration and the development of cohesiveness at 678 the level of the group as a whole . As a consequence , the probabil - ity of turnover may increase equally for all group members . If an association between group heterogeneity and team turnover rates is due solely to such group - level processes , then no rela - tionship should be found between individual dissimilarity and individual turnover . Hypothesis 6 . The relationship between personal dissimilarity and turnover is weaker for executives in the elite subgroup than for executives in the nonelite subgroup . The rationale for expecting the relationship between per - sonal dissimilarity and individual turnover from the team to be different for members of the elite and nonelite subgroups paral - lels the rationale presented to support Hypothesis 3 . For members of the elite subgroup , a restriction in range for the dissimilarity measure may attenuate the relationship between dissimilarity and turnover . In addition , rewards for team perfor - mance may be greater for these executives than for the other members of the team , and these greater incentives may counter - act any internal or external pressures on them to leave the group . Also , their position of relative power may insulate them from the pressures to leave that might otherwise be exerted by the lower status group members . Finally , even if lower status members attempted to pressure dissimilar high - status members to leave , these influence attempts would probably be less effective than similar influence attempts directed at lower status members by higher status members ( Shaw , 1981 ) . Hypothesis 7 . Lower status team members who are similar to their higher status team mates are more likely to be promoted than are lower status team members who are less similar . This hypothesis follows from the expectation that biases fa - voring selection of similar others into the group operate during the selection of new group members . When the elite subgroup considers who to select to fill a vacancy within their ranks , they are likely to more favorably evaluate those who are most similar to themselves because these people are assumed to be more predictable and trustworthy ( Kanter , 1977 ; Useem & Karabel , 1 986 ) , their past job performance may be evaluated more posi - tively ( Tsui & O ' Reilly , 1989 ) , and they may be perceived as having the characteristics needed to continue implementing the organization ' s current strategy ( see Vancil , 1987 ) . It is reason - able to assume that nonelite group members represent a signifi - cant proportion of the " applicant " pool for vacancies that arise at the next organizational level ( Dalton & Kesner , 1985 ) , that is , vacancies at the elite level within the top management team . Applying the logic of the ASA model to the special case of promotions suggests Hypothesis 7 . Control Variables The topic of turnover has generated a large number of empiri - cal studies of numerous variables that might be correlated with turnover patterns , and elaborate models of the turnover process have been developed . The objective of the present study was not to test the adequacy of the available models of turnover . How - ever , some known correlates of turnover could also be expected to correlate with the personal attributes or team composition variables assessed in this study , and they were examined . In the JACKSON , BRETT , SESSA , COOPER , JULIN , PEYRONNIN following paragraphs , we discuss several variables that might produce spurious correlations between our predictor and out - come variables . Differences in results found across studies might also be related to these extraneous variables . Industry The typical length of tenure for chief executive officers ( CEOs ) varies as a function of industry characteristics , such as the number of firms in the industry , the productivity growth rate of the industry , and the volatility of the economic environ - ment ( Pfeffer & Leblebici , 1973 ; Osborn , Jauch , Martin , & Gluck , 1981 ) . It is possible that the personal attributes of top executives also differ across industries , with some industries being more likely to have relatively younger or more educated top executives than others . In this study , we controlled for possi - ble industry effects by studying top management teams within a single industry . Age and Tenure Many studies of voluntary turnover have found that older , more tenured employees are less likely to leave than are younger employees ( see Cotton & Tuttle , 1986 ; Mobley , Griffeth , Hand , & Meglino , 1979 ; Mowday , Porter , & Steers , 1982 ; Muchinsky & Tuttle , 1979 ) . In this study , we expected turnover to be positiveh • associated with age because some top level executives are likely to be near retirement age ; both mandatory retirement and op - tional early retirement could be significant reasons for higher turnover among older team members . By controlling for age , we controlled for retirement effects . Tenure also has been found to correlate with turnover among employees who hold positions below the level of the top management team . Explanations of - fered for the relationship between tenure and turnover empha - size the increasing organizational commitments and invest - ments that bind more tenured employees to their employers . Organization Size Numerous reasons have been advanced for expecting a posi - tive relationship between organization size and turnover rates among top level executives ( Harrison , Torres , & Kukalis , 1988 ) . The empirical literature provides modest support for this ex - pectation for employees in general ( Berger & Cummings , 1979 ; L . W Porter & Lawler , 1966 ) and for top level executives in particular ( Harrison et al . , 1988 ) . Organization size has also been suggested as a correlate of internal promotion rates for executives ( Dalton & Kesner , 1985 ; Guthrie , Olian , & Gupta , 1990 ) . All of these results suggest the importance of consider - ing organization size as a potentially important control vari - able . Organization Life - Cycle Stage Contingency approaches to leadership effectiveness posit that the personal attributes needed from leaders of organiza - tions in the early stages of organizational growth differ from the personal attributes needed from leaders of organizations at the later stages of development ( Gerstein & Reisen , 1983 ; Ham - brick & Mason , 1984 ; Szilagyi & Schweiger , 1984 ) . Conse - quently , the personal attributes of top executives may be asso - ciated with organization life - cycle stage ( Gupta & Govindara - jan , 1984 ) . Furthermore , staffing and turnover patterns are likely to correlate with organizational life - cycle stage ( Kerr & Slocum , 1987 ; Kotter & Sathe , 1978 ) . To the extent that organi - zation life - cycle stage is associated with the personal attributes of top level executives and turnover and promotion rates , any association found between top management team characteris - tics and turnover or promotion patterns may be due to their shared association with life - cycle stage . We assessed life - cycle stage to address this possibility . Group Size As groups grow in size , they experience increasing problems of communication and coordination ( Blau , 1970 ) . Perhaps be - cause of these problems , larger teams tend to be less cohesive ( Shaw . 1976 ) . Alternatively , differences in the amount of hetero - geneity present in large and small teams may account for the empirical relationships found between team size and cohesive - ness . The potential for heterogeneity is greater for larger teams than for smaller teams , so it may be that higher levels of hetero - geneity account for the low levels of cohesiveness found in larger teams . In this case , the association between team size and turnover should not be significant after the variance in turnover attributable to heterogeneity is accounted for . Method Sources of Information Public archival data were used in this study . The primary source of information about the employment status and personal attributes of top management team members was Dun & Bradstreet ' s ( 1985 - 1988 ) Reference Book of Corporate Managements . To obtain reliability esti - mates for the information published in the Reference Book , we queried officials at Dun & Bradstreet , who indicated that all information pub - lished is obtained in writing from the firm and then confirmed by telephone . Dun & Bradstreet officials explained that , because they are in the business of selling information , accuracy is considered essential . As a further check , we contacted directly a 25 % random sample of the firms we selected to obtain the names of the 1987 top management team members . This telephone survey yielded information that was in nearly complete agreement ( 96 ( 1 / ' c , ) with the published lists of team members . For some top team members in our sample , the information about personal attributes listed in Dun & Bradstreet was incomplete or ambiguous . In these instances , Dun & Bradstreet entries were supple - mented by referring to other sources , including Who ' s Who in Finance and Industry ( 25th ed . , 1987 - 1988 ) and the national and regional ver - sions of Who ' s Who . Mood ys Bank and Finance Manual ( Moody ' s In - vestor Service , 1985 - 1988 ) was used to assess organization size and growth . Sample A sample of bank holding companies was drawn from those listed in Dun & Bradstreet ' s Reference Book of Corporate Managements for the years 1985 through 1988 . The following procedures were used to select companies for inclusion in this study . We began by selecting firms listed in 1988 with standard industry classification ( SIC ) codes of 6711 ( holding company ) and 6022 ( state banks , members of the Federal Re - serve System ) or 6025 ( national banks , members of the Federal Reserve SOME DIFFERENCES MAKE A DIFFERENCE (cid:9) 679 System ) . Firms from this list were retained only if listings also ap - peared for each of the three preceding years . Because we were inter - ested in groups , we imposed a minimum team size of three members . Consequently , large firms are overrepresented in our sample : Of the 100 largest U . S . bank holding companies that were operating in 1988 , our sample included 51 . The bank holding companies in our sample had total assets ranging from $ 237 million to $ 150 billion ( Mdn = $ 5 . 22 billion ) ; they employed between 127 and 87 , 000 people ( Mdn = 5 , 215 employees ) ; and they were founded between 1925 and 1983 ( Mdn = 1968 ) . A team member was defined as an executive who was listed as an officer in Dun & Bradstreet ' s Reference Book of Corporate Manage - ments . The number of executives in the top management teams in our study ranged from 3 ( because of our sampling criteria ) to 18 ( M = 7 . 44 , SD = 3 . 60 ) . For these 93 firms , the total number of executives listed for the years 1985 through 1988 was 939 . Of these , 625 were members of a top management team in 1985 ; the remainder joined in one of the following three years . To verify that team members listed in Dun & Bradstreet ' s Reference Book constituted a co - acting executive team , we contacted a randomly selected subsample of 25 % of the firms in the study . Replies indicated that most teams ( 88 % ) met formally at least once per month . The distri - bution of regularly scheduled meetings was as follows : 46 % met at least weekly ; 42 % met once or twice a month ; 4 % met quarterly ; 4 % met twice a year ; and 4 % met annually . Coding Procedures Coding instructions were developed and pilot tested with a sample of 15 firms . Three research assistants were trained to code informa - tion . Each bit of information was coded independently by two trained coders . Then , Susan E . Jackson reviewed the coded results and identi - fied discrepancies between coders . ( For a 25 % random sample of the codings , a count of these discrepancies indicated 86 % interrater agree - ment ) Coders resolved discrepancies by first referring to the archival data sources to locate and correct simple inaccuracies . When discrep - ancies were due to disagreements over how to interpret available infor - mation , resolution was accomplished by consensus . Measurement of Variables Personal Attributes of Executives For each team member , personal attributes were coded as follows : Age . Date of birth was recorded and then used to calculate age as of 1 985 . Tenure . The year the person first joined the bank holding company was recorded and used to determine length of tenure with the organiza - tion as of 1985 . Checks were conducted to detect interruptions in em - ployment status . If an individual left the firm and then returned , the years spent away from the firm were not counted toward the person ' s total tenure . Level of education attained . Level of education attained was as - sessed as no college degree ( 0 ) , four - year degree ( 1 ) , master ' s degree ( 2 ) . or doctoral degree ( 3 ) . College curriculum . This dichotomous variable ( 0 = no , I = yes ) indicated whether a person had an undergraduate or graduate degree that designated specialization in business administration . Military experience . Coders recorded whether a team member had served in the military , his or her military rank , and military branch . The analyses reported in this article were based on a dichotomous variable ( 0 = no , 1 = yes ) that indicated whether the person served in any branch of the armed forces . Analyses of alternative variables that captured differences in rank and military branch were also conducted : 680 comparable results were obtained regardless of which measure was used . Experience outside the financial industry This dichotomous vari - able indicated whether a team member had held a job in another in - dustry ( 0 = no . I = yes ) . College alma mater . The names of colleges attended by members were recorded , and number codes were assigned to this polychotomous variable . For measures of individual dissimilarity and group - level het - erogeneity , we used only information about undergraduate colleges attended because most team members reported that they had com - pleted at least some undergraduate course work but some had not attended graduate school . We chose to treat 2 people who attended the same college but at different stages in their educational career ( under - graduate vs . graduate ) as if they had attended different colleges . We assumed that undergraduate and graduate students at the same school share few common experiences and may not develop the same degree of school loyalty . To the extent that these assumptions are inaccurate , our measures may overestimate dissimilarity and heterogeneity with respect to college attended . Fu4tctional area of expertise . In addition to the background charac - teristics described above , we attempted to code functional area of ex - pertise , which is a variable of some theoretical interest ( see Dearborn & Simon , 1958 : Hambrick & Mason . 1984 : Walsh , 1988 ) . However , because coders were unable to generate adequately reliable data for this variable , we did not include it in our analyses . Sex . Sex was recorded , but severe range restriction ( 2 % female ) required us to exclude this variable from our analyses . Status within the team . Job titles were used to determine a person ' s status within the team . Following the procedure of Murray ( 1989 ) , ' we defined elite team members ( for 1985 , n = 203 ) as those with job titles of president , CEO , chairman , or vice - chairman . All other members of the executive team were coded as nonelites ( for 1985 , n = 422 ) . The size of the elite subgroups ranged from I to 5 executives . Nonelite subgroups ranged in size from 0 to 17 executives . For analyses focusing on the elite and nonelite subgroups , we included only subgroups composed of at least 3 people ( for 1985 , ns = 71 elite subgroups and 76 nonelite sub - groups ) . An alternative way to measure status might be to assess whether or not a team member also served on the board of directors . We recorded board membership and assessed the association between these alter - native measures of status . A strong association ( 17 2 = . 67 ) was found , X 2 ( 1 . N = 939 ) = 630 . 43 , p < . 05 : Most elite team members ( 92 % ) were also members of their board of directors , whereas very few ( 5 % ) none - lite members were members of the board of directors . Attribute Dissimilarity and Group Heterogeneity Measures Attribute dissimilarity of individual team member . Following the procedures of Wagner et al . ( 1984 ) and O ' Reilly et al . ( 1989 ) , we used the Euclidean distance measure to measure an individual ' s dissimilar - ity from the group ( or relevant status subgroup ) for a given year . For each personal attribute , individual dissimilarity equalled ( s , - s ) 2 12 , ( n - 1 ) , (cid:9) ( 1 ) where n is the number of group ( or subgroup ) members , s , is the individ - ual ' s value on the attribute , and s , is the jth member ' s value on the attribute . 2 Group heterogeneity measures . Group heterogeneity for a given year was computed for each demographic characteristic assessed . Two types of heterogeneity indices were computed . For interval variables , the coefficient of variation ( standard deviation divided by the mean ) was computed ; its psychometric properties ( in particular , the fact that JACKSON , BRETT , SESSA , COOPER , JULIN , PEYRONNIN it is a scale - invariant measure ) are preferred over the standard devia - tion ( Allison , 1978 ) . For categorical variables , Blau ' s ( 1977 ) index of heterogeneity was computed . This index varies from a low of 0 ( if all group members are the same ) to a theoretical high of 1 . Heterogeneity is defined as follows : Heterogeneity = ( I - Zp , 2 ) , (cid:9) ( 2 ) where p is the proportion of group ( or subgroup ) members in a category and i is the number of different categories represented on a team . ' Turnover Measures Turnover was operationalized as turnover from the team . Because we studied top level executives , it is likely that our indices represent turnover from the organization . We note , however , that the archival records used in this study did not permit us to verify this assumption . Hypothetically , a top team member could leave the top management team yet remain in the firm . For example , in some firms , poor per - formers are effectively demoted rather than fired . We assumed that such events were quite rare , although hypothetically possible . Individual turnover . A dichotomous variable was created : A code of 0 indicated that a 1985 team member had remained on the team through 1988 , and a code of I indicated that a 1985 team member had left the team by 1988 . Both voluntary and involuntary turnover are included . Although measures of turnover that include both voluntary and involuntary turnover have been criticized as imprecise ( e . g . , Mu - chinsky & Tuttle , 1979 ) , we had two reasons for not attempting to differentiate between these forms of turnover . First , when top level executives are the focus of study , the distinction between voluntary and involuntary turnover is often unclear . Because of the high visibility of these positions and the potential effects that executive turnover can have on stockholder reactions ( see Friedman & Singh , 1989 ) , the label - ing of an executive ' s departure as voluntary more likely reflects politi - cal objectives than individual preferences and intentions . Second , the argument that heterogeneity creates group conflict , which in turn causes turnover , is equally applicable to understanding voluntary and involuntary leaving ( Wagner et al . , 1984 ) . On the one hand , conflict may increase the group members ' desire to leave the group , leading to voluntary turnover . On the other hand , group members may exert pressure on those perceived to be the cause of the conflict , leading to involuntary leaving . Group turnover rate . When the team was the unit of analysis , the turnover index used was the proportion of 1985 team members who were no longer on the team in 1988 . When status subgroups were the units of analysis , the index used was the proportion of 1985 subgroup ' Whereas Murray ( 1989 ) referred to inclusive and exclusive team members , we refer to nonelite and elite team members . 2 For college attended , the value for ( s , - s ) was 0 if the two group members attended the same college and I if they did not attend the same college . ' Information about individuals was sometimes unobtainable . When individual - level variables must be combined to produce group - level variables , as in this study , missing data are particularly problemat - ical . A group - level index is most accurate when it is based on informa - tion about all group members ; confidence in the fidelity of a group measure declines as the proportion of group members for whom infor - mation is missing increases . The decision to either discard a group for which only partial information are available or include that group and accept the loss of measurement fidelity is a necessarily subjective one , for which no standard rules are available . The decision rule we adopted to handle missing data was to calculate a team score only if the needed information was available for at least 75 % of the team ' s members . members who were no longer on the team in 1988 ; thus , members who left one subgroup to join the other subgroup were not counted as cases of turnover . Individual Promotion For the individual - level analyses , promotion was defined as a change from nonelite status to elite status within the top management team . A dichotomous variable was computed for executives who were members of the nonelite subgroup in 1985 , 1986 , or 1987 ( n = 606 ) . If an execu - tive ' s job title in one of these years indicated he or she was a nonelite member of the team , and a subsequent listing ( in 1986 , 1987 , or 1988 ) indicated a change to a title classified as elite , a promotion was re - corded ( value = 1 ) . If no change in job title occurred , or if a new title appeared that was classified as being at the nonelite status level , then no promotion was indicated ( value = 0 ) . People who joined the top management team after 1985 may have arrived in their position as a result of a promotion from the ranks of middle management , but they are not included in the tests ofour hypotheses about individual promo - tions . This is because , to test our individual level hypotheses about promotion , we would need to know the personal attributes of all mid - dle managers eligible for promotion to the top management teams . This information was not available . Promotion can also occur within the elite subgroup , as when a senior vice president becomes CEO . However , because of the complex nature of the succession processes through which new CEOs come into power ( see Friedman & Singh , 1989 ) , we concluded that promotions within the elite subgroups might not be validly indicated by the timing of title changes . Groups ' Reliance on Internal Sources for Recruitment of New Members Top management teams can recruit new members from inside or outside their firm . To assess the propensity of a team to rely on internal sources , we determined the percentage of new team members ( all members who joined the team in 1986 , 1987 , or 1988 ) who had been employed by the firm in the year immediately prior to the one in which they joined the top management team . This index should not be inter - preted as an aggregated index derived from our measure of individual promotion , which indicates whether a nonelite team member was pro - moted to elite status within the team . In contrast , propensity to use internal sources for filling team vacancies captures the extent to which teams recruited new members from among any of their firms ' current employees . Organization Characteristics Size . Two indicators of organization size were recorded : total num - ber of employees and total assets ( dollars ) . Life - cycle stage . Following the procedure of Smith , Mitchell , and Summer ( 1985 ) . we used growth rate and founding date as indicators of life - cycle stage . Growth rate was operationalized as the percentage increase in the size indicators between 1985 and 1988 . Thus , growth in number of employees and growth in total assets were both determined . Founding date was the year the bank holding company was estab - lished . Results Descriptive Statistics The means , standard deviations , and correlations among the group level measures are shown in Table 1 . Comparable individ - ual level statistics are shown in Table 2 . SOME DIFFERENCES MAKE A DIFFERENCE 681 Hypothesis 1 One - way multivariate analysis of variance ( MANOVA ) , em - ploying Householder transformations for unbalanced designs ( Anderson , 1984 ) , was used to test the hypothesis that execu - tives would be clustered into groups that were more homoge - neous with respect to personal attributes than would be ex - pected by chance . All individuals who had been employed by the firms in our sample during the four years of the study were included in this analysis ( N = 939 ) . Place of employment ( 93 categories ) was the independent variable . The dependent vari - ables were age , tenure , education level , college curriculum , expe - rience outside the industry , and military experience . 4 A test of homogeneity of covariance matrices ( Box ' s M ) indicated that our distributions met the assumption of normality , F ( 504 , 17637 ) = 1 . 09 , ns . Results for the multivariate test revealed a significant effect of place of employment . When unequal sam - ple sizes are present , alternative statistics can lead to differing conclusions about the significance of results ( Bray & Maxwell , 1985 ) , but for our data , three commonly used statistics all sup - ported the conclusion to reject ( p < . 05 ) the null hypothesis : Wilks ' lambda = . 21 , Pillai - Bartlett trace = 1 . 39 , and Hotel - lings T 2 = 1 . 96 . Effect sizes ( q2 ) associated with these alternative statistics were all approximately . 24 . Univariate tests revealed significant effects ( p < . 05 ) for all of the dependent variables except experience outside the industry , for which the effect was marginally significant ( p < . 06 ) . Thus , Hypothesis I was sup - ported . As predicted by the ASA model , top management exec - utives in our sample were clustered together into teams that were relatively homogeneous with respect to the personal attrib - utes we assessed . Consideration of Control Variables Before testing the remaining hypotheses , we examined the role of several potentially important organization , team , and person characteristics to determine whether it was necessary to include them as control variables in subsequent analyses . Organization Characteristics To examine the association between turnover rate and the organization characteristics of size ( number of employees and assets ) and date of founding , we conducted three regression analyses : Dependent variables were the turnover rates for whole teams , elite subgroups , and nonelite subgroups . Predictor vari - ables were the organization characteristics as of the year 1985 . No significant relationships were found . To test for possible curvilinear relationships , such as those hypothesized by Blau ( 1970 ) , we transformed the predictors to their natural log values and conducted a second , parallel set of analyses . No significant College alma mater was not included . Although chi - square or mul - tiway frequency table analyses are usually appropriate for polychoto - mous data , the large number of schools resulted in the observed fre - quency per cell being below the preferred value of 5 ( Hays , 1981 ) . Because of the severity of the violation , corrections for low observed frequencies were not attempted . Visual inspection of the college infor - mation clearly indicated a nonrandom distribution for this variable . however . 9 682 Table I Means , Standard Deviations , and Correlation Coefficients for Group Level Variables relationships were found . Next , we regressed the three turnover rates on the two indices of organizational growth . Turnover rates were not significantly associated with organizational growth rate . To check for the unlikely possibility of suppressor effects , we regressed turnover rates on the control variables plus the demographic characteristics . No evidence of suppression was found . A parallel set of analyses examined the associations between promotion rates and these organization characteris - tics , and similar results were found . Therefore , organization characteristics were not included in subsequent analyses . Age and Tenure When individuals were treated as the unit of analysis , turn - over was significantly and positively correlated with age for the sample as a whole ( r = . 18 , p < . 05 ) and for both the elite ( r = . 24 , p < . 05 ) and nonelite ( r = . 18 , p < . 05 ) subsamples . Turnover was not significantly correlated with tenure for the sample as a whole or for the elite and nonelite subgroups ( rs = . 05 , . 05 , and Note . N = 625 executives in 1985 . * p < . 05 ( two - tailed ) . JACKSON , BRETT , SESSA , COOPER , JULIN , PEYRONNIN Table 2 Means , Standard Deviations , and Correlation Coefficients for Individual Level Variables - - . 00 . 06 , respectively , all ns ) . When turnover was regressed on age and tenure together , a significant positive beta coefficient was obtained for age but not for tenure ; this was true for the sample as a whole and for both the elite and nonelite subsamples . When analyses were conducted that included age and tenure along with all other predictors of interest , the tenure coefficients re - mained nonsignificant for the sample as a whole and for both subgroups , indicating the absence of a suppression effect for tenure . Therefore , in all analyses related to individual turnover , we included age but not tenure as a control variable . When groups were treated as the unit of analysis , the rela - tionships of interest were between group turnover rate and the average age and average tenure of group members . For groups as wholes , turnover rate was unrelated to average age ( r = . 00 , ns ) and average tenure ( r = . 07 , ns ) . For nonelite subgroups , a simi - lar result was found ( rs = . 00 and . 02 , both ns , for age and tenure , respectively ) . For elite subgroups , turnover rate was signifi - cantly correlated with both average age ( r = . 36 , p < . 05 ) and average tenure ( r = . 20 , p < . 05 ) . However , when turnover rate Variable ' M SD 1 (cid:9) 2 (cid:9) 3 4 5 (cid:9) 6 (cid:9) 7 8 9 10 (cid:9) 11 12 13 1 4 l . Age 55 . 15 8 . 39 - . 26 * - . 07 - . 17 * . 03 (cid:9) . 29 * . 07 . 13 * . 03 - . 04 - . 02 . 03 - . 08 . 1 8 * 2 . Tenure 1 6 . 41 8 . 56 - - . 13 * . 01 - . 16 * . 04 - . l2 * . 41 * - . 08 - . 07 . 02 - . 12 * - . 09 * . 05 3 . Education level 1 . 63 0 . 86 - . 30 * . 07 - . 01 (cid:9) . 05 . 01 . 24 * . 06 . 22 * . 01 . 03 . 00 4 . Curriculum . 24 . 42 - - . 14 * - . 01 - . 01 . 07 - . 27 * . 01 (cid:9) . 60 * - . 06 . 05 - . 02 5 . Other industry experience . 42 . 45 - - . 01 (cid:9) . 10 * - . 04 . 10 * . 01 - . 03 . 23 * . 07 . 05 6 . Military experience . 56 . 46 - - . 08 - . 05 - . 13 * - . 02 - . 03 - . 05 - . 19 * . 05 7 . Age distance 10 . 46 4 . 05 - - . 10 * . 03 - . 07 - . 03 . 07 . 12 * . 03 8 . Tenure distance 10 . 07 5 . 01 . 01 - . 01 (cid:9) . 17 * - . 06 . 02 . 02 9 . Education distance 1 . 13 0 . 41 - . 12 * - . 08 . 09 * . 07 . 09 * 10 . College distance 1 . 03 0 . 09 - . 01 . 03 . 06 - . 05 11 . Curriculum distance . 50 . 29 - - . 07 . 18 * . 10 12 . Other industry experience distance . 67 . 16 . 13 * . 1 3 * 1 3 . Military distance . 55 . 26 - . 01 14 . Turnover ( 3 years ) . 35 . 48 1 (cid:9) 2 3 4 5 6 (cid:9) 7 8 9 1 0 11 1 2 - . 27 * . 20 - . 30 * . 20 . 01 (cid:9) . 37 * . 55 * . 34 * . 33 * . 32 * . 25 * - . 91 * - . 03 - . 02 . 14 (cid:9) . 03 . 28 * . 28 * . 18 . 1 9 . 06 - - . 04 - . 03 . 14 (cid:9) . 10 . 24 * . 27 * . 15 . 22 * . 02 - - . 15 - . 05 - . 05 . 03 - . 07 - . 21 - . 13 - . 12 - . 20 (cid:9) . 1 7 . 11 . 15 - . 08 . 31 * . 25 * - - . 07 . 11 . 29 * . 05 . 12 . 02 - . 28 * . 00 . 21 . 22 * . 1 2 - . 33 * . 21 . 24 * . 20 - . 20 . 18 . 28 * - . 02 . 27 * Variable M SD I . Team size 7 . 44 3 . 60 2 . Assets ( $ millions ) 14 . 75 25 . 31 3 . Number of employees ( in thousands ) 9 . 86 1 3 . 20 4 . Founding date 1 , 966 . 25 1 2 . 12 5 . Age heterogeneity . 18 . 13 6 . Tenure heterogeneity . 58 . 24 7 . Education heterogeneity . 50 . 31 8 . College heterogeneity . 79 . 09 9 . Curriculum heterogeneity . 26 . 18 1 0 . Other industry experience heterogeneity . 40 . 12 11 . Military experience heterogeneity . 31 . 20 12 . Turnover rate ( 3 years ) . 32 . 23 Note . N = 93 teams in 1985 . * p < . 05 ( two - tailed ) . for the elite subgroup was regressed on these two variables , a significant beta coefficient was obtained for average age only . Finally , a check for suppression effects revealed none . The mean of the average ages of the teams in this study was 54 . 23 years ( SD = 5 . 09 ) . The mean of the average ages of the elite subgroups ( M = 59 . 64 , SD = 5 . 54 ) was significantly higher than the mean of the average ages of the nonelite subgroups ( M = 52 . 75 , SD = 5 . 37 ) paired t ( 70 ) = 6 . 28 , p < . 00 1 . Interest - ingly ; the elite and nonelite subgroups had nearly the same rates of turnover ( Ms = . 33 and . 32 ) . Given these results , it appears that age was a more important predictor of turnover for groups whose members were older and closer to retirement age than for groups with younger members . In all subsequent regression analyses involving turnover rates , we included average age as a control variable . We included this control variable regardless of whether we were examining relationships for the whole team or for the elite and nonelite subgroups to facilitate comparisons across results for these - different units of analysis . Group Size Regression analyses conducted to assess the relationship be - tween group size and turnover rate revealed a significant rela - tionship . as expected ( R 2 = . 06 , p < . 05 ) . For the group as a whole , when team turnover rate was regressed on average age and the seven heterogeneity indices , entered first , and team size , entered second , the effect of team size was nonsignificant ( AR ' = . 00 , ns ) . For the elite subgroup , subgroup size and sub - group turnover rate were significantly related ( R 2 = . 1 0 , p < . 05 ) ; however , when turnover rate was regressed on average age and the seven heterogeneity indices , entered first , and subgroup size . entered second . the effect of size was nonsignificant ( R 2 = . 00 . ns ) . For the nonelite subgroup . no significant relationship was found between subgroup size and turnover rate , regardless of whether size was considered alone ( R ' = . 02 , ns ) or in combi - nation with the heterogeneity indices ( AR ' = . 00 , ns ) . Overall , these analyses indicated that size did not need to be included as a control variable in subsequent analyses . Hypothesis 2 To test the hypothesis that attribute heterogeneity would pre - dict team turnover rates , we regressed team turnover rate on average age . entered first ( R 2 = . 00 , ns ) , and the seven indices of heterogeneity , entered second . The set of heterogeneity vari - ables explained a significant proportion of the variance in team turnover ( AR 2 = . 22 , p < . 05 ) . The beta coefficients revealed significant unique effects for heterogeneity of age ( S = . 35 , p < . 05 ) and experience outside the industry ( S = . 22 , p < . 05 ) and a marginally significant effect for college curriculum heterogene - ity ( 0 = . 20 , p < . 10 ) . These results , shown in Table 3 , supported Hypothesis 2 . Hypothesis 3 To test the hypothesis that subgroup status would interact with team heterogeneity to predict turnover rate , we conducted regression analyses in which status - based subgroups were treated as the units of analysis . First , elite and nonelite sub - SOME DIFFERENCES MAKE A DIFFERENCE 683 groups were both included in a single regression analysis . In analyses carried out for each heterogeneity index , turnover was regressed on average subgroup age , entered on the first step , subgroup status and the relevant heterogeneity index , both en - tered on the second step , and the relevant interaction term ( Sta - tus X Heterogeneity ) , entered on the third step . These seven analyses revealed only one significant interaction ( for college alma mater ) . Next , elite and nonelite subgroups were examined separately . Turnover was regressed on age , entered first , and the seven heterogeneity indicators , entered second . The results , summarized in Table 3 , reveal that group heterogeneity was equally predictive of turnover from the elite and nonelite sub - groups ( OR2 = . 22 , p < . 05 ) . Thus , Hypothesis 3 was not sup - ported . Hypothesis 4 We predicted that reliance on internal recruitment as a means for filling team vacancies would result in greater homo - geneity , in comparison with reliance on external recruitment . Bivariate correlation coefficients were evaluated and three re - gression analyses were conducted to test this hypothesis . In all analyses , the predictor variable was percentage of new team members who had been recruited from inside the firm during the time period studied , and the dependent variables were the team heterogeneity indices for the 1988 team . The average team in our sample recruited 43 % of all new team members from inside the firm . The percentage of new members who were recruited from within the firm was significantly ( p < . 05 ) correlated in the predicted direction with four of the attribute heterogeneity vari - ables : age ( r = - . 30 ) , college curriculum ( r = - . 22 ) , experience outside the industry ( r = - . 25 ) , and military experience ( r = - . 20 ) . Canonical correlation analysis also provided support for Hypothesis 4 : Reliance on internal recruitment accounted for 21 . 1 % of the variance in the canonical variate of heterogeneity indices for the 1988 teams ( Wilks ' lambda = . 80 , Pillai - Bartlett trace = . 19 , and Hotellings T 2 = . 24 , all ps < . O 1 ) . Inspection of the standardized canonical function coefficients indicated that reliance on internal recruitment was most predictive ofhomoge - neity with respect to age , industry experience , and military ex - perience . Hypothesis 5 Hypothesis 5 predicted that team members whose personal attributes were dissimilar to their teammates would be more likely to leave the team than would team members with similar personal attributes . Multiple regression analyses were used to test this hypothesis . Age was entered on the first step ( R2 = . 03 . p < . 05 ) . When the seven attribute - dissimilarity variables were entered on the second step , a significant but small amount of additional variance in turnover was accounted for ( AR ' = . 04 , p < . 05 ) . Beta weights for the full equation indicated that members were significantly ( p < . 05 ) more likely to leave if they were older ( / 3 = . 18 ) and dissimilar to their teammates in terms of education level ( / 3 = . 10 ) , college curriculum ( 0 = . 12 ) . and experience outside the industry ( ( 3 = . 11 ) . These results , shown in Table 4 , support Hypothesis 5 . 684 JACKSON , BRETT , SESSA , COOPER , JULIN , PEYRONNIN Table 3 Regression Results for Equations Relating Turnover Rate to Team and Subgroup Heterogeneity ' Only subgroups with three or more members were included in the analyses . b Values are for final equation , after all variables have been entered . * p < . 10 . * * p < . 05 . Consideration of each of these significant predictors raises the question of whether these results truly reflect a dissimilarity effect . An alternative explanation might be that those who are dissimilar on these variables also have more job mobility . This would be the case if the more dissimilar members were also the more highly educated and the more broadly experienced members . To test this possibility , we conducted a regression analysis in which age was entered on the first step , other per - sonal attributes per se ( e . g . , education level ) were entered on the second step , and dissimilarity measures ( e . g . , dissimilarity in education level ) were entered on the third step . This analysis indicated that personal attributes other than age were not pre - dictive of turnover ; significant beta coefficients were obtained only for age and the dissimilarity measures . Hypothesis 6 The strength of the relationship between attribute dissimilar - ity and turnover was predicted to be weaker for elite team Table 4 Regression Results for Equations Relating Turnover Rate From the 1985 Team to Personal Attribute Dissimilarity Values are for final equation , after all variables have been entered . * p < . 05 . members than for nonelite team members . For elite team members , turnover was significantly associated only with age ( AR 2 = . 06 , p < . 05 ) . Attribute dissimilarity did not account for a significant amount of variance when entered in the second step ( AR 2 = . 02 ) ; no beta coefficients for dissimilarity were significant in the final equation . For nonelite team members , both age ( AR 2 = . 03 , p < . 05 ) and the set of attribute - dissimilar - ity indicators ( AR ' = . 06 , p < . 05 ) were significantly associated with turnover . Beta weights for the full equation indicated that nonelite team members were more likely to leave ( p < . 05 ) if they were older ( 0 = . 18 ) and dissimilar to their teammates with respect to education level ( 0 = . 12 ) , college curriculum ( , 8 = . 1 4 ) , and experience outside the industry ( ( 3 = . 13 ) . These results , shown in Table 4 , appear to support Hypothesis 6 . However , when moderated regression was used to test the statistical signif - icance of the interaction effects , none reached acceptable levels of significance . Thus , although the direction of the results was as predicted , the strength of the results was weak . Predictors fi b AR 2 „CP qb AR ' s " fi b AR 2 „ ep Step 1 : age . 12 . 00 . 09 . 00 . 28 * * . 1 3 * * Step 2 : dissimilarity indices . 22 * * . 22 * * . 22 * * Age . 35 * * . 19 . 06 Tenure - . 08 - . 02 - . 03 Education level . 03 . 10 - . 06 College alma mater . 08 - . 13 . 33 * * Curriculum . 20 * . 29 * * . 11 Experience outside industry . 22 * * . 34 * * . 18 Military experience - . 13 . 07 - . 13 All team members ( N = 625 ) Nonelite members only ( n = 422 ) Elite members only ( n = 203 ) Predictors 0 ' - step # . AR 2 P " 0 ' A R 2 " CP Step 1 : age . 18 * . 03 * . 18 * . 03 * . 26 * . 06 * Step 2 : dissimilarity indices . 04 * . 06 * . 02 Age . 01 . 05 - . 08 Tenure - . 02 - . 05 . 06 Education level . 10 * . 12 * . 01 College alma mater - . 06 - . 06 - . 01 Curriculum . 12 * . 14 * . 08 Experience outside industry . 11 . 13 * . 08 Military experience - . 04 - . 05 - . 01 Nonelite Whole teams subgroups ' Elite subgroups ' ( N = 93 ) ( n = 71 ) ( n = 76 ) Hypothesis 7 Our final hypothesis predicted that promotion from nonelite to elite status within the team would be more likely for nonelite members who were relatively similar to their elite - status team - mates than for nonelite members who were dissimilar . A multi - ple regression analysis in which age was entered first ( R 2 = . 00 ) , followed by the set of attribute - dissimilarity scores ( AR 2 = . 01 ) , provided no support for this hypothesis . We conducted several exploratory analyses to determine whether the use of alterna - tive indices of dissimilarity would yield different results . The alternative indices included dissimilarity from nonelite team members , dissimilarity from the team as a whole , and dissimi - larity from the longer tenured elite members . Regardless of the dissimilarity index used , there were no significant relationships between demographic dissimilarity and promotion from non - elite to elite status . However , because only 5 % of nonelite team members experienced a promotion during the time period for which data were available , range restriction for the promotion variable limits our ability to draw conclusions about the effect of similarity on probability of promotion . Discussion This study contributes to the existing literature in three ways : ( a ) It elaborates and tests hypotheses based on Schneider ' s ( 1987 ) ASA model , which is grounded in an interactionist per - spective on organizational behavior ; ( b ) it elaborates and tests hypotheses based on Pfeffer ' s ( 1983 ) organizational demogra - phy model , which is grounded in a sociological perspective on organizational behavior ; and ( c ) it highlights the complemen - tary nature of these two models and illustrates the potential value of integrating the two theoretical perspectives . We ad - dress each of these contributions in turn . Attraction - Selection - Attrition Model Schneider ' s ( 1987 ) ASA model begins with the assumption that organizations are composed of individuals who are rela - tively homogeneous with respect to psychological attributes , such as attitudes , values , and personality . Psychological attrib - utes are known to be associated with demographic attributes , so we extended Schneider ' s arguments to hypothesize that organi - zations would be relatively homogeneous with respect to their demographic backgrounds . The empirical evidence was consis - tent with this hypothesis . Executives within firms were more similar to each other than they were to executives in other firms in our sample with respect to age , education level , college curric - ulum , military experience , and length of tenure in their firm . In contrast to studies of psychological attributes , which can be influenced by experiences subsequent to group entry , most of the personal characteristics we assessed were attributes that characterized individuals prior to their entry into the teams we studied and would not be influenced by their experiences within those groups ( length of tenure is an exception to this statement ) . Therefore , conformity and group socialization pro - cesses , which might cause group members to become similar over time with respect to values and attitudes ( see Newcomb , 1 953 , 1961 ) , can be ruled out as explanations for group homoge - neity . With conformity and socialization effects ruled out as SOME DIFFERENCES MAKE A DIFFERENCE (cid:9) 685 explanations for the clustering together of similar executives , Schneider ' s ( 1987 ) assertion that selection and attrition pro - cesses explain within - group homogeneity is bolstered . Schneider ' s ( 1987 ) description of how selection and attrition processes create homogeneous organizations emphasized indi - vidual psychological processes . He argued that , in organiza - tional settings , the tendency of people to be attracted to similar others and to feel uncomfortable among dissimilar others leads them to ( a ) seek membership in groups composed of people perceived to be similar to themselves , ( b ) select into their groups people they perceive to be similar to themselves ( the similarity - selection effect ) , and ( c ) discontinue their member - ship in groups whose members are uncomfortably dissimilar to themselves ( the dissimilarity - attrition effect ) . We tested hy - potheses about the latter two processes only . Similarity - Selection Effect To assess the similarity - . selection effect , we examined pro - motions from lower to higher status positions within the top management team . For promotions , our analyses revealed no direct evidence to support the hypothesized similarity bias , which has been found in other studies ( Arvey & Campion , 1 982 ) . Several explanations for this are possible : The small num - ber of promotions that occurred may have limited our ability to detect a similarity bias ; the similarity bias may operate for pro - motions within top management teams , but not for the particu - lar variables we assessed ; the value of promoting the most quali - fied people may be sufficiently great for executives selecting new members of top management teams that no similarity bias occurs ; or the similarity among executives within top manage - ment teams may be so great that there is little potential for a similarity bias to create effects in the promotion process . This latter explanation is consistent with our first result , that is , that executives are clustered into homogeneous teams . Thus , it may be that the similarity - selection bias has its greatest effects on entry - level selection decisions and promotions at the lower lev - els of organizations . Additional research is needed to examine these possible explanations . Dissimilarity - * Attrition Effect To assess the dissimilarity - • attrition effect , we examined individual turnover . Our results support the conclusion that dissimilar members were more likely to leave the team . Dissimi - larity with respect to education level , college curriculum , and industry experience were most predictive of turnover . With the exception of age , personal attributes per se did not predict turn - over from the group . This latter finding provides strong support for the interactionist perspective , which highlights the role of person - environment fit in determining behavior and argues for the importance of taking interpersonal contexts into account when explaining behavior . Status as a Moderator Status inequality is a fact of life in hierarchically organized work settings . We studied individuals with positions high in the status hierarchy . Although Schneider ( 1987 ) did not discuss hier - 686 (cid:9) JACKSON , BRETT , SESSA , COOPER , JULIN , PEYRONNIN archical status as a potentially important mediator of the effects of a similarity bias , we suggested that weaker effects ofa similar - ity bias might be found for executives at the highest status level . The direction of our results was consistent with this expectation ( see Table 4 ) , although tests for interaction effects failed to reach statistical significance . Because the two status levels compared in this study were only modestly unequal , we believe future research should con - tinue to attend to status as a theoretically important construct . Future studies that compare the strength of the similarity bias for people at more discrepant organizational status levels may find stronger effects . Consideration of status level as a potential moderator vari - able is important for at least two reasons . First , because the sample for this study was made up of top level executives , it is possible that the effects we found are weaker than those that would be found at the lower status levels , where the majority of people are employed . Second , evidence of an interaction of the form we predicted between status level and dissimilarity effects would support the conclusion that strong situational incentives for maximizing the effectiveness of a work team , which are generally more salient at higher organizational levels , can effec - tively reduce the tendency of people to allow the similarity bias to influence their behaviors in detrimental ways . Research is needed to learn more about how situational incentives might be used to inhibit the similarity bias as an influence on both selec - tion of new group members and the turnover decisions of em - ployees because , for employers , the dysfunctional conse - quences of turnover decisions stimulated by feelings of poor person - organization fit can be as significant as the dysfunc - tional consequences of bias during selection of new organiza - tion members . Demography Model Several previously published studies have tested hypotheses derived from Pfeffer ' s ( 1983 ) demography model of organiza - tional behavior . These studies share several common features , including use of intact organizational groups as the targets of study , use of demographics ( age and tenure , in particular ) as the basis for defining predictor variables , and use of sociometric indices for assessing group heterogeneity . The outcomes stud - ied have included turnover ( McCain , O ' Reilly , & Pfeffer , 1983 ; O ' Reilly et al . , 1989 ; Pfeffer & O ' Reilly , 1987 ; Wagner et al . , 1984 ) , communications ( Zenger & Lawrence , 1989 ) , innovation ( Bantel & Jackson , 1989 ) , and liking , role ambiguity , and perfor - mance ratings ( Tsui & O ' Reilly , 1989 ) . The present study adds to the demography literature in general and to the studies of turn - over in particular in two significant ways . First , several method - ological improvements were made : The number of firms stud - ied was considerably larger than in most previous research ; more demographic attributes were examined simultaneously and some new demographic attributes were included ; and we conducted a variety of analyses designed to rule out possible confounding variables that might spuriously create associations between group heterogeneity and our outcome variables . Sec - ond , some theoretical extensions were suggested : We extended the demography arguments to generate hypotheses about re - cruitment patterns and we showed how the interactionist per - spective could be integrated with the demography literature to develop hypotheses about the behavior of individuals . The design features noted above , in combination with find - ings that generally supported predictions based on the demogra - phy model , increase the strength of the evidence accumulating in this research area . In addition , the design and analysis fea - tures of this study may account for the differences between our results and those of others . Specifically , whereas others have concluded that tenure heterogeneity , but not age heterogeneity , is predictive of group turnover rates ( McCain et al . , 1983 ; Wagner et al . , 1984 ) , our results suggest that , when age level is controlled for , age distributions may be more powerful predic - tors of turnover rates than are tenure distributions ; we found no evidence of a significant effect for tenure level or tenure hetero - geneityCaution is called for when drawing conclusions about the relative predictive power of age and tenure heterogeneity , how - ever . In general , whether age or tenure heterogeneity is more predictive of turnover in a particular instance may be affected by the extent to which cohort differences reflect significant differences in experiences , for it is these differences in experi - ences that are likely to account for the differing attitudes and perspectives that are assumed to explain the demographic ef - fects . ( Note , however , that age effects may be due , in part , to developmental phenomena that operate independently of so - cietal conditions ) For example , age heterogeneity may have more substantial consequences if members of the age cohorts being studied experienced meaningful differences in societal conditions , such as economic booms versus busts or times of peace versus war . Tenure heterogeneity may have significant consequences primarily when organizational cohorts have expe - rienced meaningfully different organizational conditions , such as expansion versus decline or reliance on fundamentally differ - ent competitive strategies . In the present study , age heterogeneity was not the only de - mography variable found to be predictive of group turnover rates . Significant bivariate correlations were found between six of the seven heterogeneity indices included in the study ; regres - sion analyses showed that the set of seven heterogeneity indices explained 22 % of the variance in turnover . These results show that attributes other than age and tenure can be successfully incorporated into research on organizational demography . Re - search that includes additional background characteristics would serve the demography literature well because it would produce a closer match between Pfeffer ' s ( 1983 ) theoretical model and empirical tests of his model . However , we caution researchers against searching for " the most important " ( i . e . , most predictive ) types of demographic heterogeneity . For statis - tical reasons and for a variety of theoretical reasons that are beyond the scope of this discussion ( but see Turner , 1987 ) , the particular demographic attributes that affect the feelings and behaviors of group members are likely to depend on the distri - butions of a large set of demographic attributes , including those we assessed but also including others , such as sex , race , ethnic - ity , and religion . Complementarity and Integration of the Two Models Demographic and Psychological Attributes A salient difference between the ASA and demography mod - els is that the former emphasizes psychological attributes whereas the latter emphasizes demographic attributes . The pre - dictive power of demographic dissimilarity and demographic heterogeneity has been investigated in several field studies . Al - though reports of those studies generally reveal the researchers ' assumption that differences in psychological attributes explain why demographic attributes are predictive of behavior , the ex - planatory value of psychological attributes has not yet been demonstrated empirically in field studies of selection or turn - over . In the future , research that assesses both demographic and psychological attributes is needed to test this assumption and provide an empirical basis for integrating the ASA and demog - raphy models . Individual , Relational , and Group Level Predictors of Turnover Traditionally , industrial and organizational psychologists have favored theories and propositions relating individual char - acteristics per se to behaviors such as turnover , and they have ignored the explanatory power that might be gained by con - sidering either relational measures , which are indicators of how the characteristics of individuals compare with those of others within their work group , or measures of group characteristics . Conversely , sociologists tend to ignore individual characteris - tics when formulating theories to explain group - and organiza - tional - level phenomena . For this study , we obtained three types of measures : Individ - ual attributes were assessed , primarily for methodological rea - sons rather than because of their theoretical interest . The seven dissimilarity measures were , by definition , relational measures that carried information about people in the context of their particular groups : they were obtained to test hypotheses de - rived from an interactional psychology perspective , which were stated as predictions about individual outcomes ( turnover and promotion ) . The seven heterogeneity indicators were measures of group characteristics , obtained to test hypotheses derived from a sociological perspective , which were stated as predic - tions about group outcomes . Neither Schneider ' s ( 1987 ) ASA model nor Pfeffer ' s ( 1983 ) organizational demography model specifically include proposi - tions about cross - level effects , and we did not formally state hypotheses about cross - level effects . Nevertheless , the develop - ment of explicitly stated cross - level propositions are a potential means for integrating the two models . Although a full treat - ment of the theoretical integration that might be achieved by cross - level hypotheses is beyond the scope of this discussion , we illustrate here the form such propositions might take . One form of cross - level propositions that could be used to integrate the two models would be those that treat group char - acteristics ( e . g . , heterogeneity ) as predictors of individual behav - ior . A recently published study ( O ' Reilly et al . , 1989 ) suggests that group heterogeneity may predict individual turnover . O ' Reilly et al . found that group heterogeneity affects group dy - SOME DIFFERENCES MAKE A DIFFERENCE 687 namics . Group dynamics may , in turn , affect the turnover pro - pensities of each group member , regardless of his or her own dissimilarity . For example , if heterogeneity tends to generate conflict among members , the higher level of conflict within heterogeneous groups may cause similar and dissimilar members alike to leave the group . If this proposition is true , then group heterogeneity should explain some of the variance in individual turnover behavior even after dissimilarity effects have been taken into account . In a supplemental regression analysis , we tested for a cross - level effect between group heterogeneity and individual turn - over . Age was entered as a predictor on the first step , the seven dissimilarity indicators were entered on the second step , and the seven heterogeneity indicators were entered on the third step . The results indicated that individual turnover was signifi - cantly ( p < . 05 ) associated with both the relational measures of dissimilarity ( A R 2 = . 04 , as reported earlier ) and the group mea - sures of heterogeneity ( AR ' = . 03 ) . This finding is consistent with Schneider ' s ( 1987 ) argument that individual attributes create group contexts , and it underscores the important point that group behaviors in turn influence individual behavior . The latter type of cross - level influence loop , from the group context back to individual behavior , has received almost no attention in research on turnover , in particular , or in organizational behav - ior research , in general . The lack of such cross - level influence loops in models of organizational behavior reflects a tendency to formulate models to predict either individual behavior or group behavior . Our supplemental analysis illustrates how the predictive power of theories about turnover could be enhanced by theoretical extensions that use cross - level propositions to integrate theories formulated at the individual and group levels of analysis ( see Rousseau , 1985 ) . Role of Personnel Practices in Creating Homogeneity Finally , we note that this study provides some support for Pfeffer ' s ( 1983 ) suggestion that personnel policies and practices are partial determinants of the demographic distributions cre - ated in organizations . On the basis of an integrative interpreta - tion of the demography and ASA models , we predicted that recruitment practices would predict demographic distribu - tions . Our results indicate that reliance on internal recruitment contributes to the creation of homogeneous top management teams . This finding , in combination with research which shows that firms headed by homogeneous top management teams are less innovative , is consistent with Schneider ' s ( 1987 ) assertion that recruitment processes are key to creating organizations capable of change . Taken as a whole , this study illustrates the value of investigat - ing the multiple influences of personnel practices , group pro - cesses , and individual psychology when attempting to under - stand behavior in organizations . Given the increasing demo - graphic diversity of the American work force ( Johnston & Packer , 1987 ) , findings such as those we have presented here suggest that additional research designed to improve under - standing of how group heterogeneity affects behavior in work organizations is likely to have both practical and scientific util - ity ( see Jackson , 1991 ) . 688 References Allison , P D . ( 1978 ) . Measures of inequality American Sociological Review 43 . 865 - 880 . Anderson , T W ( 1984 ) . . 4n introduction to multivariate statistical anal _ v - sis . New York : Wiley . Arvey , R . D . , & Campion , J . E . ( 1982 ) . The employment interview : A summary and review of recent research . Personnel Psychology : 35 , 281 - 322 . Banas , P A . ( 1988 ) . Employee involvement : A sustained labor / manage - ment initiative at the Ford Motor Company In J . P . Campbell , R . J . Campbell , & Associates ( Eds . ) , Productivity in organizations . New perspectives from industrial and organizational psychology ( pp . 388 - 416 ) . San Francisco : Jossey - Bass . Bantel . K . A . , & Jackson , S . E . ( 1989 ) . Top management and innova - tions in banking : Does the composition of the top team make a difference ? Strategic Management Journal , 10 ( Special issue ) , 107 - 1 24 . Bass , B . M . ( 1981 ) . Stogdills handbook of leadership . A survey of theory and research . New York : Free Press . Berger , C . C . , & Cummings , L . L . ( 1979 ) . Organizational structure , attitudes , and behavior . In B . M . Staw ( Ed . ) , Research in organiza - tional behavior ( Vol . 1 , pp . 169 - 208 ) . Greenwich , CT : JAI Press . Berscheid , E . ( 1985 ) . Interpersonal attraction . In G . Lindzey & E . Ar - onson ( Eds . ) , The handbook of social psychology ( Vol . 2 , pp . 413 - 484 ) . New York : Random House . Blau . P . M . ( 1970 ) . A formal theory of differentiation in organizations . American Sociological Review , 35 , 201 - 218 . Blau . P M . ( 1977 ) . Inequality and heterogeneity New York : Free Press . Bray , J . H . , & Maxwell , S . E . ( 1985 ) . Multivariate analysis of variance . Beverly Hills , CA : Sage . Byrne , D . ( 1971 ) . The attraction paradigm . New York : Academic Press . Cotton , J . L . , & Tuttle , J . M . ( 1986 ) . Employee turnover : A meta - analy - sis with implications for research . Academy of Management Review , 11 , 55 - 70 . Daft , R . L . , & Weick , K . E . ( 1984 ) . Toward a model of organizations as interpretation systems . Academy of : Management Review 9 , 284 - 296 . Dalton , D . R . , & Kesner . I . F ( 1985 ) . Organizational performance as an antecedent of inside / outside chief executive succession : An empiri - cal assessment . Academy of Management Journal , 28 , 749 - 762 . Datan , N . , Rodeheaver , D . , & Hughes , F . ( 1987 ) . Adult development and aging . Annual Review of Psychology : 38 , 15 3 - 180 . Dearborn , D . , & Simon , H . A . ( 1958 ) . Selective perception : A note on the departmental identification of executives . Sociometry , 35 , 38 - 48 . Dun & Bradstreet . ( 1985 - 1988 ) . Reference book of corporate manage - ments . New York : Author . Elder , G . H . , Jr . ( 1974 ) . Children of the great depression . Chicago : Uni - versity of Illinois Press . Elder , G . H . , Jr . ( 1975 ) . Age differentiation and the life course . Annual Review of Sociology , 1 , 1 65 - 190 . Finkelstein , S . , & Hambrick , D C . ( 1990 ) . Top management team ten - ure and organizational outcomes : The moderating role of manage - rial discretion . Administrative Science Quarterly , 35 , 484 - 503 . Friedman , S . D . , & Singh , H . ( 1989 ) . CEO succession and stockholder reaction : The influence of organizational context and event context . Academy of Management Journal , 2 , 718 - 744 . George , J . M . ( 1990 ) . Personality , affect , and behavior in groups . Jour - nal of Applied Psychology , 75 , 107 - 116 . Gerstein , J . , & Reisen , H . ( 1983 , Winter ) . Strategic selection : Matching executives to business conditions . Sloan Management Review , pp . 33 - 49 . Gomez - Mejia , L . R . , & Welbourne , T . M . ( 1989 ) . Strategic design of executive compensation programs . In L . R . Gomez - Mejia ( Ed . ) , JACKSON , BRETT , SESSA , COOPER , JULIN , PEYRONNIN Compensation and benefits ( pp . 216 - 269 ) . Washington , DC : Bureau of National Affairs . Gupta , A . , & Govindarajan , V ( 1984 ) . Business unit strategy , manage - rial characteristics , and business unit effectiveness at strategy imple - mentation . Academy of Management Journal . 27 , 25 - 41 . Guthrie , J . P , Olian , J . D . , & Gupta , A . K . ( 1990 ) . Does context affect staffing decisions ? The case of general managers . Unpublished manu - script , University of Kansas . Hambrick , D . C . , Geletkanycz , M . A . , & Fredrickson , J . W ( 1990 , Au - gust ) . Top executive commitment to the status quo : Some tests of its determinants . Paper presented at the 50th Annual Meeting of the Academy of Management , San Francisco . Hambrick , D C . , & Mason , P A . ( 1984 ) . Upperechelons : The organiza - tion as a reflection of its top managers . Academy of Management Review , 9 , 193 - 206 . Harrison , J . R . , Torres , D . L . . & Kukalis , S . ( 1988 ) . The changing of the guard : Turnover and structural change in the top - management posi - tions . Administrative Science Quarterly 33 , 211 - 232 . Hastie , R . , Ostrom , T . M . , Ebbesen , E . B . , Wyer . R . S . , Jr . , Hamilton , D . L . , & Carlston , D . E . ( Eds ) ( 1980 ) . Person memory : The cognitive basis of social perception . Hillsdale , NJ : Erlbaum . Hays , W L . ( 1981 ) . Statistics . New York : Holt , Rinehart , & Winston . Hofer , C . W ( 1980 ) . Turnaround strategies . Journal of Business Strat - egy : 1 ( 1 ) , 1 9 - 31 . Hogg , M . A . , & Abrams , D . ( 1988 ) . Social identifications . London : Routledge & Kegan Paul . Holland , J . L . ( 1976 ) . Vocational preferences . In M . D . Dunnette ( Ed . ) . Handbook of industrial organizational psychology ( pp . 521 - 570 ) . Chicago : Rand McNally . Holland , J . L . ( 1985 ) . Making vocational choices : A theory of careers . Englewood Cliffs , NJ : Prentice - Hall . Jackson , S . E . ( 1991 ) . Team composition in organizational settings : Issues in managing an increasingly diverse workforce . In S . Worchel . W Wood . , & J . Simpson ( Eds ) , Group process and productivity ( pp . 1 38 - 173 ) . Beverly Hills , CA : Sage . Johnston , W B . . & Packer , A . H . ( 1987 ) . Workforce 2000 . Indianapolis . IN : Hudson Institute . Kanter , R . M . ( 1977 ) . Some effects of proportions on group life : Skewed sex ratios and responses to token women . American Journal of Sociology : 82 , 965 - 990 . Kerr . J . , & Slocum , J . W , Jr . ( 1987 ) . Managing corporate culture through reward systems . Academy of Management Executive , 1 . 99 - 108 . Kotter , J . , & Sathe , V ( 1978 , Winter ) . Problems of human resource management in rapidly growing companies . California . Management Review pp . 26 - 36 . Levine , J . M . , & Moreland , R . L . ( 1990 ) . Progress in small group re - search . Annual Review of Psychology , 41 , 585 - 634 . Lott , A . J . , & Lott , B . E . ( 1965 ) . Group cohesiveness and interpersonal attraction : A review of relationships with antecedent and consequent variables . Psychological Bulletin , 4 , 259 - 302 . Majchrzak , A . ( 1988 ) . Thehuman side offactory automation . San Fran - cisco : Jossey - Bass . McCain , B . R . , O ' Reilly , C . C . , III , & Pfeffer , J . ( 1983 ) . The effects of departmental demography on turnover . Academy of Management Journal , 26 , 626 - 641 . Mobley , W H . , Griffeth , R . W , Hand , H . H . , & Meglino , B . M . ( 1979 ) . Review and conceptual analysis of the employee turnover process . Psychological Bulletin , 86 , 483 - 522 . Moody ' s Investor Service . ( 1985 - 1988 ) . Moody c bank and finance man - ual . New York : Author . Mowday . R . T , Porter , L . W , & Steers , R . M . ( 1982 ) . Employee - organi - zation linkages : The psychology of commitment , absenteeism , and turnover . New York : Academic Press .