A R T I C L E S Fluctuations of intracellular forces during cell protrusion Lin Ji 1 , James Lim 1 and Gaudenz Danuser 1 , 2 We present a model to estimate intracellular force variations from live - cell images of actin filament ( F - actin ) flow during protrusion - retraction cycles of epithelial cells in a wound healing response . To establish a mechanistic relationship between force development and cytoskelal dynamics , force fluctuations were correlated with fluctuations in F - actin turnover , flow and F - actin – vinculin coupling . Our analyses suggest that force transmission at focal adhesions requires binding of vinculin to F - actin and integrin ( indirectly ) , which is modulated at the vinculin – integrin but not the vinculin – F - actin interface . Force transmission at focal adhesions is colocalized in space and synchronized in time with transient increases in the boundary force at the cell edge . Surprisingly , the maxima in adhesion and boundary forces lag behind maximal edge advancement by about 40 s . Maximal F - actin assembly was observed about 20 s after maximal edge advancement . On the basis of these findings , we propose that protrusion events are limited by membrane tension and that the characteristic duration of a protrusion cycle is determined by the efficiency in reinforcing F - actin assembly and adhesion formation as tension increases . Cell protrusion requires the precise integration of F - actin polymeriza - tion at the leading edge 1 – 3 , coupling of F - actin to the extracellular matrix ( ECM ) 4 – 6 , and contraction 7 , 8 . Each of these force - generating processes has been characterized in great detail at the molecular level , but their coordina - tion in space and time , and their relationships to F - actin network dynamics are poorly understood . To study these aspects , intracellular forces must be mapped at spatial and temporal scales of protrusion dynamics 9 . Methods used to probe forces with subcellular resolution have included traction force microscopy ( TFM ) 5 , 10 – 12 , optical traps 13 , 14 and atomic force microscopy 15 , 16 . However , these measurements capture only the extracel - lular portion of cell - generated forces . They neither reveal the location of cell contraction nor the force balance between contraction and edge propulsion . In addition , they are mechanically invasive and offer limited insights into spatial force relationships , precluding undistorted analyses of force regulation . We have devised a mechanical model that relates variations in F - actin network flow , tracked by fluorescent speckle microscopy ( FSM ) , to vari - ations in intracellular force levels . On the basis of this model , we have mapped force fluctuations during protrusion and retraction cycles of epi - thelial cells with single - micron resolution . We found that adhesion force transients were inversely correlated with motion coupling of F - actin and vinculin speckles 4 . This indicates that cell adhesion is regulated at the vinculin – integrin but not the vinculin – F - actin interface . Spatiotemporal correlation of force fluctuations with F - actin assembly , flow and cell - edge movements established an inverse relationship between edge advance - ment and boundary force , suggesting that membrane tension limits cell protrusion in a dynamic cycle whose time scale is determined by putative feedback between tension increase and F - actin assembly . RESULTS Principles of force prediction and model assumptions Forces in lamellipodia and lamellae of epithelial cells were estimated from the F - actin network flow field u ( x , t ) , measured by quantitative FSM 17 , 18 ( Fig . 1a ) . Spatiotemporal gradients in direction and / or mag - nitude of the flow vectors indicate local deformations of the F - actin network ( Fig . 1b ) associated with intracellular forces ( Supplementary Information , Note 1 ) . Our goal was to predict the distribution of bound - ary forces F I at the leading edge ( ∂Ω LE ) , and contraction and adhesion forces ( F I + II ) inside the cellular region ( Ω ) , which would optimally explain the measured network deformation . The concept of force reconstruc - tion can be understood by analogy of a Hookean spring under tension ( Fig . 1c ) . The force F required to extend a spring is proportional to the extension u , relative to the relaxation length L ; that is , the external force is balanced by spring - internal stresses . The ratio ε = u / L is referred to as the strain . Knowing the spring constant k and the strain , force can be calculated from the equation F = kε . The material properties of a spring are well - defined and constant , but they are difficult to calibrate for an F - actin network and they change continually as the cell migrates . To date , no method exists to probe the material properties of F - actin in living cells at the spatial and temporal scale of FSM data . To fill this information gap , we based our analysis on four central assumptions : 1 ) at the length scale of live - cell light micros - copy ( ~ 0 . 5 – 1 µm ) , F - actin networks are locally isotropic and continuous ; 2 ) at the timescale of FSM movies ( 1 – 10 sec per frame ) , the response of F - actin networks to force changes is predominantly linearly elastic 19 ( Supplementary Information , Note 2 ) ; 3 ) at any time point , the F - actin network is in a resting quasi - steady state ; 4 ) the mechanical coupling of 1 Department of Cell Biology , The Scripps Research Institute , 10550 North Torrey Pines Road , La Jolla , CA 92037 , USA . 2 Correspondence should be addressed to G . D . ( e - mail : gdanuser @ scripps . edu ) Received 12 May 2008 ; accepted 23 September 2008 ; published online 16 November 2008 ; DOI : 10 . 1038 / ncb1797 nature cell biology volume 10 | number 12 | DeCember 2008 1393 © 2008 Macmillan Publishers Limited . All rights reserved . A RT I C L E S the lamellipodium and lamella actin networks 20 , 21 is sufficiently rigid to approximate the actin cytoskeleton at the leading edge as a single mate - rial entity ( Supplementary Information , Note 3 ) . There are two main sources of material anisotropy in F - actin networks : filament branching and filament bundling . Branching occurs an order of magnitude below the length scales observed by light microscopy . As indicated by our results below , filament bundles are often large enough to be resolved explicitly as force - bearing and / or force - generating struc - tures between isotropic regions . Thus , the simplification of an isotropic network mostly neglects small alignments of actin filaments that do not affect force predictions on a length scale of about1 µm . In view of the mainly elastic behaviour of F - actin over δ t = 1 – 10 s , we describe the flow changes between consecutive frames of FSM mov - ies as the transiently elastic response of the network to force applica - tion . Over ∆T of about 100 s , the network shows a plastic response as filaments disassemble and reassemble 22 , 23 . Stresses produced by shorter - term force transients are continually relaxed . The character - istics of such a material model are illustrated in Fig . 1d . Based on this model , force fluctuations can be predicted by analysis of the spatial and temporal variation of F - actin flow over short time - intervals δ t , assuming that the material properties between analysis points are in quasi - steady state . Inference of force transients F - actin flow fields were recorded with dense multi - fluorophore speck - les 17 , allowing the measurement of F - actin flow gradients over submi - cron distances . Using the continuum mechanical model and numerical force inference discussed in Supplementary Information , Notes 4 and 5 , we predicted maps of intracellular force transients ( Fig . 2a ) . These maps indicate force variations between different cellular locations and between time - points on a relative scale . Inference of absolute force levels would require measurements of the elastic properties of lamellipodial and lamellar F - actin structures . No method exists to accomplish this at the length scale of flow gradients . Nevertheless , relative force levels were sufficient to examine the modulation of contraction , adhesion and boundary forces during protrusion and retraction events . Boundary forces ( Fig . 2a , region I ) reflect the pressure that the growing F - actin network experiences at the cell edge . A region of forward - directed force vectors ( Fig . 2a , region II ) indicates the resistance F - actin retrograde flow experiences near the cell edge . A region of opposing retrograde and anterograde force vectors localizes about 10 µm behind the cell edge ( Fig . 2a , regions III and IV ) . Retrograde flow in region III is accompanied by forces parallel to the flow direction . Slower anterograde flow in region IV is accompanied by forces of almost similar magnitude . Conversely , fast flow speeds between regions II and III ( Fig . 2b ) are accompanied by low force levels ( Fig . 2a ) . These observations illustrate that ‘flow - speed’ and ‘force - strength’ are not directly related . Strong forces occur in regions with high strain , which is independent of the flow speed . The force reconstruction algorithm distinguishes between boundary forces F I and domain forces F II + III To estimate the contribution of adhe - sion and contraction to the domain force transients , we defined the cone rule ( Fig . 2c , d ; Supplementary Information , Note 6 ) , assuming that in adhesion - dominated regions , forces are anti - parallel to network flow , whereas force and flow vectors are approximately parallel in contraction - dominated regions . Accordingly , in Fig . 2e the lamellipodium at the cell edge is an adhesion - dominant region , whereas contraction - dominant regions distribute throughout the lamella . Figure 2e - I highlights a mixed - force region where adhesion forces are gradually overcome by contraction forces as the flow field is deflected into sites of higher contractile activ - ity . Further evaluation of the proposed model and numerical approach to force reconstruction was performed on simulated force - fields with simulated measurement noise ( Supplementary Information , Note 7 ) . We also tested the colocalization of contraction forces with myosin II motors ( Supplementary Information , Note 8 , Fig . S4 and Movie 1 ) and of adhe - sion forces with EGFP – vinculin ( Fig . 3a ) , following previous reports of correlations between vinculin density and traction force 5 , 24 . Overall , these analyses established the possibility of making predictions from F - actin flow of adhesion , contraction and boundary force transients that mediate morphological changes during protrusion and retraction . Strong adhesion forces require simultaneous linking of vinculin to F - actin and integrins Predicted high adhesion forces colocalized with high EGFP – vinculin intensity only in regions where the cell edge was in a protruding state ( Fig . 3a ) . High EGFP – vinculin signals could also be observed in the b Domain force Flow vector Boundary force F II t 1 + δ t t 1 c d F s h o r t t i m e s h o r t t i m e l o n g t i m e s c a l e L u t 2 t 1 u 1 u 2 u F 1 F 2 F L 1 L 2 a F III F I ∂Ω LE Ω ∂Ω IN δ t < < t 2 – t 1 t 1 + δ t t 2 + δ t Relative to L 1 Figure 1 Reconstruction of intracellular force transients from F - actin network flow . ( a ) Flow vectors measured by quantitative fluorescent speckle microscopy ( qFSM ; scale bar , 10 µ m . ) . ( b ) Network flow is driven by forces at the cell boundary ( ∂Ω LE ) and by domain forces within lamellipodium and lamella ( Ω ) . These forces generate transient deformations of the network , observed as spatial gradients in the displacement of fluorescent speckles over the time interval δ t between two consecutive frames ( illustrated by the transformation of a rectangle , ( dashed lines ) , into a polygon , ( solid lines ) ) . Network flows without spatial gradients indicate force free areas . ( c ) Force prediction from transient deformations of an elastic spring . ( d ) Model of the F - actin network as a transiently elastic material . Over a time scale 1 s ≤ δ t ≤ 10 s , crosslinked F - actin networks deform predominantly elastically 19 . Thus , the material behaves like an ensemble of springs . At longer timescales , ∆ T = t 2 – t 1 , ∆ T > > δ t , structures ( cyan ) break , whereas others ( green ) form ( plastic behaviour ) . As a result pre - stress in the network is relaxed , which preserves the elastic constant and resting length of the spring ensemble L 1 ≈ L 2 ; yet , the relationship between the deformation u and the actual force change from t 1 to t 2 is lost . When the extension is fast , compared with the timescale of remodelling , as from t 1 to t 1 + δ t or from t 2 to t 2 + δ t , force changes can be inferred as F 1 = ku 1 / L 1 and F 1 = ku 2 / L 2 . 1394 nature cell biology volume 10 | number 12 | DeCember 2008 © 2008 Macmillan Publishers Limited . All rights reserved . A RT I C L E S absence of adhesion forces ( Fig . 3b , upper panel ) . Kymograph analyses showed local cell - edge retraction and sliding of the focal adhesion sites in these regions ( Fig . 3a , T and B ) . In contrast , the adhesion site in the middle region ( Fig . 3a , M ) was stationary for about 15 min and the cell edge advanced by about 7 µm between 6 and 9 min ( Supplementary Information , Movie 2 ) . Previous analyses of the relative motion between F - actin and vinculin suggested that the motion coupling of spectrally distinct actin and vinculin speckles , assessed by the direction - coupling score ( DCS ) and the velocity - magnitude coupling score ( VMCS ) 4 , increased concurrently with sliding of the focal adhesion site ( Fig . 3b , green and blue curves , lower - right panel , T and B ) . In contrast , DCS and VMCS values fluctuated at a medium level when cells protruded ( Fig . 3b , lower - right panel , M ) . On the basis of these data , it was proposed that in protruding regions , vinculin would bind transiently and directly or indirectly to both F - actin and integrins , whereas in retracting regions , the link to the integrins would be selectively released . Thus , vinculin would be a key component of a regulatable slippage clutch that transmits forces from the F - actin network to the ECM . To test this hypothesis , further mechanical evidence was required , to show that changes in the motion coupling between vinculin and F - actin would alter force transmission . By combining intracellular force recon - struction and multispectral speckle analysis , we found that the predicted adhesion force increased when the motion of vinculin speckles was par - tially coupled to the F - actin flow , and disappeared when the motion of vinculin and F - actin speckles was fully coupled ( compare time - courses of VMCS / DCS with time - courses of adhesion force in Fig . 3b , c ) . Importantly , the only information used to predict these adhesion force changes was the temporal variation of F - actin flow gradients . Thus , force predictions and motion coupling of F - actin and vinculin speckles are independent variables reporting the dynamic state of adhesions . Coupling of predicted adhesion and boundary forces Efficient cell protrusion requires a balance of propulsive forces at the leading edge and adhesion forces behind the protruding sector . To investigate the coordination of propulsive and adhesive forces , we performed a spatiotemporal correlation analysis of boundary and e - II M i x e d z o n e Adhesion dominant C o n t r ac t i o n d o m i n a n t e 1 . 2 0 . 2 0 . 4 0 . 6 0 . 8 1 b Positive Cone Negative Contractiondominant Adhesiondominant F II + III F III c a e - I I I II III IV II Weak Strong A d h e s i o n f o r ce Mixedzone F II 18 0 45 0 Boundary force Domain force Flow vector µm min – 1 45 – 180 103 . 5 0 – 180 – 103 . 5 180 – 103 . 5 Angle to flow vector ( degree ) P o p u l a t i o n Mixed Mixed Adhesiondominant Contractiondominant 18 d Cone Figure 2 Prediction of intracellular forces from F - actin network flow in Fig . 1 . ( a ) Predicted force vectors ( cyan , boundary forces ; red , domain forces ) . Polygons I – IV highlight regions with different force characteristics . ( b ) Flow fields ( yellow vectors ) that would be produced by the predicted forces . Vectors are overlaid onto the colour - coded speed map of the measured network flow . Insert : comparison of the calculated ( yellow ) and measured ( green ) flow indicating the noise filtering during force reconstruction . ( c ) Cone rule to separate the contributions from adhesion and contraction to the predicted domain force . ( d ) Distribution of angles between predicted force vectors and measured flow vectors . ( e ) Classification of predicted forces following the cone rule . In adhesion - dominant regions the magnitude of the adhesion force component is colour - coded . Positions with significant contributions from both adhesion and contraction ( mixed zone ) are indicated by grey dots . Insets e - I and e - II show regions of mixed adhesion and contraction forces , respectively . Mixed forces are further decomposed into a contraction component ( blue ) and adhesion component ( magenta ) . Scale bar in a : 10 µ m . nature cell biology volume 10 | number 12 | DeCember 2008 1395 © 2008 Macmillan Publishers Limited . All rights reserved . A RT I C L E S adhesion force transients along the leading edge . Predicted force mag - nitudes were averaged in reporter windows that moved with the cell edge ( Fig . 4a ; Supplementary Information , Movie 3 ) and were copied column - by - column into a colour - coded matrix ( blue , weak forces ; red , strong forces ) referred to as activity maps ( Fig . 4b ) . Activity maps of adhesion and boundary forces show similar spatiotemporal organizations . Time ( min ) 0 . 5 7 . 5 4 14 . 5 11 Time ( min ) 1 0 . 6 0 . 20 . 5 5 14 . 5 10 Focal adhesion sliding 0 0 0 ( AU ) ( AU ) B M T Middle sector ( protrusion state ) Bottom sector ( retraction state ) ADHF VMCS ADHF VMCS 0 : 00 : 30 0 : 00 : 30 0 : 04 : 00 0 : 07 : 30 0 : 11 : 00 0 : 14 : 30 0 : 00 : 30 0 : 04 : 00 0 : 07 : 30 0 : 11 : 00 0 : 14 : 30 Weak Strong a b c A d h e s i o n f o r ce 0 . 1 0 . 5 1 . 0 T M B B M M VinculinActin Actin Vinculin Integrin Strong Weak Bond strength Actin flow Sliding FA / retraction d 0 : 14 : 30 0 : 07 : 30 * * * * * * * * I II III IV a b c d Vinculin flow Stationary FA / protrus Actin flow Vinculin flow EGFP - vinculin D C S & V M C S A D H F & B N D F Figure 3 Relationship between predicted adhesion forces and F - actin - vinculin interactions during protrusion and retraction . ( a ) Top left panel : adhesion force magnitude ( colour - coded ) and boundary force ( cyan vectors ; T , top ; M , middle , B , bottom ) . Top right panel : dual - colour FSM image of F - actin ( red ) and vinculin 4 ( green ) ( see Supplementary Information , Movie 2 ) . Bottom left panel : zoom of the middle sector M showing F - actin flow ( yellow vectors ) , adhesion forces ( red vectors ) overlaid to adhesion force magnitude ( colour - coded ) . Bottom right panel : EGFP – vinculin signal . ( b ) Top panels : adhesion force magnitude ( colour - coded ) and F - actin / vinculin signal in two time - points between which the cell edge in the bottom sector ( first ) and top sector ( second ) retracts and the adhesions slide ( asterisk ) . Bottom left panels : kymograph display of vinculin signal along three profiles indicated in the top panels . Bottom right panels : time - courses of the average adhesion ( ADHF ; red ) and boundary forces ( BNDF ; cyan ) in the top , bottom and middle sectors . Also shown are time - courses of the direction - coupling score ( DCS , green ) and the velocity - magnitude - coupling score ( VMCS , blue ) of F - actin and vinculin speckle motion 4 . Arrows : onset of decreasing adhesion and boundary forces , which correlates in time with increased motion coupling of F - actin and vinculin speckles . Asterisks : time - points of minimal adhesion forces ( correspond to asterisks in top row ) . Scale bars , 2 µ m . ( c ) Time montages of the adhesion force ( ADHF ) and the velocity magnitude coupling score ( VMCS ) in the middle and bottom sectors . Scale bars , 1 µ m . ( d ) Models of a vinculin - mediated clutch . 1396 nature cell biology volume 10 | number 12 | DeCember 2008 © 2008 Macmillan Publishers Limited . All rights reserved . A RT I C L E S Both forces drop in bottom and top sectors at 4 min and 10 min , respec - tively ( arrows ) . These events coincided with the onset of focal adhesion sliding ( Fig . 3b , arrows ) . To quantify the coupling of predicted boundary and adhesion force tran - sients , we computed their cross - correlation , as a function of both tempo - ral and spatial shifts . The resulting cross - correlation score map indicates whether the two forces are co - modulated and , if so , by how much ( Fig . 4c ) . The position of the maximal correlation score determines the time - lag between adhesion and boundary force transients ( horizontal displacement of the peak from 0 ) and the spatial shifts between force transients along the cell leading edge ( vertical displacement of the peak from 0 ) . A sharp peak at zero shifts was obtained : when the boundary force was high , the adhe - sion force was high , and vice versa . This finding suggests that adhesions adjacent to the leading edge balance propulsive forces , whereas network contraction contributes much less to the adhesion forces in this region . Timing of force modulation relative to morphological and cytoskeletal dynamic events Next , we applied spatiotemporal cross - correlation analysis to identify the timing between predicted boundary / adhesion forces ; velocities of cell edge movement 9 ; and rates of F - actin assembly / disassembly 23 . For each of these parameters , an activity map was constructed , in this example , using 24 reporter windows ( Fig . 5a ) . The cell shows a burst of forward motion in the sector of the leading edge approximately 5 µm wide , while remaining stationary or undergoing slow retraction in other sectors ( Supplementary Information , Movie 4 ) . The analyses confirmed that boundary and adhesion forces are colocalized and synchronized ( Fig . 5a - left , b - III / IV , c - i ) . Visual inspection of time - lapse sequences of adhesion / boundary force maps and maps of F - actin assembly / dis - assembly suggested that the forward movement of the cell edge was accompanied by transient increases in force and F - actin assembly ( Fig . 5a - right ) . Cross - correlation analysis revealed that the increase in boundary / adhesion force lags behind the increase in F - actin assembly by about 20 s ( Fig . 5a - right , b - III / IV / V , c - ii ; Supplementary Information , Movie 4 ) . Variations in assembly / disassembly rates also lag behind the corresponding variations in protrusion / retraction velocities by 20 s ( Fig . 5b - I / V , c - iii ) . Thus , boundary force increases should be delayed by 40 s relative to the corresponding protrusion event , as confirmed by cross - correlation ( Fig . 5b - I / IV , c - iv ) . Together , these analyses established the following sequence of events during cell protrusion ( Fig . 5d ) : initial activation of F - actin assembly causes the leading edge to advance rapidly against low plasma - membrane tension ( low boundary force ) . Hence , work produced by F - actin polym - erization is mostly converted into cell - edge advancement , and the protru - sion velocity is significantly higher than retrograde flow ( Fig . 5b - I / II ) . Twenty seconds after maximal protrusion , F - actin assembly reaches the maximum rate . During this period , boundary and adhesion forces begin to rise , indicating a tension increase in the expanding plasma - membrane . Boundary and adhesion force maxima are reached 20 s later . At this time - point edge advancement is largely stalled and substantial work by F - actin polymerization is converted into retrograde flow . Hence , fastest retro - grade flow rates were reached concurrently with the peak in boundary force ( Fig . 5c - v ) . The internal consistency among these events provides additional validation of the force predictions that corroborate with inde - pendent measurements of cell edge movement and F - actin turnover . DISCUSSION Morphogenic cell functions require precise spatiotemporal coordination of intracellular forces , often in concert with local cytoskeleton reorganiza - tion . We implemented a method to estimate intracellular force fields from the transiently elastic response of the F - actin network observed by actin speckle flows . Inference of absolute force distributions would require knowledge of network elasticity and pre - stress . Several approaches have been proposed to probe these parameters in living cells 25 – 28 ; however , none of these match the resolution of FSM or capture the properties of thin protruding lamellae and lamellipodia , which are of interest here . Without a precise profile of network material properties , it is still pos - sible to estimate force transients on a relative scale . Variations of the elastic modulus up to one order of magnitude have no qualitative effect on force predictions in lamella and lamellipodium ( Supplementary Information , 10 15 22 25 30 Cross - correlation B o un d a r y s e g m e n t s h i f t Time shift ( min ) – 3 . 5 0 – 2 3 . 5 2 – 7 0 – 4 7 4 Time ( min ) 0 . 5 2 . 5 7 . 5 5 14 . 5 12 . 5 10 B M T 0 . 5 2 . 5 7 . 5 5 14 . 5 12 . 5 10 Time ( min ) 1 5 15 10 30 25 20 B M T a b 1 c 0 0 . 2 0 . 4 0 . 6 Weak Strong B o un d a r y s e g m e n t Activity map of predicted adhesion force Activity map of predicted boundary force Figure 4 Predicted adhesion force transients near the leading edge are synchronized in time and colocalized in space with predicted boundary force transients . ( a ) Definition of edge - tracking reporter windows ( see Supplementary Information , Movie 3 ) . Per window and time - point averaged boundary and adhesion force transients are calculated . ( b ) Construction of activity maps of predicted adhesion ( left ) and boundary forces ( right ) . For one time - point , predicted force magnitudes are collected in all reporter windows along the cell edge and copied into one column of the activity map ( see example of reporter window number 19 mapped into the first column ) . The procedure is repeated for the entire time - lapse sequence to reveal the spatiotemporal organization of force development . Arrows : concurrent dropping of adhesion and boundary forces at the time - points adhesion begin to slide ( compare with Fig . 3b ) . ( c ) Cross - correlation of adhesion and boundary force activity maps . Scale bar , 5 µ m ( a ) . nature cell biology volume 10 | number 12 | DeCember 2008 1397 © 2008 Macmillan Publishers Limited . All rights reserved . A RT I C L E S Note 8 ) . This robustness originates in the different length scales of network deformation and material property changes . Network deformations vary over distances less than 1 µm , material properties in lamellipodium and lamella vary over distances 5 – 10 µm . Thus , the flow gradients resolved by speckles ( distances of about 500 nm ) are dominated by force transients . Although the method is limited to the specific space and timescales 1 24 8 16 – 160 – 80 0 160 80 Time Lag ( s ) – 6 0 – 3 6 3 S e g m e n t s h i f t ( i ) IV to III – 20 Activity cross - correlation 00 : 01 : 20 00 : 03 : 20 00 : 05 : 40 00 : 07 : 40 00 : 10 : 00 00 : 01 : 00 00 : 03 : 00 00 : 05 : 20 00 : 07 : 20 00 : 09 : 40 D e p o l y m e r i a z t i o n P o l y m e r i a z t i o n A d h e s i o n Fo r ce - 10 0 30 20 10 ( nm s – 1 ) 20 160 300 600 440 1 4 12 8 24 20 16 B o un d a r y s e g m e n t B o un d a r y s e g m e n t B o un d a r y s e g m e n t Activity map of edge movement I Weak Strong Activity map of predicted adhesion force ( ADHF ) III 20 160 300 600 440 1 4 12 8 24 20 16 Activity map of predicted boundary force ( BNDF ) 20 160 300 600 440 IV 0 P o l y - / D e p o l y m e r i z a t i o n Activity map of polymerization / depolymerization 20 160 300 600 440 V 1 4 12 8 24 20 16 – 160 – 80 0 160 80 Time Lag ( s ) 0 a b c Activity map of boundary force power 20 160 300 600 440 VI P o w e r 20 160 300 600 440 Activity map of retrograde flow II 0 – 20 0 – 40 ( v ) IV to II ( ii ) IV to V ( iii ) V to I ( iv ) IV to I ( vii ) VI to V – 6 0 – 3 6 3 – 6 0 – 3 6 3 Time M a g n i t u d e Boundaryforce Power Retrogradeflow Polymeri - zation rate 40 s d 0 0 . 2 0 . 4 0 . 6 ( vi ) VI to I – 20 – 6 0 – 3 6 3 S e g m e n t s h i f t S e g m e n t s h i f t S e g m e n t s h i f t Time ( s ) Time ( s ) Time ( s ) Time ( s ) Time ( s ) Time ( s ) C o rr . s c o r e Protrusionvelocity Figure 5 : Coordination of predicted force transients during cell protrusion with F - actin assembly and edge movement . ( a ) Left panel : boundary forces ( cyan vectors ) and adhesion force magnitudes ( colour - coded ) at the leading edge of a protruding epithelial cell . Twenty - four reporter windows ( overlaid boxes ) were used to construct the activity maps shown in b . Zoom in : predicted boundary ( cyan ) and adhesion ( red ) force vectors , and F - actin flow vectors ( yellow ) overlaid to the adhesion force magnitude ( colour - coded ) in protruding sector of the cell edge . Right panel : time montage of rates of F - actin polymerization ( red ) and depolymerization ( green , top row ) ; and of adhesion force magnitude ( colour - coded ) and boundary forces ( cyan vectors , bottom row ) during a protrusion event . The two time series are shifted by 20 s to account for the delay in predicted adhesion / boundary force transients relative to rate changes in F - actin turnover ( Supplementary Information , Movie 4 for time - resolved force and assembly maps ) . ( b ) Activity maps of cell edge movement ( I ) , velocity of F - actin retrograde flow ( II ) , predicted adhesion force ( III ) , predicted boundary force ( IV ) , rate of F - actin polymerization and depolymerization ( V ) and power ( boundary force multiplied by the sum of the speeds of cell edge protrusion and retrograde flow , VI ) . ( c ) Cross - correlation between activities . Negative time - lags indicate that the first activity is delayed relative to the second activity . ( d ) Event sequence during a protrusion cycle . Scale bar , 5 µ m ( a ) . 1398 nature cell biology volume 10 | number 12 | DeCember 2008 © 2008 Macmillan Publishers Limited . All rights reserved . A RT I C L E S captured by FSM , its particular strength is that forces are probed passively and without mechanical influence on the cell . Hence , force fluctuations can be tracked during rapid processes , such as cell edge protrusion . We used these capabilities to analyse how force transmission from the cytoskeleton to the ECM relates to vinculin – F - actin interactions within focal adhesions , as observed by motion coupling of vinculin and actin speckles 4 . Vinculin molecules may undergo transitions between four binding states ( Fig . 3d , scenario I ) : a ) direct binding to F - actin only ; b ) indirect binding to integrin only ( for example , through talin ; ref . 29 ) ; c ) simultaneous binding to F - actin and integrin ; and 4 ) binding to neither . The fourth state does not contribute to speckle images 30 . State c is likely to be short - lived , compared with a and b , but essential for transmit - ting intracellular forces to the ECM 4 . Partial coupling of vinculin to actin speckle motion , as observed in stationary focal adhesions behind protruding edges , could be associated with scenarios I ( clutch engaged ) and II ( clutch disengaged ) . Similarly , full coupling , as observed in slid - ing focal adhesions during edge retraction , could be associated with both scenarios III ( clutch disengaged ) and IV ( clutch weakly engaged ) . Thus , the coupling of speckle motion is not representative of the state of force transmission . By relating speckle motion coupling to force generation in individual focal adhesionss we excluded scenarios II and IV . Predicted adhesion forces were high when the motion of vinculin speckles was only partially coupled to F - actin speckle flow . Tight coupling of vinculin and actin speckle flows results in almost complete loss of force ( Fig . 3b , c ) , suggest - ing that vinculin is the core of a molecular clutch that modulates force transmission from the contractile cytoskeleton to the ECM . We then scrutinized relationships between predicted adhesion force and boundary force during protrusion events . At the timescales of our analyses , the two forces are tightly co - modulated . First , this means that contraction contributes little to the force balance at the leading edge , confirming previous conclusions from F - actin flow data alone 20 . Second , this means that between cell boundary and adhesion sites , forces are transmitted instantaneously . Importantly , this prediction is not by construction of the mathematical model . Adhesion and bound - ary force predictions are numerically independent if network deforma - tions at focal adhesions and at the boundary are resolved separately ( see Supplementary Information , Equations S4 – S6 ) . Network deformations were calculated between neighbouring speckles ( that is , over 0 . 5 – 1 µm , which is significantly less than the 2 – 3µm between cell boundary and adhesion sites ; Supplementary Information , Note 7 ) . The instantaneous coupling of adhesion and boundary forces confirmed that over a few seconds , and during protrusion events , lamellipodium and lamella are mechanically well - integrated and predominantly elastic ( Supplementary Information , Note 3 ) . Adhesion and boundary forces gradually increase during a protrusion event , whereas the rate of edge advancement decreases . Edge advancement is stalled at the time - point of maximum boundary force ( ~ 40 s after fastest edge advancement ; Fig . 5d ) . This suggests that the rate of cell protrusion is limited by increasing tension in the plasma - membrane , a result that has been difficult to obtain by direct measurements of boundary forces 16 . Consistent with this interpretation , maximal F - actin retrograde flow coin - cides with the boundary force maximum ( Fig . 5c - v , d ) , suggesting that on reaching a tension level precluding further expansion of the plasma - mem - brane , the work by F - actin assembly is converted into retrograde flow . The onset of a new protrusion cycle requires relaxation of tension , for instance by lipid flow within 31 or vesicular transport to the plasma - membrane 32 , 33 . Multiplication of the sum of edge motion and F - actin flow velocities ( Fig . 5b - I / II ) with the predicted boundary force ( Fig . 5b - IV ) produces the instantaneous power output of the protrusion machinery ( Fig . 5b - VI ) . Given the time - shifts between edge movement and boundary force , maximal power output is expected to fall between the peaks of protru - sion velocity and force . Indeed , the cross - correlation score between edge velocity and power peaks at – 20 s ( Fig . 5c - vi , d ) . Power output is energy production per time unit . The energy required to advance the cell edge is presumably harnessed from the binding energy of monomers newly incorporated into the network 34 . Accordingly , the power output , but not the protrusion velocity , is expected to rise concurrently with the rate of F - actin polymerization . To test this hypothesis , we used FSM to generate activity maps of F - actin assembly and disassembly ( Fig . 5b - V ) . Cross - correlation between these activities and edge velocity confirmed that the peak in F - actin assembly is delayed by 20 s to the peak in protrusion velocity ( Fig . 5c - iii ) . Consistently , the correlation score between power output and F - actin assembly is maximal at 0 s ( Fig . 5c - vii ) . In summary , contrary to a model where protrusion rates are directly related to actin assembly rates 1 , relatively low assembly rates at the onset of a protrusion cycle are sufficient to rapidly push forward the plasma - membrane . The rate of polymerization increases as the plasma - membrane expands , possibly mediated by tension - feedback . 20 s after peak protrusion , tension reaches a threshold level beyond which the efficiencies of feedback and / or F - actin assembly begin to decay . Forty seconds after peak protrusion , the resistance of the plasma membrane is too high to allow further advancement . The interval from feedback activation at low tension to feedback inhibition under high tension sets the timescale of a cell protrusion cycle . The molecular details of feedback between membrane tension and F - actin assembly remain unknown . Possible mechanisms include curvature - dependent transport and / or scaffolding of signalling molecules within the plasma membrane 35 , 36 . Unravelling these connections will depend on in situ measurements of the timing between forces , feedback signals and cytoskeleton dynam - ics . The force reconstruction presented will provide an unprecedented source of high - resolution data to achieve this goal . METHODS Cell culture and microinjection . Ptk1 cells were cultured in Ham’s F - 12 medium ( Gibco ) , supplemented with 10 % fetal bovine serum ( FBS ) , 100 U ml – 1 penicillin , 0 . 1 mg ml – 1 streptomycin , 1 mM sodium pyruvate , and 2 mM of l - glutamine . The cells were incubated at 37 °C / 5 % CO 2 . Cells were plated on acid - washed glass coverslips for 20 – 24 h before experiments . To reduce the effects of pho - tobleaching , Oxyrase ( 1 . 0 U , Oxyrase . ) was added to 1 ml of culture medium . Cells were microinjected with X - rhodamine - conjugated actin using an Eppendorf transjector 5246 ( Eppendorf ) into the cell cytoplasm at 0 . 5 mg ml – 1 , as described previously 37 . Full - length myosin regulatory light chain ( MRLC ) cDNA with Eco RI and Bam HI restriction sites was cloned into a pHAT2 vector containing a histi - dine tag followed by an enhanced GFP ( EGFP ) sequence ( obtained from Torsten Wittmann , UCSF ) . EGFP – MRLC was expressed in BL21 ( DE3 ) Escherichia coli and purified on a talon metal affinity resin ( Clontech Laboratories ) accord - ing to the manufacturer’s instructions . EGFP – RLC was co - microinjected with X - rhodamine - conjugated actin at 1 . 0 and 0 . 5 mg ml – 1 , respectively . Microscopy . Time - lapse image sequences were acquired by spinning disc confocal microscopy using a ×100 / 1 . 4 NA Plan Apo phase objective lens ( Nikon ) . Images were acquired at 10 - s intervals , with illumination at the 568 nm ( X - rhodamine ) and 488 nm ( EGFP ) provided by a 2 . 5W KrAr laser ( Coherent ) . Images were cap - tured using a CoolSNAP - HQ2 camera from Photometrics . Raw image sequences of multi - colour total internal reflection microscopy of F - actin and vinculin were nature cell biology volume 10 | number 12 | DeCember 2008 1399 © 2008 Macmillan Publishers Limited . All rights reserved . A RT I C L E S retrieved from an existing data pool 4 and re - analysed as described in the text , with respect to adhesion coupling and force fluctuations . Image analysis . FSM time - lapse sequences were analysed using a custom - writ - ten program to obtain velocities of F - actin flow 18 , assembly / disassembly rate of F - actin network 30 and velocities of cell edge movement 9 . Force reconstruction . The prediction of intracellular forces from F - actin network flows relied on a continuum - mechanical model that related forces inside the cell and at the cell boundary to network flows ( Supplementary Information , Note 4 ) . On the basis of these equations , the problem was inverted , that is , forces were derived from the measured flow fields ( Supplementary Information , Note 5 ) . The solution of the inverse problem was determined by identifying the force field among many candidate fields that would produce a flow field most simi - lar to the measured flow field . This approach optimized the spatial filtering of measurement noise , which would otherwise yield nonsensical force spikes . The predicted intracellular forces were further decomposed into adhesion - dominant and contraction - dominant forces , using the cone rule ( Fig . 2c ) to distinguish the specific local relationships between force direction and network flow associated with adhesion and contraction forces ( Supplementary Information , Note 6 ) . Note : Supplementary Information is available on the Nature Cell Biology website . AcknowLeDGements We thank Clare Waterman and Ke Hu for continued discussion of and encouragement for this study . We gratefully acknowledge funding from NIH R01 GM71868 and the Cell Migration Consortium , Grant No U54 GM064346 from NIGMS . Author contributions L . J . designed and implemented the force reconstruction algorithm and performed all image analyses ; J . L . acquired fluorescent speckle microscopy data of F - actin and myosin II , and assisted with the preparation of the figures and manuscript ; G . D . proposed the idea of force reconstruction from speckle movies and wrote the manuscript . competinG finAnciAL interests The authors declare no competing financial interests . Published online at http : / / www . nature . com / naturecellbiology / Reprints and permissions information is available online at http : / / npg . nature . com / reprintsandpermissions / 1 . Pollard , T . D . & Borisy , G . B . Cellular motility driven by assembly and disassembly of actin filaments . Cell 112 , 453 – 465 ( 2003 ) . 2 . Mogilner , A . & Oster , G . Force generation by actin polymerization II : the elastic ratchet and tethered filaments . Biophys . J . 84 , 1591 – 1605 ( 2003 ) . 3 . Dickinson , R . B . , Caro , L . & Purich , D . L . Force generation by cytoskeletal filament end - tracking proteins . Biophys . J . 87 , 2838 – 2854 ( 2004 ) . 4 . Hu , K . , Ji , L . , Applegate , K . , Danuser , G . & Waterman - Storer , C . M . Differential trans - mission of actin motion within focal adhesions . Science 315 , 111 – 115 ( 2007 ) . 5 . Balaban , N . Q . et al . Force and focal adhesion assembly : a close relationship studied using elastic micropatterned substrates . Nature Cell Biol . 3 , 466 – 472 ( 2001 ) . 6 . Beningo , K . A . , Dembo , M . , Kaverina , I . , Small , J . V . & Wang , Y . L . Nascent focal adhesions are responsible for the generation of strong propulsive forces in migrating fibroblasts . J . Cell Biol . 153 , 881 – 887 ( 2001 ) . 7 . Verkhovsky , A . B . , Svitkina , T . M . & Borisy , G . G . Network contraction model for cell translocation and retrograde flow , in Cell Behaviour : Control and Mechanism of Motility 207 – 222 ( Portland , London , 1999 ) . 8 . Gupton , S . L . & Waterman - Storer , C . M . Spatiotemporal feedback between actomyosin and focal - adhesion systems optimizes rapid cell migration . Cell 125 , 1361 – 1374 ( 2006 ) . 9 . Machacek , M . & Danuser , G . Morphodynamic profiling of protrusion phenotypes . Biophys . J . 90 , 1439 – 1452 ( 2006 ) . 10 . Dembo , M . & Wang , Y . L . Stresses at the cell - to - substrate interface during locomotion of fibroblasts . Biophys . J . 76 , 2307 – 2316 ( 1999 ) . 11 . Munevar , S . , Wang , Y . - L . & Dembo , M . Traction force microscopy of migrating normal and H - ras transformed 3T3 fibroblasts . Biophys . J . 80 , 1744 – 1757 ( 2001 ) . 12 . Dembo , M . , Oliver , T . , Ishihara , A . & Jacobson , K . Imaging the traction stresses exerted by locomoting cells with the elastic substratum method . Biophys . J . 70 , 2008 – 2022 ( 1996 ) . 13 . Sterba , R . E . & Sheetz , M . P . Basic laser tweezers . Methods Cell Biol . 55 , 29 – 41 ( 1998 ) . 14 . Jiang , G . , Giannone , G . , Critchley , D . R . , Fukumoto , E . & Sheetz , M . P . Two - piconewton slip bond between fibronectin and the cytoskeleton depends on talin . Nature 424 , 334 – 337 ( 2003 ) . 15 . Parekh , S . H . , Chaudhuri , O . , Theriot , J . A . & Fletcher , D . A . Loading history determines the velocity of actin - network growth . Nature Cell Biol . 7 , 1119 – 1123 ( 2005 ) . 16 . Prass , M . , Jacobson , K . , Mogilner , A . & Radmacher , M . Direct measurement of the lamellipodial protrusive force in a migrating cell . J . Cell Biol . 174 , 767 – 772 ( 2006 ) . 17 . Danuser , G . & Waterman - Storer , C . M . Quantitative fluorescent speckle microscopy of cytoskeleton dynamics . Annu . Rev . Biophys . Biomol . Struct . 35 , 361 – 387 ( 2006 ) . 18 . Ji , L . & Danuser , G . Tracking quasi - stationary flow of weak fluorescent signals by adap - tive multi - frame correlation . J . Microsc . 220 , 150 – 167 ( 2005 ) . 19 . Gardel , M . L . et al . Elastic behavior of cross - linked and bundled actin networks . Science 304 , 1301 – 1305 ( 2004 ) . 20 . Ponti , A . , Machacek , M . , Gupton , S . L . , Waterman - Storer , C . M . & Danuser , G . Two dis - tinct actin networks drive the protrusion of migrating cells . Science 305 , 1782 – 1786 ( 2004 ) . 21 . Delorme , V . et al . Cofilin activity downstream of Pak1 regulates cell protrusion efficiency by organizing lamellipodium and lamella actin networks . Dev . Cell 13 , 646 – 662 ( 2007 ) . 22 . McGrath , J . L . , Tardy , Y . , Dewey , C . F . , Jr . , Meister , J . J . & Hartwig , J . H . Simultaneous measurements of actin filament turnover , filament fraction , and monomer diffusion in endothelial cells . Biophys . J . 75 , 2070 – 2078 . ( 1998 ) . 23 . Ponti , A . et al . Periodic patterns of actin turnover in lamellipodia and lamellae of migrat - ing epithelial cells analyzed by quantitative fluorescent speckle microscopy . Biophys . J . 89 , 3456 – 3469 ( 2005 ) . 24 . Galbraith , C . G . , Yamada , K . M . & Sheetz , M . P . The relationship between force and focal complex development . J . Cell Biol . 159 , 695 – 705 ( 2002 ) . 25 . Tseng , Y . et al . How actin crosslinking and bundling proteins cooperate to generate an enhanced cell mechanical response . Biochem . Biophys . Res . Commun . 334 , 183 – 192 ( 2005 ) . 26 . Mahaffy , R . E . , Park , S . , Gerde , E . , Kas , J . & Shih , C . K . Quantitative analysis of the viscoelastic properties of thin regions of fibroblasts using atomic force microscopy . Biophys . J . 86 , 1777 – 1793 ( 2004 ) . 27 . Tseng , Y . , Kole , T . P . & Wirtz , D . Micromechanical mapping of live cells by multiple - particle - tracking microrheology . Biophys . J . 83 , 3162 – 3176 ( 2002 ) . 28 . Van Citters , K . M . , Hoffman , B . D . , Massiera , G . & Crocker , J . C . The role of F - actin and myosin in epithelial cell rheology . Biophys . J . 91 , 3946 – 3956 ( 2006 ) . 29 . Bakolitsa , C . et al . Structural basis for vinculin activation at sites of cell adhesion . Nature 430 , 583 – 586 ( 2004 ) . 30 . Ponti , A . , Vallotton , P . , Salmon , W . C . , Waterman - Storer , C . M . & Danuser , G . Computational analysis of F - actin turnover in cortical actin meshworks using fluores - cent speckle microscopy . Biophys . J . 84 , 3336 – 3352 ( 2003 ) . 31 . Weisswange , I . , Bretschneider , T . & Anderson , K . I . The leading edge is a lipid diffusion barrier . J . Cell Sci . 118 , 4375 – 4380 ( 2005 ) . 32 . Prigozhina , N . L . & Waterman - Storer , C . M . Decreased polarity and increased random motility in PtK1 epithelial cells correlate with inhibition of endosomal recycling . J . Cell Sci . 119 , 3571 – 3582 ( 2006 ) . 33 . Bretscher , M . S . & Aguado - Velasco , C . Membrane traffic during cell locomotion . Curr . Opin . Cell Biol . 10 , 537 – 541 ( 1998 ) . 34 . Hill , T . L . & Kirschner , M . W . Bioenergetics and kinetics of microtubule and actin fila - ment assembly - disassembly . Int . Rev . Cytol . 78 , 1 – 125 ( 1982 ) . 35 . Gov , N . S . & Gopinathan , A . Dynamics of membranes driven by actin polymerization . Biophys . J . 90 , 454 – 469 ( 2006 ) . 36 . Habermann , B . The BAR - domain family of proteins : a case of bending and binding ? EMBO Rep . 5 , 250 – 255 ( 2004 ) . 37 . Waterman - Storer , C . M . Fluorescent speckle microscopy ( FSM ) of microtubules and actin in living cells . in Current Protocols in Cell Biology . ( eds J . S . Bonifacino , M . Dasso , J . B . Harford , J . Lippincott - Schwartz and K . M . Yamada ) , chapter 4 , unit 4 . 10 ( Wiley , New York ; 2002 ) . 1400 nature cell biology volume 10 | number 12 | DeCember 2008 © 2008 Macmillan Publishers Limited . All rights reserved . s u p p l e m e n ta ry i n f o r m at i o n www . nature . com / naturecellbiology 1 DOI : 10 . 1038 / ncb1797 Figure S1 Simulation of network deformation induced by assumed boundary and intracellular force distributions . ( a ) Domain of simulation ( Ω ) with a free leading edge ( ∂Ω IN ) and a fixed interior boundary ( ∂Ω IN ) . The interior boundary is fixed so that the whole cell does not move . ( b ) Simulated flow response ( yellow ) to an assumed contraction force field ( F III , red ) . ( c ) Simulated flow response ( yellow ) to an assumed boundary force distribution ( F i , cyan ) . ( d ) Simulated flow response to the assumed force distributions in b and c , plus an adhesion force distribution . Adhesion forces are modeled by viscous friction between network flow and substrate ( see text ) . The assumed friction term is color - coded . Scale bar in b : 5 µ m Supplementary Information Lin et al . 3 Figure S1 : Simulation of network deformation induced by assumed boundary and intracellular force distributions . ( a ) Domain of simulation ( (cid:159) ) with a free leading edge ( LE (cid:119)(cid:58) ) and a fixed interior boundary ( IN (cid:119)(cid:58) ) . The interior boundary is fixed so that the whole cell does not move . ( b ) Simulated flow response ( yellow ) to an assumed contraction force field ( III F , red ) . ( c ) Simulated flow response ( yellow ) to an assumed boundary force distribution ( I F , cyan ) . ( d ) Simulated flow response to the assumed force distributions in b and c , plus an adhesion force distribution . Adhesion forces are modeled by viscous friction between network flow and substrate ( see text ) . The assumed friction term is color - coded . Scale bar in b : 5 (cid:80) m . © 2008 Macmillan Publishers Limited . All rights reserved . s u p p l e m e n ta ry i n f o r m at i o n 2 www . nature . com / naturecellbiology Figure S2 Self consistency test of the model assumption that the F - actin networks of lamellipodium ( LP ) and lamella are mechanical coupled . ( a ) F - actin flow velocities ( yellow vectors ) tracked by qFSM . ( b ) Predicted adhesion force transients displayed both as colormaps of force magnitude and as force vectors . Top row : Reconstruction with lamellipodium region . Bottom row : Reconstruction without lamellipodium region , i . e . a virtual cell boundary follows the transition between lamellipodium and lamella ( gray dash - dotted and gray solid line in top and bottom rows , respectively ) . Supplementary Information Lin et al . 7 Figure S2 : Self consistency test of the model assumption that the F - actin networks of lamellipodium ( LP ) and lamella are mechanical coupled . ( a ) F - actin flow velocities ( yellow vectors ) tracked by qFSM . ( b ) Predicted adhesion force transients displayed both as colormaps of force magnitude and as force vectors . Top row : Reconstruction with lamellipodium region . Bottom row : Reconstruction without lamellipodium region , i . e . a virtual cell boundary follows the transition between lamellipodium and lamella ( gray dash - dotted and gray solid line in top and bottom rows , respectively ) . © 2008 Macmillan Publishers Limited . All rights reserved . s u p p l e m e n ta ry i n f o r m at i o n www . nature . com / naturecellbiology 3 Figure S2 continued ( c ) Predicted contraction ( red vectors and colormap of force magnitude ) and boundary forces ( cyan vectors ) reconstructed with ( top row ) or without ( bottom row ) lamellipodium region . Forces at the virtual boundary in bottom row indicate the network - internal stresses at the lamellipodium - lamella transition . Grey transparent arrows in a ) highlight changes in predicted adhesion forces that are equally capture by reconstructions with and without lamellipodium . Circled areas are locations where relatively significant discrepancies between the two reconstructions are observed ( see text ) . Scale bar : 5 µm . Supplementary Information Lin et al . 8 Figure S2 ( continued ) : ( c ) ( c ) Predicted contraction ( red vectors and colormap of force magnitude ) and boundary forces ( cyan vectors ) reconstructed with ( top row ) or without ( bottom row ) lamellipodium region . Forces at the virtual boundary in bottom row indicate the network - internal stresses at the lamellipodium - lamella transition . Grey transparent arrows in a ) highlight changes in predicted adhesion forces that are equally capture by reconstructions with and without lamellipodium . Circled areas are locations where relatively significant discrepancies between the two reconstructions are observed ( see text ) . Scale bar : 5 µm . F - actin network generated by F - actin polymerization at the cell edge . Thus , the virtual boundary force should approximately match the real boundary force . However , some significant differences are found along the virtual boundary ( Fig . S2 , circles ) . Closer examination of the two force maps showed that these mismatches localize in areas of either strong adhesion or contraction . The algorithm has no criterion to separate between boundary and domain ( adhesion / contraction ) forces and the resulting split is random . In contrast , when the boundary is defined by the actual cell edge , adhesion and contraction forces are by nature of the force distribution sufficiently distant from the cell edge to allow a reliable split between boundary and domain forces . Besides these differences , predicted force reconstruction in the lamella region is not distorted by removing the lamellipodium region . Therefore , we concluded that a simplified model of one network is sufficient for reconstructing relative changes in predicted force transients at a length scale of 1 (cid:80) m . © 2008 Macmillan Publishers Limited . All rights reserved . s u p p l e m e n ta ry i n f o r m at i o n 4 www . nature . com / naturecellbiology Figure S3 Error analysis of predicted forces based on simulated flow data . ( a ) Upper panel : Assumed input force field ( red arrows ) and corresponding simulated flow field ( yellow arrows ) . The input force field is governed by one small ( I ) , one large ( II ) and two medium size adhesions ( III ) . The latter are closely apposed to each other . In addition , input forces are generated by one weak ( IV ) and one strong ( V ) contraction zone and boundary forces ( cyan arrows ) . The boundary force field is designed such that its maxima are shifted relative to the maxima of adhesion forces . This design is intended to demonstrate that the co - localization of predicted boundary and adhesion forces in real experimental data is not by construction of the continuum mechanical model . Lower panel : Force field reconstructed from the simulated flow vectors without adding noise . The regularization step , which is required for the reconstruction of forces from noisy flow fields , yields small errors in the reconstructed force location and underestimated force magnitudes even for noise - free flow fields . ( b ) Force fields reconstructed from noise - perturbed flow fields at noise levels 5 % , 36 % , and 90 % . Noise levels are determined by posterior estimation of the flow residual , defined as the relative difference between the noise - perturbed input flow field ( green ) and the recovered flow field ( yellow ) produced by the reconstructed forces ( see Eq . S16 ) . Lower right panel : Comparison of input ( green ) and recovered ( yellow ) flow vectors at a residual level 90 % . Blue and grey dots in A and B represent false negative and false positive force locations , respectively ( see text ) . ( c ) Relative error of the force reconstruction according to Eqs . ( S17 ) and ( S18 ) . This error is dominated by underestimation of absolute force levels associated with the requirement for regularization . ( d ) Top axis : Error of force relations in terms of relative magnitude ( upper two thick lines ) and force direction ( lower two thin lines ) . Red corresponds to the predicted domain force whereas cyan corresponds to boundary force . Bottom axis : Relative error in reconstructed force location . To measure the relative error of force location , a threshold is used to cut off insignificant forces . Grey , black , green and blue curves in the lower axis correspond to thresholds of 20 % , 30 % , 40 % and 50 % of the mean force magnitude of the nonzero force region . False positive and false negative force locations in a and b are calculated by using thresholds of 30 % and 40 % , respectively . Scale bar in a : 5 µ m . Supplementary Information Lin et al . 18 Figure S3 : Error analysis of predicted forces based on simulated flow data . ( a ) Upper panel : Assumed input force field ( red arrows ) and corresponding simulated flow field ( yellow arrows ) . The input force field is governed by one small ( I ) , one large ( II ) and two medium size adhesions ( III ) . The latter are closely apposed to each other . In addition , input forces are generated by one weak ( IV ) and one strong ( V ) contraction zone and boundary forces ( cyan arrows ) . The boundary force field is designed such that its maxima are shifted relative to the maxima of adhesion forces . This design is intended to demonstrate that the co - localization of predicted boundary and adhesion forces in real experimental data is not by construction of the continuum mechanical model . Lower panel : Force field reconstructed from the simulated flow vectors without adding noise . The regularization step , which is required for the reconstruction of forces from noisy flow fields , yields small errors in the reconstructed force location and underestimated force magnitudes even for noise - free flow fields . ( b ) Force fields reconstructed from noise - © 2008 Macmillan Publishers Limited . All rights reserved . s u p p l e m e n ta ry i n f o r m at i o n www . nature . com / naturecellbiology 5 Figure S4 Validation of force reconstruction by colocalization of predicted contraction forces with myosin - II distribution in lamellipodium and lamella . ( a ) Localization of eGFP - myosin regulatory light chain . ( b ) Predicted contraction forces ( red arrows overlaid to color - coded map of contraction force magnitude ) . Bars highlight matching details in myosin - II and force patterns . Colocalization is weak in white boxes . Ellipses mark contraction forces that form an angle greater ( left ) and less ( right ) than 450 to the flow direction ( see panel d ) . ( c ) Localization of X - rhodamine - F - actin speckles ( see Video 1 for dual - color time - lapse sequence of F - actin and myosin - II ) . Color - coded lines indicate movement of the cell edge ( blue : early time - points ; red : late time - points ) . ( d ) F - actin flow field ( yellow arrows ) . Predicted adhesion forces ( red arrows ) and boundary forces ( cyan arrows ) . Scale bar in a : 10 µ m . Supplementary Information Lin et al . 21 Figure S4 : Validation of force reconstruction by colocalization of predicted contraction forces with myosin - II distribution in lamellipodium and lamella . ( a ) Localization of eGFP - myosin regulatory light chain . ( b ) Predicted contraction forces ( red arrows overlaid to color - coded map of contraction force magnitude ) . Bars highlight matching details in myosin - II and force patterns . Colocalization is weak in white boxes . Ellipses mark contraction forces that form an angle greater ( left ) and less ( right ) than 450 to the flow direction ( see panel d ) . ( c ) Localization of X - rhodamine - F - actin speckles ( see Video 1 for dual - color time - lapse sequence of F - actin and myosin - II ) . Color - coded lines indicate movement of the cell edge ( blue : early time - points ; red : late time - points ) . ( d ) F - actin flow field ( yellow arrows ) . Predicted adhesion forces ( red arrows ) and boundary forces ( cyan arrows ) . Scale bar in a : 10 (cid:80) m . © 2008 Macmillan Publishers Limited . All rights reserved . s u p p l e m e n ta ry i n f o r m at i o n 6 www . nature . com / naturecellbiology Figure S5 Sensitivity of the force reconstruction to spatial heterogeneity in network elasticity . ( a ) X - rhodamine F - actin and eGFP - vinculin distribution . Circles highlight locations of adhesion sites with stress fibers . ( b ) F - actin flow ( yellow vectors ) and predicted adhesion forces ( red vectors ) overlaid on color - coded adhesion force magnitude map . ( c ) F - actin flow ( yellow vectors ) and predicted contraction forces ( red vectors ) overlaid on color - coded contraction force magnitude map . Forces in b and c are reconstructed by assumption of spatially homogeneous network elasticity . ( d ) Elasticity field derived from the F - actin intensity . Values vary over one order of magnitude . ( e , f ) Predicted adhesion and contraction forces , reconstructed by assumption of spatially variable network elasticity . Scale bar in b : 5 µ m . Supplementary Information Lin et al . 23 Figure S5 : Sensitivity of the force reconstruction to spatial heterogeneity in network elasticity . ( a ) X - rhodamine F - actin and eGFP - vinculin distribution . Circles highlight locations of adhesion sites with stress fibers . ( b ) F - actin flow ( yellow vectors ) and predicted adhesion forces ( red vectors ) overlaid on color - coded adhesion force magnitude map . ( c ) F - actin flow ( yellow vectors ) and predicted contraction forces ( red vectors ) overlaid on color - coded contraction force magnitude map . Forces in b and c are reconstructed by assumption of spatially homogeneous network elasticity . ( d ) Elasticity field derived from the F - actin intensity . Values vary over one order of magnitude . ( e , f ) Predicted adhesion and contraction forces , reconstructed by assumption of spatially variable network elasticity . Scale bar in b : 5 (cid:80) m . © 2008 Macmillan Publishers Limited . All rights reserved . s u p p l e m e n ta ry i n f o r m at i o n www . nature . com / naturecellbiology 7 Supplementary movie legends Movie S1 : Dual - channel FSM of X - Rhodamine - labeled F - actin ( red ) and eGFP - myosin regulatory light chain ( green ) . Color - combined movie of F - actin and eGFP - myosin is shown in the rightmost panel of the video ( yellow ) . Data of this movie is used in Figure 3 to analyze the co - localization of myosin - II and predicted contraction forces . The leading edge undergoes persistent protrusion in the bottom - right sector whereas other parts retract at the same time . Thus , differences in force organization can be analyzed simultaneously for protruding and retracting events . Streaks of strong fluorescent signals in the red channel indicate the location of actomyosin stress fibers . Notice the strong contraction in the region of lamella all the way to the perinuclear region at the top border of the movie . Width of the image : ~ 60 µ m . Original frame rate : 0 . 1 frames / s . Replay rate : 12 frames / s . Movie S2 : Left panel : Dual - channel FSM of X - Rhodamine - labeled F - actin ( red ) and eGFP tagged vinculin ( green ) . Middle panel : Color - coded map of the predicted adhesion forces overlaid to vinculin channel . No overlay : no adhesion force . Green colors : low forces ; red colors : high forces ( see color bar in Fig . 4a ) . Right panel : Coupling of vinculin and F - actin speckle movements as quantified by the velocity magnitude coupling score ( VMCS , see text ) . Red colors indicate strong coupling , yellow colors weaker coupling . The red curve in the left panel indicates the leading edge of cell protrusion . The leading edge undergoes persistent retraction in the top and bottom sectors whereas the middle sector maintains a protrusive state ( boxes in middle panel ) . Predicted adhesion forces start to decrease when retraction starts , first in the bottom sector then in the top sector . The force decrease is synchronized with an increase of flow coupling . Notice the concurrent appearance of a no color region in the top and bottom sectors of the force map with full coupling ( red colors ) of F - actin and vinculin in the right panel . Image width : ~ 40 µ m . Original frame rate : 0 . 1 frames / s . Replay rate : 1 frames / s . Movie S3 : Definition of reporter windows ( white rectangles ) along the leading edge . Original frame rate : 0 . 1 frames / s . Replay rate : 6 frames / s . Movie S4 : Leftmost panel : FSM image time - lapse sequence of the protruding front of a Ptk1 epithelial cell ( data analyzed in Figure 6 ) . 2 nd Panel ( from the left ) : Rates of F - actin assembly ( red ) and disassembly ( green ) . 3 rd Panel : Predicted adhesion force magnitude ( red : strong ; green : weak ) and boundary force ( cyan vectors ) . 4 th Panel : Speed ( red : fast ; green slow ) and direction ( yellow vectors ) of F - actin retrograde flow . The predicted force and flow panels are time - shifted by 20 sec relative to the F - actin turnover map to compensate for the delay of these events ( see Figure 6 ) . © 2008 Macmillan Publishers Limited . All rights reserved . Supplementary Information Lin et al . 1 Note 1 : Flow driven by simulated intracellular forces To aid the reader in understanding the principle force prediction by solving the inverse problem of how to get from network flow to force , we demonstrate by simulation the solution of the corresponding forward problem : Given a force distribution at the cell boundary and inside the cell , what is the resulting network flow ? We show by separate simulations of each intracellular force type , i . e . , boundary force I F at the leading edge LE ! " , and adhesion and contraction forces II + III F inside the cellular region ! ( Fig . S1a ) , their specific effect on the resulting network flow . To perform a realistic simulation , we assumed boundary , contraction , and adhesion forces throughout the field of view of an FSM movie for which we have shown the force reconstruction from experimentally measured flows ( Figs 1 and 2 ) . For all three examples , we held the interior boundary IN ! " stationary , assuming the cell as a whole does not move . In the scenario of Figure S1b , only contraction forces are applied ( III 0 ! F , red arrows ) . This generates almost uniform retrograde flow away from the leading edge ( yellow arrows ) . In the scenario of Figure S1c , only boundary forces are applied ( I 0 ! F ) . In the absence of adhesions , this generates retrograde flow deep into the cell . In fact , the flow tapers off towards the bottom of the field of view only because of the boundary condition IN ( ) 0 , on ! " # u x . In the scenario of Figure S1d , the retrograde flow generated by boundary and contraction forces is being resisted by adhesions . Adhesion forces are modeled as a viscous friction between the flowing network and the substrate , i . e . II ( ) ( ) ( ) ! = " F x x u x . The parameter ( ) ! x denotes the friction coefficient , which can vary in space ( color - coding in Fig . S1d ) . Therefore , spatial variations in the adhesion force are caused by spatial variations in the friction coefficient or by spatial variations in the magnitude and direction of the flow field . This model implies that the network - substrate interface consists of transient bonds . The faster the F - actin slides over the cytoplasmic domain of adhesion complexes the higher is the probability for an interaction between the binding sites on both structures 1 . Qualitatively this behavior has been confirmed by indirect comparison of F - actin flow fields and traction force maps in moving keratocytes 2 . The simulations in Figure S1b - d illustrate that adhesion sites modulate the rather uniform flows generated by polymerization and network contraction . In particular , they give rise to a gradient from fast to slow flow behind the protruding edge , a characteristic feature of actin dynamics in migrating epithelial cells . Given the specific effects the three forces have on flow organization , we expected that inversion of the procedure would allow us to reconstruct the force necessary to drive a measured flow field . © 2008 Macmillan Publishers Limited . All rights reserved . Supplementary Information Lin et al . 2 Note 2 : Mechanical properties of the actin cytoskeleton In vitro studies have shown that on length scales above the characteristic distance between filament cross - links and branches , F - actin networks behave like a viscoelastic continuum 3 . The viscous contribution is frequency - dependent . It can be neglected for frequencies less than 1Hz 4 , 5 at which high - resolution fluorescence microscopy experiments are typically performed . Although the relationship between force and network deformation becomes nonlinear at high strain rates due to strain stiffening 4 , 6 , our qFSM data reveal that at the time scale of ~ 1 - 10 seconds , the intracellular strain induced by transient network deformation rarely exceeds 5 % . Thus , for the purpose of force reconstruction on these time scales , in vitro F - actin networks can be approximated as a linear elastic material . Whether F - actin networks in living cells can be approximated as purely elastic is still a subject of intensive research . Currently , the published literature varies in opinion about whether cells behave more viscous - like or elastic - like in the frequency range typical for imaging . For 0 . 1 Hz , i . e . frame intervals of 10 s , several groups have estimated the cytoskeletal elastic modulus to be significantly larger than the viscous modulus 7 - 9 . Others report the opposite , finding a large viscous modulus in the 0 . 1 Hz frequency range 10 - 12 , and a dominant elastic modulus only towards higher ( 1 - 10 Hz ) frequencies . The variation between in vivo studies and their discrepancy from in vitro F - actin network results may partly be explained by challenges in defining the elastic and viscous contributions to F - actin mechanical properties in living cells . Existing live cell rheological measurements do not probe F - actin specifically , but gauge the ensemble behavior of all species of cytoskeletal filaments , membranes , and the cytosol . Our measurements of F - actin network deformations , however , are molecularly specific , allowing us to neglect contributions by other cytoskeleton components , cytosol , or membranes . We therefore adhere to the more specific data available from in vitro networks , and consider F - actin networks as essentially elastic at the time scale of high - resolution live cell microscopy . Even when neglecting viscous properties and focusing on values of the elastic modulus , published magnitudes range from < 1 Pa 13 , single Pa levels 11 , 14 - 16 , up to several tens 17 , 18 or even hundreds of Pa 19 . The elastic modulus has also been found to vary between cell types , between individual cells , and between different regions of the same cell . Thus , in order to reconstruct absolute force levels , each experiment would require in situ calibration of the elastic properties . Currently , no tools exist to accomplish this at the spatiotemporal scale of microns and seconds . The most critical distinction between an in vivo F - actin cytoskeleton and in vitro actin networks is the continuous assembly and disassembly of the former 20 - 23 , leading to high plasticity of the material . Such a remodeling of the network continually relaxes the © 2008 Macmillan Publishers Limited . All rights reserved . Supplementary Information Lin et al . 3 prestress of the network and resets its resting state . Accordingly , there is no defined relaxation state of the F - actin network in living cells for time scales that exceed the time scale of network remodeling 16 . Rather , the F - actin network appears to flow as a viscous material over the time scale of network remodeling although its response at shorter time scales may be purely elastic . The consequences of material plasticity for the reconstruction of predicted forces from F - actin network deformation are illustrated in Figure 1d with the analogy of a system of linear springs . For long time scales , at which remodeling takes place , breaking ( disassembly ) of some springs and new formation ( assembly ) of others yield a change of the ensemble resting length ( relaxation state ) and / or the spring constant of the system . Therefore , Hooke’s law of a linear relationship between force ( F ) and spring extension ( u ) ( S1 ) ( / ) k u L F = (cid:0) is no longer valid ( L for resting length ) . As an example , if we were to apply Eq . ( S1 ) to the spring extension between 1 t and 2 t in Figure 1d , implicitly assuming identical resting lengths 1 L in both time - points , we would significantly overestimate the force level at 2 t ( arrow with dashed line ) , even when the ensemble spring constant were to remain approximately constant . On the other hand , on time scales t ! significantly shorter than the remodeling process ( 2 1 t t t ! < < " ) , plasticity is not manifest . Consequently , Hooke’s law still holds for the spring system . Low plasticity conditions apply to the spring extension both between 1 t and 1 t t ! + and between 2 t and 2 t t ! + in Figure 1d . Accordingly , forces are reconstructed by 1 1 1 ( / ) F k u L = and 2 2 2 ( / ) F k u L = respectively . To describe the mechanical properties of such a plastic system at a specific moment , we introduce the concept of transient elasticity , which captures the linearity of the relationship between force development and transient F - actin network deformation over short time intervals . Using this concept , the local difference in the velocity of F - actin network flow recorded at a short time scale defines the network deformation induced by transient application of intracellular forces . Clearly , it is critical to know the time scale of plasticity in order to know the time scale within which the assumption of transient elasticity is valid . Rates of F - actin turnover vary strongly between cell types and cell regions . Quantitative Fluorescent Speckle Microscopy ( qFSM ) provides precise information on F - actin assembly and disassembly rates in addition to F - actin deformations . This allows us to determine the timescale of network remodeling and to identify the time interval over which network deformations are non - plastic . For the epithelial cells studied in this work , the time scale of F - actin network remodeling is ~ 80 s 23 . Sampling intervals of 5 - 10 s are one order of magnitude faster than the time scale of plastic network deformation . Thus , the short - term deformations of F - actin tracked by qFSM between two consecutive frames mainly result from transient variation of intracellular forces throughout the cell . By analyzing these changes over multiple time steps , it is possible to monitor the regulation of force generation on a relative scale . This was sufficient in this study to establish critical relationships between force fluctuations , cell morphological variations , and F - actin dynamics during epithelial cell protrusions . To define the force level on an absolute scale , additional measurements of the spatiotemporally variable elasticity of the F - actin cytoskeleton will be necessary . © 2008 Macmillan Publishers Limited . All rights reserved . Supplementary Information Lin et al . 4 Note 3 : Mechanical coupling between lamellipodium and lamella Protrusions of epithelial cells are composed of two dynamically and molecularly distinct , spatially in parts overlapping F - actin networks 24 . The lamellipodium covers a band of ~ 1 to 2 µ m subjacent to the protruding cell edge . Its F - actin network undergoes fast treadmilling under the control of Arp 2 / 3 and cofilin , which leads to rapid retrograde flow of F - actin at the cell leading edge . The lamellipodium has been shown to be largely devoid of myosin - II ( also confirmed by Video 1 ; and Fig . 3 ) and retrograde flow does not slow down myosin - II activity in inhibited by blebbistatin . In contrast , the lamella network flows under myosin - II mediated contraction . In the PtK1 cell studies presented here the flow rates in the lamella were 2 to 3 times slower than in the lamellipodium and F - actin turnover rates were substantially slower . Separation of speckles based on flow velocity and lifetime showed that there might be significant spatial overlap of these two F - actin networks 24 , 25 . Thus , the question arises whether the F - actin cytoskeleton at the cell periphery can be modeled as one elastic network . We argue for the purpose of intracellular force reconstruction at the length scale of 1 - 1 . 5 µ m it is appropriate to make such an approximation if lamellipodium and lamella are mechanically coupled . Two observations from our force results suggest that they are indeed mechanically coupled . First , adhesion forces estimated from F - actin flow co - localize with distinct focal adhesion sites that are independently labeled and simultaneously imaged with the F - actin flow ( Fig . 4 ) . Given the spatially uniform gradient of the averaged flow from the lamellipodium / lamella region next to the leading edge to the lamella - only region , one would expect a uniform band of resistance forces at the junction of these regions that would yield adhesion forces regardless of the location of components of focal adhesions . Only if the two networks are mechanically integrated can one explain the precise co - localization of predicted adhesion forces with focal adhesions . Second , predicted boundary forces change in synchrony with predicted adhesion forces . This indicates that any variation of membrane tension due to the pushing of actin polymerization at the leading edge is instantaneously transmitted to focal adhesion sites . Such pure elastic response requires that the two networks are mechanically well - coupled . . To further test the assumption of two integrated networks , we performed a self - consistency test in which we removed the lamellipodium region from the image data , and thus constrained the force reconstruction to the lamella region only . If the assumption of coupled networks was invalid , one would expect fundamentally different force distributions between reconstructions with and without lamellipodium . Figure S2 shows a time sequence of the F - actin flow velocities ( a ) tracked by qFSM and both predictions of adhesion ( b ) and contraction / boundary ( c ) force transients are reconstructed with ( upper panel ) or without ( lower panel ) lamellipodium . Clearly , there is no fundamental difference between the two . Most importantly both reconstructions capture the same dynamic change of force transients over time ( Fig . S2b , grey arrows ) . The virtual boundary force reconstructed along the lamellipodium - lamella transition ( gray , solid line Fig . S2 ) when the lamellipodium is removed reflects the stress inside the © 2008 Macmillan Publishers Limited . All rights reserved . Supplementary Information Lin et al . 5 F - actin network generated by F - actin polymerization at the cell edge . Thus , the virtual boundary force should approximately match the real boundary force . However , some significant differences are found along the virtual boundary ( Fig . S2 , circles ) . Closer examination of the two force maps showed that these mismatches localize in areas of either strong adhesion or contraction . The algorithm has no criterion to separate between boundary and domain ( adhesion / contraction ) forces and the resulting split is random . In contrast , when the boundary is defined by the actual cell edge , adhesion and contraction forces are by nature of the force distribution sufficiently distant from the cell edge to allow a reliable split between boundary and domain forces . Besides these differences , predicted force reconstruction in the lamella region is not distorted by removing the lamellipodium region . Therefore , we concluded that a simplified model of one network is sufficient for reconstructing relative changes in predicted force transients at a length scale of 1 µ m . © 2008 Macmillan Publishers Limited . All rights reserved . Supplementary Information Lin et al . 6 Note 4 : Continuum mechanical model to relate domain and boundary forces to network deformation Under force application , a linear elastic network deforms as illustrated in Figure 1b ( main text ) . Deformations of a two - dimensional network at a given point are measured by a 2x2 matrix referred to as the strain tensor 26 . Mathematically , the strain tensor is defined as ( S2 ) ( ) ( , ) 1 / 2 ( , ) ( , ) = ! + ! T t t t " x u x u x , where spatial variation of the flow field ( ) [ ] 1 2 ( ) ; ( ) = u u u x x x at time t is analyzed by applying the gradient operator 1 2 [ / ; / ] x x ! = " " " " to both components of the flow vector at [ ] 1 2 , = x x x . Importantly , non - zero strain is observed only when the displacements in the immediate vicinity of x differ in either direction or magnitude or both . Spatially uniform displacements indicate that locally no forces are applied to the network . This is illustrated in Figure 1b where the flow vectors at the four corners of a rectangular network patch vary in direction and magnitude . Thus , in the next time - point the rectangle is deformed ( solid polygon ) . Network deformations create tension , which balance the forces applied to the network . The relationship between network deformation and tension for an elastic material is given by ( S3 ) 2 , 1 , , 1 , 2 ij ijkl kl k l c i j ! " = = = # . In this equation , ! denotes the 2x2 stress tensor and c the elasticity tensor of order 4 . The structure of Eq . ( S3 ) resembles the structure of Eq . ( S1 ) , which describes the force - extension relationship for an elastic spring . Instead of a scalar force F , Eq . ( S3 ) contains the stress tensor ij ! ; instead of a scalar extension / u L , the strain tensor kl ! ; and instead of a scalar spring constant k , the elasticity tensor whose coefficients ijkl c define the material properties of the 2D network . For the simplest case of a linear elastic , locally isotropic 2D network , ijkl c depends on two parameters 26 . One widely used pair of elastic parameters consists of Young’s modulus E and the Poisson ratio ! . Together , they are complete in defining the local properties of the linear elastic F - actin network . For F - actin networks the Poisson ratio is approximately constant in space and time ( ! ~ 1 / 3 ) 27 , leaving Young’s modulus as the only free variable of the model . Expressing ijkl c in terms of these two parameters , the stress tensor at any location x is calculated from the flow vector ( ) u x by substitution of ( S2 ) into ( S3 ) : ( S4 ) ( ) ( , ) ( , ) ( , ) ( , ) ( ( , ) ) ( , ) ( , ) ( 1 2 ( , ) ) ( 1 ( , ) ) 2 ( 1 ( , ) ) ! " ! ! ! = # + # + # $ + + (cid:0) T E t t E t t t I t t t t t x x x x u x u x u x x x x . I is the 2x2 identity matrix , and ! (cid:0) denotes the divergence of the flow vector . Eq . ( S4 ) incorporates the notions of transient elasticity and network deformation by defining all terms as time - dependent variables . In addition , the material properties are represented by space - dependent variables , accounting for the spatial heterogeneity of the network . Currently , there is no method to measure absolute values of Young’s modulus in the © 2008 Macmillan Publishers Limited . All rights reserved . Supplementary Information Lin et al . 7 lamellipodium and lamella networks that matches the sampling resolution of ( , ) t u x . Thus , ( , ) E t x in Eq . ( S4 ) had to be defined on a relative scale assuming that variations in ( , ) E t x are mainly associated with variations in network density 4 . Accordingly , we set ( , ) E t x proportional to the speckle intensity averaged over 1 µ m 2 ( see Supplementary Note 6 ) . The balance between network stresses and the intracellular forces II F and III F exerted on the network inside the domain ! ( Fig . 1a ) is defined as ( S5 ) II + III , in ! = " (cid:0) F # . The balance between the boundary force I F and network stresses along the cell edge LE ! " is given by Neumann boundary conditions : ( S6 ) I LE , on = ! " n F # where n is the outward normal to the cell edge . An important conclusion from these equations is that the forces at a specific position are defined by the local network deformation . What local means depends on the sampling density of flow vectors based on which strain tensors are calculated by discrete spatial differentiation ( Eq . S2 ) . In the case of qFSM , the spatial sampling of flow vectors is diffraction - limited ( ~ 500 nm distance between speckles ) allowing calculation of strain tensors with submicron resolution . In practice , the force reconstruction requires regularization to filter noise in the speckle flow fields ( see Fig . 2b in main text ) . Thus , effectively the resolution of our predicted force maps is in the range of 1 – 1 . 5 µ m ( see also Supplementary Note 7 ) . © 2008 Macmillan Publishers Limited . All rights reserved . Supplementary Information Lin et al . 8 Note 5 : Solution of the inverse problem to relate measured network flows to predicted boundary and domain forces Given an experimentally measured F - actin flow field D ( , ) t u x boundary forces I F and domain forces II + III ( ) t F x , are predicted by solving Eqs . ( S4 ) – ( S6 ) simultaneously in all locations of ! . To define the solution , additional Dirichlet boundary conditions have to be introduced for the leading edge ( S7 ) LE , on = ! " u h , and the interior boundaries ( S8 ) IN , on = ! " u h , Here , h denotes the flow velocities at the boundary . Because of measurement noise in D ( , ) t u x no meaningful force field exists that strictly satisfies Eqs . ( S4 – ( S8 ) . Thus , the force reconstruction must be further constrained by minimizing the difference between the measured flow field and the flow field produced by the predicted domain and boundary forces . To define the objective functions of the minimization problem we computed two forward maps , A and B , between the force field inside the cell and along the cell boundary , respectively , and the resulting network flow . Let L ! and L ! " denote the function spaces for the domain forces and the boundary forces , respectively , and H the function space for the flow vectors . Based on this definition , the forward map A from the domain force space to the flow vector space ( S9 ) : A L H ! " " a F u and the forward map B from the boundary force space to the flow vector space ( S10 ) : B L H ! " # # a F u are given by the solution u to the partial differential equations ( PDE ) ( S4 ) and ( S5 ) , subject to the following two homogenized boundary conditions : HA . The solution u satisfies the Dirichlet boundary conditions ( S7 ) and ( S8 ) with boundary flow IN LE 0 on and ! " # " # h . HB . The solution u satisfies Eq . ( S5 ) with II + III 0 = F , the Neumann boundary condition ( S6 ) on LE ! " , and the Dirichlet boundary condition ( S8 ) on IN ! " , where the boundary flow IN 0 on ! " # h . Because of the homogenization of the boundary conditions both maps A and B are linear and of infinite dimensions . Thus , assuming a continuous force field , the resulting flow field can be approximated by calculating and summing up the contributions of elementary force field samples distributed throughout ! and along ! " . The more force field elements are sampled the more accurate will be the approximation of the resulting flow . © 2008 Macmillan Publishers Limited . All rights reserved . Supplementary Information Lin et al . 9 Using the linear forward maps A and B the inverse mappings of flow to the domain force II + III F and of flow to boundary force I F are obtained by least - squares minimization of ( S11 ) ( ) 2 2 II + III II + III arg min | | | | | | | | , and L A ! " # = $ + F F u F F ( S12 ) ( ) 2 2 I I arg min | | | | | | | | L B ! " # $ = % + F F u F F . Here , II + III u and I u denote the homogenized flow fields . These are derived from the measured flow field D u so that they satisfy the homogenization conditions HA and HB , respectively ( see summary of algorithms below ) . The operator | | | | (cid:0) denotes the vector 2 L norm ( Euclidean length ) . The objective functions ( S11 ) and ( S12 ) are comprised of two terms . The first term defines the 2 L norm of the difference between the homogenized , measured flow vectors and the flow field obtained by application of the forward mapping A and B to a candidate force field F . Minimization of these terms by variation of F within the cell and along the cell edge yields predicted domain and boundary forces that optimally match the measured flows . Minimization of the first term alone may generate very large force values in locations where measurement noise causes sharp flow gradients . To lower the influence of noise on the force prediction , a second term penalizes irregularly large force magnitudes via the 2 L norm of the force vectors . This extension of the objective function is referred to as Tikhonov regularization 28 . Minimization of the second term alone yields a zero force field . Simultaneous minimization of both terms balances between matching predicted forces to the measured flow fields and limiting the influence of measurement noise . The balance is controlled by the regularization parameter ( 0 ) ! > . The choice of values for α depends on the signal - to - noise ratio of the flow measurements and the characteristics of the flow field . Several strategies have been proposed to identify the “optimal” range of ! values . We applied the L - curve method 29 , an a posteriori strategy that does not require prior knowledge of the noise level . ! values identified by the L - curve method span about two decades . Within this range , lower ! value provide fine spatial details in the predicted force fields at the cost of more noise , while a high ! values yield smoother force field with less spatial detail but also Numerical solutions to ( S11 ) and ( S12 ) are found in finite subspaces ( ) m L ! and ( ) n L ! " that approximate L ! and L ! " by m and n basis functions , respectively . Let m A and n B denote the finite matrix representations of A and B . The discrete solutions to ( S11 ) and ( S12 ) are then given by inversion of two linear equations : ( S13 ) II + III II + III ( ) T T m m m I A A A ! + = F u , and ( S14 ) I I ( ) T T n n n I B B B ! + = F u . Many choices of basis functions in ( ) m L ! and ( ) n L ! " are possible . The main requirement is that the length scales of the functions match the resolution of the flow measurements . We used the shape functions of finite element meshes as the basis functions in ( ) m L ! , and B - splines as the basis functions in ( ) n L ! " . Given these bases , m A and n B were calculated © 2008 Macmillan Publishers Limited . All rights reserved . Supplementary Information Lin et al . 10 column by column . The j th column of m A was obtained by solving Eqs . ( S4 ) and ( S5 ) subject to the homogenization conditions HA using the j th basis function in ( ) m L ! as the domain force . The k th column of n B was obtained by solving Eqs . ( S4 ) – ( S6 ) subject to the homogenization conditions HB using the k th basis function in ( ) n L ! " as the boundary force . In summary , predicted domain forces II + III F and boundary forces I F were obtained by execution of two algorithms . Inverse Algorithm A : • Establish the finite subspace ( ) m L ! of the function space of domain forces . • Use each of the m basis functions in ( ) m L ! once as the domain force II + III F and solve Eqs . ( S4 ) and ( S5 ) subject to HA . Each flow solution evaluated at the positions of flow measurements defines one column of the finite forward map m A . • Calculate II + III u by subtracting from the measured flow field D u the flow solution to Eqs . ( S4 ) and ( S5 ) that satisfies the Dirichlet boundary condition Eqs . ( S7 ) and ( S8 ) with D ! h u on both LE ! " and IN ! " and an assumed domain force II III 0 + ! F in ! . • Solve Eq . ( S13 ) using the regularization parameter ! as determined by the L - curve method . Inverse Algorithm B : • Establish the finite subspace ( ) n L ! " of the function space of boundary forces . • Use each of the n basis functions in ( ) n L ! " once as the boundary force I F on LE ! " and solve Eq . ( S4 ) – ( S6 ) subject to HB . Each flow solution evaluated at the positions of flow measurements defines one column of the finite forward map n B . • Calculate I u as the difference between two flow solutions to Eqs . ( S4 ) and ( S5 ) : For both solutions , the domain force II III + F obtained by the Inverse Algorithm A is used in Eq . ( S5 ) . Both also satisfy the Dirichlet boundary condition Eq . ( S8 ) with D ! h u on IN ! " . The first solution additionally satisfies the Dirichlet boundary condition Eq . ( S7 ) with D ! h u on LE ! " . The second solution satisfies the Neumann boundary condition Eq . ( S6 ) on LE ! " with a free edge , i . e . I 0 = F . • Solve Eq . ( S14 ) using the regularization parameter ! as determined by the L - curve method . © 2008 Macmillan Publishers Limited . All rights reserved . Supplementary Information Lin et al . 11 Note 6 : Decomposition of predicted domain forces into adhesion and contraction forces To separate the contributions of contraction and adhesion to the predicted domain forces we relied on two assumptions : I . in adhesive regions , force vectors are directed anti - parallel to the flow ; and II . in contractile regions , force vectors are directed parallel to the flow . To implement these criteria , we designed the so - called cone rule ( Fig . 2c ) . The cone rule divides the directions about the local flow vector into a negative cone and a positive cone respectively . To determine the division line between the two force domains ( bold black line in Fig . 2c ) , we first identified two narrow cones with opening angles of 45º ( contraction ) and 18º ( adhesion ) . These openings were derived from the spread of two clusters of angles between predicted forces and measured flow vectors ( Fig . 2d ) , the first centered at 0º , the second at 180º . Predicted force vectors falling into one of the narrow cones are classified as contraction - dominant and adhesion - dominant , respectively . The difference in spread reflects that , by nature , adhesion forces strictly oppose the flow direction , while contraction forces do not necessarily align with the flow direction . The division line between the two narrow cones is then defined such that the two clusters associated with the narrow cones have minimal overlap ( 103 . 5º in Fig . 2d ) . The sector between the 18º narrow cone and the division line is referred to as the mixed zone . Here , forces are predominantly adhesive , but contraction makes a significant contribution . To further separate the contributions of adhesion and contraction , predicted forces in the mixed zone are decomposed into projections onto the two narrow cones ( Fig . 2c ) . No such separation is calculated for predicted forces in the sector between the 45º narrow cone and the division line . Although contributions from a weak coupling of the F - actin network to adhesion sites cannot be excluded , contraction force vectors alone can form angles greater than 45º with the direction of F - actin flow . In this case , the effect of contraction is change in flow direction rather than increases flow speed ( circles in Fig . 3c ) . © 2008 Macmillan Publishers Limited . All rights reserved . Supplementary Information Lin et al . 12 Note 7 : Error analysis of force reconstruction on simulated flow data We tested the performance of force reconstruction on flow data that was simulated assuming an input force field . We analyzed the error in the predicted force field by adding normally distributed noise of increasing levels to the simulated flow field . The analysis shows that our inverse algorithm is robust and reliable up to a noise level of ~ 90 % ( definition of relative noise level : see Eq . ( S16 ) below ) . The force field used as an input for the simulations ( Fig . S3a , red arrows overlaid on a color coded map of force magnitude ) consists of two categories of focal adhesions ( small , I and big , II ) , two closely apposed medium - size focal adhesions ( III ) , and a weak ( IV ) and a strong ( V ) contraction zone . This force field design allowed us to test the performance of force reconstruction in detecting weak forces and small FAs , and in separating close FAs . The boundary force ( cyan arrows ) was designed such that its magnitude modulation was independent of the magnitude modulation of adhesion forces . The purpose of this design item is to demonstrate that our experimental finding of spatiotemporally coupled boundary and adhesion forces ( see main text ) is not by construction of the mechanical model , but presents a significant cell mechanical behavior . Noise was added to the simulated flow field according to ( S15 ) noise E 1 E R 2 mean A ( ) ( ) | | ( ) | | ( ) ( ) u ! ! = + + u x u x u x r x r x , where E u is the exact , simulated flow vector without noise ( yellow arrows in Fig . S3a ) , ( ) mean E mean | | ( ) | | u = x u x is the average length of the flow vectors in the field , and R r ( relative noise ) and A r ( absolute noise ) are random vectors with two independent , normally distributed components with standard deviation equal to 1 . The levels of the two noise types 1 ! and 2 ! are denoted in percentages of the individual and the average flow vector length , respectively . To measure the combined level of the two noise types , we use the relative difference between the recovered flow field F u ( produced by the predicted force field ) and the noise - perturbed input flow field noise u : ( S16 ) F noise tiny F | | | | max ( , | | | | ) u ! " = u u u A threshold , tiny u ( 25 % of the mean flow velocity ) , is used in Eq . ( S16 ) to avoid systematic bias of the residual statistics caused by very slow flow vectors . Our analysis shows that the regularization scheme increasingly underestimates force magnitude as the noise level is elevated ( color bars in Fig . S3a and b ) . Regularization , however , is necessary because force reconstruction is sensitive to noise . The ill - posed nature of the inverse problem is evidenced by two observations in Figure S3c and d : i ) © 2008 Macmillan Publishers Limited . All rights reserved . Supplementary Information Lin et al . 13 The reported error in the predicted force field is significant even in absence of noise , i . e . 1 ! = 2 ! = 0 . ii ) The error increases sharply at small noise levels ( < 10 % ) but stabilizes at higher noise levels . The reconstruction error at zero noise is associated mainly with the different treatment of adhesion resistance in the forward simulation and in the inverse reconstruction . In the forward simulation , the predicted adhesion resistance force is modeled as a friction term , i . e . II ( ) ( ) ( ) ! = " F x x u x where the friction coefficient ( ) ! x is a known input . In the inverse reconstruction , we first reconstruct the domain force II + III F and then separate II F from III F by the cone rule ( see Supplementary Note 6 ) . The error of force reconstruction as shown in Figure S3c is measured for boundary forces , and for regions with nonzero and zero domain forces . Errors in the reconstructed boundary and the nonzero domain forces are calculated as the mean relative error , i . e . ( S17 ) 0 R I 0 I I | | ( ) ( ) | | mean , { : | | ( ) | | 0 } | | ( ) | | E ! ! " # $ % & = # = ! ’ ( ) * x F x F x x F x F x . Errors in the region of zero domain force are calculated relative to the average magnitude of nonzero forces : ( S18 ) 0 R I 0 I mean | | ( ) ( ) | | mean , { : | | ( ) | | 0 } E F ! " # $ % = " = = & ’ ( ) x F x F x x F x . In Eqs . ( S17 ) and ( S18 ) , R F denotes the reconstructed force field , I F the input force field to the simulation and mean F the mean force magnitude in 0 ! " , the region of nonzero input forces . A significant portion of the reconstruction error as measured in Eq . ( S17 ) originates from the systematic underestimation of force magnitude . Thus , we further performed an error analysis on the relative distribution of reconstructed forces . This indicates the accuracy with which force relations between different cellular locations can be reconstructed . We define relations in a predicted force field in terms of i ) magnitude , ii ) direction , and iii ) the location of nonzero force vectors ( Fig . S3d ) . To measure the error in the relations between force magnitudes , we first scaled the mean magnitude of estimated forces uniformly in the region with nonzero forces to the mean magnitude of the input forces . Accordingly , the relative error of force relations is defined as ( S19 ) 0 0 0 I R I M I R mean ( | | ( ) | | ) | | ( ) | | | | ( ) | | mean , | | ( ) | | mean ( | | ( ) | | ) x x x E x x ! ! " " " # $ # $ # $ % & ’ = = ( ) * + x x x F F F F F ( Fig . S3d top panel ) . To measure the error in the force direction we calculated the angle between the reconstructed and the input force vectors divided by ! ( Fig . S3d lower panel ) . To measure the relative error of force location , we first defined the location of significant reconstructed forces by setting a threshold below which forces are statistically © 2008 Macmillan Publishers Limited . All rights reserved . Supplementary Information Lin et al . 14 insignificant . Misidentified force locations occur either i ) in areas with false negatives ( blue dots in Fig . S3b ) , or ii ) in areas with false positives ( grey dots in Fig . S3b ) . The error is then defined as the area ratio between misidentified force locations and ! . Clearly , the error depends on the selection of the significance threshold . Figure S3d ( lower axis ) shows the relative error of force location when the threshold is varied from 20 % to 50 % of the mean magnitude of reconstructed forces in 0 ! " . The error curves indicate that a threshold of 50 % provides optimal identification of force location for input noise levels above ~ 15 % . For input noise levels below 15 % thresholds down to 30 % can be used . More restrictive threshold ( < 30 % ) are not preferred even with input noise levels close to zero . The results in Figure S3b indicate that the separation of nonzero and zero forces gets increasingly blurred by the force reconstruction as the noise level increases . In the example shown , predicted force locations obfuscate the distinction of closely apposed FAs when the combined noise level is above ~ 50 % . The analysis also shows that above noise levels of 50 % caution must be applied as to the interpretation of small patches of adhesion or contraction forces . However , overall these tests confirmed that force location , direction and magnitude on a relative scale can be predicted from noisy measurements of F - actin network flow . © 2008 Macmillan Publishers Limited . All rights reserved . Supplementary Information Lin et al . 15 Note 8 : Validation of force reconstruction by co - localization of contraction forces with eGFP - myosin - II and adhesion forces with eGFP - vinculin In epithelial cells , contraction forces are generated by myosin - II motors 30 , while adhesion forces are transmitted to the extracellular matrix in nascent adhesion complexes and focal adhesions 31 . Therefore , it is expected that regions of dominant contraction forces co - localize with myosin - II . Regions of dominant adhesion forces are expected to co - localize with the protein components of adhesion sites 32 . Fig S4a / b confirms co - localization of the predicted contraction force transients with eGFP - myosin - II regulatory light chain , especially within the central and posterior portion of the lamella . Some anterior regions display weak contraction forces despite the relatively strong myosin - II signals ( area marked by a rectangle ) . The actin signals indicate an elevated density of stress fiber ends in this region ( Fig . S4c ) , which are known to innervate into focal adhesions 33 . Thus , in these areas contraction and adhesion forces are likely to cancel one another , as reflected by low predicted forces . Fig . S4d displays the corresponding adhesion and boundary force predictions . The cell edge is in a state of retraction in the left half of the field - of - view while it is in a state of protrusion in the right half of the field - of - view ( Fig . S4c , Video 1 ) . The protruding sector is associated with strong predicted adhesion forces in a ~ 5 µ m - wide band next to the cell edge . No such forces are predicted in the retracting sector . This provides mechanical evidence that cell protrusion requires the formation of adhesive bonds between cytoskeleton and ECM , which is regulated on a scale of single microns . To test the co - localization of predicted adhesion force transients with adhesion complexes , we relied on previous reports which showed high traction forces are accompanied with high fluorescence intensity of eGFP - vinculin 34 , 35 . Indeed , areas of high eGFP - vinculin intensity co - localized with areas of increased adhesion forces ( Fig . 3a , main text , Top , Middle and Bottom boxes ) . Together , these experiments established the co - localization of contraction and adhesion force transients with molecular components of the corresponding force generating machineries , further validating the proposed model for intracellular force reconstruction . © 2008 Macmillan Publishers Limited . All rights reserved . Supplementary Information Lin et al . 16 Note 9 : Effect of spatial variation in network elasticity Absolute force levels could be estimated only if the material properties were known in every location of the sample . For live cells this information is inaccessible at the resolution scale of qFSM flow data . However , to study how forces are dynamically regulated during morphogenic events , the reconstruction of absolute force magnitudes is unnecessary . It is sufficient to know where and when forces develop , and how the directions of forces in neighboring locations deviate . These data could be directly derived from the flow field if the F - actin elasticity was spatially homogeneous or spatial variations could be assessed from , e . g . , the fluorescence intensity . Clearly , the assumption of a spatially homogeneous F - actin network seems overly simplified . Thus , we asked to what extent predicted force distributions in lamellipodium and lamella still reflect meaningful force relationships , even when homogenous elasticity of the F - actin network had to be assumed due to a lack of more complete information . To address this question , we compared force distributions reconstructed with different assumptions of network elastic properties . We recorded a dual - color qFSM movie of X - rhodamine actin ( red ) and GFP - vinculin ( green , Fig . S5a ) . The X - rhodamine signal shows significant spatial variation in intensity , indicating , for instance , the position of stress fibers . Presumably , stress fibers and other regions of higher F - actin density are stiffer than the rest of the network . To test how such heterogeneity affects force reconstruction , we calculated a map of heterogeneous Young’s modulus assuming it is proportional to the F - actin concentration indicated by the X - rhodamine fluorescence ( Fig . S5b ) . The resulting range of moduli varied over one order of magnitude , which is in good agreement with the stiffness variation across lamellipodium and lamella reported by high resolution AFM mapping 36 . Predicted force fields were then reconstructed , first assuming homogenous elasticity ( Fig . S5c and d ) and then assuming spatially variable elasticity ( Fig . S5e and f ) . The two force fields display very similar patterns . In both cases , the adhesion - dominant regions ( Fig . S5c and e ) colocalize well with the location and intensity of the GFP - vinculin signal ( Fig . S5a , green ) . Close comparison of the predicted force vectors ( zoom - in views of Fig . S5c and e ) suggests that the distributions of both the direction and relative magnitudes are similar . Thus , the outcome of the predicted force reconstruction is relatively insensitive to elasticity variations . A possible explanation for this robust behavior is the high resolution of the qFSM - measured flow data , which warrants determination of stable flow gradients with submicron resolution ( see Supplementary Note 4 ) . At this length scale variations in the average network elasticity are small compared to the magnitude of the flow gradient . Consequently , the numerical solution to the inverse problem formulated by Eqs . ( S11 ) and ( S12 ) is dominated by the strain tensor for which high quality information is available . © 2008 Macmillan Publishers Limited . All rights reserved . Supplementary Information Lin et al . 17 Supplementary References 1 . Howard , J . Mechanics of motor proteins and the cytoskeleton . ( Sinauer Associates , Inc . , Sunderland , MA ; 2001 ) . 2 . Vallotton , P . , Danuser , G . , Bohnet , S . , Meister , J . J . & Verkhovsky , A . Retrograde Flow in Keratocytes : News from the Front . Mol Biol Cell 16 , 1223 - 1231 ( 2005 ) . 3 . Shin , K . H . , Gardel , M . L . , Mahadevan , L . , Matsudaira , P . & Weitz , D . A . Relating microstructure to rheology of a bundled and cross - linked F - actin network in vitro . Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 101 , 9636 - 9641 ( 2004 ) . 4 . Gardel , M . L . et al . Elastic Behavior of Cross - Linked and Bundled Actin Networks . Science 304 , 1301 - 1305 ( 2004 ) . 5 . Tseng , Y . , An , K . M . , Esue , O . & Wirtz , D . The Bimodal Role of Filamin in Controlling the Architecture and Mechanics of F - actin Networks . J . Biol . Chem . 279 , 1819 – 1826 ( 2004 ) . 6 . Storm , C . , Pastore , J . J . , MacKintosh , F . C . , Lubensky , T . C . & Janmey , P . A . Nonlinear elasticity in biological gels . Nature 435 , 191 - 194 ( 2005 ) . 7 . Fabry , B . et al . Scaling the microrheology of living cells . Physical Review Letters 8714 , 8102 - 8101 - 8104 ( 2001 ) . 8 . Alcaraz , J . et al . Microrheology of Human Lung Epithelial Cells Measured by Atomic Force Microscopy . Biophys . J . 84 , 2071 - 2079 ( 2003 ) . 9 . Trepat , X . et al . Viscoelasticity of human alveolar epithelial cells subjected to stretch . Am J Physiol Lung Cell Mol Physiol 287 , L1025 - 1034 ( 2004 ) . 10 . Panorchan , P . , Lee , J . S . H . , Kole , T . P . , Tseng , Y . & Wirtz , D . Microrheology and ROCK Signaling of Human Endothelial Cells Embedded in a 3D Matrix . Biophys . J . 91 , 3499 - 3507 ( 2006 ) . 11 . Kole , T . P . , Tseng , Y . , Huang , L . , Katz , J . L . & Wirtz , D . Rho Kinase Regulates the Intracellular Micromechanical Response of Adherent Cells to Rho Activation . Mol . Biol . Cell 15 , 3475 - 3484 ( 2004 ) . 12 . Kole , T . P . , Tseng , Y . , Jiang , I . , Katz , J . L . & Wirtz , D . Intracellular Mechanics of Migrating Fibroblasts . Mol . Biol . Cell 16 , 328 - 338 ( 2005 ) . 13 . Yanai , M . , Butler , J . P . , Suzuki , T . , Sasaki , H . & Higuchi , H . Regional rheological differences in locomoting neutrophils . Am J Physiol Cell Physiol 287 , C603 - 611 ( 2004 ) . 14 . Marion , S . , Guillen , N . , Bacri , J . C . & Wilhelm , C . Acto - myosin cytoskeleton dependent viscosity and shear - thinning behavior of the amoeba cytoplasm . Eur Biophys J 34 , 262 - 272 ( 2005 ) . 15 . Wang , Q . et al . Changes in the biomechanical properties of neutrophils and endothelial cells during adhesion . Blood 97 , 660 - 668 ( 2001 ) . 16 . Wang , N . Mechanical Interactions Among Cytoskeletal Filaments . Hypertension 32 , 162 - 165 ( 1998 ) . 17 . Tseng , Y . , Kole , T . P . & Wirtz , D . Micromechanical mapping of live cells by multiple - particle - tracking microrheology . Biophys J 83 , 3162 - 3176 ( 2002 ) . 18 . Yamada , S . , Wirtz , D . & Kuo , S . C . Mechanics of Living Cells Measured by Laser Tracking Microrheology . Biophys . J . 78 , 1736 - 1747 ( 2000 ) . © 2008 Macmillan Publishers Limited . All rights reserved . Supplementary Information Lin et al . 18 19 . Bausch , A . R . , Moller , W . & Sackmann , E . Measurement of local viscoelasticity and forces in living cells by magnetic tweezers . Biophys J 76 , 573 - 579 ( 1999 ) . 20 . Diez , S . , Gerisch , G . , Anderson , K . , Muller - Taubenberger , A . & Bretschneider , T . Subsecond reorganization of the actin network in cell motility and chemotaxis . PNAS 102 , 7601 - 7606 ( 2005 ) . 21 . McGrath , J . L . , Tardy , Y . , Dewey , C . F . , Jr . , Meister , J . J . & Hartwig , J . H . Simultaneous measurements of actin filament turnover , filament fraction , and monomer diffusion in endothelial cells . Biophys J 75 , 2070 - 2078 . ( 1998 ) . 22 . Ponti , A . , Vallotton , P . , Salmon , W . C . , Waterman - Storer , C . M . & Danuser , G . Computational Analysis of F - Actin Turnover in Cortical Actin Meshworks Using Fluorescent Speckle Microscopy . Biophys . J . 84 , 3336 - 3352 ( 2003 ) . 23 . Ponti , A . et al . Periodic patterns of actin turnover in lamellipodia and lamellae of migrating epithelial cells analyzed by Quantitative Fluorescent Speckle Microscopy . Biophys . J . 89 , 3456 - 3469 ( 2005 ) . 24 . Ponti , A . , Machacek , M . , Gupton , S . L . , Waterman - Storer , C . M . & Danuser , G . Two distinct actin networks drive the protrusion of migrating cells . Science 305 , 1782 - 1786 ( 2004 ) . 25 . Delorme , V . et al . Cofilin activity downstream of Pak1 regulates cell protrusion efficiency by organizing lamellipodium and lamella actin networks . Dev . Cell 13 , 646 - 662 ( 2007 ) . 26 . Landau , L . D . & Lifshitz , E . M . Theory of Elasticity , Edn . 3rd . ( 1986 ) . 27 . Boal , D . Mechanics of the Cell . ( Cambridge University Press , Cambridge ; 2002 ) . 28 . Engl , H . W . , Hanke , M . & Neubauer , A . Regularization of Inverse Problems . ( Springer , 1996 ) . 29 . Engl , H . W . & Grever , W . Using the L - - curve for determining optimal regularization parameters . Numerische Mathematik 69 , 25 - 31 ( 1994 ) . 30 . Gupton , S . L . & Waterman - Storer , C . M . Spatiotemporal feedback between actomyosin and focal - adhesion systems optimizes rapid cell migration . Cell 125 , 1361 - 1374 ( 2006 ) . 31 . Beningo , K . A . , Dembo , M . , Kaverina , I . , Small , J . V . & Wang , Y . L . Nascent focal adhesions are responsible for the generation of strong propulsive forces in migrating fibroblasts . J . Cell Biol . 153 , 881 - 887 ( 2001 ) . 32 . Geiger , B . , Bershadsky , A . , Pankov , R . & Yamada , K . M . Transmembrane extracellular matrix - cytoskeleton crosstalk . Nature Reviews Molecular Cell Biology 2 , 793 - 805 ( 2001 ) . 33 . Hotulainen , P . & Lappalainen , P . Stress fibers are generated by two distinct actin assembly mechanisms in motile cells . J . Cell Biol . 173 , 383 - 394 ( 2006 ) . 34 . Balaban , N . Q . et al . Force and focal adhesion assembly : a close relationship studied using elastic micropatterned substrates . Nature Cell Biology 3 , 466 - 472 ( 2001 ) . 35 . Galbraith , C . G . , Yamada , K . M . & Sheetz , M . P . The relationship between force and focal complex development . J . Cell Biol . 159 , 695 - 705 ( 2002 ) . 36 . Almqvist , N . et al . Elasticity and Adhesion Force Mapping Reveals Real - Time Clustering of Growth Factor Receptors and Associated Changes in Local Cellular Rheological Properties . Biophys . J . 86 , 1753 - 1762 ( 2004 ) . © 2008 Macmillan Publishers Limited . All rights reserved .