772 © 2007 Blackwell Publishing Ltd . No claim to original US government works , Journal of Evaluation in Clinical Practice 13 ( 2007 ) 772 – 780 Journal of Evaluation in Clinical Practice ISSN 1356 - 1294 Blackwell Publishing LtdOxford , UKJEPJournal of Evaluation in Clinical Practice13561294© 2006 Blackwell Publishing Ltd No claim to original US government works2006135772780Original Article Information seeking in ambulatory educationJ . C . Tilburt et al . How do doctors use information in real - time ? A qualitative study of internal medicine resident precepting Jon C . Tilburt MD MPH , 1 Susan D . Goold MD MHSA MA , 2 Nazema Siddiqui MD 3 and Rajesh S . Mangrulkar MD 4 1 Staff Scientist , Department of Clinical Bioethics , National Institutes of Health , Bethesda , MD , and Department of Medicine , Division of General Internal Medicine , the Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine , Baltimore , MD , USA 2 Association Professor of Medicine , 4 Clinical Assistant Professor of Medicine , Department of Internal Medicine , Division of General Internal Medicine , University of Michigan Health System , Ann Arbor , MI , USA 3 Fellow , Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology , Duke University Medical Center , Durham , NC , USA Abstract Background Despite the importance of evidence - based medicine in medical education , little observational research exists on how doctors - in - training seek and use evidence from information resources in ambulatory care . Objective To describe information exchange behaviour by internal medicine residents and attendings in ambulatory resident clinic precepting rooms . Design We observed resident behaviour and audiotaped resident – attending doctor interac - tions during precepting sessions . Participants Participating residents included 70 of an eligible 89 residents and 28 of 34 eligible attendings from one large academic internal medicine residency programme in the Midwestern USA . Residents were observed during 95 separate precepting interactions at four ambulatory sites . Approach Using a qualitative approach , we analysed transcripts and ﬁeld notes of observed behaviours and interactions looking for themes of information exchange . Coders discussed themes which were reﬁned using feedback from an interdisciplinary panel . Results Four themes of information exchange behaviour emerged : ( i ) questioning behav - iours that were used as part of the communication process in which the resident and attending doctor could reason together ; ( ii ) searching behaviour of non - human knowledge sources occurred in a minority of precepting interations ; ( iii ) unsolicited knowledge offer - ing and ( iv ) answering behaviours were important means of exchanging information . Conclusions Most clinic interactions between resident and attending doctors relied heavily on spoken deliberation without resorting to the scientiﬁc literature or other pub - lished information resources . These observations suggest a range of factors that may moderate information exchange behaviour in the precepting context including relation - ships , space and efﬁciency . Future research should aim to more readily adapt information resources to the relationships and practice context of precepting . Background Ambulatory care activities comprise one - third of the 3 - year inter - nal medicine residency education in the USA . And despite the ascendancy of evidence - based medicine as a tool to gather reliable health information , with the exception of work by Ramos et al . [ 1 ] , little evidence exists on how information seeking occurs dur - ing the real - time ambulatory precepting activity . Precepting is a dedicated educational activity involving patient care and teaching where resident doctors discuss care plans with supervising faculty doctors ( called , ‘attendings’ ) . Studying this interaction can serve as a window into how doctors ( attendings and doctors - in - training called , ‘residents’ ) do or don’t obtain and integrate health informa - tion into their practice . Previous studies of information seeking in private practice and other contexts by Woolf & Benson [ 2 ] , Stinson & Mueller [ 3 ] , and Smith [ 4 ] indicate that information needs of practising doctors often go unmet . Various models of health information seeking have been formulated to explain those needs including those by Curley et al . [ 5 ] and Gruppen et al . [ 6 ] , revealing several consistent inﬂu - encing factors , including access , habit , reliability , quality , speed and applicability of resource use recently summarized by Dawes & Keywords evidence - based medicine , graduate medical education , information - seeking behaviour , precepting , qualitative research Correspondence Jon Tilburt Department of Clinical Bioethics Building 10 Room 1C 119 National Institutes of Health Bethesda MD 20892 - 1156 USA E - mail : jontilburt @ yahoo . com These results were presented at the Annual Meeting of the Society of General Internal Medicine , May 2003 , Vancouver , BC , Canada . Accepted for publication : 19 April 2006 doi : 10 . 1111 / j . 1365 - 2753 . 2006 . 00752 . x J . C . Tilburt et al . Information seeking in ambulatory education © 2007 Blackwell Publishing Ltd . No claim to original US government works 773 Sampson [ 7 ] . However , it is not clear whether these factors apply to the same degree in contemporary ambulatory teaching contexts for the following reasons . First , many crucial studies examining information seeking occurred in the early and mid 1990s when computer - based information systems were just emerging in health care . Second , studies that focus on primary care specialties other than internal medicine ( e . g . family practice or paediatrics ) may have different expectations about behaviours during precepting . Finally , inpatient work practices and team dynamics may signiﬁ - cantly alter the information retrieval process , making studies from the hospital setting difﬁcult to generalize to ambulatory care . Work by Greenhalgh et al . [ 8 ] , Rousseau et al . [ 9 ] , Montori et al . [ 10 ] and Ely et al . [ 11 ] have suggested that evaluating infor - mation search and retrieval processes may beneﬁt from qualitative approaches . Ramos et al . [ 1 ] and Forsythe et al . [ 12 ] cite a lack of verbatim audiotaped data as a limitation in their attempts to study real - time information - seeking behaviour , especially in the clinical teaching environment . In an era when competency and account - ability must be demonstrated , educators would ideally gather valid baseline descriptions about how doctors interact with their existing knowledge resources , combine that data with existing theory of information seeking and methods of scientiﬁc inference ( e . g . clin - ical epidemiology ) , before devising educational interventions in this domain . Using semi - structured observation and audiotaped techniques , this study sought to observe and characterize the information exchange behaviour of doctors in the ambulatory setting as a means of better understanding the range of contextual and behav - ioural factors involved in seeking out and utilizing health informa - tion in ambulatory residency training . We hypothesized that information exchange behaviours in this setting were common , but that they occurred within the human precepting relationship , and that search of non - human knowledge resources occurred rarely . Study design Setting We observed and audiotaped general internal medicine resident – attending precepting interactions at four outpatient centres afﬁli - ated with a university - based internal medicine training programme in the Midwestern USA in October 2001 . In these clinics , precept - ing interactions take place in dedicated educational spaces called ‘mentor rooms’ where various information resources , chairs and tables are assembled ( Fig . 1 ) . At the time the study was conducted , information resources and computers were not available in the other areas of the clinics . We deﬁned a precepting interaction as the entirety of the resident’s experience in the mentor room for one patient case . Each precepting attending supervises two or three residents . In this setting , resident doctors conduct weekly continuity ambula - tory primary care , where patients are scheduled every 30 minutes . Attending doctors accompany all ﬁrst year residents back to the patient room during the ﬁrst 6 months of clinic and at their discre - tion after 6 months . In this training programme , the precepting expectation is that all new patient cases , and the vast majority of returning patient cases be presented to the attending completely using an accepted approach ( chief complaint , history of present illness , past medical history , allergies , social and family history , exam , data , and assessment and plan ) . When senior residents ( in their third and ﬁnal year of training ) are managing stable patients with whom faculty are familiar or when faculty patients are sched - uled to see residents assigned to that faculty member , presentation of cases may be more abbreviated . Typically , clinic attendings in this programme do not schedule their own patients for visits dur - ing precepting time . Data collection and management Our observer , a recent medical graduate of the residency pro - gram’s parent medical school , had training in medical informatics , knew the study setting well but was not well known to residents and was not pursuing a career in primary care . She observed residents in half - day increments , recording data using audio tapes and scribing ﬁeld notes of observations consistent with a partici - pant observation approach outlined by Bernard [ 13 ] . We sampled residents from eligible clinic sessions – any half - day weekly resident clinic session at a site that was large enough to use a mentor room . Successive sessions were observed until the end of the observation period . Residents were observed in isola - tion and sequentially from the time of entry into the mentor room after seeing a patient , through the precepting interaction , until leaving the room . All relevant clinical management behaviour during each resident’s mentor room experience was observed for a given patient case . Observer ﬁeld notes focused on all information exchange behaviour between resident doctors , precepting attending doctors , and other information resources in the mentor room , deﬁned as any behaviour seeking or receiving information for patient management . The observer used a ﬁeld - tested , semistructured instrument developed in collaboration with three of the investiga - tors ( JT , SDG , RM ) . Field notes were transcribed and merged with Figure 1 Clinic mentor room . Model of a large typical clinic mentor room with tables centrally surrounded by resources , chairs , personal computers ( PC ) , and doorways ( double - sided arrows ) depicting the ﬂow of trafﬁc in and out of the mentor room . All locations included in the study used the space described above or a space with the same general features , furniture and resources . PCPC Table Table Table Table Printer Mailboxes Mailboxes PC PC PC PC PC PC PC PC Bookshelf Observer Resident Attending ( Student ) Chair 774 © 2007 Blackwell Publishing Ltd . No claim to original US government works Information seeking in ambulatory education J . C . Tilburt et al . transcripts of audio recordings from each precepting interaction . For those audio tapes that were inaudible ( 11 tapes ) , ﬁeld notes alone were used . We used N5 ® , a qualitative data software system , to store transcripts and assist with data analysis . Participants Among all programme residents ( n = 147 ) , 54 ( 36 . 7 % ) were excluded for one of several reasons and four refused to participate ( 3 . 8 % ) . We excluded those who we observed during piloting ses - sions ( n = 8 ) . Twenty - ﬁve residents were excluded for logistical complications with an afﬁliated clinic site , one resident because of previous knowledge of the research hypothesis , eight because there was no mentor room at their clinic , and 12 residents were absent either owing to exempting clinical commitments , vacation or maternity leave . Of the 89 remaining eligible residents , we observed 70 over a 1 - month period during 17 of a possible 21 half - day clinic sessions in 95 precepting interactions at four sites . This number of residents was both consistent with our sampling goals and the maximum feasible number of observations given the observer’s schedule . Analytic approach Three investigators initially read transcripts and ﬁeld notes to gain a general familiarity with the transcript content . Consensus and revision of themes culminated in a codebook that included deﬁni - tions , examples and inclusion / exclusion criteria for particular themes . All documents were analysed by at least one investigator using the codebook in its ﬁnal version . All other steps in data analysis ( open coding , initial coding , consensus , revision , code book construction , extraction of themes ) involved at least two investigators . Trustworthiness Calibration of the observational technique occurred at two time points using a second observer . Recorded information exchange events were categorized as having complete agreement ( described by both observers using essentially the same language ) , near agreement ( similar language ) , or no agreement . Substantive agree - ment between the two observers [ ( complete + near agreement ) / total information exchange events ] was 75 % and 85 % in the ﬁrst and second sessions respectively . We insured trustworthiness of our interpretation by involving multiple investigators in each phase of the analysis , soliciting feedback from experts , and examining coherence with existing theory on learning behaviours . In addition , two investigators anal - ysed a subset ( 10 % ) of merged documents from the initial coding phase , revealing substantive agreement in 64 % ( 79 / 124 ) of recorded events . The coding scheme was reviewed with eight social scientists and educators through a convened research - in - progress session where several randomly selected observation text passages were presented and an initial coding scheme with exam - ples was discussed in detail . Their primary task was to review and revise our initial thematic schema . With this feedback , the revised coding scheme was then calibrated against the social science liter - ature for plausibility , resulting in a codebook that was then used to analyse all 95 merged transcript documents . This study was reviewed and approved by the University of Michigan Health System’s Institutional Review Board . Results Demographic characteristics of the participating residents and attendings did not differ signiﬁcantly from all residents and attend - ings in the programme ( Table 1 ) . Interpretation of observation data using the reﬂective methodology outlined above revealed four themes of information exchange behaviour for ambulatory pre - cepting : ( i ) questioning behaviour , ( ii ) searching behaviour , ( iii ) unsolicited knowledge offering , and ( iv ) answering behaviour . Table 2 describes the relative frequencies of the themes by tran - script number , number of observed doctors exhibiting the behav - iour , and coded text units . Interpretation of the themes follow . Theme 1 : Questioning behaviour ‘Questioning behaviour’ , as a category , included any behaviour expressing a lack of knowledge to or seeking knowledge from the partner in the mentoring interaction . We further subcoded all ques - tions into three subthemes by degree of explicitness : classic inter - rogative statements , expressed knowledge deﬁcits , or interrogative gestures . See Table 3 for descriptions and examples of each subtheme . Subtheme : Classic interrogative statements In their most straightforward and easily recognized formulation , questioning behaviours were most often expressed as ‘Classic Table 1 Participant characteristics Characteristics Resident characteristics * Residency population ( n = 147 ) Participating residents ( n = 70 ) Men ( % ) 102 ( 69 % ) 48 ( 69 % ) , P = 1 . 00 PGY 1 ( % ) 53 ( 36 % ) 28 ( 40 % ) , P = 0 . 55 PGY 2 ( % ) 44 ( 30 % ) 19 ( 27 % ) , P = 0 . 65 PGY 3 ( % ) 44 ( 30 % ) 21 ( 30 % ) , P = 1 . 00 PGY 4 ( % ) 6 ( 4 % ) 2 ( 3 % ) , P = 0 . 71 Characteristics Faculty characteristics † Faculty population ( n = 29 ) Participating faculty ( n = 21 ) Mean age in years ( SD ) 40 ( 6 . 1 ) 40 ( 5 . 3 ) Number of Males ( % ) 19 ( 66 % ) 14 ( 67 % ) Mean years of precepting ( SD ) 9 . 0 ( 5 . 1 ) 9 . 4 ( 4 . 9 ) Years out of medical school ( SD ) 13 . 3 ( 5 . 4 ) 13 . 6 ( 4 . 9 ) * P - values represent tests of equality of means or proportions between participants and their respective population . † Twenty - nine of 34 attendings from the programme responded to a survey to ascertain group characteristics . Twenty - one of those 28 partic - ipating faculty responded to the survey . PGY , post - graduate year . J . C . Tilburt et al . Information seeking in ambulatory education © 2007 Blackwell Publishing Ltd . No claim to original US government works 775 Table 2 Frequency of information exchange behaviours Behaviour themes Transcripts containing * ( n = 95 ) , n ( % ) Coded text units † ( n = 4367 ) , n ( % ) Attendings exhibiting ‡ ( n = 28 ) , n ( % ) Residents exhibiting § ( n = 70 ) , n ( % ) Questions 94 ( 99 ) 1030 ( 24 ) 29 ( 100 ) 56 ( 80 ) Interrogative statement 87 ( 92 ) 900 ( 21 ) – – Structured clinical 18 ( 19 ) 64 ( 1 ) – – Knowledge deﬁcit 36 ( 38 ) 119 ( 3 ) – – Interrogative gesture 7 ( 7 ) 11 ( 0 . 2 ) – – Searching 25 ( 26 ) 66 ( 2 ) 9 ( 31 ) 15 ( 21 ) Unsolicited knowledge offering 86 ( 91 ) 1853 ( 42 ) 29 ( 100 ) 49 ( 70 ) Answering 94 ( 99 ) 1418 ( 32 ) 26 ( 90 ) 69 ( 99 ) * Number of transcripts containing the information exchange behaviour listed ; each transcript describes a single precepting interaction . † Number of text units ( i . e . lines of text ) coded by each of these categories . ‡ Number of attendings who exhibited these behaviours . § Number of residents who exhibited these behaviours . Table 3 Examples of questioning behaviour Question subtype Case context Statement syntax Data ( coded text in italics ) Classic interrogative Interrogative Learning Pharyngitis case ATT : It’s amazing that it works . RES : Why does that work ? ATT : I don’t know . One of the things that we’ve been handed down from mother to child . . . RES : I know it’s really rare to see strep in adults . Do you ever look for that ? Teaching Diabetic with borderline hypertension ATT : What is the degree of blood pressure control that we’re shooting for here , do you think ? Fatigue ATT : Five things that cause fatigue . What are the ﬁve things that cause fatigue ? Immediate need Treatment of respiratory infection RES : Are people giving ‘Azithro’ 500 milligrams for 5 days now ? Isn’t that the recommendation for community - acquired pneumonia ? Expressed knowledge deﬁcit Further evaluation of renal function Declarative RES : The renal function sort of stabilized at one point . I’m not sure what to do about that . Tentative plan Work - up of another thyroid problem RES : I’m just , I want to be real smart about the thyroid test I need before I do it , but I’m thinking Free T4 , TSH and , I don’t know if I’m going to learn a lot more from any other of her tests . Reasoning out loud Further evaluation for chronic pancreatitis and abdominal pain syndrome ATT : We thought all along that the guy has other issues related to this . But I don’t think we’ve considered anything other than that he has this pain syndrome that’s unclear to us what’s causing it . RES : Right . ATT : He’s had a pretty good work - up . I don’t know what else we can do for him . RES : I don’t either , especially from a GI perspective . He’s gotten everything . Lack of speciﬁcity Work - up of thyroid problem RES : There’s this question I have , which , I guess I can look it up , I can form a clinical question . But she has lid lag . I mean it’s got to be completely non - speciﬁc , at least hers is , but I’m just kind of curious on that . . . Interrogative gesture Work - up of syncope None Field notes : When resident responds to type of stress test , sounds like a guess ( voice hesitant , questioning ) ATT , attending doctor ; RES , resident . 776 © 2007 Blackwell Publishing Ltd . No claim to original US government works Information seeking in ambulatory education J . C . Tilburt et al . Interrogative Statements’ , ranging from simple to more sophisti - cated . These short , direct questions ﬁlled in deﬁned knowledge gaps quickly for residents or were used by attendings to rapidly orient the resident to common salient information in ambulatory care . Classic interrogative statements frequently sought to rein - force background knowledge about basic physiology , clariﬁed the management of the patient to date or solicited general opinion about what the attending’s experience had been . Questions were phrased informally , but addressed an immediate information need . Formal structured clinical questions , such as those advocated by proponents of evidence - based medicine [ 14 , 15 ] , were stated in a minority of precepting interactions ( 18 of 95 interactions ) . Subthemes : Expressed knowledge deﬁcits and interrogative gestures ‘Expressed knowledge deﬁcits’ conveyed a lack of knowledge or uncertainty in the form of a declarative ( rather than interrogative ) statement . We included these expressions in the ‘Questioning behaviour’ category despite this syntax . For instance , a resident presenting several ongoing medical issues mentioned that the kid - ney function was abnormal but stated that he was not sure what that meant . In other instances , trainees expressed a tentative man - agement plan , but made it clear that their inclination to implement that plan was uncertain . Still , other times , these expressed knowl - edge deﬁcits were attempts to reason out loud about the nuances of patient management , often for chronic poorly explained symp - toms . Finally , we identiﬁed ‘Interrogative gestures’ : resident behaviour , mannerisms , and intonations that also implied a need for knowledge . This last subtheme was the subtlest and least common questioning behaviour observed . Theme 2 : Searching behaviour We deﬁned ‘Searching’ as behaviours seeking information from a non - human knowledge resource . When searches for patient - spe - ciﬁc data from the medical record were excluded , we found a total of 42 individual searches in 25 of the precepting interactions . Eighteen of the searches were conducted purely for drug dosing clariﬁcation , while 24 were targeted at in - depth clinical manage - ment problems . When observed doctors used these resources , they usually searched either hand - held manuals ( 18 of 42 searches ) or personal digital assistants ( PDA , 10 of 42 searches ) . Two searches involved UpToDate© ( that was readily available to all trainees ) . Only one search involved the MEDLINE database . When deciding on an information resource , residents and attendings generally ﬁrst turned to those resources physically clos - est to them , moving away from the mentoring table after the resources at hand had been attempted . This behaviour is demon - strated in the ﬁeld notes below . Field notes Resident mentions she can’t ﬁnd Vasocydin dose in Pharma - copeia . Attending takes out PDA and at same time , resident takes out Harriet Lane – both look up Vasocydin . Attending leaves mentor room to look for PDR© . Attending returns , asks resident if she can ﬁnd Vasocydin online . Another resident suggests looking at Micromedex© . Resident pulls up Micromedex© and ﬁnds medicine – Attending looking over resident shoulder at computer screen and advises which dose to pick . Doctors left their physical position to search a knowledge source in 14 out of the 42 recorded search behaviours . Frequently , service commitments and time pressures were observed in direct association with resident searching behaviour . Field notes Resident seems to be about to look something up but [ apparently ] doesn’t have time because attending ﬁnishes conversation with medical assistant . In this example , the attending had initially interrupted dialogue with the resident to resolve another issue he had been address - ing with a medical assistant . When the attending resumed his conversation with the resident , the resident aborted her own search to discuss the case with the attending . However , aborted searches were observed in only a small minority of interactions that did not contain explicit searches . Theme 3 : answers We deﬁned ‘Answers’ as direct responses to a question . Answers were expressed in the vast majority of transcripts ( 99 % ) and in a variety of styles depending on ( i ) the role the answerer played ( resident or attending ) and ( ii ) the complexity of the clinical content . Answers from residents often conveyed their reasoning , clari - ﬁed information about the patient’s management , or expressed potential uncertainty in response to attending questioning ( see examples provided in Table 4 ) . In many such instances the ques - tion and answer dynamics between residents and attendings were an iterative way to focus shared clinical reasoning . Answers from attendings were often used for teaching . Attendings frequently not only conveyed clinical knowledge , but also ( what seemed to us as ) a style of clinical judgement and knowledge of the literature related to the immediate clinical questions . In addition , attending answers used different linguistic devices such as metaphor , simile , and storytelling ( Table 4 ) . Theme 4 : Unsolicited knowledge offering We also notice a signiﬁcant number of non - ‘Question’ , non - ‘Answer’ dialogue excerpts that resembled ‘Answers’ , but were not preceded by a ‘Question . ’ We labelled these as Unsolicited knowledge offering , deﬁned as any knowledge conveyed regard - ing patient management that was not in response to a question ( and was not simply conveying or clarifying patient data ) . These behav - iours displayed some of the same diversity seen in Answers , and included some styles not found in Answers . This category included information exchange that was usually initiated by the attending , offered without citing references , yet was immediately relevant to patient management . We observed many formats of this behaviour , including advice - giving , articulation of a plan , com - mentary , medical knowledge and sharing personal experience ( Table 5 ) . J . C . Tilburt et al . Information seeking in ambulatory education © 2007 Blackwell Publishing Ltd . No claim to original US government works 777 Discussion We set out to characterize real - time information exchange behav - iour in the ambulatory internal medicine training environment using direct observation and audiotaped data collection tech - niques . We found that , in most precepting interactions , doctors relied heavily on the spoken deliberation process between resident and attending without resorting to the primary scientiﬁc literature or other non - human knowledge sources . In our estimation the ﬁrst two themes , questioning behaviour and searching behaviour are most crucial to understanding information exchange behaviour in this setting . Questioning behaviour was used both by residents and attendings as a means of gathering information either for their own knowledge , to assess the learner , or to facilitate a decision at the point of care . Furthermore , searching behaviour seemed to arise out of a mutual need for more information and focused on resources that were nearby . Like information seeking in other professional contexts , these interactions were shaped by emergent , dynamic components of the precepting interaction and struck a balance between planned and unplanned aspects of information seeking as described by Ng [ 16 ] . These results are important for understanding the role of information resources in the precepting relationship which transpires in a speciﬁc context – the mentor room . By extension these results suggest implications for how information resource use can be improved in ambulatory training settings . Table 4 Examples of answering behaviour Answering behaviour Example ( coded text in italics ) Convey reasoning ATT : What are you thinking ? RES : Well , it could be a lot of things . But it sounds like she’s been treated for all the most common things . I mean , nothing helps . Didactic vehicle RES : What do you feel about checking out a chest x - ray on him ? ( Question ) ATT : Some of it depends how suspicious the cough is . If it’s just sort of one of these dry , nagging coughs , he’s not bringing up a lot of sputum , that he’s not short of breath or increasing just beyond exertion , then it doesn’t sound like COPD . . . The issue on the horizon now are these studies that have come out of Europe , and particularly the UK , about rapid CT as a new screening approach for heavy smokers ( Answer ) . Linguistic devices Metaphor ATT : However , if there are [ hoofprints ] and there’s bad breath in your face and you look up and say that’s just a horse , I don’t think I need to examine that horse , that will be ﬁne . Simile ATT : It’s like toothpaste . Which brand works for you . . . Storytelling ATT : He’s always been a wheezy kid from day one . . . I mean , at one point , he had pulmonary oedema . . . I was seeing him so many times . . . He’s never had an ear infection that I know of and I just have never seen his ears because I can’t ever get down there . ATT , attending doctor ; RES , resident . Table 5 Styles of unsolicited knowledge offering Style Quote Advice giving ATT : You know , the other thing is if she’s , you know . in a woman like this , I think if we start a whole bunch of medications at once , she’s going to get confused . She’s going to get irritated . Articulation of plan ATT : And you could even dictate if he ends up developing rhinorrhea that’s green , he can call back in for antibiotics . Behavioural commentary ATT : Basically , she has a severe personality disorder . and this is the way she interacts with the world ; this is how she lives her life . This is how she sort of identiﬁed her life and how she interacts with people . She probably almost has no friends , right ? Sharing personal experience ATT : Gargling with warm salt water helps much more than it sounds like it will . I certainly use that myself . You just put a handful of salt water , basically as much salt as you can get to dissolve in the water , and the water as hot as your tap will run it . and then you gargle it and spit . You don’t swallow . ( ﬁle 3 ) Citation / referencing ATT says ‘let’s take care of the coughing ﬁrst’ . Then goes on to give details about managed care guidelines and how to treat this pt . ( ﬁle 20 ) Medical knowledge ATT : Most important , probably , is travellers’ precautions . [ If ] you can’t boil it or peel it , don’t eat it . Boil it , bake it , peal it , I guess . And , make sure she knows about ice cubes . Bottle water is generally safe , although , in many countries , they recycle water because tourists all drink the water . and so , if she want to , get water in bottles with the unbroken seal . ( ﬁle 48 ) ATT , attending doctor ; RES , resident . 778 © 2007 Blackwell Publishing Ltd . No claim to original US government works Information seeking in ambulatory education J . C . Tilburt et al . Importance of the precepting relationship Attendings When we observed attendings’ dialogue ( including questioning behaviour ) , we were observing teaching at the point of care . However , that role as teacher ( and by extension , informal knowl - edge source ) may at times discourage formal information seek - ing : These dynamics may demonstrate aspects of power and interpersonal expectations , as well as socializing forces that may add important constraints to information retrieval described in the work of Mignerey et al . [ 17 ] and Knobloch & Solomon [ 18 ] . Furthermore , in the precepting setting we observed , computer - based searches were associated with physically turning away from the other doctor . While far from proving a causal relation - ship , this association raises the question of whether residents implicitly avoid turning away from an attending to search , sub - consciously giving priority to the spoken interaction with the authority ﬁgure . When viewed from within the precepting rela - tionship , the human - oriented information - seeking behaviour and lack of searching of non - human resources that were observed becomes understandable . Residents Residents rely on attending doctors to provide information in precepting . This is its own kind of information - seeking behav - iour described by Weinberg et al . [ 19 ] . The social expectation in precepting that attendings personally deliver important informa - tion may mean no further explicit statement of information need or subsequent information seeking is typically required . Perhaps only when both the attending and resident encounter a clinical issue that is foreign to their shared experience , described as a ‘dilemma’ by Timpka & Arborelius [ 20 ] will an explicit ques - tion need to be articulated and a more formal search process ensue . Under usual circumstances , we observed that the uncer - tainty of decisions was handled informally without a structured information - seeking process . Wilson et al . [ 21 ] have found that uncertainty is an important variable in a problem - solving model of information seeking . Our data are consistent with those previ - ous observations . Furthermore , we suspect the way that uncer - tainty is communicated , detected and interpreted may be important for information seeking in the ambulatory precepting context . Finally , some shortcuts to coping with uncertainty may discourage formal information seeking and accurate problem solving . Importance of the precepting context The context of the mentor room not only includes a variety of social roles , expectations and dynamics , but also time and space factors that may shape information exchange behaviour . Attending - resident precepting , as described in this study , occurs with patients scheduled every 30 minutes , one attending for every two or three residents , and competing communication with other members of the staff . This raises the possibility of trade - offs between efﬁciency of clinical practice ( e . g . being on time for the next patient ) , and comprehensive , conscientious , up - to - date clini - cal care . Thus , time may represent a ‘resource cost’ in the precept - ing information exchange behaviour we observed just as Woolf & Benson [ 2 ] described . In the training programme we studied , doctors discuss patient cases at a central table in the mentor room , which is usually 5 – 10 feet from the nearest computer and print resources ( Fig . 1 ) . Searching of non - human resources were used more frequently with at - hand resources ( e . g . PDA’s , pocket manuals ) . As Ng [ 16 ] observed , these ﬁndings also raise the possibility that ease of use and accessibility may inﬂuence information seeking in this context . Implications for residency training Seeking out and applying reliable evidence - based information are keys to improving competency in practice - based learning and medical knowledge , as called for in the USA by the Accreditation Council for Graduate Medical Education’s [ 22 ] core competen - cies . As Fidel & Green [ 23 ] as well as Leckie et al . [ 24 ] have found in studies of practising doctors and other professionals , these descriptive ﬁndings prompt us to hypothesize that efﬁciency and convenience may be equally important mediating factors for trainees’ use of information . By extension , more attention may need to be paid to the user end of information resources in the practice context of trainees . Speciﬁcally , educators should attempt to deliberately connect doc - tors - in - training to the right information resources in context – a prescription for effective information delivery . Such an informa - tion prescription , would devote attention not only to high quality resources , but customize the right information to the doctor’s needs at the right time and in the right place given the strengths , weaknesses and preferences of the particular attending – resident pair . We suspect , for instance , that summaries of the best evidence that are linked with the patient’s current problem list within an electronic medical record may be one attractive way to facilitate evidence - based information access while preserving the relational and contextual aspects of current precepting practice . This would bring a more reﬁned , systems - based approach to integrating evi - dence into practice , as advocated by Haynes [ 25 ] . Such easily accessible , concise , and current medical information may more readily guide clinical decision making while accepting the logisti - cal and interpersonal realities of ambulatory care . Increasing facil - ity with at - hand resources , we suspect , may also prepare residents to enter practice where learning - oriented precepting interactions no longer occur . Accomplishing this enhanced information pre - scription while preserving the admirable relational qualities of precepting as a teaching practice should be the goal of informatics education in ambulatory residency training for the future . As lead - ers seek to transform ambulatory education , integrating informa - tion technology into the human elements of practice will hopefully enhance the quality of internal medicine training in this setting . Limitations There are some limitations to our study . First , we did not debrief participants about their information exchange behaviour – a pro - cess referred to as ‘member checking’ ( n = 14 ) . We speciﬁcally avoided member checking for fear that awareness of our study hypotheses and objectives would contaminate the environment we were trying to observe over a 1 - month study period . This means J . C . Tilburt et al . Information seeking in ambulatory education © 2007 Blackwell Publishing Ltd . No claim to original US government works 779 we are limited in making inferences about which speciﬁc factors were most inﬂuential in explaining the individual behaviours we observed . For instance , this study cannot address other potentially relevant non - human factors such as resource characteristics ( usability , relevance and trust ) that may contribute to the frequency of information exchange behaviour we observed . Second , the study took place relatively early in the academic year , which means that many of the ﬁrst year residents had not yet received formal instruction on optimal informatics resources and search techniques . Furthermore , we recognize that this study sampled from one large , academic residency programme . Therefore , apply - ing the results to speciﬁc residency programmes with different population characteristics and precepting arrangements may be limited . Importantly , in the interval time since this study was conducted , the pace of technological innovation for information seeking in clinical practice has grown . These developments include , for example , the evolution of wireless technology and the expansion of clinical knowledge databases in hand - held form . These devel - opments may have changed the format and content of resources available to doctors - in - training , compared with the time of our study . However , we suspect the themes of information exchange behaviour that this study addresses remain relevant and timely in the current educational context . Despite these limitations , we believe this study provides a real - istic and detailed description of information exchange behaviour and its relevance for precepting in internal medicine training contexts . Conclusions Information exchange behaviour in the ambulatory clinical train - ing context seems to reﬂect many of the same themes echoed in the literature on information seeking . Our observations can provide relevant baseline descriptions of these behaviours . This descrip - tion can inform the design of more realistic interventions to improve doctor interactions with their knowledge resources during ambulatory precepting . Acknowledgements We would like to express our appreciation for assistance with this study to John Del Valle , MD and Kym Orsetti , MD . This project was funded by support to Dr Mangrulkar from the Division of General Internal Medicine , University of Michigan Health System . Dr Tilburt received fellowship support from the Greenwall Foundation and the National Heart Lung and Blood Institute during part of the research period . References 1 . Ramos , K . , Linscheid , R . & Schafer , S . ( 2003 ) Real - time information - seeking behavior of residency physicians . Family Medicine , 35 , 257 – 260 . 2 . Woolf , S . H . & Benson , D . A . ( 1989 ) The medical information needs of internists and pediatricians at an academic medical center . Bulletin of the of the Medical Library Association , 77 , 372 – 380 . 3 . Stinson , E . R . & Mueller , D . A . ( 1980 ) Survey of Health Profession - als’ Information Habits and Needs . Journal of the American Medical Association , 243 , 140 – 143 . 4 . Smith , R . ( 1996 ) What clinical information do doctors need ? British Medical Journal , 313 , 1062 – 1068 . 5 . Curley , S . P . , Connelly , D . P . & Rich , E . C . ( 1990 ) Physician’s use of medical knowledge resources : preliminary theoretical framework and ﬁndings . Medical Decision Making , 10 , 231 – 241 . 6 . Gruppen , L . D . , Wolf , F . M . & Stross , J . K . ( 1990 ) Physician practice characteristics as a context for primary care treatment decision - making – a preliminary - study . Academic Medicine , 65 , S9 – S10 . 7 . Dawes , M . & Sampson , U . ( 2003 ) Knowledge management in clinical practice : a systematic review of information seeking behavior in physicians . International Journal of Medical Informatics , 71 , 9 – 15 . 8 . Greenhalgh , T . , Toon , P . , Russell , J . , Wong , G . , Plumb , L . & Macfar - lane , F . ( 2004 ) Transferability of principles of evidence - based medi - cine to improved educational quality : systematic review and case study of an online course in primary health care . British Medical Journal , 326 , 142 – 145 . 9 . Rousseau , N . , McColl , E . , Newton , J . , Grimshaw , J . & Eccles , M . ( 2003 ) Practice based , longitudinal , qualitative interview study of computerised evidence based guidelines in primary care . British Medical Journal , 326 , 314 . 10 . Montori , V . M . , Tabini , C . C . & Ebbert , J . O . ( 2002 ) A qualitative assessment of 1st - year internal medicine residents’ perceptions of evidence - based clinical decision making . Teaching and Learning in Medicine , 14 , 114 – 118 . 11 . Ely , J . W . , Osheroff , J . A . , Ebell , M . H . , et al . ( 1999 ) Analysis of questions asked by family doctors regarding patient care . British Med - ical Journal , 319 , 358 – 361 . 12 . Forsythe , D . E . , Buchanan , B . G . , Osheroff , J . A . & Miller , R . A . ( 1992 ) Expanding the concept of medical information : an observa - tional study of physician’s information needs . Computers and Biomed - ical Research , 25 , 181 – 200 . 13 . Bernard , H . R . ( 1995 ) Research Methods in Anthropology : Qualitative and Quantitative Approaches , 2nd edn . Thousand Oaks , CA : Sage Publications . 14 . Hatala , R . & Guyatt , G . ( 2002 ) Evaluating the teaching of evidence - based medicine . Journal of the American Medical Association , 288 ( 9 ) , 1110 – 1112 . 15 . Richardson , W . S . , Wilson , M . C . , Nishikawa , J . & Hayward , R . S . ( 1995 ) The well - built clinical question : a key to evidence - based deci - sions . ACP Journal Club , 123 , A12 – A13 . 16 . Ng , K . B . ( 2002 ) Toward a theoretical framework for understanding the relationship between situated action and planned action models of behavior in information retrieval contexts : contributions from phe - nomenology . Information Processing and Management , 38 , 613 – 626 . 17 . Mignerey , J . T . , Rubin , R . B . & Gorden , W . I . ( 1995 ) Organizational entry – an investigation of newcomer communication behavior and uncertainty . Communications Research , 22 , 54 – 85 . 18 . Knobloch , L . K . & Solomon , D . H . ( 2002 ) Information seeking beyond initial interaction – negotiating relational uncertainty within close relationships . Human Communications Research , 28 , 243 – 257 . 19 . Weinberg , A . D . , Ullian , L . , Richards , W . D . & Cooper , P . ( 1981 ) Informal advice - and information - seeking between physicians . Jour - nal of Medical Education , 56 , 174 – 180 . 20 . Timpka , T . & Arborelius , E . ( 1990 ) The GP’s dilemmas : a study of knowledge need and use during health care consultations . Methods of Information in Medicine , 29 , 23 – 29 . 21 . Wilson , T . D . , Ford , N . , Ellis , D . , Foster , A . & Spink , A . ( 2002 ) Information seeking and mediated searching . Part 2 . Uncertainty and its correlates . Journal of the American Society of Information Science Technology , 53 , 704 – 715 . 22 . Accreditation Council for Graduate Medical Education . ( 2005 ) Accreditation Council for Graduate Medical Education Outcomes 780 © 2007 Blackwell Publishing Ltd . No claim to original US government works Information seeking in ambulatory education J . C . Tilburt et al . Project : General Competencies . Available at : http : / / www . acgme . org / Outcome ( accessed 19 April 2005 ) . 23 . Fidel , R . & Green , M . ( 2004 ) The many faces of accessibility : engi - neers’ perception of information sources . Information Processing and Management , 40 ( 3 ) , 563 – 581 . 24 . Leckie , G . J . , Pettigrew , K . E . & Sylvain , C . ( 1996 ) Modeling the information seeking of professionals : a general model derived from research on engineers , health care professionals , and lawyers . Library Quarterly , 66 , 161 – 193 . 25 . Haynes , R . B . ( 2001 ) Of studies , syntheses , synopses , and systems : the ‘4S’ evolution of services for ﬁnding current best evidence . ACP Journal Club , 134 , A11 – A13 .