Exploring Learning Ecologies among People Experiencing Homelessness Angelika Strohmayer , Rob Comber , Madeline Balaam Culture Lab , School of Computing Science Newcastle University , UK { a . strohmayer , rob . comber , madeline . balaam } @ ncl . ac . uk ABSTRACT Non - homeless youths outperform their homeless peers in school even if they live in extreme poverty . This disadvantage can have long - term consequences for engagement with and navigation of wider society . In this paper we examine how differences in achievement could be tackled outside of school through the re - envisioning of ecologies of digital education . Through interviews , design workshops , and a street visit with a total of 20 homeless young adults during a three - week engagement with a centre for people of low social stability in Bucharest , Romania , we examine the perceptions of education among street involved youth or adults . We identify the core values , aspirations , opportunities and barriers for education among these people , including survival , friendship , learning networks , and curiosity . These findings resulted in five implications for design : learning ‘happens’ , learning ‘works’ , designing for distanced learning , designing for the social politics of learning , and designing artefacts of everyday learning . These show the importance and necessity of educational reform in the field of HCI . Author Keywords homeless , learning , local learning ecology , learning networks , self - organised learning environments , education . ACM Classification Keywords H . 5 . m . Information interfaces and presentation ( e . g . , HCI ) : Miscellaneous . INTRODUCTION Over one billion people worldwide lack adequate housing , of which 100 million are estimated to have no housing at all [ 17 ] . Precise statistics of homelessness are lacking , partly because there are many definitions of homelessness ranging from a literal meaning of not having a roof over one’s head [ 26 ] to describing “any form of accommodation which does not meet the prevailing cultural standard” [ 11 ] and even people living under “threat of eviction” [ 12 ] . HCI research has begun to attend to the diverse information and technology practices and the possibilities afforded by digital technology for people experiencing homelessness [ 8 , 35 ] . In this paper we add to this growing body of research focusing on the special case of Romania and explore educational needs and interests , as well as current involvement in education , among homeless adults as a means to support people experiencing homelessness in the context of progression opportunity environments , or the opportunity for progressing up a scale of opportunities . Given that people experiencing homelessness are similarly disadvantaged as populations in developing nations , which affects the relationship between this population and technology [ 7 ] , we propose that people experiencing homelessness are a critical population for examining the potential of digital learning technology . We position this work within a context of radical change in approaches to education , particularly in forms that respond to typically excluded or marginalised groups , and in ways that reconfigure the institutional and societal structures of learning [ 18 ] . Through empirical data collected with twenty people experiencing homelessness in Bucharest , Romania , we contribute insight on the prominent values and levers in learning practises for people experiencing homelessness , characterised as learning for survival , adaptive learning , learning in transactions and learning through curiosity . We deploy these characteristics in illustrating alternative learning ecologies of people experiencing homelessness with five implications for future design . BACKGROUND AND RELATED WORK Through the use of technology and digital media , people experiencing homelessness begin to be included with the urban community , which can be “vitally important” [ 25 ] . Not only is information technology and digital media arguably now a basic need [ 15 ] , but its use among the homeless is also linked to collaborative practices aiding survival and inclusion among the larger community . Mobile phones are important for survival on the streets ; as they are tools for communication and connection between peers , their families and friends , social service centres , job opportunities , etc . [ 26 ] . To cater specifically to the need of Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation on the first page . Copyrights for components of this work owned by others than ACM must be honored . Abstracting with credit is permitted . To copy otherwise , or republish , to post on servers or to redistribute to lists , requires prior specific permission and / or a fee . Request permissions from Permissions @ acm . org . CHI 2015 , April 18 - 23 , 2015 , Seoul , Republic of Korea Copyright is held by the owner / author ( s ) . Publication rights licensed to ACM . ACM 978 - 1 - 4503 - 3145 - 6 / 15 / 04… $ 15 . 00 http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2702123 . 2702157 Neighborhoods & Disadvantaged Communities CHI 2015 , Crossings , Seoul , Korea 2275 communication between shelter staff and the homeless regarding available services , reminders about appointments , preservation of any accumulated knowledge and experiences of homelessness , and any inquires beneficiaries may have , Le Dantec et al . [ 8 ] created the Community Resource Messenger - Web Application ( CRM ) . They found that it enabled “immediate action to be taken” [ 8 ] regarding any issues that arose via the application and amplified the relationships between staff and residents . In this sense , mobile and information technologies assist in connecting the homeless population with friends and family [ 8 ] , and are also an important factor in building collaboration in neighbourhoods [ 26 ] . Ultimately , it is these social networks and ties that have an impact in whether or not the person is able to get off the street [ 7 ] . However , although people experiencing homelessness have access to technology , they typically lack immediate and private contact , and resort to use public services [ 33 ] . They have been found to part with their digital artefacts , exchanging them for immediate needs [ 35 ] . This causes the population to live in “information poverty” [ 7 ] and a reduction in the relationships they tend outside their immediate community . In this paper , we explore this contrasting potential and isolation of homeless populations in relation to education . Although ‘education’ can be understood as secondary to ‘life’ on the streets , we argue that the possibility for learning among homeless populations is tied to and mutually constitutive of the socio - technical marginalisation of homelessness . We explore the educational exclusion experienced by the homeless population and examine two theoretical models of learning ecologies as a means to understand the relationships between social , material , and technological marginalisation . Homelessness and Schools Non - homeless youths outperform their homeless peers in school even if they live in extreme poverty [ 23 ] . Retention rates among homeless students can be as high as 25 % [ 23 ] ; and high proportions of children who are homeless may be failing in reading and math ( 50 % ) and may also have behavioural issues ( 40 % ) [ 14 ] . The state of mobility that these youths have due to their ever - changing status and cyclical living behaviour is “one of the greatest barriers to educational achievement” [ 23 ] . These disadvantages can have long - term consequences for engagement with , and navigation of wider society in later life [ 27 ] . Such challenges faced by young people who are homeless suggest a need to reconsider the processes , places and policies of education towards an informal setting . We draw on theories of Illich [ 18 ] as well as learning environments and ecologies to understand and describe the interactions and possibilities between learners , technologies and the construction of learning environments . In particular , we draw on models of the Local Learning Ecology [ 16 ] and Learning Networks [ 32 ] and the role of digital technology in the everyday lives and environments of people experiencing homelessness [ 7 , 8 , 33 , 34 ] . Local Learning Ecologies ( LLE ) LLE is a model that describes the factors that affect the education opportunities and labour market conditions that young people ( 14 - 19 years ) navigate , originally proposed in relation to young people Not in Education , Employment or Training ( NEET ) . Accounting for the differences in opportunities available to young people , the model considers factors such as : young people’s travel - to - learn and earn patterns ; the organization of schools , colleges , work - based learning providers and higher education institutions ; the local labour market ; socio - economic geography ; and the nature of communities and their traditions [ 16 ] . These factors are mutually influencing at the wider institutional context , such as a school ( meso ) , local authority ( exo 1 ) , regional economic landscape ( exo 2 ) , and global ( macro ) levels , such that the opportunity landscape for young people lies on a continuum ranging from a low opportunity progression equilibrium ( LOPE ) , where all factors interact to diminish opportunities , to a high opportunity progression eco - system ( HOPE ) , where a process of devolution establishes a self - sustaining logic . In regards to homelessness a HOPE would include the willingness of an individual to move cities ; the cooperation between NGOs and locally based learning providers ; the willingness to employ homeless individuals in the local job - market ; and the global understanding of traditions and issues regarding homelessness . Hodgson and Spours [ 16 ] suggest that changes need to be made at all levels of the ecological system to sustain movement towards a HOPE , although some movement can be achieved if changes are made at the meso and exo system levels . Fielding and Moss [ 13 ] postulate that by creating local infrastructure to support the development of the local educational project , both in individual schools and through building networks between schools , communities and the local authority , learning will increase and improve , causing the environment to move further towards a HOPE . Learning Environments Learning networks [ 32 ] are based on the idea of sharing information by connecting the separate learning networks of individuals through the use of personal tools and user artefacts . However , when superimposing Wilson’s [ 32 ] model of learning networks onto the idea of LLE , it becomes questionable whether buildings and physical infrastructure are even necessary to foster learning . HCI research has demonstrated the possibility for technology and mobile learning to be used in certain environments where local school infrastructure is not readily available for the entire population [ 7 ] . These Asynchronous Learning Networks ( ALNs ) can establish critical thinking , a high degree of cohesion among participants and triggered responsiveness among students [ 1 ] . For instance , Freinet Neighborhoods & Disadvantaged Communities CHI 2015 , Crossings , Seoul , Korea 2276 found that after students had sent their self - printed writing portfolios to schools in other towns and countries creating their own learning network , student interest was increased as children responded to “the inexhaustible curiosity of correspondents” . In this sense , collaborative learning , social discourse , technology and networking have all been linked to a process of empowerment [ 31 ] . In 1970 Illich stated that there was a need to “research on the possible use of technology to create institutions which serve personal , creative , and autonomous interaction” [ 18 ] . An example of this is Mitra’s [ 21 , 22 ] Self - Organised Learning Environments ( SOLEs ) , where the role of teachers shifts towards a facilitator of learning and the digital environment allows children to answer ‘big questions’ . This model has further progressed into the School in the Cloud ( SitC ) , a network of SOLEs and ‘grannies’ that communicate with children over the internet to facilitate learning [ 9 ] . This would allow peers around the globe to exchange ideas , information and stories ; it would be a cradle for knowledge exchange and learning , allowing the already existing social networks [ 25 ] to expand . Much has been researched towards the use of SOLEs as a tool within the classroom and national curriculum [ 9 , 22 ] , but little has been done regarding transformative pedagogy and out - of - school education—particularly for minorities and / or marginalized groups like people experiencing homelessness . CASE STUDY : HOMELESSNESS IN ROMANIA Although homelessness is a global problem , the local policies of national governments greatly impact on the continued and self - reproducing exclusion of people experiencing homelessness . Romania , for example , does not have an established policy recognising homelessness and , as such , does not have an estimated number of people who are experiencing homelessness and few social service institutions that cater to the needs of the homeless population . In 2009 more than 40 % of Romania’s population were living either in a household with zero or very low work intensity , in severe material deprivation , or at risk of poverty [ 10 ] ; causing it to be the country with the second highest percentage of population living in severe deprivation and at - risk - of poverty in Europe . Despite this , Romania is also the country with the second lowest gross expenditure on social protection benefits [ 10 ] . In 2001 , it was reported that as much as 14 % of the respondents in Romania had experienced homelessness themselves , while 43 % knew someone that had [ 3 ] . This prevalence of homelessness is founded in an effective ban on contraception in 1966 . This ban backfired and over the following generations estimates of up to 20 , 000 children either fled orphanages or were abandoned and left to fend for themselves on the street [ 2 ] . Following the revolution of 1989 and the collapse in provision of social services , the number of homeless in Romania drastically increased as the police no longer collected loitering children and teens to distribute among orphanages . Furthermore , policy within the EU aimed at issues of homelessness focus on housing as the central challenge , with little attention on the underlying causes and hidden consequences of homelessness . This study was carried out in in the suburbs of Northern Bucharest with a private social service provider that was established in 1991 . The Non - Governmental Organisation ( NGO ) runs several centres for children and adults who are homeless or from socially unstable homes throughout Bucharest and the surrounding area , and coordinates weekly visits to living hubs of the homeless by a street worker . The centre is part of a phased re - integration programme for independent living . The centre is split into two sections ; the day centre , and the hostel . In the day centre anyone is welcome to wash , have a warm meal , and a change of clothes . Twice a week a nurse is also present to perform free health check - ups . The hostel provides accommodation for both men and women who have fulfilled criteria showing their willingness to stay at the centre—for example following house rules . Hostel residents are eligible for three meals a day , have access to the nurse , social workers and volunteers , and to make use of different types of therapies , sports and music programmes . METHODS The purpose of the data collection was to identify the ways and means through which participants engaged in learning , with a broad definition of learning as a life - long process that is not confined to schools , universities , or other institutions . However , in the initial phases of engagement with the centre , participants were reluctant to describe anything they had done since living on the street as learning . More detailed descriptions of learning appeared not when respondents were asked about them , but when time was taken to reflect on , and explain the daily life on the streets . The design methods therefore respond to the perceived hidden nature of everyday learning . Consequently , a mixed methods approach was chosen , to allow the researcher to triangulate information , and to take the most appropriate action for specific situations . The various methods informed one another through clarification and elaboration . The data collection methods can be split into ethnography [ 5 ] , semi - structured interviews [ 5 , 24 ] and the toolbox approach [ 6 ] . Throughout the study the ethical frameworks set out by Newcastle University [ 29 ] , and BERA [ 4 ] were followed . Ethnography The life of those living at the hostel was recorded based on the first author’s experiences as the participant - observer . Notes were produced throughout the three weeks that were spent at the hostel reflecting daily activities ( café time , therapy group sessions , spending time in the garden , etc . ) . Informal interviews , chats with resident social workers , the hostel manager and shadowing the street worker informed Neighborhoods & Disadvantaged Communities CHI 2015 , Crossings , Seoul , Korea 2277 her understanding of the situation the respondents were in and enabled her to ask nuanced questions during the data collection process . Interviews Interviews were used to scope the understanding of learning and of the participants’ lived experiences on the street . Semi - structured interviews were applied to “explore , not interrogate” [ 5 ] and to gain insights into the lives of the respondents . The directed conversations were carried out in a separate room and audio recorded . Open questions were used “to elicit responses which are more discursive . ” [ 24 ] Participants were asked about their experiences and learning processes on the street in general before specific examples were discussed and questions regarding necessary and important factors for life and learning were asked . Toolbox approach A set of methods were utilised during the study to respond to emergent issues in the ethnographic and interview data . These included a Likert Scale , a value ranking exercise , constructing personal learning timelines , the use of voting technologies [ 30 ] , and free drawing . Each method revealed particularities of the participants’ experiences or were used to unfold complexities in the data . For instance , during the interviews and discussions participants described a large variety of values and needs for life , learning and living . To further unpack the relationships between these values and characteristics Likert Scale and Diamond ranking exercises were conducted . Other design methods were also used to gain a deeper understanding of the respondents’ thoughts and lives . Timelines encouraged reflection among the respondents and were an important stepping - stone to finding out about educational needs and aspirations . Analysis The process of analysis of the data followed several steps in coding . Coding [ 5 ] was used to compare incidents as they arose within the data , with previously conceptualized pieces of data across the different methods . To further add precision and clarity to the discussion , the underpinning constructivist theory was cross - referenced with the codes to support the analysis . Participants In total twenty people experiencing homelessness participated in this study . The participants all lived in the hostel at the time of the study with a median age of 29 . On average , the participants had spent 12 . 05 years of their lives on the street ; arriving at the mean age of 16 . 9 years , ranging between 5 and 28 years . Sixteen of the twenty participants moved between their homes , the streets and hostels or orphanages ; causing their schooling patterns to be interrupted . Despite this , fourteen of the respondents were fully literate , five were able to either recognize letters or write letters or words , with only one respondent unable to recognize or write individual letters . All participants had some access to mobile phones and the internet . Since this study took place in Romania , all but one of the interviews are conducted in Romanian , with one participant communicating with the researcher in English , the majority of quotations found in this paper have been translated . FINDINGS Across all data collected during the study the following themes emerged : Health , Love , Family and Friendship , as they appeared to be of most importance to people experiencing homelessness . Although many of these factors were not addressed directly in the lives of the respondents , they were deemed most important in life in general . In contrast , Survival on the streets was a different issue , with many contradictory values exhibited . For instance , one factor that was not seen to be as important for life , but that became clear after spending time at the centre , informal conversations , and visiting the street with the social worker was drugs . Although most respondents acknowledged they were unhealthy , and a potential reason for their isolation from family , love , and society , they were also something that was necessary for survival . Given both the empirical data and the theoretical foundation [ 20 ] , we take survival as a starting point to explore how learning takes place within this population . We further expand on this with three characteristics : adapting , learning in transactions , and curiosity . Survival Understandably learning about survival was often seen as an ‘important’ , ‘most important’ , or at least ‘positive’ experience , with participants labelling it as being a factor that encompassed all other things that were of importance for life on the street encompassing knowledge exchange , curiosity , and community . However , there was a conflict between the perception of ‘no education’ as a negative side effect of homelessness and ‘learning life lessons’ , ‘learning to survive’ , ‘seeing and experiencing new things’ , ‘getting to know many different types of people’ as positive outcomes of homelessness . To further illustrate the juxtaposition one respondent stated that nobody is able to help those that come to the streets ; that they must experience the life to learn from it . Others however have made it clear that they “give knowledge that [ they ] have , and [ others ] give [ them ] knowledge of street knowledge . ” For many participants , although survival is seen as an umbrella concern , these latter learning experiences are the result of the connections established between survival and interpersonal relationships . These relationships are divorced from the wider society through the emphasis on necessity and survival and the in - situ production of ‘survival’ as learning . Neighborhoods & Disadvantaged Communities CHI 2015 , Crossings , Seoul , Korea 2278 This intertwining of learning , survival and friendship is revealed through exploring the learning timelines of participants . These timelines ( see Figures 1 , 2 ) , although showing a variety of lessons , share a similar pattern . At first the rules and regulations of life of the streets must be learnt ; where to obtain money , where to find shelter and to be a strong person . After these lessons were learnt , lessons of relationships and friendships were identified : how to profit from others , who to trust , how to tell if someone is dangerous . Following the establishment of these relationships , the use of drugs becomes evidently tied to friendships . In Figure 2 the discovery of drugs is followed by a long gap in learning , something participants regularly commented on . These gaps in learning are both evidence of the impact of drugs , but also the sometimes complicated nature of friendships on the street . Following the gap in learning a third theme that arose out of these timelines was around ideas of personal improvement and self - awareness : respondents stopped taking drugs , learnt the English language , wanted to go to school and began appreciating family and helping . In this evolution of learning experiences , we identify three emergent motivations and actions : adapting , transacting and enquiring . Adapting together It was often described that the first days that respondents spent on the street were extremely difficult . It wasn’t until they found others who helped them that their street - lives began to take shape : “we adapted with them and became friends . ” The rules of life on the street were learnt , as well as “how to respect people . ” Older children , or those who were more experienced showed the newcomers how to survive on the streets ; how and where to get food , money , shelter , etc . In return their company and extra income from begging , working and stealing were demanded within the community . This relationship transformed into a substitute family . The community lived and played sports together ( see Figures 3 , 4 ) . This perception of co - dependence drives relationships of trust and the sharing of resources ( such as food ) and knowledge . One respondent described the life he led with his “friends [ that ] were like brothers” as follows : “When I left in the morning they didn’t eat until I came back in the evening . And all the food and money we made we put together . We didn’t eat without the other . We had a trust between each other . ” Figure 2 Respondent Timeline . Left to right : life of the street , not to be scared , smoke cigarettes , where to get money , who is friend and who is dangerous , drugs , write Figure 3 Respondent drawing representing the canal where the respondent lived with his friends and the train tracks that pass nearby . Figure 1 Respondent Timeline . Left to right : write , smoke , housing , steal , friends , drugs , stop drugs Figure 4 Respondent drawing representing him and his friends playing sports , probably football , together . Neighborhoods & Disadvantaged Communities CHI 2015 , Crossings , Seoul , Korea 2279 Despite all these positive aspects of friendships , friends are also sometimes seen as “traitors” and bad influences because they assist in making street - life more bearable rather than aiding in leaving this life . Such contradictory influences become evident in the complex networks of transactions , particularly in relation to skills exchange ( e . g . stealing ) and resource sharing ( e . g . drugs ) . Learning in transactions One respondent describes the activities he takes part in with his friends as follows : “we did drugs , we ate , we talked , we communicated like colleagues . ” On top of the sport activities described above , talking , eating and taking drugs are also part of daily life of the homeless in Bucharest . These activities are entwined in the perceived family of the street , but also in the reproduction of negative cycles of homelessness . For instance , the leader of the canal that many grew up in in Bucharest was not only referred to as a father to the many children , but many still refer to him as their father as adults . It became clear that this man was a father - figure to the children and adults in the canal who ensured safety and wellbeing for all inhabitants upon investigating the canal . Anecdotally , the lives of those living in this canal greatly improved as this man took power ; life expectancy , comfort , and health increased while hunger , theft , and fighting decreased . However this man is also the local drug dealer . With a single patriarch around whom communities of people experiencing homelessness coalesce , a situated community of transaction appears . As one participant notes : “ [ we ] all buy from the same person” so you “meet with another group” . The different groups of the homeless seldom meet outside of these drug transactions . It is even rarer that they meet with friends and family that do not live on the streets . Despite the prevalence of mobile communication available for connecting with those outside the homeless community , these drug transactions are seen to be “better than Facebook” , because “you meet a lot of faces . ” It is this connection that is necessary for social interaction , communication and learning on the streets . Curiosity The possibility to meet new people brings with it the possibility to expand the learning horizon of people experiencing homelessness . However , taking part in activities that do not resemble survival , for example reading , may make one look “weak” in the eyes of friends . It is because of this , that this particular respondent believes his friends : “would like to help and do a lot of good things , but they are afraid to do it because people will see them different . And that’s not a good thing . ” Here , the perceived values and desires of people experiencing homelessness are contrasted with the public perception of them . In combination with the invisibility of homeless learning , even to the participants themselves , this public perception produces a significant barrier to trusting others to support learning and motivations to reach out . Yet , peer learning cannot only support the skills necessary for survival as suggested earlier , but also for other aspirations , such as reading . One respondent described how he had learnt to help others on the street . One way in which he helped others was by teaching them to read and write . This started because he loved to read . At first his friends laughed at him , but then “by curiosity they begin to look . ” As he realized their interest he began teaching them to read , “And little by little they began to read and began to love it to read . ” Curiosity in this way underlines the possibility to extend behind learning to survive . Social relationships and the presence of artefacts , such as books in the above example , create the atmosphere and the potential for this to emerge . Yet these relationships are also tied to the transactions of the community , which in turn is tied to the adaptive behaviour that must be learned to survive . DISCUSSION The social and material exclusion of people experiencing homelessness from mainstream education requires consideration of new models of learning and teaching [ 21 , 22 ] , and new technologies to support learning networks and ecologies . Data collected in this study demonstrated the ways in which learning occurred and the variety of pathways taken . Our findings suggest that at the beginning of these pathways is a common starting point for learning driven by motivations to survive and adapt . The learning processes of the streets start with the first connection with a peer who is willing to share shelter , resources , and information . As the basic needs for survival are met , a variety of new skills such as reading , drug - use , a variety of languages , how to steal and beg efficiently , and how to figure out who to trust , were learnt by respondents . These learning processes of the street are constituted by shifting connections between people ( such as social workers , drug dealers , peers ) to help in the adaptation process to the street , places ( such as the street and the hostel ) , and artefacts ( such as mobile phones , books , syringes ) . The learning environment of people experiencing homelessness is constituted by both the artefacts and contexts of learning , and their relationship with the wider social and societal contexts of , for instance , media and public discourses , public policy making , design of and access to digital technology , and the educational institution [ 16 ] . In each case , the value of a learning context is derived from its particular performance in the complexity of networked learning opportunities . For instance , although books are a valuable learning artefact for some participants , this learning potential must be situated within and becomes emergent in the context of a social relationship to achieve that potential . In this case , by eliciting curiosity , the social relationship enhances the learning potential of the artefact . Similarly , it is clear that learning in the homeless community is disconnected from and invisible to wider publics , and often from that population itself . Rather than Neighborhoods & Disadvantaged Communities CHI 2015 , Crossings , Seoul , Korea 2280 assuming a necessity for channels of information to seep down to homeless people , the learning networks recognize the reciprocal benefit of learning and the necessity to challenge perceptions of people experiencing homelessness and homeless - related spaces and artefacts as a relational characteristic within the learning network . That is , if public discourses assume that the artefacts and relationships of people experiencing homelessness do not facilitate learning , and that learning is absent from this population , then the possibility to create high opportunity progression through learning artefacts is low . These multiple and shifting sites and sources of learning provide a number of challenges to the HCI community , including the visibility of learning , the function of learning , and engaging in and with the socio - political and material realities of learning in sensitive settings . In this section , we propose five implications for the design of technology to support people experiencing homelessness which seek to address these challenges . Learning ‘happens’ Our data demonstrate the perceived lack of learning on behalf of the homeless population , and echo a wider invisibility of both the homeless community itself and of the indigenous knowledge in that community . Making learning visible and acknowledging that learning happens are challenges for the HCI community and the wider public , particularly where the learning is mundane , unconventional , and even deviant . Since education is an empowering process , this is an important step in acknowledging the value of indigenous knowledge . In this study it took detailed questioning , time , and a variety of research methods to come to the understanding that learning how to survive , where to obtain clothing , shelter , food , money , and how to use drugs were learning processes . One way of dealing with this issue , may be simply talking more explicitly about learning among this population . The simple act of discussing a variety of topics that interest people and people experiencing homelessness in particular may result in a change in perception of learning , by broadening the community , and wider publics’ understanding of it ; to be more than a synonym for schooling . This is a shift away from designing education technologies and instead designing for the revelation and archiving of learning as and where it happens . This externalisation , as well as the capturing of learning , can be facilitated through technology . We can create connections among learning publics through social media , or a specifically designed archival system to increase the visibility of learning . Learning ‘works’ On one hand , learning in the homeless community is practical—if it is not useful , do not teach it—while on the other hand it needs to recognise the priorities of the learner in the context of what is useful to them - starting from survival . This duality complicates the issue of designing technology to support learning , as it means that when we design technologies for learning we should not aim any higher than survival if it is what must be learnt . Yet , where do we draw the line of what is ‘necessary’ to learn to survive ? And in turn , does a focus on learning just the ‘minimum’ limit this population ? In these ways , it is important to understand that this ‘work’ of learning can also mean that knowledge is a resource in the learning network that can be utilised to survive . In seeing the exchange of skills ( for example hand washing ) as a transaction , we can see that knowledge is doing ‘work’ of survival and relationship building , as part of the process of adapting together . Rather than assuming information needs to be channelled in a top - down model of education , we suggest that HCI embrace bottom - up and peer approaches . This would embed education in indigenous practice of and by the target population , rather than being decided upon by outsiders with little or no connection to the community itself . It might for instance , be beneficial to use technology to develop skills sharing services . Designing for distanced learning The transient nature of people experiencing homelessness can lead to gaps ( between community and society , relational , temporal , spatial , etc . ) . In this context , there is a distancing between different communities ( such as the homeless population and the general public ) , as well as relational shifts ( changes in relationships between groups and individuals ) , temporal shifts ( different people going through similar experiences at different instances in time ) , and spatial distances . These do not necessarily need to be ‘filled’ through learning but it is necessary to be aware of these gaps when designing for learning among this population . Furthermore , it is important to connect the learning in the homeless community with wider publics , but also to fit within the steps of temporal displacement of learning . For instance , there was recognition of cycles of homelessness and of the stages of learning including a ‘long break’ . Distancing requires an approach to learning and design that is resilient to decay , and which can be performed across time and places , as homelessness occurs in cyclical processes for individuals , and as a community . Learning happens in a malleable line following survival , drug use , a large gap , and self - improvement . Technology can be used to assist the community to learn from its own relapses by developing archives that can be continuously edited and added to by individuals within the community . This would cater to distanced communities , overcoming temporal and spatial gaps . It is the purpose of the LLE [ 16 ] to assist people in moving away from LOPE and more towards a HOPE through the use of technology assisted learning networks and artefacts . Although learning networks already exist in the form of street families or groups of friends [ 28 ] , they are not explicitly mentioned to be used for technology assisted Neighborhoods & Disadvantaged Communities CHI 2015 , Crossings , Seoul , Korea 2281 learning purposes . From what has been shown in this paper , there is potential to fill this gap in the form of technology assisted learning networks as they harness the existing networks and put platforms in place that allow for more intergroup contact to spark curiosity and in turn naturally occurring peer learning . Designing with the social politics of learning When drawing on the capital ( knowledge , information , skills , etc . ) in learning networks and LLEs it is important to recognise the reciprocal benefit of learning and detaching . As designers we must be sensitive to the flow of ‘learning capital’ and the politics of learning among this population to challenge not only the communities own perceptions of learning ( or lack thereof ) , but also to tackle wider society’s assumptions about this population . Within the homeless community it is seen that knowledge is often diffused and seen as a communal source rather than an individual commodity . Due to this , it is necessary to make the collaborative potential of learning , knowledge production , reproduction , and sharing more visible . This is particularly crucial for newcomers as the learning of norms and rituals , where to obtain food , shelter , information , etc . were important for the process of adapting together . Examples from the data presented above , such as one of the respondents loving to read and thus sparking curiosity in his friends which lead to him teach his colleagues how to read and write , have shown that some of the respondents have taken on proactive roles as learners and teachers for their peers . With this information , it makes it clear to us that peer learning is already occurring on the streets . It is not a question of introducing education , or learning , to this community , but rather of finding a way of streamlining the process that already occurs , making it easier for newcomers , or those with less experience . This could result in more understanding of learning among this community , making it clearer that they are learning things . In turn , this could potentially increase their self - esteem and hope ( potentially even the need of self - actualisation [ 20 ] ) It is important to understand how learning may be empowering , but it is also important to see how through certain environments and negotiations , learning , in itself , can be disempowering by creating barriers . An example of this is the power negotiations that are necessary to happen between the drug dealer described above and his customers , as they also see him as a father - figure . On one hand it is arguable that he is a facilitator of learning regarding drug - related topics . On the other hand however , it was shown that after respondents started using drugs , a large gap in learning seemed to follow ; in this sense , the drug - dealer / father is also a barrier to higher level learning . Again , skills - exchange technology could be a useful tool if it were to be co - opted with the drug dealer . Since he also has a father - figure relation to many of his customers , he may have genuine interest in their wellbeing . If we were to put a form of skills - exchange technology in place , he , as a facilitator of learning and an authority figure , would have ownership of the intervention . If he were not convinced by the potential of the intervention , and did not want it to occur , it is likely that it would not . In this example , it is important to understand the politics of teaching and its potential for limiting a learners’ full potential as any authority figure may set limitations for learners . Designing artefacts of everyday learning Learning Networks are embedded in everyday life , and as designers we have to consider learning where it happens . In this case , this involves significant practical and ethical challenges , where learning often occurs around and involving drug use . The transient nature of homelessness , as well as the cyclical nature of homelessness shows that a single continuous reflection process does not work among this population . It is also important to take everyday relationships into consideration rather than assuming a static teacher - student role . As these roles often shift , it might be interesting to take a look at apprenticeships ; particularly when examining the effects of co - survival . All of these arguments show that learning on the streets is a messy and complex process , and that all realities need to be taken into consideration . As a community , HCI has avoided researching with active drug - users , understandably due to its ethical and social implications . This study has taken an asset - based approach taking a different path to many HCI research projects in this field [ 7 , 8 , 36 ] . This gave us the possibility of seeing life of the street for what it is , giving us a unique perspective and opportunity to understanding this population , as well as future design work . We argue that despite the ethical issues that the researchers had to contemplate , it is important to acknowledge this reality of homelessness in Romania . Taking these ideas into consideration , we examine the complex socio - material context of drug - use in the homeless community as a learning environment , as was expressed in the theme of learning in transactions . In this environment , the learning occurs organically and is entirely learner - led . We recognise both the realities of drug - use as a negative influence on health , education and social relationships , but also as a practical reality of homelessness in Bucharest . For some participants it is arguable that drugs can create and take away hope , they are a cause for health problems , and may be the reason for the disconnection between the respondents and their families . However , they can also replace food , are necessary for survival , let you forget your problems and are a reason for different communities of homeless to communicate and exchange information . When comparing this environment to Mitra’s SOLEs [ 9 , 21 , 22 ] that occur mainly in schools , or since the development into the school in the cloud in specifically built learning environments , it becomes evident that there is no need for a designated teacher to pose the ‘big question’ , and no need for specifically designed environments for learning to take place for this population . Neighborhoods & Disadvantaged Communities CHI 2015 , Crossings , Seoul , Korea 2282 Through the essential , if controversial , role of drugs in the lives of people experiencing homelessness , we propose using syringes as potential learning artefacts . Participants could ask questions anonymously to be printed onto stickers and stuck onto syringes at needle exchange programmes . Due to the reality of needle sharing this would elicit discussion on these participant - created questions . Answers , or snippets of interesting information , could be sent as an sms to be shared on social media . This would not only allow for discussion based learning , but also for externalisation of information to participants and the wider publics . Here , the role of learners and teachers is constantly shifting , allowing opportunities for everyone to be an expert in a certain field . Much like in Mitra’s SOLEs [ 9 , 21 , 22 ] , technology could play a crucial role in obtaining information , but we propose taking this further , and using technology to facilitate discussions on topics that are of interest to individuals within the homeless community . If questions are created , discussed and answered in this community through a variety of technological artefacts and means , and information is shared more broadly , it is possible that more people will have similar realizations as this respondent : “I thought my problems were big problems , the centre of the universe , but when I come here and I see the people with that many problems ; health problems , I said hey , I am fine . [ … ] I learnt something : to help , [ …because… ] when you help someone you help yourself . I like to help myself . ” This would let learning be an empowering self - directed occurrence , rather than a process of normative socialisation [ 19 ] . Within the homeless community it is seen that knowledge is often diffused and seen as a communal resource rather than an individual commodity . Due to this , it is necessary to make the collaborative potential of learning , knowledge production , and sharing more visible . This is particularly crucial for newcomers as the learning of norms and rituals , where to obtain food , shelter , information , etc . were incredibly important for the process of adapting together . CONCLUSION New models of learning and teaching for people with social and material exclusion , such as those experiencing homelessness , require new models and technologies of learning and teaching . This paper has presented that learning occurs through survival , adapting together , learning in transactions , and curiosity among adults experiencing homelessness . These findings resulted in expressing five implications for design . It is important to note that learning ‘happens’ , and that it ‘works’ . Taking this into consideration , it is important to design for distanced learning , the social politics of learning , and artefacts of everyday learning . The findings and implications presented in this paper show that educational HCI needs to change quite drastically to cater to the needs of people who are socially and materially excluded . As a community , embracing bottom - up approaches to learning could be a way forward that allows for learning in mundane , unconventional , and even deviant activities . ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS We would like to take this opportunity to thank the NGO that we worked with for this study , as well as all the participants that made this study possible . REFERENCES 1 . Aviv , R . , Erlich , Z . , Ravid , G . , and Geva , A . Network Analysis of Knowledge Construction In Asynchronous Learning Networks . JALN 7 , 3 ( 2003 ) , 1 – 23 . 2 . Belzberg , E . Children underground . USA , 2002 . 3 . Brandon , D . , Khoo , R . , Maglajlic , R . , and Abuel - Ealeh , M . European snapshot homeless survey : Results of questions asked of passers - by in 11 European cities . International Journal of Nursing Practice 6 , 1 ( 2000 ) , 39 – 45 . 4 . British Educational Research Association , . BERA . Ethics and guidance , 2011 . https : / / www . bera . ac . uk / researchers - resources / resources - for - researchers . 5 . Charmaz , K . Constructing Grounded Theory . SAGE Publications , 2014 . 6 . Clark , J . , Laing , K . , Tiplady , L . , and Woolner , P . Connected Communities . Making Conections : Theory and Practice of Using Visual Methods to Aid Participation in Research . Newcastle Upon Tyne , 2013 . 7 . Le Dantec , C . A . and Edwards , W . K . Designs on dignity . Proceeding of the twenty - sixth annual CHI conference on Human factors in computing systems - CHI ’08 , ACM Press ( 2008 ) , 627 . 8 . Le Dantec , C . A . , Farrell , R . G . , Christensen , J . E . , et al . Publics in practice . Proceedings of the 2011 annual conference on Human factors in computing systems - CHI ’11 , ACM Press ( 2011 ) , 1687 . 9 . Dolan , P . , Leat , D . , Mazzoli Smith , L . , Mitra , S . , Todd , L . , and Wall , K . Self - Organised Learning Environments ( SOLEs ) in an English School : an example of transformative pedagogy ? Online Educational Research Journal . http : / / www . oerj . org / View ? action = viewPDF & paper = 10 9 . 10 . European Commission , . The social dimension of the Europe 2020 strategy . 2011 . 11 . Farrugia , D . Youth homelessness and individualised subjectivity . Journal of Youth Studies 14 , 7 ( 2011 ) , 761 – 775 . Neighborhoods & Disadvantaged Communities CHI 2015 , Crossings , Seoul , Korea 2283 12 . FEANTSA . ETHOS : Typology of Homelessness and housing exclusion . ETHOS , 2006 . http : / / www . feantsa . org / spip . php ? article120 . 13 . Fielding , M . and Moss , P . Radical Education and the Common School , a democratic alternative . Routledge , London , 2011 . 14 . Friedman Robertson , D . Homeless students : a search for understanding . International Journal of Leardership in Education 1 , 2 ( 1998 ) , 155 – 168 . 15 . Hendry , D . G . , Woelfer , J . P . , Harper , R . , Bauer , T . , Fitzer , B . , and Champagne , M . How to integrate digital media into a drop - in for homeless young people for deepening relationships between youth and adults . Children and Youth Services Review 33 , 774 - 802 ( 2011 ) . 16 . Hodgson , A . and Spours , K . Tackling the crisis facing young people : building ‘high opportunity progression eco - systems . ’ Oxford Review of Education 39 , 2 ( 2013 ) , 211 – 228 . 17 . Human Rights , . More Than 100 Million Homeless Worldwide . ipsnews . net , 2014 . http : / / www . ipsnews . net / 2005 / 03 / human - rights - more - than - 100 - million - homeless - worldwide / . 18 . Illich , I . Deschooling Society . Marion Boyars Publisher Ltd , London , 1970 . 19 . Illich , I . Deschooling Society . Marion Boyars Publisher Ltd , London , 1970 . 20 . Maslow , A . H . Toward a Psychology of Being . Start Publishing LLC , 2013 . 21 . Mitra , S . and Quiroga , M . Children and the Internet - A Preliminary Study in Uruguay . International Journal of Humanitites and Social Science 2 , 15 ( 2012 ) , 123 – 129 . 22 . Mitra , S . The hole in the wall : self organising systems in education . 2010 . http : / / repository . alt . ac . uk / 855 / 1 / ALTC _ 2010 _ keynote _ Sugata _ Mitra _ transcript . pdf . 23 . Murphy , J . Homeless Children and Youth at Risk : The Educational Impact of Displacement . ( 2011 ) . 24 . O’Sullivan , T . , Rice , J . , Saunders , C . , Owen , A . , and Rothwell , A . Research skills for students . Kogan Page , London , 1996 . 25 . Roberson , J . and Nardi , B . Survival needs and social inclusion . Proceedings of the 2010 ACM conference on Computer supported cooperative work - CSCW ’10 , ACM Press ( 2010 ) , 445 . 26 . Rokach , A . The causes of loneliness in homeless youth . The Journal of psychology 139 , 5 ( 2005 ) , 469 – 80 . 27 . Shane , P . G . What About America’s Homeless Children ? : Hide and Seek . SAGE Publications , 1996 . 28 . Snow , David , A . and Anderson , L . Down on Their Luck . University of California Press , Los Angeles , 1993 . 29 . University , N . Students . www . ncl . ac . uk , 2014 . http : / / www . ncl . ac . uk / res / research / ethics _ governance / et hics / procedures / students . htm . 30 . Vlachokyriakos , V . , Comber , R . , Ladha , K . , et al . PosterVote . Proceedings of the 2014 conference on Designing interactive systems - DIS ’14 , ACM Press ( 2014 ) , 795 – 804 . 31 . Warschauer , M . , Turbee , L . , and Roberts , B . Computer learning networks and student empowerment . System 24 , 1 ( 1996 ) , 1 – 14 . 32 . Wilson , S . Patterns of Personal Learning Environments . ( 2008 ) . 33 . Woelfer , J . P . and Hendry , D . G . Homeless young people’s experiences with information systems . Proceedings of the 28th international conference on Human factors in computing systems - CHI ’10 , ACM Press ( 2010 ) , 1291 . 34 . Woelfer , J . P . and Hendry , D . G . Homeless young people and living with personal digital artifacts . Proceedings of the 2011 annual conference on Human factors in computing systems - CHI ’11 , ACM Press ( 2011 ) , 1697 . 35 . Yamaguchi , B . J . , Strawser , S . , and Higgins , K . Children Who Are Homeless : Implications for Educators . Intervention in School and Clinic 33 , 2 ( 1997 ) , 90 – 97 . 36 . Yarosh , S . Shifting dynamics or breaking sacred traditions ? Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems - CHI ’13 , ACM Press ( 2013 ) , 3413 . Neighborhoods & Disadvantaged Communities CHI 2015 , Crossings , Seoul , Korea 2284