brief communications nature methods | VOL . 9 NO . 5 | MAY 2012 | 483 We produced transgenic Arabidopsis plants that expressed spectrally distinct fluorescent proteins in cell nuclei and plasma membranes ( Fig . 1c – e ) , imaged plant tissues with confocal laser scanning microscopy and subjected them to the procedure out - lined above . We used the identified nuclei as seeds for a two - phase active contour segmentation , to define cell shapes in the tissue ( Fig . 1f ) . First , our method makes use of inflated balloon - like structures , each of which comprises connected vertices that define an envelope . During the segmentation process , the bal - loons are gradually inflated and subsequently constrained by the application of external forces from pixel intensities at cell bounda - ries ( fluorescent proteins localized to the plasma membrane ) . The expansion process is stopped when balloons come in contact with each other or when the balloon internal pressure , the elastic forces in the balloon and the forces resulting from the image pixel inten - sity , are in equilibrium . The balloon forms a boundary around the object of interest . In the second phase of the segmentation pro - cess , the final shape of the object is obtained by fitting to the edge of the cell using an energy - minimizing spline ( or ‘snake’ ) guided by external constraint forces and influenced by image forces that pull it toward edge features 5 ( Online Methods ) . We grew Arabidopsis on the surface of agar nutrient plates and maintained the plants upright between microscopy scans to avoid root bending . We constrained the orientation of the root tip using a coverslip , held in position by surface tension . Under these condi - tions , seedlings could be maintained healthy for 2 – 3 d . We followed easily recognizable cellular features during root growth by collecting three - dimensional image stacks over time . We could follow cells for up to 10 h across a series of images during time - lapse experiments by adjusting the focus plane of the stack during or after image collection ( Online Methods and Supplementary Movies 1 and 2 ) . We tested the balloon - segmentation routine on a variety of images . Using this approach , we segmented cells in confocal microscopy images of plant tissues with irregular cell shapes , such as epidermal pavement cells from Arabidopsis leaves ( Supplementary Fig . 1a ) . We also applied the method to images with reduced signal - to - noise ratios , such as internal cells of the root apical meristem ( Fig . 1g – j ) and wide - field microscopy images of Coleocheate scutata ( Supplementary Fig . 1b – e ) . Comparison of balloon segmentation with other methods showed that the active contour segmentation routine was resistant to introduced noise and showed no major loss of performance after we artifi - cially degraded 35 % or 50 % of pixels , whereas we saw failures in segmentation with watershed segmentation ( Supplementary Fig . 1f – m ) . A priori knowledge of the position of nuclei impro - ved the robustness of segmentation . Other techniques such as integrated genetic and computation methods for in planta cytometry Fernán Federici 1 , 6 , Lionel Dupuy 2 , 6 , Laurent Laplaze 3 , Marcus Heisler 4 , 5 & Jim Haseloff 1 We present the coupled use of specifically localized fluorescent gene markers and image processing for automated quantitative analysis of cell growth and genetic activity across living plant tissues . We used fluorescent protein markers to identify cells , create seeds and boundaries for the automatic segmentation of cell geometries and ratiometrically measure gene expression cell by cell in Arabidopsis thaliana . A major challenge in developmental biology is to understand genetic and biophysical mechanisms that guide cell growth and self - organization during organogenesis . Studies of such complex mechanisms rely on computer - aided analysis and mathematical modeling of microscopy data . The quantitative analysis of image data generally requires manual extraction of parameters for cell growth and gene activity in intact living tissues . Automated mea - surement of gene activity and cellular geometry would contribute to better models of morphogenesis . The generation of multiple spectral variants of fluorescent proteins and the development of more powerful image - analysis algorithms and hardware has considerably expanded the scope of automation and informa - tion processing in microscopy 1 – 4 . We exploited these technical advances for simultaneous quantitative analysis of cell topology , size , shape and gene activity from in vivo images of plant tissues , using an automated and open - source computational procedure . Our procedure , which we term in planta cytometry , allowed the measurement of cellular properties in intact tissue while retaining the cellular context for subsequent studies . The routine consists of three automated steps . First , we used a genetic marker to specifically label nuclei , index cells and extract positional information using a particle search algorithm ( Fig . 1a ) . Second , we used identified nuclei to initiate an active contour segmentation algorithm 5 that used a fluorescent signal located at the plasma membrane to extract information regarding cell size , shape and topology ( Fig . 1b ) . Third , we quantified cell - specific gene expression by ratiometric measure - ment of spectrally distinct nuclear fluorescent proteins expressed under the control of different regulated promoters . 1 Department of Plant Sciences , University of Cambridge , Cambridge , UK . 2 The James Hutton Institute , Invergowrie , Dundee , Scotland , UK . 3 Institut de Recherche pour le Développement , Unité Mixte de Recherche , Diversité Adaptation Développement , E´quipe Rhizogenèse , Montpellier , France . 4 Developmental Biology Unit , European Molecular Biology Laboratory , Heidelberg , Germany . 5 School of Biological Sciences , University of Sydney , Sydney , Australia . 6 These authors contributed equally to this work . Correspondence should be addressed to J . H . ( jh295 @ cam . ac . uk ) . Received 1 NovembeR 2011 ; accepted 2 FebRuaRy 2012 ; published oNliNe 1 apRil 2012 ; doi : 10 . 1038 / Nmeth . 1940 n p g © 2012 N a t u r e A m e r i ca , I n c . A ll r i gh t s r ese r ve d . 484 | VOL . 9 NO . 5 | MAY 2012 | nature methods brief communications level sets 1 , histogram shape – based 2 and entropy autothreshold - ing 3 were also less accurate in noisy images . Threshold - based methods were the most efficient for cell segmentation in terms of calculation time but tended to oversegment images . The level - set method , a nonmarked active contour method , resulted in less deviation from manually segmented cells compared to threshold - ing and watershed methods , but remained susceptible to ‘spilling’ and was the least computationally efficient method of all . As a proof of concept , we used in planta cytometry to study the effect of cytokinins on cell expansion in the root apical meristem and compared it to manual measurements of cellular properties . We treated Arabidopsis roots expressing EGFP - LTI6b ( LTI6b is also known as AT3G05890 and encodes a low temperature – induced protein ) and H2B - mRFP1 ( H2B is also known as AT5G22880 and encodes histone H2B ) , each under the control of a CaMV 35S pro - moter , with 0 . 1 µ M trans - zeatin or a control solution . We tracked a cohort of cells for 10 h to analyze rates of cell expansion and measured cortex cell size manually or using balloon segmentation ( Supplementary Fig . 2a – h ) . The analysis demonstrated that cyto - kinin application inhibited cell expansion in the root apical meri - stem and resulted in a threefold reduction in strain rate across the meristem . Automatic and manual measurements of cells produced similar estimates for cell size and strain rates ( slope = 0 . 975 , inter - cept = 0 . 0037 , R 2 = 0 . 8 ) ( Fig . 1k – l and Supplementary Fig . 2i ) . These results indicated that the automatic segmentation did not introduce substantial distortion and can provide reliable informa - tion for kinematic studies . The cellular architecture and arrange - ment of cells in the growing root was unaffected by the culture and time - lapse procedure . We measured strain rates of 3 – 5 % h −1 in the apical few hundred micrometers of control root tips , which are similar to values of 4 % h −1 obtained using bead tracking in growing roots 6 . The segmented nuclear regions used for balloon seeding can be used to obtain the average pixel intensity for the constitutive nuclear marker in the targeted cell . This can act as a reference value for nor - malization of additional colocalized fluorescent markers . We fused different regulated promoters to sequences encoding spectrally distinct fluorescent proteins targeted to the nucleus , and analyzed the resulting fluorescence signal with respect to a standard nuclear reporter expressed from the 35S promoter ( Fig . 2 ) . Fluorescence signals in deeper tissues are attenuated by light scattering , absorb - ance and refraction . Ratiometric measurement allows normaliza - tion of fluorescence values and comparison of signals at different tissue depths ( Fig . 2a – d ) . We visualized cellular responses to gravity - induced redistribution of auxin in Arabidopsis roots by imaging expression of the DR5rev ø 3 × Venus - N7 ( ref . 7 ) marker with respect to 35S ø H2B - mRFP1 ( Fig . 2e ) . The synthetic DR5rev promoter 7 has been widely used as an indicator of auxin response . We plotted the ratio of the expression of the markers encoded by the two constructs on tracings of cells in the root tip and epidermis ( Fig . 2f , g ) . The shift of roots to the horizontal position triggered redistribution of auxin to the lower side of roots , as has been previously reported 8 . We examined DR5rev promoter activity in the cells of reoriented roots and found relative differences of up to 200 - fold in DR5 - regulated expression in epidermis cells of the elongation zone in the upper and lower portions of a root . We also used in planta cytometry to classify root epidermal cells as hair cells and non – hair cells according to their size and response to the phytohormone auxin . It has been shown recently that a subset of epidermal cells , which later develop root hairs , accumulate less auxin than non – hair cells owing to the lack of AUX1 protein 9 . We created an auxin reporter line expressing the IAA2 ( AT3G23030 ) promoter fused to H2B – mRFP1 sequence ( IAA2 ø H2B - mRFP1 ) to study the response of root epidermis cells to auxin . We used 35S ø H2B - EYFP as a nuclear marker to normalize the IAA2 ø H2B - mRFP1 auxin - responsive marker and to identify cells , whereas we used a third marker , 35S ø EGFP - LTI6b , to segment cells ( Fig . 2h ) . We saw a sharp boundary between non – hair cells and hair cells based on auxin response . i h g j 01234560 7 . 5 6 . 0 4 . 5 3 . 0 1 . 5 0 S t r a i n r a t e ( % h – 1 ) 50 Distance from quiescent center ( µ m ) 100 150 200 k l B a ll oon s t r a i n r a t e ( % h – 1 ) Manual strain rate ( % h – 1 ) ControlCytokinin 1 2 3 4 5 6 e d c f a b figure 1 | Automated segmentation of cells in Arabidopsis . ( a , b ) Schematics of a transgenic plant cell used for in planta cytometry : a nuclear fluorescent protein is used for balloon ‘seeding’ and cell indexing ( a ) , and a plasma membrane marker is used to obtain cell geometries ( b ) . ( c – e ) Confocal microscopy images of Arabidopsis root meristem tissues containing 35S ø H2B - mRFP1 and 35S ø EGFP - LTI6b ( c ) , 35S ø H2B - EYFP and 35S ø mCherry - LTI6b ( d ) and 35S ø H2B - ECFP and 35S ø mCherry - LTI6b ( e ) . Histone 2B fusions are localized to nuclei , LTI6b fusions are localized to the plasma membrane . ( f ) Step - by - step progress of balloon ( red ) inflation during the segmentation of epidermis cells of Arabidopsis hypocotyl . ( g – j ) Segmentation of cells in the shoot apical meristem of Arabidopsis . Confocal micrographs of a meristem ( g ) showing nuclear localization of H2B - mRFP1 protein ; automated identification of labeled nuclei ( h ) ; plasma membrane – localized distribution of EGFP - LTI6b in the same plant ( i ) ; and automated segmentation of cells using individual mRFP1 - labeled nuclei as seeds for balloon segmentation with EGFP labeled cell outlines ( j ) . Scale bars , 40 µ m ( g – j ) and 15 µ m ( c – f and insets in h and j ) . ( k ) Cell - expansion rates at indicated distance from the quiescent center in the root meristem in control and cytokinin - treated roots . Individual values for cortex cell strain rates were obtained from segmented image data . Solid lines indicate mean expansion rate and dashed lines , ± s . e . m . ( n = 20 ) . ( l ) Comparison of strain rate values obtained from the balloon segmentation technique and from manual measurements of cell size using ImageJ . n p g © 2012 N a t u r e A m e r i ca , I n c . A ll r i gh t s r ese r ve d . nature methods | VOL . 9 NO . 5 | MAY 2012 | 485 brief communications Non – hair cells responded more than hair cells , as measured by relative expression of the IAA2 ø H2B - mRFP1 marker . Because non – hair cells are bigger than hair cells located at the same posi - tion in the longitudinal axis of the root , we could classify cells according to gene activity or cell size ( Fig . 2i ) . In planta cytometry has several benefits . First , the combined use of specific gene markers and active contour segmentation methods 5 , 10 allowed robust segmentation and fitting of cellular models to biological features such as nuclei and plasma mem - branes 11 , 12 . Second , active contour methods can be tailored for image analysis of features at a cellular scale , whereas watershed algorithm – based procedures require processing of an entire image . Third , the use of nuclear fluorescent markers also per - mitted implementation of nuclear ratiometric measurements ( Fig . 2 ) , enabling quantitative analysis of the relative contribution of multiple genes to cellular processes and correction for vari - ability in marker fluorescence . The use of normalized units of measurement has aided the standardization and description of genes for design of predictable gene circuits in isolated cells and microbes 13 . Our work combines computational techniques and specific cellular markers to facilitate automatic identification and quantitative characterization of cells . methods Methods and any associated references are available in the online version of the paper at http : / / www . nature . com / naturemethods / . Note : Supplementary information is available on the Nature Methods website . acknoWledgments This research was supported by the Biotechnology and Biological Sciences Research Council , and Engineering and Physical Sciences Research Council research grants ( BBS / B / 16720 and BEP / 17053 to J . H . ) , Institut de Recherche pour le Développement ( L . L ) . F . F . ’s PhD scholarship was supported by the Bill and Melinda Gates foundation ( Gates Cambridge Trust ) . The Scottish Crop Research Institute receives grant - in - aid support from the Scottish Government Rural and Environment Research and Analysis Directorate ( Workpackage 1 . 7 ) . M . H . acknowledges the Australian Research Council for funding . We thank B . Scheres and H . Hofhuis ( Utrecht University ) for DR5rev ø 3 × Venus - N7 seeds and R . Y . Tsien ( University of California , San Diego ) for the mRFP1 cassette . author contributions F . F . generated the transgenic lines , analyzed the data and performed experiments . L . D . created the computational tools and plugin for ImageJ , and analyzed the data . J . H . provided instructions and supervision . M . H . performed confocal imaging of shoot apical meristem shown in figure 2 and supplementary figure 1 . L . L . generated the pBI 35S ø H2B - RFP binary vector and the Arabidopsis 35S ø H2B - RFP transgenic line . comPeting financial interests The authors declare no competing financial interests . Published online at http : / / www . nature . com / naturemethods / . reprints and permissions information is available online at http : / / www . nature . com / reprints / index . html . 1 . Caselles , V . , Kimmel , R . & Sapiro , G . Int . J . Comput . Vis . 22 , 61 – 79 ( 1997 ) . 2 . Otsu , N . IEEE Trans . Syst . Man Cybern . 9 , 62 – 66 ( 1979 ) . 3 . Kapur , J . N . , Sahoo , P . K . & Wong , A . K . C . Comput . Vis . Graph . Image Process 29 , 273 – 285 ( 1985 ) . 4 . Rittscher , J . Ann . Rev . Biomed . Eng . 12 , 315 – 344 ( 2010 ) . 5 . Makowski , P . et al . Comput . Med . Imaging Graph . 26 , 9 – 17 ( 2002 ) . 6 . Beemster , G . T . & Baskin , T . I . Plant Physiol . 116 , 1515 – 1526 ( 1998 ) . 7 . Laskowski , M . et al . PLoS Biol . 6 , 307 ( 2008 ) . 8 . Ottenschläger , I . et al . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA 100 , 2987 – 2991 ( 2003 ) . 9 . Jones , A . R . et al . Nat . Cell Biol . 11 , 78 – 84 ( 2009 ) . 10 . Kass , M . , Witkin , A . & Terzopoulos , D . Int . J . Computer Vision 1 , 321 – 331 ( 1988 ) . 11 . Mace , D . L . et al . Bioinformatics 22 , e323 – e331 ( 2006 ) . 12 . Jönsson , H . et al . Bioinformatics 21 ( suppl . 1 ) , i232 – i240 ( 2005 ) . 13 . Kelly , J . R . et al . J . Biol . Eng . 3 , 4 ( 2009 ) . figure 2 | Nuclear ratiometric measurements for in planta cytometry . ( a ) Confocal projection image of the hypocotl of a 4 - day - old seedling expressing H2B – EYFP ( green channel ) , histone H2B – mRFP1 ( red channel ) and EGFP - LTI6b ( blue channel ) . ( b , c ) Confocal image sections at depths of 10 µ m ( b ) and 40 µ m ( c ) . ( d ) Mean fluorescence intensity ( arbitrary units ) at indicated depths was normalized to values at 10 µ m . Error bars , s . e . m . ( n = 25 cells ) ; similar data were obtained after analysis of 8 different seedlings . ( e ) Confocal image of the root of an Arabidopsis seedling containing auxin - responsive DR5rev ø 3 × Venus - N7 ( labeled DR5 ) and a constitutive 35S ø H2B - mRFP1 ( labeled 35S ) , and imaged 6 h after shift to a horizontal orientation . ( f , g ) Relative levels of expression of the DR5rev ø 3 × Venus - N7 and 35S ø H2B - mRFP1 markers was quantified and plotted on a tracing of the root cell outlines . Ratiometric measurement of auxin - responsive reporter gene expression in the root tip ( f ) before ( left ) and 6 h after ( right ) shift to a horizontal orientation and in the non – hair cells of the elongation zone 6 h after shift to a horizontal orientation ( g ) . Arrows indicate the direction of gravitational force . ( h ) Confocal image of epidermal cells in the elongation zone of an Arabidopsis root expressing IAA2 ø H2B - mRFP1 , 35S ø H2B - EYFP and 35S ø EGFP - LTI6b ( top ) . Root hair ( H ) and non – root hair ( N ) cell files are indicated . Nuclear segmentation using the signal from 35S ø H2B - EYFP and cell outline after balloon segmentation are shown in the middle . The ratio of fluorescence signals from IAA2 ø H2B - mRFP1 to 35S ø H2B - EYFP , visualized using a color map ( bottom ) . ( i ) Ratiometric fluorescence values and size of cells from h . Cells with high mRFP1 : EYFP ratios and larger cell sizes are indicated in red , cells with low mRFP1 : EYFP ratios and smaller cell sizes in blue . Scale bars , 20 µ m . a b c g 3 . 8 0 . 01 2 . 04 0 . 01 35S DR5 f e H N h 0 . 65 0 Ratio 2 , 000 4 , 000 6 , 000 8 , 000 0 0 . 2 0 . 4 0 . 6 C e ll s i z e ( p i x e l s ) i 0 0 . 2 0 . 4 0 . 6 0 . 8 1 . 0 1 . 2 1 . 4 10 20 30 40 mRFP1YFPmRFP1 / YFP d mRFP1 : YFP ratio DR5 : 35S ratio DR5 : 35S ratio F l uo r e sc en c e Depth into tissue ( µ m ) n p g © 2012 N a t u r e A m e r i ca , I n c . A ll r i gh t s r ese r ve d . nature methods doi : 10 . 1038 / nmeth . 1940 online methods Plant material . The mRFP1 cassette was amplified by PCR using primers RFP5Eco 5 ′ - CGGAATTCATGGCCTCCTCCGAG GAC - 3 ′ and RFP3Sac 5 ′ - CGGAGCTCTTAGGCGCCGGTGGA GTG - 3 ′ introducing 5 ′ EcoRI and 3 ′ SacI restriction sites . This cassette was cloned in frame with the Arabidopsis histone H2B sequence in pBI35S ø H2B - EYFP 14 giving rise to pBI35S ø H2B - mRFP1 . The pBI35S ø H2B - RFP vector was digested by HindIII and EcoRI to remove the 35S ø H2B cassette as the H2B open reading frame contains two internal HindIII sites . This frag - ment was replaced by a synthetic multiple cloning site created by annealing primers A5 5 ′ - AGCTCTCGAGCCCGGGGGAT CCG - 3 ′ and A3 AATTCGGATCCCCCGGGCTCGAG - 3 ′ in vitro . This removed the 5 ′ HindIII restriction site , intro - duced XhoI , SmaI and BamHI sites and maintained the 3 ′ EcoRI site . The H2B cassette was then amplified using prim - ers H2B5 5 ′ - CGGGGGACTCTAGAGGATCC - 3 ′ and H2B3 5 ′ - ACTGAATTCTCCAGCTCCAG - 3 ′ to include 5 ′ BamHI and 3 ′ EcoRI sites and cloned back in frame with mRFP1 in this new vector to generate the promoter - less pBI ∆ ø H2B - mRFP1 binary vector . The 35S ø mCherry - LTI6b transgenic plants were created in Arabidopsis ecotypes C24 and Col - 0 . The mCherry gene was PCR - amplified from the Registry of Standard Biological Parts ( http : / / partsregistry . org / ) using the following oligonucleotides : forward 5 ′ - AAGCCAACAATGGTGAGCAAGGGCGAGG - 3 ′ and reverse 5 ′ - AGCGGCCGCAGCCTTGTACAGCTCGTCCA TGCC - 3 ′ ; and subsequently cloned into Zero Blunt PCR vector ( Invitrogen ) . After sequencing , the mCherry gene was transferred to the pGEM - T - Easy vector ( Promega ) , digested with BamHI and NotI enzymes and cloned into the BamHI and NotI sites flanking the EGFP sequence of the pBIB 35S - EGFP - LTI6b binary vector 15 . pBIB 35S ø mCherry - LTI6b binary vector was used to transform Arabidopsis ecotypes C24 and Col - 0 using the floral dip method . Positive seedlings were selected by red fluorescence using a Leica MZFLIII epifluorescence stereomicroscope . The 35S ø EGFP - LTI6b and 35S ø mCherry - LTI6b lines were crossed to 35S ø H2B - mRFP1 , 35S ø H2B - ECFP and 35S ø H2B - EYFP lines to obtain all the combinations of nuclear and plasma membrane markers . The IAA2 auxin responsive promoter was PCR - amplified from genomic Arabidopsis DNA using the following oligonucleotides : forward 5 ′ - CCCGGGCCTGCACTA TACACTTTCAAAAAGAG - 3 ′ and reverse 5 ′ - GGATCCGAGTTTT GGAGAAAAGGGGAG - 3 ′ ; digested with BamHI and SmaI enzymes and subsequently cloned into BamHI and SmaI sites upstream of histone H2B gene in the pBI ∆ ø H2B - RFP binary vector . Plant growth conditions and imaging . All seeds were surface - sterilized with 95 % ( v / v ) ethanol for 5 min , followed by 10 % ( v / v ) Parazone ( commercial bleach ) with 0 . 01 % ( v / v ) Triton X - 100 detergent for 5 min . After five washes in sterile distilled water , seeds were cold - treated for 2 – 5 d at 4 °C to synchronize germina - tion , and then plated on Petri dishes containing 0 . 5× Murashige and Skoog ( MS ) basal salts ( Melford ) , 0 . 5 g / l 2 - ( N - morpholino ) ethanesulfonic acid ( MES ) , 0 . 7 % agar ( Sigma ) , pH 5 . 8 and sealed with gas permeable tape . If required , zeatin ( tZ ; Sigma - Aldrich ) was dissolved in sterile water , filter - sterilized and diluted from a 1 , 000× stock in autoclaved medium cooled to 50 °C . We prepared 1 mg / ml 1 - NAA ( α - napthaleneacetic acid ) from a liquid solution ( Sigma - Aldrich ) . We dissolved 10 µ M 2 , 4 - dichlorophenoxyacetic acid ( 2 , 4 - D ; Sigma - Aldrich ) in sterile water , filter - sterilized and diluted from a 1000× stock . GA 3 ( gibberellic acid ; Duchefa ) was dissolved in 50 % ( v / v ) ethanol , filter - sterilized and a 1 , 000× stock dilution was used for each experiment . All seeds were germinated and grown vertically in 0 . 5× MS under long day length light ( 16 h – 8 h cycle ) at 22 °C . For zeatin treatment , seeds were germinated in 0 . 5× MS and grown for 3 . 5 days before transfer to vertical Petri dishes containing 0 . 1 µ M zeatin . After 16 h of treatment , 20 µ l of MS liquid containing 0 . 1 µ M zeatin or control solution was added to each root and gently covered with a coverslip . The experiments continued for 10 h after the addition of the coverslips and dishes were maintained vertical during intervals between microscopy scans to avoid root bending and thus main - taining the orientation of cells with respect to the focal plane . A simple procedure was followed to minimize fluctuations in the z plane during image collection over long time courses . ( i ) A feature was chosen that was easily recognizable in longitudinal section . In roots for example , a focal plane that provided a longitudinal opti - cal section through the labeled nuclei of a median layer of the cortex could be reproducibly selected on a confocal microscope . ( ii ) A series of 10 optical sections were obtained from the region above and below this median section . It was sometimes necessary to manually adjust the focus of the microcope during a time course experiment , to follow cells growing at the curved tip of the root apex . ( iii ) The 3D stacks of images were used to manually identify the optimum optical section for each sample . Only roots that do not rotate or twist during time - lapse experiments were considered for analysis . The coverslips were held in position over tips of the roots by surface tension . Aliquots ( 20 µ l ) of 0 . 5× MS medium were regularly added to avoid dehydration and pressure on the root between the agar surface and coverslip . Under these conditions , seedlings could be maintained healthy for 2 – 3 d . This provided a simple and effective device for positioning and registration of growing Arabidopsis roots for long - term imaging experiments . The roots were growing over the surface of a vertically orientated nutrient agar plate , and showed no evident perturbation of root form . For NAA , and 2 , 4 - D GA 3 treatments , seeds were germinated and grown in 0 . 5× MS and treated with 20 - µ l droplets contain - ing the hormones or control solution . For GA 3 treatment , seeds were germinated and grown in 0 . 5× MS for 4 d before treated with 100 µ M GA 3 . After GA 3 application , roots were covered with a coverslip and imaged at the indicated different times . Images were acquired as 8 - bit TIFF files using a Leica TCS SP1 confocal laser scanning microscope with 40× NA 0 . 8 oil - immersion objective and pinhole equivalent to 1 . 5× the Airy disk diameter . EGFP and YFP were excited using the 488 nm and 514 nm lines of an argon ion laser , respectively , whereas mCherry and mRFP1 were excited using the 568 - nm krypton laser . Fluorescence emis - sion was detected at 505 – 530 nm for EGFP , 535 - 545 nm for EYFP and 606 – 635 nm for mCherry . Identical microscope settings were maintained during the experiments and clipping of pixel intensities was avoided . For time lapse experiments , images were acquired every 1 h . After acquisition of each image during a time - lapse experiment , the plates were sealed with tape to prevent desicca - tion and returned to the vertical position in the plant growth room . Multichannel images were merged in ImageJ ( http : / / rsb . info . nih . gov / ij / ) , and unedited images were used for ratiometric analysis . Image levels were adjusted in Adobe Photoshop for presentation . n p g © 2012 N a t u r e A m e r i ca , I n c . A ll r i gh t s r ese r ve d . nature methods doi : 10 . 1038 / nmeth . 1940 For cell - expansion analyses , two continuous side - to - side files of cortex cells were used and thus avoiding segmentation of cells that were not perfectly aligned with respect to the focus plane . Balloon segmentation . The algorithm has been implemented as a Java ImageJ plugin , which can be freely downloaded ( http : / / www . archiroot . org . uk / ) . A graphical interface has been provided to allow adjustment of the main parameters of the algorithm ( Supplementary Fig . 3 ) . Other properties , such as number of vertices , bending stiffness , initial balloon size , can be modified in configuration files . Before segmentation , images were processed to remove background noise . First , long - range modulations of the background intensity were removed using a boxcar averaging routine over a region of 20 square pixels ( using the background removal function under ImageJ ) . Images were normalized and filtered with a Gaussian filter of radius 4 pixels to smooth images and reduce noise . Robustness of segmentation was assessed by degrading cell wall signal using random black speckle of increasing intensity , repre - senting successively 20 % , 35 % and 50 % of the signal in the image . We modeled the balloon geometry as a closed envelope . The bal - loon was decomposed into sections modeled as springs , which were bound together at their end points to form vertices . The springs are characterized by stiffness K , relaxation rate R , current length L and natural length L 0 . Vertices have a mass m and are characterized by their position M and the velocity V . The motion of vertices results from the action of forces in the two adjacent spring F s1 and F s2 forces , a constant inflation force F i applied perpendicularly to the balloon surface , and the external image force F p : F n s1 = − K L L ( ) 0 1s F n i N = P 0 F n n n N N = − C I L C I L 1 2 / / or ∆ P 0 ( pressure ) , C 1 and C 2 are constants . The segmentation can follow two steps . In the inflation stage F i is not zero and external image forces are proportional to the image intensity ( I ) along the normal vector of the balloon ( n N ) . In a second stage , opti - mal boundary detections can be obtain by suppressing inflation forces and using the image Laplacian ( ∆ I ) as external image forces . Time is dimensionless and its unit will be denoted T for clarity . In order solve the physical equations for balloon deformation , time is discretised into steps , so that time t at the n th time step t = ndt . Inelastic deformation is necessary to enable modelling of growth and formation of irregular shapes . This is implemented through a relaxation mechanism where the natural length of the spring varies as a function of the deformation state : L R L L dt t dt t t 0 0 + = − ( ) Inflation of the balloons causes the build up of forces perpendicu - lar to each surface as well as the forces stored in the springs due to elastic deformation . These are computed and equilibrated at the end vertices ( Supplementary Fig . 4 ) . A forward finite difference scheme is then used to determine the displacement of the balloon vertices at time t + dt using the conservation of momentum : V V F t dt t t dt m + = + / M M V t dt t t dt + = + The model also takes into account bending stiffness K b and vis - cous forces ( υ ) at the vertices . Balloons interact with each other to prevent overlap between neighboring balloons . The detection of contact is achieved by translating each vertex by small distance e ( interface width ) and checking for inclusion in neighboring bal - loons . If inclusion is detected for a given vertex , its movement is allowed only in parallel to the surface it is in contact with , following a perfectly smooth interaction model ( Supplementary Fig . 4b ) . In this model , image intensity is measured in units , for example , 0 – 255 in 8 - bit images , and are assumed to be equivalent to a pres - sure ( P 0 = 50 units ) . Forces are therefore measured in units pix . The dynamic parameters , such as viscosity or point mass , influ - ence the convergence and stability of the algorithm but not the final shape of the balloon at equilibrium . We have chosen them empirically to maintain convergence and we kept them constant throughout our study : m = 1 units T 2 ; υ = 2 units T ; dt = 0 . 02 T . The parameters we varied for segmenting the different types of cells are those acting on the resolution ( number of vertices per pixel ) and describing the resistance to balloon deformation : spring stiffness K ( units ) restrain the overall size of the segmented cell ; the relaxation rate R ( T −1 ) allows cells of different shape and size to be segmented ; bending stiffness influence the smoothness of the shape K b ( unit pix 2 ) . An ImageJ plugin has been developed to implement the bal - loon segmentation algorithm in two dimensions . It is distributed under the terms of the General Public License and is available at http : / / www . archiroot . org . uk / doku . php / navigation / architools / and is available in the Fiji distribution of ImageJ . A graphical interface has been developed which allows selection of regions of interest , location of cell centres , import and saving of results . Although all segmentation steps can be automated , manual intervention is possible through the different steps of the segmentation process . Settings for the segmentation algorithm are saved in properties files , and examples can be found on the plugin website . Calculation of strain rate . The strain is a measure of deformation used in mechanics that quantify the relative displacement of mate - rial particles . The strain is a local measure that can be expressed , when deformations are small , as the ratio of the total deformation by the initial dimension of an object : E dL L = / 0 This definition of strain is termed engineering or Cauchy strain 16 . When the small strain hypothesis is not true anymore , a non lin - ear measure of the strain is used ( obtained by integrating the engineering strain over the length of the object ) : E L dL L = + ln ( ) / 0 Strain rate is the change of strain with time and was calculated as d dt L dL dtL e / ln ( ) / ( ) = + 0 where dt is the time interval between two images , and dL is the change with time of the balloon longitudinal dimension obtained by projecting the balloon vertices along the longitudinal axis . Particle searching and tracking . Nuclei were processed using well known image - analysis techniques . Nuclei were automatically n p g © 2012 N a t u r e A m e r i ca , I n c . A ll r i gh t s r ese r ve d . nature methods doi : 10 . 1038 / nmeth . 1940 identified by thresholding the image and applying a connected component algorithm . For analysis of particle movement , we used a particle - tracking algorithm developed previously 17 based on optimization ( SpotTracker ImageJ plugin ) . We did not address the issue of cell division and tracking of lineage ; there are , however , algorithms that allow this type of analysis 18 . 14 . Boisnard - Lorig , C . et al . Plant Cell 13 , 495 – 509 ( 2001 ) . 15 . Kurup , S . et al . Plant J . 42 , 444 – 453 ( 2005 ) . 16 . Boresi , A . P . & Chong , K . P . Elasticity in Engineering Mechanics ( Wiley - IEEE , New York , 2000 ) . 17 . Sage , D . , Neumann , F . R . , Hediger , F . , Gasser , S . M . & Unser , M . IEEE Trans . Image Process . 14 , 1372 – 1383 ( 2005 ) . 18 . Bao , Z . et al . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA 103 , 2707 – 2712 ( 2006 ) . n p g © 2012 N a t u r e A m e r i ca , I n c . A ll r i gh t s r ese r ve d .