A comprehensive text analysis of lecture slides to generate concept maps Thushari Atapattu * , Katrina Falkner , Nickolas Falkner School of Computer Science , University of Adelaide , Adelaide , SA 5005 , Australia a r t i c l e i n f o Article history : Received 28 November 2016 Received in revised form 31 July 2017 Accepted 2 August 2017 Available online 4 August 2017 Keywords : improving classroom teaching Media in education Pedagogical issues Teaching / learning strategies a b s t r a c t Current instructional methods widely support verbal learning through linear and sequential teaching materials , focusing on isolated pieces of information . However , an important aspect of learning design is to facilitate students in identifying relationships between information . The transformation of linearity in teaching resources into integrated network models such as concept maps facilitates effective knowledge organisation by constructing relationships between new and existing knowledge . However , the manual construction of concept maps from teaching materials places an additional workload on the academics involved . Consequently , this research investigates the effectiveness of automated approaches in extracting concept maps from lecture slides and the suitability of auto - generated concept maps as a pedagogical tool . We develop a set of Natural Language Processing ( NLP ) algorithms to support concept - relation - concept triple extraction to form concept maps . Structural and graph - based features are utilised to rank the triples ac - cording to their importance . The natural layout of the lecture slides is incorporated to organise the triples in a hierarchy , facilitating highly integrated structure . Our evaluation studies identify promising results , with several case studies demonstrating a statistically signi ﬁ cant correlation ( r s > 0 . 455 ) between auto - generated concept maps and human experts ' judgment . Auto - generated concept maps were rated from ‘ good ’ to ‘ very good ’ by the academics on evaluation factors such as coverage , accuracy , and suitability as a peda - gogical tool . Thus , auto - generated concept maps from this research can be utilised as a positive alternative to the manual construction of expert concept maps and further , it is possible to utilise these maps for a wider range of applications including knowledge organisation and re ﬂ ective visualisation of course contents . Our research contributes to bridging the gap between linearity in teaching materials and the necessity of creating integrated network models from teaching resources . © 2017 Elsevier Ltd . All rights reserved . 1 . Introduction An important aspect of designing teaching material is to facilitate students in understanding the important concepts of the domain and the relationships between new and existing information . With the popularity of open online learning platforms and the lack of teachers ' presence , it is crucial to embed knowledge organisation opportunities to assist learners . Current instructional methods , particularly sequentially - structured lecture slides which are developed on top of presentation * Corresponding author . E - mail address : thushari . atapattu @ adelaide . edu . au ( T . Atapattu ) . Contents lists available at ScienceDirect Computers & Education journal homepage : www . elsevier . com / locate / compedu http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . compedu . 2017 . 08 . 001 0360 - 1315 / © 2017 Elsevier Ltd . All rights reserved . Computers & Education 115 ( 2017 ) 96 e 113 frameworks are not very supportive in aiding learners in identifying complex relationships between information , which can result in poor knowledge organisation ( Kinchin , Chadha , & Kokotailo , 2008 ) . Despite the richness of the knowledge structures of the teachers , the ultimate form of the lecture slides is a series of bullet points . There has been a long - standing criticism of the cognitive style of PowerPoint presentations where it is believed to weaken verbal and spatial reasoning when utilised as a lecture delivery mechanism ( Tufte , 2003 ) . Irrespective of its pedagogical value or cognitive ability , point - based lecture slides are embedded in the culture of teaching and hence , widely popular across the world ( Bartsch & Cobern , 2003 ; Apperson , Laws , & Scepansky , 2008 ) . There have been numerous educational bene ﬁ ts in utilising knowledge organisation techniques over text representations . Among them , the use of knowledge maps as a knowledge organisation technique demonstrated signi ﬁ cantly higher per - formance for recall , subjective concentration , and motivation over traditional text ( Hall & O ' Donnell , 1996 ) . Low ability students taught using knowledge maps recalled more central ideas than students who were taught using traditional text ( Patterson , Dansereau , & Wiegmann , 1993 ) . Students with low prior knowledge learned most when the lecture is accom - panied by knowledge maps ( Lambiotte & Dansereau , 1992 ) . Students performed signi ﬁ cantly better on complex program - ming problem solving using knowledge maps over traditional hierarchical representations ( Gao , Wang , & Gao , 2015 ) . Concept maps are amongst one of the well - established educational visualisation tools , assisting learners in organising , sharing , re ﬂ ecting , and representing knowledge ( Novak & Gowin , 1984 ) . Concept mapping is grounded in the Assimilation theory which states “ learning takes place by the integration of new concepts and propositions into existing concept and propositional framework held by the learner ” ( Ausubel , 1968 ; Novak & Gowin , 1984 ) . The hierarchical nature of concept maps supports this theory by identifying the general concepts held by the learner prior to introducing more speci ﬁ c concepts . The integration of relevant prior knowledge in learning new information ( i . e . meaningful learning ) enables the construction of effective knowledge structures . Additionally , the use of concept maps to identify relations between concepts and more progressively , identi ﬁ cation of cross - links between concepts , involves a high level of cognitive performance ( Novak & Canas , 2006 ) . Since 1997 , more than 500 empirical studies have utilised concept maps for effective learning and teaching activities ( Nesbit & Adesope , 2006 ) , particularly assessing the conceptual understanding , conceptual change ( i . e . evolution of con - ceptual understanding over time ) , and misconception ( Novak & Gowin , 1984 ) . In addition to the bene ﬁ ts for learners , concept maps can be used to create ‘ conceptually transparent ’ curriculum planning where domain concepts are organised in advance ( i . e . advance organisers ) without introducing redundancies or lessening its organisation ( Novak & Canas , 2006 ) . Concept maps demonstrate the ability in externalising experts ' tacit knowledge which is often dif ﬁ cult to articulate well to others through text representation ( Novak & Canas , 2006 ) . Therefore , the ability to generate concept maps from teaching materials provides one way of assessing whether the learning design has been transferred successfully to teaching materials . Therefore , this research focuses on supporting the knowledge organisation of teaching materials ( i . e . lecture slides ) through concept maps . Our motivation is supported by numerous previous studies ( Bradley , Paul , & Seeman , 2006 ; Kinchin et al . , 2008 ) . As stated in previous studies , it is challenging for teachers to express complex knowledge structures explicitly using point - based lecture slides . Therefore , it is unpredictable for teachers to perceive how students will interpret and reconstruct the knowledge . It is possible for learners to construct false hierarchies that are not the intention of the teachers . According to Kinchin et al . ( 2008 ) , the integrated knowledge structure of an expert ( ‘ expert structure ’ ) is transformed into teaching space using the sequence of slides ( ‘ teaching sequence ’ ) . Therefore , students often interpret the information pre - sented early in the sequence as the most important . Therefore , a combination of lecture slides and concept maps are encouraged to an epistemologically balanced teaching approach ( Kinchin et al . , 2008 ) . The widespread adoption of concept maps is hindered by the substantial assistance and feedback required by learners constructing concept maps . Most learners struggle to identify correct concepts , relations , and their hierarchical organisation . More speci ﬁ cally , learners struggle to identify relation labels and cross - links between concepts both of which involve higher mental load ( Novak & Canas , 2006 ) . This occurs mainly when traditional teaching resources such as lecture slides and textbooks focus more on isolated pieces of information than their inter - relationships . All , Huycke , and Fisher ( 2003 ) stated that “ helping students to formalise concept links is one of the most challenging tasks in teaching ” . In a study by Chang , Sung , and Chen ( 2001 ) , 94 % students expressed that concept map construction is an effort - demanding task and requires scaffolding during concept map construction . In order to overcome the issues associated with manual concept map construction , the idea of expert maps ( also known as expert skeleton maps ( Novak & Canas , 2006 ) , teacher - prepared maps ( Nesbit & Adesope , 2006 ) , expert - generated maps ( Olney , Cade , & Williams , 2011 ) ) , or concept map critique ( Schwendimann , 2016 ) is introduced . Expert maps are prepared by domain experts ( i . e . teachers ) with the intention to utilise for learning , comparison , evaluation , problem - solving , and scaffolding purposes for students ( Ruiz - Primo & Shavelson , 1996 ; Chang et al . , 2001 ) . The construction of expert maps places an addi - tional workload on the academics involved , requiring the multifaceted expertise of the domain , and the creation of complex concept maps . In this work , we use the term ‘ expert maps ’ to denote the concept maps constructed by the domain experts . Therefore , our main focus of this work is to develop techniques to extract concept maps from lecture slides . We aim to utilise auto - generated concept maps to design numerous pedagogical activities and assessments for students including providing concept maps as a scaffolding resource for educational question answering . Auto - generated concept maps facilitate as a re ﬂ ective visualisation of course contents for teachers as well as students . Additionally , Intelligent Tutoring Systems ( ITS ) such as Guru ( Person , Olney , D ' Mello , & Lehman , 2012 ) and Betty ' s Brain ( Leelawong & Biswas , 2008 ) utilised auto - generated concept maps to model domain knowledge and to create concept map learning activities . Olney et al . ( 2011 ) utilise the auto - generated concept maps from Biological textbooks to generate questions for students . Auto - generated concept maps from T . Atapattu et al . / Computers & Education 115 ( 2017 ) 96 e 113 97 student essays for cognitive visualisation considered as a re ﬂ ective activity of individual ' s writing ( Villalon & Calvo , 2009 ; Villalon , Calvo , & Montenegro , 2010 ) . Previous efforts within the ﬁ eld of research work toward automated approaches to extract concept maps from numerous text sources ( known as concept map mining ( Villalon & Calvo , 2008 ) ) including textbooks ( Olney et al . , 2011 ) , text documents ( Alves , Pereira , & Cardoso , 2001 ) , e - learning documents ( Lee & Segev , 2012 ) , academic articles ( Chen , Kinshuk , Wei , & Chen , 2008 ) , and student essays ( Villalon & Calvo , 2009 ) with the aim of providing useful educational tools with minimal human intervention . The semantically and syntactically missing and ambiguous text in lecture slides makes it undesirable for uti - lising already developed tools or techniques to concept map extraction . Therefore , this research conducts a comprehensive text analysis of Computer Science ( CS ) lecture slides to identify the issues associated with text ( e . g . noise , pronouns ) and develop techniques to extract concept maps . Our main hypothesis for this work is ‘ Auto - generated concept maps from CS lecture slides will be as effective as expert concept maps constructed from CS lecture slides ’ . To support this , we address following research questions ; Do auto - generated concept maps from CS lecture slides be as effective as expert concept maps constructed from CS lecture slides ? If so , are auto - generated concept maps from CS lecture slides acceptable on coverage of domain knowledge , accuracy and suitability as a pedagogical tool ? Our corpus included CS lecture slides utilised within the local teaching context , and the slides obtained from textbook publishers ( Stalling , 2007 ; Sommerville , 2010 ; Silberchatz , Galvin , & Gagne , 2012 ) . A series of evaluation studies in this work identify promising results , with several case studies demonstrating a strong positive correlation ( p < 0 . 01 ) between auto - generated concept maps and expert maps . The results indicate that our research provides an effective and ef ﬁ cient alter - native to expert maps . Auto - generated concept maps were rated between ‘ good ’ to ‘ verygood ’ by the academics on evaluation factors such as coverage , accuracy , hierarchy , readability , and suitability as a pedagogical tool . Academics involved in the evaluation were extremely receptive ( M ¼ 4 . 9 , SD ¼ 0 . 11 ; scale is ranging from 1 ( very poor ) to 5 ( very good ) ) on utilising auto - generated concept maps as a re ﬂ ective tool for their materials . 2 . Concept map mining from text : a review According to the de ﬁ nition by Villalon and Calvo ( 2008 ) , concept map mining ( CMM ) from a document ( D ) ( Fig . 1 ) can be expressed as ; 1 ) Concept Extraction ( CE ) and identifying the set of concepts ( C ) 2 ) Relation Extraction ( RE ) and identifying the set of relations ( R ) 3 ) Topology Extraction ( TE ) and identifying a generalisation ( G ) of the set of concepts 4 ) Identify the subsets from C , R , G that are a good summary of D This section summaries prominent research works that generate concept maps from various text sources using fully - or semi - automated approaches . Interested readers can refer to some of the state - of - art works related to the stages in Fig . 1 as listed below : 1 . Concept Extraction ( Frantzi , Ananiadou , & Mima , 2000 ; Blei , Ng , & Jordan , 2003 ; Matsuo & Ishizuka , 2004 ; Cimiano , 2006 ; Manning , Raghavan , & Schutze , 2008 ; Rose , Engel , Cramer , & Cowley , 2010 ) 2 . Relation Extraction ( Kambhatla , 2004 ; Bunescu & Mooney , 2005 ; Banko , Cafarella , Soderland , Broadhead , & Etzioni , 2007 ; Fundel , Kuffer , Zimmer , & Miyano , 2007 ; Angeli , Premkumar , & Manning , 2015 ) 3 . Topology Extraction ( Hearst , 1992 ; Sanderson & Croft , 1999 ; Cimiano , Hotho , & Staab , 2005 ; Manning et al . , 2008 ) 4 . Summarisation ( Frantzi et al . , 2000 ; Leake , Gabriela , & Thomas , 2004 ; Manning et al . , 2008 ; Villalon & Calvo , 2009 ) To guide the reader , we present the related CMM works in four stages : 1 ) source ; 2 ) techniques ; 3 ) evaluation methodology ; and 4 ) applications . Firstly , we discuss the studies related to our ‘ knowledge source ’ ( i . e . lecture slides ) . Prominent research works to extract concept maps from lecture slides is lacking . Intelligent tutoring system known as Guru extracts concept - relation - concept Fig . 1 . Concept map mining process ( Villalon & Calvo , 2008 ) . T . Atapattu et al . / Computers & Education 115 ( 2017 ) 96 e 113 98 triples from bulleted facts in lecture materials of high school Biology to construct concept map activities ( Person et al . , 2012 ) . The authors ' have not included the nature of the ‘ bulleted facts ’ such as whether the text is noisy or grammatically complete . Domain experts reviewed the extracted triples and edited them to ﬁ t with other text . One of the key issues of this work is locating a suf ﬁ ciently mineable source without extensive noisiness of bulleted facts that will , on automated processing , produce a concept map that the amount of work required to correct or re ﬁ ne the map is relativelysmall . In this study , students are expected to ﬁ ll - in - the - blanks of skeleton maps extracted from CMM . The correlation between the time spent on concept map activities and the learning gain is measured . In the ﬁ rst cycle of concept map activities ( out of two cycles ) , time spent on the map is positively correlated with the learning gain . However , there was no signi ﬁ cant correlation between concept map activities and learning gain in cycle 2 . Secondly , we summarise computational ‘ techniques ’ used for concept map extraction from text . Clariana and Koul ( 2004 ) measures the co - occurrence between the terms in students ' written summaries and a pre - de ﬁ ned list of important terms in the Biological domain . They construct an ‘ aggregated proximity array ’ by assigning ‘ 1 ’ when co - occurred and ‘ 0 ’ otherwise . A concept map - like Path ﬁ nder Network ( PFNet ) representation ( Schvaneveldt , 1990 ) is generated from the proximity array . The ability of PFNet to capture important propositions from written text is moderate ( Pearson r ¼ 0 . 69 ) according to the human evaluators . PFNet lacks relation labels since this approach focuses only on whether there is any association exists between terms . In addition , determining a pre - de ﬁ ned list is subjective which resulted in neglecting false positives . Similarly , Chen et al . ( 2008 ) conducted a study to extract concept maps from ‘ e - learning ’ articles ( conference papers & journals ) by considering author - de ﬁ ned ‘ keywords ’ as ‘ concepts ’ and the distance between two ‘ keywords ’ within the article as ‘ relationship strength ’ . Concept maps from academic articles provide a useful overview of the domain for researchers , particularly beginners in the ﬁ eld . A 10 - point Likert scale questionnaire is used to collect opinions from two domain experts , and the experts agree that relationships and overall ﬁ tness are up to 80 % and concept ranking is 70 % . Their work lacks ‘ relationship labels ’ and ‘ hierarchy ’ of concept maps . Alternatively , they provide ‘ relationship strength ’ between terms using a numeric value . Wang , Cheung , Lee , and Kwok ( 2008 ) utilised the Fuzzy Association Concept Mapping ( FACM ) methodology to extract concept maps from abstracted short text of Science Citation Index ( SCI ) . FACM consists of an automatic process of extraction and interactive process of re ﬁ nement . This technique extracts propositions ( i . e . concept - relation - concept triples ) from the text and interactively re ﬁ nes the extracted proposition with the use of human recommendations using fuzzy set theory . This framework is evaluated with the CNET News database of abstracts . A comparison of proposed approach with a baseline al - gorithm called ANNIE ( Cunningham , Maynard , Bontcheva , & Tablan , 2002 ) obtains higher precision ( e . g . 87 % for ‘ abstracts ’ ) and recall ( e . g . 74 % for ‘ news articles ’ ) . TEXTCOMON ( Text - Concept Map - Ontology ) system focuses on extracting concept maps from textual sources ( i . e . textual learning objects ) using machine learning and linguistic methods ( e . g . parsing and lexico - syntactic patterns ) ( Zouaq & Nkambou , 2008 ) . This approach converts extracted concept maps to a domain ontology . A corpus of 36 text documents containing approximately 30 , 000 words in e - learning domain is used for the evaluation . The system outperforms similar tools built previously for the same purpose ( e . g . TEXT - TO - ONTO ( Cimiano & Volker , 2005 ) ) . This work intends to bridge the gap between e - learning and Intelligent Tutoring Systems by providing a common domain model . Thirdly , we discuss the ‘ evaluation methodologies ’ that are related to concept map extraction from text . Concept map mining from a Biology textbook ( Olney et al . , 2011 ) utilises key terms exist in the ‘ Glossary ’ and ‘ index ’ of textbooks as nodes in triples ( i . e . node - relation - node ) . After applying triple extraction algorithms to extract nearly 4400 triples , a manual cate - gorisation is carried out to cluster them according to relationship types . Statistical - based ﬁ lters are applied to discard triples that are not suitable for concept map exercise generation . Two experts having a background in Biology and pedagogy evaluate the auto - generated concept maps using the dimensions such as coverage , accuracy , and pedagogy and found that computer - generated maps are more ‘ accurate ’ to be utilised as expert maps . Textbook as the mining source is bene ﬁ cial as they contain grammatically complete sentences with minimal ambiguities . Lau , Chung , Song , and Huang ( 2008 ) extract concept maps from ‘ discussion forums ’ using Fuzzy domain ontology - based approach . Generally , discussion forums as the knowledge source are noisy and unstructured . However , their study invited ten students to write concise and precise posts about ‘ knowledge management ’ and request the individuals to assess whether the concept maps extracted from forum posts re ﬂ ects their understanding . Their study utilised ﬁ ve evaluation parameters ( i . e . accuracy , cohesiveness , isolation , hierarchy and readability ) to assess the automated concept maps using ﬁ ve scales ranging from ‘ very poor ’ to ‘ very good ’ . The overall results demon - strate that accuracy and the quality of auto - generated concept maps are promising ( M ¼ 4 . 3 , SD ¼ 0 . 61 ) . Finally , we discuss interesting educational ‘ applications ’ developed as a consequence of concept map extraction from text . Concept map mining from students ' written essays on the topic of ‘ English as a global language ’ facilitates visualising the essay according to how students ' understand the topic ( Villalon & Calvo , 2009 ) . The generation of concept maps from highly cognitive tasks like essay writing allows students and teachers to visualise the essays in new ways . This approach utilises grammar trees to identify concepts and Latent Semantic Analysis ( LSA ) for ranking the important concepts . The system suggests a list of concepts from student essays ( approximately 12 concepts per essay ) and human experts build concept maps from them , enabling the visualisation of the essay as a concept map . The system reports promising results when compared to the related summarisation works in the literature . Lee , Lee , and Leu ( 2009 ) developed a system to assist teachers in iden - tifying students ' misconceptions and knowledge gaps through the automated construction of concept maps from learners ' wrong answers to the exam questions ( Intelligent Concept Diagnostic Syst em ( ICDS ) ) . Through students ' answering portfolio , the system identi ﬁ es whether the learner understands each concept . Their system utilises A priori algorithm and association rules and suggests remedial learning for students through the Remedial - Instruction Path ( RIP ) algorithm . Information loss is likely to occur when considering misconceptions and knowledge gaps ( i . e . incorrect answers ) regardless of what student T . Atapattu et al . / Computers & Education 115 ( 2017 ) 96 e 113 99 already knows ( i . e . correct answers ) . Therefore , Chen and Bai ( 2010 ) suggests extracting concept maps from both correctly and incorrectly answered exam questions . A similar study by Tseng , Sue , Su , Weng , and Tsai ( 2007 ) constructs concept maps using the concepts extracted from quizzes using Two - Phase Concept Map Construction ( TP - CMC ) and builds the prerequisite relationships between these concepts using the students ' testing records . Results show that this approach is practical for analysing and visualising learners ' testing records . In summary , previous CMM from text approaches extract relations without label ( Chen et al . , 2008 ; Chen & Bai , 2010 ; Lee et al . , 2009 ) , or concepts and relations without hierarchy ( Alves et al . , 2001 ; Valerio & Leake , 2006 ; Wang et al . , 2008 ; Olney et al . , 2011 ) . However , our proposed approach generates all important elements of concept maps ( i . e . concepts , relations , hierarchy , and summarisation ) . In addition , our work develops approaches to handle semantically and syntactically missing and ambiguous text in lecture slides in contrast to CMM from well - written text such as textbooks ( Olney et al . , 2011 ) , academic articles ( Chen et al . , 2008 ) , text documents ( Alves et al . , 2001 ; Valerio & Leake , 2006 , 2012 ) , and student essays ( Villalon & Calvo , 2009 ) . 3 . Concept map mining from lecture slides This section discusses the techniques developed for concept map extraction from lecture slides . The overview of our design is presented in Fig . 2 , containing four main components : structured data analysis , knowledge acquisition , ranking , and visualisation . 3 . 1 . Structured data analysis This component aims to analyse the source material ( i . e . lecture slides ) and identify and remove the element of noise . For clarity , we explain the process using an example slide ( Fig . 3 ) . Initially , the document is parsed through a PowerPoint Reader , 1 supporting the extraction of structural information from text such as text location ( e . g . title , bullet offset ) and rich text features ( e . g . font colour , font size , and underline ) . It is expected to have a meaningful , brief noun phrase as the topic of the lecture , excluding category headings like Chapter 1 , Introduction to represent the ‘ root ’ or ‘ central concept ’ of the map . Our approach to remove noise in lecture slides includes two stages : slide - level and sentence - level . Slide - level noise identi ﬁ es slides which contain information inappropriate for a concept map ( e . g . course announcements , exam policy , and references ) . Our extensive analysis of the corpus found that it is infrequent to include ‘ course announcements ’ in the same slide as important subject contents . This clear separation of important and domain - independent data across slides simpli ﬁ ed the automated slide - level noise removal . Since our work is built upon NLP algorithms , we process the text as sentences . Therefore , sentence - level noise identi ﬁ es syntactically and semantically incomplete , incorrect or ambiguous sentences occurs due to the point - based nature of lecture slides . This includes verb phrases without a proper subject ( Fig . 3a ) , noun phrases without an object ( Fig . 3b ) , or ambiguous Fig . 2 . Overview of concept map mining from lecture slides . 1 http : / / poi . apache . org / . T . Atapattu et al . / Computers & Education 115 ( 2017 ) 96 e 113 100 sentences due to pronouns ( e . g . it , you ) ( Fig . 3c ) . The majority of the sentences included in the lecture slides are grammatically incomplete . The presentation framework often encourages writing of informal sentences , fragments or colloquialisms ( known as bullet points ) ( Fig . 3 ) . This kind of texts restricts the application of NLP algorithms . Therefore , we utilise contextual in - formation to resolve syntactic - level ambiguities . Our approach nominates syntactically missing elements including ‘ objects ’ for noun phrases ( NP ) and ‘ subjects ’ for verb phrases ( VP ) by obtaining parse trees 2 at the phrase - and clause - levels . Accordingly . (cid:2) Verb phrases ( Fig . 3a ) which contain the pattern [ VP [ VB NP ] ] look backward for candidates in ‘ parent ’ levels ( numbered ‘ 1 ’ in Fig . 3 ) to replace the missing ‘ subject ’ ( e . g . unit testing ) . Here , ‘ parent ’ levels imply preceding - indentation levels . (cid:2) Noun phrases ( Fig . 3b ) which contain the pattern [ NP [ VP [ VB ] ] look forward for candidates in ‘ child ’ levels ( numbered ‘ 2 ’ in Fig . 3 ) to replace the missing ‘ object ’ . Here , ‘ child ’ levels imply sub - indentation levels or enumerated sub - points . Candidates ( e . g . nouns or compound nouns ) along with the features such as grammatical structure , distance from ‘ input fragment ’ to the candidate , and whether it is an immediate indentation level or not ( either backward or forward ) are utilised to obtain a replacement for missing ‘ subject ’ or ‘ object ’ . This approach assists in transforming the majority of fragments into meaningful , complete sentences , enabling the application of NLP algorithms . There is a possibility of semantic information loss if pronouns are not properly replaced from the context . The existing approaches for pronoun resolution rely on linguistics ( e . g . named entities ) ( Leskovec , Grobelnik , & Milic - Frayling , 2004 ) or logical relationships between preceding and succeeding sentences ( Mitkov , 1998 ) . However , Computer Science domain lacks named entities and lecture slides lack logical relationships between preceding or succeeding bullet points . This issues in ﬂ uenced us to utilise contextual information based on the ‘ word window model ’ ( Ide & Veronis , 1998 ) for pronoun resolution . The word window model considers a window of n words to the left and right of the ‘ ambiguous term ’ to determine the context of the target word . The window can be selected as several words in the same sentence , several sentences in a paragraph , slide or a document . Based on this idea , we utilise contextual information embedded in lecture slides to resolve ambiguity in sentences or fragments . To support the claim , we assume that the ‘ slide heading re ﬂ ects the content in that particular slide ’ and further , ‘ each sentence ( or bullet - point ) shares logical relations with its enumerated sub - points ’ . This implies that successive indentation levels further elaborate the information presented at the current level . However , there is no guarantee that there is any existence of logical relations between preceding and succeeding bullet points at the same indentation level . Our pronoun resolution approach performs a backward search to ﬁ nd replacement candidates in the sentence itself , and in the preceding and succeeding sentences if the bullet - point contains multiple sentences ( Mitkov , 1998 ) . Further , we utilise contextual information to ﬁ nd replacement candidates in ‘ parent - levels ’ which are the preceding indentation level or title of the slide . For instance , the pronoun in Fig . 3c does not contain replacement candidates in the sentence itself . Therefore , replacement candidate is obtained from the slide title ( i . e . development testing ) ( numbered ‘ 3 ’ in Fig . 3 ) . Our pronoun resolution algorithm utilises features such as the location of candidate ( e . g . same sentence , parent - indentation level ) , sub - location ( e . g . headword ) , grammatical number ( singular or plural ) , and type of pronoun ( personal or possessive ) . Authors ' previous work report the results of our approach in identifying semantic and syntactic ambiguities presented in lecture slides ( Atapattu , Falkner , & Falkner , 2014 ) . 3 . 2 . Knowledge acquisition This component extracts useful knowledge in the form of triples ( concept - relation - concept ) and arranging the triples in a hierarchy according to the layout of presentation framework . Our approach utilises the grammatical structures of text to decompose knowledge as fragments in the form of subject - verb - object ( SVO ) or noun - verb - noun to identify concept - Fig . 3 . Sample Software Engineering slide . 2 https : / / nlp . stanford . edu / software / lex - parser . shtml . T . Atapattu et al . / Computers & Education 115 ( 2017 ) 96 e 113 101 relation - concept triples . These triples produce non - taxonomic relations that occur at sentence - level . Fig . 4 illustrates the process of knowledge acquisition . 3 . 2 . 1 . Triple extraction In Fig . 4 , SVO _ EXTRACTOR refers to the apparent subject - verb - object triples included in the simple declarative sentences . Our initial experiments utilised a heuristic - based approach for SVO extraction from sentences ( Atapattu et al . , 2014 ) . How - ever , interest readers can utilise the recent Stanford Open Information Extraction ( Open IE ) system ( Angeli et al . , 2015 ) to include more grammatically variant sentences . For clarity , we discuss the knowledge acquisition process using the example given in Fig . 3 . According to Fig . 4 , we ﬁ rst examine whether the sentences in lecture slides contain SVO . For instance , our SVO parser returns system testing as ‘ subject ’ , focus as ‘ verb ’ , and testing component interactions as ‘ object ’ for the sentence “ system testing should focus on testing component interactions ” . We use the notation ‘ focus ( system testing , testing component interactions ) ’ to describe the relation . As shown in Fig . 4 , if a sentence does not contain SVO , we extract noun - verb - noun triples from them . We consider part - of - speech of such sentences to identify nouns , compound nouns , verbs , and adjectives . These extractions are checked against ‘ order ’ where a verb should be in - between two nouns to form a triple . The candidate list should contain at least one verb which should not be a ‘ gerund verb ( VBG ) ( i . e . averb in its e ing form such as operating system that can function as a noun ) ’ . For instance , in the example discussed above on “ system testing should focus . ” the word - ‘ testing ’ is a gerund verb which is used as a noun to create a compound noun as the ‘ object ’ ( i . e . testing component interactions ) . We extract all possible combinations of noun - verb - noun triples ( TRIPLE _ EXTRACTOR in Fig . 4 ) . These triples can either be meaningful or weak . Therefore , a ‘ likeli - hood ﬁ lter ’ is applied for re ﬁ nement ( Olneyet al . , 2011 ) . The ‘ likelihood ratio ’ de ﬁ ned by Olney et al . ( 2011 ) calculates whether the relation between the start and the end node is meaningful . The start and end nodes are pooled into bag - of - words , and the association between each of these is calculated using co - occurrence analysis . For instance , the terms ‘ development testing ’ and ‘ development team ’ in Software testing topic could co - occur frequently and hence , comprised strong association . Our approach considers some additional features to identify strong triples such as the order of nouns and verbs in the sentence and subject - verb / verb - object distance . These extracted triples are checked against ‘ redundancy cycles ’ to ensure the ‘ subject ’ is not repeated in an ‘ object ’ . In order to minimise the information loss , isolated concepts are extracted from the remaining text ( CONCEPT _ EXTRACTOR in Fig . 4 ) . Our previous work de ﬁ nes regular expressions using part - of - speech tags and adopts ‘ greedy ’ approach to extract isolated concepts ( Atapattu , Falkner , & Falkner , 2012 ) . 3 . 2 . 2 . Hierarchy extraction Although state - of - art approaches for topology extraction utilise lexico - syntactic patterns ( Hearst , 1992 ) , lecture slides lack these patterns due to their point - based nature and the use of sentence fragments in preference to complete sentences . Therefore , we introduce a new approach to identify more general and more speci ﬁ c concepts ( i . e . hierarchical relations ) according to the natural layout of the presentation framework , assuming ‘ concepts included in lecture slides are further elab - orated using the next level ( s ) of indentation ’ . This suggests that important parent concepts tend to end up as titles , with the subordinate and related information on the same slide as smaller bullet points . We propose following hierarchical relation patterns identi ﬁ ed from our corpus analysis . 1 ) Slide title e bullet point e sub - point ( usually have a relation label ) 2 ) Lecture topic e slide title e bullet point ( usually have a relation label ) 3 ) Lecture topic e slide title ( mostly have no relation label ) 4 ) Slide title e bullet point ( mostly have no relation label ) The hierarchy extraction process is demonstrated using examples in Figs . 5 and 6 ‘ with ’ and ‘ without ’ a relation label respectively . The example illustrated in Fig . 6 not allows de ﬁ ning ‘ relation labels ’ . If the two participating concepts are ranked Fig . 4 . Knowledge acquisition from text in lecture slides . T . Atapattu et al . / Computers & Education 115 ( 2017 ) 96 e 113 102 as important in the domain , it is unlikely that these concepts are removed from the generated concept maps even though they do not have a valid relation label . There is no existing approach in resolving this without introducing human interventions ( e . g . Cloud ( Alves et al . , 2001 ) ) . Therefore , we generate the hierarchy with the existing source of information by highlighting a blank label ‘ ? ? ? ? ’ ( Fig . 6 ) . This allows domain experts to resolve the issue by providing a suitable label or simply removing the ‘ ? ? ? ? ’ and restoring the relation without a label . Although this lessens the level of automation , an intermediate participation of domain experts to assess the auto - generated concept maps is suitable within the educational context , especially when these maps are utilised by learners . 3 . 3 . Ranking According to Novak & Gowin ( Novak & Gowin , 1984 ) , a concept map should form an overview of approximately 15 e 25 concepts , organising the most important knowledge in a domain . However , in the educational context , particularly in lecture slides , the majority of the knowledge presented is deemed important to the learner , resulting in a large portion of lecture slides being retrieved and identi ﬁ ed for concept map . To satisfy both the requirements ( i . e . overview and most important knowledge ) , we test three hypotheses in our previous work ( Atapattu , Falkner , & Falkner , 2015a ) . The ﬁ rst hypothesis utilises the ‘ text location ’ ( e . g . slide title , bullet offset ) determined by the presentation framework . To clarify further , we refer to the example slide in Fig . 3 . Since ‘ development testing ’ concept is located in the slide title , it is assigned with rank ‘ 3 ’ ( i . e . most important ) . The next level of ranks is given based on the indentation levels of bullet points ( i . e . bullet offset ) . The text associated with the left most bullet points are given the rank ‘ 2 ’ ( i . e . important ) and remaining enumerated sub - points get rank ‘ 1 ’ ( i . e . least important ) . Accordingly , ‘ development testing ’ is reassigned with rank ‘ 2 ’ . However , in the occasions where the same concept gets more than one rank , our algorithm selects the highest rank . The concepts like ‘ unit testing ’ , ‘ component testing ’ in Fig . 3 is assigned with rank ‘ 1 ’ . Our second hypothesis considers the ‘ grammatical structure ’ ( i . e . simple or complex ) of text to determine the importance of the concept . This hypothesis is based on the recommendation of using the smallest number of words for a concept , usually a single word ( Novak & Canas , 2006 ) . For instance , nouns or noun phrases ( e . g . ‘ development testing ’ in Fig . 3 ) are given the rank ‘ 3 ’ . The simple sentences with obvious SVO ( e . g . process is a program in execution ¼ > is ( process , program in execution ) ) is assigned the rank ‘ 2 ’ while complex grammatical structures with nested sentences , dependent clauses or indirect objects are given the rank ‘ 1 ’ ( i . e . least important ) . Our third hypothesis utilises structural features ( e . g . term frequency , co - occurrence , typography ) and graph - based features ( e . g . degree centrality , proximity ) to determine the concept importance . The rank per concept is calculated as a combination of these features . For instance , concepts like ‘ development testing ’ in Fig . 3 receives higher score since it has a larger font size ( typography information ) as well as high occurring frequency ( term frequency ¼ 2 ) . The mechanism for calculating the ranks using structural features is broadly discussed in authors ' previous work ( Atapattu et al . , 2015a ) . Additionally , our previous Fig . 5 . An example of hierarchy extraction ( with ‘ relation label ’ ) . Fig . 6 . An example of hierarchy extraction ( without ‘ relation label ’ ) . T . Atapattu et al . / Computers & Education 115 ( 2017 ) 96 e 113 103 results demonstrated that the structural features are more important than ‘ text location ’ and ‘ grammatical structure ’ to determine the concept importance for several Computer Science case studies ( Atapattu et al . , 2015a ) . Therefore , this work considers ‘ structural features ’ for ranking the extracted concepts according to the importance . 3 . 4 . Visualisation The outcome of our research is a collection of triples in the form of concept - relation - concept with some exceptions without relation labels ( see Fig . 6 ) . We generate an XML - based ﬁ le called Concept Map Extensible Language ( CXL ) 3 from the triples ( see Appendix for a sample CXL ﬁ le ) . The IHMC CMap Tools ( Canas et al . , 2004 ) allows direct import of CXL ﬁ les to generate concept maps with an option of ‘ auto layout ’ or user preferred layout ( see Appendix for a sample of auto - generated concept map ) . 3 . 5 . Technical details Our system is written using the Java language ( Version 8 ) . We considered the standard lecture slide formats such as Microsoft PowerPoint , Apple KeyNote , and OpenOf ﬁ ce with consistent headers and text . The text extraction from PowerPoint utilises Apache POI API , 4 a Java API for Microsoft documents . We adopted Stanford Core NLP tools ( Version 3 . 6 . 0 ) ( Klein & Manning , 2003 ; Manning et al . , 2014 ) to analyse the natural language text . 4 . Study 1 : algorithm analysis 4 . 1 . Data To understand the nature of Computer Science lecture materials and hence , develop new techniques to extract concept maps , we analysed approximately 27 CS courses , including those available within the local teaching context and from textbook publishers such as Software Engineering ( Sommerville , 2010 ) , Computer Networking ( Stalling , 2007 ) , and Operating Systems ( Silberchatz et al . , 2012 ) . Each course contains approximately 22 lecture topics , which resulted in an analysis of a collection of nearly 600 slide sets . Additionally , each slide set contained approximately 40 slides . Therefore , we have collectively analysed ( either manually or automatically ) nearly 24 , 000 slides from CS courses . ( Note : the corpus used for the studies describe in this manuscript is a sample from the full dataset ) . Our corpus contained Microsoft PowerPoint lecture slides written in English using the Computer Science domain within the University context . This study involves seven University lecturers of selected CS courses ( See Table 1 ) since they are the arbiters of developed lecture slides . The volunteers are academics from the Computer Science School with extensive experience in teaching the selected CS courses . For consistency , we use the term ‘ domain experts ’ to introduce academics who involve in this study . According to Table 1 , there is a variation in the number of slides presented to each domain expert . This occurs when some courses contain more texts ( e . g . OS , SA ) while others have more diagrams and programming codes ( e . g . ADDS ) . However , we have maintained an approximately similar number of English sentences ( MD ¼ 287 . 3 , SD ¼ 13 . 2 ) per domain expert except in Introductory Programming ( IP ) course . IP is an exception as it contains multiple slides repeated the similar content with slight variations for animation purposes . The average number of sentences ( e . g . titles , bullet points ) per slide was 6 . 2 . Our system and domain experts extracted 678 and 658 concepts from 378 lecture slides respectively . This difference in a total number of Table 1 Corpus of lecture slides for study 1 . Undergraduate Level Course # slides # sentences # concept extracted from Our system Human experts Level 1 Introductory Programming ( IP ) 110 627 88 96 Algorithm Design and Data Structures ( ADDS ) 63 296 79 108 Object Oriented Programming ( OOP ) 40 272 73 74 Level 2 Software Engineering ( SE ) 46 285 101 104 Level 3 Distributed Systems ( DS ) 44 308 109 112 Operating Systems ( OS ) 35 287 122 73 Level 4 Software Architecture ( SA ) 40 276 106 91 Total 378 2351 678 658 Mean ( SD ) 54 ( 26 . 2 ) 335 . 8 ( 128 . 9 ) 96 . 8 ( 17 . 5 ) 94 ( 15 . 6 ) 3 CXL - http : / / cmap . ihmc . us / xml / CXL . html . 4 http : / / poi . apache . org / . T . Atapattu et al . / Computers & Education 115 ( 2017 ) 96 e 113 104 concepts occurs due to the variance of judgment on ‘ concept importance ’ between our system and domain experts . However , the statistics suggest that the variance of concepts between our system and domain experts are negligible when comparing the average number of concepts per slide . The average number of concepts per slide is 2 . 2 and 2 . 1 using our system and domain experts respectively except in IP course . In IP , the average number of concepts per slide was 0 . 8 and 0 . 87 using our system and domain experts respectively . 4 . 2 . Method As discussed in Section 3 . 3 , this study requires participants ( i . e . domain experts ) to rate the c oncepts according to their importance . The importance of knowledge components of a domain could depend on factors such as learning objectives , graduate attributes , examination or assessment perspectives and the attitudes of academics . The three rating scale given to the participants consisted of ‘ most important ’ , ‘ important ’ , and ‘ least important ’ using three colors ‘ red ’ , ‘ yellow ’ and ‘ green ’ respectively . Participants tended to rate single concepts as well as noun phrases . We assign ranks ‘ 3 ’ , ‘ 2 ’ , and ‘ 1 ’ for ‘ most important ’ , ‘ important ’ , and ‘ least important ’ concepts rated by domain experts respectively . We assign rank ‘ 0 ’ for the concepts retrieved by our system , but not selected and rated by the domain expert . During the experiments , the machine - extracted concept maps were not shown to the participants . They only had access to the lecture slides . This prevented any in ﬂ uence arising from the ‘ topology ’ of concept maps to the judgements of evaluators . Each task is expected to complete in 1 e 2 h . Each of the concepts extracted from our system is assigned with an aggregate weight based on the structural features ( e . g . proximity , typographic information , and co - occurrence ) . Our system de ﬁ nes upper , medium , and lower threshold values to rank the most important ( above upper threshold ) , important ( in - between upper and medium ) , and least important ( in - between medium and lower ) concepts using the descending order of weights . These three threshold values varied depending on the number of concepts retrieved in each slide set . We assign ranks to the concepts extracted from our system as similar to the human extracted concepts ( e . g . ‘ 3 ’ for ‘ most important ’ ) and rank ‘ 0 ’ is given for the concepts selected and rated by the domain expert as important , but not retrieved by our system . 4 . 3 . Results In this study , we focus only on concepts and their importance ( i . e . ranking ) rather than the relationships between con - cepts . Authors ' previous work ( Atapattu et al . , 2014 ) demonstrated an acceptable machine performance ( F 1 > 0 . 69 ) for automated relation extraction ( i . e . SVO ) from lecture slides for several CS case studies . To guide the readers in understanding the relation extraction process , we summarise dataset , method , and the results in Section 4 . 3 . 1 . Interested readers can refer to our previous work for further information ( Atapattu et al . , 2014 ) . 4 . 3 . 1 . Evaluation of relation extraction In order to test our hypothesis of ‘ Auto - generated concept - relation - concept triples from CS lecture slides will be as effective as expert extracted triples from CS lecture slides ’ , we utilise eleven computer science courses ( e . g . Introductory Programming , Database and information systems , Computer Networks , and Software process improvement ) . ( Note : to improve the performance of our algorithms , we utilise wide - variety of CS courses . Some of the courses shared across studies ( e . g . Software Engineering , Operating Systems ) while others used in individual studies ) . The dataset contains 15 slides sets with approximately 40 slides per slide set . A collection of 1838 triples were extracted from 1731 sentences . A sentence could consist of no , one or more triples . Two independent evaluators ( i . e . CS causal teachers ) who have knowledge of CS concepts were recruited . They are native and ﬂ uent English speakers . The task of evaluators to identify Subject - Verb - Object ( SVO ) from the given English sentences . The evaluators were advised to ﬂ ag complex sentences whose triples are dif ﬁ cult to judge . Our system also generates SVO from the same set of sentences based on our underlying NLP techniques . We measure the agreement of determining SVO between two evaluators using inter - rateragreement and obtained a ‘ reference list ’ of SVOs for sentences . The performance of automated relation extraction is measured using precision , recall , and F - measure ( F 1 ) by comparing the ‘ reference list ’ with the system - generated triples . The average F - measure of all courses are acceptable ( F 1 > 0 . 69 ) while several case studies demonstrated promising results ( F 1 > 0 . 8 for Software Engineering , Software Architecture , Operating System , Software Process Improvement , and Computer Networks ) . Therefore , the Study 1 focuses only on evaluating concept importance since our underlying algorithms already demonstrated acceptable machine performance for ‘ relation extraction ’ . 4 . 3 . 2 . Evaluation of concept map extraction To test the hypothesis of ‘ Auto - generated concept maps from CS lecture slides will be as effective as expert concept maps constructed from CS lecture slides ’ , we compare the ranks of each concept given by domain experts and our systems using Spearman ' s ranking correlation coef ﬁ cient ( r s ) ( Table 2 ) . r s ¼ ( 1 (cid:3) 6 P d i2 ) / ( n ( n 2 (cid:3) 1 ) ) ; d ¼ difference between ranks , n ¼ sample size . T . Atapattu et al . / Computers & Education 115 ( 2017 ) 96 e 113 105 The results of Table 2 show satisfactory correlation ( r s > 0 . 45 ) for the majority of the courses and strong positive corre - lation with r s greater than 0 . 7 ( p < 0 . 01 ) for SE , OS , and SA courses . For instance , in a topic of Software Engineering ( i . e . Software testing ) , 55 % of concept ranks ( out of 64 ) overlapped between the computer and human ( distance ¼ 0 ) and 39 % of concept ranks indicated one level difference between ranks . This implies 94 % of concept ranks extracted from Software testing using machine algorithms are closely aligned with human judgement . Both OS and SE lecture slides are constructed with the use of slides from textbook publishers . The SA slide set is well - written and structured . Therefore , those topics contain aspects such as high overlap of concept words between sentences to create connections ( i . e . high - cohesive text ) , grammatically rich sentences with apparent independent clauses , infrequent use of complex sentences or confusing idioms , less ambiguity of text ( e . g . pronouns ) , and emphasis on important domain concepts using techniques such as different font colors , underline , and italics . Courses like DS and OOP demonstrated satisfactory correlation ( r s > 0 . 45 ) with human judgment . Our manual inspection of contents of these courses revealed that DS contains a combination rich text , noisy text , and notations . In general , contents of programming courses like OOP are not suitable for concept map generation ( see Section 6 . 1 ) due to the nature of less text and more code fragments and notations . However , our randomly selected slide set from OOP contains more facts than programming components , providing an exception . Conversely , the remaining two programming courses ( i . e . ADDS and IP ) contain a large amount of noisy contents such as using category headings ( e . g . introduction , what ' s next , review ) as slide titles , additional text boxes with excessive text content which makes it undesirable for our system to determine important concepts , resulting a low correlation between human and machine ranks ( r s < 0 . 45 ) . 5 . Study 2 : qualitative analysis Algorithm analysis in the previous study demonstrated statistically signi ﬁ cant results for CS courses in the category of Software Engineering and Computer Architecture ( see Section 6 . 1 ) . Therefore , we have selected four courses from this category to evaluate auto - generated concept maps as a pedagogical tool . 5 . 1 . Data 5 . 2 . Method This study involves four volunteer University academics who taught the CS courses listed in Table 3 . Five lecture topics are selected from each course with each slide set containing approximately 10 slides . These topics are different from the topics used in the study 1 . We extracted an average of 36 . 7 concepts from each CS topic ( actual number of concepts retrieved are shown in Table 3 ) . However , we limit 30 concepts per map when presenting to the academics , enabling them to perform a comprehensive analysis of concept maps without being encumbered . Each participant received an experimental version of lecture slides ( i . e . reduced number of slides ) , ﬁ ve concept maps and task sheets containing 10 questions with a combination of 5 - point Likert scale and open - ended questions . The questionnaire is organised to collect data on the factors such as coverage , accuracy , readability and the suitability of auto - generated concept maps as a pedagogical tool ( Lau et al . , 2008 ; Olney et al . , 2011 ) . We also collect suggestions on utilising auto - generated concept maps to improve learning and teaching . The tasks are expected to complete within 1 e 2 h . Table 3 Corpus of lecture slides for study 2 . Course # slides # sentences # concept Mean ( SD ) concepts per topic Software Engineering ( SE ) 50 311 177 35 . 4 ( 4 . 1 ) Operating Systems ( OS ) 50 399 212 42 . 4 ( 4 . 0 ) Software Engineering and Project ( SEP ) 50 290 170 34 ( 1 . 8 ) Software Architecture ( SA ) 50 344 176 35 . 2 ( 3 . 7 ) Total 200 1344 735 Table 2 Spearman ' s correlation between machine - generated concept maps and human experts ' judgment . Course Spearman ' s correlation ( r s ) Introductory programming ( IP ) 0 . 353 Algorithm design and data structures ( ADDS ) 0 . 435 Object - oriented programming ( OOP ) 0 . 521 * Software Engineering ( SE ) 0 . 805 * Distributed Systems ( DS ) 0 . 455 * Operating Systems ( OS ) 0 . 715 * Software Architecture ( SA ) 0 . 806 * * p < 0 . 01 . T . Atapattu et al . / Computers & Education 115 ( 2017 ) 96 e 113 106 5 . 3 . Results Table 4 illustrates the means and standard deviations for each evaluation factor per course , ranging from 1 ( very poor ) to 5 ( very good ) . According to the results in Table 4 , all the concept map evaluation factors ( i . e . coverage , accuracy , hierarchy , readability , and suitability ) except the coverage of relations were rated between ‘ good ’ to ‘ very good ’ ( Mean > 4 ) by the academics . Interest - ingly , academics have indicated very high ratings ( Mean ~ 5 ) on the suitability of the auto - generated maps as a re ﬂ ection tool for own course content , emphasising ‘ I think this is a great tool for teachers as it can be used as a way to understand how students will process information , to improve consistency , etc . ’ . Table 5 summarises some of the other comments made by academics on each evaluation factors . Conversely , the coverage of relations is rated between ‘ average ’ to ‘ good ’ ( 3 < Mean < 4 ) , while the coverage of relations of concept maps from SE and SEP is rated as ‘ bad ’ . Our observation into these statistics indicated that the majority of the relations of these concept maps do not contain ‘ relation labels ’ ( see Fig . 6 ) . Further , due to the limit of 30 concepts per map , some important concepts from these courses were excluded , which resulted in a mean of 3 . 8 for coverage of concepts in SEP course . Even though the accuracy of concepts are rated as good ( M ¼ 4 . 25 ) , some academics mentioned about the issue of acronyms ( e . g . TDD and Test - Driven Development are both being retrieved as concepts ) not being classi ﬁ ed correctly . Based on the results in Table 4 , academics were satis ﬁ ed with the hierarchical organisation of concepts including their ability to visualise the comparison between concepts . However , we received some contradictory feedback about the ‘ hierarchy ’ . For instance , one lecturer commented about the ‘ accuracy of hierarchy ’ as “ it ( our system ) performed better than I thought e particularly on the hierarchy ” ( see Table 5 ) . Another lecturer commented about the ‘ readability of concept map ’ as “ more dif ﬁ cult than necessary due to hierarchical issues ” and “ sometimes too cluttered ” . A further comment from the same lecturer mentioned that the importance of increasing the readability of the information from left to right , aligning with the sequence of slides . Also , some general comments made by lecturers include the importance of generating timely concept maps as the course progresses , reducing the possibility of being overwhelmed . Table 4 Descriptive statistics of evaluation factors in each CS course . Factor / Course SE OS SEP SA Mean ( SD ) Coverage of concepts 4 . 0 ( 0 ) 4 . 6 ( 0 . 55 ) 3 . 8 ( 0 . 44 ) 4 . 6 ( 0 . 55 ) 4 . 25 ( 0 . 41 ) Coverage of relations 2 . 4 ( 0 . 89 ) 4 . 0 ( 0 ) 2 . 4 ( 0 . 5 ) 4 . 4 ( 0 . 89 ) 3 . 3 ( 1 . 05 ) Accuracy of concepts 4 . 2 ( 0 . 44 ) 4 . 6 ( 0 . 55 ) 3 . 8 ( 0 . 44 ) 4 . 4 ( 0 . 89 ) 4 . 25 ( 0 . 34 ) Accuracy of relations 4 . 0 ( 0 ) 4 . 4 ( 0 . 89 ) 4 . 0 ( 0 ) 4 . 8 ( 0 . 44 ) 4 . 3 ( 0 . 38 ) Accuracy of hierarchy 4 . 0 ( 0 . 7 ) 4 . 6 ( 0 . 55 ) 3 . 6 ( 0 . 89 ) 4 . 8 ( 0 . 44 ) 4 . 25 ( 0 . 55 ) Readability of concept map 4 . 0 ( 0 . 7 ) 4 . 8 ( 0 . 44 ) 3 . 8 ( 0 . 44 ) 4 . 2 ( 0 . 83 ) 4 . 2 ( 0 . 43 ) Suitability as a knowledge organisation tool for students 4 . 0 ( 0 ) 4 . 6 ( 0 . 55 ) 3 . 6 ( 0 . 89 ) 4 . 4 ( 0 . 89 ) 4 . 15 ( 0 . 44 ) Suitability as a re ﬂ ection of course contents for students 4 . 8 ( 0 . 44 ) 4 . 4 ( 0 . 89 ) 4 . 0 ( 0 . 7 ) 4 . 8 ( 0 . 44 ) 4 . 5 ( 0 . 38 ) Suitability as a re ﬂ ection of own course contents for teachers 5 . 0 ( 0 ) 4 . 8 ( 0 . 44 ) 5 . 0 ( 0 ) 4 . 8 ( 0 . 44 ) 4 . 9 ( 0 . 11 ) Table 5 Summary of feedback on auto - generated concept maps from lecture slides . Factor Feedback Coverage of concepts Good coverage , missing some aspects , e . g . ‘ implemented versus conceptual connectors ’ . In SA modeling , ‘ static ’ and ‘ dynamic analysis ’ is included multiple times in different ways . Coverage of relations Relationship modeling is particularly good in ‘ model - driven engineering ’ concept map with good hierarchy organisation . Few relationships were identi ﬁ ed in ‘ SA modeling ’ . Some cross - links generated by the tool are very interesting . They are not visible in the slides . Accuracy of concepts Some issues with using abbreviations of acronyms not being classi ﬁ ed correctly , or being entered multiple times . Accuracy of relations The tense of some of the relationships is wrong , which can make it a little dif ﬁ cult to follow . Accuracy of hierarchy It performed better than I thought e particularly on the hierarchy Readability of concept map More dif ﬁ cult than necessary due to hierarchical issues . Sometimes too cluttered . I think ‘ model drive architecture ’ concept map is a very good example . Suitability as a knowledge organisation tool for students It is crucial not to give maps to students with missing details ( if it ' s not intentional ) , it will confuse students . This limitation can be used as an exercise for students . Some maps need improvements . Suitability asare ﬂ ectionofcoursecontents for students Itbecameclearthattheorganisationofthecontentontheslideswaspoorlythoughtout , Toomanyconcepts are introduced on a ﬂ at hierarchywithout clearrelationships . These may have been described inthe lecture , but the slides would not have been an effective tool for concept review or to help students understand the detail of the concepts covered . Usefultoseepotentialissuesinknowledgeorganisation , Icanseeexamples , wheretheheadingsofslidesare not really supportive of clearly identifying the key concepts or relations . Suitability as a re ﬂ ection of own course contents for teachers Good in that it re ﬂ ects what is now obviously a poorly organised slide set ! T . Atapattu et al . / Computers & Education 115 ( 2017 ) 96 e 113 107 6 . Discussion 6 . 1 . Interpretation of results The results of Study 1 ( see Table 2 ) as well as authors ' previous study in evaluating relation extraction ( Section 4 . 3 . 1 ) demonstrated that our proposed approach work well ( r s > 0 . 7 ) for CS courses categorised as Software Engineering , Computer Architecture , Communication and Security ( see the sub ﬁ elds in ‘ outline of Computer Science ’ 5 ) . Therefore , these course con - tents are categorised as well - ﬁ tted for CMM from lecture slides using the techniques proposed in this research . Other courses such as Distributed Systems included reasonably good text contents with combinations of notations demonstrated ‘ satisfac - tory ’ correlation with human experts ( r s ~ 0 . 5 ) . Therefore , we categorise these courses as average - ﬁ tted for CMM from lecture slides . Concept maps generated from average - ﬁ tted CS lecture slides may require additional human interventions to produce effective concept maps . The relation extraction study also supports this as Distributed Systems and Database and Information Systems courses demonstrated average F - measure ( 0 . 5 < F 1 < 0 . 7 ) . Further , Study 1 supports the previous ﬁ ndings ( see Section 4 . 3 . 2 ) on courses which have large programming component or mathematical notations ( classi ﬁ ed as Programming Languages and Compilers , Algorithms and Data Structures and Mathematical Foundations ) ( e . g . Introduction to Programming , Algorithm Design and Data Structures ) are not suitable for CMM from lecture slides ( r s ~ 0 ) and hence , categorised as ill - ﬁ tted contents . However , this study provides an exception to our categorisation for Object - Oriented Programming ( r s ¼ 0 . 521 , p < 0 . 01 ) . This occurred since the randomly selected lecture topic of OOP ( i . e . memory ) contained more meaningful textual facts than programming components . Similarly , there can be some exceptions to our categorisation based on the nature of contents in speci ﬁ c lecture slides . There can be some lecture slides in well - ﬁ tted or average - ﬁ tted category with excessive use of ambiguous terms ( e . g . pronouns ) which are dif ﬁ cult to resolve using the given contextual information , high use of category headings in slides ( e . g . Chapter 1 , Introduction , continue , summary ) , and additional text boxes placed all over the slides without any connection with the other text in the slide . These types of content reduce the performance of CMM algorithm . Even though CMM from lecture slides provides acceptable machine performance for well - ﬁ tted lecture contents , it is not fully supporting our main hypothesis of this research which states ‘ Auto - generated concept maps from CS lecture slides will be as effective as expert concept maps constructed from CS lecture slides ’ . Instead , our results demonstrate that auto - generated concept maps from lecture slides belong to well - ﬁ tted CS course category are effective as expert concept maps constructed from lecture slides . It is practically challenging for the machine to outperform experts maps in a corpus like lecture slides . Although creating lecture slides follows a consistent presentation template , there is no well - de ﬁ ned structure for writing course materials , and it is free - form depending on the writing and presentation style of the lecturer . For instance , results from Study 2 ( see Table 4 ) suggested that coverage of relations is ‘ bad ’ ( M ¼ 2 . 4 ) in SE and SEP . Our observation of corresponding concept maps and lecture slides suggested that complex sentences and ‘ insolvable ’ pronouns ( e . g . we , us , you ) cause inef - fective relationship extraction , particularly in the topics like ‘ Project Management ’ . The majority of contents in the ‘ Project Management ’ is written using ‘ second person ’ pronouns ( i . e . you ) such as “ At the proposal stage , when you are bidding . ” , “ During the project startup phase , when you have to plan . ” . A similar type of issue introduced in relations , where the ‘ tense ’ of some relations was wrong . However , this is an inherent issue of presentation frameworks where the authors tend to write grammatically incorrect sentences which will only be visible when the lecture slides are transferred into a conceptual map . Therefore , it is dif ﬁ cult to generalise the performance of CMM from a knowledge source like lecture slides since contents of the lecture slides is not consistent like textbooks or academic articles . In addition to the CMM performance , it is important to re ﬂ ect the implications from additional data collected from this research . For instance , domain expert ' s judgment of ‘ concept importance ’ in Study 1 highlights the importance of structural features in contrast to text location or the grammatical structure of the text . It is important to consider how each of these features contributes to produce a high - quality concept map from lecture slides . For instance , important domain concepts in lecture slides are required to be emphasised ( i . e . typography information ) and reiterated ( i . e . term frequency , co - occurrence ) locally ( i . e . in adjacent sentences or within a slide ) and globally ( i . e . within the lecture slide set ) to improve the cohesion , facilitating the learners to integrate the new concepts with already known knowledge . Also , a construction of probable links with the central idea of the topic and between other concepts ( i . e . degree centrality and proximity features ) will improve the meaningful learning as well as the concept map mining . 6 . 2 . Implications for educators Based on the ﬁ ndings of this research as well as our comprehensive text analysis of lecture slides , we suggest some guidelines for educators to structure their teaching materials in order to satisfy the need for automated knowledge acquisition using NLP and statistical techniques . DOs ✓ Use designated layout ( e . g . headings and body ) by the presentation framework to include contents 5 https : / / en . wikipedia . org / wiki / Outline _ of _ computer _ science . T . Atapattu et al . / Computers & Education 115 ( 2017 ) 96 e 113 108 ✓ Emphasis important concepts using different font colors , font size , underline , bold , italics , and background highlights ✓ Reiterate concepts where necessary such as when two concepts co - occur ✓ Increase the overlap of concepts between sentences and slides ( i . e . high - cohesive text ) ✓ Write simple , grammatically correct and complete sentences with apparent independent clauses and subject , verb and objects ✓ Reduce the use of pronouns ✓ De ﬁ ne acronyms when you ﬁ rst use them DON ’ Ts 7 Use additional text boxes other than the layout of the presentation framework 7 Use category headings as slide headings ( e . g . introduction , continue , summary ) 7 Use synonyms unless it is certainly required 7 Write sentences with more than one dependent clauses or indirect objects 7 Use confusing idioms 7 Use different ‘ tense ’ unless it is certainly required 7 Use gender - related pronouns ( e . g . you , us , we and itself ) and dummy pronouns ( e . g . it is raining ) 6 . 3 . Limitations and future works One of the limitations of our proposed approach is its text - only aspect . Currently , we are not capable of extracting useful knowledge from ﬁ gures or tables , resulting in a probable information loss . For instance , there can be slides with diagrams that are critical for the content knowledge for the subject . However , existing tools such as OCR do not provide a reliable output when extracting text from low - quality images . Therefore , future works are necessary to extract useful knowledge from images and diagrams in lecture slides . Additionally , our work ' s inability to correctly recognise negations in sentences results in incorrect triples . For instance , lecture slides occasionally contain text in the negative form ( e . g . the class has no member function or member variable ) . This limitation occurs due to a lack of speci ﬁ c part - of - speech tag for negation . Another limitation of our approach is the dif ﬁ culty in understanding the similarity of some terms ( e . g . one lecturer has mentioned about the repeated terms ‘ behavioural model ’ and ‘ behavioural perspective ’ ) . Occasionally , it is dif ﬁ cult to learn these similarities using techniques such as LSA , word2vec due to the limited contextual information of lecture slides or lack of an external ontology in CS domain to resolve these issues . One future approach to resolving this issue is by applying techniques like topic models ( Blei , Ng , & Jordan , 2003 ) to Wikipedia articles related to the CS domain and utilise that knowledge to improve our concept maps . We also exclude triple extraction from sentences that contain pronouns such as you , us , we , and itself . The context of a slide does not provide suf ﬁ cient information to ﬁ nd the replacements for the ‘ gender - related ’ or ‘ dummy ( e . g . it is raining ) ’ pronouns . Gender - related pronouns were resolved in a different context by a work of Leskovec et al . ( 2004 ) . Also , some extremely dif ﬁ cult sentences with more than one dependent clause and pronouns ( e . g . need to write it to disk before replacing it if it was updated since it was last fetched from / written to disk ) are excluded from our analysis , resulting in some form of information loss . Lecturers also mentioned the loss of some important information . This occurs due to our ranking of important concepts and limiting each concept map to 30 concepts in the Study 2 . In contrast , one of our studies with students reported the excess of information in the auto - generated concept maps , creating navigational issues . Therefore , it is critical that we create concept maps with as much as information , however being able to explore the map through clicking on a concept , enabling the low visual clutter . 7 . Auto - generated concept maps for education Auto - generated concept maps from well - ﬁ tted CS course lecture slides provide a positive alternative to expert maps , demonstrating the ability to utilise as a re ﬂ ective visualisation of course contents for teachers as well as students , and further , allowing the design of numerous pedagogical activities and assessments for students . According to Kinchin et al . ( 2008 ) , the ability to generate effective concept maps from lecture slides and presenting a combination of lecture slides and concept maps to students encourage to an epistemologically balanced teaching approach . Further , auto - generated concept maps can be used to create ‘ conceptually transparent ’ curriculum planning for teachers , particularly for preservice teachers to create a more integrated view of subject matters and improve their curriculum planning skills . Additionally , Intelligent Tutoring Systems ( ITS ) such as Guru ( Person et al . , 2012 ) and Betty ' s Brain ( Leelawong & Biswas , 2008 ) utilise auto - generated concept maps to model domain knowledge and to create concept map learning activities . Olney et al . ( 2011 ) utilise the auto - generated concept maps from Biological textbooks to generate questions for students . CMM from stu - dent essays for cognitive visualisation considered as a re ﬂ ective activity of individual ' s writing ( Villalon & Calvo , 2009 ; Villalon et al . , 2010 ) . In addition to the related research studies , we utilise the auto - generated concept maps as a scaffolding resource for educational question answering . We obtained statistically signi ﬁ cant results for learning outcome when using concept maps T . Atapattu et al . / Computers & Education 115 ( 2017 ) 96 e 113 109 adapted to the task ( i . e . question ) with compared to lecture slides ( control group ) or full concept maps as a scaffolding resource . Interested readers can refer to the results of this experimental study in authors ' previous works ( Atapattu , Falkner , & Falkner , 2015b ) . The second year undergraduates who participated in this study were very positive about having concept maps as a scaffolding resource for question answering . The statistics demonstrated that the students were extremely receptive to use auto - generated concept maps as a supplementary to lecture slides . Surprisingly , none of the participants out of 55 was interested in constructing the concept maps manually . This feedback can be used to support the rationale of providing students with auto - generated concept maps as a learning tool . 8 . Conclusion The concept maps extracted from well - ﬁ tted CS lecture contents had a strong positive correlation ( p < 0 . 01 ) with the human experts ' judgments . Therefore , auto - generated concept maps from aforementioned contents can be utilised as a positive alternative to the manual construction of expert maps and further , it is possible to utilise them for a wider range of applications within the educational context including knowledge organisation , re ﬂ ective visualisation of course content , pedagogical activities and assessments , and as a scaffolding resource for intelligent educational environments . To the authors ' knowledge , there are no studies until this which have developed a comprehensive text analysis to extract concept maps from lecture slides in contrast to the related works which extract concept maps from well - written text such as textbooks , academic articles , and student essays . Further , our work generates all important elements of concept maps ( i . e . concepts , relations , hierarchy , and summarisation ) , in contrast to other CMM works which extract relations without a label , or concepts and relations without hierarchy since concept maps without relationships are ineffective in facilitating meaningful learning . Further , concept maps with a highly integrated structure demonstrate a deep understanding of the domain or topic . The design of our system does not rely on external resources . Therefore , our work can be utilised across any discipline , inde - pendent from the domain , with the availability of suf ﬁ ciently mineable lecture slides . Thus , our research contributes to bridging the gap between linearity in teaching materials and the necessity of creating integrated network models from teaching resources . Appendix Fig . 1 . Auto - generated concept map from ‘ software process model ’ . T . Atapattu et al . / Computers & Education 115 ( 2017 ) 96 e 113 110 Fig . 2 . Sample CXL ﬁ le . References All , A . C . , Huycke , L . I . , & Fisher , M . J . ( 2003 ) . Instructional tools for nursing education : Concept maps . Nursing Education Perspectives , 24 ( 6 ) , 311 e 317 . Alves , A . O . , Pereira , F . C . , & Cardoso , A . ( 2001 ) . Automatic reading and learning from text . In International symposium on arti ﬁ cial intelligence Fort Panhala , India . Angeli , G . , Premkumar , M . J . , & Manning , C . D . ( 2015 ) . Leveraging linguistic structure for open domain information extraction . In Proceedings of the asso - ciation of computational linguistics , Beijing , China . Apperson , J . M . , Laws , E . L . , & Scepansky , J . A . ( 2008 ) . An assessment of student preferences for PowerPoint presentation structure in undergraduate courses . Computers & Education , 50 ( 1 ) , 148 e 153 . Atapattu , T . , Falkner , K . , & Falkner , N . ( 2012 ) . Automated extraction of semantic concepts from semi - structured data : Supporting computer - based education through the analysis of lecture notes . In Proceedings of the 23rd international conference on database and expert systems applications , Vienna , Austria . Atapattu , T . , Falkner , K . , & Falkner , N . ( 2014 ) . Acquisition of triples of knowledge from lecture notes : A natural language processing approach . In Proceedings of the 7th International conference on educational data mining , London , United Kingdom . Atapattu , T . , Falkner , K . , & Falkner , N . ( 2015a ) . An evaluation methodology for concept maps mined from lecture notes : An educational perspective . In Communications in computer and information science ( CCIS ) ( Vol . 510 , pp . 68 e 83 ) . Springer International Publishing . Atapattu , T . , Falkner , K . , & Falkner , N . ( 2015b ) . Educational question answering motivated by question - speci ﬁ c concept maps . In Proceedings of the 17th international conference on arti ﬁ cial intelligence in education , Madrid , Spain . Ausubel , D . ( 1968 ) . Educational psychology : A cognitive view . New York and Toronto , Halt : Rinehart and Winston . Banko , M . , Cafarella , M . J . , Soderland , S . , Broadhead , M . , & Etzioni , O . ( 2007 ) . Open information extraction from the web . In Proceedings of the 20th inter - national joint conference on Arti ﬁ cal intelligence ( pp . 2670 e 2676 ) . Hyderabad , India : Morgan Kaufmann Publishers Inc . Bartsch , R . A . , & Cobern , K . M . ( 2003 ) . Effectiveness of PowerPoint presentations in lectures . Computers & Education , 41 ( 1 ) , 77 e 86 . Blei , D . , Ng , A . , & Jordan , M . ( 2003 ) . Latent dirichlet allocation . Machine Learning Research , 3 , 993 e 1022 . Blei , D . M . , Ng , A . Y . , & Jordan , M . I . ( 2003 ) . Latent dirichlet allocation . Journal of Machine Learning Research , 3 , 993 e 1022 . Bradley , J . H . , Paul , R . , & Seeman , E . ( 2006 ) . Analyzing the structure of expert knowledge . Information and Management , 43 ( 1 ) , 77 e 91 . Bunescu , R . C . , & Mooney , R . J . ( 2005 ) . A shortest path dependency kernel for relation extraction . In Proceedings of the conference on human language technology and empirical methods in natural language processing ( pp . 724 e 731 ) . Vancouver , British Columbia , Canada : Association for Computational Linguistics . Canas , A . J . , Hill , G . , Carff , R . , Suri , N . , Lott , J . , & Eskridge , T . ( 2004 ) . CmapTools : A knowledge modeling and sharing environment . In First international conference on concept mapping , Pamplona , Spain . Chang , K . E . , Sung , Y . T . , & Chen , S . F . ( 2001 ) . Learning through computer - based concept mapping with scaffolding aid . Journal of Computer Assisted Learning , 17 ( 1 ) , 21 e 33 . Chen , S . - M . , & Bai , S . - M . ( 2010 ) . Using data mining techniques to automatically construct concept maps for adaptive learning systems . Expert Systems with Applications , 37 ( 6 ) , 4496 e 4503 . Chen , N . - S . , Kinshuk , Wei , C . - W . , & Chen , H . - J . ( 2008 ) . Mining e - learning domain concept map from academic articles . Computers & Education , 50 ( 3 ) , 1009 e 1021 . T . Atapattu et al . / Computers & Education 115 ( 2017 ) 96 e 113 111 Cimiano , P . ( 2006 ) . Ontology learning and population from text : Algorithms , evaluation and applications . New York : Springer Science and Business media , LLC . Cimiano , P . , Hotho , A . , & Staab , S . ( 2005 ) . Learning concept hierarchies from text corpora using formal concept analysis . Journal of Arti ﬁ cial Intelligence Research , 24 ( 1 ) , 305 e 339 . Cimiano , P . , & Volker , J . ( 2005 ) . Text2Onto : A framework for ontology learning and data - driven change discovery . In Proceedings of the 10th international conference on natural language processing and information systems ( pp . 227 e 238 ) . Alicante , Spain : Springer - Verlag . Clariana , R . , & Koul , R . ( 2004 ) . A Computer - based approach for translating text into concept map - like representations . In Proceedings of the ﬁ rst international conference on concept mapping . Cunningham , H . , Maynard , D . , Bontcheva , K . , & Tablan , V . ( 2002 ) . GATE : A framework and graphical development environment for robust NLP tools and applications . In Proceedings of the 40th annual meeting of the ACL . Frantzi , K . , Ananiadou , S . , & Mima , H . ( 2000 ) . Automatic recognition of multi - word terms : . the C - value / NC - value method . International Journal on Digital Libraries , 3 ( 2 ) , 115 e 130 . Fundel , K . , Kuffer , R . , Zimmer , R . , & Miyano , S . ( 2007 ) . RelEx e - Relation extraction using dependency parse trees . Bioinformatics , 23 ( 3 ) , 365 e 371 . Gao , Q . , Wang , D . , & Gao , F . ( 2015 ) . Impact of knowledge representations on problem - oriented learning in online environments . International Journal of Human e Computer Interaction , 31 ( 12 ) , 922 e 938 . Hall , R . H . , & O ' Donnell , A . M . ( 1996 ) . Cognitive and affective outcomes of learning from knowledge maps . Contemporary Educational Psychology , 21 ( 1 ) , 94 e 101 . Hearst , M . A . ( 1992 ) . Automatic acquisition of hyponyms from large text corpora . In Proceedings of the 14th conference on computational linguistics - volume 2 ( pp . 539 e 545 ) . Nantes , France : Association for Computational Linguistics . Ide , N . , & Veronis , J . ( 1998 ) . Introduction to the special issue on word sense disambiguation : The state of the art . Compututational Linguistics , 24 ( 1 ) , 2 e 40 . Kambhatla , N . ( 2004 ) . Combining lexical , syntactic , and semantic features with maximum entropy models for extracting relations . In Proceedings of the ACL 2004 on Interactive poster and demonstration sessions ( p . 22 ) . Barcelona , Spain : Association for Computational Linguistics . Kinchin , I . M . , Chadha , D . , & Kokotailo , P . ( 2008 ) . Using PowerPoint as a lens to focus on linearity in teaching . Journal of Further and Higher Education , 32 ( 4 ) , 333 e 346 . Klein , D . , & Manning , C . ( 2003 ) . Accurate unlexicalized parsing . In Proceedings of the 41st annual meeting on association for computational linguistics - volume 1 ( pp . 423 e 430 ) . Sapporo , Japan : Association for Computational Linguistics . Klein , D . , & Manning , C . ( 2003 ) . Fast exact inference with a factored model for natural language parsing . Advances in neural information processing systems . MIT Press . Lambiotte , J . G . , & Dansereau , D . F . ( 1992 ) . Effects of knowledge maps and prior knowledge on recall of science lecture content . The Journal of Experimental Education , 60 ( 3 ) , 189 e 201 . Lau , R . Y . K . , Chung , A . Y . K . , Song , D . , & Huang , Q . ( 2008 ) . Towards fuzzy domain ontology based concept map generation for e - learning . In H . Leung , F . Li , R . Lau , & Q . Li ( Eds . ) , Advances in web based learning e ICWL 2007 ( Vol . 4823 , pp . 90 e 101 ) . Springer Berlin Heidelberg . Leake , D . B . , Gabriela , M . A . , & Thomas , R . ( 2004 ) . Understanding knowledge models : Modeling assessment of concept importance in concept maps . In Twenty - sixth annual conference of the cognitive science society . Erlbaum . Leelawong , K . , & Biswas , G . ( 2008 ) . Designing learning by teaching agents : The Betty ' s Brain system . Internation Journal of Arti ﬁ cial Intelligence in Education , 18 ( 3 ) , 181 e 208 . Lee , C . - H . , Lee , G . - G . , & Leu , Y . ( 2009 ) . Application of automaticallyconstructed conceptmap of learning toconceptual diagnosis of e - learning . Expert Systems with Applications , 36 ( 2 , Part 1 ) , 1675 e 1684 . Lee , J . H . , & Segev , A . ( 2012 ) . Knowledge maps for e - learning . Computers & Education , 59 ( 2 ) , 353 e 364 . Leskovec , J . , Grobelnik , M . , & Milic - Frayling , N . ( 2004 ) . Learning sub structures of document semantic graphs for document summarization . In KDD 2004 workshop on link analysis and group detection ( LinkKDD ) , Seattle , WA , USA . Manning , C . , Raghavan , P . , & Schutze , H . ( 2008 ) . Introduction to information retrieval . Cambridge University Press . Manning , C . , Surdeanu , M . , Bauer , J . , Finkel , J . , Bethard , S . J . , & McClosky , D . ( 2014 ) . The stanford CoreNLP natural language processing toolkit . In 52nd annual meeting of the association for computational Linguistics : System demonstrations . Baltimore , Maryland : Association for Computational Linguistics . Matsuo , Y . , & Ishizuka , M . ( 2004 ) . Keyword extraction from a single document using word co - occurrence statistical information . International Journal on Arti ﬁ cial Intelligence Tools , 13 . Mitkov , R . ( 1998 ) . Robust pronoun resolution with limited knowledge . In Proceedings of the 36th annual meeting of the association for computational lin - guistics and 17th international conference on computational linguistics - volume 2 ( pp . 869 e 875 ) . Montreal , Quebec , Canada : Association for Computa - tional Linguistics . Nesbit , J . C . , & Adesope , O . ( 2006 ) . Learning with concept and knowledge maps : A meta - analysis . Review of Educational Research , 76 ( 3 ) , 413 e 448 . Novak , J . D . , & Canas , A . J . ( 2006 ) . The Theory underlying concept maps and How to construct and use them . Pensacola FI , Florida : Institute for Human and Machine Cognition . Novak , J . D . , & Gowin , D . B . ( 1984 ) . Learning how to learn . Cambridge and NY : Cambridge University Press . Olney , A . M . , Cade , W . L . , & Williams , C . ( 2011 ) . Generating concept map exercises from textbooks . In Proceedings of the 6th workshop on innovativeuse of NLP for building educational applications ( pp . 111 e 119 ) . Portland , Oregon : Association for Computational Linguistics . Patterson , M . E . , Dansereau , D . F . , & Wiegmann , D . A . ( 1993 ) . Receiving information during a cooperative episode : Effects of communication aids and verbal ability . Learning and Individual Differences , 5 ( 1 ) , 1 e 11 . Person , N . , Olney , A . M . , D ' Mello , S . , & Lehman , B . ( 2012 ) . Interactive concept maps and learning outcomes in Guru . In Twenty - ﬁ fth international FLAIRS conference Menlo Park , CA . AAAI Press . Rose , S . , Engel , D . , Cramer , N . , & Cowley , W . ( 2010 ) . Automatic keyword extraction from individual documents . In M . W . Berry , & J . Kogan ( Eds . ) , Text mining : Applications and theory . John Wiley & Sons , Ltd . Ruiz - Primo , M . A . , & Shavelson , R . J . ( 1996 ) . Problems and issues in the use of concept maps in science assessment . Journal of Research in Science Teaching , 33 ( 6 ) , 569 e 600 . Sanderson , M . , & Croft , B . ( 1999 ) . Deriving concept hierarchies from text . In Proceedings of the 22nd annual international ACM SIGIR conference on Research and development in information retrieval ( pp . 206 e 213 ) . Berkeley , California , USA : ACM . Schvaneveldt , R . W . E . ( Ed . ) . ( 1990 ) . Path ﬁ nder associative networks : Studies in knowledge organization . Ablex Publishing Corp . Schwendimann , B . A . ( 2016 ) . Critiquing as an alternative to generating concept maps to support knowledge integration processes . In A . Ca ~ nas , P . Reiska , & J . Novak ( Eds . ) , Proceedings of the 7th international conference on concept mapping : Innovating with concept mapping ( pp . 40 e 53 ) . Cham : Springer In - ternational Publishing . Silberchatz , A . , Galvin , P . B . , & Gagne , G . ( 2012 ) . Operating system concepts . John Wiley and Sons , Inc . Sommerville , I . ( 2010 ) . Software engineering . Addison - Wesley . Stalling , W . ( 2007 ) . Data and computer communications . Upper Saddle River , NJ : Prentice Hall . Tseng , S . - S . , Sue , P . - C . , Su , J . - M . , Weng , J . - F . , & Tsai , W . - N . ( 2007 ) . A new approach for constructing the concept map . Computers & Education , 49 ( 3 ) , 691 e 707 . Tufte , E . R . ( 2003 ) . The cognitive style of PowerPoint . Graphics Press . Valerio , A . , & Leake , D . B . ( 2006 ) . Jump - starting concept map construction with knowledge extracted from documents . In Proceedings of the second in - ternational conference on concept mapping . Valerio , A . , & Leake , D . B . ( 2012 ) . Using automatically generated concept maps for document understanding : A human subjects experiment . In Fifth in - ternational conference on concept mapping , Valletta , Malta . Villalon , J . , & Calvo , R . A . ( 2008 ) . Concept map mining : A de ﬁ nition and a framework for its evaluation . Web Intelligence and Intelligent Agent Technology , 2008 . WI e IAT ' 08 . IEEE / WIC / ACM International Conference on . T . Atapattu et al . / Computers & Education 115 ( 2017 ) 96 e 113 112 Villalon , J . , & Calvo , R . A . ( 2009 ) . Concept extraction from student essays , towards concept map mining . In Proceedings of the 2009 ninth IEEE international conference on advanced learning technologies ( pp . 221 e 225 ) . IEEE Computer Society . Villalon , J . , Calvo , R . A . , & Montenegro , R . ( 2010 ) . Analysis of a gold standard for concept map mining e How humans summarize text using concept maps . In Fourth international conference on concept mapping ( CMC ' 10 ) , Vi ~ na del Mar , Chile . Wang , W . M . , Cheung , C . F . , Lee , W . B . , & Kwok , S . K . ( 2008 ) . Mining knowledge from natural language texts using fuzzy associated concept mapping . Information Processing & Management , 44 ( 5 ) , 1707 e 1719 . Zouaq , A . , & Nkambou , R . ( 2008 ) . Building domain ontologies from text for educational purposes . Learning Technologies , IEEE Transactions on , 1 ( 1 ) , 49 e 62 . T . Atapattu et al . / Computers & Education 115 ( 2017 ) 96 e 113 113