Correction SYSTEMS BIOLOGY , BIOPHYSICS AND COMPUTATIONAL BIOLOGY Correction for “ System - wide organization of actin cytoskeleton determines organelle transport in hypocotyl plant cells , ” by David Breuer , Jacqueline Nowak , Alexander Ivakov , Marc Somssich , Staffan Persson , and Zoran Nikoloski , which was first published June 27 , 2017 ; 10 . 1073 / pnas . 1706711114 ( Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 114 : E5741 – E5749 ) . The authors note that the affiliation c ARC Centre of Excel - lence in Plant Cell Walls , School of Biosciences , University of Melbourne , Parkville , VIC 3010 , Australia should instead appear as c School of Biosciences , University of Melbourne , Parkville , VIC 3010 , Australia . The corrected author and affiliation lines appear below . The online version has been corrected . David Breuer a , b , Jacqueline Nowak a , b , c , Alexander Ivakov c , d , Marc Somssich c , Staffan Persson c , e , and Zoran Nikoloski a , b a Systems Biology and Mathematical Modeling , Max Planck Institute of Molecular Plant Physiology , 14476 Potsdam , Germany ; b Bioinformatics , Institute of Biochemistry and Biology , University of Potsdam , 14476 Potsdam , Germany ; c School of Biosciences , University of Melbourne , Parkville , VIC 3010 , Australia ; d ARC Centre of Excellence for Translational Photosynthesis , College of Medicine , Biology and Environment , Australian National University , Canberra , Acton , ACT 2601 , Australia ; and e Plant Cell Walls , Max Planck Institute of Molecular Plant Physiology , 14476 Potsdam , Germany www . pnas . org / cgi / doi / 10 . 1073 / pnas . 1712371114 E6732 | PNAS | August 8 , 2017 | vol . 114 | no . 32 www . pnas . org P N A S P L U S S Y S T E M S B I O L O G Y B I O P H Y S I C S A ND C O M P U T A T I O N A L B I O L O G Y System - wide organization of actin cytoskeleton determines organelle transport in hypocotyl plant cells David Breuer a , b , 1 , Jacqueline Nowak a , b , c , Alexander Ivakov c , d , Marc Somssich c , Staffan Persson c , e , 2 , and Zoran Nikoloski a , b , 2 a Systems Biology and Mathematical Modeling , Max Planck Institute of Molecular Plant Physiology , 14476 Potsdam , Germany ; b Bioinformatics , Institute of Biochemistry and Biology , University of Potsdam , 14476 Potsdam , Germany ; c School of Biosciences , University of Melbourne , Parkville , VIC 3010 , Australia ; d ARC Centre of Excellence for Translational Photosynthesis , College of Medicine , Biology and Environment , Australian National University , Canberra , Acton , ACT 2601 , Australia ; and e Plant Cell Walls , Max Planck Institute of Molecular Plant Physiology , 14476 Potsdam , Germany Edited by Natasha V . Raikhel , Center for Plant Cell Biology , Riverside , CA , and approved May 25 , 2017 ( received for review April 26 , 2017 ) The actin cytoskeleton is an essential intracellular ﬁlamentous structure that underpins cellular transport and cytoplasmic streaming in plant cells . However , the system - level properties of actin - based cellular trafﬁcking remain tenuous , largely due to the inability to quantify key features of the actin cytoskeleton . Here , we developed an automated image - based , network - driven frame - work to accurately segment and quantify actin cytoskeletal struc - tures and Golgi transport . We show that the actin cytoskeleton in both growing and elongated hypocotyl cells has structural proper - ties facilitating efﬁcient transport . Our ﬁndings suggest that the erratic movement of Golgi is a stable cellular phenomenon that might optimize distribution efﬁciency of cell material . Moreover , we demonstrate that Golgi transport in hypocotyl cells can be accurately predicted from the actin network topology alone . Thus , our framework provides quantitative evidence for system - wide coordination of cellular transport in plant cells and can be readily applied to investigate cytoskeletal organization and transport in other organisms . actin | cytoskeleton | Golgi | image processing | networks T he cell interior is a heterogeneous and crowded space com - prising a large range of molecules and organelles ( 1 , 2 ) . Because diffusion through this complex environment is not sufﬁ - cient to match varying demands for cell maintenance and growth , intricate cellular transport schemes have evolved ( 3 , 4 ) . Trans - port of cellular components across large distances relies sub - stantially on the cytoskeleton ( 4 – 7 ) . Moreover , in plant cells , many organelles move rapidly due to actomyosin - based cytoplas - mic streaming ( 8 – 10 ) . For instance , Golgi transport relies on the actomyosin system , and an impaired actin cytoskeleton leads to Golgi aggregation and reduced secretion and endocytosis ( 10 – 12 ) . Although many molecular features of actin - based transport in plant cells have been elucidated ( 13 , 14 ) , quantitative mea - sures of the structure of the actin cytoskeleton , and how this structure relates to organelle transport , remain elusive . This is largely due to the difﬁculties in accurately segmenting the actin cytoskeleton and organelle movement , in particular in growing plant cells . Theoretical models have been used to analyze the interplay between cytoplasmic streaming and actin organization , demon - strating the emergence of self - organized , rotational streaming patterns ( 3 , 15 ) . However , these studies neglected the discrete , ﬁlamentous structure of the cytoskeleton . Theoretical inves - tigations that have considered discrete cytoskeletal structures revealed different regimes of transport , depending on the con - tribution from diffusion or motor - protein – driven transport along random networks of segments ( 16 ) ; the impact of motor - protein movements on cytoplasm in lattice networks ( 17 ) ; and the effect of length , orientation , and polarity of random ﬁlament segments on transport rates ( 18 ) . The studies that do incorporate biologi - cal data have suggested that plant cytoskeletal networks , approx - imated as grids , may support efﬁcient transport processes in hypocotyl cells ( 19 , 20 ) and that organelle movement depends on local actin structures in root epidermal cells ( 10 ) . A detailed study of leaf trichome growth demonstrated the importance of organized actin networks for efﬁcient and targeted distribu - tion of new cell wall material ( 21 ) . However , a global , system - wide view of actin - based organelle transport remains elusive and is complicated by differences between cell types and develop - mental stages . Here , we developed a network - based framework that accu - rately segments the actin cytoskeleton from three developmen - tal stages of hypocotyl plant cells and combined it with an auto - mated tracking of Golgi transport . This approach allowed us to analyze the four aspects of the actin cytoskeletal transport sys - tem , including its structure , design principles , dynamics , and con - trol ( 22 ) . We found that the actin cytoskeleton maintains proper - ties that support efﬁcient transport over time in growing , partially and fully elongated hypocotyl cells , despite rapid reorganization . We also show that Golgi wiggling behavior is reminiscent of Signiﬁcance In the crowded interior of a cell , diffusion alone is insufﬁ - cient to master varying transport requirements for cell sus - tenance and growth . The dynamic actin cytoskeleton is an essential cellular component that provides transport and cyto - plasmic streaming in plant cells , but little is known about its system - level organization . Here , we resolve key challenges in understanding system - level actin - based transport . We present an automated image - based , network - driven framework that accurately incorporates both actin cytoskeleton and organelle trafﬁcking . We demonstrate that actin cytoskeleton network properties support efﬁcient transport in both growing and elongated hypocotyl cells . We show that organelle trans - port can be predicted from the system - wide cellular organiza - tion of the actin cytoskeleton . Our framework can be readily applied to investigate cytoskeleton - based transport in other organisms . Author contributions : D . B . , S . P . , and Z . N . designed research ; D . B . and J . N . performed research ; D . B . , J . N . , and M . S . contributed new reagents / analytic tools ; D . B . and J . N . ana - lyzed data ; D . B . , J . N . , A . I . , S . P . , and Z . N . wrote the paper ; and A . I . and M . S . recorded data . The authors declare no conﬂict of interest . This article is a PNAS Direct Submission . Freely available online through the PNAS open access option . 1 To whom correspondence should be addressed . Email : breuer @ mpimp - golm . mpg . de . 2 S . P . and Z . N . contributed equally to this work . Thisarticlecontainssupportinginformationonlineatwww . pnas . org / lookup / suppl / doi : 10 . 1073 / pnas . 1706711114 / - / DCSupplemental . www . pnas . org / cgi / doi / 10 . 1073 / pnas . 1706711114 PNAS | Published online June 27 , 2017 | E5741 – E5749 optimized search strategies that might indicate efﬁcient uptake and deposition of Golgi - related cell material . In addition , we demonstrated that features of Golgi transport can be predicted from properties of the system - wide organization of the actin cytoskeleton . Altogether , our framework opens up a systems per - spective to dissect and understand the transport functionality of the actin cytoskeleton . Results A Pipeline to Extract and Represent the Actin Cytoskeleton as a Network . Because the actin cytoskeleton is composed of discrete and interconnected ﬁlaments , it can be efﬁciently represented in a network - based framework ( 19 , 23 , 24 ) with nodes represent - ing crossings or end points of actin ﬁlaments ( AFs ) and weighted edges capturing AF segments . We extracted network represen - tations from partially elongated Arabidopsis thaliana ( Arabidop - sis ) hypocotyl cells , around 3 mm from the apical hook , that expressed FABD - GFP , using spinning - disc confocal microscopy data ( Fig . 1 F for pipeline ; Materials and Methods ) . To study actin - based transport at different cell developmental stages , we fur - A F G H I J K B C D E Fig . 1 . Automated extraction and validation of networks from actin cytoskeletal image data . ( A ) Grayscale confocal image of two partially elongated Arabidopsis hypocotyl cells after registration and background subtraction ( “original + preprocessing” ) . The same cell was used as example throughout the paper . ( B ) Cytoskeleton image with improved signal - to - noise ratio after cropping of the largest cell and application of tubeness ﬁlter ( v width = 1 . 8 ; “ﬁlter - ing” ) . ( C ) Binary cytoskeleton image after application of adaptive median threshold ( v thres = 101 ; “thresholding” ) . ( D ) Skeletonized cytoskeletal structures after removal of spurious fragments of small size or low intensity ( v size = 27pixels and v int = 0 . 5 ; “skeletonization + cleaning” ) . Positions of network nodes are marked by colored pixels ( Inset ) . ( E ) Overlay of skeleton image and extracted cytoskeletal network with edges color coded by their capacity , reﬂecting average ﬁlament thickness ( “network extraction” ) . Multiple ﬁlaments may contribute to an edge ( compare Inset and star ) . Edges were added to connect the network ( compare dotted lines and triangles ) . ( F ) Overview of automated pipeline for network - based representation of the actin cytoskeleton incorpo - rating image processing ( A – D ) , network extraction ( E ) , and parameter gauging ( G – K ) . ( G ) Overlay of synthetic ﬁlaments ( blue ) and automated segmentation ( red ) of a synthetic cytoskeleton image ( gray ) . ( H ) Overlay of manual ( blue ) and automated ( red ) segmentation of a biological cytoskeleton image ( gray ) . ( I ) Four image processing parameters were varied to determine their optimal values for 20 images and 20 images of synthetic and biological cytoskeletons , respectively , which were segmented manually for comparison ( “parameter gauging” ) . Segmentation quality was measured by the average of the small - est distance , d manu → auto ( blue ) , from the pixels of the manual segmentation to those of the automated segmentation and vice versa , d auto → manu ( red ) . Shown are sections of the parameter space , averaged over all 40 studied images , for ﬁxed ( v width , v int ) = ( 1 . 8 , 101 ) and varying block size v thres and size threshold v size . ( J ) Minimization of the Haussdorf distance d HD = 12 ( d manu → auto + d auto → manu ) ( purple ) to avoid both over - and undersegmentation yielded (cid:0) v ∗ width , v ∗ thres , v ∗ size , v ∗ int (cid:1) = ( 1 . 8 , 101 , 27 , 0 . 50 ) ± ( 0 . 2 , 8 . 0 , 8 . 9 , 0 . 06 ) ( mean ± SD ) . ( K ) Distribution of average distances between manual and automated segmentations for the optimal parameters with d manu → auto = 1 . 2 ± 0 . 9pixels , d auto → manu = 3 . 5 ± 3 . 2pixels , and d HD = 2 . 4 ± 2 . 1pixels , respectively . ther analyzed fully elongated as well as growing hypocotyl cells , around 5 mm and 1 mm from the apical hook , respectively ( Fig . S1 and below ) . The recorded images were corrected for drift and bleaching ( Fig . 1 A ) , manually cropped to the cellular region of interest , and ﬁltered to enhance tube - like structures of the cytoskeleton with a parameter v width ( Fig . 1 B ) . AFs were seg - mented by applying an adaptive median threshold of block size , v thres ( Fig . 1 C ) . The binary images were skeletonized to obtain AF center lines and spurious fragments smaller than v size pixels or below v int of the average fragment intensity were removed ( Fig . 1 D ) . Networks were obtained by identifying the nodes , adding edges between pairs of nodes directly connected via the skeleton , and assigning edge weights reﬂecting features of AF segments , e . g . , average thickness ( Fig . 1 E ) . To test whether our network - based framework captured rel - evant biological features of the actin cytoskeleton , we com - pared our automated segmentations against synthetic images of known cytoskeleton - like structures ( Fig . 1 G ) as well as man - ually segmented cytoskeleton images as a gold standard ( Fig . 1 H ) . Because the accuracy of the network representation relies E5742 | www . pnas . org / cgi / doi / 10 . 1073 / pnas . 1706711114 Breuer et al . P N A S P L U S S Y S T E M S B I O L O G Y B I O P H Y S I C S A ND C O M P U T A T I O N A L B I O L O G Y on four parameters ( v width , v thres , v size , and v int ) , we per - formed extensive gauging by varying these parameters in a wide range of values ( Fig . 1 I and J ) and identiﬁed those ensur - ing best agreement between manual and automated segmen - tations measured by the Haussdorf distance , i . e . , the average minimum distance between pixels of the two segmentations ( 25 , 26 ) . Parameter gauging yielded an optimal average of d HD = 2 . 4 ± 2 . 1 pixels ( Fig . 1 J and K ; mean ± SD ) , compara - ble to contending approaches ( SI Materials and Methods ) . Thus , whereas errors in the automated segmentation occur , our param - eter optimization ensures an optimal compromise between over - and undersegmentation across different recordings . Our approach is directly applicable to 3D image data . How - ever , our focus in the main text on 2D networks is justiﬁed by the cylindrical shell geometry of the cortical cytoskeleton ( 19 , 27 ) as well as the size of the transported Golgi , which may bridge gaps between cortical AFs that are not resolved in 2D images ( 28 – 30 ) . Moreover , we show that our ﬁndings remain valid for 3D image data ( Fig . S2 and below ) . Thus , our approach yields an accurate and mathematically powerful network representation of the cytoskeleton in hypocotyl plant cells from image data . The Network Representations Capture Biologically Relevant Features of the Actin Cytoskeleton . To ensure that our framework captured known changes in the actin cytoskeleton , we determined differ - ences in cytoskeletal organization between partially elongated hypocotyl cells of plants treated with Latrunculin B ( LatB ; Fig . 2 A ) , a drug that inhibits actin polymerization ( 31 ) , and control cells ( Fig . 2 B ; seven cells from seven different seedlings per treat - ment ) . To quantify actin network phenotypes , we computed the number of connected components after removal of edges with capacities below the 50th percentile as a measure of fragmen - tation ( Fig . 2 D and ref . 32 ; mathematical deﬁnitions and inter - pretations of all studied network properties are given in Table S1 ) . Fragmentation was lower in networks of control than of LatB - treated cells ( Fig . 2 E ; independent two - sample t test P value P t < 10 − 50 ) , indicating that large connected patches of AFs were absent in LatB - treated cells , consistent with visual inspec - tion . Similarly , the average edge capacity was higher in control than in LatB - treated cells ( P t < 10 − 38 ) , reﬂecting a reduction in actin bundling in the LatB - treated cells . Finally , these ﬁnd - ings were corroborated by the assortativity ( 32 ) , which quantiﬁes whether two adjacent nodes are of similar degree and reﬂects the network heterogeneity . We found stronger heterogeneity for con - trol than for LatB - treated cells ( P t < 10 − 50 ) , suggesting regions of bundled actin that are surrounded by AFs in the control cells . To further assess the ﬁlamentous structure of the actin cyto - skeleton , we compared the arc length of ﬁlament segments to their Euclidean length and found a strong correlation ( Fig . 2 F ; Pearson correlation coefﬁcient c P = 0 . 998 and P value P P < 10 − 50 ) . Consequently , ﬁlament bending , i . e . , the ratio of the two lengths , was small , B = 1 . 2 ± 0 . 2 , in particular for long ﬁlament segments ( Fig . 2 F , Inset ) . This limited bending of longer ﬁlament segments is plausible because actin bundles , typically resulting in longer ﬁlament segments , exhibit greater stiffness compared with AFs ( 33 , 34 ) . Furthermore , we found that ﬁlament segments were preferentially oriented in parallel to the major cell axis in control cells , but not in LatB - treated cells ( Fig . 2 G ) . To demonstrate the robustness of our ﬁndings , we showed that the differences in network properties between control and treatment were not affected by removal of a random fraction of edges , sim - ulating effects of erroneous network extraction ( Fig . S3 ) . Next , we compared cytoskeletal networks in hypocotyl cells at different developmental stages , i . e . , in growing and fully elon - gated cells , and found notable differences ( Fig . S1 ) . In partic - ular , in contrast to both partially and fully elongated hypocotyl cells , the actin cytoskeleton in untreated growing hypocotyl cells showed stronger fragmentation and weaker bundling than in their LatB - treated counterparts . These differences are in agreement with the more even distribution and more strongly branched structure of the actin cytoskeleton in growing hypocotyl cells ( 35 , 36 ) ( Fig . S1 ) , as well as the continuous gradient in cell elongation rates along the hypocotyl in dark - grown Arabidopsis seedlings ( 37 ) . Moreover , our ﬁndings from 2D image data were corroborated by analyses of 3D image data and networks ( Fig . S2 ) . Therefore , our results show that the extracted network rep - resentations of the actin cytoskeleton enable automated pheno - typing of cytoskeletal structures . The Actin Cytoskeleton Supports Efﬁcient Transport . A major func - tion of the plant actin cytoskeleton is to mediate transport of a range of organelles and compartments . To assess the transport efﬁciency of actin networks in partially elongated hypocotyl cells , we computed a number of seminal network properties and com - pared them against ensembles of two types of randomized null model networks ( each network was randomized 20 times ; Fig . 2 C for ﬁrst null model that shufﬂes node positions and edges and Fig . S3 for second null model that shufﬂes edge properties only ) . We determined the average path length ( 32 ) , which reﬂects the reachability of a network , and compared it against an ensemble of networks from the ﬁrst null model ( Fig . 2 H ) . We found that the average path length of the extracted networks was smaller than that of the null model networks ( Fig . 2 I ; P t < 10 − 50 ; Fig . S3 for analysis of robustness of this ﬁnding against removal of edges ) . This difference indicates that the actin cytoskeleton is tuned toward shorter path lengths . Similarly , the coefﬁcients of variation ( CVs ) of the shortest path lengths in the extracted net - works were smaller than expected from the null model networks ( P t < 10 − 50 ) , indicating that also ﬂuctuations in the path length between any two nodes are maintained at a low level . Another classical transport - related network property is the algebraic con - nectivity ( 32 ) , which reﬂects the redundancy of paths between any two nodes and thus captures the robustness of the trans - portation network against disruptions . The algebraic connectivity of the extracted networks was higher than expected by chance ( P t < 10 − 14 ) . In contrast , the LatB - disrupted actin cytoskele - tons did not show any signiﬁcant differences in their transport - related network properties compared with the null model net - works ( Fig . S3 ) . These ﬁndings support the hypothesis that trans - port efﬁciency is a biological design principle of the intact actin cytoskeleton ( 19 ) . To investigate the structural origin of this transport efﬁciency , we reconsidered the assortativity ( 32 ) of the cytoskeleton and found that it was higher in the extracted networks than expected by chance ( P t < 10 − 50 ) . Similarly , we found that the CV of the angles between AF segments and the major cell axis was smaller in the extracted networks than expected by chance ( P t < 10 − 50 ) . Together these ﬁndings suggest that the formation of connected patches of aligned actin bundles is a functionally relevant feature of the cytoskeleton . To ensure that our results were robust , we used an additional and more restricted null model , which shufﬂes only edge proper - ties . Whereas the ﬁrst null model is more ﬂexible , the second one excludes potential artifacts that could arise from an increased number of edge crossings or a more homogeneous distribution of node positions compared with the extracted networks ( Fig . S3 ) . Our ﬁndings from the ﬁrst null model were consistently con - ﬁrmed by the second one . Hence , differences in the studied net - work properties between extracted and null model networks are not an artifact of the randomization procedures . Despite organizational differences of the actin cytoskeleton in hypocotyl cells at different developmental stages , the actin net - work in partially elongated as well as fully elongated and growing hypocotyl cells showed properties of efﬁcient transport ( Fig . S1 ) . For example , both reachability and robustness of the actin net - works were better than expected by chance . Again , our ﬁndings Breuer et al . PNAS | Published online June 27 , 2017 | E5743 A D G H I E F B C Fig . 2 . Phenotyping of actin cytoskeleton using the extracted networks captures biological signals and reveals transport efﬁciency . Shown are results for partially elongated hypocotyl cells of plants treated with the actin - disrupting drug LatB ( orange ) , untreated control plants ( green ) , and ensembles of 20 randomized networks ( gray ) . ( A ) Cellular recording ( Left ) and extracted actin network ( Right ) of a LatB - treated cell with edge colors representing edge capacities . ( B ) Cellular recording ( Left ) and extracted actin network ( Right ) of an untreated control cell . ( C ) Artistic interpretation of the random - ization procedure ( Left ) and a randomized network ( Right ) of the control cell ( B ) with occasional edge crossings ( e . g . , triangles ) . ( D ) Time series and box plots of the number of connected components after removal of edges with capacities below the 50th percentile ( “fragmentation” ) for a control and a LatB - treated cell . ( E ) Ratios of different properties of networks extracted from seven control and seven LatB - treated cells . The number of con - nected components was lower and the average edge capacity ( “bundling” ) and the degree assortativity ( “heterogeneity” ) were higher for control than for LatB - treated cells ( independent two - sample t test P values P t < 0 . 05 were considered signiﬁcant ) . ( F ) Scatter plots of the arc length a F of the ﬁla - ment segments vs . the Euclidean length a E of the corresponding edges showed strong correlation for control and LatB - treated cells ( Pearson correla - tion coefﬁcient c P = 0 . 998 and P value P P < 10 − 50 ) . F , Inset displays relative lengths B = a − 1 E a F ( “bending” ) with an average of B = 1 . 2 ± 0 . 2 ( mean ± SD ) . ( G ) Distribution of edge angles , weighted by edge capacities , relative to the major cell axis showed a prevalence of AFs parallel to the cell axis in the control cells but not in LatB - treated cells . ( H ) Time series and box plots of the average path length ( “reachability” ) for one control cell and 20 randomized networks of the ﬁrst null model for each time step ( mean ± SD ) . ( I ) The extracted actin networks of the seven control cells showed signiﬁcantly lower average path lengths , CV of the path lengths ( “dispersal” ) , and CV of the edge angles ( “contortion” ) than their counterparts from the ﬁrst null model . The algebraic connectivities ( “robustness” ) and assortativities ( heterogeneity ) of the actin networks were higher than expected from the ﬁrst null model . remained valid when studying actin networks extracted from 3D image data ( Fig . S2 ) . A potential issue , shared by all current approaches that extract transport - related networks from image data , is the unknown edge directionality . Individual AFs usually allow unidirectional movement of motor proteins only , and actin bundles in root hairs and other tip growing cells are typically composed of parallel AFs ( 9 , 38 , 39 ) . In contrast , our analyses of cytoskeletal transport capacity rely on the assumption of bidirectional transport along edges . Indeed , our data showed that < 50 % of actin edges exhibit predominantly unidirectional movement of close - by Golgi , irre - spective of the actin bundle thickness ( see Fig . 4 and Fig . S4 ) , partially justifying the assumption of bidirectional transport . This deviation from the expected unidirectional movement along bun - dles of parallel AFs may be partially due to noise - induced track - ing errors that may lead to apparent bidirectional movement , especially during phases of Golgi pausing ( 11 , 40 ) . Moreover , in the computation of edge directionality a given Golgi may be asso - ciated with multiple edges and neighboring actin bundles may exhibit different orientations ( 10 , 21 ) ( details in Fig . S4 ) . Finally , given the low Reynolds numbers of the cytoplasm ( 1 ) , cytoplas - mic streaming may carry temporarily detached Golgi ( 41 ) irre - spective of the underlying actin bundle or its orientation ( Fig . S5 ) . In summary , our analyses indicate that transport efﬁciency E5744 | www . pnas . org / cgi / doi / 10 . 1073 / pnas . 1706711114 Breuer et al . P N A S P L U S S Y S T E M S B I O L O G Y B I O P H Y S I C S A ND C O M P U T A T I O N A L B I O L O G Y is a central design principle of the actin cytoskeleton in hypocotyl plant cells . Automated Quantiﬁcation of Golgi Movement . To quantify actin - based cellular transport , we studied partially elongated hypocotyl cells dually labeled with FABD - GFP and tdTomato - CesA6 ( tdT - CesA6 ) , used as a proxy for Golgi movement ( 42 , 43 ) . We ana - lyzed the ﬂow of Golgi through automated tracking ( 44 , 45 ) in image series from control and LatB - treated cells ( Fig . 3 A and B ) . Golgi bodies moved with velocity v = 0 . 36 ± 0 . 26 s − 1 · µ m in con - trol cells ( Fig . 3 C ) , which is higher than v = 0 . 04 ± 0 . 03 s − 1 · µ m A F I J K G H B C D E Fig . 3 . Quantiﬁcation of Golgi movement indicates stability and efﬁciency of wiggling behavior . Shown are Golgi dynamics in partially elongated hypocotyl cells of plants treated with the actin - disrupting drug LatB ( orange ) and untreated control plants ( green ) . ( A ) Overlay of cellular recording of Golgi and Golgi tracks from a control cell . ( B ) Overlay of cellular recording of Golgi and Golgi tracks from a LatB - treated cell . ( C ) Distributions of Golgi velocities in LatB - treated cells , v = 0 . 04 ± 0 . 03s − 1 · µ m , and control cells , v = 0 . 36 ± 0 . 26s − 1 · µ m ( mean ± SD ) . ( D ) Distributions of absolute angles for control and LatB - treated cells . ( E ) Schematic of different angles used to study movement of Golgi bodies . Shown are the absolute angle between a Golgi track seg - ment and the major cell axis ( dashed gray angle ) and the relative angle between two consecutive segments of a given Golgi track ( solid gray angle ) , as well as the pairwise angle between two segments of two different Golgi tracks at a given time step ( dotted gray angle ) . ( F ) Distributions of rela - tive angles were broad with a = 85 ◦ ± 55 ◦ and a = 104 ◦ ± 55 ◦ for control and LatB - treated cells , respectively ( dashed lines ) . ( G ) Distributions of rela - tive angles , averaged over a given track , showed unimodal distributions with peaks around 85 ◦ and 104 ◦ for control and LatB - treated cells , respectively ( dashed lines ) . ( H ) Time series of relative angles , averaged over a given time step , for each of the studied control and LatB - treated cells ( Left ) . All time series were stationary ; i . e . , they showed no increasing or decreasing trend ( H , Upper Right ; augmented Dickey – Fuller unit root - test P values P DF < 0 . 05 ) , except one ( see triangle ) . The ﬂuctuations of the time series were small ( H , Lower Right ; CV [ a ] = 0 . 10 ± 0 . 03 ) . ( I ) Distributions of relative angles in depen - dence of distance of the track segments from the cytoskeleton ( Left ; circles show results for control cells ; solid lines and shaded areas show mean ± SD ) . Excess of Golgi at a given distance from the cytoskeleton for control and LatB - treated cells ( I , Right ; compare solid lines and triangle ) is given by the difference between the frequency of actual Golgi and the frequency of Golgi distributed randomly and uniformly across the cell area ( dashed black line ) . ( J ) Example of an original Golgi track ( solid light green ) and the corresponding straightened track ( dashed dark green ) , where each new track segment represents a largely straight run of the Golgi with relative angles below 90 ◦ . ( K ) Distributions of segment lengths of straightened Golgi tracks followed truncated power laws with exponents α = 3 . 60 and α = 4 . 48 and bounds l min = 5 . 11 and l min = 0 . 62 for control and LatB - treated cells , respectively . in LatB - treated cells , consistent with previous studies ( 10 , 11 ) . The Golgi movement was predominantly parallel to the major cell axis in control cells but not in LatB - treated cells ( Fig . 3 D ) , correlating with the orientation of actin bundles ( compare with Fig . 2 G ) . Thus , our automated tracking captures known features of Golgi movement and may therefore be suitable for further , more detailed analyses of Golgi behavior . Golgi Bodies Exhibit Wiggling , Which Does Not Change Over Time or with Distance to the Actin Cytoskeleton . The movement of Golgi bodies is characterized as saltatory or stop and go ( 11 , 30 ) , Breuer et al . PNAS | Published online June 27 , 2017 | E5745 whereby Golgi switch between periods of directed movement and undirected “wiggling” behavior ( Fig . 3 E ) . Whereas it has been suggested that Golgi wiggling is not speciﬁc to individual Golgi bodies ( 10 ) , it is yet unclear whether Golgi wiggling changes over time or depends on the distance of the Golgi from the actin cytoskeleton . To quantify these characteristics , we computed the angles between consecutive Golgi track segments ( referred to as “relative angles” ; Fig . 3 E ) and refer to movement with relative angles above 90 ◦ as wiggling behavior ( Fig . S6 shows another measure of wiggling ) . The observed distributions of rel - ative angles across the studied cells were broad , demonstrating that both largely unidirectional movement and wiggling behavior were present ( Fig . 3 F ) . For LatB - treated cells , the average rel - ative angle a = 104 ◦ ± 55 ◦ was larger than for control cells with a = 85 ◦ ± 55 ◦ and wiggling was thus more common . The distri - butions of relative angles averaged across a given track ( Fig . 3 G ) peaked at around 90 ◦ for both untreated and LatB - treated cells , showing that the majority of Golgi tracks contained both peri - ods of directed movement and wiggling behavior . Hence , our ﬁndings conﬁrm that wiggling behavior is not speciﬁc to indi - vidual Golgi . To test whether the prevalence of Golgi wiggling changes over time , we calculated the distribution of average relative angles over time ( Fig . 3 H , Left ) . We found that Golgi motility did not change during the course of the recordings ( Fig . 3 H , Upper Right ) . Moreover , the prevalence of Golgi wiggling showed only very minor ﬂuctuations within and across time series ( Fig . 3 H , Lower Right ; CV [ a ] = 0 . 10 ± 0 . 03 ) , indicating that a constant fraction of Golgi exhibited wiggling behavior over time . Our data therefore suggest that Golgi wiggling is a common and stable cel - lular phenomenon . To study the effect of the distance between actin cytoskeleton and Golgi on wiggling , we computed the rel - ative angles between consecutive track segments at a given dis - tance from the cytoskeletal center line ( Fig . 3 I , Left ) . The fre - quency of Golgi was dependent on the distance to the AFs ( Fig . 3 I , Right ) , with high Golgi densities up to 2 µ m from the AFs . Surprisingly , the prevalence of Golgi wiggling did not depend on the distance from the AFs ( or on their thickness , Fig . S6 ) . More - over , although Golgi movement may vary substantially between cells , the features of Golgi movement studied here were highly consistent across cells ( Fig . S6 ) . Movement Patterns of Golgi Resemble Search Strategies and Might Optimize Uptake and Delivery . We note that the Golgi wiggling resembles the searching behavior of foraging animals ( 46 , 47 ) or microbial motion ( 48 ) that has been suggested to optimize search efﬁciency . This type of motion is characterized by random reorientations ( Fig . 3 D ) and step sizes l that follow a power - law distribution P ( l ) = α − 1 l min (cid:16) l l min (cid:17) − α . Because our image series provide snapshots with ﬁxed time intervals , to quantify the dis - tribution of Golgi step sizes , we considered track segments with relative angles below 90 ◦ as one step and replaced them by a sin - gle segment capturing the net displacement ( Fig . 3 J ) . Indeed , the distributions of step sizes of these straightened tracks followed truncated power laws with exponents α = 3 . 60 and α = 4 . 48 for control and LatB - treated cells , respectively [ Fig . 3 K ; in partic - ular , truncated power laws yielded higher likelihoods than expo - nential distributions ( 49 ) ] . These exponents are larger than those typically reported for foraging animals or bacteria , 1 < α < 3 ( 46 – 48 ) , but might indicate search strategies in small areas with a lim - ited number of targets ( 50 ) or in the presence of obstacles or preferred areas ( 51 – 53 ) , e . g . , other organelles or delivery sites . Again , these ﬁndings were highly consistent across cells ( Fig . S6 ) . Despite obvious differences in mechanisms underlying Golgi movement and animal foraging there may be similar goals . Namely , it is plausible that Golgi - derived material may need to be exchanged between parts of the plasma membrane , the endo - plasmatic reticulum ( ER ) , and other compartments . Assuming that these sites are not globally coordinated by the cell , the switching of Golgi between directed movement and wiggling behavior may therefore provide an efﬁcient search strategy . This is compatible with proposed models of Golgi movement ( 30 ) , such as the “vacuum cleaner” model ( Golgi move through the cell and pick up products from the ER ) or the “recruitment” model ( Golgi pause in the vicinity of active ER sites to facili - tate trafﬁcking ) . Our ﬁndings might therefore indicate a connec - tion between Golgi wiggling and the optimization of uptake and delivery of Golgi - related material throughout the cell . The Golgi search behavior is compatible with the movement of Golgi along the actin structures . Whereas , at a given time step , the majority of Golgi stayed at the same AF , some faster Golgi moved to different AFs ( Fig . S5 ) . Moreover , it remains unclear whether Golgi bodies are transported through the cell by direct interactions with motor proteins or indirectly via cyto - plasmic streaming ( 54 ) . By investigating the relative movement of different Golgi at a given time step ( referred to as “pairwise angles” ; Fig . 3 E ) , we found substantial antiparallel movement of close - by Golgi ( Fig . S5 ) . Taking into account the low Reynolds numbers of the cytoplasm ( 1 ) , this antiparallel movement contra - dicts the assumption of indirect , cytoplasmic - streaming – induced movement and instead supports myosin - based transport of a sub - stantial fraction of Golgi bodies . In conclusion , our data sug - gest that switching of Golgi to adjacent AFs is myosin depen - dent , whereas switching to nonadjacent AFs is due to cytoplasmic streaming that may carry the Golgi over large distances . Local and Global Actin Network Architecture May Be Used to Predict Direction and Velocity of Golgi Movement . Our previous analyses assumed that the capacity of a given actin network edge , i . e . , its average thickness , reﬂects its potential to transport cellular cargo ( Fig . 2 ) . To test this hypothesis , we studied the Golgi ﬂow on two levels : First , we computed pairwise correlations between the properties of Golgi ﬂow and actin structures , as modeled by our extracted networks . Second , we combined different edge prop - erties of the actin networks to predict features of Golgi ﬂow ( e . g . , direction and velocity ) , using a multiple – linear - regression approach . To this end , for the extracted actin networks ( Fig . 4 A and B ) , we determined the local edge capacities and global edge properties that incorporate information about the importance of any given edge in the network context . Namely , we studied edge degree ( measuring the total thickness of adjacent edges ) , the edge page rank ( measuring the probability that cargo that randomly traverses the network is found at the given edge ) , the edge path betweenness ( measuring the likelihood that the given edge lies on a shortest path through the network ) , and the edge ﬂow betweenness [ measuring the total maximum ﬂow between any two nodes through the given edge ( 32 ) ; see Table S1 for mathematical deﬁnitions and explanations ] . In parallel , from the Golgi tracks at each time step , we constructed an auxiliary Golgi ﬂow network by copying the structure of the actin network and assigning new edge weights in the Golgi ﬂow network accord - ing to various features of Golgi movement in the vicinity of the respective edge [ e . g . , the number of Golgi ( Fig . 4 E ) or the direc - tion and velocity of close - by Golgi ( Fig . 4 F ) ] . To investigate the relationship between actin structure and Golgi dynamics in partially elongated hypocotyl cells , we ﬁrst computed the correlation between the determined edge prop - erties of actin and Golgi ﬂow networks . For instance , we studied the dependence of the Golgi direction and velocity on the actin edge rank . The correlation between the two properties varied over time and across cells ( Fig . 4 G ) . Across all studied partially elongated cells , this correlation was signiﬁcant for control cells with c P = 0 . 384 , whereas no signiﬁcant correlation was found for the LatB - treated cells with c P = − 0 . 023 . These ﬁndings are com - patible with the severely reduced ﬂow ( Fig . 3 C ) and increased E5746 | www . pnas . org / cgi / doi / 10 . 1073 / pnas . 1706711114 Breuer et al . P N A S P L U S S Y S T E M S B I O L O G Y B I O P H Y S I C S A ND C O M P U T A T I O N A L B I O L O G Y A B C G D E F H I J Fig . 4 . Analysis of cellular organization of actin cytoskeleton enables prediction of Golgi dynamics . Shown are results for partially elongated hypocotyl cells of plants treated with the actin - disrupting drug LatB ( orange ) and untreated control cells ( green ) . ( A ) Overlay of cellular recording of actin cytoskeleton and extracted actin network . ( B ) Extracted actin network with edge colors representing their capacities , i . e . , average thicknesses . ( C ) Extracted actin network with edge colors representing their edge ranks . ( D ) Overlay of cellular recording of Golgi and Golgi tracks throughout the recording . ( E ) Golgi ﬂow network with edge colors representing the numbers of close - by Golgi , i . e . , track segments with starting points within 8pixels from a given edge . ( F ) Golgi ﬂow network with edge colors representing the direction and velocity of close - by Golgi track segments ( no Golgi were assigned to white edges , e . g . , triangles ) . ( G ) Time series of Pearson correlation coefﬁcients c P between Golgi track segment direction and velocity and actin edge rank ( Upper ) and exemplary scatter plots for one time point for a control and a LatB - treated cell , respectively ( Lower ; compare to open circles in Upper ) . ( H ) Heat maps of Pearson correlation coefﬁcients c P between different edge properties of actin and Golgi ﬂow networks for control ( Left ) and LatB - treated ( Right ) cells . For control cells and LatB - treated cells , there was a signiﬁcant correlation between the actin edge capacity and the Golgi number ( compare to I ) . Correlations between the actin edge rank and Golgi direction and velocity were signiﬁcant for the control cells with c P = 0 . 384 but not for the LatB - treated cells with c P = − 0 . 023 ( compare to G ) . ( I ) Scatter plots of the number of Golgi close to an edge and the respective edge capacity showed positive correlations with c P = 0 . 347 for control and c P = 0 . 350 for LatB - treated cells . The slope of a linear regression for the combined data was s = 51 ( black ) . ( J ) Heat map of coefﬁcients of determination R 2 for multiple linear regressions of the Golgi ﬂow network edge properties ( ﬁrst column ) and the respective predictive power P values P t (cid:48) of the actin edge properties that were used as predictors ( last ﬁve columns ; one - sample two - sided t test P values P t (cid:48) measure whether inclusion of the respective predictor improves the prediction ) for the control cells . Coefﬁcients of determination were highest for direction - and velocity - related Golgi properties ( R 2 > 0 . 7 ) . The actin capacity , degree , and rank were more reliable predictors ( P t (cid:48) < 0 . 05 ) than edge ﬂow and path betweenness ( P t (cid:48) ≥ 0 . 05 ) . wiggling behavior of Golgi ( Fig . 3 F ) in LatB - treated cells . We further evaluated the correlations between all pairs of edge prop - erties , averaged across the studied cells and time points ( Fig . 4 H ) . Some pairs of properties , such as Golgi direction and veloc - ity and actin edge rank discussed above , were correlated for the control cells ( | c P | > 0 . 2 ) but not for the LatB - treated cells ( | c P | ≤ 0 . 2 ; Fig . 4 G ) . Only the number of Golgi close to a given edge was correlated with the respective edge capacity and edge degree for both control and LatB - treated cells ( Fig . 4 I ) . These ﬁndings show that although the ﬂow of Golgi is severely altered by the LatB treatment , Golgi still agglomerate in the vicinity of the actin stubs ( Fig . 3 I ) . However , for most pairs of actin and Golgi ﬂow network edge properties , there was no or only weak correlation ( | c P | ≤ 0 . 2 ) . Hence , whereas in particular , edge ﬂow and path betweenness have been suggested to predict transport in real - world networks ( 55 – 57 ) , they were not predictive of Golgi transport along the actin cytoskeleton in hypocotyl plant cells . This deviation may be due to different transport requirements in particular regions of the cell , especially during hypocotyl elonga - tion growth ( 37 , 58 ) . Breuer et al . PNAS | Published online June 27 , 2017 | E5747 Because pairwise correlations were of moderate value , we then used multiple linear regression to see whether certain aspects of Golgi ﬂow could be predicted from a combination of actin edge properties . Indeed , the number of Golgi close to an actin edge ( Fig . 4 K ; coefﬁcient of determination R 2 = 0 . 704 ) and the Golgi direction and velocity ( R 2 = 0 . 747 ) were accurately predicted from the edge properties of the underlying actin cytoskeletal net - work . Moreover , edge capacity , edge degree , and edge rank of the actin network had higher predictive power ( one - sample two - sided t test P values P t (cid:48) < 0 . 05 for most Golgi ﬂow properties ) than the edge path and ﬂow betweenness ( P t (cid:48) ≥ 0 . 05 ) . As edge capacity and edge degree reﬂect ( semi ) local actin bundling , their observed high predictive power supports the ﬁnding that actin bundling is correlated with Golgi density and velocity ( Fig . S5 ) ( 10 ) . As indicated above , the edge rank measures the ( global ) importance of an edge in the network context and corresponds to the probability that cargo that randomly switches between adjacent ﬁlament segments is found at the given edge , whereby thicker ﬁlaments are frequented with higher probabilities . This assumption of random movement is compatible with the wiggling of Golgi ( Fig . 3 ) . Interestingly , these correlations between actin structures and Golgi movement were very similar for growing and fully elon - gated hypocotyl cells ( Fig . S1 ) . Our results were conﬁrmed by analysis of 3D data of actin cytoskeleton and Golgi ( Fig . S2 ) . Therefore , the system - wide organization of the actin cytoskele - ton in hypocotyl cells shapes , and may be used to predict , the dynamic ﬂow of Golgi . Finally , we note that our imaging setup captured only the outer periclinal cell side , for both 2D and 3D data . Because 3D imaging of the complete , quickly rearranging plant cytoskeleton is not yet feasible , we modeled the cylindrical geometry of the cortical cytoskeleton by periodically extending the original , 2D extracted network . Whereas cytoskeletal structures on different cell sides generally differ ( e . g . , refs . 59 and 60 for actin and ref . 61 for microtubules ) , it is parsimonious and avoids an unbiologi - cal plane - like cytoskeletal geometry . Indeed , taking into account this cylindrical geometry moderately but signiﬁcantly improved the predictive power of our regression - based analyses of Golgi movement ( Fig . S4 ) . Taken together , our data show that Golgi transport in hypocotyl cells is not merely determined by the local structure of the cortical cytoskeleton , but also depends on larger architectural contexts , as well as its cylindrical geometry . Concluding Remarks Although the molecular details of actin monomers and ﬁla - ments as well as actin - associated proteins are relatively well stud - ied , quantifying actin - based transport in a larger cellular con - text remains challenging . To address this gap , we introduced an accurate image - based network representation of the actin cytoskeleton to facilitate automated and unbiased quantiﬁca - tion of cytoskeletal phenotypes and functions . We used this framework to establish that system - level properties of the actin cytoskeleton determine key features of Golgi transport in Ara - bidopsis hypocotyl cells . Our approach of integrating cytoskeletal network structures with tracking data of organelles is directly transferable to var - ious biological systems and functions : In plants , in addition to the analysis of different cell types , transport of mitochon - dria ( 4 , 10 ) and photodamage avoidance movement of chloro - plasts ( 62 ) represent interesting test grounds . In animals , it has been shown that cytoplasmic streaming in fruit ﬂy oocytes ( 63 ) and transport of lysosomes in monkey kidney cells depend on microtubules ( 7 ) . Although these are interesting local correla - tions of cytoskeletal features and organelle transport , we expect broader , system - level understanding of these processes by the application of interdisciplinary approaches such as ours . Our automated framework paves the way for quantitative assess - ment of the actin cytoskeleton and trafﬁcking in , for example , large - scale chemical and genetic screens . Moreover , our ﬁnd - ings indicate that network - based models could be used to predict potential exchange sites of Golgi - related material . Altogether , the presented combination of experimental imaging techniques and theoretical network - based analyses provides an important step toward a systems understanding and , ultimately , control of cytoskeleton - based transport . Materials and Methods Plant Material and Experimental Setup . We used Arabidopsis Columbia - 0 35S : FABD - GFP and pCesA6 : tdT - CesA6 dual - labeled , 3 - d - old , and dark - grown seedlings ( 12 , 36 ) to study actin cytoskeleton and Golgi bodies ( SI Materi - als and Methods and Movie S1 ) . For drug and control treatment , seedlings were ﬂoated on distilled water with and without 150nM LatB , respectively . Image series of partially elongated hypocotyl cells around 1mm below the apical hook were captured using a spinning - disk confocal microscope with a spatial resolution of 0 . 133pixel − 1 · µ m and a time interval of 2s between subsequent 2D images ( 64 ) . In a slightly modiﬁed imaging setup , both grow - ing and fully elongated cells around 1mm and 5mm below the apical hook , respectively , wereimagedforcomparison . Additionally , 3Dimagestackswere obtainedusingthesamesetupwith1 µ mbetweenthreesubsequentzslices . Extraction and Randomization of Actin Networks . We corrected the poten - tial drift of the seedlings using Fiji - StackReg rigid body stack registration ( 45 , 65 ) , compensated photobleaching by normalizing mean intensities , and improved the signal - to - noise ratio by using the Fiji - BackgroundSubtraction ﬁlter with a radius of 50pixels ( 66 ) ( SI Materials and Methods ; see mathbiol . mpimp - golm . mpg . de / CytoSeg / for open - source code and examples ) . To rep - resent the actin cytoskeleton as a network in 2D and 3D , we enhanced ﬁla - mentous structures of width v width with a 2D tubeness ﬁlter ( 67 ) , applied an adaptive median threshold with block size v thres ( 68 ) , skeletonized the resul - tant binary image ( 69 ) , and removed all spurious connected components smaller than v size pixels or with average intensities below v int of the average component intensity . We identiﬁed the nodes of the network as crossings or endpoints of ﬁlaments . We added an edge between two nodes if they were directly connected by a skeleton line and assigned different edge weights such as its capacity , i . e . , the average intensity along the respective ﬁlament per unit length . We gauged the four imaging parameters , using synthetic images of known cytoskeleton - like structures and manual segmentations of cytoskeleton images as a gold standard . To assess the biological relevance of the studied actin network properties , we used a ﬁrst null model that dis - tributes the nodes of the original network randomly and uniformly across the cell area ( 2D ) or volume ( 3D ) and shufﬂes edges such that their Euclidean length is preserved . A second null model shufﬂes only the edge properties of the original network ( 19 ) . Quantiﬁcation of Golgi Movement . We automatically tracked the movement of Golgi in 2D and 3D , using Fiji - TrackMate ( SI Materials and Methods ) . We detected the Golgi as particles of around 5pixels in radius ( 44 , 45 ) . We then linked the Golgi in different frames , using the linear assignment problem tracker with a maximum linkage distance of 24pixels , a maximum gap - closing distance of 24pixels , and a maximum frame gap number of 4 . To correlate actin structures with Golgi movement , we constructed auxiliary Golgi ﬂow networks by copying the actin network . Each edge of the Golgi ﬂow network was then assigned different weighting factors , e . g . , the num - ber of track segments within a cutoff distance of 8pixels or the average velocity of close - by Golgi . ACKNOWLEDGMENTS . D . B . was funded by an International Max Planck Research School scholarship . S . P . was funded by the Max Planck Society , an Australian Research Council Future Fellowship grant ( FT160100218 ) , an R @ MAPProfessorshipatUniversityofMelbourne , andaDyasontravelgrant . S . P . and Z . N . acknowledge an International Research and Research Training Fund ( Research Network and Consortia ) grant . 1 . Luby - Phelps K ( 2000 ) Cytoarchitecture and physical properties of cytoplasm : Volume , viscosity , diffusion , intracellular surface area . Int Rev Cytol 192 : 189 – 221 . 2 . Ellis RJ ( 2001 ) Macromolecular crowding : An important but neglected aspect of the intracellular environment . Curr Opin Struct Biol 11 : 114 – 119 . 3 . Goldstein RE , van de Meent JW ( 2015 ) A physical perspective on cytoplasmic stream - ing . Interface Focus 5 : 20150030 . 4 . WangP , HusseyPJ ( 2015 ) Interactionsbetweenplantendomembranesystemsandthe actin cytoskeleton . Front Plant Sci 6 : 422 . E5748 | www . pnas . org / cgi / doi / 10 . 1073 / pnas . 1706711114 Breuer et al . P N A S P L U S S Y S T E M S B I O L O G Y B I O P H Y S I C S A ND C O M P U T A T I O N A L B I O L O G Y 5 . Kim H , Park M , Kim SJ , Hwang I ( 2005 ) Actin ﬁlaments play a critical role in vacuolar trafﬁcking at the Golgi complex in plant cells . Plant Cell 17 : 888 – 902 . 6 . Cheung AY , de Vries SC ( 2008 ) Membrane trafﬁcking : Intracellular highways and country roads . Plant Physiol 147 : 1451 – 1453 . 7 . B´alint S , Verdeny Vilanova I , Sandoval ´Alvarez A , Lakadamyali M ( 2013 ) Correlative live - cell and superresolution microscopy reveals cargo transport dynamics at micro - tubule intersections . Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 110 : 3375 – 3380 . 8 . Volkmann D , Baluska F ( 1999 ) Actin cytoskeleton in plants : From transport networks to signaling networks . Microsc Res Tech 47 : 135 – 154 . 9 . Tominaga M , et al . ( 2000 ) The role of plant villin in the organization of the actin cytoskeleton , cytoplasmic streaming and the architecture of the transvacuolar strand in root hair cells of Hydrocharis . Planta 210 : 836 – 843 . 10 . AkkermanM , OverdijkEJ , SchelJH , EmonsAMC , KetelaarT ( 2011 ) Golgibodymotility in the plant cell cortex correlates with actin cytoskeleton organization . Plant Cell Physiol 52 : 1844 – 1855 . 11 . Nebenf¨uhrA , etal . ( 1999 ) Stop - and - gomovementsofplantGolgistacksaremediated by the acto - myosin system . Plant Physiol 121 : 1127 – 1142 . 12 . SampathkumarA , etal . ( 2013 ) Patterningandlifetimeofplasmamembrane - localized cellulose synthase is dependent on actin organization in Arabidopsis interphase cells . Plant Physiol 162 : 675 – 688 . 13 . Staiger CJ , Baluˇska F , Volkmann D , Barlow P ( 2000 ) Actin : A Dynamic Framework for Multiple Plant Cell Functions ( Springer , Amsterdam ) , 1st Ed . 14 . Shimmen T , Yokota E ( 2004 ) Cytoplasmic streaming in plants . Curr Opin Cell Biol 16 : 68 – 72 . 15 . WoodhouseFG , GoldsteinRE ( 2013 ) Cytoplasmicstreaminginplantcellsemergesnat - urally by microﬁlament self - organization . Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 110 : 14132 – 14137 . 16 . Neri I , Kern N , Parmeggiani A ( 2013 ) Modeling cytoskeletal trafﬁc : An interplay between passive diffusion and active transport . Phys Rev Lett 110 : 098102 . 17 . Houtman D , et al . ( 2007 ) Hydrodynamic ﬂow caused by active transport along cytoskeletal elements . Europhys Lett 78 : 18001 . 18 . Ando D , Korabel N , Huang KC , Gopinathan A ( 2015 ) Cytoskeletal network morphol - ogy regulates intracellular transport dynamics . Biophys J 109 : 1574 – 1582 . 19 . Breuer D , et al . ( 2014 ) Quantitative analyses of the plant cytoskeleton reveal under - lying organizational principles . J R Soc Interface 11 : 20140362 . 20 . Breuer D , Nikoloski Z ( 2014 ) img2net : Automated network - based analysis of imaged phenotypes . Bioinformatics 30 : 3291 – 3292 . 21 . Yanagisawa M , et al . ( 2015 ) Patterning mechanisms of cytoskeletal and cell wall sys - tems during leaf trichome morphogenesis . Nat Plants 1 : 15014 . 22 . Kitano H ( 2002 ) Systems biology : A brief overview . Science 295 : 1662 – 1664 . 23 . Gardel ML , et al . ( 2004 ) Elastic behavior of cross - linked and bundled actin networks . Science 304 : 1301 – 1305 . 24 . Banerjee N , Park J ( 2015 ) Modeling and simulation of biopolymer networks : Clas - siﬁcation of the cytoskeleton models according to multiple scales . Korean J Chem Engineer 32 : 1207 – 1217 . 25 . MayerichD , BjornssonC , TaylorJ , RoysamB ( 2012 ) NetMets : Softwareforquantifying and visualizing errors in biological network segmentation . BMC Bioinformatics 13 : S7 . 26 . Xu T , et al . ( 2015 ) SOAX : A software for quantiﬁcation of 3D biopolymer networks . Sci Rep 5 : 9081 . 27 . Clark AG , Dierkes K , Paluch EK ( 2013 ) Monitoring actin cortex thickness in live cells . Biophys J 105 : 570 – 580 . 28 . Boevink P , et al . ( 1998 ) Stacks on tracks : The plant Golgi apparatus trafﬁcs on an actin / ER network . Plant J 15 : 441 – 447 . 29 . Dupree P , Sherrier DJ ( 1998 ) The plant Golgi apparatus . Biochim Biophys Acta 1404 : 259 – 270 . 30 . Nebenf¨uhr A , Staehelin LA ( 2001 ) Mobile factories : Golgi dynamics in plant cells . Trends Plant Sci 6 : 160 – 167 . 31 . Wakatsuki T , Schwab B , Thompson NC , Elson EL ( 2001 ) Effects of cytochalasin D and latrunculin B on mechanical properties of cells . J Cell Sci 114 : 1025 – 1036 . 32 . Newman M ( 2009 ) Networks : An Introduction ( Oxford Univ Press , Oxford ) , 1st Ed . 33 . Claessens MM , Bathe M , Frey E , Bausch AR ( 2006 ) Actin - binding proteins sensitively mediate F - actin bundle stiffness . Nat Mater 5 : 748 – 753 . 34 . Breuer D , Nikoloski Z ( 2015 ) DeFiNe : An optimisation - based method for robust disen - tangling of ﬁlamentous networks . Sci Rep 5 : 18267 . 35 . FuY , LiH , YangZ ( 2002 ) Therop2GTPasecontrolstheformationofcorticalﬁnef - actin and the early phase of directional cell expansion during Arabidopsis organogenesis . Plant Cell 14 : 777 – 794 . 36 . Sheahan MB , Staiger CJ , Rose RJ , McCurdy DW ( 2004 ) A green ﬂuorescent protein fusion to actin - binding domain 2 of Arabidopsis ﬁmbrin highlights new features of a dynamic actin cytoskeleton in live plant cells . Plant Physiol 136 : 3968 – 3978 . 37 . Gendreau E , et al . ( 1997 ) Cellular basis of hypocotyl growth in Arabidopsis thaliana . Plant Physiol 114 : 295 – 305 . 38 . Fu Y , Wu G , Yang Z ( 2001 ) Rop GTPase – dependent dynamics of tip - localized F - actin controls tip growth in pollen tubes . J Cell Biol 152 : 1019 – 1032 . 39 . Thomas C , et al . ( 2009 ) Actin bundling in plants . Cell Motil Cytoskeleton 66 : 940 – 957 . 40 . Crowell EF , et al . ( 2009 ) Pausing of Golgi bodies on microtubules regulates secretion of cellulose synthase complexes in Arabidopsis . Plant Cell 21 : 1141 – 1154 . 41 . Tominaga M , et al . ( 2003 ) Higher plant myosin XI moves processively on actin with 35 nm steps at high velocity . EMBO J 22 : 1263 – 1272 . 42 . Paredez AR , Somerville CR , Ehrhardt DW ( 2006 ) Visualization of cellulose synthase demonstrates functional association with microtubules . Science 312 : 1491 – 1495 . 43 . Luo Y , et al . ( 2015 ) V - ATPase activity in the TGN / EE is required for exocytosis and recycling in Arabidopsis . Nat Plants 1 : 15094 . 44 . Jaqaman K , et al . ( 2008 ) Robust single - particle tracking in live - cell time - lapse sequences . Nat Methods 5 : 695 – 702 . 45 . Schindelin J , et al . ( 2012 ) Fiji : An open - source platform for biological - image analysis . Nat Methods 9 : 676 – 682 . 46 . Viswanathan GM , et al . ( 1999 ) Optimizing the success of random searches . Nature 401 : 911 – 914 . 47 . Humphries NE , Weimerskirch H , Queiroz N , Southall EJ , Sims DW ( 2012 ) Foraging suc - cessofbiologicalL´evyﬂightsrecordedinsitu . Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 109 : 7169 – 7174 . 48 . Matth¨ausF , JagodicM , DobnikarJ ( 2009 ) E . colisuperdiffusionandchemotaxis - search strategy , precision , and motility . Biophys J 97 : 946 – 957 . 49 . Clauset A , Shalizi CR , Newman M ( 2009 ) Power - law distributions in empirical data . SIAM Rev 51 : 661 – 703 . 50 . Zhao K , et al . ( 2015 ) Optimal L´evy - ﬂight foraging in a ﬁnite landscape . J R Soc Inter - face 12 : 20141158 . 51 . Sutantyo DK , Kernbach S , Levi P , Nepomnyashchikh VA ( 2010 ) Multi - robot searching algorithm using L´evy ﬂight and artiﬁcial potential ﬁeld . IEEE SSRR 1 : 1 – 6 . 52 . Viswanathan GM , Da Luz MG , Raposo EP , Stanley HE ( 2011 ) The Physics of Forag - ing : An Introduction to Random Searches and Biological Encounters ( Cambridge Univ Press , New York ) , 1st Ed . 53 . Hills TT , Kalff C , Wiener JM ( 2013 ) Adaptive L´evy processes and area - restricted search in human foraging . PLoS One 8 : e60488 . 54 . Buchnik L , Abu - Abied M , Sadot E ( 2014 ) Role of plant myosins in motile organelles : Is a direct interaction required ? J Integr Plant Biol 57 : 23 – 30 . 55 . Borgatti SP ( 2005 ) Centrality and network ﬂow . Soc Networks 27 : 55 – 71 . 56 . Jiang B , Zhao S , Yin J ( 2008 ) Self - organized natural roads for predicting trafﬁc ﬂow : A sensitivity study . J Stat Mech 2008 : P07008 . 57 . KazeraniA , WinterS ( 2009 ) Canbetweennesscentralityexplaintrafﬁcﬂow ? Proceed - ings of the 12th AGILE International Conference on Geographic Information Science , edsSesterM , BernardL , PaelkeV ( LeibnizUniversit¨atHannover , Hannover , Germany ) , pp 1702 – 1717 . 58 . Geisler DA , Sampathkumar A , Mutwil M , Persson S ( 2008 ) Laying down the bricks : Logistic aspects of cell wall biosynthesis . Curr Opin Plant Biol 11 : 647 – 652 . 59 . Jacques E , Verbelen JP , Vissenberg K ( 2014 ) Review on shape formation in epidermal pavement cells of the Arabidopsis leaf . Funct Plant Biol 41 : 914 – 921 . 60 . Armour WJ , Barton DA , Law AM , Overall RL ( 2015 ) Differential growth in periclinal and anticlinal walls during lobe formation in Arabidopsis cotyledon pavement cells . Plant Cell 27 : 2484 – 2500 . 61 . Peaucelle A , Wightman R , H¨ofte H ( 2015 ) The control of growth symmetry breaking in the Arabidopsis hypocotyl . Curr Biol 25 : 1746 – 1752 . 62 . Kasahara M , et al . ( 2002 ) Chloroplast avoidance movement reduces photodamage in plants . Nature 420 : 829 – 832 . 63 . Ganguly S , Williams LS , Palacios IM , Goldstein RE ( 2012 ) Cytoplasmic streaming in Drosophila oocytes varies with kinesin activity and correlates with the microtubule cytoskeleton architecture . Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 109 : 15109 – 15114 . 64 . Sampathkumar A , et al . ( 2011 ) Live cell imaging reveals structural associations between the actin and microtubule cytoskeleton in Arabidopsis . Plant Cell 23 : 2302 – 2313 . 65 . Th´evenaz P , Ruttimann UE , Unser M ( 1998 ) A pyramid approach to subpixel registra - tion based on intensity . IEEE Trans Image Process 7 : 27 – 41 . 66 . Sternberg SR ( 1983 ) Biomedical image processing . IEEE Comput Soc 16 : 22 – 34 . 67 . Sato Y , et al . ( 1998 ) Three - dimensional multi - scale line ﬁlter for segmentation and visualization of curvilinear structures in medical images . Med Image Anal 2 : 143 – 168 . 68 . van der Walt S , et al . ( 2014 ) scikit - image : Image processing in Python . PeerJ 2 : e453 . 69 . Haralick RM , Sternberg SR , Zhuang X ( 1987 ) Image analysis using mathematical mor - phology . IEEE Trans Pattern Anal Mach Intell 4 : 532 – 550 . 70 . vanRossumG , DrakeFL ( 2011 ) PythonLanguageReferenceManual ( NetworkTheory , Godalming , UK ) , 1st Ed . 71 . Dhondt S , et al . ( 2012 ) Quantitative analysis of venation patterns of Arabidopsis leaves by supervised image analysis . Plant J 69 : 553 – 563 . 72 . Baumgarten W , Hauser MJ ( 2012 ) Computational algorithms for extraction and anal - ysis of two - dimensional transportation networks . J Comput Interdiscip Sci 3 : 107 – 16 . 73 . Cooper GM ( 2000 ) The Cell : A Molecular Approach ( ASM , Boston ) , 2nd Ed . 74 . Dirnberger M , Kehl T , Neumann A ( 2014 ) NEFI : Network extraction from images . Sci Rep 5 : 15669 . 75 . ObaraB , GrauV , FrickerMD ( 2012 ) Abioimageinformaticsapproachtoautomatically extract complex fungal networks . Bioinformatics 28 : 2374 – 2381 . 76 . Obara B , Fricker M , Gavaghan D , Grau V ( 2012 ) Contrast - independent curvilinear structure detection in biomedical images . IEEE Trans Image Process 21 : 2572 – 2581 . 77 . Mayerich DM , Keyser J ( 2008 ) Filament tracking and encoding for complex biological networks . Proceedings of the 2008 ACM Symposium on Solid and Physics Modeling , eds Haines E , McGuire M ( ACM , New York ) , pp 353 – 358 . 78 . Meijering E ( 2010 ) Neuron tracing in perspective . Cytometry A 77 : 693 – 704 . 79 . Caldarelli G , Capocci A , De Los Rios P , Munoz MA ( 2002 ) Scale - free networks from varying vertex intrinsic ﬁtness . Phys Rev Lett 89 : 258702 . 80 . Cover TM , Hart PE ( 1967 ) Nearest neighbor pattern classiﬁcation . IEEE Trans Inf The - ory 13 : 21 – 27 . 81 . BelsleyDA ( 2006 ) EncyclopediaofStatisticalSciences ( WileyOnlineLibrary , Bethesda ) , 2nd Ed . 82 . Dijkstra EW ( 1959 ) A note on two problems in connexion with graphs . Numer Math 1 : 269 – 271 . 83 . Berger F , Keller C , Klumpp S , Lipowsky R ( 2015 ) External forces inﬂuence the elastic coupling effects during cargo transport by molecular motors . Phys Rev E 91 : 022701 . 84 . Klumpp S , Lipowsky R ( 2005 ) Cooperative cargo transport by several molecular motors . Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 102 : 17284 – 17289 . 85 . Staiger CJ , et al . ( 2009 ) Actin ﬁlament dynamics are dominated by rapid growth and severing activity in the Arabidopsis cortical array . J Cell Biol 184 : 269 – 280 . Breuer et al . PNAS | Published online June 27 , 2017 | E5749