1 Information acquisition in Adapt / Exchange decisions : When do people check alternative solution principles ? Romy Müller & Maria Pohl Faculty of Psychology , Chair of Engineering Psychology and Applied Cognitive Research , TUD Dresden University of Technology , Dresden , Germany Corresponding author : Romy Müller Chair of Engineering Psychology and Applied Cognitive Research TUD Dresden University of Technology Helmholtzstraße 10 , 01069 Dresden , Germany Email : romy . mueller @ tu - dresden . de Phone : + 49 351 46335330 Fax : + 49 351 46337741 ORCID : 0000 - 0003 - 4750 - 7952 2 Abstract Many problems can be solved in two ways : either by adapting an existing solution , or by exchanging it for a new one . To investigate under what conditions people consider new solutions , we traced their information acquisition processes in a simulated mechanical engineering task . Within a multi - step optimisation procedure , participants could either adapt the properties of a currently used machine component , or exchange this component for a new one . They had the opportunity to check whether the solutions met a set of requirements , which was varied systematically . We investigated whether participants would consistently check both solutions , or whether they would satisfice , ignoring the new solution as long as the current one was good enough . The results clearly refuted consistent checking , but only partly confirmed satisficing . On the one hand , participants indeed checked the new solution least often when the current one was applicable without problems . On the other hand , in this case the new solution still was not fully ignored . However , the latter finding could be traced back to a few participants who diverged from our anticipated strategy of first checking the current solution , and directly went for the new one . The results suggest that in Adapt / Exchange decisions , people do not usually check both solutions in an unbiased manner , but rely on existing solutions as long as they are good enough . Keywords : decision making , Adapt / Exchange decisions , information acquisition , cross - checking , heuristics , satisficing 3 1 . Introduction How do problem solvers decide between adapting a current solution and exchanging it for a new one ? While the trade - off between stability and flexibility has received ample empirical attention in cognitive psychology ( Chrysikou et al . , 2014 ; Geddert & Egner , 2022 ; Goschke , 2013 ; Hommel , 2015 ) , it is unclear what these theories and findings can tell us about complex problem solving . In complex systems , people often face ill - defined problems : the situation , the goal , and the ways to achieve this goal are underspecified ( Dörner & Funke , 2017 ; Hollnagel , 2012 ; Perrow , 1984 ) . Accordingly , decision makers need to collect information about the system , predict the outcomes of interventions , check different solution alternatives , and use their creativity to put these solutions into practice . However , an exhaustive exploration of all potential solutions is rarely possible . Thus , problem solvers often employ heuristics ( Fischer et al . , 2012 ) and show a tendency economise by relying on less resource - demanding strategies ( Schoppek , 2023 ) . Moreover , real - world problem solving typically is not a one - time activity , and thus previous solutions to similar problems are often available . If these solutions still produce satisfactory outcomes , they might simply be re - applied ( perhaps with some modifications ) , instead of generating a new solution from scratch . Given problem solvers’ tendency to economise , it is questionable whether they will flexibly consider alternative solutions when it is not mandatory . 1 . 1 Stability versus flexibility in decision making and Adapt / Exchange decisions Psychological research on decision making provides ample evidence that people indeed favour stability over flexibility , and often stick with previous choices . Such status quo bias ( Samuelson & Zeckhauser , 1988 ) or choice perseveration ( Senftleben et al . , 2019 ) has been observed in various decision contexts ( Betsch et al . , 2002 ; Dutt & Gonzalez , 2012 ; Erev et al . , 2010 ; Rakow & Miler , 2009 ; Scherbaum et al . , 2013 ) . Similarly , people exhibit a clear preference to go with defaults , particularly when these defaults reflect the status quo ( Jachimowicz et al . , 2019 ) . This can sometimes have far - reaching consequences , for instance when deciding about organ donations ( Johnson & Goldstein , 2003 ) or pro - environmental behaviour ( Pichert & Katsikopoulos , 2008 ) . However , the stability - flexibility trade - off is quite simple in most psychological studies : participants merely have to decide whether to make a change or not . Conversely , many real - world problems require decision makers to choose between different types of changes : local versus global ones . That is , when an existing solution no longer produces satisfactory outcomes , you can either modify its details ( Adapt ) , or apply a fundamentally different solution principle ( Exchange ) ( Müller & Urbas , 2017 ) . Such Adapt / Exchange decisions also are a cornerstone of problem solving in many vocational settings . For instance , when mechanical engineers re - design a machine , they can either adapt the properties of a component that is currently used ( e . g . , change its dimensions and material ) or replace it by a completely new component that fulfils the same function but might overcome the shortcomings of the current component . Adapt / Exchange decisions differ from the decisions typically studied by psychologists in theoretically interesting ways ( Müller & Urbas , 2020 ) . In short , they reflect decisions between solving a problem by means of local or global changes . These two options are qualitatively different in the sense that only some of their attributes are shared . Given that Adapt and Exchange are different means of achieving an abstract goal , decision making is not merely a matter of preference . Yet , choosing one of these solutions does not fully determine the outcome , as this outcome critically depends on how the change is implemented . Due to these peculiarities of Adapt / Exchange decisions , their underlying cognitive and behavioural processes are poorly understood . Particularly , do decision makers consider both solution principles equally , and thoroughly gather all relevant information about them before making their choice ? A previous study suggests otherwise ( Müller & Urbas , 2020 ) : in a chemical process control scenario , participants seemed to refrain from checking the consequences of exchanging the solution as long as adapting the current solution was good enough . Such satisficing ( Simon , 1956 ) was inferred 4 from two findings . First , the frequency of Exchange choices depended on the costs of Adapt , instead of on the cost ratio between Adapt and Exchange . Second , Adapt choices were much faster than Exchange choices , suggesting that the latter included an additional cognitive process that was otherwise omitted ( i . e . , checking the alternative solution ) . Admittedly , these performance outcomes only provide very indirect evidence of satisficing , and cannot actually tell us whether participants indeed ignored the alternative solution . To obtain more conclusive evidence , the present study used an experimental setup that allows us to trace participants’ information acquisition processes . Under what conditions do people check alternative solutions when making Adapt / Exchange decisions ? This was investigated in a simplified mechanical engineering task , in which participants chose between adapting the properties of a currently used machine component and exchanging it for a new component . They were free to examine the quality of one or both solutions by performing a sequence of cognitively demanding checks . We hypothesised that participants would refrain from checking the alternative solution when a check of the current solution revealed that the latter was good enough . This satisficing was contrasted with the alternative hypothesis that participants will consistently check both solutions . Before describing the experimental setting , we will elaborate on the nature of Adapt / Exchange decisions , and discuss to what extent their information acquisition processes can be inferred from previous research in various decision contexts . 1 . 2 Decisions within an abstraction hierarchy The essence of Adapt / Exchange decisions is a choice between solving problems on a low level of abstraction versus moving up in the abstraction hierarchy . To understand this difference , one must consider that complex systems can be conceptualised in abstraction hierarchies ( Naikar , 2017 ; Rasmussen , 1985 ) : one and the same system can be described with regard to either its goals , the functions carried out to achieve these goals , the components realising these functions , or the properties characterising these components . Higher levels of abstraction define why the contents of a given level are needed , whereas lower levels define how they are implemented . Figure 1 illustrates this principle by using the example of a packaging machine . The goal of such a machine might be to maximise the output of products packaged per time unit . This goal can be achieved by combining different abstract functions or product handling tasks , such as transporting , filling , and forming ( Bleisch et al . , 2011 ) . Each of them can be specified further , with the number of functional levels depending on the goal of description and the type of system ( Vicente & Rasmussen , 1992 ) . For instance , transporting can mean that the product is turned over . Ultimately , functions are realised by physical machine components . In the case of turning over , the component could be a turning wheel or a turning belt . These components have properties , such as their dimensions and the materials they are made of . Successful problem solving requires a flexible navigation between these abstraction levels , instead of getting stuck on a particular one ( Hall et al . , 2006 ; Janzen & Vicente , 1998 ) . Especially when problems are complex , it is beneficial to move up in the abstraction hierarchy ( Ham & Yoon , 2001 ) . This is because higher levels of abstraction allow problem solvers to find suitable alternatives when it is impossible to solve a problem by merely modifying the details of the current solution ( Hajdukiewicz & Vicente , 2002 ) . However , people may not always be so flexible : instead of considering an exchange of the solution principle , they often try to adapt it by merely making minor modifications . This lack of fundamental changes can be observed in various problem solving contexts . One example is the well - known phenomenon of design fixation ( Alipour et al . , 2018 ; Youmans & Arciszewski , 2014 ) . It occurs when people remain focused on a product’s physical implementation , while being unable to revisit the more general ideas underlying this implementation ( Jansson & Smith , 1991 ) . In other words , designers remain stuck in a so - called configuration space , instead of moving to 5 the more abstract concept space , although real change can rarely occur without moving to concept space . Previous research has investigated forms of design fixation that are more conceptual or more knowledge - based , and various cognitive mechanisms have been elaborated , such as unconscious adherence , conscious blocking , or intentional resistance ( for an overview see Youmans & Arciszewski , 2014 ) . However , a common theme across design fixation studies is that people face difficulties in recognising or generating new solutions . In contrast , we investigate processes of decision making in Adapt / Exchange scenarios : we focus on situations in which people are fully aware of the possibility of using an alternative solution . Instead of asking whether they come up with this solution all by themselves , we ask whether they choose to seek out information about this solution , given that both the solution and the information are made available to them . Under what conditions do they make the effort of thoroughly checking the quality of the alternative solution ? When do they choose to ignore it and simply stay with the current solution ? Above all , we are interested in the information acquisition strategies that precede Adapt / Exchange decisions . Therefore , the following section will discuss what we can learn about such information acquisition strategies from research in other decision contexts . Figure 1 Implementation of the abstraction hierarchy in the present study . When adapting the current solution ( e . g . , turnover wheel ) by modifying its properties ( e . g . , material ) does not meet the requirements , problem solvers need to move up in the hierarchy and reconsider the solution principle as such , in this case by exchanging the type of component ( e . g . , using a turnover belt instead ) . 1 . 3 How do decision makers acquire information about potential solutions ? Several lines of decision making research have investigated how people collect and integrate information before making their choices . In this section , we will consider some of them , and compare their problem structures to that of Adapt / Exchange decisions . As we will see , these problem structures differ quite starkly , limiting the inferences we can draw from previous research , and emphasising the need for dedicated studies of information acquisition in Adapt / Exchange decisions . 6 In multi - attribute decision making , people choose between several options that differ in several attributes . For instance , they might choose between different houses that differ in their location , price , presence of a garden , and connection to public transport . People typically do not consider all attributes and integrate them in a weighted - average manner , but instead use simpler heuristics ( Bettman et al . , 1993 ; Payne et al . , 1988 ) . This is the case especially when interpreting or integrating the information is effortful , for instance when the scales and categories are ill - designed or when the attributes must be sampled successively ( Glöckner & Betsch , 2008 ; Söllner et al . , 2013 ) . Similarly , people show various distortions and biases in the way they use particular attributes ( Martin & Norton , 2009 ; Sun et al . , 2010 ) . These findings cast doubts on whether people will thoroughly check all available information in Adapt / Exchange decisions . However , note that in multi - attribute decision making , limited information acquisition usually pertains to attributes rather than options – people rarely ignore an option as a whole . Thus , the problem structure differs from Adapt / Exchange decisions , where we assume that people might refrain from checking one of only two solutions altogether . Moreover , given that they do check the Exchange solution , we assume that they will most likely examine all of its attributes ( e . g . , check whether a component meets all requirements , not just an arbitrary subset ) . Therefore , the conclusions we can draw from multi - attribute decision making research are limited . Another line of research has investigated the conditions under which people stop their information acquisition efforts once an option is good enough . This is referred to as satisficing ( Simon , 1956 , 1990 ) , and it typically occurs when the number of options is excessive or unknown ( Gigerenzer et al . , 2012 ; Todd & Gigerenzer , 2007 ; Todd & Miller , 1999 ) . For instance , when choosing a spouse , people cannot possibly consider all options that may exist in principle ( Todd & Miller , 1999 ) . Although satisficing is considered a heuristic , it can be a highly reasonable strategy in complex environments ( Todd et al . , 2012 ) . However , this line of research also does not enable strong inferences about information acquisition strategies in Adapt / Exchange decisions . This is because it is unclear whether satisficing also occurs when the number of options is as low as in Adapt / Exchange decisions , where the choice is often restricted to only two solutions ( Müller & Urbas , 2017 , 2020 ) . Can satisficing be an issue in this case ? It might be , namely when the costs of information acquisition are high . For a long time , it has been known that the higher the costs of evaluating an option , the fewer options are considered ( Hauser & Wernerfelt , 1990 ) . However , not until recently , studies have begun to systematically examine how decision makers trade off the costs and benefits of information acquisition ( Fiedler et al . , 2021 ; McCaughey et al . , 2023 ) . For instance , in a series of experiments ( Fiedler et al . , 2021 ) , participants could sample information about the past performance of two stocks , and each piece of information reflected an exemplary outcome ( i . e . , increase or decrease ) . Thus , the more often participants sampled the stocks , the more accurately they could assess which one is superior – but the longer it took them to reach a decision and thus the fewer decisions they were able to make in the available time . When do people stop gathering information and make their choice ? The authors observed a striking tendency to over - sample . Participants did not seem to consider that collecting more samples had a less beneficial impact on accuracy than it had a detrimental impact on speed , and thus produced much lower payoffs overall . This is interesting , given that previous research has often stressed that people fail to acquire sufficient information to make optimal choices . However , when information does not come for free , the principle of “more information is better” does not hold anymore , and the optimal amount depends on the costs of information acquisition ( McCaughey et al . , 2023 ) . In spite of this , participants in psychological studies usually prioritise accuracy over speed and efficiency ( Fiedler & McCaughey , 2023 ) . Thus , in Adapt / Exchange decisions , people might also show an accuracy bias , consistently checking the alternative solution even when the current one is feasible and information acquisition is 7 costly . However , two factors set Adapt / Exchange decisions apart from the information sampling studies discussed above . The first concerns the type of information acquisition . In the sampling studies , participants checked how often an option produced a particular outcome , while in our Adapt / Exchange context , they check how well a solution can solve the problem right now . The former requires a quantitative integration of information across instances , while the latter requires a qualitative integration within a single instance . It is unclear how this difference will affect information acquisition strategies . A second difference between sampling studies and Adapt / Exchange decisions concerns the dominance of options . In the sampling studies , participants encountered two parallel options with equal weight , while in Adapt / Exchange decisions , one solution ( i . e . , Adapt ) represents the status quo . How might information acquisition be affected by non - equally weighted solutions ? Information acquisition in the presence of recommended solutions has been the focus of Human Factors studies on the use and misuse of decision support systems . When such systems offer a solution , do people directly accept it , or do they carefully cross - check its validity ? The evidence is mixed . On the one hand , a myriad of studies has reported that people over - rely on automated systems and fail to cross - check their decisions – a phenomenon known as automation bias ( for reviews see Mosier & Manzey , 2019 ; Onnasch et al . , 2014 ; Parasuraman & Manzey , 2010 ) . Automation bias might increase with verification complexity ( i . e . , costs of information acquisition ) , but the evidence is limited so far ( Lyell & Coiera , 2017 ) . On the other hand , under some circumstances people do cross - check suggested solutions quite thoroughly , even when information acquisition is costly . For instance , when people had to diagnose and solve machine problems and a particular solution was highly recommended , they thoroughly cross - checked its validity , even when time pressure and workload were high ( Müller et al . , 2019 ) . Similarly , people usually cross - checked the validity of alarms , even when the time - consuming checks drew resources from concurrent tasks ( Manzey et al . , 2014 ) . The task features that determine when people cross - check recommended solutions are yet to be clarified ( for a discussion see Müller et al . , 2019 ) . Still , in line with the over - sampling studies discussed above , a take - home message is that people sometimes have a strong preference for accuracy , despite substantial costs of information acquisition . This might lead to the conclusion that that they will also consistently check the alternative solution in Adapt / Exchange decisions . Taken together , previous research on information acquisition during decision making has painted a mixed picture . On the one hand , when people choose between multiple options with multiple attributes , they usually do not collect and integrate all available information . This is exacerbated when the information is suboptimally presented and when the available options are excessive or unknown . Can such limited information acquisition also be expected with only two options ? One might assume that this depends on the costs of information acquisition . However , according to basic research on information sampling and applied research on using automated decision support , people often incur substantial costs for the sake of making slightly more accurate decisions . Thus , one might infer that they will also scrutinise the alternative solution in Adapt / Exchange decisions , even when the current solution is feasible . However , this contrasts with the speculative conclusion from a previous study ( Müller & Urbas , 2020 ) , where performance outcomes suggested that people refrained from checking the alternative Exchange solution as long as the current Adapt solution was good enough . Unfortunately , this conclusion remained highly speculative , because information acquisition was not actually assessed . To close this gap , an experimental setting is needed that allows us to trace the process of how people acquire information while making Adapt / Exchange decisions . 8 1 . 4 Present study 1 . 4 . 1 Research questions end experimental setup The aim of the present study was to broaden our understanding of information acquisition processes in Adapt / Exchange decisions . Specifically , we investigated under what conditions people check the alternative solution . Do they consistently engage in a thorough comparison of both solutions before making their choice , or do they only consider alternative solutions when adaptations of the current solution are unable to solve the problem ? In other words , do they refrain from checking Exchange when Adapt is good enough ? We addressed this question in a computer - based mechanical engineering task , in which participants had to select and specify a component for a chocolate wrapping machine . This component fulfilled the function of turning over a chocolate bar , which could be realised by two different solution principles . These solution principles were made available to participants by a simulated decision support system . One solution was framed as a previously used machine component that participants could modify in terms of its specific physical properties ( Adapt ) , whereas they were instructed that the alternative solution ( Exchange ) had to be constructed from scratch . However , this additional construction process was only hypothetical and not part of the experimental task , which was identical for both solutions . In each trial , participants performed a multi - step optimisation procedure ( for an overview see Figure 3 ) . First , they had to select which solution they wanted to check and specify ( e . g . , adapt the current turnover wheel , or exchange it for a turnover belt ) . Second , they had to check the feasibility and quality of this solution in four steps of specifying its physical properties ( e . g . , size of the turning wheel ) . To this end , they had to check which of two versions of the respective property ( e . g . , two sizes ) performed better on four requirements ( i . e . , effort , costs , output , physical features ) . To do this , they had to compare the versions’ numerical goal achievement values ( e . g . , their costs ) to a fixed requirement threshold ( e . g . , maximum acceptable cost ) . After this process of checking and specifying was completed , participants could either confirm their solution ( with all adaptations they had made ) or check the other solution principle ( e . g . , exchange the turnover wheel for a turnover belt ) . Our aim was to examine how the frequency of checking Exchange depended on whether Adapt was good enough . Therefore , we manipulated the feasibility of both solutions between trials . The feasibility of Adapt reflected whether the requirements could be met by merely adapting the current component ( see Table 1 ) . Thus , participants could only find out whether Adapt was feasible by checking all of its properties . Adapt could either be non - problematic , meaning that it met all requirement thresholds ( henceforth referred to as A + ) , locally problematic in the sense that it failed to meet an individual requirement threshold for one property but still met the total requirement threshold at the end of the trial ( A ( - ) ) , or globally problematic in the sense that it also failed to meet this total threshold ( A - ) . Local problems were undesirable but acceptable , whereas global problems rendered Adapt impossible . Exchange always met all individual and total requirement thresholds , as this is the very purpose of exchanging the solution principle . Instead , the feasibility of Exchange depended on whether the new component could be constructed before the scheduled delivery deadline ( E + ) or not ( E - ) . This was already known at the start of a trial and did not require any extra checking . Checking Exchange could still be useful , because the two solutions reached different point scores with regard to the requirements , determining which one was numerically better . However , checking Exchange never was mandatory , because as long as no global problems ( A - ) or scheduling problems ( E - ) were present , either solution was a valid choice . 9 Table 1 Five types of solution feasibility with their labels and explanations for Adapt and Exchange . Selecting a solution with a “ + ” or “ ( - ) ” sign was a valid choice , while selecting a solution with a “ - “ sign was an error Label Adapt Exchange A - E + Global problem : a total threshold on one requirement is not met after specifying all properties No problem : required construction time is shorter than time to deadline A ( - ) E + Local problem : an individual threshold on one requirement is not met for one property No problem : required construction time is shorter than time to deadline A ( - ) E - Local problem : an individual threshold on one requirement is not met for one property Scheduling problem : required construction time is longer than time to deadline A + E + No problem : all thresholds are met No problem : required construction time is shorter than time to deadline A + E - No problem : all thresholds are met Scheduling problem : required construction time is longer than time to deadline 1 . 4 . 2 Hypotheses Information acquisition . When do people check the alternative solution in Adapt / Exchange decisions ? Below we present four competing hypotheses about the percentage of trials in which participants check Exchange . Note that we generally assumed that participants rarely check Exchange when it is ruled out in advance by a scheduling problem ( E - ) . Similarly , we assumed that participants consistently check Exchange when Adapt is ruled out by a global problem ( A - ) . Accordingly , these conditions served as an upper and lower baseline , respectively . In principle , one conceivable outcome is what we will call the no - checking hypothesis . It rests on the large literature on automation bias , reporting that people uncritically accept the solutions suggested by decision support systems ( Mosier & Manzey , 2019 ; Onnasch et al . , 2014 ; Parasuraman & Manzey , 2010 ) . Similarly , they might accept Adapt without checking its feasibility , and thus also have no need to check Exchange . Regardless of Adapt feasibility , Exchange checking rates should not differ from the lower baseline . That is , A - E + , A ( - ) E + , and A + E + should neither differ from A + E - , nor from each other . However , we considered this hypothesis highly unlikely , as the present task structure clearly differed from that of typical studies on automation bias . We will elaborate these differences in the Discussion . The second hypothesis will be referred to as the consistent - checking hypothesis . It rests on the observation that people have a strong bias for accuracy , and thus thoroughly acquire information even when it is costly and the achievable gains are minimal ( Fiedler et al . , 2021 ; Manzey et al . , 2014 ; Müller et al . , 2020 ; Müller et al . , 2019 ) . Accordingly , participants should be highly motivated to find out which solution reaches a higher point score , and therefore check both solutions unless the alternative is ruled out in advance ( E - ) . Thus , similar to the no - checking hypothesis , the frequency of checking Exchange would not depend on Adapt feasibility , but it should be similar to the upper instead of the lower baseline . That is , A ( - ) E + , and A + E + should neither differ from each other , nor from A - E + . 10 The hypothesis we considered most likely was that people satisfice when making Adapt / Exchange decisions ( Müller & Urbas , 2020 ) . This satisficing hypothesis comes in two flavours . The strong satisficing hypothesis predicts that participants refrain from checking Exchange whenever Adapt is good enough . Thus , when Adapt is non - problematic , the frequency of checking Exchange should not differ between situations in which Exchange is possible ( A + E + ) or impossible ( A + E - , lower baseline ) . The weak satisficing hypothesis predicts that the rate of checking Exchange decreases as Adapt feasibility increases . Most Exchange checking is expected when Adapt is globally problematic ( A - E + ) , less when Adapt is locally problematic ( A ( - ) E + ) , and even less when Adapt is non - problematic ( A + E + ) . We also analysed the frequency of checking Adapt in an exploratory manner . We had no specific hypotheses about that , other than assuming that participants would always check this solution . This is because participants had to go through the specification procedure of at least one solution to reach the end of the trial . We expected this to be Adapt in any case , given that it was the default suggested by the system . Moreover , it also did not require additional construction effort , making it a priori preferable to Exchange . Choice . In addition to participants’ information acquisition behaviour , we also analysed their rates of choosing Exchange . Regardless of whether the information acquisition results would support the consistent - checking hypothesis or either version of the satisficing hypothesis , we expected the same data pattern : participants’ choices should reflect the different levels of Adapt and Exchange feasibility . That is , we expected most Exchange choices when Adapt was globally problematic ( A - ) , fewer when it was locally problematic ( A ( - ) ) , and fewest when it was non - problematic ( A + ) . Similarly , we expected more Exchange choices when Exchange was non - problematic ( E + ) than when it was ruled out by a scheduling problem ( E - ) . Thus , regardless of participants’ information acquisition behaviour , we expected their choice patterns to resemble the information acquisition pattern of the weak satisficing hypothesis . Finally , we expected a general increase in Exchange choices when it reached a higher point score than Adapt , but had no hypotheses about interactions of this factor with solution feasibility . Exploratory analyses of individual strategies . We intended to assess inter - individual differences in participants’ information acquisition strategies in an exploratory manner . Specifically , we looked at the order in which participants would check the two solutions ( i . e . , which solution is checked first , and whether solutions are checked repeatedly ) . 2 . Methods 2 . 1 Data availability All stimuli , instructions , human participant data , and syntax files are made available via the Open Science Framework : https : / / osf . io / 53yd4 / 2 . 2 Participants Twenty - five members of the TUD Dresden University of Technology participant pool ( ORSEE , Greiner , 2015 ) took part in the study in exchange for course credit or 8€ per hour . No participant had to be excluded , because all achieved the required score in a knowledge test before the experiment ( see below ) . The sample included 17 female and 8 male participants , and their age ranged from 18 to 45 years ( M = 26 . 4 , SD = 6 . 4 ) . Participants provided written informed consent and all procedures followed the principles of the Declaration of Helsinki . 11 2 . 3 Apparatus and stimuli 2 . 3 . 1 Lab setup Experiments took place in a quiet lab room , using one of two desktop computers ( monitor sizes 24 " ) for stimulus presentation as well as a standard QWERTZ keyboard and computer mouse as input devices . The experimental procedure was programmed with the Experiment Builder ( SR Research , Ontario , Canada , Version 2 . 2 . 61 ) . 2 . 3 . 2 Instruction video and knowledge test Before starting the experiment , participants watched an instruction video of 22 minutes . The video was based on a Microsoft PowerPoint presentation , which used several instructional techniques to facilitate learning , such as animations ( Mayer & Moreno , 2003 ) , advance organisers ( Mayer , 2008 ) , test questions ( Nungester & Duchastel , 1982 ) , and summary slides . The video consisted of two parts : Introduction of the scenario . Participants were informed that during the experiment they would play the role of an engineer designing a component of a wrapping machine for chocolate bars . They learned that the function of this component was to turn a chocolate bar , and that two solution principles were available . The video explained that each solution could be specified by selecting between two versions for each of four properties . Participants learned that each version was characterised by its values with regard to four requirements , and that it was important to achieve low values on the first two requirements , but high values on the second two requirements . Experimental screens and procedure . The second part of the video provided walk through a step - by - step demonstration of the experimental procedure . It explained how the solutions had to be selected and specified , by presenting the consecutive screens of an example trial . The contents of each screen were described , and participants were shown which actions they could perform . However , no strategy for comparing the values or making the decisions was suggested . In the example , Adapt was selected , specified , and confirmed . Participants were informed that they could go back and check out Exchange as well ( following the same procedure ) , but this procedure was not shown to them again . Knowledge test . A paper - and - pencil knowledge test was administered to identify participants with insufficient understanding of the instruction . This test consisted of 10 multiple - choice questions with four response alternatives , only one of which was correct for each question . A cut - off of 90 % correct answers was used to determine whether a participant needed to be excluded from the experiment . 2 . 3 . 3 Scenarios and calculations The scenario reflected one part of mechanical engineering processes : the selection and specification of solution principles ( for an overview see Table 2 ) . The solutions were two machine components , a turnover wheel and a turnover belt . They could be specified regarding four properties ( i . e . , dimensions , material , surface , and sensors ) by selecting among two versions ( e . g . , 5 vs . 7 cm for dimensions ) . The two versions differed in their performance on four requirements ( i . e . , effort , costs , output , physical features ) . All properties and requirements were treated alike in the calculations ( see below ) . Thus , in principle participants could simply ignore their identities ( e . g . , whether a property was dimensions vs . material , or whether a requirements was effort vs . costs ) and simply add up their numerical values . 12 Thresholds . The individual thresholds for the property / requirement combinations had values of either 40 , 50 , 60 or 70 , which were counterbalanced across the four properties ( see lower part of Table 2 ) . Accordingly , summed over all properties , the total threshold for each requirement was 220 . The individual and total thresholds needed to be considered when specifying a solution . For the requirements effort and costs , the values of a selected version had to be lower than the thresholds , and for output and physical features they had to be higher . The actual requirement values for the two versions were created by generating random numbers : If the value had to be lower than the threshold ( for effort and costs ) , random values between one and ten points below the threshold were generated ( e . g . , between 60 and 69 , if the threshold was < 70 ) . If the value had to be higher than the threshold ( for output and physical features ) , random values between one and ten points above the threshold were generated ( e . g . , between 71 and 80 , if the threshold was > 70 ) . Solution feasibility . The feasibility of Adapt and Exchange solutions varied between five types of trials ( see Table 1 ) . For Adapt , solution feasibility was defined by whether it was possible to meet the requirement thresholds . Adapt could either be non - problematic , locally problematic , or globally problematic . ( 1 ) Non - problematic ( A + ) meant that all eight requirement values ( i . e . , four properties with two versions each ) met the individual thresholds . ( 2 ) Locally problematic ( A ( - ) ) meant that one requirement threshold for one property could not be met by any of the two versions ( e . g . , in the property “dimensions” neither the 5 nor 7 cm version met the effort threshold of < 70 ) . The threshold was violated by 11 to 19 points . However , this did not lead to a global problem , as it was compensated by the remaining properties . ( 3 ) Globally problematic ( A - ) meant that in addition to a local problem , the total achieved value on one requirement did not meet the acceptable total threshold of 220 at the end of the property specification , no matter which versions were chosen during the trial . The total achieved values were calculated by adding the values of the four chosen versions in the four properties . The total threshold of 220 was at least violated by one to three points , if participants had chosen optimally with regard to the respective requirement , but this deviation could be higher , depending on participants’ choices . Local problems led to global problems in 50 % of the trials , whereas all trials with a global problem also had a local problem . Contrary to Adapt , Exchange always met the individual and total requirement thresholds . Instead , its feasibility was defined by whether the deadline for delivering the machine was shorter or longer than the time needed to construct the new component . Both the delivery deadline and the required time were presented as numbers of days . ( 1 ) No problem ( E + ) meant that more days were left until the delivery deadline than days needed for construction , whereas ( 2 ) a scheduling problem ( E - ) meant that fewer days were left . For the days left until the delivery deadline , random values between 21 and 30 were generated . The difference between the delivery deadline and the required time was created by selecting random values between 5 and 9 . Based on this , the days at least required for the construction were calculated : If Exchange had no problem , the difference was subtracted from the days left until the delivery deadline ( e . g . , 25 - 7 = 18 ) . If Exchange had a scheduling problem , the difference was added to the days left until the delivery deadline ( e . g . , 25 + 7 = 32 ) . All combinations of Adapt and Exchange feasibility were presented in the experiment , except for a global problem combined with a scheduling problem ( A - E - ) , because such trials would be non - solvable . Solution with higher point score . The trials differed as to whether Adapt or Exchange reached a higher point score at the end of the property specification procedure , if always choosing optimally ( i . e . , choosing the versions with the higher deviation from the threshold in the desired direction ) . This point score was created by adding the amounts by which each total requirement value differed from its total 13 threshold . For instance , when the total requirement values across the four properties were 191 for effort , 195 for costs , 236 for output and 240 for physical features , the point score corresponded to the sum of their differences from 220 , which is 93 . The differences between the point scores achievable with Adapt versus Exchange ranged from 7 to 32 . Importantly , which solution reached a higher point score was independent of solution feasibility . For instance , even when Adapt was globally problematic , it could still reach a higher point score than Exchange , given that its violated threshold on one requirement was compensated by high values on the other requirements . This enables a factorial combination of solution feasibility and solution with higher point score . Table 2 Overview of the scenario . Each solution had four properties , each property had two versions , and the thresholds of four requirements had to be met during each step of solution specification Property 1 : Dimensions Property 2 : Material Property 3 : Surface Property 4 : Sensors Solution principle : Turnover wheel Version 1 5 cm Steel Coated Without Version 2 7 cm Aluminium Non - coated With Solution principle : Turnover belt Version 1 13 cm Rubber Grooves Without Version 2 17 cm Fabric No grooves With Requirements Effort < 70 < 40 < 60 < 50 Costs < 40 < 70 < 50 < 60 Output > 50 > 60 > 40 > 70 Physical features > 60 > 50 > 70 > 40 2 . 3 . 4 Screens Stimuli were shown with a resolution of 1920 × 1080 pixels . All stimuli presented text , pictures , and interaction elements on a black background and with consistent colour coding ( i . e . , green for Adapt , purple for Exchange ) . All text was presented in German . Example stimuli are shown in Figure 2 . Each trial used three types of screens : a principle selection screen as well as four choice screens and one summary screen for each solution principle . Additionally , a number of instruction screens were shown . Principle selection screen . The principle selection screen ( see Figure 2A ) presented the task , two boxes for the solutions , and two buttons to check these solutions . The task shown at the top of the screen specified the intended machine function ( i . e . , “Turn over a chocolate bar ! ” ) and remained the same throughout the experiment . The two boxes always put Adapt on the left - hand side and Exchange on the right - hand side . They contained a description of the respective component , its name and a picture , as well as additional information about it . The Adapt box stated that a solution already existed ( e . g . , turnover wheel ) and that participants could adopt or partly adapt it . In addition to the solution’s name and picture , its current properties were listed ( e . g . , dimensions : 5cm ) . The Exchange box stated that 14 alternatively , another solution principle could be applied , but that it would have to be designed from scratch . Moreover , in addition to the name and picture , two temporal information elements were provided : a delivery deadline indicating how many days were left until the machine had to be delivered to the customer , and an estimation of the minimum number of days that the construction process would take when exchanging the component . Below each box , a button allowed participants to check the current or alternative solution ( i . e . , Adapt and Exchange , respectively ) . Choice screens . The choice screens ( see Figure 2B and C ) provided information about the specification of each property of the respective solution . The upper part of the screen presented the solution ( e . g . , Adapt ) , the name of the component ( e . g . , turnover wheel ) , and a photograph of the implemented solution . The middle part of the screen specified the current properties ( e . g . , material ) , current values , and thresholds . For the current property , two versions were available ( e . g . , rubber and steel ) . Adapt and Exchange slightly differed in how these versions were presented . For Adapt , version 1 , which corresponded to the current implementation , was labeled “existing solution” and highlighted by a blue box , while version 2 was labeled “Adapt” and presented without highlighting . For Exchange , the two versions were labeled “option 1” and “option 2” , respectively , and none was highlighted . For each version , a table listed its values on four requirements ( i . e . , effort , costs , output , physical features ) . The current values provided the sum for each requirement based on the previous choices . The thresholds indicated the maximum value ( for effort and cost ) or minimum value ( for output and physical features ) that needed to be achieved . These thresholds were provided for both the current trial and the total ( i . e . , sum over all four properties ) . As the current thresholds should be complied with , they were highlighted in yellow , and as the total thresholds had to be complied with , they were highlighted in red . The lower part of the screen provided buttons for the available actions . Below each version , a button allowed participants to select it . For Adapt , version 1 corresponded to the current solution and version 2 corresponded to an adaptation of it . Hence , the buttons were labeled “Adopt” and “Adapt” , respectively . For Exchange , both versions corresponded to a new design , and hence both buttons were labeled “Select” . Finally , a “To Principle Selection” button in the lower right corner allowed participants to return to the principle selection screen . Summary screen . For each solution principle , a screen summarised the specifications of the four properties that had been selected on the previous choice screens ( see Figure 2D ) . The upper part of the summary screen was identical to the choice screens , naming and visualising the solution . The middle part provided a list of the selected property versions ( e . g . , dimensions : 5 cm , material : steel , surface : coated , sensors : no ) , the sum of the achieved values for each requirement , and the total thresholds highlighted in red . Moreover , it provided a total point score indicating the summed deviations of the achieved values from the thresholds in the desired direction ( e . g . , a value of 93 could indicate that effort deviated by 29 , cost by 25 , output by 16 , and physical features by 20 ) . The lower part of the screen provided a button to confirm the current solution and a button to return to the principle selection screen . Additional instruction screens . On an opening screen , participants were welcomed , informed that demographic data would be requested next , and that they could proceed with the space bar . On a demographics screen , participants had to fill in their age and gender . Two introductory screens informed participants that the experiment would start , and that a practice trial together with the experimenter would follow . After practice , a start screen stated that the main experiment would begin and that participants could take breaks between trials . After each trial , intermediate screens announced the next trial . Finally , an ending screen told participants that the experiment was finished . 15 Figure 2 Stimulus material . ( A ) Principle selection screen . ( B ) Choice screen Adapt . ( C ) Choice screen Exchange . ( D ) Summary screen Adapt . In the experiment , all text was presented in German . 2 . 4 Procedure 2 . 4 . 1 Instruction video and knowledge test Participants watched the instruction video and then completed the multiple - choice test . For being allowed to participate in the experiment , they had to answer at least 90 % of the questions correctly . All participants passed the test . The instruction video and knowledge test took about 30 minutes . 2 . 4 . 2 Experiment The experiment consisted of one practice trial and thirty experimental trials . The practice trial was an A + E + trial , meaning that there were no local or global Adapt problems and no Exchange scheduling problems . Adapt reached the higher point score . Participants went through this practice trial with the experimenter and could ask questions . Afterwards , they completed three blocks of ten experimental trials . These ten trials corresponded to all combinations of the two within - participants factors solution feasibility ( A - E + , A ( - ) E + , A ( - ) E - , A + E + , A + E - ) and solution with higher point score ( Adapt , Exchange ) . The order of trials in a block was randomised for each participant individually , and the order of blocks was counterbalanced across participants . It also was counterbalanced which component ( i . e . , turnover wheel , turnover belt ) served as the current ( Adapt ) or alternative ( Exchange ) solution . Participants could already infer the feasibility of Exchange on the principle selection screen by comparing the available time to the delivery deadline . To infer the feasibility of Adapt , they had to go through all four choice screens to check the four properties ( i . e . , calculating whether the solution met the requirement thresholds ) . In A - and A ( - ) trials , there was one property ( e . g . , dimensions ) for which neither of the two versions ( e . g . , 5 and 7 cm ) met one of the requirements ( e . g . , both were too costly ) . The property and requirement on which this problem showed up were selected pseudo - randomly , with the constraint of being evenly spread across trials instead of being biased towards a particular 16 requirement or property . In the same way , we pseudo - randomised the requirement on which the total threshold was not met at the end of the Adapt checking procedure in A - trials . A schematic overview of the trial procedure is provided in Figure 3 . Each trial started with the principle selection screen on which participants had to select whether they wanted to check and specify the pre - constructed solution ( Adapt ) or the alternative solution ( Exchange ) that needed to be constructed from scratch . If participants wanted to check Adapt , they had to click the left green button ( “Check existing solution principle” ) on the principle selection screen , which led them to the first choice screen for Adapt . If they wanted to check Exchange , they had to click the right purple button ( “Check alternative solution principle” ) , which led them to the first choice screen for Exchange . The procedure of checking and specifying a solution was identical for Adapt and Exchange . Therefore , in the next paragraph we only describe the procedure for Adapt . Figure 3 Procedure of a trial . Participants first selected a solution principle to check , then specified its four properties by choosing between two versions , and finally confirmed the specified solution . During each step , they could return to the principle selection and check the other solution . Adapt could either meet or not meet the individual and total requirement thresholds , while Exchange always met them but could either meet or not meet a delivery deadline . P = property , V = version , R = requirement In a five - step procedure , participants selected between two versions for each of the four properties and then entered the summary screen to either confirm their specifications or go back to the principle selection screen . In detail , they first had to specify the dimensions of the component by either adopting the existing property version presented on the left ( 5 cm ) , or by adapting it to a different property value presented on the right ( 7 cm ) . To this end , participants had to compare the two versions with regard to the four requirements ( i . e . , effort , cost , output , and physical features ) , considering both the current and total requirement thresholds . For instance , if the acceptable cost threshold is 70 and this value must not be exceeded , you might prefer version 2 with a cost of 63 to version 1 with a cost of 17 69 , because the former is further away from the threshold in the desired direction . When finished with this comparison , participants could either choose the available property version by clicking the left button ( “Adopt” ) , or the adapted property version by clicking the right button ( “Adapt” ) . Alternatively , they could abort their checking procedure and return to the principle selection screen by clicking the “To Principle Selection” button . Choosing a property version for dimensions brought participants to the second choice screen on which they had to perform the same selection procedure for the property material ( i . e . , steel vs . aluminium ) . Subsequently , they were transferred to the third and fourth choice screen for the properties surface and sensors , respectively . After having specified all fourth properties , the summary screen appeared ( see Figure 2D ) on which participants could compare their achieved requirement values with the total thresholds , and view their achieved point score . They could either confirm their previous actions by clicking the “Confirm Selection and Adapt Principle” button , which brought them to the next trial , or return to the principle selection screen by clicking the “To Principle Selection” button . After three blocks with ten trials each , the experiment ended and participants entered a post - experimental interview to explain their strategies to the experimenter . Finally , they received their course credit or monetary compensation and were debriefed about the specific goals and hypotheses of the study . Taken together , an experimental session took about one and a half hours . 2 . 5 Data analysis We analysed participants’ choices and their underlying information acquisition behaviour . Choices were analysed by calculating the percentage of trials in which participants chose Exchange . Information acquisition behaviour was analysed as the percentage of trials in which participants checked the Adapt and Exchange solution , respectively . That is , an Exchange checking rate of 100 % means that a participant went through the four choice screens of Exchange in every single trial . Only trials were included in which participants clicked through all four properties before either confirming a solution or returning to the principle selection screen , because only complete checks allowed participants to conclusively evaluate the solution . This led to an exclusion of 46 aborted solution checks over all participants ( 6 . 1 % of the total checks ) . Of these aborted checks , 41 . 3 % were committed by only two participants , suggesting that aborting a check was not a common strategy . Moreover , in 78 . 3 % of the aborted checks , participants only opened the first property and then immediately returned to the principle selection screen , suggesting that aborted checks did not usually reflect genuine evaluations of a solution . To statistically analyse how choice depended on the characteristics of the two solutions , we computed a 5 ( solution feasibility : A - E + , A ( - ) E + , A ( - ) E - , A + E + , A + E - ) × 2 ( solution with higher point score : Adapt , Exchange ) repeated measures ANOVA . To analyse information acquisition , we computed two one - way 5 ( solution feasibility : A - E + , A ( - ) E + , A ( - ) E - , A + E + , A + E - ) repeated measures ANOVAs , one for checking Adapt and one for checking Exchange . If sphericity was violated , the Greenhouse - Geisser correction was applied and the degrees of freedom were adjusted accordingly . To determine statistical significance , an alpha level of p < . 05 was used , and all pairwise comparison were performed with Bonferroni correction . Exploratory analyses are described in the respective parts of the Results section . 18 3 . Results 3 . 1 Percentage of Exchange choices Overall , participants chose Exchange in 30 . 9 % of the trials . The ANOVA revealed significant main effects of solution feasibility , F ( 2 . 8 , 66 . 6 ) = 52 . 419 , p < . 001 , η p ² = . 686 , and solution with higher point score , F ( 1 , 24 ) = 20 . 178 , p < . 001 , η p ² = . 457 , as well as an interaction that just reached significance , F ( 3 . 0 , 70 . 8 ) = 2 . 812 , p = . 046 , η p ² = . 105 ( see Figure 4A and Table 3 ) . The main effect of solution feasibility indicated that the rate of choosing Exchange depended on problems in both solutions . When Exchange was feasible , the results were in line with the weak satisficing hypothesis : Exchange was mostly chosen when Adapt was globally problematic ( A - E + ) , less when Adapt was only locally problematic ( A ( - ) E + ) , and even less when Adapt was non - problematic ( A + E + ) ( 72 . 0 vs . 44 . 0 vs . 26 . 0 % ) , all p s < . 03 . Conversely , the data did not support the strong satisficing hypothesis : When Adapt was non - problematic , Exchange was chosen more often when it was feasible ( A + E + ) than when it was not ( A + E - ) ( 26 . 0 vs . 4 . 7 % ) , p = 026 . The main effect of solution with higher point score indicated that Exchange was chosen more often when it scored higher than Adapt ( 40 . 5 vs . 21 . 3 % ) . Although the same basic choice pattern was observed regardless of which solution scored higher , the significant interaction can be attributed to stronger effects of solution feasibility when Exchange did . However , the difference between A + E + and A + E - did not reach significance for either type of solution with higher point score alone , neither for Adapt , p = . 184 , nor for Exchange , p = . 054 . Thus , when Adapt was non - problematic , Exchange choices were rare overall , and the feasibility of Exchange did not make a major difference . Admittedly though , with regard to our strong satisficing hypothesis , this is weak evidence at best . Only because a descriptive difference misses significance , this does not warrant inferring that it does not exist . 3 . 2 Information acquisition Overall , Exchange was checked less than half as often as Adapt ( 41 . 7 vs . 87 . 7 % of all trials ) . However , these checking rates strongly depended on solution feasibility ( see Figure 4B and Table 3 ) . For checking Adapt , there was a significant effect of solution feasibility , F ( 4 , 96 ) = 10 . 338 , p < . 001 , η p ² = . 301 . Pairwise comparisons revealed that the effect merely depended on whether Exchange was feasible or not . When it was feasible , Adapt was checked similarly often when it was globally problematic ( A - E + ) , locally problematic ( A ( - ) E + ) , and non - problematic ( A + E + ) ( 80 . 7 , 80 . 7 and 80 . 0 % , respectively ) , all p s > . 9 . When Exchange was not feasible , Adapt was checked almost all the time , and equally often when it was locally problematic ( A ( - ) E - ) and non - problematic ( A + E - ) ( both 98 . 7 % ) , p > . 9 . Moreover , for all trial types in which Exchange was feasible , Adapt was checked less often than when Exchange was not feasible , all p s < . 04 . For checking Exchange , there also was a significant effect of solution feasibility , F ( 4 , 96 ) = 55 . 789 , p < . 001 , η p ² = . 699 . The pattern of results mirrored the one observed in the analysis of choice behaviour . In line with the weak satisficing hypothesis , Adapt feasibility modulated the rate of Exchange checking , given that Exchange was feasible . That is , Exchange was checked most often when Adapt was globally problematic ( A - E + ) , less when Adapt was only locally problematic ( A ( - ) E + ) , and even less when Adapt was non - problematic ( A + E + ) ( 88 . 0 vs . 58 . 0 vs . 37 . 3 % ) , all p s < . 03 . However , contrary to the strong satisficing hypothesis , when Adapt was non - problematic , Exchange was checked more often when it was feasible ( A + E + ) than when it was not ( A + E - ) ( 37 . 3 vs . 8 . 0 % ) , p = . 006 . 19 Table 3 Mean rates of choices and information acquisition ( in % of trials ) as well as their standard deviations ( in parentheses ) for choice and information acquisition Solution feasibility A - E + A ( - ) E + A ( - ) E - A + E + A + E - Choice Solution with higher point score Adapt 57 . 3 ( 31 . 2 ) 30 . 7 ( 28 . 7 ) 1 . 3 ( 6 . 7 ) 16 . 0 ( 29 . 1 ) 1 . 3 ( 6 . 7 ) Exchange 86 . 7 ( 27 . 2 ) 57 . 3 ( 36 . 7 ) 14 . 7 ( 23 . 7 ) 36 . 0 ( 38 . 4 ) 8 . 0 ( 17 . 4 ) Information acquisition Checking of solution Adapt 80 . 7 ( 22 . 4 ) 80 . 7 ( 24 . 9 ) 98 . 7 ( 27 . 6 ) 80 . 0 ( 4 . 6 ) 98 . 7 ( 6 . 7 ) Exchange 88 . 0 ( 22 . 3 ) 58 . 0 ( 30 . 5 ) 17 . 3 ( 21 . 2 ) 37 . 3 ( 35 . 1 ) 8 . 0 ( 13 . 7 ) Figure 4 Mean rates of choices and information acquisition ( in % of trials ) , depending on solution feasibility . ( A ) Choices of Exchange depending on which solution reached the higher point score . ( B ) Checking of the two solutions . ( C ) Checking of Exchange for the subsample of participants ( n = 14 ) who started with checking Adapt in at least 80 % of the trials . Error bars represent standard errors of the mean 3 . 3 Exploratory analyses To better understand participants’ individual strategies of information acquisition , we plotted which solution they checked at what time of the trial ( see Figure 5 ) . An inspection of this figure reveals that , contrary to our assumptions , not all participants started a trial with checking Adapt . In fact , only seven participants always started with Adapt ( top row of Figure 5 ) . Other participants started with checking Exchange more or less often . For instance , participants 20 - 25 ( bottom row of Figure 5 ) preferably started with Exchange when Exchange was feasible ( E + ) . It needs to be noted that both versions of the satisficing hypothesis rested on the assumption that people start with checking Adapt , because this is a necessary condition for knowing whether Adapt is good enough . Therefore , our lack of support for the strong satisficing hypothesis might be attributable to the fact that some participants did not fulfil this basic condition . 20 Figure 5 Individual checking behaviour for all participants and trials . Each black bar represents one participant ( sorted by the frequency of checking Adapt first ) and the green and purple cells indicate instances of checking Adapt and Exchange , respectively ( only complete checks of all four properties are included ) . The vertical direction represents the 30 trials , sorted by solution feasibility . The horizontal direction represents at what time a solution was checked ( e . g . , first , second , third ) . When only green cells are attached to the right of a black bar ( i . e . , participants 1 - 7 ) , this means that Adapt was always checked first . When chains of cells extend far to the right , it means that a participant performed several rounds of checking , either by checking the same solution repeatedly ( e . g . , participant 21 , fourth trial of A + E - ) or by frequently switching between Adapt and Exchange ( e . g . , participant 7 , last trial of A - E + ) . The last solution checked in each row is the one ultimately chosen . To test this possibility , we repeated the critical information acquisition analysis on the rate of checking Exchange with only those participants who usually fulfilled the necessary condition for satisficing . That is , we computed a one - way 5 ( solution feasibility : A - E + , A ( - ) E + , A ( - ) E - , A + E + , A + E - ) repeated measures ANOVA that included only participants who started with checking Adapt in more than 80 % of the trials ( including 14 participants , 56 % of the sample ) . There was a significant effect of solution feasibility , F ( 4 , 52 ) = 42 . 278 , p < . 001 , η p ² = . 765 . In line with the strong satisficing hypothesis , when Adapt was non - problematic , the frequency of checking Exchange did not differ between trials in which Exchange was feasible ( A + E + ) or not feasible ( A + E - ) ( 11 . 9 and 9 . 5 % ) , p > . 9 ( see Figure 4C ) . Arguably , the cut - off of 80 % trials that started with checking Adapt is quite arbitrary . Therefore , we repeated the analysis with different cut - offs to test the stability of the strong satisficing hypothesis . 21 We used cut - offs of 70 % ( including 18 participants , 72 % ) , 50 % ( including 21 participants , 84 % ) and a median split of the sample ( including 13 participants , 52 % ) . The strong satisficing hypothesis was supported consistently : in all these analyses , the difference between A + E + and A + E - failed to reach significance , all p s > . 1 . This was true even for the most inclusive cut - off of 50 % trials being started with Adapt ( only excluding four participants ) , p = . 107 . These results indicate that the majority of participants acted according to the strong satisficing hypothesis . This hypothesis only was at odds with the behaviour of a few participants who did not fulfil the necessary condition for satisficing , because they did not find out whether Adapt was good enough in the first place . 4 . Discussion Various decision making tasks call for a situation - specific balance between stability and flexibility ( Chrysikou et al . , 2014 ; Goschke , 2013 ; Hommel , 2015 ) . This stability - flexibility trade - off also is at the heart of Adapt / Exchange decisions ( Müller & Urbas , 2017 ) . Is it advisable in a given situation to slightly adapt a currently existing solution that has proven successful in the past ? Or would it be better to exchange it for a new , less familiar , but potentially superior solution ? In an idealised world without resource limitations on the side of the decision maker , the answer should depend on which solution is better able to meet relevant requirements . Thus , decision makers might be expected to carefully evaluate both solutions , and then choose the superior one . However , when balancing stability and flexibility in real life , decision makers face a second trade - off , namely between thoroughness and efficiency ( Hollnagel , 2009 ) . This trade - off does not only depend on the solutions as such , but also on the benefits and costs of acquiring information about them ( Fiedler & McCaughey , 2023 ; McCaughey et al . , 2023 ) . Is it even worth contemplating alternative solutions ? Should decision makers spend their limited resources on checking them out , when the current solution already is good enough ? The present study asked how people navigate these trade - offs : under what conditions do they make the extra effort of acquiring information about an alternative solution ? 4 . 1 Overview of the study and findings Participants performed a simplified mechanical engineering task , in which they could either adapt the physical properties of an existing machine component , or exchange this component for a new one . A cognitively demanding multi - step procedure allowed them to check how one or both solutions fulfilled a set of requirements . We varied the feasibility of both solutions to test whether participants would thoroughly check them under all conditions in order to maximise accuracy , or rather show some form of satisficing . A strong version of this satisficing hypothesis holds that participants refrain from checking the alternative Exchange solution altogether , whenever the current Adapt solution can be applied without problems . In this case , Exchange should not be checked any more often when it is feasible than when it is not ( i . e . , regardless of whether the construction can or cannot be completed in time ) . A weaker version of the satisficing hypothesis relies on a monotonic dependence of Exchange checking rates on Adapt feasibility . That is , Exchange should be checked less often as Adapt becomes more feasible ( from globally problematic to locally problematic to non - problematic ) . Our results clearly refuted the hypothesis that participants consistently check both solutions . Even when excluding all trials in which Exchange was known to be non - feasible , it still was only checked in 61 . 1 % of the trials . Obviously , participants did not attempt to maximise accuracy at any cost . Did they satisfice instead ? While our results supported the weak satisficing hypothesis , they contradicted the strong satisficing hypothesis : Exchange checking rates decreased as Adapt became more feasible , but 22 even when Adapt was completely non - problematic , they still exceeded the lower baseline of non - feasible Exchange . However , exploratory analyses of individual participants’ information acquisition strategies revealed a crucial dependency : the higher checking rate of feasible than non - feasible Exchange solutions ( given that Adapt was non - problematic ) could be attributed to only a subset of participants who regularly started their trials with checking Exchange . When excluding these participants , Exchange checking rates no longer depended on Exchange feasibility , as predicted by the strong satisficing hypothesis . Thus , strong satisficing was evident if and only if its necessary condition was met : that people had the chance to initially find out whether Adapt was good enough . This additional analysis revealed that we had based our hypotheses on an unwarranted assumption . We had pre - supposed a particular strategy , namely that participants would first check Adapt , and then , depending on the outcome , decide whether or not to check Exchange . In reality , however , participants adopted a wide variety of strategies ( see Figure 5 ) . Upon closer consideration , the strategy to start with Exchange is quite reasonable . In this way , you only have to go through the cognitively demanding Adapt procedure once , instead of a first time before checking Exchange and then a second time afterwards . However , sometimes participants also started with checking Exchange and then immediately chose it , without checking Adapt at all ( in fact , 68 % of the participants did this at least once ) . Seemingly , satisficing can go both ways – the high information acquisition costs might generally discourage people from checking another solution once they have found one that is feasible and has a reasonably high point score ( we will return to this issue below ) . Overall , these observations are a reminder to be cautious about the implicit assumptions one makes about participants’ strategies when formulating hypotheses , as the reality usually is more complex than anticipated . The following sections will discuss our findings in the light of previous research , highlight some limitations of the present study , and propose implications for future work . 4 . 2 Why did participants not check both solutions consistently ? An alternative hypothesis that we contrasted with satisficing was that participants consistently check both solutions . This hypothesis was based on the strong accuracy bias reported in previous studies across various decision contexts ( Fiedler & McCaughey , 2023 ; Fiedler et al . , 2021 ; Manzey et al . , 2014 ; Müller et al . , 2020 ; Müller et al . , 2019 ) . However , we found no evidence for consistent ( over - ) checking . What features of our Adapt / Exchange decisions might have prevented such thorough performance ? We can conceive of two potential explanations , which are not mutually exclusive . First , the cognitive demands of checking a solution were considerably higher than in previous studies . Participants had to perform mental arithmetic in a multi - step procedure , and keep track of the results throughout the entire trial . If they decided to check another solution , this meant that they had to memorise the point score of the previously checked solution in order to later compare both scores . This sets our scenario apart not only from simplistic decision making tasks ( e . g . , Fiedler et al . , 2021 ) , but also from the Human Factors studies in which people incurred high information acquisition costs in order to make accurate decisions ( e . g . , Manzey et al . , 2014 ; Müller et al . , 2020 ; Müller et al . , 2019 ) . Those checking procedures typically required sequences of manual actions , comparisons of parameter readings to nominal values , and passive waiting . Thus , information acquisition was time - consuming and tedious , but not cognitively demanding , as it was in the Adapt / Exchange scenario . In the future , it will be interesting to systematically investigate whether and how the checking of alternative solutions varies with the type of information acquisition costs . This might also depend on personality constructs like Cognitive Effort Investment ( Kührt et al . , 2023 ) . 23 A second reason why participants might not have consistently checked Exchange is the absence of clear performance criteria . In previous studies , failing to check a suggested solution could result in making wrong diagnoses ( Müller et al . , 2020 ; Müller et al . , 2019 ) or missing valid alarms ( Manzey et al . , 2014 ) . In the present study , the only wrong choices were those that selected a non - feasible solution ( i . e . , one that violated a total requirement or could not be delivered in time ) . Other than that , participants were free to set their own standards . For instance , some participants might have decided that the additional construction effort of Exchange generally is unjustified . This would obviously make it superfluous to check Exchange , unless Adapt was completely non - feasible . If the goal of sampling possible solutions is to find the one that maximises expected utility ( Brockbank et al . , 2023 ) , people need not sample solutions that they evaluate negatively right from the start . This freedom of evaluation emerges from the fact that different cost metrics of Adapt / Exchange decisions are incommensurable . For instance , does a point score benefit of 15 justify 23 days of constructing the component ? Adapt and Exchange are qualitatively different options , characterised by partly non - overlapping attributes . Although this renders decision making less straightforward , it is an important characteristic of many real - world decisions . Still , it has been ignored almost entirely in psychological research , and thus it remains an open question for future studies how people balance qualitatively different costs and benefits . 4 . 3 What can we learn about decision making in Adapt / Exchange scenarios ? Our results corroborate the conclusions from a previous Adapt / Exchange study , which speculated that participants might satisfice , instead of thoroughly checking both solutions ( Müller & Urbas , 2020 ) . This had been inferred from two types of performance data . First , the frequency of choosing Exchange had varied with the costs of Adapt , instead of the cost ratio between Adapt and Exchange . Second , solution times had been higher when participants chose Exchange . While we cannot cross - check the former finding in the present study , we replicated the latter : Exchange choices were much slower than Adapt choices ( 110 vs . 76 sec , respectively ) , t ( 23 ) = - 4 . 718 , p < . 001 , d = - . 963 . We do not want to put too much emphasis on this finding , because the trial numbers entering the analysis for Exchange choices were quite low and variable , reflecting that some participants rarely chose the alternative solution . Fortunately , the rates of checking Exchange provided a much more direct and informative measure of information acquisition . They fully supported the speculative conclusion from the previous study , namely that participants tend to avoid checking Exchange when Adapt is good enough . Given the consistent results across different Adapt / Exchange scenarios , a critical question is what insights they provide . Do they teach us anything new , beyond what is already known from traditional decision making research ? One novel aspect of the present results is that we found evidence for satisficing with only two options . To recapitulate , previous studies found that people resort to simple heuristics when comparing multiple options with multiple attributes ( Bettman et al . , 1993 ; Payne et al . , 1988 ) and that they satisfice when the number of options is large or unknown ( Simon , 1956 ; Todd et al . , 2012 ; Todd & Miller , 1999 ) . Here , we obtained evidence for satisficing with only two options , showing that participants refrained from checking an option entirely under particular circumstances . As discussed above , we attribute this to a combination of participants setting their own subjective performance standards and shying away from the high information acquisition costs . This resonates with previous findings on the consequences of manipulating information acquisition costs . Specifically , the typical heuristics and shortcuts in multi - attribute decision making are observed when participants have to gather bits and pieces of information sequentially , but disappear when all the information is available at once , or when search demands are low ( Glöckner & Betsch , 2008 ; Söllner et al . , 2013 ) . More generally , people’s use of information sources depends on their accessibility ( O ' Reilly , 1982 ) . 24 Conversely , people include fewer options in their consideration sets when evaluation costs are high ( Hauser & Wernerfelt , 1990 ) . One might argue that it is trivial that people rely on less information when acquiring it is costly . However , this raises serious concerns about the generalisability of psychological findings . In most studies of decision making , all information was readily available or could be obtained with minimal effort . How does this relate to real world decisions , where information has to be actively collected , for instance by conducting open - ended internet searches , performing series of measurements , or even hiring other people to provide the information ? Is it warranted to isolate the “core processes” of decision making from the tedious processes of getting to know one’s options ? The reductive approach of psychological research sure has its benefits . However , we argue for a complementary , more ecologically inspired perspective that factors in the costs of information acquisition . Given that people show a tendency to economise during complex problem solving ( Schoppek , 2023 ) , realistic information acquisition costs do not seem conducive to a flexible consideration of new solution alternatives . That said , the propensity to adapt or exchange will also depend on the work domain . Initial evidence in the context of fault diagnosis comes from an investigation of how domain characteristics shape cognitive requirements and diagnostic strategies ( Schmidt & Müller , 2023 ) . It was found that malfunctioning components are more often adapted when solving problems of packaging machines , and more often exchanged in the case of cars . Such differences are deeply rooted in the characteristics of different technical domains , instead of merely depending on the human problem solver . 4 . 4 Limitations of the present study The present study is rooted in a tradition of engineering psychology where research endeavours start from a problem that exits in the real world . We try to extract its problem structure , and transfer it into a scenario that is simple enough to be investigated in the lab , under somewhat controlled conditions . This approach always requires a delicate balance between peeling off enough confounding factors to gain sufficient experimental control , but not peeling off too much of what constitutes the essence of the problem of interest . Finding this balance comes with a number of limitations both in terms of internal and external validity . Perhaps the main limitation with regard to internal validity is our number concept , or more specifically , the absolute values of requirement point scores and time delays . Their variation inevitably led to numerical differences between trials ( e . g . , Adapt reaching a point score of 93 in one trial and 78 in another ) . These absolute values were arbitrary and did not systematically vary with our experimental conditions . Moreover , we ignored them in our argumentation , merely basing our hypotheses on solution feasibility ( e . g . , A + E - ) . However , this does not mean that our participants also ignored the absolute numbers . Some participants might have decided that Adapt being “good enough” was not only a matter of its feasibility ( as we had intended ) but of its point score reaching a particular value , or of its performance on their favourite requirement . In the post - experimental interview , some participants indeed reported to have based their decisions about checking Exchange on the absolute point score of Adapt . Others reported having prioritised particular requirements ( e . g . , considering output and physical features to be more important than effort and costs ) . Thus , different participants probably set different subjective criteria for satisficing . A related limitation is that the point scores depended on participants’ choices , and thus were not comparable between participants . Individual choices could never change the solution feasibility of a trial ( e . g . , in A - trials , Adapt remained globally problematic no matter what participants chose ) . Still , 25 the choice - dependence of point scores might have affected participants’ information acquisition decisions . That is , one participant might have seen a high point score at the end of checking Adapt , and concluded that it is not worthwhile to check Exchange . In the very same trial , another participant who has made different component choices might have seen a lower point score , and concluded that it is crucial to check Exchange . This results from an important characteristic of Adapt / Exchange decisions , namely that the decision alone does not determine the outcome , as this outcome critically depends on how the decisions are implemented . The present study also had its share of limitations regrading external validity . One of them is the mismatch between our theoretical conception of Adapt and Exchange as two fundamentally different solution principles , and their implementation in a simplistic lab experiment . We had to face constraints of how the engineering solutions can be presented to non - experts in a temporally restricted , artificial experiment with hypothetical decisions . For our participants , the Adapt solutions were just as new as the Exchange solutions , and all differences were merely based on instruction . Also , the deeper implications of either staying on the current level of abstraction ( Adapt ) or moving up in the abstraction hierarchy ( Exchange ) could not be appreciated adequately , given that our student participants most likely did not mentally represent the solutions in terms of their functional principles . Finally , participants did not actually have to endure the additional Exchange effort of spending about a month constructing a new machine component . The risks of such simplifications are obvious , and in the future we would like to study how experts make Adapt / Exchange decisions in their actual work practice . A second limitation of external validity is that the integration of goal criteria was far too simple . In reality , Adapt / Exchange decisions require a balance between qualitatively different goals ( e . g . , effort , costs , output ) . For instance , does a 5 % increase in output justify a 10 % increase in costs ? We also asked our participants to integrate the solutions’ performance on different requirements . However , these requirements did not actually have meaning – participants could simply add up the point values . This simple mathematical integration contrasts with the complex decision making required in real life , which should be addressed in future work . For instance , in another Adapt / Exchange study , we assessed how participants integrate the qualitatively different risks of harming the plant and impairing product quality , and how this integration varied with instructions ( Müller & Blunk , in preparation ) . A final limitation of external validity is the dependence of information acquisition on short - versus long - term consequences . In realistic engineering tasks , the information acquisition costs a designer faces right now presumably weigh less than the hassles a customer must endure for the next 30 years after purchasing an inferior machine . One might conclude that our findings will not scale : in reality , people might always make the effort of checking a reasonable alternative solution . However , it should be considered that in reality , checking also is more demanding than in the present study ( e . g . , performing resource - intensive tests to find out whether a new solution meets the requirements ) . In addition , uncertainty will be an issue , which we completely eliminated from our experiment . Accordingly , engineers by no means can be expected to always check alternative solutions as a general strategy . However , the exact conditions under which they do this remain to be studied in the future . 4 . 5 Outlook and future research We are only at the very beginning of understanding Adapt / Exchange decisions , and the opportunities for future research are exciting . A particularly challenging but important issue is to assess how sensitive people are to the optimum amount of information acquisition in different situations . Our participants often refrained from checking Exchange – but is this a bad thing ? Not necessarily , as suggested by the 26 literature on automation bias and complacency . In this context , frequently cross - checking automated systems is not necessarily optimal , as it draws resources from other important tasks ( Manzey et al . , 2014 ; Moray & Inagaki , 2000 ) . How much information is needed to optimise overall performance ? The answer depends on the costs of information acquisition and the accuracy that can be gained with more information . Basing one’s decisions on only very few observations can be optimal when information acquisition is costly ( Vul et al . , 2014 ) . In contrast , lower information costs and higher payoffs for accurate decisions call for larger information samples . However , people seem to be quite insensitive to this relation , making surprisingly little adjustments to their information acquisition activities ( McCaughey et al . , 2023 ) . Examining this sensitivity for Adapt / Exchange decisions requires systematic manipulations of the costs of checking alternative solutions and the performance improvements that these solutions can achieve . Along the same lines , it would be interesting to know how thoroughly people sample information about a solution principle , instead of just whether . This could be investigated in scenarios that provide plenty of information about each solution . Before deciding between Adapt and Exchange , people could sample as much information as they want , and then terminate their search whenever they feel that they have learned enough . The sampling literature provides insights about when people stop sampling ( Gonzalez & Aggarwal , 2023 ; Prager et al . , 2023 ) . However , transferring them to Adapt / Exchange decisions is not straightforward . Customers would likely expect designers to consider all relevant requirements when choosing a solution , not just a subjectively selected subset . Limited information sampling still is conceivable , namely with regard to alternative solutions : when do people truncate their process of investigating an alternative and decide that the status quo is preferable ? Moreover , in real - life Adapt / Exchange decisions , global problems are often predictable from local problems . That is , significant costs down the line can be expected as adapting the current solution requires more and more compromises . This accumulation of problems becomes increasingly apparent with time . When will people give up their attempts to adapt ? Given the literature on perseveration and adherence to the status quo ( Betsch et al . , 2002 ; Jachimowicz et al . , 2019 ; Samuelson & Zeckhauser , 1988 ; Scherbaum et al . , 2013 ) , it can be predicted that this will be rather late . It would be interesting to investigate which factors this depends on , such as the time of problem occurrence or the sunk costs that have already gone into an adaptation . From an application perspective , future research should contemplate the design of interventions to support Adapt / Exchange decisions . Inspiration can be gained from general measures to counteract design fixation ( Youmans & Arciszewski , 2014 ) and specific technologies like case - based reasoning that can enhance creative problem solving ( Althuizen & Wierenga , 2014 ) . However , it should be kept in mind that the problem we considered here was not to generate new ideas , but to include them into one’s consideration set once they are already known . To this end , assistance systems could reduce information acquisition costs by facilitating the comparison of solutions . Such comparisons should support problem solvers in navigating the abstraction hierarchy . How would changes in a low - level property of a component affect system functions and goal achievement ? Or vice versa , given particular functional constraints or goal - related requirements , which low - level changes are compatible with this , and which ones should be avoided ? The idea that decision aids should bridge abstraction levels is not new ( Bisantz & Vicente , 1994 ) . However , nowadays , model - based assistance systems might support the matching of abstraction levels between human cognitive task representations and formal engineering models ( Müller & Urbas , 2023 ) . In this way , a situationally optimal balance between stability and flexibility could be achieved collaboratively by joint cognitive human - machine systems . 27 Acknowledgments We want to thank Thomas Nündel for valuable discussions of mechanical engineering processes , the Adapt / Exchange problems that occur during these processes , and the role of abstraction hierarchies in dealing with them . Parts of this work were funded by a grant of the German Federal Ministry of Education and Research ( BMBF , grant number 02K16C070 ) and a grant of the German Research Foundation ( DFG , PA 1232 / 12 - 3 ) . References Alipour , L . , Faizi , M . , Moradi , A . M . , & Akrami , G . ( 2018 ) . A review of design fixation : Research directions and key factors . International Journal of Design Creativity and Innovation , 6 ( 1 - 2 ) , 22 - 35 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1080 / 21650349 . 2017 . 1320232 Althuizen , N . , & Wierenga , B . ( 2014 ) . Supporting creative problem solving with a case - based reasoning system . Journal of Management Information Systems , 31 ( 1 ) , 309 - 340 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 2753 / MIS0742 - 1222310112 Betsch , T . , Haberstroh , S . , & Höhle , C . ( 2002 ) . Explaining routinized decision making a review of theories and models . Theory & Psychology , 12 ( 4 ) , 453 - 488 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1177 / 0959354302012004294 Bettman , J . R . , Johnson , E . J . , Luce , M . F . , & Payne , J . W . ( 1993 ) . Correlation , conflict , and choice . Journal of Experimental Psychology : Learning , Memory , & Cognition , 19 ( 4 ) , 931 - 951 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1037 / 0278 - 7393 . 19 . 4 . 931 Bisantz , A . M . , & Vicente , K . J . ( 1994 ) . Making the abstraction hierarchy concrete . International Journal of Human - Computer Studies , 40 ( 1 ) , 83 - 117 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1006 / ijhc . 1994 . 1005 Bleisch , G . , Majschak , J . - P . , & Weiß , U . ( 2011 ) . Verpackungstechnische Prozesse : Lebensmittel - , Pharma - und Chemieindustrie ( 1 . Aufl . ) . Behr . Brockbank , E . , Holdaway , C . , Acosta - Kane , D . , & Vul , E . ( 2023 ) . Sampling data , beliefs , and actions . In K . Fiedler , P . Juslin , & J . Denrell ( Eds . ) , Sampling in judgment and decision making ( pp . 513 - 548 ) . Cambridge University Press . Chrysikou , E . G . , Weber , M . J . , & Thompson - Schill , S . L . ( 2014 ) . A matched filter hypothesis for cognitive control . Neuropsychologia , 341 - 355 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . neuropsychologia . 2013 . 10 . 021 Dörner , D . , & Funke , J . ( 2017 ) . Complex problem solving : What it is and what it is not . Frontiers in Psychology , 8 ( 1153 ) , 1 - 11 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 3389 / fpsyg . 2017 . 01153 Dutt , V . , & Gonzalez , C . ( 2012 ) . The role of inertia in modeling decisions from experience with instance - based learning . Frontiers in Psychology , 3 : 177 , 1 - 12 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 3389 / fpsyg . 2012 . 00177 Erev , I . , Ert , E . , & Roth , A . E . ( 2010 ) . A choice prediction competition for market entry games : An introduction . Games , 1 ( 2 ) , 117 - 136 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 3390 / g1020117 Fiedler , K . , & McCaughey , L . ( 2023 ) . Insecurity can be beneficial : Reflections on adaptive strategies for diverse trade - off settings . In J . P . Forgas , W . D . Crano , & K . Fiedler ( Eds . ) , The Psychology of Insecurity ( pp . 74 - 92 ) . Routledge . Fiedler , K . , McCaughey , L . , Prager , J . , Eichberger , J . , & Schnell , K . ( 2021 ) . Speed - accuracy trade - offs in sample - based decisions . Journal of Experimental Psychology : General , 150 ( 6 ) , 1203 - 1224 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1037 / xge0000986 Fischer , A . , Greiff , S . , & Funke , J . ( 2012 ) . The process of solving complex problems . Journal of Problem Solving , 4 ( 1 ) , 9 - 42 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 7771 / 1932 - 6246 . 1118 Geddert , R . , & Egner , T . ( 2022 ) . No need to choose : Independent regulation of cognitive stability and flexibility challenges the stability - flexibility trade - off . Journal of Experimental Psychology : General , 151 ( 12 ) , 3009 - 3027 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1037 / xge0001241 28 Gigerenzer , G . , Dieckmann , A . , & Gaissmaier , W . ( 2012 ) . Efficient cognition through limited search . In P . M . Todd , G . Gigerenzer , & The ABC Research Group ( Eds . ) , Ecological rationality : Intelligence in the world ( pp . 241 - 273 ) . Oxford University Press . Glöckner , A . , & Betsch , T . ( 2008 ) . Multiple - reason decision making based on automatic processing . Journal of Experimental Psychology : Learning , Memory , and Cognition , 34 ( 5 ) , 1055 - 1075 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1037 / 0278 - 7393 . 34 . 5 . 1055 Gonzalez , C . , & Aggarwal , P . ( 2023 ) . Sequential decisions from sampling : Inductive generation of stopping decisions using instance - based learning theory . In K . Fiedler , P . Juslin , & J . Denrell ( Eds . ) , Sampling in judgment and decision making ( pp . 289 - 310 ) . Goschke , T . ( 2013 ) . Volition in action : Intentions , control dilemmas and the dynamic regulation of intentional control . In W . Prinz , A . Beisert , & A . Herwig ( Eds . ) , Action science . Foundations of an Emerging Discipline . MIT Press . Greiner , B . ( 2015 ) . Subject pool recruitment procedures : Organizing experiments with ORSEE . Journal of the Economic Science Association , 1 ( 1 ) , 114 - 125 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1007 / s40881 - 015 - 0004 - 4 Hajdukiewicz , J . R . , & Vicente , K . J . ( 2002 ) . Designing for adaptation to novelty and change : Functional information , emergent feature graphics , and higher - level control . Human Factors , 44 ( 4 ) , 592 - 610 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1518 / 0018720024496980 Hall , T . J . , Rudolph , J . W . , & Cao , C . G . L . ( 2006 ) . Fixation and attention allocation in anesthesiology crisis management : An abstraction hierarchy perspective . In Proceedings of the Human Factors and Ergonomics Society Annual Meeting ( pp . 1064 - 1067 ) , San Fransisco , CA . Ham , D . H . , & Yoon , W . C . ( 2001 ) . The effects of presenting functionally abstracted information in fault diagnosis tasks . Reliability Engineering & System Safety , 73 ( 2 ) , 103 - 119 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / S0951 - 8320 ( 01 ) 00053 - 9 Hauser , J . R . , & Wernerfelt , B . ( 1990 ) . An evaluation cost model of consideration sets . Journal of Consumer Research , 16 , 393 - 407 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1086 / 209225 Hollnagel , E . ( 2009 ) . The ETTO Principle : Efficiency - thoroughness Trade - off , Why Things that Go Right Sometimes Go Wrong . Ashgate . Hollnagel , E . ( 2012 ) . Coping with complexity : Past , present and future . Cognition , Technology & Work , 14 ( 3 ) , 199 - 205 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1007 / s10111 - 011 - 0202 - 7 Hommel , B . ( 2015 ) . Between persistence and flexibility : The Yin and Yang of action control . In A . J . Elliot ( Ed . ) , Advances in Motivation Science ( Vol . 2 , pp . 33 - 67 ) . Elsevier . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / bs . adms . 2015 . 04 . 003 Jachimowicz , J . M . , Duncan , S . , Weber , E . U . , & Johnson , E . J . ( 2019 ) . When and why defaults influence decisions : A meta - analysis of default effects . Behavioural Public Policy , 3 ( 2 ) , 159 - 186 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1017 / bpp . 2018 . 43 Jansson , D . G . , & Smith , S . , M . ( 1991 ) . Design fixation . Design Studies , 12 ( 1 ) . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / 0142 - 694X ( 91 ) 90003 - F Janzen , M . E . , & Vicente , K . J . ( 1998 ) . Attention allocation within the abstraction hierarchy . International Journal of Human - Computer Studies , 48 ( 4 ) , 521 - 545 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1006 / ijhc . 1997 . 0172 Johnson , E . J . , & Goldstein , D . ( 2003 ) . Do defaults save lives ? Science , 302 ( 5649 ) , 1338 - 1339 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1126 / science . 1091721 Kührt , C . , Graupner , S . T . , Paulus , P . C . , & Strobel , A . ( 2023 ) . Cognitive effort investment : Does disposition become action ? PLoS ONE , 18 ( 8 ) , e0289428 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1371 / journal . pone . 0289428 Lyell , D . , & Coiera , E . ( 2017 ) . Automation bias and verification complexity : A systematic review . Journal of the American Medical Informatics Association , 24 ( 2 ) , 423 - 431 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1093 / jamia / ocw105 Manzey , D . , Gérard , N . , & Wiczorek , R . ( 2014 ) . Decision - making and response strategies in interaction with alarms : The impact of alarm reliability , availability of alarm validity 29 information and workload . Ergonomics , 57 ( 12 ) , 1833 - 1855 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1080 / 00140139 . 2014 . 957732 Martin , J . M . , & Norton , M . I . ( 2009 ) . Shaping online consumer choice by partitioning the web . Psychology & Marketing , 26 ( 10 ) , 908 - 926 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1002 / mar . 20305 Mayer , R . E . ( 2008 ) . Learning and instruction ( 2 ed . ) . Pearson Merrill Prentice Hall . Mayer , R . E . , & Moreno , R . ( 2003 ) . Nine ways to reduce cognitive load in multimedia learning . Educational Psychologist , 38 ( 1 ) , 43 - 52 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1207 / S15326985EP3801 _ 6 McCaughey , L . , Prager , J . , & Fiedler , K . ( 2023 ) . The information cost – benefit trade - off as a sampling problem in information search . In K . Fiedler , P . Juslin , & J . Denrell ( Eds . ) , Sampling in judgment and decision making ( pp . 334 - 356 ) . Cambridge University Press . Moray , N . , & Inagaki , T . ( 2000 ) . Attention and complacency . Theoretical Issues in Ergonomics Science , 1 , 354 - 365 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1080 / 14639220052399159 Mosier , K . L . , & Manzey , D . ( 2019 ) . Humans and automated decision aids : A match made in heaven ? In M . Mouloua & P . A . Hancock ( Eds . ) , Human Performance in Automated and Autonomous Systems ( pp . 19 - 42 ) . CRC Press . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1201 / 9780429458330 - 2 Müller , R . , & Blunk , A . ( in preparation ) . Choosing between options with qualitatively different risks : How does content framing affect people ' s strategies of risk balancing ? Müller , R . , Gögel , C . , & Bönsel , R . ( 2020 ) . Data or interpretations : Impacts of information presentation strategies on diagnostic processes . Human Factors and Ergonomics in Manufacturing & Service Industries , 30 ( 4 ) , 266 - 281 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1002 / hfm . 20838 Müller , R . , Ullrich , L . , Dessel , A . - K . , Bengsch , A . , Heinze , S . , Müller , T . , & Oehm , L . ( 2019 ) . Case - based decision support for fault diagnosis : Do salient ratings discourage situation analysis ? Human Factors and Ergonomics in Manufacturing & Service Industries , 29 ( 1 ) , 44 - 62 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1002 / hfm . 20757 Müller , R . , & Urbas , L . ( 2017 ) . Cognitive challenges of changeability : Multi - level flexibility for operating a modular chemical plant . Chemie Ingenieur Technik , 89 ( 11 ) , 1409 - 1420 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1002 / cite . 201700029 Müller , R . , & Urbas , L . ( 2020 ) . Adapt or Exchange : Making changes within or between contexts in a modular plant scenario . Journal of Dynamic Decision Making , 6 , 1 - 20 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 11588 / jddm . 2020 . 1 . 69326 Müller , R . , & Urbas , L . ( 2023 ) . Model - based operator assistance : How to match engineering models with humans’ cognitive representations of their actions ? In S . Mukherjee , V . Dutt , & N . Srinivasan ( Eds . ) , Applied Cognitive Science and Technology : Implications of Interactions Between Human Cognition and Technology ( pp . 73 - 88 ) . Springer . Naikar , N . ( 2017 ) . Cognitive work analysis : An influential legacy extending beyond human factors and engineering . Applied Ergonomics , 59 ( Part B ) , 528 - 540 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . apergo . 2016 . 06 . 001 Nungester , R . J . , & Duchastel , P . C . ( 1982 ) . Testing versus review : Effects on retention . Journal of Educational Psychology , 74 ( 1 ) , 18 - 22 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1037 / 0022 - 0663 . 74 . 1 . 18 O ' Reilly , C . A . ( 1982 ) . Variations in decision makers ' use of information sources : The impact of quality and accessibility of information . Academy of Management Journal , 25 ( 4 ) , 756 - 771 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 5465 / 256097 Onnasch , L . , Wickens , C . D . , Li , H . , & Manzey , D . ( 2014 ) . Human performance consequences of stages and levels of automation : An integrated meta - analysis . Human Factors , 56 ( 3 ) , 476 - 488 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1177 / 0018720813501549 Parasuraman , R . , & Manzey , D . ( 2010 ) . Complacency and bias in human use of automation : an attentional integration . Human Factors , 52 ( 3 ) , 381 - 410 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1177 / 0018720810376055 Payne , J . W . , Bettman , J . R . , & Johnson , E . J . ( 1988 ) . Adaptive strategy selection in decision making . Journal of Experimental Psychology : Learning , Memory , & Cognition , 14 ( 3 ) , 534 - 552 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1037 / 0278 - 7393 . 14 . 3 . 534 Perrow , C . ( 1984 ) . Normal accidents : Living with high - risk technologies . Basic Books . 30 Pichert , D . , & Katsikopoulos , K . V . ( 2008 ) . Green defaults : Information presentation and pro - environmental behaviour . Journal of Environmental Psychology , 28 ( 1 ) , 63 - 73 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . jenvp . 2007 . 09 . 004 Prager , J . , Fiedler , K . , & McCaughey , L . ( 2023 ) . Thurstonian uncertainty in self - determined judgment and decision making . In K . Fiedler , P . Juslin , & J . Denrell ( Eds . ) , Sampling in judgment and decision making ( pp . 311 - 333 ) . Cambridge University Press . Rakow , T . , & Miler , K . ( 2009 ) . Doomed to repeat the successes of the past : History is best forgotten for repeated choices with nonstationary payoffs . Memory & Cognition , 37 ( 7 ) . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 3758 / MC . 37 . 7 . 985 Rasmussen , J . ( 1985 ) . The role of hierarchical knowledge representation in decisionmaking and system management . IEEE Transactions on Systems , Man , and Cybernetics , SMC - 15 ( 2 ) , 234 - 243 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1109 / TSMC . 1985 . 6313353 Samuelson , W . , & Zeckhauser , R . ( 1988 ) . Status quo bias in decision making . Journal of Risk and Uncertainty , 1 ( 1 ) , 7 - 59 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1007 / BF00055564 Scherbaum , S . , Dshemuchadse , M . , Leiberg , S . , & Goschke , T . ( 2013 ) . Harder than expected : increased conflict in clearly disadvantageous delayed choices in a computer game . PLoS ONE , 8 ( 11 ) , e79310 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1371 / journal . pone . 0079310 Schmidt , J . , & Müller , R . ( 2023 ) . Diagnosing faults in different technical systems : How requirements for diagnosticians can be revealed by comparing domain characteristics . Machines , 11 ( 12 ) , 1045 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 3390 / machines11121045 Schoppek , W . ( 2023 ) . A dual processing approach to complex problem solving . Journal of Dynamic Decision Making , 9 , 1 - 17 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 11588 / jddm . 2023 . 1 . 76662 Senftleben , U . , Schoemann , M . , Schwenke , D . , Richter , S . , Dshemuchadse , M . , & Scherbaum , S . ( 2019 ) . Choice perseveration in value - based decision making : The impact of intertrial interval and mood . Acta Psychologica , 198 , 1 - 13 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . actpsy . 2019 . 102876 Simon , H . A . ( 1956 ) . Rational choice and the structure of the environment . Psychological Review , 63 ( 2 ) , 129 - 138 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1037 / h0042769 Simon , H . A . ( 1990 ) . Invariants of human behavior . Annual Review of Psychology , 41 , 1 - 19 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1146 / annurev . ps . 41 . 020190 . 000245 Söllner , A . , Bröder , A . , & Hilbig , B . E . ( 2013 ) . Deliberation versus automaticity in decision making : Which presentation format features facilitate automatic decision making ? Judgment and Decision Making , 8 ( 3 ) , 278 - 298 . Sun , Y . , Li , S . , & Bonini , N . ( 2010 ) . Attribute salience in graphical representations affects evaluation . Judgment and Decision Making , 5 ( 3 ) , 151 - 158 . Todd , P . M . , & Gigerenzer , G . ( 2007 ) . Environments that make us smart : Ecological rationality . Current Directions in Psychological Science , 16 ( 3 ) , 167 - 171 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1111 / j . 1467 - 8721 . 2007 . 00497 . x Todd , P . M . , Gigerenzer , G . , & The ABC Research Group . ( 2012 ) . Ecological Rationality : Intelligence in the World . Oxford University Press . Todd , P . M . , & Miller , G . F . ( 1999 ) . From pride and prejudice to persuasion : Satisficing in mate search . In G . Gigerenzer , P . M . Todd , & The ABC Research Group ( Eds . ) , Simple Heuristics That Make Us Smart ( pp . 287 - 308 ) . Oxford University Press . Vicente , K . J . , & Rasmussen , J . ( 1992 ) . Ecological interface design : Theoretical foundations . IEEE Transactions on Systems , Man , and Cybernetics , 22 , 1 - 18 . Vul , E . , Goodman , N . , Griffiths , T . L . , & Tenenbaum , J . B . ( 2014 ) . One and done ? Optimal decisions from very few samples . Cognitive Science , 38 ( 4 ) , 599 - 637 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1111 / cogs . 12101 Youmans , R . J . , & Arciszewski , T . ( 2014 ) . Design fixation : Classifications and modern methods of prevention . AI EDAM , 28 ( 2 ) , 129 - 137 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1017 / S0890060414000043