Bending elasticity and thermal ﬂuctuations of lipid membranes . Theoretical and experimental requirements J . F . Faucon , M . D . Mitov , P . M´el´eard , I . Bivas , P . Bothorel To cite this version : J . F . Faucon , M . D . Mitov , P . M´el´eard , I . Bivas , P . Bothorel . Bending elasticity and thermal ﬂuc - tuations of lipid membranes . Theoretical and experimental requirements . Journal de Physique , 1989 , 50 ( 17 ) , pp . 2389 - 2414 . < 10 . 1051 / jphys : 0198900500170238900 > . < jpa - 00211069 > HAL Id : jpa - 00211069 https : / / hal . archives - ouvertes . fr / jpa - 00211069 Submitted on 1 Jan 1989 HAL is a multi - disciplinary open access archive for the deposit and dissemination of sci - entiﬁc research documents , whether they are pub - lished or not . The documents may come from teaching and research institutions in France or abroad , or from public or private research centers . L’archive ouverte pluridisciplinaire HAL , est destin´ee au d´epˆot et ` a la diﬀusion de documents scientiﬁques de niveau recherche , publi´es ou non , ´emanant des ´etablissements d’enseignement et de recherche fran¸cais ou ´etrangers , des laboratoires publics ou priv´es . 2389 Bending elasticity and thermal fluctuations of lipid membranes . Theoretical and experimental requirements J . F . Faucon ( 1 ) , M . D . Mitov ( 2 ) , P . Méléard ( 1 ) , I . Bivas ( 2 ) and P . Bothorel ( 1 ) ( 1 ) Centre de Recherche Paul Pascal , C . N . R . S . , Domaine Universitaire , 33405 Talence , France ( 2 ) Department of Liquid Crystals , Institute of Solid State Physics , Bulgarian Academy of Sciences , Sofia 1784 , Bulgaria ( Reçu le I S février 1989 , révisé le 25 mai 1989 , accepté le 26 mai 1989 ) Résumé . 2014 Les fluctuations thermiques de vésicules lipidiques géantes ont été étudiées d’un point de vue théorique et expérimental . Au niveau théorique , le modèle développé prend explicitement en compte la conservation du volume de la vésicule et de la surface de la membrane . I1 en résulte que l’ amplitude des fluctuations thermiques dépend non seulement de l’élasticité de courbure de la bicouche , mais aussi de la tension de membrane et / ou de la différence de pression hydrostatique entre l’intérieur et l’extérieur de la vésicule . Au niveau expérimental , la détermination du module de courbure kc nécessite d’abord l’analyse d’un grand nombre ( plusieurs centaines ) de contours afin d’obtenir une bonne statistique . En second lieu , la contribution de l’erreur expérimentale sur les coordonnées du contour , qui se traduit par un bruit blanc sur les amplitudes de Fourier , doit être éliminée , et ceci peut être réalisé grâce à l’utilisation de la fonction d’autocorrélation angulaire des fluctuations . Enfin , les amplitudes des harmoniques ayant des temps de corrélation courts doivent être corrigées de l’effet du temps d’intégration ( 40 ms ) de la caméra vidéo , qui , dans le cas contraire , conduit à une surestimation de kc . Toutes ces exigences théoriques et expérimentales ont été prises en compte dans l’analyse des fluctuations thermiques de 42 vésicules géantes de phosphatidylcholine du jaune d’0153uf . Il peut être rendu compte du comportement de cette population de vésicules avec un module de courbure kc égal à 0 . 4 - 0 . 5 x 10 - 19 J , et des tensions de membrane extrêmement faibles , de moins de 15 x 10 - 5 mN / m . Abstract . 2014 Thermal fluctuations of giant lipid vesicles have been investigated both theoretically and experimentally . At the theoretical level , the model developed here takes explicitly into account the conservation of vesicle volume and membrane area . Under these conditions , the amplitude of thermal fluctuations depends critically not only on the bending elasticity of the bilayer , but also on the membrane tension and / or hydrostatic pressure difference between the interior and exterior of the vesicle . At the experimental level , the determination of the bending modulus kc first requires the analysis of a large number ( several hundred ) of vesicle contours to obtain a significant statistics . Secondly , the contribution of the experimental error on the contour coordinates , which results in a white noise on the Fourier amplitudes , must be eliminated , and this can be done by using the angular autocorrelation function of the fluctuations . Finally , the amplitudes of harmonics having short correlation times must be corrected from the effect of the integration time ( 40 ms ) of the video camera , which otherwise leads to an overestimation of kc . All these theoretical and experimental requirements have been considered in the analysis of the thermal fluctuations of 42 giant vesicles composed of egg phosphatidylcholine . The behaviour J . Phys . France 50 ( 1989 ) 2389 - 2414 ler SEPTEMBRE 1989 , Classification Physics Abstracts 68 . 10 - 82 . 70 - 87 . 20 Article published online by EDP Sciences and available at http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1051 / jphys : 0198900500170238900 2390 of this population of vesicles can be accounted for with a bending modulus kc equal to 0 . 4 - 0 . 5 x 10 - 19 J , and extremely low membrane tensions , ranging below 15 10 - 5 mN / m . 1 . Introduction . Biological membranes are an essential constituent of every living cell . Their mechanical properties are closely related to the problem of cell stability and resistance to extemal influences , and hence have become the subject of increased attention . Considering the membrane as an infinitely thin layer of liquid crystal and applying the ideas of liquid crystal physics , Helfrich [ 1 ] has demonstrated that the mechanical state of a membrane element can be completely characterized specifying its area and principal curvatures . The stretching elastic energy per unit area , F , , is given by the expression [ 1 ] : where v - is the bilayer tension , So is the equilibrium area of the membrane element ( e . g . the area at zero membrane tension ) , S is the deformed area of the same element , and ks is the stretching elastic constant . The mechanical experiments of Kwok and Evans [ 2 , 3 ] yield ks = ( 140 ± 16 ) mJ / m2 for egg lecithin bilayers . When a small piece of membrane is bent , the bending elastic energy per unit area , Fc , is given , according to Helfrich [ 1 ] , by the expression : where cl and c2 are the principal curvatures of the membrane , co is the spontaneous curvature ( co : 0 0 if the two monolayers have different composition or they face different environments ) , kc and kc are the elastic constants for cylindrical bending and saddle bending , respectively . The first attempt to measure the curvature elastic modulus , kc , was made by Servuss et al . [ 4 ] . Analysing the thermal shape fluctuations of long tubular vesicles they obtained k , = ( 2 . 3 ± 0 . 3 ) x 10 - 19 J , for egg lecithin membranes . Later on , Sakurai and Kawamura [ 5 ] evaluated kc = 0 . 4 x 10 - 19 J by bending myelin figures in a magnetic field . Measuring the time correlation function of the shape fluctuations of long cylindrical tubes [ 6 ] , as well as giant spherical vesicles [ 7 ] , Schneider et al . found kc = ( 1 - 2 ) x 10 - 19 J . Using Fourier analysis of thermally excited surface undulations of vesicles , Engelhardt et al . [ 8 ] obtained kc = 0 . 4 x 10 - 19 J . Recently , Duwe et al . [ 9 ] reported kc = 1 . 1 x 10 - 19 J . Introducing the angular correlation function of thermal shape fluctuations , Bivas et al . [ 15 ] measured kc = ( 1 . 28 ± 0 . 25 ) x 10 - 19 J . In contrast to the measurements of stretching elastic constant , ks , where a single value has been reported , there is a great variety between the values measured by various authors kc = ( 0 . 4 - 2 . 3 ) x 10 - 19 J . Different explanations for these variations have been put forward by the authors , but rarely acceptable arguments have been given , except in [ 10 ] . Obviously , there is an appealing necessity for more precise treatment of this important question . The aim of this article is to analyze in detail potential sources of theoretical , as well as experimental errors and to explore different possibilities for overcoming them . 2391 2 . Theory . To a very good approximation , the vesicle membrane can be considered as a two - dimensional ( geometrical ) surface . Using spherical polar coordinates ( r , 0 , cp ) , with origin 0 in the center of the vesicle , we can describe a slightly deformed spherical vesicle by writing : where R is the radius of a sphere enclosing the same volume as that of the vesicle , an u ( 03B8 , cp , t ) is a function describing the relative displacements ( the fluctuations ) of the vesicl wall from the ideal spherical shape , 0 and ~ being the polar angles . It is assumed in whé follows that the amplitudes of the fluctuations are very small compared to the vesicl dimensions , u ( 03B8 , cp , t ) 1 « 1 . As far as we have chosen the origin of the coordinate system in the center of the vesicle w where Ym1 ( 03B8 , cp ) are the spherical harmonics defined below . The volume of the vesicle , V { u } , is given by the expression : Here , cu - 0 denotes the volume of a sphere of radius R , and we have kept only the terms of first and second order with respect to u . Similarly , the deformed area of the vesicle , S { u } , is given by the expression : where uo and ulp stand for the partial derivatives of u with respect to parameters 03B8 and ~ , respectively , 80 is the total vesicle area at zero membrane tension and s is the area in excess over that of a sphere of equivalent volume . Here again we have kept only the terms of first and second order with respect to u and its derivatives . The lipid bilayers behave like two - dimensional liquids , therefore every local variation of the membrane tension is rapidly relaxed via local flows of the lipid material resulting in a = const . all over the membrane . As a consequence , the stretching elastic energy of the whole vesicle , Fs { u } , as well as the membrane tension , u , may be written in a global form : 2392 The bending elastic energy of the vesicle , { u } , is given by the expression : where U88 and u ~ ~ stand for the second partial derivatives of the function u with respect to parameters 0 or cp , respectively . When integrated over the closed vesicle surface , the Gaussian curvature term ( the second term in the equation ( 3 ) ) gives a constant value , 4 irkc , independent of the vesicle shape [ 11 , 12 ] , and it can therefore be omitted . We have kept again only the terms of first and second order with respect to u and its derivatives . Usually , vesicles are poorly permeable to water and salts , and to a very good approximation water is an uncompressible fluid . So , we shall consider that the vesicle volume does not change during the fluctuations , and therefore the following condition always holds : The fluctuations of the vesicle membrane are time dependent thermal agitations around the equilibrium vesicle form . Thus , we can consider the vesicle shape at a given moment , U ( 8 , cp , t ) , as composed of two contributions : a static part , Uo ( 8 , cp ) , that is the average ( equilibrium ) vesicle shape and a dynamic part or perturbation , & # x26 ; u ( 0 , cp , t ) , that gives the deviation from this equilibrium and describes the fluctuations of the vesicle : The angle brackets in the above equation denote an ensemble or time average . It is natural to suppose that the ergodic hypothesis holds when there are no temporal drifts or changes in the environmental conditions during the experiment . To find the equilibrium vesicle shape , we have to minimize the total energy , keeping the volume constant . This is a variational problem with a constraint . The usual method to solve it is to replace the original functional and the associated constraint with a new functional , : F { u } , that is a linear combination of them and to treat the last like a functional without constraint , so we write : Here , Ap is Lagrange multiplier associated with the constraint of constant vesicle volume ( physically , Ap is the hydrostatic pressure difference acting across the vesicle membrane ) . If the function uo minimizes the functional ( 13 ) then its first variation , B [ f { uo , ÔM } , is zero for all small perturbations , 8u , around this equilibrium shape , uo : 2393 It is well known that if a function uo satisfies a condition like ( 14 ) , this function is a solution of the Euler - Lagrange equation associated with this variational problem . The explicit form of the Euler - Lagrange equation in our case is : Here , p and if are the effective dimensionless pressure and tension , respectively , and co is the spontaneous membrane curvature . Equation ( 15 ) is linear because of the quadratic approximation used throughout in this work . If the same problem is treated without approximations a forth order nonlinear partial differential equation , similar to those of Deuling and Helfrich [ 11 , 12 ] and of Jenkins [ 17 ] , would be obtained instead . It is inhomogeneous because the vesicle radius is given by ( 1 + uo ) , and not by uo itself . In the spherical case , uo = const . , equation ( 15 ) transforms into the well known Laplace law , p = 2 & # x26 ; / ( 1 + uo ) , thus it can be considered as a natural generalisation of Laplace law for the case of an arbitrarily deformed closed membrane possessing curvature and stretching elasticity . All the functions that are extremals of the functional ( 13 ) are solutions of the Euler - Lagrange equation ( 15 ) . In the case that uo is a function that minimizes 37 { uo } we must have : The last term in the above equation represents the contributions originating from the fluctuations of the total vesicle area and conjugated to them fluctuations of the membrane tension . Generally , the second variation of a functional like ( 16 ) , the last term excluded , is a quadratic form of the perturbations 8u and its derivatives ( 8ue , 8ulp’ 8uee , 8ulplp ) with coefficients depending on the function uo . But it can be always transformed , via integrations by parts , into a more convenient form : where C { uo } is a linear differential operator acting on the perturbations bu . It is convenient to expand the perturbations , 8u , in a series of the eigenfunctions of the operator C { uo } . In the case of our quadratic approximation the dependence of C { Mo } on uo disappears and the eigenfunction equation obtains the very simple form : The eigenfunctions are the well known spherical harmonics , Y : : ’ ( 8 , cp ) , defined as ( see [ 14 ] ) : and the corresponding eigenvalues are : 2394 We represent bu in a series of Y : ( 6 , cp ) . But , when writing such a series one has to take into account that there is a « high frequency » cut - off due to the discrete structure of the membrane , so we include only the terms up to nmax = Ùk ( N is the number of lipid molecules constituting the vesicle ) . Here nmaX is so selected that the number of independent amplitudes is equal to the number of lipid molecules . The exact value of nmax is not of great importance because we shall see further on that the physical quantities are only logarithmically dependent on it . Using the eigenfunctions of equation ( 18 ) we can write : where Un ( t ) are the time dependent coefficients in the expansion . Using equations ( 21 , 12 , 5 ) we obtain : This equation clearly shows that the amplitudes Um1 ( t ) are not time dependent . Therefore , they do not describe fluctuations . Moreover , using the second equation in ( 12 ) , ( ÔM ) = 0 , and the orthogonality of the spherical harmonics , one can conclude that ( U § J’ ( t ) ) = 0 , and so do Ui ( t ) = 0 . Now we can readily calculate the second variation . Substituting ( 21 ) into ( 17 ) , and thereafter into ( 16 ) , we obtain : Expression ( 23 ) gives the increase of the vesicle energy due to the thermal fluctuations as a sum of the squared amplitudes of the different modes of agitation . The ks - term in it is the only second order contribution coming from the last term in equation ( 16 ) , all the others being of higher orders , and thus neglected . If the coefficients À n ( if , p ) are positive , one can obtain the mean - squared value of each amplitude , ( 1 U : ’ ( t ) 12 ) , applying the equipartition theorem to each mode of agitation : If we take kT = 4 X 1O - 21 J , ks = 100 Mj / M2 , R = 10 - 5 m ( 10 03BCm ) , we calculate ( 1 U8 ( t ) 12 ) = 10 - 10 . This means that the fluctuations of the mean vesicle radius are very small . Now we proceed further and look for a solution of the Euler - Lagrange equation ( 15 ) in series of spherical harmonics : 2395 where Amn are constants that have to be determined . Substituting the expansion ( 25 ) into the differential equation ( 15 ) , one obtains a system of ordinary equations equivalent to it : It is easily seen that for each n # 0 , there are two possibilities : either 03BBn ( 03C3 p ) = 0 or An - 0 . As far as À n depends on the index n , if for a given value n we have ’k n 0 , then for all the others we would have k n ( ô : , p ) = A 0 , and therefore Amn = 0 . Using equations ( 25 , 22 ) , we obtain Ai + Um1 ( t ) = 0 and as far as Um1 ( t ) = 0 , we have Ai = 0 as well . Thus , the series expansion ( 25 ) is reduced either to a single term ( Ag only ) , and the equilibrium shape of the vesicle is spherical , or to a sum of a few terms ( A 0 and the different amplitudes An of any given order n ) . However , starting from a spherical vesicle and increasing the excess area ( 7 ) , the n = 2 eigenvalue À 2 ( if , p ) will first vanish for given values of J and p . A sphere to ellipsoid transition should then occur leading to a non - zero average value for the n = 2 mode ( Ar # = 0 ) . The equation of Euler - Lagrange ( 15 ) as well as its equivalent form ( 26 ) contains two parameters , a : and . Therefore , we need two supplementary conditions to determine them . These are equations ( 9 ) and ( 11 ) . Using the series expansions ( 21 , 25 ) , these supplementary conditions satisfied by the functions uo ( 0 , ç ) and 8u ( ( J , cp , t ) are transformed into relations between the amplitudes An and Un ( t ) : where s is the excess area defined in ( 7 ) . The above two equations must hold for each moment of time , and therefore , the membrane tension , J ( t ) , is a function of time determined by equation ( 28 ) . These fluctuations of the membrane tension give rise to the last term in the second variation ( 16 ) as already pointed . We see that as far as equation ( 27 ) holds , Uoo ( t ) is of second order instead of first ( as expected a priori ) , and therefore , it may be always dropped when squared . Because Um ( t ) = 0 as already mentioned , the summation on n in equations ( 27 , 28 ) can start from n = 2 . Furthermore , since the equilibrium shape of the vesicle is time independent we can take a time average of both equations : We have to stress now that it is the mean value of the membrane tension , if = if ( t ) , that enters the above equation . One can readily see that the equilibrium shape of the vesicle ( given by the ampliudes , An is influenced by the presence of the fluctuations , ( U : : ’ ( t ) 12 ) , whose mean squared values are determined by the equipartition theorem . Substituting ( 24 ) into ( 29 , 2396 30 ) one can finally obtain the relations that determine the equilibrium shape of the vesicle . In the case of a single term we have : Equation ( 28 ) contains the excess area , s , as a parameter and the average shape of the vesicle depends critically on its value . The first two equations in ( 31 ) impose an implicit dependence of the mean membrane tension , u ( s ) , and the hydrostatic pressure , p ( s ) , on the excess area , s , and therefore k , , ( u ( s ) , p ( s ) ) is determined via ( 20 ) as well . The third of them gives the value of Aô . Here , An - 0 ( for n _ 1 ) and the average vesicle shape is spherical . At a given critical value of the excess area , scr , ( determined from the condition : k 2 ( a ; ( Sc , ) , p ( Sc , » = 0 ) the amplitudes A2 are not zero anymore , and thereafter , for any value satisfying the relation s & # x3E ; scr we have : Here again the first two equations of ( 32 ) impose an implicit dependence of the membrane tension , 03C3 ( s ) , and the hydrostatic pressure , p ( s ) , on the excess area , s , and the last two of them determine the vesicle shape via the amplitudes Aô and Ai . In the case s & # x3E ; scr the vesicle m = + 2 fluctuates around an elliptical equilibrium shape m = £ + 2 I Am2 # 0 . We point out that it is Îm = - 2 / m = + 2 03A3 1 Ail2 that is determined by the last of the above equations , the sign and the relative m = - 2 proportion of different m - modes being undetermined . This is a consequence of the quadratic approximation used . Higher order terms must be included to discriminate between prolate and oblate ellipsoids ( see [ 10 ] for more detailed discussion ) and to fix the relative proportion of different m - modes ( to be published ) . As far as the vesicle tension , 03C3 ( s ) , and hydrostatic pressure , p ( s ) , depend on the excess area , s , it follows from ( 24 ) that the mean squared value of the fluctuations , ( 1 ( Umn ( t ) 12 ) , will depend on it as well : For a spherical vesicle , as long as the fluctuations are not too big ( e . g . when the quadratic approximation is valid ) the last term in the denominator is very small ( p = 2 if ) , and 2397 therefore , it can be omitted . Then equation ( 33 ) is transformed into the expression ( 34 ) previously obtained by Milner and Safran [ 10 ] : The neglected term in ( 33 ) becomes of importance in the case of an ellipsoidal vesicle ( e . g . relatively bigger excess area ) . In this case J + 6 = 0 , according to Milner and Safran [ 10 ] , and therefore the membrane tension does not vary when the excess area , s , is changed . The amplitudes of the elliptical modes ( n = 2 , m 1 - - 2 ) adjust themselves to fit the available excess area . In our model it is Àz ( u , p ) that vanishes , the membrane tension , u ( s ) , and the hydrostatic pressure , p ( s ) are functions of the excess area , s . We have U = - 6 ( p = - 12 ) , both becoming more and more negative when the excess area is increased . This result is in agreement with the conclusions made by Deuling and Helfrich [ 11 , 12 ] as well as those of Jenkins [ 17 ] , both obtained on the basis of numerical solution of the exact nonlinear equivalent of our Euler - Lagrange equation ( 15 ) . The static amplitudes of the second m = + 2 harmonies , 03A3 + 2 Am 2 , adjust themselves , according to ( 32 ) , to fit the excess area as well . m = - 2 We need to find a practical method for determining the mean membrane tension , ô . According to equation ( 34 ) the product : is independent of n as seen from the right - hand sides of the above equations . This result can be effectively used to determine a : by comparing the products in the left - hand side of equation ( 35 ) for different harmonics , n . The value thus obtained is the exact membrane tension we are looking for . The bending elastic modulus , kc , can be calculated thereafter from equation ( 35 ) . The amplitudes of the fluctuations of giant vesicles are extremely sensitive to the presence of a very small membrane tension , as already mentioned by Schneider et al . [ 7 ] . For a vesicle of radius R = 10 - 5 m ( 10 03BCm ) and kc = 10 - 19 J a tension of u = 2 x 10 - 5 mN / m leads to a two - fold decrease of the amplitudes of second harmonics , U2 ( t ) . For a small vesicle of radius R = 10 - 8 m ( 100 Â ) the tension producing the same effect is a = 20 mN / m , a value one order of magnitude higher than the membrane rupture tension , 2 - 3 mN / m , as reported by Kwok and Evans [ 2 ] . Due to the relation p - - 2 ôF , the same two - fold decrease of U2 ( t ) can alternatively be produced by osmotic effects of as low as 2 x 10 - 9 M concentration difference for a giant vesicle ( 10 03BCm ) , while 2 M are necessary for a small ( 100 Â ) one . Therefore , the small vesicles are always fluctuating even under osmotic stresses that lead to membrane rupture ! 3 . Some expérimental quantities . Now we have to find a relation between the amplitudes , ( 1 Un ( t ) 2 & # x3E ; , and an experimentally measurable quantity . It is believed that what is seen under a phase contrast microscope is the cross - section of the vesicle membrane with the focal plane of the objective . Considering the equatorial cross - section of a vesicle with a plane through its center and parallel to the XY plane of our coordinate system , given by 03B8 = 03C0 in equation ( 4 ) , we can write : 2398 The mean radius of the equatorial cross - section , p ( t ) , at a given moment , t , is : Using the series ( 25 , 21 ) , after some algebra we obtain : where : Equation ( 38 ) shows that the equatorial cross - section radius fluctuates . This effect is mainly due to the vesicle deformations changing its shape from oblate to prolate and vice - versa . The time averaged radius , p = ( p ( t ) & # x3E ; , is easily calculated because the last term in ( 38 ) vanishes when averaged over the time . Using equation ( 29 ) ( for a spherical vesicle An = 0 when n & # x3E ; 1 ) , we finally have : We see that the mean cross - section radius is equal to the mean vesicle radius , both being always smaller than the radius of a sphere of equivalent volume , an effect purely due to the existence of thermal fluctuations . Following Bivas et al . [ 15 ] we calculate the normalized angular autocorrelation function of the vesicle radius , 03BE ( y , t ) , at a given moment of time : Using the series expansions ( 25 , 21 ) , after some algebra we obtain the time averaged autocorrelation function : According to equations ( 24 , 34 ) , the amplitudes , ( 1 Umn ( t ) 12 ) , are not dependent on the index m . Taking advantage of this fact and using the addition theorem for the spherical harmonics [ 14 ] , the sum on m can be explicitly performed and the above expression is transformed into the form : This equation shows that the time averaged autocorrelation function , 03BE ( y ) , is a series of Legendre polynomials , Pn ( cos y ) , with coefficients given by the equipartition theorem , 2399 equations ( 34 ) . The term ( 2 n + 1 ) reflects the fact that for each n there are ( 2 n + 1 ) statistically independent m - modes . The last term in ( 42 ) compensates for the addition of all missing m = 0 modes to equation ( 41 ) which are otherwise necessary for the addition theorem . Up to now we were supposing that we knew the position of the vesicle center 0 , whose coordinates are given by equation ( 5 ) . But observing ( and measuring ) only the equatorial cross - section it is not possible to calculate them because the complete u ( 03B8 , ~ , t ) is necessary . The best we can do is to calculate the coordinates , ( xÓ ( t ) , yÓ ( t ) ) , of the center 0’ of the observed equatorial contour . Let ( p , cp ) and ( p’ , ç ’ ) be the polar coordinates measured with respect to point 0 and 0’ respectively . By definition we have : Let us denote the distance O’O by Rw , the angle it makes with the X axis by t / J , and the angle it is seen from a point on the contour by ~ , ( Fig . 1 ) . The primed quantities can be expressed as functions of nonprimed ones and developed in series with respect to w « 1 and 0 « 1 , keeping only the terms up to the second order . The quantities w = w ( t ) and 03C8 = 03C8 ( t ) are both unknowns that have to be determined from equations ( 43 ) . We calculate the radius , p’ ( t ) , of the equatorial cross - section defined by equation ( 37 ) , but now we use ( p’ ( q ; " t ) , q ; ’ ) instead of ( p ( cp , t ) , cp ) : Fig . 1 . - Cross - section of a vesicle in the plane ( X , Y ) . 0 is the center of the vesicle , 0’ the center of the observed cross - section . 2400 The first term in the above equation coincides with expression ( 39 ) and the last is a consequence of the fact that the center of the cross - section is fluctuating around the vesicle center . The displacement itself is a first order effect , given by U ; l ( t ) amplitudes , but its influence on the cross - section radius is of second order . Using the same approach we calculate the experimental autocorrelation function , 03BE ( y , t ) , given by the relation ( 40 ) , but now we use ( p’ ( Cf " , t ) , ~ ) instead of ( p ( cp , t ) , cp ) . Keeping only the terms up to the second order we calculate the experimental autocorrelation function , 1 ’ ( y ) = 03BE ( y , t ) : We see that the experimentally calculated autocorrelation function has the same form as the theoretical one except the extra P 1 ( cos y ) - term . Equation ( 45 ) shows that the angular autocorrelation function , 03BE’ ( y ) , is a series of Legendre polynomials , Pn ( cos y ) , with theoretical coefficients Bn ( 03C3 , kc ) : Comparing with equation ( 24 ) we conclude that En ( if , kc ) = 2 n + 1 Un ( t ) I 2 , & # x3E ; Thus we 4 03C0 have obtained the needed direct correspondence between the amplitudes of the vesicle fluctuations , Un ( t ) I 2 & # x3E ; , and the experimentally measured vesicle radius , p’ ( ~ , t ) , via the autocorrelation function , 03BE’ ( y ) . To find the value of the bending elastic modulus , kc , we calculate the experimental autocorrelation function , 03BE’ ( y , t ) , for each contour and , decomposing it into series of Legendre polynomials , we get the experimental coefficients , Bn ( t ) . We evaluate the mean values , Bn = ( Bn ( t ) , and estimate the corresponding dispersions ( standard deviations ) , Dn . Using and kc as fitting parameters we minimize the function , M ( 03C3 , kc ) : where N is the number of amplitudes ( harmonics ) used for the fitting . As far as Bn values are an arithmetic mean of a very large number of experimental Bn ( t ) data ( usually 400 or more ) , their distribution is Gaussian , therefore , the quantity M ( 03C3 , kc ) obeys a X 2 distribution with ( N - 2 ) degrees of freedom . This fact can be used to verify the quality of the fit by comparing the calculated M ( 03C3 , kc ) value with the value of X 2 - distribution with ( N - 2 ) degrees of freedom , taken from the statistical tables . It is practical to introduce the ratio of the two values , X 2 and to compare it with unity . If X R 1 the fit is acceptable othervise it is rejected . 2401 There is one more point that deserves a comment . The image formed by the microscope is projected onto the target of a video camera and is accumulated on it for the time between two successive scans , ts = 40 ms . This integration leads to smearing of the fastly moving parts of the contour , and degradation of the resolution . If one suppose that the experimentally measurable radius , p’ ( ~ ’ , t ) is the mean value over the scan time : the autocorrelation function , 03BE’ ( y ) , averaged over the period of the observation , to , would be given by the expression : This is in fact a triple integral with respect to the time in which we change the order of integration . Using the series expansions ( 25 , 21 ) and making first the integration over the period of observation , to , one obtains an expression similar to ( 41 ) , but now we have : The integral in the last equation is the correcting factor due to the camera integration . If there was no such effect ( ts = 0 ) this factor would be 1 and we would obtain the previous result ( 41 ) . The quantity Tn is the correlation time of the respective modes calculated by Milner and Safran [ 10 ] . Comparing the expressions for the correlation time ( see [ 10 ] ) with that for the mean squared amplitudes ( 34 ) one can see that they are related : where q is the viscosity of the medium surrounding the vesicle membrane . We see that , as a result of the camera integration , the value of the experimentally measured quantities , Bn , is modified by a factor depending on the ratio between the camera scan time , ts , and the correlation time of the respective modes : Using an iterative procedure , the best values of the correction factor and Bn were calculated from the experimental amplitudes Bn , and the corrected values , Bn were used in equation ( 47 ) to calculate the elastic modulus , kc . 4 . Sample preparation . Egg - yolk phosphatidylcholine ( EPC ) was prepared according to the method of Singleton et al . [ 18 ] , and dissolved in CH30H / CHCl3 ( 1 : 9 v / v ) at a concentration of 0 . 5 mglml . A small amount of this solution was sprayed on a microslide , then the solvent was removed under vacuum for about 1 hour . The microscope cell was prepared as already described in [ 15 ] 2402 except a watertight material , about 0 . 1 mm thick , made up of the silicon product CAF4 ( Rhône - Poulenc , France ) was used as a spacer . Both the microslide and the cover slip were previously treated with trimethylchlorosilan ( Sigma , U . S . A . ) for making them hydrophobic . The cell was filled with deionized water ( Millipore MQ , U . S . A . ) , and then sealed to avoid any evaporation . Giant vesicles were formed spontaneously in the cell , and generally they were studied one day to one week after the sample preparation . 5 . Vesicle observation and image processing . Giant vesicles were observed using an inverted phase contrast microscope IM35 ( Carl Zeiss , F . R . G . ) ( objective PH 100 x , NA = 1 . 25 ) . The thermal fluctuations were monitored vi a a contrast - enhancing video camera C2400 - 07 ( Hamamatsu Photonics , Japan ) and recorded on a U - matic video tape recorder ( Sony , Japan ) for at least eight minutes . Video images , taken at regular time intervals of 1 s , were digitized with a Pericolor 2001 image processing system ( Numelec , France ) . Digitized images were constituted of 512 x 512 8 - bit pixels , and , with the magnification used , 1 pixel roughly corresponded to 0 . 1 03BCm . An out - of - focus image was usually subtracted from that of the vesicle to eliminate mottle or background heterogeneities . Digitized images were then transferred to a VAX - 8600 computer ( Digital , U . S . A . ) for the determination of the contour coordinates . This was performed as in [ 8 ] by searching for the minimum intensity along the vesicle radius in given directions . In the conditions used , the contours appeared like a dark line of about 5 pixels width at half - height . In order to increase the accuracy on the contour determination , the vesicle radius in a given direction was calcùlated as the intensity - weighted average of the radii of these five points . The number of contour points so determined was roughly equal to the number of pixels constituting the contour , i . e . between 500 and 1000 depending on the vesicle size . An example of what can be obtained is shown in figure 2 , where calculated contours have been superimposed to the digitized images of vesicles . Fig . 2 . - Images of two different vesicles obtained after digitization and background subtraction . The white line represents the calculated contour coordinates . Left figure : images taken at different time intervals of a vesicle having a mean radius of 8 . 45 03BCm , kc = 0 . 42 x 10 - 19 J , u = 22 . 6 . Right figure : picture of a vesicle having a mean radius of 14 . 05 tim , kc = 0 . 64 x 10 - 19 J , u = 93 . 3 . 2403 The second step of the treatment was to eliminate the contours corresponding to noisy records , which can originate from a bad microscope focusing , for example . For this purpose , the experimental contours were roughly represented by a Fourier series limited to the first five terms . All the experimental points being farther than a chosen critical distance ( = 2 pixels ) from that representation were deleted . If the number of deleted points for a given contour exceeded some value ( = 5 % ) , the whole contour itself was eliminated . Usually , less than 5 % of the total number of digitized images was lost after such manipulation . The rest were used for the determination of the bending elastic constant . 6 . Numerical simulations . The only way to check the validity of the theoretical model is to use the function ( 47 ) with as many different harmonics , Bn , as possible . It is obvious however , that due to the experimental limitations the number , N , of the harmonics that can actually be observed and investigated is limited . At least three important factors have to be considered : ( i ) the limited number of analysed images ( contours ) , ( ii ) the precision on the contour coordinates , and ( iii ) the time resolution of video ( 40 ms ) compared to the correlation times of the fluctuations modes . An easy way to estimate the effect of these different factors is to perform computer simulations . In a first step , simulated contours were created without taking into account the third factor , i . e . video time . The theoretical values of the mean - squared Fourier amplitudes corresponding to a given set of values for kc , if , and the mean vesicle radius were calculated as in [ 8 ] . The squared Fourier amplitudes for a given contour were obtained by multiplying these theoretical values by random numbers obeying a X 2 - distribution . These amplitudes were then randomly decomposed into the sine and cosine components of the Fourier series , which allowed the angular dependence of the radius of the simulated contour to be computed . A Gaussian noise could then be added to the vesicle radius , with a chosen standard deviation , in order to account for the experimental errors on the contour coordinates . These simulated contours were further analysed in the same way as the experimental ones . An example of such a simulation is shown in figure 3 . In this case , 40 contours , which roughly corresponds to the number used in the previous works [ 8 , 15 ] , have been generated Fig . 3 . - Simulated data : values of kc versus the order n of fluctuations . 40 contours were generated , using k , = 10 - 19 J , Ir = 0 , and a mean vesicle radius equal to 100 pixels . No noise was added to the calculated vesicle radii . 2404 without any added noise . It is clear that the obtained values of kc present large variations versus n , the order of the harmonics . However , when the number of generated contours is equal to 400 , kc remains rather constant up to n = 20 , as seen in figure 4 , even in the presence of a Gaussian noise of 1 % on the vesicle radius . Such a noise corresponds to an error of 1 pixel on the radius for a 20 & # x3E ; m diameter vesicle , i . e . to the expected error in normal experimental conditions . Fig . 4 . - Simulated data : autocorrelation functions ( left Fig . ) and dependence of kc versus the order n ( right Fig . ) . Four hundred contours were generated , in the presence ( full line ) or absence ( dotted line ) of a Gaussian noise equal to 1 % on the vesicle radius . Entered values for simulations : kc = 10 - 19 J , 03C3 = 0 , and mean vesicle radius = 100 pixels . Another interesting point is worth mentioning . It can be seen that the autocorrelation functions obtained either with or without noise are almost identical , except in one point , y = 0 . So , the noise contributes to the autocorrelation function mainly in the form of a 8 - function at y - 0 , as already pointed out in [ 15 ] , and it has practically no effect on the values of kc calculated from the Legendre amplitudes , Bn , of the autocorrelation function . When the analysis of these simulated data is performed by direct Fourier decomposition of the contours , as in [ 8 ] , the presence of noise leads to an important decrease of kc for wavevectors q 8 ( Fig . 5 ) . The noise contribution can be considerably reduced in this case as well , but an appropriate white noise have to be subtracted from the Fourier amplitudes , as shown in figure 5 . Finally , we should mention that the accurate value of kc can be recovered from simulated contours generated with initial values of J ranging from 0 to 200 , even in the presence of a 1 % Gaussian noise on the vesicle radius ( data not shown ) . All the preceding simulations have been performed assuming that the time resolution of video is much higher than the frequency of the fluctuations , which is obviously not the case when high order harmonics are considered . So , an attempt has been done to quantify this effect by using the correction factor ( 52 ) derived above . As a first approximation , the theoretical mean - squared Fourier amplitudes of the contours were multiplied by this factor , taking the video time ts = 40 ms , and using the relation ( 51 ) to calculate the correlation times 2405 Fig . 5 . - Analysis of simulated data by Fourier decomposition of the contours : ( - - - - - - - - - ) without added noise on the vesicle radius ; ( - ) in the presence of a Gaussian noise of 1 % ; ( - - - - - - - ) in the presence of noise , after subtraction of an appropriate white noise from the Fourier amplitudes . Entered values for the simulations were the same as in figure 3 . Tn of the respective modes . An example of what can be obtained is shown in figure 6 , the entered values being in this case : kc = 0 . 5 x 10 - 19 J , J = 50 , vesicle radius = 100 pixels , Gaussian noise = 1 pixel . When the fit is done as usual , using only the X 2 - - 1 criterion , 12 modes can be fitted ( Fig . 6A , solid line ) , and this leads to kc = ( 0 . 71 ± 0 . 05 ) x 10 - 19 J and J = 35 ± 4 , i . e . to values clearly different from the entered ones . Moreover , a significant increase of kc is observed when n 13 . On the contrary , if the fit is limited to the first few modes , whose correlation times are larger than the video time , the obtained values are nearly equal to the entered ones : for example , when n = 2 , . . . , 7 , ( corrélation times - 0 . 1 s ) , one obtains kc = ( 0 . 49 ± 0 . 09 ) x 10 - 19 J and if = 57 ± 15 ( Fig . 6A , dotted line ) . Finally , when the correction factor is introduced in the analysis of simulated data ( Fig . 6A , dashed line ) , kc remains constant up to n = 20 , and the recovered value kc = ( 0 . 43 ± 0 . 03 ) x 10 - 19 J , is again very close to the entered one . The results obtained by direct Fourier analysis of these simulated data are reported in figure 6B . The solid line represents the values of kc versus the wavevector q of fluctuations , without taking into account the effect of if and the white noise contribution . As expected , the entered positive value of if leads to large values of k , at low wavevectors . A plateau is observed for q = 10 with kc = 0 . 8 x 10 - 19 J , then k , decreases for q . 19 . It is interesting to note that the decrease of kc at high q is much less pronounced than in the case of figure 5 , when the effect of integration time is not included . These data clearly demonstrate that the 2406 Fig . 6 . - Simulated data : effect of the integration time of the video camera . ( A ) Values of kc derived from the autocorrelation function : full line : using the XR , 1 criterion ; dotted line : considering only modes with n = 5 ; dashed line : after introducing the correction factor ( Eq . ( 52 ) ) . ( B ) Values of kc derived from the Fourier analysis of the contours : full line : rough analysis ; dotted line : after white noise subtraction and using J = 35 . contributions of the Gaussian noise and the effect of video integration time act in opposite way on the final result . However , in this case , the noise contribution prevails over the effect of correlation times , so that a decrease of kc is still observed . The dashed line in figure 6B represents the values of kc obtained after white noise subtraction and after introducing J = 35 . A constant value of kc 0 . 75 x 10 - 19 J , once again very different from the entered one , is then obtained for q 12 . 7 . Experimental results and discussion . 7 . 1 EXAMPLES OF GIANT EPC VESICLES . - An example of experimental data is shown in figure 7 , for a vesicle of 19 . 4 03BCm in diameter : 384 contours have been analysed , either using the autocorrelation function and its decomposition into Legendre amplitudes Bn ( Fig . 7A , B ) , or by direct Fourier analysis of the contours ( Fig . 7C ) . As can be seen in figure 7B , different behaviours are observed depending on the criteria used to fit the Legendre amplitudes , Bn , of the autocorrelation function . When the only criterium used is X R , 1 , up to 16 amplitudes can be fitted ( Fig . 7B , solid line ) , and kc = ( 0 . 69 ± 0 . 03 ) x 10 - 19 J with J = 26 ± 2 is obtained . It is noteworthy that kc increases for orders n - - 14 , as expected if the video time is larger than the correlation times of these modes . When the analysis is limited to the first few amplitudes , having correlation times larger than 0 . 16 s ( i . e . at least fourfold larger than the video time ) , the dotted line in figure 7B , with kc = ( 0 . 44 ± 0 . 1 ) x 10 - 19 J and u = 47 ± 15 is obtained . Finally , when the correction factor is used as described in the preceding section , a good fip up to n = 21 can be obtained , with kc = ( 0 . 40 ± 0 . 02 ) x 10 - 19 J and J = 55 ± 5 . The Fourier analysis of the contours of the same vesicle is presented in figure 7C . When u is taken equal to zero ( solid line ) , kc first decreases at low wavevectors , q , due to the small 2407 excess area of the vesicle . Then a plateau is reached around q = 10 , and finally , an increase is observed for q & # x3E ; 15 . In this case , therefore , the noise contribution to the measured Fourier amplitudes is smaller than the effect due to the video integration time . The comparison of the experimental data with the simulations for a vesicle of nearly the same characteristics , in the presence of 1 pixel Gaussian noise ( Fig . 6B ) , seems to indicate that the experimental noise on the vesicle radius is significantly less than the indicated value . Using = 26 , the dotted line in figure 7C is obtained , and k , = 0 . 7 x 10 - 19 J remains practically constant for q ‘ 13 . The behaviour is quite similar to that obtained from the Legendre amplitudes of the autocorrelation function ( Fig . 7B , solid line ) . Fig . 7 . - Example of experimental data obtained with a vesicle of 19 . 4 ktm in diameter , and using 384 contours : ( A ) autocorrelation function e ( y ) of the fluctuations ; ( B ) dependence of kc versus the order n , deduced from e ( y ) : full line : using the X2 R - - 1 criterion ; dotted line : considering only modes with correlation times larger than 0 . 16 s ; dashed line : after introducing the correction factor ( Eq . ( 52 ) ) ; ( C ) values of kc derived from the Fourier analysis of the contours : full line : rough analysis ; dotted line : using 03C3 = 26 . 2408 7 . 2 EFFECT OF VIDEO INTEGRATION TIME : SUM OF DIGITIZED IMAGES . - It is clear from the above example that the video integration time constitutes a serious limitation in the study of fluctuating vesicles . Another mean to illustrate this effect is to increase at wish the characteristic time of video , which can be roughly done by adding successive digitized images before performing the analysis . Of course , it would be much better to act in the opposite way , i . e . to decrease the integration time . Unfortunately , this is not so easy . The result from the analysis of contours obtained after such additions of digitized images is presented in figure 8 . A vesicle of radius 14 itm was used in this case . The analysis has been performed either as usual , on single images ( solid line ) , or after summing two ( dotted line ) or four ( dashed line ) successive images . Figure 8A shows the dependence of kc on n when the only criterion taken into account is x 2 1 . In this case , the kc value obtained increases from 1 . 0 x 10 - 19 J to 1 . 4 x 10 - 19 J and to 2 . 0 x 10 - 19 J for a single , sum of two and sum of four images , respectively . Fig . 8 . - Values of kc versus the order n of fluctuations obtained from the usual analysis ( full line ) , or after summing 2 ( dotted line ) or 4 ( dashed line ) digitized images : ( A ) using the x2 = 1 criterion ; ( B ) considering only modes with n = 5 ; ( C ) after introducing the correction factor ( Eq . ( 52 ) ) . 2409 When the analysis is limited to the first few amplitudes only ( having the longest correlation times ) , figure 8B is obtained . The kc values are very close to each other at low orders , therefore , the integration time has practically no effect on these modes . But , one can observe an increase of kc with n , which is much larger when the number of added images is higher . Finally , the correction factor has been introduced for the analysis of these data , using 40 ms , 80 ms , and 160 ms as integration times ( depending on the number of summed images ) . As can be seen in figure 8C , the dependence of kc on n is almost identical in the three cases considered here . Moreover , kc remains practically constant up to n = 21 . This example is a strong support that the effect of the video integration time can be properly taken into account via the correction factor . 7 . 3 MEAN BEHAVIOUR OF GIANT EPC VESICLES . - An important characteristic of the analysis of thermal fluctuations , compared to the usual biophysical techniques , is that it does not deal with large populations of vesicles , but on the contrary with individuals . So , it is quite necessary to check both the reproductibility of the method and an eventual variability of the system , by studying the behaviour of a number of vesicles . For this purpose , thermal fluctuations of 62 giant EPC vesicles have been recorded and analysed . Among all these vesicles , 14 led to negative values of if and could not be well fitted . The 48 remaining vesicles have been analysed using different criteria , as described below . The obtained results are presented in the form of normalized distributions of the obtained kc values . These histograms have been constructed by summing the individual contributions of each vesicle , which have been assumed to be Gaussian distributions centered on the respective kc values deduced from Legendre amplitudes Bn , with standard deviations equal to errors estimated from the goodness of the fit . Disregarding any effect related to experimental limitations , the « best » vesicles should be those leading to a good fit ( XR , 1 ) on the maximum number of amplitudes ( N & # x3E ; 20 ) . Seventeen vesicles fulfil these conditions and lead to the histogram plotted in figure 9A . As can be seen , the histogram is constituted of two ill - defined peaks , the first one centered at ( 0 . 69 : : t 0 . 06 ) x 10 - 19 J , and the second one , much more important , at ( 1 . 02 ± 0 . 13 ) x 10 - 19 J . On the contrary , if one takes into account the problem of video integration time , the best values of kc must be obtained by limiting the analysis to the modes having correlation times much longer than 40 ms . This has been done by considering only those harmonics whose correlation time was larger than 160 ms , and selecting only the vesicles satisfying this condition up to at least n = 5 . In this case , one obtains the histogram of figure 9B , with only 10 vesicles . The main peak of this histogram corresponds to kc = ( 0 . 53 ± 0 . 11 ) x 10 - 19 J . Two other minor peaks can also be distinguished , at ( 0 . 91 : : t 0 . 17 ) x 10 - 19 J and ( 1 . 45 ± 0 . 15 ) x 10 - 19 J . It is interesting to notice that these values are about twofold and threefold larger than that of the first peak . It must be mentioned that increasing the threshold time to 300 ms leads to a smaller value kc = 0 . 45 x 10 - 19 J . However , only five vesicles can then be fitted . Finally , the vesicles have been analysed using the correction factor as already discussed . However , only the amplitudes corrected by less than a twofold factor have been considered . In these conditions , as many as 42 vesicles can be correctly fitted on more than 5 amplitudes with X R _ 1 , and the obtained distribution of kc is plotted in figure 10A . The best fit of this histogram using a sum of three Gaussian distributions ( dotted line ) leads to kc = ( 0 . 4 ± 0 . 04 ) x 10 - 19 J , ( 0 . 51 ± 0 . 16 ) x 10 - 19 J , and ( 1 . 3 ± 0 . 2 ) x 10 - 19 J . Thus , the two first populations are not clearly distinguished , and can be fitted by a single Gaussian with kc = ( 0 . 43 : : t 0 . 11 ) x 10 - 19 J . It is worth mentioning that almost the same value for 2410 Fig . 9 . - Histograms of kc values , obtained : ( A ) with 17 vesicles fitted up to n = 21 with x£ = 1 ; ( B ) with 10 vesicles fitted up to at least n = 5 , with the correlation times of thèse modes ± 0 . 16 s . The full lines represent the experimental histogram , and the dotted lines correspond to the best fits obtained using a sum of 2 ( A ) or 3 ( B ) Gaussian distributions ( see text ) . Fig . 10 . - Histograms of kc values , obtained : ( A ) with 42 vesicles fitted up to at least n = 6 , using the correction factor for the integration time of the camera ( Eq . ( 52 ) ) , with x 2 1 ; ( B ) with the same 42 vesicles fitted up to at least n = 5 with XR , 1 , but without using the correction factor . The full lines represent the experimental histogram , and the dotted lines correspond to the best fits obtained using a sum of 3 ( A ) or 1 ( B ) Gaussian distributions ( see text ) . kc is obtained by considering only the long correlation time amplitudes . For comparison , the histogram obtained with the same vesicles , but without correction factor and using as criterion only X R , 1 on at least 4 amplitudes , is represented in figure 10B . As can be seen , the 2411 distribution is then very broad and , when fitted with a single Gaussian , the first peak leads to kc = ( 0 . 80 ± 0 . 24 ) x 10 - 19 J . It is interesting to consider the behaviour of some other physical properties of the studied vesicles . The size distribution of the 42 vesicles well - fitted using the correction factor is represented in figure 11A . Their diameters range from about 10 jjum to 40 03BCm , with a maximum centered around 20 03BCm . However , when the criterion used is the correlation time of harmonics , as in the histogram of figure 9B , only the large - size vesicles ( with diameters larger than 18 03BCm , dotted line in Fig . 11A ) , are retained . The membrane tension can be calculated from U , using equation ( 15 ) . As shown in figure 11B , the distribution is broad with values between ( 0 - 15 ) 10 x - 5 mN / m for most of the analysed vesicles . An interesting point is that the long correlation time vesicles exhibit a sharper distribution , at low values of the membrane tension ( 0 - 3 ) x 10 - 5 mN / m . Fig . 11 . - Size ( A ) and membrane tension ( B ) distributions of the studied vesicles . The full line corresponds to the 42 vesicles represented in the figure 9A , and the dotted line to the 10 vesicles of figure 8B . 8 . Conclusion . The main conclusion that can be drawn from the above results is that thermal fluctuations of giant vesicles constitute a useful tool to quantify the bending elasticity of lipid bilayers , provided that some requirements are fulfilled , both at experimental and theoretical levels . First , fluctuation amplitudes being random variables , the precision is directly related to the number of analysed contours . As illustrated by simulations , several hundred contours must be digitized and analysed to obtain a good accuracy . With the experimental set - up used in our laboratory , this can be routinely done in about 1 - 2 hours , which is not too much time - consuming . Future development , based on real - time image processing , should still consider - ably increase these technical capabilities . Another important point is the precision on the contour coordinates , which depends on the magnification used and on the resolution of the microscope , the camera , the video tape recorder , and the image digitizer . However , simulations clearly show that , as far as the error 2412 on the vesicle radius is a random Gaussian noise , its contribution is almost completely cancelled by the use of the autocorrelation function and of its decomposition into associated Legendre amplitudes , which remain statistically significant on more than 20 modes . On the contrary , the noise largely contributes to the mean - squared Fourier amplitudes of the contours , resulting in an apparent decrease of the calculated kc values for wavevectors q & # x3E ; 8 . This effect can be readily corrected , at least in simulated data , by subtracting an appropriate level of white noise from the Fourier amplitudes . However , in the case of experimental data , this becomes much more difficult , if not impossible , due to the occurence of another experimental limitation , the camera integration time , which acts in the opposite way . Indeed , as already stressed in [ 9 ] , the camera integration time , t , = 40 ms , is expected to decrease the amplitudes of modes having correlation times of the same order of magnitude as , or smaller than ts . Both simulated and experimental data clearly show that this effect cannot be ignored in the analysis of thermal fluctuations . Two attempts can be made to overcome this difficulty . The first one consists of limiting the analysis to the harmonics having Tn & # x3E ; ts . However , this method , which a priori looks quite satisfactory , suffers from some serious disadvantages . Indeed , if one considers a vesicle of 10 03BCn in diameter , which corresponds to the typical size in previous studies , one can calculate that 03C4mn decreases from 0 . 95 s for n = 2 down to about 40 ms for n = 6 , in the favorable case = 0 and k , = 0 . 5 x 10 - 19 J . Fortunately , Tn is proportional to the third power of the vesicle radius , so this kind of analysis can be nevertheless performed , provided that large enough vesicles of low membrane tension are available . This limitation is well - illustrated in figure 11 , which shows that only vesicles of about 20 f . Lm or more , with o , - - 3 x 10 - 5 mN / m , satisfy such drastic conditions . Moreover , even with these very large vesicles , only few amplitudes can be analysed , typically between 4 and 7 . This necessarily leads to a loss of precision in determining kc and if , and to a broadening of the final histogram . Another way of taking into account the effect of the integration time is to introduce a correction factor in the analysis , as described in section 3 . The validity of this factor is entirely based on the assumption that the experimentally determined contours correspond to the mean values of the actual contours over the integration time , a hypothesis not quite obvious . However , at least two features argue for the usefulness of this correction : ( i ) it leads to values of kc very close to those obtained from the long correlation time harmonics , and ( ii ) it allows the « good » value of kc to be recovered after summation of two or four digitized images , provided that the integration time ts is multiplied by a factor two or four , respectively . At the theoretical level , it is now clear that the assumption for the independence of the different fluctuation harmonics , made in previous studies [ 9 , 15 ] , is not tenable in view of the experimental data . Indeed , large variations in the kc values are obtained at low orders , even when the experimental limitations described above can be neglected . A complete and exact theory has been developed here to account for both constraints that are exerted upon thermal fluctuations , namely the constant area and constant volume of the vesicle . This has been done via two Lagrange multipliers related to the membrane tension and hydrostatic pressure difference . However , these two parameters are not independent , and only one of them , either if or p , has to be considered . Hence , the final expression for kc is almost the same as that proposed in [ 10 ] . This theoretical model holds for all the vesicles having positive values of if , i . e . for a spherical average contour . Finally , applying this method to a relatively large number of giant EPC vesicles , one obtains for the bending modulus a value : kc = ( 0 . 40 - 0 . 53 ) x 10 - 19 J , with membrane tensions ranging below 15 x 10 - 5 mN / m . First , it is noteworthy that these membrane tensions are extremely low , experimentally undetectable by classical techniques . Nevertheless , they 2413 modify considerably the amplitudes of thermal fluctuations , and must absolutely be taken into account . This is illustrated in figure 2 , where the contours of two vesicles having different values of J are reported : deformations are clearly larger in the case of 03C3 = 22 . 6 ( top figure ) compared to if = 93 . 3 ( bottom figure ) . On the other hand , the value obtained for kc is of the same order as those previously reported [ 9 , 15 ] . However , it must be stressed that all the above - mentioned problems , both at the experimental and theoretical levels , have been for the first time taken into account in the analysis , which strongly supports the reliability of the obtained results . Indeed , it is clear that , in the case of the direct Fourier transform of the contours , as performed in [ 9 ] , the noise contribution together with the effects of if and of the video integration time can balance each other , and lead to an apparent constancy of k , , in some range of wavevectors q . The obtained value of kc , therefore , reflects these three contributions , in addition to the true bending elasticity . The autocorrelation function of the fluctuations has already been used in [ 15 ] . However , a global fit of this function , instead of its decomposition into Legendre amplitudes , was done without considering the effect of nonzero membrane tension , ôF . Thus , the derived value of kc was mainly dependent on the behaviour of the 2nd harmonic , which is extremely sensitive to the variations of the membrane tension . In conclusion , it can be stressed that most of the conditions required to truly extract the bending elasticity of lipid bilayers from thermal fluctuations can be fulfilled : analysis of a large number of contours to obtain a meaningful statistics , suppression of the noise contribution , use of an appropriate mathematical model to take the effect of membrane tension into account . The only remaining limiting factor in the proposed method is the integration time of standard video devices . As shown above , this difficulty can be overcome either by considering only the first harmonics of very large vesicles having low membrane tensions , or by using a proper correction factor . However , it would be much more satisfactory to decrease the integration time of the experimental set - up , down to about 1 ms . This last major improvement is currently under investigation in our laboratory . Acknowledgments . We would like to thank Prof . E . Sackmann and Prof . W . Helfrich for helpful discussions during the Second ECIS Conference ( 19 - 22 Sept . 1988 , Arcachon , France ) , where part of this work [ 19 ] was presented . One of us ( M . D . M . ) thanks C . N . R . S . for financial support and all his colleagues for the excellent atmosphere during his stay in C . R . P . P . , ( C . N . R . S . ) , where the work was done . This work ( 1 ) was made within the frame of the scientific cooperation between C . N . R . S . ( France ) and Bulgarian Academy of Sciences . ( 1 ) This work was supported in part : by Ministère de la Recherche et de l’Enseignement Superieur ( France ) , Grant 87C00181 , by Region Aquitaine ( France ) , and by Bulgarian Ministry of Culture , Science and Education , Contract 587 / 15 . 07 . 1987 . References [ 1 ] HELFRICH W . , Z . Naturforsch . 28c ( 1973 ) 693 . [ 2 ] KWOK R . and EVANS E . , Biophys . J . 35 ( 1981 ) 637 . [ 3 ] EVANS E . and NEEDHAM D . , Faraday Discuss . Chem . Soc . 81 ( 1986 ) 267 . [ 4 ] SERVUSS R . M . , HARBICH W . and HELFRICH W . , Biochim . Biophys . Acta 436 ( 1976 ) 900 . [ 5 ] SAKURAI I . and KAWAMURA Y . , Biochim . Biophys . Acta 735 ( 1983 ) 189 . 2414 [ 6 ] SCHNEIDER M . B . , JENKINS J . T . and WEBB W . W . , Biophys . J . 45 ( 1984 ) 891 . [ 7 ] SCHNEIDER M . B . , JENKINS J . T . and WEBB W . W . , J . Phys . France 45 ( 1984 ) 1457 . [ 8 ] ENGELHARDT H . , DUWE H . P . and SACKMANN E . , J . Phys . Lett . France 46 ( 1985 ) L - 395 . [ 9 ] DUWE H . P . , ENGELHARDT H . , ZILKER A . and SACKMANN E . , Mol . Cryst . Liq . Cryst . 152 ( 1987 ) 1 . [ 10 ] MILNER S . T . and SAFRAN S . A . , Phys . Rev . A 36 ( 1987 ) 4371 . [ 11 ] DEULING H . J . and HELFRICH W . , Biophys . J . 16 ( 1976 ) 861 . [ 12 ] DEULING H . J . and HELFRICH W . , J . Phys . France 37 ( 1976 ) 1335 . [ 13 ] HARBICH W . , DEULING H . J . and HELFRICH W . , J . Phys . France 38 ( 1977 ) 727 . [ 14 ] ARFKEN G . , Mathematical Methods for Physicists ( Academic Press , New York - San Francisco - London ) 1970 . [ 15 ] BIVAS I . , HANUSSE P . , BOTHOREL P . , LALANNE J . and AGUERRE - CHARIOL O . , J . Phys . France 48 ( 1987 ) 855 . [ 16 ] HELFRICH W . , SERVUSS R . M . , Nuovo Cimento 3D ( 1984 ) 137 . [ 17 ] JENKINS J . T . , J . Math . Biol . 4 ( 1977 ) 143 . [ 18 ] SINGLETON W . S . , GRAY M . S . , BLOWN M . L . and WHITE J . L . , J . Am . Oil Chem . 42 ( 1965 ) 53 . [ 19 ] FAUCON J . F . , MÉLÉARD P . , MITOV M . D . , BIVAS I . , BOTHOREL P . , Colloid and Polym . Sci . ( in press ) .