Compartmentalization from the outside : the extracellular matrix and functional microdomains in the brain Alexander Dityatev 1 , Constanze I . Seidenbecher 2 and Melitta Schachner 3 , 4 1 Department of Neuroscience and Brain Technologies , Italian Institute of Technology , via Morego 30 , Genova , 16163 Italy 2 Leibniz - Institut fu¨r Neurobiologie , Brenneckestr . 6 , 39118 Magdeburg , Germany 3 Zentrum fu¨r Molekulare Neurobiologie Hamburg , Falkenried 94 , Hamburg , 20251 Germany 4 Keck Center for Collaborative Neuroscience and Department of Cell Biology and Neuroscience , Rutgers University , Piscataway , NJ 08854 , USA The extracellular matrix ( ECM ) of the central nervous system is well recognized as a migration and diffusion barrier that allows for the trapping and presentation of growth factors to their receptors at the cell surface . Recent data highlight the importance of ECM molecules as synaptic and perisynaptic scaffolds that direct the clustering of neurotransmitter receptors in the postsyn - aptic compartment and that present barriers to reduce the lateral diffusion of membrane proteins away from synapses . The ECM also contributes to the migration and differentiation of stem cells in the neurogenic niche and organizes the polarized localization of ion channels and transporters at contacts between astrocytic pro - cesses and blood vessels . Thus , the ECM contributes to functional compartmentalization in the brain . Introduction The extracellular space , which accounts for approximately 20 % of the total volume of the mature brain [ 1 ] , is ﬁlled with a highly organized extracellular matrix ( ECM ) . ECM mole - cules are already present in the developing embryo , where they play important roles in central nervous system ( CNS ) development . ECM molecules are also decisive players in the adult CNS , where they are present in almost every structure of the brain and spinal cord [ 2 ] . There are multiple forms of ECM structures in the CNS . The most conspicuous of these are the chondroitin sulfate - rich perineuronal nets ( PNNs ; Glossary ) that are associated with mature neurons , and a basal lamina - like ECM that is localized at the blood – brain barrier and in neurogenic niches . Despite the heterogeneity of the ECM throughout the brain and during different developmental stages ( Table 1 ) , it serves a rather universal role as an extracellular scaffold and as a barrier for reducing the diffusion of soluble and membrane - associated molecules . The ECM , therefore , con - tributes to the clustering of signaling molecules in func - tional microdomains in neurons and glial cells , as reviewed below . Other important functions of the ECM , such as in the regulation of signaling through cell surface receptors , synaptic plasticity , epilepsy and in response to injury , have been discussed elsewhere [ 3 – 7 ] . The ECM of the neurogenic niche and its function as a diffusion and cell migration barrier ECM molecules contribute to the migration and differenti - ation of stem cells in both the embryonic and adult brain . Review Glossary Basal lamina : a layer of the ECM commonly found at the interfaces between different cell types . At the electron microscopic level , the basal lamina is composed of an electron - dense layer called the lamina densa ( composed of type IV collagen ) and an electron - lucid layer called the lamina lucida ( consisting of laminin , dystroglycan and associated proteins ) . Fluorescence recovery after photobleaching ( FRAP ) experiments : in these experimentsa flash of light is used to bleachfluorescentlylabeled moleculesin the region of interest . If these molecules are able to diffuse , the non - photobleached fluorescent molecules will migrate into the region of interest and the fluorescent signal at this area will gradually increase in brightness . The rate of recovery provides information about lateral mobility of molecules . Fractones : fractones are conspicuous aggregates of ECM molecules in the neurogenic niche that possess a microscopically highly complex fractal - like structure , hence their name . Fractones display some morphological features of basal laminae . The glycoproteins of fractones are different isoforms of laminin chains , collagen type IV , nidogen and , to a lesser extent in the adult , TNC . Glycosaminoglycans : glycosaminoglycans are long , unbranched polysacchar - ides comprising a repeating disaccharide unit . The repeating unit consists of a hexose ( a six - carbon sugar ) or a hexuronic acid that is linked to a hexosamine ( a six - carbon sugar containing nitrogen ) . Hyaluronidase : an enzyme that degrades hyaluronic acid . Lecticans : a family of CSPGs , which includes aggrecan , versican , brevican and neurocan . These molecules bind to hyaluronan via their N - terminal domains and to the glycoprotein TNR via their C - terminal domains . Their interaction with hyaluronan is stabilized by link proteins . TNR forms dimers and trimers that crosslink and stabilize hyaluronan – lectican complexes . Lipid rafts : detergent - insoluble cholesterol - and glycolipid - enriched micro - domains of the cell membrane . Long - term potentiation ( LTP ) : LTP is a long - lasting enhancement in synaptic transmission . After the initial phase of LTP , i . e . induction , there is a period of stabilization ( consolidation ) , during which LTP becomes invulnerable to disruption by different conditions , which do not affect naı¨ve synapses but reverse LTP when applied immediately after its induction . Neurogenic niche : this niche is a zone in which stem cells are retained during and after ontogenetic development to produce new cells in the nervous system . Perineuronal nets ( PNNs ) : PNNs are conspicuous aggregates of ECM molecules that embed cell bodies and proximal dendrites of many neurons in a mesh - like structure that interdigitates with synaptic contacts and astrocytic processes . In molecular terms , PNNs form a meshwork of interconnected molecules that contain the glycosaminoglycan hyaluronan ( also called hyaluronic acid ) , CSPGs , TNR and link proteins . PNNs develop concomitantly with the maturation of brain circuits . They possess a diverse molecular composition ; hyaluronic acid is commonly present , but some CSPGs and glycan epitopes are selectively accumulated only in subsets of PNNs . Volumetransmission : themodeofsignaltransmissionwhichischaracterizedby diffusion of signaling molecules in a three - dimensional fashion within the brain extracellular fluid before they activate or modulate receptors on target cells . Corresponding authors : Dityatev , A . ( alexander . dityatev @ iit . it ) ; Schachner , M . ( Schachner @ Biology . Rutgers . Edu ) . 0166 - 2236 / $ – see front matter (cid:2) 2010 Elsevier Ltd . All rights reserved . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . tins . 2010 . 08 . 003 Trends in Neurosciences , November 2010 , Vol . 33 , No . 11 503