PACM on Human - Computer Interaction , Vol . 5 , No . CSCW2 , Article 397 , Publication date : October 2021 . Examining the Design and Development of a Social Justice Makerspace KAYLA DESPORTES , SHIRI MUND , New York University , USA CLARISA JAMES , DIVAS for Social Justice , USA In our society , where technologies continue to act as a marginalizing force for various individuals and communities , makerspaces present unique opportunities for community - driven work that engages people with a variety of communal technologies , knowledge , and work practices . However , makerspaces grew out of largely exclusionary discourses , which continue to neglect non - dominant technology practices , knowledge bases , and communities . Despite these origins , research remains largely optimistic about the potential for makerspaces to provide equitable opportunities for those stereotypically excluded to engage , learn , and build with technologies . We mirror this optimism through our work examining how makerspaces might be positioned to address social inequities while supporting community growth and development . This paper traces the development of a social justice makerspace situated within a community of color in the United States . The work contributes a contextual analysis of the design of a makerspace explicitly positioned to forefront community voices and address issues of social inequities . We highlight community perspectives within our situated design process as we draw out the themes and tensions that arose . Applying a social justice framework from Dombrowski et al . [ 23 ] and Lötter’s [ 45 ] to our findings we demonstrate how makerspaces can be positioned to address social inequities through : identifying , educating , and communicating about inequities ; engaging in the distribution of resources and opportunities ; and enabling capacity building at the individual and structural levels . We highlight how an asset - based orientation can position the makerspace to grow in effective ways to address community issues .  CCS Concepts : • Social and professional topics ~ Professional topics ~ Computing education ~ Computing literacy • Social and professional topics ~ Professional topics ~ Computing education ~ Informal education KEYWORDS : Makerspace ; hackerspace ; maker cultures ; participatory action research ACM Reference format : Kayla DesPortes , Shiri Mund , and Clarisa James . 2021 . Examining the Design and Development of a Social Justice Makerspace . In Proceedings of the ACM on Human - Computer Interaction , Vol . 5 , CSCW2 , Article 397 ( October 2021 ) , 27 pages , https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3479541 1 INTRODUCTION Inequities surrounding the access , use , and implementation of computing technologies are multidimensional and complex . These inequities cause harm within various marginalized communities . Harm can range from algorithmic biases that act as oppressive forces [ 53 , 56 ] , to the Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation on the first page . Copyrights for components of this work owned by others than the author ( s ) must be honored . Abstracting with credit is permitted . To copy otherwise , or republish , to post on servers or to redistribute to lists , requires prior specific permission and / or a fee . Request permissions from Permissions @ acm . org . 2573 - 0142 / 2021 / 10 – Art397 $ 15 . 00 © Copyright is held by the owner / author ( s ) . Publication rights licensed to ACM . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3479541 397 397 : 2 Kayla DesPortes , Shiri Mund , & Clarisa James PACM on Human - Computer Interaction , Vol . 5 , No . CSCW2 , Article 397 , Publication date : October 2021 . implicit denial of access to technology and knowledge [ 19 , 29 ] , to the neglect of the needs and values of minorities while prioritizing those of the majority [ 14 , 57 ] . Computing technologies , just like other aspects of society , are situated within socio - political structures that marginalize various people . Whether we make it explicit or not , the oppressive forces are implicated within our technology design , implementation , and research practices [ 26 , 54 ] . Unless specific attention is directed at disrupting this marginalization it will be propagated . Researchers have identified makerspaces and fabrication labs as a place for this disruption specifically aimed at addressing inequities with technology . These spaces are technology - rich and usually grounded in a community commitment to sharing knowledge across a wide variety of disciplines and tools [ 72 ] . They can serve as hubs for computer - supported cooperative work that builds on existing practices and expertise while facilitating engagement in long - term collaborative projects [ 8 ] . Substantial research has identified the educational potential of makerspaces to engage individuals and communities with new technology [ 8 , 31 , 37 , 46 , 70 ] . However , these statements of optimism are also generally coupled with an acknowledgment of how these spaces , and the maker movement more generally , has fallen short of these ideals [ 1 , 11 , 13 , 31 , 66 , 74 ] . Vossoughi et al . [ 74 ] point to the failure of the maker movement to recognize situated forms of knowledge and practices within certain communities , which creates barriers for individuals to leverage their current capabilities as they build new knowledge . Additionally , researchers have pointed to the need to address socio - political structures and realities of various people to fully realize equity within makerspaces [ 13 ] . We echo these critiques , arguing for the need to examine how makerspaces can be situated to address larger structural inequities in society while integrating the knowledge of the community . We believe this disposition is essential to situating makerspaces as an asset to combat continued marginalization within and beyond technology . We explore this position through tracing the design and development of a makerspace located within a predominantly Black neighborhood in the United States that is run by a social justice organization , Digital Interactive Visual Arts & Sciences ( DIVAS ) for Social Justice . Working collaboratively through a participatory action research ( PAR ) investigation with DIVAS’ founder and Executive Director , Clarisa ( who is also an author on this paper ) , the work is oriented towards understanding how the makerspace can provide community value . The work contributes to the CSCW and HCI literature by offering a contextualized investigation outlining how makerspaces can be conceptualized beyond individual and industrialized forms of making to contribute to a broader conversation on inequities within a community . We outline our findings from the first year and a half of the development process , centering our report on the design work with DIVAS and their local community members . We highlight themes and tensions that provide insight into the growth of a social justice makerspace and how these technology - rich spaces can reorient their educational purposes around a broader perspective of community and its development . The work with community members enables us to examine the interplay between various perspectives , the values of individuals , and the goals of the organization . The work provides two main contributions to the literature . First , the work ( to our knowledge ) is one of the first studies to engage a community of color in the US in design work to set an agenda for what a makerspace could be within their community . The contextualized design work highlights insights from community members to identify how makerspaces can address individual and structural marginalization within society while building on the assets and capacities of its community members . Second , the work demonstrates how a justice - centered framework [ 23 , 45 ] can be applied to the roles of a makerspace to address inequities by engaging with recognition of Examining the Design and Development of a Social Justice Makerspace 397 : 3 PACM on Human - Computer Interaction , Vol . 5 , No . CSCW2 , Article 397 , Publication date : October 2021 . inequities , distribution of resources , and enablement of capacity building . We present illustrative examples from our work with the community members and the initial program development . 2 BACKGROUND LITERATURE 2 . 1 Addressing Structural Inequities in the HCI Community The interaction design community has had a surge in work over the past decade that draws out the need to address structural and societal issues within our HCI research to more thoroughly and honestly engage with issues of race , gender , equity , and marginalization ( ex . [ 14 , 23 , 26 , 54 ] ) . This work explicitly draws attention to our research practices while building on earlier work that examined how intersectional and structural power are implicated in design work [ 4 , 36 ] . Ogbonnaya - Ogburu et al . [ 54 ] provide a theoretical grounding for critical race theory in HCI that points to the pervasive , structural , and socially constructed nature of racism that proliferates the field . Our work draws on this orientation , arguing that makerspaces cannot fully address inequities of the individual or community without engaging with the socio - cultural and political landscape in which they are situated and in which race is implicated . We examine these issues through the lens of social justice . Justice - oriented frameworks have been used to center the structural implications of design within interaction design research [ 14 , 23 , 55 ] . Dombrowski et al . [ 23 ] leverage Lötter’s [ 45 ] definition of justice , which is “to give everyone their due . ” They explore how we can achieve this in the HCI community through applying Lötter’s six dimensions of justice : recognition , reciprocity , enablement , distribution , accountability , and transformation . Our work engages with three of these dimensions . Specifically , we explore how makerspaces can be positioned to support : ( 1 ) recognition— through identifying and educating around injustices and those who are impacted by it ; ( 2 ) enablement— through supporting people as they “fulfill their potential and develop their own capacity” [ 23 ] ; and ( 3 ) distribution— through how the makerspace is situated as a resource and develops community capacities through its activities . Our findings highlight the importance of an asset - based orientation as we frame this justice - centered work . We draw from the literature of Asset - Based Community Development ( ABCD ) , which focuses on empowering community members to solve problems by identifying and capitalizing on their community’s individual , institutional , and associational strengths [ 40 , 48 ] . Specifically , “ABCD draws attention to social assets : the particular talents of individuals , as well as the social capital inherent in the relationships that fuel local associations and informal networks . ” [ 47 ] . This contrasts with a deficit or “needs - driven” approach , which has been used to understand where a community is lacking and thus where resources should be allocated [ 52 ] . Kretzmann and McKnight outline three pillars to ABCD . First , it needs to be asset - based starting with what is in the community , the capacities of individuals , and the foundational institutions and associations in the area . Second , it needs to be internally focused , capitalizing on the individual , institutional , and associational capacities for setting agendas and problem - solving . Third , it needs to be relationship - driven , requiring attention and effort dedicated to building and rebuilding relationships between the local individuals , associations , and institutions [ 40 , 41 ] . Pinkett discusses the potential for integrating an asset - based approach for developing equity with technology . He argues that “an asset - based approach to community technology and community building can be equally effective in achieving a social and cultural resonance that truly taps into the interests of residents and their community” [ 59 ] . He goes onto propose an approach to studying this with residents in a low - income community ; however , it stands as pre - work without any empirical data on its instantiation . Our work contributes to the literature by providing empirical data from design 397 : 4 Kayla DesPortes , Shiri Mund , & Clarisa James PACM on Human - Computer Interaction , Vol . 5 , No . CSCW2 , Article 397 , Publication date : October 2021 . work with a social justice organization to explore an asset - based orientation in the design of a makerspace and its activities . Specifically , the work provides insights into how we can build on community assets and capacities through the design of makerspaces and their activities . We will now explore the makerspace literature to demonstrate how our work builds on prior works’ efforts towards equity . 2 . 2 Realizing the Potential of Makerspaces Despite the alleged educational and personal benefits of makerspaces in developing new practices and cultures around technology , many researchers argue that makerspaces are far from reaching their full potential as sources of equity for underserved populations [ 7 , 12 , 31 , 61 , 62 , 74 ] . Makerspaces have become more prevalent and on some accounts more physically accessible to diverse populations [ 58 ] , but this does not necessarily make them culturally relevant or valuable to communities that have been underrepresented in them . Makerspaces are often positioned as spaces for personal projects and beds for entrepreneurship “where the public can , usually for a fee , rent space to prototype and manufacture small - scale quantities of a wide range of objects” [ 7 ] . However , “the public” that uses these spaces is not typically diverse and the practices and technology integrated within them are often implicitly exclusionary [ 42 , 61 , 74 ] . In their critique of the maker movement , Vossoughi , Hooper , and Escudé argue for the importance of being critical of how we frame making and equity to provide opportunities for the maker movement to contribute to “liberatory educational experiences” [ 74 ] . The authors contend that makerspaces currently present a narrow definition of what counts as making and thus limit our approaches towards equity . The HCI and CSCW community has engaged in these critical conversations , cautioning against the technocentricity of making and its associated reliance on technology to solve problems while failing to acknowledge social and economic dimensions [ 43 ] . Researchers have begun to add plurality to our understandings of makerspaces through work exploring the non - dominant narratives within the making literature . One avenue explores the history of making as a practice of resilience within communities that deals with concrete needs and values [ 2 , 25 ] . These practices have historical roots that have served to bring additional skills and knowledge bases into conversation with the maker movement , which expand our framing of making and its value within various communities [ 74 ] . At the collective level , these types of orientations offer the opportunity to not only consider communities of makers who frequent spaces but also harness sources of expertise in the community in which they are situated [ 7 , 49 , 69 ] . Fox et al . [ 28 ] explore feminist hackerspaces and point to opportunities to “contest widely accepted understandings of hacking , technology , and collaboration” and to reframe the kinds of activities that are part of this narrative . Working across various sub - cultures provides us with additional perspectives on motivations behind maker cultures . Lindtner et al . demonstrate how non - western maker cultures offer diverse perspectives with making practices that can serve both economic goals as well as those concerned with cultural sustainment [ 43 ] . Recent examination of humanitarian makerspaces that serve migrant refugees and asylum seekers , has identified the potential for these spaces to provide important value . For example , they can empower participants to improve their living situation and build skills for employment and integration . They also identified how makerspaces can offer youth places to engage in playful and meaningful interactions with technology [ 16 , 17 , 22 , 67 ] . Lastly , researchers working with people with disabilities have demonstrated the importance of allowing Examining the Design and Development of a Social Justice Makerspace 397 : 5 PACM on Human - Computer Interaction , Vol . 5 , No . CSCW2 , Article 397 , Publication date : October 2021 . their participants to develop their perspectives of empowerment through making [ 50 ] . It is through exploring situated forms of making that we can contribute to a more nuanced understanding of making across cultures to break down the “universal” perspective that is often exclusionary [ 43 ] . The work examining makerspaces in racially and economically marginalized communities highlights some of the socio - economic challenges of funding , community building , and engaging users across their skills and interests in meaningful and useful ways [ 16 , 17 ] . Two foundational explorations from Taylor et al . [ 71 ] and Vyas and Vines [ 75 ] of an e - waste recycling center in Australia examine the socio - political partnerships between the government , non - profit organizations , and community participants . They examine how the partnerships supported a makerspace geared towards workforce development and skill - building in low socioeconomic communities . The studies illustrate how the maker activities offered various value to those engaged . Specifically , it offered employment opportunities , government payments to individuals , skill - building opportunities , support of sustainable practices , and it contributed resources to the broader community . While the majority of the participants in the space were from low socioeconomic backgrounds , the activities were largely institutionally dictated [ 71 , 75 ] . Our study builds on this work as we examine how makerspaces could be positioned within economically and racially marginalized communities in the US . We demonstrate how a social justice orientation places the makerspace as a resource to recognize marginalization , build the communities’ capacities , and leverage and distribute resources to address social inequities . 2 . 3 Makerspace Communities and Cultures How we frame and discuss community around makerspaces is important to our continued exploration of equity with technology . The literature points to the significance of community in understanding the structure and operation of makerspaces , maker activities , and how the activities impact those who participate [ 30 , 34 , 35 , 39 , 64 , 72 ] . Khanipour et al . [ 38 ] found that the way community is structured within makerspaces impacted the physical and emotional connections formed , the types of collaboration that occurred , and how learning materialized . The social support within a makerspace community has been found to impact participants’ development of self - efficacy [ 35 ] , and plays a role in why individuals participate in the first place [ 30 ] . Grimme et al . describe how individuals can empower themselves within these spaces through building community by “sharing tools , resources , networking , and collaborat [ ing ] ” [ 30 ] . Our research builds on these insights through design work that develops greater knowledge of how we conceptualize community within a makerspace targeted at social justice and community empowerment . In addition to understanding the communities within makerspaces , researchers have begun to explore the potential for framing community in ways that reach beyond the space . For example , Taylor et al . [ 72 ] report on four makerspaces and describe how they can serve as social spaces by “ supporting wellbeing , ” “serving the needs of the communities they are located in , ” and “reaching out to excluded groups . ” Yet in the cases presented , the makerspace’s engagement with the community was still framed in the dominant rhetoric of maker culture , focusing on “catering to industry and employment needs . ” If makerspaces are going to develop for communities that have been marginalized , we also need to understand how to engage with the local community in ways that are valuable to individuals within these groups . This involves taking into consideration the sociopolitical structures that may have contributed to their marginalization in the first place . 397 : 6 Kayla DesPortes , Shiri Mund , & Clarisa James PACM on Human - Computer Interaction , Vol . 5 , No . CSCW2 , Article 397 , Publication date : October 2021 . When engaging with the greater community , some researchers have identified the importance of partnerships between the makerspace and outside resources , people , and organizations . Litts’ study of three youth makerspaces identifies four types of partnerships : financial partnerships that secure funding for the makerspace , mutually beneficial partnerships with other organizations , one - sided outreach partnerships that serve a particular group , and public partnerships that benefit the community at large [ 44 ] . This initial outline is a useful start , but the work does not yet provide details of the relationships between organizations or the activities they engage in together . As we examine makerspaces focused on community action , it is necessary to build out our understanding of what types of partnerships and relationships are important . Makerspaces designed to serve the local community can reorient the types of activities that occur and the types of engagement they motivate . Holbert [ 34 ] demonstrated how re - framing making as a “set of practices , skills , and technologies to give back to and support members of one’s community” was associated with higher levels of engagement for young girls . Calabrese Barton et al . [ 12 ] speak to the importance of enabling youth to engage in making projects that allow them to draw from their own experience as they create things that benefit their community . The authors describe instances of youth’s making practices as “rooted in a wide range of community spaces , drawing upon expert knowledge on community issues they have developed from growing up in their community” [ 12 ] . Our research furthers the HCI agenda of equity within these technology spaces by exploring how makerspaces can be designed for and by local community members to address community issues and build their capacities to address structural inequities . 3 CONTEXT OF INVESTIGATION 3 . 1 Digital Interactive Visual Arts & Sciences ( DIVAS ) for Social Justice DIVAS for Social Justice ( DIVAS ) is an organization dedicated to empowering underserved youth of color through media art and technology . Clarisa , the founder and Executive Director of the non - profit , started the organization in 2008 with a focus on using instant photography and digital media to provide youth with the education to critique and reimagine their communities through social action projects . Since its inception , the organization has facilitated after - school programs , summer camps , and intergenerational projects within New York City . The programs and activities seek to engage youth in collaborative work addressing challenges within their communities and exploring how technology can be used to address these challenges . Some of their programs focus on issues specific to the neighborhoods the children live in . For example , in one project , youth participants created a map with embedded images and interviews with community members that they used to document the impact of gentrification on their neighborhoods . Other programs engage with issues of gender , race , and ethnicity . For example , in one of their programs , young females reflected on the media’s depiction of the black female body and used digital photography to create self - portraits that reframe the narrative around their bodies . The goal of these initiatives is for participants to learn about issues of social justice and engage in production with digital technologies in ways that benefit the participants and their communities more broadly . Examining the Design and Development of a Social Justice Makerspace 397 : 7 PACM on Human - Computer Interaction , Vol . 5 , No . CSCW2 , Article 397 , Publication date : October 2021 . 3 . 2 Storefront Makerspace In 2019 , the organization acquired a storefront within Bedford – Stuyvesant , a neighborhood in Brooklyn , NY that is 65 % Black and Hispanic with a poverty rate of 23 % [ 77 ] . The storefront is located across the street from government - subsidized housing and next to a health center designed to support low to moderate - income women , mothers , and children . The neighborhood has been a cultural center for the black community since the 1930s with a substantial Afro - Caribbean population [ 78 ] . However , the neighborhood has been facing issues of community displacement tied to gentrification [ 24 ] . Rent in the area increased by 31 % between 2010 - 2016 [ 68 ] . Outside of localized issues , these communities are situated within the larger US structure in which communities of color face issues of denial of equitable resources that other communities receive [ 51 ] . DIVAS’ programming seeks to address issues that communities of color are facing while also educating the community about the rich cultural heritage and prosperity of these communities within their historical landscape . After acquiring the storefront , Clarisa saw the opportunity to extend their programming and reach additional members within their community by turning it into an intergenerational makerspace dedicated to social justice and community action . When the researchers first met with Clarisa , they aligned on their desire to create educational opportunities to reframe the production and use of technology in communities of color . Since Clarisa had just acquired the makerspace , they determined they would work together to design the space and activities to fit it into DIVAS’ programming and mission to serve the local community . 3 . 3 Positionality DIVAS’ founder and director Clarisa , identifies as a Black Woman of Afro - Caribbean descent and lives in one of the neighborhoods in which DIVAS runs programming . Three researchers are from a private University within New York City and formed a partnership with Clarisa , soon after the storefront was acquired . The lead researcher identifies as a mixed - race ( Black and White ) American Woman , a supporting researcher identifies as a White Woman of Mexican descent , and the last researcher identifies as a White Jewish Man . All of the researchers lived within the same city , but outside of the neighborhood in which this work was taking place . Since the researchers were outside of the neighborhood and local community Clarisa served as a broker for our engagement with other community members . 4 METHODS The work presented is part of an ongoing participatory action research ( PAR ) investigation with DIVAS in which the community members are core contributors to the knowledge - production process [ 6 , 15 , 60 ] . The partnership grew out of a collaboration between three researchers and Clarisa , the founder and Executive Director of DIVAS . We will refer to the three researchers and Clarisa as the design team throughout the paper . The researchers chose to engage in a participatory approach to the research to focus on community empowerment and mutual learning throughout the process [ 15 ] . The work prioritizes the sustainability of solutions tying the research agenda and knowledge production directly to problem - solving with the community partner in their context . Thus our forms of “knowing” are directly tied to our forms of “doing” [ 33 ] . 397 : 8 Kayla DesPortes , Shiri Mund , & Clarisa James PACM on Human - Computer Interaction , Vol . 5 , No . CSCW2 , Article 397 , Publication date : October 2021 . To begin the work together , the researchers discussed the collaborative project from the research perspective including data collection and analysis procedures before gaining her consent . The researchers’ goal was to prioritize Clarisa’s control in guiding the activities in ways that supported her needs as the leader of DIVAS , while also engaging her in reflection across the findings from the activities and in the dissemination through co - writing this paper . The relationship between the researchers and Clarisa was new at the beginning of the project and grew across the project . The makerspace activities reported on span 1 . 5 years—from November 2019 when the initial design meetings took place , to April 2021 when this paper was written . This longitudinal engagement enabled the researchers to build a relationship with Clarisa developing trust and care . The activities and dates are outlined in Table 1 . After the makerspace launch , the lead researcher continued to meet with Clarisa weekly to discuss the continued development of the makerspace and the development of community activities . Their partnership is ongoing , and they are currently engaged in continuing the development of social action programs for the makerspace community . We outline the methods for conducting the initial research activities listed in Table 1 before going into the findings from these activities and discussing the programming that has developed . Table 1 . Timeline of Makerspace Development Activities Timing Activities Nov - May 2019 Initial Planning Sessions with Design Team ( 4 . 1 . 1 ) Feb 2019 Community Design Workshop ( 4 . 1 . 2 ) Jun 2019 Makerspace Launch Event ( 7 . 1 ) Jul 2019 - Present Planning Meetings with Lead Researcher & Clarisa PROGRAM DEVELOPMENT Nov - Dec 2019 Teen VR Mentorship Jul 2019 - Apr 2021 STEM Community Garden Stewardship ( 7 . 1 . 1 ) Sep 2019 - Mar 2020 Urban Window Display ( 7 . 1 . 2 ) Mar 2020 - Apr 2021 COVID19 Learning Center ( 7 . 1 . 3 ) 4 . 1 Overview of Initial Planning and Design Activities 4 . 1 . 1 Initial Planning Sessions with Design Team . The initial planning sessions took place when the only programming in the makerspace was a Teen VR Mentorship program that Clarisa had shifted from one of their other locations . Our initial meetings were therefore aimed at developing a shared understanding of the vision for the makerspace and the role it could serve in the organization and community . Clarisa shared artifacts and pictures from several projects and discussed the impact they have had on the community . The design team went through an affinity diagramming process to put down all their ideas and visions for the makerspace and iteratively organize them into categories . Based on the goals identified , the team determined it would be important to hear from local community members . The researchers identified participatory design ( PD ) as a method they could draw on for a design session with the community . Participatory design ( PD ) is an approach for educational equity through justice - oriented social change - making that gets rid of a deficit narrative [ 3 ] and engages community members in dialogue to set an agenda for design [ 20 , 21 ] . Together , the design team developed a set of goals for a design session with community members anchored to Examining the Design and Development of a Social Justice Makerspace 397 : 9 PACM on Human - Computer Interaction , Vol . 5 , No . CSCW2 , Article 397 , Publication date : October 2021 . Clarisa’s vision for the makerspace and the shared goals identified in the initial session . One of the staff members who was a strategic consultant for DIVAS joined one of the planning calls for the community outreach activity and suggested that we develop the session to be educational and focused around design thinking 1 . The design team felt that this would both support the educational goals of DIVAS and provide a way for participants to engage in the makerspace design . 4 . 1 . 2 Community Design Workshop . The workshop took place at the organization’s makerspace on a Sunday afternoon for three hours . It was facilitated by two members of the research team with Clarisa guiding the introduction of the space and goals . The participants consisted of four adult community members , four youth participants , and Clarisa who also participated in the activities . The other adult community members included a parent of one of the youth participants , the president of the tenant’s association of a nearby apartment complex , a teacher whose child was involved with DIVAS ( although not present at the workshop ) , and a community resident who also served in the local government . The youth participants had all been involved with the organization for several years . The design session kicked off with an introduction from Clarisa describing DIVAS and the research partnership . She described the community work and grant acquisition that enabled DIVAS to start the makerspace . She then identified the goals of the session—i . e . to get the community members’ input in the design of the neighborhood’s first social justice makerspace as they engaged in design thinking . In the session , the participants were then given the following design challenge developed by Clarisa : Design a Makerspace with the following goals : ( 1 ) A place for you , your friends and your family ; ( 2 ) A place where you can work to solve community problems together ; and ( 3 ) A place where you can explore your creativity . Outside of Clarisa calling the space a makerspace , the design team did not define what a makerspace was allowing the goals to drive the discussion . Table 2 . Community Design Workshop Participants Identifier Description of Participant Clarisa Founder and Executive Director of DIVAS Adult 0 Parent of one youth participants ( Y0 ) Adult 1 President of tenant’s association of nearby apartment complex Adult 2 Local teacher and parent of child who participates in DIVAS Adult 3 Community resident who serves in local government Youth 0 Youth participant whose parent was present ( A0 ) Youth 1 Young participant involved in organization Youth 2 Youth participant involved in organization Youth 3 Youth participant involved in organization The research team explained that each individual would take on the role of “designer” and would approach the challenge by designing for a specific “client”—i . e . another participating community member . The entire group collectively brainstormed and iterated on a list of interview questions they thought would be essential to understand their client’s needs given the design problem . The participants then took turns embodying the role of “client” and “designer” as they participated in 1 The consultant had previously worked with Clarisa , but was only peripherally involved in this work because of other commitments . 397 : 10 Kayla DesPortes , Shiri Mund , & Clarisa James PACM on Human - Computer Interaction , Vol . 5 , No . CSCW2 , Article 397 , Publication date : October 2021 . and conducted their interviews with one another . After 20 minutes of interviewing , participants split into two design teams and shared their interview notes to design a plan for the space that would meet the needs of each of their clients collectively . The teams each presented their designs , which sparked feedback and discussion . 4 . 3 Data Collection The researchers collected various types of qualitative data throughout the design activities . Video and audio were captured from the initial design team activities . We also took pictures of the design artifacts and the researchers recorded notes from the discussions . In the community design workshop , we collected data from two voice recorders attached to two participants . While we intended to have two more recordings in the environment , they malfunctioned and did not record any data . However , the two recorders were able to capture two pairs of interviews ( i . e . between Adult 0 and Adult 3 , and between Adult 2 and Youth 1 ) , one of the group design conversations , and the whole - group presentations and discussions . In conjunction with the audio , we also collected design artifacts and notes that emerged from the activities . During the makerspace launch event , we collected additional data about community issues that individuals wanted to address and activities and tools they would like to have in the makerspace . While we triangulated the data with the community design workshop data , we did not explicitly include this data since many of the same themes were replicated . 4 . 4 Interpretive Procedures The audio data from the design team meetings with Clarisa and the design session with the community members were transcribed for analysis . The transcripts were imported into Dedoose for thematic analysis ( TA ) of the data [ 9 , 10 ] . As with most TA , our analysis was a combination of both inductive and deductive TA [ 9 ] . We inductively coded based on the narratives the participants shared about their ideas , needs , and experiences ; and we deductively drew on theoretical constructs from Kretzmann and McKnight’s Asset - Based Community Development [ 40 , 41 ] and Lötter’s social justice framework [ 45 ] . The researchers first read through the transcripts to familiarize themselves with the data . To generate the initial codes , one of the authors independently went through the data and coded based on the community members’ values , perceived purposes of the space , and articulated design principles . A second researcher reviewed the codes with the first researcher , working through iterative cycles to refine and solidify the codes into themes [ 9 , 10 ] . To assist in the definition and refinement process , we integrated the inter - rater reliability ( IRR ) metric of the Pooled Kappa Cohen [ 18 ] . While integrating a Pooled Kappa Cohen is not explicitly part of TA , the TA method is designed to flexibly support the integration of additional qualitative methods to support the process [ 10 ] . We viewed the Pooled Kappa Cohen as a way to support our analysis stages of “Reviewing Potential Themes” and “Defining and Naming Themes” [ 9 ] . After the initial themes were defined , two of the researchers worked in iterative cycles to refine and solidify the themes using 20 % of the data on each refinement . If the Pooled Kappa Cohen score was under 70 % , they identified disagreements and clarified the definition of each theme . The integration of this metric helped us improve the naming scheme and definitions to ensure that both researchers were consistently applying them over time within the data set . The researchers ended the process with a 74 % Pooled Kappa Cohen . During the iterative process , the other forms of data that we collected ( i . e . Examining the Design and Development of a Social Justice Makerspace 397 : 11 PACM on Human - Computer Interaction , Vol . 5 , No . CSCW2 , Article 397 , Publication date : October 2021 . design artifacts , researcher notes ) were used to compare with our findings in the audio transcripts and triangulate across sources [ 76 ] . Because of the significant labor associated with the TA process , Clarisa did not engage in the full iterative process . Instead , the researchers shared the themes and definitions during the analysis process to get her perspectives , provide space for further iteration , and improve the trustworthiness and credibility of the findings [ 76 ] . The final thematic codes and descriptions can be seen in Table 3 . 5 RESULTS 5 . 1 Design Team Goals The initial brainstorming session with the design team resulted in an affinity diagram with seven high - level categories of goals for the makerspace : 1 . Engage in community and civic innovation 2 . Empower its participants 3 . Expose an intergenerational community to new technologies 4 . Provide accessible and inclusive experience for its community members 5 . Create a comfortable environment that honors DIVAS’ history and their participants’ work 6 . Provide learning opportunities across community engagement and new technologies 7 . Develop the organization and space in a scalable , sustainable way With these guiding categories , the design team set out to understand them in the context of the community residents who might become participants within the space . 5 . 2 Community Designed Makerspaces The community design workshop led to two makerspace ideas that , while distinct , were not fully solidified or agreed upon . The incompleteness and lack of consensus led to thoughtful discussions amongst the participants , which we explore in the following sections . 5 . 2 . 1 Design Team 1 – The Transformable Makerspace . The first design team created a makerspace with walls and floors that were tiled with removable covers . The participants could draw and graffiti on them to change the look and feel of the space . The ceiling would allow you to hang photos and illuminate the photography and visual art . The makerspace would also integrate a stage and podium for performative art forms and be used for holding community meetings . The space would be open long hours on weekends and regular hours on weekdays so that it could be easily accessible for the community . To support the longer hours , the community would help to run the space . The space would be designed to allow youth to come in and schedule a time to work on a project that they have . There would also be structured DIY workshops that are “economically friendly” and can help participants learn skills they are interested in with the technology they have access to ( ex . smart phones ) . The space would also have activities centered on mental health such as stress relief and a guidance counselor “where a kid [ could ] just come in and talk about what’s on [ their ] mind” . The activities would also be set up so that you can meet new people and build connections . The space could house a thrift shop or a temporary swap meet designed so that you could learn something about the person whose things you are receiving so that it would facilitate “building a relationship” . 397 : 12 Kayla DesPortes , Shiri Mund , & Clarisa James PACM on Human - Computer Interaction , Vol . 5 , No . CSCW2 , Article 397 , Publication date : October 2021 . 5 . 2 . 2 Design Team 2 – The Sidewalk Makerspace . The second design team imagined a makerspace that would create awareness through a community programmed neon light sign that would hang outside . The sign would have graphic art and highlight the activities in the space . Outside there would be a wall for community engagement where people could respond to prompts such as , “How do you describe community ? ” The makerspace windows would be floor to ceiling and could be completely opened when the weather is good to make the sidewalk become part of the space . Within the space , there would be a pinboard and TVs where you would find announcements , see activities , and sign up to volunteer on a certain day . The space would be equipped with working Wi - Fi and snacks . The space would have a simple color palette with white walls that could be projected on . There would be moveable walls including a smart wall for graphic designs , chalk walls that you could write on , and customizable art and fabric walls . The community could bring furniture into the space to create a “sustainable” and “eco - friendly” model . The furniture would incorporate storage space and would be modular and moveable so people could arrange it as needed . An image of the participants’ drawing of the space can be seen in Figure 1 below . Fig . 1 . A participant drawing of The Sidewalk Makerspace highlighting the resources to be integrated into the makerspace . The image includes the programmable LED sign , a sewing machine , bike racks , reusable furniture , wardrobe with interview clothing that helps you go from “dreaming of me” to “becoming me” , movable walls ( smart wall , sketch / art wall , and chalk wall ) , and a table with money signifying the financial literacy class . Examining the Design and Development of a Social Justice Makerspace 397 : 13 PACM on Human - Computer Interaction , Vol . 5 , No . CSCW2 , Article 397 , Publication date : October 2021 . The makerspace was designed to highlight a few different activities and technologies . The neon light sign that welcomes people into the space would be part of an ongoing STEAM ( Science , Technology , Engineering , Art , and Math ) activity where participants would program the lights to display relevant text and graphics . There would be sewing machines and other tools that would “encourage many activities . ” For example , “if someone wants to learn how to make a dress you can teach them how to make a prom dress out of the old couch” . The space would also host healthy eating and cooking classes as well as financial literacy classes so that people could learn how to manage their money . There would be a waffle maker in the space , and “while you have your meeting about your money management somebody makes you waffles” . Additionally , there would be a wardrobe in the space that has clothes for people to transform themselves into their vision for success as part of the activities . 6 FINDINGS FROM THEMATIC ANALYSIS The two designs provide some insight into the things the community valued , which are complemented by the thematic analysis across the design conversations with Clarisa and the community . The analysis resulted in five high - level themes that are distinct , but not exclusive ; therefore , a particular quote or observation could be associated with more than one theme if applicable ( Table 3 ) . In addition to the themes , the researchers identified tensions that arose since there was a plurality of voices in the space and participants did not necessarily have the same opinions . Additionally , there were times when one person’s ideas had characteristics that were at odds with one another . We will discuss three salient tensions ( Table 4 ) . Table 3 . Themes Identified Surrounding Community Participant Values Individual Empowerment Space and Resources : Strengthening an individual ' s ability to accomplish their goals by providing the tangible resources and space to do so . Growth and Support : Supporting an individual ' s personal development through skill - building , including opportunities for development , social support , and social - emotional growth Initiative and Resourcefulness : Taking advantage of existing resources and materials and using them in novel and useful ways Inclusion : Entering a space that is welcoming ; making it easier to include more people across generations ; the ability for people to make the space their own Community Connectedness : Enabling connections across community organizations Participation and Leadership in the Community : Promoting an individual ' s involvement in a community and the ability to take a leadership role and have an impact—the individual ' s role in both the broader community and the makerspace community Table 4 . Tensions in Design Process Individual Empowerment Vs . Community Impact : Managing time and resources dedicated to individual use and projects while providing time for community projects targeted at wellbeing and social change . Openness Vs . Safety : Managing being open and inclusive allowing anyone to enter the space while providing a space for youth and adults to feel comfortable in their safety . Diversity Vs . Cultural Preservation : Managing the inclusion of a diversity of cultures and perspectives while helping participants celebrate their cultural richness and differences . 397 : 14 Kayla DesPortes , Shiri Mund , & Clarisa James PACM on Human - Computer Interaction , Vol . 5 , No . CSCW2 , Article 397 , Publication date : October 2021 . The following sections illustrate how the themes and tensions manifested within the design conversations and artifacts with the community participants and Clarisa . 6 . 1 Themes Identified within the Design Process 6 . 1 . 1 Individual Empowerment . The theme of individual empowerment was identified based on the ways participants tied their goals for themselves and others to the shared space , tangible resources , growth opportunities , and social support that the makerspace could offer . Adult 0 wanted a space , “where folks could come in , get resources , explore , get smarter and learn how to do stuff so they can be productive adults . ” Youth 2 had the desire to “give his community the ability to be independent in their own space . ” In alignment with this desire for independence , the majority of the needs that the community members articulated oriented towards practical life skills , such as financial literacy , interview training , nutrition , and healthy eating ( ex . Sidewalk Makerspace ) , and mental health support ( ex . Transformable Makerspace ) . The perspectives of the benefits ranged between the participants as they brought in non - stereotypical makerspace resources into the discussions . For example , the Sidewalk Makerspace team presented the integration of the wardrobe ( Figure 1 ) , which stemmed from Adult 0 who wanted financial literacy classes where the participants could explore career paths , dress up to match that career , and learn to manage their money based on their career choices . Youth 0 identified the importance of this for younger children to be able to put themselves in the mindset of what they can do . Youth 3 responded to this idea , “So that class , how to be an adult , I would attend that . Teach me about banks and credit cards and stuff . But with a wardrobe don ' t you think it would be also like be more plausible as well to actually have teens that if they have an interview they can use those suits . ” In this example , the community members are tying the resource to its practical uses : the design team seeing the wardrobe for its potential to empower youth emotionally and through financial literacy skills , and Youth 3 seeing it as a resource for interviews . All of the participants felt it was essential that the makerspace activities be situated as part of this individual capacity building . In our debrief with Clarisa , she reflected on the practicality of the resources , “we ' re a social justice organization and it ' s great to be rah , rah , rah sis coom bah , but at the end of the day , it really is how are you gonna live , how you gonna eat , and how you gonna be just better to each other , you know ? ” 6 . 1 . 2 Initiative and Resourcefulness . On top of individual empowerment , we identified the theme of taking initiative and being resourceful as an asset that was within the community and its members . While the makerspace ethos admires creativity and innovation , the community members placed particular emphasis on the thrifty utilization of resources , such as making a prom dress from a couch , which Youth 0 said they had done before . The theme carried into how the participants imagined the makerspace , which is housed in a single - room storefront . Participants brainstormed how they could expand beyond the constraints of square footage . In the Sidewalk Makerspace design , participants designed windows that pulled down to integrate the sidewalk into the space . Within both designs , the participants reiterated the importance of flexibility as they proposed walls , floors , and furniture for the makerspace that were “changing” , “mobile” , “moveable” , “removable” , and “reusable . ” Examining the Design and Development of a Social Justice Makerspace 397 : 15 PACM on Human - Computer Interaction , Vol . 5 , No . CSCW2 , Article 397 , Publication date : October 2021 . Additionally , participants used the word resourceful as an identifier when describing their community , and it was exemplified in the narratives they shared . For example , a discussion arose surrounding how the community converted an abandoned lot into a skate park . Adult 3 described it : “It’s not a skate park ; they made [ it ] one . This is what I love about . It is basically they found stuff to make their own obstacles , it’s really… You’re talking about design…all the benches in the park are made out of broken skateboards . Chairs made of skateboards…” Adult 3 continued the discussion about the skate park and shifted her attention to the youth as she shared her knowledge about how resourcefulness could also include seeking out opportunities for funding within the local government . Specifically , she began a discussion about the process of participatory budgeting that could be applied to this example , “So participatory budgeting is when the city council member gives the community a million dollars of his capital budgets and tells them that they can decide how they ' re going to spend the money… [ in depth explanation of the process ] …In April every year , they go and they have a vote and anybody can vote . So you can be as young as 11 years old all the way up to adult . . . You don’t have to be a citizen or anything…So say for instance with him , you guys would be able to sit down with the parks department and , and say ‘these are all ideas , but what we really want is this skate park’ . . . [ continued description of process ] ” Adult 3 goes on to further explain how the process would continue to play out and what the community members would need to do to win a project with participatory budgeting . She focuses her explanation on how it is possible and useful for the community members to engage in this process . This demonstrates how community members can act as brokers to additional knowledge for community action while building on the initiative and resourcefulness that already exists in the community . 6 . 1 . 3 Inclusion . The themes also extended to have a focus on how others would be supported . The most frequently identified theme in the data was that of inclusion . Inclusion comprised of making the space and community welcoming , integrating a diversity of participants , addressing issues of accessibility , fitting into the schedules of the community members , and involving a set of intergenerational participants . As participants developed designs for the makerspace , they focused on creating a welcoming atmosphere . For Adult 3 this meant having “the opportunity to gather in peace and create with community . ” Youth 2 felt this could be achieved through customizability , “The walls should be able to be customizable . For the community to feel welcome in the space it should have their touch in it . ” Inclusion also meant that the makerspace could be easily used by the community . Given that some individuals work long hours and multiple jobs , inclusion extended to making the space open for long hours to make it possible for participants to use the space . Additionally , conversations about inclusion in this space emphasized the necessity of intergenerational participation . Clarisa explicitly recruited an intergenerational set of participants for the design workshop . In our debrief of the community workshop , she reflected on the importance of this , “it ' s not just about the children . It is community - based programming , and we have a responsibility to the community . ” 397 : 16 Kayla DesPortes , Shiri Mund , & Clarisa James PACM on Human - Computer Interaction , Vol . 5 , No . CSCW2 , Article 397 , Publication date : October 2021 . The importance of intergenerational participation was also implicitly and explicitly identified by the other participants . For example , Adult 3 identified how her role models are her seniors , and Youth 1 similarly reflected on the importance of intergenerational mentors : “So it ' s like every generation you have that one branch of age they look up to , so me as a teenager the youth will look at me and want to grow up to be like us or even better than us . And you give them the right guidelines to do what they do . To make the environment better or make themselves better . ” 6 . 1 . 4 Participation and Leadership in the Community . P articipants also discussed how they would engage with others in the community within and beyond the makerspace . For many of them , their community identity was intricately tied to their self - perception as leaders and “motivator [ s ] for the next generation . ” ( Youth 1 ) . Adult 3 described herself as , “a community - minded , innovative justice - seeker who loves family and community . ” Adult 0 saw her role in the community as one to “give as much as [ she ] can , or what [ she ] can . ” Participants expressed great admiration for community leaders , such as Clarisa , their block president , and more generally for people who volunteer . When Youth 0 was asked what she saw as her role in her community , her response was “to be a community activist . ” One of her primary concerns was that “youth are not being heard and there’s not enough spaces for them to be heard . ” DIVAS’ goal of creating a social justice makerspace was in part to ensure that the space would be situated within the context of the broader community . Clarisa’s guiding principle for the makerspace is that the space and the activities within it should be dedicated to , “doing impactful work that ' s really speaking to the issues of the community . ” Adult 3 recognized the need to educate people about their community so they can develop their goals and aspirations as community leaders and activists : “The reason why it has been so difficult for people [ is ] because they don ' t have a vision for the community so they can ' t ask the question about…‘what do you want to fix ? ’…I say…when was the last time you left the neighborhood and saw someplace that was really good or saw something and was like wow why don ' t I have that in my community . ” Youth 1 identified how he wanted to contribute to his community through transforming the landscape , “there ' s a lot of empty lots where I live in my community…so all those empty spaces I want to fill those up and put different things that people like . ” Participants’ also expressed willingness to take on leadership roles within the makerspace itself . For Clarisa , it was about participants having a “sense of ownership . ” Some participants envisioned a “worker to worker cooperative” ( Adult 3 ) to make the makerspace open longer . The Youth envisioned this as a job opportunity , with Youth 0 suggesting that the makerspace have “youth workers on a stipend and fellowship” to help manage the space being open . 6 . 1 . 5 Community Connectedness . The makerspace was seen as an engine for the empowerment of the broader community . Clarisa identified the potential for the space to serve as a resource for local community groups . In our debrief from the community workshop , Clarisa stated : “I think that the other thing that I felt came out of the design session as far as fostering community…the tenant organizer , he runs a social justice group called the [ Cultural Hip Hop Collective ] where they do this parade every year in [ the local community ] . . . and he was saying Examining the Design and Development of a Social Justice Makerspace 397 : 17 PACM on Human - Computer Interaction , Vol . 5 , No . CSCW2 , Article 397 , Publication date : October 2021 . to me like the kids he works with do banners and…he doesn ' t have his own space . So I was like , well , that ' s a great way to foster community too . And I was like , I had said to him , well , what date do you wanna do it and you can do it here with them . ” During the session the community participants began creating connections between resources in their community , identifying existing structures in the broader community that could be mobilized to help the makerspace develop in ways that spoke to their design ideas . For example , they suggested organizations that could run financial workshops , individuals who could serve as role models , and members who could help run the space to keep it open for longer hours . Importantly , they drew on their networks and the community assets as they identified relationships that could enact and sustain their ideas . 6 . 2 Tensions Identified within the Design Process On top of themes representing the participants’ values in the design process , tensions existed within the dialogue both between people and within the ideas of individuals . In this section , we highlight three of the most salient . 6 . 2 . 1 Individual Empowerment Vs . Community Impact . In the community design workshop , participants expressed individual and community needs . They envisioned the space offering them skill - building opportunities and emphasized the ways the makerspace could help them accomplish their individual goals , such as showcasing their art or offering suits to wear to interviews . However , Clarisa recognized that there would be a tension between the time dedicated to individual work and the time participants dedicated to community contributions : “So that ' s something that whoever is here really needs to be on board with that . Not like , you know what , I ' mma come in here and I ' m gonna do my Valentine’s Day cards and…I ' mma sell them for 10 dollars up the block . . . no . It can ' t just be that ; you know ? Like there ' s gotta be some give and take . . . What are you giving back to the overall community ? ” Additionally , she recognized that even having open and stable Wi - Fi could be a benefit , “I don’t want it to just be a handout . I want it to be truly a learning environment . That there’s really outputs , and not just , ‘Oh Imma go here and access the free Wi - Fi and be on WhatsApp’ . And I know there has to be room for some of that . But that can’t be the whole afternoon . ” Designing the space and activities with this community demonstrates how the mission of supporting the community can be at odds with itself as we balance supporting the individual with the support of the broader community . 6 . 2 . 2 Openness Vs . Safety . In the community design workshop , participants were also faced with balancing the openness and accessibility of the makerspace , while ensuring the safety of the participants and equipment in the space . This was of particular concern since one of the primary groups using the space would be the youth . Youth 0 voiced her concern , “What about my safety ? If you ' re having the windows open , anybody can just walk in . ” This tension was also close to home for Clarisa , who previously experienced DIVAS being robbed , “I want it to be open , but then I don’t wanna be a fool . ” Within the discussions , there were several ideas presented . Clarisa expressed interest in exploring the cost of installing a buzzer system as a way of allowing her to “keep the space open” 397 : 18 Kayla DesPortes , Shiri Mund , & Clarisa James PACM on Human - Computer Interaction , Vol . 5 , No . CSCW2 , Article 397 , Publication date : October 2021 . without “keeping the door open . ” Adult 2 felt they could manage this tension through strengthening the community : “Well hopefully you build enough community where people will not even think , or just people will take ownership of and feel like if there ' s a problem we ' ll just regulate it because we love this space so much . ” Adult 3 followed up , “if we were right on the sidewalk they can actually ask the question so it , it creates a sense of community that would draw more people in . ” The dedication to the local community makes this tension more apparent as DIVAS tries to prioritize engaging people who might just be walking down the street , which stands in contrast to most makerspaces that typically engage those who already have an explicit interest in the space . 6 . 2 . 3 Diversity Vs . Cultural Preservation . While several participants made references to culture throughout the conversations , they framed culture in somewhat opposing ways . Some community members described cultural diversity as an important component of inclusion . For example , Youth 1 brainstormed ways in which cultural diversity could be introduced into the activities taking place in the makerspace through themed events : “You could also do it as if like you guys have like a different theme like every night you know have like an African night or different types of nights because my client wants cultural diversity . ” For other community members , culture was viewed as an important element of individual and collective identity that was being lost as the neighborhood has changed . To them , it was important to create a space that was welcoming to all but also preserved the essence of the community in which the makerspace will reside . Adult 2 commented on the tension between change and preservation , explaining that “my community is becoming more diverse . But one thing I think that ' s really a tiny community losing its richness and culture . ” These differing perspectives on culture are illustrative of a broader challenge faced by makerspaces designed for and by communities underrepresented in traditional makerspace environments : how might they honor and preserve the local context while maintaining their values of openness and equity within a changing landscape ? 7 MAKERSPACE LAUNCH AND PROGRAM DEVELOPMENT After the community design workshop , the design team developed a launch event for the makerspace and programming began to grow . The design team leveraged what they learned from the design workshop as they continued to build out the makerspace activities . We will briefly discuss the makerspace launch and some of the larger programs that became part of the space . 7 . 1 Makerspace Launch Event As the design team continued to analyze data from the community design session , they organized the launch of the space . The makerspace launch took place on a Saturday and was intended to raise awareness about the existence of the space , establish connections with potential partner organizations and members , and gather additional data on what people wanted from the space . The design team developed six stations that were representative of the organization , educational , and provided a take - home item . Station # 1 was a “take what you need” gardening station where visitors could learn about urban farms and take home seedlings and herbs ( connected to Community Garden Examining the Design and Development of a Social Justice Makerspace 397 : 19 PACM on Human - Computer Interaction , Vol . 5 , No . CSCW2 , Article 397 , Publication date : October 2021 . Stewardship below ) . Station # 2 was a VR station that showcased one of DIVAS’ student’s immersive poetry called “Dear Black Child” . Visitors could learn how to use , decorate , and take home a Google Cardboard VR viewer for a smartphone . Station # 3 was a healthy shakes station where visitors could get a smoothie and get a handout on the recipe and ingredients . Station # 4 was a 3D printing station where visitors could observe a 3D model being printed and take home a handout on 3D printing . Station # 5 was a soldering station where visitors could solder and take home an LED circuit board that incorporated the name and logo of DIVAS . Lastly , station # 6 was a research station where visitors were introduced to the research and could consent to their data being collected as they contributed ideas for what they wanted to see in the space , the skills they wanted to build , and issues in the community they wanted to address . The visitors were encouraged to write down their ideas for the makerspace either on sticky notes placed on the wall or on a sheet of paper that was put into a suggestion box . 7 . 2 Program Development After the launch , the activities began to develop in the space more fully . While there were some smaller workshops and events hosted in the space , there were four major activities that the makerspace supported : Teen VR Mentorship , Community Garden Stewardship , Urban Window Display , and COVID - 19 Learning Center . Since the Teen VR Mentorship was developed before the work on the makerspace we will focus on the latter three . 7 . 2 . 1 Community Garden Stewardship . DIVAS turned an abandoned lot into a community garden that they are stewarding as part of the city’s community garden network . The community garden served as a social action project led by middle school students who realized the project through petitioning local community members and securing letters of support from the local city council and community board . The garden is being designed to connect the local residents and schools to fresh food options while also integrating STEM educational programming . The Community Garden Stewardship was featured at the makerspace launch with the “take what you need” gardening station in which a planter on wheels contained fresh herbs for everyone . The design team wanted to connect the work between the garden and the makerspace to leverage resources between the two initiatives . To fulfill the goal of being the 1st interactive community garden in the metropolitan area the youth used the makerspace to laser cut QR code designs that could make the garden interactive . Building off of the design workshop and the importance of community narratives around resourcefulness , the QR codes link to community stories of social action projects accomplished by community members . Additionally , to position the garden as a STEM educational resource , the QR codes also link to STEM curricula that partner schools will be able to use . The launch of the community garden began just as COVID - 19 hit and the students made the collective decision to use the garden to address the issue of food insecurity . Now all fruits and vegetables grown in the garden are given to the community for free . 7 . 2 . 2 Urban Window Display . The makerspace also began to develop programming that leveraged knowledge within the community . Clarisa worked with a local community member to create an ongoing workshop in which participants would design the seasonal window displays for the storefront of the Makerspace . The program was led by a community volunteer who connected with 397 : 20 Kayla DesPortes , Shiri Mund , & Clarisa James PACM on Human - Computer Interaction , Vol . 5 , No . CSCW2 , Article 397 , Publication date : October 2021 . Clarisa through the makerspace launch event . She is a local artist with a professional career in designing and implementing retail window displays . This program serves as a catalyst to bring intergenerational members of the community together through engaging families and senior centers to work with elderly individuals in the community . Since the launch of the makerspace , DIVAS has been able to create 4 community - led window display designs that have highlighted the issues of The Digital Divide , The Black Lives Matter Movement , and the importance of hope . Each window design is created with both analog and digital artistic media . With the onset of the global pandemic , the program started to use QR codes in the window display to interact with the community and keep members socially distanced . 7 . 2 . 3 COVID - 19 Learning Center . The makerspace development continued during the COVID - 19 pandemic . The makerspace was identified as a resource that could be leveraged to support the community during this unprecedented time . The makerspace thus was transitioned into a COVID - 19 Learning Center in which DIVAS offered a safe space for learning during the pandemic . Students in the surrounding area could sign up to attend socially distanced , remote learning from 8AM - 3PM in the space and were provided with access to WiFi and computers . For students with developmental needs and those in foster care , these Learning Centers became especially important for creating a support network within the community . During the pandemic , the Learning Centers were cautioned about learners spending too much time online and sent guidelines prohibiting children from being on devices for more than the 5 - 7 hours they spent on remote learning . Coupled with the fact that students could not travel because of the pandemic , DIVAS used the makerspace to creatively engage the learners . The learners in their program “adopted” the block and used the makerspace as they designed and planted gardens in tree - pits that lined the street . Clarisa reflected on the feedback she received from parents and social workers that indicated how this process has helped with the social - emotional wellbeing of the youth in this isolated time . 7 . 2 . 4 On - Going Research Partnership and Capacity Building . The researchers are continuing to work with DIVAS and Clarisa to develop the makerspace and the activities to serve the community . While COVID has stalled and reoriented some of the plans for the makerspace , we are continuing to build capacity within the makerspace through our participatory action research partnership . The lead researcher meets with Clarisa weekly and has helped to secure additional funding for the makerspace to develop the community garden work to address issues of food insecurity and inequities with technology . The team is working on developing programming for youth to educate their community about the importance of food access and its effects on communities of color . Additionally , we are expanding the STEM curricula within the community garden that can be accessed by teachers through laser cut QR codes . The work is continuing to explore the ways that the makerspace can operate as a place to facilitate community action and social change through building on community assets . 8 DISCUSSION The findings presented highlighted the various community themes and tensions that arose in the design work exploring how a social justice makerspace can be a valuable resource in the community . In this discussion , we focus on two main points . First , we identify how the framing of a justice - Examining the Design and Development of a Social Justice Makerspace 397 : 21 PACM on Human - Computer Interaction , Vol . 5 , No . CSCW2 , Article 397 , Publication date : October 2021 . centered makerspace provided pathways for DIVAS to engage with recognition of inequities , distribution of resources , and enablement of capacity building [ 23 , 45 ] . Second , we highlight how an asset - based orientation is essential to conducting this work and can support the growth and positioning of a makerspace in ways that center the community and its participants . 8 . 1 Addressing Individual and Structural Inequities Social justice is a multi - dimensional and evolving issue [ 23 , 45 ] . Working specifically with a social justice organization we were provided with the opportunity to build on DIVAS’ history of using educational programming that engages learners in addressing inequities as they learn about new technologies and contribute to their communities . Situated within a community of color in an under - resourced neighborhood there were a diversity of ways in which the community perceived value in the space and resources that a makerspace could provide . Clarisa’s orientation for DIVAS forefronts recognition [ 23 , 45 ] of societal inequities through their educational programs that teach and engage participants with issues in their community . The community members in the design session articulated community issues from abandoned lots , to food justice , to mental health . By bringing these ideas into organizational discussions surrounding the framing of makerspace programming we can drive activities that not only recognize but address the local community members’ experiences with structural marginalization . The Urban Window Display program is one example of how the makerspace can support educational programming that focuses on the recognition of inequities as it engages learners in creation to communicate about initiatives for justice , such as the Black Lives Matter Movement . A second key dimension of the social justice framework is distribution , which highlights how resources and opportunities are made available to people [ 23 , 45 ] . Makerspaces have the potential to serve as a physical space that mediates access to additional community resources . The types of resources identified by community members , such as interview clothing and healthy food options , were broader than resources that are typically associated with makerspaces . As we continue to explore the development of justice - oriented makerspaces , we need to expand how we identify important resources that the spaces can make available to the community . The Community Garden Stewardship is one example of this , demonstrating the ways that makerspaces can engage with distribution —in this case , the distribution of fresh foods—through sustainable pathways that leverage other organizational and community resources . The third dimension that we draw on in the social justice framework , is enablement in which design can contribute the needed environment for individuals to “fulfill their potential” and grow their skills and knowledge [ 23 , 45 ] . Dombroski et al . [ 23 ] distinguish the importance of a multilevel approach in developing capacities at both the individual and structural levels . At the individual level , the community members identified the ways that the makerspace could help provide access to knowledge and resources that could be directly situated in their lives in practical ways that aligned with their life and career pathways . Prior work has pointed to the importance of this capacity building in under - resourced communities [ 16 , 17 , 71 , 75 ] . In our work , we demonstrate how multifaceted makerspace activities can broaden the ways we integrate individual capacity building within community - building activities . One example of how this manifested was with the COVID - 19 Learning Center . The pandemic confronted our educational system with having to deal with the stark inequities with technology . The COVID - 19 Learning Center played a key role in providing access to technologies to facilitate individuals in fulfilling their potential . It was through this programming that learners had access to their remote learning and engaged in community design work through their planting of garden beds . By broadening the scope of makerspace activities , we 397 : 22 Kayla DesPortes , Shiri Mund , & Clarisa James PACM on Human - Computer Interaction , Vol . 5 , No . CSCW2 , Article 397 , Publication date : October 2021 . can creatively address multiple issues helping individuals build capacities and address additional community needs . Few studies in the makerspace literature focus on fostering knowledge , agency , and opportunities for their participants to take on initiatives that directly address structural inequities . The community members in our session identified the importance of participating and leading efforts to improve their communities . They saw these traits as integral to themselves , what they valued , and who they looked up to . Through the programming that has developed , like the Community Garden Stewardship , community members are directly involved in maker activities and community development activities that speak to issues like food justice . Vakil [ 73 ] argues that computing education has failed to engage learners adequately in ethical and political issues . He claims that we can forefront justice in the learning experience by creating opportunities for participants to engage with their socio - political identities in the context of real issues . Makerspaces can and should be part of this orientation . Through our work , we demonstrate ways in which a community can leverage a makerspace in educating about differences in how communities and individuals are treated and impacted by society while providing a situated context for engaging in social action projects that address the realities of their community . 8 . 2 Developing with Community Assets and Capacities The findings from this work demonstrate how an asset - based orientation can complement the social justice focus to build individual and community capacities . Prior research has critiqued the maker movement for not building on various communities’ knowledge and practices [ 74 ] . In our work , the stories participants shared around how they repurposed resources and revitalized areas within their communities demonstrated the wealth of knowledge that can be shared throughout the community . The narratives from the community , such as the discussion about the skate park , demonstrated the situated ways in which the community already engages in design work . As researchers , we missed an opportunity to connect how we conceptualized design in the workshop to the legitimate practices in the community . This reinforces how our research should decenter the elite status of design [ 55 ] and focus on the grounded realities of individuals [ 32 ] . In the makerspace activities that developed , the Urban Window Display illustrates how makerspaces can position individuals from the community in leadership positions to draw on their capacities within making activities . On top of the communities’ design and making knowledge , the participants illustrated how community activism—in both its mindset and knowledge—was situated across the intergenerational community . From adults who admired seniors , to youth who felt they served as mentors for the younger generation , community members described how their intergenerational connections led to their learning and inspiration in community participation . Prior work examining equity with computing technologies points to the role intergenerational relationships—specifically parent - child relationships—can play in serving as brokers of technology [ 5 , 27 , 63 , 65 ] . Our findings point to how an asset - based orientation can expand our conceptualization beyond familial ties as we examine how an intergenerational community can serve as brokers to civic engagement and technology . In addition to community members sharing knowledge , we witnessed the community members implicitly engaging in asset - mapping—identifying the capacities of individuals within their community [ 47 , 48 ] . The community members identified particular people to run programming and fill roles within the makerspace . The development of the Urban Window Display is a direct example of how Clarisa connected an individual’s knowledge to the development of programming in the space . Additionally , Clarisa saw opportunities to connect , support , and share resources , such as providing a space to make banners for the community member who organizes a cultural parade . Examining the Design and Development of a Social Justice Makerspace 397 : 23 PACM on Human - Computer Interaction , Vol . 5 , No . CSCW2 , Article 397 , Publication date : October 2021 . This is similar to Litts’ [ 44 ] identification of mutual partnerships and outreach . Our work provides direct examples of what these could look like in a makerspace . Asset - based community development also has an implicit connection to the distribution dimension of the social justice framework . The relationships that form connections between assets in a community provide a sustainable solution to promoting the allocation of resources throughout a community . 9 LIMITATIONS This paper reports on the initial participatory action research activities carried out by the design time to design a makerspace within the context of a community social justice organization . Although the design work with Clarisa has lasted for one and a half years , many findings were gathered within a short engagement with the local community members . The COVID - 19 pandemic hit the community after the launch of the makerspace , impacting our continued design engagement with the community members and our ability to implement programming based on our findings . We completed this design work before the makerspace was active ( because it was in the early stages of development ) ; therefore , we did not have a fully formed makerspace community that we could easily develop rapport within . We thus relied on Clarisa to facilitate our relationship with the community members . Had we been able to engage more with community members we could have developed relationships to facilitate trust and dialogue that could have potentially led to different findings . Additionally , based on the socio - economic and political landscape of particular communities the findings might not be able to be integrated in the same way across all makerspaces . We do not take these findings as generalizable and instead hoped to provide enough contextual details surrounding how the organization , community members , and space are situated such that we can expand our understanding of the roles makerspaces can play within communities that have been historically disenfranchised . 10 CONCLUSION The work presented in this paper explores the various themes and tensions that arose throughout the design of a social justice makerspace situated within a community of color in the United States . Working collaboratively with DIVAS for Social Justice and its Founder and Executive Director , Clarisa , we developed a contextual understanding of how the makerspace could develop in ways that aligned with community perspectives and values . Specifically , the work identifies the need to position equity - oriented makerspace research towards addressing structural marginalization at both the individual and community levels . Applying a social justice framework enabled us to examine how a makerspace can address inequities through identifying and educating about them , engaging in the distribution of resources and opportunities , and facilitating individuals to build their capacities . By leveraging the assets and capacities of the individuals and organizations in the area , we can build on community knowledge to develop effective programming and create sustainable solutions to community issues . ACKNOWLEDGMENTS We’d like to thank all the members of DIVAS for Social Justice and the local community members who contributed their time and thoughtful ideas . We would also like to thank Joey Azoulai , who was an integral member of the research team but was not able to participate in writing the paper . 397 : 24 Kayla DesPortes , Shiri Mund , & Clarisa James PACM on Human - Computer Interaction , Vol . 5 , No . CSCW2 , Article 397 , Publication date : October 2021 . REFERENCES [ 1 ] Ames , M . G . 2018 . Hackers , Computers , and Cooperation : A Critical History of Logo and Constructionist Learning . 2 , ( 2018 ) , 18 . [ 2 ] Ames , M . G . et al . 2018 . Making or making do ? Challenging the mythologies of making and hacking . ( 2018 ) , 21 . [ 3 ] Bang , M . and Vossoughi , S . 2016 . Participatory Design Research and Educational Justice : Studying Learning and Relations Within Social Change Making . Cognition and Instruction . 34 , 3 ( Jul . 2016 ) , 173 – 193 . DOI : https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1080 / 07370008 . 2016 . 1181879 . [ 4 ] Bardzell , S . 2010 . Feminist HCI : taking stock and outlining an agenda for design . Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems ( 2010 ) , 1301 – 1310 . [ 5 ] Barron , B . et al . 2009 . Parents as learning partners in the development of technological fluency . International Journal of Learning and Media . 1 , 2 ( 2009 ) , 55 – 77 . [ 6 ] Bergold , J . and Thomas , S . 2012 . Participatory Research Methods : A Methodological Approach in Motion . ( 2012 ) , 191 – 222 . [ 7 ] Bevan , B . 2017 . The promise and the promises of Making in science education . Studies in Science Education . 53 , 1 ( Jan . 2017 ) , 75 – 103 . DOI : https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1080 / 03057267 . 2016 . 1275380 . [ 8 ] Blikstein , P . 2013 . Digital fabrication and ‘making’in education : The democratization of invention . FabLabs : Of Machines , Makers and Inventors . ( 2013 ) , 1 – 21 . [ 9 ] Braun , V . and Clarke , V . 2012 . Thematic analysis . APA handbook of research methods in psychology , Vol 2 : Research designs : Quantitative , qualitative , neuropsychological , and biological . H . Cooper et al . , eds . American Psychological Association . 57 – 71 . [ 10 ] Braun , V . and Clarke , V . 2006 . Using thematic analysis in psychology . Qualitative Research in Psychology . 3 , 2 ( Jan . 2006 ) , 77 – 101 . DOI : https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1191 / 1478088706qp063oa . [ 11 ] Buechley , L . 2013 . Closing Address . [ 12 ] Calabrese Barton , A . et al . 2016 . Mobilities of Criticality : Space - Making , Identity and Agency in a Youth - Centered Makerspace . ( 2016 ) , 8 . [ 13 ] Calabrese Barton , A . and Tan , E . 2018 . A Longitudinal Study of Equity - Oriented STEM - Rich Making Among Youth From Historically Marginalized Communities . American Educational Research Journal . 55 , 4 ( Aug . 2018 ) , 761 – 800 . DOI : https : / / doi . org / 10 . 3102 / 0002831218758668 . [ 14 ] Corbett , E . and Loukissas , Y . 2019 . Engaging Gentrification as a Social Justice Issue in HCI . Proceedings of the 2019 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems ( Glasgow Scotland Uk , May 2019 ) , 1 – 16 . [ 15 ] Cornwall , A . and Jewkes , R . 1995 . What is Participatory Research ? Social Science & Medicine . 41 , 12 ( 1995 ) , 1667 – 1676 . [ 16 ] Corsini , L . and Moultrie , J . 2020 . Humanitarian makerspaces in crisis - affected communities . Artificial Intelligence for Engineering Design , Analysis and Manufacturing . ( 2020 ) , 1 – 13 . [ 17 ] Corsini , L . and Moultrie , J . 2018 . The Role Of Makerspaces For Crisis - Affected Communities : Benefits And Challenges . ( Aug . 2018 ) . DOI : https : / / doi . org / 10 . 5281 / ZENODO . 1344465 . [ 18 ] De Vries , H . et al . 2008 . Using Pooled Kappa to Summarize Interrater Agreement across Many Items . Field Methods . 20 , 3 ( Mar . 2008 ) , 272 – 282 . DOI : https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1177 / 1525822X08317166 . [ 19 ] DiSalvo , B . et al . 2016 . Information Seeking Practices of Parents : Exploring Skills , Face Threats and Social Networks . Proceedings of the 2016 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems ( San Jose California USA , May 2016 ) , 623 – 634 . [ 20 ] DiSalvo , B . and DiSalvo , C . 2014 . Designing for Democracy in Education : Participatory Design and the Learning Sciences . ( 2014 ) , 7 . [ 21 ] DiSalvo , C . et al . 2008 . The neighborhood networks project : A case study of critical engagement and creative expression through participatory design . ( Oct . 2008 ) , 41 – 50 . [ 22 ] Dittert , N . and Katterfeldt , E . - S . 2018 . Diversity in Digital Fabrication : Programming Personally Meaningful Textile Imprints . Proceedings of the Conference on Creativity and Making in Education ( Trondheim Norway , Jun . 2018 ) , 112 – 113 . [ 23 ] Dombrowski , L . et al . 2016 . Social Justice - Oriented Interaction Design : Outlining Key Design Strategies and Commitments . Proceedings of the 2016 ACM Conference on Designing Interactive Systems ( Brisbane QLD Australia , Jun . 2016 ) , 656 – 671 . [ 24 ] Echanove , M . 2003 . Bed - Stuy on the Move : Demographic trends and Economic Development in the heart of Brooklyn . Columbia University , GSAPP , Urban Planning . [ 25 ] Eglash , R . 2004 . Appropriating technology : Vernacular science and social power . University of Minnesota Press . [ 26 ] Erete , S . et al . 2021 . I Can’t Breathe : Reflections from Black Women in CSCW and HCI . Proceedings of the ACM on Human - Computer Interaction . 4 , CSCW3 ( Jan . 2021 ) , 1 – 23 . DOI : https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3432933 . [ 27 ] Forssell , K . S . et al . 2008 . Roles of parents in fostering technological fluency . Proceedings of the 8th international conference on International conference for the learning sciences - Volume 3 ( 2008 ) , 33 – 34 . [ 28 ] Fox , S . et al . 2015 . Hacking Culture , Not Devices : Access and Recognition in Feminist Hackerspaces . Proceedings of the 18th ACM conference on Computer supported cooperative work & social computing . ( 2015 ) , 56 – 68 . [ 29 ] Gonzales , A . 2017 . Technology Maintenance : A New Frame for Studying Poverty and Marginalization . Proceedings of the 2017 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems ( Denver Colorado USA , May 2017 ) , 289 – 294 . Examining the Design and Development of a Social Justice Makerspace 397 : 25 PACM on Human - Computer Interaction , Vol . 5 , No . CSCW2 , Article 397 , Publication date : October 2021 . [ 30 ] Grimme , S . et al . 2014 . “We’ve conquered dark” : shedding light on empowerment in critical making . Proceedings of the 8th Nordic Conference on Human - Computer Interaction Fun , Fast , Foundational - NordiCHI ’14 ( Helsinki , Finland , 2014 ) , 431 – 440 . [ 31 ] Halverson , E . R . and Sheridan , K . 2014 . The Maker Movement in Education . Harvard Educational Review . 84 , 4 ( Dec . 2014 ) , 495 – 504 . DOI : https : / / doi . org / 10 . 17763 / haer . 84 . 4 . 34j1g68140382063 . [ 32 ] Harrington , C . N . et al . 2019 . Deconstructing Community - Based Collaborative Design : Towards More Equitable Participatory Design Engagements . PACM on Human - Computer Interaction . 3 , ( 2019 ) , 1 – 25 . [ 33 ] Hayes , G . R . 2014 . Knowing by doing : action research as an approach to HCI . Ways of Knowing in HCI . Springer . 49 – 68 . [ 34 ] Holbert , N . 2016 . Bots for Tots : Building Inclusive Makerspaces by Leveraging “Ways of Knowing . ” Proceedings of the The 15th International Conference on Interaction Design and Children - IDC ’16 ( Manchester , United Kingdom , 2016 ) , 79 – 88 . [ 35 ] Hui , J . S . and Gerber , E . M . 2017 . Developing Makerspaces as Sites of Entrepreneurship . Proceedings of the 2017 ACM Conference on Computer Supported Cooperative Work and Social Computing - CSCW ’17 ( Portland , Oregon , USA , 2017 ) , 2023 – 2038 . [ 36 ] Irani , L . et al . 2010 . Postcolonial computing : a lens on design and development . ( 2010 ) , 10 . [ 37 ] Kafai , Y . B . et al . 2014 . A Crafts - Oriented Approach to Computing in High School : Introducing Computational Concepts , Practices , and Perspectives with Electronic Textiles . ACM Transactions on Computing Education . 14 , 1 ( Mar . 2014 ) , 1 – 20 . DOI : https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2576874 . [ 38 ] Khanipour , P . R . et al . 2017 . Framing Makerspace Communities . 7th Annual Conference on Creativity and Making in Education , FabLearn 2017 ( 2017 ) . [ 39 ] Khanipour Roshan , P . et al . 2015 . Collaborative Learning in Online and Offline Makerspaces . ( Gothenberg , Jun . 2015 ) . [ 40 ] Kretzmann , J . and McKnight , J . 1993 . Building Communities from the Inside Out : A Path Toward Finding and Mobilizing a Community’s Assets . ACTA Publications . [ 41 ] Kretzmann , J . L . and McKnight , J . P . 1996 . Asset - Based Community Development . National Civic Review . 85 , 4 ( 1996 ) , 23 – 29 . [ 42 ] Lachney , M . et al . 2016 . Software Design in the ‘Construction Genre’ of Learning Technology : Content Aware Versus Content Agonistic . Computational Culture : A Journal of Software Studies . 5 , ( 2016 ) , 1 – 15 . [ 43 ] Lindtner , S . et al . 2016 . Reconstituting the Utopian Vision of Making : HCI After Technosolutionism . Proceedings of the 2016 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems - CHI ’16 ( Santa Clara , California , USA , 2016 ) , 1390 – 1402 . [ 44 ] Litts , B . K . 2015 . Resources , facilitation , and partnerships : three design considerations for youth makerspaces . Proceedings of the 14th International Conference on Interaction Design and Children - IDC ’15 ( Boston , Massachusetts , 2015 ) , 347 – 350 . [ 45 ] Lötter , H . P . P . [ Hennie ] 2011 . Poverty Ethics and Justice . University of Wales Press . [ 46 ] Martin , L . 2015 . The Promise of the Maker Movement for Education . Journal of Pre - College Engineering Education Research ( J - PEER ) . 5 , 1 ( Apr . 2015 ) . DOI : https : / / doi . org / 10 . 7771 / 2157 - 9288 . 1099 . [ 47 ] Mathie , A . and Cunningham , G . 2003 . From clients to citizens : Asset - based Community Development as a strategy for community - driven development . Development in Practice . 13 , 5 ( Nov . 2003 ) , 474 – 486 . DOI : https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1080 / 0961452032000125857 . [ 48 ] McKnight , J . L . and Kretzmann , J . P . 1990 . Mapping Community Capacity . Chicago Community Trust . [ 49 ] Meehan , R . J . et al . 2014 . A Card - Sorting Task to Establish Community Values in Designing Makerspaces . FabLearn . ( 2014 ) , 4 . [ 50 ] Meissner , J . L . et al . 2017 . Do - It - Yourself Empowerment as Experienced by Novice Makers with Disabilities . Proceedings of the 2017 Conference on Designing Interactive Systems ( Edinburgh United Kingdom , Jun . 2017 ) , 1053 – 1065 . [ 51 ] Miller , J . and Garran , A . M . 2007 . The Web of Institutional Racism . Smith College Studies in Social Work . 77 , 1 ( Mar . 2007 ) , 33 – 67 . DOI : https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1300 / J497v77n01 _ 03 . [ 52 ] Nel , H . 2018 . A Comparison between the Asset - oriented and Needs - based Community Development Approaches in Terms of Systems Changes . Practice . 30 , 1 ( Jan . 2018 ) , 33 – 52 . DOI : https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1080 / 09503153 . 2017 . 1360474 . [ 53 ] Noble , S . U . 2018 . Algorithms of Oppression : How search engines reinforce racism . NYU Press . [ 54 ] Ogbonnaya - Ogburu , I . F . et al . 2020 . Critical Race Theory for HCI . Proceedings of the 2020 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems ( Honolulu HI USA , Apr . 2020 ) , 1 – 16 . [ 55 ] O’Leary , J . T . et al . 2019 . Who Gets to Future ? Race , Representation , and Design Methods in Africatown . Proceedings of the 2019 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems ( 2019 ) . [ 56 ] O’Neil , C . 2017 . Weapons of math destruction : How big data increases inequality and threatens democracy . Broadway Books . [ 57 ] Oudshoorn , N . et al . 2004 . Configuring the User as Everybody : Gender and Design Cultures in Information and Communication Technologies . Science , Technology , & Human Values . 29 , 1 ( Jan . 2004 ) , 30 – 63 . DOI : https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1177 / 0162243903259190 . [ 58 ] Peppler , K . et al . 2017 . Survey of Assessment in Makerspaces . Open Portfolio Project . ( 2017 ) , 29 . 397 : 26 Kayla DesPortes , Shiri Mund , & Clarisa James PACM on Human - Computer Interaction , Vol . 5 , No . CSCW2 , Article 397 , Publication date : October 2021 . [ 59 ] Pinkett , R . and Street , A . 2000 . Bridging the Digital Divide : Sociocultural Constructionism and an Asset - Based Approach to Community Technology and Community Building . 81st Annual Meeting of the American Educational Research Association ( AERA ) ( New Orleans , LA , 2000 ) , 1 – 14 . [ 60 ] Ponzoni , E . 2016 . Windows of understanding : broadening access to knowledge production through participatory action research . Qualitative Research . 16 , 5 ( 2016 ) , 557 – 574 . [ 61 ] Richard , G . T . and Giri , S . 2017 . Inclusive Collaborative Learning With Multi - Interface Design : Implications for Diverse and Equitable Makerspace Education . ( Philadelphia , PA , 2017 ) , 415 – 422 . [ 62 ] Roedl , D . et al . 2015 . Sustainable Making ? Balancing Optimism and Criticism in HCI Discourse . ACM Transactions on Computer - Human Interaction . 22 , 3 ( Jun . 2015 ) , 1 – 27 . DOI : https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2699742 . [ 63 ] Roque , R . et al . 2016 . “I’m Not Just a Mom” : Parents Developing Multiple Roles in Creative Computing . International Conference of the Learning Sciences . ( 2016 ) , 663 – 670 . [ 64 ] Sheridan , K . et al . 2014 . Learning in the Making : A Comparative Case Study of Three Makerspaces . Harvard Educational Review . 84 , 4 ( Dec . 2014 ) , 505 – 531 . DOI : https : / / doi . org / 10 . 17763 / haer . 84 . 4 . brr34733723j648u . [ 65 ] Simpkins , S . D . et al . 2005 . Parents’ socializing behavior and children’s participation in math , science , and computer out - of - school activities . Applied Developmental Science . 9 , 1 ( 2005 ) , 14 – 30 . [ 66 ] Sivek , S . C . 2011 . “We Need a Showing of All Hands” : Technological Utopianism in MAKE Magazine . Journal of Communication Inquiry . ( 2011 ) , 0196859911410317 . [ 67 ] Stickel , O . et al . 2015 . 3D Printing with Marginalized Children—An Exploration in a Palestinian Refugee Camp . ECSCW 2015 : Proceedings of the 14th European Conference on Computer Supported Cooperative Work , 19 - 23 September 2015 , Oslo , Norway . N . Boulus - Rødje et al . , eds . Springer International Publishing . 83 – 102 . [ 68 ] Stringer , S . M . 2018 . NYC Neighborhood Economic Profiles . [ 69 ] Tan , E . and Calabrese Barton , A . 2017 . Designing for rightful presence in STEM - rich making : Community ethnography as pedagogy . Proceedings of the 7th Annual Conference on Creativity and Fabrication in Education - FabLearn ’17 ( Stanford , CA , USA , 2017 ) , 1 – 8 . [ 70 ] Tanenbaum , J . et al . 2010 . The Reading Glove : designing interactions for object - based tangible storytelling . ( 2010 ) , 1 – 9 . [ 71 ] Taylor , J . L . et al . 2017 . Diversity and coherence in a hackerspace for people from a low socioeconomic community . Proceedings of the 29th Australian Conference on Computer - Human Interaction - OZCHI ’17 ( Brisbane , Queensland , Australia , 2017 ) , 238 – 247 . [ 72 ] Taylor , N . et al . 2016 . Making Community : The Wider Role of Makerspaces in Public Life . Proceedings of the 2016 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems ( 2016 ) , 1415 – 1425 . [ 73 ] Vakil , S . 2018 . Ethics , Identity , and Political Vision : Toward a Justice - Centered Approach to Equity in Computer Science Education . Harvard Educational Review . 88 , 1 ( Mar . 2018 ) , 26 – 52 . DOI : https : / / doi . org / 10 . 17763 / 1943 - 5045 - 88 . 1 . 26 . [ 74 ] Vossoughi , S . et al . 2016 . Making Through the Lens of Culture and Power : Toward Transformative Visions for Educational Equity . Harvard Educational Review . 86 , 2 ( Jun . 2016 ) , 206 – 232 . DOI : https : / / doi . org / 10 . 17763 / 0017 - 8055 . 86 . 2 . 206 . [ 75 ] Vyas , D . and Vines , J . 2019 . Making at the Margins : Making in an Under - resourced e - Waste Recycling Center . Proceedings of the ACM on Human - Computer Interaction . 3 , CSCW ( Nov . 2019 ) , 1 – 23 . DOI : https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3359290 . [ 76 ] Yvonna S . , L . and Guba , E . 1985 . Naturalistic Inquiry . Sage . [ 77 ] 2021 . Bedford Stuyvesant BK03 Demographics . NYU Furman Center . [ 78 ] 2021 . Bedford – Stuyvesant , Brooklyn . Wikipedia . Received April 2021 ; revised June 2021 ; accepted July 2021 .