Neuron , Vol . 35 , 121 – 133 , July 3 , 2002 , Copyright  2002 by Cell Press Abnormal Spine Morphology and Enhanced LTP in LIMK - 1 Knockout Mice ever , the molecular mechanisms that regulate the actin cytoskeleton at synapses are poorly understood . Previous studies in cultured cells have indicated that Yanghong Meng , 1 , 6 Yu Zhang , 1 , 6 Vitali Tregoubov , 1 , 2 Christopher Janus , 1 , 3 Luis Cruz , 1 Mike Jackson , 2 Wei - Yang Lu , 2 John F . MacDonald , 2 Jay Y . Wang , 4 Douglas L . Falls , 4 and Zhengping Jia 1 , 2 , 5 the protein kinases LIM kinase ( LIMK ) - 1 and LIMK - 2 are potent regulators of actin dynamics . They exert their 1 Program in Brain and Behavior The Hospital for Sick Children effect via phosphorylating and thus inactivating the ac - tin - depolymerization factor ( ADF ) / cofilin ( Arber et al . , 555 University Avenue Toronto , Ontario M5G 1X8 1998 ; Yang et al . , 1998 ; Sumi et al . , 1999 ) . ADF / cofilin can directly bind to actin filaments and promote their 2 Department of Physiology University of Toronto disassembly ( Carlier et al . , 1999 ; Bamburg , 1999 ) . The fact that Rac - and Rho - induced cofilin phosphorylation Toronto , Ontario M5S 1A8 3 Center for Research in Neurodegenerative and reorganization of actin network can be blocked by catalytically inactive LIMK suggests that LIMK is a com - Diseases 6 Queen’s Park Crescent West mon downstream effector of the Rho family small GTPases ( Arber et al . , 1998 ; Yang et al . , 1998 ; Sumi et Toronto , Ontario M5S 3H2 Canada al . , 1999 ) , which are known to regulate various signaling pathwaysinvolvedintheregulationoftheactincytoskel - 4 Department of Biology Emory University eton ( Hall , 1998 ) . LIMK can be directly phosphorylated and activated by Rho - associated protein kinases PAK Atlanta , Georgia 30322 and ROCK ( Edwards et al . , 1999 ; Maekawa et al . , 1999 ; Sumi et al . , 2001 ) . LIMK and ADF / cofilin are widely expressed in the Summary mammalian CNS ( Bamburg and Bray , 1987 ; Mori et al . , 1997 ) . WhileLIMK - 2isexpressedinallcelltypes , LIMK - 1 In vitro studies indicate a role for the LIM kinase family in the regulation of cofilin phosphorylation and actin is restricted to neuronal tissues and accumulates at high levels at mature synapses ( Bernard et al . , 1994 ; Mizuno dynamics . In addition , abnormal expression of LIMK - 1 is associated with Williams syndrome , a mental disor - et al . , 1994 ; Proschel et al . , 1995 ; Wang et al . , 2000 ) . In addition , LIMK - 1candirectlyinteractwithproteinkinase der with profound deficits in visuospatial cognition . However , the in vivo function of this family of kinases C ( PKC ) and neuregulins ( Kuroda et al . , 1996 ; Wang et al . , 1998 ) , both of which are known to play a critical role remains elusive . Using LIMK - 1 knockout mice , we dem - onstrate a significant role forLIMK - 1 in vivo in regulating in the development and function of the nervous system . Furthermore , abnormal expression of several proteins cofilin and the actin cytoskeleton . Furthermore , we show that the knockout mice exhibited significant ab - including LIMK - 1 results in human Williams syndrome , a complex developmental disorder characterized by normalities in spine morphology and in synaptic func - tion , including enhanced hippocampal long - term po - mental retardation and profound deficits in visuospatial cognition ( Frangiskakis et al . , 1996 ; Belluji et al . , 1999 ) . tentiation . The knockout mice also showed altered fearresponsesandspatial learning . Theseresultsindi - Therefore , it has been hypothesized that LIMK - 1 is criti - cally involved in brain function via regulation of actin cate that LIMK - 1 plays a critical role in dendritic spine morphogenesis and brain function . dynamics . In order to address this possibility , we have generated mutant mice deficient in the expression of LIMK - 1 . We Introduction showed here that the knockout mice were altered in ADF / cofilin phosphorylation and the actin cytoskeleton . The actin cytoskeleton is important for many cellular processes , including cytokinesis , endocytosis , chemo - These mice were also perturbed in synaptic structure and function related to the actin network . Consistent taxis , and neurite outgrowth ( Mitchison and Cramer , 1996 ) . Actin remodeling may be particularly important with the physiological deficits , the LIMK - 1 knockout mice exhibited abnormalities in behavioral responses , for the establishment and structural modification of den - dritic spines on which the great majority of excitatory including impaired fear conditioning and spatial learn - ing . Our results represent genetic and in vivo biochemi - synapses are formed in the mammalian CNS ( Harris , 1999 ; Matus , 2000 ; Sorra and Harris , 2000 ) . In addition , cal evidence for a role of LIMK signaling in the regulation of actin dynamics and in the development and function the actin network is directly involved in synaptic regula - tion at mature synapses , including hippocampal long - of the mammalian CNS . term potentiation ( LTP ) , a form of synaptic plasticity considered critical to learning and memory formation Results ( Bliss and Collingridge , 1993 ; Malenka and Nicoll , 1999 ; Smart and Halpain , 2000 ; Rao and Craig , 2000 ) . How - Altered ADF / Cofilin ( AC ) Phosphorylation The LIMK - 1 knockout mice were generated by homolo - gous recombination using R1 ES cell lines followed by 5 Correspondence : jia @ sickkids . ca 6 These authors contributed equally to this work . aggregation ( Figure 1 ) . F1 LIMK - 1 (cid:1) / (cid:2) breeding gener - Neuron122 Figure 1 . Targeted Disruption of LIMK - 1 ( A ) Schematic representation of the LIMK - 1 cDNA structure , the wild - type LIMK - 1 locus , the targeting vector , and the targeted LIMK - 1 locus . The solid dark boxes in the wild - type LIMK - 1 locus mark the positions of exons containing the second LIM and the PDZ domains , which have been deleted and replaced by a pgk - neo cassette in the mutant LIMK - 1 locus . H , HindIII ; Rv , EcoRV ; X , XhoI ; B , BamHI ; S , SalI ; Xb , XbaI . The two probes ( 1 and 2 ) used for Southern blot analysis of ES and mouse tail DNA are indicated . ( B ) Southern blot analysis of tail DNA cut either : ( a ) by HindIII , probed with an external probe , probe 1 ; or ( b ) by BamHI , probed with the deleted internal probe , probe 2 , and with a LIMK - 2 probe . Probe 1 detected a 13Kb HindIII fragment in wild - type ( (cid:1) / (cid:1) ) and heterozygous ( (cid:1) / (cid:2) ) LIMK - 1 mice , and an 8 . 5 kb fragment in the knockout ( (cid:2) / (cid:2) ) and heterozygous mice ( a ) . Probe 2 detected a 1 . 8 kb BamHI fragment only in the wild - type ( (cid:1) / (cid:1) ) and heterozygous mice ( (cid:1) / (cid:2) ) , but not in the knockout mice ( (cid:2) / (cid:2) ) , confirming deletion of this fragment in the targeted locus . A LIMK - 2 probe detected the same pattern across all genotypes . ( C ) Northern blot analysis showing an absence of LIMK - 1 but normal expression of LIMK - 2 mRNA in the LIMK - 1 knockout mice . Total RNA was isolated from the postnatal day 7 mouse brains and hybridized with either the entire LIMK - 1 cDNA or a LIMK - 2 N - terminal cDNA fragment . ( D ) Immunoprecipitation detection of LIMK - 1 proteins . Total proteins were isolated from mature brain lysate , immunoprecipitated with either IgG or anti - LIMK - 1 , and detected by anti - LIMK - 1 . Only anti - LIMK - 1 but not IgG brought down LIMK - 1 in the wild - type ( (cid:1) / (cid:1) ) and heterozygous ( (cid:1) / (cid:2) ) but not in the knockout ( (cid:2) / (cid:2) ) mice . The LIMK - 1 antibody was raised against the 18 C - terminal amino acids of the predicted LIMK - 1 protein ( Wang et al . , 1998 ) . ( E ) Normal gross structure of the hippocampal formation . Paraformaldehyde - fixed and parafin - embedded brain sections were stained with either thionin or with anti - GluR1 or anti - Synapsin antibodies . ( F ) Western blot analysis of various proteins . Total proteins were isolated from mature brains of wild - type ( (cid:1) / (cid:1) ) and knockout ( (cid:2) / (cid:2) ) mice and immunoblotted with the indicated antibodies . ated an F2 population ( (cid:3) 500 mice , 19 % (cid:1) / (cid:1) , 51 % (cid:1) / (cid:2) , (cid:4) m serial paraffin sections and sections labeled with anti - GluR1 and anti - synapsin antibodies revealed no and 30 % (cid:2) / (cid:2) ) that deviated slightly from the expected Mendelian ratio . All experiments were performed using significant abnormalities in gross structure of the CNS , including the hippocampus ( Figure 1E ) , cortex , or olfac - F2offspringofage - andsex - matchedLIMK - 1 (cid:2) / (cid:2) ( knock - out ) and LIMK - 1 (cid:1) / (cid:1) ( wild - type ) littermates . The knockout tory bulb where LIMK - 1 is highly expressed . To examine the phosphorylation status of ADF / cofilin , miceshowednodetectableexpressionofLIMK - 1mRNA or protein ( Figures 1C and 1D ) , but normal expression we performed Western blot analysis on protein lysates prepared from whole - brain slices ( Figure 2 ) . While the of other proteins , including LIMK - 2 , PAKs , ROCK 2 , and cofilin ( Figure 1F , n (cid:5) 3 ) . Analysis of thionin - stained 5 protein levels of cofilin and ADF / cofilin were compara - Synaptic Function in LIMK - 1 Knockout Mice 123 Figure 2 . AlteredADF / Cofilin ( AC ) Phosphor - ylation Western blot analysis of total cofilin , AC , and phosphorylatedADF / cofilin ( p - AC ) usinganti - bodies specific to cofilin , all forms of ADF / cofilin , or p - AC . ( A ) Reductioninp - ACbutnotthetotalprotein level of cofilin or AC in the LIMK - 1 knockout mice . The amount of p - AC in the wild - type slices was defined as 100 % . ( B and C ) Abolition of PDBu effect . Addition of the PKC activator PDBu ( 20 (cid:4) M ) for 10 min dramatically reduced the amount of p - AC in the wild - type but not in the knockout slices ( B ) . The level of cofilin was not altered by the treatment with PDBu ( C ) . ( D and E ) Abolition of NMDA effect . Addition of 50 (cid:4) M NMDA induced a significant in - crease inthe amount ofp - AC inwild - type but not in the knockout slices ( D ) . Total cofilin protein was not altered by NMDA treatment in wild - type or knockout slices ( E ) . ( F ) Lack of DMSO effect . Addition of 0 . 1 % DMSO for up to 30 min had no effect on the amount of p - AC in either wild - type or knock - out slices . ( G ) Abolition of glutamate effect in cultured hippocampal neurons . Addition of 100 (cid:4) M glutamate for 30 min induced a significant reduction in the amount of p - AC in wild - type butnotinknockoutneurons . Totalcofilinpro - tein remained stable in both genotypes ( data not shown ) . Error bars in all graphs indicate SEM . Asterisks indicate p values less than 0 . 05 with Student’s t test . For each experi - ment , two slices ( except four slices in [ F ] ) from one animal of each genotype were used for treatments . ble , the amount of phosphorylated ADF / cofilin ( p - AC ) treatment , however , significantly reduced p - AC in cul - tured neurons from the wild - type ( 67 % (cid:6) 9 % of un - was significantly lower in the knockout slices ( 58 % (cid:6) 9 % ofwild - type , Figure2A ) , indicatingthatLIMK - 1medi - treated ) but not from the knockout mice ( Figure 2G ) . The total protein level of cofilin was not altered by PDBu ates , at least in part , the tonic phosphorylation of ADF / cofilin in the brain . ( Figure 2C ) , NMDA ( Figure 2E ) , or glutamate ( data not shown ) . TreatmentswithDMSO ( 0 . 1 % , themaximalcon - To evaluate the role of LIMK - 1 in the regulation of p - AC in response to acute external stimuli , we assessed centration used as vehicle for drugs ) alone for 30 min did not cause any significant changes in p - AC or total the effect of several agents known to alter the actin cytoskeletoninneurons . Applicationof20 (cid:4) M4 (cid:7) - phorbol - cofilin in either the wild - type or knockout slices ( Figure 2F ) . These results indicate that LIMK - 1 is critical to the 12 , 13 - dibutyrate ( PDBu ) , an activator of PKC , for 10 min decreased the amount of p - AC to approximately 64 % (cid:6) stimulus - induced changes in ADF / cofilin phosphoryla - tion and / or dephosphorylation . 6 % of the untreated level in wild - type slices ( Figure 2B ) . This rapid reduction was absent in knockout slices ( treated (cid:5) 96 % (cid:6) 7 % ofuntreated , Figure2B ) . NMDA ( 50 Abnormalities in the Actin Cytoskeleton To directly examine if the absence of LIMK - 1 affects the (cid:4) M ) treatment for10 min caused asignificant increase in p - AC in the wild - type ( 163 % (cid:6) 19 % of untreated ) but neuronal structuresand actincytoskeleton , weimmuno - stained cultured hippocampal neurons for the dendritic notintheknockoutslices ( Figure2D ) . Interestingly , addi - tion of glutamate ( 100 (cid:4) M ) for up to 30 min had no marker MAP2 , cofilin , and actin filaments . The complex - ity of dendritic branches , as judged by MAP2 and cofilin effects on brain slices ( data not shown ) . This glutamate Neuron124 Figure 3 . Abnormal Actin Cytoskeleton in the LIMK - 1 Knockout Neurons ( A – F ) MAP2 ( A , C , D , and F ) and cofilin ( B , C , E , and F ) double staining showing an uniform distribution of cofilin and normally spread growth cones ( arrowheads ) in the wild - type ( A , B , and C ) , and an abnormal clustered distribution of cofilin and lack of growth cones ( arrowheads ) in the knockout ( D , E , and F ) hippocampal neurons ( 5 days in vitro ) . ( G and H ) Phalloidin staining showing uniform distribution of actin filaments in a wild - type neuron ( G ) and abnormal formation of actin filament clusters ( arrows ) along the dendrites in a knocokout neuron ( H ) ( 8 days in vitro ) . ( I ) Phalloidin staining of a mature wild - type neuron ( 17 days in vitro ) showing highly enriched filamentous actin in the dendritic spines ( arrowheads ) . Scale bar , 10 (cid:4) m . ( J ) Phalloidin staining of a mature knockout neuron ( 17 days in vitro ) showing abnormal actin clusters ( arrows ) in the dendrites and the weakly stained spines ( arrowheads ) . Some spines do not appear due to their weak fluorescence . Scale bar , 6 (cid:4) m . ( K and L ) High magnifications of phalloidin staining showing typical spines ( arrowheads ) of the wild - type ( K ) and of the knockout ( L ) neurons . Circlesarethespineheadandthecorrespondingdendriticareabelowtheneckwherethefluorescenceintensitywasmeasuredforquantificationin ( M ) . Scale bar , 2 (cid:4) m . ( M ) Summary histogram of average intensity differences between spine head and the dendritic area below the neck ( spine head minus dendrite fluorescence intensity (cid:8) 10 (cid:2) 3 gray levels of 250 spines from three independent cultures for each genotype ) showing a significant difference between the wild - type and knockout neurons . ( N ) Distribution of head / neck ratios of 225 randomly selected spines from three independent hippocampal cultures for each genotype . For measurements in ( M ) and ( N ) , only clearly separated spines were chosen . Error bars in ( M ) and ( N ) indicate SEM . Asterisks indicate p values less than 0 . 05 with Student’s t test . staining , showed no differences between the wild - type intensity ratio (cid:5) 208 % (cid:6) 57 % ; also see Figure 3M for average spine head minus dendrite intensity ) . In the and knockout neurons ( Figures 3A – 3F ) . However , the size of the growth cones was greatly reduced or com - knockout neurons ( Figures 3J and 3L ) , the spine inten - sity was weak and not significantly higher than that of pletely absent in the LIMK - 1 knockout neurons ( Figures 3D – 3F ) . In young neurons ( 5 or 8 days in vitro ) , both dendritic areas ( average spine head / dendrite intensity ratio (cid:5) 104 % (cid:6) 21 % , and Figure 3M for average spine cofilin and actin were evenly distributed along the den - drites in the wild - type ( Figures 3B , 3C , and 3G ) . In con - head minus dendrite intensity ) . These data indicated that LIMK - 1 is essential for proper accumulation and trast , abnormal clusters of cofilin and actin were fre - quently observed in the knockout neurons ( Figures 3E , distribution of actin filaments in the dendritic branches and spines . 3F , and 3H ) . In mature knockout neurons ( 17 days ) , clus - tered actin filaments were also evident in the dendrites ( Figure 3J ) . In the wild - type neurons ( Figure 3I ) , the phal - Abnormal Spine Morphology Since the actin cytoskeleton is disrupted and the actin loidin staining intensity was much higher in spine heads compared to that in the adjacent dendritic areas where network is important for cell morphology , we suspected that the spine structures might be affected in the knock - staining was low and even ( average spine head / dendrite Synaptic Function in LIMK - 1 Knockout Mice 125 Figure 4 . Abnormal Morphology of Dendritic Spines ( A ) Representative single plane confocal images of Golgi - impregnated visual cortex layer V pyramidal neurons from wild - type ( a and b ) and knockout ( c and d ) mice . Arrows indicate typical dendritic spines found in both genotypes . ( B ) Representative thin - section electron micrographs of hippocampal CA1 stratum radiatum from the wild - type ( a ) and knockout ( b ) mice . The cross - sectional areas and PSD lengths ( asterisks ) of dendritic spines bearing synapses were dramatically reduced in the knockout mice . ( See supplemental data online at http : / / www . neuron . org / cgi / content / full / 35 / 1 / 121 / DC1 for larger images . ) ( C and D ) Distribution of head / neck ratios ( C ) and spine lengths ( D ) of randomly selected spines from the apical dendrites of layer V cortical pyramidal neurons . For each spine , the maximal diameters of the head and the neck were measured on line by adjusting the focus of the laser on a confocal microscope . A total of 300 spines from each genotype ( three wild - type and three knockout adult mice ) were measured . ( E and F ) Distribution of cross - sectional areas ( E ) and postsynaptic density ( PSD ) lengths ( F ) from four wild - type and four knockout mice . For each animal , 20 – 35 thin - section micrographs covering neuropil regions totaling 4000 – 7500 (cid:4) m 2 were used for quantitation . Error bars in all graphs indicate SEM . * p (cid:9) 0 . 05 , * * p (cid:9) 0 . 001 , * * * p (cid:9) 0 . 0001 with Student’s t test . out mice . Golgi staining of rapidly fixed brain sections tinct postsynaptic density ( PSD ) and presynaptic vesi - cles ( Figure 4B ) . However , the cross - sectional area of showed that although spine density and length were normal ( Figures 4A and 4D ) , spine shape was clearly the postsynaptic component of asymmetric synapses and the length of PSD of these synapses were signifi - altered in the adult knockout mice ( Figures 4A and 4C ) . Most dendritic spinesof the pyramidal neuronsof cortex cantly reduced in the knockout mice ( Figures 4E and 4F ) , consistent with the results that the knockout mice and hippocampus in the wild - type mice displayed thin necks and relatively large heads , with a head / neck ratio had smaller spine heads in Golgi - stained sections . TheseresultsindicatethatLIMK - 1iscriticaltoestablish - greater than 2 ( Figures 4Aa , 4Ab , and 4C ) , whereas most of the spines in the knockout mice had thick necks and ment and / or maintenance of normal spine morphology in vivo and in culture . relatively small heads , characteristic of sessile spines without a neck constriction ( Figures 4Ac , 4Ad , and 4C ) . Almost 80 % of the knockout spines had a head / neck Enhanced Hippocampal LTP To investigate the physiological consequences of ratio between 1 and 2 , whereas fewer than 10 % of the wild - type spines fell into this category ( Figure 4C ) . The LIMK - 1 inactivation and actin abnormalities , we per - formed electrophysiological recordings in the CA1 re - abnormal spine morphology of the knockout mice was also evident in cultured hippocampal neurons ( Figures gion of the hippocampus . Previous studies using actin - perturbing agents have shown that alterations of actin 3J , 3L , and 3N ) . Despite spine perturbation , EM thin sections showed that the knockout mice had a normal dynamics affect both basal synaptic transmission and hippocampal LTP ( Kim and Lisman , 1999 ; Krucker et al . , density of synapses identified by the presence of a dis - Neuron126 2000 ) . Since basal responses were not altered in the romi and Kidokoro , 1998 ; Cole et al . , 2000 ; Morales et al . , 2000 ) . We therefore examined if the knockout mice LIMK - 1 knockout mice ( data not shown ) , we focused on analyzing hippocampal synaptic plasticity , specifically were altered in the properties of neurotransmitter re - lease . The degree of paired - pulse facilitation ( PPF ) , a LTP andlong - term depression ( LTD ) . WhileLTD induced by low - frequency stimulation was normal ( Figures 5A short - term presynaptic plasticity , was indistinguishable between the wild - type and knockout slices ( Figure 6A ) . and 5E ) , the magnitude of LTP induced by several high - frequency stimulations was significantly altered in the The magnitude of posttetanic potentiation ( PTP ) was also identical between the two groups of mice ( Figure knockout slices ( Figure 5E ) . Tetanic stimulations of 5 or 10 Hz elicited LTP in the wild - type slices but failed to 6B ) . When a repetitive high - frequency stimulation was applied to evoke synaptic responses , both groups generate an appreciable amount of LTP in the knockout slices ( Figures 5B and 5E ) . In contrast , LTP induced by showed an initial facilitation of fEPSPs followed by grad - ual depression as the number of stimuli increased . How - 50 or 100 Hz stimulation was clearly enhanced in the knockout mice ( Figures 5C – 5E ) . ever , the knockout slices showed faster and increased synaptic depression ( Figure 6C ) . The averaged fEPSPs To investigate whether the enhanced LTP was linked to abnormal actin filaments , we analyzed the effect of 25 s – 35 s after the onset of stimulation were 72 % (cid:6) 4 % and 55 % (cid:6) 3 % of the initial response for the wild - type the actin depolymerizing compound cytochalasin D ( Cyto - D ) . Although it has been shown to affect both and knockout mice , respectively ( p (cid:9) 0 . 01 , Student’s t test ) . Theenhancedsynapticdepressionintheknockout basal responses and hippocampal LTP ( Kim and Lis - man , 1999 ) , low concentrations of the drug inhibit only mice suggests that LIMK - 1 is involved in sustained neu - rotransmitter release . LTP in rat hippocampus ( Krucker et al . , 2000 ) . In mouse hippocampus , we found that low concentrations of Alteredpresynaptic functionintheknockout micewas also supported by pharmacological analysis ( Figures Cyto - D ( 1 (cid:4) M ) actually facilitated LTP in wild - type slices . AsshowninFigures5Gand5H , bathperfusionofCyto - D 6D and 6E ) . Application of aminocyclopentane - 1S , 3R - dicarboxylic acid ( ACPD ) , an agonist for metabotropic ( 1 (cid:4) M ) for 30 min with no effect on basal synaptic trans - mission , significantly enhanced LTP in wild - type ( p (cid:9) glutamate receptors , induces a transient synaptic de - pression that is believed to be caused by inhibition of 0 . 002 , Student’s t test ) , but not in the knockout slices . Higher concentrations of Cyto - D ( 5 (cid:4) M ) again had no neurotransmitter release . This depression was greatly attenuated in the knockout mice ( Figure 6D ) . A profound effect on basal responses but inhibited LTP in both ge - notypes althoughto aless degreein theknockout slices . change was noted in response to the PKC activator PDBu . Addition of 10 (cid:4) M PDBu induced a long - lasting 5 (cid:4) M Cyto - D reduced LTP by 68 % (cid:6) 5 % in wild - type andby44 % (cid:6) 5 % inknockoutslices ( p (cid:9) 0 . 02 , Student’s synapticpotentiationinwild - typeslicesandthispotenti - ation was dramatically reduced in the knockout slices t test , by comparing 1 (cid:4) M Cyto - D and 5 (cid:4) M Cyto - D LTP ) . Latrunculin B ( 0 . 5 (cid:4) M ) , another actin - perturbing ( Figure 6E ) . To further investigate if actin filaments played a role in agent , significantly enhanced LTP in the wild - type but not in the knockout slices ( data not shown ) . These re - the alterations of neurotransmitter release , we analyzed the frequency and amplitude of miniature excitatory sults are consistent with the finding that there is less filamentous actin in the knockout spines , and they sug - postsynaptic currents ( mEPSCs ) from CA1 pyramidal neurons . We found that , although the amplitude was not gest that altered hippocampal LTP in the knockout mice is likely due to changes in the actin cytoskeleton . altered , the rate of mEPSCs was significantly higher in the knockout neurons ( 0 . 1 – 0 . 3 Hz for the wild - type and Since actin - depolymerizing agents also affect distri - bution ( Rao and Craig , 2000 ; Zhou et al . , 2001 ) and 0 . 3 – 0 . 6 Hz for the knockoutneurons ; Figures 6F and 6G ) . Addition of 10 (cid:4) M Cyto - D caused a transient increase in channel properties of glutamate receptors ( Rosenmund and Westbrook , 1993 ) , we analyzed whole - cell synaptic the rate of mEPSCs in the wild - type ( Figures 6H and 6I ) but not in the knockout ( Figure 6I ) slices . The normalized currents mediated by NMDA and AMPA receptors , re - spectively . No differences were evident in amplitude frequency of mEPSCs 5 min after addition of Cyto - D was 187 % (cid:6) 15 % for the wild - type and 119 % (cid:6) 17 % or reversal potential ( data not shown ) , suggesting that receptor targeting is not significantly perturbed and that for the knockout neurons ( p (cid:9) 0 . 02 , Student’s t test ) . Lower concentrations of Cyto - D ( 2 (cid:4) M ) , latrunculin B ( 1 altered LTP in the knockout mice is not likely caused by a differential activation of synaptic NMDA receptors (cid:4) M ) , or DMSO ( 0 . 1 % ) showed no effect in either geno - type ( data not shown ) . The enhancing effect of Cyto - D during induction of LTP . However , NMDA - ( Figure 5F ) , but not AMPA - evoked currents ( data not shown ) de - on mEPSCs and its absence in the knockout mice sug - gest that LIMK - 1 modulates neurotransmitter release sensitize more rapidly in the knockout neurons acutely isolated from hippocampal slices . The enhanced desen - through regulating the actin cytoskeleton . sitization may be linked to alterations in the actin cy - toskeleton since the actin binding proteins , such as Abnormal Behavioral Characteristics (cid:10) - actinin 2 , are known to interact with NMDA receptors Increased Locomotor Activity and to affect Ca 2 (cid:1) - dependent inactivation of NMDA cur - in the Open - Field Test rents ( Wyszynski et al . , 1997 ; Krupp et al . , 1999 ) . An open - field test was used to evaluate spontaneous exploration of a new environment and locomotor activity of the mice . The knockout mice ( n (cid:5) 4 ) differed signifi - Faster Synaptic Depression and Increased Frequency of mEPSCs cantly from the wild - type mice ( n (cid:5) 8 ) in their overall locomotor activities [ MANOVA , F ( 1 , 10 ) (cid:5) 10 . 9 , p (cid:9) 0 . 01 ] . Several studies have shown that presynaptic function is also affected by perturbations of actin dynamics ( Ku - Univariate analyses revealed that the knockout mice Figure 5 . Altered Hippocampal LTP ( A ) Normal CA1 - LTD induced by 1 Hz stimulation lasting 15 min ( arrow ) in the knockout slices . ( B ) Abolition of CA1 - LTP induced by 10 Hz stimulation lasting 1 . 5 min ( arrow ) in the knockout slices . ( C ) Increased CA1 - LTP induced by two trains of 50 Hz stimulation ( arrows , 1 s each with a 10 s intertrain interval ) in the knockout mice . The magnitude of fEPSPs 30 min after the induction was 154 % (cid:6) 4 % for the wild - type and 178 % (cid:6) 5 % for the knockout slices ( p (cid:5) 0 . 004 ) . ( D ) Enhanced CA1 - LTP induced by six trains of 100 Hz stimulation ( arrows , 1 s each with 5 min intertrain interval ) in the knockout mice . The fEPSP 20 min after the last train of 100 Hz stimulation was 167 % (cid:6) 11 % for the wild - type and 222 % (cid:6) 14 % for the knockout slices ( p (cid:9) 0 . 001 ) . ( E ) Summary plot showing alterations in the degree of LTP and LTD induced by stimulation in the CA1 area of the hippocampus at several different frequencies . * p (cid:9) 0 . 05 , * * p (cid:9) 0 . 001 with Student’s t test . ( F ) Enhanced desensitization of NMDA currents . Histogram of averaged steady state current ( I ss ) / peak current ( I p ) ratio for 25 wild - type ( (cid:1) / (cid:1) ) and 22 knockout ( (cid:2) / (cid:2) ) neurons from four mice of each group , showing a significantly reduced I ss / I p in the knockout neurons . Above the plot arerepresentativetracesofNMDA - evokedcurrentsinacutelyisolatedCA1pyramidalneuronsshowinganenhancedinactivationordesensitiza - tion in the knockout neurons at various concentrations ( in mM ) of extracellular Ca 2 (cid:1) . ( G ) Effect of Cyto - D on LTP in wild - type slices . Perfusion of 1 (cid:4) M Cyto - D significantly enhanced LTP ( p (cid:9) 0 . 002 ) , whereas 5 (cid:4) M Cyto - D inhibited LTP ( p (cid:9) 0 . 001 ) . ( H ) Reduced effect of Cyto - D on LTP in the knockout slices . Perfusion of 1 (cid:4) M Cyto - D had no effect on LTP although 5 (cid:4) M Cyto - D decreased LTP ( p (cid:9) 0 . 05 , Student’s t test ) . Cyto - D was perfused during the entire experiments . LTP in ( G ) and ( H ) was induced by 1 s 100 Hz stimulation given at t (cid:5) 0 , in control and 1 (cid:4) M Cyto - D , or at t (cid:5) 10 for 5 (cid:4) M Cyto - D experiments . Error bars in all graphs indicate SEM . Neuron128 Figure 6 . Altered Presynaptic Mechanisms ( A ) Normalpaired - pulsefacilitation ( PPF ) . The plot summarizes the ratio of the second fEPSP slope compared with the first one as a function of the interpulse interval . ( B ) Normal posttetanic potentiation ( PTP ) . A brief ( 1 s ) 100 Hz stimulation was given at t (cid:5) 0 in the presence of 50 (cid:4) M D - APV , and the fEPSPs were recorded immediately after the tetanus . ( C ) Faster synaptic depression in the knock - out mice . Repetitive stimuli ( 10 Hz , lasting 40 s ) were initiated at t (cid:5) 0 and the fEPSP to each stimulus was recorded during this pe - riod . Eachdatapointrepresentstheaveraged slope of 20 responses ( 2 s ) . The knockout mice showed an enhanced rate and level of depression . Above the graph are representa - tive traces ( average of four sweeps ) before ( 1 ) and during ( 2 ) the 10 Hz stimulation . ( D ) Reduced response to the metabotropic glutamate receptor agonist ( 1S , 3R ) - ACPD . Application of 20 (cid:4) M ACPD ( at t (cid:5) 0 for 10 min ) resulted in a transient synaptic depres - sion in both genotypes , but the degree of depression was significantly less in the knockout slices . Representative traces are shown above the plot . ( E ) Reduced response to the phorbol ester PDBu . 10 (cid:4) M PDBu was added to the perfu - sionsolution ( att (cid:5) 0for10min ) . Representa - tive traces ( average of four sweeps ) were ob - tained before ( 1 ) and 15 min after ( 2 ) addition of PDBu . ( F and G ) Enhanced frequency of minature excitatory postsynaptic currents ( mEPSCs ) . mEPSCs of CA1 pyramidal neurons were re - cordedunderwhole - cellvoltageclampmode in the presence of TTX ( 1 (cid:4) M ) and picrotoxin ( 100 (cid:4) M ) . Representative examples ( F ) and summary histogram ( G ) showing an in - creased frequency of basal mEPSCs in the knockout neurons . mEPSCswere blocked by AMPA receptor antagonist CNQX ( 5 (cid:4) M ) in both wild - type and knockout neurons . Aster - isks indicate p values less than 0 . 05 with Stu - dent’s t test . ( H and I ) Lack of Cyto - D effect in the knockout neurons . Representative example ( H ) showing an increase in the frequency of mEPSC by application of 10 (cid:4) M Cyto - D in a wild - type neuron , and averaged data ( I ) showing differences in normalized frequency of mEPSCs between the wild - type and knockout neurons ( p (cid:9) 0 . 02 , Student’s t test ) . Error bars in all graphs indicate SEM . displayed significantly higher levels of locomotor ( CS phase ) and to a foot shock ( post - US phase ) [ t ( 26 ) (cid:5) 1 . 0 ; t ( 26 ) (cid:5) 0 . 32 , respectively ; Figure 7B ] . The knockout [ F ( 1 , 10 ) (cid:5) 6 . 92 , p (cid:9) 0 . 05 ] and rearing [ F ( 1 , 10 ) (cid:5) 5 . 4 , p (cid:9) 0 . 05 ] activities but not wall - leaning rate [ F ( 1 , 10 ) (cid:5) 2 . 6 , mice also did not differ significantly from the wild - type in their freezing response during the context test carried p (cid:3) 0 . 05 ] or object exploration behavior ( F s (cid:9) 1 ) . The elevated locomotor activity of the knockout mice was out 24 hr later [ F ( 1 , 26 ) (cid:5) 0 . 48 ] , though they tended to freeze more , especiallyin the later part ofthe test ( Figure sustained during the period of testing . Enhanced Cued Fear Response in Contextual 7C ) . In the following cue - conditioning test , however , the knockout mice showed a significantly longer and con - Fear Conditioning ( CFC ) To evaluate learning performance , we first employed stant freezing in response to the sound [ F ( 1 , 26 ) (cid:5) 6 . 9 , p (cid:9) 0 . 02 , Figure 7D ] , suggesting that the fear response a fear - conditioning paradigm , which provides a robust associative learning test in mice . The knockout ( n (cid:5) 8 ) to simple CS stimulus is enhanced . Impaired Learning Reversal and wild - type ( n (cid:5) 6 ) mice showed similar responses to different levels of a foot shock [ F ( 1 , 27 ) (cid:5) 1 . 5 ; Figure in the Water Maze Test In addition to CFC test , we also employed the Morris 7A ] , indicating comparable nociceptive sensitivity to aversive stimulation . Both the wild - type ( n (cid:5) 14 ) and water maze test to examine more specifically spatial learning abilities of the mice . During learning acquisition knockout ( n (cid:5) 14 ) mice showed no freezing during the first 120 s of exploration of the conditioning chamber training , the knockout mice ( n (cid:5) 8 ) performed compara - bly to the wild - type ( n (cid:5) 19 ) in search path [ F ( 1 , 25 ) (cid:5) ( Figure 7B ) and comparable rates of freezing to a sound Synaptic Function in LIMK - 1 Knockout Mice 129 Figure 7 . Altered Behavioral Responses ( A ) Normal sensitivity to electric shock in the minimal amount of current required to elicit three stereotypical behavioral responses ( flinching , running / jumping , and vocalizing ) [ F ( 1 , 27 ) (cid:5) 1 . 48 , p (cid:5) 0 . 23 ] . ( B ) Freezingresponsetoasingletrainingtrial . Solid line indicates the duration of the condi - tioned stimulus ( CS , tone ) given between the fourth and fifth 30 s interval , and the small closed square above the solid line indicates the2sfootshock ( US ) . Neitherknockout ( n (cid:5) 14 ) nor wild - type ( n (cid:5) 14 ) mice showed any freezing before CS onset . During the CS and after the US phase , both groups showed a similar amount of freezing ( CS phase : 6 . 4 (cid:6) 9 . 3 s and 10 . 7 (cid:6) 12 . 7 s for (cid:2) / (cid:2) and (cid:1) / (cid:1) groups , respectively [ t ( 26 ) (cid:5) 1 . 02 , p (cid:5) 0 . 32 ] ; post - US phase : 18 . 6 (cid:6) 11 . 7 s and 17 . 1 (cid:6) 12 . 0 s for (cid:2) / (cid:2) and (cid:1) / (cid:1) groups , respectively [ t ( 26 ) (cid:5) 0 . 32 , p (cid:5) 0 . 75 ] . ( C ) Contextual conditioning test 24 hr after the training trial . The knockout mice showed a slower decrease in freezing response over the testing period , although ANOVA did not show significant differences between groups [ F ( 1 , 26 ) (cid:5) 0 . 48 , p (cid:5) 0 . 5 ] . ( D ) Cued ( CS , tone ) conditioningtest2hrafter the context test . ANOVA revealed a signifi - cant group effect [ F ( 1 , 26 ) (cid:5) 5 . 08 , p (cid:9) 0 . 05 ] : theknockoutmiceshowedmorefreezingandaslowerdecreaseinfreezingresponse . Thus , during the last minute of CS testing , the knockout mice showed a much higher freez - ing response [ 43 . 6 (cid:6) 3 . 6 s and 24 . 3 (cid:6) 5 . 5 s for (cid:2) / (cid:2) and (cid:1) / (cid:1) , respectively ; t ( 26 ) (cid:5) 2 . 93 , p (cid:9) 0 . 01 ] . ( E ) Averaged path lengths during learning ac - quisition training . Both groups of mice showed a comparable initial performance [ F ( 1 , 25 ) (cid:5) 0 . 73 , p (cid:5) 0 . 40 ] and significant im - provement in finding the platform over the testing period [ F ( 4 , 100 ) (cid:5) 10 . 13 , p (cid:9) 0 . 001 ] . The insert represents an annulus crossing index ( AC Index ) of the spatial bias during the probe trial run 24 hr after the acquisition . Both groups showed comparable spatial bias for the platform position during the probe trail [ t ( 25 ) (cid:5) 0 . 30 , p (cid:5) 0 . 8 ] . ( F ) Averaged path lengths during the reversal of learning carried out 48 hr after the completion of the initial learning acquisition phase . The knockout mice showed a significant impairment in locating the new position of the platform [ F ( 1 , 25 ) (cid:5) 5 . 0 , p (cid:9) 0 . 05 ] . During the probe trail carried out 24 hr after the reversal training , both groups showed a comparable spatial bias for the platform position [ insert ; t ( 25 ) (cid:5) 0 . 26 , p (cid:5) 0 . 8 ] . Error bars in all graphs indicate SEM . 0 . 73 , Figure 7E ] , escape latency [ F ( 1 , 25 ) (cid:5) 0 . 98 , data performance [ effect of days F ( 3 , 75 ) (cid:5) 6 . 6 , p (cid:5) 0 . 001 ; day by group interaction not significant ] , after the sec - not shown ] , and swim speed [ F ( 1 , 25 ) (cid:5) 0 . 02 , data not shown ] . The probe trial results indicated that both ond day of learning reversal , the knockout mice did not improve their performance further ( Figure 7F ) . This groups developed similar spatial bias for the platform position site [ t ( 25 ) (cid:5) 0 . 3 , Annulus Crossing ( AC ) index ; deficit was not explained by differences in their swim - ming speed [ F ( 1 , 25 ) (cid:5) 1 . 8 ] . However , both groups Figure 7E , insert ] . They did not differ in the total number of platform - site crossings [ 6 . 5 (cid:6) 1 . 1 and 7 . 2 (cid:6) 0 . 6 for showedacomparablebiasforthespatialpositionduringprobetrial [ t ( 25 ) (cid:5) 0 . 26 ; Figure 7F , insert ] . During their knockout and wild - type mice , respectively , t ( 25 ) (cid:5) 0 . 65 ] , indicating comparable search patterns during the probe search , they crossed all platform sites a comparable number of times [ 7 . 0 (cid:6) 0 . 8 for knockout and 6 . 3 (cid:6) 0 . 7 trial . A visible platform test carried out on experimentally naı¨ve mice also showed no significant differences be - for wild - type mice , t ( 25 ) (cid:5) 0 . 55 ] . These results indicate that the knockout mice are impaired in certain aspects tween the knockout ( n (cid:5) 19 ) and wild - type mice ( n (cid:5) 20 ) in their latency to reach the platform , swim path , or of spatial learning performance . swim speed [ F ( 1 , 27 ) (cid:5) 0 . 25 ; F ( 1 , 27 ) (cid:5) 0 . 71 ; F ( 1 , 27 ) (cid:5) 0 . 38 , respectively ] . Discussion However , the knockout mice showed significant im - pairment in locating a submerged platform position In cultured cells , LIMK - 1 is a major ADF / cofilin kinase , and , through phosphorylating and thereby inhibiting [ F ( 1 , 25 ) (cid:5) 5 . 0 , p (cid:9) 0 . 05 ] when the platform was moved to the opposite quadrant during the learning reversal ADF / cofilin , it plays an important role in regulating actin dynamics . Therefore , we hypothesized that genetic de - phase ( Figure 7F ) . Although both groups improved their Neuron130 letion of LIMK - 1 in mice would lead to a reduction in and SPAR ( Luo et al . , 1996 ; Nakayama et al . . , 2000 ; Sala et al . , 2001 ; Pak et al . , 2001 ) . All of these proteins can the level of ADF / cofilin phosphorylation and an increase in its actin depolymerizing activity . Thus , we expected potentially regulate the actin network , and it is possible that their effects are mediated by alterations in LIMK1 that in the knockout mice the actin cytoskeleleton would be altered due to the increased turnover of actin fibers activity . This possibility is supported by in vitro studies demonstrating that dominant - negative forms of LIMK - 1 andthat asaconsequencethere wouldbeabnormalities in the structure and function of the nervous system . blocked Rac - induced cofilin phosphorylation and actin filament accumulation ( Arber et al . , 1998 ; Yang et al . , As predicted , in LIMK - 1 knockout brain slices , the amount of phosphorylated ADF / cofilin is markedly di - 1998 ) . While the present study has not examined the role of LIMK - 1 in the regulation of actin - based spine minishedwhereas totalADF / cofilinis unchanged ( Figure 2 ) , indicating that LIMK - 1 is an important ADF / cofilin motility , our finding that glutamate - induced changes in phosphorylated ADF / cofilin are absent in the knockout kinase in the CNS . An obvious candidate kinase respon - sible for the residual ADF / cofilin phosphorylation ob - mice suggests the possibility that glutamate - induced spine motility is affected in these mice . served in the LIMK - 1 knockout mice is LIMK - 2 , which is known to be expressed in the CNS ( Mori et al . , 1997 ) IntheLIMK - 1knockoutmice , basalsynaptictransmis - sion was normal but hippocampal LTP was altered ( Fig - but whose expression is not altered by the absence of LIMK - 1 ( Figure 1 ) . LIMK - 2 is known to have activities ure 5 ) . Furthermore , we found that low concentrations of the actin polymerization - inhibiting drugs Cyto - D or similar to those of LIMK - 1 in transfected cell lines ( Smol - ich et al . , 1997 ; Sumi et al . , 1999 ) . Other kinases capable Latrunculin B had no effect on basal synaptic transmis - sionbutsignificantlyincreasedLTPinthewild - typemice of phosphorylating ADF / cofilin have been reported , but their presence in the CNS remains to be investigated and that this facilitating effect was abolished in the knockout mice . Higher concentrations of Cyto - D ( 5 (cid:4) M ) ( Lian et al . , 2000 ; Toshima et al . , 2001 ) . In addition to its role in maintaining a tonic level of ADF / cofilin phos - inhibited LTP in both genotypes but to a lesser degree in theknockoutmice . Theseresultssupportthehypothesis phorylation , our data revealed that LIMK - 1 is critical in mediating acute effects of external stimuli , including that the effects of LIMK - 1 on synaptic plasticity are a consequence of LIMK - 1’s effects on actin dynamics . activation of PKC and glutamate receptors . The mecha - nisms by which LIMK - 1 affects the level of phosphory - LIMK - 1’s regulation of spine morphology , likely through its effects on actin cytoskeleton , may be one lated ADF / cofilin in the CNS have not been fully defined but may involve both protein kinases and phosphatases mechanism by which LIMK - 1 influences hippocampal LTP . It is thought that the main function of dendritic ( Bamburg , 1999 ) . Direct phosphorylation of ADF / cofilin by LIMK - 1 has been demonstrated ( Arber et al . , 1998 ; spines is to compartmentalize and restrict calcium and other molecules ( Yuste et al . , 2000 ) . Thus , dendritic Yang et al . , 1998 ) . LIMK - 1 may also interact with other proteins such as protein phosphatases that in turn con - spines without neck constrictions in the knockout mice may fail to accumulate essential molecules to induce tribute to ADF / cofilin dephosphorylation ( Bamburg , 1999 ) . LTP when tetanic stimulations were weak ( such as in the case of 5 and 10 Hz ) ; however , under strong stimulations In accordance with our hypothesis , we demonstrated that the actin cytoskeleton was dramatically altered by ( such as 50 and 100 Hz ) , molecules such as Ca 2 (cid:1) in the activated spines may readily spread to parent dendrites the absence of LIMK - 1 . In wild - type neurons , actin fila - ments accumulate at a much higher level in the spines and adjacent spines , inducing LTP at their synapses , thus enhancing global potentiation . Examination of compared to the dendrites . This regional accumulation is disrupted in the knockout neurons ( Figure 3 ) , indicat - spine calcium and the synapse specificity of LTP induc - tion of the knockout mice may provide new insights ing that LIMK - 1 is critical for a high level of expression of actin filaments in the spines . Furthermore , the knockout into the fundamental mechanisms regulating synaptic plasticity . neurons accumulate abnormal clusters of actin fila - ments along the dendrites . Although the molecular The changes in spine morphology , hippocampal LTP , and NMDA receptor function in the knockout mice dem - structure of these actin clusters remains to be deter - mined , they may be related in some aspects to the rods onstrate essential postsynaptic functions of LIMK - 1 . However , our results that the knockout mice showed an previously described in rat cortical neurons treated with glutamate or by drugs that deplete ATP , treatments that enhanced synaptic depression and an increased rate of mEPSCs indicate that LIMK - 1 has important presynap - also induced a reduction in phosphorylated ADF / cofilin ( Minamide et al . , 2000 ) . Our results are consistent with tic roles . The presynaptic function of LIMK - 1 may also be actin - based since the facilitating effect of Cyto - D on the hypothesis that LIMK - 1 is critically involved in the regulation of neuronal actin dynamics . mEPSC was abolished in the knockout mice ( Figure 6 ) , and previous studies have demonstrated a similar effect Dendritic spines and growth cones are actin - based structures , and therefore changes in their morphology for actin polymerization inhibitors on both synaptic de - pression and the rate of mEPSCs ( Landis et al . , 1988 ; reflect alterations in the actin cytoskeleton . In LIMK - 1 knockout mice , the morphology of both spines and Cole et al . , 2000 ; Morales et al . , 2000 ) . A role for LIMK - 1 in presynaptic function is consistent with the pharmaco - growth cones was altered ( Figures 3 and 4 ) , suggesting that LIMK - 1 is an important regulator of the actin - based logical results that both PDBu and ACPD had an attenu - ated effect on synaptic transmission in the knockout mechanisms shaping these structures . Although the molecular events that regulate spine formation and mor - mice . Early studies have indicated that these com - pounds exert their effect primarily through presynaptic phology are largely unknown , some important mole - cules have been identified ( Nakayama and Luo , 2000 ; mechanisms ( Malenka et al . , 1986 ; Finch and Jackson , 1990 ; ParfittandMadison , 1993 ; PinandDuvoisin , 1995 ) . Ehlers , 2002 ) . These include the Rho family of small GTPases and the postsynaptic proteins Shank , Homer , Our data suggest that synaptic regulation by PKC and Synaptic Function in LIMK - 1 Knockout Mice 131 taining the second LIM and PDZ domains with a pgk - neo cassette metabotropic glutamate receptors may be related to the in a sense direction . The G418 resistant ES clones were tested for actin cytoskeleton . This possibility is supported by the atargetedeventbySouthernblotanalysis . Twoprobes , oneexternal fact that LIMK - 1 can physically interact with PKC ( Ku - to the targeting vector upstream of LIM domain and one internal roda et al . , 1996 ) and is expressed in presynaptic termi - containing the PDZ domain , were used for analyzing ES cell and nals ( Wang et al . , 2000 ) . mouse tail DNA . The procedures for culturing and screening ES cells and for generation of chimeric mice were described previously In addition to abnormalities in synaptic structure and ( Jia et al . , 1996 ) . function , we showed that the LIMK - 1 knockout mice were altered in certain behavioral responses , including heightened locomotor activities and impaired spatial Histochemistry , Golgi Impregnation , learning . Several factors , including the difficulties of the and Electron Microscopy task ( Morrisetal . , 1996 ) andthedifferencesinthedegree The procedures for thionin and immunostaining of fixed brain sec - tions were described previously ( Jia et al . , 1996 , Lu et al . , 1997 ) . of initial learning—i . e . , the knockout mice might have ForGolgistaining , brainswererapidlyisolated , immersedinosmium learned the task “better , ” resulting in a greater increase tetroxide ( 0 . 4 % ) - potassium dichromate ( 3 . 0 % ) solution , and kept in in the latency to locate a new platform position , may all the dark for 1 week . The fixed tissue was then rinsed with distilled contribute to the deficits in learning a new spatial cue . water and treated further with 0 . 75 % silver nitrate for 24 hr . The The prolonged freezing of the knockout mice in the fear samples were then processed and paraffin embedded . Comparable response task may be related to altered habituation . sections ( 10 – 50 (cid:4) m ) weretakenfor imagecollectionandanalysison a confocal microscope . For electron microscopy , the transcardially Further experiments such as water maze and fear condi - fixed brain samples were sliced ( 500 (cid:4) m ) on a vibratome and 1 (cid:8) tioning tasks with varying training intensity and testing 1 mm CA1 areas isolated from comparable sections . The blocks at various posttraining time points will help to address were then postfixed for an additional 3 hr and processed according these issues . It is important to note that the visuospatial to standard methods . For each block , 1 (cid:4) m thick sections were cut deficits andhyperactivity areamong the hallmarksof the and stained with 1 % toluidine blue to guide further trimming to cognitiveprofileofWilliams syndromepatients ( Bellujiet isolate equivalent CA1 subfields . Thin sections ( 60 nm ) were then cut and stained with uranyl acetate and Reynolds lead citrate . The al . , 1999 ) , but it remains to be determined whether the number of synapses ( Kirov et al . , 1999 ) and cross - sectional areas behavioral abnormalities in the knockout mice and in of spines bearing synapses ( Luo et al . , 1996 ) were determined on thehumanpatientsarerelated . Furtherbehavioralanaly - electron micrographs at a final magnification of 25 , 000 (cid:8) , using a sis of the knockout mice , especially the heterozygous NIH program . mice , will be important to assess if these mice can be used as a model to investigate the molecular mecha - Hippocampal Cell Culture , Immunostaining , nisms underlying human cognitive deficits . and Immunoblotting Another intriguing question raised by our analysis of Cultured hippocampal neurons were prepared from postnatal day LIMK - 1 knockout mice is whether abnormalities in den - 1 mice and maintained according to a procedure recommended for dritic spine morphology are present in Williams patients Neurobasal - Amedium ( LifeTechnologies ) . Cellsweretypicallyfixed and contribute to the behavioral abnormalities observed for 30 min with 4 % paraformaldehyde / 0 . 1 % glutaraldehyde in PBS . in these patients . Spine abnormalities are commonly For F - actin labeling , cells were permeabilized with 0 . 1 % Triton X - 100 / PBS and stained for 30 min with 1 (cid:4) g / ml TRITC - conjugated found in human patients suffering from neurological dis - phalloidin ( Sigma ) . Theintensityofphalloidinfluorescencewasmea - eases such as Down’s syndrome and Fragile X syn - sured using a Northern Eclipse program ( Toronto ) . The intensity of drome ( Sorra and Harris , 2000 ) . Fragile X knockout mice the entire spine head ( ranging from 0 . 3 – 1 . 0 (cid:4) m in diameter ) was exhibit developmental stage - dependent spine abnor - measured and subtracted ( or divided to obtain spine / dendrite ratio ) malities and an impairment in spatial learning resem - by that of an adjacent dendritic area of a similar size below the bling the spatial learning impairment observed in hu - neck . Forimmunostaining , fixed cellswere permeabilized for10 min withcoldmethanol , blockedfor1hrwith1 % milk / 2 % BSA , andthen mans with Fragile X syndrome ( Comery et al . , 1997 ; incubated with appropriate primary and then secondary antibodies . Nimchinsky et al . , 2001 ) . These observations plus the Fluorescent images were collected on a confocal microscope . The results of this paper are consistent with the notion that primary antibodies used were : anti - LIMK - 1 ( Wang et al . , 1998 ) , anti - alterations in spine structure may have important effects LIMK - 2 ( Santa Cruz ) , anti - MAP2 ( Upstates ) , anti - actin ( Sigma ) , anti - on synaptic function and behavior . cofilin ( SantaCruz ) , anti - NMDAR1andanti - NMDAR2A / B ( Upstates ) , In summary , we have presented genetic and physio - anti - GluR1 ( Upstates ) , anti - PKC (cid:10) , (cid:7) , (cid:11) ( Sigma ) , anti - synapsin ( Santa Cruz ) , anti - PAK - (cid:10) , anti - PAK - (cid:7) , anti - ROCK - 2 ( Santa Cruz ) , and anti - logical evidence supporting the hypothesis that LIMK - 1 CaMKII (cid:10) ( gift of Dr . Bill Trimble ) . is critically involved in spine morphogenesis and synap - tic function via regulation of the actin cytoskeleton . Im - portant issues for future investigation raised by this Cofilin Phosphorylation Assay study will include determining the molecular mecha - We used whole - brain slices , prepared and maintained as described for electrophysiological recordings , to analyze ADF / cofilin phos - nisms by which LIMK - 1 regulates spine structure , syn - phorylation , using rabbit polyclonal antibodies specific for ADF / aptic function , and behavior ; determining the relation - cofilin or phosphorylated ADF / cofilin ( Meberg et al . , 1998 ) or cofilin ship of the abnormalities observed in LIMK - 1 knockout ( SantaCruz ) . Thehealthofthesliceswasverifiedbynormalsynaptic mice to the pathology of Williams syndrome ; and exam - responses . Under these conditions , the level of both p - AC and total ining effects of deleting LIMK - 2 alone and in combina - cofilinremainedstableforatleast3hr . PDBu , NMDA , andglutamate tion with LIMK - 1 deletion . were prepared in DMSO as stock solutions and added directly to the slices held in a chamber containing 2 – 5 ml of 95 % O 2 / 5 % CO 2 - saturated extracellular solution . The treatment was terminated by Experimental Procedures homogenizing the slices at 4 (cid:12) C . The total protein concentration of each sample was determined and analyzed with Western blots . Generation of LIMK - 1 Knockout Mice AgenomicclonecontainingtheLIMandPDZdomainsofthe LIMK - 1 The amounts of cofilin and p - AC were compared by the enhanced chemiluminescence ( Amersham ) method of detection and the films gene was isolated from a genomic 129 / sv library . The targeting vector was constructed by replacing a 1 . 8 kb BamHI fragment con - scanned for optical density and statistical analysis . Neuron132 Electrophysiology dynamics in cell motility . Role of ADF / cofilin . J . Biol . Chem . 274 , 33827 – 33830 . The procedures for electrophysiological recordings were described previously ( Jia et al . , 1996 ) . For LTP studies , the age of mice ranged Cole , J . C . , Villa , B . R . S . , and Wilkinson , R . S . ( 2000 ) . Disruption of from 2 to 6 months and , for LTD and whole - cell patch clamping , actinimpedes transmitterrelease insnake motorterminals . J . Phys - from 2 to 4 weeks . Extracellular solution contained ( in mM ) : 120 iol . 525 , 579 – 586 . NaCl , 2 . 5 KCl , 1 . 3 MgSO 4 , 1 . 0 NaH 2 PO 4 , 26 NaHCO 3 , 2 . 5 CaCl 2 , and Comery , T . A . , Harris , J . B . , Willems , P . J . , Oostra , B . A . , Irwin , S . A . , 11 D - glucose . For field EPSPs , the recording pipette ( 3 MOhm ) Weiler , I . J . , and Greenough , W . T . ( 1997 ) . Abnormal dendritic spines was filled with extracellular solution . For whole - cell voltage clamp in fragile X knockout mice : maturation and pruning deficits . Proc . recordings , the patch pipette ( 3 – 5 MOhm ) contained the following Natl . Acad . Sci . USA 95 , 5401 – 5404 . ( in mM ) : 132 Cs gluconate , 17 . 5 CsCl , 0 . 05 EGTA , 10 HEPES , 2 Mg - Edwards , D . C . , Sanders , L . C . , Bokoch , G . M . , and Gill , G . N . ( 1999 ) . ATP , 0 . 2 Na - GTP , QX - 314 ( pH 7 . 4 ) ( 292 mOsm ) . All data acquisition Activation of LIM - kinase by Pak1 couples Rac / Cdc42 GTPase sig - and analysis were done using pCLAMP 7 software ( Axon instru - naling to actin cytoskeletal dynamics . Nat . Cell Biol . 1 , 253 – 259 . ments ) . When average data were plotted , data were normalized to Ehlers , M . D . ( 2002 ) . Molecular morphogens for dendritic spines . the average of the baseline responses unless indicated otherwise . Trends Neurosci . 25 , 64 – 67 . All data were statistically evaluated by Student’s t test . Finch , D . M . , and Jackson , M . B . ( 1990 ) . Presynaptic enhancement of synaptic transmission in hippocampal cell cultures by phorbol Behavioral Tests esters . Brain Res . 518 , 269 – 273 . The apparatus and definitions of recorded behaviors for open - field test were given previously ( Janus et al . , 1995 ; Jia et al . , 1996 ) . Mice Frangiskakis , J . M . , Ewart , A . , Morris , C . , Mervis , C . , Bertrand , J . , wereindividuallytestedfora5minsessionperdayduring2consec - Robinson , B . , Klei , B . , Ensing , G . , Everett , L . , Green , E . , et al . ( 1996 ) . utivedays . Thetrainingandtestingproceduresandstatisticalanaly - LIM - kinase 1 hemizygosity implicated in impaired visuospatial con - ses for fear conditioning and water maze test were described pre - structive cognition . Cell 86 , 59 – 69 . viously ( Lu et al . , 1997 ) . The learning acquisition training , in which Hall , A . ( 1998 ) . Rho GTPases and the actin cytoskeleton . Science a hidden platform was always in the NE quadrant of the tank , lasted 279 , 509 – 514 . for5dayswithfourtrialsperday ( intertrialintervalsof30min ) . Onthe Harris , K . M . ( 1999 ) . Structure , development , and plasticity of den - sixth day , mice were given only a probe trial . The learning reversal dritic spines . Curr . Opin . Neurobiol . 9 , 343 – 348 . training , in which the submerged platform was moved to the oppo - Janus , C . , Koperwas , J . S . , Janus , M . , and Roder , J . ( 1995 ) . Rearing site ( SE ) quadrant , started on day 8 and lasted for 4 days followed environment and radial maze explorationin mice . Behav . Processes byaprobetrial24hrlater . Only thedataonswimpathwasreported . 34 , 129 – 140 . Other measures , including escape latency , the percentage of the Jia , Z . P . , Agopyan , N . , Miu , P . , Xiong , Z . , Henderson , J . , Gerlai , R . , path length spent by mice in the target quadrant , and thigmotaxic Taverna , F . , Velumian , A . , MacDonald , J . , Carlen , P . , et al . ( 1996 ) . behavior were also analyzed , and the results were consistent with Enhanced LTP in mice deficient in the AMPA receptor , GluR2 . Neu - those on the swim path . ron 17 , 945 – 956 . Kim , C . H . , andLisman , J . E . ( 1999 ) . Aroleofactin filamentsinsynap - Acknowledgments tic transmission and long - term potentiation . J . Neurosci . 19 , 4314 – 4324 . We are indebted to J . Hwang and C . Ackerley for electron micros - copy assistance and to W . Abramow - Newerly and J . Roder for pro - Kirov , S . A . , Sorra , K . E . , and Harris , K . M . ( 1999 ) . Slices have more viding us with the R1 ES cell line . We thank L . Shen and W . Ju for synapses than perfusion - fixed hippocampus from both young and assistance with Western blot analysisand J . Henderson for sugges - mature rats . J . Neurosci . 19 , 2876 – 2886 . tions and assistance with neuroanatomy . We are grateful to Dr . J . R . Krucker , T . , Siggins , G . R . , and Halpain , S . ( 2000 ) . Dynamic actin Bamburgforsupplyinguswiththeanti - p - ACandanti - ACantibodies filaments arerequired forstable long - termpotentiation ( LTP ) inarea and to Dr . K . Misuno for providing the LIMK - 1 cDNA and antibodies . CA1 of hippocampus . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA 97 , 6856 – 6861 . This work was supported by grants from Canadian Institutes of Krupp , J . J . , Vissel , B . , Thomas , C . , Heinemann , S . F . , andWestbrook , Health Research to Z . J . , grants from the NIH to D . L . F . , a CIHR G . L . ( 1999 ) . Interactions of calmodulin and (cid:10) - actinin with the NR1 New Investigator Award to Z . J . , and The Hospital For Sick Children subunit modulate Ca 2 (cid:1) - dependent inactivation of NMDA receptors . Foundation ( Z . J . ) . J . Neurosci . 19 , 1165 – 1178 . Kuroda , S . , Tokunaga , C . , Kiyohara , Y . , Higuch , O . , Konishi , H . , Received : October 23 , 2001 Mizono , K . , Gill , G . , and Kikkawa , U . ( 1996 ) . Protein - protein interac - Revised : April 23 , 2002 tion of zinc finger LIM domain with protein kinase C . J . Biol . Chem . 271 , 31029 – 31032 . References Kuromi , H . , and Kidokoro , R . ( 1998 ) . Two distinct pools of synaptic vesicles in single presynaptic boutons in a temperature - sensitive Arber , S . , Barbayannis , F . , Hanser , H . , Schneider , C . , Stanyon , C . , Drosophila mutant , shibire . Neuron 20 , 917 – 925 . Bernard , O . , and Caroni , P . ( 1998 ) . Regulation of actin dynamics Landis , D . M . , Hall , A . K . , Weinstein , L . A . , and Reese , T . S . ( 1988 ) . The through phosphorylation of cofilin by LIM kinase . Nature 393 , organization of cytoplasm at the presynaptic active zone of central 805 – 809 . nervous system synapse . Neuron 1 , 201 – 209 . Bamburg , J . R . ( 1999 ) . Proteins of the ADF / cofilin family : essential Lian , J . P . , Marks , P . G . , Wang , J . Y . , Falls , D . L . , and Badwey , J . A . regulatorsof actindynamics . Annu . Rev . CellDev . Biol . 15 , 185 – 230 . ( 2000 ) . Aproteinkinasefromneutrophilsthatspecificallyrecognizes Bamburg , J . R . , andBray , D . ( 1987 ) . Distributionandcellularlocaliza - Ser - 3 in cofilin . J . Biol . Chem . 275 , 2869 – 2876 . tion of actin depolymerizing factor . J . Cell Biol . 105 , 2817 – 2825 . Lu , Y . M . , Jia , Z . P . , Janus , C . , Henderson , J . , Gerlai , R . , Wojtowicz , Belluji , U . , Lichtenberger , L . , Galaburda , A . , and Korenberg , J . R . M . , and Roder , J . ( 1997 ) . Mice lacking metabotropic glutamate re - ( 1999 ) . Bridging cognition , the brain and molecular genetics : evi - ceptor 5 show impaired learning and reduced CA1 long - term poten - dence from Williams syndrome . Trends Neurosci . 22 , 197 – 207 . tiation but normal CA3 LTP . J . Neurosci . 17 , 5196 – 5205 . Bernard , O . , Ganiatsas , S . , Kannourakis , G . , and Dringen , R . ( 1994 ) . Luo , L . , Hensch , T . K . , Ackerman , L . , Barbel , S . , Jan , L . Y . , and Jan , Kiz - 1 , a protein with LIM zinc finger and kinase domains , is ex - Y . N . ( 1996 ) . Differential effects of the Rac GTPases on Purkinje cell pressed mainly in neurons . Cell Growth Diff . 5 , 1159 – 1171 . axons and dendritic trunks and spines . Nature 379 , 837 – 840 . Bliss , T . V . P . , and Collingridge , G . L . ( 1993 ) . A synaptic model of Maekawa , M . , Ishizaki , T . , Boku , S . , Watanabe , N . , Fujita , A . , Iwa - memory : long - term potentiation in the hippocampus . Nature 361 , matsu , A . , Obinata , T . , Ohashi , K . , Mizuno , K . , and Narumiya , S . 31 – 39 . ( 1999 ) . Signaling from Rho to the actin cytoskeleton through protein kinases ROCK and LIM - kinase . Science 285 , 895 – 898 . Carlier , M . F . , Ressad , F . , and Pantaloni , D . ( 1999 ) . Control of actin Synaptic Function in LIMK - 1 Knockout Mice 133 Malenka , R . C . , and Nicoll , R . A . ( 1999 ) . Long - term potentiation - a position , function , development , and plasticity of hippocampal den - dritic spines . Hippocampus 10 , 501 – 511 . decade of progress ? Science 285 , 1870 – 1874 . Sumi , T . , Matsumoto , K . , Takai , Y . , and Nakamura , T . ( 1999 ) . Cofilin Malenka , R . C . , Madison , D . V . , Andrade , R . , and Nicoll , R . A . ( 1986 ) . phosphorylation and actin cytoskeletal dynamics regulated by Rho - Potentiation of synaptic transmission in the hippocampus by phor - and Cdc42 - activated LIM - kinase 2 . J . Cell Biol . 147 , 1519 – 1532 . bol esters . Nature 321 , 175 – 177 . Sumi , T . , Matsumoto , K . , and Nakamura , T . ( 2001 ) . Specific activa - Matus , A . ( 2000 ) . Actin - based plasticity in dendritic spines . Science tion of LIM kinase 2 via phosphorylation of threonine 505 by ROCK , 290 , 754 – 758 . a Rho - dependent protein kinase . J . Biol . Chem . 5 , 670 – 676 . Meberg , P . J . , Ono , S . , Minamide , L . S . , Takahashi , M . , andBamburg , Toshima , J . , Toshima , J . Y . , Amano , T . , Yang , N . , Narumiya , S . , and J . R . ( 1998 ) . Actin depolymerizing factor and cofilin phosphorylation Mizuno , K . ( 2001 ) . Cofilin phosphorylation by protein kinase testicu - dynamics : response to signals that regulate neurite extension . Cell larproteinkinase1anditsroleinintegrin - mediatedactinreorganiza - Motil . Cytoskeleton 39 , 172 – 190 . tion and focal adhesion formation . Mol . Biol . Cell 12 , 1131 – 1145 . Minamide , L . S . , Striegl , A . M . , Boyle , J . A . , Meberg , P . J . , and Bam - Wang , J . Y . , Frenzel , K . E . , Wen , D . , andFalls , D . L . ( 1998 ) . Transmem - burg , J . R . ( 2000 ) . Neurodegenerative stimuli induce persistent ADF / brane neuregulins interact with LIM kinase 1 , a cytoplasmic protein cofilin - actin rods that disrupt distal neurite function . Nat . Cell Biol . kinase implicated in development of visuospatial cognition . J . Biol . 2 , 628 – 636 . Chem . 273 , 20525 – 20534 . Mitchison , T . J . , and Cramer , L . P . ( 1996 ) . Actin - based cell motility Wang , J . Y . , Wigston , D . J . , Rees , H . D . , Levey , A . I . , and Falls , D . L . and cell locomotion . Cell 84 , 371 – 379 . ( 2000 ) . LIM kinase 1 accumulates in presynaptic terminals during Mizuno , K . , Okano , I . , Ohashi , K . , Nunoue , K . , Kuma , K . , Miyata , T . , synapse maturation . J . Comp . Neurol . 416 , 319 – 334 . and Nakamura , T . ( 1994 ) . Identification of a human cDNA encoding Wyszynski , M . , Lin , J . , Rao , A . , Nigh , E . , Beggs , A . H . , Craig , A . M . , and anovelproteinkinasewithtworepeatsoftheLIM / doublezincfinger Sheng , M . ( 1997 ) . Competitivebindingof (cid:10) - actininandcalmodulinto motif . Oncogene 9 , 1605 – 1612 . the NMDA receptor . Nature 385 , 439 – 442 . Morales , M . , Colicos , M . A . , and Goda , Y . ( 2000 ) . Actin - dependent Yang , N . , Higuchi , O . , Ohashi , K . , Nagata , K . , Wada , A . , Kangawa , regulation of neurotransmitter release at central synapses . Neuron K . , Nishida , E . , and Mizuno , K . ( 1998 ) . Cofilin phosphorylation by 27 , 539 – 550 . LIM - kinase 1 and its role in Rac - mediated actin reorganization . Na - Mori , T . , Okano , I . , Mizuno , K . , Tohyama , M . , and Wanaka , A . ( 1997 ) . ture 393 , 809 – 812 . Comparison of tissue distribution of two novel serine / threonine ki - Yuste , R . , Majewaska , A . , and Holthoff , K . ( 2000 ) . From form to nase genes containing the LIM motif ( LIMK - 1 and LIMK - 2 ) in the function : calcium compartmentalization in dendritic spines . Nat . developing rat . Mol . Brain Res . 45 , 247 – 254 . Neurosci . 3 , 653 – 659 . Morris , R . , Bannerman , D . , and Good , M . A . ( 1996 ) . NMDA receptors Zhou , Q . , Xiao , M . Y . , andNicoll , R . A . ( 2001 ) . Contributionofcytoskel - and spatial learning : differential pretraining dissociates the behav - eton to the internalization of AMPA receptors . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . ioraleffectsofthereceptorantagonistAP5andselectivehippocam - USA 98 , 1261 – 1266 . pal lesions . In The Hippocampus : Function and Clinical Relevance , N . Kata , ed . ( New York : Elsevier ) , pp . 55 – 73 . Nakayama , A . Y . , and Luo , L . ( 2000 ) . Intracellular signaling pathways that regulate dendritic morphogenesis . Hippocampus 10 , 582 – 586 . Nakayama , A . Y . , Harms , M . B . , and Luo , L . ( 2000 ) . Small GTPases RacandRhointhemaintenanceofdendriticspinesinthehippocam - pal pyramidal neurons . J . Neurosci . 20 , 5329 – 5338 . Nimchinsky , E . A . , Oberlander , A . M . , and Svoboda , K . ( 2001 ) . Abnor - mal development of dendritic spines in FMR1 knockout mice . J . Neurosci . 21 , 5139 – 5146 . Pak , D . T . S . , Yang , S . , Rudolph - Correia , S . , Kim , E . , and Sheng , M . ( 2001 ) . Regulation of dendritic spine morphology by SPAR , a PSD - 95 - associated rapGAP . Neuron 31 , 289 – 303 . Parfitt , K . D . , and Madison , D , V . ( 1993 ) . Phorbol esters enhance synaptictransmissionbyapresynaptic , calcium - dependentmecha - nism in rat hippocampus . J . Physiol . 471 , 245 – 268 . Pin , J . P . , and Duvoisin , R . ( 1995 ) . The metabotropic glutamate re - ceptors : structure and functions . Neuropharmacology 34 , 1 – 26 . Proschel , C . , Blouin , M . J . , Gutowski , N . J . , Ludwig , R . , and Nobel , M . ( 1995 ) . Limk 1 is predominantly expressed in neural tissues and phosphorylates serine , threonine and tyrosine residues in vitro . On - cogene 11 , 1271 – 1281 . Rao , A . , and Craig , A . M . ( 2000 ) . Signaling between the actin cy - toskeleton and the postsynaptic density of dendritic spines . Hippo - campus 10 , 527 – 541 . Rosenmund , C . , and Westbrook , G . L . ( 1993 ) . Calcium - induced actin depolymerization reduces NMDA channel activity . Neuron 10 , 805 – 814 . Sala , C . , Piech , V . , Wilson , N . R . , Passafaro , M . , Liu , G . , and Sheng , M . ( 2001 ) . Regulation of dendritic spine morphology and synaptic function by Shank and Homer . Neuron 31 , 115 – 130 . Smart , F . M . , and Halpain , S . ( 2000 ) . Regulation of dendritic spine stability . Hippocampus 10 , 542 – 554 . Smolich , B . , Mynga , V . , Buckely , S . , Plowan , G . , and Papkoff , J . ( 1997 ) . Cloning and biochemical characterization of LIMK - 2 , a pro - tein kinase containing two LIM domains . J . Biochem . 121 , 382 – 388 . Sorra , K . E . , and Harris , K . M . ( 2000 ) . Overviewon thestructure , com -