ORIGINAL ARTICLE A classiﬁcation of cultural engagements in community technology design : introducing a transcultural approach Heike Winschiers - Theophilus 1 • Tariq Zaman 2 • Colin Stanley 1 Received : 2 December 2016 / Accepted : 16 June 2017 / Published online : 24 June 2017 (cid:2) Springer - Verlag London Ltd . 2017 Abstract Community technology design has been deeply affected by paradigm shifts and dominant discourses of its seminal disciplines , such as Human Computer Interaction , Cultural and Design theories , and Community Develop - ment as reﬂected in Community Narratives . A particular distinction of community technology design endeavours has been their cultural stance , which directs the agendas , interactions , and outcomes of the collaboration . Applying different cultural lenses to community technology design , shifts not only practices but also directs the levels of awareness , thereby unfolding fundamentally distinct cul - tural engagement approaches . Previous community tech - nology design research indulged in cross - , inter - , and multicultural approaches to community engagement ; it was occupied with meticulously deconstructing and recon - structing perspectives , interactions , roles , and agendas . We argue that when deeply immersed in joint design activities in long - term collaborations , we look beyond individual cultures and enter a transcultural mode of engagement . A transcultural community technology design endeavour supports a continuous creation and re - creation of new meanings , originating from individual entities yet being diffused and continuously reﬂected within the existing design space . We suggest that within community technol - ogy design , a context with abundant cultural diversity , a heightened awareness becomes a necessity . We exemplify different instantiations of the cultural engagement approaches within our long - term collaborations and tech - nology design projects with indigenous communities in Malaysian Borneo and Namibia . A transcultural approach to indigenous knowledge preservation and digitisation efforts with indigenous communities opens up a contro - versial debate about protecting versus integrating local epistemologies . Keywords Transcultural (cid:2) Multicultural (cid:2) Crosscultural (cid:2) Intercultural (cid:2) Community technology design (cid:2) Cultural engagement (cid:2) Penan (cid:2) OvaHimba 1 Introduction The discourse in community technology design has taken various directions , being continuously inﬂuenced by dif - ferent disciplines , theories , and experiences . While the related disciplines such as Human Computer Interaction ( HCI ) , community development , and design itself , have established different paradigms over the years embedded in a wider socio - political global movement , we have seen fundamental changes of agendas and perspectives deeply affecting technology design with communities . Our previ - ous work on technology design with Namibian communi - ties ( Winschiers - Theophilus et al . 2010 , 2013 ) has demonstrated that the success of the design process is dependent on the individual participants’ commitment and engagement , as well as on the collective communities’ agendas and cohesion ( Kapuire et al . 2015 ) . & Heike Winschiers - Theophilus hwinschiers @ nust . na Tariq Zaman zamantariq @ gmail . com Colin Stanley cstanley @ nust . na 1 Namibia University of Science and Technology , Storchstr . 5 , Windhoek , Namibia 2 Universiti Malaysia Sarawak , 94300 Kota Samarahan , Sarawak , Malaysia 123 AI & Soc ( 2019 ) 34 : 419 – 435 DOI 10 . 1007 / s00146 - 017 - 0739 - y As we have navigated through the phases , learning and continuously repositioning ourselves within a fast moving ﬁeld of research , we reﬂect back on the past in an attempt to connect the dots across the different narratives . Our point of departure is grounded in some initial thoughts presented by Burstall in 1992 on ‘Computing’ as ‘yet another reality construction’ and his consequent framing of thoughts , processes , and moderated levels of awareness . Burstall ( 1992 ) unfolds the concept of awareness from a Buddhist perspective , as an antidote to ignorance and primitive views of reality , thereby emphasising people’s lack of mindfulness , the situational energy , and atmosphere present at that time . Interestingly , those deﬁciencies poin - ted out became the focal points in the so - called three paradigms or waves in HCI . In the ﬁrst wave the focus is on humans as subjects , which originated from a cognitive science viewpoint ; the second wave emphasises interac - tions and collaborations ; while the third wave centres around embodied experiences and new meaning making ( Boedker 2015 ) . Each paradigm suggests appropriate methods of analysis , design , and validation of derived knowledge ( Harrison et al . 2007 ) , which emphasises fun - damentally different aspects within technology develop - ment . Thus , generally we associate user - centred design with the ﬁrst wave , participatory design with the second wave , and embodied interaction design with the third wave . Each of those design paradigms draws upon different the - ories as a means to create order and justiﬁcations within the vast experiences and empirical work . Community tech - nology design is directly impacted by dominant discourses and paradigms in its formative disciplines of community development , HCI , Design , and cultural theories . Applying different cultural lenses to community technology design shifts not only practices but also directs the levels of awareness , thereby unfolding fundamentally distinct cul - tural engagement approaches . Considering that the conceptualisation of ‘‘culture’’ remains contentious , we concur with Hakken and Mate ( 2014 ) in that a description of a culture of a group of people is an abstract and analytical construct , and not a ‘‘uniﬁed phenomenon with ontological status’’ nor an ‘‘empirical totality’’ . However , in the current discourse , we presume that we can theoretically specify a sub - culture through a pre - deﬁned and agreed upon incomplete set of descriptors , such as speciﬁc practices , values , and habits of people . We equally acknowledge that each individual can belong to a number of different demarcated cultures , and that a group of people labelled by a culture might have different variations or deviations regarding the descriptors . Contrary to Hakken and Mate’s ( 2014 ) suggestion that due to the inadequacy of being a ‘‘comprehensive collection of all forms’’ one should focus on very speciﬁc aspects of culture at the time , we argue the opposite , namely to attain a wider more holistic perspective . Irani et al . ( 2010 ) re - emphasise that the dynamic aspect of culture contributes to meaning making of experiences and encounters , while at the same time collectively and continuously reshaping everyday life and technology design endeavours . Cultural diversity within community technology design projects has become a norm . As He et al . ( 2015 ) points out , it ‘‘offers both signiﬁcant beneﬁts and challenges in the design , usage and evaluation of technologies’’ . Community technology design originated in the ﬁrst HCI wave , thus much attention has been on studying the communities as entities from a distant developer’s perspective applying a crosscultural lens . This remains problematic , as focusing on dichotomies and ‘othering’ of some participants , often excludes the role of designers and undermines relations and interactions ( Winschiers - Theophilus and Bidwell 2013 ) . In line with the HCI paradigm shift , awareness around the need and mode of community involvement in design decisions has led to substantial work in participatory community design . Experiences have uncovered numerous intercultural challenges , such as negotiation of interaction protocols , power relations , levels of participation , and incompatibilities with underlying epistemologies ( Puri et al . 2004 ; Winschiers - Theophilus et al . 2015 ) . Win - schiers - Theophilus and Bidwell’s ( 2013 ) attempt to shift HCI paradigms towards an Afrocentric and local episte - mology , further uncovered weaknesses of mainstream design research and its unsuitability in a multicultural context . Pushing the agenda , we are now introducing a transcultural approach to community technology design engagements based on our experiences with indigenous communities . We propose to widen our awareness and to look beyond culture . In this article , we follow a multi - threaded narrative scaffolding from the distinct approaches to cultural engagement interlinked with the different paradigms in HCI , Design and Community Narratives . The latter is mirroring trends in Community Development , yet recounting from a community perspective rather than from the outside . Exempliﬁed by our own work in Malaysia and in Namibia , we demonstrate how the variations of focus and awareness throughout the collaborations inﬂuenced the methods and techniques deployed as well as altering agendas , motivations , and framing thoughts of all participants . 2 Cultural engagement approaches Practices and methodologies of community technology design have varied across the globe and over time . A particular distinction has been their cultural stance , which implicitly directs the agendas , processes , and outcomes of 420 AI & Soc ( 2019 ) 34 : 419 – 435 123 the projects and collaborations . Thus , in the following sections , we distinguish crosscultural , intercultural , multi - cultural , and transcultural engagement approaches with communities . We base our conceptualisation on an initial distinction by pre - ﬁxes as adopted by Frame ( 2009 ) , whereby crosscultural emphasises the differences between cultures , intercultural implies cultures interacting , multi - cultural suggests the coexistence of cultures involved in joint efforts , and transcultural maintains validity across cultures being independent of a speciﬁc culture . In an attempt to elucidate the conceptual differences of the cul - tural approaches of collaboration , we make use of the metaphor of fruit mixes , which can take different shapes depending on the level of processing ( Table 1 ) . 2 . 1 Crosscultural engagement Crosscultural engagement can be depicted as a set of dis - tinct adjacent fruits . Each entity is clearly distinguishable from the other based on obvious differences . Crosscultural studies in technology design deliberately expose the cul - tural differences between communities , developers , tech - nologies , and other stakeholders . This relates directly to the ﬁrst wave or paradigm in HCI , which is based on cognitive science , where the human is the subject of study ( Boedker 2015 ) . Moreover , the human studied is often reduced to the users only , excluding the designer , researchers , and other stakeholders from the investigation . With this focus , user - centred design has established itself as a paradigm with numerous methods , techniques , and tools supporting the modelling process of users by developers . Early design endeavours with communities , especially in a developing context , were nearly always based on crosscultural theories embedded in a wider discussion centring on ‘‘developing countries’’ , digital divide , internationalisation , and locali - sation . The concept of culture was introduced in the Information and Communication Technology ( ICT ) dis - course as a set of parameters and dimensions , which can easily be modelled , and thereby be absorbed in the main - stream software development process ( Winschiers - Theo - philus 2009 ) . Cultural models , such as Hofstede’s ( 1997 ) , Hall’s ( 1969 ) , Victor’s De Munck ( 2000 ) , and Trompe - naars and Hampden - Turner ( 2011 ) have established themselves in the crosscultural HCI literature despite much criticism . Smith , Bannon and Gulliksen ( 2010 ) point out a number of problems with those models , speciﬁcally Hof - stede’s . They state that these are based on false assump - tions , like the concept of culture being static , a group as large as a nation being homogenous , and a lack of sys - tematic research and empirical evidences . The applicability and relevance of the Hofstede dimensions to HCI have also been questioned . Moreover , Winschiers - Theophilus ( 2009 ) expressed a major concern with the principle of develop - ers’ modelling users across cultures , thereby reinforcing their own bias in technology design . In other words , even though differences between cultures are exposed , the intrinsic values of technology and their developers are continuously perpetuated within the design . Thus , if aiming to create locally appropriate technology within a cross - cultural paradigm , it would require the community to val - idate not only the developed technology but the model used as a basis of design as well as the interpretations . The developer carrying much of the responsibility would need to possess a set of skills that are often not taught as part of the computer science curricula , such as increased aware - ness of the context in which the model , interpretation , and translation takes place . Further self - awareness and self - Table 1 Cultural engagement approaches Metaphor Relateddisciplines Cross cultural Inter cultural Multi cultural Trans cultural HCI Wave 1 : cognitive science , humans as subjects Wave 2 : collaboration and interactions Wave 3 : embodied experience and new meaning making Designparadigms User - centred design : user and cultural models Participatory design : engagement , empowerment Interaction design : user experiences , reciprocity Community - based Co - design : unity of epistemologies , relevance Communitynarratives Narratives by the other Counter - narrative Harmonious narrative Reﬂected narrative AI & Soc ( 2019 ) 34 : 419 – 435 421 123 reﬂection is required to minimise the induced bias in the perception and interpretation process . 2 . 2 Intercultural engagement An intercultural engagement can be depicted as a set of processed fruits , arranged in such a manner that they rep - resent something else . This depiction is inspired by the fact that emphasis on the interaction creates different expecta - tions from the parties involved in terms of their expres - sions . Considering that other social and cultural groups governed many communities , especially marginalised and indigenous communities , their voices were suppressed and their agency of self - expression diminished ( Sabiescu 2015 ) . Having been given the voice to express themselves , stories that were previously told by others ( as in cross - cultural studies ) , may result in a responsive counter - nar - rative . Sabiescu ( 2015 ) reports that one Roma group involved in a participatory design study deﬁned themselves nearly exclusively as an alternative to stereotypes , which were created in mainstream narratives before . We observed similar effects with the Penan communities in Malaysia ( Winschiers - Theophilus et al . 2015 ) and the San youth in Namibia ( Cabrero et al . 2016 ) . On the other hand , the OvaHerero and OvaHimba communities in Namibia mostly concurred with the alien narratives and even reinforced stereotypical and archetypal self - representations ( Cabrero et al . 2016 ) . In either case , the accounts by the communi - ties are constructed in response to alien and mainstream narratives . Participatory Design ( PD ) , with an underlying political agenda of giving voices to the ‘‘oppressed’’ and ‘‘marginalised’’ , originated in the Scandinavian workers’ movement ( Bratteteig and Wagner 2016 ) . PD seems like an obvious methodological choice to facilitate community technology design in the context of marginalised commu - nities . However , many challenges of applying the Scandi - navian PD within the community development context were identiﬁed . The deployment of PD as a philosophy and a set of methods and techniques to the community devel - opmental context have shown that practices needed to be adapted to the context ( Puri et al . 2004 ) but also that the concept of ‘‘participation’’ needs to be redeﬁned ( Win - schiers - Theophilus et al . 2010 ) . While the early discourse in community participatory design investigated the appli - cability of established methods and techniques , it was later dominated by the topic of power relations and empower - ment framed under ‘‘postcolonial computing’’ by Irani et al . ( 2010 ) . Based on the assumption that ‘‘design research and practice is culturally located and power laden … ’’ Irani et al . ( 2010 ) argue ‘‘ … for attentiveness to the emergence of hybrid practices in information technol - ogy design , coupled with sensitivity to how uneven power relations are enacted in design practice’’ . Overly concerned with ‘‘doing good’’ and operating within a doubtful ‘‘rhetoric of compassion’’ ( Rogers and Marsden 2013 ) and reminding us of a missionary approach has set the tone for the current community technology design discourse . Intercultural collaborations focusing on the interaction per se have unveiled many conceptual , methodological , and also political challenges in community technology design . Particularly contentious have been the discussions around conﬂicting protocols . Researchers are requested to ‘‘respect the local practices’’ , yet no direction is given on how to act or re - act in case of conﬂict ( Peters et al . 2014 ) . What if the values and practices are in contradiction with the researchers’ agendas ? Which values and practices should be respected ? Should they be respected by equal practice or from a distant visitor position ? The research into appro - priate interactions has raised more questions than ever , yet no sufﬁciently generalisable answers are found . Even more disappointing have been ethical research guidelines , which have been developed within University settings and are shown to be inappropriate for interventions with commu - nities ( Dearden 2013 ) . A major issue has been that com - munity participants are still considered to be informants and subjects , rather than co - designers or participants . As a ﬁrst step , the community of Long Lamai in Malaysia in collaboration with Zaman and Yeo ( 2014 ) has co - devel - oped a cultural protocol guiding novel researcher’s actions within the community . Having observed many failed encounters , the written cultural protocols have been enhanced and transformed into a Sketchbook that is used as a discussion probe in the training workshops organised ‘‘in situ’’ for students and researchers and co - facilitated by community members ( Zaman et al . 2016a , b ) . The com - munity interaction and guiding sessions , co - facilitated by community members , showed effective results in preparing the researchers and community for partnership . 2 . 3 Multicultural engagement A multicultural engagement is best depicted as a fruit salad , whereby fruits are cut and mixed , producing a tasteful combination of ﬂavours yet with fruits being clearly distinguishable . We consider a multicultural approach as one where we attempt to build bridges to ensure a peaceful coexistence with reciprocity and mutual beneﬁts . Brereton et al . ( 2014 ) and Duysburgh ( 2015 ) pointed out the importance of reciprocity in engagement processes between researchers and community . They highlighted that reciprocity should be considered ﬁrst and foremost when starting to work with the community members , both for moral and epistemological reasons . In this phase , both sides are encouraged to acquire a deeper understanding of ‘‘the other’’ and strive for consensus and harmony . Thus , from a developer’s perspective the aim is 422 AI & Soc ( 2019 ) 34 : 419 – 435 123 to understand the given context and to situate the design at its best in local epistemologies at a conceptual and prac - tical level . On the other hand , the community engaging with the alien researcher team attempts to mostly please and answer as assumed to be ‘‘expected’’ . Relating to the third wave in HCI , the focus is on experiences and new meaning making in coexistence . Thus , the premises to engage in joint technology design endeavours are often based on creating cohesion among researchers , designers , and community members . New roles of individual partic - ipants will have to be deﬁned in the process of conceptu - alising participatory community design . In a traditional PD approach , the designer kept a pro - fessional distance and often acted as a facilitator on the basis of empathy with the community / user group . ‘‘A key aspect of our role as designers lies in acknowledging that , as part of a community of participants , we must embrace the experience of ‘being participated’’ ( Winschiers - Theo - philus et al . 2010 ) . In an endeavour of ‘‘designing for participation’’ Sabiescu et al . ( 2014 ) rightfully criticised the narrow focus on embedding practices in local episte - mologies without considering the role of the alien devel - opers . They conclude that community PD needs to be ‘‘located in a space between the designer’s and local views of participation’’ ( Sabiescu et al . 2014 ) . In summary , the discourse of community technology design under a multi - cultural perspective oscillates between an overly focus on ‘‘creating harmony’’ by ‘‘pleasing’’ the other in attempts to embrace ‘‘the other’s’’ epistemologies , while on the other side ﬁnding one’s own place as alien developers within an established community , or vice versa as community members within an established ﬁeld of technology design . 2 . 4 Transcultural engagement Having indulged previously in cross - , inter - , and multi - cultural approaches to community technology design , occupied with meticulously deconstructing and recon - structing perspectives , interactions , roles , and agendas , we would like to suggest a radically different approach . Transcultural engagement is depicted as a ‘‘smoothie’’ , where the fruits are no longer distinguishable entities but have been blended beyond individual recognition to form a tasteful whole . While each entity has contributed with a unique ﬂavour , it is no longer relevant to distinguish the individual entities . Thus , striving for what we frame as a transcultural approach to community technology design , we no longer focus on the individual contributors , their interaction or roles , but on the smooth and tasteful collaboration . ‘‘Transculture is a new sphere of cultural development that transcends the borders of traditional cultures ( ethnic , national , racial , religious , gender , sexual , and profes - sional ) . Transculture overcomes the isolation of their symbolic systems and value determinations and broadens the ﬁeld of ‘supra - cultural’ creativity . We acquire tran - sculture at the boundaries of our own culture and at the crossroads with other cultures through the risky experience of our own cultural wanderings and transgressions’’ ( Ep - stein 2009 ) . We argue that while deeply immersed in joint design activities in long - term collaborations , where we have pas - sed the stages of attempting to understand each other , deﬁning our roles , positions , and agendas , we can now freely perform in a new space occupied with only the matter at hand . ‘‘The differences complement each other and create a new interpersonal transcultural community to which we belong , not because we are similar , but because we are different’’ ( Epstein 2009 ) . We suggest entering a design dialogue , as conceptualised earlier by Bohm ( 2007 ) , where partners jointly create while suspending judgements and respecting all contributions . Thus , a transcultural community technology design endeavour supports a con - tinuous creation and re - creation of new meanings origi - nating from individual entities , yet being diffused and continuously reﬂected within the existing design space . Narratives and counter - narratives are freely colliding to form joint reﬂected narratives . ‘‘Viewed from a transcul - tural perspective , all existing cultures get a broader meaning , as any of their elements is no longer imposed as a tradition but is chosen freely , like an artist chooses colours in order to combine them in a new way in a painting . Transcultural creativity uses the palette of all available as well as possible cultures . It is known that the same physical reality , for example , water or stone , is symbolised differ - ently in different cultures ; likewise , elements of the same culture acquire new colourings and multiple refractions in the transcultural space’’ ( Epstein 2009 ) . Such a perspective induces new insights to the dominating discourse of glob - alisation , internationalisation , and localisation in which community technology design was framed . Thus , within a transcultural technology design endeavour , we heighten awareness in an explorative mode , observant of the odd and the familiar , the close and the far , the past , present and future , the empirical and the abstract at the same time . 3 Our cultural metamorphosis In the following sections , we present ourselves and our context of actions and interactions with indigenous com - munities in Malaysian Borneo and Namibia , exemplifying different instantiations of the cultural engagement approaches within long - term collaborations and technology design projects . AI & Soc ( 2019 ) 34 : 419 – 435 423 123 3 . 1 The plots in a nutshell 3 . 1 . 1 Long Lamai Long Lamai is a very remote Penan village in upper Baram East Malaysia . It is located in some of the last remaining rainforest of Baram region , Sarawak , and is only reachable via boat or by foot . In the 1950s , the nomadic Penan group of the area , under headman Belare´ Jabu , was encouraged by the missionaries to settle at the current village site on the Balong River close to the Indonesian border . In the village of Long Lamai , there are approximately 598 indi - viduals in 116 households , inhabiting individual and communal long houses on poles ( Zaman , Yeo and Jengan 2016 ) . In terms of gender and age , Long Lamai is a very lively and balanced community . The Penans in Long Lamai periodically return to the forest to hunt and to gather jungle produce . There are still Penans who are nomadic and depend totally on the forests for their livelihood ( Siew , Yeo and Zaman 2013 ) . The journey to the forest , called Toro , is undertaken to collect livelihoods for the family . Importantly , it links community elders to members of the younger generations , as the elders groom future guardians of the rainforest ( Zaman , Yeo and Kulathuramaiyer 2015 ) . Toro is an activity - based knowledge sharing and mentoring journey in the forest , which can last around a week . An entire family , consisting of parents and children , complete the journey together . Normally , the parents do not bring along children below the age of seven . There are six activities in the Toro journey . The journey begins by leaving the Lamin Toto ( house in the village ) and ﬁnding a place in the jungle that has enough food , such as fruit trees , ﬁsh in the nearby river , sago plants , and animals for hunting . In the Toro journey , the Penan family travels in two groups . The journey is led by the young and physically strong members of the family , who ﬁnd a suitable place and establish the Lamin Toro ( a traditional temporary hut in the forest ) . Subsequently , the elders and children follow the group on the same route and join them at the Lamin Toro . During the journey , the ﬁrst group communicates with the following group by making signs out of available forest materials such as leaves , barks , and twigs of the trees . This medium of communication through signs made of forest material is called Oroo’ . 3 . 1 . 2 Institute - community collaboration The Institute of Social Informatics and Technological Innovations ( ISITI ) started its ﬁrst collaboration project with the Long Lamai community in 2008 ; they aimed to develop a local telecentre , which has been fully functional since December 2009 . The telecentre is equipped with three networked PCs , three laptops , a printer , and a scan - ner . The telecentre also provides other facilities , such as telephone connection , Internet access , printing , and pho - tocopying services . Meanwhile , a number of community members also have their own devices , such as laptops , tablets , and smartphones . These are connected via Wi - Fi , installed in the telecentre or using low mobile coverage , which can be accessed at speciﬁc locations in the village . To ensure that interactions between the local community and researchers run smoothly , the community appointed one of the elders , Garen , as a local champion and a liaison for development projects . Garen is a government retiree , he speaks ﬂuent English and Bahasa Malays , and has vast experience as a community representative in government organisations . Garen is an early adopter and supporter of using ICTs for his community development . His tasks include facilitating researchers’ activities during their visits with the community . Garen has an essential role in the community’s governance structure , comprising the village headman , the pastor of the local church , heads of church , women and youth groups , and the council of elders . It is also Garen’s role to keep the members of the council of elders informed about the development progress . In 2010 , after the successful telecentre project , the second author and a colleague from ISITI had a discussion with Garen about the ‘‘next step’’ within the collaboration . Garen was enthusiastic to digitise the indigenous botanical knowledge of the Penans , which opened the opportunity for the second author to formalise this project as a proof of concept under his PhD where he developed an Indigenous Knowledge Governance Framework ( Zaman , Yeo and Kulathuramaiyer 2015 ) . The second author conducted monthly or later bi - monthly visits to the community , in order to establish a strong relationship and to build and maintain trust with the community . In time , many more projects mushroomed and new researchers started to come to Long Lamai , bringing along new challenges to the collaboration . The community requested that the second author should be one of the entrusted university liaisons . The main tasks of the com - munity and university liaisons are to guide and facilitate organisational , project , and researchers’ interactions during the process of collaboration . Each visit of researchers was led by a university liaison . As mentioned in an earlier section , the research teams and a group of community members co - developed the Penan cultural protocols as a sketchbook for guest researchers ( Zaman et al . 2016a , b ) . The cultural protocols address free , prior , and informed engagement process , as well as the development of mutual understanding and respect for customary laws , values , and decision - making processes , particularly those concerning stewardship of resources and territories . 424 AI & Soc ( 2019 ) 34 : 419 – 435 123 3 . 1 . 3 Otjisa Otjisa village is about 55 km north of Opuwo , a town in the Kunene region situated north - west in Namibia . The Ova - Himba clan migrated from the Ohandungu village , which is about 15 km from Opuwo , to the Otjisa village as there is a steady access to water . The OvaHimba tribe consists of nomadic cattle farmers that move around from one location to the next searching for better grazing land for their livestock . The number of oxen one owns is seen as a sign of wealth , fame , and respect in the community . The Ova - Himba is one of the tribes in Namibia that have maintained their cultural customs . They still wear their traditional attires , like the omitjira ( loincloth made from animal skin ) , even when going to the cities . Their attire represents sig - niﬁcant details , such as whether one is a teenage boy / girl , or a married man / woman . The female OvaHimba apply otjize , a mixture of fat from fragmented milk , red ochre , and aromatic resin to their entire body and hair every morning . While scientists have speculated that it could be for protection from the sun or insects , OvaHimba women say it makes them beautiful . OvaHimba communities are rich in indigenous knowledge and still make use of it . A stochastic strategic grassland management model has been derived from the OvaHimba farmers ( Mu¨ller et al . 2007 ) . According to Mu¨ller et al . ( ibid ) , the grazing system ( temporal and spatially heterogeneous use of grazing land ) used by the OvaHimba returns a higher productivity and quality of a pasture area than homogenous permanent grazing . The grazing system used by the OvaHimba entails resting the dry land pastures during rainy seasons and an incremental extension of grassing area in drought seasons . Otjisa village has poor telecommunication network coverage , due to the high mountains in the surrounding area . People in Otjisa have to stand at certain higher grounds to get a semi - reliable coverage to make telephonic calls or send short text messages ( SMS ) , thus there is not much ICT usage with the exception of mobile phones for the above - mentioned purpose . 3 . 1 . 4 Indigenous knowledge research cluster : Otjisa collaboration In 2008 , we created a niche research cluster in Indigenous Knowledge ( IK ) Technologies , at the then Polytechnic of Namibia , now Namibia University of Science and Tech - nology ( NUST ) . We identiﬁed an OvaHerero pilot com - munity in Erindi - Roukambe in Eastern Namibia . We embarked on a project of co - designing tools for community members to empower them to collect , curate , document , and disseminate their indigenous knowledge . We were equipped with then current technological and participatory design knowledge , with an understanding that concepts , methods , and designs are to be adapted to the local context . In our team , we had a researcher originating from the Erindi - Roukambe community , who had studied computer science . He was thus responsible for linguistic and con - ceptual translations , as well as technical facilitations , besides conducting his master studies on the conceptuali - sation of an indigenous knowledge management system . In August 2013 , our local core team was joined by the third author , who is from the OvaHerero tribe . He conducted his PhD studies on crowdsourcing 3D graphic requests by indigenous communities in Namibia to preserve indigenous knowledge . In order to evaluate our co - developed tools elsewhere , we went for a validation trip engaging the Otjisa OvaHimba community members . The community mem - bers were introduced to us by a relative of one of our students . Besides sharing a number of customs , the OvaHimba and the OvaHerero speak the same language , allowing the third author to communicate in his mother tongue throughout the interactions . Uaraieke , a village elder , showed particular interest in the technology and the project aiming at preserving their cultural heritage . However , considering the difference of appearances between the OvaHerero and the OvaHimba , many 3D graphics models needed to be created afresh . Interestingly , when asked to select relevant real world items to be modelled , the par - ticipants knew exactly what they wanted and took corre - sponding photos for the 3D graphic designers to start ( Stanley et al . 2015 ) . The conﬁdence of the choices and the informative conversations during this exercise was an extremely enriching experience . The community members asked us to come back as soon as possible . Thus , we returned regularly every four months . Over time , we have built up a very close relationship with Uaraieke and his extended family , which have been extremely accommo - dating to us and other visiting researchers from different joint projects . Uaraieke and his wife recently visited the University ( NUST ) where they joined a public presentation on their work with us and attended research meetings . He also co - authored a paper , which we fully translated into Otjiherero in order to discuss and adjust with him ( Kapuire et al . 2016 ) . 3 . 1 . 5 Trans - continental collaboration The authors , one based in Borneo and two in Namibia , have been collaborating on a conceptual and practical level , as exhibited through various joint publications based on site exchange visits , debrieﬁng , and reﬂective conver - sations since 2011 . Although the development contexts seem in many ways different , e . g . one site being in the Rainforest while the other in the Desert , they have a AI & Soc ( 2019 ) 34 : 419 – 435 425 123 number of fundamental similarities allowing for transfer - ability of best practices and design patterns ( Winschiers - Theophilus et al . 2013 ) . At both sites , long - term collabo - rations between the university researchers and the com - munity elders and their families have been established and maintained since 2008 . Both had the aim to create tools that enable knowledge holders to preserve , document , curate , and disseminate their cultural heritage . We respectively have adopted what we frame to be a com - munity - based co - design approach , which is anchored in an action research paradigm following PD principles . The underlying motivation for digitalising indigenous knowl - edge at both sites is the fact that the youth no longer assimilate local knowledge through accompanying the elders on instructive walks , listening to the elders’ stories , or participating in activities , which have been the previous mode of knowledge transfer . In both rural communities , wise elders embody local practices and knowledge with a strong desire to preserve it for the next generations to come . Under these long - term collaborations , a number of different projects have been founded and prototypes developed . 3 . 2 Community technology design projects 3 . 2 . 1 eToro eToro is an ICT - based platform to support the storage , processing , and distribution of indigenous botanical knowledge of the Penan community . It was developed within a crosscultural approach , whereby the focus of the study was to explore the community’s tradition and knowledge about the plants and later to model and translate this into a requirement speciﬁcation . The explored struc - tures were implemented within mainstream technologies , such as an android - based application for data collection ( ODK ) and a content management system to support the data management ( Siew et al . 2013 ) . Garen is always optimistic about using digital means to preserve indigenous knowledge , so a perceived beneﬁt of eToro was to cover the knowledge gap between the young and old generations in the village . The youth , who have ICT skills , were more conﬁdent in collecting information for the documentation process , i . e . recording videos of the elders explaining botanics , taking photos , and entering relevant data . Ulti - mately , they became a part of the learning cycle and ful - ﬁlled Garen’s hope for the youth to re - engage with the forest knowledge . Within the project mutual learning took place , while the author gained a well - developed under - standing of the local culture and traditions , Garen gained technology skills and conﬁdence , which became the basis for the next project . 3 . 2 . 2 Oroo’ tools In 2012 , the ﬁrst author came to Long Lamai for a site visit , to evaluate prototypes and methods , as well as to explore further joint project opportunities . The second author requested Garen to demonstrate the creation of Oroo’ signs as he had done many times before for other visitors . Fas - cinated by the power of expression of the sign language , the conceptual challenge and the designerly opportunities the two ﬁrst authors agreed with Garen to engage in a digitisation process of Oroo’ without more speciﬁcs at that time . Oroo’ is a very peculiar jungle sign language of the semi - nomadic Penan in Malaysia , Borneo Island . The Oroo’ signs consist of one or two sticks of varying length with a cut cleft that can hold a number of folded leaves , twigs , and branches . The leaves , twigs , and branches are like language tokens and their speciﬁc arrangements create meaning—much like words in a sentence . The messages can express complex content , including notions of time , space , and states of the traveller . With settlement , the language is being lost as it is not being used by the younger generation . In 2014 , after securing an international grant , a joint project for the digitisation and preservation of the Oroo’ language was launched . As a ﬁrst step , we documented the Oroo’ signs ; we collected 50 signs with photos , videos , drawings , and written descriptions . Keeping in view the community interest in digital solutions ; we further developed a PC - based Oroo’ Adventure Game ( Zaman et al . 2015a , b ) and Oroo’ Tangibles for an android platform . In the third attempt , we co - designed an innovative communication tool , namely the Penan Oroo’ Short Messages Signs ( PO - SMS ) app with a group of Penan youth in Long Lamai ( Zaman and Winschiers - Theophilus 2015 ) . Considering that the vocabulary of Oroo’ did not match the current communicative expressions of the Penan youth , new signs were created following the principles of Oroo’ sign cre - ation . The app now allows the Penan youth to send each other Oroo’ messages , by arranging 2D graphical repre - sentations of leaves and twigs to create meaningful mes - sages . Its ﬁrst implementation was an android - based app , which was evaluated at two sites with Penan youth . We are currently addressing usability concerns to ensure the PO - SMS app can be deployed . 3 . 2 . 3 Community crowdsourcing platform In our on - going collaboration with the Erindi - Roukambe community in Eastern Namibia , we have previously co - designed and developed a tablet - based three - dimensional ( 3D ) visualisation IK preservation tool , called the Home Stead Creator ( HSC ) ( Rodil et al . 2012 ) . The HSC 426 AI & Soc ( 2019 ) 34 : 419 – 435 123 developed in Unity 3D allows users to build their home - steads and create scenarios of cultural practices by drag - ging and dropping 3D traditional objects , representing real elements , in the rural surroundings to be placed on a soil look - alike surface . To evaluate the HSC with the OvaHimba communities from Otjisa , we requested Uaraieke and his fellow elders , and later a group of women , to construct 3D homesteads . The 3D models in the HSC were all from the OvaHerero tradition , which differ in many ways from those found in the OvaHimba tradition . For example , huts and fences are square and not round , and the attire of the people is dif - ferent . The community members could not relate it to their own context ( Stanley et al . 2015 ) . The OvaHimba elders expressed that the current OvaHerero version of the HSC would not serve the purpose of preserving OvaHimba cultural heritage . Uaraieke commented that , ‘‘I am now forced to marry a OmuHerero woman’’ after he was done with his homestead construction and needed to place a woman at his house ( Stanley et al . ibid ) . Noting this , it was a conﬁrmation that the 3D models needed to be replaced with models that adequately represented the OvaHimba traditions . Being part of the national digitisation effort of Namibian Indigenous Knowledge , we asked ourselves : how could we fast track ethnical adaptations of the system , more speciﬁcally the fast production of these 3D graphic models even for other rural communities ? We opted to develop a Community Crowdsourcing Platform ( CCSP ) to allow rural indigenous communities to crowdsource the required 3D models via the Internet ( Stanley et al . 2013 ) . The crowdsourcing concept was chosen due to its cost - effective beneﬁts ( Kaufmann , Schulze and Veit 2011 ) , creativity and open innovation ( Bonabeau 2009 ) , and quality of work ( Schenk and Guit - tard 2009 ) delivered by the contributors . The conceptualised CCSP has two front - ends : a web based end referred to as the Community Crowdsourcing website ( CCS ) and a mobile tablet front - end called Task Request Management ( TRM ) component . The community member formulates a request via the TRM . The request can consist of a bundle of photos , drawings , audio , video , and / or text . The request is sent to the CCS , and then approved and published for the crowd by an administrator . If the request contains indigenous language ( audio / video ) , then these are ﬁrst crowdsourced to translators , otherwise gra - phic designers are targeted straight away . Once the graphic designers are done , the 3D graphic models are forwarded to the community member who requested for it . They then evaluate the 3D models ; if not satisﬁed they provide more details and send it back , creating a feedback loop mecha - nism with the graphic designers . Since 2013 , we have been co - designing two compo - nents , an Indigenous Knowledge Media Collector ( IKMC ) ( Kapuire et al . 2016 ) and the TRM application with Uar - aieke and his family . The IKMC allows indigenous knowledge holders to record media items such as pictures , videos , audios , and text or drawings about a traditional object to be modelled in 3D . Those media items are then selected and bundled into a request within the TRM com - ponent as described above . One reason to split the appli - cations into a media collection and a task request management is that the media collection tool also serves to collect media for other projects and applications , such as the national survey on indigenous plants . Furthermore , the assumption was that media is collected throughout the day , while a task request is formulated in a dedicated time and space not normally part of everyday activities . 3 . 3 Cultural engagement transformations In the following section , we exemplify the distinct approaches to cultural engagement that we have taken within the different phases of the projects . 3 . 3 . 1 Oroo’ engagement approaches The Oroo’ digitisation project came at a time when the Long Lamai community found themselves in a transition phase , trying to come to terms with their attachment to their past nomadic life and their current settled lifestyle which they are still dependent on and deeply connected to the forest . Moreover , the Penans have recently had a number of bad encounters with the government who is pushing for logging and thereby destroying the last remaining rainforest , which is sacred and valuable to the Penan . The Oroo’ language links them to their past as well as to the forest . Hence , one of the ﬁrst interests of the community expressed was ‘‘to preserve’’ the language . According to Bian Bilare’ , the village headman , ‘‘The documentation process will not only help our youths to learn and understand Oroo’ signs but will also help the elders to refresh on what they already know’’ . Richard Jengan , a Penan elder expressed his interest in the following ( directly translated ) words , ‘‘I want to know how my parents and ancestors lived in this area and all the signs they made and left in the forest during their time . I want to meet outsiders who would like to cooperate with us to document and preserve Penan culture to avoid extinc - tion . It will get lost because only a minority still use and remember it . Sure , I want to preserve these Penan culture and tradition . The main reason that I like the Oroo’ digi - tisation project is because I want to preserve Oroo’ for upcoming generations . All will know about Penan culture and their origin ( forest ) if we preserve Oroo’ . Penan use Oroo’ in their life to gain knowledge ( about forest ) . Even if they don’t know about books ( can’t write and read ) , they AI & Soc ( 2019 ) 34 : 419 – 435 427 123 know Oroo’ and by that they understand and communicate in a language . That is what I need to know from my origin’’ . Encouraged by the strong desire of the elders to preserve Oroo’ , we ( researchers ) were further driven by curiosity and the scientiﬁc inquiry ahead . With relatively little to no literature to fall back on , we followed a rapid ethnographic approach by systematically documenting all the different single signs known by elders , including their meanings and makings . We compiled a table of signs , taking photos and videos , validating with the elders , and ordered drawings from a community artist illustrating the details of the signs . With a total of 50 signs recorded we then attempted to understand the composition rules . Penans transfer knowl - edge by showing and doing . The community organised several forest trips for the researchers , led by local elders and Oroo’ experts , to demonstrate the Oroo’ making pro - cess , explain the meanings of the composites , as well as to facilitate questions / answers sessions . We soon realised the limitation of our own cognitive and linguistics framing of language in a desperate attempt to create a position - based rules system , which did not lead to any correct formation of composites . Presenting the elders with random composi - tions , created through trial - and - error , led to great laughter on their side yet no explicit reasoning on the validity . It was clear that from a crosscultural perspective new modes of transferring knowledge between our cultures had to be identiﬁed , as neither our systematic inquiry nor their showing and doing led to our deeper understanding . Through continuous engagement in intercultural con - versations , we become aware of the signiﬁcance of the digitalisation of Oroo’ for the Penan ; it is very speciﬁc and thereby helps them to overcome multiple stigmas . The anthropologist Janowski ( 1996 ) , remarked that the Kelabit , one of the dominant tribes in the region , have labelled the Penan to be ‘‘forever children’’ due to the lack of taking responsibilities in their worldview . A much worse rumour that was spread across Borneo and neighbouring countries , was the belief that Penans have tails . In a recent ( January 2016 ) community meeting in Long Lamai , former Penan penghulu ( chief ) , James Lalo Keso , welcomed the inter - national guests by saying that he is happy that they can see Penan with their own eyes ; people are saying that Penans are monkeys , but now the guests can conﬁrm that Penan are actually people like themselves and others . The Penan are to many only known through mass media reports , where they are depicted as a traditional tribe ﬁghting against aggressive timber operations and opposing development . Well acquainted with all those discriminatory depictions , the Penans are very consciously countering the mainstream narrative . One of the leveraging mechanisms has been to demonstrate to the other tribes and the rest of the world that Penans are actually a very progressive tribe , adopting technologies mindfully and even digitalising their so far ‘‘secret’’ jungle sign language , which has received inter - national recognition . Tangible and visible technologies such as the telecentre , eToro , and Oroo’ tools have become a necessity in their identity building to counter mainstream narratives ( Win - schiers - Theophilus et al . 2015 ) . Different tools were con - ceptualised to facilitate the learning of Oroo’ by the next generation . First , a traditional concept of digital adventure games was adopted , based on the observation that Long Lamai children happily gather around technology gadgets rather than joining the jungle walks ( Zaman et al . 2015a , b ) . Garen has been re - emphasising over and over again that Oroo’ is an essential part of their cultural her - itage that it should be remembered by the next generation . Garen stated ‘‘if the younger generation loses Oroo’ , it will be difﬁcult for them to associate themselves with the life in forest [ nomadic life ] ’’ . The development of a digital game seemed to unfold , in our perspective , a contagious and contradictory practice supporting the children’s learning of the jungle sign language digitally while still being sur - rounded by the jungle . This is clearly a misalignment with current pedagogical trends in the northern hemisphere , where children are encouraged to become part of nature , experience embodied learning , and spend less time with technologies . However , at this stage with the pre - dominant desire of the Long Lamai elders to impart the knowledge to the next generation by all means , a technological solution had to be implemented , despite the contradictory opinions . While the Oroo’ adventure game showed some immediate positive results , such as attracting the Penan children’s attention towards their cultural heritage , it also demon - strated that the learning curve was not as expected ( Zaman et al . 2015a , b ) . The digital Oroo’ game showed the community that technology can encompass their cultural content , but also has clear limitations in terms of replacing the knowledge transfer processes . Thus , this phase greatly contributed to the communities learning about and reﬂecting upon technology , as well as to empowerment in terms of technology implementation decisions . Based on this , a different approach to teaching and learning was conceptualised , namely the introduction of tangibles ; engaging parents and children into the knowl - edge transfer process by reinstating some local practices and current pedagogical principles . In this phase of the project , mutual learning was facilitated through joint meaning making of a novel approach to digitalise Oroo’ . The idea of tangibles was introduced by distant collabo - rators from New Zealand and Singapore ( Plimmer et al . 2015 ) , and ﬁrst encountered with scepticism by the com - munity representatives . As the project progressed and showed literally tangible results , the community became enthusiastic about this new approach to teaching their 428 AI & Soc ( 2019 ) 34 : 419 – 435 123 children Oroo’ . However , the project was generally over - shadowed by technical challenges , such as a lack of inte - gration with other technologies , as well as the composition and durability of the tangibles ( Zaman and Winschiers - Theophilus 2015 ) . The community members suggested using tangibles made from artiﬁcial material , unaware of the wider discourse in tangible technologies on the use of real materials and their emergence in virtual environments . Overall , the tangible project can be described as an inter - esting research project , where the different parties were exposed to novel thinking around technologies and context within a multicultural setting . In line with the third wave of HCI , engaging with a tablet - based android tangible system created great user experiences and learning within the community . However , considering the expectations of the community members in the development of a deployable technology to sustain Oroo’ across generations , yet another approach needed to be taken . As conventional attempts to address the issue of preservation , as well as teaching and learning , did not yield satisfactory results , we took a step back and re - evaluated our epistemological framework . The concept of preserva - tion in the form of dictionary - like repositories , framed in a mainstream linguistic paradigm , supported by technology - based teaching and learning platforms detached from every day activities , needed to be questioned . While the focus had been on the interaction and means , little attention was attributed to the relevance of Oroo’ in the daily life of the Penan youth . It became clear that if we wanted the lan - guage to be sustainably preserved , it needed to be revi - talised and be meaningful for the youth , from a youth perspective rather than an elder’s nostalgic perspective . Thus , we engaged in a co - design phase with the Long Lamai youth , aiming to develop an Oroo’ sign language messaging service similar to SMS or WhatsApp ( Zaman and Winschiers - Theophilus 2015 ) . We ﬁrst established current communication practices among the youth , to explore in which ways Oroo’ could be integrated into their daily communications . Like the youth elsewhere , the Long Lamai youth is mostly equipped with cell phones , making excessive use of SMS services to converse . Thus , common SMS texts were established using a persona method , to maintain privacy of chats . We were aware of the limita - tions of Oroo’ in terms of its asynchronous nature and conﬁned vocabulary , which was mostly geared to express activities in the forest and messages relevant within the context of Penan’s nomadic movements . Hence , the inte - gration of Oroo’ into everyday communications meant major adaptations , such as the creation of new signs as an addition to the ‘‘original’’ language . The Long Lamai elders agreed that it was an acceptable move , so that the Penan youth could feel more connected to the jungle and not undermine the signiﬁcance and power of Oroo’ . A number of new signs were created by the youth and the elders separately , following the underlying principles of Oroo’ creations . For example , the ‘‘death of a man’’ was expressed with an Atip na’o’ ( a utensil used by men for eating starchy sago ﬂour ) ; the elders suggested the ‘‘birth of a baby boy’’ ( a new sign ) should be represented by the symbol of a blow pipe , as he will be the one hunting with it in the future . Similarly , the youth created a sign for ‘‘I am ﬁne’’ , based on the existing sign of ‘‘I am not ﬁne’’ ; the later shows a scrapped bark , while the newly created sign is intact ( Zaman and Winschiers - Theophilus 2015 ) . There - fore , the language was not preserved in its original state , but the language with its underlying structure and mean - ings was re - appropriated and re - interpreted in a modern context of the Penan youth . This has opened a very con - troversial debate among the researchers and Penan com - munity . Fellow researchers and neighbouring villages argue that it pollutes the ‘‘original’’ language . Interestingly , we found that introducing new signs to the Oroo’ language is not a new practice for the Long Lamai community . They have shown us recently introduced signs , such as the signs that represent the village Long Lamai , which the neigh - bouring Penan community labelled as not ‘‘original’’ . However , a language by nature evolves around the relevant concepts that need to be expressed by a society at a point in time and therefore the concept of preservation needs to be re - examined . While we originally embarked on developing tools to safeguard the language , we have realised that its appreciation reaches far beyond the few elders who would like their children to master it . The origin of Oroo’ will never be lost , yet the language has a chance to evolve within different epistemologies attaining universality ; after all the last experts of the ‘‘original’’ language have opted to share it globally after reﬂecting on its wider impact . 3 . 3 . 2 Crowdsourcing from Otjisa Our ﬁrst encounter with the Otjisa community was with a mixed team of researchers consisting of two OvaHerero and two Namibian domiciled who had been working with the OvaHerero communities before . Hence , much of the crosscultural analysis was reduced to ﬁnding out what the differences between the OvaHerero and the OvaHimba practices were . The evaluation of the 3D graphic tool ( HSC ) , facilitated discussions around cultural practices and representations . Through this , the Otjisa community members allowed us to gain a deeper understanding of their context and value system . Having established a co - design methodology , based on re - contextualised concepts and methods originating from participatory design , much of our focus has been on establishing and maintaining a good collaboration with the community . Communication has been one of the most AI & Soc ( 2019 ) 34 : 419 – 435 429 123 important means in forming relationships . Fortunately , there is only a slight dialectic difference between the Otjiherero spoken by the OvaHimba and the one of the OvaHerero . Thus , conversations between the OvaHerero researchers and the community members were near ﬂuent , only occasionally interrupted by single word misunder - standings that were clariﬁed immediately . At times , the other researchers were included in the conversations with a translator . Direct interactions between the community members and the non - Otjiherero speakers were improvised with gestures and single known words . Uaraieke possesses a great sense of humour , which left all of us in great laughter many times . This allowed us to jokingly interact , thereby lightening technical sessions . Once Uaraieke had ﬁnished constructing his homestead on the HSC , he was asked whether there was anything missing to make his homestead complete . He replied that a chicken was miss - ing . One of the researchers politely interrupted him , and asked him whether there was not a woman missing . In agreement , he replied with laughter and poked the two Otjiherero speaking researchers . During the ﬁrst crowd - sourcing simulation workshop Uaraieke received a phone call , he informed his caller that he was busy with two OvaHerero and some whites , and that he was busy pressing things that he usually does not do ( referring to the tablet with the HSC app ) . Uaraieke commented with excitement , ‘‘I have now seen that my culture is not going to die especially if the white people are involved’’ , he said while pointing to one of the non - Otjiherero speaking researchers from NUST . Having been welcomed and trusted in the Otjisa com - munity , our collaborations have been dominated by joyful interactions that led to deeper connections beyond the project tasks . During the last visit , the researchers remained in the village for a couple of days ; they switched between technology design activities and everyday village activi - ties . This brought the team even closer together and led to major breakthroughs , in the design of the TRM as well as the conceptual and technical understanding gained by Uaraieke . He mentioned that having the researchers sleep over at his homestead was fruitful ; he could go to sleep with an idea and early in the morning , he could talk to the researchers before he forgot about it . He said he appreci - ated that the researchers slept over at his homestead with his family , as this showed love and true commitment to the project . At the beginning of the last TRM co - design ses - sions , Uaraieke was shown the overall Community Crowdsourcing Platform ( CCSP ) diagram , depicting tech - nical details , process ﬂows , and him among others as an actor / user . The third author explained the diagram relating it back to past sessions , which Uaraieke clearly remem - bered . At a later stage during the co - design session , Uar - aieke pointed at the diagram to conﬁrm that we were ‘‘ now talking about the completed 3D model ’’ , revealing his understanding of the model . The team had meanwhile reached a level where all understood each other’s episte - mology and could freely move between the worlds in the creation of a new digital reality . Prior to this session , Uaraieke had been part of a number of user interface design sessions . Starting with mastering simple choices of icons , to the creation of icons related to his cultural practices . For example , saving related to ‘‘holding tight’’ and deleting related to ‘‘hiding’’ , both symbolised by hand gestures ( Kapuire et al . 2016 ) . Uar - aieke demonstrated a deeper reﬂection and validation of choices . The researchers have at many occasions been surprised by the depth of Uaraieke’s contributions to the technical system , in his position as co - designer . Given the opportunity to make decisions , he at times ran out of ideas but often his wife chipped in and together they agreed on speciﬁcs . At one of the early user interface design sessions , he had chosen the picture of his son to represent ‘‘video’’ mode . However , remaining with the tablet and the appli - cation , he could later not remember all the icons even though he decided on them ( Kapuire et al . 2016 ) . At a follow - up visit , we then problematised the choice and he understood that it should be meaningful for him to remember . Thus , it was agreed to replace the symbol with feet ( as they move ) next to eyes ( for picture ) . Also , the choice to represent a gallery with an old Nokia phone , as that is where they currently keep their images , was ques - tionable though logical from their perspective . Yet from a designerly point it reminds us of the ‘diskette’ symbol for saving , which is long outdated . Over time , Uaraieke made many further interesting design suggestions showing his understanding of technol - ogy design , such as one tab on a button shows the ﬁrst set of media and two tabs the next set . In deciding on a meaningful representation for the tab of 3D graphics models received from the crowd , Uaraieke mentioned that this should be an icon representing something good . One of the participants commented that he should remember that not all delivered 3D models might be good , and Uaraieke agreed . His wife proposed to use a picture of an OvaHimba woman and looked at her husband for approval . Uaraieke replied he would be happy with whatever is used as he will remember it . One of the researchers asked Uaraieke and his wife , whether they would prefer the picture of the Ova - Himba woman to be represented in a 2D or 3D model . They both replied that it would be a very good idea to have the image represented in 3D , rotating in all angles for full inspection . Everyone agreed that this was the ideal representation . Overall , the step in step out Action Research reﬂection cycles proved to be very crucial for all of us . We noticed that one single co - design workshop was not enough to 430 AI & Soc ( 2019 ) 34 : 419 – 435 123 reach ﬁnal decisions . We conducted several co - design workshops with longer breaks in between , so that both parties could reﬂect on what they have created . At times , Uaraieke commented on the selected icons selected in the previous co - design workshop . He stated that they were randomly selected and did not make much sense in relation to the application functionality , but that he had developed a better understanding in the meantime . 4 Consequences of cultural stances While one could argue that designing within a transcultural space seems promising , we however inspect the different cultural stances in more detail for the digitisation of IK , where the matter of design is a local culture and its context . We further argue that it is important to elevate awareness , rather than to continuously narrow down and shift focus within a new approach to cultural engagement . 4 . 1 Reﬂecting on digitising IK Approaches to digitising IK and cultural heritage have fundamentally changed over time based on the pursued agendas , different paradigms , cultural theories , and meth - ods . They vary in being more or less sensitive to created tensions as part of the digitisation process and the involvement or exclusion of non - indigenous stakeholders . The different cultural approaches to IK preservation , from a community perspective , can be considered as an issue of positioning and agency , where their adequacy depends on the communities’ needs and expectations . In development thinking and traditional cultural heritage preservation , the mainstream narrative has reduced IK to practical techniques and artefacts . Attempted ‘‘scientiﬁca - tion’’ of IK has further cut out important details and con - textual information that are critical to indigenous epistemologies ( van der Velden 2010 ) . Clearly operating within a crosscultural approach , only practices and tech - niques that can be perceived and represented from an ethnocentric perspective are represented and digitised . Furthermore , technologies deeply embedded in a western epistemology implicitly replicate and enact the very same biased cultural logics ( Dourish and Bell 2011 ; Christie 2004 ; Winschiers - Theophilus et al . 2012 ) . Thus , it becomes questionable to what extent IK can even be ade - quately digitally represented , considering the cultural par - tiality of developers and current technologies . However , if the aim of digitalising IK is to support commercialisation initiatives or cultural heritage exhibitions for the wider public , a crosscultural approach seems appropriate within a national regulated IK system that acknowledges IK custo - dians . While South Africa and other countries have an established IK policy , Namibia is currently in the process of creating an IK policy that recognises indigenous com - munities’ contributions and ensures recognition and beneﬁt sharing . In such cases , a crosscultural lens can serve the communities’ immediate needs for rewards , recognition , as well as positioning in the mainstream socio - economical context , through a very selective preservation of IK as a commodity . Shifting the focus to an intercultural approach , Win - schiers - Theophilus et al . ( 2012 ) pronounced that they ‘‘intend to adjust [ their ] perspective from ‘somewhere else’ to a local perspective through an on - going dialogue around technology , in order to design a representation which is meaningful to the community’’ . Much effort was dedicated to ensuring the involvement of indigenous knowledge holders in the digitisation process , as well as to study local practices to enhance the intercultural design process per se . Based on the premises that the designers’ values are cov - ertly transferred into the technologies , indigenous knowl - edge holders now being co - designers could ensure that their values were equally present . However , indigenous communities , often not having had voices and now dwelling in counter - narratives ( Sabiescu 2015 ) , have shown little reﬂection in the representation of themselves or their heritage . Thus , communities tacitly still propagated a biased digital representation . Especially concerning IK , community members are uncertain about its value and position , thereby eagerly reshaping it to ﬁt mainstream technologies being unaware of alternatives . We equally recognise the limitations of the technologies we selected , which substantially constrain the representation of IK ( Rodil et al . 2014 ; Bidwell and Winschiers - Theophilus 2012 ) . Yet considering the urgency of preserving and digitising the IK held by a few elders , many communities appreciate the recording of IK with current technologies and means available , allowing for later interpretations and processing . Moving the design space to a multicultural context , in which all participants add to the ﬂavours of the outcome , we can no longer strive for a singular perspective . We recognise that the alien developer is the gateway to tech - nological opportunities , which when jointly explored can open up the pathway for innovative IK tools development , such as the tangibles presented above . Thus , the preser - vation of IK can take novel shapes , enhancing user expe - riences and without any doubt representing new meanings and interpretations of IK , rather than conserving it . Within an iterative design and evaluation process , a workable solution can be created which embraces the involved par - ticipant’s values and aesthetics . For example , within the development of the crowdsourcing application , we brought along two 3D models ( a hut and a woman ) for evaluation by the elders in Otjisa ( Stanley et al . 2015 ) . The roof of the AI & Soc ( 2019 ) 34 : 419 – 435 431 123 hut was created using a uniform straw pattern , which the elder criticised for being unrealistically perfect looking . Yet they decided that it should be represented in that way , as it shows how a hut should look . The model of the OvaHimba woman lacked too many signiﬁcant cultural markers to be acceptable , and thus was sent back to the 3D graphic designers . This kind of discussions and develop - ments allow for mutual learning and reciprocity in the creation of new means of preserving and representing IK , which is equally rewarding to the community and the developers . Anchored in philosophies such as Ubuntu , the process itself can be described as harmonious . This has been emphasised as a very important aspect of collabora - tion by both communities we have been working with ( Winschiers - Theophilus et al . 2015 ; Kapuire et al . 2015 ) . The community elders also expressed their deep appreci - ation regarding the chance to learn about technologies , which in many African contexts re - establishes their posi - tion as a carrier of knowledge and wisdom ( Kapuire et al . 2015 ) . Pushing the boundaries beyond culture and embracing different epistemologies simultaneously casts a new light on IK preservation and digitisation . While aware of its origin , IK per se is de - and re - constructed , re - interpreted , and represented within a transcultural approach . We cre - ate a detached design space , where we ﬁrst elevate local practices to a higher abstraction level from which we then re - instantiate them . This approach is comparable to the derivation of a generic class out of a speciﬁc object , which can then instantiate different other objects . For example , in the case of the Oroo’ language preservation , we ﬁrst re - conceptualised preservation , de - constructed and re - constructed the language itself , created new signs , and then re - contextualised it in the youth’s daily life . While on the one hand the language has lost its local originality , no longer depending on the forest or nomadic movements , it can instead be used by the youth world - wide . In more general terms , it would facilitate the full integration of IK with the mainstream knowledge system . This has been an important aspect in our recent crowd - sourcing platform development , in which we realised the signiﬁcance of the community members’ communication with the outside world in regard to the representation of their cultural heritage . Through this interaction , they can reﬂect upon their own meaning making and relevance of their cultural markers . In the transcultural design endeavour of digitising indigenous knowledge , all parties can re - create new meanings and symbols in a conscious decision - taking and negotiation process ; deciding on what is relevant and what not , as well as what should be pre - served and what not . The technology design process allows the indigenous designers to distance themselves from their own culture , listen to other points of view , and reﬂect upon the digitisation of their culture and the newly gained perspective thereof . The communities’ interest in IK preservation was fore - most the transfer of IK to the next generation of their own kin and secondly to a wider audience , with technology as one of many means . The various cultural approaches to community technology design fulﬁl different expectations and needs . While the transcultural approach is promising in terms of operating in a shared space of mutual respect , acknowledgement of epistemologies , and heightened awareness , we also recognise that it is not the solution to all issues associated with the digitalisation of IK . Yet we argue that it provides a new legitimate interpretation and repre - sentation of IK , without claiming preservation of its orig - inal form . 4 . 2 Elevating awareness Methodologies and methods have been established for designing within a cross - , inter - , and multicultural para - digm , in line with their theoretical frameworks . Yet with the proposition of a new cultural approach to design , methodologies , and methods ﬁrst need to be derived based on empirical data , lessons learned , as well as an exploration of theories originating from different epistemologies . Central to the transcultural approach becomes ‘‘the prin - ciple of exotopy , or extra locality , [ which ] is applicable to any culture and in fact to any object of study or reﬂection : by increasing our awareness of it , we distance ourselves from it’’ ( Epstein 2009 ) . Thus , we relate back to our point of departure , where Burstall ( 1992 ) encourages us to heighten our awareness about seemingly unrelated phe - nomena to the immediate technology design , considering the atmosphere and energy ﬂow among participants , rather than dwelling in a state of ignorance or focus on a pre - determined phenomenon . Similarly , we have often expe - rienced in our design sessions that having paid attention to side - remarks and side effects , provided us with important insights that informed further design and research deci - sions . For example , while the third author facilitated a dialogue in OtjiHerero , the ﬁrst author ( with a very limited vocabulary in that language ) could direct her attention towards non - verbal clues and the entire setting within the wider rural design space , observing passers - by and seem - ingly unrelated interactions . Contextualised in Ubuntu , an African philosophy , we acknowledge that everything is interconnected at a spiri - tual , physical , and virtual level ; thus , awareness is to be directed at the interrelationships rather than the individual entities . With a growing body of work on community technology design in the African continent , a number of authors have recognised the role of Ubuntu , as embodied humanness transpiring throughout the communities , in 432 AI & Soc ( 2019 ) 34 : 419 – 435 123 creating a different consciousness ( Bidwell 2010 ; Chmela - Jones 2015 ; Kapuire et al . 2015 ) . Centred around the concepts of interconnectedness and relationships , Rogers ( 2014 ) has brieﬂy introduced the term ‘‘mindfulness’’ into the HCI discourse , where she argues ‘‘for a radical rethink of our relationship with future digital technologies . One that inspires us , through shared devices , tools and data , to be more creative , playful and thoughtful of each other and our surrounding environments’’ . However , the concept of mindfulness , originating in the Buddhist philosophy , has a much more profound meaning than often attributed in its adopted secular domains such as health and psychology . Numerous authors have attempted to clarify the meaning of mindfulness , often entangled in translations and the usage of ill corresponding terms . ‘‘Conceptual issues such as bare awareness , clear com - prehension , and discernment between wholesome and unwholesome states are not simply historical , doctrinal , or scriptural details but critical practices that can have an impact on the usefulness of the teachings that occur over such a short period of time in secular programs’’ . ( Monteiro et al . 2015 ) . Of importance in our context , is the fact that heightened awareness or mindfulness is a skill that needs to be culti - vated over time and does not occur automatically . Mill - erand and Bowker ( 2008 ) argued that ‘‘time is a variable , not an explanatory framework for the phenomenon under consideration’’ . The partners in the design process need time for engagement and disengagement in the develop - ment of the projects and objects . The reality of the col - laboration varies over time , in line with the action and reﬂection of the actors in the partnership . 5 Outlook We acknowledge that each engagement is built on different premises ; it unfolds based on choices , intents , agendas , resources , and purposes within a community technology design endeavour . Yet we suggest that the approach to cultural engagement is a conscious choice , which frames the interactions and outcomes of the community collabo - ration . Based on a major criticism on the early phase of humans , mostly users , being subjectiﬁed and classiﬁed within crosscultural models , shifting the focus to partici - pation and empowerment seemed like an obvious solution . Participatory Design has since its inception been primarily concerned with power relations , being conscious of the control of the designers within the process and striving to empower users ( Bratteteig and Wagner 2016 ) . As it remains narrowly focused on interactions and inter - rela - tions it brings about various socio - political challenges in intercultural and multicultural settings . Although the need for re - conceptualising Participatory Design methods , techniques and even the notion of participation in non - Scandinavian contexts has been acknowledged , discourses revolving around ‘‘postcolonial computing’’ and ‘‘doing - good’’ unveil constructs of unequal collaborations further fostered through outdated ethics guidelines still consider - ing community members as research subjects instead of co - designers . Thus , we suggest a radical paradigm shift in research and development work , which embraces a blending of epistemologies , recognising contributions from all participants , including the designers , within a collective context . Our thinking is based on our own evolution within our long - term collaborations with indigenous communities in Namibia and Malaysia . We argue that enough spotlights were directed at singular entities , such as the community , interactions , relations , and roles within design endeavours meticulously deconstructing and reconstructing distinct perspectives , thereby losing a holistic view . Thus , we promote a transcultural approach to community technology development , in which we strive for an elevated awareness , which needs to be cultivated over time among participants within the design space . Acknowledgements Firstly , we thank our community collaborators who have enabled us to gain insights beyond our own previous worldviews . Secondly , we acknowledge our Universities and the funding agents , the National Commission on Research , Science and Technology in Namibia and the Information Society Innovation Fund Asia in Malaysia , who have supported our research explorations . Thirdly , we thank the anonymous reviewers for their valuable and critical feedback . References Bidwell NJ ( 2010 ) Ubuntu in the network : humanness in social capital in rural Africa . Interactions 17 : 68 – 71 Bidwell NJ , Winschiers - Theophilus H ( 2012 ) Audio pacemaker : walking , talking indigenous knowledge . In : Proceedings of the South African Institute for Computer Scientists and Information Technologists Conference . ACM , pp . 149 – 158 Bødker S ( 2015 ) Third - wave HCI , 10 years later : participation and sharing . Interactions 22 : 24 – 31 Bohm D ( 2007 ) On dialogue London . Routledge , Great Britain Bonabeau E ( 2009 ) Decisions 2 . 0 : the power of collective intelli - gence . MIT Sloan Manage Rev 50 : 45 – 52 Bratteteig T , Wagner I ( 2016 ) Unpacking the notion of participation in participatory design . Comput Support Coop Work 25 : 425 – 475 Brereton M , Roe P , Schroeter R , Lee Hong A ( 2014 ) Beyond ethnography : engagement and reciprocity as foundations for design research out here . In : Proceedings of the 32nd Annual ACM Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems . ACM , pp . 1183 – 1186 Burstall R ( 1992 ) Computing : yet another reality construction . In : Floyd C , Zu¨llighoven H , Budde R , Keil - Slawik R ( eds ) Software development and reality construction . Springer , Berlin , pp 45 – 51 Cabrero DG , Winschiers - Theophilus H , Abdelnour - Nocera J , Kapuire GK ( 2016 ) A hermeneutic inquiry into user - created personas in different Namibian locales . In : Proceedings of the 14th AI & Soc ( 2019 ) 34 : 419 – 435 433 123 Participatory Design Conference : Full papers , Vol 1 . ACM , pp 101 – 110 Chmela - Jones KA ( 2015 ) The ethics of Ubuntu and community participation in design . In : Proceedings of the 7th International DEFSA Conference , Vanderbijlpark , South Africa pp 43 – 50 Christie M ( 2004 ) Computer databases and aboriginal knowledge . Learn Communities Int J Learn Soc Contexts 1 : 4 – 12 De Munck V ( 2000 ) Culture , self , and meaning . Waveland Press , Long Grove Dearden A ( 2013 ) See no evil : ethics in an interventionist ICTD . Inf Technol Int Develop 9 : 1 – 17 Dourish P , Bell G ( 2011 ) Divining a digital future : mess and mythology in ubiquitous computing . MIT Press , Cambrigde Duysburgh P , Slegers K ( 2015 ) Reciprocity in rapid ethnography . In : Abascal J , Barbosa S , Fetter M , Gross T , Palanque P , Winckler M . ( eds ) Human - computer Interaction—INTERACT 2015 . Lecture Notes in Computer Science , vol 9297 . Springer , pp . 292 – 299 Epstein M ( 2009 ) Transculture : a broad way between globalism and multiculturalism . Am J Econ Sociol 68 : 327 – 351 Frame A ( 2009 ) Deﬁning culture and interculturality in the workplace : how cultures interact within organisations . EUPRERA 2009 Congress Corporate citizens of the third millennium . Towards a Shared European Perspective , Bucharest , Romania Hakken D , Mate P ( 2014 ) The culture question in participatory design . In : Proceedings of the 13th Participatory Design Conference , Vol 2 . ACM , pp 87 – 91 Hall ET ( 1969 ) The hidden dimension . Anchor Books , Garden City Harrison S , Tatar D , Sengers P ( 2007 ) The three paradigms of HCI . In Alt . Chi . Session at the SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems San Jose , California , USA , pp 1 – 18 He HA , Memarovic N , Sabiescu A , de Moor A ( 2015 ) CulTech2015 : cultural diversity and technology design . In : Proceedings of the 7th International Conference on Communities and Technologies . ACM , pp 153 – 156 Hofstede GH ( 1997 ) Cultures and organizations : software of the mind . McGraw - Hill , New York Irani L , Vertesi J , Dourish P , Philip K , Grinter R ( 2010 ) Ostcolonial computing : a lens on design and development . In Proceedings of the SIGCHI conference on human factors in computing systems , ACM , pp 1311 – 1320 . Janowski M ( 1996 ) The Kelabit attitude to the Penan : forever children . La ricerca folklorica . doi : 10 . 2307 / 1480175 Kapuire GK , Winschiers - Theophilus H , Blake E ( 2015 ) An insider perspective on community gains : a subjective account of a Namibian rural communities’ perception of a long - term partic - ipatory design project . Int J Hum Comput Stud 74 : 124 – 143 Kapuire GK , Winschiers - Theophilus H , Stanley C , Maasz D , Chamunorwa M , Heide Møller R , Rodil K , Gonzalez - Cabrero D ( 2016 ) Technologies to promote the inclusion of Indigenous knowledge holders in digital cultural heritage preservation . In International Conference on Culture & Computer Science Windhoek , Namibia Kaufmann N , Schulze T , Veit D ( 2010 ) More than fun and money . Worker motivation in crowdsourcing - a Study on mechanical turk . In AMCIS 11 ( 2011 ) : 1 – 11 Millerand F , Bowker GC ( 2009 ) . Metadata standard : trajectories and enactment in the life of an ontology . In : Lampland M , Star SL ( eds ) Standards and their stories . How quantifying , classifying , and formalizing practices shape everyday life Ithaca : Cornell University Press , pp 149 – 165 Monteiro L , Musten RF , Compson J ( 2015 ) Traditional and contem - porary mindfulness : ﬁnding the middle path in the tangle of concerns . Mindfulness 6 : 1 – 13 Mu¨ller B , Linsta¨dter A , Frank K , Bollig M , Wissel C ( 2007 ) Learning from local knowledge : modeling the pastoral - nomadic range management of the Himba , Namibia . Ecol Appl 17 : 1857 – 1875 . doi : 10 . 1890 / 06 - 1193 . 1 Peters AN , Winschiers - Theophilus H , Awori K , Bidwell NJ , Blake E , Kumar A , Chivuno - Kuria S ( 2014 ) Collaborating with commu - nities in Africa : a hitch hikers guide . In : Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems . ACM , 1969 – 1974 Plimmer B , He L , Zaman T , Karunanayaka K , Yeo AW , Jengan G , Blagojevic R , Yi - Luen ED ( 2015 ) New interaction tools for preserving an old language . In Proceedings of the 33rd Annual ACM Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems , ACM , pp 3493 – 3502 . Puri S , Byrne E , Nhampossa JL , Quraishi ZB ( 2004 ) Contextuality of participation in IS design : a developing country perspective . In : Proceedings of the 8th Participatory Design Conference . ACM , pp 42 – 52 Rodil K , Winschiers - Theophilus H , Jensen K , Rehm M ( 2012 ) Homestead creator : a tool for indigenous designers . In Proceed - ings of the 7th Nordic Conference on Human - Computer Interaction : Making Sense Through Design , ACM , pp 627 – 630 . Rodil K , Winschiers - Theophilus H , Kapuire GK , Stanley C , Chivuno - Kuria S ( 2014 ) Participatory exploration of digitalizing cultural content : Getting married . Are we ready ? In : Proceedings of the 13th Participatory Design Conference : Short Papers , Industry Cases , Workshop Descriptions , Doctoral Consortium papers , and Keynote abstracts , Vol 2 . ACM , pp 93 – 97 Rogers Y ( 2014 ) Should technology be more mindful ? http : / / blogs . cs . st - andrews . ac . uk / csblog / 2014 / 02 / 04 / interaction - design - ageing - computing - and - creativity - by - yvonne - rogers - ucl / . Accessed Mar 2017 Rogers Y , Marsden G ( 2013 ) Does he take sugar ? Moving beyond the rhetoric of compassion . Interactions 20 ( 4 ) : 48 – 57 Sabiescu A ( 2015 ) Mainstream narratives and counter - narratives in the representation of the other : the case of the Romani ethnic minority . In : Bidwell NJ , Winschiers - Theophilus H ( eds ) At the intersection of indigenous and traditional knowledge and tech - nology design . Informing Science Press , Santa Rosa , California Sabiescu AG , David S , van Zyl I , Cantoni L ( 2014 ) Emerging spaces in community - based participatory design : reﬂections from two case studies . In Proceedings of the 13th Participatory Design Conference : Research Papers , Vol 1 . ACM , pp 1 – 10 Schenk E , Guittard C ( 2009 ) Crowdsourcing : what can be outsourced to the crowd , and why . In Workshop on Open Source Innovation , Strasbourg , p 72 Siew ST , Yeo AW , Zaman T ( 2013 ) Participatory action research in software development : indigenous knowledge management sys - tems case study . International conference on human - computer interaction . Springer , Berlin Heidelberg . Chicago , pp 470 – 479 Smith A , Bannon L , Gulliksen J ( 2010 ) Localising HCI practice for local needs . In : Proceedings of the 2010 International Confer - ence on Interaction Design & International Development . British Computer Society , pp 114 – 123 Stanley C , Winschiers - Theophilus H , Onwordi M , Kapuire GK ( 2013 ) Rural communities Crowdsource technology develop - ment : A Namibian expedition . In : Proceedings of the 6th International Conference on Information and Communications Technologies and Development : Notes , Vol 2 . ACM , pp . 155 – 158 Stanley C , Winschiers - Theophilus H , Blake E , Rodil K , Kapuire G ( 2015 ) Ovahimba community in Namibia ventures into crowd - sourcing design . Proc IFIP WG 9 : 277 – 287 Trompenaars F , Hampden - Turner C ( 2011 ) Riding the waves of culture : understanding diversity in global business . Nicholas Brealey Publications , New York 434 AI & Soc ( 2019 ) 34 : 419 – 435 123 Van der Velden M ( 2010 ) Design for the contact zone : knowledge management software and the structure of indigenous knowl - edges . In Proceedings Cultural Attitudes Towards Communica - tion and Technology 2010 , Murdoch University , Australia , pp 1 – 18 . Winschiers - Theophilus H ( 2009 ) The art of cross - cultural design for usability . In : International Conference on Universal Access in Human - Computer Interaction . Springer , Heidelberg , pp 665 – 671 Winschiers - Theophilus H , Bidwell NJ ( 2013 ) Toward an afro - centric indigenous HCI paradigm . Int J Hum Comput Interact 29 : 243 – 255 Winschiers - Theophilus H , Chivuno - Kuria S , Kapuire GK , Bidwell NJ , Blake E ( 2010 ) Being participated : a community approach . In : Proceedings of the 11th Biennial Participatory Design Conference . ACM , pp 1 – 10 Winschiers - Theophilus H , Jensen K , Rodil K ( 2012 ) Locally situated digital representation of indigenous knowledge . In Proceedings Cultural Attitudes Towards Technology and Communication 2012 , Murdoch University , Australia , pp 454 – 468 Winschiers - Theophilus H , Winschiers - Goagoses N , Rodil K , Blake E , Zaman T , Kapuire GK , Kamukuenjandje R ( 2013 ) Moving away from Erindi - roukambe : transferability of a rural community - based co - design . InIFIP WG 9 : 363 – 374 Winschiers - Theophilus H , Zaman T , Yeo AW ( 2015 ) Reducing white elephant ICT4D projects : a community - researcher engagement . In Proceedings of the 7th International Conference on Commu - nities and Technologies , ACM , pp 99 – 107 Zaman T , Winschiers - Theophilus H ( 2015 ) Penan’s Oroo’Short Message Signs ( PO - SMS ) : co - design of a digital jungle sign language application . In Human - Computer Interaction— INTERACT 2015 : 15th IFIP TC 13 International Conference , Springer , pp 489 – 504 Zaman T , Yeo AW ( 2014 ) Ensuring participatory design through free , prior and informed consent : a tale of indigenous knowledge management system . In User - Centric Technology Design for Nonproﬁt and Civic Engagements , Springer , Switzerland , pp 41 – 54 Zaman T , Winschier - Theophilus H , Yeo AW , Ting LC , Jengan G ( 2015 ) Reviving an indigenous rainforest sign language : digital Oroo’ adventure game . In Proceedings of the Seventh Interna - tional Conference on Information and Communication Tech - nologies and Development ( ICTD ‘15 ) . ACM , New York , NY , USA , pp 1 – 4 Zaman T , Yeo AW , Kulathuramaiyer N ( 2015b ) Indigenous knowl - edge governance framework : scaffolding joint ICT develop - ments in Long Lamai , Malaysia . In : Bidwell NJ , Winschiers - Theophilus H ( eds ) At the intersection of indigenous and traditional knowledge and technology design . Informing Science Press , California , pp 171 – 185 Zaman T , Winschiers - Theophilus H , George F , Wee AY , Falak H , Goagoses N ( 2016 ) Using sketches to communicate interaction protocols of an indigenous community . In : Proceedings of the 14th Participatory Design Conference : Short Papers , Interactive Exhibitions , Workshops , Vol 2 . ACM , pp 13 – 16 Zaman T , Yeo AW , Jengan G ( 2016b ) Designing digital solutions for preserving Penan sign language : a reﬂective study . Adv Hum Comput Interact . doi : 10 . 1155 / 2016 / 4174795 AI & Soc ( 2019 ) 34 : 419 – 435 435 123