Judgment and Decision Making , Vol . 7 , No . 1 , January 2012 , pp . 25 – 47 Measuring Risk Literacy : The Berlin Numeracy Test Edward T . Cokely ∗† Mirta Galesic , † Eric Schulz † ‡ Saima Ghazal § Rocio Garcia - Retamero † ¶ Abstract We introduce the Berlin Numeracy Test , a new psychometrically sound instrument that quickly assesses statistical numeracy and risk literacy . We present 21 studies ( n = 5336 ) showing robust psychometric discriminability across 15 countries ( e . g . , Germany , Pakistan , Japan , USA ) and diverse samples ( e . g . , medical professionals , general populations , Mechanical Turk web panels ) . Analyses demonstrate desirable patterns of convergent validity ( e . g . , numeracy , general cognitive abilities ) , discriminant validity ( e . g . , personality , motivation ) , and criterion validity ( e . g . , numerical and non - numerical questions about risk ) . The Berlin Numeracy Test was found to be the strongest predictor of comprehension of everyday risks ( e . g . , evaluating claims about products and treatments ; interpreting forecasts ) , doubling the predictive power of other numeracy instruments and accounting for unique variance beyond other cognitive tests ( e . g . , cognitive reﬂection , working memory , intelligence ) . The Berlin Numeracy Test typically takes about three minutes to complete and is available in multiple languages and formats , including a computer adaptive test that automatically scores and reports data to researchers ( www . riskliteracy . org ) . The online forum also provides interactive content for public outreach and education , and offers a recommendation system for test format selection . Discussion centers on construct validity of numeracy for risk literacy , underlying cognitive mechanisms , and applications in adaptive decision support . Keywords : risk literacy , statistical numeracy , individual differences , cognitive abilities , quantitative reasoning , decision making , risky choice , adaptive testing , Mechanical Turk . 1 Introduction Mathematics skills are among the most inﬂuential educa - tional factors contributing to economic prosperity in in - dustrialized countries ( Hunt & Wittmann , 2008 ) . Accord - ingly , there has been considerable interest in the causes and consequences of numeracy ( Huff & Geis , 1954 ; Pau - We are indebted to the following researchers who provided assis - tance with cross cultural and other data collection / analysis / suggestions : Adrien Barton , Nicolai Bodemer , Gregor Caregnato , Siegfried Dewitte , Rob Hamm , Deak Helton , Stefan Herzog , Anna Koehler , Marcus Lind - skog , Hitashi Lomash , Nico Mueller , Yasmina Okan , Robert Pastel , Ellen Peters , Jing Qian , Samantha Simon , Helena Szrek , Masanori Takezawa , Karl Teigen , Jan Woike , and Tomek Wysocki . We offer special thanks to Jonathan Baron . We also thank Gerd Gigerenzer , Lael Schooler , and other members of the Center for Adaptive Behav - ior and Cognition and of the Harding Center for Risk Literacy at the Max Planck Institute for Human Development for support and feed - back . This study was part of the grant “How to Improve Understanding of Risks about Health ( PSI2008 – 02019 ) , ” and “Helping Doctors and Their Patients Make Decisions about Health ( PSI2011 – 22954 ) ” funded by the Ministerio de Ciencia e Innovación ( The Spanish Ministry of Science and Innovation ) . ∗ Department of Cognitive and Learning Sciences , Michigan Tech - nological University . Email : ecokely @ mtu . edu † Center for Adaptive Behavior and Cognition , Max Planck Institute for Human Development . ‡ Perceptual and Brain Sciences , University College London . § Department of Cognitive and Learning Sciences , Michigan Tech - nological University . ¶ Department of Psychology , University of Granada . los , 1988 ) , which refers speciﬁcally to mathematical or quantitative literacy ( Steen , 1990 ) . The more basic lev - els of numeracy are concerned with the “real number line , time , measurement , and estimation” whereas higher levels focus on “an understanding of ratio concepts , no - tably fractions , proportions , percentages , and probabili - ties” ( Reyna , Nelson , Ham , & Dieckman , 2009 ) . Much of the research on numeracy has involved assessment of a wide range of mathematical skills among large and di - verse samples . More recently , however , research and theory in the decision sciences has focused on a sub - set of numeracy that is important for informed and ac - curate risky decision making—i . e . , statistical numeracy ( Galesic , Garcia - Retamero & Gigerenzer , 2009 ; Lipkus , Samsa , & Rimer , 2001 ; Peters et al . , 2006 ; Reyna et al . , 2009 ) . In this paper , we use “statistical numeracy” speciﬁcally to refer to an understanding of the operations of prob - abilistic and statistical computation , such as comparing and transforming probabilities and proportions ( Lipkus et al . , 2001 ; Schwartz , Woloshin , Black , & Welch , 1997 ) . These statistical aspects of numeracy are key features of risk assessment in business and engineering ( Ayyub , 2003 ; Covello & Mumpower , 1985 ; Froot , Scharfstein , & Stein , 1993 ) , and play central roles in health risk quan - tiﬁcation and communication ( Lipkus & Peters , 2009 ; see also Gigerenzer , Gaissmaier , Kurz - Milcke , Schwartz , 25 JudgmentandDecisionMaking , Vol . 7 , No . 1 , January2012 BerlinNumeracyTest 26 Woloshin , 2007 ) . Moreover—although risk commonly refers to many topics ( e . g . , variability in probability dis - tributions ; the effect of uncertainty on objectives ; expo - sure to danger and loss ; Figner & Weber , 2011 ; Fox & Tennenbaum , 2011 ; Gigerenzer , Swijtink , Porter , Das - ton , Beatty , Kruger , 1989 ) —economic and psychological theory have long held that decision making under risk is that involving known “statistical probabilities” and quan - titative “probabilistic reasoning” ( Knight , 1921 ; for a re - cent review see Rakow , 2010 ) . 1 In these ways and others , statistical numeracy is one factor that gives rise to risk literacy—i . e . , the ability to accurately interpret and act on information about risk . 2 Indeed , statistical numeracy has been shown to be a predictor of decision strategies , af - fective reactions , comprehension and normative choices across many risky economic , health , and consumer deci - sions ( Banks , O’Dea , & Oldﬁeld , 2010 ; Cokely & Kelley , 2009 ; Lipkus & Peters , 2009 ; Peters & Levin , 2008 ; Pe - ters et al . , 2006 ; Reyna et al . , 2009 ) . Efforts to measure individual differences in statistical numeracy and risk literacy come primarily in three forms . Some research examines risky decisions in relation to individual differences in overall educational attainment , cognitive abilities , or cognitive styles ( Frederick , 2005 ; Stanovich & West , 2000 , 2008 ) . Other research primar - ily focusing on clinical and health domains has devel - oped a valid subjective instrument for self - reported esti - mations of numeracy ( Galesic & Garcia - Retamero , 2010 ; Zikmund - Fisher , Smith , Ubel , & Fagerlin , 2007 ) . Most common , however , is the use of objective performance measures of numeracy—i . e . , psychometric tests ( for a list of tests see Reyna et al . , 2009 ; but see also Black , Nease , & Tosteson , 1995 ; Galesic & Garcia - Retamero , 2010 ; Lipkus et al . , 2001 ; Peters et al . , 2006 ; Schwartz et al . , 1997 ; Weller , Dieckmann , Tusler , Mertz , Burns , & Peters , 2011 ) . In this paper , we review the development of the most widely used statistical numeracy instruments ( Lipkus et al . , 2001 ; Schwartz et al . , 1997 ) , examining successes and psychometric limits . We then introduce a new test of statistical numeracy and risk literacy—i . e . , the Berlin Numeracy Test . The Berlin Numeracy Test can be used in multiple formats ( i . e . , computer adaptive , paper - and - pencil , multiple choice , single - item median - split ) , pro - viding a fast , valid , and reliable tool for research , assess - ment , and public outreach . Speciﬁcally , we show that the new test offers unique predictive validity for comprehen - 1 On Knight’s ( 1921 ) view , risk refers to known ( objective ) proba - bilities whereas uncertainty refers to unknown , subjective or indeter - minable probabilities . For a related quantiﬁcation of risk that is more inclusive of both uncertainty and other decision making trade - offs re - lated to risk management see Kaplan and Garrack ( 1981 ) . 2 Risk literacy should not be confused with risk awareness or risk knowledge , which refer more speciﬁcally to one’s awareness of “facts” about risks ( e . g . , being aware that ﬂying is safer than driving ) . sion of everyday risks beyond other cognitive ability and numeracy tests ( e . g . , cognitive reﬂection , working mem - ory span , and ﬂuid intelligence ) . Furthermore , we show that the Berlin Numeracy Test dramatically improves psy - chometric discriminability among highly - educated indi - viduals ( e . g . , college students and graduates , medical professionals ) , across diverse cultures and different lan - guages . We close with a discussion of construct validity , underlying mechanisms , and applications ( e . g . , custom - tailored , interactive , and adaptive risk communication ) . 1 . 1 Numeracy and risk literacy in educated samples In 2001 , Lipkus et al . ( 2001 ) published the numeracy test for highly - educated samples , as an extension of previous work by Schwartz et al . ( 1997 ) . Lipkus et al . ( 2001 ) con - ducted a series of 4 studies ( n = 463 ) on community sam - ples of well - educated adult participants ( at least 40 years of age ) in North Carolina . Among other tasks , all par - ticipants answered 11 total numeracy questions includ - ing ( i ) one practice question , ( ii ) three numeracy ques - tions taken from the work of Schwartz et al . ( 1997 ) , and ( iii ) seven other questions ( one of which had two parts ) that were framed in the health domain ( e . g . , if the chance of getting a disease is 10 % how many people would be expected to get the disease : ( a ) out of 100 , ( b ) out of 1000 ) . Two questions had multiple choice options while all others were open - ended . All questions were scored ( 0 or 1 ) with data aggregated across several studies and entered into a factor analysis , showing that a one factor solution was appropriate . Overall , results indicated that the reﬁned test by Lipkus et al . ( 2001 ) was a reliable and internally consistent measure of high - school and college educated individuals’ statistical numeracy . The results of Lipkus et al . ( 2001 ) were interesting for a number of reasons . First , the results provided additional evidence that even among educated US community sam - ples some sizable proportion of individuals were likely to be statistically innumerate ( e . g . , 20 % failed questions dealing with risk magnitude ) . Such ﬁndings were and continue to be important as many efforts designed to sup - port informed and shared decision making rest on an er - roneous assumption that decision - makers are numerate ( or at least sufﬁciently statistically numerate ; see also Guadagnoli & Ward P , 1998 ; Schwartz et al . , 1997 ) . Sec - ond , results indicated that domain framing ( e . g . , medical versus ﬁnancial versus abstract gambles ) did not neces - sary differentially affect test performance or comprehen - sion . This ﬁnding indicates that various domain - speciﬁc items ( e . g . , items framed in terms of ﬁnancial or med - ical or gambling risks ) can provide a reasonable basis for the assessment of general statistical numeracy skills that will have predictive power across diverse domains . JudgmentandDecisionMaking , Vol . 7 , No . 1 , January2012 BerlinNumeracyTest 27 Overall , for nearly a decade , the Lipkus et al . ( 2001 ) test , and its predecessor from Schwartz et al . ( 1997 ) have pro - vided relatively short , reliable , and valuable instruments that have been used in more than 100 studies on topics such as medical decision making , shared decision mak - ing , trust , patient education , sexual behavior , stock eval - uations , credit - card usage , graphical communication , and insurance decisions , among many others ( Lipkus & Pe - ters , 2009 ) . 1 . 2 Psychometrics Despite its many successes and its inﬂuential role in ad - vancing risky decision research , as anticipated by Lip - kus et al . ( 2001 ) , a growing body of data suggests some ways the current numeracy instrument could be improved ( for an item response theory based analysis see Schapira , Walker , & Sedivy , 2009 ; see also Weller et al . 2011 ) . For example , one major concern is that the Lipkus et al . test is not hard enough to adequately differentiate among the higher - performing , highly - educated individuals who are often studied ( e . g . , convenience samples from univer - sities ) . To illustrate , in one study of college students at the Florida State University , data indicated that , although the Lipkus et al . ( 2001 ) test was a signiﬁcant predictor of risky decisions , the Lipkus et al . test showed extensive negative skew with scores approaching the measurement ceiling ( e . g . , most participants answered more than 80 % of items correctly ; Cokely & Kelley , 2009 ; for similar re - sults see Peters et al . , 2006 , 2007a , 2008 ; Schapira et al . , 2009 ; and for similar patterns from physicians - in - training see Hanoch , Miron - Shatz , Cole , Himmelstein , & Feder - man , 2010 ) . Another recent study using large probabilis - tically representative samples of the whole populations of two countries ( the United States and Germany ) revealed negative skew in numeracy scores even among partic - ipants from the general population ( Galesic & Garcia - Retamero , 2010 ) . Although most people are not college educated , most people in these two countries are likely to get the majority of questions right . These data sug - gest that most individuals tend to produce distributions of scores that are negatively skewed and are subject to mea - surement ceiling effects . A second psychometric concern is that there is rel - atively little known about the relations between either the Lipkus et al . ( 2001 ) or Schwartz et al . ( 1997 ) nu - meracy test and other individual differences , such as ba - sic cognitive abilities ( Liberali , Reyna , Furlan , Stein , & Pardo , 2011 ) . To illustrate , one might argue that statisti - cal numeracy is a useful predictor of risky choice sim - ply because it is correlated with measures of ﬂuid in - telligence . It is well known that tests of general intel - ligence , including those designed to measure ﬂuid in - telligence , are valid and reliable predictors of a wide variety of socially desirable cognitive , behavioral , oc - cupational , and health - related outcomes ( Neisser et al . , 1996 ) . 3 Fluid intelligence tests such as Raven’s Stan - dard or Advanced Progressive Matrices tend to be more time consuming yet also confer considerable beneﬁts in terms of psychometric rigor and cross - cultural fairness ( Raven , 2000 ) . To date , however , few tests have inves - tigated the extent to which the Lipkus et al . ( 2001 ) or Schwartz et al . ( 1997 ) instruments provide unique pre - dictive power beyond other cognitive ability instruments either within or across cultures ( Cokely & Kelley , 2009 ; Galesic & Garcia - Retamero , 2010 ; Garcia - Retamero & Galesic , 2010a , 2010b ; Liberali et al . , 2011 ; Okan , Garcia - Retamero , Cokely , & Maldonado , in press ) . A third psychometric issue is that , even if numer - acy is compared with other abilities , the observed mea - surement skew and ceiling effects will complicate com - parative evaluations ( e . g . , intelligence v . statistical nu - meracy ) . Consider a recent study designed to investi - gate the extent to which each of several individual dif - ferences ( e . g . , executive functioning , cognitive impulsiv - ity , numeracy ) inﬂuenced decision - making competence ( Del Missier , Mäntylä , & Bruine de Bruin , 2011 ; but see also 2010 ) . The study found that numeracy was less re - lated to some decision - making competencies than were measures of executive functioning or cognitive impulsiv - ity , measured by the cognitive reﬂection test ( Frederick , 2005 ) . It is however possible that , at least in part , some measurement ceiling effects in numeracy scores among the college student sample could have limited differenti - ation of those individuals with the highest levels of nu - meracy . In contrast , both executive functioning and the cognitive reﬂection tests are known to provide discrim - ination even among highly - educated individuals . To be clear , our reading of the individual differences study by Del Missier et al . ( 2011 ) is that it represents precise and careful research using many of the best available meth - ods and tools . However , the potential psychometric limits inherent in the now decade old numeracy test leave open important questions . To the extent that a numeracy instru - ment does not adequately or accurately estimate variation in the sub - populations of interest it is not an efﬁcient ba - sis for theory development or policy evaluations . 2 Test development and validation Building on the work of Lipkus et al . ( 2001 ) and Schwartz et al . ( 1997 ) we aimed to develop a new psy - chometrically sound statistical numeracy test that could 3 The underlying cognitive mechanisms that give rise to these effects are debated and remain unclear ( Cokely , Kelley , & Gichrist , 2006 ; Eric - sson , Prietula , & Cokely , 2007 ; Fox , Roring , & Mitchum , 2009 ; Neisser et al . , 1996 ) JudgmentandDecisionMaking , Vol . 7 , No . 1 , January2012 BerlinNumeracyTest 28 be used with educated and high - ability samples . 4 Our goal was not to develop a high - ﬁdelity comprehensive test of statistical numeracy or of its sub - skills . Rather , the goal was to develop a brief , valid , and easy - to - use in - strument , with improved discriminability . Development of the Berlin Numeracy Test began with pre - testing on a pool of items including all items from both the Lipkus et al . ( 2001 ) and Schwartz et al . ( 1997 ) tests along with other items that were internally generated . Following a protocol analysis in which participants solved all nu - meracy problems while thinking aloud ( Barton , Cokely , Galesic , Koehler , & Haas , 2009 ; see also Fox , Ericsson , & Best , 2011 ) , we analyzed responses and selected 28 candidate questions for inclusion in the next stage of test development ( i . e . , 12 original items plus 16 new items ) . 2 . 1 Participants We tested a community sample of 300 participants ( 57 % women ) from Berlin , Germany at the Max Planck Insti - tute for Human Development . Participants were primar - ily current or former undergraduate or graduate students from the Humboldt , Free , and Technical Universities of Berlin . The mean participant age was approximately 26 years old ( i . e . , 25 . 86 , SD = 3 . 98 ; range = 18 – 44 ) . Each par - ticipant completed about six hours of testing over the course of two to three weeks in exchange for 40 euro ( ca . $ 55 ) . 2 . 2 Materials and procedure A number of different instruments were used to provide convergent , discriminant , and criterion ( predictive ) valid - ity for the Berlin Numeracy Test . All comparative instru - ments are listed and described in Table 1 . Participants were tested in three separate phases . In phase 1 , all partic - ipants were tested individually via computer and / or with the assistance of a laboratory technician as required by the particular instrument . The ﬁrst testing session lasted for approximately two hours and consisted primary of cognitive ability instruments and cognitive performance tasks , including assessment of all candidate numeracy items . Note that participants only answered each candi - date numeracy question once . During this session calcu - lators were not allowed ; however , participants were pro - vided with paper and pens / pencils for notes . In phase 2 , participants completed an online assessment from their home including a variety of self - report personality and 4 The Berlin Numeracy Test is named to reﬂect the international , in - terdisciplinary development effort initiated in 2007 in the Center for Adaptive Behavior and Cognition at the Max Planck Institute for Hu - man Development . For additional discussion and similar public out - reach efforts concerning expertise , ethics and philosophical judgment see philosophicalcharacter . org ( Feltz & Cokely , 2009 , in press ; Schulz , Cokely , & Feltz , 2011 ) . other survey instruments . All participants agreed to com - plete the online portion of the study in one session in which they sat alone , in a quiet room . In phase 3 , partic - ipants returned about two weeks after their ﬁrst session and completed another two hours of testing . All partici - pants were again tested individually via computer and / or with the assistance of a laboratory technician as required by the particular instrument / task . The ﬁnal two hours of testing involved new cognitive performance tasks includ - ing a battery of everyday risky decision - making compre - hension questions that served as a means of assessing pre - dictive validity ( Galesic & Garcia - Retamero , submitted ; Garcia - Retamero & Galesic , in press ) . 2 . 3 Test construction and test items Performance quartiles for all participants were assessed according to performance on all 28 candidate statistical numeracy questions ( i . e . , 12 questions from the Lipkus et al . , 2001 set , plus 16 new questions ) . A subset of ﬁve questions with a 4 - level tree structure was identi - ﬁed using the categorization tree application from the predictive modeling and forecasting software DTREG ( Sherrod , 2003 ) . The tree structure was constructed such that participants arriving at each branch of the tree had approximately a 50 % probably of answering cor - rectly / incorrectly . The test’s tree structure was subjected to cross - validation and showed less than 10 % misclassiﬁ - cation . 5 Subsequent analyses indicated that reducing the 4 - level solution to a simpler 3 - level solution ( i . e . , remov - ing one problem ) did not affect test classiﬁcation perfor - mance or validity yet reduced test - taking time ( i . e . , 10 % reduction ) , increased test format ﬂexibility ( i . e . , simpli - ﬁed paper - and - pencil format scoring ) , and provided im - proved discriminability among new samples ( see “cross - cultural discriminability” below ) . All ﬁnal Berlin Nu - meracy Test formats are based on the four questions used for the optimal 3 - level categorization tree as follows ( an - swers provided in each blank ) : 1 . Out of 1 , 000 people in a small town 500 are mem - bers of a choir . Out of these 500 members in the choir 100 are men . Out of the 500 inhabitants that are not in the choir 300 are men . What is the probability that a randomly drawn man is a member of the choir ? Please indicate the probability in percent . _ _ _ 25 % _ _ _ 2a . Imagine we are throwing a ﬁve - sided die 50 times . On average , out of these 50 throws how many times would this ﬁve - sided die show an odd number ( 1 , 3 or 5 ) ? _ _ 30 _ _ out of 50 throws . 5 Although some misclassiﬁcation is unavoidable , the algorithm rarely misclassiﬁed a participant by more than one quartile . The as - sessment is similar to an item response theory analysis in that it identi - ﬁes items with high levels of discriminability across the range of item difﬁculty with a guessing parameter of zero . JudgmentandDecisionMaking , Vol . 7 , No . 1 , January2012 BerlinNumeracyTest 29 Table 1 : Descriptions and references for tests used to establish psychometric validity . Measure Description Reference Fluid Intelligence ( RAPM ) Short form Raven’s Advanced Progressive Matrices—a 12 item test of ﬂuid intelligence . Bors and Stokes ( 1998 ) Cognitive Reﬂec - tion ( CRT ) The Cognitive Reﬂection Test uses three math questions to assess cogni - tive impulsivity . Frederick ( 2005 ) Crystallized Intel - ligence ( Vocabu - lary ) A 37 item “spot - a - word” German vocabulary test . Lindenberger , Mayr , and Kliegl ( 1993 ) Working Memory Capacity ( Span ) A multi - item performance measure of one’s ability to control attention when simultaneously solving math operations and remember words . Turner and Engle ( 1989 ) Understanding everyday risks A ﬁve item battery involving interpretation of information about risks in consumer products , medical treatments , and weather forecasts . Garcia - Retamero and Galesic ( in press ) Maximizing - Sat - isﬁcing A 13 item scale measuring one’s tendency to maximize v . satisﬁce during decision making . Schwartz et al . ( 2002 ) Persistence The Grit - S is an eight item brief measure designed to assess persistence in the face of adversity . Duckworth and Quinn ( 2009 ) Achievement Mo - tivation The AMS - R is a 10 item trait assessment of one’s general achievement motivation ( e . g . , one’s desire to achieve good grades or performance evaluations ) . Lang and Fries ( 2006 ) Self efﬁcacy A10 item self - report measure of one’s general sense of self efﬁcacy . Schwarzer and Jerusalem ( 1995 ) Personality A 10 item assessment of the Big Five personality traits . Gosling , Rentfrow , and Swann ( 2003 ) Test Anxiety The TAI - G is a 20 item assessment of test - taking anxiety . Hodapp and Benson ( 1997 ) Implicit theories A four item measurement of the extent to which one believes intelligence is stable v . changeable . Blackwell , Trzesniewski , and Dweck ( 2007 ) Satisfaction with life A ﬁve item instrument measuring self - reported levels of one’s satisfac - tion with life . Diener , Emmons , Larsen , & Grifﬁn ( 1985 ) 2b . Imagine we are throwing a loaded die ( 6 sides ) . The probability that the die shows a 6 is twice as high as the probability of each of the other numbers . On average , out of these 70 throws how many times would the die show the number 6 ? _ _ _ 20 _ _ _ out of 70 throws . 3 . In a forest 20 % of mushrooms are red , 50 % brown and 30 % white . A red mushroom is poisonous with a probability of 20 % . A mushroom that is not red is poi - sonous with a probability of 5 % . What is the proba - bility that a poisonous mushroom in the forest is red ? _ _ _ 50 % _ _ _ 2 . 4 Test formats and scoring Different research environments have different con - straints such as computer - access , group - testing options , data - security requirements , etc . Accordingly , we de - signed the test to be ﬂexible , offering multiple formats ( for the multiple choice test see the “A Multiple Choice Format” section ) . A test format recommendation system is available online at www . riskliteracy . org . This system asks 1 – 4 questions ( e . g . , how much time is available for testing ; what type of sample will you test ) in order to recommend appropriate formats and provide sample ma - terials . 2 . 4 . 1 Computer adaptive test format In this format , 2 – 3 questions ( of 4 possible questions ) are asked to participants ( Appendix II ) . Questions are adap - tively selected based on participants’ past success in an - swering previous questions ( see Figure 1 for test struc - ture ) . The adaptive structure means that all questions have about a 50 % probability of being answered correctly JudgmentandDecisionMaking , Vol . 7 , No . 1 , January2012 BerlinNumeracyTest 30 Table 2 : Psychometric properties of the scale : Basic attributes , reliability , and discriminability . Schwartz et al . ( 1997 ) , 3 items Lipkus et al . ( 2001 ) , 11 items Berlin Numeracy Test Computer Adaptive Test format , 2 – 3 items Paper and Pencil format , 4 items Single Item format Basic attributes Range of possible scores 0 – 3 0 – 11 1 – 4 0 – 4 0 – 1 Range of achieved scores 0 – 3 5 – 11 1 – 4 0 – 4 0 – 1 Average score Mean 2 . 4 9 . 7 2 . 6 1 . 6 . 52 Median 3 10 3 2 1 Standard deviation . 82 1 . 38 1 . 13 1 . 21 . 50 Length Number of items 3 11 2 – 3 4 1 Mean duration in minutes 1 . 2 4 . 5 2 . 6 4 . 3 1 . 1 Reliability Cronbach’s alpha . 52 . 54 – a . 59 – a Discriminability Item % correct ( mean ) . 82 . 89 – b . 41 . 52 Mean score of 1 st quartile 0 . 8 7 . 3 1 . 0 0 . 0 0 . 0 2 nd quartile 2 . 0 9 . 0 2 . 0 1 . 0 3 rd quartile 3 . 0 10 . 0 3 . 0 2 . 0 1 . 0 4 th quartile 3 . 0 11 . 0 4 . 0 3 . 3 a Cronbach’s alpha cannot be computed . Principal component analysis indicates that the four items used in Berlin Numeracy Test all loaded highly on a single factor explaining 45 % of variance . b Approximately 50 % , conditional on previous responses . with subsequent questions adjusted on the basis of partic - ipants’ prior answers . If an answer is correct / incorrect then a harder / easier question is automatically provided . A participant’s skill - level can then be determined from answers to 2 – 3 questions in roughly half the time nor - mally required for the Lipkus et al . ( 2001 ) numeracy test ( less than three minutes ; see Table 2 ) . To facili - tate access , the computer adaptive Berlin Numeracy Test is available online in a format that automatically scores participants’ responses and reports data to researchers in terms of estimated participant quartile scores . Scores are typically batched such that the researcher requests a certain number of test scores and when that number is reached the full results are emailed . The test can be found at www . riskliteracy . org , which also provides access via other internet ready devices ( e . g . , smart phones ) . The online forum allows the public to complete the test and receive feedback on their performance relative to others , along with information about potential challenges they may face when making risky decisions . However , be - fore completing any online test items , the adaptive test seamlessly redirects participants to a secure online server . All Berlin Numeracy Test data collection is managed and hosted via the Unipark survey software system designed for academic research ( www . unipark . de ) . We request that researchers use the computer adaptive test format when - ever possible as this format provides an efﬁcient balance between speed and psychometric accuracy , and also al - lows us to continue to collect data that can be used to further reﬁne the test . JudgmentandDecisionMaking , Vol . 7 , No . 1 , January2012 BerlinNumeracyTest 31 Figure 1 : The structure of the Computer Adaptive Berlin Numeracy Test . Each question has a 50 % probably of being right / wrong . If a question is answered right / wrong a harder / easier question is provided that again has a 50 % probability of being right / wrong . Question 1 Question 2a Question 2b Question 3 1 2 3 4 2 . 4 . 2 Traditional ( paper and pencil ) format The alternative , traditional format ( Appendix III ) requires that participants answer all four questions from the Berlin Numeracy Test in sequence . Scoring involves totaling all correct answers ( i . e . , 0 – 4 points possible ) . In this format the structure of the adaptive test is ignored , although the adaptive scoring algorithm can be applied following data collection as might be useful ( e . g . , to estimate quartiles compared to available norms for college educated sam - ples ) . This alternative ( traditional ) format may be use - ful when computerized testing is impractical , such as in group testing or when computer access is limited . Testing requires about as long as the original Lipkus et al . ( 2001 ) numeracy test ( i . e . , less than 5 minutes ) . 2 . 4 . 3 Single - item ( median ) format In cases where time is extremely limited , it is possible to use only the ﬁrst item of the test ( question 1 ) as a means of estimating median splits ( Appendix IV ) . Those who answer the question right are estimated to belong to the top half of educated participants while all others are as - signed the bottom half . Given the relatively small time savings over the adaptive format we recommend this op - tion be avoided in favor of the computer adaptive ver - sion whenever practical . Generally , this test format takes about as long as the Schwartz et al . ( 1997 ) instrument ( i . e . , about 1 minute ) . 2 . 5 Results and discussion : Psychometric properties Results of psychometric analyses are presented in Tables 2 – 4 . Three formats of the Berlin Numeracy Test—i . e . , Computer Adaptive , Traditional Paper and Pencil , and Single Item—are compared with the standard numeracy test by Lipkus et al . ( 2001 ) as well as with the brief three item test by Schwartz et al . ( 1997 ) . 2 . 5 . 1 Basic attributes In our educated sample , scores on the Lipkus et al . ( 2001 ) numeracy scale show dramatic negative skew ( Table 2 ) . Although possible scores range from 0 to 11 , the lowest observed score was 5 ( 45 % correct ) . Both the mean and median are close to the measurement ceiling ( i . e . , 88 % and 91 % correct , respectively ) . Similar levels of skew are observed for the Schwartz et al . ( 1997 ) test . In con - trast , scores on the Berlin Numeracy Test are distributed evenly across the whole range of possible scores regard - less of format . Estimates of internal consistency for the Berlin Numeracy Test show some modest improvement over other existing numeracy tests . However , as is com - mon for very short tests , the Cronbach’s alpha level of all numeracy tests was below the typical . 7 aspiration level . 6 A principal axis factor analysis of the four items from the Berlin Numeracy Test indicated that all items loaded highly on a single factor explaining 45 % of the observed variance . An additional study at Michigan Technological University found that , when the test was taken two dif - ferent times , ﬁve days apart , it showed high levels of test - retest reliability , r ( 11 ) = . 91 , p = . 001 . All Berlin Numeracy Test formats also typically take less time to complete than the Lipkus et al . ( 2001 ) numeracy test . 2 . 5 . 2 Convergent and discriminant validity If the Berlin Numeracy Test is successful in assessing lev - els of statistical numeracy , it should correlate with other numeracy tests and with measures of cognitive ability ( i . e . , convergent validity ) . Moreover , to the extent the Berlin Numeracy Test primarily measures statistical nu - meracy it should not correlate with essentially unrelated constructs , such as motivation , personality , beliefs , or at - titudes ( i . e . , discriminant validity ) . As Table 3 shows , both requirements—high correlations with related con - structs and low with unrelated constructs—are satisﬁed for all three forms of Berlin Numeracy Test . 7 6 For comparison , the 3 item Cognitive Reﬂection Test ( Frederick , 2005 ) had a Cronbach’s alpha = . 62 and a mean duration 2 . 5 minutes . 7 For comparison , the correlation of the Cognitive Reﬂection Test ( Frederick , 2005 ) with Raven’s Adv . Matrices was . 40 , with Vocabulary . 28 , and with Working Memory Span . 26 . Correlation with Extraversion was – . 14 , with Openness to experience – . 23 , and with Text Anxiety – JudgmentandDecisionMaking , Vol . 7 , No . 1 , January2012 BerlinNumeracyTest 32 Table 3 : Psychometric properties of tests : Convergent and discriminant validity . ( BNT is Belin Numeracy Test . ) Schwartz et al . ( 1997 ) , 3 items Lipkus et al . ( 2001 ) , 11 items Berlin Numeracy Test ComputerAdaptiveTestformat , 2 – 3 items Paper and Pencil format , 4 items Single Item format Convergent validity Numeracy tests Lipkus et al . 11 items . 75 * * BNT : Computer Adaptive . 45 * * . 49 * * BNT : Paper and Pencil . 50 * * . 50 * * . 91 * * BNT : Single Item . 39 * * . 42 * * . 90 * * . 75 * * Cognitive abilities / styles Raven’s Adv . Matrices . 41 * * . 37 * * . 48 * * . 53 * * . 41 * * Cognitive Reﬂection Test . 40 * * . 41 * * . 51 * * . 56 * * . 41 * * Vocabulary Spot - a - word . 25 * * . 21 * * . 24 * * . 25 * * . 22 * * Working memory span . 14 * . 11 . 21 * * . 20 * * . 16 * * Discriminant validity Motivation measures Maximizing - Satisﬁcing . 01 . 04 . 05 . 04 . 05 Persistence ( Grit - S ) . 02 . . 03 – . 05 – . 07 – . 03 Achievement motivation – . 08 – . 10 – . 02 . 00 – . 01 Self - efﬁcacy . 00 – . 01 – . 01 . 02 . 03 Personality Traits Emotional stability – . 10 – . 05 . 01 . 05 – . 02 Conscientiousness – . 09 – . 04 – . 09 – . 08 – . 06 Agreeableness – . 03 – . 07 – . 14 * – . 08 – . 17 * * Extraversion – . 07 – . 06 – . 05 – . 05 – . 06 Openness to experience – . 14 * – . 16 * * – . 18 * * – . 14 * – . 16 * * Other measures Test anxiety – . 15 * – . 16 * – . 12 – . 16 * – . 09 Implicit theories – . 15 * – . 13 * * – . 07 – . 10 * – . 04 Satisfaction with life . 14 * . 08 . 12 . 16 . 07 * p = . 05 ; * * p < . 01 . 2 . 5 . 3 Predictive validity One of the intended purposes of the Berlin Numeracy Test is predicting people’s understanding of information about risk in consumer , medical , and everyday contexts— i . e . , predicting risk literacy . To investigate the predictive . 13 . Correlations with other variables were not signiﬁcant . validity of the Berlin Numeracy Test , we administered a short battery of items dealing with information about everyday risks related to common consumer , health , and medical choices ( e . g . , evaluating the efﬁcacy of tooth - pastes and cancer screenings ) , as well as information about probabilities typically used in weather forecasts ( Garcia - Retamero & Galesic , in press ; see Appendix for JudgmentandDecisionMaking , Vol . 7 , No . 1 , January2012 BerlinNumeracyTest 33 Table 4 : Psychometric properties of the tests : Predictive validity . Schwartz et al . ( 1997 ) , 3 items Lipkus et al . ( 2001 ) , 11 items Berlin Numeracy Test ComputerAdaptiveTest format , 2 – 3 items Paper and Pencil format , 4 items Single Item format Mean proportion correct answers on understanding of everyday risks , by test quartiles 1 st quartile . 72 . 68 . 68 . 66 . 70 2 nd quartile . 74 . 66 . 70 . 70 3 rd quartile . 78 . 78 . 74 . 78 . 78 4 th quartile . 78 . 78 . 84 . 84 Predictive validity for correct answers on understanding of everyday risks ( standardized beta coefﬁcients ) As a single predictor . 20 * * . 20 * * . 29 * * . 34 * * . 25 * * With Raven . 14 * . 15 * . 24 * * . 31 * * . 19 * * With CRT . 09 . 08 . 17 * * . 23 * * . 14 * * p < . 05 ; * * p < . 01 examples ) . Table 4 shows correlations of different nu - meracy tests with the overall accuracy of interpretations of these items . All formats of the Berlin Numeracy Test were superior to the previous numeracy tests . Both the Computer Adaptive test and the Paper and Pencil format doubled the predictive resolution of the previous tests . When either of these formats was included in the model the previous numeracy tests lost all of their unique pre - dictive power . We next investigated the extent to which the Berlin Numeracy Test explained additional variance in risk understanding controlling for the strongest alter - native predictors of performance—i . e . , ﬂuid intelligence and cognitive reﬂection . As Table 4 shows , all formats of the Berlin Numeracy Test explain a substantial portion of additional variance after these others tests are included in a hierarchical regression model . 8 In contrast , both previ - ous numeracy tests lose most ( or all ) of their predictive power when intelligence or cognitive reﬂection tests are included . Overall , results indicate that the Berlin Numer - acy Test is a reliable and valid test of statistical numeracy and risk literacy , offering higher levels of discriminabil - ity and overcoming the major psychometric limitations of the Lipkus et al . ( 2001 ) test and Schwartz et al . ( 1997 ) tests . 8 For comparison , risk comprehension was predicted by the Cogni - tive Reﬂection Test with a standardized beta of . 31 and by the Raven’s test with a standardized beta of . 20 . When controlling for the Berlin Numeracy Test , the cognitive reﬂection test continued to predict unique variance . 20 , but Raven’s test did not . 05 . See the general discussion for a theoretical account of these differences . 3 Additional validation studies 3 . 1 Cross - cultural discriminability The initial validation of the Berlin Numeracy Test was completed on a sample of highly - educated people living in a major metropolitan city in Germany . As a means of out - of - sample validation , we sought to assess the extent to which test discriminability generalized to other highly - educated samples from different cultures , presented in different languages . Speciﬁcally , we examined test per - formance in studies conducted in 15 different countries with diverse cultural backgrounds . Studies were con - ducted by different research groups , examining college student samples at research - active universities , primar - ily testing participants from introduction to psychology participant pools . Studies were conducted in China ( Ts - inghua University ) , England ( University College Lon - don ) , France ( Universite de Lausanne ) , Germany ( Max Planck Institute for Human Development ) , India ( Tha - par University ) , Japan ( University of Tokyo ) , the Nether - lands ( Katholieke Universiteit Leuven ) , Norway ( Univer - sity of Oslo ) , 9 Pakistan ( University of Punjab ) , Poland ( Wroclaw University ) , Portugal ( University of Porto ) , 10 9 Data collection in Norway used the traditional 4 item rather than adaptive form of the Berlin Numeracy Test . Data reported in the table are calculated using the adaptive scoring algorithm , which was highly correlated with overall score , r ( 154 ) = . 90 . In the standard format the average score was 62 % correct showing modest skew ( – . 29 ) . 10 Data collection in Portugal used a modiﬁed Berlin Numeracy Test . Data were only available for the single item test and are not presented in the table . Overall 46 . 4 % of participants ( n = 306 ) from Portugal JudgmentandDecisionMaking , Vol . 7 , No . 1 , January2012 BerlinNumeracyTest 34 Table 5 : Proportion of participants in each quartile from 14 countries . Quartile scores are estimated based on the computer adaptive test algorithm . Countries are ordered by their percentage of top quartile scores . See footnote 8 for data from Portugal . Country Language N 1st quartile 2nd quartile 3rd quartile Top quartile China English 166 . 04 . 07 . 14 . 75 Poland Polish 205 . 14 . 20 . 22 . 44 England English 420 . 20 . 31 . 14 . 35 Japan Japanese 63 . 06 . 36 . 24 . 34 Sweden Swedish 47 . 21 . 28 . 17 . 34 France French 86 . 30 . 13 . 23 . 34 USA English 55 . 20 . 29 . 20 . 31 Switzerland German 503 . 26 . 23 . 23 . 28 Germany German 173 . 29 . 21 . 22 . 28 Norway Norwegian 156 . 25 . 24 . 25 . 26 Belgium Dutch 50 . 30 . 30 . 16 . 24 India English 83 . 19 . 52 . 08 . 21 Pakistan English 114 . 29 . 41 . 19 . 11 Spain Spanish 258 . 48 . 41 . 07 . 04 Total 2 , 379 . 23 . 28 . 18 . 31 Spain ( University of Granada ) , Sweden ( Uppsala Univer - sity ) , Switzerland ( University of Basel ) , and the United States ( Michigan Technological University ) . 11 In total , additional data from n = 2685 college students was exam - ined . All reported data are scored via the adaptive Berlin Numeracy Test algorithm , where 2 – 3 questions ( out of 4 ) are used to estimate statistical numeracy quartiles for each participant . 12 Overall results show the test generally discriminated within desirable tolerances ( i . e . , pm 10 % ) for each quar - tile ( Table 5 ) . Aggregating across samples , the mean test score was 51 . 7 % correct , which closely approximated the ideal score of 50 % . This score indicates that on average the ﬁrst test item of the Berlin Numeracy Test achieved the intended 50 % discriminability . We also observed some modest underestimation of the third quartile and commensurate overestimation in the top quartile . In part , higher top quartile scores may reﬂect the fact that sev - eral of our samples were collected from elite universi - ties and selective technical / engineering universities ( e . g . , University College London ; Tsinghua University ) . Vi - answered the ﬁrst question right ( theoretical ideal test score = 50 % ) . 11 We thank Nicolai Bodemer , Siegfried Dewitte , Stefan Herzog , Mar - cus Lindskog , Hitashi Lomash , Yasmina Okan , Jing Qian , Samantha Si - mon , Helena Szrek , Masanori Takezawa , Karl Teigen , Jan Woike , and Tomek Wysocki for assistance with cross cultural data collection . 12 Translation involved iterative cycles of back - translation with revi - sion . sual inspection shows some speciﬁc positive and nega - tive skewing of scores across various countries . 13 For example , Spain , Pakistan , and India all show moderate positive skew . In contrast , the highest performing sam - ple , which was collected in China , showed very strong negative skew . Taken together , aggregated scores closely approximated the intended quartiles . The observed distri - butions indicate that with only 2 – 3 statistical numeracy questions the Berlin Numeracy Test achieves good dis - criminability across most countries even when presented in different languages or when used at elite or technolog - ical universities . 3 . 2 Physician assistants One goal for the Berlin Numeracy Test is to offer an in - strument that can quickly assess statistical numeracy and risk literacy in highly - trained professionals . Of particu - lar interest are those professionals who commonly make risky decisions and communicate risks . One such group in the United States is physician assistants . Physician as - sistants are independently licensed medical profession - als who work under the supervision of physicians in all medical subspecialties ( e . g . , emergency medicine , family practice , surgery ) . Physician assistants independently di - 13 The Berlin Numeracy Test estimates quartiles , so caution is re - quired when interpreting standard assessments of skew . JudgmentandDecisionMaking , Vol . 7 , No . 1 , January2012 BerlinNumeracyTest 35 Table 6 : Percentage of people in each quartile from three different samples estimated by the computer adaptive Berlin Numeracy Test algorithm . Sample N 1st quartile 2nd quartile 3rd quartile 4th quartile Graduating US Physician Assistants 51 . 16 . 39 . 29 . 16 Population Sample in Sweden 213 . 20 . 36 . 24 . 20 USA Web Panel Sample ( M - Turk ) 1 , 612 . 49 . 27 . 12 . 13 Total 1 , 876 . 28 . 34 . 22 . 16 agnose and treat patients , and provide care similar to that provided by a physician , with professional training typi - cally involving two or three years of post graduate study and clinical rotations . Previous studies of physicians - in - training in the UK ( Hanoch et al . , 2010 ) revealed dramatic skew in re - sponses to the Lipkus et al . ( 2001 ) test . Speciﬁcally , in one sample of physicians - in - training , Hanoch and col - leagues found that the average Lipkus et al . test score was 95 % correct , with 64 % of participants answering all questions correctly . Here , we assessed performance of the Berlin Numeracy Test by administering a paper and pencil format to a group of physician assistant students ( n = 51 ) who were completing their ﬁnal semester of train - ing at the University of Oklahoma . 14 Results revealed slight positive skew ( . 16 ) suggesting the test was well cal - ibrated , if somewhat difﬁcult . A similar distribution was observed when the adaptive scoring algorithm was ap - plied ( Table 6 ) . The mean adaptive test score was 44 . 3 % correct , which reasonably approximated the ideal score of 50 % . Note that , in contrast to other highly - educated sam - ples , these data show some central clustering of scores . To the extent this pattern generalizes it suggests physi - cian assistants are less likely to have very low levels of statistical numeracy , as would be expected . Overall , re - sults indicate that the Berlin Numeracy Test is well suited for use with these and other highly - educated profession - als who are often charged with interpreting and commu - nicating risks . Ongoing research is assessing test perfor - mance among other diverse professional groups ( e . g . , di - eticians , ﬁnancial advisors , judges , lawyers , physicians , professional athletes , and poker players ) . 3 . 3 Numeracy in the general population : Data from Sweden The Berlin Numeracy Test was designed to estimate differences in risk literacy among educated individuals . Considering the observed skew in scores from the Lip - kus et al . , ( 2001 ) test , the Berlin Numeracy Test may also be suitable for use among general , non - highly educated 14 We thank Robert Hamm for data collection . populations . As part of a larger validation and transla - tion study , data were collected from a quota sample of adults living in the Uppsala area of Sweden ( ages 20 – 60 ) who were matched against the known population on age and gender ( Lindskog , Kerimi , Winman , & Juslin , 2011 ) . 15 Approximately 370 of 2000 potential partici - pants responded to a request for participation , of which 213 were selected for testing in the current study . Of the 213 participants included in this sample approximately 30 % had only high - school education with 20 % complet - ing a masters degree or higher . The test was presented in Swedish and was administered using the adaptive format . Results show the average test score was 48 . 8 % correct , which closely approximated the theoretically ideal score of 50 % . Distributions of estimated quartiles were some - what concentrated around the middle quartiles , particu - larly quartile two ( Table 6 ) . In addition to the Berlin Numeracy Data , data were also collected for the Lipkus et al . , ( 2001 ) test . As ex - pected , results showed marked skew in scores with an average score of 83 . 5 % correct and clear negative skew ( - 1 . 94 ) . We next compared these Lipkus et al . test scores with other data from previous studies that had been col - lected using probabilistic , representative sampling in the USA and Germany ( Galesic & Garcia - Retamero , 2010 ) . Results indicate that this sample of Swedish residents’ scores showed considerably more negative skew reﬂect - ing signiﬁcantly higher levels of statistical numeracy compared to the populations in Germany , t ( 1209 ) = 9 . 29 , p = . 001 ( skewness = – . 55 ) , or the USA , t ( 1375 ) = 13 . 51 , p = . 001 , ( skewness = – . 33 ) . Overall , results indicate that the Berlin Numeracy Test is well suited for estimating numeracy among some seg - ments of the general population of Sweden or other sim - ilar community samples . However , because the current sample from Sweden is more numerate than that of ei - ther the USA or Germany , we can expect some positive skew in representative samples of the general population from the US , Germany , or other similar countries . Ac - cordingly , when assessing statistical numeracy in repre - 15 This research was ﬁnanced by the Swedish Research Council . We thank Marcus Lindskog and colleagues for sharing these data . JudgmentandDecisionMaking , Vol . 7 , No . 1 , January2012 BerlinNumeracyTest 36 sentative samples of the general population we suggest including at least one other test in addition to the Berlin Numeracy Test ( e . g . , Weller et al . , 2011 ) . One promising strategy that adds only about 1 minute in testing time is to combine the three item Schwartz et al . ( 1997 ) test with the Berlin Numeracy Test ( for an example see the next section on web panel data ) . Ongoing studies are examin - ing this strategy in representative samples of residents of the USA . 3 . 4 United States web panel data from Me - chanical Turk Behavioral scientists are increasingly using paid web panels for data collection and hypothesis testing . One popular option for data collection is Amazon . com’s Me - chanical Turk Web Panel ( for a review see Paolacci , Chandler , & Ipeirotis , 2010 ) . The ﬁrst published study to assess numeracy among participants from Mechani - cal Turk was published in 2010 ( Paolacci et al . , 2010 ) . In this study , Paolacci and colleagues assessed numer - acy using the subjective numeracy scale ( Fagerlin et al . , 2007 ) , which is known to correlate with the objective Lipkus et al . ( 2001 ) test ( Paolacci et al . , 2010 ) . Results revealed an average subjective numeracy score of 4 . 35 ( 67 % of maximum ) , which is similar to previously re - ported scores ( e . g . , participants recruited from a univer - sity hospital showed a modest skew ( – . 3 ) ; see Fagerlin et al . , 2007 ) . Similarly , we recently investigated numer - acy using the Schwartz et al . , ( 1997 ) test on a conve - nience sample from Mechanical Turk ( n = 250 ) ( Okan , Garcia - Retamero , Galesic , & Cokely , in press ) . Consis - tent with results from the subjective numeracy test , re - sults revealed moderate negative skew ( - 1 . 2 ) , indicating an average score of 2 . 11 ( i . e . , 70 % correct ) . A total of 42 % of the sample also answered 100 % of the questions correct . To evaluate the performance of web panelists on the Berlin Numeracy Test we administered an adaptive test to a large Mechanical Turk web panel sample ( n = 1612 ) . All reported data were scored via the adaptive algorithm , where 2 – 3 questions ( out of 4 ) were used to estimate sta - tistical numeracy quartiles for each participant . As an - ticipated , we observed positive skew ( . 90 ) in the sample scores indicating that the test was moderately difﬁcult . 16 In the previous web panel studies we observed posi - tive and negative skew for the Berlin Numeracy Test and the Schwartz et al . ( 1997 ) test , respectively . It stands to reason that combining the two tests would yield a better distribution , providing increased discriminability . Therefore , we conducted a new study including both the 16 To the extent our data generalize , results suggest that our single question 2a may allow for a rough approximation of a median split among Mechanical Turk participants . Schwartz et al . test and the Berlin Numeracy Test with participants on Mechanical Turk ( n = 206 ) . When scored separately , we replicated the negative ( – . 62 ) and positive ( . 48 ) skewing of scores on the two tests . However , sim - ply adding the two scores together yielded a normal dis - tribution with no evidence of skew ( – . 016 ) . In summary , results suggest that combining the Berlin Numeracy Test with the Schwartz et al . test provides a very fast assess - ment ( < 4 minutes ) with good discriminability . This com - bined assessment is well suited for use with Mechanical Turk and should also be appropriate for estimating the wider range of differences in statistical numeracy that ex - ist in samples of the general population . 3 . 5 A multiple choice format In some cases researchers may require more ﬂexibility than the current Berlin Numeracy Test formats provide . For example , many psychometric tests are given in a mul - tiple choice format . Unfortunately , providing potential answers to participants increases the beneﬁts of guessing . With four options , guessing would be expected to yield a score of approximately 25 % correct . In contrast , in all other “ﬁll in the blank” formats of the Berlin Numeracy Test , the contribution of a guessing parameter is essen - tially zero . To address this issue , multiple choice test format development began with an analysis of patterns of incorrect responses to previous tests from participants in the aforementioned Mechanical Turk study ( n = 1612 ) . For each question , we listed the most frequently given in - correct options ( each recorded in 8 – 20 % of incorrect an - swers ) . Then , for each Berlin Numeracy Test question we included the correct answer , the two most frequent incor - rect answers , and a “none of the above” option ( Appendix V ) . Next , we collected data from participants at the Michi - gan Technological University ( n = 269 ) . Participants in - cluded convenience samples primarily from departments of Psychology , Mechanical Engineering , and Computer Science . The majority of participants were undergradu - ate students , with a small proportion of the sample com - posed of either graduate students or faculty . Participants were either sent a link asking them to complete a sur - vey via internal listservs or tests were administered in classes . Participants were presented with one of two ver - sions of the multiple choice format differing only in the wording of one problem ( Appendix V ) . 17 This manipu - lation was conducted because we received feedback that some professional groups may be more willing to partici - 17 The exact wording of the alternative question is as follows : “Out of 1 , 000 people in a small town , 500 have a minor genetic mutation . Out of these 500 who have the genetic mutation , 100 are men . Out of the 500 inhabitants who do not have the genetic mutation , 300 are men . What is the probability that a randomly drawn man has the genetic mutation ? ” JudgmentandDecisionMaking , Vol . 7 , No . 1 , January2012 BerlinNumeracyTest 37 pate if questions seemed related to their areas of expertise ( e . g . , some medical doctors will see more face validity in questions about genetic mutations as compared to choir membership ) . Accurate responses to the new ( M = . 56 ) v . old ( M = . 60 ) items did not signiﬁcantly differ χ 2 ( 1 ) = . 259 . Distributions of scores also did not signiﬁcantly differ between tests , t ( 267 ) = 1 . 383 , p = . 17 , and so data sets were combined for subsequent analyses . Overall , the mean multiple choice test score was 55 % correct , which reasonably approximated the ideal score of 50 % . Anal - ysis of distributions of responses indicated the multiple choice format showed no skew ( – . 006 ) . Results indicate that the multiple choice format provided good discrim - inability and remained well balanced even when used with highly numerate individuals ( e . g . , computer science students ) . 4 General discussion Over the last decade , the Schwartz et al . ( 1997 ) and Lip - kus et al . ( 2001 ) numeracy tests have proven useful and sometimes essential for various aspects of theory devel - opment , as well as for applications in risk communica - tion . However , as anticipated by Lipkus and colleagues , in the 10 years since publication of their test , research has identiﬁed a number of limitations and opportunities for improvement in measures of statistical numeracy . Build - ing on the work of Lipkus et al . ( 2001 ) , Schwartz et al . ( 1997 ) , and many others ( e . g . , Peters et al . , 2006 , 2007b ; Reyna et al . , 2009 ) , we have developed a ﬂexible , multi - format test of statistical numeracy and risk literacy for use with diverse samples ( e . g . , highly - educated college grad - uates from around the world ) . Next we turn to discussion of construct validity , underlying cognitive mechanisms , and emerging applications in adaptive decision support . 4 . 1 Construct validity , limits , and future di - rections The Berlin Numeracy Test speciﬁcally measures the range of statistical numeracy skill that is important for accurately interpreting and acting on information about risk—i . e . , risk literacy . Our studies showed that a very short , adaptive numeracy test could provide sound assess - ment with dramatically improved discriminability across diverse samples , cultures , education levels , and lan - guages . Content validity is clear in the types of ques - tions included in the test—i . e . , math questions involv - ing ratio concepts and probabilities . Convergent validity was documented by showing high intercorrelations with other numeracy tests , as well as with other assessments of general cognitive abilities , cognitive styles , and educa - tion . Discriminant validity was documented by showing the test was unrelated to common personality and motiva - tion measures ( e . g . , uncorrelated with emotional stability or extraversion ) . Criterion validity was documented by showing that the Berlin Numeracy Test provided unique predictive validity for evaluating both numeric and non - numeric information about risks . This unique predictive validity held when statistically controlling for other nu - meracy tests and for other general ability and cognitive - style instruments . Taken together , results converge and contribute to our evolving understanding of the construct validity of both numeracy and risk literacy . 18 Going forward , more research is needed to document the causal connections between numeracy , risk literacy and risky decision making . Theoretically , improving some types of mathematics skills will improve risk lit - eracy and risky decision making . However , the evidence of such beneﬁts along with quantiﬁcation of the magni - tudes of these beneﬁts is surprisingly limited ( e . g . , how much study time is required to help less numerate indi - viduals overcome denominator neglect ? Does the same level of training continue to inoculate participants under conditions of high emotional stress as might be expected in medical decisions ? ) . As well , despite the utility of cur - rent theoretical frameworks , our understanding of under - lying cognitive mechanisms is still somewhat underspeci - ﬁced ( for discussion see next section ) . Future studies are likely to beneﬁt by more closely aligning with current research in mathematics and general literacy education , as well as research on mathematics development , mathe - matics expertise , and training for transfer ( Seigler , 1988 ) . Additionally , there is a need for statistical numeracy tests that provide larger item pools and parallel forms that can be administered to the same participants multiple times without inﬂating test scores ( e . g . , limiting item familiar - ity effects ) . This option for repeated measurement is nec - essary for the assessment of developmental changes as - sociated with skill acquisition . Related test development efforts are currently underway for the Berlin Numeracy Test . It is important to again note that the Berlin Numer - acy Test is designed speciﬁcally for educated and highly - educated samples ( e . g . , college students ; business , medi - cal , and legal professionals ) . Discriminability will be re - duced when assessing individuals who have lower levels of educational attainment ( e . g . , the Berlin Numeracy Test may show some positive skew in samples of high school students or among older adults ) . When this is a concern , researchers can include an additional instrument such as the fast three item test by Schwartz et al . ( 1997 ) . The re - 18 According to Cronbach and Meehl’s ( 1955 ) review of construct va - lidity “a construct is some postulated attribute of people , assumed to be reﬂected in test performance . ” Similarly , contemporary views hold that construct validity “ . . . is not a property of the test or assessment as such , but rather of the meaning of the test scores” which is established by integrating and evaluating multiple lines of evidence ( Messick , 1995 ) . JudgmentandDecisionMaking , Vol . 7 , No . 1 , January2012 BerlinNumeracyTest 38 sults of our Mechanical Turk web panel study show that this strategy can produce excellent discriminability with virtually no skew , estimating variation among relatively low and very high ranges of statistical numeracy . Because the Berlin Numeracy Test provides a broad es - timate of variation in statistical numeracy and risk liter - acy it is not able to provide a detailed assessment of spe - ciﬁc differences in numeracy , such as identifying deﬁcits in reasoning about probability as compared to perform - ing multiplication . This level of analysis is necessary be - cause , although risk literacy is a major concern , numer - acy is important for thinking and general decision making well beyond its inﬂuence on risk comprehension ( Peters , in press ) . Of note , other factor analytic research by Lib - erali and colleagues ( 2011 ) indicates that , at least with re - spect to some risky decisions and some judgments , com - ponent numeracy skills ( e . g . , multiplication vs . probabil - ity ) can be differentially beneﬁcial . 19 We also currently do not have any theoretical account systematically link - ing component numeracy skills and competencies with the many various types of risky decisions people com - monly face ( e . g . , retirement planning v . medical screen - ing decisions , etc . ) . There is a need for larger scale cogni - tive process tracing and factor analytic assessments to be conducted across a wider range of numeracy , risk literacy , and risky decision making . Initial studies may beneﬁt by examining relations between established numeracy tests , component math skills , and other established instruments such as the advanced decision making competency tests ( Bruine de Bruin , Parker , Fischhoff , 2007 ; Parker & Fis - chhoff , 2005 ) . Future research will also need to use methods that pro - vide details about the ecological frequencies of problem - atic risky decisions , including those related to risk lit - eracy , using techniques such as representative sampling ( Dhami , Hertwig , & Hoffrage , 2004 ) . This type of epi - demiological data could then be used to start to quan - tify the relative economic , personal , and social impact of speciﬁc weaknesses in numeracy and risk literacy ( e . g . , when and how often does denominator neglect affect high - stakes vs . lower stakes risky decisions among less numerate individuals ; for a related discussion see Garcia - Retamero , Okan , & Cokely , in press ) . This ecologi - cal approach would provide essential input for relative prioritization of different interventions ( i . e . , which kind of problems do the most harm and which interventions would provide the greatest beneﬁt ; for a recent review see Reyna et al . , 2009 ) . Of course , given the wide in - ﬂuence of numeracy , analyses will need to be conducted across and within various domains ( medicine vs . ﬁnance ) and sub - domains ( e . g . , retirement planning versus credit decisions ) . Because there are many cognitive skills in - 19 The factor structures varied across two studies , which complicates interpretation although the results are suggestive . volved in statistical numeracy and risk literacy a test of all component skills may turn out to be prohibitively long , necessitating the use of more complex adaptive testing ( Thompson & Weiss , 2011 ) . Generally , more compre - hensive assessments will also need to address the wide range of cognitive mechanisms that link numeracy , risk literacy , and decision making . 4 . 2 Underlying cognitive mechanisms At its core , numeracy refers to one’s ability to repre - sent , store , and accurately process mathematical opera - tions ( Peters , in press ) . As with all complex skills , indi - vidual differences in numeracy will reﬂect the interaction of many cognitive and affective mechanisms that vary by situation . The recent review by Reyna and colleagues ( 2009 ) provides an overview of some of the causal frame - works that are used to understand the relationship be - tween numerical processing and risky decision making . For example , in the psychophysical tradition , theory em - phasizes individual differences in the representation of internal mental magnitudes ( e . g . , linear v . logarithmic ) . In part , differences in risky decisions result from inde - pendent contributions of both evolved and acquired nu - merical estimation systems . That is , in part individual differences in numeracy reﬂect differences in one’s intu - itive number sense and the affective meaning issued by this sense ( Peters , in press ; Peters et al . , 2008 ; Slovic & Peters , 2006 ) . A second framework used to understand the relation between numeracy and risky decision making draws on fuzzy trace theory ( Reyna , 2004 ; Reyna & Lloyd , 2006 ; Reyna et al . , 2009 ) . Following traditions in psycholin - guistics , fuzzy trace theory explains differences in numer - ical processing in terms of cognitive representations and memory . Cognition is said to involve simultaneous en - coding of verbatim information ( “literal facts” ) and gist information ( “fuzzy meaning or interpretations” ) into two separable forms of memory . For example , when evaluat - ing two options with different prices , participants can be shown to encode both verbatim information ( e . g . , “op - tion one costs $ 25 dollars and option two costs $ 0” ) as well as gist information ( e . g . , “the cost is something ver - sus nothing” ) . Moreover , theoretically , people have a fuzzy - processing preference such that responses tend to be based on one’s gist representation . That is , people tend to base choices on the fuzziest or the least precise repre - sentation of numeric information . There is a well devel - oped literature linking fuzzy trace theory to judgment and decision making , including a mathematical model that explains some types of memory illusions and judgment processes . However , there is currently no validated in - strument that can be used to assess or predict individual differences in one’s likelihood of relying on gist versus JudgmentandDecisionMaking , Vol . 7 , No . 1 , January2012 BerlinNumeracyTest 39 verbatim numeric representations . 20 A third framework used to understand numeracy in - volves computational approaches in the information pro - cessing tradition of Newell and Simon ( 1972 ) , and many others ( Anderson , 1982 ; 1996 ; Gigerenzer , Todd , & the ABC Research Group , 1999 ; Siegler , 1988 ) . A cen - tral goal of this tradition is the development of precise , integrative computational models that allow for high - ﬁdelity cognitive simulations ( e . g . , ACT - R computational models ; Anderson 1996 , Marewski & Mehlhorn , 2011 ; Schooler & Hertwig , 2005 ; see also Katsikopoulos & Lan , 2011 ) . Accordingly , this tradition relies heavily on cognitive process tracing studies , including studies of reaction times , eye - tracking , information search , and think - aloud protocols ( Ericsson & Simon , 1980 ; Schulte - Mecklenbeck , Kuhberger , & Ranyard , 2011 ) . These methods provide data on how cognition unfolds over time , often producing relatively direct evidence about strategies ( e . g . , heuristics ) and essential mechanisms ( e . g . , the inﬂuence of an incorrect understanding of math operations ) . Cognitive process tracing methods are also thought to be essential components of test construction and construct validation ( Cronbach & Meehl , 1995 ; Mes - sick , 1995 ) . Among other virtues these methods avoid the perils of making inferences about speciﬁc cognitive processes based on averaged responses . That is , because participants sometimes use different strategies on differ - ent trials—and because different people often use differ - ent strategies—one cannot reliably identify or infer “the” underlying cognitive strategy because multiple strategies are at play ( Siegler , 1987 ; see also Cokely & Kelley , 2009 ) . Although there is a considerable body of experimen - tal research emphasizing differences in information pro - cessing , such as differences in analytical versus intuitive processing , 21 there are only a few cognitive process trac - ing studies on statistical numeracy and its relationship to risky decision making ( Barton , Cokely , Galesic , Koehler , & Haas , 2009 ) . In one study of decisions in simple risky lotteries , a retrospective think - aloud protocol analy - sis was used in combination with assessments of decision reaction times and decision performance ( Cokely & Kel - ley , 2009 ) . 22 Results indicated that numeracy and other 20 An instrument is currently in the initial stages of development in Valerie Reyna’s Lab ( personal communication with Valerie Reyna ) . 21 Although generic dual process theory is popular among decision scientists we do not discuss this framework here as there is concern about its construct validity . Arguments hold that , although it is a useful organizational framework , the framework suffers from theoretical and conceptual under - speciﬁcation and inconsistency , and as a result lacks predictive validity ( Cokely , 2009 ; Keren & Schul , 2010 ; Kruglanski & Gigerenzer , 2011 ; Gigerenzer & Regier , 1996 ; Osman , 2004 ; Newell , 1973 ; Reyna et al . , 2009 ) . For a brief review of recent debiasing studies see Milkman , Chugh , and Bazerman , ( 2009 ) . 22 In concurrent verbal protocol analysis participants are asked to ver - balize their thoughts while performing a task . A meta - analysis indicated abilities ( e . g . , working memory ) predicted more norma - tive risky decisions . However , in contrast to theory as - suming that more normative decisions resulted from more normative cognitive processes ( i . e . , calculating expected value ) , numeracy was shown to predict more elaborative encoding and heuristic search ( e . g . , transforming proba - bilities , comparing relative magnitudes , and considering the time required to earn equivalent sums of money ) . In turn , the differences in elaborative encoding and search ( e . g . , reaction time ) were found to fully mediate the re - lationship between numeracy and superior risky deci - sion making . Similarly , individuals who score higher on general cognitive ability measures are known to spend more time preparing for tasks and more deliberatively encode task relevant information ( Baron , 1978 ; 1990 ; Ericsson & Kintsch , 1995 ; Hertzog & Robinson , 2005 ; Jaeggi et al . , 2011 ; McNamara & Scott , 2001 ; Stern - berg , 1977 ; Turley - Ames & Whitﬁeld , 2003 ; Vigneau , Caissie , & Bors , 2005 ; Jaeggi et al . , 2011 ; see also Duck - worth , Quinn , Lynam , Loeber , & Stouthamer - Loeber , 2011 ) . Research shows that elaborative encoding causes information in working memory to be stored in long - term memory , thereby freeing - up additional resources and functionally increasing information processing ca - pacity ( Cokely , Kelley , & Gilchrist , 2006 ; Unsworth & Spillers , 2010 ) . Other experimental data also shows that varying encoding and search causes changes in numerical processing and decision making performance ( Natter & Berry , 2005 ; Smith & Windschitl , 2011 ) . However , cog - nitive abilities such as numeracy do not simply result in more complex decision algorithms ( Broder , 2003 ; Mata , Schooler , & Rieskamp , 2007 ) . Rather , cognitive abili - ties tend to predict more adaptive allocation of limited cognitive resources , which tends to include more reﬂec - tive , careful , and elaborative encoding even when deci - sions are ultimately based on heuristics ( Cokely & Kelley , 2009 ; see also Broder , 2003 ; Keller et al . , 2010 ; Mata , Schooler , & Rieskamp , 2007 ) . More research is needed to improve theoretical spec - iﬁcation of how and when differences in numeracy will predict differences in encoding and search . One hypothe - sis is that higher levels of general abilities , including nu - meracy , are associated with differences in metacognition , which enables greater sensitivity to feedback ( Mitchum & Kelley , 2010 ; see also Flavell , 1979 ) . In turn , better detection of task feedback can give rise to more adaptive decision making as participants may become more likely to exploit cognitive niches ( Marewski & Schooler , 2011 ) . that when used with the standard instructions , and Level 1 data , concur - rent reports are not reactive , meaning they do not interact with cognitive processes although they may increase total processing time ( Fox et al . 2011 ) . In retrospective protocol analysis participants are asked to ver - balize their thoughts after a task is complete , which can be less reliable than concurrent methods , and so converging methods such as reaction time or eye - tracking are advisable . JudgmentandDecisionMaking , Vol . 7 , No . 1 , January2012 BerlinNumeracyTest 40 These metacognitive processes likely include a host of simple heuristics such as ( i ) double checking , ( ii ) perfor - mance predicting , and ( iii ) searching for disconﬁrming evidence—which may be useful components of reﬂective thinking ( for a detailed theoretical account of reﬂective thinking , see Baron , 1985 ) . The link between abilities and elaborative encoding may in part explain why including the cognitive reﬂec - tion test in our hierarchical model reduced the strength of the relationship between the Berlin Numeracy Test and risk comprehension ( see validation study one ) . The predictive power of the Berlin Numeracy Test may have decreased because the cognitive reﬂection test captured shared - variance owing to differences in encoding and search . Research in our laboratories has demonstrated that the cognitive reﬂection test is sometimes uniquely as - sociated with differences in information search , predict - ing differences in encoding , memory , and judgment in ﬁnancial estimation tasks ( Cokely , Parpart , & Schooler , 2009 ; in preparation ) . Factor analytic research by Lib - erali and colleagues indicates that the cognitive reﬂec - tion test loads on a factor that is distinct from numeracy ( Liberali et al . , 2011 ) . This cognitive reﬂection test fac - tor predicted differences in one’s memory for stimulus items , which in turn was one of the strongest predictors of task performance—consistent with an elaborative en - coding account . Beyond other mechanisms , knowledge of speciﬁc mathematical operations and rules is at the heart of nu - meracy ( Buttersworth , 2006 ) . Research shows that ma - jor differences in skill and expert performance primar - ily reﬂect differences in knowledge and proceduraliza - tion of skill caused by differences in deliberate practice ( Anderson , 1996 ; Ericsson , Charness , Feltovich , & Hoff - man , 2006 ; Ericsson , Krampe , & Tesch - Römer , 1993 ) . As with all forms of learning and expertise , skill tends to be domain - speciﬁc and generalizes or transfers only to the extent that the skill and the new task involve sim - ilar elements ( Thorndike & Woodworth , 1901 ) . For ex - ample , if a participant had an excellent working knowl - edge of multiplication then other tasks that involve mul - tiplication would also beneﬁt ( e . g . , risky decision tasks that require calculation of expected values ) . As noted , recent factor analytic research indicated that both multi - plication and proportion - comprehension skills accouted for unique variance when predicting ratio biases and con - junction / disjunction fallacies ( Liberali et al . , 2011 ) . In summary , individual differences in statistical nu - meracy and risk literacy result from the complex inter - action of many factors including one’s ( 1 ) intuitive num - ber sense ; ( 2 ) gist v . verbatim representations ; ( 3 ) re - ﬂective and elaborative encoding ; and ( 4 ) skilled under - standing of mathematical operations . Moreover , there are likely many other important factors to consider . For ex - ample , the initial validation study for the Berlin Numer - acy Test indicated that test anxiety was another factor that can be negatively related to test performance . We spec - ulate that in some cases anxiety may reduce motivation to engage in elaborative encoding of numerical informa - tion , limiting one’s willingness to practice and develop one’s skills . However , other individuals who do not ex - perience anxiety may instead experience higher levels of affective meaning from numbers which could inspire fur - ther encoding , reﬂection , and learning . In turn , greater levels of elaborative encoding and knowledge may lead to richer and more contextualized ( if still imprecise ) gist based representations and reasoning . Further research is needed to disentangle and map the interplay of these factors in close connection with speciﬁc task characteris - tics . 23 5 Conclusions We make sense of our complex and uncertain world with data about risks that are presented in terms of ratio concepts such as probabilities , proportions , and percent - ages . Whether patients , consumers , and policy - makers correctly understand these risks—i . e . , whether or not they are risk literate—depends in part on their statistical nu - meracy ( see Lipkus et al . , 2010 for a recent example in medicine ) . Rather than develop a long or comprehensive test assessing a wide - range of statistical numeracy skills , our efforts here focused on developing a fast test of statis - tical numeracy that leveraged available computing tech - nology and internet accessibility ( e . g . , online data collec - tion and scoring ; accessible via smart phones and other internet ready devices ) . We believe this type of technol - ogy integration with psychometric reﬁnement is timely given the growing need for assessment of factors that in - teract with risky decision - making in basic and applied do - mains ( Cokely & Kelley , 2009 ; Lipkus & Peters , 2009 ; Galesic & Garcia - Retamero , 2010 ; Garcia - Retamero & Cokely , in press ; Peters et al . , 2006 ; Reyna et al . , 2011 ) . Looking forward , there are many emerging opportu - nities to use this and other validated tests to enhance adaptive decision support systems ( i . e . , custom - tailored risk communication ; Lipkus et al . , 2010 ) . For exam - ple , waiting patients or new employees selecting bene - ﬁts might answer a couple of questions on a tablet com - puter in order to notify professionals about the appropri - ate level of subsequent risk discourse necessary for in - formed decision making . Similarly , following a diagnosis 23 The information processing tradition typically takes a “systems” perspective recognizing the importance of the interaction between task environments and the computational capabilities of the actor ( Simon , 1990 ) . In other words , cognitive performance is the product of the in - teraction of persons , processes , and task environments ( Cokely & Feltz , 2009a ; 2009b ; Cokely & Kelley , 2009 ) . JudgmentandDecisionMaking , Vol . 7 , No . 1 , January2012 BerlinNumeracyTest 41 of certain diseases or the introduction of new technolo - gies , interactive information brochures could be accessed online with custom - tailored information adaptively de - livered according to one’s level of risk literacy . These instruments hold the promise of not only helping facili - tate risk communication but they may also be important for mitigating legal and ethical concerns . An appropri - ate risk literacy test could provide additional evidence that people who are considering loans or elective surg - eries have sufﬁcient numeracy to interpret the risks in the formats that are presented . Of course , there are several promising simple solutions for transparent risk commu - nication like visual aids and natural frequencies that are widely understandable and should be used when practical ( Galesic , Garcia - Retamero , & Gigerenzer , 2009 ; Garcia - Retamero & Cokely , 2011 ; Garcia - Retamero et al . , in press ; Gigerenzer & Hoffrage , 1995 ) . Nevertheless , one size cannot ﬁt all—different situations will sometimes re - quire different thresholds of numeracy and risk literacy for accurate understanding and informed decision mak - ing ( Chapman & Lui , 2009 ; Gaissmaier et al . , 2011 ) . Beyond applications in risk communication and adap - tive decision support , adaptive tests like the Berlin Nu - meracy Test may also ﬁnd use in selecting appropriate interactive tutorials for learning about risk literacy itself . Using adaptive tests can quickly get students to ability - appropriate examples of common errors in risk interpre - tation ( e . g . , confusing relative and absolute risk formats ) . In these cases , tests could help ensure that tutorials are not too hard or too easy , and may limit boredom and frus - tration . Given the importance of statistical numeracy for economic prosperity and informed citizenship even mod - est educational beneﬁts may confer considerable valu - able . Research on all these topics is ongoing in our lab - oratories along with efforts to develop other similar fast , adaptive tests ( e . g . , graph literacy , knowledge of sexual health risks , nutritional knowledge ) . Across all these endeavors , development and applications should adhere to standards for educational and psychological testing ( 1999 ) . As new tools , interactive activities , and improved tests become available they will be added to the content on www . riskliteracy . org ( see also Appelt , Milch , Hand - graaf , & Weber , 2011 ; http : / / www . sjdm . org / dmidi ) . References Appelt , K . C . , Milch , K . F . , Handgraaf , M . J . J . , & Weber , E . U . ( 2011 ) . The Decision Making Individual Differ - ences Inventory and guidelines for the study of indi - vidual differences in judgment and decision making . Judgment and Decision Making , 6 , 252 - 262 . Anderson , J . R . ( 1982 ) . Acquisition of cognitive skill . Psychological Review , 89 , 369 – 403 . Anderson , J . R . ( 1996 ) . The architecture of cognition . Mahwah , NJ : Lawrence Earlbaum Associates . Ayub , B . M . ( 2003 ) . Risk analysis in engineering and economics . Boca Raton , FL : Chapman & Hall / CRC press . Buttersworth , B . ( 2006 ) . Mathematical Expertise . In Er - icsson K . A . , Charness N . , Feltovich P . J . and Hoffman R . R . ( Eds . ) , The cambridge handbook of expertise and expert performance ( pp . 553 - 568 ) . New York , NY , US : Cambridge University Press . Banks , J . , O’Dea , C . , & Oldﬁeld , Z . ( 2010 ) . Cognitive function , numeracy and retirement saving trajectories . The Economic Journal , 120 , 381 – 410 . Baron , J . ( 1978 ) . Intelligence and general strategies . In G . Underwood ( Eds . ) . Strategies of information pro - cessing , ( pp . 403 – 450 ) . Academic Press . Baron , J . ( 1985 ) Rationality and intelligence . New York , NY : Cambridge University Press . Baron , J . ( 1990 ) . Reﬂectiveness and rational thinking : Response to Duemler and Mayer ( 1988 ) . Journal of Educational Psychology , 82 , 391 – 392 . Barton , A . , Cokely , E . T . , Galesic , M . , Koehler , A . , & Haas , M . ( 2009 ) . Comparing risk reductions : On the dynamic interplay of cognitive strategies , numeracy , complexity , and format . In N . A . Taatgen & H . van Rijn ( Eds . ) , Proceedings of the 31st Annual Confer - ence of the Cognitive Science Society ( pp . 2347 – 2352 ) . Black , W . C . W . , Nease , R . F . R . , & Tosteson , A . N . A . ( 1995 ) . Perceptions of breast cancer risk and screening effectiveness in women younger than 50 years of age . Journal of the National Cancer Institute , 87 , 720 – 731 . Blackwell , L . , Trzesniewski , K . , & Dweck , C . S . ( 2007 ) . Implicit theories of intelligence predict achievement across an adolescent transition : A longitudinal study and an intervention . Child Development , 78 , 246 – 263 . Bors , D . A . , & Stokes , T . L . ( 1998 ) . Raven’s advanced progressive matrices : Norms for ﬁrst - year university students and the development of a short form . Educa - tional and Psychological Measurement , 58 , 382 – 398 . Broder , A . ( 2003 ) . Decision making with the “adaptive toolbox” : Inﬂuence of environmental structure , intelli - gence , and working memory load . Journal of Experi - mental Psychology : Learning , Memory , & Cognition , 29 , 611 – 625 . Bruine de Bruin W . B . , Parker A . M . , & Fischhoff B . ( 2007 ) . Individual differences in adult decision - making competence . Journal of Personality and Social Psychology , 92 , 938 – 56 . Chapman , G . B . , & Liu , J . ( 2009 ) . Numeracy , frequency , and Bayesian reasoning . Judgment and Decision Mak - ing , 4 , 34 – 40 . Cokely , E . T . ( 2009 ) . Beyond generic dual processes : How should we evaluate scientiﬁc progress ? PsycCri - tiques , 54 . JudgmentandDecisionMaking , Vol . 7 , No . 1 , January2012 BerlinNumeracyTest 42 Cokely , E . T . , & Feltz , A . ( 2009a ) . Adaptive variation in judgment and philosophical intuition . Consciousness and Cognition , 18 , 355 – 357 . Cokely , E . T . , & Feltz , A . ( 2009b ) . Individual differ - ences , judgment biases , and theory - of - mind : Decon - structing the intentional action side effect asymmetry . Journal of Research in Personality , 43 , 18 – 24 . DOI : 10 . 1016 / j . jrp . 2008 . 10 . 007 Cokely , E . T . , & Kelley , C . M . ( 2009 ) . Cognitive abilities and superior decision making under risk : A protocol analysis and process model evaluation . Judgment and Decision Making , 4 , 20 – 33 . Cokely , E . T . , Kelley , C . M . , & Gilchrist , A . H . ( 2006 ) . Sources of individual differences in working memory : Contributions of strategy to capacity . Psychonomic Bulletin & Review , 13 , 991 – 997 . Cokely , E . T . , Parpart , P . , & Schooler , L . J . ( 2009 ) . On the link between cognitive control and heuristic processes . In N . A . Taatgen & H . van Rijn ( Eds . ) , Proceedings of the 31th Annual Conference of the Cognitive Science Society ( pp . 2926 - 2931 ) . Austin , TX : Cognitive Sci - ence Society . Cokely , E . T . , Parpart , P . , & Schooler , L . J . ( in prepara - tion ) . Cognitive reﬂection and judgment biases . Ironic effects of ﬂuency and memory in ﬁnancial estimates . Covello , V . T . , and J . L . Mumpower . ( 1985 ) . Risk anal - ysis and risk management : A historical perspective . Risk Analysis , 2 , 103 – 20 . Cronbach , L . J . & Meehl , P . E . ( 1995 ) . Construct Valid - ity in Psychological Tests , Psychological Bulletin , 52 , 281 – 302 . Dhami , M . K . , Hertwig , R . , & Hoffrage , U . ( 2004 ) . The role of representative design in an ecological approach to cognition . Psychological Bulletin , 130 , 959 – 988 . Del Missier , F . T . , Mäntylä , T . , & Bruine de Bruin , W . ( 2010 ) Executive functionions in decision making : An individual differences approach . Thinking & Reason - ing , 16 , 69 – 97 . Del Missier , F . T . , Mäntylä , T . & Bruine de Bruin , W . ( 2011 ) . Decision - making competence , executive func - tioning , and general cognitive abilities . Journal of Be - havioral Decision Making . DOI : 10 . 1002 / bdm . 731 Diener , E . , Emmons , R . A . , Larsen , R . , & Grifﬁn , S . ( 1985 ) . The satisfaction with life scale . Journal of Per - sonality Assessment , 49 , 71 – 75 . Duckworth A . L . , & Quinn P . D . ( 2009 ) . Development and validation of the short grit scale ( grit - s ) . Journal of Personality Assessment , 91 , 166 – 174 . Duckworth , A . L . , Quinn , P . D . , Lynam , D . R . , Loeber , R . , & Stouthamer - Loeber , M . ( 2011 ) . Role of test mo - tivation in intelligence testing . Proceedings of the Na - tional Academy of Sciences , 108 , 7716 – 7720 . Ericsson K . A . , Charness N . , Feltovich P . J . & Hoffman R . R . ( Eds . ) ( 2006 ) . The cambridge handbook of ex - pertise and expert performance . New York , NY , US : Cambridge University Press . Ericsson , K . A . , & Kintsch , W . ( 1995 ) . Long - term work - ing memory . Psychological Review , 102 , 211 – 245 . Ericsson , K . A . , Krampe , R . Th . , & Tesch - R ? mer , C . ( 1993 ) . The role of deliberate practice in the acqui - sition of expert performance . Psychological Review , 100 , 363 - 406 . Ericsson , A . , Prietula , M . J . , & Cokely , E . T . ( 2007 ) . The making of an expert . Harvard Business Review , 85 , 114 – 121 . Ericsson , K . A . , & Simon , H . A . ( 1980 ) . Verbal reports as data . Psychological Review , 87 , 215 – 251 . Fagerlin , A . , Zikmund - Fisher , B . J . , Ubel , P . A . , Jankovic , A . , Derry , H . A . , & Smith , D . M . ( 2007 ) . Measuring numeracy without a math test : Develop - ment of the Subjective Numeracy Scale . Medical De - cision Making , 27 , 672 - 680 . Feltz , A . , & Cokely , E . T . ( 2009 ) . Do judg - ments about freedom and responsibility depend on who you are ? Personality differences in intuitions about compatibilism and incompatibilism . Con - sciousness and Cognition , 18 , 342 – 350 . DOI : 10 . 1016 / j . concog . 2008 . 08 . 001 . Feltz , A . , & Cokely , E . T . ( in press ) . The philosophi - cal personality argument . Philosophical Studies . DOI : 10 . 1007 / s11098 - 011 - 9731 - 4 Figner , B . , & Weber , E . U . ( 2011 ) . Who takes risk when and why ? Determinants of risk - taking . Current Direc - tions in Psychological Science , 20 , 211 - 216 . Flavell , J . H . ( 1979 ) . Metacognition and cognitive moni - toring : A new area of cognitive - developmental inquiry . American Psychologist , 34 , 906 – 911 . Fox , C . R . & Tannenbaum , D . ( 2011 ) . The elusive search for stable risk preferences . Frontiers in Psychology , 2 , 1 – 4 . Fox , M . C . , Ericsson , K . A . , & Best , R . ( 2011 ) . Do pro - cedures for verbal reporting of thinking have to be re - active ? A meta - analysis and recommendations for best reporting methods . Psychological Bulletin , 137 , 316 – 344 . Fox , M . C . , Roring , R . , & Mitchum A . L . ( 2009 ) . Re - versing the speed - IQ correlation : Intra - individual vari - ability and attentional control in the inspection time paradigm . Intelligence , 37 , 76 – 80 . Frederick , S . ( 2005 ) . Cognitive reﬂection and decision making . Journal of Economic Perspectives , 19 , 25 – 42 . Froot , K . J . , Scharfstein , D . S . , & Stein , J . C . ( 1993 ) . Risk management : Coordinating corporate investment and ﬁnancing policies . The Journal of Finance , 48 , 1629 – 1658 . Gaissmaier , W . & Marewski , J . N . ( 2011 ) . Forecasting elections with mere recognition from lousy samples . Judgment and Decision Making , 6 , 73 – 88 . JudgmentandDecisionMaking , Vol . 7 , No . 1 , January2012 BerlinNumeracyTest 43 Galesic , M . , & Garcia - Retamero , R . ( 2010 ) . Statistical numeracy for health : A cross - cultural comparison with probabilistic national samples . Archives of Internal Medicine , 170 , 462 – 468 . Galesic , M . , Garcia - Retamero , R . , & Gigerenzer , G . ( 2009 ) . Using icon arrays to communicate medical risks to low - numeracy people . Health Psychology , 28 , 210 – 216 . Garcia - Retamero , R . , & Cokely , E . T . ( 2011 ) . Effective communication of risks to young adults : Using mes - sage framing and visual aids to increase condom use and STD screening . Journal of Experimental Psychol - ogy : Applied , 17 , 270 – 328 . Garcia - Retamero , R . , & Galesic , M . ( Eds . ) ( in press ) . Transparent communication of risks about health : Overcoming cultural differences . New York : NY . Springer . Garcia - Retamero , R . , & Galesic , M . ( 2010a ) . How to reduce the effect of framing on messages about health . Journal of General Internal Medicine , 25 , 1323 – 1329 . Garcia - Retamero , R . , & Galesic , M . ( 2010b ) . Who proﬁts from visual aids : Overcoming challenges in people’s understanding of risks . Social Science & Medicine , 70 , 1019 – 1025 . Garcia - Retamero , R . , Okan , Y . , & Cokely , E . T . ( in press ) . Using visual aids to improve communication of risks about health : A review . TheScientiﬁcWorld Journal . Gigerenzer , G . , Gaissmaier , W . , Kurz - Milcke , E . , Schwartz , L . M . , Woloshin , S . ( 2007 ) . Helping doctors and patients to make sense of health statistics . Psycho - logical Science in the Public Interest , 8 , 53 – 96 . Gigerenzer , G . , Hertwig , R . , van den Broek , E . , Fasolo , B . , & Katsikopoulos , K . ( 2005 ) . A 30 % chance of rain tomorrow : How does the public understand probabilis - tic weather forecasts ? Risk Analysis , 25 , 623 – 629 . Gigerenzer , G . , & Hoffrage , U . ( 1995 ) . How to im - prove Bayesian reasoning without instruction : Fre - quency formats . Psychological Review , 102 , 684 – 704 . Gigerenzer , G . , & Regier , T . ( 1996 ) . How do we tell an association from a rule ? Comment on Sloman ( 1996 ) . Psychological Bulletin , 119 , 23 – 26 . Gigerenzer , G . , Swijtink , Z . G . , Porter , T . M . , Daston , L . , Beatty , J . , & Krüger , L . ( 1989 ) . The empire of chance : How probability changed science and every - day life . New York , NY : Cambridge University Press . Gigerenzer , G . , Todd , P . M . , & the ABC Group ( 1999 ) . Simple heuristics that make us smart . New York , NY : Oxford University Press . Gosling , S . D . , Rentfrow , P . J . , & Swann , W . B . ( 2003 ) . A very brief measure of the big - ﬁve personality domains . Journal of Research in Personality , 37 , 504 – 528 . Guadagnoli , E . , & Ward , P . ( 1998 ) . Patient participation in decision - making . Social Science and Medicine , 47 , 329 – 339 . Hanoch , Y . , Miron - Shatz , T . , Cole , H . , Himmelstein , M . , & Federman , A . D . ( 2010 ) . Choice , numeracy and physicians - in - training performance : The case of Medi - care part D . Health Psychology , 29 , 454 – 459 . Hertzog , C . & Robinson , A . E . ( 2005 ) Metacognition and intelligence . In O . Wilhelm , & R . W . Engle , ( Eds . ) , Handbook of Understanding and Measuring Intelli - gence ( pp . 101 – 121 ) . CA : Sage publishers . Hodapp , V . , & Benson , J . ( 1997 ) . The multidimensional - ity of test anxiety : A test of different models . Anxiety , Stress , and Coping , 10 , 219 – 244 . Huff , D . , & Geis , I . ( 1954 ) . How to lie with statistics . New York , NY : Norton . Hunt , E . , & Wittmann , W . ( 2008 ) . National intelligence and national prosperity . Intelligence , 36 , 1 – 9 . Jaeggi , S . M . , Buschkuehl , M . , Jonides , J . , & Shah , P . ( 2011 ) . Short - and long - term beneﬁts of cognitive training . Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences , 108 , 10081 – 10086 . DOI : 10 . 1073 / pnas . 1103228108 Kaplan , S . & Garrick , B . J . ( 1981 ) . On The quantitative deﬁnition of risk . Risk Analysis , 1 , 11 – 27 . Katsikopoulos , K . V . , & Lan , C . ( 2011 ) . Herbert Simon’s spell on judgment and decision making . Judgment and Decision Making , 6 , 722 – 732 . Keller , N . , Cokely , E . T . , Katsikopoulos , K . , & Weg - wartwh , O . ( 2010 ) . Naturalistic heuristics for decision making . Journal of Cognitive Engineering and Deci - sion Making , 4 , 256 – 274 . Keren , G . & Schul , Y . ( 2009 ) . Two is not always better than one : a critical evaluation of two - system theories . Perspectives on Psychological Science , 4 , 533 – 550 . Knight , F . H . ( 1921 ) . Risk , uncertainty and proﬁt . Boston , MA : Houghton Mifﬂin Company . Kruglanski , A . W . , & Gigerenzer , G . ( 2011 ) . Intuitive and deliberate judgments are based on common princi - ples . Psychological Review , 118 , 97 – 109 . Lang , J . W . B . , & Fries , S . ( 2006 ) . A revised 10 - item version of the Achievement Motives Scale : Psychome - tric properties in German - speaking samples . European Journal of Psychological Assessment , 22 , 216 – 224 . Liberali , J . M . , Reyna , V . F . , Furlan , S . , Stein , L . M . & Pardo , S . T . ( 2011 ) . Individual differences in numer - acy and cognitive reﬂection , with implications for bi - ases and fallacies in probability judgment . Journal of Behavioral Decision Making . DOI : 10 . 1002 / bdm . 752 Lindenberger , U . , Mayr , U . , & Kliegl , R . ( 1993 ) . Speed and intelligence in old age . Psychology and Aging , 8 , 207 – 220 . Lindskog , M . , Kerimi , N . , Winman , A . , & Juslin , P . ( 2011 ) . A Swedish validation study of the Berlin Nu - meracy Test . Unpublished raw data . JudgmentandDecisionMaking , Vol . 7 , No . 1 , January2012 BerlinNumeracyTest 44 Lipkus , I . M . , & Peters , E . ( 2009 ) . Understanding the role of numeracy in health : Proposed theoretical insights . Health Education & Behavior , 36 , 1065 – 1081 . Lipkus , I . M . , Peters , E . , Kimmick , G . , Liotcheva , V . , & Marcom , P . ( 2010 ) . Breast cancer patients’ treat - ment expectations after exposure to the decision aid program . Adjuvant online : The inﬂuence of numeracy . Medical Decision Making , 30 , 464 – 473 . Lipkus , I . M . , Samsa , G . , & Rimer , B . K . ( 2001 ) . Gen - eral performance on a numeracy scale among highly - educated samples . Medical Decision Making , 21 , 37 – 44 . Marewski J . N . & Mehlhorn K . ( 2011 ) . Using the ACT - R architecture to specify 39 quantitative process models of decision making . Judgment and Decision Making , 6 , 439 – 519 . Marewski , J . N . , & Schooler , L . J . ( 2011 ) . Cognitive niches : An ecological model of strategy selection . Psy - chological Review , 118 , 393 – 437 . Mata , R . , Schooler , L . J . , & Rieskamp , J . ( 2007 ) . The ag - ing decision maker : Cognitive aging and the adaptive selection of decision strategies . Psychology and Aging , 22 , 796 – 810 . McNamara , D . S . , & Scott , J . L . ( 2001 ) . Working mem - ory capacity and strategy use . Memory & Cognition , 29 , 10 – 17 . Messick , S . ( 1995 ) . Validity of psychological assess - ment : Validation of inferences from persons responses and performances as scientiﬁc inquiry into score mean - ing . American Psychologist , 50 , 741 – 749 . Milkman , K . L . , Chugh , D . , & Bazerman , M . H . ( 2009 ) . How can decision making be improved ? Perspectives on Psychological Science , 4 , 379 – 383 . Mitchum , A . L . , & Kelley , C . M . ( 2010 ) . Solve the prob - lem ﬁrst : Constructive solution strategy can inﬂuence the accuracy of retrospective conﬁdence judgments . Journal of Experimental Psychology : Learning , Mem - ory , and Cognition , 36 , 699 – 710 . Natter , H . M . , & Berry , D . C . ( 2005 ) . Effects of pre - senting the baseline risk when communicating abso - lute and relative risk reductions . Psychology , Health & Medicine , 10 , 326 – 334 . Neisser , U . , Boodoo , G . , Bouchard , T . J . , Boykin , A . W . , Brody , N . , Ceci , S . J . , Halpern , D . F . , Loehlin , J . C . , Perlo , R . , Sternberg , R . J . , & Urbina , S . ( 1996 ) . Intel - ligence : Knowns and unknowns . American Psycholo - gist , 51 , 77 – 101 . Newell , A . ( 1973 ) . You can’t play 20 questions with na - ture and win : Protective comments on the papers of this symposium . In W . G . Chase ( Ed . ) , Visual informa - tion processing ( pp . 283 – 308 ) . New York , NY : Aca - demic Press . Newell , A . & Simon , H . A . ( 1972 ) Human problem solv - ing . Englewood Cliffs , NJ : Prentice - Hall . Okan , Y . , Garcia - Retamero , R . , Cokely , E . T . , & Mal - donado , A . ( in press ) . Individual differences in graph literacy : Overcoming denominator neglect in risk com - prehension . Journal of Behavioral Decision Making . DOI : 10 . 1002 / bdm . 751 Okan , Y . , Garcia - Retamero , R . , Galesic , M . , & Cokely , E . T . ( in press ) . When higher bars are not larger quan - tities : On individual differences in the use of spatial information in graph comprehension . Spatial Cogni - tion and Computation . Osman , M . ( 2004 ) . An evaluation of dual - process theo - ries of reasoning . Psychonomic Bulletin & Review , 11 , 988 – 1010 . Paolacci G . , Chandler , J . , Ipeirotis , P . G . ( 2010 ) . Running experiments on amazon Mechanical Turk . Judgment and Decision Making , 5 , 411 – 419 . Parker A . M . , Fischhoff B . ( 2005 ) . Decision - making competence : external validation through an individual differences approach . Journal of Behavioral Decision Making , 18 , 1 – 27 . Paulos , J . A . ( 1988 ) . Innumeracy : Mathematical illiter - acy and its consequences . New York , NY : Hill and Wang . Peters , E . ( in press ) . Beyond comprehension : The role of numeracy in judgment and decision making . Current Directions in Psychological Science . DOI : 10 . 1177 / 0963721411429960 Peters , E . , Dieckmann , N . F . , Dixon , A . , Slovic , P . , Mertz , C . K . , & Hibbard , J . H . ( 2007 ) . Less is more in present - ing quality information to consumers . Medical Care Research and Review , 64 , 169 – 190 . Peters , E . , Hibbard , J . H . , Slovic , P . , & Dieckmann , N . F . ( 2007 ) . Numeracy skill and the communication , com - prehension , and use of risk and beneﬁt information . Health Affairs , 26 , 741 – 748 . Peters , E . & Levin , I . P . ( 2008 ) . Dissecting the risky - choice framing effect : Numeracy as an individual - difference factor in weighting risky and riskless op - tions . Judgment and Decision Making , 3 , 435 – 448 . Peters , E . , Slovic , P . , Västfjäll , D . , & Mertz , C . K . ( 2008 ) . Intuitive numbers guide decisions . Judgment and De - cision Making , 3 , 619 – 635 . Peters , E . , Västfjäll , D . , Slovic , P . , Mertz , C . K . , Maz - zocco , K . , & Dickert , S . ( 2006 ) . Numeracy and deci - sion making . Psychological Science , 17 , 407 – 413 . Rakow , T . ( 2010 ) . Risk , uncertainty and prophet : The psychological insights of Frank H . Knight . Judgment and Decision Making , 5 , 458 – 466 . Raven , J . ( 2000 ) . The Raven’s Progressive Matrices : Change and stability over culture and time . Cognitive Psychology , 41 , 1 – 48 . Reyna , V . F . ( 2004 ) . How people make decisions that involve risk : A dual - processes approach . Current Di - rections in Psychological Science , 13 , 60 – 66 . JudgmentandDecisionMaking , Vol . 7 , No . 1 , January2012 BerlinNumeracyTest 45 Reyna , V . F . , & Lloyd , F . ( 2006 ) . Physician decision mak - ing and cardiac risk : Effects of knowledge , risk percep - tion , risk tolerance , and fuzzy processing . Journal of Experimental Psychology : Applied , 12 , 179 – 195 . Reyna , V . F . , Nelson , W . L . , Han , P . K . , & Dieckmann , N . F . ( 2009 ) . How numeracy inﬂuences risk compre - hension and medical decision making . Psychological Bulletin , 135 , 943 – 973 . Schapira , M . M . , Walker , C . M . , & Sedivy , S . K . ( 2009 ) . Evaluating existing measures of health numeracy using item response theory . Patient Educational Counseling , 75 , 308 – 314 . Schooler , L . J . , & Hertwig , R . ( 2005 ) . How forgetting aids heuristic inference . Psychological Review , 112 , 610 – 628 . Schulte - Mecklenbeck , M . , Kühberger , A . & Ranyard , R . ( Eds . ) ( 2011 ) . A Handbook of Process Tracing Meth - ods for Decision Research : A Critical Review and User’s Guide . New York , NY : Taylor & Francis . Schulz , E . , Cokely , E . T . , & Feltz , A . ( 2011 ) . Per - sistent bias in expert judgments about free will and moral responsibility : A test of the expertise defense . Consciousness and Cognition , 20 , 1722 – 1731 . DOI : 10 . 1016 / j . concog . 2011 . 04 . 007 Schwartz , B . , Ward , A . , Monterosso , J . , Lyubomirsky , S . , White , K . , & Lehman , D . R . ( 2002 ) . Maximizing ver - sus satisﬁcing : Happiness is a matter of choice . Jour - nal of Personality and Social Psychology , 83 , 1178 – 1197 . Schwartz , L . M . L . , Woloshin , S . S . , Black , W . C . W . , & Welch , H . G . H . ( 1997 ) . The role of numeracy in understanding the beneﬁt of screening mammography . Annals of Internal Medicine , 127 , 966 – 972 . Schwarzer , R . , & Jerusalem , M . ( 1995 ) . Generalized self - efﬁcacy scale . In J . Weinman , S . Wright , & M . John - ston ( Eds . ) , Measures in health psychology : A user’s portfolio . Windsor , UK : Nfer - Nelson . Sherrod , P . H . ( 2003 ) . DTREG : Predictive Modeling Software . Software available at http : / / www . dtreg . com . Siegler , R . S . ( 1987 ) . The perils of averaging data over strategies : An example from children’s addition . Jour - nal of Experimental Psychology General , 116 , 250 – 264 . Siegler , R . S . ( 1988 ) . Strategy choice procedures and the development of multiplication skill . Journal of Exper - imental Psychology : General , 117 , 258 – 275 . Slovic , P . , & Peters , E . ( 2006 ) . Risk perception and af - fect . Current Directions in Psychological Science , 15 , 322 – 325 . Smith , A . R . , & Windschitl , P . D . ( 2011 ) . Biased cal - culations : Numeric anchors inﬂuence answers to math equations . Judgment and Decision Making , 6 , 139 – 146 . Stanovich , K . E . , & West , R . F . ( 2000 ) . Advancing the rationality debate . Behavioral and Brain Sciences , 23 , 701 – 726 . Stanovich , K . E . , & West , R . F . ( 2008 ) . On the relative independence of thinking biases and cognitive ability . Journal of Personality and Social Psychology , 94 , 672 – 695 . Sternberg , R . J . ( 1977 ) . Intelligence , information pro - cessing , and analogical reasoning : The componen - tial analysis of human abilities . Oxford , England : Lawrence Erlbaum . Steen L . A . ( 1990 ) . On the shoulders of giants : New ap - proaches to numeracy . Washington , DC , US : National Academy Press . Thompson , N . A . , & Weiss , D . J . ( 2011 ) . A frame - work for the development of computerized adaptive tests . Practical Assessment , Research , and Evaluation , 16 ( 1 ) . http : / / www . pareonline . net / pdf / v16n1 . pdf . Turley - Ames , K . J . , & Whitﬁeld , M . M . ( 2003 ) . Strategy training and working memory task performance . Jour - nal of Memory & Language , 49 , 446 – 468 . Turner , M . L . , & Engle , R . W . ( 1989 ) . Is working mem - ory capacity task dependent ? Journal of Memory and Language , 28 , 127 – 154 . Unsworth , N . , & Spillers , G . J . ( 2010 ) . Working memory capacity : Attention , memory , or both ? A direct test of the dual - component model . Journal of Memory and Language , 62 , 392 – 406 . Vigneau , F . , Caissie , A . F . , & Bors , D . A . ( 2005 ) . Eye - movement analysis demonstrates strategic inﬂuence on intelligence . Intelligence , 34 , 261 – 272 . Weller , J . A . , Dieckmann , N . , Tusler , M . , Mertz , C . K . , Burns , W . , & Peters , E . ( 2011 ) . Development and Test - ing of an Abbreviated Numeracy Scale : A Rasch Anal - ysis Approach . Unpublished manuscript . Zikmund - Fisher , B . , Smith , D . M . , Ubel , P . A . , & Fager - lin , A . ( 2007 ) . Validation of the subjective numeracy scale : Effects of low numeracy on comprehension of risk communications and utility elicitations . Medical Decision Making , 27 , 663 – 671 . Appendix I : Example of everyday risky decision - making Weather forecasting ( from Gigerenzer , Her - twig , van den Broek , Fasolo , & Katsikopou - los , 2005 ) Imagine there is a 30 % chance of rain tomorrow . Please indicate which of the following alternatives is the most appropriate interpretation of the forecast . JudgmentandDecisionMaking , Vol . 7 , No . 1 , January2012 BerlinNumeracyTest 46 1 . It will rain tomorrow in 30 % of the region . 2 . It will rain tomorrow for 30 % of the time . 3 . It will rain on 30 % of the days like tomorrow . The correct answer is ( 3 ) . Example 2 : Everyday risky decision - making Zendil – Gum Inﬂammation ( from Garcia - Retamero & Galesic , in press ) Imagine that you see the following advertisement for a new toothpaste : Zendil—50 % reduction in occurrence of gum inﬂam - mation . Zendil is a new toothpaste to prevent gum inﬂam - mation . Half as many people who used Zendil developed gum inﬂammation when compared to people using a dif - ferent toothpaste . Which one of the following would best help you evalu - ate how much a person could beneﬁt from using Zendil ? 1 . The risk of gum inﬂammation for people who do not use Zendil 2 . The risk of gum inﬂammation for people who use a different brand of toothpaste for the same purpose 3 . How many people there were in the group who used a different toothpaste 4 . How old the people who participated in the study were 5 . How much a weekly supply of Zendil costs 6 . Whether Zendil has been recommended by a den - tists’ association for this use The correct answer is ( 1 ) . Appendix II : Adaptive Berlin Nu - meracy Test format Go to www . riskliteracy . org for a unique link to a secure adaptive test that can be embedded in your experiment and will automatically score responses . Alternatively , you can program your own adaptive test as follows : Instructions : Please answer the questions that follow . Do not use a calculator but feel free to use the scratch paper for notes . [ See Figure 1 for adaptive test structure . ] 1 . Out of 1 , 000 people in a small town 500 are mem - bers of a choir . Out of these 500 members in the choir 100 are men . Out of the 500 inhabitants that are not in the choir 300 are men . What is the prob - ability that a randomly drawn man is a member of the choir ? Please indicate the probability in percent . _ _ _ _ _ _ % 2a . Imagine we are throwing a ﬁve - sided die 50 times . On average , out of these 50 throws how many times would this ﬁve - sided die show an odd number ( 1 , 3 or 5 ) ? _ _ _ _ _ _ out of 50 throws . 2b . Imagine we are throwing a loaded die ( 6 sides ) . The probability that the die shows a 6 is twice as high as the probability of each of the other numbers . On average , out of these 70 throws how many times would the die show the number 6 ? _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ out of 70 throws . 3 . In a forest 20 % of mushrooms are red , 50 % brown and 30 % white . A red mushroom is poisonous with a probability of 20 % . A mushroom that is not red is poisonous with a probability of 5 % . What is the probability that a poisonous mushroom in the forest is red ? _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ Scoring = Based on answers to 2 - 3 questions following the adaptive structure . Correct answers are as follows : 1 = 25 ; 2a = 30 ; 2b = 20 ; 4 = 50 . Appendix III : Berlin Numeracy Test traditional paper and pencil format Instructions : Please answer the questions below . Do not use a calculator but feel free to use the space available for notes ( i . e . , scratch paper ) . 1 . Imagine we are throwing a ﬁve - sided die 50 times . On average , out of these 50 throws how many times would this ﬁve - sided die show an odd number ( 1 , 3 or 5 ) ? _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ out of 50 throws . 2 . Out of 1 , 000 people in a small town 500 are mem - bers of a choir . Out of these 500 members in the choir 100 are men . Out of the 500 inhabitants that are not in the choir 300 are men . What is the proba - bility that a randomly drawn man is a member of the choir ? ( please indicate the probability in percent ) . _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ % 3 . Imagine we are throwing a loaded die ( 6 sides ) . The probability that the die shows a 6 is twice as high as the probability of each of the other numbers . On average , out of these 70 throws , how many times would the die show the number 6 ? _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ out of 70 throws . 4 . In a forest 20 % of mushrooms are red , 50 % brown and 30 % white . A red mushroom is poisonous with a probability of 20 % . A mushroom that is not red is poisonous with a probability of 5 % . What is the probability that a poisonous mushroom in the forest is red ? _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ % JudgmentandDecisionMaking , Vol . 7 , No . 1 , January2012 BerlinNumeracyTest 47 Scoring = Count total number of correct answers . Correct answers are as follows : 1 = 30 ; 2 = 25 ; 3 = 20 ; 4 = 50 . Appendix IV : Berlin Numeracy Test single item ( median ) format Instructions : Please answer the questions below . Do not use a calculator but feel free to use the space available for notes ( i . e . , scratch paper ) . 1 . Out of 1 , 000 people in a small town 500 are mem - bers of a choir . Out of these 500 members in the choir 100 are men . Out of the 500 inhabitants that are not in the choir 300 are men . What is the proba - bility that a randomly drawn man is a member of the choir ? ( please indicate the probability in percent ) . _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ _ % Scoring = Count total number of correct answers . Correct answers are as follows : 1 = 25 . Appendix V : Berlin Numeracy Test multiple choice format Instructions : Please answer the questions below . Do not use a calculator but feel free to use the space available for notes ( i . e . , scratch paper ) . 1 . Imagine we are throwing a ﬁve - sided die 50 times . On average , out of these 50 throws how many times would this ﬁve - sided die show an odd number ( 1 , 3 or 5 ) a ) 5 out of 50 throws b ) 25 out of 50 throws c ) 30 out of 50 throws d ) None of the above 2 . Out of 1 , 000 people in a small town 500 are mem - bers of a choir . Out of these 500 members in the choir 100 are men . Out of the 500 inhabitants that are not in the choir 300 are men . What is the proba - bility that a randomly drawn man is a member of the choir ? Please indicate the probability in percent a ) 10 % b ) 25 % c ) 40 % d ) None of the above 3 . Imagine we are throwing a loaded die ( 6 sides ) . The probability that the die shows a 6 is twice as high as the probability of each of the other numbers . On average , out of these 70 throws , about how many times would the die show the number 6 ? a ) 20 out of 70 throws b ) 23 out of 70 throws c ) 35 out of 70 throws d ) None of the above 4 . In a forest 20 % of mushrooms are red , 50 % brown and 30 % white . A red mushroom is poisonous with a probability of 20 % . A mushroom that is not red is poisonous with a probability of 5 % . What is the probability that a poisonous mushroom in the forest is red ? a ) 4 % b ) 20 % c ) 50 % d ) None of the above Scoring = Count total number of correct answers . Correct answers are : 1 = c ; 2 = b ; 3 = a ; 4 = c .