EDITORIAL The Plant Cell Begins Opt - in Publishing of Peer Review Reports OPEN As of January 2017 , The Plant Cell will offer authors the option of associating a Peer Review Report with each research article . Reviewer anonymity will be strictly maintained . The reports will include the major comments from reviewers and the editors’ decision letters along with the authors’ response to re - viewersforeachsubmissionofthemanuscript ( includingoriginal , revised , and previously declined versions ) , as well as a timeline documenting the path of the manuscript from submission to publication . The decision letters typically include the substance of comments from any post - review consultation among editors and reviewers . ASPB members , as well as The Plant Cell authors , reviewers , and readers from whom we have heard have been enthusiastic about this venture , especially those in training ( student , post - doctoral researcher ) or early ( junior group leader , assistant pro - fessor ) stagesoftheircareers . BeneﬁtstopublishingPeerReview Reports include their ability to demonstrate the criteria used for evaluating papers , usefulness for journal club discussions , and value as a tool for learning how to write good papers and re - sponses to reviewer comments , as well as how to be a good reviewer . These factors are the main reasons we have chosen to launch this policy . However , preparation of the Peer Review Reports comes at some expense . We will monitor feedback and access / download statistics for two years and may discon - tinue the program if the expense is found to outweigh the per - ceived value to the community . So please let us know ! Startingimmediately , invitations toreviewamanuscriptfor The Plant Cell will include information about the Peer Review Rep - ort . As noted above , reviewers will remain anonymous in these reports . The editorial board is committed to preserving thepower and utility of peer review , and we feel strongly that reviewer anonymityisintegraltotheprocess . Statisticsfromotherjournals that have published similar peer review reports for a number of yearsindicate that publishing referee reportsdoes not affecttheir ability to secure reviewers for papers , and we hope that the same will prove true for The Plant Cell . After acceptance of a manuscript by the reviewing editor , the PeerReviewReport ( withauthorapproval ) willbepreparedbythe science editor handling the paper . The reports will follow a stan - dard format and will reﬂect editing to remove the more minor comments , miscellaneous and mundane correspondence , and information that might identify a reviewer . From June through December 2016 , examples of Peer Review Reports will be pub - lishedforasmallsetofarticleseachmonthtointroduceourreaders , authors , and reviewers to the concept and test the format . Links to articles and reports included in this pilot program can be accessed via the Instructions for Authors ( http : / / tpc . msubmit . net / cgi - bin / main . plex ? form _ type 5 display _ auth _ instructions # peerreviewreport ) . As always , we welcome feedback from our readers to help us improve the quality of The Plant Cell . Sabeeha Merchant Editor in Chief merchant @ chem . ucla . edu ORCID ID : 0000 - 0002 - 2594 - 509X Nancy A . Eckardt Senior Features Editor neckardt @ aspb . org ORCID ID : 0000 - 0003 - 1658 - 1412 OPEN Articles can be viewed without a subscription . www . plantcell . org / cgi / doi / 10 . 1105 / tpc . 16 . 00798 The Plant Cell , Vol . 28 : 2343 , October 2016 , www . plantcell . org ã 2016 American Society of Plant Biologists . All rights reserved . DOI 10 . 1105 / tpc . 16 . 00798 ; originally published online October 18 , 2016 ; 2016 ; 28 ; 2343 Plant Cell Sabeeha Merchant and Nancy A . Eckardt Begins Opt - in Publishing of Peer Review Reports The Plant Cell This information is current as of August 4 , 2017 Permissions https : / / www . copyright . com / ccc / openurl . do ? sid = pd _ hw1532298X & issn = 1532298X & WT . mc _ id = pd _ hw1532298X eTOCs http : / / www . plantcell . org / cgi / alerts / ctmain Sign up for eTOCs at : CiteTrack Alerts http : / / www . plantcell . org / cgi / alerts / ctmain Sign up for CiteTrack Alerts at : Subscription Information http : / / www . aspb . org / publications / subscriptions . cfm is available at : Plant Physiology and The Plant Cell Subscription Information for ADVANCING THE SCIENCE OF PLANT BIOLOGY © American Society of Plant Biologists