Accepted Manuscript Title : Physicochemical Characterization of pH - responsive and Fusogenic Self - assembled Non - phospholipid Vesicles for a Potential Multiple Targeting Therapy Authors : Martina Di Francesco , Christian Celia , Rosita Primavera , Nicola D’Avanzo , Marcello Locatelli , Massimo Fresta , Felisa Cilurzo , Cinzia Anna Ventura , Donatella Paolino , Luisa Di Marzio PII : S0378 - 5173 ( 17 ) 30467 - 2 DOI : http : / / dx . doi . org / doi : 10 . 1016 / j . ijpharm . 2017 . 05 . 055 Reference : IJP 16703 To appear in : International Journal of Pharmaceutics Received date : 14 - 12 - 2016 Revised date : 22 - 5 - 2017 Accepted date : 23 - 5 - 2017 Please cite this article as : Di Francesco , Martina , Celia , Christian , Primavera , Rosita , D’Avanzo , Nicola , Locatelli , Marcello , Fresta , Massimo , Cilurzo , Felisa , Ventura , Cinzia Anna , Paolino , Donatella , Di Marzio , Luisa , Physicochemical Characterization of pH - responsive and Fusogenic Self - assembled Non - phospholipid Vesicles for a Potential Multiple Targeting Therapy . International Journal of Pharmaceutics http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . ijpharm . 2017 . 05 . 055 This is a PDF ﬁ le of an unedited manuscript that has been accepted for publication . As a service to our customers we are providing this early version of the manuscript . The manuscript will undergo copyediting , typesetting , and review of the resulting proof before it is published in its ﬁ nal form . Please note that during the production process errors may be discovered which could affect the content , and all legal disclaimers that apply to the journal pertain . 1 Physicochemical Characterization of pH - responsive and Fusogenic Self - assembled Non - phospholipid Vesicles for a Potential Multiple Targeting Therapy Martina Di Francesco a , b , 1 , Christian Celia b , c , 1 , Rosita Primavera b , Nicola D’Avanzo a , Marcello Locatelli b , Massimo Fresta a , d , Felisa Cilurzo a , b , Cinzia Anna Ventura e , Donatella Paolino d , f , * , Luisa Di Marzio b , * a Department of Health Sciences , University of Catanzaro “Magna Graecia” , 88100 , Catanzaro , Italy . b Department of Pharmacy , University of Chieti – Pescara “G . d’Annunzio” , 66100 , Chieti , Italy . c Department of Nanomedicine , Houston Methodist Research Institute , Houston , Texas , 77030 , USA . d IRC FSH - Interregional Research Center for Food Safety & Health , University of Catanzaro “Magna Graecia” , 88100 , Catanzaro , Italy . e Department of Chemistry , Biological , Pharmaceutical , and Environmental Sciences , University of Messina , 98166 , Messina , Italy . f Department of Experimental and Clinical Medicine , University of Catanzaro “Magna Graecia” , 88100 , Catanzaro , Italy . Author information * Corresponding authors : * Donatella Paolino , Pharm . D . , Ph . D . ( D . P . ) ; E - mail : paolino @ unicz . it ; Phone Office : ( + 39 ) 0961 369 4211 ; Fax : ( + 39 ) 0961 369 4237 . * Luisa Di Marzio , Ph . D . ( L . Di . M . ) ; E - mail : luisa . dimarzio @ unich . it ; Phone Office : ( + 39 ) 0871 355 4705 ; Fax : ( + 39 ) 0871 355 4911 . 1 Martina Di Francesco ( M . Di . F . ) , and Christian Celia ( C . C . ) contributed equally to this work . 2 Graphical abstract ABSTRACT In order to obtain nanocarriers suitable for the delivery of drugs in the treatment of cancer , pH - responsive nanovesicles capable of facilitating fusion ( fusogenic nanovesicles ) were synthesized and then their physicochemical characteristics were modified . These nanovesicles were made by combining polysorbates having different physicochemical features with the aim of realizing multiple - targeting nanoformulations suitable for in vitro treatment of cancer cells . Tween21 and Tween80 were self - assembled at different molar concentrations resulting in pH - responsive fusogenic nanovesicles with an average size of less than 150 nm , and a narrow size distribution ( polydispersity index ) value of less than 0 . 2 . Hydrophobic and hydrophilic fluorescent probes were loaded inside the nanovesicles in order to study their pH - responsiveness and fusogenic properties and it was noted that this process did not modify their physicochemical features . The pH - responsiveness and fusogenic assay demonstrated that the nanovesicles containing Tween21 at different molar ratios were pH - responsive and interacted with a synthetic model of a biological membrane supplemented with Ca 2 + in the incubation medium . Fifty percent ( molar ratio ) of Tween21 was replaced with Tween80 , since Tween80 can promote the adsorption of apolipoproteins ( A - E ) onto the surfaces of nanovesicles without altering their pH - responsiveness or fusogenic properties . In fact this equivalent molar concentration of Tween21 and Tween80 also maintained their degree of interaction with the apolipoproteins ( A - E ) . Doxorubicin hydrochloride - loaded nanovesicles were synthesized and physicochemically characterized in order to obtain 3 nanoformulations suitable for anticancer treatment . The therapeutic nanovesicles showed physicochemical properties similar to those of empty nanoformulations , and maintained pH - responsiveness , fusogenic properties and targeting versus the apolipoproteins ( A - E ) . The doxorubicin hydrochloride was loaded into the nanovesicles using both passive and pH gradient remote loading procedures . The latter provided the nanovesicles with an entrapment efficiency percentage of over 30 % , which was much higher than the 10 % that was obtained using the passive loading procedure . The entrapment efficiency improved up to 60 % for the nanovesicles made from the same molar concentration of Tween21 and Tween80 . The anticancer activity of doxorubicin hydrochloride - loaded nanovesicles was further tested in vitro using human neuroblastoma ( SH - SY5Y ) cells which respond to treatment with this chemotherapeutic drug , but the nanovesicles carrying it must cross the BBB by means of specific receptors before the drug can provide a therapeutic effect in vivo . The anticancer activity of these doxorubicin hydrochloride - loaded nanovesicles was time - and dosage - dependent , and the surfactant components making up the nanoformulations was also a determining factor in the efficiency of their activity . These nanovesicles could provide innovative nanotherapeutics for potential in vitro multidrug targeting therapy . Keywords : Niosomes ; pH - responsiveness ; Multiple targeting therapy ; Physicochemical characterization ; Fusion assay ; Fluorescence spectroscopy . 1 . Introduction Supramolecular nanotherapeutics are the nanomedicines of the future and provide complex nanoconstructs through the manipulation of safe , biocompatible materials . During previous experimentation we demonstrated that polymers and lipids can form supramolecular vesicular aggregates suitable for anticancer therapy by combining the advantages of polymers and lipids ( Paolino et al . , 2008 ) . The structure of supramolecular nanoconstructs can easily be modified , providing cationic ( Paolino et al . , 2008 ) , long - term circulating , targeting systems ( Paolino et al . 2012 ) which can increase the therapeutic efficacy of anticancer drugs . In addition , polymers and lipids improve the biopharmaceutical features of nanocarriers and enhance the anticancer activity of payloads ( Paolino et al . , 2012 ) . Recently other macromolecules such as cyclodextrins ( Namgung et al . , 2014 ) , calixarenes ( Nasuhi Pur , 2016 ) , dendrimers ( Li et al . , 2016 ) , and non - ionic surfactants ( Marianecci et al . , 2014 ) in addition to polymers and lipids have been used to synthesize nanocarriers which can interact with cellular membranes , and provide selective targeting towards specific biological tissues . In this attempt , non - ionic surfactant - based vesicles with physicochemical and biopharmaceutical features 4 similar to those of liposomes were proposed as potential customized nanotherapeutics for use in anticancer therapy and nanomedicines ( Marianecci et al . , 2014 ) . In fact , non - ionic surfactants such as the polysorbates or Tweens ( Tw ) , can : i ) furnish numerous biopharmaceutical advantages ; and ii ) increase long - term circulation , besides providing the passive targeting of niosomes . The polyethylene oxide ( PEO ) of the Tweens , which has biopharmaceutical features similar to those of polyethylene glycol ( PEG ) ( Pasut and Veronese , 2012 ) , might increase the long - term circulation of niosomes following their systemic administration , and decrease their uptake by the mononuclear phagocyte system ( MPS ) . Moreover , PEO can easily be modified through the conjugation of therapeutic agents such as transferrin , folate , small peptides and antibody fragments to the backbone structures of polymers . This approach allows the selective targeting of specific tissues following the systemic administration of non - ionic surfactant vesicles ( NSVs ) . When Tw80 is used to coat the nanoparticles , they can passively adsorb apolipoproteins ( A and E series ) ( Kreuter et al . , 2003 ) , target specific receptors of the blood brain barrier ( BBB ) ( Jones and Shusta , 2007 ) , and accumulate therapeutic agents inside the central nervous system ( CNS ) ( Kreuter et al . , 2003 ) . In fact Tw80 - coated nanoparticles are a promising strategy for targeting the BBB because Tw80 interacts with the circulating apolipoproteins A and E , thus camouflaging the nanoparticles and helping them avoid detection by the MPS . These nanovesicles can also selectively target the low - density lipoprotein receptors of brain capillary endothelial cells by means of receptor - mediated endocytosis ( Jones and Shusta , 2007 ) . External stimuli such as pH and temperature can further affect the targeting abilities of nanoparticles following systemic administration ( Shen et al . , 2015 ; Kirui et al . , 2015 ) . Changes in pH can modify the supramolecular structure of the nanoparticles and decrease their non - specific cellular uptake ( Chen et al . , 2015 ) by the MPS ; conversely , induced temperature or mild hyperthermia treatment ( ≥ 42°C ) , can enhance the transport of nanotherapeutics through the biological barriers , improve the therapeutic efﬁcacy of drugs , and decrease their dose - dependent cytotoxicity ( Torchilin , 2014 ) . It was also observed that the modification of the pH and / or temperature in the physiological microenvironment promoted the targeting of nanoparticles towards specific tissues through the extension or shrinking of the polymers ( Torchilin , 2014 ) . In particular , the long - term circulating and stimuli - responsive colloidal nanoparticles were accumulated and degraded in specific tissues , thus releasing the therapeutic agents they were carrying ( Torchilin , 2014 ; Marianecci et al . , 2016 ) . This occurs even though the colloidal nanoparticles are distributed throughout the circulatory system . Moreover , these stimuli are multiple and depend on the tissues that are being targeted ( Torchilin , 2014 ; Marianecci et al . , 2016 ) . 5 We previously demonstrated that pH - responsive Tw21 - niosomes may protect their payloads from degradation in simulated biological fluids , and modulate their interaction with biological membranes ( Marianecci et al . , 2016 ) . Conversely , Tw20 and Tw80 may provide long - term circulation of niosomes due to their polymeric structure which is similar to PEG , passively targeting the low - density lipoprotein ( LDL ) receptors by means of the apolipoproteins ( Marianecci et al . , 2014 ) . The synthesis of pH - responsive amino acidic derivatives of Tw20 can increase pH stability , and affect the fluidity and the supramolecular structure of the niosomes ( Marianecci et al . , 2016 ) . The pH - responsive niosomes interact and merge with the model biological membranes ( Marianecci et al . , 2013 ) . This effect depends on the molar concentration of the surfactants and cholesterol of which the nanocarriers are composed ( Di Marzio et al . , 2011 ) . The pH - responsive niosomes can further escape the acidic pH of endosomes ( Di Marzio et al . , 2008 ) , and protect the drugs from lysosome degradation ( Di Marzio et al . , 2011 ) . In fact , solid tumors develop in an acidic microenvironment , which depends on : i ) the lactate and H + secreted in the extracellular compartment because of the hypoxia that occurs during the disease , and ii ) the high degree of glycolytic activity ( Gatenby and Gillies , 2008 ) . The microenvironment of the tumor further raises the body temperature to over 37°C , increases the interstitial pressure to over 42 mmHg , and involves the lymphatic system , all of which contribute to promoting the accumulation of the nanocarriers inside the tumor ( Drummond et al . , 1999 ) . Surfactants , which are pH and thermo - sensitive , can also be combined to make niosomes that simultaneously provide both physical and molecular targeting capabilities . Based on this fact , the aim of this study was to synthesize and characterize the physicochemical features of niosomes composed of Tw21 , Tw80 and cholesterol , in order to combine the pH - responsiveness and targeting assets of these Tweens . The amount of surfactant used was optimized and the minimum molar concentration of Tw21 and Tw80 was employed that would allow pH - responsiveness , long - term circulation and targeting by the niosomes . The pH - responsive niosomes were synthesized while the modifications of their physicochemical features , such as size and size distribution were being evaluated . Multilamellar liposomes were used as models of biological membranes . The lipidic composition and molar weight of the liposomes were similar to those of the biological and cerebral endothelial cell membranes , and provided preliminary data for the potential targeting of niosomes in vitro . Doxorubicin hydrochloride - loaded niosomes were tested in vitro on human neuroblastoma ( SH - SY5Y ) cells . The doxorubicin hydrochloride - loaded niosomes had physicochemical features similar to those of empty niosomes and maintained their pH - responsiveness , as well as their fusogenic and targeting properties . The entrapment efficiency of doxorubicin - loaded niosomes was enhanced using a pH gradient and remote loading procedure . This method allowed an 6 approximately ten - fold increase in the percentage of drug uploaded into the niosomes . The anticancer activity of the doxorubicin hydrochloride - loaded niosomes was time - and dose - dependent , and was observed to be slightly greater for niosomes made up from the same molar concentration of Tw21 and Tw80 as compared to the free drug at all concentrations and times tested . 2 . Materials and methods 2 . 1 . Materials Tween 21 ( Tw21 ) , Tween 80 ( Tw80 ) , Sephadex G - 75 , Hepes salt , [ N - ( 2 - Hydroxyethyl ) piperazine - N′ - ( 2 - ethanesulfonic acid ] , 2 - ( N - Morpholino ) ethanesulfonic acid ( MES ) , cholesteryl hemissucinate ( CHEMS ) , sodium acetate , Whatman ® nucleopore ™ track - etched membranes ( 0 . 1 µm ) , calcium chloride ( CaCl 2 ) , N - ( 2 - Hydroxyethyl ) piperazine - N′ - ( 2 - ethanesulfonic acid ) ( HEPES ) buffer , phosphate buffered saline ( PBS ) , trypan blue exclusion assay ( 10× ) , 3 - [ 4 , 5 - dimethylthiazol - 2 - yl ] - 3 , 5 diphenyltetrazolium bromide ( MTT ) dye ( TLC purity ≥97 . 5 % ) , dimethyl sulphoxide ( DMSO ) , amphotericin B solution ( 250 μg / ml ) , calcein , chlorpromazine , ethylene diamino tetracetic acid solution ( EDTA ) , and filipin were purchased from Sigma - Aldrich ( Sigma - Aldrich SRL , Milan , Italy ) . Uranyl acetate , 98 % ACS grade , was purchased from Polysciences Europe GmbH ( Hirschberg an der Bergstrasse , Germany ) . Doxorubicin hydrochloride ( DOX ) was obtained from LC Laboratories ( Woburn , MA , USA ) . Cholesterol ( Chol ) , p - Xylene - bis ( N - pyridinium bromide ) ( DPX ) , hydroxypyrene - 1 , 3 , 6 - trisulfonic acid ( HPTS ) and 9 - ( diethylamino ) - 5H - benzo [ 𝑅 ] phenoxazin - 5 - one ) ( Nile Red , NR ) were obtained from Acros Organics ( Acros Organics BVBA Geel , Belgium ) . 1 , 2 - dipalmitoyl - sn - glycero - 3 - phosphocholine ( DPPC ) , ganglioside G M1 ( Brain , Ovine - Sodium Salt ) , 1 , 2 - dipalmitoyl - sn - glycero - 3 - phospho - L - serine sodium salt ( DPPS ) , 1 , 2 - dipalmitoyl - sn - glycero - 3 - phosphoethanolamine ( DPPE ) and 1 , 2 - distearoyl - sn - glycero - 3 - phosphoethanolamine - N - [ methoxy ( polyethylene glycol ) - 2000 ] ( DSPE - PEG 2000 ) were purchased from Avanti Polar Lipids , Inc . ( Alabaster , Alabama , USA ) . Methyl - β - cyclodextrin ( CD ) was a kind gift of Roquette ( France ) . RPMI1640 culture medium , Dulbecco’s modified Eagle’s medium ( DMEM ) , heat - inactivated fetal bovine serum ( FBS ) , penicillin / streptomycin solution , sodium pyruvate , glutamine , and trypsin were obtained from GIBCO ( Invitrogen Corporation , Giuliano Milanese ( Mi ) , Italy ) . Plastic culture flasks and disposable cell filters were obtained from Costar ( Cambridge , MA , USA ) . Double - distilled pyrogenic - free water and sterile saline solution were Sifra S . p . A . ( Verona , Italy ) and Fresenius Kabi Potenza S . r . l . ( Verona , Italy ) products , respectively . Mouse monocyte macrophage ( Raw 264 . 7 , ATCC ® TIB - 71™ ) , and human neuroblastoma ( SH - SY5Y , ATCC ® CRL - 2266™ ) cells were 7 purchased from ATCC retailer LGC Standards S . r . l . ( Sesto San Giovanni ( MI ) Italy ) . All other products and reagents were of analytical grade , and used without any further purification . 2 . 2 . Synthesis of non - ionic surfactant vesicles ( NSVs ) The NSVs or niosomes were made up of Chol , Tw21 ( Fig . S1 ) and / or Tw80 ( Fig . S2 ) at different molar concentrations ( Table 1 ) . The thin layer evaporation method was used in this process , as described in another of our papers ( Di Marzio et al . , 2011 ) . The final molar concentration of the various NSVs was 30 mM ( Table 1 ) . Tw21 , Tw80 , and Chol ( Table 1 ) were dissolved in round - bottomed vials with the help of a mixture of organic solvents , CH 3 OH : CHCl 3 ( 1 : 3 , v / v ) . A multi - component solution resulted from which the organic solvent was then removed by means of a rotary evaporator ( Laborota 4000 , Heidolph , Delchimica , Naples , Italy ) operating at room temperature . The film that was produced was dispersed with Hepes buffer ( 10 mM , pH = 7 . 4 ) , mixed ( 5 min at 60°C ) , and then sonicated ( 10 min at 60°C ) using an ultrasonic disintegrator ( UP200H , Hielscher , Teltow , Germany ) equipped with an exponential microprobe operating at 24 KHz , and an amplitude of 60 % . NR - loaded NSVs were obtained by dissolving Nile Red ( 16 μg / ml ) with Chol and Tw20 and / or Tw80 . HPTS / DPX - loaded NSVs were obtained by adding HPTS / DPX ( 15 mM / 30 mM ) during the hydration phase . Calcein - loaded NSVs were obtained by adding calcein ( 10 mM ) during the hydration phase . The NSVs were purified by size exclusion chromatography in Sephadex G75 glass columns as previously reported ( Di Marzio et al . , 2011 ) . 2 . 3 . Synthesis of DOX - loaded non - ionic surfactant vesicles DOX - loaded NSVs were obtained by adding DOX ( 100 μg / ml ) during the hydration phase , and then purifying the NSVs through size exclusion chromatography in Sephadex G75 glass columns as previously reported ( Di Marzio et al . , 2011 ) . The DOX - loaded NSVs were then extruded through polycarbonate membranes ( 100 nm ) using a steel - extrusion device ( Lipex Biomembranes , Northern Lipids Inc . , Vancouver , BC , Canada ) , resulting in passively loaded NSVs . A pH gradient / remote loading procedure was done to increase the loading of DOX into the aqueous cores of the NSVs . The NSVs ( 1 - 5 ) were synthesized using the thin layer evaporation method . A thin lipid film remained in a round - bottomed vial after removing the organic solvent at room temperature , and this lipid film was hydrated using 5 ml of ( NH4 ) 2 SO 4 ( 300 mM , pH = 4 . 0 ) , vortex - mixed for 5 min at 25 - 30 Hz , sonicated with an ultrasonic disintegrator ( UP200H , Hielscher , Teltow , Germany ) for 10 min at 60°C , then incubated at 37°C , for 12 h under continuous stirring ( 700 rpm ) with a DOX solution in order to reach a final concentration of 100 µg / ml . The resulting NSVs were extruded through 100 nm polycarbonate stacked membranes ( twice ) using a steel - 8 extrusion device ( Lipex Biomembranes , Vancouver , BC , Canada ) , and then neutralized using Na 2 CO 3 ( 40 µl every 5 ml of suspension ) . The samples were subsequently dialyzed for 1 h in Hepes buffer ( 10 mM , pH = 7 . 4 ) using dialysis tubes ( cut - off 8 , 000 Da , Spectrum Labs , Breda , The Netherlands ) . The Hepes buffer was used at the final ratio of 1 : 100 ( v / v ) . The resulting DOX - loaded NSVs were used to quantify the entrapment efficiency , in order to determine the release kinetic of the drug compound , and to perform in vitro experiments . 2 . 4 . Synthesis of liposomes Multilamellar liposomes ( HBECLips ) with a composition similar to that of human cerebral endothelial cell membranes ( Campbell et al . , 2014 ) , and conventional liposomes ( LIPs , control ) , were synthetized using Chol and lipids at different weight ratios ( Table 2 ) . The liposomes were made following the procedure previously reported , but with some modifications ( Paolino et al . , 2014 ) . Briefly , Chol and lipids ( 20 mg / ml ) were dissolved in the organic solvent previously mentioned ( CH 3 OH : CHCl 3 , 1 : 3 v / v ) , and then evaporated at 75°C using a rotary evaporator ( Laborota 4000 , Heidolph , Delchimica , Naples , Italy ) at 90 rpm . The resulting thin layer lipid film was then hydrated with Hepes buffer ( 10 mM , pH = 7 . 4 ) by itself ( HBECLips ) , or Hepes buffer and HPTS / DPX ( LIPs ) , respectively . The resulting lipidic suspension was warmed ( 5 min , at 75°C ) and vortex - mixed ( 5 min ) four times . The lipids were extruded through polycarbonate membranes ( 100 nm ) using a steel - extrusion device ( Lipex Biomembranes , Northern Lipids Inc . , Vancouver , BC , Canada ) , and then purified by way of size exclusion chromatography in Sephadex G75 glass columns . Calcein - loaded LIP1s were obtained by adding Calcein ( 10 mM ) during the hydration phase . 2 . 5 . Physicochemical characterization of niosomes and liposomes The average sizes , size distribution ( PdI ) and zeta potentials of empty NSVs , HBECLips , LIPs , and DOX - loaded NSVs that were synthesized , some with and some without the pH gradient remote loading procedure , were analyzed using the Dynamic Light Scattering ( DLS ) technique . The sample was diluted with isosmotic double - distilled pyrogen free - water ( 1 : 10 v / v ) in order to avoid multiscattering phenomena , and then analyzed at 25°C with a Malvern Zetasizer Nano ZS ( Malvern Instruments Ltd . , United Kingdom ) . The measurements were done in triplicate on three different batches ( 5 analyses for each batch ) . The results were the mean ± standard deviation . Transmission electron microscopy ( TEM ) microphotography of LIP1 was performed as previously reported ( Belletti et al . , 2015 ) . Briefly , diluted samples ( 0 . 05 mg / ml ) were placed on a 200 - mesh formvar copper grid ( TABB Laboratories Equipment , Berks , UK ) , and the excess was removed with blotting paper . A drop of 2 % ( w / v ) aqueous solution of uranyl acetate was added and 9 left in contact with the sample for at least 5 min . The excess suspension was removed , and the resulting sample was dried at room temperature and atmospheric pressure before the analysis . The analysis was performed using a TEM JEM 2010 microscope ( Jeol , MA , USA ) at 200 kV . 2 . 6 . Entrapment efficiency and release kinetic of DOX - loaded NSVs The entrapment efficiency of DOX - loaded NSVs was determined using an HPLC Waters Liquid Chromatograph apparatus equipped with a model 1525 binary solvent pump , a 2996 photodiode array , and a 2475 Multi λ Fluorescent detector . The mobile phase was directly degassed online using a Degassex , mod . DG - 400 ( Phenomenex , Torrance , CA , USA ) , and Empower v . 2 Software ( Waters Spa , Mil - ford , MA , USA ) was used to acquire the spectra and analyze the data . A Gemini reverse phase C18 packing column ( 4 . 6 mm × 250 mm ; 5 μm particle size ; Phenomenex , Torrance , CA , USA ) was used for analytical separation . A disposable Security - Guard column ( 4 . 0 × 3 . 0 mm , 5 μm particle size ; Phenomenex , Torrance , CA , USA ) was used to protect the column . The column was warmed to 25°C ( ±1°C ) using a Waters Temperature Control Module II ( Waters Spa , Milford , MA , USA ) . The analysis was carried out under isocratic conditions , and the mobile phase was composed of water ( HPLC grade ) + 0 . 05 % ( v / v ) TFA ; acetonitrile ( ACN ) , 40 ; 60 ( v / v ) at 1 . 0 ml / min flow rate . The quantification of the chromatograms was obtained at the fluorescence intensities of 590 nm ( emission ) and 490 nm ( excitation ) , respectively . Empty NSVs were used as a blank . The total run time was 10 min ; while the retention time of DOX was 4 . 65 min . An external calibration curve for DOX was used to quantify the different chromatographic peaks according to the S1 Equation ( see Supplementary material ) . The DOX - loaded NSVs were dissolved using isopropyl alcohol ( 1 : 1 v / v ) , and the entrapment efficiency of DOX was calculated using the HPLC apparatus herein reported according to the S2 equation ( see Supplementary material ) . The release kinetic of DOX - loaded NSVs was investigated using dialysis tubes ( cut - off 8 , 000 Da , Spectrum Labs , Breda , The Netherlands ) . The dialysis tubes were hydrated in distilled water at room temperature for 60 min before the experiments to remove any residual sodium azide solution . The dialysis tubes were firmly sealed using clamps , soaked in crystallizing dishes containing 200 ml of Hepes buffer ( 10 mM , pH = 7 . 4 ) , then incubated at 37°C under continuous stirring at 120 rpm . The crystallizing dishes were covered with aluminum foil to prevent the evaporation of the receptor medium during the experiment . At regular intervals , 1 ml of the receptor fluid was drawn off and replaced with an equal volume of fresh medium . 10 Samples were collected at different time intervals ( 0 . 5 , 1 , 2 , 3 , 4 , 5 , 18 , 24 , 48 , 72 h ) , and drug release was calculated using the HPLC apparatus already mentioned , according to the S3 equation ( see Supplementary material ) . 2 . 7 . pH - responsiveness of NSVs The pH - responsiveness of the NSVs was determined using two different fluorescent probes ( NR and HPTS / DPX ) as previously reported ( Di Marzio et al . , 2013 ) . Briefly , HPTS / DPX - or NR - loaded vesicles were incubated in Hepes ( 10 mM , pH = 7 . 4 ) , acetate ( 200 mM , pH = 5 . 5 ) or MES ( 10 mM , pH = 5 . 5 ) buffers . The increase in the intensity of the fluorescence of the HPTS probe in the MES buffer , and the shift of the emission wavelengths of NR in the acetate buffer were measured by means of an LS55 spectrofluorometer ( PerkinElmer , MA , USA ) . The experimental parameters were : a 25°C analysis temperature ; 2 . 5 nm slit widths ; and a scanning speed of 10 nm / min . The increase in the fluorescence of the HPTS probe was measured at the excitation ( λ ex ) and emission wavelengths ( λ em ) of 403 and 510 nm , respectively . The shifts in the emission wavelengths of the NR probe registered in the range between 550 and 700 nm at λ ex of 550 nm . The empty and fluorescent pH - responsive NSVs , incubated in Hepes ( 10 mM , pH = 7 . 4 ) , acetate ( 200 mM , pH = 5 . 5 ) or MES ( 10 mM , pH = 5 . 5 ) buffers , were further analyzed through DLS ( section 2 . 5 Physicochemical characterization of niosomes and liposomes ) . 2 . 8 . Study of the kinetic fusion of nanovesicles Kinetic fusion coming about between HPTS / DPX - loaded NSVs or LIPs and HBECLips was evaluated by measuring the increase of the HPTS fluorescence signal following dilution of the HPTS / DPX complex in the aqueous compartment of the merged vesicles . The kinetic studies were carried out with or without Ca 2 + as previously reported ( Wu and Li , 1999 ) . The mixture ( 1 : 3 v / v ) of HPTS / DPX - loaded NSVs or LIPs and HBECLips was incubated in Hepes buffer ( 10 mM , pH = 7 . 4 ) with or without CaCl 2 ( 10 mM ) at different time intervals ( 0 , 5 , 10 , 15 , 20 , 30 and 60 min ) . Kinetic fusion was measured using an LS55 spectrofluorometer ( Perkin Elmer , MA , USA ) at 25°C , with 2 . 5 nm slit widths , and a scanning speed of 10 nm / min . , as mentioned . The increase of HPTS fluorescence ( AU : arbitrary unit ) was measured at 403 ( λ ex ) and 510 ( λ em ) nm , respectively . The percentage of fusion of de - quenched HPTS was calculated according to the following equation ( Equation 1 ) : % 𝐹𝑢𝑠𝑖𝑜𝑛 = { Α𝑈 𝑡 – 𝐴𝑈 𝑡𝑜 𝐴𝑈 𝑡ℎ𝑒𝑜𝑟𝑖𝑐𝑎𝑙 – ( 𝐴𝑈 𝑣𝑒𝑠−𝐻𝑃𝑇𝑆 −𝐴𝑈 𝑣𝑒𝑠−𝐻𝑃𝑇𝑆𝐷𝑃𝑋 ) × 𝑓 𝑐𝑜𝑟𝑟𝑒𝑐𝑡𝑖𝑜𝑛 } × 100 ( Equation 1 ) 11 where , AU t is the fluorescence of HPTS / DPX at different incubation times , AU t0 is the fluorescence of HPTS / DPX - loaded NSVs , or LIPs , and HBECLips at t = 0 ; AU theorical is the intensity of the fluorescence of HPTS / DPX - loaded - NSVs or LIPs and HBECLips was obtained using the calibration curve of HTPS in Hepes buffer ( see Supplementary material Equations S4 , S5 ) , AU ves - HPTS was the intensity of fluorescence obtained using the calibration curve of HPTS - loaded vesicles ( see Supplementary material Equations S6 , S7 , S8 ) , AU ves - HTPS / DPX was the basal fluorescence of vesicles , and f correction was the correction factor obtained by quenching the basal fluorescence of niosomes ( NSVs # 10 ) and liposomes ( Lip # 11 ) . The resulting empty and fluorescent merged vesicles were further analyzed by DLS ( see section 2 . 5 . Physicochemical characterization of niosomes and liposomes ) . The experiments were done by measuring the variation of the average sizes of NSVs and HPTS / DPX - loaded NSVs or LIPs and HBECLips that were incubated in the Hepes buffer ( 10 mM , pH = 7 . 4 ) , with or without the addition of CaCl 2 ( 10 mM ) , at different time intervals ( 0 , 5 , 10 , 15 , 20 , 30 and 60 min ) . 2 . 9 . Cell culture SH - SY5Y human neuroblastoma cells were seeded in RPMI 1640 supplemented with MgSO 4 × 7 H 2 O ( 0 . 407 mM ) , FBS ( 10 % v / v ) , amphotericin B solution ( 250 μg / ml ) ( 1 % v / v ) , penicillin ( 100 UI / ml ) - streptomycin ( 100 μg / ml ) solution ( 1 % v / v ) , sodium pyruvate ( 1 mM ) and glutamine ( 2 mM ) at 37°C in 5 % CO 2 . Raw 264 . 7 cells were seeded at 37°C and 5 % CO 2 in DMEM cell culture medium supplemented with FBS ( 10 % v / v ) , glutamine ( 2 mM ) , penicillin ( 100 UI / ml ) and streptomycin ( 100 μg / ml ) . 2 . 10 . Cell incubation and intracellular uptake Raw 264 . 7 cells at 70 % confluence were harvested using trypsin ( 0 . 01 % v / v ) / EDTA ( 0 . 02 % v / v ) , centrifuged ( 200 × g , 4°C , 5 min ) , and washed twice with ice - cold PBS solution . Raw 264 . 7 cells ( 95 % cell viability ) , at 20 × 10 6 cells / ml , were co - incubated in propylene tubes together with calcein - loaded liposomes , pH - responsive NSVs and non - responsive NSVs diluted in DMEM culture medium in order to obtain a final concentration of 10 mM ( based on Tween ® derivatives or phospholipids , respectively ) . Raw 264 . 7 cells were incubated with liposomes ( control ) , pH - responsive , and non - responsive NSVs for 1 h , washed twice with a PBS solution ( 2 ml ) , centrifuged ( 200 × g , 4°C , 5 min ) , and then suspended in a PBS solution ( 1 ml ) . The resulting suspension was incubated with trypan blue dye ( 0 . 4 % v / v ) for 5 min at room temperature , washed twice with PBS ( 2 ml ) , and suspended in a PBS solution ( 1 ml , and final concentration of 10 6 cells / ml ) . Calcein ( 10 mM ) , empty liposomes , and NSVs were used as controls and showed a cell viability of 90 - 95 % . 12 The intracellular uptake ( internalization ) of NSVs was determined after 3 h of incubation at different temperatures ( 4 and 37°C ) , with and without molecular inhibitors ( chlorpromazine , CD , filipin ) . The pre - incubation of cells together with molecular inhibitors was carried out in order to discover the pathways involved in the intracellular mechanisms ( endocytosis - mediated uptake or fusion ) . In particular , chlorpromazine ( 10 μg / ml ) , CD ( 4 mM ) , and filipin ( 5 μg / ml ) were used as molecular inhibitors of caveolae - and clathrin - mediated endocytosis or fusion . Raw 264 . 7 cells were pre - incubated with molecular inhibitors for 15 min , washed twice with a PBS solution ( 2 ml ) , centrifuged ( 200 × g , 4°C , 5 min ) , and then incubated for 1 h with liposomes ( control ) , pH - responsive NSVs and non - responsive NSVs . The resulting samples were washed with a PBS solution ( 2 ml ) , and then analyzed through fluorescent - activated cell sorting ( FACS ) of the live cells as previously reported ( Di Marzio et al . , 2008 ) . Twenty thousand cells were analyzed by means of FACS at the emission wavelengths of 488 and 522 nm ; raw 264 . 7 cells with a viability percentage ranging between 90 - 95 % were used during the experiments . 2 . 11 . Cytotoxicity study SH - SY - 5Y cells were cultivated in 25 cm 2 / cell culture flasks as previously reported ( Celia et al . 2013 ) . Cells at 70 % confluence were seeded ( 1 . 56 × 10 4 cells / cm 2 ) into 96 - well plates . After 24 h of incubation , the cells were treated using different concentrations ( 0 . 05 , 0 . 1 , 0 . 5 , and 1 μM ) of free DOX and DOX - loaded NSVs . Untreated cells were used as control . The cytotoxicity study was carried out at different incubation times ( 24 , 48 and 72 h ) . The resulting cytotoxicity was performed measuring the decrease in the viability of the SH - SY - 5Y cells through MTT assay ( cell viability test ) . At the end of the designated incubation times , 5 mg / ml of MTT solution in 10 μl of PBS buffer was added to each well and the cells were incubated for 3 more hours at 37°C . The incubated medium was removed after 3 h , and replaced with an ethanol and DMSO solution ( 1 : 1v / v , 100 μl ) . The resulting crystals of formazane that precipitated inside the living cells during the incubation times were dissolved , and gently shaken for 20 min at 230 rpm using an orbital shaker ( IKA ® KS 130 Control , IKA ® WERKE GMBH & Co , Staufen , Germany ) . The samples were then analyzed using an ELISA microplate reader spectrophotometer ( Labsystems mod . Multiskan MS , Midland , ON , Canada ) set at the wavelength of 570 nm . The percentage of cell viability was measured using the following equation ( Equation 2 ) : Cell viability ( % ) = [ AbsT / AbsC ] × 100 ( Equation 2 ) where , AbsT is the adsorbance of the treated cells and AbsC is the adsorbance of the control ( untreated ) cells . 2 . 13 . Statistical analysis 13 Data were reported as the mean of three different experiments ( n = 3 ) ± standard deviation ( S . D . ) . Statistical analysis was performed using the t - test . A * P - value < 0 . 05 was considered statistically significant . 3 . Results and discussion 3 . 1 . Physicochemical characterization of NSVs , Lips , and HBECLips Empty - NSVs , NR - loaded NSVs , and HPTS / DPX - loaded NSVs showed average sizes ranging from 110 to 225 nm ( Fig . 1 [ A ] ) . The average sizes of the NSVs depended on the surfactants used and the molar concentrations of the Tw21 and Tw80 . Empty NSV1s and NSV2s , made with a high molar concentration of Tw21 , had average sizes of less than 120 nm , but the average sizes of the empty NSVs increased when the molar concentration of Tw21 was decreased ( Fig . 1 [ A ] ) . The loading of NR or HTPS / DPX further increased the average sizes of NSV1s and NSV2s ( Fig . 1 [ A ] ) . The HTPS / DPX - loaded NSV1s averaged 222 . 5 nm . This increase might depend on the hydrophilic HTPS / DPX complex , which modified the ionic strength and lipidic molecular area of the nanovesicles ( Xu et al . , 2012 ) . Cholesterol and Hepes buffer can also affect the ionic strength and lipidic molecular area of NSVs . In fact , the cholesterol and the neutral lipids of liposomes increase the ionic strength of the colloidal vesicles to a lipidic concentration of over 10 mM due to the reduction of their hydrodynamic radius . This variation potentiates the hydrating effect of the vesicles because of the water molecules adsorbed on the head groups of the surfactants . Consequently , the loading of the hydrophilic HTPS / DPX complex inside the aqueous core of the NSVs provoked an increase in the hydration and electrostatic forces of the vesicles , which were normally repulsive . The resulting increase in the average sizes of the vesicles was in agreement with data previously reported for liposomes loaded with cefotaxime aqueous solution , which increased the hydrodynamic radius by at least 80 nm as compared to the empty liposomes ( Ling et al . , 2006 ) . NR - loaded NSV3s and NSV4s had average sizes similar to those of empty NSVs ( Fig . 1 ) . HPTS / DPX - loaded NSV1s ( 222 . 5 nm ) had sizes larger than HPTS / DPX - loaded NSV2s ( 167 nm ) . This result may depend on the presence of Tw80 at a low molar concentration , which can modify the thickness of the bilayer of the NSVs . In fact , Tw80 contains oleic acid while lauryl acid is present in the backbone structures of Tw21 . The presence of the unsaturated chains of Tw80 that were intercalated between the head groups of the surfactants and their acylic chains decreased the thickness of the bilayer . This effect was specific for the thickness of the lipid bilayer at the gel - liquid phase ( Xu et al . , 2012 ) which allowed the colloidal nanoparticles and nanovesicles to transition from a solution or suspension to a gel - like diphasic system containing both liquid and 14 solid phases . These morphologies range from discriminate particles to a continuous polymeric , lipidic or surfactant network . The gel - like properties of the colloidal nanovesicles depend on the volume fraction of the particles dispersed in the liquid suspension or solution . The colloidal nanocarriers can further evolve from a solution to a gel - like structure under specific conditions , depending on factors such as temperature , pH or material components , and the changes in their supramolecular structure depend on the equilibrium that exists between the particles forming the colloidal network and the liquid medium . Average sizes similar to those of NSV2s were obtained for HTPS / DPX - loaded NSV3s and NSV4s by increasing the molar concentration of Tw80 , and decreasing that of Tw21 ( Fig . 1 [ A ] ) . These results suggested that the different molecular weights , pending alkyl chains , and hydrophilic / hydrophobic balance of the surfactants , could all influence the physicochemical features of the different formulations ( Fig . 1 [ A ] ) . Empty NSV3s and NSV4s were larger than empty NSV1s , which were slightly bigger than NSV2s ( Fig . 1 [ A ] ) . The average sizes of NSV3s and NSV4s were the same for nanocarriers with or without NR , but they increased slightly when the vesicles were loaded with HTPS / DPX ( Fig . 1 [ A ] ) . The average sizes of NSV3s and NSV4s were similar to those of NSV2s loaded with HTPS / DPX or NR , and vice versa ; conversely , empty NSV3s and NSV4s were larger than empty NSV2s ( Fig . 1 [ A ] ) . Empty NSV5s were larger than NSV1s , - 2s , - 3s , and - 4s ( Fig . 1 [ A ] ) . The average sizes of NSV5s decreased when NR was loaded , while they increased when HTPS / DPX was loaded , except for HTPS / DPX - loaded NSV1s which were bigger than HTPS / DPX - loaded NSV5s ( Fig . 1 [ A ] ) . These results suggest that NSVs made of Tw80 and Chol might form a rigid bilayer , and , in the presence of Chol , change from a solution to a gel - like or gel - sol structure , which could partially decrease at equal molar concentrations of Tw21 and Tw80 ( NSV3s ) . The results were in agreement with data previously reported for NSVs made of different combinations of surfactants ( Shatalebi et al . , 2010 ; Yoshioka et al . , 1994 ) . The zeta potential affected the long - term stability of the colloidal nanoparticles . A net charge , either negative or positive , stabilized the nanoformulations , allowing them to avoid aggregation ( Chen et al . , 2016 ) . We previously demonstrated that negatively - charged , PEGylated nanoliposomes ( Paolino et al . , 2014 ) and nanoparticles ( Cosco et al . , 2015 ) are stable for a long time , and can systemically deliver anticancer drugs ( Paolino et al . , 2014 ; Cosco et al . , 2015 ) . In this work we synthesized negatively - charged NSVs having a zeta potential ranging from – 20 to – 50 mV ( Fig . 1 [ B ] ) , and long - term stability features . The zeta potential of the NSVs was found to depend on the molar concentration of the surfactants they contain , and showed a data trend similar to that of the average sizes herein reported ( Fig . 1 [ B ] ) . In fact we have already mentioned that Tw21 and Tw80 contain different fatty acids ( lauryl and oleic ) and PEO units in their backbone structures , and 15 this may cause them to interact differently with the bilayer of NSVs , modifying their net negative charge . Similar data have been reported for gemcitabine hydrochloride - loaded liposomes , which were optimized using different preparation procedures , lipid compositions , and molar ratios ( Calvagno et al . , 2007 ) . In fact , these parameters can modify the physicochemical properties of liposomes , and affect their average sizes , PdI , and zeta potential as herein reported for NSVs . The loading of NR and HPTS / DPX modified the zeta potential values of NSVs ( Fig . 1 [ B ] ) ; however , NSVs showed a net negative charge below – 20 mV , and were stable as a suspension . The decrease of the zeta potential values of NR - loaded NSV1s might depend on the fact that the payload ( NR ) was partially adsorbed onto the external surfaces of the NSVs . It could be that the NR interacts with the PEO units ( # 4 ) of Tw21 , thus decreasing the net negative surface charges of NSV1s ( Fig . 1 [ B ] ) . The long - term stability of NSVs was further supported by PdI analysis . Results demonstrated that the PdI was below 0 . 3 ( see Supplementary material Fig . S3 ) , so there was a narrow size distribution of the particles as previously reported ( Ingallina et al . , 2016 ) . Liposomes were synthesized to make synthetic biological membranes so that the fusion kinetic studies could be performed . In this attempt two different liposomes ( LIPs and HBECLips ) were synthesized ( Table 2 ) . Their physicochemical parameters ( see Supplementary material Table S1 ) depended on the preparation procedures and type of lipid used , as previously reported for liposomes ( Calvagno et al . , 2007 ) . The sizes of the HBECLips were in the micrometer scale , and had a net negative surface charge of – 55 mV , and a PdI of 0 . 35 ; conversely , LIP - 1s , - 2s and - 3s had : i ) average sizes of 129 , 125 . 3 , and 135 . 6 nm , respectively ; ii ) a net negative surface charge ranging from – 18 to – 44 . 7 mV ; and iii ) a PdI below 0 . 07 ( see Supplementary material Table S1 ) . The different average sizes of HBECLips and LIPs depended on the preparation procedures as previously reported for liposomes ( Calvagno et al . , 2007 ) . In fact , HBECLips were multilamellar liposomes and were synthesized using the thin layer ( TLE ) evaporation procedure without extrusion ( Table 2 ) , while , LIP - 1s , - 2s and - 3s were unilamellar and had a narrow size distribution , and were obtained by combining the TLE and extrusion methods . These data are in agreement with the TEM image of LIP1s showing the presence of unilamellar nanoparticles with a narrow size distribution ( see Supplementary material Fig . S4 ) . The TEM images of LIP - 2s and - 3s were similar to those of LIP1s ( data not shown ) . HBECLips had large particle sizes and a wide distribution similar to that of eukaryotic cells , which have a complex structure and contain various organelles dispersed in the cytoplasm ( Zhang et al . , 2013 ) . HBECLips were more negative than LIP - 1s , - 2s and - 3s , and had a zeta potential value of less than – 55 mV , due to the presence of phosphatidylserine and monosialotetrahexosylganglioside ( negatively charged pospholipids ) in the lipid bilayer ( Table 2 ) . 16 Conversely , LIP1s ( – 37 . 1 mV ) , LIP2s ( – 44 . 7 mV ) , and LIP3s ( – 18 mV ) , which were synthesized using CHEMS , DSPE - PEG and DPPC ( amphiphilic and zwitterionic lipids ) , had lower zeta potential values than the HBECLips ( – 55 mV ) ( see Supplementary material Table S1 ) . The physicochemical features of DOX - loaded NSVs were further investigated prior to in vitro cytotoxicity assay . The DOX - loaded NSVs were synthesized using two different procedures ( passive , and pH gradient / remote loading ) as herein reported . The passive loading of DOX increased the average sizes of NSV1s ( 190 nm ) and NSV2s ( 150 nm ) as compared to the empty NSVs ( see Supplementary material Table S2 ) . This increase in the average sizes was in agreement with data previously reported for cefotaxime aqueous solution - loaded liposomes ( Ling et al . , 2006 ) , but was contrary to data previously reported for non - ionic surfactant vesicles . The diameter of nanovesicles can decrease after they encapsulate hydrophilic drugs due to the electrostatic attraction that occurs between the drug and the lipid bilayer ; conversely , the vesicular bilayer can cause the cohesive interaction between nanoparticles to increase . In this attempt , the resulting closely - packed configuration of the lipid bilayer could increase the membrane curvature radius of phospholipids , and decrease the average sizes of NSVs as previously reported for sulfadiazine or diclofenac sodium salt entrapped in the NSV ( Muzzalupo et al . , 2011 ; Tavano et al . , 2010 ) . Similar data were obtained for the other NSVs ( see Supplementary material Table S2 ) . The DLS analysis showed a PdI below 0 . 3 ( see Supplementary material Table S2 ) . This value demonstrated that the NSVs had a narrow size distribution as previously reported ( Ingallina et al . , 2016 ) . The NSVs had zeta potential values ranging from – 20 to – 40 mV ( see Supplementary material Table S2 ) , thus evidencing the long - term stability of DOX - loaded NSVs . The pH gradient / remote loading procedure did not affect the physicochemical features of DOX - loaded NSVs ; in fact the average sizes , zeta potentials and PdIs were similar when the passive and the pH gradient / remote loading procedures were compared ( see Supplementary material Table S2 ) . 3 . 2 . Entrapment efficiency and release kinetic of DOX The passive loading of DOX resulted in low entrapment efficiency ( < 30 % ) and poor drug retention as previously reported ( Fenske and Cullis , 2005 ) . The entrapment efficiency ( EE ) of DOX inside the NSVs was less than 10 % when they were passively loaded ( see Supplementary material Table S2 ) . In this attempt , the EE of NSVs increased when a pH gradient / remote loading procedure was used , as previously reported ( Fritze et al . , 2006 ) . This loading procedure increased the EE to over 40 % for NSV - 1s , - 2s , and - 3s ; while the EE was 20 % and 13 % for NSV4s , and NSV5s , respectively ( see Supplementary material Table S2 ) . Using the same procedure , the maximum EE of DOX was obtained for NSV3s , they reached a value of over 60 % ( see Supplementary material 17 Table S2 ) . The increase in the EE of the NSVs when the pH gradient / remote loading procedure was used depended on the acidic ( pH 3 - 4 ) environment of the aqueous core of the NSVs which crystallized the DOX giving rise to a gel - like drug structure which was retained inside the aqueous core of the nanovesicles to a great degree . In fact , DOX , as do other hydrophilic compounds , has a logD at pH 7 in the range between 2 . 5 and 2 . 0 , a drug - to - lipid ( D / L ) ratio < 0 . 3 ( ratio 1 ) , and a pKa ≥ 3 , and can be loaded into nanovesicles using a pH gradient / remote loading procedure as previously reported ( Cern et al . , 2017 , 2014 , 2012 ) . The DOX - loaded NSVs , obtained using the pH gradient / remote loading procedure , were further tested in vitro in order to quantify the release kinetic of the drug compound . The release of DOX from NSV - 1s , - 2s and - 3s was below ≈30 % after 72 h of incubation ( see Supplementary material Fig . S5 ) . The release of NSV - 4s and - 5s was ≈50 % and ≈70 % , respectively , after 72 h of incubation ( see Supplementary material Fig . S5 ) . The differences observed in the drug release percentages among the various NSVs might depend on the variations in their compositions ( Table 1 ) . The results for NSV - 1s , - 2s and - 3s was in agreement with data previously reported for liposomes ( Gao et al . , 2013 ; Alyane et al . , 2016 ) and NSVs ( Tavano et al . , 2016 ; Lohade et al . , 2015 ) . NSVs , obtained using the pH gradient / remote loading procedure showed a sustained release of DOX , which was independent from the presence of surfactants . This might depend on the acidic ammonium gradient that exists inside the cores of the NSVs together with the resulting gel - like structure of the drug . In fact , DOX precipitated as a gel - like structure and could not be quickly separated from its precipitate , in order to slowly permeate through the lipid bilayer as previously reported for liposomes ( Fritze et al . , 2006 ) . DOX - loaded NSV3s had a release kinetic of ≈10 % after 72 h of incubation ( see Supplementary material Fig . S5 ) , thus showing the retention of the crystallized DOX inside the aqueous compartments of NSV3s . This is important because NSV3s accumulate a large amount of DOX inside the tumor cells , thus increasing its anticancer activity . DOX - loaded NSVs were further tested in vitro through cytotoxicity assay . 3 . 3 . pH - responsiveness of NSVs The pH - responsiveness of NSVs was tested using fluorescence spectroscopy and DLS . Fluorescence spectroscopy is a non - invasive method of analysis providing precise and accurate measurements without destroying the biological samples ( Zhang et al . , 2013 ) . The fluorescent probes used to monitor the pH - responsiveness of the nanoparticles were NR and HPTS because they respond to changes of pH in the microenvironment . The fluorescence of HPTS was de - quenched by using DPX , while the fluorescence intensity of NR was shifted to a different maximum emission wavelength due to the transition of NSVs from the lamellar to micellar phase because of 18 the specific physical stimuli present ( Alves et al . , 2007 ) . The fluorescence emission of NR further depended on the medium composition and the pH used to disperse the nanoparticles ( Stuart et al . , 2005 ) . The maximum shift of the λ em of the NR - loaded NSVs was affected by the molar concentration and the physicochemical properties of the surfactants . In fact , the pH - responsive NSVs responded to the pH modifications in the microenvironment by changing their bilayers and supramolecular structures . The degree of pH - responsiveness depended on the protons adsorbed at the surfaces of the NSVs . A slight decrease in proton concentration on the vesicular surface was enough to change the aggregation state of the NSVs , and switch the nanocarriers from the lamellar to the crystal - liquid phase of the surfactant , thus modifying their bilayers , and forming inverted micelles ( Marianecci et al . , 2013 ) . The λ em of NR shifted from 591 ( pH = 7 . 4 ) to 584 nm ( pH = 5 . 5 ) for NSV - 1s , - 2s and - 3s ( Fig . 2 [ A ] ) , respectively . This shift depended on a significant increase in the polarity of NR at the high excitation wavelength , and promoted the synthesis of inverted micelles , which had a water - pool region of polarity in the head groups of the mixed surfactants of which the NSVs were composed ( Stuart et al . , 2005 ) . In fact , the NR showed solvatochromic properties which were used to monitor the aggregation of NSVs at different surfactant concentrations ( Stuart et al . , 2005 ; Hungerford et al . , 2005 ) , and the synthesis of inverted micelles . This effect depended on the surfactants that made up the NSVs , and their ratios . In particular , the microenvironment modified the polar properties of NR , and greatly modified its dipole moment upon excitation . This large change in the dipole moment depended on the difference in charge between the diethyl amino group of NR , which worked as an electron donor compartment , and the quinoid portion of the fluorescent probe , which worked as an electron acceptor compartment . The NR showed a low fluorescence quantum yielded at a pH value of 5 . 50 , while it became more hydrophobic at a pH value of 7 . 40 . This modification shifted the maximum wavelength emission at the blue spectrum ( Greenspan and Fowler , 1985 ; Dutta et al . , 1996 ; Ghoneim , 2000 ; Golini et al . , 1998 ) . These results were in agreement with data previously reported for liposomes made of DOPC and Chol , thus showing that the increase in the concentration of Chol provided a progressive emission maximum shift toward the lower wavelength ( Mukherjee et al . , 2007 ) . The NR probe is poorly water soluble and partitioned with the colloidal nanonocarriers , which provided large hydrophobic binding sites . This process shifted the emission wavelength of the NR after its dispersion inside the NSVs which occurred after the transition of the bilayer from the lamellar to the micellar phase . In fact , the inverted micelles were oriented with their hydrophobic tails directed towards the solvent . This effect allowed the hydration of the head groups of the surfactants present in the cores of the colloidal nanocarriers . NR can be partitioned in the interface compartment of NSVs , thus making contact with both the aqueous medium and with the hydrophobic tails of the 19 surfactants . The shifting of the excitation wavelength depended on the microenvironment , and supported the hypothesis that the inverted micelles were accumulated without the presence of an aqueous medium by saturating the systems with the organic solvent ( Stuart et al . , 2005 ; Hungerford et al . , 2005 ) . Conversely , NSV - 4s and - 5s were not pH - responsive , and did not provide any significant shift in the λ em of NR ( Fig . 2 [ A ] ) . The different pH - responsiveness of NSVs could depend on the surfactants comprising the NSVs and their molar concentrations . In particular , the pH - responsiveness of Tw21 could depend on its cone - shaped structure similar to the micelle - forming lipids with large head groups , and a pKa that promoted the fusion of colloidal nanovesicles at a low pH . At room temperature , The PEO units of Tw21 could partially provide an inverted hexagonal phase ( Hll ) similar to that of the pH - responsive dioleylphosphatidylethanolamine ( DOPE ) , or its derivatives , from which liposomes cannot be made without the addition of cone - shaped phospholipids , acidic aphiphiles , diacylsuccinylglycerols , lipid - based succinate derivatives , and cholesteryl hemisucinate or CHEMS ( Cui et al . , 2004 ) . When responding to a low pH , the large head groups and the pKa , as well as the partially inverted hexagonal phase Hll of Tw21 , support the pH - responsiveness of the NSVs . With or without the presence of other Tweens ® ( Table 1 ) , Tw21 made NSVs that were stabilized using cholesterol , as previously reported ( Marianecci et al . , 2014 ) . In fact , the cholesterol stabilized the NSVs , and made up their bilayer structure , which was not possible when only surfactants were used . Moreover , Tw21 , with or without other Tweens ® ( Table 1 ) or pH - responsive phospholipids , can affect the pH - responsiveness of NSVs and liposomes which become leaky at pHs below 5 . 5 , and can trigger the release of payloads both in vitro and in vivo at an acid pH ( Cui et al . , 2004 ) . NSV - 1s , - 2s and - 3s were synthesized from high molar concentrations of Tw21 ( Table 1 ) ; NSV4s contained a small molar concentration of the same surfactant , and NSV5s did not contain any molar concentration of Tw21 ( Table 1 ) . It was observed that Tw21 had 4 PEG units attached to the secondary hydroxyl groups of surfactants , which affects the pH - responsiveness of NSVs . In fact , these 4 PEG units of Tw21 generated low counter ions , and a related water pool region close to the polar head groups of the surfactants ; it also promoted the shift of the bilayer from the lamellar to the hexagonal liquid crystalline state . This assembling of the bilayer promoted the aggregation of NSV1s , - 2s and - 3s as a specific response to the acid pH ( 5 . 5 ) , and affected interaction between Tw21 and Tw80 . The simultaneous self - assembling of different Tweens ® inside the NSVs yielded a hexagonal liquid crystalline phase ( H I ) as previously reported ( Kijima et al . , 2007 ) . In fact , the Tw21 comprising the NSV - 1s , - 2s and - 3s affected their pH - responsiveness , as previously reported ( Di Marzio et al . , 2011 ) . The opposite occurred when the molar concentration of the Tw21 was decreased and that of the Tw80 increased in the NSVs ( Table 1 ) . The NSV - 4s and - 5s , which 20 contained high molar concentrations of Tw80 , were not pH - responsive , nor did they aggregate at pH 5 . 5 , and the bilayer did not change from the lamellar to the hexagonal liquid crystalline state as a specific response to the decrease in pH ( Fig . 2 [ A ] ) . Rather , this is the effect of the significant increase of the water - polar region close to the head groups of the NSVs ( Stuart et al . , 2005 ) , and depends on the 20 PEG units of Tw80 which is a more hydrophilic surfactant than Tw21 , and has the same PEG units as Tw20 ( Dai et al . , 2007 ) . The 20 PEG units of Tw80 and the oleic acid residue of its primary hydroxyl group can stabilize the bilayers of the NSVs in the lamellar phase , and prevent their transition from the lamellar to hexagonal liquid crystalline state due to the increase of aqueous volume in the polar head group of the surfactants . The pH - responsiveness of Tw80 - NSVs was similar to that of Tw20 - NSVs that were protected from pH degradation as compared to the Tw21 - NSVs , as previously reported ( Di Marzio et al . , 2011 ) . Similar results were obtained using the HTPS / DPX complex ( see Supplementary material Fig . S6 [ A ] ) . NSV - 1s , - 2s and - 3s were pH - responsive at the acid pH ( 5 . 5 ) while NSV - 4s and - 5s were not pH - responsive . In particular , the fluorescence intensity of NSV - 1s , - 2s and - 3s increased to 80 , 78 and 70 AU , respectively , when the pH of the microenvironment was decreased from 7 . 4 to 5 . 5 . This difference was statistically significant for various NSVs ( see Supplementary material Fig . S6 [ A ] ) . Conversely , NSV - 4s and - 5s , which had low molar concentrations or lack of Tw21 in the bilayer , did not show any change in the intensity of the fluorescence when the pH was decreased from 7 . 4 to 5 . 5 ( see Supplementary material Fig . S6 [ A ] ) . This decrease of intensity at pH 5 . 5 , depended on the NSV composition , and the Tw21 molar concentration . In fact , we previously reported that Tw21 , at a high molar concentration and an acid pH ( 5 . 5 ) , promotes the aggregation of NSVs and the transition of the bilayer from the lamellar to the hexagonal liquid crystalline state ( Gruner , 1989 ; Bailey and Cullis , 1997 ) . This effect depended on the combination of the water - pool region of polarity at the head groups of the surfactants , and was the result of inverted micelles that were produced after the modification of the NSV bilayer ( Stuart et al . , 2005 ) . The transition of the bilayers of NSV - 1s , - 2s and - 3s at an acid pH ( 5 . 5 ) favored the release of the HTPS loaded in the NSVs , which was immediately de - quenched by the DPX present in the aqueous media ( Draffehn and Kumke , 2016 ) . The de - quenching effect of DPX provided a significant increase in the intensity of the fluorescence of HTPS ( see Supplementary material Fig . S6 [ A ] ) due to the leakage of the HTPS / DPX complex into the medium . The pH - responsiveness of NSV - 1s , - 2s and - 3s did not depend on the incubation time ( 5 - 30 min ) ; in fact , the fluorescence intensity did not change , and was constant at the various incubation times ( data not reported ) . The NSV - 4s and - 5s were not pH - responsive , and the fluorescence intensity showed similar values at both pHs 7 . 4 and 5 . 5 ( see Supplementary material Fig . S6 [ A ] ) . This effect might depend 21 on the Tw80 , which self - assembled at different molar concentrations in the NSV - 4s and - 5s ( Table 1 ) . In particular , Tw80 increased the aqueous volume at the polar head groups of the surfactants , prevented the transition of the bilayer from the lamellar to the hexagonal liquid crystalline state ( Gruner , 1989 ; Bailey and Cullis , 1997 ) , and provided steric hindrance on the surfaces of the NSVs , which impeded the pH - dependent transition of the surfactants and lipids ( Sudimack et al . , 2002 ) . These data were in agreement with the DLS analysis of the NSVs ( Fig . 2 [ B ] ) . The average sizes of the NSV - 1s , - 2s and - 3s increased significantly ( p < 0 . 05 ) at a pH of 5 . 5 , while the average sizes of the NSV - 4s and - 5s did not change ( Fig . 2 [ B ] ) at the same pH , and the NSVs had a narrow size distribution ( see Supplementary material Fig . S6 [ B ] ) . The acid pH ( 5 . 5 ) of the aqueous media destabilized the NSV - 1s , - 2s and - 3s and caused the transition of the bilayer from the lamellar to the hexagonal liquid crystalline phase ( H I ) as already mentioned . This effect promoted the aggregation of the NSVs , making large ( Fig . 2 [ B ] ) nanoparticles that were widely distributed in the aqueous medium ( see Supplementary material Fig . S6 [ B ] ) . 3 . 4 . Study of the kinetic fusion of nanovesicles The two aqueous compartments of the NSVs and the synthetic models of the human endothelial cell membranes used during experimentation were firstly separated and then merged following this process : i ) the NSVs stick to HBECLips and aggregate on their surfaces ; ii ) the NSVs then modify the lipid bilayer of HBECLips , and merge with the synthetic membranes at the point of their adhesion , after which iii ) the vesicles exchange lipids , thus making aqueous pores through the bilayers and leaking the HPTS / DPX complex , which de - quenches the fluorescent probe in the aqueous cores of the merged vesicles ( Bentz et al . , 1983 ) . The Ca 2 + that was obtained from CaCl 2 , was used to study the fusion kinetic between the NSVs and HBECLips . It was previously demonstrated that Ca 2 + in an acidic pH stimulates interaction between the biological membranes and causes fusion between the nanovesicles ( Wu and Li , 1999 ; Ellens et al . , 1985 ; Sukumaran and Ohki , 1988 ) . The following was observed that the Ca 2 + was adsorbed onto the surfaces of the vesicles and neutralized the negative charge of the lipids and surfactants , thus promoting their aggregation and fusion . The adsorption of the Ca 2 + on the external bilayer of the vesicles further dehydrated the surfaces of the lipid membranes , and bridges were formed between various vesicles ( Wu and Li , 1999 ; Montich et al . , 1985 ) . This effect triggered the synthesis of non - bilayer fusion intermediates ( Wu and Li , 1999 ; Hope et al . , 1983 ) . Conversely , the acid pH ( 5 . 5 ) neutralized the net negative charge of the vesicles , and partially removed the adsorbed water from their external surfaces ( Wu et al . , 1996 ) . In this attempt , we studied the fusion kinetic between NSVs and HBECLips with or 22 without Ca 2 + under physiological conditions that corresponded to the extracellular concentration of Ca 2 + ions present in biological systems . The fusion kinetic was studied by measuring the dynamic rate arising between different vesicles ( Diao et al . , 2011 ) . NSVs and LIPs ( control ) were incubated with HBECLip with or without Ca 2 + ( 10 mM Ca 2 + ) , and the resulting kinetic of fusion was evaluated by measuring the increase of fluorescence after the de - quenching of the HPTS / DPX complex . This evidenced the aggregation phase of the vesicles , which depended on the primary minimum distance of the intermembrane interaction energy of the NSVs and HBECLips as previously reported for phosphatidylserine - based unilamellar liposomes incubated with or without calcium . The high concentration of Ca 2 + in the aqueous media simulated physiological conditions , and supported the fusion of vesicles at different incubation times ( Wu and Li , 1999 ) . The fusion between NSVs and HBECLips depended on the molar concentration of the surfactants , and the length of the incubation time with Ca 2 + ( Fig . 3 ) . NSVs or LIPs ( control ) did not merge with HBECLips without Ca 2 + ( Figs . 3 [ A , B ] ) . In fact , the fusion percentage of HTPS / DPX - loaded NSVs was less than 8 % ( Fig . 3 [ A ] ) . The percentage of fusion kinetic was below reported : ≈3 % ( NSV1s ) , ≈8 % ( NSV2s ) , ≈5 % ( NSV3s ) , ≈0 . 02 % ( NSV4s ) , and ≈0 . 99 % ( NSV5s ) at 60 min . Similar data were obtained for LIPs ( control ) : ≈3 % ( LIP1s ) , ≈1 . 41 % ( LIP2s ) , and ≈0 . 68 % ( LIP3s ) ( Fig . 3 [ B ] ) . The difference in maximum fusion percentages between the NSVs and LIPs might depend on the different compositions and concentrations of the components of NSVs and liposomes . In fact , the NSVs were made up of surfactants , which had different thermodynamic properties and transition temperatures from those of lipids . The phospholipids present in LIPs responded differently to the pH and interacted differently with the ions as compared to surfactants , and they could de - quench the HTPS / DPX complex across time in a different manner . The lack of fusion percentage values for the NSVs and LIPs also depended on the lack of the Ca 2 + in the incubation medium . The presence of Ca 2 + can trigger the fusion of vesicles after their surfaces make contact , and increase the kinetic of interaction following the aggregation that occurs during the first stage of the interaction process ( Wilschut et al . , 1985 ) . The presence of Ca 2 + increased the fusion between the pH - responsive NSVs and HBECLips ( Fig . 3 [ C ] ) . The NSV - 1s , - 2s and - 3s had fusion percentages of 29 % , 22 % and 18 . 3 % , respectively ( Fig . 3 [ C ] ) , as compared to those of NSVs without Ca 2 + , which had fusion percentages of 3 . 25 % , 8 . 6 % and 5 . 01 % , respectively ( Fig . 3 [ A ] ) . These differences could depend on the number of PEG units in the various NSVs which varied between Tw21 ( 4 PEG units ) and Tw80 ( 20 PEG units ) ( Marianecci et al . , 2014 ) . The decrease of the molar concentration of Tw21 and the resulting increase of Tw80 in NSV - 1s , - 2s and - 3s could provide a low value of counter ions and a related water pool region close to the polar head groups of the surfactants ( Gruner , 1989 ) . 23 It was observed that Tw80 increased the total number of PEG units , modified the bilayers and improved the stability of the nanoparticles ( Kreuter et al . , 2003 ) . In fact , the brushed structure of PEG together with its low molecular weight and short chain length might further promote the aggregation of nanoparticles , and bring about the interaction and fusion of the NSVs and HBECLips ( as occurs with the opsonins ) that promoted the uptake of non - PEGylated nanoparticles by the macrophages ( Nagayama et al . , 2007 ) . The length of the PEG chains can also affect the interaction between these proteins and the surfaces of the nanovesicles , thus hampering the subsequent diffusion of the adsorbed proteins ( Diaz et al . , 2008 ) . During experimentation , the NSV - 4s and - 5s did not show any significant variation in fusion percentage either with ( Fig . 3 [ C ] ) or without Ca 2 + ( Fig . 3 [ A ] ) . This effect depended on the surfactants and their composition ( Table 1 ) . The NSV - 4s and - 5s containing Tw80 or a low molar concentration of Tw21 were not responsive when the pH was decreased due to the number of PEG units ( over 20 ) which prevented the adsorption of the resulting water pool region close to the polar head groups of the surfactants ( Gruner et al . , 1989 ) . Conversely , LIPs , which were used as control and were not pH - responsive , showed similar values of fusion percentages after their incubation with ( Fig . 3 [ D ] ) or without Ca 2 + ( Fig . 3 [ B ] ) . In fact , the lipids comprising LIPs ( Table 2 ) were less fusogenic than 1 , 2 - dioleoyl - sn - glycero - 3 - phosphoethanolamine ( DOTAP ) , 1 , 2 - dioleoyl - 3 - trimethylammonium - propane ( DOPE ) ( Sun et al . , 2013 ) , and Tw21 ( Di Marzio et al . , 2011 ) . The Tw80 of NSV - 4s and - 5s showed a fusion percentage below ≈5 % ( Fig . 3 ) . Similar results were obtained by measuring the fluorescence intensity of NSVs ( see Supplementary material Fig . S7 ) , when NSV - 1s , - 2s and - 3s incubated with Ca 2 + presented values of over 200 AU ( see Supplementary material Fig . S7 [ B ] ) . On the other hand , the NSVs did not show any significant changes in fluorescence intensity without Ca 2 + ( see Supplementary material Fig . S7 [ A ] ) . Similar results were obtained for NSV - 4s and - 5s with ( see Supplementary material Fig . S7 [ B ] ) or without ( see Supplementary material Fig . S7 [ A ] ) Ca 2 + and LIPs ( see Supplementary material Figs . S7 [ C , D ] ) , which were incubated under the same experimental conditions herein reported for NSVs . The decay times of fluorescence depended on the HPTS which was sensitive to the polarity of the microenvironment , and changed its photo - physical features upon modifications in molecular mobility under specific stimuli ( Pistolis and Malliaris , 1997 ) . The fluorescence decay time of HPTS / DPX - loaded pH - responsive NSVs changed from the monoexponential to biexponential kinetic , thus shifting the pH from physiological ( 7 . 4 ) to acidic ( 5 . 5 ) values . This effect depended on the acidification of the microenvironment which modified the polarity of the fluorescent probe , and caused its translocation from the quenched to the de - quenched complex ( Draffehn and Kumke , 2016 ; Draffehn et al . , 2016 ) . The modification of the fluorescence of HPTS / DPX - loaded pH - 24 responsive NSVs can further depend on : i ) the arrangement of the probe at the interfacial region of the NSVs , ii ) the collapse of the bilayer due to the anisotropy of pH - responsive vesicles , and iii ) the dark complex existing between HPTS and DPX ( Chen and Knutson , 1988 ) . Fusion between the NSVs and HBECLips was also related to DLS analysis which measured the size variation of vesicles under specific stimuli ( Yang et al . , 2015 ; Trivedi et al . , 2000 ; Day et al . , 1977 ) . In this attempt , we monitored the appearance of new peaks at different incubation times . At t = 0 , we had a narrow distribution of vesicles ( Fig . 4 [ A ] ) with two main peaks at 107 ( NSV1s ) ( Fig . 1 ) and 1494 ( HBECLips ) nm ( see Supplementary material Table S1 ) . The incubation of NSV1s and HBECLips decreased the NSV1s to 107 nm , and increased the average sizes of the NSVs so that they fell between those of NSV1s and HBECLips ( 400 - 3900 nm ) . At the 5 minute mark , the NSVs and HBECLips merged , and formed hemifused vesicles at the outer bilayer of the resulting vesicles ( Fig . 4 [ B ] ) . This arrangement maintained the inner bilayers separate from the outer bilayers , and yielded a peanut - shaped structure ( Yang et al . , 2015 ) . By increasing the incubation time from 5 to 15 min , the average sizes of the NSVs ranged between 100 and 2000 nm . These sizes were the sum of the intensity of individual D1 and D2 ( Figs . 4 [ A , B ] ) that were equal to D 1 + D 2 ( Fig . 4 [ C ] ) in the hemifused state ( Yang et al . , 2015 ; Trivedi et al . , 2000 ) . The size increase remained for up to 30 min of incubation when the number of NSVs with an average size of 107 nm decreased and the number of HBECLips of 1490 nm increased , thus endorsing the arrangement of the presence of hemifused membranes ( Fig . 4 [ C ] ) . After 60 min of incubation , the NSV1s of 107 nm disappeared completely , and vesicles of 1280nm and 3901nm appeared . These vesicles demonstrated that the NSV1s and HBECLips merged , and the hemifused membranes became larger than the single membranes ( Fig . 4 [ C ] ) . The size of the merged vesicles corresponded to the square root of D 21 + D 22 ( Fig . 4 [ D ] ) , and was representative of the fusion of vesicles ( Yang et al . , 2015 ) . The resulting vesicles at these sizes were a docked vesicle pair , and were in agreement with the fusion data herein reported ( Fig . 3 ) , thus demonstrating that Tw21 did affect the final fusion of the aqueous cores of the nanovesicles . The docked vesicle pairs matched the DLS peaks during analysis , and showed a wide distribution of the different populations of particles ( Yang et al . , 2015 ) . Moreover , DLS analysis provided a qualitative investigation of the merged vesicles at different incubation times ( Yang et al . , 2015 ) . Similar results were obtained for the hybrid NSV2s and NSV3s in which a 25 and 50 molar concentration of Tw21 , respectively , was replaced with the same molar concentration of Tw80 ( data not shown ) . In particular NSV3s , which have 50 % of the molar concentration of pH - responsive Tw21 in their lipid bilayers , manifested specific distribution of the various populations of colloidal vesicles at the different incubation times investigated ( data not shown ) . The intensity of the peaks of the fused and hemifused states 25 gradually increased as the incubation times increased ( 0 – 60 min ) . This effect generated the disappearance of the 183 nm ( t = 0 ) NSV3s and the appearance of fused vesicles with average sizes of over 2000 nm , which corresponded to the sum of an NSV3s and an HBECLips . These results supported the evidence that Tw21 maintained the fusogenic features of the NSVs , although only a 50 % molar concentration of surfactant ( Table 1 ) was included in the bilayer . The fusion between NSVs and HBECLips can also affect the curvature radius of vesicles ( Pallicer and Krämer , 2012 ) at the intermediate region of hemifused state . The changes of the anisotropy of pH - responsive NSVs further supported the collapse of the nanoparticles at the acid pH ( 5 . 5 ) ( Draffehn and Kumke , 2016 ) . We obtained similar results for the LIPs used as control , and demonstrated that the interaction between the pH - responsive vesicles and the synthetic membranes generated vesicles having physicochemical features that differed from those of the native particles . The progression of the fusion of the membranes showed up as peaks of varying intensity that depended on the lipidic composition of the vesicles , and were not the same for LIP - 1s , - 2s and - 3s , respectively ( Figs . 3 [ B , D ] ) . 3 . 5 . Intracellular uptake Particle size ( Rejman et al . , 2004 ) , surface properties ( Sauer et al . , 2006 ) , and targeting agents ( Papadia et al . , 2017 ) can all affect the intracellular uptake ( internalization ) of nanoparticles ( Primavera et al . , 2015 ) , and modulate the pathways of endocytosis . The pH - responsive lipids making up the liposomal bilayer can trigger the release of payloads under specific stimuli and enhance intracellular trafficking ( Guo and Szoka , 2003 ) . This effect depends on the raw materials that go into making up the nanoparticles , and can modulate their metabolic fate and determine their intracellular delivery by different pathways . The intracellular uptake of pH - responsive NSVs was monitored using monocyte macrophage ( Raw 264 . 7 ) cells and calcein as a molecular probe . The internalization of these NSVs was determined using FACS analysis . The results demonstrated that pH - responsive NSVs were taken up better and more quickly by the Raw 264 . 7 cells as compared to liposomes ( control ) and non - pH - responsive NSVs ( see Supplementary material Fig . S8 ) . The intracellular uptake of pH - responsive NSVs depended on the temperature ; in particular , the Raw 264 . 7 cells incubated at 4°C inhibited the uptake of NSVs as compared to the NSVs incubated at 37°C ( see Supplementary material Fig . S8 ) . This effect was independent of both the pH - responsiveness and the composition of the NSVs , and depended on the energy process that was modulating the intracellular fate of the colloidal nanovesicles ( Duzgunes and Nir , 199 ) . Conversely , the pH - responsive NSVs were taken up to a greater degree at 4°C than the liposomes ( control ) and the non - pH - responsive NSVs ( see Supplementary material Fig . S8 ) . The intracellular uptake of the pH - responsive NSVs was further investigated by incubating the Raw 264 . 7 cells with specific 26 inhibitors of the energy - dependent ( endocytosis ) and non - dependent ( fusion ) processes ( see Supplementary material Fig . S9 ) . The results demonstrated that chlorpromazine and CD decreased the intracellular uptake of the pH - responsive NSVs ( see Supplementary material Fig . S9 [ B ] ) ; while filipin did not affect the intracellular uptake of pH - responsive NSVs which showed data similar to that for the liposomes ( control ) and non - pH - responsive NSVs ( see Supplementary material Fig . S9 [ A ] ) . These results supported the hypothesis that the pH - responsive NSVs were taken up by the Raw 264 . 7 cells by means of cholesterol - dependent clathrin - mediated endocytosis ( Rodal et al . 1999 ) using caveolae - mediated pathways ( Orlandi and Fishman , 1998 ) . 3 . 6 . Cytotoxicity study The anticancer activity of DOX - loaded NSVs was tested using human neuroblastoma ( SH - SY5Y ) cells . The free form of DOX decreased the viability of the SH - SY5Y cells at a dose - dependent concentration ( Fig . 5 ) , and 28 % cell viability was measured after 72 h of incubation at 1 μM ( Fig . 5 [ C ] ) . The cell viability of the free DOX decreased when the incubation time was increased ; in fact , at the maximum DOX concentration tested ( 1 μM ) , the cell viability decreased from 81 . 62 to 28 . 51 % ( Fig . 5 ) . DOX - loaded NSV3s , with a high degree of entrapment efficiency and suitable physicochemical features for in vitro testing ( see Supplementary material Table S2 ) , showed a cell viability percentage similar to that of the free DOX after 72 h of incubation ( Fig . 5 ) . The cell viability percentage of DOX - loaded NSV3s ( 1 μM ) was 39 . 03 % at 48 h of incubation ( Fig . 5 [ B ] ) , and 29 . 03 % ( Fig . 5 [ C ] ) at 72 h of incubation respectively . These values were slightly less than those of the free DOX ( Fig . 5 ) ; however , the NSVs can protect the DOX , increase the compliance of the patient , decrease its cardiac toxicity , and improve its therapeutic efficacy in animal models and patients as previously reported for Doxil ® ( Barenholz , 2012 ; Ewer et al . , 2004 ) . The cell viability of DOX - loaded NSV3s is in agreement with data previously reported for Doxil ® , and doxorubicin - loaded liposomes that showed a lower or similar degree of cytotoxicity of the free DOX in vitro ( Gabizon et al . , 1998 ; 2012 ) . The cell viability percentage of DOX - loaded NSV3s ( 1 μM ) decreased up to 49 . 12 % after 24 h of incubation . This value was 50 % lower ( 81 . 62 % , free DOX ) at the same concentration and incubation time , thus improving the therapeutic activity of DOX delivered at brief incubation times ( Fig . 5 [ A ] ) . DOX - loaded NSV2s showed the best anticancer effect as compared to the free DOX and the other NSVs ( Fig . 5 ) . Unfortunately , the drug concentration inside the NSV2s was ≈32 % after the pH gradient remote loading procedure ( see Supplementary material Table S2 ) . This percentage of DOX might not be suitable for the potential use of NSV2s in vivo due to the necessity of administering a large amount of nanovesicles in order to reach a therapeutic drug dosage ( Barenholz , 2012 ) . DOX - loaded NSV - 1s , - 4s , and - 5s showed a 27 lower cell viability percentage than the free DOX at different concentrations ( 0 . 05 , 0 . 1 , 0 . 5 , and 1 μM ) , and incubation times ( 24 - 72 h ) ( Fig . 5 ) . 4 . Conclusion In order to obtain customized nanomedicines , pH - responsive NSVs with suitable physicochemical features were synthesized . Negatively - charged , pH - responsive NSVs with a narrow size distribution interacted with synthetic membranes and merged with them , resulting in vesicles with average sizes larger than those of the native nanovesicles . The specific interaction between the NSVs and multilamellar liposomes occurred at an acidic pH ( 5 . 5 ) , and provided an intermediate state of interaction between the two . This state displaced the docked , hemifused , and fully fused states , respectively , and caused a modification in the average sizes of NSVs , and HBECLips due to the collapse of the bilayer at the acid pH ( 5 . 5 ) . The modification of the average sizes of the NSVs demonstrated the fusion of NSVs that comes about at the acid pH . These data were further supported by the results of pH - responsiveness and fusion of NSVs . The presence of surfactants affected the pH - responsiveness and fusion of NSVs . Tw21 did not modify the physicochemical properties of NSVs . The replacement of the Tw21 with Tw80 up to 50 % ( molar concentration ) did not modify the pH - responsiveness of the NSVs . The combination of Tw21 and Tw80 maintained the pH - responsiveness and fusogenic features of the NSVs , and provided a specific improvement of nanotherapeutics . The resulting NSVs combined the pH - responsiveness of Tw21 and the PEG - mimetic and targeting properties of Tw80 , which could provide long - term circulation of nanocarriers such as PEG , and form complexes with the circulating APO - E . DOX - loaded NSVs had a time - and dose - dependent anticancer effect on human neuroblastoma ( SH - SY5Y ) cells . In particular , NSV3s made from a combination of Tw21 and Tw80 at the same molar concentration , slightly increased the anticancer effect of DOX at 48 and 72 h of incubation . Moreover , NSV3s demonstrated the highest entrapment efficiency for DOX that was suitable for a potential therapeutic application of NSVs . These properties allowed the achievement of potential multidrug targeting of nanotherapeutics , which are capable of combining the advantages of passive and active targeting , besides pH - responsiveness . The NSV3 nanoformulation was the one that combined all these physicochemical features together with a noteworthy anticancer effect , and could be selected as a potential nanotherapeutic for cancer or inflammation therapy , and in the treatment of neurodegenerative disorders . Author contributions Martina Di Francesco ( M . Di . F . ) , Rosita Primavera ( R . P . ) , Marcello Locatelli ( M . L . ) , Nicola D’Avanzo ( N . D . A . ) did experiments and acquired data . 28 Martina Di Francesco ( M . Di . F . ) , Christian Celia ( C . C . ) , Massimo Fresta ( M . F . ) , Felisa Cilurzo ( F . C . ) , Cinzia Anna Ventura ( C . A . V . ) analyzed and interpreted the data . Martina Di Francesco ( M . Di . F . ) , Christian Celia ( C . C . ) , Massimo Fresta ( M . F . ) , Donatella Paolino ( D . P . ) , Luisa Di Marzio ( L . Di . M . ) drafted and critically revised the data . Donatella Paolino ( D . P . ) and Luisa Di Marzio ( L . Di . M . ) designed the study and approved the final version of the manuscript before submission . All authors have given approval to the final version of the manuscript . All authors declare no conflicts of interest . Acknowledgements This work was financially supported by the Inter - regional Research Center for Food Safety and Health ( IRC - FSH ) ( grant no . PON a3 _ 00359 ) , and Research project of National Interest ( grant no . PRIN 2010 - 2011 - prot . 2010H834LS _ 006 ) . The authors are also very grateful to Lynn Whitted for her expert revision of the language of this manuscript . 29 References Alves , F . R . , Zaniquelli , M . E . , Loh , W . , Castanheira , E . M . , Real Oliveira , M . E . , Feitosa , E . , 2007 . Vesicle - micelle transition in aqueous mixtures of the cationic dioctadecyldimethylammonium and octadecyltrimethylammonium bromide surfactants . J . Colloid Interface Sci . 316 , 132 – 139 . Alyane , M . , Barratt , G . , Lahouel , M . , 2016 . Remote loading of doxorubicin into liposomes by transmembrane pH gradient to reduce toxicity toward H9c2 cells . Saudi Pharm . J . 24 , 165 – 175 . Bailey , A . L . , Cullis , P . R . , 1997 . Membrane fusion with cationic liposomes : effects of target membrane lipid composition . Biochemistry 36 , 1628 – 1634 . Barenholz , Y . , 2012 . Doxil® - - the first FDA - approved nano - drug : lessons learned . J . Control . Release 160 , 117 – 134 . Belletti , D . , Vandelli , M . A . , Tonelli , M . , Zapparoli , M . , Forni , F . , Tosi , G . , Ruozi , B . , 2015 . Functionalization of liposomes : microscopical methods for preformulative screening . J . Liposome Res . 25 , 150 – 156 . Bentz , J . , Duzgune , N . , Nir , S . , 1983 . Kinetics of divalent cation induced fusion of phosphatidylserine vesicles : correlation between fusogenic capacities and binding affinities . Biochemistry 22 , 3320 – 3330 . Calvagno , M . G . , Celia , C . , Paolino , D . , Cosco , D . , Iannone , M . , Castelli , F . , Doldo , P . , Fresta , M . , 2007 . Effects of lipid composition and preparation conditions on physical - chemical properties , technological parameters and in vitro biological activity of gemcitabine - loaded liposomes . Curr . Drug Deliv . 4 , 89 – 101 . Celia , C . , Trapasso , E . , Locatelli , M . , Navarra , M . , Ventura , C . A . , Wolfram , J . , Carafa , M . , Morittu , V . M . , Britti . D . , Di Marzio , L . , Paolino , D . , 2013 . Anticancer activity of liposomal bergamot essential oil ( BEO ) on human neuroblastoma cells . Colloids Surf . B Biointerfaces 112 , 548 – 553 . Cern , A . , Marcus , D . , Tropsha , A . , Barenholz , Y . , Goldblum , A . , 2017 . New drug candidates for liposomal delivery identified by computer modeling of liposomes ' remote loading and leakage . J . Control . Release 252 , 18 – 27 . Cern , A . , Barenholz , Y . , Tropsha , A . , Goldblum , A . , 2014 . Computer - aided design of liposomal drugs : In silico prediction and experimental validation of drug candidates for liposomal remote loading . J . Control . Release 173 , 125 – 131 . 30 Cern , A . , Golbraikh , A . , Sedykh , A . , Tropsha , A . , Barenholz , Y . , Goldblum , A . , 2012 . Quantitative structure - property relationship modeling of remote liposome loading of drugs . J . Control . Release 160 , 147 – 157 . Campbell , S . D . , Regina , K . J . , Kharasch , E . D . , 2014 . Significance of lipid composition in a blood - brain barrier - mimetic PAMPA assay . J . Biomol . Screen . 19 , 437 – 444 . Chen , R . F . , Knutson , J . R . , 1988 . Mechanism of fluorescence concentration quenching of carboxyfluorescein in liposomes : energy transfer to nonfluorescent dimers . Anal . Biochem . 172 , 61 – 77 . Chen , Y . , Minh le , V . , Liu , J . , Angelov , B . , Drechsler , M . , Garamus , V . M . , Willumeit - Römer , R . , Zou , A . , 2016 . Baicalin loaded in folate - PEG modified liposomes for enhanced stability and tumor targeting . Colloids Surf . B Biointerfaces 140 , 74 – 82 . Chen , W . , Achazi , K . , Schade , B . , Haag , R . , 2015 . Charge - conversional and reduction - sensitive poly ( vinyl alcohol ) nanogels for enhanced cell uptake and efficient intracellular doxorubicin release . J . Control . Release 205 , 15 – 24 . Cosco , D . , Paolino , D . , De Angelis , F . , Cilurzo , F . , Celia , C . , Di Marzio , L . , Russo , D . , Tsapis , N . , Fattal , E . , Fresta , M . , 2015 . Aqueous - core PEG - coated PLA nanocapsules for an efficient entrapment of water soluble anticancer drugs and a smart therapeutic response . Eur . J . Pharm . Biopharm . 89 , 30 – 39 . Cui , H . F . , Ye , J . S . , Liu , A . L . , Tien T . H . , 2004 . Lipid Microvesicles : On the Four Decades of Liposome Research , in : Advances in Planar Lipid Bilayer and Liposomes , Academic Press , Elsevier Inc . , Amsterdam , Netherlands . Dai , W . G . , Dong , L . C . , Li , S . , Pollock - Dove , C . , Chen , J . , Mansky , P . , Eichenbaum , G . , 2007 . Parallel screening approach to identify solubility - enhancing formulations for improved bioavailability of a poorly water - soluble compound using milligram quantities of material . Int . J . Pharm . 336 , 1 – 11 . Day , E . P . , Ho , J . T . , Kunze , R . K . J . , Sun , S . T . , 1977 . Dynamic light scattering study of calcium - induced fusion in phospholipid vesicles . Biochim . Biophys . Acta 470 , 503 – 508 . Di Marzio , L . , Esposito , S . , Rinaldi , F . , Marianecci , C . , Carafa , M . , 2013 . Polysorbate 20 vesicles as oral delivery system : in vitro characterization . Colloids Surf . B Biointerfaces 104 , 200 – 206 . 31 Di Marzio , L . , Marianecci , C . , Cinque , B . , Nazzarri , M . , Cimini , A . M . , Cristiano , L . , Cifone , M . G . , Alhaique , F . , Carafa M . , 2008 . pH - sensitive non - phospholipid vesicle and macrophage - like cells : binding , uptake and endocytotic pathway . Biochim . Biophys . Acta 1778 , 2749 – 2756 . Di Marzio , L . , Marianecci , C . , Petrone , M . , Rinaldi , F . , Carafa , M . , 2011 . Novel pH - sensitive non - ionic surfactant vesicles : comparison between Tween 21 and Tween 20 . Colloids Surf . B Biointerfaces 82 , 18 – 24 . Diao , J . , Ishitsuka , Y . , Bae , W . R . , 2011 . Single - molecule FRET study of SNARE - mediated membrane fusion . Biosci . Rep . 31 , 457 – 463 . Diaz , A . J . , Albertorio , F . , Daniel , S . , Cremer , P . S . , 2008 . Double cushions preserve transmembrane protein mobility in supported bilayer systems . Langmuir 24 , 6820 – 6826 . Draffehn , S . , Eichhorst , J . , Wiesner , B . , Kumke , M . U . , 2016 . Insight into the modification of polymeric micellar and liposomal nanocarriers by fluorescein - labeled lipids and uptake - mediating lipopeptides . Langmuir 32 , 6928 – 6939 . Draffehn , S . , Kumke , M . U . , 2016 . Monitoring the collapse of pH - sensitive liposomal nanocarriers and environmental pH simultaneously : a fluorescence - based approach . Mol . Pharm . 13 , 1608 – 1617 . Drummond , D . C . , Meyer , O . , Hong , K . , Kirpotin , D . B . , Papahadjopoulos , D . , 1999 . Optimizing liposomes for delivery of chemotherapeutic agents to solid tumors . Pharmacol . Rev . 51 , 691 – 743 . Dutta , A . K . , Kamada , K . , Ohta , K . , 1996 . Spectroscopic studies of Nile Red in organic solvents and polymers . J . Photochem . Photobiol . A Chem . 93 , 57 – 64 . Duzgunes , N . , Nir , S . , 1999 . Mechanisms and kinetics of liposome - cell interaction . Adv . Drug Deliv . Rev . 40 , 3 – 18 . Ellens , H . , Bentz , J . , Szoka , F . C . , 1985 . H + - and Ca 2 + - induced fusion and destabilization of liposomes . Biochemistry 24 , 3099 – 3106 . Ewer , M . S . , Martin , F . J . , Henderson , C . , Shapiro , C . L . , Benjamin , R . S . , Gabizon , A . A . , 2004 . Cardiac safety of liposomal anthracyclines . Semin . Oncol . 31 ( 6 Suppl 13 ) , 161 – 181 . Fenske , D . B . , Cullis , P . R . , 2005 . Entrapment of small molecules and nucleic acid - based drugs in liposomes . Methods Enzymol . 391 , 7 – 40 . Fritze , A . , Hens , F . , Kimpfler , A . , Schubert , R . , Peschka - Süss , R . , 2006 . Remote loading of doxorubicin into liposomes driven by a transmembrane phosphate gradient . Biochim . Biophys . Acta 1758 , 1633 – 1640 . 32 Gabizon , A . , Goren , D . , Cohen , R . , Barenholz , Y . , 1998 . Development of liposomal anthracyclines : from basics to clinical applications . J . Control . Release 53 , 275 – 279 . Gabizon , A . , Shmeeda , H . , Grenader , T . , 2012 . Pharmacological basis of pegylated liposomal doxorubicin : impact on cancer therapy . Eur . J . Pharm . Sci . 45 , 388 – 398 . Gao , J . Q . , Lv , Q . , Li , L . M . , Tang , X . J . , Li . F . Z . , Hu . Y . L . , Han , M . , 2013 . Glioma targeting and blood - brain barrier penetration by dual - targeting doxorubincin liposomes . Biomaterials 34 , 5628 – 5639 . Gatenby , R . A . , Gillies , R . J . , 2008 . A microenvironmental model of carcinogenesis . Nat . Rev . Cancer . 8 , 56 – 61 . Ghoneim , N . , 2000 . Photophysics of Nile Red in solution steady state spectroscopy . Spectrochim . Acta A 56 , 1003 – 1010 . Golini , C . M . , Williams , B . W . , Foresman , J . B . , 1998 . Further solvatochromic , thermochromic , and theoretical studies on Nile Red . J . Fluoresc . 8 , 395 – 404 . Greenspan , P . , Fowler , S . D . , 1985 . Spectrofluorometric studies of the lipid probe , nile red . J . Lipid Res . 26 , 781 – 789 . Gruner , S . M . , 1989 . Stability of lyotropic phases with curved interfaces . J . Phys . Chem . 93 , 7562 . Guo , X . , Szoka , F . C . Jr . , 2003 . Chemical approaches to triggerable lipid vesicles for drug and gene delivery . Acc . Chem . Res . 36 , 335 – 341 . Hope , M . J . , Walker , D . C . , Cullis , P . R . , 1983 . Ca 2 + and pH induced fusion of small unilamellar vesicles consisting of phosphatidylethanolamine and negatively charged phospholipids : a freeze fracture study . Biochem . Biophys . Res . Commun . 110 , 15 – 22 . Hungerford , G . , Castanheira , E . M . , Baptista , A . L . , Coutinho , P . J . , Oliveira , M . E . , 2005 . Domain formation in DODAB - cholesterol mixed systems monitored via Nile Red nisotropy . J . Fluoresc . 15 , 835 – 840 . Ingallina , C . , Rinaldi , F . , Bogni , A . , Ponti , J . , Passeri , D . , Reggente , M . , Rossi , M . , Kinsner - Ovaskainen , A . , Mehn , D . , Rossi , F . , Botta , B . , Carafa , M . , Marianecci , C . , 2016 . Niosomal approach to brain delivery : development , characterization and in vitro toxicological studies . Int . J . Pharm . 511 , 969 – 982 . Jones , A . R . , Shusta , E . V . , 2007 . Blood - brain barrier transport of therapeutics via receptor - mediation . Pharm . Res . 24 , 1759 – 1771 . 33 Kijima , T . , Nishida , Y . , Fujikawa , D . , Uota , M . , Yoshimura , T . , Sakai , G . , 2007 . Long - chain alcohol induced phase transition in lyotropic mixed polyoxyethylene - type surfactant liquid - crystals . J . Mol . Liq . 133 , 54 – 60 . Kirui , D . K . , Celia , C . , Molinaro , R . , Bansal , S . S . , Cosco , D . , Fresta , M . , Shen , H . , Ferrari , M . , 2015 . Mild hyperthermia enhances transport of liposomal gemcitabine and improves in vivo therapeutic response . Adv . Healthc . Mater . 4 , 1092 – 1103 . Kreuter , J . , Ramge , P . , Petrov , V . , Hamm , S . , Gelperina , S . E . , Engelhardt , B . , Alyautdin , R . , von Briesen , H . , Begley , D . J . , 2003 . Direct evidence that polysorbate - 80 - coated poly ( butylcyanoacrylate ) nanoparticles deliver drugs to the CNS via speciﬁc mechanisms requiring prior binding of drug to the nanoparticles . Pharm . Res . 20 , 409 – 416 . Li , Y . , Li , Y . , Zhang , X . , Xu , X . , Zhang , Z . , Hu , C . , He , Y . , Gu , Z . 2016 . Supramolecular PEGylated dendritic systems as pH / redox dual - responsive theranostic nanoplatforms for platinum drug delivery and NIR imaging . Theranostics 6 , 1293 – 3305 . Ling , S . S . , Magosso , E . , Khan , N . A . , Yuen , K . H . , Barker , S . A . , 2006 . Drug enhanced oral bioavailability and intestinal lymphatic transport of a hydrophilic drug using liposomes . Drug Dev . Ind . Pharm . 32 , 335 – 345 . Lohade , A . A . , Jain , R . R . , Iyer , K . , Roy , S . K . , Shimpi , H . H . , Pawar , Y . , Rajan , M . G . , Menon , M . D . , 2016 . A Novel Folate - Targeted Nanoliposomal System of Doxorubicin for Cancer Targeting . AAPS PharmSci . Tech . 17 , 1298 – 1311 . Marianecci , C . , Di Marzio , L . , Del Favero , E . , Cantù , L . , Brocca , P . , Rondelli , V . , Rinaldi , F . , Dini , L . , Serra , A . , Decuzzi , P . , Celia , C . , Paolino , D . , Fresta , M . , Carafa , M . , 2016 . Niosomes as drug nanovectors : multiscale pH - dependent structural response . Langmuir 32 , 1241 – 1249 . Marianecci , C . , Di Marzio , L . , Rinaldi , F . , Celia , C . , Paolino , D . , Alhaique , F . , Esposito , S . , Carafa , M . , 2014 . Niosomes from 80s to present : the state of the art . Adv . Colloid Interface Sci . 205 , 187 – 206 . Marianecci , C . , Rinaldi , F . , Di Marzio , L . , Pozzi , D . , Caracciolo , G . , Manno , D . , Dini , L . , Paolino , D . , Celia , C . , Carafa , M . , 2013 . Interaction of pH - sensitive non - phospholipid liposomes with cellular mimetic membranes . Biomed . Microdevices 15 , 299 – 309 . Montich , G . G . , Bustos , M . M . , Maggio , B . , Cumar , F . A . , 1985 . Micropolarity of interfaces containing anionic and neutral glycosphingolipids as sensed by merocyanine 540 . Chem . Phys . Lipid s 38 , 319 – 326 . 34 Mukherjee , S . , Raghuraman , H . , Chattopadhyay , A . , 2007 . Membrane localization and dynamics of Nile Red : effect of cholesterol . Biochim . Biophys . Acta 1768 , 59 – 66 . Muzzalupo , R . , Tavano , L . , Cassano , R . , Trombino , S . , Ferrarelli , T . , Picci , N . A . , 2011 . New approach for the evaluation of niosomes as effective transdermal drug delivery systems . Eur . J . Pharm . Biopharm . 79 , 28 – 35 . Nagayama , S . , Ogawara , K . , Fukuoka , Y . , Higaki , K . , Kimura , T . , 2007 . Time - dependent changes in opsonin amount associated on nanoparticles alter their hepatic uptake characteristics . Int . J . Pharm . 342 , 215 – 221 . Namgung , R . , Mi Lee , Y . , Kim , J . , Jang , Y . , Lee , B . H . , Kim , I . S . , Sokkar , P . , Rhee , Y . M . , Hoffman , A . S . , Kim , W . J . , 2014 . Poly - cyclodextrin and poly - paclitaxel nano - assembly for anticancer therapy . Nat . Commun . 5 , 3702 . Nasuhi Pur , F . , 2016 . Calixdrugs : calixarene - based clusters of established therapeutic drug agents . Mol . Divers . 20 , 781 – 787 . Old , W . M . , Meyer - Arendt . K . , Aveline - Wolf . L . , Pierce . K . G . , Mendoza , A . , Sevinsky , J . R . , Resing , K . A . , Ahn , N . G . , 2005 . Comparison of label - free methods for quantifying human proteins by shotgun proteomics . Mol . Cell . Proteomics 4 , 1487 – 1502 . Orlandi , P . A . , Fishman , P . H . , 1998 . Filipin - dependent inhibition of cholera toxin : evidence for toxin internalization and activation through caveolae - like domains . J . Cell Biol . 141 , 905 – 915 . Pallicer , J . M . , Krämer , S . D . , 2012 . Evaluation of fluorescence anisotropy to assess drug - lipid membrane partitioning . J . Pharm . Biomed . Anal . 71 , 219 – 227 . Paolino , D . , Cosco , D . , Gaspari , M . , Celano , M . , Wolfram , J . , Voce , P . , Puxeddu , E . , Filetti , S . , Celia , C . , Ferrari , M . , Russo , D . , Fresta , M . , 2014 . Targeting the thyroid gland with thyroid - stimulating hormone ( TSH ) - nanoliposomes . Biomaterials 35 , 7101 – 7109 . Paolino , D . , Cosco , D . , Licciardi , M . , Giammona , G . , Fresta , M . , Cavallaro , G . , 2008 . Polyaspartylhydrazide copolymer - based supramolecular vesicular aggregates as delivery devices for anticancer drugs . Biomacromolecules 9 , 1117 – 1130 . Paolino , D . , Licciardi , M . , Celia , C . , Giammona , G . , Fresta , M . , Cavallaro G . , 2012 . Folate - targeted supramolecular vesicular aggregates as a new frontier for effective anticancer treatment in in vivo model . Eur . J . Pharm . Biopharm . 82 , 94 – 102 . Papadia , K . , Giannou , A . D . , Markoutsa , E . , Bigot , C . , Vanhoute , G . , Mourtas , S . , der Linden . A . V . , Stathopoulos , G . T . , Antimisiaris , S . G . , 2017 . Multifunctional LUV liposomes decorated for BBB 35 and amyloid targeting - B . In vivo brain targeting potential in wild - type and APP / PS1 mice . Eur . J . Pharm . Sci . DOI : 10 . 1016 / j . ejps . 2017 . 03 . 010 . Pasut , G . , Veronese , F . M . , 2012 . State of the art in PEGylation : the great versatility achieved after forty years of research . J . Control . Release 161 , 461 – 472 . Pistolis , G . , Malliaris , A . , 1997 . Simultaneous double probing of the microenvironment in colloidal systems and molecular assemblies by DPH derivatives . Langmuir 13 , 1457 – 1462 . Primavera , R . , Di Francesco , M . , De Cola , A . , De Laurenzi , V . , Paolino , D . , Ciancaioni , M . , Carafa , M . , Celia , C . , Di Ilio , C . , Di Stefano , A . , Fresta , M . , Locatelli , M . , Di Marzio , L . , 2015 . HPLC - FLD and spectrofluorometer apparatus : How to best detect fluorescent probe - loaded niosomes in biological samples . Colloids Surf . B Biointerfaces 135 , 575 – 580 . Rejman , J . , Oberle , V . , Zuhorn , I . S . , Hoekstra , D . , 2004 . Size - dependent internalization of particles via the pathways of clathrin - and caveolae - mediated endocytosis . Biochem . J . 377 ( Pt 1 ) , 159 – 169 . Rodal , S . K . , Skretting , G . , Garred , O . , Vilhardt , F . , van Deurs , B . , Sandvig , K . , 1999 . Extraction of cholesterol with methyl - beta - cyclodextrin perturbs formation of clathrin - coated endocytic vesicles . Mol . Biol . Cell . 10 , 961 – 974 . Shatalebi , M . A . , Mostafavi , S . A . , Moghaddas , A . , 2010 . Niosome as a drug carrier for topical delivery of N - acetyl glucosamine . Res . Pharm . Sci . 5 , 107 – 117 . Shen , Z . , Wu , H . , Yang , S . , Ma , X . , Li , Z . , Tan , M . , Wu , A . , 2015 . A novel trojan - horse targeting strategy to reduce the non - specific uptake of nanocarriers by non - cancerous cells . Biomaterials 70 , 1 – 11 . Stuart , M . C . A . , van de Pas , J . C . , Engberts , J . B . F . N . , Pas , J . C . V . D . , 2005 . The use of nile red to monitor the aggregation behavior in ternary surfactant - water - organic solvent systems . J . Phys . Org . Chem . 18 , 929 – 934 . Sauer , I . , Nikolenko , H . , Keller , S . , Abu Ajaj , K . , Bienert , M . , Dathe , M . , 2006 . Dipalmitoylation of a cellular uptake - mediating apolipoprotein E - derived peptide as a promising modification for stable anchorage in liposomal drug carriers . Biochim . Biophys . Acta 1758 , 552 – 561 . Sudimack , J . J . , Guo , W . , Tjarks , W . , Lee , R . J . , 2002 . A novel pH - sensitive liposome formulation containing oleyl alcohol . Biochim . Biophys . Acta 1564 , 31 – 37 . Sukumaran , D . K . , Ohki , S . , 1988 . Effect of monovalent cations on polyvalent cation - induced fusion of phosphatidylserine small unilamellar vesicles . Chem . Phys . Lipids 49 , 9 – 14 . 36 Sun , S . , Wang , M . , Alberti , K . A . , Choy , A . , Xu , Q . , 2013 . DOPE facilitates quaternized lipidoids ( QLDs ) for in vitro DNA delivery . Nanomedicine 9 , 849 – 854 . Tavano , L . , Mauro , L . , Naimo , G . D . , Bruno , L . , Picci , N . , Andò , S . , Muzzalupo , R . , 2016 . Further Evolution of Multifunctional Niosomes Based on Pluronic Surfactant : Dual Active Targeting and Drug Combination Properties . Langmuir 32 , 8926 – 8933 . Tavano , L . , Muzzalupo , R . , Trombino , S . , Cassano , R . , Pingitore , A . , Picci , N . , 2010 . Effect of formulations variables on the in vitro percutaneous permeation of Sodium Diclofenac from new vesicular systems obtained from Pluronic triblock copolymers . Colloids Surf . B Biointerfaces 79 , 227 – 234 . Torchilin , V . P . , 2014 . Multifunctional , stimuli - sensitive nanoparticulate systems for drug delivery . Nat . Rev . Drug Discov . 13 , 813 – 827 . Trivedi , V . D . , Yu , C . , Veeramuthu , B . , Francis , S . , Chang , D . K . , 2000 . Fusion induced aggregation of model vesicles studied by dynamic and static light scattering . Chem . Phys . Lipids 107 , 99 – 106 . Wilschut , J . , Nir , S . , Scholma , J . , Hoekstra , D . , 1985 . Kinetics of Ca 2 + - induced fusion of cardiolipin - phosphatidylcholine vesicles : correlation between vesicle aggregation , bilayer destabilization , and fusion . Biochemistry 24 , 4630 – 4606 . Wu , X . , Lee , K . H . , Li , Q . T . , 1996 . Stability and pH sensitivity of sulfatide - containing phosphatidylethanolamine small unilamellar vesicles . Biochim . Biophys . Acta 1284 , 13 – 19 . Wu , X . , Li , Q . T . , 1999 . Ca2 + - induced fusion of sulfatide - containing phosphatidylethanolamine small unilamellar vesicles . J . Lipid Res . 40 , 1254 – 1262 . Xu , X . , Khan , M . A . , Burgess , D . J . , 2012 . Predicting hydrophilic drug encapsulation inside unilamellar liposomes . Int . J . Pharm . 423 , 410 – 418 . Yang , Y . , Heo , P . , Kong , B . , Park , J . B . , Jung , Y . H . , Shin , J . , Jeong , C . , Kweon , D . H . , 2015 . Dynamic light scattering analysis of SNARE - driven membrane fusion and the effects of SNARE - binding flavonoids . Biochem . Biophys . Res . Commun . 465 , 864 – 870 . Yoshioka , T . , Sternberg , B . , Florence , A . T . , 1994 . Preparation and properties of vesicles ( niosomes ) of sorbitan monoesters ( Span 20 , 40 , 60 , and 80 ) and sorbitan triester ( Span 85 ) . Int . J . Pharm . 105 , 1 – 6 . Zhang , X . X . , Wang , Z . , Yue , X . , Ma , Y . , Kiesewetter , D . O . , Chen , X . , 2013 . pH - sensitive fluorescent dyes : are they really pH - sensitive in cells ? Mol . Pharm . 10 , 1910 – 1917 . 37 Figure captions Fig . 1 . Physicochemical characterization of NSVs . The average size ( A ) and the zeta potential or Z - potential ( B ) of non - ionic surfactant vesicles were determined by DLS analysis . Data are the mean ( n = 3 ) ± S . D . NSV1 : Tw21 : Chol ( 15 mM : 15 mM ) ; NSV2 : Tw21 : Tw80 : Chol ( 11 . 25 mM : 3 . 75 mM : 15 mM ) ; NSV3 : Tw21 : Tw80 : Chol ( 7 . 5 mM : 7 . 5 mM : 15 mM ) ; NSV4 : Tw21 : Tw80 : Chol ( 3 . 75 mM : 11 . 25 mM : 15 mM ) ; NSV5 : Tw80 : Chol ( 15mM : 15 mM ) . Fig . 2 . pH - responsiveness of NSVs . ( A ) The phase transition of NSVs was evaluated measuring the shift of Nile Red at a specific emission wavelength in fluorescence mode . Lα = lamellar phase ; H I = hexagonal liquid crystalline phase . ( B ) The pH - responsiveness of NSVs was investigated by DLS analysis . Data are the mean of 3 independent experiments ( n = 3 ) in triplicate ± S . D . * p < 0 . 05 as compared to NSVs incubated at pH 7 . 4 . A * p < 0 . 05 was considered statistically significant as compared to the control . Fig . 3 . Study of kinetic fusion between the NSVs and synthetic models of human endothelial cell membranes . The fusion ( % ) was measured to monitor the study of the kinetic fusion between the NSVs and HBECLips at different incubation times ( 0 – 60 min ) . The analysis was performed incubating the NSVs and HBECLips without ( A ) and with calcium ( C ) . LIPs were used as controls to test the performance of NSVs during the fusion process . The fusion ( % ) between LIPs and HBECLips was further measured without ( B ) or with calcium ( D ) at the same incubation times herein reported . Results are the mean ( n = 3 ) of three different experiments ± standard deviation ( SD ) . The error bars if not shown are within the symbols . Fig . 4 . The schematic description of the dynamic light scattering ( DLS ) analysis of fusion membranes . A schematic cartoon of the size charges during the progression of membrane fusion . ( A ) Multilamellar vesicles ( MLVs ) with a similar lipid composition of biological membranes are incubated with niosomes ( NSVs ) loading the complex HPTS / DPX . ( D ) The full fusion of MLVs and NSVs , which have initial diameters of D 1 and D 2 , generates a final diameter equaling to the square root of ( D 12 + D 22 ) ; ( C ) whereas the hemifusion state results in a diameter of D 1 + D 2 . ( B ) The intermediate distance between vesicles is d , and represents the state where vesicles are moving from a simple to fused state . Fig . 5 . In vitro cell viability percentage of free DOX and DOX - loaded NSVs on human neuroblastoma ( SH - SY5Y ) cells at 24 ( A ) , 48 ( B ) , and 72 ( C ) h of incubation . The cell viability percentage was carried out using the MTT assay as reported in section 2 . 11 . of Materials and methods . The cell viability percentage of various DOX - loaded NSVs was normalized with the control ( untreated cells ) . The empty NSVs were tested at different concentrations and incubation 38 times of DOX - loaded NSVs , and showed a cell viability percentage in the range from 90 - 95 % . Untreated cells ( control ) had a final cell viability percentage of ≈ 99 % . Results are the average of three different experiments ( n = 3 ) ± standard deviation ( S . D . ) . The S . D . , if not shown , is within the symbols . 39 40 41 42 43 44 Table 1 Synthesis of niosomes ( NSVs ) made up from Chol , Tw21 and / or Tw80 at different molar concentrations . The NSVs were synthesized using the experimental protocol herein reported in the Materials and Methods section ( 2 . 2 . Synthesis of non - ionic surfactant vesicles ) . The thin layer evaporation ( TLE ) and probe sonicator methods were used to make the NSVs . The resulting suspension was purified by the size exclusion chromatography using a Sephadex G75 glass column as stationary phase before the experiments . The NSVs were highly reproducible according to the standard protocol included in section 2 . 2 of Materials and Methods . The NSVs were made in triplicate ( n = 3 ) for each single experiment . Samples Tw21 ( mM ) Tw80 ( mM ) Chol ( mM ) NSV1 15 . 00 - - - - 15 NSV2 11 . 25 3 . 75 15 NSV3 7 . 50 7 . 50 15 NSV4 3 . 75 11 . 25 15 NSV5 - - - 15 15 45 Table 2 Synthesis of multilamellar liposomes ( HBECLips ) and liposomes ( LIPs ) at different weight ( w / w in mg ) ratios . The HBECLips and LIPs were used as membrane models and controls , respectively . The HBECLips had a composition similar to that of human brain endothelial cell membranes , while the LIPs were pH - responsive or non - responsive , based on the different lipids used during the preparation procedure . The HBECLips and LIPs were synthesized combining the thin layer evaporation ( TLE ) and extrusion techniques as herein reported in section 2 . 4 of Materials and Methods and are highly reproducible . The HBECLips and LIPs were made in triplicate ( n = 3 ) for each single experiment . Lipids HBECLip Lip1 Lip2 Lip3 DPPE 25 . 80 −−− −−− −−− DPPC 62 . 10 54 . 50 61 . 20 74 . 00 DPPS 6 . 80 −−− −−− −−− Chol CHEMS G M1 Ganglioside DSPE - PEG 2000 20 . 80 −−− 2 . 50 −−− 1 . 35 −−− −−− 32 . 00 4 . 06 35 . 15 −−− −−− 26 . 00 −−− −−− −−−