G * Power ( Faul , Erdfelder , Lang , & Buchner , 2007 ) is a stand - alone power analysis program for many statistical tests commonly used in the social , behavioral , and bio - medical sciences . It is available free of charge via the In - ternet for both Windows and Mac OS X platforms ( see the Concluding Remarks section for details ) . In this article , we present extensions and improvements of G * Power 3 in the domain of correlation and regression analyses . G * Power now covers ( 1 ) one - sample correlation tests based on the tetrachoric correlation model , in addition to the bivari - ate normal and point biserial models already available in G * Power 3 , ( 2 ) statistical tests comparing both dependent and independent Pearson correlations , and statistical tests for ( 3 ) simple linear regression coefficients , ( 4 ) multiple linear regression coefficients for both the fixed - and random - predictors models , ( 5 ) logistic regression coef - ficients , and ( 6 ) Poisson regression coefficients . Thus , in addition to the generic power analysis procedures for the z , t , F , χ 2 , and binomial tests , and those for tests of means , mean vectors , variances , and proportions that have already been available in G * Power 3 ( Faul et al . , 2007 ) , the new version , G * Power 3 . 1 , now includes statistical power analyses for six correlation and nine regression test problems , as summarized in Table 1 . As usual in G * Power 3 , five types of power analysis are available for each of the newly available tests ( for more thorough discussions of these types of power analyses , see Erdfelder , Faul , Buchner , & Cüpper , in press ; Faul et al . , 2007 ) : 1 . A priori analysis ( see Bredenkamp , 1969 ; Cohen , 1988 ) . The necessary sample size is computed as a func - tion of user - specified values for the required significance level α , the desired statistical power 1 2 β , and the to - be - detected population effect size . 2 . Compromise analysis ( see Erdfelder , 1984 ) . The sta - tistical decision criterion ( “critical value” ) and the asso - ciated α and β values are computed as a function of the desired error probability ratio β / α , the sample size , and the population effect size . 3 . Criterion analysis ( see Cohen , 1988 ; Faul et al . , 2007 ) . The required significance level α is computed as a function of power , sample size , and population effect size . 4 . Post hoc analysis ( see Cohen , 1988 ) . Statistical power 1 2 β is computed as a function of significance level α , sample size , and population effect size . 5 . Sensitivity analysis ( see Cohen , 1988 ; Erdfelder , Faul , & Buchner , 2005 ) . The required population effect size is computed as a function of significance level α , sta - tistical power 1 2 β , and sample size . As already detailed and illustrated by Faul et al . ( 2007 ) , G * Power provides for both numerical and graphical out - put options . In addition , any of four parameters— α , 1 2 β , sample size , and effect size—can be plotted as a function of each of the other three , controlling for the values of the remaining two parameters . Below , we briefly describe the scope , the statistical back - ground , and the handling of the correlation and regression 1149 © 2009 The Psychonomic Society , Inc . Statistical power analyses using G * Power 3 . 1 : Tests for correlation and regression analyses F ranz F aul Christian - Albrechts - Universität , Kiel , Germany E dgar E rdFEldEr Universität Mannheim , Mannheim , Germany and a xEl B uchnEr and a lBErt - g Eorg l ang Heinrich - Heine - Universität , Düsseldorf , Germany G * Power is a free power analysis program for a variety of statistical tests . We present extensions and improve - ments of the version introduced by Faul , Erdfelder , Lang , and Buchner ( 2007 ) in the domain of correlation and regression analyses . In the new version , we have added procedures to analyze the power of tests based on ( 1 ) single - sample tetrachoric correlations , ( 2 ) comparisons of dependent correlations , ( 3 ) bivariate linear regres - sion , ( 4 ) multiple linear regression based on the random predictor model , ( 5 ) logistic regression , and ( 6 ) Poisson regression . We describe these new features and provide a brief introduction to their scope and handling . Behavior Research Methods 2009 , 41 ( 4 ) , 1149 - 1160 doi : 10 . 3758 / BRM . 41 . 4 . 1149 E . Erdfelder , erdfelder @ psychologie . uni - mannheim . de 1150 F aul , E rdFEldEr , B uchnEr , and l ang have not been defined for tetrachoric correlations . How - ever , Cohen’s ( 1988 ) conventions for correlations in the framework of the bivariate normal model may serve as rough reference points . Options . Clicking on the “Options” button opens a window in which users may choose between the exact ap - proach of Brown and Benedetti ( 1977 ) ( default option ) or an approximation suggested by Bonett and Price ( 2005 ) . Input and output parameters . Irrespective of the method chosen in the options window , the power of the tet - rachoric correlation z test depends not only on the values of ρ under H 0 and H 1 but also on the marginal distributions of X and Y . For post hoc power analyses , one therefore needs to provide the following input in the lower left field of the main window : The number of tails of the test ( “Tail ( s ) ” : one vs . two ) , the tetrachoric correlation under H 1 ( “H1 corr ρ ” ) , the α error probability , the “Total sample size” N , the tetrachoric correlation under H 0 ( “H0 corr ρ ” ) , and the marginal probabilities of X 5 1 ( “Marginal prob x” ) and Y 5 1 ( “Marginal prob y” ) —that is , the proportions of val - ues exceeding the two criteria used for dichotomization . The output parameters include the “Critical z” required for deciding between H 0 and H 1 and the “Power ( 1 2 β err prob ) . ” In addition , critical values for the sample tetra - choric correlation r ( “Critical r upr” and “Critical r lwr” ) and the standard error se ( r ) of r ( “Std err r” ) under H 0 are also provided . Hence , if the Wald z statistic W 5 ( r 2 ρ 0 ) / se ( r ) is unavailable , G * Power users can base their statisti - cal decision on the sample tetrachoric r directly . For a two - tailed test , H 0 is retained whenever r is not less than “Criti - cal r lwr” and not larger than “Critical r upr” ; otherwise H 0 is rejected . For one - tailed tests , in contrast , “Critical r lwr” and “Critical r upr” are identical ; H 0 is rejected if and only if r exceeds this critical value . Illustrative example . Bonett and Price ( 2005 , Exam - ple 1 ) reported the following “yes” ( 5 1 ) and “no” ( 5 2 ) power analysis procedures that are new in G * Power 3 . 1 . Further technical details about the tests described here , as well as information on those tests in Table 1 that were already available in the previous version of G * Power , can be found on the G * Power Web site ( see the Concluding Remarks section ) . We describe the new tests in the order shown in Table 1 ( omitting the procedures previously de - scribed by Faul et al . , 2007 ) , which corresponds to their order in the “Tests  Correlation and regression” drop - down menu of G * Power 3 . 1 ( see Figure 1 ) . 1 . The Tetrachoric Correlation Model The “Correlation : Tetrachoric model” procedure refers to samples of two dichotomous random variables X and Y as typically represented by 2 3 2 contingency tables . The tetrachoric correlation model is based on the assumption that these variables arise from dichotomizing each of two standardized continuous random variables following a bi - variate normal distribution with correlation ρ in the under - lying population . This latent correlation ρ is called the tet - rachoric correlation . G * Power 3 . 1 provides power analysis procedures for tests of H 0 : ρ 5 ρ 0 against H 1 : ρ  ρ 0 ( or the corresponding one - tailed hypotheses ) based on ( 1 ) a precise method developed by Brown and Benedetti ( 1977 ) and ( 2 ) an approximation suggested by Bonett and Price ( 2005 ) . The procedure refers to the Wald z statistic W 5 ( r 2 ρ 0 ) / se 0 ( r ) , where se 0 ( r ) is the standard error of the sample tetrachoric correlation r under H 0 : ρ 5 ρ 0 . W fol - lows a standard normal distribution under H 0 . Effect size measure . The tetrachoric correlation under H 1 , ρ 1 , serves as an effect size measure . Using the effect size drawer ( i . e . , a subordinate window that slides out from the main window after clicking on the “Determine” button ) , it can be calculated from the four probabilities of the 2 3 2 contingency tables that define the joint distribu - tion of X and Y . To our knowledge , effect size conventions Table 1 Summary of the Correlation and Regression Test Problems Covered by G * Power 3 . 1 Correlation Problems Referring to One Correlation Comparison of a correlation ρ with a constant ρ 0 ( bivariate normal model ) Comparison of a correlation ρ with 0 ( point biserial model ) Comparison of a correlation ρ with a constant ρ 0 ( tetrachoric correlation model ) Correlation Problems Referring to Two Correlations Comparison of two dependent correlations ρ jk and ρ jh ( common index ) Comparison of two dependent correlations ρ jk and ρ hm ( no common index ) Comparison of two independent correlations ρ 1 and ρ 2 ( two samples ) Linear Regression Problems , One Predictor ( Simple Linear Regression ) Comparison of a slope b with a constant b 0 Comparison of two independent intercepts a 1 and a 2 ( two samples ) Comparison of two independent slopes b 1 and b 2 ( two samples ) Linear Regression Problems , Several Predictors ( Multiple Linear Regression ) Deviation of a squared multiple correlation ρ 2 from zero ( F test , fixed model ) Deviation of a subset of linear regression coefficients from zero ( F test , fixed model ) Deviation of a single linear regression coefficient b j from zero ( t test , fixed model ) Deviation of a squared multiple correlation ρ 2 from constant ( random model ) Generalized Linear Regression Problems Logistic regression Poisson regression g * P owEr 3 . 1 : c orrElation and r EgrEssion 1151 correlation coefficient estimated from the data ) as “H1 corr ρ ” and press “Calculate . ” Using the exact calculation method , this results in a sample tetrachoric correlation r 5 . 334 and marginal proportions p x 5 . 602 and p y 5 . 582 . We then click on “Calculate and transfer to main window” in the effect size drawer . This copies the calcu - lated parameters to the corresponding input fields in the main window . For a replication study , say we want to know the sample size required for detecting deviations from H 0 : ρ 5 0 con - sistent with the above H 1 scenario using a one - tailed test answer frequencies of 930 respondents to two questions in a personality inventory : f 11 5 203 , f 12 5 186 , f 21 5 167 , f 22 5 374 . The option “From C . I . calculated from observed freq” in the effect size drawer offers the possi - bility to use the ( 1 2 α ) confidence interval for the sample tetrachoric correlation r as a guideline for the choice of the correlation ρ under H 1 . To use this option , we insert the observed frequencies in the corresponding fields . If we assume , for example , that the population tetrachoric correlation under H 1 matches the sample tetrachoric cor - relation r , we should choose the center of the C . I . ( i . e . , the Figure 1 . The main window of G * Power , showing the contents of the “Tests  Correlation and regression” drop - down menu . 1152 F aul , E rdFEldEr , B uchnEr , and l ang . 17 with visuospatial working memory ( VWM ) and au - ditory working memory ( AWM ) , respectively . The cor - relation of the two working memory measures was r ( VWM , AWM ) 5 . 17 . Assume we would like to know whether VWM is more strongly correlated with age than AWM in the underlying population . In other words , H 0 : ρ ( Age , VWM ) # ρ ( Age , AWM ) is tested against the one - tailed H 1 : ρ ( Age , VWM ) . ρ ( Age , AWM ) . Assum - ing that the true population correlations correspond to the results reported by Tsujimoto et al . , what is the sample size required to detect such a correlation difference with a power of 1 2 β 5 . 95 and α 5 . 05 ? To find the answer , we choose the a priori type of power analysis along with “Correlations : Two dependent Pearson r’s ( com - mon index ) ” and insert the above parameters ( ρ ac 5 . 27 , ρ ab 5 . 17 , ρ bc 5 . 17 ) in the corresponding input fields . Clicking on “Calculate” provides us with N 5 1 , 663 as the required sample size . Note that this N would drop to N 5 408 if we assumed ρ ( VWM , AWM ) 5 . 80 rather than ρ ( VWM , AWM ) 5 . 17 , other parameters being equal . Ob - viously , the third correlation ρ bc has a strong impact on statistical power , although it does not affect whether H 0 or H 1 holds in the underlying population . 2 . 2 . Comparison of Two Dependent Correlations ρ ab and ρ cd ( No Common Index ) The “Correlations : Two dependent Pearson r’s ( no com - mon index ) ” procedure is very similar to the procedure described in the preceding section . The single difference is that H 0 : ρ ab 5 ρ cd is now contrasted against H 1 : ρ ab  ρ cd ; that is , the two dependent correlations here do not share a common index . G * Power’s power analysis procedures for this scenario refer to Steiger’s ( 1980 , Equation 12 ) Z 2 * test statistic . As with Z 1 * , which is actually a special case of Z 2 * , the Z 2 * statistic is asymptotically z distributed under H 0 given a multivariate normal distribution of the four random variables X a , X b , X c , and X d involved in ρ ab and ρ cd ( see also Dunn & Clark , 1969 ) . Effect size measure . The effect size specification is identical to that for “Correlations : Two dependent Pearson r’s ( common index ) , ” except that all six pairwise correla - tions of the random variables X a , X b , X c , and X d under H 1 need to be specified here . As a consequence , ρ ac , ρ ad , ρ bc , and ρ bd are required as input parameters in addition to ρ ab and ρ cd . Input and output parameters . By implication , the input parameters include “Corr ρ _ ac , ” “Corr ρ _ ad , ” “Corr ρ _ bc , ” and “Corr ρ _ bd” in addition to the correla - tions “H1 corr ρ _ cd” and “H0 corr ρ _ ab” to which the hypotheses refer . There are no other differences from the procedure described in the previous section . Illustrative example . Nosek and Smyth ( 2007 ) re - ported a multitrait – multimethod validation using two attitude measurement methods , the Implicit Association Test ( IAT ) and self - report ( SR ) . IAT and SR measures of attitudes toward Democrats versus Republicans ( DR ) were correlated at r ( IAT - DR , SR - DR ) 5 . 51 5 r cd . In contrast , when measuring attitudes toward whites versus blacks ( WB ) , the correlation between both methods was only r ( IAT - WB , SR - WB ) 5 . 12 5 r ab , probably because and a power ( 1 2 β ) 5 . 95 , given α 5 . 05 . If we choose the a priori type of power analysis and insert the correspond - ing input parameters , clicking on “Calculate” provides us with the result “Total sample size” 5 229 , along with “Critical z” 5 1 . 644854 for the z test based on the exact method of Brown and Benedetti ( 1977 ) . 2 . Correlation Problems Referring to Two Dependent Correlations This section refers to z tests comparing two dependent Pearson correlations that either share ( Section 2 . 1 ) or do not share ( Section 2 . 2 ) a common index . 2 . 1 . Comparison of Two Dependent Correlations ρ ab and ρ ac ( Common Index ) The “Correlations : Two dependent Pearson r’s ( common index ) ” procedure provides power analyses for tests of the null hypothesis that two dependent Pearson correlations ρ ab and ρ ac are identical ( H 0 : ρ ab 5 ρ ac ) . Two correlations are dependent if they are defined for the same population . Correspondingly , their sample estimates , r ab and r ac , are observed for the same sample of N observations of three continuous random variables X a , X b , and X c . The two cor - relations share a common index because one of the three random variables , X a , is involved in both correlations . Assuming that X a , X b , and X c are multivariate normally distributed , Steiger’s ( 1980 , Equation 11 ) Z 1 * statistic fol - lows a standard normal distribution under H 0 ( see also Dunn & Clark , 1969 ) . G * Power’s power calculations for dependent correlations sharing a common index refer to this test . Effect size measure . To specify the effect size , both correlations ρ ab and ρ ac are required as input parameters . Alternatively , clicking on “Determine” opens the effect size drawer , which can be used to compute ρ ac from ρ ab and Cohen’s ( 1988 , p . 109 ) effect size measure q , the dif - ference between the Fisher r - to - z transforms of ρ ab and ρ ac . Cohen suggested calling effects of sizes q 5 . 1 , . 3 , and . 5 “small , ” “medium , ” and “large , ” respectively . Note , however , that Cohen developed his q effect size conven - tions for comparisons between independent correlations in different populations . Depending on the size of the third correlation involved , ρ bc , a specific value of q can have very different meanings , resulting in huge effects on sta - tistical power ( see the example below ) . As a consequence , ρ bc is required as a further input parameter . Input and output parameters . Apart from the num - ber of “Tail ( s ) ” of the z test , the post hoc power analysis procedure requires ρ ac ( i . e . , “H1 Corr ρ _ ac” ) , the signifi - cance level “ α err prob , ” the “Sample Size” N , and the two remaining correlations “H0 Corr ρ _ ab” and “Corr ρ _ bc” as input parameters in the lower left field of the main win - dow . To the right , the “Critical z” criterion value for the z test and the “Power ( 1 2 β err prob ) ” are displayed as output parameters . Illustrative example . Tsujimoto , Kuwajima , and Sawaguchi ( 2007 , p . 34 , Table 2 ) studied correlations between age and several continuous measures of work - ing memory and executive functioning in children . In 8 - to 9 - year - olds , they found age correlations of . 27 and g * P owEr 3 . 1 : c orrElation and r EgrEssion 1153 is that power can be computed as a function of the slope values under H 0 and under H 1 directly ( Dupont & Plum - mer , 1998 ) . Effect size measure . The slope b assumed under H 1 , labeled “Slope H1 , ” is used as the effect size measure . Note that the power does not depend only on the difference be - tween “Slope H1” and “Slope H0 , ” the latter of which is the value b 5 b 0 specified by H 0 . The population standard de - viations of the predictor and criterion values , “Std dev σ _ x” and “Std dev σ _ y , ” are also required . The effect size drawer can be used to calculate “Slope H1” from other basic pa - rameters such as the correlation ρ assumed under H 1 . Input and output parameters . The number of “Tail ( s ) ” of the t test , “Slope H1 , ” “ α err prob , ” “Total sample size , ” “Slope H0 , ” and the standard deviations ( “Std dev σ _ x” and “Std dev σ _ y” ) need to be specified as input parameters for a post hoc power analysis . “Power ( 1 2 β err prob ) ” is displayed as an output parameter , in addition to the “Critical t” decision criterion and the pa - rameters defining the noncentral t distribution implied by H 1 ( the noncentrality parameter δ and the df of the test ) . Illustrative example . Assume that we would like to assess whether the standardized regression coefficient β of a bivariate linear regression of Y on X is consistent with H 0 : β $ . 40 or H 1 : β , . 40 . Assuming that β 5 . 20 actu - ally holds in the underlying population , how large must the sample size N of X – Y pairs be to obtain a power of 1 2 β 5 . 95 given α 5 . 05 ? After choosing “Linear bivariate re - gression : One group , size of slope” and the a priori type of power analysis , we specify the above input parameters , making sure that “Tail ( s ) ” 5 one , “Slope H1” 5 . 20 , “Slope H0” 5 . 40 , and “Std dev σ _ x” 5 “Std dev σ _ y” 5 1 , be - cause we want to refer to regression coefficients for stan - dardized variables . Clicking on “Calculate” provides us with the result “Total sample size” 5 262 . 3 . 2 . Comparison of Two Independent Intercepts a 1 and a 2 ( Two Samples ) The “Linear bivariate regression : Two groups , difference between intercepts” procedure is based on the assumption that the standard bivariate linear model described above holds within each of two different populations with the same slope b and possibly different intercepts a 1 and a 2 . It computes the power of the two - tailed t test of H 0 : a 1 5 a 2 against H 1 : a 1  a 2 and for the corresponding one - tailed t test , as described in Armitage , Berry , and Matthews ( 2002 , ch . 11 ) . Effect size measure . The absolute value of the differ - ence between the intercepts , | D intercept | 5 | a 1 2 a 2 | , is used as an effect size measure . In addition to | D intercept | , the significance level α , and the sizes n 1 and n 2 of the two samples , the power depends on the means and standard deviations of the criterion and the predictor variable . Input and output parameters . The number of “Tail ( s ) ” of the t test , the effect size “ | D intercept | , ” the “ α err prob , ” the sample sizes in both groups , the standard deviation of the error variable E ij ( “Std dev residual σ ” ) , the means ( “Mean m _ x1 , ” “Mean m _ x2” ) , and the standard deviations ( “Std dev σ _ x1 , ” “Std dev σ _ x2” ) are required as input parameters for a “Post hoc” power analysis . The SR measures of attitudes toward blacks are more strongly biased by social desirability influences . Assuming that ( 1 ) these correlations correspond to the true population cor - relations under H 1 and ( 2 ) the other four between - attitude correlations ρ ( IAT - WB , IAT - DR ) , ρ ( IAT - WB , SR - DR ) , ρ ( SR - WB , IAT - DR ) , and ρ ( SR - WB , SR - DR ) are zero , how large must the sample be to make sure that this devia - tion from H 0 : ρ ( IAT - DR , SR - DR ) 5 ρ ( IAT - WB , SR - WB ) is detected with a power of 1 2 β 5 . 95 using a one - tailed test and α 5 . 05 ? An a priori power analysis for “Corre - lations : Two dependent Pearson r’s ( no common index ) ” computes N 5 114 as the required sample size . The assumption that the four additional correlations are zero is tantamount to assuming that the two correla - tions under test are statistically independent ( thus , the procedure in G * Power for independent correlations could alternatively have been used ) . If we instead assume that ρ ( IAT - WB , IAT - DR ) 5 ρ ac 5 . 6 and ρ ( SR - WB , SR - DR ) 5 ρ bd 5 . 7 , we arrive at a considerably lower sample size of N 5 56 . If our resources were sufficient for recruiting not more than N 5 40 participants and we wanted to make sure that the “ β / α ratio” equals 1 ( i . e . , balanced error risks with α 5 β ) , a compromise power analysis for the lat - ter case computes “Critical z” 5 1 . 385675 as the optimal statistical decision criterion , corresponding to α 5 β 5 . 082923 . 3 . Linear Regression Problems , One Predictor ( Simple Linear Regression ) This section summarizes power analysis procedures addressing regression coefficients in the bivariate linear standard model Y i 5 a 1 b · X i 1 E i , where Y i and X i repre - sent the criterion and the predictor variable , respectively , a and b the regression coefficients of interest , and E i an error term that is independently and identically distrib - uted and follows a normal distribution with expectation 0 and homogeneous variance σ 2 for each observation unit i . Section 3 . 1 describes a one - sample procedure for tests ad - dressing b , whereas Sections 3 . 2 and 3 . 3 refer to hypoth - eses on differences in a and b between two different un - derlying populations . Formally , the tests considered here are special cases of the multiple linear regression proce - dures described in Section 4 . However , the procedures for the special case provide a more convenient interface that may be easier to use and interpret if users are interested in bivariate regression problems only ( see also Dupont & Plummer , 1998 ) . 3 . 1 . Comparison of a Slope b With a Constant b 0 The “Linear bivariate regression : One group , size of slope” procedure computes the power of the t test of H 0 : b 5 b 0 against H 1 : b  b 0 , where b 0 is any real - valued constant . Note that this test is equivalent to the standard bivariate regression t test of H 0 : b * 5 0 against H 1 : b *  0 if we refer to the modified model Y i * 5 a 1 b * · X i 1 E i , with Y i * : 5 Y i 2 b 0 · X i ( Rindskopf , 1984 ) . Hence , power could also be assessed by referring to the standard regres - sion t test ( or global F test ) using Y * rather than Y as a criterion variable . The main advantage of the “Linear bi - variate regression : One group , size of slope” procedure 1154 F aul , E rdFEldEr , B uchnEr , and l ang of H 0 : b 1 # b 2 against H 1 : b 1 . b 2 , given α 5 . 05 ? To an - swer this question , we select “Linear bivariate regression : Two groups , difference between slopes” along with the post hoc type of power analysis . We then provide the ap - propriate input parameters [ “Tail ( s ) ” 5 one , “ | D slope | ” 5 . 57 , “ α error prob” 5 . 05 , “Sample size group 1” 5 “ Sample size group 2” 5 30 , “Std dev . residual σ ” 5 . 80 , and “Std dev σ _ X1” 5 “Std dev σ _ X2” 5 1 ] and click on “ Calculate . ” We obtain “Power ( 1 2 β err prob ) ” 5 . 860165 . 4 . Linear Regression Problems , Several Predictors ( Multiple Linear Regression ) In multiple linear regression , the linear relation between a criterion variable Y and m predictors X 5 ( X 1 , . . . , X m ) is studied . G * Power 3 . 1 now provides power analysis pro - cedures for both the conditional ( or fixed - predictors ) and the unconditional ( or random - predictors ) models of mul - tiple regression ( Gatsonis & Sampson , 1989 ; Sampson , 1974 ) . In the fixed - predictors model underlying previous versions of G * Power , the predictors X are assumed to be fixed and known . In the random - predictors model , by con - trast , they are assumed to be random variables with values sampled from an underlying multivariate normal distribu - tion . Whereas the fixed - predictors model is often more appropriate in experimental research ( where known pre - dictor values are typically assigned to participants by an experimenter ) , the random - predictors model more closely resembles the design of observational studies ( where par - ticipants and their associated predictor values are sam - pled from an underlying population ) . The test procedures and the maximum likelihood estimates of the regression weights are identical for both models . However , the mod - els differ with respect to statistical power . Sections 4 . 1 , 4 . 2 , and 4 . 3 describe procedures related to F and t tests in the fixed - predictors model of multiple linear regression ( cf . Cohen , 1988 , ch . 9 ) , whereas Sec - tion 4 . 4 describes the procedure for the random - predictors model . The procedures for the fixed - predictors model are based on the general linear model ( GLM ) , which includes the bivariate linear model described in Sections 3 . 1 – 3 . 3 as a special case ( Cohen , Cohen , West , & Aiken , 2003 ) . In other words , the following procedures , unlike those in the previous section , have the advantage that they are not limited to a single predictor variable . However , their disadvantage is that effect size specifications cannot be made in terms of regression coefficients under H 0 and H 1 directly . Rather , variance proportions , or ratios of variance proportions , are used to define H 0 and H 1 ( cf . Cohen , 1988 , ch . 9 ) . For this reason , we decided to include both bivariate and multiple linear regression procedures in G * Power 3 . 1 . The latter set of procedures is recommended whenever sta - tistical hypotheses are defined in terms of proportions of explained variance or whenever they can easily be trans - formed into hypotheses referring to such proportions . 4 . 1 . Deviation of a Squared Multiple Correlation ρ 2 From Zero ( Fixed Model ) The “Linear multiple regression : Fixed model , R 2 de - viation from zero” procedure provides power analyses for “Power ( 1 2 β err prob ) ” is displayed as an output param - eter in addition to the “Critical t” decision criterion and the parameters defining the noncentral t distribution im - plied by H 1 ( the noncentrality parameter δ and the df of the test ) . 3 . 3 . Comparison of Two Independent Slopes b 1 and b 2 ( Two Samples ) The linear model used in the previous two sections also underlies the “Linear bivariate regression : Two groups , dif - ferences between slopes” procedure . Two independent sam - ples are assumed to be drawn from two different popula - tions , each consistent with the model Y ij 5 a j 1 b j · X i 1 E i , where Y ij , X ij , and E ij respectively represent the criterion , the predictor , and the normally distributed error variable for observation unit i in population j . Parameters a j and b j denote the regression coefficients in population j , j 5 1 , 2 . The procedure provides power analyses for two - tailed t tests of the null hypothesis that the slopes in the two populations are equal ( H 0 : b 1 5 b 2 ) versus different ( H 1 : b 1  b 2 ) and for the corresponding one - tailed t test ( Armitage et al . , 2002 , ch . 11 , Equations 11 . 18 – 11 . 20 ) . Effect size measure . The absolute difference between slopes , | D slope | 5 | b 1 2 b 2 | , is used as an effect size mea - sure . Statistical power depends not only on | D slope | , α , and the two sample sizes n 1 and n 2 . Specifically , the standard deviations of the error variable E ij ( “Std dev residual σ ” ) , the predictor variable ( “Std dev σ _ X” ) , and the criterion variable ( “Std dev σ _ Y” ) in both groups are required to fully specify the effect size . Input and output parameters . The input and output parameters are similar to those for the two procedures de - scribed in Sections 3 . 1 and 3 . 2 . In addition to | D slope | and the standard deviations , the number of “Tail ( s ) ” of the test , the “ α err prob , ” and the two sample sizes are required in the Input Parameters fields for the post hoc type of power analysis . In the Output Parameters fields , the “Noncen - trality parameter δ ” of the t distribution under H 1 , the deci - sion criterion ( “Critical t” ) , the degrees of freedom of the t test ( “Df” ) , and the “Power ( 1 2 β err prob ) ” implied by the input parameters are provided . Illustrative application . Perugini , O’Gorman , and Prestwich ( 2007 , Study 1 ) hypothesized that the criterion validity of the IAT depends on the degree of self - activation in the test situation . To test this hypothesis , they asked 60 participants to circle certain words while reading a short story printed on a sheet of paper . Half of the participants were asked to circle the words “the” and “a” ( control con - dition ) , whereas the remaining 30 participants were asked to circle “I , ” “me , ” “my , ” and “myself ” ( self - activation condition ) . Subsequently , attitudes toward alcohol versus soft drinks were measured using the IAT ( predictor X ) . In addition , actual alcohol consumption rate was assessed using the self - report ( criterion Y ) . Consistent with their hypothesis , they found standardized Y – X regression coef - ficients of β 5 . 48 and β 5 2 . 09 in the self - activation and control conditions , respectively . Assuming that ( 1 ) these coefficients correspond to the actual coefficients under H 1 in the underlying populations and ( 2 ) the error standard de - viation is . 80 , how large is the power of the one - tailed t test g * P owEr 3 . 1 : c orrElation and r EgrEssion 1155 H 0 : ρ 2 Y . X 1 , . . . , Xm 5 ρ 2 Y . X 1 , . . . , Xk ( i . e . , Set B does not increase the proportion of explained variance ) versus H 1 : ρ 2 Y . X 1 , . . . , Xm . ρ 2 Y . X 1 , . . . , Xk ( i . e . , Set B increases the proportion of explained variance ) . Note that H 0 is tantamount to claiming that all m 2 k regression coefficients of Set B are zero . As shown by Rindskopf ( 1984 ) , special F tests can also be used to assess various constraints on regression coefficients in linear models . For example , if Y i 5 b 0 1 b 1 · X 1 i 1 . . . 1 b m · X mi 1 E i is the full linear model and Y i 5 b 0 1 b · X 1 i 1 . . . 1 b · X mi 1 E i is a restricted H 0 model claiming that all m regression coefficients are equal ( H 0 : b 1 5 b 2 5 . . . 5 b m 5 b ) , we can define a new predic - tor variable X i : 5 X 1 i 1 X 2 i 1 . . . 1 X mi and consider the restricted model Y i 5 b 0 1 b · X i 1 E i . Because this model is equivalent to the H 0 model , we can compare ρ 2 Y . X 1 , . . . , Xm and ρ 2 Y . X with a special F test to test H 0 . Effect size measure . Cohen’s ( 1988 ) f 2 is again used as an effect size measure . However , here we are interested in the proportion of variance explained by predictors from Set B only , so that f 2 5 ( ρ 2 Y . X 1 , . . . , Xm 2 ρ 2 Y . X 1 , . . . , Xk ) / ( 1 2 ρ 2 Y . X 1 , . . . , Xm ) serves as an effect size measure . The effect size drawer can be used to calculate f 2 from the variance ex - plained by Set B ( i . e . , ρ 2 Y . X 1 , . . . , Xm 2 ρ 2 Y . X 1 , . . . , Xk ) and the error variance ( i . e . , 1 2 ρ 2 Y . X 1 , . . . , Xm ) . Alternatively , f 2 can also be computed as a function of the partial correlation squared of Set B predictors ( Cohen , 1988 , ch . 9 ) . Cohen ( 1988 ) suggested the same effect size conven - tions as in the case of global F tests ( see Section 4 . 1 ) . However , we believe that researchers should reflect the fact that a certain effect size , say f 2 5 . 15 , may have very different substantive meanings depending on the propor - tion of variance explained by Set A ( i . e . , ρ 2 Y . X 1 , . . . , Xk ) . Input and output parameters . The inputs and out - puts match those of the “Linear multiple regression : Fixed model , R 2 deviation from zero” procedure ( see Sec - tion 4 . 1 ) , with the exception that the “Number of tested predictors” : 5 m 2 k —that is , the number of predictors in Set B—is required as an additional input parameter . Illustrative example . In Section 3 . 3 , we presented a power analysis for differences in regression slopes as analyzed by Perugini et al . ( 2007 , Study 1 ) . Multiple linear regression provides an alternative method to ad - dress the same problem . In addition to the self - report of alcohol use ( criterion Y ) and the IAT attitude measure ( predictor X ) , two additional predictors are required for this purpose : a binary dummy variable G represent - ing the experimental condition ( G 5 0 , control group ; G 5 1 , self - activation group ) and , most importantly , a product variable G · X representing the interaction of the IAT measure and the experimental conditional . Differ - ences in Y – X regression slopes in the two groups will show up as a significant effect of the G · X interaction in a regression model using Y as the criterion and X , G , and G · X as m 5 3 predictors . Given a total of N 5 60 participants ( 30 in each group ) , α 5 . 05 , and a medium size f 2 5 . 15 of the interaction ef - fect in the underlying population , how large is the power of the special F test assessing the increase in explained variance due to the interaction ? To answer this question , we choose the post hoc power analysis in the “Linear mul - omnibus ( or “global” ) F tests of the null hypothesis that the squared multiple correlation between a criterion vari - able Y and a set of m predictor variables X 1 , X 2 , . . . , X m is zero in the underlying population ( H 0 : ρ 2 Y . X 1 , . . . , Xm 5 0 ) ver - sus larger than zero ( H 1 : ρ 2 Y . X 1 , . . . , Xm . 0 ) . Note that the for - mer hypothesis is equivalent to the hypothesis that all m re - gression coefficients of the predictors are zero ( H 0 : b 1 5 b 2 5 . . . 5 b m 5 0 ) . By implication , the omnibus F test can also be used to test fully specified linear models of the type Y i 5 b 0 1 c 1 · X 1 i 1 . . . 1 c m · X mi 1 E i , where c 1 , . . . , c m are user - specified real - valued constants defining H 0 . To test this fully specified model , simply define a new criterion variable Y i * : 5 Y i 2 c 1 · X 1 i 2 . . . 2 c m · X mi and perform a multiple regression of Y * on the m predictors X 1 to X m . H 0 holds if and only if ρ 2 Y * . X 1 , . . . , Xm 5 0—that is , if all regression coefficients are zero in the transformed regres - sion equation pertaining to Y * ( see Rindskopf , 1984 ) . Effect size measure . Cohen’s f 2 , the ratio of explained variance and error variance , serves as the effect size mea - sure ( Cohen , 1988 , ch . 9 ) . Using the effect size drawer , f 2 can be calculated directly from the squared multiple cor - relation ρ 2 Y . X 1 , . . . , Xm in the underlying population . For omni - bus F tests , the relation between f 2 and ρ 2 Y . X 1 , . . . , Xm is simply given by f 2 5 ρ 2 Y . X 1 , . . . , Xm / ( 1 2 ρ 2 Y . X 1 , . . . , Xm ) . According to Cohen ( ch . 9 ) , f 2 values of . 02 , . 15 , and . 35 can be called “small , ” “medium , ” and “large” effects , respectively . Al - ternatively , one may compute f 2 by specifying a vector u of correlations between Y and the predictors X i along with the ( m 3 m ) matrix B of intercorrelations among the predictors . Given u and B , it is easy to derive ρ 2 Y . X 1 , . . . , Xm 5 u T B 2 1 u and , via the relation between f 2 and ρ 2 Y . X 1 , . . . , Xm de - scribed above , also f 2 . Input and output parameters . The post hoc power analysis procedure requires the population “Effect size f 2 , ” the “ α err prob , ” the “Total sample size” N , and the “Total number of predictors” m in the regression model as input parameters . It provides as output parameters the “Non - centrality parameter λ ” of the F distribution under H 1 , the decision criterion ( “Critical F” ) , the degrees of freedom ( “Numerator df , ” “Denominator df ” ) , and the power of the omnibus F test [ “Power ( 1 2 β err prob ) ” ] . Illustrative example . Given three predictor variables X 1 , X 2 , and X 3 , presumably correlated to Y with ρ 1 5 . 3 , ρ 2 5 2 . 1 , and ρ 3 5 . 7 , and with pairwise correlations of ρ 13 5 . 4 and ρ 12 5 ρ 23 5 0 , we first determine the effect size f 2 . Inserting b 5 ( . 3 , 2 . 1 , . 7 ) and the intercorrelation matrix of the predictors in the corresponding input dialog in G * Power’s effect size drawer , we find that ρ 2 Y . X 1 , . . . , Xm 5 . 5 and f 2 5 1 . The results of an a priori analysis with this effect size reveals that we need a sample size of N 5 22 to achieve a power of . 95 in a test based on α 5 . 05 . 4 . 2 . Deviation of a Subset of Linear Regression Coefficients From Zero ( Fixed Model ) Like the previous procedure , this procedure is based on the GLM , but this one considers the case of two Predictor Sets A ( including X 1 , . . . , X k ) and B ( including X k 1 1 , . . . , X m ) that define the full model with m predictors . The “Linear multiple regression : Fixed model , R 2 increase” procedure provides power analyses for the special F test of 1156 F aul , E rdFEldEr , B uchnEr , and l ang tively , the three - moment F approximation suggested by Lee ( 1972 ) can also be used . In addition to the five types of power analysis and the graphic options that G * Power 3 . 1 supports for any test , the program provides several other useful procedures for the random - predictors model : ( 1 ) It is possible to calculate exact confidence intervals and confidence bounds for the squared multiple correlation ; ( 2 ) the critical values of R 2 given in the output may be used in hypothesis testing ; and ( 3 ) the probability density function , the cumulative distri - bution function , and the quantiles of the sampling distri - bution of the squared multiple correlation coefficients are available via the G * Power calculator . The implemented procedures provide power analyses for tests of the null hypothesis that the population squared multiple correlation coefficient ρ 2 equals ρ 20 ( H 0 : ρ 2 5 ρ 20 ) versus a one - or a two - tailed alternative . Effect size measure . The squared population correla - tion coefficient ρ 2 under the alternative hypothesis ( H 1 ρ 2 ) serves as an effect size measure . To fully specify the ef - fect size , the squared multiple correlation under the null hypothesis ( H 0 ρ 2 ) is also needed . The effect size drawer offers two ways to calculate the effect size ρ 2 . First , it is possible to choose a certain per - centile of the ( 1 2 α ) confidence interval calculated for an observed R 2 as H 1 ρ 2 . Alternatively , H 1 ρ 2 can be obtained by specifying a vector u of correlations between criterion Y and predictors X i and the ( m 3 m ) matrix B of correla - tions among the predictors . By definition , ρ 2 5 u T B 2 1 u . Input and output parameters . The post hoc power analysis procedure requires the type of test ( “Tail ( s ) ” : one vs . two ) , the population ρ 2 under H 1 , the population ρ 2 under H 0 , the “ α error prob , ” the “Total sample size” N , and the “Number of predictors” m in the regression model as input parameters . It provides the “Lower critical R 2 , ” the “Upper critical R 2 , ” and the power of the test “Power ( 1 2 β err prob ) ” as output . For a two - tailed test , H 0 is re - tained whenever the sample R 2 lies in the interval defined by “Lower critical R 2 ” and “Upper critical R 2 ” ; otherwise , H 0 is rejected . For one - tailed tests , in contrast , “Lower critical R 2 ” and “Upper critical R 2 ” are identical ; H 0 is rejected if and only if R 2 exceeds this critical value . Illustrative examples . In Section 4 . 1 , we presented a power analysis for a three - predictor example using the fixed - predictors model . Using the same input procedure in the effect size drawer ( opened by pressing “Insert / edit matrix” in the “From predictor correlations” section ) de - scribed in Section 4 . 1 , we again find “H1 ρ 2 ” 5 . 5 . How - ever , the result of the same a priori analysis ( power 5 . 95 , α 5 . 05 , 3 predictors ) previously computed for the fixed model shows that we now need a sample size of at least N 5 26 for the random model , instead of only the N 5 22 previously found for the fixed model . This difference il - lustrates the fact that sample sizes required for the random - predictors model are always slightly larger than those re - quired for the corresponding fixed - predictors model . As a further example , we use the “From confidence in - terval” procedure in the effect size drawer to determine the effect size based on the results of a pilot study . We insert the values from a previous study ( “Total sample tiple regression : Fixed model , R 2 increase” procedure . In addition to “Effect size f 2 ” 5 . 15 , “ α err prob” 5 . 05 , and “Total sample size” 5 60 , we specify “Number of tested predictors” 5 1 and “Total number of predictors” 5 3 as input parameters , because we have m 5 3 predictors in the full model and only one of these predictors cap - tures the effect of interest—namely , the interaction ef - fect . Clicking on “Calculate” provides us with the result “Power ( 1 2 β err prob ) ” 5 . 838477 . 4 . 3 . Deviation of a Single Linear Regression Coefficient b j From Zero ( t Test , Fixed Model ) Special F tests assessing effects of a single predic - tor X j in multiple regression models ( hence , numerator df 5 1 ) are equivalent to two - tailed t tests of H 0 : b j 5 0 . The “Linear multiple regression : Fixed model , single re - gression coefficient” procedure has been designed for this situation . The main reason for including this procedure in G * Power 3 . 1 is that t tests for single regression coef - ficients can take the form of one - tailed tests of , for ex - ample , H 0 : b j # 0 versus H 1 : b j . 0 . Power analyses for one - tailed tests can be done most conveniently with the “Linear multiple regression : Fixed model , single regres - sion coefficient” t test procedure . Effect size measures , input and output param - eters . Because two - tailed regression t tests are special cases of the special F tests described in Section 4 . 2 , the effect size measure and the input and output parameters are largely the same for both procedures . One exception is that “Numerator df” is not required as an input parameter for t tests . Also , the number of “Tail ( s ) ” of the test ( one vs . two ) is required as an additional input parameter in the t test procedure . Illustrative application . See the example described in Section 4 . 2 . For the reasons outlined above , we would ob - tain the same power results if we were to analyze the same input parameters using the “Linear multiple regression : Fixed model , single regression coefficient” procedure with “Tail ( s ) ” 5 two . In contrast , if we were to choose “Tail ( s ) ” 5 one and keep the other parameters unchanged , the power would increase to . 906347 . 4 . 4 . Deviation of Multiple Correlation Squared ρ 2 From Constant ( Random Model ) The random - predictors model of multiple linear regres - sion is based on the assumption that ( Y , X 1 , . . . , X m ) are random variables with a joint multivariate normal distri - bution . Sampson ( 1974 ) showed that choice of the fixed or the random model has no bearing on the test of sig - nificance or on the estimation of the regression weights . However , the choice of model affects the power of the test . Several programs exist that can be used to assess the power for random - model tests ( e . g . , Dunlap , Xin , & Myers , 2004 ; Mendoza & Stafford , 2001 ; Shieh & Kung , 2007 ; Steiger & Fouladi , 1992 ) . However , these programs either rely on other software packages ( Mathematica , Excel ) or provide only a rather inflexible user interface . The procedures implemented in G * Power use the exact sampling distribution of the squared multiple correlation coefficient ( Benton & Krishnamoorthy , 2003 ) . Alterna - g * P owEr 3 . 1 : c orrElation and r EgrEssion 1157 5 . 1 . Logistic Regression Logistic regression models address the relationship between a binary dependent variable ( or criterion ) Y and one or more independent variables ( or predictors ) X j , with discrete or continuous probability distributions . In contrast to linear regression models , the logit trans - form of Y , rather than Y itself , serves as the criterion to be predicted by a linear combination of the independent variables . More precisely , if y 5 1 and y 5 0 denote the two possible values of Y , with probabilities p ( y 5 1 ) and p ( y 5 0 ) , respectively , so that p ( y 5 1 ) 1 p ( y 5 0 ) 5 1 , then logit ( Y ) : 5 ln [ p ( y 5 1 ) / p ( y 5 0 ) ] is modeled as logit ( Y ) 5 β 0 1 β 1 · X 1 1 . . . 1 β m · X m . A logistic re - gression model is called simple if m 5 1 . If m . 1 , we have a multiple logistic regression model . The imple - mented procedures provide power analyses for the Wald test z 5 ˆ β j / se ( ˆ β j ) assessing the effect of a specific pre - dictor X j ( e . g . , H 0 : β j 5 0 vs . H 1 : β j  0 , or H 0 : β j # 0 vs . H 1 : β j . 0 ) in both simple and multiple logistic re - gression models . In addition , the procedure of Lyles et al . ( 2007 ) also supports power analyses for likelihood ratio tests . In the case of multiple logistic regression models , a simple approximation proposed by Hsieh et al . ( 1998 ) is used : The sample size N is multiplied by ( 1 2 R 2 ) , where R 2 is the squared multiple correlation coefficient when the predictor of interest is regressed on the other predic - tors . The following paragraphs refer to the simple model logit ( Y ) 5 β 0 1 β 1 · X . Effect size measure . Given the conditional probability p 1 : 5 p ( Y 5 1 | X 5 1 ) under H 0 , we may define the effect size either by specifying p 2 : 5 p ( Y 5 1 | X 5 1 ) under H 1 or by specifying the odds ratio OR : 5 [ p 2 / ( 1 2 p 2 ) ] / [ p 1 / ( 1 2 p 1 ) ] . The parameters β 0 and β 1 are related to p 1 and p 2 as follows : β 0 5 ln [ p 1 / ( 1 2 p 1 ) ] , β 1 5 ln [ OR ] . Under H 0 , p 1 5 p 2 or OR 5 1 . Input and output parameters . The post hoc type of power analysis for the “Logistic regression” procedure requires the following input parameters : ( 1 ) the num - ber of “Tail ( s ) ” of the test ( one vs . two ) ; ( 2 ) “Pr ( Y 5 1 | X 5 1 ) ” under H 0 , corresponding to p 1 ; ( 3 ) the effect size [ either “Pr ( Y 5 1 | X 5 1 ) ” under H 1 or , option - ally , the “Odds ratio” specifying p 2 ] ; ( 4 ) the “ α err prob” ; ( 5 ) the “Total sample size” N ; and ( 6 ) the proportion of variance of X j explained by additional predictors in the model ( “R 2 other X” ) . Finally , because the power of the test also depends on the distribution of the predictor X , the “X distribution” and its parameters need to be specified . Users may choose between six predefined distributions ( binomial , exponential , log - normal , normal , Poisson , or uniform ) or select a manual input mode . Depending on this selection , additional parameters ( corresponding to the distribution parameters or , in the manual mode , the vari - ances v 0 and v 1 of β 1 under H 0 and H 1 , respectively ) must be specified . In the manual mode , sensitivity analyses are not possible . After clicking “Calculate , ” the statistical decision criterion ( “Critical z” in the large - sample pro - cedures , “Noncentrality parameter λ , ” “Critical χ 2 , ” and “df” in the enumeration approach ) and the power of the test [ “Power ( 1 2 β err prob ) ” ] are displayed in the Output Parameters fields . size” 5 50 , “Number of predictors” 5 5 , and “Observed R 2 ” 5 . 3 ) , choose “Confidence level ( 1 2 α ) ” 5 . 95 , and choose the center of the confidence interval as “H1 ρ 2 ” [ “Rel . C . I . pos to use ( 0 5 left , 1 5 right ) ” 5 . 5 ] . Pressing “Calculate” produces the two - sided interval ( . 0337 , . 4603 ) and the two one - sided intervals ( 0 , . 4245 ) and ( . 0589 , 1 ) , thus confirming the values computed by Shieh and Kung ( 2007 , p . 733 ) . In addition , “H1 ρ 2 ” is set to . 2470214 , the center of the interval . Given this value , an a priori analysis of the one - sided test of H 0 : ρ 2 5 0 using α 5 . 05 shows that we need a sample size of at least 71 to achieve a power of . 95 . The output also provides “Upper critical R 2 ” 5 . 153427 . Thus , if in our new study we found R 2 to be larger than this value , the result here implies that the test would be significant at the . 05 α level . Suppose we were to find a value of R 2 5 . 19 . Then we could use the G * Power calculator to compute the p value of the test statistic : The syntax for the cumulative distribution function of the sampling distribution of R 2 is “mr2cdf ( R 2 , ρ 2 , m 1 1 , N ) ” . Thus , in our case , we need to insert “1 2 mr2cdf ( 0 . 19 , 0 , 5 1 1 , 71 ) ” in the calculator . Pressing “Calculate” shows that p 5 . 0156 . 5 . Generalized Linear Regression Problems G * Power 3 . 1 includes power procedures for logistic and Poisson regression models in which the predictor variable under test may have one of six different predefined dis - tributions ( binary , exponential , log - normal , normal , Pois - son , and uniform ) . In each case , users can choose between the enumeration approach proposed by Lyles , Lin , and Williamson ( 2007 ) , which allows power calculations for Wald and likelihood ratio tests , and a large - sample ap - proximation of the Wald test based on the work of Demi - denko ( 2007 , 2008 ) and Whittemore ( 1981 ) . To allow for comparisons with published results , we also implemented simple but less accurate power routines that are in wide - spread use ( i . e . , the procedures of Hsieh , Bloch , & Lar - sen , 1998 , and of Signorini , 1991 , for logistic and Poisson regressions , respectively ) . Problems with Whittemore’s and Signorini’s procedures have already been discussed by Shieh ( 2001 ) and need not be reiterated here . The enumeration procedure of Lyles et al . ( 2007 ) is conceptually simple and provides a rather direct , simulation - like approach to power analysis . Its main disadvantage is that it is rather slow and requires much computer memory for analyses with large sample sizes . The recommended practice is therefore to begin with the large - sample approximation and to use the enumeration approach mainly to validate the results ( if the sample size is not too large ) . Demidenko ( 2008 , pp . 37f ) discussed the relative mer - its of power calculations based on Wald and likelihood ratio tests . A comparison of both approaches using the Lyles et al . ( 2007 ) enumeration procedure indicated that in most cases the difference in calculated power is small . In cases in which the results deviated , the simulated power was slightly higher for the likelihood ratio test than for the Wald test procedure , which tended to underestimate the true power , and the likelihood ratio procedure also ap - peared to be more accurate . 1158 F aul , E rdFEldEr , B uchnEr , and l ang criterion Y ) and one or more independent variables ( i . e . , the predictors X j , j 5 1 , . . . , m ) . For a count variable Y indexing the number Y 5 y of events of a certain type in a fixed amount of time , a Poisson distribution model is often reasonable ( Hays , 1972 ) . Poisson distributions are defined by a single parameter λ , the so - called intensity of the Pois - son process . The larger the λ , the larger the number of crit - ical events per time , as indexed by Y . Poisson regression models are based on the assumption that the logarithm of λ is a linear combination of m predictors X j , j 5 1 , . . . , m . In other words , ln ( λ ) 5 β 0 1 β 1 · X 1 1 . . . 1 β m · X m , with β j measuring the “effect” of predictor X j on Y . The procedures currently implemented in G * Power provide power analyses for the Wald test z 5 ˆ β j / se ( ˆ β j ) , which assesses the effect of a specific predictor X j ( e . g . , H 0 : β j 5 0 vs . H 1 : β j  0 or H 0 : β j # 0 vs . H 1 : β j . 0 ) in both simple and multiple Poisson regression models . In addition , the procedure of Lyles et al . ( 2007 ) provides power analyses for likelihood ratio tests . In the case of multiple Poisson regression models , a simple approxima - tion proposed by Hsieh et al . ( 1998 ) is used : The sample size N is multiplied by ( 1 2 R 2 ) , where R 2 is the squared multiple correlation coefficient when the predictor of interest is regressed on the other predictors . In the fol - lowing discussion , we assume the simple model ln ( λ ) 5 β 0 1 β 1 X . Effect size measure . The ratio R 5 λ ( H 1 ) / λ ( H 0 ) of the intensities of the Poisson processes under H 1 and H 0 , given X 1 5 1 , is used as an effect size measure . Under H 0 , R 5 1 . Under H 1 , in contrast , R 5 exp ( β 1 ) . Input and output parameters . In addition to “Exp ( β 1 ) , ” the number of “Tail ( s ) ” of the test , the “ α err prob , ” and the “Total sample size , ” the following input pa - rameters are required for post hoc power analysis tests in Poisson regression : ( 1 ) The intensity λ 5 exp ( β 0 ) assumed under H 0 [ “Base rate exp ( β 0 ) ” ] , ( 2 ) the mean exposure time during which the Y events are counted ( “Mean expo - sure” ) , and ( 3 ) “R 2 other X , ” a factor intended to approxi - mate the influence of additional predictors X k ( if any ) on the predictor of interest . The meaning of the latter fac - tor is identical to the correction factor proposed by Hsieh et al . ( 1998 , Equation 2 ) for multiple logistic regression ( see Section 5 . 1 ) , so that “R 2 other X” is the proportion of the variance of X explained by the other predictors . Fi - nally , because the power of the test also depends on the distribution of the predictor X , the “X distribution” and its parameters need to be specified . Users may choose from six predefined distributions ( binomial , exponential , log - normal , normal , Poisson , or uniform ) or select a manual input mode . Depending on this choice , additional param - eters ( corresponding to distribution parameters or , in the manual mode , the variances v 0 and v 1 of β 1 under H 0 and H 1 , respectively ) must be specified . In the manual mode , sensitivity analyses are not possible . In post hoc power analyses , the statistical decision criterion ( “Critical z” in the large - sample procedures , “Noncentrality parameter λ , ” “Critical χ 2 , ” and “df ” in the enumeration approach ) and the power of the test [ “Power ( 1 2 β err prob ) ” ] are displayed in the Output Pa - rameters fields . Illustrative examples . Using multiple logistic regres - sion , Friese , Bluemke , and Wänke ( 2007 ) assessed the ef - fects of ( 1 ) the intention to vote for a specific political party x ( 5 predictor X 1 ) and ( 2 ) the attitude toward party x as measured with the IAT ( 5 predictor X 2 ) on actual vot - ing behavior in a political election ( 5 criterion Y ) . Both X 1 and Y are binary variables taking on the value 1 if a participant intends to vote for x or has actually voted for x , respectively , and the value 0 otherwise . In contrast , X 2 is a continuous implicit attitude measure derived from IAT response time data . Given the fact that Friese et al . ( 2007 ) were able to analyze data for N 5 1 , 386 participants , what would be a reasonable statistical decision criterion ( criti - cal z value ) to detect effects of size p 1 5 . 30 and p 2 5 . 70 ( so that OR 5 . 7 / . 3 · . 7 / . 3 5 5 . 44 ) for predictor X 1 , given a base rate B 5 . 10 for the intention to vote for the Green party , a two - tailed z test , and balanced α and β error risks so that q 5 β / α 5 1 ? A compromise power analysis helps find the answer to this question . In the ef - fect size drawer , we enter “Pr ( Y 5 1 | X 5 1 ) H1” 5 . 70 , “Pr ( Y 5 1 | X 5 1 ) H0” 5 . 30 . Clicking “Calcu - late and transfer to main window” yields an odds ratio of 5 . 44444 and transfers this value and the value of “Pr ( Y 5 1 | X 5 1 ) H0” to the main window . Here we specify “Tail ( s ) ” 5 two , “ β / α ratio” 5 1 , “Total sam - ple size” 5 1 , 386 , “X distribution” 5 binomial , and “x parm π ” 5 . 1 in the Input Parameters fields . If we as - sume that the attitude toward the Green party ( X 2 ) explains 40 % of the variance of X 1 , we need “R 2 other X” 5 . 40 as an additional input parameter . In the Options dialog box , we choose the Demidenko ( 2007 ) procedure ( without variance correction ) . Clicking on “Calculate” provides us with “Critical z” 5 3 . 454879 , corresponding to α 5 β 5 . 00055 . Thus , very small α values may be reasonable if the sample size , the effect size , or both are very large , as is the case in the Friese et al . study . We now refer to the effect of the attitude toward the Green party ( i . e . , predictor X 2 , assumed to be standard normally distributed ) . Assuming that a proportion of p 1 5 . 10 of the participants with an average attitude toward the Greens actually vote for them , whereas a proportion of . 15 of the participants with an attitude one standard de - viation above the mean would vote for them [ thus , OR 5 ( . 15 / . 85 ) · ( . 90 / . 10 ) 5 1 . 588 and b 1 5 ln ( 1 . 588 ) 5 . 4625 ] , what is a reasonable critical z value to detect effects of this size for predictor X 2 with a two - tailed z test and balanced α and β error risks ( i . e . , q 5 β / α 5 1 ) ? We set “X distribu - tion” 5 normal , “X parm m ” 5 0 , and “X parm σ ” 5 1 . If all other input parameters remain unchanged , a compro - mise power analysis results in “Critical z” 5 2 . 146971 , corresponding to α 5 β 5 . 031796 . Thus , different de - cision criteria and error probabilities may be reasonable for different predictors in the same regression model , pro - vided we have reason to expect differences in effect sizes under H 1 . 5 . 2 . Poisson Regression A Poisson regression model describes the relationship between a Poisson - distributed dependent variable ( i . e . , the g * P owEr 3 . 1 : c orrElation and r EgrEssion 1159 AuThOR NOTE Manuscript preparation was supported by Grant SFB 504 ( Project A12 ) from the Deutsche Forschungsgemeinschaft . We thank two anonymous reviewers for valuable comments on a previous version of the manuscript . Correspondence concerning this article should be addressed to E . Erd - felder , Lehrstuhl für Psychologie III , Universität Mann heim , Schloss Ehrenhof Ost 255 , D - 68131 Mannheim , Germany ( e - mail : erdfelder @ psychologie . uni - mannheim . de ) or F . Faul , Institut für Psychologie , Christian - Albrechts - Universität , Olshausenstr . 40 , D - 24098 Kiel , Ger - many ( e - mail : ffaul @ psychologie . uni - kiel . de ) . Note—This article is based on information presented at the 2008 meeting of the Society for Computers in Psychology , Chicago . REFERENCES Armitage , P . , Berry , G . , & Matthews , J . N . S . ( 2002 ) . Statistical methods in medical research ( 4th ed . ) . Oxford : Blackwell . Benton , D . , & Krishnamoorthy , K . ( 2003 ) . Computing discrete mix - tures of continuous distributions : Noncentral chisquare , noncentral t and the distribution of the square of the sample multiple correlation coefficient . Computational Statistics & Data Analysis , 43 , 249 - 267 . Bonett , D . G . , & Price , R . M . ( 2005 ) . Inferential methods for the tet - rachoric correlation coefficient . Journal of Educational & Behavioral Statistics , 30 , 213 - 225 . Bredenkamp , J . ( 1969 ) . Über die Anwendung von Signifikanztests bei theorie - testenden Experimenten [ On the use of significance tests in theory - testing experiments ] . Psychologische Beiträge , 11 , 275 - 285 . Brown , M . B . , & Benedetti , J . K . ( 1977 ) . On the mean and variance of the tetrachoric correlation coefficient . Psychometrika , 42 , 347 - 355 . Cohen , J . ( 1988 ) . Statistical power analysis for the behavioral sciences ( 2nd ed . ) . Hillsdale , NJ : Erlbaum . Cohen , J . , Cohen , P . , West , S . G . , & Aiken , L . S . ( 2003 ) . Applied multiple regression / correlation analysis for the behavioral sciences ( 3rd ed . ) . Mahwah , NJ : Erlbaum . Demidenko , E . ( 2007 ) . Sample size determination for logistic regres - sion revisited . Statistics in Medicine , 26 , 3385 - 3397 . Demidenko , E . ( 2008 ) . Sample size and optimal design for logistic re - gression with binary interaction . Statistics in Medicine , 27 , 36 - 46 . Dunlap , W . P . , Xin , X . , & Myers , L . ( 2004 ) . Computing aspects of power for multiple regression . Behavior Research Methods , Instru - ments , & Computers , 36 , 695 - 701 . Dunn , O . J . , & Clark , V . A . ( 1969 ) . Correlation coefficients measured on the same individuals . Journal of the American Statistical Associa - tion , 64 , 366 - 377 . Dupont , W . D . , & Plummer , W . D . ( 1998 ) . Power and sample size cal - culations for studies involving linear regression . Controlled Clinical Trials , 19 , 589 - 601 . Erdfelder , E . ( 1984 ) . Zur Bedeutung und Kontrolle des beta - Fehlers bei der inferenzstatistischen Prüfung log - linearer Modelle [ On sig - nificance and control of the beta error in statistical tests of log - linear models ] . Zeitschrift für Sozialpsychologie , 15 , 18 - 32 . Erdfelder , E . , Faul , F . , & Buchner , A . ( 2005 ) . Power analysis for categorical methods . In B . S . Everitt & D . C . Howell ( Eds . ) , Encyclo - pedia of statistics in behavioral science ( pp . 1565 - 1570 ) . Chichester , U . K . : Wiley . Erdfelder , E . , Faul , F . , Buchner , A . , & Cüpper , L . ( in press ) . Effekt größe und Teststärke [ Effect size and power ] . In H . Holling & B . Schmitz ( Eds . ) , Handbuch der Psychologischen Methoden und Evaluation . Göttingen : Hogrefe . Faul , F . , Erdfelder , E . , Lang , A . ‑G . , & Buchner , A . ( 2007 ) . G * Power 3 : A flexible statistical power analysis program for the so - cial , behavioral , and biomedical sciences . Behavior Research Meth - ods , 39 , 175 - 191 . Friese , M . , Bluemke , M . , & Wänke , M . ( 2007 ) . Predicting voting be - havior with implicit attitude measures : The 2002 German parliamen - tary election . Experimental Psychology , 54 , 247 - 255 . Gatsonis , C . , & Sampson , A . R . ( 1989 ) . Multiple correlation : Exact power and sample size calculations . Psychological Bulletin , 106 , 516 - 524 . Hays , W . L . ( 1972 ) . Statistics for the social sciences ( 2nd ed . ) . New York : Holt , Rinehart & Winston . Illustrative example . We refer to the example given in Signorini ( 1991 , p . 449 ) . The number of infections Y ( modeled as a Poisson - distributed random variable ) of swimmers ( X 5 1 ) versus nonswimmers ( X 5 0 ) during a swimming season ( defined as “Mean exposure” 5 1 ) is analyzed using a Poisson regression model . How many participants do we need to assess the effect of swimming versus not swimming ( X ) on the infection counts ( Y ) ? We consider this to be a one - tailed test problem ( “Tail ( s ) ” 5 one ) . The predictor X is assumed to be a binomially dis - tributed random variable with π 5 . 5 ( i . e . , equal numbers of swimmers and nonswimmers are sampled ) , so that we set “X distribution” to Binomial and “X param π ” to . 5 . The “Base rate exp ( β 0 ) ”—that is , the infection rate in nonswimmers—is estimated to be . 85 . We want to know the sample size required to detect a 30 % increase in in - fection rate in swimmers with a power of . 95 at α 5 . 05 . Using the a priori analysis in the “Poisson regression” procedure , we insert the values given above in the cor - responding input fields and choose “Exp ( β 1 ) ” 5 1 . 3 5 ( 100 % 1 30 % ) / 100 % as the to - be - detected effect size . In the single - predictor case considered here , we set “R 2 other X” 5 0 . The sample size calculated for these values with the Signorini procedure is N 5 697 . The procedure based on Demidenko ( 2007 ; without variance correc - tion ) and the Wald test procedure proposed by Lyles et al . ( 2007 ) both result in N 5 655 . A computer simulation with 150 , 000 cases revealed mean power values of . 952 and . 962 for sample sizes 655 and 697 , respectively , con - firming that Signorini’s procedure is less accurate than the other two . 6 . Concluding Remarks G * Power 3 . 1 is a considerable extension of G * Power 3 . 0 , introduced by Faul et al . ( 2007 ) . The new version provides a priori , compromise , criterion , post hoc , and sensitivity power analysis procedures for six correlation and nine regression test problems as described above . Readers interested in obtaining a free copy of G * Power 3 . 1 may download it from the G * Power Web site at www . psycho . uni - duesseldorf . de / abteilungen / aap / gpower3 / . We recom - mend registering as a G * Power user at the same Web site . Registered G * Power users will be informed about future updates and new G * Power versions . The current version of G * Power 3 . 1 runs on Windows platforms only . However , a version for Mac OS X 10 . 4 ( or later ) is currently in preparation . Registered users will be informed when the Mac version of G * Power 3 . 1 is made available for download . The G * Power site also provides a Web - based manual with detailed information about the statistical background of the tests , the program handling , the implementation , and the validation methods used to make sure that each of the G * Power procedures works correctly and with the ap - propriate precision . However , although considerable effort has been put into program evaluation , there is no warranty whatsoever . Users are kindly asked to report possible bugs and difficulties in program handling by writing an e - mail to gpower - feedback @ uni - duesseldorf . de . 1160 F aul , E rdFEldEr , B uchnEr , and l ang Shieh , G . ( 2001 ) . Sample size calculations for logistic and Poisson re - gression models . Biometrika , 88 , 1193 - 1199 . Shieh , G . , & Kung , C . ‑F . ( 2007 ) . Methodological and computational considerations for multiple correlation analysis . Behavior Research Methods , 39 , 731 - 734 . Signorini , D . F . ( 1991 ) . Sample size for Poisson regression . Biometrika , 78 , 446 - 450 . Steiger , J . H . ( 1980 ) . Tests for comparing elements of a correlation matrix . Psychological Bulletin , 87 , 245 - 251 . Steiger , J . H . , & Fouladi , R . T . ( 1992 ) . R2 : A computer program for interval estimation , power calculations , sample size estimation , and hypothesis testing in multiple regression . Behavior Research Meth - ods , Instruments , & Computers , 24 , 581 - 582 . Tsujimoto , S . , Kuwajima , M . , & Sawaguchi , T . ( 2007 ) . Developmen - tal fractionation of working memory and response inhibition during childhood . Experimental Psychology , 54 , 30 - 37 . Whittemore , A . S . ( 1981 ) . Sample size for logistic regression with small response probabilities . Journal of the American Statistical As - sociation , 76 , 27 - 32 . ( Manuscript received December 22 , 2008 ; revision accepted for publication June 18 , 2009 . ) Hsieh , F . Y . , Bloch , D . A . , & Larsen , M . D . ( 1998 ) . A simple method of sample size calculation for linear and logistic regression . Statistics in Medicine , 17 , 1623 - 1634 . Lee , Y . ‑S . ( 1972 ) . Tables of upper percentage points of the multiple cor - relation coefficient . Biometrika , 59 , 175 - 189 . Lyles , R . H . , Lin , H . ‑M . , & Williamson , J . M . ( 2007 ) . A practical ap - proach to computing power for generalized linear models with nominal , count , or ordinal responses . Statistics in Medicine , 26 , 1632 - 1648 . Mendoza , J . L . , & Stafford , K . L . ( 2001 ) . Confidence intervals , power calculation , and sample size estimation for the squared mul - tiple correlation coefficient under the fixed and random regression models : A computer program and useful standard tables . Educational & Psychological Measurement , 61 , 650 - 667 . Nosek , B . A . , & Smyth , F . L . ( 2007 ) . A multitrait – multimethod valida - tion of the Implicit Association Test : Implicit and explicit attitudes are related but distinct constructs . Experimental Psychology , 54 , 14 - 29 . Perugini , M . , O’Gorman , R . , & Prestwich , A . ( 2007 ) . An ontological test of the IAT : Self - activation can increase predictive validity . Experi - mental Psychology , 54 , 134 - 147 . Rindskopf , D . ( 1984 ) . Linear equality restrictions in regression and log - linear models . Psychological Bulletin , 96 , 597 - 603 . Sampson , A . R . ( 1974 ) . A tale of two regressions . Journal of the Ameri - can Statistical Association , 69 , 682 - 689 .