How broad should the scope of patent protection be ? Klemperer 1990 , RAND • What is the optimal breadth of patent protection ? • Patents of optimal length and breadth that allocate a given pro ﬁ t to the innovator at the least social cost . 1 Sketch of the model : • horizontal differentiation , • a patentholder ( H ) and competitors , • Breadth : distance of the product spectrum away from the patentholder’s product where competing ﬁ rms are allowed , • Consumers prefer the patented products at equal prices , • H and consumers are located at 0 , • Consumers’ have a . travel cost per unit of distance , t ; b . reservation price , m . 2 Graph : 3 consumers , identical m , different t • Consumer 1 is indifferent between – buying H ’s product located at 0 at price p ∗ , – and buying the product from a competitor ; the travel cost is t 1 b . • Consumer 2 buys from a competitor because p ∗ > t 2 b , i . e . , it is cheaper to travel to b and buy from a competitor . • Consumer 3 buys from H because p ∗ < t 3 b , i . e . , it is cheaper to buy the patented product rather than travelling to b . 3 Consumer cost per unit purchased for a consumer with reservation price m Breadth = b Competitors are locate 0 Patentholder and consumers are located in 0 m P * t 3 b t 2 b 1 2 3 1 . A simple illustration of Klemperer ( van Dijk , 1994 ) 4 • If perfect competition : maximum welfare , no loss . • Comparison of the patent situation with the perfectly competitive situation . Two kinds of welfare losses ( W L ) : • W L 1 : consumers who shift to less preferred varieties . These consumers face travel costs ( e . g . , consumer 2 , who incurs travel cost t 2 b ) • W L 1 : consumers drop out of the market ; too low reservation price . – e . g . , if the reservation price of consumer 3 is below the price charged by H ( p ∗ > m ) he will not buy . – Or if t 2 b > m , consumer 2 will not buy . 5 • Assumption : there is a minimum pro ﬁ t level that makes H invest in R & D . • Patent policy maker have two instruments : – patent breadth , – patent length ; • A long but narrow patent can provide as much pro ﬁ t as a short but broad patent . • Problem : How to determine the optimal mixture of breadth and length that is optimal from a social viewpoint ? • The distribution of t , and the distribution of m turn out to be decisive for the optimal mix . 6 • Extreme cases : – narrow patents with long life are optimal when consumers face identical travel costs ; – broad patents with adjusted life are optimal when the reservation prices are identical . • Why ? • A1 : all consumers face identical travel costs . H sets p ∗ = tb − ε . Suppose that all consumers have the same travel cost t 1 ( see graph ) , thus p ∗ < t 1 b . No consumers will buy from competitors . W L ? – W L 1 = 0 – W L 2 > 0 • Objective of policy maker : reduce W L 2 ; set very narrow patent to force H to reduce the price . The lifetime will be adjusted such as to give the given reward to H . 7 • A2 : all consumers have identical reservation prices . H will set p ∗ = m ( comparable to perfect price discrimination which is commonly known to cause no welfare loss , compared to perfect competition ) . W L ? – W L 1 > 0 – W L 2 = 0 • Objective of the policy maker : reduce W L 1 ; set very broad patent in order to reduce W L 1 . The lifetime must be adjusted in order to provide the minimum pro ﬁ t level required . 8