Current Biology 23 , 2135 – 2139 , November 4 , 2013 ª 2013 Elsevier Ltd All rights reserved http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . cub . 2013 . 08 . 053 Report Live Imaging of Bicoid - Dependent Transcription in Drosophila Embryos Tanguy Lucas , 1 , 2 , 4 , 5 Teresa Ferraro , 1 , 2 , 3 , 4 , 5 Baptiste Roelens , 1 , 2 , 4 , 6 Jose De Las Heras Chanes , 1 , 2 Aleksandra M . Walczak , 2 , 3 , 4 Mathieu Coppey , 1 , 2 , 3 , 4 and Nathalie Dostatni 1 , 2 , 4 , * 1 Institut Curie , Centre de Recherche , Paris 75248 , France 2 CNRS , UMR218 / UMR168 / UMR8549 / UMR8550 , Paris 75248 , France 3 ENS , UMR8549 / UMR8550 , Paris 75005 , France 4 UPMC , Paris 75248 , France Summary The early Drosophila embryo is an ideal model to understand the transcriptional regulation of well - deﬁned patterns of geneexpressioninadevelopingorganism [ 1 ] . Inthissystem , snapshots of transcription measurements obtained by RNA FISH on ﬁxed samples [ 2 , 3 ] cannot provide the temporal res - olution needed to distinguish spatial heterogeneity [ 3 ] from inherent noise [ 4 , 5 ] . Here , we used the MS2 - MCP system [ 6 , 7 ] to visualize in living embryos nascent transcripts ex - pressed from the canonical hunchback ( hb ) promoter [ 8 , 9 ] under the control of Bicoid ( Bcd ) [ 10 ] . The hb - MS2 reporter is expressed as synchronously as endogenous hb in the anterior half of the embryo , but unlike hb it is also active in the posterior , though more heterogeneously and more transiently than in the anterior . The length and intensity of active transcription periods in the anterior are strongly reduced in absence of Bcd , whereas posterior ones are mostly Bcd independent . This posterior noisy signal de - creases progressively through nuclear divisions , so that the MS2 reporter expression mimics the known anterior hb pattern at cellularization . We propose that the establish - ment of the hb pattern relies on Bcd - dependent lengthening of transcriptional activity periods in the anterior and may require two distinct repression mechanisms in the posterior . Results and Discussion Recently , the simple Bcd / hunchback gene network in the Drosophila embryo has been quantitatively investigated with the aim to uncover the transcriptional dynamics of Bcd target genes [ 10 , 11 ] . No more than 30 min after the steady establishment of the Bicoid gradient [ 12 ] , most nuclei in the anterior half of the embryo express synchronously both alleles of the main Bcd target gene hb [ 3 ] . Based on Bcd phys - ical parameters [ 3 , 13 ] , theoretical models predict a realistic timing from the Bcd concentration measurement to the establishment of a robust hb expression pattern [ 3 , 14 ] . How - ever , given the absence of FISH signal for hb during the successive mitoses occurring in this short developmental period , it remains difﬁcult to understand how such spatial homogeneity is achieved so rapidly in light of the challenge imposed by nuclear division [ 3 ] . To answer this question , we needed access to the temporal dimension lacking in the ﬂuorescence in situ hybridization ( FISH ) approach on ﬁxed samples . We used the MS2 - MCP system , which allows ﬂuorescent labeling of RNA in living cells and relies on the interaction between GFP - tagged MS2 coat protein ( MCP - GFP ) and MS2 RNA stem loops [ 6 ] . To adapt this system to the Bcd / hb network in the Drosophila embryo , we generated transgenic ﬂies for single insertions of a P element carrying the canonical Bcd - dependent hb promoter [ 8 , 9 ] upstream of a CFP - SKL - MS2 cassette carrying 24 MS2 repeats [ 15 ] ( Figure 1A ) . Periods of transcriptional activity were observed in nuclei as time persistent green dots likely corresponding to the on - going production of several ﬂuores - cently labeled mRNA at the hb - MS2 locus ( Movie S1 available online and Figure 1 ) . Movie S1 demonstrates the possibility to collectively monitor transcriptional dynamics at a given locus in most nuclei of the living embryo , from the onset of zygotic expression ( nuclear cycle 10 ) to the beginning of cellularization ( nuclear cycle 14 ) . Remarkably , in an embryo carrying a single hb - MS2 transgene , we never detect more than one period of intense transcriptional activity per nucleus during a given interphase ( 10 to 13 ) . During interphases 10 to 12 , transcription at the hb - MS2 transgene is detected in both anterior and posterior nuclei . During interphase 13 , the periods of transcriptional activity are intense and long - lasting in the anterior domain limited by a well - deﬁned boundary , whereas fewer , shorter and weaker ﬂuorescent events are seen in the posterior . One of the most striking differences between live hb - MS2 reporter expression and endogenous hb FISH data [ 3 ] are the unexpected hb - MS2 transgene activity events in the posterior during interphases 10 , 11 , and 12 . This posterior expression is observed with several independent insertions ( Movie S1 ) and is thus intrinsic to the transgene . It is also observed with RNA FISH using a CFP - MS2 probe on embryos carrying two copies of the hb - MS2 transgene ( Figures 2E – 2H ) . Double RNA FISH using hb and CFP - MS2 probes on the same embryo indicates that the hb - MS2 transgene nicely recapitu - lates endogenous hb expression at interphase 13 and for the anterior but not the posterior at earlier interphases ( Figures 2A – 2H ) . To assess the probability for a locus to be activated , we considered the coarse temporal activity of the transgene by spatial averaging the fraction of active nuclei in four regions of equal amplitude along the anterior - posterior ( AP ) axis . Consistently with FISH data on endogenous hb [ 3 ] , a large proportion of nuclei in the anterior express the hb - MS2 allele in live embryos ( Figure 2I ) . In the posterior , the proportion of active hb - MS2 loci detected by both the FISH signals and live imaging is lower , more scattered when compared to the anterior , and reduced to only 10 % at interphase 13 ( Figure 2 ) . Since consistent expression patterns are observed with FISH and live imaging , we conclude that the unexpected expres - sion of the hb - MS2 transgene during interphases 10 to 12 is not due to the MS2 - MCP experimental system and is therefore mechanistically meaningful . To characterize the temporal and spatial features of these GFP signals ( Figure S1 ) , we performed an in - depth three - dimensional ( 3D ) image analysis ( Supplemental Experimental Procedures ) . For each nucleus , we quantiﬁed the period of 5 These authors contributed equally to this work 6 Present address : Stanford University , Stanford , CA 94305 , USA * Correspondence : nathalie . dostatni @ curie . fr transcriptional activity at the hb - MS2 locus ( Figure S1 ) ﬁtting 2D Gaussians ( Supplemental Experimental Procedures ) . We distinguished four parameters : ( 1 ) the delay of signal detection after mitosis ( initiation time , T in ) , ( 2 ) the intensity of the signal at each time point ( instantaneous activity ) , ( 3 ) the duration of the period during which the ﬂuorescent signal is con - tinuously detected ( persistence ) , and ( 4 ) the total activity integrated in time , which is likely proportional to the total amount of RNA produced over the whole interphase per nucleus ( integral activity ) . Except for the posterior events at interphase 13 , initiated randomly throughout interphase , the initiation time ( T in ) depends neither on the nuclear cycle nor the position along the AP axis ( Figure 3A ) ; this surprising invariability in time and space suggests a universal delay to initiate transcription after mitosis . Because activities in the anterior were qualitatively different from posterior ones ( Movie S1 and Figures S1 and S3B ) , we computed mean activities for these two groups of signals separately , using T in to syn - chronize the various events . Both mean activities and duration of activity periods show a dependence on the AP axis ( Figures 3B and 3C ) . Thus , the difference between the anterior and posterior expression greatly increases over the cycles . The regulation of hb - MS2 expression during interphase 10 to 13 is principally controlled in the anterior through the scaling of the persistence of activity periods in relation to the inter - phase duration unlike in the posterior where arrests of transcription rapidly occur . Integrated activities per nucleus over each interphase estimate the total amount of mRNA produced in each nucleus per cycle along the AP axis ( Fig - ure 3D ) . We discern two groups of nuclei : anterior nuclei , expressing an increasing amount of mRNA over the cycles , and posterior nuclei , expressing on average a decreasing Figure 1 . The MS2 - MCP System to Monitor Transcription at the hb Promoter in Living Drosophila Embryos ( A ) Schematic view of the hb - MS2 transgene . The ﬂuorescent detection of MS2 - containing mRNAs was obtained with a second transgene express - ing maternally the MCP - GFP [ 7 ] . The ﬂuorescent labeling of Nucleoporin ( mRFP - Nup ) [ 16 ] allowed the detection of nuclear envelops . MCP - GFP ( green ) and mRFP - Nup ( red ) signals were imaged simultaneously using 3D confocal time - lapse mi - croscopy . ( B ) A2DmaximalprojectionsnapshotfromMovie S1 ( clip 1 ) reveals periods of intense transcrip - tional activity in an embryo heterozygous for the hb - MS2 transgene . In green , MCP - GFP proteins are recruited at the nascent MS2 - containing mRNA accumulating at the hb - MS2 locus ( bright spots ) . In red , the mRFP - Nup proteins localize at nuclear envelops . ( C ) Snapshots of a nucleus selected at cycle 11 that divides twice in the movie , giving rise to four daughter nuclei at interphase 13 . Panels were extracted at different time points ( indicated at the top left ) and correspond to a magniﬁcation of the white square in ( B ) . In agreement with FISH data [ 3 ] , theGFPsignalsdisappearduringmitosis ( Movie S1 ) . Anterior is left . See also Figure S1 and Movie S1 . amount of mRNA over the cycles . There - fore , the border separating those two groups sharpens and steepens from cycle 11 to 13 and is shifted to the anterior from 50 % egg length ( EL ) at interphase 11 to 40 % EL at interphase 13 ( Figure 3D ) . To determine whether expression of the hb - MS2 reporter depends on Bcd , we analyzed its expression in embryos from bcd mutant females . Surprisingly , we observed a signiﬁ - cant number of transcriptional activity events in this mutant during early interphases indicating that the hb canonical pro - moter in the hb - MS2 transgene can be transcribed without Bcd ( Movie S2 ) . However , in contrast to wild - type , the expres - sion of the transgene in this mutant showed no signiﬁcant AP axis dependence : T in ( Figure S3A ) , persistence of activity ( Figures 3C and S3C ) , and integral activity per cycle ( Figure 3D ) are not statistically different between the anterior and pos - terior groups . Comparison of activity features between wild - type and bcd backgrounds indicates that the persistence of activity periods in the anterior strongly depends on Bcd at each interphase ( Figure 3C ) . Additionally , in the bcd mutant background , the fractions of active nuclei are very similar in the four regions along the AP axis , following the same increase of repression strength over the cycles ( Figure 2J ) . Importantly , once a locus has been turned ON in the anterior to produce mRNA , its probability to be ON remains high during the whole interphase and this occurs in a Bcd - dependent manner . Alto - gether , our data indicate that the hb canonical promoter is ex - pressed efﬁciently and homogenously in the anterior half of the embryo from interphase 10 to interphase 13 . Unexpectedly , it is also expressed in the posterior region in a more scattered manner . This posterior expression is efﬁciently repressed at cycle 13 , and it is mostly Bcd independent . It can be due either to a general activator homogeneously expressed along the AP axis or to leakiness of the promoter at which PolII can ﬁre without speciﬁc triggers . Current Biology Vol 23 No 21 2136 Our data indicate that the establishment of the precise border of endogenous hb gene expression results from at least three distinct processes . First , Bcd is responsible for a strong and persistent expression in nuclei localized in the anterior half of the embryo . This Bcd - dependent expression does not seem to control the instantaneous activity of the gene in a spatially graded fashion but sets a rough boundary of maximal activation . Interestingly , the transcription initiation time is constant at each interphase and along the AP axis . This observation suggests that the postmitotic delay of transcription reactivation is not limited by the Bcd physical parameters , but more probably by the assembly of the tran - scription machinery after decondensation of mitotic chromo - somes and the delay of transcribing sufﬁcient numbers of MS2 stem loops for signal detection . Mechanistically , as shown by the Bcd - dependent lengthening of activity events in the anterior , as a transcription activator , Bcd may be critical to maintain the ﬂux of polymerases initiating tran - scription . Second , transcriptional repression in the posterior initiates mildly during interphase 11 and progresses over cycles 12 and 13 . In the posterior , as the number of active loci decreases from one cycle to the next , initiation times of activity events become more variable , suggesting a posterior repressor becoming stronger . This putative repressor does not necessarily require Bcd as the overall repression exhibits the same feature in an embryo lacking Bcd . Third , as early as interphase 10 , a ‘‘silencing’’ mechanism prevents the erratic posterior expression of the canonical hb promoter observed upon insertion as a reporter transgene in the genome . As endogenous hb is not expressed in the posterior , this third regulation mechanism must be encoded in the genomic DNA outside of the canonical promoter and could involve the newly identiﬁed distal shadow or stripe enhancers of hb [ 17 , 19 ] . This last silencing mechanism together with the Bcd induced activation of transcription are likely responsible for the sharp border observed for endogenous hb as early as cycle 11 [ 3 ] . In absence of this early silencing in the posterior , as exempliﬁed by the hb - MS2 reporter , a second unidentiﬁed mechanism of repression ( discussed in the second point ) can rescue the formation of the sharp boundary by cycle 13 . Our ability to observe the early transcription of develop - mental genes in live embryos opens news perspectives for the understanding of the patterning processes . Despite not recapitulating all the features of the endogenous regulation , access to new quantitative measurements sheds light on this critical biological process . At the mechanistic level , this approach indicates how the Bcd transcription factor could activate transcription : it is not absolutely required for tran - scription initiation at the promoter and it does not allow faster initiation at the promoter after mitosis , but it is essential for the maintenance of the activity event once the latter has been initiated . Figure 2 . Spatiotemporal Activity of the hb Promoter at the Scale of the Whole Embryo ( A – H ) Transcription fate maps of embryos carrying a hb - MS2 homozygous insertion costained by FISH for endogenous hb ( A – D ) and for CFP - MS2 ( E – H ) . Each nucleus is colored according to its transcriptional status [ 3 ] : two active loci ( green ) , one active locus ( blue ) , or no detectable activation ( white ) . Nuclei with more than two bright dots were sometimes observed ( red ) ; these were observed either after the replication of the hunchback locus or when the thresholdforspotdetectionwasbelowalowerlimit . Incontrasttoendogenous hb , whichislikelyrepressedinthemostanteriorregionbytheTorsoterminal system ( D ) , the hb - MS2 reporter remains strongly expressed in this region ( H ) [ 17 ] . Anterior is left . ( IandJ ) Thefraction of activated nucleiis shownasafunctionof developmental time . At eachcycle , timezeroorthe verticaldashedlines indicate the mean ofinterphase onset . NucleiaregroupedinspatialregionsaccordingtotheirpositionalongtheAPaxis ( cartoonontheright ) : from0 % to25 % ELinred , from 25 % to 50 % EL in yellow , from 50 % to 75 % EL in light blue , and from 75 % to 100 % EL in dark blue . The fraction of active nuclei is calculated for each time point , astheratioofactivenucleitothetotalnumberofnucleifollowedbyanaveragingwindowofthreetimepoints . Datafromawild - typeembryo ( I ) andan embryo from a bcd female ( J ) are shown . Similar results were obtained with movies of embryos carrying the same hb - MS2 transgenic insertion ( Figure S2 ) . 0 % EL is anterior . See also Figure S2 and Movie S2 . Imaging Gene Transcription in Living Embryos 2137 Figure 3 . Transcriptional Activity at the Single Locus Resolution DatawereextractedfromMovieS1 ( clip1 ) andshownforinterphase10inpurple ( left ) , interphase11inred ( middleleft ) , interphase12inblack ( middleright ) , and interphase 13 in blue ( right ) . ( A ) For each expressing locus , the initiation time of the activity period ( T in ) is indicated by a circle as a function of position along the AP axis . ( B ) Mean of activity as a function of time for anterior ( plain ) or posterior ( open ) nuclei in a wild - type embryo ( dark ) or in an embryo from bcd females ( light ) accordingto the cartoon legend on the top . Mean activities per active locus quickly rise in less than2 min , ﬂuctuate arounda plateau , then rapidly decrease and disappear . Maximal levels of activity in the anterior of the embryo are higher than in the posterior and they are similar during interphases 11 , 12 , and 13 , showing that the system has reached its maximal efﬁciency . Mean activities were computed by binning the time axis in temporal steps of two frames , cor - responding to w 0 . 5 min each . Error bars represent the SEM . All the nuclei positioned below 45 % egg length ( EL ) were considered anterior , the ones above 55 % EL posterior . Arrowhead , onset of mitosis . 0 % EL is anterior . ( C ) Persistence of activity periods was calculated at each expressing locus ( Figure S1 ) , and their distribution in the anterior domain ( gray , x < 0 . 5 EL ) were compared using a classical boxplot representation , to those of the posterior domain ( white , x > 0 . 5 EL ) , except for interphase 13 , where the distribution in gray was for x < 0 . 4 EL and in white was for x > 0 . 4 EL . In the anterior , the mean persistence values increase progressively from w 2 min in interphase 10 to w 8 min in interphase 13 and tend to be limited by the duration of the interphase . In contrast , in the posterior , mean persistence remains at w 2 min over the cycles . The median value is indicated in black and the mean value is in gray . Statistical tests were performed on R [ 18 ] using a nonpara - metric test ( Mann - Whitney - Wilcoxon test , two - tailed ) . ns , p > 0 . 05 ; * p < 0 . 05 ; * * p < 0 . 01 ; * * * p < 0 . 001 . ( D ) MeanintegratedactivitiespernucleusasafunctionofpositionalongtheAPaxisinawild - typeembryo ( plain ) andinanembryofroma bcd mutantfemale ( open ) . The border separating roughly the two groups of nuclei is indicated by a dashed gray line . It is positioned in the middle of the biggest decrease of the integral activity and corresponds to the highest derivative . For each nucleus with or without a period of activity , the integral activity was deﬁned as the sumoftheactivityoverallthetimepointsofaninterphase . ThemeanswereobtainedbybinningoftheAPaxisintenequalbins , andtheerrorbarsrepresent the SEM . See also Figure S3 and Movie S2 . Current Biology Vol 23 No 21 2138 Supplemental Information Supplemental Information includes Supplemental Experimental Proce - dures , three ﬁgures , and two movies and can be found with this article online at http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . cub . 2013 . 08 . 053 . Acknowledgments We thank Genevie ` ve Almouzni , Maxime Dahan , Xavier Darzacq , Angela Taddei , and the members of the UMR218 for helpful discussions and suggestions , Mathieu Leroux - Coyau for ﬂy care , Xavier Darzacq for the CFP - MS2 construct , the Bloomington Center for ﬂies , Bestgene for transgenics , and the Imagery platform PICT - IBISA of the Institut Curie . This work was supported by the ARC Subvention Fixe 29311 to N . D . , the AXOMORPH ANR BLANC to N . D . and A . M . W . , a Marie Curie CIG grant to A . M . W , and ANR - 11 - LABX - 0044 and ANR - 10 - IDEX - 0001 - 02 PSL * . Received : July 26 , 2013 Revised : August 22 , 2013 Accepted : August 23 , 2013 Published : October 17 , 2013 References 1 . Jaeger , J . , Manu , and Reinitz , J . ( 2012 ) . Drosophila blastoderm patterning . Curr . Opin . Genet . Dev . 22 , 533 – 541 . 2 . Levine , M . , Hafen , E . , Garber , R . L . , andGehring , W . J . ( 1983 ) . Spatialdis - tribution of Antennapedia transcripts during Drosophila development . EMBO J . 2 , 2037 – 2046 . 3 . Porcher , A . , Abu - Arish , A . , Huart , S . , Roelens , B . , Fradin , C . , and Dostatni , N . ( 2010 ) . The time to measure positional information : maternal hunchback is required for the synchrony of the Bicoid transcriptional response at the onset of zygotic transcription . Development 137 , 2795 – 2804 . 4 . Boettiger , A . N . , and Levine , M . ( 2009 ) . Synchronous and stochastic patterns of gene activation in the Drosophila embryo . Science 325 , 471 – 473 . 5 . Eldar , A . , and Elowitz , M . B . ( 2010 ) . Functional roles for noise in genetic circuits . Nature 467 , 167 – 173 . 6 . Bertrand , E . , Chartrand , P . , Schaefer , M . , Shenoy , S . M . , Singer , R . H . , and Long , R . M . ( 1998 ) . Localization of ASH1 mRNA particles in living yeast . Mol . Cell 2 , 437 – 445 . 7 . Forrest , K . M . , and Gavis , E . R . ( 2003 ) . Live imaging of endogenous RNA reveals a diffusion and entrapment mechanism for nanos mRNA localization in Drosophila . Curr . Biol . 13 , 1159 – 1168 . 8 . Driever , W . , and Nu¨sslein - Volhard , C . ( 1989 ) . The bicoid protein is a positive regulator of hunchback transcription in the early Drosophila embryo . Nature 337 , 138 – 143 . 9 . Struhl , G . , Struhl , K . , and Macdonald , P . M . ( 1989 ) . The gradient morphogen bicoid is a concentration - dependent transcriptional acti - vator . Cell 57 , 1259 – 1273 . 10 . Porcher , A . , and Dostatni , N . ( 2010 ) . The bicoid morphogen system . Curr . Biol . 20 , R249 – R254 . 11 . Grimm , O . , Coppey , M . , and Wieschaus , E . ( 2010 ) . Modelling the Bicoid gradient . Development 137 , 2253 – 2264 . 12 . Gregor , T . , Wieschaus , E . F . , McGregor , A . P . , Bialek , W . , and Tank , D . W . ( 2007 ) . Stability and nuclear dynamics of the bicoid morphogen gradient . Cell 130 , 141 – 152 . 13 . Drocco , J . A . , Grimm , O . , Tank , D . W . , and Wieschaus , E . ( 2011 ) . Measurement and perturbation of morphogen lifetime : effects on gradient shape . Biophys . J . 101 , 1807 – 1815 . 14 . Gregor , T . , Tank , D . W . , Wieschaus , E . F . , and Bialek , W . ( 2007 ) . Probing the limits to positional information . Cell 130 , 153 – 164 . 15 . Janicki , S . M . , Tsukamoto , T . , Salghetti , S . E . , Tansey , W . P . , Sachidanandam , R . , Prasanth , K . V . , Ried , T . , Shav - Tal , Y . , Bertrand , E . , Singer , R . H . , and Spector , D . L . ( 2004 ) . From silencing to gene expression : real - time analysis in single cells . Cell 116 , 683 – 698 . 16 . Katsani , K . R . , Karess , R . E . , Dostatni , N . , and Doye , V . ( 2008 ) . In vivo dy - namics of Drosophila nuclear envelope components . Mol . Biol . Cell 19 , 3652 – 3666 . 17 . Perry , M . W . , Bothma , J . P . , Luu , R . D . , and Levine , M . ( 2012 ) . Precisionof hunchback expression in the Drosophila embryo . Curr . Biol . 22 , 2247 – 2252 . 18 . RDC T . ( 2008 ) . R : A Language and Environment for statistical computing . R Foundation for Statistical Computing ( Austria : Vienna ) . 19 . Perry , M . W . , Boettiger , A . N . , and Levine , M . ( 2011 ) . Multiple enhancers ensureprecisionofgapgene - expressionpatternsintheDrosophilaem - bryo . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA 108 , 13570 – 13575 . Imaging Gene Transcription in Living Embryos 2139