Clathrin - Independent Pathways of Endocytosis Satyajit Mayor 1 , Robert G . Parton 2 , and Julie G . Donaldson 3 1 National Centre for Biological Sciences , Tata Institute of Fundamental Research , and Institute for Stem Cell Biology and Regenerative Medicine , Bangalore 560065 , India 2 The University of Queensland , Institute for Molecular Bioscience and Centre for Microscopy and Microanalysis , Queensland 4072 , Brisbane , Australia 3 Cell Biology and Physiology Center , National Heart , Lung , and Blood Institute , National Institutes of Health , Bethesda , Maryland 20892 Correspondence : mayor @ ncbs . res . in There are many pathways of endocytosis at the cell surface that apparently operate at the same time . With the advent of new moleculargenetic andimaging tools , an understanding of thedifferentways by whichacellmayendocytosecargoisincreasing byleapsandbounds . In this review we explore pathways of endocytosis that occur in the absence of clathrin . These are referred to as clathrin - independent endocytosis ( CIE ) . Here we primarily focus on those pathways that function at the small scale in which some have distinct coats ( caveolae ) and others function in the absence of speciﬁc coated intermediates . We follow the trafﬁcking itineraries of the material endocytosed by these pathways and ﬁnally discuss the functional rolesthat these pathways play in cell and tissue physiology . It is likely that these pathwayswill play key roles in the regulation of plasma membrane area and tension and also control the availability of membrane during cell migration . T he identiﬁcation of manyof the components involved in clathrin - mediated endocytosis ( CME ) and their subsequent characterization have provided a window into how this complex process works . Forexample , understanding how a clathrin basket is assembled , and how adaptor complexes , the mechanochemical GTPase dy - namin , and Rab GTPases work have given us insights into endocytic pit formation , cargo concentration , vesicle scission , and subsequent trafﬁcking . These topics are described in detail elsewhere in this volume ( see Johannes et al . 2014 ; Kirchhausen et al . 2014 ; Merriﬁeld and Kaksonen 2014 ) . Consequently , CME has remained a pre - dominant paradigm for following the uptake of material into the cell . Several endocytic path - ways that do not use clathrin and its attendant molecular machinery have begun to be recog - nized as distinct clathrin - independent endo - cytic pathways ( CIEs ) ( see Fig . 1 ) . Some of these pathways are constitutive , whereas others are triggered by speciﬁc signals or are even hijacked by pathogens . In addition , they differ in their mechanisms and kinetics of endocytic vesicle formation , associated molecular machinery , and cargo destination . Here we discuss charac - teristics of clathrin - independent ( CI ) endocytic Editors : Sandra L . Schmid , Alexander Sorkin , and Marino Zerial Additional Perspectives on Endocytosis available at www . cshperspectives . org Copyright # 2014 Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory Press ; all rights reserved ; doi : 10 . 1101 / cshperspect . a016758 Cite this article as Cold Spring Harb Perspect Biol 2014 ; 6 : a016758 1 on October 26 , 2017 - Published by Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory Press http : / / cshperspectives . cshlp . org / Downloaded from pathways , the logic and mechanisms of cargo selection , vesicle budding , the itineraries of in - ternalized cargo , and provide a perspective on the regulation of CIE . At ﬁrst glance CIE facilitates two types of endocytic processes—the large micrometer - scale pathways such as macropinocytosis and phagocytosis , and a spectrum of smaller ( , 200 nm ) scale processes ( Fig . 1 ) . The large - scale processes involve internalization of signif - icant patches of membrane , but these pathways may share some of the same molecular machin - ery as the smaller scale processes , especially those utilizing actin machinery in membrane remodeling , and have been addressed in recent reviews ( Flannagan et al . 2012 ; Bohdanowicz and Grinstein 2013 ; see also Cossart and Helen - ius 2014 ) . SMALL - SCALE CIE PROCESSES The physical demands of bending membrane at small scales , and trapping speciﬁc cargo creates distinct problems to be resolved when the scale of the membrane shrinks below 200 nm , espe - cially when relatively rigid scaffolds such as the clathrin coat are not used . This is in part owing to the bending modulus of the membrane be - coming a major determinant in the endocytic process ( see Johannes et al . 2014 ) , and the necessity of trapping diffusible cargo in small regions of the membrane undergoing inter - nalization . These requirements place endocytic pathways that operate without clathrin into a distinct category . A simple classiﬁcation scheme for the small - scale CIE pathways was attempted earlier ( May - or and Pagano 2007 ) and still remains a useful one ( Fig . 1 ) . The requirement for dynamin neatly divides those that use dynamin ( dyna - min - dependent ) from those that require other machinery ( dynamin - independent ) . Another important classiﬁer is the presence or absence of a coat that marks the internalized patch of membrane , and in those that lack a deﬁned coat , it is the small GTPases that regulate actin that are often involved in mediating CIE . The divi - sion of CIE pathways into subclasses is not to set up rigid categories but to provide a framework to organize and discuss emerging data in this rapidly growing ﬁeld and to fuel systematic ex - perimentation . It is clear that there are common themes and this will be discussed at the end of this work . We begin our discussion on the small - scale CIEs with the best - studied non - clathrin - coated representative , the dynamin - dependent caveo - lar endocytic system . CAVEOLAE : PLASMA MEMBRANE PITS POISED FOR ENDOCYTOSIS ? Caveolae in nonmuscle cells are characterized by (cid:2) 140 molecules of the oligomeric integral Small - scale endocytic processes Macropinocytosis Phagocytosis Caveolar RhoA Flotillin Cdc42 Arf6 Clathrin Dynamin + + + Figure 1 . The diversity of endocytic pathways available at the cell surface of metazoan cells . The schematic outlines multiple means by which a cargo located at the plasma membrane or in the extracellular milieu enters the endocytic pathway in metazoan cells . Dynamin - dependent pathways ( þ ; circles ) are typically associated with small - scale coat - mediated invaginations , such as clathrin orcaveolar pathways . The dynamin - independent pathways reﬂect a larger diversity of forms , ranging from the small - scale processes to the larger scale membrane invaginations . The main effectors of the CIE pathways are indicated below their primary invaginations . All the dynamin - independent mechanisms appear to use actin ﬁlament ( red bars ) polymerization machinery . S . Mayor et al . 2 Cite this article as Cold Spring Harb Perspect Biol 2014 ; 6 : a016758 on October 26 , 2017 - Published by Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory Press http : / / cshperspectives . cshlp . org / Downloaded from membrane protein , caveolin - 1 ( CAV1 ) , 30 – 70 mol of caveolin - 2 CAV2 ) , and a complex of peripheral membrane proteins , now termed cavins ( Hansen and Nichols 2010 ; Hayer et al . 2010a ; Parton and Del Pozo 2013 ) . Cavins 1 , 2 , and 3 associate with the caveolae of mamma - lian nonmuscle cells . In skeletal muscle cells , caveolin - 3 ( CAV3 ) replaces the caveolin - 1 / 2 complex and an additional cavin family mem - ber , cavin4 / MURC , associates with the cavin complex ( Way and Parton 1995 ; Ogata et al . 2008 ; Tagawa et al . 2008 ; Bastiani et al . 2009 ) . A long - standing question in the ﬁeld has been the endocytic potential of caveolae . How dynamic are caveolae , particularly in compari - son to clathrin - coated pits , and are they endo - cytic at all ? If so , what machinery is involved and does it share components with other endocytic pathways ? Do they differ in their dynamics in different tissues and in different regions of the same cells ? And of course , what is the function of caveola internalization ; are there a set of car - goes that are dependent on caveolae for entry into cells or does caveolar endocytosis serve some other purpose ? When considering these questions we must also be aware of the dramatic differences in caveolar density in different cell types ( and even within the same cell type in different tissues , e . g . , brain versus cardiac endo - thelia ) ( Simionescuetal . 2002 ) , pointingtocon - siderable cell - type - speciﬁc functions in contrast to the ubiquitous clathrin - coated pits ( Parton and Del Pozo 2013 ) . The relatively mild pheno - type observed in caveolin - deﬁcient mice ( Drab et al . 2001 ; Park et al . 2002 ) is also consistent with specialized functions of caveolae and / or signiﬁcant compensation , rather than a univer - sal essential cellular function . Caveolae as Endocytic Carriers It is now clear that caveolae can detach from the plasma membrane to form an endocytic caveo - larcarrier . Earlierstudiesusinggreenﬂuorescent protein ( GFP ) - CAV1 and CAV1 - GFP suggested caveolae were relatively immobile , at least com - pared with clathrin - coated pits , although inter - nalizationcouldbestimulatedbytreatmentwith a general phosphatase inhibitor ( Thomsen et al . 2002 ) in agreement with earlier studies ( Parton et al . 1994 ) . Subsequent work deﬁned the steady - state kinetics of caveolae in more detail and reported two distinct pools : a majority that is immobile , and a minority displaying a fast “kiss - and - run” behavior involving transient fu - sion without full collapse of the vesicle with life - times of 2 – 5 sec ( Pelkmans and Zerial 2005 ) . A recentstudy using stable celllines expressing low levels of CAV1 - GFP studied at 37 ˚ C was com - bined with examination of cavins and electron microscopy ( Boucrot et al . 2011 ) . Cavin1 ap - pears to represent a particularly good marker of caveolae as cavin1 does not bind to CAV1 in transit through the secretory pathway or if caveolae are disassembled ( Hill et al . 2008 ) . These studies provided further important in - sightsintothedynamicsofcaveolaeinacultured cell line . In interphase cells 85 % of caveolaewere internalized as deﬁned by loss of CAV1 - GFP ﬂuorescence in the TIRF plane , in the 10 min observation period ( Boucrot et al . 2011 ) . Life - times ranged from , 2 sec ( 30 % of caveolae ) to . 7 min . Buddedstructureswere cavin - positive , providing independent evidence for their iden - tiﬁcationasendocyticcaveolarcarriers ( Boucrot et al . 2011 ) . Boucrot et al . further showed that despite different lifetimes at the plasma mem - brane , budding and fusion back to the plas - ma membrane showed similar kinetics ( within 1 sec ) . Importantly , these detailed kinetic stud - ies were complemented by studies of caveolar density and caveolar budding by electron mi - croscopy ( EM ) ( Boucrot et al . 2011 ) . Generallysimilarconclusions can be derived from other recent studies that have used a com - bination of complementary techniques ( Bou - crot et al . 2011 ; Moren et al . 2012 ; Stoeber et al . 2012 ) that seem to contradict the earlier studiesthat concludedthat caveolae are not con - stitutively budding endocytic carriers ( Thom - sen et al . 2002 ) . Importantly , the recent studies also showed agreement on the dependence on dynamin function , both using small molecule inhibitors and dominant – negative inhibitors ( Boucrot et al . 2011 ; Moren et al . 2012 ; Stoeber et al . 2012 ) . From these studies we can therefore conclude that current evidence would suggest a dynamic cycle of caveolae budding from the Clathrin - Independent Pathways of Endocytosis Cite this article as Cold Spring Harb Perspect Biol 2014 ; 6 : a016758 3 on October 26 , 2017 - Published by Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory Press http : / / cshperspectives . cshlp . org / Downloaded from plasma membrane , some of which fuse with the plasma membrane ( PM ) in an apparent futile cycle , whereas others reach the early endosome and then return as a stable entity to the PM . The dynamic nature of caveolae is supported by studies of caveolae in endothelia in vivo ( Oh et al . 2007 ) . In these live imaging experiments caveolae were not followed by using a ﬂuores - cent caveolin fusion protein but using an - tibodies to an endogenous surface marker of caveolae , the glycosylphosphatidylinositol - an - chored protein ( GPI - AP ) aminopeptidase P ( Oh et al . 2007 ) . These studies showed a remark - able ability of caveolae to mediate rapid trans - endothelial transport in the lung . Transport was blocked by down - regulation of CAV1 and did not occur with other surface markers that were not concentrated in caveolae ( Oh et al . 2007 ) . The kinetics of the transport were consistent with very rapid endocytosis via caveolae in en - dothelial cells , similar or even faster than that mediated by clathrin - coated pits . Taken togeth - er with the studies of caveolin - GFP fusions and parallel electron microscopic studies we can conclude that caveolae are indeed dynamic en - docytic carriers . The machinery involved in caveolae endo - cytosis is gradually emerging . In addition to the GTPase , dynamin , localized to the neck of cav - eolae ( Henley et al . 1998 ; Oh et al . 1998 , 2012 ; Boucrot et al . 2011 ) , we can now add the ATPase EHD2 , and the F - BAR - domain protein pacsin2 . In contrast to dynamin , EHD2 is a negative reg - ulator of endocytosis ; budding of caveolae is increased by knockdown of the ATPase EHD2 ( Moren et al . 2012 ; Stoeber et al . 2012 ) . Again , this was shown by both light microscopy ( to - tal internal reﬂection ﬂuorescence microscopy [ TIRF ] and photobleaching ) and by electron microscopic caveolar endocytic assays strength - ening the conclusions that bona ﬁde caveolar budding was being observed ( Moren et al . 2012 ; Stoeber et al . 2012 ) . The mechanism by which EHD2 inhibits caveolar endocytosis is not yet known but the actin cytoskeleton has been implicated in providing the EHD2 - de - pendent inhibitory constraint . Caveolae align along actin ﬁlaments and real - time observation of drug - induced redistribution of actin showed that EHD2 followed the reorganizing actin cy - toskeleton in WT cells but not in cells with down - regulated EHD2 ( Stoeber et al . 2012 ) . This implicated EHD2 directly or indirectly , in linking caveolae to actin . A mutated form of EHD2 with accelerated ATPase activity showed actin association even in cells lacking CAV1 sug - gesting that the ADP form of the protein might link to actin independently of caveolae . The full ATPase cycle would be required to provide a regulated link between caveolae and the actin cytoskeleton . In cells with caveolae this mutant shows more stable association with caveolae and displacement of endogenous EHD2 ( Stoeber et al . 2012 ) . Interaction with actin may not be direct and a number of candidate actin - binding proteins , including ﬁlaminA ( Muriel et al . 2011 ) , have been linked to caveolae ; depletion of ﬁlamin A increases caveolar dynamics and disrupts stable anchoring of caveolae ( Sverdlov et al . 2009 ; Muriel et al . 2011 ) . Like dynamin , EHD2 appears to be associated mainly with the neck of caveolae ( Ludwig et al . 2013 ) . EHD2 also interacts with Pacsin2 ( PKC and casein kinase substrate in neurons 2 ) , another key regulator of caveolar formation ( Hansen et al . 2011 ; Senju et al . 2011 ) . Pacsin2 binds both dynamin and CAV1 and is a BAR - do - main - containing protein , able to sense and modulate membrane curvature . In addition to these components , studies of endothelial cells have identiﬁed various components of the cel - lular membrane fusion machinery including NSF , SNAP , and VAMP2 ( Schnitzer et al . 1995 ; McIntosh and Schnitzer 1999 ) . The latter ap - peared to be a major component of isolated caveolae and was shown to be required for en - dothelial uptake of cholera toxin via caveolae ( Schnitzer et al . 1995 ) . OTHER DYNAMIN - DEPENDENT CIES The IL - 2 Receptor Endocytic Route As indicated above , a number of CI pathways that operate at the small scale ( 0 . 1 – 1 m m ) , function to internalize speciﬁc cargo . In this category there are dynamin - dependent path - ways and dynamin - independent pathways . S . Mayor et al . 4 Cite this article as Cold Spring Harb Perspect Biol 2014 ; 6 : a016758 on October 26 , 2017 - Published by Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory Press http : / / cshperspectives . cshlp . org / Downloaded from Awell - studied example of the ﬁrst category is the RhoA - dependent IL - 2 receptor endocytic route ( Lamaze et al . 2001 ; Gesbert et al . 2004 ) . EM studies conﬁrm that IL - 2 receptors are concentrated and then internalized via small noncoated invaginations . Both the speciﬁc con - centration of the receptors and uniform size ( 50 – 100 nm ) of the endocytic vesicle indicate the presence of an as - yet - unidentiﬁed protein coat that could aid in the recruitment of these proteins to the site of endocytosis , and mold the endocytic pit . Many cytokine receptors and their constitu - ents , such as the b chain of the interleukin 2 and 15 receptors ( IL - 2R b ) and the common cyto - kine g chain ( IL - 2R gg ) of the receptors for in - terleukins 2 , 4 , 7 , 9 , 15 , and 21 use this route ( Gesbert et al . 2004 ) . Here dynamin regulates endocytosis via an endocytic pathway that is cholesterol sensitive , wherein many IL receptor subunits associatewith “lipid raft” - like domains ( Lamaze et al . 2001 ) . It is likely that in this do - main , an actin - based machinery , involving cor - tactin and neuronal Wiskott - Aldrich syndrome protein ( N - WASP ) is assembled to facilitate IL - 2R entry . This is regulated by input from a IL - 2R - activated PI3P signaling cascade that in turn activates RhoA , and consequently Rac1 ( Basquin et al . 2013 ) . Subsequently p21 - activat - ed kinase 1 ( Pak1 ) , a downstream target of Rac1 , phosphorylatescortactin , promotingitsinterac - tion with N - WASP ( Grassart et al . 2008 , 2010 ) . This cascade facilitates the recruitment and activation of a complex composed of cortactin , N - WASP , Arp2 / 3 , followed by generation of F - actin during IL - 2Rendocytosis . Amyloid pre - cursor protein ( APP ) endocytosis in primary neurons ( Saavedra et al . 2007 ) is another exam - ple of this pathway . Endocytosis of the EGF Receptor In the context of the ( epidermal growth fac - tor EGF ) receptor ( EGFR ) , at low doses of EGF the receptor is directedtowardaclathrin - depen - dent pathway , and at high doses it appears that it uses a CI pathway ( Sigismund et al . 2005 ) . Enhanced ligand - dependent ubiquitination of the receptor has been suggested to act as a regu - latory switch that shunts the receptor toward a clathrin - independent endocytic route , and this likely involves a ubiquitin adaptor for endocy - tosis ( Sigismund et al . 2013 ) . The endocytosis of EGFR at high concentrations of EGF requires cholesterol and “raft” association of the EGF re - ceptor similar to the IL - 2 receptor above . Here the role of dynamin remains controversial be - cause in separate studies at high concentrations of EGF , dynamin inhibition appeared to inhibit endocytosis ( Sigismund et al . 2005 ) , or had no effect on EGF internalization ( Jiang and Sorkin 2003 ) . The role ( s ) of actin machinery here is poorly characterized ; the activity of N - WASP ( Benesch et al . 2005 ) is important , and RhoA ( Nishimura et al . 2011 ) and cortactin ( Timpson et al . 2005 ) have also been implicated , albeit as negative regulators of EGFR endocytosis . COAT - AND DYNAMIN - INDEPENDENT ENDOCYTIC PROCESSES Given the accumulating body of literature on clathrin , and now caveolar endocytosis ( see above ) , it is much easier to conceptualize a ded - icated protein deformation machinery assem - bling at the inner surface of the cell , governing the endocytic process . This coat in turn could act as molecular ﬂypaper to concentrate endo - cytic cargo , and where studied , the pathways have been shown to require the function of dy - namin to affect the endocytic process . Endocy - tosis in the absence of identiﬁable coats poses multiple problems . However , it is now well es - tablished ( despite major debates [ Mayor and Pagano 2007 ; Howes et al . 2010b ; Kumari et al . 2010 ] ) , that there are a number of endocytic pathways in which neither speciﬁc coat proteins nor a particular pinching machinery have been identiﬁed . As early as the 1980s researchers realized that bulk phase markers ( such as Lucifer yellow or the cell - surface - binding lectin , ricin ) could be endocytosed in cells where clathrin function was inhibited by a number of physicochemical means ( Moya et al . 1985 ; Doxsey et al . 1987 ; Sandvig and van Deurs 1994 ) . Later studies used molecular genetic tools to conﬁrm these observations ( Damke et al . 1994 ; Sabharanjak Clathrin - Independent Pathways of Endocytosis Cite this article as Cold Spring Harb Perspect Biol 2014 ; 6 : a016758 5 on October 26 , 2017 - Published by Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory Press http : / / cshperspectives . cshlp . org / Downloaded from et al . 2002 ) , and establish the existence of dy - namin - independent endocytosis . Unimpaired ﬂuid phase endocytosis in primary hemocytes derived from the temperature - sensitive shibire mutants of Drosophila ( Guha et al . 2003 ) in which the mutant dynamin gene in Drosophila renders all dynamin splice forms temperature sensitive because it is located in the exon encod - ing the common GTPase domain ( Grant et al . 1998 ) , also provides convincing evidence for dynamin - independent endocytosis . In the absence of a deﬁned coat , recent evi - dence suggests that speciﬁc lipid accumulation ( reviewed in Johannes and Mayor 2010 ) or ac - cretions of almost any membrane - tethered pro - tein ( Stachowiak et al . 2012 ) , could initiate membrane deformation by physically making the membrane bud and form a vesicle , by an energetically favorable process . For example , Shiga toxin entry is initiated by binding of toxin to the ganglioside , Gb3 . This induces invagina - tions in cells as well as model membranes as a result of its speciﬁc organization as a heptameric toxin recruiting multiple Gb3 species into close proximity ( Romeret al . 2007 ) , leading to acom - paction of lipid species into a speciﬁc geometry . To relieve line tension , these lipid clusters aggre - gate and favor the formation of a membrane bud . An example in which a protein accretion initiates endocytosis is the process of HPV16 virus infection , in which tetraspannin - enriched domains are recruited for virus entry ( Spoden et al . 2008 ) . The CLIC / GEEC Pathway Endocytosis of lipid - anchored proteins such as GPI - APs does not use any detectable pro - tein coat ; there is a lack of any electron - dense material surrounding the earliest detectable endocytic intermediates by EM visualization ( Kirkham et al . 2005 ) . Together with the highly pleiomorphic nature of the endocytic interme - diates , this suggests that if there are coats , they are too transient to be captured by current methodologies of cell ﬁxation and processing and would allow a whole plethora of membrane morphologies . GPI - APs are endocytosed via a dynamin - independent endocytic route , into a specialized early endosomal compartment that also accommodates a major fraction of internal - ized ﬂuid phase ( Sabharanjaket al . 2002 ) . These endocytic structures containing endocytosed GPI - APs are termed GEECs ( GPI - AP enriched early endosomal compartments ) , and they re - sult from fusion of the primary uncoated CI tubulovesicular carriers called CLICs ( CI carri - ers ) , which are directly derived from the cell surface ( Kirkham et al . 2005 ) . The process is thereby termed the CLIC / GEEC ( CG ) pathway . The CG pathway is a high - capacity pathway in which most of the internalized ﬂuid phase is delivered to the cell , in a process that is distinct from macropinocytosis ( because it is a consti - tutive process , and not sensitive to amilioride , a selective inhibitor of macropinocytosis ) . In many cell types it is also responsible for the rapid recycling of the membrane area of the cell ; in mouse embryonic ﬁbroblasts , the entire cell surface is recycled in , 15 min ( Kirkham et al . 2005 ) . Although GEECs appear enriched in GPI - APs ( Sabharanjaket al . 2002 ) , the mech - anism for selectively enriching the outer leaﬂet tethered GPI - APs in CLICs is not well under - stood . A lipid - based sorting mechanism has been proposed because alterations in cholester - ol and sphingolipid levels as well as perturba - tion of the nanoclustering of GPI - AP affects endocytosis via this pathway ( Sharma et al . 2004 ; Chadda et al . 2007 ) . The size of the extra - cellular moiety attached to the lipid tail may act as an additional determinant for inclusion into GEECs ( Bhagatji et al . 2009 ) . Additionally , sev - eral transmembrane proteins such as CD44 and dysferlin are also selectivelyendocytosed viathis pathway ( Howes et al . 2010a ) . ThemolecularmachineryoftheCGpathway is apparently initiated by the recruitment of GBF1 , a guanine nucleotide exchange factor ( GEF ) for Arf 1 , at the cell surface ( Gupta et al . 2009 ) , which in turn serves to activate Arf1 . Ac - tivated Arf1 in turn recruits ARHGAP10 / 21 , a RhoGAP , to the cell surface ( Kumari and Mayor 2008 ) or vice versa . This complex machinery is used to maintain the RhoGTPase Cdc42 in its cycling state to effect the recruitment of down - stream actin polymerization machinery . Dy - namic actin polymerization is necessary for en - S . Mayor et al . 6 Cite this article as Cold Spring Harb Perspect Biol 2014 ; 6 : a016758 on October 26 , 2017 - Published by Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory Press http : / / cshperspectives . cshlp . org / Downloaded from docytosis , and is maintained by Cdc42 dynam - ics at the PM ( Chadda et al . 2007 ; Kumari and Mayor2008 ) . Another recently reportedeffector of GEEC formation is the multidomain protein GTPase regulatorassociated with focal adhesion kinase1 ( GRAF1 ) , which has a BAR domain , SH3 domain , and a Rho - GAP domain . It colo - calizes to CG carriers in HeLa cells where its loss results in reduced CG uptake ( Lundmark et al . 2008 ) . Additionally , GRAF1 colocalizes with ac - tive Cdc42 and also contains a Rho - GAP do - main , thereby ensuring a loss of Cdc42 activity , along with ARHGAP10 / 21 . The roles of the BAR domain , which could aid in generating membrane curvature , and the SH3 domain , ca - pable of interacting with dynamin GTPase , are yet to be explored . Although CLIC formation is dynamin - independent , dynamin is localized to GEECs postinternalization ( Kirkham et al . 2005 ) , and this is necessary in some cell types for recycling of the membrane internalized into GEECs . This step could be mediated by GRAF1 . At this time it is not clear if there are mul - tiple mechanisms that function in a similar coat - independent fashion to form CLICs and deliver cargo to the GEECs . ARF6 - Associated Pathway Another mode of CIE that is also dynamin - in - dependent is one that was originally identiﬁed owing to its association with Arf6 ( Radha - krishna and Donaldson 1997 ) . Arf6 is present at the cell surface and in many cells on endo - somes that contain CIE cargo proteins . A wide varietyof endogenous cell - surface proteins have been identiﬁed that enter cells by this pathway that include proteins involved in nutrient trans - port ( Glut1 , CD98 , Lat1 ) , in matrix interaction ( CD44 , CD147 ) , in immune function ( MHC Class I , CD1a ) , and proteins anchored to the membrane by GPI ( CD55 and CD59 ) ( Eyster et al . 2009 ; Maldonado - Baez et al . 2013b ) . Internalization is clathrin - and dynamin - inde - pendent , but cholesterol - dependent . The in - coming endosomes are distinct from the cla - thrin - dependent cargo - containing endosomes but soon after internalization they fuse with Rab5 - positive sorting endosomes ( Naslavsky et al . 2003 ) where they are sorted for recycling or degradation ( see section below ) . Arf6 activation and inactivation modulates membrane trafﬁcking in this pathway ( Grant and Donaldson 2009 ) mediated in part by Arf6 activation of phosphatidylinositol - 4 - phos - phate 5 - kinase . In most cases , Arf6 activation is not required for endocytosis , but is required for recycling . In contrast , Arf6 inactivation is required soon after internalization for sorting of endosomal cargo as overexpression of the constitutively active form of Arf6 traps cargo in internal vacuolar structures that are coat - ed with phosphatidylinositol - 4 , 5 - bisphosphate ( PIP2 ) ( Naslavsky et al . 2003 ) . It is important to note that the Arf6 - stimulated generation of PIP2 at the PM can also indirectly affect other endocytic events . In particular because CME requires PIP2 , increased Arf6 - GTP can some - times enhance or facilitate CME . The ARF6 - associated pathway bears resem - blance to the CLIC / GEEC pathway in that these pathways internalize similar cargo ( Eyster et al . 2009 ; Howes et al . 2010a ) . The CG pathway and the Ar6 pathway have been considered as sepa - rate ( Fig . 1 ) ( see also Doherty and McMahon 2009 ) ; however , it is not certain if they represent the same or distinct process . In cells in which the CG pathway has been shown to function , Arf6 plays little or no role in endocytosis of the CG cargo ( Kumari and Mayor 2008 ) ; how - ever , the reverse experiment has yet to be per - formed . It is likely that these two processes could use similar mechanisms for initial entry , and the association with speciﬁcally activated Arf6 with these endocytic vesicles in the context of speciﬁc cell types generates a distinct endo - somal trafﬁcking system . Other Dynamin - Independent Endocytic Pathways Flotillins appear to outline yet another dyna - min - and clathrin - independent endocytic pro - cess , because cargo including ﬂuid phase and a GPI - anchored protein CD59 in HeLa cells are endocytosed via this pathway ( Glebov et al . 2006 ) . In the cells depleted of ﬂotillin1 , there is a defect in uptake of CD59 , and CTxB inter - Clathrin - Independent Pathways of Endocytosis Cite this article as Cold Spring Harb Perspect Biol 2014 ; 6 : a016758 7 on October 26 , 2017 - Published by Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory Press http : / / cshperspectives . cshlp . org / Downloaded from nalization is shifted to a dynamin - dependent mode . There are two ﬂotillin genes , ﬂotillin 1 and 2 ( identical to Reggie 2 and 1 , respectively ) ( Babuke and Tikkanen 2007 ) , and ﬂotillin 1 and 2 appear to induce membrane invaginations in a dose - dependent manner ( Frick et al . 2007 ) . In addition the nonreceptor tyrosine kinase fyn - mediated phosphorylation of ﬂotillin appears to trigger endocytosis via this pathway ( Riento et al . 2009 ) . Recently , Lencer and colleagues found that cholera toxin intoxication of zebra - ﬁsh embryos and mammalian cells requires ﬂo - tillin ( Saslowsky et al . 2010 ) . However , Sandvig and coworkers found that in the case of Shiga toxin and ricin , ﬂotillin depletion increases tox - icity ( Pust et al . 2010 ) . Although in all these toxins , intoxication requires delivery of the tox - in to the ER , the differential responses to ﬂotil - lin depletion indicates a more complex require - ment for this protein , potentially in multiple locations in the endocytic pathway . Further - more , although ﬂotillins may deﬁne yet another dynamin - independent endocytic process , there are studies that suggest that dynamin may be involved in endocytosis of cargo that require ﬂotillin ( Otto and Nichols 2011 ) . This has been rationalized by suggesting that ﬂotillins could act as adaptors for speciﬁc cargo , tracking them to alternative dynamin - dependent endo - cytic routes . Thus , until additional molecular machinery is identiﬁed , the function of endog - enous ﬂotillins in endocytosis , their capacity to interact with speciﬁc cargo , and the mechanism of vesicle generation remain unresolved . The antagonist of the nicotinic acetylcho - line receptor , a bungarotoxin , induces internal - ization of its target , via a relatively slow dyna - min - independent process . This proceeds via a mechanism dependent on local actin polymer - ization triggered by antagonist - induced activa - tion of the nonreceptor tyrosine kinase c - src that in turn activates the Rac1 GTPase and sub - sequently promotes actin polymerization ; inhi - bition of Rac1 activity or actin polymerization inhibits endocytosis of the nicotinic receptor ( Kumari et al . 2008 ) . A similar pathway is trig - gered by the HIV Nef protein to down - regulate the costimulatory proteins CD80 and CD86 in macrophages to render infected macrophages incapable of activating naı¨ve T cells ( Chaudhry et al . 2007 ) . A Central Role for Actin Polymerization in the Absence of Clathrin and Dynamin There is a breathtaking diversity in the cargo and the molecular machinery behind clathrin - and dynamin - independent endocytic systems ( Conner and Schmid 2003 ; Mayor and Pagano 2007 ; Sandvig et al . 2008 ; Doherty and McMa - hon 2009 ) . If there is any generalizable mecha - nism for endocytosis in the absence of both cla - thrin and dynamin , it is the role of specialized actin - based platformsthat emerges as a unifying mechanism to aid in this form of endocytosis . Indeed perturbation of actin polymerization by using inhibitors of polymerzation or depolyme - rization has been shown to inhibit the forma - tion of CLICs in a number of these pathways . A recent study shows that actin reorganization is necessary for the scission of membrane tubules generated via the assembly of lipid nanoassem - blies in vitro ( Romer et al . 2010 ) . It is more complicated to assess the role of actin polymer - ization in the cell because it is also involved in the assemblyof the lipid and protein assemblies , itself ( Gowrishankar et al . 2012 ) . Mechanistically , there may be many ways to recruit and assemble actin machinery to affect endocytosis ; therefore these pathways have dis - tinct upstream mechanisms of initiating the endocytic process , depending on the nature of cargo and the mechanism for its selection . This may involve the recruitment of actin polymeri - zation regulators ; for example , Cdc42 for the CG pathway , RhoA for the IL - 2R pathway , Rac for the nicotinic receptor and the CD80 and 86 proteins , and so on . However , all these pathways may share a common downstream signature that revolves around the assembly and deploy - ment of actin polymerization to affect the actual endocytic process . Endocytosis Mediated by the Actin Cytoskeleton : A Case Study To understand this downstream role of the actin machinery in endocytosis , it may be useful to S . Mayor et al . 8 Cite this article as Cold Spring Harb Perspect Biol 2014 ; 6 : a016758 on October 26 , 2017 - Published by Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory Press http : / / cshperspectives . cshlp . org / Downloaded from focusonone systeminwhichthispathway isbest understood , namely , in the genetic system yeast ( Galletta and Cooper 2009 ) . Although endocy - tosis in yeast is deﬁned as a clathrin - mediated process , clathrin itself is dispensable forendocy - tosis in yeast ( Payne 1990 ; Munn et al . 1991 ; Tan et al . 1993 ) , and subsequent studies have shown that although clathrin facilitates endo - cytic site assembly , it is not required for mem - brane invagination or vesicle formation . In a mutant screen for endocytic defects in yeast , actin and its regulators were the prime hits ; one - third of the endocytic proteins identiﬁed in this screen bind actin or regulate its assembly ( Munn et al . 1995 ) . Therefore , the role of actin in almost every stage of this pathway provides a way to understand how actin may play a spe - ciﬁc role in endocytosis ( Weinberg and Drubin 2012 ) . With the visualization of the recruit - ment of actin to the sites of endocytosis in live cells ( Toret and Drubin 2006 ) , Drubin and col - leagues have systematically identiﬁed actin patches , which have distinct protein composi - tion and motility properties , and accumulate in the different genetic mutants as intermediates in the endocytic process ( Kaksonen et al . 2003 , 2005 ) . This allowed a dissection of the endocy - tic pathway into four stages representing distinct protein modules involved in coat formation , membrane invagination , actin - meshwork as - sembly , and vesicle scission ( also see Merriﬁeld and Kaksonen 2014 ) . Based on these studies and more recent cor - relative light and electron microscopy , followed by EM - based tomography , it appears that endo - cytosis is initiated at a site where the membrane invaginates and then is elongated into a tube by active polymerization of actin and traction by myosin motors ( Geli and Riezman 1996 ; Kukul - ski et al . 2012 ) . This culminates in the scission of this tube by a mechanochemical process ( Liu et al . 2006 ) . Here it is proposed that distinct membrane domains are created by the action of lipid kinases and phosphatases acting differ - entially on the neck and stalk of the tube ; the resultant line tension between these domains is a cause for scission . This is a mechanochemical model because it is the generation of the elon - gated and narrow neck of the endocytic tube that differentially recruits lipid kinases and phosphatases , resulting in a kinetic segregation of lipids in the neck region . Although interest - ing as a model , several tests need to be per - formed before its validity may be ascertained , but it does provide an actin - centric way of look - ing at the endocytic process . POSTENDOCYTIC TRAFFICKING OF CIE CARGO PROTEINS After entry , newly formed endocytic structures arising from CIE can undergo rounds of homo - typic fusion followed by heterotypic fusion with endosomes arising from CME . The tracking of incoming endosomes from CIE to assess what endosomes they fuse with and how they acquire particular endosomal Rab proteins is an experimental challenge and data on this is in - complete . Further complicating this is the vari - ety of types of both clathrin - independent and - dependent forms of endocytosis and how these membrane systems manifest themselves in dif - ferent cell types . A consensus has emerged from real - time studies that the destination for budded caveolae is the early endosome ( Pelkmans et al . 2004 ; Hayer et al . 2010a ; Boucrot et al . 2011 ; Stoeber et al . 2012 ) , a conclusion actually reached in earlier ultrastructural studies ( Montesano et al . 1982 ; Tran et al . 1987 ; Parton et al . 1994 ) . Pre - vious reports of a specialized endosomal com - partment receiving internalized CAV1 , termed the “caveosome , ” have been explained as an ar - tifactual late endosomal destination of overex - pressed caveolin ( Hayer et al . 2010a ) . The use of ﬂuorescently tagged cavin with CAV1 in light microscopic experiments helped establish that caveolae travel to early endosomes ( Hayer et al . 2010a ; Boucrot et al . 2011 ) . Cavin - labeled vesi - cles are readily observed by EM in the cytosol of cultured cells , as well as on putative endoso - mal structures ( Hayer et al . 2010b ) , consistent with observations of caveolin forming a stable domain on the early endosome from which car - go , including cholera toxin , is released ( Pelk - mans et al . 2004 ) . In contrast , EHD2 is not de - tectable on the early endosome ( Stoeber et al . 2012 ) . Clathrin - Independent Pathways of Endocytosis Cite this article as Cold Spring Harb Perspect Biol 2014 ; 6 : a016758 9 on October 26 , 2017 - Published by Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory Press http : / / cshperspectives . cshlp . org / Downloaded from There is compelling evidence in the CG pathway that the incoming endosomes have the capacity for homotypic endosomal fusion and subsequent sorting of cargo . In some cell lines , (cid:2) 50 % of the newly endocytosed material is recycled at this early stage , and the remaining membranes fuse to mature into GEEC struc - tures . The initial ﬂuid and membrane - contain - ing endocytic structures become highly acidic , and acquire PI3P , Rab5 , and the early endoso - mal antigen 1 ( EEA1 ) ( Kalia et al . 2006 ) . Both the morphology and highly acidic nature of the GEEC suggest that this endosome could begin to sort cargo and membrane for different desti - nations ( Sabharanjak et al . 2002 ; Howes et al . 2010a ) , before delivery of material to the early sorting endosome ( Fig . 2 ) . In the Arf6 - associated pathway , the incom - ing endosomes can undergo homotypic fusion stimulated by Arf6 - GTP and phosphatidylino - sitol - 4 , 5 - bisphosphate ( PIP2 ) ( Brown et al . 2001 ) but further trafﬁcking toward recycling or degradation requires inactivation of Arf6 , loss of PIP2 , and acquisition of Rab5 and PI3P ( Brown et al . 2001 ; Naslavsky et al . 2003 ) . Recy - cling of endosomal membrane back to the PM requires Arf6 in a number of cell systems ( Rad - hakrishna and Donaldson 1997 ; Powelka et al . 2004 ; Balasubramanian et al . 2007 ) . Regardless of the speciﬁc mode of cellular entry , endosomescontainingCIEcargoproteins eventually fuse with the early or sorting endo - some ( SE ) that contains CME - derived cargo proteins ( see Fig . 2 ) . Although sorting occurs throughout the endosomal pathway , the “classi - cal” SE is deﬁned by the presence of Rab5 , PI3P , and EEA1 . Recent work by Zerial and colleagues suggests more variety in the composition of Ubi ESCRTcomplex EHD3Rab10Rab22a Rab35Rab10Rab22 CD98CD147 Hook1Rab22a RE RE SE ERC Rab11 Rab11 Rab8Rab22a FIP3 EHD1 / Rme1 Alix FIP2 Arf6 Rab11 Rab5 Rab11Arf6 Arf6 - associated pathway PI3PRab5 Rab4Rab35 Rab5AppL Rab5 Rapidrecycling Caveolar Clathrin Cdc42 CLIC GEEC EEA1 LE Figure 2 . Trafﬁcking itineraries of endocytosed cargo in a typical mammalian cell . The diagram maps the trafﬁcking itineraries of cargo endocytosed via multiple means including the clathrin - mediated pathway ( see text for details ) . A number of endocytic compartments and destinies are available for cargo endocytosed via the CIE , whereas clathrin and caveolar pathways typically deliver their cargo directly to the sorting endosomal system . The CIE pathways often use distinct molecular machinery and separate recycling compartments to return cargo internalized via these routes . S . Mayor et al . 10 Cite this article as Cold Spring Harb Perspect Biol 2014 ; 6 : a016758 on October 26 , 2017 - Published by Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory Press http : / / cshperspectives . cshlp . org / Downloaded from these compartments including those with Rab5 only , Rab5 and APPL positive , and Rab5 and EEA1positive ( Miaczynska etal . 2004 ) . Forsim - plicity , herewedepicttheSEasalargecomposite structure with differentiation of distinct do - mains enriched in particular membrane lipids and Rab proteins . Fusion with this compart - ment requires the acquisition of PI3P and Rab5 ( Naslavsky et al . 2003 ; Kalia et al . 2006 ) . Once in this compartment CIE cargo proteins now join cargo entering through CME and fur - ther sorting of cargo can occur . Through the process of maturation and release of transport carriers , cargo proteins and membrane can pro - ceed toward late endosomes and lysosomes , the trans - Golginetwork , or torecyclingendosomes . Also trafﬁcking into and through this compart - ment are CME cargo proteins such astransferrin and LDL receptors . Endosomal trafﬁcking and sorting is discussed in more detail elsewhere in this volume ( see Henne et al . 2013 ; Burd and Cullen 2014 ; Klumperman and Raposo 2014 ) ; therefore , here we focus on the sorting and traf - ﬁcking of CIE proteins . The ﬁnal destination of internalized mem - brane and cargo varies with the type of CIE , particularcargoproteins , andcelltype . Thecon - tents of GEECs proceed to the juxtanuclear re - cycling compartment in Chinese hamster ovary ( CHO ) cells and ﬁbroblasts ( Sabharanjak et al . 2002 ) , and to late endosomes and lysosomes in baby hamster kidney ( BHK ) cells ( Fivaz et al . 2002 ) . In mouse embryonic ﬁbroblasts , CD44 enters GEECs and is sorted away to reside in a long - lived compartment that is distinct from the recycling compartment as well as late endo - somes ( Howes et al . 2010a ) . It is likely that this pathway may use similar machinery as the Arf6 pathway to segregate out material from its deg - radative destination . In T cells , the IL - 2 receptor that enters cells via a RhoA / Rac and dynamin - dependent pathway is also delivered to late en - dosomesfordegradation ( Roccaetal . 2001 ) . Car - go entering cells through Arf6 - associated CIE is sorted to recycling or degradation based on spe - ciﬁc cytoplasmic sequences ( Eyster et al . 2009 ; Maldonado - Baez et al . 2013b ) and the presence or absence of ubiquitination on the cytoplasmic tails of these cargo proteins ( Eyster et al . 2011 ) . SORTING OF CIE CARGO PROTEINS AFTER ENDOCYTOSIS In HeLa cells a number of PM proteins have been identiﬁed that enter cells via CIE . The ma - jor histocompatibility complex class I ( MHCI ) is a prototypic cargo protein that enters in en - dosomes associated with Arf6 , and then is found in SE associated with CME cargo , Rab5 and EEA1 . From here MHCI trafﬁcs via the multivesicular bodies ( MVB ) pathway into late endosomes and lysosomes for degradation or is recycled back to the cell surface via elaborate recycling tubular endosomes under the control of multiple Rab GTPases . Joining the itinerary of MHCI are the glucose transporter 1 ( Glut1 ) and the GPI - APs CD55 and CD59 ( Naslavsky et al . 2004 ; Eyster et al . 2009 ) . Additional CIE cargo proteins have been identiﬁed that follow an alternative itinerary after entry . Among these proteins are CD44 , the hyaluronan receptor ; CD98 , which together with Lat1 , is an amino acid transporter ; and CD147 ( also called EMM - PRIN or basigin ) , which interacts with integrins and matrix metalloproteases . CD44 , CD98 , and CD147 enter cells with MHCI but then rap - idly join recycling tubules and avoid trafﬁcking to endosomes containing the transferrin recep - tor and EEA1 ( Eyster et al . 2009 ) . As a conse - quence of this postendocytic sorting , CD44 , CD98 , and CD147 avoid trafﬁcking to lyso - somes and degradation ( Eyster et al . 2011 ) . It was recently shown that cytoplasmic sequences in CD44 , CD98 , and CD147 are responsible for this altered trafﬁcking and that the microtu - bule and cargo - binding protein Hook1 facili - tates this altered trafﬁcking in coordination with Rab22a and microtubules ( Maldonado - Baez et al . 2013a ) . CD44 and CD98 are also present as cargo proteins in the CLIC / GEEC pathway ( Howes et al . 2010a ) and so it will be interesting to see whether they are also differ - entially trafﬁcked by Hook1 and Rab22a . Other CIE cargo proteins have been iden - tiﬁed that have speciﬁc amino acid sequences that facilitate recycling back to the cell surface . The inwardly rectifying potassium channel , Kir3 . 4 , contains cytoplasmic clusters of acidic amino acids that facilitate recycling ( Gong et al . Clathrin - Independent Pathways of Endocytosis Cite this article as Cold Spring Harb Perspect Biol 2014 ; 6 : a016758 11 on October 26 , 2017 - Published by Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory Press http : / / cshperspectives . cshlp . org / Downloaded from 2007 ) . Syndecan 1 enters cells by CIE but through its carboxy - terminal PDZ ligand it in - teracts with syntenin . Syntenin facilitates recy - cling of syndecan 1 back to the PM in a PIP2 - and Arf6 - dependent manner ( Zimmermann et al . 2001 ) . There are likely to be many more examples of cargo - speciﬁc sorting arising from CIE as more CIE cargo proteins are studied . In - deed one purpose of CIE may be to sample bulk PM proteins and lipid for inspection at an endo - somal station . From here misfolded or ubiquiti - nated proteins can be routed to degradation and other proteins that pass inspection returning to the cell surface . Ubiquitinylation of CIE cargo proteins has a dramatic effect on their endosomal trafﬁcking and is very likely to be the mechanism for pro - tein quality control of cell - surface proteins ( Piper and Lehner 2011 ) . This was dramatically shown in HeLa cells expressing the MARCH8 E3 ubiquitin ligase . CD44 and CD98 are long - lived proteins that entercells via CIE but they do not reside in endosomes that label with EEA1 and do not normally trafﬁc to late endosomes and lysosomes for degradation ( Eyster et al . 2011 ) . In cells expressing MARCH8 , however , CD44 and CD98 still enter cells by CIE but now trafﬁc to EEA1 - positive endosomes and on to lysosomes for degradation ( Eyster et al . 2011 ) . The ubiquitin tag may both engage the ESCRT - ubiquitin recognition system and abrogate sort - ing signals in the cytoplasmic tails of CIE cargo proteins thus altering the itinerary and fate of the cargo proteins . Normally , the E3 ligases are balanced by deubiquitinylating enzymes , which by removing the ubiquitin would allow recy - cling back to the cell surface . Although the biol - ogy of the ubiquitinylation / deubiquitinylation ﬁeld is still in its infancy , it promises to enhance our understanding of how endocytic cargo is examined and sorted on endosomes . MACHINERY INVOLVED IN ENDOSOMAL MATURATION AND CARGO SORTING Important regulators of endosomal maturation and trafﬁcking are the Rab GTPases . There are a number of Rab proteins associated with the en - dosomal system ( Rab4 , 5 , 7 , 8 , 9 , 10 , 11 , 14 , 22 , 35 ) , with each Rab contributing to the identity of a particular endosome or domain on an en - dosomal structure ( see Fig . 2 ) . Rab proteins ac - complish this through their scaffolding func - tion and ability to connect to motor proteins . A numberof Rab proteins also interact with and inﬂuence activities of Arf , Rho , and other Rab proteins . Details of the speciﬁc functions pro - vided by the Rabs have yet to be sorted out . For speciﬁc CIE cargo proteins , distinct Rabs have been shown to be important for cargo recycling . Recycling of MHCI requires Rab11 , Rab22 , and Arf6 activation ( Radhakrishna and Donaldson 1997 ; Weigert et al . 2004 ) and CD1b requires Rab11 , Rab22 , Arf6 , and Arl13b ( Barral et al . 2012 ) . Rab35 has been implicated in a rapid recycling pathway in both mammalian cells and in the worm ( Kouranti et al . 2006 ; Sato et al . 2008 ) . Interestingly Rab35 and Arf6 each recruit the other’s GAP to inactivate each other . This cross talk raises interesting kinds of regu - lation because both are present at the cell sur - face , Rab35 is also present in clathrin - coated vesicles , and Arf6 has recently been observed in clathrin structures when overexpressed . A re - cent study reported that Rab35 promoted the recycling of E - cadherin , a cargo that can enter cells by CME or CIE , whereas Arf6 promoted the recycling of b 1 - integrin ( Powelka et al . 2004 ; Allaire et al . 2013 ) . In addition to the Rab proteins , there are a number of cytosolic proteins that associate with endosomes that are capable of inducing or sta - bilizing membrane curvature , suggesting their involvement in endosomal sorting through tu - bulation . The epsin homology domain family of proteins , the EHDs , was ﬁrst implicated in endosomal recycling when the worm homolog Rme1 was associated with transferrin recycling . There are four mammalian EHDs and they have been implicated in the recycling of MHCI ( Caplan et al . 2002 ) and GPI - AP ( Cai et al . 2011 ) in cavolae structure for EHD2 ( Moren et al . 2012 ; Stoeber et al . 2012 ) , and for EHD1 in the retrograde transport of shiga toxin from the endocytic recycling compartment ( ERC ) to the trans - Golgi network ( TGN ) ( McKenzie et al . 2012 ) . EHDs can serve a scaffolding func - tion but can also oligomerize to stabilize or in - S . Mayor et al . 12 Cite this article as Cold Spring Harb Perspect Biol 2014 ; 6 : a016758 on October 26 , 2017 - Published by Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory Press http : / / cshperspectives . cshlp . org / Downloaded from duce the formation of membrane tubules ( Nas - lavsky and Caplan 2011 ) . Other proteins capable of tubulating mem - branes include those that contain BAR domains ( see Burd and Cullen 2014 ; Johannes et al . 2014 ) . GRAF1 is a BAR - domain protein associ - ated with tubular invaginations that form dur - ing the CLIC form of CIE ( Lundmark et al . 2008 ; Howes et al . 2010a ) . The Arf6 GAPs , ACAP1 and ACAP2 , also have BAR domains and they are recruited to membranes by Rab10 ( Shi et al . 2012 ) and Rab35 ( Egami et al . 2011 ; Kobayashi and Fukuda 2012 ) , respectively . Thus as ACAPs are brought onto the endosome , they may coordinately inactivate Arf6 and allow tu - bules to form from endosomes , sorting cargo . ROLES OF THE CIE PATHWAYS In a very general sense , any endocytic pathway must take up cargo , and these could lead to speciﬁc consequences for the components that are endocytosed . A number of such examples abound for all the pathways described here and we detail some of the interesting examples that suggest important general possibilities of - fered by these pathways . Second , the CIE path - ways offer cell - wide functionality in terms of being able to act as sensors for the physical state of the cell , and ﬁne regulation of the local and global composition of membrane components . Finally , these endocytic pathways could help in engaging in tissue - wide properties by integrat - ing information from many cells . Role of Caveolar Endocytosis As discussed above , caveolae could form endo - cytic devices akin to clathrin - coated pits , able to concentrate and transport speciﬁc proteins . Yet few markers seem to be completely depen - dent on caveolae for entry . SV40 , shown to be concentrated in caveolae ( Anderson et al . 1996 ; Stang et al . 1997 ; Pelkmans et al . 2001 ) , is now known to also use other entry mecha - nisms ( Damm et al . 2005 ) . Studies of endothelia have provided strong evidence from various lines of workforefﬁcient transendothelial trans - port via caveolae ( Oh et al . 2007 ) . Knockdown of CAV1 provided strong support for this model ( Oh et al . 2007 ) , yet the consequences of the apparent loss of this important pathway in mice genetically deﬁcient for CAV1 seem to somewhat contradict the essential role of caveo - lae that would be envisaged . Compensation can be the explanation but because these mice lack caveola - like invaginations , vesicular transport would have to occur through other pathways . An interesting example of compensation , which might provide more evidence for an endocytic role of caveolae , comes from work on a speciﬁc isoform of myosin VI ( Puri 2009 ) . Loss of this protein blocks transferrin uptake through cla - thrin - coated pits but , remarkably , transferrin receptors are instead concentrated in AP2 - pos - itive caveolae , which mediate transferrin uptake ( Puri 2009 ) . TGF - b - receptor internalization has also been linked to caveolae . Although uptake of TGF - b receptors through clathrin - coated pits was shown to link to signaling , uptake through caveolae was implicated in receptor turnover ( Di Guglielmo et al . 2003 ) . Thus the pathway of uptake determined a signaling role or degra - dative fate for the receptor . No overlap was ob - served between caveolin and an earlyendosomal marker in this study and so the entire pathway - mediating uptake initiated in caveolae was con - sidered to be quite distinct from that using cla - thrin - coated pits ( Di Guglielmo et al . 2003 ) . This now seems at variance with a number of studies , and in view of the apparent demise of the caveosome as a unique compartment , might need to be reassessed . A number of junctional proteins also use caveolae for entry in response to speciﬁc signals such as TNF treatment or epidermal growth factor treatment ( Orlichenko et al . 2009 ; Marchiando et al . 2010 ) . A second possible role for caveolar endocy - tosisrelatestotheneedtotightly regulatesurface caveolardensity ( forother PMfunctionssuch as mechanosensation [ Parton and Del Pozo 2013 ] ) or to provide a way of transiently regulating plasma membrane composition or properties under speciﬁc cellular conditions . During the mammalian cell cycle the densityof the caveolae on the surface changes ( Boucrot et al . 2011 ) : An imbalance between arrivals and departures Clathrin - Independent Pathways of Endocytosis Cite this article as Cold Spring Harb Perspect Biol 2014 ; 6 : a016758 13 on October 26 , 2017 - Published by Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory Press http : / / cshperspectives . cshlp . org / Downloaded from causes a decrease in caveolae density during metaphase . This is reversed during cytokinesis to return caveolar density to interphase levels . This process might be linked to a role for CAV1 endocytosis in internalization of ordered mem - brane domains required for Rac1 signaling ; in theabsenceofcaveolincellsprogressthroughthe cell cycle more rapidlyowing to increased mem - brane order and Rac targeting ( Cerezo et al . 2009 ; Boucrot et al . 2011 ) . This may be partially achieved by loss of the interphase microtubule network as microtuble depolymerization mim - ics the loss of surface caveolae ( Cerezo et al . 2009 ) . This is in agreement with recent work showing a requirement for microtubules in cav - eola dynamics in a range of tissues ( Wickstrom et al . 2010 ; Malan et al . 2013 ) . Similarly as cells are detached from the substratum there is a net increase in caveolarendocytosis . During mitosis or upon cell detachment , increased PKC a - me - diated phosphorylation of ﬁlamin A allows in - ternalization of caveolae controlling RAC1 tar - geting to the PM and cell - cycle progression ( Muriel et al . 2011 ) . Caveolae can also act as a major regulator of membrane tension owing to their capacity to passively open up under high mechanical stress , but reform actively thereby being capable of setting membrane tension ( Sinha et al . 2011 ) . Because key caveolar coat proteins such as the cavins ( including cavin1 / PTRF ) are also poten - tially capable of regulating transcription , and theyarereleaseduponapplicationofmechanical stress , this suggests that caveolae could act as a global transducer of this mechanical input ( Mayor 2011 ) . For example in muscle cells at high strain , caveolae may buffer membrane ten - sion and mutations that disrupt caveolin , and cavins in muscle have been linked to a number of muscle diseases ( Parton and Del Pozo 2013 ) . Regulation of caveolar endocytic dynamics could transiently alter surface caveolae levels and so control the cellular response to tension . The IL - 2R Pathway In lymphocytes , cell proliferation is activated by ligand binding to interleukin receptors of vari - ous ligand - binding speciﬁcities ( Gaffen 2001 ) and is essential for shaping the immune re - sponse . Cytokine receptors are endocytosed constitutively , and in ligand - bound states the endocytosis of these receptors follow a CI path - way that is exempliﬁed by the IL - 2R pathway described above . These receptors are then sorted toward lysosomes where they are degraded ( He - mar et al . 1994 , 1995 ; Subtil et al . 1994 ) . Endo - cytosis of cytokine receptors via this pathway is also a mechanism to control the signaling cas - cade and cell proliferation . It has been recently shown that the same mechanism that triggers cell proliferation resulting in PI3P signaling , also via the activation of the PI3P signaling cas - cade is capable of activating endocytosis via this pathway ( Basquin et al . 2013 ) , suggesting the possibility of negative - feedback loops in con - trolling cell proliferation . CIE and EGFReceptor Endocytosis EGFR endocytosis via clathrin - dependent and - independent mechanisms in the same cells also points toward avery powerful interplay between endocytic mechanisms . Here clathrin - depen - dent endocytosis regulates the initial signal as - sembly platform necessary for EGFR signaling ( Sigismund et al . 2008 ) , whereas CIE of the EGFR occurs at high doses of EGF ( Sigismund et al . 2005 ) . The CIE pathway directs excess EGFR toward a degradative fate by the thresh - old that is set by the extent of ubiquitination of the substrates of the Ubq - ligase Cbl ( Sigismund et al . 2013 ) . The ligase is recruited to the recep - tor in a sigmoidal fashion related to the extent of ligand - dependent activation of the receptor . This mechanism provides the capacity to exqui - sitely tune the proliferative drive of a cell by controlling EGFR activity . CLIC / GEEC and the Arf6 - Associated Pathway Avariety of GPI - APs are internalized by the CG pathway , and therefore it is no surprise that this pathway is used for the function of some of these molecules . An important cargo of GEECs is the folate receptor in which its endocytosis via a CI mechanism speciﬁcally aids in accomplish - ing its capacity to deliver folates to cells ( Ritter S . Mayor et al . 14 Cite this article as Cold Spring Harb Perspect Biol 2014 ; 6 : a016758 on October 26 , 2017 - Published by Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory Press http : / / cshperspectives . cshlp . org / Downloaded from et al . 1995 ) . This must be mediated by the spe - ciﬁc colocalization of appropriate folate trans - porters as well the low pH of these endosomes to strip the receptor of its folate cargo , captured at the neutral pH environment of the cell surface ( Sabharanjak and Mayor 2004 ) . This pathway could be of vital importance for a number of cargoes where a low concentration bulk ligand is captured at the cell surface and is concentrated at the membrane surface and delivered into the cell via GEECs . Another cargo for a GEEC - like pathway is dysferlin , a muscle repair protein , mutations of which are associated with several myopathies . In cells devoid of CAV1 , dysferlin is endocytosed in a dynamin - independent fash - ion into compartments containing GPI - APs invoking the CG pathway ( Hernandez - Deviez et al . 2008 ) . Considering the constitutive nature and fast kinetics , the CG pathway is a prime candidate for regulating membrane area and consequent - ly tension . It is likely that although clathrin - and caveolae - coated pathways respond to large changes in membrane tension , small changes may be buffered by the functioning of the CG pathway . Studies in which PM tension has been modulated have indicated the involvement of a GPI - containing recycling pathway that re - sponds to changes in membrane tension by de - livering membrane to the cell surface ( Gauthier et al . 2009 ) . Indeed the pleiomorphic nature of the CLICs formed from the cell surface suggests that endocytosis via this pathway could be reg - ulated by membrane tension , and recyling . The CIE pathway is also involved in regulat - ing cell migration . Both the CG and the Arf6 pathway serve as membrane reservoirs not only of the membrane area required for cell spread - ing ( Gauthier et al . 2009 ) , but a number of key cell - surface proteins involved in membrane at - tachment ( CD44 ) are also trafﬁcked into the cell via these pathways . This membrane recycling is important for cell adhesion , cell spreading , and cell migration ( Song et al . 1998 ; Santy and Ca - sanova 2001 ) . Brought back to the cell surface are integrins , nutrient transporters , and small G proteins . Directed cell migration is also affected upon inhibition of the CG pathway ( Howes et al . 2010a ) . FUTURE PERSPECTIVES The endocytic activity of caveolae has been a controversial question for many decades . Early models of constitutive uptake were followed by studies suggesting limited endocytosis unless stimulated and even suggestions that caveolae were immobile . More recently a number of dif - ferent approaches have been used in combina - tion to study caveolae and results from these studies support the idea that caveolae can be constitutive endocytic carriers , but that their endocytic activity can be modulated . Crucial questions remain about the role and relevance of these pathways in vivo . Studies of transendothelial transport in vivo are a start but we need additional in vivo studies to compare the dynamics of caveolae in different tissues . Overexpression of caveolin or other regulators of the different CIE pathways is clearly a cru - cial issue and genome - edited cells and tissues ( Doyon et al . 2011 ) will be of immense value in caveolar research . As we learn more of the components that regulate caveolar dynamics but do not play avital role in caveolar formation we can start to compare cells with active and immobile caveolae . The same applies to key players of the other CIE pathways . It is clear that there is a dire need for a parts list for all the multiple CIE pathways . It is in - creasingly likely that this will occur using so - phisticated genetic screens that are capable of uncovering perturbations in these pathways . An important question that needs to be ad - dressed is the relationship between the different CIE pathways . Because multiple endocytic path - ways exist in a single cell , the cell must have mechanisms to both globally and locally regu - late endocytic processes . This implies a consid - erable amount of molecular wiring that must be dedicated to cross talk between these pathways . Some of this machinery is being discovered ser - endipitously ; overexpression of caveolin caused an inhibition of the CLIC / GEEC pathway , and this was traced to an unappreciated activity of phosphocaveolin to inhibit Cdc42 ( Cheng et al . 2010 ) . A systematic monitoring of the correlat - ed expression of the molecular players of these endocytic pathways in different contexts along Clathrin - Independent Pathways of Endocytosis Cite this article as Cold Spring Harb Perspect Biol 2014 ; 6 : a016758 15 on October 26 , 2017 - Published by Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory Press http : / / cshperspectives . cshlp . org / Downloaded from with the endocytic capacity of a few character - istic cargoes will provide valuable information in this context . In particular , questions about the mecha - nism and functioning of pathways that operate without both clathrin and dynamin need ad - dressing . Do these pathways represent a spec - trum of functionally redundant processes or does each one playa distinct role ( s ) in particular contexts in a noninterchangeable fashion ? Most deﬁnitely , an exploration of the roles of these pathways in the development and survival of whole organism models will provide answers to these questions . The development of small molecule inhibitors speciﬁc for CIE pathways would clearly help in studies requiring acute regulation of these endocytic processes , and provide a functional dissection of these path - ways , and their complex roles in cellular physi - ology and tissue homeostasis . REFERENCES (cid:2) Reference is also in this collection . Allaire PD , Seyed Sadr M , Chaineau M , Seyed Sadr E , Ko - nefal S , Fotouhi M , Maret D , Ritter B , Del Maestro RF , McPherson PS . 2013 . Interplay between Rab35 and Arf6 controls cargo recycling to coordinate cell adhesion and migration . J Cell Sci 126 : 722 – 731 . Anderson HA , Chen Y , Norkin LC . 1996 . Bound simian virus40 translocatesto caveolin - enriched membrane do - mains , and its entry is inhibited by drugs that selectively disrupt caveolae . Mol Biol Cell 7 : 1825 – 1834 . Babuke T , Tikkanen R . 2007 . Dissecting the molecularfunc - tion of reggie / ﬂotillin proteins . Eur J Cell Biol 86 : 525 – 532 . Balasubramanian N , Scott DW , Castle JD , Casanova JE , Schwartz MA . 2007 . Arf6 and microtubules in adhesion - dependent trafﬁcking of lipid rafts . Nat Cell Biol 9 : 11 . Barral DC , Garg S , Casalou C , Watts GF , Sandoval JL , Ra - malho JS , Hsu VW , Brenner MB . 2012 . Arl13b regulates endocytic recycling trafﬁc . Proc Natl Acad Sci 109 : 21354 – 21359 . Basquin C , Malarde V , Mellor P , Anderson DH , Meas - Yedid V , Olivo - Marin JC , Dautry - Varsat A , Sauvonnet N . 2013 . The signalling factor PI3K is a speciﬁc regulator of the clathrin - independent dynamin - dependent endocytosis of IL - 2 receptors . J Cell Sci 126 : 1099 – 1108 . Bastiani M , Liu L , Hill MM , Jedrychowski MP , Nixon SJ , Lo HP , Abankwa D , Luetterforst R , Fernandez - Rojo M , Breen MR , et al . 2009 . MURC / Cavin - 4 and cavin family members form tissue - speciﬁc caveolar complexes . J Cell Biol 185 : 1259 – 1273 . BeneschS , PoloS , LaiFP , AndersonKI , StradalTE , Wehland J , Rottner K . 2005 . N - WASP deﬁciency impairs EGF in - ternalization and actin assembly at clathrin - coated pits . J Cell Sci 118 : 3103 – 3115 . Bhagatji P , Leventis R , Comeau J , Refaei M , Silvius JR . 2009 . Steric and not structure - speciﬁc factors dictate the en - docytic mechanism of glycosylphosphatidylinositol - an - chored proteins . J Cell Biol 186 : 615 – 628 . Bohdanowicz M , Grinstein S . 2013 . Role of phospholipids in endocytosis , phagocytosis , and macropinocytosis . Physiol Rev 93 : 69 – 106 . Boucrot E , Howes MT , Kirchhausen T , Parton RG . 2011 . Redistribution of caveolae during mitosis . J Cell Sci 124 : 1965 – 1972 . BrownFD , RozelleAL , YinHL , BallaT , DonaldsonJG . 2001 . Phosphatidylinositol4 , 5 - bisphosphateandArf6 - regulat - ed membrane trafﬁc . J Cell Biol 154 : 1007 – 1017 . (cid:2) Burd C , Cullen PJ . 2014 . Retromer : A master conductor of endosome sorting . Cold Spring Harb Perspect Biol doi : 10 . 1101 / cshperspect . a016774 . Cai B , Kataﬁasz D , Horejsi V , Naslavsky N . 2011 . Pre - sort - ing endosomal transport of the GPI - anchored protein , CD59 , is regulated by EHD1 . Trafﬁc 12 : 102 – 120 . Caplan S , Naslavsky N , Hartnell LM , Lodge R , Polishchuk RS , DonaldsonJG , BonifacinoJS . 2002 . AtubularEHD1 - containingcompartmentinvolvedintherecyclingofma - jor histocompatibility complex class I molecules to the plasma membrane . EMBO J 21 : 2557 – 2567 . Cerezo A , Guadamillas MC , Goetz JG , Sanchez - Perales S , Klein E , Assoian RK , del Pozo MA . 2009 . The absence of caveolin - 1 increases proliferation and anchorage - inde - pendent growth by a Rac - dependent , Erk - independent mechanism . Mol Cell Biol 29 : 5046 – 5059 . ChaddaR , Howes MT , PlowmanSJ , Hancock JF , Parton RG , Mayor S . 2007 . Cholesterol - sensitive Cdc42 activation regulates actin polymerization for endocytosis via the GEEC pathway . Trafﬁc 8 : 702 – 717 . Chaudhry A , Das SR , Jameel S , George A , Bal V , Mayor S , Rath S . 2007 . A two - pronged mechanism for HIV - 1 Nef - mediated endocytosis of immune costimulatory mole - cules CD80 and CD86 . Cell Host Microbe 1 : 37 – 49 . Cheng ZJ , Singh RD , Holicky EL , Wheatley CL , Marks DL , Pagano RE . 2010 . Co - regulation of caveolar and Cdc42 - dependent ﬂuid phase endocytosis by phospho - caveolin - 1 . J Biol Chem 285 : 15119 – 15125 . Conner SD , Schmid SL . 2003 . Regulated portals of entry into the cell . Nature 422 : 37 – 44 . (cid:2) Cossart P , Helenius A . 2014 . Endocytosis of viruses and bacteria . Cold Spring Harb Perspect Biol doi : 10 . 1101 / cshperspect . a016972 . Damke H , Baba T , Warnock DE , Schmid SL . 1994 . Induc - tion of mutant dynamin speciﬁcally blocks endocytic coated vesicle formation . J Cell Biol 127 : 915 – 934 . Damm EM , Pelkmans L , Kartenbeck J , Mezzacasa A , Kurz - chalia T , Helenius A . 2005 . Clathrin - and caveolin - 1 - in - dependentendocytosis : Entryofsimianvirus40intocells devoid of caveolae . J Cell Biol 168 : 477 – 488 . Di Guglielmo GM , Le Roy C , Goodfellow AF , Wrana JL . 2003 . Distinct endocytic pathways regulate TGF - b recep - tor signalling and turnover . Nat Cell Biol 5 : 410 – 421 . Doherty GJ , McMahon HT . 2009 . Mechanisms of endocy - tosis . Annu Rev Biochem 78 : 857 – 902 . S . Mayor et al . 16 Cite this article as Cold Spring Harb Perspect Biol 2014 ; 6 : a016758 on October 26 , 2017 - Published by Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory Press http : / / cshperspectives . cshlp . org / Downloaded from Doxsey SJ , Brodsky FM , Blank GS , Helenius A . 1987 . Inhi - bition of endocytosis by anti - clathrin antibodies . Cell 50 : 453 – 463 . Doyon JB , Zeitler B , Cheng J , Cheng AT , Cherone JM , San - tiago Y , Lee AH , Vo TD , Doyon Y , Miller JC , et al . 2011 . Rapid and efﬁcient clathrin - mediated endocytosis re - vealed in genome - edited mammalian cells . Nat Cell Biol 13 : 331 – 337 . DrabM , VerkadeP , ElgerM , KasperM , LohnM , Lauterbach B , Menne J , Lindschau C , Mende F , Luft FC , et al . 2001 . Loss of caveolae , vascular dysfunction , and pulmonary defects in caveolin - 1 gene - disrupted mice . Science 9 : 9 . Egami Y , Fukuda M , Araki N . 2011 . Rab35 regulates phag - osomeformationthroughrecruitmentofACAP2inmac - rophages during Fc g R - mediated phagocytosis . J Cell Sci 124 : 3557 – 3567 . Eyster CA , Higginson JD , Huebner R , Porat - Shliom N , Wei - gertR , WuWW , ShenRF , DonaldsonJG . 2009 . Discovery of new cargo proteins that enter cells through clathrin - independent endocytosis . Trafﬁc 10 : 590 – 599 . Eyster CA , Cole NB , Petersen S , Viswanathan K , Fruh K , Donaldson JG . 2011 . MARCH ubiquitin ligases alter the itinerary of clathrin - independent cargo from recy - cling to degradation . Mol Biol Cell 22 : 3218 – 3230 . Fivaz M , Vilbois F , Thurnheer S , Pasquali C , Abrami L , BickelPE , PartonRG , vanderGootFG . 2002 . Differential sorting and fate of endocytosed GPI - anchored proteins . EMBO J 21 : 3989 – 4000 . Flannagan RS , Jaumouille V , Grinstein S . 2012 . The cell biology of phagocytosis . Annu Rev Pathol 7 : 61 – 98 . Frick M , Bright NA , Riento K , Bray A , Merriﬁed C , Nichols BJ . 2007 . Coassembly of ﬂotillins induces formation of membrane microdomains , membrane curvature , and vesicle budding . Curr Biol 17 : 1151 – 1156 . Gaffen SL . 2001 . Signaling domains of the interleukin 2 receptor . Cytokine 14 : 63 – 77 . Galletta BJ , Cooper JA . 2009 . Actin and endocytosis : Mech - anisms and phylogeny . Curr Opin Cell Biol 21 : 20 – 27 . Gauthier NC , Rossier OM , Mathur A , Hone JC , Sheetz MP . 2009 . Plasma membrane area increases with spread area by exocytosis of a GPI - anchored protein compartment . Mol Biol Cell 20 : 3261 – 3272 . Geli MI , Riezman H . 1996 . Role of type I myosins in recep - tor - mediated endocytosis inyeast . Science 272 : 533 – 535 . Gesbert F , Sauvonnet N , Dautry - Varsat A . 2004 . Clathrin - independent endocytosis and signalling of interleukin 2 receptors IL - 2Rendocytosis and signalling . Curr Top Mi - crobiol Immunol 286 : 119 – 148 . Glebov OO , Bright NA , Nichols BJ . 2006 . Flotillin - 1 deﬁnes a clathrin - independent endocytic pathway in mammali - an cells . Nat Cell Biol 8 : 46 – 54 . Gong Q , Weide M , Huntsman C , Xu Z , Jan LY , Ma D . 2007 . Identiﬁcation and characterization of a new class of traf - ﬁckingmotifsforcontrollingclathrin - independentinter - nalization and recycling . J Biol Chem 282 : 13087 – 13097 . Gowrishankar K , Ghosh S , Saha SCR , Mayor S , Rao M . 2012 . Active remodeling of cortical actin regulates spa - tiotemporal organization of cell surface molecules . Cell 149 : 1353 – 1367 . Grant BD , Donaldson JG . 2009 . Pathways and mechanisms ofendocyticrecycling . NatRevMolCellBiol 10 : 597 – 608 . GrantD , UnadkatS , KatzenA , KrishnanKS , RamaswamiM . 1998 . Probable mechanisms underlying interallelic com - plementation and temperature - sensitivity of mutations at the shibire locus of Drosophila melanogaster . Genetics 149 : 1019 – 1030 . Grassart A , Dujeancourt A , Lazarow PB , Dautry - Varsat A , Sauvonnet N . 2008 . Clathrin - independent endocytosis used by the IL - 2 receptor is regulated by Rac1 , Pak1 and Pak2 . EMBO Rep 9 : 356 – 362 . Grassart A , Meas - Yedid V , Dufour A , Olivo - Marin JC , Dau - try - Varsat A , Sauvonnet N . 2010 . Pak1 phosphorylation enhances cortactin - N - WASP interaction in clathrin - cav - eolin - independent endocytosis . Trafﬁc 11 : 1079 – 1091 . Guha A , Sriram V , Krishnan KS , Mayor S . 2003 . Shibire mutationsrevealdistinctdynamin - independentand - de - pendent endocytic pathways in primary cultures of Dro - sophila hemocytes . J Cell Sci 116 : 3373 – 3386 . Gupta GD , Swetha MG , Kumari S , Lakshminarayan R , Dey G , Mayor S . 2009 . Analysis of endocytic pathways in Dro - sophila cells reveals a conserved role for GBF1 in inter - nalization via GEECs . PLoS ONE 4 : e6768 . Hansen CG , Nichols BJ . 2010 . Exploring the caves : Cavins , caveolins and caveolae . Trends Cell Biol 20 : 177 – 186 . HansenCG , HowardG , NicholsBJ . 2011 . Pacsin2isrecruit - ed to caveolae and functions in caveolar biogenesis . J Cell Sci 124 : 2777 – 2785 . Hayer A , StoeberM , Bissig C , Helenius A . 2010a . Biogenesis of caveolae : Stepwiseassemblyoflargecaveolinandcavin complexes . Trafﬁc 11 : 361 – 382 . HayerA , StoeberM , RitzD , EngelS , MeyerHH , HeleniusA . 2010b . Caveolin - 1 is ubiquitinated and targeted to intra - lumenal vesicles in endolysosomes for degradation . J Cell Biol 191 : 615 – 629 . Hemar A , Lieb M , Subtil A , DiSanto JP , Dautry - Varsat A . 1994 . Endocytosis of the b chain of interleukin - 2 recep - tor requires neither interleukin - 2 nor the g chain . Eur J Immunol 24 : 1951 – 1955 . Hemar A , Subtil A , Lieb M , Morelon E , Hellio R , Dautry - Varsat A . 1995 . Endocytosis of interleukin 2 receptors in human T lymphocytes : Distinct intracellular localization and fateof the receptor a , b , and g chains . J Cell Biol 129 : 55 – 64 . Henley JR , Krueger EW , Oswald BJ , McNiven MA . 1998 . Dynamin - mediated internalization of caveolae . J Cell Biol 141 : 85 – 99 . (cid:2) Henne WM , Stenmark H , Emr SD . 2013 . Molecular mech - anisms of the membrane sculpting ESCRT pathway . Cold Spring Harb Perspect Biol 5 : a016766 . Hernandez - Deviez DJ , Howes MT , Laval SH , Bushby K , Hancock JF , Parton RG . 2008 . Caveolin regulates endo - cytosisofthemusclerepairprotein , dysferlin . JBiolChem 283 : 6476 – 6488 . Hill MM , Bastiani M , Luetterforst R , Kirkham M , Kirkham A , Nixon SJ , Walser P , AbankwaD , Oorschot VM , Martin S , et al . 2008 . PTRF - Cavin , a conserved cytoplasmic pro - tein required for caveola formation and function . Cell 132 : 113 – 124 . Howes MT , Kirkham M , Riches J , Cortese K , Walser PJ , Simpson F , Hill MM , Jones A , Lundmark R , Lindsay MR , et al . 2010a . Clathrin - independent carriers form a Clathrin - Independent Pathways of Endocytosis Cite this article as Cold Spring Harb Perspect Biol 2014 ; 6 : a016758 17 on October 26 , 2017 - Published by Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory Press http : / / cshperspectives . cshlp . org / Downloaded from highcapacityendocyticsortingsystemattheleadingedgeofmigratingcells . J Cell Biol 190 : 675 – 691 . Howes MT , Mayor S , Parton RG . 2010b . Molecules , mech - anisms , and cellular roles of clathrin - independent endo - cytosis . Curr Opin Cell Biol 22 : 519 – 527 . Jiang X , Sorkin A . 2003 . Epidermal growth factor receptor internalization through clathrin - coated pits requires Cbl RING ﬁnger and proline - rich domains but not receptor polyubiquitylation . Trafﬁc 4 : 529 – 543 . Johannes L , Mayor S . 2010 . Induced domain formation in endocytic invagination , lipid sorting , and scission . Cell 142 : 507 – 510 . (cid:2) Johannes L , Wunder C , Bassereau . 2014 . Bending “on the rocks”—A cocktail of biophysical modules to build endoyctic pathways . Cold Spring Harb Perspect Biol 6 : a016741 . Kaksonen M , Sun Y , Drubin DG . 2003 . A pathway for asso - ciationofreceptors , adaptors , andactinduringendocytic internalization . Cell 115 : 475 – 487 . KaksonenM , ToretCP , DrubinDG . 2005 . A modulardesign for the clathrin - and actin - mediated endocytosis ma - chinery . Cell 123 : 305 – 320 . Kalia M , Kumari S , Chadda R , Hill MM , Parton RG , Mayor S . 2006 . Arf6 - independent GPI - anchored protein - en - riched early endosomal compartments fuse with sorting endosomes via a Rab5 / phosphatidylinositol - 3 0 - kinase - dependent machinery . Mol Biol Cell 17 : 3689 – 3704 . (cid:2) KirchhausenT , OwenD , HarrisonSC , etal . 2014 . Molecular Structure , Function and Dynamics of Clathrin - Mediated Membrane Trafﬁc . Cold Spring Harb Perspect Biol doi : 10 . 1101 / cshperspect . a016725 . Kirkham M , Fujita A , Chadda R , Nixon SJ , Kurzchalia TV , Sharma DK , Pagano RE , Hancock JF , Mayor S , Parton RG . 2005 . Ultrastructural identiﬁcation of uncoated cav - eolin - independent early endocytic vehicles . J Cell Biol 168 : 465 – 476 . (cid:2) KlumpermanJ , RaposoG . 2014 . Thecomplexultrastructure of the endo - lysosome system . Cold Spring Harb Perspect Biol doi : 10 . 1101 / cshperspect . a016857 . KobayashiH , FukudaM . 2012 . Rab35regulatesArf6activity through centaurin - b 2 ( ACAP2 ) during neurite out - growth . J Cell Sci 125 : 2235 – 2243 . Kouranti I , Sachse M , Arouche N , Goud B , Echard A . 2006 . Rab35 regulates an endocytic recycling pathway essential for the terminal steps of cytokinesis . Curr Biol 16 : 1719 – 1725 . KukulskiW , SchorbM , KaksonenM , BriggsJA . 2012 . Plasma membrane reshaping during endocytosis is revealed by time - resolved electron tomography . Cell 150 : 508 – 520 . Kumari S , Mayor S . 2008 . ARF1is directly involved in dyna - min - independent endocytosis . Nat Cell Biol 10 : 30 – 41 . Kumari S , Borroni V , Chaudhry A , Chanda B , Massol R , Mayor S , Barrantes FJ . 2008 . Nicotinic acetylcholine re - ceptor is internalized via a Rac - dependent , dynamin - independent endocytic pathway . J Cell Biol 181 : 1179 – 1193 . Kumari S , Mg S , Mayor S . 2010 . Endocytosis unplugged : Multiple ways to enter the cell . Cell Res 20 : 256 – 275 . Lamaze C , Dujeancourt A , Baba T , Lo CG , Benmerah A , Dautry - Varsat A . 2001 . Interleukin 2 receptors and de - tergent - resistant membrane domains deﬁne a clathrin - independent endocytic pathway . Mol Cell 7 : 661 – 671 . Liu J , Kaksonen M , Drubin DG , Oster G . 2006 . Endocytic vesicle scission by lipid phase boundary forces . Proc Natl Acad Sci 103 : 10277 – 10282 . Ludwig A , Howard G , Mendoza - Topaz C , Deerinck T , Mackey M , Sandin S , Ellisman MH , Nichols BJ . 2013 . Molecularcompositionandultrastructureofthecaveolarcoatcomplex . PLoS Biol 11 : e1001640 . Lundmark R , Doherty GJ , Howes MT , Cortese K , Vallis Y , Parton RG , McMahon HT . 2008 . The GTPase - activating protein GRAF1 regulates the CLIC / GEEC endocytic pathway . Curr Biol 18 : 1802 – 1808 . Malan D , Elischer A , Hesse M , Wickstrom SA , Fleischmann BK , Bloch W . 2013 . Deletion of integrin linked kinase in endothelialcellsresultsindefectiveRTKsignalingcausedbycaveolin1mislocalization . Development 140 : 987 – 995 . Maldonado - Baez L , Cole NB , Kramer H , Donaldson JG . 2013a . Microtubule - dependent endosomal sorting of clathrin - independent cargo by Hook1 . J Cell Biol 201 : 233 – 247 . Maldonado - Baez L , Williamson C , Donaldson JG . 2013b . Clathrin - independent endocytosis : A cargo - centric view . Exp Cell Res 319 : 2759 – 2769 . Marchiando AM , Shen L , Graham WV , Weber CR , Schwarz BT , Austin JR2nd , Raleigh DR , GuanY , WatsonAJ , Mon - trose MH , et al . 2010 . Caveolin - 1 - dependent occludin endocytosis is required for TNF - induced tight junction regulation in vivo . J Cell Biol 189 : 111 – 126 . Mayor S . 2011 . Need tension relief fast ? Try caveolae . Cell 144 : 323 – 324 . Mayor S , Pagano RE . 2007 . Pathways of clathrin - indepen - dent endocytosis . Nat Rev Mol Cell Biol 8 : 603 – 612 . McIntosh DP , Schnitzer JE . 1999 . Caveolae require intact VAMP for targeted transport in vascular endothelium . Am J Physiol 277 : H2222 – H2232 . McKenzie JE , Raisley B , Zhou X , Naslavsky N , Taguchi T , CaplanS , SheffD . 2012 . RetromerguidesSTxBandCD8 - M6PR from early to recycling endosomes , EHD1 guides STxB from recycling endosome to Golgi . Trafﬁc 13 : 1140 – 1159 . (cid:2) Merriﬁeld CJ , Kaksonen M . 2014 . Endocytic accessory fac - tors and regulation of clathrin - mediated endocytosis . Cold Spring Harb Perspect Biol doi : 10 . 1101 / cshper spect . a016733 . Miaczynska M , Pelkmans L , Zerial M . 2004 . Not just a sink : Endosomes in control of signal transduction . Curr Opin Cell Biol 16 : 400 – 406 . Montesano R , Roth J , Robert A , Orci L . 1982 . Non - coated membrane invaginations are involved in binding and in - ternalization of cholera and tetanus toxins . Nature 296 : 651 – 653 . Moren B , Shah C , Howes MT , Schieber NL , McMahon HT , Parton RG , Daumke O , Lundmark R . 2012 . EHD2 regu - lates caveolar dynamics via ATP - driven targeting and oligomerization . Mol Biol Cell 23 : 1316 – 1329 . Moya M , Dautry - Varsat A , Goud B , Louvard D , Boquet P . 1985 . Inhibition of coated pit formation in Hep2 cells blocks the cytotoxicity of diphtheria toxin but not that of ricin toxin . J Cell Biol 101 : 548 – 559 . S . Mayor et al . 18 Cite this article as Cold Spring Harb Perspect Biol 2014 ; 6 : a016758 on October 26 , 2017 - Published by Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory Press http : / / cshperspectives . cshlp . org / Downloaded from Munn AL , Silveira L , Elgort M , Payne GS . 1991 . Viability of clathrinheavy - chain - deﬁcient Saccharomycescerevisiae is compromised by mutations at numerous loci : Implica - tions for the suppression hypothesis . Mol Cell Biol 11 : 3868 – 3878 . Munn AL , Stevenson BJ , Geli MI , Riezman H . 1995 . end5 , end6 , andend7 : Mutationsthatcauseactindelocalization and block the internalization step of endocytosis in Sac - charomyces cerevisiae . Mol Biol Cell 6 : 1721 – 1742 . Muriel O , Echarri A , Hellriegel C , Pavon DM , Beccari L , Del Pozo MA . 2011 . Phosphorylated ﬁlamin A regulates ac - tin - linked caveolae dynamics . J Cell Sci 124 : 2763 – 2776 . NaslavskyN , CaplanS . 2011 . EHDproteins : Keyconductors of endocytic transport . Trend Cell Biol 21 : 122 – 131 . Naslavsky N , Weigert R , Donaldson JG . 2003 . Convergence of non - clathrin - and clathrin - derived endosomes in - volves Arf6 inactivation and changes in phosphoinositi - des . Mol Biol Cell 14 : 417 – 431 . Naslavsky N , Weigert R , Donaldson JG . 2004 . Characteriza - tion of a nonclathrin endocytic pathway : Membrane car - go and lipid requirements . Mol Biol Cell 15 : 3542 – 3552 . Nishimura Y , Bereczky B , Yoshioka K , Taniguchi S , Itoh K . 2011 . A novel role of Rho - kinase in the regulation of ligand - induced phosphorylated EGFR endocytosis via the early / late endocytic pathway in human ﬁbrosarcoma cells . J Mol Histol 42 : 427 – 442 . Ogata T , Ueyama T , Isodono K , Tagawa M , Takehara N , Kawashima T , Harada K , Takahashi T , Shioi T , Matsubara H , et al . 2008 . MURC , a muscle - restricted coiled - coil protein that modulatesthe Rho / ROCK pathway , induces cardiac dysfunction and conduction disturbance . Mol Cell Biol 28 : 3424 – 3436 . OhP , McIntoshDP , SchnitzerJE . 1998 . Dynaminattheneck of caveolae mediates their budding to form transport vesicles by GTP - driven ﬁssion from the plasma mem - brane of endothelium . J Cell Biol 141 : 101 – 114 . OhP , BorgstromP , WitkiewiczH , LiY , BorgstromBJ , Chras - tina A , Iwata K , Zinn KR , Baldwin R , Testa JE , et al . 2007 . Live dynamic imaging of caveolae pumping targeted an - tibody rapidly and speciﬁcally across endothelium in the lung . Nature Biotechnol 25 : 327 – 337 . Oh P , Horner T , Witkiewicz H , Schnitzer JE . 2012 . Endothe - lin induces rapid , dynamin - mediated budding of endo - thelial caveolae rich in ET - B . J Biol Chem 287 : 17353 – 17362 . Orlichenko L , Weller SG , Cao H , Krueger EW , Awoniyi M , Beznoussenko G , Buccione R , McNiven MA . 2009 . Cav - eolae mediate growth factor - induced disassembly of ad - herens junctions to support tumor cell dissociation . Mol Biol Cell 20 : 4140 – 4152 . Otto GP , Nichols BJ . 2011 . The roles of ﬂotillin microdo - mains—Endocytosis and beyond . J Cell Sci 124 : 3933 – 3940 . Park DS , Woodman SE , Schubert W , Cohen AW , Frank PG , Chandra M , Shirani J , Razani B , Tang B , Jelicks LA , et al . 2002 . Caveolin - 1 / 3double - knockoutmiceareviable , but lackbothmuscleandnon - musclecaveolae , anddevelopa severe cardiomyopathic phenotype . Am J Pathol 160 : 2207 – 2217 . Parton RG , Del Pozo MA . 2013 . Caveolae as plasma mem - brane sensors , protectors , and organizers . Nat Rev Mol Cell Biol 14 : 98 – 112 . Parton RG , Joggerst B , Simons K . 1994 . Regulated internal - ization of caveolae . J Cell Biol 127 : 1199 – 1215 . Payne GS . 1990 . Genetic analysis of clathrin function in yeast . J Membr Biol 116 : 93 – 105 . Pelkmans L , Zerial M . 2005 . Kinase - regulated quantal as - semblies and kiss - and - run recycling of caveolae . Nature 436 : 128 – 133 . Pelkmans L , Kartenbeck J , Helenius A . 2001 . Caveolar en - docytosis of simianvirus 40 reveals a new two - step vesic - ular - transport pathway to the ER . Nat Cell Biol 3 : 473 – 483 . Pelkmans L , Burli T , Zerial M , Helenius A . 2004 . Caveolin - stabilized membrane domains as multifunctional trans - port and sorting devices in endocytic membrane trafﬁc . Cell 118 : 767 – 780 . Piper RC , Lehner PJ . 2011 . Endosomal transport via ubiq - uitination . Trend Cell Biol 21 : 647 – 655 . Powelka AM , Sun J , Li J , Gao M , Shaw LM , Sonnenberg A , Hsu VW . 2004 . Stimulation - dependent recycling of in - tegrin b 1 regulated by ARF6 and Rab11 . Trafﬁc 5 : 20 – 36 . Puri C . 2009 . Loss of myosin VI no insert isoform ( NoI ) induces a defect in clathrin - mediated endocytosis and leads to caveolar endocytosis of transferrin receptor . J Biol Chem 284 : 34998 – 35014 . Pust S , Dyve AB , Torgersen ML , van Deurs B , Sandvig K . 2010 . Interplay between toxin transport and ﬂotillin lo - calization . PLoS ONE 5 : e8844 . Radhakrishna H , Donaldson JG . 1997 . ADP - ribosylation factor 6 regulates a novel plasma membrane recycling pathway . J Cell Biol 139 : 49 – 61 . Riento K , Frick M , Schafer I , Nichols BJ . 2009 . Endocytosis of ﬂotillin - 1 and ﬂotillin - 2 is regulated by Fyn kinase . J Cell Sci 122 : 912 – 918 . Ritter TE , Fajardo O , Matsue H , Anderson RG , Lacey SW . 1995 . Folate receptors targeted to clathrin - coated pits cannot regulate vitamin uptake . Proc Natl Acad Sci 92 : 3824 – 3828 . Rocca A , Lamaze C , Subtil A , Dautry - Varsat A . 2001 . In - volvement of the ubiquitin / proteasome system in sorting of the interleukin 2 receptor b chain to late endocytic compartments . Mol Biol Cell 12 : 1293 – 1301 . Romer W , Berland L , Chambon V , Gaus K , Windschiegl B , Tenza D , Aly MR , Fraisier V , Florent JC , Perrais D , et al . 2007 . Shiga toxin induces tubular membrane invagina - tions for its uptake into cells . Nature 450 : 670 – 675 . RomerW , PontaniLL , SorreB , RenteroC , BerlandL , Cham - bon V , Lamaze C , Bassereau P , Sykes C , Gaus K , et al . 2010 . Actin dynamics drive membrane reorganization and scission in clathrin - independent endocytosis . Cell 140 : 540 – 553 . Saavedra L , Mohamed A , Ma V , Kar S , de Chaves EP . 2007 . Internalizationof b - amyloidpeptidebyprimaryneurons in the absence of apolipoprotein E . J Biol Chem 282 : 35722 – 35732 . Sabharanjak S , Mayor S . 2004 . Folate receptor endocytosis and trafﬁcking . Adv Drug Deliv Rev 56 : 1099 – 1109 . Sabharanjak S , Sharma P , Parton RG , Mayor S . 2002 . GPI - anchored proteins are delivered to recycling endosomes via a distinct cdc42 - regulated , clathrin - independent pi - nocytic pathway . Dev Cell 2 : 411 – 423 . Clathrin - Independent Pathways of Endocytosis Cite this article as Cold Spring Harb Perspect Biol 2014 ; 6 : a016758 19 on October 26 , 2017 - Published by Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory Press http : / / cshperspectives . cshlp . org / Downloaded from SandvigK , vanDeursB . 1994 . Endocytosiswithoutclathrin . Trend Cell Biol 4 : 275 – 277 . Sandvig K , Torgersen ML , Raa HA , van Deurs B . 2008 . Clathrin - independent endocytosis : From nonexisting to an extreme degree of complexity . Histochem Cell Biol 129 : 267 – 276 . Santy LC , Casanova JE . 2001 . Activation of ARF6 by ARNO stimulates epithelial cell migration through downstream activation of both Rac1 and phospholipase D . J Cell Biol 154 : 599 – 610 . Saslowsky DE , Cho JA , Chinnapen H , Massol RH , Chin - napen DJ , Wagner JS , De Luca HE , Kam W , Paw BH , Lencer WI . 2010 . Intoxication of zebraﬁsh and mamma - lian cells by cholera toxin depends on the ﬂotillin / reggie proteins but not Derlin - 1 or - 2 . J Clin Invest 120 : 4399 – 4409 . Sato M , Sato K , Liou W , Pant S , Harada A , Grant BD . 2008 . Regulation of endocytic recycling by C . elegans Rab35 and its regulator RME - 4 , a coated - pit protein . EMBO J 27 : 1183 – 1196 . Schnitzer JE , Liu J , Oh P . 1995 . Endothelial caveolae have the molecular transport machinery for vesicle budding , docking , and fusion including VAMP , NSF , SNAP , annex - ins , and GTPases . J Biol Chem 270 : 14399 – 14404 . Senju Y , Itoh Y , Takano K , Hamada S , Suetsugu S . 2011 . Essential role of PACSIN2 / syndapin - II in caveolae mem - brane sculpting . J Cell Sci 124 : 2032 – 2040 . Sharma P , Varma R , Sarasij RC , Ira , Gousset K , Krishna - moorthy G , Rao M , Mayor S . 2004 . Nanoscale organiza - tion of multiple GPI - anchored proteins in living cell membranes . Cell 116 : 577 – 589 . ShiA , LiuO , KoenigS , BanerjeeR , ChenCC , EimerS , Grant BD . 2012 . RAB - 10 - GTPase - mediatedregulationofendo - somal phosphatidylinositol - 4 , 5 - bisphosphate . Proc Natl Acad Sci 109 : E2306 – E2315 . SigismundS , WoelkT , PuriC , MasperoE , TacchettiC , Tran - sidico P , Di Fiore PP , Polo S . 2005 . Clathrin - independent endocytosis of ubiquitinated cargos . Proc Natl Acad Sci 102 : 2760 – 2765 . Sigismund S , Argenzio E , Tosoni D , Cavallaro E , Polo S , Di Fiore PP . 2008 . Clathrin - mediated internalization is es - sential for sustained EGFR signaling but dispensable for degradation . Dev Cell 15 : 209 – 219 . Sigismund S , Algisi V , Nappo G , Conte A , Pascolutti R , Cuomo A , Bonaldi T , Argenzio E , Verhoef LG , Maspero E , et al . 2013 . Threshold - controlled ubiquitination of the EGFR directs receptor fate . EMBO J 32 : 2140 – 2157 . Simionescu M , Gafencu A , Antohe F . 2002 . Transcytosis of plasma macromolecules in endothelial cells : A cell bio - logical survey . Microsc Res Tech 57 : 269 – 288 . SinhaB , KosterD , RuezR , GonnordP , BastianiM , Abankwa D , Stan RV , Butler - Browne G , Vedie B , Johannes L , et al . 2011 . Cells respond to mechanical stress by rapid disas - sembly of caveolae . Cell 144 : 402 – 413 . Song J , Khachikian Z , Radhakrishna H , Donaldson JG . 1998 . Localization of endogenous ARF6 to sites of corti - cal actin rearrangement and involvement of ARF6 in cell spreading . J Cell Sci 111 : 2257 – 2267 . Spoden G , Freitag K , Husmann M , Boller K , Sapp M , Lam - bert C , Florin L . 2008 . Clathrin - and caveolin - indepen - dent entry of human papillomavirus type 16—Involve - ment of tetraspanin - enriched microdomains ( TEMs ) . PLoS ONE 3 : e3313 . Stachowiak JC , Schmid EM , Ryan CJ , Ann HS , Sasaki DY , Sherman MB , Geissler PL , Fletcher DA , Hayden CC . 2012 . Membrane bending by protein - protein crowding . Nat Cell Biol 14 : 944 – 949 . Stang E , Kartenbeck J , Parton RG . 1997 . Major histocom - patibility complex class I molecules mediate association of SV40 with caveolae . Mol Biol Cell 8 : 47 – 57 . Stoeber M , Stoeck IK , Hanni C , Bleck CK , Balistreri G , Helenius A . 2012 . Oligomers of the ATPase EHD2 con - ﬁne caveolae to the plasma membrane through associa - tion with actin . EMBO J 31 : 2350 – 2364 . Subtil A , Hemar A , Dautry - Varsat A . 1994 . Rapid endocy - tosis of interleukin 2 receptors when clathrin - coated pit endocytosis is inhibited . J Cell Sci 107 : 3461 – 3468 . Sverdlov M , Shinin V , Place AT , Castellon M , Minshall RD . 2009 . Filamin A regulates caveolae internalization and trafﬁcking in endothelial cells . Mol Biol Cell 20 : 4531 – 4540 . Tagawa M , Ueyama T , Ogata T , Takehara N , Nakajima N , Isodono K , Asada S , Takahashi T , Matsubara H , Oh H . 2008 . MURC , a muscle - restricted coiled - coil protein , is involved in the regulation of skeletal myogenesis . Am J Physiol Cell Physiol 295 : C490 – C498 . Tan PK , Davis NG , Sprague GF , Payne GS . 1993 . Clathrin facilitates the internalization of seven transmembrane segment receptors for mating pheromones in yeast . J Cell Biol 123 : 1707 – 1716 . Thomsen P , Roepstorff K , Stahlhut M , van Deurs B . 2002 . Caveolae are highly immobile plasma membrane micro - domains , which are not involved in constitutive endo - cytic trafﬁcking . Mol Biol Cell 13 : 238 – 250 . TimpsonP , LynchDK , SchramekD , WalkerF , DalyRJ . 2005 . Cortactin overexpression inhibits ligand - induced down - regulation of the epidermal growth factor receptor . Can - cer Res 65 : 3273 – 3280 . Toret CP , Drubin DG . 2006 . The budding yeast endocytic pathway . J Cell Sci 119 : 4585 – 4587 . Tran D , Carpentier JL , Sawano F , Gorden P , Orci L . 1987 . Ligandsinternalizedthroughcoatedornoncoatedinvag - inations follow a common intracellular pathway . Proc Natl Acad Sci 84 : 7957 – 7961 . Way M , Parton RG . 1995 . M - caveolin , a muscle - speciﬁc caveolin - related protein . FEBS Lett 376 : 108 – 112 . Weigert R , Yeung AC , Li J , Donaldson JG . 2004 . Rab22a regulatestherecyclingofmembraneproteinsinternalizedindependentlyofclathrin . Mol Biol Cell 15 : 3758 – 3770 . Weinberg J , Drubin DG . 2012 . Clathrin - mediated endocy - tosis in budding yeast . Trend Cell Biol 22 : 1 – 13 . Wickstrom SA , Lange A , Hess MW , Polleux J , Spatz JP , Kru - ger M , Pfaller K , Lambacher A , Bloch W , Mann M , et al . 2010 . Integrin - linked kinase controls microtubule dy - namics required for plasma membrane targeting of cav - eolae . Dev Cell 19 : 574 – 588 . Zimmermann P , TomatisD , RosasM , GrootjansJ , Leenaerts I , Degeest G , Reekmans G , Coomans C , David G . 2001 . Characterization of syntenin , a syndecan - binding PDZ protein , as acomponentof celladhesion sites and micro - ﬁlaments . Mol Biol Cell 12 : 339 – 350 . S . Mayor et al . 20 Cite this article as Cold Spring Harb Perspect Biol 2014 ; 6 : a016758 on October 26 , 2017 - Published by Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory Press http : / / cshperspectives . cshlp . org / Downloaded from 2014 ; doi : 10 . 1101 / cshperspect . a016758 Cold Spring Harb Perspect Biol Satyajit Mayor , Robert G . Parton and Julie G . Donaldson Clathrin - Independent Pathways of Endocytosis Subject Collection Endocytosis Endocytosis : Past , Present , and Future ZerialSandra L . Schmid , Alexander Sorkin and Marino Clathrin - Mediated Endocytosis Imaging and Modeling the Dynamics of Marcel Mettlen and Gaudenz Danuser Endosomal System Rab Proteins and the Compartmentalization of the Angela Wandinger - Ness and Marino Zerial Clathrin - Mediated Endocytosis Endocytic Accessory Factors and Regulation of Christien J . Merrifield and Marko Kaksonen Regulator of Cell Polarity and Tissue Dynamics Cargo Sorting in the Endocytic Pathway : A Key Suzanne Eaton and Fernando Martin - Belmonte SystemThe Complex Ultrastructure of the Endolysosomal Judith Klumperman and Graça Raposo Links to Human Disease Cytoskeleton , Cell Cycle , Nucleus , and Beyond : and Other Endocytic Regulators in the Unconventional Functions for Clathrin , ESCRTs , et al . Frances M . Brodsky , R . Thomas Sosa , Joel A . Ybe , Lysosome - Related Organelles The Biogenesis of Lysosomes and Dieckmann , et al . J . Paul Luzio , Yvonne Hackmann , Nele M . G . Endocytosis of Viruses and Bacteria Pascale Cossart and Ari Helenius Endocytosis , Signaling , and Beyond Pier Paolo Di Fiore and Mark von Zastrow Responds to External Cues Lysosomal Adaptation : How the Lysosome Carmine Settembre and Andrea Ballabio Clathrin - Independent Pathways of Endocytosis DonaldsonSatyajit Mayor , Robert G . Parton and Julie G . MetabolismReciprocal Regulation of Endocytosis and Amira Klip Costin N . Antonescu , Timothy E . McGraw and SignalingThe Role of Endocytosis during Morphogenetic Marcos Gonzalez - Gaitan and Frank Jülicher Cooperation ? Endocytosis and Autophagy : Exploitation or Sharon A . Tooze , Adi Abada and Zvulun Elazar DiseaseRole of Endosomes and Lysosomes in Human Frederick R . Maxfield http : / / cshperspectives . cshlp . org / cgi / collection / For additional articles in this collection , see Copyright © 2014 Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory Press ; all rights reserved on October 26 , 2017 - Published by Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory Press http : / / cshperspectives . cshlp . org / Downloaded from