Phase separation and critical size in molecular sorting Elisa Floris , 1 , ∗ Andrea Piras , 2 , ∗ Francesco Saverio Pezzicoli , 3 , ∗ Marco Zamparo , 4 , 5 Luca Dall’Asta , 1 , 6 , 5 , 2 , † and Andrea Gamba 1 , 5 , 2 , ‡ 1 Institute of Condensed Matter Physics and Complex Systems , Department of Applied Science and Technology , Politecnico di Torino , Corso Duca degli Abruzzi 24 , 10129 Torino , Italy 2 Italian Institute for Genomic Medicine ( IIGM ) and Candiolo Cancer Institute IRCCS , str . prov . 142 , km 3 . 95 , Candiolo ( TO ) 10060 , Italy 3 Laboratoire Interdisciplinaire des Sciences du Numérique ( LISN ) , Université Paris - Saclay , Gif - sur - Yvette , Île - de - France , France 4 Dipartimento di Fisica , Università degli Studi di Bari , via Amendola 173 , 70126 Bari , Italy 5 Istituto Nazionale di Fisica Nucleare ( INFN ) , Italy 6 Collegio Carlo Alberto , Piazza Arbarello 8 , 10122 , Torino , Italy Molecular sorting is a fundamental process that allows eukaryotic cells to distill and concentrate speciﬁc chemical factors in appropriate cell membrane subregions , thus endowing them with diﬀerent chemical identities and functional properties . A phenomenological theory of this molecular distilla - tion process has recently been proposed [ 1 ] , based on the idea that molecular sorting emerges from the combination of : a ) phase - separation - driven formation of sorting domains , and b ) domain - induced membrane bending , leading to the production of submicrometric lipid vesicles enriched in the sorted molecules . In this framework , a natural parameter controlling the eﬃciency of molecular distilla - tion is the critical size of phase - separated domains . In the experiments , sorting domains appear to fall into two classes : unproductive domains , characterized by short lifetimes and low probability of extraction , and productive domains , that evolve into vesicles that ultimately detach from the mem - brane system . It is tempting to link these two classes to the diﬀerent fates predicted by classical phase separation theory for subcritical and supercritical phase - separated domains . Here , we discuss the implication of this picture in the framework of the previously introduced phenomenological the - ory of molecular sorting . Several predictions of the theory are veriﬁed by numerical simulations of a lattice - gas model . Sorting is observed to be most eﬃcient when the number of sorting domains is close to a minimum . To help in the analysis of experimental data , an operational deﬁnition of the critical size of sorting domains is proposed . Comparison with experimental results shows that the statistical properties of productive / unproductive domains inferred from experimental data are in agreement with those predicted from numerical simulations of the model , compatibly with the hypothesis that molecular sorting is driven by a phase separation process . I . INTRODUCTION Molecular sorting is a major process responsible for the organization of cellular matter in eukaryotic cells [ 2 ] . This highly complex task is accomplished by selectively concentrating and distilling speciﬁc proteins and lipids that dwell on the plasma membrane and on the mem - branes of inner cellular bodies into submicrometric lipid vesicles . Once formed , these vesicles detach from the membrane and are subsequently delivered to their ap - propriate destinations . It has recently been proposed that molecular sorting may emerge from the combina - tion of two fundamental physical processes [ 1 ] : a ) phase separation of speciﬁc molecules into localized sorting do - mains , and b ) domain - induced membrane bending , lead - ing to the formation of vesicles constitutively enriched in the biochemical factors of the engulfed domains , thus resulting in a natural distillation process . In the pro - posed abstract model of the process , molecules arriving ∗ These authors contributed equally . † luca . dallasta @ polito . it ‡ andrea . gamba @ polito . it on a membrane region can laterally diﬀuse and aggregate into localized domains , whose formation and growth oc - curs through the typical stages of phase separation : after the initial nucleation stage , in the case of low supersat - uration , the growth of domains is mainly governed by the absorption of freely diﬀusing molecules . One of the main predictions of the classical theory of phase separa - tion is that a critical size A c has to be reached in order for domains to survive and continue to grow irreversibly to larger and larger scales [ 3 , 4 ] . In the present theory of molecular distillation such domains are extracted once they reach a characteristic size A E (cid:29) A c , determined by the physical and biomolecular processes that induce membrane bending and vesicle formation . In the pres - ence of a constant ﬂux of incoming molecules , the mem - brane system selforganizes in a driven non - equilibrium stationary state , which can be seen as a realization in Nature of the classical Szilard’s model of droplet forma - tion [ 4 – 6 ] . Phase separation phenomena are emerging as central drivers of the selforganization of cell structures [ 7 – 11 ] , and the idea that phase separation is an essential step for molecular sorting is increasingly ﬁnding support in recent studies [ 12 – 16 ] . As advances in live - cell imaging have en - a r X i v : 2 2 05 . 03337v2 [ c ond - m a t . s o f t ] 1 5 A ug 2022 2 abled more accurate observations in real time , a striking heterogeneity in domain growth kinetics has emerged , and several approaches to unambiguously classify dif - ferent dynamic populations have been proposed [ 17 – 22 ] . In the experiments , a crucial parameter used to describe the sorting process is the lifetime of a sorting domain . It has been recently shown that the lifetime of a sort - ing domain is related to the domain stability , which in its turn depends on the number of molecules contained in the domain , and thus on the domain size [ 23 ] . It is therefore tempting to relate the existence , in the context of phase separation , of a critical size for domain growth , to the observation that sorting domains on cell mem - branes can undergo qualitatively diﬀerent ﬁnal fates . As a matter of fact , sorting domains are commonly classiﬁed in two groups : productive domains , if their growth even - tually terminates in the nucleation of a vesicle which is ultimately detached from the membrane , and unproduc - tive ( or abortive ) domains which , instead , progressively dismantle and are ultimately dissolved [ 18 , 22 , 24 ] . It seems natural to interpret this distinction in the context of classical nucleation theory , where the fate of a domain results from the balance between bulk stabilization and the propensity to dismantle along the domain boundary , which in its turn is controlled by the value of a char - acteristic boundary tension [ 3 , 11 , 25 ] . As a result , cir - cular domains ( that minimize the boundary perimeter ) are favored , subcritical domains ( having size A < A c ) have short lifetimes and a low probability of reaching the extraction size A E , while supercritical domains have a high probability of being ultimately extracted . Here we discuss the implications of this picture in the frame - work of the phenomenological theory of molecular sort - ing introduced in Ref . 1 . Several predictions of the phe - nomenological theory are veriﬁed by extensive numerical simulations of a lattice - gas model . To help in the anal - ysis of experimental data , we introduce an operational deﬁnition of critical size , and discuss its relation to re - cently introduced methods for the classiﬁcation of do - main formation events into productive and unproductive classes [ 22 ] . The operational deﬁnition is used here to compare the predictions of our phenomenological theory of molecular sorting to experiments on the formation of productive and unproductive clathrin - coated pits at the plasma membrane . However , the proposed framework is more general , and we expect that it can turn useful in the interpretation of experiments on molecular sorting at diﬀerent membrane regions , such as sorting endosomes , or the Golgi complex . A direct comparison with exper - imental results shows that the statistical properties of productive / unproductive domains inferred from experi - mental data are in good qualitative agreement with those emerging from simulations performed in some speciﬁc pa - rameter regions . These results hint at a central role of phase separation , and of the related notions of boundary tension and critical size , in the processes of molecular sorting that control the establishment and maintenance of distinct chemical identities on cell membranes . II . PHENOMENOLOGICAL THEORY We brieﬂy summarize here the phenomenological the - ory of phase - separation - driven molecular sorting intro - duced in Ref . [ 1 ] , and set up a convenient notation in view of the present discussion . The theory is based on the fol - lowing non - equilibrium steady - state picture : a constant ﬂux φ of “sortable” cargo molecules is deposited on the lipid membrane ; each molecule occupies a characteristic area A 0 on the membrane , diﬀuses laterally , and can ag - gregate into sorting domains with the help of a pool of specialized auxiliary molecules , which sustain “active” do - main formation by triggering localized positive feedback loops [ 10 , 11 , 26 ] , and / or “passive” aggregation , driven by weak attractive intermolecular interactions [ 7 , 27 ] . Since domain formation is characterized by competing eﬀects , according to classical nucleation theory , a critical size A c is required for a domain to continue to grow irreversibly and avoid decay [ 3 , 28 , 29 ] . Once formed , sorting do - mains coarsen due to the incoming ﬂux of laterally dif - fusing molecules , and are eventually extracted from the membrane in the form of lipid vesicles of characteristic area A E = mA 0 . It follows that the growing domains co - exist with a continuously repleted two - dimensional “gas” of laterally diﬀusing molecules in a statistically station - ary state . If we consider a region of linear size L of the order of the average interdomain half distance , centered around a growing supercritical domain of approximately circu - lar shape and radius R , the quasi - static proﬁle n R ( r ) of the density of the gas of freely diﬀusing molecules in the proximity of the domain can be approximately obtained by solving a Laplace equation with Dirichlet boundary conditions n R ( R ) = n 0 and n R ( L ) = ¯ n , obtaining n R ( r ) = n 0 + log ( r / R ) log ( L / R ) ∆ n , ( 1 ) where r ≥ R denotes the distance from the domain cen - ter , and ∆ n = ¯ n − n 0 . Domain growth is induced by the ﬂux Φ A of molecules from the gas to the domain , which can be calculated by integrating the ﬂux density − D ∇ n R ( r ) across the boundary of the domain of size A = πR 2 , obtaining Φ A = 4 πD ∆ n log ( A L / A ) ( 2 ) where D is the lateral diﬀusivity of the molecules . This formula implies that the domain will grow according to the dynamic equation ˙ A = 4 πA 0 D ∆ n log ( A L / A ) . ( 3 ) In a membrane system where sorting domains may be assumed to be approximately evenly distributed , the statistics of supercritical domains can be conveniently de - scribed in terms of the number density N ( t , A ) d A , giving 3 the average number per unit membrane area of supercrit - ical domains with size comprised between A and A + d A . Since the eﬀects of random ﬂuctuations can be approx - imately neglected in the case of supercritical domains , N ( A , t ) satisﬁes the continuity equation ∂N ∂t + ∂ ∂A ( ˙ AN ) + γ ( A ) N = 0 , ( 4 ) where the rate of removal of domains of size A from the system is γ ( A ) = 0 for A < A E , and γ ( A ) = γ 0 > 0 for A > A E . The stationary solution of Eq . ( 4 ) , N st ( A ) = J log ( A L / A ) 4 πD ∆ n exp (cid:34) − (cid:90) A A c γ ( a ) log ( A L / a ) 4 πA 0 D ∆ n d a (cid:35) ( 5 ) has a universal logarithmic behavior for A < A E . The normalization constant J can be determined from the steady state condition φ = (cid:90) ∞ A c Φ A N st ( A ) d A (cid:39) JA E ( 6 ) for large γ 0 and A E (cid:29) A c . Assuming that the incoming ﬂux φ of molecules is evenly distributed in average among all available supercritical sorting domains , and neglecting logarithmic corrections , the average number of supercrit - ical domains per unit area is given by ¯ N d ∼ φ Φ A ∼ φ D ∆ n . ( 7 ) Numerical observations suggest that faster responses of the membrane system to changing environmental condi - tions are related to shorter residence times of the sorted molecules on the membrane in the steady - state [ 1 ] . It is therefore interesting to investigate under which para - metric conditions this residence time can be minimized . From the moment of insertion to the moment of extrac - tion , molecules spend an average time ¯ T f diﬀusing freely and an average time ¯ T d attached to supercritical sorting domains . In principle , for the molecules that aggregate in the initial stage of the domain formation process , when the domain is still subcritical , one should also consider the time spent in the subcritical stage , but this is gener - ally negligible if the critical size is small . In the following , repeated use will be made of a gen - eral steady - state relation , which applies to open systems in a driven non - equilibrium stationary state [ 30 ] : the av - erage density of molecules in the system is given by the product of the average density ﬂux of molecules ( enter - ing or leaving the system ) and the average time that a molecule spends in the system . According to this general relation , the steady - state average density of molecules that are freely diﬀusing as a two - dimensional gas on the membrane is ¯ n = φ ¯ T f . ( 8 ) The same steady - state relation can be applied to the av - erage density ¯ N d of supercritical domains that are gener - ated and ultimately extracted from the membrane , giving ¯ N d = d ¯ N d d t ¯ T d = φ m ¯ T d . ( 9 ) On the other hand , since each new domain starts its ag - gregation process from the encounter of two freely diﬀus - ing molecules , one can write ( see also App . A ) d ¯ N d d t = CD ¯ n 2 , ( 10 ) where C is a dimensionless proportionality constant mea - suring the strength of the eﬀective interaction that keeps molecules together in a sorting domain . Combining ( 8 ) , ( 9 ) and ( 10 ) , the following steady - state relations are ob - tained : ¯ n ∼ (cid:18) φ m CD (cid:19) 1 / 2 , ( 11 ) ¯ T f = ¯ n φ ∼ ( m C Dφ ) − 1 / 2 . ( 12 ) For approximately absorbing domains , n 0 (cid:28) ∆ n and ∆ n ∼ ¯ n , therefore ( 7 ) , ( 9 ) and ( 10 ) give : ¯ N d ∼ (cid:18) m Cφ D (cid:19) 1 / 2 ∼ m C ¯ n , ( 13 ) ¯ T d ∼ C m 2 ¯ n φ ∼ (cid:18) C m 3 D φ (cid:19) 1 / 2 . ( 14 ) The average time spent by molecules in the system is approximately ¯ T = ¯ T d + ¯ T f , which is minimum for ¯ T f + ¯ T d = ¯ T opt ∼ (cid:18) m D φ (cid:19) 1 / 2 . ( 15 ) The optimal value ¯ T opt is obtained for C = C opt ∼ 1 m 2 . ( 16 ) For this value , the average number densities of gas molecules and of supercritical domains are : ¯ n opt ∼ (cid:18) φA E DA 0 (cid:19) 1 / 2 , ¯ N d , opt ∼ (cid:18) φ m D (cid:19) 1 / 2 . ( 17 ) III . NUMERICAL VALIDATION In a minimal lattice - gas model of the distillation process , the lipid membrane is modelled as a two - dimensional square lattice with periodic boundary con - ditions , where each site can be occupied by a single molecule at most [ 1 ] . The system evolves according to 4 ( a ) ( b ) ( c ) ( d ) ( e ) g = 3 g = 10 g = 30 g = 10 2 g = 10 4 Figure 1 . Snapshots of conﬁgurations of the lattice - gas model of molecular sorting for a system of 400 2 sites in the steady state , with incoming ﬂux φ / k D = 10 − 6 and increasing values of the interaction strength g ( from left to right ) . In the central panel the interaction strength is close to the optimal value g opt = 31 . a Markov process consisting of the following three ele - mentary events : 1 ) insertion : molecules from an inﬁ - nite reservoir arrive and are inserted on empty sites with rate k I ; 2 ) diﬀusion and aggregation : molecules can per - form diﬀusive jumps to an empty neighboring site with rate k D / g N nn , where g > 1 is a dimensionless parame - ter representing the interaction strength , and N nn is the number of neighboring molecules of the hopping molecule before the jump occurs ; 3 ) extraction : molecules are ex - tracted from the system by simultaneously removing all connected clusters of molecules that contain a completely ﬁlled square of size m . In what follows , A 0 = 1 , i . e . areas are measured as numbers of lattice sites , and m = 10 2 . In every simulation , the system is allowed to relax to the steady state before starting the collection of relevant statistical data . One of the main observations of Ref . 1 is that both the average permanence time ¯ T of sorted molecules on the membrane system and the average molecule density ρ in the steady state are minimal in an intermediate , optimal range of values of the interaction strength g , where the molecular distillation process is most eﬃcient . Snapshots of the simulations taken in the steady state show the typ - ical behavior of the system both inside and outside of this optimal range ( Fig . 1 ) . For low interaction strength , molecular crowding accompanied by a hectic formation of small short - lived domains is observed ( Fig . 1 ( a ) ) . As the interaction strength increases , the density of freely diﬀusing molecules decreases ( Fig . 1 ( b - d ) ) . Consistently with the predictions of the phenomenological theory , the molecular density ρ and residence time ¯ T are lower in this intermediate range , and reach a minimum in correspon - dence with the optimal value of the interaction strength g ( Ref . 1 and Fig . 1 ( c ) ) . When the interaction strength be - comes much larger than its optimal value , the gas of free molecules is strongly depleted , and the system enters into a regime of domain crowding ( Fig . 1 ( d ) ) . Here , a large number of sorting domains shares the incoming molecular ﬂux , the growth of each sorting domain is slowed down , and the eﬃciency of the distillation process is impaired , as both the molecular density and molecular residence time are much larger than in the optimal region . For very high values of the microscopic interaction strength g , the formation of highly irregular domains of the type pre - dicted by the theory of diﬀusion - limited aggregation [ 31 ] is observed ( Fig . 1 ( e ) ) . This latter regime is unlikely to correspond to physiological sorting , but could be related to pathological conditions where high intermolecular in - teraction strength induced by mutations promote the for - mation of irregular , solid - like aggregates associated to de - generative deseases [ 32 , 33 ] . Similar behaviors have also been observed in experiments , where overexpression of adaptor proteins responsible for mediating intermolecu - lar interactions leads to the formation of large and ir - regularly shaped sorting domains [ 34 ] . In summary , for varying values of the interaction strength g , our abstract model recapitulates two main phenomenologies . At low and intermediate values of the interaction strength g , the simulated dynamics is characterized by the formation of approximately circular sorting domains via nucleation and coarsening , compatibly with the phenomenology of liquid - liquid phase separation observed in several impor - tant biological processes [ 7 – 9 ] . For very large g instead , domain remodeling is impaired and a DLA phenomenol - ogy [ 31 ] is recovered , which may possibly describe the features of pathological processes . A precise characteri - zation of the crossover between these two regimes will be the matter of future investigation . Numerical simulations conﬁrm the validity of the scal - ing laws ρ opt ∼ φ a , ¯ n opt ∼ φ b and ¯ T opt ∼ φ − c , as the nu - merically obtained values a = 0 . 48 , b = 0 . 46 and c = 0 . 52 are in good agreement with the theoretical predictions a = b = c = 1 / 2 [ 1 ] , that were derived under simplifying assumptions . In addition to these former results , other predictions of the phenomenological theory can be veriﬁed numerically using the microscopic lattice - gas model . The previously exposed phenomenological theory is valid in the regime where supercritical domains are well separated objects , with a well deﬁned value of the average interdomain half distance ¯ L . Since the number of supercritical domains scales as ¯ N d ∼ φ 1 / 2 , and π ¯ L 2 ¯ N d ≈ 1 , it is expected that ¯ L ∼ φ − 1 / 4 . This scaling law can be veriﬁed numerically in the following way . First , the center of mass of each 5 10 8 10 7 10 6 Incoming flux / k D 10 1 10 2 I n t e r d o m a i n h a l f d i s t a n c e L 0 2 4 Domain half distance L / L 0 . 0 0 . 5 1 . 0 1 . 5 2 . 0 F r e q u e n c y d e n s i t y / k D = 10 8 / k D = 3 10 8 / k D = 10 7 / k D = 3 10 7 / k D = 10 6 1 2 0 1 ( a ) ( b ) ( c ) Figure 2 . ( a ) Nearest - neighbor distances between simulated sorting domains are highlighted in red in a snapshot from a simulation performed with incoming ﬂux φ / k D = 10 − 7 and interaction strength g = 10 2 . ( b ) Scaling of the optimal values of the average interdomain half distance . The red line is a ﬁt with the power law φ − a , with a = 0 . 23 . ( c ) The frequency density and cumulative frequency distribution ( inset ) for the rescaled half distances L / ¯ L for varying values of the incoming ﬂux φ / k D collapse on a single universal frequency distribution . domain is computed . A critical size is determined using the operational deﬁnition given in the following Sect . IV . Domains with size smaller than the critical size are ne - glected . The nearest neighbour of each domain is found ( Fig . 2 ( a ) ) . Finally , the distances between nearest neigh - bors and the corresponding statistical measures are com - puted . The numerical values of the average interdomain half distance ¯ L obtained by this method follow a scaling law ¯ L ∼ φ − d with d = 0 . 23 , close to the theoretically pre - dicted value d = 1 / 4 ( Fig . 2 ( b ) ) . When the mean value ¯ L is used to rescale the interdomain half distances , the corresponding frequency distributions for diﬀerent values of φ collapse on a single universal distribution ( Fig . 2 ( c ) ) . Several results of the phenomenological theory stem from the assumption that the steady - state proﬁle of molecule density around a sorting domain has the log - arithmic form ( 1 ) , and from the related idea that the membrane region can be divided into “attraction basins” of linear size ∼ L pertaining to distinct sorting domains . Given the approximate nature of these hypotheses , it is interesting to check their validity by direct numerical simulations . A convenient way to computationally de - ﬁne this kind of attraction basins is the use of a Voronoi decomposition , which is a partition of the plane into non - overlapping regions according to their proximity to points of a given set [ 35 ] . The two - dimensional square lattice used for the numerical simulations was therefore decom - posed according to the following procedure . Once all su - percritical domains were identiﬁed and tracked , for each time frame the center of mass of each domain was com - puted and the set of these centers was used to partition the lattice area into Voronoi regions ( Fig . 3 ( b ) ) . Then , free molecules belonging to each region were identiﬁed , and their distance from the domain center of mass com - puted . A direct validation of the theoretical expression ( 1 ) is computationally very demanding , as it requires building histograms of distances conditional to the ra - dius R of a given sorting domain . We studied a slightly diﬀerent quantity , i . e . the average frequency of the dis - tances of free molecules from domains of linear sizes R comprised between the critical radius R c and the extrac - tion radius R E : ¯ n ( r ) = (cid:90) R E R c n R ( r ) N st ( R ) d R ( 18 ) for 0 ≤ r ≤ L , where the theoretical model describes a density proﬁle characterized by gas depletion in the proximity of the sorting domain . Computing the integral in ( 18 ) we obtain ¯ n ( r ) = K 1 + K 2 log ( r ) , ( 19 ) where K 1 and K 2 are functions of the model parameters . If p ( r ) d r is the empirical probability of ﬁnding a molecule at a distance comprised between r and r + d r from the center of mass of a domain , then ¯ n ( r ) = p ( r ) 2 πr . ( 20 ) The measure of ¯ n ( r ) obtained from the numerical simu - lations by this procedure is in agreement with a ﬁt of the theoretical prediction ( Fig . 3 ( a ) ) In the phenomenological theory , a central role is played by the dimensionless eﬀective interaction strength C . A convenient expression for C , amenable to empirical estimation , can be obtained by inverting Eq . ( 10 ) and making use of ( 9 ) to get C = φ mD ¯ n 2 , ( 21 ) which is a function of directly measurable quantities , such as the incoming ﬂux φ and the bulk gas density ¯ n . The theory predicts that the optimal value C = C opt scales 6 ( b ) 0 5 10 15 20 r [ No . sites ] 16 18 20 22 24 n ( r ) ( a ) n ( r ) simulated n ( r ) fitted Figure 3 . ( a ) Average density proﬁle ¯ n ( r ) of the gas of free molecules at a distance r from the center of supercritical do - mains , obtained from the simulations , and ﬁtted with the theoretical prediction Eq . 19 ( φ / k D = 10 − 7 , g = 10 2 ) . ( b ) Voronoi decomposition obtained from a set of simulated su - percritical sorting domains . ( 19 ) . as m − h , with h = 2 ( cf . Eq . 16 ) . Numerical simulations yield the compatible value h = 1 . 8 ( Fig . 4 ( a ) ) . One of the main tenets of the phenomenological theory is the existence of a well - deﬁned critical domain size A c , arising from the balance between the mixing power of lateral diﬀusion and the tendency of sorted molecules to aggregate . In the lattice - gas model , the tendency to ag - gregation is controlled by the microscopic parameter g , while in the phenomenological theory , an analogous role is played by the eﬀective interaction strength C . The op - erational deﬁnition provided by Eq . 21 allows to deter - mine C from the simulated molecule density ¯ n as a func - tion of model parameters ( Fig . 4 ( b ) ) . Accordingly with its interpretation as an eﬀective interaction strength , C is observed to be a non linear , monotonically increasing function of the microscopic parameter g . The critical domain size A c is a central control param - eter of the molecular distillation process , but there is no simple analytical expression for it in the framework of the phenomenological theory . Explicit approximate ex - 10 1 10 2 m 10 3 10 2 10 1 C o p t ( a ) 10 1 10 2 10 3 10 4 Microscopic interaction strength g 10 6 10 4 10 2 10 0 10 2 E ff e c t i v e i n t e r a c t i o n s t r e n g t h C ( b ) / k D = 10 6 / k D = 10 7 / k D = 10 8 Figure 4 . ( a ) Optimal eﬀective interaction strength C opt as a function of m = A E / A 0 , at ﬁxed φ / k D = 10 − 6 . The red line is a ﬁt with the power law m − h , with h = 1 . 8 . ( b ) Eﬀective interaction strength C as a function of the microscopic inter - action strength g , for diﬀerent values of the incoming ﬂux . pressions for the critical size can be obtained using clas - sical metastability analysis in quasi - equilibrium lattice - gas models ( see App . B and references therein ) . Such an analysis predicts that A c is a monotonically decreasing function of the microscopic interaction strength between sorted molecules , which , however , is not practically mea - surable . For this reason , in the next Section we provide an operational deﬁnition of critical size that can be more directly related to the analysis of experimental observa - tions . IV . OPERATIONAL DEFINITION OF THE CRITICAL SIZE In experimental studies of molecular sorting , domain “trajectories” have been observed to fall into two classes , depending on their fate [ 18 , 22 , 24 ] : productive trajecto - ries , where the domain is ﬁnally extracted as a part of a lipid vesicle , and unproductive trajectories , where the domain progressively dismantles and is ultimately dis - 7 0 10 20 30 Time [ 10 3 / k D ] 0 50 100 150 S i z e [ N o . s i t e s ] unproductive productive Figure 5 . Time evolution of the size of productive ( blue ) and unproductive ( red ) sorting domains , from numerical simula - tion of the lattice - gas model ( φ / k D = 10 − 6 , g = 20 ) . solved . It is worth observing here that these are prop - erties of the domain history , and not of its state at a given instant . However , for simplicity , we will deﬁne in what follows as productive or unproductive domains , those that belong to productive or unproductive trajec - tories , respectively . In our lattice - gas model , produc - tive and unproductive domains can be directly distin - guished by tracking their evolution in time , and check - ing whether their trajectory ends up with an extraction event , or not ( Fig . 5 ) . The classiﬁcation into productive and unproductive trajectories can be used to provide a natural , operational deﬁnition of critical size , applicable to the analysis of actual experimental data . Let us de - ﬁne the ‘operational’ critical size as the value A c such that a domain of size A c has 50 % probability of being productive : P ( prod . | A c ) = 1 2 , ( 22 ) ( similar deﬁnitions have been adopted in previous works , see e . g . Ref . 36 ) . In terms of ( joint ) probability density functions ( pdf’s ) , Eq . 22 is equivalent to p ( A c , prod . ) = p ( A c , unprod . ) , ( 23 ) i . e . , the critical size is found at the intersection of the joint pdf’s of , respectively , productive and unproductive domain sizes . Under a few additional hypotheses ( see App . C ) , Eq . 22 implies P ( prod . | A ) ≥ 1 2 for all A ≥ A c ( 24 ) consistently with the phenomenological picture , where smaller domains decay with high probability , while , once a domain exceeds the critical size , the probability that it will continue to grow up to the extraction size is larger than the probability that it will disappear . In terms of the joint pdf’s of , respectively , productive and unpro - ductive domains , Eq . 24 is in its turn equivalent to the condition that p ( A , prod . ) ≥ p ( A , unprod . ) for all A ≥ A c . ( 25 ) Either ( 24 ) or ( 25 ) can be conveniently applied to the analysis of empirical data , which are given as integer or ﬂoating - point numbers of ﬁnite precision . The critical size A c can thus be estimated either from conditional frequencies ( using Eq . 24 ) or from frequency histograms of domain sizes ( using Eq . 25 ) , as long as productive and unproductive domains can be eﬀectively discriminated . As an example , in Fig . 6 ( a ) , A c is found at the approxi - mate intersection of the ( joint ) frequency histograms of , respectively , productive and unproductive domains . The existence of this intersection appears to be guaranteed by the fact that p ( A , unprod . ) is a decreasing function of A , while p ( A , prod . ) is initially increasing . Fig . 6 ( b ) shows that the probability of a domain being productive increases with its size , while the complementary proba - bility of being unproductive decreases . The above pro - cedure allows to compute A c from numerical simulations for diﬀerent values of model parameters . The critical size A c is thus found to be a decreasing function of both the microscopic interaction strength g , and of the incom - ing molecule ﬂux φ ( Fig . 6 ( c ) ) . Having at our disposal an operational deﬁnition of crit - ical size , we are now in a position to check numerically the validity of theoretical predictions about the shape of the domain size distribution . The theory predicts functionally diﬀerent forms for the number densities for the size of , respectively , subcritical and supercritical do - mains . In the subcritical region , transient domains con - tinuously form and dissolve . This quasi - equilibrium state is approximately described by classical nucleation the - ory [ 28 , 29 ] , which predicts that the stationary number density for domains of size A < A c is N subst ( A ) = N sub0 e λ ( A 1 / 2 − A 1 / 2 c ) 2 , ( 26 ) where λ is a constant , which is expected to be pro - portional to the interaction strength between sorted molecules . For A > A c , according to Eq . 5 , the shape of the num - ber density is instead of the logarithmic type : N st ( A ) = N 0 log A L A , ( 27 ) with N 0 ∼ φ 1 / 2 . By ﬁtting the full histogram of all do - main sizes with Eq . 26 for small A and with Eq . 27 for large A , and by imposing the continuity condition N sub0 = N 0 log A L A c ( 28 ) one obtains an estimate ˜ A c of the critical size A c in the framework of classical nucleation theory ( see Fig . 7 ( a ) ) . The thus obtained value ˜ A c is of the same order as the previously introduced value A c , the diﬀerence being due to the presence of a small tail of unproductive domains 8 0 50 100 150 Domain size A [ No . sites ] 0 1 2 3 F r e q u e n c y p e r l a tt i c e s i t e ×10 6 c ( a ) unproductive productive 0 50 100 Domain size A [ No . sites ] 0 . 0 0 . 2 0 . 4 0 . 6 0 . 8 1 . 0 P r o b a b ili t y c ( b ) P ( unprod . | A ) P ( prod . | A ) 10 1 10 2 10 3 Microscopic interaction strength g 0 20 40 60 C r i t i c a l s i z e c ( c ) / k D = 10 6 / k D = 10 7 / k D = 10 8 Figure 6 . ( a ) Empirical histograms of domain sizes for productive ( blue ) and unproductive ( red ) domains obtained from numerical simulations of the lattice - gas model ( φ / k D = 10 − 7 , g = 20 ) . ( b ) Probability of a domain being productive or unproductive , conditioned by its size A . The vertical dashed lines mark the position of the critical size A c , that can be found , according to ( 25 ) , where the frequency of productive domains surpasses the frequency of unproductive domains ( a ) , or equivalently , according to ( 24 ) , where the conditional probability of a domain of size A being productive exceeds 1 / 2 ( b ) . ( c ) Critical size A c as a function of the interaction strength g for diﬀerent values of the incoming ﬂux φ / k D . 0 50 100 150 Domain size A [ No . sites ] 0 1 2 3 F r e q u e n c y p e r l a tt i c e s i t e ×10 6 c A c ( a ) undercritical overcritical 10 8 10 7 10 6 Incoming flux / k D 10 8 10 7 N 0 ( b ) Figure 7 . ( a ) Full histogram of all domain sizes ( φ / k D = 10 − 7 , g = 20 ) . The lines are ﬁts with Eq . 26 ( red ) for A < ˜ A c , and with Eq . 27 ( blue ) for ˜ A c < A < A E . The A > A E tail depends on the details of the extraction mechanism and is therefore non universal . ( b ) Numerical estimate of the prefactor N 0 appearing in Eq . 27 , as a function of the incoming ﬂux φ / k D , in the optimal region . The red line is a ﬁt with the power - law φ f with f = 0 . 54 . with A > A c ( see Fig . 6 ( a ) ) . The deﬁnition of A c has a clear probabilistic interpretation and is independent of phenomenological assumptions about the underlying process of domain formation . On the other hand , the estimate ˜ A c by the above empirical ﬁtting procedure can be used when it is not possible to discriminate between productive and unproductive domains . A numerical estimate of the prefactor N 0 for diﬀerent values of the incoming molecule ﬂux φ gives N 0 ∼ φ f with f = 0 . 54 , in reasonably good agreement with the theoretical value f = 1 / 2 ( Fig . 7 ( b ) ) . The systematic discrimination of productive and un - productive domains allows to unravel additional aspects of the phenomenology . Optimal sorting takes place when the total number of molecules in the system is minimal [ 1 ] ( Fig . 8 ( a ) ) . In a neighborhood of this optimal value , one observes also a minimum in the number of molecules con - tained in the domains ( Fig . 8 ( b ) ) , and in the number of domains itself ( Fig . 8 ( c ) ) . This is a somehow paradoxical eﬀect , since at ﬁrst sight , one would expect that a larger number of sorting domains could increase the speed of the sorting process . Instead , sorting turns out to be most eﬃcient precisely when the number of sorting domains is close to a minimum . As a matter of fact , when the interaction strength increases , the number of molecules in unproductive domains decreases , while the number of those in productive domains increases . As a consequence , their sum , i . e . the number of molecules in any of the 9 10 1 10 2 10 3 Interaction strength g 0 . 0 0 . 5 1 . 0 1 . 5 M o l e c u l e d e n s i t y ×10 2 ( a ) total in gas in domains 10 1 10 2 10 3 Interaction strength g 0 . 0 0 . 5 1 . 0 1 . 5 M o l e c u l e d e n s i t y ×10 2 ( b ) in unproductive domains in productive domains in domains 10 1 10 2 10 3 Interaction strength g 0 . 0 0 . 5 1 . 0 1 . 5 D o m a i n d e n s i t y ×10 4 ( c ) unproductive productive total Figure 8 . ( a ) The number of free molecules per unit area decreases for increasing interaction strength g ( magenta ) , while the number of molecules found inside of sorting domains has an increasing trend at large g ( orange ) . As a consequence , the total number of molecules per unit area ( black ) has a minimum , which marks the position of the optimal sorting regime [ 1 ] . ( b ) In its turn , the number of molecules inside of sorting domains ( orange ) is a non - monotonic function of the interaction strength g . This can be understood as follows . The number of molecules inside of unproductive domains ( red ) decreases with increasing interaction strength , while the number of molecules inside of productive domains ( blue ) increases . As a consequence , the total number of molecules found inside of sorting domains of any of the two types ( orange ) has a minimum close to the optimal sorting regime . ( c ) Similarly , the number of unproductive domains per unit area ( red ) decreases with the interaction strength , whereas the number of productive domains ( blue ) increases . As a consequence , the total number of sorting domains of the two types ( orange ) has a minimum for intermediate interaction strength , close to the optimal sorting regime . Simulations performed with φ / k D = 10 − 8 . The number of both productive and unproductive domains increase with increasing φ ( not shown here ) . two types of domains , has a minimum ( Fig . 8 ( b ) ) . A similar argument applies directly to the total numbers of productive and unproductive domains : the number of unproductive domains decreases when the interaction strength increases , while the number of productive do - mains increases , as predicted by Eq . 13 [ 37 ] . This leads to the appearance of an intermediate minimum in the to - tal number of domains ( Fig . 8 ( c ) ) . The emerging picture is that the eﬃciency of the sorting process is not favored by a proliferation in the number of sorting domains : in that case , the ﬂux of incoming molecules has to be shared among a larger number of domains , and the growth rate of individual domains is slowed down . A balance has therefore to be struck between two competing require - ments : the interaction strength should be large enough to allow for easy nucleation of new sorting domains , but small enough to avoid their unnecessary proliferation . These theoretical predictions are compatible with for - mer experimental work where the strength of interac - tion between transferrin receptors on cell plasmamem - branes was experimentally controlled , and higher inter - action strength was shown to induce higher rates of gen - eration of productive sorting domains , and lower numbers of unproductive events [ 38 ] . V . INTERPRETATION OF EXPERIMENTAL DATA The correct classiﬁcation of productive / unproductive trajectories in data obtained from living cell experiments is a challenging process . Several approaches have been adopted . Productive trajectories can be singled out by detecting bursts in the concentration of speciﬁc molecules involved in the process of vesicle detachment , such as dy - namin [ 20 , 24 , 39 ] . Other approaches rely on the mea - sure of extremal properties of domain trajectories , such as the maximum size reached by domains , or their life - time [ 1 , 17 , 18 , 24 , 40 ] , which are expected to be less dependent on the small - scale details of the stochastic pro - cess . More recently , a new classiﬁcation method based on a “disassembly asymmetry score” ( DASC ) [ 22 ] has been proposed . In this context , productive and unproductive trajectories are discriminated by clustering the values of a set of statistical indicators that compare properties of the backward and forward histories of the domains [ 22 ] . The eﬀectiveness of some of these approaches can be tested on numerical simulations of the lattice - gas model discussed in the previous Sections , where the productive vs . unpro - ductive classiﬁcation can be performed exactly . The ﬁrst two columns of Fig . 9 show scatter plots of maximum size vs . lifetime ( Fig . 9 ( a , e ) ) , and of the DASC indica - tors d 1 , d 2 [ 22 ] ( Fig . 9 ( b , f ) ) , for g = 10 2 and g = 10 1 . Diﬀerent colors are used for productive ( blue ) and un - productive ( red ) trajectories . For g = 10 2 the two popu - lations are clearly separated , and can be easily discrimi - nated automatically using standard clustering methods . For g = 10 1 instead the representative points of the two populations start to overlap , and clustering methods are likely to return a certain number of erroneously classi - ﬁed points . For g = 10 2 the existence of two distinct populations of domain trajectories is reﬂected in the bi - 10 0 200 Maximum size 0 . 0 0 . 5 1 . 0 1 . 5 L i f e t i m e ×10 2 g = 100 ( a ) 4 2 0 2 d 1 6 4 2 0 2 d 2 ( b ) 0 200 Maximum size 0 1 2 3 4 F r e q u e n c y ×10 2 ( c ) 0 300 0 4 ×10 2 0 50 100 150 Lifetime 0 . 0 0 . 5 1 . 0 1 . 5 2 . 0 F r e q u e n c y ×10 2 ( d ) 0 150 0 4 ×10 2 0 200 Maximum size 0 . 0 0 . 5 1 . 0 L i f e t i m e ×10 2 g = 10 ( e ) 4 2 0 2 d 1 6 4 2 0 2 d 2 ( f ) 0 200 400 Maximum size 0 1 2 F r e q u e n c y ×10 2 ( g ) 0 400 0 1 ×10 3 0 80 Lifetime 0 . 0 0 . 5 1 . 0 1 . 5 2 . 0 F r e q u e n c y ×10 2 ( h ) 0 80 0 1 ×10 3 Figure 9 . Statistical properties of productive ( blue ) and unproductive ( red ) domains for incoming ﬂux φ / k D = 10 − 6 and interaction strength g = 10 2 ( a - d , 5 · 10 4 domain trajectories ) and g = 10 1 ( e - h , 1 . 5 · 10 6 domain trajectories ) , collected over a 3 · 10 6 / k D time interval . Simulated trajectories were classiﬁed into productive and unproductive depending on whether they ended up in an extraction event , or not . ( a , b , e , f ) Scatter plots of domain lifetimes vs . maximum sizes ( a , e ) and of DASC indicators d 1 , d 2 ( b , f ) . ( c , d , g , h ) frequency distributions of maximum sizes and lifetimes . Insets : complementary cumulative frequency distributions . Domain sizes are given as number of occupied lattice sites , lifetimes are measured in units of 10 3 / k D . modal shape of the frequency distributions of maximum sizes and lifetimes ( Fig . 9 ( c , d ) ) . This clear separation corresponds to a distinct plateau in the ( complementary ) cumulative frequency distribution ( insets ) . For g = 10 1 instead ( Fig . 9 ( g , h ) ) , the frequency distributions of the two populations start to overlap and the bimodal char - acter of the two frequency distributions tends to disap - pear . The loss of discriminating power takes place ap - proximately for values of the interaction strength such that the critical size A c becomes of the order of the ex - traction size A E ( cf . Fig . 6 ( c ) ) . Interestingly , the model predictions for the frequency distributions of the maximum sizes and lifetimes of sort - ing domains are similar to those resulting from exper - imental observations . In particular , the maximum size and lifetime distributions for unproductive domains show a rapid monotonic decay , while the corresponding distri - butions for productive domains show a distinct maximum and a slower decaying tail ( Fig . 9 ( c , d , g , h ) ) . Both of these features have been observed in experiments of endo - cytic sorting [ 18 , 22 ] , where productive and unproductive domains correspond to clathrin - coated pits ( CCPs ) and abortive coats ( ACs ) , respectively . ( A third population of outlier traces ( OTs ) [ 22 ] , characterized by short lifetimes and large sizes , likely correspond to cytoplasm - originated events [ 40 ] and are not observed in the simulations . ) We looked for model parameters providing the best ﬁt of sim - ulated frequency distributions with data from Fig . 2B , C of Ref . 22 , where productive and unproductive domains were classiﬁed using DASC . By a single ﬁt of the two parameters of the model and of two rescaling factors for the time and length scales , good agreement between sim - ulation and experimental data was found for both the lifetime and maximum size distributions , simultaneously for both productive and unproductive domains ( Fig . 10 ) . The frequency histograms obtained from the exact clas - siﬁcation of simulated productive and unproductive do - mains ( Fig . 10 ( a , b ) ) was compared with the frequency histograms obtained with the same model parameters , where however simulated domains were classiﬁed by the DASC method , yielding similar results ( Fig . 10 ( c , d ) ) . VI . CONCLUSIONS To generate and maintain their internal order and guarantee proper physiological functioning , eukaryotic cells rely on a sophisticated process by which speciﬁc biomolecules are sorted and concentrated on small lipid vesicles , that are later delivered to appropriate membrane subregions through well - deﬁned pathways . A recently proposed phenomenological theory of molecular sorting assumes that this process emerges from the coupling of two simpler biophysical mechanisms [ 1 ] : a ) the tendency of similar molecules to phase separate into localized sort - ing domains , and b ) domain - induced membrane bend - 11 0 20 40 60 80 100 Lifetimes [ s ] 0 1 2 3 P r o b a b ili t y d e n s i t y ×10 2 ( a ) ( b ) ( c ) ( d ) Exact classification 0 50 100 150 200 Maximum size [ a . u . ] 0 1 P r o b a b ili t y d e n s i t y ×10 2 0 20 40 60 80 100 Lifetimes [ s ] 0 1 2 3 P r o b a b ili t y d e n s i t y ×10 2 DASC 0 50 100 150 200 Maximum size [ a . u . ] 0 1 P r o b a b ili t y d e n s i t y ×10 2 Figure 10 . Comparison between the experimental distribu - tions of lifetimes ( a , c ) and maximum sizes ( b , d ) of unpro - ductive ( red lines ) and productive ( blue lines ) domains from Ref . 22 , Fig . 2B , C ( kindly shared by Dr . Xinxin Wang ) , and corresponding distributions obtained from simulations of the lattice - gas model ( red and blue histograms , respectively ) with ﬁtted values of the model parameters ( g = 6 . 5 , φ / k D = 10 − 6 ) and ﬁtted rescaling factors for lifetime and domain size units ( k D = 715 s − 1 , 1 lattice site = 0 . 3 a . u . ) . Lower cutoﬀs on lifetime and maximum size approximately equal to the values reported in the experimental data were used . In the experi - ments , productive and unproductive domains were classiﬁed by DASC . In the analysis of simulated data ( histograms ) , use was made of both the exact classiﬁcation obtained directly from the simulations ( a , b ) , and a posteriori use of DASC on the numerically generated domains ( c , d ) , obtaining similar results . ing , leading to the formation and ultimate detachment of speciﬁcally enriched vesicles . A central notion of the theory of phase separation is that only domains larger than a critical size A c are able to grow indeﬁnitely , while smaller domains tend to be dissolved . In combination with a contextual process of domain extraction at a larger scale A E > A c , this introduces a sort of “physical check - point” , such that only domains that are able to reach the “critical mass” A c can drive extraction ( distillation ) events , and are thus “productive” . This scenario is con - sistent with experimental observations where , in addition to “productive” long - lived domains that grow into vesi - cles that are ultimately extracted from the membrane , a large number of short - lived , small domains , which tend to disassemble and ultimately disappear , is also detected . The existence of such a “physical checkpoint” is reﬂected in the particular shape of the size distribution for pro - ductive domains ( Eq . 5 ) , which exhibits a maximum at sizes of the order of the critical size A c , a slowly ( loga - rithmically ) decaying intermediate region , followed by a non - universal decaying tail at scales larger than the ex - traction threshold A E ( Fig . 6 ( a ) , blue histogram ) . On the other hand , the existence of a biochemical check - point has also been postulated in this regard [ 17 , 18 ] . It would be quite interesting to further investigate the relation between these two eﬀects . It is worth observing here that in the actual biophysical process , a wealth of diﬀerent biomolecular species takes place in the forma - tion and stabilization of sorting domains . In the theoret - ical model , the complex interplay between these diﬀerent species is eﬀectively encoded into the value of the single dimensionless interaction parameter g . Intriguingly , even such a highly simpliﬁed abstract model , founded on ba - sic notions from the theory of phase separation , is able to capture relevant features of the real process . This yields support to the hypothesis that endocytic sorting is driven by an underlying phase separation process . We have here considered a spatially homogeneous probability of nucleation of sorting domains . It has been observed however that nucleation events may cluster in “hotspots” or “nucleation organizers” [ 41 ] . The origin of such hotsposts is an interesting open question , that de - serves to be investigated in the framework of phase sep - aration theory . ACKNOWLEDGMENTS We gratefully acknowledge useful discussions with Igor Kolokolov , Vladimir Lebedev , Guido Serini , Carlo Campa and Roland Wedlich - Söldner . We thank Xinxin Wang , Sandra Schmid and Gaudenz Danuser for kindly sharing their data and for their insightful observa - tions . Numerical calculations were made possible by a CINECA - INFN agreement providing access to CINECA high - performing computing resources . Appendix A : Rate of supercritical domain production The rate at which supercritical domains are generated in the non - equilibrium driven stationary state of the lat - tice model of molecular sorting is assumed , in Eq . ( 10 ) , to be proportional to the square of the free molecule den - sity ¯ n . Here we provide a justiﬁcation for this assump - tion , based on a simpliﬁed mean - ﬁeld model of monomer aggregation . Consider a model of domain formation by means of monomer attachment and detachment , and suppose that there exists a threshold area value A c above which monomer detachment from domains is not possible , and clusters grow irreversibly . This way , the existence of a critical size in the system is artiﬁcially reproduced . Let us call n A the number density per unit surface of domains 12 of area A , and N + the number density per unit surface of domains with A > A c . The incoming ﬂux of monomers is φ . The set of mean - ﬁeld Smoluchowski equations for this model is : d n 1 d t = − 2 c 1 n 21 + b 2 n 2 − n 1 A c (cid:88) A = 2 c A n A + A c (cid:88) A = 2 b A n A − c + n 1 N + + φ ( A1a ) d n A d t = c A − 1 n 1 n A − 1 − b A n A − c A n 1 n A + b A + 1 n A + 1 , 2 ≤ A ≤ A c ( A1b ) d N + d t = c A c n 1 n A c ( A1c ) where c A ( and , respectively , b A ) are dimensional coeﬃ - cients representing the attachment ( detachment ) rates of monomers on ( from ) domains of area A , and b A = 0 for A > A c . According to reaction rate theory [ 42 ] , in two dimensions , the eﬀective reaction rate of two domains is proportional to the sum of their diﬀusion constants . In the approximation where only monomers can move ( ex - tended domains being much slower , as their diﬀusivity decreases with size as A − 3 / 2 ) , the eﬀective aggregation rates c A become independent of A and proportional to the diﬀusivity D of a monomer . It is also important to notice that dimers can split with a rate proportional to D / g per molecule , i . e . b 2 = b / g . Summing over the areas 2 ≤ A ≤ A c to obtain an equation for N − = (cid:80) A c A = 2 n A , we ﬁnd d N − d t = c n 21 − c n 1 n A c − g − 1 b n 2 ( A2a ) d N + d t = c n 1 n A c . ( A2b ) The stationary condition d N − / d t = 0 for the subcritical domains implies d N + / d t = c n 21 − g − 1 b n 2 . In order for N − to be approximately constant with a non - zero pro - duction of supercritical domains , the second term must be subdominant already at moderately large values of g . One can then conclude that the net production of super - critical domains N + is well approximated by the equa - tion d N + / d t ≈ c n 21 . The quantity N + corresponds to the number density N d of supercritical domains used in the main text , thus qualitatively justifying Eq . 10 . Appendix B : Metastability in lattice - gas models Assuming that in a quasi - equilibrium condition the molecule gas density outside of a growing domain in a lattice - gas model follows the Gibbs - Thomson relation n 0 = n ( R ) = n ∞ ( 1 + σ / R ) [ 36 ] , where σ is the line ten - sion of the domain , using Eq . 3 we get ˙ R = A 0 D log ( L / R ) (cid:18) R − σn ∞ ¯ n − n ∞ (cid:19) ¯ n − n ∞ R 2 . ( B1 ) Therefore the critical value of the domain radius is R c = σn ∞ ¯ n − n ∞ . ( B2 ) This is a non - equilibrium result , in which ¯ n and n ∞ repre - sent respectively the bulk average density of the molecule gas and the equilibrium density of the gas at the interface with a large ﬂat domain . These two quantities , together with σ , can be easily estimated at equilibrium in a lattice - gas model . Con - sider an equilibrium lattice - gas model with a chemical potential µ , and let (cid:15) > 0 be the energy gain due to the attractive interaction between two molecules occupying nearest - neighboring sites of the lattice . The energy func - tion of the equilibrium lattice - gas system takes the form E ( η ) = µ (cid:88) i η i − (cid:15) (cid:88) (cid:104) i , j (cid:105) η i η j , ( B3 ) where η = { η i } with η i ∈ { 0 , 1 } for i = 1 , . . . , N is a binary conﬁguration representing the presence or absence of molecules on lattice sites . According to the dynamic viewpoint of Ref . 43 , the expression R c ≈ (cid:15) z (cid:15) − 2 µ , ( B4 ) with z the number of nearest neighbors of a given site , is obtained imposing a local equilibrium condition be - tween the probability of growing and that of shrinking . In a mean - ﬁeld equilibrium picture , the chemical poten - tial is related to the average total density ¯ n eq = e − βµ of free molecules in a supersaturated system . At the con - densation point µ = z(cid:15) / 2 , the average total density is equal to the saturation density n ∞ ≈ e − βz(cid:15) / 2 , which is the molecule density of a gas phase in equilibrium with a liquid phase ( with ﬂat interface ) . In terms of these quantities , the critical domain radius becomes R c ≈ β(cid:15) 2 log ( ¯ n eq / n ∞ ) ≈ β(cid:15)n ∞ 2 ( ¯ n eq − n ∞ ) ( B5 ) close to the condensation point . The expression is for - mally equivalent to Eq . B2 if we identify σ = β(cid:15) / 2 . Given 13 two conﬁgurations η , η (cid:48) of the dynamic lattice - gas model , the detailed balance condition implies W ( η → η (cid:48) ) W ( η (cid:48) → η ) = P eq ( η (cid:48) ) P eq ( η ) . ( B6 ) Focusing on the transition η → η (cid:48) , in which a dimer frag - ments into two monomers as a consequence of one of them hopping away , and since z = 4 for a square lattice , the previous relation implies β (cid:15) = log g , and consequently n ∞ ≈ e − 2 β(cid:15) = g − 2 . Moreover , in a lattice gas at equi - librium , the average density ¯ n eq of supersaturated gas is ﬁxed by the chemical potential and is independent of the microscopic interaction strength . Therefore , from ( B5 ) the critical radius is seen to be a monotonically decreas - ing function of g . In the non - equilibrium stationary state relevant to the description of molecular sorting , ¯ n is numerically ob - served to be a decreasing function of g , however its de - crease is slower than the decrease of n ∞ , since ¯ n is sus - tained by the constant molecular inﬂux φ . This way , from Eq . B2 the critical radius R c is seen to be a monotoni - cally decreasing function of g also in the non - equilibrium case of interest . Appendix C : Alternative deﬁnitions of critical size Maintaining the notations used in the main text , let us deﬁne the empirical critical size as the value A c such that P ( prod . | A c ) = 1 2 . ( C1 ) This value is well deﬁned if P ( prod . | A ) is a continuous function which tends to 0 for A → 0 and to 1 for A → ∞ . Equivalently , A c can be deﬁned as the solution of p ( A , prod . ) = p ( A , unprod . ) ( C2 ) since ( C2 ) can be rewritten as p ( A , prod . ) = p ( A ) − p ( A , prod . ) yielding P ( prod . | A ) = p ( A , prod . ) p ( A ) = 1 2 . If p ( A , unprod . ) is a decreasing function of A , and p ( A , prod . ) is an increasing function of A in a right neigh - borhood of 0 ( as the simulations suggest , see e . g . Fig . 6 ) , one can easily show that P ( prod . | A 1 (cid:62) A (cid:62) A c ) is a non decreasing function of A 1 by directly computing its derivative with respect to that variable . Then , for all A 1 (cid:62) A c one has : P ( prod . | A (cid:62) A c ) (cid:62) P ( prod . | A 1 (cid:62) A (cid:62) A c ) (cid:62) P ( prod . | A = A c ) = 1 2 . [ 1 ] M . Zamparo , D . Valdembri , G . Serini , I . V . Kolokolov , V . V . Lebedev , L . Dall’Asta , and A . Gamba , Phys . Rev . Lett . 126 , 088101 ( 2021 ) . [ 2 ] I . Mellman and W . J . Nelson , Nat . Rev . Mol . Cell Biol . 9 , 833 ( 2008 ) . [ 3 ] E . Lifshitz and L . Pitaevskii , Physical Kinetics , 1st ed . , Course of Theoretical Physics , Vol . 10 ( Pergamon Press , 1981 ) . [ 4 ] V . V . Slezov , Kinetics of ﬁrst order phase transitions ( John Wiley & Sons , 2009 ) . [ 5 ] L . Farkas , Z . Phys . Chem . 125 , 236 ( 1927 ) . [ 6 ] J . Schmelzer , G . Röpke , and F . - P . Ludwig , Phys . Rev . C 55 , 1917 ( 1997 ) . [ 7 ] J . Berry , C . P . Brangwynne , and M . Haataja , Rep . Prog . Phys . 81 , 046601 ( 2018 ) . [ 8 ] A . A . Hyman , C . A . Weber , and F . Jülicher , Ann . Rev . Cell Dev . Biol . 30 , 39 ( 2014 ) . [ 9 ] A . S . Lyon , W . B . Peeples , and M . K . Rosen , Nat . Rev . Mol . Cell Biol . , 1 ( 2021 ) . [ 10 ] A . Gamba , A . de Candia , S . Di Talia , A . Coniglio , F . Bus - solino , and G . Serini , Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . U . S . A . 102 , 16927 ( 2005 ) . [ 11 ] E . Floris , A . Piras , L . Dall’Asta , A . Gamba , E . Hirsch , and C . C . Campa , Comput . Struct . Biotechnol . J . 19 , 3225 ( 2021 ) . [ 12 ] Bergeron - Sandoval et al . , Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . U . S . A . 118 , e2113789118 ( 2021 ) . [ 13 ] M . Kozak and M . Kaksonen , Elife , e72865 ( 2022 ) . [ 14 ] K . J . Day , G . Kago , L . Wang , J . B . Richter , C . C . Hay - den , E . M . Lafer , and J . C . Stachowiak , Nat . Cell Biol . 23 , 366 ( 2021 ) . [ 15 ] Y . G . Zhao and H . Zhang , Dev . Cell 55 , 30 ( 2020 ) . [ 16 ] I . S . Lomoriello , S . Sigismund , and K . J . Day , Curr . Opin . Cell Biol . 75 , 102068 ( 2022 ) . [ 17 ] D . Loerke , M . Mettlen , D . Yarar , K . Jaqaman , H . Jaqa - man , G . Danuser , and S . L . Schmid , PLoS Biol . 7 , e1000057 ( 2009 ) . [ 18 ] F . Aguet , C . N . Antonescu , M . Mettlen , S . L . Schmid , and G . Danuser , Dev . Cell 26 , 279 ( 2013 ) . [ 19 ] Z . Kadlecova , S . J . Spielman , D . Loerke , A . Mohanakr - ishnan , D . K . Reed , and S . L . Schmid , J . Cell Biol . 216 , 167 ( 2016 ) . [ 20 ] A . Grassart , A . T . Cheng , S . H . Hong , F . Zhang , N . Zen - zer , Y . Feng , D . M . Briner , G . D . Davis , D . Malkov , and D . G . Drubin , J . Cell Biol . 205 , 721 ( 2014 ) . [ 21 ] K . He , E . Song , S . Upadhyayula , S . Dang , R . Gaudin , W . Skillern , K . Bu , B . R . Capraro , I . Rapoport , I . Kusters , M . Ma , and T . Kirchhausen , J . Cell Biol . 219 , e201908142 ( 2020 ) . [ 22 ] X . Wang , Z . Chen , M . Mettlen , J . Noh , S . L . Schmid , and G . Danuser , eLife 9 , e53686 ( 2020 ) . [ 23 ] M . Lehmann , I . Lukonin , F . Noé , J . Schmoranzer , C . Clementi , D . Loerke , and V . Haucke , Sci . Adv . 5 , eaax5775 ( 2019 ) . 14 [ 24 ] M . Ehrlich , W . Boll , A . van Oijen , R . Hariharan , K . Chandran , M . L . Nibert , and T . Kirchhausen , Cell 118 , 591 ( 2004 ) . [ 25 ] A . Gamba , I . Kolokolov , V . Lebedev , and G . Ortenzi , J . Stat . Mech . Theory Exp . 2009 , P02019 ( 2009 ) . [ 26 ] M . Zamparo , F . Chianale , C . Tebaldi , M . Cosentino - Lagomarsino , M . Nicodemi , and A . Gamba , Soft Matter 11 , 838 ( 2015 ) . [ 27 ] A . S . Lyon , W . B . Peeples , and M . K . Rosen , Nat . Rev . Mol . Cell Biol . 22 , 215 ( 2021 ) . [ 28 ] R . Becker and W . Döring , Ann . Phys . 416 , 719 ( 1935 ) . [ 29 ] Y . B . Zeldovich , Acta Physicochem . USSR 18 , 1 ( 1943 ) . [ 30 ] M . Zamparo , L . Dall’Asta , and A . Gamba , J . Stat . Phys . 174 , 120 ( 2019 ) . [ 31 ] A . - L . Barabási , H . E . Stanley , et al . , Fractal concepts in surface growth ( Cambridge Uni - versity Press , 1995 ) . [ 32 ] S . Boeynaems , S . Alberti , N . L . Fawzi , T . Mit - tag , M . Polymenidou , F . Rousseau , J . Schymkowitz , J . Shorter , B . Wolozin , L . V . D . Bosch , P . Tompa , and M . Fuxreiter , Trends Cell Biol . 28 , 420 ( 2018 ) . [ 33 ] A . Patel et al . , Cell 162 , 1066 ( 2015 ) . [ 34 ] M . Mettlen , D . Loerke , D . Yarar , G . Danuser , and S . L . Schmid , J . Cell Biol . 188 , 919 ( 2010 ) . [ 35 ] A . Okabe , B . Boots , K . Sugihara , S . N . Chiu , and D . G . Kendall , Spatial Tessellations , Wiley Series in Probabil - ity and Statistics ( 2000 ) . [ 36 ] S . Ryu and W . Cai , Phys . Rev . E 82 , 011603 ( 2010 ) . [ 37 ] Recalling also that the macroscopic interaction strength C is a monotonically increasing function of the micro - scopic parameter g ( Fig . 4 ( b ) ) . [ 38 ] A . P . Liu , F . Aguet , G . Danuser , and S . L . Schmid , J . Cell Biol . 191 , 1381 ( 2010 ) . [ 39 ] S . M . Ferguson and P . De Camilli , Nat . Rev . Mol . Cell Biol . 13 , 75 ( 2012 ) . [ 40 ] S . H . Hong , C . L . Cortesio , and D . G . Drubin , Cell Rep . 12 , 2121 ( 2015 ) . [ 41 ] D . Nunez , C . Antonescu , M . Mettlen , A . Liu , S . L . Schmid , D . Loerke , and G . Danuser , Traﬃc 12 , 1868 ( 2011 ) . [ 42 ] P . L . Krapivsky , S . Redner , and E . Ben - Naim , A kinetic view of statistical physics ( Cambridge Univer - sity Press , 2010 ) . [ 43 ] F . den Hollander , E . Olivieri , and E . Scoppola , J . Math Phys . 41 , 1424 ( 2000 ) .