Recent Advances in the Use of High Pressure as an Effective Processing Technique in the Food Industry Tomás Norton & Da - Wen Sun Received : 27 May 2007 / Accepted : 17 July 2007 / Published online : 25 September 2007 # Springer Science + Business Media , LLC 2007 Abstract High pressure processing is a food processing method which has shown great potential in the food industry . Similar to heat treatment , high pressure processing inactivates microorganisms , denatures proteins and extends the shelf life of food products . But in the meantime , unlike heat treatments , high pressure treatment can also maintain the quality of fresh foods , with little effects on flavour and nutritional value . Furthermore , the technique is independent of the size , shape or composition of products . In this paper , many aspects associated with applying high pressure as a processing method in the food industry are reviewed , including operating principles , effects on food quality and safety and most recent commercial and research applica - tions . It is hoped that this review will promote more widespread applications of the technology to the food industry . Keywords High pressure . HPP . HPLT . Low temperature . Inactivation . Enzyme . Microorganism . Shelf life . Food quality . Food safety . Freezing . Thawing Nomenclature P pressure ( Pa ) T temperature ( °C ) ρ density ( kg m − 3 ) η viscosity ( Pa s ) C p specific heat ( W kg − 1 K − 1 ) D characteristic length ( m ) k inactivation constant λ thermal conductivity ( W / m 1 K ) t time α thermal expansion coefficient ( K − 1 ) A , B , C mass of each designated food component CH compression heating ( °C ) Subscripts M food medium W water p food product pp food product packaging hyd _ me hydraulic mechanisms in processing medium hyd _ p hydraulic mechanisms in product th _ me thermal conduction in processing medium th _ p thermal conduction in food product th _ pp thermal conduction in product packaging in inactivation x , y , z designated food component food composite food material Introduction Food processing involves synergism between different physical processes to transform raw animal / plant materials into consumer - ready products . Today , the food industry is expected to prevent or reduce negative changes in food quality over time to provide a wide variety of food rich in colour , texture and flavour and to adapt and develop new food processes to satisfactorily meet the requirements of a wide demographic within different cultures . Without food Food Bioprocess Technol ( 2008 ) 1 : 2 – 34 DOI 10 . 1007 / s11947 - 007 - 0007 - 0 T . Norton : D . - W . Sun ( * ) Food Refrigeration and Computerised Food Technology Group , University College Dublin , National University of Ireland , Earlsfort Terrace , Dublin 2 , Ireland e - mail : dawen . sun @ ucd . ie url : www . ucd . ie / refrig ; www . ucd . ie / sun processing , these goals could not be upheld , as food could neither be transported over long distances nor stored from time of plenty to time of need ( Lund 2002 ) . In the present day , consumers judge food quality based on its sensory and nutritional characteristics ( e . g . texture , flavour , aroma , shape and colour , calorie content , vitamins etc . ) , and alongside shelf life , these now determine an individual ’ s preference for specific products . Consequently , retailers are reporting up to a 30 % growth in fresh , chilled and healthy food sales ( Hogan et al . 2005 ) . US sales in pre - cut salad mixes were $ 1 . 9 billion in 2001 and increased to $ 2 . 11 billion in 2003 ( Hodge 2003 ) . However , the recent upsurge in demand has presented challenges to the food industry , mainly in implementing techniques to keep food fresher for longer , whilst offering a reasonable shelf life and convenience and assuring food safety . Owing to recent consumer preferences , impetus has been given to the development of concept - driven novel technologies that provide the required processing through non - or mildly thermal means ( Welti - Chanes et al . 2005 ) . Accordingly , much of the recent scientific research for the food industry has focused on non - thermal processing techniques , with high pressure processing ( HPP ) being amongst the few experiencing great potential in commercial settings ( Sun 2005 ) . Food safety and shelf life are often closely related to microbial quality and other phenomena such as biochemical reactions , enzymatic reactions and structural changes , and thus , although often indirectly , can significantly influence consumers ’ perception of food quality ( LeBail et al . 2003 ) . Physical ( e . g . heating , freezing , dehydration and packaging ) and chemical ( e . g . reduction of pH or use of preservatives ) preservation methods continue to be used extensively ( Manas and Pagan 2005 ) . Conventional thermal sterilisa - tion processes are the most commonly used methods of food preservation and involve heat transfer from a process - ing medium to the slowest heating zone of a product and subsequent cooling . Thus , although being effective mech - anisms for microbial inactivation , thermal processes can permit changes in product quality and cause off - flavour generation , textural softening and destruction of colours and vitamins , the extent of which is dependent on the product being treated and the temperature gradients between food and process boundaries . Microbial inactiva - tion provided by HPP mainly targets cell membranes of treated cells , but in some cases , additional damaging events such as extensive solute loss during pressurisation , protein denaturation and key enzyme inactivation are also required ( Manas and Pagan 2005 ) . The multi - target ability of high pressure ( HP ) has meant that in situations where its sole employment yields unsatisfactory results , a high level of synergism can be obtained when combined with other processing techniques . Effective preservation has been reported from combinations of HP with pH ( Raso and Barbosa - Canovas 2003 ) , HP with pulsed electric fields ( Ross et al . 2003 ) and HP with CO 2 ( Spilimbergo et al . 2002 ) . Furthermore , when used in conjunction with mildly thermal processes , HP has been found to significantly increase the inactivation of bacterial spores ( Raso and Barbosa - Canovas 2003 ) . High pressure processing is a technology that potentially addresses many , if not all , of the most recent challenges faced by the food industry . It can facilitate the production of food products that have the quality of fresh foods but the convenience and profitability associated with shelf life extension ( McClements et al . 2001 ) . HPP has already become a commercially implemented technology , spreading from its origins in Japan , followed by USA and now Europe , with worldwide take - up increasing almost expo - nentially since 2000 ( Fig . 1a ) ; although as of yet , this has not been homogenous throughout the food industry . HPP can be applied to a range of different foods , including juices and beverages , fruits and vegetables , meat - based products ( cooked and dry ham , etc . ) , fish and pre - cooked dishes , with meat and vegetables being the most popular applica - tions ( Fig . 1b ) . European companies presently employing this technology include orange juice by UltiFruit® ; the Pernod Ricard Company , France ; and sliced ham by Espuña , Spain ; fruit jams by Solofruita , Italy ( Urrutia - Benet 2005 ) . Furthermore , as evident in Table 1 , a wide variety of companies provide HPP technology to the food industry . High pressure processing techniques have also gained momentum in areas of food preservation outside of sterilisation and pasteurisation . The range of possibilities offered by combining high pressure with low temperatures ( HPLT ) has allowed the basis of a new field of HP food applications to be formed , such as pressure - supported freezing , thawing and subzero storage . Much work has been conducted in the development and optimisation of HPLT processes , and new findings regarding the phase transitions of water , with consequential benefits for the food industry , have recently been revealed ( Urrutia - Benet et al . 2004 ) . High pressure research and development in different disciplines within the food industry has been recently reviewed by some authors ( Rastogi et al . 2007 ; Torres and Velazquez 2005 ; San Martin et al . 2002 ; San Martin - Gonzalez et al . 2006 ; Toepfl et al . 2006 ) . A comprehensive review was conducted by Rastogi et al . ( 2007 ) who , as well as assessing many studies on the effect of HPP on enzymes and proteins , also provided information on the successful use of HPP , either solely or in combination with other processing techniques . Other reviews have focused on the effect of HPP on microorganisms and food constituents ( San Martin et al . 2002 ) ; the use of HPP in the dairy Food Bioprocess Technol ( 2008 ) 1 : 2 – 34 3 industry ( O ’ Reilly et al . 2001 ; San Martin - Gonzalez et al . 2006 ; Huppertz et al . 2006 ) ; the commercial opportunities and research challenges in HPP ( Torres and Velazquez 2005 ) ; the energy efficiency of HPP ( Toepfl et al . 2006 ) and pressure - assisted freezing and thawing of foods ( Cheftel et al . 2002 ) . However , no review has completed a combined study of the modern engineering aspects of HP technology alongside its conventional and novel uses in the food industry . Moreover , the extensive progress made in very recent years in non - and mildly thermal and low temperature HPP merits a state - of - the - art review . Conse - quently , this study addresses many of the aspects associated with applying high pressure as a processing method in the food industry , from the engineering principles involved , through food quality and safety issues , to the most recent commercial and research applications , all of which have seen great development in recent times . Engineering Concepts of HPP The governing principles of HPP are based on the assumption that foods which experience HP in a vessel follow the isostatic rule regardless of the size or shape of the food . The isostatic rule states that pressure is instanta - neously and uniformly transmitted throughout a sample whether the sample is in direct contact with the pressure medium or hermetically sealed in a flexible package . Therefore , in contrast to thermal processing , the time necessary for HPP should be independent of the sample size ( Rastogi et al . 2007 ) . The effect of HP on food chemistry and microbiology is governed by Le Chatelier ’ s principle . This principle states that when a system at equilibrium is disturbed , the system then responds in a way that tends to minimise the disturbance ( Pauling 1964 ) . In other words , HP stimulates Fig . 1 ( Color online ) The num - ber of HP equipment installed in Europe by Hyperbaric® versus a year of installment and b the industrial sector for the install - ment ( Urrutia - Benet 2005 ) 4 Food Bioprocess Technol ( 2008 ) 1 : 2 – 34 some phenomena ( e . g . phase transition , chemical reactivity , change in molecular configuration , chemical reaction ) that are accompanied by a decrease in volume , but opposes reactions that involve an increase in volume . The effects of pressure on protein stabilisation are also governed by this principle , i . e . the negative changes in volume with an increase in pressure cause an equilibrium shift towards bond formation . Alongside this , the breaking of ions is also enhanced by HP , as this leads to a volume decrease due to the electrostriction of water . Moreover , as hydrogen bonds are stabilised by high pressure , as their formation involves a volume decrease , pressure does not generally affect covalent bonds . Consequently , HP can disrupt large molecules of or microbial cell structures , such as enzymes , proteins , lipids and cell membranes , and leave small molecules such as vitamins and flavour components unaffected ( Linton and Patterson 2000 ) . Due to the work of compression , HPP causes temper - atures to rise inside the HP vessel . This is known as adiabatic heating and should be given due consideration during the preservation process . The value of the temper - ature increments in the food and pressure transmitting medium will be different , as they depend on food composition as well as processing temperature and pressure and the rate of pressurisation ( Otero et al . 2007a ) . In food sterilisation , adiabatic heating can be used advantageously to provide heating without the presence of sharp thermal gradients at the process boundaries ( Toepfl et al . 2006 ) . Knowledge of the engineering concepts of HPP has been broadened extensively in recent times . Therefore , relevant engineering principles that promote the capabilities of HPP are discussed in the following . The Mechanisms of Cellular Inactivation The effectiveness of a food preservation technique is primarily evaluated on the basis of its ability to eradicate the pathogenic microorganisms that are present . Cellular inactivation is closely associated with morphological changes that occur within individual microbial cells during Table 1 Main suppliers of high pressure processing equipment and services Company Company specialisation Services and / or products offered Pressure capacity of standard machines ( MPa ) Resato International http : / / www . resato . com This company commercialises laboratory and industrial high pressure hydrostatic machines The company pressure shift freezing systems . They use single shot or reciprocating intensifiers which are suitable for one or multiple autoclave systems Up to 1 , 400 Avure Technologies Inc . , http : / / www . avure . com Manufactures batch presses that pasteurize prepared ready - to - eat foods , e . g . packaged meats Have unique pumping systems that enhance product throughput . Continuous systems are not currently being developed 600 Elmhurst Research , Inc . , http : / / www . elmhurstresearch . com Designs and manufactures batch presses The company has developed a system which incorporates patent pending vessel technology . The system that was developed exclusively for the food processing industry from scratch 689 Engineered Pressure Systems Inc . , http : / / www . epsi - highpressure . com Manufactures laboratory and industrial high pressure equipment for many industries Manufacture hot , cold and warm isostatic presses 100 – 900 Kobelco , http : / / www . kobelco . co . jp Manufactures laboratory and industrial high pressure equipment for many industries Manufacture many hot and cold isostatic presses , wet and dry - bag processes 98 - 686 Mitsubishi Heavy Industries , http : / / www . mhi . co . jp Manufactures laboratory and industrial high pressure equipment for many industries Manufacture isostatic pressing system with large operating temperature range as option 686 NC Hyperbaric , http : / / www . nchyperbaric . com European leader in manufacture of industrial HPP equipment Designed a system to work with different volumes , guaranteeing the necessary versatility to process a wide range of products of different sizes and shapes 600 Stansted Fluid Power LTD . http : / / www . sfp - 4 - hp . demon . co . uk Offer a full range of advanced , high pressure equipment for research and development applications Single and multiple vessels with temperature control from − 20 °C to + 150 °C . Multiple Telemetry option and variable pressurisation times from 2s Up to 1 , 400 Uhde Hockdrucktechnik , http : / / www . uhde - hpt . com Uhde develop and build high pressure processes for industry and research purposes Help in the development of plant processes from initial testing to full scale application 700 Food Bioprocess Technol ( 2008 ) 1 : 2 – 34 5 HPP ; studies of which , as briefly reviewed by Hartmann et al . ( 2006 ) , are summarised in Table 2 . From the small group of investigations , which have thus far focussed on this area , it is evident that cell disruption is highly specific to the geometry of the bacteria , as opposed to its gram - type ( Ludwig and Schreck 1997 ; Schreck et al . 1999 ) , although this is disputed ( Yuste et al . 2001 ) . Moreover , the presence of a cell wall does not mean pressure resistance is enhanced ; in fact , quite the opposite has been hypothesised by Ludwig et al . ( 2002 ) who suggested that pressure may induce mechanical stresses on the microbial cell wall , which , in turn , may interact with inactivation mechanisms . Although the above studies show strong correlations between the physiological state of the microorganisms and degree of pressurisation , cell disruption during processing remains poorly understood at the fundamental level of fluid and cell interactions ( Smith et al . 2000a ) . Up to quite recently , this has been quantified via a cell - wall - strength model which presumes disruption to occur when the fluid stresses that are imparted on a cell wall exceed some defined threshold . This has been successfully applied to animal cells , as these have no proper cell wall ( Thomas and Zhang 1998 ) . Progress , however , has been slower for microbial cells whose well - structured cell walls add considerable complexity . As a consequence , there is a lack of understanding and characterisation of the mechanical properties of microbial cell walls ( Smith et al . 2000a ) . To appreciate the mechanical strength of microbial cells and the factors that contribute to that strength , investiga - tions of cell mechanical properties under periods of pressurisation are necessary . As yeast cells are widely used to produce intracellular bio - products of commercial interest , experimental techniques have been employed to evaluate their properties ; for example , via micromanipulation , the relationship between bursting force , diameter and the relationship between force and displacement of yeast cells have been established ( Mashmoushy et al . 1998 ) . Fortu - nately , yeast cell walls are structurally complex , so experimentation may provide scope for understanding the mechanisms of inactivation in complex microorganisms such as Escherichia coli . In recent years , it has been found that unless three dimensionless parameters , namely the permeability constant , the initial thickness to radius ratio and the initial radial stretch ratio , were found from experi - ments , then non - unique properties for cell walls of biological cells could be derived ( Smith et al . 1998 ) . To determine the cell wall properties for yeast cells using these dimensionless parameters , Smith et al . ( 2000a ) conducted compression experiments . They used osmotic theory to interpret measurements of cell volume as a function of external osmotic pressure . Then , they quantified the effect of osmotic pressure and cell compression rates on the bursting force , deformation at bursting and cell diameter . To determine the intrinsic cell wall properties and cell wall failure criteria , the force - deformation data obtained were used in conjunction with a finite element ( FE ) mechanical model ( Smith et al . 2000b ) . Specifically , this model determined the mean Young ’ s modulus ( when used in conjunction with simple membrane theory ) , mean maxi - mum von Mises stress - at - failure and mean maximum von Mises strain - at - failure . Unfortunately , internal organelles of the yeast cell which are also susceptible to stress were not considered , thereby reducing the models applicability in the area of HPP . Hartmann and Delgado ( 2004 ) addressed this issue by using the above information in the development of a FE mechanical model of a yeast cell during the compression phase of HPP ( as shown in Fig . 2 ) , which was experimen - Table 2 Mechanisms of cellular inactivation Target microorganism Findings Reference E . coli S . aureus P . aeruginosa Morphological changes were only noticed for the rod shaped E . coli and P . aeruginosa of which P . aeruginosa was more pressure sensitive , whereas the S . aureus ( cocci ) was the most resistant to pressure . Ludwig and Schreck ( 1997 ) M . pneumoniae The pressure sensitivity of M . pneumoniae , which has no cell wall , was high compared to cell wall gram - positive bacteria . The cell wall wasn ’ t found to protect the bacteria and no correlation between gram - type and pressure sensitivity was observed . However , correlation existed between cell shape and pressure sensitivity , similar to above Schreck et al . ( 1999 ) L . monocytogenes S . typhimurium Cellular morphology of L . monocytogenes was not affected when exposed to pressures of 400 MPa and membranes were perforated in small part of the population . S . typhimurium shows morphological changes such as dimples and swellings . Ritz et al . ( 2002 ) S . cerevisiae Cell wall disruption occurs at 400 MPa to 500 MPA . The organelles of the cell are very sensitive to pressure . The nuclear membrane begins to feel the affect at of 100 MPa , and at 400 MPA all the organelles are disrupted Shimada et al . ( 1993 ) S . fibuligera At 250 MPa the volume shrinkage of the cell was 15 % , after compression . The volume of non - viable cells was found to be 65 % after the holding time of 15 min . Perrier - Cornet et al . ( 1995 ) 6 Food Bioprocess Technol ( 2008 ) 1 : 2 – 34 tally validated with yeast cell volume reduction data from Perrier - Cornet et al . ( 1995 ) . Instead of using a volume loss equation as was done in the study of Smith et al . ( 1998 ) , a reduced form of the Cauchy equation of motion represented the mechanical behaviour of the yeast cell . Major organ - elles were modelled to investigate the homogeneity of the stress distribution in the cell as well as the cell deformation characteristics . The authors found that at 400 Mpa , the critical effective strain upon failure of the organelles membranes of 80 % ( Shimada et al . 1993 ) was predicted , correlating well to experimental studies of Shimada et al . ( 1993 ) . Most notably , Hartmann and Delgado ( 2004 ) predicted a non - homogenous ( as opposed to the widely assumed homogenous ) stress distribution in the cell . In addition , through dimensional analysis , the authors found that the compression rates did not influence cellular inactivation . They found that a frequency of over 700 MHz would be required for any noticeable inactivation to occur ; this frequency exceeds the feasible range of transient pressure protocols applicable in a pulsed - HPP system . The possibility of independence between inactiva - tion and compression rates has been shown experimentally for other microbial species ( Rademacher et al . 2002 ) . Later , Hartmann et al . ( 2006 ) derived a simple linear model to explain the stress distribution on a spherical shell ; although the model assumed constant material properties , the model still predicted the existence of heterogeneous mechanical stresses under high hydrostatic pressure . Thermal – Hydraulic Processes in HPP As HPP often involves heat interactions and fluid flow , thermal - hydraulic investigations , i . e . the study of thermo - dynamic and fluid - dynamic phenomena , have shown to be of high importance . The thermal – hydraulic processes that occur during the HPP of both fluid and solid food systems can be highly influential on the efficiency and effectiveness of the overall process ( Hartmann 2002 ; Rademacher et al . 2002 ) . During compression / decompression phases , the internal energy of the HP system changes , resulting in heat transfer between the internal system and its boundaries . The first experimental observations of fluid temperature in a HP vessel were made by Pehl et al . ( 2000 ) who revealed a heterogeneous temperature distribution via high - pressure thermochromatic liquid crystals . Using the same experi - mental rig at room temperatures , Rademacher et al . ( 2002 ) noted periods of forced convection during the compression / decompression phase followed by natural convection during the pressure holding stage . The observed tempera - ture gradients were found to be dependent on the pressure ramp employed . These thermal – hydraulic characteristics were also confirmed through numerical simulations by Hartmann ( 2002 ) who noted that if food particles or microorganisms were to be suspended in the fluid they would undergo periodic temperature treatment with a variation of 6 K due to a vortex motion in the pressurised cell . Owing to the ability of the numerical simulations to provide non - intrusive flow , thermal and concentration field predictions , such techniques were deemed necessary in gaining thorough understanding of the phenomena inherent in HPP , especially when the scale - up phenomena need to be analysed ( e . g . layout and design of high pressure devices , packages , etc . ; Hartmann 2002 ) . An important contribution to the understanding of thermal – hydraulics in the HPP of a fluid – food system at mild temperatures ( i . e . 313 K ) was made by Hartmann and Delgado ( 2002 ) . The authors used computational fluid dynamics ( CFD ) and dimensional analyses to determine the timescales of convection , conduction and bacterial inactivation , the relative values of which contribute to the efficiency and uniformity of conditions during HPP . These timescales are summarised in Table 3 from which the dependency of both convection and conduction timescales on the geometry of the processing equipment and the Fig . 2 Finite element model of yeast cell under compression ( Hartmann and Delgado 2004 ) Food Bioprocess Technol ( 2008 ) 1 : 2 – 34 7 transport mechanisms of the fluid matrix , i . e . dynamic viscosity and thermal conductivity , can be seen . During the study , conductive and convective timescales were directly compared to the inactivation timescale to provide a picture of the thermal – hydraulic states of HP vessel during bacterial inactivation . Results of high industrial relevance were provided as , for example ; it was shown for pilot scale systems that when processed fluids exhibit a larger convection timescale than the inactivation timescale , inten - sive fluid motion and convective heat transfer resulted in homogenous bacterial inactivation . Conversely , non - unifor - mities in the inactivation process were dominant when the convection timescale was significantly smaller and the conduction timescale was significantly larger than the inactivation timescale . Furthermore , the simulations of industrial - scaled systems showed greater efficiency in bacterial inactivation as the compression heating subsisted for greater time periods when compared to smaller laboratory systems . As regards the HP vessel boundaries , Otero et al . ( 2002a ) and Hartmann et al . ( 2004 ) showed that the thermal properties of the HP vessel boundaries have considerable influence on the uniformity of the process , and insulated material promoted the most effective conditions . As well as this , the insulated vessel was found to increase the efficiency of HPP by 40 % ( Hartmann et al . 2004 ) . A dimensionless analysis of the convective heat transfer mechanisms in liquid foods systems under pressure was also done by Kowalczyk and Delgado ( 2007a ) who advised that HP systems with a characteristic dimension of 1 m alongside a low viscous medium should be used to avoid heterogeneous processing of the product . Other studies provided similar solutions to the thermal – hydraulic phenomena in HPP systems containing packaged ultra - heat treatment ( UHT ) milk ( Hartmann et al . 2003 ) packaged enzyme mixture ( Hartmann et al . 2003 ) solid beef fat ( Ghani and Farid 2006 ) and solid food analogue material ( Otero et al . 2007a ) , e . g . tylose with similar properties to meat and agar with similar properties to water , were both used . In both of the investigations of Hartmann et al . , the most significant results , revealed by validated CFD simulations , showed strong coupling between con - centrations of the surviving microorganisms and the spatial distribution of low temperature zones within the food package in the HP vessel . A low thermal conductive package material was also found to improve the uniformity of processing by preserving the elevated temperature level within the package throughout the pressurisation phase ; an average difference of about two log reductions was found per tenfold increase in the package thermal conductivity . The two - dimensional CFD simulations of Otero et al . ( 2007a ) found that the filling ratio of the HP vessel played a major role in process uniformity , with convective currents having least effect on heat transfer when this ratio is large ( Fig . 3 ) . They also showed that by anticipating the temperature increase , which results from compression heating , and by allowing the pressure transmitting medium to supply the appropriate quantity of heat , the uniformity of HPP was enhanced when both large and small sample ratios were used ( Fig . 4 ) . More recently , Ghani and Farid ( 2006 ) used three - dimensional CFD simulations to illustrate both convective and conductive heat transfer in a HPP system loaded with pieces of solid beef fat . The simulation showed a greater adiabatic heating in the beef fat than the pressure transmitting medium owing to the greater compression heating coefficient used in this case . A notable feature of the above modelling studies was that contrasting results were possible owing to ( 1 ) the HP systems having different operational properties or ( 2 ) numerical modelling limitations . Therefore , different boundary conditions have been used , and , consequently , results between studies cannot be directly compared . For example , in the studies of Hartmann and Delgado ( 2003 ) and Hartmann et al . ( 2004 ) , a HP vessel which permitted the transient pressure increase as a result of the mass Table 3 HP - associated equations suitable for industrial application Fluid - food systems Packed food systems Reason and references Convection timescale t hyd ¼ r D 2 h t hyd me ¼ r D 2 k h ; t hyd p ¼ r D 2 p k h By calculating these timescales the uniformity of HPP can be determined ( Hartmann and Delgado 2002 ) . Conduction timescale t th ¼ r D 2 c p l t th me ¼ r D 2 C p k l ; t th pp ¼ r pp D 2 pp C ppp k l ; t th p ¼ r p D 2 p C pp k l Inactivation timescale t in ¼ 1 k t in ¼ kk Adiabatic temperature rise dTdP ¼ a TC P r ( 1 ) CH food ¼ CH X (cid:2) A þ CH Y (cid:2) B þ CH Z (cid:2) C ð Þ A þ B þ C ( 2 ) dTdP ¼ a TC P r ( 1 ) CH food ¼ CH X (cid:2) A þ CH Y (cid:2) B þ CH Z (cid:2) C ð Þ A þ B þ C ( 2 ) Eq . 1 should be used estimate the temperature increase for water based foods . Eq . 2 should be used for fatty foods ( Rasanayagam et al . 2003 ) . 8 Food Bioprocess Technol ( 2008 ) 1 : 2 – 34 augmentation of the inflowing pressure medium and deformation of the packaged food , also called the indirect HP system , was modelled . Otero et al . ( 2007a ) and Ghani and Farid ( 2006 ) modelled a direct system , i . e . a plunger - press which increased vessel pressure directly via the displacement of a drive piston . Both a direct and an indirect system are illustrated in Fig . 5 . In contrast to Otero et al . ( 2007a ) , Ghani and Farid ( 2006 ) and Hartmann et al . ( 2004 ) , Hartmann and Delgado ( 2003 ) modelled pressure buildup to occur instantaneously in HP vessel because of modelling limitations . The authors noted that this assump - tion was justified because the pressure holding time exceeded the compression / decompression phase of HPP . However , as investigations with a laboratory scale ( 0 . 8 l ) systems were cited in this justification , i . e . with small convection and conduction timescales ( Pehl et al . 2000 ) , whereas systems with much larger convection and conduc - tion timescales were modelled ( 6 . 3 l ) , this must be considered cautiously . Overall , the difference between the boundary conditions used in these HPP modelling studies lies in the adjustment they provided to the relative contributions of forced and natural convection and , as a result , their effect on temperature distribution . It was evident from the above studies that both temperature and velocity fields are transient during the phase of pressure holding , as the fluid velocity distribution influences strongly the temperature distribution and vice versa ( Otero et al . 2007a ) . Therefore , to accurately study the relative contributions of forced and natural convection to the effectiveness of HPP , it would be most beneficial to measure velocity as well as temperature and use both to develop a comprehensive validation in future simulation studies . Thermophysical Properties Designing safe , effective and efficient HPP systems demands the modelling of conceptual designs throughout the range of pressures and temperatures experienced in the food industry . One of the main difficulties when developing or optimising these systems is the lack of knowledge about the important thermophysical properties of food while under pressure . However , such knowledge is important as , Fig . 3 Temperature distribution in an HP chamber with a large filling ratio ( Otero et al . 2006 ) Fig . 4 Temperature evolution in a big Tylose sample calculated from the model : the initial temperature of both the Tylose sample and the pressure medium is a 40 °C and b 24 °C , i . e . showing the benefits of anticipating the adiabatic temperature rise ( Otero et al . 2006 ) Food Bioprocess Technol ( 2008 ) 1 : 2 – 34 9 from an engineering point of view , theoretically based heat and mass transfer models that allow the accurate prediction of the physical history of food undergoing HP are desirable . For example , considering the thermal – hydraulic studies reviewed above , it would not have been possible to evaluate the relative importance of process parameters such as the compression rate ( Hartmann 2002 ) , the size of the HP vessel ( Hartmann et al . 2003 ) , the viscosity of the pressure transmitting medium ( Hartmann and Delgado 2002 ) and the process uniformity ( Otero et al . 2007a ) etc . unless the physical properties of the systems fluids were modelled as functions of pressure and temperature . For these calculations , the thermophysical properties used include density , viscosity , specific heat and thermal con - ductivity of both the pressure - transmitting medium and the food product being processed . Of course , not all properties have been modelled precisely , especially when limited experimental data were available concerning the property ’ s variation over the desired pressure and temperature range , and when omitting the precise details of its dependency would not have a large bearing on the accuracy of simulation results , e . g . as Hartmann et al . ( 2003 ) found when prescribing constant values for thermal conductivity in CFD simulations ( note that the variation of thermal conductivity with pressure and temperature above freezing point is slight as can be seen in Fig . 6 . ) . In addition , when HPP involves a change of phase , the ice fraction , the enthalpy and the initial freezing point also need to be modelled ( Otero et al . 2006 ) . Models of these properties during HPP can be derived from ( 1 ) additive models considering the food properties under pressure ( Otero et al . 2006 ) ; ( 2 ) in the phase change domain data at atmospheric pressure can be shifted according to the freezing point depression , or an experimentally observed change , associated with the applied pressure ( Denys et al . Fig . 5 Examples of a a direct system and b an indirect systems ( Urrutia - Benet 2005 ) Fig . 6 The variation in thermal conductivity of a Tylose sample with respect to temperature and pressure ( Otero et al . 2006 ) 10 Food Bioprocess Technol ( 2008 ) 1 : 2 – 34 1997 ; Hartmann et al . 2003 ) and ( 3 ) the physical property of water under pressure can be multiplied by a constant which represents the ratio of the foods physical property to that of water at atmospheric pressure ( Hartmann et al . 2003 ; Ghani and Farid 2006 ) . Another method used by Chen et al . ( 2007 ) and Kowalczyk et al . ( 2005 ) was to firstly run two - dimensional CFD simulations for a food product undergo - ing the HPLT process and then fit the resulting curves to experimental data by varying the appropriate thermophys - ical property . A similar technique was followed by Schluter et al . ( 2004 ) who allowed coefficients in Weibull distribu - tions of the physical properties to vary in accordance with the prevailing experimental conditions . The variation of some important thermophysical properties under pressure are discussed in the following . Viscosity Fluids which undergo pressurisation become more viscous especially at subzero temperatures . Forst et al . ( 2000 ) have published experimental data on the viscosity of water at various temperatures as a function of pressure . Effective use of these data permits the results obtained from viscosity – temperature equations , such as that developed by Watson et al . ( 1980 ) , to be adjusted so that the pressure experienced in the HP system can be represented ( Hartmann et al . 2004 ) . Many other numerical representations for viscosity of fluid systems as a function of temperature have been published by Seeton ( 2006 ) . For liquid food systems over limited ranges of concentration , the effect of solids concentration on viscosity of liquid food can be described by either exponential ( Vitali and Rao 1984 ) or a power type of relationship ( Rao et al . 1986 ) . The dynamic relationship with viscosity and pressure , however , is not so well documented . In HPP simulations of UHT milk , Hartmann et al . ( 2003 ) considered milk to follow the same pressure – viscosity profile as that of water , represented by : h M p ; T ð Þ ¼ h M T ð Þ h W T ð Þ (cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1) amb p h W p ; T ð Þ ð 1 Þ However , owing to phenomena such as micelle disrup - tion , the viscosity of milk during HPP cannot be explained accurately in this way ( Harte et al . 2003 ) . Density The equation of state developed by Saul and Wagner ( 1989 ) , which accounts for the compressibility of pure water under high pressure , has been used to describe density as a function of pressure and temperature during studies when convection heat transfer during HPP is being modelled ( Ghani and Farid 2006 ) ; other sources for density data have also been used for water - like substances ( Otero et al . 2007a ) . As regards food , high pressure has been found to increase the density of a food analogue by about 3 . 5 % of its original value for each 100 - MPa increment in applied pressure ( Otero et al . 2006 ) . Modelling compression \ decompression effects within a food sample during HPP requires that the samples density – temperature – pressure relationship be taken into account . Denys et al . ( 2000 ) measured this relationship in apple sauce and tomato paste and regressed data to form a simple equation which they then incorporated in their numerical heat transfer model . When such measurements have not been possible , it was necessary to allow the density of the food sample to vary as a function of water density , assuming that no phase change would occur during the HPP ( Hartmann and Delgado 2003 ; Ghani and Farid 2006 ) , i . e . : r M p ; T ð Þ ¼ r M T ð Þ r W T ð Þ (cid:1) (cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1) amb p r W p ; T ð Þ ð 2 Þ In the phase - change domain , food density also increases with an increase in applied pressure . Otero et al . ( 2006 ) have shown predictions from an additive density model under pressure to be more accurate than shifting the atmospheric pressure density data according to the freezing point depression . This is because shifting the data did not take into account the increment registered in liquid water and ice densities under pressure ( Otero et al . 2006 ) . Specific Heat In many foods , water substantially influences specific heat . In addition , for matters of reducing modelling complexity , the specific heat of the solid food components of a food matrix can be assumed independent of temperature and pressure ( Otero et al . 2006 ) . This means that the lower the foods water content , the greater the difference between predictions for the food and specific heat of water ( Miles 1991 ) . For pure water at temperatures over 0 °C , increasing the pressure causes the specific heat to decrease in an almost linear fashion . For example , using the thermophys - ical data corresponding to pure water ( Lemmon et al . 2005 ) , its specific heat at 1 °C was found to decrease gradually from 4 , 216 J kg − 1 K − 1 at atmospheric pressure to 3 , 488 J kg − 1 K − 1 at 600 MPa . A similar gradient in the specific heat versus pressure curve exists for all water temperatures in the range of 0 to 120 °C ( Otero et al . 2002b ) . By assuming that this gradient is representative of a food sample , the specific heat of the food can then be determined as a function of pressure . For example , in the absence of accurate data , Ghani and Farid ( 2006 ) represented the Food Bioprocess Technol ( 2008 ) 1 : 2 – 34 11 dependency of specific heat on temperature and pressure as follows , assuming that no phase change would occur during the HPP : C pM p ; T ð Þ ¼ C pM T ð Þ C pW T ð Þ (cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1) amb p C pW p ; T ð Þ ð 3 Þ However , it must be noted that the food should have a high water content for this type of modelling to be accurate . It is well known that the latent heat of fusion is reduced under pressure and must be carefully considered when modelling high - pressure low - temperature processes . There - fore , the apparent specific heat of foods , which includes the contribution of the heat capacity and the latent heat of fusion , is generally used in modelling studies . The reason for this is that unlike the specific heat , the apparent specific heat can be modified to account for the freezing point depression and the reduction in latent heat of fusion via the simple shifting approach . For more details , the reader is referred to the articles of Otero et al . ( 2006 ) and Denys et al . ( 2000 ) . Thermal Conductivity In the modelling of HPP at moderate temperatures , Ghani and Farid ( 2006 ) have followed the above methods in describing the dependency of thermal conductivity on temperature and pressure when no physical data for the modelled food under pressure was available : l M p ; T ð Þ ¼ l M T ð Þ l W T ð Þ (cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1)(cid:1) amb p l W p ; T ð Þ ð 4 Þ In the main , thermal conductivity does not change substantially under pressure in foods above their initial freezing point and can even be considered constant in modelling exercises ( Hartmann et al . 2003 ) . In the phase change domain , both shifting the atmospheric data and using the additive model to calculate the thermal conduc - tivity give reasonably accurate results , as thermal conduc - tivity shifts according to freezing point depression without exhibiting anomalous behaviour ( Otero et al . 2006 ) . Phase Transitions The level of pressure imposed on a system determines the liquid – solid phase transitions in water and food . The most important benefits of high pressure combined with low temperatures can be observed in the phase change diagram of water and include ( 1 ) freezing point depression ( a minimum of − 22 °C at 209 MPa ) , ( 2 ) reduced latent heat of fusion ( from 334 kJ / kg at atmospheric pressure to 193 kJ / kg at 209 MPa ) , ( 3 ) a reduced change in specific volume and ( 4 ) possibilities for the crystallisation ( from 209 MPa ) of higher level ice polymorphs with greater density than water ( Schluter et al . 2004 ) . All of these conditions are evident in Fig . 7 . Phase changes are classified according to the thermody - namic changes occurring at transition temperatures ( Roos 2003 ) . During food processing and storage , phase tran - sitions govern the deviations in a foods physical state , with the temperature and pressure at which they occur being specific to the food material . As discussed by LeBail et al . ( 2003 ) , Schluter ( 2003 ) and Roos ( 2003 ) , two types of phase transitions occur in food systems , namely those of the first and second order . In first - order transitions , the first derivatives of the thermodynamic functions exhibit a discontinuity in heat capacity and thermal expansion coefficient at transition temperature ( i . e . solid – liquid – gas transitions ) . The amorphous structures of a food system , which are formed during freezing or other forms of processing , will undergo second - order transitions involving no such discontinuity as , unlike first - order transitions , no latent heat is required during the phase change ; instead , there is a step - change in the properties suffering disconti - nuity in the first - order transition ( Roos 2003 ) . The existence of second - order transitions in amorphous food structures increases the complexity of physical and chem - ical changes in foods ( Slade and Levine 1991 ) . The freezing of foods gives rise to metastable , amorphous or partially amorphous structures which exhibit time - depen - dent changes as they approach an equilibrium state , i . e . crystalline ( Roos 2003 ) . The concept of “ metastable states ” as regards the formation of different ice types was introduced about 40 years ago ( Urrutia - Benet 2005 ) . The concept was also recognised by Kalichevsky et al . ( 1995 ) who noted the possibility of obtaining certain ice forms , such as ice III or ice VI , outside their range of stability . Metastable states can be defined as those states at which the free energy is at a relative minimum ( Schluter 2003 ) , i . e . they correspond to a domain in which one phase exists where another phase would have a lower free energy . Their very existence gives exploitable advantages to the HPLT industry . For example , in pressure shift freezing , the presence of a metastable supercooled liquid phase in the domains of ice I or ice III could allow larger thermal gradients to be employed , thereby permitting reduced processing times , and greater amounts of ice instantaneously formed upon depressurisa - tion ( Urrutia - Benet et al . 2006 ) . Moreover , HPLT microbial inactivation was found to perform best in the range of conditions corresponding to the metastable region in the domain of ice III ( Shen et al . 2005 ) . Schluter et al . ( 2004 ) recently provided definitions of the various metastable phases , which , in turn , have been illustrated on the phase change diagram of water ( Fig . 8 ) by Urrutia - Benet et al . ( 2007 ) . Schluter et al . ( 2004 ) also showed that freezing 12 Food Bioprocess Technol ( 2008 ) 1 : 2 – 34 within metastable states could be predicted by a one - dimensional numerical heat transfer model , which used initial freezing points obtained from an experimentally determined phase diagram for a potato sample , illustrated in Fig . 9 . The model itself was used as a tool to give back the corresponding values for the thermophysical properties for each experimental condition . Doing this allowed the authors to gain a very close fit to experimental profiles , even when solid – solid transitions ( ice I – ice II ) occurred . In the comprehensive study of Schluter ( 2003 ) , the authors made some important conclusions , namely ( 1 ) as volume changes increase concomitantly with pressure from + 9 % at 0 . 1 MPa to + 13 MPa at 209 MPa , it is desirable to pressurise the sample to the domain of ice III and as close as possible to the triple point so that ice III has a better chance of being formed ( volume changes are − 3 % ) , ( 2 ) the total freezing time may not be reduced when freezing to ice III , as precooling time may be higher , ( 3 ) the degree of supercooling is enhanced when freezing to ice III , thereby promoting uniformity in crystal size and distribution . As evident from Fig . 8 , depending on idealised freezing or thawing path followed in the phase transition diagram , numerous different freezing or thawing processes can be achieved . In fact , according to the working group of the European project SAFE - ICE , there are in total seven governing processes , and within this total , 13 special cases exist ( Urrutia - Benet et al . 2004 ) . In the same study , the authors provided clear terminology for each of these 20 processes via schematic and experimental paths and temperature and pressure profiles ; the most commercially important of these HPLT processes will be discussed at a later stage of this review . Supercooling was also clearly Fig . 7 The influence of pres - sure on the enthalpy of fusion of ice , the specific volume changes and the phase transition temper - atures ( Urrutia - Benet 2005 ) Food Bioprocess Technol ( 2008 ) 1 : 2 – 34 13 defined as the sudden temperature increase from nucleation temperature to the initial freezing point . Table 4 summarises the standardised nomenclature in HPP research . Of the governing high pressure freezing and thawing processes , those that have been modelled include subzero cooling at high pressure , pressure - shift freezing ( PSF ) , pressure - assisted freezing ( PAF ) , pressure - assisted thawing and pressure induced thawing ( PIT ) . Numerical modelling can provide a clearer picture of the complex heat and mass transfer mechanisms that govern these processes , and so it is quickly becoming a comprehensive optimising technique in freezing applications . Denys et al . ( 1997 ) were one of the first to develop a numerical model of the conduction heat transfer within an analogue food during PSF and PIT processes . In their study , the thermophysical data were shifted along the temperature melting curve according to the prevalent pressure . Reasonable correspondence between predictions and experimental measurements were achieved . Later , the predictions were enhanced when the authors correctly permitted the apparent specific heat to change as a function of pressure ( Denys et al . 2000 ) . Many of the other pressure - supported phase - transition modelling studies , us - Fig . 8 The metastable states that exist on the phase diagram of water ( Urrutia - Benet 2005 ) Fig . 9 The phase diagram of a potato sample ( Schluter 2003 ) 14 Food Bioprocess Technol ( 2008 ) 1 : 2 – 34 ing conduction heat transfer models , were reviewed by Denys et al . ( 2001 ) and Schluter et al . ( 2004 ) and will not be covered here . Instead , the most recent contributions , all of which include convective heat transfer from pressure medium to the processed sample , will be reviewed . Kowalczyk et al . ( 2004 ) were the first to model convective heat transfer during the pressure - assisted freezing and thawing of water . Conservation equations for phase change were adapted to account for a compressible medium , and alongside linearised source terms , they were solved with CFD simulations . Contrasting heat transfer mechanisms between freezing under atmospheric pressure and high pressure were observed . Most notably , the authors stressed the importance of future studies or applications to deter - mine convection timescales for both the heating and cooling processes and to provide correct heating parameters during the heating phase of thawing to avoid recrystallisa - tion . In a later study , Kowalczyk and Delgado ( 2007b ) found that gravity considerably influenced the shape of ice formed under pressure , although volumetric ice formations under low - gravity and normal conditions were not signif - icantly different . Recently , convective and conductive heat transfer through a tylose solution have been modelled with the aim of determining optimum processing lengths for semi - continuous HPLT unit , and the results indicated its feasibility in a commercial setting ( Otero et al . 2007b ) . It is also worth noting the study of Ozmutlu et al . ( 2006 ) who were the first to experimentally observe the phase change of water under pressure . This study determined the relative contributions of momentum and energy transfers during the development of both ice I and ice III via particle image velocitometry and thermography . Such encouraging developments provide an excellent platform for the devel - opment of comprehensively validated models to gain understanding of the physical mechanisms that govern HPLT processes . Developments in HPP Equipment and Processes The general process - flow for both batch and / or semi - continuous HPP has been discussed by other authors and will not be considered here in detail ( see Hogan et al . 2005 ; van den Berg et al . 2001 ; Mertens and Deplace 1993 ; Torres and Velazquez 2005 ; Hjelmqwist 2005 ) . Batch processing is the more conventional of the two operations and was relatively easy to implement when HPP was first commercialised in the food industry , as hot and cold isostatic pressing technologies could be directly adopted from the ceramic and metal industries . For batch systems , advances in mechanical engineering have allowed the development of enhanced intensifier designs , advanced opening and closing mechanisms that promote efficient processing times and better prestressing techniques that allow vessels to work under higher pressures with greater fatigue resistance ( van den Berg et al . 2001 ) . A semi - continuous ( or in - line ) system can act as an alternative to batch operations only when a pumpable product is being processed . Consequently , over the years , their development Table 4 Summary of HPP / HPLT terminology Term Definition Reference HPP High pressure processing Commonly used UHP Ultra high pressure Commonly used HHP High hydrostatic pressure Commonly used HP High pressure Commonly used Come - up time Time taken to pressurise the HP vessel Commonly used Hold - time Time taken to maintain pressure in the HP vessel at a predefined level Commonly used HPLT High pressure low temperature Urrutia - Benet et al . ( 2004 ) PAF Pressure assisted freezing : an unfrozen sample is frozen after pressurization at a constant pressure Urrutia - Benet et al . ( 2004 ) PSF Pressure shift freezing : a sample is frozen due to a pressure release , leading to an instantaneous crystallization of ice , homogeneously distributed throughout the sample Urrutia - Benet et al . ( 2004 ) PIF Pressure induced freezing : a thawed sample can frozen by forcing to a phase transition by pressure increase ( not possible to get ice I ) Urrutia - Benet et al . ( 2004 ) PAT Pressure assisted thawing : a sample is thawed at a constant pressure , the difference between the sample and the bath temperature being the driving force for this process Urrutia - Benet et al . ( 2004 ) PIT Pressure induced thawing : a frozen sample can be forced to a phase transition from ice to liquid water by applying pressure along the melting curve of ice I Urrutia - Benet et al . ( 2004 ) Plateau time or phase transition time The time span between nucleation and reaching a sample temperature ( center ) 5°C below the corresponding initial freezing point Urrutia - Benet et al . ( 2004 ) Supercooling The sudden temperature increase from nucleation temperature to the initial freezing point Urrutia - Benet et al . ( 2004 ) Food Bioprocess Technol ( 2008 ) 1 : 2 – 34 15 has been specifically aimed at the food industry . Most notably , a semi - continuous operation promoted by many HP system developers couples a number of pressure systems so that most of the energy stored in a pressurised vessel can be then used to pressurise a second vessel , thus , saving energy and process time ( van den Berg et al . 2001 ) . Some of the recent engineering developments and innova - tive concepts that have contributed to the efficiency of HPP operations will be discussed in the following . From a review of the patented technology , it is obvious that scientific research has caused many of the HPP developments in the food industry . For example , a controlled temperature HP system has been developed based on the adiabatic heating phenomenon ( Ting and Lonneborg 2002 ) . The authors claimed that this system would improve the efficacy of the pressure treatment process by providing an insulated vessel into which the food product could be placed . This simple concept came about only 2 years after the research of Denys et al . ( 2000 ) who proposed that a high level of HPP uniformity could be achieved if the temperature increase resulting from com - pression was anticipated and an appropriate heat source at the boundary of the product was then applied . As discussed above , more recent contributions have confirmed this hypothesis , adding more credence to the potential of this invention ( Otero et al . 2007a ; Hartmann et al . 2004 ) . Other inventions have also been patented contempora - neously to scientific research . For example , recent studies have observed textural changes in HP - treated vegetables to be primarily associated with very rapid changes in hydrostatic pressure ( compression and / or decompression ) during processing , which promotes turgidity loss ( Trejo - Ayara et al . 2007 ) . Contemporaneously with these findings , Ting and Anderson ( 2006 ) have developed a system and method for decompressing a HP vessel in a controlled manner over a selected period of time . In justifying this invention , the authors claimed that by controlling decom - pression , the texture of the processed product can in turn be controlled , and as pressure is one of the primary thermo - dynamic variables controlling complex biomolecular struc - ture , controlling decompression may allow delicate structures to remain near equilibrium . It was also suggested that rapid decompression of a food material may cause cellular damage due to rapid expansion of the gas that was dissolved during pressurisation , and that slow decompres - sion could allow gases to diffuse from structures without cellular rupture . Although these suggestions are in line with the scientific hypothesis of Trejo - Ayara et al . ( 2007 ) , they have yet to be proven within the scientific domain . In batch HPP systems , the product is generally treated in its final primary package ; commonly , the food and its package are treated together and so the entire pack remains a “ secure unit ” until the consumer opens it . When considering new technologies , which involve the treatment of packaging materials , it is important to study the safety of the material , the possible formation of compounds that influence the odour and taste of the food and the effects of pressure on mechanical and physical properties of the packaging material , e . g . strength and barrier properties . HPP requires airtight packages that can withstand a change in volume corresponding to the compressibility of the product ( Hugas et al . 2002 ) , as foods decrease in volume as a function of the pressure applied , while an equal expansion occurs on decompression . For this reason , the packaging used for treated foods must be able to accommodate up to a 15 % reduction in volume and return to its original volume without loss of seal integrity or barrier properties . Packag - ing materials , which are oxygen - impermeable and opaque to light , have been developed for keeping fresh colour and flavour of certain HP - treated foods ( Hayashi 1995 ) . For HP pasteurisation , a method and apparatus to store and transport treated and untreated foods during HPP have been developed by Hotek and Morrison ( 2006 ) . In production , the use of flexible pouches can achieve high packing ratios ; the use of semi - rigid trays is also possible , and vacuum - packed products are ideally suited for HPP . Miller and McLean ( 2006 ) have developed a flexible water - resistant packaging to prevent water from coming in contact with a food product during HPP . As the size and shape of the product will have major effects on the stacking effectiveness of the product carrier , they must be optimised for the most cost - effective process . This allows further development of innovative package shapes and printing graphics ( Ting and Marshall 2002 ) . Recent Applications of HPP Maintaining Food Quality Characteristics Knowledge of the sensory and nutritional characteristics of food products is essential for product development , quality control , sensory evaluation and design and evaluation of process equipment ( Ahmed et al . 2003 ; Polydera et al . 2003 ) . Thermal processing can often lead to quality changes in foods such as the destruction of vitamins , modifications to food texture and colour and the develop - ment of off - flavours . It is generally considered that HP operations can render harmful microorganisms inactive without having a detrimental effect on food quality ( Smelt 1998 ) . Increasing treatment pressures will generally in - crease microbial inactivation in shorter times , but higher pressures may also cause greater levels of protein denatur - ation and other potentially detrimental changes in food quality when compared to the unprocessed product . Yet , as no shear forces are generated by HPP , the physical structure 16 Food Bioprocess Technol ( 2008 ) 1 : 2 – 34 of most high - moisture product qualities remains minimally changed after treatment . Food characteristics which dictate the consumer ’ s perception of food quality , and consequent - ly the ability of HPP as a processing technology that retains these characteristics , are reviewed in the following . Some of the effects of HPLT process on food quality are summarised in Table 5 . Fruit and Vegetables and Derived Products As discussed by Cano and de Ancos ( 2005 ) , the texture of fruit and vegetable products are largely determined by the structure of the cell wall and middle lamella . Under pressure , the composition of these can change , as certain cell wall enzymes are inactivated and / or structural changes occur in the polysaccharide , lipid and protein fraction . On a physical level , HP can disrupt the tissues morphology , cell organelles and cell membranes ( Hartmann et al . 2004 ) . Pressure has been shown to have a softening influence on texture of fruits and vegetables , and tissue firmness may be lost due to cell wall breakdown and loss of turgidity ( De Belie 2002 ) . Trejo - Ayara et al . ( 2007 ) have found that textural changes in raw carrots are primarily caused by loss of turgidity induced by rapid compression and decompres - sion . They noted that texture loss may be reduced by turgidity manipulation of the cells or reduced by pectin methylesterase ( PME ) activation during high pressure processing given optimal conditions . In addition , they observed loss in texture when carrots were treated with pressures of above 300 MPa . Turgidity loss has also been found in the cell structures of spinach , which were exposed to a pressure level of 400 MPa for 30 min , owing to the soft and elastic structures which characterise the cell walls ; the same was not found for tougher plant tissues such as cauliflower ( Préstamo and Arroyo 1998 ) . Basak and Ramaswamy ( 1998 ) found that pressure - induced textural changes occurred in two phases , namely the textural change due to instantaneous pressure application followed by a gradual texture recovery or further loss during pressure holding . In the same study , texture recovery was achieved between 25 and 40 min for vegetable products under a pressure of 100 MPa . Biochemical changes also play an important role in texture modification during HPP . PME , which is found in plants and bacteria , de - esterifies plant cell wall pectins , resulting in methanol and pectin with a lower degree of methylation . In some cases , PME may enhance the texture of fruit and vegetable products ( Villarreal - Alba et al . 2004 ) . However , it is mostly known for inducing cloud separation in fruit juices , making PME inactivation a prerequisite in their processing . Moreover , the action of both PG and PME results in the softening of plant tissues , a decrease in viscosity , as well as cloud separation in fruit juices ( Cano and de Ancos 2005 ) . In response to these attributes , HPP has been used to improve or preserve the viscosity of tomato - based products by inactivating PG whilst maintain - ing PME activity ( Crelier et al . 2001 ; Fachin et al . 2002 , 2004 ) . As PME is reasonably tolerant to HP , complete inactivation is only successful in real food samples at very high pressures , i . e . pressures in the range 400 to 600 MPa combined with mild heat ( 50 °C ) to accelerate PME inactivation were advised by Nienaber and Shellhammer ( 2001 ) . Other influencing factors such as temperature , pH and solids and protein concentrations must be considered when pressure treating enzymes . The colour of most fruit and vegetable products such as jams , fruit juices and purees is generally preserved once thresholds of temperature and / or pH are observed ( Ludikhuyze and Hendrickx 2001 ) . For example , discol - ouration of broccoli juice was found after exposure to pressures Table 5 Summary of some food quality characteristics after HPP Product type Treatment ( MPa / °C / min ) Comparison to experimental control Reference Orange juice 500 / 35 / 5 Improved shelf - life , better consistency , lower acid loss Polydera et al . ( 2003 ) Sausages 500 / 65 / 5 and 15 Better texture , improved taste , more juicy , less firm , no loss in colour Mor - Mor and Yuste ( 2003 ) Green Beans 500 / room temp . / 1 Retention of colour , good firmness and extended shelf - life , showed residual peroxidase activity Krebbers et al . ( 2002 ) 1000 / 105 / 1 . 3 HPP showed similar reductions of vegetative cells and spores as in heat - sterilized green beans . Beef 150 / 60 / 30 Stimulated proteolysis and ultra - structural changes , tougher meat , less juicy Bertram et al . ( 2004 ) Salmon 200 / 20 / 10 Lighter colour , increased tissue firmness , shelf - life extended Lakshmanan et al . ( 2003 ) Cheese 400 / 20 / 20 Higher yield , higher pH , reduced microbial content , less crumbly , no colour change Sandra et al . ( 2004 ) Food Bioprocess Technol ( 2008 ) 1 : 2 – 34 17 at temperatures more than 50 °C , owing to chlorophyll degradation . However , below this temperature , pressures of up to 800 MPa have been applied without having a negative effect on chlorophyll ( Van Loey et al . 1998 ) . The ability to preserve colour at high pressures is not evident in some products , e . g . owing to polyphenol oxidase ( PPO ) , the colour of an onion becomes brown upon exposure to pressure , turning browner contemporaneously with increas - ing pressure intensity ( Butz et al . 1994 ) . Krebbers et al . ( 2003 ) observed an increase in colour of tomato juice when treating the samples at 700 MPa , for 1 min at 80 – 90 °C , as a result of compacting and homogenizing effects of the high pressure treatment . Rodrigo et al . ( 2007 ) found that no colour degradation of tomato appeared under combined thermal and high pressure treatment ( 300 – 700 MPa , 60 min , 65 °C ) , and a maximum increase in colour of 8 . 8 % was found for strawberry samples ( pH 5 ) . Thus , recent results suggest that HPP promotes colour retention once circumspect treatment is applied . In many fruit and vegetable products , HPP has either no or minor influence on flavour . Lambadarios and Zabetakis ( 2002 ) found that HP had very little effect on strawberry flavour compounds . Highest flavour stability was observed when samples were treated with pressures of 200 – 400 MPa , and the best flavour retention was observed at 400 MPa . Fruit juices , jams and purees all show excellent retention of fresh like flavours for a far greater time period than that exhibited by conventional thermal treatment under optimal storage conditions ( Ludikhuyze and Hendrickx 2001 ) . In fact , quite recently Baxter et al . ( 2005 ) found that HPP of orange juice could produce a product acceptable to most consumers even after storage for 12 weeks at temperatures up to 10 °C . On the other hand , storage at 30 °C causes 900 % increase in the rate of flavour deterioration ( Polydera et al . 2004 ) . Meat and Derived Products As pressure bears a considerable influence on the structure and functionality of many proteins , it consequently affects textural , sensory and nutritive properties of meat and meat - derived products ( Jung et al . 2000 ) . For meat systems , the effectiveness of HPP depends on the characteristics associated with the specific meat product and the intensity , holding - time and temperature of HPP operation . Other influencing factors include whether a meat is in a pre - or post - rigour state , the meats pH and ionic strength , etc . ( Cheftel and Culioli 1997 ) . Although investigations of the effects of HPP on meat quality are limited , studies have so far found that HP treatments can influence texture and colour in raw , cured and battered meat systems ( Jung et al . 2000 ; Carballo et al . 2000 ) . From the studies of raw meat , HPP has been shown to tenderise meat when applied pre - rigor , but does not have a pronounced effect on post - rigor meat at low temperatures , with some studies even showing that HP causes meat hardening ( Jung et al . 2000 ) . Recently , Ma and Ledward ( 2004 ) found a massive decrease in hardness , chewiness and cohesiveness at 200 MPa and 70 °C , which they attributed to increased enzymic activity on protein struc - tures that have been drastically modified . At lower pressure and temperature combinations , similar results to those found in the literature were reported . Jung et al . ( 2003 ) found that exposing raw meat to a high intensity of pressure ( 520 MPa ) for a short time ( 260 s ) led to a decrease in the evolution of total meat flora and a consequent delay of growth of a week . It was then hypothesised that this delay increases the meat maturation period , which , in turn , could improve the meat tenderness . The authors also found meat colour to be highly dependent on pressure intensity , as pressures of 130 MPa improved redness , yet pressures above 325 MPa resulted in strong discoloration , i . e . a heightening in brown colouration . Jung et al . ( 2003 ) related this discolouration to the increase in metmyoglobin ( Fe 3 + ) content in the meat after pressurisation . High pressure technology has also been employed as a stabilising and texturising technique for meat paste ( Apichartsrangkoon and Ledward 2002 ; Apichartsrangkoon 2003 ; Jung et al . 2000 ) . Pressure - induced changes in protein and subsequent aggregation leads to the formation of gels , which have better quality characteristics than those procured through thermal means ( Supavititpatana and Apichartsrangkoon 2007 ) . The influence of combined pressure and heat treatment in gel formation may or may not be synergistic , depending on the meat system under investigation ( Supavititpatana and Apichartsrangkoon 2007 ; Carballo et al . 2000 ) . Nevertheless , increasing either pressure or temperature during treatment was found to increase gel strength , leading to a useful means of producing meat pastes with different eating qualities ( Supavititpatana and Apichartsrangkoon 2007 ) . When applied to cooked sausages , Mor - Mor and Yuste ( 2003 ) reported that HPP increased cohesiveness and reduced firmness when compared to heat - treated sausages . They also reported that weight loss was significantly higher in heat - treated sausages than in HP - treated control samples . As for changes in colour , HP - treated meat pastes became lighter , as both the intensity of pressure and temperature increased , thereby reducing the saleability of meat products after processing at higher intensities ( Yuste et al . 1999 ; Supavititpatana and Apichartsrangkoon 2007 ) . For dry - cured meat products , their ability to retain quality characteristics during HPP and throughout chilled storage has been investigated by some authors ( Rubio et al . 2007 ; Serra et al . 2007 ) . Rubio et al . ( 2007 ) found that 18 Food Bioprocess Technol ( 2008 ) 1 : 2 – 34 deterioration in sensorial qualities of treated - cured ham ( 500 MPa for 5 min ) limited its storage time to 90 days , although an adequate shelf life for microbial control was found to be 210 days in the same storage conditions . Serra et al . ( 2007 ) studied the textural and visual qualities of pressure - treated frozen hams at different early stages in the dry - cured process . They found that the pressurised hams showed lower visual colour intensity than the control ones , but did not have any significant affect on sensorial properties of the ham . They also observed HP to increase the ham fibrousness , which , they hypothesised , could be useful to improve the texture of dry - cured hams with excessive softness . Dairy Products As noted by Huppertz et al . ( 2006 ) , although milk was the first food to undergo HP treatment by Hite ( 1899 ) , up to now , no milk products have been commercially treated with HP , attributed accordingly to the complex changes that milk and derived products undergo during HP applications . The effects of HP on milk constituents , milk properties and bacteria that are present in milk have been comprehensively reviewed by Huppertz et al . ( 2006 ) . As well as this , investigations into the functional improvements of milk whey proteins promoted by HP treatment are discussed by Lopez - Fandino ( 2006 ) and will not be covered here . Instead of a detailed review of physiochemical and technological changes that HP imposes on dairy products , some instances of where the relevant functionality of dairy products , e . g . milk and cheese , have been altered by the application of HP technology will be discussed . A recent finding of high importance was made by Gervilla et al . ( 2001 ) who observed the level of free fatty acids in ovine milk to either remain unchanged or be reduced by HPP ( 500 MPa at 4 , 25 , 50 °C ) , ameliorating the effects of milk rancidity during storage . The effect on milk fat globules was noted and seemed to be specific to the temperature of the treatment . For example , smaller globules were slightly increased at temperatures of both 25 and 50 °C ( which may have been due to the formation of large casein aggregates ; Huppertz et al . 2003 ) , thereby increasing milk stability , whereas at 4 °C globules were increased in size which in turn influenced the creaming phenomenon . As seen in Fig . 10 , the creaming phenome - non in raw bovine milk was recently found to be highly dependent on the level of pressure applied , with the volume of percentage of cream peaking at 200 MPa and reducing to a minimum at 600 MPa ( Huppertz et al . 2003 ) . The effect of temperature on creaming was not examined . The authors tried to use Stokes ’ law to explain this phenomenon , i . e . the rate of rise of fat globules is inversely correlated with the viscosity of the suspending medium . However , although an increase in the milk viscosity was observed with increasing pressure , this being attributed to the shape of the casein micelle as well as the disruption caused to them during treatment , the observed reduction in creaming was much greater than that calculated from Stokes ’ law . In addition , in opposition to the results of Gervilla et al . ( 2001 ) , no significant HP - induced effect on milk fat globules was Fig . 10 Change in the volume of cream as a function of pres - sure ( Huppertz et al . 2003 ) Food Bioprocess Technol ( 2008 ) 1 : 2 – 34 19 noted . Consequently , HP - induced changes in the creaming of milk were attributed to changes in the formation of clusters of milk fat globules in the cold , i . e . cold agglutination . From their findings , the authors concluded that the use of HP presents some exciting opportunities in the homogenisation of milk and in the development of new milk products , as unlike traditional processing techniques , flavour compounds are unharmed and microbial content can be contemporaneously reduced ( Huppertz et al . 2003 ) . In cheese making , the attributes of HP treatment are currently being studied extensively . The most interesting , not to mention the most economically important , inves - tigations include those highlighting the differences between cheese made with treated and untreated milk , the acceler - ation of cheese ripening and of course the reduction of pathogenic or spoilage microbes . From studies undertaken thus far , HP treatments at intensities greater than 200 MPa have enhanced acid and rennet coagulation and curd firmness times in cheese , with timescales being dependent on the treatment temperature and pressure holding time ( San Martin - Gonzalez et al . 2007 ; Huppertz et al . 2005 ) . The main problems with using HP - treated milk for cheese , similar to heat - treated milk ( of course depending on the type of heat treatment ) , are associated with the deterioration in composition that can arise ; these can even violate the prevailing standards for cheese and are owing to the moisture retention abilities of HP - treated milk ( San Martin - Gonzalez et al . 2007 ) . This increased moisture retention was suggested to be due to the formation of a finer structural network and to the water - binding properties of denatured â - lg incorporated into the protein matrix ( Needs et al . 2000 ) and has also been attributed to temperature during HP treatment ( San Martin - Gonzalez et al . 2007 ) . Overall , HP treatment has been found to affect rennet coagulation and other cheese - making characteristics of milk in a fairly positive manner , although treatments could be economically costly due to relatively long treatment time required on expensive equipment . HP treatment can also be conducted during the cheese - making , e . g . it was also reported that HP treatment of Mozzarella cheese signifi - cantly accelerated the development of desirable functional properties on melting ( O ’ Reilly et al . 2002 ) . However , the application of HP as a pre - treatment of milk may limit the cost of HPP ( Huppertz et al . 2005 ) . Inactivation of Microorganisms A primary objective of a food preservation technique is to prevent pathogenic microorganisms from affecting the safeness of a product . Microorganisms are resistant to selective chemical inhibitors due to their ability to exclude such agents from the cell , mainly by the action of the cell membrane . However , if the cell membrane becomes damaged , e . g . due to HP treatment , this tolerance is lost , and the cells are vulnerable . A secondary objective is inactivation of spoilage micro - organisms to improve the shelf life of the food . Growth of microorganisms in foods can cause spoilage by producing unacceptable changes in taste , odour , appearance and texture . The stage of growth of the microorganism can have an effect on its pressure resistance , with cells in the stationary phase being more resistant than those in the exponential phase ( McClements et al . 2001 ) . HP treatment is known to cause sublethal injury to microbes , which is a particularly important consideration for any preservation method . Microbial inactivation by HP has been extensively studied and has been concluded to be the result of a combination of factors ( Manas and Pagan 2005 ) . The primary site for pressure - induced microbial inactivation is the cell membrane ( e . g . modifications in permeability and ion exchange ; McClements et al . 2001 ) . Microorganisms are resistant to selective chemical inhibitors due to their ability to exclude such agents from the cell , mainly by the action of the cell membrane ; however , if the membrane becomes damaged , this tolerance is lost . The ability of HP to effectively inactivate microorgan - isms is heavily reliant on the pressure range afforded by the HP system , with current technology limiting commercial HP applications to ∼ 700 MPa . Bacteria , fungi and viruses can all be processed at pressures lower 800 MPa , the growth and reproduction of which are severely hindered at pressures up to 200 – 300 MPa , with total inactivation occurring at higher pressures . The mechanisms of microbial inactivation including cell morphology as discussed above and biochemical reactions and genetic mechanisms etc . , these have been detailed by numerous authors and are not discussed here ( Hoover et al . 1989 ; Torres and Velazquez 2005 ) . Instead , the following paragraphs will focus on the influence of HP ( < 800 MPa ) treatment on specific micro - organisms . Inactivating Bacteria Bacteria are relatively simple , single - celled organisms and are among the smallest free - living organisms known . The main bacteria that cause food poisoning are Campylobacter spp . , Salmonella spp . , Listeria monocytogenes , Staphyloc - cocus aureus , E . coli and Vibrio spp . Among these , L . monocytogenes and S . aureus are probably the two most intensively studied species in terms of use of HP process - ing . L . monocytogenes is a gram - positive rod that is an important pathogen in acidified and other foods such as dairy products and ready - to - eat meats . As a foodborne bacterium , L . monocytogenes requires particular care for processing and storage because it is moderately heat - 20 Food Bioprocess Technol ( 2008 ) 1 : 2 – 34 resistant and can grow anaerobically under refrigeration . Nevertheless , it was shown that the use of moderate HP treatments at mild temperatures coupled with a reason - able ripening time at refrigerating temperatures can substantially improve cheese safety regarding L . mono - cytogenes ( Lopez - Pedemonte et al . 2007 ) . Alpas and Bozoglu ( 2003 ) found that nine L . monocytogenes strains HP - treated in fruit juice substrates developed a loss in viability from 0 . 92 to 3 . 53 log cycles after HP treatment of 350 MPa at 25 °C for 5 min . The most resistant strains ( CA and ScottA ) and most sensitive strain ( SLR1 ) differed in viability loss by a factor of 4 . However , no survivors were detected for all of the L . monocytogenes strains when pressurized at 350 MPa , 50 °C for 5 min , suggesting this condition as optimum for commercial inactivation . Ritz et al . ( 2002 ) showed that although pressure treatment leads to total inactivation of a L . monocytogenes population , individual cells retain their morphological characteristics . However , some physical damage was seen by the occur - rence of buds on the cell surface , and membrane integrity was lost . S . aureus appears to have a high resistance to pressure ( Erkmen and Karatas 1997 ) . Treating food samples using HP can destroy both pathogenic and spoilage microorgan - isms ; however , there is a large variation in the pressure resistance of different bacterial strains , and the nature of the substrate can affect the response of microorganisms to pressure . Yet , by providing strict parameter control in processes such as cheese making , significant reductions of S . aureus can be obtained by means of HP coupled with a suitable ripening time ( superior to 30 days ) at low storage temperature ( 8 °C ) and short time pressure conditions ( Lopez - Pedemonte et al . 2007 ) . E . coli 0157 : H7 also has a high barotolerance and is considered to be an important pathogen that can cause serious illness ( Linton et al . 2001 ) . Outbreaks of food poisoning due to E . coli 0157 : H7 have been associated with a range of foods including ground beef ( Doyle 1991 ) , raw and skimmed milk ( Garcia - Graells et al . 1999 ; Linton et al . 2001 ) ; it has also been isolated from pork , lamb and poultry ( Doyle 1991 ; Patterson and Kilpatrick 1998 ) . In addition , high - acid foods such as apple cider ( Besser et al . 1993 ) , mayonnaise ( Weagent et al . 1994 ) and yoghurt ( Morgan et al . 1993 ) have also been implicated in E . coli outbreaks . It has been found that after storage for a number of days in refrigerated conditions , the growth of E . coli in the pressure - treated food products is inhibited ( Upmann et al . 2000 ) . This was hypothesised to be due to pressure - induced injury sensitising some of the bacteria to the low temper - ature and / or reduced oxygen conditions ( Linton et al . 2000 ) . Sublethal pressure treatment has also made E . coli O157 : H7 more susceptible to subsequent heat treatment ( Linton et al . 2000 ) . The stage of growth of the bacteria is also important in determining pressure resistance , with cells in the stationary phase being more resistant than those in the exponential phase ( McClements et al . 2001 ) . Also , as discussed above , the shape of the microorganism , as opposed to its gram - type , can significantly inactivation rate due to pressure . Further work is required to more fully understand the factors that can affect the response of microorganisms , including pathogens , to pressure so that treatments can be optimised and microbiological safety can be assured . Inactivating Viruses Viruses are very different from other groups of micro - organisms in terms of their structure and the way in which they function ; there is also considerable diversity within the virus family . With the exception of nucleic acid , viruses do not have the structures that one normally associates with living cells ; they simply consist of a protein coat , called a capsid , made up of a number of protein subunits ( cap - someres ) that enclose a central core of nucleic acid . Viruses may also contain a small number of enzymes required for the infection of host cells . Among viruses , there is a high degree of structural diversity , and this is reflected in a wide range of pressure resistances ( Smelt 1998 ) . The most common human enteric viruses are Norwalk - like viruses ( SRSVs ) , hepatitis A , rotavirus and human astrovirus . Complete inactivation of suspensions of feline calicivirus ( a Norwalk - like virus surrogate ) , adenovirus , and adenovirus and hepatitis A can be achieved by treatment at 275 MPa for 5 min ( Kingsley et al . 2002 ) , 400 MPa for 15 min ( Wilkinson et al . 2001 ) and at 450 MPa for 5 min ( Kingsley et al . 2002 ) , respectively . In contrast , several studies have demonstrated the remark - able baroresistance of poliovirus ( Nakagami et al . 1992 ; Oliveira et al . 1999 ; Wilkinson et al . 2001 ; Kingsley et al . 2002 ) . Foot and mouth disease virus was reduced by 102 . 9 plaque - forming units by treatment at 220 MPa for 1 h ( Kingsley et al . 2002 ) . The mode of inactivation of viruses by high pressure has not been fully elucidated , although the viral envelope , when present , appears to be one target for HP inactivation . Treatment at pressures above 300 MPa damages the envelopes of human immunodeficiency virus ( HIV ) and cytomegalovirus , preventing the binding of virus particles to cells ( Nakagami et al . 1992 ) . Pressure can also cause the dissociation of virus particles ; depending on the virus and the treatment conditions , pressure - induced disso - ciation may be fully reversible or irreversible ( Da Poian et al . 1994 ) . High pressure can also induce minor changes in viral structures without disassembling the whole particle ( Gaspar et al . 2002 ) . The formation of non - infectious particles after HP treatment has been observed for many viruses , including rotavirus ( Pontes et al . 2001 ) , HIV Food Bioprocess Technol ( 2008 ) 1 : 2 – 34 21 ( Nakagami et al . 1996 ) , lambda phage ( Bradley et al . 2000 ) and picornaviruses ( Oliveira et al . 1999 ) . Inactivating Fungi Fungi can be divided into two groups based on their vegetative structures : unicellular fungi ( yeasts ) and those producing hyphae ( moulds , mushrooms , etc . ) . Vegetative bacterial cells , yeasts and moulds are , in general , more susceptible to pressure than bacterial spores and can be inactivated using relatively low pressures . Yeasts are simply single - celled fungi that reproduce by budding or fission . The group includes members of the ascomycetes and imperfect fungi . Yeasts are an important group of spoilage microorganisms , but are generally not food pathogens , although toxic mould growth may be a safety concern in foods . The Saccharomyces species are well known for their fruit - spoiling attributes . Treatment at pressures less than 400 MPa for a few minutes is sufficient to inactivate most yeasts , although some strains within species have exhibited a sluggish rate at pressures of 500 MPa ( Chen and Tseng 1997 ) . It was proposed by the same authors that the pressure resistance of yeast is closely related to thermal resistance . Smelt ( 1998 ) reported that at about 100 MPa , the nuclear membrane of yeasts was affected and that at more than 400 - to 600 - MPa further alteration occurred in the mitochondria and the cytoplasm . Moulds are mycelial fungi , and many of these organisms are important industrially , e . g . in food spoilage , food fermentations and biodegradation processes . Pressures between 300 and 600 MPa can inactivate most moulds ( Smelt 1998 ) . O ’ Reilly et al . ( 2000 ) demonstrated that HP was effective for inactivation of Penicillium roqueforti spores in cheese systems . Inactivating Bacterial Spores The elimination of bacterial endospores from food probably represents the greatest food processing and food safety challenges to the industry . It is well established that spores are the most pressure - resistant life forms known ; in general , only very high pressures ( > 800 MPa ) can kill bacterial spores around ambient temperatures . Alternatively , other processing methods , closer to conventional methods , can be applied in combination with HP to effectively eliminate bacterial spores by achieving a synergistic or hurdle effect . In particular , HP treatment at elevated temperatures ( e . g . HP treatment at up to 90 °C ) has been found to be very effective ( Sangsuk and Myoung 2003 ) . Most notably , pressure - induced inactivation of bacterial spores is mark - edly enhanced at temperatures of 50 – 70 °C , and perhaps also at or below 0 °C ( Okazaki et al . 2000 ) . The most heat - resistant pathogenic bacterium is Clos - tridium botulinum , and spores of C . botulinum are also among the most pressure - resistant microorganisms known . Among other spore - forming bacteria of concern , Bacillus cereus has been widely studied because of its anaerobic nature and very low rate of lethality . B . cereus is a spore - forming bacteria foodborne pathogen , which is ubiquitous in nature , and hence occurs frequently in a wide range of raw food materials . It is recognised as a leading cause of bacterial food poisoning , with a variety of proteinaceaous and starchy foods being implicated ( Van Opstal et al . 2004 ) . An alternative to using treatments combining heat and pressure for enhanced killing of bacterial spores is to first cause bacterial spore germination and then use HP to kill the much more pressure - sensitive vegetative cells . Germi - nation is the process by which a dormant spore changes into a vegetative cell . Interestingly , bacterial spores can be stimulated to germinate by treatment at relatively low pressures , e . g . 50 – 300 MPa ; germinated spores can then be killed by relatively mild heat treatments or higher pressure treatments ( Smelt 1998 ) . Process temperatures in the range of 80 – 110 °C in conjunction with pressures of about 600 MPa have been used to inactivate spore - forming bacteria such as B . cereus ( Van Opstal et al . 2004 ) . A matrix of conditions for inactivation of spores of Bacillus and Clostridia was presented by Meyer et al . ( 2000 ) . The mode of action of HP on bacterial spores is still largely a matter of speculation . Reducing the Infectivity of Prions Prions are associated with certain neurological disorders , including bovine spongiform encephalopathy in cattle and Creutzfeldt – Jakob disease in humans . In general , prions are even more difficult to destroy than bacterial spores , with certain prions surviving autoclaving at 134 °C ( Taylor 1999 ) . Recently , it was reported that high pressure treatment of prion - contaminated meat at 690 – 1 , 200 MPa and 121 – 137 °C reduced the infectivity of the prions therein ( Brown et al . 2003 ) . Such treatments may have the advantage of ensuring safety of samples without the excessive damage that may be associated with autoclaving alone . Knorr et al . ( 2006 ) give a detailed review on the latest application of HP in prion inactivation . Recent Applications of HPLT Processing Water , a significant component of food , has many physical and chemical properties that are significantly affected by pressure ( Otero et al . 2002a ) . From the phase diagram of water , it can be seen that the freezing temperature of water 22 Food Bioprocess Technol ( 2008 ) 1 : 2 – 34 decreases with increasing pressure . This phenomenon allows the achievement of novel methods for freezing and thawing foods . The influence of this phenomenon on low - temperature processes in the food industry will be discussed in the following . Some of the effects of HPLT process on food quality are summarised in Table 6 . HPLT Processes and the Phase Diagram High - pressure low - temperature processes are split up into three categories , namely pressure - supported freezing , pres - sure - supported thawing and subzero storage . The physical mechanisms behind these processes have been detailed by many authors and will not be discussed here . Suffice to say that by making reference to the phase diagram of water , one can follow the schematic path of a desired process ( Fig . 8 ) . However , in doing this for foods , a number of concepts must be considered . Firstly , the presence of solutes in a food substance will cause an additional depression of its freezing point to a level below that of water , the magnitude of this being a function of the concentration and molecular weight of the solutes ; the liquid – Ice I phase transition line for a potato was shown to lie about 3 °C below , and parallel to , that of water ( Schluter 2003 ) . Secondly , solid and liquid metastable states exist on the phase diagram , which means that initial process conditions must be accurately set to obtain a desired ice polymorph when freezing or to prevent recrystallisation to a higher ice polymorph when thawing . Such recrystallisation can permit drastic changes in ice volume and can negate the benefits obtained through the nucleation of higher density ice crystals depending on the types of ice encountered . During pressure - assisted freezing , the ideal freezing point lies near the triple point of liquid / ice III / ice V , i . e . where ice III is theoretically formed and the volume changes from liquid – solid are low ( i . e . about 3 % ; Schluter et al . 2004 ) . However , below the zone of supercooling , the areas of nucleation of both ice I and ice III coincide , rendering the formation of ice III unpredictable ; if ice I is formed , solid – solid transition can occur quite easily ( Urrutia - Benet et al . 2004 ) . In addition , during pressure - shift freezing , it may be important to freeze at pressures equivalent to those that support the development of ice III to take advantage of the higher degree of supercooling promoted by this ice type . However , in doing so , it is important to maintain cooling temperature at a safe level , i . e . above that required for ice III / ice I transition , because if this is done accurately , then ice I can be successfully formed . In pressure - induced thawing , the experimental path does not follow the theoretical path as explained in Fig . 8 ( Urrutia - Benet 2005 ) . Instead , when the food is pressurised , its temperature drops due to compression work being converted into melting energy , along the phase transition line . If the temperature of the food is high enough , then an ice I / liquid phase transition will occur , often close to triple point ( liquid / ice III / ice V ) of the foods phase diagram , resulting in a negative change in volume and with a consequential decrease in pressure . Thawing can then continue at constant pressure . Also , the melting point may be manipulated in that pressures of up to 300 MPa with the correct temperature combination may be used ( of course depending on the food ) , taking full advantage of the large supercooling zone within ice III ( Schluter et al . 2004 ) . On the other hand , if the initial temperature of the sample is too low , then an ice I / ice III phase transition will occur , with consequential volume - changing effects . After melting has been achieved , it is important to provide enough heat so as to avoid recrystallisation ( Denys et al . 2001 ) . Pressure - Induced Changes and Ice Crystal Formation Freezing has long been established as an excellent method for preserving food products . However , damage can be caused by the formation of ice within a food during freezing . The ice polymorph , Ice I , typically formed by conventional freezing practices , is less dense than liquid water and expands as phase change takes place . As ice crystals are formed in conventional freezing , a freezing front develops , inducing stress as it moves across the food Table 6 Effect of HPLT on the quality characteristics of food Product type Treatment ( Name / MPa / °C / min ) Comparison to experimental control Reference Mango and peach PSF / 200 / − 20 / NA Reduced thermal gradients , good microstructure Otero et al . ( 2000 ) Chinese cabbage PSF / 100 to 700 / − 20 / 45 Improved texture and histological structure Fuchigami et al . ( 1998 ) Beef PSF / 140 to 350 / − 22 / 5 to 30 Decreased thawing time , no negative effects on quality , colour , penetration force or cooking loss Zhao et al . ( 1998 ) Fish and shellfish PIT / 100 to 200 / 15 / 60 Reduced drip , reduced thawing time , no colour change Rouille et al . ( 2002 ) Fish PIT / 200 / 15 Colour changes , improved texture , reduced thawing times , reduced drip improved microbial status Schubring et al . ( 2003 ) Food Bioprocess Technol ( 2008 ) 1 : 2 – 34 23 ( LeBail et al . 2003 ) ; this can damage tissues and puncture cell walls within foods and can also lead to the loss of nutrients and flavour . The rate of freezing and the final temperature of the freezing process determine the size and location of the ice crystals formed . Fast freezing rates result in a fine ice structure owing to intensive nucleation and formation of high numbers of small ice crystals . This may cause less damage to the structure of a product than conventional atmospheric freezing ( Thiebaud et al . 2002 ) . Owing to a high degree of supercooling , pressure - supported freezing is known for forming instantaneous and homoge - nous ice crystals throughout the entire volume of a food sample ( Kalichevsky et al . 1995 ) . However , in contrast to this benefit , HP - induced microstructural damage may also occur , e . g . denaturation of proteins etc . , the effects of which may lead to a degradation of quality characteristics . Recent studies which have focused on both of these aspects in HPLT processes will be discussed in the following . Raw Meat Products The influence of HP on different food matrixes during freezing has ignited a debate among the scientific commu - nity ( Fernández - Martín 2004 ; LeBail 2004 ) . This has primarily arisen from the conflict of opinions concerning the relative contribution of small ice crystals and pressure - induced protein denaturation to the quality of raw meats frozen under pressure - supported means . Fernández - Martín ( 2004 ) suggested that this argument has been confounded by conclusions made from studies using inadequate experimental techniques . For example , Martino et al . ( 1998 ) , using light microscopy , studied the size and location of ice crystals formed in raw pork meat with PSF and concluded that from a microstructural point of view , damage to cells was minimal because of the small size of the ice crystals and that HP - induced distortion to fibres was not evident . An indirect microscopic approach was again used by Molina - Garcia et al . ( 2004 ) who found no micro - structural damage associated with PAF of pork meat , this time when frozen to ice VI . However , Fernández - Martín ( 2004 ) vehemently argued against the use of light micros - copy , suggesting that this technique could not determine the level of understanding which was implied in the conclu - sions of Martino et al . ( 1998 ) and that a combination of transmission electron microscopy ( TEM ) and differential scanning calorimeter ( DSC ) would be more adequate . Zhu et al . ( 2004 ) used DSC tests to show that PSF treatment at or above 150 MPa caused considerable denaturation of myofibrillar proteins , which may have increased the toughness of pork muscle during the PSF process , especially for the 150 and 200 MPa PSF samples . Futher , using both TEM and DSC , pressure - induced changes to myofibrillar proteins during PSF of raw pork meat were found by Fernandez - Martin et al . ( 2000 ) , which , when coupled with the compaction caused by the formation of ice , irreversibly reduced the water holding capacity of the meat samples . This consequently led Fernandez - Martin et al . ( 2000 ) to conclude that PSF was inferior to the conventional freezing of raw meat systems . Such a strong conclusion was noted by both Cheftel et al . ( 2000 ) and LeBail ( 2004 ) as not fully supported , and a sensorial evaluation of the HP - treated raw meat after cooking was advised to further substantiate the argument ( Cheftel et al . 2000 ; LeBail 2004 ) . Fruit and Vegetable Products Few recent studies of the pressure - supported freezing of fruits exist . Otero et al . ( 2000 ) placed the reason for texture loss in frozen fruit on the formation of large ice crystals during conventional freezing . They found that PSF - treated mangoes and peaches formed small ice crystals and did not develop any freeze - cracking . They also observed , with light microscopy and scanning electron microscopy , a direct relationship between the rate of freezing and cell structural damage , with lower freezing rates showing greater struc - tural damage than higher freezing rates ( PSF ) . More recently , an analysis of the effects of PSF on the water retention and firmness of strawberries was conducted by Van Buggenhout et al . ( 2006a ) . The authors focused the study on examining various means of promoting the quality characteristics of strawberries through the combination of freezing techniques with PME / calcium or pectin infusion ; however , the tissue microstructure after freezing was not examined . Interestingly , and as evident in Fig . 11 , raw strawberries ( no infusion ) treated with PSF did not have a positive effect on the weight loss and texture ( measured as relative firmness ) . In fact , weight loss was much greater from the PSF - treated strawberries ( 56 % ) than from the conventionally frozen strawberries ( 40 % ) , with both en - countering an 87 % loss in their original firmness . More - over , rapidly frozen strawberries ( i . e . placed in a − 18 °C cryostat bath ) were found to be about 7 % firmer and had about the same weight loss than the PSF - treated ones . This shows that the influences of PSF on the textural character - istics of soft fruit transcended those presented by the presence of small ice crystals . However , an analysis of the effects caused by finishing the freezing process at atmo - spheric pressure were not assessed ; these effects may have countered the benefits obtained from the development of small ice crystals , as observed by the same authors when studying carrots ( Van Buggenhout et al . 2006b ) . The authors also found that pressure - induced thawing did not have any beneficial effects of texture . It must also be noted that when infused with PME / Ca and combined with PSF , the best texture was achieved out of all treatments . 24 Food Bioprocess Technol ( 2008 ) 1 : 2 – 34 However , the infusion of PME / Ca had also caused the strawberries to swell up before the PSF treatment . Studies on the quality characteristics of blanched broccoli samples have shown that PSF treatment did not produce major changes in the colour and flavour . Further investigations showed that finishing the freezing outside the HP - vessel , in this case in liquid nitrogen , enhanced the process efficiency whilst retaining all the quality character - istics ( Fernandez et al . 2006 ) . When Van Buggenhout et al . ( 2005 ) measured carrot firmness after overnight storage , the PSF - treated samples were found to be twice as firm as those that were conventionally frozen . Interestingly , after 3 months storage , this firmness deteriorated to a level where the carrots frozen by both techniques were found to be almost equal . Also , PSF - treated carrots underwent a pronounced improvement in firmness when PSF was combined with a calcium dip and thermal or HP treatment before the freezing step . This result was attributed to a combination of small ice crystals , owing to the high freezing rate in pressure shift freezing ( PSF ) and a strong calcium – pectate network , as a result of pre - treatment . This argument is convincing considering that a synergistic effect was not seen when the pre - treatment was combined with conventional freezing ( Van Buggenhout et al . 2005 ) . In a later study , Van Buggenhout et al . ( 2006b ) found that tissue damage in a PSF - treated carrot developed mainly during the completion period of the freezing process , which occurred at atmospheric pressure , as evident in Fig . 12 . The synergistic effect of pre - treating the vegetable and PSF on textural quality was again shown , substantiating the results of the previous study . Studies of pressure - supported freezing and subzero cooling have been completed by Luscher et al . ( 2005 ) . They calculated true compressive stress and strain of treated potatoes from force - deformation curves , and their results showed that freezing to ice III enhanced the texture of the potato . They also showed that although PSF preserved the skeletal cell structure of the tissue , it promoted cell Fig . 12 Hardness and tissue damage ( filled diamond ) of fresh carrots at different stages of the PSF process : i pressuri - zation to 200 MPa , ii cooling to − 15 °C , iii decompression , iv after process completion at at - mospheric pressure ( Van Buggenhout et al . 2006b ) Fig . 11 Hardness and drip loss ( filled diamond ) of strawberries frozen under different condi - tions : 1 slow freezing , 2 rapid freezing , 3 cryogenic freezing and 4 high - pressure shift freez - ing . a – b Means with the same letter indicate there is no signif - icant difference ( Tukey ’ s test : P < 0 . 05 ) between hardness results ( bar = standard deviation ; Van Buggenhout et al . 2006a ) Food Bioprocess Technol ( 2008 ) 1 : 2 – 34 25 permeability . Volume changes during freeze - thaw cycles at a pressure of 200 MPa were noted to have a detrimental effect on membrane permeability ( Fig . 13 ) . During subzero cooling , membrane permeability was also adversely influ - enced by phase transition within the membrane itself , which gave rise to cell lysis . Urrutia - Benet et al . ( 2007 ) analysed the ability of pressure - supported freezing and thawing to inactivate PPO in potatoes and also presented a textural and microstuctural assessment after different pressure – tempera - ture combinations . They presented evidence that supported the use of the metastable zone of the phase diagram to promote the retention of colour after freezing . However , using relative fail stress and strain values , they showed that supercooling in the metastable zone ( i . e . around 12 °C below the triple point ) did not provide any additional benefits to both the texture and drip loss of the samples when compared to tradition PSF , i . e . 200 MPa and 20 °C , followed by PIT treatment at 200 MPa . In fact , at this traditional pressure – temperature combination , which sup - ports the formation of ice I , overall sample texture was better than that of samples which underwent PSF - PIT treatments at pressure – temperature combinations of 240 MPa / − 28 °C , 280 MPa / − 20 °C and 280 MPa / − 28 °C . Other than better colour retention and slight enzyme inactivation , the only obvious benefit presented by super - cooling into the metastable zone was seen in the reduced swelling of cells in the potato tissue owing to the development of smaller ice crystals . Moreover , freezing time was increased when freezing to the metastable zone of the phase diagram ; the increase in applied pressure only promotes efficiency of PIT , as shown in their previous study ( Urrutia - Benet et al . 2006 ) . Therefore , more work needs to be done to conclusively prove the benefits of PSF applications which supercool within the metastable zone of ice III . For the moment , as suggested by Schluter et al . ( 2004 ) , some considerations must be taken into account before freezing to other ice modifications , or cooling to ice III metastable zone , such as volume changes , overall freezing time as well as phase transition time . As regards process efficiency , due to the protracted precooling time , cooling to zone of ice III does not provide any benefits for the PSF process ; in contrast , PIT efficiency is increased . Enhancing HPP Performance Controlling Acidity The pH of the food is one of the main factors affecting the growth and survival of microorganisms ; all microorganisms have a pH range in which they can grow and an optimum pH at which they grow best . The pH of a food , if not optimal for a particular species , can thus not only enhance inactivation during treatment but also inhibit outgrowth of sublethally injured cells . Bacterial spores are generally most resistant to the direct effects of pressure treatment at neutral pH ( Smelt 1998 ) . The extent of pressure - induced inactivation will gener - ally be enhanced , and recovery of sublethally injured cells Fig . 13 Fractional pore area after high pressure treatments with phase transitions . Deter - mined ice polymorphs and the constant treatment pressure dur - ing the freeze - thaw cycles are given in the legend text ( Luscher et al . 2005 ) 26 Food Bioprocess Technol ( 2008 ) 1 : 2 – 34 inhibited , for most bacteria , at acidic pH values ( Gao et al . 2007 ) . For example , the pressure resistance of E . coli 0157 : H7 in orange juice is dependent on the pH of the juice and the degree of inactivation increasing as pH decreases ; survival of E . coli 0157 : H7 in orange juice during storage is also dependent on pH ( Linton and Patterson 2000 ) . Recently , Gao et al . ( 2006a ) found that HP treatments increased the death rate of S . aureus in growth medium agar with increasing pH , but by increasing beyond a pH of 6 . 25 , they found that the death rate decreased . Suitable pH is also important with regards to the quality aspect of foods . Guiavarc ’ h et al . ( 2005 ) found that an optimum pH of 7 during HP processing was needed to enhance cloud stability in grapefruit juice . HP treatment of foods may shift the pH of the weakly acidic or basic food as a function of imposed pressure . For example , it has been shown that HP increased the pH of minced tuna fish samples ( p < 0 . 05 ; Ramirez - Suarez and Morrissey 2006 ) . In fact , for weak acids and bases , the equilibrium A ( + ) + B ( − ) < = > AB is shifted towards the reactant A ( + ) and B ( − ) constituents when the reaction volume change is positive and towards the product , AB , when the reaction volume change is negative . The results reported on the minced tuna fish may be explained by the sole shift of the acid equilibrium constant ( p K a ) of ionisable groups of amino acid side chains under HP . Packaging Food for HPP To protect food from contamination by the pressure - inducing medium , as well as to enhance processing efficiency , HPP is generally applied to a product in its final packaging . Polymers or copolymers are generally used as package materials and are suitable for HPP , as the associated elasticity permits adequate pressure transmission to the food , alongside maintaining a high sealing - ability factor . The use of copolymer multilayer packaging films are commonplace , and their tensile strength , heat seal strength , oxygen permeability , vapour barrier permeability and aroma permeability during HPP have been studied ( LeBail et al . 2006 ; Caner et al . 2004 ) . In the main , HPP has been shown to have a minimal effect on the mechanical strength of packaging , e . g . LeBail et al . ( 2006 ) showed this for seven different composite materials . Moreover , in the same study , HPP only affected the water vapour permeability of low - density polyethylene , in which case , the barrier properties of the packaging were enhanced . Furthermore , the small influence that HPP had on oxygen permeability barrier of copolymer packaging contrasted the large deterioration in the oxygen barrier that was observed in conventional sterilisation processes ( Lopez - Rubio et al . 2005 ) . Kuebel et al . ( 1996 ) have also found that HPP had a minimal effect on the diffusion of food components into a polymer packaging material during exposure to high aroma across the membrane of various polymer constructed packaging materials . Despite the generality amenability of many packaging materials to HPP , some challenges have been presented , generally caused by package flexibility problems . For example , Caner et al . ( 2004 ) concluded that packaging which composed of thin metal layers may provide a physical barrier to diffusion but , as the metal and polymer layers have different compressibility factors , HP treatment promotes rupture in the less elastic component , i . e . the metal layer . Effect of Water Activity ( a w ) Water in the liquid state is essential for the existence of all living organisms . The amount of water available for microbial growth is generally expressed in terms of the water activity ( a w ) of the system . Lowering the water activity of a food can significantly influence the growth of food spoilage or food - poisoning organisms that may be present in the raw materials or introduced during process - ing ; this is the principle of the very old method of food preservation by drying . Reducing a w appears to protect microbes against inactivation by HPP ; however , on the other hand , recovery of sublethally injured cells can be inhibited by low a w ( Smelt 1998 ) . The phenomenon of sublethal injury can lead to an overestimation of microbial inactivation , as counts taken immediately after HP treat - ment can be lower than those observed after a recovery period ( Murchie et al . 2005 ) . Consequently , the net effect of water activity on microbial inactivation by HP treatment may be difficult to predict . Factors Associated with Process Operation Increasing treatment pressure , holding time or temperature will generally increase the number of microorganisms inactivated ( with bacterial spores being the important exception ) . While many HP treatments are performed at ambient temperature , increasing or , to a lesser extent , decreasing temperature has been found to increase the inactivation rate of microorganisms during HP treatment . Temperatures above 45 – 50 °C increase the rate of inacti - vation of food pathogens and spoilage microorganisms ( Palou et al . 2002 ) . The use of high temperatures for food processing is complicated by the fact that the large steel cylinders in which the food is held during treatment are very slow to change in temperature , and that the food itself can undergo a significant increase in temperature during processing due to adiabatic heating . Moreover , if the food contains a significant amount of fat , such as butter or cream , the temperature rise can be large . Foods cool down Food Bioprocess Technol ( 2008 ) 1 : 2 – 34 27 to their original temperature on decompression if no heat is lost to , or gained through , the walls of the pressure vessel during the hold time at pressure . Temperature increases due to adiabatic compressions can be 3 °C or more per 100 Mpa , and whilst these increases in temperature are generally transient , in some processes , use of sample insulation may retain this heat and add to the thermal dimension of the processing conditions ( Ting and Marshall 2002 ) . The choice of processing temperature will also influence the selection of suitable pressure - transmitting media . Recently , empirical relations were developed to estimate the temperature increase of vegetable oil , honey and cream cheese as a function of applied pressure and product initial temperature ( Patazca et al . 2007 ) . There is a minimum critical pressure below which microbial inactivation by HP will not take place regardless of process time . Important processing parameters to be considered are the come - up times ( period necessary to reach treatment pressure ) and pressure - release times . Obviously , long come - up times will add appreciably to the total process time and affect the process throughput , but these periods will also affect inactivation kinetics of microorganisms . Therefore , consistency and control of these times are important in the development of HPP techniques . Implementing HP as an Effective Processing Technology European Regulations for HPP Today , in most countries , food safety is tightly controlled by regulation . While many of the factors and micro - organisms that can present hazards to the consumer are known and have been intensively studied , new and emerging pathogens not previously regarded as problematic continue to be identified . As already discussed , processors must also increasingly balance the need for assurance of food safety against consumer demand for minimally processed products . For these reasons , emerging technolo - gies such as HPP are of considerable interest and potential benefit to the food industry . However , before the implementation of new preservation technologies , several issues need to be addressed , such as the mechanisms of microbial resistance and adaptation to these new technologies , the mechanisms of microbial and enzyme inactivation , the identification of the most resistant and relevant microorganisms in every food habitat , the role of bacterial stress , the robustness of the technologies , the increased safety relative to existing technologies and , last but not least , the legislation needed to implement them ( Hugas et al . 2002 ) . Two regulatory attitudes towards commercialisation of food products manufactured using HPP have emerged , i . e . within the EU or outside . In countries outside the EU , there is currently no specific legislation applicable to HPP treatment . In the USA , for example , the traditional health regulations are applied , and products treated by HPP , such as guacamole and oysters , have already been introduced to the market without any specific regulation . In EU countries , however , national regulations for new products have been replaced , in the application of the precautionary principle , by a community regulation for novel foods and ingredients ( Regulation 258 / 97 / EC ) and has been in force since 1997 . This “ novel foods ” legislation establishes an evaluation and licensing system that is compulsory for new foods and new processes . HPP food products are novel foods as they fulfill two conditions : their history of human consumption has so far been negligible and , secondly , a new manufacturing process has produced them . In July 2001 , after the last meeting of the EU commission in charge of “ novel foods ” , several decisions were taken to simplify the regulations . Specifically , if it is possible to show that the new product ( e . g . the HP - treated food ) is substantially equivalent to a product already on the market , then the product can be treated at a national regulation level and will not need to comply with the “ novel food ” regulation ( Hugas et al . 2002 ) . All new pressure vessels to be used in the EU have to comply with the “ pressure equipment directive ” ( PED ) regulation which came into force in 2002 . This regulation is an extension of the ‘ CE ’ safety standard already employed in the EU and now recognised worldwide where CE indicates conformity with mandatory European safety requirements . As pressure vessels of all types utilise potentially hazardous energy , the PED regulation seeks to identify good design , good manufacturing practices and detailed safety assessment for safe operation and mainte - nance of the vessels and auxiliary parts . Also in 2001 , the UK Food Standard Agency issued a statement which removed the “ novel ” tag from HP technology once the processed foods are those obtained from fruit or vegetable , have a pH below 4 . 2 , conform to HACCP criteria and that the germination of clostridia is prevented during the shelf life which should not be longer than 21 days . Commercialisation of HPP Food quality and safety are the two main driving forces behind the choices made by today ’ s consumers . This means that the food industry must adopt new technologies to enhance the safety , nutritional quality and sensory quality of food products . HPP is a technology that can deliver on all of these aspects . The biggest obstacle for HP systems is 28 Food Bioprocess Technol ( 2008 ) 1 : 2 – 34 the initial capital investment required , which currently limits its application to high - value products . As with any new technology , the commercial feasibility of HPP depends ultimately on its business profitability . As a consequence , HPP is currently , in many cases , employed where existing technologies perform unsatisfactory instead of as a replace - ment technology ( Corkindale 2006 ) . The production cost of a process must be lower than the value added to the product . The value added by HP can be measured in terms of a higher product quality , increased product safety and a longer product shelf life . These issues can further translate into reduced transportation , storage , insurance and labour costs , consumer convenience and enhanced safety . Food companies must be able to make a realistic cost - benefit analysis of the potential rewards in investment in HPP . The value of HP in terms of increasing food safety assurance , in some cases , may alone be sufficient to justify an investment . As microbiological standards become more widely mandated and sensitive assessment techniques become available in food produc - tion , the financial cost of unacceptable products will be transferred back to the producer . The value of food safety is frequently difficult to quantify before an incident ; however , as has been observed in recent pathogen contamination events , a producer ’ s reputation or brand name may never recover from a single food - safety - related incident . Having a consistently safe product is now essential in the food industry ( Ting and Marshall 2002 ) . The actual cost of operating a HPP plant will depend on many factors ranging from operating pressure , cycle time and product geometry to labour skills and energy costs . As with all equipment , the greater the utilisation the more cost - effective it is . As the technology matures and producers gain experience , lower equipment and operations costs can be anticipated ( Ting and Marshall 2002 ) . In many sectors of the food industry , for example , the cooked meat and ready meals sectors , HP treatment offers a unique opportunity to produce fresh - tasting products , which are safe and have a desirable shelf life . The growing markets for these sectors and the commercially successful implementation of HP by a number of companies in these sectors suggest that the initial investment costs may be sustainable . It appears that consumers are willing to pay extra for new products or products that have higher quality and are more convenient than the existing range ( Corkindale 2006 ) . Conclusions High pressure processing is an industrially tested technol - ogy that offers a natural alternative for the processing of a wide range of different food products . It is a technology that can achieve the food safety of heat pasteurisation whilst meeting consumer demand for fresher - tasting mini - mally processed foods . Application of HP can inactivate microorganisms and enzymes and modify structures whilst having little or no effects on nutritional and sensory quality aspects of foods . The key advantages of HP applications to food systems are the independence of size and geometry of the sample during processing , possibilities for low temper - ature treatment and the availability of a waste - free environmentally friendly technology . References Ahmed , J . , Ramaswamy , H . S . , Alli , I . , & Ngadi , M . ( 2003 ) . Effect of high pressure on rheological characteristics of liquid egg . Lebensmittel - Wissenschaft und - Technologie , 36 , 517 – 524 . Alpas , H . , & Bozoglu , F . ( 2003 ) . Efficiency of high pressure treatment for destruction of Listeria monocytogenes in fruit juices . FEMS Immunology and Medical Microbiology , 35 ( 3 ) , 269 – 273 . Apichartsrangkoon , A . ( 2003 ) . Effects of high pressure on rheological properties of soy protein gels . Food Chemistry , 80 ( 1 ) , 55 – 60 . Apichartsrangkoon , A . , & Ledward , D . A . ( 2002 ) . Dynamic visco - elastic behaviour of high pressure treated gluten – soy mixtures . Food Chemistry , 77 ( 3 ) , 317 – 323 . Basak , S . , & Ramaswamy , H . ( 1998 ) . Effect of high pressure processing on the texture of selected fruits and vegetables . Journal of Texture Studies , 29 , 587 – 601 . Baxter , I . A . , Easton , K . , Schneebeli , K . , & Whitfield , F . B . ( 2005 ) . High pressure processing of Australian navel orange juices : Sensory analysis and volatile flavor profiling . Innovative Food Science and Emerging Technologies , 6 ( 4 ) , 372 – 387 . Bertram , H . C . , Whittaker , A . K . , Shorthose , W . R . , Andersen , H . J . , & Karlsson , A . H . ( 2004 ) . Water characteristics in cooked beef as influenced by ageing and high - pressure treatment — an NMR micro imaging study . Meat Science , 66 , 301 – 306 . Besser , R . E . , Lett , S . M . , Weber , J . T . , Doyle , M . P . , Barrett , T . J . , Wells , J . G . , et al . ( 1993 ) . An outbreak of diarrhoea and hemolytic uremic syndrome from E . coli O157 : H7 in fresh - pressed apple cider . Journal of American Medical Association , 269 , 2217 – 2220 . Bradley , D . W . , Hess , R . A . , Tao , F . , Sciaba - Lentz , L . , Remaley , A . T . , Laugharn , J . A . , et al . ( 2000 ) . Pressure cycling technology : a novel approach to virus inactivation in plasma . Transfusion , 40 ( 2 ) , 193 – 200 . Brown , P . , Meyer , R . , Cardone , F . , & Pocchiari , M . ( 2003 ) . Ultra - high - pressure inactivation of prion infectivity in processed meat : a practical method to prevent human infection . Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences , 100 ( 10 ) , 6093 – 6097 . Butz , P . , Koller , W . D . , Tauscher , B . , & Wolf , S . ( 1994 ) . Ultra - high pressure processing of onions : Chemical and sensory changes . Lebensmittel - Wissenschaft und - Technologie , 27 ( 5 ) , 463 – 467 . Caner , C . , Hernandez , R . J . , & Harte , B . R . ( 2004 ) . High - pressure processing effects on the mechanical , barrier and mass transfer properties of food packaging flexible structures : A critical review . Packaging Technology and Science , 17 ( 1 ) , 23 – 29 . Cano , M . P . , & de Ancos , B . ( 2005 ) . Advances in use of high pressure to processing and preservation of plant foods . In G . V . Barbosa - Canovas , M . S . Tapia , & M . P . Cano ( Eds . ) , Novel food processing technologies Ch 13 ( pp . 361 – 373 ) . Boca Raton , FL , US : CRC Press . Carballo , J . , Cofrades , S . , Solas , M . T . , & Jimenez - Colmenero , F . ( 2000 ) . High pressure / thermal treatment of meat batters prepared from freeze - thawed pork . Meat Science , 544 , 357 – 364 . Food Bioprocess Technol ( 2008 ) 1 : 2 – 34 29 Cheftel , J . C . , & Culioli , J . ( 1997 ) . Effects of high pressure on meat : A review . Meat Science , 46 ( 3 ) , 211 – 236 . Cheftel , J . C . , Levy , J . , & Dumay , E . ( 2000 ) . Pressure - assisted freezing and thawing : principles and potential applications . Food Reviews International , 16 ( 4 ) , 453 – 483 . Cheftel , J . C . , Thiebaud , M . , & Dumay , E . ( 2002 ) . Pressure - assisted freezing and thawing of foods : A review of recent studies . High Pressure Research , 22 ( 3 – 4 ) , 601 – 611 . Chen , C . S . , & Tseng , C . W . ( 1997 ) . Effect of high hydrostatic pressure on the temperature dependence of Saccharomyces cerevisiae and Zygosaccharomyces rouxii . Process Biochemistry , 32 ( 4 ) , 337 – 343 . Chen , C . R . , Zhu , S . M . , Ramaswamy , H . S . , Marcotte , M . , & LeBail , A . ( 2007 ) . Computer simulation of high pressure cooling of pork . Journal of Food Engineering , 79 , 401 – 409 . Corkindale , D . ( 2006 ) . Technology too risky for major players . Food Technology and Ingredients , 31 ( 2 ) , 56 – 57 . Crelier , S . , Robert , M . C . , Claude , J . , & Juillerat , M . A . ( 2001 ) . Tomato ( Lycopersicon esculentum ) pectin methylesterase and polygalacturonase behaviors regarding heat - and pressure - in - duced inactivation . Journal of Agricultural and Food Chemistry , 49 ( 11 ) , 5566 – 5575 . Da Poian , A . T . , Johnston , J . E . , & Silva , J . L . ( 1994 ) . Differences in stability of the three components of cowpea mosaic virus : Implications for virus assembly and disassembly . Biochemistry , 33 , 8339 – 8346 . De Belie , N . ( 2002 ) . Use of physico - chemical methods for assessment of sensory changes in carrot texture and sweetness during cooking . Journal of Texture Studies , 33 , 367 – 388 . Denys , S . , VanLoey , A . M . , & Hendrickx , M . E . , & Tobback , P . P . ( 1997 ) . Modeling heat transfer during high - pressure freezing and thawing . Biotechnology Progress , 13 ( 4 ) , 416 – 423 . Denys , S . , Van Loey , A . M . , & Hendrickx , M . E . ( 2000 ) . Modelling conductive heat transfer during high - pressure thawing processes : Determination of latent heat as a function of pressure . Biotech - nology Progress , 16 ( 3 ) , 447 – 455 . Denys , S . , Schluter , O . , Hendrickx , M . E . , & Knorr , D . ( 2001 ) . Effects of high pressure on water – ice transitions in foods . In M . E . Hendrickx , & D . Knorr ( Eds . ) , Ultra high pressure treatment of food , Ch . 8 . ( pp . 214 – 249 ) . London , UK : Kluwer . Doyle , M . P . ( 1991 ) . Escherichia coli O157 : H7 and its significance in foods . International Journal of Food Microbiology , 13 , 207 – 216 . Erkmen , O . , & Karatas , S . ( 1997 ) . Effect of high hydrostatic pressure on Staphylococcus aureus in milk . Journal of Food Engineering , 33 , 257 – 262 . Fachin , D . , Van Loey , A . M . , Nguyen , B . L . , Verlent , I . , & Indrawati Hendrickx , M . E . ( 2002 ) . Comparative study of the inactivation kinetics of pectinmethylesterase in tomato juice and purified form . Biotechnology Progress , 18 ( 4 ) , 739 – 744 . Fachin , D . , Smout , C . , Verlent , I . , Nguyen , B . L . , Van Loey , A . M . , & Hendrickx , M . E . ( 2004 ) . Inactivation kinetics of purified tomato polygalacturonase by thermal and high - pressure processing . Journal of Agricultural and Food Chemistry , 52 ( 9 ) , 2697 – 2703 . Fernandez , P . P . , Prestamo , G . , Otero , L . , & Sanz , P . D . ( 2006 ) . Assessment of cell damage in high - pressure - shift frozen broccoli : Comparison with market samples . European Food Research and Technology , 224 ( 1 ) , 101 – 107 . Fernández - Martín , F . ( 2004 ) . Comments to the article : ‘ High pressure freezing and thawing of foods : A review ’ : By LeBail A , Chevalier D , Mussa DM , Ghoul M . International Journal of Refrigeration 25 : 504 – 13 . International Journal of Refrigeration , 27 ( 5 ) , 567 – 568 . Fernandez - Martin , F . , Otero , L . , Solas , M . T . , & Sanz , P . ( 2000 ) . Protein denaturation and structural damage during high - pressure - shift freezing of porcine and bovine muscle . Journal of Food Science , 65 ( 6 ) , 1002 – 1008 . Forst , P . , Werner , F . , & Delgado , A . ( 2000 ) . The viscosity of water at high pressures — especially at subzero degrees centigrade . Rheo - logica Acta , 39 ( 6 ) , 566 – 573 . Fuchigami , M . , Kato , N . , & Teramoto , A . ( 1998 ) . High - pressure - freezing effects on textural quality of Chinese cabbage . Journal of Food Science , 63 ( 1 ) , 122 – 125 . Gao , Y . - L . , Ju , X . - R . , & Jiang , H . - H . ( 2006a ) . Use of response surface methodology to investigate the effect of food constituents on Staphylococcus aureus inactivation by high pressure and mild heat . Process Biochemistry , 41 ( 2 ) , 362 – 369 . Gao , Y . - L . , Ju , X . - R . , Qiu , W . - F . , & Jiang , H . - H . ( 2007 ) . Investigation of the effects of food constituents on Bacillus subtilis reduction during high pressure and moderate temperature . Food Control , 18 ( 10 ) , 1250 – 1257 . Garcia - Graells , C . , Kristel , J . , Hauben , A . , & Michiels , C . W . ( 1999 ) . High - pressure inactivation and sublethal injury of pressure - resistant Escherichia coli mutants in fruit juices . Applied Environmental Microbiology , 64 , 1566 – 1568 . Gaspar , L . P . , Silva , A . C . B . , Gomes , A . M . O . , Freitas , M . S . , Ano Bom , A . P . D . , Schwarcz , W . D . , et al . ( 2002 ) . Hydrostatic pressure induces the fusion - active state of enveloped viruses . Journal of Biological Chemistry , 277 , 8433 – 8439 . Gervilla , R . , Ferragut , V . , & Guamis , B . ( 2001 ) . High hydrostatic pressure effects on color and milk - fat globule of ewe ’ s milk . Journal of Food Science , 66 ( 6 ) , 880 – 885 . Ghani , A . G . A . , & Farid , M . M . ( 2006 ) . Numerical simulation of solid – liquid food mixture in a high pressure processing unit using computational fluid dynamics . Journal of Food Engineering , 80 ( 4 ) , 1031 – 1042 . Guiavarc ’ h , Y . , Segovia , O . , Hendrickx , M . , & Van Loey , A . ( 2005 ) . Purification , characterization , thermal and high - pressure inacti - vation of a pectin methylesterase from white grapefruit ( Citrus paradisi ) . Innovative Food Science & Emerging Technologies , 6 ( 4 ) , 363 – 371 . Harte , F . , Luedecke , L . , Swanson , B . , & Barbosa - Canovas , G . V . ( 2003 ) . Low - fat set yogurt made from milk subjected to combinations of high hydrostatic pressure and thermal process - ing . Journal Dairy Science , 86 , 1074 – 1082 . Hartmann , C . ( 2002 ) . Numerical simulation of thermodynamic and fluid - dynamic processes during the high - pressure treatment of fluid food systems . Innovative Food Science & Emerging Technologies , 3 ( 1 ) , 11 – 18 . Hartmann , C . , & Delgado , A . ( 2002 ) . Numerical simulation of convective and diffusive transport effects on a high - pressure - induced inactivation process . Biotechnology and Bioengineering , 79 ( 1 ) , 94 – 104 . Hartmann , C . , & Delgado , A . ( 2003 ) . The influence of transport phenomena during high - pressure processing of packed food on the uniformity of enzyme inactivation . Biotechnology and Bioengineering , 82 ( 6 ) , 725 – 735 . Hartmann , C . , & Delgado , A . ( 2004 ) . Numerical simulation of the mechanics of a yeast cell under high hydrostatic pressure . Journal of Food Engineering , 37 ( 7 ) , 977 – 987 . Hartmann , C . , Delgado , A . , & Szymczyk , J . ( 2003 ) . Convective and diffusive transport effects in a high pressure induced inactivation process of packed food . Journal of Food Engineering , 59 ( 1 ) , 33 – 44 . Hartmann , C . , Schuhholz , J . - P . , Kitsubun , P . , Chapleau , N . , LeBail , A . , & Delgado , A . ( 2004 ) . Experimental and numerical analysis of the thermofluiddynamics in a high - pressure autoclave . Food Science & Emerging Technologies , 5 ( 4 ) , 399 – 411 . Hartmann , C . , Mathmann , K . , & Delgado , A . ( 2006 ) . Mechanical stresses in cellular structures under high hydrostatic pressure . Food Science & Emerging Technologies , 7 ( 1 – 2 ) , 1 – 12 . Hayashi , R . ( 1995 ) . Advances in high pressure food processing technology in Japan . Food Processing : Recent Developments , Gaonkar AG , 9 , 185 – 195 . 30 Food Bioprocess Technol ( 2008 ) 1 : 2 – 34 Hite , B . H . ( 1899 ) . The effect of high pressure in the preservation of milk . West Virginia Agricultural Experimental Station Bulletin , 58 , 15 – 35 . Hjelmqwist , J . ( 2005 ) . Commercial high pressure equipment . In G . V . Barbosa - Canovas , M . S . Tapia , & M . P . Cano ( Eds . ) , Novel food processing technologies , Chapter 16 ( pp . 361 – 373 ) . Boca Raton , FL , USA : CRC . Hodge , K . ( 2003 ) . Salads still hot after all these years . Fresh cut magazine ( pp . 22 – 24 ) . Yakima : Columbia Publishing and Design , July . Hogan , E . , Kelly , A . L . , & Sun , D . - W . ( 2005 ) . High pressure processing of foods : An overview . In D . - W . Sun ( Eds . ) , Emerging technologies for food processing , Chapter 1 ( pp . 3 – 32 ) . London , UK : Elsevier . Hoover , D . G . , Metrick , C . , Papineau , A . M . , Farkas , D . F . , & Knorr , D . ( 1989 ) . Biological effects of high hydrostatic pressure on food micro - organisms . Food Technology , 4 , 399 – 107 . Hotek , J . P . , & Morrison , J . J . ( 2006 ) . Method and apparatus for material handling for a food product using high pressure pasteurization . U . S . Patent 2006257552 ; ( 16 Nov 2006 ) . Hugas , M . , Garriga , M . , & Monfort , J . M . ( 2002 ) . New mild technologies in meat processing : High pressure as a model technology . Meat Science , 62 , 359 – 371 . Huppertz , T . , Fox , P . F . , & Kelly , A . L . ( 2003 ) . High pressure - induced changes in the creaming properties of bovine milk . Innovative Food Science & Emerging Technologies , 4 ( 4 ) , 349 – 359 . Huppertz , T . , Hinz , K . , Zobrist , M . R . , Uniacke , T . , Kelly , A . L . , & Fox , P . F . ( 2005 ) . Effects of high pressure treatment on the rennet coagulation and cheese - making properties of heated milk . Innovative Food Science & Emerging Technologies , 6 ( 3 ) , 279 – 285 . Huppertz , T . , Smiddy , M . A . , Upadhyay , V . K . , & Kelly , A . L . ( 2006 ) . High - pressure - induced changes in bovine milk : A review . International Journal of Dairy Technology , 59 ( 2 ) 58 – 66 . Jung , S . , De Lamballerie - Anton , M . , & Ghoul , M . ( 2000 ) . Textural changes in bovine meat treated with high pressure . High Pressure Research , 19 ( 1 – 6 ) , 459 – 464 . Jung , S . , Ghoul , M . , & de Lamballerie - Anton , M . ( 2003 ) . Influence of high pressure on the color and microbial quality of beef meat . Lebensmittel - Wissenschaft - und - Technologie - Food Science and Technology , 36 ( 6 ) , 625 – 631 . Kalichevsky , M . T . , Knorr , D . , & Lillford , P . J . ( 1995 ) . Potential food applications of high - pressure effects on ice - water transitions . Trends in Food Science & Technology , 6 , 253 – 258 . Kingsley , D . H . , Hoover , D . G . , Papfragkou , E . , & Richards , G . P . ( 2002 ) . Inactivation of hepatitis A virus and a calicivirus by high hydrostatic pressure . Journal of Food Protection , 65 , 1605 – 1609 . Knorr , D . , Heinz , V . , & Buckow , R . ( 2006 ) . High pressure application for food biopolymers . Biochemica et Biophysica Acta , 1764 ( 3 ) , 619 – 631 . Kowalczyk , W . , & Delgado , A . ( 2007a ) . On convection phenomena during high pressure treatment of liquid media . High Pressure Research , 27 ( 1 ) , 85 – 92 . Kowalczyk , W . , & Delgado , A . ( 2007b ) . Dimensional analysis of thermo - fluid - dynamics of high hydrostatic pressure processes with phase transition . International Journal of Heat and Mass Transfer , 50 ( 15 – 16 ) , 3007 – 3018 . Kowalczyk , W . , Hartmann , C . , & Delgado , A . ( 2004 ) . Modelling and numerical simulation of convection driven high pressure induced phase changes . International Journal of Heat and Mass Transfer , 47 ( 5 ) , 1079 – 1089 . Kowalczyk , W . , Hartmann , C . , Luscher , C . , Pohl , M . , Delgado , A . , & Knorr , D . ( 2005 ) . Determination of thermophysical properties of foods under high hydrostatic pressure in combined experimental and theoretical approach . Innovative Food Science & Emerging Technologies , 6 ( 3 ) , 318 – 326 . Krebbers , B . , Matser , A . M . , Koets , M . , & Van den Berg , R . W . ( 2002 ) . Quality and storage - stability of high - pressure preserved green beans . Journal of Food Engineering , 54 , 27 – 33 . Krebbers , B . , Matser , A . M . , Hoogerwerf , S . W . , Moezelaar , R . , Tomassen , M . , & Van den Berg , R . W . ( 2003 ) . Combined high - pressure and thermal treatments for processing of tomato puree : Evaluation of microbial inactivation and quality parameters . Innovative Food Science & Emerging Technologies , 4 ( 4 ) , 377 – 385 . Kuebel , J . , Ludwig , H . , Marx , H . , & Tauscher , B . ( 1996 ) . Diffusion of aroma compounds into packaging films under high - pressure . Packaging Technology and Science , 9 ( 3 ) , 143 – 152 . Lakshmanan , R . , Piggott , J . R . , & Paterson , A . ( 2003 ) . Potential applications of high pressure for improvement in salmon quality . Trends in Food Science & Technology , 14 , 354 – 363 . Lambadarios , E . , & Zabetakis , I . ( 2002 ) . Does high hydrostatic pressure affect fruit esters ? Lebensmittel - Wissenschaft - und - Tech - nologie - Food Science and Technology , 35 ( 4 ) , 362 – 366 . LeBail , A . ( 2004 ) . Reply to the ‘ Letter to the Editor ’ : by the corresponding author A . LeBail of the Article : ‘ High pressure freezing and thawing of foods : A review ’ by LeBail A , Chevalier D , Mussa DM , Ghoul M . International Journal of Refrigeration 25 , 504 – 13 . International Journal Refrigeration , 27 ( 5 ) , 569 . LeBail , A . , Boillereaux , L . , Davenel , A . , Hayert , M . , Lucas , T . , & Monteau , J . Y . ( 2003 ) . Phase transition in foods : Effect of pressure and methods to assess or control phase transition . Innovative Food Science & Emerging Technologies , 4 ( 1 ) , 15 – 24 . LeBail , A . , Hamadami , N . , & Bahuaud , S . ( 2006 ) . Effect of high - pressure processing on the mechanical and barrier properties of selected packagings . Packaging Technology and Science , 19 ( 4 ) , 237 – 243 . Lemmon , E . W . , McLinden , M . O . , & Friend , D . G . ( 2005 ) . Thermophysical properties of fluid systems . In P . J . Linstron , & W . G . Mallard ( Eds . ) , NIST chemistry WebBook , NIST standard reference database number 69 . June 2005 . National Institute of Standards and Technology . Gaitherburg MD , 20899 . Available from http : / / webbook . nist . gov . Linton , M . , & Patterson , M . F . ( 2000 ) . High pressure processing of foods for microbiological safety and quality . Acta Microbiologica et Immunologica Hungarica , 47 ( 2 – 3 ) , 175 – 182 . Linton , M . , McClements , J . M . J . , & Patterson , M . F . ( 2000 ) . The combined effect of high pressure and storage on the heat sensitivity of Escherichia coli 0157 : H7 . Innovative Food Science & Emerging Technologies , 1 ( 1 ) , 31 – 37 . Linton , M . , McClements , J . M . J . , & Patterson , M . F . ( 2001 ) . Inactivation of pathogenic Escherichia coli in skimmed milk using high hydrostatic pressure . Innovative Food Science & Emerging Technologies , 2 ( 2 ) , 99 – 104 . Lopez - Fandino , R . ( 2006 ) . Functional improvement of milk whey proteins induced by high hydrostatic pressure . Critical Reviews in Food Science and Nutrition , 46 ( 4 ) , 351 – 363 . Lopez - Pedemonte , T . , Roig - Sagués , A . , De Lamo , S . , Gervilla , R . , & Buenaventura , G . ( 2007 ) . High hydrostatic pressure treatment applied to model cheeses made from cow ’ s milk inoculated with Staphylococcus aureus . Food Control , 18 ( 5 ) , 441 – 447 . Lopez - Rubio , A . , Lagaron , J . M . , Hernandez - Munoz , P . , Almenar , E . , Catala , R . , Gavara , R . , et al . ( 2005 ) . Effect of high pressure treatments on the properties of EVOH - based food packaging materials . Innovative Food Science & Emerging Technologies , 6 ( 1 ) , 51 – 58 . Ludikhuyze , L . , & Hendrickx , M . E . ( 2001 ) . Effects of high pressure on chemical reactions related to food quality . In M . E . Hendrickx , & D . Knorr ( Eds . ) , Ultra high pressure treatment of food , Chapter 6 ( pp . 17 – 185 ) . London , UK : Kluwer . Ludwig , H . , & Schreck , C . ( 1997 ) . The inactivation of vegetative bacteria by pressure . In K . Heremans ( Eds . ) , High pressure Food Bioprocess Technol ( 2008 ) 1 : 2 – 34 31 research in bioscience and biotechnology ( pp . 221 – 224 ) . Leuven : Leuven University Press . Ludwig , H . , van Almsick , G . , & Schreck , C . ( 2002 ) . The effect of high hydrostatic pressure on the survival of microorganisms . In Y . Taniguchi , H . E . Stanley , & H . Ludwig ( Eds . ) , Biological systems under extreme conditions ( pp . 239 – 256 ) . Berlin : Spring - er . Lund , D . B . ( 2002 ) . Food engineering for the 21st century . In J . Welti - Chanes , G . V . Barbosa - Canovas , & J . M . Aguilera ( Eds . ) , Engineering and food for the 21st century . Food Preservation Technology Series , Chapter 44 ( pp . 3 – 14 ) . Boca Raton , FL , USA : CRC Press LLC . Luscher , C . , Schluter , O . , & Knorr , D . ( 2005 ) . High pressure - low temperature processing of foods : Impact on cell membranes , texture , color and visual appearance of potato tissue . Innovative Food Science & Emerging Technologies , 6 ( 1 ) , 59 – 71 . Ma , H . J . , & Ledward , D . A . ( 2004 ) . High pressure / thermal treatment effects on the texture of beef muscle . Meat Science , 68 ( 3 ) , 347 – 355 . Manas , P . , & Pagan , R . ( 2005 ) . Microbial inactivation by new technologies offood preservation . Journal of Applied Microbiology , 98 ( 6 ) , 1387 – 1399 . Martino , M . N . , Otero , L . , Sanz , P . D . , & Zaritzky , N . E . ( 1998 ) . Size and location of ice crystals in pork frozen by high - pressure assisted freezing as compared to classical methods . Meat Science , 50 ( 3 ) , 303 – 313 . Mashmoushy , H . , Zhang , Z . , & Thomas , C . R . ( 1998 ) . Micromanip - ulation measurement of the mechanical properties of baker ’ s yeast cells . Biotechnology Letters , 12 , 925 – 929 . McClements , J . M . J . , Patterson , M . F . , & Linton , M . ( 2001 ) . The effect of growth stage and growth temperature on high hydrostatic pressure inactivation of some psychrotrophic bacteria in milk . Journal of Food Protection , 64 ( 4 ) , 514 – 522 . Mertens , B . A . , & Deplace , G . ( 1993 ) . Engineering aspects of high pressure technology in the food industry . Food Technology , 47 , 164 – 168 . Meyer , R . , Cooper , K . L . , Knorr , D . , & Lelieveld , H . L . M . ( 2000 ) . High pressure sterilisation of foods . Food Technology , 54 ( 11 ) , 67 – 72 . Miles , C . A . ( 1991 ) . The thermophysical properties of frozen foods . In W . Bald ( Eds . ) , Food freezing : Today and tomorrow ( pp . 45 – 65 ) . London : Springer . Miller , D . S . , & Mclean , C . ( 2006 ) . Packaging for use with high pressure pasteurization . U . S . Patent 20060099306 ; ( 11 May 2006 ) . Molina - Garcia , A . D . , Otero , L . , Martino , M . N . , Zaritzky , N . E . , Arabas , J . , Szczepek , J . , et al . ( 2004 ) . Ice VI freezing of meat : Supercooling and ultrastructural studies . Meat Science , 66 ( 3 ) , 709 – 718 . Mor - Mor , M . , & Yuste , J . ( 2003 ) . High pressure processing applied to cooked sausage manufacture : Physical properties and sensory analysis . Meat Science , 65 ( 3 ) , 1187 – 1191 . Morgan , D . , Newman , C . P . , Hutchinson , D . N . , Walker , A . M . , Rowe , B . , & Majid , F . ( 1993 ) . Verotoxin producing Escherichia coli O157 : H7 infections associated with the consumption of yogurt . Epidemiology and Infection , 111 , 181 – 187 . Murchie , L . W . , Cruz - Romero , M . , Kerry , J . P . , Linton , M . , Patterson , M . F . , Smiddy , M . , et al . ( 2005 ) . High pressure processing of shellfish : A review of microbiological and other quality aspects . Innovative Food Science & Emerging Technologies , 6 ( 3 ) , 257 – 270 . Nakagami , T . , Shigehisa , T . , Ohmori , T . , Taji , S . , Hase , A . , Kimura , T . , et al . ( 1992 ) . Inactivation of herpes viruses by high hydrostatic pressure . Journal of Virological Methods , 38 , 255 – 262 . Nakagami , T . , Ohno , H . , Shigehisa , T . , Otake , T . , Mori , H . , Kawahata , T . , et al . ( 1996 ) . Inactivation of human immunodeficiency virus by high hydrostatic pressure . Transfusion , 36 ( 5 ) , 475 – 476 . Needs , E . C . , Stenning , R . A . , Gill , A . L . , Ferragut , V . , & Rich , G . T . ( 2000 ) . High pressure treatment of milk : Effects on casein micelle structure and on enzymic coagulation . Journal of Dairy Research , 67 , 31 – 42 . Nienaber , U . , & Shellhammer , T . H . ( 2001 ) . High - pressure processing of orange juice : Kinetics of pectinmethylesterase inactivation . Journal of Food Science , 66 ( 2 ) , 328 – 331 . Okazaki , T . , Kakugawa , K . , Yoneda , T . , & Suzuki , K . ( 2000 ) . Inactivation behaviour of heat - resistant bacterial spores by thermal treatments combined with high hydrostatic pressure . Food Science Technology , 6 , 204 – 207 . Oliveira , A . C . , Ishimaru , D . , Gonçalves , R . B . , Smith , T . J . , Mason , P . , Sá - Carvalho , D . , et al . ( 1999 ) . Low temperature and pressure stability of picornaviruses : Implications for virus uncoating . Biophysical Journal , 76 , 1270 – 1279 . O ’ Reilly , C . E . , O ’ Connor , P . M . , Kelly , A . L . , Beresford , T . P . , & Murphy , P . M . ( 2000 ) . Use of hydrostatic pressure for inactiva - tion of microbial contaminants in cheese . Applied and Environ - mental Microbiology , 66 , 4890 – 4896 . O ’ Reilly , C . E . , Kelly , A . L . , Murphy , P . M . , & Beresford , T . P . ( 2001 ) . High pressure treatment : Applications in cheese manufacture and ripening . Trends in Food Science & Technology , 12 ( 2 ) , 51 – 59 . O ’ Reilly , C . E . , Murphy , P . M . , Kelly , A . L . , Guinee , T . P . , & Beresford , T . P . ( 2002 ) . The effect of high pressure treatment on the functional and rheological properties of Mozzarella cheese . Innovative Food Science & Emerging Technologies , 3 , 3 – 9 . Otero , L . , Martino , M . , Zaritzky , N . , Solas , M . , & Sanz , P . D . ( 2000 ) . Preservation of microstructure in peach and mango during high - pressure - shift freezing . Journal of Food Science , 65 ( 3 ) , 466 – 470 . Otero , L . , Molina , A . , Ramos , A . , & Sanz , P . D . ( 2002a ) . A model for a real thermal control in high - pressure treatment of foods . Biotechnology Progress , 18 ( 4 ) , 904 – 908 . Otero , L . , Molina - García , A . D . , & Sanz , P . D . ( 2002b ) . Some interrelated thermophysical properties of liquid water and ice I : A user - friendly modelling review for high - pressure processing . Critical Reviews in Food Science and Nutrition , 44 ( 2 ) , 339 – 352 . Otero , L . , Ousegui , A . , Guignon , B . , LeBail , A . , & Sanz , P . D . ( 2006 ) . Evaluation of the thermophysical properties of tylose gel under pressure in the phase change domain . Food Hydrocoll , 20 ( 4 ) , 449 – 460 . Otero , L . , Ramos , A . M . , de Elvira , C . , & Sanz , P . D . ( 2007a ) . A model to design high - pressure processes towards an uniform temperature distribution . Journal of Food Engineering , 78 ( 4 ) , 1463 – 1470 . Otero , L . , Ousegui , A . , Urrutia - Benet , G . , de Elvira , C . , Havet , M . , LeBail , A . , et al . ( 2007b ) . Modelling industrial scale high - pressure - low - temperature processes . Journal of Food Engineering , 83 ( 2 ) , 136 – 141 . Ozmutlu , O . , Hartmann , C . , & Delgado , A . ( 2006 ) . Momentum and energy transfer during phase change of water under high hydrostatic pressure . Innovative Food Science & Emerging Technologies , 7 ( 3 ) , 161 – 168 . Palou , B . , Lopez - Malo , A . , & Welti - Chanes , J . ( 2002 ) . Innovative fruit preservation methods using high pressure . In J . Welti - Chanes , G . V . Barbosa - Canovas , & J . M . Aguilera ( Eds . ) , Engineering and food for the 21st Century . Food Preservation Technology Series , Chapter 44 ( pp . 3 – 14 ) . Boca Raton , FL , USA : CRC Press LLC . Patazca , E . , Koutchma , T . , & Balasubramaniam , V . M . ( 2007 ) . Quasi - adiabatic temperature increase during high pressure processing of selected foods . Journal of Food Engineering , 80 ( 1 ) , 199 – 205 . Patterson , M . , & Kilpatrick , D . ( 1998 ) . The combined effect of high hydrostatic pressure and mild heat on inactivation of pathogens in milk and poultry . Journal of Food Protection , 61 ( 4 ) , 432 – 436 . Pauling , L . ( 1964 ) . College chemistry : An introductory textbook of general chemistry . San Francisco , CA : Freeman and Company . Pehl , M . , Werner , F . , & Delgado , A . ( 2000 ) . First visualization of temperature fields in liquids at high pressure . Experiments in Fluids , 29 , 302 – 304 . 32 Food Bioprocess Technol ( 2008 ) 1 : 2 – 34 Perrier - Cornet , J . M . , Maréchal , P . A . , & Gervais , P . ( 1995 ) . A new design intended to relate high - pressure treatment to yeast cell mass transfer . Journal of Biotechnology , 41 , 49 – 58 . Polydera , A . C . , Stoforos , N . G . , & Taoukis , P . S . ( 2003 ) . Comparitive shelf life study and vitamin C loss kinetics in pasteurised and high pressure processed reconstituted orange juice . Journal of Food Engineering , 60 , 21 – 29 . Polydera , A . C . , Galanou , E . , Stoforos , N . G . , & Taoukis , P . S . ( 2004 ) . Inactivation kinetics of pectin methylesterase of Greek navel orange juice as a function of high hydrostatic pressure and temperature process conditions . Journal of Food Engineering , 62 ( 3 ) , 291 – 298 . Pontes , L . , Cordeiro , Y . , Giongo , V . , Villas - Boas , M . , Barreto , A . , Araujo , J . R . , et al . ( 2001 ) . Pressure - induced formation of inactive triple - shelled rotavirus particles is associated with changes in the spike protein VP4 . Journal of Molecular Biology , 307 ( 5 ) , 1171 – 1179 . Préstamo , G . , & Arroyo , G . ( 1998 ) . High hydrostatic pressure effect on vegetable structure . Journal of Food Science , 63 , 878 – 881 . Rademacher , B . , Werner , F . , & Pehl , M . ( 2002 ) . Effect of the pressurizing ramp on the inactivation of Listeria innocua considering thermofluiddynamical processes . Innovative Food Science & Emerging Technologies , 3 , 13 – 24 . Ramirez - Suarez , J . , & Morrissey , M . ( 2006 ) . Effect of high pressure processing ( HPP ) on shelf life of albacore tuna ( Thunnus alalunga ) minced muscle . Innovative Food Science & Emerging Technologies , 7 ( 1 – 2 ) , 19 – 27 . Rao , M . A . , Ooley , H . J . , & Vitali , A . A . ( 1986 ) . Flow properties of con - centrated juices at low temperatures . Food Technology , 38 , 113 – 119 . Rasanayagam , V . , Balasubramaniam , V . M . , Ting , E . , Sizer , C . E . , Bush , C . , & Anderson , C . ( 2003 ) . Compression heating of selected fatty food materials during high - pressure processing . Journal of Food Science , 68 ( 1 ) , 254 – 259 . Raso , J . , & Barbosa - Canovas , G . V . ( 2003 ) . Non - thermal preservation of foods using combined processing techniques . Critical Reviews in Food Science and Nutrition , 43 ( 3 ) , 265 – 285 . Rastogi , N . K . , Raghavarao , K . S . M . S . , Balasubramaniam , V . M . , Niranjan , K . , & Knorr , D . ( 2007 ) . Opportunities and challenges in high pressure processing of foods . Critical Reviews in Food Science and Nutrition , 47 ( 1 ) , 69 – 112 . Ritz , M . , Tholozan , J . L . , Federighi , M . , & Pilet , M . F . ( 2002 ) . Physiological damages of Listeria monocytogenes treated by high hydrostatic pressure . International Journal of Food Microbiology , 79 ( 1 – 2 ) , 47 – 53 . Rodrigo , D . , van Loey , A . , & Hendrickx , M . E . ( 2007 ) . Combined thermal and high pressure colour degradation of tomato puree and strawberry juice . Journal of Food Engineering , 79 ( 2 ) , 553 – 660 . Roos , Y . H . ( 2003 ) . Thermal analysis , state transitions and food quality . Journal of Thermal Analysis and Calorimetry , 71 ( 1 ) , 197 – 203 . Ross , A . I . V . , Griffiths , M . W . , Mittal , G . S . , & Deeth , H . C . ( 2003 ) . Combining non - thermal technologies to control foodborne micro - organisms . International Journal of Food Microbiology , 89 ( 2 – 3 ) , 125 – 138 . Rouille , J . , LeBail , A . , Ramaswamy , H . S . , & Leclerc , L . ( 2002 ) . High pressure thawing of fish and shellfish . Journal of Food Engineering , 53 , 83 – 88 . Rubio , B . , Martinez , B . , Garcia - Cachan , M . D . , Rovira , J . , & Jaime , I . ( 2007 ) . Effect of high pressure preservation on the quality of dry cured beef “ Cecina de Leon ” . Innovative Food Science & Emerging Technologies , 8 ( 1 ) , 102 – 110 . Sandra , S . , Stanford , M . A . , & Meunier Goddik , L . ( 2004 ) . The use of high - pressure processing in the production of Queso Fresco cheese . Journal of Food Science , 69 ( 4 ) , 153 – 158 . Sangsuk , O . , & Myoung , J . ( 2003 ) . Inactivation of Bacillus cereus spores by high hydrostatic pressure at different temperatures . Journal of Food Protection , 66 , 599 – 603 . San Martin , M . F . , Barbosa - Canovas , G . V . , & Swanson , B . G . ( 2002 ) . Food processing by high hydrostatic pressure . Critical Reviews in Food Science and Nutrition , 42 ( 6 ) , 627 – 645 . San Martin - Gonzalez , M . F . , Welti - Chanes , J . , & Barbosa - Canovas , G . V . ( 2006 ) . Cheese manufacture assisted by high pressure . Food Reviews International , 22 ( 3 ) , 275 – 289 . San Martin - Gonzalez , M . F . , Rodriguez , J . J . , Gurram , S . , Clark , S . , Swanson , B . G . , & Barbosa - Canovas , G . V . ( 2007 ) . Yield , composition and rheological characteristics of cheddar cheese made with high pressure processed milk . LWT - Food Science Technology , 40 ( 4 ) , 697 – 705 . Saul , A . , & Wagner , W . ( 1989 ) . A fundamental equation for water covering the range from the melting line to 1273 K at pressures up to 25000 MPa . Journal of Physical and Chemical Reference Data , 18 ( 4 ) , 1537 – 1564 . Schluter , O . ( 2003 ) . Impact of high pressure - low temperature processes on cellular materials related to foods . PhD thesis , Berlin University of Technology . Schluter , O . , Urrutia - Benet , G . U . , Heinz , V . , & Knorr , D . ( 2004 ) . Metastable states of water and ice during pressure - supported freezing of potato tissue . Biotechnology Progress , 20 ( 3 ) , 799 – 810 . Schreck , C . , Layh - Schmidt , G . , & Ludwig , H . ( 1999 ) . Inactivation of Mycoplasma pneumoniae by high hydrostatic pressure . Pharma - ceutical Industry , 61 ( 8 ) , 759 – 762 . Schubring , R . , Meyer , C . , Schluter , O . , Boguslawski , S . , & Knorr , D . ( 2003 ) . Impact of high pressure assisted thawing on the quality of fillets from various fish species . Innovative Food Science & Emerging Technologies , 4 ( 3 ) , 257 – 267 . Seeton , C . J . ( 2006 ) . Viscosity – temperature correlation for liquids . Tribology Letters , 22 ( 1 ) , 67 – 78 . Serra , X . , Grebol , N . , Guardia , M . D . , Guerrero , L . , Gou , P . , Masoliver , P . , et al . ( 2007 ) . High pressure applied to frozen ham at different process stages . 2 . Effect on the sensory attributes and on the colour characteristics of dry - cured ham . Meat Science , 75 ( 1 ) , 21 – 28 . Shen , T . , Urrutia - Benet , G . , Brul , S . , & Knorr , D . ( 2005 ) . Influence of high - pressure - low - temperature treatment on the inactivation of Bacillus subtilis cells . Innovative Food Science & Emerging Technologies , 6 ( 3 ) , 271 – 278 . Shimada , S . , Andou , M . , Naito , N . , Yamada , N . , Osumi , M . , & Hayashi , R . ( 1993 ) . Effects of hydrostatic pressure on the ultrastructure and leakage of internal substances in the yeast Saccharomyces cerevisiae . Applied Microbiology and Biotech - nology , 40 , 23 – 131 . Slade , L . , & Levine , H . ( 1991 ) . Beyond water activity : Recent advances based on an alternative approach to the assessment of food quality and safety . Critical Reviews in Food Science and Nutrition , ( 30 ) , 115 . Smelt , J . P . P . M . ( 1998 ) . Recent advances in the microbiology of high pressure processing . Trends in Food Science & Technology , 9 , 152 – 158 . Smith , A . E . , Moxham , K . E . , & Middelberg , A . P . J . ( 1998 ) . On uniquely determining cell - wall material properties with the compression experiment . Chemical Engineering Science , 53 , 3913 – 3922 . Smith , A . E . , Zhang , Z . , & Thomas , C . R . ( 2000a ) . Wall material properties of yeast cells : Part 1 . Cell measurements and compression experiments . Chemical Engineering Science , 55 ( 11 ) , 2031 – 2041 . Smith , A . E . , Moxham , K . E . , & Middelberg , A . P . J . ( 2000b ) . Wall material properties of yeast cells . Part II . Analysis . Chemical Engineering Science , 55 ( 11 ) , 2043 – 2053 . Spilimbergo , S . , Elvassore , N . , & Bertucco , A . ( 2002 ) . Microbial inactivation by high - pressure . Journal of Supercritical Fluids , 22 ( 1 ) , 55 – 63 . Sun , D . - W . ( Ed . ) ( 2005 ) . Emerging technologies for food processing . London , UK : Elsevier . Food Bioprocess Technol ( 2008 ) 1 : 2 – 34 33 Supavititpatana , T . , & Apichartsrangkoon , A . ( 2007 ) . Combination effects of ultra - high pressure and temperature on the physical and thermal properties of ostrich meat sausage ( yor ) . Meat Science , 76 ( 3 ) , 555 – 560 . Taylor , D . M . ( 1999 ) . Inactivation of prions by physical and chemical means . Journal of Hospital Infection , 43 ( Suppl ) , S69 – S76 . Thiebaud , M . , Dumay , E . , & Cheftel , J . C . ( 2002 ) . Pressure - shift freezing of o / w emulsions : Influence of fructose and sodium alginate on undercooling , nucleation , freezing kinetics and ice crystal size distribution . Food Hydrocolloids , 16 , 527 – 545 . Thomas . C . R . , & Zhang , Z . ( 1998 ) . The effect of hydrodynamics on biological materials . In E . Galindo , & O . T . Ramírez ( Eds . ) , Advances in bioprocess engineering II ( pp . 137 – 170 ) . London : Kluwer . Ting , E . Y . , & Anderson , C . ( 2006 ) . Systems and methods to slowly reduce the pressure in a pressure chamber over time . U . S . Patent 2006272709 ; ( 7 Dec 2006 ) . Ting , E . Y . , & Lonneborg , N . - G . ( 2002 ) . Method and apparatus for high pressure treatment of substances under controlled tempera - ture conditions . U . S . Patent 20020192109 ; ( 19 Dec 2002 ) . Ting , E . Y . , & Marshall , R . G . ( 2002 ) . Production Issues Related to UHP Food . In J . Welti - Chanes , G . V . Barbosa - Canovas , & J . M . Aguilera ( Eds . ) , Engineering and food for the 21st century . Food preservation technology series , Chapter 44 ( pp . 727 – 738 ) . Boca Raton , FL , USA : CRC Press LLC . Toepfl , S . , Mathys , A . , Heinz , V . , & Knorr , D . ( 2006 ) . Potential of high hydrostatic pressure and pulsed electric fields for energy efficient and environmentally friendly food processing . Food Reviews International , 22 ( 4 ) , 405 – 423 . Torres , J . A . , & Velazquez , G . ( 2005 ) . Commercial opportunities and research challenges in the high pressure processing of foods . Journal of Food Engineering , 67 ( 1 – 2 ) , 95 – 112 . Trejo - Ayara , X . I . , Hendrickx , M . , Verlinden , B . E . , Van Buggenhout , S . , Smale , N . J . , Stewart , C . , et al . ( 2007 ) . Understanding texture changes of high pressure processed fresh carrots : A micro - structural and biochemical approach . Journal of Food Engineer - ing , 80 ( 3 ) , 873 – 884 . Upmann , M . , Paulsen , P . , James , C . , & Smulders , F . J . M . ( 2000 ) . Microbiology of refrigerated meat . Fleischwirtschaft , 80 , 90 – 97 . Urrutia - Benet , G . ( 2005 ) . High - pressure - low - temperature processing of foods : Impact of metastable phases of process and quality parameters . PhD thesis , Berlin University of Technology . Urrutia - Benet , G . , Schlüter , O . , & Knorr , D . ( 2004 ) . High pressure - low temperature processing . Suggested definitions and terminology . Innovative Food Science & Emerging Technologies , 5 ( 4 ) , 413 – 427 . Urrutia - Benet , G . , Chapleau , N . , Lille , M . , LeBail , A . , Autio , K . , & Knorr , D . ( 2006 ) . Quality related aspects of high pressure low temperature processed whole potatoes . Innovative Food Science & Emerging Technologies , 7 ( 1 – 2 ) , 32 – 39 . Urrutia - Benet , G . , Balogh , T . , Schneider , J . , & Knorr , D . ( 2007 ) . Metastable phases during high - pressure - low - temperature process - ing of potatoes and their impact on quality - related parameters . Journal of Food Engineering , 78 ( 2 ) , 375 – 389 . Van Buggenhout , S . , Messagie , I . , Van Loey , A . , & Hendrickx , M . E . ( 2005 ) . Influence of low - temperature blanching combined with high - pressure shift freezing on the texture of frozen carrots . Journal of Food Science , 70 ( 4 ) , S304 – S308 . Van Buggenhout , S . , Messagie , I . , Maes , V . , Duvetter , T . , Van Loey , A . , & Hendrickx , M . E . ( 2006a ) . Minimizing texture loss of frozen strawberries : Effect of infusion with pectinmethylesterase and calcium combined with different freezing conditions and effect of subsequent storage / thawing conditions . European Food Research and Technology , 223 ( 3 ) , 395 – 404 . Van Buggenhout , S . , Lille , M . , Messagie , I . , Van Loey , A . , Autio , K . , & Hendrickx , M . ( 2006b ) . Impact of pretreatment and freezing conditions on the microstructure of frozen carrots : Quantification and relation to texture loss . European Food Research and Technology , 222 ( 5 – 6 ) , 543 – 553 . Van den Berg , R . W . , Hoogland , H . , Lelieveld , H . L . M . , & van Schepdael , L . ( 2001 ) . High pressure equipment for food processing applications . In M . E . Hendrickx , & D . Knorr ( Eds . ) , Ultra high pressure treatment of food , Chapter 11 ( pp . 297 – 312 ) . London , UK : Kluwer Academia . Van Loey , A . , Ooms , V . , Weemaes , C . , Van den Broeck , I . , Ludikhuyze , L . , Indrawati , et al . ( 1998 ) . Thermal and pressure - temperature degradation of chlorophyll in broccoli ( Brassica oleracea L italica ) juice : A kinetic study . Journal of Agricultural and Food Chemistry , 46 ( 12 ) , 5289 – 5294 . Van Opstal , I . , Bagamboula , C . F . , Vanmuysen , S . C . M . , Wuytack , E . Y . , & Michiels , C . W . ( 2004 ) . Inactivation of Bacillus cereus spores in milk by mild pressure and heat treatments . Interna - tional Journal of Food Microbiology , 92 , 227 – 234 . Villarreal - Alba , E . G . , Contreras - Esquivel , J . C . , Aguilar - Gonzalez , C . N . , & Reyes - Vega , M . L . ( 2004 ) . Pectinesterase activity and the texture of Jalapeno pepper . European Food Research and Technology , 218 ( 2 ) , 164 – 166 . Vitali , A . A . , & Rao , M . A . ( 1984 ) . Flow properties of low pulp concentrated orange juice - serum viscosity and effect of pulp content . Journal of Food Science , 49 ( 3 ) , 876 – 881 . Watson , J . T . R . , Basu , R . S . , & Sengers , J . V . ( 1980 ) . An improved representative equation for the dynamic viscosity of water substance . Journal of Physical and Chemical Reference Data , 9 , 1255 – 1290 . Weagent , S . D . , Bryant , J . L . , & Bark , D . H . ( 1994 ) . Survival of E . coli ( O157 : H7 ) in mayonnaise based sauces at room and refrigerated temperatures . Journal of Food Protection , 57 , 629 – 631 . Welti - Chanes , J . , Lopez - Malo , A . , Palou , E . , Bermudez , D . , Guerrero - Beltran , J . A . , & Barbosa - Canovas , G . V . ( 2005 ) . Fundamentals and applications of high pressure processing to foods . In G . V . Barbosa - Canovas , M . S . Tapia , & P . M . Cano ( Eds . ) , Novel food processing technologies , Chapter 8 ( pp . 157 – 181 ) . Boca Raton , FL , USA : CRC Press LLC . Wilkinson , N . , Kurdziel , A . S . , Langton , S . , Needs , E . , & Cook , N . ( 2001 ) . Resistance of poliovirus to inactivation by hydrostatic pressures . Innovative Food Science & Emerging Technologies , 2 , 95 – 98 . Yuste , J . , Mor - Mur , M . , Capellas , M . , & Pla , R . ( 1999 ) . Pressure vs . heat - induced bacterial stress in cooked poultry sausages : A preliminary study . Letters in Applied Microbiology , 29 4 , 233 – 237 . Yuste , J . , Capellas , M . , Pla , R . , Fung , D . Y . C . , & Mor - Mor , M . ( 2001 ) . High pressure processing for food safety and preserva - tion : A review . Journal of Rapid Methods and Automation in Microbiology , 9 1 , 1 – 10 . Zhao , Y . , Flores , R . A . , & Olson , D . ( 1998 ) . High hydrostatic pressure effects on rapid thawing of frozen beef . Journal of Food Science , 63 2 , 272 – 275 . Zhu , S . M . , LeBail , A . , Chapleau , N . , Ramaswamy , H . S . , & de Lamballerie - Anton , M . ( 2004 ) Pressure shift freezing of pork muscle : Effect on color , drip loss , texture , and protein stability . Biotechnology Progress , 20 3 , 939 – 945 . 34 Food Bioprocess Technol ( 2008 ) 1 : 2 – 34