P O S T E R S Collaborative information monitoring : Preliminary results of a systematic mixed studies review and a framework synthesis Vera Granikov | Reem El Sherif | France Bouthillier | Pierre Pluye McGill University , Montreal , Quebec , Canada Correspondence Vera Granikov , McGill University , Montreal , Quebec , Canada . Email : vera . granikov @ mail . mcgill . ca Abstract Keeping up to date is essential across professional fields , yet it remains a challenge . Collaboration may act as a facilitator , yet more knowledge is needed to see if , how , and why it could overcome the challenges of keeping up to date . This systematic mixed studies review , a work in progress , bridges the conceptual fields of information monitoring / environmental scanning with collaborative information seeking . Specifically , a “ best fit ” framework synthesis approach is used to identify potential factors and outcomes , and to adapt a model of environmental scanning to collaborative information monitoring . K E Y W O R D S collaborative information monitoring , collaborative information seeking , environmental scanning , framework synthesis , mixed studies review 1 | INTRODUCTION Keeping up to date is essential across domains and profes - sions . Yet , despite existing tools and services , it remains challenging . Researchers , for example , struggle to monitor scientific literature ( Pontis , Blandford , Greifeneder , Attalla , & Neal , 2017 ) and find it impossible due to the ever - growing volume of articles ( Brainard , 2020 ) . The most common barriers are information overload , time constraints , and insufficient evaluation skills ( Pontis et al . , 2017 ) . Collaborative monitoring may facilitate keep - ing up to date by sharing the tasks and reducing the indi - vidual burden ( Fourie , 2006 ) . More knowledge is needed on collaborative monitoring . Although information monitoring is recognized as impor - tant and figures prominently in seminal information seek - ing models ( Bates , 2002 ; Choo , Detlor , & Turnbull , 2000 ; Ellis , 1993 ; Savolainen , 2017 ) , most studies focus on active behaviour rather than passive , such as monitoring ( Attfield , Blandford , & Makri , 2010 ) . Moreover , informa - tion seeking has been traditionally studied as an individual rather than a collaborative behaviour . This trend is chang - ing ( Foster , 2010 ; Shah , 2014 ) , but more research is needed to understand the experiences and outcomes of collabora - tive information seeking ( CIS ) ( Hertzum & Hansen , 2019 ) . Finally , although there are many conceptual models , there is no appropriate model to guide the study of collaborative monitoring , which justifies the need for this mixed studies review and a framework synthesis . Starting with the “ best - fit ” a priori framework of envi - ronmental scanning ( Choo et al . , 2000 ) , the objectives of this review are to ( a ) identify the factors and outcomes of CIS and ( b ) use the findings to adapt the model of envi - ronmental scanning to a collaborative context . DOI : 10 . 1002 / pra2 . 369 83rd Annual Meeting of the Association for Information Science & Technology October 25 - 29 , 2020 . Author ( s ) retain copyright , but ASIS & T receives an exclusive publication license Proc Assoc Inf Sci Technol . 2020 ; 57 : e369 . wileyonlinelibrary . com / journal / pra2 1 of 4 https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1002 / pra2 . 369 2 | METHODS Given that CIS research involves quantitative , qualita - tive , and mixed methods ( Hertzum & Simonsen , 2019 ) , this review is a mixed studies review ( Hong & Pluye , 2018 ) . Included studies satisfy all of the follow - ing criteria : ( a ) empirical research studies using quanti - tative , qualitative or mixed methods ; ( b ) carried out in a laboratory or in the field ; ( c ) on CIS ; ( d ) that address influencing factors and / or related outcomes ; ( e ) publi - shed in English or French , ( f ) since 1990 . For this review , CIS is defined as a group of users ( 2 + ) with a shared information need or interest , which they pursue by sharing or participating together in information seeking activities . A comprehensive search strategy was developed by the first author and peer - reviewed by a specialized librar - ian in Library and Information Studies . Searches were conducted in LISA , LISTA , ERIC , ProQuest Disserta - tions & Theses , and Scopus ( backward and forward cita - tion tracking ) . All identified records were imported into EndNote x9 . After removing duplicates , records were imported into DistillerSR online screening software . Using the eligibility criteria , the first author and a second reviewer ( RES ) independently screened the titles and abstracts of all records . Records that satisfied all eligibil - ity criteria , and those whose abstracts did not provide enough information to decide , passed to full text screen - ing . The same two reviewers independently screened all full text articles . Disagreements were solved through dis - cussion , or arbitrage by a third party when consensus was not reached . Characteristics of included studies were extracted into a spreadsheet by the first author . The sec - ond reviewer double - checked extracted data for 25 % of included studies . As recommended for framework syn - theses , critical appraisal was not done ( Carroll , Booth , & Cooper , 2011 ) . This review follows a convergent data - based synthesis design ( Hong , Pluye , Bujold , & Wassef , 2017 ) . All extracted data ( quantitative and qualitative ) were analyzed using the same qualitative method and integrated at the synthesis stage . Text passages from included studies were coded line - by - line in NVivo 10 ( qualitative analysis software ) using a deductive - inductive thematic analysis ( Fereday & Muir - Cochrane , 2006 ) . Themes from the a priori best - fit framework were operationalised in a coding guide ( Booth & Carroll , 2015 ) . Data were coded against existing themes ; new themes were generated from the data . Syn - thesis will be carried out by the first author , who will inter - pret the relationships between the a priori framework and FIGURE 1 PRISMA flow diagram 2 of 4 GRANIKOV ET AL . the data to produce a revised framework of collaborative monitoring . The revised framework will be discussed until consensus is reached among all research team members . 3 | PRELIMINARY RESULTS Out of 268 unique records , 53 studies satisfied the selection criteria and were included in the synthesis ( Figure 1 ) . As per objective 1 , seven types of factors and four types of outcomes related to CIS were identified ( Figure 2 ) . This publication describes a work in progress . The characteristics of included studies and the revised framework are forthcoming . Using a systematic and replicable approach , this review will produce a revised conceptual framework of collaborative information monitoring . It will contribute new knowledge relevant to researchers and all those impacted by the challenges of keeping up to date . A future empirical study is planned to assess the applicabil - ity of the new framework , thus bridging the knowledge on CIS and information monitoring . REFERENCES Attfield , S . , Blandford , A . , & Makri , S . ( 2010 ) . Social and interac - tional practices for disseminating current awareness informa - tion in an organisational setting . Information Processing and Management , 46 ( 6 ) , 632 – 645 . Bates , M . J . ( 2002 ) . Toward an Integrated Model of Information Seek - ing and Searching . Paper presented at the Fourth international Conference on Information Needs , Seeking and Use in Differ - ent Contexts , Lisbon , Portugal . Booth , A . , & Carroll , C . ( 2015 ) . How to build up the actionable knowledge base : The role of ‘ best fit ’ framework synthesis for studies of improvement in healthcare . BMJ Quality & Safety , 24 ( 11 ) , 700 – 708 . Brainard , J . ( 2020 ) . Scientists are drowning in COVID - 19 papers . Can new tools keep them afloat ? Science . https : / / www . sciencemag . org / news / 2020 / 05 / scientists - are - drowning - covid - 19 - papers - can - new - tools - keep - them - afloat Carroll , C . , Booth , A . , & Cooper , K . ( 2011 ) . A worked example of " best fit " framework synthesis : A systematic review of views concerning the taking of some potential chemopreventive agents . BMC Medical Research Methodology , 11 , 1 – 9 . Choo , C . , Detlor , B . , & Turnbull , D . ( 2000 ) . Information seeking on the web : An integrated model of browsing and searching . First Monday , 5 ( 2 ) , 1 – 16 . Ellis , D . ( 1993 ) . Modelling the information - seeking patterns of aca - demic researchers : A grounded theory approach . Library Quar - terly , 63 ( 4 ) , 469 – 486 . Fereday , J . , & Muir - Cochrane , E . ( 2006 ) . Demonstrating rigor using thematic analysis : A hybrid approach of inductive and deduc - tive coding and theme development . International Journal of Qualitative Methods , 5 ( 1 ) , 80 – 92 . Foster , J . ( 2010 ) . Collaborative information behavior : User engage - ment and communication sharing . Hershey , PA : Information Science Reference . Fourie , I . ( 2006 ) . How LIS professionals can use alerting services . Oxford : Chandos Publishing . Hertzum , M . , & Hansen , P . ( 2019 ) . Empirical studies of collabora - tive information seeking : A review of methodological issues . Journal of Documentation , 75 ( 1 ) , 140 – 163 . Hertzum , M . , & Simonsen , J . ( 2019 ) . How is professionals ’ informa - tion seeking shaped by workplace procedures ? A study of healthcare clinicians . Information Processing and Management , 56 ( 3 ) , 624 – 636 . Hong , Q . N . , & Pluye , P . ( 2018 ) . Systematic reviews : A brief histori - cal overview . Education for Information , 34 ( 4 ) , 261 – 276 . FIGURE 2 Factors and outcomes related to CIS GRANIKOV ET AL . 3 of 4 Hong , Q . N . , Pluye , P . , Bujold , M . , & Wassef , M . ( 2017 ) . Convergent and sequential synthesis designs : Implications for conducting and reporting systematic reviews of qualitative and quantitative evidence . Systematic Reviews , 6 ( 1 ) , 61 . Pontis , S . , Blandford , A . , Greifeneder , E . , Attalla , H . , & Neal , D . ( 2017 ) . Keeping up to date : An academic researcher ' s informa - tion journey . Journal of the Association for Information Science and Technology , 68 ( 1 ) , 22 – 35 . Savolainen , R . ( 2017 ) . Contributions to conceptual growth : The elaboration of Ellis ' s model for information - seeking behavior . Journal of the Association for Information Science and Technol - ogy , 68 ( 3 ) , 594 – 608 . Shah , C . ( 2014 ) . Collaborative information seeking . Journal of the Asso - ciation for Information Science and Technology , 65 ( 2 ) , 215 – 236 . How to cite this article : Granikov V , El Sherif R , Bouthillier F , Pluye P . Collaborative information monitoring : Preliminary results of a systematic mixed studies review and a framework synthesis . Proc Assoc Inf Sci Technol . 2020 ; 57 : e369 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1002 / pra2 . 369 4 of 4 GRANIKOV ET AL .