Rho - stimulated Contractility Drives the Formation of Stress Fibers and Focal Adhesions Magdalena Chrzanowska - Wodnicka and Keith Burridge Department of Cell Biology and Anatomy , University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill , Chapel Hill , North Carolina 27599 Abstract . Activated rhoA , a ras - related GTP - binding protein , stimulates the appearance of stress fibers , focal adhesions , and tyrosine phosphorylation in quiescent cells ( Ridley , A . J . , and A . Hall , 1992 . Cell . 70 : 389 - 399 ) . The pathway by which rho triggers these events has not been elucidated . Many of the agents that activate rho ( e . g . , vasopressin , endothelin , lysophosphatidic acid ) stimulate the contractility of smooth muscle and other cells . We have investigated whether rho ' s induction of stress fibers , focal adhesions , and tyrosine phosphoryla - tion is the result of its stimulation of contractility . We demonstrate that stimulation of fibroblasts with lyso - phosphatidic acid , which activates rho , induces myosin light chain phosphorylation . This precedes the forma - tion of stress fibers and focal adhesions and is accompa - nied by increased contractility . Inhibition of contractil - ity by several different mechanisms leads to inhibition of rho - induced stress fibers , focal adhesions , and ty - rosine phosphorylation . In addition , when contractility is inhibited , integrins disperse from focal adhesions as stress fibers and focal adhesions disassemble . Con - versely , upon stimulation of contractility , diffusely dis - tributed integrins are aggregated into focal adhesions . These results suggest that activated rho stimulates con - tractility , driving the formation of stress fibers and focal adhesions and elevating tyrosine phosphorylation . A model is proposed to account for how contractility could promote these events . F OCAL adhesions are sites where cells in culture ad - here strongly to the underlying extracellular matrix ( ECM ) 1 via specific members of the integrin family of ECM receptors ( Burridge et al . , 1988 ; Jockusch et al . , 1995 ) . At their cytoplasmic face , focal adhesions provide attachment for bundles of actin filaments ( stress fibers ) . More than just sites of structural linkage between the ECM on the outside and the cytoskeleton on the inside , focal adhesions are regions of signal transduction . Compo - nents involved in multiple signal transduction pathways have been identified in focal adhesions ( Hynes , 1992 ; Juliano and Haskill , 1993 ; Clark and Brugge , 1995 ; Rich - ardson and Parsons , 1995 ; Schwartz et al . , 1995 ) with most attention being directed toward tyrosine phosphorylation at these sites . Indeed , these are the most prominent sites Address all correspondence to Dr . Keith Burridge , Department of Cell Biology and Anatomy , 108 Taylor Hall , CB # 7090 , University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill , Chapel Hill , NC 27599 . Tel . : ( 919 ) 966 - 5783 . Fax : ( 919 ) 966 - 1856 . 1 . Abbreviations used in this paper : BCS , bovine calf serum ; BDM , 2 , 3 - butanedione 2 - monoxime ; ECM , extracellular matrix ; FAK , pp125 focal adhesion kinase ; GST , glutathione - S transferase ; LPA , lysophosphatidic acid ; MHC , myosin heavy chain ; MLC , myosin light chain ; MLCK , myosine light chain kinase ; PIP2 , phosphatidylinositol 4 , 5 - biphosphate ; PIP - 5 K , phosphatidylinositol 4 - phosphate 5 - kinase ; PKC , protein kinase C ; PKN , protein kinase N . of tyrosine phosphorylation within fibroblasts as well as many other cells in culture and , typically , the most promi - nently tyrosine - phosphorylated proteins in whole cell ly - sates are focal adhesion components , such as paxillin and the tyrosine kinase , FAK . Tyrosine phosphorylation is stimulated under conditions of focal adhesion assembly when cells are plated on ECM substrata ( Guan et al . , 1991 ; Burridge et al . , 1992 ; Hanks et al . , 1992 ; Kornberg et al . , 1992 ) . In addition , tyrosine phosphorylation is necessary for focal adhesion assembly , although whether this in - volves focal adhesion components or upstream steps in the pathway has not been determined ( Burridge et al . , 1992 ) . Several agents that induce the formation of focal adhe - sions and stress fibers in quiescent cells lacking these structures act via the low molecular GTP - binding protein , rhoA ( Paterson et al . , 1990 ; Ridley and Hall , 1992 ) . Direct microinjection of activated rho into quiescent fibroblasts stimulates focal adhesions and stress fibers to assemble rapidly . Conversely , inactivation of rho via ADP - ribosyla - tion catalyzed by the C3 exotransferase , blocks the assem - bly of these structures . How rho stimulates these cytoskel - etal events has not been resolved . Because there is elevated pp125 focal adhesion kinase ( FAK ) activity in rho - stimulated cells ( Zachary et al . , 1992 ; Kumagai et al . , 1993 ; Barry and Critchley , 1994 ; Chrzanowska - Wodnicka and Burridge , 1994 ; Hordijk et al . , 1994 ; Ridley and Hall , © The Rockefeller University Press , 0021 - 9525 / 96 / 06 / 1403 / 13 $ 2 . 00 The Journal of Cell Biology , Volume 133 , Number 6 , June 1996 1403 - 1415 1403 1994 ) , and because tyrosine kinase inhibitors decrease the tyrosine phosphorylation of FAK and prevent the assem - bly of focal adhesions and stress fibers ( Burridge et al . , 1992 ; Chrzanowska - Wodnicka and Burridge , 1994 ; Ridley and Hall , 1994 ; Romer et al . , 1994 ) , the general assump - tion in the field has been that rho promotes focal adhesion and stress fiber formation by stimulating FAK activity . Many of the agents that stimulate focal adhesion and stress fiber formation via rho also induce cells to contract . For example , in smooth muscle , contractility is induced by lysophosphatidic acid ( LPA ) , thrombin , vasopressin , en - dothelin , and bombesin ( Said , 1983 ; Schmid et al . , 1983 ; Liard , 1984 ; Yanagisawa et al . , 1988 ; for review see Moolenaar , 1994 ) . Some of these compounds also have been shown to stimulate contraction in other cell types . LPA causes chicken embryo fibroblasts and human endothelial cells to con - tract ( Kolodney and Elson , 1993 ) and induces neurite re - traction ( Jalink et al . , 1994 ) . Similarly , thrombin stimu - lates fibroblast and endothelial cell contraction ( Giuliano and Taylor , 1990 ; Goekeler and Wysolmerski , 1995 ) , and also induces neurite retraction ( Jalink and Moolenaar , 1992 ; Suidan et al . , 1992 ) . With neurite retraction , this ef - fect of LPA and thrombin has been shown to be mediated by rho , because it is inhibited by the C3 exotransferase ( Jalink et al . , 1994 ) . In addition , activated rho has been shown to affect directly the contractility of permeabilized smooth muscle by decreasing the calcium requirement for contractility ( Hirata et al . , 1992 ) . The stimulation of contractility by rho suggests a mecha - nism by which rho may induce the formation of stress fi - bers . Previously it was suggested that stress fibers arise as a result of isometric tension generated in ceils ( Heath and Dunn , 1978 ; Burridge , 1981 ) , Much evidence has accumu - lated supporting this idea and that contractility / tension also leads to focal adhesion assembly . For example , micro - injection into fibroblasts of antibodies that prevent myosin filament assembly and a functional contractile complex disrupt stress fibers ( Honer et al . , 1988 ) . Contractility in nonmuscle cells is regulated by the phosphorylation of the 20 - kD myosin light chain ( MLC ) catalyzed by a myosin light chain kinase ( MLCK ) ( Citi and Kendrick - Jones , 1987 ) . Diverse agents acting directly or indirectly to inhibit the MLCK , thereby inhibiting contractility , promote disas - sembly of stress fibers and focal adhesions ( Lamb et al . , 1988 ; Turner et al . , 1989 ; Fernandez et al . , 1990 ; Volberg et al . , 1994 ) . Conversely , when contractility is induced in cul - tured fibroblasts by depolymerizing microtubules , this is accompanied by increased assembly of stress fibers ( Da - nowski , 1989 ) and focal adhesions ( our unpublished obser - vations ) . In this paper , we have asked whether rho induces the as - sembly of focal adhesions and stress fibers by stimulating contractility . We have examined MLC phosphorylation and fibroblast contractility in response to rho activation . In addition , we have investigated the effects of agents that block contractility , either by inhibiting the MLCK or by inhibiting actin - myosin interaction , on rho - induced stress fibers , focal adhesions , and tyrosine phosphorylation . Our results indicate that rho - stimulated contractility drives the formation of stress fibers and focal adhesions , and elevates the tyrosine phosphorylation of focal adhesion compo - nents . Materials and Methods Cell Culture and Inhibitors of Contractility Balb / c 3T3 Clone A31 ( Balb / c ) fibroblasts ( American Type Culture Col - lection , Rockville , MD ) , were grown in DME ( Life Technologies , Inc . , Grand Island , NY ) , with 100 U / ml penicillin , 100 p ~ g / ml streptomycin , and 250 ng / ml amphotericin B as fungizone , supplemented with 10 % bovine calf serum ( BCS ; JRH Biosciences , Lenexa , KS ) . To obtain quiescence , cells were seeded at identical density in tissue culture dishes and main - tained in the culture medium with serum until they reached confluence . The cells were then extensively washed and starved in serum - free culture medium for 2 - 4 h . Quiescent , serum - starved cells were stimulated with culture medium containing 2 } xg / ml LPA ( 1 - oleoyl - 2 - hydroxy - sn - glycero - 3 - phosphate , monosodium salt in 1 - t20 ; Avanti Polar Lipids , Alabaster , AL ) . In some experiments inhibitors were used : an inhibitor of MLCK , KT5926 ( Calbiochem Corp . , La Jolla , CA ) was used at 15 ~ M ; 1 - ( 5 - iso - quinolinylsulfonyl ) - 2 - methylpiperazine ( H7 ; Sigma Chemical Co . , St . Louis , MO ) was used at 300 IxM final concentration ; an inhibitor of actin - myosin interactions , 2 , 3 - butanedione 2 - monoxime ( BDM ; Sigma Chemi - cal Co . ) was used at 20 mM . These compounds were added to the culture media during stimulation with LPA . To determine the effect of BDM on cellular ATP levels , ATP was measured using a luciferin / luciferase assay kit ( Enlighten ; Promega Corp . , Madison , WI ) . Silicone Rubber Substrates To visualize cell contractility , flexible rubber substrates have been gener - ated by a modification of the protocol of Harris et al . ( 1980 ) . Silicone rub - ber ( dimethyl polysiloxane , viscosity : 10 , 000 - 60 , 000 centistokes ; Sigma Chemical Co . ) was aliquoted into tissue culture dishes and allowed to spread for 1 - 2 h . The top of the silicone was then coated with a thin layer of gold - palladium using a cold sputter coater . The UV glow discharge that occurred during the gold - palladium coating served to polymerize the sili - cone rubber . The thin layer of gold - palladium decreased the hydrophobic nature of the rubber surface and enhanced the adhesion and spreading of ceils plated onto this surface . Cells were plated on the gold - coated , poly - merized flexible rubber and processed as described above for cells plated on tissue culture plastic . Immunofluorescence Microscopy Immunofluorescence was essentially performed as described before ( Chrzanowska - Wodnicka and Burridge , 1994 ) . Actin was stained with 400 mU / ml TRITC - phalloidin ( Molecular Probes , Inc . , Eugene , OR ) , myosin was stained with a polyclonal anti - platelet myosin antibody ( Kawamoto and Adelstein , 1987 ; a kind gift from Dr . Robert Adelstein , NIH ) fol - lowed by FITCqabeled goat anti - mouse IgG ( Chemicon International , Inc . , Temecula , CA ) . Phosphotyrosine was visualized using antiphospho - tyrosine , py20 ( Transduction Laboratories , Lexington , KY ) , vinculin was stained with an mAb ( 7f9 ) , kindly provided by Dr . Alexey Belkin , Univer - sity of North Carolina , Chapel Hill ( Glukhova et al . , 1990 ) followed by TRITC - or FITC - labeled goat anti - mouse IgG . Integrins were detected either with an affinity - purified rabbit antibody directed against the M cy - toplasmic domain , kindly provided by Dr . Crispin Taylor , University of North Carolina , Chapel Hill , or with a goat antibody directed against the ct5131 complex , kindly provided by Dr . Rudy Juliano , University of North Carolina , Chapel Hill , followed by TRITC - or FITC - labeled donkey anti - rabbit or rabbit anti - goat IgG . Cells microinjected with recombinant pro - teins were visualized by staining with rabbit anti - GST IgG ( Molecular Probes , Inc . ) followed by an FITC - labeled goat anti - rabbit IgG ( Chemi - con International , Inc . ) . Analysis of Tyrosine Phosphorylation of Focal Adhesion Proteins For analysis of tyrosine phosphorylation in focal adhesion proteins , immu - noprecipitates from whole cell lysates were analyzed by Western blotting as described before ( Chrzanowska - Wodnicka and Burridge , 1994 ) . Briefly , cells were lysed on ice with cold lysis buffer consisting of TBS ( 150 mM NaCI , 50 mM Tris - Cl , pH 7 . 6 ) with 0 . 1 % sodium azide , 0 . 1 % Triton X - 100 , 0 . 1 % sodium deoxycholate , 2 mM EDTA , 2 mM EGTA , 1 mM so - dium orthovanadate , and 25 } xg / ml leupeptin . The lysates were clarified by a 10 - min centrifugation at 13 , 000 g . Supernatants were either incubated with anti - paxillin or anti - FAK monoclonal IgG for 2 - 4 h at 4°C , followed The Journal of Cell Biology , Volume 133 , 1996 1404 by rabbit anti - mouse - conjugated protein A - Sepharose ( Chemicon Inter - national , Inc . ) . Proteins bound to the sepharose were dissolved in SDS - sample buffer , separated by electrophoresis on 7 . 5 % polyacrylamide gels ( Laemmli , 1970 ) and transferred electrophoretically to nitrocellulose . Ni - trocellulose was blocked with 2 % cold water fish gelatin ( Sigma Chemical Co . ) in TBSTB ( TBS with 0 . 1 % BSA and 0 . 05 % Tween 20 ) for 20 - 30 min . The nitrocellulose was then incubated for 45 rain with anti - phosphoty - rosine IgG conjugated to HRP , py20 - HRP ( ICN Biochemicals Inc . , Irvine , CA ) and extensively washed with TBSTB and TBS . Enhanced chemilumi - nescence ( Amersham International , Buckinghamshire , UK ) was used to develop the blots . Immunoblots were stripped in 62 . 5 mM Tris - HCl , pH 6 . 75 , 2 % sodium dodecyl sulfate , and 100 mM 13 - mercaptoethanol at 55°C for 45 min . Stripped blots were washed in TBS and reprobed with 2A7 , anti - FAK monoclonal IgG ( Upstate Biotechnology , Inc . , Lake Placid , NY ) , or with anti - paxiUin antibody in TBSTB . After washing in TBSTB the blots were incubated with HRP - conjugated goat anti - mouse IgG ( Jackson Immunoresearch Laboratories , West Grove , PA ) . Purification and Microinjection of Recombinant Proteins Recombinant Vall4rhoA ( a gift from Dr . A . Hall , University College , London , UK ) was expressed as a glutathione - S - transferase ( GST ) fusion protein in Escherichia coli . GST was also expressed in E . coli . As a con - trol , some cells were injected with GST alone expressed in E . coli . Pro - teins were purified on glutathione agarose beads as described before ( Rid - ley et al . , 1992 ) . Proteins were released from beads by triple elution with 25 mM reduced glutathione in a buffer ( 50 mM Tris - C1 , pH 7 . 5 , 50 mM NaC1 , 5 mM MgC12 , 1 mM DTT , 1 mM PMSF ) , dialyzed against microin - jection buffer ( 50 mM Tris , pH 7 . 5 , 50 mM NaC1 , 5 mM MgC12 , 0 . 1 mM DTr ) and concentrated to 2 - 7 mg / ml using a Centricon concentrator ( Amicon Inc . , Beverly , MA ) . Purified proteins were loaded by capillarity into needles pulled on a Brown - Flaming micropipette puller ( Sutter In - strument Co . ) and injected into cells as described previously ( Burridge and Feramisco , 1980 ) . Cells were injected for 15 - 30 min and then incu - bated at 37°C in an atmosphere of 10 % CO2 for varying time intervals ac - cording to the experiment . In some experiments inhibitors were present during the injection and after incubation . Cell Labeling , Myosin Immunoprecipitation , and Quantitation of Myosin Light Chain Phosphorylation For analysis of MLC phosphorylation a procedure was adapted from the work of Goekeler and Wysolmerski ( 1995 ) . Cells were labeled with trans - 35S - label ( 70 % L - methionine 35S + L - cysteine 35S ) ( ICN Biochemicals , Inc . ) and 32Porthophosphoric acid ( ICN Biochemicals , Inc . ) . The double labeling of cells allowed us to quantitate the incorporation of phosphate into MLC relative to the amount of myosin immunoprecipitated . For these experiments cells were plated in 24 - well dishes at identical density in 10 % BCS in DMEM , grown to confluency , washed once in phosphate - free Eagle ' s medium ( Life Technologies , Inc . ) , and labeled with 100 ixCi / ml trans - 35S - label and 125 p . Ci / ml 32porthophosphoric acid in tissue cul - ture phosphate - free media containing 2 % BCS for 16 - 40 h . Cells were starved by washing in serum - free ( phosphate - free ) media for 2 h and then stimulated with LPA in the presence or absence of inhibitors , as described above . Medium was removed and cells were lysed by scraping in 150 p . l of ice - cold buffer A , ( 25 mM Tris - HC1 , pH 8 . 0 , 300 mM NaC1 , 100 mM Na4P207 , 75 mM NaF , 5 mM EGTA , 5 mM EDTA , 10 p , g aprotinin , and 10 ~ g leupeptin ) . After scraping , the dishes were rinsed once with 50 p . l of buffer A which was combined with the lysate . These were centrifuged at 132 , 000 g for 10 min in a centrifuge ( TL - 100 ; Beckman Instruments , Ful - lerton , CA ) . The supernatants were incubated with 3 p , l of a polyclonal rabbit anti - platelet myosin IgG fraction ( a kind gift from Dr . R . S . Adel - stein ) and 100 ixl of a 10 % suspension of protein A - Sepharose in buffer A . The pellets were washed once in buffer A and two times in buffer A with a lower concentration of NaC1 ( 100 mM ) . The samples were boiled in sam - ple buffer and electrophoresed on 15 % SDS - polyacrylamide gels . The gels were stained with Coomassie blue , destained , dried , and exposed to a phosphorimaging screen ( PhosphorImager , Molecular Dynamics ) or x - ray film ( Eastman - Kodak Co . , Rochester , NY ) . Quantitation of 32p incorporation into MLC was performed using the phosphorImager as follows ( Johnston et al . , 1991 ) . Double - labeled sam - ples were exposed to phosphorimaging screens directly and the total amount of radioactivity ( 35S + 32p ) was quantitated for myosin heavy chains ( MHCs ) and MLCs ( the position of bands was established by run - ning a sample of purified smooth muscle myosin in parallel to the labeled samples ) . A second exposure was obtained in which a filter was present between the gel and the phosphorimaging screen so as to block 35S radia - tion . The filter used was a triple layer heavy - duty Reynolds aluminum foil . This attenuated the detection of 35S to < 1 % , while detection of 32p re - mained at > 97 % . The amount of 35S was calculated by subtracting the number of counts for each myosin band obtained with the filter present ( which represents 97 % of 32p ) , adjusted to 100 % 32p , from the number of counts obtained without the filter ( total 32p + 35S ) " The number of 32p counts from each MLC sample was divided by the number of 35S counts from the corresponding MHC . This procedure allowed us to calculate MLC phosphorylation relative to the amount of myosin in each immuno - precipitate . Results Inhibitors of Actin - Myosin Interaction Block LPA - stimulated Contractility LPA induces the formation of stress fibers and focal adhe - sions in quiescent fibroblasts by a mechanism dependent on rho ( Ridley and Hall , 1992 ) . Previous studies have indi - cated that LPA can stimulate contractility of chicken em - bryo fibroblasts ( Kolodney and Elson , 1993 ) . To explore whether LPA induces contractility in quiescent Balb / c 3T3 cells , we have used a modification of the flexible rubber substrate assay of Harris et al . ( 1980 ) . Confluent cells in the presence of serum wrinkle the substrate extensively ( Fig . 1 ) . Starvation of cells in serum - free media for 2 h leads to a relaxation of the wrinkles generated by cells . Stimulation of these quiescent cells with LPA rapidly re - stores wrinkles in the substrate . The time course of the re - appearance of the wrinkles in the substrate correlates well with the time course of reappearance of stress fibers and focal adhesions and increased tyrosine phosphorylation in focal adhesions . Increased wrinkling can be seen within 5 min of stimulation with LPA . At this time stress fibers and focal adhesions become visible in cells grown on plastic ( Ridley and Hall , 1992 , see below ) and LPA - induced ty - rosine phosphorylation of focal adhesion components peaks ( Seufferlein and Rozengurt , 1994 ) . We have used several inhibitors of actin - myosin interac - tion with distinct modes of action to block LPA - induced contractility of Balb / c 3T3 cells , using the flexible rubber substrates as an assay . KT5926 is an inhibitor of MLCK , a key enzyme in the regulation of smooth muscle and non - muscle cell contractility ( Nakanishi et al . , 1990 ) . KT5926 inhibits MLCK phosphorylation of the myosin regulatory light chain ( MLC ) , which in turn inhibits actomyosin con - tractility . Butanedione - 2 - monoxime ( BDM ) has been used by several groups to inhibit muscle contractility . BDM inhib - its muscle myosin ATPase activity ( Higuchi and Takemori , 1989 ) by slowing the release of phosphate from myosin af - ter ATP hydrolysis ( McKillop et al . , 1994 ) . Cramer and Mitchison ( 1995 ) have shown that BDM also inhibits the ATPase activity of nonmuscle myosin II , as well as several of the unconventional myosins . Compound H7 ( 1 - ( 5 - iso - quinolinylsulfonyl ) - 2 - methylpiperazine ) , a broad specific - ity kinase inhibitor , often used to inhibit protein kinase C ( PKC ) , has been shown to inhibit actomyosin contractility in fibroblasts and epithelial cells in a way that is indepen - dent of its action on PKC ( Volberg et al . , 1994 ) . BDM , H7 , or KT5926 were added with LPA to serum - starved Balb / c 3T3 cells plated on the flexible rubber substrates . In each Chrzanowska - Wodnicka and Burridge Rho and Contractility 1405 Figure 1 . LPA stimulates fibroblast contractility . Balb / c 3T3 cells are plated on silicon rubber substrates . In the presence of serum , cells generate tension on the underlying substrate that is revealed by wrinkles in the rubber . Quiescence , induced by serum starvation of the cells for 2 h , leads to relaxation of tension and loss of wrinkles ( top ) . Treatment of quiescent cells with LPA stimulates reappearance of wrinkles in the substrate , here shown at 1 h after stimulation . This behavior of cells in response to LPA is blocked by BDM , KT5926 ( middle and bottom panels , respectively ) , and H7 ( data not shown ) . Upon removal of the inhibitors ( here shown after 1 h ) , wrinkles in the substrate reappear , indicating reversibility . Each panel in a row represents the same field of view . Bar , 100 txm . case , these drugs inhibited the development of wrinkles in the substrate induced by LPA treatment of quiescent cells ( Fig . 1 , and data not shown ) , indicating that they blocked LPA - stimulated contractility . After 1 h , the medium con - taining the drugs was replaced with normal medium and 10 % serum . This led to extensive wrinkling of the underly - ing substrate by the cells within 5 min . LPA - stimulated Myosin Light Chain Phosphorylation Is Blocked by Inhibitors of Contractility We analyzed the level of MLC phosphorylation in quies - cent cells and cells stimulated with LPA in the absence or presence of the inhibitors , BDM , H7 , and KT5926 . Myosin was immunoprecipitated from cells labeled simultaneously with [ 32p ] orthophosphate and [ 35S ] methionine / [ 35S ] cysteine . The level of 32p incorporation into MLCs was calculated relative to the amount of 35S incorporation into the MHC in the same immunoprecipitated samples , to account for variable protein content in the immunoprecipitates , as de - scribed in Materials and Methods . This double - labeling protocol improves quantitation of the level of phosphate incorporation into MLCs occurring during stimulation or inhibition ( Goekeler and Wysolmerski , 1995 ) . The results are presented in Fig . 2 . LPA stimulates an increase in MLC phosphorylation that is blocked by BDM , H7 , and KT5926 . Although BDM is an inhibitor of myosin ATPase activity , previous studies have also noted decreased MLC phosphorylation ( Osterman et al . , 1993 ; Siegman et al . , 1994 ) . With BDM and H7 , the level of MLC phosphoryla - tion was depressed even below that found in the quiescent cells . For most experiments , MLC phosphorylation was measured at 10 min after LPA stimulation . When a time course of MLC phosphorylation was investigated , LPA treatment for 1 min was sufficient to stimulate nearly peak phosphorylation ( data not shown ) . This was more rapid than the appearance of stress fibers and focal adhesions , which were visible after 5 min , but were usually most prominent after 20 min of treatment with LPA ( see be - low ) . Myosin Relocalizes to Stress Fibers upon LPA Stimulation Phosphorylation of MLCs leads to a conformational changes in myosin enabling it to assemble into filaments and pro - motes its productive interaction with F - actin ( Citi and Kendrick - Jones , 1987 ; Tan et al . , 1992 ) . We studied the The Journal of Cell Biology , Volume 133 , 1996 1406 Figure 2 . Myosin light chain phosphorylation is stimulated by LPA . ( A ) Quantitation of MLC phosphorylation . The level of 32p incorporation into MLCs was calculated relative to the amount of 35S incorporation into the myosin heavy chains in the same sam - ple , as described in Materials and Methods . Stimulation of quies - cent cells with LPA for 10 min leads to an 80 - 100 % increase in MLC phosphorylation . This response to LPA is inhibited when BDM , H7 , or KT5926 are present during stimulation . MLC phos - phorylation is expressed relative to the level of MLC phosphory - lation in quiescent cells ( 100 % ) . Values shown are the means + / - SEM of three different experiments . ( B ) Autoradiograph of myosin light chains immunoprecipitated from [ 32p ] and [ 3ss ] ( me - thionine and cysteine ) - labeled cells under different conditions of stimulation and inhibition . Quiescent cells ( SF ) were stimulated with LPA for 10 min ( LPA ) , or with LPA and BDM ( BDM ) , or with LPA and H7 ( H7 ) , or LPA and KT5926 ( KT ) . distribution of myosin in quiescent cells and after stimula - tion with LPA ( Fig . 3 ) . In quiescent cells myosin is dis - persed throughout the cytoplasm and reveals very little detectable organization at the level of light microscopy ( Fig . 3 A ) . Stimulation with LPA induces rapid reorgani - zation of myosin into stress fibers and generates a charac - teristic periodic staining pattern that is not detectable in quiescent cells ( Fig . 3 B ) . The time course of this rear - rangement of myosin upon LPA treatment paralleled that of actin , with prominent stress fiber staining being seen within 20 min of stimulation . Inhibitors of Contractility Block LPA - stimulated Stress Fibers , Focal Adhesions , and Tyrosine Phosphorylation To investigate the possible role of contractility in the for - mation of stress fibers and focal adhesions we have exam - ined the effects of the inhibitors of actin - myosin contrac - tility on the formation of these structures induced by LPA . BDM , H7 , and KT5926 all inhibit LPA - induced formation of stress fibers and focal adhesions in Balb / c 3T3 cells ( Fig . 4 ) . Essentially identical results were obtained with Swiss 3T3 cells ( data not shown ) . These three inhibitors , how - ever , result in different morphologies , as seen in Fig . 4 , G , J , and M . The differences may reflect additional effects of these inhibitors on other kinases or enzymes . Tyrosine phosphorylation of several focal adhesion pro - teins , including FAK , paxillin , tensin , and p130 , occurs during the formation of focal adhesions when quiescent cells are stimulated with LPA ( Kumagai et al . , 1993 ; Barry and Critchley , 1994 ; Chrzanowska - Wodnicka and Burr - idge , 1994 ; Hordijk et al . , 1994 ; Ridley and Hall , 1994 ; Seufferlein and Rozengurt , 1994 ) and when cells are plated on fibronectin ( Guan et al . , 1991 ; Burridge et al . , 1992 ; Guan and Shalloway , 1992 ; Hanks et al . , 1992 ; Bock - holt and Burridge , 1993 ; Petch et al . , 1995 ) . LPA induces increased phosphotyrosine staining in focal adhesions ( Fig . 4 F ) , compared with quiescent cells ( Fig . 4 C ) ( Barry and Critchley , 1994 ; Chrzanowska - Wodnicka and Burr - idge , 1994 ; Seufferlein and Rozengurt , 1994 ) . When BDM , H7 , and KT5926 are present during LPA stimulation , phosphotyrosine staining in focal adhesions is diminished ( Fig . 4 , I , L , and O ) . This immunofluorescence data corre - late with biochemical analysis of tyrosine - phosphorylated proteins in cells under different conditions of stimulation and inhibition . As reported before , LPA induces increased tyrosine phosphorylation of several focal adhesion compo - nents . Here we have specifically examined two of the most prominent tyrosine - phosphorylated focal adhesion pro - teins , FAK and paxillin ( Fig . 5 , A and B ) . BDM , KT5926 , and H7 all inhibit the LPA - induced increase in tyrosine phosphorylation of these proteins . With BDM and H7 the level of tyrosine phosphorylation is decreased to below that found in quiescent cells . KT5926 had the least effect on tyrosine phosphorylation . Of the three inhibitors at the respective concentrations used , KT5926 was generally the least effective at inhibiting MLC phosphorylation , con - tractility , and the formation of stress fibers and focal adhe - sions . All three inhibitors appeared to decrease the level of tyrosine phosphorylation more in paxillin than FAK . This may be due in part to paxillin being downstream of FAK , with changes in the signal being amplified in down - stream targets . Consistent with this , LPA induces a greater change in the tyrosine phosphorylation of paxillin than FAK . FAK is phosphorylated on multiple tyrosines ( Schwartz et al . , 1995 ) , some of which may be less affected or unaffected by LPA stimulation . This would also tend to lessen the apparent change in tyrosine phosphorylation of FAK in response to LPA or inhibition of LPA action . Rho - induced Stress Fibers , Focal Adhesions , and Tyrosine Phosphorylation Are Blocked by Inhibitors of Contractility The effects of LPA on the cytoskeleton have been shown to be mediated by rho , but the steps between LPA and rho have not been fully elucidated . We wished to determine whether the inhibitors of contractility that block the ac - tions of LPA act upstream or downstream of rho . To in - vestigate this question , we explored the effects of these in - hibitors of actomyosin contractility on cells microinjected with recombinant rho ( Vall4rho ) . As described previously ( Ridley and Hall , 1992 ) , activated rho induced the rapid Chrzanowska - Wodnicka and Burridge Rho and Contractility 1407 Figure 3 . LPA induces myo - sin reorganization in quies - cent cells . The distribution of myosin in quiescent ( A ) and LPA - stimulated ( B ) cells has been visualized by stain - ing with anti - myosin antibod - ies . In quiescent cells myosin is diffusely distributed throughout the cytoplasm ( A ) . Stimulation with LPA for 20 min induces reorgani - zation of myosin into stress fibers ( B ) . Bar , 20 Ixm . formation of stress fibers and focal adhesions in injected cell s ( Fig . 6 , A and D ) . However , when BDM or H7 were present during injections , the formation of stress fibers ( Fig . 6 , B and C ) and focal adhesions ( Fig . 6 H ) was inhib - ited . Similar results were found with Swiss 3T3 cells ( data not shown ) . In some cells , there appeared to be an in - crease in actin staining in the presence of these inhibitors without the formation of large stress fibers , suggesting that actin polymerization induced by rho had not been inhib - ited , but that the assembly of the filaments into stress fi - bers had . BDM and H7 greatly decreased the phospho - tyrosine staining in focal adhesions in rho - injected cells ( Fig . 6 , E and F , compared with Fig . 6 D ) . These results suggest that rho - induced assembly of stress fibers and fo - cal adhesions involves stimulation of contractility . Contractility Modulates the Distribution of lntegrins We wanted to follow the behavior and distribution of inte - grins during the transition of cells from quiescence , when cytoplasmic focal adhesion proteins are dispersed , to the stimulated state , when focal adhesions are prominent . However , mouse integrins have been difficult to immu - nolocalize due to the lack of good anti - mouse integrin an - tibodies . Hence , we used another system to look at the be - havior of integrins under conditions of relaxation and contraction . Rat embryo fibroblasts were allowed to spread on fibronectin in serum - free media and were stained for actin ( Fig . 7 A ) and 131 integrin ( Fig . 7 D ) . To mimic , the quiescent state and inhibit contractility , cells were incubated in the presence of H7 . The cells remained spread but the stress fibers ( Fig . 7 B ) and focal adhesions disassembled . Notably , the distribution of integrins be - came diffuse and no focal adhesion staining was detected ( Fig . 7 E ) . Removal of H7 followed by stimulation with LPA induced the reformation of stress fibers ( Fig . 7 C ) and relocalization of integrins into focal adhesions ( Fig . 7 F ) . This behavior of integrins is similar to that of other fo - cal adhesion proteins upon rho stimulation and indicates that integrins mediating adhesion to the underlying ECM can be rapidly reorganized into focal adhesions while maintaining adhesion to the substrate . Discussion In this paper we have demonstrated that rho - induced for - mation of stress fibers , focal adhesions , and tyrosine phos - phorylation depends on contractility . Agents that inhibit contractility , either by inhibiting the MLCK or actin - myo - sin interaction , inhibit all three events . At the outset of this work we picked the three inhibitors used here because of their reported different modes of inhibiting actin - myo - sin force generation . KT5926 is a well - characterized inhib - itor of MLCK with relatively high specificity for this en - zyme in vitro ( Nakanishi et al . , 1990 ) . BDM is an inhibitor of skeletal muscle myosin ATPase ( Fryer et al . , 1988 ; Horiuti et al . , 1988 ; Higuchi and Takemori , 1989 ) which acts by slowing the release of phosphate from the myosin head following ATP hydrolysis ( Herrmann et al . , 1993 ; McKillop et al . , 1994 ) . BDM also inhibits the ATPase ac - tivity of nonmuscle myosins ( Cramer and Mitchison , 1995 ) . It was demonstrated , however , that BDM does not affect the ATPase activity of kinesin , nor does it affect several myosin - independent motile phenomena , such as actin po - lymerization , mitosis , and the intracellular movement of Listeria monocytogenes ( Cramer and Mitchison , 1995 ) . Ef - fects of BDM on energy metabolism and ATP synthesis have been described ( Hebisch et al . , 1993 ) . However , we did not find significant differences in the levels of ATP in cells treated with BDM for the times used in our experi - ments ( data not shown ) . BDM has been reported to de - crease MLC phosphorylation in smooth muscle ( Oster - man et al . , 1993 ) and depresses MLCK activity ( Siegman et al . , 1994 ) . In our work we also have found that it inhibits MLC phosphorylation ( Fig . 2 ) . At present , we cannot say whether the inhibition of nonmuscle contractility by BDM is due to a direct action on the nonmuscle myosin ATPase , to inhibition of MLCK , or to a combination of both . The third inhibitor in this study , H7 , was picked because of its inhibition of fibroblast and epithelial contractility ( Volberg et al . , 1994 ) . H7 has often been used to inhibit PKC but Volberg and colleagues demonstrated that more specific PKC inhibitors had no effect on contractility . Sim - ilarly , we have found that the more specific PKC inhibitor , GF109203X has little effect on stress fibers , focal adhe - sions , or tyrosine phosphorylation ( data not shown ) . In ad - dition , previous work demonstrated that the effects of LPA on the cytoskeleton did not involve a PKC pathway ( Ridley and Hall , 1994 ; Moolenaar , 1995 ) and that LPA - and bombesin - induced tyrosine phosphorylation of FAK and paxillin are independent of PKC ( Zachary et al . , 1993 ; Seufferlein and Rozengurt , 1994 ) . Further evidence that The Journal of Cell Biology , Volume 133 , 1996 1408 Figure 4 . LPA - stimulated stress fiber and focal adhesion assembly is blocked by inhibitors of contractility . Quiescent , serum - starved cells ( A - C ) were stimulated with LPA which led to increased stress fibers ( D ) , focal adhesions ( E ) , and tyrosine phosphorylation ( F ) in focal adhesions . These effects of LPA were abolished when BDM ( G - 0 , H7 ( J - L ) , or KT5926 ( M - O ) were present during LPA stimu - lation . Actin was stained with phalloidin in A , D , G , J , and M ; vinculin staining is shown in B , E , H , K , and N , and phosphotyrosine is shown in C , F , / , L , and O . Bar , 20 ~ m . Chrzanowska - Wodnicka and Burridge Rho and Contractility 1409 Figure 5 . Inhibitors of contractility block LPA - induced tyrosine phosphorylation . FAK ( A ) or paxillin ( B ) were immunoprecipi - tated from confluent , quiescent Balb / c 3T3 fibroblasts starved in the absence of serum for 2 - 4 h ( lanes 1 ) and stimulated with 2 ~ g / ml LPA for 10 min ( lanes 2 ) , or with LPA and BDM ( lanes 3 ) , or with LPA and H7 ( lanes 4 ) , or with LPA and KT5926 ( lanes 5 ) . LPA elevated FAK and paxillin tyrosine phosphorylation . This is inhibited by BDM , H7 , and KT5926 . Blots were stripped and re - probed for FAK or paxillin to ensure equal protein loading ( data not shown ) . we are not looking at the inhibition of PKC by H7 comes from the use of the PKC activator , PMA . Rather than hav - ing an opposite effect to H7 , PMA also decreases contrac - tility of fibroblasts plated on flexible rubber substrates ( Danowski and Harris , 1988 ; our unpublished observa - tions ) . With H7 , we have observed decreased MLC phos - phorylation suggesting that H7 may be acting directly on MLCK , even though H7 is reported to have a low activity for MLCK ( Hidaka et al . , 1984 ) . We note , however , that a novel form of MLCK has recently been identified in non - muscle cells ( Gallagher et al . , 1995 ) and it is possible that H7 may be more effective at inhibiting this isoform than the conventional smooth muscle enzyme . Alternatively , H7 may be acting on an upstream kinase between rho and the activation of MLC phosphorylation ( see below ) . Within 1 min of LPA stimulation we detect significant elevation of MLC phosphorylation . In our hands this pre - cedes the detection of stress fibers , focal adhesions , and ty - rosine phosphorylation induced by rho injection or LPA treatment . Similarly , Kolodney and Elson ( 1993 ) found that LPA led to a rapid stimulation of contractility and light chain phosphorylation in fibroblasts . Likewise , Goekeler and Wysolmerski ( 1995 ) demonstrated in thrombin - stimulated endothelial cells that MLC phospho - rylation and the development of tension preceded the re - organization of actin and myosin into stress fibers . To - gether these results suggest that , in the pathway from rho , light chain phosphorylation and the resultant onset of con - tractility are upstream of stress fiber and focal adhesion assembly , as well as upstream of the tyrosine phosphoryla - tion of focal adhesion components . The elevation of MLC phosphorylation could result from increased MLCK activity or from decreased phos - phatase activity . In permeabilized smooth muscle , C3 exo - transferase promotes dephosphorylation of MLCs , sug - gesting that rho inhibits the MLC phosphatase ( Noda et al . , 1995 ) . Whether the elevation of MLC phosphorylation in nonmuscle cells is due to enhanced MLCK activity or depressed phosphatase activity , we suspect that , in either case , a kinase cascade is involved . The rho - related pro - teins , rac and cdc42 , activate kinase cascades that resem - ble the ras / raf / MAP kinase pathway ( Coso et al . , 1995 ; Hill et al . , 1995 ; Minden et al . , 1995 ) . Rho has been shown re - cently to bind and activate protein kinase N ( PKN ) ( Amano et al . , 1996 ; Watanabe et al . , 1996 ) and to bind RhoA - binding kinase ( Roket ) ( Leung et al . , 1995 ) . Both may be initial steps in rho - activated cascades . How could contractility lead to the formation of stress fibers , focal adhesions , and elevated tyrosine phosphoryla - tion ? One scenario that we can envision is outlined in Fig . 8 . In a quiescent cell , the integrins responsible for adhe - sion to the underlying ECM are not clustered in focal ad - hesions but are dispersed over the ventral surface . At their cytoplasmic face , these integrins are linked to the actin cy - toskeleton , via proteins such as ot - actinin or talin , but in - stead of being bundled the filaments are organized as a loose network . Stimulation by rho would result in MLC phosphorylation , converting the myosin from a relaxed conformation to an elongated conformation that can as - semble into bipolar filaments ( Citi and Kendrick - Jones , 1987 ; Tan et al . , 1992 ) . Light chain phosphorylation would also promote the productive interaction of myosin heads with actin filaments , generating contractility and isometric tension . The actin filaments would become aligned both because of the tension generated and because myosin fila - ments are very effective at bundling F - actin . At the mem - brane , the bundled actin filaments would aggregate the in - tegrins to which they are attached . Associated with the integrins is FAK ( Schaller et al . , 1995 ) . Clustering of inte - grins from the outside with antibodies has been shown to stimulate FAK activity ( Kornberg et al . , 1992 ) . Indeed , clustering rather than ligand occupancy appears to be crit - ical for FAK activation ( Miyamoto et al . , 1995 ) . Clustering from the inside by bundling of the associated filaments would also be expected to stimulate FAK activity . This would account for the observed increase in tyrosine phos - phorylation of focal adhesion components that occurs in rho - stimulated cells . Tyrosine kinase inhibitors block the assembly of focal adhesions and stress fibers induced either by adhesion to ECM or by stimulation with activated rho ( Burridge et al . , 1992 ; Romer et al . , 1994 ; Chrzanowska - Wodnicka and Figure 6 . Rho induction of stress fibers and focal adhesions is blocked by inhibitors of contractility . Purified , recombinant active rho ( GST - Vall4rho ) was microinjected into quiescent cells . Cells were stained for actin ( A - C ) , phosphotyrosine ( G - / ) or vinculin ( M and N ) . Injected cells were revealed by staining with anti - GST antibody ( D - F , J - L , 0 , and P ) . Recombinant activated rho induces stress fi - bers ( A ) and focal adhesions ( M ) and elevates phosphotyrosine staining ( G ) in focal adhesions . When BDM ( B , H , and N ) or H7 ( C and / ) are present during microinjection , stress fibers are inhibited ( B and C ) and focal adhesions do not form ( H , I , and N ) . Control cells in - jected with GST alone did not induce stress fibers or focal adhesions ( data not shown ) . Bar , 20 txm . The Journal of Cell Biology , Volume 133 , 1996 1410 Chrzanowska - Wodnicka and Burridge Rho and Contractility 1411 Figure 7 . Contractility modulates the distribution of integrins . REF 52 fibroblasts were plated on fibronectin in serum - free conditions , stained at 90 min for actin ( A ) and 131 integrin ( D ) . Cells were treated for 30 min with H7 and then stained for actin ( B ) and 131 integrin ( E ) . After 30 min in H7 , parallel cells were returned to serum - free medium containing LPA for 30 min and then stained for actin ( C ) and 131 integrin ( F ) . Addition of H7 disassembles stress fibers and disperses integrins . Removal of H7 and stimulation with LPA induces reformation of stress fibers and clustering of integrins into focal adhesions . Bar , 20 ~ m . Burridge , 1994 ; Ridley and Hall , 1994 ) . Because these in - hibitors decrease the phosphorylation of FAK , these find - ings have usually been interpreted as indicating a role for FAK in focal adhesion assembly . Evidence has been pre - sented , however , that FAK is not involved in focal adhe - sion or stress fiber assembly ( Wilson et al . , 1995 ; Ilic et al . , 1995 ) . Our results suggest that FAK phosphorylation is downstream of rho - induced contractility , which aggregates integrins into focal adhesions . These findings , together with the previous work with tyrosine kinase inhibitors , suggest that the relevant tyrosine kinase regulating focal adhesion assembly is not FAK but one that is upstream of light chain phosphorylation . It will be important in the fu - ture to determine if any rho - activated kinases are targets for the tyrosine kinase inhibitors that prevent focal adhe - sion assembly . Likewise it will be interesting to explore whether H7 is inhibiting MLC phosphorylation by acting on an upstream kinase . PKN , a rho - activated kinase , is a potential candidate , given that it is related to PKC ( Mukai and Ono , 1994 ; Palmer et al . , 1995 ) . The balance between adhesion and contractility is com - plex . In response to isometric tension there may be a corn - pensatory increase in the adhesive strength of focal adhe - sions , for example by recruitment of additional integrins . When the contractile force generated in stress fibers ex - ceeds the adhesive strength of focal adhesions , the adhe - sions would be released from the substrate . This may be important during cell migration when focal adhesions , par - ticularly at the rear of a cell need to be disassembled . Studying permeabilized cells , Crowley and Horwitz ( 1995 ) found that ATP - induced contractility does , indeed , pro - mote the disassembly of focal adhesions . Many of the fac - tors that regulate adhesive strength may not operate in permeabilized cells and , with permeabilization , focal ad - hesions may be weakened by extraction of critical compo - nents . Together , these changes in permeabilized cells may result in the contractile force exceeding the strength of the adhesion , as observed by Crowley and Horwitz ( 1995 ) . Although there is a large body of evidence consistent with contractility generating both stress fibers and focal adhesions , one previous study suggested that focal adhe - sions could form in the apparent absence of stress fibers ( Nobes and Hall , 1995 ) . In this work focal adhesions were induced by activated rho in the presence of low concentra - The Journal of Cell Biology , Volume 133 , 1996 1412 contraction Figure 8 . Mechanism of contractility - induced focal adhesion and stress fiber formation . In quiescent cells integrins are attached to the underlying ECM , but dispersed and not aggregated in focal adhesions . At the cytoplasmic face , integrins are attached to actin filaments through proteins such as ct - actinin and talin , but the fil - aments form a loose network and are not bundled . Activation of rho results in phosphorylation of MLCs . This leads to a confor - mational change in myosin , myosin filament assembly , and an ac - tive interaction with actin . The generation of tension aligns the actin filaments and aggregates integrins in the plane of the mem - brane , stimulating FAK activity and elevating tyrosine phospho - rylation . tions of cytochalasin D . Careful examination of their im - ages suggests that the focal adhesions in the cytochalasin - treated cells were still associated with bundles of actin fila - ments . Although the concentration of cytochalasin used may have prevented polymerization of additional actin in response to rho and may have induced some depolymer - ization , it was not destroying all the actin filaments in this experiment . One can imagine that the residual actin fila - ments were still sufficient to generate enough tension to aggregate the integrins on the ventral surface and stimu - late focal adhesion formation . In general , cytochalasin has been found to inhibit FAK phosphorylation ( Lipfert et al . , 1992 ; Pelletier et al . , 1992 ; Haimovich et al . , 1993 ; Bock - holt and Burridge , 1993 ; Seufferlein and Rozengurt , 1994 ) . The requirement for an intact cytoskeleton for FAK to be activated has always been a somewhat surprising result . Our results suggest that an intact actin cytoskeleton is re - quired for FAK activation because contractility within the microfilament system is needed to aggregate integrins . The model we propose requires that integrins go from a dispersed , but ligand - bound state , to an aggregated ligand - bound state , found in focal adhesions . With mouse 3T3 cells , it has been difficult to examine the behavior of inte - grins due to the paucity of reagents that detect mouse inte - grins . However , we have used a different cell system to ex - amine the behavior of integrins in cells adhering to fibronectin under conditions where contractility is inhib - ited or where it is stimulated . With the transition from a relaxed state to a contractile state , the integrin , a5131 , goes from a diffuse distribution to being concentrated within focal adhesions , consistent with the predictions of our model . Conversely , when contractility is inhibited , inte - I Growth Factors I I Adhesi°n ' , , / ® / $ MPP or ~ MLCK Myosin P2 Activation Focal Adhesion Stress Fibers = - Assembly Figure 9 . Mechanism of rho regulation of the actin cytoskeleton . Activation of rho is proposed to regulate the organization of the actin cytoskeleton by two synergistic pathways . One pathway , possibly involving a kinase cascade , leads to inactivation of myo - sin phosphatase ( MPP ) or activation of MLCK . This elevates MLC phosphorylation , activating myosin and stimulating con - tractility . Rho also stimulates the activity of PIP 5 - kinase and ele - vates PIP2 levels in cells . PIPe has been shown to affect multiple actin - binding proteins in ways that should elevate actin polymer - ization and promote focal adhesion assembly ( see text ) . grins disperse from focal adhesions as stress fibers and fo - cal adhesions disassemble . These observations imply that integrins can redistribute on the ventral surface of a cell in response to tension generated within stress fibers . The rel - atively low affinity of integrins for their ECM ligands ( Kd 10 - 7 M ) suggests a rapid off rate that would permit easy remodeling of integrin - ECM interactions in response to applied tension , while at the same time maintaining cell adhesion to the ECM substratum . Previous studies have suggested other pathways by which rho may affect cytoskeletal organization . In particu - lar , rho has been shown to stimulate the activity of phos - phatidylinositol 4 - phosphate 5 - kinase ( PIP 5 - K ) leading to elevated phosphatidylinositol 4 , 5 - biphosphate ( PIPe ) lev - els in response to adhesion ( Chong et al . , 1994 ) . In turn , PIPe has been demonstrated to interact with actin - binding proteins such as profilin and gelsolin , promoting their dis - sociation from actin ( Lassing and Lindberg , 1985 ; Janmey et al . , 1987 ) . These effects of PIP2 would be expected to lead to increased actin polymerization . In addition , work from this lab has recently demonstrated that PIP2 stimu - lates a conformational change in vinculin to expose cryptic actin - and talin - binding sites ( Gilmore and Burridge , 1996 ) . This effect of PIP 2 would also be expected to en - hance the assembly of focal adhesions . Under normal con - ditions , we suspect that rho - stimulated contractility will synergize with the other cytoskeletal events triggered by elevated PIP2 levels , together contributing to the forma - tion of stress fibers and focal adhesions ( Fig . 9 ) . Chrzanowska - Wodnicka and B urridge Rho and Contractility 1413 We thank Andrew Nelson for valuable technical assistance and ingenuity with the flexible rubber substrates . We are grateful to Simon Barry for suggesting the use of Balb / c 3T3 cells and for advice on how to starv e them . Alan Hall kindly provided the GST - rho construct . We thank Bob Adelstein for gifts of antibodies against myosin . Valuable discussions were had with Drs . R . Adelstein , A . Bershadsky , B . Geiger , J . Kendrick - Jones , F . Matsumura , and T . Mitchison . We acknowledge the helpful com - ments of Drs . Belkin , Gilmore , and Petch on drafts of this manuscript . This work was supported by National Institutes of Health grants GM29860 and HL45100 . Received for publication 19 January 1996 and in revised form 12 April 1996 . References Amano , M . , H . Mukai , Y . Ono , K . Chihara , T . Matsui , Y . Hamajima , K . Okawa , A . Iwamatsu , and K . Kaibuchi . 1996 . Identification of a putative tar - get for rho as the serine - threonine kinase protein kinase N . Science ( Wash . DC ) . 271 : 648 - 650 . Barry , S . T . , and D . R . Critchley . 1994 . The Rho - A dependent assembly of focal adhesions in Swiss 3T3 cells is associated with increased tyrosine phosphory - lation and the recruitment of both pp125FAK and protein kinase C - 5 to fo - cal adhesions . J . Cell Sci . 107 : 2033 - 2045 . Bockholt , S . M . , and K . Burridge . 1993 . Cell spreading on extracellular matrix proteins induces tyrosine phosphorylation of tensin . J . Biol . Chem . 268 : 14565 - 14567 . Burridge , K . 1981 . Are stress fibers contractile ? Nature ( Lond . ) . 294 : 6914592 . Burridge , K . , K . Fath , T . Kelly , G . Nuckolls , and C . Turner . 1988 . Transmem - brane junctions between the extracellular matrix and the cytoskeleton . Annu . Rev . Cell Biol . 4 : 487 - 525 . Burridge , K . , and J . R . Feramisco . 1980 . Microinjection and localization of a 130K protein in living fibroblasts : a relationship to actin and fibronectin . Cell . 19 : 587 - 595 . Burridge , K . , C . E . Turner , and L . H . Romer . 1992 . Tyrosine phosphorylation of paxillin and pp125 FAK accompanies cell adhesion to extracellular matrix : a role in cytoskeletal assembly . J . Cell Biol . 119 : 893 - 903 . Chong , L . D . , A . Traynor - Kaplan , G . Bohoch , and M . A . Schwartz . 1994 . The small GTP - binding protein rho regulates a phosphatidylinositol 4 - phosphate 5 - kinase in mammalian ceils . Cell . 79 : 507 - 513 . Chrzanowska - Wodnicka , M . , and K . Burridge . 1994 . Tyrosine phosphorylation is involved in reorganization of the actin cytoskeleton in response to serum or LPA stimulation . J . Cell Sci . 107 : 3643 - 3654 . Citi , S . , and J . Kendrick - Jones . 1987 . Regulation of non - muscle myosin struc - ture and function . Bioessays . 7 : 155 - 159 . Clark , E . A . , and J . S . Brugge . 1995 . Integrins and signal transduction pathways : the road taken . Science ( Wash . DC ) . 268 : 233 - 239 . Coso , O . A . , M . Chiariello , J - C . Yu , H . Teramoto , P . Crespo , N . Xu , T . Miki , and J . S . Gutkind . 1995 . The small GTP - binding proteins Racl and Cdc42 regulate the activity of the JNK / SAPK signaling pathway . Cell . 81 : 1137 - 1146 . Cramer , L . P . , and T . J . Mitchison . 1995 . Myosin is involved in postmitotic cell spreading . J . Cell Biol . 131 : 179 - 189 . Crowley , E . , and A . F . Horwitz . 1995 . Tyrosine phosphorylation and cytoskele - tal tension regulate the release of fibroblast adhesions . J . Cell Biol . 131 : 525 - 537 . Danowski , B . A . , and A . K . Harris . 1988 . Changes in fibroblast contractility , morphology , and adhesion in response to a phorbol ester tumor promoter . Exp . Cell Res . 177 : 47 - 59 . Danowski , B . 1989 . Fibroblast contractility and actin organization are stimu - lated by microtubule inhibitors . J . Cell Sci . 93 : 255 - 266 . Fernandez , A . , D . L . Brautigan , M . Mumby , and N . J . C . Lamb . 1990 . Protein phosphatase type - l , not type - 2A , modulates actin microfilament integrity and myosin light chain phosphorylation in living nonmuscle cells . J . Cell Biol . 111 : 103 - 112 . Fryer , M . W . , P . W . Gage , I . R . Neering , A . F . Dulhunty , and G . D . Lamb . 1988 . Paralysis of skeletal muscle by butanedione monoxime , a chemical phos - phatase . Pflugers Arch . Eur . J . Physiol . 411 : 76 - 79 . Gallagher , P . J . , J . G . N . Garcia , and B . P . Herring . 1995 . Expression of a novel myosin light chain kinase in embryonic tissues and cultured cells . Z Biol . Chem . 270 : 29090 - 29095 . Gilmore , A . P . , and K . Burridge . 1996 . Regulation of vinculin binding to talin and actin by phosphatidylinositol - 4 - 5 - bisphosphate . Nature . In press . Giuliano , K . A . , and D . L . Taylor . 1990 . Formation , transport , contraction and disassembly of stress fibers in fibroblasts . Cell Motil . Cytoskeleton . 16 : 14 - 21 . Glukhova , M . A . , M . G . Frid , B . V . Shekhonin , Y . V . Balabanov , and V . E . Kote - liansky . 1990 . Expression of fibronectin variants in vascular and visceral smooth muscle . Dev . Biol . 141 : 193 - 202 . Goeckeler , Z . M . , and R . B . Wysolmerski . 1995 . Myosin light chain kinase - regu - lated endothelial cell contraction : the relationship between isometric ten - sion , actin polymerization , and myosin phosphorylation . J . Cell Biol . 130 : 6134527 . Guan , J . L . , and D . Shalloway . 1992 . Regulation of focal adhesion - associated protein tyrosine kinase by both cellular , adhesion and oncogenic transforma - tion . Nature ( Lond . ) . 358 : 69ff4592 . Guan ; L = L , , J . E . Trevithiek , and R . O . Hynes . 1991 . Fibronecfin / integrin inter - action induces tyrosine phosphorylation of a 120 kDa protein . Cell Regul . 2 : 951 - 964 . Haimovich , B . , L . Lipfert , J . S . Brugge , and S . J . Shattil . 1993 . Tyrosine phospho - rylation and cytoskeletal reorganization in platelets are triggered by interac - tion of integrin receptors with their immobilized ligands . J . Biol . Chem . 268 : 15868 - 15877 . Harks , S . K . , M . B . Calalb , M . C . Harper , and S . K . Patel . 1992 . Focal adhesion protein - tyrosine kinase phosphorylated in response to cell attachment to fi - bronectin . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA . 89 : 8487 - 8491 . Harris , A . K . , P . Wild , and D . Stopak . 1980 . Silicone rubber substrata : a new wrinkle in the study of cell locomotion . Science ( Wash . DC ) . 208 : 177 - 179 . Heath , J . P . , and G . A . Dunn . 1978 . Cell to substratum contacts of chick fibro - blasts and their relation to the microfilament system . A correlated interfer - ence - reflexion and high - voltage electron - microscope study . J . Cell Sci . 29 : 197 - 212 . Hebisch , S . , E . Bischoff , and S . Soboll . 1993 . Influence of 2 , 3 - butanedione mon - oxime on heart energy metabolism . Basic Res . Cardiol . 88 : 566 - 575 . Herrmann , C . , J . Wray , F . Travers , and T . Barman . 1993 . The effect of 2 , 3 , bu - tanedione monoxime on myosin and myofibrillar ATPases . An example of an uncompetitive inhibitor . Biochemistry . 31 : 12227 - 12232 . Hidaka , H . , M . Inagaki , S . Kawamoto , and Y . Sasaki . 1984 . lsoquinoline sul - fonamides , novel and potent inhibitors of cyclic nucleotide dependent pro - tein kinase and protein kinase C . Biochemistry . 23 : 5036 - 5041 . Higuchi , H . , and S . Takemori . 1989 . Butanedione monoxime suppresses con - traction and ATPase activity of rabbit skeletal muscle . J . Biochem . ( Tokyo ) . 105 : 638 - - 643 . Hill , C . S . , J . Wynne , and R . Treisman . 1995 . The rho family GTPases RhoA , Racl , and Cdc42Hs regulate transcriptional activation by SRF . Cell . 81 : 1159 - 1170 . Hirata , K . , A . Kikuchi , T . Sasaki , S . Kuroda , K . Kaibuchi , Y . Matsuura , H . Seki , K . Saida , and Y . Takai . 1992 . Involvement of rho p21 in the GTP - enhanced calcium ion sensitivity of smooth muscle contraction . J . Biol . Chem . 267 : 8719 - 8722 . Honer , B . , S . Citi , J . Kendrick - Jones , and B . Jockusch . 1988 . Modulation of cel - lular morphology and locomotory activity by antibodies against myosin . J . Cell Biol . 107 : 2181 - 2189 . Hordijk , P . L . , I . Verlaan , E . J . van Corven , and W . H . Moolenaar . 1994 . Protein tyrosine phosphorylation induced by lysophosphatidic acid in Rat - 1 fibro - blasts . Evidence that phosphorylation of MAP kinase is mediated by the G i - p21 ra ~ pathway . J . Biol . Chem . 269 : 6454551 . Horiuti , K . , H . Higuchi , Y . Umazume , M . Konishi , O . Okazaki , and S . Kurikara . 1988 . Mechanism of action of BDM on contraction of frog skeletal muscle . J . Mus . Res . Cell Motil . 9 : 156 - 164 . Hynes , R . O . 1992 . Integrins : versatility , modulation , and signaling in cell adhe - sion . Cell . 69 : 11 - 25 . Ilic , D . , Y . Furuta , S . Kanazawa , N . Takeda , K . Sobue , N . Nakatsuji , S . No - mura , J . Fujimoto , M . Okada , T . Yamamoto , and S . Aizawa . 1995 . Reduced cell motility and enhanced focal adhesion contact formation in ceils from FAK - deficient mice . Nature ( Lond . ) . 377 : 539 - 544 . Janmey , P . A . , and T . P . Stossel . 1987 . Modulation of gelsolin function by phophatidylinositol 4 , 5 - bisphosphate . Nature ( Lond . ) . 325 : 362 - 365 . Jalink , K . , and W . H . Moolenaar . 1992 . Thrombin receptor activation causes rapid neural cell rounding and neurite retraction independent of classic sec - ond messengers . J . Cell Biol . 118 : 411 - 419 . Jalink , K . , E . J . van Corven , T . Hengeveld , N . Morii , S . Narumiya , and W . H . Moolenaar . 1994 . Inhibition of lysophosphatidate - and thrombin - induced neurite retraction and neuronal cell rounding by ADP ribosylation of the small GTP - binding protein rho . J . Cell Biol . 126 : 801 - 810 . Jockush , B . M . , P . Bubeck , K . Giehl , M . Kroemker , J . Moschner , M . Rothkegel , M . Rudiger , K . Schluter , G . Stanke , and J . Winkler . 1995 . The molecular ar - chitecture of focal adhesions . Ann . Rev . Cell Dev . Biol . 11 : 379 - 416 . Johnston , R . F . , S . C . Pickett , and D . L . Barker . 1991 . Double - label image analy - sis using storage phosphor technology . Comp . Methods Enzymol . 3 : 128 - 134 . Juliano , R . , and S . Haskill . 1993 . Signal transduction from the extracellular ma - trix . Z Cell Biol . 120 : 577 - 585 . Kawamoto , S . , and R . S . Adelstein . 1987 . Characterization of myosin heavy chains in cultured aorta smooth muscle cells . J . Biol . Chem . 262 : 7282 - 7288 . Kolodney , M . S . , and E . L . Elson . 1993 . Correlation of myosin light chain phos - phorylation with isometric contraction of fibroblasts . J . Biol . Chem . 268 : 23850 - 23855 . Kornberg , L . , H . S . Earp , J . T . Parsons , M . Schaller , and R . L . Juliano . 1992 . Cell adhesion or integrin clustering increases phosphorylation of a focal adhe - sion - associated tyrosine kinase . J . Biol . Chem . 267 : 23439 - 23442 . Kornberg , L . J . , H . S . Earp , C . E . Turner , C . Prockop , and R . L . Juliano . 1991 . Signal tranduction by integrins : increased protein tyrosine phosphorylation caused by integrin clustering . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA . 88 : 8392 - 8396 . Kumagai , N . , N . Morii , K . Fujisawa , Y . Nemoto , and S . Narumiya . 1993 . ADP - ribosylation of rho p21 inhibits lysophosphatidic acid - induced protein ty - rosine phosphorylation and phosphatidylinositol 3 - kinase activation in cul - tured Swiss 3T3 cells . J . Biol . Chem . 268 : 24535 - 24538 . Laemmli , U . K . 1970 . Cleavage of structural proteins during the assembly of the The Journal of Cell Biology , Volume 133 , 1996 1414 head of bacteriophage T4 . Nature ( Lond . ) . 227 : 6804585 . Lamb , N . J . C . , A . Fernandez , M . A . Conti , R . Adelstein , D . B . Glass , W . J . Welch , and J . R . Feramisco . 1988 . Regulation of actin microfilament integrity in liv - ing nonmuscle cells by the cAMP - dependent protein kinase and the myosin light chain kinase . J . Cell Biol . 106 : 1955 - 1971 . Lassing , I . , and U . Lindberg . 1985 . Specific interaction between phosphatidyl - inositol 4 , 5 - bisphosphate and profilactin . Nature ( Lond . ) . 314 : 472 - 474 . Liard , J . F . 1984 . Vasopressin in cardiovascular control : role of circulating vaso - pressin . Clin . Sci . ( Lond . ) . 67 : 473 - - - 481 . Lipfert , L . , B . Haimovich , M . D . Shaller , B . S . Cobb , J . T . Parsons , and J . Brugge . 1992 . Integrin - dependent phosphorylation and activation of the protein ty - rosine kinase pp125 FAK in platelets . J . Cell Biol . 119 : 905 - 912 . Leung , T . , E . Manser , L . Tan , and L . Lim . 1995 . A novel serine / threonine ki - nase binding the ras - related RhoA GTPase which translocates the kinase to peripheral membranes . J . Biol . Chem . 270 : 29051 - 29054 . McKillop , D . F . A . , N . S . Fortune , K . W . Ranatunga , and M . A . Geeves . 1994 . The influence of 2 , 3 - butanedione 2 - monoxime ( BDM ) on the interaction be - tween actin and myosin in solution and in skinned muscle fibers . J . Muscle Res . Cell Motil . 15 : 30 % 318 . Minden , A . , A . Lin , F . - X . Claret , A . Abo , and M . Karin . 1995 . Selective activa - tion of the JNK signaling cascade and c - jan transcriptional activity by the small GTPases Rac and Cdc42Hs . Cell . 81 : 1147 - 1157 . Miyamoto , S . , S . K . Akiyama , and K . M . Yamada . 1995 . Synergistic roles for re - ceptor occupancy and aggregation in integrin transmembrane function . Sci - ence ( Wash . DC ) . 267 : 883 - 885 . Moolenaar , W . H . 1994 . LPA : a novel lipid mediator with diverse biological ac - tions . Trends Cell Biol . 4 : 213 - 219 . Moolenaar , W . H . 1995 . Lysophosphatidic acid signaling . Curr . Opin . Cell Biol . 7 : 203 - 210 . Mukai , H . , and Y . Ono . 1994 . A novel protein kinase with leucine zipper - like sequences : its catalytic domain is highly homologous to that of protein ki - nase C . Biochem . Biophys . Res . Comm . 199 : 897 - 904 . Nakanishi , S . , K . Yamada , K . Iwanashi , K . Kuroda , and H . Kase . 1990 . KT5926 , a potent and selective inhibitor of myosin light chain kinase . Mol . Pharma - col . 37 : 482 - 488 . Nobes , C . D . , and A . Hall . 1995 . Rho , rac and cdc42 GTPases regulate the as - sembly of multimolecular focal complexes associated with actin stress fibers , lameUipodia , and filopodia . Cell 81 : 53 ~ fi2 . Noda , M . , C . Yasuda - Fukazawa , K . Moriishi , T . Kato , T . Okuda , K . Kurokawa , and Y . Takuwa . 1995 . Involvement of rho in GTP gammaS - induced en - hancement of phosphorylation of 20 kDa myosin light chain in vascular smooth muscle cells : inhibition of phosphatase activity . FEBS Lett . 367 : 246 - 250 . Osterman , A . , A . Arner , and U . Malmqvist . 1993 . Effects of 2 , 3 - butanedione monoxime on activation of contraction and crossbridge kinetics in intact and chemically skinned smooth muscle fibres from guinea pig taenia coli . J . Musc . Res . Cell Motil . 14 : 186 - 194 . Palmer , R . H . , J . Ridden , and P . J . Parker . 1995 . Cloning and expression patterns of two members of a novel protein - kinase - C - related kinase family . Eur . J . Biochem . 227 : 344 - - 351 . Paterson , H . F . , A . J . Self , M . D . Garrett , I . Just , K . Aktories , and A . Hall . 1990 . Microinjection of recombinant p2F h° induces rapid changes in cell morphol - ogy . J . Cell Biol . 111 : 1001 - 1007 . Pelletier , A . J . , S . C . Bodary , and A . D . Levinson . 1992 . Signal transduction by the platelet integrin ctiib133 induction of calcium oscillations required for pro - tein - tyrosine phosphorylation and ligand - induced spreading of stably trans - fected cells . Mol . Biol . Cell 3 : 989 - 998 . Petch , L . A . , S . M . Bockholt , A . Bouton , J . T . Parsons , and K . Burridge . 1995 . Adhesion - induced tyrosine phosphorylation of the p130 SRC substrate . Z Cell Sci . 108 : 1371 - 1379 . Richardson , A . , and J . T . Parsons . 1995 . Signal transduction through integrins : a central role for focal adhesion kinase ? Bioessays . 17 : 229 - 236 . Ridley , A . J . , and A . Hall . 1992 . The small GTP - binding protein rho regulates the assembly of focal adhesions and actin stress fibers in response to growth factors . Cell . 70 : 389 - 399 . Ridley , A . J . , and A . Hall . 1994 . Signal transduction pathways regulating Rho - mediated stress fibre formation : requirement for a tyrosine kinase . EMBO ( Eur . Mol . Biol . Organ . ) J . 13 : 2600 - 2610 . Ridley , A . J . , H . F . Paterson , C . L . Johnston , D . Diekmann , and A . Hall . 1992 . The small GTP - binding protein rac regulates growth factor - induced mem - brane ruffling . Cell . 70 : 401 - 410 . Romer , L . H . , N . McLean , C . E . Turner , K . Burridge . 1994 . Tyrosine kinase ac - tivity , cytoskeletal organization , and motility in human vascular endothelial cells . Mol . BioL Cell . 5 : 349 - 361 . Said , S . I . 1983 . Vasoactive peptides : state - of - the - art review . Hypertension ( NY ) 5 : 17 - 26 . Schaller , M . D . , C . A . Otey , J . D . Hildebrand , and J . T . Parsons . 1995 . Focal adhe - sion kinase and paxillin bind to peptides mimicking 13 integrin cytoplasmic domains . J . Cell Biol . 130 : 1181 - 1187 . Schmid , P . G . , F . M . Sharabi , and M . I . Phillips . 1983 . Peptides and blood vessels . In Handbook of Physiology . The Cardiovascular System . Vol . IlL Peripheral Circulation and Blood Flow . Pt . II . J . T . Shepherd and F . M . Abboud , editors . American Physiological Society , Bethesda , MD . 815 - 835 . Schwartz , M . A . , M . D . Schaller , and M . H . Ginsberg . 1995 . Integrins : emerging paradigms of signal transduction . Ann . Rev . Cell Dev . Biol . 11 : 549 - 599 . Seufferlein , T . , and E . Rozengurt . 1994 . Lysophosphatidic acid - stimulates pro - tein tyrosine phosphorylation of focal adhesion kinase , paxillin and p130 . J . Biol . Chem . 269 : 9345 - 9351 . Siegman , M . J . , S . U . Mooers , T . B . Warren , D . M . Warshaw , M . Ikebe , and T . M . Butler . 1994 . Comparison of the effects of 2 , 3 - butanedione monoxime on force production , myosin light chain phosphorylation and chemical energy usage in intact and permeabilized smooth and skeletal muscles . . L Masc . Res . Cell Motil . 15 : 457 - 472 . Suidan , H . S . , S . R . Stone , B . A . Hemmings , and D . Monard . 1992 . Thrombin causes neurite retraction in neuronal cells through activation of cell surface receptors . Neuron . 8 : 363 - 375 . Tan , J . L . , S . Ravid , and J . A . Spudich . 1992 . Control of nonmuscle myosins by phosphorylation . Annu . Rev . Biochem . 61 : 721 - 759 . Turner , C . E . , F . M . Pavalko , and K . Burridge . 1989 . The role of phosphorylation and limited proteolytic cleavage of talin and vinculin in the disruption of fo - cal adhesion integrity . Z Biol . Chem . 264 : 11938 - 11944 . Volberg , T . , B . Geiger , S . Citi , and A . D . Bershadsky . 1994 . Effect of protein ki - nase inhibitor H7 on the contractility , integrity , and membrane anchorage of the microfilament system . Cell Motil . Cytoskeleton . 29 : 321 - 338 . Watanabe , G . , Y . Saito , P . Madaule , T . Ishizaki , K . Fujisawa , N . Morii , H . Mu - kai , Y . Ono , A . Kakizuka , and S . Narumiya . 1996 . Protein kinase N ( PKN ) and PKN - related protein rhophilin as targets of small GTPase rho . Science ( Wash . DC ) . 271 : 645 ~ i48 . Wilson , L . , M . J . Carrier , and S . Kellie . 1995 . pp125FAK tyrosine kinase activity is not required for the assembly of F - actin stress fibers and focal adhesions in cultured mouse aortic smooth muscle cells . J . Cell Sci . 108 : 2381 - 2391 . Yanagisawa , M . , H . Kurihara , S . Kimura , Y . Mitsui , M . Kobayashi , T . X . Wa - tanabe , and T . Masaki . 1988 . A novel potent vasoconstrictor peptide pro - duced by vascular endothelial cells . Nature ( Lond . ) . 332 : 411 - 415 . Zachary , I . , J . Sinett - Smith , and E . Rozengurt . 1992 . Bombesin , vasopressin , and endothelin stimulation of tyrosine phosphorylation in Swiss 3T3 cells . J . Biol . Chem . 267 : 19031 - 19034 . Zachary , I . , J . Sinett - Smith , C . E . Turner , and E . Rozengurt . 1993 . Bombesin , vasopressin , and endothelin rapidly stimulate tyrosine phosphorylation of the focal adhesion - associated protein paxillin in Swiss 3T3 cells . J . BioL Chem . 268 : 22060 - 22065 . Chrzanowska - Wodnicka and Burridge Rho and Contractility 1415