GPCR SIGNALING The dual - function chemokine receptor CCR2 drives migration and chemokine scavenging through distinct mechanisms Thomas M . Shroka 1 , 2 , Irina Kufareva 2 , Catherina L . Salanga 2 , Tracy M . Handel 2 * C - C chemokine receptor 2 ( CCR2 ) is a dual - function receptor . Similar to other G protein – coupled chemokine receptors , it promotes monocyte infiltration into tissues in response to the chemokine CCL2 , and , like atypical chemokine receptors ( ACKRs ) , it scavenges chemokine from the extracellular environment . CCR2 therefore me - diates CCL2 - dependent signaling as a G protein – coupled receptor ( GPCR ) and also limits CCL2 signaling as a scavenger receptor . We investigated the mechanisms underlying CCR2 scavenging , including the involvement of intracellular proteins typically associated with GPCR signaling and internalization . Using CRISPR knockout cell lines , we showed that CCR2 scavenged by constitutively internalizing to remove CCL2 from the extracellular space and recycling back to the cell surface for further rounds of ligand sequestration . This process occurred independently of G proteins , GPCR kinases ( GRKs ) , β - arrestins , and clathrin , which is distinct from other “ pro - fessional ” chemokine scavenger receptors that couple to GRKs , β - arrestins , or both . These findings set the stage for understanding the molecular regulators that determine CCR2 scavenging and may have implications for drug development targeting this therapeutically important receptor . Copyright © 2023 The Authors , some rights reserved ; exclusive licensee American Association for the Advancement of Science . No claim to original U . S . Government Works INTRODUCTION Chemokine receptors control the migration of many different cell types , including leukocytes , in response to specific chemokine ligands . Upon binding to chemokine , most of these receptors couple to the Gα i class of heterotrimeric G proteins , which , in turn , activate the cell motility machinery . Although most chemo - kine receptors are G protein – coupled receptors ( GPCRs ) , four re - ceptors are referred to as atypical chemokine receptors ( ACKRs ) because they do not couple to G proteins or directly mediate cell migration ( 1 ) . Instead , some of these ACKRs ( ACKR2 , ACKR3 , and ACKR4 ) scavenge chemokines to regulate extracellular ligand concentrations , which maintains the responsiveness of canonical G protein – coupled chemokine receptors that share the same ligand ( s ) ( 2 ) . For example , proper migration and positioning of cor - tical interneurons require not only CXCR4 , which is directly re - sponsible for driving neuronal migration toward CXCL12 , but also ACKR3 , which scavenges CXCL12 . In the absence of ACKR3 - mediated CXCL12 scavenging , CXCR4 - mediated migra - tion is markedly defective because of overstimulation and down - regulation of CXCR4 ( 3 ) . Chemokine uptake by atypical receptors also contributes to the resolution phase of inflammatory responses and the creation of chemokine gradients that promote leukocyte mi - gration and extravasation ( 2 , 4 – 8 ) . Scavenging is not restricted to atypical receptors , however . Early receptor knockout ( KO ) studies of canonical chemokine receptors ( CCR2 , CXCR2 , CXCR3 , and CX3CR1 ) revealed elevated plasma levels of the cognate chemokines , suggesting that these receptors mediate chemokine scavenging ( 9 ) . CCR2 , a GPCR and key regula - tor of monocyte migration , was later confirmed as a scavenger re - ceptor ( 10 , 11 ) , and one study showed that CCR2 scavenges more efficiently than the atypical receptor ACKR2 ( 6 , 12 ) . Thus , CCR2 is a dual - function receptor that directly regulates both cell migration and scavenging , in contrast to professional scavenger receptors that cooperate with canonical GPCRs to facilitate migration . For both atypical and canonical receptors , scavenging involves internalization and recycling of the receptor with concomitant clearance of the ligand from the extracellular space . However , knowledge of the detailed interactions and pathways that regulate scavenging is sparse and at times contradictory . In this study , we investigated the molecular mechanisms by which CCR2 scavenges , focusing on the role of intracellular proteins usually associated with GPCR signaling and internalization . Our data suggest that , in addi - tion to the G protein – dependent receptor population that controls migration , a second functional population of CCR2 scavenged CCL2 in a manner independent of G proteins , GRKs , arrestins , and clathrin . This population constitutively internalized and recy - cled through mechanisms that have yet to be defined and accounted for the largest amount of chemokine removed from the extracellular space . We also showed that CCR1 , another GPCR on monocytes that scavenges chemokine , did so in a G protein – independent but β - arrestin – dependent manner , in contrast to CCR2 . This suggested that different mechanisms may operate for different receptors , pos - sibly to avoid pathway competition in inflammatory situations and complex chemokine stimuli . CCR2 ( and CCR1 ) have been pursued as targets for inflammatory diseases ( 12 ) , and the presence of a scav - enging population may affect the efficacy of antagonists directed against these receptors , warranting an understanding of the mechanisms . RESULTS Internalization and chemokine scavenging by CCR2 occurs independent of G α proteins Similar to canonical chemokine receptors , CCR2 requires the acti - vation of Gα i βγ heterotrimers as the first step in a cascade of events 1 Biomedical Sciences Program , School of Medicine , University of California , San Diego , La Jolla , CA 92093 , USA . 2 Skaggs School of Pharmacy and Pharmaceutical Sciences , University of California , San Diego , La Jolla , CA 92093 , USA . * Corresponding author . Email : thandel @ health . ucsd . edu Shroka et al . , Sci . Signal . 16 , eabo4314 ( 2023 ) 31 January 2023 1 of 15 S C I E N C E S I G N A L I N G | R E S E A R C H A R T I C L E that regulate cell migration . Subsequent interactions are less well understood but are assumed to involve common mechanisms asso - ciated with GPCR signaling . This includes phosphorylation of the receptor C terminus by G protein receptor kinases ( GRKs ) , specif - ically GRK2 and GRK3 , which promote CCR2 desensitization ( 13 ) . β - Arrestin recruitment is then triggered by CCR2 phosphorylation ( 14 – 17 ) and , as for many GPCRs , implicated in the internalization of the receptor ( 18 , 19 ) . We sought to systematically investigate whether and how these mediators ( G proteins , GRKs , and β - arrest - in ) contribute to internalization and scavenging by CCR2 , starting with G proteins . In contrast to CCR2 - mediated cell migration , scavenging by CCR2 is Gα i independent as shown by pharmacological inhibition using pertussis toxin ( 10 , 11 ) . In addition , in human embryonic kidney ( HEK ) 293 cell lines with CRISPR KO of G proteins , scav - enging is independent of Gα q / 11 , which also couples to CCR2 ( 10 , 11 , 20 ) . However , because Gα i and Gα q / 11 were assessed individual - ly , which could lead to compensatory effects , and other Gα protein subtypes have not been tested , we measured CCL2 remaining in the media of CCR2 - expressing cell lines with CRISPR KO of Gα i ( Gα i KO ) or KO of all Gα subtypes ( Gα _ all KO ) ( 21 ) . These experiments showed that the ability of CCR2 to scavenge CCL2 was only slightly perturbed in cells deficient in all Gα proteins and , to a lesser extent , in Gα i KO cells compared with the parental [ wild - type ( WT ) ] HEK293 cells ( Fig . 1A ) . The slight reduction in the clearance of CCL2 from the media in the Gα _ all KO cells is likely due to a slight contribution from Gα i and some other G protein ( likely Gα q / 11 ) due to the canonical G protein – dependent population , which , by default , internalizes some chemokine along with the re - ceptor . However , the bulk of chemokine scavenged did not depend on G proteins , consistent with prior work ( 10 , 11 ) . β - Arrestin1 and β - arrestin2 associate with CCR2 after stimula - tion with agonist in a manner that partially depends on Gα i ( 19 ) . Because β - arrestin is often involved in receptor internalization , and receptor internalization is critical for chemokine scavenging , we examined CCL2 - triggered β - arrestin recruitment to the plasma membrane ( PM ) in Gα i KO and Gα _ all KO HEK293 cells . To monitor β - arrestin translocation , we used enhanced bystander bioluminescence resonance energy transfer ( ebBRET ) between RlucII - tagged β - arrestin1 / 2 and a fluorescently [ green fluorescent protein from Renilla reniformis ( rGFP ) ] tagged version of the PM marker CAAX ( 22 ) . The advantage of this ebBRET assay is that it allows the use of WT CCR2 without any C - terminal tags , which can potentially affect receptor trafficking and / or interactions . Recruit - ment of both β - arrestin1 and β - arrestin2 was significantly dimin - ished in the absence of Gα i and almost completely lost when all Gα proteins were absent ( Fig . 1 , B and C ) . The latter result is likely due to the loss of GRK2 - and GRK3 - mediated phosphoryla - tion of the receptor C terminus . Both kinases contain pleckstrin ho - mology domains , and because their recruitment to the PM depends on the binding of this domain to active Gβγ ( 23 , 24 ) , CCR2 phos - phorylation is expected to be diminished in cells lacking all Gα sub - units ( 13 ) . Similar results were also observed by BRET with direct recruitment of GFP10 – β - arrestin to CCR2 - RlucII ( fig . S1 , A and B ) . Because a substantial decrease in β - arrestin recruitment in the absence of G proteins would be expected to impair receptor inter - nalization , we also investigated the ability of CCR2 to internalize in the Gα i and Gα _ all KO cells with CCR2 - RlucII and rGFP - CAAX BRET pairs . As compared with WT HEK293 cells , cells deficient in all Gα subunits showed only a minor loss of CCL2 - induced re - ceptor internalization ( Fig . 1D ) , which was unexpected given the lack of β - arrestin recruitment . Similar results were also observed when using CCR2 - RlucII association with the early endosome marker rGFP - FYVE as an orthogonal measure of receptor internal - ization ( fig . S2 , A to E ) . However , we previously showed that BRET - based methods cannot detect the constitutive internalization of CCR2 in the absence of chemokine ( 11 ) because processes that occur continuously and effectively at equilibrium give rise to a base - line BRET state . It is only after a perturbation , such as ligand addi - tion , that a BRET signal corresponding to a change in receptor internalization can be detected above the baseline ( fig . S3A ) . There - fore , to monitor constitutive receptor internalization , another method is required . Accordingly , we developed a “ prelabel ” flow cy - tometry assay ( 11 ) in which cell surface receptors are labeled at 4°C , a temperature that does not permit internalization and therefore enables quantification of the initial level of surface receptor . Upon warming the cells to 37°C ( without ligand ) , constitutive inter - nalization and endocytic trafficking of the receptor resume , and the amount of labeled receptor at the cell surface decreases . The amount of original ( or prelabeled ) receptor remaining at the surface can then be detected with a fluorescent secondary antibody ( fig . S3B ) , and loss of receptor due to constitutive internalization can be quan - tified by the decrease in fluorescence signal compared with that at 4°C . Using this method , we showed that constitutive internalization of CCR2 was not reduced by the loss of Gα i and , in fact , was slightly increased by the loss of all Gα proteins ( Fig . 1E ) . Confirmation of G protein – independent receptor internalization was visualized by confocal fluorescence microscopy using surface - labeled soluble N - ethylmaleimide – sensitive factor attachment protein ( SNAP ) – CCR2 ( Fig . 1F ) . Together , these data suggest that CCR2 constitutively in - ternalizes in a ligand - dependent and - independent manner and scavenges chemokine independently of G proteins , similar to ACKRs ( 1 ) . GRKs and receptor C - terminal phosphorylation are not required for CCR2 internalization and scavenging Phosphorylation of the C terminus of agonist - stimulated GPCRs is a crucial step in the recruitment of β - arrestins and often results in arrestin - mediated receptor internalization ( 25 – 27 ) . Phosphoryla - tion of CCR2 contributes to receptor internalization ( 13 , 28 ) , but which GRKs play a role and whether phosphorylation contributes to constitutive and agonist - induced internalization are unclear . To address these questions , we conducted receptor internalization and chemokine - scavenging experiments in CCR2 - expressing HEK293A CRISPR KO cells lacking GRK2 / 3 , GRK5 / 6 , or GRK2 / 3 / 5 / 6 . Enzyme - linked immunosorbent assay ( ELISA ) – based quantifica - tion of CCR2 scavenging revealed that only the GRK2 / 3 / 5 / 6 KO cell lines showed a significant reduction in extracellular CCL2 ( Fig . 2A ) . However , even in these cells , the difference compared with CCR2 in WT cells was minor . Assessment of β - arrestin recruit - ment by ebBRET showed a substantial loss of CCL2 - mediated β - ar - restin recruitment in both GRK2 / 3 and GRK2 / 3 / 5 / 6 KO cells ( Fig . 2 , B and C ) , consistent with a contribution of GRK2 to the phosphorylation of CCR2 ( 13 ) . The further decrease in β - arrestin2 recruitment in GRK2 / 3 / 5 / 6 KO cells indicated that GRK5 and / or GRK6 had only a minor effect . Assessment of CCR2 internalization by BRET and flow cytometry analysis revealed that CCL2 - depen - dent internalization was partially decreased in GRK2 / 3 KO cells Shroka et al . , Sci . Signal . 16 , eabo4314 ( 2023 ) 31 January 2023 2 of 15 S C I E N C E S I G N A L I N G | R E S E A R C H A R T I C L E and almost completely lost in the GRK2 / 3 / 5 / 6 KO cells ( Fig . 2D ) , whereas constitutive receptor internalization was unaffected ( Fig . 2E ) . Fluorescence microscopy imaging also confirmed that constitutive internalization of CCR2 was independent of GRKs ( Fig . 2F ) . Although GRKs contribute to the phosphorylation of CCR2 , we sought to determine whether any C - terminal phosphorylation was required for chemokine scavenging using a mutant of CCR2 ( CCR2 - ST / 9A ) with nine C - terminal serine / threonine residues mutated to alanine . Ser 356 at the extreme C terminus of CCR2 was left unchanged because it is part of a putative class II PDZ - binding motif , which may be required for receptor trafficking or re - cycling ( 29 , 30 ) . Moreover , CCR2 - ST / 9A with an additional S356A mutation ( CCR2 - ST / 10A ) behaved similarly as the CCR2 - ST / 9A mutant ( fig . S4 , A to C ) . Consistent with the GRK KO cells , cells expressing the CCR2 - ST / 9A mutant showed only a minor loss of CCL2 scavenging ( Fig . 3A ) but a significant loss of β - arrestin re - cruitment ( Fig . 3 , B and C ) and CCL2 - dependent internalization ( Fig . 3D ) . However , as with the loss of Gα proteins or GRKs , con - stitutive internalization of CCR2 was unaffected ( Fig . 3 , E and F ) . Fluorescence microscopy confirmed that CCL2 - mCherry was effi - ciently scavenged in the absence of GRK2 / 3 / 5 / 6 and C - terminal serine / threonine residues ( fig . S5 , A and B ) and that the loss of ex - tracellular CCL2 was due to chemokine uptake into cells and not just binding at the surface . These results suggest that CCR2 phos - phorylation is important for β - arrestin recruitment and canonical ligand - induced internalization but not for constitutive internaliza - tion and chemokine scavenging . The data also further support the role of constitutive CCR2 internalization in chemokine scavenging . β - Arrestins play a minor role in chemokine scavenging by CCR2 Upon activation and phosphorylation by GRKs , many GPCRs in - teract with β - arrestins , which mediate internalization by engaging endocytic machinery components such as adaptor related protein complex 2 ( AP - 2 ) and clathrin ( 31 , 32 ) . The above data showing the sensitivity of β - arrestin recruitment to the loss of Gα proteins , GRKs , and C - terminal phosphorylation suggested a canonical role for β - arrestins in CCR2 function , similar to many GPCRs . Indeed , β - arrestin is recruited to CCR2 after chemokine stimulation ( 19 ) and is involved in receptor desensitization in primary monocytes such that disruption of GRK2 - mediated receptor phosphorylation and β - arrestin recruitment leads to increased monocyte migration ( 13 , 33 , 34 ) . Through their effects on internalization , β - arrestins Fig . 1 . Scavenging of CCR2 is G protein independent . ( A ) WT , G α i KO , and G α _ all KO HEK293 cells stably expressing CCR2 and respective nonexpressing cells were cultured in media containing 5 nM CCL2 for 16 hours . The remaining levels of CCL2 were measured by ELISA , interpolated from CCL2 standards , and are presented as percentages of the remaining CCL2 relative to non – CCR2 - expressing cells . ( B and C ) Cells transfected with β - arrestin1 ( β Arr1 ) – or β - arrestin2 – RlucII and rGFP - CAAX were stimulated with 100 nM CCL2 or left untreated . β - Arrestin recruitment was assessed byebBRET . Data are presented as percentages of BRET values for untreated controls . ( D ) CCR2 internalization assessed byBRET . Cellstransfected with CCR2 - RlucII andrGFP - CAAX were stimulatedwith 100nM CCL2or left untreated . The BRETratio changes upon agonist treatment are expressed as percentages of the BRET ratio observed in untreated controls . ( E ) Constitutive internalization of WT , G α i KO , and G α _ all KO HEK293 cells stably expressing CCR2 was assessed by prelabel flow cytometry . Data are presented as the percentage of surface receptor remaining compared with non - internalizedcontrol . ( F ) Constitutive internalizationwas visualized byfluorescence confocalmicroscopy in WT , G α i KO , and G α _ allKO HEK293cells expressing SNAP - CCR2 that was labeled with cell - impermeable SNAP - Surface Alexa Fluor 488 at 4°C for 1 hour . The cells were held at 4°C for 45 min ( top ) or transferred to 37°C for 45 min ( bottom ) before being imaged . Images are representative of three independent experiments . Scale bars , 10 μ m . Data are expressed as the means ± SEM of n ≥ 3 inde - pendent experiments . * P < 0 . 05 , * * P < 0 . 01 , * * * P < 0 . 001 , and * * * * P < 0 . 0001 compared with controls by one - way analysis of variance ( ANOVA ) with Dunnet ’ s multiple comparison test . Shroka et al . , Sci . Signal . 16 , eabo4314 ( 2023 ) 31 January 2023 3 of 15 S C I E N C E S I G N A L I N G | R E S E A R C H A R T I C L E also contribute to chemokine scavenging by the atypical receptors ACKR2 ( 35 ) , ACKR4 ( 36 ) , and possibly ACKR3 , although there are conflicting reports for this receptor ( 37 – 39 ) . By contrast , the reduc - tion of CCL2 - stimulated β - arrestin recruitment but not CCL2 scav - enging in the G protein or GRK KO cells or cells expressing the CCR2 phosphorylation mutants suggested that β - arrestins are not necessary for CCR2 - mediated scavenging . However , these experi - ments do not exclude a role for a constitutive interaction between CCR2 and β - arrestin , which is not detectable in the β - arrestin re - cruitment assay . To more directly address the role of β - arrestin , we investigated CCR2 - mediated scavenging using HEK293 cells with CRISPR KO of both β - arrestin1 and β - arrestin2 and observed only a small ( ~ 19 % ) but measurable loss of CCL2 scavenging ( Fig . 4A ) . Moreover , CCL2 - mCherry was efficiently scavenged in the absence of β - arrestin1 / 2 ( fig . S6 ) . On the other hand , KO of β - arrestin1 / 2 led to a complete loss of CCL2 - induced receptor in - ternalization ( Fig . 4B ) , similar to the effects of the GRK2 / 3 / 5 / 6 de - letion , but it did not affect constitutive receptor internalization as determined by flow cytometry ( Fig . 4C ) and confocal microscopy ( Fig . 4D ) . We confirmed these observations in a CCR2 - expressing THP - 1 monocytic cell line with CRISPR KO of β - arrestin1 and β - arrestin2 ( fig . S7 , A and B ) . As for the CCR2 - expressing HEK293 cells , only a small ( ~ 19 % ) reduction in scavenging ( Fig . 4E ) and an even smaller ( ~ 8 % ) loss of constitutive internalization ( Fig . 4F ) were observed . Because loss of GRK2 - mediated receptor phosphorylation and β - arrestin recruitment was previously reported to result in increased monocyte migration ( 13 , 33 , 34 ) , we tested the effect of β - arrestin1 / 2 knockdown ( KD ) in THP - 1 cells and also observed a significant increase in migration but only at CCL2 concentrations of 100 nM and above ( Fig . 4G ) . This is consistent with the role of β - arrestin in receptor desensitization ; however , the lack of increased migration in the β - arrestin1 / 2 KD cells at lower , more physiological levels of CCL2 indicates that CCR2 remains responsive even when β - arrestin is present . Together with minor contributions of G proteins and GRKs to scavenging ( described above ) but the significant loss of β - arrestin recruitment in the absence of Gα subunits or GRKs , these data suggest that β - arrestins only play a small role in CCR2 - mediated scavenging , which is associated with canonical ligand - stimulated G protein – , GRK - , and phosphorylation - dependent re - ceptor internalization . The data also suggest that constitutive Fig . 2 . CCR2 scavenging of CCL2 is not dependent on GRKs . ( A ) WT HEK293A , HEK293A GRK2 / 3 KO , HEK293A GRK5 / 6 KO , and HEK293A GRK2 / 3 / 5 / 6 KO cells stably expressing CCR2 and the corresponding CCR2 nonexpressing cells were cultured in media containing 5 nM CCL2 for 16 hours . The remaining levels of CCL2 were in - terpolated from CCL2 standards and are presented as percentages of the remaining CCL2 relative to CCR2 nonexpressing cells . ( B and C ) Cells transfected with β - arrest - in1 – or β - arrestin2 – RlucII and rGFP - CAAX were stimulated with 100 nM CCL2 or left untreated . β - Arrestin recruitment was assessed by ebBRET . Data are presented as percentagesof BRETvalues foruntreatedcontrols . ( D ) CCR2 internalizationassessed byBRET . Cellstransfectedwith CCR2 - RlucIIandrGFP - CAAX were stimulatedwith100 nM CCL2 or left untreated . The BRET ratio changes upon agonist treatment are expressed as percentages of the BRET ratio observed in the untreated controls . ( E ) Con - stitutive internalization of WT HEK293A , HEK293A GRK2 / 3 KO , HEK293A GRK5 / 6 KO , and HEK293A GRK2 / 3 / 5 / 6 KO stably expressing CCR2 was assessed by prelabel flow cytometry . Data are presented as percentages of surface receptor remaining as compared with noninternalized control . ( F ) Constitutive internalization was visualized by fluorescence confocal microscopy in WT and corresponding GRK KO HEK293A cells expressing SNAP - CCR2 that was labeled with cell - impermeable SNAP - Surface Alexa Fluor 488 at 4°C for 1 hour . The cells were then held at 4°C for 45 min ( top ) or transferred to 37°C for 45 min ( bottom ) before being imaged . Images are representative of three independent experiments . Scale bars , 10 μ m . Data are expressed as the means ± SEM of n ≥ 3 independent experiments . * P < 0 . 05 , * * P < 0 . 01 , and * * * * P < 0 . 0001 compared with controls by ANOVA with Dunnet ’ s multiple comparison test . Shroka et al . , Sci . Signal . 16 , eabo4314 ( 2023 ) 31 January 2023 4 of 15 S C I E N C E S I G N A L I N G | R E S E A R C H A R T I C L E internalization , which appears to play a major role in CCR2 - medi - ated scavenging , is β - arrestin independent . Chemokine scavenging occurs independently of clathrin - mediated endocytosis The above data implicate constitutive internalization as a consistent feature of CCR2 scavenging . However , the pathways by which CCR2 ( and other chemokine receptors ) constitutively internalize are poorly understood . Although clathrin is often involved in canonical ligand - dependent internalization of many GPCRs ( 40 ) , some GPCRs , such as protease - activated receptor - 1 ( PAR1 ) and throm - boxane - A2β receptor , constitutively internalize through clathrin - coated pits independently of phosphorylation and β - arrestin ( 41 – 43 ) . We therefore evaluated the ability of CCR2 to internalize and scavenge using a dominant - negative form of dynamin - 2 ( DNM2 - K44A ) that inhibits clathrin - mediated endocytosis ( CME ) ( 44 ) . DNM2 - K44A had no effect on the ability of CCR2 to scavenge che - mokine ( Fig . 5A ) and only a small effect on constitutive internali - zation ( Fig . 5 , B and C ) . By contrast , CCL2 - dependent internalization was significantly inhibited by the dominant - nega - tive dynamin mutant ( Fig . 5D ) , consistent with a canonical mech - anism of internalization . Consistent with this finding , confocal microscopy showed that the dynamin inhibitor Dyngo - 4a ( 45 ) did not affect constitutive internalization ( fig . S8 ) . CCR2 undergoes rapid recycling and is resistant to degradation The above data suggest that CCR2 - mediated ligand scavenging is robust and largely unaffected by perturbations of mediators fre - quently associated with GPCR function . To further probe CCR2 scavenging mechanisms , we investigated its endosomal trafficking patterns in comparison to the scavenging receptor ACKR3 ( 46 , 47 ) and the nonscavenging receptor CXCR4 ( 11 ) . BRET experi - ments were conducted using C - terminally RlucII - tagged receptors in combination with rGFP - tagged Rab4 , Rab11 , or Rab7 endosomal markers that represent fast recycling , slow recycling , and late endo - somal association , respectively ( 48 ) . CCR2 rapidly sorted into fast - recycling Rab4 - positive endosomes and Rab7 - positive late endo - somes but did not associate with Rab11 - positive slow - recycling en - dosomes ( Fig . 6 , A to C ) . Sorting of CCR2 into Rab4 - positive fast - recycling endosomes was more extensive and sustained compared with the atypical scavenging receptor ACKR3 , which sorted to a greater extent into slow - recycling endosomes . In addition , although Rab7 is generally regarded to be associated with lysosomal degrada - tion , Rab7 also recycles through the trans - Golgi network ( TGN ) Fig . 3 . CCR2 scavenging of CCL2 occurs independently of receptor phosphorylation . ( A ) HEK293 cells stably expressing CCR2 or CCR2 with nine C - terminal serine / threonine residues mutated to alanine ( CCR2 - ST / 9A ) , and nonexpressing cells were cultured in media containing 5 nM CCL2 for 16 hours . The remaining levels of CCL2 were interpolated from CCL2 standards and are presented as percentages of the respective non – CCR2 - expressing cells . ( B and C ) Cells expressing CCR2 or CCR2 - ST9 / A transfectedwith β - arrestin1 – or β - arrestin2 – RlucIIandrGFP - CAAXwerestimulatedwith100nMCCL2orleftuntreated . β - ArrestinrecruitmentwasassessedbyebBRET . ( D ) Cells transfected with CCR2 - RlucII or CCR2 - ST / 9A - RlucII and rGFP - CAAX were stimulated with 100 nM CCL2 or left untreated . CCR2 internalization was assessed by BRET . The BRET ratio changes upon agonist treatment are expressed as percentages of the BRET ratio for untreated controls . ( E ) Constitutive internalization of WT CCR2 and CCR2 - ST / 9A in HEK293 cells was assessed by prelabel flow cytometry . ( F ) Constitutive internalization was visualized by fluorescence confocal microscopy in HEK293 cells expressing SNAP - CCR2 or SNAP - CCR2 - ST / 9A labeled with cell - impermeable SNAP - Surface Alexa Fluor 488 at 4°C for 1 hour . Cells were then either held at 4°C for 45 min ( top ) or transferredto 37°C for 45 min ( bottom ) before beingimaged . Images are representativeof threeindependent experiments . Scalebars , 10 μ m . Dataare expressed as the means ± SEM of n ≥ 3 independent experiments . * P < 0 . 05 and * * * P < 0 . 001 compared with controls by unpaired t test . Shroka et al . , Sci . Signal . 16 , eabo4314 ( 2023 ) 31 January 2023 5 of 15 S C I E N C E S I G N A L I N G | R E S E A R C H A R T I C L E ( 49 – 51 ) , and because of the lack of observed degradation ( shown below ) , we believe that CCR2 is trafficking through this TGN recy - cling pathway . In contrast to CCR2 and ACKR3 , the chemokine - ac - tivated GPCR CXCR4 showed minimal association with recycling endosomes , consistent with the fact that it does not scavenge che - mokine . These results highlight the general differences between en - dosomal trafficking patterns observed in chemokine receptor endocytosis . Using a BRET - based method ( 22 ) , we also demonstrated that CCR2 internalized after chemokine stimulation but robustly recy - cled back to the PM upon chemokine washout ( Fig . 6 , D to F ) or after addition of the CCR2 inhibitor BMS681 ( fig . S9 ) . Compared with ACKR3 , which also constitutively internalizes and recycles , CCR2 recycled back to the PM more efficiently . As an orthogonal strategy , we used a surface receptor labeling method ( 38 ) , which also revealed that cell surface CCR2 decreased upon chemokine stimu - lation but was quickly replenished after CCL2 removal ( Fig . 6G ) . Last , although CCR2 associated with Rab7 - positive late endosomes , Western blot analysis revealed that the expression level of CCR2 was maintained after CCL2 stimulation , in contrast to the control GPCR PAR1 ( Fig . 6 , H and I ) , which was degraded after agonist addition . These data suggest that CCR2 has distinct trafficking mechanisms compared with other chemokine and nonchemokine receptors , which is not unexpected because it functions as both a scavenging receptor and a canonical GPCR . The ability to rapidly recycle and avoid depletion may also contribute to its ability to efficiently scav - enge chemokine . CCR2 and CCR1 have distinct mechanisms of scavenging CCR1 is another chemokine receptor expressed on monocytes that regulates migration ( 52 , 53 ) . We and others previously showed that despite being a G protein – coupled chemokine receptor like CCR2 , CCR1 scavenges chemokine ( 54 , 55 ) . Furthermore , we determined that CCR1 is constitutively phosphorylated , constitutively interacts with β - arrestin2 , and constitutively internalizes in a β - arrestin2 – de - pendent manner ( 54 ) . Given that scavenging relies on constitutive internalization , we hypothesized that chemokine scavenging by CCR1 may be β - arrestin dependent . β - Arrestin KO cells showed a major reduction ( ~ 54 % ) in CCL14 scavenging by CCR1 ( Fig . 7A ) , which contrasts with the minor effect of β - arrestin KO on chemo - kine sequestration by CCR2 ( 19 % ) . Given the different β - arrestin dependencies of CCR1 and CCR2 , as well as the general role of β - arrestins in receptor desensitization , we also evaluated the impact of the loss of β - arrestin on Gα i Fig . 4 . β - Arrestins are dispensable for constitutive internalization and chemokine scavenging by CCR2 . ( A ) WT HEK293 and β - arrestin1 / 2 KO HEK293 cells stably expressingCCR2andrespectivenonexpressingcellswereculturedinmediacontaining5nMCCL2for16hours . TheremaininglevelsofCCL2wereinterpolatedfromCCL2 standardsand are presented as percentages of respective non – CCR2 - expressing cells . ( B ) Cellstransfected with CCR2 - RlucII andrGFP - CAAX were stimulated with 100 nM CCL2 or left untreated . CCR2 internalization was assessed by BRET . The BRET ratio changes upon agonist treatment are expressed as percentages of the BRET ratio ob - served in untreated controls . ( C ) Constitutive internalization of WT HEK293 and β - arrestin1 / 2 KO HEK293 cells stably expressing CCR2 was assessed by prelabel flow cytometry . Data are presented as percentages of surface receptor remaining as compared with noninternalized control . ( D ) Constitutive internalization was visualized by fluorescence confocal microscopy in WT and β - arrestin1 / 2 KO HEK293 cells expressing SNAP - CCR2 that was labeled with cell - impermeable SNAP - Surface Alexa Fluor 488 at 4°C for 1 hour . The cells were then held at 4°C for 45 min ( top ) or transferred to 37°C for 45 min ( bottom ) before being imaged . Images are representative of three independentexperiments . Scalebars , 10 μ m . ( E ) THP - 1cellstransducedwithnontargetinggRNA ( neg - gRNA ) andTHP - 1 β - arrestin1 / 2KDcellsweretreatedwithvehicleor the CCR2 inhibitor BMS681 and cultured in media containing 5 nM CCL2 for 16 hours . The remaining levels of CCL2 were interpolated from CCL2 standards and are presented as percentages of nonscavenging control BMS681 - treated cells . ( F ) Constitutive internalization of CCR2 in THP - 1 neg - gRNA and β - arrestin1 / 2 KD THP - 1 cells was assessed by prelabel flow cytometry . Data are presented as percentages of surface receptor remaining as compared with noninternalized control . ( G ) Transwell migration of THP - 1 neg - gRNA and β - arrestin1 / 2 KD THP - 1cells at various concentrations of chemokine . Data are presented as percentages of migratedcells as compared with initial number of cells added to each well . Data are expressed as the means ± SEM of n ≥ 3 independent experiments . * P < 0 . 05 , * * * P < 0 . 001 , and * * * * P < 0 . 0001 compared with controls by unpaired t test . Shroka et al . , Sci . Signal . 16 , eabo4314 ( 2023 ) 31 January 2023 6 of 15 S C I E N C E S I G N A L I N G | R E S E A R C H A R T I C L E activation using Gα i - Nluc and Gβγ - cpVenus in a BRET - based Gαβγ dissociation assay ( 36 ) . In the β - arrestin KO cells , both CCR1 and CCR2 triggered similar , sustained Gα i : Gβγ dissociation upon stimulation with chemokine , as expected ( Fig . 7 , B and C ) . However , in WT cells , CCR1 quickly activated Gα i , but Gα i and Gβγ rapidly reassociated , likely because the receptor returned to a state in which it was constitutively phosphorylated and associated with β - arrestin ( Fig . 7D ) . By contrast , CCR2 had a similar activation profile in the presence or absence of β - arrestin ( Fig . 7E ) , indicating that β - arrestin – mediated desensitization of CCR2 does not occur to the same extent as for CCR1 . The prolonged activation of G protein as observed in this assay may reflect the ability of CCR2 to avoid desensitization and / or down - regulation ( Fig . 6H ) , allowing cells to migrate , even when exposed to high concentrations of chemokine ( 10 ) . Consistent with these findings , activation by the formyl peptide receptor - 1 results in heterologous desensitization of CCR1 but not CCR2 ( 56 ) . Comparisons to endosomal trafficking of CCR1 were attempted but proved unsuccessful because of the lack of cell surface expression of C - terminally RlucII - tagged CCR1 ( CCR1 - RlucII ) ( fig . S10 , A and B ) . Together , the results suggest that β - arrestin regulates scavenging and signaling of CCR1 to a greater extent than CCR2 . Moreover , the greater suscept - ibility of CCR1 to desensitization may reflect a functional hierarchy of these two receptors in monocytes . DISCUSSION The physiological importance of clearing circulating chemokines and chemokines from tissue microenvironments has been docu - mented most extensively for ACKRs . These receptors work in concert with canonical G protein – coupled chemokine receptors to regulate extracellular chemokine availability during normal im - munological responses and inflammatory conditions . However , several canonical chemokine receptors , including CCR1 , CCR2 , and CCR5 , also act as scavenger receptors ( 2 , 9 – 11 , 54 , 55 ) . In this study , we sought to define the mechanisms that regulate CCR2 scavenging because they are poorly understood . Similar to most chemokine receptors , CCR2 is a GPCR that ac - tivates G proteins , is phosphorylated by GRKs , recruits β - arrestin , and is internalized upon agonist stimulation ( 13 , 19 , 28 ) . However , we showed that , in contrast to its function in controlling cell migra - tion , CCR2 robustly scavenged chemokine in a manner that was Fig . 5 . CME is not required for CCR2 constitutive internalization or scavenging . ( A ) Non – CCR2 - expressing cells and HEK293 cells stably expressing CCR2 were trans - fected with two different concentrations of a dynamin dominant – negative mutant ( DNM2 - K44A ) or left untransfected . The cells were cultured in mediacontaining 5 nM CCL2 for 16 hours . The remaining levels of CCL2 were determined by ELISA , interpolated from CCL2 standards , and are presented as percentages of the respective non – CCR2 - expressing cells . ( B ) Constitutive internalization of CCR2 was assessed by prelabel flow cytometry . HEK293 cells expressing CCR2 were transfected with pcDNA or an increasing amount of DNM2 - K44A . Data are presented as percentages of surface receptor remaining as compared with noninternalized control . ( C ) Con - stitutiveinternalizationinthepresenceorabsenceofDNM2 - K44AwasvisualizedbyfluorescenceconfocalmicroscopyinHEK293cellsexpressingSNAP - CCR2andDNM2 - K44A - GFP . SNAP - CCR2 was labeled with cell - impermeable SNAP - Surface Alexa Fluor 649 at 4°C for 1 hour and then either held at 4°C for 45 min ( top ) or transferred to 37°C for 45 min ( bottom ) before being analyzed . Scale bars , 10 μ m . ( D ) Cells transfected with CCR2 - RlucII , rGFP - CAAX , and pcDNA or increasing amounts of DNM2 - K44A were incubated in the absence or presence of 100 nM CCL2 . CCR2 internalization was assessed by BRET . The BRET ratio changes on agonist treatment are expressed as percentages of the BRETratio observed in the untreated controls . Data are expressed asthe means ± SEM of n ≥ 3 independent experiments . * P < 0 . 05 , * * * P < 0 . 001 , and * * * * P < 0 . 0001 compared with controls by ANOVA with Dunnet ’ s multiple comparison test . Shroka et al . , Sci . Signal . 16 , eabo4314 ( 2023 ) 31 January 2023 7 of 15 S C I E N C E S I G N A L I N G | R E S E A R C H A R T I C L E largely independent of these classical GPCR signaling pathways . We hypothesize that the minor contributions to scavenging from G pro - teins , GRKs , and β - arrestins are attributable to chemokine uptake that occurs by default in canonical GPCR agonist – stimulated path - ways . However , the bulk of chemokine scavenging arises from con - stitutive “ passive ” internalization of CCR2 through mediators that have yet to be identified . Thus , CCR2 appears to have two mecha - nistically distinct functional populations , one that regulates migra - tion and one involved in scavenging ( Fig . 8 ) . Receptor molecules in these populations likely interchange , with constitutively internalized and recycling CCR2 acting as a feeder pathway that provides nondesensitized receptor for persistent CCL2 - stimulated cell migration by the signaling pathway . The importance of rapid receptor recycling for continuous CCR2 signaling at the leading edge of monocytes was suggested by Volpe and coworkers ( 10 ) to explain why receptor internalization does not reduce the respon - siveness of the cells as they migrate toward CCL2 . The existence of a large population of internalized / recycling CCR2 molecules that do not need to be resensitized by dephosphorylation may con - tribute to the efficiency by which signaling - ready receptor Fig . 6 . CCR2 endosomal trafficking , recycling , and lackof degradation contribute to scavenging . ( A to C ) HEK293 cells were transfected with receptor - RlucII ( CCR2 , ACKR3 , orCXCR4 ) alongwitheitherrGFP - Rab4 ( A ) , rGFP - Rab11 ( B ) , orrGFP - Rab7 ( C ) . Cellswerestimulatedat37°Cwiththeindicatedchemokineorleftuntreated . Dataare presentedas percentagesof BRETvaluescompared tountreatedcontrols . ( D to F ) HEK293cells were transfected with rGFP - CAAX andCCR2 - RlucII ( D ) , ACKR3 - RlucII ( E ) , or CXCR4 - RlucII ( F ) . Cells were stimulated at 37°C with the indicated chemokine and washed with PBS to remove chemokine or left unwashed . Data are presented as per - centages of BRET values compared with non – chemokine - treated controls . ( G ) HEK293 cells stably expressing SNAP - CCR2 were preincubated for 90 min with cyclohex - imide ( 10 mg / ml ) to block de novo protein synthesis and left untreated or stimulated with 100 nM CCL2 at 37°C for 45 min . The remaining SNAP - CCR2 at the surfacewas blocked at 4°C with SNAP - Surface Block for 45 min . Cells were moved to 37°C for 15 , 45 , or 75 min . Receptors were labeled with SNAP - Surface Alexa Fluor 649 at 4°C after eachexperimentalconditionandtimepoint . Dataare displayedaspercentagesof CCR2 detectedrelative toinitial levelsof surfaceCCR2beforestimulation ( start ) . ( H and I ) HEK293 cells expressing FLAG - CCR2 or FLAG - PAR1 were pretreated with cycloheximide ( 10 μ g / ml ) for 90 min and left unstimulated ( 0 min ) or stimulated with 100 nM CCL2 ( to activate CCR2 ) or 100 μ M TFLLRN ( to activate PAR1 ) for 2 hours at 37°C . An equivalent amount of cell lysates was immunoprecipitated with M2 anti - FLAG antibody and immunoblotting detection with anti - FLAG antibody . Cell lysates were analyzed for endogenous α - tubulin as controls ( H ) . Receptor degradation was quan - tified and data ( means ± SEM ) shown are expressed as the fraction of receptor remaining compared with untreated control cells as determined from three independent experiments ( I ) . Data are expressed as the means ± SEM of n ≥ 3 independent experiments . * * P < 0 . 01 compared with controls by ANOVAwith Dunnet ’ s multiple com - parison test or unpaired t test . Shroka et al . , Sci . Signal . 16 , eabo4314 ( 2023 ) 31 January 2023 8 of 15 S C I E N C E S I G N A L I N G | R E S E A R C H A R T I C L E molecules can be replenished at the leading edge of migrating cells from the scavenger pathway . We originally hypothesized that β - arrestin might be an essential component of CCR2 scavenging because of its common role in re - ceptor internalization . In addition , we previously identified CCR1 as a scavenger that relies on β - arrestin to constitutively internalize ( 54 ) , a key feature of scavenging , and we confirmed here that β - ar - restin played a major role in chemokine sequestration by CCR1 . However , unlike CCR1 , we found that CCR2 constitutively internal - izes in the absence of β - arrestin and that KO of β - arrestin has only a small effect on scavenging ( possibly because of the agonist - stimu - lated canonical pathway ) . Consistent with these contrasting depen - dencies on β - arrestin , CCR2 scavenges largely independently of GRKs and phosphorylation of its C terminus , whereas CCR1 is basally phosphorylated ( 54 ) . Thus , it appears that different recep - tors use different mechanisms for scavenging . Because CCR1 and CCR2 are both chemoattractant receptors on monocytes that pre - dominantly scavenge distinct ligands , the use of different scaveng - ing mechanisms might be important for avoiding competition for pathway regulators , which could impair chemokine clearance . CCR2 and CCR1 also differ with respect to the duration of G protein activation , with CCR1 - activated G proteins returning more rapidly to an inactive state when β - arrestin is present . The pro - longed activation of G proteins after stimulation by CCR2 both in the presence and absence of β - arrestin may reflect its relative func - tional independence from arrestin . Whereas CCR2 scavenges chemokine independently of the most common agonist - triggered GPCR internalization mechanisms , constitutive internalization and recycling are crucial . We previously showed that the entire surface population of CCR2 in monocytes constitutively turns over and is replaced in under 30 min ( 11 ) . Ac - cordingly , we investigated the role of clathrin . However , perturbing CME did not inhibit CCR2 - mediated chemokine scavenging ( Fig . 5A ) . β - Arrestin often acts as an adapter along with AP - 2 to bridge clathrin ( 31 , 32 , 57 ) , and these results are consistent with a lack of a role for β - arrestin in scavenging . Therefore , future endeav - ors will be focused on identifying mediators of clathrin - indepen - dent endocytosis ( CIE ) . Possibilities include Cdc42 and adenosine diphosphate ribosylation factor ( Arf ) in the Rho family of guano - sine triphosphatases , which regulate both clathrin - and dynamin - independent internalization pathways and recycling of membrane proteins , including GPCRs . For example , Arf3 is required for main - taining the integrity of recycling endosomes ( 58 ) , whereas other members are involved in CIE ( 59 – 61 ) . Arf6 is also involved in actin cytoskeleton remodeling , phagocytosis and migration , and regulating the recycling of GPCRs , such as the β 2 - adrenergic recep - tor ( 62 – 64 ) . Cdc42 is involved in macropinocytosis and phagocyto - sis in macrophages and dendritic cells , as well as transmigration of monocytes , all of which express CCR2 and could contribute to its passive scavenging ( 65 – 67 ) . Pathways involved in the natural turn - over of the cell membrane and the constitutive endocytic processes may also play a role ( 68 ) . For example , GPCRs and other membrane proteins can sense and sort according to membrane curvature ( 69 ) . The specific niches in which CCR2 resides within the membrane and its capacity to recycle back to the surface after constitutive en - docytosis could influence its ability to scavenge . These pathways are Fig . 7 . CCR1 and CCR2 have distinct mechanisms of chemokine scavenging . ( A ) WT HEK293 and β - arrestin1 / 2 KO HEK293 cells stably expressing CCR1 and the respective nonexpressing cells were cultured in media containing 5 nM CCL14 for 16 hours . The remaining CCL14 was quantified by ELISA , interpolated from CCL14 standards , and presented as percentages of the respective non – CCR1 - expressing cells . ( B to E ) HEK293 β - arrestin1 / 2 KO cells ( B and C ) or HEK293 WT cells ( D and E ) expressing eitherCCR1 orCCR2 andtransfected with an IRES vectorencoding G α i - Nluc and G βγ - cpVenus were stimulated with 0 . 1 to 500 nMCCL14 orCCL2 , respectively ( indicatedbythedottedlines ) . ThedissociationoftheG βγ fromtheG α subunitresultsinadecreaseinBRETratiouponagonisttreatmentandisexpressedaspercentages ofthe BRETratio tothatobservedintheuntreatedcontrolcells . Dataareexpressedasthe means±SEMof n ≥ 3independentexperiments . * * * * P < 0 . 0001comparedwith controls by ANOVA with Dunnet ’ s multiple comparison test or unpaired t test . Shroka et al . , Sci . Signal . 16 , eabo4314 ( 2023 ) 31 January 2023 9 of 15 S C I E N C E S I G N A L I N G | R E S E A R C H A R T I C L E less understood but may involve micro - and macropinocytosis men - tioned above , as well as the clathrin - independent carriers ( CLICs ) and GPI - enriched endocytic compartments ( GEECs ) CLIC / GEEC pathway and other CME and CIE mechanisms ( 70 – 72 ) . In addition to understanding the molecular controls of scaveng - ing , a key question relates to the functional relevance of scavenging by canonical receptors . As suggested above and by Volpe and co - workers ( 10 ) , scavenging may allow cells to continuously migrate by remaining responsive to chemoattractant , which may be partic - ularly important for monocytes during pro - inflammatory immune responses . For CCR2 , sustained G protein activation after agonist stimulation ( Fig . 7E ) may also contribute to persistent migration , thereby synergizing with scavenging and rapid recycling . On the other hand , migration without desensitizing may be inappropriate for certain cell types in some contexts , which could be why some canonical receptors , such as CXCR4 , do not scavenge but instead rely on atypical receptors when scavenging is needed . Scavenging by canonical chemokine receptors may also enable migrating cells to create their own chemokine gradients and undergo self - directed migration or contribute to dampening or terminating the inflam - matory response when such a response is no longer needed ( 5 , 73 – 78 ) . Last , because some ligands of CCR2 are shared with other chemokine receptors ( such as chemokine CCL7 with receptor CCR1 ) , scavenging by CCR2 may affect other chemokine receptors and affect the migration of cells that express both receptors in trans ( on different cells ) , or in cis , such as monocytes that express both CCR1 and CCR2 . Along these lines , desensitization and down - reg - ulation of CCR1 occur in peripheral blood mononuclear cells from CCR2 KO mice , which fail to scavenge CCR2 ligands ( 9 ) . A final question concerns what mechanisms regulate whether CCR2 scavenges chemokine or is directed into G protein – depen - dent pathways to promote cell migration and the factors that deter - mine the balance of scavenging versus migration . In monocytes and dendritic cells exposed to treatments mimicking inflammation ( li - popolysaccharide or interferon - γ plus interleukin - 10 ) , CCR1 , CCR2 , and CCR5 switch purely to scavenging ( 55 ) . They simulta - neously become incapable of promoting cell migration as if uncou - pled from G proteins despite continued cell surface expression of the receptors . This is likely due to inhibition of some component of the cell motility machinery rather than a receptor - specific phe - nomenon , but whether there are also receptor - specific switches that determine relative amounts of scavenging versus migration remains to be determined . Changes in trafficking patterns could change the balance ; for example , the β 2 - adrenergic and M3 muscarinic recep - tors are reported to constitutively internalize via CIE and shift to clathrin - dependent endocytosis after agonist stimulation ( 79 ) . The scavenging function of chemokine receptors needs to be considered when evaluating the safety and therapeutic efficacy of blocking receptor - ligand binding , especially considering the above potential roles of scavenging . CCR2 is being pursued as a target for several diseases ( 12 , 80 – 87 ) , but inhibition with small - molecule an - tagonists leads to inhibition of scavenging and elevated plasma levels of CCL2 ( 88 – 91 ) , the consequences of which are unknown ( 11 ) . The presence of elevated levels of chemokine may also compete with receptor antagonists , thereby decreasing the efficacy of therapeutic drugs aimed at blocking CCR2 - mediated cell migra - tion ( 88 , 89 ) . To fully understand the role of scavenging in normal physiology and potential consequences of blocking it , a better un - derstanding of the regulatory mechanisms will be required . This Fig . 8 . CCR2appearstohavetwodistinctfunctionalpopulations , onethatregulatesmigrationandoneinvolvedinscavenging . ThecanonicalGPCRinteractors — including G αβγ , GRKs , β - arrestins , and clathrin — are primarily involved in the CCL2 - induced internalization mechanisms and are part of the migration - promoting pop - ulation ( left ) . These same interactors are dispensable for the scavenging population of CCR2 ( right ) , which instead can constitutively internalize while passively seques - teringextracellularCCL2 . Theexactmechanismsandregulatoryproteinsinvolvedinthescavengingpathwayareyettobedetermined . Akeyaspectofbothpopulationsis the ability of CCR2 to recycle to the cell surface to continue to drive G protein – dependent migratory functions and continue to scavenge excess chemokine . In addition , the constitutively internalized receptor may provide nondesensitized receptors ( dotted arrow ) for the G protein – coupled pathway to enable sustained cell migration . Shroka et al . , Sci . Signal . 16 , eabo4314 ( 2023 ) 31 January 2023 10 of 15 S C I E N C E S I G N A L I N G | R E S E A R C H A R T I C L E study provides insight in this direction by demonstrating that CCR2 has two functional populations , one that controls migration through canonical G protein mechanisms and one that controls scavenging through G protein – independent mechanisms . The results also provide a framework for understanding a body of prior studies directed at defining the network of intracellular pro - teins involved in CCR2 pharmacology . MATERIALS AND METHODS Cell lines KO and parental ( WT ) control HEK293 cells were a gift of A . Inoue ( Tohoku University , Japan ) . HEK293 cells lacking functional Gα i ( G i KO ) or a combination of Gα i , Gα o , Gα q , Gα z , Gα olf , Gα 11 , Gα s , Gα 12 , and Gα 13 KOs ( ΔGs / i / o / olf / q / z / 11 / 12 / 13 = G _ all KO ) were generated by CRISPR - Cas9 , as previously reported ( 21 , 92 ) . A dual β - arrestin1 and β - arrestin2 KO ( β - arrestin1 / 2 KO ) was pre - pared by CRISPR - Cas9 targeting of ARRB1 and ARRB2 , as de - scribed previously ( 93 ) . Similarly , CRISPR - Cas9 was used to generate GRK2 / 3 KO , GRK5 / 6 KO , and GRK2 / 3 / 5 / 6 KO in the HEK293A cell line ( 94 ) . THP - 1 β - arrestin1 / 2 KD and correspond - ing THP - 1 – negative guide RNA ( gRNA ) control cells were pre - pared using lentiCRISPRv2 ( 95 ) , a gift from F . Zhang ( Broad Institute , MA , USA ) , and gRNAs were generated using CHOP - CHOPv3 ( 96 ) . THP - 1 β - arrestin1 / 2 KD was confirmed by Western blot ( fig . S6A ) using anti – β - arrestin1 ( no . D8O3J , Cell Sig - naling Technology , MA , USA ) and anti – β - arrestin2 ( no . C16D9 , Cell Signaling Technology , MA , USA ) antibodies . Stable chemokine receptor – expressing cells ( CCR1 or CCR2 ) were generated in the HEK293 WT and all KO cell lines by lentiviral transduction using pLenti - CMV - Hygro expression vector , a gift from E . Campeau and P . Kaufman ( University of Massachusetts Medical School , MA , USA ) ( 97 ) , and receptor surface expression was confirmed by flow cytometry ( Guava easyCyte 8HT , Luminex ) with an anti – hCCR2 - PE ( phycoerythrin ) antibody ( FAB151P , R & D Systems ) . Cell lines were cultured in Dulbecco ’ s modified Eagle ’ s medium ( DMEM ) supplemented with GlutaMax ( Gibco ) and 10 % fetal bovine serum ( FBS ) and grown at 37°C with 5 % CO 2 . DNA plasmids and cloning The pcDNA3 . 1 ( + ) constructs of β - arrestin1 – RlucII , β - arrestin2 – R - lucII , rGFP - CAAX , rGFP - Rab4 , and rGFP - Rab11 ( 22 ) were gifted by M . Bouvier ( Université de Montréal , Canada ) . The FLAG - PAR1 construct was gifted by J . Trejo [ University of California ( UC ) , San Diego , La Jolla , CA , USA ] . The rGFP - Rab7 construct was generated by polymerase chain reaction ( PCR ) amplification of the Rab7 coding sequence of enhanced GFP ( EGFP ) – Rab7A , a gift from Q . Zhong ( UC Berkeley , CA , USA ) , ( 98 ) and in - frame insertion into the XbaI and PmeI sites of rGFP - Rab4 by DNA ligation . Recep - tor - RlucII ( CCR2 , CXCR4 , and ACKR3 ) constructs were created by PCR amplification of the coding region of CCR2 , CXCR4 , and ACKR3 ; products were subcloned in - frame at the N terminus of the RlucII sequence into the pcDNA3 . 1 RlucII vector . The CCR2 - ST / 9A ( S316A , T324A , T338A , T343A , S344A , T345A , T347A , S349A , and T350A ) phosphorylation - deficient mutant was created using site - directed mutagenesis with the QuikChange Mu - tagenesis Kit ( Agilent Technologies , La Jolla , CA , USA ) . To obtain FLAG - SNAP - CCR2 , the coding sequence of pcDNA3 . 1 ( + ) CCR2 vectors was PCR - amplified and then inserted into the pRK5 – FLAG - ST – CXCR4 plasmid ( 99 ) containing an mGlu5 recep - tor signal peptide ( 100 ) that promotes proper receptor trafficking to the cell surface ( gift of A . Levoye , University of Paris , France ) . In - troduction of two gRNAs into the lentiCRISPRv2 plasmid for β - ar - restin1 / 2 KD was performed using the Multiplex CRISPR - Cas9 Assembly System , a gift from T . Yamamoto ( Hiroshima University , Japan ) ( 101 ) , following the Golden Gate assembly method as previ - ously described ( 102 ) . Chemokine - scavenging ELISA assay WT nonreceptor - expressing or stable receptor - expressing ( CCR1 or CCR2 ) HEK293 cells and corresponding KO cells were seeded in triplicate in 96 - well dishes at 50 , 000 cells per well and allowed to adhere for ~ 8 hours . Subsequently , the medium was replaced with DMEM / 10 % FBS media containing 5 nM CCL2 or CCL14 and incubated for ~ 16 hours . The remaining chemokine levels in the supernatants of cultured cells were measured in triplicate using commercially available CCL2 and CCL14 Invitrogen ELISA kits according to the manufacturer ’ s instructions ( Thermo Fisher Scientific , Hampton , NH , USA ) and read using a SpectraMax M5 plate reader ( Molecular Devices , Sunnyvale , CA , USA ) . The re - maining levels of exogenous chemokine are reported as the percent - age of levels in supernatants of the corresponding nonreceptor - expressing cells . BRET assays HEK293 cells were seeded directly into 96 - well plates ( 20 , 000 cells per well ) and transfected the next day using Mirus TransIT - LT1 transfection reagent at ~ 70 % confluency . Cells were transfected with a BRET donor ( 1 . 2 ng of receptor - RlucII or 0 . 72 ng of β - arrest - in1 – or β - arrestin2 – RlucII per well ) along with 4 . 8 ng of BRET ac - ceptor per well ( for example , rGFP - CAAX , rGFP - Rab4 , rGFP - Rab11 , or rGFP - Rab7 ) . All assays were performed ~ 30 hours after transfection , modified from previously described methods ( 22 ) . Cells were washed once with prewarmed Tyrode ’ s buffer [ 140 mM NaCl , 2 . 7 mM KCl , 1 mM CaCl 2 , 12 mM NaHCO 3 , 5 . 6 mM D - glucose , 0 . 5 mM MgCl 2 , 0 . 37 mM NaH 2 PO 4 , and 25 mM HEPES ( pH 7 . 4 ) ] , and then , cell - permeable RlucII substrate , Prolume Purple ( NanoLight Technologies ) , at a final concentration of 5 μM was added ~ 3 to 6 min before BRET measurements . Three baseline BRET measurements were performed about 1 min apart and were followed by the addition of the indicated concentrations of chemokine . Subsequent BRET measurements were taken about 1 min apart for 50 min or the indicated times . For evaluation of receptor recycling to the PM , cells were seeded onto poly - D - lysine – coated 96 - well plates and transfected as de - scribed above . After 13 min of chemokine stimulation , cells were washed three times with prewarmed Tyrode ’ s buffer , and subse - quent BRET measurements were taken about 1 min apart for an ad - ditional 25 min . Values are presented as the percentage of mock treated ( no ligand ) [ ( BRET ligand / BRET basal ) × 100 ] . All BRET mea - surements were read using a VictorX Light luminescence reader ( PerkinElmer , Waltham , MA , USA ) or Spark microplate reader ( Tecan , Männedorf , Switzerland ) . Prelabel assay to measure receptor constitutive internalization CCR2 receptor surface expression was determined by a prelabel flow cytometry – based internalization assay ( 11 , 54 ) , which Shroka et al . , Sci . Signal . 16 , eabo4314 ( 2023 ) 31 January 2023 11 of 15 S C I E N C E S I G N A L I N G | R E S E A R C H A R T I C L E measures the number of labeled CCR2 molecules remaining on the cell surface after 45 min of incubation at 37°C . HEK293 cells stably expressing CCR2 were labeled with mouse anti - hCCR2 antibody ( clone no . 48607 , R & D Systems ) or its isotype - matched control for 30 min on ice and protected from light . Unbound antibody was washed away with wash buffer [ phosphate - buffered saline ( PBS ) and 0 . 5 % bovine serum albumin ( BSA ) ] . Cells were then re - suspended in assay buffer ( DMEM and 0 . 5 % BSA ) and either held at 4°C ( which prevents receptor trafficking and internalization ) or transferred to 37°C ( which allows for normal receptor trafficking ) and incubated for 45 min . After incubation , cells were transferred to wet ice , and the remaining surface receptor was labeled with anti - mouse antibody conjugated to PE ( clone no . 344701 , R & D Systems ) for 40 min on ice and protected from light . CCR2 expression was assessed by flow cytometry using a Guava easyCyte 8HT flow cy - tometer ( Luminex ) and analyzed using FlowJo software ( FlowJo , Ashland , OR , USA ) . The geometric mean fluorescent intensity of analyzed cells was used to quantify surface expression of CCR2 and compared with noninternalized control to determine relative percentage of receptor remaining at the surface . Receptor constitutive internalization microscopy Constitutive internalization of CCR2 was qualitatively assessed on the basis of a previously described method ( 100 ) . HEK293 cells or the corresponding KO cell lines expressing FLAG - SNAP - CCR2 or FLAG - SNAP - CCR2 - ST / 9A were seeded onto fibronectin - coated 10 - mm glass - bottom dishes ( FluoroDish , FD3510 , WPI ) . For cells expressing DNM2 dominant negative mutant DNM2 - K44A , cells were transfected with DNM2 - K44A - EGFP , a gift of J . Zhang ( UC San Diego , La Jolla , CA , USA ) , and reseeded 24 hours after trans - fection . The next day , cells were stained with 5 μM cell - impermeable SNAP - Surface Alexa Fluor 488 or 647 ( New England Biolabs ) in complete media ( DMEM + 10 % FBS ) at 4°C in the dark for 45 min . Excess SNAP substrate was removed by washing with ice - cold complete media . Cells were imaged in phenol - red free DMEM media containing 2 % FBS at 4°C ( a temperature that pre - vents receptor trafficking and internalization ) or transferred to 37°C for 45 min ( a temperature that allows for normal receptor traffick - ing ) and then imaged on an Eclipse Ti2 - E ( Nikon ) equipped with a CSU - X1 ( Yokogawa ) spinning disk field scanning confocal system and stage top incubator ( Tokai Hit ) . SNAP receptor recycling assay The ability of CCR2 to recover to the cell surface after internaliza - tion was assessed on the basis of a modified method as described ( 38 ) . HEK293 cells stably expressing SNAP - tagged CCR2 were pre - incubated for 2 hours with cycloheximide ( 5 mg / ml ) . Cells were then left untreated or stimulated with 100 nM CCL2 at 37°C for 45 min . Subsequently , cells were washed , and the remaining nonin - ternalized SNAP - CCR2 at the cell surface was blocked at 4°C with SNAP - Surface Block ( New England Biolabs ) for 45 min . The cells were then washed and shifted to 37°C for 15 , 45 , or 75 min . After the specified time points , cells were transferred to wet ice , and receptors were labeled with SNAP - Surface Alexa Fluor 649 ( New England Biolabs ) at 4°C . Data are displayed as a percentage of receptor com - pared with surface receptor measured at the start of the protocol . Chemotaxis assay Chemotaxis assays were carried out using Transwell chemotaxis chambers ( Corning Inc . , Corning , NY , USA ) . Cells were harvested by centrifugation and resuspended in complete media , RPMI 1640 + 10 % FBS , at a density of 6 . 6 × 10 5 cells / ml . Various concentrations of CCL2 were added to the bottom of the chambers and covered with a 5 - μm pore - sized polycarbonate membrane filter , whereas 5 × 10 4 cells were added to the top of the filter . After 2 hours of incubation at 37°C , media containing migrated cells was removed from the bottom chamber , and cells were counted by flow cytome - try using a Guava easyCyte 8HT flow cytometer ( Luminex ) and an - alyzed with FlowJo software ( FlowJo , Ashland , OR , USA ) . Data are presented as percentage of migrated cells compared with the initial number of cells added before migration . Receptor degradation assay CCR2 degradation was assessed as described previously ( 103 ) . HEK293 cells were seeded in 12 - well dishes ( 1 . 5 × 10 5 cells per well ) and transfected the next day with either FLAG - CCR2 or FLAG - PAR1 using Mirus TransIT - LT1 transfection reagent . After 48 hours , cells were treated with cycloheximide ( 10 μg / ml ) for 90 min at 37°C . Cells were then incubated in the same media with or without 100 nM CCL2 or 100 μM TFLLRN ( PAR1 - specific agonist ) for 2 hours at 37°C . Cells were placed on ice , washed with PBS , and lysed in RIPA ( radioimmunoprecipitation assay lysis buffer , Thermo Fisher Scientific ) containing cOmplete , Mini , EDTA - Free Protease Inhibitor Cocktail ( Roche ) . Cell lysates were collected and rotated end - over - end for 1 hour at 4°C , and protein concentrations were determined by Pierce Rapid Gold bicinchoninic acid assay ( Thermo Fisher Scientific ) . Equivalent amounts of lysates were used for immunoprecipitation ( IP ) using M2 anti - FLAG affinity resin ( MilliporeSigma ) according to the manufacturer ’ s instruc - tions . Equivalent volumes of IP elution and equal amounts of lysates were resolved by SDS – polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis and transferred to nitrocellulose membrane ( Bio - Rad ) . Membranes were blocked with 5 % nonfat dry milk ( Bio - Rad ) diluted in wash buffer [ 50 mM Tris - HCl ( pH 7 . 4 ) , 15 mM NaCl , and 0 . 1 % Tween 20 ] and subsequently washed . IP elution Western blots were incu - bated overnight at 4°C with anti - FLAG antibody ( F4725 , Millipor - eSigma ) diluted in Tris - buffered saline ( TBS ) containing 5 % BSA , and lysate Western blots were incubated overnight at 4°C with anti – α - tubulin ( T6074 , MilliporeSigma ) . Membranes were washed and probed with corresponding secondary IRDye 800CW antibody ( LI - COR Biosciences ) diluted in TBS containing 5 % BSA at room temperature for 1 hour . Membranes were washed and imaged on an Odyssey infrared imaging system ( LI - COR Biosciences ) . Densitom - etry was performed using LI - COR Image Studio software . G protein dissociation assay HEK293 cells and corresponding KO cells stably expressing CCR1 or CCR2 were seeded directly into 96 - well plates ( 20 , 000 cells per well ) and transfected the next day with pIRES Gα - Nluc Gβγ - cpVenus , a gift from D . Legler ( University of Konstanz , Germany ) , using Mirus TransIT - LT1 transfection reagent with cells at ~ 70 % confluency ( 36 ) . After ~ 30 hours , cells were washed once with prewarmed Tyrode ’ s buffer , followed by addition of 5 μM luciferase substrate coelenterazine - H ( Biotium , CA , USA ) . Three baseline BRET measurements were performed about 1 min apart , followed by the addition of indicated concentrations of Shroka et al . , Sci . Signal . 16 , eabo4314 ( 2023 ) 31 January 2023 12 of 15 S C I E N C E S I G N A L I N G | R E S E A R C H A R T I C L E chemokine ligand , and subsequent BRET measurements were taken about 1 min apart for 25 min or indicated times . Statistics Data points are the means ± SEM of at least three independent ex - periments . Data were analyzed using GraphPad Prism with statisti - cally significant differences ( P < 0 . 05 ) using one - way analyses of variance ( ANOVAs ) with Dunnett ’ s multiple comparison post hoc test or unpaired t test with Welch ’ s correction post hoc test . For comparison of BRET internalization and β - arrestin recruit - ment , the area under the curve was determined using GraphPad Prism , and statistical significance was determined using the appro - priate tests mentioned above . Supplementary Materials This PDF file includes : Figs . S1 to S10 Other Supplementary Material for this manuscript includes the following : MDAR Reproducibility Checklist View / request a protocol for this paper from Bio - protocol . REFERENCES AND NOTES 1 . M . H . Ulvmar , E . Hub , A . Rot , Atypical chemokine receptors . Exp . Cell Res . 317 , 556 – 568 ( 2011 ) . 2 . R . J . B . Nibbs , G . J . Graham , Immuneregulationbyatypicalchemokinereceptors . Nat . Rev . Immunol . 13 , 815 – 829 ( 2013 ) . 3 . P . Abe , W . Mueller , D . Schütz , F . MacKay , M . Thelen , P . Zhang , R . Stumm , CXCR7 prevents excessiveCXCL12 - mediateddownregulationofCXCR4inmigratingcorticalinterneurons . Development 141 , 1857 – 1863 ( 2014 ) . 4 . R . Bonecchi , G . J . Graham , Atypicalchemokinereceptors andtheir rolesin theresolution of the inflammatory response . Front . Immunol . 7 , ( 2016 ) . 5 . C . A . H . Hansell , C . E . Hurson , R . J . B . Nibbs , DARC and D6 : Silent partners in chemokine regulation ? Immunol . Cell Biol . 89 , 197 – 206 ( 2011 ) . 6 . G . J . Graham , M . Locati , A . Mantovani , A . Rot , M . Thelen , Thebiochemistryandbiologyof the atypical chemokine receptors . Immunol . Lett . 145 , 30 – 38 ( 2012 ) . 7 . A . Mantovani , M . Locati , A . Vecchi , S . Sozzani , P . Allavena , Decoy receptors : A strategy to regulate inflammatory cytokines and chemokines . Trends Immunol . 22 , 328 – 336 ( 2001 ) . 8 . A . Mantovani , R . Bonecchi , M . Locati , Tuning inflammation and immunity by chemokine sequestration : Decoys and more . Nat . Rev . Immunol . 6 , 907 – 918 ( 2006 ) . 9 . A . E . Cardona , M . E . Sasse , L . Liu , S . M . Cardona , M . Mizutani , C . Savarin , T . Hu , R . M . Ransohoff , Scavenging roles of chemokine receptors : Chemokine receptor defic - iency is associated with increased levels of ligand in circulation and tissues . Blood 112 , 256 – 263 ( 2008 ) . 10 . S . Volpe , E . Cameroni , B . Moepps , S . Thelen , T . Apuzzo , M . Thelen , CCR2actsasscavenger for CCL2 during monocyte chemotaxis . PLOS ONE 7 , e37208 ( 2012 ) . 11 . B . N . Zhao , J . J . Campbell , C . L . Salanga , L . S . Ertl , Y . Wang , S . Yau , T . Dang , Y . Zeng , J . P . McMahon , A . Krasinski , P . Zhang , I . Kufareva , T . M . Handel , I . F . Charo , R . Singh , T . J . Schall , CCR2 - mediated uptake of constitutively produced CCL2 : A mechanism for regulating chemokine levels in the blood . J . Immunol . 203 , 3157 – 3165 ( 2019 ) . 12 . L . B . Ford , V . Cerovic , S . W . F . Milling , G . J . Graham , C . A . H . Hansell , R . J . B . Nibbs , Char - acterization of conventional and atypical receptors for the chemokine CCL2 on mouse leukocytes . J . Immunol . 193 , 400 – 411 ( 2014 ) . 13 . A . M . Aragay , M . Mellado , J . M . Frade , A . M . Martin , M . C . Jimenez - Sainz , C . Martinez - A , F . Mayor Jr . , Monocyte chemoattractant protein - 1 - induced CCR2B receptor desensitiza - tionmediatedbytheGprotein - coupledreceptorkinase2 . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . U . S . A . 95 , 2985 – 2990 ( 1998 ) . 14 . C . V . Carman , J . L . Benovic , G - protein - coupled receptors : Turn - ons and turn - offs . Curr . Opin . Neurobiol . 8 , 335 – 344 ( 1998 ) . 15 . J . L . Benovic , H . Kühn , I . Weyand , J . Codina , M . G . Caron , R . J . Lefkowitz , Functional de - sensitization of the isolated beta - adrenergic receptor by the beta - adrenergic receptor kinase : Potential role of an analog of the retinal protein arrestin ( 48 - kDa protein ) . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . U . S . A . 84 , 8879 – 8882 ( 1987 ) . 16 . H . Attramadal , J . L . Arriza , C . Aoki , T . M . Dawson , J . Codina , M . M . Kwatra , S . H . Snyder , M . G . Caron , R . J . Lefkowitz , Beta - arrestin2 , a novel member of the arrestin / beta - arrestin gene family . J . Biol . Chem . 267 , 17882 – 17890 ( 1992 ) . 17 . M . J . Lohse , J . L . Benovic , J . Codina , M . G . Caron , R . J . Lefkowitz , beta - Arrestin : A protein that regulates beta - adrenergic receptor function . Science 248 , 1547 – 1550 ( 1990 ) . 18 . V . V . Gurevich , E . V . Gurevich , GPCR signaling regulation : The role of GRKs and arrestins . Front . Pharmacol . 10 , 125 ( 2019 ) . 19 . Y . A . Berchiche , S . Gravel , M . - E . Pelletier , G . St - Onge , N . Heveker , Different effects of the different natural CC chemokine receptor 2b ligands on beta - arrestin recruitment , G α i signaling , and receptor internalization . Mol . Pharmacol . 79 , 488 – 498 ( 2011 ) . 20 . M . Mellado , J . M . Rodríguez - Frade , A . J . Vila - Coro , S . Fernández , A . Martín de Ana , D . R . Jones , J . L . Torán , C . Martínez - A , Chemokine receptor homo - or heterodimerization activates distinct signaling pathways . EMBO J . 20 , 2497 – 2507 ( 2001 ) . 21 . M . Grundmann , N . Merten , D . Malfacini , A . Inoue , P . Preis , K . Simon , N . Rüttiger , N . Ziegler , T . Benkel , N . K . Schmitt , S . Ishida , I . Müller , R . Reher , K . Kawakami , A . Inoue , U . Rick , T . Kühl , D . Imhof , J . Aoki , G . M . König , C . Hoffmann , J . Gomeza , J . Wess , E . Kostenis , Lack of beta - arrestin signaling in the absence of active G proteins . Nat . Commun . 9 , 341 ( 2018 ) . 22 . Y . Namkung , C . Le Gouill , V . Lukashova , H . Kobayashi , M . Hogue , E . Khoury , M . Song , M . Bouvier , S . A . Laporte , Monitoring G protein - coupled receptor and β - arrestin trafficking in live cells using enhanced bystander BRET . Nat . Commun . 7 , 12178 ( 2016 ) . 23 . W . J . Koch , J . Inglese , W . C . Stone , R . J . Lefkowitz , The binding site for the beta gamma subunits of heterotrimeric G proteins on the beta - adrenergic receptor kinase . J . Biol . Chem . 268 , 8256 – 8260 ( 1993 ) . 24 . K . Touhara , J . Inglese , J . A . Pitcher , G . Shaw , R . J . Lefkowitz , Binding of G protein beta gamma - subunits to pleckstrin homology domains . J . Biol . Chem . 269 , 10217 – 10220 ( 1994 ) . 25 . R . J . Lefkowitz , G protein - coupled receptor kinases . Cell 74 , 409 – 412 ( 1993 ) . 26 . M . J . Lohse , C . Krasel , R . Winstel , F . Mayor Jr . , G - protein - coupled receptor kinases . Kidney Int . 49 , 1047 – 1052 ( 1996 ) . 27 . R . T . Premont , J . Inglese , R . J . Lefkowitz , Protein kinases that phosphorylate activated G protein - coupled receptors . FASEB J . 9 , 175 – 182 ( 1995 ) . 28 . C . Franci , J . Gosling , C . L . Tsou , S . R . Coughlin , I . F . Charo , Phosphorylation byaGprotein - coupled kinase inhibits signaling and promotes internalization of the monocyte che - moattractant protein - 1 receptor . Critical role of carboxyl - tail serines / threonines in re - ceptor function . J . Immunol . 157 , 5606 – 5612 ( 1996 ) . 29 . H . - J . Lee , J . J . Zheng , PDZ domains and their binding partners : Structure , specificity , and modification . Cell Commun . Signal 8 , 8 ( 2010 ) . 30 . G . Romero , M . vonZastrow , P . A . Friedman , Role ofPDZproteins inregulating trafficking , signaling , and function of GPCRs : Means , motif , and opportunity . Adv . Pharmacol . 62 , 279 – 314 ( 2011 ) . 31 . S . A . Laporte , R . H . Oakley , J . A . Holt , L . S . Barak , M . G . Caron , The interaction of beta - ar - restin with the AP - 2 adaptor is required for the clustering of beta 2 - adrenergic receptor into clathrin - coated pits . J . Biol . Chem . 275 , 23120 – 23126 ( 2000 ) . 32 . E . Boucrot , S . Saffarian , R . Zhang , T . Kirchhausen , Roles of AP - 2 in clathrin - mediated en - docytosis . PLOS ONE 5 , e10597 ( 2010 ) . 33 . D . Jiang , T . Xie , J . Liang , P . W . Noble , β - Arrestins in the immune system . Prog . Mol . Biol . Transl . Sci . 118 , 359 – 393 ( 2013 ) . 34 . D . Sharma , N . Parameswaran , Multifaceted role of β - arrestins in inflammation and disease . Genes Immun . 16 , 499 – 513 ( 2015 ) . 35 . E . Galliera , V . R . Jala , J . O . Trent , R . Bonecchi , P . Signorelli , R . J . Lefkowitz , A . Mantovani , M . Locati , B . Haribabu , beta - Arrestin - dependent constitutive internalization of the human chemokine decoy receptor D6 . J . Biol . Chem . 279 , 25590 – 25597 ( 2004 ) . 36 . C . Matti , A . Salnikov , M . Artinger , G . D ’ Agostino , I . Kindinger , M . Uguccioni , M . Thelen , D . F . Legler , ACKR4recruitsGRK3priorto β - arrestinsbutcanscavengechemokinesinthe absence of β - arrestins . Front . Immunol . 11 , 720 ( 2020 ) . 37 . K . E . Luker , J . M . Steele , L . A . Mihalko , P . Ray , G . D . Luker , Constitutive and chemokine - dependent internalization and recycling of CXCR7 in breast cancer cells to degrade chemokine ligands . Oncogene 29 , 4599 – 4610 ( 2010 ) . 38 . N . Montpas , G . St - Onge , N . Nama , D . Rhainds , B . Benredjem , M . Girard , G . Hickson , V . Pons , N . Heveker , Ligand - specific conformational transitions and intracellular transport are required for atypical chemokine receptor 3 - mediated chemokine scavenging . J . Biol . Chem . 293 , 893 – 905 ( 2018 ) . 39 . F . Saaber , D . Schütz , E . Miess , P . Abe , S . Desikan , P . Ashok Kumar , S . Balk , K . Huang , J . M . Beaulieu , S . Schulz , R . Stumm , ACKR3 regulation of ceuronal migration requires ACKR3 phosphorylation , but not β - arrestin . Cell Rep . 26 , 1473 – 1488 . e9 ( 2019 ) . 40 . M . Kaksonen , A . Roux , Mechanisms of clathrin - mediated endocytosis . Nat . Rev . Mol . Cell Biol . 19 , 313 – 326 ( 2018 ) . Shroka et al . , Sci . Signal . 16 , eabo4314 ( 2023 ) 31 January 2023 13 of 15 S C I E N C E S I G N A L I N G | R E S E A R C H A R T I C L E 41 . M . M . Paing , A . B . Stutts , T . A . Kohout , R . J . Lefkowitz , J . Trejo , β - Arrestinsregulateprotease - activated receptor - 1 desensitization but not internalization or down - regulation . J . Biol . Chem . 277 , 1292 – 1300 ( 2002 ) . 42 . J . L . Parent , P . Labrecque , M . Driss Rochdi , J . L . Benovic , Role of the differentially spliced carboxyl terminus in thromboxane A2 receptor trafficking : Identification of a distinct motif for tonic internalization . J . Biol . Chem . 276 , 7079 – 7085 ( 2001 ) . 43 . A . Marchese , C . Chen , Y . - M . Kim , J . L . Benovic , The ins and outs of G protein - coupled receptor trafficking . Trends Biochem . Sci . 28 , 369 – 376 ( 2003 ) . 44 . H . Damke , T . Baba , D . E . Warnock , S . L . Schmid , Induction of mutant dynamin specifically blocks endocytic coated vesicle formation . J . Cell Biol . 127 , 915 – 934 ( 1994 ) . 45 . A . McCluskey , J . A . Daniel , G . Hadzic , N . Chau , E . L . Clayton , A . Mariana , A . Whiting , N . N . Gorgani , J . Lloyd , A . Quan , L . Moshkanbaryans , S . Krishnan , S . Perera , M . Chircop , L . vonKleist , A . B . McGeachie , M . T . Howes , R . G . Parton , M . Campbell , J . A . Sakoff , X . Wang , J . - Y . Sun , M . J . Robertson , F . M . Deane , T . H . Nguyen , F . A . Meunier , M . A . Cousin , P . J . Robinson , Building a better dynasore : The dyngo compounds potently inhibit dynamin and endocytosis . Traffic 14 , 1272 – 1289 ( 2013 ) . 46 . J . Koenen , F . Bachelerie , K . Balabanian , G . Schlecht - Louf , C . Gallego , Atypical chemokine receptor3 ( ACKR3 ) : Acomprehensiveoverviewofitsexpressionandpotentialrolesinthe immune system . Mol . Pharmacol . 96 , 809 – 818 ( 2019 ) . 47 . S . Lau , A . Feitzinger , G . Venkiteswaran , J . Wang , S . W . Lewellis , C . A . Koplinski , F . C . Peterson , B . F . Volkman , M . Meier - Schellersheim , H . Knaut , Anegative - feedbackloop maintains optimal chemokine concentrations for directional cell migration . Nat . Cell Biol . 22 , 266 – 273 ( 2020 ) . 48 . A . Wandinger - Ness , M . Zerial , Rab proteins and the compartmentalization of the endo - somal system . Cold Spring Harb . Perspect . Biol . 6 , a022616 ( 2014 ) . 49 . A . Sapmaz , I . Berlin , E . Bos , R . H . Wijdeven , H . Janssen , R . Konietzny , J . J . Akkermans , A . E . Erson - Bensan , R . I . Koning , B . M . Kessler , J . Neefjes , H . Ovaa , USP32 regulates late endosomaltransport andrecyclingthrough deubiquitylation of Rab7 . Nat . Commun . 10 , 1454 ( 2019 ) . 50 . P . J . Cullen , H . C . Korswagen , Sorting nexins provide diversity for retromer - dependent trafficking events . Nat . Cell Biol . 14 , 29 – 37 ( 2012 ) . 51 . M . N . J . Seaman , Theretromercomplex – endosomalproteinrecyclingandbeyond . J . Cell Sci . 125 , 4693 – 4702 ( 2012 ) . 52 . X . Gong , W . Gong , D . B . Kuhns , A . Ben - Baruch , O . M . Howard , J . M . Wang , Monocyte chemotactic protein - 2 ( MCP - 2 ) uses CCR1 and CCR2B as its functional receptors . J . Biol . Chem . 272 , 11682 – 11685 ( 1997 ) . 53 . C . Weber , K . S . Weber , C . Klier , S . Gu , R . Wank , R . Horuk , P . J . Nelson , Specializedrolesofthe chemokine receptors CCR1 and CCR5 in the recruitment of monocytes and T ( H ) 1 - like / CD45RO ( + ) T cells . Blood 97 , 1144 – 1146 ( 2001 ) . 54 . C . T . Gilliland , C . L . Salanga , T . Kawamura , J . Trejo , T . M . Handel , The chemokine receptor CCR1 is constitutively active , which leads to G protein - independent , β - arrestin - mediated internalization . J . Biol . Chem . 288 , 32194 – 32210 ( 2013 ) . 55 . G . D ’ Amico , G . Frascaroli , G . Bianchi , P . Transidico , A . Doni , A . Vecchi , S . Sozzani , P . Allavena , A . Mantovani , Uncoupling of inflammatory chemokine receptors by IL - 10 : Generation of functional decoys . Nat . Immunol . 1 , 387 – 391 ( 2000 ) . 56 . F . Bednar , C . Song , G . Bardi , W . Cornwell , T . J . Rogers , Cross - desensitization of CCR1 , but not CCR2 , following activation of the formyl peptide receptor FPR1 . J . Immunol . 192 , 5305 – 5313 ( 2014 ) . 57 . S . A . Laporte , R . H . Oakley , J . Zhang , J . A . Holt , S . S . Ferguson , M . G . Caron , L . S . Barak , The beta2 - adrenergicreceptor / betaarrestincomplexrecruitstheclathrinadaptorAP - 2during endocytosis . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . U . S . A . 96 , 3712 – 3717 ( 1999 ) . 58 . Y . Kondo , A . Hanai , W . Nakai , Y . Katoh , K . Nakayama , H . - W . Shin , ARF1 and ARF3 are re - quired for the integrity of recycling endosomes and the recycling pathway . Cell Struct . Funct . 37 , 141 – 154 ( 2012 ) . 59 . R . Karnik , M . J . Ludlow , N . Abuarab , A . J . Smith , M . E . L . Hardy , D . J . S . Elliott , A . Sivaprasadarao , Endocytosis of HERG is clathrin - independent and involves arf6 . PLOS ONE 8 , e85630 ( 2013 ) . 60 . N . Naslavsky , R . Weigert , J . G . Donaldson , Characterization of a nonclathrin endocytic pathway : Membrane cargo and lipid requirements . Mol . Biol . Cell 15 , 3542 – 3552 ( 2004 ) . 61 . K . Sandvig , M . L . Torgersen , H . A . Raa , B . van Deurs , Clathrin - independent endocytosis : From nonexisting to an extreme degree of complexity . Histochem . Cell Biol . 129 , 267 – 276 ( 2008 ) . 62 . Q . Zhang , D . Cox , C . C . Tseng , J . G . Donaldson , S . Greenberg , A requirement for ARF6 in Fcgamma receptor - mediated phagocytosis in macrophages . J . Biol . Chem . 273 , 19977 – 19981 ( 1998 ) . 63 . L . C . Santy , J . E . Casanova , ActivationofARF6byARNOstimulatesepithelialcellmigration through downstream activation of both Rac1 and phospholipase D . J . Cell Biol . 154 , 599 – 610 ( 2001 ) . 64 . E . Macia , M . Partisani , O . Paleotti , F . Luton , M . Franco , Arf6 negatively controls the rapid recycling of the β 2 adrenergic receptor . J . Cell Sci . 125 , 4026 – 4035 ( 2012 ) . 65 . Y . Egami , T . Taguchi , M . Maekawa , H . Arai , N . Araki , SmallGTPasesandphosphoinositides in the regulatory mechanisms of macropinosome formation and maturation . Front . Physiol . 5 , 374 ( 2014 ) . 66 . W . S . Garrett , L . M . Chen , R . Kroschewski , M . Ebersold , S . Turley , S . Trombetta , J . E . Galán , I . Mellman , Developmental control of endocytosis in dendritic cells by Cdc42 . Cell 102 , 325 – 334 ( 2000 ) . 67 . K . S . Weber , L . B . Klickstein , P . C . Weber , C . Weber , Chemokine - induced monocyte transmigration requires cdc42 - mediated cytoskeletal changes . Eur . J . Immunol . 28 , 2245 – 2251 ( 1998 ) . 68 . M . Tanaka , T . Kikuchi , H . Uno , K . Okita , T . Kitanishi - Yumura , S . Yumura , Turnoverand flow of the cell membrane for cell migration . Sci . Rep . 7 , 12970 ( 2017 ) . 69 . K . R . Rosholm , N . Leijnse , A . Mantsiou , V . Tkach , S . L . Pedersen , V . F . Wirth , L . B . Oddershede , K . J . Jensen , K . L . Martinez , N . S . Hatzakis , P . M . Bendix , A . Callan - Jones , D . Stamou , Membranecurvatureregulatesligand - specificmembranesortingofGPCRsinlivingcells . Nat . Chem . Biol . 13 , 724 – 729 ( 2017 ) . 70 . S . Sabharanjak , P . Sharma , R . G . Parton , S . Mayor , GPI - anchored proteins are delivered to recycling endosomes via a distinct cdc42 - regulated , clathrin - independent pinocytic pathway . Dev . Cell 2 , 411 – 423 ( 2002 ) . 71 . M . Kirkham , A . Fujita , R . Chadda , S . J . Nixon , T . V . Kurzchalia , D . K . Sharma , R . E . Pagano , J . F . Hancock , S . Mayor , R . G . Parton , Ultrastructural identification of uncoated caveolin - independent early endocytic vehicles . J . Cell Biol . 168 , 465 – 476 ( 2005 ) . 72 . S . Mayor , R . G . Parton , J . G . Donaldson , Clathrin - independent pathways of endocytosis . Cold Spring Harb . Perspect . Biol . 6 , a016758 ( 2014 ) . 73 . D . P . Dyer , K . Pallas , L . Medina - Ruiz , F . Schuette , G . J . Wilson , G . J . Graham , CXCR2deficient mice display macrophage - dependent exaggerated acute inflammatory responses . Sci . Rep . 7 , 42681 ( 2017 ) . 74 . E . Bakos , C . A . Thaiss , M . P . Kramer , S . Cohen , L . Radomir , I . Orr , N . Kaushansky , A . Ben - Nun , S . Becker - Herman , I . Shachar , CCR2 regulates the immune response by modulating the interconversion and function of effector and regulatory T cells . J . Immunol . 198 , 4659 – 4671 ( 2017 ) . 75 . P . D . Doodes , Y . Cao , K . M . Hamel , Y . Wang , R . L . Rodeghero , T . Kobezda , A . Finnegan , CCR5 is involved in resolution of inflammation in proteoglycan - induced arthritis . Arthritis Rheum . 60 , 2945 – 2953 ( 2009 ) . 76 . A . Ortega - Gómez , M . Perretti , O . Soehnlein , Resolution of inflammation : An integrated view . EMBO Mol . Med . 5 , 661 – 674 ( 2013 ) . 77 . G . J . Graham , M . Locati , Regulation of the immune and inflammatory responses by the “ atypical ” chemokine receptor D6 . J . Pathol . 229 , 168 – 175 ( 2013 ) . 78 . M . Aswad , S . Assi , S . Schif - Zuck , A . Ariel , CCL5 promotes resolution - phase macrophage reprogramming in concert with the atypical chemokine receptor D6 and apoptotic polymorphonuclear cells . J . Immunol . 199 , 1393 – 1404 ( 2017 ) . 79 . M . Scarselli , J . G . Donaldson , Constitutive internalization of G protein - coupled receptors and G proteins via clathrin - independent endocytosis . J . Biol . Chem . 284 , 3577 – 3585 ( 2009 ) . 80 . M . M . Tu , H . A . Abdel - Hafiz , R . T . Jones , A . Jean , K . J . Hoff , J . E . Duex , A . Chauca - Diaz , J . C . Costello , G . M . Dancik , B . A . J . Tamburini , B . Czerniak , J . Kaye , D . Theodorescu , Inhi - bition of the CCL2 receptor , CCR2 , enhances tumor response to immune checkpoint therapy . Commun . Biol . 3 , 720 ( 2020 ) . 81 . I . Bot , N . V . Ortiz Zacarías , W . E . A . de Witte , H . de Vries , P . J . van Santbrink , D . van der Velden , M . J . Kröner , D . - J . van der Berg , D . Stamos , E . C . M . de Lange , J . Kuiper , A . P . IJzerman , L . H . Heitman , A novel CCR2 antagonist inhibits atherogenesis in apoE deficient mice by achieving high receptor occupancy . Sci . Rep . 7 , 52 ( 2017 ) . 82 . E . Pairo - Castineira , S . Clohisey , L . Klaric , A . D . Bretherick , K . Rawlik , D . Pasko , S . Walker , N . Parkinson , M . H . Fourman , C . D . Russell , J . Furniss , A . Richmond , E . Gountouna , N . Wrobel , D . Harrison , B . Wang , Y . Wu , A . Meynert , F . Griffiths , W . Oosthuyzen , A . Kousathanas , L . Moutsianas , Z . Yang , R . Zhai , C . Zheng , G . Grimes , R . Beale , J . Millar , B . Shih , S . Keating , M . Zechner , C . Haley , D . J . Porteous , C . Hayward , J . Yang , J . Knight , C . Summers , M . Shankar - Hari , P . Klenerman , L . Turtle , A . Ho , S . C . Moore , C . Hinds , P . Horby , A . Nichol , D . Maslove , L . Ling , D . McAuley , H . Montgomery , T . Walsh , A . C . Pereira , A . Renieri ; The GenOMICC Investigators ; The ISARIC4C Investigators ; The COVID - 19 Human Genetics Initiative ; 23andMe Investigators ; BRACOVID Investigators ; Gen - COVID Investigators , X . Shen , C . P . Ponting , A . Fawkes , A . Tenesa , M . Caulfield , R . Scott , K . Rowan , L . Murphy , P . J . M . Openshaw , M . G . Semple , A . Law , V . Vitart , J . F . Wilson , J . K . Baillie , Genetic mechanisms of critical illness in COVID - 19 . Nature 591 , 92 – 98 ( 2021 ) . 83 . K . Yumimoto , S . Sugiyama , K . Mimori , K . I . Nakayama , Potentials of C - C motif chemokine 2 - C - C chemokine receptor type 2 blockers including propagermanium as anticancer agents . Cancer Sci . 110 , 2090 – 2099 ( 2019 ) . Shroka et al . , Sci . Signal . 16 , eabo4314 ( 2023 ) 31 January 2023 14 of 15 S C I E N C E S I G N A L I N G | R E S E A R C H A R T I C L E 84 . Q . Liu , Y . Zhou , Z . Yang , The cytokine storm of severe influenza and development of immunomodulatory therapy . Cell . Mol . Immunol . 13 , 3 – 10 ( 2016 ) . 85 . D . deZeeuw , P . Bekker , E . Henkel , C . Hasslacher , I . Gouni - Berthold , H . Mehling , A . Potarca , V . Tesar , H . J . L . Heerspink , T . J . Schall ; CCX140 - BDiabetic NephropathyStudy Group , The effect of CCR2 inhibitor CCX140 - B on residual albuminuria in patients with type 2 dia - betes and nephropathy : A randomised trial . Lancet Diabetes Endocrinol . 3 , 687 – 696 ( 2015 ) . 86 . T . M . Nywening , A . Wang - Gillam , D . E . Sanford , B . A . Belt , R . Z . Panni , B . M . Cusworth , A . T . Toriola , R . K . Nieman , L . A . Worley , M . Yano , K . J . Fowler , A . C . Lockhart , R . Suresh , B . R . Tan , K . - H . Lim , R . C . Fields , S . M . Strasberg , W . G . Hawkins , D . G . DeNardo , S . P . Goedegebuure , D . C . Linehan , Targetingtumour - associatedmacrophageswithCCR2 inhibition in combination with FOLFIRINOX in patients with borderline resectable and locally advanced pancreatic cancer : A single - centre , open - label , dose - finding , non - randomised , phase 1b trial . Lancet Oncol . 17 , 651 – 662 ( 2016 ) . 87 . M . Xu , Y . Wang , R . Xia , Y . Wei , X . Wei , Role of the CCL2 - CCR2 signalling axis in cancer : Mechanisms and therapeutic targeting . Cell Prolif . 54 , e13115 ( 2021 ) . 88 . J . Gilbert , J . Lekstrom - Himes , D . Donaldson , Y . Lee , M . Hu , J . Xu , T . Wyant , M . Davidson ; MLN1202 Study Group , Effect of CC chemokine receptor 2 CCR2 blockade on serum C - reactive protein in individuals at atherosclerotic risk and with a single nucleotide poly - morphism of the monocyte chemoattractant protein - 1 promoter region . Am . J . Cardiol . 107 , 906 – 911 ( 2011 ) . 89 . C . E . Vergunst , D . M . Gerlag , L . Lopatinskaya , L . Klareskog , M . D . Smith , F . van den Bosch , H . J . Dinant , Y . Lee , T . Wyant , E . W . Jacobson , D . Baeten , P . P . Tak , Modulation of CCR2 in rheumatoid arthritis : A double - blind , randomized , placebo - controlled clinical trial . Ar - thritis Rheum . 58 , 1931 – 1939 ( 2008 ) . 90 . R . J . Aiello , B . D . Perry , P . - A . Bourassa , A . Robertson , W . Weng , D . R . Knight , A . H . Smith , K . S . Frederick , A . Kalgutkar , R . P . Gladue , CCR2 receptorblockadealtersbloodmonocyte subpopulations but does not affect atherosclerotic lesions in apoE ( − / − ) mice . Athero - sclerosis 208 , 370 – 375 ( 2010 ) . 91 . Y . Wang , L . Cui , W . Gonsiorek , S . - H . Min , G . Anilkumar , S . Rosenblum , J . Kozlowski , D . Lundell , J . S . Fine , E . P . Grant , CCR2 and CXCR4 regulate peripheral blood monocyte pharmacodynamics and link to efficacy in experimental autoimmune encephalomyelitis . J . Inflamm . 6 , 32 ( 2009 ) . 92 . N . Okashah , Q . Wan , S . Ghosh , M . Sandhu , A . Inoue , N . Vaidehi , N . A . Lambert , Variable G protein determinants of GPCR coupling selectivity . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . U . S . A . 116 , 12054 – 12059 ( 2019 ) . 93 . M . O ’ Hayre , K . Eichel , S . Avino , X . Zhao , D . J . Steffen , X . Feng , K . Kawakami , J . Aoki , K . Messer , R . Sunahara , A . Inoue , M . von Zastrow , J . S . Gutkind , Genetic evidence that β - arrestins are dispensable for the initiation of β 2 - adrenergic receptor signaling to ERK . Sci . Signal . 10 , eaal3395 ( 2017 ) . 94 . S . Pandey , P . Kumari , M . Baidya , R . Kise , Y . Cao , H . Dwivedi - Agnihotri , R . Banerjee , X . X . Li , C . S . Cui , J . D . Lee , K . Kawakami , J . Maharana , A . Ranjan , M . Chaturvedi , G . D . Jhingan , S . A . Laporte , T . M . Woodruff , A . Inoue , A . K . Shukla , Intrinsic bias at non - canonical , β - arrestin - coupled seven transmembrane receptors . Mol . Cell 81 , 4605 – 4621 . e11 ( 2021 ) . 95 . N . E . Sanjana , O . Shalem , F . Zhang , Improved vectors and genome - wide libraries for CRISPR screening . Nat . Methods 11 , 783 – 784 ( 2014 ) . 96 . K . Labun , T . G . Montague , M . Krause , Y . N . TorresCleuren , H . Tjeldnes , E . Valen , CHOPCHOP v3 : Expanding the CRISPR web toolbox beyond genome editing . Nucleic Acids Res . 47 , W171 – W174 ( 2019 ) . 97 . E . Campeau , V . E . Ruhl , F . Rodier , C . L . Smith , B . L . Rahmberg , J . O . Fuss , J . Campisi , P . Yaswen , P . K . Cooper , P . D . Kaufman , Aversatile viral system for expression and de - pletion of proteins in mammalian cells . PLOS ONE 4 , e6529 ( 2009 ) . 98 . Q . Sun , W . Westphal , K . N . Wong , I . Tan , Q . Zhong , Rubiconcontrolsendosomematuration as a Rab7 effector . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . U . S . A . 107 , 19338 – 19343 ( 2010 ) . 99 . A . Levoye , J . M . Zwier , A . Jaracz - Ros , L . Klipfel , M . Cottet , D . Maurel , S . Bdioui , K . Balabanian , L . Prézeau , E . Trinquet , T . Durroux , F . Bachelerie , A broad G protein - coupled receptor internalization assay that combines SNAP - tag labeling , diffusion - enhanced resonance energy transfer , and a highlyemissiveterbium cryptate . Front . Endocrinol . 6 , 167 ( 2015 ) . 100 . F . Ango , S . Albani - Torregrossa , C . Joly , D . Robbe , J . M . Michel , J . P . Pin , J . Bockaert , L . Fagni , A simple method to transfer plasmid DNA into neuronal primary cultures : Functional expression of the mGlu5 receptor in cerebellar granule cells . Neuropharmacology 38 , 793 – 803 ( 1999 ) . 101 . T . Sakuma , A . Nishikawa , S . Kume , K . Chayama , T . Yamamoto , Multiplex genome engi - neering in human cells using all - in - one CRISPR / Cas9 vector system . Sci . Rep . 4 , 5400 ( 2014 ) . 102 . T . Cermak , E . L . Doyle , M . Christian , L . Wang , Y . Zhang , C . Schmidt , J . A . Baller , N . V . Somia , A . J . Bogdanove , D . F . Voytas , Efficient design and assembly of custom TALEN and other TAL effector - based constructs for DNA targeting . Nucleic Acids Res . 39 , e82 ( 2011 ) . 103 . M . R . Dores , M . M . Paing , H . Lin , W . A . Montagne , A . Marchese , J . Trejo , AP - 3regulatesPAR1 ubiquitin - independent MVB / lysosomal sorting via an ALIX - mediated pathway . Mol . Biol . Cell 23 , 3612 – 3623 ( 2012 ) . Acknowledgments : WeacknowledgeM . Bouvier ( UniversitédeMontréal ) , D . Legler ( University of Konstanz ) , M . Gustavsson ( UC San Diego , currently University of Copenhagen ) , A . Levoye , ( Universityof Paris ) , A . Inoue ( Tohoku University ) , and B . Moepps ( Ulm University ) for the BRET reagents , plasmidconstructs , celllines , andCCL2 - mCherryusedinourstudies . WethankM . Pu of the UC San Diego Moores Cancer Center Biostatistics Shared Resource for critical review of and assistance with the statistical analyses in the manuscript . We also thank E . Griffis and the Nikon Imaging Center at UC San Diego for technical support and advice . Funding : This work was supported by the National Institute of General Medical Sciences NIH R01 grant GM136202 ( toT . M . H . andI . K ) , National Instituteof AllergyandInfectiousDiseasesNIHR21 grantAI149369 ( to I . K . ) , and National Institute of General Medical Sciences , Cellular and Molecular Pharmacology Training Grant T32 GM007752 ( to T . M . S . ) . Author contributions : Conceptualization : C . L . S . andT . M . H . Methodology : T . M . S . , C . L . S . , andT . M . H . Investigation : T . M . S . Visualization : T . M . S . Funding acquisition : T . M . S . , I . K . , and T . M . H . Supervision : C . L . S . and T . M . H . Writing — original draft : T . M . S . and T . M . H . Writing — reviewandediting : All authors . Competing interests : T . M . H . isacofounderofLassogenInc . andservesontheScientificAdvisoryBoardsof Artica , Abilita Bio , and Abalone Bio . The terms of these arrangement have been reviewed and approved by the University of California , San Diego in accordance with its conflict of interest policies . Theotherauthorsdeclarethattheyhavenocompetinginterests . Dataandmaterials availability : All dataneeded to evaluate theconclusions in the paperarepresent in the paper or the Supplementary Materials . Submitted 17 March 2022 Accepted 11 January 2023 Published 31 January 2023 10 . 1126 / scisignal . abo4314 Shroka et al . , Sci . Signal . 16 , eabo4314 ( 2023 ) 31 January 2023 15 of 15 S C I E N C E S I G N A L I N G | R E S E A R C H A R T I C L E