1 Scientific RepoRtS | ( 2020 ) 10 : 5039 | https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1038 / s41598 - 020 - 60900 - y www . nature . com / scientificreports Artificial microbiome heterogeneity spurs six practical action themes and examples to increase study power - driven reproducibility Abigail R . Basson 1 , 2 , Alexandria LaSalla 1 , Gretchen Lam 1 , Danielle Kulpins 1 , Erika L . Moen 3 , Mark S . Su nd ru d 4 , Jun Mi yo s h i 5 , Sanja i l i c 6 , Betty R . t he ri a u l t 7 , Fabio c om i nell i 1 , 2 , 8 , 9 & Alexander Rodriguez - Palacios 1 , 2 , 8 , 9 * With > 70 , 000 yearly publications using mouse data , mouse models represent the best engrained research system to address numerous biological questions across all fields of science . Concerns of poor study and microbiome reproducibility also abound in the literature . Despite the well - known , negative - effects of data clustering on interpretation and study power , it is unclear why scientists often house > 4 mice / cage during experiments , instead of ≤ 2 . We hypothesized that this high animal - cage - density practice abounds in published literature because more mice / cage could be perceived as a strategy to reduce housing costs . Among other sources of ‘artificial’ confounding , including cyclical oscillations of the ‘dirty - cage / excrement microbiome’ , we ranked by priority the heterogeneity of modern husbandry practices / perceptions across three professional organizations that we surveyed in the USA . Data integration ( scoping - reviews , professional - surveys , expert - opinion , and ‘implementability - score - statistics’ ) identified Six - Actionable Recommendation Themes ( SART ) as a framework to re - launch emerging protocols and intuitive statistical strategies to use / increase study power . ‘Cost - vs - science’ discordance was a major aspect explaining heterogeneity , and scientists’ reluctance to change . With a ‘housing - density cost - calculator - simulator’ and fully - annotated statistical examples / code , this themed - framework streamlines the rapid analysis of cage - clustered - data and promotes the use of ‘study - power - statistics’ to self - monitor the success / reproducibility of basic and translational research . Examples are provided to help scientists document analysis for study power - based sample size estimations using preclinical mouse data to support translational clinical trials , as requested in NIH / similar grants or publications . According to a U . S . National Science Foundation subcommittee on science replicability , “reproducibility refers to the ability of a researcher to duplicate the results of a prior study using the same materials as were used by the original investigator . That is , a second researcher might use the same raw data to build the same analysis files and implement the same statistical analysis in an attempt to yield the same results” 1 . More recently , reproducibility as a scientific concept has been proposed to be divided into three types : methods reproducibility , results reproducibil - ity , and inferential reproducibility . While these terms are applied predominantly to the biomedical field , they are not without utility across other scientific fields , each of which are governed by their own internalized needs and criteria for “proof” 2 , 3 . With 73 , 363 PubMed publications using ‘mice’ in 2018 , laboratory mice represent a critical 1 Division of Gastroenterology & Liver Diseases , Case Western Reserve University School of Medicine , Cleveland , OH , USA . 2 Digestive Health Research Institute , University Hospitals Cleveland Medical Center , Cleveland , OH , USA . 3 Department of Biomedical Data Science , Geisel School of Medicine , The Dartmouth Institute for Health Policy and Clinical Practice , Lebanon , NH , USA . 4 Department of Immunology and Microbiology , The Scripps Research Institute , Jupiter , FL , USA . 5 Department of Gastroenterology and Hepatology , Kyorin University School of Medicine , Tokyo , Japan . 6 Department of Human Sciences and Nutrition , The Ohio State University , Columbus , OH , USA . 7 Department of Surgery , University of Chicago , Chicago , IL , USA . 8 Mouse Models Core , Silvio O’Conte Cleveland Digestive Diseases Research Core Center , Cleveland , OH , USA . 9 Germ - free and Gut Microbiome Core , Digestive Health Research Institute , Case Western Reserve University , Cleveland , OH , USA . * email : axr503 @ case . edu open 2 Scientific RepoRtS | ( 2020 ) 10 : 5039 | https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1038 / s41598 - 020 - 60900 - y www . nature . com / scientificreports www . nature . com / scientificreports / component to understanding human biology in a variety of fields , from inflammatory bowel diseases , neurology , and cancer , to microbiome and nutrition . In the current era of microbiome research , multiple factors are becom - ing evident as sources for confounding . Integrating microbiome science into animal research necessitates that experiments control for confounding derived from emerging artificial factors , especially the ‘cage microbiome’ 4 – 8 , which we recently discovered causes ‘cyclical microbiome bias’ due to the periodic accumulation of excrements in mouse cages 4 . Understanding the factors that contribute to research heterogeneity will address this need . Primary causes of artificial analytical heterogeneity and low study power include putting many mice into one cage , having insufficient cages per group , and using incorrect statistical methods assuming that groups of mice in a cage are independent , and not cage - clustered data . In statistics and science , heterogeneity is a concept that describes the uniformity and variability of an organ - ism , a surface , or the distribution of data . Sources of study heterogeneity can be natural or artificial . Artificial heterogeneity refers to study variance introduced by humans or anthropological factors , including animal hus - bandry and the ‘cage microbiome’ , which non - uniformly affect mouse biology . Fundamental to hypothesis testing , data heterogeneity determines which statistical methods are needed to decisively quantify if two independent naturally - heterogeneous groups , truly differ . To appropriately select statistics controlling for cage - clustered data , scientists must be aware of study details , namely , which data points belong to which mice and respective cages in a dataset or published figure . Unfortunately , these details are often omitted during analysis and in publications , and misconceptions on heterogeneity , husbandry and analysis may exist among leading research organizations . To exemplify that scientists are under pressure and need recommendations to prevent bias and improve ani - mal research quality and reproducibility , the National Institutes of Health ( NIH ) , a major federal funding institu - tion in the US implemented a mandate on ‘Rigor and Reproducibility’ in 2014 9 – 11 . The mandate assures funding is constrained unless researchers prove that they consistently yield reproducible results . Our report seeks to illus - trate concepts on study power and intra - class correlation among mice in a cage to support a framework based on Six Actionable Recommendation Themes ( SART ) to increase study reproducibility . Concerning study power , two concepts of expected validity exist : internal and external validity . Both refer to the statistical expectation that results from a given study are true , reproducible , and not by random chance if a study is repeated locally ( internal ) , or in another setting ( external validity ) 12 – 14 . Intrinsically , experiments have high internal validity if appropriate statistics and power are applied , and if data clusters and confounders are avoided . Studies with experiments in different settings ( microbiota , mouse lines ) are more likely replicable ; but experimental reproducibility requires appropriate power . Validity thus depends on the study power , which is the probability of not making a type II error ( fail to reject false null hypotheses in favor of true alternatives ) . Power is a statistical measure from 0 to 1 , with 1 indicating highly - powered studies . While power 0 . 5 yields statistically haphazard results ( ‘tossing a coin’ ) , powers > 0 . 8 indicate optimal chance for replication . Power increases with large sample sizes ( more mice ) , but decreases with clustering of animals in cages by introducing a ‘cage effect’ , and intra - class correlation coefficient ( ICC ) complexity to the analysis of cage - clustered data . The negative impact of cage clustering is maximum when all mice of a study group are housed in one cage because it is impossible to differentiate ‘real’ from ‘confounding cage effects’ . The negative impact of clustering is reduced when more cages , with fewer mice per cage , are used per group ( ‘less mice - per - cage is more’ ) . Despite the 5 - year - old NIH mandate , the public and federal perception on mouse research reproducibility is often negative 10 , 15 . However , to our knowledge , there are no scientific studies ( i ) confirming that research repro - ducibility is an ongoing issue , ( ii ) defining what role perceptions and academic husbandry practices play on reproducibility , or ( iii ) predicting the implementability of potential solutions to increase study power , if proposed . To refine our understanding on research heterogeneity , study power and reproducibility , our study objectives were to , ( i ) verify research methods heterogeneity in current literature , ( ii ) quantify current perceptions on mouse husbandry and microbiome using a survey , ( iii ) identify potential areas of solution using a Delphi - based strat - egy , and ( iv ) to quantify the potential implementability of an evidence - based framework of six recommendation themes to cost - effectively increase study power using a grading scale based on perceived clarity , benefit and recommendability . As an accompanying practical set of tools , we also created ( i ) a simple housing density cost calculator in Excel that can be used by scientists to determine whether less animals per cage , or more cages per experimental group suit research budgets , and ( ii ) provide graphical examples and a fully annotated statistical code to com - pute and report analysis of cage - clustered data , and power , for both single - and clustered - caged mice . Post - hoc study power calculations were deemed cumbersome and non - informative in the past 16 , but more sophisticated user - friendly software now provides emerging methods to compute such important statistics 17 , which we provide for investigators to infer and objectively self - monitor power and reproducibility across mouse research at large . Results Husbandry heterogeneity and cage - cluster effects are pervasive in current literature . To iden - tify husbandry factors capable of influencing gut microbiome and study reproducibility , especially mice per cage ( MxCg ) and mice per group ( MxGr ) , we reviewed 172 recent studies selected from PubMed searching ‘diet - mi - crobiome - mice’ ( Fig . 1 ) . From 865 articles published over the past 10 years , 93 % were published in the last five years ( Supplementary Materials ) . Of concern , most studies failed to report in sufficient detail aspects of animal husbandry ( e . g . , cage density / sanitation frequency , diet sterility ) making the study of cage - effects and confound - ing challenging to assess ( Fig . 2 , Supplementary Fig . 1 ) . While 30 % of the studies originated in China and USA ( n = 52 ) , it is remarkable that almost 60 % of studies across all countries failed to report animal density ( i . e . , MxCg ) . Of the 72 studies that reported density , 30 % ( 22 / 72 ) have highly cage - clustered data ; reporting experiments with 5 MxCg . Slightly encouraging , 18 % of studies housed mice at lower densities of ≤ 2 MxCg , which is ideal because it increases study power by decreasing cage effects ( Fig . 2a – c ) . Although low animal den - sity could be perceived as an expensive practice , density practices did not correlate with gross domestic product 3 Scientific RepoRtS | ( 2020 ) 10 : 5039 | https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1038 / s41598 - 020 - 60900 - y www . nature . com / scientificreports www . nature . com / scientificreports / ( GDP ; yearly US $ / capita ) implying that national wealth is not a driving factor for housing mice individually during experiments . Irrespective of wealth , it was reassuring to identify scientists who publish studies stating that they exclu - sively housed mice individually in Belgium , Taiwan , Italy , Finland , Korea , France , Brazil and Japan 18 – 48 ( Fig . 2d , e ) . Several husbandry aspects contribute to cage - cage variations and cause cage effects ( see Supplementary Tables 1 and 2 ) . Therefore , it is difficult to substantiate whether the significant effects identified in any given study , where all mice in a group were housed in one single cage ( decreasing study power ) , were truthfully due to the experimental intervention and not from the random distribution of cage effects in a laboratory ( Fig . 2f ) . To quantify the potential for ‘cage effect confounding’ , we used the ‘total number of cages per group’ ( TCgxGr ) as a quantitative estimate ( see Methods ) to determine the prevalence of studies that conducted experiments using only a few cages per group . Estimates indicate that studies used on average 4 . 4 ± 3 . 2 TCgxGr ( notice large SD ) , of which 39 % ( 28 / 72 ) generated data derived from only 1 – 2 TCgxGr ( Supplementary Fig . 1 ) . Given that cage clusters decrease study power 49 – 51 , experiments conducted with low animal density , ideally one MxCg , and the reporting of TCgxGr deserves to be highlighted as an exemplary habit . Despite available reporting guidelines 52 , data illustrates that inadequate reporting of methodological details in published literature continues in 2019 , diminishing the ability to replicate studies . To complement guidelines , we propose to con - sider using a standard verbatim paragraph - style format to unify reporting and facilitate future meta - analyses ( see below Recommendation Theme on ‘Reporting’ ) . Expertise differences across scientific organizations surveyed . To further advance our understand - ing of husbandry heterogeneity , we applied an online survey to academicians ( Supplementary Fig . 2 ) . After con - tacting over 2000 professionals , a total of 166 participants started the online survey . One - hundred and sixty - three ( 97 % ) surveys were completed and used for analysis . The majority of respondents were from USA ( 133 ; 81 % , 95 % CI = 74 . 3 , 87 . 6 ) and participants reflected individuals with leading roles in science ( Assistant Professors , Professors , Veterinarians ) within the DDRCC , AALAS and GNOTOBIOTIC organizations ( see Methods ) . The GNOTOBIOTIC respondent set had a smaller number of faculty / veterinary directors or managers ( vs . Postdocs ) compared to the DDRCC group ( p = 0 . 087 , 61 . 4 % vs . 78 . 8 % , Odds ratio [ OR ] = 2 . 15 95 % CI = 0 . 82 , 5 . 7 ) but included slightly more participants with access to germ - free ( GF ) animals compared to DDRCC ( p = 0 . 083 , 95 . 5 % vs . 84 . 6 % , OR = 3 . 82 , 95 % CI = 0 . 69 , 38 . 5 , Fig . 3a , b ) . Multi - and single - cage GF isolators ( used as a proxy for state - of - the - art equipment and knowledge ) were most frequently used as a GF - caging system among those Figure 1 . Study design to understand artificial heterogeneity in mouse microbiome research and a ‘Concept Map of Six Actionable Recommendation Themes’ to facilitate , increase , and promote the use of study power statistics to self - monitor the quality of research . 4 Scientific RepoRtS | ( 2020 ) 10 : 5039 | https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1038 / s41598 - 020 - 60900 - y www . nature . com / scientificreports www . nature . com / scientificreports / with GF facility access . Collectively , demographic analysis indicates that although statistically different , all groups had comparable levels of expertise , access to state - of - the - art facilities and knowledge ( note p - values and wide 95 % CIs ; see Fig . 3c , d ) which is important to inferring that the perceptions acquired herein are relevant to current research . Scientific organizations rank similarly 15 husbandry factors that affect the mouse microbi - ome . To determine whether differences in knowledge / practices or perceptions on animal husbandry exist due to the professional nature of each organization , we asked participants to rank , from 1 to 5 ( least to most important ) , how important each of 15 husbandry factors contribute to variability in mouse research ( “ Rank how important you believe each of the following 15 aspects contribute to microbiome research variability ) ” . Using ‘ diet Figure 2 . Literature on ‘diet , gut microbiome & mice’ illustrates ongoing animal density problematics . Published methodologies illustrate variability in husbandry and inconsistent animal density across studies as a major source of cluster - confounding . ( a ) Schematic representation of factors screened from the methods and results section in peer - reviewed publications . ( b ) Distribution of studies that did and did not report animal density . Pie chart shows that most studies ( 58 % ) do not report how many animals were housed per cage . ( c ) Ranking shows MxCg as reported by the number of studies per country based on the number of studies reporting animal density ( 78 of 172 reported ) . Note that 15 % of reviewed studies reported exclusively housing 1 MxCg ( 27 of 172 total studies ) . ( d ) Correlation between number of MxCg reported by reviewed studies and their representative GDP US $ / capita . Note that the country’s GDP does not correlate with number of MxCg suggesting experimental animal density practices are not related to wealth of a country . ( e ) Average MxCg used in experiments represented by country . ( f ) Summary of studies that reported cage change / sanitation frequency , bedding material and diet sterility ( including method for diet sterilization ; autoclaving , irradiation & dose used ) . Note that more studies reported ‘cage type’ ( e . g . , plastic flexible film , metal wired , Plexiglas , etc . ) than those which reported ‘sterility of diet’ ( 25 % vs 21 % ) . Only one study reported ‘time of fecal collection’ ( see complementary data in Supplementary Fig . 1 ) . 5 Scientific RepoRtS | ( 2020 ) 10 : 5039 | https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1038 / s41598 - 020 - 60900 - y www . nature . com / scientificreports www . nature . com / scientificreports / composition ’ as a positive control ( as diet affects gut microbes ) , we found that all groups of professionals ranked each parameter similarly ( mean of ranks for all participants across factors , Kruskal - Wallis p > 0 . 05 ) . Except for ‘diet composition’ , ranked 1 st as ‘very important’ by the majority of respondents ( > 75 % ) , there was marked heterogeneity in response patterns at the individual level ( Fig . 4a ) . Importantly , perceptions of individ - uals did not cluster within their professional affiliation , suggesting that the organizations surveyed ‘think’ alike . Instead , we identified ‘patterns of beliefs / perception’ in academia that reflect ‘types of individuals’ , with a given set of research practices in mind ( beliefs ) , that differs from their peers within their organization ( Fig . 4a – c ) . For example , although ‘ coprophagia’ ranked 4 th overall as a ‘very important’ factor to microbiome variability , fewer than 40 % of participants ranked ‘number of animals per cage’ ( ranked 8 th ) and ‘cage change frequency’ ( ranked 9 th ) as aspects ‘very important’ , even though coprophagia contributes to microbiome confounding depending on the extent of ‘cage bedding soiledness’ ( ranked 12 th ) , which depends on ‘number of animals per cage’ and ‘cage change frequency’ . In the studies reviewed , aspects deemed ‘very important’ by survey respondents were not always reported , while ‘less important’ factors were frequently reported . This discordant pattern of thinking - reporting was fur - ther illustrated by individual perceptions on ‘ bedding type’ ( e . g . , corncob vs . non - edible wood shavings ) , ‘ cage ventilation’ type , ‘ room temperature’ and ‘room humidity ’ , all of which contribute to cyclical bedding microbial overgrowth ( which selects for aerobic microbes in cage bedding ) and thus cage - cage microbiome variability 4 , 5 , 51 . Beliefs agreement was identified between ‘ diet composition’ , ‘diet sterility’ and ‘water source’ ( top 3 ranked factors ) illustrating that dietary intake is perceived as a collective of all aspects consumed orally , including the microbial content of diet ( Fig . 4d ) . Most respondents do not think ‘cage type’ ( ranked 14 th ) is important . The majority of reviewed studies ( Fig . 2f ) , however , reported cage type in their methods , while the ‘very important’ aspect of ‘diet sterility’ was described in only 22 % of studies reviewed . Of concern , the ‘time of year / season’ was the least impor - tant aspect believed to influence the microbiome ( ranked 15 th ) ; however , we have shown that cross - sectional metagenome experiments conducted in separate seasons produce contrasting results when assessing the role of Helicobacter spp . in spontaneous Crohn’s disease - like ileitis in mice 6 , implying that repeating experiments across seasons may yield unreproducible results over time . As a recommendation , repeating experiments to build composite datasets , which often occurs across seasons , should be conducted with caution unless we understand the effect of season on the microbiome and animal phys - iology ( see Recommendation Theme on ‘Repeating Experiments’ ) . Figure 3 . Demographics of surveyed professionals on ‘animal husbandry in microbiome research’ . ( a ) Pooled distribution of job descriptions categorized based on information provided by all respondents . ( b ) Distribution of job descriptions by the three largest groups of participants . Notice that the DDRCC group has the largest proportion of faculty ( from instructors to full professors ) participating in the survey , but all groups were composed of academicians with comparable job descriptions . More veterinarians and project leaders were observed in the AALAS and Gnotobiotic listserv groups . ( c ) Distribution of participants who reported having current access to GF animals or facilities ( outer pie circle chart ) and that would like to have access , or continue working with , GF animals / facilities ( inner circle chart ) . Notice that the majority of participants are expected to have high levels of expertise and understanding of GF mouse facilities , husbandry , and microbiome knowledge . ‘ * ’ and ‘ * * ’ indicate subgroups who would like ( or not ) to change their current GF research trends . ( d ) Distribution of respondents who did or did not know about the presence of GF facilities in their institution , and the types of caging system used . This question contextualizes the knowledge of respondents in terms of GF equipment / systems . 6 Scientific RepoRtS | ( 2020 ) 10 : 5039 | https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1038 / s41598 - 020 - 60900 - y www . nature . com / scientificreports www . nature . com / scientificreports / Diet - dwelling microbes and homogenizing cage microbiome variability before experiments . With sub - sterilizing radiation protocols , diets have variable microbial composition even within the same batch 4 , 5 , 53 . Survey questions interrogated basic knowledge relevant to irradiation and the degree of diet steril - ity . When asked whether standard irradiated commercial diets for mice were sterile , 67 % answered that such diets were ‘sterile’ . Although diet sterility depends on the irradiation dose , in the case of commercial diets , com - panies employ a single , standard dose , insufficient to achieve GF - grade sterility . Of note , no studies reviewed reported irradiation dose when reporting diet sterility . Thus , unless certified as sterile , diets used during mice rearing and experiments expectedly contain potentially confounding microbes , primarily spore - formers and gamma - radiation resistant bacteria and fungi 54 . The random distribution of diet - dwelling microbes , Figure 4 . Ranking of 15 factors believed to cause microbiome research variability is reproducible . ( a ) Heat map shows respondent perceptions on the importance of various animal husbandry factors in microbiome research variability . The heterogeneity across respondent perceptions illustrates that individual thinking is not related to institutional affiliation . ( b ) Boxplots show raw data ranking distribution of respondent perceptions on the importance of various animal husbandry practices . ( c ) Heat map shows the overall ranking of variables according to institution . ( d ) Stacked bar graphs show overall ranking of variables . Note that diet composition , sterility and drinking water were identified by > 50 % of individuals as ‘very important’ contributors to microbiome research . Note the discordance between coprophagia ( ranked 4 th ) to that of bedding soiledness ( ‘dirtiness’ ) and the importance of cage change frequency . 7 Scientific RepoRtS | ( 2020 ) 10 : 5039 | https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1038 / s41598 - 020 - 60900 - y www . nature . com / scientificreports www . nature . com / scientificreports / bedding - dependent microbial overgrowth and other cage effect factors are sources of microbiome divergence 55 and bias that accumulate across cages as animals are reared and aged before , or during experimentation . Since there is no consensus on one single approach to control for cage - cage microbiome variability before using mice in experiments , we surveyed which methods are used by scientists 55 – 58 . Despite evidence that co - housed mice have varying microbiome patterns 59 , 60 and the recent evidence of cyclical bedding - dependent bias 4 , the most popular combination of methods used to control for cage microbiome variability was ‘cohousing’ , ‘ use of mixed bedding’ and ‘increasing the number of animals per cage’ ( Fig . 5a ) . The least frequently used method was ‘fecal homogenization’ ( animals exposed to a composite of feces harvested from all mice ) , yet this method is arguably the simplest and most effective in homogenizing cage microbiome variability ( see Recommendation Themes on ‘Cage - cage microbiome variability BEFORE experiments’ and ‘Dirty cages and time - of - sampling DURING experiments’ ) . Figure 5 . Survey responses for animal husbandry practices and cost . ( a ) Venn diagram ( n of respondents ) on ‘popularity’ of various methods used to control cage - cage microbiome variability prior to the experiment . Note ‘fecal homogenization protocol’ compared to others . ( b ) Perception contrast between the ‘financial’ and the ‘scientific’ preference when asked what animal density was preferable for a 1 - month dietary experiment . Of interest , 88 % and 35 % of the survey respondents believe that 5 MxCg ( i . e . group housing of mice ) is financially and scientifically preferable than housing fewer animals per cage . ( c ) Stacked bar plots show ‘cage change frequency’ . Most facilities change cages weekly or every 2 weeks . ( d ) ‘Water - type’ in facilities ( 8 . 6 % ‘did not know’ ) shown as the raw data ( right ) and as a percentage of 100 ( left ) . Note wide array of water sources , including untreated tap , autoclaved tap , acidified tap and reverse osmosis , all of which affect the gut microbiota 86 . ( e ) Cost analysis example using a customizable spreadsheet calculator ( Supplementary File 1 ) . Notice the power function correlation between ‘number of cages desired’ in a study and ‘animal density’ with the linear costs of husbandry due to payment of ‘basic costs’ in an Animal Resource Center ( ARC ) and the presumed costs of cage handling by a technician paid by the Principal Investigator ( PI ) . 8 Scientific RepoRtS | ( 2020 ) 10 : 5039 | https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1038 / s41598 - 020 - 60900 - y www . nature . com / scientificreports www . nature . com / scientificreports / Clusters and scientific - financial discordance when housing five mice in a study of five mice . To interrogate whether cost is a contributing factor to animal housing density practices , we posed two identical multiple - choice questions that differed only by the assumption of financial vs . scientific preference . The first survey question asked , “ In a 1 - month diet experiment with 5 mice / group , which housing option do you believe is FINANCIALLY preferable ? while the second question replaced the capitalized word ‘ FINANCIALLY’ with ‘SCIENTIFICALLY’ . The three possible answers were , using ‘5 cages’ , ‘2 cages’ , or ‘1 cage’ . The majority of par - ticipants believe it is both scientifically ( 54 % ) and financially ( 95 . 7 % ) preferable to maintain cages with higher animal density ( 2 – 3 or 5 MxCg ) , which , of concern , introduces cage cluster effects 61 . Thus , studies with 5 mice are underpowered as they consist of only 1 – 2 cages ; commonly seen in studies reviewed . Intriguingly , while 45 % ( 95 % CI = 37 . 3 , 52 . 6 ) of survey respondents think that it is more scientifically appropriate to have 1 MxCg , the same individuals do not think that this practice is economically feasible ( Fig . 5b ) , which reflects current literature where only 15 % ( 27 of 172 total , 95 % CI = 9 . 6 , 20 . 3 ) of studies reported exclusively housing 1 MxCg ( see Fig . 2c ) . Considering that the majority of respondents’ facilities implement weekly or every 2 weeks ‘ cage change’ pro - tocols , with a wide array of drinking water sources across facilities ( Fig . 5c ) , our data suggests that cage change / sanitation ( via ‘cage microbiome’ ) ( Fig . 5d ) , and animal density could contribute greatly to artificial heterogeneity in mouse research . To address concerns of cost regarding the number of MxCg in context to ‘ cage change frequency’ , we devel - oped an Excel spreadsheet ‘Housing Density Cost Comparison Calculator’ . Graphical cost - effectiveness analy - sis illustrates that a higher number of MxCg requires more frequent cage changes ( Fig . 5e , available as https : / / figshare . com / s / 377fa429bd8cc405fc1b ) . Overall , costs increase when comparing 5 vs . 1 MxCg linearly over a continuum of cage cluster possibilities , therefore conducting highly clustered underpowered studies is not neces - sarily cheaper . When considering response patterns regarding financial vs . scientific feasibility of animal housing density , we show that the heterogeneity in respondents’ perceptions is not attributed to institution but instead to professional organization ( Fig . 6a – f ) . Although scientists could argue that statistical methods exist to control for clustering 61 , our analysis of lit - erature indicates that scientists do not implement cluster - statistics . Since cluster - statistics are not trivial to implement ( e . g . , R Statistical Package ‘clusterPower’ 62 ) , we provide technical guidelines on how to account for unbalanced MxCg designs , ICC and low sample size using clustered - data statistics ( see Recommendation Themes 5 – 6 on ‘Animal density , clusters , ICC , and power’ ) . Identification of potential areas of solution ( themes ) using a Delphi - based strategy . To enable a practical solution to the aspects of husbandry and reporting heterogeneity , highlighted in the results section above and described below as practical ‘action themes’ , a multi - theme actionable framework was constructed for statistical validation of implementability ( Figs . 1 and 7a ) . To statistically determine if the ‘action themes’ were ( i ) clearly drafted as a sentence ( sentence clarity ) , ( ii ) had the potential benefit to improve power and reproducibility ( potential benefit ) , and ( iii ) were deemed appropriate for readers to recommend to others ( would you recommend it ? ) , we asked active academicians and scientists conducting research to grade each recommendation and provide comments to create an ‘implementability grade metric’ ( Supplementary Table 3 ) . To objectively quantify whether the obtained implementability grades were significantly different from ran - dom responses , we compared the distribution of grades to that of a random generator of 30 numbers , from 1 – 10 . A grade of 1 indicates poor , while a grade 10 means outstanding . Of great practical value for the multi - theme framework proposed , analysis indicated that , collectively , all recommendations are very likely to be implemented by scientists ( mean grade , 8 . 02 ± 1 . 4 vs . random grade 5 . 0 , n = 20 , t - test p < 0 . 001 ; Fig . 7b ) . The wording of the post - expert - assessed action theme recommendations here described as the final result of the Delphi - based study ( underlined with ‘ quotation marks and italics ’ ) reflect the improved version of the expert - graded sentences and comments received during the grading phase . See examples of the representative comments provided by the participants in Supplementary Table 4 , and a synthesis of the husbandry concepts used to integrate the survey data with peer - reviewed literature supporting the framework in Supplementary Table 5 . The implementability statistics , rationale ( extended version in Supplementary Table 6 ) , and goals for each sug - gested recommendation theme are described below . Action theme 1 on ‘Reporting of diet and husbandry factors’ . ‘Use of a paragraph - style template to report detailed diet and husbandry factors consistently and reproducibly ( e . g . , macronutrient , diet sterility ) , publishable as accom - panying “Supplementary Materials” . See an example of a reporting template in Supplementary Table 7 . The goal of this theme would be to minimize reporting with insufficient detail or details that are open to interpre - tation , yet still suffice standard reporting checklists / guidelines 52 . The expert - prediction for implementation is significantly high ( grade , 8 . 7 ± 1 . 2 with 99 . 5 % probability of being significantly higher than random in 96 . 7 % [ n = 29 ] of t - test analysis conducted for 30 simulations with 30 random numbers , mean t - test p = 0 . 005 ± 0 . 012 ) . Note that ‘text - recycling’ is currently allowed ( when clearly justified ) based on current code of ethics in scientific publishing 63 – 65 . Action theme 2 on ‘Cage - cage microbiome variability BEFORE mouse experiments’ . ‘Use of a fecal matter - based microbiome normalization protocol ( e . g . , by orally administering a homogenous pool of feces from a group of mice intended for experimentation to all the mice at baseline prior to starting the study ) to homogenize the microbial expo - sure risk across all mice intended for an experiment , and thus reduce the cage - cage microbiome variability that natu - rally occurs as animals age during intensive production of animals for research and experiments ’ . The goal would be to normalize microbiome variability that accumulates across cages over the lifespan of mice before experiments . The expert - prediction for implementation is significantly high ( grade , 8 . 5 ± 0 . 04 ; 98 . 25 % probability of higher score vs . random ; significant in 86 . 6 % of simulations , t - test p = 0 . 018 ± 0 . 03 ) . Described in 2014 as ‘Inter - subject 9 Scientific RepoRtS | ( 2020 ) 10 : 5039 | https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1038 / s41598 - 020 - 60900 - y www . nature . com / scientificreports www . nature . com / scientificreports / Pre - experimental Fecal Microbiota homogenization’ ( IsPreFeH ) 57 , this revised microbiome ‘normalization’ pro - tocol , which excludes use of soiled bedding material , in combination with a reproducible protocol for oral gavage of microorganisms 66 , is a scalable solution , which has served to identify the role of the microbiome in the treat - ment of experimental Crohn’s disease in mice using anti - IL1 - alpha antibody neutralization 67 . Action theme 3 on ‘“Dirty cages” and time of sampling DURING experiments’ . ‘Prevent the uncontrolled accumu - lation of animal excrements in the cage , ( i ) house a homogeneous number of animals per cage ( ideally at low density , 1 mouse / cage ) , ( ii ) adjust frequency of cage sanitation based on animal density , and ( iii ) collect samples 1 – 2 days after mice have been in clean bedding / cages , because coprophagia and ‘dirty cages’ affect the mouse physiology and microbiota’ . The goal would be to minimize the uncontrolled permanent contact of mice with their ( decompos - ing ) feces . The expert - prediction for implementation is significantly high ( grade , 8 . 3 ± 0 . 15 ; 98 . 7 % of probability of higher vs . random ; significant in 96 . 6 % of simulations , t - test p = 0 . 014 ± 0 . 024 ) . Given that coprophagia ( not relevant to humans ) and excrements in cages may cause bedding - dependent cyclical microbiome bias 4 , frequent cage replacements ( increases with animal density 4 , Supplementary Fig . 3 ) , studying / sampling mice in clean cages and / or the use of slatted floors 68 deserve emphasis . Figure 6 . Beliefs on ‘husbandry and microbiome research variability’ are similar , but professional organizations differ in response to questions on practices and knowledge . Normalized principal component analysis of survey respondent data . Superscript asterisks : large or small symbols depict the individual response of each participant when asked how important ‘animal density’ was as a factor in influencing the gut microbiome . ( a ) Clustering - based questions about financial vs . scientific feasibility of caging 1 , 2 or 5 MxCg . Notice that each cluster ( type of response patterns ) contains individuals from all professional groups , i . e . , AALAS . ( b ) Clustering - based knowledge questions , i . e . , irradiated diets . Notice the same pattern as in panel A , suggesting that response heterogeneity is not due to group . ( c ) Normalized and non - normalized percentage of variance in entire data set explained by the maximum number of components ( questions ; n = 24 ) using “animal density” as outcome for prediction ( which cannot be achieved as large and small symbols occur throughout plot ) . ( d ) Cloud representation of collective influence of the 15 questions to predict group separation . ( e ) Clustering based on 15 ranking - based PERCEPTION questions + 11 Knowledge , Financial vs . Scientific feasibility , access to facilities and practices . Although clusters of individuals collectively think very similarly and slightly different than the rest , analyses indicate that the different clustering for certain areas in the plot is due to differences in answers related to ‘type of facilities’ , or practices that are more common among certain groups of professionals . ( f ) Best achievable clustering of individuals based on relief F scores to predict animal density shows surveys from different groups are distinct . 10 Scientific RepoRtS | ( 2020 ) 10 : 5039 | https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1038 / s41598 - 020 - 60900 - y www . nature . com / scientificreports www . nature . com / scientificreports / Action theme 4 on ‘Repeating experiments in different seasons’ . ‘Plan and execute statistically powerful designs and do not repeat underpowered ( cage clustered , low sample size ) experiments in different seasons ( because several unforeseen factors affecting animal husbandry are challenging to detect and control for in diet and personnel ) ’ . The goal would be to control for the variable effect of season on study reporting and heterogeneity using well - powered designs . The expert - prediction for implementation is significantly high ( grade , 8 . 1 ± 0 . 76 ; 96 % probability of higher score vs . random ; significant in 76 . 6 % of simulations , t - test p = 0 . 04 ± 0 . 062 ) . We acknowledge that at times replication is desirable , and also that ‘poor breeding colonies’ often yield insufficient mice to perform final experiments . In this context , it is advisable to store fresh - frozen feces anaerobically ( − 80 °C with / without cry - oprotectants ; 7 % - DMSO , 10 % - glycerol ) from initial experimental mice for the colonization of newly available mice , and to store sufficient vacuum - packed diet ( − 20 °C ) and supplies to last across experiments . Action theme 5 on ‘Animal density , clusters , and study power’ . ‘House one mouse per cage ( unless more mice per cage is scientifically justifiable ) and increase the number of cages per group ( instead of few cages co - housing many mice which results in cage clustered - correlated data , lower study power and requires more mice to compensate for study power loss ) to maximize the experimental and statistical value of each animal as a test subject during experi - mentation’ . The expert - prediction for implementation is moderately significant ( grade , 7 . 7 ± 0 . 56 ; 91 . 4 % prob - ability of higher score vs . random ; significant in 63 . 3 % of simulations , p = 0 . 086 ± 0 . 13 ) . The goal would be to maximize the scientific / test value of each mouse by promoting individual housing , emphasizing that social stress has been equally demonstrated , irrespective of sex , for single - and socially - housed mice 69 , 70 , and to promote the use of study power through cost - effective , reproducible experiments . As expected , this recommendation elicited the most heterogeneous responses , reflecting a partial reluctance to modify current animal density practices ( Fig . 7b ) . To promote implementation and facilitate the accuracy / reproducibility of reports , we provide three graphical examples of why / how - to compute and report power / sample sizes for any completed experiment using single - caged mice and intuitive open - access software ( ‘G * power’ 71 in Fig . 8a – c , R 72 , and our STATA code below ) . Action theme 6 on ‘Implementing statistical models to consider ICC in clustered data’ . ‘Use statistical methods designed for analyzing clustered data when multiple mice are housed in one cage , and when data points are obtained from mice over time , to ( i ) properly assess treatment effects , ( ii ) determine the intraclass correlation coefficient ( ICC ) for each study , and then ( iii ) to use that information to rapidly generate experiment - specific , customizable study power tables to aid in the assessment , re - / design ( if more mice or cages are needed ) , and reporting of adequately powered studies’ . The goal would be to promote and facilitate the implementation of cage - clustered data analysis in mouse research by ( i ) providing examples demonstrating the misleading effect when univariate methods are used for clustered - mice , and by ( ii ) making our statistical code available to the public to gain familiarity with protocol principles of cluster - data statistical tools . Recommendation six is intended to serve as a technical guide supporting the framework , and therefore was not tested for implementability . To expand the outreach of our multi - theme framework , and to support scientists with their analysis and publication of justifiable / clustered experiments , we recommend to analyze and follow the statistical example we provide . The example is based on data extracted ( using ImageJ 73 analysis ) from a published dot plot figure in a reviewed study that exclusively reported cohousing 5 MxCg , and where authors compared two diets using Figure 7 . Implementability of recommendation theme framework . ( a ) Framework integrating NIH guidelines , and our recommendations . ( b ) Implementability grades scores ( IGS ) for each recommendation . Asterisks indicate IGS were statistically higher than random simulations ( see statistics details in - text ) . Line plot connects individual grades . Notice that people who disagree with sentence clarity tend to disagree interpreting the potential benefits . High mean grades indicate high potential for implementability . 11 Scientific RepoRtS | ( 2020 ) 10 : 5039 | https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1038 / s41598 - 020 - 60900 - y www . nature . com / scientificreports www . nature . com / scientificreports / 8 and 9 MxGr ( 2 TCgxGr ; Fig . 9a ) . The published p - value was 0 . 058 , but to emphasize our message , we slightly / evenly adjusted the extrapolated data to achieve a univariate p < 0 . 050 . By simulating 5 possible cage - clustering scenarios , Fig . 8 was designed to help visually understand the benefits of computing ICC and experiment - specific customizable power tables to determine whether more cages / group or mice / cage are needed to achieve study powers of ideally > 0 . 8 . When using clustered - data methods , we showed that only one of the five scenarios yielded a significant diet treatment effect ( i . e . , scenario 2 , where all cages were unbiased , having mice with high and low response values , something unlikely to occur naturally in clustered settings , Fig . 9b ) . Data proves that artificial heterogeneity due to mouse caging and unsupervised ‘cage - effects’ lead to poor reproducibility ( 80 % of cases would misleadingly show that the test diet induces an effect on the mouse response ) . Graphically , we show that the variability of ICC ( computed after running the mixed - effect models ) depends on the hypothetical mouse allocation to cages , which in turn influences the post - hoc estimations of study power ( Fig . 9c , d ) . As a final practical product in this manuscript , we provide the statistical scheme / code in the GitHub repos - itory ( https : / / github . com / axr503 / cagecluster _ powercode ) to implement this streamlined analysis and compute comprehensive power tables based on the ICC derived for each simulation to help scientists determine the best mice - to - cage combinations to match resources ( Fig . 9e ) . Thus far , we have examined the relevance of husbandry in mouse research practices . However , preclinical studies with animals are intended to inform human clinical trials , which are considered the “gold standard” in medical research . The observed effect size of interventions in animals ( mean ± SD of treatment effect , % of improvement ) may be used to initiate the design of clinical trials . Statistically , preclinical data may help deter - mine the number of patients that need to be recruited ( sample size estimations ) to verify if the effects observed in animals also occur in humans . Variations on the implementability of this preclinical strategy to inform clinicians exist and could be complemented and paired with data derived from human pilot studies , or interim analysis starting with the first patients entering a study , which can be repeated at intervals through the study 74 . Herein , we provide an example of how dietary interventions in a ‘humanized’ IBD mouse model 6 , 75 have been used to document the sample size calculations for patients during the implementation of the actual clinical trial , and for the seeking of federal grants that require statistical support sections in this regard . Figure 10a – d is an extension of the aforementioned scripts produced in G * power software followed by integration with STATA . The figure is an Figure 8 . Graphical examples of rapid ‘study power’ calculations and reporting of individually - caged mouse data . ( a ) Example of study power calculation & graphical reporting ( post - hoc means after study completion , all datasets are real unpublished data ) . Intestinal inflammation in mice from two groups housed individually after pre - experimental cage microbiome normalization using IsPreFeH ( fresh feces only ; no bedding material ) . Post - test plot analysis ( inset , software screenshot of power vs . sample size ) shows that in this case , only 4 mice would be needed . Notice p - value and power increase after excluding outliers ( dashed circles , N = 19 ) . ( b ) Power analysis for two groups with different variance ( diet A , narrow SD ; diet B , wide SD ) . Fecal MPO test following a diet intervention illustrates that for this diet , a sample size of 10 is sufficient to achieve a well - powered study despite large variance in diet B . ( c ) Example of importance of data normalization ( e . g . , from raw small changes in millions , 10 7 , to a log scale ) in post hoc power analysis . Fluorescence intensity units in a test after intervention caused early mortality in diet B . Although the p - value does not change , normalized data ( smooth edges of datasets ) increases study power as it fulfills assumptions of t - tests normality . Since all mice were individually caged , the dataset quality and the early mortality are not due to , or are confounded by cage effects . Therefore , despite the small sample size ( n = 9 vs . 4 ) , this is a well - powered study . The most recent version of open - source software G * Power can be downloaded from http : / / www . psycho . uni - duesseldorf . de / abteilungen / aap / gpower3 / . See Supplementary Fig . 4 with step - by - step process to compute powers herein shown . Examples for power and sample size for studies with individually caged mice intended for ANOVA or regression analysis are available at https : / / stats . idre . ucla . edu / other / gpower / . 12 Scientific RepoRtS | ( 2020 ) 10 : 5039 | https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1038 / s41598 - 020 - 60900 - y www . nature . com / scientificreports www . nature . com / scientificreports / Figure 9 . Analysis of cage - clustered data , intra - class correlation coefficients and power tables to facilitate study design by the number of cages / group and mice / cage . Five scenarios using a single dataset where mice housed as 5 mice / cage illustrate the effect of cage clustered data . Raw data extrapolated from one of the 172 reviewed studies . ( a ) Extrapolated raw data ( original published dot plot ; p - value = 0 . 059 ) . Note that data from the diet ‘W’ group was not normally distributed ( A - D p = 0 . 005 ) . ( b ) Graphical representation of 5 scenarios considering different cage allocations of 2 cages / group . P < 0 . 05 for the regression analysis ( ‘Regress’ ) indicates cage effect . Except for scenario 2 ( with mice representing the entire data range spectrum for treatment outcome ‘response’ ; y - axis ) , note that all scenarios are subject to significant cage effect . ‘Diet’ , treatment ; ‘Cg’ , Cage effect . ( c ) Paired line plot depicting power estimates for the same data , without transformation ( left ) and after log2 transformation ( right ) . Note the best power estimation for raw data may have a marked influence on the power estimation based on log2 . We advise log2 transformed data for this dataset . ( d ) Line plot depicting power calculations for three ICCs , as a function of ICC , ( histogram ) . Power estimations depend on ICC , simulation determined the n MxCg and TCgxGr needed to achieve a study power , which changes depending on degree of cage clustering ( i . e . , ICC , intra - class correlation coefficients ) . ( e ) Power table illustrates the number and distribution of mice using a clustered design to achieve study power . 13 Scientific RepoRtS | ( 2020 ) 10 : 5039 | https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1038 / s41598 - 020 - 60900 - y www . nature . com / scientificreports www . nature . com / scientificreports / Figure 10 . Translational analysis of preclinical mouse data to determine sample size estimations to validate in a human clinical trial . Treatment - control in two mouse groups ( 1 mouse / cage ) before - after data ( see Discussion ) . ( a ) Description of mouse study to plan human clinical trial that needs to be statistically supported / reported in an NIH grant . In this example , the best statistical strategy is to use paired ( repeated - measures ) data t - test . Notice control diet had no effect , which contrasted the significant effect induced by treatment ( 68 % reduction on [ inflammation ] outcome ) . Post - hoc power analyses were conducted for each plot using paired - data t - test functions in G * power . ( b ) Integration of the two groups to determine overall study power was conducted using t - test linear bivariate regression ( paired - data , two groups ) using mean ± SD of all ( before - after ) slopes [ computed in Excel using = slope ( ) ; = rsq ( ) ; = correl ( ) functions ] . G * Power screenshots illustrate input data needed and the output . Notice overall study power is perfect , i . e . , 1 . 0 . ( c ) STATA study power tables based on mouse data effect from panel ‘a’ , and two simulations where controls had different outcomes . This example is for non - clustered sampling , i . e . , K = 1 . 1 mouse / cage . Red font , power < 0 . 8 . Simple one - line code in STATA ( power twomeans ) generates power tables that integrate cluster effects and ICC ( ‘rho’ ) when individuals cluster in households / cages ( ‘K’ , cluster ; K1 ( 1 ) , one - individual / cluster group 1 ; K1 ( 2 ) , two individuals / cluster group 1 ; ‘M’ , individuals / group ; ‘m’ , group mean ; ‘delta’ , effect difference between groups ; ‘rho’ , ICC ) . Notice study power changes in each scenario after more patients are added to the study . If the effect observed in mice reproduces in humans at the same rate ( 68 % improvement in treat / diet patients ; 3 . 7 % in control diet ) , the study could be stopped after 11 patients / group , because it would be unethical to not treat controls with the beneficial diet . However , if control diet has a different / unexpected effect , new study power tables could be generated based on data from first patients to adjust recruitment decisions . ( d ) STATA study power and sample sizes of patients / mice to be recruited varies if individuals cluster in households / cages and if the outcome is expected to be more / less similar between individuals within clusters ( rho = 0 . 01 , nonsimilar ; rho = 0 . 51 more similar ) . 14 Scientific RepoRtS | ( 2020 ) 10 : 5039 | https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1038 / s41598 - 020 - 60900 - y www . nature . com / scientificreports www . nature . com / scientificreports / example of mouse data ( treatment vs control in two mouse groups , 1 mouse / cage ) in a preclinical study of a diet used to determine sample size estimations to validate the findings ( good therapeutic effect ) in a human clinical trial for which no human data existed . Our study thus illustrates a translational strategy that links animal - based data and the need of physicians to estimate sample sizes and recruiting of patients for clinical trials for which various methods and issues have been described 74 . A ‘quick reference’ of actionable steps for all six themes is in Supplementary Table 8 . To expand our implementability strategy for continuous assessment by the international scientific community the survey is available online ( https : / / forms . gle / LxPCydbySddcndZ7A ) . Discussion This study and proposed framework were motivated by the identification of a wide heterogeneity in published methods relevant to diet , microbiome , and the pathogenesis of inflammatory bowel diseases and digestive health in humans , where mice models are critical to study diseases biology , translational interventions , or to inform clin - ical trials for humans 75 . The action framework herein described as SART , specifically applies to promote the use of study power and improve reproducibility in any field of modern mouse research . Although it is impossible to develop a single consensus statement on practices pertaining to experimental supplies ( e . g . , bedding type , water , facilities ) to accommodate every scientific community / goal , and not every mouse study involves the microbiome and there are mouse phenomena that are less affected by cage - level effects ( for example , brain tumor studies initiated in genetically engineered mouse models ) , our proposed implementability statistics indicate that our 6 actionable recommendation themes could be widely adopted ( possibly by > 70 – 80 % of investigators ) to reduce the deleterious impact of these emerging concepts on artificial heterogeneity . This framework especially designed around reducing animal density , cage dirtiness , and cage microbiome bias , stresses the need of statistical methods for power and cluster data . Herein , we confirmed that research methodology continues to vary in published literature , and as docu - mented by a survey of academicians , such variability may be attributed to well - ingrained heterogeneous per - ceptions among scientists concerning how animal husbandry impacts the mouse microbiome . Animal density and the cost dilemma of how many cages are used to test hypotheses in experiments were deemed amenable for improvement . Because adjustments to facility settings are not easy to standardize , we propose that the most experimentally effective strategy to improve study power / reproducibility in the literature is to implement a lower number of mice per cage . From our analyses , we provide recommendation themes to minimize cage - clustering effects and implement clustered data analysis methods as a means to reduce artificial heterogeneity . To address the above challenges surrounding microbiome research and the experimental environment , we have drafted six thematic concepts that could be put forth for discussion as part of a consensus effort in the future by various professional organizations . Action theme 1 on ‘Reporting of diet and husbandry factors’ . Reproducibility will occur only if critical study details are provided in published literature . Our review of studies combined with the high number of ARRIVE guideline 52 citations ( > 7000 ) indicates that while ‘checklists’ may improve reporting quality , they do not ensure reporting with sufficient / consistent detail . A template paragraph for reporting would enforce uniform transparency , reproducibility , and enable rapid data mining for future meta - analyses , widely used to help guide the practice of medicine , but scarcely used in basic science . Action theme 2 on ‘Cage - cage microbiome variability BEFORE mouse experiments’ . Fecal bac - terial profiles can differ widely between cages within a single mouse strain housed under identical conditions and occurs even across mice produced for experimentation in contained breeding colonies 5 , 6 , 76 . Our survey demon - strated that although scientists implement strategies to control for cage microbiome variability before experi - ments 5 , 58 , 59 , there is ample variability of arguably reproducible method combinations used across organizations . Littermates have been proposed as an ideal for use as control groups 77 , however , numerous technical aspects ( e . g . , poor breeding colonies , small litter sizes , males fighting especially in certain genetic lines ) frequently prevent this practice . As an alternative , or complementary option when littermates are available , a fecal homogenization pro - tocol wherein all mice are administered a composite of freshly collected feces via oral gavage for 3 days 57 , has been shown to effectively minimize inter - cage gut microbiota heterogeneity before experimentation 57 , 58 , 67 , 78 . Action theme 3 on ‘“Dirty cages” and time of sampling DURING experiments’ . Our survey showed ample heterogeneity in timing of mouse cage sanitation protocols despite recent studies indicating that bedding soiledness ( ‘dirtiness’ ) contributes to periodic variations in gut microbiome via contact / coprophagia 4 , 55 . Mouse experiments would benefit if conducted with cages having reduced animal density ( 1 – 2 MxCg ) with bio - logical samples systematically collected from clean cages at the same time of day to avoid diurnal variation 79 – 81 . Action theme 4 on ‘Repeating experiments in different seasons’ . As reflected by the literature reviewed and the misconceptions documented in our survey , little is known about the effect of time of year / sea - son on mouse research heterogeneity 6 , 76 , 82 . Since it is almost impossible to control for seasonal variation within long - term , or multiple short - term experiments spanning over several seasons , it is important to take measures to improve study variation / reproducibility over time ( e . g . , food batch , inter - experiment IsPreFeH ) . Action theme 5 on ‘Animal density , clusters , and study power’ . First , our scoping review identi - fied numerous laboratories publishing clustered MxCg data with few cages / groups , without the verification of study power / sample sizes , or use of statistics for clustered - data . Then , our survey and cost simulator showed financial - scientific discordance among scientists when deciding animal densities . Unless higher densities are scientifically ( not only financially ) justifiable , housing 1 MxCg could yield more cost - effective and powerful study 15 Scientific RepoRtS | ( 2020 ) 10 : 5039 | https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1038 / s41598 - 020 - 60900 - y www . nature . com / scientificreports www . nature . com / scientificreports / designs by increasing the number of cages and minimizing the need to use advanced statistics 50 , 75 , 83 . Although adding more cages to a study increases handling costs , studying ‘less mice per cage is more’ is a pro - statistically powerful , comparably effective practice 75 . The use of cost as a rationale for conducting cage - clustered experiments needs conscientious consideration , since housing costs are just a fraction of the research funds required for tests . Perhaps , institutions could provide discounts to investigators for the cost of housing when conducting experi - ments , because fewer MxCg requires less cage changes and experiments are often short - term . Logistically , since fewer MxCg may be an option limited by space in certain facilities , well - powered and well - analyzed cage - cluster studies is desirable . Action theme 6 on ‘Implementing statistical models to consider ICC in clustered data’ . Depending on the experiment , we recognize that it is not always possible to single - house mice . Our review showed that scientists often analyze clustered observations using methods that mathematically function under the assumption of data independence ( student T - , Mann - Whitney , One - / Two - way ANOVAs ) , without imple - menting statistics for intra - class ( ‘intra - cage’ ) correlated ( ICC ) cage - clustered data ( Multivariable linear / logistic , Marginal , Generalized Estimating Equations , or Mixed Random / Fixed Regressions ) 50 , 84 , 85 . The ICC describes how units in a cluster resemble one another , and can be interpreted as the fraction of the total variance due to variation between clusters 50 . Housing multiple MxCg as homogeneous densities across study groups is logistically challenging using few cages . As identified in the literature review , the statistical description in peer - review mouse studies is frequently suboptimal . The examples here provided were designed to assist scientists address this limitation . As an advanced example relevant to translational research , Fig . 10a is a case of an outcome measured in mice before and after treatment , which can be best analyzed by using the slope of the effect ( as in repeated measures ) , or the net dif - ference / change of the outcome measured ( after - minus - before ) to aid determine sample sizes for pilot clinical trials . Of practical value , G * power has statistical tests based on means and slopes , which can also be used to draw informative sample size - vs - power curves , and integrate repeated - measure studies with two groups ( Fig . 10b ) . A simple line of code in STATA , in turn , however generates comprehensive study power tables to assist scientists determine the number of patients to recruit , and based on interim study power estimations , if the study needs to be halted earlier ( due to more significant than expected , or non - significant effects ) as patients are recruited . The STATA power tables can be used to document the analysis requested in NIH / similar grants or publications , when needed for the planning and justification of sample sizes of animals or humans . This is especially relevant to transitional science , because the tables integrate cluster effects and intra - class correlation coefficients ( ICC , ‘rho’ ) in scenarios where individuals are clustered in households / cages , which ultimately influences the study power and the decisions to be made in follow - up interim analyses , for instance , after recruiting the first ( e . g . , 6 , 11 , 16 , 21 or 26 ) individuals as shown in Fig . 10c for two groups . Study power and sample size estimates vary depending on whether individuals are sampled clustered in households / cages , and if the outcome is expected to be more or less similar between individuals within a cluster ( rho = 0 . 01 , non - similar ; rho = 0 . 51 more similar , rho = 1 , highly similar ) . The notion that the gut microbiome influences mouse phenotypes / physiology is not a new concept and has been discussed in the past . For example , a 2016 perspective article accounting for reciprocal host – microbiome interactions in experimental science 77 provided conceptual examples on different aspects that influence the microbiome biology during experimentation and different factors that influence host communities , such as diet , maternal transfer and host genetics , and emphasized the importance of GF animals to study microbes illustrating that GF studies do not account for the effect of microbes on host development . In the present paper , we integrated peer reviewed data with survey data from practitioners primarily in the USA via expert panel , and provide ana - lytical insights and concrete statistical examples with their respective code . We acknowledge that aspects described in this paper may not always be applicable to every research scenario or experimental objective . For example , studies involving morphological aspects of brain biology and develop - ment may not be subject to the same modulatory effect by the gut microbiome as one could anticipate in a study of intestinal mucosal biology . We emphasize again that the recommendation themes , succinctly discussed below , are not derived from a formal consensus as it is customary for societies to guide medical practice . However , as a unique contribution to the body of literature in husbandry and reproducibility is the emphasis we are placing on the use of statistical study power . Power study tables have helped scientists make decisions with respect to study design and execution of experiments to prevent and control bias , data interpretation , and the use of data derived from animals to inform the potential effects in human clinical trials . In conclusion , we confirmed that research methodology continues to vary in published literature and as doc - umented by a survey of academicians . Analyses indicate that the reporting of post - hoc study power calculations , in the context of the proposed framework , could be objectively used to guide and monitor the research power and reproducibility across mouse microbiome research at large . The examples here are expected to contribute to improvement of methods reproducibility , results reproducibility , and inferential reproducibility as previously described 3 . As a unique contribution , here we provide specific numeric and graphic examples to illustrate these concepts , and the means by which improper analysis may lead to spurious analysis or interpretations which in turn affect reproducibility . Our statistical illustrations highlight concepts on analytical problems ( with their prac - tical solutions ) which frequently affect methods - , results - and inferential - reproducibility . Materials and Methods Study overview . As an overall methodological strategy to confirm and quantify the extent to which animal husbandry variability has been , and continues to be , present in mouse and microbiome research , we first con - ducted a quantitative verification of animal husbandry variability in academia ( i ) by screening the recent pub - lished peer - reviewed literature ( 2018 – 2019 ) to infer the historic prevalence of prevailing practices that could have 16 Scientific RepoRtS | ( 2020 ) 10 : 5039 | https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1038 / s41598 - 020 - 60900 - y www . nature . com / scientificreports www . nature . com / scientificreports / influenced research and ( ii ) by conducting a survey of academicians across relevant professional organizations to determine the present status on beliefs and knowledge on husbandry practices . Then , we ranked the practices based on relevance to influence microbiome research , as perceived by respondents , to prioritize / make six rec - ommendations . Lastly , to document the validity of such recommendations , we conducted a targeted literature search to cite examples enabling the analysis of such suggestions in future consensus efforts . Using a Delphi - based consensus strategy , these suggestions were graded for quality to compute heterogeneity and probability statistics for implementability by investigators . See Fig . 1 for illustrated study overview . Quantification of husbandry methods heterogeneity . As a test topic , we chose to use ‘dietary studies in mice’ as PubMed search terms to screen ( scoping review ) original peer - review studies for animal husbandry practices as of May 3 rd , 2019 , published literature ( see references of identified studies in Supplementary Materials ) To interrogate and quantify perceptions and opinions among academicians on animal husbandry practices that influence microbiome data variability , a one - time online IRB - approved survey with 11 multiple - choice questions was administered , via recruitment email , to eligible participants through membership list servers of the following : ( i ) faculty of 17 NIH National Institute Diabetes and Digestive and Kidney Diseases ( NIDDK ) Silvio O’Conte Digestive Diseases Research Core Centers ( ‘DDRCC’ ) , which provide research support to local and national insti - tutions , ( ii ) registrants of the 2018 Cleveland International Digestive Education and Science ( IDEAS ) Symposium hosted by the Cleveland DDRCC , Case Western Reserve University ( CWRU ) , ( iii ) registrants of the Taconic Biosciences Webinar titled ‘Cyclical Bias and Variability in Microbiome Research’ , ( iv ) members of the American Association of Laboratory Animal Science ( ‘AALAS’ ) , and ( v ) members of ‘GNOTOBIOTIC’ ListServ , forum of the National Gnotobiotics Association . Six evidence - based recommendations graded for future implementability . To provide evidence - based suggestions and to support the development of a large - scale consensus report that can be imple - mented and beneficial to research , we used a ranking of the survey - derived husbandry practices to prioritize the husbandry topics deemed influential in mouse microbiome by respondents . Using Google PubMed and keywords contained in the survey question / topic ( e . g . , mouse , water ) , five coauthors cataloged relevant peer - reviewed scientific articles on each topic ( targeted review ) . The information gathered , as tables , was used as assessment tools by 14 individuals to grade a table with 5 - recommendations drafted by the lead and senior authors in this study . Collectively , the individuals comprised professional experiences across five research institutions ; CWRU , The Scripps Research Institute , Kyorin University , South Dakota State University , The Ohio State University , University of Chicago , and Cornell University . To determine if the 5 - recommendations could be implemented as a framework , individuals were asked to provide suggestions , new recommendations , and to grade ( 1 , low ; 10 , highest ) each item for sentence clarity , potential impact , and recommendability to others ( Supplementary Materials ) . These ‘implementability grades’ numerically illustrate the potential for variance and adoption of the recommendations by others in mouse research . The sixth recommendation was constructed in response to the suggestions made by the implementability and study ‘blind’ anonymous reviewers . Ethical considerations . All research was approved by the Case Western Reserve University Institutional Review Board ( STUDY20180138 ) . All methods were carried out in accordance with the relevant guidelines and regulations . Informed consent was obtained from all participants . Statistics . For computation purposes , animal / cage density data extracted from the scoping review were used to create a secondary index . Specifically , the number of animals per group ( group size , MxGr ) and the number of mice housed per cage ( animal density , MxCg ) were used to compute a semi - descriptive index metric of ‘cage cluster effect’ on each study : ‘estimated number of cages per experimental group’ ( i . e . , total n of cage clusters per group , TCgxGr = MxGr divided by MxCg ) . If a range was provided for animal density ( e . g . , 1 – 5 ) , estimations were computed using the median value within the range , as well as the minimum and maximum values . Average of estimated center values were used for analysis and graphical summaries . For Fig . 9 , study selection was based on the use of 5 mice / cage , and that study results were published as dot plots ( allowing us to infer the raw data for our analysis ) in the manuscript . Descriptive statistics for parametric data were employed if assumptions were fulfilled ( e . g . , 1 - way ANOVA ) . Non - fulfilled assumptions were addressed with nonparametric methods ( e . g . , Kruskal - Wallis ) . As needed , 95 % confidence intervals are reported to account for sample size ( e . g . , MxCg ; sur - veyed participants ) and for external validity context . Significance was held at p < 0 . 05 . Analysis , study powers , and graphics were conducted with R , STATA , Python 3 . 0 Anaconda , GraphPad and G * Power 71 . G * Power is an open - source power specialized software for various family of tests ; calculations only require p - value ( alpha ) , sample size , and mean ± SD to compute effect size . Excel was used to create a cage handling frequency and cost spreadsheet calculator . Permissions . We confirm that all drawings in manuscript figures were drawn by the corresponding author or one of the co - authors . Preprint . Motivated by Springer Nature Publishing policies * * * on preprint sharing , and their encouragement to integrate input from the scientific community into formal peer - review at Nature Communications , section Scientific Community , we have shared the herein improved manuscript version , as a preprint . ( bioRxiv pre - print first posted online Sep . 25 , 2019 ; https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1101 / 778043 ) . * * * Nature 569 , 307 ( 2019 ) , https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1038 / d41586 - 019 - 01493 - z . Data availability The authors will make all data available upon request . 17 Scientific RepoRtS | ( 2020 ) 10 : 5039 | https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1038 / s41598 - 020 - 60900 - y www . nature . com / scientificreports www . nature . com / scientificreports / Received : 15 October 2019 ; Accepted : 17 February 2020 ; Published : xx xx xxxx References 1 . Bollen , K . , Cacioppo , J . T . , Kaplan , R . , Krosnick , J . & Olds , J . L . ( National Science Foundation , Arlington , VA ( 2015 ) . 2 . Fanelli , D . & Glänzel , W . Bibliometric Evidence for a Hierarchy of the Sciences . PLoS One 8 , e66938 , https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1371 / journal . pone . 0066938 ( 2013 ) . 3 . Goodman , S . N . , Fanelli , D . & Ioannidis , J . P . What does research reproducibility mean ? Sci . Transl . Med . 8 , 341ps312 , https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1126 / scitranslmed . aaf5027 ( 2016 ) . 4 . Rodriguez - Palacios , A . et al . ‘Cyclical Bias’ in Microbiome Research Revealed by A Portable Germ - Free Housing System Using Nested Isolation . Sci . Rep . 8 , 18 , https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1038 / s41598 - 018 - 20742 - 1 ( 2018 ) . 5 . Franklin , C . L . & Ericsson , A . C . Microbiota and reproducibility of rodent models . Lab . Anim . 46 , 114 – 122 , https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1038 / laban . 1222 ( 2017 ) . 6 . Rodriguez - Palacios , A . et al . The Artificial Sweetener Splenda Promotes Gut Proteobacteria , Dysbiosis , and Myeloperoxidase Reactivity in Crohn’s Disease - Like Ileitis . Inflamm . Bowel Dis . 24 , 1005 – 1020 , https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1093 / ibd / izy060 ( 2018 ) . 7 . McCoy , K . D . , Geuking , M . B . & Ronchi , F . Gut Microbiome Standardization in Control and Experimental Mice . Curr . Protoc . Immunol . 117 , 23 21 21 – 23 21 13 , https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1002 / cpim . 25 ( 2017 ) . 8 . Laukens , D . , Brinkman , B . M . , Raes , J . , De Vos , M . & Vandenabeele , P . Heterogeneity of the gut microbiome in mice : guidelines for optimizing experimental design . Fems Microbiol . Rev . 40 , 117 – 132 , https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1093 / femsre / fuv036 ( 2016 ) . 9 . Collins , F . S . & Tabak , L . A . Policy : NIH plans to enhance reproducibility . Nat . 505 , 612 – 613 , https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1038 / 505612a ( 2014 ) . 10 . Perrin , S . Preclinical research : Make mouse studies work . Nat . 507 , 423 – 425 , https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1038 / 507423a ( 2014 ) . 11 . Health , N . N . I . o . Enhancing reproducibility through rigor and transparency , https : / / grants . nih . gov / reproducibility / index . 12 . Younger , D . S . & Chen , X . Research Methods in Epidemiology . Neurol . Clin . 34 , 815 – 835 , https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . ncl . 2016 . 05 . 003 ( 2016 ) . 13 . Slack , M . K . & Draugalis , J . R . Establishing the internal and external validity of experimental studies . Am J Health Syst Pharm 58 , 2173 – 2181 ; quiz 2182 – 2173 ( 2001 ) . 14 . Patino , C . M . & Ferreira , J . C . Internal and external validity : can you apply research study results to your patients ? J . Bras . Pneumol . 44 , 183 , https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1590 / S1806 - 37562018000000164 ( 2018 ) . 15 . Ioannidis , J . P . A . Why most published research findings are false . PLoS Med . 2 , 696 – 701 , https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1371 / journal . pmed . 0020124 ( 2005 ) . 16 . Hoenig , J . H . D . M . The abuse of power : the pervasive fallacy of power calculations for data analysis . Am . Statistician 55 , 1 – 6 ( 2001 ) . 17 . Walker , M . et al . Mixed - strain housing for female C57BL / 6 , DBA / 2 , and BALB / c mice : validating a split - plot design that promotes refinement and reduction . BMC Med . Res . Methodol . 16 , 11 , https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1186 / s12874 - 016 - 0113 - 7 ( 2016 ) . 18 . Chen , K . et al . Preventive Effects and Mechanisms of Garlic on Dyslipidemia and Gut Microbiome Dysbiosis . Nutrients 11 , https : / / doi . org / 10 . 3390 / nu11061225 ( 2019 ) . 19 . Liu , Y . , Wu , X . & Jiang , H . High dietary fat intake lowers serum equol concentration and promotes prostate carcinogenesis in a transgenic mouse prostate model . Nutr . Metab . 16 , 24 , https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1186 / s12986 - 019 - 0351 - x ( 2019 ) . 20 . Nerurkar , P . V . , Orias , D . , Soares , N . , Kumar , M . & Nerurkar , V . R . Momordica charantia ( bitter melon ) modulates adipose tissue inflammasome gene expression and adipose - gut inflammatory cross talk in high - fat diet ( HFD ) - fed mice . J . Nutr . Biochem . 68 , 16 – 32 , https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . jnutbio . 2019 . 03 . 003 ( 2019 ) . 21 . Bang , S . J . et al . Effect of raw potato starch on the gut microbiome and metabolome in mice . Int . J . Biol . Macromol . 133 , 37 – 43 , https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . ijbiomac . 2019 . 04 . 085 ( 2019 ) . 22 . Poole , A . C . et al . Human Salivary Amylase Gene Copy Number Impacts Oral and Gut Microbiomes . Cell Host Microbe 25 , 553 – 564 e557 , https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . chom . 2019 . 03 . 001 ( 2019 ) . 23 . Liu , T . et al . A More Robust Gut Microbiota in Calorie - Restricted Mice Is Associated with Attenuated Intestinal Injury Caused by the Chemotherapy Drug Cyclophosphamide . Mbio 10 , https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1128 / mBio . 02903 - 18 ( 2019 ) . 24 . Bernard , A . et al . A Preventive Prebiotic Supplementation Improves the Sweet Taste Perception in Diet - Induced Obese Mice . Nutrients 11 , https : / / doi . org / 10 . 3390 / nu11030549 ( 2019 ) . 25 . Vidal - Lletjos , S . et al . Dietary Protein Intake Level Modulates Mucosal Healing and Mucosa - Adherent Microbiota in Mouse Model of Colitis . Nutrients 11 , https : / / doi . org / 10 . 3390 / nu11030514 ( 2019 ) . 26 . Wu , Y . et al . Inhibition of Tumor Growth by Dietary Indole - 3 - Carbinol in a Prostate Cancer Xenograft Model May Be Associated with Disrupted Gut Microbial Interactions . Nutrients 11 , https : / / doi . org / 10 . 3390 / nu11020467 ( 2019 ) . 27 . Manuel , C . R . , Latuga , M . S . , Ashby , C . R . Jr . & Reznik , S . E . Immune tolerance attenuates gut dysbiosis , dysregulated uterine gene expression and high - fat diet potentiated preterm birth in mice . Am . J . Obstet . Gynecol . 220 , 596 e591 – 596 e528 , https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . ajog . 2019 . 02 . 028 ( 2019 ) . 28 . Xu , J . et al . Jamun ( Eugenia jambolana Lam . ) Fruit Extract Prevents Obesity by Modulating the Gut Microbiome in High - Fat - Diet - Fed Mice . Mol . Nutr . Food Res . 63 , e1801307 , https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1002 / mnfr . 201801307 ( 2019 ) . 29 . Tousen , Y . et al . Resistant Starch Attenuates Bone Loss in Ovariectomised Mice by Regulating the Intestinal Microbiota and Bone - Marrow Inflammation . Nutrients 11 , https : / / doi . org / 10 . 3390 / nu11020297 ( 2019 ) . 30 . Zinno , P . et al . Supplementation with dairy matrices impacts on homocysteine levels and gut microbiota composition of hyperhomocysteinemic mice . Eur J Nutr , https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1007 / s00394 - 019 - 01911 - y ( 2019 ) . 31 . Ribeiro , F . M . et al . Limited Effects of Low - to - Moderate Aerobic Exercise on the Gut Microbiota of Mice Subjected to a High - Fat Diet . Nutrients 11 , https : / / doi . org / 10 . 3390 / nu11010149 ( 2019 ) . 32 . Tanabe , K . et al . Dietary Fructooligosaccharide and Glucomannan Alter Gut Microbiota and Improve Bone Metabolism in Senescence - Accelerated Mouse . J . Agric . Food Chem . 67 , 867 – 874 , https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1021 / acs . jafc . 8b05164 ( 2019 ) . 33 . Raza , G . S . et al . Hypocholesterolemic Effect of the Lignin - Rich Insoluble Residue of Brewer’s Spent Grain in Mice Fed a High - Fat Diet . J . Agric . Food Chem . 67 , 1104 – 1114 , https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1021 / acs . jafc . 8b05770 ( 2019 ) . 34 . Wu , S . et al . Modulation of Gut Microbiota by Lonicera caerulea L . Berry Polyphenols in a Mouse Model of Fatty Liver Induced by High Fat Diet . Molecules 23 , https : / / doi . org / 10 . 3390 / molecules23123213 ( 2018 ) . 35 . Du , Y . W . et al . Effects of Taste Signaling Protein Abolishment on Gut Inflammation in an Inflammatory Bowel Disease Mouse Model . J Vis Exp , https : / / doi . org / 10 . 3791 / 58668 ( 2018 ) . 36 . Albaugh , V . L . et al . Role of Bile Acids and GLP - 1 in Mediating the Metabolic Improvements of Bariatric Surgery . Gastroenterology 156 , 1041 – 1051 e1044 , https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1053 / j . gastro . 2018 . 11 . 017 ( 2019 ) . 37 . Chen , Y . T . et al . A combination of Lactobacillus mali APS1 and dieting improved the efficacy of obesity treatment via manipulating gut microbiome in mice . Sci . Rep . 8 , 6153 , https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1038 / s41598 - 018 - 23844 - y ( 2018 ) . 38 . Pace , F . et al . Helminth infection in mice improves insulin sensitivity via modulation of gut microbiota and fatty acid metabolism . Pharmacol . Res . 132 , 33 – 46 , https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . phrs . 2018 . 04 . 008 ( 2018 ) . 39 . Martinez - Guryn , K . et al . Small Intestine Microbiota Regulate Host Digestive and Absorptive Adaptive Responses to Dietary Lipids . Cell Host Microbe 23 , 458 – 469 e455 , https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . chom . 2018 . 03 . 011 ( 2018 ) . 18 Scientific RepoRtS | ( 2020 ) 10 : 5039 | https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1038 / s41598 - 020 - 60900 - y www . nature . com / scientificreports www . nature . com / scientificreports / 40 . Zheng , X . et al . Food withdrawal alters the gut microbiota and metabolome in mice . Faseb J . 32 , 4878 – 4888 , https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1096 / fj . 201700614R ( 2018 ) . 41 . Pan , F . et al . Predominant gut Lactobacillus murinus strain mediates anti - inflammaging effects in calorie - restricted mice . Microbiome 6 , 54 , https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1186 / s40168 - 018 - 0440 - 5 ( 2018 ) . 42 . Wang , D . et al . In utero and lactational exposure to BDE - 47 promotes obesity development in mouse offspring fed a high - fat diet : impaired lipid metabolism and intestinal dysbiosis . Arch . Toxicol . 92 , 1847 – 1860 , https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1007 / s00204 - 018 - 2177 - 0 ( 2018 ) . 43 . An , J . et al . Physiological mechanisms of sustained fumagillin - induced weight loss . JCI Insight 3 , https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1172 / jci . insight . 99453 ( 2018 ) . 44 . Janssen , A . W . F . et al . Loss of angiopoietin - like 4 ( ANGPTL4 ) in mice with diet - induced obesity uncouples visceral obesity from glucose intolerance partly via the gut microbiota . Diabetologia 61 , 1447 – 1458 , https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1007 / s00125 - 018 - 4583 - 5 ( 2018 ) . 45 . Battson , M . L . et al . Suppression of gut dysbiosis reverses Western diet - induced vascular dysfunction . Am . J . Physiol . Endocrinol . Metab . 314 , E468 – E477 , https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1152 / ajpendo . 00187 . 2017 ( 2018 ) . 46 . Connor , K . L . et al . Maternal metabolic , immune , and microbial systems in late pregnancy vary with malnutrition in mice . Biol . Reprod . 98 , 579 – 592 , https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1093 / biolre / ioy002 ( 2018 ) . 47 . Li , C . C . et al . Tomato Powder Inhibits Hepatic Steatosis and Inflammation Potentially Through Restoring SIRT1 Activity and Adiponectin Function Independent of Carotenoid Cleavage Enzymes in Mice . Mol . Nutr . Food Res . 62 , e1700738 , https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1002 / mnfr . 201700738 ( 2018 ) . 48 . Zeng , H . , Ishaq , S . L . , Liu , Z . & Bukowski , M . R . Colonic aberrant crypt formation accompanies an increase of opportunistic pathogenic bacteria in C57BL / 6 mice fed a high - fat diet . J . Nutr . Biochem . 54 , 18 – 27 , https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . jnutbio . 2017 . 11 . 001 ( 2018 ) . 49 . Pearl , D . L . Making the most of clustered data in laboratory animal research using multi - level models . ILAR J . 55 , 486 – 492 , https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1093 / ilar / ilu034 ( 2014 ) . 50 . Moen , E . L . , Fricano - Kugler , C . J . , Luikart , B . W . & O’Malley , A . J . Analyzing Clustered Data : Why and How to Account for Multiple Observations Nested within a Study Participant ? PLoS One 11 , e0146721 , https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1371 / journal . pone . 0146721 ( 2016 ) . 51 . Ericsson , A . C . et al . The influence of caging , bedding , and diet on the composition of the microbiota in different regions of the mouse gut . Scientific Reports 8 , https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1038 / s41598 - 018 - 21986 - 7 ( 2018 ) . 52 . Kilkenny , C . , Browne , W . J . , Cuthill , I . C . , Emerson , M . & Altman , D . G . Improving bioscience research reporting : the ARRIVE guidelines for reporting animal research . PLoS Biol . 8 , e1000412 , https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1371 / journal . pbio . 1000412 ( 2010 ) . 53 . Rausch , P . et al . Analysis of factors contributing to variation in the C57BL / 6J fecal microbiota across German animal facilities . Int . J . Med . Microbiol . 306 , 343 – 355 , https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . ijmm . 2016 . 03 . 004 ( 2016 ) . 54 . Rodriguez - Palacios , A . et al . Clinical Effects of Gamma - Radiation - Resistant Aspergillus sydowii on Germ - Free Mice Immunologically Prone to Inflammatory Bowel Disease . J . Pathog . 2016 , 5748745 , https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1155 / 2016 / 5748745 ( 2016 ) . 55 . McCafferty , J . M . et al . changes over time and not founder effects drive cage effects in microbial community assembly in a mouse model . ISME J . 7 , 2116 – 2125 , https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1038 / ismej . 2013 . 106 ( 2013 ) . 56 . Hart , M . L . et al . Development of outbred CD1 mouse colonies with distinct standardized gut microbiota profiles for use in complex microbiota targeted studies . Scientific Reports 8 , https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1038 / s41598 - 018 - 28448 - 0 ( 2018 ) . 57 . Rodriguez - Palacios , A . , Aladyshkina , N . & Cominelli , F . Stereomicroscopy and 3D - target myeloperoxidase intestinal phenotyping following a fecal flora homogenization protocol . Protocol Exchange , https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1038 / protex . 2015 . 065 ( 2015 ) . 58 . Miyoshi , J . et al . Minimizing confounders and increasing data quality in murine models for studies of the gut microbiome . PeerJ 6 , e5166 , https : / / doi . org / 10 . 7717 / peerj . 5166 ( 2018 ) . 59 . Velazquez , E . M . et al . Endogenous Enterobacteriaceae underlie variation in susceptibility to Salmonella infection . Nat . Microbiol . 4 , 1057 – 1064 , https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1038 / s41564 - 019 - 0407 - 8 ( 2019 ) . 60 . Robertson , S . J . et al . Comparison of Co - housing and Littermate Methods for Microbiota Standardization in Mouse Models . Cell Rep . 27 , 1910 – 1919 e1912 , https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . celrep . 2019 . 04 . 023 ( 2019 ) . 61 . Galbraith , S . , Daniel , J . A . & Vissel , B . A study of clustered data and approaches to its analysis . J . Neurosci . 30 , 10601 – 10608 , https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1523 / JNEUROSCI . 0362 - 10 . 2010 ( 2010 ) . 62 . Power Calculations for Cluster - Randomized and Cluster - Randomized Crossover Trials v . 0 . 6 . 111 ( CRAN ( 2017 ) . 63 . Barham , K . ISMTE Recap : Text recycling and self - plagarism in academic publishing . 64 . Harriman , S . & Patel , J . Text recycling : acceptable or misconduct ? BMC Med . 12 , 148 , https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1186 / s12916 - 014 - 0148 - 8 ( 2014 ) . 65 . Burdine , L . K . , de Castro Maymone , M . B . & Vashi , N . A . Text recycling : Self - plagiarism in scientific writing . Int . J . Womens Dermatol . 5 , 134 – 136 , https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . ijwd . 2018 . 10 . 002 ( 2019 ) . 66 . Rodriguez - Palacios , A . , Khoretonenko , M . V . & Ilic , S . Institutional protocols for the oral administration ( gavage ) of chemicals and microscopic microbial communities to mice : Analytical consensus . Exp . Biol . Med . 244 , 459 – 470 , https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1177 / 1535370219838203 ( 2019 ) . 67 . Menghini , P . et al . Neutralization of IL - 1 α ameliorates Crohn’s disease - like ileitis by functional alterations of the gut microbiome . Proc Natl Acad Sci USA , https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1073 / pnas . 1915043116 ( 2019 ) . 68 . Bangsgaard Bendtsen , K . M . et al . Gut microbiota composition is correlated to grid floor induced stress and behavior in the BALB / c mouse . PLoS One 7 , e46231 , https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1371 / journal . pone . 0046231 ( 2012 ) . 69 . Bartolomucci , A . et al . Social factors and individual vulnerability to chronic stress exposure . Neurosci . Biobehav . Rev . 29 , 67 – 81 , https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . neubiorev . 2004 . 06 . 009 ( 2005 ) . 70 . Arndt , S . S . et al . Individual housing of mice – impact on behaviour and stress responses . Physiol . Behav . 97 , 385 – 393 , https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . physbeh . 2009 . 03 . 008 ( 2009 ) . 71 . Faul , F . , Erdfelder , E . , Lang , A . G . & Buchner , A . G * Power 3 : a flexible statistical power analysis program for the social , behavioral , and biomedical sciences . Behav . Res . Methods 39 , 175 – 191 ( 2007 ) . 72 . Quick - R , https : / / www . statmethods . net / stats / power . html 73 . Schneider , C . A . , Rasband , W . S . & Eliceiri , K . W . NIH Image to ImageJ : 25 years of image analysis . Nat . Methods 9 , 671 – 675 ( 2012 ) . 74 . Kang , M . , Ragan , B . G . & Park , J . H . Issues in outcomes research : an overview of randomization techniques for clinical trials . J . Athl . Train . 43 , 215 – 221 , https : / / doi . org / 10 . 4085 / 1062 - 6050 - 43 . 2 . 215 ( 2008 ) . 75 . Basson , A . et al . Human Gut Microbiome Transplantation in Ileitis Prone Mice : A Tool for the Functional Characterization of the Microbiota in Inflammatory Bowel Disease Patients . Inflammatory Bowel Diseases , https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1093 / ibd / izz242 ( 2019 ) . 76 . Montonye , D . R . et al . Acclimation and Institutionalization of the Mouse Microbiota Following Transportation . Front . Microbiol . 9 , 1085 , https : / / doi . org / 10 . 3389 / fmicb . 2018 . 01085 ( 2018 ) . 77 . Stappenbeck , T . S . & Virgin , H . W . Accounting for reciprocal host - microbiome interactions in experimental science . Nat . 534 , 191 – 199 , https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1038 / nature18285 ( 2016 ) . 78 . Ericsson , A . C . , Personett , A . R . , Turner , G . , Dorfmeyer , R . A . & Franklin , C . L . Variable Colonization after Reciprocal Fecal Microbiota Transfer between Mice with Low and High Richness Microbiota . Front . Microbiol . 8 , 196 , https : / / doi . org / 10 . 3389 / fmicb . 2017 . 00196 ( 2017 ) . 79 . Leone , V . et al . Effects of diurnal variation of gut microbes and high - fat feeding on host circadian clock function and metabolism . Cell Host Microbe 17 , 681 – 689 , https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . chom . 2015 . 03 . 006 ( 2015 ) . 19 Scientific RepoRtS | ( 2020 ) 10 : 5039 | https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1038 / s41598 - 020 - 60900 - y www . nature . com / scientificreports www . nature . com / scientificreports / 80 . Thaiss , C . A . et al . Microbiota Diurnal Rhythmicity Programs Host Transcriptome Oscillations . Cell 167 , 1495 – 1510 e1412 , https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . cell . 2016 . 11 . 003 ( 2016 ) . 81 . Nobs , S . P . , Tuganbaev , T . & Elinav , E . Microbiome diurnal rhythmicity and its impact on host physiology and disease risk . EMBO Rep 20 , https : / / doi . org / 10 . 15252 / embr . 201847129 ( 2019 ) . 82 . Ericsson , A . C . & Franklin , C . L . Manipulating the Gut Microbiota : Methods and Challenges . ILAR J . 56 , 205 – 217 , https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1093 / ilar / ilv021 ( 2015 ) . 83 . Dohoo , I . M . W . & Stryhn , H . Veterinary Epidemiologic Research . Vol . 69 151 – 162 ( AVC , Inc . ( 2003 ) . 84 . Killip , S . , Mahfoud , Z . & Pearce , K . What is an intracluster correlation coefficient ? Crucial concepts for primary care researchers . Ann . Fam . Med . 2 , 204 – 208 ( 2004 ) . 85 . Kelcey , B . , Shen , Z . & Spybrook , J . Intraclass Correlation Coefficients for Designing Cluster - Randomized Trials in Sub - Saharan Africa Education . Eval . Rev . 40 , 500 – 525 , https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1177 / 0193841X16660246 ( 2016 ) . 86 . Barnett , J . A . & Gibson , D . L . H2Oh No ! The importance of reporting your water source in your in vivo microbiome studies . Gut Microbes 10 , 261 – 269 , https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1080 / 19490976 . 2018 . 1539599 ( 2019 ) . Acknowledgements Authors want to express their gratitude to Mrs . Colleen Karlo at Case Western Reserve University for her guidance during survey preparation and institutional guidance to ensure compliance and protection of the human subjects that participated in the survey . The authors are indebted to all the survey participants for their time and suggestions . Special thanks go to Drs . Jung - Fu Chang , DVM , PhD , Population Medicine , Cornell University ; Craig L . Franklin , DVM , PhD , Mutant Mouse Resource and Research Center , Department of Veterinary Pathobiology , University of Missouri - Columbia ; Eugene B . Chang , MD , PhD , Department of Medicine and Microbiome Center , University of Chicago , for enlightening discussions , comments and scientific suggestions in various phases of this study which ultimately influenced the directions and focus of the present report . This work and authors were partially supported by the National Institutes of Health Grants P01DK091222 , R01DK055812 , and P30DK097948 to FC ; T32DK083251 and F32DK117585 to AB ; P01DK091222 - Germ - free and Gut Microbiome Core and R21DK118373 to ARP , and R01AI143821 to MS / ARP . Author contributions A . B . and A . R . P . envisioned and planned this study , conducted the survey and analysis , interpreted data , and wrote manuscript . A . B . , A . L . , D . K . , G . L . and A . R . P . conducted literature search . All authors were involved in providing comments and discussing the six recommendations drafted by the lead and senior authors . All authors reviewed and commended on the final recommendations . A . R . P . and S . I . implemented the grading strategy of recommendations . A . R . P . conducted statistical analysis and power analysis , outlined excel calculator , and wrote statistical scripts . E . L . M . provided and verified statistical scripts . F . C . , M . S . , J . M . and B . R . T . contributed with suggestions to manuscript . All authors approved final manuscript . Competing interests The authors declare no competing interests . Additional information Supplementary information is available for this paper at https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1038 / s41598 - 020 - 60900 - y . Correspondence and requests for materials should be addressed to A . R . - P . Reprints and permissions information is available at www . nature . com / reprints . Publisher’s note Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in published maps and institutional affiliations . Open Access This article is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution 4 . 0 International License , which permits use , sharing , adaptation , distribution and reproduction in any medium or format , as long as you give appropriate credit to the original author ( s ) and the source , provide a link to the Cre - ative Commons license , and indicate if changes were made . The images or other third party material in this article are included in the article’s Creative Commons license , unless indicated otherwise in a credit line to the material . If material is not included in the article’s Creative Commons license and your intended use is not per - mitted by statutory regulation or exceeds the permitted use , you will need to obtain permission directly from the copyright holder . To view a copy of this license , visit http : / / creativecommons . org / licenses / by / 4 . 0 / . © The Author ( s ) 2020