Review ARticle https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1038 / s41563 - 020 - 00829 - 9 1 Department of Mechanical Engineering , University of Michigan , Ann Arbor , MI , USA . 2 Department of Biomedical Engineering , University of Michigan , Ann Arbor , MI , USA . 3 Department of Cell and Developmental Biology , University of Michigan Medical School , Ann Arbor , MI , USA . 4 Department of Biosciences , Rice University , Houston , TX , USA . 5 Department of Bioengineering , Rice University , Houston , TX , USA . 6 Laboratory of Stem Cell Bioengineering , Institute of Bioengineering , School of Life Sciences and School of Engineering , École Polytechnique Fédérale de Lausanne , Lausanne , Switzerland . 7 Institute of Chemical Sciences and Engineering , School of Basic Science , École Polytechnique Fédérale de Lausanne , Lausanne , Switzerland . ✉ e - mail : matthias . lutolf @ epfl . ch ; aryeh . warmflash @ rice . edu ; jpfu @ umich . edu T he development of a multicellular organism from a single fertilized egg is a brilliant triumph of evolution that has fas - cinated generations of scientists ( Box 1 ) . Understanding our own development is of particular fundamental and practical inter - est ; however , it poses a unique set of technical and ethical challenges . Our current knowledge of embryonic development is derived from a number of animal species , chosen because they are convenient to study and amenable to experimental manipulation or genetic analy - sis 1 . These studies have revealed developmental principles ( Box 2 ) , and signalling and transcriptional networks that underlie cell fate patterning and tissue morphogenesis . In particular , most of our knowledge of mammalian development derives from the mouse model . However , it is becoming evident that there are morphologi - cal and genetic differences between mice and humans that make cross - species comparisons problematic 2 . Knowledge of human embryogenesis , which is critical for assisted reproductive technologies and prevention of pregnancy loss , birth defects and teratogenesis ( Box 3 ) , should ideally be learned from studying the human embryo per se ; however , such studies have been challenging due to limited access to and bioethical constraints on human embryo specimens . Excess pre - implantation human embryos generated in in vitro fertilization ( IVF ) clinics are available for research 3 , 4 ; however , once a human embryo implants into the uterus , subsequent development is hidden from direct observation . Recent progress in prolonged in vitro culture of IVF human embryos has opened the door for genetic and molecu - lar studies of human embryos directly 5 – 7 . However , international guidelines prohibit in vitro culture of human embryos beyond 14 days post - fertilization ( embryonic day 14 , E14 . 0 ) or reaching the onset of primitive streak ( PS ) development ( ‘the 14 - day rule’ ) 8 , 9 , which marks the outset of gastrulation . The bioethical regulation of human embryo culture has limited studies of IVF human embryos for understanding post - implantation human development . There is notable progress in studying non - human primate ( NHP ) monkey embryos 10 – 12 , whose developments are similar to humans . However , NHP monkey models remain costly , are difficult to modify geneti - cally , and have their own ethical challenges . Recent advances in mammalian embryology , stem cell biol - ogy , organoid technology , and bioengineering have contributed to a considerable interest in the development of multicellular systems based on emergent self - organization and tissue pattern - ing . Importantly , different models of the mammalian conceptus have been developed using mouse and human stem cells 13 – 30 . This emerging field aims to use stem cell cultures to create organized embryo - like structures ( or embryoids ) , whose development and architecture bear remarkable similarities to their in vivo coun - terparts . Embryoids are distinct from organoids , as organoids are organized multicellular structures that mimic the develop - ment , regeneration and homeostasis of a single tissue or organ . In contrast , embryoids aim to model integrated development of the entire conceptus or a considerable portion thereof . In gen - eral , embryoids have a more reproducible cellular organization and architecture than organoids , as bioengineering approaches are commonly deployed to guide their development and culture time is limited to a few days . In addition , the stem cells used in embryoids have been well established and their cultures are usu - ally robust . This Review discusses the developmental principles manifested in the development of embryoids and their appli - cations for advancing human embryology ( particularly at the post - implantation stages ) and reproductive and regenerative medicine . Bioengineering tools used for controlling multicellular interactions and self - organization critical for embryoid develop - ment are highlighted . We conclude with a discussion of impor - tant next steps to leverage advanced bioengineering controls of multicellular interactions to promote the continuous , progressive development of this exciting nascent field . Stem - cell - based embryo models for fundamental research and translation Jianping Fu 1 , 2 , 3 ✉ , Aryeh Warmflash 4 , 5 ✉ and Matthias P . Lutolf 6 , 7 ✉ Despite its importance , understanding the early phases of human development has been limited by availability of human sam - ples . The recent emergence of stem - cell - derived embryo models , a new field aiming to use stem cells to construct in vitro models to recapitulate snapshots of the development of the mammalian conceptus , opens up exciting opportunities to promote fundamental understanding of human development and advance reproductive and regenerative medicine . This Review provides a summary of the current knowledge of early mammalian development , using mouse and human conceptuses as models , and emphasizes their similarities and critical differences . We then highlight existing embryo models that mimic different aspects of mouse and human development . We further discuss bioengineering tools used for controlling multicellular interactions and self - organization critical for the development of these models . We conclude with a discussion of the important next steps and exciting future opportunities of stem - cell - derived embryo models for fundamental discovery and translation . NAture MAteriALS | VOL 20 | FEBRUARy 2021 | 132 – 144 | www . nature . com / naturematerials 132 Review ARticle NaTuRe MaTeRials Mammalian development as a reference framework The development of embryoids , like that of embryos , involves the emergence of organized multicellular structures , through coor - dinated cellular processes including pattern formation , morpho - genesis , cell differentiation and growth . Here we first discuss the principles of early mouse and human development before turning to how these are manifested in embryoids . During early development , both mouse and human embryos develop from a zygote and proceed through recognizable stages of morula , blastula , gastrula , neurula and organogenesis ( Fig . 1 , Box 1 , Box 4 ) . The overall programme of pre - implantation development from a zygote to a blastocyst is conserved between mice and Box 2 | Classic developmental concepts and principles Developmental potency . Developmental potency describes the ability of a cell in the embryo to differentiate into other cell types . There is a continuum of developmental potency following pro - gressive development of the embryo , from totipotency , pluripo - tency , multipotency , oligopotency and finally unipotency . Pattern formation . Pattern formation is the process by which initially equivalent cells in a developing tissue acquire identities that lead to a well - ordered spatial pattern of cell activities . Pattern formation can involve positional information or cell sorting ( see below ) . Positional information . The concept of positional information proposes that cells in a developing tissue acquire positional values as in a coordinate system , which they interpret by developing in particular ways to give rise to spatial patterns . Positional information often involves diffusion of morphogens , leading to signalling gradients and differential gene expression in a morphogen concentration - dependent manner . A key feature of positional information being the basis for pattern formation is that there is no pre - pattern in the developing tissue . Cell sorting . Pattern formation in a developing tissue can initiate from the specification of different cell types in the tissue in a salt - and - pepper fashion , which is followed by sorting of different cell types into distinct domains from where different tissues are formed . Cell sorting involves a morphogenetic process during which individual cells exchange neighbours , increasing the number of homotypic contacts and decreasing the number of heterotypic contacts . Symmetry breaking . Symmetry breaking is the process by which an initially homogeneous system acquires an asymmetry along an axis . While external cues can induce or assist symmetry breaking , asymmetries can emerge spontaneously without such input , guided by self - organization ( see below ) . Self - organization . Self - organization , as a non - equilibrium process , can be defined as the formation of complex patterned structures from units of less complexity by collective , nonlinear interactions , without referring to an external blueprint or template . These local internal interactions typically form feedback loops , thereby conferring robustness to the system . Other common features found in self - organizing systems are nonlinearity , symmetry breaking , and the emergence of patterns through amplifications of stochastic fluctuations . Embryonic induction . Embryonic induction is an interaction between one ( inducing ) tissue and another ( responding ) tissue , as a result of which the responding tissue undergoes a change in its direction of differentiation . Signalling centre . A localized region of the embryo that exerts a special influence on surrounding cells , usually by means of secreted signalling molecules , and thus instructs how those cells develop . Organizer . A signalling centre that directs the development of the whole embryo or of part of the embryo . Community effect . Community effect describes cell – cell communication among a group of nearby cells in a developing tissue , which is necessary for them to maintain coordinated behaviours . Morphogenetic regulation . Tissue - scale morphogenetic changes , including changes in cell shape , number , position and force , can work in concert with classic developmental signalling events mediated by diffusible signals to regulate gene expression and cell fate specification . Box 1 | Glossary Conceptus . The products of conception at all stages of develop - ment from zygote to birth . These include the embryo proper , the fetus , the placenta and all extraembryonic membranes . The term ‘embryo proper’ refers to those parts of the conceptus that will form the new body and excludes extraembryonic tissues . Often , the terms ‘embryo’ and ‘conceptus’ are used interchangeably . Pre - implantation development . The first few days of development , from fertilization to implantation , during which the conceptus travels down the oviduct toward the uterus . It encompasses the first 7 – 9 days after fertilization in humans . Morula . The very early stage in a conceptus when cleavage has resulted in a solid ball of cells . Implantation . The process of attachment and invasion of the conceptus to the uterine tissues that occurs around day 7 – 9 after fertilization in humans . Implantation establishes the fetal – maternal interface leading to later placental development . Blastula and blastocyst . The stage of the conceptus prior to implantation is termed blastula . At this stage , the conceptus is called a blastocyst . Peri - implantation development . The development of the conceptus in the uterine tissues prior to gastrulation . Gastrula and gastrulation . Gastrulation describes the process by which the three definitive germ layers of the embryonic compartment of the conceptus are formed . Gastrulation begins around day 14 in humans . The gastrulation stage conceptus is termed gastrula . Primitive streak . The embryonic structure that breaks radial symmetry by establishing the anterior – posterior axis and establishes bilateral symmetry ( alignment of equivalent structures on both sides of the anterior – posterior axis ) , the site of gastrulation , and the formation of the germ layers . In the human embryo , the primitive streak appears around day 14 after fertilization . Neurula and neurulation . Neurulation describes the process by which the neural tube is formed from the ectodermal neural plate . The neural tube will give rise to the brain and spinal cord . The neurulation stage conceptus is termed neurula . Organogenesis . The development of specific organs in the embryo such as the brain and heart . Organogenesis starts soon after gastrulation . In humans , organogenesis commences during the fourth week after fertilization . Embryonic and fetal stages . The embryonic stage begins with the division of the zygote and encompasses the development of the body plan and formation of the organs . This is followed by the fetal stage , during which growth and maturation of tissues and organs occurs . In humans , the fetal stage begins during the ninth week after fertilization and continues to birth . NAture MAteriALS | VOL 20 | FEBRUARy 2021 | 132 – 144 | www . nature . com / naturematerials 133 Review ARticle NaTuRe MaTeRials humans , leading to the formation of the blastocyst , containing an outer trophectoderm ( TE ) layer surrounding a cavity ( blastocoel ) and an inner cell mass ( ICM ) on one side of the cavity 31 , 32 ( Fig . 1 , Box 4 ) . As the blastocyst develops , the ICM becomes further segre - gated into two cell populations : the pluripotent epiblast ( EPI ) and primitive endoderm ( PE ; or hypoblast in human ) 31 , 32 . The timing of blastocyst implantation differs between mice and humans ( E5 . 0 in mouse and E7 . 0 in human ) . Furthermore , morpho - genesis and lineage developments during early post - implantation mouse and human development show distinct features 2 , 33 ( Fig . 1 , Box 4 ) . Mouse development from E5 . 0 – E6 . 5 leads to the formation of a cup - shaped EPI juxtaposed with TE - derived extraembryonic ectoderm ( ExE ) , enclosing the pro - amniotic cavity . Concurrently , the PE forms the visceral endoderm ( VE ) that envelops both EPI and ExE . In contrast , soon after human blastocyst implanta - tion , while the EPI undergoes epithelization and lumenogenesis to form the pro - amniotic cavity 5 – 7 , EPI cells closer to invading TE cells become specified into the amniotic ectoderm ( AM ) 34 , with remaining pluripotent EPI cells forming the embryonic disc . Thus , in pre - gastrulation human embryo , the pro - amniotic cavity is sur - rounded by a continuous epithelium with AM cells on one side and EPI cells on the other . Studies of mouse gastrulation support the importance of extra - embryonic tissues 35 , 36 ( Fig . 1 , Box 4 ) . In particular , regional pattern - ing of VE in pre - gastrulation mouse embryo leads to a gradient of WNT and NODAL signalling and the establishment of the anterior – posterior ( A – P ) axis of the embryo 37 , 38 . Importantly , developmental signals involving WNT , NODAL and BMP at the proximal , poste - rior end of the EPI instruct EPI cells to form the PS by E6 . 5 and ingress through the PS to acquire mesoderm and endoderm fates 39 – 41 . Human gastrulation initiates around E14 . 0 . However , given limited access to post - implantation human tissues , gastrulation remains one of the most mysterious phases of human development . During mouse gastrulation , primordial germ cells ( PGCs ) , pre - cursors of sperm and egg , emerge at the boundary between pos - terior EPI and ExE 42 , 43 . Data on human PGC specification remain sparse 44 . Existing data from NHP monkey embryos 45 suggest that primate PGCs may emerge in the nascent AM prior to the gastrula - Box 3 | Clinical benefits of human embryology Advancing fundamental understanding of human embryogen - esis can provide a scientific foundation for improving assisted human reproduction and prevention of pregnancy loss , birth de - fects and teratogenesis . It will also advance the biology of germ cells and treatment of infertility . Advancing understanding of human implantation will help develop effective contraception technologies and treatments of recurrent implantation failure . Detailed understanding of the widespread epigenetic program - ming during human embryonic development can provide im - portant insights for disease progression in later life . Studying human development is critical for improving stem cell differen - tiation protocols to mimic embryogenesis , to achieve desired cell functions for research and therapy . E3 . 0 E4 . 5 E5 . 5 E6 . 5 E3 . 5 E7 . 0 E10 . 0 E14 . 0 E6 . 0 Mouse Human Zygote Morula Early blastocyst Matureblastocyst Post - implantationembryo Gastrulation Fig . 1 | Overview of mouse and human development from pre - implantation to the onset of gastrulation . Prior to implantation , both mouse and human embryos undergo cell divisions culminating in the development of a blastocyst , comprising an outer trophectoderm ( TE ) layer and an inner cell mass ( ICM ) that further segregates into epiblast ( EPI , light blue ) and primitive endoderm ( PE , yellow ; hypoblast in humans ) . The timing of blastocyst implantation differs between mice and humans ( E5 . 0 in mouse and E7 . 0 in human ) . Furthermore , morphogenesis and lineage developments during peri - implantation mouse and human development show distinct features . Mouse development from E5 . 0 – E6 . 5 leads to the formation of a cup - shaped EPI juxtaposed with TE - derived extraembryonic ectoderm ( ExE ) , enclosing the pro - amniotic cavity . Concurrently , the PE forms the visceral endoderm ( VE ) that envelops both EPI and ExE . In contrast , soon after human blastocyst implantation , while the EPI undergoes lumenogenesis to form the pro - amniotic cavity , EPI cells adjacent to polar TE cells become specified into the amniotic ectoderm ( AM , dark blue ) , with remaining pluripotent EPI cells forming the embryonic disc . By E6 . 5 for mice and E14 . 0 for humans , gastrulation is initiated in the posterior EPI compartment ( gastrulating cells in red ) . Mouse primordial germ cells ( PGCs ) emerge at the boundary between posterior EPI and ExE at the onset of gastrulation ( not shown ) . Data on primate PGC specification remain sparse . Existing data suggest that human PGCs may emerge in the nascent AM prior to the gastrulation ( not shown ) . Human PGC specification requires additional studies for clarification . NAture MAteriALS | VOL 20 | FEBRUARy 2021 | 132 – 144 | www . nature . com / naturematerials 134 Review ARticle NaTuRe MaTeRials Box 4 | early mouse and human development Pre - implantation development . Pre - implantation mouse and human development displays intricate self - organization and au - tonomy . After fertilization , the one - cell zygote undergoes cleavage cell divisions to form a solid ball of cells resembling a mulberry ( and hence the name morula ) . Cells of the morula begin to differ - entiate , leading to blastocyst formation . In the blastocyst , the tro - phectoderm ( TE ) surrounds a fluid - filled cavity ( blastocoel ) with an inner cell mass ( ICM ) on one side . The TE is an extraembryonic tissue and will give rise to the placenta . As the blastocyst develops , the ICM becomes segregated into two distinct cell populations : the embryonic epiblast ( EPI ) , which will give rise to the embryo proper , and a second extraembryonic tissue known as the primi - tive endoderm ( PE ; or hypoblast in human ) . Pre - implantation de - velopment has been extensively studied using the mouse embryo , revealing important cellular and morphogenetic events including position - dependent TE / ICM patterning , the blastocoelic cavity formation , and lineage segregation and sorting of EPI and PE in the ICM . The readers are referred to some excellent reviews on the mouse blastocyst development 31 , 32 . Human blastocyst formation remains incompletely understood 3 , 111 . Existing data suggests that there are differences in timing , in gene expression and potential - ly in mechanisms of lineage development and function between mice and humans during pre - implantation development 2 . Peri - implantation development . Successful implantation involves a bilateral interaction between a competent blastocyst and a receptive uterus . Implantation of the blastocyst ( E5 . 0 in mouse and E7 . 0 in human ) triggers major morphological reorganization and lineage developments . Upon implantation of the mouse blastocyst , the TE adjacent to the EPI ( polar TE ) forms the extraembryonic ectoderm ( ExE ) and ectoplacental cone . Concomitantly , the EPI and ExE each undergo lumenogenesis so that separate apical lumens are formed in each compartment 84 , 105 . The two lumenal cavities soon fuse to establish the pro - amniotic cavity , leading to the formation of a cup - shaped EPI juxtaposed with the ExE at E6 . 0 ( the egg cylinder ) . From E5 . 0 to E6 . 0 , the PE forms the parietal endoderm and visceral endoderm ( VE ) . By E6 . 0 , the VE envelops both the EPI and ExE , setting the stage for gastrulation . Morphogenesis and lineage development in the peri - implantation human embryo show distinct features compared with mice 34 . Upon implantation , the EPI undergoes lumenogenesis to form the pro - amniotic cavity 5 – 7 , similar to the mouse EPI . Distinctly , the lumenal EPI soon breaks symmetry and resolves into the bipolar patterned EPI - amnion sac 7 , 33 . Specifically , EPI cells adjacent to invading polar TE cells differentiate into the amniotic ectoderm ( AM ) 7 , 33 , an extraembryonic tissue involved in future fetal membrane development . The EPI cells at the opposite pole adjacent to the hypoblast remain pluripotent and become thickened and more columnar , forming the embryonic disc . Thus , the pre - gastrulation EPI displays distinct topologies between humans and mice : discoid in human and cup - shaped in mouse . The mouse embryo does not develop the bipolar EPI - amnion structure . In mice , the AM emerges as amniotic folds at the junction of the EPI and ExE during gastrulation 112 , 113 . Gastrulation . Prior to mouse gastrulation , reciprocal interactions between EPI , ExE and VE lead to regionalized patterning in these tissues 35 , 36 . Regionalization of VE is particularly important , leading to the formation of the anterior VE or AVE at the prospective anterior side of the embryo 37 , 38 . The AVE secrets antagonists to shield overlying EPI cells from differentiation . Development of the AVE thus breaks radial symmetry and marks anterior – posterior ( A – P ) axis formation in the mouse embryo . Soon after , gastrulation is initiated at the proximal , posterior end of the EPI by a convergence of BMP - WNT - NODAL signalling interactions between EPI , ExE and VE 39 – 41 . The antagonists secreted by the AVE block signalling and impart neuroectoderm characters at the anterior pole of the EPI 38 , whereas signals at the proximal , posterior end of the EPI instruct cells to undergo the epithelial – mesenchymal transition ( EMT ) and ingress through the PS to acquire mesendodermal fates 39 . During mouse gastrulation , primordial germ cells ( PGCs ) emerge at the proximal , posterior end of the EPI 42 , 43 . Experimental evidence supports that prospective PGCs are selected from somatic , gastrulating EPI cells by dose - dependent BMP signals that originate from the ExE 114 . Gastrulation remains one of the most mysterious phases of human development . Recent studies of NHP monkey embryos suggest conserved mechanisms are likely to be in play for A – P patterning during human gastrulation 12 , 45 . Limited data from NHP monkey 45 and in vitro cultured human embryos 44 suggest that PGCs may emerge in the dorsal nascent AM soon after implantation . This unexpected finding will require additional confirmation . After gastrulation , the EPI in mouse and human embryos transforms into a trilaminar structure consisting of ectoderm , mesoderm and endoderm . As gastrulation proceeds , it brings subpopulations of cells in the three germ layer linages into proximity so that they can undergo inductive interactions to pattern layers and specify new cell types , driving the development of organ rudiments . Neurulation . Gastrulation is followed by neurulation . During neurulation , the ectoderm is first patterned into the neuroectoderm ( neural plate ) in the medial portion of the embryo flanked by future epidermis . At the border between these regions , the neural crest and placodes form in response to BMP and WNT signals emanated from surrounding tissues 115 , 116 . The neural plate soon folds into the neural tube ( NT ) 46 , 47 , with its anterior and posterior regions giving rise to the brain and spinal cord , respectively . Cells in the NT continue to differentiate under the influence of inductive factors emanating from surrounding tissues . Sonic hedgehog ( Shh ) - mediated transcriptional networks that control ventral patterning of the mouse spinal cord have been well elucidated 48 , 49 . Human neurulation remains challenging to study , even though NT closure defects remain one of the most common birth defects 46 , 47 . Recent studies suggest that late - manifesting neurodegenerative disorders , such as Huntington’s disease , may have a neurodevelopmental component 25 , 117 . The role of early nervous system development in late - onset neurodegenerative disorders remains a debated topic . While the ectoderm undergoes neurulation , the mesoderm and endoderm also become further specified . Specifically , mesodermal cells are organized into cardiogenic mesoderm , axial mesoderm of the prechordal plate and notochord , paraxial mesoderm , intermediate mesoderm and lateral plate mesoderm . Each of these mesodermal regions undergoes some form of segmentation . The most evident and complete segmentation occurs in the paraxial trunk mesoderm , where each segment becomes an entirely separate somite . Much of the other mesodermal regions develop into embryonic connective tissues , cardiovascular and lymphatic systems , skeletal muscle cells , most of the urogenital system , and the lining of the pericardial , pleural and peritoneal cavities . Following gastrulation , the endoderm folds to form the primitive gut tube consisting of three subdivisions : foregut , midgut and hindgut , which subsequently give rise to the epithelial lining of the digestive and respiratory systems . NAture MAteriALS | VOL 20 | FEBRUARy 2021 | 132 – 144 | www . nature . com / naturematerials 135 Review ARticle NaTuRe MaTeRials tion . Additional studies are required to determine whether the same is true for human PGCs . In mouse and human embryos , gastrulation transforms the EPI into a trilaminar structure consisting of definitive ectoderm , mesoderm and endoderm . The three germ layers undergo induc - tive interactions to pattern layers and specify new cell types , driving organ rudiment development ( Box 4 ) . Following gastrulation , the ectoderm undergoes neurulation , in which the neural plate is first patterned in the dorsal ectoderm before folding into the neural tube ( NT ) 46 , 47 ( Box 4 ) . Cells in the NT continue to differentiate into dif - ferent classes of neuronal progenitors 48 , 49 . Concomitantly , mesoder - mal cells are organized into different regions to from the primordia of major organ systems including cardiovascular and lymphatic sys - tems and skeletal muscle cells . Simultaneously , the endoderm will fold to form the primitive gut tube , which will produce the digestive and respiratory systems . embryonic and extraembryonic stem cells as building blocks As a bottom - up approach , the development of embryoids uses embryonic and extraembryonic stem cells , including those derived from embryos , as building blocks to construct models to recapitu - late embryonic development ( Fig . 2 ) . Mouse stem cells . The EPI cells of the mouse blastocyst are plu - ripotent , and their functional , epigenetic and signalling properties have been extensively characterized . These studies reveal that plu - ripotency is dynamic and progressive . As the mouse embryo devel - ops from blastula to gastrula , EPI cells transit from a naive state , in which they do not respond to inductive signals , to a primed state in which they readily differentiate 50 . The transition between naive and primed states has been referred to as formative pluripotency during which EPI cells gain the capacity to make lineage decisions 51 . Mouse pluripotent stem cells ( mPSCs ) in culture display a simi - lar continuum of states . Mouse embryonic stem cells ( mESCs ) with naive pluripotency can be isolated directly from the ICM of the mouse blastocyst and maintained in culture 52 , 53 . In contrast , mouse stem cells corresponding to the primed state , known as mouse epi - blast stem cells ( mEpiSCs ) , are derived from the post - implantation mouse EPI 54 , 55 . mEpiSCs exhibit more advanced developmental fea - tures consistent with the early - gastrulation EPI 56 . Mouse EPI - like cells ( mEpiLCs ) with formative pluripotency have been generated from mESCs in vitro , with a transcriptional profile consistent with early post - implantation mouse EPI 57 . Stem cell lines representative of extraembryonic lineages in the mouse blastocyst have also been established , including mouse trophoblast stem cells ( mTSCs ) 58 and extraembryonic endoderm ( XEN ) cells representing the stem cell population of the PE 59 . Human stem cells . Human ESCs ( hESCs ) have also been success - fully derived from human blastocysts 60 . However , hESCs have a transcriptome and methylome different from the EPI of the human blastocyst 61 , 62 , suggesting that the conditions in which hESCs are cultured fail to capture the pre - implantation developmental pro - gramme of the human embryo . Instead , hESCs are developmentally similar to the post - implantation , pre - gastrulation EPI in cynomol - gus monkey embryos 12 . Consistently , hESCs more closely resemble mEpiSCs than mESCs in terms of molecular properties , lineage potency and culture conditions 50 , 54 , 55 . However , there are still some notable differences in gene expression 63 and in the propensity for E2 . 0 E5 . 0 E4 . 5 E5 . 75 E7 . 0ÐE8 . 0 E12 . 0ÐE13 . 0 E7 . 0 Mouse Human EPSCs EPSCs Induced embryonic and extraembryonic stem cells Induced embryonic and extraembryonic stem cells Naive ESCs EpiLCs EpiSCs Primed ESCs Naive ESCs XEN cells HypoSCs TSCs TSCs Adult Fig . 2 | Mouse and human embryonic and extraembryonic stem cells and their corresponding developmental potencies . Expanded potential stem cells ( EPSCs ) are established by isolating individual cells ( or blastomeres ) from eight - cell stage mouse and human embryos ( or morula ) . By isolating cells from mouse blastocysts , mouse embryonic stem cells ( mESCs ) with naive pluripotency , trophoblast stem cells ( mTSCs ) , and extraembryonic endoderm ( mXEN ) cells representing the stem cell population of the primitive endoderm ( PE ) have been established . Similarly , human trophoblast stem cells ( hTSCs ) have been derived from human blastocyst . Primed mouse ESCs , known as mouse epiblast stem cells ( mEpiSCs ) , are derived from the late post - implantation , pre - gastrulation mouse EPI . Mouse EPI - like cells ( EpiLCs ) with an intermediate or formative state between naive and primed pluripotency have been generated from mESCs in vitro , with a transcriptional profile similar to the early post - implantation mouse EPI . Human ESCs ( hESCs ) with primed pluripotency have also been derived from pre - implantation human blastocysts . Using strategies such as reprogramming , differentiated somatic mouse and human cells can be converted to induced embryonic and extraembryonic stem cells , including induced pluripotent stem cells , or iPSCs . Using chemical cocktails , primed hESCs can be reverted into a naive - like pluripotent state . Human hypoblast stem cells ( hypoSCs ) can be generated using these chemically reset naive hESC lines . NAture MAteriALS | VOL 20 | FEBRUARy 2021 | 132 – 144 | www . nature . com / naturematerials 136 Review ARticle NaTuRe MaTeRials PGC formation between hESCs and mEpiSCs , as hESCs can initi - ate PGC formation whereas mEpiSCs cannot 64 , 65 . There are recent reports showing derivations of hESC lines from human blasto - cysts with naive pluripotency features 66 , 67 , and of chemical repro - gramming cocktails capable of converting hESCs from primed to naive pluripotency 68 , 69 . However , functional validations of naive pluripotency including chimera formation and germline transmis - sion as well as tetraploid complementation , which have been used for mESCs , cannot be implemented with human cells for ethical reasons . To address this issue , there are ongoing discussions of a testable functional framework to assess naive pluripotency in human cells 33 . Somatic human cells can also be converted to a pluripotent state by cell fusion , somatic cell nuclear transfer , transcription factor - based reprogramming , and chemical reprogramming 70 . Pluripotent stem cells generated by these reprogramming strategies are called induced pluripotent stem cells , or iPSCs . Human iPSCs ( hiPSCs ) are considered molecularly and functionally equivalent to hESCs 71 . Recently , through chemical screening , individual blastomeres isolated from eight - cell stage mouse morula were successfully cul - tured to establish mouse expanded potential stem cells ( mEPSCs ) that appear to possess developmental potency for all embryonic and extraembryonic lineages in blastocyst chimaera assays 72 , 73 . Using similar approaches , human EPSCs ( hEPSCs ) were also derived from primed hESCs and hiPSCs , and hEPSCs are shown to have the potency to form trophoblast stem cells 74 . In contrast to mouse extraembryonic stem cells , human extra - embryonic stem cells have only emerged recently . Using chemical screening , human trophoblast stem cells ( hTSCs ) were first derived from human blastocysts and first - trimester placental tissues 75 . Human hypoblast stem cells ( hypoSCs ) were also recently reported using chemically reset naive hESC lines 76 . Recent work showed that chemically reprogrammed naive hESCs could give rise to hTSCs when cultured in appropriate conditions 77 , and that both chemi - cally reset and embryo - derived naive hESCs could be used to derive hTSC lines 78 . With the emergence of these human extraembryonic cell lines as well as hEPSCs , it becomes imperative for additional molecular and functional characterizations for authentication and establishing their developmental identities compared to their in vivo counterparts 78 , 79 . A rapidly growing toolbox of embryoids Stem cells serve as building blocks for the development of embry - oids that recapitulate different stages of mammalian development , from blastula through gastrula or early neurula and organogenesis ( Fig . 3 ) . Development of embryoids use the same developmental principles that manifest in mammalian development . Importantly , embryoids have already generated new insights into early mamma - lian development . Embryoid to model blastocyst development . The first embry - oid to model blastocyst formation ( or blastoid ) was successfully developed by mixing mESCs with mTSCs at a defined ratio under appropriate culture conditions , leading to their self - assembly into a tissue organization reminiscent of the mouse blastocyst 22 . As in vivo , mouse blastoids possess an outer TE layer surrounding a compact ICM - like compartment , and their transcriptome is more similar to mouse blastocyst than is achieved by simply combining mESC and mTSC transcriptomes . Mouse blastoids have been used to dissect interactions between embryonic and extraembryonic compartments , revealing that NODAL and BMP signals from the ICM - like compartment are important for growth and morphogen - esis of TE cells 22 . This insight has proven useful for improving cul - ture conditions of mTSCs 80 . In the initial blastoid protocol , further cell segregation and sorting of ICM - like cells into PE - like cells was inefficient . Optimization studies yielded improved conditions in which the relative proportions of the three cell lineages ( EPI - , TE - and PE - like cells ) more closely resemble that of mouse blastocyst 81 . Remarkably , culture of mEPSCs in appropriate conditions yields self - organized blastoids consisting of EPI - , TE - and PE - like cells 30 . Another recent work mixing mEPSCs with mTSCs also led to the formation of blastoids that showed developmental progression from the pre - to post - implantation egg cylinder morphology in vitro 82 , similar to the mouse ETX embryoid described below . Although capable of implanting in the mouse uterus , all of the mouse blas - toids fail to develop much further than the blastocyst stage either in vitro or in vivo . The reasons for this are not currently under - stood and may point to a requirement for greater organization than currently achieved in mouse blastoids . It remains to be determined whether human blastoids can be generated by using either naive hPSCs or hEPSCs with or without hTSCs or hypoSCs under suitable culture environments . Human amniotic sac embryoid . During early post - implantation human development , a patterned bipolar EPI - AM structure arises from the EPI . It was recently shown that culturing primed hPSCs on a soft culture surface together with native extracellular matrix ( ECM ) proteins ( that is , Geltrex ) diluted in culture medium leads to the formation of a spherical lumenal hPSC colony 20 . This observa - tion is consistent with the intrinsic lumenogenic property associ - ated with primed but not naive hPSCs 83 , 84 . Interestingly , hPSCs in the colony lose pluripotency and differentiate into amniotic cells , even without exogenous inductive factors in the culture medium 20 . If only one of these culture elements is present , either a soft substrate or diluted gel in the culture medium , primed hPSCs form lumenal sacs but retain pluripotency , suggesting that amniotic differentia - tion of hPSCs is mechanosensitive 20 . Amniotic differentiation of hPSCs requires endogenous BMP signalling , and its inhibition under amnion - differentiation conditions is sufficient for rescuing hPSC pluripotency 20 . A small fraction of lumenal sacs , rather than differentiating entirely into amniotic tissues , spontaneously break symmetry and form a bipolar structure with columnar pluripotent cells on one side and amniotic cells on the other , mimicking EPI - AM pattern - ing in the pre - gastrulation human embryo 20 . This model is termed the post - implantation amniotic sac embryoid ( PASE ) . Symmetry breaking in the PASE also depends on BMP activity , and active BMP signalling is only evident at the prospective AM - like pole 20 . Progressive development of the PASE results in EPI - like cells fur - ther differentiating into PS - like cells . This spontaneous symmetry breaking occurs in only 5 – 10 % of lumenal hPSC sacs . To increase efficiency of PASE formation , a microfluidic PASE model has recently been developed 27 . This microfluidic device allows small clusters of primed hPSCs to be grown in small indentations with separate channels supplying culture medium to each side 27 . Flowing BMP4 in only one of these channels leads to reproducible pat - terning of amniotic cells only on the side exposed to BMP4 27 . The opposite side remains pluripotent but soon goes on to differentiate into PS - like cells 27 . The identity of PS derivatives can be modulated by stimulating this side of the cell clusters with additional ligands : WNT stimulation together with either BMP4 or ACTIVIN - A leads to posterior and anterior PS derivatives , respectively 27 . Importantly , human PGC - like cells ( hPGCLCs ) emerge in the microfluidic PASE before it initiates gastrulation - like events 27 , suggesting applications of the microfluidic PASE model for studying the origin and specifi - cation of hPGCs . The PASE represents the first embryoid to model early post - implantation development of the EPI and AM compartments of the human embryo . It also suggests the inductive role of AM in triggering human gastrulation . Although the microfluidic PASE model considerably improves the controllability of EPI - AM pat - NAture MAteriALS | VOL 20 | FEBRUARy 2021 | 132 – 144 | www . nature . com / naturematerials 137 Review ARticle NaTuRe MaTeRials terning , further asymmetries are not demonstrated and the EPI - like compartment is either entirely anterior or posterior in character . Prolonged culture of the PASE is also limited by the confined space in the microfluidic device . Furthermore , disseminating cells from the PASE mimicking gastrulation would lead to its disassembly . Future efforts should be devoted to identifying a strategy to prolong the culture of the PASE and promote self - organization of gastrulat - ing cells . It is possible that adding human extraembryonic stem cells including hypoSCs to the PASE will be helpful for these efforts . Two - dimensional models of gastrulation . Treatment of primed hPSCs confined to micropatterned colonies with BMP4 reproducibly leads to organized differentiation with putative TE - like cells on the colony outer edge , ectodermal cells in the colony centre , and meso - dermal and endodermal cells forming two layers in between 18 , 85 , 86 . This multicellular pattern is consistent as in the gastrulating mam - malian embryo . However , the fate territories in the two - dimensional ( 2D ) gastrulation model are adjacent on a 2D surface rather than lay - ered one on top of the other as in in vivo . Although the 2D geometry is artificial and distinct from the three - dimensional ( 3D ) topology of mammalian embryos , the reproducibility and compatibility with live imaging of the 2D gastrulation model has allowed quantifica - tion of the self - organized signalling dynamics that drive these pat - terning events 87 – 90 . These studies have revealed that rather than creating stable gradients , cells generate dynamic expanding fronts of endogenous WNT and NODAL signalling that are interpreted combinatorially to pattern different germ layers . These studies can serve as a template for investigating the mechanisms of patterning through signalling dynamics in other embryoids . Interestingly , in colonies treated with WNT rather than BMP4 , similar cell fate pat - terns are observed but with a different mechanism , which involves a wave of epithelial – mesenchymal transition ( EMT ) that sensi - tizes cells to the exogenous WNT signal 91 . Mouse gastrulation has also been successfully modelled using the 2D gastrulation embry - oid with mouse EpiLCs 92 . Importantly , findings from this mouse embryoid have been compared to the mouse embryo , providing a more direct validation , which for obvious reasons is not possible for human gastrulation embryoids . Micropatterning can be read - ily combined with other bioengineering approaches . For example , recent work has shown that overlaying gradients of exogenous ligands on micropatterned 2D gastrulation embryoids can bias the resulting fate pattern in a reproducible way 93 . Specifically , a gradi - E4 . 5 E5 . 5 E6 . 5 Implantation Gastrulation E7 . 0 E10 . 0 E14 . 0 Implantation Gastrulation 2D gastrulation model 3D blastoid 3D gastruloid 3D ETX embryoid 3D trunk - like structure 3D PASE 3D epiblast patterning model 2D gastrulation model 3D gastruloid 2D neurulation model Fig . 3 | existing embryoids that recapitulate different stages of mouse and human development . 3D blastoids are embryoids for modelling pre - implantation blastocyst development . 3D ETX embryoids model post - implantation embryo development up to early gastrulation . 3D gastruloid and trunk - like structure are embryoids to model post - gastrulation development of the posterior portion of the embryo . The 2D gastrulation model is an embryoid for modelling germ layer patterning during gastrulation . The 3D epiblast patterning model is an embryoid for modelling epiblast morphogenesis and patterning during early post - implantation development . 3D post - implantation amniotic sac embryoid ( PASE ) models post - implantation human development up to early gastrulation . 2D neurulation models are embryoids for modelling the neurulation process , leading to neural tube development and patterning . NAture MAteriALS | VOL 20 | FEBRUARy 2021 | 132 – 144 | www . nature . com / naturematerials 138 Review ARticle NaTuRe MaTeRials ent of BMP4 ( and in some cases a counteracting gradient of BMP antagonist NOGGIN ) generated in a microfluidic device induced axially organized patterning of the germ layers along the gradient , breaking the radial symmetry of 2D circular colonies 93 . 3D models of gastrulation . In addition to blastoids , mESCs and mTSCs can be cultured together in conditions that promote their self - organization to model post - implantation mouse development . In such models , rather than forming structures that morphologically resemble the mouse blastocyst , mESCs and mTSCs form separate compartments before fusing together . Each compartment under - goes lumenogenesis , with the resulting lumens merging together , resulting in a structure resembling the egg cylinder stage mouse embryo ( referred to as the ETS embryoid ) 19 . Remarkably , the ETS embryoid initiates developmental events mimicking both germ cell formation and PS development in an asymmetric manner 19 . This is surprising as VE , which is critical for A – P symmetry breaking in vivo , is not present in the ETS embryoid , although further studies show that adding XEN cells into the ETS embryoid improves this model ( called the ETX embryoid ) 23 . A 3D embryoid for modelling symmetry breaking of the EPI has also been developed starting from primed hPSCs 26 . In this model , hPSCs grown in 3D and treated with a low dose of BMP4 form lumenal sacs before polarizing into two opposing regions displaying gene expression patterns associated with ectoderm and mesoderm induction 26 . This observation is similar to cell fate patterning that emerges from the 2D human gastrulation embryoid 18 . However , as the initial degree of symmetry is higher in 3D ( sphere versus disc ) , the development of the 3D human gastrulation embryoid involves spontaneous symmetry breaking while in 2D it does not . Finally , an embryoid model beginning from only mESCs or primed hPSCs has been shown to be able to model the post - gastrulation development of the posterior portion of the mouse and human embryos , respectively 17 , 21 , 28 , 94 . Growing these cells in aggregates of defined size and exposing them to a prop - erly timed pulse of WNT activation leads to the formation of a tail - bud - like structure on one end of the aggregate that continues with axial organization , somitogenesis , PGC specification and even NT formation 17 , 21 , 28 , 94 . These structures , known as gastruloids , recapitulate some essential features of A – P axial patterning of the post - gastrulation mouse and human embryos as revealed by HOX gene expression and somite formation 21 , 28 , 94 . The mouse gastruloid can even be coaxed to generate a primitive beating heart following pathways similar to those of the mouse embryo 95 . These mouse and human gastruloids all lack anterior structures , such as the forebrain , likely to be due to the posteriorizing effect of WNT signalling . While the 3D embryoid models of gastrulation show remark - able emergence of patterning and morphogenesis , they lack the controllability and reproducibility of the 2D gastrulation models . Bioengineering approaches , which can control cell – cell interactions and modulate symmetry breaking and patterning , as in the micro - fluidic PASE 27 , will be useful for improving the controllability and reproducibility of the 3D gastrulation models . Models of neurulation . The nervous system acquires its form and pattern during the neurulation stage . Several stem - cell - based neurulation models have been developed , which focus on the ecto - dermal germ layer , the source of the nervous system . One of the earliest studies showed that 3D spherical lumenal sacs composed of neuroepithelial ( NE ) cells , reminiscent of the NT , could be grown from single mESCs under appropriate neural differentiation condi - tions 15 . These neural sacs were entirely dorsal in character but could be patterned by exogenous ventralizing or posteriorizing signals . Optimizing the gel matrix in which neural sacs were embedded also improved their dorsal – ventral ( D – V ) patterning , showing the power of bioengineering approaches to optimize conditions for embryoid self - organization 96 . D – V patterned neural sacs mimicking human NT development were recently demonstrated using primed hPSCs under a culture condition similar to that used for mESCs 29 . Recently , several 2D models have been reported to recapitulate patterning of a considerable portion of the ectodermal germ layer . One study with primed hPSCs showed that regional patterning of neural crest and NE cells could be created on micropatterned surfaces , mimicking neural induction as the first step of the neu - rulation process , and that this emergent regional patterning was regulated by mechanical control of BMP - SMAD signalling 24 . Other recent studies have recapitulated patterning of all four major fates within the ectoderm during neural induction—neural , neural crest , placode and epidermis 25 , 97 . Modulating both BMP and WNT sig - nalling enabled control over the fates that emerged at the border between neural and non - neural ectoderm 97 , and one of these mod - els was shown to be useful for modelling developmental effects of the mutations that cause Huntington’s disease 25 . In the future , models that recapitulate not only regional fate patterning , but also morphogenesis involved in neural plate folding and neural fold clo - sure , could both lead to new fundamental knowledge of this stage of human development and provide essential systems for research into human NT closure defects . Bioengineering tools to control embryoid development Mammalian embryogenesis is a context - dependent process , involv - ing interactions between multiple , co - emerging embryonic and extraembryonic cell lineages that are intricately organized in three dimensions . This 3D context provides spatial boundary conditions , as well as biochemical and biomechanical inputs and positional information that are often absent in conventional 2D culture ves - sels . Although mouse and human stem cells can be efficiently differ - entiated into specialized cell types under classical 2D cultures , poor control over initial seeding conditions and tissue growth lead to dis - organized cell fate patterns and tissue shapes . Bioengineering tools such as microfluidics or microfabricated cell culture substrates have been proven highly effective to ‘reconstruct’ , in a bottom - up fash - ion , the missing 3D physical and biochemical context of the early embryo ( Fig . 4 ) . Indeed , recent advances in bioengineering and biomaterials not only promote the reproducibility of embryoids , for example , to facilitate the development of quantitative assays , but also enable systematic studies of how the complex array of extrinsic inputs influences embryonic development . Micropatterning to control embryoid shape . The simplest and perhaps most adopted approach to influence multicellular self - organization is based on cultures of cell colonies selectively on cell adhesive substrates that are designed to spatially control tissue size and shape . This can be readily achieved through micropattern - ing , a classical microfabrication technique widely used to study how cell or tissue shape affects cellular phenotypes 98 . As illustrated in 2D embryoid models , 2D micropatterning provides important advan - tages as an assay technology , given their scalability and reproduc - ibility , coupled with the ability to manipulate culture conditions and the simplicity of live imaging . Importantly , 2D micropattern - ing can be integrated with microfluidics 93 and cell mechanics tools ( such as micropost force sensors or traction force microscopy 99 ) for dynamic , quantitative measurements and perturbations of soluble biochemical signals and insoluble biophysical cues . These unique features have not been fully exploited to date , but are important for future studies to examine the roles of tissue geometry and mechani - cal forces in influencing cell signalling and cell – cell communication to regulate patterning in 2D embryoids . Using similar microfabrication approaches , micropatterning can be extended from 2D to 3D , such as to embed cells within microscale cavities in soft materials such as hydrogels or viscoelastic polymers . This approach has been demonstrated for tubular mammary epithe - NAture MAteriALS | VOL 20 | FEBRUARy 2021 | 132 – 144 | www . nature . com / naturematerials 139 Review ARticle NaTuRe MaTeRials lia , shedding light on mechanisms of branching morphogenesis 100 . When single primed hPSCs are grown in microcavities overlaid with Matrigel , the cells self - organize and form a single central lumen with a defined geometry 83 . Such tissues might serve as precursors for the generation of new embryoids , for example , for modelling NT patterning along the A – P and / or D – V axes . Microwell arrays for controlling initial cell aggregation . Another simple yet useful microfabrication approach for improving the consistency of embryoid development is the microwell array . The microwell array can be used to trap cells in suspension to pro - mote their initial aggregation into spheroids of controlled sizes and multicellular compositions . This approach , for example , has been exploited to reproducibly generate blastoids from mESC / mTSC aggregates in microwell arrays composed of agarose hydro - gels fabricated by micromolding with poly - dimethylsiloxane ( PDMS ) stamps 22 . Along similar lines , the AggreWell plate , a com - mercial microwell array , was used to improve the reproducibility and efficiency in generating ETX embryoids and mEPSC - based blastoids 23 , 30 , 82 . For both micropatterning and microwell arrays , their impact on embryoid development seems to derive from their influence on the determination of the initial cell number in each colony and the geometric boundaries of the colony . Colony geometry can directly influence cell signalling and cell – cell communication through regulatory mechanisms involving dynamic morphogenetic cues and diffusible signals 24 , 86 , 87 . It remains elusive how the initial num - ber of cells ( or cell density ) in each cell colony affects progressive embryoid development . Existing data suggest its effect on cell polarity , paracrine signalling , the actin cytoskeleton , and mecha - notransduction , which are known to regulate classic developmental signalling events . Microfluidics for establishing signalling centres and gradients and stem cell niches . Whereas micropatterned substrates and microwell arrays offer an effective means to control cell colony shape and aggregate composition , the environment in which the cells are grown is typically isotropic and static , and thus poorly suited to recapitulate the spatiotemporal dynamics of morpho - gen signalling operating in vivo . Because of its ability to precisely manipulate tiny quantities of fluids and establish dynamic chemi - cal gradients , microfluidics offers exciting opportunities to con - trol morphogen signalling in space and time such as to establish artificial signalling centres to direct multicellular self - organization and patterning . An example along this line reported the development of micro - fluidic devices to expose micropatterned 2D gastrulation embryoids to linear morphogen gradients generated via passive diffusion ( that is , a ‘source and sink’ type gradient system ) 93 . Beyond establishing controlled biomolecular gradients , microfluidics offers a power - ful way to optimize and standardize advanced embryoid cultures , as demonstrated by the microfluidic PASE 27 . This and similar microengineered 3D culture systems should be particularly useful for designing multicellular embryoid systems with the robustness and scalability needed in translational applications such as high - content screening . a b c d Fig . 4 | Bioengineering tools to promote multicellular interaction and self - organization in embryoid development . a , Micropatterning to generate 2D circular colonies of hPSCs to model germ layer patterning during gastrulation . Immunofluorescence image shows emergence of concentric gene expression regions , mimicking development of the germ layers ( SOX2 + ectoderm , blue ; TBXT + mesendoderm , red ) as well as a GATA3 + extraembryonic layer ( green ) . b , Microwell array to promote cell aggregation and development of mouse blastoids . Top : a microwell array composed of agarose hydrogel to promote aggression of mESCs and mTSCs . Bottom : merged image showing two blastoids , with a layer of mTSCs surrounding a cavity and a cluster of mESCs mimicking the inner cell mass . Immunostaining : NANOG ( red ) and GATA6 ( green ) . c , Microfluidics to control spatiotemporal morphogen signalling and tissue patterning . Bright - field ( top ) and immunofluorescence ( bottom ) images of an array of post - implantation amniotic sac embryoids ( PASEs ) , showing molecular asymmetry and tissue patterning , with TFAP2A + amniotic cells on one pole ( green ) and TBXT + gastrulating cells ( magenta ) on the opposite pole . d , Chemically and physically defined hydrogels for 3D embryoid development . Immunofluorescence image of a 3D human gastrulation embryoid for modeling epiblast morphogenesis and patterning ( SOX2 , green ; TBXT , magenta ) . Credit : A . yoney / E . D . Siggia ( a ) ; N . Rivron ( b ) ; y . Zheng ( c ) ; M . Simunovic ( d ) NAture MAteriALS | VOL 20 | FEBRUARy 2021 | 132 – 144 | www . nature . com / naturematerials 140 Review ARticle NaTuRe MaTeRials It is worth noting that artificial signalling centres in multicellu - lar self - organization and development can also be established using microbeads loaded with signalling molecules 101 , optogenetics 102 , or through co - culture with morphogen - secreting cells 103 . A recent work demonstrated optogenetic stimulation for local activation of WNT signals in both 2D and 3D human gastrulation models to drive mesendoderm differentiation 102 . In another work , an induc - ible Shh - producing cell aggregate was embedded at one pole of an hPSC spheroid , mimicking a developmental organizer , to promote ordered self - organization along D – V and A – P axes in a forebrain organoid model 103 . Advanced biomaterials to mimic the extracellular matrix . Mammalian development involves not only cell – cell interactions , but also cell – ECM interactions that guide embryonic organization , cellular differentiation and morphogenesis . The ECM is synthesized and secreted by embryonic cells beginning at the earliest stages of development . Providing adhesive substrates in a 3D context , the ECM further defines tissue boundaries to guide cell migration and functions as a dynamic repository for growth factors to regulate mor - phogen signalling . Importantly , embryonic cells sense and respond to the 3D organization and physical properties of the ECM through mechanotransductive processes involving integrin - mediated adhe - sions and the intracellular actin cytoskeleton 104 . An exciting con - temporary research question is how these mechanotransduction processes interact with growth - factor - mediated developmental sig - nalling to regulate cellular differentiation and patterning 104 . The importance of basement membrane - mediated integrin sig - nalling in transforming amorphous EPI cells into an apico - basally polarized lumenal EPI sac was first shown in the peri - implantation mouse embryo 105 . Indeed , the use of 3D ECM cultures to promote the development of mESCs and primed hPSCs into lumenal EPI - like structures has been an important first step for the development of different embryoids 19 , 20 , 23 , 26 . In view of these data , how can one then explain the remarkable level of self - organization and patterning seen in the mouse and human gastruloids grown in suspension , that is , without a surrounding 3D matrix support 13 , 17 , 21 ? Two recent papers that report the exposure of mouse gastruloids to low percentage Matrigel at a later culture time point might shed light on the role of ECM in morphogenesis in the gastruloid 28 , 94 . Intriguingly , instead of observing gene expression patterns in the absence of any visible morphogenesis , as in mouse gastruloids derived in suspension cul - ture 17 , 21 , the provision of Matrigel resulted in the development of somites and a NT 28 , 94 , suggesting that fate patterns could arise even in morphologically rather disorganized tissues and elaborate mor - phogenesis and tissue formation might be dependent on physical contacts with ECM . However , whether Matrigel exerts its function in the mouse gastruloid through adhesive signalling or mechanical interactions or both remains to be elucidated . All of the above examples have relied on native ECM isolated from animal tissues , in particular Matrigel and Geltrex , basement membrane extracts derived from mouse tumour tissues . The main limitations of these native ECM , for example , its batch - to - batch variability and potential immunogenicity , are widely documented . However , despite sizeable efforts in biomaterial development over the past decade , it has not yet been possible to identify synthetic alternatives that can completely replace native ECM in 3D cultures . However , some progress has been reported in the use of Matrigel alternatives for embryoid cultures . For example , scientists utilized fibrin matrices , a clinically approved biomaterial generated from fibrinogen , to coax mESC colonies to differentiate and form spa - tially organized germ layers 16 . Interestingly , the authors reported the roles of matrix dimensionality , stiffness , as well as cell – cell adhesion in promoting germ layer self - organization 16 . An approach based on chemically defined , poly ( ethylene gly - col ) ( PEG ) - based hydrogels was explored in the context of 3D NT models generated from mESCs 15 , 96 . By systematically screening PEG matrices of variable stiffness , degradability and ECM composition , the authors identified a parameter window in which apico - basally polarized NE sacs with proper D – V patterning robustly emerged , with an efficiency greater than achieved in Matrigel 96 . More recently , synthetic hydrogels were applied to the 3D human gastrulation embryoid , by using two commercially available hydrogel systems ( physically crosslinked PNIPAAm - PEG gel and an Fmoc - based supramolecular gel ) that were admixed with Matrigel 26 . Beyond assisting translational applications of embryoids , the exquisite mod - ularity of such chemically and physically defined hydrogel systems will facilitate a systematic dissection of the independent roles of extrinsic ECM factors ( including matrix stiffness , porosity , degrad - ability and ECM composition ) in early development . Conclusions and future directions Understanding human development has been one of the central goals of modern biology . To circumvent the limited availability of human samples , conventional mammalian developmental biol - ogy studies have relied heavily on animal models , including NHP monkeys . In all of these models , the need for in utero development prevents precise manipulations and high - resolution observation . As a matter of fact , there will never be sufficient embryonic materi - als—from humans , NHP monkeys , or other mammalian species— available for quantitative assays with a level of resolution offered by synthetic in vitro embryoid systems . As a bottom - up approach using stem cells to model embryonic development without using intact embryos , embryoids are quickly becoming an essential exper - imental tool for advancing mammalian embryology . In particular , human embryoids are the only method available to study human embryological events between the onset of gastrulation and 4 – 5 weeks post - fertilization when the earliest fetal tissues from elective terminations are available . By this time point , the primordia of most of the major organ systems have formed in the recognizable fetal body , so it is imperative to develop alternative models to understand the origins of the human body plan . The development of embryoids integrates knowledge and meth - odologies from stem cell biology , developmental biology , synthetic biology , tissue engineering and bioengineering . Coupled with the ease of genetically modifying stem cell lines , the ability to manipu - late culture conditions and the simplicity of live imaging , embry - oids are becoming robust and attractive systems to disentangle cellular behaviours and signalling interactions that drive mam - malian embryogenesis . Using lineage and signalling reporter lines , embryoids offer exciting experimental systems to study pattern formation , morphogenesis , cell differentiation , and growth , and how these developmental processes are dynamically regulated and coordinated during embryonic development . Embryoids are also useful for elucidating intracellular signalling dynamics and gene regulatory networks and their cross - regulation with cell mechanics and morphogenetic signals during embryonic development and for studying classic developmental biology questions , such as symme - try breaking , scaling and induction . Directed differentiations of hPSCs towards clinically relevant cell lineages using conventional 2D cultures have made remarkable prog - ress over the last two decades . Directed differentiations of hPSCs are largely based on developmental biology knowledge generated from model organisms to optimize growth and differentiation factors to modulate relevant developmental signalling pathways . However , intricate cell – cell interactions involved in embryonic development , which are important for lineage specification and functional mat - uration , are often missing and difficult to recapitulate in conven - tional 2D cultures . Thus , it is possible that continuous development of human embryoids can lead to advanced 3D cultures in which human stem cells can undergo successive developmental stages to produce tissue progenitors and fully differentiated cells with better NAture MAteriALS | VOL 20 | FEBRUARy 2021 | 132 – 144 | www . nature . com / naturematerials 141 Review ARticle NaTuRe MaTeRials fidelity to their in vivo counterparts in terms of gene expression , epigenetics and function . Nonetheless , the widespread utility of embryoids and their broad impact on human embryology and reproductive medicine will depend on continuous improvements of their controllability , scalability , reproducibility and standardization and the commercial availability of culture platforms used for embryoid development . More sophisticated embryoid platforms , such as the microfluidic PASE , will require additional collaborative efforts between bioengi - neers and stem cell and developmental biologists for their dissemi - nation to the broad research community . In principle , embryoids can be integrated with multi - well plate formats to achieve highly parallelized assays compatible with existing automation workflows and screening infrastructure . Mouse embryoids , which contain all embryonic and extraem - bryonic lineages and their correct organizations to mimic mouse development from pre - implantation to early gastrulation , have been successfully developed 19 , 22 , 23 . Since culture protocols are avail - able to enable whole mouse embryos to develop in vitro from the pre - gastrula to the early organogenesis stages 106 , it is conceivable that mouse embryoids will eventually be able to mimic whole mouse embryonic development to the organogenesis stages . Compared to mouse embryoids , human embryoids developed so far have only used primed hPSCs to model post - implantation developmental events associated with the EPI lineage . It is foresee - able that as hTSCs and human hypoSC lines become available and further authenticated , these extraembryonic cells will be integrated into existing human embryoids ( as in the mouse blastoids and ETS and ETX embryoids 19 , 22 , 23 ) , allowing their prolonged and organized development and studies of the roles of embryonic – extraembryonic interactions in guiding implantation , placentation , embryonic pat - terning and gastrulation . Another future direction will be to leverage hPSCs possessing developmental potency for both embryonic and extraembryonic cell lineages ( such as naive hPSCs and hEPSCs ) and identify suitable culture conditions to guide their development into embryoids that contain organized embryonic and extraembryonic structures . Architecturally and functionally competent endometrial culture systems are available using both human primary cultures and established cell lines 107 . In the future , it will be important to use human embryoids containing TE - like cells coupled with endo - metrial culture systems to model human implantation and placen - tation , in the hope of understanding the interrelationship between embryonic and placental development . We envision that continuous developments of mouse and human embryoids will incorporate new advances of developmental biol - ogy , stem cell biology and bioengineering and will lead to improved understanding of intracellular signalling and cell fate dynamics at the single - cell resolution , extracellular movement of developmental signals at cellular and tissue scales , and embryonic – extraembryonic interactions and their critical roles in guiding embryonic develop - ment . It is foreseeable that advanced approaches integrating differ - ent bioengineering tools will further promote the controllability and reproducibility of different embryoids . Bioengineering tools to dynamically control the cellular environment , such as by modulat - ing morphogen gradients , symmetry breaking and local signalling centres , will be essential for improving embryoids and gleaning new insights in their developments . Next - generation 3D human embry - oids ( such as human ETX embryoids ) or even new human embry - oid systems mimicking organogenesis ( including the brain , heart , blood and gut ) are likely to emerge . We also envision that initial translational applications of human embryoids will allow studying genetic and environmental causes of recurrent implantation failure ( by combining human embryoids with endometrial culture sys - tems ) and early birth structural defects such as NT defects ( NTDs ) and congenital heart defects . Embryoids also have the potential to replace in vivo teratoma assays commonly used for establish - ing stem cell pluripotency . ‘Organism - level’ , high - throughput , embryoid - based screening pipelines are likely to emerge in the near future . We also envision that an important next technological milestone is to achieve a human embryoid that can recapitulate the entire gastrulation process and the development of the trilaminar germ disc containing the three organized definitive germ layers . Validation of findings from embryoids using in vivo controls will be important to evaluate their developmental relevance 92 . However , this is challenging for human embryoids that aim to reca - pitulate post - gastrulation human development , given the scarcity of relevant human embryo data 108 . This challenge will be partially addressed by the recent progress of NHP monkey embryo stud - ies 10 – 12 , which provide quantitative transcriptomic and epigenomic profiles of monkey cells at post - gastrulation developmental stages . Nonetheless , it becomes imperative to establish a molecular and cellular standard to assess the authenticity and equivalency and establish developmental identities of human embryoids compared to their in vivo counterparts . This might require the current 14 - day rule governing the in vitro human embryo research to be extended to a post - gastrulation developmental stage 9 . Accompanying the emergence of different human embryoids , there are ongoing discussions and recommendations from the bioethics community on their regulation 109 , 110 . Even though the existing human embryoids are far from being equivalent to human embryos , as we continue to improve and generate new human embryoids , they are expected to more closely mimic human embryos , in terms of cell organization , morphogenesis and gene expression . The continuous development and progression of this nascent field will inevitably lead to important bioethical ques - tions : what should the ethical status of human embryoids be and how should they be regulated ? What does determine the devel - opmental potential of human embryoids in culture and equally as important , can it be functionally assessed ? Discussions about these questions are clearly out of the scope of this Review , and the readers are referred to recent commentaries elsewhere 109 , 110 . Currently there is little explicit regulation of human embryoid research . However , a consensus among researchers working in this field ( including the authors ) has urged regulators to prohibit implantation of human embryoids into mammalian uterus and ban the use of human embryoids for reproductive purposes 109 , 110 . As this nascent field moves forward , we should keep in mind social responsibility as an essential part of the responsible con - duct of research . Transparency and effective engagement with all stakeholders including the public is essential to ensure that prom - ising avenues for research proceed with due caution , especially given the complexity and rapid progress of this field . Received : 14 April 2020 ; Accepted : 14 September 2020 ; Published online : 16 November 2020 references 1 . Solnica - Krezel , L . ( ed . ) Gastrulation : From Embryonic Pattern to Form ( Academic Press , 2020 ) . 2 . Rossant , J . & Tam , P . P . L . New insights into early human development : lessons for stem cell derivation and differentiation . Cell Stem Cell 20 , 18 – 28 ( 2017 ) . 3 . Fogarty , N . M . E . et al . Genome editing reveals a role for OCT4 in human embryogenesis . Nature 550 , 67 – 73 ( 2017 ) . 4 . Ma , H . et al . Correction of a pathogenic gene mutation in human embryos . Nature 548 , 413 – 419 ( 2017 ) . 5 . Deglincerti , A . et al . Self - organization of the in vitro attached human embryo . Nature 533 , 251 – 254 ( 2016 ) . 6 . Shahbazi , M . N . et al . Self - organization of the human embryo in the absence of maternal tissues . Nat . Cell Biol . 18 , 700 – 708 ( 2016 ) . 7 . Xiang , L . et al . A developmental landscape of 3D - cultured human pre - gastrulation embryos . Nature 577 , 537 – 542 ( 2020 ) . 8 . Daley , G . Q . et al . Setting global standards for stem cell research and clinical translation : the 2016 ISSCR guidelines . Stem Cell Rep . 6 , 787 – 797 ( 2016 ) . NAture MAteriALS | VOL 20 | FEBRUARy 2021 | 132 – 144 | www . nature . com / naturematerials 142 Review ARticle NaTuRe MaTeRials 9 . Hyun , I . , Wilkerson , A . & Johnston , J . Revisit the 14 - day rule . Nature 533 , 169 – 171 ( 2016 ) . 10 . Ma , H . et al . In vitro culture of cynomolgus monkey embryos beyond early gastrulation . Science 366 , eaax7890 ( 2019 ) . 11 . Niu , Y . et al . Dissecting primate early post - implantation development using long - term in vitro embryo culture . Science 366 , eaaw5754 ( 2019 ) . 12 . Nakamura , T . et al . A developmental coordinate of pluripotency among mice , monkeys and humans . Nature 537 , 57 – 62 ( 2016 ) . 13 . ten Berge , D . et al . Wnt signaling mediates self - organization and axis formation in embryoid bodies . Cell Stem Cell 3 , 508 – 518 ( 2008 ) . 14 . Fuchs , C . et al . Self - organization phenomena in embryonic stem cell - derived embryoid bodies : axis formation and breaking of symmetry during cardiomyogenesis . Cells Tissues Organs 195 , 377 – 391 ( 2012 ) . 15 . Meinhardt , A . et al . 3D reconstitution of the patterned neural tube from embryonic stem cells . Stem Cell Rep . 3 , 987 – 999 ( 2014 ) . 16 . Poh , Y . - C . et al . Generation of organized germ layers from a single mouse embryonic stem cell . Nat . Commun . 5 , 4000 ( 2014 ) . 17 . van den Brink , S . C . et al . Symmetry breaking , germ layer specification and axial organisation in aggregates of mouse embryonic stem cells . Development 141 , 4231 – 4242 ( 2014 ) . 18 . Warmflash , A . et al . A method to recapitulate early embryonic spatial patterning in human embryonic stem cells . Nat . Methods 11 , 847 – 854 ( 2014 ) . 19 . Harrison , S . E . et al . Assembly of embryonic and extra - embryonic stem cells to mimic embryogenesis in vitro . Science 356 , eaal1810 ( 2017 ) . 20 . Shao , Y . et al . A pluripotent stem cell - based model for post - implantation human amniotic sac development . Nat . Commun . 8 , 208 ( 2017 ) . 21 . Beccari , L . et al . Multi - axial self - organization properties of mouse embryonic stem cells into gastruloids . Nature 562 , 272 – 276 ( 2018 ) . 22 . Rivron , N . C . et al . Blastocyst - like structures generated solely from stem cells . Nature 557 , 106 – 111 ( 2018 ) . 23 . Sozen , B . et al . Self - assembly of embryonic and two extra - embryonic stem cell types into gastrulating embryo - like structures . Nat . Cell Biol . 20 , 979 – 989 ( 2018 ) . 24 . Xue , X . et al . Mechanics - guided embryonic patterning of neuroectoderm tissue from human pluripotent stem cells . Nat . Mater . 17 , 633 – 641 ( 2018 ) . 25 . Haremaki , T . et al . Self - organizing neuruloids model developmental aspects of Huntington’s disease in the ectodermal compartment . Nat . Biotechnol . 37 , 1198 – 1208 ( 2019 ) . 26 . Simunovic , M . et al . A 3D model of a human epiblast reveals BMP4 - driven symmetry breaking . Nat . Cell Biol . 21 , 900 – 910 ( 2019 ) . 27 . Zheng , Y . et al . Controlled modelling of human epiblast and amnion development using stem cells . Nature 573 , 421 – 425 ( 2019 ) . 28 . van den Brink , S . C . et al . Single - cell and spatial transcriptomics reveal somitogenesis in gastruloids . Nature 582 , 405 – 409 ( 2020 ) . 29 . Zheng , Y . et al . Dorsal - ventral patterned neural cyst from human pluripotent stem cells in a neurogenic niche . Sci . Adv . 5 , eaax5933 ( 2019 ) . 30 . Li , R . et al . Generation of blastocyst - like structures from mouse embryonic and adult cell cultures . Cell 179 , 687 – 702 ( 2019 ) . 31 . Rossant , J . & Tam , P . P . L . Blastocyst lineage formation , early embryonic asymmetries and axis patterning in the mouse . Development 136 , 701 – 713 ( 2009 ) . 32 . Wennekamp , S . , Mesecke , S . , Nédélec , F . & Hiiragi , T . A self - organization framework for symmetry breaking in the mammalian embryo . Nat . Rev . Mol . Cell Biol . 14 , 452 – 459 ( 2013 ) . 33 . Boroviak , T . & Nichols , J . Primate embryogenesis predicts the hallmarks of human naïve pluripotency . Development 144 , 175 – 186 ( 2017 ) . 34 . O’Rahilly , R . & Müller , F . Developmental Stages in Human Embryos : Revised and New Measurements . Cells Tissues Organs 192 , 73 – 84 ( 2010 ) . 35 . Tam , P . P . L . & Loebel , D . A . F . Gene function in mouse embryogenesis : get set for gastrulation . Nat . Rev . Genet . 8 , 368 – 381 ( 2007 ) . 36 . Arnold , S . J . & Robertson , E . J . Making a commitment : cell lineage allocation and axis patterning in the early mouse embryo . Nat . Rev . Mol . Cell Biol . 10 , 91 – 103 ( 2009 ) . 37 . Rivera - Pérez , J . A . , Mager , J . & Magnuson , T . Dynamic morphogenetic events characterize the mouse visceral endoderm . Dev . Biol . 261 , 470 – 487 ( 2003 ) . 38 . Thomas , P . & Beddington , R . Anterior primitive endoderm may be responsible for patterning the anterior neural plate in the mouse embryo . Curr . Biol . 6 , 1487 – 1496 ( 1996 ) . 39 . Yamamoto , M . et al . Nodal antagonists regulate formation of the anteroposterior axis of the mouse embryo . Nature 428 , 387 – 392 ( 2004 ) . 40 . Yoon , Y . et al . Extra - embryonic Wnt3 regulates the establishment of the primitive streak in mice . Dev . Biol . 403 , 80 – 88 ( 2015 ) . 41 . Tortelote , G . G . et al . Wnt3 function in the epiblast is required for the maintenance but not the initiation of gastrulation in mice . Dev . Biol . 374 , 164 – 173 ( 2013 ) . 42 . Ohinata , Y . et al . Blimp1 is a critical determinant of the germ cell lineage in mice . Nature 436 , 207 – 213 ( 2005 ) . 43 . Saitou , M . , Barton , S . C . & Surani , M . A . A molecular programme for the specification of germ cell fate in mice . Nature 418 , 293 – 300 ( 2002 ) . 44 . Chen , D . et al . Human primordial germ cells are specified from lineage - primed progenitors . Cell Rep . 29 , 4568 – 4582e4565 ( 2019 ) . 45 . Sasaki , K . et al . The germ cell fate of cynomolgus monkeys is specified in the nascent amnion . Dev . Cell 39 , 169 – 185 ( 2016 ) . 46 . Colas , J . - F . & Schoenwolf , G . C . Towards a cellular and molecular understanding of neurulation . Dev . Dynam . 221 , 117 – 145 ( 2001 ) . 47 . Vijayraghavan , D . S . & Davidson , L . A . Mechanics of neurulation : from classical to current perspectives on the physical mechanics that shape , fold , and form the neural tube . Birth Defects Res . 109 , 153 – 168 ( 2017 ) . 48 . Ribes , V . & Briscoe , J . Establishing and interpreting graded sonic hedgehog signaling during vertebrate neural tube patterning : The role of negative feedback . Cold Spring Harbor Persp . Biol . 1 , a002014 ( 2009 ) . 49 . Briscoe , J . & Small , S . Morphogen rules : Design principles of gradient - mediated embryo patterning . Development 142 , 3996 – 4009 ( 2015 ) . 50 . Nichols , J . & Smith , A . Naive and primed pluripotent states . Cell Stem Cell 4 , 487 – 492 ( 2009 ) . 51 . Smith , A . Formative pluripotency : the executive phase in a developmental continuum . Development 144 , 365 – 373 ( 2017 ) . 52 . Boroviak , T . et al . The ability of inner - cell - mass cells to self - renew as embryonic stem cells is acquired following epiblast specification . Nat . Cell Biol . 16 , 513 – 525 ( 2014 ) . 53 . Ying , Q . - L . et al . The ground state of embryonic stem cell self - renewal . Nature 453 , 519 – 523 ( 2008 ) . 54 . Brons , I . G . M . et al . Derivation of pluripotent epiblast stem cells from mammalian embryos . Nature 448 , 191 – 195 ( 2007 ) . 55 . Tesar , P . J . et al . New cell lines from mouse epiblast share defining features with human embryonic stem cells . Nature 448 , 196 – 199 ( 2007 ) . 56 . Kojima , Y . et al . The transcriptional and functional properties of mouse epiblast stem cells resemble the anterior primitive streak . Cell Stem Cell 14 , 107 – 120 ( 2014 ) . 57 . Hayashi , K . et al . Reconstitution of the mouse germ cell specification pathway in culture by pluripotent stem cells . Cell 146 , 519 – 532 ( 2011 ) . 58 . Tanaka , S . et al . Promotion of trophoblast stem cell proliferation by FGF4 . Science 282 , 2072 – 2075 ( 1998 ) . 59 . Niakan , K . K . , Schrode , N . , Cho , L . T . Y . & Hadjantonakis , A . - K . Derivation of extraembryonic endoderm stem ( XEN ) cells from mouse embryos and embryonic stem cells . Nat . Protocols 8 , 1028 – 1041 ( 2013 ) . 60 . Thomson , J . A . et al . Embryonic stem cell lines derived from human blastocysts . Science 282 , 1145 – 1147 ( 1998 ) . 61 . Guo , H . et al . The DNA methylation landscape of human early embryos . Nature 511 , 606 – 610 ( 2014 ) . 62 . Yan , L . et al . Single - cell RNA - Seq profiling of human preimplantation embryos and embryonic stem cells . Nature Struct . Mol . Biol . 20 , 1131 – 1139 ( 2013 ) . 63 . Chia , N . - Y . et al . A genome - wide RNAi screen reveals determinants of human embryonic stem cell identity . Nature 468 , 316 – 320 ( 2010 ) . 64 . Irie , N . et al . SOX17 is a critical specifier of human primordial germ cell fate . Cell 160 , 253 – 268 ( 2015 ) . 65 . Sasaki , K . et al . Robust in vitro induction of human germ cell fate from pluripotent stem cells . Cell Stem Cell 17 , 178 – 194 ( 2015 ) . 66 . Theunissen , T . W . et al . Systematic identification of culture conditions for induction and maintenance of naive human pluripotency . Cell Stem Cell 15 , 471 – 487 ( 2014 ) . 67 . Guo , G . et al . Naive pluripotent stem cells derived directly from isolated cells of the human inner cell mass . Stem Cell Rep . 6 , 437 – 446 ( 2016 ) . 68 . Theunissen , T . W . et al . Molecular criteria for defining the naive human pluripotent state . Cell Stem Cell 19 , 502 – 515 ( 2016 ) . 69 . Takashima , Y . et al . Resetting transcription factor control circuitry toward ground - state pluripotency in human . Cell 158 , 1254 – 1269 ( 2014 ) . 70 . Yamanaka , S . & Blau , H . M . Nuclear reprogramming to a pluripotent state by three approaches . Nature 465 , 704 – 712 ( 2010 ) . 71 . Choi , J . et al . A comparison of genetically matched cell lines reveals the equivalence of human iPSCs and ESCs . Nat . Biotechnol . 33 , 1173 – 1181 ( 2015 ) . 72 . Quadrato , G . et al . Cell diversity and network dynamics in photosensitive human brain organoids . Nature 545 , 48 – 53 ( 2017 ) . 73 . Yang , Y . et al . Derivation of pluripotent stem cells with in vivo embryonic and extraembryonic potency . Cell 169 , 243 – 257 ( 2017 ) . 74 . Gao , X . et al . Establishment of porcine and human expanded potential stem cells . Nat . Cell Biol . 21 , 687 – 699 ( 2019 ) . 75 . Okae , H . et al . Derivation of human trophoblast stem cells . Cell Stem Cell 22 , 50 – 63e56 ( 2018 ) . 76 . Linneberg - Agerholm , M . et al . Naïve human pluripotent stem cells respond to Wnt , Nodal and LIF signalling to produce expandable naïve extra - embryonic endoderm . Development 146 , dev180620 ( 2019 ) . 77 . Dong , C . et al . Derivation of trophoblast stem cells from naïve human pluripotent stem cells . eLife 9 , e52504 ( 2019 ) . NAture MAteriALS | VOL 20 | FEBRUARy 2021 | 132 – 144 | www . nature . com / naturematerials 143 Review ARticle NaTuRe MaTeRials 78 . Guo , G . et al . Trophectoderm potency is retained exclusively in human naïve cells . Preprint at https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1101 / 2020 . 02 . 04 . 933812 ( 2020 ) . 79 . Posfai , E . et al . Defining totipotency using criteria of increasing stringency . Preprint at https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1101 / 2020 . 03 . 02 . 972893 ( 2020 ) . 80 . Frias - Aldeguer , J . et al . Embryonic signals perpetuate polar - like trophoblast stem cells and pattern the blastocyst axis . Preprint at https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1101 / 510362 ( 2019 ) . 81 . Vrij , E . J . et al . Chemically - defined induction of a primitive endoderm and epiblast - like niche supports post - implantation progression from blastoids . Preprint at https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1101 / 510396 ( 2019 ) . 82 . Sozen , B . et al . Self - organization of mouse stem cells into an extended potential blastoid . Dev . Cell 51 , 698 – 712 ( 2019 ) . 83 . Taniguchi , K . et al . Lumen formation is an intrinsic property of isolated human pluripotent stem cells . Stem Cell Rep . 5 , 954 – 962 ( 2015 ) . 84 . Shahbazi , M . N . et al . Pluripotent state transitions coordinate morphogenesis in mouse and human embryos . Nature 552 , 239 – 243 ( 2017 ) . 85 . Minn , K . T . et al . High - resolution transcriptional and morphogenetic profiling of cells from micropatterned human embryonic stem cell gastruloid cultures . Preprint at https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1101 / 2020 . 01 . 22 . 915777 ( 2020 ) . 86 . Tewary , M . et al . A stepwise model of reaction - diffusion and positional - information governs self - organized human peri - gastrulation - like patterning . Development 144 , 4298 – 4312 ( 2017 ) . 87 . Etoc , F . et al . A balance between secreted inhibitors and edge sensing controls gastruloid self - organization . Dev . Cell 39 , 302 – 315 ( 2016 ) . 88 . Heemskerk , I . et al . Rapid changes in morphogen concentration control self - organized patterning in human embryonic stem cells . eLife 8 , e40526 ( 2019 ) . 89 . Nemashkalo , A . , Ruzo , A . , Heemskerk , I . & Warmflash , A . Morphogen and community effects determine cell fates in response to BMP4 signaling in human embryonic stem cells . Development 144 , 3042 – 3053 ( 2017 ) . 90 . Chhabra , S . et al . Dissecting the dynamics of signaling events in the BMP , WNT , and NODAL cascade during self - organized fate patterning in human gastruloids . PLoS Biol . 17 , e3000498 ( 2019 ) . 91 . Martyn , I . , Brivanlou , A . H . & Siggia , E . D . A wave of WNT signaling balanced by secreted inhibitors controls primitive streak formation in micropattern colonies of human embryonic stem cells . Development 146 , dev172791 ( 2019 ) . 92 . Morgani , S . M . et al . Micropattern differentiation of mouse pluripotent stem cells recapitulates embryo regionalized cell fate patterning . eLife 7 , e32839 ( 2018 ) . 93 . Manfrin , A . et al . Engineered signaling centers for the spatially controlled patterning of human pluripotent stem cells . Nat . Methods 16 , 640 – 648 ( 2019 ) . 94 . Veenvliet , J . V . et al . Mouse embryonic stem cells self - organize into trunk - like structures with neural tube and somites . Preprint at https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1101 / 2020 . 03 . 04 . 974949 ( 2020 ) . 95 . Rossi , G . et al . Embryonic organoids recapitulate early heart organogenesis . Preprint at https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1101 / 802181 ( 2019 ) . 96 . Ranga , A . et al . Neural tube morphogenesis in synthetic 3D microenvironments . Proc . Natl Acad . Sci . USA 113 , E6831 – E6839 ( 2016 ) . 97 . Britton , G . et al . A novel self - organizing embryonic stem cell system reveals signaling logic underlying the patterning of human ectoderm . Development 146 , dev179093 ( 2019 ) . 98 . McBeath , R . et al . Cell shape , cytoskeletal tension , and RhoA regulate stem cell lineage commitment . Dev . Cell 6 , 483 – 495 ( 2004 ) . 99 . Lam , R . H . W . , Sun , Y . , Chen , W . & Fu , J . Elastomeric microposts integrated into microfluidics for flow - mediated endothelial mechanotransduction analysis . Lab Chip 12 , 1865 – 1873 ( 2012 ) . 100 . Nelson , C . M . et al . Tissue geometry determines sites of mammary branching morphogenesis in organotypic cultures . Science 314 , 298 – 300 ( 2006 ) . 101 . Habib , S . J . et al . A localized Wnt signal orients asymmetric stem cell division in vitro . Science 339 , 1445 – 1448 ( 2013 ) . 102 . Repina , N . A . et al . Optogenetic control of Wnt signaling for modeling early embryogenic patterning with human pluripotent stem cells . Preprint at https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1101 / 665695 ( 2019 ) . 103 . Cederquist , G . Y . et al . Specification of positional identity in forebrain organoids . Nat . Biotechnol . 37 , 436 – 444 ( 2019 ) . 104 . Sun , Y . , Chen , C . S . & Fu , J . Forcing stem cells to behave : A biophysical perspective of the cellular microenvironment . Annu . Rev . Biophys . 41 , 519 – 542 ( 2012 ) . 105 . Bedzhov , I . & Zernicka - Goetz , M . Self - organizing properties of mouse pluripotent cells initiate morphogenesis upon implantation . Cell 156 , 1032 – 1044 ( 2014 ) . 106 . Tam , P . P . Postimplantation mouse development : whole embryo culture and micro - manipulation . Int . J . Dev . Biol . 42 , 895 – 902 ( 1998 ) . 107 . Wang , H . et al . A novel model of human implantation : 3D endometrium - like culture system to study attachment of human trophoblast ( Jar ) cell spheroids . Mol . Human Reprod . 18 , 33 – 43 ( 2011 ) . 108 . Tyser , R . C . V . et al . A spatially resolved single cell atlas of human gastrulation . Preprint at https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1101 / 2020 . 07 . 21 . 213512 ( 2020 ) . 109 . Rivron , N . et al . Debate ethics of embryo models from stem cells . Nature 564 , 183 – 185 ( 2018 ) . 110 . Hyun , I . et al . Toward guidelines for research on human embryo models formed from stem cells . Stem Cell Rep . 14 , 169 – 174 ( 2020 ) . 111 . Petropoulos , S . et al . Single - Cell RNA - Seq reveals lineage and X chromosome dynamics in human preimplantation embryos . Cell 165 , 1012 – 1026 ( 2016 ) . 112 . Dobreva , M . P . et al . Amniotic ectoderm expansion in mouse occurs via distinct modes and requires SMAD5 - mediated signalling . Development 145 , dev157222 ( 2018 ) . 113 . Pereira , P . N . G . et al . Amnion formation in the mouse embryo : the single amniochorionic fold model . BMC Dev . Biol . 11 , 48 ( 2011 ) . 114 . Lawson , K . A . et al . Bmp4 is required for the generation of primordial germ cells in the mouse embryo . Genes Dev . 13 , 424 – 436 ( 1999 ) . 115 . Munoz - Sanjuan , I . & Brivanlou , A . H . Neural induction , the default model and embryonic stem cells . Nat . Rev . Neurosci . 3 , 271 – 280 ( 2002 ) . 116 . Stern , C . D . Neural induction : old problem , new findings , yet more questions . Development 132 , 2007 – 2021 ( 2005 ) . 117 . Barnat , M . et al . Huntington’s disease alters human neurodevelopment . Science 369 , 787 – 793 ( 2020 ) . Acknowledgements The authors thank S . Vianello for invaluable work on illustrations and N . Rivron , A . Yoney , E . D . Siggia , M . Simunovic and Y . Zheng for microscopic images shown in Fig . 4 . J . F . ’s research is supported by the University of Michigan Mechanical Engineering Department , the Michigan – Cambridge Research Initiative , the University of Michigan Mcubed Fund , the National Institutes of Health ( R21 NS113518 and R21 HD100931 ) , and the National Science Foundation ( CMMI 1917304 and CBET 1901718 ) . A . W . ’s work is supported by the Rice University , the Welch Foundation ( C - 2021 ) , the Simons Foundation ( 511709 ) , the National Institutes of Health ( R01 GM126122 ) , and the National Science Foundation ( MCB - 1553228 ) . M . P . L . ’s work is supported by the École Polytechnique Fédérale de Lausanne , the National Center of Competence in Research ( NCCR ) ‘Bio - Inspired Materials’ , and the Swiss National Science Foundation Sinergia Grant ( no . 3189956 ) . The authors apologize to colleagues whose work they could not cite owing to space restrictions . Author contributions J . F . , A . W . and M . P . L . wrote the manuscript . All authors edited and approved the manuscript . Competing interests The authors declare no competing interests . Additional information Correspondence should be addressed to M . P . L . , A . W . or J . F . Reprints and permissions information is available at www . nature . com / reprints . Publisher’s note Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in published maps and institutional affiliations . © Springer Nature Limited 2020 NAture MAteriALS | VOL 20 | FEBRUARy 2021 | 132 – 144 | www . nature . com / naturematerials 144