Direct observation of individual endogenous protein complexes in situ by proximity ligation Ola So ¨ derberg 1 , 3 , Mats Gullberg 1 , 3 , Malin Jarvius 1 , 3 , Karin Ridderstra˚le 2 , Karl - Johan Leuchowius 1 , Jonas Jarvius 1 , Kenneth Wester 1 , Per Hydbring 2 , Fuad Bahram 2 , Lars - Gunnar Larsson 2 & Ulf Landegren 1 Cellular processes can only be understood as the dynamic interplay of molecules . There is a need for techniques to monitor interactions of endogenous proteins directly in individual cells and tissues to reveal the cellular and molecular architecture and its responses to perturbations . Here we report our adaptation of the recently developed proximity ligation method to examine the subcellular localization of protein - protein interactions at single - molecule resolution . Proximity probes—oligonucleotides attached to antibodies against the two target proteins—guided the formation of circular DNA strands when bound in close proximity . The DNA circles in turn served as templates for localized rolling - circle ampliﬁcation ( RCA ) , allowing individual interacting pairs of protein molecules to be visualized and counted in human cell lines and clinical specimens . We used this method to show speciﬁc regulation of protein - protein interactions between endogenous Myc and Max oncogenic transcription factors in response to interferon - c ( IFN - c ) signaling and low - molecular - weight inhibitors . To achieve the speciﬁcity and sensitivity required to directly observe interacting endogenous proteins in cells and subcellular compart - ments , single proteins must yield easily detectable signals , whereas nonspeciﬁc background noise must be reduced to negligible levels . For this purpose , we adapted the proximity ligation technique 1 , 2 for highly speciﬁc in situ detection coupled to a localized ampliﬁcation reaction . The proximity ligation method depends on the dual proximal binding by pairs of detection reagents to generate ampliﬁable DNA strands , which then serve as surrogate markers for the detected protein molecules 1 , 2 . We combined proximity ligation with RCA for localized readout in ﬁxed cells or tissues . The oligonucleotides on the proximity probes , when brought into close proximity by binding adjacent proteins , serve as templates for the circularization of so - called connector oligonucleotides by enzymatic ligation . The circularized DNA strands remain hybri - dized to the proximity probes . Upon addition of phi29 DNA polymerase , one of the oligonucleotides serves as a primer for the RCA reaction , in the process unwinding the other oligonucleotide from the DNA circle . The oligonucleotide of the other proximity probe has three mismatched , exonuclease - resistant 2 ¢ O - methyl RNA nucleotides at the 3 ¢ end , preventing it from serving as a primer for RCA . A 1 - h RCA reaction generates a randomly coiled , single - stranded product composed of up to 1 , 000 complements of the DNA circle 3 , covalently linked to an antibody - antigen complex . This product is easily detected through hybridization of comple - mentary ﬂuorescence - labeled oligonucleotides ( Fig . 1a ) . We used this proximity ligation in situ assay ( P - LISA ) to inves - tigate the well - characterized interaction between the transcription factor and oncoprotein c - Myc and its obligatory partner protein Max . c - Myc and Max heterodimerize through their basic helix - loop - helix leucine - zipper domains , thereby enabling the c - Myc / Max complex to bind DNA recognition elements at targeted gene promoters . c - Myc – dependent recruitment of coactivator complexes leads to activation of numerous genes involved in fundamental cellular processes , such as proliferation , apoptosis , metabolism , differentiation and genomic stability 4 – 6 . Deregulation of Myc - family genes resulting in uncontrolled cell growth is frequently observed in tumors 7 . Although the Myc network has been extensively studied , there has been a lack of techniques to monitor the interactions and the subcellular localization of endogenous c - Myc and Max proteins or any other protein complexes . Coimmunoprecipitation and other protein pull - down assays allow stable protein interactions to be investigated in cell populations , but they do not easily reveal transient interactions and the distribution of interacting proteins between or within individual cells . In contrast , techniques such as bimolecular ﬂuorescence complementation 8 reﬂect the subcellular localization of protein interactions but require the proteins to be ectopically expressed as fusion proteins at high levels . Here we show that the P - LISA method enables the localized detection of indivi - dual , endogenous , interacting protein pairs in ﬁxed cultured cells , cytospin preparation , and tissue sections , thus providing an impor - tant new tool for use in basic and clinical research . RESULTS Visualizing endogenous protein - protein interactions We applied the P - LISA technique to investigate interactions between endogenous c - Myc / Max proteins in various cell types puo r G gn i h s il bu P e r u t a N 6002 © e r u t a n / m o c . e r u t a n . www / / : p tt h s doh t e m RECEIVED 9 MAY ; ACCEPTED 5 SEPTEMBER ; PUBLISHED ONLINE 29 OCTOBER 2006 ; DOI : 10 . 1038 / NMETH947 1 Department of Genetics and Pathology , Rudbeck Laboratory , University of Uppsala , SE - 75185 Uppsala , Sweden . 2 Department of Plant Biology and Forest Genetics , Uppsala Genetic Center , Swedish University of Agricultural Sciences , SE - 75007 , Uppsala , Sweden . 3 These authors contributed equally to this work . Correspondence should be addressed to U . L . ( ulf . landegren @ genpat . uu . se ) . NATURE METHODS | ADVANCE ONLINE PUBLICATION | 1 ARTICLES and observed strong ﬂuorescence signals in U2OS human osteo - sarcoma cells ( Fig . 1b ) , Skov - 3 human ovary adenocarcinoma cells ( Fig . 1c ) , CHO - K1 Chinese hamster ovary cells ( Fig . 1d ) , normal human ﬁbroblasts ( Fig . 1e ) and telomerase - immortalized human microvascular endothelial ( TIME ) cells 9 ( Fig . 1f , g ) . As expected from the nuclear localization of c - Myc and of c - Myc / Max hetero - dimers previously identiﬁed by bimolecular ﬂuorescence comple - mentation 10 , the P - LISA signals were predominantly present in the cell nuclei , except in mitotic cells ( Fig . 1g ) , which showed a strict cytopolar staining pattern 11 . The presence of prominent signals in Rat1 TGR - 1 ﬁbroblasts ( Fig . 2a ) and absence of signals in the corresponding c - myc knockout cells 12 ( Fig . 2b ) conﬁrmed the strict dependence on dual recognition of c - Myc / Max heterodimers to yield signals . Additionally , we observed no RCA products in U2OS cells when a proximity probe directed against the epidermal growth factor receptor ( EGFR ) , which does not interact with c - Myc , was substituted for the anti - Max reagent ( Fig . 2c ) . In contrast , the EGFR probe did yield RCA products when combined with a probe against Her - 2 , revealing the known colocalization of these two cell - surface proteins 13 ( Fig . 2d ) . To investigate whether the assay is sufﬁciently sensitive to permit detection of individual c - Myc / Max heterodimers , we simulta - neously applied two variants of one of the connector oligonucleo - tides . Under this condition , distinct ﬂuorescent probes would hybridize to the RCA products depending on whether one or the other connector fragment was included in the DNA circles that formed . The spots consistently exhibited one of the two ﬂuorescent colors but not both , conﬁrming that they were composed of single RCA products and that the signals originated from individual c - Myc / Max molecule pairs ( Fig . 2e ) . The induction of transcription of Myc - regulated genes depends on chromatin remodeling at the promoters by the c - Myc complex , while RNA polymerase II may be recruited through the Akt pathway 14 , 15 . c - Myc has been reported to interact with med - iator subunits of the RNA polymerase II holoenzyme and with other components of the preinitiation complex 15 , suggesting that the c - Myc / Max and RNA polymerase II complexes may be in close proximity at the promoter , although c - Myc / Max binding sites are often found several kilobases away from the transcriptional binding site . We therefore modiﬁed the P - LISA design to detect three interacting proteins . We detected c - Myc / Max heterodimers located near the RNA polymerase , with proximity probes directed at each of the three proteins binding in proximity and giving rise to an ampliﬁable detection reaction ( Fig . 2f ) . This allowed us to observe endogenous interactions between the DNA - binding activator complex c - Myc / Max with RNA polymerase II in the SHSY5Y neuroblastoma cell line in situ , possibly reﬂect - ing induction of transcription of endogenous Myc - regulated genes ( Fig . 2g ) . We next used the P - LISA technique to investigate tissue sections from clinical material . Staining for c - Myc / Max interactions in frozen tissue sections from normal colon revealed abundant signals in a subpopulation of colon crypt epithelial cells ( Fig . 3a ) . The pattern of c - Myc / Max interactions was associated with c - Myc expression in the same tissue , as determined by conventional enzyme - based immunostaining ( Fig . 3b ) . Interactions between c - Myc and Max in human tonsil tissue were restricted to a subpopulation of cells ( Fig . 3c ) , in contrast to tissue sections from a sample of Burkitt lymphoma . This B - cell lymphoma is characterized by translocation of the gene encoding c - Myc to one of the immunoglobulin loci , resulting in deregulated c - Myc expression . The vast majority of cells in the Burkitt lymphoma sample stained positively for the presence of c - Myc / Max hetero - dimers ( Fig . 3d ) . puo r G gn i h s il bu P e r u t a N 6002 © e r u t a n / m o c . e r u t a n . www / / : p tt h s doh t e m Addition of circularizable probes Ligation RCA and detection a b c d e f g Figure 1 | Detection of endogenous c - Myc / Max heterodimers in cultured cells using P - LISA . ( a ) Schematic presentation of proximity probe – templated DNA circularization and subsequent RCA and detection . If two proximity probes bind close to each other , such as by binding two proteins present in the same complex , then subsequently added linear connector oligonucleotides are guided to form a circular structure covalently joined by enzymatic DNA ligation . After ligation , RCA is initiated using one of the proximity probes as a primer . The RCA product is detected through hybridization of ﬂuorescence - labeled oligonucleotides complementary to a tag sequence in the RCA product . The ﬁlled circle represents the blocked 2 ¢ - O - methyl RNA 3 ¢ end of the nonpriming proximity probe . The green line in the circle that forms the proximity ligation reaction gives rise to multiple copies of complementary sequence in the RCA product ( blue ) . This motif is detected by hybridizing ﬂuorescence - labeled detection oligonucleotides ( green ) . ( b – g ) c - Myc / Max heterodimers were visualized by staining cells with proximity probes directed against c - Myc and Max , followed by ligation and RCA as outlined in a . The hybridization probes were labeled with Alexa 555 ( red ) , the cytoplasm was counterstained with FITC - labeled antibody to actin ( green ) and the nuclei were stained with Hoechst 33342 ( blue ) . Scale bar represents 10 m m . The c - Myc / Max heterodimers were detected in U2OS cells ( b ) , Skov - 3 cells ( c ) , CHO - K1 cells ( d ) , normal human ﬁbroblasts ( e ) , TIME cells ( f ) and TIME cells during mitosis ( g ) . 2 | ADVANCE ONLINE PUBLICATION | NATURE METHODS ARTICLES Monitoring perturbations of Myc / Max interactions Previous studies have shown that transformation of human U - 937 monoblasts with a potent viral form of Myc ( v - Myc ) abrogates differentiation and cell cycle arrest induced by 12 - O - tetradecanoyl - phorbol - 13 - acetate TPA , vitamin D3 or retinoic acid . IFN - g restores the response to these agents , resulting in terminal differ - entiation and cell cycle arrest in transformed U - 937 cells and in cell lines derived from patients with N - myc – ampliﬁed neuroblastomas . This occurs in both cases despite constitutive myc mRNA and Myc protein expression 16 , 17 . Subsequent studies showed that IFN - g inhibits Myc activity by destabilizing Myc / Max heterodimers 18 . We used the P - LISA method to monitor Myc / Max interactions in individual U - 937 monoblasts and observed a profound decrease in Myc / Max heterodimers after treatment with IFN - g in combination with TPA ( Fig . 4a – c ) . Notably , the Myc / Max interactions that remained after treatment with IFN - g and phorbol esters were predominantly localized in the cytoplasm of treated cells , suggesting that Myc / Max heterodimers were either formed in the cytoplasm or exported out of the nucleus before Myc / Max dissociation or that the IFN - g – induced dissociation signals acted solely in the nucleus . The visualization of individual proteins or protein complexes as distinct ﬂuorescent spots by P - LISA allowed quantitative effects to be digitally recorded by computer - assisted image analysis , increasing both throughput and objectivity of measurement ( Fig . 4c ) . To verify that P - LISA speciﬁcally measures c - Myc / Max hetero - dimers , we used the well - known Myc - estrogen receptor ( MycER ) system , where c - Myc is fused to the ligand - binding domain of ER 19 – 21 . In the absence of ligand , Max is precluded from interacting with c - Myc by Hsp90 , which is displaced after stimulation of the cells with 4 - OH - tamoxifen 21 . The expression of MycER was similar in stimulated cells and controls , as determined by P - LISA using a pair of proximity probes directed against c - Myc and ER ( Fig . 4d ) . However , using the c - Myc and Max proximity probes , we observed a considerable increase in signal in 4 - OH - tamoxifen – stimulated cells over the endogenous levels detected in unstimulated cells , conﬁrming that P - LISA speciﬁcally reported the presence of c - Myc / Max heterodimers . Recently , a series of small molecules have been described that speciﬁcally inhibit c - Myc / Max association in a yeast two - hybrid system , interfere with transcription , cell growth in culture and in vivo tumor formation induced by c - Myc in cells 22 , and efﬁciently puo r G gn i h s il bu P e r u t a N 6002 © e r u t a n / m o c . e r u t a n . www / / : p tt h s doh t e m a b c d Figure 3 | Visualization of c - Myc / Max heterodimerization in tissue sections . In all panels except b , c - Myc / Max heterodimers were visualized in zinc - ﬁxed frozen tissue sections by staining cells with proximity probes directed against c - Myc and Max , followed by ligation and RCA . The hybridization probes were labeled with Alexa 555 ( red ) , the cytoplasm was counterstained with FITC - labeled antibody to actin ( a ; green ) or CD45 ( c , d ; green ) and the nuclei were stained with Hoechst 33342 ( blue ) . Scale bar represents 10 m m . ( a ) Staining of a tissue section of normal human colon . ( b ) Regular immunostaining for c - Myc expression in normal human colon . ( c ) Staining of a tissue section from human tonsil . ( d ) Staining of a tissue section from a sample of Burkitt lymphoma . a b c d e g f Figure 2 | Detection of protein - protein interactions . c - Myc / Max heterodimers were visualized using hybridization probes labeled with Alexa 555 ( red ) . The cytoplasm was stained with FITC - labeled antibody to actin ( green ) , and the nuclei were stained with Hoechst 33342 ( blue ) . Scale bar represents 10 m m . ( a ) Staining of Rat1 TGR - 1 cells . ( b ) Staining of Rat 1 c - Myc knockout cells ( HO15 . 19 , myc – / – ) . ( c ) Staining of U2OS cells with one of the two proximity probes directed against an irrelevant target ( EGFR ) together with a c - Myc probe . ( d ) Detection of EGFR together with a Her - 2 probe . ( e ) Staining of U2OS cells in which individual RCA products were detected by hybridization with either of two hybridization probes labeled with Alexa 555 and Cy5 . Individual spots characterized by one or the other color are likely to be the products of ampliﬁcation of single DNA circles . ( f ) Schematic presentation of proximity probe – templated DNA circularization using three proximity probes . ( g ) c - Myc / Max / RNA polymerase II interactions were visualized in SHSY5Y cells by P - LISA using hybridization probes labeled with Alexa 555 ( red ) . The cytoplasm was stained with FITC - labeled antibody to actin ( green ) , and the nuclei were stained with Hoechst 33342 ( blue ) . Scale bar represents 10 m m . NATURE METHODS | ADVANCE ONLINE PUBLICATION | 3 ARTICLES repress c - Myc – induced transcription of DNA encoding ribosomal RNA by RNA polymerase I ( ref . 23 ) . The effects of the inhibitors on authentic c - Myc / Max interactions , however , have not been shown in any cell system . Using P - LISA , we showed that the experimental compound 10058 very efﬁciently inhibited endogenous c - Myc / Max interactions in normal cultured human ﬁbroblasts to 2 % of the control level ( Fig . 4e ) . The compound 10074G inhibited the interaction less efﬁciently but to a still - signiﬁcant 27 % of the control level ( Fig . 4e ) . We conﬁrmed these results by coimmuno - precipitation ( data not shown ) . These observations extend pub - lished ﬁndings 22 , 23 by showing the efﬁcacy of the compounds in inhibiting the formation of endogenous c - Myc / Max heterodimers in cells . The P - LISA technique therefore has potential for monitor - ing the response to molecular therapies targeting protein - protein interactions in any cells or tissues . DISCUSSION The ability to detect the intra - and intercellular distribution of endogenous proteins at the single - molecule level using P - LISA will be valuable for studies of biological processes such as regulation of proliferation , differentiation and survival in complex microenvi - ronments . Moreover , because it is possible to increase the number of proximity probes used to create a circular ampliﬁable ligation product , P - LISA is uniquely suited to study multiprotein com - plexes such as the ternary c - Myc / Max / RNA polymerase II com - plexes demonstrated here . Because samples are ﬁxed before analysis , snapshots of cellular processes are obtained , and transient interactions can therefore be easily detected . P - LISA offers at least two advantages over such methods as ﬂuorescence or biolumines - cence resonance energy transfer and bimolecular ﬂuorescence complementation . First , endogenous proteins can be investigated ; and second , signal ampliﬁcation by RCA increases the number of ﬂuorophores per detected protein interaction , so that single events can be easily visualized as prominent ﬂuorescent spots while ignoring any nonspeciﬁcally bound ﬂuorescent probes . At present , we have no measure of the efﬁciency of detection by P - LISA , but we expect that only a fraction of the molecules present in a cell are detected as ﬂuorescent spots . By varying the protein binders ( such as intact antibodies or F ab fragments ) and the lengths of the oligonucleotides on the proximity probes , P - LISA could theoretically be used as a molecular ruler , allowing measurements of distances between epitopes . The maxi - mum distance between determinants recognized by P - LISA here was estimated at roughly 30 nm , including the size of the two antibodies and the oligonucleotides connecting them in the detected protein pairs . If required , substantially longer distances could be spanned using longer oligonucleotides , or more compact binders and shorter DNA sequences could be used to improve resolution by limiting detection distances to just over 10 nm . This is comparable to the distance at which resonance energy transfer occurs between ﬂuor - ophores ( 5 – 10 nm ) . The method could also be modiﬁed to detect interactions between proteins and other molecules , such as speciﬁc DNA or RNA sequences ( O . S . et al . , unpublished observations ) . In conclusion , P - LISA confers dual - binder speciﬁcity for protein detection in situ and can reveal interactions between proteins directly in normal cells and tissues without being subject to artifacts of overexpression or ectopic expression . This method should contribute to the establishment and use of comprehensive inter - actome maps in basic research and for clinical diagnosis . METHODS Preparation of proximity probes . The proximity probes consisted of afﬁnity - puriﬁed polyclonal or monoclonal antibodies modiﬁed by covalently attachment of the 5 ¢ end of various oligonucleotides to each antibody . For each conjugation , we dialyzed 20 m g of antibody , c - Myc ( sc - 764X , sc - 40X ) , Max ( sc - 197X , sc - 765X ) , puo r G gn i h s il bu P e r u t a N 6002 © e r u t a n / m o c . e r u t a n . www / / : p tt h s doh t e m 200 100 10 1 M yc E R – O H T C on t r o l + 10058 + 10074 G M yc E R + O H T M yc / M a x + O H T M yc / M a x – O H T 100 10 1 Untreated cells Treated with TPA and IFN - γ 150 100 50 0 0 50 100 Number of nuclear signals per cell N u m be r o f cy t op l a s m i c s i gna l s pe r c e ll N u m be r o f s i gna l s pe r c e ll N u m be r o f s i gna l s pe r c e ll 150 200 250 NS * * * * * * * * * c d e a b Figure 4 | Perturbation of Myc / Max heterodimerization . ( a , b ) Myc / Max heterodimers were visualized in cytospin preparations of v - Myc – transformed U - 937 - myc6 cells counterstained with antibody to CD45 . The cells were left untreated ( a ) or stimulated with 1 . 6 (cid:1) 10 – 8 M TPA ( Sigma ) and 100 U / ml IFN - g for 16 h ( b ) . Scale bar represents 10 m m . ( c ) The signals were counted using MATLAB , and the number of Myc / Max interactions in the nucleus was plotted against the number of interactions in the cytoplasm in individual cells . Untreated cells ( n ¼ 29 ) ; cells treated with TPA and IFN - g ( n ¼ 42 ) . ( d ) Rat1 MycER cells were stained with proximity probes against c - Myc and ER or with proximity probes against c - Myc and Max . The expression of MycER ( using proximity probes against c - Myc and ER ) was similar in cells stimulated with 4 - OH - tamoxifen ( OHT ) and control cells ( NS , not signiﬁcant ) . In contrast , there was an increase in c - Myc / Max heterodimers ( using proximity probes against c - Myc and Max ) in stimulated cells compared to unstimulated cells ( * * * , P o 0 . 01 ) . ( e ) Normal human ﬁbroblasts were treated with the low - molecular - weight compounds 5404711 ( 10058 ) and 5241991 ( 10074G ) at concentrations of 64 m M and 32 m M , respectively , or with vehicle ( control ) for 6 h . They were then stained with c - Myc and Max proximity probes and analyzed by P - LISA . c - Myc / Max interactions were signiﬁcantly inhibited by 10058 and 10047G ( * * * , P o 0 . 01 for both ) compared to control . Statistical analyses were performed using ANOVA with Dunnett’s correction ( P o 0 . 0001 ) . 4 | ADVANCE ONLINE PUBLICATION | NATURE METHODS ARTICLES RNA polymerase II ( sc - 9001X ) and either ER ( sc - 787 ) or EGFR and Her - 2 ( Merck ) overnight against PBS using Slide - A - Lyzer MINI dialysis unit ( Pierce Biotechnology ) . This was followed by a 2 - h incubation with a 30 - fold excess of sulfosuccinimidyl - 4 - ( N - maleimidomethyl ) cyclohexane - 1 - carboxylate ( sulfo - SMCC ; Pierce ) , freshly prepared in DMSO , in 55 mM phosphate buffer , 150 mM NaCl and 20 mM EDTA ( pH 7 . 2 ) . In parallel , we reduced 300 pmol of the thiol - modiﬁed , nonpriming proximity probe oligo - nucleotide SH - AAAAAAAAAAGACGCTAATAGTTAAGACGCTT [ UUU ] ( the sequence within the brackets is 2 ¢ O - methyl - RNA ) or , for the experiment in Figure 2g , the oligonucleotide SH - AAAAAA AAAAATGGCCGACTCACGAATTAGA [ UUU ] or the RCA pri - mer proximity probe oligonucleotide SH - AAAAAAAAAATATGA CAGAACTAGACACTCTT ( purchased from Eurogentec ) with 10 mM DTT ( Sigma ) in 55 mM phosphate buffer , 150 mM NaCl and 20 mM EDTA ( pH 7 . 2 ) for 1 h at 37 1 C . We puriﬁed the reactions using MicroSpin G - 50 columns ( Amersham Biosciences ) that had been equilibrated with 5 mM EDTA in PBS at 735 g for 1 min . We then mixed the puriﬁed antibodies and oligonu - cleotides and incubated them overnight at 4 1 C for conjugation ( see Supplementary Protocol online ) . Cell cultures and tissue sections . We cultured GM08402 normal human ﬁbroblasts ( purchased from Coriell Cell Repositories ) in MEM with 10 % FBS , U2OS cells in McCoy 5A with 10 % FBS , CHO - K1 and Skov - 3 cells in RPMI 1640 with 10 % FBS , SHSY5Y in DMEM with 20 % FBS , and TIME cells 9 in MV2 endothelial - cell basal medium ( PromoCell ) supplemented with penicillin and streptomycin on Lab - Tek chamber slides ( Nalge Nunc Interna - tional ) . Six hours before the collection of GM08402 cells that had been cultured on growth factor – reduced , Matrigel - coated Lab - Tek chamber slides ( BD Biosciences ) , we added the low - molecular - weight inhibitors 5404711 ( 10058 ) and 5241991 ( 10074G ; Chem - Bridge ) , at concentrations of 64 m M and 32 m M , respectively . We washed the slides in TBS and ﬁxed them with zinc ﬁx 24 overnight for all experiments , except the one shown in Figure 2d in which we ﬁxed slides with 1 % paraformaldehyde ( Sigma ) , and washed them with TBS before staining . We cultured Rat1 TGR ( myc + / + ) and HO15 . 19 ( myc – / – ) cells 12 and Rat1 MycER cells 19 in DMEM with 10 % FBS supplemented with penicillin and streptomycin . We serum - starved the Rat1 Myc - ER cells on chamber slides in DMEM with 0 . 3 % FBS for 48 h before a 6 - h stimulation with 200 nM 4 - OH - tamoxifen ( Sigma ) . We rinsed the slides with TBS and ﬁxed them with zinc ﬁx overnight . We cultured U937 - myc6 cells , infected with a v - myc – containing retrovirus 16 , and thus constitu - tively expressing the v - Myc protein , in RPMI 1640 with 10 % FBS supplemented with penicillin and streptomycin and stimulated with 1 . 6 (cid:1) 10 – 8 M TPA ( Sigma ) and 100 U / ml IFN - g for 16 h . After washing the cells in TBS , we made cytospin preparations that were air - dried for 30 min and ﬁxed with zinc ﬁx overnight 24 . We placed tissue sections from frozen colon tissues on Super - frost Plus slides ( Erie Scientiﬁc Company ) and zinc - ﬁxed them overnight . To prevent the tissue sections from falling off during staining , we placed the zinc - ﬁxed frozen tissue sections of human tonsil and Burkitt lymphoma on plain glass slides and covered them with a thin ﬁlm of 0 . 5 % agarose . P - LISA reactions . We blocked the slides with zinc - ﬁxed cells or tissues by treatment with 4 % normal rabbit serum ( Jackson ImmunoResearch ) , 250 ng / m l BSA ( New England Biolabs ) , 50 ng / m l RNase A ( Promega ) , 11 ng / m l poly ( A ) ( Sigma ) and 0 . 05 % Tween - 20 in TBS for 2 h at 37 1 C before overnight incubation at 4 1 C with 2 . 5 ng / m l proximity probes , 7 . 5 ng / m l poly ( A ) , 2 . 5 mM cysteine ( Sigma ) , 250 ng / m l BSA and 0 . 05 % Tween - 20 in TBS with 5 mM EDTA . We then added two con - nector oligonucleotide probes ( P - CTATTAGCGTCCAGTGAATGC GAGTCCGTCTAAGAGAGTAGTACAGCAGCCGTCAAGAGTGTCTAandP - GTTCTGTCATA TTTAAGCGTCTTAA ) at 125 nM in 10 mM Tris - acetate ( pH 7 . 5 ) , 10 mM magnesium acetate , 50 mM potassium acetate , 0 . 05 U / m l T4 DNA ligase ( Fermentas ) , 250 mM NaCl , 250 ng / m l BSA and 0 . 05 % Tween - 20 in H 2 O and ligated the probes to form circles using as templates the two oligonucleotides attached to the antibodies . In the experiment shown in Figure 2e , we also used the connector oligonucleotide probe P - CTATTAGCG TCAGCGATCTGCGAGACCGTATAAGAGAGTAGTACAGCAGCC GTCAAGAGTGTCTA . In the experiment shown in Figure 2g , we replaced the short connector oligonucleotide with two oligonucleo - tides ( P - GTTCTGTCATATTTATCTAATTCGT and P - GAGTCGGC CATAGTATCCTTTAAGCGTCTTAA ) , both at 125 nM . We per - formed ligations at 37 1 C for 30 min . After washes , we ampliﬁed the ligated circles with 0 . 125 U / m l phi29 DNA polymerase ( Fer - mentas ) in 50 mM Tris - HCl ( pH 7 . 5 ) , 10 mM MgCl 2 , 10 mM ( NH 4 ) 2 SO 4 , 250 m M dNTPs , 250 ng / m l BSA and 0 . 05 % Tween - 20 at 37 1 C for 60 min . We detected the single - stranded RCA products by hybridization with 6 . 25 nM ﬂuorescence - labeled probe Alexa 555 - CAGTGAATGCGAGTCCGTCT ( MWG - BIOTECH ) in 2 (cid:1) SSC , 7 . 5 ng / m l poly ( A ) , 250 ng / m l BSA and 0 . 05 % Tween - 20 for 30 min at 37 1 C . For the experiment in Figure 2e , we also used the ﬂuorescence - labeled probe Cy5 - AGCGATCTGCGAGACCGTAT . We then stained the slides with a mouse antibody to actin ( Cederlane Labs ) , followed by incubation with FITC - labeled rab - bit - anti - mouse antibody ( Jackson ImmunoResearch ) or FITC - labeled antibody to CD45 ( Dako ) and subsequent counterstaining with 1 m M Hoechst 33342 ( Sigma ) . Conventional immunostaining ( used in Fig . 3b ) was performed by staining with antibody to c - Myc and EnVision + System - HRP ( DAB ; Dako ) according to the staining protocol provided by the manufacturer , followed by counterstaining with Mayer hema - toxylin ( see also Supplementary Protocol ) . Image analysis . We used an epiﬂuorescence microscope ( Axioplan II , Zeiss ) , equipped with a 100 - W mercury lamp , a charge - coupled device camera ( C4742 - 95 , Hamamatsu ) and a computer - controlled ﬁlter wheel with excitation and emission ﬁlters for visualization of DAPI , FITC , Cy3 and Cy5 . We used a (cid:1) 63 objective ( Plan - Neoﬂuar , Zeiss ) for all images , except in Figure 3 ( (cid:1) 40 , Plan - Neoﬂuar ) . We collected images using the Imstar software ( Imstar ) , and the AxioVision LE 4 . 3 software ( Zeiss ) and thresholded them using Adobe Photoshop CS ( Adobe Systems ) . To further increase the contrast of the images , we multiplied the readings in the green and blue channels by the inverse value of the red channel using a MATLAB 7 . 0 script ( MathWorks ) . Similarly , we multiplied the values in the green channel by the inverse value of the blue channel . For quantitative measurements , we stored data in a 24 - bit RGB TIF ﬁle and analyzed them using dedicated software written in MATLAB 7 . 0 . Brieﬂy , the software applied a user - deﬁned threshold on the speciﬁc nuclear or cytoplasmic colored layers to identify each cell puo r G gn i h s il bu P e r u t a N 6002 © e r u t a n / m o c . e r u t a n . www / / : p tt h s doh t e m NATURE METHODS | ADVANCE ONLINE PUBLICATION | 5 ARTICLES or compartment and subsequently identiﬁed and counted single - molecule objects within each compartment by applying a second user - deﬁned threshold . We removed isolated single pixels from the binary mask to ﬁlter out detector noise . Statistical analysis . We used the GraphPad 4 . 0 software ( Graph - Pad ) . Statistical signiﬁcance was accepted when P o 0 . 05 using one - tailed Student t test when comparing two groups and analysis of variance with Dunnett’s correction when comparing more than two groups . Values are presented as means ± s . d . Note : Supplementary information is available on the Nature Methods website . ACKNOWLEDGMENTS We thank A . - C . Andersson for technical assistance ; C . Wa¨hlby for image analysis ; M . Taussig and S . Fredriksson for valuable comments on the manuscript ; J . M . Sedivy and M . Eilers for providing cells ; A . - C . Steffen and J . Carlsson for providing EGFR and Her - 2 antibodies ; and G . R . Adolf for providing IFN - g . We obtained frozen human tissues from the Fresh Tissue Biobank at the Department of Clinical Pathology , Uppsala University Hospital ( supported by the SWEGENE / Wallenberg Consortium North Biobank Program ) . This project was supported by the Wallenberg Foundation , the EU Integrated Project MolTools , the Research Councils of Sweden for natural science and for medicine ( to U . L . ) ; and the Swedish Cancer Foundation , the Swedish Children Cancer Foundation and the Human Frontiers Science Program ( to L . - G . L . ) . COMPETING INTERESTS STATEMENT The authors declare competingﬁnancialinterests ( seethe NatureMethods websitefor details ) . Published online at http : / / www . nature . com / naturemethods / Reprints and permissions information is available online at http : / / npg . nature . com / reprintsandpermissions / 1 . Fredriksson , S . et al . Protein detection using proximity - dependent DNA ligation assays . Nat . Biotechnol . 20 , 473 – 477 ( 2002 ) . 2 . Gullberg , M . et al . Cytokine detection by antibody - based proximity ligation . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA 101 , 8420 – 8424 ( 2004 ) . 3 . Baner , J . , Nilsson , M . , Mendel - Hartvig , M . & Landegren , U . Signalampliﬁcationof padlock probes by rolling circle replication . Nucleic Acids Res . 26 , 5073 – 5078 ( 1998 ) . 4 . Grandori , C . , Cowley , S . M . , James , L . P . & Eisenman , R . N . The Myc / Max / Mad network and the transcriptional control of cell behavior . Annu . Rev . Cell Dev . Biol . 16 , 653 – 699 ( 2000 ) . 5 . Oster , S . K . , Ho , C . S . , Soucie , E . L . & Penn , L . Z . The myc oncogene : MarvelouslY Complex . Adv . Cancer Res . 84 , 81 – 154 ( 2002 ) . 6 . Patel , J . H . , Loboda , A . P . , Showe , M . K . , Showe , L . C . & McMahon , S . B . Analysis of genomic targets reveals complex functions of MYC . Nat . Rev . Cancer 4 , 562 – 568 ( 2004 ) . 7 . Pelengaris , S . , Khan , M . & Evan , G . c - MYC : more than just a matter of life and death . Nat . Rev . Cancer 2 , 764 – 776 ( 2002 ) . 8 . Hu , C . D . , Chinenov , Y . & Kerppola , T . K . Visualization of interactions among bZIP and Rel family proteins in living cells using bimolecular ﬂuorescence complementation . Mol . Cell 9 , 789 – 798 ( 2002 ) . 9 . Venetsanakos , E . et al . Induction of tubulogenesis in telomerase - immortalized human microvascular endothelial cells by glioblastoma cells . Exp . Cell Res . 273 , 21 – 33 ( 2002 ) . 10 . Grinberg , A . V . , Hu , C . D . & Kerppola , T . K . Visualization of Myc / Max / Mad family dimers and the competition for dimerization in living cells . Mol . Cell . Biol . 24 , 4294 – 4308 ( 2004 ) . 11 . Winqvist , R . , Saksela , K . & Alitalo , K . The myc proteins are not associated with chromatin in mitotic cells . EMBO J . 3 , 2947 – 2950 ( 1984 ) . 12 . Mateyak , M . K . , Obaya , A . J . , Adachi , S . & Sedivy , J . M . Phenotypes of c - Myc - deﬁcient rat ﬁbroblasts isolated by targeted homologous recombination . Cell Growth Differ . 8 , 1039 – 1048 ( 1997 ) . 13 . Alroy , I . & Yarden , Y . The ErbB signaling network in embryogenesis and oncogenesis : signal diversiﬁcation through combinatorial ligand - receptor interactions . FEBS Lett . 410 , 83 – 86 ( 1997 ) . 14 . Bouchard , C . , Marquardt , J . , Bras , A . , Medema , R . H . & Eilers , M . Myc - induced proliferation and transformation require Akt - mediated phosphorylation of FoxO proteins . EMBO J . 23 , 2830 – 2840 ( 2004 ) . 15 . Adhikary , S . & Eilers , M . Transcriptional regulation and transformation by Myc proteins . Nat . Rev . Mol . Cell Biol . 6 , 635 – 645 ( 2005 ) . 16 . O¨berg , F . , Larsson , L . G . , Anton , R . & Nilsson , K . Interferon gamma abrogates the differentiationblockinv - myc - expressingU - 937monoblasts . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA 88 , 5567 – 5571 ( 1991 ) . 17 . Guzhova , I . et al . Interferon - gamma cooperates with retinoic acid and phorbol ester to induce differentiation and growth inhibition of human neuroblastoma cells . Int . J . Cancer 94 , 97 – 108 ( 2001 ) . 18 . Bahram , F . , Wu , S . , O¨berg , F . , Lu¨scher , B . & Larsson , L . G . Posttranslational regulation of Myc function in response to phorbol ester / interferon - gamma - induced differentiation of v - Myc - transformed U - 937 monoblasts . Blood 93 , 3900 – 3912 ( 1999 ) . 19 . Eilers , M . , Picard , D . , Yamamoto , K . R . & Bishop , J . M . Chimaeras of myc oncoprotein and steroid receptors cause hormone - dependent transformation of cells . Nature 340 , 66 – 68 ( 1989 ) . 20 . Littlewood , T . D . , Hancock , D . C . , Danielian , P . S . , Parker , M . G . & Evan , G . I . A modiﬁed oestrogen receptor ligand - binding domain as an improved switch for the regulation of heterologous proteins . Nucleic Acids Res . 23 , 1686 – 1690 ( 1995 ) . 21 . Solomon , D . L . , Philipp , A . , Land , H . & Eilers , M . Expression of cyclin D1 mRNA is not upregulated by Myc in rat ﬁbroblasts . Oncogene 11 , 1893 – 1897 ( 1995 ) . 22 . Yin , X . , Giap , C . , Lazo , J . S . & Prochownik , E . V . Low molecular weight inhibitors of Myc - Max interaction and function . Oncogene 22 , 6151 – 6159 ( 2003 ) . 23 . Arabi , A . et al . c - Myc associates with ribosomal DNA in the nucleolus and activates RNA polymerase I transcription . Nat . Cell Biol . 7 , 303 – 310 ( 2005 ) . 24 . Beckstead , J . H . A simple technique for preservation of ﬁxation - sensitive antigens in parafﬁn - embedded tissues . J . Histochem . Cytochem . 42 , 1127 – 1134 ( 1994 ) . puo r G gn i h s il bu P e r u t a N 6002 © e r u t a n / m o c . e r u t a n . www / / : p tt h s doh t e m 6 | ADVANCE ONLINE PUBLICATION | NATURE METHODS ARTICLES