Review Rafting through traf ﬁ c : Membrane domains in cellular logistics Blanca Diaz - Rohrer a , Kandice R . Levental a , Ilya Levental a , b , ⁎ a University of Texas Health Science Center at Houston , 6431 Fannin St , Houston , TX 77030 , USA b Cancer Prevention and Research Institute of Texas , USA a b s t r a c t a r t i c l e i n f o Article history : Received 28 May 2014 Received inrevised form 28 July 2014 Accepted 31 July2014 Available online 15 August 2014 Keywords : Membrane domain Lipid raft Subcellular traf ﬁ c Sorting Endocytosis The intricate and tightly regulated organization of eukaryotic cells into spatially and functionally distinct membrane - bound compartments is a de ﬁ ning feature of complex organisms . These compartments are de ﬁ ned by their lipid and protein compositions , with their limiting membrane as the functional interface to the rest of the cell . Thus , proper segregation of membrane proteins and lipids is necessary for the maintenance of organelle identity , and this segregation must be maintained despite extensive , rapid membrane exchange between com - partments . Sorting processes of high ef ﬁ ciency and ﬁ delity are required to avoid potentially deleterious mis - targeting andmaintain cellularfunction . Althoughmuchmolecularmachineryassociated with membrane traf ﬁ c ( i . e . membrane budding / fusion / ﬁ ssion ) has been characterized both structurally and biochemically , the mecha - nisticdetailsunderlyingthetightlyregulateddistributionofmembranesbetweensubcellularlocationsremainto be elucidated . This review presents evidence for the role of ordered lateral membrane domains known as lipid rafts in both biosynthetic sorting in the late secretory pathway , as well as endocytosis and recycling to / from the plasma membrane . Although such evidence is extensive and the involvement of membrane domains in sorting is de ﬁ nitive , speci ﬁ c mechanistic details for raft - dependent sorting processes remain elusive . © 2014 Elsevier B . V . All rights reserved . Contents 1 . Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 3003 2 . Rafts in secretory traf ﬁ c . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 3004 2 . 1 . Genesis of the raft hypothesis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 3004 2 . 2 . Polarized sorting in epithelial cells . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 3006 2 . 3 . Raft - mediated sorting in non - epithelial cells . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 3007 2 . 4 . Sorting in neuronal plasma membrane analogous to epithelial cells . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 3007 3 . Rafts in endocytic traf ﬁ c . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 3007 3 . 1 . Rafts in endocytosis from the plasma membrane . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 3007 3 . 2 . Deeper down : raft - associated sorting in endosomal progression , recycling , and degradation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 3008 4 . Molecular machinery for raft - mediated sorting . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 3009 4 . 1 . Caveolin , ﬂ otillin , and caveolae . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 3009 4 . 2 . Arf6 and other machinery . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 3010 5 . Perspective . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 3010 Acknowledgements . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 3010 References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 3010 1 . Introduction The self - organization of cellular macromolecules into structurally and functionally distinct subcellular compartments is one of the most intriguing and complex questions in biology . Most eukaryotic cell organelles are delimited by a lipid and protein membrane , which sepa - rates the cytoplasm from a topologically disconnected aqueous lumen . Because these membranes are the interface between the organelles and the rest of the cell , their molecular identities ( i . e . protein and lipid composition ) playakeyroleinde ﬁ ningthefunctionofagivencompart - ment as a whole . Therefore , the ef ﬁ cient and accurate sorting of mem - brane molecules between organelles underlies much of subcellular organization . Biochimica et Biophysica Acta 1838 ( 2014 ) 3003 – 3013 ⁎ Correspondingauthorat : Suite 4 . 202A , 6431FanninSt , Houston , TX 77030 , USA . Tel . : + 1 713 500 5566 ; fax : + 1 713 500 7456 . E - mail address : ilya . levental @ uth . tmc . edu ( I . Levental ) . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . bbamem . 2014 . 07 . 029 0005 - 2736 / © 2014 Elsevier B . V . All rights reserved . Contents lists available at ScienceDirect Biochimica et Biophysica Acta journal homepage : www . elsevier . com / locate / bbamem Recent decades have seen the discovery and characterization of the extensive proteinaceous machinery responsible for intracellular mem - brane transport . One general theme is that membranes are sorted and transportedbysmall ( i . e . lessthan100nmdiameter ) vesicularintermedi - ates produced by the action of a “ coat protein ” , which are actually large , multiprotein complexes . The classic examples of such “ coatomers ” are the COat Protein complexes ( COPI and COPII ) that mediate vesicle forma - tion and transport between the endoplasmic reticulum ( ER ) and early Golgi , and the polymerized clathrin cages in the late secretory pathway and endocytosis . An alternative vesicle - producing apparatus – that does not utilize a coated intermediate – is the ESCRT machinery responsible for lumen - directed vesicle ﬁ ssion in endocytosis [ 1 ] , virus budding [ 2 ] , and membrane repair [ 3 ] . These machines are responsible for the gener - ation and ﬁ ssion of transport vesicles , but all require additional factors for targeted , vectorial vesicle transport to the appropriate cellular compart - ment and fusion with the target membrane . These functions are served in part by the famous SNARE ( Soluble N - ethylmaleimide - sensitive - factor Attachment protein REceptor ) proteins [ 4 ] , which determine where and when a given transport vesicle will fuse . In addition to this core machinery , hundreds of ancillary proteins regulate subcel - lular traf ﬁ c , including the vital sorting function served by Adapter Proteins ( AP1 - 4 [ 5 ] ) to selectively recruit speci ﬁ c proteins into the transport carriers , and the Rab GTPases that act as “ address labels ” for the various organelles [ 6 ] . In contrast to thewealth of information available for subcellular pro - tein sorting , amechanisticunderstandingofhow lipids aredistributedin cells remains elusive . Organellar membranes have distinct lipid compo - sitions ( thoughclean , detaileddatatothispointarescant ) thatarelikely required for their function and cannot be accounted for solely by enzy - matic production / turnover [ 7 – 9 ] . However , how the cells achieve this steady - state heterogeneity despite active and rapid exchange of lipids between compartments remains unclear , in part because the rules for sorting lipids and proteins are quite different : ( 1 ) lipids arenotsortedabsolutely , i . e . allmembranes containbroad - ly similar lipid classes ( e . g . phosphatidylcholine ) , but the speci ﬁ c molecular identities and , more importantly , relative concentra - tions of the lipids vary between compartments ( 2 ) lipids are not covalently linked into membranes , but are orga - nized by weaker intermolecular interactions which give rise to the ﬂ uid matrix of the bilayer ( 3 ) whereasproteinsare oftensorted byspeci ﬁ c intermolecularcou - plingbetweenacargoproteinandthecoatomer , lipidsaregener - ally too numerous and too small for such one - by - one selection ( although there are important exceptions [ 10 – 12 ] ) . Because of these unique features , speci ﬁ c mechanisms are required for intracellular lipid sorting . Membrane lipid monomer transport through the cytoplasm does not occur on cell - relevant time scales ( though cholesterol transport may be an exception [ 13 ] ) , because de - spitelipids notbeingcovalently incorporated intothebilayer , theentro - pic penalty for hydrating their aliphatic regions makes spontaneous diffusion of lipid monomers into the cytoplasm extremely unfavorable [ 14 ] . In some cases , carrier proteins facilitate monomeric lipid transport by providing a hydrophobic cavity [ 10 – 12 ] . Additionally , physical con - tact sites between the ER and other organellar membranes may provide channels for direct lipid transfer between organelles [ 15 ] . However , these mechanisms are insuf ﬁ cient for the whole lipidome sorting observed in subcellularorganelles ; thus , membrane lipids , like proteins , aregenerallytraf ﬁ ckedbyvesicularintermediates , beggingthequestion of how such vesicles “ choose ” the lipids destined for a particular compartment . Lateralmembranedomainsof distinctcompositionsprovideanideal platformforlipid sorting . The archetypeof such domainsare membrane rafts , de ﬁ ned as lipid and protein assemblies whose formation is depen - dent on the preferential interactions between speci ﬁ c lipids ( sterols , glycosphingolipids , and saturated lipids ) that drive the formation of a liquid - ordered membrane state that coexists with a relatively disor - dered state as ﬂ uid , lateral domains [ 16 ] . It is important to emphasize that the conception of rafts aslong - lived , large , stable domainsis impre - cise and probably incorrect — rafts in the PM are believed to be small and highly dynamic [ 17 ] , and there remains active controversy about the physical properties , compositions , and mechanistic consequences of raft domains . However , several recent observations – most notably , microscopically observable liquid – liquid phase separation in biological membranes [ 18 – 22 ] – haveprovidedstrongevidencefortheirexistence and biological relevance . Moreover , the proposed size of such domains ( tens tohundredsof nm [ 17 ] ) and theircapacityto sequesterbothlipids andproteinsprovideraftswithidealfeaturesforactingassortingmech - anisms in membrane traf ﬁ cking . This review focuses on evidence supporting the central role of raft domains in subcellular membrane sorting . We start with a dis - cussion of the genesis of the raft hypothesis to explain the distinct membrane compositions of apical and basolateral plasma mem - brane ( PM ) domains in polarized epithelia , and expand on the gen - eral utilization of these domains in secretory sorting and traf ﬁ cking to the PM in both polarized and non - polarized cells . Next , we sum - marize the robust literature describing raft domains in endocytosis and sorting in the endocytic system , before brie ﬂ y reviewing the scant information on the protein machinery that supports raft - mediated traf ﬁ cking . As with much of the raft ﬁ eld , there remain more questions than answers . However , this review is intended to provide a primer to the topic , while highlighting the abundant evidence in support for the hypothesis that rafts are a key mediator of the speci ﬁ c membrane compositions of several subcellular organelles . 2 . Rafts in secretory traf ﬁ c The Golgi Apparatus ( GA ) is the intermediate between the site of most lipid synthesis ( ER ) and other membrane - bound organelles , thus making it a major membrane sorting station . More speci ﬁ cally , while the “ cis ” portions of the GA ( i . e . those associated with bi - directional membrane exchange with the ER ) are responsible for the post - translational modi ﬁ cation and re ﬁ nement of membrane proteins , the most “ trans ” cisterna of the organelle , termed the trans - Golgi network ( TGN ) , is the site of selection for export of membrane ( and luminal ) components via newly assembled transport carriers destined for their ﬁ nal cellular location ( Fig . 1 ) . In some cases ( e . g . the mannose - 6 - phosphate receptor for lysosomal delivery [ 23 ] ) , the sorting determi - nants are simple and clear . However , for most membrane lipids and proteins , the mechanisms of distribution remain unresolved . In epithe - lialcells , this problem is further complicated by theexistenceof a highly specialized PM domain , the apical PM , coexisting contiguously with a basolateral PM . These domains must be compositionally distinct be - cause their functional requirements are very different : the apical PM mustoften provide a robustbarrier between thecell and a harshand in - hospitable environment ( e . g . gut or kidney lumen ) , whereas the basolateral is responsible for exchanging information and nutrients with the rest of the body . 2 . 1 . Genesis of the raft hypothesis An early observation in epithelial cell biology was that not only the protein , but also the lipid composition of the apical PM is highly differ - entiated , most notable in the enrichment of glycosylated sphingolipids ( GSLs ) and cholesterol , and relative depletion of glycerophospholipids ( see studies cited in Ref . [ 24 ] ) . The sorting of both glycosylated proteins [ 25 ] and lipids [ 26 ] tothe apicalsurfaceseemedtooccursimultaneously in the TGN , suggesting a membrane - mediated mode of action , which was con ﬁ rmed by the isolation of distinct vesicle subtypes originating at the TGN and containing either apical or basolateral cargo [ 27 ] . To ex - plain these observations , a model based on the known propensity for 3004 B . Diaz - Rohrer et al . / Biochimica et Biophysica Acta 1838 ( 2014 ) 3003 – 3013 sphingolipidstoself - associateviatheirintramembranehydrogenbonds [ 28 ] posited that membrane lipids and proteins separate into microdo - mains representing the composition of their eventual target compart - ments ( i . e . apical and basolateral PM ) [ 24 ] . A critical validation of this model came with the observation that the “ apically - directed ” microdo - mains could be speci ﬁ cally isolated by their relative resistance to non - ionic detergents ( usually Triton X - 100 ) , and that they gain insolubility late in the secretory pathway , i . e . in the TGN [ 29 , 30 ] . Components of these detergent - resistant membranes ( DRMs ) were similarly observed tobeinvolvedinPM - directedtraf ﬁ cinnon - polarizedcells [ 31 ] , suggest - ing that the glycosphingolipid - enriched entities are a general feature of TGN - to - PM sorting ( Fig . 1 ) . The physicochemical mechanism by which Table 1 Involvement of raft domains invarious endocytic pathways and their cargo . Endocytic pathway Clathrin coated pits Caveolae CLIC / GEEC Flotillin Arf6 dependent Raft involvement ? No ( a ) Yes ( b , c ) Cav1 binds cholesterol Yes ( d , e ) GPI - AP found in lipid rafts Likely Unclear ( f ) Cholesterol dependence Unclear ( g ) Affected by cholesterol depletion , but might be due to cellular toxicity Yes ( b , c ) Yes ( d , e ) Not known Yes ( h ) Implicated proteins Clathrin ( i ) , epsin ( j ) , intersectin ( k ) , dynamin ( l ) , Arf6 ( m ) , PKC ( n ) , Rac1 ( o ) , cdc42 ( p ) d , RhoA ( o ) Caveolins ( b , c ) , PKC ( q ) , SRC ( q ) , cdc42 ( r ) , intersectin ( r ) , dynamin ( s ) RhoA ( t ) , GRAF ( u ) , cdc42 ( d ) , Arf1 ( v ) , cortactin ( w ) , Arf6 ( v ) Flotillin ( x ) Arf6 ( h ) Known cargo GPCR ( y ) transferrin receptor ( j ) anthrax toxin ( z ) , cadherin ( aa ) , LDL ( bb ) , in ﬂ uenza ( l ) GP60 ( cc ) , CTX ( ee ) , SV40 ( ff ) , cadherin ( aa ) , GPI - AP ( ff ) , LacCer ( gg ) , IL2 ( hh ) IL2 , SV40 ( e ) , GPI - AP ( d , e ) CD59 , proteoglycans ( ii ) MHC I ( h ) , CD59 a . Nichols , B . J . ( 2003 ) . GM1 - containing lipid rafts are depleted within clathrin - coated pits . Curr . Biol . 13 , 686 – 690 . b . Monier S , Dietzen DJ , Hastings WR , Lublin DM , Kurzchalia TV . 1996 . Oligomerization of VIP21 - caveolin in vitro is stabilized by long chain fatty acylation or cholesterol . FEBS Lett . 388 : 143 – 49 . c . Rothberg KG , Heuser JE , Donzell WC , Ying YS , Glenney JR , Anderson RG . 1992 . Caveolin , a protein component of caveolae membrane coats . Cell 68 : 673 – 82 . d . SabharanjakS , SharmaP , PartonRG , MayorS . 2002 . GPI - anchoredproteinsaredeliveredtorecyclingendosomesviaadistinctcdc42 - regulated , clathrin - independentpinocyticpathway . Dev . Cell 2 : 411 – 23 . e . M . Damm , L . Pelkmans , J . Kartenbeck , A . Mezzacasa , T . Kurzchalia , A . Helenius , Clathrin - andcaveolin - 1 - independentendocytosis : entryofsimianvirus40intocellsdevoidofcaveolae , J . Cell Biol . 168 ( 2005 ) 477 – 488 . f . GongQ , WeideM , HuntsmanC , XuZ , JanLY , MaD . 2007 . Identi ﬁ cationandcharacterizationofa newclassoftraf ﬁ ckingmotifsforcontrollingclathrin - independentinternalizationand recycling . J . Biol . Chem . 282 : 13087 – 97 . g . S . K . Rodal , G . Skretting , O . Garred , F . Vilhardt , B . vanDeurs , K . Sandvig , Extractionofcholesterolwithmethyl - beta - cyclodextrinperturbsformationofclathrin - coatedendocyticvesicles , Mol . Biol . Cell 10 ( 1999 ) 961 – 974 . h . Naslavsky N , Weigert R , Donaldson JG . 2004 . Characterization of a nonclathrinendocytic pathway : membrane cargo and lipid requirements . Mol . Biol . Cell 15 : 3542 – 52 . i . B . M . Pearse , Clathrin : a unique protein associated with intracellular transfer of membrane by coated vesicles , Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . U . S . A . 73 ( 1976 ) 1255 – 1259 . j . P . P . Di Fiore , S . Polo , K . Hofmann , When ubiquitin meets ubiquitin receptors : a signalling connection , Nat . Rev . , Mol . Cell Biol . 4 ( 2003 ) 491 – 497 . k . M . Yamabhai , N . G . Hoffman , N . L . Hardison , P . S . McPherson , L . Castagnoli , G . Cesareni , B . K . Kay , Intersectin , a novel adaptor protein with two Eps15 homology and ﬁ ve Src homology 3 domains , J . Biol . Chem . 273 ( 1998 ) 31401 – 31407 . l . A . M . vanderBliek , T . E . Redelmeier , H . Damke , E . J . Tisdale , E . M . Meyerowitz , S . L . Schmid , Mutationsinhumandynaminblockanintermediatestageincoatedvesicleformation , J . CellBiol . 122 ( 1993 ) 553 – 563 . m . K . Tanabe , T . Torii , W . Natsume , S . Braesch - Andersen , T . Watanabe , M . Satake , A novel GTPase - activating protein for ARF6 directly interacts with clathrin and regulates clathrin - dependent endocytosis , Mol . Biol . Cell 16 ( 2005 ) 1617 – 1628 . n . P . J . Robinson , J . M . Sontag , J . P . Liu , E . M . Fykse , C . Slaughter , H . McMahon , T . C . Sudhof , Dynamin GTPase regulated by protein kinase C phosphorylation in nerve terminals , Nature 365 ( 1993 ) 163 – 166 . o . C . Lamaze , T . H . Chuang , L . J . Terlecky , G . M . Bokoch , S . L . Schmid , Regulation of receptor - mediated endocytosis by Rho and Rac , Nature 382 ( 1996 ) 177 – 179 . p . W . Yang , C . G . Lo , T . Dispenza , R . A . Cerione , The Cdc42 target ACK2 directly interacts with clathrin and in ﬂ uences clathrin assembly , J . Biol . Chem . 276 ( 2001 ) 17468 – 17473 . q . D . K . Sharma , J . C . Brown , A . Choudhury , T . E . Peterson , E . Holicky , D . L . Marks , R . Simari , R . G . Parton , R . E . Pagano , Selective stimulation of caveolar endocytosis by glycosphingolipidsand cholesterol , Mol . Biol . Cell ( 2004 ) . r . Klein , I . K . , Predescu , D . N . , Sharma , T . , Knezevic , I . , Malik , A . B . , Predescu , S . , 2009 . Intersectin - 2 LregulatescaveolaendocytosissecondarytoCdc42 - mediatedactinpolymerization . J . Biol . Chem . 284 , 25953 – 25961 . s . P . Oh , D . P . McIntosh , J . E . Schnitzer , DynaminattheneckofcaveolaemediatestheirbuddingtoformtransportvesiclesbyGTPdriven ﬁ ssionfromtheplasmamembraneofendothelium , J . Cell Biol . 141 ( 1998 ) 101 – 114 . t . C . Lamaze , A . Dujeancourt , T . Baba , C . G . Lo , A . Benmerah , A . Dautry - Varsat , Interleukin2receptorsanddetergent - resistantmembranedomainsde ﬁ neaclathrin - independentendocytic pathway , Mol . Cell 7 ( 2001 ) 661 – 671 . u . Lundmark R , Doherty GJ , Howes MT , Cortese K , VallisY , et al . 2008 . The GTPase - activating protein GRAF1 regulates the CLIC / GEEC endocytic pathway . Curr . Biol . 18 : 1802 – 8 . v . Lundmark R , Doherty GJ , VallisY , Peter BJ , McMahon HT . 2008 . Arf family GTP loading is activated by , and generates , positive membrane curvature . Biochem . J . 414 : 189 – 94 . w . N . Sauvonnet , A . Dujeancourt , A . Dautry - Varsat , Cortactinanddynaminarerequiredfortheclathrin - independentendocytosisofgammaccytokinereceptor , J . CellBiol . 168 ( 2005 ) 155 – 163 . x . Glebov OO , Bright NA , Nichols BJ . Flotillin - 1 de ﬁ nes a clathrin - independent endocytic pathway inmammalian cells . Nat . Cell Biol . ( 2006 ) 8 : 46 – 54 . y . Wolfe BL , Trejo J . Clathrin - dependent mechanisms of G protein - coupled receptor endocytosis . Traf ﬁ c 8 : 462 – 70 . z . Abrami L , Liu S , Cosson P , Leppla SH , van der Goot FG . 2003 . Anthrax toxin triggers endocytosis of its receptor via a lipid raft - mediated clathrin - dependent process . J . Cell Biol . ( 2007 ) 160 : 321 – 28 . aa . Bonazzi M , Veiga E , Pizarro - Cerda ́ J , Cossart P . Successive post - translational modi ﬁ cations of E - cadherin are required for InlA - mediated internalisation of Listeria monocytogenes . Cell Microbiol . ( 2008 ) 10 : 2208 – 22 . bb . Maurer ME , Cooper JA . The adaptor protein Dab2 sorts LDL receptors into coated pits independentlyof AP - 2 and ARH . J . Cell Sci . ( 2006 ) 119 : 4235 – 46 . cc . MinshallRD , TiruppathiC , VogelSM , NilesWD , GilchristA , etal . Endothelialcell - surfacegp60activatesvesicleformationandtraf ﬁ ckingviaG ( i ) - coupledSrckinasesignalingpathway . J . Cell Biol . ( 2000 ) 150 : 1057 – 70 . dd . P . A . Orlandi , P . H . Fishman , Filipin - dependent inhibition of cholera toxin : evidence fortoxin internalization and activation through caveolae - like domains , J . Cell Biol . 141 ( 1998 ) 905 – 915 . ee . AndersonHA , ChenY , NorkinLC . Boundsimianvirus40translocatestocaveolin - enrichedmembranedomains , anditsentryisinhibitedbydrugsthatselectivelydisruptcaveolae . Mol Biol Cell 1996 ; 7 : 1825 – 1834 . ff . Cheng ZJ , Singh RD , Marks DL , Pagano RE . Membrane microdomains , caveolae , and caveolar endocytosis of sphingolipids . Mol . Membr . Biol . ( 2006 ) 23 : 101 – 10 . gg . PuriV , WatanabeR , SinghRD , DominguezM , BrownJC , Wheatley CL , MarksDL , Pagano RE . Clathrin - dependent and - independentinternalizationofplasmamembrane sphingolipids initiates two Golgi targeting pathways . J Cell Biol 2001 ; 154 : 535 – 547 . hh . Lamaze C , Dujeancourt A , Baba T , Lo CG , Benmerah A , Dautry - Varsat A . Interleukin 2 receptors and detergent - resistant membrane domains de ﬁ ne a clathrin - independent endocytic pathway . Mol Cell 2001 ; 7 : 661 – 671 . ii . Payne CK , Jones SA , Chen C , ZhuangX . Internalization and traf ﬁ cking of cell surface proteoglycans and proteoglycan - binding ligands . Traf ﬁ c ( 2007 ) 8 : 389 – 401 . 3005 B . Diaz - Rohrer et al . / Biochimica et Biophysica Acta 1838 ( 2014 ) 3003 – 3013 cholesterol - driven , sphingolipid - rich domains mediate lateral mem - brane sorting coalesced from the convergence of cell biological studies with a wealth of biophysical observations in synthetic model mem - branes . In these ( incl . Langmuir monolayers [ 32 ] , supported lipid bilay - ers [ 33 ] , and Giant Unilamellar Vesicles [ 34 ] ) , large - scale equilibrium separation of a cholesterol - dependent liquid ordered domain – the synthetic analog of in vivo rafts – is observable across a physiologically appropriate range of lipid mixtures . The model combining these observations to explain post - Golgi sorting by lateral , lipid - driven membrane domains is known as the lipidrafthypothesis [ 35 ] . Becausemuchofthedatainsupportofthishy - pothesis came from DRM isolations , this preparation became synony - mous with lipid rafts . However , it is vital to emphasize the crucial ( previously made [ 36 – 40 ] ) point that DRMs should not be equated with in vivo rafts , or any structure existing in the cell prior to detergent treatment . Cold detergent extraction is unlikely to re ﬂ ect the speci ﬁ c underlyingreality of a live cell , and the interactions between detergents and native membranes are complex , unpredictable , and dif ﬁ cult to con - trol , making cellular extrapolations from DRM experiments inherently speculative . Although recent experiments in intact isolated membranes have con ﬁ rmed some of the DRM - based inferences into raft com - position and function [ 18 , 20 ] , the volume of such studies pales in com - parison to those relying on detergent resistance . Because it would be obtrusive to point out the artifactual nature of DRMs for every study referenced here , the rest of the text will conform to the inferred relationship between inclusion in DRMs and in vivo raft association ; however , the reader is cautioned to take a skeptical view . 2 . 2 . Polarized sorting in epithelial cells The seminal observations in epithelial cells touched off a ﬂ urry of investigations that de ﬁ ned the lipid and protein compositions of raft subdomains and the mechanisms by which they mediate sorting and traf ﬁ cking . Some of the earliest proteins found to be associated with the DRMs – and by implication , rafts – were membrane proteins anchored to the lumenal side of the PM by glycophosphatidylinositol ( GPI - AP ) [ 29 , 30 , 41 ] . These observations suggested a solution to the rid - dle of how to sort proteins without cytosolic features that can be recog - nized by canonical sorting machinery . Both glycosylation and lipidation werealsoidenti ﬁ edasraft - mediatedapicalPMsortingdeterminantsfor transmembrane proteins ( TMPs ) , includingthosewithN - glycosylations [ 42 , 43 ] , O - glycosylations [ 44 ] , and S - acylations ( i . e . palmitoylation ) ( reviewed in Ref . [ 45 ] ) . A key ﬁ nding was that the ef ﬁ cient apical deliv - ery of raft - associated proteins was interrupted by inhibition of either cholesterol [ 46 ] or sphingolipid [ 47 ] synthesis . Recently , these in vitro inferences were con ﬁ rmed by an exciting in vivo study , which showed that organogenesis in Caenorhabditis elegans – which requires assembly ofapolarizedepithelium – wascriticallyunderminedbyperturbationof in situ GSL biosynthesis [ 48 ] . A number of exceptions challenge the central role of rafts in polarized PM sorting in simple epithelia ( reviewed in Ref . [ 49 ] ) . For example , not all GPI - APs are apically directed , even when these are associated with DRMs [ 43 , 50 ] . Further , raft lipid pertur - bations do not always lead to mis - sorting , even when they induce disruption of DRMs [ 51 ] . To explain these discrepancies , the model was amended to include the stabilization / coalescence of small and dynamic raft domains into practically useful platforms by protein - mediated clustering of raft components . The key evidence for this hypothesis was the observation that apically directed GPI - APs clustered into large , multimolecular , cholesterol - dependent ag - gregates , whereas basolateral GPI - APs remained as monomers [ 50 ] . These clusters , which dramatically inhibit the lateral mobili - ty of their constituent proteins , seem to disperse upon arrival at the PM [ 52 ] , into homodimeric “ unit rafts ” [ 53 ] or homoclusters [ 54 ] . At the moment , it is unclear whether clustering of raft com - ponents stabilizes the domains themselves [ 33 , 55 ] , or instead in - creases the af ﬁ nity of proteins for pre - existing domains ( as has been shown in model membranes [ 20 , 56 ] ) . It is most probable that both effects synergize to underlie the important function served by clustering . Fig . 1 . Involvementofraftdomainsinmembranetraf ﬁ c . Lateralmembranedomainsaidinsortingofproteinandlipidcomponentsbetweenthemembranesofsubcellularcompartments . Membranerafts ( greenstripedregions ) arelikelypresentinthelatterstagesofthesecretorypathway ( i . e . theTGNandPM ) andearlystageoftheendosomalpathway ( earlyandrecycling endosomes ) . Rafts recruit components for coordinated exit from a source compartment and traf ﬁ c to a donor compartment via a raft - enriched vesicular carrier ( blue shading around membranes ) . SuchvectorialrafttransportincludesTGN - to - PMsorting , speci ﬁ cendocytosisatthePM , andrecyclingfromtheendosomalsystemintheEEandRE . Theraftpathwaycoexists with a number of coat / adapter - mediated pathways ( red shading ) . The protein machinery mediating raft traf ﬁ cking is incompletely characterized , but includes caveolins and ﬂ otillins , lectins ( e . g . Gal9 ) , the small GTPase Arf6 , Annexin 13b , and speci ﬁ c SNARE proteins ( Syntaxin 3 / 6 and SNAP - 23 ) . 3006 B . Diaz - Rohrer et al . / Biochimica et Biophysica Acta 1838 ( 2014 ) 3003 – 3013 Intriguingly , these raft - mediated traf ﬁ cking mechanisms also seem to be involved in more complex epithelial tissues like hepatocytes , which rely on basolateral - to - apical transcytosis for differentiation of PM domains . In these , clustering of GPI - anchored GFP mediated ef ﬁ cient apical PM transcytosis , with an unclustered point mutant of the same protein accumulating in an endosomal compartment [ 57 ] . Also , like in simple epithelia , the ﬂ ow of cargo to the apical PM can be interrupted by depletion of raft lipids ( i . e . cholesterol and sphingolipids ) [ 58 ] . Because stabilized raft domains appear to be a major mediator of se - cretory traf ﬁ cking to the apical PM , it stands to reason that this mem - brane would be a raft - enriched compartment . Consistently , the apical PM was shown to be a “ percolating ” raft domain , i . e . one in which the raft phase is the continuum interrupted by non - raft inclusions [ 59 ] . This contrasts with non - polarized cells , whose PMs are believed to pres - ent a continuous non - raft state with dissolved raft domains [ 60 , 61 ] . However , it is important to emphasize that the relative fraction of raft versusnon - raft phases in any membrane is not well established , and ar - guments for a majority raft phase have recently been forwarded in cel - lular biophysical literature [ 21 , 62 – 64 ] . The site of separation for apically directed raft components has tradi - tionally been understood to be the TGN . Dramatic images of apical cargo separating from basolateral / non - raft cargo con ﬁ rmed separation of these membranes in the Golgi prior to generation of a carrier vesicle [ 65 ] . However , it is also possible that the appearance of raft lipid enriched domains happens earlier in the biosynthetic pathway . The cholesterol concentration in the ER is low ( b 5 mol % [ 7 ] ) and almost certainly insuf ﬁ - cient to support cholesterol - mediated domains ; however , the relative fraction of cholesterol increases progressively through the Golgi stacks [ 66 ] peaking in the PM [ 67 ] , which can be as high as 40 – 50 mol % choles - terol [ 68 ] . Similarly , glycosylation of sphingolipids occurs throughout the GA . Together , these effects lead to a thickening of the membrane in the late secretory pathway [ 69 ] , potentially re ﬂ ective of increased raft - like membranecontent . Itisdif ﬁ culttoestimatetheminimum ( ormaximum ) cholesterol and sphingolipid fractions at which robust separation of raft domains would be expected , although model membrane studies can pro - vide a guide . In these , liquid – liquid domains can be observed with as low as 10 % cholesterol [ 21 ] , suggesting that domains may exist and mediate sorting also in the cis Golgi regions , and maybe even as early as the ER [ 70 , 71 ] . Fully consistent with this proposal , a recent combination of modeling and experimental observations suggested that a two - phase membrane system best explains Golgi maturation [ 72 ] . 2 . 3 . Raft - mediated sorting in non - epithelial cells Although most of the attention in membrane - mediated subcellular traf ﬁ c has been paid to polarized sorting in epithelial cells , non - polarized cells also require accurate and ef ﬁ cient membrane distribu - tion , and despite the relative ( compared to the apical PM ) paucity of glycosphingolipids in the PMs of non - polarized cells . For example , as in epithelial cells , perturbation of sphingolipid organization inhibits transport carrier formation in the GA in HeLa cells , leading to defective secretion [ 73 ] . Similarly , cholesterol is required for ef ﬁ cientPM localiza - tion of proteins that localize to the apical PM in epithelia ( e . g . in ﬂ uenza hemagglutinin [ 46 ] and GPI - APs [ 74 ] ) . Although non - polarized cells do not obviously require a mechanism for spatially distinct PM delivery , there remain many advantages to having parallel routes to the cell sur - face . Consistently , two such routes have been observed in both BHK and CHO cells [ 75 ] , with one mediated by raft domains . Moreover , non - polarized cells clearly have mechanisms to speci ﬁ cally sort cargo that would be apically - directed in polarized cells [ 75 , 76 ] ; however , the eventual destination of such cargo seems to depend on cell and cargo type . Theraft - mediatedGA - to - PMsortingtrackinnon - epithelialcellswas directly demonstrated in a series of methodological tour de force exper - iments in the budding yeast , Saccharomyces cerevisiae [ 77 – 80 ] . By a combination of yeast genetics , sophisticated immunoisolation of intact subcellular compartments , and quantitative shotgun mass spectrome - try , it was demonstrated that lipid composition of the ~ 100 nm traf ﬁ ck - ing intermediates leaving the TGN for the PM was wholly distinct from the source compartment . These vesicles were clearly enriched in sterol and glycosphingolipids , in addition to being signi ﬁ cantly more ordered [ 78 ] . With regard to almost all lipid categories and features , these car - riers proved to be intermediate between their source and destination compartments ( i . e . the TGN and PM ) , de ﬁ nitively con ﬁ rming lipid - based secretory sorting [ 77 ] . 2 . 4 . Sorting in neuronal plasma membrane analogous to epithelial cells Neuronal PMs represent a curious hybrid between the sharply de ﬁ ned PM domains of polarized epithelia and the undifferentiated membrane of non - polarized cells . Despite the absence of the lipid - impermeable tight junctions that act as diffusion barriers to maintain the extreme lipid compositional heterogeneity that characterizes epi - thelial PM domains , the compositional uniqueness of axonal versus somatodendritic regions of neurons underlies their functional speciali - zation [ 81 ] . Raft - mediated protein sorting in neurons was observed to be highly analogous to epithelial cells , with the axonal delivery of pro - teins that de ﬁ ne apical PM domains being dependent on intact raft do - mains [ 82 ] . By constraining the delivery of axonal proteins and lipids , raft - mediated traf ﬁ cking appears to be required for the maturation of the axon [ 83 ] , and thus functional neuronal maturation . 3 . Rafts in endocytic traf ﬁ c Classically , intracellular membrane traf ﬁ c has been separated into outward and inward routes referred to as biosynthetic and endocytic pathways , respectively . In reality , there is extensive cross - talk between these cellular highways , with direct transit from the biosynthetic machinery to late endosomes and / or lysosomes [ 84 ] aswell asshuttling of endocytosed components back to the Golgi for processing and re - sorting . Althoughtheyare treatedhereseparately , itisimportanttoem - phasize the extensive integration of the membrane traf ﬁ cking system and thus the critical organizing role that membrane domains play in both pathways . 3 . 1 . Rafts in endocytosis from the plasma membrane Endocytosis and vesicle formation by polymerization of the clathrin triskelion is one of the most architecturally striking and functionally important aspects of eukaryotic cell biology , and so unsurprisingly , clathrin - mediated endocytosis ( CME ) is one of the most well - studied and thoroughly characterized cellular mechanisms [ 85 ] . However , com - pletedeletionofclathrinfunctiondoesnotabrogateallendocytosis [ 86 ] , suggesting multiple parallel routes for internalization of surface mem - branes and extracellular material . A signi ﬁ cant observation is the recip - rocal exclusion between clathrin and membrane rafts — i . e . proteins endocytosed by CME , and clathrin itself , are generally excluded from DRMs , while raft - associated proteins are often excluded from clathrin - coated pits [ 87 ] ( though there are exceptions [ 88 ] ) . Moreover , whereas all raft functions are believed to be sensitive to depletion of PM choles - terol , CMEisnot [ 89 , 90 ] . Thisobservationsuggestsasimple ( likelyover - simpli ﬁ ed ) dichotomy for endocytosis : CME mediated by speci ﬁ c protein - protein interactions is responsible for internalizing non - raft PM components , while rafts mediate the alternate route for those pro - teins with speci ﬁ c af ﬁ nity for ordered membrane domains ( Fig . 1 ) . Possible analogs for clathrin - coated pits in this raft - mediated endocytic route are caveolae — small tapered invaginations of the plasma membrane observable under electron microscopy [ 91 ] . These caveolar invaginations appear to be intermediates in raft - associated ( but notably clathrin - independent ) traf ﬁ cking pathways , especially en - docytosis from the PM [ 92 ] ( for discussion of mechanisms of caveolar 3007 B . Diaz - Rohrer et al . / Biochimica et Biophysica Acta 1838 ( 2014 ) 3003 – 3013 traf ﬁ cking , see Section 4 . 1 ) . The two key pieces of evidence for the rela - tionship between caveolae and lipid rafts are the enrichment of raft components in caveolae and the sensitivity of caveolae - mediated traf ﬁ c to perturbation of raft lipids . Both cholesterol and sphingolipids are highly enriched in caveolae , even compared to the relatively cholesterol - / SL - rich PM [ 93 ] . Similarly , several raft - associated proteins were shown to be included in caveolae [ 94 ] , and more importantly , to induce the genesis of caveolar traf ﬁ cking intermediates upon their cross - linking ( which , as described below , stabilizes and coalesces raft domains ) [ 95 ] . This crosslink - mediated raft coalescence is the mecha - nism that might be responsible for the internalization of pathogens or bacterial toxins that target cellular glycosphingolipids like cholera and SV40 for GM1 [ 96 ] and Shigella dysenteriae for Gb3 [ 97 ] . Despite the central role of caveolae in raft - associated endocytosis , robust clathrin - independent endocytosis can be observed even in cells without caveolae [ 86 ] . These observations led to the characterization of non - clathrin / non - caveolar endocytic routes ( Fig . 1 ) , which remain better de ﬁ ned by what they are not , than what they are and how they work . The most prominent example is the CLIC / GEEC system — i . e . Clathrin - Independent Carriers ( CLIC ) and GPI - Enriched Endocytic Compartments ( GEEC ) [ 86 , 98 ] . This pathwayis largelyde ﬁ ned by its in - ternalization of proteins anchored to the extracellular lea ﬂ et of the PM , including GPI - anchored proteins and the GSL - binding toxins described above , as well as its independence for caveolin , clathrin , and dynamin , the necessary scission factor in CME [ 99 ] . It is tempting to speculate from ( 1 ) the cholesterol - sensitivity of the CLIC / GEEC pathway ; ( 2 ) the signi ﬁ cant overlap between its cargo and that of caveolin - mediated en - docytosis ; and ( 3 ) the coordinate regulation of caveolin and GEEC by Cdc42 [ 99 , 100 ] , that the core molecular machinery for both of these pathways is linked to ordered membrane domains ; however , a clear molecular description of that machinery remains elusive . A similar case can be made for Arf6 - mediated traf ﬁ cking , which is poorly charac - terized but appears to be a route for both endocytosis and recycling of raft - associated cargo to the PM [ 101 ] ( See Table 1 ) . A surprising recent set of observations supports raft - associated en - docytosis via a novel endocytic mechanism known as Massive ENDocy - tosis ( MEND ) . In MEND , up to 50 % of the PM can be endocytosed in a matter of minutes , induced by large intracellular calcium transients . The hypothesized cause for this effect is an unregulated coalescence of raft domains leading to endocytosis [ 102 ] . 3 . 2 . Deeper down : raft - associated sorting in endosomal progression , recycling , and degradation Although most of the attention in endocytic traf ﬁ cking has been on internalization of speci ﬁ c components from the PM domains are likely integrated into all aspects of endocytic traf ﬁ c ( Fig . 1 ) . In analogy to the vectorial ﬂ ow of thesecretorysystem ( i . e . ER - to - PM ) , theendocytic sys - tem can be conceptualized as a two - way highway , with bulk traf ﬁ c pro - ceedingtowards thecellular wastebin – i . e . thelysosome – and a robust pathway for recycling internalized components back to the PM ( note : while the various endocytic compartments are typically referred to as discrete cellular locations , it is probably more accurate to conceptualize themasamaturingcontinuum , fromsmall , neutralendocyticvesiclesto larger , more acidic degradative compartments ) . Moreover , in polarized epithelia , these endocytic pathways are complicated by the presence of two different “ source ” compartments — i . e . the apical and basolateral PMs . These are associated with specialized apical and basolateral recycling endosomes ( ARE and BRE , respectively ) , which converge / ma - ture into a common recycling endosome ( CRE ) . The divergence of lipid compositioninthosecompartmentshasnotbeenclearlydelineated , but it is a reasonable prediction that they re ﬂ ect the speci ﬁ c membrane compositions of their sources / destinations . The main location for raft involvement in these processes is the cen - tral sorting compartment of the endocytic system , the early endosome ( EE ) ( Fig . 2 ) . The EE is the primary destination of most endocytosed material , and is also the site of bifurcation for the degradative and recycling pathways . Its structure contains both reticulated tubules characteristic of the recycling endosome ( RE — the intermediate for endosomal recycling back to the PM ) and a multivesicular vacuole re - sembling the late endosome ( Fig . 2 ) . Both EEs [ 103 ] and REs [ 104 ] are enriched in cholesterol , sphingomyelin , and phosphatidylserine ( PS ) [ 105 ] , as well as caveolin [ 104 ] . In striking contrast , these same compo - nents are largely depleted from late endosomes ( LEs ) [ 103 , 105 , 106 ] , though there is evidence for raft domains in LEs [ 107 ] . These ﬁ ndings prompt the hypothesis that rafts mediate one route for recycling of spe - ci ﬁ c membrane components from the EE to the PM ( via the RE ) ( Fig . 2 ) . This hypothesis has recently received striking experimental con ﬁ r - mation . Our group generated panels of mutants of several single - spanning PM proteins to yield variants with experimentally de ﬁ ned raft af ﬁ nities ranging from completely raft - excluded to raft - enriched . Rather than relying on detergent resistance ( which can be artifact - prone [ 38 , 39 ] and intractable for quanti ﬁ cation [ 40 ] ) , we quanti ﬁ ed raft association using Giant Plasma Membrane Vesicles [ 18 , 20 , 108 ] ( Fig . 2 ) and observed a clear relationship between raft af ﬁ nity and PM localization . While all raft - partitioning variants were enriched at the PM , a variety of unrelated mutants with abrogated raft af ﬁ nity accumulated in late endosomes and lysosomes , via transit through EEs [ 109 ] . These observations were explained by a model wherein PM pro - teins are constitutively endocytosed , then recycled from the EE via their association withraftdomains . If raftassociationwasabrogated , proteins not equipped for an alternative recycling route ( e . g . coat / adapter pro - tein recognition sequences ) , were degraded through a bulk endosomal maturation pathway ( Fig . 2 ) . Although these ﬁ ndings were consistent across different cell lines [ 109 ] , raft - mediated recycling has previously been shown to be cell - type dependent . A dramatic example is the traf ﬁ cking of GPI - APs be - tween CHO and BHK cells , two common , ﬁ broblastic cell lines . In CHO cells , internalized GPI - APs are recycled from EEs to REs to the PM [ 110 ] , via their association with rafts [ 111 ] . Interestingly , when raft as - sociation is perturbed by modifying the lipid anchor ( to bear non - raft preferring unsaturated acyl chains ) , proteins also recycled to the PM , but at a different rate , comparable to other non - raft cargo [ 111 , 112 ] . In contrast , in BHKs , both raft and non - raft variants of lipid - anchored proteins were targeted for the LE , and degradation in the lysosome [ 110 , 112 ] . An alternative , non - exclusive mechanism to explain thedepletion of raft components from late endosomes and lysosomes is that cholesterol is selectively enriched in the intraluminal vesicles ( ILVs ) that give LEs their characteristic multivesicular body ( MVB ) appearance [ 113 ] . The ILVs are destined for degradation or secretion , suggesting a speci ﬁ c mechanism for removal of raft lipids from the endocytic cycle . ILV for - mation is mediated by the ESCRT complex , suggesting that this machin - ery may have speci ﬁ cityfor recruitingand deformingraft domains , both in the LEs and otherwise . Remarkable recent observations in yeast have de ﬁ nitively demonstrated the potential for large - scale lateral domain formation in degradative endosomes , speci ﬁ cally the yeast vacuole . A va - riety of metabolic challenges induced swelling of the vacuoles such that they were observable by light microscopy and a clear , sterol - dependent coexistence of two liquid domains was observed in the vacuolar membranes [ 22 ] . We speculate that this dramatic effect was observable because the cellular stresses prevented the selective removal of raft lipids from LEs and lysosomes causing phase separation . An intriguing hypothesis [ 114 ] is that the speci ﬁ c recruitment of raft material into the internal vesicles of LEs results in some diseases charac - terized by dysfunctional lysosome catabolism . Such lysosomal storage diseases ( LSDs ) comprise several dozen disorders , all characterized by the accumulation of undegraded lysosomal material , resulting in lyso - somal proliferation and hypertrophy , and often - severe neuronal dys - functions [ 115 ] . Canonical raft components ( sphingolipids , glycolipids , cholesterol ) are often over - represented in the accumulated , undegraded material [ 116 , 117 ] , particularly in sphingolipidoses , which comprise a 3008 B . Diaz - Rohrer et al . / Biochimica et Biophysica Acta 1838 ( 2014 ) 3003 – 3013 relatively large group of lysosomal storage diseases including Fabry , Niemann – Pick , and Tay – Sachs diseases . Moreover , raft lipids seem to be inseparable travel partners , as failure to degrade one type ( e . g . cholester - ol ) oftenleadstoaccumulationofothertypes ( e . g . sphingolipids ) without a speci ﬁ c defect in their catabolism [ 117 , 118 ] . Although the molecular pathophysiology of these sphingolipidoses remains unresolved , it is pos - sible that altered cholesterol / sphingolipid homeostasis resulting from theco - recruitmentofraftlipidsintolysosomesleadstowide - rangingdel - eterious effects [ 114 ] . 4 . Molecular machinery for raft - mediated sorting Although the raft concept emphasizes lipid - driven membrane self - organization as a key mechanistic contributor to cellular logistics , these functions clearly require extensive proteinaceous molecular ma - chinery for ef ﬁ cient and accurate traf ﬁ cking . A hypothesized exception to this requirement is the budding of raft - enriched vesicular carriers from their host membranes driven by the line tension ( two - dimensional analog of surface tension ) present at the interface between unlike mem - brane regions [ 119 ] . This edge energy – the same force that produces spherical droplets in three - dimensional emulsions and circular domains in planar membranes – is dependent on the length of the domain inter - face , which could be reduced by deforming the planar domain into a bud in order to minimize edge length . In theory , such a mechanism could potentially lead to complete vesicle budding as the edge length is driven to zero [ 119 ] . This drive to minimize the line tension is opposed by the energy necessary to bend a planar bilayer into a curved vesicle , with the competition between these two forces determining the extent of budding . Unfortunately , direct estimation for membrane parameters likelinetension , bendingrigidity , andintrinsiccurvatureis dif ﬁ cultforbi - ological membranes , especially the membranes of internal organelles where much traf ﬁ cking occurs . The current understanding is that a strictly domain - induced mechanism for vesicle budding is unlikely be - cause the difference between coexisting domains , and thus the tension between them , is likely to be small in biomimetic membranes [ 120 ] , or even non - existent , as would be the case for a critical system [ 21 ] . Small tensions would require micrometer - sized domains to induce domain budding , and such domains are generally not observed in living cells , evenunderraft - coalescingconditions . Thus , asisthecaseformostcellular functions , proteins play a primary role in raft dependent sorting ( Fig . 1 ) . 4 . 1 . Caveolin , ﬂ otillin , and caveolae The protein most associated with lipid rafts in cellular traf ﬁ c is caveolin . Originally identi ﬁ ed as a phosphorylation target of v - Src and potential mediator of oncogenesis [ 121 ] , VIP21 / caveolin was soon de - scribedasthecorecomponentofcaveolae [ 122 ] andamajorconstituent of apically directed transport vesicles [ 123 ] . It has since been shown to be widely expressed and required for inducing caveolae in a variety of cell types ( reviewed in Ref . [ 91 , 94 ] ) , remarkably including prokaryotes [ 124 ] . Caveolin binds cholesterol directly [ 125 ] and its function is sensi - tive to cholesterol depletion [ 122 ] . Correspondingly , caveolin itself is highly enriched in DRMs — indeed it is widely used a raft marker , though it likely de ﬁ nes a subset of raft domains involved in caveolin - mediated traf ﬁ c . Importantly , caveolin only associates with the raft - enriched membrane fractions after its oligomerization , and this oligo - merization is stabilized by raft lipids present in PMs and the late Golgi [ 126 , 127 ] . These observations suggest caveolin oligomerization ( likely mediated by co - factors including the other caveolin family members Cav2 and Cav3 , as well as cavins [ 91 ] ) as one possible driving force for raft coalescence and functionalization , and feedback regulation be - tween this oligomerization and raft lipids . A secondprotein familyinvolved in functional raft coalescence is the ﬂ otillins ( aka reggie1 and 2 ) . Both family members are highly DRM - Fig . 2 . Transmembranedomain - dependentraftassociationandendosomalrecycling . Earlyendosomesarekeysortingstationsforinternalizedmembranecargo . Endocytosedmembrane proteinsare recycled to the PM by two parallel routes . For non - raft proteins ( red ) , speci ﬁ c amino acid motifs intheir cytosolic domains recruit coat / adapter machinery , whichboth sort componentsandaidinthegenerationofatransportvesicle . Proteinsrequiringraftassociationforrecycling ( blue ) partitionintoorderedmembranedomainsduetotheirtransmembrane domains ( TMD ) [ 109 ] andpost - translationalmodi ﬁ cations [ 20 , 45 ] , andarepackagedintoaraft - enrichedrecyclingcarrierdestinedforthePM ( possiblyviarecyclingendosomes ) . Proteins withneitherrecyclingsignal ( redTMDbutnoadapterproteinrecognitionsequence ) areretainedintheendosomalsystem , foreventualdegradationinthelysosomes . Raftassociationcan nowbedirectlyquanti ﬁ edbyobservingisolatedplasmamembranevesicles [ 108 , 109 ] , whichseparateintocoexistingdomainsthatselectivelyrecruitmembraneproteins . Therightimage is of a plasma membrane vesicle from a cell expressing a raft protein ( linker for activation of T - cells — LAT - GFP ) , stained with a non - raft marker lipid . The image at the top is a similar preparation , but the tagged protein is the non - raft Transferrin Receptor ( TfR - GFP ) . Images at the left show colocalization between LAT with a non - raft TMD and a lysosomal marker . For details , see Ref . [ 109 ] . 3009 B . Diaz - Rohrer et al . / Biochimica et Biophysica Acta 1838 ( 2014 ) 3003 – 3013 enriched [ 128 ] , though unlike caveolins , they are not integral mem - brane proteins and therefore require lipid modi ﬁ cations for stable membrane attachment . Like caveolins , ﬂ otillins tend to oligomerize [ 128 ] , with oligomerization required for endocytosis [ 129 ] . In polarized epithelia , theinternalizationofraftmarkersGPI - APsandcholeratoxinis strongly dependent on ﬂ otillin expression [ 130 , 131 ] , a fact made more remarkable considering that neither set of proteins crosses the mem - brane , thus precluding any direct protein – protein interaction with the intracellular ﬂ otillin [ 130 ] . Finally , there remain several mysterious partners involved in raft - mediated vesicle generation , implicated through crude proteomic characterization of apical transport vesicles in MDCK cells [ 27 ] . Among these is VIP17 / MAL [ 132 ] , a small proteolipid that can oligomerize , in - duce membrane domains [ 133 ] , and affect traf ﬁ cking [ 132 , 134 ] ; annexin 13b , an epithelial speci ﬁ c isoform [ 135 ] responsible for raft - mediated traf ﬁ c in MDCKs [ 136 ] ; and galectin - 9 , an extracellular lectin that binds and crosslinks raft glycosphingolipids [ 137 ] . 4 . 2 . Arf6 and other machinery In addition to the core machinery associated with raft traf ﬁ cking , there is a plethora of supporting players that are necessary to mediate speci ﬁ c targeting , identi ﬁ cation , and fusion to destination compart - ments [ 138 ] . One of the best characterized of these is the Ras superfam - ily small GTPase Arf6 [ 139 ] . Small GTPases , like Rho , Rac , and the many Rab family proteins , are ubiquitous regulators of cytoskeletal and mem - brane dynamics , relying on switchable activity mediated by GTP hydro - lysis for their rapid and dynamic regulation . Although they are not themselves protein coats , several members of the Arf family recruit clathrin and potentially other coat / adaptor proteins [ 140 ] . Unlike the other Arf proteins , Arf6 is localized to the PM and early endosomes , where it appears to be directly involved in both endocytosis and recycling of raft - like membranes [ 101 ] . To some extent , Arf6 appears to mediate its own distinct non - clathrin / non - caveolar pathway that also does not enrich for GPI - APs [ 141 ] . This pathway has been shown to be important in processing of the amyloid precursor protein ( APP ) , the source of the amyloid peptides accumulated in Alzheimer ' s disease , where it facilitates the endosomal rendezvous between APP and the beta - secretase ( BACE1 ) required for peptide generation [ 142 ] . Such amyloidogenic processing has previously been associated with lipid rafts [ 143 ] , further implicating Arf6 as a key mediator of raft traf ﬁ c . Mi - crotubules are proposed to be the cellular track taken by Arf6 / raft vesi - cles [ 101 , 144 ] , with the minus - end directed motor KIFC3 as the carrier [ 145 ] . Finally , severalSNAREs have beenimplicated in raft vesicle fusion and targeting , including syntaxin 3 , SNAP - 23 , and VAMP7 [ 146 ] , as well as VAMP4 and syntaxin 2 [ 147 ] . 5 . Perspective As with much of our current understanding of cellular functions that rely on collective properties rather than individual molecular com - ponents , membrane sorting and traf ﬁ cking between cellular organelles remain largely mysterious . Rafts clearly play an important role in these processes ; however , the paltry list of molecular players in Section 4 and the lack of structural insight into their mechanisms of action suggest that the details of how rafts are coalesced , budded , traf ﬁ cked , and targeted are unresolved . Much of the dif ﬁ culty arises from the inherent interconnectedness and redundancy of membrane traf ﬁ c . Although Fig . 1suggestsstep - wise , discreetpathways , inreality , thereisextensive crosstalk between the secretory and endosomal systems , with direct membrane exchange possibly occurring between all compartments . Moreover , the plethora of traf ﬁ cking options in the cell allows cargo to take “ alternate ” routes when a given pathway is abrogated . It remains an open question whether all of the endosomal routes associated with raft domains ( described in Section 3 ) share core machinery , or whether each is truly distinct . An underappreciated consideration is that almost all studies aimed at elucidating raft properties have focused on the only easily accessible membrane of the cell ( thePM ) , despite there being noa priori reason to believe that intracellular membranes should have similar rafts to the PM . Indeed , rafts are almost certainly different in each compartment ofacellbecauseoftheuniqueprotein / lipidcompositionofanygivenor - ganelle . Thus , it is probably more accurate to conceptualize lipid rafts as amechanismformembraneorganization , ratherthanspeci ﬁ centitiesof strictly de ﬁ ned compositions and physical properties ( e . g . size ) [ 16 ] . The impact of suchraft diversity onsubcellularsorting can only bespec - ulated , but it is possible that the compositions of the major membrane sorting stations in the cell ( TGN and early endosome ) may promote a morerobustseparationofraftfromnon - raftdomainsthanwouldbeob - served at the PM . Although caveolin is almost certainly a key raft - traf ﬁ cking mediator , there is no comparison between it and the level of mechanistic insight into clathrin - mediated endocytosis . Caveolin - mediated membrane budding and speci ﬁ c selection of raft components into in vitro caveolae have not been reconstituted ( though demonstrated in a cell - free assay [ 148 ] ) , thus there is no evidence for whether caveolin comprises the minimal required machinery for raft sorting . Moreover , the speci ﬁ c re - cruitment of proteins into raft domains underlies the functional rele - vance of rafts , but the structural determinants by which transmembrane proteins are recruited into raft domains are only now starting to become elucidated [ 45 , 109 , 149 , 150 ] . The evidence presented above makes a strong case for lipid - mediated , lateralmembranedomainsinsubcellularsortingandtraf ﬁ ck - ing . Moreover , the ubiquity of this involvement suggests a simple orga - nizing principle for cellular traf ﬁ c , wherein lipid - driven domains interface with protein machinery . However , a mechanistic description of this simple principle remains elusive , with tangled , interconnected pathways often sharing cargo and machinery both spatially and tempo - rally . We hope that this confusion will be resolved by a combination of nanometer - resolution imaging methods [ 151 , 152 ] , advances in func - tional membrane protein reconstitution [ 153 ] , a nd a more accurate un - derstandingofwhatraftsare , whattheyarenot , andwhattheydointhe cell . Acknowledgements IL is a Cancer Prevention and Research Institute of Texas scholar for cancer research ( R1215 ) . References [ 1 ] C . Raiborg , H . Stenmark , The ESCRT machineryinendosomalsorting of ubiquitylated membrane proteins , Nature 458 ( 2009 ) 445 – 452 . [ 2 ] B . McDonald , J . Martin - Serrano , No strings attached : the ESCRT machinery in viral budding and cytokinesis , J . Cell Sci . 122 ( 2009 ) 2167 – 2177 . [ 3 ] A . J . Jimenez , P . Maiuri , J . Lafaurie - Janvore , S . Divoux , M . Piel , F . Perez , ESCRT machinery is required for plasma membrane repair , Science 343 ( 2014 ) 1247136 . [ 4 ] T . C . Sudhof , J . E . Rothman , Membrane fusion : grappling with SNARE and SM proteins , Science 323 ( 2009 ) 474 – 477 . [ 5 ] D . J . Owen , B . M . Collins , P . R . Evans , Adaptors for clathrin coats : structure and func - tion , Annu . Rev . Cell Dev . Biol . 20 ( 2004 ) 153 – 191 . [ 6 ] M . Zerial , H . McBride , Rab proteins as membrane organizers , Nat . Rev . Mol . Cell Biol . 2 ( 2001 ) 107 – 117 . [ 7 ] G . van Meer , D . R . Voelker , G . W . Feigenson , Membrane lipids : where they are and how they behave , Nat . Rev . Mol . Cell Biol . 9 ( 2008 ) 112 – 124 . [ 8 ] I . Mellman , W . J . Nelson , Coordinated protein sorting , targeting and distribution in polarized cells , Nat . Rev . Mol . Cell Biol . 9 ( 2008 ) 833 – 845 . [ 9 ] C . Klose , M . A . Surma , K . Simons , Organellar lipidomics — background and perspec - tives , Curr . Opin . Cell Biol . 25 ( 2013 ) 406 – 413 . [ 10 ] K . Hanada , K . Kumagai , S . Yasuda , Y . Miura , M . Kawano , M . Fukasawa , M . Nishijima , Molecular machinery for non - vesicular traf ﬁ cking of ceramide , Nature 426 ( 2003 ) 803 – 809 . [ 11 ] B . Mesmin , N . H . Pipalia , F . W . Lund , T . F . Ramlall , A . Sokolov , D . Eliezer , F . R . Max ﬁ eld , STARD4abundanceregulatessteroltransportandsensing , Mol . Biol . Cell22 ( 2011 ) 4004 – 4015 . [ 12 ] K . Maeda , K . Anand , A . Chiapparino , A . Kumar , M . Poletto , M . Kaksonen , A . C . Gavin , Interactome map uncovers phosphatidylserine transport by oxysterol - binding proteins , Nature 501 ( 2013 ) 257 – 261 . 3010 B . Diaz - Rohrer et al . / Biochimica et Biophysica Acta 1838 ( 2014 ) 3003 – 3013 [ 13 ] B . Mesmin , F . R . Max ﬁ eld , Intracellular sterol dynamics , Biochim . Biophys . Acta 1791 ( 2009 ) 636 – 645 . [ 14 ] J . Bai , R . E . Pagano , Measurement of spontaneous transfer and transbilayer movement of BODIPY - labeled lipids in lipid vesicles , Biochemistry 36 ( 1997 ) 8840 – 8848 . [ 15 ] A . Toulmay , W . A . Prinz , Lipid transfer and signaling at organelle contact sites : the tip of the iceberg , Curr . Opin . Cell Biol . 23 ( 2011 ) 458 – 463 . [ 16 ] D . Lingwood , K . Simons , Lipid rafts as a membrane - organizing principle , Science 327 ( 2010 ) 46 – 50 . [ 17 ] L . J . Pike , Raftsde ﬁ ned : areportontheKeystoneSymposiumonLipidRaftsandCell Function , J . Lipid Res . 47 ( 2006 ) 1597 – 1598 . [ 18 ] T . Baumgart , A . T . Hammond , P . Sengupta , S . T . Hess , D . A . Holowka , B . A . Baird , W . W . Webb , Large - scale ﬂ uid / ﬂ uid phase separation of proteins and lipids in giant plasma membrane vesicles , Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . U . S . A . 104 ( 2007 ) 3165 – 3170 . [ 19 ] I . Levental , M . Grzybek , K . Simons , Raft domainsofvariableproperties and compo - sitions in plasma membrane vesicles , Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . U . S . A . 108 ( 2011 ) 11411 – 11416 . [ 20 ] I . Levental , D . Lingwood , M . Grzybek , U . Coskun , K . Simons , Palmitoylation regulates raft af ﬁ nity for the majority of integral raft proteins , Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . U . S . A . 107 ( 2010 ) 22050 – 22054 . [ 21 ] S . L . Veatch , P . Cicuta , P . Sengupta , A . Honerkamp - Smith , D . Holowka , B . Baird , Critical ﬂ uctuations in plasma membrane vesicles , ACS Chem . Biol . 3 ( 2008 ) 287 – 293 . [ 22 ] A . Toulmay , W . A . Prinz , Direct imaging reveals stable , micrometer - scale lipid do - mains that segregate proteins in live cells , J . Cell Biol . 202 ( 2013 ) 35 – 44 . [ 23 ] P . Ghosh , N . M . Dahms , S . Kornfeld , Mannose6 - phosphate receptors : new twists in the tale , Nat . Rev . Mol . Cell Biol . 4 ( 2003 ) 202 – 212 . [ 24 ] K . Simons , G . van Meer , Lipid sorting in epithelial cells , Biochemistry 27 ( 1988 ) 6197 – 6202 . [ 25 ] G . Grif ﬁ ths , K . Simons , Thetrans Golgi network : sorting at theexitsite ofthe Golgi complex , Science 234 ( 1986 ) 438 – 443 . [ 26 ] G . van Meer , E . H . Stelzer , R . W . Wijnaendts - van - Resandt , K . Simons , Sorting of sphingolipids in epithelial ( Madin – Darby canine kidney ) cells , J . Cell Biol . 105 ( 1987 ) 1623 – 1635 . [ 27 ] A . Wandinger - Ness , M . K . Bennett , C . Antony , K . Simons , Distinct transport vesicles mediate the delivery of plasma membrane proteins to the apical and basolateral domains of MDCK cells , J . Cell Biol . 111 ( 1990 ) 987 – 1000 . [ 28 ] I . Pascher , Molecular arrangements in sphingolipids . Conformation and hydrogen bonding of ceramide and their implication on membrane stability and permeability , Biochim . Biophys . Acta 455 ( 1976 ) 433 – 451 . [ 29 ] D . A . Brown , J . K . Rose , Sorting of GPI - anchored proteins to glycolipid - enriched membrane subdomains during transport to the apical cell surface , Cell 68 ( 1992 ) 533 – 544 . [ 30 ] K . Fiedler , T . Kobayashi , T . V . Kurzchalia , K . Simons , Glycosphingolipid - enriched , detergent - insoluble complexes in protein sorting in epithelial cells , Biochemistry 32 ( 1993 ) 6365 – 6373 . [ 31 ] J . E . Skibbens , M . G . Roth , K . S . Matlin , Differential extractability of in ﬂ uenza virus hemagglutinin during intracellular transport in polarized epithelial cells and non - polar ﬁ broblasts , J . Cell Biol . 108 ( 1989 ) 821 – 832 . [ 32 ] S . L . Keller , W . H . Pitcher , W . H . Huestis , H . M . McConnell , Red blood cell lipids form immiscible liquids , Phys . Rev . Lett . 81 ( 1998 ) 5019 . [ 33 ] A . T . Hammond , F . A . Heberle , T . Baumgart , D . Holowka , B . Baird , G . W . Feigenson , Crosslinking a lipid raft component triggers liquid ordered - liquid disordered phase separation in model plasma membranes , Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . U . S . A . 102 ( 2005 ) 6320 – 6325 . [ 34 ] S . L . Veatch , S . L . Keller , Organization in lipid membranes containing cholesterol , Phys . Rev . Lett . 89 ( 2002 ) 268101 . [ 35 ] K . Simons , E . Ikonen , Functional rafts in cell membranes , Nature 387 ( 1997 ) 569 – 572 . [ 36 ] D . A . Brown , Lipid rafts , detergent - resistant membranes , and raft targeting signals , Physiology 21 ( 2006 ) 430 – 439 . [ 37 ] A . K . Kenworthy , Havewebecomeoverlyreliantonlipidrafts ? TalkingPointonthe involvement of lipid rafts in T - cell activation , EMBO Rep . 9 ( 2008 ) 531 – 535 . [ 38 ] H . Heerklotz , Triton promotes domain formation in lipid raft mixtures , Biophys . J . 83 ( 2002 ) 2693 – 2701 . [ 39 ] S . Munro , Lipid rafts : elusive or illusive ? Cell 115 ( 2003 ) 377 – 388 . [ 40 ] D . Lingwood , K . Simons , Detergentresistance as a tool inmembrane research , Nat . Protoc . 2 ( 2007 ) 2159 – 2165 . [ 41 ] M . P . Lisanti , I . W . Caras , M . A . Davitz , E . Rodriguez - Boulan , A glycophospholipid membrane anchor acts as an apical targeting signal in polarized epithelial cells , J . Cell Biol . 109 ( 1989 ) 2145 – 2156 . [ 42 ] P . Scheiffele , J . Peranen , K . Simons , N - glycans as apical sorting signals in epithelial cells , Nature 378 ( 1995 ) 96 – 98 . [ 43 ] J . H . Benting , A . G . Rietveld , K . Simons , N - Glycans mediate the apical sorting of a GPI - anchored , raft - associated protein in Madin - Darby canine kidney cells , J . Cell Biol . 146 ( 1999 ) 313 – 320 . [ 44 ] C . Yeaman , A . H . LeGall , A . N . Baldwin , L . Monlauzeur , A . LeBivic , E . Rodriguez - Boulan , TheO - glycosylatedstalkdomainisrequiredforapicalsortingofneurotrophinrecep - tors inpolarized MDCKcells , J . Cell Biol . 139 ( 1997 ) 929 – 940 . [ 45 ] I . Levental , M . Grzybek , K . Simons , Greasing their way : lipid modi ﬁ cations determine protein association with membrane rafts , Biochemistry 49 ( 2010 ) 6305 – 6316 . [ 46 ] P . Keller , K . Simons , Cholesterol is required for surface transport of in ﬂ uenza virus hemagglutinin , J . Cell Biol . 140 ( 1998 ) 1357 – 1367 . [ 47 ] R . W . Mays , K . A . Siemers , B . A . Fritz , A . W . Lowe , G . van Meer , W . J . Nelson , Hierarchy of mechanisms involved in generating Na / K - ATPase polarity in MDCK epithelial cells , J . Cell Biol . 130 ( 1995 ) 1105 – 1115 . [ 48 ] H . Zhang , N . Abraham , L . A . Khan , D . H . Hall , J . T . Fleming , V . Gobel , Apicobasal do - main identities of expanding tubular membranes depend on glycosphingolipid biosynthesis , Nat . Cell Biol . 13 ( 2011 ) 1189 – 1201 . [ 49 ] S . Schuck , K . Simons , Polarized sorting in epithelial cells : raft clustering and the biogenesis of the apical membrane , J . Cell Sci . 117 ( 2004 ) 5955 – 5964 . [ 50 ] S . Paladino , D . Sarnataro , R . Pillich , S . Tivodar , L . Nitsch , C . Zurzolo , Protein oligo - merizationmodulatesraftpartitioningandapicalsortingofGPI - anchoredproteins , J . Cell Biol . 167 ( 2004 ) 699 – 709 . [ 51 ] C . Lipardi , L . Nitsch , C . Zurzolo , Detergent - insoluble GPI - anchored proteins are apically sorted in ﬁ scher rat thyroid cells , but interference with cholesterol or sphingolipids differentially affects detergent insolubility and apical sorting , Mol . Biol . Cell 11 ( 2000 ) 531 – 542 . [ 52 ] L . A . Hannan , M . P . Lisanti , E . Rodriguez - Boulan , M . Edidin , Correctly sorted mole - cules of a GPI - anchored protein are clustered and immobile when they arrive at the apical surface of MDCK cells , J . Cell Biol . 120 ( 1993 ) 353 – 358 . [ 53 ] K . G . Suzuki , R . S . Kasai , K . M . Hirosawa , Y . L . Nemoto , M . Ishibashi , Y . Miwa , T . K . Fujiwara , A . Kusumi , Transient GPI - anchored protein homodimers are units for raft organization and function , Nat . Chem . Biol . 8 ( 2012 ) 774 – 783 . [ 54 ] S . Paladino , S . Lebreton , S . Tivodar , F . Formiggini , G . Ossato , E . Gratton , M . Tramier , M . Coppey - Moisan , C . Zurzolo , Golgi sorting regulates organization and activity of GPI proteins at apical membranes , Nat . Chem . Biol . 10 ( 2014 ) 10 . [ 55 ] D . Lingwood , J . Ries , P . Schwille , K . Simons , Plasma membranes are poised for activation of raft phase coalescence at physiological temperature , Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . U . S . A . 105 ( 2008 ) 10005 – 10010 . [ 56 ] N . Kahya , D . A . Brown , P . Schwille , Raft partitioning and dynamic behavior of human placental alkaline phosphatase in giant unilamellar vesicles , Biochemistry 44 ( 2005 ) 7479 – 7489 . [ 57 ] R . Galmes , J . L . Delaunay , M . Maurice , T . Ait - Slimane , Oligomerizationisrequiredfor normal endocytosis / transcytosis of a GPI - anchored protein in polarized hepatic cells , J . Cell Sci . 126 ( 2013 ) 3409 – 3416 . [ 58 ] L . K . Nyasae , A . L . Hubbard , P . L . Tuma , Transcytotic ef ﬂ ux from early endosomes is dependent on cholesterol and glycosphingolipids in polarized hepatic cells , Mol . Biol . Cell 14 ( 2003 ) 2689 – 2705 . [ 59 ] D . Meder , M . J . Moreno , P . Verkade , W . L . Vaz , K . Simons , Phase coexistence and connectivity in the apical membrane of polarized epithelial cells , Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . U . S . A . 103 ( 2006 ) 329 – 334 . [ 60 ] I . A . Prior , C . Muncke , R . G . Parton , J . F . Hancock , DirectvisualizationofRasproteinsin spatially distinct cell surface microdomains , J . Cell Biol . 160 ( 2003 ) 165 – 170 . [ 61 ] A . Pralle , P . Keller , E . L . Florin , K . Simons , J . K . H . Horber , Sphingolipid - cholesterol rafts diffuse as small entities in the plasma membrane of mammalian cells , J . Cell Biol . 148 ( 2000 ) 997 – 1008 . [ 62 ] I . Levental , F . J . By ﬁ eld , P . Chowdhury , F . Gai , T . Baumgart , P . A . Janmey , Cholesterol - dependent phase separation in cell - derived giant plasma - membrane vesicles , Biochem . J . 424 ( 2009 ) 163 – 167 . [ 63 ] S . A . Sanchez , M . A . Tricerri , E . Gratton , Laurdan generalized polarization ﬂ uctua - tions measures membrane packing micro - heterogeneity in vivo , Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . U . S . A . 109 ( 2012 ) 7314 – 7319 . [ 64 ] D . M . Owen , D . J . Williamson , A . Magenau , K . Gaus , Sub - resolution lipid domains exist in the plasma membrane and regulate protein diffusion and distribution , Nat . Commun . 3 ( 2012 ) 1256 . [ 65 ] P . Keller , D . Toomre , E . Diaz , J . White , K . Simons , Multicolourimaging ofpost - Golgi sorting and traf ﬁ cking in live cells , Nat . Cell Biol . 3 ( 2001 ) 140 – 149 . [ 66 ] L . Orci , R . Montesano , P . Meda , F . Malaisse - Lagae , D . Brown , A . Perrelet , P . Vassalli , Heterogeneousdistributionof ﬁ lipin – cholesterolcomplexesacrossthecisternaeof the Golgi apparatus , Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . U . S . A . 78 ( 1981 ) 293 – 297 . [ 67 ] L . Liscum , N . J . Munn , Intracellular cholesterol transport , Biochim . Biophys . Acta 1438 ( 1999 ) 19 – 37 . [ 68 ] M . J . Gerl , J . L . Sampaio , S . Urban , L . Kalvodova , J . M . Verbavatz , B . Binnington , D . Lindemann , C . A . Lingwood , A . Shevchenko , C . Schroeder , K . Simons , Quantitative analysis of the lipidomes of the in ﬂ uenza virus envelope and MDCK cell apical membrane , J . Cell Biol . 196 ( 2012 ) 213 – 221 . [ 69 ] M . S . Bretscher , S . Munro , Cholesterol and the Golgi apparatus , Science 261 ( 1993 ) 1280 – 1281 . [ 70 ] D . C . Smith , D . J . Sillence , T . Falguieres , R . M . Jarvis , L . Johannes , J . M . Lord , F . M . Platt , L . M . Roberts , The association of Shiga - like toxin with detergent - resistant mem - branes is modulated by glucosylceramide and is an essential requirement in the endoplasmic reticulum for a cytotoxic effect , Mol . Biol . Cell 17 ( 2006 ) 1375 – 1387 . [ 71 ] G . A . Castillon , R . Watanabe , M . Taylor , T . M . Schwabe , H . Riezman , Concentration of GPI - anchored proteins upon ER exit in yeast , Traf ﬁ c 10 ( 2009 ) 186 – 200 . [ 72 ] G . H . Patterson , K . Hirschberg , R . S . Polishchuk , D . Gerlich , R . D . Phair , J . Lippincott - Schwartz , Transport through the Golgi apparatus by rapid partitioning within a two - phase membrane system , Cell 133 ( 2008 ) 1055 – 1067 . [ 73 ] J . M . Duran , F . Campelo , J . van Galen , T . Sachsenheimer , J . Sot , M . V . Egorov , C . Rentero , C . Enrich , R . S . Polishchuk , F . M . Goni , B . Brugger , F . Wieland , V . Malhotra , Sphingomyelin organization is required for vesicle biogenesis at the Golgi com - plex , EMBO J . 31 ( 2012 ) 4535 – 4546 . [ 74 ] M . Esfahani , R . D . Bigler , J . L . Al ﬁ eri , S . Lund - Katz , J . D . Baum , L . Scerbo , Cholesterol regulates the cell surface expression of glycophospholipid - anchored CD14 antigen on human monocytes , Biochim . Biophys . Acta 1149 ( 1993 ) 217 – 223 . [ 75 ] T . Yoshimori , P . Keller , M . G . Roth , K . Simons , Differentbiosynthetictransportroutes to the plasma membrane in BHK and CHO cells , J . Cell Biol . 133 ( 1996 ) 247 – 256 . [ 76 ] P . L . Tuma , L . K . Nyasae , A . L . Hubbard , Nonpolarized cells selectively sort apical proteinsfromcellsurface toanovelcompartment , butlackapicalretentionmech - anisms , Mol . Biol . Cell 13 ( 2002 ) 3400 – 3415 . [ 77 ] M . A . Surma , C . Klose , R . W . Klemm , C . S . Ejsing , K . Simons , Generic sorting of raft lipids into secretory vesicles in yeast , Traf ﬁ c 12 ( 2011 ) 1139 – 1147 . 3011 B . Diaz - Rohrer et al . / Biochimica et Biophysica Acta 1838 ( 2014 ) 3003 – 3013 [ 78 ] R . W . Klemm , C . S . Ejsing , M . A . Surma , H . J . Kaiser , M . J . Gerl , J . L . Sampaio , Q . de Robillard , C . Ferguson , T . J . Proszynski , A . Shevchenko , K . Simons , Segregation of sphingolipids and sterols during formation of secretory vesicles at the trans - Golgi network , J . Cell Biol . 185 ( 2009 ) 601 – 612 . [ 79 ] C . S . Ejsing , J . L . Sampaio , V . Surendranath , E . Duchoslav , K . Ekroos , R . W . Klemm , K . Simons , A . Shevchenko , Global analysis of the yeast lipidome by quantitative shot - gun mass spectrometry , Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . U . S . A . 106 ( 2009 ) 2136 – 2141 . [ 80 ] M . Bagnat , S . Keranen , A . Shevchenko , K . Simons , Lipidraftsfunctioninbiosynthet - ic delivery of proteins to the cell surface in yeast , Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . U . S . A . 97 ( 2000 ) 3254 – 3259 . [ 81 ] A . C . Horton , M . D . Ehlers , Neuronal polarity and traf ﬁ cking , Neuron 40 ( 2003 ) 277 – 295 . [ 82 ] M . D . Ledesma , K . Simons , C . G . Dotti , Neuronal polarity : essential role of protein – lipid complexes in axonal sorting , Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . U . S . A . 95 ( 1998 ) 3966 – 3971 . [ 83 ] M . D . Ledesma , B . Brugger , C . Bunning , F . T . Wieland , C . G . Dotti , Maturation of the axonal plasma membrane requires upregulation of sphingomyelin synthesis and formation of protein – lipid complexes , EMBO J . 18 ( 1999 ) 1761 – 1771 . [ 84 ] E . Rodriguez - Boulan , G . Kreitzer , A . Musch , Organization of vesicular traf ﬁ cking in epithelia , Nat . Rev . Mol . Cell Biol . 6 ( 2005 ) 233 – 247 . [ 85 ] H . T . McMahon , E . Boucrot , Molecular mechanism and physiological functions of clathrin - mediated endocytosis , Nat . Rev . Mol . Cell Biol . 12 ( 2011 ) 517 – 533 . [ 86 ] M . Kirkham , R . G . Parton , Clathrin - independentendocytosis : newinsightsintocaveo - laeandnon - caveolarlipidraftcarriers , Biochim . Biophys . Acta1746 ( 2005 ) 349 – 363 . [ 87 ] B . J . Nichols , GM1 - containing lipid rafts are depleted within clathrin - coated pits , Curr . Biol . 13 ( 2003 ) 686 – 690 . [ 88 ] L . Abrami , S . Liu , P . Cosson , S . H . Leppla , F . G . vanderGoot , Anthraxtoxintriggersen - docytosisofitsreceptorviaalipidraft - mediatedclathrin - dependentprocess , J . Cell Biol . 160 ( 2003 ) 321 – 328 . [ 89 ] B . J . Nichols , A . K . Kenworthy , R . S . Polishchuk , R . Lodge , T . H . Roberts , K . Hirschberg , R . D . Phair , J . Lippincott - Schwartz , Rapid cycling of lipid raft markers between the cell surface and Golgi complex , J . Cell Biol . 153 ( 2001 ) 529 – 541 . [ 90 ] V . Puri , R . Watanabe , R . D . Singh , M . Dominguez , J . C . Brown , C . L . Wheatley , D . L . Marks , R . E . Pagano , Clathrin - dependent and - independent internalization of plas - ma membrane sphingolipids initiates two Golgi targeting pathways , J . Cell Biol . 154 ( 2001 ) 535 – 547 . [ 91 ] R . G . Parton , M . A . del Pozo , Caveolae as plasma membrane sensors , protectors and organizers , Nat . Rev . Mol . Cell Biol . 14 ( 2013 ) 98 – 112 . [ 92 ] R . G . Parton , A . A . Richards , Lipid rafts and caveolae as portals for endocytosis : new insights and common mechanisms , Traf ﬁ c 4 ( 2003 ) 724 – 738 . [ 93 ] U . Ortegren , M . Karlsson , N . Blazic , M . Blomqvist , F . H . Nystrom , J . Gustavsson , P . Fredman , P . Stralfors , Lipids and glycosphingolipids in caveolae and surrounding plasma membrane of primary rat adipocytes , Eur . J . Biochem . 271 ( 2004 ) 2028 – 2036 . [ 94 ] R . G . Parton , K . Simons , The multiple faces of caveolae , Nat . Rev . Mol . Cell Biol . 8 ( 2007 ) 185 – 194 . [ 95 ] P . Verkade , T . Harder , F . Lafont , K . Simons , Induction of caveolae in the apical plasma membrane of Madin – Darby canine kidney cells , J . Cell Biol . 148 ( 2000 ) 727 – 739 . [ 96 ] H . Ewers , W . Romer , A . E . Smith , K . Bacia , S . Dmitrieff , W . Chai , R . Mancini , J . Kartenbeck , V . Chambon , L . Berland , A . Oppenheim , G . Schwarzmann , T . Feizi , P . Schwille , P . Sens , A . Helenius , L . Johannes , GM1 structure determines SV40 - induced membrane invagination and infection , Nat . Cell Biol . 12 ( 2010 ) 11 – 18 ( sup pp 11 – 12 ) . [ 97 ] W . Romer , L . Berland , V . Chambon , K . Gaus , B . Windschiegl , D . Tenza , M . R . Aly , V . Fraisier , J . C . Florent , D . Perrais , C . Lamaze , G . Raposo , C . Steinem , P . Sens , P . Bassereau , L . Johannes , Shiga toxin induces tubular membrane invaginations for its uptake into cells , Nature 450 ( 2007 ) 670 – 675 . [ 98 ] S . Sabharanjak , P . Sharma , R . G . Parton , S . Mayor , GPI - anchored proteins are deliv - ered to recycling endosomes via a distinct cdc42 - regulated , clathrin - independent pinocytic pathway , Dev . Cell 2 ( 2002 ) 411 – 423 . [ 99 ] R . Chadda , M . T . Howes , S . J . Plowman , J . F . Hancock , R . G . Parton , S . Mayor , Cholesterol - sensitive Cdc42 activation regulates actin polymerization for endocy - tosis via the GEEC pathway , Traf ﬁ c 8 ( 2007 ) 702 – 717 . [ 100 ] A . K . Nevins , D . C . Thurmond , Caveolin - 1 functions as a novel Cdc42 guanine nucle - otide dissociation inhibitor in pancreatic beta - cells , J . Biol . Chem . 281 ( 2006 ) 18961 – 18972 . [ 101 ] N . Balasubramanian , D . W . Scott , J . D . Castle , J . E . Casanova , M . A . Schwartz , Arf6 and microtubules in adhesion - dependent traf ﬁ cking of lipid rafts , Nat . Cell Biol . 9 ( 2007 ) 1381 – 1391 . [ 102 ] D . W . Hilgemann , M . Fine , M . E . Linder , B . C . Jennings , M . J . Lin , Massive endocytosis triggered by surface membrane palmitoylation under mitochondrial control in BHK ﬁ broblasts , eLife 2 ( 2013 ) e01293 . [ 103 ] T . Kobayashi , E . Stang , K . S . Fang , P . de Moerloose , R . G . Parton , J . Gruenberg , A lipid associatedwiththeantiphospholipidsyndrome regulates endosome structure and function , Nature 392 ( 1998 ) 193 – 197 . [ 104 ] R . Gagescu , N . Demaurex , R . G . Parton , W . Hunziker , L . A . Huber , J . Gruenberg , The recycling endosome of Madin – Darby canine kidney cells is a mildly acidic com - partment rich in raft components , Mol . Biol . Cell 11 ( 2000 ) 2775 – 2791 . [ 105 ] M . Hao , S . X . Lin , O . J . Karylowski , D . Wustner , T . E . McGraw , F . R . Max ﬁ eld , Vesicular andnon - vesicularsterol transportinlivingcells . The endocyticrecycling compart - ment is a major sterol storage organelle , J . Biol . Chem . 277 ( 2002 ) 609 – 617 . [ 106 ] S . Lusa , T . S . Blom , E . L . Eskelinen , E . Kuismanen , J . E . Mansson , K . Simons , E . Ikonen , Depletion of rafts in late endocytic membranes is controlled by NPC1 - dependent recycling of cholesterol to the plasma membrane , J . Cell Sci . 114 ( 2001 ) 1893 – 1900 . [ 107 ] K . Sobo , J . Chevallier , R . G . Parton , J . Gruenberg , F . G . van der Goot , Diversity of raft - like domains in late endosomes , PLoS ONE 2 ( 2007 ) e391 . [ 108 ] E . Sezgin , H . J . Kaiser , T . Baumgart , P . Schwille , K . Simons , I . Levental , Elucidating membrane structure and protein behavior using giant plasma membrane vesicles , Nat . Protoc . 7 ( 2012 ) 1042 – 1051 . [ 109 ] B . Diaz - Rohrer , K . Levental , K . Simons , I . Levental , Membrane raft association is a determinant of plasma membrane localization , Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . U . S . A . 111 ( 2014 ) . [ 110 ] M . Fivaz , F . Vilbois , S . Thurnheer , C . Pasquali , L . Abrami , P . E . Bickel , R . G . Parton , F . G . van der Goot , Differential sorting and fate of endocytosed GPI - anchored proteins , EMBO J . 21 ( 2002 ) 3989 – 4000 . [ 111 ] S . Mayor , S . Sabharanjak , F . R . Max ﬁ eld , Cholesterol - dependent retention of GPI - anchored proteins in endosomes , EMBO J . 17 ( 1998 ) 4626 – 4638 . [ 112 ] M . Refaei , R . Leventis , J . R . Silvius , Assessment of the roles of ordered lipid microdo - mains in post - endocytic traf ﬁ cking of glycosyl - phosphatidylinositol - anchored proteins in mammalian ﬁ broblasts , Traf ﬁ c 12 ( 2011 ) 1012 – 1024 . [ 113 ] W . Mobius , E . van Donselaar , Y . Ohno - Iwashita , Y . Shimada , H . F . Heijnen , J . W . Slot , H . J . Geuze , Recycling compartments and the internal vesicles of multivesicular bodies harbor most of the cholesterol found in the endocytic pathway , Traf ﬁ c 4 ( 2003 ) 222 – 231 . [ 114 ] K . Simons , J . Gruenberg , Jamming the endosomalsystem : lipid raftsand lysosomal storage diseases , Trends Cell Biol . 10 ( 2000 ) 459 – 462 . [ 115 ] T . Kolter , K . Sandhoff , Recent advances in the biochemistry of sphingolipidoses , Brain Pathol . 8 ( 1998 ) 79 – 100 . [ 116 ] T . Kobayashi , M . H . Beuchat , M . Lindsay , S . Frias , R . D . Palmiter , H . Sakuraba , R . G . Parton , J . Gruenberg , Late endosomal membranes rich in lysobisphosphatidic acid regulate cholesterol transport , Nat . Cell Biol . 1 ( 1999 ) 113 – 118 . [ 117 ] R . E . Pagano , V . Puri , M . Dominguez , D . L . Marks , Membrane traf ﬁ c in sphingolipid storage diseases , Traf ﬁ c 1 ( 2000 ) 807 – 815 . [ 118 ] V . Puri , R . Watanabe , M . Dominguez , X . Sun , C . L . Wheatley , D . L . Marks , R . E . Pagano , Cholesterol modulates membrane traf ﬁ c along the endocytic pathway in sphingolipid - storage diseases , Nat . Cell Biol . 1 ( 1999 ) 386 – 388 . [ 119 ] R . Lipowsky , Domain - induced budding of ﬂ uid membranes , Biophys . J . 64 ( 1993 ) 1133 – 1138 . [ 120 ] A . Tian , C . Johnson , W . Wang , T . Baumgart , Linetension at ﬂ uidmembranedomain boundaries measured by micropipette aspiration , Phys . Rev . Lett . 98 ( 2007 ) 208102 . [ 121 ] J . R . Glenney Jr . , Tyrosine phosphorylation of a 22 - kDa protein is correlated with transformation by Rous sarcoma virus , J . Biol . Chem . 264 ( 1989 ) 20163 – 20166 . [ 122 ] K . G . Rothberg , J . E . Heuser , W . C . Donzell , Y . S . Ying , J . R . Glenney , R . G . Anderson , Caveolin , a protein component of caveolae membrane coats , Cell 68 ( 1992 ) 673 – 682 . [ 123 ] T . V . Kurzchalia , P . Dupree , R . G . Parton , R . Kellner , H . Virta , M . Lehnert , K . Simons , VIP21 , a21 - kDmembraneproteinisanintegralcomponentoftrans - Golgi - network - derived transportvesicles , J . Cell Biol . 118 ( 1992 ) 1003 – 1014 . [ 124 ] P . J . Walser , N . Ariotti , M . Howes , C . Ferguson , R . Webb , D . Schwudke , N . Leneva , K . J . Cho , L . Cooper , J . Rae , M . Floetenmeyer , V . M . Oorschot , U . Skoglund , K . Simons , J . F . Hancock , R . G . Parton , Constitutive formation of caveolae in a bacterium , Cell 150 ( 2012 ) 752 – 763 . [ 125 ] M . Murata , J . Peranen , R . Schreiner , F . Wieland , T . V . Kurzchalia , K . Simons , VIP21 / caveolin is a cholesterol - binding protein , Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . U . S . A . 92 ( 1995 ) 10339 – 10343 . [ 126 ] A . Pol , S . Martin , M . A . Fernandez , M . Ingelmo - Torres , C . Ferguson , C . Enrich , R . G . Parton , Cholesterol and fatty acids regulate dynamic caveolin traf ﬁ cking through the Golgi complex and between the cell surface and lipid bodies , Mol . Biol . Cell 16 ( 2005 ) 2091 – 2105 . [ 127 ] S . Monier , D . J . Dietzen , W . R . Hastings , D . M . Lublin , T . V . Kurzchalia , Oligomerization of VIP21 - caveolin in vitro is stabilized by long chain fatty acylation or cholesterol , FEBS Lett . 388 ( 1996 ) 143 – 149 . [ 128 ] C . Neumann - Giesen , B . Falkenbach , P . Beicht , S . Claasen , G . Luers , C . A . Stuermer , V . Herzog , R . Tikkanen , Membrane and raft association of reggie - 1 / ﬂ otillin - 2 : role of myristoylation , palmitoylation and oligomerization and induction of ﬁ lopodia by overexpression , Biochem . J . 378 ( 2004 ) 509 – 518 . [ 129 ] T . Babuke , M . Ruonala , M . Meister , M . Amaddii , C . Genzler , A . Esposito , R . Tikkanen , Hetero - oligomerization of reggie - 1 / ﬂ otillin - 2 and reggie - 2 / ﬂ otillin - 1 is required for their endocytosis , Cell . Signal . 21 ( 2009 ) 1287 – 1297 . [ 130 ] O . O . Glebov , N . A . Bright , B . J . Nichols , Flotillin - 1 de ﬁ nes a clathrin - independent endocytic pathway in mammalian cells , Nat . Cell Biol . 8 ( 2006 ) 46 – 54 . [ 131 ] T . Ait - Slimane , R . Galmes , G . Trugnan , M . Maurice , Basolateral internalization of GPI - anchoredproteinsoccurs via a clathrin - independent ﬂ otillin - dependentpath - way in polarized hepatic cells , Mol . Biol . Cell 20 ( 2009 ) 3792 – 3800 . [ 132 ] K . H . Cheong , D . Zacchetti , E . E . Schneeberger , K . Simons , VIP17 / MAL , a lipid raft - associated protein , is involved in apical transport in MDCK cells , Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . U . S . A . 96 ( 1999 ) 6241 – 6248 . [ 133 ] S . P . Ramnarayanan , P . L . Tuma , MAL , but not MAL2 , expression promotes the for - mation of cholesterol - dependent membrane domains that recruit apical proteins , Biochem . J . 439 ( 2011 ) 497 – 504 . [ 134 ] S . P . Ramnarayanan , C . A . Cheng , M . Bastaki , P . L . Tuma , ExogenousMAL reroutesse - lectedhepatic apical proteinsinto thedirectpathway inWIF - Bcells , Mol . Biol . Cell 18 ( 2007 ) 2707 – 2715 . [ 135 ] K . Fiedler , F . Lafont , R . G . Parton , K . Simons , AnnexinXIIIb : anovelepithelialspeci ﬁ c annexin is implicated in vesicular traf ﬁ c to the apical plasma membrane , J . Cell Biol . 128 ( 1995 ) 1043 – 1053 . [ 136 ] K . Astanina , C . I . Delebinski , D . Delacour , R . Jacob , Annexin XIIIb guides raft - dependent and - independent apical traf ﬁ c in MDCK cells , Eur . J . Cell Biol . 89 ( 2010 ) 799 – 806 . 3012 B . Diaz - Rohrer et al . / Biochimica et Biophysica Acta 1838 ( 2014 ) 3003 – 3013 [ 137 ] R . Mishra , M . Grzybek , T . Niki , M . Hirashima , K . Simons , Galectin - 9 traf ﬁ cking reg - ulates apical - basal polarity in Madin – Darby canine kidney epithelial cells , Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . U . S . A . 107 ( 2010 ) 17633 – 17638 . [ 138 ] C . Salaun , D . J . James , L . H . Chamberlain , Lipid rafts and the regulation of exocytosis , Traf ﬁ c 5 ( 2004 ) 255 – 264 . [ 139 ] J . G . Donaldson , Multiple roles for Arf6 : sorting , structuring , and signaling at the plasma membrane , J . Biol . Chem . 278 ( 2003 ) 41573 – 41576 . [ 140 ] C . D ' Souza - Schorey , P . Chavrier , ARF proteins : roles in membrane traf ﬁ c and be - yond , Nat . Rev . Mol . Cell Biol . 7 ( 2006 ) 347 – 358 . [ 141 ] C . A . Eyster , J . D . Higginson , R . Huebner , N . Porat - Shliom , R . Weigert , W . W . Wu , R . F . Shen , J . G . Donaldson , Discovery of new cargo proteins that enter cells through clathrin - independent endocytosis , Traf ﬁ c 10 ( 2009 ) 590 – 599 . [ 142 ] R . Sannerud , I . Declerck , A . Peric , T . Raemaekers , G . Menendez , L . Zhou , B . Veerle , K . Coen , S . Munck , B . De Strooper , G . Schiavo , W . Annaert , ADP ribosylation factor 6 ( ARF6 ) controls amyloid precursor protein ( APP ) processing by mediating the endosomal sorting of BACE1 , Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . U . S . A . 108 ( 2011 ) E559 – E568 . [ 143 ] R . Ehehalt , P . Keller , C . Haass , C . Thiele , K . Simons , Amyloidogenicprocessingof the Alzheimer beta - amyloid precursor protein depends on lipid rafts , J . Cell Biol . 160 ( 2003 ) 113 – 123 . [ 144 ] D . Toomre , P . Keller , J . White , J . C . Olivo , K . Simons , Dual - colorvisualizationoftrans - Golginetworktoplasmamembranetraf ﬁ calongmicrotubulesinlivingcells , J . Cell Sci . 112 ( Pt 1 ) ( 1999 ) 21 – 33 . [ 145 ] Y . Noda , Y . Okada , N . Saito , M . Setou , Y . Xu , Z . Zhang , N . Hirokawa , KIFC3 , a micro - tubule minus end - directed motor for the apical transport of annexin XIIIb - associated Triton - insoluble membranes , J . Cell Biol . 155 ( 2001 ) 77 – 88 . [ 146 ] F . Lafont , P . Verkade , T . Galli , C . Wimmer , D . Louvard , K . Simons , Raft association of SNAP receptors acting in apical traf ﬁ cking in Madin – Darby canine kidney cells , Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . U . S . A . 96 ( 1999 ) 3734 – 3738 . [ 147 ] N . Puri , P . A . Roche , Ternary SNARE complexes are enriched in lipid rafts during mast cell exocytosis , Traf ﬁ c 7 ( 2006 ) 1482 – 1494 . [ 148 ] P . Candela , F . Gosselet , F . Miller , V . Buee - Scherrer , G . Torpier , R . Cecchelli , L . Fenart , Physiologicalpathwayforlow - density lipoproteinsacross theblood – brainbarrier : transcytosis through brain capillary endothelial cells in vitro , Endothelium 15 ( 2008 ) 254 – 264 . [ 149 ] Q . Lin , E . London , Altering hydrophobic sequence lengths shows that hydro - phobic mismatch controls af ﬁ nity for ordered lipid domains ( rafts ) in the multitransmembrane strand protein perfringolysin O , J . Biol . Chem . 288 ( 2013 ) 1340 – 1352 . [ 150 ] P . Scheiffele , M . G . Roth , K . Simons , Interaction of in ﬂ uenza virus haemagglutinin with sphingolipid - cholesterolmembrane domains via its transmembrane domain , EMBO J . 16 ( 1997 ) 5501 – 5508 . [ 151 ] C . Eggeling , C . Ringemann , R . Medda , G . Schwarzmann , K . Sandhoff , S . Polyakova , V . N . Belov , B . Hein , C . von Middendorff , A . Schonle , S . W . Hell , Di - rect observation of the nanoscale dynamics of membrane lipids in a living cell , Nature 457 ( 2009 ) 1159 – 1162 . [ 152 ] T . S . van Zanten , A . Cambi , M . Koopman , B . Joosten , C . G . Figdor , M . F . Garcia - Parajo , Hotspots of GPI - anchored proteins and integrin nanoclusters function as nucle - ation sitesforcelladhesion , Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . U . S . A . 106 ( 2009 ) 18557 – 18562 . [ 153 ] U . Coskun , M . Grzybek , D . Drechsel , K . Simons , Regulation of human EGF receptor by lipids , Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . U . S . A . 128 ( 22 ) ( 2010 ) 9044 – 9048 . 3013 B . Diaz - Rohrer et al . / Biochimica et Biophysica Acta 1838 ( 2014 ) 3003 – 3013