(cid:14) . Social Networks 21 1999 375 – 395 www . elsevier . com r locate r socnet Models of core r periphery structures Stephen P . Borgatti a , ) , Martin G . Everett b , 1 a Department of Organization Studies , Carroll School of Management , Boston College , Chestnut Hill , MA 02467 , USA b School of Computing and Mathematical Sciences , Uni ˝ ersity of Greenwich , 30 Park Row , London SE10 9LS , UK Abstract A common but informal notion in social network analysis and other fields is the concept of a core r periphery structure . The intuitive conception entails a dense , cohesive core and a sparse , unconnected periphery . This paper seeks to formalize the intuitive notion of a core r periphery structure and suggests algorithms for detecting this structure , along with statistical tests for testing a priori hypotheses . Different (cid:14) . models are presented for different kinds of graphs directed and undirected , valued and nonvalued . In addition , the close relation of the continuous models developed to certain centrality measures is discussed . q 1999 Elsevier Science B . V . All rights reserved . Keywords : Core ; Periphery ; Algorithm 1 . Introduction A common image in social network analysis and other fields is that of the core r pe - riphery structure . The notion is quite prevalent in such diverse fields of inquiry as world (cid:14) . systems Snyder and Kick , 1979 ; Nemeth and Smith , 1985 ; Smith and White , 1992 , (cid:14) . (cid:14) . economics Krugman , 1996 and organization studies Faulkner , 1987 . In the context of (cid:14) social networks , it occurs in studies of national elites and collective action Laumann . (cid:14) and Pappi , 1976 ; Alba and Moore , 1978 , interlocking directorates Mintz and Schwartz , . (cid:14) . 1981 , scientific citation networks Mullins et al . , 1977 ; Doreian , 1985 , and proximity (cid:14) . among Japanese monkeys Corradino , 1990 . Given its wide currency , it comes as a bit of a surprise that the notion of a core r periphery structure has never been formally defined . The lack of definition means that different authors can use the term in wildly different ways , making it difficult to ) Corresponding author . Tel . : q 1 - 617 - 552 - 0452 ; fax : q 1 - 617 - 552 - 4230 ; e - mail : borgatts @ bc . edu 1 Tel . : q 44 - 181 - 331 - 8716 ; fax : q 44 - 181 - 331 - 8665 ; e - mail : m . g . everett @ gre . ac . uk . 0378 - 8733 r 99 r $ - see front matter q 1999 Elsevier Science B . V . All rights reserved . (cid:14) . PII : S0378 - 8733 99 00019 - 2 ( ) S . P . Borgatti , M . G . E ˝ erett r Social Networks 21 1999 375 – 395 376 compare otherwise comparable studies . Furthermore , a formal definition provides the basis for statistical methods of testing whether a given dataset has a hypothesized core r periphery structure , and for computational methods of discovering core r periphery structures in data . Without such a definition , we cannot proceed with developing these kinds of tools . In this paper , we develop two families of core r periphery models , based on intuitive conceptions of the structure . Any formalization of an intuitive concept needs to identify , in a precise way , the essential features of a particular concept . This part of the process (cid:14) involves a certain degree of conceptual clarification and interpretation that can and . many would argue should be challenged by others . In view of this , we see this paper as a starting point in a methodological debate on what constitutes a core r periphery structure . 2 . Intuitive conceptions One intuitive view of the core r periphery structure is the idea of a group or network that cannot be subdivided into exclusive cohesive subgroups or factions , although some actors may be much better connected than others . The network , to put it another way , consists of just one group to which all actors belong to a greater or lesser extent . This is (cid:14) . the sense in which Pattison 1993 , p . 97 uses the term . This conception is rooted in the (cid:14) cohesive subsets literature for a review , see Scott , 1991 , or Wasserman and Faust , . 1994 . (cid:14) Another intuitive idea is the notion of a two - class partition of nodes one class is the . core and the other is the periphery . In the terminology of blockmodeling , the core is seen as a 1 - block , and the periphery is seen as a 0 - block . This is the sense in which (cid:14) . Breiger 1981 uses the terms . The blocks representing ties between the core and periphery can be either 1 - blocks or 0 - blocks . In its implications , this conception is quite similar to the ‘‘one - group’’ idea presented above , with the exception that it specifies the character of ties within the periphery as well as within the core . A third intuitive view of the core r periphery structure is based on the physical center and periphery of a cloud of points in Euclidean space . Given a map of the space , such as provided by multidimensional scaling , nodes that occur near the center of the picture are those that are proximate not only to each other but to all nodes in the network , while nodes that are on the outskirts are relatively close only to the center . This is the view of (cid:14) . the core r periphery structure that is implicit in Laumann and Pappi 1976 . In its implications , this view is virtually identical to the partition approach described above , as we will discuss in a later section . (cid:14) . As we have phrased them , these intuitive views particularly the first one make the assumption that a network cannot have more than one core . However , other ways of thinking about core r periphery structures lead us to think of multiple cores , each with its (cid:14) own periphery . We discuss multiple cores in a companion piece Everett and Borgatti , in . press . In any case , the restriction of a single core is not as limiting as might at first appear , since we can always choose to analyze a subgraph of the network that is thought to contain just one core . ( ) S . P . Borgatti , M . G . E ˝ erett r Social Networks 21 1999 375 – 395 377 Fig . 1 . A network with a core r periphery structure . We use these intuitive conceptions as the basis for two models of the core r periphery structure : a discrete model and a continuous model . We describe the discrete model first . 3 . Discrete model In this section we explore the idea that the core periphery model consists of two (cid:14) . classes of nodes , namely a cohesive subgraph the core in which actors are connected to each other in some maximal sense and a class of actors that are more loosely connected to the cohesive subgraph but lack any maximal cohesion with the core . Consider the graph in Fig . 1 , which intuitively seems to have a core r periphery structure . The adjacency matrix for the graph is given in Table 1 . The matrix has been blocked to emphasize the pattern , which is that core nodes are adjacent to other core nodes , core nodes are adjacent to some periphery nodes , and Table 1 The adjacency matrix of Fig . 1 ( ) S . P . Borgatti , M . G . E ˝ erett r Social Networks 21 1999 375 – 395 378 Table 2 Idealized core r periphery structure periphery nodes do not connect with other periphery nodes . In blockmodeling terms , the (cid:14) . core r core region is a 1 - block , the core r periphery regions are imperfect 1 - blocks , and the periphery r periphery region is a 0 - block . We claim that this pattern is characteristic of core r periphery structures and is in fact a defining property . 2 An idealized version that corresponds to a core r periphery structure of the adjacency matrix is given in Table 2 . That this pattern of blocks suggests a core r periphery (cid:14) structure and has been noticed many times Burt , 1976 ; White , Boorman and Breiger , . 1976 ; Knoke and Rogers , 1979 ; Marsden , 1989 . The pattern can be seen as a (cid:14) . generalization of the maximally centralized graph of Freeman 1979 , the simple star (cid:14) . (cid:14) . see Fig . 2 . In the star , a single node the center is connected to all other nodes , which are not connected to each other . To move to the core r periphery image , we simply add duplicates of the center to the graph , and connect them to each other and to the (cid:14) . periphery see Fig . 3 . The patterns in Table 2 and Figs . 2 and 3 are idealized patterns that are unlikely to be actually observed in empirical data . We can readily appreciate that real structures will only approximate this pattern , in that they will have 1 - blocks with less than perfect density , and 0 - blocks that contain a few ties . A simple measure of how well the real (cid:14) . (cid:14) . structure approximates the ideal is given by Eq . 1 together with Eq . 2 . r s a d 1 (cid:14) . (cid:7) ij ij i , j 1 if c s CORE or c s CORE i j d s 2 (cid:14) . ij (cid:21) 5 0 otherwise In the equations , a indicates the presence or absence of a tie in the observed data , c ij i (cid:14) . (cid:14) refers to the class core or periphery that actor i is assigned to , and d subsequently ij 2 However , in a later section we introduce variations of this pattern that we shall argue are preferable in most circumstances . ( ) S . P . Borgatti , M . G . E ˝ erett r Social Networks 21 1999 375 – 395 379 Fig . 2 . Freeman’s star . . called the pattern matrix indicates the presence or absence of a tie in the ideal image . For a fixed distribution of values , the measure achieves its maximum value when and (cid:14) . (cid:14) . only when A the matrix of a and D the matrix of d are identical , which occurs ij ij when A has a perfect core r periphery structure . Thus , a structure is a core r periphery structure to the extent that r is large . (cid:14) . Eq . 1 is essentially an unnormalized Pearson correlation coefficient applied to (cid:14) . matrices rather than vectors Hubert and Schultz , 1976 ; Panning , 1982 . A more interpretable and more generally useful measure is the Pearson correlation coefficient itself . 3 For undirected nonreflexive graphs , we define the association measure r to be the Pearson correlation coefficient applied to the values found in the upper half of the matrices , diagonal not included . For directed graphs we include the lower half values as well , and for reflexive graphs of any kind we include the diagonal values . (cid:14) Although simpler measures of similarity are available e . g . , the simple matching . coefficient , the correlation coefficient has the benefit of generality , as it works equally well for valued as for nonvalued data , as well as for valued pattern matrices , which we consider later . A network exhibits a core r periphery structure to the extent that the correlation between the ideal structure and the data is large . However , we need to assume the existence of a partition that assigns each node to either the core or the periphery . In Sections 3 . 1 and 3 . 2 , we consider , respectively , the case where a partition is given a priori , and the case where we must construct the partition from the data itself . 3 . 1 . Testing a priori partitions If we obtain a partition of nodes into core and periphery blocks a priori , we can use (cid:14) . Eq . 1 as the basis for a statistical test for the presence of a core r periphery structure . (cid:14) . (cid:14) This is precisely the QAP test described by Mantel 1967 and Hubert Hubert and . Schultz , 1976 ; Hubert and Baker , 1978 . The test is a permutation test for the independence of two proximity matrices . 3 At first glance it may seem inappropriate to use the correlation coefficient for dichotomous data since the classical significance test for correlation coefficients demands that the variables follow a bivariate normal distribution in the population . However , we are using the correlation coefficient only to measure association , and will not be using the associated inferential test . ( ) S . P . Borgatti , M . G . E ˝ erett r Social Networks 21 1999 375 – 395 380 Fig . 3 . Core r periphery structure . As an example , consider testing the naive hypothesis that males in a troop of monkeys — because of their position of physical dominance — would comprise the core of the interaction network , while females would comprise the periphery . Interaction (cid:14) . data collected by Linda Wolfe Borgatti et al . , 1999 are shown in Table 3 , sorted by sex . The first five monkeys are males , the rest are females . The ideal pattern matrix has the same structure as the matrix in Table 2 but with different dimensions . Note that since Table 3 Interactions among a troop of monkeys ( ) S . P . Borgatti , M . G . E ˝ erett r Social Networks 21 1999 375 – 395 381 the pattern matrix is dichotomous and the data matrix is not , the correlation between them amounts to a test that the average value in the 1 - blocks is higher than the average value in the 0 - blocks , relative to the variation within blocks . That is , we are implicitly performing an analysis of variance . The correlation between these two matrices is 0 . 206 which according to the QAP (cid:14) . permutation test is not significant p ) 0 . 1 . Thus we conclude that there is no evidence for believing that in this troop of monkeys , the males form a core while the females form a periphery . 3 . 2 . Detecting core r periphery structures in data We can use the basic approach outlined above as the basis for constructing an algorithm for detecting a core r periphery structure without the benefit of an a priori partition . Using any combinatorial optimization technique such as simulating annealing (cid:14) . (cid:14) . (cid:14) Kirkpatrick et al . , 1983 , Tabu search Glover , 1989 , or genetic algorithm Goldberg , . 1989 , we can design a computer program to find a partition such that the correlation between the data and the pattern matrix induced by the partition is maximized . 4 The program we have written uses a genetic algorithm , which is a robust and convenient method , though perhaps not the fastest . For the graph in Fig . 1 , the program correctly (cid:14) . and reliably identifies the intuitive core r periphery partition see Table 1 , and reports a correlation of 0 . 475 . (cid:14) . An empirical example is provided by Baker 1992 , who studied co - citations among social work journals . His data consisted of the number of citations from one journal to (cid:14) . another journal during a 1 - year period 1985 – 1986 . For our immediate purposes we find it convenient to dichotomize the data . The results of analyzing the data with our genetic algorithm are given in Table 4 . The correlation is 0 . 54 , indicating strong but far from perfect fit with the ideal . 5 It is important to note that the significance tests we presented for testing a priori hypotheses cannot be used to evaluate the core r periphery partitions obtained by the optimization algorithms . This is because the significance tests are based on randomiza - (cid:14) . (cid:14) tion methods Edgington , 1980 that count the number of random permutations or . equivalently in this case , partitions of the data yielding fit statistics as strong as the one actually observed . However , by definition , our algorithms are designed to find the partition that maximizes the fit statistic . Hence , the results would always be significant . (cid:14) . As Hubert 1983 puts it , the situation is like sorting all the large numbers in a distribution into one bin and all the small numbers into another , then doing a t - test to see if there is a difference in means . 4 Programs for fitting both the discrete and continuous core r periphery models have been incorporated into (cid:14) . the computer package UCINET 5 For Windows Borgatti et al . , 1999 . 5 Reflexive ties were ignored by the algorithm . ( ) S . P . Borgatti , M . G . E ˝ erett r Social Networks 21 1999 375 – 395 382 Table 4 Core r periphery structure in a citation network 3 . 3 . Additional pattern matrices The ideal pattern of Table 2 is not the only one that is consistent with the intuitive notion of a core r periphery structure . A more extreme expression of the core r periphery (cid:14) concept is the pattern shown in Table 5 this is image ‘‘C’’ in White , Boorman and . Breiger , 1976 . Here , the only ties are found among core nodes . All other nodes are isolates . To measure the extent that a graph approximates this version of the core r pe - riphery concept , we can again use correlation to measure fit , but modify the definition of (cid:14) the pattern matrix D as follows note the change of ‘‘or’’ to ‘‘and’’ , as compared with (cid:14) . . Eq . 2 : 1 if c s CORE and c s CORE i j d s 3 (cid:14) . ij (cid:21) 5 0 otherwise (cid:14) . One problem with Eq . 3 is that part of the intuitive notion of a periphery is that it be somehow related to a core . Yet here the peripheral nodes are complete isolates so it is hard to argue that they are related to the core . (cid:14) . (cid:14) . Still another ideal pattern , midway between the patterns given by Eqs . 2 and 3 , is the one in which the density of core - to - periphery and periphery - to - core ties is a (cid:14) . specified intermediate value between 0 the density of periphery - to - periphery ties and 1 ( ) S . P . Borgatti , M . G . E ˝ erett r Social Networks 21 1999 375 – 395 383 Table 5 Alternative ideal core r periphery pattern (cid:14) . the density of core r core ties . For example , we could decide that the density of core - to - periphery ties should be 0 . 5 . However , while the density of the core - to - periphery and periphery - to - core ties could be treated as fixed parameters that a core r periphery detecting algorithm would be required to match , it is unlikely that in practice we will have a good reason for choosing one density value over another . A better approach is to treat those off - diagonal regions of the matrix as missing data , so that the algorithm seeks only to maximize density in the core and minimize density in the periphery , without regard for the density of ties between these regions . This is the model we recommend . We formalize the idea as (cid:14) (cid:14) . . follows Eq . 4 , where ‘‘ . ’’ indicates a missing value : 1 if c s CORE and c s CORE ¡ ƒ i j ~ ¥ d s 4 (cid:14) . 0 if c s PERIPHERY and c s PERIPHERY ij i j ¢ § . otherwise Applying this model to the journal co - citation data , we obtain the partition shown in Table 6 , which has a correlation of 0 . 860 . Since in this model no restraints are placed on the density of the core - to - periphery and periphery - to - core blocks , there is no reason why the model cannot handle asymmet - ric data . The journal co - citation data used above were artificially symmetrized . If we do not symmetrize , the results are as follows Table 7 . ( ) S . P . Borgatti , M . G . E ˝ erett r Social Networks 21 1999 375 – 395 384 Table 6 Alternative core r periphery model The composition of the core is quite similar to what we found when we had symmetrized the data . However , there are certain notable exceptions . For example , the journal ‘‘CYSR’’ moves out of the core . This makes sense because although CYSR has outgoing ties with most of the core , it has only one incoming tie from anywhere . Thus , its relational style is more like a periphery member than a core member ; it is in fact a (cid:14) . particular type of peripheral member that Burt 1976 has referred to as a ‘‘sycophant’’ . (cid:14) . It is also worth noting that the density of the bottom left block periphery to core is (cid:14) . much higher than the density of the top right block core to periphery . This is consistent with an intuitive notion of coreness associated with directed data . Essentially , we have a prestigious group , the core , that ‘‘nominates’’ only other prestigious actors . Then we have a nonprestigious group , the periphery , which also nominates only the prestigious actors . No one nominates nonprestigious actors , including themselves . The discrete model can also handle valued data , in which case maximizing the correlation between the binary ideal matrix and the valued observed data is equivalent to running a t - test for the difference in means between the core - to - core ties and the periphery - to - periphery ties . A valued network has a core r periphery structure to the extent that the difference in means across blocks is large relative to the variation within blocks . ( ) S . P . Borgatti , M . G . E ˝ erett r Social Networks 21 1999 375 – 395 385 Table 7 Asymmetric core r periphery model Correlation : 0 . 826 (cid:14) . An empirical example is provided by the raw citation data see Table 8 . The partition found by the genetic algorithm puts three journals , SSR , SW and SCW , in the core , and all others in the periphery . Ignoring the diagonal , the correlation with the ideal matrix is 0 . 81 . 4 . Continuous model One limitation of the partition - based approach presented above is the excessive simplicity of defining just two classes of nodes : core and periphery . To remedy this , we could introduce a three - class partition consisting of core , semiperiphery , and periphery , as world system theorists have done , or try partitions with even more classes . This approach is feasible , but specifying the ideal blockmodel that best captures the notion of a core r periphery structure is relatively difficult , as there are many reasonable structures to choose from . The problem becomes exponentially more difficult as the number of classes is increased . 6 6 However , in cases where theoretical considerations clearly point to one structure over another , this would be a fruitful avenue to explore . ( ) S . P . Borgatti , M . G . E ˝ erett r Social Networks 21 1999 375 – 395 386 T a b l e 8 V a l u e d c it a ti on d a t a ( ) S . P . Borgatti , M . G . E ˝ erett r Social Networks 21 1999 375 – 395 387 An alternative approach is to abandon the discrete model altogether in favor of a continuous model in which each node is assigned a measure of ‘‘coreness’’ . In a Euclidean representation , this would correspond to distance from the centroid of a single point cloud . If we assume that the network data consist of continuous values represent - ing strengths or capacities of relationships , an obvious approach is to continue using correlation to evaluate fit , but define the structure matrix as follows : d s c c 5 (cid:14) . ij i j where C is a vector of nonnegative values indicating the degree of coreness of each (cid:14) . node . Thus , the pattern matrix has a large values for pairs of nodes that are both high (cid:14) . in coreness , b middling values for pairs of nodes in which one is high in coreness and (cid:14) . the other is not , and c low values for pairs of nodes that are both peripheral . Thus , the model is consistent with the interpretation that the strength of tie between two actors is a function of the closeness of each to the center , or perhaps the gregariousness of each actor . This is the same situation found in factor analysis , where the correlations among a set of variables are postulated to be a function of the correlation of each to the latent (cid:14) . (cid:14) . factor Nunnally , 1978 , and in consensus analysis Romney et al . , 1986 , where agreements among pairs of takers of a knowledge test is seen as a function of the knowledge possessed by each one . Thus , when the continuous model fits a given dataset , it provides an extremely parsimonious model of all pairwise interactions . (cid:14) . It should be noted that if the values of C are constrained to 1’s and 0’s , Eq . 5 reproduces one of the discrete models presented earlier — the one in which there are no ties between the core and the periphery . As with the partition approach , we can use the basic formulation of the core r periph - ery model to either estimate coreness empirically , or test a priori hypotheses about core r periphery structures . Sections 4 . 1 and 4 . 2 consider each of these in turn . 4 . 1 . Estimating coreness empirically The objective is to obtain values of C so as to maximize the correlation between the (cid:14) . data matrix and the pattern matrix associated with Eq . 5 . To accomplish this , we have (cid:14) . written a simple computer program using a standard Fletcher – Powell Press et al . , 1989 function maximization procedure . The program simply finds a set of values c such that i the matrix correlation between c c and the data matrix is maximized . i j As an empirical example , we return to the journal co - citation data provided by Baker (cid:14) . 1992 , using the data in valued , nondichotomized form , and symmetrized by choosing the larger of a and a . After calculating coreness for each journal , the correlation ij ji between the data and the pattern matrix was 0 . 917 , indicating a good fit of the core r periphery model . We then sorted the rows and columns of the data matrix (cid:14) . according to descending values of coreness . The result Table 9 provides visual confirmation of a basic core r periphery structure , together with a few ties that do not fit (cid:14) the pattern e . g . , journals CAN and CCQ have ‘‘unusually close’’ relationships with . journals CW and CYSR . It can be seen that the three journals with the highest coreness values , SW , SCW and SSR , are the same journals identified by the discrete model as comprising the core . ( ) S . P . Borgatti , M . G . E ˝ erett r Social Networks 21 1999 375 – 395 388 T a b l e 9 C it a ti on d a t a s o r t e d by c o r e n e ss ( ) S . P . Borgatti , M . G . E ˝ erett r Social Networks 21 1999 375 – 395 389 The matrix of expected values , D , is given as Table 10 . Note that because the fit criterion is a correlation coefficient , the absolute values need not resemble the input data in scale : it is only the pattern that matters . Since D is constructed as a cross - products matrix , it can be embedded without distortion in a Euclidean space of no more than N y 1 dimensions . Hence , we can use (cid:14) . metric multidimensional scaling procedures Gower , 1967 to visualize the structure of the matrix . A scaling of the matrix in Table 10 is shown in Fig . 4 . It can be seen in the figure that as we consider successively wider concentric circles , centered at the centroid , the average distance among points within the circles increases monotonically with the distance from the center . This is a defining characteristic of a core r periphery structure . It means that in a core r periphery structure , the strength of relationship between any two actors is entirely a function of the extent to which each is associated with the core . 7 This multiplicative characterization of the core r periphery concept is particularly attractive because it has close links with other mathematical models . Consider , for example , the algorithm we have described for computing C and measuring the fit of the core r periphery model . Let us assume that the data matrix is symmetric , and the values along the diagonal are meaningful . Furthermore , let us allow that instead of maximizing the correlation between the data matrix A and the pattern matrix D , we are willing to minimize the sum of squared differences between the two matrices . Then the vector C we are looking for is the principal eigenvector of A . Besides the theoretical benefits of linking coreness to a well - known mathematical property of matrices , this linkage also means that we can make use of well - known and enormously efficient analytical procedures for finding eigenvectors instead of using optimization algorithms . The use of eigenvectors also suggests an additional measure of fit : the relative size of the principal eigenvalue . 8 It should also be noted that if the diagonals of the data matrix are not meaningful , the task becomes isomorphic with some forms of common factor analysis , and we can use (cid:14) . standard factor analytic procedures such as the MINRES algorithm of Comrey 1962 to (cid:14) . estimate the values of C . Like the cultural consensus model of Romney et al . 1986 , our application of factor analysis is to actors rather than variables , and the coreness scores may be seen as a latent relational profile that all actors resemble to some degree . This factor may be seen as the prime ordering agent in the network so that , aside from the relationship to the core , all associations occur at random . In the language of chaos theory , the coreness vector can be seen as an attractor for each of the actors . The continuous model also resembles the loglinear model of independence . When independence fits , we have a core r periphery structure , although the converse is not necessarily true . From the point of view of trying to maximize r , the difference between the two models is that in the independence model the values for C are constrained to be 7 However , we will not ordinarily observe this principle to hold perfectly in two - dimensional MDS representations because of high stress : exact representations of core r periphery structures require almost as many dimensions as points . Hence in Fig . 4 there are some pairs of points on the periphery that are too close together given their distance from the core . 8 It also suggests the possibility of using multiple eigenvectors to analyze networks with multiple cores (cid:14) . Breiger , personal communication ; however , this is beyond the scope of this paper . ( ) S . P . Borgatti , M . G . E ˝ erett r Social Networks 21 1999 375 – 395 390 T a b l e 10 E xp ec t e d v a l u e s f o r c o - c it a ti on d a t a ( ) S . P . Borgatti , M . G . E ˝ erett r Social Networks 21 1999 375 – 395 391 Fig . 4 . MDS of core r periphery expected values for co - citation data . Points are labeled by their coreness scores . row and column marginals , while in the core r periphery model we may use any values (cid:14) . that maximize the correlation not the chi - square nor likelihood ratio statistic between the expected values and the observed . The similarity with the model of independence brings up a potentially counterintu - itive property of the multiplicative core r periphery model , which is that the conditions of the model are satisfied by networks in which all actors are in the core , as well as networks in which all actors are in the periphery . Hence an adjacency matrix of all 1’s is consistent with the core r periphery model , even though no core may appear to exist . 9 The only data that really violate the model are networks that contain distinct , largely exclusive , subgroups . In such networks , actors with high degree need not be connected to each other , as required in a core periphery structure . 9 Actually , it is the periphery that does not exist — all nodes are in the core . ( ) S . P . Borgatti , M . G . E ˝ erett r Social Networks 21 1999 375 – 395 392 The multiplicative coreness model clearly applies to valued network data . It is not quite as clear whether it should apply to dichotomous data ; the expected values are normally continuous and the data are dichotomous , so the correlation coefficient that measures the fit of the model cannot achieve its maximum value of unity . This does not cause the coreness algorithm any problems , but makes it difficult to evaluate the fit of the model : a correlation of 0 . 4 may be small under normal circumstances , but not when the maximum possible is 0 . 5 . Unfortunately , without a theory of how ties are generated in the kind of network being studied , it will not usually be possible to calculate the maximum . An alternative way to formulate the model is to define a threshold value to dichotomize the pattern matrix . For example : d s f c c (cid:14) . ij i j 1 if c c ) t i j f c c s 6 (cid:14) . (cid:14) . i j (cid:21) 5 0 otherwise Thus , the pattern matrix has 1’s for pairs of nodes that are both high in coreness and has 0’s for pairs of nodes that are both peripheral . Depending on the value of the threshold parameter t , the core r periphery and periphery r core regions contain either all (cid:14) ones , all zeros , or a combination of both reproducing the models represented by Eqs . (cid:14) . (cid:14) . . 3 and 4 . Note that if the vector C is dichotomous rather than truly continuous , we reproduce the partition models of the previous section . In practice , we can specify t in advance , or estimate it from the data — along with the values of C — so as to maximize the correlation coefficient . Another approach would be to conceive of the ties as the result of a probabilistic (cid:14) . process dependent on c c . The function f c c might be specified as a logistic of the i j i j general form e a q b c i c j Pr a s 1 s 7 (cid:14) . (cid:14) . ij a q b c c i j 1 q e (cid:14) . where a and b are parameters to be estimated . Many variations on Eq . 7 are possible . In general , this approach is aesthetically pleasing , but it is important to remember that without a theory of how ties are formed , there is no reason to choose this particular response function . Again , in a given application it may be possible to choose a particular function with some confidence , but it is doubtful that we can do this in the general case where the nature of dependencies among ties is unknown . 4 . 2 . Coreness and centrality It could hardly escape notice that the multiplicative core r periphery model , when (cid:14) . phrased as an eigenvector , is precisely the measure of centrality of Bonacich 1987 . Furthermore , it is closely related to degree — another measure of centrality . The question then arises , is coreness different from centrality or are we simply introducing a new approach to centrality ? It is interesting to note in this regard that in the sociological literature , empirical studies of core r periphery structures almost never make use of network centrality measures . For example , in the world systems r dependency literature , ( ) S . P . Borgatti , M . G . E ˝ erett r Social Networks 21 1999 375 – 395 393 (cid:14) several researchers have used blockmodeling Snyder and Kick , 1979 ; Nemeth and . Smith , 1985 ; Smith and White , 1992 to classify countries as core , periphery and semiperiphery , but none have used centrality measures . It is true that all actors in a core are necessarily highly central as measured by (cid:14) . virtually any measure except when the model fits vacuously . However , the converse is not true , as not every set of central actors forms a core . For example , it is possible to collect a set of the n most central actors in a network , according to some measure of (cid:14) . centrality say , closeness or degree , and yet find that the subgraph induced by the set contains no ties whatsoever — an empty core . This is because each actor may have high centrality by being strongly connected to different cohesive regions of the graph and need not have any ties to each other . Our view , then , is that all coreness measures are centrality measures , but the converse is not necessarily true . For example , the betweenness - based measures of centrality (cid:14) . Anthonisse , 1971 ; Freeman , 1979 ; Freeman et al . , 1991 ; Friedkin , 1991 will assign high values to actors who are not strongly connected to a core group of people , but who link two otherwise unconnected regions of a network . Coreness measures do not do this . From a theoretical point of view , the key difference between a centrality measure and a coreness measure is that coreness carries with it a model of the pattern of ties in the network as a whole . The coreness measure is only interpretable to the extent that the model fits . In contrast , a centrality measure is interpretable no matter what the structure of the network . For example , closeness centrality measures the total graph theoretic distance of a node to all others . A node’s closeness centrality can be used to predict the time that messages originating at random nodes throughout the network will take to reach that node . The measure holds this interpretation no matter what the structure of the network . 5 . Conclusion This paper sets forth a set of ideal images of core r periphery structures , then develops measures of the extent to which real networks approximate these images . These measures are used as the basis for tests of a priori hypotheses and for optimization algorithms to detect core r periphery structures . What is missing in this paper is a statistical test for the significance of the core r periphery structures found by the algorithms . We know how well the models fit , but we do not know how easy it is to obtain a fit as good as actually observed by chance alone . To develop such a test , of course , we need additional theory about how network ties are formed — otherwise , we cannot construct a sensible baseline model to compare against . For example , we could assume that ties occur randomly with constant probabil - ity equal to the density of the observed network . We could then calculate the chance of obtaining fits as large as actually observed . But that would mean that our data would implicitly be compared with networks that have very different characteristics than our (cid:14) observed network . For instance , our network may show strong reciprocity biases if i . chooses j , then j chooses i because of the nature of the relation being studied . But the random networks do not have this constraint unless we deliberately impose it . Unfortu - nately , we do not know in general which constraints should be imposed — row and ( ) S . P . Borgatti , M . G . E ˝ erett r Social Networks 21 1999 375 – 395 394 column marginals ? Degree of transitivity ? Network analysts do not study a homoge - neous set of structures . Some researchers study friendship ties among children , others agonistic behavior among primates , still others joint ventures and personnel flows (cid:14) among corporations . Some network data are valued representing anything like capaci - . ties , flows , strengths , costs , probabilities , frequencies , etc , others directed , some have meaningful reflexive ties — in short , network data arise from a variety of social and sampling processes . It seems unlikely that the same baseline models would be appropri - ate in all these cases . It seems wiser to develop different chance models for every dataset (cid:14) . (cid:14) . as the need arises . A similar point is made by Friedkin 1991 and Skvoretz 1991 . As a final point for reflection , it is interesting to consider that to fit a core r periphery model is to reduce a complex dyadic variable — a network — to a single attribute of (cid:14) . actors . Network researchers tend to disdain ‘‘attribute data’’ Wellman , 1988 , p . 31 . The complaint is not that we compute from the pattern of network relations a single summary value that describes each actor’s position . This is what any centrality measure does and is completely unremarkable . Rather , the core r periphery model says that all ties (cid:14) . in the network error aside are the result of a single attribute . In effect , this denies the (cid:14) . necessity for having collected complex relational data a matrix , since much simpler (cid:14) . data a vector contains the same information content . This goes against the grain for network analysts , who like to think that relational data are richer and reveal emergent (cid:14) . properties that mere attributes of actors simply cannot capture e . g . , see Wellman , 1988 . When the core r periphery model fits , it means that to a certain extent , we do not need to know who is connected to whom . All we need is a single actor attribute . It is the same thing as when we fit the model of independence on a contingency table and find that it fits . As good scientists and structuralists we should be happy to find such a parsimo - nious description of our data . But , more likely , we are disappointed that nothing more ‘‘interesting’’ is going on . References Alba , R . D . , Moore , G . , 1978 . Elite social circles . Sociological Methods and Research 7 , 167 – 188 . Anthonisse , J . M . , 1971 . The Rush in a Graph . Mathematische Centrum , Amsterdam . Baker , D . R . , 1992 . A structural analysis of the social work journal network : 1985 – 1986 . Journal of Social Service Research 15 , 153 – 168 . Bonacich , P . , 1987 . Power and centrality : a family of measures . American Journal of Sociology 92 , 1170 – 1182 . Borgatti , S . P . , Everett , M . G . , Freeman , L . C . , 1999 . UCINET 5 For Windows : Software for Social Network Analysis . Analytic Technologies , Harvard , MA . (cid:14) . Breiger , 1981 . Structures of economic interdependence among nations . In : Blau , P . M . , Merton , R . K . Eds . , Continuities in Structural Inquiry . Sage , Newbury Park , CA , pp . 353 – 380 . Burt , R . S . , 1976 . Positions in networks . Social Forces 55 , 93 – 122 . Comrey , A . L . , 1962 . The minimum residual method of factor analysis . Psychological Reports 11 , 15 – 18 . (cid:14) . Corradino , C . , 1990 . Proximity structure in a captive colony of Japanese monkeys Macaca fuscata fuscata : (cid:14) . an application of multidimensional scaling . Primates 31 3 , 351 – 362 . Doreian , P . , 1985 . Structural equivalence in a psychology journal network . American Society for Information (cid:14) . Science 36 6 , 411 – 417 . Edgington , E . S . , 1980 . Randomization Tests . Marcel Dekker , New York . Faulkner , R . R . , 1987 . Music on Demand : Composers and Careers in the Hollywood Film Industry . Transaction Books , New Brunswick , NJ . ( ) S . P . Borgatti , M . G . E ˝ erett r Social Networks 21 1999 375 – 395 395 Freeman , L . C . , 1979 . Centrality in social networks : I . Conceptual clarification . Social Networks 1 , 215 – 239 . Freeman , L . C . , Borgatti , S . P . , White , D . R . , 1991 . Centrality in valued graphs : a measure of betweenness based on network flow . Social Networks 13 , 141 – 154 . Friedkin , N . E . , 1991 . Theoretical foundations for centrality measures . American Journal of Sociology 96 , 1478 – 1504 . Glover , F . , 1989 . Tabu search — Part 1 . ORSA Journal on Computing 1 , 190 – 206 . Goldberg , D . E . , 1989 . Genetic Algorithms . Addison Wesley , New York . Gower , J . C . , 1967 . Multivariate analysis and multidimensional geometry . Statistician 17 , 13 – 28 . Hubert , L . J . , 1983 . Inference procedures for the evaluation and comparison of proximity matrices . In : (cid:14) . Felsenstein , J . Ed . , Numerical Taxonomy . Springer , New York . Hubert , L . J . , Baker , F . B . , 1978 . Evaluating the conformity of sociometric measurements . Psychometrika 43 , 31 – 41 . Hubert , L . J . , Schultz , L . , 1976 . Quadratic assignment as a general data analysis strategy . British Journal of Mathematical and Statistical Psychology 29 , 190 – 241 . Kirkpatrick , S . , Gelatt , C . D . , Vecchi , M . P . , 1983 . Optimization by simulated annealing . Science 220 , 671 – 680 . Knoke , D . , Rogers , D . L . , 1979 . A blockmodel analysis of interorganizational networks . Sociology and Social Research 64 , 28 – 52 . Krugman , P . , 1996 . The Self - Organizing Economy . Blackwell , Oxford . Laumann , E . O . , Pappi , F . U . , 1976 . Networks of Collective Action : A Perspective on Community Influence Systems . Academic Press , New York . Mantel , M . , 1967 . The detection of disease clustering and a generalized regression approach . Cancer Research 27 , 209 – 220 . Marsden , P . V . , 1989 . Methods for the characterization of role structures in network analysis . In : Freeman , (cid:14) . L . C . , White , D . R . , Romney , A . K . Eds . , Research Methods in Social Network Analysis . George Mason University Press , Fairfax , VA , pp . 489 – 530 . Mintz , B . , Schwartz , M . , 1981 . Interlocking directorates and interest group formation . American Sociological Review 46 , 851 – 868 . Mullins , N . C . , Hargens , L . L . , Hecht , P . K . , Kick , E . L . , 1977 . The group structure of cocitation clusters : a comparative study . American Sociological Review 42 , 552 – 562 . Nemeth , R . J . , Smith , D . A . , 1985 . International trade and world - systems structure , a multiple network analysis . Review 8 , 517 – 560 . Nunnally , J . C . , 1978 . Psychometric Theory . McGraw - Hill , New York . Panning , W . H . , 1982 . Fitting blockmodels to data . Social Networks 4 , 81 – 101 . Pattison , P . , 1993 . Algebraic Models for Social Networks . Cambridge Univ . Press , Cambridge . Press , W . H . , Flannery , B . P . , Teukolsky , S . A . , Vertterling , W . T . , 1989 . Numerical Recipes in Pascal . Cambridge Univ . Press , Cambridge . Romney , A . K . , Weller , S . C . , Batchelder , W . H . , 1986 . Culture as consensus : a theory of culture and informant accuracy . American Anthropologist 88 , 313 – 338 . Scott , J . , 1991 . Social Network Analysis : A Handbook . Sage Publications , Newbury Park . Skvoretz , J . , 1991 . Theoretical and methodological models of networks and relations . Social Networks 13 , 275 – 300 . Smith , D . , White , D . , 1992 . Structure and dynamics of the global economy : network analysis of international trade 1965 – 1980 . Social Forces 70 , 857 – 893 . Snyder , D . , Kick , E . L . , 1979 . Structural position in the world system and economic growth , 1955 – 1970 : a (cid:14) . multiple - network analysis of transnational interactions . American Journal of Sociology 84 5 , 1096 – 1126 . Wasserman , S . , Faust , K . , 1994 . Social Network Analysis : Methods and Applications . Cambridge Univ . Press , Cambridge . Wellman , B . , 1988 . Structural analysis : from method and metaphor to theory and substance . In : Wellman , B . , (cid:14) . Berkowitz , S . D . Eds . , Social Structures : A Network Approach . Cambridge Univ . Press , Cambridge , pp . 19 – 61 .