PM06CH18 - Friedman ARI 10 December 2010 14 : 38 Pathogenesis of Liver Fibrosis Virginia Hernandez - Gea and Scott L . Friedman Division of Liver Diseases , Mount Sinai School of Medicine , New York , New York 10029 ; email : Scott . Friedman @ mssm . edu Annu . Rev . Pathol . Mech . Dis . 2011 . 6 : 425 – 56 First published online as a Review in Advance on November 8 , 2010 The Annual Review of Pathology : Mechanisms of Disease is online at pathol . annualreviews . org This article’s doi : 10 . 1146 / annurev - pathol - 011110 - 130246 Copyright c (cid:2) 2011 by Annual Reviews . All rights reserved 1553 - 4006 / 11 / 0228 - 0425 $ 20 . 00 Keywords hepatic stellate cells , extracellular matrix , cirrhosis , myoﬁbroblasts Abstract Liver ﬁbrosis is a major cause of morbidity and mortality worldwide due to chronic viral hepatitis and , more recently , from fatty liver disease as - sociated with obesity . Hepatic stellate cell activation represents a critical event in ﬁbrosis because these cells become the primary source of ex - tracellular matrix in liver upon injury . Use of cell - culture and animal models has expanded our understanding of the mechanisms underlying stellate cell activation and has shed new light on genetic regulation , the contribution of immune signaling , and the potential reversibility of the disease . As pathways of ﬁbrogenesis are increasingly clariﬁed , the key challenge will be translating new advances into the development of antiﬁbrotic therapies for patients with chronic liver disease . 425 A nnu . R e v . P a t ho l . M ec h . D i s . 2011 . 6 : 425 - 456 . D o w n l o a d e d fr o m www . a nnu a l r e v i e w s . o r g by O tt e r b e i n U n i v e r s it y on 04 / 11 / 13 . F o r p e r s on a l u s e on l y . PM06CH18 - Friedman ARI 10 December 2010 14 : 38 Hepatic ﬁbrosis : a wound - healing response to either acute or chronic liver injury ; characterized by the accumulation of interstitial or ﬁbrillar ECM Extracellular matrix ( ECM ) : tightly organized molecular network that provides functional and structural integrity for liver parenchyma Cirrhosis : end - stage liver disease characterizedmorphologically by the presence of diffuse ﬁbrosis , regenerative nodules , and distortion in both liver parenchyma and vascular architecture HSC : hepatic stellate cell KC : Kupffer cell MF : myoﬁbroblast ( s ) INTRODUCTION Hepatic ﬁbrosis is a reversible wound - healing response characterized by the accumulation of extracellular matrix ( ECM ) following liver in - jury . If the insult is acute or self - limited , these changes are transient , and liver architecture is restored to its normal composition . However if the injury is sustained , chronic inﬂammation and accumulation of ECM persist , leading to a progressive substitution of liver parenchyma by scar tissue . This process results in cirrhosis , the end consequence of progressive ﬁbrosis , which can have a poor outcome and high mortality . Progression to this end stage is typically vari - able but slow , developing over 20 to 40 years in patients with chronic liver injury ; the pace is inﬂuenced by both genetic and environmental factors . The hepatic parenchyma is composed of epithelial cells ( hepatocytes ) , endothelial cells , and resident nonparenchymal cells , including hepatic stellate cells ( HSCs ) and Kupffer cells ( KCs ) . The sinusoid is the hepatic microvascular unit . It has an endothelial lining distinguished by fenestration of pores and is separated from the hepatocytes by the subendothelial space of Disse , where HSCs reside . This space contains a low - density basal membrane – like matrix that is essential for maintaining the differentiated function of parenchymal cells yet is sufﬁciently porous to enable metabolic exchange between the bloodstream and hepatocytes . CLINICAL AND PATHOLOGIC CONTEXTS Deposition of ECM in the space of Disse leads to loss of the normal fenestrations that are characteristic of the endothelial lining , which provokes the impairment of the normal bidi - rectional metabolic exchange between portal venous ﬂow and hepatocytes . This process is termed capillarization of the sinusoids ( 1 ) . Different patterns of ﬁbrosis progression have been described on the basis of their etiology , the region of injury ( e . g . , portal or central ) , the source of ﬁbrogenic cells in - volved , and the predominant ﬁbrogenic mech - anism ( s ) ( Figure 1 ) ( 2 ) . Chronic viral hepati - tis B and C are the major causes of bridging ﬁbrosis , which is characterized by the pres - ence of interface hepatitis and portal - central vein bridging necrosis , resulting in the for - mation of portal - central ﬁbrotic septa . Peris - inusoidal or pericellular ﬁbrosis are typically found in alcohol - related disorders and nonal - coholic fatty liver disease . Alcohol - related ﬁ - brosis is characterized by deposition of ECM in the space of Disse around sinusoids or hep - atocytes ( chicken - wire pattern ) . Biliary ﬁbro - sis incorporates the proliferation of bile duc - tules and periductular myoﬁbroblasts ( MF ) , which leads to the formation of portal - portal ﬁbrotic septa surrounding liver nodules . Con - ditions that alter venous outﬂow are the main cause of centrolobular ﬁbrosis , which is characterized by central - central ﬁbrotic septa . Progression of disease with sustained ﬁbro - genesis leads to cirrhosis , which is not merely the end - stage accumulation of scar , but rather is characterized by a distortion of the liver parenchyma and vascular architecture . The main pathological feature of cirrhosis is the for - mation of nodules of regenerative parenchyma surrounded by ﬁbrotic septae , which may in - corporate terminal hepatic venules and portal tracts when the nodules are especially large ( i . e . , macronodularcirrhosis ) . Porto - systemicshunts and venous occlusion often occur , leading to impairment in liver function and the develop - ment of portal hypertension . The formation of vascularized ﬁbrous septa that link portal tracts and central veins is stimulated by angiogene - sis and contributes to porto - systemic shunting that bypasses the liver parenchyma ( Figure 2 ) ( 3 ) . Whereas hepatic ﬁbrosis is largely asymp - tomatic , progression to cirrhosis confers a risk of signiﬁcant morbidity and mortality . Among digestivediseases , cirrhosisisthemostcommon nonneoplastic cause of mortality in the United 426 Hernandez - Gea · Friedman A nnu . R e v . P a t ho l . M ec h . D i s . 2011 . 6 : 425 - 456 . D o w n l o a d e d fr o m www . a nnu a l r e v i e w s . o r g by O tt e r b e i n U n i v e r s it y on 04 / 11 / 13 . F o r p e r s on a l u s e on l y . PM06CH18 - Friedman ARI 10 December 2010 14 : 38 b 225 μm c 100 μm a 100 μm d 100 μm e 225 μm Figure 1 Photomicrographs of ﬁbrosis patterns in different etiologies of liver disease . ( a ) Autoimmune hepatitis . Portal - central vein bridging necrosis . ( b ) Chronic viral hepatitis C . Trichrome staining showing portal - central ﬁbrotic septa and nodule formation . ( c ) Acute alcoholic hepatitis . Deposition of extracellular matrix around hepatocytes ( so - called chicken - wire pattern ) and ballooning degeneration of hepatocytes . ( d ) Nonalcoholic steatohepatitis . Trichrome staining showing macrovesicular steatosis and pericellular ﬁbrosis . ( e ) Biliary cirrhosis . Portal - portal ﬁbrotic septa and proliferation of bile ductules . Images reproduced courtesy of Dr . M . Isabel Fiel , Mount Sinai School of Medicine . States , causing 30 , 000 deaths per year . An addi - tional 10 , 000 deaths occur due to liver cancer , which usually arises in the setting of cirrhosis ( 4 ) . Once cirrhosis has developed , its natural history typically includes progression from a compensated phase to a decompensated phase ; the latter is deﬁned by the development of por - tal hypertension and liver failure . Portal hyper - tension is therefore a major complication of cir - rhosis that leads either to death or to the need for liver transplantation . According to the principle of Ohm’s law ( P = Q × R , where P is the change in pressure along a vessel , Q is the ﬂow , and R is the re - sistance to that ﬂow ) , portal hypertension may arise from increased hepatic resistance to blood ﬂow and / or from increased ﬂow . The initial event in the pathophysiology of portal hyper - tension is increased vascular resistance that oc - curs mainly in the sinusoids . COMPOSITION OF THE HEPATIC SCAR , OR EXTRACELLULAR MATRIX , OF LIVER In normal liver , ECM is a highly dynamic substratum with a precisely regulated balance between synthesis and degradation . During chronic liver injury , however , ECM production exceeds ECM degradation , and hepatic ﬁbrosis develops as a result of the progressive thicken - ing of ﬁbrotic septae and chemical cross - linking of collagen . Moreover , these changes in ECM composition directly stimulate ﬁbrogenesis ( 5 ) . Hepatic ﬁbrosis affects both the quality and quantity of hepatic ECM , which is a tightly organized molecular network that pro - videsfunctionalandstructuralintegrityforliver parenchyma ( 5 ) . Normally , the hepatic ECM comprises less than 3 % of the relative area on a liver tissue section , and approximately 0 . 5 % www . annualreviews . org • Pathogenesis of Liver Fibrosis 427 A nnu . R e v . P a t ho l . M ec h . D i s . 2011 . 6 : 425 - 456 . D o w n l o a d e d fr o m www . a nnu a l r e v i e w s . o r g by O tt e r b e i n U n i v e r s it y on 04 / 11 / 13 . F o r p e r s on a l u s e on l y . PM06CH18 - Friedman ARI 10 December 2010 14 : 38 of the wet weight ( 6 ) . It is also a component of Glisson’s capsule , portal tracts , central veins , and the subendothelial space of Disse . The most important structural ECM components in liver are collagen , proteoglycans , laminin , ﬁ - bronectin , and matricellular proteins . The low - density basement membrane – like matrix of the space of Disse in normal liver Fibril - forming collagens ( Types I , III , V ) Basement membrane collagens ( Types IV , VI ) Glycoconjugates ( laminin , fibronectin , glycosaminoglycans , tenascin ) Portal vein Bile duct Portal triad Sinusoidal space of Disse Sinusoidal space of Disse Sinusoidal space of Disse Hepatocytes T e r m i n a l h e p a t i c v e i n KC Sinusoidal endothelial cells Hepaticarteriole HSC Distortionof veins Loss of hepatocyte microvilli HSC activation and proliferation Loss of endothelial fenestrations Increase in fibril - forming collagen in space of Disse a Normal liver b Fibrotic liver 428 Hernandez - Gea · Friedman A nnu . R e v . P a t ho l . M ec h . D i s . 2011 . 6 : 425 - 456 . D o w n l o a d e d fr o m www . a nnu a l r e v i e w s . o r g by O tt e r b e i n U n i v e r s it y on 04 / 11 / 13 . F o r p e r s on a l u s e on l y . PM06CH18 - Friedman ARI 10 December 2010 14 : 38 MMP : matrix metalloproteinase HSC activation : transition following liver injury of a residentnonparenchymal cell type from a quiescent vitamin A – rich cell to a proliferative , contractile , and highly ﬁbrogenic MF cell type EMT : epithelial - to - mesenchymaltransition is composed mainly of collagens IV and VI . After liver injury , disruption of this matrix and replacement by ﬁbrillar collagens occur ; this matrix is composed of collagens I and III and ﬁbronectin ( 7 , 8 ) . These quantitative and qualitative changes in ECM composition ( termed capillarization ; see above ) alter the matrix microenvironment and create a func - tional and physical impediment to the bidirec - tional ﬂow of plasma between sinusoidal lumen and hepatocytes , which leads to altered hepatic function . In addition to incorporating structural molecules , ECM also incorporates a range of growth factors and matrix metalloproteinases ( MMPs ) that are speciﬁcally bound and pre - served in latent forms ( 5 ) . ECM may thereby regulate cellular activity and the availability of growth factors . For instance , decorin and bigly - can , two ECM components , bind transform - ing growth factor β ( TGF - β ) ; ﬁbronectin and laminin bind tumor necrosis factor α ( TNF - α ) ; and collagen binds platelet - derived growth fac - tor ( PDGF ) , hepatocyte growth factor ( HGF ) , and interleukin ( IL ) - 2 . The binding of survival factors to the ECM may prevent apoptosis in the damaged liver and also prevent growth fac - tor proteolysis ( 9 ) . Interactions between ECM and its sur - rounding cells are bidirectional . After injury , ECM can modulate the activation and prolifer - ation of HSC , angiogenesis , and the availabil - ity and activity of growth factors and MMPs . ECM also provides cells with signals for po - larization , adhesion , migration , proliferation , survival , and differentiation . ECM - cell interac - tions are determined largely by speciﬁc mem - brane adhesion receptors . Among these recep - tors , the integrin family , ADAM ( a disintegrin and metalloproteinase domain ) molecules , and discoidin domain receptors have been the most extensively studied , as detailed below . Integrins are heterodimeric transmembrane receptors composed of α - and β - subunits ; they have a globular head domain that can bind components of the ECM and cell adhe - sion molecules ( 10 ) . Classic integrin ligands contain an arginine – glycine – aspartic acid se - quence , which is necessary but not sufﬁcient for signal transduction . Integrins can also modu - late signal transduction pathways downstream of other receptors following cell adhesion ( 11 ) . Cultured HSCs express α 1 β 1 , α 2 β 1 , α 5 β 1 , and α 6 β 4 ( 12 ) . Upregulation of α 2 β 1 , α 6 β 4 , α V β 8 , and α 5 β 1 has been identiﬁed in ex - perimental hepatic ﬁbrosis models ; however , cholestatic human diseases are also associated with α V β 6 induction ( 13 ) . Integrins can also interfere with TGF - β 1 , PDGF , and hedge - hog signaling pathways , and they play a role in cancer biology , including hepatocarcinogenesis ( 14 – 16 ) . ADAM molecules are a family of ECM membrane receptors implicated in liver ﬁbro - sis . In liver , two molecules have been identi - ﬁed : ADAMSTS - 13 and ADAMSTS - 1 , which are expressed by HSCs and endothelial cells , respectively ( 17 , 18 ) . Discoidin domain receptor 2 ( DDR2 ) is a tyrosine kinase receptor activated primarily by collagen type I and secondarily by collagens II , III , and V . DDR2 contributes to HSC ac - tivation and epithelial - to - mesenchymal transi - tion ( EMT ) ( 19 – 21 ) . Increased production of collagen type I during HSC activation induces DDR2 via its phosphorylation , leading to an in - crease in MMP - 2 production and growth stim - ulation . Higher expression of DDR2 has also ←−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−−− Figure 2 Matrix and cellular alteration in hepatic ﬁbrosis . Normal liver parenchyma contains epithelial cells ( hepatocytes ) and nonparenchymal cells : fenestrated sinusoidal endothelium , hepatic stellate cells ( HSCs ) , and Kupffer cells ( KCs ) . ( a ) Sinusoids are separated from hepatocytes by a low - density basement membrane – like matrix conﬁned to the space of Disse , which ensures metabolic exchange . Upon injury , the HSCs become activated and secrete large amounts of extracellular matrix ( ECM ) , resulting in progressive thickening of the septa . ( b ) Deposition of ECM in the space of Disse leads to the loss of both endothelial fenestrations and hepatocyte microvilli , which results in both the impairment of normal bidirectional metabolic exchange between portal venous ﬂow and hepatocytes and the development of portal hypertension . Adapted from Reference 216 with permission . www . annualreviews . org • Pathogenesis of Liver Fibrosis 429 A nnu . R e v . P a t ho l . M ec h . D i s . 2011 . 6 : 425 - 456 . D o w n l o a d e d fr o m www . a nnu a l r e v i e w s . o r g by O tt e r b e i n U n i v e r s it y on 04 / 11 / 13 . F o r p e r s on a l u s e on l y . PM06CH18 - Friedman ARI 10 December 2010 14 : 38 qHSC : quiescent hepatic stellate cell been demonstrated in the small bile ducts of patients with primary biliary cirrhosis ( 22 ) . CELLULAR SOURCES OF EXTRACELLULAR MATRIX IN LIVER The scarring response of liver is a common pathway that results from a range of injuries , including , toxic , metabolic , and viral insults . Underlying this response is the activation of resident mesenchymal cells into contractile MF , primarily derived from HSCs , that gen - erate scar , which encapsulates injury . HSCs are a resident mesenchymal cell type located in the subendothelial space of Disse , interposed be - tween sinusoidal endothelium and hepatocytes ( 12 ) . Following liver injury , HSCs become acti - vated , which leads to the conversion of a resting vitamin A – rich cell [ a quiescent HSC ( qHSC ) ] to one that has lost vitamin A droplets , lead - ing to increased proliferation and contraction and the release of proinﬂammatory , proﬁbro - genic , and promitogenic cytokines . These acti - vated cells are capable of enhanced migration and deposition of ECM components ( 23 , 24 ) . HSC activation can be conceptually divided into two phases : initiation and perpetuation ( 25 ) . Initiation , also known as the preinﬂam - matory stage , refers to early changes in gene expression and phenotype . It is the result of primarily paracrine stimulation from damaged parenchymal cells . Maintenance of these stim - uli leads to a perpetuation phase regulated by autocrine and paracrine stimuli . Perpetuation involves at least six distinct changes in HSC behavior , including proliferation , chemotaxis , ﬁbrogenesis , contractility , matrix degradation , and retinoid loss ( 23 ) . MF are the prototypical mesenchymal cell type regulating repair following injury in a range of tissues , including liver , kidney , skin , lung , and bone marrow , as well as the central nervous system ( 26 ) . MF are deﬁned primar - ily by their ability to produce ECM and exhibit contractile activity . Although HSCs are the pri - mary source of this ﬁbrogenic population in the liver ( 23 ) , contributions from other cells , listed below , are increasingly being appreciated ( Figure 3 ) . 1 . Portal ﬁbroblasts . Because of their loca - tion within the connective tissue of por - tal areas , the recruitment and activation of resident ﬁbroblasts into MF are espe - cially relevant in diseases associated with ischemia and cholestasis ( 27 , 28 ) . Increas - ingattentionisbeingfocusedontheiden - tiﬁcation , puriﬁcation , and analysis of this ﬁbrogenic population , whose contribu - tion to ﬁbrosis is especially important in biliary diseases ( 29 ) . 2 . Bone marrow – derived cells and circu - lating ﬁbrocytes . Several studies have demonstrated that , following liver injury , the bone marrow supplies MF - like cells that may participate in the progression of liver ﬁbrosis ( 30 – 33 ) . However , the con - tribution of these bone marrow – derived cells to collagen production during liver injury may be limited ( 34 ) . 3 . EMT . Epithelial cells can contribute to the replacement of dead or damaged hepatic cells through a biological process known as EMT . This process allows a closely attached epithelial cell with apical - basal polarity to migrate and accu - mulateintheinterstitiumofthetissueand acquire a mesenchymal cell phenotype ( e . g . , migratory capacity , invasiveness , resistance to apoptosis , and production of ECM ) ( 35 – 37 ) . EMT has been associated not only with tissue regeneration and ﬁbrosis but also with embryonic devel - opment and cancer progression ( 38 ) . During chronic liver inﬂammation , cells with characteristic markers of epithelial cells ( cytokeratin , E - cadherin ) and mesenchy - mal cells [ α smooth muscle actin ( ASMA ) , ﬁbroblast - speciﬁc protein 1 ( FSP1 ) ] appear to represent an intermediate stage of EMT ( 39 , 40 ) . Signals that induce and regulate EMT after injury have been extensively studied in carcinogenesis and in lung and kidney ﬁbrosis . After liver injury , the most important trigger to EMT is the release of chemokines , MMPs , 430 Hernandez - Gea · Friedman A nnu . R e v . P a t ho l . M ec h . D i s . 2011 . 6 : 425 - 456 . D o w n l o a d e d fr o m www . a nnu a l r e v i e w s . o r g by O tt e r b e i n U n i v e r s it y on 04 / 11 / 13 . F o r p e r s on a l u s e on l y . PM06CH18 - Friedman ARI 10 December 2010 14 : 38 QuiescentHSC ActivatedHSC Fibrogenesis Bone marrow – derived cells MET MFs Portal fibroblast Hepatocytes and cholangiocytes Fibrocytes EMTHh signaling BMP - 7 Figure 3 Sources of extracellular matrix . Liver ﬁbrosis is characterized by the proliferation of contractile and ﬁbrogenic myoﬁbroblasts ( MFs ) . The primary and best - characterized source of MFs is activated hepatic stellate cells ( HSCs ) ; other cells may also transdifferentiate into MFs , although their exact contribution to human disease remains unclear . These cells include bone marrow – derived cells , portal ﬁbroblasts , and epithelial - to - mesenchymal transition ( EMT ) from hepatocytes and cholangiocytes . Abbreviations : BMP - 7 , bone morphogenetic protein 7 ; Hh , hedgehog ; MET , mesenchymal - to - epithelial transition . and growth factors such as PDGF and TGF - β [ via both the Smad2 / 3 and mitogen - activated protein kinase ( MAPK ) - dependent pathways ] ( 41 ) . More recently , hedgehog signaling has been implicated in this process as well ( 15 , 42 ) . EMT is dynamic and bidirectional , given that ﬁbrogenic cells can undergo mesenchymal - to - epithelial transition and revert back to an epithelial phenotype ( 35 ) . Biliary epithelial cells coexpressing epithe - lial and MF markers have also been identiﬁed in animal models following bile duct ligation ( 43 ) and in human ﬁbrotic livers , particularly in primary biliary cirrhosis and biliary atresia ( 44 , 45 ) . TGF - β - mediated stimulation of primary human cholangiocytes upregulates p - Smad2 / 3 , S100A4 , and ASMA , which confer a motile phenotype ( 45 ) Hepatocyte EMT may also contribute to hepatic ﬁbrogenesis . In vitro studies show that TGF - β induces both EMT in mature hepa - tocytes and expression of collagen α 1 ( I ) ( 46 ) . Increased FSP1 ( S100A4 ) expression in hepa - tocytes following carbon tetrachloride ( CCl 4 ) - induced ﬁbrosis ( 47 ) has also been reported . Despite these data , type I collagen produc - tion by EMT hepatocytes has not yet been conclusively proven in in vivo models ( 48 ) , and a recent study refutes the participation of EMT as a signiﬁcant source of ﬁbrosis ( 48 , 49 ) . Recently , endothelial cells have also been im - plicated in the transformation of mesenchymal cells during kidney ( 50 ) and cardiac ( 51 ) ﬁ - brosis via an analogous process ( endothelial - to - mesenchymal transition ) ; however , their role in liver ﬁbrosis is unknown . www . annualreviews . org • Pathogenesis of Liver Fibrosis 431 A nnu . R e v . P a t ho l . M ec h . D i s . 2011 . 6 : 425 - 456 . D o w n l o a d e d fr o m www . a nnu a l r e v i e w s . o r g by O tt e r b e i n U n i v e r s it y on 04 / 11 / 13 . F o r p e r s on a l u s e on l y . PM06CH18 - Friedman ARI 10 December 2010 14 : 38 CYTOKINES AND SIGNALING PATHWAYS Cytokines Inﬂammatory cytokines play a key role in ﬁbrosis , given that persistent inﬂammation almost always precedes ﬁbrosis . Following liver injury , several cell types can secrete in - ﬂammatory cytokines ; these cell types include KCs , hepatocytes , HSCs , natural killer ( NK ) cells , lymphocytes , and dendritic cells . Cytokines are a family of proteins that include chemokines [ monocyte chemotactic protein 1 ( MCP - 1 ) , RANTES , IL - 8 ] , inter - ferons ( IFN - α , IFN - γ ) , interleukins ( IL - 1 , IL - 6 , IL - 10 ) , growth factors , adipokines , and soluble neurohumoral ligands ( endocannabi - noids ) ( Table 1 ) . Adipokines ( adipose tissue cytokines ) are polypeptides secreted mainly by adipocytes and , to a lesser extent , by stromal cells including macrophages , ﬁbroblasts , and inﬁltrating monocytes ( 52 ) . Leptin and adiponectin are the main adipokines implicated in liver injury . Translation of the obese ( ob ) gene results in the expression of leptin . Leptin can mediate its biological effects through one of several leptin receptors ( ObRa to ObRf ) via activation of the Janus kinase 2 ( JAK2 ) and signal transducer and activator of transcription 3 ( STAT3 ) pathways ( Figure 4 ) ( 52 ) . Leptin has a proﬁbrogenic effect ; it directly modulates the HSC phenotype through ObRb and acti - vates KCs , macrophages , and endothelial cells to produce TGF - β ( 53 , 54 ) . Leptin also plays a role in promoting the proliferation , migration , and metastasis of hepatocellular carcinoma and cholangiocarcinoma cells ( 55 , 56 ) . In addition to leptin , the JAK - STAT signal - ing pathway is activated by a large variety of cy - tokines , including IFN - γ ( 112 ) . Binding of the cytokines to their receptors activates receptor - associated tyrosine kinases ( JAK1 , JAK2 , JAK3 , Tyk2 ) , which interact with the STAT pro - teins . Phosphorylation of the STAT proteins ( STAT1 – 6 ) at their phosphotyrosine - binding SH2 domain allows the complexes to translo - cate to the nucleus and regulate target gene transcription ( 59 , 113 ) . STAT1 and STAT3 play a key role in liver ﬁbrosis . STAT1 can be activated by IFN - α / - β andIFN - γ , andSTAT3canbeactivatedmainly by IL - 6 and IL - 22 . STAT1 and STAT3 regu - late the transcription of many target genes in - volved in antiviral defense , liver inﬂammation , and liver regeneration . STAT1 has been proposed to negatively regulate liver ﬁbrosis through several mech - anisms , including inhibition of HSC pro - liferation , suppression of β - PDGF receptor ( β - PDGFR ) expression , inhibition of TGF - β / Smad3 signaling , and stimulation of NK cell cytotoxicity ( 114 ) . In vivo , mice with a selective knockout of STAT1 in HSCs develop acceler - ated liver ﬁbrosis in response to liver injury due to CCl 4 ( 114 ) . Adiponectin inhibits hepatic ﬁbrogenesis both in vitro and in vivo ( 54 , 57 ) . In HSCs , adiponectin binds its speciﬁc receptors , Adi - poR1 and AdipoR2 , whose downstream ef - fects are mediated by adenosine monophos - phate ( AMP ) – activated protein kinase ( AMPK ) and peroxisome proliferator – activated receptor α ( PPAR - α ) ( 58 , 115 ) . AMPK activation gener - ates ATP and inhibits processes that consume ATP , apart from those crucial for short - time survival . A recent study has implicated an additional adipokine , ghrelin , in attenuating hepatocellu - lar injury and ﬁbrosis ( 59 ) . Ghrelin - deﬁcient mice have enhanced injury and ﬁbrosis follow - ing toxic injury , whereas recombinant ghrelin attenuates injury in wild - type animals . More - over , human polymorphisms of the ghrelin gene may inﬂuence ﬁbrosis progression in patients with chronic hepatitis . Peptide growth factors are also members of the cytokine family . The most important growth factors implicated in HSC activation and collagen synthesis are PDGF and TGF - β . PDGF is a dimeric protein composed of vary - ing combinations of four polypeptide chains ( A , B , C , and D ) that signal via the tyrosine ki - nase receptors PDGFR - α and PDGFR - β . All PDGF isoforms are upregulated during HSC activation and correlate with the degree of ﬁ - brosis and inﬂammation ( 59 – 63 ) . 432 Hernandez - Gea · Friedman A nnu . R e v . P a t ho l . M ec h . D i s . 2011 . 6 : 425 - 456 . D o w n l o a d e d fr o m www . a nnu a l r e v i e w s . o r g by O tt e r b e i n U n i v e r s it y on 04 / 11 / 13 . F o r p e r s on a l u s e on l y . PM06CH18 - Friedman ARI 10 December 2010 14 : 38 Table 1 Repertoire of cytokines and membrane receptors associated with hepatic stellate cells a Cytokine family Cytokines Receptors Effect ( s ) TGFs TGF - β 1 / TGF - α , BMP4 , BMP6 TGF - β receptor types I , II , III ; mannose - 6 - phosphate receptor Proliferative ﬁbrogenic PDGFs PDGF - B β - PDGFR , α - PDGFR Proliferative ﬁbrogenic EGF Unknown EGF receptor Proliferative ﬁbrogenic Stem cell factor Stem cell factor Unknown Proliferative ﬁbrogenic HGF HGF c - Met Proliferative ﬁbrogenic , regenerative , antiﬁbrogenic CTGF CTGF ( CCN2 ) α v β 3 - integrin , low - density lipoprotein receptor - related protein Proliferative ﬁbrogenic FGFs aFGF and bFGF FGF receptor 2 Proliferative ﬁbrogenic ET - 1 ET - 1 , ECE ET - A and ET - B receptors Proliferative ﬁbrogenic , chemotactic / inﬂammatory Leptin Leptin OB - Ra and OB - Rb Proliferative ﬁbrogenic Plasminogen uPA / PAI - 1 uPA receptor Proliferative ﬁbrogenic VEGFs VEGF VEGF receptors 1 and 2 Proliferative ﬁbrogenic IGFs IGF - I , IGF - II IGF - IR Proliferative ﬁbrogenic Thrombin Unknown Thrombin receptor Proliferative ﬁbrogenic RGD - containing and integrin ligands — Integrins α 1 β 1 , α 2 β 1 , α 6 β 4 , α 5 β 1 , α 8 β 1 , α v β 1 , and α v β 3 ; integrin - linked kinase Proliferative ﬁbrogenic Fibrillar collagens Collagens I , II Discoidin domain receptors 1 and 2 Proliferative ﬁbrogenic Cannabinoids Unknown CB1 receptor Proliferative ﬁbrogenic Purines Ubiquitous P2Y receptors Proliferative ﬁbrogenic Adenosine Ubiquitous A ( 2a ) adenosine receptor Proliferative ﬁbrogenic Renin - angiotensin Angiotensin II , renin , ACE Angiotensin II types 1 and 2 receptors Proliferative ﬁbrogenic Serotonin Unknown SSR2 , SSR3 , and SSR5 receptors Proliferative ﬁbrogenic Hedgehog Indian hedgehog and sonic hedgegog Patched Proliferative ﬁbrogenic Galectins Galectin - 3 Unknown Proliferative ﬁbrogenic AGE Unknown Receptor for AGE Chemotactic / inﬂammatory M - CSF M - CSF Unknown Chemotactic / inﬂammatory PAF PAF PAF receptor Chemotactic / inﬂammatory CD40 CD40 ligand Unknown Chemotactic / inﬂammatory TNF - α TNF - α TNF receptor 1 , p75NTR Chemotactic / inﬂammatory Chemokines CXCL1 , MCP - 1 , RANTES , MIP - 1 , eotaxin , IL - 8 CXCR3 Chemotactic / inﬂammatory Opioids Unknown δ 1 and δ 2 opioid receptors Chemotactic / inﬂammatory Oxidized LDl Unknown CD36 Chemotactic / inﬂammatory TLR ligands Unknown TLR4 , CD14 Chemotactic / inﬂammatory IL - 6 IL - 6 Unknown Regenerative NTs NGF , BDNF , NT - 4 , NT - 4 / 5 p75 - NTR , Trk - B , Trk - C Regenerative IL - 10 IL - 10 IL - 10 receptor Antiﬁbrogenic Adiponectin Adiponectin CB2 receptor Antiﬁbrogenic Follistatin Follostatin Unknown Antiﬁbrogenic ( Continued ) www . annualreviews . org • Pathogenesis of Liver Fibrosis 433 A nnu . R e v . P a t ho l . M ec h . D i s . 2011 . 6 : 425 - 456 . D o w n l o a d e d fr o m www . a nnu a l r e v i e w s . o r g by O tt e r b e i n U n i v e r s it y on 04 / 11 / 13 . F o r p e r s on a l u s e on l y . PM06CH18 - Friedman ARI 10 December 2010 14 : 38 Table 1 ( Continued ) Cytokine family Cytokines Receptors Effect ( s ) Fas signaling Unknown Fas Unknown Cystatin Cystatin Unknown Miscellaneous Catecholamines Norepinephrine α 1A - and β - adrenergic receptors Miscellaneous 5 - hydroxytamine Unknown 5 - hydroxytamine receptor subtypes 1A , 2A , and 2B Miscellaneous Adrenomedullin Adrenomedullin Unknown Miscellaneous Complement cascade Unknown C5a receptor Miscellaneous Natriuretic peptides Unknown Natriuretic peptide receptor B Miscellaneous a Adapted from Reference 12 . Abbreviations : ACE , angiotensin - converting enzyme ; AGE , advanced glycation end products ; BDNF , brain - derived neurotrophic factor ; BMP , bone morphogenetic protein ; CTGF , connective tissue growth factor ; ET , endothelin ; FGF , ﬁbroblast growth factor ; HGF , hepatocyte growth factor ; IGF , insulin - like growth factor ; IL , interleukin ; M - CSF , macrophage colony – stimulating factor ; MCP , monocyte chemotactic protein ; MIP , macrophage inﬂammatory protein ; NGF , nerve growth factor ; NT , neurotrophin ; PAF , platelet - activating factor ; PAI , plasminogen activator inhibitor ; PDGF , platelet - derived growth factor ; TGF , transforming growth factor ; TLR , Toll - like receptor ; TNF , tumor necrosis factor ; uPA , urokinase - type plasiminogen activator ; VEGF , vascular endothelial growth factor . PDGFRs transmit their activity in part through phosphoinositol 3 - kinase ( PI3K ) / Akt , which also transduces signals for other tyrosine kinases [ e . g . , vascular endothelial growth factor ( VEGF ) ] , cytokine receptors ( e . g . , MCP - 1 ) , integrins , adipokines ( leptin ) , and G protein – coupled receptor stimulators [ e . g . , angiotensin II ( AII ) , thrombin ] ( 96 – 98 ) . When a receptor tyrosine kinase binds to its cognate receptor , its tyrosine residues become autophosphorylated , which leads to the recruitment of PI3K to the membrane . Once activated and localized to the membrane , PI3K phosphorylates phosphoinositol lipids , which translocate Akt to the plasma membrane . After its recruitment , Akt is phosphorylated by phosphoinositide - dependent kinase and thereby activated . Activated Akt regulates sev - eral cell functions through phosphorylation of many different targets , including mammalian target of rapamycin ( Figure 4 ) ( 99 ) . Growth factor receptors may also utilize MAPK signaling pathways . The MAPK fam - ily includes extracellular signal – regulated ki - nase , c - Jun N - terminal kinase ( JNK ) , and p38 MAPK . These molecules are activated by proliferative peptides ( PDGF , thrombin , AII , VEGF , leptin ) and chemokines . Once ac - tivated , they recruit the signaling molecule Ras , which leads to the transcription of cell - proliferative and proﬁbrogenic factors ( 98 , 100 , 101 ) . TGF - β is secreted by a variety of cell types ; ithasthreemajorisoforms ( TGF - β 1 , TGF - β 2 , and TGF - β 3 ) . TGF - β 1 is produced mainly by monocytes and macrophages and is the princi - pal isoform implicated in liver ﬁbrosis . TGF - β 1 is stored as an inactivated protein bound to a latency - associated protein . Once activated , TGF - β 1 signals via its cognate receptors to Smad proteins , which enhance the transcrip - tion of target genes , including procollagen I and procollagen III ( 64 ) . TGF - β 1 signaling is initiated by binding to the type II receptor . Subsequently , this receptor dimerizes with its type I receptor and binds Smad2 and Smad3 ; this complex becomes phosphorylated and is released into the cytosol , where it associates with Smad4 . The resulting heterodimer can then translocate into the nucleus and regu - late transcription . The pathway can be endoge - nously inhibited , which prevents the binding of Smad2 / 3tothereceptorbySmad6 / 7 ( Figure 4 ) ( 102 , 103 ) . VEGF , a well - characterized angiogenesis modulator , is upregulated during HSC activa - tion and stimulates cell proliferation , migra - tion , and collagen production ( 65 , 66 ) . Other 434 Hernandez - Gea · Friedman A nnu . R e v . P a t ho l . M ec h . D i s . 2011 . 6 : 425 - 456 . D o w n l o a d e d fr o m www . a nnu a l r e v i e w s . o r g by O tt e r b e i n U n i v e r s it y on 04 / 11 / 13 . F o r p e r s on a l u s e on l y . PM06CH18 - Friedman ARI 10 December 2010 14 : 38 Activated HSC Growth factor IFN - γ TK receptor Adiponectin AdipoR PPAR - α AMPK mTOR AKT P 13 K Leptin Smad2 Smad4 Smad4 STAT3 JAK2 ObRb Smad3 Smad3 TGF - β PDGFR PDGF TGF - βR ERK I κ B I κ B NF - κ B P65 P P P50 P65P50 MEK Raf Ras I κ K Transcriptional regulation Proteinsynthesis JAK T2K Smad7 Smad2 TNF Figure 4 Main cytokine pathways regulating liver ﬁbrosis . Liver injury is followed by the secretion of cytokines that mediate the activation of several intracellular signaling pathways , primarily through their binding to speciﬁc receptors . Leptin and interferon ( IFN ) - γ can activate STAT3 and regulate the transcription of many target genes involved in liver ﬁbrosis . Adiponectin , through its binding to its receptor , AdipoR , can inhibit hepatic ﬁbrogenesis via peroxisome proliferator – activated receptor ( PPAR ) - α signaling . The dimerization of the transforming growth factor β receptor ( TGF - β R ) , following binding by TGF - β , recruits Smad2 and Smad3 proteins , which are then phosphorylated and released into the cytosol , where they can associate with Smad4 . These heterodimers can then translocate into the nucleus and regulate ﬁbrogenic gene transcription . Platelet - derived growth factor ( PDGF ) mediates its transcriptional regulation in part through the activation of the extracellular signal – regulated kinase ( ERK ) pathway following binding to the PDGF receptor ( PDGFR ) . In addition to PDGF , several other growth factors can activate tyrosine receptors , which lead to the recruitment of phosphoinositol 3 - kinase ( PI3K ) and the phosphorylation of AKT ; activated AKT regulates synthesis of ﬁbrogenic proteins via the mammalian target of rapamycin ( mTOR ) pathway . Abbreviations : JAK , Janus kinase ; NF - κ B , nuclear factor κ B ; TK , tyrosine kinase ; TNF , tumor necrosis factor . peptide growth factors related to liver ﬁbrosis are HGF , ﬁbroblast growth factor , and insulin - like growth factor 1 ( 43 , 67 – 69 ) Endogenous cannabinoids are a family of molecules derived from arachidonic acid that signal through CB1 and CB2 receptors . Major endogenous ligands are anandamide ( arachi - donylethanolamide ) , 2 - arachidonylglycerol , noladin ether , and virodhamine ( 70 ) . Chronic liver disease is associated with the upregulation www . annualreviews . org • Pathogenesis of Liver Fibrosis 435 A nnu . R e v . P a t ho l . M ec h . D i s . 2011 . 6 : 425 - 456 . D o w n l o a d e d fr o m www . a nnu a l r e v i e w s . o r g by O tt e r b e i n U n i v e r s it y on 04 / 11 / 13 . F o r p e r s on a l u s e on l y . PM06CH18 - Friedman ARI 10 December 2010 14 : 38 of endocannabinoids and their receptors ; however , the two CB receptors have com - pletely divergent activities . Whereas CB1 is ﬁbrogenic , CB2 has the opposite effect ; thus , CB1 antagonism and CB2 agonism are two opposing strategies that represent new therapeutic options to reduce ﬁbrosis ( 70 – 73 ) . Vasoactive Mediators HSCs can regulate intrahepatic blood ﬂow dur - ing injury according to several lines of evidence : 1 . Intheirperisinusoidalorientation , HSCs , which contain extensive long cytoplas - mic foot processes , embrace the sinusoids and resemble tissue pericytes , a cell pop - ulation thought to regulate blood ﬂow by modulating pericapillary resistance ( 74 ) . 2 . Activation of HSCs includes the adoption of a contractile phenotype . 3 . In vivo microscopy has demonstrated di - rectsinusoidalconstrictionbyHSCs ( 75 ) . Moreover , contraction of HSCs in response to vasoactive substances has been demonstrated in vitro and in vivo , and the actual force gen - erated by HSC contraction is sufﬁcient to con - tract sinusoids [ the average force contraction generated by endothelin 1 ( ET - 1 ) stimulation of a single HSC exceeds sinusoidal pressure ] ( 76 ) . Several vascular mediators provoke hepatic stellate cell contractility . The endothe - lin ( ET ) family consists of three members ( ET - 1 , ET - 2 , and ET - 3 ) that are produced by endothelial cells , which bind to two G protein – coupled receptors , ETA and ETB , and exert paracrine and autocrine effects . ETA receptors are found mainly on vascular smooth muscle cells , and ETB receptors are found on endothelial cells ( 77 , 78 ) . After liver injury , ET - 1 is secreted by HSCs , whereas its synthesis by sinusoidal endothe - lial cells is reduced ( 79 ) . Liver injury is asso - ciated with both an increase in local ET pro - duction and enhanced ET receptor expression , which lead to HSC contractility that increases sinusoidal constriction and intrahepatic blood ﬂow resistance ( 78 , 80 ) . Nitric oxide ( NO ) is a tightly regulated , unique messenger molecule that is produced from L - arginine by three isoforms of NO syn - thase . NO modulates intrahepatic resistance in an autocrine manner by stimulating a soluble guanylate cyclase that decreases Ca 2 + levels , provokingvasodilationandHSCrelaxation ( 78 , 81 ) . In the cirrhotic liver , sinusoidal endothe - lial cells have decreased NO secretion , thereby contributing to the imbalance between vaso - constrictor and vasodilator substances that is typical of advanced liver disease ( 82 ) . The renin - angiotensin system ( RAS ) is an endocrine system that can regulate intrahepatic vascular resistance . The main mediator is AII , which is either produced through endothelial cleavage of angiotensin I ( AI ; synthesized from angiotensinogen by hepatocytes ) or generated de novo in damaged tissues . AII binds AI recep - tor in MF and promotes ﬁbrogenesis and in - ﬂammation . In the ﬁbrotic liver , HSCs highly express AI receptors and secrete AII , thereby inducing cell proliferation and contraction ( 83 , 84 ) . Moreover , RAS activity correlates with the degree of portal hypertension ( 85 ) . AII mediates its effects ( a ) by directly stimulating Smad signaling and ( b ) through an increase in intracellular calcium and ROS pro - duction , which stimulate the PI3K / Akt , Rho kinase , nuclear factor κ B ( NF - κ B ) , and MAPK pathways ( 83 , 86 ) . Like many systems , RAS contains an endogenous antagonistic pathway in which a truncated form of AII , Ang1 – 7 , exerts effects on ﬁbrosis that are opposite to those of AII ( 87 ) . Ang1 – 7 is generated by a homolog of angiotensin - converting enzyme 1 ( ACE1 ) known as ACE2 ( 88 ) . Thus , whereas ACE1 and AII are proﬁbrotic , ACE2 and Ang1 – 7 are antiﬁbrotic . Other vasoactive factors . Several vascular agents are also implicated in hepatic vascular homeostasis . Carbon monoxide is produced in the hepatic sinusoidal cells and mediates relaxation in sinusoids and HSCs ( 89 ) . The 436 Hernandez - Gea · Friedman A nnu . R e v . P a t ho l . M ec h . D i s . 2011 . 6 : 425 - 456 . D o w n l o a d e d fr o m www . a nnu a l r e v i e w s . o r g by O tt e r b e i n U n i v e r s it y on 04 / 11 / 13 . F o r p e r s on a l u s e on l y . PM06CH18 - Friedman ARI 10 December 2010 14 : 38 serine protease thrombin regulates platelet aggregation and endothelial cell activation . It can act as a hormone or a cytokine , de - pending on which receptor isoform is engaged ( protease - activated receptors 1 through 4 ) . Expression of protease - activated receptor 1 by HSCs increases during activation and induces the contraction , proliferation , and secretion of several chemokines , as well as platelet - activating factor . The binding of atrial natriuretic peptide to its receptor in HSCs antagonizes the effects of ET on Ca 2 + and con - traction ( 90 ) . Prostaglandinsare alsoimplicated in HSC contraction ; some of them ( PGI 2 , PGE 2 ) induce relaxation , whereas others ( tromboxane , PGF 2 α ) induce contraction ( 91 ) . Vasopressin and thrombin elicit contraction of HSCs by releasing Ca 2 + from intracellu - lar stores ( 92 ) . Adenosine , substance P , and lysophosphatidic acid also induce HSC con - traction in vitro ( 93 – 95 ) . REGULATION OF GENE EXPRESSION Transcriptional Regulation Regulationofgeneexpressionineukaryotecells is a complex , precise , and cell - speciﬁc process . There has been tremendous progress in re - vealing the regulatory mechanisms that con - trol gene expression in HSCs during ﬁbrosis , and research has focused primarily on tran - scriptional control pathways ( 104 , 105 , 116 ) . Recent advances have also highlighted the im - pact of posttranslational modiﬁcations , includ - ing phosphorylation , SUMOylation , prenyla - tion , acetylation , and glucosylation , which can regulate a range of effects in transcriptional ac - tivity ; binding afﬁnity to DNA ; oligomeriza - tion ; and / or targeting for degradation of tran - scription factors , corepressors , and coactivators ( 117 ) . Rather than comprehensively review all facets of transcriptional biology in HSCs , we describe here a few examples of key transcrip - tionfactorsimplicatedintheregulationofHSC activation ( Table 2 ) . Basic helix - loop - helix ( bHLH ) transcrip - tional factors constitute a two - class family in - volved in HSC contractility . Class A bHLH factors are ubiquitously expressed , whereas class B bHLH factors are tissue speciﬁc ; both can be inhibited by related bHLH pro - teins known as inhibitors of DNA bind - ing / differentiation ( Id proteins ) . The best - characterized HLH members in HSCs are MyoD , sterol regulatory element – binding pro - tein1c , c - Myc , andc - Myb . MyoDisamyogenic transcriptional factor expressed in rat and hu - man HSCs that is implicated in the acquisition of a contractile phenotype ( 118 ) . The role of Id proteinsinliverﬁbrosisremainspoorlydeﬁned , as there are some contradictory ﬁndings . Id1 is implicated in the maintenance of the in vitro quiescent phenotype of HSCs ( 118 ) , and forced overexpression of Id1 enhances HSC activation ( 119 ) . In contrast , Id2 plays an important role in perpetuating ﬁbrosis and is upregulated dur - ingearlyHSCactivation ( 120 ) ; however , itlater leads to the suppression of ﬁbrogenic markers ( ASMA , collagen I , MMP - 2 ) ( 121 ) . These di - vergent data may reﬂect the effects of different modes of cross talk between Id proteins and the major proﬁbrogenic factor TGF - β ( 105 ) . Three members of the CCAAT / enhancer binding protein ( C / EBP ) family , C / EBP α , C / EBP β , and C / EBP δ , are expressed in HSCs ( 122 ) . C / EBP α , a key factor in adipocyte dif - ferentiation ( 123 ) , is also a negative regula - tor of HSC activation and liver ﬁbrosis ( 124 ) . Its expression declines with activation , and its forced overexpression inhibits HSC prolifer - ation , decreases production of ECM and ex - pression of ASMA , and enlarges cytoplasmic lipid droplets ( 122 ) . C / EBP β modulates colla - gen I expression in HSCs in response to oxidant stress induced by acetaldehyde ( 125 , 126 ) . It also plays an important role in preventing apop - tosisofactivatedHSCsandpromotingprogres - sion of ﬁbrosis . During HSC activation in an experimental model of injury , phosphorylation of Thr217 C / EBP β by ribosomal S - 6 kinase ( RSK ) induces HSC proliferation and prevents apoptosis . In contrast , HSCs in C / EBP β − / − mice or in wild - type animals treated with a se - lectiveinhibitioninRSKundergoapoptosisfol - lowing liver injury with CCl 4 ( 127 ) . www . annualreviews . org • Pathogenesis of Liver Fibrosis 437 A nnu . R e v . P a t ho l . M ec h . D i s . 2011 . 6 : 425 - 456 . D o w n l o a d e d fr o m www . a nnu a l r e v i e w s . o r g by O tt e r b e i n U n i v e r s it y on 04 / 11 / 13 . F o r p e r s on a l u s e on l y . PM06CH18 - Friedman ARI 10 December 2010 14 : 38 Table 2 Transcription factors expressed by hepatic stellate cells a Factor Function of target gene ( s ) Miscellaneous NF - κβ Inﬂammation and apoptosis survival regulation AP - 1 ( c - Jun , JunB , JunD , c - Fos , Fra1 , Fra2 , Fos - B ) TGF - β 1 , TIMP - 1 , and IL - 6 gene regulation AP - 2 Collagen gene regulation Ets - 1 Activation NF - 1 Collagen gene regulation Smads Collagen gene regulation , gene arrest C / EBP Collagen gene regulation Mef2 Activation E - box factors Mannose - 6 - phosphate / IGF - II regulation c - Myb α smooth muscle actin CREB Activation CRP2 Quiescence SREBP Quiescence Lhx2 Quiescence KLFs KLF6 Varied Sp1 , Sp3 Collagen gene regulation BTEB Collagen gene regulation ZNF267 MMP - 10 Egr - 1 Activation Nuclear hormone receptors FXR Quiescence PPAR - γ Quiescence LXR Quiescence PXR Quiescence Vitamin D receptor Activation RAR - α , - β ; RXR Varied Forkhead factors Foxf1 Activation FoxO1 Activation a Adapted from Reference 12 . Abbreviations : AP , activator protein ; C / EBP , CCAAT / enhancer - binding protein ; CREB , cyclin AMP response element – binding ; CRP2 , cysteine - and glycine - rich LIM ( Lin11 , Isl1 , Mec3 ) domain protein 2 ; FXR , farnesoid X receptor ; IGF , insulin - like growth factor ; IL , interleukin ; KLF , Kr¨uppel - like transcription factor ; LXR , liver X receptor ; MMP , matrix metalloproteinase ; NF , nuclear factor ; PPAR , peroxisome proliferator – activated receptor ; PXR , pregnane X receptor ; SREBP , sterol regulatory element – binding protein ; TGF , transforming growth factor ; TIMP , tissue inhibitor of matrix metalloproteinase , ZNF , zinc ﬁnger protein . Mef2 , amemberoftheMADS ( MCM1 , AG , DEFA , SRF ) - box family implicated in differ - entiation and organogenesis ( 128 ) , also drives HSC proliferation and contractility ( 129 ) . Al - though Mef2 is not detectable in qHSCs , dur - ing activation its messenger RNA increases , whichinturnincreasesexpressionofASMAand collagen I and stimulates HSC proliferation . Cysteine - and glycine - rich LIM ( Lin11 , Isl1 , Mec3 ) domain protein 2 is expressed solely by HSCs among liver cells and induces their activation . It expression is regulated by TGF - β ( 130 ) . The LIM homeobox gene , Lhx2 , pre - serves the quiescent phenotype of HSCs ( 105 ) , and its overexpression in human HSCs re - duces ECM production and ASMA expression 438 Hernandez - Gea · Friedman A nnu . R e v . P a t ho l . M ec h . D i s . 2011 . 6 : 425 - 456 . D o w n l o a d e d fr o m www . a nnu a l r e v i e w s . o r g by O tt e r b e i n U n i v e r s it y on 04 / 11 / 13 . F o r p e r s on a l u s e on l y . PM06CH18 - Friedman ARI 10 December 2010 14 : 38 ( 131 ) . Activator protein ( AP ) - 1 expression be - comes evident at early stages of HSC activation , when it enhances the transcription of tissue in - hibitor of metalloproteinase ( TIMP ) - 1 , IL - 6 , and TGF - β 1 ( 132 ) . AP - 2 ( 133 ) , NF - 1 ( 134 ) , and SOX9 ( 135 ) also regulate collagen α I ex - pression in activated HSCs . Nuclear receptors [ pregnane X receptor ( PXR ) , PPAR ] regulate the expression of tar - get genes following ligand activation in the cy - toplasm and translocation to the nucleus . Al - though retinoid storage is the most prominent and characteristic feature of HSCs in normal liver , the relative importance of the nuclear re - ceptors , RXR and RAR , in liver homeostasis and injury responses is surprisingly obscure . Nonetheless , expression of RAR and RXR is downregulated during HSC activation ( 136 ) . The farnesoid X receptor ( FXR ) is acti - vated by bile acids and diminishes collagen and TIMP - 1 expression in HSCs without affecting either ASMA expression or cell proliferation ( 137 , 138 ) . PXR is implicated in the response to several xenobiotica and endogenous metabo - lites through upregulation of the CYP3A fam - ily of cytochrome p450 enzymes , particularly CYP3A4 . Activation of PXR by pregnelone - 16 - α - carbonitrile prevents rat HSC activation and ﬁbrosis following liver injury with CCl 4 ( 139 ) . The PPARs regulate lipid and glucose metabolism and are expressed in HSCs . Although there are several isoforms ( i . e . , PPAR - α , - β , - γ , and - δ ) the most extensively investigated in liver ﬁbrosis is PPAR - γ , which plays an important role in the maintenance of qHSCs . Forced expression of PPAR - γ in activated HSCs inhibits collagen I expression , blocks TGF - β 1 signaling , reduces prolifera - tion , and increases cytoplasmic lipid droplets ( 140 – 142 ) . PPAR - γ exerts these effects though physical interaction with JunD ( an AP - 1 pro - tein ) and the blockade of TGF - β signaling by Smad3 inhibition , which leads to reduced colla - gen and connective tissue growth factor expres - sion , respectively ( 140 ) . Stimulation of PPAR - γ , with either a natural ligand [ 15 - d - PJ ( 2 ) ] or a synthetic ligand ( GW7845 , pioglitazone ) , inhibits HSC proliferation and induces apo - ptosis in vitro and in vivo ( 140 , 143 ) . PPAR - γ requires formation of a heterodimer , primarily with RXR , to become transcriptionally active , but it also dimerizes with RAR and FXR ( 144 ) . Epigenetic Regulation Changes in gene expression can also arise without modiﬁcations in DNA sequences through epigenetic regulation . Epigenetic modiﬁcations of gene expression are typically stable and are retained through mitosis , without leading to DNA mutations . They are highly responsive to environmental and developmental cues ( see Reference 145 and references therein ) . Epigenetic modiﬁcations consist of three main processes : histone mod - iﬁcation , DNA methylation , and silencing by noncoding RNAs ( Figure 5 ) ( 146 ) . Several studies have identiﬁed a potential roleforhistonemodiﬁcationinHSCactivation . Trichostatin A , a histone deacetylase inhibitor , blocks the morphological features of HSC acti - vation in vitro and reduces both cellular prolif - eration and transcription of the ASMA and col - lagen I genes ( 147 , 148 ) . Interestingly , ethanol , the chronic ingestion of which is linked to hep - atic ﬁbrosis , can induce a posttranslational hi - stone modiﬁcation through acetylation of his - tone H3 lysine ( 149 ) . Gene silencing , which results from the ad - dition of a methyl group to the 5 (cid:3) position of cytosine residues ( i . e . , methylation ) in the cytosine phosphoguanine dinucleotide , is also implicated in the regulation of HSC activa - tion . The DNA methylation inhibitor 5 - aza - 2 (cid:3) - deoxycytidine blocks HSC activation through sustained repression of I κ B α in qHSCs and PPAR - γ in activated HSCs , respectively ( 108 ) . Chromatin silencing can also be accom - plished by small noncoding RNA genes that bind to their target messenger RNA and down - regulate their stability and / or translation ( 150 ) . These RNA modulators can act at either the transcriptional ( antisense RNA ) or posttran - scriptional level [ e . g . , via small interfering RNA or microRNA ( miRNA ) ] and are involved in www . annualreviews . org • Pathogenesis of Liver Fibrosis 439 A nnu . R e v . P a t ho l . M ec h . D i s . 2011 . 6 : 425 - 456 . D o w n l o a d e d fr o m www . a nnu a l r e v i e w s . o r g by O tt e r b e i n U n i v e r s it y on 04 / 11 / 13 . F o r p e r s on a l u s e on l y . PM06CH18 - Friedman ARI 10 December 2010 14 : 38 Neutrophil Dendritic cell T cell HDAC TF RNApol Methylation Epigenetic regulation Transcription factors ( TF ) Cytokines Extracellular matrix Immunity miRNA QuiescentHSC Figure 5 Regulation of gene expression in hepatic stellate cells ( HSCs ) during ﬁbrosis . Transcription factors ( TFs ) can promote or block the recruitment of RNA polymerase ( RNA pol ) binding to a speciﬁc DNA sequence and thereby control the rate of gene expression . Changes in genes expression can also occur without modiﬁcation in DNA sequences through at least three distinct epigenetic processes : histone deacetylation ( HDAC ) , DNA methylation , and silencing by noncoding microRNAs ( miRNAs ) . Activation of immune cells following liver injury is also an important stimulus to HSC activation that occurs mainly through the secretion of proinﬂammatory and ﬁbrogenic molecules . Cytokines and extracellular matrix components also play an important role in initiating ﬁbrosis and perpetuating HSC activation . many biological pathways such as cell differen - tiation , proliferation , and death ( 151 , 152 ) . miRNA - mediated RNA silencing is associ - ated with HSC activation through the upregu - lation of 13 miRNAs and the regulation of 22 signaling pathways ( 153 ) . Speciﬁcally , the over - expression of miR - 27a and miR - 27b is involved in the reversal of the activated phenotype of rat HSCs in vitro ( 154 , 155 ) . Intriguingly , cross talk between transcrip - tion factors and epigenetics occurs during HSC activation . Speciﬁcally , HSC activation is as - sociated with a persistent suppression of I κ B α caused by the methylation of a CpG island up - stream of the I κ B α promoter by the repres - sors centromere - binding factor 1 ( CBF1 ) and methyl CpG – binding protein 2 ( MeCP2 ) ( 107 , 108 ) . In the context of hepatocellular carci - noma , activated HSCs overexpress the tran - scription factor Mef2 , which interacts with class II histone deacetylase . This interaction leads to the hyperacetylation of histones H3 and H4 ( 156 ) . IMMUNE REGULATION AND HOST GENETICS IN LIVER FIBROSIS As the ﬁrst solid organ beyond the gut to pro - cess ingested antigens , the liver is constantly exposed to antigen - rich blood and therefore is amajorlineofdefenseagainstsuchantigens , es - pecially microorganisms . Both the adaptive and innate immune systems of the liver are highly evolved to serve this function . In doing so , how - ever , innate immune pathways may also drive ﬁbrogenesis , given that their primary activity is to protect against acute insult ; however , ﬁbro - sis is a late - stage response that does not pose an immediate threat to an organism’s survival . Both the innate and adaptive immune systems play an important role in hepatic ﬁbrosis mod - ulation ( Figure 6 ) . Innate Immune Response Innate immune mechanisms are critical to de - fense from microorganisms through a range 440 Hernandez - Gea · Friedman A nnu . R e v . P a t ho l . M ec h . D i s . 2011 . 6 : 425 - 456 . D o w n l o a d e d fr o m www . a nnu a l r e v i e w s . o r g by O tt e r b e i n U n i v e r s it y on 04 / 11 / 13 . F o r p e r s on a l u s e on l y . PM06CH18 - Friedman ARI 10 December 2010 14 : 38 Adaptive immune regulation HSC autoregulation Phagocytosisof apoptoticbodies Neutrophil Dendritic cell B cell NK cell NKT cell T cells Tc KC TCR H K II CD161 CD161 Th Antigenpresentation TLR4 CD4 CD8 MD2 LPS receptorcomplex Innate immune regulation CD4 Antige QuiescentHSC Figure 6 Both the adaptive and innate immune systems play important roles in hepatic ﬁbrosis modulation . Liver Kupffer cells ( KCs ) can secrete soluble mediators and function as antigen presenting cells , thereby modulating hepatic stellate cell ( HSC ) activation . Neutrophils are implicated in the early response following liver injury . Natural killer ( NK ) cells confer a protective role by inducing HSC apoptosis and secreting antiﬁbrotic mediators , whereas NKT cells have a proﬁbrogenic proﬁle . HSCs also function as professional antigen presenting cells and can phagocytose apoptotic debris , especially from hepatocytes . HSCs express the innate immune receptor Toll - like receptor 4 ( TLR4 ) , whose main ligand is lipopolysaccharide ( LPS ) . Abbreviation : TCR , T cell receptor . of pathways . A secondary consequence of this response , however , may include effects on ﬁbrogenesis . Hepatic macrophages and monocytes . KCs are tissue macrophages derived from circulat - ing monocytes ; they constitute 15 % of the to - tal liver cell population and reside predomi - nantly in the periportal areas . They have a wide repertoire of functions in liver pathophysiol - ogy , including phagocytosis , antigen presenta - tion , and secretion of soluble mediators that can modulate innate immune and inﬂammatory re - sponses . Once activated , KCs secrete a large number of proinﬂammatory and ﬁbrogenic mediators , which can drive HSC activation ( 157 , 158 ) . KCs are also the ﬁrst point of contact for bacterial products , including endotoxin , that are derived from the gastrointestinal tract . KCs are therefore the main target of lipopolysac - charide ( LPS ) , and they strongly express Toll - like receptor 4 ( TLR4 ) , the innate immune receptor whose main ligand is LPS . TLRs are a family of mammalian transmembrane pattern - recognition receptors that distinguish pathogen - associated motifs . TLR4 - mediated signals are transduced through two major path - ways , which are either MyD88 dependent or MyD88 independent , and they signal through NF - κ B , MAPK , andPI3K / Akt ( 157 , 158 ) . Most resident liver cells , including HSCs , express TLR4 . Activated human HSCs that express TLR4 respond to LPS by secreting cytokines and activating I κ B kinase / NF - κ B and JNK www . annualreviews . org • Pathogenesis of Liver Fibrosis 441 A nnu . R e v . P a t ho l . M ec h . D i s . 2011 . 6 : 425 - 456 . D o w n l o a d e d fr o m www . a nnu a l r e v i e w s . o r g by O tt e r b e i n U n i v e r s it y on 04 / 11 / 13 . F o r p e r s on a l u s e on l y . PM06CH18 - Friedman ARI 10 December 2010 14 : 38 ( 159 ) . Moreover , LPSdownregulatestheTGF - β pseudoreceptor BAMBI in qHSCs , thereby promoting TGF - β signaling and enhancing hepatic ﬁbrogenesis ( 160 ) . Interestingly , two single - nucleotide polymorphisms of the TLR gene ( D299G and T399I ) , which are associated with reduced LPS responsiveness , confer a sig - niﬁcantly reduced risk for ﬁbrosis progression in patients with chronic hepatitis C virus infec - tion ( 161 , 162 ) . TLR9 is also expressed by HSCs and can be activated by apoptotic hepatocyte DNA , which leads to cellular activation and collagen produc - tion ( 163 ) . Accordingly , TLR9 - deﬁcient mice display decreased hepatic ﬁbrosis in experimen - tal liver injury ( 164 ) . Neutrophils . Neutrophils are implicated in the early response of the innate immune sys - tem following liver injury , and they are espe - cially prominent in both alcoholic and nonal - coholic steatohepatitis . Moreover , they may be stimulated to directionally migrate into injured liver by numerous chemokines , including IL - 8 ( 165 ) . However , their role in directly driving ﬁbrogenesis , rather than through their ampli - ﬁcation of tissue damage per se , is not clear , as few pathways that directly link neutrophils to ﬁbrogenic pathways have been identiﬁed . Natural killer and natural killer T cells . NK cells confer a protective role in ﬁbrosis devel - opment ( a ) by inducing HSC apoptosis and ( b ) through the production of antiﬁbrotic me - diators ( 166 – 170 ) . The inhibitory effect of NK cells on HSCs may be mediated by STAT1 , given that induction of HSC killing by NK cells is attenuated in STAT1 − / − mice ( 114 ) . NKT cells are a heterogeneous group of cellsthatexpressbothTcellmarkers ( αβ TCR ) and NK cell markers ( NK1 . 1 , CD161 ) ( 171 ) . A proﬁbrogenic role in ﬁbrogenesis has been suggested on the basis of the ﬁnding that de - pletion of NKT cells in mice treated with CCl 4 has a protective effect against liver damage and ﬁbrosis ( 172 ) . Dendritic cells , which are classical antigen presenting cells , are abundant in liver , and their contribution to hepatic ﬁbrosis is an area of active interest . Recent evidence suggests that they may modulate the inﬂammatory milieu via TNF - α ( 173 ) . Adaptive Immune Response Growing interest has also uncovered a vital role for the adaptive immune system in hepatic ﬁbrosis . T lymphocytes . T cells can be classiﬁed as CD8 + and CD4 + cells , as well as cells deﬁned by the cytokine secreted . For example , clas - sical T helper 1 ( Th1 ) cells secrete IL - 2 and IFN - γ , whereas Th2 cells secrete IL - 4 , - 5 , - 10 , and - 13 ( 174 ) . In general , Th2 cytokines from CD8 + cells play a proﬁbrotic role in liver ﬁ - brosis , whereas Th1 cytokines play a protective role ( 157 , 175 ) . B lymphocytes . B cells may play a proﬁbro - genic role in liver ﬁbrosis because B cell – deﬁcient mice demonstrate reduced collagen deposition after CCl 4 injury compared with wild - type animals . The impact of B cell deﬁ - ciency is probably antibody independent ( 176 ) . Inﬂuence of Hepatic Stellate Cells on Immune System Cells Both immune cells and HSCs are important mediators of hepatic ﬁbrosis through bidirec - tional interactions . HSCs can be regulated by immune cells and can modulate inﬂamma - tory cell behavior ( 175 , 177 ) . They can pro - duce macrophage colony – stimulating factor , which is an important KC regulator ( 178 ) ; the lipid chemoattractant platelet - activating fac - tor ( 179 ) ; and several chemokines ( 165 , 180 ) . HSCs are also immunoregulatory because they both secrete soluble mediators and upregulate leukocyte adhesion molecule receptors , includ - ing intracellular adhesion molecule type 1 ( 181 , 182 ) , vascular cell adhesion molecule type 1 ( 183 ) , and neural cell adhesion molecule type 1 ( 184 , 185 ) . 442 Hernandez - Gea · Friedman A nnu . R e v . P a t ho l . M ec h . D i s . 2011 . 6 : 425 - 456 . D o w n l o a d e d fr o m www . a nnu a l r e v i e w s . o r g by O tt e r b e i n U n i v e r s it y on 04 / 11 / 13 . F o r p e r s on a l u s e on l y . PM06CH18 - Friedman ARI 10 December 2010 14 : 38 Fibrosis regression : any reduction in ECM content of any degree , without necessarily a return to normal histology RESOLUTION OF FIBROSIS Fibrosis Reversibility Recent clinical evidence contradicts the long - standing belief that cirrhosis is always irre - versible ( 186 , 187 ) . In experimental animal models of ﬁbrosis , cessation of the causative agent results in ﬁbrosis regression ( 188 , 189 ) . Eveninhumans , successfultreatmentoftheun - derlying disease may reverse liver ﬁbrosis . Re - gression of liver ﬁbrosis has been observed in patientswithironandcopperoverload ; alcohol - induced liver injury ; chronic hepatitis B , C , and D ; hemochromatosis ; secondary biliary cirrho - sis ; nonalcoholic steatohepatitis ; and autoim - mune hepatitis ( reviewed in References 186 and 187 ) . Extracellular Matrix Degradation Liver ﬁbrosis following chronic liver injury en - tails both qualitative and quantitative changes in ECM composition as a result of an imbal - ance between the rates of matrix synthesis and degradation . The ECM becomes progressively insoluble and resistant to protease digestion be - causeofthethickeningofﬁbroticseptaeandthe increase in cross - linking ( 189 , 190 ) . MMPs , also known as matrixins , are the major family of calcium - dependent enzymes that degrade collagenous and noncollagenous ECM substrates . They are a tightly regulated 25 - member family traditionally classiﬁed into ﬁve categories on the basis of their substrate speciﬁcity : interstitial collagenases , gelatinases , stromelysins , membrane types , and metallo - elastases ( Table 3 ) . To tightly regulate the turnover and constant remodeling of ECM , MMPs are regulated at several levels . They are secreted as inactive proenzymes , have com - plex transcriptional control , and are modu - lated by a family of endogenous proteinase in - hibitors known as TIMPs ( Figure 7 ) ( 189 , 191 , 192 ) . Four TIMP members bind reversibly to the active site of all MMPs and have differ - ent afﬁnities for speciﬁc MMPs . Thus , TIMPs play an important role in preventing degrada - tion of the accumulating matrix during liver injury by antagonizing the activity of metal - loproteinases . TIMP - 1 has also an antiapop - totic effect on HSCs : It prevents clearance of activated HSCs during injury and promotes their survival through induction of B cell lym - phoma 2 ( Bcl - 2 ) ( 193 ) . HSCs are a key source of MMPs , especially MMP - 2 , - 3 , - 9 , and - 13 . Hepatic macrophages also regulate matrix re - modeling and play a decisive role in matrix degradationbyincreasingMMP - 13production during resolution of liver ﬁbrosis ( 194 , 195 ) . In acute liver injury in rats , expression of bothMMPsandTIMPsincreaseswithinhours . After a single dose of CCl 4 , increased MMP - 13 , MMP - 2 , MMP - 9 , MMP - 3 , MMP - 10 , TIMP - 1 , and TIMP - 2 can be detected . During the recovery phase , levels of all of them—apart from MMP - 2 and the TIMPs—are rapidly re - duced ( 196 ) . In chronic human liver disease and animal models of ﬁbrosis , however , levels of MMP - 1 / - 13 do not change , but there is a pro - gressive increase in TIMP - 1 and - 2 as ﬁbro - sis advances . TIMP expression can be detected soon ( 6 h ) after liver injury and may precede the induction of procollagen I ( 197 ) . Mechanisms of Fibrosis Reversibility Animal models remain essential to the study of the basic mechanism of ﬁbrosis progression , re - versibility , and the development of new antiﬁ - brotictherapies . The moststandardized models are rodents ( mouse and rat ) . Mouse models are morecost - effectivebecausetheyusuallyrequire lower amounts of therapeutic agents ( 198 ) . Bile duct ligation and CCl 4 are well - validated mod - els of ﬁbrosis progression and resolution . Spon - taneous resolution may be observed four to six weeks after establishment of a bilio - jejunal anastomosis to reverse biliary obstruction or af - ter cessation of CCl 4 administration . Analysis of mechanisms underlying ﬁbrosis regression requires the use of more than one model to ensure that the ﬁndings are not model - speciﬁc artifacts . Experimental evidence for the reversal of cirrhosis was rigorously characterized in a 12 - week CCl 4 injury model ( 190 ) . Following www . annualreviews . org • Pathogenesis of Liver Fibrosis 443 A nnu . R e v . P a t ho l . M ec h . D i s . 2011 . 6 : 425 - 456 . D o w n l o a d e d fr o m www . a nnu a l r e v i e w s . o r g by O tt e r b e i n U n i v e r s it y on 04 / 11 / 13 . F o r p e r s on a l u s e on l y . PM06CH18 - Friedman ARI 10 December 2010 14 : 38 Table 3 Main metalloproteinases involved in liver ﬁbrosis a Name Family Substrate Sources Collagenases Collagenase - 1 MMP - 1 III , I , II , VII , VIII , X , gelatin HSCs Neutrophil collagenase MMP - 8 I , III , II , V , VII , X , gelatin Neutrophils Collagenase - 3 MMP - 13 II , III , I , VII , X , gelatin HSCs , MFs , KCs Stromelysins Stromelysin - 1 MMP - 3 III , IV , V , IX , X , XI , gelatin , laminin , ﬁbronectin , proteoglycans , glycoproteins , elastin , pro - MMP - 1 , pro - MMP - 13 HSCs Stromelysin - 2 MMP - 10 III , IV , V , gelatin , elastin , aggrecan HSCs Stromelysin - 3 MMP - 11 PAI - 1 ; weak activity against matrix proteins Hepatocytes Gelatinases Gelatinase A MMP - 2 Gelatin , V , IV , VII , X , XI , elastin , laminin , III , II , I HSCs , MFs Gelatinase B MMP - 9 Gelatin , V , IV , VII , X , XI , elastin , laminin , III , II , I KCs , HSCs , hepatocytes Matrilysin MMP - 7 Entacin , gelatin , elastin , ﬁbronectin , vitronectin , laminin , ﬁbrinogen HSCs Metalloelastases MT - MMPs MMP - 12 Elastin , gelatins , IV , laminin , ﬁbronectin , entactin , vitronectin , proteoglycan , myelin basic protein , a1 - antitrypsin Macrophages MT - MMP - 1 MMP - 14 I , II , III , gelatin , ﬁbronectin , vitronectin , laminin , ﬁbrogen , pro - MMP - 2 , pro - MMP - 13 HSCs , MFs , KCs MT - MMP - 2 MMP - 15 Pro - MMP2 , ﬁbronectin , tenascin , laminin , aggrecan , perlecan Hepatocytes , bile duct epithelial cells TIMPs TIMP - 1 TIMP - 1 Pro - MMP - 9 , MMP - 1 , MMP - 2 , MMP - 3 , MMP - 13 HSCs , MFs , KCs , hepatocytes TIMP - 2 TIMP - 2 MT - MMPs , pro - MMP - 2 , MMP - 3 , MMP - 13 , MMP - 7 KCs , HSCs , MFs TIMP - 3 TIMP - 3 MT - MMPs , TACE , MMP - 13 — Others α 2 - Macroglobulin — Nonspeciﬁc proteinase scavenging — a Adapted from Reference 217 . Abbreviations : HSC , hepatic stellate cells ; KC , Kupffer cell ; MF , myoﬁbroblast ; MMP , matrix metalloproteinase ; PAI , plasminogen activator inhibitor ; TIMP , tissue inhibitor of metalloproteinase . cessation of toxin administration , liver pathol - ogy revealed the coexistence of macro - and micronodular cirrhosis . Micronodular cirrho - sis was progressively replaced by macronodular cirrhosis , which persisted up to one year postin - jury . Similar results were obtained in the bile duct occlusion model . The best - validated explanation for sponta - neous liver ﬁbrosis regression is provided by apoptosis of hepatic MF . Although this re - sponse has been well characterized in rodent models ( CCl 4 - and bile duct ligation – induced ﬁbrosis in rats ) , evidence in human disease is limited . Moreover , humanhepaticMFhaverel - atively higher levels of Bcl - 2 than do rodent cells , and they are therefore less susceptible to apoptosis ( 199 ) . Regulation of Myoﬁbroblast Apoptosis Because the switch from survival to apop - totic mode appears critical to the clearance of ﬁbrogenic MF during ﬁbrosis resolution , ex - tensive studies have explored its underlying mechanisms . For example , NF - κ B prevents 444 Hernandez - Gea · Friedman A nnu . R e v . P a t ho l . M ec h . D i s . 2011 . 6 : 425 - 456 . D o w n l o a d e d fr o m www . a nnu a l r e v i e w s . o r g by O tt e r b e i n U n i v e r s it y on 04 / 11 / 13 . F o r p e r s on a l u s e on l y . PM06CH18 - Friedman ARI 10 December 2010 14 : 38 apoptosis by maintaining expression of anti - apoptotic Bcl - 2 and suppressing JNK activa - tion of p53 , thereby inhibiting Bax and PUMA expression ( 104 , 200 ) . NF - κ B signaling refers to a family of dimeric transcription factors that regulate inﬂammation , innate and adaptive im - munity , wound - healing responses , and cell sur - vival . The molecules p50 , p52 , p65 , ReIB , and cReI are the ﬁve subunits of NF - κ B that usu - ally form dimers that operate as transcriptional activators ( 104 , 105 ) . Given its central role in preventing MF apoptosis , a more detailed summary of NF - κ B signaling is relevant . Activation of NF - κ B can occur via at least two signal transduction routes known as the canonical and noncanonical pathways . In the canonical pathway , the tran - scriptionally active NF - κ B is the heterodimer p65 : p50 , although it remains inactivated in the cytoplasm bound to its inhibitory protein , I κ B α . Various activators ( TNF - α , LPS ) can phosphorylate I κ B α and allow its removal , permitting NF - κ B to translocate to the nucleus and initiate transcription . When NF - κ B binds to its cognate promoters , it also induces the expression of I κ B α as an autoregulatory mech - anism to prevent persistent NF - κ B activation . NF - κ B proteins are expressed in qHSCs ; however , during cellular activation , the level of transcriptionally active NF - κ B increases dramatically , which is crucial for two reasons : ( a ) It induces the expression of proinﬂamma - tory and proﬁbrotic genes ( IL - 6 , IL - 8 , MCP - 1 , and ICAM1 ) , and ( b ) it confers resistance to apoptosis ( 106 ) . Despite the autoregulatory ability of NF - κ B to induce the expression of the I κ B α gene , HSC activation is associated with a paradoxically persistent suppression of I κ B α that is mediated by the transcriptional repressors CBF1 and MeCP2 ( 107 – 109 ) . Other molecules are implicated in MF apo - ptosis and survival . For example , FXR stim - ulates apoptosis via the induction of short heterodimer partner , a nuclear receptor that interacts with JunD , thereby preventing FXR from binding to the TIMP - 1 promoter ( 138 , 201 ) . C / EBP β induces apoptosis through caspase - 8 activation when it is phosphorylated Activated HSC Senescence Apoptosis Fibrilar ECM Matrix degradation FXRCEBPβCB2NGF Integrins α 3 β 2 p53 p16 p21 MMP - 13 MMP - 3 MMP - 9 MMP - 2 TIMPs Adiponectin Figure 7 Fibrosis resolution pathways . Two key events in ﬁbrosis resolution are the degradation of the ﬁbrillar extracellular matrix ( ECM ) and reduction in myoﬁbroblast survival . Tissue inhibitors of metalloproteinase ( TIMPs ) play an important role in preventing degradation of the accumulating matrix during liver injury by antagonizing the activity of metalloproteinases ( MMPs ) and promoting survival of activated hepatic stellate cells ( HSCs ) . In contrast , several mediators have been implicated in inducing apoptosis and clearance of HSCs . Similarly , p21 and p16 proteins can limit the ﬁbrogenic response by promoting senescence of HSCs . Abbreviations : CEBP , CCAAT - enhancer – binding protein ; FXR , farnesoid X receptor ; NGF , nerve growth factor . at threonine 127 by its regulatory molecule , RSK ( 127 ) . Endogenous cannabinoids can either stimu - lateorinhibitliverﬁbrosis , dependingonwhich receptor ( CB1 or CB2 ) is engaged . As men - tioned above , CB1 − / − mice are resistant to ﬁ - brosis induced by CCl 4 , thioacetamide , or bile duct ligation , and they display high rates of MF apoptosis ( 72 , 202 ) . Additionally , stimulation of CB2 induces MF apoptosis via induction of in - tracellular oxidative stress ( 73 ) . Nerve growth factor , a member of the mammalian neurotrophin family , can stimulate human melanocyte apoptosis via the inhibi - tion of NF - κ B ( 203 – 205 ) . HGF promotes human melanocyte apoptosis in vitro and in vivo and suppresses PDGF - stimulated proliferation . However , other antiﬁbrogenic effects have been attributed to the inhibition of TGF - β and to the reduced recruitment of www . annualreviews . org • Pathogenesis of Liver Fibrosis 445 A nnu . R e v . P a t ho l . M ec h . D i s . 2011 . 6 : 425 - 456 . D o w n l o a d e d fr o m www . a nnu a l r e v i e w s . o r g by O tt e r b e i n U n i v e r s it y on 04 / 11 / 13 . F o r p e r s on a l u s e on l y . PM06CH18 - Friedman ARI 10 December 2010 14 : 38 bone marrow – derived cells expressing MMP ( 206 – 208 ) . Adiponectin can suppress MF proliferation and stimulate their apoptosis ( 209 , 210 ) . This antiﬁbrotic effect has been partially attributed to the downstream effect of adiponectin in AMPK activation ( see above ) , which inhibits NF - κ B activation and RSK phosphorylation . In contrast to adiponectin , leptin promotes sur - vival of HSCs and is thus antiapoptotic ( 211 ) , as well as a proﬁbrogenic signal ( 212 ) . NK cells expressing NKG2D and TRAIL can directly induce MF apoptosis , although they are unable to kill qHSCs ( 167 ) . Interest - ingly , alcohol may abrogate the antiﬁbrotic ef - fects of NK cells by blocking their apoptotic activity ( 167 ) . Components of the ECM may also be in - volved in the regression process and human melanocyte apoptosis . For example , disruption of the integrin α 3 β 2 increases the ratio of Bax / Bcl2 and increases caspase - 3 activation , leading to human melanocyte apoptosis ( 213 ) . Hepatic Stellate Cells and Myoﬁbroblast Senescence Senescence of activated HSCs can limit the ﬁbrogenic response to tissue damage . Cellu - lar senescence is a stable form of cell - cycle arrest that is mediated by progressive telo - mere shortening and activation of a DNA damage response ( 214 , 215 ) . Senescent HSCs are characterized by expression of β - galactosidase ; induction of p53 , p21 , and p16 ; downregulation of matrix production ; and upregulation of matrix - degrading enzymes ( Figure 7 ) ( 214 ) . The immune system , espe - cially NK cells , plays an important role in the clearance of senescent cells . Although senes - cent HSCs may have a greater susceptibility to apoptosis ( 199 ) , the functional and regulatory relationship between apoptosis and senescence in this cell type remains to be clariﬁed . CONCLUDING COMMENTS The ﬁbrotic response to chronic liver injury depends on both resident and recruited cell types . Characterization of the ﬁbrogenic cell populations , evidence of their plasticity and pluripotentiality , and characterization of their cross talk with inﬂammatory cells will lead to important progress in our understanding of the disease . There have been major advances in characterizing the cellular and molecular biology , ﬁbrogenic pathways , and genetic determinants of ﬁbrosis progression and regression . Given such substantive progress in elucidating the underlying mechanisms , our current task is to translate these ﬁndings into the development of effective and targeted antiﬁbrotic therapies that will modify the natural history of chronic ﬁbrosing disease . SUMMARY POINTS 1 . Hepatic ﬁbrosis is the liver’s wound - healing response to any type of acute or chronic liver injury . 2 . Perpetuation of the ﬁbrotic reaction can lead to end - stage liver disease , cirrhosis , and hepatocellular carcinoma , whose incidence is increasing worldwide . 3 . Because they produce ECM following activation by liver injury , HSCs are the key effec - tors of the ﬁbrogenic process . However , other cellular sources implicated in hepatic scar production were recently identiﬁed . 4 . Hepaticﬁbrogenesisisacomplex , tightlyregulatedprocessinwhichgeneticdeterminants and the immune system make important contributions . 446 Hernandez - Gea · Friedman A nnu . R e v . P a t ho l . M ec h . D i s . 2011 . 6 : 425 - 456 . D o w n l o a d e d fr o m www . a nnu a l r e v i e w s . o r g by O tt e r b e i n U n i v e r s it y on 04 / 11 / 13 . F o r p e r s on a l u s e on l y . PM06CH18 - Friedman ARI 10 December 2010 14 : 38 5 . Advances in elucidating ﬁbrosis pathophysiology and regulation revealed the potential reversibility of ﬁbrosis through apoptosis and senescence of ﬁbrogenic cells . 6 . A future challenge will be developing therapeutic strategies that can modify the progres - sion of ﬁbrogenic disease . DISCLOSURE STATEMENT The authors are not aware of any afﬁliations , memberships , funding , or ﬁnancial holdings that might be perceived as affecting the objectivity of this review . LITERATURE CITED 1 . Describes the anatomical changes in the microvascular unit of the liver , or sinusoid , which is responsible for the impairment of hepatic metabolic exchange during cirrhosis . 1 . Schaffner F , Popper H . 1963 . Capillarization of hepatic sinusoids in man . Gastroenterology 44 : 239 – 42 2 . Cassiman D , Libbrecht L , Desmet V , Denef C , Roskams T . 2002 . Hepatic stellate cell / myoﬁbroblast subpopulations in ﬁbrotic human and rat livers . J . Hepatol . 36 : 200 – 9 3 . Fernandez M , Semela D , Bruix J , Colle I , Pinzani M , Bosch J . 2009 . Angiogenesis in liver disease . J . Hepatol . 50 : 604 – 20 4 . El - Serag HB , Rudolph KL . 2007 . Hepatocellular carcinoma : epidemiology and molecular carcinogen - esis . Gastroenterology 132 : 2557 – 76 5 . Schuppan D , Ruehl M , Somasundaram R , Hahn EG . 2001 . Matrix as modulator of stellate cell and hepatic ﬁbrogenesis . Semin . Liver Dis . 21 : 351 – 72 6 . GeertsA . 2001 . History , heterogeneity , developmentalbiology , andfunctionsofquiescenthepaticstellate cells . Semin . Liver Dis . 21 : 311 – 35 7 . Olaso E , Ikeda K , Eng FJ , Xu L , Wang LH , et al . 2001 . DDR2 receptor promotes MMP - 2 - mediated proliferation and invasion by hepatic stellate cells . J . Clin . Investig . 108 : 1369 – 78 8 . Gressner AM . 1995 . Cytokines and cellular crosstalk involved in the activation of fat - storing cells . J . Hepatol . 22 : 28 – 36 9 . SchuppanD , RuehlM , SomasundaramR , HahnEG . 2001 . Matrixasamodulatorofhepaticﬁbrogenesis . Semin . Liver Dis . 21 : 351 – 72 10 . Avraamides CJ , Garmy - Susini B , Varner JA . 2008 . Integrins in angiogenesis and lymphangiogenesis . Nat . Rev . Cancer 8 : 604 – 17 11 . Stupack DG . 2007 . The biology of integrins . Oncology 21 : 6 – 12 12 . Friedman SL . 2008 . Hepatic stellate cells—protean , multifunctional , and enigmatic cells of the liver . Physiol . Rev . 88 : 125 – 72 13 . Popov Y , Patsenker E , Stickel F , Zaks J , Bhaskar KR , et al . 2008 . Integrin α v β 6 is a marker of the progression of biliary and portal liver ﬁbrosis and a novel target for antiﬁbrotic therapies . J . Hepatol . 48 : 453 – 64 14 . Hehlgans S , Haase M , Cordes N . 2007 . Signaling via integrins : implications for cell survival and anti - cancer strategies . Biochim . Biophys . Acta 1775 : 163 – 80 15 . Omenetti A , Porrello A , Jung Y , Yang L , Popov Y , et al . 2008 . Hedgehog signaling regulates epithelial - mesenchymal transition during biliary ﬁbrosis in rodents and humans . J . Clin . Investig . 118 : 3331 – 42 16 . Omenetti A , Popov Y , Jung Y , Choi SS , Witek RP , et al . 2008 . The hedgehog pathway regulates remodelling responses to biliary obstruction in rats . Gut 57 : 1275 – 82 17 . Kesteloot F , Desmouliere A , Leclercq I , Thiry M , Arrese JE , et al . 2007 . ADAM metallopeptidase with thrombospondin type 1 motif 2 inactivation reduces the extent and stability of carbon tetrachloride – induced hepatic ﬁbrosis in mice . Hepatology 46 : 1620 – 31 18 . Niiya M , Uemura M , Zheng XW , Pollak ES , Dockal M , et al . 2006 . Increased ADAMTS - 13 proteolytic activity in rat hepatic stellate cells upon activation in vitro and in vivo . J . Thromb . Haemost . 4 : 1063 – 70 www . annualreviews . org • Pathogenesis of Liver Fibrosis 447 A nnu . R e v . P a t ho l . M ec h . D i s . 2011 . 6 : 425 - 456 . D o w n l o a d e d fr o m www . a nnu a l r e v i e w s . o r g by O tt e r b e i n U n i v e r s it y on 04 / 11 / 13 . F o r p e r s on a l u s e on l y . PM06CH18 - Friedman ARI 10 December 2010 14 : 38 19 . Olaso E , Labrador JP , Wang L , Ikeda K , Eng FJ , et al . 2002 . Discoidin domain receptor 2 regulates ﬁbroblast proliferation and migration through the extracellular matrix in association with transcriptional activation of matrix metalloproteinase 2 . J . Biol . Chem . 277 : 3606 – 13 20 . Ikeda K , Wang LH , Torres R , Zhao H , Olaso E , et al . 2002 . Discoidin domain receptor 2 interacts with Src and Shc following its activation by type I collagen . J . Biol . Chem . 277 : 19206 – 12 21 . Labrador JP , Azcoitia V , Tuckermann J , Lin C , Olaso E , et al . 2001 . The collagen receptor DDR2 regulates proliferation and its elimination leads to dwarﬁsm . EMBO Rep . 2 : 446 – 52 22 . Mao TK , Kimura Y , Kenny TP , Branchi A , Gishi RG , et al . 2002 . Elevated expression of tyrosine kinase DDR2 in primary biliary cirrhosis . Autoimmunity 35 : 521 – 29 23 . Friedman SL . 2010 . Evolving challenges in hepatic ﬁbrosis . Nat . Rev . Gastroenterol . Hepatol . 7 : 425 – 36 24 . Reynaert H , Thompson MG , Thomas T , Geerts A . 2002 . Hepatic stellate cells : role in microcirculation and pathophysiology of portal hypertension . Gut 50 : 571 – 81 25 . Friedman SL . 2008 . Mechanisms of hepatic ﬁbrogenesis . Gastroenterology 134 : 1655 – 69 26 . Kalluri R , Zeisberg M . 2006 . Fibroblasts in cancer . Nat . Rev . Cancer 6 : 392 – 401 27 . Novo E , di Bonzo LV , Cannito S , Colombatto S , Parola M . 2009 . Hepatic myoﬁbroblasts : a heteroge - neous population of multifunctional cells in liver ﬁbrogenesis . Int . J . Biochem . Cell Biol . 41 : 2089 – 93 28 . Parola M , Marra F , Pinzani M . 2008 . Myoﬁbroblast - like cells and liver ﬁbrogenesis : emerging concepts in a rapidly moving scenario . Mol . Aspects Med . 29 : 58 – 66 29 . Soliman EM , Rodrigues MA , Gomes DA , Sheung N , Yu J , et al . 2009 . Intracellular calcium signals regulate growth of hepatic stellate cells via speciﬁc effects on cell cycle progression . Cell Calcium 45 : 284 – 92 30 . Baertschiger RM , Serre - Beinier V , Morel P , Bosco D , Peyrou M , et al . 2009 . Fibrogenic potential of human multipotent mesenchymal stromal cells in injured liver . PLoS One 4 : e6657 31 . Russo FP , Alison MR , Bigger BW , Amofah E , Florou A , et al . 2006 . The bone marrow functionally contributes to liver ﬁbrosis . Gastroenterology 130 : 1807 – 21 32 . Forbes SJ , Russo FP , Rey V , Burra P , Rugge M , et al . 2004 . A signiﬁcant proportion of myoﬁbroblasts are of bone marrow origin in human liver ﬁbrosis . Gastroenterology 126 : 955 – 63 33 . Fujimiya T , Liu J , Kojima H , Shirafuji S , Kimura H , Fujimiya M . 2009 . Pathological roles of bone marrow – derived stellate cells in a mouse model of alcohol - induced fatty liver . Am . J . Physiol . Gastrointest . Liver Physiol . 297 : G451 – 60 34 . Higashiyama R , Moro T , Nakao S , Mikami K , Fukumitsu H , et al . 2009 . Negligible contribution of bone marrow – derived cells to collagen production during hepatic ﬁbrogenesis in mice . Gastroenterology 137 : 1459 – 66 e1 35 . Choi SS , Diehl AM . 2009 . Epithelial - to - mesenchymal transitions in the liver . Hepatology 50 : 2007 – 13 36 . Kalluri R , Neilson EG . 2003 . Epithelial - mesenchymal transition and its implications for ﬁbrosis . J . Clin . Investig . 112 : 1776 – 84 37 . Okada H , Strutz F , Danoff TM , Kalluri R , Neilson EG . 1996 . Possible mechanisms of renal ﬁbrosis . Contrib . Nephrol . 118 : 147 – 54 38 . LeeJM , DedharS , KalluriR , ThompsonEW . 2006 . Theepithelial - mesenchymaltransition : newinsights in signaling , development , and disease . J . Cell Biol . 172 : 973 – 81 39 . Zeisberg M , Hanai J , Sugimoto H , Mammoto T , Charytan D , et al . 2003 . BMP - 7 counteracts TGF - β 1 - induced epithelial - to - mesenchymal transition and reverses chronic renal injury . Nat . Med . 9 : 964 – 68 40 . Kalluri R , Weinberg RA . 2009 . The basics of epithelial - mesenchymal transition . J . Clin . Investig . 119 : 1420 – 28 41 . Zavadil J , Bottinger EP . 2005 . TGF - β and epithelial - to - mesenchymal transitions . Oncogene 24 : 5764 – 74 42 . Choi SS , Omenetti A , Witek RP , Moylan CA , Syn WK , et al . 2009 . Hedgehog pathway activation and epithelial - to - mesenchymal transitions during myoﬁbroblastic transformation of rat hepatic cells in culture and cirrhosis . Am . J . Physiol . Gastrointest . Liver Physiol . 297 : G1093 – 106 43 . Xia JL , Dai C , Michalopoulos GK , Liu Y . 2006 . Hepatocyte growth factor attenuates liver ﬁbrosis induced by bile duct ligation . Am . J . Pathol . 168 : 1500 – 12 44 . Diaz R , Kim JW , Hui JJ , Li Z , Swain GP , et al . 2008 . Evidence for the epithelial to mesenchymal transition in biliary atresia ﬁbrosis . Hum . Pathol . 39 : 102 – 15 448 Hernandez - Gea · Friedman A nnu . R e v . P a t ho l . M ec h . D i s . 2011 . 6 : 425 - 456 . D o w n l o a d e d fr o m www . a nnu a l r e v i e w s . o r g by O tt e r b e i n U n i v e r s it y on 04 / 11 / 13 . F o r p e r s on a l u s e on l y . PM06CH18 - Friedman ARI 10 December 2010 14 : 38 45 . Rygiel KA , Robertson H , Marshall HL , Pekalski M , Zhao L , et al . 2008 . Epithelial - mesenchymal transi - tion contributes to portal tract ﬁbrogenesis during human chronic liver disease . Lab . Investig . 88 : 112 – 23 46 . Kaimori A , Potter J , Kaimori JY , Wang C , Mezey E , Koteish A . 2007 . Transforming growth factor β 1 induces an epithelial - to - mesenchymal transition state in mouse hepatocytes in vitro . J . Biol . Chem . 282 : 22089 – 101 47 . Demonstrates the potential contributions of hepatocytes to the generation of ﬁbrogenic cells in vivo following liver injury and in culture liver injury . 47 . Zeisberg M , Yang C , Martino M , Duncan MB , Rieder F , et al . 2007 . Fibroblasts derive from hepatocytes in liver ﬁbrosis via epithelial to mesenchymal transition . J . Biol . Chem . 282 : 23337 – 47 48 . Refutes the concept of EMT and contradicts the ﬁndings of Reference 47 : No hepatocyte - derived collagen type I – expressing cells were identiﬁed after induction of liver injury . 48 . Taura K , Miura K , Iwaisako K , Osterreicher CH , Kodama Y , et al . 2009 . Hepatocytes do not undergo epithelial - mesenchymal transition in liver ﬁbrosis in mice . Hepatology 51 : 1027 – 36 49 . Wells RG . 2010 . The epithelial - to - mesenchymal transition in liver ﬁbrosis : here today , gone tomorrow ? Hepatology 51 : 737 – 40 50 . Potenta S , Zeisberg E , Kalluri R . 2008 . The role of endothelial - to - mesenchymal transition in cancer progression . Br . J . Cancer 99 : 1375 – 79 51 . Zeisberg EM , Tarnavski O , Zeisberg M , Dorfman AL , McMullen JR , et al . 2007 . Endothelial - to - mesenchymal transition contributes to cardiac ﬁbrosis . Nat . Med . 13 : 952 – 61 52 . Marra F , Bertolani C . 2009 . Adipokines in liver diseases . Hepatology 50 : 957 – 69 53 . MarraF . 2007 . Leptinandlivertissuerepair : Dorodentmodelsprovidetheanswers ? J . Hepatol . 46 : 12 – 18 54 . Ikejima K , Takei Y , Honda H , Hirose M , Yoshikawa M , et al . 2002 . Leptin receptor – mediated signaling regulateshepaticﬁbrogenesisandremodelingofextracellularmatrixintherat . Gastroenterology 122 : 1399 – 410 55 . Saxena NK , Sharma D , Ding X , Lin S , Marra F , et al . 2007 . Concomitant activation of the JAK / STAT , PI3K / AKT , and ERK signaling is involved in leptin - mediated promotion of invasion and migration of hepatocellular carcinoma cells . Cancer Res . 67 : 2497 – 507 56 . Fava G , Alpini G , Rychlicki C , Saccomanno S , DeMorrow S , et al . 2008 . Leptin enhances cholangio - carcinoma cell growth . Cancer Res . 68 : 6752 – 61 57 . Marra F . 2002 . Leptin and liver ﬁbrosis : a matter of fat . Gastroenterology 122 : 1529 – 32 58 . Ding X , Saxena NK , Lin S , Xu A , Srinivasan S , Anania FA . 2005 . The roles of leptin and adiponectin : a novel paradigm in adipocytokine regulation of liver ﬁbrosis and stellate cell biology . Am . J . Pathol . 166 : 1655 – 69 59 . Moreno M , Bataller R . 2008 . Cytokines and renin - angiotensin system signaling in hepatic ﬁbrosis . Clin . Liver Dis . 12 : 825 – 52 60 . Pinzani M , Gesualdo L , Sabbah GM , Abboud HE . 1989 . Effects of platelet - derived growth factor and other polypeptide mitogens on DNA synthesis and growth of cultured rat liver fat - storing cells . J . Clin . Investig . 84 : 1786 – 93 61 . Borkham - Kamphorst E , van Roeyen CR , Ostendorf T , Floege J , Gressner AM , Weiskirchen R . 2007 . Pro - ﬁbrogenic potential of PDGF - D in liver ﬁbrosis . J . Hepatol . 46 : 1064 – 74 62 . Pinzani M , Milani S , Herbst H , DeFranco R , Grappone C , et al . 1996 . Expression of platelet - derived growth factor and its receptors in normal human liver and during active hepatic ﬁbrogenesis . Am . J . Pathol . 148 : 785 – 800 63 . Wong L , Yamasaki G , Johnson RJ , Friedman SL . 1994 . Induction of β - platelet - derived growth factor receptorinrathepaticlipocytesduringcellularactivationinvivoandinculture . J . Clin . Investig . 94 : 1563 – 69 64 . Inagaki Y , Okazaki I . 2007 . Emerging insights into TGF β and Smad signaling in hepatic ﬁbrogenesis . Gut 56 : 284 – 92 65 . Novo E , Cannito S , Zamara E , Valfre di Bonzo L , Caligiuri A , et al . 2007 . Proangiogenic cytokines as hypoxia - dependentfactorsstimulatingmigrationofhumanhepaticstellatecells . Am . J . Pathol . 170 : 1942 – 53 66 . Yoshiji H , Kuriyama S , Yoshii J , Ikenaka Y , Noguchi R , et al . 2003 . Vascular endothelial growth factor and receptor interaction is a prerequisite for murine hepatic ﬁbrogenesis . Gut 52 : 1347 – 54 67 . Yu C , Wang F , Jin C , Huang X , Miller DL , et al . 2003 . Role of ﬁbroblast growth factor type 1 and 2 in carbon tetrachloride – induced hepatic injury and ﬁbrogenesis . Am . J . Pathol . 163 : 1653 – 62 68 . CanturkNZ , CanturkZ , OzdenM , DalcikH , YardimogluM , TulubasF . 2003 . ProtectiveeffectofIGF - 1 on experimental liver cirrhosis – induced common bile duct ligation . Hepatogastroenterology 50 : 2061 – 66 www . annualreviews . org • Pathogenesis of Liver Fibrosis 449 A nnu . R e v . P a t ho l . M ec h . D i s . 2011 . 6 : 425 - 456 . D o w n l o a d e d fr o m www . a nnu a l r e v i e w s . o r g by O tt e r b e i n U n i v e r s it y on 04 / 11 / 13 . F o r p e r s on a l u s e on l y . PM06CH18 - Friedman ARI 10 December 2010 14 : 38 69 . Sanz S , Pucilowska JB , Liu S , Rodriguez - Ortigosa CM , Lund PK , et al . 2005 . Expression of insulin - like growth factor I by activated hepatic stellate cells reduces ﬁbrogenesis and enhances regeneration after liver injury . Gut 54 : 134 – 41 70 . Reichenbach V , Ros J , Jimenez W . 2009 . Endogenous cannabinoids in liver disease : many darts for a single target . Gastroenterol . Hepatol . 33 : 323 – 29 71 . Siegmund SV , Schwabe RF . 2008 . Endocannabinoids and liver disease . II . Endocannabinoids in the pathogenesis and treatment of liver ﬁbrosis . Am . J . Physiol . Gastrointest . Liver Physiol . 294 : G357 – 62 72 . Teixeira - Clerc F , Julien B , Grenard P , Tran Van Nhieu J , Deveaux V , et al . 2006 . CB1 cannabinoid receptor antagonism : a new strategy for the treatment of liver ﬁbrosis . Nat . Med . 12 : 671 – 76 73 . Julien B , Grenard P , Teixeira - Clerc F , Van Nhieu JT , Li L , et al . 2005 . Antiﬁbrogenic role of the cannabinoid receptor CB2 in the liver . Gastroenterology 128 : 742 – 55 74 . SimsDE . 1991 . Recentadvancesinpericytebiology—implicationsforhealthanddisease . Can . J . Cardiol . 7 : 431 – 43 75 . Feng HQ , Weymouth ND , Rockey DC . 2009 . Endothelin antagonism in portal hypertensive mice : implications for endothelin receptor – speciﬁc signaling in liver disease . Am . J . Physiol . Gastrointest . Liver Physiol . 297 : G27 – 33 76 . Thimgan MS , Yee HF Jr . 1999 . Quantitation of rat hepatic stellate cell contraction : stellate cells’ con - tribution to sinusoidal resistance . Am . J . Physiol . 277 : G137 – 43 77 . Shao R , Rockey DC . 2002 . Effects of endothelins on hepatic stellate cell synthesis of endothelin - 1 during hepatic wound healing . J . Cell Physiol . 191 : 342 – 50 78 . Rockey DC . 2001 . Cellular pathophysiology of portal hypertension and prospects for management with gene therapy . Clin . Liver Dis . 5 : 851 – 65 79 . Shao R , Yan W , Rockey DC . 1999 . Regulation of endothelin - 1 synthesis by endothelin - converting enzyme - 1 during wound healing . J . Biol . Chem . 274 : 3228 – 34 80 . Housset C , Rockey DC , Bissell DM . 1993 . Endothelin receptors in rat liver : lipocytes as a contractile target for endothelin 1 . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci USA 90 : 9266 – 70 81 . Rockey DC . 2003 . Vascular mediators in the injured liver . Hepatology 37 : 4 – 12 82 . Loureiro - Silva MR , Cadelina GW , Groszmann RJ . 2003 . Deﬁcit in nitric oxide production in cirrhotic rat livers is located in the sinusoidal and postsinusoidal areas . Am . J . Physiol . Gastrointest . Liver Physiol . 284 : G567 – 74 83 . Bataller R , Sancho - Bru P , Gines P , Brenner DA . 2005 . Liver ﬁbrogenesis : a new role for the renin - angiotensin system . Antioxid . Redox Signal . 7 : 1346 – 55 84 . Bataller R , Sancho - Bru P , Gines P , Lora JM , Al - Garawi A , et al . 2003 . Activated human hepatic stellate cells express the renin - angiotensin system and synthesize angiotensin II . Gastroenterology 125 : 117 – 25 85 . Bosch J , Arroyo V , Betriu A , Mas A , Carrilho F , et al . 1980 . Hepatic hemodynamics and the renin - angiotensin - aldosterone system in cirrhosis . Gastroenterology 78 : 92 – 99 86 . Oakley F , Teoh V , Ching ASG , Bataller R , Colmenero J , et al . 2009 . Angiotensin II activates I kappa B kinase phosphorylation of RelA at Ser 536 to promote myoﬁbroblast survival and liver ﬁbrosis . Gas - troenterology 136 : 2334 – 44 87 . LubelJS , HerathCB , TchongueJ , GraceJ , JiaZ , etal . 2009 . Angiotensin - ( 1 – 7 ) , analternativemetabolite of the renin - angiotensin system , is up - regulated in human liver disease and has antiﬁbrotic activity in the bile - duct - ligated rat . Clin . Sci . 117 : 375 – 86 88 . Osterreicher CH , Taura K , De Minicis S , Seki E , Penz - Osterreicher M , et al . 2009 . Angiotensin - converting enzyme 2 inhibits liver ﬁbrosis in mice . Hepatology 50 : 929 – 38 89 . Suematsu M , Goda N , Sano T , Kashiwagi S , Egawa T , et al . 1995 . Carbon monoxide : an endogenous modulator of sinusoidal tone in the perfused rat liver . J . Clin . Investig . 96 : 2431 – 37 90 . Gorbig MN , Gines P , Bataller R , Nicolas JM , Garcia - Ramallo E , et al . 1999 . Atrial natriuretic peptide antagonizes endothelin - induced calcium increase and cell contraction in cultured human hepatic stellate cells . Hepatology 30 : 501 – 9 91 . Kawada N , Klein H , Decker K . 1992 . Eicosanoid - mediated contractility of hepatic stellate cells . Biochem . J . 285 : 367 – 71 92 . Tao J , Mallat A , Gallois C , Belmadani S , Mery PF , et al . 1999 . Biological effects of C - type natriuretic peptide in human myoﬁbroblastic hepatic stellate cells . J . Biol . Chem . 274 : 23761 – 69 450 Hernandez - Gea · Friedman A nnu . R e v . P a t ho l . M ec h . D i s . 2011 . 6 : 425 - 456 . D o w n l o a d e d fr o m www . a nnu a l r e v i e w s . o r g by O tt e r b e i n U n i v e r s it y on 04 / 11 / 13 . F o r p e r s on a l u s e on l y . PM06CH18 - Friedman ARI 10 December 2010 14 : 38 93 . YanaseM , IkedaH , MatsuiA , MaekawaH , NoiriE , etal . 2000 . Lysophosphatidicacidenhancescollagen gel contraction by hepatic stellate cells : association with rho - kinase . Biochem . Biophys . Res . Commun . 277 : 72 – 78 94 . Ueno T , Tanikawa K . 1997 . Intralobular innervation and lipocyte contractility in the liver . Nutrition 13 : 141 – 48 95 . Hashmi AZ , Hakim W , Kruglov EA , Watanabe A , Watkins W , et al . 2007 . Adenosine inhibits cytoso - lic calcium signals and chemotaxis in hepatic stellate cells . Am . J . Physiol . Gastrointest . Liver Physiol . 292 : G395 – 401 96 . Lechuga CG , Hernandez - Nazara ZH , Hernandez E , Bustamante M , Desierto G , et al . 2006 . PI3K is involved in PDGF - β receptor upregulation post - PDGF - BB treatment in mouse HSC . Am . J . Physiol . Gastrointest . Liver Physiol . 291 : G1051 – 61 97 . Alefﬁ S , Petrai I , Bertolani C , Parola M , Colombatto S , et al . 2005 . Upregulation of proinﬂammatory and proangiogenic cytokines by leptin in human hepatic stellate cells . Hepatology 42 : 1339 – 48 98 . Bataller R , Schwabe RF , Choi YH , Yang L , Paik YH , et al . 2003 . NADPH oxidase signal transduces angiotensin II in hepatic stellate cells and is critical in hepatic ﬁbrosis . J . Clin . Investig . 112 : 1383 – 94 99 . PaezJ , SellersWR . 2003 . PI3K / PTEN / AKTpathway . Acriticalmediatorofoncogenicsignaling . Cancer Treat . Res . 115 : 145 – 67 100 . Pinzani M . 2002 . PDGF and signal transduction in hepatic stellate cells . Front . Biosci . 7 : 1720 – 26 101 . Bonacchi A , Romagnani P , Romanelli RG , Efsen E , Annunziato F , et al . 2001 . Signal transduction by the chemokine receptor CXCR3 : activation of Ras / ERK , Src , and phosphatidylinositol 3 - kinase / Akt controls cell migration and proliferation in human vascular pericytes . J . Biol . Chem . 276 : 9945 – 54 102 . Inagaki Y , Okazaki I . 2007 . Emerging insights into Transforming growth factor β Smad signal in hepatic ﬁbrogenesis . Gut 56 : 284 – 92 103 . Breitkopf K , Godoy P , Ciuclan L , Singer MV , Dooley S . 2006 . TGF - β / Smad signaling in the injured liver . Z . Gastroenterol . 44 : 57 – 66 104 . Chakraborty BC , Mann D . 2010 . NF - κ B signaling : embracing complexity to achieve translation . J . Hepatology 52 : 285 – 91 105 . Mann J , Mann DA . 2009 . Transcriptional regulation of hepatic stellate cells . Adv . Drug . Deliv . Rev . 61 : 497 – 512 106 . Tergaonkar V . 2006 . NF κ B pathway : a good signaling paradigm and therapeutic target . Int . J . Biochem . Cell Biol . 38 : 1647 – 53 107 . Oakley F , Mann J , Ruddell RG , Pickford J , Weinmaster G , Mann DA . 2003 . Basal expression of I κ B α is controlled by the mammalian transcriptional repressor RBP - J ( CBF1 ) and its activator Notch1 . J . Biol . Chem . 278 : 24359 – 70 108 . Reveals the importance of epigenetic regulation in HSC activation through DNA methylation via induction of MeCP and methylation inhibition by 5 - aza - 2 (cid:3) - deoxycytidine . 108 . Mann J , Oakley F , Akiboye F , Elsharkawy A , Thorne AW , Mann DA . 2007 . Regulation of myoﬁbroblast transdifferentiation by DNA methylation and MeCP2 : implications for wound healing and ﬁbrogenesis . Cell Death Differ . 14 : 275 – 85 109 . Elsharkawy AM , Mann DA . 2007 . Nuclear factor – κ B and the hepatic inﬂammation - ﬁbrosis - cancer axis . Hepatology 46 : 590 – 97 110 . Shi Z , Wakil AE , Rockey DC . 1997 . Strain - speciﬁc differences in mouse hepatic wound healing are mediated by divergent T helper cytokine responses . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA 94 : 10663 – 68 111 . Jiang F , Parsons CJ , Stefanovic B . 2006 . Gene expression proﬁle of quiescent and activated rat hepatic stellate cells implicates Wnt signaling pathway in activation . J . Hepatol . 45 : 401 – 9 112 . Cao Q , Mak KM , Ren C , Lieber CS . 2004 . Leptin stimulates tissue inhibitor of metalloproteinase - 1 in human hepatic stellate cells : respective roles of the JAK / STAT and JAK - mediated H 2 O 2 - dependent MAPK pathways . J . Biol . Chem . 279 : 4292 – 304 113 . Gao B . 2005 . Cytokines , STATs and liver disease . Cell Mol . Immunol . 2 : 92 – 100 114 . Underscores the emerging role of NK cells in clearing HSCs and preventing their expansion via STAT1 . 114 . Jeong WI , Park O , Radaeva S , Gao B . 2006 . STAT1 inhibits liver ﬁbrosis in mice by inhibiting stellate cell proliferation and stimulating NK cell cytotoxicity . Hepatology 44 : 1441 – 51 115 . AdachiM , BrennerDA . 2008 . Highmolecularweightadiponectininhibitsproliferationofhepaticstellate cells via activation of adenosine monophosphate – activated protein kinase . Hepatology 47 : 677 – 85 116 . Teng Y , Zeisberg M , Kalluri R . 2007 . Transcriptional regulation of epithelial - mesenchymal transition . J . Clin . Investig . 117 : 304 – 6 www . annualreviews . org • Pathogenesis of Liver Fibrosis 451 A nnu . R e v . P a t ho l . M ec h . D i s . 2011 . 6 : 425 - 456 . D o w n l o a d e d fr o m www . a nnu a l r e v i e w s . o r g by O tt e r b e i n U n i v e r s it y on 04 / 11 / 13 . F o r p e r s on a l u s e on l y . PM06CH18 - Friedman ARI 10 December 2010 14 : 38 117 . Eng FJ , Friedman SL . 2001 . Transcriptional regulation in hepatic stellate cells . Semin . Liver Dis . 21 : 385 – 95 118 . Vincent KJ , Jones E , Arthur MJ , Smart DE , Trim J , et al . 2001 . Regulation of E - box DNA binding during in vivo and in vitro activation of rat and human hepatic stellate cells . Gut 49 : 713 – 19 119 . Wiercinska E , Wickert L , Denecke B , Said HM , Hamzavi J , et al . 2006 . Id1 is a critical mediator in TGF - β - induced transdifferentiation of rat hepatic stellate cells . Hepatology 43 : 1032 – 41 120 . Tajima K , Terai S , Takami T , Kawaguchi K , Okita K , Sakaida I . 2007 . Importance of inhibitor of DNA binding / differentiation 2 in hepatic stellate cell differentiation and proliferation . Hepatol . Res . 37 : 647 – 55 121 . Mann DA , Smart DE . 2002 . Transcriptional regulation of hepatic stellate cell activation . Gut 50 : 891 – 96 122 . Huang GC , Zhang JS , Tang QQ . 2004 . Involvement of C / EBP α gene in in vitro activation of rat hepatic stellate cells . Biochem . Biophys . Res . Commun . 324 : 1309 – 18 123 . Zhang JW , Tang QQ , Vinson C , Lane MD . 2004 . Dominant - negative C / EBP disrupts mitotic clonal expansion and differentiation of 3T3 - L1 preadipocytes . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA 101 : 43 – 47 124 . Geier A , Kim SK , Gerloff T , Dietrich CG , Lammert F , et al . 2002 . Hepatobiliary organic anion trans - porters are differentially regulated in acute toxic liver injury induced by carbon tetrachloride . J . Hepatol . 37 : 198 – 205 125 . Greenwel P , Dominguez - Rosales JA , Mavi G , Rivas - Estilla AM , Rojkind M . 2000 . Hydrogen peroxide : a link between acetaldehyde - elicited α 1 ( I ) collagen gene up - regulation and oxidative stress in mouse hepatic stellate cells . Hepatology 31 : 109 – 16 126 . Iraburu MJ , Dominguez - Rosales JA , Fontana L , Auster A , Garcia - Trevijano ER , et al . 2000 . Tumor necrosisfactor α down - regulatesexpressionofthe α 1 ( I ) collagengeneinrathepaticstellatecellsthrough a p20C / EBP β - and C / EBP δ - dependent mechanism . Hepatology 31 : 1086 – 93 127 . Buck M , Chojkier M . 2007 . A ribosomal S - 6 kinase – mediated signal to C / EBP - β is critical for the development of liver ﬁbrosis . PLoS ONE 2 : e1372 128 . Potthoff MJ , Olson EN . 2007 . MEF2 : a central regulator of diverse developmental programs . Develop - ment 134 : 4131 – 40 129 . Wang X , Tang X , Gong X , Albanis E , Friedman SL , Mao Z . 2004 . Regulation of hepatic stellate cell activation and growth by transcription factor myocyte enhancer factor 2 . Gastroenterology 127 : 1174 – 88 130 . Herrmann J , Borkham - Kamphorst E , Haas U , Van de Leur E , Fraga MF , et al . 2006 . The expression of CSRP2 encoding the LIM domain protein CRP2 is mediated by TGF - β in smooth muscle and hepatic stellate cells . Biochem . Biophys . Res . Commun . 345 : 1526 – 35 131 . Demonstrates that the LIM homeobox gene Lhx2 is a transcription factor that represses the activation of HSCs and that its loss provokes ﬁbrogenesis in vivo . 131 . Wandzioch E , Kolterud A , Jacobsson M , Friedman SL , Carlsson L . 2004 . Lhx2 − / − mice develop liver ﬁbrosis . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA 101 : 16549 – 54 132 . ParkEY , ShinSM , MaCJ , KimYC , KimSG . 2005 . Meso - dihydroguaiareticacidfrom Machilusthunbergii down - regulates TGF - β 1 gene expression in activated hepatic stellate cells via inhibition of AP - 1 activity . Planta Med . 71 : 393 – 38 133 . ChenA , BenoDWA , DavisBH . 1996 . SuppressionofstellatecelltypeIcollagengeneexpressioninvolves AP - 2 transmodulation of nuclear factor 1 – dependent gene transcription . J . Biol . Chem . 271 : 25994 – 98 134 . Anania FA , Potter JJ , Rennie - Tankersley L , Mezey E . 1995 . Effects of acetaldehyde on nuclear protein bindingtothenuclearfactorIconsensussequenceinthe α 2 ( I ) collagenpromoter . Hepatology 21 : 1640 – 48 135 . Bell DM , Leung KK , Wheatley SC , Ng LJ , Zhou S , et al . 1997 . SOX9 directly regulates the type - II collagen gene . Nat . Genet . 16 : 174 – 78 136 . Milliano MT , Luxon BA . 2005 . Rat hepatic stellate cells become retinoid unresponsive during activation . Hepatol . Res . 33 : 225 – 33 137 . Kuipers F , Claudel T , Sturm E , Staels B . 2004 . The farnesoid X receptor ( FXR ) as modulator of bile acid metabolism . Rev . Endocr . Metab . Disord . 5 : 319 – 26 138 . Fiorucci S , Antonelli E , Rizzo G , Renga B , Mencarelli A , et al . 2004 . The nuclear receptor SHP mediates inhibition of hepatic stellate cells by FXR and protects against liver ﬁbrosis . Gastroenterology 127 : 1497 – 512 139 . Haughton EL , Tucker SJ , Marek CJ , Durward E , Leel V , et al . 2006 . Pregnane X receptor activators inhibit human hepatic stellate cell transdifferentiation in vitro . Gastroenterology 131 : 194 – 209 452 Hernandez - Gea · Friedman A nnu . R e v . P a t ho l . M ec h . D i s . 2011 . 6 : 425 - 456 . D o w n l o a d e d fr o m www . a nnu a l r e v i e w s . o r g by O tt e r b e i n U n i v e r s it y on 04 / 11 / 13 . F o r p e r s on a l u s e on l y . PM06CH18 - Friedman ARI 10 December 2010 14 : 38 140 . Hazra S , Xiong S , Wang J , Rippe RA , Krishna V , et al . 2004 . Peroxisome proliferator – activated receptor γ induces a phenotypic switch from activated to quiescent hepatic stellate cells . J . Biol . Chem . 279 : 11392 – 401 141 . Tsukamoto H . 2005 . Adipogenic phenotype of hepatic stellate cells . Alcohol . Clin . Exp . Res . 29 : 132 – 33S 142 . Lin J , Chen A . 2008 . Activation of peroxisome proliferator – activated receptor γ by curcumin blocks the signaling pathways for PDGF and EGF in hepatic stellate cells . Lab . Investig . 88 : 529 – 40 143 . Xu J , Fu Y , Chen A . 2003 . Activation of peroxisome proliferator – activated receptor γ contributes to the inhibitory effects of curcumin on rat hepatic stellate cell growth . Am . J . Physiol . Gastrointest . Liver Physiol . 285 : G20 – 30 144 . Ohata M , Lin M , Satre M , Tsukamoto H . 1997 . Diminished retinoic acid signaling in hepatic stellate cells in cholestatic liver ﬁbrosis . Am . J . Physiol . 272 : G589 – 96 145 . Zvibel I , Bar - Zohar D , Kloog Y , Oren R , Reif S . 2008 . The effect of Ras inhibition on the proliferation , apoptosis and matrix metalloproteases activity in rat hepatic stellate cells . Dig . Dis . Sci . 53 : 1048 – 53 146 . MannDA , MannJ . 2008 . Epigeneticregulationofhepaticstellatecellactivation . J . Gastroenterol . Hepatol . 23 ( Suppl . 1 ) : S108 – 11 147 . Niki T , Rombouts K , De Bleser P , De Smet K , Rogiers V , et al . 1999 . A histone deacetylase inhibitor , trichostatin A , suppresses myoﬁbroblastic differentiation of rat hepatic stellate cells in primary culture . Hepatology 29 : 858 – 67 148 . Rombouts K , Knittel T , Machesky L , Braet F , Wielant A , et al . 2002 . Actin ﬁlament formation , reorga - nization and migration are impaired in hepatic stellate cells under inﬂuence of trichostatin A , a histone deacetylase inhibitor . J . Hepatol . 37 : 788 – 96 149 . KimJS , ShuklaSD . 2005 . HistoneH3modiﬁcationsinrathepaticstellatecellsbyethanol . AlcoholAlcohol . 40 : 367 – 72 150 . Bala S , Marcos M , Szabo G . 2009 . Emerging role of microRNAs in liver diseases . World J . Gastroenterol . 15 : 5633 – 40 151 . Carthew RW , Sontheimer EJ . 2009 . Origins and mechanisms of miRNAs and siRNAs . Cell 136 : 642 – 55 152 . Winter J , Jung S , Keller S , Gregory RI , Diederichs S . 2009 . Many roads to maturity : microRNA bio - genesis pathways and their regulation . Nat . Cell Biol . 11 : 228 – 34 153 . Guo CJ , Pan Q , Cheng T , Jiang B , Chen GY , Li DG . 2009 . Changes in microRNAs associated with hepatic stellate cell activation status identify signaling pathways . FEBS J . 276 : 5163 – 76 154 . Venugopal SK , Jiang J , Kim TH , Li Y , Wang SS , et al . 2009 . Liver ﬁbrosis causes down - regulation of miRNA - 150 and miRNA - 194 in hepatic stellate cells and their overexpression causes decreased stellate cell activation . Am . J . Physiol . Gastrointest . Liver Physiol . 298 : 101 – 6 155 . Ji J , Zhang J , Huang G , Qian J , Wang X , Mei S . 2009 . Over - expressed microRNA - 27a and 27b inﬂuence fat accumulation and cell proliferation during rat hepatic stellate cell activation . FEBS Lett . 583 : 759 – 66 156 . Bai X , Wu L , Liang T , Liu Z , Li J , et al . 2008 . Overexpression of myocyte enhancer factor 2 and histone hyperacetylation in hepatocellular carcinoma . J . Cancer Res . Clin . Oncol . 134 : 83 – 91 157 . Gao B , Jeong WI , Tian Z . 2008 . Liver : an organ with predominant innate immunity . Hepatology 47 : 729 – 36 158 . Szabo G , Mandrekar P , Dolganiuc A . 2007 . Innate immune response and hepatic inﬂammation . Semin . Liver Dis . 27 : 339 – 50 159 . Paik YH , Schwabe RF , Bataller R , Russo MP , Jobin C , Brenner DA . 2003 . Toll - like receptor 4 medi - ates inﬂammatory signaling by bacterial lipopolysaccharide in human hepatic stellate cells . Hepatology 37 : 1043 – 55 160 . Identiﬁes the role of TLR4 in HSC activation , ﬁbrogenesis , and induction of TGF - β signaling through repression of an antagonistic TGF - β pseudoreceptor , BAMBI . 160 . Seki E , De Minicis S , Osterreicher CH , Kluwe J , Osawa Y , et al . 2007 . TLR4 enhances TGF - β signaling and hepatic ﬁbrosis . Nat . Med . 13 : 1324 – 32 161 . Guo J , Loke J , Zheng F , Hong F , Yea S , et al . 2009 . Functional linkage of cirrhosis - predictive single nucleotide polymorphisms of Toll - like receptor 4 to hepatic stellate cell responses . Hepatology 49 : 960 – 68 162 . Huang H , Shiffman ML , Friedman S , Venkatesh R , Bzowej N , et al . 2007 . A 7 gene signature identiﬁes the risk of developing cirrhosis in patients with chronic hepatitis C . Hepatology 46 : 297 – 306 163 . Watanabe A , Hashmi A , Gomes DA , Town T , Badou A , et al . 2007 . Apoptotic hepatocyte DNA inhibits hepatic stellate cell chemotaxis via Toll - like receptor 9 . Hepatology 46 : 1509 – 18 www . annualreviews . org • Pathogenesis of Liver Fibrosis 453 A nnu . R e v . P a t ho l . M ec h . D i s . 2011 . 6 : 425 - 456 . D o w n l o a d e d fr o m www . a nnu a l r e v i e w s . o r g by O tt e r b e i n U n i v e r s it y on 04 / 11 / 13 . F o r p e r s on a l u s e on l y . PM06CH18 - Friedman ARI 10 December 2010 14 : 38 164 . Gabele E , Muhlbauer M , Dorn C , Weiss TS , Froh M , et al . 2008 . Role of TLR9 in hepatic stellate cells and experimental liver ﬁbrosis . Biochem . Biophys . Res . Commun . 376 : 271 – 76 165 . Marra F . 2002 . Chemokines in liver inﬂammation and ﬁbrosis . Front . Biosci . 7 : 1899 – 914 166 . Melhem A , Muhanna N , Bishara A , Alvarez CE , Ilan Y , et al . 2006 . Anti - ﬁbrotic activity of NK cells in experimental liver injury through killing of activated HSC . J . Hepatol . 45 : 60 – 71 167 . RadaevaS , SunR , JarugaB , NguyenVT , TianZ , GaoB . 2006 . Naturalkillercellsameliorateliverﬁbrosis by killing activated stellate cells in NKG2D - dependent and tumor necrosis factor – related apoptosis - inducing ligand - dependent manners . Gastroenterology 130 : 435 – 52 168 . Gao B , Radaeva S , Park O . 2009 . Liver natural killer and natural killer T cells : immunobiology and emerging roles in liver diseases . J . Leukoc . Biol . 86 : 513 – 28 169 . Radaeva S , Wang L , Radaev S , Jeong WI , Park O , Gao B . 2007 . Retinoic acid signaling sensitizes hepatic stellate cells to NK cell killing via upregulation of NK cell activating ligand RAE1 . Am . J . Physiol . Gastrointest . Liver Physiol . 293 : G809 – 16 170 . Notas G , Kisseleva T , Brenner D . 2009 . NK and NKT cells in liver injury and ﬁbrosis . Clin . Immunol . 130 : 16 – 26 171 . Bendelac A , Savage PB , Teyton L . 2007 . The biology of NKT cells . Annu . Rev . Immunol . 25 : 297 – 336 172 . Park O , Jeong WI , Wang L , Wang H , Lian ZX , et al . 2009 . Diverse roles of invariant natural killer T cells in liver injury and ﬁbrosis induced by carbon tetrachloride . Hepatology 49 : 1683 – 94 173 . Connolly MK , Bedrosian AS , Mallen – St Clair J , Mitchell AP , et al . 2009 . In liver ﬁbrosis , dendritic cells govern hepatic inﬂammation in mice via TNF - α . J . Clin . Investig . 119 : 3213 – 25 174 . Romagnani S . 2006 . Regulation of the T cell response . Clin . Exp . Allergy 36 : 1357 – 66 175 . Mehal WZ , Friedman SL . 2007 . The role of inﬂammation and immunity in the pathogenesis of liver ﬁbrosis . In Liver Immunology , ed . ME Gershwin , JM Veirling , MP Manns , pp . 99 – 109 . Totowa , NJ : Humana 176 . Novobrantseva TI , Majeau GR , Amatucci A , Kogan S , Brenner I , et al . 2005 . Attenuated liver ﬁbrosis in the absence of B cells . J . Clin . Investig . 115 : 3072 – 82 177 . Maher JJ . 2001 . Interactions between hepatic stellate cells and the immune system . Semin . Liver Dis . 21 : 417 – 26 178 . Pinzani M , Abboud HE , Gesualdo L , Abboud SL . 1992 . Regulation of macrophage colony – stimulating factor in liver fat - storing cells by peptide growth factors . Am . J . Physiol . 262 : C876 – 81 179 . Pinzani M , Carloni V , Marra F , Riccardi D , Lafﬁ G , Gentilini P . 1994 . Biosynthesis of platelet - activating factor and its 1O - acyl analogue by liver fat - storing cells . Gastroenterology 106 : 1301 – 11 180 . Seki E , De Minicis S , Gwak GY , Kluwe J , Inokuchi S , et al . 2009 . CCR1 and CCR5 promote hepatic ﬁbrosis in mice . J . Clin . Investig . 119 : 1858 – 70 181 . ElsharkawyAM , WrightMC , HayRT , ArthurMJ , HughesT , etal . 1999 . Persistentactivationofnuclear factor – B in cultured rat hepatic stellate cells involves the induction of potentially novel Rel - like factors and prolonged changes in the expression of I κ B family proteins . Hepatology 30 : 761 – 69 182 . Muhanna N , Doron S , Wald O , Horani A , Eid A , et al . 2008 . Activation of hepatic stellate cells after phagocytosis of lymphocytes : a novel pathway of ﬁbrogenesis . Hepatology 48 : 963 – 77 183 . Hellerbrand , Wang SC , Tsukamoto H , Brenner DA , Rippe RA . 1996 . Expression of intracellular adhe - sion molecule 1 by activated hepatic stellate cells . Hepatology 24 : 670 – 76 184 . Knittel T , Dinter C , Kobold D , Neubauer K , Mehde M , et al . 1999 . Expression and regulation of cell adhesion molecules by hepatic stellate cells ( HSC ) of rat liver : involvement of HSC in recruitment of inﬂammatory cells during hepatic tissue repair . Am . J . Pathol . 154 : 153 – 67 185 . Tsuchiya A , Kamimura H , Takamura M , Yamagiwa S , Matsuda Y , et al . 2009 . Clinicopathological anal - ysis of CD133 + and NCAM + human hepatic stem / progenitor cells in damaged livers and hepatocellular carcinomas . Hepatol . Res . 39 : 1080 – 90 186 . Mallet V , Gilgenkrantz H , Serpaggi J , Verkarre V , Vallet - Pichard A , et al . 2008 . Brief communication : the relationship of regression of cirrhosis to outcome in chronic hepatitis C . Ann . Intern . Med . 149 : 399 – 403 187 . Friedman SL , Bansal MB . 2006 . Reversal of hepatic ﬁbrosis—fact or fantasy ? Hepatology 43 : S82 – 88 188 . Ramachandran P , Iredale JP . 2009 . Reversibility of liver ﬁbrosis . Ann . Hepatol . 8 : 283 – 91 454 Hernandez - Gea · Friedman A nnu . R e v . P a t ho l . M ec h . D i s . 2011 . 6 : 425 - 456 . D o w n l o a d e d fr o m www . a nnu a l r e v i e w s . o r g by O tt e r b e i n U n i v e r s it y on 04 / 11 / 13 . F o r p e r s on a l u s e on l y . PM06CH18 - Friedman ARI 10 December 2010 14 : 38 189 . Henderson NC , Iredale JP . 2007 . Liver ﬁbrosis : cellular mechanisms of progression and resolution . Clin . Sci . 112 : 265 – 80 190 . Shows that micronodular but not macronodular cirrhosis can partially resolve spontaneously after cessation of liver injury ; underscores the role of chemical cross - linking in attenuating scar degradation . 190 . Issa R , Zhou X , Constandinou CM , Fallowﬁeld J , Millward - Sadler H , et al . 2004 . Spontaneous recovery from micronodular cirrhosis : evidence for incomplete resolution associated with matrix cross - linking . Gastroenterology 126 : 1795 – 808 191 . Iredale JP . 1997 . Tissue inhibitors of metalloproteinases in liver ﬁbrosis . Int . J . Biochem . Cell Biol . 29 : 43 – 54 192 . McCrudden R , Iredale JP . 2000 . Liver ﬁbrosis , the hepatic stellate cell and tissue inhibitors of metallo - proteinases . Histol . Histopathol . 15 : 1159 – 68 193 . Murphy FR , Issa R , Zhou X , Ratnarajah S , Nagase H , et al . 2002 . Inhibition of apoptosis of activated hepatic stellate cells by tissue inhibitor of metalloproteinase 1 is mediated via effects on matrix metallo - proteinase inhibition : implications for reversibility of liver ﬁbrosis . J . Biol . Chem . 277 : 11069 – 76 194 . Dufﬁeld JS , Forbes SJ , Constandinou CM , Clay S , Partolina M , et al . 2005 . Selective depletion of macrophages reveals distinct , opposing roles during liver injury and repair . J . Clin . Investig . 115 : 56 – 65 195 . Fallowﬁeld JA , Mizuno M , Kendall TJ , Constandinou CM , Benyon RC , et al . 2007 . Scar - associated macrophages are a major source of hepatic matrix metalloproteinase 13 and facilitate the resolution of murine hepatic ﬁbrosis . J . Immunol . 178 : 5288 – 95 196 . Knittel T , Mehde M , Kobold D , Saile B , Dinter C , Ramadori G . 1999 . Expression patterns of matrix metalloproteinases and their inhibitors in parenchymal and nonparenchymal cells of rat liver : regulation by TNF - α and TGF - β 1 . J . Hepatol . 30 : 48 – 60 197 . Godichaud S , Krisa S , Couronne B , Dubuisson L , Merillon JM , et al . 2000 . Deactivation of cultured human liver myoﬁbroblasts by trans - resveratrol , a grapevine - derived polyphenol . Hepatology 31 : 922 – 31 198 . Popov Y , Schuppan D . 2009 . Targeting liver ﬁbrosis : strategies for development and validation of an - tiﬁbrotic therapies . Hepatology 50 : 1294 – 306 199 . Shows that activated human HSCs are relatively resistant to proapoptotic stimuli partly because of the elevated expression of Bcl - 2 ; this feature distinguishes HSCs from rodent stellate cells . 199 . Novo E , Marra F , Zamara E , Valfre di Bonzo L , Monitillo L , et al . 2006 . Overexpression of Bcl - 2 by activated human hepatic stellate cells : resistance to apoptosis as a mechanism of progressive hepatic ﬁbrogenesis in humans . Gut 55 : 1174 – 82 200 . Watson MR , Wallace K , Gieling RG , Manas DM , Jaffray E , et al . 2008 . NF - κ B is a critical regulator of the survival of rodent and human hepatic myoﬁbroblasts . J . Hepatol . 48 : 589 – 97 201 . Fiorucci S , Rizzo G , Antonelli E , Renga B , Mencarelli A , et al . 2005 . A FXR - SHP regulatory cascade modulatesTIMP - 1andMMPsexpressioninHSCsandpromotesresolutionofliverﬁbrosis . J . Pharmacol . Exp . Ther . 314 : 584 – 95 202 . Mallat A , Teixeira - Clerc F , Deveaux V , Lotersztajn S . 2007 . Cannabinoid receptors as new targets of antiﬁbrosing strategies during chronic liver diseases . Expert Opin . Ther . Targets 11 : 403 – 9 203 . Passino MA , Adams RA , Sikorski SL , Akassoglou K . 2007 . Regulation of hepatic stellate cell differenti - ation by the neurotrophin receptor p75NTR . Science 315 : 1853 – 56 204 . Cassiman D , Denef C , Desmet VJ , Roskams T . 2001 . Human and rat hepatic stellate cells express neurotrophins and neurotrophin receptors . Hepatology 33 : 148 – 58 205 . Trim N , Morgan S , Evans M , Issa R , Fine D , et al . 2000 . Hepatic stellate cells express the low afﬁnity nerve growth factor receptor p75 and undergo apoptosis in response to nerve growth factor stimulation . Am . J . Pathol . 156 : 1235 – 43 206 . Kim WH , Matsumoto K , Bessho K , Nakamura T . 2005 . Growth inhibition and apoptosis in liver myoﬁbroblasts promoted by hepatocyte growth factor leads to resolution from liver cirrhosis . Am . J . Pathol . 166 : 1017 – 28 207 . Inagaki Y , Higashi K , Kushida M , Hong YY , Nakao S , et al . 2008 . Hepatocyte growth factor suppresses proﬁbrogenicsignaltransductionvianuclearexportofSmad3withgalectin - 7 . Gastroenterology 134 : 1180 – 90 208 . HigashiyamaR , InagakiY , HongYY , KushidaM , NakaoS , etal . 2007 . Bonemarrow – derivedcellsexpress matrix metalloproteinases and contribute to regression of liver ﬁbrosis in mice . Hepatology 45 : 213 – 22 209 . Marra F , Bertolani C . 2009 . Adipokines in liver diseases . Hepatology 50 : 957 – 69 210 . Ikejima K , Okumura K , Kon K , Takei Y , Sato N . 2007 . Role of adipocytokines in hepatic ﬁbrogenesis . J . Gastroenterol . Hepatol . 22 ( Suppl . 1 ) : S87 – 92 www . annualreviews . org • Pathogenesis of Liver Fibrosis 455 A nnu . R e v . P a t ho l . M ec h . D i s . 2011 . 6 : 425 - 456 . D o w n l o a d e d fr o m www . a nnu a l r e v i e w s . o r g by O tt e r b e i n U n i v e r s it y on 04 / 11 / 13 . F o r p e r s on a l u s e on l y . PM06CH18 - Friedman ARI 10 December 2010 14 : 38 211 . Qamar A , Sheikh SZ , Masud A , Jhandier MN , Inayat IB , et al . 2006 . In vitro and in vivo protection of stellate cells from apoptosis by leptin . Dig . Dis . Sci . 1697 – 705 212 . SaxenaNK , TitusMA , DingX , FloydJ , SrinivasanS , etal . 2004 . Leptinasanovelproﬁbrogeniccytokine inhepaticstellatecells : mitogenesisandinhibitionofapoptosismediatedbyextracellularregulatedkinase ( ERK ) and Akt phosphorylation . FASEB J . 18 : 1612 – 14 213 . Gieling RG , Burt AD , Mann DA . 2008 . Fibrosis and cirrhosis reversibility—molecular mechanisms . Clin . Liver Dis . 12 : 915 – 37 , xi 214 . Demonstrates that activated HSCs undergo senescence , a novel mechanism involved in the limitation of the ﬁbrogenic response to tissue damage . 214 . Krizhanovsky V , Yon M , Dickins RA , Hearn S , Simon J , et al . 2008 . Senescence of activated stellate cells limits liver ﬁbrosis . Cell 134 : 657 – 67 215 . Schrader J , Fallowﬁeld J , Iredale JP . 2009 . Senescence of activated stellate cells : not just early retirement . Hepatology 49 : 1045 – 47 216 . Millward - Sadler GH , Wright R , Arthur MJP . 1992 . Wright’s Liver and Biliary Disease , Vol . 2 : Pathophys - iology , Diagnosis , and Management . New York : Saunders . 3rd ed . 217 . Guo J . 2007 . Hepatic ﬁbrogenesis . Semin . Liver Dis . 27 : 413 – 26 456 Hernandez - Gea · Friedman A nnu . R e v . P a t ho l . M ec h . D i s . 2011 . 6 : 425 - 456 . D o w n l o a d e d fr o m www . a nnu a l r e v i e w s . o r g by O tt e r b e i n U n i v e r s it y on 04 / 11 / 13 . F o r p e r s on a l u s e on l y . PM06 - FrontMatter ARI 1 December 2010 11 : 14 Annual Review of Pathology : Mechanisms of Disease Volume 6 , 2011 Contents Starting in Immunology by Way of Immunopathology Emil R . Unanue (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) 1 The Pathogenesis of Sepsis Deborah J . Stearns - Kurosawa , Marcin F . Osuchowski , Catherine Valentine , Shinichiro Kurosawa , and Daniel G . Remick (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) 19 EGFR Mutations and Lung Cancer Gilda da Cunha Santos , Frances A . Shepherd , and Ming Sound Tsao (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) 49 Zebraﬁsh Models for Cancer Shu Liu and Steven D . Leach (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) 71 Mouse Models of Cancer Dong - Joo Cheon and Sandra Orsulic (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) 95 Disorders of Bone Remodeling Xu Feng and Jay M . McDonald (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) 121 The Acute Respiratory Distress Syndrome : Pathogenesis and Treatment Michael A . Matthay and Rachel L . Zemans (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) 147 The HIF Pathway and Erythrocytosis Frank S . Lee and Melanie J . Percy (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) 165 Parkinson’s Disease : Genetics and Pathogenesis Joshua M . Shulman , Philip L . De Jager , and Mel B . Feany (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) 193 Pathogenic Mechanisms of HIV Disease Susan Moir , Tae - Wook Chun , and Anthony S . Fauci (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) 223 Pathogenesis of Myeloma Kenneth C . Anderson and Ruben D . Carrasco (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) 249 Alternative Macrophage Activation and Metabolism Justin I . Odegaard and Ajay Chawla (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) 275 v A nnu . R e v . P a t ho l . M ec h . D i s . 2011 . 6 : 425 - 456 . D o w n l o a d e d fr o m www . a nnu a l r e v i e w s . o r g by O tt e r b e i n U n i v e r s it y on 04 / 11 / 13 . F o r p e r s on a l u s e on l y . PM06 - FrontMatter ARI 1 December 2010 11 : 14 The Pathobiology of Arrhythmogenic Cardiomyopathy Jeffrey E . Safﬁtz (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) 299 Mechanisms of Leukocyte Transendothelial Migration William A . Muller (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) 323 Retinoids , Retinoic Acid Receptors , and Cancer Xiao - Han Tang and Lorraine J . Gudas (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) 345 Biomedical Differences Between Human and Nonhuman Hominids : Potential Roles for Uniquely Human Aspects of Sialic Acid Biology Nissi M . Varki , Elizabeth Strobert , Edward J . Dick Jr . , Kurt Benirschke , and Ajit Varki (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) 365 A Glimpse of Various Pathogenetic Mechanisms of Diabetic Nephropathy Yashpal S . Kanwar , Lin Sun , Ping Xie , Fu - you Liu , and Sheldon Chen (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) 395 Pathogenesis of Liver Fibrosis Virginia Hernandez - Gea and Scott L . Friedman (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) 425 Mesenchymal Stem Cells : Mechanisms of Inﬂammation Nora G . Singer and Arnold I . Caplan (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) 457 Molecular Genetics of Colorectal Cancer Eric R . Fearon (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) 479 The Pathogenesis of Systemic Sclerosis Tamiko R . Katsumoto , Michael L . Whitﬁeld , and M . Kari Connolly (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) 509 Indexes Cumulative Index of Contributing Authors , Volumes 1 – 6 (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) 539 Cumulative Index of Chapter Titles , Volumes 1 – 6 (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) (cid:2) 542 Errata An online log of corrections to Annual Review of Pathology : Mechanisms of Disease articles may be found at http : / / pathol . annualreviews . org vi Contents A nnu . R e v . P a t ho l . M ec h . D i s . 2011 . 6 : 425 - 456 . D o w n l o a d e d fr o m www . a nnu a l r e v i e w s . o r g by O tt e r b e i n U n i v e r s it y on 04 / 11 / 13 . F o r p e r s on a l u s e on l y .