ABSTRACT In our research on tangible user interaction we focus on the design of products that are dedicated to a particular user , task and context . In doing so , we are interested in strengthening the actions side of tangible interaction . Currently , the actions required by electronic products are limited to pushing , sliding and rotating . Yet humans are capable of far more complex actions : Human dexterity is highly reﬁ ned . This focus on ac - tions requires a reconsideration of the design process . In this paper we propose two design methods that potentially boost the focus on skilled actions in the design of tangible user in - teraction : The Hands - Only Scenario is a ʻclose - up versionʼ of the dramatised use scenario . It helps focus effort on what we imagine the hands of the users doing . The Video Action Wall is a technique of ʻlive post - itsʼ on a ( projected ) compu - Wall is a technique of ʻlive post - itsʼ on a ( projected ) compu - Wall ter screen . Little snippets of action videos running simultane - ously help designers understand user actions by the qualities they represent . Categories & Subject Descriptors : H . 5 . 2 [ Information Interfaces and Presentation ] : User Interfaces – tangible user interaction , human actions ; D . 2 . 2 [ Software Engineering ] : Design Tools and Techniques – scenarios , video studies General Terms : Design ; Experimentation INTRODUCTION Often tangible user interfaces are deﬁ ned as a way of cou - pling information from inside the computer with physical ob - jects that allow manipulation of the data outside the screen . The physical objects represent information . Coming from an industrial design background , this deﬁ nition seems limiting in that it takes a technology standpoint and perceives ʻcom - putersʼ as typical ofﬁ ce machines . We are interested in actions rather than representation of information : Actions that allow humans to build skills ; in keeping with the use context and the non - computer artefacts in it . Our path into tangible user interaction research is formed through : ( 1 ) Our background as the user centred design competence of the Danish manu - facturing company Danfoss , and ( 2 ) our inclination towards the Scandinavian approach to user participation in design . The industry background means that our focus is on manufactured product in plant contexts , operated by professional technicians rather than PC - based applications for ofﬁ ce environments and knowledge workers . Over the last decade we have developed user interaction for heating and refrigeration controls , ﬂ ow meters , motor controllers , hydraulic equipment etc . for heating plants , supermarkets , waste water treatment plants , breweries , construction machineries . Such products are typically designed to solve speciﬁ c control - related tasks . In the sense of Norman [ 1999 ] they are ʼstrong speciﬁ cʼ rather than ʼweak generalʼ . The people interacting with such products are heating installers , refrigeration mechanics , process operators , industry electricians , service technicians , and vehicle operators . They share a crafts tradition with strong respect for the work of hands , and they have a well - developed sensitivity to the physical surroundings they operate in . Touching , listening , smelling , is—besides observing—a central part of their work and a precondition for constantly ﬁ ne - tuning their activity . The participatory design approach makes us inquire into the broader picture of context and work practice and strive to in - clude a userʼs point of view in all design activities . Through the 90s our group has developed its practice from the one - shot involvement of users in usability testing , to a continuous user dialog staged in user ﬁ eld studies , user workshops , and collaborative design activities ( Buur and Bagger 1999 ; Bød - ker and Buur 2002 ) . We build on the Scandinavian tradition of experimental systems development ( Greenbaum and Kyng 1991 ) . In general , we work from observing users towards re - designing the artefacts , rather than ﬁ rst redesigning the arte - facts to then observe the effects on users . RESEARCH APPROACH As this is research into the process of design — the work practice of designers — our primary method is action re - search , ( Van Beinum 1998 ) . In action research the researchers strive to understand and describe social reality through inter - vention in practice ; by solving a problem with ʻthe studiedʼ , rather than for ʻthe studiedʼ . In this way the participants be - for ʻthe studiedʼ . In this way the participants be - for come part of the research process and contribute to the results through feedback , discussions , and new actions . Hands - Only Scenarios and Video Action Walls – novel methods for tangible user interaction design Jacob Buur , Mads Vedel Jensen , Tom Djajadiningrat Mads Clausen Institute for Product Innovation University of Southern Denmark Grundtvigsalle 150 , DK - 6400 Sønderborg buur @ mci . sdu . dk ; mads @ mci . sdu . dk ; j . p . djajadiningrat @ tue . nl Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for per - sonal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed for proﬁ t or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation on the ﬁ rst page . To copy otherwise , or re - publish , to post on servers or to redistribute to lists , requires prior speciﬁ c permission and / or a fee . DIS 2004 , August 1 – 4 , 2004 , Cambridge , Massachusetts , USA . Copyright 2004 ACM 1 - 58113 - 787 - 7 / 04 / 0008… $ 5 . 00 . In practical terms , we staged a series of design experiments with both design students , researchers , and industrialists over a 2 - year period . It developed from the original proposition that ʻdesigning actions before productʼ would be beneﬁ cial , i . e . we would try to focus on user actions separately from the design of the interface mechanisms that afford such actions . Based on results , participant reactions , and experiences from each experiment we reiterated and improved the techniques for the next event . In this way our understanding of tangible interaction and design process developed along with the re - ﬁ nement of design methods . The series of design experiments included : Student design events ( IT Product Design graduate students ) : 3 - week projects Tangible Interaction , SDU ( 2002 , 2003 ) 2 - day event Tangible Interaction , TU Eindhoven ( 2002 ) 2 - week projects Video Studies of Crafts , SDU ( 2001 , 2003 ) Research seminars ( researchers and industrialists ) : 1 - day workshop , Danish Center for Pervasive Computing ( 2002 ) 1 - day workshop , Designing Interactive Systems , London ( 2002 ) 1 - week PhD summerschool , University of Southern Denmark ( 2003 ) Each project and event had 15 - 25 participants . The design cases we have worked with include brewery automisation , and playground equipment , car alarms , ofﬁ ce telephones , and video recorders . TANGIBLE USER INTERFACES – RICH ACTIONS Currently , much of the ( HCI - rooted ) tangible interaction community focuses on the coupling between the physical and virtual representation of data ( Ulmer and Ishii 2000 ) . Tangi - ble user interfaces are taken as a method of making virtual information in the computer subject to physical manipulation outside the screen . The core design challenge is how data is represented in physical objects , and how the data may be con - trolled through conﬁ guring the objects in 2D or 3D space . The shape of the physical objects ( Holmquist , Redström and Ljungstrand 1999 ) tends to get far more attention than how the users will interact with the physical components . The most common realisation is a table with computer project - ed image , on which physical objects , tokens , can be moved around to control how the computer handles data , for instance metaDESK ( Ullmer and Ishii 1997 ) and PitA Board ( Eden , Hornecker , and Scharff 2002 ) . We regard this type of solutions as important , but then only as a subclass of a much broader ﬁ eld of tangible interaction op - portunities . There are two reasons why we ﬁ nd the prevailing understanding of tangible user interaction too limited : ( 1 ) It builds on the assumption that computers are foremost information processing machines . However , when we regard the vast and growing ﬁ eld of products with embedded proces - sors , such as household appliances , hospital equipment , and industrial components , they all suffer from the intangibility of computer data , although their main purpose is not informat - ion processing , rather they monitor or control things in the physical world – think of a washing machine , for instance . With the advancement of electronics technology many of these ʻcomputersʼ have experienced an explosion in func - tions that all require choices and adjustments through tiny displays and buttons . We are overwhelmed with user inter - faces of smart appliances that beg to be improved . And most appliances already have as much computing power as the last generation of PCs . ( 2 ) It builds on the assumption that interaction – and indeed work – is primarily a cognitive activity . However , as soon as we leave the ofﬁ ce domain , peopleʼs activities are very much physical . In industrial settings , like heating plants , breweries , factory ﬂ oors , for instance , there is a striking discrepancy be - tween the non - computer apparatus and the electronic control - lers and computers . Whilst the traditional apparatus and tools leverage the action skills of the operators , the interaction with the computer equipment is based almost exclusively on but - ton pushing and display reading . When observing how skilled operators handle such electronic equipment , it is evident that the style of interaction bears no relationship whatsoever to the emphasis on hands and tools that is characteristic for their work tradition . The map shown in Figure 1 was produced in discussions among the participants at the DIS 2002 workshop ( Djajadin - ingrat et al . 2002 ) . It helps pinpoint our concerns : That the type of tangible user interfaces we talk about here , aim to control rather than create ( information ) , and deal with actions rather than objects ( representations ) . Most interaction design today focuses on simplifying the required actions thus reducing the skills requirements . With keyboards and buttons the main challenge for the user is to locate the key – sufﬁ ciently fast . Locating keys is solely a cognitive effort , whereas the pushing itself is a monotonous string of motorically trivial actions . The same can be said for Figure 1 : Map of tangible interaction designs , produced by participants at the DIS 2002 research workshop the type of tangible user interfaces in which users move to - kens as carriers of information on a ﬂ at surface : The actions are larger but they hardly require skill , let alone allow the building of skill . This underrating of bodily actions has its origin in the prevailing understanding that mind and body can be regarded as separate entities ; that knowledge is different from skill ( Ingold 2001 ) . With the move towards physical interaction we are interested in exploring the very opposite : basing interaction on actions that require the user to build bodily skills . We see ʻrich actionsʼ as a so - far neglected , yet essential approach to tangible interaction . When interaction with computers becomes more physical , it is crucial to make the most of manʼs motoric skills . An extended understanding of user actions as skill can help us set ambitious goals for tangible user interaction design : We want to create products that address the body , that allow us - ers to learn skilled operation through bodily action and to let them perfect this skill over time until it becomes second na - ture . This may be in direct opposition to the prevailing easy - to - learn paradigm , but we feel that this is indeed a necessary step to take to radically improve tangible interaction design . Since many industrial , computerized products show how dif - ﬁ cult it is to make the easy - to - learn mantra come true , we are interested in directing the seemingly unavoidable learning ef - fort toward bodily rather than cognitive skills . DESIGNING TANGIBLE INTERACTION With the working hypothesis of ʻdesigning actions before productʼ we want to force ourselves to be explicit about ac - tions before linking them to physical design solutions . This approach has taken inspiration from projects such as Xerox PARCʼs ʻEmbodied User Interfacesʼ and FX PALʼs ʻPaper - Buttonsʼ . Fishkin et al . ( 1999 ) observe how people handle a book and operate a Rolodex card index . They use this infor - mation to embed interface mechanisms that allow users to ʻTurnʼ pages in an E - book and ʻscrollʼ cards in a PDA , using familiar actions . Rønby Pedersen et al . ( 2000 ) observe how experienced speakers use paper cards to control their mul - timedia presentation . Based on that they augment the cards with wireless buttons that accept actions similar to paper han - dling . To talk about designing interaction or user actions is in itself presumptuous ; designers can hardly inﬂ uence how humans act directly . At best we can design user interfaces that afford certain ways of handling them . But the conception of design - ing actions does help focus on the broader level of user activ - ity rather than technology . Equally , to talk about design methods may appear premature in a ﬁ eld as young and fast moving as tangible interaction de - sign . However , the ﬁ eld of tangible interaction does need new approaches and experiments , and this is how we view our methods proposals ; as inspiration for particular approaches to design , rather than production rules that promise to deliver speciﬁ c results in any context . Interaction is temporal ; it unfolds in time . Our prior experience with the use of video as a ʼdesign materialʼ ( Buur et al . 2002 ) has proved very valuable for this work with the tangible interaction . The basic idea is that we may regard the video media not simply as an objective record of for instance usersʼ work practices – as ʻhard dataʼ from the ﬁ eld – but we can exploit video as a media for expressing understanding and sculpturing ideas , collaboratively in the design team , and with users . In these design experiments we have used the video camera both to capture actions , but also to provoke actions ( usersʼ and designersʼ alike ) , and to maintain focus on actions , for instance in scenarios . In line with Mackay et al . such ʻvideo artefacts act as both the output of one design activity and as input to the nextʼ ( 2000 ) Also , we have previously struggled with the idea of mapping actions to functions in tangible interaction design . The method ʻInteraction Relabellingʼ ( Djajadiningrat et . al . 2000 ) introduces everyday objects with rich mechanical actions to inspire designers to think of physical interaction . – If the heating controller were this toy gun , what function would the trigger action represent ? From our design experiments , in particular two methods stand out as very promising in creating a strong focus on user actions : Hands - Only Scenarios and Video Action Walls . HANDS - ONLY SCENARIOS Use scenarios – short stories of projected use of future designs – have been recognized as a powerful means of relating ideas to use context and work practice . In industrial design circles the dramatising of use scenarios has become increasingly popular for exploring ideas and evaluating interaction qualities ( Burns et al . 1994 ; Brandt and Grunnet 2000 ) , more so than the format of written stories that is widespread in HCI - circles . Figure 2 : Students use gestures to analyse human actions in video footage from ethnographic studies of childrenʼs play So far , most scenarios focused on the social interaction , the interaction with the use context and the sequence of events . Tangible user interaction requires particular attention to hand actions . For this reason we have developed hands - only sce - narios as a supplement to full - body acting of use scenarios . The hands - only scenario focusses on what the hands will do to interact with the artefact to be designed . String of User Actions For some years the inﬂ uence of anthropology has taught us that the narrow focus on how humans operate computers is not sufﬁ cient to grasp the complexity of interaction design . Ethnographic ﬁ eld study techniques – in particular partici - pant observation and video recording – help designers under - stand the broader context of work practice and socio - culture as background for human actions . Designers have learned to shift from telephoto shots of interaction in usability labs to wide - angle views of users in their natural environment . For tangible user interaction design the wide - angle view is still valuable , but as designers we need an additional , detailed focus on hands and actions to get a feel for skilled hand ac - tions and motion preferences of users . To stay within the fo - cal length metaphor , designers need not only the wide - angle views of real work practice but also macro footage of how humans use their hands with familiar tools and objects . Established methods for analysing video include Interac - tion Analysis Labs ( Jordan and Henderson 1995 ) , in which a multidisciplinary team works closely with selected video sequences to offer observations and hypotheses about the ac - tivities recorded . However powerful this method is in mak - ing sense of user studies in general , it has proven inadequate for studying human movements , as it is a purely intellectual , non - physical effort . Instead of using words only , we have experimented with gestures as a way to analyse and convey ﬁ ndings , see Figure 2 . At a recent summerschool on Tangible Interaction Design at the University of Southern Denmark , we had a mixed group of PhD researchers and usability professionals from compa - nies experiment with understanding and designing actions . At ﬁ rst , we took inspiration from a modern dance instructor ( McBride 2002 ) to focus attention on the human body and expressions of movement . Then we split the participants into ﬁ ve teams and asked them to analyse selected video footage of brewery operators at work and children playing in play - grounds , respectively . This material had been prepared in ad - vance by some of the participants as part of research projects on Pervasive Computing in Industrial Plants and on Interac - tive Playgrounds . To communicate the results of their analy - sis , we asked the teams to perform a sequence of actions – a little dance , if you like – as a concentrated reproduction of the most characteristic actions observed . We observed that many of the teams chose to exaggerate the actions a little to make their point clear , see Figure 3 . The challenge in this type of scenarios is to capture and ex - press the qualities down to the details of the human actions – embedded in the context of work practice . The teams cer - tainly gained a ʼbodily understandingʼ of the userʼs activity very different for what could have been achieved by discuss - ing only . ʼScholars suggest that the curiously disembodied view of hu - man beings that until recently has permeated the social sci - ences is due to a longstanding bias against the body in the tradition of thought we call Western . . . ʼ ( Farnell 1999 ) . One can see the hands - only scenarios as a means to overcome the preoccupation with mind and cognition in HCI - circles . Actions before Product We experiment with hands - only scenarios that show actions only , as a vehicle to design a string of hand movements with - out yet considering the physical shape of the product . In two design projects on tangible interaction we have asked gradu - ate students to work with our strategy of ʻdesigning actions before productʼ . We suggested them to ﬁ rst select a set of actions to work with , then map which actions can be used for which function . From this , they should create a hands - only scenario , before proceeding to design a mock - up of the actual artefact . The object of design was an ofﬁ ce telephone for the ﬁ rst experiment , and a video tape recorder for the second . Figure 3 . A design team acts out a string of user actions in a small choreography . It is inspired from a video observation of a brewery worker grabbing a handle , pulling , pressing a button Figure 4 : A hands - only scenario without product ( upper series ) and an interaction scenario with tinkered mock - up ( lower series ) . The graduate students act out a sequence of movements to operate a video recorder , inspired by their use of everyday objects . Then they design a mock - up to support the same actions : A juggling motion for fast - forward , a ʻtape measurement actionʼ to set the timer . Before the ﬁ rst experiment we were anxious that gesturing how to interact without having thought about what the prod - uct should look like might lead to a lot of vague hand - waving . But in the course of the experiment we learned two tricks that made the second experiment more successful : ( 1 ) Compared to those teams that selected one team member to act out the hands - only scenario alone , the teams in which all participants presented their scenario simultaneously were much more precise in their actions . With several members acting together , the team needs to train to get the synchronisation exactly right . In this way they get to pay attention to little details about movements and ﬁ ngers and to be very exact in each action , see Figure 4a . ( 2 ) Also , introducing a video camera to record the actions helped create a discipline and further strengthen precision and rhythm . A shot of the table from the top proved an interesting camera angle , because the image then has only hands , all sticking into the frame . Product Interaction On the following day the graduate students worked with simple tinkering material to create a mock - up of a product , which took the selected actions to operate . This brought about a variety of untraditional solutions , and the students agreed that the ʻdesigning actions before productʼ strategy had help them thinking out - of - the - box , Figure 4 . In the reﬂ ection session following the ﬁ rst experiment , the students discussed if they really managed to maintain the action qualities when moving from hands - only scenario without product to the interaction scenario with the product . Therefore , in the second experiment , we organised a presentation of the two video scenarios side by side on the screen , so the students could visually compare the ʼbefore and afterʼ scenarios . This made it quite obvious that indeed it requires much care to create a design that affords the precise actions intended . The students realised that there was a tendency to exaggerate the actions in the ﬁ rst step , then simplify them in the next . But now , at least we have the means to put the discussion on the agenda . It also became apparent in these experiments that it is crucial to ﬁ nd a precise way of describing qualities of actions , which is what the second method supports . VIDEO ACTION WALL To understand and discuss quality of actions it is essential to be able to compare movements . As movements are highly temporal , we have experimented with a technique of multiple video loops running on the same screen . This technique we have coined video action wall , and it takes inspiration from Mackayʼs ʼVideo Mosaicʼ ( Mackay and Pagani 1994 ) and our own ʼVideo Card Gameʼ ( Buur and Søndergaard 2000 ) . On the screen 12 – 20 small - size video clips show the actions to be discussed . Each clip runs a loop of an action , there - fore the video wall not only shows dynamic information that still images cannot convey , but also shows this information in parallel , providing an opportunity to compare actions that normal video does not . Moreover , similar to post - its , the vid - eo clips are freely movable across the screen , allowing the participants to collectively group and regroup the actions , to create clusters that emphasize differences and similarities , see Figure 5 . Technically we have experimented with two different ver - sions of the video action wall . In the ﬁ rst version , we used a QuickTime Player to run the videoclips compressed to 160 a QuickTime Player to run the videoclips compressed to 160 a QuickTime Player x 120 pixels . An AppleScript made sure all clips opened in AppleScript made sure all clips opened in AppleScript looped players . Because each clip lives in its own window , the clips can be easily re - positioned on the screen . In the second version we used Macromedia Director to run the videoclips . We wrote a simple Director behaviour to be attached to each clip . The behaviour made a clip draggable . One advantage of using Director is that the clips can run completely borderless , even without a dragbar . Quality of Everyday Actions As button pushing is such a commonly accepted mode of in - teraction it requires a conscious effort to abandon ﬁ xed no - tions of what user interfaces should look like , and focus on the rich potential of human actions . We have found that tak - ing peopleʼs own experience with handling everyday objects as a starting point , works well as an eye - opener and provides a rich source of action inspiration . At the DIS 2002 workshop ( Djajadiningrat et al . 2002 ) we invited the participants to bring along an everyday ( non - elec - tronic ) object , which they found themselves conﬁ dent in han - dling . The participants brought along objects like can - opener , yoyo , necktie , pencil sharpener , CD - cover , pencil . In a show - and - tell session we videotaped the movements as input for the video action wall session . The looped videos were pro - jected onto a whiteboard to allow participants to freely add text . An assistant used a mouse to move images around the screen on the participantsʼ commands . The video action wall triggered participants to discuss qualities of hand movements by comparing , grouping and re - grouping the video clips and naming each group . The outcome of the discussion is shown in Figure 6 . Later , we have used the same activity with graduate students on several occasions , and we have conﬁ rmed that it indeed opens a fruitful discussion of qualities of actions rooted in personal experience . We have noticed how the words in which participants describe actions differ signiﬁ cantly across teams : Some descriptions are very mechanistic , some metaphoric . One group of students , for instance , brought together the four actions of tooth brushing , turning a screwdriver , drawing cir - cles , and ﬂ ipping hamburgers . They described the activities like this : ʼControlled effort : Making repetitive circular movements and adapting the force to the feedbackʼ . In contrast , another group found a metaphor to describe their actions of spinning a Frisbee , juggling two balls in one hand , playing with a coin , moving a rubber band between ﬁ ngers : ʼA dog continuously chasing its own tail – actions to pass the timeʼ The anthropologist Ingold ( 2001 ) investigates this phenom - enon of choosing metaphorical descriptions of human ac - tions . He compares the skill of weaving string baskets among the Telfol people of Central New Guinea to the nest building skills of the male weaverbird : ʻHuman beings , it seems , differ from other animals in that they are peculiarly able to treat the manifold threads of expe - rience as material for further acts of weaving and looping . In so doing , they create intricate patterns of metaphorical con - nections , such as – in the Telfol case – between the movement of hands and ﬂ owing water . ʼ Figure 6 . A video action wall mapping qualities in everyday actions ( Djajadiningrat et al . 2002 ) Figure 5 . Participants at the DIS 2002 workshop discuss action qualities at the video action wall . As the main purpose of the video wall activity is to establish understanding of qualities and inspiration for design , it ap - pears that the poetic , metaphoric expressions serve the design process much better , than a mechanistic , factual one . Quality of User Actions Once the focus on action qualities is established , it is easier to discuss the quality of user actions , i . e . of actions that one observes in real context or on video . In a project with 16 graduate students on video techniques , we asked the students to visited 8 traditional crafts to observe actions with real people : Blacksmith , watch maker , taxidermist , ﬂ orist , baker , massage therapist , violinist , hair dresser . The reason for choosing these sites was that we wanted the students to focus on people and their actions rather than on problems they may solve with new technology . As a ﬁ rst step in the analysis we asked the students to edit a 3 - minute portrait of their crafts person and his / her work . Then we used the video card game ( Buur and Søndergaard 2000 ) to ﬁ nd common themes across the crafts : ʼHands as toolsʼ – ʼTwo - handed actionsʼ – ʼGestures as - if - toolsʼ – ʼForceful actionsʼ . Each student team produced a collage video expanding one themes , Figure 7 . When the students were sufﬁ ciently familiar with the material , we selected 20 video sequences across the crafts actions for the video action wall session . Based on the video loops , the students made an effort to group actions according to how they percieved action qualities . The looped videos provided the students with an opportunity to concentrate on action rather than on purpose or function of the action . The main difﬁ culty that students encountered was to actually describe qualities ( the experience of an action ) , rather than the actions themselves , Figure 8 . Figure 7 . Graduate students discuss the work of crafts people at a ʻscreen - sizeʼ video action wall . Figure 8 . A video action wall produced by a team of graduate students . It illustrates qualities of human actions in 8 different crafts . CONCLUSIONS Based on a string of design experiments with graduate students , researchers and industrialists , we have developed two preliminary design methods , which support our strategy of ʻdesigning actions before productʼ . This strategy – although in itself a contradiction – helps designers move beyond the one - eyed focus on cognition and computers to a sensitivity towards hand actions and physicality . The Hands - Only Scenarios focus the design teamʼs attention on understanding user actions and on designing products that afford rich actions . The Video Action Wall encourages the discussion about the quality of actions ( both designersʼ and usersʼ ) and thus the formulation of values for the user interaction design . These methods support a particular approach to tangible interaction design , namely the focus on user actions . Our experience with the 100 or so involved participants is that the methods work as powerful eye - openers - they make people see that there is more to tangible interaction than tokens and projections . The next step in our research is a proof - of - concept : To explore the rich actions approach in the design of real - world products . The main challenge will surely be to develop ways of ensuring that the ﬁ ne details in user actions will survive in the design process Acknowledgements We would like to thank the students from the IT Product De - sign programme in Sønderborg and from the Industrial De - sign programme in Eindhoven for their willingness to play along with our experiments and allow us to publish their work . Also we are indebted to the researchers and industrial - ists who joined seminars and helped relate our work to real - world design practice . This project is supported by the Danish Center for Pervasive Computing . References Brandt , E . and Grunnet , C . ( 2000 ) Evoking the future : Drama and props in user centered design . In Proceedings of Participatory Design Conference ( PDC00 ) , New York . Burns , C ; Dishman , E ; Verplank , W . and Lassiter , B , ( 1994 ) Actors , Hairdos & Videotape – Informance Design . In : CHI ʼ94 Conference Companion , ACM , Boston . Buur , J and Bagger , K . ( 1999 ) Replacing Usability Testing with User Dialogue . Communicat . of the ACM , 42 , 5 , May , pp . 63 - 66 . Buur , J ; Binder , T and Brandt , E . ( 2000 ) Taking Video beyond ʻHard Dataʼ in User Centred Design . Participatory Design Conference , New York . Buur J , and Bødker S . ( 2000 ) From Usability Lab to “Design Collaboratorium” : Reframing Usability Practice . Proceed - ings of DIS ʼ00 , Designing Interactive Systems . ACM , New York . Buur , J and Søndergaard , A ( 2000 ) Video Card Game : An Augmented Environment for User Centred Design Discussions . In Proceedings of DARE 2000 , Designing Augmmented Reality Environments , ACM , Elsinore Djajadiningrat , J . P . , Gaver , W . W . and Frens , J . W . ( 2000 ) Interaction Relabelling and extreme characters : Methods for exploring aesthetic interactions . Proceedings of DIS ʼ00 , Designing Interactive Systems . ACM , New York , pp . 66 - 72 . Djajadiningrat , T ; Buur , J . and Brereton , M ( 2002 ) : Look Mama , with Hands ! On tangible interaction , gestures and learning . Proceedings of DIS 2002 , Designing Interactive Systems . ACM , London , p . 417 . Eden , H , Hornecker , E , and Scharff , E . ( 2002 ) Multilevel Design and Role Play : Experiences in Assessing Support for Neigborhood Participation in Design . Proceedings of DIS 2002 , Designing Interactive Systems . ACM , London , pp . 387 - 92 . Farnell , B . ( 1999 ) Moving Bodies , Acting Selves . Annu . Rev . Anthropol . Vol 28 , pp . 341 - 73 Greenbaum J , and Kyng M . ( 1991 ) Design at Work : Cooperative Design of Computer Systems , LEA Publishers , Hillsdale , New Jersey . Holmquist , L . E . , J . Redström , et al . ( 1999 ) Token - Based Access to Digital Information . ( HUC ) . Ingold , T . ( 2001 ) Beyond Art and Technology : The Anthropology of Skill . In : Schiffer , H . B : Anthropological Perspectives on Technology . Albuquerque , Univ . Of New Mexico Press , pp . 17 - 33 Jordan B . and Henderson A . ( 1995 ) Interaction analysis : Foundations and Practice . J . of the Learning Sciences 4 ( 1 ) , pp . 39 - 103 . Mackay , W . E . and Pagani , D . S . ( 1994 ) Video Mosaic : Laying out time in a physical space . Proceedings of Multimedia 94 , San Fransisco . Mackay , W . E . , Ratzer , A . and Janecek , P . ( 2000 ) Video Artifacts for Design : Bridging the Gap Between Abstraction and Detail . In : Proceedings of DIS 2000 , Designing Interactive Systems . ACM , New York pp . 72 - 82 McBride , J . A . ( 2002 ) Between Dance and Language . In : McNeill , D : Hand and Mind , Univ . of Chicago Press Norman , D . A . ( 1999 ) The invisible computer . MIT Press . Pedersen , E . R . Sokoler , T . and Nelson , L . ( 2000 ) PaperButtons : Expanding a Tangible User Interface . In : Proceedings of DIS 2000 , Designing Interactive Systems . ACM , New York Ullmer , B . and Ishii , H . ( 1997 ) The metaDESK : Models and Prototypes for Tangible User Interfaces . In : Proc . of UIST ʼ97 , ACM Ullmer , B . and Ishii , H . ( 2000 ) Emerging frameworks for tangible user interfaces . IBM Systems J . Vol 39 , No 3 & 4 , 2000 : 925 - 931