Endocytic proteins drive vesicle growth via instability in high membrane tension environment Nikhil Walani , Jennifer Torres , and Ashutosh Agrawal 1 Department of Mechanical Engineering , University of Houston , Houston , TX 77204 Edited by L . B . Freund , University of Illinois at Urbana – Champaign , Urbana , IL , and approved February 10 , 2015 ( received for review September 25 , 2014 ) Clathrin - mediated endocytosis ( CME ) is a key pathway for trans - porting cargo into cells via membrane vesicles ; it plays an integral role in nutrient import , signal transduction , neurotransmission , and cellular entry of pathogens and drug - carrying nanoparticles . Because CME entails substantial local remodeling of the plasma membrane , the presence of membrane tension offers resistance to bending and hence , vesicle formation . Experiments show that in such high - tension conditions , actin dynamics is required to carry out CME successfully . In this study , we build on these pioneering experimental studies to provide fundamental mechanistic insights into the roles of two key endocytic proteins — namely , actin and BAR proteins — in driving vesicle formation in high membrane ten - sion environment . Our study reveals an actin force - induced “ snap - through instability ” that triggers a rapid shape transition from a shallow invagination to a highly invaginated tubular structure . We show that the association of BAR proteins stabilizes vesicles and induces a milder instability . In addition , we present a rather counterintuitive role of BAR depolymerization in regulating the shape evolution of vesicles . We show that the dissociation of BAR proteins , supported by actin – BAR synergy , leads to consider - able elongation and squeezing of vesicles . Going beyond the membrane geometry , we put forth a stress - based perspective for the onset of vesicle scission and predict the shapes and composi - tion of detached vesicles . We present the snap - through transition and the high in - plane stress as possible explanations for the in - triguing direct transformation of broad and shallow invaginations into detached vesicles in BAR mutant yeast cells . clathrin - mediated endocytosis | membrane tension | instability | actin | BAR proteins C lathrin - mediated endocytosis ( CME ) is one of the key meta - bolic pathways for transporting macromolecules into eukary - otic cells ( 1 – 7 ) ; it is characterized by a chain of remodeling events that transforms an almost flat patch of plasma membrane into a cargo - carrying closed vesicle . The journey from a patch to a shallow invagination , then to a mature vesicle , and finally to a de - tached vesicle is executed by an elaborate set of proteins that act in a well - orchestrated fashion . Because this shape evolution entails significant local bending of the membrane , it is highly sensitive to the resting tension in the membrane . A higher tension in a mem - brane makes a membrane taut and harder to bend , thus increasing the energetic cost required to form new vesicles . As a consequence , in cells experiencing high membrane tension , such as yeast cells and mammalian cells with polarized domains or those subjected to increased tension , actin dynamics has been found to be necessary to provide additional driving force to successfully complete CME ( 8 – 14 ) . Although this fact has been established by seminal exper - imental studies , how actin forces actually drive vesicle formation and facilitate vesicle scission is not well understood . In addition , the role of another key membrane remodeling protein — the BAR protein — in overcoming tension has not yet been explored . In this paper , we pursue a detailed theoretical and computational analysis to unravel some previously unidentified mechanisms by which these key endocytic proteins ( actin and BAR proteins ) offset membrane tension , drive vesicle growth , and assist vesicle scission . We begin by posing a conundrum . In yeast cells , clathrin , actin , and BAR proteins contribute to vesicle formation in different capacities . Though the inhibition of actin polymerization com - pletely arrests endocytosis ( 9 , 11 , 12 , 14 ) , the absence of clathrin and BAR proteins only leads to ∼ 50 % and 25 % reduction in the internalization events , respectively ( 14 – 18 ) . Although a high scission rate is maintained in BAR mutant cells , there is a fun - damental difference between the shape evolution process in these and the wild - type cells . In the wild - type cells , a shallow invagination turns into an elongated vesicle with a constricted neck before scission , which is successfully imaged in experi - mental studies ( Fig . 1 ) ( 14 , 18 , 19 ) . In contrast , such an in - termediate shape is not observed in BAR mutant cells . After a shallow and broad invagination , experimental images directly show detached vesicles in the cytoplasm ( Fig . 1 ) ( 18 ) . This is rather intriguing because the existing model of membrane scis - sion requires lipids to come in close proximity and pass through a hemifission state before scission to avoid any leak during the to - pological transition ( 20 – 23 ) . How then does a shallow invagination directly transform into a detached vesicle ? We will show in later sections that this conundrum is at the core of the shape - evolution mechanism in the presence of resting tension in the plasma membrane and is critical for understanding the roles of actin and BAR proteins in CME . Several theoretical and computational studies have advanced our physical understanding of CME in both mammalian and yeast cells ( 24 – 27 ) . Liu et al . ( 24 ) studied vesicle formation and scission in yeast cells under the action of curvature - generating proteins and actin filaments . The study highlighted a critical role of lipid phase boundary - induced line tension in budding and scission . In a follow - up work , temporal and spatial coordination of endocytic proteins was studied in an integrated model to Significance Biological cells are engaged in an incessant uptake of macro - molecules for nutrition and inter - and intracellular communi - cation ; this entails significant local bending of the plasma membrane and formation of cargo - carrying vesicles executed by a designated set of membrane - deforming proteins . The energetic cost incurred in forming vesicles is directly related to the stressed state of the membrane and , hence , that of the cell . In this study , we reveal a protein - induced “ snap - through in - stability ” that offsets tension and drives vesicle growth during clathrin - mediated endocytosis , the main pathway for the transport of macromolecules into cells . Because these proteins ( actin and BAR proteins ) are involved in other interfacial rearrangements in cells , the predicted instability could be at play in cells at - large . Author contributions : A . A . designed research ; N . W . and J . T . performed research ; N . W . and A . A . analyzed data ; and N . W . and A . A . wrote the paper . The authors declare no conflict of interest . This article is a PNAS Direct Submission . 1 To whom correspondence should be addressed . Email : ashutosh @ uh . edu . Thisarticlecontainssupportinginformationonlineatwww . pnas . org / lookup / suppl / doi : 10 . 1073 / pnas . 1418491112 / - / DCSupplemental . www . pnas . org / cgi / doi / 10 . 1073 / pnas . 1418491112 PNAS | Published online March 9 , 2015 | E1423 – E1432 B I O P H Y S I C S A ND C O M P U T A T I O N A L B I O L O G Y P N A S P L U S simulate endocytosis in mammalian and yeast cells ( 25 ) . The study showed a dynamic two - way coupling between the membrane geometry and the various biochemical reactions . Agrawal and Steigmann ( 26 ) used a unified theory of heterogeneous mem - brane to show that clathrin coat could drive vesicle formation without assistance from line tension in the absence of a resting plasma membrane tension . Agrawal et al . ( 27 ) studied the roles of epsin and clathrin in the nucleation of membrane vesicles . Although these studies have provided fundamental mechanistic insights into CME , the physical underpinnings of the remodeling mechanism in the presence of tension and the specific roles played by key proteins in countering tension remain unaddressed . In this study , we simulate membrane – protein interactions at the continuum scale to explore the consequences of finite tension . We first model the effect of actin forces in driving the growth of a shallow clathrin - coated vesicle . We find that until a critical force is reached , the vesicle undergoes smooth transition . Once the critical force is crossed , it experiences a snap - through transition that drastically elongates and squeezes the vesicle ; this leads to a significant in - plane stress in the tubular region of the vesicle that far exceeds the rupture tension . We then model the effect of BAR proteins . We find that the attachment of BAR proteins also drives vesicle formation by instability , but it is much gentler compared with the actin case . To our surprise , we find that after the instability has occurred , the dissociation of BAR proteins leads to a larger elongation and growth of the vesicle . We predict vesicle shapes at different stages of CME that closely match those observed experimentally in yeast cells . To test the in - plane stress as a criterion for membrane scission , we simulate the geometries of detached vesicles . We find that the vesicles in the actin - driven case ( in the absence of BAR proteins ) are smaller than the vesicles in the BAR - driven case . In the latter case , the BAR proteins end up in the vesicle along with the clathrin coat as observed in ref . 18 . Finally , we show that the membrane tension is the key parameter that regulates vesicle morphology . The Model The central feature of our model is that it incorporates protein - induced heterogeneities in the membrane in a seamless manner . As shown in refs . 26 and 28 , this generalization has a crucial consequence : it breaks down the well - known requirement that the surface tension has to be uniform in the entire membrane , as is the case for a homogenous membrane . This feature is perti - nent because tension and its impact on membrane remodeling are at the center of this study . The fact that nonuniform tension can exist in the plasma membrane of cells is supported by ex - perimental studies . The tension - based variation in the roles of actin dynamics on the apical and basolateral surfaces of polar - ized MDHK cells ( 13 ) unambiguously shows that the tensions in the two parts of the same plasma membrane are different . It is , therefore , extremely crucial to capture the local variations in surface tension by allowing for heterogeneities in the membrane to model all of the nuances of the membrane – protein inter - actions and their effect on membrane geometry . A brief overview of the key physical concepts that govern membrane – protein energetics is discussed next ( details provided in SI Appendix ) . Lipid Membrane . The lipid bilayer is modeled as a two - dimensional surface embedded in three - dimensional space . Because a relative misalignment of the lipids costs energy , a bilayer offers flexural stiffness . For an isotropic fluid bilayer , the areal strain energy density depends on the local mean curvature ( H ) and the Gaussian curvature ( K ) of the surface ( 1 , 29 – 32 ) . For our model , we use the well - known Helfrich – Canham energy density , W = k B H 2 + k G K , where k B and k G are the bending moduli . The values of these parameters and those discussed later are presented in SI Appendix , Table S2 . Because a lipid bilayer sustains a very small areal dilation ( less than 2 – 3 % ) , we assume that any arbitrary patch on the bilayer surface maintains its area ( 1 , 33 ) ; this results in a Lagrange multiplier field λ , which is well known as the surface tension in the membrane . Clathrin Coat . Trilegged proteins , called triskelions , assemble to form a clathrin scaffold that imparts a spherical geometry to the underlying bilayer ( Fig . 2 A ) . The preferred mean curvature of the sphere , called the spontaneous curvature , is isotropic in na - ture . In other words , the curvature induced by clathrin is iden - tical in all of the directions in the tangent plane at any point on the coated membrane surface . In addition to curvature genera - tion , clathrin scaffold along with other initial coat proteins stiffens the membrane , resulting in an increase in the bending moduli of the coated domain ( 34 ) . These effects manifest themselves in the form of a modified strain energy density W = ^ k B ð H − C Þ 2 + ^ k G K , where C is the spontaneous curvature and f ^ k B ; ^ k G g are the modified bending moduli . Fig . 1 . The conundrum : In wild - type yeast cells , actin and BAR proteins turn a shallow invagination into a mature vesicle with a narrow tubular domain before scission ( lipid membrane is shown in yellow , clathrin coat in red , actin filaments in blue , and BAR coat in green ) . In BAR mutant yeast cells , the intermediate vesicle with a constricted neck is not observed . A detached vesicle is directly seen after an initial broad invagination . Because a nonleaky scission requires lipids to come in close proximity and transition through a hemifission state , how broad and shallow invaginations undergo scission remains intriguing . This puzzle is at the core of this study . The figure is not drawn to scale . E1424 | www . pnas . org / cgi / doi / 10 . 1073 / pnas . 1418491112 Walani et al . Actin Forces . Polymerizing actin filaments apply a force f on membrane invaginations . At a point on the bilayer with a unit surface normal n , projection of f yields a normal component ð f · n Þ n and an in - plane component f − ð f · n Þ n ( red and blue arrows in Fig . 2 A ) . Because the precise architecture of the actin network in the vicinity of the invagination and the resulting forces are not yet well established , we model a few different forcing scenarios shown in Fig . 2 B . In the first case , we assume that the actin filaments form a branched network and are con - nected to a portion of the clathrin coat . Hip1R in mammalian cells and sla2p in yeast cells have been known to establish this clathrin – actin link ( 35 – 37 ) . We assume that the actin filaments apply a vertical distributed load on the invagination ; this is in - spired from the model proposed by Idrissi et al . ( 19 ) based on their ultrastructural analysis of endocytic profiles obtained using immunoelectron microscopy ( 12 ) . A similar model was proposed as a likely driving mechanism when the initial coat is unable to drive vesicle growth ( 38 ) . In the second case , we assume that the actin filaments form bundles that apply vertical forces on an annulus at the interface of the clathrin domain and the uncoated membrane . This model is aligned with the dendritic actin net - work with collar - like arrangement observed via high - resolution platinum replica electron microscopy and electron tomography ( 39 ) , and is also in agreement with the parallel bundled net - work scenario proposed by Drubin and coworkers ( 14 ) and used in the computational study by Liu et al . ( 25 ) on yeast cells . In the third case , we assume that the actin bundles apply inward - acting horizontal forces near the base of the invagination . This loading condition has been discussed by Collins et al . ( 39 ) and Kirchhausen and coworkers ( 13 ) in the context of mammalian cells . For all of the loading conditions , we assume that the downward - acting forces are balanced by equal upward - acting forces that impose global force equilibrium , and this should be true in the real scenario as the actin network or bundle has to take support from some structure to apply forces on to the vesicle . A natural consequence of this condition is that it allows the parent bilayer to maintain planar geometry outside the remodeling domain as observed in experimental images . BAR Coat . BAR dimers are crescent - shaped proteins that bend the underlying bilayer by forming a cylindrical scaffold . Unlike the clathrin coat , the BAR coat imposes different preferred curvatures in the longitudinal and the circumferential directions ( Fig . 2 A ) ; as a consequence , interaction of a bilayer with BAR proteins breaks the isotropy present in a typical bilayer . Such a bilayer possesses local orthotropic symmetry , and its strain energy depends on an additional physical parameter D , referred to as the curvature deviator ( 40 – 43 ) . In addition , similar to the clathrin coat , the BAR coat also stiffens the membrane ( 44 ) . To incorporate these effects , we prescribe a more generalized bend - ing energy that has a quadratic dependence on D and a corre - sponding spontaneous curvature D 0 . The resultant strain energy takes the form : W = ^ K 1 ð H − C Þ 2 + ^ K 2 ð D − D 0 Þ 2 + ^ K 3 K ; where f ^ K 1 ; ^ K 2 ; ^ K 3 g are the modified bending moduli . We combine these contributions from the membrane and the endocytic proteins to construct the total free energy of the mem - brane patch . Minimization of the free energy yields the Euler – Lagrange equations that govern the morphology of the membrane patch . Because of heterogeneity , we obtain two force – balance equations in the tangential and the normal directions . The equa - tion in the normal direction , called the shape equation , drives changes in the curvatures ( hence the geometry ) , whereas the one in the tangential direction drives changes in membrane tension . We solve these governing equations for an axisymmetric geometry in conjunction with a few geometric relations and the appropriate boundary conditions to compute the shape transitions of the vesicle and the internal stresses . Further details of the model and the equations are presented in SI Appendix . Results Actin Forces Drive Membrane Invagination via Instability . We first present the actin - driven growth of a vesicle for loading case I ( Fig . 2 B ) in the absence of BAR proteins . We assume that an initial invagination has been created by a clathrin domain of 3 , 200 nm 2 . This estimate of coat size is based on the study of Kukulski et al . ( 18 ) in which clathrin was found to form a hemispherical coat on vesicles with an average size of 6 , 400 nm 2 . We assume that the resting tension in the membrane is 0 . 5 mN / m . This estimate is computed from the Young – Laplace relation based on an Fig . 2 . ( A ) Remodeling mechanisms of the three key endocytic proteins . ( Left ) Clathrin coat imposes spherical geometry on to a bilayer . The induced cur - vature is isotropic in nature . ( Center ) Actin filaments apply pulling / pushing forces on to a bilayer . This force gives rise to an in - plane component and a normal component . ( Right ) BAR imposes cylindrical geometry on to a bilayer . In contrast to the clathrin coat , the BAR coat induces anisotropic curvature . In addition , the two protein coats increase the effective bending stiffness of the underlying bilayer . ( B ) Forces applied by actin network / bundles . The precise arrangement of the actin filaments at the endocytic site is not yet well established . As a result , the distribution of actin forces on an invagination is also not well un - derstood . We therefore model three different potential loading scenarios , inspired from the existing viewpoints in the literature , to simulate vesicle growth . Walani et al . PNAS | Published online March 9 , 2015 | E1425 B I O P H Y S I C S A ND C O M P U T A T I O N A L B I O L O G Y P N A S P L U S estimated turgor pressure of 1 kPa in yeast cells ( 45 ) , which have an average cell diameter of 1 μ m ( 46 ) . The vesicle shapes are computed in response to an increase in the intensity of the actin forces . Such an increase in the force intensity ( force per unit area ) is expected to arise from an increasing filament density , which is observed experimentally in the vicinity of the vesicle ( 36 ) . Similar to Liu et al . ( 25 ) , we neglect the pressure across the membrane because the force intensity due to actin is an order of magnitude higher than the osmotic pressure . Fig . 3 presents our first key finding ( Movie S1 ) . The upper row shows the vesicle morphology at three discrete stages of actin loading . As expected , the invagination grows as the actin force intensity is increased . The first shape is the initial invagination driven by the clathrin coat in the absence of actin forces ( Fig . 3 A ) . As the actin forces are increased , the invagination grows deeper reaching the geometry shown in Fig . 3 B , in a continuous manner . However , a further slight increase in the actin force leads to an unexpected shape change characterized by a drastic increase in vesicle length and a concurrent reduction in the tu - bule width ( Fig . 3 C ) . To gain insight into this discontinuous shape transition , we plot the force – deflection response of the vesicle ( Fig . 3 D ) . The force – deflection curve exhibits a classic snap - through instability and comprises of three phases . In the first phase , the invagination grows monotonically as the force intensity is increased . This branch tracks shape evolution from the geometry in Fig . 3 A to Fig . 3 B . After reaching a peak force of ∼ 190 pN , the system jumps to a point on the third linear branch with a much larger invagination length and positive slope ; this represents the discontinuous transition from the shape in Fig . 3 B to that in Fig . 3 C , whereas the intermediate shapes are skipped during the loading phase . The second branch with a negative slope is unstable and never realized by the system . How do the computed geometries compare with the experi - mentally observed shapes ? The simulated shape just before in - stability is very similar to the shallow 50 - nm invaginations observed in BAR ( Rvs 161 / 167 ) mutant yeast cells by Briggs and coworkers ( 18 ) . In addition , the computed and experimentally measured angles between the membranes ( defined in SI Appendix , Fig . S5 ) during the shape evolution show a very good agreement ( SI Appendix , Fig . S6 ) . In contrast , a highly elongated vesicle after the instability predicted by our model has not been experimentally observed in these BAR mutant cells . Instead , as noted previously , the experiments report a detached vesicle directly after a shallow invagination , which leads to a natural question : Why is the com - puted postinstability shape not seen in experiments ? To investigate this issue , we compute the surface tension and the tangential stress in the vesicle as it undergoes shape evolution . It should be noted that unlike soap films , the net tangential stress in a bilayer com - prises of two components : the surface tension and the bending - induced stress . The stresses for the shapes just before and after instability are presented in Fig . 4 . F ν is the net in - plane stress , and λ is the surface tension . The maximum tangential stress in the vesicle just before the snap - through transition reaches a value of 1 mN / m . After the transition , the in - plane stress increases to 17 mN / m . To get a sense of how high this stress is , we compute an average esti - mate of the lysis tension of a bilayer . Because a typical bilayer can withstand a maximum of ∼ 3 % areal strain and has an average stretch modulus of 250 mN / m ( 1 , 33 ) , it can endure a rupture stress of ∼ 7 . 5 mN / m . The peak stress in the postinstability vesicle far exceeds this critical value and as a result , before the elongated vesicle is realized , the bilayer is likely to undergo rupture . Because A B C D Fig . 3 . Actin - driven vesicle growth exhibits classic snap - through instability . ( A – C ) Vesicle geometries at different stages . ( A ) Vesicle shape at vanishing actin force ; ( B ) vesicle shape just before instability ; and ( C ) vesicle shape just after the snap - through instability ( Movie S1 ) . ( D ) Overall force – deflection response . The jump undergone by the vesicle at the critical actin force is highlighted with a red arrow . The intermediate states on the force – deflection curve are not realized . The snap - through transition results in a significant elongation and constriction of the vesicle . The simulations have been performed at a resting tension of 0 . 5 mN / m . E1426 | www . pnas . org / cgi / doi / 10 . 1073 / pnas . 1418491112 Walani et al . the tubular domain is narrow ( ≈ 5 nm in diameter ) , the lipids in the inner monolayer are adjacent to each other , which can allow a nonleaky scission to proceed via the hemifission state . Thus , a snap - through instability followed by a high stress - induced scission pro - vides a mechanism by which shallow invaginations can end up directly as detached vesicles , furnishing a quantitatively tested an - swer to the mystery observed in BAR mutant yeast cells . BAR Proteins Act as Facilitators . We now simulate the effect of BAR - coat proteins on shape evolution . To this end , we incor - porate the effect of BAR proteins starting from an intermediate stage corresponding to a net vertical actin force that is lower than the critical force needed to induce snap - through transition . Here , we present the results for a net actin force of 160 pN ( 84 % of the critical force value ) . To isolate the effect of BAR scaffold on vesicle growth , we hold the actin force and the clathrin do - main fixed during the shape evolution . We follow the BAR di - mer assembly trend observed in yeast cells characterized by two main phases : the polymerization phase , where dimers self - assemble on actin - driven partial invaginations at a uniform rate , and the depolymerization phase , where they begin to dissociate at a uniform rate ( 25 , 47 ) . This observed change in BAR con - centration could be a consequence of an increase in either the areal density of the dimers or in the area over which polymeri - zation has occurred , or both . For our simulations , we allow both the areal density and area of BAR - coated domain to increase and decrease simultaneously in the two phases ( Fig . 5 A ) . We further assume that the BAR coat - induced curvatures and stiff - nesses are linearly proportional to the dimer concentration . This assumption is based on the rationale that an increased proximity between the dimers would lead to a stronger lattice with en - hanced remodeling capabilities . Such a behavior has indeed been experimentally observed for amphiphysins that bind onto vesicles at dilute concentrations ( 48 ) . Fig . 5 B – G shows our second key finding ( Movie S2 ) . In the BAR - driven case , the shape transition occurs in a more gradual and controlled fashion , in contrast to the rapid and discontinu - ous transition in the actin - driven case ; this is a consequence of the stabilizing effect of the BAR scaffold because it increases the flexural rigidity of the coated domain , thereby reducing its compliance to bending . The BAR proteins transform the shallow invagination to a more U - shaped invagination , as shown in Fig . 5 B . An increase in the BAR density and area leads to vesicle elongation and a narrowing of the neck domain ( Fig . 5 C ) . Once past this point , a decrease in the density and the area of the BAR coat has a counterintuitive impact on the vesicle morphology . Instead of decreasing the invagination , the removal of the BAR coat leads to a further elongation and narrowing of the vesicle ( Fig . 5 D ) . This irreversibility suggests that the vesicle again undergoes instability during the shape transition , this time trig - gered by the BAR scaffold . Thus , for a prescribed concentration ( hence spontaneous curvatures and stiffness ) , and area of BAR proteins , there exist two vesicle geometries corresponding to the two branches ( polymerization and depolymerization ) . The two solution branches meet at a unique set of BAR - coat values . For the simulated case , this turning point corresponds to a preferred radius of curvature of 15 nm in the circumferential direction , bending moduli of 200 k B T , and an area of attachment of 3 , 700 nm 2 . We compare the computed vesicle geometries with those observed by Briggs and coworkers ( 18 ) for wild - type yeast cells ( Fig . 5 E – G ) . The shapes show a remarkable agreement at three different stages of vesicle formation . In addition , we also see an excellent agreement in the angles between the membranes and the tip radius computed from our simulations and those measured by Briggs and coworkers ( 18 ) ( SI Appendix , Figs . S7 and S8 ) . What makes the postinstability geometries in Fig . 5 experi - mentally tractable for visualization ? To explain this question , we again compute the stresses in the vesicle as it undergoes BAR - driven invagination . Unlike the highly invaginated vesicle in the actin case , the in - plane stress for the shapes in Fig . 5 B – D are well below the rupture limit , making them stable structures that could potentially be imaged in experiments . If we continue to decrease the BAR density and the BAR domain size , we see enhanced elongation and narrowing of the tubule leading to higher internal stresses . Eventually , a shape is obtained for which the in - plane stress reaches the critical rupture stress ( SI Appendix , Fig . S9 ) . All of the intermediate shapes are therefore conducive to imaging and might be the reason for a variation in vesicle shapes observed in wild - type yeast cells ( 18 ) . Detached Vesicle Shapes Support Stress - Based Scission Criterion . To further test the role of membrane stresses in CME , we simulate the geometry of detached vesicles for actin - driven and BAR - driven cases . Although scission is an intricate process in itself involving participation of special scission proteins or lipids , like dynamin in mammalian cells or PIP2 in yeast cells , we identify the probable sites for scission based on the in - plane stress pro - file . We hypothesize that the external work needed from scission proteins / lipids for executing membrane scission would be mini - mal at these sites . We therefore detach the vesicle at the site of maximum in - plane stress and simulate the geometry of the closed vesicle . In addition , we constrain the area and volume of the detached membrane domain before and after scission . The geometries of the vesicles for the actin - driven and BAR - driven cases are shown in Fig . 6 . Both vesicles exhibit a prolate geom - etry , unlike the nearly spherical vesicles observed in mammalian cells at low resting tension values . The vesicle in the actin - driven case possesses a more teardrop geometry . Interestingly , the vesicles observed by Briggs and coworkers ( 18 ) in yeast cells also fall into two categories : tear - dropped vesicles and prolate vesi - cles ; their study also revealed a size variation in the wild - type and BAR mutant cells . For the wild - type cells , the vesicles had an average surface area of 6 , 400 nm 2 and in the BAR mutant cells , the average size reduced to 5 , 000 nm 2 . These values are in ex - cellent agreement with the computed vesicle sizes of 5 , 500 and 6 , 480 nm 2 for the actin - and BAR - driven cases , respectively , based on the in - plane stress criterion . In addition , as the peak stress is reached at the interface of the BAR coat and the un - coated membrane tubule , our model predicts that the BAR - coated domain , along with the clathrin - coated domain , becomes part of the detached vesicles . This prediction is aligned with the findings of Kukulski et al . ( 18 ) who found the detached vesicles to be coated with both clathrin and BAR proteins . This match Fig . 4 . Stresses within the vesicle just prior to ðÞ 1 and after ðÞ 2 instability . Net in - plane stress ð F ν Þ is shown in blue , and the surface tension ð λ Þ in ma - genta . The net in - plane stress comprises of the surface tension and the bending - induced stress . The peak in - plane stress in the vesicle before in - stability is 1 mN / m , whereas after instability , it increases significantly to 17 mN / m in the narrow tubule region , which far exceeds the rupture stress of 7 . 5 mN / m that a bilayer can typically sustain . As a consequence , the postinstability shape is not stable and the vesicle would directly undergo scission during the snap - through transition . Walani et al . PNAS | Published online March 9 , 2015 | E1427 B I O P H Y S I C S A ND C O M P U T A T I O N A L B I O L O G Y P N A S P L U S between the simulations and experimental data further strengthens the peak stress - based criterion for scission . Discussion Actin – BAR Synergy Imparts Robustness to the Endocytic Machinery . Our study on actin - driven vesicle growth predicts a net vertical force of ∼ 190 pN for inducing instability at a resting tension of 0 . 5 mN / m ( Figs . 3 and 7 ) . In terms of force per actin filament , it amounts to an average force of ∼ 2 . 4 pN , which is distributed over an area of 1 , 600 nm 2 in the clathrin - coated domain . This value is comparable to the compressive load required to buckle actin filaments obtained experimentally by Kovar and Pollard ( 49 ) and Footer et al . ( 50 ) . However , if the BAR proteins begin to polymerize before the critical actin force is reached , the in - stability could be induced sooner . In fact , BAR proteins establish an alternative transition pathway that connects the equilibrium solutions on the first and the third branches of the actin - driven force – deflection curve ( Fig . 7 ) . The BAR association phase ( in cyan in Fig . 7 ) induces the instability and drives the initial membrane invagination . Once the instability has been triggered by the BAR proteins and the BAR proteins begin to dissociate , the vesicle has a natural tendency to go to the equilibrium so - lution on the third branch of the force – deflection curve corre - sponding to the initial actin force at which the BAR proteins began to polymerize . Thus , once the BAR polymerization has tipped the system over , BAR disassembly reduces the stabiliza - tion effect of the scaffold and the vesicle growth becomes more actin driven . It is for this reason that the disassembly of BAR proteins leads to larger elongation and tubulation of a vesicle . The above discussion highlights a remarkable synergy between the actin and BAR proteins in driving vesicle growth . If we look at the above findings from a slightly different perspective , we can link the timing of the BAR activity to the functionality of the BAR proteins . Liu et al . ( 25 ) , for example , observed short phases of BAR polymerization and depolymerization after an initial phase of actin dynamics . Such a timing of the arrival of BAR A B C D E F G Fig . 5 . BAR - driven shape evolution of a vesicle . ( A ) Areal density and surface area of the BAR proteins ( blue curve ) . Areal density and surface area increase in the initial polymerization phase and decrease in the depolymerization phase . The spontaneous curvatures and the stiffness of the BAR scaffold have been assumed to be proportional to the areal density . ( B and C ) Vesicle shapes during the polymerization phase ( membrane is shown in yellow , clathrin domain in red , actin domain in blue , and BAR domain in green ) . ( D ) Vesicle shape during the depolymerization phase ( Movie S2 ) . The presence of BAR scaffold provides structural stability making the actin - driven transition more controlled . Intriguingly , the depolymerization of BAR proteins shows a counterintuitive response . Instead of undoing the expected squeezing effect , BAR removal results in a further elongation and constriction of the vesicle . ( E – G ) Observed vesicle shapes in wild - type yeast cells . E – G republished with permission from Elsevier ; www . sciencedirect . com / science / journal / 00928674 . E1428 | www . pnas . org / cgi / doi / 10 . 1073 / pnas . 1418491112 Walani et al . proteins and their brief stay can now be seen to be more function oriented than coincidental . The BAR proteins arrive after the actin forces have set the stage and brought the system close to instability . The BAR proteins serve to tip the system over and depart , allowing instability driven transition to proceed . Thus , a short but well - timed activity of BAR proteins is enough to drive vesicle growth and facilitate CME . If we take this argument a step further , we can predict a do - main over which actin and BAR proteins can synergistically drive vesicle growth ( shaded area in Fig . 7 ) . The upper limit of this domain is defined by the pure actin - driven path . To define a lower limit , we require the vesicle after BAR dissociation to experience rupture stress for a successful completion of CME . For this pathway , the green domain represents BAR polymeri - zation - dependent invagination and the cyan domain represents BAR depolymerization - driven invagination . The actin force re - quired for this path is ∼ 30 % lower than the critical actin force needed to induce instability in the absence of BAR proteins ( double - sided vertical arrow in Fig . 7 ) . For any force above this threshold value and lower than the peak force ( shaded region in Fig . 7 ) , actin and BAR can synergistically drive vesicle formation and set the stage for scission ; this showcases an inherent ro - bustness of the endocytic machinery where the two proteins can work together to complete CME . If , in addition to in - plane stresses , other scission effects , such as the line tension induced by PIP2 , are at play , the actin force requirement would decrease further , thereby expanding the domain of actin – BAR coopera - tivity . However , a certain actin force would always be needed to create an initial invagination onto which BAR dimers can poly - merize , making actin forces indispensable for CME in tense plasma membranes . Instability and Morphological Evolution . The snap - through transi - tion in Fig . 3 D , is primarily driven by the actin forces . Applica - tion of actin forces on a planar membrane in the absence of clathrin domain leads to a similar force – deflection curve with a marginal reduction in the critical force ( SI Appendix , Fig . S10 ) . These curves bear similarity to that computed for a tether pulled out of a vesicle by a point force ( 51 ) . As the pulling force is increased , the tether elongates linearly till it reaches a critical point , beyond which it undergoes a first - order shape transition and continues to elongate at a constant force . The main differ - ence between the force – deflection curves obtained in this study and the one by Derényi et al . ( 51 ) lies in the third branch . Though our curves show positive slope indicating structural stiffening , the one obtained by Derényi et al . ( 51 ) remains hor - izontal . This difference mainly stems from the fact that we apply counter forces from the actin network onto the planar membrane adjacent to the vesicle site . If we suppress this force in the ab - sence of clathrin domain and apply only pulling forces on the bud of the vesicle , we recover a force – deflection curve with a hori - zontal third branch ( SI Appendix , Fig . S11 ) . We would also like to note that the force – deflection curves obtained by us and Derényi et al . ( 51 ) do not exhibit any activation barrier associ - ated with the initiation of the invagination , as predicted in the case of a tether pulled out of a spherical vesicle by Smith et al . ( 52 ) . A possible reason for this difference could be the initial flat geometry considered by us and Derényi et al . ( 51 ) as opposed to a spherical shape considered by Smith et al . ( 52 ) . In addition to membrane tethers , instability - induced morphological changes have also been predicted for closed vesicles . For example , Smith et al . ( 53 ) predicted an unbinding pathway via metastable shapes characterized by discontinuous transition for adhered vesicles . Agrawal and Steigmann ( 54 ) showed that a closed vesicle with a preferred spontaneous curvature undergoes a snap - through transition when subjected to point loads . Tension Differentiates CME in Yeast and Mammalian Cells . Although membrane tension has been postulated to be an important factor leading to differences in yeast and mammalian cells , it has not yet been quantitatively examined . Mammalian cells have , on average , a lower resting tension in the plasma membrane be - cause of a lower turgor pressure ( 55 ) . The tension estimates vary from 0 . 003 mN / m in chick neurons ( 56 ) to 0 . 02 mN / m in molluscan neurons ( 57 ) . For the case of vanishing tension , clathrin - driven vesicle formation has been shown to reproduce the experimental findings ( 26 ) . For higher tension ( 0 . 5 mN / m ) , we have shown a good match between the simulations and the shape evolu - tion in yeast cells ( 14 , 18 ) . We now present the results for an intermediate value of 0 . 08 mN / m and compare them with the experimental findings of ( 13 ) in mammalian cells subjected to increased tension generated by either osmotic swelling or Fig . 6 . Shapes of detached vesicles obtained for the actin - driven ( Left ) and BAR - driven ( Right ) shape evolutions . The scission was assumed to occur at the site where the in - plane stress in the vesicle reaches the rupture stress . Both the vesicles exhibit a nonspherical shape , with the actin - driven vesicle having a more tear - dropped geometry . In addition , the size of the actin - driven vesicle is smaller compared with that of the BAR - driven vesicle . These findings are consistent with the observations of Kukulski et al . ( 18 ) in BAR mutant and wild - type yeast cells . 0 100 200 300 400 0 50 100 150 200 Invagination ( nm ) F o r c e ( p N ) Fig . 7 . Synergistic roles of actin and BAR proteins in executing CME . In the absence of BAR proteins , a tension - dependent critical actin force is needed to induce instability and drive vesicle growth . In the presence of BAR scaf - fold , a lower actin force suffices . A reduced dependence on actin force is accompanied with a stronger squeezing effect of the BAR scaffold . However , a certain amount of actin force would always be needed to form an initial invagination that would allow polymerization of BAR proteins and enable them to drive invagination . This interplay results in a broad range in which the two proteins can work cooperatively to counter membrane tension and drive invagination . The shaded region shows such a domain that ensures that the final vesicle obtained after complete BAR dissociation experiences close to rupture stress . Walani et al . PNAS | Published online March 9 , 2015 | E1429 B I O P H Y S I C S A ND C O M P U T A T I O N A L B I O L O G Y P N A S P L U S stretching . In addition to lowering the resting tension value , we increase the clathrin coat size to 20 , 800 nm 2 , which is in between the value used for yeast cells and that for a closed spherical coat ( 32 , 000 nm 2 for a spherical vesicle of radius 50 nm ) , which would ideally form in a low - tension environment in mammalian cells . The computed shapes with the above parameters are shown in Fig . 8 . The shape in Fig . 8 A corresponds to a clathrin - induced invagination in the absence of actin forces , and it matches well with the stalled vesicles ( Fig . 8 B ) observed by Boulant et al . ( 13 ) . The shape in Fig . 8 C is obtained after the occurrence of the snap - through transition , which bears resemblance to the mature vesicles observed by Boulant et al . ( 13 ) ( Fig . 8 D ) . The good agreement between the computed vesicle shapes at different tension values and those observed in yeast and mammalian cells provides quantitative evidence that tension indeed is a key factor that differentiates CME in the two cell types . The vesicle in Fig . 8 C has a maximum in - plane stress of 0 . 46 mN / m , almost an order of magnitude less than the rupture tension , thereby , making it stable . We note that vesicles with elongated tubular domains have also been observed in dynamin - mutant mammalian cells ( 58 ) . Because actin burst in mammalian cells ( under low resting tension ) occurs just before scission , our work suggests that actin forces lead to elongation of the vesicles but are unable to dis - sociate vesicles from the plasma membrane due to inadequate scission stress . Tension Governs Vesicle Morphology . If we generalize the actin - driven shape evolution studies to a wider range of tension values , we find that the vesicle geometry and the initiation and extent of discontinuous shape transition are a function of the resting tension in the membrane . Fig . 9 A shows the critical force needed to induce instability as a function of the resting tension in the planar bilayer . These results have been obtained for a fixed clathrin coat size of 3 , 200 nm 2 . The critical force increases monotonically with an increase in the resting tension . This trend is aligned with the recent studies by Basu et al . ( 59 ) and Aghamohammadzadeh and Ayscough ( 55 ) that found actin requirement to be proportional to the turgor pressure and , hence , resting tension in yeast cells . In addition , we compute the invagination length at the critical point before ð Z 1 Þ and after transition ð Z 2 Þ . An increase in tension reduces the initial in - vagination depth at which the snap - through transition occurs in a linear fashion ( Fig . 9 B ) . In contrast , the jump in the in - vagination length ð Z 2 − Z 1 Þ increases almost linearly as the ten - sion is ramped up . Elongation of vesicles is also accompanied with a narrowing of the width of the tubular domain . Thus , be - yond a critical resting tension , invaginated vesicles after in - stability would experience significant in - plane stresses , making them experimentally intractable until stabilized by BAR - coat proteins . For a clathrin area of 3 , 200 nm 2 , we predict this critical value to be ∼ 0 . 2 mN / m . These predictions can be tested in experiments by systematically varying tension in the plasma membrane , either by osmotic swelling or stretching , and imaging the vesicles . Actin Induced In - Plane Stress Should Be a Key Determinant of Scission . Our study provides strong evidence that in - plane stress should play an integral role in governing membrane scission . Our explanation of the discontinuous transition observed in BAR mutant yeast cells and the vesicle shapes and sizes gener - ated by our model support this prediction . Although other mechanisms have been implicated in scission , membrane stress could facilitate the topological transition and determine the site for membrane scission . For example , Liu et al . ( 24 ) proposed the role of line tension in vesicle formation and scission in yeast cells . The arrival of synaptojanin in the later stages hydrolyzes PIP2 in the clathrin - coated domain , giving rise to a line tension at the interface of the clathrin and BAR - coated domains . However , it is A C D B Fig . 8 . Vesicle shapes obtained at lower resting tension and larger clathrin coat domain . ( A ) Vesicle shape obtained in the absence of actin force . ( B ) A partially stalled vesicle observed in MDCK cells subjected to increased ten - sion ( 13 ) . ( C ) Vesicle shape with actin force . ( D ) A mature vesicles observed in MDCK cells with enhanced tension ( 13 ) . ( A and B ) and ( C and D ) show close resemblance . B and D republished with permission from Macmillan Pub - lishers Ltd : Nature Cell Biology , ref . 13 , Copyright 2011 . A B Fig . 9 . Effect of resting tension . ( A ) The critical actin force required to induce instability increases monotonically with the resting tension present in the bilayer . ( B ) The invagination length before instability ð Z 1 Þ decreases with the resting tension ( blue curve ) . In contrast , the jump in the invagination length ð Z 2 − Z 1 Þ increases with the resting tension ( green curve ) ; as a consequence , shallower invaginations will transform into more elongated vesicles at higher resting tension , which in turn would increase the in - plane stress in the postinstability vesicle , making it susceptible to rupture . E1430 | www . pnas . org / cgi / doi / 10 . 1073 / pnas . 1418491112 Walani et al . important to note that even in the absence of BAR proteins , scission events occur in ∼ 75 – 80 % of the endocytic events ( 18 ) , which alludes to a role of additional mechanisms in executing scission . We propose actin - induced in - plane stress to be a poten - tial candidate . In wild - type mammalian cells , because actin burst occurs in the latter part of endocytosis , actin - induced stress could assist dynamin in scission . In addition , actin - induced in - plane stress in the neck domain could facilitate dynamin polymerization ( 60 ) . This idea is supported by the recent work of Campelo and Kozlov ( 61 ) , which predicts that high stress facilitates insertion of shallow proteins within the bilayer . Thus , in - plane stress could act as a facilitator for dynamin - induced scission . Limitations . The major limitation of our mathematical framework is that it is not equipped to model topological changes and , hence , cannot be used to simulate vesicle scission . It is for this reason that our model predicts highly elongated vesicles after snap - through transition that would otherwise undergo scission . The other limitation of our study is that the actin - loading scenarios modeled are based on the proposals made in the literature and might not be very accurate . However , the findings made above are true for both the distributed network and bundle - type actin loadings ( cases I and II in Fig . 2 B ) . Barring some minor quantitative differences , the overall nature of the force – deflection response of the vesicle remains unchanged for the first two cases ( Fig . 10 ) , which suggests that our predictions should hold for a wide variation in the actin - loading mechanisms . Only the hori - zontal loading ( case III in Fig . 2 B ) requires a much higher actin force ( almost twice ) , induces negative in - plane stress in the tubule region and leads to short spherical vesicles typically not seen in yeast cells ( Fig . 10 ) . These major differences indicate that a purely horizontal force driven vesicle formation is not likely to exist in the high tension regime . The shape evolutions for cases II and III are presented in SI Appendix , Figs . S12 and S13 . Concluding Remarks . In this study , we investigated the individual roles of actin forces and BAR scaffold in executing CME in high membrane tension environment . We presented a snap - through instability - driven remodeling mechanism that governs vesicle shape evolution and provided quantitative insights into the actin - BAR synergy that imparts robustness to the endocytic machinery . Because actin dynamics plays an integral role in other endocytic pathways , such as phagocytosis , macropinocytosis , and caveolae - mediated endocytosis ( 62 ) , it is probable that instability could also be at play in these processes . In addition , because other cellular processes , such as cellular division and locomotion , are associated with large - scale remodeling of cellular interfaces , it would not be surprising if protein - induced instabilities , regulated by interface tension , contribute to these phenomena as well . ACKNOWLEDGMENTS . This work was partially supported by the National Science Foundation Grant CMMI 1437330 . 1 . Phillips R , Kondev J , Theriot J , Garcia H ( 2009 ) Physical Biology of the Cell ( Garland Science , New York ) . 2 . Kirchhausen T ( 2000 ) Clathrin . Annu Rev Biochem 69 ( 1 ) : 699 – 727 . 3 . Conner SD , Schmid SL ( 2003 ) Regulated portals of entry into the cell . Nature 422 ( 6927 ) : 37 – 44 . 4 . Le Roy C , Wrana JL ( 2005 ) Clathrin - and non - clathrin - mediated endocytic regulation of cell signalling . Nat Rev Mol Cell Biol 6 ( 2 ) : 112 – 126 . 5 . Doherty GJ , McMahon HT ( 2009 ) Mechanisms of endocytosis . Annu Rev Biochem 78 : 857 – 902 . 6 . Weinberg J , Drubin DG ( 2012 ) Clathrin - mediated endocytosis in budding yeast . Trends Cell Biol 22 ( 1 ) : 1 – 13 . 7 . Boettner DR , Chi RJ , Lemmon SK ( 2012 ) Lessons from yeast for clathrin - mediated endocytosis . Nat Cell Biol 14 ( 1 ) : 2 – 10 . 8 . HymanT , ShmuelM , AltschulerY ( 2006 ) Actinis requiredforendocytosisatthe apical surface of Madin - Darby canine kidney cells where ARF6 and clathrin regulate the actin cytoskeleton . Mol Biol Cell 17 ( 1 ) : 427 – 437 . 9 . Rodal AA , Kozubowski L , Goode BL , Drubin DG , Hartwig JH ( 2005 ) Actin and septin ultrastructures at the budding yeast cell cortex . Mol Biol Cell 16 ( 1 ) : 372 – 384 . 10 . Fujimoto LM , Roth R , Heuser JE , Schmid SL ( 2000 ) Actin assembly plays a variable , but not obligatory role in receptor - mediatedendocytosis in mammalian cells . Traffic 1 ( 2 ) : 161 – 171 . 11 . Mooren OL , Galletta BJ , Cooper JA ( 2012 ) Roles for actin assembly in endocytosis . Annu Rev Biochem 81 ( 1 ) : 661 – 686 . 12 . Girao H , Geli MI , Idrissi FZ ( 2008 ) Actin in the endocytic pathway : From yeast to mammals . FEBS Lett 582 ( 14 ) : 2112 – 2119 . 13 . Boulant S , Kural C , Zeeh JC , Ubelmann F , Kirchhausen T ( 2011 ) Actin dynamics counteract membrane tension during clathrin - mediated endocytosis . Nat Cell Biol 13 ( 9 ) : 1124 – 1131 . 14 . Kishimoto T , et al . ( 2011 ) Determinants of endocytic membrane geometry , stability , and scission . Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 108 ( 44 ) : E979 – E988 . 15 . KaksonenM , ToretCP , DrubinDG ( 2005 ) Amodulardesignfortheclathrin - andactin - mediated endocytosis machinery . Cell 123 ( 2 ) : 305 – 320 . 16 . Payne GS , Schekman R ( 1985 ) A test of clathrin function in protein secretion and cell growth . Science 230 ( 4729 ) : 1009 – 1014 . 17 . Chu DS , Pishvaee B , Payne GS ( 1996 ) The light chain subunit is required for clathrin function in Saccharomyces cerevisiae . J Biol Chem 271 ( 51 ) : 33123 – 33130 . 18 . KukulskiW , SchorbM , KaksonenM , BriggsJAG ( 2012 ) Plasmamembranereshapingduring endocytosis is revealed by time - resolved electron tomography . Cell 150 ( 3 ) : 508 – 520 . 19 . Idrissi FZ , et al . ( 2008 ) Distinct acto / myosin - I structures associate with endocytic pro - files at the plasma membrane . J Cell Biol 180 ( 6 ) : 1219 – 1232 . 20 . Bashkirov PV , et al . ( 2011 ) Variation of lipid membrane composition caused by strong bending . Biochemistry ( Moscow ) Suppl Ser A 5 ( 2 ) : 205 – 211 . 21 . Frolov VA , Escalada A , Akimov SA , Shnyrova AV ( 2015 ) Geometry of membrane fis - sion . Chem Phys Lipids 185 : 129 – 140 . 22 . Noguchi H ( 2013 ) Structure formation in binary mixtures of lipids and detergents : Self - assembly and vesicle division . J Chem Phys 138 ( 2 ) : 024907 . 23 . KozlovskyY , KozlovMM ( 2003 ) Membranefission : Modelforintermediatestructures . Biophys J 85 ( 1 ) : 85 – 96 . 24 . Liu J , Kaksonen M , Drubin DG , Oster G ( 2006 ) Endocytic vesicle scission by lipid phase boundary forces . Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 103 ( 27 ) : 10277 – 10282 . 25 . Liu J , Sun Y , Drubin DG , Oster GF ( 2009 ) The mechanochemistry of endocytosis . PLoS Biol 7 ( 9 ) : e1000204 . 26 . Agrawal A , Steigmann DJ ( 2009 ) Modeling protein - mediated morphology in bio - membranes . Biomech Model Mechanobiol 8 ( 5 ) : 371 – 379 . 27 . Agrawal NJ , Nukpezah J , Radhakrishnan R ( 2010 ) Minimal mesoscale model for protein - mediated vesiculation in clathrin - dependent endocytosis . PLOS Comput Biol 6 ( 9 ) : e1000926 . 28 . Rangamani P , Mandadap KK , Oster G ( 2014 ) Protein - induced membrane curvature alters local membrane tension . Biophys J 107 ( 3 ) : 751 – 762 . 29 . Steigmann DJ ( 1999 ) Fluid films with curvature elasticity . Arch Ration Mech Anal 150 : 127 – 152 . 30 . Jenkins JT ( 1977 ) The equations of mechanical equilibrium of a model membrane . SIAM J Appl Math 32 ( 4 ) : 755 – 764 . 31 . HelfrichW ( 1973 ) Elasticpropertiesof lipidbilayers : Theoryandpossible experiments . Z Naturforsch C 28 ( 11 ) : 693 – 703 . 32 . Lipowsky R ( 1991 ) The conformation of membranes . Nature 349 ( 6309 ) : 475 – 481 . 33 . Rawicz W , Olbrich KC , McIntosh T , Needham D , Evans E ( 2000 ) Effect of chain length and unsaturation on elasticity of lipid bilayers . Biophys J 79 ( 1 ) : 328 – 339 . 34 . Jin AJ , Prasad K , Smith PD , Lafer EM , Nossal R ( 2006 ) Measuring the elasticity of clathrin - coated vesicles via atomic force microscopy . Biophys J 90 ( 9 ) : 3333 – 3344 . 35 . Gourlay CW , et al . ( 2003 ) An interaction between Sla1p and Sla2p plays a role in regulating actin dynamics and endocytosis in budding yeast . J Cell Sci 116 ( Pt 12 ) : 2551 – 2564 . 36 . Kaksonen M , Sun Y , Drubin DG ( 2003 ) A pathway for association of receptors , adaptors , and actin during endocytic internalization . Cell 115 ( 4 ) : 475 – 487 . 0 100 200 300 400 500 0 100 200 300 400 Invagination ( nm ) F o r c e ( p N ) IIIIII Fig . 10 . Force – deflection curves for the different actin loading cases pre - sented in Fig . 2 B . All three cases show snap - through transition . Cases I and II show similar response with vesicles undergoing a significant elongation after instability . In contrast , case III predicts much smaller invaginations and requires much larger force to induce instability . Walani et al . PNAS | Published online March 9 , 2015 | E1431 B I O P H Y S I C S A ND C O M P U T A T I O N A L B I O L O G Y P N A S P L U S 37 . Boettner DR , Friesen H , Andrews B , Lemmon SK ( 2011 ) Clathrin light chain directs endocytosis by influencing the binding of the yeast Hip1R homologue , Sla2 , to F - actin . Mol Biol Cell 22 ( 19 ) : 3699 – 3714 . 38 . Kaksonen M , Toret CP , Drubin DG ( 2006 ) Harnessing actin dynamics for clathrin - mediated endocytosis . Nat Rev Mol Cell Biol 7 ( 6 ) : 404 – 414 . 39 . Collins A , Warrington A , Taylor KA , Svitkina T ( 2011 ) Structural organization of the actin cytoskeleton at sites of clathrin - mediated endocytosis . Curr Biol 21 ( 14 ) : 1167 – 1175 . 40 . Iglic VK , Remskar M , Vidmar G , Fosnaric M , Iglic A ( 2002 ) Deviatoric elasticity as a possible physical mechanism explaining collapse of inorganic micro and nanotubes . Phys Lett A 296 ( 2 - 3 ) : 151 – 155 . 41 . Iglic VK , Heinrich V , Svetina S , Zeks V ( 1999 ) Free energy of closed membrane with anisotropic inclusions . Eur Phys J B 10 ( 1 ) : 5 – 8 . 42 . Fosnaric M , et al . ( 2005 ) The influence of anisotropic membrane inclusions on cur - vature elastic properties of lipid membranes . J Chem Inf Model 45 ( 6 ) : 1652 – 1661 . 43 . Walani N , Torres J , Agrawal A ( 2014 ) Anisotropic spontaneous curvatures in lipid membranes . Phys Rev E Stat Nonlin Soft Matter Phys 89 ( 6 ) : 062715 . 44 . Ayton GS , Blood PD , Voth GA ( 2007 ) Membrane remodeling from N - BAR domain interactions : Insights from multi - scale simulation . Biophys J 92 ( 10 ) : 3595 – 3602 . 45 . GustinMC , ZhouXL , MartinacB , KungC ( 1988 ) Amechanosensitiveionchannelinthe yeast plasma membrane . Science 242 ( 4879 ) : 762 – 765 . 46 . Parker SP ( 1984 ) McGraw - Hill Concise Encyclopedia of Science and Technology ( McGraw - Hill , New York ) . 47 . Sun Y , Carroll S , Kaksonen M , Toshima JY , Drubin DG ( 2007 ) PtdIns ( 4 , 5 ) P2 turnover is required for multiple stages during clathrin - and actin - dependent endocytic in - ternalization . J Cell Biol 177 ( 2 ) : 355 – 367 . 48 . Sorre B , et al . ( 2012 ) Nature of curvature coupling of amphiphysin with membranes depends on its bound density . Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 109 ( 1 ) : 173 – 178 . 49 . Kovar DR , Pollard TD ( 2004 ) Insertional assembly of actin filament barbed ends in associa - tionwithforminsproducespiconewtonforces . ProcNatlAcadSciUSA 101 ( 41 ) : 14725 – 14730 . 50 . Footer MJ , Kerssemakers JWJ , Theriot JA , Dogterom M ( 2007 ) Direct measurement of force generation by actin filament polymerization using an optical trap . Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 104 ( 7 ) : 2181 – 2186 . 51 . Derényi I , Jülicher F , Prost J ( 2002 ) Formation and interaction of membrane tubes . Phys Rev Lett 88 ( 23 ) : 238101 . 52 . SmithAS , SackmannE , SeifertU ( 2004 ) Pullingtethersfromadheredvesicles . PhysRev Lett 92 ( 20 ) : 208101 . 53 . Smith AS , Sackmann E , Seifert U ( 2003 ) Effects of a pulling force on the shape of a bound vesicle . Europhys Lett 64 ( 2 ) : 281 – 287 . 54 . AgrawalA , SteigmannDJ ( 2009 ) Boundary - valueproblems in the theory of fluidfilms with curvature elasticity . Contin Mech Thermodyn 21 : 57 – 82 . 55 . Aghamohammadzadeh S , Ayscough KR ( 2009 ) Differential requirements for actin during yeast and mammalian endocytosis . Nat Cell Biol 11 ( 8 ) : 1039 – 1042 . 56 . Hochmuth FM , Shao JY , Dai J , Sheetz MP ( 1996 ) Deformation and flow of membrane into tethers extracted from neuronal growth cones . Biophys J 70 ( 1 ) : 358 – 369 . 57 . Dai J , Sheetz MP , Wan X , Morris CE ( 1998 ) Membrane tension in swelling and shrinking molluscan neurons . J Neurosci 18 ( 17 ) : 6681 – 6692 . 58 . Park RJ , et al . ( 2013 ) Dynamin triple knockout cells reveal off target effects of com - monly used dynamin inhibitors . J Cell Sci 126 ( Pt 22 ) : 5305 – 5312 . 59 . Basu R , Munteanu EL , Chang F ( 2014 ) Role of turgor pressure in endocytosis in fission yeast . Mol Biol Cell 25 ( 5 ) : 679 – 687 . 60 . Ramachandran R , Schmid SL ( 2008 ) Real - time detection reveals that effectors couple dynamin ’ s GTP - dependent conformational changes to the membrane . EMBO J 27 ( 1 ) : 27 – 37 . 61 . Campelo F , Kozlov MM ( 2014 ) Sensing membrane stresses by protein insertions . PLOS Comput Biol 10 ( 4 ) : e1003556 . 62 . Engqvist - Goldstein AE , Drubin DG ( 2003 ) Actin assembly and endocytosis : From yeast to mammals . Annu Rev Cell Dev Biol 19 ( 1 ) : 287 – 332 . E1432 | www . pnas . org / cgi / doi / 10 . 1073 / pnas . 1418491112 Walani et al .