Send Orders of Reprints at bspsaif @ emirates . net . ae 4 Current Medicinal Chemistry , 2013 , 20 , 4 - 21 Membrane Domains and the “Lipid Raft” Concept S . Sonnino and A . Prinetti * Department of Medical Biotechnology and Translational Medicine , University of Milan , Milan , Italy Abstract : The bulk structure of biological membranes consists of a bilayer of amphipathic lipids . According to the fluid mosaic model proposed by Singer and Nicholson , the glycerophospholipid bilayer is a two - dimensional fluid construct that allows the lateral movement of membrane components . Different types of lateral interactions among membrane components can take place , giving rise to multiple levels of lateral order that lead to highly organized structures . Early observations suggested that some of the lipid components of biologi - cal membranes may play active roles in the creation of these levels of order . In the late 1980s , a diverse series of experimental findings collectively gave rise to the lipid raft hypothesis . Lipid rafts were originally defined as membrane domains , i . e . , ordered structures cre - ated as a consequence of the lateral segregation of sphingolipids and differing from the surrounding membrane in their molecular compo - sition and properties . This definition was subsequently modified to introduce the notion that lipid rafts correspond to membrane areas stabilized by the presence of cholesterol within a liquid - ordered phase . During the past two decades , the concept of lipid rafts has become extremely popular among cell biologists , and these structures have been suggested to be involved in a great variety of cellular functions and biological events . During the same period , however , some groups presented experimental evidence that appeared to contradict the ba - sic tenets that underlie the lipid raft concept . The concept is currently being re - defined , with greater consistency regarding the true nature and role of lipid rafts . In this article we will review the concepts , criticisms , and the novel confirmatory findings relating to the lipid raft hypothesis . Keywords : Detergent - resistant membrane , ganglioside , lipid raft , liquid - ordered phase , membrane domain , microdomain , sphingolipid . THE ORGANIZATION OF BIOLOGICAL MEMBRANES : ORDER IS NOT A SIMPLE MATTER Cell membrane lipids in vertebrates and many other major phyla consist mainly of glycerophospholipids ( GPLs ) , sphingolipids ( SLs ) and cholesterol Fig . ( 1 ) . Amphipathic lipids such as GPLs and SLs are the major structural lipids that form the basic matrix of all cellular membranes in eukaryotes because of their aggregative properties ; i . e . , the tendency of their hydrophobic portions to asso - ciate together and exclude water molecules and the tendency of their hydrophilic portions to interact with the extra - and intra - cellular aqueous environments . GPLs are by far the major structural lipids in cellular membranes , and phosphatidylcholine ( PC ) , which typically accounts for > 50 % of all cell membrane phospholipids , is the main bilayer - forming lipid . SLs are minor components of cell membranes . Complex glycosphingolipids ( GSL ) , including gangli - osides ( sialic acid - containing GSLs ) , are not bilayer - forming lipids ; in aqueous solution they tend to form micellar aggregates because of the large size of their polar head groups . However , GSLs can be inserted in the glycerolipid bilayer through their hydrophobic cera - mide moiety . Although SLs are minor components of cell mem - branes overall , their local concentration can be high . They are asso - ciated with the external leaflet of the plasma membrane and are particularly abundant in certain cells and tissues such as the myelin sheath and neurons . In cultured cerebellar neurons , SLs comprise ~ 5 % of total amphipathic lipids , i . e . , about 10 % of total lipids of the outer membrane layer . The organization of eukaryotic cells is determined largely by their biological membranes , and the structures and functions of biological membranes are based on the intrinsic properties of mem - brane lipid . Biological membranes separate the intracellular environment from the extracellular environment and create discrete compart - ments within living cells . This simple fact has enormous conse - quences . It permits gradients of water - soluble molecules ( ions , enzymes , reaction substrates and products ) to be formed , thereby restricting the occurrence of specific biochemical reactions to spe - cific environments . The primary function of biological membranes * Address correspondence to this author at the Department of Medical Biotechnology and Translational Medicine , University of Milan , Via Fratelli Cervi 93 , 20090 Segrate ( Milano ) , Italy ; Tel / Fax : + 390250330365 ; E - mail : alessandro . prinetti @ unimi . it is to serve as a physical boundary of a hydrophobic nature between different aqueous compartments . Biological membranes also pro - vide a hydrophobic milieu capable of acting as a solvent for water - insoluble ( lipophilic or amphipathic ) biological molecules , thereby increasing the complexity of chemical reactions occurring in bio - logical environments . A fairly simple molecular organization is apparently sufficient to achieve these functions tasks . Around 1970 ( 45 years after the observation that biological membranes are com - posed of a bimolecular sheet [ 1 ] ) , the nature of this molecular orga - nization as a bilayer of amphipathic phospholipids was elucidated [ 2 - 4 ] . The first level of ordered organization of biological mem - branes , the creation of the lipid bilayer , is lipid - driven ; i . e . , it is a consequence of the aggregative properties of complex amphipathic membrane lipids . The lipid bilayer is characterized by several basic properties that are relevant to its biological functions ; in particular , the bilayer as a whole is quite stable , consistent with its primary function as a physical barrier . On the other hand , the fatty acyl chains of the phospholipids that comprise the bulk of lipid bilayers at 37 °C are in a fluid phase . Thus , biological lipid bilayers under physiological conditions are two - dimensional fluids . The fluid phospholipid bilayer acts as a solvent for membrane proteins such that , similarly to a three - dimensional viscous solution , protein molecules dissolved in the two - dimensional fluid possess a certain degree of lateral motility that permits their free diffusion in the phospholipid bilayer and their distribution along the membrane surface in a random ( “aperiodic” ) arrangement ( the “fluid mosaic” model proposed by Singer and Nicolson in 1972 [ 5 ] ) . As a consequence of the fluidity of the phospholipid bilayer , the components of biological membranes can be arranged in a non - homogeneous lateral distribution , leading to the creation of “or - dered structures that differ in lipid and / or protein composition from the surrounding membrane” [ 6 ] , or “membrane domains” . The exis - tence of membrane areas having highly differentiated molecular composition and supermolecular architecture is directly linked to the multiple roles played by biological membranes in addition to that of a boundary . A biological membrane has to serve as a matrix or scaffold for the organization of multimolecular interactions that are dynamic in time and space and to physically and functionally link the different environments that are compartmentalized by the membrane . For example , biological membranes must be able to transduce signals and to translocate molecules and to couple events that take place in the outer and the inner plasma membrane leaflets . They should also have the potential to assume a great variety of 1875 - 533X / 1 3 $ 58 . 00 + . 00 © 201 3 Bentham Science Publishers The Lipid Raft Concept Current Medicinal Chemistry , 2013 , Vol . 20 , No . 1 5 different geometries that underlie the dynamic control of the shapes of specialized plasma membrane areas and intracellular organelles and of the inward and outward budding and fusion of membrane vesicles . These events imply the existence of a second level of order in the organization of biological membranes , made possible by the existence of lateral interactions that stabilize different membrane domains . The non - homogeneous lateral distribution of membrane components at the micron scale is particularly evident in polarized epithelial cells ( in which basolateral and apical membrane macro - domains can be distinguished ) and polarized neurons ( characterized by the presence of somatodendritic , axonal , and synaptic membrane macrodomains ) . Morphologically distinct domains specialized for particular functions are present at the membrane surface of virtually any cell type ; e . g . , any mobile cell becomes polarized during movement , with a clearly recognizable leading edge and trailing edge . Lateral heterogeneity in membrane structure is also present at the sub - micron and nanometer scale , as revealed by the finding that even in membrane regions without a morphologically distinguish - able architecture , certain proteins do not undergo free and continu - ous lateral diffusion but rather are transiently confined to small domains at the sub - micron scale ( “microdomains” ) [ 7 ] . Membrane macro - and microdomains are characterized in gen - eral by the presence of specific subsets of proteins . Differential sorting and trafficking of proteins is considered to be an important mechanism responsible for the creation of distinct domains in intra - cellular and plasma membranes , and protein - protein interactions have long been regarded as the main factor responsible for the sta - bilization of membrane macro - and microdomains . Reciprocally interacting membrane proteins or proteins belonging to a common membrane - tethered multiprotein complex formed by direct protein - protein interactions ( e . g . , the respiratory chain complex in pro - karyotes and the complexes organized by certain membrane recep - tors or ion channels ) are obviously limited in their reciprocal diffu - sion . Certain proteins appear to be specifically designed to serve as scaffolds for multimolecular complexes that trap other proteins . Protein scaffolds [ 6 ] can be organized by extracellular proteins ( e . g . , galectins ) , intracellular proteins ( clathrin in clathrin - coated pits ) , or membrane proteins ( tetraspanins [ 8 ] , caveolins [ 9 , 10 ] , flotillins [ 11 ] ) . To explain the lateral compartmentalization of the fluid plasma membrane , models such as the “membrane skeleton fence” have been proposed . According to this model , the limitations in lateral diffusion observed for some membrane - bound proteins are due to the formation of compartmental boundaries by actin - based membrane skeleton “fences” that are anchored to the membrane by “picklets” consisting of transmembrane proteins [ 12 ] . Based on this and similar models , the formation and stabilization of membrane domains have been regarded by many investigators as protein - driven events . However , the aggregative properties of complex membrane lip - ids are responsible for not only the creation of the lipid bilayer but also its lateral and transverse organization , at least to some extent . GSLs in particular possess a high potential for the creation of order in biological membranes [ 13 ] , as we will discuss later . Membrane lipids , through their cooperative behavior , achieve the complexity of a “non - covalent macromolecule” that is much larger and more adaptive than a protein molecule . Interestingly , this notion was already present in Singer and Nicholson’s description of the fluid mosaic model ; i . e . , some lipid membrane components were as - sumed not to be in the bulk fluid bilayer phase , but rather to be strongly ( specifically ? ) interacting with membrane proteins , thereby allowing lateral heterogeneity over a short distance ( < 100 nm ) . Soon after formulation of the fluid mosaic model ( 1974 - 1978 ) , studies of thermal effects on the behavior of membrane lipids sug - gested that phase behavior of lipid mixtures was responsible for lateral organization in biological membranes , suggesting that the aggregative properties of membrane lipids constituted one of the major driving forces leading to the creation of lateral order [ 14 - 16 ] . The idea that the existence of multiple phases in the membrane lipid environment drives the “organization of the lipid components of membranes into domains” was clearly stated in 1982 [ 17 ] and probably represents the first formulation of the “lipid membrane domain” concept . The idea that lipids can organize domains in cel - lular membranes as a consequence of the limited solubility of lipids in mixtures , leading to fluid - fluid phase separation , was elaborated subsequently by Simons and van Meer to explain the differing lipid composition of the apical and basolateral plasma membrane do - mains of polarized epithelial cells , and provided the basis for their “lipid raft” hypothesis [ 18 ] . The components of these apical and basolateral domains are largely immiscible because of the diffusion barrier formed by the tight junction that separates the domains . The lipid components that are enriched in the apical domain ( GSLs and HO H H H O O O P O N + O O O O - H O OH O OH HO OH O OH OH NHAc O O O OH O OH O - OOC HO HO OH OH O OH HO OH O H HN HO H O AcHN Fig . ( 1 ) . Chemical structures of cholesterol , phosphatidylcholine ( a glycerophospholipid ) , and GM1 ganglioside ( a glycosphingolipid ) . 6 Current Medicinal Chemistry , 2013 , Vol . 20 , No . 1 Sonnino and Prinetti cholesterol ) need to be sorted from the lipids of the basolateral do - main ( mainly GPLs ) at some intracellular site during their traffick - ing to the surface . The self - associative properties of the apical lipids were proposed as the driving force for such sorting . Experimental proof that SLs and sterols are segregated from GPLs during forma - tion of secretory vesicles in the trans - Golgi network was not ob - tained until 21 years later [ 19 ] - - a good example of the difficulties in applying lipidomic analyses to basic cell biological problems . Simons and Ikonen hypothesized in 1997 that the association of a particular protein with lipid clusters ( “rafts” ) could provide a sort - ing and targeting signal during intracellular trafficking and signal transduction [ 20 ] . Although the role of lipid rafts as sorting mecha - nisms leading to the polarized distribution of lipids and proteins at the surface membrane of epithelial cells remains an elusive and controversial topic even today [ 21 - 24 ] , the lipid raft concept has become extremely popular and has been implicated in a wide vari - ety of cellular functions and biological events [ 25 - 33 ] , some of which will be discussed later . The forces that control the formation and dynamics of lipid rafts are not yet fully understood . This is not surprising given the in - credible complexity that underlies the apparently simple notion of lipid rafts . It has long been known that a typical biological mem - brane contains hundreds of different lipid species , but it has been possible to quantify this complexity only recently through the emerging contribution of a sophisticated “lipidomic” approach [ 34 - 36 ] . The level of complexity is particularly evident for SLs , includ - ing GSLs , which display great heterogeneity in both their lipid moieties and hydrophilic headgroups . A contribution in modulating the cell signaling has been documented for a category of lipids other than “classical” membrane lipids , i . e . cannabinoids [ 37 ] . De - tailed information on phase behavior is available only for simple mixtures of the most common membrane lipids [ 38 - 40 ] . Translating this information to the phase behavior of natural membranes is extremely difficult . Reductionist approaches such as the use of artificial membrane models are conceptually inadequate to investi - gate a phenomenon that is based on the maintenance of collective properties [ 41 ] . The complexity of membrane chemistry applies to protein com - ponents as well as to lipid components . Biological membranes con - tain a huge number of different proteins that interacts with mem - branes in very different ways ; e . g . , transmembrane proteins , pro - teins with short hydrophobic amino acid sequences , palmitoylated or myristoylated proteins , GPI - anchored proteins [ 42 - 44 ] . Mem - brane proteins can interact with lipids , or can be partitioned be - tween different lipid phases . Besides fluid - fluid phase separation , interactions between membrane lipids and membrane proteins are clearly relevant to membrane organization . Biological membranes are systems that are far from equilibrium [ 45 ] . However , most of our information regarding lipid phase sepa - ration has been obtained from studies of artificial systems in equi - librium . Many studies of lipid rafts in biological systems are based on the putative resistance of raft components to solubilization by non - ionic detergents , as discussed below . Detergent - resistant mem - brane ( DRM ) preparations may reflect to some extent the properties of lipid rafts in living cells [ 46 ] ; however , such systems are obvi - ously driven to equilibrium by the specific experimental conditions used for detergent extraction . Despite these caveats , phase separation as a consequence of the limited solubility of lipids in lipid mixtures ( a phenomenon that can be described using phase diagrams [ 40 ] ) , has been observed in all membrane models that reproduce the other basic properties of cellu - lar membranes [ 6 , 13 , 38 , 39 , 41 , 47 , 48 ] . Lipid rafts should there - fore be defined as areas of phase separation in biological membrane [ 6 ] . Lipid bilayers under physiological conditions generally exist in a liquid - disordered ( l d ) phase characterized by high fluidity , in which the lipid acyl chains are disordered and highly mobile . When the temperature is lowered below the melting point , the lipid acyl chains are frozen in an ordered gel phase ( solid - ordered ) with very limited freedom of movement . In mixtures comprised of bilayer - forming lipids such as dipalmitoyl - PC and cholesterol ( or ergosterol in yeast ) , a third physical phase , the liquid - ordered ( l o ) phase [ 49 ] , can be observed . In the l o phase , the acyl chains of lipids are ex - tended and ordered , as in the gel phase , but have higher lateral mo - bility in the bilayer . Sterols can stabilize the l o phase by filling in the hydrophobic gaps between the phospholipid or glycolipid acyl chains [ 39 , 50 ] . Complex membrane lipids are highly heterogeneous in their hydrophobic portions . The prevalence of GPLs that contain unsatu - rated acyl chains ensures the fluidity of biological bilayers . Glycer - olipids with saturated chains are sometimes abundant membrane components [ 51 ] . In some classes of complex membrane lipids , e . g . , sphingomyelin ( SM ) and gangliosides in the nervous system , palmitic and stearic acid are the main fatty acids . Lipids with a high content of saturated acyl chains ( which have a high melting point and can be tightly packed with a high degree of order in the hydro - phobic core of a bilayer ) are typically characterized by a high tran - sition temperature within or above the physiological range [ 39 , 51 ] . Differences in transition temperatures due to the differences in acyl chain composition are most likely one of the major forces leading to phase separation in lipid mixtures and aggregates , including bilay - ers . Phase separation can be observed in binary mixtures of diacyl lecithins that differ in chain length and / or saturation [ 52 - 59 ] . Com - plex lipids containing palmitic acid are highly enriched in putative lipid raft fractions prepared from cultured neurons [ 51 , 60 ] . Phase separation of SM in dimyristoyl - PC bilayers depends on the degree of SM chain mismatch [ 61 ] . The distribution of gangli - oside GM1 in the fluid phase of a phospholipid bilayer [ 56 ] is in - versely correlated with the acyl chain length and directly correlated with the degree of unsaturation . Brain gangliosides , usually highly enriched in stearic acid , are typical l o phase lipids . Very long ( (cid:1) C24 ) fatty acids are abundant in SLs outside the nervous system . Lipid bilayers of the stratum corneum in the skin are characterized by an extremely high content of long - chain ceramides and are very rigid [ 62 ] . Based on neutron diffraction experiments using artificial membranes , it has been proposed that the organization of lipid bi - layers in stratum corneum is stabilized by partial interdigitation between the two leaflets [ 63 ] . Interdigitated hydrocarbon chains have been suggested to play a role in the stabilization of lipid do - mains in human neutrophils ; these domains are enriched in lacto - sylceramide having a high content of C24 fatty acid chains [ 64 - 66 ] . Interdigitation of long - chain fatty acid residues of complex mem - brane lipids may be another feature that favors the separation of phases with a high level of order . Long - chain fatty acid - containing SL have been suggested to form quasi - crystalline structures in GPL bilayers even in the absence of interdigitation [ 38 ] . Cholesterol , which has a melting point of 148 . 5 °C , associates preferentially with ordered acyl chains of complex lipids because of the tight packing of the smooth planar (cid:1) - face of the sterol ring against the extended acyl chains of l o phase GPLs and SLs [ 38 , 41 ] . Choles - terol ( within a wide range of molarity , including physiological con - centrations ) forms a l o phase in dimyristoyl - PC or distearoyl - PC bilayers [ 67 ] alone , in phospholipid bilayers in the presence of SM ( which mixes better with cholesterol than with PC having the same acyl chain ) [ 68 , 69 ] , and in SM vesicles [ 70 ] . In the l o phase , the sterol molecules are tightly intercalated between the ordered acyl chains of the bilayer - forming lipid [ 39 , 50 ] . Cholesterol is generally regarded as a key lipid component of lipid rafts [ 71 ] . However , understanding the role of cholesterol in stabilizing membrane do - mains is hampered by the lack of precise information regarding its trans - bilayer distribution , which is largely asymmetric [ 72 ] . A large percentage of plasma membrane cholesterol has been reported to be associated with the inner leaflet : 75 % in human erythrocytes [ 73 ] ; 85 % in mouse synaptic membranes [ 72 , 74 ] . Ergosterol , the major The Lipid Raft Concept Current Medicinal Chemistry , 2013 , Vol . 20 , No . 1 7 sterol in fungi , is also able to stabilize l o phases [ 75 ] . The coexis - tence of l o and l d phases has been demonstrated in ternary mixtures of cholesterol with a high and a low melting point lipid ( e . g . , with dipalmitoyl - PC and dioleyl PC [ 76 ] ) , sometimes using a SL as the high melting point lipid [ 77 ] . Some studies using mixed monolayers suggested a strong preferential interaction between cholesterol and SM , leading to the formation of liquid - condensed cholesterol - and SM - rich domains [ 77 - 79 ] . However , this idea was refuted by the clear demonstration that there is no specific interaction between cholesterol and SM in phospholipid bilayers [ 80 ] . The phase separation of SLs and their association with the l o phase in GPL bilayers are favored by two features unique to this class of lipids : ( 1 ) SL are ceramide - based amphipathic lipids that can create a complex network of hydrogen bonds because of the presence in the ceramide moiety of amide nitrogen , carbonyl oxygen , and a hy - droxyl group positioned near the water / lipid interface of the bilayer [ 81 ] . The hydrogen bond network makes a high energetic contribu - tion to lipid - lipid interactions that stabilize a rigid segregated phase in the bilayer ( 3 - 10 kcal per hydrogen bond vs . 2 - 3 kcal per interac - tion in the case of van der Waals forces between hydrocarbon chains ) . The relevance of this factor has been confirmed by recent studies showing that ( a ) mixtures of natural SM and PC molecular species with comparable fatty acyl chains are largely immiscible at temperatures above the transition temperature of the SM [ 82 ] ; ( b ) C18 - SM molecules in a dioleyl - PC bilayer display increased order because of the formation of SM nanoclusters stabilized by hydrogen bonds [ 83 , 84 ] . ( 2 ) GSLs , which are present as minor components in all mam - malian cell membranes but are abundant in certain tissues ( e . g . , brain ) and cell types ( e . g . , neurons ) and are asymmetrically en - riched in the outer leaflet of the plasma membrane , are defined on the basis of their hydrophilic sugar head group . The volume occu - pied by this headgroup increases with the complexity of the oligo - saccharide chain Fig . ( 2 ) . Theoretical calculations of minimum energy conformation show that the hydrophilic oligosaccharide head group of GM1 , one of best studied gangliosides , occupies a volume much larger than that of phosphocholine , the bulkiest head group among the phospholipids . According to predictions based on the geometrical properties of GSL molecules , the separation of a GSL - rich phase in a phospholipid bilayer with the concomitant acquisition of a positive membrane curvature implies a minimiza - tion of the interfacial free energy required to accommodate the amphipathic GSL molecule in the bilayer . I . e . , the geometrical properties resulting from the bulky hydrophilic head group of GSLs strongly favor phase separation and spontaneous membrane curva - ture [ 85 - 87 ] . These predictions are supported by findings that the degree of ganglioside phase separation in GPL bilayers depends on the surface area occupied by the GSL oligosaccharide chains , which is directly correlated with the number of sugar residues present in the oligosaccharide [ 52 - 54 ] . GM1 - enriched domains can be formed in SM bilayers [ 70 ] , and phase separation was observed in mixed micelles comprised of two different gangliosides ( GM2 and GT1b [ 88 ] , GD1b and GD1b - lactone [ 89 ] , and GM1 and GD1a [ 90 ] ) with identical composition of the hydrophobic moiety Fig . ( 3 ) . Membrane curvature was recently proposed to contribute greatly to reduction of line tension ( the energy required to maintain a border between a membrane domain and the surrounding mem - brane environment ) [ 91 ] . This general principle could explain the segregation of lipids and proteins in cellular membranes [ 92 ] . It has been suggested that clustering of GSL could be further stabilized by the formation of lateral carbohydrate - carbohydrate interactions . Although head - to - head carbohydrate - carbohydrate interactions have been clearly demonstrated for glycolipids [ 93 ] , direct side - by - side oligosaccharide - oligosaccharide interactions remain hypothetical at present , and NMR studies on ganglioside micelles [ 94 ] appear to rule out significant side - by - side intermo - lecular interactions . The NMR studies also revealed strong interac - tions between different portions of the GM1 oligosaccharide and solvent water molecules [ 94 ] , suggesting that a network of water - mediated hydrogen bridges might contribute to the stabilization of glycolipid clusters . In analogy , water bridges between saccharides were shown to help stabilize the three - dimensional structure of hyaluronan [ 95 ] . These studies of membrane model systems , taken together , strongly suggest that the separation of a l o phase resulting from the fluid - fluid immiscibility of the lipid components of biological membranes is sufficient to create the lateral order and heterogene - ous organization of membranes . These models , of course , do not reflect the complexity of the lipid environment in a membranes or the interactions between lipids and proteins . Fluid phase separation has been reported recently in reconstituted versions of biological membranes , e . g . , giant unilamellar vesicles formed by lipids from brush border membranes [ 96 ] or by lung surfactants [ 97 ] , vesicles obtained from mast cells , fibroblasts [ 98 - 100 ] , and A431 cells [ 101 ] , and budded HIV virus membranes [ 102 ] ( an example of natural cell - originated membrane vesicles ) . Although no current analytical approach is able to identify l o phase in living cells , there Fig . ( 2 ) . Schematic representation of the volume occupied by phosphocholine , the headgroup of PC , and by the oligosaccharide chains of three gangliosides of the gangliotetraose series : monosialoganglioside GM1 , disialoganglioside GD1a , and trisialoganglioside GT1b . Reproduced with modification from Sonnino S and Prinetti A ( 2010 ) Lipids and membrane lateral organization . Front . Physio . 1 : 153 . doi : 10 . 3389 / fphys . 2010 . 00153 [ 329 ] . PC GM1 GD1a GT1b 8 Current Medicinal Chemistry , 2013 , Vol . 20 , No . 1 Sonnino and Prinetti is persuasive evidence for the ordered nature of lipid - driven mem - brane domains . In a study of plasma membrane spheres obtained from A431 cells by a cell - swelling procedure , Lingwood et al . [ 101 ] showed that cross - linking of GM1 using pentavalent cholera toxin at 37 °C resulted in the cholesterol - dependent aggregation of GM1 - rich domains and the formation of micrometer - scale domains . The resulting GM1 - and cholesterol - enriched phase was character - ized by reduced translational diffusion . Fluorescence microscopic and spectroscopic analyses using order - sensitive probes [ 103 ] re - vealed that the degree of lateral order in the GM1 domains was higher than in the surrounding membrane but was considerably lower than in the ordered phase of giant unilamellar vesicles ( repre - sentative of a l o phase ) . The GM1 domains consequently recruited lipid - anchored proteins regarded as lipid raft markers ( but not trans - ferrin receptor , which is not found in lipid rafts ) and also trans - membrane proteins that are not normally associated with the l o phase in model systems or with DRM fractions . Coskun et al . [ 104 ] reconstituted the human EGF receptor ( EGFR ) into prote - oliposomes having a defined lipid composition to test the influence of phase separation on the well - known ability of GM3 ganglioside to inhibit EGFR autophosphorylation [ 105 , 106 ] . GM3 was able to inhibit EGFR autophosphorylation without affecting ligand binding in proteoliposomes composed of unsaturated PC , SM , and choles - terol in a molar ratio that allowed the separation of immiscible l o and l d phases , but not in a mixture of the same lipids in proportions that led to formation of a single l d membrane phase . These studies strongly support the concept that phase separation occurs under physiological conditions and accounts in part for the behavior of ordered membrane domains . The studies also indicate that ordered phases in living cells share some of the properties of - - but are not completely equivalent to - - the l o phases observed in model systems , implying that additional forces play an important role in the creation of lateral order in natural membranes . Other lipid - dependent lateral interactions besides liquid - liquid immiscibil - ity indeed contribute to heterogeneity in cell membranes . Protein - and lipid - driven lateral organization have been regarded as some - how mutually exclusive , but it has become clear that they cooperate in the creation of structural and functional heterogeneity in mem - branes . Certain lipids are components of the quaternary structure of membrane - associated proteins and protein complexes ( e . g . , beta 2 adrenergic receptor [ 107 , 108 ] , cytochrome bc1 [ 109 ] ) . Specific binding of gangliosides to membrane tyrosine kinase receptors has been known for a long time , although some molecular details of the process were clarified only recently ( see for review [ 110 ] ) . Some proteins that are associated with lipid rafts are surrounded by a “shell” of typical raft lipids ( SLs , cholesterol ) [ 111 ] . Such a shell may confer to a membrane protein a higher affinity for lipid rafts , resulting in its partitioning to a phase - separated membrane domain in cooperation with or even in the absence of a specific raft target - ing motif . Cholesterol - binding domains and SL - binding domains ( that bind to the polar head groups of SLs ) have been identified and characterized in several proteins [ 111 , 112 ] . The binding of lipids to receptors induces conformational changes that affect both ligand binding and signaling pathways downstream of receptor activation . Lipid - to - receptor binding also influences the lateral organization of membrane components in the domain of a membrane - organizing protein . E . g . , caveolin - 1 , a typical scaffold - forming protein , binds strongly and specifically to cholesterol [ 113 , 114 ] , which in turn is essential for the formation and maintenance of caveolae , a flask - shaped type of lipid raft subdomain [ 115 , 116 ] . Palmitoylation ( usually regarded as a lipid raft - targeting motif ) of caveolin does not affect its association with lipid rafts , but does affect the interac - tion of caveolin with cholesterol [ 117 ] . The interaction of tetraspan - ins with cholesterol or SLs does not affect their direct interactions with other membrane proteins ( integrins ) , but does affect their homo - oligomerization and signal transduction through tetraspanin - containing complexes ( glycosynapses ) [ 118 , 119 ] . In clathrin - dependent endocytosis , which is regarded as a lipid raft - independent event , phosphatidylinositol ( 4 , 5 ) - bisphosphate serves as the membrane anchor for several proteins that are involved in the formation of clathrin - coated pits [ 12 , 120 , 121 ] . Transient confine - ment zones bounded by a diffusion barrier created by the anchoring of actin filaments to transmembrane proteins have been proposed as an alternative model to lipid rafts to explain the organization of membrane domains [ 12 ] . However , recent studies indicate a close interplay between actin - mediated and lipid raft - mediated events ( e . g . , endocytosis of GPI - anchored proteins [ 122 , 123 ] ) and suggest that lipid - based domains can be stabilized by the cortical actin net - work [ 124 , 125 ] . Fig . ( 3 ) . Schematic representation of phase separation driven by the differences in the oligosaccharide chains in a GM2 / GT1b micelle . Reproduced with modi - fication from Sonnino S and Prinetti A ( 2010 ) Lipids and membrane lateral organization . Front . Physio . 1 : 153 . doi : 10 . 3389 / fphys . 2010 . 00153 [ 329 ] . GT1b GT1b GM2 GM2 The Lipid Raft Concept Current Medicinal Chemistry , 2013 , Vol . 20 , No . 1 9 In summary , our current concepts of membrane organization are heavily influenced by the lipid raft hypothesis , which empha - sizes the importance of the collective properties of the cellular lipid environment in determining membrane organization , and the notion that membrane order is highly dynamic and constantly changing . There is increasing evidence that the interplay of different lipid - sensitive mechanisms plays a key role in membrane lateral organi - zation . Models based solely on fluid - fluid phase separation are no longer adequate in representing the overall complexity of lipid - dependent membrane heterogeneity . FUNCTIONS OF PROTEINS ARE MODULATED BY THEIR ASSOCIATION WITH LIPID RAFTS Certain membrane - associated proteins are highly concentrated in lipid rafts even though overall protein content in the rafts is very low [ 126 ] , suggesting that the segregation of signaling proteins within the rafts may modulate signal transduction cascades [ 127 ] . Several classes of membrane - associated proteins display a strong association with lipid rafts ( see for review [ 128 , 129 ] ) . A common raft - targeting motif is the presence of a GPI anchor [ 130 ] , which is sometimes modified by acylation of the inositol head group or by replacement of the glycerolipid residue with ceramide [ 131 ] . A classic example of this phenomenon is the prion protein [ 32 , 132 ] . Another raft - targeting motif is a lipid modification such as cysteine S - palmitoylation ; tandem NH 2 terminal myristoylation / palmitoyla - tion and double palmitoylation are particularly efficient signals for targeting to lipid domains [ 133 - 135 ] . Modeling studies of trans - membrane proteins indicate that , in general , they are not targeted to l o phases and are excluded from lipid rafts . However , the presence of a lipid modification ( palmitoylation ) or of a specific targeting sequence ( e . g . , a cholesterol - binding or a SL - binding domain such as those present in (cid:1) - synuclein [ 136 , 137 ] ) within the hydrophobic or the extracellular / cytoplasmic domains of a transmembrane pro - tein can increase its concentration in lipid rafts [ 138 ] . Proteins that lack a specific raft - targeting motif can also be associated or re - cruited to lipid rafts indirectly via interactions with raft - resident proteins . Certain raft - associated proteins appear to play important roles in organizing multiprotein complexes within lipid rafts ; one example is caveolin - 1 [ 9 , 10 ] ) . The function of a membrane protein can be affected by its association with lipid rafts through three dis - tinct mechanisms [ 139 ] : ( 1 ) The association of a protein with an l o phase that displays reduced fluidity with respect to the surrounding bilayer may restrict the lateral motility of the protein , thereby favoring more stable in - teractions with other proteins that are segregated in the same do - main . I . e . , association with lipid rafts may provide a mechanism that facilitates the co - clustering of different membrane proteins . In some cases , all of the proteins that belong to a signaling complex are resident in lipid rafts in the resting state . In other cases , the acti - vation of membrane receptors is followed by the recruitment to lipid membrane domains of the receptors themselves or of effector proteins that are not located in lipid rafts under basal conditions . Different populations of lipid rafts sometimes aggregate and fuse together upon stimulation , making possible interactions between sets of proteins that were previously physically separated from each other [ 140 ] . One argument against this simplistic view is that the surface density of proteins in lipid rafts is very low and that limita - tions in lateral motility could hamper protein - protein interactions . On the other hand , the trapping of a protein within lipid rafts could prevent it from interacting with other proteins that are localized preferentially in fluid membrane regions ; in such cases the associa - tion of a protein with rafts could inhibit biological events based on protein - protein interactions . ( 2 ) The association of a protein with a rigid membrane area could induce conformational changes in the polypeptide chain that affect its functional activity , independently from the formation of specific high - affinity lateral interactions with other raft compo - nents . ( 3 ) Proteins that are concentrated in lipid rafts are favored in terms of interactions with lipid raft components . GSL , because of their complex oligosaccharide groups , are good candidates for spe - cific lipid - protein lateral interactions . In addition to their associa - tion with lipid rafts , GSLs ( gangliosides in particular ) are well known for their ability to modulate the activity of membrane - associated proteins such as receptor tyrosine kinases ( for review see [ 110 , 141 , 142 ] ) . In most cases , the molecular aspects of GSL - protein interactions that underlie the modulatory effects of GSL remain to be elucidated . The oligosaccharide chain of a GSL in - serted in the plasma membrane may interact with a membrane pro - tein in several ways : ( a ) through the amino acid residues in the extracellular loops of the protein , if the conformation of the poly - peptide chain allows these residues to be sufficiently close to the membrane surface ; ( b ) through the sugar residues in the glycans of a glycosylated protein , if the dynamics of the protein oligosaccha - ride chain allow the appropriate orientation toward the cell surface ; ( c ) through the hydrophilic portion of the anchor in the case of GPI - anchored proteins ; this portion is by definition located near the extracellular surface of the membrane . Early studies showed that many biological effects of gangli - osides are due at least in part to the modulation of various protein kinase systems [ 143 - 151 ] . Receptor and non - receptor protein kinases were later found to be highly enriched in lipid rafts , sug - gesting new models of ganglioside - mediated signal transduction . Coskun et al . showed recently [ 104 ] that the inhibitory effect of GM3 on EGFR phosphorylation ( which is mediated by side - by - side carbohydrate - carbohydrate interaction between the GM3 oligosac - charide and an N - linked glycan bearing multiple GlcNAc terminal residues on the receptor [ 152 , 153 ] ) is possible only in a phase - separated lipid environment . LIPID RAFTS AND DETERGENT - RESISTANT MEM - BRANES ( DRMs ) Brown and Rose demonstrated in 1992 that GPI - anchored pro - teins can be recovered from lysates of epithelial cells in a low - density , detergent - insoluble form . DRM structures enriched in GPI - anchored proteins were also enriched in GSLs , but not in baso - lateral marker proteins [ 154 ] . This was the first evidence supporting Simons and van Meer ' s 1988 hypothesis regarding the sorting of proteins to the apical domain of polarized cells as a consequence of their association with a GSL - enriched environment ( i . e . , lipid raft ) , and strongly influenced subsequent research in this field . There were several biochemical studies on the composition , organization , and biological roles of lipid rafts based on Brown and Rose’s method , and many investigators equated de facto lipid rafts with a membrane fraction characterized by a particular lipid composition leading to a l o or highly - organized phase operationally defined in terms of insolubility in non - ionic aqueous detergents [ 154 ] . Most of the components of cell membranes ( including GPLs , bulk lipid components , and intrinsic membrane glycoproteins ) are solubilized by detergents and chaotropic agents [ 155 ] . In contrast , certain com - ponents were known to be insoluble in non - ionic ( Triton X - 100 ) or zwitterionic detergents ( Empigin BB ) under certain experimental conditions , and detergent insolubility was used as an analytical criterion or a preparative tool long before the appearance of the lipid raft hypothesis . In early studies , “detergent - insoluble material” ( DIM ) was shown to be enriched in pericellular matrix proteins ( e . g . , fibronectin , tenascin , Gp140 ) , in components of cell attach - ment sites ( including cytoskeletal elements ) ( termed “detergent - insoluble substrate attachment matrix” , DISAM ) [ 156 ] , and in GSLs , particularly GM1 ( termed “detergent - insoluble glycolipid - enriched material” , DIG ) [ 157 - 159 ] . Later studies showed that these detergent - insoluble fractions had highly complex compositions , 10 Current Medicinal Chemistry , 2013 , Vol . 20 , No . 1 Sonnino and Prinetti including other SLs , gangliosides , SM [ 160 - 162 ] , cholesterol [ 161 ] , lipid - anchored proteins ( containing GPI anchors or fatty acid modi - fications ) [ 154 , 162 - 167 ] , and other hydrophobic plasma membrane proteins ( e . g . , caveolin ) [ 168 ] . The concept gradually evolved that DIM consisted at least in part of DRMs such as those in the apical compartment of polarized epithelial cells ( e . g . , MDCK cells ) or in the caveolar membrane system and that membrane fractions corre - sponding to or containing lipid rafts could be separated based on their insolubility in non - ionic aqueous detergents . Treatment with a non - ionic detergent ( typically Triton X - 100 ) at low temperature resulting in the solubilization of lipid components present in the membrane ( e . g . , most GPLs ) in a liquid - disordered phase . These lipids are thereby removed from the membrane through the forma - tion of mixed micelles with the detergent ( “solubilization” ) while l o phase components remain laterally organized and form microsome - like or planar structures Fig . ( 4 ) . The DIM / DRM fraction can be separated following the detergent treatment based on its low rela - tive density ( buoyancy ) [ 154 ] , using continuous or discontinuous density gradients . The low density of the DIM / DRM fraction is most likely due to its high lipid content , i . e . , high lipid - to - protein ratio . Low - density , detergent - insoluble fractions were isolated from a wide variety of cultured cells , including almost all the mammalian cell types [ 51 , 126 , 168 - 179 ] and tissues [ 180 - 187 ] investigated so far , fish [ 188 ] , yeast [ 189 , 190 ] , protozoan [ 191 - 193 ] , and plant cells [ 194 , 195 ] . The availability of an efficient method to purify lipid raft - containing fractions dramatically advanced the biochemi - cal and compositional characterization of these structures and pro - vided essential pieces of information that helped guide and direct studies on the structure and function of lipid rafts by many research groups . Consistent with findings from studies in model membranes re - garding the segregation of membrane lipids , DRMs were found to be highly enriched in SLs , cholesterol , and palmitic acid - containing GPLs . The composition of a typical DRM fraction prepared from cultured rat cerebellar neurons is summarized in ( Table 1 ) . Insolubility in Triton X - 100 soon became the standard criterion for assessing the association of a given protein with lipid rafts . However , several criticisms were raised regarding the significance of the biochemical data obtained by analyzing DRM fractions ( for excellent reviews on this topic , with very different points of view , see [ 196 - 199 ] ) . One argument was that the apparent detergent in - solubility of a given cellular component might result from an arti - factual rearrangement induced by the detergent itself . The method was also found to be highly sensitive to the specific experimental parameters ( particularly temperature , detergent concentration , and detergent - to - cell ratio ) . Standardization of the experimental proce - dures was difficult , and the overall composition of DRM fractions and the association of specific molecules with DRMs appeared to be significantly affected by even tiny modifications of various con - ditions , including the agents used for membrane disruption ( differ - ent detergents or detergent concentrations [ 168 , 200 - 202 ] ) , the me - chanical procedures used to promote membrane solubilization ( sonication , homogenization ) [ 203 ] , temperature [ 154 , 202 , 204 , 205 ] , pH , and the ratio of the detergent to the biological material [ 187 , 201 ] . Because of the concern regarding the possible artifactual nature of detergent - prepared fractions , comparative studies were per - formed using a wide variety of detergents [ 200 , 202 , 206 , 207 ] . These studies showed that DRMs enriched in cholesterol and SL and in particular proteins that are regarded as lipid raft markers ( e . g . , GPI - anchored proteins and acylated proteins ) can be prepared Fig . ( 4 ) . Insolubility of lipid raft components in the presence of Triton X - 100 and preparation of detergent - resistant membranes ( DRMs ) . Detergents in water solutions aggregate as small micelles over a critical micellar concentration ( c . m . c . ) . The c . m . c . for Triton X - 100 is 0 . 31 mM ; at a 1 % concentration many detergent monomers are therefore present in solution and enter into the fluid ( “non - raft” ) portions of the membrane . Fluid membranes containing Triton X - 100 are dissolved and form small mixed micelles that are enriched in detergent , GPLs , and proteins . The detergent does not enter into the less fluid ( “raft” ) portions of membrane , which contain few proteins but are enriched in SLs and cholesterol . The membrane in these areas therefore maintains the bilayer structure . De - tergent - resistant and detergent - soluble components can be separated by gradient centrifugation . The figure schematically depicts only the external membrane layer . Proteins are not illustrated , and the relative proportions of the membrane components as shown are not accurate . + Triton X - 100 RAFT NON - RAFT Low - density fraction DRM High - density fraction cholesterol sphingolipid glycerophospholipid Triton X - 100 The Lipid Raft Concept Current Medicinal Chemistry , 2013 , Vol . 20 , No . 1 11 using detergents with various stringencies . However , the associa - tion of other proteins ( particularly integral membrane proteins ) with DRM fractions was strongly affected by the type of detergent and by the detergent / protein ratio . The DIMs obtained in the presence of Triton X - 100 , CHAPS , Brij 96 , and Triton X - 102 were found to float at different densities , suggesting that the domains insoluble in different detergents were characterized by different lipid content or different lipid / protein ratio . Some studies indicated that the differ - ences observed in the composition of DRM fractions isolated using different detergents might reflect the existence of different levels of order within lipid membrane domains and / or of biochemically dis - tinct lipid membrane domains within the plasma membrane of a given cell [ 202 , 208 - 211 ] , i . e . , the existence of different subpopula - tions of lipid rafts . E . g . , ( a ) differential solubilization by Triton X - 100 and Brij 96 was used to demonstrate that two GPI - anchored proteins in neurons , Thy - 1 and PrP , belong to structurally different lipid membrane domains characterized by differing degrees of order [ 200 ] and lipid composition [ 212 ] ; ( b ) biochemically distinct deter - gent - specific domains from myelin membrane were separated using different non - ionic ( Triton X - 100 , Brij 96 , Triton X - 102 ) or zwitte - rionic ( CHAPS ) detergents [ 202 ] . Thus , differential detergent solu - bilization may provide a powerful tool for studying different lipid raft subpopulations or different degrees of lateral order within the same lipid raft . On the other hand , the above findings imply that a DRM may contain membrane fragments derived from the aggrega - tion of distinct lipid membrane domains [ 200 ] , thus posing a further methodological concern regarding possible artifacts associated with this method . It is clear that detergents , particularly Triton X - 100 , substantially alter the lateral organization of biological membranes [ 213 ] . However , a recent study showed that Triton X - 100 did not induce the formation of liquid ordered domains in a model mem - brane with a composition similar to that of the outer leaflet of plasma membranes , although it increased the average domain size by inducing the aggregation of pre - existing domains [ 214 ] . Given that DRMs correspond to phase - separated l o domains in membrane bilayers , it is not surprising that temperature critically affects DRM preparations . All of the steps in the preparation proce - dure are performed between 0 and + 4 °C [ 154 ] . The low tempera - ture necessary for DRM preparation is an experimental condition that cannot be easily extrapolated to living cells ; this fact is one of the major criticisms directed at the physiological relevance of DRM fractions . The working temperature was shown to have a major effect on the composition of DRM prepared from bovine brain myelin . When purified myelin was extracted with Triton X - 100 at 20 °C and the extract was then fractionated over a continuous su - crose density gradient , two distinct low - density fractions were iso - lated [ 215 ] which both had higher cholesterol and galactosylcera - mide levels than the starting preparation but differed from each other in their levels of GM1 and specific protein markers . The l o / l d phase separation in model membranes occurs at 37 °C [ 216 ] , and DRM can be prepared from cells or tissues at 20° or 37°C in some cases [ 201 , 202 , 204 , 215 ] . Proper adjustment of the ionic composi - tion of the solubilization buffer ( e . g . , Mg + and K + concentrations similar to those in the intracellular environment and addition of EGTA to chelate Ca 2 + ) allows the preparation at 37 °C of DRMs that have many of the properties of lipid rafts isolated from brain membranes or cultured cells using Triton X - 100 or Brij 96 [ 217 ] . These “37 °C DRMs” were larger than lipid rafts prepared at low temperature , indicating that some aggregation may have occurred during the purification . This phenomenon can be avoided by replac - ing the flotation method for DRM isolation with a magnetic im - munopurification procedure , which minimizes the time required for DRM isolation [ 218 ] . Although isolation procedures based on different detergents are useful and appropriate for understanding the lateral order of bio - logical membranes [ 202 , 212 ] , the detergent insolubility of a pro - tein is clearly determined in some cases by the protein ' s intrinsic structural features ( e . g . , the mode of its association with the plasma membrane ) rather than by its association with lipid rafts [ 206 ] . De - tergent - insolubility per se is therefore not a sufficient criterion for establishing the association of a protein with lipid rafts . Biochemi - cal analysis of the complex environment of the protein ( particularly of its lipid composition ) or complementary approaches in intact cells are necessary to establish the association of a protein with a lipid - rich , highly organized membrane domain . To avoid problems related to the use of detergents , there have been many attempts to develop “detergent - free” methods for the separation of low - density membrane fractions corresponding to lipid rafts . The rationale for these attempts was that resistance to detergent solubilization might be just one aspect of a more general phenomenon , i . e . , resistance to a variety of treatments capable of disrupting the structure of less ordered membrane areas but not that of highly organized , “rigid” , and thermodynamically favored lipid membrane domains . Several distinct techniques have been devel - oped for the separation of lipid raft fractions without the use of detergents . The disruption of cells in the presence of high pH or hypertonic sodium carbonate or by mechanical treatments ( sonica - tion under carefully controlled conditions ) produces membrane fragments that can be separated by density gradient centrifugation [ 219 - 226 ] . Comparative analyses have shown that the compositions of DRM fractions obtained using different detergents vs . detergent - free low - density membrane fractions obtained after cell lysis under very different experimental conditions as described above are very similar but not identical [ 126 , 168 , 176 , 203 , 204 , 227 - 236 ] This finding suggests that the highly resistant and ordered supra - molecular structures that correspond to the native cores of lipid rafts can be isolated using these procedures , although the proce - dures alter the lateral order of biological membranes to some extent . Table 1 . Composition of DRMs from Rat Cerebellar Neurons Differentiated in Culture . The Composition of the Cell Homogenate is Shown for Comparison [ 51 , 126 ] Homogenate DRM nmoles / 10 6 cells % of total nmoles / 10 6 cells % of total Proteins 1 . 25 3 . 05 0 . 02 0 . 28 GPLs 32 . 84 80 . 29 3 . 95 55 . 39 SLs 2 . 01 5 . 13 1 . 25 17 . 53 Ceramide 0 . 22 0 . 54 0 . 11 1 . 54 SM 1 . 00 2 . 44 0 . 67 9 . 39 Gangliosides 0 . 79 1 . 93 0 . 47 6 . 59 Cholesterol 4 . 80 11 . 73 1 . 91 26 . 78 12 Current Medicinal Chemistry , 2013 , Vol . 20 , No . 1 Sonnino and Prinetti DIRECT DETECTION OF LIPID RAFTS AT THE CELL SURFACE Several techniques are available for the detection of lipid rafts or organized domains in intact cell membranes . These techniques overcome the limitations of analytical methods based on detergent solubilization and add several relevant layers of information to the basic compositional knowledge obtained from the analysis of DRMs . The highly diverse experimental methods used for the iden - tification of lipid rafts at the cell surface are all based on detection of the membrane topology of a putative lipid raft marker ( which is usually defined on the basis of the marker’s enrichment in DRM fractions ) and require the use of a physical , chemical , or biological probe whose nature depends on the experimental approach . Electron microscopy ( EM ) allows the ultra - high spatial resolu - tion necessary for the investigation of membrane lateral heterogene - ity at the meso scale and is therefore perfectly suited in principle for the detection of lipid rafts . The observation that GSLs form clusters ( visualized by immuno - EM ) at the cell surface was a key piece of evidence leading to development of the lipid raft hypothesis [ 237 ] . GSL clustering in cell membranes has been documented for glo - boside in human erythrocytes [ 238 ] , polysialogangliosides in fish brain neurons [ 239 ] , GM3 ganglioside in peripheral human lym - phocytes , Molt - 4 lymphoid cells [ 240 ] , and murine 3T3 - L1 adipo - cytes [ 241 ] , lactosylceramide ( LacCer ) in human neutrophils and neutrophilic differentiated HL60 cells [ 64 ] , and GM1 in dorsal root ganglion neurons [ 242 ] . Lipid raft markers can be detected by im - muno - EM using colloidal gold particles of different sizes linked to anti - GSL antibodies or glycolipid - binding proteins . This method allows us to define the topology of a putative lipid raft marker in relation to cell architectural features or to other target molecules , and quantitative image analysis allows us to estimate average lipid raft size and the total membrane area occupied by lipid rafts . The fact that the method requires extensive sample manipulation , the use of multivalent probes ( e . g . , IgM anti - glycolipid antibodies or cholera toxin B - subunit for GM1 ) , and the use of organic solvents and / or of chemical fixatives raises concerns regarding possible experimental artifacts , particularly when the target molecule is a membrane lipid . Immunolabeling should be performed following fixation to prevent the redistribution of SLs after cross - linking with antibodies [ 243 ] . Most lipids do not react with the aldehyde fixa - tives commonly used in EM and can therefore be redistributed within or even removed from the membrane during sample han - dling [ 12 , 244 ] . On the other hand , chemical fixatives do not pre - serve the in situ localization of membrane lipids [ 245 ] . Standard EM protocols can be modified in order to minimize these concerns . Immuno - EM using anti - LacCer IgM on ultrathin cryosections pre - pared without organic solvents showed that LacCer is present in clusters ( ~ 40 nm diameter ) on the plasma membrane of human neutrophils , and double labeling with anti - LacCer and anti - Lyn antibodies showed that 24 % of the LacCer clusters are associated with the Src family kinase Lyn [ 64 ] . A freeze - fracture replica label - ing method was recently established that overcomes some of the disadvantages of conventional immuno - EM and allows quantitative analysis of the distribution of membrane lipids at a nanometer scale [ 246 , 247 ] . In this method , living cells without pretreatment are flash - frozen using a liquid helium - cooled copper block which pre - vents any molecular motion in the membrane during the fixation procedure [ 248 ] . Samples are kept deep - frozen throughout the freeze - fracture procedure , and the fractured membrane is coated by a thin layer of carbon and platinum by vacuum evaporation , thereby immobilizing and physically fixing the membrane components . The labeling procedure is then performed on the replicas with an appro - priate probe at a relatively high temperature ( 4 - 37 °C ) . This method has been successfully applied for nanoscale analysis of the distribu - tion of membrane lipids in the outer ( GM3 and GM1 ) or the inner leaflet ( phosphatidylinositol 4 , 5 - bisphosphate ) of the plasma mem - brane . GM3 and GM1 formed independent clusters ( < 100 nm di - ameter ) at the cell surface [ 249 , 250 ] . Ganglioside clustering was sensitive to cholesterol depletion , depolymerization of the actin cytoskeleton , and ( in the case of GM3 ) inhibition of Src family kinases [ 250 ] . Clustering of GM1 in GM1 - null fibroblasts loaded exogenously with GM1 was similar to that of endogenous GM1 [ 249 ] . The same method revealed that phosphatidylinositol 4 , 5 - bisphosphate is unevenly distributed in the plasma membrane and highly clustered in the cytoplasmic leaflet at the rim of caveolae ; this was the first direct evidence that lipid lateral segregation also occurs in the inner leaflet of the membrane [ 251 ] . EM analysis has high spatial resolution power but is not suit - able for studies of lipid raft dynamics in time and space . Fluores - cence microscopy , which has high sensitivity and is suitable for dynamic studies of living cells , has the disadvantage of poor spatial resolution ( the average diameter of a detection spot in confocal microscopy is > 200 nm ) . Several high - resolution techniques that utilize fluorescent probes are now available for studies of mem - brane heterogeneity in intact cells , allowing the study of lipid rafts in vivo [ 139 , 252 - 255 ] ( Table 2 ) . Some of these techniques are par - ticularly appealing because of their capability to reveal the dynam - ics of membrane domains . Such capability is completely lacking in equilibrium - based methods such as those used to study phase sepa - ration in model systems and those used to analyze membrane frac - tions separated on the basis of detergent solubility . The widely used techniques of fluorescence recovery after pho - tobleaching ( FRAP ) and fluorescence correlation spectroscopy ( FCS ) allow us to determine the translational mobility of a fluoro - phore [ 256 , 257 ] . Fluorescence resonance energy transfer [ 258 ] ( FRET ) measures the energy transfer between an excited donor fluorophore and an acceptor molecule , allowing us to determine donor - acceptor proximity with high spatial resolution . Single fluorophore tracking microscopy ( SFTM ) [ 7 , 259 , 260 ] , single par - ticle fluorescence tracking ( SPFT ) , and single particle tracking ( SPT ) follow the translational trajectories of membrane molecules by measuring the motility of a fluorescent label or of a colloidal gold particle ( in the latter case , by Rayleigh light scattering ) spe - cifically bound to the target molecule [ 139 , 261 , 262 ] . These tech - niques are promising because of their applicability to dynamic stud - ies , in striking contrast to the biochemical methods based on deter - gent solubility . The results obtained from application of these techniques to studies of cell membrane heterogeneity were consistent to some extent with the concept of lipid rafts developed based on DRM analysis . In particular , studies using these techniques revealed a non - random distribution of cell surface molecules leading to a highly hierarchical membrane organization that includes microdo - mains differing in terms of composition , size , and spatial and tem - poral dynamics . The studies also confirmed the importance of cho - lesterol and SLs in membrane domain formation [ 263 ] . However , some of the findings obtained using these techniques appeared to contradict the basic assumptions that underlie the lipid raft hypothe - sis . FRAP studies , for example , indicated that the diffusion coeffi - cients for various membrane proteins were correlated with the mode of association of the protein with the membrane rather than with the protein ' s detergent solubilization behavior [ 264 ] . FRET studies showed no evidence for non - random distribution of GPI - anchored proteins ( detergent - insoluble membrane components that are usu - ally regarded as lipid raft markers ) [ 256 , 265 ] , and SPT of deter - gent - insoluble components suggested a behavior consistent with monomer diffusion [ 266 - 268 ] . However , several points must be taken into account when comparing results obtained in intact cells with those obtained from detergent solubility studies : ( 1 ) The tech - niques applied in living cells vary widely in their windows of spa - tial and temporal resolution [ 139 ] , and results obtained using differ - ent techniques are therefore not directly comparable . ( 2 ) The tech - niques applied in cells rely on the use of a physical or chemical probe or tag to follow the behavior of a membrane molecule . The The Lipid Raft Concept Current Medicinal Chemistry , 2013 , Vol . 20 , No . 1 13 use of probes introduces several possibilities for generating artifacts because of , e . g . , the multivalency of the probe ( as in the case of anti - glycolipid antibodies , which are usually IgM , and of the chol - era toxin B - subunit ) , chemical modifications introduced in the marker molecule , or the use of an extrinsic label . ( 3 ) The techniques typically follow the behavior of a selected marker molecule but do not provide information on the composition of lipid rafts or on their behavior as an entire entity . ( 4 ) A biochemical approach based on detergent solubility defines an averaged , non - dynamic situation that most likely results from the summed activity of many heterogene - ous and time - dependent microdomains . Thus , each of the various techniques may be better suited for the detection of a specific sub - domain population . The limitations described above may be overcome in the near future by use of Stimulated Emission Depletion ( STED ) micros - copy , the first and most widely applied in a family of fluorescence - based microscopic techniques that are able to pass the limit im - posed by the diffraction barrier , thus scaling the resolution of fluo - rescence microscopy down to the nano level ( some authors have referred to this technique as “nanoscopy” ) [ 269 , 270 ] . In STED microscopy , the fluorescence emission of the probe is confined to a region smaller than that corresponding to the excitation spot by the application of a second doughnut - shaped light beam that is able to eliminate the fluorescence in the outer region of the excitation spot . This technique can be applied to the ultrastructural organization of living cells ( e . g . , imaging of dendritic spines [ 271 ] ) and even to living animals [ 272 ] . Application of STED microscopy to testing of the lipid raft hypothesis [ 263 , 273 ] demonstrated that putative lipid raft markers , including GPI - an chored proteins , SM , and GM1 , were confined to molecular complexes that cover membrane areas with diameters < 20 nm . These complexes were transient and had an average lifespan of 10 - 20 msec . The complexes appeared to be cholesterol - dependent , as the trapping was reduced upon choles - terol depletion . STED microscopy was also used to demonstrate that CD11b integrin and LacCer are associated with the same “nanodomain” in the membrane of living neutrophils and partici - pate in LacCer - mediated phagocytosis of microorganisms [ 274 ] . The major limitation of this technique is the necessity of using fluo - rescent probes or analogues or fluorescence - tagged antibodies against the target molecule , with the usual caveats related to the use of probes [ 275 ] . In summary , lipid rafts in intact cells appear to be non - equilibrial structures that can be generated , dissipated , or exten - sively reorganized in response to a wide variety of biochemical stimuli . The size of these short - term ordered structures in intact cells varies considerably from the nanometer [ 212 , 263 , 267 , 276 , 277 ] to the micrometer range [ 278 - 280 ] , and their lifespan ranges from microseconds [ 281 - 283 ] to milliseconds or seconds [ 267 , 277 - 279 ] . Such remarkable variability in the reported features of these membrane domains most likely reflects the great differences in spatial and temporal resolution that are characteristic of the differ - ent techniques used . Clearly , however , these observations indicate the coexistence of multiple kinds of non - equilibrial membrane do - mains the features of which cannot be explained solely on the basis of the lipid raft hypothesis , i . e . , fluid - fluid phase separation . LIPID RAFTS AT WORK : EXAMPLES OF RAFT DYNAM - ICS AND RAFT - MEDIATED FUNCTIONS We discuss in this section some examples of lipid - raft mediated cellular events . Our intent is not to provide a comprehensive over - view or to list all the biological functions described for lipid rafts , but rather to illustrate the incredible complexity and dynamic nature of lipid raft biology . Other articles in this special issue describe in detail the effects of lipids and lipid rafts on the organization and function of various classes of G - protein coupled receptors . The nervous system ( whose cells , particularly neurons , are among the most highly enriched in SLs and cholesterol ) provides many examples of lipid raft - associated signaling proteins and lipid raft - dependent signal transduction [ 126 , 169 , 176 , 205 , 207 , 228 , 230 , 242 , 284 - 305 ] . Lipid rafts in nervous system cells have been implicated in neurotrophic factor signaling [ 287 - 290 ] , cell adhesion and migration [ 288 , 296 , 300 ] , axon guidance and neurite out - growth [ 242 ] , synaptic transmission [ 288 , 295 ] , neuron - glia interac - tions [ 301 , 302 ] , and myelin genesis [ 303 ] . Several classes of proteins that are involved in signal transduc - tion mechanisms have been reported to be associated with lipid rafts in cultured neural cells ( neurons , oligodendrocytes , astrocytes , and neurotumor cell lines ) and in various brain regions , myelin , and synaptic plasma membranes . These proteins include : ( 1 ) receptor tyrosine kinases ( neurotrophin receptors Trk A , Trk B , Trk C , c - Ret , and ErbB , and the ephrin receptor Eph ) , GPI - anchored recep - tors ( e . g . , GDNF family receptor GFR (cid:1) ) , G - protein - coupled recep - tors ( e . g . , cannabinoid receptors and neurotransmitter receptors such as (cid:1) 1 - , (cid:2) 1 - , (cid:2) 2 - adrenergic , adenosine A1 , (cid:3) - aminobutyric acid GABAb , muscarinic M2 , glutamate metabotropic mGLUR , sero - tonin 5HT2 ) ; ( 2 ) non - receptor tyrosine kinases of the Src family ; ( 3 ) adapter and regulatory molecules of tyrosine kinase signaling ; ( 4 ) heterotrimeric and small GTP - binding proteins ; ( 5 ) protein kinase C isoenzymes , ( 6 ) cell adhesion molecules , including in - tegrins , Notch1 , NCAMs , TAG - 1 , Thy - 1 , F3 / contactin ; ( 7 ) ion channel proteins , proteins involved in neurotransmitter release , and postsynaptic density complex proteins . Two modes of involvement of lipid rafts in neuronal and glial signal transduction have been reported : ( 1 ) receptors and effector proteins that are intrinsically present in lipid rafts are activated , giving rise to signal propagation that involves other intrinsic com - ponents . Examples of receptors are neurotrophin receptors of the trk family , EGFR , PDGFR , p75NTR , GFR (cid:1) [ 287 - 290 ] , and the neural cell adhesion molecule TAG - 1 [ 228 , 304 , 306 ] . Src family tyrosine Table 2 . Techniques Used for Studies of Membrane Heterogeneity in Intact Cells Technique Experimentally Observable Events Selected References Fluorescence recovery after photobleaching ( FRAP ) , Fluorescence correlation spectroscopy ( FCS ) Translational mobility of a fluorophore [ 256 , 257 , 320 , 324 ] Fluorescence resonance energy transfer ( FRET ) Energy transfer between an excited donor fluorophore and an acceptor molecule , allowing the determination of donor - acceptor proximity [ 257 , 258 , 325 , 326 ] Single fluorophore tracking microscopy ( SFTM ) , Single - particle fluorescence tracking ( SPFT ) , Single - particle tracking ( SPT ) Translational trajectories of membrane molecules , allowing measurement of the motility of a fluorescent label or of a colloidal gold particle bound to the target molecule [ 7 , 139 , 259 , 260 , 262 , 327 , 328 ] Stimulated emission depletion ( STED ) microscopy Time traces of single molecule diffusion of a fluores - cence - labeled probe at the nano - scale [ 263 , 274 ] 14 Current Medicinal Chemistry , 2013 , Vol . 20 , No . 1 Sonnino and Prinetti kinases are among the effector signaling proteins that are most commonly involved . ( 2 ) The activation of membrane receptors is followed by the recruitment to lipid rafts of the receptors them - selves or of effector signaling proteins that are not located in the rafts under basal conditions . Alternatively , the activation of recep - tors that are associated with lipid rafts under resting conditions determines their translocation outside the rafts . Examples of the former case are the receptor tyrosine kinase c - Ret which is recruited into lipid membrane domains by its GPI - anchored co - receptor GFR (cid:1) [ 287 , 288 , 290 ] and the neuronal adhesion receptor NCAM which is recruited into lipid membrane domains by cis - or trans - interaction with its membrane - bound , GPI - anchored ligand , prion protein [ 300 ] . GM3 / EGFR Interaction Long before the lipid raft hypothesis was proposed , observa - tions that the growth of cultured cells was inhibited by exogenous addition of GSLs led to the idea that growth factor receptor function could be modulated by gangliosides [ 143 ] . EGFR was identified as the target of the inhibitory effect of GM3 [ 106 ] . GM3 was shown to inhibit EGFR autophosphorylation without competing with EGF for receptor binding [ 143 , 307 , 308 ] and without affecting receptor dimerization [ 105 ] . Other gangliosides were found to exert much smaller effects on EGFR , indicating that the GM3 / EGFR interac - tion is highly specific [ 106 , 309 ] . Studies of the purified human recombinant extracellular domain of EGFR indicated that the oligo - saccharide sialyllactose was essential for ganglioside - receptor in - teraction and that its substitution by any other sugar reduced the binding [ 309 ] . The molecular basis of the GM3 / EGFR interaction was not fully elucidated until 2006 , in studies that demonstrated the importance of side - by - side carbohydrate - carbohydrate interaction between the GM3 oligosaccharide and an N - linked glycan bearing multiple GlcNAc terminal residues on the receptor [ 152 , 153 ] . A 2011 study showed that the membrane - proximal lysine 642 residue of the receptor is essential for receptor interaction with GM3 oligo - saccharide [ 104 ] . GM3 / EGFR interaction is promoted by the enrichment of EGFR in ganglioside - enriched , cholesterol - sensitive , Triton X - 100 insoluble membrane domains [ 310 , 311 ] . Other GSL - and lipid raft - dependent factors can also affect EGFR function . Caveolae [ 9 , 10 ] and caveolin - 1 are involved in the modulation of EGFR signaling [ 312 , 313 ] , EGFR is localized within a caveolin - rich fraction in A431 cells , and EGFR - containing membrane fragments can be separated from caveolae [ 203 , 314 ] . In a keratinocyte - derived cell line , GM3 overexpression induced a shift of caveolin - 1 to EGFR - rich membrane regions , allowing its functional interaction with EGFR and the consequent inhibition of EGFR tyrosine phosphory - lation and dimerization [ 315 ] . These findings indicate that GM3 influences EGFR signaling through a second distinct molecular mechanism that involves modulation of the EGFR / caveolin - 1 asso - ciation . GM3 also has an inhibitory effect on the ligand - independent cross - talk of EGFR with integrin receptor signaling ; the accumulation of GM3 in cultured cells disrupts the interaction of the integrin (cid:2) 1 subunit with EGFR [ 316 ] . The 2011 study by Simons ' group using recombinant EGFR re - constituted in proteoliposomes with phase separation - prone or - resistant lipid composition demonstrated convincingly that associa - tion with an l o phase is essential for the inhibitory effect of GM3 on EGFR autophosphorylation . In an l o phase , the effect of GM3 is linked to its ability to stabilize the inactive EGFR monomer in the absence of EGFR [ 104 ] . GM3 and the Regulation of Insulin Receptor Function Insulin receptors ( IRs ) are present in DRMs from normal adi - pocytes [ 317 ] and are partially localized in caveolae in intact cells [ 318 ] , in which the (cid:2) - subunit of IR interacts with caveolin - 1 through a binding motif that recognizes its scaffold domain [ 319 ] . Co - immunoprecipitation , cross - linking , fluorescence microscopy , and FRAP experiments showed that IRs are able to form distinct complexes with caveolin - 1 and GM3 within lipid membrane do - mains [ 320 ] . The GM3 / IR interaction was shown to be direct ( as IR could be cross - linked by a photoactivable GM3 derivative ) and specific ( as the interaction was abolished by addition of exogenous GM3 to cells prior to the co - immunoprecipitation experiment ) . The GM3 / IR interaction was abolished in IR mutants in which the ly - sine 944 residue was replaced by arginine , valine , serine , or glu - tamine . Taken together , these findings suggest that an electrostatic interaction between the negatively charged sialyllactose chain of GM3 and the positively charged amino group of lysine 944 of IR , which is located in close proximity to the transmembrane domain sequence , is essential for the formation of the GM3 / IR complex . In 3T3 - L1 adipocytes , the induction of insulin resistance by treatment with TNF (cid:1) was accompanied by the upregulation of GM3 synthase , leading to an increase of cellular GM3 [ 318 , 321 ] which was accu - mulated in DRMs . Conversely , the pharmacological inhibition of ganglioside synthesis by the glucosylceramide synthase inhibitor D - PDMP restored insulin signaling in TNF (cid:1) - treated adipocytes [ 321 ] . In insulin resistance , the association of IR with GM3 was increased whereas its association with caveolin - 1 and its localization in caveolae were decreased , indicating that the presence of excessive GM3 in lipid rafts leads to the displacement of IR from the complex with caveolin - 1 and from caveolae . The association of IRs with caveolae was restored by D - PDMP treatment , suggesting that the regulation of IR / caveolin - 1 association by GM3 may be responsible for the changes in insulin response in adipocytes [ 241 , 320 ] . IR function is thus regulated by its partitioning between two distinct lipid raft populations ( GM3 - rich , flat membrane domains vs . caveo - lin - 1 - rich , invaginated caveolar domains ) , and this partitioning is in turn regulated by cellular GM3 levels . Based on these findings , Inokuchi proposed that insulin resistance in adipocytes be defined as a “microdomain disease” [ 322 ] and that the inhibition of gangli - oside biosynthesis is a useful , novel therapeutic approach for this disease [ 323 ] . CONCLUSION We hope that the studies described in this review have con - vinced the reader that multiple levels of order exist in biological membranes , and that membrane lipids play important roles in de - termining these levels of order . Clearly , the forces and interactions that underlie lipid - driven order in biological membranes are much more complex than was assumed at the time the lipid raft hypothe - sis was formulated . The biological consequences of this multi - scale and multi - level order are increasingly important and intriguing , and many crucial and exciting studies in this field remain to be per - formed . CONFLICT OF INTEREST The author ( s ) confirm that this article content has no conflicts of interest . ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS The studies by the authors described in this review were sup - ported by grants from CARIPLO , AIRC ( to S . S . ) . The authors thank Drs . Kazuhisa Iwabuchi and Toyoshi Fujimoto for stimulat - ing discussions and Dr . Steve Anderson for English editing of the manuscript . ABBREVIATIONS DRM = Detergent - Resistant Membrane EGFR = Epidermal Growth Factor Receptor The Lipid Raft Concept Current Medicinal Chemistry , 2013 , Vol . 20 , No . 1 15 EM = Electron Microscopy FRAP = Fluorescence Recovery After Photobleach - ing FRET = Fluorescence Resonance Energy Transfer GPI = Glycosylphosphatidylinositol GPL = Glycerophospholipid GSL = Glycosphingolipid IR = Insulin Receptor LacCer = Lactosylceramide l o = Liquid - Ordered PC = Phosphatidylcholine SL = Sphingolipid SM = Sphingomyelin STED Microscopy = Stimulated Emission Depletion Micros - copy REFERENCES [ 1 ] Gorter , E . ; Grendel , F . On Bimolecular Layers of Lipoids on the Chromo - cytes of the Blood . J Exp Med , 1925 , 41 ( 4 ) , 439 - 443 . [ 2 ] Tourtellotte , M . E . ; Branton , D . ; Keith , A . Membrane structure : spin labeling and freeze etching of Mycoplasma laidawii . Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A , 1970 , 66 ( 3 ) , 909 - 916 . [ 3 ] Steim , J . M . ; Tourtellotte , M . E . ; Reinert , J . C . ; McElhaney , R . N . ; Rader , R . L . Calorimetric evidence for the liquid - crystalline state of lipids in a biomem - brane . Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A , 1969 , 63 ( 1 ) , 104 - 109 . [ 4 ] Engelman , D . M . X - ray diffraction studies of phase transitions in the mem - brane of Mycoplasma laidlawii . J Mol Biol , 1970 , 47 ( 1 ) , 115 - 117 . [ 5 ] Singer , S . J . ; Nicolson , G . L . The fluid mosaic model of the structure of cell membranes . Science , 1972 , 175 ( 23 ) , 720 - 731 . [ 6 ] Lindner , R . ; Naim , H . Y . Domains in biological membranes . Exp Cell Res , 2009 , 315 ( 17 ) , 2871 - 2878 . [ 7 ] Jacobson , K . ; Sheets , E . D . ; Simson , R . Revisiting the fluid mosaic model of membranes . Science , 1995 , 268 ( 5216 ) , 1441 - 1442 . [ 8 ] Hemler , M . E . Tetraspanin functions and associated microdomains . Nat Rev Mol Cell Biol , 2005 , 6 ( 10 ) , 801 - 811 . [ 9 ] Prinetti , A . ; Prioni , S . ; Loberto , N . ; Aureli , M . ; Chigorno , V . ; Sonnino , S . Regulation of tumor phenotypes by caveolin - 1 and sphingolipid - controlled membrane signaling complexes . Biochim Biophys Acta , 2008 , 1780 ( 3 ) , 585 - 596 . [ 10 ] Sonnino , S . ; Prinetti , A . Sphingolipids and membrane environments for caveolin . FEBS Lett , 2009 , 583 ( 4 ) , 597 - 606 . [ 11 ] Rajendran , L . ; Le Lay , S . ; Illges , H . Raft association and lipid droplet target - ing of flotillins are independent of caveolin . Biol Chem , 2007 , 388 ( 3 ) , 307 - 314 . [ 12 ] Kusumi , A . ; Suzuki , K . Toward understanding the dynamics of membrane - raft - based molecular interactions . Biochim Biophys Acta , 2005 , 1746 ( 3 ) , 234 - 251 . [ 13 ] Sonnino , S . ; Mauri , L . ; Chigorno , V . ; Prinetti , A . Gangliosides as compo - nents of lipid membrane domains . Glycobiology , 2007 , 17 ( 1 ) , 1R - 13R . [ 14 ] Lee , A . G . ; Birdsall , N . J . ; Metcalfe , J . C . ; Toon , P . A . ; Warren , G . B . Clusters in lipid bilayers and the interpretation of thermal effects in biological mem - branes . Biochemistry , 1974 , 13 ( 18 ) , 3699 - 3705 . [ 15 ] Wunderlich , F . ; Ronai , A . ; Speth , V . ; Seelig , J . ; Blume , A . Thermotropic lipid clustering in tetrahymena membranes . Biochemistry , 1975 , 14 ( 17 ) , 3730 - 3735 . [ 16 ] Wunderlich , F . ; Kreutz , W . ; Mahler , P . ; Ronai , A . ; Heppeler , G . Thermo - tropic fluid goes to ordered " discontinuous " phase separation in microsomal lipids of Tetrahymena . An X - ray diffraction study . Biochemistry , 1978 , 17 ( 10 ) , 2005 - 2010 . [ 17 ] Karnovsky , M . J . ; Kleinfeld , A . M . ; Hoover , R . L . ; Klausner , R . D . The con - cept of lipid domains in membranes . J Cell Biol , 1982 , 94 ( 1 ) , 1 - 6 . [ 18 ] Simons , K . ; van Meer , G . Lipid sorting in epithelial cells . Biochemistry , 1988 , 27 ( 17 ) , 6197 - 6202 . [ 19 ] Klemm , R . W . ; Ejsing , C . S . ; Surma , M . A . ; Kaiser , H . J . ; Gerl , M . J . ; Sampaio , J . L . ; de Robillard , Q . ; Ferguson , C . ; Proszynski , T . J . ; Shevchenko , A . ; Simons , K . Segregation of sphingolipids and sterols during formation of se - cretory vesicles at the trans - Golgi network . J Cell Biol , 2009 , 185 ( 4 ) , 601 - 612 . [ 20 ] Simons , K . ; Ikonen , E . Functional rafts in cell membranes . Nature , 1997 , 387 ( 6633 ) , 569 - 572 . [ 21 ] Cao , X . ; Surma , M . A . ; Simons , K . Polarized sorting and trafficking in epithelial cells . Cell Res , 2012 , 22 ( 5 ) , 793 - 805 . [ 22 ] Hyenne , V . ; Labouesse , M . Making sense of glycosphingolipids in epithelial polarity . Nat Cell Biol , 2011 , 13 ( 10 ) , 1185 - 1187 . [ 23 ] Refaei , M . ; Leventis , R . ; Silvius , J . R . Assessment of the roles of ordered lipid microdomains in post - endocytic trafficking of glycosyl - phosphatidylinositol - anchored proteins in mammalian fibroblasts . Traffic , 2011 , 12 ( 8 ) , 1012 - 1024 . [ 24 ] Weisz , O . A . ; Rodriguez - Boulan , E . Apical trafficking in epithelial cells : signals , clusters and motors . J Cell Sci , 2009 , 122 ( Pt 23 ) , 4253 - 4266 . [ 25 ] Lajoie , P . ; Partridge , E . A . ; Guay , G . ; Goetz , J . G . ; Pawling , J . ; Lagana , A . ; Joshi , B . ; Dennis , J . W . ; Nabi , I . R . Plasma membrane domain organization regulates EGFR signaling in tumor cells . J Cell Biol , 2007 , 179 ( 2 ) , 341 - 356 . [ 26 ] Guirland , C . ; Zheng , J . Q . Membrane lipid rafts and their role in axon guid - ance . Adv Exp Med Biol , 2007 , 621 , 144 - 155 . [ 27 ] Benarroch , E . E . Lipid rafts , protein scaffolds , and neurologic disease . Neu - rology , 2007 , 69 ( 16 ) , 1635 - 1639 . [ 28 ] Hanzal - Bayer , M . F . ; Hancock , J . F . Lipid rafts and membrane traffic . FEBS Lett , 2007 , 581 ( 11 ) , 2098 - 2104 . [ 29 ] Riethmuller , J . ; Riehle , A . ; Grassme , H . ; Gulbins , E . Membrane rafts in host - pathogen interactions . Biochim Biophys Acta , 2006 , 1758 ( 12 ) , 2139 - 2147 . [ 30 ] Debruin , L . S . ; Harauz , G . White matter rafting - - membrane microdomains in myelin . Neurochem Res , 2007 , 32 ( 2 ) , 213 - 228 . [ 31 ] Delacour , D . ; Jacob , R . Apical protein transport . Cell Mol Life Sci , 2006 , 63 ( 21 ) , 2491 - 2505 . [ 32 ] Taylor , D . R . ; Hooper , N . M . The prion protein and lipid rafts . Mol Membr Biol , 2006 , 23 ( 1 ) , 89 - 99 . [ 33 ] Manes , S . ; Viola , A . Lipid rafts in lymphocyte activation and migration . Mol Membr Biol , 2006 , 23 ( 1 ) , 59 - 69 . [ 34 ] van Meer , G . ; Voelker , D . R . ; Feigenson , G . W . Membrane lipids : where they are and how they behave . Nat Rev Mol Cell Biol , 2008 , 9 ( 2 ) , 112 - 124 . [ 35 ] van Meer , G . ; de Kroon , A . I . Lipid map of the mammalian cell . J Cell Sci , 2011 , 124 ( Pt 1 ) , 5 - 8 . [ 36 ] Merrill , A . H . , Jr . Sphingolipid and glycosphingolipid metabolic pathways in the era of sphingolipidomics . Chem Rev , 2011 , 111 ( 10 ) , 6387 - 6422 . [ 37 ] Maccarrone , M . ; Bernardi , G . ; Agro , A . F . ; Centonze , D . Cannabinoid recep - tor signalling in neurodegenerative diseases : a potential role for membrane fluidity disturbance . Br J Pharmacol , 2011 , 163 ( 7 ) , 1379 - 1390 . [ 38 ] Quinn , P . J . A lipid matrix model of membrane raft structure . Prog Lipid Res , 2010 , 49 ( 4 ) , 390 - 406 . [ 39 ] Sonnino , S . ; Prinetti , A . ; Mauri , L . ; Chigorno , V . ; Tettamanti , G . Dynamic and structural properties of sphingolipids as driving forces for the formation of membrane domains . Chem Rev , 2006 , 106 ( 6 ) , 2111 - 2125 . [ 40 ] Goni , F . M . ; Alonso , A . ; Bagatolli , L . A . ; Brown , R . E . ; Marsh , D . ; Prieto , M . ; Thewalt , J . L . Phase diagrams of lipid mixtures relevant to the study of mem - brane rafts . Biochim Biophys Acta , 2008 , 1781 ( 11 - 12 ) , 665 - 684 . [ 41 ] Mouritsen , O . G . The liquid - ordered state comes of age . Biochim Biophys Acta , 2010 , 1798 ( 7 ) , 1286 - 1288 . [ 42 ] Staubach , S . ; Hanisch , F . G . Lipid rafts : signaling and sorting platforms of cells and their roles in cancer . Expert Rev Proteomics , 2011 , 8 ( 2 ) , 263 - 277 . [ 43 ] Zhang , T . ; Zhang , X . ; Sun , Z . Global Network Analysis of Lipid - Raft - Related Proteins Reveals Their Centrality in the Network and Their Roles in Multiple Biological Processes . Journal of Molecular Biology , 2010 , 402 ( 4 ) , 761 - 773 . [ 44 ] Pike , L . J . The challenge of lipid rafts . Journal of Lipid Research , 2009 , 50 ( Supplement ) , S323 - S328 . [ 45 ] Mayor , S . ; Rao , M . Rafts : scale - dependent , active lipid organization at the cell surface . Traffic , 2004 , 5 ( 4 ) , 231 - 240 . [ 46 ] Sonnino , S . ; Prinetti , A . Membrane lipid domains and membrane lipid do - main preparations : are they the same thing ? Trends in Glycoscience and Gly - cotechnology 2008 , 20 , 315 - 340 . [ 47 ] Westerlund , B . ; Slotte , J . P . How the molecular features of glycosphingolip - ids affect domain formation in fluid membranes . Biochim Biophys Acta , 2009 , 1788 ( 1 ) , 194 - 201 . [ 48 ] Elson , E . L . ; Fried , E . ; Dolbow , J . E . ; Genin , G . M . Phase separation in bio - logical membranes : integration of theory and experiment . Annu Rev Biophys , 2010 , 39 , 207 - 226 . [ 49 ] Ipsen , J . H . ; Karlstrom , G . ; Mouritsen , O . G . ; Wennerstrom , H . ; Zuckermann , M . J . Phase equilibria in the phosphatidylcholine - cholesterol system . Biochim Biophys Acta , 1987 , 905 ( 1 ) , 162 - 172 . [ 50 ] Brown , D . A . ; London , E . Structure and function of sphingolipid - and choles - terol - rich membrane rafts . J Biol Chem , 2000 , 275 ( 23 ) , 17221 - 17224 . [ 51 ] Prinetti , A . ; Chigorno , V . ; Prioni , S . ; Loberto , N . ; Marano , N . ; Tettamanti , G . ; Sonnino , S . Changes in the lipid turnover , composition , and organization , as sphingolipid - enriched membrane domains , in rat cerebellar granule cells developing in vitro . J Biol Chem , 2001 , 276 ( 24 ) , 21136 - 21145 . [ 52 ] Masserini , M . ; Freire , E . Thermotropic characterization of phosphatidylcho - line vesicles containing ganglioside GM1 with homogeneous ceramide chain length . Biochemistry , 1986 , 25 ( 5 ) , 1043 - 1049 . [ 53 ] Masserini , M . ; Palestini , P . ; Venerando , B . ; Fiorilli , A . ; Acquotti , D . ; Tet - tamanti , G . Interactions of proteins with ganglioside - enriched microdomains on the membrane : the lateral phase separation of molecular species of GD1a ganglioside , having homogeneous long - chain base composition , is recog - nized by Vibrio cholerae sialidase . Biochemistry , 1988 , 27 ( 20 ) , 7973 - 7978 . [ 54 ] Masserini , M . ; Palestini , P . ; Freire , E . Influence of glycolipid oligosaccha - ride and long - chain base composition on the thermotropic properties of di - palmitoylphosphatidylcholine large unilamellar vesicles containing gangli - osides . Biochemistry , 1989 , 28 ( 12 ) , 5029 - 5034 . 16 Current Medicinal Chemistry , 2013 , Vol . 20 , No . 1 Sonnino and Prinetti [ 55 ] Terzaghi , A . ; Tettamanti , G . ; Masserini , M . Interaction of glycosphingolipids and glycoproteins : thermotropic properties of model membranes containing GM1 ganglioside and glycophorin . Biochemistry , 1993 , 32 ( 37 ) , 9722 - 9725 . [ 56 ] Palestini , P . ; Allietta , M . ; Sonnino , S . ; Tettamanti , G . ; Thompson , T . E . ; Tillack , T . W . Gel phase preference of ganglioside GM1 at low concentration in two - component , two - phase phosphatidylcholine bilayers depends upon the ceramide moiety . Biochim Biophys Acta , 1995 , 1235 ( 2 ) , 221 - 230 . [ 57 ] Goins , B . ; Masserini , M . ; Barisas , B . G . ; Freire , E . Lateral diffusion of gan - glioside GM1 in phospholipid bilayer membranes . Biophys J , 1986 , 49 ( 4 ) , 849 - 856 . [ 58 ] Palestini , P . ; Masserini , M . ; Tettamanti , G . Exposure to galactose oxidase of GM1 ganglioside molecular species embedded into phospholipid vesicles . FEBS Lett , 1994 , 350 ( 2 - 3 ) , 219 - 222 . [ 59 ] Rock , P . ; Allietta , M . ; Young , W . W . , Jr . ; Thompson , T . E . ; Tillack , T . W . Ganglioside GM1 and asialo - GM1 at low concentration are preferentially in - corporated into the gel phase in two - component , two - phase phosphatidylcho - line bilayers . Biochemistry , 1991 , 30 ( 1 ) , 19 - 25 . [ 60 ] Pitto , M . ; Parenti , M . ; Guzzi , F . ; Magni , F . ; Palestini , P . ; Ravasi , D . ; Masser - ini , M . Palmitic is the main fatty acid carried by lipids of detergent - resistant membrane fractions from neural and non - neural cells . Neurochem Res , 2002 , 27 ( 7 - 8 ) , 729 - 734 . [ 61 ] Kahya , N . ; Scherfeld , D . ; Schwille , P . Differential lipid packing abilities and dynamics in giant unilamellar vesicles composed of short - chain saturated glycerol - phospholipids , sphingomyelin and cholesterol . Chem Phys Lipids , 2005 , 135 ( 2 ) , 169 - 180 . [ 62 ] Bouwstra , J . A . ; Ponec , M . The skin barrier in healthy and diseased state . Biochim Biophys Acta , 2006 , 1758 ( 12 ) , 2080 - 2095 . [ 63 ] Ruettinger , A . ; Kiselev , M . A . ; Hauss , T . ; Dante , S . ; Balagurov , A . M . ; Neubert , R . H . Fatty acid interdigitation in stratum corneum model mem - branes : a neutron diffraction study . Eur Biophys J , 2008 . [ 64 ] Iwabuchi , K . ; Prinetti , A . ; Sonnino , S . ; Mauri , L . ; Kobayashi , T . ; Ishii , K . ; Kaga , N . ; Murayama , K . ; Kurihara , H . ; Nakayama , H . ; Yoshizaki , F . ; Ta - kamori , K . ; Ogawa , H . ; Nagaoka , I . Involvement of very long fatty acid - containing lactosylceramide in lactosylceramide - mediated superoxide gen - eration and migration in neutrophils . Glycoconj J , 2008 , 25 ( 4 ) , 357 - 374 . [ 65 ] Yoshizaki , F . ; Nakayama , H . ; Iwahara , C . ; Takamori , K . ; Ogawa , H . ; Iwabu - chi , K . Role of glycosphingolipid - enriched microdomains in innate immu - nity : microdomain - dependent phagocytic cell functions . Biochim Biophys Acta , 2008 , 1780 ( 3 ) , 383 - 392 . [ 66 ] Iwabuchi , K . ; Nakayama , H . ; Iwahara , C . ; Takamori , K . Significance of glycosphingolipid fatty acid chain length on membrane microdomain - mediated signal transduction . FEBS Lett , 2010 , 584 ( 9 ) , 1642 - 1652 . [ 67 ] Almeida , P . F . ; Vaz , W . L . ; Thompson , T . E . Lateral diffusion and percolation in two - phase , two - component lipid bilayers . Topology of the solid - phase domains in - plane and across the lipid bilayer . Biochemistry , 1992 , 31 ( 31 ) , 7198 - 7210 . [ 68 ] Snyder , B . ; Freire , E . Compositional domain structure in phosphatidylcho - line - - cholesterol and sphingomyelin - - cholesterol bilayers . Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A , 1980 , 77 ( 7 ) , 4055 - 4059 . [ 69 ] Sankaram , M . B . ; Thompson , T . E . Interaction of cholesterol with various glycerophospholipids and sphingomyelin . Biochemistry , 1990 , 29 ( 47 ) , 10670 - 10675 . [ 70 ] Ferraretto , A . ; Pitto , M . ; Palestini , P . ; Masserini , M . Lipid domains in the membrane : thermotropic properties of sphingomyelin vesicles containing GM1 ganglioside and cholesterol . Biochemistry , 1997 , 36 ( 30 ) , 9232 - 9236 . [ 71 ] Simons , K . ; Sampaio , J . L . Membrane organization and lipid rafts . Cold Spring Harb Perspect Biol , 2011 , 3 ( 10 ) , a004697 . [ 72 ] Gibson Wood , W . ; Igbavboa , U . ; Müller , W . E . ; Eckert , G . P . Cholesterol asymmetry in synaptic plasma membranes . Journal of Neurochemistry , 2011 , 116 ( 5 ) , 684 - 689 . [ 73 ] Schroeder , F . ; Nemecz , G . ; Wood , W . G . ; Joiner , C . ; Morrot , G . ; Ayraut - Jarrier , M . ; Devaux , P . F . Transmembrane distribution of sterol in the human erythrocyte . Biochim Biophys Acta , 1991 , 1066 ( 2 ) , 183 - 192 . [ 74 ] Igbavboa , U . ; Avdulov , N . A . ; Chochina , S . V . ; Wood , W . G . Transbilayer distribution of cholesterol is modified in brain synaptic plasma membranes of knockout mice deficient in the low - density lipoprotein receptor , apolipopro - tein E , or both proteins . J Neurochem , 1997 , 69 ( 4 ) , 1661 - 1667 . [ 75 ] Klose , C . ; Ejsing , C . S . ; Garcia - Saez , A . J . ; Kaiser , H . J . ; Sampaio , J . L . ; Surma , M . A . ; Shevchenko , A . ; Schwille , P . ; Simons , K . Yeast Lipids Can Phase - separate into Micrometer - scale Membrane Domains . J Biol Chem , 2010 , 285 ( 39 ) , 30224 - 30232 . [ 76 ] Veatch , S . L . ; Keller , S . L . Miscibility phase diagrams of giant vesicles con - taining sphingomyelin . Phys Rev Lett , 2005 , 94 ( 14 ) , 148101 . [ 77 ] Mattjus , P . ; Slotte , J . P . Does cholesterol discriminate between sphingomye - lin and phosphatidylcholine in mixed monolayers containing both phosphol - ipids ? Chem Phys Lipids , 1996 , 81 ( 1 ) , 69 - 80 . [ 78 ] Li , X . M . ; Momsen , M . M . ; Brockman , H . L . ; Brown , R . E . Sterol structure and sphingomyelin acyl chain length modulate lateral packing elasticity and de - tergent solubility in model membranes . Biophys . J . , , 2003 , 85 , 3788 - 3801 . [ 79 ] Ohvo - Rekila , H . ; Ramstedt , B . ; Leppimaki , P . ; Slotte , J . P . Cholesterol inter - actions with phospholipids in membranes . Prog Lipid Res , 2002 , 41 ( 1 ) , 66 - 97 . [ 80 ] Holopainen , J . M . ; Metso , A . J . ; Mattila , J . P . ; Jutila , A . ; Kinnunen , P . K . Evidence for the lack of a specific interaction between cholesterol and sphin - gomyelin . Biophys J . , 2004 , 86 , 1510 - 1520 . [ 81 ] Pascher , I . Molecular arrangements in sphingolipids . Conformation and hydrogen bonding of ceramide and their implication on membrane stability and permeability . Biochim Biophys Acta , 1976 , 455 ( 2 ) , 433 - 451 . [ 82 ] Quinn , P . J . ; Wolf , C . The liquid - ordered phase in membranes . Biochim Biophys Acta , 2009 , 1788 ( 1 ) , 33 - 46 . [ 83 ] Pandit , S . A . ; Jakobsson , E . ; Scott , H . L . Simulation of the early stages of nano - domain formation in mixed bilayers of sphingomyelin , cholesterol , and dioleylphosphatidylcholine . Biophys J , 2004 , 87 ( 5 ) , 3312 - 3322 . [ 84 ] Mombelli , E . ; Morris , R . ; Taylor , W . ; Fraternali , F . Hydrogen - bonding propensities of sphingomyelin in solution and in a bilayer assembly : a mo - lecular dynamics study . Biophys J , 2003 , 84 ( 3 ) , 1507 - 1517 . [ 85 ] Sonnino , S . ; Cantu , L . ; Corti , M . ; Acquotti , D . ; Venerando , B . Aggregative properties of gangliosides in solution . Chem Phys Lipids , 1994 , 71 ( 1 ) , 21 - 45 . [ 86 ] Acquotti , D . ; Poppe , L . ; Dabrowski , J . ; von der Lieth , G . W . ; Sonnino , S . ; Tettamanti , G . Three - Dimensional Structure of the Oligosaccaride Chain of GM1 Ganglioside Revealed by a Distance - Mapping Procedure : A Rotating and Laboratory Frame Nuclear Overhauser Enhancement Investigation of Native Glycolipid in Dimethyl Sulfoxide and in Water - Dodecylphosphocholine Solutions . J . Am . Chem . Soc . , 1990 , 112 , 7772 - 7778 . [ 87 ] Brocca , P . ; Cantu , L . ; Sonnino , S . Aggregation properties of semisynthetic GD1a ganglioside ( IV3Neu5AcII3Neu5AcGgOse4Cer ) containing an acetyl group as acyl moiety . Chem Phys Lipids , 1995 , 77 ( 1 ) , 41 - 49 . [ 88 ] Cantu , L . ; Corti , M . ; Sonnino , S . ; Tettamanti , G . Evidence for spontaneous segregation phenomena in mixed micelles of gangliosides . Chem Phys Lip - ids , 1990 , 55 ( 3 ) , 223 - 229 . [ 89 ] Cantù , L . ; Corti , M . ; Casellato , R . ; Acquotti , D . ; Sonnino , S . Aggregation properties of GD1b , II3Neu5Ac2GgOse4Cer , and of GD1b - lactone , II3 [ alpha - Neu5Ac - ( 2 - - - - 8 , 1 - - - - 9 ) - alpha - Neu5Ac ] GgOse4Cer , in aqueous solution . Chem Phys . Lipids , , 1991 , 60 , 111 - 118 . [ 90 ] Del Favero , E . ; Brocca , P . ; Motta , S . ; Rondelli , V . ; Sonnino , S . ; Cantu , L . Nanoscale structural response of ganglioside - containing aggregates to the in - teraction with sialidase . J Neurochem , 2011 , 116 ( 5 ) , 833 - 839 . [ 91 ] Baumgart , T . ; Hess , S . T . ; Webb , W . W . Imaging coexisting fluid domains in biomembrane models coupling curvature and line tension . Nature , 2003 , 425 ( 6960 ) , 821 - 824 . [ 92 ] Tian , A . ; Baumgart , T . Sorting of lipids and proteins in membrane curvature gradients . Biophys J , 2009 , 96 ( 7 ) , 2676 - 2688 . [ 93 ] Hakomori , S . Carbohydrate - to - carbohydrate interaction , through glycosyn - apse , as a basis of cell recognition and membrane organization . Glycoconj J , 2004 , 21 ( 3 - 4 ) , 125 - 137 . [ 94 ] Brocca , P . ; Berthault , P . ; Sonnino , S . Conformation of the oligosaccharide chain of G ( M1 ) ganglioside in a carbohydrate - enriched surface . Biophys J , 1998 , 74 ( 1 ) , 309 - 318 . [ 95 ] Heatley , F . ; Scott , J . E . A water molecule participates in the secondary struc - ture of hyaluronan . Biochem J , 1988 , 254 ( 2 ) , 489 - 493 . [ 96 ] Dietrich , C . ; Bagatolli , L . A . ; Volovyk , Z . N . ; Thompson , N . L . ; Levi , M . ; Jacobson , K . ; Gratton , E . Lipid rafts reconstituted in model membranes . Bio - phys J , 2001 , 80 ( 3 ) , 1417 - 1428 . [ 97 ] Bernardino de la Serna , J . ; Perez - Gil , J . ; Simonsen , A . C . ; Bagatolli , L . A . Cholesterol rules : direct observation of the coexistence of two fluid phases in native pulmonary surfactant membranes at physiological temperatures . J Biol Chem , 2004 , 279 ( 39 ) , 40715 - 40722 . [ 98 ] Sengupta , P . ; Hammond , A . ; Holowka , D . ; Baird , B . Structural determinants for partitioning of lipids and proteins between coexisting fluid phases in gi - ant plasma membrane vesicles . Biochim Biophys Acta , 2008 , 1778 ( 1 ) , 20 - 32 . [ 99 ] Veatch , S . L . ; Cicuta , P . ; Sengupta , P . ; Honerkamp - Smith , A . ; Holowka , D . ; Baird , B . Critical fluctuations in plasma membrane vesicles . ACS Chem Biol , 2008 , 3 ( 5 ) , 287 - 293 . [ 100 ] Baumgart , T . ; Hammond , A . T . ; Sengupta , P . ; Hess , S . T . ; Holowka , D . A . ; Baird , B . A . ; Webb , W . W . Large - scale fluid / fluid phase separation of pro - teins and lipids in giant plasma membrane vesicles . Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A , 2007 , 104 ( 9 ) , 3165 - 3170 . [ 101 ] Lingwood , D . ; Ries , J . ; Schwille , P . ; Simons , K . Plasma membranes are poised for activation of raft phase coalescence at physiological temperature . Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A , 2008 , 105 ( 29 ) , 10005 - 10010 . [ 102 ] Brugger , B . ; Glass , B . ; Haberkant , P . ; Leibrecht , I . ; Wieland , F . T . ; Kraus - slich , H . G . The HIV lipidome : a raft with an unusual composition . Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A , 2006 , 103 ( 8 ) , 2641 - 2646 . [ 103 ] Kaiser , H . J . ; Lingwood , D . ; Levental , I . ; Sampaio , J . L . ; Kalvodova , L . ; Rajendran , L . ; Simons , K . Order of lipid phases in model and plasma mem - branes . Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A , 2009 , 106 ( 39 ) , 16645 - 16650 . [ 104 ] Coskun , U . ; Grzybek , M . ; Drechsel , D . ; Simons , K . Regulation of human EGF receptor by lipids . Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A , 2011 , 108 ( 22 ) , 9044 - 9048 . [ 1 05 ] Zhou , Q . ; Hakomori , S . ; Kitamura , K . ; Igarashi , Y . GM3 directly inhibits tyrosine phosphorylation and de - N - acetyl - GM3 directly enhances serine phosphorylation of epidermal growth factor receptor , independently of recep - tor - receptor interaction . J Biol Chem , 1994 , 269 ( 3 ) , 1959 - 1965 . [ 106 ] Bremer , E . G . ; Schlessinger , J . ; Hakomori , S . Ganglioside - mediated modula - tion of cell growth . Specific effects of GM3 on tyrosine phosphorylation of the epidermal growth factor receptor . J Biol Chem , 1986 , 261 ( 5 ) , 2434 - 2440 . [ 107 ] Cherezov , V . ; Rosenbaum , D . M . ; Hanson , M . A . ; Rasmussen , S . G . ; Thian , F . S . ; Kobilka , T . S . ; Choi , H . J . ; Kuhn , P . ; Weis , W . I . ; Kobilka , B . K . ; Stevens , R . C . High - resolution crystal structure of an engineered human beta2 - The Lipid Raft Concept Current Medicinal Chemistry , 2013 , Vol . 20 , No . 1 17 adrenergic G protein - coupled receptor . Science , 2007 , 318 ( 5854 ) , 1258 - 1265 . [ 108 ] Hanson , M . A . ; Cherezov , V . ; Griffith , M . T . ; Roth , C . B . ; Jaakola , V . P . ; Chien , E . Y . ; Velasquez , J . ; Kuhn , P . ; Stevens , R . C . A specific cholesterol binding site is established by the 2 . 8 A structure of the human beta2 - adrenergic receptor . Structure , 2008 , 16 ( 6 ) , 897 - 905 . [ 109 ] Wenz , T . ; Hielscher , R . ; Hellwig , P . ; Schagger , H . ; Richers , S . ; Hunte , C . Role of phospholipids in respiratory cytochrome bc ( 1 ) complex catalysis and supercomplex formation . Biochim Biophys Acta , 2009 , 1787 ( 6 ) , 609 - 616 . [ 110 ] Prinetti , A . ; Loberto , N . ; Chigorno , V . ; Sonnino , S . Glycosphingolipid be - haviour in complex membranes . Biochim Biophys Acta , 2009 , 1788 ( 1 ) , 184 - 193 . [ 111 ] Fantini , J . ; Barrantes , F . J . Sphingolipid / cholesterol regulation of neurotrans - mitter receptor conformation and function . Biochim Biophys Acta , 2009 , 1788 ( 11 ) , 2345 - 2361 . [ 112 ] Epand , R . M . Cholesterol and the interaction of proteins with membrane domains . Prog Lipid Res , 2006 , 45 ( 4 ) , 279 - 294 . [ 113 ] Murata , M . ; Peranen , J . ; Schreiner , R . ; Wieland , F . ; Kurzchalia , T . V . ; Simons , K . VIP21 / caveolin is a cholesterol - binding protein . Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A , 1995 , 92 ( 22 ) , 10339 - 10343 . [ 114 ] Thiele , C . ; Hannah , M . J . ; Fahrenholz , F . ; Huttner , W . B . Cholesterol binds to synaptophysin and is required for biogenesis of synaptic vesicles . Nat Cell Biol , 2000 , 2 ( 1 ) , 42 - 49 . [ 115 ] Fielding , C . J . ; Fielding , P . E . Cholesterol and caveolae : structural and func - tional relationships . Biochim Biophys Acta , 2000 , 1529 ( 1 - 3 ) , 210 - 222 . [ 116 ] Ikonen , E . ; Heino , S . ; Lusa , S . Caveolins and membrane cholesterol . Bio - chem Soc Trans , 2004 , 32 ( Pt 1 ) , 121 - 123 . [ 117 ] Uittenbogaard , A . ; Everson , W . V . ; Matveev , S . V . ; Smart , E . J . Cholesteryl ester is transported from caveolae to internal membranes as part of a caveo - lin - annexin II lipid - protein complex . J Biol Chem , 2002 , 277 ( 7 ) , 4925 - 4931 . [ 118 ] Charrin , S . ; Manie , S . ; Thiele , C . ; Billard , M . ; Gerlier , D . ; Boucheix , C . ; Rubinstein , E . A physical and functional link between cholesterol and tet - raspanins . Eur J Immunol , 2003 , 33 ( 9 ) , 2479 - 2489 . [ 119 ] Hakomori , S . I . Glycosynaptic microdomains controlling tumor cell pheno - type through alteration of cell growth , adhesion , and motility . FEBS Lett , 2009 , 584 ( 9 ) , 1901 - 1906 . [ 120 ] Haucke , V . Phosphoinositide regulation of clathrin - mediated endocytosis . Biochem Soc Trans , 2005 , 33 ( Pt 6 ) , 1285 - 1289 . [ 121 ] Honing , S . ; Ricotta , D . ; Krauss , M . ; Spate , K . ; Spolaore , B . ; Motley , A . ; Robinson , M . ; Robinson , C . ; Haucke , V . ; Owen , D . J . Phosphatidylinositol - ( 4 , 5 ) - bisphosphate regulates sorting signal recognition by the clathrin - associated adaptor complex AP2 . Mol Cell , 2005 , 18 ( 5 ) , 519 - 531 . [ 122 ] Chadda , R . ; Howes , M . T . ; Plowman , S . J . ; Hancock , J . F . ; Parton , R . G . ; Mayor , S . Cholesterol - sensitive Cdc42 activation regulates actin polymeriza - tion for endocytosis via the GEEC pathway . Traffic , 2007 , 8 ( 6 ) , 702 - 717 . [ 123 ] Goswami , D . ; Gowrishankar , K . ; Bilgrami , S . ; Ghosh , S . ; Raghupathy , R . ; Chadda , R . ; Vishwakarma , R . ; Rao , M . ; Mayor , S . Nanoclusters of GPI - anchored proteins are formed by cortical actin - driven activity . Cell , 2008 , 135 ( 6 ) , 1085 - 1097 . [ 124 ] Chichili , G . R . ; Rodgers , W . Cytoskeleton - membrane interactions in mem - brane raft structure . Cell Mol Life Sci , 2009 , 66 ( 14 ) , 2319 - 2328 . [ 125 ] Rollason , R . ; Korolchuk , V . ; Hamilton , C . ; Jepson , M . ; Banting , G . A CD317 / tetherin - RICH2 complex plays a critical role in the organization of the subapical actin cytoskeleton in polarized epithelial cells . J Cell Biol , 2009 , 184 ( 5 ) , 721 - 736 . [ 126 ] Prinetti , A . ; Chigorno , V . ; Tettamanti , G . ; Sonnino , S . Sphingolipid - enriched membrane domains from rat cerebellar granule cells differentiated in culture . A compositional study . J Biol Chem , 2000 , 275 ( 16 ) , 11658 - 11665 . [ 127 ] Simons , K . ; Toomre , D . Lipid rafts and signal transduction . Nat Rev Mol Cell Biol , 2000 , 1 ( 1 ) , 31 - 39 . [ 128 ] Brown , D . A . Lipid rafts , detergent - resistant membranes , and raft targeting signals . Physiology ( Bethesda ) , 2006 , 21 , 430 - 439 . [ 129 ] Levental , I . ; Grzybek , M . ; Simons , K . Greasing their way : lipid modifica - tions determine protein association with membrane rafts . Biochemistry , 2010 , 49 ( 30 ) , 6305 - 6316 . [ 130 ] Maeda , Y . ; Kinoshita , T . Structural remodeling , trafficking and functions of glycosylphosphatidylinositol - anchored proteins . Progress in Lipid Research , 2011 , 50 ( 4 ) , 411 - 424 . [ 131 ] Zhu , Y . ; Vionnet , C . ; Conzelmann , A . Ethanolaminephosphate Side Chain Added to Glycosylphosphatidylinositol ( GPI ) Anchor by Mcd4p Is Required for Ceramide Remodeling and Forward Transport of GPI Proteins from En - doplasmic Reticulum to Golgi . Journal of Biological Chemistry , 2006 , 281 ( 29 ) , 19830 - 19839 . [ 132 ] Lewis , V . ; Hooper , N . M . The role of lipid rafts in prion protein biology . Front Biosci , 2011 , 16 , 151 - 168 . [ 133 ] Aic art - Ramos , C . ; Valero , R . A . ; Rodriguez - Crespo , I . Protein palmitoylation and subcellular trafficking . Biochimica et Biophysica Acta ( BBA ) - Biomem - branes , 2011 , 1808 ( 12 ) , 2981 - 2994 . [ 134 ] Chini , B . ; Parenti , M . G - protein - coupled receptors , cholesterol and palmitoy - lation : facts about fats . Journal of Molecular Endocrinology , 2009 , 42 ( 5 ) , 371 - 379 . [ 135 ] Resh , M . D . Membrane targeting of lipid modified signal transduction pro - teins . Subcell Biochem , 2004 , 37 , 217 - 232 . [ 136 ] Fantini , J . ; Carlus , D . ; Yahi , N . The fusogenic tilted peptide ( 67 - 78 ) of alpha - synuclein is a cholesterol binding domain . Biochim Biophys Acta , 2011 , 1808 ( 10 ) , 2343 - 2351 . [ 137 ] Fantini , J . ; Yahi , N . Molecular basis for the glycosphingolipid - binding specificity of alpha - synuclein : key role of tyrosine 39 in membrane insertion . J Mol Biol , 2011 , 408 ( 4 ) , 654 - 669 . [ 138 ] Horejsi , V . ; Zhang , W . ; Schraven , B . Transmembrane adaptor proteins : organizers of immunoreceptor signalling . Nat Rev Immunol , 2004 , 4 ( 8 ) , 603 - 616 . [ 139 ] Jacobson , K . ; Mouritsen , O . G . ; Anderson , R . G . Lipid rafts : at a crossroad between cell biology and physics . Nat Cell Biol , 2007 , 9 ( 1 ) , 7 - 14 . [ 140 ] Zhang , Y . ; Li , X . ; Becker , K . A . ; Gulbins , E . Ceramide - enriched membrane domains - - structure and function . Biochim Biophys Acta , 2009 , 1788 ( 1 ) , 178 - 183 . [ 141 ] Yates , A . J . ; Rampersaud , A . Sphingolipids as receptor modulators . An overview . Ann N Y Acad Sci , 1998 , 845 , 57 - 71 . [ 142 ] Hakomori , S . ; Igarashi , Y . Functional role of glycosphingolipids in cell recognition and signaling . J Biochem ( Tokyo ) , 1995 , 118 ( 6 ) , 1091 - 1103 . [ 143 ] Bremer , E . G . ; Hakomori , S . ; Bowen - Pope , D . F . ; Raines , E . ; Ross , R . Gan - glioside - mediated modulation of cell growth , growth factor binding , and re - ceptor phosphorylation . J Biol Chem , 1984 , 259 ( 11 ) , 6818 - 6825 . [ 144 ] Chan , K . F . Ganglioside - modulated protein phosphorylation . Partial purifica - tion and characterization of a ganglioside - inhibited protein kinase in brain . J Biol Chem , 1988 , 263 ( 1 ) , 568 - 574 . [ 145 ] Chan , K . F . Ganglioside - modulated protein phosphorylation in muscle . Acti - vation of phosphorylase b kinase by gangliosides . J Biol Chem , 1989 , 264 ( 31 ) , 18632 - 18637 . [ 146 ] Goldenring , J . R . ; Otis , L . C . ; Yu , R . K . ; DeLorenzo , R . J . Cal - cium / ganglioside - dependent protein kinase activity in rat brain membrane . J Neurochem , 1985 , 44 ( 4 ) , 1229 - 1234 . [ 147 ] Kim , J . Y . ; Goldenring , J . R . ; DeLorenzo , R . J . ; Yu , R . K . Gangliosides inhibit phospholipid - sensitive Ca2 + - dependent kinase phosphorylation of rat myelin basic proteins . J Neurosci Res , 1986 , 15 ( 2 ) , 159 - 166 . [ 148 ] Nakajima , J . ; Tsuji , S . ; Nagai , Y . Bioactive gangliosides : analysis of func - tional structures of the tetrasialoganglioside GQ1b which promotes neurite outgrowth . Biochim Biophys Acta , 1986 , 876 ( 1 ) , 65 - 71 . [ 149 ] Tsuji , S . ; Arita , M . ; Nagai , Y . GQ1b , a bioactive ganglioside that exhibits novel nerve growth factor ( NGF ) - like activities in the two neuroblastoma cell lines . J Biochem ( Tokyo ) , 1983 , 94 ( 1 ) , 303 - 306 . [ 150 ] Tsuji , S . ; Nakajima , J . ; Sasaki , T . ; Nagai , Y . Bioactive gangliosides . IV . Ganglioside GQ1b / Ca2 + dependent protein kinase activity exists in the plasma membrane fraction of neuroblastoma cell line , GOTO . J Biochem , 1985 , 97 ( 3 ) , 969 - 972 . [ 151 ] Bassi , R . ; Chigorno , V . ; Fiorilli , A . ; Sonnino , S . ; Tettamanti , G . Exogenous gangliosides GD1b and GD1b - lactone , stably associated to rat brain P2 subcellular fraction , modulate differently the process of protein phosphorylation . J Neurochem , 1991 , 57 ( 4 ) , 1207 - 1211 . [ 152 ] Yoon , S . J . ; Nakayama , K . ; Hikita , T . ; Handa , K . ; Hakomori , S . I . Epidermal growth factor receptor tyrosine kinase is modulated by GM3 interaction with N - linked GlcNAc termini of the receptor . Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A , 2006 , 103 ( 50 ) , 18987 - 18991 . [ 153 ] Yoon , S . J . ; Nakayama , K . ; Takahashi , N . ; Yagi , H . ; Utkina , N . ; Wang , H . Y . ; Kato , K . ; Sadilek , M . ; Hakomori , S . I . Interaction of N - linked glycans , having multivalent GlcNAc termini , with GM3 ganglioside . Glycoconj J , 2006 , 23 ( 9 ) , 639 - 649 . [ 154 ] Brown , D . A . ; Rose , J . K . Sorting of GPI - anchored proteins to glycolipid - enriched membrane subdomains during transport to the apical cell surface . Cell , 1992 , 68 ( 3 ) , 533 - 544 . [ 155 ] Marchesi , V . T . ; Andrews , E . P . Glycoproteins : isolation from cellmembranes with lithium diiodosalicylate . Science , 1971 , 174 ( 15 ) , 1247 - 1248 . [ 156 ] Carter , W . G . ; Hakomori , S . A new cell surface , detergent - insoluble glyco - protein matrix of human and hamster fibroblasts . The role of disulfide bonds in stabilization of the matrix . J Biol Chem , 1981 , 256 ( 13 ) , 6953 - 6960 . [ 157 ] Okada , Y . ; Mugnai , G . ; Bremer , E . G . ; Hakomori , S . Glycosphingolipids in detergent - insoluble substrate attachment matrix ( DISAM ) prepared from substrate attachment material ( SAM ) . Their possible role in regulating cell adhesion . Exp Cell Res , 1984 , 155 ( 2 ) , 448 - 456 . [ 158 ] Streuli , C . H . ; Patel , B . ; Critchley , D . R . The cholera toxin receptor gangli - oside GM remains associated with triton X - 100 cytoskeletons of BALB / c - 3T3 cells . Exp Cell Res , 1981 , 136 ( 2 ) , 247 - 254 . [ 159 ] Hagmann , J . ; Fishman , P . H . Detergent extraction of cholera toxin and gan - gliosides from cultured cells and isolated membranes . Biochim Biophys Acta , 1982 , 720 ( 2 ) , 181 - 187 . [ 160 ] Yu , J . ; Fischman , D . A . ; Steck , T . L . Selective solubilization of proteins and phospholipids from red blood cell membranes by nonionic detergents . J Su - pramol Struct , 1973 , 1 ( 3 ) , 233 - 248 . [ 161 ] Davies , A . A . ; Wigglesworth , N . M . ; Allan , D . ; Owens , R . J . ; Crumpton , M . J . Nonidet P - 40 extraction of lymphocyte plasma membrane . Characterization of the insoluble residue . Biochem J , 1984 , 219 ( 1 ) , 301 - 308 . [ 162 ] Mescher , M . F . ; Jose , M . J . ; Balk , S . P . Actin - containing matrix associated with the plasma membrane of murine tumour and lymphoid cells . Nature , 1981 , 289 ( 5794 ) , 139 - 144 . [ 163 ] Vitetta , E . S . ; Boyse , E . A . ; Uhr , J . W . Isolation and characterization of a molecular complex containing Thy - 1 antigen from the surface of murine thymocytes and T cells . Eur J Immunol , 1973 , 3 ( 7 ) , 446 - 453 . [ 164 ] Letarte - Muirhead , M . ; Barclay , A . N . ; Williams , A . F . Purification of the Thy - 1 molecule , a major cell - surface glycoprotein of rat thymocytes . Biochem J , 18 Current Medicinal Chemistry , 2013 , Vol . 20 , No . 1 Sonnino and Prinetti 1975 , 151 ( 3 ) , 685 - 697 . [ 165 ] Hoessli , D . ; Rungger - Brandle , E . Association of specific cell - surface glyco - proteins with a triton X - 100 - resistant complex of plasma membrane proteins isolated from T - lymphoma cells ( P1798 ) . Exp Cell Res , 1985 , 156 ( 1 ) , 239 - 250 . [ 166 ] Thiele , H . G . ; Koch , F . ; Hamann , A . ; Arndt , R . Biochemical characterization of the T - cell alloantigen RT - 6 . 2 . Immunology , 1986 , 59 ( 2 ) , 195 - 201 . [ 167 ] Hooper , N . M . ; Turner , A . J . Ectoenzymes of the kidney microvillar mem - brane . Differential solubilization by detergents can predict a glycosyl - phosphatidylinositol membrane anchor . Biochem J , 1988 , 250 ( 3 ) , 865 - 869 . [ 168 ] Sargiacomo , M . ; Sudol , M . ; Tang , Z . ; Lisanti , M . P . Signal transducing molecules and glycosyl - phosphatidylinositol - linked proteins form a caveolin - rich insoluble complex in MDCK cells . J Cell Biol , 1993 , 122 ( 4 ) , 789 - 807 . [ 169 ] Rivaroli , A . ; Prioni , S . ; Loberto , N . ; Bettiga , A . ; Chigorno , V . ; Prinetti , A . ; Sonnino , S . Reorganization of prion protein membrane environment during low potassium - induced apoptosis in primary rat cerebellar neurons . J Neuro - chem , 2007 , 103 ( 5 ) , 1954 - 1967 . [ 170 ] Fra , A . M . ; Williamson , E . ; Simons , K . ; Parton , R . G . Detergent - insoluble glycolipid microdomains in lymphocytes in the absence of caveolae . J Biol Chem , 1994 , 269 ( 49 ) , 30745 - 30748 . [ 171 ] Iwabuchi , K . ; Nagaoka , I . Lactosylceramide - enriched glycosphingolipid signaling domain mediates superoxide generation from human neutrophils . Blood , 2002 , 100 ( 4 ) , 1454 - 1464 . [ 172 ] Waheed , A . A . ; Shimada , Y . ; Heijnen , H . F . ; Nakamura , M . ; Inomata , M . ; Hayashi , M . ; Iwashita , S . ; Slot , J . W . ; Ohno - Iwashita , Y . Selective binding of perfringolysin O derivative to cholesterol - rich membrane microdomains ( rafts ) . Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A , 2001 , 98 ( 9 ) , 4926 - 4931 . [ 173 ] Ledesma , M . D . ; Simons , K . ; Dotti , C . G . Neuronal polarity : essential role of protein - lipid complexes in axonal sorting . Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A , 1998 , 95 ( 7 ) , 3966 - 3971 . [ 174 ] Shogomori , H . ; Futerman , A . H . Cholera toxin is found in detergent - insoluble rafts / domains at the cell surface of hippocampal neurons but is internalized via a raft - independent mechanism . J Biol Chem , 2001 , 276 ( 12 ) , 9182 - 9188 . [ 175 ] Naslavsky , N . ; Stein , R . ; Yanai , A . ; Friedlander , G . ; Taraboulos , A . Charac - terization of detergent - insoluble complexes containing the cellular prion pro - tein and its scrapie isoform . J Biol Chem , 1997 , 272 ( 10 ) , 6324 - 6331 . [ 176 ] Prinetti , A . ; Iwabuchi , K . ; Hakomori , S . Glycosphingolipid - enriched signal - ing domain in mouse neuroblastoma Neuro2a cells . Mechanism of gangli - oside - dependent neuritogenesis . J Biol Chem , 1999 , 274 ( 30 ) , 20916 - 20924 . [ 177 ] Sahu , S . K . ; Saxena , R . ; Chattopadhyay , A . Cholesterol depletion modulates detergent resistant fraction of human serotonin ( 1A ) receptors . Mol Membr Biol , 2012 . [ 178 ] Pryor , S . ; McCaffrey , G . ; Young , L . R . ; Grimes , M . L . NGF causes TrkA to specifically attract microtubules to lipid rafts . PLoS One , 2012 , 7 ( 4 ) , e35163 . [ 179 ] Podyma - Inoue , K . A . ; Hara - Yokoyama , M . ; Shinomura , T . ; Kimura , T . ; Yanagishita , M . Syndecans reside in sphingomyelin - enriched low - density fractions of the plasma membrane isolated from a parathyroid cell line . PLoS One , 2012 , 7 ( 3 ) , e32351 . [ 180 ] Nixon , B . ; Mitchell , L . A . ; Anderson , A . L . ; McLaughlin , E . A . ; O ' Bryan M , K . ; Aitken , R . J . Proteomic and functional analysis of human sperm detergent resistant membranes . J Cell Physiol , 2011 , 226 ( 10 ) , 2651 - 2665 . [ 181 ] Chang , W . J . ; Ying , Y . S . ; Rothberg , K . G . ; Hooper , N . M . ; Turner , A . J . ; Gam - bliel , H . A . ; De Gunzburg , J . ; Mumby , S . M . ; Gilman , A . G . ; Anderson , R . G . Purification and characterization of smooth muscle cell caveolae . J Cell Biol , 1994 , 126 ( 1 ) , 127 - 138 . [ 182 ] Celver , J . ; Sharma , M . ; Kovoor , A . D ( 2 ) - Dopamine receptors target regulator of G protein signaling 9 - 2 to detergent - resistant membrane fractions . J Neu - rochem , 2012 , 120 ( 1 ) , 56 - 69 . [ 183 ] Suzuki , T . ; Zhang , J . ; Miyazawa , S . ; Liu , Q . ; Farzan , M . R . ; Yao , W . D . Association of membrane rafts and postsynaptic density : proteomics , bio - chemical , and ultrastructural analyses . J Neurochem , 2011 , 119 ( 1 ) , 64 - 77 . [ 184 ] Minami , S . S . ; Hoe , H . S . ; Rebeck , G . W . Fyn kinase regulates the association between amyloid precursor protein and Dab1 by promoting their localization to detergent - resistant membranes . J Neurochem , 2011 , 118 ( 5 ) , 879 - 890 . [ 185 ] Florey , O . ; Durgan , J . ; Muller , W . Phosphorylation of leukocyte PECAM and its association with detergent - resistant membranes regulate transendothe - lial migration . J Immunol , 2010 , 185 ( 3 ) , 1878 - 1886 . [ 186 ] Domingues , C . C . ; Ciana , A . ; Buttafava , A . ; Casadei , B . R . ; Balduini , C . ; de Paula , E . ; Minetti , G . Effect of cholesterol depletion and temperature on the isolation of detergent - resistant membranes from human erythrocytes . J Membr Biol , 2010 , 234 ( 3 ) , 195 - 205 . [ 187 ] Scandroglio , F . ; Venkata , J . K . ; Loberto , N . ; Prioni , S . ; Schuchman , E . H . ; Chigorno , V . ; Prinetti , A . ; Sonnino , S . Lipid content of brain , brain mem - brane lipid domains , and neurons from acid sphingomyelinase deficient mice . J Neurochem , 2008 , 107 ( 2 ) , 329 - 338 . [ 188 ] Garcia - Garcia , E . ; Grayfer , L . ; Stafford , J . L . ; Belosevic , M . Evidence for the presence of functional lipid rafts in immune cells of ectothermic organisms . Dev Comp Immunol , 2012 , 37 ( 2 ) , 257 - 269 . [ 189 ] K ubler , E . ; Dohlman , H . G . ; Lisanti , M . P . Identification of Triton X - 100 insoluble membrane domains in the yeast Saccharomyces cerevisiae . Lipid requirements for targeting of heterotrimeric G - protein subunits . J Biol Chem , 1996 , 271 ( 51 ) , 32975 - 32980 . [ 190 ] Tanigawa , M . ; Kihara , A . ; Terashima , M . ; Takahara , T . ; Maeda , T . Sphin - golipids regulate the yeast high - osmolarity glycerol response pathway . Mol Cell Biol , 2012 , 32 ( 14 ) , 2861 - 2870 . [ 191 ] Zhang , X . ; Thompson , G . A . , Jr . An apparent association between glycosyl - phosphatidylinositol - anchored proteins and a sphingolipid in Tetrahymena mimbres . Biochem J , 1997 , 323 ( Pt 1 ) , 197 - 206 . [ 192 ] Parish , L . A . ; Colquhoun , D . R . ; Ubaida Mohien , C . ; Lyashkov , A . E . ; Gra - ham , D . R . ; Dinglasan , R . R . Ookinete - interacting proteins on the microvillar surface are partitioned into detergent resistant membranes of Anopheles gambiae midguts . J Proteome Res , 2011 , 10 ( 11 ) , 5150 - 5162 . [ 193 ] Obando - Martinez , A . Z . ; Curtidor , H . ; Arevalo - Pinzon , G . ; Vanegas , M . ; Vizcaino , C . ; Patarroyo , M . A . ; Patarroyo , M . E . Conserved high activity binding peptides are involved in adhesion of two detergent - resistant mem - brane - associated merozoite proteins to red blood cells during invasion . J Med Chem , 2010 , 53 ( 10 ) , 3907 - 3918 . [ 194 ] Carmona - Salazar , L . ; El Hafidi , M . ; Enriquez - Arredondo , C . ; Vazquez - Vazquez , C . ; Gonzalez de la Vara , L . E . ; Gavilanes - Ruiz , M . Isolation of de - tergent - resistant membranes from plant photosynthetic and non - photosynthetic tissues . Anal Biochem , 2011 , 417 ( 2 ) , 220 - 227 . [ 195 ] Fujiwara , M . ; Hamada , S . ; Hiratsuka , M . ; Fukao , Y . ; Kawasaki , T . ; Shima - moto , K . Proteome analysis of detergent - resistant membranes ( DRMs ) asso - ciated with OsRac1 - mediated innate immunity in rice . Plant Cell Physiol , 2009 , 50 ( 7 ) , 1191 - 1200 . [ 196 ] Hooper , N . M . Detergent - insoluble glycosphingolipid / cholesterol - rich mem - brane domains , lipid rafts and caveolae ( review ) . Mol Membr Biol , 1999 , 16 ( 2 ) , 145 - 156 . [ 197 ] Munro , S . Lipid rafts : elusive or illusive ? Cell , 2003 , 115 ( 4 ) , 377 - 388 . [ 198 ] Shogomori , H . ; Brown , D . A . Use of detergents to study membrane rafts : the good , the bad , and the ugly . Biol Chem , 2003 , 384 ( 9 ) , 1259 - 1263 . [ 199 ] Chamberlain , L . H . Detergents as tools for the purification and classification of lipid rafts . FEBS Lett , 2004 , 559 ( 1 - 3 ) , 1 - 5 . [ 200 ] Madore , N . ; Smith , K . L . ; Graham , C . H . ; Jen , A . ; Brady , K . ; Hall , s . ; Morris , R . Functionally different GPI proteins are organized in different domains on the neuronal surface . EMBO J . , 1999 , 18 ( 24 ) , 6917 - 6926 . [ 201 ] Parkin , E . T . ; Turner , A . J . ; Hooper , N . M . Differential effects of glycosphin - golipids on the detergent - insolubility of the glycosylphosphatidylinositol - anchored membrane dipeptidase . Biochem J , 2001 , 358 ( Pt 1 ) , 209 - 216 . [ 202 ] Taylor , C . M . ; Coetzee , T . ; Pfeiffer , S . E . Detergent - insoluble glycosphin - golipid / cholesterol microdomains of the myelin membrane . J Neurochem , 2002 , 81 ( 5 ) , 993 - 1004 . [ 203 ] Waugh , M . G . ; Lawson , D . ; Hsuan , J . J . Epidermal growth factor receptor activation is localized within low - buoyant density , non - caveolar membrane domains . Biochem J , 1999 , 337 ( Pt 3 ) , 591 - 597 . [ 204 ] Kim , K . B . ; Kim , S . I . ; Choo , H . J . ; Kim , J . H . ; Ko , Y . G . Two - dimensional electrophoretic analysis reveals that lipid rafts are intact at physiological temperature . Proteomics , 2004 , 4 ( 11 ) , 3527 - 3535 . [ 205 ] Prinetti , A . ; Prioni , S . ; Chigorno , V . ; Karagogeos , D . ; Tettamanti , G . ; Son - nino , S . Immunoseparation of sphingolipid - enriched membrane domains en - riched in Src family protein tyrosine kinases and in the neuronal adhesion molecule TAG - 1 by anti - GD3 ganglioside monoclonal antibody . J Neuro - chem , 2001 , 78 ( 5 ) , 1162 - 1167 . [ 206 ] Parkin , E . T . ; Turner , A . J . ; Hooper , N . M . Amyloid precursor protein , al - though partially detergent - insoluble in mouse cerebral cortex , behaves as an atypical lipid raft protein . Biochem J , 1999 , 344 Pt 1 , 23 - 30 . [ 207 ] Loberto , N . ; Prioni , S . ; Bettiga , A . ; Chigorno , V . ; Prinetti , A . ; Sonnino , S . The membrane environment of endogenous cellular prion protein in primary rat cerebellar neurons . J Neurochem , 2005 , 95 ( 3 ) , 771 - 783 . [ 208 ] Fiedler , K . ; Kobayashi , T . ; Kurzchalia , T . V . ; Simons , K . Glycosphingolipid - enriched , detergent - insoluble complexes in protein sorting in epithelial cells . Biochemistry , 1993 , 32 ( 25 ) , 6365 - 6373 . [ 209 ] Kim , T . ; Pfeiffer , S . E . Myelin glycosphingolipid / cholesterol - enriched micro - domains selectively sequester the non - compact myelin proteins CNP and MOG . J Neurocytol , 1999 , 28 ( 4 - 5 ) , 281 - 293 . [ 210 ] Simons , M . ; Kramer , E . M . ; Thiele , C . ; Stoffel , W . ; Trotter , J . Assembly of myelin by association of proteolipid protein with cholesterol - and galactosyl - ceramide - rich membrane domains . J Cell Biol , 2000 , 151 ( 1 ) , 143 - 154 . [ 211 ] Roper , K . ; Corbeil , D . ; Huttner , W . B . Retention of prominin in microvilli reveals distinct cholesterol - based lipid micro - domains in the apical plasma membrane . Nat Cell Biol , 2000 , 2 ( 9 ) , 582 - 592 . [ 212 ] Brugger , B . ; Graham , C . ; Leibrecht , I . ; Mombelli , E . ; Jen , A . ; Wieland , F . ; Morris , R . The membrane domains occupied by glycosylphosphatidylinosi - tol - anchored prion protein and Thy - 1 differ in lipid composition . J Biol Chem , 2004 , 279 ( 9 ) , 7530 - 7536 . [ 213 ] Ingelmo - Torres , M . ; Gaus , K . ; Herms , A . ; Gonzalez - Moreno , E . ; Kassan , A . ; Bosch , M . ; Grewal , T . ; Tebar , F . ; Enrich , C . ; Pol , A . Triton X - 100 promotes a cholesterol - dependent condensation of the plasma membrane . Biochem J , 2009 , 420 ( 3 ) , 373 - 381 . [ 214 ] Pathak , P . ; London , E . Measurement of lipid nanodomain ( raft ) formation and size in sphingomyelin / POPC / cholesterol vesicles shows TX - 100 and transmembrane helices increase domain size by coalescing preexisting nano - domains but do not induce domain formation . Biophys J , 2011 , 101 ( 10 ) , 2417 - 2425 . [ 215 ] Arvanitis , D . N . ; Min , W . ; Gong , Y . ; Heng , Y . M . ; Boggs , J . M . Two types of detergent - insoluble , glycosphingolipid / cholesterol - rich membrane domains from isolated myelin . J Neurochem , 2005 , 94 ( 6 ) , 1696 - 1710 . [ 216 ] Ahmed , S . N . ; Brown , D . A . ; London , E . On the origin of sphin - golipid / cholesterol - rich detergent - insoluble cell membranes : physiological concentrations of cholesterol and sphingolipid induce formation of a deter - The Lipid Raft Concept Current Medicinal Chemistry , 2013 , Vol . 20 , No . 1 19 gent - insoluble , liquid - ordered lipid phase in model membranes . Biochemis - try , 1997 , 36 ( 36 ) , 10944 - 10953 . [ 217 ] Chen , X . ; Jen , A . ; Warley , A . ; Lawrence , M . J . ; Quinn , P . J . ; Morris , R . J . Isolation at physiological temperature of detergent - resistant membranes with properties expected of lipid rafts : the influence of buffer composition . Bio - chem J , 2009 , 417 ( 2 ) , 525 - 533 . [ 218 ] Morris , R . J . ; Jen , A . ; Warley , A . Isolation of nano - meso scale detergent resistant membrane that has properties expected of lipid ' rafts ' . J Neurochem , 2011 , 116 ( 5 ) , 671 - 677 . [ 219 ] Rimmerman , N . ; Bradshaw , H . B . ; Kozela , E . ; Levy , R . ; Juknat , A . ; Vogel , Z . Compartmentalization of endocannabinoids into lipid rafts in a microglial cell line devoid of caveolin - 1 . Br J Pharmacol , 2012 , 165 ( 8 ) , 2436 - 2449 . [ 220 ] Song , K . S . ; Li , S . ; Okamoto , T . ; Quilliam , L . A . ; Sargiacomo , M . ; Lisanti , M . P . Co - purification and direct interaction of Ras with caveolin , an integral membrane protein of caveolae microdomains . Detergent - free purification of caveolae microdomains . J Biol Chem , 1996 , 271 ( 16 ) , 9690 - 9697 . [ 221 ] Smart , E . J . ; Ying , Y . S . ; Mineo , C . ; Anderson , R . G . A detergent - free method for purifying caveolae membrane from tissue culture cells . Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A , 1995 , 92 ( 22 ) , 10104 - 10108 . [ 222 ] Kennedy , C . ; Nelson , M . D . ; Bamezai , A . K . Analysis of detergent - free lipid rafts isolated from CD4 + T cell line : interaction with antigen presenting cells promotes coalescing of lipid rafts . Cell Commun Signal , 2011 , 9 ( 1 ) , 31 . [ 223 ] Hummel , I . ; Klappe , K . ; Ercan , C . ; Kok , J . W . Multidrug resistance - related protein 1 ( MRP1 ) function and localization depend on cortical actin . Mol Pharmacol , 2011 , 79 ( 2 ) , 229 - 240 . [ 224 ] Persaud - Sawin , D . A . ; Lightcap , S . ; Harry , G . J . Isolation of rafts from mouse brain tissue by a detergent - free method . J Lipid Res , 2009 , 50 ( 4 ) , 759 - 767 . [ 225 ] Rimmerman , N . ; Hughes , H . V . ; Bradshaw , H . B . ; Pazos , M . X . ; Mackie , K . ; Prieto , A . L . ; Walker , J . M . Compartmentalization of endocannabinoids into lipid rafts in a dorsal root ganglion cell line . Br J Pharmacol , 2008 , 153 ( 2 ) , 380 - 389 . [ 226 ] Hofman , E . G . ; Ruonala , M . O . ; Bader , A . N . ; van den Heuvel , D . ; Voortman , J . ; Roovers , R . C . ; Verkleij , A . J . ; Gerritsen , H . C . ; van Bergen En Henegou - wen , P . M . EGF induces coalescence of different lipid rafts . J Cell Sci , 2008 , 121 ( Pt 15 ) , 2519 - 2528 . [ 227 ] Iwabuchi , K . ; Yamamura , S . ; Prinetti , A . ; Handa , K . ; Hakomori , S . GM3 - enriched microdomain involved in cell adhesion and signal transduction through carbohydrate - carbohydrate interaction in mouse melanoma B16 cells . J Biol Chem , 1998 , 273 ( 15 ) , 9130 - 9138 . [ 228 ] Kasahara , K . ; Watanabe , K . ; Takeuchi , K . ; Kaneko , H . ; Oohira , A . ; Yama - moto , T . ; Sanai , Y . Involvement of gangliosides in glycosylphosphatidyli - nositol - anchored neuronal cell adhesion molecule TAG - 1 signaling in lipid rafts . J Biol Chem , 2000 , 275 ( 44 ) , 34701 - 34709 . [ 229 ] Liu , P . ; Ying , Y . ; Anderson , R . G . Platelet - derived growth factor activates mitogen - activated protein kinase in isolated caveolae . Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A , 1997 , 94 ( 25 ) , 13666 - 13670 . [ 230 ] Wu , C . ; Butz , S . ; Ying , Y . ; Anderson , R . G . Tyrosine kinase receptors con - centrated in caveolae - like domains from neuronal plasma membrane . J Biol Chem , 1997 , 272 ( 6 ) , 3554 - 3559 . [ 231 ] Couet , J . ; Sargiacomo , M . ; Lisanti , M . P . Interaction of a receptor tyrosine kinase , EGF - R , with caveolins . Caveolin binding negatively regulates tyro - sine and serine / threonine kinase activities . J Biol Chem , 1997 , 272 ( 48 ) , 30429 - 30438 . [ 232 ] Bilderback , T . R . ; Gazula , V . R . ; Lisanti , M . P . ; Dobrowsky , R . T . Caveolin interacts with Trk A and p75 ( NTR ) and regulates neurotrophin signaling pathways . J Biol Chem , 1999 , 274 ( 1 ) , 257 - 263 . [ 233 ] Silva , W . I . ; Maldonado , H . M . ; Lisanti , M . P . ; Devellis , J . ; Chompre , G . ; Mayol , N . ; Ortiz , M . ; Velazquez , G . ; Maldonado , A . ; Montalvo , J . Identifica - tion of caveolae and caveolin in C6 glioma cells . Int J Dev Neurosci , 1999 , 17 ( 7 ) , 705 - 714 . [ 234 ] Bravo - Zehnder , M . ; Orio , P . ; Norambuena , A . ; Wallner , M . ; Meera , P . ; Toro , L . ; Latorre , R . ; Gonzalez , A . Apical sorting of a voltage - and Ca2 + - activated K + channel alpha - subunit in Madin - Darby canine kidney cells is independent of N - glycosylation . Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A , 2000 , 97 ( 24 ) , 13114 - 13119 . [ 235 ] Waugh , M . G . ; Lawson , D . ; Tan , S . K . ; Hsuan , J . J . Phosphatidylinositol 4 - phosphate synthesis in immunoisolated caveolae - like vesicles and low buoy - ant density non - caveolar membranes . J Biol Chem , 1998 , 273 ( 27 ) , 17115 - 17121 . [ 236 ] Eckert , G . P . ; Igbavboa , U . ; Muller , W . E . ; Wood , W . G . Lipid rafts of purified mouse brain synaptosomes prepared with or without detergent reveal differ - ent lipid and protein domains . Brain Res , 2003 , 962 ( 1 - 2 ) , 144 - 150 . [ 237 ] Hakomori , S . ; Handa , K . ; Iwabuchi , K . ; Yamamura , S . ; Prinetti , A . New insights in glycosphingolipid function : " glycosignaling domain , " a cell sur - face assembly of glycosphingolipids with signal transducer mole - cules , involved in cell adhesion coupled with signaling . Glycobiology , 1998 , 8 ( 10 ) , xi - xix . [ 238 ] Tillack , T . W . ; Allietta , M . ; Moran , R . E . ; Young , W . W . , Jr . Localization of globoside and Forssman glycolipids on erythrocyte membranes . Biochim Biophys Acta , 1983 , 733 ( 1 ) , 15 - 24 . [ 239 ] Rahmann , H . ; Rosner , H . ; Kortje , K . H . ; Beitinger , H . ; Seybold , V . Ca ( 2 + ) - ganglioside - interaction in neuronal differentiation and development . Prog Brain Res , 1994 , 101 , 127 - 145 . [ 240 ] Sorice , M . ; Parolini , I . ; Sansolini , T . ; Garofalo , T . ; Dolo , V . ; Sargiacomo , M . ; Tai , T . ; Peschle , C . ; Torrisi , M . R . ; Pavan , A . Evidence for the existence of ganglioside - enriched plasma membrane domains in human peripheral lymphocytes . J Lipid Res , 1997 , 38 ( 5 ) , 969 - 980 . [ 241 ] Sekimoto , J . ; Kabayama , K . ; Gohara , K . ; Inokuchi , J . - i . Dissociation of the insulin receptor from caveolae during TNFÎ± - induced insulin resistance and its recovery by d - PDMP . FEBS Letters , 2012 , 586 ( 2 ) , 191 - 195 . [ 242 ] Ichikawa , N . ; Iwabuchi , K . ; Kurihara , H . ; Ishii , K . ; Kobayashi , T . ; Sasaki , T . ; Hattori , N . ; Mizuno , Y . ; Hozumi , K . ; Yamada , Y . ; Arikawa - Hirasawa , E . Binding of laminin - 1 to monosialoganglioside GM1 in lipid rafts is crucial for neurite outgrowth . J Cell Sci , 2009 , 122 ( Pt 2 ) , 289 - 299 . [ 243 ] Fujimoto , T . GPI - anchored proteins , glycosphingolipids , and sphingomyelin are sequestered to caveolae only after crosslinking . J Histochem Cytochem , 1996 , 44 ( 8 ) , 929 - 941 . [ 244 ] Mayor , S . ; Rothberg , K . G . ; Maxfield , F . R . Sequestration of GPI - anchored proteins in caveolae triggered by cross - linking . Science , 1994 , 264 ( 5167 ) , 1948 - 1951 . [ 245 ] Jost , P . ; Brooks , U . J . ; Griffith , O . H . Fluidity of phospholipid bilayers and membranes after exposure to osmium tetroxide and gluteraldehyde . J Mol Biol , 1973 , 76 ( 2 ) , 313 - 318 . [ 246 ] Fujita , A . ; Cheng , J . ; Fujimoto , T . Quantitative electron microscopy for the nanoscale analysis of membrane lipid distribution . Nat Protoc , 2010 , 5 ( 4 ) , 661 - 669 . [ 247 ] Fujita , A . ; Fujimoto , T . High - resolution molecular localization by freeze - fracture replica labeling . Methods Mol Biol , 2010 , 657 , 205 - 216 . [ 248 ] Fujita , A . ; Fujimoto , T . Quantitative retention of membrane lipids in the freeze - fracture replica . Histochem Cell Biol , 2007 , 128 ( 5 ) , 385 - 389 . [ 249 ] Fujita , A . ; Cheng , J . ; Hirakawa , M . ; Furukawa , K . ; Kusunoki , S . ; Fujimoto , T . Gangliosides GM1 and GM3 in the living cell membrane form clusters susceptible to cholesterol depletion and chilling . Mol Biol Cell , 2007 , 18 ( 6 ) , 2112 - 2122 . [ 250 ] Fujita , A . ; Cheng , J . ; Fujimoto , T . Segregation of GM1 and GM3 clusters in the cell membrane depends on the intact actin cytoskeleton . Biochim Biophys Acta , 2009 , 1791 ( 5 ) , 388 - 396 . [ 251 ] Fujita , A . ; Cheng , J . ; Tauchi - Sato , K . ; Takenawa , T . ; Fujimoto , T . A distinct pool of phosphatidylinositol 4 , 5 - bisphosphate in caveolae revealed by a nanoscale labeling technique . Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A , 2009 , 106 ( 23 ) , 9256 - 9261 . [ 252 ] Owen , D . M . ; Magenau , A . ; Majumdar , A . ; Gaus , K . Imaging membrane lipid order in whole , living vertebrate organisms . Biophys J , 2010 , 99 ( 1 ) , L7 - 9 . [ 253 ] Owen , D . M . ; Williamson , D . ; Rentero , C . ; Gaus , K . Quantitative micros - copy : protein dynamics and membrane organisation . Traffic , 2009 , 10 ( 8 ) , 962 - 971 . [ 254 ] Ishitsuka , R . ; Sato , S . B . ; Kobayashi , T . Imaging lipid rafts . J Biochem ( To - kyo ) , 2005 , 137 ( 3 ) , 249 - 254 . [ 255 ] Lagerholm , B . C . ; Weinreb , G . E . ; Jacobson , K . ; Thompson , N . L . Detecting microdomains in intact cell membranes . Annu Rev Phys Chem , 2005 , 56 , 309 - 336 . [ 256 ] Varma , R . ; Mayor , S . GPI - anchored proteins are organized in submicron domains at the cell surface . Nature , 1998 , 394 ( 6695 ) , 798 - 801 . [ 257 ] Rao , M . ; Mayor , S . Use of Forster ' s resonance energy transfer microscopy to study lipid rafts . Biochim Biophys Acta , 2005 , 1746 ( 3 ) , 221 - 233 . [ 258 ] Pralle , A . ; Keller , P . ; Florin , E . L . ; Simons , K . ; Horber , J . K . Sphingolipid - cholesterol rafts diffuse as small entities in the plasma membrane of mam - malian cells . J Cell Biol , 2000 , 148 ( 5 ) , 997 - 1008 . [ 259 ] Saxton , M . J . ; Jacobson , K . Single - particle tracking : applications to mem - brane dynamics . Annu Rev Biophys Biomol Struct , 1997 , 26 , 373 - 399 . [ 260 ] Sheets , E . D . ; Lee , G . M . ; Simson , R . ; Jacobson , K . Transient confinement of a glycosylphosphatidylinositol - anchored protein in the plasma membrane . Biochemistry , 1997 , 36 ( 41 ) , 12449 - 12458 . [ 261 ] Chen , Y . ; Lagerholm , B . C . ; Yang , B . ; Jacobson , K . Methods to measure the lateral diffusion of membrane lipids and proteins . Methods , 2006 , 39 ( 2 ) , 147 - 153 . [ 262 ] Jacobson , K . ; Dietrich , C . Looking at lipid rafts ? Trends Cell Biol , 1999 , 9 ( 3 ) , 87 - 91 . [ 263 ] Eggeling , C . ; Ringemann , C . ; Medda , R . ; Schwarzmann , G . ; Sandhoff , K . ; Polyakova , S . ; Belov , V . N . ; Hein , B . ; von Middendorff , C . ; Schonle , A . ; Hell , S . W . Direct observation of the nanoscale dynamics of membrane lipids in a living cell . Nature , 2009 , 457 ( 7233 ) , 1159 - 1162 . [ 264 ] Kenworthy , A . K . ; Nichols , B . J . ; Remmert , C . L . ; Hendrix , G . M . ; Kumar , M . ; Zimmerberg , J . ; Lippincott - Schwartz , J . Dynamics of putative raft - associated proteins at the cell surface . J Cell Biol , 2004 , 165 ( 5 ) , 735 - 746 . [ 265 ] Kenworthy , A . K . ; Edidin , M . Distribution of a glycosylphosphatidylinositol - anchored protein at the apical surface of MDCK cells examined at a resolu - tion of < 100 A using imaging fluorescence resonance energy transfer . J Cell Biol , 1998 , 142 ( 1 ) , 69 - 84 . [ 266 ] Vrljic , M . ; Nishimura , S . Y . ; Brasselet , S . ; Moerner , W . E . ; McC onnell , H . M . T ranslational diffusion of individual class II MHC membrane proteins in cells . Biophys J , 2002 , 83 ( 5 ) , 2681 - 2692 . [ 267 ] Douglass , A . D . ; Vale , R . D . Single - molecule microscopy reveals plasma membrane microdomains created by protein - protein networks that exclude or trap signaling molecules in T cells . Cell , 2005 , 121 ( 6 ) , 937 - 950 . [ 268 ] Murakoshi , H . ; Iino , R . ; Kobayashi , T . ; Fujiwara , T . ; Ohshima , C . ; Yoshi - mura , A . ; Kusumi , A . Single - molecule imaging analysis of Ras activation in living cells . Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A , 2004 , 101 ( 19 ) , 7317 - 7322 . [ 269 ] Hell , S . W . Microscopy and its focal switch . Nat Methods , 2009 , 6 ( 1 ) , 24 - 32 . 20 Current Medicinal Chemistry , 2013 , Vol . 20 , No . 1 Sonnino and Prinetti [ 270 ] Eggeling , C . ; Mueller , V . ; Ringemann , C . ; Sahl , SteffenÂ J . ; Leutenegger , M . ; Schwarzmann , G . n . ; Belov , V . ; SchÃ¶nle , A . ; Hell , S . W . Exploring Membrane Dynamics by Fluorescence Nanoscopy . Biophysical Journal , 2010 , 98 ( 3 , Supplement 1 ) , 619a . [ 271 ] Nagerl , U . V . ; Willig , K . I . ; Hein , B . ; Hell , S . W . ; Bonhoeffer , T . Live - cell imaging of dendritic spines by STED microscopy . Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A , 2008 , 105 ( 48 ) , 18982 - 18987 . [ 272 ] Berning , S . ; Willig , K . I . ; Steffens , H . ; Dibaj , P . ; Hell , S . W . Nanoscopy in a living mouse brain . Science , 2012 , 335 ( 6068 ) , 551 . [ 273 ] Eggeling , C . ; Ringemann , C . ; Medda , R . ; Hein , B . ; Hell , S . W . High - Resolution Far - Field Fluorescence STED Microscopy Reveals Nanoscale Details of Molecular Membrane Dynamics . Biophysical Journal , 2009 , 96 ( 3 , Supplement 1 ) , 197a . [ 274 ] Iwabuchi , K . ; Nakayama , H . ; Masuda , H . ; Kina , K . ; Ogawa , H . ; Takamori , K . Membrane microdomains in immunity : Glycosphingolipid - enriched do - main - mediated innate immune responses . Biofactors , 2012 , doi : 10 . 1002 / biof . 1017 . [ Epub ahead of print ] [ 275 ] Sezgin , E . ; Levental , I . ; Grzybek , M . ; Schwarzmann , G . ; Mueller , V . ; Honigmann , A . ; Belov , V . N . ; Eggeling , C . ; Coskun , U . ; Simons , K . ; Schwille , P . Partitioning , diffusion , and ligand binding of raft lipid analogs in model and cellular plasma membranes . Biochim Biophys Acta , 2012 , 1818 ( 7 ) , 1777 - 1784 . [ 276 ] Sharma , P . ; Varma , R . ; Sarasij , R . C . ; Ira ; Gousset , K . ; Krishnamoorthy , G . ; Rao , M . ; Mayor , S . Nanoscale organization of multiple GPI - anchored pro - teins in living cell membranes . Cell , 2004 , 116 ( 4 ) , 577 - 589 . [ 277 ] Lommerse , P . H . ; Spaink , H . P . ; Schmidt , T . In vivo plasma membrane orga - nization : results of biophysical approaches . Biochim . Biophys . Acta . , 2004 , 1664 , 119 - 131 . [ 278 ] Schutz , G . J . ; Kada , G . ; Pastushenko , V . P . ; Schindler , H . Properties of lipid microdomains in a muscle cell membrane visualized by single molecule mi - croscopy . Embo J , 2000 , 19 ( 5 ) , 892 - 901 . [ 279 ] Gaus , K . ; Gratton , E . ; Kable , E . P . ; Jones , A . S . ; Gelissen , I . ; Kritharides , L . ; Jessup , W . Visualizing lipid structure and raft domains in living cells with two - photon microscopy . Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A , 2003 , 100 ( 26 ) , 15554 - 15559 . [ 280 ] Hao , M . ; Mukherjee , S . ; Maxfield , F . R . Cholesterol depletion induces large scale domain segregation in living cell membranes . Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A , 2001 , 98 ( 23 ) , 13072 - 13077 . [ 281 ] Kusumi , A . ; Nakada , C . ; Ritchie , K . ; Murase , K . ; Suzuki , K . ; Murakoshi , H . ; Kasai , R . S . ; Kondo , J . ; Fujiwara , T . Paradigm shift of the plasma membrane concept from the two - dimensional continuum fluid to the partitioned fluid : high - speed single - molecule tracking of membrane molecules . Annu Rev Bio - phys Biomol Struct , 2005 , 34 , 351 - 378 . [ 282 ] Dahan , M . ; Levi , S . ; Luccardini , C . ; Rostaing , P . ; Riveau , B . ; Triller , A . Diffusion dynamics of glycine receptors revealed by single - quantum dot tracking . Science , 2003 , 302 ( 5644 ) , 442 - 445 . [ 283 ] Dietrich , C . ; Yang , B . ; Fujiwara , T . ; Kusumi , A . ; Jacobson , K . Relationship of lipid rafts to transient confinement zones detected by single particle track - ing . Biophys J , 2002 , 82 ( 1 Pt 1 ) , 274 - 284 . [ 284 ] Kasahara , K . ; Watanabe , Y . ; Yamamoto , T . ; Sanai , Y . Association of Src family tyrosine kinase Lyn with ganglioside GD3 in rat brain . Possible regu - lation of Lyn by glycosphingolipid in caveolae - like domains . J Biol Chem , 1997 , 272 ( 47 ) , 29947 - 29953 . [ 285 ] Chini , B . ; Parenti , M . G - protein coupled receptors in lipid rafts and caveolae : how , when and why do they go there ? J Mol Endocrinol , 2004 , 32 ( 2 ) , 325 - 338 . [ 286 ] Prinetti , A . ; Marano , N . ; Prioni , S . ; Chigorno , V . ; Mauri , L . ; Casellato , R . ; Tettamanti , G . ; Sonnino , S . Association of Src - family protein tyrosine kinases with sphingolipids in rat cerebellar granule cells differentiated in cul - ture . Glycoconj J , 2000 , 17 ( 3 - 4 ) , 223 - 232 . [ 287 ] Paratcha , G . ; Ibanez , C . F . Lipid rafts and the control of neurotrophic factor signaling in the nervous system : variations on a theme . Curr Opin Neurobiol , 2002 , 12 ( 5 ) , 542 - 549 . [ 288 ] Tsui - Pierchala , B . A . ; Encinas , M . ; Milbrandt , J . ; Johnson , E . M . , Jr . Lipid rafts in neuronal signaling and function . Trends Neurosci , 2002 , 25 ( 8 ) , 412 - 417 . [ 289 ] Nagappan , G . ; Lu , B . Activity - dependent modulation of the BDNF receptor TrkB : mechanisms and implications . Trends Neurosci , 2005 , 28 ( 9 ) , 464 - 471 . [ 290 ] Saarma , M . GDNF recruits the signaling crew into lipid rafts . Trends Neuro - sci , 2001 , 24 ( 8 ) , 427 - 429 . [ 291 ] Yang , X . L . ; Xiong , W . C . ; Mei , L . Lipid rafts in neuregulin signaling at synapses . Life Sci , 2004 , 75 ( 21 ) , 2495 - 2504 . [ 292 ] Gauthier , L . R . ; Robbins , S . M . Ephrin signaling : One raft to rule them all ? One raft to sort them ? One raft to spread their call and in signaling bind them ? Life Sci , 2003 , 74 ( 2 - 3 ) , 207 - 216 . [ 293 ] Becher , A . ; McIlhinney , R . A . Consequences of lipid raft association on G - protein - coupled receptor function . Biochem Soc Symp , 2005 ( 72 ) , 151 - 164 . [ 294 ] Barnett - Norris , J . ; Lynch , D . ; Reggio , P . H . Lipids , lipid rafts and caveolae : Their importance for GPCR signaling and their centrality to the endocan - na bin oid system . Life Sciences Targeted Lipidomics : Endocannabinoids and other Endolipid Modulators , 2005 , 77 ( 14 ) , 1625 - 1639 . [ 295 ] Tooze , S . A . ; Martens , G . J . ; Huttner , W . B . Secretory granule biogenesis : rafting to the SNARE . Trends Cell Biol , 2001 , 11 ( 3 ) , 116 - 122 . [ 296 ] Decker , L . ; Baron , W . ; Ffrench - Constant , C . Lipid rafts : microenvironments for integrin - growth factor interactions in neural development . Biochem Soc Trans , 2004 , 32 ( Pt3 ) , 426 - 430 . [ 297 ] Mineo , C . ; James , G . L . ; Smart , E . J . ; Anderson , R . G . Localization of epider - mal growth factor - stimulated Ras / Raf - 1 interaction to caveolae membrane . J Biol Chem , 1996 , 271 ( 20 ) , 11930 - 11935 . [ 298 ] Bilderback , T . R . ; Grigsby , R . J . ; Dobrowsky , R . T . Association of p75 ( NTR ) with caveolin and localization of neurotrophin - induced sphingomyelin hy - drolysis to caveolae . J Biol Chem , 1997 , 272 ( 16 ) , 10922 - 10927 . [ 299 ] Masserini , M . ; Palestini , P . ; Pitto , M . Glycolipid - enriched caveolae and caveolae - like domains in the nervous system . J Neurochem , 1999 , 73 ( 1 ) , 1 - 11 . [ 300 ] Santuccione , A . ; Sytnyk , V . ; Leshchyns ' ka , I . ; Schachner , M . Prion protein recruits its neuronal receptor NCAM to lipid rafts to activate p59 fyn and to enhance neurite outgrowth . J . Cell Biol . , 2005 , 169 ( 2 ) , 341 - 354 . [ 301 ] McKerracher , L . Ganglioside rafts as MAG receptors that mediate blockade of axon growth . Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A , 2002 , 99 ( 12 ) , 7811 - 7813 . [ 302 ] Vyas , A . A . ; Patel , H . V . ; Fromholt , S . E . ; Heffer - Lauc , M . ; Vyas , K . A . ; Dang , J . ; Schachner , M . ; Schnaar , R . L . Gangliosides are functional nerve cell ligands for myelin - associated glycoprotein ( MAG ) , an inhibitor of nerve re - generation . Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A , 2002 , 99 ( 12 ) , 8412 - 8417 . [ 303 ] Boggs , J . M . ; Wang , H . ; Gao , W . ; Arvanitis , D . N . ; Gong , Y . ; Min , W . A glycosynapse in myelin ? Glycoconj J , 2004 , 21 ( 3 - 4 ) , 97 - 110 . [ 304 ] Loberto , N . ; Prioni , S . ; Prinetti , A . ; Ottico , E . ; Chigorno , V . ; Karagogeos , D . ; Sonnino , S . The adhesion protein TAG - 1 has a ganglioside environment in the sphingolipid - enriched membrane domains of neuronal cells in culture . J Neurochem , 2003 , 85 ( 1 ) , 224 - 233 . [ 305 ] Pierchala , B . A . ; Milbrandt , J . ; Johnson , E . M . , Jr . Glial cell line - derived neurotrophic factor - dependent recruitment of Ret into lipid rafts enhances signaling by partitioning Ret from proteasome - dependent degradation . J Neurosci , 2006 , 26 ( 10 ) , 2777 - 2787 . [ 306 ] Kasahara , K . ; Watanabe , K . ; Kozutsumi , Y . ; Oohira , A . ; Yamamoto , T . ; Sanai , Y . Association of GPI - anchored protein TAG - 1 with src - family kinase Lyn in lipid rafts of cerebellar granule cells . Neurochem Res , 2002 , 27 ( 7 - 8 ) , 823 - 829 . [ 307 ] Hanai , N . ; Nores , G . A . ; MacLeod , C . ; Torres - Mendez , C . R . ; Hakomori , S . Ganglioside - mediated modulation of cell growth . Specific effects of GM3 and lyso - GM3 in tyrosine phosphorylation of the epidermal growth factor re - ceptor . J Biol Chem , 1988 , 263 ( 22 ) , 10915 - 10921 . [ 308 ] Song , W . X . ; Vacca , M . F . ; Welti , R . ; Rintoul , D . A . Effects of gangliosides GM3 and De - N - acetyl GM3 on epidermal growth factor receptor kinase ac - tivity and cell growth . J Biol Chem , 1991 , 266 ( 16 ) , 10174 - 10181 . [ 309 ] Miljan , E . A . ; Meuillet , E . J . ; Mania - Farnell , B . ; George , D . ; Yamamoto , H . ; Simon , H . G . ; Bremer , E . G . Interaction of the extracellular domain of the epi - dermal growth factor receptor with gangliosides . J Biol Chem , 2002 , 277 ( 12 ) , 10108 - 10113 . [ 310 ] Ringerike , T . ; Blystad , F . D . ; Levy , F . O . ; Madshus , I . H . ; Stang , E . Choles - terol is important in control of EGF receptor kinase activity but EGF recep - tors are not concentrated in caveolae . J Cell Sci , 2002 , 115 ( 6 ) , 1331 - 1340 . [ 311 ] Roepstorff , K . ; Thomsen , P . ; Sandvig , K . ; van Deurs , B . Sequestration of epidermal growth factor receptors in non - caveolar lipid rafts inhibits ligand binding . J Biol Chem , 2002 , 277 ( 21 ) , 18954 - 18960 . [ 312 ] Pike , L . J . Growth factor receptors , lipid rafts and caveolae : an evolving story . Biochim Biophys Acta , 2005 , 1746 ( 3 ) , 260 - 273 . [ 313 ] Pike , L . J . ; Han , X . ; Gross , R . W . Epidermal growth factor receptors are localized to lipid rafts that contain a balance of inner and outer leaflet lipids : a shotgun lipidomics study . J Biol Chem , 2005 , 280 ( 29 ) , 26796 - 26804 . [ 314 ] Waugh , M . G . ; Minogue , S . ; Anderson , J . S . ; dos Santos , M . ; Hsuan , J . J . Signalling and non - caveolar rafts . Biochem . Soc . Trans . , 2001 29 ( Pt 4 ) , 509 - 511 . [ 315 ] Wang , X . - Q . ; Sun , P . ; Paller , A . S . Ganglioside Induces Caveolin - 1 Redistri - bution and Interaction with the Epidermal Growth Factor Receptor . J . Biol . Chem . , 2002 , 277 ( 49 ) , 47028 - 47034 . [ 316 ] Wang , X . Q . ; Sun , P . ; Paller , A . S . Ganglioside GM3 blocks the activation of epidermal growth factor receptor induced by integrin at specific tyrosine sites . J Biol Chem , 2003 , 278 ( 49 ) , 48770 - 48778 . [ 317 ] Gustavsson , J . ; Parpal , S . ; Karlsson , M . ; Ramsing , C . ; Thorn , H . ; Borg , M . ; Lindroth , M . ; Peterson , K . H . ; Magnusson , K . E . ; Stralfors , P . Localization of the insulin receptor in caveolae of adipocyte plasma membrane . Faseb J , 1999 , 13 ( 14 ) , 1961 - 1971 . [ 318 ] Kabayama , K . ; Sato , T . ; Kitamura , F . ; Uemura , S . ; Kang , B . W . ; Igarashi , Y . ; Inokuchi , J . TNFalpha - induced insulin resistance in adipocytes as a mem - brane microdomain disorder : involvement of ganglioside GM3 . Glycobiol - ogy , 2005 , 15 ( 1 ) , 21 - 29 . [ 319 ] Couet , J . ; Li , S . ; Okamoto , T . ; Ikezu , T . ; Lisanti , M . P . Identification of peptide and protein ligands for the caveolin - scaffolding domain . Implications for the interaction of caveolin with caveolae - associated proteins . J Biol Chem , 1997 , 272 ( 10 ) , 6525 - 6533 . [ 320 ] Kabayama , K . ; Sato , T . ; Saito , K . ; Loberto , N . ; Prinetti , A . ; Sonnino , S . ; Kinjo , M . ; Igarashi , Y . ; Inokuchi , J . Dissociation of the insulin receptor and caveolin - 1 complex by ganglioside GM3 in the state of insulin resistance . Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A , 2007 , 104 ( 34 ) , 13678 - 13683 . [ 321 ] Tagami , S . ; Inokuchi Ji , J . ; Kabayama , K . ; Yoshimura , H . ; Kitamura , F . ; Uemura , S . ; Ogawa , C . ; Ishii , A . ; Saito , M . ; Ohtsuka , Y . ; Sakaue , S . ; Igara - shi , Y . Ganglioside GM3 participates in the pathological conditions of insu - lin resistance . J Biol Chem , 2002 , 277 ( 5 ) , 3085 - 3092 . [ 322 ] Inokuchi , J . - i . Membrane microdomains and insulin resistance . FEBS Let - The Lipid Raft Concept Current Medicinal Chemistry , 2013 , Vol . 20 , No . 1 21 ters , 2010 , 584 ( 9 ) , 1864 - 1871 . [ 323 ] Inokuchi , J . Inhibition of ganglioside biosynthesis as a novel therapeutic approach in insulin resistance . Handb Exp Pharmacol , 2011 ( 203 ) , 165 - 178 . [ 324 ] Kenworthy , A . K . Fluorescence recovery after photobleaching studies of lipid rafts . Methods Mol Biol , 2007 , 398 , 179 - 192 . [ 325 ] Loura , L . M . S . ; de Almeida , R . F . M . ; Silva , L . C . ; Prieto , M . FRET analysis of domain formation and properties in complex membrane systems . Biochimica Et Biophysica Acta - Biomembranes , 2009 , 1788 ( 1 ) , 209 - 224 . [ 326 ] de Almeida , R . F . M . ; Loura , L . M . S . ; Prieto , M . Membrane lipid domains and rafts : current applications of fluorescence lifetime spectroscopy and imaging . Chemistry and Physics of Lipids , 2009 , 157 ( 2 ) , 61 - 77 . [ 327 ] Saxton , M . J . Single - particle tracking : the distribution of diffusion coeffi - cients . Biophys J , 1997 , 72 ( 4 ) , 1744 - 1753 . [ 328 ] Chen , X . ; Morris , R . ; Lawrence , M . J . ; Quinn , P . J . The isolation and structure of membrane lipid rafts from rat brain . Biochimie , 2006 . [ 329 ] Sonnino , S . ; Prinetti , A . Lipids and membrane lateral organization . Frontiers in Physiology , 2010 , 1 . Received : July 06 , 2012 Revised : July 16 , 2012 Accepted : July 17 , 2012