CHI 2020 Paper CHI 2020 , April 25 – 30 , 2020 , Honolulu , HI , USA Community Collectives : Low - tech Social Support for Digitally - Engaged Entrepreneurship Julie Hui 1 , Nefer Ra Barber 2 , Wendy Casey 2 , Suzanne Cleage 2 , Danny C . Dolley 2 , Frances Worthy 2 , Kentaro Toyama 1 , Tawanna R . Dillahunt 1 University of Michigan School of Information 1 , Eastside Community Network 2 Ann Arbor , MI ; Detroit , MI USA juliehui @ umich . edu , barberbiz @ yahoo . com , wendylcasey @ gmail . com , suzannecleage0 @ gmail . com , arrendayl . dolley @ gmail . com , worth23karat @ yahoo . com , toyama @ umich . edu , tdillahu @ umich . edu ABSTRACT With the rise of social media , entrepreneurs are feeling the pressure to adopt digital tools for their work . However , the upfront effort and resources needed to participate on these plat - forms is ever more complex , particularly in underresourced contexts . Through participatory action research over two years in Detroit’s Eastside , we found that local entrepreneurs pre - ferred to become engaged digitally through a community col - lective , which involved ( a ) resource - connecting organizations , ( b ) regular in - person meetings , ( c ) paper planning tools , and ( d ) practice and validation . Together , these elements com - bined to provide ( 1 ) awareness and willingness to use digital tools , ( 2 ) regular opportunities to build internet self - efﬁcacy , and ( 3 ) ways to collectively overcome digital obstacles . We discuss our ﬁndings in the context of digital engagement and entrepreneurship , and outline recommendations for digital platforms seeking to better support economic mobility more broadly . Author Keywords Entrepreneurship ; Digital Divide ; Digital Literacy ; Participatory Action Research , Qualitative Methods , Community Informatics CCS Concepts • Human - centered computing → Human computer inter - action ( HCI ) ; INTRODUCTION In 2019 , one in three Americans reported participating in small - scale entrepreneurship through side gigs , largely in part due to the diminishing availability of long - term stable employ - ment and shift towards on - demand labor [ 28 , 97 ] . In order to support this growing entrepreneurial way of working , digital Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed for proﬁt or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation on the ﬁrst page . Copyrights for components of this work owned by others than ACM must be honored . Abstracting with credit is permitted . To copy otherwise , or republish , to post on servers or to redistribute to lists , requires prior speciﬁc permission and / or a fee . Request permissions from permissions @ acm . org . CHI ’20 , April 25 – 30 , 2020 , Honolulu , HI , USA . © 2020 Association for Computing Machinery . ACM ISBN 978 - 1 - 4503 - 6708 - 0 / 20 / 04 . . . $ 15 . 00 . platforms have begun to implement new approaches to engag - ing new users . Recently , Facebook pledged to “train 1 million people and small business owners” through their online initia - tive “Learn with Facebook” [ 3 ] . YouTube provides an online “Creator Academy” where they scaffold the process of building a channel through “Boot Camps” [ 7 ] . Airbnb Experiences , where locals host short activities like cooking classes , provides an online resource center with general tips , like how to take high quality photos and write an event description [ 1 ] . Despite these efforts , there still exists a stark digital divide in who is able to beneﬁt from the “democratization” of digitally - enabled entrepreneurship [ 21 , 50 , 90 ] . Previous work ﬁnds that digital tools for entrepreneurship disproportionately favor those with pre - existing advantages , such as a strong social capital , self - efﬁcacy , and communication skills [ 21 , 90 ] . In addition , participation on digital platforms is ever more com - plex with respect to technology access , algorithm awareness , property ownership ( i . e . car , store ) , and insurance [ 13 , 14 , 21 , 43 , 69 , 72 , 88 ] . In effect , entrepreneurs with limited avenues for learning about these requirements are burdened with both navigating how to use these platforms while also securing the myriad resources needed to participate . Previous work on supporting digital engagement among under - resourced populations has focused on analyzing design meth - ods [ 46 ] , outlining opportunities for technology [ 21 ] , and im - plementing new technology [ 64 ] . Unlike this previous work , we studied the introduction and adoption of existing digi - tal platforms among entrepreneurs in under - resourced areas where expertise networks are limited and the work is isolating [ 37 , 95 ] . Speciﬁcally , we build on prior work emphasizing the importance of social support in motivating digital engagement [ 84 , 100 ] , thus informing the following research questions : • RQ1 : How does social support facilitate digital engagement for entrepreneurship in under - resourced 1 communities ? • RQ2 : How can local communities leverage their existing assets to provide social support for digitally - engaged en - trepreneurship ? 1 Community members were asked how they preferred to have their socio - economic status described . They chose " under - resourced , " which we use throughout the paper . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3313831 . 3376363 Paper 236 Page 1 CHI 2020 Paper CHI 2020 , April 25 – 30 , 2020 , Honolulu , HI , USA We deﬁne digitally - engaged entrepreneurship as small - scale entrepreneurship ( i . e . involving < 5 people [ 36 ] ) that might ben - eﬁt from engagement on digital platforms like social media for marketing ( e . g . Facebook , Instagram ) , event management plat - forms to sell tickets ( e . g . Eventbrite ) , and gig work platforms to connect with new customers ( e . g . Airbnb Experiences ) . Following participatory action research principles of working “with” rather than “for” communities , we aimed to uncover how entrepreneurs in under - resourced communities preferred to become digitally - engaged , rather suggesting or assuming interventions [ 56 , 65 , 76 , 77 ] . We performed a 2 - year long study involving a collaborative team of university researchers , local entrepreneurs on Detroit’s Eastside , and a local non - proﬁt ( Eastside Community Network ) . Residents perform entrepreneurship by designing and running educational tours of Detroit’s local history and culture . We found that in order to support digital tool use for en - trepreneurship in under - resourced areas , there must be an on - going and available ecosystem of social support . In our study context , this took the form of a community collective 2 . The process of co - developing the community collective surfaced four primary elements : ( a ) resource - connecting organizations , ( b ) regular in - person meetings , ( c ) paper planning tools , and ( d ) practice and validation ( RQ2 ) . We then provide qualitative evidence through interviews and observations for how these elements combine to support ( 1 ) awareness and willingness to use digital tools , ( 2 ) regular opportunities to build internet self - efﬁcacy , and ( 3 ) collectively overcoming digital obstacles ( RQ1 ) . We discuss these ﬁndings in relation to prior work on digital engagement and entrepreneurship in HCI and conclude with implications for how under - resourced communities and digital platforms could apply these elements to support a more inclusive and sustainable approach to digital engagement for entrepreneurship . LITERATURE Our research is motivated by previous work on the barriers to digital engagement that under - resourced communities face . In this section , we motivate why it is important to study digitally - engaged entrepreneurs in HCI and outline challenges the study population might face . We then present opportunities for building on related work about how social support can foster digital engagement . Becoming an Entrepreneur in the Digital Age With the growing shift toward on - demand labor and fewer opportunities to acquire long - term stable work , workers are increasingly having to “self - entreprenuerialize” to make ends meet [ 97 ] . Small - scale entrepreneurship ( e . g . side gigs , side hustles , micro - businesses ) provides a way to generate supple - mental income , buffer against potential layoffs , and prepare for unexpected ﬁnancial crises [ 50 , 97 , 99 ] . Yet , entrepreneur - ship is not easy , and involves creating one’s own employment opportunities by acquiring needed resources , connecting with mentors , and making short - and long - term plans [ 95 ] . In addition to these myriad tasks , entrepreneurs today are also 2 Community members decided on the term “collective” because it described “people coming together to build something together . ” increasingly expected to learn about and navigate the com - plex digital landscape of social media [ 49 , 50 , 90 ] . In many cases , this involves investing upfront labor and resources just to participate . Both Gina Neff [ 79 ] and Brooke Erin Duffy [ 31 ] describe how people take on increasing risks and invest additional time and resources to strive toward professional as - pirations , whether through creative pursuits or joining a startup . Duffy refers to this as “aspirational labor , ” which might in - clude activities like quitting one’s job in hopes of becoming a social media inﬂuencer full - time . However , this behavior has primarily been studied among middle - income populations who can take on ﬁnancial risks by relying on personal savings or family support [ 31 , 39 , 79 ] . Our study is less about entrepreneurs who are currently dig - itally engaged , as covered in this previous work [ 12 , 21 , 51 , 50 , 89 ] , and more about people contemplating entrepreneur - ship but face barriers of entry as far as technology and other resources are concerned . For instance , in order to crowdfund , project creators are often expected to invest in high quality marketing material and provide an existing proof - of - concept to succeed [ 50 , 52 ] . Yet , the ability to do so is often contingent on one’s socio - economic status and strong within - network wealth and knowledge . We study these barriers to digital en - gagement in the context of local entrepreneurship , which we deﬁne as the process of creating and recombining local re - sources with the intention of making a proﬁt [ 95 ] . In the case of under - resourced populations , the upfront costs to perform local entrepreneurship can be a huge ﬁnancial burden . Digital Engagement in Under - resourced Contexts Barriers to online participation have been studied in various income - generating activities . For example , while job - search platforms aim to make the job application process easier , many users have never written a digital résumé or know what to include , which leads them to abandon these platforms prema - turely [ 104 ] . Massive Open Online Courses ( MOOCS ) hope to democratize career development , but are often inaccessi - ble to users in under - resourced areas [ 25 , 26 ] . In the case of MOOCS , under - resourced populations are interested in par - ticipating if they are aware of the platforms and beneﬁts they could offer [ 22 ] . Yet , the majority of MOOC users continue to be higher income , suggesting limitations to existing pathways of engagement . For instance , perceptions of digital tools and risks to engagement deter digital participation among groups who face greater socio - economic risk [ 45 , 50 , 55 ] . Many solutions to supporting digital engagement proposed by industry [ 1 , 3 , 7 ] still assume basic ability and motivation to use these tools , thus creating invisible barriers to fruitful technology use in under - resourced contexts [ 105 , 106 ] . Few have outlined approaches to digital engagement for profes - sional work outside of formal education [ 59 , 80 ] , traditional workplaces [ 57 ] , or international development contexts [ 78 , 107 ] . Yet , digital skills are seen as critical for the social and economic development of under - resourced communities [ 18 , 23 , 48 , 104 ] . Researchers are now calling for greater attention to be paid to supporting more advanced digital skills , like be - ing able to build professional networks online and strategically using different tools [ 101 , 102 , 107 ] . Paper 236 Page 2 CHI 2020 Paper CHI 2020 , April 25 – 30 , 2020 , Honolulu , HI , USA The majority of this work has occurred in the information and communication technologies for development ( ICTD ) space , where researchers have explored setting up tech centers as a way to provide informal access to Internet and computers [ 60 , 85 ] , only to ﬁnd that people were primarily motivated to socialize online rather than perform “professional” activities , like taking online classes [ 17 ] . Such studies have focused on areas of the Global South where basic technology access and expertise are considerably limited [ 78 , 107 ] . Conversely , we explore the use of digital tools in one U . S . city in the Global North where impacts of the digital divide are less extreme , but still highly salient [ 10 , 24 , 82 , 104 ] . Despite broadly used labels of Global North and Global South , an understanding of how local neighborhood - or city - level wealth inﬂuences digital engagement in both regions is critical for taking a more nuanced approach to HCI research in under - resourced contexts around the world [ 12 , 50 ] . Social Support and Digital Engagement While previous studies of tool use for professional purposes primarily focused on the “digital” aspect of these skills , such as learning typing to create reports [ 87 ] , our work focuses on understanding how to support the surrounding social and cog - nitive capacities intertwined with effective use of these tech - nologies . These skills include determining which technologies are appropriate given one’s goals and level of resources . Previous work highlights the importance of sense of commu - nity and social inclusion in motivating digital engagement [ 84 , 100 ] . However , marginalized users are less likely to engage online if they do not perceive the platform to be “for them” [ 15 , 104 ] . Psychological factors , like internet self - efﬁcacy [ 34 ] , are critical in motivating people to consider adopting digital tools [ 61 ] . While previous work has focused on fostering online connections between people to motivate online engagement [ 15 , 62 , 68 ] , we focus on the role ofﬂine connections play given the importance of in - person relationships in generating trust in under - resourced contexts [ 24 ] . Previous work ﬁnds that under - resourced groups are more likely to rely on their local social network of family and friends to build digital skills and self - efﬁcacy [ 101 ] . Some of this is touched upon in re - cent work by Ogbonnaya - Ogburu et al . , who describe how digital literacy training for returning citizens should involve the surrounding social ecosystem of family , friends , and em - ployment [ 80 ] . Others ﬁnd that ofﬂine engagement positively inﬂuences online engagement for activities like local gover - nance [ 35 ] and general contributions to online communities [ 74 , 94 ] . We expect social support to be particularly important for entrepreneurs because the work can be highly isolating during early stages [ 95 ] , and expertise networks hard to ﬁnd in under - resourced areas [ 50 ] . METHODS This work was inspired by a previous study to identify the technical and non - technical requirements to performing entrepreneurship , namely small tour businesses , in under - resourced communities [ 21 ] . Whereas this previous research identiﬁed the importance of social support , it posed future work opportunities to understand how such supports could be implemented sustainably . We answer this call by work - ing in collaboration [ 65 ] with local entrepreneurs and a local organization , the Eastside Community Network , to identify what existing assets within the community could provide so - cial support , and how these supports could be implemented while actively attending to the preferences of community mem - bers . Participatory action research was used given its em - phasis on building equitable partnerships between all entities involved and leveraging the strengths and resources within the community [ 56 , 76 , 77 ] —principles shared by a variety of community - based approaches [ 27 , 29 , 54 , 44 , 40 ] . As is expected in action research , the research team , involv - ing the community partners and university researchers , were actively participating in the research outcome through an in - teractive process of planning , acting , and reﬂecting [ 47 , 77 , 86 ] . In this case , the elements of social support implemented throughout the research process were collectively evaluated and iterated upon to account for evolving goals and prefer - ences . We took “action” with the community partners by collaboratively creating the community collective . Since its inception , the collective has become a change - oriented en - tity within the neighborhood by creating a mission statement around educating new entrepreneurs , voting on a board of leaders , and developing partnerships with local organizations . Context Our research setting was on Detroit’s Eastside . According to the 2015 U . S . Census Bureau’s American Community Survey , the per capita income on the Eastside is $ 15 , 611 , the median household income is $ 25 , 980 [ 16 ] , and 84 % of students receive free or reduced lunch . The neighborhood is predominantly African American , with disproportionate unemployment rates of 13 . 6 % for African American working - age adults , compared to 5 . 9 % for working - age White adults [ 11 ] . In conversations with the Eastside Community Network , entrepreneurship is considered one of their constituents’ top interests because it provides opportunities to work on something personally meaningful and make side income . There are at least three en - trepreneurial support organizations that serve this area , as well as libraries that offer free entrepreneurship classes through the Small Business Administration . While these organizations primarily support the business side of entrepreneurial develop - ment ( e . g . how to write a business plan , ﬁnding a bank loan ) , they cite aspects of digital engagement ( e . g . how to create and manage a Facebook Page ) as a top priority of their constituents . The latter , however , is not yet adequately addressed in their curricula . Similar to past work [ 21 ] , we focused on supporting the cre - ation of small neighborhood tours given the minimal startup costs , lack of special training requirements , ability for partici - pants to leverage their unique local knowledge , and opportu - nity to become a viable income - generating business . The idea of “tour businesses” were seen as a way to regain control over local narratives . By describing the community in their own words , community members were able to shed light on both its assets and complicated history as an educational exercise for tour participants , who came from both within and outside the city . Paper 236 Page 3 CHI 2020 Paper CHI 2020 , April 25 – 30 , 2020 , Honolulu , HI , USA Community and University Research Team Local Non - proﬁt . Prior to the start of this study , we established a relationship with a local non - proﬁt , the Eastside Community Network ( ECN ) , whose mission is to “develop people , places and plans for sustainable neighborhood growth on Detroit’s Eastside . ” We ﬁrst engaged with ECN to ensure that this project reﬂected the interests of the community . The research idea was shared with the leadership of ECN , during which they provided feedback and agreed to provide a local meeting space . Members of ECN leadership were regularly updated on our progress both in - person and online and were invited to participate in the meetings as their schedules permitted . Local Entrepreneurs . We recruited participants on a rolling basis from August 2017 onward through open online and ofﬂine ﬂiers , emails , and social media posts at least once a month . Seventeen local entreprenuers attended at least one meeting from 2017 - 2019 , 12 returned after their ﬁrst meeting , and 6 succeeded in leading proﬁtable tours by September 2018 . Some people attended one meeting just to “see what was happening in their neighborhood , ” explaining the slight drop in attendance for ﬁrst - time participants . As of April 2019 , ﬁve others are still in early to mid planning stages . Participants were primarily women ( 13 F , 4 M ) , between the ages of mid - 30’s to mid - 60’s , and were all African American . All participants either lived or had some form of employment in Detroit’s Eastside . All participants knew how to type , had a social media presence ( primarily Facebook ) , and had access to the Internet . Local entrepreneurs chose their own pseudonyms to preserve anonymity . University Researchers . The university research team con - sisted of three university faculty members . Combined , our experience spans two decades of research in technology as it relates to employment , socio - economic development , and en - trepreneurship . All researchers have taken considerable care to educate themselves on the history of Detroit’s socio - economic environment by attending and volunteering for community events , reading local historical narratives , and attending both practice and completed tours . In an attempt to be as transpar - ent as possible , we expressed our motivations for engaging in this research to the local community in an introductory presentation and throughout whenever people inquired . Our motivations broadly included identifying new opportunities for supporting economic mobility through entrepreneurship , and understanding the role technology plays in this process . Timeline Participants who succeeded in giving tours typically solidiﬁed their tour ideas within two months of initial participation , held their ﬁrst practice tour within six months , and their pilot tour within eleven months . For example , Casey and Barbara at - tended their ﬁrst meeting on Sept . 28 . They decided on Nov . 14 to collaborate and give a tour together about urban agricul - ture based on their mutual interest in gardening . On March 31 , they held a practice tour . They started advertising their pilot tour in May via Facebook , Eventbrite , email listservs , and ﬂiers . Then , on June 16 , they held a pilot tour , which attracted 43 customers , and sold $ 1 , 175 in tickets ( $ 751 in proﬁts due to Eventbrite and bus costs ) . Overall , six participants led suc - cessful neighborhood tours that garnered on average $ 980 in ticket sales and $ 500 in proﬁts per tour . The remaining inter - ested participants are in planning stages . Three participants have begun to expand their businesses beyond tours to cooking classes , pop - up dinners , and gardening experiences . Data Collection The ﬁndings presented in this study represent results from September 2017 to September 2019 . We collected data through regular observations of meetings and tours , and in - terviews with participants . Notes were taken by at least one research team member at each of the meetings . Overall , this included about 100 hours of observation notes . Interviews were performed with nine of the most consistent participants . We asked about their motivations for participation , their ex - perience so far , and what they have and hope to learn . We interviewed ﬁve participants about their tour plans and expec - tations , and after their tour to reﬂect on their tour results . We audio recorded and transcribed all except two interviews . We took notes , as per participant preferences , for those interviews that were not audio recorded . We also took notes , photos , and videos of the pilot tours and have only used the photo and video data for the tour leaders’ publicity material . Tour cus - tomers signed a photo and video release form before the start of the tour . In addition , all research activities were reviewed and approved in advance by the university Institutional Review Board . Analysis The goals of the analyses were to identify what elements of so - cial support were particularly supportive for digitally - engaged entrepreneurship ( RQ2 ) , and why these elements were pro - posed and continued to be used by the local entrepreneurs ( RQ1 ) . The university research team analyzed observation and interview data through two main rounds of coding . Fo - cused coding , used to identify major higher level themes in the data [ 91 ] , was used to identify the primary elements of the community collective . These elements form the main themes in the ﬁndings . In these sections , we discuss other activities that were tried , but ultimately dropped and why . In the sec - ond round , we used evaluation coding , which assigns merit , worth , or signiﬁcance to elements of a program or policy [ 91 ] . We used the data to identify why the elements identiﬁed dur - ing the ﬁrst round of coding were proposed and how each was perceived as useful by community members in fostering digitally - engaged entrepreneurship . These themes make up the sub - sections in the ﬁndings . Throughout these coding rounds , the university researchers followed member checking practices [ 67 ] , which involved iteratively sharing the results of data analysis with the local entrepreneurs and non - proﬁt . We discussed the ﬁndings during meetings and in interviews with local entrepreneurs to hear their perspective on whether and why identiﬁed community collective elements were ( or were not ) useful . Both the local entrepreneurs and institutional partners were also invited to read through drafts of the paper and provide feedback to make sure the ﬁndings reﬂected the reality of their experiences . Paper 236 Page 4 CHI 2020 Paper CHI 2020 , April 25 – 30 , 2020 , Honolulu , HI , USA FINDINGS The community - engaged research process led to the co - development and implementation of the community collective as a way to provide regular social support for entrepreneur - ship and related digital tasks . The elements of the community collective included ( a ) resource - connecting organizations , ( b ) regular in - person meetings , ( c ) paper planning tools , and ( d ) practice and validation . The higher level sections outline what community - identiﬁed elements of social support were supportive for digitally - engaged entrepreneurship ( RQ2 ) . Sub - sections describe why these elements were proposed and con - tinued to be used by the local entrepreneurs ( RQ1 ) . Through - out , we describe how we identiﬁed these elements and imple - mented them within the study context of Detroit’s Eastside . Resource - connecting Organizations Per participatory action research , university researchers ﬁrst approached the local non - proﬁt organization to identify mutual interests around community development and economic mo - bility . We found that the non - proﬁt connection was critical in the sustainability of the collective by attracting new members ( via the non - proﬁt listserv , ﬂiers , and general status within the community ) , connecting them to other resources and partners , and motivating leadership among members . Ongoing Access to Resources and Connections It became clear to the local entrepreneurs that being able to use technology for their tours requires a host of other resources that many entrepreneurs from higher - income areas might take for granted . In our study context of tours , one of the primary resources provided through the an organizational partnership was transportation . Tour leaders expressed that few areas of Detroit were walkable given its sprawling nature as a “car city . ” The challenge of transportation is exacerbated by Detroit’s economic history where 81 % of businesses left between the 1940’s and early 2010’s , creating large swaths with little eco - nomic activity [ 8 ] . In fact , some of the tour leaders’ goals were to highlight new businesses in different neighborhoods . In a meeting with a representative for Airbnb Experiences , one tour leader asked how Airbnb supports transportation for Experience users . The representative suggested using pub - lic transportation or Uber . While these modes of transporta - tion may be feasible in more population dense locations with stronger urban infrastructure , most of the tour locations in Detroit were 5 - 10 minute drives between each other , which could have taken an hour or more by public transportation . While ridesharing applications were an option , they could only hold very small groups of about four people . Travis , who gives historical tours full time explained that he tried giving a small tour with a van , but ultimately the proﬁt he made from such a small group was not worth the time he invested . To identify more affordable transportation options , tour lead - ers discussed people within their network who might have connections to bus companies . The local organization also offered to contact the bus company they use for transporting local constituents . In the past year , the university partner also worked with the local organization to co - author a successful grant for these transportation costs and provide income for local entrepreneurs coordinating future meetings . The resources and connections provided through the local or - ganization also helped with sustainability beyond just grants . For instance , tour leaders suggested creating mutually beneﬁ - cial partnerships with local institutions ( e . g . museums ) who could provide infrastructural support in exchange for tour ex - pertise . During these conversations , tour leaders expressed that their connection with the local organization would be crit - ical in developing these initial relationships given their social capital in the community . Since these conversations , a local well - known community organization asked Faith to give her music tour for events , in which the organization rented the bus and paid for her tour services . Barbara and Casey were approached by other entities , including a state representative , to give their agricultural tour . Given their growing presence in the community as tour leaders , the local entrepreneurs have started to plan an “Expo” to be held at the local organization community center in order to make connections with tour re - lated businesses , like hotels and transportation companies , as well as to attract potential new members . Building Relationships with Digital Platforms Local entrepreneurs realized the beneﬁt of organizations for making connections with digital platforms as well . For in - stance , organizational partners used their network connections to invite representatives from various entrepreneurial support platforms , such as Airbnb Experiences and a local crowdfund - ing platform , to speak about how their tools could support the local tours . Following discussions with these representa - tives , tour leaders pointed out how using these entrepreneurial support platforms could expand their ability to reach wider customer networks , like people “from Europe . ” When explain - ing to a new tour leader how tour publicity works , a veteran tour leader described : “We used Eventbrite to publicize . [ Anon ] and [ Anon ] posted ﬂiers . But , the beneﬁt of Airbnb Experiences is that they are already popular . What’s nice is that it is promoted through their ecosystem . ” - Casey Even though much of this knowledge could have been learned through just reading the platforms’ websites , having a repre - sentative visit the community and answer questions speciﬁc to their business goals , helped to build trust with the platform and ease concerns about adopting a new tool . Tour leaders also sometimes asked the organizational partners to make connections with outside organizations to help with publicity efforts . For instance , after overhearing a discussion on how to connect with tourism - related businesses in the city ( e . g . hotels ) , the Director of Neighborhood Growth for the lo - cal community organization offered to connect the tour group with the Detroit tourism board , which hosts an active tourism webpage for city visitors . Regular In - person Meetings In - person meetings were initially held because the local orga - nization emphasized the importance of ofﬂine socialization for building initial connections between community constituents . While we considered switching to call - in meetings once ev - eryone got to know each other , local entrepreneurs continued to push for meeting in person and even requested meetings be Paper 236 Page 5 CHI 2020 Paper CHI 2020 , April 25 – 30 , 2020 , Honolulu , HI , USA held more regularly . In the ﬁrst six months of the collective engagement ( September 2017 to February 2018 ) , meetings were held monthly . Twice - monthly meetings started in March 2018 and continued into Summer 2019 . Options to call in to in - person meetings digitally were also requested and added starting February 2018 to accommodate for people who could not attend in person . Digital attendance to in - person meet - ings was minimal , but these options were provided whenever someone requested them . By regularly engaging with oth - ers working on similar goals , local entrepreneurs were able to develop new professional relationships , share advice and feedback , and negotiate technology use on their own terms . Building Motivation and Self - Efﬁcacy for Digitally - engaged Entrepreneurship The majority of collective members described how they con - sidered giving neighborhood tours for years , but never imple - mented their ideas . They had the desire , and the necessary basic skills to organize tours , but did not take formal steps to implementing their ideas until they met others working towards similar goals . Developing relationships with other local entrepreneurs helped boost motivation and self - efﬁcacy around entrepreneurship , which also inﬂuenced intentions around technology use . In other words , local entrepreneurs desired a reason to engage online before doing so . Early on , the meetings provided a space to express ideas with peers , which helped members crystallize the purposes of their tours and build conﬁdence in carrying them out . Many found that they shared motivations to support the local community by raising awareness around historical knowledge ( e . g . De - troit’s role in the underground railroad ) or current issues ( e . g . updating a local park ) . For instance , Fredrick , who is the pres - ident of a public housing complex , shared how he wanted to “empower the [ residents ] to tell their story . ” This conversation sparked an entire discussion around what it was like growing up in Detroit , which in turn inspired others’ tour ideas . Fol - lowing that discussion , Dan decided he wanted to give a tour sharing the history of his childhood neighborhood , and Percy decided he wanted to give bike tours of his local park to raise funds for park maintenance . These ideas built on prior rumi - nations by each person , but it was during the initial meetings that collective members drew on one another’s energy and committed to their ideas . Similar dynamics occurred throughout the two - year period as members continued to provide advice and feedback , develop new professional relationships , and share support tools for carrying out this work . In - person meetings also had expected functions , such as building trust among members , providing support and encouragement , and holding members account - able to monthly or bi - weekly progress . We do not belabor these points , as they are well - established in the literature on team and organizational dynamics [ 103 ] , but we still highlight them as important . Overall , regular in - person meetings provided an informal at - mosphere that helped increase and sustain self - efﬁcacy month to month , separate from more tangible increases in digital or entrepreneurial knowledge and skill . Negotiating Technology Use Perhaps the most visible aspects of the in - person meetings were opportunities to collectively work through both technical and non - technical problems and learn about new tools . For example , one tour leader wanted to visually plan out her tour route , and learned from another member about Google Maps . While the university researchers also knew about this tool , having the advice come from another local tour leader helped make the tool more approachable . Another participant , who had more technological experience and already created her own business website , expressed coming to meetings to learn about additional digital support tools . “I want to know [ how to use tech ] because I just want to . . . I get a message everyday that somebody’s following me on Instagram , and I’m like , ‘Well what does that mean ? ’ I don’t understand that . I have the book , Pinterest for Dummies . . . I need to know how they mesh . At ﬁrst , they were saying you should pick three [ social media platforms ] , but nowadays , it’s like everybody’s doing all of them , you know ? ” - Barbara Similarly , Ileen , who has run a tour business for over 20 years using only ﬂyers and her phone wanted to learn how to use Eventbrite and Facebook pages to ﬁnd new customers . Dan , who hoped to give tours of his local park , expressed that he wanted to learn how to create hyperlinks in online text , so that he could write a blog about different points - of - interest . Soon after , he created a blog using SimpleSite in which he posted pictures of all the signs he wanted to replace using proceeds from his tour . The meetings provided opportunities to not only learn about technologies , but also collectively work through challenges that were more likely to surface in under - resourced contexts . For example , Casey and Barbara spent ten months planning their Urban Garden Tour before giving the pilot tour in June 2019 . After being exposed to Airbnb Experiences , they de - cided to pivot their business to an “Experience” where they could teach people how to cook . However , when brainstorm - ing potential experiences , Barbara and Casey had difﬁculty ﬁguring out where to host the Experience at a low cost . They were stuck on this challenge for 8 weeks , until other tour leaders helped them brainstorm potential solutions . Casey : [ The Airbnb Representative ] said we should stick with what we have passion or experience in . But , I couldn’t ﬁgure out what to do without the expensive venue and the 20 % [ Airbnb ] overhead . That’s a lot . I looked at Airbnb Experiences around the country and they all had their own storefront . Faith : So , they had everything already set up . Casey : But , I don’t have that ( storefront ) . If you don’t have all that set up , it’ll be over $ 100 [ to rent a space per event ] . We called commercial kitchens and no one picked up . Faith : What about schools with cooking programs ? Barbara : My friend said she could let us use her space on the [ location ] . Paper 236 Page 6 CHI 2020 Paper CHI 2020 , April 25 – 30 , 2020 , Honolulu , HI , USA Figure 1 . Example of how a ﬁlled out tour idea worksheet was used to inform one local entrepreneur’s Facebook Event description . Following this conversation , Casey and Barbara submitted an Airbnb Experience idea within the next two weeks . These types of interactions happened more frequently as tour leaders got to know each other better . Paper Planning Tools While regular meetings sustained personal motivation of col - lective members , there were also other obstacles to progress that required additional planning tools . We detail one example here , and illustrate how paper planning tools bridged the way to integrating digital tools into one’s entrepreneurial practice . Paper Worksheets to Scaffold Technology Use During the initial phases of tour planning , discussions at sev - eral meetings seemed to go in circles without resolution or progress . Collective members kept sharing ideas with one another , but focused tours and concrete itineraries were not emerging . Collective members often took notes during these meetings on paper journals and notebooks , despite suggestions to keep notes digitally , so as to facilitate easier transitions to Facebook Pages or Airbnb Experiences applications . Collective members were , on the whole , comfortable typing on a computer , phone , or tablet . But , they reported that they felt documenting their thoughts directly on these technologies seemed too ofﬁcial during the early stages of their work . They wanted to keep their brainstorming “unpublished” until they were ready to share online . They preferred transferring their written words to digital platforms only after their thoughts were organized and solidiﬁed on paper ( Figure 1 ) . In response , the university researchers created and provided paper worksheets , developed using iterative design methods typical with developing paper - based scaffolds [ 58 ] . The initial designs of these worksheets were informed by how collective members were taking notes already , such as listing out tour stops , and what they planned to say and do at each each stop . The researchers went through 3 - 4 iterations of the worksheets by soliciting feedback from collective members both during meetings and in interviews , and observing how worksheets were being used . Throughout this process , we found that collective members liked some structure , such as prompts for completing certain tasks ( e . g . writing a script ) and examples of what content looked like ( e . g . example scripts ) . ECN was also particularly excited about the worksheets because they saw it as a concrete way to structure and sustain participation in the collective long - term . In total , ﬁve business planning worksheets were developed with the intent to help collective members think through choos - ing a tour focus , organizing an itinerary , writing a tour script , outlining marketing materials , and determining the budget . Their content was very simple for the most part . For exam - ple , the tour itinerary worksheet was a two - column table with one column for listing tour stops and the other column for descriptions of each stop . Scaffolding Peer Feedback These worksheets also served as effective prompts to advance tour planning . In the meeting in which the itinerary work - sheets were introduced , for example , the conversation quickly focused on speciﬁc itinerary stops , logistics , and the content to be shared by the tour guide . By the following meeting , some collective members returned with completed itineraries . Other collective members did not ﬁll out the worksheets they took home , but came back with other materials prompted by the worksheet . For instance , Dan took home a script - planning worksheet , and returned the next week with a physical map book to explain his route , and scrap paper with a written script of what he was planning to say at each stop . Even though he did not ﬁll out the worksheet itself , it had motivated him to think formally about his itinerary . When Faith was ready to create her Facebook and Eventbrite page , she used what she had written on a tour planning worksheet to determine what to type for her “About Me” and event description ( Figure 1 ) . The worksheets also helped structure peer discussion and feed - back around one’s ideas . For instance , the suggestion to use Google Maps only came about after someone else saw the locations for someone’s tour listed out on the tour itinerary worksheet ( Figure 2 ) : “When we’re there at the meeting and actually do hands on , how when we actually mapped out the route . I didn’t know that you could do that on MapQuest or Google Maps . I didn’t know that you could do it . . . I would have never known to even ask anybody . It’s something simple , but it saves a lot of time for me . I still use it now . ” - Casey Overall , paper scaffolds for thinking through the tours played an essential role in breaking through cognitive obstacles dur - Paper 236 Page 7 CHI 2020 Paper CHI 2020 , April 25 – 30 , 2020 , Honolulu , HI , USA Figure 2 . One local entrepreneur only learned about using Google Maps after describing her plans on paper with peers during a meeting . ing planning , supplying further motivation to attend to the planning process itself . Practice and Validation Only after practicing their tour did tour leaders reﬂect on the beneﬁts of planning and technology use . As described by previous work [ 50 ] , risk - taking for entrepreneurship is not embraced in resource - constrained communities where there is very little buffer for failure . For these reasons , it was critical that tour leaders had opportunities to see the outcomes of using technology to boost their business activity in a low - risk environment . “I had no idea we could make the money that we made . . . You have to research , you have to plan . You have to get your timing right . You have to publicize , you have to get the people to come . You can do it as a fundraiser for your block club . ” - Theresa The pilot tours were the ﬁrst times tour leaders experienced the reality of their entrepreneurial aspirations . When asked how she felt after her pilot tour , Faith said , “I’m a bad ass woman , that’s what . ” This excitement of carrying out her tour sparked greater motivation to continue planning and partici - pate in learning activities [ 9 ] . Faith explained that the tours are only one part of a larger business idea to expand music tourism and education in Detroit . She has since applied to a local entrepreneurial accelerator program to build out her vision . Similarly , Casey and Barbara only started to under - stand the role of technology in their business after running the practice and pilot tours . They saw that practice tours provided an opportunity to take publicity photos needed to attract initial customers , while publicising and selling tickets on Facebook and Eventbrite helped them attract customers outside their personal network . After their pilot tour , visitors to Detroit found their Facebook Page and arranged private tours of ur - ban gardens via Facebook Messenger . Since then , they have become more invested in trying out other new tools . While performing and attending practice and pilot tours were one of the biggest motivators for sustained engagement online and ofﬂine , it is important to acknowledge how the in - person meetings and paper worksheets were critical in scaffolding the initial preparation for this to happen . For instance , Casey , who had wanted to turn her love of gardening into a business for the past six years , described how participating in the collective was the ﬁrst time she had followed through with her business ideas : “I think sometimes it’s fear that stops me and not just , oh I gained interest in something else . I think it’s that I get , what is it called ? Paralysis analysis . I over analyze . . . I’m always starting and never ﬁnishing anything and never seeing anything through , so this is the ﬁrst time since I’ve become involved in agriculture where everything is all pretty connected . . . All of my training and workshops and things go to support this work that I do . ” - Casey Those who succeeded in giving tours were motivated to con - tinue their entrepreneurial efforts . Theresa and Rosalynne plan to give another history tour , and have already given two practice tours since then . Casey and Barbara are considering giving another urban agriculture tour and planning to host corresponding cooking classes in partnership with some of the farms . Others maintain planning momentum by seeing the success of their peers . DISCUSSION This work uncovers how local entrepreneurs create alternative avenues to digital engagement that utilize the social ecosys - tem of their communities . We show how pathways to online engagement should not just be provided digitally , especially among groups who are initially not comfortable or aware of such platforms [ 20 ] . Inspired by calls - to - action to create more inclusive approaches to digital engagement [ 21 , 90 , 98 ] , we in - volved local entrepreneurs and a non - proﬁt directly in a 2 - year long participatory action research process to identify how so - cial support aids in digitally - mediated entrepreneurship ( RQ1 ) , and what these supports could look like in the local commu - nity ( RQ2 ) . We contribute to a more nuanced understanding of digital inequality by surfacing community preferences for low - tech approaches to digital engagement . Low - Tech Social Support Ecosystem The outcome of this research engagement resulted in the forma - tion of a community collective , which includes four elements of what we consider a low - tech social support ecosystem : ( a ) resource - connecting organizations , ( b ) regular in - person meetings , ( c ) paper planning tools , and ( d ) practice and vali - dation . In this context , we consider “technology” broadly as Paper 236 Page 8 CHI 2020 Paper CHI 2020 , April 25 – 30 , 2020 , Honolulu , HI , USA “the general tasks , techniques , and knowledge utilized when humans engage in any productive activities” [ 81 ] . This def - inition was introduced by information systems researchers to conceptualize technology beyond just “machinery . ” The elements presented in this work reﬂect principles rooted in de - velopment frameworks that emphasize equitable partnerships with community members and building on local assets [ 32 , 33 , 73 , 75 ] . Our work ﬁnds that participation in community collectives provided three main beneﬁts for digital engagement in en - trepreneurship : ( 1 ) awareness and willingness to use digital tools , ( 2 ) regular opportunities to build internet self - efﬁcacy , and ( 3 ) collectively overcoming digital obstacles . Below , we discuss these themes and connect them to prior literature in digital engagement and entrepreneurship in under - resourced contexts . Finally , we conclude with concrete implications for the design of social media and gig work platforms to support digitally - mediated entrepreneurship . Awareness and Willingness to Use Digital Tools Digitally - engaged entrepreneurship is deeply socio - technical in that the resources and relationships realized online are almost always rooted in ofﬂine trust and connections [ 19 ] . While previous research ﬁnds that people with some technol - ogy comfort can go online individually and ﬁgure out how to use new tools , this primarily applies to higher educated non - marginalized Internet users [ 101 ] . We found that regu - lar in - person meetings with others working toward similar goals was essential to foster the antecedents to digital engage - ment , including awareness of which digital tools to use for what purpose . These activities begin to address ways of build - ing complex digital skills , like deciding what tools to use for different work tasks [ 90 , 101 , 102 ] . For some tour leaders , it took months of hearing about certain digital tools and seeing peers use them before they tried it themselves . In other cases , they expressed greater interest in using digital tools ( e . g . , crowdfunding platforms , Airbnb Experiences ) after meeting with and asking questions to local staff representing these platforms – connections made possible via resource - connecting organizations . These observations re - ﬂect similar ﬁndings in health behavior change , which shows that it usually takes months of contemplation and regular ex - posure before people feel ready to change and then actually take action [ 83 ] . We extend this research to digitally - engaged entrepreneurship . We argue that to support digital tool use in under - resourced areas , there must be an ongoing and available ecosystem of support just to foster awareness and willingness to use technology in the ﬁrst place . The elements of the com - munity collective helped provide some structure to such an ecosystem . Regular Opportunities to Build Internet Self - Efﬁcacy Multiple local entrepreneurs expressed that they wanted to start a tour business for years , had access to Internet and a personal computer , and had basic digital literacy . Yet , not until they participated in the collective did they start exhibiting internet self - efﬁcacy [ 34 ] by drafting out plans and transfer - ring them online . Some tour leaders were aware that other entrepreneurs used social media , like Facebook Pages , to pub - licize their businesses , but not until regular in - person meetings did they consider using these tools for their own work . In order to maintain this momentum , opportunities for practice and val - idation through pilot and practice tours were critical in proving how digital platforms were useful in bringing in customers . Similarly , tour leaders knew how to write , type , and come up with tour ideas . But , they preferred outlining and getting feed - back on their publicity plans ofﬂine using paper planning tools before transcribing them online . They were also more likely to share their progress and give feedback in - person before engaging with each other online . This suggests that planning out their ideas ofﬂine ﬁrst where they were most comfortable , helped reduce anxiety around sharing their work with peers and publicly on digital platforms . Similar to existing ﬁndings in Global South contexts where technology access is often much more limited [ 78 , 107 ] , we show that paper - based tools and in - person engagement are still preferred mediums to build internet self - efﬁcacy in Global North contexts , like the U . S . Collectively Overcoming Digital Obstacles The upfront work and resources needed to participate on dig - ital platforms can be complex and resource - intensive with respect to background checks , insurance , property ( e . g . , car , home ) maintenance , and property ownership [ 88 , 13 ] . Many digital platforms , like Airbnb Experiences , intended to make entrepreneurship more accessible are still out of reach for those in under - resourced communities because platform use requires “basic” resources , like transportation and space , needed to host experiences regularly . Previous research on aspirational and venture labor outlines how middle - class entrepreneurs can often rely on personal saved up wealth to make initial investments in these resources [ 31 , 79 ] . Conversely , we ﬁnd that in under - resourced contexts , entrepreneurs take a more collective approach in order to par - ticipate . Regular in - person meetings allowed participants to realize the skills and resources they had as a group . One partic - ipant was already an experienced tour guide ; another had close contacts with transportation companies ; while another had multiple creative ideas for tour themes . Together , they relied on each other’s assets to both promote their own tour business and strengthen the collective as a whole . This conﬁrms pre - vious research , which ﬁnds that residents of under - resourced communities often work together to overcome socio - economic challenges [ 30 ] . Our work shows how these collective activi - ties are also being leveraged to participate on digital platforms for entrepreneurship . Implications for HCI Existing tech - mediated supports [ 1 , 3 , 7 ] may foster digital engagement among those with adequate resources and comfort using online technologies . But , in order to encourage digitally - engaged entrepreneurship in under - resourced communities , low - tech community - based avenues of social support were needed to initiate action ( Figure 3 ) . We found that involving community members in the research process helped identify locally - available solutions and pathways to sustainability . Paper 236 Page 9 CHI 2020 Paper Figure 3 . Existing tech - mediated supports ( above ) may foster digital engagement among those with adequate resources and comfort using on - line technologies . But , we found that low - tech social support ( below ) en - couraged digital engagement among entrepreneurs in under - resourced contexts . Industry - Community Partnerships Digital platforms that market themselves as in support of en - trepreneurship , such as Airbnb [ 1 ] , Facebook [ 2 , 3 ] , and Uber [ 5 ] , could develop connections with local organizations ( e . g . non - proﬁts , advocacy groups ) to identify unique challenges to digital engagement in their communities and co - develop structures that make sense locally and long - term . Currently , platforms like Facebook are holding one - off events in different cities to support platform awareness and networking [ 2 , 4 ] . But , it is unclear whether these events are attracting a repre - sentative population from under - resourced neighborhoods or having a lasting impact on digital engagement . Digital plat - forms could work with local organizations to support regular in - person meetings where people share best practices for plat - form use , while paper planning tools could help people outline requirements and seek feedback from local representatives in preparation for online engagement . Platforms could also foster additional opportunities for prac - tice and validation , such as connecting new entrepreneurs to try out and give feedback on each others’ services . For instance , Airbnb Experiences could connect aspiring guides with each other to test out their experience ﬂow and hospitality , two key components of the Experiences vetting process . Or digital platforms could encourage local businesses ( e . g . trans - portation companies ) to support low - stakes practice runs in exchange for publicity . These activities would not only encour - age new and continued engagement on digital platforms , but also build professional social networks within the community . Fostering Sustainable Cooperatives HCI researchers have also been exploring how member - owned cooperatives could counteract the power imbalances experi - enced in emerging entrepreneurship - related contexts , such as in gig work and the sharing economy [ 38 , 63 ] . Cooperatives allow members to identify issues they experience at work and share resources in order to change socio - economic structures from the ground - up [ 93 ] . However , identifying how to foster sustainable cooperatives and engage marginalized communi - ties has been an ongoing question in this line of work [ 38 , 6 ] . Our study provides one in - depth example of how a collective of entrepreneurs from an under - resourced community lever - aged their local assets to organize and engage digitally in a way that worked for them . Examples from our data demonstrating efforts towards sustainability include how local entrepreneurs CHI 2020 , April 25 – 30 , 2020 , Honolulu , HI , USA developed business partnerships with organizations beyond the local organization , incoming requests to give future tours , a community - led leadership structure within the collective , proposed membership funding models , and plans to hold a community event to attract new members and resources . In terms of implications for technology , platforms like Facebook could facilitate the formation of business cooperatives by con - necting people setting up business Pages in similar industries and surfacing events where they can meet in person . Such ideas promote designs that help reduce burdens of organizing often placed on marginalized populations [ 92 ] . We emphasize that the community collective elements iden - tiﬁed in this research could be used for inspiration , but is in no way a set - in - stone template for all other communities . These initial suggestions informed by our research are meant to outline potential opportunities for how digital platforms could tap into under - resourced populations that are interested in using digital tools for their entrepreneurial work , but desire alternative avenues to getting started [ 24 , 41 , 66 , 96 ] . LIMITATIONS AND FUTURE WORK We acknowledge that the community collective elements iden - tiﬁed in this study context may not work for other under - resourced communities considering solutions appropriate for one context may be inappropriate for others [ 53 , 70 , 71 ] . While local meetings and the idea of tours were considered normal forms of community and entrepreneurial engagement on Detroit’s Eastside , this may not be the case in other places that are not based in cities [ 42 ] , or have different ways of organizing and communicating . This collaborative investi - gation is an initial attempt at outlining elements needed to support digitally - engaged entrepreneurship . We encourage other researchers and practitioners to continue testing out these elements in their community contexts to identify other case studies and opportunities for improvement . CONCLUSION If we are to believe that digital platforms can enhance the work of entrepreneurs , we should pay as much attention to the socio - economic factors involved in what it takes to become engaged online . In this study , we seek to provide a more com - prehensive understanding of how to support digitally - mediated entrepreneurship in under - resourced contexts . Through a par - ticipatory action research approach , we co - develop the con - cept of a community collective , which involves ( a ) resource - connecting organizations , ( b ) regular in - person meetings , ( c ) paper planning tools , and ( d ) practice and validation . Together , we ﬁnd that these elements provide the combined ongoing social support needed to foster ( 1 ) awareness and willingness to use digital tools , ( 2 ) regular opportunities to build internet self - efﬁcacy , and ( 3 ) collectively overcoming digital obstacles . ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS We would like to thank the Eastside Community Network for supporting this work and all the people who participated in the collective for sharing their experiences . This work was funded by the NSF EAGER award IIS - 1665049 . Paper 236 Page 10 CHI 2020 Paper CHI 2020 , April 25 – 30 , 2020 , Honolulu , HI , USA REFERENCES [ 1 ] 2019 . Experiences Resource Center . airbnb . com / experience - hosting / resource - center . ( 2019 ) . Accessed : 2019 - 9 - 20 . [ 2 ] 2019a . Facebook Boost Your Business . https : / / www . facebook . com / business / a / boost - events . ( 2019 ) . Accessed : 2019 - 9 - 20 . [ 3 ] 2019b . Learn with Facebook . https : / / learn . fb . com / en - us / . ( 2019 ) . Accessed : 2019 - 9 - 20 . [ 4 ] 2019 . Task Rabbit Events . https : / / www . eventbrite . com / o / taskrabbit - 10940024839 . ( 2019 ) . Accessed : 2019 - 9 - 20 . [ 5 ] 2019 . UberENTREPRENEUR . https : / / www . uber . com / en - SG / drive / resources / uber - entrepreneur / . ( 2019 ) . Accessed : 2019 - 09 - 20 . [ 6 ] 2019 . USIG meeting on “Cooperativism and Human - Computer Interaction” at CHI 2019 . https : / / uc . inf . usi . ch / event / sig - chi - 2019 / . ( 2019 ) . Accessed : 2019 - 9 - 20 . [ 7 ] 2019 . YouTube Creator Academy . https : / / creatoracademy . youtube . com / page / welcome . ( 2019 ) . Accessed : 2019 - 9 - 20 . [ 8 ] Paula Allen - Meares . 2017 . A Twenty - ﬁrst Century Approach to Community Change : Partnering to Improve Life Outcomes for Youth and Families in Under - served Neighborhoods . Oxford University Press . [ 9 ] Teresa M Amabile and Steven J Kramer . 2011 . The power of small wins . Harvard Business Review 89 , 5 ( 2011 ) , 70 – 80 . [ 10 ] Monica Anderson . 2017 . Digital divide persists even as lower - income Americans make gains in tech adoption . Pew research center ( 2017 ) . [ 11 ] JP Morgan Chase & Co . New Skills at Work . 2015 . Driving Opportunity in Detroit : Building a middle - skill workforce to strengthen economic recovery and expand the middle class . https : / / www . jpmorganchase . com / corporate / Corporate - Responsibility / document / 54841 - jpmc - gap - detroit - aw3 - final . pdf , ( 2015 ) . [ 12 ] Seyram Avle , Julie Hui , Silvia Lindtner , and Tawanna Dillahunt . 2019 . Additional Labors of the Entrepreneurial Self . Proceedings of the ACM on Human - Computer Interaction 3 , CSCW ( 2019 ) , 218 . [ 13 ] Aman Batheja . OCT . 7 , 2015 . Uber , Lyft Shun Driver Fingerprint Requirements . https : / / www . texastribune . org / 2015 / 10 / 07 / background - checks - center - city - fights - uber / , The Texas Tribune ( OCT . 7 , 2015 ) . [ 14 ] Pernille Bjørn and Nina Boulus - Rødje . 2018 . Infrastructural inaccessibility : Tech entrepreneurs in occupied palestine . ACM Transactions on Computer - Human Interaction ( TOCHI ) 25 , 5 ( 2018 ) , 26 . [ 15 ] Robin Brewer and Anne Marie Piper . 2016 . Tell it like it really is : A case of online content creation and sharing among older adult bloggers . In Proceedings of the 2016 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems . ACM , 5529 – 5542 . [ 16 ] United States Census Bureaun . 2015 . Selected Economic Characteristics : 2010 - 2015 American Community Survey 5 - Year Estimates . https : / / factfinder . census . gov , ( 2015 ) . [ 17 ] Jenna Burrell . 2012 . Invisible users : Youth in the Internet cafés of urban Ghana . Mit Press . [ 18 ] Namkee G Choi and Diana M DiNitto . 2013 . The digital divide among low - income homebound older adults : Internet use patterns , eHealth literacy , and attitudes toward computer / Internet use . Journal of medical Internet research 15 , 5 ( 2013 ) , e93 . [ 19 ] Eric Corbett and Christopher Le Dantec . 2019 . Towards a Design Framework for Trust in Digital Civics . In Proceedings of the 2019 on Designing Interactive Systems Conference . ACM , 1145 – 1156 . [ 20 ] Nicola Dell , Trevor Perrier , Neha Kumar , Mitchell Lee , Rachel Powers , and Gaetano Borriello . 2015 . Paper - Digital Workﬂows in Global Development Organizations . In Proceedings of the 18th ACM Conference on Computer Supported Cooperative Work & Social Computing . ACM , 1659 – 1669 . [ 21 ] Tawanna Dillahunt , Vaishnav Kameswaran , Desiree McLain , Minnie Lester , Delores Orr , and Kentaro Toyama . 2018 . Entrepreneurship and the Socio - Technical Chasm in Lean Economies . In Proceedings of the 33rd Annual ACM Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems ( CHI ’18 ) . ACM , New York , NY , USA . [ 22 ] Tawanna Dillahunt , Zengguang Wang , and Stephanie D Teasley . 2014a . Democratizing higher education : Exploring MOOC use among those who cannot afford a formal education . International Review of Research in Open and Distributed Learning 15 , 5 ( 2014 ) , 177 – 196 . [ 23 ] Tawanna R . Dillahunt , Nishan Bose , Suleman Diwan , and Asha Chen - Phang . 2016 . Designing for Disadvantaged Job Seekers : Insights from Early Investigations . In Proceedings of the 2016 ACM Conference on Designing Interactive Systems ( DIS ’16 ) . ACM , New York , NY , USA , 905 – 910 . [ 24 ] Tawanna R Dillahunt and Amelia R Malone . 2015 . The promise of the sharing economy among disadvantaged communities . In Proceedings of the 33rd Annual ACM Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems . ACM , 2285 – 2294 . [ 25 ] Tawanna R Dillahunt , Sandy Ng , Michelle Fiesta , and Zengguang Wang . 2016 . Do massive open online course platforms support employability ? . In Proceedings of the 19th ACM conference on computer - supported cooperative work & social computing . ACM , 233 – 244 . Paper 236 Page 11 CHI 2020 Paper CHI 2020 , April 25 – 30 , 2020 , Honolulu , HI , USA [ 26 ] Tawanna R Dillahunt , Brian Zengguang Wang , and Stephanie Teasley . 2014b . Democratizing higher education : Exploring MOOC use among those who cannot afford a formal education . The International Review of Research in Open and Distributed Learning 15 , 5 ( 2014 ) . [ 27 ] Carl DiSalvo . 2012 . Adversarial design . The MIT Press . [ 28 ] Amanda Dixon . June 5 , 2019 . Survey : Nearly 1 in 3 side hustlers needs the income to stay aﬂoat . https : / / www . bankrate . com / personal - finance / side - hustles - survey - june - 2019 / , Bankrate ( June 5 , 2019 ) . [ 29 ] Lynn Dombrowski , Ellie Harmon , and Sarah Fox . 2016 . Social Justice - Oriented Interaction Design : Outlining Key Design Strategies and Commitments . In Proceedings of the 2016 ACM Conference on Designing Interactive Systems ( DIS ’16 ) . ACM , New York , NY , USA , 656 – 671 . [ 30 ] Silvia Dominguez and Celeste Watkins . 2003 . Creating networks for survival and mobility : Social capital among African - American and Latin - American low - income mothers . Social problems 50 , 1 ( 2003 ) , 111 – 135 . [ 31 ] Brooke Erin Duffy . 2017 . ( Not ) getting paid to do what you love : Gender , social media , and aspirational work . Yale University Press . [ 32 ] Deborah Eade . 1997 . Capacity - building : An approach to people - centred development . Oxfam . [ 33 ] Deborah Eade and Suzanne Williams . 1995 . The Oxfam handbook of development and relief . Vol . 2 . Oxfam . [ 34 ] Matthew S Eastin and Robert LaRose . 2000 . Internet self - efﬁcacy and the psychology of the digital divide . Journal of computer - mediated communication 6 , 1 ( 2000 ) , JCMC611 . [ 35 ] Sheena Erete and Jennifer O Burrell . 2017 . Empowered participation : How citizens use technology in local governance . In Proceedings of the 2017 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems . ACM , 2307 – 2319 . [ 36 ] Robert Fairlie , Arnobio Morelix , Inara Tareque , Joshua Russell , and EJ Reedy . 2016 . The Kauffman Main Street Entrepreneurship Index 2016 . ( 2016 ) . [ 37 ] Robert W Fairlie and Alicia M Robb . 2010 . Race and entrepreneurial success : Black - , Asian - , and White - owned businesses in the United States . MIT Press . [ 38 ] Anton Fedosov , Airi Lampinen , Tawanna R Dillahunt , Ann Light , and Coye Cheshire . 2019 . Cooperativism and Human - Computer Interaction . In Extended Abstracts of the 2019 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems . ACM , SIG05 . [ 39 ] Richard Florida . 2019 . The rise of the creative class . Basic books . [ 40 ] Batya Friedman and WS Bainbridge . 2004 . Value sensitive design . ( 2004 ) . [ 41 ] Yanbo Ge , Christopher R Knittel , Don MacKenzie , and Stephen Zoepf . 2016 . Racial and gender discrimination in transportation network companies . Technical Report . National Bureau of Economic Research . [ 42 ] Eric Gilbert , Karrie Karahalios , and Christian Sandvig . 2010 . The network in the garden : Designing social media for rural life . American Behavioral Scientist 53 , 9 ( 2010 ) , 1367 – 1388 . [ 43 ] Mary L Gray and Siddharth Suri . 2019 . Ghost Work : How to Stop Silicon Valley from Building a New Global Underclass . Eamon Dolan Books . [ 44 ] Gary Paul Green and Anna Haines . 2015 . Asset building & community development . Sage publications . [ 45 ] Tamy Guberek , Allison McDonald , Sylvia Simioni , Abraham H Mhaidli , Kentaro Toyama , and Florian Schaub . 2018 . Keeping a Low Proﬁle ? : Technology , Risk and Privacy Among Undocumented Immigrants . In Proceedings of the 2018 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems . ACM , 114 . [ 46 ] Christina Harrington , Sheena Erete , and Anne Marie Piper . 2019 . Deconstructing Community - Based Collaborative Design : Towards More Equitable Participatory Design Engagements . Proceedings of the ACM on Human - Computer Interaction 3 , CSCW ( 2019 ) , 216 . [ 47 ] Gillian R Hayes . 2011 . The relationship of action research to human - computer interaction . ACM Transactions on Computer - Human Interaction ( TOCHI ) 18 , 3 ( 2011 ) , 15 . [ 48 ] Tina N Hohlfeld , Albert D Ritzhaupt , Ann E Barron , and Kate Kemker . 2008 . Examining the digital divide in K - 12 public schools : Four - year trends for supporting ICT literacy in Florida . Computers & Education 51 , 4 ( 2008 ) , 1648 – 1663 . [ 49 ] Julie Hui , Matthew Easterday , and Elizabeth Gerber . 2018 . Distributed Apprenticeship in Online Communities . Human - Computer Interaction ( 2018 ) . [ 50 ] Julie Hui , Kentaro Toyama , Joyojeet Pal , and Tawanna Dillahunt . 2018 . Making a Living My Way : Necessity - driven Entrepreneurship in Resource - Constrained Communities . Proceedings of the ACM on Human - Computer Interaction 2 , CSCW ( 2018 ) , 71 . [ 51 ] Julie S Hui , Matthew W Easterday , and Elizabeth M Gerber . 2019 . Distributed Apprenticeship in Online Communities . Human – Computer Interaction 34 , 4 ( 2019 ) , 328 – 378 . [ 52 ] Julie S Hui , Michael D Greenberg , and Elizabeth M Gerber . 2014 . Understanding the role of community in crowdfunding work . In Proceedings of the 17th ACM conference on Computer supported cooperative work & social computing . ACM , 62 – 74 . Paper 236 Page 12 CHI 2020 Paper CHI 2020 , April 25 – 30 , 2020 , Honolulu , HI , USA [ 53 ] Lilly Irani , Janet Vertesi , Paul Dourish , Kavita Philip , and Rebecca E Grinter . 2010 . Postcolonial computing : a lens on design and development . In Proceedings of the SIGCHI conference on human factors in computing systems . ACM , 1311 – 1320 . [ 54 ] Barbara A Israel , Amy J Schulz , Chris M Coombe , Edith A Parker , Angela G Reyes , Zachary Rowe , and Richard L Lichtenstein . 2019 . Community - based participatory research . Urban Health ( 2019 ) , 272 . [ 55 ] Margaret C Jack , Pang Sovannaroth , and Nicola Dell . 2019 . Privacy is not a concept , but a way of dealing with life : Localization of Transnational Technology Platforms and Liminal Privacy Practices in Cambodia . Proceedings of the ACM on Human - Computer Interaction 3 , CSCW ( 2019 ) , 128 . [ 56 ] Stephen Kemmis and Robin McTaggart . 2005 . Participatory action research : Communicative action and the public sphere . Sage Publications Ltd . [ 57 ] John Leslie King and Kenneth L Kraemer . 1984 . Evolution and organizational information systems : an assessment of Nolan’s stage model . Commun . ACM 27 , 5 ( 1984 ) , 466 – 475 . [ 58 ] Janet L Kolodner , Paul J Camp , David Crismond , Barbara Fasse , Jackie Gray , Jennifer Holbrook , Sadhana Puntambekar , and Mike Ryan . 2003 . Problem - based learning meets case - based reasoning in the middle - school science classroom : Putting learning by design ( tm ) into practice . The journal of the learning sciences 12 , 4 ( 2003 ) , 495 – 547 . [ 59 ] Gunther Kress . 2003 . Literacy in the new media age . Routledge . [ 60 ] Renee Kuriyan , Kentaro Toyama , and Isha Ray . 2006 . Integrating social development and ﬁnancial sustainability : The challenges of rural computer kiosks in Kerala . In 2006 International Conference on Information and Communication Technologies and Development . IEEE , 121 – 130 . [ 61 ] Jolie Lam and Matthew Lee . 2005 . Bridging the digital divide - The roles of Internet self - efﬁcacy towards learning computer and the Internet among elderly in Hong Kong , China . In Proceedings of the 38th annual Hawaii international conference on system sciences . IEEE , 266b – 266b . [ 62 ] Cliff Lampe , Rick Wash , Alcides Velasquez , and Elif Ozkaya . 2010 . Motivations to participate in online communities . In Proceedings of the SIGCHI conference on Human factors in computing systems . ACM , 1927 – 1936 . [ 63 ] Airi Lampinen , Moira McGregor , Rob Comber , and Barry Brown . 2018 . Member - Owned Alternatives : Exploring Participatory Forms of Organising with Cooperatives . Proceedings of the ACM on Human - Computer Interaction 2 , CSCW ( 2018 ) , 100 . [ 64 ] Christopher Le Dantec . 2012 . Participation and publics : supporting community engagement . In Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems . ACM , 1351 – 1360 . [ 65 ] Christopher A Le Dantec and Sarah Fox . 2015 . Strangers at the gate : Gaining access , building rapport , and co - constructing community - based research . In Proceedings of the 18th ACM Conference on Computer Supported Cooperative Work & Social Computing . ACM , 1348 – 1358 . [ 66 ] Min Kyung Lee , Daniel Kusbit , Evan Metsky , and Laura Dabbish . 2015 . Working with machines : The impact of algorithmic and data - driven management on human workers . In Proceedings of the 33rd Annual ACM Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems . ACM , 1603 – 1612 . [ 67 ] Yvonna S Lincoln . 2007 . Naturalistic inquiry . The Blackwell Encyclopedia of Sociology ( 2007 ) . [ 68 ] Janne Lindqvist , Justin Cranshaw , Jason Wiese , Jason Hong , and John Zimmerman . 2011 . I’m the mayor of my house : examining why people use foursquare - a social - driven location sharing application . In Proceedings of the SIGCHI conference on human factors in computing systems . ACM , 2409 – 2418 . [ 69 ] Silvia Lindtner . 2017 . Laboratory of the precarious : Prototyping entrepreneurial living in Shenzhen . Women’s Studies Quarterly 45 , 3 / 4 ( 2017 ) , 287 – 305 . [ 70 ] Aaron Marcus and Emilie West Gould . 2000 . Crosscurrents : cultural dimensions and global Web user - interface design . interactions 7 , 4 ( 2000 ) , 32 – 46 . [ 71 ] Gary Marsden . 2006 . Designing technology for the developing world . interactions 13 , 2 ( 2006 ) , 39 – ff . [ 72 ] David Martin , Benjamin V Hanrahan , Jacki O’Neill , and Neha Gupta . 2014 . Being a turker . In Proceedings of the 17th ACM conference on Computer supported cooperative work & social computing . ACM , 224 – 235 . [ 73 ] Alison Mathie and Gord Cunningham . 2003 . From clients to citizens : Asset - based community development as a strategy for community - driven development . Development in practice 13 , 5 ( 2003 ) , 474 – 486 . [ 74 ] Wyl McCully , Cliff Lampe , Chandan Sarkar , Alcides Velasquez , and Akshaya Sreevinasan . 2011 . Online and ofﬂine interactions in online communities . In Proceedings of the 7th international symposium on wikis and open collaboration . ACM , 39 – 48 . [ 75 ] John L McKnight , John Kretzmann , and others . 1996 . Mapping community capacity . Institute for Policy Research , Northwestern University Evanston , IL . [ 76 ] Robin McTaggart . 1996 . Issues for participatory action researchers . New directions in action research ( 1996 ) , 243 – 256 . [ 77 ] Robin McTaggart . 1997 . Participatory action research : International contexts and consequences . Suny Press . Paper 236 Page 13 CHI 2020 Paper CHI 2020 , April 25 – 30 , 2020 , Honolulu , HI , USA [ 78 ] Indrani Medhi and Kentaro Toyama . 2007 . Full - context videos for ﬁrst - time , non - literate PC users . In 2007 International Conference on Information and Communication Technologies and Development . IEEE , 1 – 9 . [ 79 ] Gina Neff . 2012 . Venture labor : Work and the burden of risk in innovative industries . MIT press . [ 80 ] Ihudiya Finda Ogbonnaya - Ogburu , Kentaro Toyama , and Tawanna R Dillahunt . 2019 . Towards an Effective Digital Literacy Intervention to Assist Returning Citizens with Job Search . In Proceedings of the 2019 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems . ACM , 85 . [ 81 ] Wanda J Orlikowski . 1992 . The duality of technology : Rethinking the concept of technology in organizations . Organization science 3 , 3 ( 1992 ) , 398 – 427 . [ 82 ] Jacob Poushter . 2017 . Smartphones are common in advanced economies , but digital divides remain . Washington , DC : Pew Research Centre ( 2017 ) . [ 83 ] James O Prochaska and Wayne F Velicer . 1997 . The transtheoretical model of health behavior change . American journal of health promotion 12 , 1 ( 1997 ) , 38 – 48 . [ 84 ] Divya Ramachandran , Matthew Kam , Jane Chiu , John Canny , and James F Frankel . 2007 . Social dynamics of early stage co - design in developing regions . In Proceedings of the SIGCHI conference on human factors in computing systems . ACM , 1087 – 1096 . [ 85 ] Nimmi Rangaswamy . 2006 . Social Entrepreneurship as Critical Agency : A study of rural internet kiosks . In 2006 International Conference on Information and Communication Technologies and Development . IEEE , 143 – 152 . [ 86 ] Robert N Rapoport . 1970 . Three dilemmas in action research : with special reference to the Tavistock experience . Human relations 23 , 6 ( 1970 ) , 499 – 513 . [ 87 ] Aishwarya Lakshmi Ratan , Sambit Satpathy , Lilian Zia , Kentaro Toyama , Sean Blagsvedt , Udai Singh Pawar , and Thanuja Subramaniam . 2009 . Kelsa + : digital literacy for low - income ofﬁce workers . In 2009 International Conference on Information and Communication Technologies and Development ( ICTD ) . IEEE , 150 – 162 . [ 88 ] Noopur Raval and Paul Dourish . 2016 . Standing out from the crowd : Emotional labor , body labor , and temporal labor in ridesharing . In Proceedings of the 19th ACM Conference on Computer - Supported Cooperative Work & Social Computing . ACM , 97 – 107 . [ 89 ] Noopur Raval and Joyojeet Pal . 2019 . Making a " Pro " : ’Professionalism’after Platforms in Beauty - work . Proceedings of the ACM on Human - Computer Interaction 3 , CSCW ( 2019 ) , 175 . [ 90 ] Laura Robinson , Shelia R Cotten , Hiroshi Ono , Anabel Quan - Haase , Gustavo Mesch , Wenhong Chen , Jeremy Schulz , Timothy M Hale , and Michael J Stern . 2015 . Digital inequalities and why they matter . Information , communication & society 18 , 5 ( 2015 ) , 569 – 582 . [ 91 ] Johnny Saldaña . 2015 . The coding manual for qualitative researchers . Sage . [ 92 ] Niloufar Salehi , Lilly C Irani , Michael S Bernstein , Ali Alkhatib , Eva Ogbe , Kristy Milland , and others . 2015 . We are dynamo : Overcoming stalling and friction in collective action for crowd workers . In Proceedings of the 33rd annual ACM conference on human factors in computing systems . ACM , 1621 – 1630 . [ 93 ] Trebor Scholz . 2016 . Platform cooperativism . Challenging the corporate sharing economy . New York , NY : Rosa Luxemburg Foundation ( 2016 ) . [ 94 ] Lauren F Sessions . 2010 . How ofﬂine gatherings affect online communities : when virtual community members ‘meetup’ . Information , Communication & Society 13 , 3 ( 2010 ) , 375 – 395 . [ 95 ] Scott Andrew Shane . 2003 . A general theory of entrepreneurship : The individual - opportunity nexus . Edward Elgar Publishing . [ 96 ] Jacob Thebault - Spieker , Loren Terveen , and Brent Hecht . 2017 . Toward a geographic understanding of the sharing economy : Systemic biases in UberX and TaskRabbit . ACM Transactions on Computer - Human Interaction ( TOCHI ) 24 , 3 ( 2017 ) , 21 . [ 97 ] Tatiana Adeline Thieme . 2018 . The hustle economy : Informality , uncertainty and the geographies of getting by . Progress in Human Geography 42 , 4 ( 2018 ) , 529 – 548 . [ 98 ] Kentaro Toyama . 2015 . Geek heresy : Rescuing social change from the cult of technology . PublicAffairs . [ 99 ] Zulema Valdez . 2011 . The new entrepreneurs : How race , class , and gender shape American enterprise . Stanford University Press . [ 100 ] Alexander Van Deursen , Cédric Courtois , and Jan AGM van Dijk . 2014 . Internet skills , sources of support , and beneﬁting from Internet use . International journal of human - computer interaction 30 , 4 ( 2014 ) , 278 – 290 . [ 101 ] Alexander Van Deursen and Jan Van Dijk . 2011 . Internet skills and the digital divide . New media & society 13 , 6 ( 2011 ) , 893 – 911 . [ 102 ] Ester Van Laar , Alexander Van Deursen , Jan AGM Van Dijk , and Jos De Haan . 2017 . The relation between 21st - century skills and digital skills : A systematic literature review . Computers in human behavior 72 ( 2017 ) , 577 – 588 . [ 103 ] Etienne Wenger . 1998 . Communities of practice . ( 1998 ) . Paper 236 Page 14 CHI 2020 Paper CHI 2020 , April 25 – 30 , 2020 , Honolulu , HI , USA [ 104 ] Earnest Wheeler and Tawanna R . Dillahunt . 2018 . Navigating the Job Search as a Low - Resourced Job Seeker . In Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems ( CHI ’18 ) . ACM , New York , NY , USA . [ 105 ] Susan Wyche and Eric PS Baumer . 2017 . Imagined Facebook : An exploratory study of non - users’ perceptions of social media in Rural Zambia . New Media & Society 19 , 7 ( 2017 ) , 1092 – 1108 . [ 106 ] Susan Wyche and Charles Steinﬁeld . 2016 . Why don’t farmers use cell phones to access market prices ? technology affordances and barriers to market information services adoption in rural Kenya . Information Technology for Development 22 , 2 ( 2016 ) , 320 – 333 . [ 107 ] Susan Wyche , Charles Steinﬁeld , Tian Cai , Nightingale Simiyu , and Martha E Othieno . 2016 . Reﬂecting on video : Exploring the efﬁcacy of video for teaching device literacy in rural Kenya . In Proceedings of the Eighth International Conference on Information and Communication Technologies and Development . ACM , 8 . Paper 236 Page 15