85 th Annual Meeting of the Association for Information Science & Technology | Oct . 29 – Nov . 1 , 2022 | Pittsburgh , PA . Author ( s ) retain copyright , but ASIS & T receives an exclusive publication license . ASIS & T Annual Meeting 2022 442 Short Papers Human - Driven Models : A Case Study of Geologists as They Engage with Data for Decision Making Keefer , Donald A . University of Illinois at Urbana - Champaign , USA | dkeefer @ illinois . edu Blake , Catherine University of Illinois at Urbana - Champaign , USA | clblake @ illinois . edu ABSTRACT The value of geologic data is well established and demonstrated by efforts such as EarthChem and EarthCube . Although these communities are active in the documentation and preservation of geologic data , more work is needed to understand how geologists use this data to address specific problems . In this preliminary analysis , we focus on the information behaviors of professional geologists as they engage with multiple data streams to make decisions . Using semi - structured interviews and grounded theory , our findings document how a single data point can drive changes to existing models . Responses also show that geologists view their experiences in data collection as critical and they use their knowledge and experience to iteratively re - assess the context and fitness of their data as they search for coherent interpretations that resolve data - model conflicts . KEYWORDS information behavior ; decision making ; data reuse ; expert practices ; geologic characterization INTRODUCTION Sampling , characterization and mapping of geologic deposits have an important role in many land use decisions— from locating and managing groundwater and mineral resources to guiding city planning decisions to protecting vulnerable ecosystems ( Ramdeen , 2015 ) . To support information exchange in these efforts , several community projects such as EarthChem ( earthchem . org ) and EarthCube ( earthcube . org ) provide data templates and xml standards to help capture and manage data resources over time . Studies of sensor - based data have found , however , that such standards “were not used” ( Borgman , 2015 , p . 112 ) . Others have advocated for site - based strategies that focuses on physical areas of importance , where stakeholder workshops and participatory engagement activities are used to construct a minimal information framework ( Palmer et al . , 2017 ) . To complement these metadata and curation research efforts , we are investigating information behaviors that take place during data reuse , where the data has been collected by multiple groups for multiple uses . By focusing on specific reuse activities we hope to shed light on critical data curation questions—such as , “what investments in meta - data are needed to ensure successful data reuse ? ” , “which pre - processing steps should be recorded to ensure reuse reliability ? ” , and “when should new data induce an update to an existing model ? ” . Moreover , as we identify places where automated decision making might play a role , we need to better understand which existing practices used by experts should be integrated into new systems , and which practices are artifacts of previous approaches that may no longer apply . It’s also important to understand where manual decision making—either old or new—might be aided by systems and tools that recognize the importance of expertise ( Mishra , Allen & Pearman , 2015 ) while helping to avoid undesired biases ( Kahneman , 2003 ; Tversky & Kahneman , 1974 ) . Much of the classic theory on information behaviors such as the Information Search Process ( Kuhlthau , 1993 ) and the berrypicking model ( Bates , 1989 ) was targeted towards understanding information seeking activities . We are interested in better understanding how specific information behaviors are applied within expert - mediated information use and decision making activities . Recognizing research on information use in an international petroleum company ( Ellis & Haugan , 1997 ) , information synthesis in medicine ( Blake & Pratt , 2006a , 2006b ) , and information use and decision making with emergency responders ( Allen , 2011 ; Mishra et al . , 2015 ) , we are interested in exploring the potential for extending these studies and adding to our understanding of expert reasoning under uncertainty . This research considers how experts work with multiple streams of evidence from different sources and with different provenance . Using a semi - structured interview and critical incident technique we sought to elicit from experts their perspectives about : how they account for the varying reliabilities of their different data ; their use of published and unpublished sources of knowledge in guiding data interpretation ; their processes for interpreting their data ; their use of colleague input as a tool for guiding interpretations ; and , how they understood the reliability of their final interpretations . Thus our goal was to better understand the human information behaviors used in making decisions from multiple streams of data . RESEARCH DESIGN To study how experts engage with uncertain data and decisions in their reasoning , we conducted semi - structured interviews with recruited participants over an online meeting platform . The interview participants are professional geologists with extensive experience in characterization and mapping of glacial and post - glacial sediments . This ASIS & T Annual Meeting 2022 443 Short Papers subdomain was selected because of the heavy reliance of these problems on the use of multiple reused data streams , the complex role of uncertainty within both the observations and decisions , and the tendency for geologists to analyze and interpret their data using a combination of domain knowledge , experience , and informal standards of practice . The geologists recruited for this study have varying levels of experience in characterization and mapping . They work for state , provincial , or national geological surveys , universities , or consulting firms throughout the United States , Canada , England , and Denmark . We initially identified and recruited 33 experts by direct email or telephone inquiry , and invited them to meet with us and discuss their experiences and perspectives on the nature and influence of uncertainty in their data and decisions . Of the 33 experts recruited , 23 agreed to participate and have been interviewed , five responded with interest but did not schedule an interview , and four did not respond to our email enquiries . This paper discusses the findings developed from the first six interviews analyzed . For the individuals who responded to our initial inquiry , we emailed them a pre - interview document that further explained the study goals , and provided a copy of our informed consent document ; both of these documents were approved by the Institutional Review Board ( IRB ) of our University . The pre - interview document included demographic questions that they were asked to provide prior to the interview ( Table 1 ) . All subjects reported in this paper worked at a state , provincial , or national geological survey when they were conducting the geological characterization efforts they discussed in our interviews . ID Degree Experience ( Years ) Number Data Streams Used Number of Projects Total Interview Time ( mins ) Geologist 1 Ph . D . 38 8 30 - 40 120 Geologist 2 Ph . D . 58 6 > 40 90 Geologist 21 Ph . D . 15 8 3 83 Geologist 28 M . S . 33 10 15 - 20 113 Geologist 41 Ph . D . 35 9 45 - 55 122 Geologist 86 Ph . D . 16 9 6 92 Table 1 . Demographic Information for the Six Geologists Whose Interviews are Analyzed for This Study The interviews were conducted and recorded using the Zoom online meeting platform ( https : / / zoom . us ) . Audio and video recordings from the interviews were used to correct the automatically - generated transcripts . All of the interviews were conducted by the first author using standardized questions . The interview was designed to be completed in 60 minutes , however , discussions with these first six experts were between 23 - 62 minutes longer than expected . Following each interview , the transcripts were anonymized by assigning random numbers to substitute for each geologist’s name , and potentially identifying details were removed . The IRB - approved interviews consisted of a series of questions , with potential follow - ups and redirects . The critical incidents in this study were specific mapping projects , and the questions asked each expert their perspectives about the reliabilities of the different types of data they used for these mapping projects , their use of published sources of knowledge in guiding data interpretation , their processes for interpreting their data , and their approach to modifying their conceptual models when data - model conflicts were identified . The interview transripts and audio recordings were imported and analyzed using Atlas . ti software ( https : / / atlasti . com ) . Throughout this study we used grounded theory ( Glaser and Strauss , 2017 ) as a guide that provided a rationale and structure to avoid projecting specific hypotheses into the interview responses or transcript analyses . High - level codes were developed directly from the data , subcategories were created when further resolution was needed ( Friese , 2019 ) , and code groups were used to organize codes around specific topical findings . FINDINGS In our interviews we found that experts regularly used individual observations to drive changes to their conceptual models . Each geologist noted how anomalous values would come to their attention as they explored data classifications . These experts described a general process where anomalous values were identified and evaluated , then determined to be either an erroneous observation that should be disregarded , or a reliable value that warranted further consideration . The reliable values would either be in agreement with their existing conceptual model or in conflict . Those in agreement with their model were interpreted as reflecting local variations in sediments that were ASIS & T Annual Meeting 2022 444 Short Papers predicted by the model but that hadn’t been previously observed within the data . Those in conflict with their model however , required revision of the model to accommodate the conflicting values . Geologist 86 : Every new borehole can change the hypothesis . Typically it does change the conceptual framework every time…A little bit . Examples of the impact of a single observation were common in our interviews . In contrast to automated or statistically - based methods that may have marked these observations as outliers , some individual values did influence these experienced geologists and were used to guide changes to their conceptual models . Geologist 41 : … if it weren ' t for the fact that I found a cobble in that outcrop during one visit—it was laminated silts with a cobble in it . If it weren ' t for that , it was the diagnostic feature for the ice contact . But otherwise , we would have just interpreted it as slack water because that ' s what we had done with all the other situations . Geologist 86 : We knew it was going to be kind of gravelly at land surface , but other interpretations had shown that there ' s thick packages of till between glacial units . But when we drilled that hole it was gravel the whole way down . 300 feet . And so it ' s still something that will change the whole framework . At least locally . Adjustments to their models from these anomalous observations were typically accommodated by identifying alternate interpretations from domain knowledge that suitably merged these new values and the sediment and landform patterns expressed in neighboring observations . Geologist 41 : …it ' s sort of the uniqueness of that observation . … weighing those two possibilities , can we can we see evidence of a similar series of facies occurring somewhere else ? … Is it more common , or is it just an aberration ? And if it ' s an aberration and then , you can just sort of discount it , just not put that much weight on it . …on the other hand , sometimes you see something and it completely defies any expectation . And so , then you might have to completely re - evaluate what ' s going on . Values determined to be unusable were generally associated with data streams that the experts considered to be relatively unreliable . In some of these situations , the observations were found to be suspect because of clearly erroneous values . Geologist 1 : And then you soon learned that there were some drillers that would just simply put down the same data for the whole subdivision . … And so there ' s some that you just kind of dispelled entirely . Other times the observations were not found to be suspect , but knowledge of the data collection methods deemed them unreliable . In some of these situations , the experts noted that these data were discarded , or not needed . One geologist discussed how observations from a highly reliable data stream would occasionally have values that didn’t fit neighboring values and couldn’t be resolved . They noted that in some cases the data would have to be discarded . Geologist 41 : On occasions when I thought it was high quality data but it just didn ' t fit with everything else , you just chalk it up that it ' s badly located… Who knows ? But then yeah , then you just throw that out . This expert behavior is a stark contrast to the treatment of anomalous data in data - driven modeling . Data - driven modeling relies on statistical algorithms which typically reduce the influence of single observations ; either because individual values do not have sufficient statistical power to significantly modify a model , or they are identified as statistical outliers ( i . e . , presumed erroneous ) and disregarded . This observation demonstrates the potential contribution that domain experts can bring to model development and emphasizes the need to reduce the gaps in domain knowledge that is included between expert - based , human - driven models and entirely data - driven models . Another compelling characteristic that we noted from the interviews was the importance each expert placed on their own personal experiences . We found it noteworthy in how deeply they integrated their experiences into data analysis and interpretation . The discussions highlighted their reliance on personal experiences , on publications describing relevant geologic processes , and on documents ( i . e . , maps , notes , and reports ) describing the geologic history and deposits of their study area . Of these three , it seemed that their personal experiences were most impactful in guiding their thinking . It is possible that this is because they use their experiences to contextualize their understanding of the domain knowledge . In fact , it became clear through these discussions that these experts routinely used their experience to contextualize the data at multiple points in their analytical efforts . Geologist 21 : If I didn ' t spend a lot of time in the field and I and without that section , my interpretation is probably wrong . ASIS & T Annual Meeting 2022 445 Short Papers More than one geologist highlighted the importance they attributed to being able to visit a modern glacier to see firsthand the different geologic processes , the kinds of sediments that these processes created , and the way these varying processes and deposits interacted over time . Geologist 28 noted that , “For me it [ visiting active modern glaciers ] just made all the connections . ” Several experts emphasized the importance of using high quality data , particularly data they personally collected . As noted earlier , these experts were all involved with collecting multiple types of data for their projects , and this familiarity with data collection methods and the ability to physically see the samples being collected as they recorded their observations was crucial for informing their understanding of what the data were observing . Geologist 1 : If I didn’t have my own borings , I’m not sure I would be comfortable interpreting these engineering borings , as an example . Geologist 86 : … if it’s a data set that I collected , it’s hard for me to question it . While personal , hands - on , experiences with the samples and materials being described was critical for these experts to feel confident in their interpretations , it was clear that their interpretations were still firmly grounded in their awareness of various sources of domain knowledge . They noted that these sources of knowledge included models of glacial sedimentary environments , the processes and deposits that were found associated with different locations on , under , in front of , or behind glaciers and glacier margins . Other important sources of knowledge that were identified and used by these experts included domain - level publications of system characterizations , regional published and unpublished notes , maps and reports , and analytical or sensor based datasets of various sediment attributes . Importantly , before using this knowledge to guide their interpretations , these experts had re - contextualized these sources of information to fit within their own understanding of modern sedimentary conceptual models or within their own personal observations and insights . Geologist 86 : In a proglacial environment you ' re certainly , you have a preconception of what that environment is like . based on real data . real observations . And through experience then , you start to have an expectation of what you ' re going to run into in the subsurface … in an ice marginal environment , then … you know that that environments going to be a hodgepodge—based on modern glacial environments that we see , and based on our observations of subsurface geology… Geologist 41 : … sometimes those landforms in and of themselves suggested certain lithology…In other cases , the landforms help infer a certain sequence DISCUSSION AND SUMMARY This study contributes to the body of information seeking studies that includes fundamental information seeking tasks of students when working with the literature ( Bates , 1989 ; Kuhlthau , 1993 ) , System 1 and 2 thinking processes ( Allen , 2011 ) , other geologically related tasks ( Ellis & Haugan , 1997 ) , and decision making within time constraints ( Mishra et al . , 2015 ) . We focused on specific information behavior patterns regarding the selection or rejection of data elements within the broader reasoning process . Thus , this study extends our framework that uses context - specific assessments of an entire data collection ( Keefer & Blake , 2021 ) to data points elements within a collection . This study documents the frequency with which geologists use small numbers of data , or even single data points , to drive changes to their models . The geologists explain these decisions as being due to the incongruity of the observations with the patterns expected from the current conceptual model . They discuss their processes of data analysis , where these incongruous data are identified , used to highlight limitations with current mental model , and then used to identify modifications to the models . This study identified the importance that geologists place on their own presence “in the field” , walking the areas being mapped and personally collecting their own data . They consistently talked about the importance these observations had on helping them establish major aspects of their models . The interviews also document how geologists use their knowledge and experience to frequently and iteratively re - assess the context and fitness of their data . Geologists describe how each interpretation involves a localized re - evaluation of the data according to the spatial context of the specific conceptual model being considered . Given the level of contextualization discussed in the interviews it is not surprising that one of the automated systems used by this community includes domain - specific knowledge and provides a rationale for decisions . Calvin is an automated system for age dating landforms , uses domain - standard decision criteria to estimate landform ages , and provides the corresponding decision justification or decision path to the user ( Rassbach , Bradley & Anderson , 2011 ) . This study provides further insight into human - driven models that support geologists as they engage with data for decision making . ASIS & T Annual Meeting 2022 446 Short Papers REFERENCES Allen , D . ( 2011 ) . Information behavior and decision making in time - constrained practice : A dual - processing perspective . Journal of the American Society for Information Science and Technology , 62 ( 11 ) , 2165 – 2181 . Bates , M . J . ( 1989 ) . The design of browsing and berrypicking techniques for the online search interface . Online Review . Blake , C . , & Pratt , W . ( 2006a ) . Collaborative information synthesis I : A model of information behaviors of scientists in medicine and public health . Journal of the American Society for Information Science and Technology , 57 ( 13 ) , 1740 – 1749 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1002 / asi . 20487 Blake , C . , & Pratt , W . ( 2006b ) . Collaborative information synthesis II : Recommendations for information systems to support synthesis activities . Journal of the American Society for Information Science and Technology , 57 ( 14 ) , 1888 – 1895 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1002 / asi . 20486 Borgman , C . L . ( 2015 ) . Big data , little data , no data : Scholarship in the networked world . The MIT Press . Ellis , D . , & Haugan , M . ( 1997 ) . Modelling the information seeking patterns of engineers and research scientists in an industrial environment . Journal of Documentation , 53 ( 4 ) , 384 – 403 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1108 / EUM0000000007204 Friese , S . ( 2019 ) . Qualitative Data Analysis with Atlas . ti ( Third ) . SAGE Publications . Glaser , B . G . , & Strauss , A . L . ( 2017 ) . The discovery of grounded theory : Strategies for qualitative research . Routledge . Kahneman , D . ( 2003 ) . A perspective on judgment and choice : Mapping bounded rationality . American Psychologist , 58 ( 9 ) , 697 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1037 / 0003 - 066X . 58 . 9 . 697 Keefer , D . A . , & Blake , C . L . ( 2021 ) . Data reuse assessment : Modeling alignment among multiple data streams . 84rd Annual Meeting of the Association for Information Science and Technology . 2021 Annual Meeting of the Association for Information Science and Technology , Salt Lake City , UT . Kuhlthau , C . C . ( 1993 ) . A principle of uncertainty for information seeking . Journal of Documentation , 49 ( 4 ) , 462 – 472 . Mishra , J . , Allen , D . , & Pearman , A . ( 2015 ) . Information seeking , use , and decision making . Journal of the Association for Information Science and Technology , 66 ( 4 ) , 662 – 673 . Palmer , C . L . , Thomer , A . K . , Baker , K . S . , Wickett , K . M . , Hendrix , C . L . , Rodman , A . , Sigler , S . , & Fouke , B . W . ( 2017 ) . Site - based data curation based on hot spring geobiology . PLOS ONE , 12 ( 3 ) , e0172090 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1371 / journal . pone . 0172090 Ramdeen , S . ( 2015 ) , Preservation challenges for geological data at state geological surveys , GeoResJ , 6 , 213 - 220 . Rassbach , L . , Bradley , E . , & Anderson , K . ( 2011 ) . Providing Decision Support for Cosmogenic Isotope Dating . Association for the Advancement of Artificial Intelligence Magazine , Summer , 69 – 78 . Tversky , A . , & Kahneman , D . ( 1974 ) . Judgment under Uncertainty : Heuristics and Biases . Science , 185 ( 4157 ) , 1124 – 1131 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1126 / science . 185 . 4157 . 1124