Theorizing a Design - Oriented Categorization for Online Voluntary Production Communities Pujan Ziaie Department of Computer Science Technical University of Munich ( TUM ) Munich , Germany ziaie @ cs . tum . edu Helmut Krcmar Department of Computer Science Technical University of Munich ( TUM ) Munich , Germany krcmar @ in . tum . de Abstract — As well - known socio - technical systems that aim at accumulating and sharing content by facilitating aligned coordination and collaboration of voluntary participant , online voluntary production communities have been the focus of academic scrutiny in the last decade . Considering their popularity and the increasing theories and models for addressing their various design intricacies and governance methods , there is still no systematic categorization available based on their characteristics to make the existing descriptive or prescriptive approaches more specific or generalizable . In this paper , we address pertinent attributes of such communities and divide them into three major categories , each further divided into few distinct types . Existing theories and frameworks are drawn upon with a design - oriented approach for the sake of this categorization , so that more transparent statements can be made with regard to their design and operation . This refined contextualization helps community designers aptly select features from successful communities only when the underlying theory and characteristic are in line with their own . Index Terms — Online communities ; user - generated content ; socio - technical systems , knowledge sharing ; collaboration ; crowdsourcing I . I NTRODUCTION Online communities and social networks are an inextricable part of today’s modern society . Voluntary production communities 1 provide a cost - efficient platform to accumulate and structure user - generated content in a systematic way . If designed and operated wisely , production communities can turn the potential creativity , manpower and knowledge of a vast and diverse crowd into well - structured knowledge or pool of digital artifacts . The concept of collaborative generation of content by voluntary members started in the field of software development by the open source movement and soon was applied to other areas including , for example , open media ( e . g . citizen journalism [ 1 ] ) , innovation crowdsourcing for products ( also called co - 1 In this paper , the term “production community” is used for voluntary production communities , unless stated otherwise . creation communities [ 2 ] or open innovation platforms [ 3 ] ) and most importantly , knowledge sharing [ 4 ] . Depending on the context and objective , voluntary production communities have been given different terms including open content projects [ 5 ] , social computing systems [ 6 ] , peer production communities [ 7 ] , community - driven knowledge sites [ 8 ] , or social media [ 9 ] . The concept of user - generated content ( UGC ) together with web - enabled collective intelligence systems [ 10 ] has induced an increased interest among scholars and practitioners and , as a result , a vast body of literature has been devoted to investigating certain aspects of these communities . These aspects include , for example , user behavior [ 11 , 12 ] , community governance [ 13 ] , content quality assessment [ 14 ] , community lifecycle [ 15 ] , constructive collaboration [ 16 ] and design guidelines [ 17 ] . Most of these studies have focused on one particular community ( e . g . OSS 2 communities , social media , Wikipedia or open innovation platforms ) or module ( e . g . incentive or recommendation systems ) . Generally , online communities are deemed as socio - technical systems , with human beings as their quintessential element . Such systems should therefore be studied from different overlapping perspectives of engineering , computing , psychology and sociology to successfully bridge the gap between technical features and individual characteristics [ 18 ] . Moreover , the contextual and individual factors change and evolve perpetually in production communities , giving them a vibrant nature under constant flux [ 19 ] . All these factors make the design and operation of online communities a dynamic and challenging task . Correspondingly , communities have different focuses and priorities in different stages of their lifecycle [ 15 ] . In such complex systems , learning from past experience and similar environment is inevitable . In order to apply existing practices , however , one should first know how generalizable the findings in other communities are . If the goal of a community , or the attitude and motivation of its users or the type of its content differs drastically from another community , there is no guarantee that a successfully applied 2 Open source software 978 - 1 - 4799 - 0048 - 0 / 13 / $ 31 . 00 ©2013 IEEE 430 solution or feature in one community can be positively employed in another . This paper aims at providing a design - oriented categorization of production communities , so that generalizing the findings and theories can be performed in a structured and constructive way . We draw upon existing theories , approaches and models to categorize relevant communities based on their characteristic similarities . Particularly findings in the fields of collective intelligence [ 10 ] and socio - technical [ 18 , 20 ] systems are harvested and extended to address different aspects of production communities . The results of our comprehensive study show that by using the collectivity and timeliness of content , communities can be divided into three primary categories , namely collaborative , creative and competitive . Collaborative communities can be divided into knowledge ( e . g . Wikipedia ) , source ( e . g . OSS communities ) and product ( e . g . Quirky . com ) development . In creative communities , users can create content individually and then have others discuss , distribute and evaluate it . Four subcategories can be distinguished here : open discussions ( e . g . Yahoo Answers ) , knowledge ( e . g . Urbandictionary . com ) , news ( e . g . Digg . com ) and digital file sharing ( e . g . Flickr or YouTube ) . Centering on short - term competitions , competitive communities can be categorized into open innovations / ideas ( e . g . IBM’s IdeaJam ) and digital artifacts ( e . g . Threadless ) . Following this categorization , a new baseline can be founded on which future research can be built . Furthermore , more distinguished and precise models and mechanisms can be theorized for a more successful design and governance of production communities . This paper is structured as follows : First , the focused area of study , namely online production communities is defined and the knowledge framework that was used as a theoretical frame to categorize existing production communities is explained . Then , the suggested categorization will be introduced and elaborated upon . Ultimately , we conclude the paper and discuss the pertinent implications . I . O NLINE V OLUNTARY P RODUCTION C OMMUNITIES A . Definition and Distinction Howard Rheingold , who coined the term “virtual community , ” described virtual communities from a social perspective as , “social aggregations that emerge from the Net when enough people carry on public discussions long enough , with sufficient human feeling to form webs of personal relationships in cyberspace” [ 21 ] . Others gave a looser definition and characterize them as , for example , “a community in which the primary mode of interaction is electronic and not face - to - face” [ 22 ] . Today , the terms “online” and “virtual” may be used interchangeably for communities . Although online communities are a rather new phenomenon , they have many similarities with real - world communities and many agree that they can be linked to the sociological definition of “community” [ 23 , 24 ] . This enables researchers to draw on theories and practices that pertain to real communities and modify , extend and apply these theories and practices to the virtual world . There are several types of online communities based on different criteria such as their objectives , activities , or users’ needs . For example , they have been categorized based on their objective ( areas of interest ) into types related to spirituality , health , work , politics , transaction and education [ 25 ] . Some researchers have classified communities according to different dimensions , such as attributes , supporting software , relation to physical communities , boundedness , supporting software possibilities [ 26 ] , or source of revenue [ 27 ] . Communities of interest to this paper are online platforms in which voluntary users create and share content either through collaboration with others or individually . This is in line with the definition of open production communities ( OPCs ) [ 28 ] , except that the created content is not necessarily open . From a social perspective , primary group focus and social structure [ 29 ] or users’ affection toward a community [ 30 ] have also been used as criteria to classify communities . In the next section , we propose a categorization based on content development approach and content type . B . Generic Design Dimensions of OPCs Based on generic design dimensions for online communities proposed by [ 20 ] , attributes of the three dimensions of user , content and community can be used to cluster communities into three groups with distinct characteristics . T ABLE 1 shows a list of these attributes . Some of these attributes are of great importance for categorizing production communities , and some are only meaningful in specific systems including , incentive systems and quality assurance . Borrowing from this framework , the relevant attributes for the purpose of categorization are : user desires , level of collaboration , content type , content function , content timeliness , licensing policy ( content ownership ) and the philosophy of the community . In the next section , we use content timeliness , licensing policy , level of collaboration and philosophy of the community to categorize communities into three distinct and general categories . Then , we use content type and function to further divide them into different subcategories . II . V OLUNTARY P RODUCTION C OMMUNITIES : C ATEGORIZATION Development ( generation and improvement ) of content can be performed either collaboratively or individually ( creatively ) . The level of collaboration indicates this fundamental distinction . Collaboratively developed content means that the main body of content ( its essence ) can be developed by more than one user . In creative content development , however , each user is considered to be the “owner” of his or her generated content and the other users may only contribute metacontent in the form of comments , ratings , recommendations and so forth ( see [ 31 ] for a 431 comprehensive taxonomy on content ) . McKenzie et al . [ 16 ] termed the generated digital artifacts in the first case “ collaborative content” and in the latter “ creative content ” . We call the general categories of community collaborative and creative . It is helpful to use the level of collaboration as an essential factor to categorize communities since the resulting two general community types often practice different governance mechanisms and approaches [ 32 , 33 ] . If we include timeliness of content and the philosophy of the community , a new category emerges that also differs from the other two in several matters including , for example , incentive mechanisms . For this new category we introduce the term “competitive community” . Competitive communities differ from the other two types in that the primary motivation behind generating content is often , but not always , extrinsic ; the time frame for contributions is limited ; and the produced content is not necessarily open ( it cannot be considered as public good ) . Our categorization aligns well with the categorization introduced by [ 10 ] , where they consider three options of collection , contest and collaboration for creating content . A . Collaborative Communities Communities that opt for a collaborative approach to generating content can be grouped into three major categories according to the type of content : source ( open source software development ) , text ( collaborative content repository ) and digital artifacts ( collaborative artifact development ) . This distinction is primarily based on the necessary skill level of users and distinguished nature of the end products of the community . Also , publication policy is often different . While there is a closed - gate policy in almost all open source software communities , such strict quality assurance mechanisms are rarely practiced in the other two types . The dominant desires of users differ as well . In collaborative content repositories fun and self - importance are primary desires , whereas in OSS communities self - development and group identity are prevalent [ 34 ] . Moreover , OSS communities show notably different success factors than the other two types [ 35 ] . Collaborative content repositories ( e . g . Wikipedia ) are distinguished from collaborative artifact development ( e . g . Quirky ) by the level of expertise of users and the desire for self - development . A cross - comparison of user desires is shown in Table 2 . B . Creative Communities Creative communities are the majority of production communities in which users generate content individually and then evaluate or discuss each other’s contributions . Four major sub - categories have been identified in literature , each focusing on a specific content type or form ( see T ABLE 1 ) for the corresponding definitions ) : open media communities facilitate citizen journalism [ 36 ] and deal mostly with user - generated news and other forms of articles ( e . g . reports , , interviews , personal opinion , etc . ) [ 37 ] . Users in these communities either generate content or refer to items on other websites . In c reative knowledge repositories , users generate or accumulate information on a certain topic . Depending on how critical the published information may be , open - gate or closed - gate policies will be observed for publishing content . For example , in urbandictionary . com , where users enter trendy expressions and colloquial words , the contributions need to be approved by privileged users before they can be made public . Open file - sharing communities are digital platforms for users to create and share files . The type of file can be document , image ( e . g . Flickr ) , audio or video ( e . g . YouTube ) . Finally , open discussion communities are one of the oldest types of communities where users can discuss certain topics or ask questions and receive answers from other members of the community ( e . g . Yahoo Answers [ 38 ] ) . T ABLE 1 R ELEVANT D ESIGN DIMENSIONS AND ATTRIBUTES T O C ATEGORIZE PRODUCTION COMMUNITIES ( BASED ON [ 20 ] ) Dimensions Attributes Description U s er Desires Users’ desires are a decisive predictor of their intrinsic or extrinsic motivations [ 39 ] . Determining desires in the context of production communities are : self - importance , self - development , fun , vindication , socialization , group identity and uniqueness ( based on [ 40 ] ) . C o n t e n t Timeliness Timeliness indicates whether the value or quality of content alters with time [ 41 ] . Collectivity or the level of collaboration Collectivity of content [ 42 ] corresponds to the depth of user collaboration with one another to develop content . The highest level of collaboration takes place in wiki - based knowledge repositories or OSS communities [ 43 ] , also known as collaborative communities , since any eligible user can alter and update the main body of content . Type Types of content include text , image , audio , video , code or digital artefact including , for example , design sketches and 3D models [ 44 ] . Form ( function ) Refers to the purpose and application of content . Examples : news , essays , entertainment , maps , designs , products or ideas ( innovations ) . C o m m u n i t y Philosophy of existence ( vision ) The purpose of existence of a community [ 45 ] . The more attractive this purpose is , the stronger the commitment and intrinsic motivations of users will be to help the community thrive [ 46 ] . Content ownership Who the content belongs to , who is responsible for the content and how to reuse , distribute or extend it . 432 Each of these categories has its own unique characteristics or features . In open media communities , for example , timeliness of content is of great importance . In open file - sharing communities , altering the generated or uploaded content is either not possible or difficult , which is in sharp contrast to the so - called permanently “unfinished” nature of the content in open media or creative knowledge repositories [ 47 ] . In open discussion communities self - importance and uniqueness are highly desirable [ 48 ] . These different desires and motivations should be carefully considered when making decisions regarding incentives . Moreover , the theoretical construct of findings in each of these categories should be consistent with another type before the statements and hypothesis can be extended or applied to another type . C . Competitive Communities Competitive communities , also known as open innovation communities [ 49 ] , are communities in which the generation of ideas or designs is crowdsourced to users . These communities run short - term and topic - oriented projects with specific problems to tackle . They are often used for commercial , political or social purposes . Considering this limited scope and the pertinent issues of content ownership [ 50 ] , extrinsic motivations such as winning prizes or bolstering reputation play a more significant role in these communities than intrinsic motivations such as altruism or reciprocity . For this reason , unlike other communities , monetary rewards do not have a “crowding out” effect and have proven effective [ 51 ] . The two most widespread forms of content in competitive communities are ideas and designs . Dell’s IdeaStorm or IBM’s IdeaJam are two examples of idea - generating competitive communities . The end result can also be a design ( or product ) . Threadless is an example of a design - oriented competitive community in which users submit their T - shirt designs and evaluate the submissions of others , with the winning designs being produced at regular intervals . The primary difference between these two sub - categories is the skill level of the users . Any user can submit an idea for various topics of interest ; however , to design a product , a certain level of expertise is needed . Accordingly , while vindication and uniqueness are two primary desires for both community types , self - development is of greater importance in design - oriented competitive communities . Companies often need to contemplate thoroughly when deciding between a competitive market and a collaborative community , since this decision will determine the types of external participating innovators [ 52 ] . A tree diagram illustrates the proposed three categories and their sub - categories in Fig . 1 . Next , we study these categories from the perspective of user desires to elucidate their design similarities and differences . Fig . 1 . Three major categories and their sub - categories for open production communities III . C ATEGORIZATION A PPLICABILITY : T HE E XAMPLE OF U SER DESIRES Constant , constructive and consistent participation is a critical success factor for voluntary production communities . This is why designing apt incentive systems to encourage user commitment to the community and its activities is one of the most important and most challenging tasks for community designers and operators . Motivating users is more of an art than a science [ 53 ] , because the context ( community ) and the actors ( users ) are perpetually changing . Many researchers have tried to study and explain new ways of motivating users with different theories based on theories pertaining to intrinsic and extrinsic motivations [ 54 ] . There are also researchers who question a fine distinction between intrinsic and extrinsic motivations and consider everything to be a matter of individual difference . 433 For example , Reiss [ 40 ] proposes the theory of 16 basic desires based on psychometric research . His theory suggests that all fundamental desires can exist with different strengths at different times in different individuals . Here , we cross compare our categorization with seven user desires in Reiss’s theory that are relevant to the context of production communities and look for similar patterns . The salient user desires in every type of voluntary production community has been drawn from existing empirical studies . The result is shown in Table 2 . T ABLE 2 C ROSS - COMPARISON BETWEEN DIFFERENT COMMUNITY CATEGORIES AND THE SALIENT USER DESIRES Category Community Type SI SD F V S GI U Selected Reference ( s ) Collaborative Open source software development X X X [ 12 , 55 ] Collaborative artifact development X X X [ 56 ] Collaborative content repository X X X [ 57 - 59 ] Creative Open media X X X [ 1 , 37 ] Open ( creative ) knowledge X X X [ 60 , 61 ] Open file sharing X X X [ 34 , 53 , 62 , 63 ] Open discussion X X X [ 64 - 66 ] Competitive Competitive idea generation X X X [ 49 , 67 , 68 ] Competitive product design X X X [ 69 , 70 ] SI : self - importance , SD : self - development , F : fun , V : vindication , S : socialization , GI : group identity , U : uniqueness As noted before , the critical question for every community designer or operator is : what kinds of incentives would be most likely to have a positive effect on users’ contribution and commitment ? For example , open media and open discussion communities present the same patterns regarding the salient desires of their users . This suggests that theories or solutions that have proven successful in one of these two communities may be applied to the other . Table 2 provides a reference for community designers to know what features are more likely to work in the incentive system of their communities based on the best practices of other communities . The same table can be made for other input variables including user behavior , governance mechanisms and quality assessment approaches . In a sense , the categorization outlined here provides a new baseline for comparing the findings in one specific type of community to those of another in the context of voluntary production communities . IV . C ONCLUSION Designing production communities as socio - technical systems requires meticulous attention to all technical , individual and social levels . This makes their design a dynamic and interactive process that needs to be constantly adapted to the needs of the users and the community . Numerous studies in online communities have put a range of different design areas under scrutiny , including incentive systems , community governance and content quality assessment . Taking different characteristics of these communities into account , it is essential to know to what extent the findings and hypotheses of one particular community type can be generalized and applied to another . In this paper , we center on the characteristics of voluntary production communities with regard to three dimensions : user , content and community ( see T ABLE 1 ) . Based on the different attributes of these dimensions [ 20 ] , we partitioned these communities into three general categories : collaborative , creative and competitive communities . We further divided these categories into sub - categories based on different types and forms of content . With the perspective that we have outlined in this paper , one can integrate prior research of one particular community type and reconcile contradictory findings for another type by specifying how different the distinguishing factors are in both communities . As an example , we applied our categorization to relevant user desires proposed by Reiss [ 40 ] and studied the similarities . For the purpose of designing incentive systems that are based on users’ desires , this construct can suggest how likely the consistency between the solutions and hypotheses in different types of communities may be . This helps with so - called “decontextualization” [ 71 ] , where ideas and solutions can become detached from their creators and from the context in which they were originally created [ 72 ] . Moreover , the proposed categorization can be used to fine - grain further theoretical development by narrowing the focus of study . R EFERENCES [ 1 ] S . Lewis , et al . , " Thinking about Citizen Journalism : The Philosophical and Practical Challenges of User - Generated Content " , Journalism , vol . 4 , pp . 163 - 179 , 2010 . [ 2 ] C . K . Prahalad and V . Ramaswamy , " Co - Creation Experiences : The Next Practice in Value Creation " , Journal of interactive marketing , vol . 18 , pp . 5 - 14 , 2004 . [ 3 ] I . Blohm , et al . , " Absorptive capacity for open innovation communities - learnings from theory and practice " , in Academy of Management Annual Meeting , 2011 . [ 4 ] C . M . Chiu , et al . , " Understanding Knowledge Sharing in Virtual Communities : An Integration of Social Capital and Social 434 Cognitive Theories " , Decision Support Systems , vol . 42 , pp . 1872 - 1888 , 2006 . [ 5 ] S . L . Bryant , et al . , " Becoming Wikipedian : transformation of participation in a collaborative online encyclopedia " , in the International ACM Conference on Supporting Group Work ( SIGGROUP ) , Sanibel Island , FL , USA , 2005 , pp . 1 - 10 . [ 6 ] M . Parameswaran and A . B . Whinston , " Social computing : An overview " , Communications of the Association for Information Systems , vol . 19 , pp . 762 - 780 , 2007 . [ 7 ] D . M . Wilkinson , " Strong Regularities in Online Peer Production " , in the 9th ACM conference on Electronic commerce ( EC ) , Stanford , CA , USA , 2008 , pp . 302 - 309 . [ 8 ] B . Kim and I . Han , " The Role of Trust Belief and Its Antecedents in a Community Driven Knowledge Environment " , Journal of the American Society for Information Science and Technology , vol . 60 , pp . 1012 - 1026 , 2009 . [ 9 ] B . A . Huberman , " Social Media and the Paradox of Cooperation " , Hewlett - Packard Laboratories , Social Science Research Network2010 . [ 10 ] T . W . Malone , et al . , " The Collective Intelligence Genome " , IEEE Engineering Management Review , vol . 38 , p . 38 , 2010 . [ 11 ] J . Vassileva , " Motivating Participation In Social Computing Applications : A User Modeling Perspective " , User Modeling and User - Adapted Interaction , pp . 1 - 25 , 2012 . [ 12 ] G . von Krogh , et al . , " Carrots and Rainbows : Motivation and Social Practice in Open Source Software Development " , MIS Quarterly , vol . 36 , pp . 649 - 676 , 2012 . [ 13 ] F . Schwagereit , et al . , " Survey on Governance of User - generated Content in Web Communities " , in the ACM WebSci ' 11 , Koblenz , Germany , 2011 . [ 14 ] E . Yaari , et al . , " Information Quality Assessment of Community Generated Content : A User Study of Wikipedia " , Journal of Information Science , vol . 37 , pp . 487 - 498 , 2011 . [ 15 ] A . Iriberri and G . Leroy , " A Life - Cycle Perspective on Online Community Success " , ACM Computing Surveys ( CSUR ) , vol . 41 , pp . 11 : 1 - 11 : 29 , 2009 . [ 16 ] P . J . McKenzie , et al . , " User - Generated Online Content 1 : Overview , Current State and Context " , First Monday , vol . 17 , 4 June 2012 2012 . [ 17 ] R . E . Kraut and P . Resnick , Building Successful Online Communities : Evidence - Based Social Design : The MIT Press , 2011 . [ 18 ] B . Whitworth , " The Social Requirements of Technical Systems " , Handbook of Research on Socio - Technical Design and Social Networking Systems , vol . 3 , 2009 . [ 19 ] C . Danescu - Niculescu - Mizil , et al . , " No country for old members : User lifecycle and linguistic change in online communities " , in the 22nd International World Wide Web Conference ( WWW’13 ) , Rio de Janeiro , Brazil , 2013 . [ 20 ] P . Ziaie and H . Krcmar , " Open Production Communities : Generalized Design Dimensions and Attributes " , presented at the submitted to the International Conference on Information Systems ( ICIS ) , Milano , Italy , 2013 . [ 21 ] H . Rheingold , The Virtual Community : Finding Commection in a Computerized World : Addison - Wesley Longman Publishing Co . , Inc . Boston , MA , USA , 1993 . [ 22 ] D . Hinds and R . M . Lee , " Social Network Structure as a Critical Success Condition for Virtual Communities " , in the 41st Annual Hawaii International Conference on System Sciences , Hawaii , 2008 , p . 323 . [ 23 ] H . Li , " Virtual community studies : a literature review , synthesis and research agenda " , in the Americas Conference on Information System ( AMCIS ) , New York , USA , 2004 , pp . 16 - 18 . [ 24 ] A . Etzioni and O . Etzioni , " Face - to - Face and Computer - Mediated Communities , a Comparative Analysis " , The Information Society , vol . 15 , pp . 241 - 248 , 1999 . [ 25 ] P . Resnick and R . Zeckhauser , " Trust among strangers in Internet transactions : Empirical analysis of eBay ' s reputation system " , Advances in Applied Microeconomics : A Research Annual , vol . 11 , pp . 127 - 157 , 2002 . [ 26 ] J . Preece and D . Maloney - Krichmar , " Online communities : focusing on sociability and usability " , Handbook of Human - Computer Interaction , 2003 . [ 27 ] J . M . Leimeister and H . Krcmar , " Revisiting the virtual community business model " , 2004 . [ 28 ] P . Ziaie and H . Krcmar , " Introducing a Design Framework for Reputation Systems in Multi - Tier Production Communities " , Digital Creativity , special issue on Collaboration and Community , vol . 23 , pp . 144 - 157 , October 2012 2012 . [ 29 ] R . V . Kozinets , " E - tribalized marketing ? : The strategic implications of virtual communities of consumption " , European Management Journal , vol . 17 , pp . 252 - 264 , 1999 . [ 30 ] Y . Ren , et al . , " Applying Common Identity and Bond Theory to Design of Online Communities " , Organization Studies , vol . 28 , pp . 377 - 408 , 2007 . [ 31 ] P . Ziaie and H . Krcmar , " Content in Open Production Communities : Taxonomy and Construct " , in the International Conference on Computer Applications Technology ( ICCAT ) , Sousse , Tunisia , 2013 . [ 32 ] S . K . Shah , " Motivation , Governance & the Viability of Hybrid Forms in Open Source Software Development " , Management Science , vol . 52 , pp . 1000 – 1014 , 2006 . [ 33 ] K . Crowston , et al . , " Free / Libre open - source software development : What we know and what we do not know " , ACM Computer Survey , vol . 44 , pp . 1 - 35 , 2012 . [ 34 ] O . Nov , et al . , " Analysis Of Participation In An Online Photo Sharing Community : A Multidimensional Perspective " , Journal of the American Society for Information Science and Technology , vol . 61 , pp . 555 - 566 , 2010 . [ 35 ] K . Luther , et al . , " Why It Works ( When It Works ) : Success Factors in Online Creative Collaboration " , in the 16th ACM International Conference on Supporting Group Work ( GROUP ' 10 ) , Sanibel , FL , USA , 2010 , pp . 1 - 10 . [ 36 ] D . Gillmor , We the media : Grassroots journalism by the people , for the people : O ' Reilly Media , Incorporated , 2006 . [ 37 ] A . Bruns , Gatewatching : Collaborative Online News Production vol . 26 : Peter Lang Pub Inc , 2005 . [ 38 ] L . A . Adamic , et al . , " Knowledge sharing and yahoo answers : everyone knows something " , in the 17th International Conference on World Wide Web , Beijing , China , 2008 , pp . 665 - 674 . [ 39 ] C . Lampe , et al . , " Motivations to Participate in Online Communities " , in ACM Conference on Human Factors in 435 Computing Systems ( CHI ) , Atlanta , Georgia , USA , 2010 , pp . 1927 - 1936 . [ 40 ] S . Reiss , " Multifaceted Nature of Intrinsic Motivation : The Theory of 16 Basic Desires " , Review of General Psychology , vol . 8 , p . 179 , 2004 . [ 41 ] D . Ballou , et al . , " Modeling Information Manufacturing Systems to Determine Information Product Quality " , Management Science , pp . 462 - 484 , 1998 . [ 42 ] T . Olsson , " Understanding collective content : purposes , characteristics and collaborative practices " , in the Fourth International Conference on Communities and Technologies ( C & T ) , Pennsylvania , USA , 2009 , pp . 21 - 30 . [ 43 ] L . De Alfaro , et al . , " Reputation Systems for Open Collaboration " , Communications of the ACM , vol . 54 , pp . 81 - 87 , 2011 . [ 44 ] G . Fischer , " End - User Development and Meta - Design : Foundations for Cultures of Participation " , End - User Development , pp . 3 - 14 , 2009 . [ 45 ] A . J . Kim , Community Building on the Web : Secret Strategies for Successful Online Communities . Berkeley , CA : Peachpit Press , 2000 . [ 46 ] U . M . Dholakia , et al . , " A Social Influence Model of Consumer Participation in Network - And Small - Group - Based Virtual Communities " , International Journal of Research in Marketing , vol . 21 , pp . 241 - 263 , 2004 . [ 47 ] G . Meikle , Future Active : Media Activism and the Internet : Routledge , 2002 . [ 48 ] P . J . Bateman , et al . , " The Impact of Community Commitment on Participation in Online Communities " , Information Systems Research , vol . 22 , pp . 841 - 854 , 2011 . [ 49 ] U . Bretschneider , et al . , " Idea Generation in Virtual Communities for Innovation : The Influence of Participants ' Motivation on Idea Quality " , 2012 , pp . 3467 - 3479 . [ 50 ] P . M . Di Gangi and M . Wasko , " Steal my idea ! Organizational adoption of user innovations from a user innovation community : A case study of Dell IdeaStorm " , Decision Support Systems , vol . 48 , pp . 303 - 312 , 2009 . [ 51 ] M . J . Antikainen and H . K . Vaataja , " Rewarding in open innovation communities – how to motivate members " , International Journal of Entrepreneurship and Innovation Management , vol . 11 , pp . 440 - 456 , 2010 . [ 52 ] S . Belenzon and M . Schankerman , " Motivation and sorting in open source software innovation " , in Intellectual Property , Technology and Productivity , ed London : EDS Innovation Research Programme , 2008 . [ 53 ] J . Vassileva , " Motivating Participation in Peer to Peer Communities " , Engineering Societies in the Agents World III , pp . 18 - 23 , 2003 . [ 54 ] S . J . J . Tedjamulia , et al . , " Motivating Content Contributions to Online Communities : Toward a More Comprehensive Theory " , in the 38th Annual Hawaii International Conference on System Sciences ( HICSS ) , Hawaii 2005 , pp . 193b - 193b . [ 55 ] J . A . Roberts , et al . , " Understanding the Motivations , Participation , and Performance of Open Source Software Developers : A Longitudinal Study of the Apache Projects " , Management Science , pp . 984 - 999 , 2006 . [ 56 ] M . L . Maher , " Design creativity research : From the individual to the crowd " , Design creativity , 2010 . [ 57 ] O . Nov , " What motivates wikipedians ? " , Communications of the ACM , vol . 50 , pp . 60 - 64 , 2007 . [ 58 ] B . Choi , et al . , " Socialization tactics in wikipedia and their effects " , 2010 , pp . 107 - 116 . [ 59 ] K . Nemoto , et al . , " Social Capital Increases Efficiency of Collaboration among Wikipedia Editors " , in the 22nd ACM conference on Hypertext and hypermedia Eindhoven , The Netherlands , 2011 , pp . 231 - 240 . [ 60 ] Y . Chen , et al . , " Social comparisons and contributions to online communities : A field experiment on movielens " , The American economic review , vol . 100 , pp . 1358 - 1398 , 2010 . [ 61 ] G . Hsieh , et al . , " Why Pay ? : Exploring How Financial Incentives Are Used for Question & Answer " , in the 28th International Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems , Atlanta , GA , USA , 2010 , pp . 305 - 314 . [ 62 ] N . A . Van House , " Flickr and Public Image - Sharing : Distant Closeness and Photo Exhibition " , in CHI ' 07 Extended Abstracts on Human Factors in Computing Systems San Jose , CA , USA , 2007 , pp . 2717 - 2722 . [ 63 ] J . Van Dijck , " Users Like You ? Theorizing Agency in User - Generated Content " , Media , Culture & Society , vol . 31 , pp . 41 - 58 , 2009 . [ 64 ] B . S . Butler and X . Wang , " The Cross - Purposes of Cross - Posting : Boundary Reshaping Behavior in Online Discussion Communities " , Information Systems Research , vol . 23 , pp . 993 - 1010 , 2012 . [ 65 ] M . M . Wasko and S . Faraj , " Why Should I Share ? Examining Social Capital and Knowledge Contribution in Electronic Networks of Practice " , MIS Quarterly , vol . 29 , pp . 35 - 57 , 2005 . [ 66 ] A . Anderson , et al . , " Discovering value from community activity on focused question answering sites : a case study of stack overflow " , in the 18th ACM SIGKDD international conference on Knowledge discovery and data mining , 2012 , pp . 850 - 858 . [ 67 ] K . Frey , et al . , " Whom Should Firms Attract to Open Innovation Platforms ? The Role of Knowledge Diversity and Motivation " , Long Range Planning , 2011 . [ 68 ] O . Alexy and M . Leitner , " A Fistful of Dollars : Are Financial Rewards a Suitable Management Practice for Distributed Models of Innovation ? " , European Management Review , 2011 . [ 69 ] E . Enkel , et al . , " Open R & D and open innovation : exploring the phenomenon " , R & d Management , vol . 39 , pp . 311 - 316 , 2009 . [ 70 ] D . C . Brabham , " Moving the crowd at Threadless " , Information , Communication & Society , vol . 13 , pp . 1122 - 1145 , 2010 . [ 71 ] J . Hughes and K . Lang , " Transmutability : Digital decontextualization , manipulation , and recontextualization as a new source of value in the production and consumption of culture products " , in System Sciences , Proceedings of the 39th Annual Hawaii International Conference on , 2006 , pp . 165a - 165a . [ 72 ] S . Faraj , et al . , " Knowledge Collaboration in Online Communities " , Organization Science , vol . 22 , pp . 1224 - 1239 , 2011 . 436