Open Research Knowledge Graph : Towards Machine Actionability in Scholarly Communication Mohamad Yaser Jaradeh 1 [ 0000 − 0001 − 8777 − 2780 ] , Allard Oelen 1 [ 0000 − 0001 − 9924 − 9153 ] , Manuel Prinz 2 [ 0000 − 0003 − 2151 − 4556 ] , S¨oren Auer 2 , 1 [ 0000 − 0002 − 0698 − 2864 ] , Viktor Kovtun 1 , G´abor Kismih´ok 2 [ 0000 − 0003 − 3758 − 5455 ] , Jennifer D’Souza 2 [ 0000 − 0002 − 6616 − 9509 ] , and Markus Stocker 2 [ 0000 − 0001 − 5492 − 3212 ] 1 L3S Research Center , Leibniz University of Hannover , Germany { jaradeh , oelen , kovtun } @ l3s . de 2 TIB Leibniz Information Centre for Science and Technology , Germany { auer , manuel . prinz , gabor . kismihok , jennifer . dsouza , markus . stocker } @ tib . eu Abstract . Despite improved ﬁndability of and access to scientiﬁc knowl - edge in recent decades , scholarly communication continues to be document - based . Scientiﬁc knowledge remains locked in representations that are inadequate for machine processing . In this article , we present initial steps towards next generation digital libraries and infrastructures that acquire , curate , publish and process scholarly knowledge semantically , in machine readable form leveraging knowledge graphs . The primary contribution of this work is to present and discuss early developments of a system designed to crowdsource machine readable descriptions of research contributions published in scholarly articles and a knowledge graph infrastructure for description storage and access . We report on the results of a ﬁrst experimental evaluation of the concept and its imple - mentation with the participants of a recent international conference . The results suggest that users ﬁnd such a system useful , and the possibilities it could enable intriguing . Keywords : Scholarly Communication , Knowledge Graph , Digital Libraries , Research Infrastructure , Information Science 1 Introduction Documents are central to scholarly communication . Indeed , virtually all research ﬁndings are nowadays communicated by means of electronic scholarly articles . Unfortunately , scientiﬁc knowledge communicated in such form remains hardly accessible to computers . Text in articles can be indexed and exploited for search , but knowledge represented in form of natural language text , images , diagrams , tables , and mathematical formulae cannot be easily processed and analysed automatically . Indeed , the primary machine - supported tasks are largely limited to classic information retrieval , full - text search arguably being the key service . a r X i v : 1901 . 10816v2 [ c s . D L ] 29 A p r 2019 2 M . Y . Jaradeh et al . Current scientiﬁc knowledge curation , publishing and processing does not exploit modern information systems and technologies to their full potential [ 20 ] . The key issue is that digital scholarly articles are mere analogues of their print relatives . In the words of Van de Sompel and Lagoze [ 30 ] dating back to 2009 and earlier : “The current scholarly communication system is nothing but a scanned copy of the paper - based system . ” A further decade has gone by and the observation continues to be true . Print and digital media suﬀer from similar challenges . However , given the dramatic increase in output volume and travel velocity of modern research [ 7 ] as well as the advancements in information technologies achieved over the past decades , the challenges are more obvious and urgent today than at any time in the past . The communicated scientiﬁc knowledge remains as ambiguous and diﬃcult to reproduce in digital as it used to be in print . Moreover , given the overall increased complexity of research and societal challenges increasingly demanding solutions that rely on interdisciplinary research , individual articles no longer satisfactorily answer scientiﬁc questions as their answers are to be found in scientiﬁc discourse spanning often dozens and sometimes hundreds of increasingly interdisciplinary articles [ 1 ] . While citation does link articles , their contents are hardly interlinked and generally not machine actionable . As a result , processing the literature is a tedious , manual task . For instance , a literature review is time consuming even for senior researchers who are familiar with the specialized search keywords of their ﬁeld of research . For young researchers , this task is usually extremely frustrating as they are not as familiar with the specialized vocabulary [ 3 ] . Reviewing the literature of a diﬀerent but relevant discipline is generally of considerable diﬃculty for both early career and senior scientists . Document - based scholarly communication stands in stark contrast to the digital transformation seen in recent years in other information rich publishing and communication services [ 20 ] . Examples include encyclopedia , mail order cat - alogs , street maps or phone books . In these domains , traditional document - based publication was not just digitized but has seen the development of completely new means of information organization and access . Document - based mail order cata - logs were replaced by e - commerce services ( e . g . , Amazon ) with faceted browsing , ﬁltering , comparisons , recommendations among other features that were unthink - able in print . Similarly , street maps were replaced by navigation services ( e . g . , OpenStreetMap ) . The striking diﬀerence with scholarly communication is that these digital services are not mere digital versions of their print analogues but en - tirely novel approaches to information organization , access , sharing , collaborative generation and processing . Another striking diﬀerence between scientiﬁc informa - tion organization and the organization of , say , geospatial information by modern navigation services is that in the latter information is highly structured [ 17 ] and managed by databases or even knowledge bases . It is of course precisely these systems that enable the kind of information processing seen in these do - mains . Conversely , it is the lack of such systems in scholarly communication that continues to hinder modern scientiﬁc knowledge processing [ 16 ] . We argue that there is an urgent need for a more ﬂexible , ﬁne - grained , context sensitive and semantic ( i . e . , machine actionable ) representation of scientiﬁc knowl - Open Research Knowledge Graph 3 edge and thus corresponding infrastructure for knowledge curation , publishing and processing . Furthermore , we suggest that representing scientiﬁc knowledge as structured , interlinked , and semantically rich knowledge graphs is a key element of a technical infrastructure [ 5 ] . In this article , we describe the Open Research Knowledge Graph ( ORKG ) , an open project led by TIB Leibniz Information Centre for Science and Technology that aims to tackle the problem of machine actionability in scholarly communication . The ORKG builds on and expands the popular Semantic Web graph - based knowledge representation technologies to al - low for more ﬂexible annotations that enable versioning and tracking provenance . We detail our back - end and front - end ORKG implementations , and describe applications and services the ORKG enables and catalyses . Finally , we report on the results of a ﬁrst user evaluation conducted with authors at the 2018 edition of the International Conference on Data Integration in the Life Sciences ( DILS ) . 2 Problem Statement Current document - based scholarly communication does not allow to clearly identify concepts and their relationships or their instantiation . This results in ambiguities , since authors refer diﬀerently to the same concepts or use the same term for referring to varying concepts . Moreover , the characteristics of concepts or relationships between concepts are not deﬁned in a way that machines could eﬀectively support users ( e . g . , researchers ) in information processing . We illustrate the problem with an example from life sciences . When searching for publications on the popular Genome editing method CRISPR / Cas in scholarly search engines we obtain a vast amount of search results . Google Scholar , for example , returns more than 56 . 000 results , when searching for the search string ‘CRISPR Cas’ . Furthermore , research questions often require to join various keywords or search strings . Examples in the context of CRISPR / Cas include : ( 1 ) How good is CRISPR / Cas w . r . t . precision , safety , cost ? ( 2 ) How is genome editing applied to insects ? ( 3 ) Who has applied CRISPR / Cas to butterﬂies ? Even if we include the term ‘butterﬂy’ to the search query we still obtain more than 500 results , many of which are not relevant . Furthermore , relevant results might not be included ( e . g . , due to the fact that the technical term for butterﬂy is Lepidoptera , which combined with ‘CRISPR Cas’ returns 1 . 700 results ) . Finally , little about the returned scientiﬁc knowledge is machine readable : Human experts are required to further process the results . We argue that keyword - based information retrieval and document - based results no longer adequately meets the requirements of modern scholarly commu - nication and processing of scientiﬁc knowledge in the digital age . Furthermore , we suggest that automated techniques to identify concepts in text as well as their relationships , despite decades of research , do not and unlikely will reach a suﬃciently high accuracy for useful applications . Research question . This article is a ﬁrst attempt to tackle the following research question : “Are authors willing to contribute structured descriptions of the key research contribution published in their articles using a ﬁt - for - purpose system , and what is the user acceptance of the system ? ” This question is important 4 M . Y . Jaradeh et al . in that it tests the feasibility of crowdsourcing such descriptions from authors , readers and possibly other stakeholders . 3 Related Work Representing encyclopedic and factual knowledge is increasingly feasible . This is underscored by knowledge graphs such as Wikidata [ 32 ] , domain - speciﬁc knowledge graphs [ 11 ] as well as industrial initiatives at Google , IBM , Bing , BBC , Thomson Reuters , Springer Nature , among others . In the context of scholarly communication and its operational infrastructure , including digital libraries , the focus has so far been on representing , managing and linking metadata about articles , people , data and other relevant entities . The Research Graph [ 4 ] is a prominent example of an eﬀort that aims to link publications , datasets , and researchers . The Scholix project [ 9 ] , driven by a corresponding Research Data Alliance working group and associated organizations , standardized the information about the links between scholarly literature and data exchanged among publishers , data repositories , and infrastructures such as DataCite , Crossref , OpenAIRE , and PANGAEA . The Research Objects [ 6 ] project proposed a machine - readable abstract structure that relates the products of a research investigation , including articles , data and other research artifacts . The RMap Project [ 19 ] aims at preserving “the many - to - many complex relationships among scholarly publications and their underlying data . ” Sadeghi et al . [ 29 ] proposed to integrate bibliographic metadata in a knowledge graph . Some initiatives such as the Semantic Publishing and Referencing ( SPAR ) Ontologies [ 27 ] and the Journal Article Tag Suite extended the representation to document structure and more ﬁne - grained elements , in addition to bibliographic metadata . Others proposed comprehensive conceptual models for scientiﬁc knowl - edge that capture problems , methods , theories , statements , concepts and their relations [ 20 , 13 , 8 , 26 ] . Fathalla et al . [ 15 ] proposed to semantically represent key ﬁndings of survey articles by describing research problems , approaches , im - plementations and evaluations . Natural Language Processing based Semantic Scholar [ 2 ] and the Machine Learning focused paperswithcode . com are related systems . Key distinguishing aspects among these systems and the ORKG are the granularity of captured knowledge ( speciﬁcally , article bibliographic metadata vs . the materials and methods used and results achieved in published research ) and the methods used to acquire knowledge ( speciﬁcally , automated techniques in machine learning or crowdsourcing ) . There has been some work on enriching documents with semantic annotations . Examples include Dokie . li [ 10 ] , RASH [ 28 ] or MicroPublications [ 12 ] for HTML and SALT [ 18 ] for L A TEX . Other eﬀorts focused on developing ontologies for rep - resenting scholarly knowledge in speciﬁc domains , for example , mathematics [ 25 ] . A knowledge graph for science as proposed here must build , integrate and further advance these and other related eﬀorts and , most importantly , translate what has been proposed so far in relatively isolated prototypes into operational and sustained scholarly infrastructure . Open Research Knowledge Graph 5 Fig . 1 . Schematic representation of the ORKG layered architecture . Greyed - out boxes show planned extensions . 4 Open Research Knowledge Graph We propose to leverage knowledge graphs to represent knowledge communicated in scholarly literature . We call this knowledge graph the Open Research Knowledge Graph ( ORKG , http : / / orkg . org ) . Crucially , the proposed knowledge graphs do not merely contain ( bibliographic ) metadata ( e . g . , about authors , confer - ences , references ) but semantic ( i . e . , machine readable / actionable ) descriptions of research contributions . The concept of ResearchContribution is central to the ORKG as it rep - resents core knowledge communicated in scholarly literature in structured and machine readable form . A ResearchContribution is a machine readable infor - mation object that relates the ResearchProblem addressed by the contribution with ResearchMethod and ( at least one ) ResearchResult . Since they are crowd - sourced , we currently do not further constrain the description of these resources . 4 . 1 Knowledge Storage and Retrieval : ORKG Back - End ResearchContribution descriptions are represented by the ORKG back - end by means of a graph data model . Similarly to RDF , the data model is thus centered around the concept of a statement , a triple consisting of two nodes ( resources ) connected by a directed edge . In contrast to RDF , it allows annotating edges and statements . As metadata of statements , provenance information is a concrete and relevant application of such annotation . Provenance information include when and by whom a statement was created . From an architectural perspective , the design follows a classical layered architecture with ports and adapters ( “hexagonal architecture” ) . As depicted in Figure 1 , the persistence layer abstracts the storage layer and is thus able to handle Linked Property Graphs ( LPG ) such as Neo4j or triple stores , and 6 M . Y . Jaradeh et al . potentially other storage systems . The domain layer holds the domain objects , i . e . , statements , resources , and literals . The application layer is responsible for the application logic , in particular the REST API . Building on the other layers , the user interface ( front - end ) is responsible for the creation , curation , display and exploration of research contributions . The back - end is written in Kotlin [ 24 ] , within the Spring Boot 2 framework . The data is stored in a Neo4j graph database accessed by the application via the Spring Data Neo4j’s Object Graph Mapper ( OGM ) . Data can be queried using Cypher , Neo4j’s native query language . We plan to add SPARQL support by building on a query algebra for graph data and the existing implementation for the Gremlin graph query language [ 31 ] . The back - end is exposed via a JSON RESTful API to be used by applications , including the ORKG user interface . A technical documentation of the current API speciﬁcation is available online at tib . eu / c28v . Users will be able to authenticate using single sign - on ( SSO ) , e . g . , with ORCID . This allows us to implement role management . Data can be exported to RDF via the Neo4j Semantics extension 3 . Due to the diﬀerences between our graph model and RDF , a “semantiﬁcation” needs to occur . Most importantly , the ORKG back - end auto - generates URIs . Mapping ( or changing ) these URIs to an existing ontology must be done manually . The Semantics extension also allows importing RDF data and ontologies ( vocabularies ) . However , only a subset of OWL is supported . In order to enrich ORKG data , we support linking to data from other sources . Of concrete interest are systems that collect , curate and publish bibliographic metadata or data about entities relevant to scholarly communication , such as people and organizations . Rather than collecting bibliographic metadata ourselves we thus aim to link and integrate with relevant systems ( e . g . , DataCite , Crossref ) and their data via identiﬁers such as DOI , ORCID , or ISNI . 4 . 2 Knowledge Curation and Exploration : ORKG Front - End The ORKG front - end ( user interface ) is a tool for researchers and digital librarians among other users and enables interacting with the underlying knowledge graph . It supports searching , browsing , creating and modifying research contributions and was built with the following two key requirements in mind : ( 1 ) Usability : Enable authors across disciplines to use the system ; and ( 2 ) Dynamicity : Enable users to control data curation with a maximum degree of freedom ( e . g . , freely describe the research problem or results ) . Its design was inspired by the Wikidata project – the central community - created data management platform of Wikipedia [ 32 , 14 ] . The goal of the user interface is to provide users with a wizard that guides them in creating graph - based representations of research contributions . The user interface is written in compliance with the ES6 standard of JavaScript using the React 4 framework . The Bootstrap 5 framework is used for responsive HTML design and user interface components . 3 https : / / github . com / jbarrasa / neosemantics 4 https : / / reactjs . org / 5 https : / / getbootstrap . com Open Research Knowledge Graph 7 Fig . 2 . Snapshot of a part of the user interface details page , showing the resource describing the Quick Sort algorithm , some of its properties and linked resources . When users create research contributions , they can provide a Crossref DOI . This facilitates automatic linking of the new research contribution with relevant bibliographic metadata . The user can then describe the research contribution by adding new properties or selecting properties from a list with auto - completion . Properties are linked to resources , either a newly created one or one that already exists in the graph . Is , say , a research problem already described , it can be reused by linking the new research contribution to the existing research problem . Furthermore , the user can edit values of the created research contribution , at the resource or predicate level . The curation aspect of the system relies on the dynamicity requirement of the user interface to provide a dynamic environment that enables collecting all possible information about research contributions . Figure 2 exemplary shows selected attributes of the “Quick Sort” algorithm research contribution with the possibility to edit the information and add new values . To support exploring research contributions , the user interface allows for listing available resources . Each ORKG resource is an entity that can be explored for its predicates and linked resources . Furthermore , for quick resource access , the user interface supports searching for any resource or predicate via labels . The relationships are displayed in statement form ( subject - predicate - object ) . 5 Evaluation To address our research question , we conducted a user evaluation . Following a qualitative approach , we aimed to determine user performance , identify major ( positive and negative ) aspects , and user acceptance / perception of the system . The evaluation process had two components : ( 1 ) Instructed interaction with the system and ( 2 ) a short evaluation questionnaire . 8 M . Y . Jaradeh et al . 5 . 1 Instructed User Interactions and Questionnaire We conducted instructed interaction sessions with 12 authors of articles presented at the 13th International Conference on Data Integration in the Life Sciences 2018 ( DILS2018 ) 6 . The aim of these interactions was to get ﬁrst - hand observations and comments on our approach and system . The interaction sessions were conducted with the support of two instructors . At the start of each session , the instructor brieﬂy ( 2 minutes ) explained the underlying principles of the system , including how the system works and what is required from the author to complete the task , i . e . create a structured description of the key research contribution in her article . Then , participants engaged with the system without any further guidance from the instructor . However , at any time they could ask the instructor for assistance . For each participant , we recorded the time required to complete the task , the instructor’s notes , and the participant’s comments . Time was recorded to determine the mean duration of a session . In addition to the instructed interaction sessions , participants were invited to complete a short evaluation questionnaire . The questionnaire is available online [ 23 ] . Its aim was to collect further insights into how users experienced the system . Since the collected data was insuﬃcient to establish any correlational or causal relationship [ 21 ] , the questionnaire was treated as a qualitative instrument . The paper - based questionnaire consisted of 11 questions . These were designed to complement participant reactions following their instructed interaction session , so that they could reﬂect on the positive and negative aspects of the system . Participants completed their questionnaire after the instructed interaction session . All 12 participants answered the questionnaire . The interaction notes , participants’ comments and the time recordings were collected together with questionnaire responses and analysed in light of our research question . 5 . 2 Results A dataset summarizing the research contributions collected in the experiment is available online [ 22 ] . The data is grouped into four main categories . Research Problem describes the main question or issue addressed by the research contri - bution . Participants used a variety of properties to describe the problem , e . g . problem , addresses , focus , subject , proposes , and topic . Approach describes the solution taken by the authors . Properties used included approach , uses , prospec - tive work , method , focus , and algorithm . Implementation & Evaluation were the most comprehensively described aspects , arguably because it is easier for participants to describe technical details compared to describing the problem or the approach . In summary , 75 % of the participants found the user interface fairly intuitive and easy to use . Among the participants , 80 % needed guidance only at the beginning while 10 % did not need guidance . The time required to complete the task was 17 minutes in average , with a minimum of 13 minutes and a maximum of 22 minutes . Five out of twelve participants suggested to make 6 https : / / www . springer . com / de / book / 9783030060152 Open Research Knowledge Graph 9 Table 1 . Overview of answers to the key aspects covered by the evaluation questionnaire . ParticipantNr Nav - igation Term - inology Auto Complete GuidanceNeeded SuggestToOthers UI likeness Time 5 = Very intuitive 5 = Easy to understand 5 = Very helpful 5 = All the time 9 = Verylikely 9 = Verymuch in mins 1 4 4 5 3 2 6 16 2 2 3 5 4 8 7 19 3 4 5 5 3 9 7 15 4 3 3 5 3 6 7 13 5 4 3 5 3 6 8 14 6 4 3 5 3 8 9 13 7 3 4 5 3 7 6 19 8 3 2 4 3 8 6 13 9 4 5 3 3 7 5 14 10 4 5 5 1 8 8 22 11 4 5 5 1 8 8 20 12 - - - - - - 21 Average 4 4 5 3 7 7 17 the user interface more keyboard - friendly to ease the addition of new research contributions . As participant # 3 stated : “More description in advance can be helpful . ” Two participants commented that the navigation process throughout the system is complicated for ﬁrst - time users and suggested alternative approaches . As an example , participant # 5 suggested to “Use breadcrumbs to navigate . ” Four participants wished for a visualization ( i . e . , graph chart ) to be available when creating new research contributions . For instance , participant # 1 com - mented that “It could be helpful to show a local view of the graph while editing . ” This type of visualisation could facilitate comprehension and ease curation . An - other participant suggested to integrate a document ( PDF ) viewer and highlight relevant passages or phrases . Participant # 4 noted that “If I could highlight the passages directly in the paper and add predicates there , it would be more intuitive and save time . ” Two participants commented on the use of a controlled vocabulary to guide the process . A vocabulary would make the process more ﬂuent and intuitive . Participant # 6 suggested to “show an overview of the existing ontology to avoid a lot of new properties and objects . ” Further details of the questionnaire , including participant ratings on main issues , are summarized in Table 1 . While the cohort of participants was too small for statistically signiﬁcant conclusions , these results still provide a number of important suggestions for the further development of the ORKG , especially on aspects of the user interface and the interaction with the system in general . 6 Discussion We model scientiﬁc knowledge communicated in the scholarly literature following the abstract concept of ResearchContribution . As presented above , its class description is minimalist . This is especially true if compared to some conceptual models of scientiﬁc knowledge that can be found in the literature , e . g . the one by Hars [ 20 ] . While comprehensive models are surely appealing to information systems , e . g . for the applications they may enable , we think that populating a database with a comprehensive conceptual model is a signiﬁcant challenge , 10 M . Y . Jaradeh et al . one that to the best of our knowledge remains unaddressed . Conscious of this challenge , for the time being we opted for a minimalist model with lower barriers for content creation . The Semantic Web is arguably an adequate scaﬀold for representing scholarly knowledge . However , aspects such as provenance , evolution , and discourse are more diﬃcult to represent using RDF . We suggest that a knowledge graph for science must extend the triple ( or quad ) RDF data model . A further and more fundamental concern is the granularity with which scientiﬁc knowledge can be captured , beyond which the problem becomes intractable . How graph data management techniques can be employed to represent and manage granular and large amounts of interconnected scholarly knowledge is another open issue . A RDF representation of the primary research contribution of this article can be found online [ 22 ] . With this ﬁrst study and user evaluation of the ORKG , we were able to scrutinize multiple aspects of the system and obtain data and feedback on user interaction , experience and system acceptance . Our results show that the system meets key requirements : it is relatively easy to use and users can fully control the creation and curation of research contribution descriptions . The results of the questionnaire ( Table 1 ) show that with the exception of Guidance , all aspects were evaluated above average ( i . e . , positively ) . The results thus suggest that Guidance is not needed , reinforcing the usability requirement of the user interface . All case study participants displayed an interest in the ORKG and provided valuable input on what should be changed , added , or removed . Furthermore , participants suggested to integrate the system with ( digital ) libraries , universities , and other institutions . Based on these preliminary ﬁndings , we suggest that ( given instruction ) authors are willing to provide structured descriptions of the key contribution published in their articles . The feasibility of crowdsourcing such descriptions at large scale needs further evaluations . The evaluation suggested that 80 % of the participants needed guidance before they were able to create their research contribution . The task should thus be more intuitive . The following features are currently being developed in order to address this and other aspects . These features will be evaluated with authors of a future conference . New concepts . As ‘statement’ has so far been the central concept of the ORKG graph - based data model , the user interface presented and evaluated here makes no explicit distinction between concepts . We are now introducing key concepts , speciﬁcally research contribution and its related concepts ( problem , method , results ) . Distinguishing these concepts will guide users in both creating and browsing knowledge . As suggested in the evaluation by participant # 5 , for browsing we adopt a breadcrumb like navigation . Create research contribution wizard . A new multi - step wizard further guides users when creating new research contributions . Figure 3 depicts step three of the new wizard . In contrast to the previous wizard ( Figure 2 ) , some information is now required from users . For example , each research contribution must address at least one research problem . In addition to guiding information entry , the new interface also suggests information . Speciﬁcally , users are prompted to enter Open Research Knowledge Graph 11 Fig . 3 . Step three of the create research contribution wizard in the new user interface design . problem , method and results of research contributions . Known values ( e . g . , for problem ) are presented and can be selected . Users can decide to select this information and / or add other information . System suggestions help users in entering the most important information and aim at reducing the heterogeneity of terms used to describe the same concept . Conceptual zones . In order to support and guide information entering , we are working on a user interface feature that identiﬁes and displays relevant conceptual zones in the text of the linked article . Speciﬁcally , when a user enters information about , say , the problem addressed by the research contribution then the interface will present problem - related text extracted from the article . This feature should help entering information , possibly by enabling users to simply highlight the relevant part in the text . State - of - the - art comparisons . The possibility to easily perform state - of - the - art comparisons in a domain of research is a key motivation for this work . Speciﬁcally , we are working on features that will support comparing research contributions and raking them by similarity . As an example , Figure 4 depicts comparing Quick Sort to other contributions known to the system . Updated design . We updated the user interface design with improved color schema and overall user experience in order to meet usability requirements of users that are not familiar with knowledge graphs technology , i . e . the majority of researchers . Textual explanations . As participant # 3 commented , more explanations would be helpful . The new user interface improves on this aspect by introducing tooltips . They are shown next to input ﬁelds or select options to explain the terminology and the expected information from users . Moreover , the interface now provides 12 M . Y . Jaradeh et al . Fig . 4 . State - of - the - art comparison between “Quick Sort” and other research contribu - tions known to the system . a short introduction text on the main page with more detailed information on a dedicated about page . Such additional information and explanation elements help users to get started without individualized guidance . With the upcoming release of the ORKG alpha system , interested parties will be able to use and test the infrastructure . This release will catalyze collect - ing feedback on features early and allow for the project to be guided by the requirements of its users . Due to the experimental and fast - changing nature of the project , it is vital to provide technical documentation to interested developers . We will also provide an easy way to download and run the ORKG infrastructure for local experiments , e . g . , as a Docker image . This will allow interested parties to get a ﬁrst glance at the technology and should spark further interest to con - tribute to the project . For an in - depth explanation of the ORKG architecture and technology used , written documentation and developers communication boards will be provided on an open Git platform . 7 Conclusion This article describes initial steps of a larger research and development agenda , called Open Research Knowledge Graph , that aims to transition scholarly commu - nication from document - based to knowledge - based information representation . In others words , we aim to bring scholarly communication to the technical standards of the 21st century and the age of modern digital libraries . We presented a ﬁrst prototypical implementation of the system , in particular the user interface , which provides the following core features : creating and curating research contributions and their exploration and retrieval . We performed an initial evaluation of the concept and implementation with the participants of the recent DILS2018 con - ference . Surely , much work lies ahead for the ORKG . Among the several ongoing and future activities discussed , we also aim to scale the user evaluations to larger venues , communities in diverse research areas , and reﬁne the authoring , curation and exploration techniques . Open Research Knowledge Graph 13 Acknowledgement The authors would like to thank the participants of the ORKG workshop series , for their contributions to ORKG developments . We also like to thank our colleagues Kemele M . Endris who coined the DILS experiment as well as Arthur Brack and Anett Hoppe for their work on conceptual zoning . References 1 . Alrøe , H . F . , Noe , E . : Second - order science of interdisciplinary research : A polyocular framework for wicked problems . Constructivist Foundations 10 ( 1 ) , 65 – 76 ( 2014 ) 2 . Ammar , W . , Groeneveld , D . , Bhagavatula , C . , Beltagy , I . , Crawford , M . , Downey , D . , Dunkelberger , J . , Elgohary , A . , Feldman , S . , Ha , V . , Kinney , R . , Kohlmeier , S . , Lo , K . , Murray , T . , Ooi , H . , Peters , M . E . , Power , J . , Skjonsberg , S . , Wang , L . L . , Wilhelm , C . , Yuan , Z . , van Zuylen , M . , Etzioni , O . : Construction of the literature graph in semantic scholar . CoRR abs / 1805 . 02262 ( 2018 ) 3 . Armstrong , J . S . : Peer review for journals : Evidence on quality control , fairness , and innovation . Science and Engineering Ethics 3 ( 1 ) , 63 – 84 ( mar 1997 ) 4 . Aryani , A . , Wang , J . : Research Graph : Building a Distributed Graph of Scholarly Works using Research Data Switchboard . In : Open Repositories CONFERENCE ( 2017 ) 5 . Auer , S . , Kovtun , V . , Prinz , M . , Kasprzik , A . , Stocker , M . , Vidal , M . E . : Towards a knowledge graph for science . In : Proceedings of the 8th International Conference on Web Intelligence , Mining and Semantics . p . 1 . ACM ( 2018 ) 6 . Bechhofer , S . , De Roure , D . , Gamble , M . , Goble , C . , Buchan , I . : Research objects : Towards exchange and reuse of digital knowledge . IRCDL ( 2010 ) 7 . Bornmann , L . , Mutz , R . : Growth rates of modern science : A bibliometric analysis based on the number of publications and cited references . Journal of the Association for Information Science and Technology 66 ( 11 ) , 2215 – 2222 ( 2015 ) 8 . Boyan , B . , Femke , R . , Yi , Q . : Skiing with dolce : toward an e - science knowledge infrastructure . Frontiers in Artiﬁcial Intelligence and Applications 183 ( Formal Ontology in Information Systems ) , 208 – 219 ( 2008 ) 9 . Burton , A . , Koers , H . , Manghi , P . , Stocker , M . , Fenner , M . , Aryani , A . , Bruzzo , S . L . , Diepenbroek , M . , Schindler , U . : The Scholix Framework for Interoperability in Data - Literature Information Exchange . D - Lib Magazine Volume 23 ( 1 / 2 ) ( 2017 ) 10 . Capadisli , S . , Guy , A . , Verborgh , R . , Lange , C . , Auer , S . , Berners - Lee , T . : De - centralised Authoring , Annotations and Notiﬁcations for a Read - Write Web with dokieli . In : International Conference on Web Engineering . pp . 469 – 481 ( 2017 ) 11 . Cheatham , M . , Krisnadhi , A . , Amini , R . , Hitzler , P . , Janowicz , K . , Shepherd , A . , Narock , T . , Jones , M . , Ji , P . : The GeoLink knowledge graph . Big Earth Data 2 ( 2 ) , 131 – 143 ( 2018 ) 12 . Clark , T . , Ciccarese , P . N . , Goble , C . A . : Micropublications : a semantic model for claims , evidence , arguments and annotations in biomedical communications . Journal of Biomedical Semantics 5 ( 1 ) ( 2014 ) 13 . De Waard , A . , Breure , L . , Kircz , J . G . , Van Oostendorp , H . : Modeling rhetoric in scientiﬁc publications . In : International Conference on Multidisciplinary Information Sciences and Technologies , InSciT2006 ( 2006 ) 14 . Erxleben , F . , G¨unther , M . , Kr¨otzsch , M . , Mendez , J . , Vrandeˇci´c , D . : Introducing wikidata to the linked data web . In : International Semantic Web Conference . pp . 50 – 65 . Springer ( 2014 ) 14 M . Y . Jaradeh et al . 15 . Fathalla , S . , Vahdati , S . , Auer , S . , Lange , C . : Towards a Knowledge Graph Rep - resenting Research Findings by Semantifying Survey Articles . In : Research and Advanced Technology for Digital Libraries . pp . 315 – 327 ( 2017 ) 16 . Fry , J . : Scholarly research and information practices : a domain analytic approach . Information Processing & Management 42 ( 1 ) , 299 – 316 ( jan 2006 ) 17 . Fu , G . , Jones , C . B . , Abdelmoty , A . I . : Building a geographical ontology for intelligent spatial search on the web . In : Hamza , M . H . ( ed . ) Databases and Applications . pp . 167 – 172 . IASTED / ACTA Press ( 2005 ) 18 . Groza , T . , Handschuh , S . , M¨oller , K . , Decker , S . : SALT - Semantically Annotated LaTeX for Scientiﬁc Publications . In : Extended Semantic Web Conference . pp . 518 – 32 ( 2007 ) 19 . Hanson , K . L . , DiLauro , T . , Donoghue , M . : The RMap Project : Capturing and Pre - serving Associations Amongst Multi - Part Distributed Publications . In : Proceedings of the 15th ACM / IEEE - CE JCDL . pp . 281 – 282 . ACM ( 2015 ) 20 . Hars , A . : Designing scientiﬁc knowledge infrastructures : The contribution of episte - mology . Information Systems Frontiers 3 ( 1 ) , 63 – 73 ( 2001 ) 21 . Jansen , H . : The Logic of Qualitative Survey Research and its Position in the Field of Social Research Methods . Forum Qualitative Sozialforschung / Forum : Qualitative Social Research 11 ( 2 ) ( 2010 ) 22 . Jaradeh , M . Y . , Oelen , A . , Kovtun , V . , Prinz , M . , Kismih´ok , G . , D´Souza , J . , Stocker , M . , Auer , S . : TPDL 2019 , ORKG overview resources ( Jan 2019 ) , https : / / doi . org / 10 . 5281 / zenodo . 2652177 23 . Jaradeh , M . Y . , S¨oren , A . , Prinz , M . , Kovtun , V . , Kismih´ok , G . , Stocker , M . : Orkg data curation & user interaction survey ( Jan 2019 ) , https : / / doi . org / 10 . 5281 / zenodo . 2549918 24 . JetBrains : The Kotlin programming language ( 2011 ) , https : / / kotlinlang . org / 25 . Lange , C . : Ontologies and languages for representing mathematical knowledge on the Semantic Web . Semantic Web 4 ( 2 ) , 119 – 158 ( 2013 ) 26 . Meister , V . G . : Towards a Knowledge Graph for a Research Group with Focus on Qualitative Analysis of Scholarly Papers . In : Proceedings of the First Workshop on Enabling Open Semantic Science co - located with 16th International Semantic Web Conference ( ISWC 2017 ) . pp . 71 – 76 ( 2017 ) 27 . Peroni , S . : The Semantic Publishing and Referencing Ontologies . In : Semantic Web Technologies and Legal Scholarly Publishing , Law , Governance and Technology , vol . 15 , pp . 121 – 193 . Springer , Cham ( 2014 ) 28 . Peroni , S . , Osborne , F . , Iorio , A . D . , Nuzzolese , A . G . , Poggi , F . , Vitali , F . , Motta , E . : Research Articles in Simpliﬁed HTML : a Web - ﬁrst format for HTML - based scholarly articles . PeerJ Computer Science 3 , e132 ( 2017 ) 29 . Sadeghi , A . , Lange , C . , Vidal , M . E . , Auer , S . : Integration of Scholarly Communica - tion Metadata Using Knowledge Graphs . In : Research and Advanced Technology for Digital Libraries . pp . 328 – 341 ( 2017 ) 30 . de Sompel , H . V . , Lagoze , C . : All aboard : toward a machine - friendly scholarly communication system . In : The Fourth Paradigm ( 2009 ) 31 . Thakkar , H . , Punjani , D . , Lehmann , J . , Auer , S . : Two for one : querying property graph databases using SPARQL via gremlinator . In : Arora , A . , Bhattacharya , A . , Fletcher , G . H . L . , Larriba - Pey , J . , Roy , S . , West , R . ( eds . ) Proceedings of the 1st ACM SIGMOD Joint International Workshop on Graph Data Management Experiences & Systems ( GRADES ) and Network Data Analytics ( NDA ) , Houston , TX , USA , June 10 , 2018 . pp . 12 : 1 – 12 : 5 . ACM ( 2018 ) 32 . Vrandeˇci´c , D . , Kr¨otzsch , M . : Wikidata : A Free Collaborative Knowledgebase . Com - munications of the ACM 57 ( 10 ) , 78 – 85 ( 2014 )