132 Introduction The traditional view is that bone modeling and remodeling are regulated by autocrine / paracrine and hormonal mecha - nisms . However , recent work suggests the influence of higher integrating neuronal pathways . The most striking evidence for a role of the nervous system in the control of bone remod - eling is the demonstration that the fat - derived hormone lep - tin controls bone formation through a hypothalamic relay . Leptin - deficient mice have an increased bone formation leading to high bone mass , and leptin binding to its hypothal - amic receptor is sufficient to induce bone loss by decreasing osteoblastic function 1 . Interestingly , these central effects of leptin on bone were recently shown to be mediated via the sympathetic nervous system 2 . Similarly , Y2 receptors - defi - cient mice have a two - fold increase in trabecular bone vol - ume compared to control mice , and intracerebroventricular administration of neuropeptide Y also causes bone loss 3 . Skeletal innervation Recent immunocytochemistry studies have shown a dense innervation of bone 4 - 6 . These nerve fibers are primary affer - ent sensory and sympathetic fibers that are frequently asso - ciated with blood vessels . Nerve fibers are present in perios - teum , bone marrow and mineralized bone , the periosteum receiving the densest sensory innervation . In cortical bone , nerve fibers run within the Haversian and Volkmann’s canals . Sensory and sympathetic nerve fibers are abundant along the epiphyseal trabecules facing the growth plate and in the metaphysis of long bones . They form dense parallel networks of thin nerve processes running along vessels at very close proximity to bone and bone marrow cells . Although no typical synapses were observed between nerve endings and bone cells , direct contact of nerve fibers and bone cells were demonstrated , strongly supporting a role of innervation in bone cells functions . Neuromediators Several neuromediators have been identified in bone by immunocytochemistry and quantitative assessments in extracts of bone tissues using radioimmunoassays 7 , 8 . They include a number of neuropeptides , such as vasoactive intes - tinal polypeptide ( VIP ) , calcitonin gene - related peptide ( CGRP ) , pituitary adenylate cyclase activating peptides ( PACAP ) , neuropeptide Y , substance P ( SP ) , as well as clas - sical neuromediators such as noradrenaline , serotonin and glutamate . Immunolocalizations of these neurotransmitters in skeletal nerve fivers were demonstrated . For most of these neuromediators , receptors on bone cells have been identified and several in vitro studies have shown that these receptors are functional and can affect osteoclast and osteoblast activities 7 , 8 . J Musculoskel Neuron Interact 2004 ; 4 ( 2 ) : 132 - 134 Role of innervation in the control of bone remodeling C . Chenu Royal Veterinary College , London , UK Abstract During the last fifteen years , an increasing number of studies have examined the origin , the ontogeny , and the distribution of nerve fibers in bone . They have also investigated the nature of neuromediators conveyed by these skeletal nerve fibers . Experimental models of sensory and sympathetic denervation and clinical studies have shown that these two neuronal systems are involved in bone development , growth and remodeling . More recently , some new concepts regarding the role of nerve fibers in bone physiology have emerged with the demonstration of a leptin - dependent central control of bone formation via the sympathetic system . This new neural regulating pathway of bone cell functions could have enormous implications for human skeletal biology and treatment of bone pathologies . Keywords : Innervation , Neuromediators , Bone Remodeling , Sympathetic Nervous System Perspective Article Hylonome The author has no conflict of interest . Corresponding author : Chantal Chenu , Ph . D . , Royal Veterinary College , Lon - don , Royal College Street , London NW1 0TU , UK E - mail : cchenu @ rvc . ac . uk Accepted 28 May 2004 C . Chenu : Innervation and bone remodeling 133 Bone modeling and remodeling are controlled by the nervous system There is an increasing body of evidence that the nervous system participates in skeletal development and bone turnover . In addition to the demonstration of a leptin - dependent central control of bone formation , several dener - vation experiments have indicated that nerve fibers control bone cell functions . Those studies have shown that develop - mental skeletal growth in the rat foot is reduced after dener - vation 9 , and that chemical and surgical denervations of sym - pathetic and / or sensory nerves modulate the number of bone - resorbing osteoclasts 10 , 11 . The role of the sympathetic nervous system in controlling bone resorption is not com - pletely understood as sympathectomy may also induce changes in neuromediator - containing skeletal nerve fibers 12 . Clinical studies have also indicated that spinal cord injury is associated with the development of a rapid and severe osteo - porosis that is not only due to a compromised biomechanical function but can have a neurological origin 13 . Changes in skeletal innervation were demonstrated in various skeletal pathobiological conditions , such as osteoarthritis , hetero - topic bone formation and fracture repair , suggesting that nerve fibers are actively involved in situations of unbalanced bone resorption and formation . We have recently shown that ovariectomy - induced bone loss in rat tibiae is associated with a reduction of skeletal nerve fibers density , suggesting that neural regulation may play a role in the bone loss observed after ovariectomy 14 . Direct or indirect effects of the nervous system on bone cells Signaling molecules in skeletal nerve fibers may be involved in the regulation of bone cell activity directly through receptors expressed by bone cells or indirectly through the regulation of the skeletal blood flow . Although blood vessels - unrelated nerves and free nerve endings are present in bone , nerve fibers are indeed frequently associat - ed with blood vessels , and it is well known in many tissues that neuromediators conveyed by the sympathetic nervous system control blood flow . The studies that were conducted to investigate blood flow changes in bone and periosteum in vivo have however not shown any consistent effect of the sympathetic nerves on blood flow in this tissue 15 . It is also possible that neuromediators released by nerve fibers con - trol bone cell functions indirectly though the regulation of cytokines expression by cells of the immune system . Neural hypothesis of bone mechanical strain - adaptive response There is an intriguing paradox between the central control of bone remodeling proposed by Karsenty’s group 1 , 2 and bone adaptive response to its local mechanical environment . It is well known that the most important property of bone that controls its normal remodeling is its adaptation to the strain environment , increased mechanical loads stimulating bone formation while bone disuse inducing a rapid bone loss . The classical view is that bone adaptation to mechani - cal loading is only under local and systemic influences . Hert et al . have indeed demonstrated that innervated and dener - vated limbs react to intermittent loading in the same way 16 , and other groups have shown that bone explants and isolat - ed bone cells are sensitive to mechanical stimuli , excluding a role for central connections 17 , 18 . The demonstration that bone formation is centrally controlled challenges this view . The hypothesis that innervation may contribute to the bone response to mechanical stress is supported by a very dense innervation of the periosteum and trabecular surfaces 4 and by the demonstration that the areas of mineralized bone which receive the greatest mechanical stress and load display the highest density of nerve fibers 5 . Furthermore , recent pre - liminary work has shown that central sympathetic control mediates the unloading - induced bone loss 19 . Further studies are required to resolve this paradox and to determine whether bone adaptive remodeling is mediated by the nerv - ous system , centrally through the hypothalamus and / or peripherally via the release of neurotransmitters . Conclusion Clearly , all these studies indicate an important role of the neural tissue in regulating bone cell functions , in addition to its previously described role in transmitting and modulating skele - tal pain . The manipulation of the neuronal pathway in bone may present a major therapeutic impact for treatments of pathologies associated with modifications of bone remodeling . References 1 . Ducy P , Amling M , Takeda S , Priemel M , Schilling AF , Beil FT , Shen J , Vinson C , Rueger JM , Karsenty G . Leptin inhibits bone formation through a hypothalamic relay : a central control of bone mass . Cell 2000 ; 100 : 197 - 207 . 2 . Takeda S , Elefteriou F , Levasseur R , Liu X , Zhao L , Parker KL , Amstrong D , Ducy P , Karsenty G . Leptin regulates bone formation via the sympathetic nervous system . Cell 2002 ; 111 : 305 - 317 . 3 . Baldock PA , Sainsbury A , Couzens M , Enriquez RF , Thomas GP , Gardiner EM , Herzog H . Hypothalamic Y2 receptors regulate bone formation . J Clin Invest 2002 ; 109 : 915 - 921 . 4 . Serre CM , Farlay D , Delmas PD , Chenu C . Evidence for a dense and intimate innervation of the bone tissue , including glutamate - containing fibers . Bone 1999 ; 25 : 623 - 629 . 5 . Mach DB , Rogers SD , Sabino MC , Luger NM , Schwei MJ , Pomonis JD , Keyser CP , Clohisy DR , Adams DJ , C . Chenu : Innervation and bone remodeling 134 O’Leary P , Mantyh PW . Origins of skeletal pain : senso - ry and sympathetic innervation of the mouse femur . Neuroscience 2002 ; 113 ( 1 ) : 155 - 166 . 6 . Hara - Hirie F , Amizuka N , Ozawa H . Immunohistochemical and ultrastructural localization of CGRP - positive nerve fibers at the epiphyseal tra - becules facing the growth plate of rat femurs . Bone 1996 ; 18 : 29 - 39 . 7 . Konttinen Y , Imai S , Suda A . Neuropeptides and the puzzle of bone remodeling . Acta Orthop Scand 1996 ; 67 : 632 - 639 . 8 . Lerner UH , Lundberg P . Kinins and neuro - osteogenic factors . In : Bilezikian JP , Raisz LG , Rodan GA ( eds ) Principles of Bone Biology ( 2 nd edition ) . Academic Press , San Diego , CA ; 2002 : 773 - 799 . 9 . Edoff K , Hellman J , Persliden J , Hildebrand C . The developmental skeletal growth in the rat foot is reduced after denervation . Anat Embryol 1997 ; 195 : 531 - 538 . 10 . Hill EL , Turner R , Elde R . Effects of neonatal sympa - thectomy and capsaicin treatment on bone remodeling in rats . Neuroscience 1991 ; 44 : 747 - 755 . 11 . Sherman BE , Chole RA . Sympathectomy which induces membranous bone remodeling , has no effect on endo - chondral long bone remodeling in vivo . J Bone Miner Res 2000 ; 15 : 1354 - 1360 . 12 . Cherruau M , Morvan FO , Schirar A , Saffar JL . Chemical sympathectomy - induced changes in TH - , VIP - , and CGRP - immunoreactive fibers in the rat mandible periosteum : influence on bone resorption . J Cell Physiol 2003 ; 194 : 341 - 348 . 13 . Ramnemark A , Nyberg L , Lorentzon R , Englund U , Gustafson Y . Progressive hemiosteoporosis on the paretic side and increased bone mineral density in the nonparetic side and increased bone mineral density in the nonparetic arm the first year after severe stroke . Osteoporos Int 1999 ; 9 : 269 - 275 . 14 . Burt - Pichat B , Lafage MH , Duboeuf F , Itzstein C , Delmas PD , Chenu C . Ovariectomy dramatically reduces bone innervation . J Bone Miner Res 2001 ; 16 ( suppl 1 ) : S282 . 15 . Hohmann EL , Elde R , Rysavy J , Einzig S , Gebhard R . Innervation of periosteum and bone by sympathetic vasoactive intestinal peptide - containing nerve fibers . Science 1986 ; 232 : 869 - 887 . 16 . Hert J , Sklenska A , Liskova M . Reaction of bone to mechanical stimuli . 5 . Effect of intermittent stress on the rabbit tibia after resection of the peripheral nerves . Folia Morphol 1971 ; 19 : 378 - 387 . 17 . Cheng MZ , Zaman G , Rawlinson SCF , Pitsillides AA , Suswillo RFL , Lanyon LE . Enhancement by sex hor - mones of the osteoregulatory effects of mechanical loading and prostaglandins in explants of rat ulnae . J Bone Miner Res 1997 ; 12 : 1424 - 1430 . 18 . Pitsillides AA , Rawlinson SCF , Suswillo RFL , Bourrin S , Zaman G , Lanyon LE . Mechanical strain - induced NO production by bone cells : a possible role in adapta - tive bone remodeling ? FASEB J 1995 ; 9 : 1609 - 1614 . 19 . Kondo H , Tsuji K , Kitahara K , Rittling S , Nifuji A , Denhardt D , Karsenty G , Noda M . Unloading - induced bone loss occurs through the central control via sympa - thetic system . J Bone Miner Res 2003 ; 18 ( Suppl . 2 ) : S45 .