EVOLVING ELECTRONIC COMMUNICATION NETWORKS : AN EMPIRICAL ASSESSMENT J . D . Eveland T . K . Bikson The Rand Corporation Understanding electronic communication and the patterns that characterize its development are critical to realizing full benefits from computer - supported work ( Hiltz and Turoff , 1978 ; Olsen and Lucas , 1982 ; Kiesler , Siegel and McGuire , 1984 ) . Cooperative work depends on effective communication and on the ability of organizations to manage the technology of communication appropriately ( Rogers and Agarwala - Rogers , 1976 ; Farace , Monge and Russell , 1977 ) . Organizations that do not understand the political and social dimensions of their communications systems will inevitably fail to achieve their purposes ( Hawes , 1974 ; Benson , 1975 ) . The capacity of computers to integrate data processing , text processing , and communication within a single user - accessible framework is one of the most fundamental changes to affect the world of work since the first Industrial Revolution ( Bair and Mancuso , 1985 ; Bikson and Eveland , 1986 ) , and the rules and practices governing the use of such tools are still evolving rapidly ( Anderson and Shapiro , 1985 ) . The degree to which these capacities are used to increase the cooperative effectiveness of managerial and production processes depends on understanding how such tools are and are not like other more familiar tools , and how these new capacities can mesh with organizational priorities and outcomes . Since electronic tools are not simply linear extensions of the familiars new systematic research exploring their use is essential . A type of social science research method eminently applicable to these issue areas is communication network analysis . As Rice and Richards ( 1885 : 106 ) phrase it , " The goal of network analysis is to obtain from low - level or raw relational data higher levels of description of a system . The higher level descriptions identify various kinds of patterns , or test hypotheses about those patterns , in a set of relationships . These patterns will be based upon the way individuals and objects interrelate in a network , and , to some extent , upon the measurement tools and methods used . " Network analysis comprises a rather disaggregated and uncoordinated collection of empirical procedures for understanding how people share information with each other . The techniques tend to be as much a matter of art as science in their application ; nonetheless they have a rich theoretical and empirical tradition ( Farace and Mabee , 1980 ; Knoke and Kuklinski , 1982 ; Burt and Minor , 1983 ) . Despite their relatively long tradition and great utility , however , network analysis methods and other kinds of empirical communication analyses have been slow to find widespread application in the study of organizational interactions ( Rogers and Kincaid , 1983 ) . In particular , these analytical methods are only beginning to be applied to the study of computer - mediated communication . Most analyses have focused on issues such as computer conferencing ( Rice , 1980 ) , teleconferencing ( Johansen , 1984 ) , and videotex ( Rice and Paisley , 1982 ) . With a few significant exceptions ( e . g . Rice and Case , 1983 ) , the empirical analysis of computer - based direct messaging systems in day - to - day use for cooperative work is largely unexplored territory . This paper presents the results of an analysis of the communication patterns that characterize The Rand Corporation ' s use of RandMail , its electronic messaging system , in the early stages of implementation . The goal of this research has been to explore and assess the development of electronic messaging networks in 91 the context of expanding use . A variety of quantitative properties of these communication networks are presented , including both sociometric structures and network metrics ; implications are developed for both the planning and assessment of electronic communications systems in other contexts . While the methods employed in this analysis are neither new nor highly sophisticated in terms of the state of the art of communication research , they shed useful light on on a phenomenon that is beginning to attract consistently larger shares of research attention and corporate resources . BACKGROUND RandMail is a UNiX - based electronic communication system implemented on minicomputer hosts . It was developed in 1983 by The Rand Corporation and introduced for general use there in 1984 ( Shapiro et al . , 1984 ) . A nonproprietary system , it is also in use in various versions in a number of other settings ( e . g . , Rose and Romine , 1985 ) . Long before the initiation of RandMail , both internal and external electronic mail programs had been available to Rand computer users ( Borden , Gaines and Shapiro , 1979 ) . However , these communication capabilities were in fact employed only by a small proportion of computer users - - typically employees in Rand ' s Information Science Department or Computer Services Department with accounts on the host machine serving Rand ' s ARPANET node . RandMail began as a pilot project whose goal was to extend the usability of the electronic mail system and broaden the user community . The new system design reflected our belief that efforts to provide computer support for information work often fail by trying to automate very specific job functions instead of trying to augment established communication skills and general organizational procedures . Along with this central thesis we also assumed : that message exchange , a critical component of generic information work , is the right starting point for developing an interactive environment for collaborative work ; that confident person - to - person messaging and data exchange can be effected without special access knowledge such as login names , host computers , and the like ; the technology has to support user teams ( since that is how work is carried out ) and to align itself with existing organization structures ( since that is how information flows ) ; • system design and implementation , so construed , poses both technical and behavioral problems that cannot be separately resolved . A team of behavioral and computer scientists developed and introduced a messaging system that attempted to satisfy these tenets . For example , RandMail allows computer users to address mail to other Rand associates on the basis of regular names of addressees as they appear in the Rand telephone directory ( or name fragments , abbreviations , nicknames ) , very much as interoffice memos are addressed . Further , RandMail users do not need to know about host machines or even whether the intended recipients use computers - - hardcopies are automatically printed and sent via the internal paper mail distribution system to addressees without computer accounts . The system can also provide links to other electronic mail systems through ARPANET , BITNET , and more recently MCI - MAIL connections . RandMail was introduced on an incremental basis to small groups of trial users ( including Rand ' s executive management ) . After initial trials proved successful , RandMail was installed on all nonclassified computers and made available for general use by anyone with a computer account . For approximately the first 18 months of its operation , mail system data were automatically logged and archived . These data were to provide base for understanding and correcting system problems that might arise under conditions of broad use and to permit an evaluation of the pilot effort and its effects . The research reported here relies on a subset of archived data : messages sent by or received by account holders oi two host machines where electronic mail programs had not previously been in common use . Thus usag ~ logs in the main represent individuals who were not new to computer use , but who were new to electronic messaging . RESEARCH SETTING AND SUBJECTS The Rand Corporation is an nonproprietary policy research organization of about 1000 members . All but about 100 of them are employed by the corporation ' s Santa Monica CA office ; the remainder are located in its Washington DC office three time zones away . Rand is formally structured for matrix management , partitioning responsibilities between " departments " and " programs . " Departments ( such as political science , information science , and the like ) are responsible for hiring and promotion and are organized along disciplinary lines . In contrast , programs ( such as health , education , labor and population ) have a domain focus , serving to organize and oversee specific projects in their topic area . They have a common executive management and share many staff support units ( e . g . , public information office , reference library ) . Individuals may be members of only one department ; however they often work on more than one concurrent project and thus may participate ir multiple programs of research . Rand research is expected to be interdisciplinary , drawing togethe ~ researchers with different kinds of expertise . I * this research setting , " professionals " are typically researchers ; however , there are a numbel of staff professionals as well . By " manager " we mean anyone who is a department head or program head , plus the president and the 8 vice - presidents . Additionally , there are employees wh¢ 92 perform standard secretarial , clerical and administrative functions ; for convenience , we refer to them in the discussion that follows as " clerical " staff . Finally , a very small proportion of employees carry out skilled craft and technical functions . Within this organization , we construe communicating units or " nodes " to be individuals , aggregate groups analytically derived from them ( such as all the individuals in a department or program ) , or organizational entities that have been given a mail " alias " and thus can send or receive messages ( e . g . , the library ' s " LIBORDER " unit ) . The communication parameters we describe reflect overall patterns of relationships , not specific behaviors at specific times , and are constructed from aggregations of more " primitive " relationships such as existence and frequency of node - to - node contacts . Individual contacts are by themselves not the subject matter for analysis . RESEARCH QUESTIONS AND METHODS We have been interested in both the overall structure of the communications system and in changes in that structure and in the behavior of individual nodes within it . Key dimensions of communications structures include parameters such as density ( the ratio of communication paths actually used to those potentially available in the network ) ; centralization ( the degree to which communication is concentrated among a relatively few members rather than broadly dispersed ) ; reciprocity ( the degree to which communication in given channels is two - way rather than one - way ) ; and linkage distance ( the length of communication chains within the network , usually measured as the number of intervening people a message must pass through to move from one individual to another ) . We also consider the effects of phenomena such as separation in time and space and organizational , professional , and functional differentiation on messaging behavior . Our consistent emphasis here is on the utility of the findings , rather than on the underlying science of communications analysis ; the analysis of these data is not finished . As noted earlier , the raw material for this study was the file of message " headers " automatically logged during the first 18 months of general RandMail use ( April 1983 - July 1984 ) . Headers as completed by the sender include the following sort of information ( a " from " line is automatically To : Tora Bikson Cc : Norm Shapiro , C . Stasz Subject : MEETING TO DISCUSS EMAIL PAPER added ) . As read by the logging system , they are supplemented with the login ID of the message sender , similar IDs for message recipients , and dates and times of each message . The first approximately 8000 messages logged by the system ( over about six weeks ) lacked date / time information . For purposes of this analysis , each " from / to " combination was treated as a separate communication , although the total number ( primary and copied ) of recipients of a message was also recorded . From the form of the header , it was possible to make a reasonable inference as to whether the message was a reply to a previous message or an initiating message , although it was not possible to link replies in turn to the initiating messages . As archived , headers did not include the " Subject " line or any of the body of the message , so no information about the content of the messages was available for research . A secondary data file was also assembled , consisting of characteristics of each established node in the message file . It included , in addition to a unique node identifier , organizational status ( manager , professional , technical , clerical ) , department , program ( s ) , function ( research vs . other ) , physical office location category , and date of first use of the RandMail system . We also identified the " host " machine serving particular individuals , although there were a number of individuals who sent messages through more than one host at different times . Overall , there were 1016 nodes identified , of whom about 200 were consultant or guest account nodes for whom much of the organizational data were unavailable . ( The number of nodes is approximately equivalent to total organizational size because all individuals in the Rand telephone directory are potential RandMail recipients whether or not they ever send electronic messages . ) In order to insure the privacy of communication behavior , identifiers for individuals were rendered anonymous to the researchers . This was accomplished by replacing all logon IDs with randomly assigned numbers ; the link file associating random numbers with IDs was made inaccessible to researchers and was destroyed after a clean , merged dataset was available . Thus the research team knew something about the organizational and message - behavior characteristics of individual nodes , but had no way to determine who a particular node - number actually represented . This procedure allows aggregated conclusions to be drawn without compromising the identities of individuals . Approximately 69 , 000 appropriately sanitized message headers were retained for this research . They include data from messages sent to anyone at Rand from s computer account holder on one of the two logged host machines ; messages received include those to anyone on the logged computers other machines , or even exclusively hardcopy recipients . Thus while the dataset represents active messaging by computer users on the two hose machines of interest ( i . e . , minicomputers serving users who were not previously part of the electronic mail culture ) , it systematically underrepresents the total level of computer - based communication at Rand as well as the patterns of communication across the total set of host computers . These conditions should be kept in mind in interpreting the findings that follow . Five subperiods were selected from the overall data set for more intensive review to look at changes across time . These were 4 - week periods 93 spaced about evenly across the data ( June 1983 , September 1983 , January 1984 , April 1984 , and July 1984 ) . Numbers of messages sent during these periods varied from about 2500 messages in Period 1 to about 4000 in Period 5 ; the number of network participants in each period was about 500 of the overall 1000 - member pool of communicators . The sample of nodes examined in this research , then , constitutes about half the membership of Rand . The analyses that follow were carried out on a personal computer , using a variety of general and special - purpose routines and applications ( Lotus i - 2 - 3 graphics in particular may be readily identifiable to the aficionado ) . Analytic techniques parallel those previously used to study communicative interactions in NSF - supported Industry - University Collaborative Research Centers ( Eveland , 1985 ) . The germane point is that for many years one of the major obstacles to the wider use of network analysis methods has been the perception that large - scale mainframe analysis methods were required . In recent years , there has been a proliferation of PC - based analysis routines , so that the techniques can be readily applied in almost any setting ; for example , the increasingly popular UCINET series available from UC - Irvine . The groundwork thus exists for a much wider utilization of communications analysis for understanding the effects of computer - mediated work . RESULTS The following findings are presented less as the final word on the communication network structure of the Rand Corporation than as illustrations of the kinds of outputs that can be generated by relatively straightforward analyses of logged messaging data . As noted , there are systematic exclusions in the logged data that may complicate complete interpretation of the data in Rand ' s organizational context . Nevertheless , the data illustrate a number of interesting points about the organization and its use of electronic communication , and suggest avenues for further research in this area . We first describe the overall structure of the communications network in terms of levels of communication , density of interaction , and volume of message traffic . We then discuss the relationships of messaging behavior to occupational status , function , and organizational position , and the effects of time and physical distance - - two phenomena all organizations must cope with . We conclude with some observations on the communication network properties of the Rand group . NETWORK DESCRIPTION . Overall , there were 69 , 219 messages sent from the relevant host machines during the approximately 18 months covered by these data ( Table I ) . As the table shows , a relatively small proportion of senders accounted for a relatively large amount of the traffic , Of about 800 network participants ( those who received softcopy messages form and who had computer accounts on one of the two logged hosts ) , only 228 nodes both sent and received more than 20 TABLE 1 RECEIVED 0 S E I - 5 N T 6 - 13 14 - 20 > 20 TOTAL 0 I - 5 6 - 13 14 - 20 > 20 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 2 112 51 22 80 6 36 30 ii 44 1 15 19 10 27 2 5 10 7 19 2 20 25 20 228 13 188 135 70 398 TOTAl 26 ~ 12 ~ 7 : 4 : 29 . ' 80 ~ messages over the period studied . On the other hand , over 500 nodes sent at least one message . Since the actual number of particpants with accounts on the logged hosts was about 500 , it appears that most people who went to the trouble to get an account at least logged in occasionally . 343 recipients received hardcopy only ; of these , 133 sent messages , while the rest must be considered only peripherally part of the electronic network at all . ( The non - sending recipients in Table I were presumably attached to a non - logged host . ) Table II shows the cumulative distributions of the message traffic across all messages , displaying a not unexpected Pareto " 80 / 20 " TUN I ! CUMMLATIVE P ' EP , : i . EtI - F t ) F ME ~ SAGES 0 . 9 ¸ 0 . 7 ' 06 ~ 0 3 • i I i t I rl ~ ' F ' : ' , i 111 I . V ' H , I I . pattern . This distribution was more or less constant across the whole logged time period , with the proportions in each cell of Table I approximately equivalent at each of the five sampled subperiods . Overall message traffic did increase somewhat across the whole period ( Table III ) , partly as a result of adding more participants , partly as a result of increasing traffic per capita . The table shows considerable random variation from week to week , in addition tc some seasonal patterns ( Week 36 , for example , was the Christmas / New Years holiday ) . In order to investigate the patterns evident as people came into the system , a subsample of 100 senders was selected , all of whom became electronic mail users after date / time logging began and retained an account on the system for at least 36 weeks . The message traffic for each week of the individual ' s participation was computed , sc that in each case Week 1 represented the first 94 TIBLl IzI P ~ l ' l C , t , AAi L U ' ~ ; . a , : : E NU£ASERS ~ F k , E35AGES B ' F ' ~ VEE ; $ 2 1 ° i 1 . 6 , . 5 - 1 . 3 - = E o . s , - , / ~ ' 08 - v ' b / ) O . 6 - " ~ " 0 . ¢ " \ 0 . 3 - 8 13 18 23 28 33 38 4 . 3 4 . 8 53 58 63 68 WEEK week the individual participated ( the calendar weeks do not necessarily coincide - - one person ' s Week 1 might be in August 1983 , another ' s in December ) . This group approximately paraIleled the overall population in generaI patterns of participation . The group was divided into two subgroups - - those who sent an average of more than 5 messages per week across the 36 weeks ( the " heavy " group ) and those who sent less than 5 ( the " light " group ) - - each group numbering 50 members . As Tables IV and V show , there are notable differences between these groups . Table IV shows the percent of members of each group who actually ' r ~ L ~ IV c - , c - ' TOT , ~ , L LJ . ~ EF . . > , ~ . T E , ~ CH PEFtlOD " H Ea9 " * " = 8 = A ' . , E RAG E3 45 40 t - , / % ' - / a . / / m ' - ~ ' 5 ~ 0 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 113 11 12 13 1¢ 18 16 17 18 PERIOD 13 HEAVY USERS + LIGHT USERS sent a message in each of the 18 two - week periods of this data set . After Period 2 , the percentage of the " heavy " user group signed on each period averaged between 20 % and 35 % , and shows a slow upward trend . By contrast , the light user group averaged no more than about 10 % of its members sending messages in any period . Table V shows the average number of messages sent by a participant in each week he / she participated ; the " heavy " group averaged 8 to 9 , again with an increasing trend , while the light group averaged less than three , with no trend . These data suggest that users differentiate early , with those who will go on to be heavier users of the system showing heavier early usage and a tendency to increase , whiIe those who make light use of the system early in their exposure to it tend to continue that pattern . T ~ Jv ~ s v AVERAGE MESSAGES SEHT PER PERIOD FI = IOO , ALL 18 PE ~ IOOS f0 7 8 B 2 . n , , r i , , i PEPtOD 13 Ut ~ HT LIS - EPS + HE . . ~ h " USEP ~ ORGANIZATIONAL CHARACTERISTICS . Basic organizational descriptors were available for 736 of the individual nodes in the total network . Table VI shows the distribution of the six TABLE VI DISTRIBUTI ~ OF PROFESSIONAL GROUPS BY DEPARTMENT AND PROGRAM PROFESSIONAL GROUPS DRPAR31 ' ~ NTS NA ~ IGES PROF TECH CLER TOTkL . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . HA 189 0 0 0 0 189 CSD 9 8 54 5 7 83 ISD 5 3 30 0 7 45 MIS 0 2 5 I 0 8 EASD 10 2 54 0 14 80 R & S 9 4 65 0 20 98 SSD 29 3 71 0 21 12 & BSD 13 3 49 0 18 83 PSD 10 3 27 0 11 51 DAG 0 4 5 0 4 13 WSP 0 3 2 2 14 21 VRS 5 I 43 0 0 49 FRES 2 3 0 0 3 8 PUB 6 7 12 7 15 47 FIN 2 13 7 1 19 42 LIB 0 6 4 8 1 19 PER 2 4 2 0 7 15 SEC 2 9 1 0 3 15 RGS 0 0 I 0 1 2 FACIL 9 3 1 0 1 14 TELEC 0 1 1 0 3 5 PIO 0 1 2 0 2 5 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . TOTAL 300 83 436 24 171 1016 different professional groups across the 21 departments and 19 major programs of the organization ( as noted earlier , Rand is best viewed as a department - by - program matrix within a common management and administrative framework . Because of their small numbers , " service " and " craft " employees were generally excluded from the analyses that follow . Table VII shows the T ~ LZ vii LEVEL OF USE BY GROC ? : L ~ I ~ ' R = ; I ¢ . LR 95 percents of each group in different sending categories ; while managers have a slightly higher percentage of high senders than do the others , neither department , program , nor professional group is a significant predictor of messaging behavior , according to analyses of variance . In fact , in these data there are NO statistically significant ways of differentiating levels of use of the system by the formal organizational characteristics of network participants . The Rand network is characterized by a high level of interactivity between groups , both professional groups and departments . Table VIII NUMBERS OF GROUP CONTACTS TOTAL CONTACTS BY , . . ) ROUP 30 , : : ' - " : ' t - ~ . : : ' ~ , ~ " . ' . : . % v . L ~ . 7 . ' . u . : . \ b : \ \ 28 - ~ . , , : c , x , . , ~ , - c . , . I ~ - , , , ~ : , , . , : \ \ , . . 7 . : . L ' . . \ . . . \ ' , i 2 ~ - > . ~ . . . \ \ \ \ ) ? ~ . , , ~ × \ , 1 e - , \ ~ \ \ \ . \ , " < " ' " ~ / / / / / I OL ' , . - , ' - . \ ' , / / / , . ~ _ : % . > . \ ~ . % ~ > : . : . S / / . . / / , . / i { / / / / / ~ ' - ~ - \ ' : " ~ ' : , ' , f4 < ~ . . ' > K / / / / ~ ; ~ ' ~ " " ! i • / / / " / / / : ~ - / / ~ - . 0 , . , - , / / i - / / . , . . o / / - / - ; - / / " / / , / L , - / / / , CLERICAL TECH ; qlCAL PROFES ' L IwlANAGERS I , JI , JR5 ~ PROFES ' L ~ . ~ TECH ~ ' ~ CLERICAL shows the overall frequencies of contacts among the different professional groups . In keeping with Rand ' s matrix structure , this contact is frequently across departmental lines in all cases except that of clerical - to - manager communications ( Table IX ) . However , the pattern is different if CONTACTS wn ~ OWN AND OTHER DEPARTMENTS , , i : communications across program lines are considered ( Table X ) ; here , at the major working level of the organization , communications tend to be within programs ( averaging over 60 % ) in all cases except for professional - to - clerical and clerical - to - clerical contacts . We noted earlier that messages could be sent to more than one recipient at the same time . CO FITACTS WITH 0 . 8 - \ x - xl ~ ~ \ \ \ xj \ k \ 0 , 7 , . , 0 . 6 / / / " ~ " ii / i i / , / ! / / / , / / / O . & ' / I / / / ' / - - - / / / _ - - / . / / / 0 . 3 , i / / / z / , - . - ~ . CG / 0 . 2 I t l , . ' I / i / / / / / y / , , 1 ~ o . , - 3 , ' . / j / / / 0 / / I / I / , i M > M M > P TaitJI 1 OWN Ar . ID OTHER PPOGRAM ' ~ , FCR EIGHT MAJOR PROGf ~ AM5 . I ' 1 = 462 " . , / / A / / / " - " \ . \ ' ~ x . . . . H . . . . . . # # ' ~ / - " / / / - \ " " " ~ I ~ \ , . ~ ! . . . . , / / / / / " \ ~ / / / " ' " I1 / , . . ~ @ @ . ' ~ " v / / ~ x / / . " - " " - . \ \ ~ / / V / / . " / / " / / / / - ' / " ' ' M r / t / / / / / / - " / ~ . ~ . I / V / t \ . . . . / / / " / " " I t v ~ . , / . ' . " " I / t . ' / I / / , v f l i i v i i u u M > C P > M P > P P > C C > M C > P C > C CONTACTS ADJUSTEG FOR PROGRAM51ZE OWN PROS ~ ~ OTHER PROG5 Table XI shows the average number of recipients for messages among professional groups . With respect to range of contacts , manager - to - manager contacts average the fewest recipients at 2 . 3 , while professional - to - professional contacts TABLE x % AVERAGE RECIPIENTS PER INTER - STATUS MESSAGE RECIPIENT : MGR PROP TECH CLER CR ~ T SERV . . . . . . . . . ÷ . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . MGR i 2 . 38 2 . 52 3 . 38 2 . 47 2 . 38 9 . 00 PROF 2 . 95 5 , 24 8 . 71 : 5 . 92 23 . 71 . 00 TECH : 5 . 16 2 . 51 5 . 63 1 . 00 1 . 00 0 . 00 SENDER CLER : ~ . 28 7 , 94 21 . 24 5 . 96 12 . 94 4 . 00 CRFT ~ 0 . 00 0 , 00 0 . 00 0 . 00 0 . 00 0 . 00 SERV : 0 . 00 0 . 00 0 . 00 0 . 00 0 . 00 0 . 00 average 5 . 2 recipients . Table XII shows the percentage of messages in each category that we estimated to be replies to previous messages . Managerial and professional messages tend to be about 13 % - 15 % replies , while clerical messages average less than 5 % replies . It is reasonable to assume that clerical personnel tend to be on the receiving end of more order - type messages that do not call for replies . T ~ LE % 1t RVERRGE PERCENT OF INTER - STRTUS MESSAGES THRT ARE REPLIES RECIPIENT MSR PRQE TECH CLER ERPT SERV . . . . . . . . . + . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . MGR ; 0 . 13 0 . 14 0 . 06 0 . 15 0 . 10 0 . 00 PROF ~ 0 . 13 0 . 15 0 . 20 0 . 15 0 , 14 0 . 00 TECH I 0 . 26 Q . 07 0 . 38 0 . 00 0 . 00 0 . 00 SENDER CLER I 0 . 04 0 . 10 0 . 03 0 . 06 0 . 05 0 , 00 CRFT I 0 . 00 0 . 00 0 . 00 0 . 00 0 . 00 0 . 00 SERV I 0 . 00 0 . 00 0 , 00 0 . 00 0 . 00 0 . 00 TIME AND DISTANCE . Our data included time of day that a message was sent , and the office locations of personnel . The Rand buildings were divided into 22 distinct zones , and an index of distance between zones was computed reflecting not only walking time but numbers of levels and other barriers to be crossed ( the longest distance index was 9 , reflecting the distance from Rand - Santa Monica to Rand - Washington ) . The aim was to investigate whether people communicate electronically with those they are physically near to , or use messaging to reach those it would otherwise be inconvenient to reach in space or time . Table XIII shows the average percentage of a person ' s messages sent across different distances , both in terms of overall frequencies and frequencies adjusted for the number of possible recipients at the various locations . In adjusted 96 flIIILI Illl MESSAGES BY DISTANCE BETWEEN PARTIES P E R C E H T S 0 , 5 ! 0 . ~ 04 0 . ~ 5 ~ o . ~ ~ . , i 0 . 2 ~ 0 , 2 0 . 15 o . , , ~ , , ~ , ~ / / . 0 . 05 1 ~ 5 • 5 6 7 8 Ol , " rAN ( E 1 3 TOT M E S S ~ A t ~ E S . I - At ' Jlj STEO M E S S A G E S terms , people on average send about 45 % of their messages to other people in their immediate physical location . This finding , surprisingly , is not explained by the prevalence of intraprogram communication . Personnel tend to be physically collocated by department , with program members relatively dispersed . With the exception of the Washington office , which gets about 10 % of messages , each farther physical step away tends to get less messages . Clearly , these data do not support the thesis that electronic messaging is primarily for communication with distant people . There is some variation in this pattern across professional groups . Table XIV shows the average percent of contacts across and within groups that involve various distance gradients . There are few striking differences here , with the z ~ XlV PHYSICAL DISTANCES BETWEEN CONTACTS ' ~ . . . . . ~ ~ " ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ - ~ N I : • , × , 4 ~ i ' R . . q " " ~ " ' f " ' # S " , x " exception of clerical - to - manager contacts , which tend to take place primarily in the immediate vicinity . Patterns across time of day are rather striking . Looking at messages per capita per hour ( Table XV ) , it is apparent that both managers and clericals sharply concentrate their messaging in the early morning and late afternoon , while messaging by professionals is much more evenly distributed across the day . It is interesting to TIMES OF MESSAGES FOF DIFFEREI ' JT GROUP # £SS ~ C - ES PEP CAPIT & 01 " HCUF ' 19 . 18 . . R / ' \ / t7 . / 1 = . 11 - i 9 . 6 - 5 - , . ~ 3 - " \ Z & " ~ , , ~ 7 R 9 1011 IZ I Z 3 4 ~ , , ~ 7 8 9 10111Z TItlE : 3F C ' ~ ( ~ . ~ , : - P = : F ' FCr ' L TECH a CLEPK , 4L note as well that there is some definite messaging activity among managers in the evening hours , perhaps reflecting work at home terminals . It is also interesting to compare messaging in the Washington and Santa Monica offices ( Table XVl ) . While the general time - of - day pattern holds in both locations , the East Coast office has a secondary peak of message activity about 10 - 11a . m . coinciding with the early - morning messaging in Santa Monica . TABLE XVI TIMES OF k . tE . S : SA , SES B ' / LOCATION PERCENT CF 14ESS . ~ C ; ES B ' r " HC ! LIP 0 . 12 0 , 11 0 . 1 0 , 09 0 . 08 0 , 07 0 . 06 0 , 05 0 . 04 - 0 . 03 O , OZ 0 . 01 0 0 , 1 3 / i # , I \ i 4 " ~ / ~ , " ' % i \ / \ P \ \ ' I / 1 ' / j J / L , " TIIIE OF DAd HC ' N - - DC + DO CFFICE As noted earlier , messaging is most concentrated among those in the same physical location . Analyzing the time / distance interaction ( Table XVII ) shows that contacts between people at different distances tend for the most part to follow the same general time patterns as for people at close range , although there is a little less concentration of messaging activity with closer people at the peak morning and afternoon hours . STRUCTURAL PROPERTIES . The pattern of overall message traffic among the different nodes and node - aggregates in the data set can be summarized in a sociogram ( Moreno , 1934 ; Rogers and Kincaid , 1981 ) that represents the interactions as " distances " in pseudo - geographic space . For economy of presentation , two - dimensional sociograms are generally preferred . 97 The positions of nodes in such a " map " generally reflect their interactions ; that is , nodes are close to nodes they communicate with frequently , more distant from those they rarely communicate with . Sociograms can be constructed in many ways ; one of the most popular and scientifically rigorous methods is to use a multidimentional scaling technique to reduce the overall interaction pattern to two dimensions . For the purposes of this analysis , smallest - space analysis ( Kruskal and Wish , 1978 ) was used . TASL ~ XVH TIMES OF MESSAGES BY DISTANCES APART PERCENT OF MES $ ~ C - E $ 0 . 12 0 , 11 / \ 0 , 1 0 . 09 0 . 08 0 , 07 0 , O6 0 , 05 0 , 0¢ 0 . 03 0 , 02 o . 0 , ~ . . _ j ~ 2 3 ¢ " 5 6 7 8 91011121 2 3 4 - , ~ 7 8 9101112 TIIJ£ OF O ~ ' ( DIST = O DIST = 3 - - ' 7 Table XVIII presents an overall sociogram representing the interactions of the 21 departments across the entire data set . ~ x ~ ~ z ~ , : m ~ s ~ r ~ TABLE XVIII This cluster contains most of the major research divisions ( BSD , PSD , SSD , E & S , and EASD ) , along with the Library . The lower - left cluster includes ( surrounding the office of the President ) the administrative groups ( such as Finance , Personnel , Publications , MIS ) . CSD , ISD , and DAG ( an administrative - coordinating group ) occupy middle positions , indicating that they talk to both sides . The most operational units - - Security , Telecommunications , Facilities - - occupy peripheral positions ; they have very little message traffic with the main group . The sociogram for program content ( Table XlX ) is somewhat different , reflecting another TABLE XIX SOCIOGRAM OF PROGRAM RELATIONSHIPS - + . . . . . . . . . + . . . . . . . . . + . . . . . . . . . + . . . . . . . . . + . . . . . . . . . + . . . . . . . . . + - + + + + I LAB 1 I I PUB WSF PUBOP I I I + APP + J L I CRJ NAT SOV l I J DOM ADH 1 I I + ED REG CSD + I l I l I HS coMp I I I + PUBSL + TEL VAX I L + FAC + I I . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . r£ ~ . C ~ E F ~ ÷ Lc - " L % " i RE IA ~ D IRE PaD : : el0 : M5 em FIN ItS PE£E BEP ; PER picture shows an interesting separation into two main clusters , with several outliers ( note that the " clusters " are derived visually rather than statistically ; there are techniques for such clique identification , but they have not been applied to these data to date ) . The upper - right PROGRkM $ ADS NAT CRJ NS DOH WSP PEG PUS FAC LAB TEL APP Ell PUS . SL PUB . OP CO ~ P V ~ X SOV TOTAL NA HGRS PROF TECH CLER TOTAL IS8 61 170 14 13 6 25 5 1 I 16 0 42 1 S1 0 4 l 9 0 1 1 2 2 0 I 10 3 0 0 1 1 0 $ 0 2 2 1 1 0 3 l 0 6 0 0 I 0 4 0 I 3 0 2 0 l 0 1 0 0 5 2 1 1 I 0 2 0 3 0 0 3 0 1 0 i 302 63 436 24 171 70 473 6 54 43 210 2 24 4 22 17 Ill 3 17 4 12 I 12 ; 12 14 8 7 7 6 6 6 5 5 S 1016 GLOSSARY OF PROGPANS * CSD : Computer Science ADH : 4tdministratiom , general KAT : National Security CRJ : Criminal Justice HS : Raslth Science DOH : Ik ~ mestic , general WSP : DC Support staff BEG : Regulatory Policy PUS : P ~ blicatimna , general FAC : Facilities LAB : Labor and Populacimn TEL : Telecomm ~ icacions APP : Applied Science £D : Education and Hash Resources PUB . EL : Publications Sales PUB . OP : Publications , Operations COHP : Composition and Production V ~ X : ISL Vax Maimtanance / Operstions SOV : Soviet Studies * Prosram £s defLned as the research program to which individuals charge mos ~ of their ~ ime 98 dimension to the communications structure . While the administrative programs tend to concentrate in one empirical cluster , the research programs are widespread and not closely associated with each other . This may conform the earlier observation on the relatively lower levels of inter - program contacts . It should be remembered that these interrelationships reflect only electronic message traffic over RandMail ( and that only over selected hosts ) , not the sum of all organizational communication . They also reflect these patterns at the most aggregated level . However , the sociogram does show in a convenient and easily comprehended fashion a complex pattern of connections , and has a useful place in the set of techniques for analyzing communication networks . Certain metrics describing the properties of the communication structure can also be calculated from the overall communication matrix . One of these is the individual property of integrativeness , defined as the proportion of the total network with whon the given individual is in contact . Table XX profiles the integrativeness scores of individuals in the four main professional groups ( managers , professionals , technical , and clerical ) . The most integrated managers ( scores of about . 27 indicate contact with 27 % of the network across the entire period ) are more integrated than the most integrated persons in the other groups , and in each group the scores tail off rapidly . In general , the RandMail data do not reflect a highly integrated network . TAILE X % DISTRIBUTION OF IblTEGRATIVENESS SCORE ~ BY PRO ~ SIOIq ~ L GPOUP 0 . 6 0 . D - O . & - 0 . 3 O ' 2 L ~ ~ 0 . 1 t 2 4 Another interesting metric is the centralization score for different groups , defined as the average difference between the centrality of the most central person and the centrality of the others ( centrality is the proportion of messages in a network in which a given node participates ) . The distributions of these scores against group size produces some interesting differences ( Table XXI ) . The groups of both managers and clerical personnel tend to be small and distinctly varied in centralization , although clerical groups tend to be more centralized than manager groups . The pattern for professional groups , by contrast , shows a clear trend line ; small groups are centralized , large groups decentralized . Clearly there are different forces operating on groups with administrative vs . programmatic emphases . CENTRALIZATION SCORES BY GROUP SIZE o , 4 oo 0 . 38 0 , 36 0 . 54 - 0 . 32 0 . 3 0 . 28 0 . 26 0 , 24 - 0 . 22 • 0 , 2 " o oo 0 . 18 - D 0 , 16 - 0 , 14 - - B 0 . 12 - 0 . 1 0 . 08 0 t 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 o I0 0 3 o 0 0 0 0 0 0 O 0 0 I I I I 210 ~ 0 6 0 8 0 SIZE CONCLUSIONS AND IMPLICATIONS The burden of these findings from the analysis of RandMail communications is both substantive and methodological . On the substantive level , the most interesting findings are those that relate to the distribution of communications in time and space - - in particular , the determination that electronic communications tend to be used for communication with those nearby more often than with those far away , and the differences in distribution of messages by time of day for the different professional groups . There are also implications for the process of implementing electronic mail . It is a common belief that the longitudinal profile of EMail use - - whether individual or organizational - - will exhibit an initial surge of messaging ( attributable to novelty effects ) , followed by a great drop - off ( end of novelty ) , followed by a steady rise . Our data do not support this belief . Rather , we see a slow and not exactly regular growth in use , in aggregate - - probably slower than EMail fans would have predicted . We do see important individual differences in use , not accounted for by whether others in the individual ' s communication network use electronic mail ( since the Rand system also delivers hardcopy ) . Differences do not seem to be explained by organizational factors . We suspect that they may be explained in part by media style preferences ; access to the " new media " ( Rice et al . , 1984 ) tends to be somewhat idiosyncratic . Two implications can be drawn . First , use will be hard for organizations to predict in advance . Second , what they do to encourage use in the user ' s first weeks of experience with EMail may be critical to later usage levels . We have also to remember , of course , that use is conditioned by many exogeneous factors at Rand ( and elsewhere ) such as whether users have exclusive use of a VDT in their offices , how heavily loaded the system is ( availability of ports and cycles ) , and cost of use . 99 Not surprisingly , a lot of interstatus contact occurs . There is also a lot of interdepartmental contact , confirming that Rand has succeeded in supporting interdisciplinary interactions . ( We had hoped to find this confirmation . ) Contact tends to be inTRA - program ~ much more so than inTER - program . This suggests that " money talks " ; that is , people interact around projects on which they work together . EMail is intimately involved in supporting cooperative work at Rand . This in turn suggests that the barriers to communication among people with different disciplinary backgrounds are mitigated by group tasks . Spatial separation between nodes is not only not positively associated with electronic communication ; the association tends toward the negative . This suggests in turn that electronic links enhance existing interactions , rather than initiating interaction patterns that were formerly not in evidence . Or it may just take more time than these data cover . But we do not see evidence from the first 18 months for the formation of non - collocated cooperative work groups . For the subset of individuals who become frequent EMail users , this medium seems to become a general way of communicating and not a special way of overcoming spatial barriers . Temporal characteristics seem , on the other hand , to be more important . At Rand , the asynchronous communication capability of electronic mail appears to be used to advantage , allowing individuals to distribute their interactions over the work day as they choose . Overcoming time - based barriers to communication - - with individuals in the next office as well as with individuals in other time zones - - probably deserves greater organizational attention ( especially because scheduling and coordination are so important to collaborative work ) . It is widely believed that electronic messaging will stimulate significant changes in social communication norms and patterns . Some hope ( and others fear ) that the new media will make for fully egalitarian interconnected networks in organizations . We see some evidence for a slight opening up of the initial clusters of communication relationships over the 18 month period , but nothing dramatic . Probing the communication space by departmental grouping at Rand shows - - at the beginning and end of the period studied - - a tendency for research departments to be close to one another and administrative departments to be close to one another , but not to engage in much exchange . This may imply that organizations ought to pay careful attention to communications between admin / management and research professionals . This certainly will come as no suprise to students of industrial and organizational relations , but it is always interesting to see such patterns reflected in real data patterns . It is also interesting to look at the communication space by program grouping . Here we see again closeness between admin / management groups but widely scattered programs ( not close to one another ) . This reflects the finding that while there is a great deal of communication within research programs , there is little communication between them . This also suggests that Rand would do well to be on the lookout for ways to alleviate impediments to interactions between programs . The integration scores suggest that there may be individuals who perform bridging functions - - but it is possible ( taking into account profiles broken down by occupational categories ) that these contacts are strictly for managerial purposes rather than for interprogram collaboration . Further investigation of this issue of the roles played by individuals in these networks is indicated . On the theoretical level , the most interesting contribution of this effort is to demonstrate just how easily a very large volume of findings can be derived from a message log and some supplementary data - - all without compromising the requirements of personal privacy in any way . The techniques applied here are not particularly new or startling , but they do provide a wide variety of information about the structure of the electronic communications system . The major utility of this study has been to illuminate how such a study should be done if it were to be done right from the start . Several differences from the present case stand out as prescriptions : Obtain advance informed consent to the message logging , so that the more onerous anonymity provisions do not need to be followed . In particular , obtain consent to logging of message subject identifiers , so that some content analysis of the messages can be tied to the message traffic analysis ; Log all messages ; do not systematically exclude certain host machines that in fact may house some of the more vigorous messagers ; Tie the traffic analysis to other sources of information about the communications patterns of the organization , such as questionnaire data , that might help understand how electronic communication is and is not like other kinds of contact - - in particular , what it may substitute for . It should be noted that an analysis is currently under way by other researchers tying certain metrics of message behavior to previously obtained questionnaire and interview data ; it is expected that this analysis may move toward greater understanding of these topics . We expect to continue the analysis of these data , and to present further findings at the conference itself . 1 O0 REFERENCES Bait , J . H . and L . Mancuso , The Office Systems Cycle ( Palo Alto CA : Hewlett Packard , 1985 ) Bikson , T . K . and J . D . Eveland , New Office Technology : Planning for People ( New York : Pergamon Press , 1986 ) . Rogers , E . M . and L . Kincaid , Communication Networks : Toward a New Paradigm for Research ( New York : McMillan , 1981 ) Rice , R . E . , " Computer Conferencing " in Progress in Communication Sciences ( Norwood , NJ : Ablex Publishing , 1980 ) Borden , Bruce S . , R . Stockton Gaines and Norman Z . Shapiro , The MH Message Handling System : User ' s Manual ( Santa Monica CA : The Rand Corporation , R - 2367 - AF , 1979 ) Rose , Marshall T . and J . L . Romine , The Rand MH Message Handling System : User ' s Manual UCI Version ( Irvine CA : University of California - Irvine , # 6 . 143 , October 1985 ) . Shapiro , Norman Z . and R . H . Anderson , Ethics and Etiquette of Electronic Mail ( Santa Monica CA : The Rand Corporation , R - 3283 - NSF / RC , 1985 ) . Hil ~ z , S . R . and Turoff , M . ( 1978 ) The Ner = twork Notion : Human Communication via Computer . Reading MA : Addison - Wesley . 01sen , M . and Lucas , H . ( 1982 ) " The Impact of Office Automation on the Organization : Some Implications for Research and Practice " . Communications of the ACM . 25 ( 11 ) : 838 - 847 Kiesler , S . , Siegel , J . and McGuire , T . ( 1984 ) Social Psychological Aspects of Computer - Mediated Communication . American Psychologist . 39 ( 10 ) : 1123 - 1134 Rogers , E . and Agarwala - Rogers , R . ( 1976 ) Communication in Organizations . New York : Free Press Farace , R . V . , Monge , P . , and Russell , H . ( 1977 ) Communicating and Organizing . Reading MA : Addison - Wesley Farace , R . V . and Mabee , T . ( 1980 ) " Communication Network Analysis Methods " In Multivariate Technoques in Human Communication Research . New York : Academic Press . 365 - 391 . Knoke , D . and Kuklinski , J . H . ( 1982 ) Network Analysis . Beverly Hills : Sage Publications Burr , R . S . and Minor , N . J . ( 1983 ) Applied Network Analysis . Beverly Hills : Sage Publications . Johansen , R . ( 1984 ) Teleconferencing and Beyond : Communications in the Office of the Future . Communications of the ACM . 28 ( 7 ) : 680 - 689 Rice , R . E . and Paisley , W . ( 1982 ) " The Green Thumb Videotex Experiment " . Telecommunications Policy . 6 ( 3 ) : 223 - 236 Rice , R . E . and Case , D . ( 1983 ) " Computer - based Messaging in the University : A description of Use and Utility " . Journal of Communication . 33 ( 1 ) : 131 - 152 Rice , R . E . et al . ( 1984 ) The New Media : Communication , Research and Technology . Hills : Sage Publications . Beverly Eveland , J . D . ( 1985 ) Communication Networks in University - Industry Cooperative Research Centers . Washington DC : National Science Foundation Moreno , J . ( 1934 ) " Who Shall Survive ? : Foundations of Sociometry , Group Psychotherapy , and Sociodrama " . Washington DC : Nervous and Mental Disease Monograph No . 58 Kruskal , J . B . and Wish , M . Multidimensional Scaling . Publications ( 1978 ) Beverly Hills : Sage Benson , J . K . ( 1975 ) " The Interorganizational Network as a Political Economy " . Administrative Science Quarterly . 20 : 229 - 249 Hawes , L . C . ( 1974 ) " Social Collectives as Communication : Perspectives on Organizational Behavior " . Quarterly Journal of Speech . 60 ( 4 ) : 497 - 502 101