1 IFOM , the FIRC Institute for Molecular Oncology Foundation , at the IFOM - IEO Campus , Via Adamello 16 , 20139 , Milan , Italy . 2 Department of Medicine , Surgery and Dentistry , Università degli Studi di Milano , Via A . Di Rudini 8 , 20122 , Milan , Italy . 3 Department of Experimental Oncology , European Institute of Oncology , at the IFOM - IEO Campus , Via Adamello 16 , 20139 , Milan , Italy . The endocytic matrix Giorgio Scita 1 , 2 & Pier Paolo Di Fiore 1 , 2 , 3 Endocytosis has long been thought of as simply a way for cells to internalize nutrients and membrane - associated molecules . But an explosive growth in knowledge has given a new dimension to our understanding of this process . It now seems that endocytosis is a master organizer of signalling circuits , with one of its main roles being the resolution of signals in space and time . Many of the functions of endocytosis that are emerging from recent research cannot yet be reconciled with the canonical view of intracellular trafficking but , instead , point to endocytosis being integrated at a deeper level in the cellular ‘master plan’ ( the cellular network of signalling circuits that lie at the base of the cell’s make - up ) . Deconvolution of this level , which we call the ‘endocytic matrix’ , might uncover a fundamental aspect of how a cell is built . Eukaryotic cells use endocytosis to internalize segments of plasma membrane , cell - surface receptors , and various soluble molecules ( including nutrients ) from the extracellular fluid . This is a complex process , as underscored by the multiple routes by which molecules can enter a cell through endocytosis . Clathrin - mediated endocytosis 1 ( a mode of vesicular transport that is involved in the internalization and recycling of receptors by endocytic vesicles coated with the pro - tein clathrin ) is the most extensively characterized route , but attention is increasingly being paid to several mechanisms of non - clathrin - mediated endocytosis 2 ( Fig . 1 ) . For signal transduction , it is clear that endocytosis is one of the main ways that signals can be attenuated , through the removal and degra - dation of signalling receptors ( and , in some cases , their ligands ) from the cell surface . Recent studies , however , have uncovered a wealth of evidence that endocytosis has a much wider impact on signalling , inclu - ding the finding that signalling pathways and endocytic pathways are regulated in a reciprocal manner , and the finding that several molecules have roles in both endocytosis and signalling ( see refs 3 – 5 for reviews ) . The emerging model is that the net biochemical output of signalling pathways largely depends on topological constraints . These constraints are imposed by the association of signalling molecules with membranes , which in turn is regulated by endocytosis and by cycles of endocytosis and recycling to the plasma membrane ( that is , endocytic and exocytic cycles ( EECs ) ) . This set - up allows signals to be decoded by the cell according to precise kinetics and at spatially defined sites of action . And , not surprisingly , it translates into endocytosis having a large impact on almost every cellular process . In addition , evidence is emerging that the endocytic machinery has molecular functions that are not immediately reconcilable with membrane trafficking , leading researchers to ques - tion whether these ‘non - canonical’ functions are ‘moonlighting’ jobs or whether they point to deeper levels of integration of the endocytic matrix within signalling circuitries and cellular programs . Here we summarize the current understanding of how endocytosis is embedded in the cellular master plan , and more specifically its con - nections to signalling . We review endocytosis at the level of the circuits involved , highlighting how the integration of endocytosis and signalling determines the net biochemical output of a cell . Then , we analyse how endocytosis affects the execution of complex cellular programs . And , last , we speculate on how endocytosis might have evolved to become a pervasive component of the cellular master plan . The circuitry level Numerous findings support the idea that the integration of signalling and endocytosis determines the net output of biochemical pathways . In this section , we discuss the emerging models of how endocytosis controls signalling at the level of signalling circuits . A vast number of studies have been published on this topic , so here we provide an over - view of the basic concepts linking endocytosis and signalling . For an in - depth analysis of the various issues , see refs 3 – 5 . Membranes and signalling effectors Endocytosis regulates the assembly of signalling platforms at the plasma membrane by modulating the presence of receptors , their ligands and downstream effectors at the plasma membrane or at intermediate ‘stations’ of the endocytic route . The first consequence of endocyto - sis is that signalling receptors disappear from the plasma membrane , thereby limiting the magnitude of signalling from this source ( Fig . 2 ) . Ligand availability can also be controlled by endocytosis , as is the case for ligands in the DSL ( Delta , Serrate and LAG - 2 ) family , which acti - vate receptors in the NOTCH family ( see ref . 6 for a review ) ( Fig . 2 ) . The differential distribution of signalling effectors between the plasma membrane and the endosomal compartment also functions to regulate signals in time and space . The integration of different endocytic routes is crucial for determin - ing the net signalling output . In the case of the epidermal growth fac - tor receptor ( EGFR ) and the transforming growth factor - β receptor ( TGF - βR ) , clathrin - mediated endocytosis couples the receptors with recycling ( and sustainment of signalling ) and non - clathrin - mediated endocytosis couples the receptors with degradation ( and signalling attenuation ) 7 , 8 ( Fig . 2 ) . Notably , in other settings ( for example in WNT - activated pathways ) , the opposite is true 9 . Thus , although the association of signalling or attenuation with each route of endocytosis is specific to the receptor , the relative partitioning of receptors between the two entry routes generally determines the final net signalling output . There is an increasing amount of evidence implicating EECs as essen - tial events in certain types of signalling . The recycling of internalized receptors to the plasma membrane replenishes the cell surface with ligand - free receptors . EECs seem , however , to have a much more active role in signalling . For example , EECs resensitize G - protein - coupled receptors ( GPCRs ) that have been rendered signalling impaired dur - ing internalization ( see ref . 3 for a review ) ( Fig . 2 ) . In addition , EECs 464 INSIGHT REVIEW NATURE | Vol 463 | 28 January 2010 | doi : 10 . 1038 / nature08910 464 - 473 Insight Scita NS . indd 464 464 - 473 Insight Scita NS . indd 464 21 / 1 / 10 11 : 01 : 07 21 / 1 / 10 11 : 01 : 07 © 20 Macmillan Publishers Limited . All rights reserved 10 E S C R T RAB5 RAB11 ARF6 ARF6 - dependent recycling Late endosome and multivesicular body Lysosome RAB8 RAB7 Clathrin - mediated endocytosis Non - clathrin - mediated endocytosis RAB4 Fast recycling Dynamin Clathrin AP - 2 Lipid raft Ligand MHC class I molecule Clathrin - coated pit B7 Ub E S C E SS E S EE R T e and body Ub Slow recycling Early endosome RTK Plasmamembrane Ligand - bound RTK Degradation restrict signals to limited regions of the plasma membrane during the execution of polarized functions ( see the subsection ‘EECs and polar - ized functions’ ) . Finally , endosomes are key signalling ‘stations’ , a concept that is embodied by the term signalling endosome . Several other types of intracellular membrane ( or endomembrane ) are also signalling plat - forms 10 . Broadly , endosomes have a dual role in signalling 3 : they sustain signals that originate from the plasma membrane ( not shown ) , and they generate unique signals that are prohibited at the plasma membrane , thus contributing to signal diversification and specificity ( Fig . 3 ) . The small volume of an endosome is a necessary feature for signal - ling , because it favours receptor – ligand association and sustains receptor activity 3 . The limited surface area of an endosome also generates the ideal conditions for ‘coincidence detectors’ ; that is , molecular functions that require two or more simultaneous , but relatively weak , interactions 11 ( Fig . 3 ) . In addition , endosomes are enriched in certain lipids and pro - teins , such as the lipid phosphatidylinositol - 3 - phosphate ( PtdIns ( 3 ) P ) and the lipid - raft adaptor protein p18 , providing specific scaffolding surfaces on which signalling complexes can be assembled ( Fig . 3 ) . Other ideal features of endosomes include rapid microtubule - mediated trans - port of molecules ( which allows the transmission of signals over long distances , such as from the plasma membrane to the nucleus ; see the next subsection ) and acidic pH ( which is necessary for a variety of spe - cific signalling pathways ) ( Fig . 3 ) . It is notable that endosomes enriched in particular signalling mol - ecules might be involved in specific signalling pathways ( Fig . 3 ) . This is the case , for instance , for endosomes marked by the presence of the protein SARA ( SMAD anchor for receptor activation ) 12 – 14 , which are known as SARA endosomes ( an operational definition that reflects a functional state rather than a distinct subpopulation of endosomes ) , and for APPL ( adaptor protein containing phosphotyrosine - interac - tion domain , pH domain and leucine - zipper motif ) endosomes 15 – 17 ( an early - stage precursor of the classic early endosome ) . These endosomes are involved in signalling through TGF - βR and through receptor tyrosine kinases ( RTKs ) , respectively . Endosome - specific sig - nalling also occurs for several other receptor systems , such as GPCRs , NOTCH - family members , tumour necrosis factor receptor 1 and Toll - like receptors ( see ref . 3 for a review ) . Thus , the signalling endosome is a generic concept describing the existence of numerous functional endosomal states that result in signal - specific platforms . This , in turn , helps cells to distinguish between signals by attributing them to specific receptor - activated pathways . Figure 1 | Endocytic trafficking of signalling receptors . Signalling receptors ( in this example receptor tyrosine kinases ( RTKs ) ) are mainly internalized through clathrin - mediated endocytosis ( left ) . In this pathway of endocytosis , ligand binding accelerates the recruitment of receptors to clathrin ( present in clathrin - coated pits ) through adaptors , such as AP - 2 or β - arrestins 1 . Clathrin then polymerizes , and this drives the invagination of the pit , which is eventually released into the cytoplasm through the action of the GTPase dynamin 1 . This process seems simple but is clearly highly complex given that more than 50 different proteins can be found in clathrin - coated pits . There are many forms of non - clathrin - mediated endocytosis ( right ) , which , in some cases , depends on plasma - membrane microdomains enriched in particular lipids ( known as lipid rafts ) . Non - clathrin - mediated endocytosis is still poorly understood at the molecular level , and the term encompasses many heterogeneous mechanisms 1 , 2 . After internalization , by either clathrin - mediated endocytosis or non - clathrin - mediated endocytosis , receptors are routed to early endosomes . Trafficking in the endosomal compartment is controlled by small GTP - binding proteins of the RAB and ARF ( ADP - ribosylation factor ) families 72 ( some of which are indicated ) . From the early endosome , cargo is either recycled to the plasma membrane ( green arrows ) or degraded ( red arrows ) . Cargo can be recycled through a fast recycling route ( which depends on RAB4 ) or a slow recycling route ( which depends on the combined action of RAB8 and RAB11 ) 72 . In addition , proteins that have been internalized by non - clathrin - mediated endocytosis , such as major histocompatibility complex ( MHC ) class I molecules , can be recycled to the plasma membrane through ARF6 - dependent pathways 73 . Cargo can also be trafficked through a RAB7 - dependent , degradative route , through late endosomes and multivesicular bodies , and then lysosomes 72 . A crucial signal in this route is ubiquitylation of the receptors . Ubiquitylated receptors are recognized by a series of ubiquitin - binding protein complexes : HRS – STAM ( also known as ESCRT - 0 ) , and endosomal sorting complex required for transport I ( ESCRT - I ) , ESCRT - II and ESCRT - III ( see ref . 74 for a review ) . 465 NATURE | Vol 463 | 28 January 2010 REVIEW INSIGHT 464 - 473 Insight Scita NS . indd 465 464 - 473 Insight Scita NS . indd 465 21 / 1 / 10 11 : 01 : 08 21 / 1 / 10 11 : 01 : 08 © 20 Macmillan Publishers Limited . All rights reserved 10 P P Lysosome TGF - (cid:66) TGF - (cid:67) R TGF - (cid:67) EGF RTK ( EGFR ) EGF P NOTCH Cleavage and activation of NOTCH Early endosome Early endosome b g f d a e In cardiomyocytes Ligandactivation DSL - family ligand To recycling To lysosomal degradation To lysosomal degradation c To clathrin binding and endocytosis Control of ligand concentration To recycling ( 70 % of EGFR ) PI ( 3 ) K G R K s PA Ras PLD GPCRligand PP2A GRB2 – SOS1 complex (cid:67) - A rr e s t i n Clathrin - coated pit GPCR Nucleus G s G s G i G i G i ( 30 % of EGFR ) A plea for systems biology From the molecular data above , it is intuitive that endocytosis confers spatial and temporal dimensions to signalling . But the real magnitude and impact of spatiotemporal dynamics can be understood only by carrying out mathematical modelling ( see ref . 18 for a review ) . The most relevant aspect of this issue is that molecules cannot travel far by free diffusion . Signals originating from the plasma membrane must travel considerable distances , for example to reach the nucleus , and signal deactivation ( such as by dephosphorylation ) during cytoplasmic diffusion can cause precipitous signalling gradients and negligible signal magnitudes near the target . The initial prediction that this would occur was shown to be accurate by theoretical modelling 19 and subsequently by experimental studies of cells ( see ref . 20 for an example ) . Conversely , endosomes , which are propelled by microtubular motors , provide fast communication routes for signalling molecules , with diffusion having a role only in the final travel paths . Although this should be enough for an average - sized cell to overcome the rate of signal deactivation , larger cells , such as Xenopus laevis oocytes , might need more help . From theoretical modelling , it is predicted that , in such cells , regulatory mechanisms are required for dampening deactivation , a prediction that is being confirmed by experimental findings 21 . In neurons , for which the signalling distance can be as much as several centimetres , neurotrophins produced by post - synaptic cells activate anti - apoptotic signals by engaging pre synaptic TRK ( neurotrophic tyrosine kinase receptor ) - family molecules in axonal ter - mini . The signal must then travel to the neuronal cell body to promote the transcription of anti - apoptotic genes . A wealth of evidence supports the prevailing model that predicts the need for retro grade endosomal transport of activated receptors — or of signalling molecules — to achieve this biological effect ( see ref . 3 for a review ) . Yet the average velocity of molecular motors is not fast enough to account for the experimentally measured signal propagation time . One mathematical model suggests that travelling ‘waves’ of protein activation can carry out the task 22 , although experimental proof for this is lacking . Molecular dissection of many of the endocytosis - based signalling circuits described above has yielded many conflicting results ( see ref . 3 for a recent review ) . Such results are usually attributed to cell - specific differences but probably betray our lack of understanding at the sys - tems level . Mathematical simulation has successfully been applied to explain the complex schemes by which endocytosis contributes to the control of cell polarity , spatial signal propagation , signal magnitude , Figure 2 | Endocytosis controls signals at the plasma membrane . There are several ways in which endocytosis regulates the assembly of signalling platforms at the plasma membrane . a , The removal of receptors from the plasma membrane , for example by clathrin - mediated endocytosis , extinguishes signals that depend on plasma - membrane - specific molecules 3 . These include signals driven by the following : stimulatory heterotrimeric G ( G s ) proteins ; phosphatidylinositol - 4 , 5 - bisphosphate ( not shown ) , which drives the activity of phospholipase C ( PLC ) and phosphatidylinositol - 3 - OH kinase ( PI ( 3 ) K ) ; and a circuit that involves an RTK , PLD and phosphatidic acid ( PA ) , which contributes to the recruitment of the GRB2−SOS1 complex and to the activation of Ras 75 . b , The endocytosis of DSLs ( ligands in the Delta , Serrate and LAG - 2 family ) is required for activation of , and therefore signalling through , receptors in the NOTCH family . Endocytosis activates the ligands ( by an ill - defined mechanism ) and maintains ligand concentrations at the plasma membrane 6 . c , The route of receptor entry to the cell affects signalling . For the epidermal growth factor receptor ( EGFR ) and the transforming growth factor - β receptor ( TGF - βR ) , clathrin - mediated endocytosis preferentially destines receptors to recycling , and non - clathrin - mediated endocytosis destines receptors for degradation 7 , 8 . In other settings ( for example in WNT - activated pathways , not shown ) , the opposite occurs 9 . d – g , Recycling pathways control signalling . d , EGFRs have different fates when engaged by EGF or TGF - α . The EGF – EGFR complex is either recycled to the plasma membrane or routed to the lysosome ( as detailed in c ) . By contrast , the TGF - α – EGFR complex dissociates at the acidic pH of the endosome , and the EGFR is recycled to the surface . e , G - protein - coupled receptors ( GPCRs ) are phosphorylated by GPCR kinases ( GRKs ) . This allows β - arrestins to bind to the GPCR , preventing G s protein recruitment and thereby terminating signalling . In addition , β - arrestins bind to clathrin , targeting the receptors for clathrin - mediated endocytosis . f , In the early endosome , GPCRs are dephosphorylated by the phosphatase PP2A and are then recycled , returning resensitized GPCRs to the cell surface 3 . g , In cardiomyocytes , the β 2 - adrenergic receptor , which is a GPCR , can elicit different biochemical and biological responses by coupling with G s proteins or inhibitory G ( G i ) proteins . The switch between these types of G protein requires endocytic and exocytic cycles ( EECs ) , which probably work by redirecting the receptors to G i - protein - enriched plasma - membrane microdomains 3 . 466 NATURE | Vol 463 | 28 January 2010 INSIGHT REVIEW 464 - 473 Insight Scita NS . indd 466 464 - 473 Insight Scita NS . indd 466 21 / 1 / 10 11 : 01 : 09 21 / 1 / 10 11 : 01 : 09 © 20 Macmillan Publishers Limited . All rights reserved 10 A PP L A PP L R A B 5 PP P Ub Deltex S M A D 2 NOTCH (cid:72) - Secretase To the nucleus H + H + H + b a c RAB5 GSK3 (cid:67) a b p 1 8 p14 MP1 PtdIns ( 3 ) P PtdIns ( 3 ) P EEA1 GPCR a b c A B C S M A D 2 TGF (cid:67) - R To the nucleus d MAPK MAPKK MAPKKK (cid:67) - Arrestin Sara SMAD4 To the nucleus SARA RAB5 PtdIns ( 3 ) P EEA1 Ligand In late endosomes MAPK MAPKK AKT signal kinetics , and dynamic synchronization of intracellular signalling with stimuli received by the cell 18 . So mathematical modelling , coupled to experimental verification , might be the sole practical solution to the innumerable conundrums that confound our understanding of the liaisons between endocytosis and signalling . The cellular level A corollary of the many connections between endocytosis and signal - ling at the circuitry level is that the integration of these two programs is likely to have a substantial impact on the execution of complex cellular programs . In this section , we review the cellular and molecular evidence for this , showing that the functions of endocytosis only partly conform to those in the canonical view . EECs and polarized functions Cells must recognize and process spatial information in order to carry out polarized functions , such as directed cell migration , cell fate deci - sions , epithelial cell polarization , growth - cone movement , and tissue morphogenesis during development ( see ref . 23 for a review ) . All of these tasks require the spatial restriction of signalling , which is achieved through asymmetrical distribution ( or redistribution ) of membranes or signalling molecules , often mediated by EECs . For instance , a continu - ous flow of membranes of endocytic origin is essential for the dynamic changes in cell shape that occur during the directional , chemotactic migration of the slime mould Dictyostelium discoideum 24 , although this mechanism may not be used by all motile cells ( see ref . 23 for a review ) . EECs can also redirect and confine signalling molecules to specialized areas of the plasma membrane , such as the apical membrane or basal membrane of polarized epithelial cells 25 , and they can sustain positive - feedback mechanisms that maintain the asymmetry of crucial molecules , such as the small GTPase Cdc42 , during the formation of polarized buds in budding yeast 26 . During the chemotactic migration of cells , whether in two dimensions or three dimensions , the cells must reorient themselves in the direction of travel through the polarization of sensors that are present in the plasma membrane , and they must coordinate the intracellular trafficking of mol - ecules , the adhesion of the cell to the substrate and the remodelling of the actin cytoskeleton to generate the propulsive forces ( Fig . 4 ) . Again , the role of EECs is paramount , as has been shown in the border cells of Drosophila melanogaster . In these cells , when endocytic pathways that depend on Figure 3 | The signalling endosome . Three situations are depicted , each showing a different concept in how endosomes generate unique signals that cannot be generated at the plasma membrane . A , Signals relying on lipids or proteins that are unique to endosomes . A , a , Locally ( and specifically ) produced phosphatidylinositol - 3 - phosphate ( PtdIns ( 3 ) P ) allows endosome - specific assembly of signalling complexes 3 , through its binding to proteins ( for example EEA1 ) that contain protein domains such as FYVE or PX . A , b , In late endosomes , the endosome - specific lipid - raft adaptor protein p18 binds to a scaffold that activates mitogen - activated protein kinases ( MAPKs ) , which consists of a MAPK kinase ( MAPKK ) , MP1 and p14 ( ref . 76 ) , thereby sustaining MAPK signalling . A , c , Some GPCRs remain associated with β - arrestins after being internalized . The β - arrestins stably anchor MAPK , which might bias signalling towards cytosolic MAPK substrates rather than nuclear MAPK substrates 77 . A , d , Internalized TGF - βR interacts with the PtdIns ( 3 ) P - binding protein SARA ( SMAD anchor for receptor activation ) 12 , 13 and phosphorylates the SARA - associated molecule SMAD2 , promoting dissociation of SMAD2 and its interaction with SMAD4 . The SMAD2−SMAD4 complex then translocates to the nucleus , where it elicits a transcriptional response . Another PtdIns ( 3 ) P - binding protein , endofin , can interact with TGF - βR and SMAD4 and facilitates the formation of SMAD2−SMAD4 complexes 14 ( not shown ) . B , The acidic pH of endosomes affects signalling in numerous ways ( see Fig . 2d for another example ) . B , a , To be activated , NOTCH needs to be cleaved by the enzyme γ - secretase , which is present at the plasma membrane and on endosomes . The peak activity of γ - secretase is at low pH 78 , suggesting that endosomal transit is necessary for NOTCH activation . B , b , This is also supported by findings that the interaction between NOTCH and its ligands from the DSL family is favoured at low pH 79 and that endocytosis is necessary for the cleavage of NOTCH 80 . B , c , NOTCH can also be activated in a ligand - independent manner , by the ubiquitin – protein ligase deltex , which promotes the internalization of NOTCH and prevents it from being engulfed into the intraluminal vesicles of the multivesicular body , thus favouring cleavage by γ - secretase 81 . C , Endosome plasticity regulates signalling . C , a , In endosomes that contain internalized EGFR , two related RAB5 effectors are recruited . These effectors , APPL1 ( adaptor protein containing phosphotyrosine - interaction domain , pH domain and leucine - zipper motif 1 ) and APPL2 ( ref . 15 ) , are recruited through binding to RAB5 and to the EGFR , either directly ( as shown ) or indirectly through the protein GIPC ( not shown ) . APPLs lead to the activation of AKT and to substrate selection by AKT , through activating the AKT – GSK3β axis , which is involved in cell survival 16 . C , b , APPL - enriched endosomes are early stages of the early endosome , the maturation of which is controlled by the localized production of different phosphoinositides 17 . As APPL - enriched endosomes mature and PtdIns ( 3 ) P is generated , APPLs are shed and replaced by PtdIns ( 3 ) P - binding proteins , such as EEA1 ( ref . 17 ) . MAPKKK , MAPKK kinase . 467 NATURE | Vol 463 | 28 January 2010 REVIEW INSIGHT 464 - 473 Insight Scita NS . indd 467 464 - 473 Insight Scita NS . indd 467 21 / 1 / 10 11 : 01 : 23 21 / 1 / 10 11 : 01 : 23 © 20 Macmillan Publishers Limited . All rights reserved 10 RAB25 RAB5RAB5 Rac RAB25 Rac GTP Rac GTP Rac GTP Rac GTP RTK ( Met ) P P HGF Extracellularmatrix Focal adhesion Lamellipodium Circulardorsal ruffles CAV1 Actinﬁlaments 1 1 1 2 Integrins 2 3 3 TIAM1 Plasmamembrane Caveola ARF6 Endosome Endosome Endosome CAV1 RAB5 ( which belongs to the RAB family of small GTPases ) are disrupted , cells migrate aberrantly in response to stimulation 27 . There are also similar circuitries in mammalian cells : the endocytic ( RAB5 - dependent ) traffick - ing of Rac proteins ( small GTPases that relay signals from cell - surface receptors to the actin cytoskeleton ) , and their recycling to specific regions of the plasma membrane , is required for the transduction and spatial reso - lution of information emanating from motion - inducing stimuli 28 . EECs also control the trafficking of integrins , which are the best - characterized cell - surface adhesion receptors and have a crucial role in cell migration . It has been suggested that the continual internalization and recycling of integrins between the plasma membrane and the endosomal compart - ment is essential for controlling cell locomotion ( see ref . 23 for a review ) . Consistent with this view , it has been found that inhibiting RAB25 , which associates with α 5 β 1 - integrins in endosomes , blocks the recycling of these integrins to the surface and impairs the formation of cellular protrusions , thus preventing the cell from migrating in three dimensions 29 ( Fig . 4 ) . Thus , EECs are required across species to resolve signals and to redirect them in space , preventing the signals from becoming uniformly distributed and therefore uninformative . Not surprisingly , cancer cells exploit these mechanisms to gain a selective advantage . For example , metastatic cancer cells switch between two modes of migration ( amoeboid migration and mesenchymal migration ) according to the environmental conditions , and the switch between these two migratory programs is controlled by the RAB5−Rac circuitry and the RAB25−integrin circuitry 28 , 29 . Finally , convergent observations support a model ( Fig . 4 ) that explains how some signalling molecules are recycled to specific regions of the plasma membrane . In this model , a proportion of the Rac proteins in the cell — activated through a process that depends on clathrin - mediated endocytosis 28 — are recycled to regions of the plasma membrane known as lipid rafts 30 , 31 . Integrins act locally to prevent the lipid rafts , which func - tion as anchor points for Rac , from being internalized by non - clathrin - mediated endocytosis . This process , in turn , maintains active Rac near sites of integrin - mediated signalling 30 , 31 . The crucial recycling route seems to depend on the GTPase ADP - ribosylation factor 6 ( ARF6 ) and controls the redelivery to the plasma membrane not only of Rac 28 and integrins 30 , 31 but also of lipid rafts , ultimately coordinating Rac - mediated signalling and directional migration of the cell with adhesion - dependent growth of the cell 32 . Figure 4 | Cell migration harnesses EECs . Cells extend polarized protrusions , such as lamellipodia and circular dorsal ruffles , under the control of small GTPases , such as Rac . Three pathways by which EECs control the migration of cells are shown . In the first pathway ( 1 ) , in response to motogenic stimuli ( for example hepatocyte growth factor ( HGF ) ) , clathrin - mediated endocytosis promotes the formation of endosomes containing Rac and its GEF ( guanine - nucleotide exchange factor ) TIAM1 . This leads Rac being activated ( present in its GTP - bound form ) and recycled to specific regions of the plasma membrane , where circular dorsal ruffles are then formed 28 . In another pathway ( 2 ) , lamellipodia ( also called pseudopods ) depend on EECs of the α 5 β 1 - integrin , which can enter cells through clathrin - mediated endocytosis or non - clathrin - mediated endocytosis . This integrin associates with RAB25 in endosomes and is then recycled to the distal tips of lamellipodia 29 ; it traffics bidirectionally between endosomes and the plasma membrane within the lamellipodial tips . This promotes the compartmentalization of a spatially restricted subpopulation of cycling α 5 β 1 - integrin within the tip of extending lamellipodia 29 . This trafficking event is necessary for the extension of the lamellipodium . In the last pathway shown ( 3 ) , EECs of membrane regions containing lipid rafts connect Rac - dependent events and integrin - dependent events . Lipid rafts are internalized and recycled through caveolae , which contain the protein caveolin 1 ( CAV1 ) . Lipid rafts are binding sites for Rac , thus Rac that has been activated by clathrin - mediated endocytosis might be recycled specifically to lipid rafts ( dashed arrow ) . Integrin signalling prevents lipid rafts from being internalized , by retaining phosphorylated CAV1 in focal adhesions , which are macromolecular protein assemblies that connect the cytoskeleton to the extracellular matrix . Thus , when integrins are activated by binding to the extracellular matrix , binding sites for Rac are available at the plasma membrane 30 , 31 . Detachment of integrins from the extracellular matrix causes signal extinction and allows relocalization of phosphorylated CAV1 to caveolae . This event is necessary for the internalization of caveolae , an event that clears lipid rafts ( and Rac - binding sites ) from the cell surface . Cells that are deficient in CAV1 consistently show a lack of spatial confinement of Rac 82 . The GTPase ARF6 has been implicated in the trafficking of Rac , integrins and lipid rafts 28 , 30 – 32 . This suggests that ARF6 might be the crucial factor that regulates the spatial confinement of all of these . 468 NATURE | Vol 463 | 28 January 2010 INSIGHT REVIEW 464 - 473 Insight Scita NS . indd 468 464 - 473 Insight Scita NS . indd 468 21 / 1 / 10 11 : 01 : 27 21 / 1 / 10 11 : 01 : 27 © 20 Macmillan Publishers Limited . All rights reserved 10 N U M B p53 p 5 3 MDM2 N U M B p53 MDM2 N U M B MDM2 Multivesicular body Exosomerelease Exosomeuptake (cid:429)(cid:613)(cid:7)(cid:35)(cid:45)(cid:35)(cid:51)(cid:40)(cid:33)(cid:613)(cid:49)(cid:35)(cid:47)(cid:49)(cid:46)(cid:37)(cid:49)(cid:31)(cid:44)(cid:44)(cid:40)(cid:45)(cid:37)(cid:429)(cid:613)(cid:3)(cid:31)(cid:45)(cid:33)(cid:35)(cid:49)(cid:46)(cid:52)(cid:50)(cid:613)(cid:44)(cid:46)(cid:34)(cid:40)(cid:394)(cid:33)(cid:31)(cid:51)(cid:40)(cid:46)(cid:45)(cid:613)(cid:613)(cid:613)(cid:46)(cid:36)(cid:613)(cid:35)(cid:45)(cid:53)(cid:40)(cid:49)(cid:46)(cid:45)(cid:44)(cid:35)(cid:45)(cid:51) a b (cid:4)(cid:35)(cid:37)(cid:49)(cid:31)(cid:34)(cid:35)(cid:34) p53 (cid:22)(cid:46)(cid:613)(cid:50)(cid:51)(cid:35)(cid:44)(cid:456)(cid:33)(cid:35)(cid:43)(cid:43)(cid:613)(cid:36)(cid:31)(cid:51)(cid:35) (cid:22)(cid:46)(cid:613)(cid:47)(cid:49)(cid:46)(cid:37)(cid:35)(cid:45)(cid:40)(cid:51)(cid:46)(cid:49)(cid:613)(cid:36)(cid:31)(cid:51)(cid:35) c d Transcriptionaleffect e RNA f (cid:5)(cid:45)(cid:34)(cid:46)(cid:33)(cid:56)(cid:51)(cid:40)(cid:33)(cid:613)(cid:47)(cid:49)(cid:46)(cid:51)(cid:35)(cid:40)(cid:45)(cid:50) (cid:466)(cid:36)(cid:46)(cid:49)(cid:613)(cid:35)(cid:55)(cid:31)(cid:44)(cid:47)(cid:43)(cid:35)(cid:613)(cid:5)(cid:17)(cid:21)(cid:399)(cid:405)(cid:422)(cid:613)(cid:5)(cid:17)(cid:21)(cid:399)(cid:405)(cid:20)(cid:422)(cid:613)(cid:35)(cid:47)(cid:50)(cid:40)(cid:45)(cid:50)(cid:422)(cid:613)(cid:3)(cid:1)(cid:12)(cid:13)(cid:422)(cid:613)(cid:8)(cid:9)(cid:17)(cid:399)(cid:422)(cid:613) (cid:67) (cid:456)(cid:31)(cid:49)(cid:49)(cid:35)(cid:50)(cid:51)(cid:40)(cid:45)(cid:50)(cid:613)(cid:31)(cid:45)(cid:34)(cid:613)(cid:3)(cid:8)(cid:3)(cid:467) g Nuclear (cid:35)(cid:45)(cid:53)(cid:35)(cid:43)(cid:46)(cid:47)(cid:35) (cid:9)(cid:45)(cid:45)(cid:35)(cid:49)(cid:613)(cid:43)(cid:35)(cid:31)(cid:395)(cid:35)(cid:51)(cid:46)(cid:36)(cid:613)(cid:45)(cid:52)(cid:33)(cid:43)(cid:35)(cid:31)(cid:49)(cid:44)(cid:35)(cid:44)(cid:32)(cid:49)(cid:31)(cid:45)(cid:35) (cid:47)(cid:49)(cid:46)(cid:456)(cid:1)(cid:20)(cid:5)(cid:7) (cid:47)(cid:49)(cid:46)(cid:456)(cid:8)(cid:2)(cid:456)(cid:5)(cid:7)(cid:6) j Effect on transcription Effect on chromatin remodelling h i CHC depletion RAB6Adepletion Wild type Wild type Dynamindepletion ARH depletion At mitosis (cid:3)(cid:39)(cid:49)(cid:46)(cid:44)(cid:31)(cid:51)(cid:40)(cid:34) (cid:11)(cid:40)(cid:45)(cid:35)(cid:51)(cid:46)(cid:33)(cid:39)(cid:46)(cid:49)(cid:35) (cid:3)(cid:35)(cid:45)(cid:51)(cid:49)(cid:46)(cid:50)(cid:46)(cid:44)(cid:35) (cid:21)(cid:47)(cid:40)(cid:45)(cid:34)(cid:43)(cid:35) microtubule (cid:21)(cid:47)(cid:40)(cid:45)(cid:34)(cid:43)(cid:35) microtubule Ub Ub p53 MDM2 a (cid:31)(cid:34)(cid:35)(cid:35)(cid:34)(cid:34) 3 (cid:51)(cid:35) Ub UUUUUUUbUUUUUUUUUUUU Ub k l m n o p (cid:5) (cid:21) (cid:3) (cid:20) (cid:22) (cid:456) (cid:9)(cid:9) Endocytic control of cell division There is increasing evidence that proteins involved in endocytosis — such as clathrin , dynamin , the endocytic adaptor protein ARH ( autosomal recessive hypercholesterolaemia protein ) and RAB6A — also have a role in mitosis . These proteins are found associated with the centrosomes or the mitotic spindle , cellular structures that are involved in mitosis 33 – 36 ( Fig . 5 ) . But do such endocytic proteins have distinct functions in mem - brane trafficking during interphase and in mitosis ? Certainly , endocytic prote ins present in mitotically relevant structures do not seem to be connected to membranes , and they interact with binding partners that are distinct from those involved in trafficking 33 – 36 . In addition , several studies have concluded that endocytosis ceases during early mitosis ( see Figure 5 | The endocytic machinery in cell - cycle progression , transcription and mitosis . How the endocytic machinery affects these three interrelated processes is depicted . First , the tumour - suppressor protein p53 ( a master regulator of cell - cycle checkpoints , apoptosis and the DNA damage response ) is controlled by the endocytic protein NUMB and controls intracellular traffic . NUMB inhibits the ubiquitylation of p53 by MDM2 ( a ) , thereby preventing its degradation , leading to increased p53 levels and therefore p53 activity 56 . In dividing mammary stem cells ( b ) , NUMB partitions to the daughter cell that adopts the stem - cell fate 57 . One intriguing possibility is that this might drive high levels of p53 in that daughter stem cell and its withdrawal into quiescence . Because the MDM2−NUMB complex shuttles in and out of the nucleus ( c ) , it is not clear whether the regulation of p53 by NUMB occurs in the cytosol or in the nucleus . At the transcriptional level , p53 controls the release of exosomes 58 ( d ) , which are tools for genetic reprogramming or for controlling the microenvironment after release by cancer cells 53 , 55 ( e ) . The endocytic machinery ( specifically ESCRT - II ) might further contribute to this process by selecting the RNAs to be included in exosomes 54 ( f ) . Second , the endocytic machinery affects transcription . Endocytic proteins shuttle in and out of the nucleus 60 ( g ) , where they affect gene expression , by binding to the transcription machinery 60 ( h ) or to chromatin - remodelling complexes 15 , 61 – 63 ( i ) . Endocytosis also delivers cargo to the inner nuclear membrane , by way of a retrograde transport mechanism 65 , 66 ( j ) . In this case , two membrane - anchored growth factors , pro - AREG ( precursor of amphiregulin ) and pro - HB - EGF ( precursor of the heparin - binding EGF - like factor ) , are delivered in a signalling - dependent and endocytosis - dependent manner to the inner nuclear membrane , where they function as chromatin - remodelling agents ( in the case of pro - AREG ) or sequester transcriptional repressors ( pro - HB - EGF ) . Third , the endocytic machinery affects mitosis . During mitosis , endocytic proteins bind to components of the chromosome segregation machinery : the kinetochore , which forms part of the mitotic spindle ( k ) , and the centrosome ( n ) . The heavy chain of clathrin ( CHC ) localizes to the kinetochore fibres of the spindle , and its depletion results in misaligned chromosomes 33 ( l ) . RAB6A is also recruited to the kinetochores , and it cooperates with the MAD2 - dependent spindle - checkpoint pathway , ensuring that the spindle microtubules attach to the kinetochores at metaphase ( m ) 36 . Depletion of the endocytic protein dynamin causes separation of the centrosome , indicating that it contributes to centrosome cohesion 34 ( o ) . ARH localizes at the centrosome during interphase and at the kinetochores and spindle poles during mitosis . ARH - null fibroblasts have smaller centrosomes than their wild - type counterparts ( p ) . Because ARH binds to the motor protein dynein , it could cooperate in the delivery of components to the centrosome 35 . 469 NATURE | Vol 463 | 28 January 2010 REVIEW INSIGHT 464 - 473 Insight Scita NS . indd 469 464 - 473 Insight Scita NS . indd 469 21 / 1 / 10 11 : 01 : 31 21 / 1 / 10 11 : 01 : 31 © 20 Macmillan Publishers Limited . All rights reserved 10 ref . 5 for a review ) . The situation , however , may be more complex than this , because clathrin - mediated endocytosis is now known to be active throughout mitosis ( from prophase to anaphase ) , although recycling slows down 37 . The net outcome is a decrease in the surface area of the cell , with ensuing detachment of the cell from the substrate and rounding up . The recycling pathway recovers at the last stage of mitosis , telophase , allowing newly formed daughter cells to spread out . Changes in cell shape and size are important features of mitosis 38 , indicating that endocytosis and recycling must have a role in the proper execution of this function . Although the details remain hazy , the endocytic machinery might there - fore have a role in coordinating mitotic events . We have a better understanding of how endocytosis regulates cytokinesis , the division of the cytoplasm . The polarized recycling of internalized membranes towards the bridge that connects the two cells being formed is important for abscission , the terminal step of cell divi - sion 39 , 40 . Various components of different recycling endosomes ( including RAB11 , RAB35 and ARF6 ) and components of the secretory machinery ( such as soluble N - ethylmaleimide - sensitive - fusion - protein attachment protein receptors ( SNAREs ) ) cooperate with microtubule - based , plus - end - directed motor proteins to orient the recycling of endosomes towards the midbody of the cell . At this location , homotypic vesicle - fusion events generate distinct membrane subcompartments with defined lipid com - positions that function as signalling platforms and result in abscission in animal cells . In plant cells , polarized membrane trafficking and spatially restricted endosome fusion have long been recognized as central mecha - nisms in the completion of cell division 40 . Thus , vesicular traffic is used across species to facilitate rapid closure of the intracellular space during cytokinesis . Endocytosis and asymmetrical cell division Unlike symmetrical cell division , which produces identical daughter cells ( discussed in the previous subsection ) , asymmetrical cell division gives rise to two daughter cells with different fates . This process is central to the maintenance of adult stem - cell compartments , and its subversion is a fundamental mechanism in the development of cancer ( see ref . 41 for a review ) . Endocytosis has an important role in several aspects of this type of cell division . In D . melanogaster , several molecular determinants of asymmetrical cell division have been identified 41 . The asymmetrical partitioning of one such determinant , NUMB , on division of the sensory - organ - precursor cell confers different destinies on the two daughter cells , known as pIIa and pIIb . NUMB counteracts the action of the signalling receptor Notch 41 . Because NUMB is an endocytic protein that can bind to Notch and to the main endocytic adaptor protein AP - 2 , models were proposed in which NUMB promotes preferential internalization and degradation of Notch ( or of other membrane proteins necessary for Notch activity , such as Sanpodo ) in the pIIb cell , in which NUMB and AP - 2 are asymmetrically partitioned 42 – 44 . Moreover , differing recycling and / or degradation fates of the Notch ligand Delta regulate the abundance of Delta on the plasma membrane of the pIIb cell 45 ( see ref . 41 for a review ) . This could cre - ate the asymmetry necessary for unidirectional signalling from the pIIb ( Delta - expressing ) cell to the pIIa ( Notch - expressing ) cell . More recent evidence , however , suggests a different model . In Caenorhabditis elegans , the homologue of NUMB inhibits recycling of the Notch homologue 46 and this is also the case in mammalian cells 47 . Thus , asymmetrical parti - tioning of NUMB could skew the fate of Notch towards degradation , by suppressing its recycling . Regardless of the exact molecular mechanism , endocytosis seems to be pivotal for cells to acquire different fates . There is evidence that endocytosis has a role not only after asymmet - rical cell division but also during this type of cell division . The asym - metrical distribution of endosomes during asymmetrical cell division might contribute to an unequal distribution of signalling molecules , thereby imparting different fates . Asymmetrical partitioning of endo - somes has been observed at the first cleavage of the C . elegans embryo 48 and during asymmetrical cell division of mammalian haematopoietic stem cells ( HSCs ) 49 . SARA endosomes might be crucial in this process . In D . melanogaster sensory - organ - precursor cells , both Notch and Delta are trafficked to SARA endosomes , which in turn are directionally trans - ported to the nascent pIIa cell 50 . This is functionally important , because mistargeting of SARA endosomes to the pIIb cell causes ectopic activation of Notch in that cell 50 . How this can be integrated into current models of NOTCH and Delta recycling and degradation remains to be established . Endocytosis and SARA endosomes may also be pivotal in the mainten - ance of the mammalian HSC niche , on interaction between HSCs and osteoblasts . In this case , a specialized membrane domain of the HSC is trans - endocytosed by the osteoblast and trafficked to SARA endosomes , where it remains ( without being degraded ) and triggers signalling path - ways that lead to attenuation of the SMAD2 and SMAD3 pathway and to production of chemokines that promote HSC homing 51 . In summary , although a coherent picture is far from evident , there is increasing evidence that endocytosis and recycling are central to asym - metrical cell division during and after the mitotic event . Endocytosis and genetic reprogramming The example of HSC – osteoblast communication introduces a fascinating aspect of how the control of endocytosis ( and of EECs ) affects homeo - stasis — the regulation of cell – cell communication through exosomes . Exosomes are 40 – 100 - nm vesicles that are present as intraluminal vesicles in multivesicular bodies and released extracellularly when these bodies fuse with the plasma membrane . Exosomes can then be captured by the surrounding cells and endocytosed . Physiologically , exosomes mediate several protein - linked functions , such as the loss of the transferrin recep - tor during reticulocyte maturation , the release of decoy receptors , and antigen presentation and related aspects of the control of the immune response 52 . One surprising aspect of exosome - mediated communication is the abil - ity of the donor cell to genetically reprogram the recipient cell . Indeed , exosomes can deliver genetic material . Mast cells , for example , release exosomes that contain more than 1 , 000 messenger RNA species and more than 100 types of microRNA , both of which can genetically reprogram a cell when taken up 53 . The presence of microRNAs can result in extensive reprogramming , given the broad regulatory capacity of these molecules . In addition , only a specific subset of the mRNAs being transcribed in a cell is found in exosomes , favouring the idea that this process is selective 53 . Notably , subunits of the ESCRT - II complex bind to specific mRNAs 54 . Thus , it is possible that the endocytic machinery in the donor cell is not only involved in producing exosomes but also in actively sorting RNAs into these vesicles ( Fig . 5 ) . These concepts have important implications for how we understand cancer . Glioblastoma cell lines release exosomes that can deliver RNAs , angiogenic proteins and even oncoproteins to the surrounding normal cells , thus promoting tumour growth 55 . Furthermore , cancer cells seem to release more exosomes than their normal counterparts , suggesting that the exosome cycle can be hijacked by mutated cancer proteins to induce genetic reprogramming of adjacent cells , in much the same way as patho - gens such as HIV - 1 and prions ensure their release from cells 52 . Endocytosis and p53 NUMB is not only a cell - fate determinant that antagonizes Notch . It also regulates the levels of the tumour - suppressor protein p53 , by inhibiting its ubiquitylation and degradation . Perturbing the cellular concentra - tions of NUMB alters p53 - mediated responses , including the DNA dam - age response , apoptosis and the activation of cell - cycle checkpoints 56 . These observations suggest that there is a level of endocytic control over the functions of p53 , and this control affects the mode of cell division , whether asymmetrical or symmetrical . Adult stem cells divide asym - metrically to yield a stem cell and a progenitor cell . Kinetically , the stem cell is quiescent ( but capable of self - renewal ) , whereas the progenitor cell actively proliferates and , eventually , differentiates . In mammary stem cells , NUMB partitions asymmetrically into the daughter stem cell . Del - etion of the gene encoding p53 ( Tp53 ) in mice skews cell division from an asymmetrical mode to a symmetrical mode , with both daughter cells acquiring a proliferative fate 57 . It would be intriguing if inducing the pro - duction of large amounts of p53 , as a consequence of NUMB segregation 470 NATURE | Vol 463 | 28 January 2010 INSIGHT REVIEW 464 - 473 Insight Scita NS . indd 470 464 - 473 Insight Scita NS . indd 470 21 / 1 / 10 11 : 01 : 35 21 / 1 / 10 11 : 01 : 35 © 20 Macmillan Publishers Limited . All rights reserved 10 to one of the daughter cells , led the cell to become quiescent and adopt a stem - cell fate . Conversely , a lack of NUMB and p53 in the progenitor cell would determine its proliferative fate ( Fig . 5 ) . The emerging role of p53 in endomembrane - related functions exempli - fies how connections between the intracellular trafficking machinery and apparently unrelated molecules point to endocytosis and trafficking being integrated at a deep level of the cellular master plan . Recently , p53 was shown to be a regulator of the endosomal compartment 58 and of recycling pathways 59 . In terms of regulation of the endosomal compartment by p53 , two p53 - regulated genes , TSAP6 ( also known as STEAP3 ) and CHMP4C ( the product of CHMP4C being a subunit of the ESCRT - III complex ) , can increase the rate of exosome production 58 . In addition , p53 controls the gene encoding caveolin 1 , a major component of non - clathrin - mediated endocytosis . Activation of TP53 results in the simultaneous disappearance of both EGFR and caveolin 1 from the plasma membrane , suggesting that p53 transcriptionally controls some forms of endocytosis 58 . Considering the role of the endocytic machinery ( through NUMB ) in controlling p53 abundance , a feedback loop from endocytosis to p53 and back to endo - cytosis is conceivable ( Fig . 5 ) . In terms of regulation of recycling path - ways by p53 , mutant forms of p53 were recently shown not only to lose tumour - suppressor activity but also to act as gain - of - function mutants , by increasing the recycling of integrins and EGFR in a way that depends on the recycling protein RCP ( RAB - coupling protein ) 59 . This results in alterations to AKT signalling that contribute to increased invasion and metastasis . Although the mechanism is not entirely clear , it presumably involves inhibiting the transcriptional activity of p63 ( a transcription fac - tor and p53 - family member ) . The above functions rely on the known role of p53 in regulating tran - scription . However , mounting evidence suggests that p53 also has a cyto - plasmic role in association with membranes . Transcriptionally impaired TP53 mutants , expressed by cancer cells , can still function at the mito - chondrion ( causing apoptosis ) or as negative regulators of autophago - cytosis . In addition , evidence that p53 binds to clathrin has been linked to the direct regulation of transcription by clathrin ( see the next subsection ) , but it might also imply that p53 has cytosolic functions . Thus , the con - nection between endocytic pathways and p53 is likely to be an important area of future investigation . Endocytosis and transcription Superficially , endocytosis ( which occurs entirely in the cytoplasm ) and transcription ( which occurs entirely in the nucleus ) seem to be unrelated . Yet there is growing support for the idea that transcription is directly con - trolled by endocytic proteins . Various clathrin adaptors and endosomal proteins translocate to the nucleus , through several mechanisms , and regulate transcription ( see ref . 60 for a review ) . The regulation of tran - scription by endocytic proteins occurs at several levels ( Fig . 5 ) : remodel - ling of chromatin , regulation of transcription initiation and delivery of transcriptionally relevant cargo . Chromatin remodelling is regulated by APPL1 and APPL2 ( ref . 15 ) and by ESCRT - III proteins 61 , which bind to chromatin - remodelling complexes . Transcription initiation is regulated by many endocytic proteins that function as co - regulators of transcription by binding known transcription factors 60 . This interaction affects transcription - factor activity ( for exam - ple in the case of TSG101 ) or stability ( for example HIP1 ) . One exam - ple of a more complex mechanism is that of the heavy chain of clathrin ( CHC ) : CHC can be found in the nucleus , where it specifically enhances p53 - dependent transactivation by binding to the p53 - responsive promoter and stabilizing the interaction between p53 and the histone acetyltrans - ferase p300 ( refs 62 and 63 ) . Finally , β - arrestins , which are endocytic adap - tor proteins , also function as nuclear messengers , regulating transcription in several ways ( see ref . 60 for a review ) . Interestingly , about one - third of the β - arrestin interactome consists of nucleic - acid - binding proteins 64 . There is also evidence that two membrane - anchored growth factors , precursors of amphiregulin ( pro - AREG ; also known as pro - AR ) and heparin - binding epidermal - growth - factor - like factor ( pro - HB - EGF ) , are delivered in a signalling - dependent and endocytosis - dependent manner to the inner leaflet of the nuclear membrane , through a retro - grade transport pathway . When present in the inner leaflet , pro - AREG and pro - HB - EGF can function as chromatin - remodelling agents or can sequester transcriptional repressors , respectively 65 , 66 . Again , the outstanding question is whether the regulation of nuclear events represents a ‘freelance’ function of endocytic proteins ( that is , this function is carried out by some endocytic proteins in addition to , and independently of , their role in endocytosis ) or an institutional trafficking duty of endocytic proteins ( that is , this nuclear regulation is an integral part of the endocytic matrix ) . In the latter case , endocytic regulation of transcription would be a powerful channel through which to transfer extracellular information to the nucleus . In some instances , however , it seems probable that the proteins operate on a freelance basis . For exam - ple , the endocytic and nuclear functions of HIP1 seem to be mutually exclusive 67 and the transcriptional activity of CHC does not require its trimerization domain , which is , by contrast , indispensable for its endo - cytic coat - protein function 63 . In other cases , endocytosis and transcription seem to be more deeply intertwined 60 . This is the case for β - arrestins and APPL , which travel through the endocytic routes as bona fide trafficking molecules and eventually translocate to the nucleus to regulate transcrip - tion . Last , pro - AREG and pro - HB - EGF are clear - cut examples that the endocytic process is involved in the delivery of transcriptionally relevant cargo to the nucleus . Perspectives Many of the connections between endocytosis and signalling that have been uncovered in the past decade were unexpected , but these connec - tions can be accommodated within the ‘standard’ view of endocytosis . In this view , endocytic routes contribute to signalling by internalizing mol - ecules and consigning them to various fates . Some of the newly uncovered functions of endocytosis are , however , not immediately reconcilable with this view , for example the control exerted by endocytic proteins over cell - cycle progression , mitosis and transcription . We propose three hypotheses that integrate the canonical and non - canonical functions of endocyto - sis in a unified framework . These hypotheses might also correspond to increasing levels of complexity in how these functions are integrated . The moonlighting hypothesis In this scheme , some endocytic proteins have dual functions , one in membrane trafficking and one in signalling ( including those aspects of signalling associated with nuclear activities ) . Endocytosis as a process would not be involved in non - canonical functions , but individual endo - cytic proteins would be . There still might be some level of integration between canonical and non - canonical functions , if only because different cellular processes would be competing for the same hardware . The autogenous hypothesis One model of the origin of endomembranes ( the autogenous model ) is that they evolved from the inward budding of the plasma membrane and its subsequent topological separation ( see ref . 68 for a review ) . In particular , according to this model , the nucleus is thought to have evolved when newly generated endomembranes surrounded chromatin . Indeed , the nuclear - pore complex and vesicle - coat complexes have been shown to be evolutionarily related 68 . In this model , a primordial endocytic or secretory compartment must have pre - dated the origin of the nucleus . Eukaryotic cells would thus have evolved as a consequence of the acquisi - tion of a novel cellular property , the capacity to carry out endocytosis 68 , putting this process at the centre of the eukaryotic cell master plan . As a consequence , several functions must have co - evolved with endocytosis . For example , the evolutionary development of endocytosis must have co - evolved with that of the cytoskeleton , because membrane dynam - ics requires cytoskeletal scaffolds and molecular motors 68 . This could explain the many connections between endocytosis and signalling that lead to polarized cytoskeletal dynamics . Finally , if endocytosis led to the formation of the nuclear membrane , the existence of shared machinery between endocytic and nuclear processes would be less surprising than it at first seems . 471 NATURE | Vol 463 | 28 January 2010 REVIEW INSIGHT 464 - 473 Insight Scita NS . indd 471 464 - 473 Insight Scita NS . indd 471 21 / 1 / 10 11 : 01 : 35 21 / 1 / 10 11 : 01 : 35 © 20 Macmillan Publishers Limited . All rights reserved 10 The Roman - road - system hypothesis The Romans first built roads to accelerate the movement of their armies but then discovered that roads supported other activities ( such as com - merce and communication ) . So they optimized the roads for non - military uses . By analogy , regardless of how and why the membrane trafficking system evolved , its end point is a powerful intracellular communication infrastructure . Molecules that were not originally involved in endo cytosis might have ‘learned’ to exploit this infrastructure , for instance to move rapidly and precisely throughout the cell or to remain physically seg - regated and inhibited ( or regulated ) until the time is right to carry out their function . There is evidence to support this hypothesis ( see ref . 4 for a review ) . The endocytic function of clathrin became increasingly important as eukaryo - tes evolved , suggesting that clathrin was participating to a greater extent in endocytic events . In addition , it has been suggested that the primordial function of dynamin was related to regulating mitochondrial inheritance , and that during evolution some dynamins were then ‘recruited’ to the endocytic pathway to carry out vesicle fission . Recently , putative endocytic functions have been attributed to known tumour - suppressor proteins , such as NF2 ( also known as merlin ) , VHL and p53 , which might further corroborate the idea that growth regulators are ‘recruited’ to the endocytic pathway . Perhaps the best example is that of pathogens that evolved to hijack the endomembrane system to facilitate their life cycles . Different passengers can be envisaged on these endocytic routes : com - muters , hitch - hikers , hijackers and ticket holders . Commuters are the regular passengers ( cargo and associated machinery ) for which the sys - tem was initially designed . Hitch - hikers are molecules that parasitize the system ( that is , they hitch a free ride ) for a purpose not associated with endocytosis , without altering the functioning of the system . Hijackers are hitch - hikers that sidetrack the system for their own purposes , causing it to malfunction , for example pathogens and , probably , cancer proteins . Ticket holders are hitch - hikers that have evolved to ‘pay the fare’ , by acquir - ing a new endocytosis - associated role ( and therefore contributing to the functioning of the endocytic system ) , while retaining their original role . Their new endocytic function might be unrelated to their original role to the extent that they seem to be moonlighting , thus bringing us back to the first proposed hypothesis . Future challenges The evidence that we have reviewed here clearly indicates that endocytosis and signalling are two sides of the same coin and should be conceptualized as a single cellular process that is central to the eukaryotic cellular master plan . Unravelling the logic of the ‘endocytic matrix’ therefore seems to be indispensable to any attempt to reverse engineer the cellular master plan in order to understand how a cell is ‘built’ . Such reverse engineering will require the convergence of high - resolution mechanistic approaches and comprehensive high - throughput approaches . At the mechanistic level , we need to build a ‘reference’ map of the endocytic matrix , through uncovering the molecular underpinning of the various endocytic phases at the level of both the core machinery and the accessory proteins . One way to tackle this issue would be to recon - stitute individual steps of the endocytic process in vitro , from the initial deformation of the plasma membrane and budding of vesicles to the maturation of distinct endomembranes with their unique protein and lipid repertoires ( see ref . 69 for an example ) . At the same time , single - molecule imaging could be used to add spatial and temporal aspects of the endocytic process to the map . ‘Bottom - up’ mathematical modelling at each step would provide information about the necessary kinetic aspects of the process , through efforts to incorporate membrane constraints and dynamics into models of signal transduction . In addition , probabilistic modelling would define ( and predict ) the impact of single - cell hetero - geneity on various endocytic steps 70 . Essential as this knowledge might be , complete understanding will be obtained only by integrating an additional level of complexity : information from ‘omics’ approaches and ‘top - down’ modelling . The impact of endo - cytosis and trafficking on many cellular and organismal systems seems too vast to be decoded solely through classical high - resolution studies and will probably require systematic strategies . The field is starting to move in this direction . At present , functional genomics efforts are mainly directed at understanding how the perturbation of genes affects endocytosis and intracellular traffic ( see ref . 71 for an example ) . Research - ers now need to start devising systematic strategies to study the impact of the endocytic machinery on non - endocytic processes ( the ‘functional’ map ) and to unravel the endocytic interactome ( the ‘interactome’ map ) . By overlaying the functional map , the interactome map and the reference map , an initial picture of the inner workings of the endocytic matrix will be obtained . Finally , scientists have traditionally devoted considerably more energy to understanding how things are than to how things came to be the way they are . Re - evolving an endomembrane system in vivo , starting from prokaryotes , is a formidable task , but if it is successful , it will enormously improve understanding of the master plan of eukaryotic cells . In this context , a closer collaboration between cell biologists and developmental biologists might prove decisive . The deconvolution of the endocytic matrix , a term we have coined here , holds promise not only for increasing basic knowledge but also for improving human health . Cancer and immune , genetic and neurological disorders are all influenced in some way by the subversion of endocytosis . For instance , unexpected links have emerged between endocytosis , asym - metrical cell division , stem cells and cancer . The modulation of endocyto - sis also has important implications for drug delivery and for determining drug efficacy . Thus , increasing the understanding of endocytosis at the molecular , cellular and organismal levels will be important not only for cell physiology but also for the ability to fight diseases . ■ 1 . Doherty , G . J . & McMahon , H . T . Mechanisms of endocytosis . Annu . Rev . Biochem . 78 , 857 – 902 ( 2009 ) . 2 . Mayor , S . & Pagano , R . E . Pathways of clathrin - independent endocytosis . Nature Rev . Mol . Cell Biol . 8 , 603 – 612 ( 2007 ) . 3 . Sorkin , A . & von Zastrow , M . Endocytosis and signalling : intertwining molecular networks . Nature Rev . Mol . Cell Biol . 10 , 609 – 622 ( 2009 ) . 4 . Lanzetti , L . & Di Fiore , P . P . Endocytosis and cancer : an ‘insider’ network with dangerous liaisons . Traffic 9 , 2011 – 2021 ( 2008 ) . 5 . Mills , I . G . The interplay between clathrin - coated vesicles and cell signalling . Semin . Cell Dev . Biol . 18 , 459 – 470 ( 2007 ) . 6 . Fortini , M . E . Notch signaling : the core pathway and its posttranslational regulation . Dev . Cell 16 , 633 – 647 ( 2009 ) . 7 . Di Guglielmo , G . M . , Le Roy , C . , Goodfellow , A . F . & Wrana , J . L . Distinct endocytic pathways regulate TGF - β receptor signalling and turnover . Nature Cell Biol . 5 , 410 – 421 ( 2003 ) . 8 . Sigismund , S . et al . Clathrin - mediated internalization is essential for sustained EGFR signaling but dispensable for degradation . Dev . Cell 15 , 209 – 219 ( 2008 ) . 9 . Yamamoto , H . , Sakane , H . , Michiue , T . & Kikuchi , A . Wnt3a and Dkk1 regulate distinct internalization pathways of LRP6 to tune the activation of β - catenin signaling . Dev . Cell 15 , 37 – 48 ( 2008 ) . 10 . Fehrenbacher , N . , Bar - Sagi , D . & Philips , M . Ras / MAPK signaling from endomembranes . Mol . Oncol . 3 , 297 – 307 ( 2009 ) . 11 . Pawson , T . Dynamic control of signaling by modular adaptor proteins . Curr . Opin . Cell Biol . 19 , 112 – 116 ( 2007 ) . 12 . Tsukazaki , T . , Chiang , T . A . , Davison , A . F . , Attisano , L . & Wrana , J . L . SARA , a FYVE domain protein that recruits Smad2 to the TGF β receptor . Cell 95 , 779 – 791 ( 1998 ) . 13 . Hayes , S . , Chawla , A . & Corvera , S . TGF β receptor internalization into EEA1 - enriched early endosomes : role in signaling to Smad2 . J . Cell Biol . 158 , 1239 – 1249 ( 2002 ) . 14 . Chen , Y . G . , Wang , Z . , Ma , J . , Zhang , L . & Lu , Z . Endofin , a FYVE domain protein , interacts with Smad4 and facilitates transforming growth factor - β signaling . J . Biol . Chem . 282 , 9688 – 9695 ( 2007 ) . 15 . Miaczynska , M . et al . APPL proteins link Rab5 to nuclear signal transduction via an endosomal compartment . Cell 116 , 445 – 456 ( 2004 ) . 16 . Schenck , A . et al . The endosomal protein Appl1 mediates Akt substrate specificity and cell survival in vertebrate development . Cell 133 , 486 – 497 ( 2008 ) . In zebrafish , Appl1 was shown to spatially restrict the activity of the signalling receptor Akt in endosomes , resulting in Akt substrates being biased towards Gsk3 β and increased cell survival during animal development . 17 . Zoncu , R . et al . A phosphoinositide switch controls the maturation and signaling properties of APPL endosomes . Cell 136 , 1110 – 1121 ( 2009 ) . Signalling through EGFR is controlled by the diversity and plasticity of the early endosome , which undergoes discrete maturation steps through a phosphoinositide switch from an early APPL endosome ( where the induction of mitosis by EGFR is enhanced ) to an endosome rich in PtdIns ( 3 ) P and EEA1 . 18 . Birtwistle , M . R . & Kholodenko , B . N . Endocytosis and signalling : a meeting with mathematics . Mol . Oncol . 3 , 308 – 320 ( 2009 ) . 19 . Kholodenko , B . N . Four - dimensional organization of protein kinase signaling cascades : the roles of diffusion , endocytosis and molecular motors . J . Exp . Biol . 206 , 2073 – 2082 ( 2003 ) . 20 . Maeder , C . I . et al . Spatial regulation of Fus3 MAP kinase activity through a reaction - diffusion mechanism in yeast pheromone signalling . Nature Cell Biol . 9 , 1319 – 1326 ( 2007 ) . 21 . Perlson , E . et al . Vimentin - dependent spatial translocation of an activated MAP kinase in injured nerve . Neuron 45 , 715 – 726 ( 2005 ) . 472 NATURE | Vol 463 | 28 January 2010 INSIGHT REVIEW 464 - 473 Insight Scita NS . indd 472 464 - 473 Insight Scita NS . indd 472 21 / 1 / 10 11 : 01 : 35 21 / 1 / 10 11 : 01 : 35 © 20 Macmillan Publishers Limited . All rights reserved 10 22 . Markevich , N . I . , Tsyganov , M . A . , Hoek , J . B . & Kholodenko , B . N . Long - range signaling by phosphoprotein waves arising from bistability in protein kinase cascades . Mol . Syst . Biol . 2 , 61 ( 2006 ) . 23 . Disanza , A . , Frittoli , E . , Palamidessi , A . & Scita , G . Endocytosis and spatial restriction of cell signaling . Mol . Oncol . 3 , 280 – 296 ( 2009 ) . 24 . Traynor , D . & Kay , R . R . Possible roles of the endocytic cycle in cell motility . J . Cell Sci . 120 , 2318 – 2327 ( 2007 ) . 25 . Bryant , D . M . & Mostov , K . E . From cells to organs : building polarized tissue . Nature Rev . Mol . Cell Biol . 9 , 887 – 901 ( 2008 ) . 26 . Altschuler , S . J . , Angenent , S . B . , Wang , Y . & Wu , L . F . On the spontaneous emergence of cell polarity . Nature 454 , 88 – 889 ( 2008 ) . 27 . Jekely , G . , Sung , H . H . , Luque , C . M . & Rorth , P . Regulators of endocytosis maintain localized receptor tyrosine kinase signaling in guided migration . Dev . Cell 9 , 197 – 207 ( 2005 ) . 28 . Palamidessi , A . et al . Endocytic trafficking of Rac is required for its activation and for the spatial restriction of signaling in cell migration . Cell 134 , 135 – 147 ( 2008 ) . 29 . Caswell , P . T . et al . Rab25 associates with α 5 β 1 integrin to promote invasive migration in 3D microenvironments . Dev . Cell 13 , 496 – 510 ( 2007 ) . RAB25 binds to the promigratory and invasive molecule α 5 β 1 - integrin , promoting rapid , spatially restricted recycling of the integrin , ultimately resulting in increased cellular migration and invasion in three - dimensional matrices . 30 . del Pozo , M . A . et al . Integrins regulate Rac targeting by internalization of membrane domains . Science 303 , 839 – 842 ( 2004 ) . 31 . del Pozo , M . A . et al . Phospho - caveolin - 1 mediates integrin - regulated membrane domain internalization . Nature Cell Biol . 7 , 901 – 908 ( 2005 ) . 32 . Balasubramanian , N . , Scott , D . W . , Castle , J . D . , Casanova , J . E . & Schwartz , M . A . Arf6 and microtubules in adhesion - dependent trafficking of lipid rafts . Nature Cell Biol . 9 , 1381 – 1391 ( 2007 ) . 33 . Royle , S . J . , Bright , N . A . & Lagnado , L . Clathrin is required for the function of the mitotic spindle . Nature 434 , 1152 – 1157 ( 2005 ) . 34 . Thompson , H . M . , Cao , H . , Chen , J . , Euteneuer , U . & McNiven , M . A . Dynamin 2 binds γ - tubulin and participates in centrosome cohesion . Nature Cell Biol . 6 , 335 – 342 ( 2004 ) . 35 . Lehtonen , S . et al . The endocytic adaptor protein ARH associates with motor and centrosomal proteins and is involved in centrosome assembly and cytokinesis . Mol . Biol . Cell 19 , 2949 – 2961 ( 2008 ) . 36 . Miserey - Lenkei , S . et al . A role for the Rab6A’ GTPase in the inactivation of the Mad2 - spindle checkpoint . EMBO J . 25 , 278 – 289 ( 2006 ) . 37 . Boucrot , E . & Kirchhausen , T . Endosomal recycling controls plasma membrane area during mitosis . Proc . Natl Acad . Sci . USA 104 , 7939 – 7944 ( 2007 ) . 38 . Meyers , J . , Craig , J . & Odde , D . J . Potential for control of signaling pathways via cell size and shape . Curr . Biol . 16 , 1685 – 1693 ( 2006 ) . 39 . Schweitzer , J . K . , Burke , E . E . , Goodson , H . V . & D’Souza - Schorey , C . Endocytosis resumes during late mitosis and is required for cytokinesis . J . Biol . Chem . 280 , 41628 – 41635 ( 2005 ) . 40 . Baluska , F . , Menzel , D . & Barlow , P . W . Cytokinesis in plant and animal cells : endosomes ‘shut the door’ . Dev . Biol . 294 , 1 – 10 ( 2006 ) . 41 . Furthauer , M . & Gonzalez - Gaitan , M . Endocytosis , asymmetric cell division , stem cells and cancer : unus pro omnibus , omnes pro uno . Mol . Oncol . 3 , 339 – 353 ( 2009 ) . 42 . Santolini , E . et al . Numb is an endocytic protein . J . Cell Biol . 151 , 1345 – 1352 ( 2000 ) . 43 . Berdnik , D . , Torok , T . , Gonzalez - Gaitan , M . & Knoblich , J . A . The endocytic protein α - Adaptin is required for Numb - mediated asymmetric cell division in Drosophila . Dev . Cell 3 , 221 – 231 ( 2002 ) . 44 . Hutterer , A . & Knoblich , J . A . Numb and α - Adaptin regulate Sanpodo endocytosis to specify cell fate in Drosophila external sensory organs . EMBO Rep . 6 , 836 – 842 ( 2005 ) . 45 . Emery , G . et al . Asymmetric Rab11 endosomes regulate Delta recycling and specify cell fate in the Drosophila nervous system . Cell 122 , 763 – 773 ( 2005 ) . 46 . Nilsson , L . et al . Caenorhabditis elegans num - 1 negatively regulates endocytic recycling . Genetics 179 , 375 – 387 ( 2008 ) . 47 . McGill , M . A . , Dho , S . E . , Weinmaster , G . & McGlade , C . J . Numb regulates post - endocytic trafficking and degradation of Notch1 . J . Biol . Chem . 284 , 26427 – 26438 ( 2009 ) . 48 . Andrews , R . & Ahringer , J . Asymmetry of early endosome distribution in C . elegans embryos . PLoS ONE 2 , e493 ( 2007 ) . 49 . Beckmann , J . , Scheitza , S . , Wernet , P . , Fischer , J . C . & Giebel , B . Asymmetric cell division within the human hematopoietic stem and progenitor cell compartment : identification of asymmetrically segregating proteins . Blood 109 , 5494 – 5501 ( 2007 ) . 50 . Coumailleau , F . , Furthauer , M . , Knoblich , J . A . & Gonzalez - Gaitan , M . Directional Delta and Notch trafficking in Sara endosomes during asymmetric cell division . Nature 458 , 1051 – 1055 ( 2009 ) . During the asymmetrical division of fly sensory - organ - precursor cells , the asymmetrical partitioning of SARA endosomes containing Notch and its ligand Delta to the pIIa daughter cell limits Notch signalling in the pIIb cell , thereby maintaining the asymmetrical configuration of the pIIb – pIIa pair . 51 . Gillette , J . M . , Larochelle , A . , Dunbar , C . E . & Lippincott - Schwartz , J . Intercellular transfer to signalling endosomes regulates an ex vivo bone marrow niche . Nature Cell Biol . 11 , 303 – 311 ( 2009 ) . A specialized membrane domain of haematopoietic progenitor cells is trans - endocytosed by osteoblasts and trafficked to SARA endosomes , where it triggers signalling that leads to attenuation of the SMAD2 and SMAD3 pathway and to expression of chemokines that promote the homing of haematopoietic progenitor cells . 52 . Simons , M . & Raposo , G . Exosomes : vesicular carriers for intercellular communication . Curr . Opin . Cell Biol . 21 , 575 – 581 ( 2009 ) . 53 . Valadi , H . et al . Exosome - mediated transfer of mRNAs and microRNAs is a novel mechanism of genetic exchange between cells . Nature Cell Biol . 9 , 654 – 659 ( 2007 ) . A new endocytic - based mechanism of intercellular communication was uncovered , in which mRNA and microRNA are transported by exosomes , which can be transferred between the mast cells of different species , regulating gene transcription and protein expression . 54 . Irion , U . & St Johnston , D . bicoid RNA localization requires specific binding of an endosomal sorting complex . Nature 445 , 554 – 558 ( 2007 ) . Components of ESCRT - II are found to bind to , and control , the localization of bicoid mRNA , which encodes a homeodomain - containing transcription factor that organizes anterior development in the fly , to the anterior of the D . melanogaster egg . 55 . Skog , J . et al . Glioblastoma microvesicles transport RNA and proteins that promote tumour growth and provide diagnostic biomarkers . Nature Cell Biol . 10 , 1470 – 1476 ( 2008 ) . 56 . Colaluca , I . N . et al . NUMB controls p53 tumour suppressor activity . Nature 451 , 76 – 80 ( 2008 ) . 57 . Cicalese , A . et al . The tumor suppressor p53 regulates polarity of self - renewing divisions in mammary stem cells . Cell 138 , 1083 – 1095 ( 2009 ) . An essential role for p53 in the regulation of cancer stem cells was uncovered in this study . In the Erbb2 - transgenic mouse model , decreased levels of p53 lead to breast cancer stem cells undergoing symmetrical divisions at a greater frequency , and pharmacological restoration of p53 levels in these animals results in increased asymmetrical division of breast cancer stem cells and a reduction in tumour growth . 58 . Yu , X . , Riley , T . & Levine , A . J . The regulation of the endosomal compartment by p53 the tumor suppressor gene . FEBS J . 276 , 2201 – 2212 ( 2009 ) . 59 . Muller , P . A . J . et al . Mutant p53 drives invasion by promoting integrin recycling . Cell 139 , 1327 – 1341 ( 2009 ) . Gain - of - function mutants of p53 increase the endocytic recycling of α 5 β 1 - integrin and EGFR in cooperation with p63 , promoting invasion and metastasis . 60 . Pyrzynska , B . , Pilecka , I . & Miaczynska , M . Endocytic proteins in the regulation of nuclear signaling , transcription and tumorigenesis . Mol . Oncol . 3 , 321 – 338 ( 2009 ) . 61 . Stauffer , D . R . , Howard , T . L . , Nyun , T . & Hollenberg , S . M . CHMP1 is a novel nuclear matrix protein affecting chromatin structure and cell - cycle progression . J . Cell Sci . 114 , 2383 – 2393 ( 2001 ) . 62 . Enari , M . , Ohmori , K . , Kitabayashi , I . & Taya , Y . Requirement of clathrin heavy chain for p53 - mediated transcription . Genes Dev . 20 , 1087 – 1099 ( 2006 ) . 63 . Ohmori , K . et al . Monomeric but not trimeric clathrin heavy chain regulates p53 - mediated transcription . Oncogene 27 , 2215 – 2227 ( 2008 ) . 64 . Xiao , K . et al . Functional specialization of β - arrestin interactions revealed by proteomic analysis . Proc . Natl Acad . Sci . USA 104 , 12011 – 12016 ( 2007 ) . 65 . Isokane , M . et al . Plasma - membrane - anchored growth factor pro - amphiregulin binds A - type lamin and regulates global transcription . J . Cell Sci . 121 , 3608 – 3618 ( 2008 ) . 66 . Hieda , M . et al . Membrane - anchored growth factor , HB - EGF , on the cell surface targeted to the inner nuclear membrane . J . Cell Biol . 180 , 763 – 769 ( 2008 ) . 67 . Mills , I . G . et al . Huntingtin interacting protein 1 modulates the transcriptional activity of nuclear hormone receptors . J . Cell Biol . 170 , 191 – 200 ( 2005 ) . 68 . Jekely , G . Origin of eukaryotic endomembranes : a critical evaluation of different model scenarios . Adv . Exp . Med . Biol . 607 , 38 – 51 ( 2007 ) . 69 . Ohya , T . et al . Reconstitution of Rab - and SNARE - dependent membrane fusion by synthetic endosomes . Nature 459 , 1091 – 1097 ( 2009 ) . 70 . Snijder , B . et al . Population context determines cell - to - cell variability in endocytosis and virus infection . Nature 461 , 520 – 523 ( 2009 ) . 71 . Pelkmans , L . et al . Genome - wide analysis of human kinases in clathrin - and caveolae / raft - mediated endocytosis . Nature 436 , 78 – 86 ( 2005 ) . 72 . Stenmark , H . Rab GTPases as coordinators of vesicle traffic . Nature Rev . Mol . Cell Biol . 10 , 513 – 525 ( 2009 ) . 73 . Donaldson , J . G . Arfs , phosphoinositides and membrane traffic . Biochem . Soc . Trans . 33 , 1276 – 1278 ( 2005 ) . 74 . Raiborg , C . & Stenmark , H . The ESCRT machinery in endosomal sorting of ubiquitylated membrane proteins . Nature 458 , 445 – 452 ( 2009 ) . 75 . Zhao , C . , Du , G . , Skowronek , K . , Frohman , M . A . & Bar - Sagi , D . Phospholipase D2 - generated phosphatidic acid couples EGFR stimulation to Ras activation by Sos . Nature Cell Biol . 9 , 706 – 712 ( 2007 ) . 76 . Nada , S . et al . The novel lipid raft adaptor p18 controls endosome dynamics by anchoring the MEK – ERK pathway to late endosomes . EMBO J . 28 , 477 – 489 ( 2009 ) . 77 . DeWire , S . M . , Ahn , S . , Lefkowitz , R . J . & Shenoy , S . K . β - Arrestins and cell signaling . Annu . Rev . Physiol . 69 , 483 – 510 ( 2007 ) . 78 . Pasternak , S . H . et al . Presenilin - 1 , nicastrin , amyloid precursor protein , and γ - secretase activity are co - localized in the lysosomal membrane . J . Biol . Chem . 278 , 26687 – 26694 ( 2003 ) . 79 . Pei , Z . & Baker , N . E . Competition between Delta and the Abruptex domain of Notch . BMC Dev . Biol . 8 , 4 ( 2008 ) . 80 . Vaccari , T . , Lu , H . , Kanwar , R . , Fortini , M . E . & Bilder , D . Endosomal entry regulates Notch receptor activation in Drosophila melanogaster . J . Cell Biol . 180 , 755 – 762 ( 2008 ) . 81 . Wilkin , M . et al . Drosophila HOPS and AP - 3 complex genes are required for a Deltex - regulated activation of Notch in the endosomal trafficking pathway . Dev . Cell 15 , 762 – 772 ( 2008 ) . 82 . Grande - Garcia , A . et al . Caveolin - 1 regulates cell polarization and directional migration through Src kinase and Rho GTPases . J . Cell Biol . 177 , 683 – 694 ( 2007 ) . Acknowledgements We apologize to those colleagues whose primary research papers or important discoveries could not be properly acknowledged because of space constraints . We thank A . Sorkin and M . von Zastrow for sharing , ahead of publication , their excellent review on endocytosis and signalling . We also thank P . R . Romano for critically editing the manuscript . Work in the authors’ laboratories is supported by grants from the following : the Italian Association for Cancer Research ( AIRC ) and the Italian Ministry of Education , University and Scientific Research ( MIUR ) ( to G . S . and P . P . D . F . ) ; the Association for International Cancer Research ( G . S . ) ; and the Italian Ministry of Health , the European Community , the European Research Council , the Cariplo Foundation , the Ferrari Foundation and the Monzino Foundation ( P . P . D . F . ) . Author Information Reprints and permissions information is available at www . nature . com / reprints . The authors declare no competing financial interests . Correspondence should be addressed to P . P . D . F . ( pierpaolo . difiore @ ifom - ieo - campus . it ) or G . S . ( giorgio . scita @ ifom - ieo - campus . it ) . 473 NATURE | Vol 463 | 28 January 2010 REVIEW INSIGHT 464 - 473 Insight Scita NS . indd 473 464 - 473 Insight Scita NS . indd 473 21 / 1 / 10 11 : 01 : 35 21 / 1 / 10 11 : 01 : 35 © 20 Macmillan Publishers Limited . All rights reserved 10