Article https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1038 / s41467 - 022 - 33230 - y Differential dysregulation of granule subsets in WASH - de ﬁ cient neutrophil leukocytes resulting in in ﬂ ammation Jennifer L . Johnson 1 , 8 , Elsa Meneses - Salas 1 , 8 , Mahalakshmi Ramadass 1 , 8 , Jlenia Monfregola 1 , 7 , Farhana Rahman 1 , Raquel Carvalho Gontijo 1 , William B . Kiosses 2 , Kersi Pestonjamasp 1 , Dale Allen 1 , Jinzhong Zhang 1 , Douglas G . Osborne 3 , Yanfang Peipei Zhu 2 , Nathan Wineinger 4 , Kasra Askari 1 , Danni Chen 1 , Juan Yu 1 , Scott C . Henderson 1 , Catherine C . Hedrick 2 , Matilde Valeria Ursini 5 , Sergio Grinstein 6 , Daniel D . Billadeau 3 & Sergio D . Catz 1 Dysregulated secretion in neutrophil leukocytes associates with human in ﬂ ammatory disease . The exocytosis response to triggering stimuli is sequential ; gelatinase granules modulate the initiation of the innate immune response , followed by the release of pro - in ﬂ ammatory azurophilic granules , requiring stronger stimulation . Exocytosis requires actin depolymerization which is actively counteracted under non - stimulatory conditions . Here we show that the actin nucleator , WASH , is necessary to maintain azurophilic granules in their refractory state by granule actin entrapment and interference with the Rab27a - JFC1 exocytic machinery . On the contrary , gelatinase granules of WASH - de ﬁ cient neutrophil leukocytes are characterized by decreased Rac1 , shortened granule - associated actin comets and impaired exocytosis . Rac1 activation restores exocytosis of these granules . In vivo , WASH de ﬁ ciency induces exacerbated azurophilic granule exocytosis , in ﬂ ammation , and decreased survival . WASH de ﬁ ciency thus differentially impacts neutrophil granule subtypes , impairing exocytosis of granules that mediate the initiation of the neutrophil innate response while exacerbating pro - in ﬂ ammatory gran - ule secretion . Exocytosis is a crucial event in in ﬂ ammation and host defense . Neu - trophils contain several subsets of secretory organelles that hold a variety of highly toxic readily - releasable proteins and peptides and act as signaling hubs , so neutrophil granules are important for host defense against infections 1 . Neutrophil exocytosis is sequential . While highlyresponsivegranulessecretecargoesthatmodulatetheinitiation of the innate immune response , the release of protease - loaded gran - ules involved in pathogen killing requires priming and stronger sti - mulation , a process hereafter referred to as sequential exocytosis . Dysregulated secretion of this granule subtype results in indiscriminate protease and cell - permeabilizing peptide secretion . Therefore , dysregulation of neutrophil secretion mediates systemic in ﬂ ammation , exacerbates the damage to the endothelium associated with endotoxemia and sepsis , and contributes to the development of auto - in ﬂ ammatory and autoimmune diseases 2 – 7 . Both secretion and signaling are regulated by vesicular traf ﬁ cking , but the mechanisms regulating the sequential , differential , exocytosis of neutrophil secre - tory organelles remain unknown . Neutrophil secretory organelles are characterized by different propensities to undergo exocytosis , a mechanism thought to be Received : 16 September 2020 Accepted : 8 September 2022 Check for updates A list of author af ﬁ liations appears at the end of the paper . e - mail : scatz @ scripps . edu Nature Communications | ( 2022 ) 13 : 5529 1 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 0 ( ) : , ; 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 0 ( ) : , ; regulated by different traf ﬁ cking effectors 1 . Gelatinase and speci ﬁ c granules constitute a gradient of organelles with overlapping func - tions ; they secrete MMP - 9 ( matrix - metalloprotein 9 ) , which con - tributes to neutrophil migration , and regulate the production of reactive oxygen species ( ROS ) by the upregulation of the membrane - associated subunit of the NADPH oxidase at the plasma and phago - somal membranes . Azurophilic granules contain the most toxic car - goes including myeloperoxidase ( MPO ) and the serine proteases elastase , cathepsin G and proteinase 3 , and require the strongest sti - mulation to undergo exocytosis , a process that if dysregulated , indu - ces systemic in ﬂ ammation 8 . For example , MPO , an abundant microbicidal protein of azurophilic granules , mediates endothelial damage 2 , 6 , 9 , is present inatherosclerotic lesions 10 and is involved in the pathogenesis of coronary artery disease ( CAD ) , sepsis and SIRS 10 – 13 . A positive correlation between plasma levels of neutrophil proteins and CADinhumansiswellestablished 11 , 14 . Inmice , MPOinhibitionaltersthe in ﬂ ammatory tone of atherosclerotic lesions and helps prevent atherosclerotic plaque rupture 15 while neutrophil permanence in cir - culation aggravates myocardial infarction , and temporary depletion reduces atherogenesis 16 . Different from azurophilic granules , gelatinase - positive granules respond to relatively weak stimulation , a property that correlates with their earlier participation in the neu - trophil response 8 . Based on the different impact of the exocytosis of granule subtypes on innate immunity and in ﬂ ammation , the identi ﬁ - cation of exocytosis regulators with differential or opposing functions in the regulation of different granule subsets has important clinical signi ﬁ cance ; however , the mechanisms regulating neutrophil sequen - tial exocytosis remain unknown . Granule exocytosis in neutrophils is regulated by the traf ﬁ cking regulatory protein Rab27a and its effectors UNC13D ( Munc13 - 4 ) and JFC1 / Slp1 17 – 19 . While Munc13 - 4 regulates docking of several granule subsets , JFC1 selectively regulates azurophilic granule secretion 19 – 21 . Just before exocytosis , dynamic azurophilic granules move to areas near the plasma membrane partially deprived of polymerized actin , maintaining anapparent actin - free environment intheirsurroundings , amechanismregulatedbygranular - associatedproteinsincludingJFC1 , a phosphatidyl - inositol 3 - phospahate - binding adaptor 22 . Conse - quently , in JFC1 - de ﬁ ciency , azurophilic granules are trapped in poly - merized actin and exocytosis is inhibited . Although this suggests that actin is a negative regulator of azurophilic granules exocytosis , the molecular mechanisms regulating granule - associated actin remodel - ing is unknown , and how a balance between putative positive and negative effects mediated by actin remodeling regulates the fate of different neutrophil secretory organelles needs further elucidation . The Wiskott - Aldrich syndrome protein ( WASP ) family , including WASP , N - WASP , WAVE1 - 3 , WHAMM , JMY and WASH , control actin cytoskeletal dynamicsby regulating the actin nucleating activity of the Arp2 / 3 complex 23 – 25 . Different fromotheractinnucleators of the WASP family , WASH ( Wiskott - Aldrich Syndrome Protein and Scar Homolog ) interacts with intracellular organelles and is proposed to regulate not only actin remodeling but also endolysosomal traf ﬁ cking mechanisms and lysosomal biogenesis 25 – 28 . FAM21 , a protein known to stabilize WASH through its interaction with WASH N - terminus is a core com - ponent of the WASH complex 25 . Despite the impact of neutrophil secretory proteins in human disease , a thorough molecular understanding of the regulation of neutrophil exocytosis is lacking . Here , we show that WASH differen - tially regulates secretion of cargoes from different neutrophil granule subsets favouring gelatinase granule exocytosis but maintaining the pro - in ﬂ ammatory azurophilic granule in a refractory state . Our work identi ﬁ es WASH as a molecular switch that regulates sequential exo - cytosis to control the timely neutrophil response and shows its dys - function causes in ﬂ ammation . The current study proposes that WASH activation is a potential therapeutic approach to target neutrophil - mediated in ﬂ ammation . Results WASH localizes at neutrophil granules but Wash - de ﬁ ciencydoes not cause quantitative granule or cargo alterations Inhibition of actin polymerization in neutrophils dismantles the cor - tical actin barrier and facilitates granule access to the plasma membrane 20 , highlighting an inhibitory involvement of actin in exo - cytosis . However , although inhibition of actin polymerization does not abolishgranulemovement , itreducesmotilityandspeed 20 , supporting that , inadditiontoactingasabarrier , actinremodelingexertsanactive role in granule traf ﬁ cking . How this putative dual role of actin remo - deling regulates neutrophil exocytosis is currently unknown . Neu - trophil azurophilic granules contain a molecular machinery that enablesthedismantlingofgranule - associatedactintofavorexocytosis during the activation of regulated secretion 20 . However , because exa - cerbated exocytosis of azurophilic granules is deleterious to the host , neutrophils maintain this granule type in a refractory state even under mild stimulatory conditions that permit the secretion of more responsive secretory organelles including gelatinase granules , and thus allowing for the initiation of the innate immune response without inducing in ﬂ ammation . However , the molecular mechanisms that dif - ferentially regulate the exocytosis of neutrophil granules subtypes is currently unknown . To study this mechanism , we focused on the relationship between actin remodeling , traf ﬁ cking and exocytosis of different granule subsets . We ﬁ rststudied the possibleregulation of neutrophilsecretion by WASH . Here , we show that WASH is expressed in both human and mouse neutrophils ( Fig . 1a ) . Next , we analyzed the subcellular locali - zation of WASH by immuno ﬂ uorescence analyses of endogenous proteins . We show that WASH localizes at neutrophil granules but not at the plasma membrane . In particular , WASH was found to distribute with a population of azurophilic granules and to colocalize with the granule marker myeloperoxidase ( MPO ) ( Fig . 1b , c ) . FAM21 was also found to localize at azurophilic granules ( Supplementary Fig . 1 ) . Fur - thermore , WASH - de ﬁ ciency , which does not affect FAM21 expression 25 , was associated with a signi ﬁ cant decrease in FAM21 localization at this granulesubset ( Supplementary Fig . 1 ) . WASH isalso present at gelatinase granules in neutrophils , albeit to a lesser extent than at azurophilic granules ( Fig . 1c ) . Similar to macrophages , WASH partially colocalized with the late endosome marker LAMP1 and with lysosomal cathepsin B in neutrophils ( Fig . 1b , c ) . Neutrophils from Vav1 - driven Washc1 - knockout mice lacking WASH expression in the haemopoietic lineage ( Washc1 Δ haemo , hereon Wash - cKO ) present nor - mal expression levels of myeloperoxidase ( Fig . 1d , e ) , and elastase ( Supplementary Fig . 2 ) , two azurophilic granule cargoes produced during the promyelocytic stage . The expression of MMP - 9 ( gelatinase granules ) , formed at a late stage in the maturation process , was also similar in WT and Wash - cKO neutrophils ( Fig . 1d , f ) , suggesting normal granule maturation in Wash - de ﬁ cient neutrophils . Furthermore , 3D reconstruction ﬂ uorescence microscopy analysis con ﬁ rmed that the number of azurophilic and gelatinase granules in Wash - cKO neu - trophils was not signi ﬁ cantly different from the number of granules present in WT cells ( Fig . 1g , h ) , further con ﬁ rming that granulopoiesis is normal in neutrophils lacking WASH . Next , we analyzed the morphology and ultrastructure of Wash - cKO neutrophils . Transmission electron microscopy ( TEM ) analysis con ﬁ rmed that neutrophils lacking WASH present normal granularity ( granule density , Fig . 1i ) . As expected , in wild - type cells , all granules appeared separated from the plasma membrane , at a distance of around ~ 80 – 180nm ( Fig . 1j , inserts a – f ) , which is thought to be mediated by an actin barrier 19 . This differed from that observed in Wash - cKO neutrophils wheremany granules are docked ( Fig . 1k , insert g ) orhavefused ( Fig . 1k , insertsh – k ) withtheplasmamembrane , which in some areas appears to have been compromised ( Fig . 1k , insert l ) , after an exocytosisevent has taken place . Of note , although Wash - cKO neutrophils show areas with apparent abnormal plasma membrane Article https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1038 / s41467 - 022 - 33230 - y Nature Communications | ( 2022 ) 13 : 5529 2 expansion ( Fig . 1k , red arrows ) , the spontaneous fusion events observed in Wash - cKO neutrophils do not take place at sites of membrane extensions , instead , many ofthese events were observed at sites of membrane bending ( white arrows in Fig . 1k ) . Wash - de ﬁ ciency causes exacerbated azurophilic granule exocytosis To study the putative dynamic changes of WASH in association with neutrophil secretory organelles during neutrophil priming and acti - vation , we ﬁ rst analyzed the distribution of WASH in relationship to F - actin and the azurophilic granules in wild - type cells by Stochastic Optical Reconstruction super - resolution Microscopy ( STORM ) . We ﬁ rst show that , under unstimulated conditions , WASH appears as a tripartitecomplextogetherwithF - actinandMPOattheexocyticactive zone ( 130nm from the plasma membrane ) ( Fig . 2a ) . Only around 20 % of total azurophilic granules are exocytable under maximum stimula - tion with , for example , calcium ionophores 29 . Under physiological conditions , azurophilic granule secretion requires priming with , for example , LPS or GM - CSF , which amplify the neutrophil response to a second stimuli but are themselves weak exocytosis inducers . To test whetherprimingorstimulation alters thedistributionof WASHrelated to the azurophilic granule , we quanti ﬁ ed the proximity of WASH Article https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1038 / s41467 - 022 - 33230 - y Nature Communications | ( 2022 ) 13 : 5529 3 molecules to the nearest azurophilic granule cargo ( MPO ) using STORM . WefoundthatprimingwithLPS ( Fig . 2b ) issuf ﬁ cienttoinduce WASH withdrawal from azurophilic granules , and this phenotype is maintained after stimulation with the neutrophil chemotactic peptide , formyl - Met - Leu - Phe ( fMLF ) ( Fig . 2b ) . Next , we analyzed the distribu - tion of F - actin in relationship to neutrophil azurophilic granules in wild - type and Wash - cKO neutrophils . Azurophilic granules in Wash - cKO neutrophils were deprived of polymerized actin ( Fig . 2c ) . This differed from that observed in wild - type neutrophils , in which azur - ophilic granules are surrounded by F - actin ( Fig . 2c ) . To further visua - lize this phenomenon at higher resolution , we used STED ( Stimulated Emission Depletion ) super - resolution microscopy . Similar to that observed by confocal microscopy ( Fig . 2c ) , STED imaging shows that while azurophilic granules are surrounded by polymerized actin in wild - type cells ( Fig . 2d , white arrowheads ) , the azurophilic granules of Wash - cKO neutrophils were deprived of polymerized actin at their neighboring areas ( Fig . 2d ) . To support these observations , we per - formed two independent quantitative analyses of the association of actin to azurophilic granules . In neutrophils , azurophilic granules are surrounded by F - actin , with overlapping ( colocalized ) pixels at the edgesofgranulesbutnotinsidethegranules . First , westudiedgranule - actin adjacency , by analysis of their colocalization in the contiguous overlapping margins between granules cargoes and F - actin . We found asigni ﬁ cantdecreaseintheamountofF - actinincloseproximitytoand in the surrounding areas of azurophilic granules of Wash - cKO neu - trophils as compared to wild - type cells ( Fig . 2e ) . Next , we use Spot to Surface Distance Transformation to analyze the distance between granule molecular cargoes and their most proximal actin molecular cluster . Again , this study con ﬁ rmed that a signi ﬁ cant number of azurophilic granules from Wash - cKO neutrophils are deprived ( increased distance , Fig . 2f ) of F - actin . This was also visualized as a net decreasein the number of granules with detectable F - actin at < 300nm from the granule ( Fig . 2g ) . We hypothesized that azurophilic granules deprived of F - actin in Wash - cKO neutrophils , could gain access to the plasma membrane and engage in exocytosis , a scenario that , in wild - type cells , only occurs under the stimulatory conditions that favor the full dismantling of the actin network surrounding the azurophilic granule . Totestthis experimentally , weisolatedhighly puri ﬁ ed mature neutrophils from wild - type and Wash - cKO mice and analyzed their abilitytoundergoexocytosisinresponsetoavarietyofprimingagents and stimuli known to induce azurophilic granule exocytosis . We found that Wash - cKO neutrophils have a marked increase of azurophilic granule exocytosis under non - stimulatory conditions ( Fig . 2h ) , as determined by the release of the azurophilic granule marker MPO . These data suggest that the inhibitory mechanism that prevents the release of highly toxic components from azurophilic granules in wild - type cells is not functional in Wash - cKO neutrophils . GM - CSF and the bacteria - derived mimicking peptide fMLF , are mild inducers of azur - ophilic granules secretion in wild - type neutrophils ( Fig . 2h ) . The exa - cerbated release of azurophilic granule cargoes in Wash - cKO neutrophils in relationship to wild - type cells was maintained even under stimulated conditions ( Fig . 2h ) . Because exocytosis assays were performed using neutrophils in suspension , the exacerbated secretion observed in Wash - cKO neutrophils was independent of putative defects in neutrophil attachment or caused by different levels of β 2 integrin expression , which were normal in Wash - cKO neutrophils ( shown below ) . This differs from the reported function of WASH in integrin ( α 5 β 1 ) recycling in invasive ovarian cancer cells 30 and high - lights unique mechanisms mediated by WASH in neutrophils . Fur - thermore , increased azurophilic granule exocytosis in Wash - cKO neutrophils was not caused by differential expression of granular proteins ( Fig . 1d , e and Supplementary Fig . 2 ) . Importantly , although GM - CSF and fMLF stimuli were individually too weak to induce secretion of this granule type in WT cells , they activate exocytosis in Wash - cKO neutrophils ( Fig . 2h ) , suggesting that a subpopulation of granules that requires activation , remodeling or maturation of their secretorymachinerythroughstimulation , isthenabletoexocyteinthe absence of priming only if WASH is not present . Next , we hypothesized that azurophilic granule docking at the plasma membrane could be increased in Wash - cKO neutrophils , a phenotype thatwasalsosuggested by the TEMdatapresented inFig . 1 . To test whether increased azurophilic granule exocytosis is mediated by increased docking and / or fusion , we studied LAMP3 ( CD63 ) , a granule membrane - associated protein that , in neutrophils , is present at the membranes of azurophilic granules 31 and is translocated to the plasma membrane upon granule - plasma membrane fusion . Here , we ﬁ rst studied whether the defects in actin remodeling observed in the absence of WASH expression decreased granule motility associated with increased granule docking . To this end , we analyzed the traf - ﬁ cking of LAMP3 - positive granules in wild - type and Wash - cKO neu - trophils by Total Internal Re ﬂ ection Fluorescence Microscopy ( TIRFM ) , a technique that allows the visualization of organelles that reside in close proximity ( ∼ 100nm ) to the plasma membrane , while maintaining a high signal to background ratio . Quantitative analyses of vesicular traf ﬁ cking showed increased numbers of azurophilic gran - ules with restricted motility ( speed < 0 . 1 µ m / sec , docked ) located adjacent to the plasma membrane in Wash - cKO neutrophils . ( Fig . 2i , Supplementary Fig . 3 and Supplementary Movies 1 and 2 ) . To further analyze whether the docking of azurophilic granules was increased in Wash - cKO neutrophils , we quanti ﬁ ed the number of azurophilic granules localized proximal to the plasma membrane using a combi - natorial TIRFM and Super - Resolution Radial Fluctuations ( SRRF ) approach . Here , we show that , under unstimulated conditions , Wash - cKO neutrophils have signi ﬁ cantly higher numbers of azurophilic Fig . 1 | WASH associates with neutrophil granules . a Immunoblot analysis of WASH expression in human and mouse neutrophils . Representative of 3 indepen - dent samples . b Enhanced - resolution microscopy ( Airyscan ) of WASH related to neutrophilsubcellularorganellesbyimmuno ﬂ uorescenceofendogenousproteins . CTSB ( cathepsin B ) ; MMP - 9 ( matrix - metalloprotein 9 ) ; MPO ( myeloperoxidase ) ; LAMP1 ( lysosome - associate membrane protein 1 ) . Scale bar : 5 µ m . Colocalized zones in cells are pseudo colored in white ( binary ) . Representative of the data quanti ﬁ ed in c . c Quantitative analysis of WASH localization at neutrophil orga - nelles . n = 24 , 18 , 20 and 28 cells for CTSB , MMP - 9 , MPO and LAMP1 groups . Each symbolrepresentsonecell . Representativeoftwoindependentexperiments . Mean ± SEM , * p = 0 . 0172 and * * * * p < 0 . 0001 . one - way ANOVA , Tukey ’ s multiple compar - isons test . Lys ( lysosome ) ; GG ( Gelatinase granule ) ; Az . G , ( azurophilic granule ) ; LE ( late endosome ) . d Immunoblot analysis of protein expression in wild - type ( WT ) and Wash - cKO ( Washc1 Δ haemo ) neutrophils . MMP - 9 , ( Gelatinase granule ) ; MPO , ( Azurophilic granule ) ; hc and Ic , MPO heavy and light chains , respectively . Equal loading , Revert 700 Total Protein Stain . Representative of 3 independent mice quanti ﬁ ed in e , f . e , f Quantitative analysis of MPO and MMP - 9 expression , respectively . Mean ± SEM , n = 3 independent mice . Two - tailed Mann - Whitney test . g 3Dquanti ﬁ cationofgranulenumbersusingAiryscan . Left , 3Dstacks , presentedas maximum intensity projections . Right , Imaris rendered 3D isosurfaces : cell outline ( blue ) and nuclei ( in inset , ) purple with quanti ﬁ ed spots marking the centroids of the MMP - 9 ( red ) and MPO ( green ) vesicles based on size and intensity . Scale bar : 2 µ m . Representative of 3 independent experiments quanti ﬁ ed in h . h Quantitative analysis of neutrophil granule numbers from 491 WT and 484 Wash - cKO cells , . Mean±SEM , of16 ﬁ elds ( symbols ) containing8to50cellseach . ns , notsigni ﬁ cant , Two - tailed Student ’ s t - test . i Transmission electron microscopy ( TEM ) analysis of neutrophilgranule density . Mean ± SEM , Two - tailed Mann - Whitney test from 6 WT and 9 Wash - cKO micrographs . j , k TEM analysis of neutrophil morphology and granule fusion . j Wild - type and k , Wash - cKO neutrophils ( two cells per group are shown , representative of 3 independent mice analyzed in two independent experiments ) . j ( a – f ) , Granules appear distant from the plasma membrane in WT neutrophils . k ( g – k ) , Dockedorfusedgranulesin Wash - cKOneutrophils . k ( l ) , post - fusionevent . Whitearrows , areasofmagni ﬁ cation . Redarrows , areasofmembrane expansion . e , f , h and i , ns , not signi ﬁ cant . See Source Data ﬁ le . Article https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1038 / s41467 - 022 - 33230 - y Nature Communications | ( 2022 ) 13 : 5529 4 granulesintheexocyticactivezonecomparedtowild - typeneutrophils ( Fig . 2j ) independently of cell spreading which was decreased in Wash - cKO neutrophils ( shown below ) . Disruption of actin polymerization with cytochalasin D ( Cyt D ) , a cell - permeable alkaloid that induces neutrophil exocytosis by permitting granule access to the plasma membrane 32 , increasedaccessofgranulesintotheexocyticactivezone to similar levels in both wild - type and Wash - cKO neutrophils ( Fig . 2j ) . Altogether , these data support the granule dynamics studies and suggest that WASH negatively regulates the docking of azurophilic granules to the plasma membrane . Next , we asked whether excess azurophilic granule secretion in WASHde ﬁ ciencywascausedbyincreasedfusionorcouldbeexplained Article https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1038 / s41467 - 022 - 33230 - y Nature Communications | ( 2022 ) 13 : 5529 5 instead by an increment in kiss - and - run exocytic events . To answer this , we analyzed azurophilic granule fusion at the plasma membrane by the detection of the extracellular domainof the granule membrane - associated protein LAMP3 ( Fig . 2k ) . Using this assay , we established that the increased azurophilic granule exocytosis phenotype in Wash - cKO neutrophils was caused by full fusion of azurophilic granule membranes with the plasma membrane ( PM ) manifested as the increment of LAMP3 at the PM under both stimulated and unstimu - lated conditions ( Fig . 2k ) . Of note , different to that shown in Fig . 2h , LAMP3 incorporation into the plasma membrane was evident even in the absence of priming in both WT and Wash - cKO cells , thus high - lighting differences between fusion mechanisms and azurophilic granule cargo release . Despite these differences , our data indicate that the exacerbated secretion in the absence of WASH is manifested at both the fusion and cargo release levels . Toestablishwhethertheincreased azurophilicgranule exocytosis observed in Wash - cKO neutrophils is caused by defective actin remodeling , we next treated wild - type and Wash - cKO neutrophilswith cytochalasin D . In secretion assays , we found that only when treated with cytochalasin D , wild - type neutrophils showed high levels of azurophilic cargo secretion similar to those observed in Wash - cKO neutrophils ( Fig . 2l ) . Importantly , inhibition of the Arp2 / 3 complex with the small molecule CK666 increased azurophilic granule exocy - tosis in wild - type cells ( Supplementary Fig . 4A ) , further supporting that both genetic or pharmacological interference with actin nuclea - tionincreasesazurophilicgranuleexocytosis . However , MPOsecretion in wild - type cellsafter treatment with CK666 is signi ﬁ cantly lower than the exocytosis observed in CK666 - treated Wash - de ﬁ cient neutrophils ( Supplementary Fig . 4A ) , suggesting that WASH may negatively reg - ulate docking and exocytosis by actin - dependent and independent mechanisms . Of note , neutrophils treated with either 50 or 150 µ M CK666 , showed similar levels of Arp2 / 3 complex inhibition measured as the decreased colocalization of F - actin with Arp2 ( Supplementary Fig . 4B – E ) . CK666 also decreased the association of F - actin with azurophilic granules in wild - type cells to the levels observed in Wash - cKO cells at both 50 and 150 µ M , and no differences were observed between treatments at these CK666 concentrations ( Supplementary Fig . 4C ) . CK666 also decreased the localization of Arp2 at azurophilic granules in wild - type cells , at both concentrations , to a similar extent ( SupplementaryFig . 4D ) , supportingthatArp2 / 3regulates F - actinnear or at azurophilic granules and that 50 µ M CK666 is suf ﬁ cient to inhibit the complex in these cells . WASH interferes with the Rab27a - JFC1 axis to impede azur - ophilic granule secretion The small GTPase Rab27a is a master regulator of exocytosis and together with itseffectors JFC1 and Munc13 - 4 , they control the docking , fusion and exocytosis of azurophilic granules 19 . Because Rab27a reg - ulates azurophilic granule exocytosis , and Rab27a effectors are postu - lated to regulate actin remodeling , we next studied a possible crosstalk between WASH - de ﬁ ciency and Rab27a activation . First , we studied the distribution of WASH related to Rab27a - positive granules by immuno - ﬂ uorescenceanalysisoftheendogenousproteinsandfoundthatWASH colocalizes at puncta with Rab27a both in neutrophils ( Fig . 3a ) . This indicates that WASH and Rab27a are present at the same secretory organelle . Next , to analyze whether Rab27a and WASH physically interact , we performed pull - down analysis of WASH using either recombinant GST - Rab27a or GST as control . We found that Rab27a ef ﬁ cientlyandspeci ﬁ callyinteractswithWASH ( Fig . 3b ) . Theinteraction was further con ﬁ rmed by quantitative analysis in four independent experiments ( Fig . 3c ) . Becausetheinteractionbetween Rab27a andJFC1 is essential for azurophilic granules to undergo exocytosis 33 , we next studied whether WASH interferes with this interaction . To this end , we used a time resolved - FRET assay , consisting of the analysis of the interaction between the Rab GTPases and its effector on intact orga - nelles , thus preserving the natural environment where the interaction takes place ( Fig . 3d ) 33 . We found that WASH signi ﬁ cantly interferes with the interaction of JFC1 with Rab27a ( Fig . 3e ) . Next , we reasoned that if WASH interferes with the Rab27a - JFC1 interaction , the GTPase would more ef ﬁ ciently recruit the effector when WASH is absent . To analyze this , we performed immuno ﬂ uorescence analysis of endogenous pro - teins and show signi ﬁ cant increased recruitment of the Rab27a - effector JFC1 at MPO - positive azurophilic granules in Wash - cKO neutrophils as compared to wild - type cells ( Fig . 3f , g ) , which is also manifested under stimulatory conditions ( Supplementary Fig . 5 ) . These data suggested thatthebindingofWASHtoRab27aatthegranulemembraneinterferes with the recruitment of JFC1 by Rab27a . Because the interaction of Rab27a with JFC1 is essential for azurophilic granule secretion , the data Fig . 2 | WASH is necessary for azurophilic granule entrapment in polymerized actin and its de ﬁ ciency unlocks exocytosis of this granule subtype . a Super - resolution microscopy analysis ( STORM ) of the tripartite complex , WASH ( green ) , F - actin ( phalloidin , red ) , andazurophilicgranules , ( myeloperoxidase , MPO , blue ) in wild - type ( WT ) neutrophils . Scale bar : 1 µ m . Representative of two independent experiments . b Association of WASH with azurophilic granules in wild - type neu - trophils . Left , STORM images . WASH ( red ) , MPO ( green ) . Scale bar : 1 µ m . Right , Quanti ﬁ cation of the proximity of WASH to the azurophilic granule marker under unstimulated ( n = 18 ) , primed ( lipopolysaccharide , LPS ) ( n = 17 ) or stimulated ( LPS + fMLF ) ( n = 17 ) conditions . Mean ± SEM of % of total granules adjacent ( 200nm ) to WASH molecular clusters per cell . Each symbol represents one cell . * * * * p < 0 . 0001 . One - way ANOVA , Tukey ’ s multiple comparisons test . c Analysis of F - actin ( green ) and azurophilic granule ( MPO , red ) near the plasma membrane of WT and Wash - cKO ( Washc1 Δ haemo ) neutrophils by confocal microscopy . Scale bar : 5 µ m . n = 3 , representative of the data quanti ﬁ ed in e . d Super - resolution STED microscopy analysis of granule - actin network . Left , granules , shown in grey scale . Right , Arrowheads , azurophilicgranule ( MPO , red ) entrappedinF - actin ( phalloidin , green ) . Scalebar : 5 µ m . Representativeof15WTand16 Wash - cKOneutrophilsfrom 2 independent mice . e Quanti ﬁ cation of F - actin distribution at the granule sur - rounding areas from confocal microscopy analysis shown in c . Mean±SEM . * * * * p < 0 . 0001 . Two - tailed unpaired Student ’ s t - test . n = 51 WT and 32 Wash - cKO cells from 3 independent mice . f Spot to Surface Distance analysis between gran - ulesand theirmostproximalactin ﬁ berpuncta . WT , 10neutrophils ( 439granules ) , Wash - cKO , 10 neutrophils ( 440 granules ) . g Percentage of azurophilic granules in each cell with actin puncta at < 300nm . Mean ± SEM . * * * p = 0 . 0002 , two - tailed unpaired Student ’ s t - test . n = 10 . h Azurophilic granule exocytosis measured as secretedMPO . NS , non - stimulated . Mean±SEM . WTvs Wash - cKO : NS * * p = 0 . 0027 ; fMLF * * * p = 0 . 0005 ; GM - CSF * * * p = 0 . 0007 ; GM - CSF + fMLF * * , 0 . 0039 ; Kruskal - Wallis ANOVA multiple comparisons . n = 12 independent mice . The p values in the ﬁ gure correspond to stimulated conditions compared to their unstimulated con - trols ( paired Student ’ s t - test , one - tailed ) . # , outlier ( Grubb ’ s test ) . i Analysis of vesicular dynamics of neutrophil granules expressing EGFP - LAMP3 , at the exocy - tosis active zone using TIRFM ( Scheme ) . Vesicles were binned in two groups : restrictedmotility ( docked , 0 . 1 μ m / s ) andhighmotility ( > 0 . 11 μ m / s ) , andplottedas a percentage of total vesicles in each group for a given cell . Mean ± SEM from 20 WTcellsand12 Wash - cKOcellsfromtwoindependentexperiments . * * * * p < 0 . 0001 . Two - tailed , unpaired t - test . j Docking of azurophilic granules in the exocyticactive zone by TIRFM and Super - Resolution Radial Fluctuations ( SRRF ) . Each symbol represents a cell . ns , not signi ﬁ cant ; Mean ± SEM . WT vs Wash - cKO , * * p = 0 . 0085 ; Wash - cKO , untreated ( – ) vscytochalasinD ( CytD ) , * * p = 0 . 0019 ; * * * * p < 0 , 0001 ( one - way ANOVA , Tukey ’ s multiple comparisons test ) . n = 48 , 42 , 44 and 36 cells from three independent mice analyzed for each condition . Scale bar : 5 µ m . k Analysis of granule fusion ( LAMP3 translocation to the plasma membrane ) . n = 9 independent mice from 3 independent experiments . Mean ± SEM . * * * * p < 0 . 0001 ( one - way ANOVA , Tukey ’ s multiple comparisons test ) . In ﬁ gure p values : stimulated condi - tions compared to their unstimulated controls ( one - tailed paired Student ’ s t - test ) . l MPO secretion after treatment with CytD and the indicated stimuli analyzed by ELISA . Mean± SEM . * p = 0 . 0279 ; ns , not signi ﬁ cant , Kruskal - Wallis ANOVA multiple comparisons uncorrected Dunn ’ s test ; NS , not stimulated . Each symbol corre - sponds to an independent mouse ( n = 23 wild - type and 24 Wash - cKO mice ) from 3 independentexperiments . ns , notsigni ﬁ cant . SourcedataareprovidedasaSource Data ﬁ le . Article https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1038 / s41467 - 022 - 33230 - y Nature Communications | ( 2022 ) 13 : 5529 6 also suggest that increased amounts of JFC1 interacting with Rab27a at azurophilic granule membranes may be partially responsible for the increased azurophilic granule exocytosis observed in WASH - de ﬁ cient neutrophils . To further investigate if the increased azurophilic granule exo - cytosis in Wash - cKO neutrophils is Rab27a - and JFC1 - dependent , we utilized a recently developed neutrophil exocytosis inhibitor , Nex - inhib20 ( NEI20 ) , that interferes with the Rab27a - JFC1 interaction 33 . Here , we show that treatment with NEI20 decreases azurophilic gran - ule exocytosis in Wash - cKO neutrophils as measured by two inde - pendent approaches : MPO secretion ( Fig . 3h ) and the upregulation of LAMP3 ( CD63 ) at the plasma membrane ( Fig . 3i ) . Nexinhib20 inhibited Article https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1038 / s41467 - 022 - 33230 - y Nature Communications | ( 2022 ) 13 : 5529 7 both stimulated and unstimulated secretion in Wash - cKO neutrophils , further supporting that exacerbated exocytosis in these cells is medi - ated by the dysregulation of the Rab27a / JFC1 secretory machinery . Next , we showed that treatment with Nexinhib20 increased the amount of F - actin localized at azurophilic granules ( Fig . 3j , k ) sup - porting the previous ﬁ nding that the Rab27a - dependent secretory machinery , which includes JFC1 , decreases localized actin poly - merization in the areas surrounding the azurophilic granules during exocytosis 20 . We also show here that azurophilic granule entrapment in polymerized actin is likely a WASH - dependent mechanism because Wash - cKO neutrophils showed decreased entrapment compared to wild - type cells ( Fig . 3k ) . However , although , NEI20 partially increased granule entrapment in the F - actin network in the absence of WASH ( Fig . 3k , Wash - cKO vs Wash - cKO NEI20 ) , Wash - cKO neutrophils showed lower entrapment even after NEI20 treatment compared to NEI20 - treated wild - type cells , indicating that the difference in F - actin association with MPO granules in this model is indeed independent of the Rab27a - JFC1 interaction . Altogether , our data support a dual mechanisms regulated by WASH : On the one hand , WASH inhibits azurophilic granule secretion by an actin - dependent mechanism ; on the other , WASH blocks azurophilic granule exocytosis by preventing vesicular docking , a mechanism mediated by inhibition of the recruitment of JFC1 to the azurophilic granule , a molecule known to regulate docking through the binding of its C2A domain to phos - phoinositides present in the plasma membrane 22 , which is further supported by the observed increased docking of azurophilic granules in WASH - de ﬁ cient cells ( Fig . 2j ) . WASH is necessary for the formation of actin comets and gela - tinase granule exocytosis The secretion of neutrophil granule subsets is sequential . Thus , secondary and tertiary granules are involved in neutrophil functions that precede the functions executed by the cargoes of azurophilic granules . In neutrophils , this is regulated by the increased suscept - ibility of secondary and tertiary granules to undergo exocytosis , which is achieved by the relatively weaker stimulation required to mobilize these granule subsets as compared to azurophilic granules . Here , to investigate the role of WASH in the regulation of secondary / tertiary granule exocytosis , we analyzed the secretion of the cargo matrix MMP - 9 ( metalloproteinase - 9 / gelatinase B ) , which is present at both these granule subsets but is absent from azurophilic granules and is expressed at normal levels in Wash - cKO neutrophils ( Fig . 1d , f ) . We found that MMP - 9 secretion is not increased under basal , unsti - mulated , conditions , in WASH - de ﬁ ciency ( Fig . 4a ) . Furthermore , basal secretion of secondary granules was also not affected as determined by quantitative analysis of lactoferrin and neutrophil gelatinase - associated lipocalin ( NGAL ) , two markers of speci ﬁ c granules ( Supplementary Fig . 6 ) . However , Wash - cKO neutrophils present defective MMP - 9 secretion in response to stimuli . Thus , signi ﬁ cantly impaired secretion of MMP - 9 was observed both in response to the physiological stimuli GM - CSF and fMLF , and when neutrophils were treated with the phorbol ester PMA ( Fig . 4a ) . Despite these differences , mass spectrometric analysis of the secre - tomes of wild - type and Wash - cKO neutrophils show that differences in gelatinase granule exocytosis are driven by functional differences but not qualitative cargo composition as gelatinase granules com - ponents were commonly detected in the secretomes of both cell types ( Supplementary Table 1 ) . Thus , mass spectrometry , identi ﬁ ed mostly common cargoes including lactoferrin , protein S100 - A9 , pre - complement component C3 and NGAL in both wild - type and Wash - cKO supernatants . We also identi ﬁ ed neutrophil secretory factors , including epithelin 1 and 2 , which were not identi ﬁ ed in previous analysis of neutrophil granules , in both wild - type and Wash - cKO secretomes . These data suggested that defective gelatinase granule exocytosis does not affect , selectively , a subpopulation of granule subtype with speci ﬁ c cargoes in Wash - cKO cells but instead is likely caused by functional differences in the secretory machinery . ToanalyzewhetherWASHregulatesgelatinasegranuleexocytosis in human neutrophils , we utilized streptolysin O ( SLO ) ‐ permeabilized human polymorphonuclear leukocytes and anti - WASH inhibitory antibodies ( Fig . 4b ) , a method previously utilized to characterize the function of other components of the neutrophil secretory machinery 20 . Here , we show that inhibition of WASH signi ﬁ cantly impairs MMP - 9 secretion in human neutrophils ( Fig . 4b ) , thus recapi - tulating the phenotypes observed in Wash - cKO mouse cells . Of note , WASH inhibitory antibodies increased azurophilic granule exocytosis ( Supplementary Fig . 7 ) , further con ﬁ rming the phenotype observed in Wash - cKO neutrophils and supporting the idea that exocytosis dys - regulation is mediated by defects triggered by the absence of func - tional WASH , not by maturation defects caused by WASH de ﬁ ciency . To further understand the relationship between actin remodeling and gelatinase granule exocytosis , we next performed immuno - ﬂ uorescence analysis of the distribution of F - actin related to endo - genous MMP - 9 , as described in Fig . 2 for MPO . Different from that observed for azurophilic granules , gelatinase granules proximal to the plasma membrane were surrounded by F - actin in unstimulated Wash - cKO cells ( Fig . 4c ) . Quantitative analysis of granule - actin adjacency at relatively low resolution showed no signi ﬁ cant differences in the dis - tribution of F - actin relative to gelatinase granules between wild - type and Wash - cKO cells ( Fig . 4d ) , an observation that correlates with the absence of spontaneous secretion of MMP - 9 under unstimulated conditions . Fig . 3 | WASH interacts with the small GTPase Rab27a and controls the recruitment of JFC1 to azurophilic granules . a Immuno ﬂ uorescence analysis of endogenous WASH and Rab27a inhuman neutrophils . Scale bar : 5 µ m . Inset : White arrows denote colocalization . Red arrow , Rab27a - positive vesicles lacking WASH , green arrow , vesicles expressing WASH but lacking Rab27a . n = 3 . b Pull - down assay , Rab27aandWASHinteraction . Representativeof4independentexperiments quanti ﬁ ed in c . c Quanti ﬁ cation of pull - down assays . Mean ± SEM , n = 4 . * * * p = 0 . 0008 . Two - tailedunpaired t - test . d , e TR - FRET assayof the binding of JFC1 to Rab27a in the presence or absence of WASH . d Schematic representation . e Upper panel , Quantitative analysis of TR - FRET reactions . Mean ± SEM of three biological replicates representative of two independent experiments . * * * * p < 0 . 0001 . One - way ANOVA , Tukey ’ s multiplecomparisons test . Bottom panel , Immunoblots of the tagged proteins representative of two independent experi - ments . f Immuno ﬂ uorescence analysis of endogenous JFC1 localization at azur - ophilicgranules ( myeloperoxidase , MPO ) inwild - typeand Wash - cKO ( Washc1 Δ haemo ) neutrophils . Representative of 3 independent experiments . Scale bar : 5 µ m . g Quantitative analysisof f . Mean± SEM . Each symbol represents anindividual cell from one experiment , representative of 3 independent experiments , shown in Supplementary Fig . 5 . n = 23 WT and 25 Wash - cKO cells . * * * * p < 0 . 0001 . Two - tailed unpaired Student ’ s t - test . h Effect of the inhibition of Rab27a - JFC1 binding on azurophilic granule exocytosis in Wash - cKO neutrophils . Neutrophils were treated with the neutrophil - exocytosis speci ﬁ c inhibitor Nexinhib20 ( NEI20 ) and stimu - lated with fMLF after GM - CSF priming . Mean ± SEM from 3 independent mice . NS , notstimulated ; ns : notsigni ﬁ cant ; * * * * p < 0 . 0001 . one - wayANOVATukey ’ smultiple comparisontest . i Analysisofvesiclefusion ( LAMP3 ) withtheplasmamembranein neutrophils treated with NEI20 and stimulated with fMLF with GM - CSF priming . n = 3 independent mice . * * * p = 0 . 0002 ; * * * * p < 0 . 0001 , NEI20 vs same condition without NEI20 . one - wayANOVA , Tukey ’ s multiplecomparisons . j , k Analysis ofthe effect Nexinhib20 on granule entrapment into F - actin . j Confocal microscopy imagesofF - actin ( phalloidin ) andazurophilicgranules ( MPO ) representativeofthe data quanti ﬁ ed in k . Scale bar : 5 µ m . k Quantitative analysis of azurophilic granule entrapment . * * * * p < 0 . 0001 . n = 20 , 19 , 31 and 21 cells from 3 independent mice . One - way ANOVA , Tukey ’ s multiple comparisons test . § p = 0 . 05 vs unstimulated control ( one tailed , paired , Mann Whitney test ) . Source data are provided as a Source Data ﬁ le . Article https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1038 / s41467 - 022 - 33230 - y Nature Communications | ( 2022 ) 13 : 5529 8 Next , we analyzed the distribution of F - actin single molecular clusters at gelatinase granules using a super - resolution approach . We observed F - actin foci polarized , in comet shapes , at MMP - 9 - positive granules in wild - type cells ( Fig . 4e ) . We suggest that this polarized distribution may have a positive role on granule movement by indu - cing propulsion through the formation of structures previously referred to as comet tails 34 . Contrarily to that observed in wild - type cells , actin foci where localized surrounding MMP - 9 cluster molecules in Wash - cKO cells , but granule - associated actin comets are not prop - erly assembled in Wash - cKO neutrophils ( Fig . 4e , f ) . Quantitative ana - lysis of actinpolarized around granule protein clusters show increased numbersofcometsinwild - typeneutrophilsascomparedto Wash - cKO Article https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1038 / s41467 - 022 - 33230 - y Nature Communications | ( 2022 ) 13 : 5529 9 cells ( Fig . 4f ) . Next , to further analyze comet formation , localization coordinates for single molecule actin clusters were reconstructed and comets analyzed according to their polarization and size ( Fig . 4g ) . In this assay , single molecular clusters obtained from all ﬂ uorescent N - storm con ﬁ rmed blinks , which are previously ﬁ ltered for drift and background signals as a sphere on an image grid , were imported and a localization coordinate map built , where the centroid of the sphere is the central coordinate position in three - dimensional space , and the diameter of the sphere ( spot ) is the localization accuracy error ( Fig . 4g ) 35 . Actin spots that liewithin a de ﬁ ned distance from the MMP - 9 signal ( < 50 nm ) were considered in contact with the granule marker ( red in Fig . 4g ) and distant spots that form the comets were repre - sented in pale red . Using this approach , we established that , compared to Wash - cKO neutrophils , wild - type cells are characterized by increased comet sizes ( Fig . 4g , h ) . We also established that comet size is signi ﬁ cantly decreased in Wash - cKO neutrophils under both basal conditions and after stimulation with the bacteria - derived mimetic peptide fMLF ( Fig . 4g , h ) suggesting that WASH regulates the forma - tion of actin comets which may help regulate the exocytosis of gela - tinase granules by recruiting granules to the plasma membrane . To better understand the crosstalk between WASH function , actin polymerization and gelatinase granule exocytosis , we treated wild - type and Wash - cKO neutrophils with the cell - permeable inhibitor of actin polymerization cytochalasin D , which increases secretion of gelatinase granules by disrupting cortical actin and by allowing access of the granules to the plasma membrane 32 . Here , we show that although treatment with cytochalasin D increased the secretion of MMP - 9 in both wild - type and Wash - cKO neutrophils , the actin depo - lymerizing agent was unable to increase gelatinase B secretion in Wash - cKOcellstothelevelsobservedinwild - typecells ( Fig . 4i ) , further indicating that WASH regulates azurophilic and gelatinase granule exocytosis in different ways . In principle , depolymerization agents would inhibitboth the construction ofa corticalactinbarrier and actin comets that mediate granule propulsion . So why doesn ’ t cytochalasin D treatment equalize gelatinase granule exocytosis in wild - type and Wash - cKO neutrophils ? To answer this question , we performed ana - lysis of vesicular docking , a process that is induced by cytochalasin D treatment as demonstrated by transmission electron and ﬂ uorescence microscopy 20 . To analyze this in further detail , we quanti ﬁ ed the number of gelatinase granules proximal to the plasma membrane using super - resolution analysis of vesicular docking at < 100 nm . Using this combinatorial TIRFM and Super - Resolution Radial Fluctuations ( SRRF ) approach , we found that wild - type cells show signi ﬁ cantly higher numbersof gelatinase granules in the exocytic active zone than Wash - cKO neutrophils even under unstimulated conditions ( Fig . 4j , k ) . Disruption of cortical actin allows for the increased access of granules into the exocytic active zone in both wild - type and Wash - cKO neu - trophils but differences between the two groups were further exa - cerbated ( Fig . 4j , k ) , suggesting that WASH is necessary to recruit a primed pool of gelatinase granules to the exocytic active zone . This agrees with the difference in exocytosis observed after treatment with cytochalasin D observed in Fig . 4i and with the observation that wild - type neutrophils show increased comet formation polarized at gela - tinase granules even under unstimulated conditions ( Fig . 4g , h ) . The decreased number ofgelatinasegranules atthe exocytic active zone in both untreated and cytochalasin D - treated Wash - cKO cells ( Fig . 4j , k ) , suggestthatgelatinasegranulesofWASH - de ﬁ cientneutrophilsmaybe altered before they access the exocytic active zone despite no differ - ences in cargo or granule maturation . To analyze whether the molecular constitution of the traf ﬁ cking molecules associated to gelatinase granules in WASH - de ﬁ ciency is modi ﬁ ed before engaging in exocytosis , we analyzed their endogen - ous molecular composition . FAM21 is signi ﬁ cantly increased in gelati - nase granules of Wash - cKO neutrophils ( Fig . 5a ) . This represents an inverted phenotype to that observed in azurophilic granules in which FAM21 was signi ﬁ cantly decreased in the absence of WASH ( Supple - mentary Fig . 1 ) . Because WASH complex subunits , including FAM21 , were demonstrated to directly interact and colocalize with the small GTPase Rab21 36 , and Rab21 is both known to regulate neutrophil function 37 and shown to mediate inhibition of secretion in myeloid cells 38 , we next analyzed whether increased FAM21 affected Rab21 localization at gelatinase granules . We show that Rab21 localizes mainly at the plasma membrane of both wild - type and Wash - cKO neutrophils with minimal recruitment of Rab21 to gelatinase granules under either resting or stimulated ( Fig . 5b ) conditions , suggesting that it is highly unlikely that Rab21 is a regulator of traf ﬁ cking of this granule subtype . Next , we focused on the Ras GTPases RhoA and Rac1 , both shown to interact with the WASH complex 39 , 40 . Western blot analysis of endogenous protein expression showed increased RhoA expressionbutsigni ﬁ cantly decreasedexpressionofRac1in Wash - cKO neutrophils ( Fig . 5c , d ) . Subcellular localization analysis of the endo - genous proteins shows increased FAM21 colocalization with RhoA in Wash - cKO neutrophils , while its colocalization with Rac1 was decreased ( Fig . 5e , f ) . This correlated with a marked increase of RhoA but decreased localization of active Rac1 at gelatinase granules in WASH - de ﬁ cient neutrophils ( Fig . 5g , h ) . We next analyzed the effect of Rac1 and RhoA function in gelatinase granule secretion . Treatment with the RhoA inhibitor CT04 signi ﬁ cantly increased secretion in wild - type cells but only moderately in Wash - cKO cells ( Fig . 5i ) . Contrarily , the activation of Rac1 using CID888706 , a small molecule that Fig . 4 | WASH forms actin comets polarized at gelatinase granules and Wash - de ﬁ ciency impairs exocytosis of this granule subtype . a Gelatinase granule ( MMP - 9 ) exocytosis . Mean±SEM . Leftpanel , n = 15independentWTand Wash - cKO mice ; Right panel , 12 WT , and 10 Wash - cKO independent mice analyzed in 4 inde - pendent experiments . Left panel , G / F ( GM - CSF / formyl - Met - Leu - Phe ) . WT non sti - mulated ( NS ) vsG / F : * p = 0 . 01 ; WTvs Wash - cKO ( G / F ) : * p = 0 . 042 . ns , notsigni ﬁ cant . Rightpanel , WTvs Wash - cKO ( PMA ) : * p = 0 . 0217 ; * * * * p < 0 . 0001 . # , notsigni ﬁ cantvs WT unstimulated . b Gelatinase granule exocytosis in human neutrophils permea - bilized with streptolysin - O ( SLO ) in the presence of anti - WASH inhibitory anti - bodies or IgG control . Mean ± SEM . * p = 0 . 0176 ( IgG - NS vs . IgG - fMLF ) and * p = 0 . 0481 ( IgG - fMLF vs . α - WASH - fMLF ) . n = 4 healthy donors . c Distribution of F - actin ( Phalloidin , green ) andgelatinasegranules ( MMP - 9 , red ) inproximitytothe plasma membrane of wild - type ( WT ) and Wash - cKO ( Washc1 Δ haemo ) neutrophils , analyzed as in Fig . 2c . Scale bar : 5 µ m . Representative of 3 experiments . d Quanti - tative analysis of granule - actin adjacency , which detects the contiguous over - lapping margins between granules and F - actin . n = 44 WT and 52 Wash - cKO cells . Mean ± SEM . ns , not signi ﬁ cant . Two - tailed unpaired t - test . e Super - resolution STORM microscopy analysis of F - actin ( phalloidin , red ) comets in association with MMP - 9 - granule molecular clusters ( green ) in unstimulated wild - type and Wash - cKO neutrophils . Scale bar : 1 µ m . n = 3 experiments . f Quantitative analysis of the number of MMP - 9 clusters associated with actin comets from 19 WT and 17 Wash - cKO cells from 2 independent experiments . Mean ± SD . Two - tailed unpaired t - test . g Representation of comets by localization coordinates for single molecule actin clusters reconstructed according to their polarization and size . Representative of the data quanti ﬁ ed in h . Scale bar : 300nm . h Quanti ﬁ cation of comet length . Each symbol represents one comet from 5 independent cells either not stimulated ( NS ) orstimulated withfMLF . Atotalof 50cometsperconditionwereanalyzed . Mean± SEM . * * * * p < 0 . 0001 . i Effect of cytochalasin D treatment on gelatinase granules exocytosis . Upper panel , Representative scheme . Lower panel , Secreted MMP - 9 wasanalyzedbyELISA . NS , notstimulated , CytD / F , cytochalasinD + fMLF . n = 17WT and 16 Wash - cKO mice . Mean ± SEM . * * * * p < 0 . 0001 . Four independent experi - ments . j , k Analysis and quanti ﬁ cation of the distribution of gelatinase granules in the exocytic active zone by TIRFM and SRRF . Scale bar = 5 µ m . Each symbol represents a cell treated with cytochalasin D / fMLF or vehicle . Mean ± SEM . * * * p = 0 . 0005 ; * * * * p < 0 , 0001 . A total of 28 to 48 cells per group were analyzed . a , b , h , i and k , one - way ANOVA multiple comparisons test ( Tukey ’ s ) . ns , not sig - ni ﬁ cant . Source data are provided as a Source Data ﬁ le . Article https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1038 / s41467 - 022 - 33230 - y Nature Communications | ( 2022 ) 13 : 5529 10 increases the pool of active Rac1 to the levels observed with physio - logical agonists in several cellular systems 41 , activates Rac1 with ﬁ ve times more potency than Cdc42 ( EC 50 : wild - type Rac1 = 20 . 17nM ; wild - type Cdc42 = 100nM 42 ( https : / / www . ncbi . nlm . nih . gov / books / NB K47359 / table / ml099 . tu1 / ) and , in our hands , markedly activates Rac1 ( Supplementary Fig . 8 ) , signi ﬁ cantly increased gelatinase secretion in Wash - cKO cells under fMLF stimulation conditions , which reached the levels observed in wild - type cells treated with fMLF in the absence of exogenous Rac1 activation ( Fig . 5j ) . Both RhoA inhibition and Rac1 activation also increased gelatinase granule exocytosis in wild - type cells beyond the levels observed in Wash - cKO cells ( Fig . 5i , j ) . These differences are partially explained by the relative increased expression Article https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1038 / s41467 - 022 - 33230 - y Nature Communications | ( 2022 ) 13 : 5529 11 levels of total RhoA and decreased levels oftotalRac1present in Wash - cKO cells ( Fig . 5c , d ) . Recent research indicated that Rac1 activity is necessary for the rapid formation of signal - dependent actin ﬁ la - mentous structures in the cell periphery , and the speci ﬁ c character - istics of these structures led to the suggestion that they are formed without Arp2 / 3 involvement 43 . Our results showing that Wash - cKO neutrophils present decreased active Rac1 and reduced actin comet formation , together with the observation that treatment with CK666 does not inhibit MMP9 secretion ( Supplementary Fig . 9 ) suggest that decreased Rac1 recruitment to gelatinase granules together with impaired formation of actin comets in Wash - de ﬁ cient cells are major contributorstothesecretorydefectofgelatinasegranules . Supporting this , using quantitative super - resolution microscopy , we show that Rac1 activation rescues the phenotype in Wash - cKO neutrophils manifested as signi ﬁ cant increases in the length of actin comets associated with gelatinase granules ( Fig . 5k , l ) . Because the activation of Rac1 increases comet length and enhances secretion in the absence ofWASH , itispossiblethat thesestructuresareformedwithoutArp2 / 3 involvement as suggested before 43 . However , the putative compensa - tion of othernucleation promoting factors ( NPF ) , suchas WAVE and N - WASP , for the absence of WASH cannot be ruled out at this time ; however , treatment with 50 or 150 µ M CK666 does not inhibit MMP9secretion ( SupplementaryFig . 9A , B ) . Ofnote , theRac1activator is also reported to activate Cdc42 albeit with less potency . In this regard , the participation of Rac1 not Cdc42 in the process under study in this work is more likelybecause a ) in addition to the activator effect , we observed a decreased presenceof Rac1 atthe granules inthe Wash - cKO cells and b ) inhibition , not activation of Cdc42 is reported to activate neutrophil granule secretion 44 albeit not tested in gelatinase granules . Altogether , our data indicate that gelatinase granules in WASH - de ﬁ ciency have an altered molecular composition of traf ﬁ cking molecules before engaging in exocytosis , and that RhoA / Rac1 inver - sion , decreased Rac1 - GTP levels at gelatinase granules and decreased comet formation may all contribute to the defective secretory phe - notype of gelatinase granules in Wash - de ﬁ ciency . WASH - de ﬁ ciency impairs neutrophil function including the production of reactive oxygen species and cell migration Neutrophils produce superoxide anion through the activation of the NADPH oxidase , which dismutates to hydrogen peroxide and is sub - sequentlyutilizedbyMPOtoproducestrongeroxidants . Becausemost of the membrane - associated subunits of the NADPH oxidase reside at gelatinase / speci ﬁ c granules , it is suggested that exocytosis and the oxidase are functionally linked . To establish the functional impact of defective secondary / tertiary granule exocytosis in WASH - de ﬁ ciency , we studied the NADPH oxidase , whose activation at the plasma membrane depends on the translocation of its membrane - associated subunit , the cytochrome b 558 ( p22 phox / gp91 phox ) , from the gelatinase and secondary granules to the plasma membrane . To this end , neu - trophils from wild - type and Wash - de ﬁ cient mice were analyzed using thecytochrome c - reductionassay , thegold standard methodtodetect extracellular superoxide anion production in neutrophils . Here we show that the production of superoxide anion is signi ﬁ cantly impaired in Wash - cKO neutrophils ( Fig . 6a , b ) , a phenotype that correlates with the decreased fusion of gelatinase - positive granules with the plasma membrane . To further understand the defective production of ROS in Wash - cKO neutrophils we utilized a chemiluminescence - based assay for the detection of reactive oxidative species , products of both the NADPH oxidase and myeloperoxidase . Using the cell - impermeant probe isoluminol , we con ﬁ rmed that extracellular ROS production is signi ﬁ cantly impaired in Wash - cKO neutrophils despite exacerbated MPO exocytosis ( Fig . 6c ) . Contrarily , intracellular ROS production in response to phorbol ester and detected by the cell - permeant probe , luminol , was not signi ﬁ cantly affected in Wash - cKO neutrophils ( Fig . 6d ) supporting that defective gelatinase / secondary granule exo - cytosis and impaired NADPH oxidase activation are functionally linked in WASH - de ﬁ ciency . Because impaired actin remodeling and defective protease release are associated with impaired exocytosis and defective uropod detachment , respectively , and therefore it may affect neutrophil che - motaxis , we next analyzed the ability of Wash - cKO neutrophils to migrate in response to chemotactic gradients . We found that Wash - cKO neutrophils have defective migration , and this defect was spe - cially marked when neutrophils were challenged with the chemokine CXCL2 or with CXCL1 ( keratinocyte - derived chemokine , KC ) ( Fig . 6e ) . Although chemotaxis in neutrophils is regulated by protease - dependent cleavage of CD11b to facilitate uropod detachment , we show that the CD11b expression at the plasma membrane is normal in Wash - cKO neutrophils under either stimulated or resting conditions ( Fig . 6f ) thus ruling out a possible involvement of CD11b in the defective migration phenotype . Actin remodeling associated with spreading was also defective in Wash - de ﬁ cient neutrophils which was manifested as reduced cycles of protrusion and retraction at the edge of lamellipodia ( Supplementary Fig . 10 and Supplementary Movies 3 and 4 ) usually associated with spreading or motile cells 45 . Contrarily , Wash - cKO neutrophils formed increased ﬁ lopodia as observed , for example , in Figs . 2c and 4c . Wash - cKO mice present neutrophil - mediated in ﬂ ammation despite neutropenia Hematologic analysis of Wash - cKO mice indicate that these animals present with generally lower levels of leukocytes ( Fig . 7a ) , mainly Fig . 5 | RhoA / Rac1inversionisassociatedwithimpairedgelatinasesecretionin Wash - de ﬁ ciency . a Immuno ﬂ uorescence analysis of the localization of endogen - ous FAM21at gelatinase granules ( MMP - 9 ) . Left , representative Airyscan images of WT and Wash - cKO ( Washc1 Δ haemo ) neutrophils ; Right , Quantitative analysis from 3 independentmice . Atotalof165WTand169 Wash - cKOcellswereanalyzed . Mean± SEM . * * * * p < 0 . 0001 . b Analysis of the localization of Rab21 at gelatinase granules . Left , representative Airyscan images of WT and Wash - cKO neutrophils ; Right , Quantitative analysisfrom 3 independent mice . A totalof152 and 188 WT , and 205 and 176 Wash - cKO , not stimulated ( NS ) or stimulated ( PMA ) cells , respectively , wereanalyzed . Mean±SEM . Immunoblotanalysisoftheendogenousexpressionof totalRhoA ( c ) andRac1 ( d ) in neutrophils . Left , representative immunoblots ( grey ) and total protein loading ( red ) . Right , Mean ± SEM , 3 independent mice . c * * * p = 0 . 001 ; d * * * p = 0 . 0007 . e , f Colocalization of endogenous RhoA and Rac1 - GTP with FAM21 , respectively , by immuno ﬂ uorescence . Left , representative Air - yscanimagesofWTand Wash - cKOneutrophils ; Right , Quantitativeanalysisfrom3 independent mice . Mean ± SEM . * * * p = 0 . 0001 and * * * * p < 0 . 0001 . A total of 99 and 103 ( e ) and 107 and 117 ( f ) WT and Wash - cKO cells were analyzed . g , h Immuno ﬂ uorescence analysis of the localization of RhoA and Rac1 - GTP at gelatinasegranules ( n = 3 ) . * * * * p < 0 . 0001 . Atotalof176and269 ( g ) and100and115 ( h ) WT and Wash - cKO cells were analyzed . a – h Scale bar : 5 µ m . a – h Two - tailed unpaired Student ’ s t - test . Three independent experiments . i , j Effect of RhoA inhibition ( cell - permeableC3Transferase , 2 µ g / m ) andRac1activation ( CID888706 , 10 µ M ) on gelatinase granule exocytosis ( MMP - 9 secretion ) . Mean ± SEM , n = 3 . i * p = 0 . 0428 ; * * p = 0 . 0038 ; j * p = 0 . 0410 ; * * p = 0 . 0037 and * * * p = 0 . 0002 ; ns , not signi ﬁ cant . Ordinaryone - wayANOVA , Tukey ’ smultiplecomparisonstest . k , l Effect of Rac1 activation on the actin comet defective phenotype of Wash - de ﬁ cient neu - trophils . k STORM super resolution images of actin comets ( phalloidin , red ) at gelatinase granules shown as MMP - 9 molecular clusters ( green ) . Representative of the data analyzed in l from three independent mice . Scale bar : 1 µ m . l Quantitative analysis of actin comet length described in k . Mean ± SEM , from the analysis of 17 , 13 , 18and12cellsand292 , 205 , 498and128comets , fromwild - type , Rac1 - activated wild - type , Wash - cKO and Rac1 - activated Wash - cKO cells respectively . CID , CID888706 . Ordinary one - way ANOVA , Tukey ’ s multiple comparisons test . One outlier value in the WT - vehicle group ( Grubb ’ s alpha = 0 . 05 ) , length = 4 . 3 µ m , ( out of scale ) . Where indicated , * p = 0 . 0168 ; * * * * p < 0 . 0001 . ns , not signi ﬁ cant . Source data are provided as a Source Data ﬁ le . Article https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1038 / s41467 - 022 - 33230 - y Nature Communications | ( 2022 ) 13 : 5529 12 originated by the low numbers of circulating neutrophils ( Fig . 7b ) , a phenotype further con ﬁ rmed by the reduced numbers of Ly6G + cells in circulation of Wash - cKO mice ( Fig . 7c ) . These mice also show reduced numbers of eosinophils ( Supplementary Fig . 11 ) . To better understand the neutropenic phenotype , we next utilized high - dimensional mass cytometry ( cytometry by time of ﬂ ight [ CyTOF ] ) to study putative differences in mouse unipotent neutrophil pro - genitors ( NeP ) 46 and neutrophil sub - populations in the bone marrow of Wash - cKO mice . First , we show that bone marrows from Wash - cKO mice show similar leukocyte characteristics to control mice of identical background ( Fig . 7d ) . Next , studies of neutrophil - lineage frequency show reduced numbers of mature neutrophils in the bone marrow of Wash - cKO mice ( Fig . 7e ) . Furthermore , bone marrow neutrophils from Wash - cKO mice show distinct neutrophil pro - genitor characteristics ( Fig . 7f ) suggesting that WASH regulates the rate of neutrophil development . Despite differences in the numbers of mature neutrophils , CD11b hi Ly6G hi ( mature ) neutrophils of Wash - CKO and wild - type mice show similar pro ﬁ le expression of cluster of Fig . 6 | Wash - de ﬁ ciency is associated with impaired ROS production and migration . a Representativekineticanalysisoftheproductionofsuperoxideanion by WT and Wash - cKO ( Washc1 Δ haemo ) neutrophils stimulated with PMA and mea - sured by the cytochrome c reduction assay . Mean ± SEM , n = 3 . b Quantitative analysis of superoxide anion production . Each symbol represents an individual mouse from 2 independent experiments . n = 6 . Mean ± SEM . * p = 0 . 0166 ; * * * p = 0 . 0002 . One - way ANOVA , Tukey ’ s multiple comparisons . c Study of the production of extracellular reactive oxygen species by WT and Wash - cKO neu - trophils as analyzed by chemiluminescence using the cell impermeant probe iso - luminol . Mean±SEM , n = 3 . * * p = 0 . 0193 ( areaunderthecurve ) , two - tailedunpaired Student ’ s t - test ; d Study of the production of total reactive oxygen species by WT and Wash - cKO neutrophils as analyzed by chemiluminescence using the cell per - meant probe luminol . Mean ± SEM , n = 3 . e Analysis of wild - type and Wash - cKO neutrophil migration in response to CXCL1 ( KC ) and CXCL2 . Mean ± SEM , n = 3 . * * p = 0 . 0012 and * * * * p < 0 . 0001 . One - way ANOVA , Tukey ’ s multiple comparisons . f Analysis of the plasma membrane expression of the β 2 integrin subunit CD11b in wild - type and Wash - cKO neutrophils by ﬂ ow cytometry . Each symbol corresponds to an individual mouse from 3 independent experiments . Mean ± SEM . n = 9 for all conditions except PMA ( n = 6 ) . ns , not signi ﬁ cant . Source data are provided as a Source Data ﬁ le . Article https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1038 / s41467 - 022 - 33230 - y Nature Communications | ( 2022 ) 13 : 5529 13 differentiation ( CD ) markers that indicate the maturation status on the neutrophil development hierarchy ( Fig . 7g ) , including high expression of the immunomodulator CD101 and lack of expression of the hematopoietic cell proliferating factor c - Kit ( CD117 ) . This indicates that the neutrophil defective development phenotype in Wash - CKO is quantitative not qualitative . This is further supported by the observation that mature neutrophils from wild - type and Wash - cKO mice express similar levels of gelatinase B ( Fig . 1 ) , a granule protein that is generated late during development because tertiary granules are the last set of granules formed during neutrophil maturation 8 . Next , to establish whether WASH - de ﬁ ciency induces a pro - in ﬂ ammatory phenotype in vivo , we analyzed plasma levels of neu - trophil secretory proteins . In Fig . 7h , we show that despite their reduced neutrophil numbers , Wash - cKO mice are characterized by a marked increase in azurophilic granule cargoes in circulation . These levels of azurophilic granule cargoes in circulation were like those observed in wild - type mice after systemic pro - in ﬂ ammatory insult 47 , and are therefore an indication of neutrophil - mediated in ﬂ ammation . Azurophilic but not gelatinase granule cargoes were increased in the plasma of Wash - de ﬁ cient mice , thus con ﬁ rming , in vivo , the granule selectivity of the exacerbated exocytosis phenotype in Wash - cKO Article https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1038 / s41467 - 022 - 33230 - y Nature Communications | ( 2022 ) 13 : 5529 14 mice . Furthermore , neutrophil activation correlated with increased myeloperoxidase levels in kidney tissue ( Fig . 7i ) which may re ﬂ ect increased secretion , further supporting that neutrophil - mediated pro - in ﬂ ammatory mechanisms are activated in hematopoietic - speci ﬁ c WASH - de ﬁ ciency . Of note MMP - 9 plasma levels were not increased in Wash - cKO mice and pro - in ﬂ ammatory cytokines were present at nor - mal levels in plasma of unchallenged Wash - cKO mice ( Supplementary Fig . 12 ) supporting that dysregulated azurophilic granule secretion in Wash - cKO miceis , inprinciple , aneutrophil - intrinsicdefect . Tofurther analyze this point , we crossed the Wash ﬂ / ﬂ mice with the Mrp8 - Cre + which expresses Cre recombinase under the promoter of the neutrophil - speci ﬁ c cargo S100A8 ( Mrp8 ) . Wash ﬂ / ﬂ / Mrp8 - Cre + mice ( hereon Wash Δ PMN ) were validated by genotyping and ﬂ ow cytometry analysisofGFPwhichisbicistronicallyexpressedwith Cre inthismodel ( Supplementary Fig . 13a , b ) . Like that shown for other S100A8 - Cre models 48 , 49 , this approach yielded partial rather than total deletion of WASH in isolated mature ( Ly6G + ) bone marrow neutrophils , as con - ﬁ rmed by western blotting ( Supplementary Fig . 13c ) . Importantly , similar to Wash ﬂ / ﬂ - Vav - Cre + , in vivo analysis of Wash Δ PMN mice pre - sented dysregulated azurophilic granule secretion characterized by signi ﬁ cantly increased levels of plasma MPO ( Supplementary Fig . 13d ) despite normal MMP - 9 levels ( Supplementary Fig . 13e ) . Different from the Wash ﬂ / ﬂ - Vav - Cre + , the Wash ﬂ / ﬂ - S100A8 - Cre + model presented normal neutrophil numbers ( Supplementary Fig . 13f ) . Whether this difference is caused by a secondary effect due to Wash - de ﬁ ciency in other hematopoietic lineages in Wash - cKO or by the fact that WASH downregulation is only partial in the Wash Δ PMN model , is currently unknown . Finally , isolated mature neutrophils from Wash Δ PMN mice also presented exacerbated secretion of azurophilic granules but not gelatinase granules ( Supplementary Fig . 13g , h ) , further supporting a neutrophil - intrinsic defect associated with dysregulated exocytosis in Wash - de ﬁ ciency . WASH - de ﬁ ciency contributes to the development of systemic in ﬂ ammation during endotoxemia Wenextstudiedtheeffectof Wash - de ﬁ ciencyinamousemodelofLPS - induced systemic in ﬂ ammation . Wash - cKO mice treated with a single i . p . injection of LPS ( 5mg / Kg ) , presented two to three - fold increase of azurophilic granule cargoes in circulation compared to wild - type mice , four hours after LPS insult , a time point at which the levels of this in ﬂ ammatory mediator are maximal in this model ( Fig . 8a ) . This cor - related with decreased survival of Wash - cKO mice in response to LPS insult with 44 % reported death at 72h vs 14 % death in wild - type mice , further supporting increased systemic in ﬂ ammation in Wash - de ﬁ - ciency ( Fig . 8b ) . This difference was observed despite no signi ﬁ cant differences in the levels of the pro - in ﬂ ammatory cytokines IL1 β , IL6 , IL10 , MIP1 - α , MIP1 β andTNF α betweenwild - typeand Wash - cKOmicein response to LPS challenge ( Fig . 8c ) . However , the levels of RANTES ( CCL5 ) , a chemokine proposed to exert neutrophil recruitment 50 , and IFN γ , were elevated in Wash - cKO mice after LPS insult ( Fig . 8c ) . Discussion Actin remodeling regulates vesicular traf ﬁ cking and exocytosis by several mechanisms . In neutrophils , we showed that actin remodeling at the azurophilic granule surface facilitate traf ﬁ cking and exocytosis of theneutrophil granuleswith the most toxiccargoes 20 . We now show that WASH , a protein that regulates branched actin ﬁ lament networks by the Arp2 / 3 complex 51 , localizes at neutrophil azurophilic granules where it interferes with the Rab27a - JFC1 axis and is essential for the repressionofazurophilicgranuleexocytosisthroughthegenerationof an actin barrier at the granule membrane . Contrarily , WASH is neces - sary for the formation of polarized actin comets and positively reg - ulates gelatinase granule exocytosis and their associated functions ( i . e . , NADPHoxidaseactivation ) . WeproposethatWASHcontributesto the regulation of sequential exocytosis by favoring gelatinase granule secretion while maintaining azurophilic granules in a refractory state . Because WASH differentially regulates the exocytosis of neutrophil granule subtypes , the manipulation of WASH function could lead to strategies to selectively reduce neutrophil granule cargo - mediated in ﬂ ammation while maintaining innate immune functions . Azurophilic granule membranes contain a secretory machinery that favors actin depolymerization manifested at the granule sur - rounding areas to facilitate movement toward the plasma membrane and favor fusion 20 but , whether the regulation of actin remodeling effectors is necessary for this mechanism is currently unknown . We previously showed that secretory organelles move in areas near the plasma membrane partially deprived of polymerized actin and that dynamic vesicles maintain an apparent actin - free environment in their surroundings 20 . However , motility is attenuated by inhibition of actin polymerization 20 , highlighting positive and negative roles for actin in granule dynamics . How actin remodeling executes this dual role both facilitating and impeding neutrophil granule motility is currently not understood . Here , we show that de ﬁ ciency of the nucleation - promoting factor , WASH , in ﬂ uences neutrophil secretion of cargoes from different granules in different ways , inhibiting gelatinase but exacerbating azurophilic granule exocytosis . Our data support a model where WASH - mediated actin polariza - tion around azurophilic granules maintains this granule subset in an arrested , exocytosis - restricted , state thus preventing the secretion of the neutrophils ’ most toxic cargoes . Not only does WASH obstruct azurophilic granule exocytosis by constructing an actin trap sur - rounding these granules , but also counteracts the azurophilic granule secretory machinery by interfering with the Rab27a - mediated recruitment of the effector JFC1 , which mediates granule docking through binding to Rab27a by its amino - terminal SHD domain ( synaptotagmin - homology domain ) and to the plasma membrane through binding to phosphoinositol 3 , 4 , 5 triphosphate ( see model in Supplementary Fig . 14 ) 52 . This double negative regulation on azur - ophilic granule secretion exerted by WASH appears to guarantee an additionallevelofcontroltoensurethattheorganellewithsomeofthe most toxic , readily releasable cargoes of the organism , is maintained Fig . 7 | Wash - cKO mice present neutrophil - mediated in ﬂ ammation despite neutropenia . a , b Hematologic analysis of WT and Wash - cKO ( Washc1 Δ haemo ) mice . a White blood cells ( WBC ) counts . Mean ± SEM , n = 9 independent mice ; ns , not signi ﬁ cant . Two - tailed Mann - Whitney test . b Neutrophil counts in WT and Wash - cKO mice . Mean ± SEM , n = 9 . * p = 0 . 0229 . Two - tailed Mann - Whitney test . c Flow cytometry analysis of neutrophils ( Ly6G + ) in bone marrows from WT and Wash - cKO neutrophils . n = 3 . Mean ± SEM . * * * * p < 0 . 0001 . Two - tailed Student ’ s t - test . d CyTOF identi ﬁ es similar leukocyte characteristics in WT and Wash - cKO mice . Bonemarrowcellswerestainedwithapanelof43surfacemarkersandanalyzedby CyTOF . Live CD45 + cells were selected for viSNE and FLOWSOM analysis . e , f Analysis of neutrophil lineage in wild - type and Wash - cKO mice . e Flow cyto - metry analysis of WT and Wash - cKO bone marrow neutrophil lineage maturation status . n = 4 . f CyTOFanalysisofwild - typeand Wash - cKObonemarrowsidentifying distinctive neutrophil progenitor and precursor phenotypes . Bone marrow cells werestainedwithapanelof43surfacemarkersandanalyzedbyCyTOF . Neutrophil lineage clusters from d were selected for viSNE and FLOWSOM analysis . n = 3 . g Wash - cKOmatureneutrophilsshowasimilardevelopmentalphenotypeasinthe WTmice . viSNEmapsshowneutrophillineageclusters ’ expressionpatternsofeach CDmarkerasspectrum - coloreddots . Blue = lowexpression . Red = highexpression . n = 3 . h , i Wash - cKO mice present neutrophil - mediated systemic in ﬂ ammation . h Plasma levels of MMP - 9 ( Gelatinase granules ) or MPO ( myeloperoxidase , azur - ophilicgranules ) quanti ﬁ edbyELISA . Eachsymbolrepresentsanindividualmouse . n = 9 . Mean±SEM . ns , notsigni ﬁ cant . * * * * p < 0 . 0001 . Two - tailedunpairedStudent ’ s t - test . i Analysis of neutrophil in ﬁ ltration into kidneys of wild - type and Wash - cKO mice measured as tissue - associated myeloperoxidase by ELISA . Each symbol represents an individual mouse . n = 6 . Mean ± SEM , * * * * p < 0 . 0001 . Two - tailed unpaired Student ’ s t - test . ns , not signi ﬁ cant . Source data are provided as a Source Data ﬁ le . Article https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1038 / s41467 - 022 - 33230 - y Nature Communications | ( 2022 ) 13 : 5529 15 inactive . On the contrary , dysregulation of this mechanisms caused by the absence of WASH , induces systemic in ﬂ ammation . Although some WASP family members contain a phospholipid binding domain that mediates their recruitment to cellular mem - branes , WASH recruitment was proposed to be mediated by the WASH - complex protein FAM21 25 , which has been shown to harbor two basic regions that can interact with phospholipids 40 . Coincidently , in neutrophils , FAM21punctalocalizedatazurophilicgranulesandthusit is possible that WASH recruitment to the granules is mediated by FAM21 . However , because FAM21 localization at azurophilic granules decreasesinWASH - de ﬁ ciency , WASHmaybenecessarytostabilizethe complex at the granule membrane . Fig . 8 | Increased neutrophil secretion and decreased survival in Wash - de ﬁ - ciencyinamodelofendotoxin - inducedsystemicin ﬂ ammation . Wild - type ( WT ) and Wash - cKO mice were challenged with a single intraperitoneal injection of LPS ( 5mg / Kg ) ( E . coli 0111 : B4 , Enzo ) . Bloodsampleswerecollectedat4hafterinjection and mice were subsequently monitored for sickness and survival . a Blood samples fromwild - typeand Wash - cKOmicewerespundown , andplasmawascollectedand analyzed for the presence of myeloperoxidase ( MPO ) by ELISA . A total of 14 mice for each group were analyzed in two independent experiments . Mean ± SEM . * * * * p < 0 . 0001 , Two - tailed Student ’ s t - test . b Kaplan - Meier survival plots for wild - type ( WT ) , and Wash - cKO mice after challenge with a single intraperitoneal injection of LPS ( 5mg / kg ) . Survival curves were generated from two independent experiments with a total of 14 mice in each group . The early deceased WT mouse , Φ , denotes a statistical outlier ( Grubb ’ s , alpha = 0 . 05 ) . The difference in survival between the wild - type and Wash - cKO mice was signi ﬁ cant by the log - rank test ( Mantel - Cox ) ( * p = 0 . 0404 ) . c In ﬂ ammatory cytokines in plasma of WT and Wash - cKO mice afterLPSchallenge ( 4hours ) . Each symbol represents one mouse from 2 independent experiments . n = 14 independent mice . IL1 β , TNF α , IL6 , IL10 , KC , MIP1 α andMIP1 β , IFN α , notsigni ﬁ cant . Rantes , * * p = 0 . 0022 ; IFN γ * p = 0 . 0367 , Two - tailed unpaired Student ’ s t - test . All data in c is represented as mean±SEM . Source data are provided as a Source Data ﬁ le . Article https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1038 / s41467 - 022 - 33230 - y Nature Communications | ( 2022 ) 13 : 5529 16 WASH regulates actin cytoskeletal dynamics by activation of the actin nucleating activity of the Arp2 / 3 complex . A role for WASH - mediated Arp2 / 3 complex activation in the mechanism of azurophilic granule entrapment is supported by the observation that pharmaco - logical inhibition of this complex in wild - type cells increases azur - ophilic granule exocytosis . However , the observation that CK666 - induced azurophilic granule secretion does not reach the levels observed in WASH - de ﬁ cient cells suggest that WASH plays additional , actin - independent roles in the regulation of azurophilic granule cargo exocytosis . Our data show that WASH competes with JFC1 for Rab27a binding and thus , this additional function of WASH is mediated by interfering with the azurophilic granule secretory machinery . There - fore , at the azurophilic granule , WASH performs two functions ( a ) it induces actin polarization and granule entrapment and ( b ) displaces JFC1 from Rab27a + vesicles thus preventing JFC1 from mediating docking through PIP 3 binding 22 . Gelatinasebutnotazurophilicgranulesecretionisassociatedwith WASH - dependent , polarized actin - induced traf ﬁ cking but not cortical actin remodeling . This is supported by secretion data showing that treatment with cytochalasinD , whichfavorsexocytosisby dismantling cortical actin but also impairs traf ﬁ cking 20 , does not rescue the MMP - 9 exocytosis defect in Wash - cKO cells , and by super - resolution micro - scopy analysis showing that actin is polarized at gelatinase granules in wild - type but not in Wash - cKO cells . To characterize these defects , we focused on small GTPases which are known to regulate the function of the WASP family . In particular , the Rho family GTPase , Cdc42 , was demonstrated to release the autoinhibition of WASP and N - WASP by competingwiththeVCA ( Verprolinhomologous , centralhydrophobic , and acidic ) domain , thus exposing the binding site for Arp2 / 3 complex on VCA 53 , 54 . Similarly , WAVE proteins are regulated by the Rho GTPase Rac1 through IRSp53 55 but , whether WASH is regulated by small GTPases is still unclear . WASH has been suggested to operate down - stream of RhoA during Drosophila oocyte development 39 . Further - more , Jia et al . demonstrated that WASH binds to Rac1 40 . However , the binding of Rac1 to WASH was shown to be weak and Rac1 does not activatetheWASHregulatorycomplex 40 , suggestingthatothercellular processes may be affected by this interaction . Here , we show that in the absence of WASH , neutrophils present decreased Rac1 expression , decreased recruitment of active Rac1 at gelatinase granules , and decreased granule - associated comet formation , while pharmacologi - cal activation of Rac1 increases comet size and rescues the gelatinase granule - defective secretory phenotype in Wash - de ﬁ ciency . Our data support a mechanism where Rac1 activation facilitates the formation ofactincometsandrescuesexocytosis , although , asmentionedabove , the contribution of additional factors to this process cannot be ruled out at this point . For instance , FAM21 presence at gelatinase granules increases in WASH - de ﬁ cient cells . Park et al . demonstrated that in the absence of FAM21 excessively active actin polymerization leads to the formation of large comet tails at lysosomes leading to the conclusion that FAM21 limits or inactivates actin polymerization 56 . In agreement with these ﬁ ndings , here we show that in the absence of WASH , gela - tinase granules fail to form actin comets which also correlates with excessive accumulation of FAM21 on these granules . Our data suggest that Rac1 activation induces comet formation and gelatinase exocy - tosis , but whether FAM21 is involved in this process and how actin comets may facilitate granule directional movement or secretion requires further investigation . Thus , gelatinase granules show unique requirements for WASH - mediated polarized comet formation at these secretory organelles which are not shared by azurophilic granules . We suggest a model where WASH - mediated polarized actin remodeling may facilitate the propulsion for gelatinase / speci ﬁ c granule traf ﬁ cking to favor exocytosis of this granule subpopulation ( Supplemen - tary Fig . 14 ) . Defective gelatinase granule exocytosis is associated with decreased translocation of the membrane - associated subunit of the NADPH oxidase , the cytochrome b 558 , to the plasma membrane leading to impaired ROS production in Wash - cKO neutrophils . Here , we show thatde ﬁ ciency ofthe actin nucleatorWASH is associated with impaired activation of the NADPH oxidase in response to a bacterial - derived peptide which induces the assembly of the oxidase at the plasma membrane and activates extracellular ROS . Furthermore , although PMA activates both intracellular and extracellular assembly of the oxidase , extracellular but not intracellular ROS production was defective in response to the phorbol ester , suggesting that exocytosis defects are the main cause of oxidase impairment in WASH - de ﬁ ciency . However , whether WASH directly modulates the oxidase activity is currently unknown and a possible mechanism mediated by actin nucleation on the modulation of ROS production is plausible . For instance , actin ﬁ lament growth is proposed to prolong the NADPH oxidase lifetime during its activation 57 and dismantling F - actin in a cell - free system decreases oxidase activity . Independently of the mechanism , which may require further investigation , our data suggest that an increase of WASH activity may favor the activation of the oxi - dase while blocking azurophilic granule exocytosis , a scenario that may be bene ﬁ cial under conditions in which enhancing the innate immune response without inducing in ﬂ ammation may be required . In vivo experiments show that Wash - cKO mice present high levels of the azurophilic granule cargo myeloperoxidasein circulation , a pro - oxidant enzyme that also has nitric oxide oxidase activity 9 and con - tributes to the development of endothelial malfunction in sepsis and SIRS . Because azurophilic cargo exocytosis is not selective for the cargo , these data indicate that all azurophilic granule cargoes are elevated in the plasma of Wash - cKO mice including potent serine proteases like elastase , proteinase 3 and cathepsin G 58 . Contrarily , gelatinase is not detected in circulationin Wash - cKO mice . Azurophilic granule - mediated systemic in ﬂ ammation in Wash - cKO mice occurs despite normal levels of pro - in ﬂ ammatory mediators and normal gelatinase levels supporting that this is largely due to a neutrophil - intrinsic cellular defect , although a possible contribution of RANTES and IFN γ , which were elevated in the endotoxin - induced in ﬂ ammation model in Wash - de ﬁ ciency , cannot be ruled out at this time . The phe - notype is also manifested regardless of the lower number of mature neutrophils present in the blood of Wash - cKO mice . An increased number of immature neutrophils are present in the bone marrow of Wash - cKO mice , and immature cells are frequently released to circu - lation in some pro - in ﬂ ammatory conditions 46 , it is therefore possible that immature neutrophils contribute to the neutrophil - mediated pro - in ﬂ ammatory genotype in Wash - cKO mice . However , a neutrophil intrinsic defect of exacerbated azurophilic granule secretion in Wash - de ﬁ ciency is supported by three additional observations : ( a ) neutrophil - speci ﬁ c Wash ﬂ / ﬂ / Mrp8 - Cre + mice , which are not neu - trophilic , also have signi ﬁ cantly increased plasma MPO levels , albeit not as high as those observed in Wash ﬂ / ﬂ / Vav - Cre + mice . ( b ) isolated Wash Δ PMN neutrophils maintain the dysregulated secretory phenotype , which is also in part recapitulated in wild - type neutrophils by treat - ment of with an Arp2 / 3 inhibitor ; ( c ) inactivation of WASH in mature human neutrophils recapitulates the secretory defective phenotypes of Wash - de ﬁ cient neutrophils . Altogether , we propose that neutrophil intrinsic mechanisms contribute to the in vivo pro - in ﬂ ammatory phe - notype in Wash - de ﬁ ciency and that this may be aided by the increased release of pro - in ﬂ ammatory cytokines and immature neutrophils in the Wash - cKO model . In conclusion , we have characterized the molecular mechanisms linking defective , granule - associated actin remodeling , with impaired sequential neutrophil exocytosis and have complemented these ﬁ nd - ings with data showing differentially dysregulated cargo exocytosis in vivo leading to systemic in ﬂ ammation . In particular , we show that de ﬁ ciency of the actin nucleator WASH is associated with decreased Rac1 and defective actin comet formation , leading to impaired gelati - nase granule secretion , while increased azurophilic granule exocytosis Article https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1038 / s41467 - 022 - 33230 - y Nature Communications | ( 2022 ) 13 : 5529 17 in WASH - de ﬁ ciency is caused by excessive recruitment of the Rab27a effector JFC1 and decreased entrapment of this granule subtype in polymerized actin . We postulate that genetic or pharmacological approaches to promote WASH activation could lead to translational mechanisms to reduce neutrophil - mediated in ﬂ ammation caused by exacerbated secretion of azurophilic granule proteases and pro - oxidant enzymes while maintaining some of the essential neutrophil responses to infection . Methods Animals C57BL / 6 Washc1 ﬂ ox / ﬂ ox / Vav - cre + mice ( Wash - cKO ) and co - housed C57BL / 6 + / ﬂ ox / Vav - cre - ( WT ) or C57BL / 6 controls were used in this work . The Washc1 ﬂ ox / ﬂ ox / Vav - cre + mouse conditionalknockout model , lacking WASH expression in the haemopoietic linage ( Washc1 Δ haemo , hereon Wash - cKO ) was generated as previously described 59 . Wash ﬂ / ﬂ / Mrp8 - Cre + mice ( hereon Wash Δ PMN ) were generated by crossing the Wash ﬂ / ﬂ mice with the Mrp8 - Cre + ( Tg - S100A8 - cre , ires - EGFP ) 1Ilw / J mice , strain # : 021614 , The Jackson Laboratory , which expresses Cre recombinase under the promoter of the neutrophil speci ﬁ c cargo S100A8 ( Mrp8 ) , and directs bicistronic Cre and EGFP protein expression to CD11b + , Ly6G + , granulocytes . The characterization of this model was per - formed by genotyping using Transnetyx technology for the detection of both the presence of the deleted allele and the Cre allele , PCR for con ﬁ rmation , ﬂ ow cytometry and immunoblotting analysis of WASH expression in Wash ﬂ / ﬂ / Mrp8 - Cre + mice ( Supplemental Fig . 13a – c ) . Mice were maintained in a pathogen - free environment and had access to foodandwateradlibitum . Housingconditionsincluded12 - hdark / light cycle ( light 6 a . m . to 6 p . m . ) , ambient temperature 24 °C and humidity 50 % . The mice genotypes were determined by Transnetyx and lack of WASH protein expression con ﬁ rmed by Western blot . Animals were euthanized by over - anesthetization by standard and approved proto - cols . All animal studies were performed in compliance with the Department of Health and Human Services Guide for the Care and Use of Laboratory Animals . All studies were conducted according to National Institutes of Health and institutional guidelines and with approvaloftheanimalreviewboardsatTheScrippsResearchInstitute . Mouse neutrophil isolation Bone marrow cellsfrom experimentalmales and females , 6 to 10 - week old mice and sex and age - matched control mice were collected from the long bones of mouse legs by ﬂ ashing the bones with 5ml of PRF - RPMI using a 30 Gauge ½ ” hypodermic needle and a BD Luer - Lok ™ 10mlsyringe . Bone marrow – derived matureneutrophils wereisolated by positive selection using Anti - Ly6G MicroBead Kit or Anti - Ly6G MicroBeads UltraPure puri ﬁ cation kit ( Miltenyi Biotec , 130 - 120 - 337 ) . The information for reagents providers and catalogue numbers is provided in Supplementary Table 2 . Isolation of human neutrophils Human neutrophils were isolated from normal donor ’ s blood by Ficoll density centrifugation as previously described 60 . All procedures regarding human subjects have been reviewed and approved by the Human Subjects Committee at The Scripps Research Institute and were conducted in accordance with the requirements set forth by the mentioned Human Subjects Committee and in accordance to NIH guidelines . Informed consent was provided by the donors . Western blotting Proteins were separated by gel electrophoresis using BOLT TM gels and 3 - ( N - morpholino ) propanesulfonic acid buffer ( Life Technologies , NW04120BOX ) . Proteins were transferred onto nitrocellulose mem - branes for 60min at 100 volts , at 4 °C . The membranes were blocked with tris - buffered saline ( TBS ) containing 5 % ( wt / vol ) blotting - grade nonfat dry milk blocker ( Rockland , Limerick , PA ) and 0 . 1 % ( wt / vol ) Tween 20 . Proteins were detected by probing the membranes with the indicated primary antibodies at appropriate dilutions and using a detection system consisting of horseradish peroxidase – conjugated secondary antibodies ( Bio - Rad Laboratories , Hercules , CA ) and the chemiluminescencesubstratesSuperSignal , WestPico , andWestFemto ( Thermo Scienti ﬁ c ) and then visualized using the c600 Azure Biosys - tem or by ﬁ lm development . All original blots are shown as either source data or in Supplementary Fig . 15 . Immuno ﬂ uorescence microscopy analysis Neutrophils were seeded on untreated coverglasses using 4 - Chamber 35mm dish with 20mm microwells ( Cellvis LLC Cat # D35C4 - 20 - 1 . 5 - N ) and incubated at 37 °C for 30min , then ﬁ xed with 3 . 7 % paraf - ormaldehyde for 8 min , permeabilized with 0 . 01 % saponin , and blocked with 1 % BSA in PBS . The samples were labeled with the indi - cated primary antibodies overnight at 4 °C in the presence of 0 . 01 % saponin and 1 % BSA . Samples were washed and subsequently incu - bated with appropriate secondary antibodies for 2 hours at room temperature . The cells were then stained with DAPI and mounted with Fluormount G . Where indicated , F - actin was labelled with 5 µ l of a 6 . 6 µ M concentration of Alexa 488 - or Alexa 647 - Phalloidin in 200 µ l PBS with 0 . 05 % Triton X - 100 . Samples were analyzed with a Zeiss LSM 880 laser scanning confocal microscope attached to a Zeiss Observer Z1microscopeat 21°C , usinga63×oilPlanApo , 1 . 4 numericalaperture ( NA ) objective . Where indicated , the images were collected using enhanced resolution microscopy ( Airyscan ) which generates images with substantially increased SNR ( signal - to - noise ratio ) 61 . Images were collected and ﬂ uorescence intensity and colocalization quanti ﬁ ed using ZEN - LSM software . Actin colocalization at the edges of granules was analyzed using Manders ’ correlation coef ﬁ cient as described below . The images were processed using ImageJ . Images acquisition and colocalization analysis All 8 - bit images were acquired using the full dynamic intensity range ( 0 – 256 ) of the speci ﬁ ed ﬂ uorophores . Stacks ( on average 20 slices ) were acquired with Nyquist resolution parameters using a 0 . 3 µ m step size and optimal frame size of 1932 ×1932 . Images were processed for quantitative colocalization in either Zen Pro in 2D ( Zeiss ) or Image Pro Premier 10 ( IPP10 ) ( Media Cybernetics ) . Brie ﬂ y , maximum intensity projections ( MIP ) were generated in Zen then processed using the Zen or IPP10 colocalization modules . Samples stained for secondary anti - bodies and unlabeled controls alone were used to de ﬁ ne thresholds of real signal above background and non - speci ﬁ c signal , which were typically and conservatively set at ( 50 – 80 to 256 ) . In Zen or IPP10 , regions of interest ( ROI ) s were drawn around each individual cell , previously de ﬁ ned minimum thresholds were input , two ﬂ uorescent channels signalsare selected and the software automaticallycalculates pixel intensity spatial overlap coef ﬁ cients between them ( both Man - der ’ s and Pearsons are scored ) . Mander ’ s overlap coef ﬁ cient ( MOC ) was primarily used and is described as MOC = ∑ i ( Ri× Gi ) ∑ iRi2 x ∑ iGi2 where Ri is the intensity of the ﬁ rst ﬂ uorophore in an individual pixel , whereas Gi is the corresponding intensity for the second ﬂ uorophore in the same pixel . Where indicated areas of overlap were pseudo - colored in white ( binary ) to mathematically and spatially de ﬁ ned colocalized zones in cells . Quanti ﬁ cation of F - actin proximity to neutrophil granules To establish granular entrapment in F - actin , we analyzed F - actin adja - cency to neutrophil granules . To this end we utilized Spot to Surface Distance Transformation ( SSDT ) module to de ﬁ ne the granular cen - troid location and automatically calculate its distance to the most proximalactin ﬁ berinthree - dimensionalspace . Speci ﬁ cally , withinthe Imaris software , we utilized the three - dimensional SSDT module to de ﬁ ne and mark the centroid of all MPO ﬂ uorescent positive bright regions of interest ( ROI ) based on their voxel space and was de ﬁ ned as Article https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1038 / s41467 - 022 - 33230 - y Nature Communications | ( 2022 ) 13 : 5529 18 a spot . Each spot of a de ﬁ ned intensity and voxel volume was asso - ciated with the most proximal F - actin ﬁ ber which was iso - surfaced in Imaris . The SSDT module scored the proximity for each pair of MPO spots and iso - surfaced phalloidin F - actin ﬁ ber . The SSDT module scoredtheproximityforeachpairofMPOspotsandphalloidinpuncta . The data were binned in the nm scale at prede ﬁ ned distance intervals and plotted using Prism . Transfection of mouse neutrophils Mouse neutrophil nucleofection was carried out using the 4D - Nucleofector X Unit system ( Lonza ) following the manufacturer ’ s instructions . Inbrief , mouseneutrophilswerecounted , and1× 10 6 cells were resuspended in 20 μ l of Lonza P3 solution with 1 μ g of DNA and the solutions were transferred into the X Unit and then subjected to nucleofection in the 4D - Nucleofector using program EA - 100 . The cells were then resuspended in phenol red – free RPMI ( Life Technologies ) and seeded into four - chamber 35mm glass - bottom dishes ( No . 1 . 5 borosilicate coverglass ) . The cells were incubated at 37°C in a tissue culture incubator ( 5 % CO 2 ) , and used in ﬂ uorescence - based assays 3 – 4 h after transfection . Total Internal Re ﬂ ection Fluorescence ( TIRF ) Microscopy TIRFM experiments were performed using a 100× / 1 . 45 NA TIRF objective ( Nikon Instruments , Melville , NY ) on a Nikon TE2000U microscope custom modi ﬁ ed with a TIRF illumination module as described 20 . Images were acquired on a 14 - bit , cooled charge - coupled device ( CCD ) camera ( Hamamatsu ) controlled through NIS - Elements software . After placing the cells on the stage , the position of the individual laser beams was adjusted with the TIRF illuminator to impinge on the coverslip at an angle to yield a calculated evanescent ﬁ eld depth of a 100 or 400 nm for TIRFM and pseudo - TIRFM modes , respectively . For TIRFM , the objective is pre - calibrated for Z - position assignment and for chromatic shift between the channels using 100nm Tetraspeck beads as speci ﬁ ed by Nikon . For pseudo - TIRFM , the calculation of the penetration depth was performed by measuring the position at which the beam is exiting from the center of the objective and subsequently correlated to the penetration depth vs the displacementof thebeamfromthecenterusingtheexponentialdecay depth equation described in ref . 62 and incorporated in the Nikon software . Thepenetrationdepthfordifferentwavelengthsisestimated plus or minus 20nm for a given beam position . For live experiments , theimages were recorded using200 – 300 msexposuresdepending on the ﬂ uorescence intensity of the sample . Vesicles and actin dynamics was tracked using surface rendering or spots modules in IMARIS . Stochastic Optical Reconstruction Microscopy ( STORM ) Imaging STORM analysis was performed as we described previously 35 . Brie ﬂ y , super - resolution microscopy using the Nikon STORM system is based on the stochastic optical reconstruction microscopy ( STORM ) tech - nology that was developed by Xiaowei Zhuang ’ s laboratory at Harvard University 63 . In this method , the position of individual molecules is localized with high accuracybyswitching them on and off sequentially using appropriate laser power settings and buffer conditions . For neutrophil experiments , cells seeded in glass bottom dishes ( # 1 . 5 borosilicate cover glass ) are ﬁ xed with freshly made 4 % paraf - ormaldehyde for 10min at room temperature , permeabilized , and blocked for 1 h with 1 % BSA in PBS . The cells are labeled with primary antibodies in blocking solution for 2h at room temperature , washed , and then incubated with the following secondary antibodies : For two - color STORM , Alexa - 647 - and Atto - 488 or Alexa - 488 - conjugated sec - ondaryantibodiesareusedtolabeltheproteinsofinterest 35 . Forthree - color super - resolution imaging , Alexa - 568 - conjugated Phalloidin was used as a third channel in addition to the above two sets of secondary antibodies . The samples were washed , post - ﬁ xed with freshly made 4 % paraformaldehyde , and re - washed with water . Prior to STORM ima - ging , the samples were incubated in freshly prepared STORM buffer ( 50mM Tris buffer ( pH 8 . 0 ) , 10 mM NaCl , 10 % glucose , 0 . 1 M mer - captoethanolamine , 56 units / ml glucose oxidase , and 340 units / mL catalase ) . The STORM buffer is prepared by adding 100 μ l of MEA solution and 10 μ l of GLOX solution to 890 μ l of buffer B ( 50mM Tris buffer ( pH 8 . 0 ) , 10 mM NaCl , 10 % Glucose ) . The samples were placed on the microscope stage , and then imaged using a 100 × 1 . 49 NA Apo TIRF objective either with or without TIRF illumination . Images were collectedataframerateofabout15mson256×256pixelregionofthe EMCCD camera using the multicolor sequential mode setting of the Nikon STORM module in Elements software 35 . Three - dimensional ( 3D ) STORM images are generated by introducing a cylindrical lens in the light path , which enables the assignment of Z position based on the shape of the point spread function . Before STORM imaging , the objective is pre - calibrated for Z position assignment and for chromatic shift between the channels using 100 - nm Tetraspeck beads as speci - ﬁ ed by Nikon . After initially photo bleaching the samples using high laser power , the power on the lasers is adjusted , so that between 50 and 300 molecules can be mapped per frame for each channel . Acquisitionisstoppedafterasuf ﬁ cientnumberofframesarecollected ( yielding 1 - 2 million molecules ) , and the super - resolution images are reconstructed with the Nikon STORM software . Automatic correction for lateral and axial drift was performed by using an autocorrelation method . Axialdrift over the course of the acquisitionis also minimized by engaging the Nikon perfect focus system . The position of well - separated molecules is estimated from the diffraction - limited images producedbythesoftwareandtheprecisionofthelocalizationduringa switching cycle from the photon count of the individual switching event . Mean localization accuracy of about 20 nm is in good agree - ment with those reported previously , which was also con ﬁ rmed using Alexa - 488 , − 568 , and − 647 labeled IgG molecules that hadbeen spread on coverslips at a low density . A Gaussian ﬁ t is used by the software to localize the position of each event to the ﬁ nal super - resolution image . Three - dimensional STORM Data analysis Images obtained on the Nikon N - storm ( Nikon Inc ) system were con - verted to high resolution images , fully calibrated , and imported into Imaris ( Bitplane Inc ) where they were analyzed using two well estab - lished modules : Spots , to mark the centroid location , and Colocalized Spots , to mark and scorepaired spots thatlie within a de ﬁ ned distance from each other in three - dimensional space as previously described 64 . The spots created areanalyzed using the Colocalized Spots module , to mark and score paired spots that lie within a de ﬁ ned distance from each other in three - dimensional space . Speci ﬁ cally , the imported localization coordinate map of all ﬂ uorescent N - storm con ﬁ rmed blinks , whichare previously ﬁ ltered for drift and background signals in the NIKON software , are represented as spheres in IMARIS where the diameter of the sphere represents the localization accuracy , and their centroid is used to compare distances between same and different paired molecules . For comet analysis , single molecular clusters obtained from all ﬂ uorescent N - storm con ﬁ rmed blinks , were impor - ted and a localization coordinate map built , where the centroid of the sphere is the central coordinate position in three - dimensional space , andthediameterofthesphere ( spot ) isthelocalizationaccuracyerror . Actin spots thatliewithin a de ﬁ ned distance ( < 50nm ) fromthe MMP - 9 signal ( green ) were considered in contact with the granule marker ( red ) and distant spots that form the comets were represented in pale red . STED super resolution microscopy Neutrophils ( 200 , 000 ) were seeded in a 4 - quadrant dish for 30min at 37 °C , ﬁ xed and permeabilized using 400 μ L of 0 . 3 % glutaraldehyde and 0 . 25 % Triton X - 100 in Cytoskeletal Buffer ( 10 mM MES , pH 6 . 1 , 150 mM NaCl , 5mM EGTA , 5 mM glucose and 5mM MgCl 2 ) for 2 min . Article https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1038 / s41467 - 022 - 33230 - y Nature Communications | ( 2022 ) 13 : 5529 19 This was followed by a second ﬁ xation step using 400 μ l of 2 % glu - taraldehyde in Cytoskeletal Buffer for 10min . The samples were trea - ted with 1ml 0 . 1 % NaBH4 ( freshly prepared in PBS ) for 7min to reduce background ﬂ uorescence and washed with PBS for three times , each timeallowing for 10minincubation . The cellswere permeabilized with PBS containing 1 % BSA and 0 . 2 % TX - 100 for 15min at room tempera - ture , subsequently blocked with PBS with 1 % BSA for 1 hour at room temperature and incubate with anti - mouse MPO primary antibody ( Hycult ) overnight at 4 °C . The samples were stained with STAR - red secondary antibody and Alexa - 594 - phalloidin . The samples were ana - lyzed , and images acquired using an Abberior STEDYCON STED super resolution microscope . Super - resolution radial ﬂ uctuations ( SRRF ) Super resolution images of neutrophil granules near the adherent cell surface were obtained by processing TIRF microscopy images using the SRRF method 65 . Neutrophils were seeded on 8 - well chamber slides with # 1 . 5 coverglass bottoms , ﬁ xed , and immunostained for MMP - 9 and MPO with an AlexaFluor - 488 or AlexaFluor - 647 secondary anti - bodies , as above . When indicated , cells had been treated with cyto - chalasin D . Images were acquired on the Oxford Nanoimager ( Oxford Nanoimaging ) with a 63x / 1 . 49 NA oil objective and a 117nm pixel size . The 473 nm excitationlaser wasset atthe criticalangle to achieve TIRF illumination . For each image , 50 frames were acquired . These image sets were processed with the FIJI plugin SRRF 66 using default settings , resulting in a single image with improved resolution ( 23 . 4nm pixel size ) , in which individual granules could be visualized . At least 5 ﬁ elds - of - view were acquired for each condition in 3 separate experiments . Neutrophil stimulation , ELISA , cytokine analysis and ﬂ ow cyto - metry analysis Mouse neutrophils ( 1×10 6 ) isolated from the bone marrow of WT and Wash - CKO mice , were resuspended in phenol - red free RPMI and either treated with GM ‐ CSF ( 10ng / ml ) , LPS ( 100ng / ml ) , cytochalasin D ( 1 µ g / ml ) or left untreated for 30min at 37°C , at which point the cells were stimulated with 10 µ M fMLF for 10 min . Where indicated , cells were stimulated with 100ng / ml PMA for 30min at 37 °C . Also , where spe - ci ﬁ ed , the cells were treated for 1 hour with a RhoA inhibitor ( cell - permeable C3 Transferase , 2 µ g / ml , Cytoskeleton , CT04 ) , a Rac1 acti - vator ( CID888706 , 10 µ M ) , the Arp2 / 3 inhibitor CK666 ( 50 µ M or 150 µ M ) or the Rab27a - JFC1 binding - inhibitor , Nexinhib20 ( 10 µ M ) before stimulation . The cells were spun down and the supernatants were collected for ELISA analysis . MMP - 9 ELISA was performed using theR & DmouseMMP - 9ELISA duokit . MPO ELISAwasperformed using the R & D mouse MPO ELISA duo kit . Mice cytokines were analyzed using multiplex technology ( Millipore ) . To evaluate the plasma mem - brane expression of CD11b or CD63 , the cells were blocked in PBS with 1 % BSA for 10min and stained with anti – mouse CD11b or CD63 - Alexa 647 ( clone M1 / 70 ; BD Biosciences , San Jose , CA ) . Ly6G staining was used to gate the neutrophil population using anti – mouse - Ly6G - ﬂ uor - escein isothiocyanate ( clone 1A8 ; BD Biosciences ) . The cells were then washed , ﬁ xed with 1 . 5 % paraformaldehyde and the samples were ana - lyzed using the NovoCyte 3000 ﬂ ow cytometer with BD FACS Diva 6 software , and the data were processed using FlowJo ( Ashland , OR ) software . TR - FRET protein binding assays TR - FRET reactions were performed as described before 33 . Brie ﬂ y , cell lysates , obtained using nitrogen cavitation to preserve the integrity of organelles , expressing Myc - JFC1 or EGFP - Rab27a and mCherry - WASH were mixed and incubated with a terbium - conjugated anti - Myc anti - body for 10 minutes . The samples were excited at 340 nm . The emis - sionpeak of terbium ( centered at490 nm ) overlapswiththeexcitation spectrum of GFP . FRET signal is measured by detecting GFP emission at 520 nm , and results are expressed as the emission ratio of the acceptor ( GFP , 520nm ) / donor ( terbium , 490nm , used as internal control ) . An increased emission ratio is indicative of speci ﬁ c binding . Mass cytometry analysis ( CyTOF ) of mouse neutrophils BM cells were harvested from femurs , and tibias of 6 - 10 week old mice as previously described 67 . Brie ﬂ y , bones were centrifuged for the col - lection of marrow into ice cold D - PBS ( Gibco ) with 2 mM EDTA to prevent cation - dependent cell - cell adhesion . Prior to staining cells , cells were subject to a red blood cell lysis ( RBC lysis buffer , eBios - ciences ) at room temperature . Cells were washed and ﬁ ltered through a 70 μ mstrainer . Cellsuspensions were prepared by sieving and gentle pipetting to reach ﬁ nal concentration of 3 ×10 6 cells per 100 µ l buffer . Metal - conjugated antibodies were purchased directly from Flui - digm for available targets . For all other targets , antibody conjugations were prepared using the Maxpar Antibody Labeling Kit according to the recommended protocol provided by Fluidigm . All antibodies used in CyTOF are described in Supplementary Table 3 and their working dilutions in Supplementary Table 4 . Maxpar - conjugated antibodies were stored in PBS - based antibody stabilization solution ( Candor Biosciences ) supplemented with 0 . 05 % NaN3 at 4 °C . All antibodies were titrated before use . Flow cytometry staining was performed in FACS buffer ( D - PBS + 1 % BSA + 0 . 1 % sodium azide + 2 mM EDTA ) on ice . Prior to surface staining , anti - CD16 / 32 ( FITC ) antibody was added for 15min to stain and block the Fc receptors . Surface staining was performed for 30minutes in a ﬁ nal volume of 100 µ l . Cells were washed twice in at least 200 µ l FACS buffer before acquisition . Results were acquired using an LSRII or an LSR Fortessa ( BD Biosciences ) . All ﬂ ow cytometry was performed on live cells . Calculations of percentages of CD45 + immune cells were based on live cells as determined by forward and side scatter and viability analysis . All analyses were repeated at least 3 times , and purity of sorted fractions was checked visually and by rea - nalysis of the surface markers . Data were analyzed using FlowJo ( ver - sion 10 . 1r5 ) . A ﬁ gure exemplifying the gating strategy can be found in the Supplementary Information ( Supplementary Fig . 16 ) . CyTOF was performed following previously described protocols 67 , 68 . Brie ﬂ y , 5 μ M Cisplatin ( Fluidigm ) were used to deter - mine viability . Prior to surface staining , RBC - lysed WB cells were resuspended in staining buffer for 15minutes on ice to block Fc receptors . The surface antibody cocktail was added into cell suspen - sionsfor1hourat4 °C . Thecellswere thenwashedwith stainingbuffer and ﬁ xed with 1 . 6 % paraformaldehyde ( Thermo Fisher ) for 15minutes at RT . Afterwards , 1ml of intercalation solution for each sample was prepared by adding Cell - ID Intercalator - Ir ( Fluidigm ) into Maxpar Fix and PermBuffer ( Fluidigm ) to a ﬁ nalconcentrationof125nM ( a1000X dilution of the 125 μ M stock solution ) and vortex to mix . After ﬁ xation , the cells were resuspended with the intercalation solution and incu - bated overnight at 4°C . Cells were then washed in staining buffer , and then with subsequent washes in Cell Acquisition Solution ( CAS ) ( Flui - digm ) , to remove buffer salts . Next , the cells were resuspended in CAS with a 1 : 10 dilution of EQ Four Element Calibration beads ( Fluidigm ) and ﬁ ltered through a 35 μ m nylon mesh ﬁ lter cap ( Corning , Falcon ) . Samples were analyzed on a Helios 2 CyTOF Mass Cytometer ( Flui - digm ) equipped with a Super Sampler ( Victorian Airship & Scienti ﬁ c Apparatus ) at an event rate ≤ 500 events / second . Mass cytometry data ﬁ les were normalized using the bead - based Normalizer 69 and analyzed using Cytobank analysis software ( https : / / www . cytobank . org / ) . Stimulated secretion in SLO ‐ permeabilized human neutrophils Secretory assays using SLO ‐ permeabilized cells were performed as previously described 19 . Brie ﬂ y , neutrophils were washed twice with PBS and resuspended in permeabilization medium . Human neu - trophils ( 2 . 5 ×10 6 ) were resuspended in permeabilization buffer ( 100 μ l ) and transferred to a tube containing 2 μ l of 2500 units / mL SLO in the presence of the indicated antibodies ( 50 μ g / ml ) and Article https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1038 / s41467 - 022 - 33230 - y Nature Communications | ( 2022 ) 13 : 5529 20 incubatedat37°Cfor5min . Whereindicated , thecellswerestimulated with fMLP ( 1 μ M ) for additional 15 min . The reactions were stopped by transferring the samples to ice and immediately centrifuged at 16 , 000× g at 4 °C for 5 min . Supernatants were stored at − 20°C until the assays were performed . MMP9 in the condition medium was ana - lyzed by immunoblotting . Plasma membrane upregulation of CD63 ( LAMP3 ) was analyzed by ﬂ ow cytometry . The anti - mWASH ( 360 – 472 ) antibody used in this assay was described previously ( 25 ) . Pulldown assay Cells ( 293 T cells , ATCC , CRL - 3216 ) were transfected with mCherry - WASH1 - C - 18 construct for 48 hours , and then lysed using lysis buffer ( 20 mMTrispH : 8 , 137mMNaCl + 0 . 5 % TritonX - 100 ) , thesampleswere cleared by centrifugation and the supernatants were collected . Glu - tathione Sepharose 4B beads were incubated with 100 pmol of GST - Rab27a protein for 75min at 4 °C , followed by 3 washes with PBS . The conjugated protein - bead mixture was then incubated with the cell lysates , overnight , at 4 °C . Following three washes with wash buffer ( PBS , 0 . 05 % Tween - 20 ) , the beads were resuspended in NuPAGE sample buffer , boiled and the pulldown samples were subjected to Western blotting . Expression vectors The mCherry - WASH1 - C - 18 construct was obtained from Addgene . GST - Rab27a , YFP - actin and GFP - LAMP3 were described previously 19 , 70 . Antibodies and staining reagents Primary antibodies used for Western blotting ( WB ) , immuno - ﬂ uorescence ( IF ) staining and ﬂ ow cytometry ( FC ) wereas follows with dilutions inticated in parenthesis : MPO , clone 8F4 ( HyCult ) ( IF : 1 : 200 ) ; MPO , AF3667 , R & D ( 1 : 400 ) ; MMP9 , AF909 , R & D ( WB 1 : 1000 ) ; the anti - WASH ( WB 1 : 1000 ) and anti - FAM21 ( IF 1 : 200 ) antibodies were descri - bed before 25 , 28 . The anti - CD63 ( clone NVG - 2 ) , anti - CD11b ( clone M1 / 70 ) and anti - Ly6G ( clone 1A8 , 127610 ) ( ﬂ ow cytometry ) antibodies were from Biolegend ( FC 1 : 50 ) . The anti - neutrophil elastase , Ab68672 , was from Abcam ( FC 1 : 50 ) and phalloidin was from Thermo Fischer . The anti - Rac1antibodywasfromProteintech ( 24072 - 1 - AP ) ( WB1 : 1000 ) and the anti - Rac1 - GTP from NewEast Biosciences ( 26903 ) ( IF 1 : 100 ) ; anti - RhoA was from Santa Cruz Biotechnology ( SC - 418 ) ( WB 1 : 1000 ; IF 1 : 100 ) , anti - Rab21 from Novus Biologicals ( NBP1 - 81544 ) ( IF 1 : 200 ) and anti - Arp2 ( ab49674 ) ( IF1 : 200 ) wasfromAbcam . Myc - Tag ( 9B11 ) Mouse mAb # 2276 ( WB : 1 : 1000 ) . Anti - mCherry antibody Abcam , [ EPR20579 ] ( ab213511 ) , WB , 1 : 1000 . Transmission electron microscopy Cellswere ﬁ xedusing4 % paraformaldehydein0 . 1 Mphosphatebuffer , pH 7 . 4 , overnight at 4°C . Fixed cells were washed with 0 . 15M glycine / phosphate buffer , embedded in 10 % gelatin / phosphate buffer , and infused with 2 . 3 M sucrose / phosphate buffer overnight at 4 °C . Frozen sections of 80 – 90 nm were placed onto Formvar - and carbon - coated copper grids . Grids were placed on 2 % gelatin at 37°C for 20 min and rinsed with 0 . 15M glycine / PBS , and the sectionswereblocked using 1 % cold - water ﬁ sh - skingelatin . Grids wereviewed using FEI Tecnai ™ Spirit transmission electron microscope . Analysis of reactive oxygen species production ROS Production , measured by the luminol ( intracellular ) or isoluminol ( extracellular ) - dependent chemiluminescence assays , was carried out as previously described 68 , 71 . Brie ﬂ y , 1 ×10 6 neutrophils resuspended in RPMI medium in a ﬁ nal volume of 50 µ l were placed in a 384 - well microtiter plate , warmed to 37°C , and luminol was added to reach a ﬁ nal concentration of 100 µ M ( DMSO ﬁ nal concentration was 0 . 1 % ) . The cells were stimulated with fMLF ( 10 µ M ) , PMA ( 0 . 1 µ g / ml ) . Chemi - luminescence was continuously monitored using an Envision 2105 reader ( PerkinElmer ) . Superoxide anion production Superoxide anion production was continuously monitored using the SOD - inhibitable cytochrome c reduction assay at 37°C 60 . Neutrophils ( 1 ×10 6 ) were washed twice with phosphate - buffered saline ( PBS ) and resuspendedinHBSSwithCa 2 + andMg 2 + Thecellswerestimulatedwith phorbol ester ( 0 . 1 µ g / ml ) or fMLF ( 10 µ M ) . Superoxide anion produc - tion was continuously monitored using the SOD - inhibitable cyto - chrome c reduction assay at 37°C as described previously 60 . Neutrophil migration assay Neutrophil migration assays were performed using uncoated Trans - well multiwell - plates with permeable polycarbonate membrane inserts with a pore size of 3 µ m ( Thermo Fisher , Catalog No . 07 - 200 - 148 ) . Puri ﬁ ed 1 ×10 6 mouse bone - marrow neutrophils resuspended in RPMI containing 0 . 5 % BSA were applied onto the upper chamber . The indicated chemoattractants ( CXCL1 or CXCL2 ) were added to the lower chambers in a volume of 500 µ l at a concentration of 50ng / mL and cells were incubated for 1 h at 37°C in a tissue culture incubator . The cells that migrated to the bottom chamber were ﬁ xed using 2 % PFA and quanti ﬁ ed by ﬂ ow cytometry . LC - MS / MS analysis Proteomics analysis was performed at the Scripps Research Institute proteomics core facility . Brie ﬂ y , proteins were solubilized in 0 . 2 % Rapigest ( Waters Corportation ) and reduced in 5mM D , L - dithio - thrietol ( Sigma ) for 30 minutes followed by alkylation with 15 mM iodoacetamide ( Sigma ) for 30minutes in the dark . Proteins were digested with trypsin at 37°C using a 1 : 30 ( w / w ) enzyme to substrate ratio . Peptides were analyzed by reverse - phase chromatography before mass spectrometry analysis using the following method . Nanoelectrospraycapillary columntips were made in - house by using a P - 2000 laser puller ( Sutter Instruments ) . The columns were packed with Zorbax SB - C18 stationary phase ( Agilent ) purchased in bulk ( 5 - Micronparticles , witha15 - cmlengthanda75 - mminnerdiameter ) . The reverse - phase gradient separation was performed by using water and acetonitrile ( 0 . 1 % formic acid ) as the mobile phases . The gradient consisted of 5 % acetonitrile for 10min followed by a gradient to 8 % acetonitrile for 5min , 35 % acetonitrile for 113 min , 55 % acetonitrile for 12 min , 95 % acetonitrile for 15 min , and re - equilibrated with 5 % acet - onitrile for 15 min . Data - dependent MS / MS data were obtained with an LTQ linear ion trap mass spectrometer using a home - built nanoelec - trospray source at 2kV at the tip . One MS spectrum was followed by 3 MS / MS scans on the most abundant ions after the application of the dynamic exclusion list . All MS / MS data samples were searched against the NCBI Mus musculus ( house mouse ) database using Mascot ( ver - sion 2 . 3 . 02 ; Matrix Science , London , United Kingdom ) . Mascot sear - ches were conducted using a peptide mass tolerance of 2 . 0Da , a fragment ion mass tolerance of 0 . 80Da , ﬁ xed modi ﬁ cations of car - bamidomethylation ( C ) , variable modi ﬁ cations of oxidation ( M ) , an enzyme of trypsin and a maximum of one missed cleavage . Proteins with a P < 0 . 05 ( corresponding to a Mascot ion score greater than 45 ) were identi ﬁ ed with two or more peptides and considered at the 95 % con ﬁ dence level . Statistical analysis and reproducibility Data are presented as mean , and error bars correspond to standard errors of the means ( SEM ) unless otherwise indicated . Statistical sig - ni ﬁ cance was determined using the unpaired Student ’ s t - test , nor parametric Mann – Whitney test , one - way ANOVA Tukey ’ s multiple comparisonstestorKruskal - Wallistest , usingGraphPadInStat ( version 3 ) or Excel software , or Wilcoxon signed rank test , and graphs were made using GraphPad Prism ( version 4 ) software . Each method used is speci ﬁ ed in its corresponding ﬁ gure legend . All measurements were taken from distinct samples . All methods were analyzed using two - tailed analyses unlessindicated . For hematological , cytokine and some Article https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1038 / s41467 - 022 - 33230 - y Nature Communications | ( 2022 ) 13 : 5529 21 MPO ELISA studies , the investigatorswere blinded to group allocation . A p value < 0 . 05 was considered statistically signi ﬁ cant . Assays were repeated at least three times including those shown as representative data unless otherwise stated in the ﬁ gure legend . The number of samples , cells or mice per group is indicated in Figure Legends . Our research includes predetermination of sample size based on power analysis , blinding of experimentalists to genotype and vehicle or drug when possible ; data reporting including all animals ; randomization of littermates to the drug or placebo groups ; and reporting of positive and negative results . Reagents and resource sharing Information and reasonable requests for resources and reagents should be directed to and will be ful ﬁ lled by the lead contact , Sergio D . Catz ( scatz @ scripps . edu ) Reporting summary Further information on research design is available in the Nature Research Reporting Summary linked to this article . Data availability Information on antibodies used is provided in the antibody list in SupplementaryTables2 - 4andintheMethodssection . Uncroppedgels areprovidedasSourceDataandintheSupplementaryInformation ﬁ le . The proteomics data generated in this are available via Proteo - meXchange with identi ﬁ er PXD036270 , and also included in Supple - metary Data 1 and 2 . The immunoblotting data generated in this study are provided in the Supplementary Information and Source Data ﬁ les . The statistical raw data are provided in the Source data ﬁ le . Source data are provided with this paper . All data that support the ﬁ ndings of this study are available within the article , its Supplementary Informa - tion , orfromthecorrespondingauthoruponreasonablerequest . NCBI Mus musculus ( house mouse ) database accessible link : https : / / www . ncbi . nlm . nih . gov / protein ? term = ( Mus + musculus + genome ) + AND + % 22Mus + musculus % 22 % 5Bporgn % 5D & cmd = DetailsSearch . Source data are provided with this paper . References 1 . Ramadass , M . & Catz , S . D . Molecular mechanisms regulating secretory organelles and endosomes in neutrophils and their implications for in ﬂ ammation . Immunol . Rev . 273 , 249 – 265 ( 2016 ) . 2 . MacCallum , N . S . , Quinlan , G . J . & Evans , T . W . The Role of Neutrophil - Derived Myeloperoxidase in Organ Dysfunction and Sepsis , in Yearbook of Intensive Care and Emergency Medicine ( Intensive care medicine ) , Vol . 2007 , Edn . 2007 . ( ed . J . - L . Vincent ) 173 − 187 ( Springer New York - New York , N , New York , 2007 ) . 3 . Bai , J . et al . TAT - SNAP - 23 treatment inhibits the priming of neu - trophilfunctionscontributingtoshockand / orsepsis - inducedextra - pulmonary acute lung injury . Innate Immun . 21 , 42 – 54 ( 2015 ) . 4 . Brown , K . A . et al . Neutrophils in development of multiple organ failure in sepsis . Lancet 368 , 157 – 169 ( 2006 ) . 5 . Nuijens , J . H . et al . Plasma elastase alpha 1 - antitrypsin and lacto - ferrininsepsis : evidenceforneutrophilsasmediatorsinfatalsepsis . J . Lab . Clin . Med . 119 , 159 – 168 ( 1992 ) . 6 . Brovkovych , V . et al . Augmented inducible nitric oxide synthase expression and increased NO production reduce sepsis - induced lung injury and mortality in myeloperoxidase - null mice . Am . J . Physiol . Lung Cell Mol . Physiol . 295 , L96 – L103 ( 2008 ) . 7 . Kaplan , M . J . Neutrophils in the pathogenesis and manifestations of SLE . Nat . Rev . Rheumatol . 7 , 691 – 699 ( 2011 ) . 8 . Borregaard , N . & Cowland , J . B . Granules of the human neutrophilic polymorphonuclear leukocyte . Blood 89 , 3503 – 3521 ( 1997 ) . 9 . Eiserich , J . P . et al . Myeloperoxidase , a leukocyte - derived vascular NO oxidase . Science 296 , 2391 – 2394 ( 2002 ) . 10 . Daugherty , A . , Dunn , J . L . , Rateri , D . L . & Heinecke , J . W . Myelo - peroxidase , a catalyst for lipoprotein oxidation , is expressed in human atherosclerotic lesions . J . Clin . Investig 94 , 437 – 444 ( 1994 ) . 11 . Zhang , R . et al . Association between myeloperoxidase levels and risk of coronary artery disease . JAMA 286 , 2136 – 2142 ( 2001 ) . 12 . Sugiyama , S . et al . Macrophage myeloperoxidase regulation by granulocyte macrophage colony - stimulating factor in human atherosclerosis and implications in acute coronary syndromes . Am . J . Pathol . 158 , 879 – 891 ( 2001 ) . 13 . Sugiyama , S . et al . Hypochlorous acid , a macrophage product , induces endothelial apoptosis and tissue factor expression : invol - vement of myeloperoxidase - mediated oxidant in plaque erosion and thrombogenesis . Arterioscler . Thromb . Vasc . Biol . 24 , 1309 – 1314 ( 2004 ) . 14 . Baldus , S . et al . Myeloperoxidase serum levels predict risk in patients with acute coronary syndromes . Circulation 108 , 1440 – 1445 ( 2003 ) . 15 . Roth Flach , R . J . et al . Myeloperoxidase inhibition in mice alters atherosclerotic lesion composition . PLoS One 14 , e0214150 ( 2019 ) . 16 . Adrover , J . M . et al . A Neutrophil Timer Coordinates Immune Defense and Vascular Protection . Immunity 50 , 390 – 402 e310 ( 2019 ) . 17 . Munafo , D . B . et al . Rab27a is a key component of the secretory machineryofazurophilicgranulesingranulocytes . Biochem . J . 402 , 229 – 239 ( 2007 ) . 18 . Johnson , J . L . et al . Rab27a and Rab27b regulate neutrophil azur - ophilic granule exocytosis and NADPH oxidase activity by inde - pendent mechanisms . Traf ﬁ c 11 , 533 – 547 ( 2010 ) . 19 . Brzezinska , A . A . etal . TheRab27aEffectorsJFC1 / Slp1andMunc13 - 4 Regulate Exocytosis of Neutrophil Granules . Traf ﬁ c 9 , 2151 – 2164 ( 2008 ) . 20 . Johnson , J . L . , Monfregola , J . , Napolitano , G . , Kiosses , W . B . & Catz , S . D . Vesiculartraf ﬁ ckingthrough corticalactin duringexocytosisis regulated by the Rab27a effector JFC1 / Slp1 and the RhoA - GTPase - activating protein Gem - interacting protein . Mol . Biol . Cell 23 , 1902 – 1916 ( 2012 ) . 21 . Pivot - Pajot , C . , Varoqueaux , F . , de Saint , B . G . & Bourgoin , S . G . Munc13 - 4 regulates granule secretion in human neutrophils . J . Immunol . 180 , 6786 – 6797 ( 2008 ) . 22 . Catz , S . D . , Johnson , J . L . & Babior , B . M . The C2A domain of JFC1 binds to 3 ’ - phosphorylated phosphoinositides and directs plasma membrane association in living cells . Proc . Natl Acad . Sci . USA 99 , 11652 – 11657 ( 2002 ) . 23 . Takenawa , T . & Suetsugu , S . The WASP - WAVE protein network : connecting the membrane to the cytoskeleton . Nat . Rev . Mol . Cell Biol . 8 , 37 – 48 ( 2007 ) . 24 . Campellone , K . G . , Webb , N . J . , Znameroski , E . A . & Welch , M . D . WHAMM is an Arp2 / 3 complex activator that binds microtubules and functions in ER to Golgi transport . Cell 134 , 148 – 161 ( 2008 ) . 25 . Gomez , T . S . & Billadeau , D . D . A FAM21 - containing WASH complex regulatesretromer - dependentsorting . Dev . Cell 17 , 699 – 711 ( 2009 ) . 26 . Derivery , E . et al . The Arp2 / 3 activator WASH controls the ﬁ ssion of endosomes through a large multiprotein complex . Dev . Cell 17 , 712 – 723 ( 2009 ) . 27 . Puthenveedu , M . A . et al . Sequence - dependent sorting of recycling proteins by actin - stabilized endosomal microdomains . Cell 143 , 761 – 773 ( 2010 ) . 28 . Monfregola , J . , Napolitano , G . , D ’ Urso , M . , Lappalainen , P . & Ursini , M . V . Functional characterization of Wiskott - Aldrich syndrome protein and scar homolog ( WASH ) , a bi - modular nucleation - pro - moting factor able to interact with biogenesis of lysosome - related organellesubunit2 ( BLOS2 ) andgamma - tubulin . J . Biol . Chem . 285 , 16951 – 16957 ( 2010 ) . 29 . Sengelov , H . , Kjeldsen , L . & Borregaard , N . Control of exocytosis in early neutrophil activation . J . Immunol . 150 , 1535 – 1543 ( 1993 ) . Article https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1038 / s41467 - 022 - 33230 - y Nature Communications | ( 2022 ) 13 : 5529 22 30 . Zech , T . et al . The Arp2 / 3 activator WASH regulates alpha5beta1 - integrin - mediated invasive migration . J . Cell Sci . 124 , 3753 – 3759 ( 2011 ) . 31 . Kuijpers , T . W . et al . Membrane surface antigen expression on neutrophils : a reappraisal of the use of surface markers for neu - trophil activation . Blood 78 , 1105 – 1111 ( 1991 ) . 32 . Jog , N . R . et al . The actin cytoskeleton regulates exocytosis of all neutrophil granule subsets . Am . J . Physiol . Cell Physiol . 292 , C1690 – C1700 ( 2007 ) . 33 . Johnson , J . L . et al . Identi ﬁ cation of Neutrophil Exocytosis Inhibitors ( Nexinhibs ) , Small Molecule Inhibitors of Neutrophil Exocytosis and In ﬂ ammation : DRUGGABILITY OF THE SMALL GTPase Rab27a . J . Biol . Chem . 291 , 25965 – 25982 ( 2016 ) . 34 . Qualmann , B . , Kessels , M . M . & Kelly , R . B . Molecular links between endocytosis and the actin cytoskeleton . J . Cell Biol . 150 , F111 – F116 ( 2000 ) . 35 . Johnson , J . L . , Pestonjamasp , K . , Kiosses , W . B . & Catz , S . D . Super - Resolution Microscopy and Particle - Tracking Approaches for the Study of Vesicular Traf ﬁ cking in Primary Neutrophils . Methods Mol . Biol . 2233 , 193 – 202 ( 2021 ) . 36 . Del Olmo , T . et al . APEX2 - mediated RAB proximity labeling identi - ﬁ es a role for RAB21 in clathrin - independent cargo sorting . EMBO Rep . 20 ( 2019 ) . 37 . Yuan , Q . et al . PKN1 Directs Polarized RAB21 Vesicle Traf ﬁ cking via RPH3A and Is Important for Neutrophil Adhesion and Ischemia - Reperfusion Injury . Cell Rep . 19 , 2586 – 2597 ( 2017 ) . 38 . Azouz , N . P . , Matsui , T . , Fukuda , M . & Sagi - Eisenberg , R . Decoding the regulation of mast cell exocytosis by networks of Rab GTPases . J . Immunol . 189 , 2169 – 2180 ( 2012 ) . 39 . Liu , R . et al . Wash functions downstream of Rho and links linear and branched actin nucleation factors . Development 136 , 2849 – 2860 ( 2009 ) . 40 . Jia , D . etal . WASH andWAVEactinregulators ofthe Wiskott - Aldrich syndrome protein ( WASP ) family are controlled by analogous structurally related complexes . Proc . Natl Acad . Sci . USA 107 , 10442 – 10447 ( 2010 ) . 41 . Palsuledesai , C . C . et al . Activation of Rho Family GTPases by Small Molecules . ACS Chem . Biol . 13 , 1514 – 1524 ( 2018 ) . 42 . Surviladze , Z . et al . Three small molecule pan activator families of Ras - related GTPases , in Probe Reports from the NIH Molecular Libraries Program ( Bethesda ( MD , 2010 ) . 43 . Marston , D . J . et al . High Rac1 activity is functionally translated into cytosolic structures with unique nanoscale cytoskeletal archi - tecture . Proc . Natl Acad . Sci . USA 116 , 1267 – 1272 ( 2019 ) . 44 . Tackenberg , H . , Moller , S . , Filippi , M . D . & Laskay , T . The Small GTPase Cdc42 Is a Major Regulator of Neutrophil Effector Func - tions . Front Immunol . 11 , 1197 ( 2020 ) . 45 . Zimmermann , J . & Falcke , M . Formation of transient lamellipodia . PLoS One 9 , e87638 ( 2014 ) . 46 . Zhu , Y . P . et al . Identi ﬁ cation of an Early Unipotent Neutrophil Pro - genitor with Pro - tumoral Activity in Mouse and Human Bone Mar - row . Cell Rep . 24 , 2329 – 2341 e2328 ( 2018 ) . 47 . Johnson , J . L . , Hong , H . , Monfregola , J . & Catz , S . D . Increased survival and reduced neutrophil in ﬁ ltration of the liver in Rab27a - but not Munc13 - 4 - de ﬁ cient mice in lipopolysaccharide - induced systemic in ﬂ ammation . Infect . Immun . 79 , 3607 – 3618 ( 2011 ) . 48 . Abram , C . L . , Roberge , G . L . , Pao , L . I . , Neel , B . G . & Lowell , C . A . Distinct roles for neutrophils and dendritic cells in in ﬂ ammation and autoimmunity in motheaten mice . Immunity 38 , 489 – 501 ( 2013 ) . 49 . Abram , C . L . , Roberge , G . L . , Hu , Y . & Lowell , C . A . Comparative analysis of the ef ﬁ ciency and speci ﬁ city of myeloid - Cre deleting strains using ROSA - EYFP reporter mice . J . Immunol . Methods 408 , 89 – 100 ( 2014 ) . 50 . Hwaiz , R . , Rahman , M . , Syk , I . , Zhang , E . & Thorlacius , H . Rac1 - dependent secretion of platelet - derived CCL5 regulates neutrophil recruitment via activation of alveolar macrophages in septic lung injury . J . Leukoc . Biol . 97 , 975 – 984 ( 2015 ) . 51 . Duleh , S . N . & Welch , M . D . WASH and the Arp2 / 3 complex regulate endosome shape and traf ﬁ cking . Cytoskeleton 67 , 193 – 206 ( 2010 ) . 52 . Hatzoglou , A . et al . Gem associates with Ezrin and acts via the Rho - GAPproteinGmiptodown - regulatetheRhopathway . Mol . Biol . Cell 18 , 1242 – 1252 ( 2007 ) . 53 . Rohatgi , R . , Ho , H . Y . & Kirschner , M . W . Mechanism of N - WASP activation by CDC42 and phosphatidylinositol 4 , 5 - bisphosphate . J . Cell Biol . 150 , 1299 – 1310 ( 2000 ) . 54 . Symons , M . et al . Wiskott - Aldrich syndrome protein , a novel effector for the GTPase CDC42Hs , is implicated in actin poly - merization . Cell 84 , 723 – 734 ( 1996 ) . 55 . Miki , H . , Yamaguchi , H . , Suetsugu , S . & Takenawa , T . IRSp53 is an essential intermediate between Rac and WAVE in the regulation of membrane ruf ﬂ ing . Nature 408 , 732 – 735 ( 2000 ) . 56 . Park , L . et al . Cyclical action of the WASH complex : FAM21 and capping protein drive WASH recycling , not initial recruitment . Dev . Cell 24 , 169 – 181 ( 2013 ) . 57 . Tamura , M . , Kanno , M . & Endo , Y . Deactivation of neutrophil NADPH oxidase by actin - depolymerizing agents in a cell - free system . Bio - chem . J . 349 , 369 – 375 ( 2000 ) . 58 . Lominadze , G . et al . Proteomic analysis of human neutrophil gran - ules . Mol . Cell Proteom . 4 , 1503 – 1521 ( 2005 ) . 59 . Piotrowski , J . T . , Gomez , T . S . , Schoon , R . A . , Mangalam , A . K . & Billadeau , D . D . WASH knockout T cells demonstrate defective receptor traf ﬁ cking , proliferation , and effector function . Mol . Cell Biol . 33 , 958 – 973 ( 2013 ) . 60 . Markert , M . , Andrews , P . C . & Babior , B . M . Measurement of O2 - production by human neutrophils . The preparation and assay of NADPH oxidase - containing particles from human neutrophils . Methods Enzymol . 105 , 358 – 365 ( 1984 ) . 61 . Huff , J . The Airyscan detector from ZEISS : confocal imaging with improved signal - to - noise ratio and super - resolution . Nature Meth - ods 12 , i – ii ( 2015 ) . 62 . Axelrod , D . Cell - substrate contacts illuminated by total internal re ﬂ ection ﬂ uorescence . J . Cell Biol . 89 , 141 – 145 ( 1981 ) . 63 . Rust , M . J . , Bates , M . & Zhuang , X . Sub - diffraction - limit imaging by stochastic optical reconstruction microscopy ( STORM ) . Nat . Meth - ods 3 , 793 – 795 ( 2006 ) . 64 . Johnson , J . L . et al . Munc13 - 4 Is a Rab11 - binding Protein That Reg - ulates Rab11 - positive Vesicle Traf ﬁ cking and Docking at the Plasma Membrane . J . Biol . Chem . 291 , 3423 – 3438 ( 2016 ) . 65 . Gustafsson , N . et al . Fast live - cell conventional ﬂ uorophore nano - scopy with ImageJ through super - resolution radial ﬂ uctuations . Nat . Commun . 7 , 12471 ( 2016 ) . 66 . Schindelin , J . et al . Fiji : an open - source platform for biological - image analysis . Nat . Methods 9 , 676 – 682 ( 2012 ) . 67 . Zhu , Y . P . et al . Preparation of Whole Bone Marrow for Mass Cyto - metry Analysis of Neutrophil - lineage Cells . J . Vis . Exp . 148 , 10 . 3791 / 59617 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 3791 / 59617 ( 2019 ) . 68 . Johnson , J . L . et al . The atypical small GTPase GEM / Kir is a negative regulator of the NADPH oxidase and NETs production through macroautophagy . J . Leukoc . Biol . 110 , 629 – 649 ( 2021 ) . 69 . Finck , R . et al . Normalization of mass cytometry data with bead standards . Cytom . A 83 , 483 – 494 ( 2013 ) . 70 . Johnson , J . L . , Pacquelet , S . , Lane , W . S . , Eam , B . & Catz , S . D . Akt regulates the subcellular localization of the Rab27a - binding protein JFC1 by phosphorylation . Traf ﬁ c 6 , 667 – 681 ( 2005 ) . 71 . Munafo , D . B . et al . DNase I inhibits a late phase of reactive oxygen species production in neutrophils . J . Innate Immun . 1 , 527 – 542 ( 2009 ) . Article https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1038 / s41467 - 022 - 33230 - y Nature Communications | ( 2022 ) 13 : 5529 23 Acknowledgements This work was supported by U . S . Public Health Service grants R01HL088256 , R01AR070837 , P01HL152958 and R01DK110162 to S . D . C . and by Cystinosis Research Foundation fellowships to F . R . , R . C . G . and E . M . S . We thank Kaia Catz Johnson for technical support . Author contributions J . L . J . conceptualization , experimentation , methodology , data analysis and manuscript editing ; E . M . S . , M . R . and J . M . , conceptualization , experimentation , methodology and data analysis ; F . R . , R . C . G . , K . P . , W . B . K . , J . Z . , Y . P . Z . , performed experiments and data analysis ; D . G . O . , provide reagents and methodology ; NW , supervised all statistical ana - lysis ; D . A . , K . A . , D . C . , J . Y . and S . C . H . , experimentation ; C . C . H . , con - ceptualization , methodology and data analysis ; M . V . U . provided important reagents , S . G . , conceptualization and manuscript editing ; D . D . B . , provide reagents including mouse model , conceptualization , manuscript editing ; S . D . C . , designed strategy , conceptualization , data analysis , manuscript writing with input from J . L . J . , manuscript editing . Competing interests The authors declare no competing interests . Additional information Supplementary information The online version contains supplementary material available at https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1038 / s41467 - 022 - 33230 - y . Correspondence and requests for materials should be addressed to Sergio D . Catz . Peer review information Nature Communications thanks the anon - ymous reviewer ( s ) for their contribution to the peer review of this work . Reprints and permission information is available at http : / / www . nature . com / reprints Publisher ’ s note Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jur - isdictional claims in published maps and institutional af ﬁ liations . Open Access This article is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution 4 . 0 International License , which permits use , sharing , adaptation , distribution and reproduction in any medium or format , as long as you give appropriate credit to the original author ( s ) and the source , provide a link to the Creative Commons license , and indicate if changes were made . The images or other third party material in this article are included in the article ’ s Creative Commons license , unless indicated otherwise in a credit line to the material . If material is not included in the article ’ s Creative Commons license and your intended use is not permitted by statutory regulation or exceeds the permitted use , you will need to obtain permission directly from the copyright holder . To view a copy of this license , visit http : / / creativecommons . org / licenses / by / 4 . 0 / . © The Author ( s ) 2022 1 DepartmentofMolecularMedicine , TheScrippsResearchInstitute , LaJolla , CA , USA . 2 DivisionofIn ﬂ ammationBiology , LaJollaInstituteforImmunology , La Jolla , CA , USA . 3 The Division of Oncology Research , Schulze Center for Novel Therapeutics , Mayo Clinic , Rochester , MN , USA . 4 Research Translational Institute , Statistics , The Scripps Research Institute , La Jolla , CA , USA . 5 Institute of Genetics and Biophysics A . Buzzati Traverso CNR , 80131 Naples , Italy . 6 Department of Biochemistry , University of Toronto , Toronto , ON , Canada . 7 Present address : Telethon Instituteof Genetics and Medicine ( TIGEM ) , ViaCampi Flegrei 34 , 80078 Pozzuoli , Naples , Italy . 8 These authors contributed equally : Jennifer L . Johnson , Elsa Meneses - Salas , Mahalakshmi Ramadass . e - mail : scatz @ scripps . edu Article https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1038 / s41467 - 022 - 33230 - y Nature Communications | ( 2022 ) 13 : 5529 24