Biophysical Perspective Single Filaments to Reveal the Multiple Flavors of Actin Antoine Je´gou 1 and Guillaume Romet - Lemonne 1 , * 1 Institut Jacques Monod , CNRS , Universite´ Paris Diderot , Universite´ Sorbonne Paris Cite´ , Paris , France ABSTRACT A number of key cell processes rely on speciﬁc assemblies of actin ﬁlaments , which are all constructed from nearly identical building blocks : the abundant and extremely conserved actin protein . A central question in the ﬁeld is to under - stand how different ﬁlament networks can coexist and be regulated . Discoveries in science are often related to technical ad - vances . Here , we focus on the ongoing single ﬁlament revolution and discuss how these techniques have greatly contributed to our understanding of actin assembly . In particular , we highlight how they have reﬁned our understanding of the many pro - tein - based regulatory mechanisms that modulate actin assembly . It is now becoming apparent that other factors give ﬁlaments a speciﬁc identity that determines which proteins will bind to them . We argue that single ﬁlament techniques will play an essential role in the coming years as we try to understand the many ways actin ﬁlaments can take different ﬂavors and unveil how these ﬂavors modulate the action of regulatory proteins . We discuss different factors known to make actin ﬁlaments distinguishable by regulatory proteins and speculate on their possible consequences . A striking feature of living cells is the variety of mecha - nisms involving actin assembly , and the diversity of ﬁlament networks being formed . Long - lived structures like the cell cortex , lying ﬂat against the plasma membrane , are main - tained and reorganized to allow the formation of speciﬁc transient structures such as the cytokinetic ring at the end of cell division . These diverse ﬁlament architectures and dy - namics are tightly controlled by the cell ( see ( 1 ) for a recent review ) . This can only be achieved if actin assembly is pre - cisely regulated in space and time . At the base of all these ﬁlament networks lies a universal assembly mechanism of actin monomers ( G - actin , for ‘‘glob - ular actin’’ ) into actin ﬁlaments ( F - actin , for ‘‘ﬁlamentous actin’’ ) ( 2 ) . Actin ﬁlaments have a double - helical structure with structurally and dynamically distinct ends , the barbed end being more dynamic than the pointed end of the ﬁlament ( 2 , 3 ) . G - actin has a strong afﬁnity for ATP and thus ﬁlaments mostly assemble from ATP - G - actin . Upon incorporation into a ﬁlament , the actin subunit changes conformation , locking its nucleotide in and hydrolyzing it , rapidly becoming ADP - Pi - F - actin and then ADP - F - actin ( following the release of inorganic phosphate Pi ) . The F - actin nucleotide state thus marks the age of the ﬁlament and modiﬁes its mechanical and biochemical properties ( 4 ) . To form the observed variety of ﬁlament networks , these assembly properties are modulated by regulatory proteins . Hundreds of these proteins have been identiﬁed , and we will refer to them in general as actin - binding proteins ( ABPs ) . They can bind to ﬁlament sides , ﬁlament ends , and / or monomers and have a variety of effects ( see ( 2 ) for a structural review ) . Typically , nucleators will initiate the assembly of new ﬁlaments , whose elonga - tion can be modulated by end - binding proteins that can enhance ( e . g . , formins , Ena / VASP ) or block ( e . g . , capping proteins ) the addition of new monomers , and ﬁlaments will eventually be disassembled by side - binding pro - teins ( e . g . , actin depolymerizing factor ( ADF ) / coﬁlin , Aip1 ) . Filaments can be connected to one another by other side - binding proteins , giving rise to speciﬁc ﬁlament or - ganizations ( e . g . , fascin or a - actinin form parallel or antiparallel bundles , respectively ) . Depending on the reg - ulatory proteins at play , various ﬁlament assemblies can be generated , with different geometries , dynamics , and life - spans ( 1 ) . Our ability to observe and manipulate single actin ﬁla - ments in vitro has made tremendous progress , to the point where we now observe individual reactions taking place live ( 5 , 6 ) . In this review , we will begin by summarizing the progress made by single ﬁlament techniques and explain how this experimental approach has contributed to our un - derstanding of how ABPs regulate actin assembly . How different ﬁlament networks can emerge , as a result of the action of ABPs , is still not entirely clear . In particular , Submitted December 7 , 2015 , and accepted for publication April 1 , 2016 . * Correspondence : romet @ ijm . fr Editor : Brian Salzberg . 2138 Biophysical Journal 110 , 2138 – 2146 , May 24 , 2016 http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . bpj . 2016 . 04 . 025 (cid:1) 2016 Biophysical Society . it seems that many ABPs can tell ﬁlaments apart , thus acting on a subset of actin networks in cells ( 7 , 8 ) . This feature questions the uniqueness of actin ﬁlaments in cells , suggest - ing that actin ﬁlaments could come in different ‘‘ﬂavors . ’’ This will be discussed in the second part of this review , and we will argue that single ﬁlament techniques will be essential in bringing answers to this tantalizing question in the near future . A brief history of single ﬁlament revolutions Being able to manipulate and observe individual actin ﬁla - ments is of great help in understanding how their assembly is regulated and to what extent molecular details matter . Some of the earliest details on actin ﬁlament dynamics were actually obtained by observing single ﬁlaments with quantitative electron microscopy ( EM ) ( 3 , 9 ) , with im - ages obtained by ﬁxing samples at different time points . Following these pioneering works , however , bulk solution measurements based mainly on the increase of signal result - ing from the assembly of pyrene - labeled actin monomers into ﬁlaments ( 10 ) have become a method of choice . They have been essential to improve our understanding of actin assembly dynamics at both ends , of how ATP hydrolysis fol - lows ﬁlament assembly , as well as of how regulatory pro - teins tune actin steady - state properties ( see ( 4 ) for a review ) . Static structural details are also required to under - stand the ﬁlament and protein conformational changes that underlie the reactions one can monitor live , and the contri - butions of crystallography as well as cryo - EM studies ( which are undergoing a revolution of their own ( 11 ) ) are essential ( 2 , 12 – 14 ) . Here , our intention is to focus on what the live imaging of single ﬁlaments has to offer to the actin ﬁeld . Live imaging relies mostly on ﬂuorescent probes to report kinetics events in the sample . The canonical in vitro exper - imental setup is a chamber of a few tens of microliters with actin ﬁlaments anchored or maintained in the vicinity of the coverslip to be imaged by a microscope objective ( Fig . 1 A ) . Since the 1980s , reconstituted actin ﬁlaments , from puriﬁed actin or cell extracts , can be visualized using ﬂuorescently labeled phalloidin ( 15 ) . The disadvantage is that it stabilizes ﬁlaments and alters the binding of some proteins , and thus does not allow the proper observation of individual reactions live . The ﬁrst real - time observations of actin dynamics were achieved in the early 2000s ( 16 , 17 ) . This revolution was made possible thanks to the use of total internal reﬂection ﬂuorescence ( TIRF ) microscopy that overcomes the limita - tion of ﬂuorescent background ( 18 ) due to monomeric actin present in solution in the micromolar range ( Fig . 1 A ) . The live observation of dynamic actin ﬁlament assembly provided a direct conﬁrmation of the elongation rates deter - mined some 20 years earlier with ﬁxed samples . Compared to bulk solution measurements , the direct observation of individual ﬁlaments , as reactions are taking place , gives ac - cess to new information . Key results include showing that a formin processively tracks an elongating barbed end ( 19 , 20 ) , showing that Arp2 / 3 - generated ﬁlaments branch off existing ones with a well - deﬁned geometry ( 21 ) ( Fig . 1 E ) , and seeing that coﬁlin - induced ﬁlament frag - mentation takes place near boundaries between bare and coﬁlin - decorated regions ( 22 ) . These results , which are essential to our understanding of these molecular mecha - nisms and their consequences in a cellular context , were FIGURE 1 Some of the main experimental conﬁgurations for the live observation and manipulation of single actin ﬁlaments and regulatory proteins . ( A ) In the canonical setup , TIRF illuminates ﬂuorophores in a shallow region above the coverslips , and labeled ﬁlaments are anchored to the surface . ( B ) Micro - ﬂuidics takes advantage of ﬂuid friction ( viscous drag ) to align ﬁlaments with the ﬂow , close to the coverslip , with only one end anchored to the surface . ( C ) Tweezer techniques ( here , optical tweezers ) manipulate ﬁlaments by anchoring their ends , or portions near their ends , to microbeads . ( D ) The background ﬂuorescent signal from solution can be reduced further using convex lens - induced conﬁnement or zero mode waveguides . ( E ) A low background enables the observation of individual molecules ( here , the Arp2 / 3 complex ) . ( F ) High speed AFM can be used to monitor ﬁlament dynamics live . ( G ) Surface patterning techniques have mostly been applied to large populations of actin ﬁlaments , but can also be used to study individual ﬁlaments . To see this ﬁgure in color , go online . Many Flavors of Single Actin Filaments Biophysical Journal 110 , 2138 – 2146 , May 24 , 2016 2139 made possible by the observation of individual events under the microscope . Bringing down technical hurdles and limitations Images are powerful and often give the compelling impres - sion that they faithfully depict reality . Naturally , one should be cautious and a number of controls have to be performed . Two technical limitations , inherent to a single ﬁlament experiment , readily come to mind : ﬁlaments are stuck to surfaces and labeled with ﬂuorescent molecules . These manipulations could bias results and generate artifacts . Fortunately , there are ways to control and limit these effects as new techniques emerge and combine . Interactions between ﬁlaments and the glass coverslip , either nonspeciﬁc or mediated by the anchoring points , may affect protein reactions and ﬁlament dynamics . Tethering points can cause uncontrolled mechanical stress , as well as occupy binding sites on the sides or the ends of ﬁlaments . Control experiments can be performed by changing surface passivation techniques and anchoring strategies . The density of tethering points can be varied , and brought down to very low values . Surface patterning techniques ( Fig . 1 G ) allow one to control the distribution of anchoring points , thereby creating speciﬁc geometries for ﬁlaments ( 23 ) . Crowding agents such as methylcellulose can be used to maintain ﬁla - ments close to the coverslip without tethers , but they induce ﬁlament bundling ( 24 ) and potentially affect reaction rates . Using microﬂuidics ( Fig . 1 B ) offers the possibility to main - tain ﬁlaments close to the surface , while anchoring one end only and without using crowding agents ( 25 ) . Fluorescent labeling is a notorious source of artifacts , from classical light - induced ﬁlament fragmentation to the recently elucidated light - induced formation of covalent di - mers within actin ﬁlaments ( 26 ) . A simple way to evaluate the occurrence of such artifacts is to vary labeling fraction and / or light exposure . Different ﬂuorophores can be used , and their location on the protein of interest can be varied . Microﬂuidics , which provides time - controlled exposure of ﬁlaments to different protein solutions , can be used to generate ﬁlaments with unlabeled segments , and to monitor elongation from unlabeled actin monomers ( 25 , 26 ) . High - speed atomic force microscopy ( AFM ) can also be used to monitor live binding of ABPs on ﬁlaments , and does not require the labeling of proteins with ﬂuorophores ( 27 , 28 ) ( Fig . 1 F ) . In addition , this technique provides useful structural data , such as the local pitch and width of the actin ﬁlament ( 28 ) . A limitation , however , is the requirement to immobilize ﬁlaments on the surface ( see previous paragraph ) . Today , cameras are sensitive enough to detect single mol - ecules and track them over time . Different proteins can be monitored individually , using different labels , and their co - localization and the sequence of their respective arrival on a given site can be determined ( 5 , 29 ) . Such observations are a great asset to decipher molecular mechanisms involving several ABPs . One important limitation for these observations is back - ground signal , either coming from the surface or from solution ( typically , single molecule observations in TIRF require working with < 100 nM of ﬂuorescent molecules ) . Surface background should be minimized by proper passiv - ation . New microscopy techniques are available to reduce background from bulk ( 30 ) , pushing the enhancement of signal / noise ratio further than TIRF does ( Fig . 1 D ) . Convex lens - induced conﬁnement locally conﬁnes the ﬂuorescent molecules in a small volume by lowering the height of the chamber dramatically , down to a few nanometers . Linear zero mode waveguide conﬁnes the excitation to a thin layer above the glass coverslip ( one order of magnitude shallower than in TIRF ) and also conﬁnes the sample in a narrow strip , thus reducing the excitation volume . Both techniques enable the use of higher concentrations of labeled proteins , thereby giving access to interactions with weak afﬁnities . Single ﬁlament techniques can also be used to move ﬁlaments around and apply forces . Optical and magnetic tweezers ( Fig . 1 C ) are particular cases of techniques that are very adapted to apply well - controlled forces to single ﬁlaments or molecular motors . They have been used suc - cessfully to provide a wealth of details on molecular ma - chineries related to actin , myosin motors in particular ( 31 ) . AFM also allows one to apply forces , but in a range of magnitude and with an orientation that are less adapted to single ﬁlament studies . Microﬂuidics can also be used to apply tension to ﬁlaments or motors , taking advantage of the viscous drag of the ﬂowing ﬂuid ( Fig . 1 B ) . The applied force ﬂuctuates more than with tweezer techniques , but it is applied to tens of ﬁlaments in parallel and thus generates larger amounts of data ( 25 ) . The downside of observing individual events is that a large amount of data needs to be collected to provide statis - tically signiﬁcant results . However , single ﬁlament tech - niques allow one to observe several individual ﬁlaments simultaneously . Motorized microscope stages further in - crease the number of observed ﬁlaments by collecting data from different ﬁelds of view . The ensuing data analysis can be automated , at least partly , by computer software to enhance its efﬁciency . Naturally , single ﬁlament techniques are not the only tool providing information on actin assembly . Rightfully , an increasing number of studies combine in vitro and in vivo observations to strengthen their conclusions . Moreover , la - beling and imaging techniques from both ﬁelds are progres - sively converging , and single ﬁlament techniques beneﬁt from developments in live cell imaging . For example , green ﬂuorescent protein fusion proteins are now also used for sin - gle molecule experiments in vitro ( 32 ) and we expect more superresolution techniques to be used in single ﬁlament studies ( 33 ) . The high spatial resolution reached by these techniques might not sufﬁce to identify protein binding sites Je´gou and Romet - Lemonne 2140 Biophysical Journal 110 , 2138 – 2146 , May 24 , 2016 and other approaches , such as cryo - EM and crystallog - raphy , will remain invaluable to decipher molecular mechanisms . Changing the way we look at actin ﬁlaments The technical developments of single ﬁlament techniques have recently brought a number of striking and unexpected results that could not be inferred from earlier , less accurate methods . Part of these results come from the ability to observe a mechanism involving several regulators , either by tracking single molecules or by using microﬂuidics to expose ﬁlaments sequentially to different proteins . For example , monitoring individual branching reactions with labeled Arp2 / 3 complexes has revealed that only a small fraction of the Arp2 / 3 binding events led to the formation of a branch . Moreover , these experiments showed that the departure of the activator of Arp2 / 3 was required for the branch to form ( 5 , 6 ) . Two different studies monitoring single molecules have shown that Aip1 fragments coﬁlin - decorated ﬁlaments with enhanced efﬁciency ( 34 , 35 ) . Mi - croﬂuidics has been used to sequentially expose ﬁlaments to formin Fmn2 and Spire , which both compete for ﬁla - ment barbed ends , and show that their direct interaction leads to a ping - pong mechanism where the recruitment of one protein at the barbed end is favored by the presence of the other , which seems to immediately depart , avoiding the formation of a complex at the barbed end ( 36 ) . In contrast , although Capping Protein ( CP ) and formins were thought to mutually exclude each other from barbed ends , two very recent studies , using either microﬂuidics ( 37 ) or single - molecule monitoring ( 29 ) , have revealed that these two proteins could coexist at the barbed end for tens of seconds . In all the examples we have just cited , quantitative mea - surements were derived from single - ﬁlament observations . It would be a terrible mistake to consider these techniques as mere providers of illustrations for phenomena already quantiﬁed through different means , since one would miss out on what they have to offer as powerful biophysical and biochemical tools that can be used to reliably measure rate constants . Single ﬁlament techniques now bring us to a point where we are able to see individual reactions live , and on ﬁlaments that we manipulate in a controlled manner ( sequential expo - sure to different proteins , application of mechanical stress ) . Future improvements will keep on expanding these tools . For example , progress in ﬂuorescent probe chemistry will hopefully provide new ways to monitor conformation changes live under the microscope . These powerful tools will play a crucial role in addressing the formidable challenge of deciphering the regulation of actin assembly . In the rest of this review , we would like to expand on a key aspect of this challenge : the emergence of the notion that , rather than one generic actin ﬁlament , we face a system where ﬁlaments can have different ﬂavors , which determine how they are regulated . The many ﬂavors of actin As we have mentioned in the beginning , there is more than one type of actin , and we often need to specify which actin we are referring to . Obviously , we distinguish G - actin from F - actin , and the terminal subunit at the barbed end is in an intermediate conformation , as illustrated by its enhanced Pi release rate compared to that of F - actin subunits ( 38 ) . The nucleotide state of a subunit also matters , and so does the nature of the surrounding divalent cations ( Ca 2 þ or Mg 2 þ , the latter being considered physiological ) because they affect interactions between neighboring subunits in the ﬁlament ( see ( 39 ) for a review ) . These different ﬂavors are relevant in cells , where they can be recognized by ABPs and thus modulate their regula - tory action . ADF / coﬁlin for example , will bind preferably to ADP - actin , forming domains on the older portion of the ﬁla - ment while leaving the ADP - Pi - actin region near the barbed end unaffected ( 22 ) . Inthefollowingparagraphs , wewillgothroughsomeofthe other factors that are emerging as means to distinguish actin ﬁlaments , i . e . , to give them different ﬂavors , which allow ABPs to tell them apart and thereby enable cells to regulate them in different ways . They are recapitulated in Fig . 2 . Differentiation of ﬁlaments through the noncovalent action of ABPs Different actin ﬁlament networks are usually associated with a speciﬁc nucleator ( or elongator ) , and each network seems to be speciﬁcally targeted by some regulatory pro - teins rather than others . Nucleators are often activated locally , downstream of speciﬁc signals . What determines the speciﬁcity for other ABPs that subsequently regulate these ﬁlaments remains an open question . A key experiment was done by placing microbeads func - tionalized by nucleation promoting factor Las17 in yeast ex - tracts , and showing that the resulting ﬁlament networks selectively recruited the corresponding ABPs ( 40 ) . This result shows that nucleators can be enough to give ﬁlaments their identity . It also indicates that local gradients ( e . g . , ATP , cations , and pH ) that may exist in cells do not seem to play a role in this particular process . Another key experiment focused on two formins , which elongate distinct ﬁlament net - works in yeast , each network getting decorated by a speciﬁc form ( acetylated and unacetylated ) of yeast’s unique tropo - myosin . The authors of this study forced these two formins to switch locations , and showed that tropomyosins switched locations accordingly , leading to the relocation of myosin motors in the cell ( 41 ) . Formins can thus dictate which tropo - myosin isoform will decorate a particular ﬁlament , and this speciﬁes which ABPs can bind to this ﬁlament . Many Flavors of Single Actin Filaments Biophysical Journal 110 , 2138 – 2146 , May 24 , 2016 2141 Tropomyosins appear to be of particular interest in this ﬁlament differentiation scheme . There are many different tropomyosin isoforms in fungi and metazoan cells , with marked differences in their subcellular localization ( see ( 8 ) for a recent review ) . Different tropomyosins block or allow the binding of other ABPs , such as ADF / Coﬁlin ( 42 , 43 ) ( Fig . 2 ) and myosins ( 44 ) . Tropomyosins thus appear as a central player in regulating the distribution of ABPs to speciﬁc ﬁlament assemblies in cells . How do tropomyosins ( or other ABPs ) recognize ﬁlament populations based on how they were nucleated ? An inter - esting hypothesis comes from the cryo - EM observation that different actin ﬁlament conformations are possible ( 13 ) , suggesting that different nucleators could build ﬁla - ments with different structures . Reinforcing this idea is the observation that formin mDia1 elongates ﬁlaments with a structure that differs from that of freely assembled ﬁlaments ( 45 ) that would therefore be recognized or even stabilized by tropomyosins ( 46 ) . Altogether , these results suggest that different nucleators will generate ﬁlaments with speciﬁc conformations , which will thus exhibit different afﬁnities for regulatory proteins , which cooperate and compete , with tropomyosin playing a central role . This scheme , described in detail by Michelot and Drubin ( 7 ) , can be tested further with single ﬁlament studies to directly measure the binding rates of proteins on ﬁlaments formed with different nucleators or elongators . These measurements could be coupled to cryo - EM obser - vations to connect the different ﬁlament structures with speciﬁc nucleators and ABPs . Actin isoforms For convenience , in vitro studies often use a - skeletal actin ( from skeletal muscle ) and almost overlook that six actin isoforms exist in mammals , including the two cytoplasmic ( or nonmuscle ) b - and g - actin isoforms . This is justiﬁed by the fact that actin is extremely conserved , and that its iso - forms differ by < 7 % in sequence , with only four residues differing between b - and g - actin . This strong similarity makes it both difﬁcult to separate isoforms during puriﬁca - tion , and reasonable to assume that relevant conclusions can be drawn by looking at the regulation of a - skeletal actin ﬁlaments by cytoplasmic proteins . In cells , however , the two cytoplasmic isoforms have been reported to locate in speciﬁc patterns ( see ( 47 ) for a brief review ) , indicating that actin networks preferentially use different isoforms . Their high sequence similarity makes these experiments challenging and selective antibodies need to be designed . A motivation to tackle the challenge of isoform puriﬁcation for in vitro studies comes from the fact that actin isoforms exhibit different assembly dynamics ( 48 ) and that ABPs are able to detect the small differences between isoforms . Coﬁlin , for example , has a lower afﬁnity for cytoplasmic actin monomers than for a - skeletal actin monomers ( 49 ) and binds to cytoplasmic ﬁlaments with a FIGURE 2 Different ﬂavors of actin ﬁlaments , and how they affect the binding of ADF / coﬁlin . Starting at the top , and going clockwise . ADF / coﬁlin binds preferably to ADP - actin rather than ADP - Pi - actin , Its binding and fragmentation activity is delayed if the ﬁlament is under mechanical tension . Fragmen - tation by ADF / coﬁlin is more efﬁcient if ﬁlaments are bundled by fascin ( though the opposite has been reported on other types of bundles ) . Speciﬁc nucle - ators and elongators , like formins , generate different ﬁlament structures and may affect ADF / coﬁlin binding as they affect the binding of other ABPs , such as tropomyosins ( Tpm3 . 1 and Tpm1 . 12 shown here ) , which in turn regulate ADF / coﬁlin binding . Posttranslational modiﬁcations , especially those targeting ADF / coﬁlin binding sites on subdomain2 ( SD2 ) are likely to have an impact . The binding of ADF / coﬁlin is more cooperative on cytoplasmic actin than a - skeletal actin ﬁlaments . To see this ﬁgure in color , go online . Je´gou and Romet - Lemonne 2142 Biophysical Journal 110 , 2138 – 2146 , May 24 , 2016 greater cooperativity than to a - skeletal actin ﬁlaments ( 50 ) . Similarly , nonsarcomeric myosin motors display marked preferences for cytoplasmic actin , and myosin - 7A ATPase activity is enhanced by g - actin over b - actin ( 51 ) . Because yeasts , with only one actin gene , are able to grow differentiated actin networks , it is clear that other factors are essential ( 7 ) . Nonetheless , actin isoforms may be a contrib - uting factor in other cells . Their ability to copolymerize of - fers the possibility to form ﬁlaments with various isoform compositions ( 47 ) . Posttranslational modiﬁcations Covalent alterations of amino acids are potentially an addi - tional cellular mechanism for the spatiotemporal regulation of actin . So far , the effect of posttranslational modiﬁcations of actin on the regulation of ﬁlament assembly dynamics have been less characterized than noncovalent factors , and this appears to be an expanding research area ( see ( 52 ) for a recent review ) . Some modiﬁcations can be the work of pathogens ( such as ADP - ribosylation ) or be part of a global regulatory pro - cess , coupled to other differentiating factors . For instance , N - terminal arginylation of cytoplasmic b - actin regulates cell motility ( 53 ) and preventing arginylation results in a number of actin - related defects ( 52 ) . Posttranslational modiﬁcation can change local interac - tions with ions , which are key in regulating a number of ﬁla - ment properties ( 39 ) . In particular , a number of these modiﬁcations occur on subdomain 2 of actin , whose confor - mation changes are likely to affect the overall structure of the ﬁlament ( 13 ) . These modiﬁcations are likely to change intrinsic ﬁlament properties as well as the afﬁnity for ABPs . To our knowledge , such modiﬁed ﬁlaments have yet to be studied as speciﬁc substrates for ABPs , and we expect single ﬁlament experiments to contribute to such studies in the coming years . For example , the redox enzyme Mical speciﬁcally oxi - dizes Met - 44 and Met - 47 of F - actin , resulting in unstable ﬁlaments ( 54 ) . Recent cryo - EM data , showing the ﬁla - ment - stabilizing role of the actin D - loop , where these amino acids are located , provides a structural interpretation for this result ( 12 ) . The disassembly dynamics of these oxidized ﬁlaments , as well as their modulation by ABPs , could be quantiﬁed by single ﬁlament experiments . Mechanical stress and geometrical constraints In cells , actin networks are exposed to a number of mechan - ical stresses that appear as another factor that could regulate the conformation and biochemical properties of actin ﬁla - ments ( 55 ) . Mechanical data in cells conﬁrm this hy - pothesis , showing for example that ﬁlaments stretched by applying tension with a microcapillary have a higher afﬁnity for myosin II motor domain ( 56 ) . Single ﬁlament experiments are particularly adapted to address this question ; however , this is still an emerging ﬁeld as these experiments are challenging , and there is only a handful of results so far ( see ( 57 ) for a recent review ) . Local ﬁlament curvature , randomly applied by sticking ﬁlaments to a coverslip , has been shown to favor Arp2 / 3 - mediated branching on the convex side of the ﬁla - ment ( 58 ) . Tension applied to ﬁlaments , using optical and magnetic tweezers , has been shown to delay the binding of coﬁlin and the subsequent ﬁlament severing ( 59 ) . These latter results still need to be quantitated extensively to test explanations of this mechanosensitivity based on structural changes of ﬁlaments ( 55 ) . Such results are likely to come from single ﬁlament experiments in the near future . Single ﬁlament experiments have already provided detailed data in situations where the tension applied to a ﬁlament is transmitted to ABPs interacting with this ﬁla - ment , thereby changing their conformations and molecular activity . Single ﬁlament microﬂuidics experiments have shown that applying tension to a ﬁlament accelerates its elongation by formin mDia1 ( 25 ) and this effect is in quan - titative agreement with the formin translocation model derived from structural data ( 60 ) . Magnetic tweezer ex - periments have shown that pulling on talin exposed its vinculin binding domains and could lead to the reinforce - ment of focal adhesions ( 61 ) . Optical tweezer experiments have shown that the cadherin - catenin complex made more stable bonds with actin ﬁlaments that were put under ten - sion , which may explain force transduction in cell - cell adhesions ( 62 ) . The application of mechanical stress to ﬁlaments in cells is often closely related to the geometry imposed by the or - ganization of actin anchoring points and bundling proteins . The geometrical organization of ﬁlaments can also be a fac - tor modulating the action of ABPs . Actin ﬁlament bundles , for example , provide a simple geometrical organization that can change how ABPs interact with the ﬁlaments . Myosin X recognizes this geometry and walks processively farther on a bundle than on individual ﬁlaments ( 63 ) . The disas - sembling activity of ADF / coﬁlin has been reported to be hindered on ﬁlaments bundled by methylcellulose ( 24 ) but enhanced on fascin - bundled actin ﬁlaments ( 64 ) . These experiments can be difﬁcult to interpret because a number of factors may contribute , including competition between coﬁlin and fascin , which could also occur on single ﬁla - ments , as well as speciﬁcally geometrical aspects such as ﬁlament - ﬁlament distance or the rigidity of their bonds . Because geometrical organization often involves me - chanically constraining ﬁlaments , the effect of geometry may be hard to separate from that of mechanical stress . Future single ﬁlament experiments ; for example , applying patterning strategies ( 23 ) to smaller ﬁlament populations to control geometry , will certainly bring insights into these questions . Many Flavors of Single Actin Filaments Biophysical Journal 110 , 2138 – 2146 , May 24 , 2016 2143 Coexistence and evolution of different ﬂavors within one actin ﬁlament The factors giving actin various ﬂavors that we have listed are of a different nature ( Fig . 2 ) . One of the challenges for future studies is that these different factors do not act inde - pendently . For example , mechanical tension may not have the same effect on an ABP’s afﬁnity for ﬁlaments made of different actin isoforms , or following speciﬁc posttransla - tional modiﬁcations . In addition , the ﬂavor of actin subunits in a ﬁlament evolves over time . The nucleotide states change irreversibly as F - actin hydrolyses ATP , whereas most of the other factors are reversible , including covalent posttranslational modiﬁ - cations . Mical - induced methionine oxidation , for example , can be reversed by another enzyme , SelR ( 65 ) . The structural polymorphism of actin ﬁlaments , deduced from cryo - EM observations ( 13 ) , provides the structural basis to understand these different ﬁlament identities . Due to thermal ﬂuctuations , a ﬁlament would be able to sample different conformations over time , or breathe—a term intro - duced some 20 years ago to describe the infrequent avail - ability of some binding sites on actin ﬁlaments ( 66 ) . The different factors giving a ﬁlament its ﬂavor would shift the conformational distribution , favoring a speciﬁc conforma - tion over the others . Moreover , these cryo - EM images also report that blocks of different structure coexist within the same ﬁla - ment ( 13 ) . This is consistent with the idea that a ﬁlament could simultaneously contain domains of different ﬂavors . A well - documented example is the existence of ADP - Pi - rich and ADP - rich regions , which can lead to the decoration of the latter by coﬁlin and change its local ﬁlament confor - mation ( 22 , 67 , 68 ) . Actin isoforms readily copolymerize ( 48 , 51 ) , and different ﬁlament regions could be made with different isoform contents . One can easily imagine how such domains could exist for other ﬂavor - giving factors ; for example , if a posttranslationally modiﬁed ﬁlament elongates further from unmodiﬁed actin monomers , or if mechanical stress is locally applied to a portion of a ﬁlament . Addressing the question of multiple domains with different ﬂavors coexisting within a single actin ﬁlament requires the ability to artiﬁcially generate hybrid ﬁlaments , with a controlled mixture of different ﬂavors . This is precisely what single ﬁlament techniques allow one to achieve today . In particular , microﬂuidics allows one to generate ﬁlaments by sequentially using different conditions , and this was initially illustrated by building ﬁlaments with an artiﬁcial , purely ADP - Pi region ( 38 ) . Barbed end region : where does the end begin ? A region of particular interest to regulate actin assembly is the barbed end of the ﬁlament . The terminal subunit at the barbed end appears to be in an intermediate state , between that of G - and F - actin , as illustrated by its enhanced Pi - release rate compared to F - actin ( 38 ) . It is likely that the few neighboring subunits also exhibit some conformational ﬂexibility so that , in addition to the two terminal subunits we refer to as the barbed end , we may have to consider the barbed end region as a domain with speciﬁc properties ( Fig . 3 A ) . The crystal structure of formin’s FH2 dimer in interaction with actin indicates that a formin preferably binds actin subunits in an arrangement that differs from the standard F - actin helical conformation , with a short helical twist of 180 (cid:2) instead of 167 (cid:2) ( 60 ) . It thus seems that formin uses the conformational ﬂexibility of the barbed end region to impose a local conformational change to the actin ﬁlament ( Fig . 3 B ) . Consistent with this idea , ﬁlaments elongated by formin mDia1 were reported to be more ﬂexible and exhibit a struc - tural rearrangement spanning over tens of subunits ( 45 ) . FIGURE 3 Where does the barbed end begin ? ( A ) Schematic representation of an actin ﬁlament , wherewe speculate that subunits near the barbed end have a greater freedom to change conformations . ( B ) A formin FH2 dimer tracking an elongating barbed end takes advantage of this conformational freedom to locally impose its preferred ﬁlament structure . ( C ) CP , in contrast , imposes a ﬁlament structure that is compatible with the standard F - actin structure . ( D ) When both CP and a formin coexist at the barbed end ( 29 , 37 ) , they compete through the conﬂicting conformations they each want to impose to the barbed end region . Eventually , the formin ( or CP ) will detach from the ﬁlament , or the formin will diffuse along the ﬁlament ( 29 ) , away from the barbed end . To see this ﬁgure in color , go online . Je´gou and Romet - Lemonne 2144 Biophysical Journal 110 , 2138 – 2146 , May 24 , 2016 CP , on the other hand , binds the ﬁlament barbed end with actin subunits in a conformation compatible with the stan - dard F - actin helical structure ( 69 ) . Barbed end capping by CP would thus suppress the conformational ﬂexibility of the barbed end region ( Fig . 3 C ) . In the frame of this hypoth - esis , when CP and a formin coexist at the barbed end , they not only compete for binding sites but also through the local conformation they each try to impose to the barbed end re - gion ( Fig . 3 D ) . Similarly , proteins binding to the ﬁlament side have been reported to alter barbed end assembly ( 70 ) even when they are bound several tens of subunits away from the barbed end ( 71 ) . More experiments along the lines of the single ﬁlament studies that have recently reported the existence of the for - min - CP - complex ( 29 , 37 ) will certainly shed more light on the speciﬁcities of the barbed end region . CONCLUSIONS Single ﬁlament techniques are a powerful , still expanding ﬁeld . So far , these new tools have contributed to deciphering a number of mechanisms regulating actin assembly . In many ways , they have changed the way we look at actin ﬁlaments , and the amount of quantitative information we can now extract from these observations brings precious insight into molecular mechanisms , simultaneously involving several regulatory proteins . Although we spontaneously marvel at the cell’s ability to generate and regulate diverse ﬁlament networks made from essentially one universal actin monomer , new challenges lay ahead as we now realize that various factors can give different ﬂavors to actin , and modify its assembly proper - ties . Our amazement is now just as strong , but somehow turned around : how can organized structures arise from such a rich ensemble of regulatory factors ? How many different types of actin ﬁlaments can a cell build ? Fortunately , to tackle this awesome question , we now have at our disposal increasingly sophisticated and efﬁcient single ﬁlament tools that allow us to fabricate , manipulate , and observe actin ﬁlaments with great accuracy . We believe they will be instrumental in the coming years , to generate quantitative data characterizing the role of actin - binding proteins in different contexts , and to reﬁne our understand - ing of actin dynamics . REFERENCES 1 . Skau , C . T . , and C . M . Waterman . 2015 . Speciﬁcation of architecture and function of actin structures by actin nucleation factors . Annu . Rev . Biophys . 44 : 285 – 310 . 2 . Dominguez , R . , and K . C . Holmes . 2011 . Actin structure and function . Annu . Rev . Biophys . 40 : 169 – 186 . 3 . Pollard , T . D . , and M . S . Mooseker . 1981 . Direct measurement of actin polymerization rate constants by electron microscopy of actin ﬁlaments nucleated by isolated microvillus cores . J . Cell Biol . 88 : 654 – 659 . 4 . Bugyi , B . , and M . - F . Carlier . 2010 . Control of actin ﬁlament treadmil - ling in cell motility . Annu . Rev . Biophys . 39 : 449 – 470 . 5 . Smith , B . A . , S . B . Padrick , . , J . Gelles . 2013 . Three - color single molecule imaging shows WASP detachment from Arp2 / 3 complextrig - gers actin ﬁlament branch formation . eLife . 2 : e01008 . 6 . Smith , B . A . , K . Daugherty - Clarke , . , J . Gelles . 2013 . Pathway of actin ﬁlament branch formation by Arp2 / 3 complex revealed by sin - gle - molecule imaging . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA . 110 : 1285 – 1290 . 7 . Michelot , A . , and D . G . Drubin . 2011 . Building distinct actin ﬁlament networks in a common cytoplasm . Curr . Biol . 21 : R560 – R569 . 8 . Gunning , P . W . , E . C . Hardeman , . , D . P . Mulvihill . 2015 . Tropomy - osin - master regulator of actin ﬁlament function in the cytoskeleton . J . Cell Sci . 128 : 2965 – 2974 . 9 . Drenckhahn , D . , and T . D . Pollard . 1986 . Elongation of actin ﬁlaments is a diffusion - limited reaction at the barbed end and is accelerated by inert macromolecules . J . Biol . Chem . 261 : 12754 – 12758 . 10 . Kouyama , T . , and K . Mihashi . 1981 . Fluorimetry Study of N - ( 1 - Pyreny1 ) iodoacetamide - labelled F - Actin . Local structural change of actin protomer both on polymerization and on binding of heavy mero - myosin . Eur . J . Biochem . 114 : 33 – 38 . 11 . Callaway , E . 2015 . The revolution will not be crystallized : a new method sweeps through structural biology . Nature . 525 : 172 – 174 . 12 . von der Ecken , J . , M . Mu¨ller , . , S . Raunser . 2015 . Structure of the F - actin - tropomyosin complex . Nature . 519 : 114 – 117 . 13 . Galkin , V . E . , A . Orlova , . , E . H . Egelman . 2010 . Structural polymor - phism in F - actin . Nat . Struct . Mol . Biol . 17 : 1318 – 1323 . 14 . Oda , T . , M . Iwasa , . , A . Narita . 2009 . The nature of the globular - to ﬁbrous - actin transition . Nature . 457 : 441 – 445 . 15 . Yanagida , T . , M . Nakase , . , F . Oosawa . 1984 . Direct observation of motion of single F - actin ﬁlaments in the presence of myosin . Nature . 307 : 58 – 60 . 16 . Amann , K . J . , and T . D . Pollard . 2001 . Direct real - time observation of actin ﬁlament branching mediated by Arp2 / 3 complex using total inter - nal reﬂection ﬂuorescence microscopy . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA . 98 : 15009 – 15013 . 17 . Fujiwara , I . , S . Takahashi , . , S . Ishiwata . 2002 . Microscopic analysis of polymerization dynamics with individual actin ﬁlaments . Nat . Cell Biol . 4 : 666 – 673 . 18 . Axelrod , D . 1981 . Cell - substrate contacts illuminated by total internal reﬂection ﬂuorescence . J . Cell Biol . 89 : 141 – 145 . 19 . Romero , S . , C . Le Clainche , . , M . F . Carlier . 2004 . Formin is a proc - essive motor that requires proﬁlin to accelerate actin assembly and associated ATP hydrolysis . Cell . 119 : 419 – 429 . 20 . Kovar , D . R . , and T . D . Pollard . 2004 . Insertional assembly of actin ﬁla - ment barbed ends in association with formins produces piconewton forces . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA . 101 : 14725 – 14730 . 21 . Amann , K . J . , and T . D . Pollard . 2001 . The Arp2 / 3 complex nucleates actin ﬁlament branches from the sides of pre - existing ﬁlaments . Nat . Cell Biol . 3 : 306 – 310 . 22 . Suarez , C . , J . Roland , . , L . Blanchoin . 2011 . Coﬁlin tunes the nucle - otide state of actin ﬁlaments and severs at bare and decorated segment boundaries . Curr . Biol . 21 : 862 – 868 . 23 . Reymann , A . - C . , J . - L . Martiel , . , M . The´ry . 2010 . Nucleation geom - etry governs ordered actin networks structures . Nat . Mater . 9 : 827 – 832 . 24 . Michelot , A . , J . Berro , . , L . Blanchoin . 2007 . Actin - ﬁlament stochas - tic dynamics mediated by ADF / coﬁlin . Curr . Biol . 17 : 825 – 833 . 25 . Je´gou , A . , M . - F . Carlier , and G . Romet - Lemonne . 2013 . Formin mDia1 senses and generates mechanical forces on actin ﬁlaments . Nat . Com - mun . 4 : 1883 – 1889 . 26 . Niedermayer , T . , A . Je´gou , . , R . Lipowsky . 2012 . Intermittent depo - lymerization of actin ﬁlaments is caused by photo - induced dimeriza - tion of actin protomers . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA . 109 : 10769 – 10774 . 27 . Kodera , N . , D . Yamamoto , . , T . Ando . 2010 . Video imaging of walking myosin V by high - speed atomic force microscopy . Nature . 468 : 72 – 76 . Many Flavors of Single Actin Filaments Biophysical Journal 110 , 2138 – 2146 , May 24 , 2016 2145 28 . Ngo , K . X . , N . Kodera , . , T . Q . Uyeda . 2015 . Coﬁlin - induced unidi - rectional cooperative conformational changes in actin ﬁlaments re - vealed by high - speed atomic force microscopy . eLife . 4 : e04806 . 29 . Bombardier , J . P . , J . A . Eskin , . , J . Gelles . 2015 . Single - molecule visualization of a formin - capping protein ‘decision complex’ at the actin ﬁlament barbed end . Nat . Commun . 6 : 8707 – 8715 . 30 . Elting , M . W . , S . R . Leslie , . , J . A . Spudich . 2013 . Single - molecule ﬂuorescence imaging of processive myosin with enhanced background suppression using linear zero - mode waveguides ( ZMWs ) and convex lens induced conﬁnement ( CLIC ) . Opt . Express . 21 : 1189 – 1202 . 31 . Finer , J . T . , R . M . Simmons , and J . A . Spudich . 1994 . Single myosin molecule mechanics : piconewton forces and nanometre steps . Nature . 368 : 113 – 119 . 32 . Hansen , S . D . , and R . D . Mullins . 2015 . Lamellipodin promotes actin assembly by clustering Ena / VASP proteins and tethering them to actin ﬁlaments . eLife . 4 : e06585 . 33 . Hayakawa , K . , S . Sakakibara , . , H . Tatsumi . 2014 . Single - molecule imaging and kinetic analysis of cooperative coﬁlin - actin ﬁlament inter - actions . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA . 111 : 9810 – 9815 . 34 . Jansen , S . , A . Collins , . , B . L . Goode . 2015 . Single - molecule imag - ing of a three - component ordered actin disassembly mechanism . Nat . Commun . 6 : 7202 – 7214 . 35 . Gressin , L . , A . Guillotin , . , A . Michelot . 2015 . Architecture depen - dence of actin ﬁlament network disassembly . Curr . Biol . 25 : 1437 – 1447 . 36 . Montaville , P . , A . Je´gou , . , M . F . Carlier . 2014 . Spire and Formin 2 synergize and antagonize in regulating actin assembly in meiosis by a ping - pong mechanism . PLoS Biol . 12 : e1001795 . 37 . Shekhar , S . , M . Kerleau , . , M . - F . Carlier . 2015 . Formin and capping protein together embrace the actin ﬁlament in a me´nage a ` trois . Nat . Commun . 6 : 8730 . 38 . Je´gou , A . , T . Niedermayer , . , G . Romet - Lemonne . 2011 . Individual actin ﬁlaments in a microﬂuidic ﬂow reveal the mechanism of ATP hy - drolysis and give insight into the properties of proﬁlin . PLoS Biol . 9 : e1001161 . 39 . Kang , H . , M . J . Bradley , . , E . M . De La Cruz . 2013 . Regulation of actin by ion - linked equilibria . Biophys . J . 105 : 2621 – 2628 . 40 . Michelot , A . , M . Costanzo , . , D . G . Drubin . 2010 . Reconstitution and protein composition analysis of endocytic actin patches . Curr . Biol . 20 : 1890 – 1899 . 41 . Johnson , M . , D . A . East , and D . P . Mulvihill . 2014 . Formins determine the functional properties of actin ﬁlaments in yeast . Curr . Biol . 24 : 1525 – 1530 . 42 . Bryce , N . S . , G . Schevzov , . , R . P . Weinberger . 2003 . Speciﬁcation of actin ﬁlament function and molecular composition by tropomyosin isoforms . Mol . Biol . Cell . 14 : 1002 – 1016 . 43 . Robaszkiewicz , K . , Z . Ostrowska , . , J . Moraczewska . 2016 . Tropo - myosin isoforms differentially modulate the regulation of actin ﬁla - ment polymerization and depolymerization by coﬁlins . FEBS J . 283 : 723 – 737 . 44 . Fanning , A . S . , J . S . Wolenski , . , J . G . Izant . 1994 . Differential regu - lation of skeletal muscle myosin - II and brush border myosin - I enzy - mology and mechanochemistry by bacterially produced tropomyosin isoforms . Cell Motil . Cytoskeleton . 29 : 29 – 45 . 45 . Papp , G . , B . Bugyi , . , M . Nyitrai . 2006 . Conformational changes in actin ﬁlaments induced by formin binding to the barbed end . Biophys . J . 91 : 2564 – 2572 . 46 . Ujfalusi , Z . , M . Kova´cs , . , B . Bugyi . 2012 . Myosin and tropomyosin stabilize the conformation of formin - nucleated actin ﬁlaments . J . Biol . Chem . 287 : 31894 – 31904 . 47 . Perrin , B . J . , and J . M . Ervasti . 2010 . The actin gene family : function follows isoform . Cytoskeleton ( Hoboken ) . 67 : 630 – 634 . 48 . Bergeron , S . E . , M . Zhu , . , P . A . Rubenstein . 2010 . Ion - dependent polymerization differences between mammalian beta - and gamma - nonmuscle actin isoforms . J . Biol . Chem . 285 : 16087 – 16095 . 49 . Kremneva , E . , M . H . Makkonen , . , P . Lappalainen . 2014 . Coﬁlin - 2 controls actin ﬁlament length in muscle sarcomeres . Dev . Cell . 31 : 215 – 226 . 50 . De La Cruz , E . M . 2005 . Coﬁlin binding to muscle and non - muscle actin ﬁlaments : isoform - dependent cooperative interactions . J . Mol . Biol . 346 : 557 – 564 . 51 . Mu¨ller , M . , R . P . Diensthuber , . , D . J . Manstein . 2013 . Distinct func - tional interactions between actin isoforms and nonsarcomeric myosins . PLoS One . 8 : e70636 . 52 . Terman , J . R . , and A . Kashina . 2013 . Post - translational modiﬁcation and regulation of actin . Curr . Opin . Cell Biol . 25 : 30 – 38 . 53 . Karakozova , M . , M . Kozak , . , A . Kashina . 2006 . Arginylation of beta - actin regulates actin cytoskeleton and cell motility . Science . 313 : 192 – 196 . 54 . Hung , R . - J . , C . W . Pak , and J . R . Terman . 2011 . Direct redox regulation of F - actin assembly and disassembly by Mical . Science . 334 : 1710 – 1713 . 55 . Galkin , V . E . , A . Orlova , and E . H . Egelman . 2012 . Actin ﬁlaments as tension sensors . Curr . Biol . 22 : R96 – R101 . 56 . Uyeda , T . Q . P . , Y . Iwadate , . , S . Yumura . 2011 . Stretching actin ﬁl - aments within cells enhances their afﬁnity for the myosin II motor domain . PLoS One . 6 : e26200 . 57 . Romet - Lemonne , G . , and A . Je´gou . 2013 . Mechanotransduction down to individual actin ﬁlaments . Eur . J . Cell Biol . 92 : 333 – 338 . 58 . Risca , V . I . , E . B . Wang , . , D . A . Fletcher . 2012 . Actin ﬁlament curvature biases branching direction . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA . 109 : 2913 – 2918 . 59 . Hayakawa , K . , H . Tatsumi , and M . Sokabe . 2011 . Actin ﬁlaments func - tion as a tension sensor by tension - dependent binding of coﬁlin to the ﬁlament . J . Cell Biol . 195 : 721 – 727 . 60 . Otomo , T . , D . R . Tomchick , . , M . K . Rosen . 2005 . Structural basis of actin ﬁlament nucleation and processive capping by a formin homology 2 domain . Nature . 433 : 488 – 494 . 61 . del Rio , A . , R . Perez - Jimenez , . , M . P . Sheetz . 2009 . Stretching single talin rod molecules activates vinculin binding . Science . 323 : 638 – 641 . 62 . Buckley , C . D . , J . Tan , . , A . R . Dunn . 2014 . Cell adhesion . The min - imal cadherin - catenin complex binds to actin ﬁlaments under force . Science . 346 : 1254211 . 63 . Nagy , S . , B . L . Ricca , . , R . S . Rock . 2008 . A myosin motor that selects bundled actin for motility . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA . 105 : 9616 – 9620 . 64 . Breitsprecher , D . , S . A . Koestler , . , J . Faix . 2011 . Coﬁlin cooperates with fascin to disassemble ﬁlopodial actin ﬁlaments . J . Cell Sci . 124 : 3305 – 3318 . 65 . Hung , R . - J . , C . S . Spaeth , . , J . R . Terman . 2013 . SelR reverses Mical - mediated oxidation of actin to regulate F - actin dynamics . Nat . Cell Biol . 15 : 1445 – 1454 . 66 . De La Cruz , E . M . , and T . D . Pollard . 1994 . Transient kinetic analysis of rhodamine phalloidin binding to actin ﬁlaments . Biochemistry . 33 : 14387 – 14392 . 67 . McCullough , B . R . , L . Blanchoin , . , E . M . De la Cruz . 2008 . Coﬁlin increases the bending ﬂexibility of actin ﬁlaments : implications for severing and cell mechanics . J . Mol . Biol . 381 : 550 – 558 . 68 . Galkin , V . E . , A . Orlova , . , E . H . Egelman . 2011 . Remodeling of actin ﬁlaments by ADF / coﬁlin proteins . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA . 108 : 20568 – 20572 . 69 . Yamashita , A . , K . Maeda , and Y . Mae´da . 2003 . Crystal structure of CapZ : structural basis for actin ﬁlament barbed end capping . EMBO J . 22 : 1529 – 1538 . 70 . Hansen , S . D . , A . V . Kwiatkowski , . , W . J . Nelson . 2013 . a E - catenin actin - binding domain alters actin ﬁlament conformation and regulates binding of nucleation and disassembly factors . Mol . Biol . Cell . 24 : 3710 – 3720 . 71 . Crevenna , A . H . , M . Arciniega , . , D . C . Lamb . 2015 . Side - binding proteins modulate actin ﬁlament dynamics . eLife . 4 : e04599 . Je´gou and Romet - Lemonne 2146 Biophysical Journal 110 , 2138 – 2146 , May 24 , 2016