Article The Rockefeller University Press $ 30 . 00 J . Exp . Med . Vol . 208 No . 5 909 - 921 www . jem . org / cgi / doi / 10 . 1084 / jem . 20102518 909 Trypanosoma cruzi , the intracellular protozoan which causes the seriously debilitating Chagas’ disease in Latin America , must invade cells to replicate within its vertebrate host . To gain ac - cess to the intracellular environment , several bacterial and protozoan pathogens rely on host cell actin polymerization , infecting mostly phagocytic cells ( i . e . , Leishmania ; Moulder , 1985 ) or inducing macropinocytosis ( i . e . , Salmonella ; Falkow et al . , 1992 ) . In contrast , the infective trypomastigote forms of T . cruzi invade a large number of different cell types by forming membrane - bound intracellular vacuoles inde - pendently of host cell actin rearrangements ( Nogueira and Cohn , 1976 ; Schenkman et al . , 1991 ; Tardieux et al . , 1992 ) . Earlier studies showed that host cell entry by T . cruzi involves the recruitment and fusion of host lysosomes at the parasite invasion site ( Tardieux et al . , 1992 ) . Lysosomal markers are gradually detected in the nascent trypomastigote - containing intra - cellular vacuoles , suggesting that fusion of lyso - somes provides the membrane required for parasitophorous vacuole formation ( Tardieux et al . , 1992 ) . Subsequent studies demonstrated that trypomastigotes trigger intracellular free Ca 2 + transients in host cells , which are re - quired for lysosomal recruitment and fusion at the invasion site ( Tardieux et al . , 1994 ; Burleigh and Andrews , 1995 ; Rodríguez et al . , 1995 ; Burleigh et al . , 1997 ) . Studies of the T . cruzi invasion mechanism revealed that conventional lysosomes in mam - malian cells can behave as Ca 2 + - regulated exo - cytic vesicles ( Rodríguez et al . , 1997 ) and led to the discovery that lysosomal exocytosis is involved in the mechanism by which eukary - otic cells repair wounds in their plasma mem - brane ( Reddy et al . , 2001 ) . Initial observations CORRESPONDENCE Norma W . Andrews : andrewsn @ umd . edu Abbreviations used : ASM , acid sphingomyelinase ; BEL , bro - moenol lactone ; EEA1 , early endosome antigen 1 ; GPI , glyco - syl phosphatidylinositol ; Lamp1 , lysosomal - associated membrane protein 1 ; PI , propidium iodide ; SLO , Streptolysin O . Trypanosoma cruzi subverts the sphingomyelinase - mediated plasma membrane repair pathway for cell invasion Maria Cecilia Fernandes , 1 Mauro Cortez , 1 Andrew R . Flannery , 1 Christina Tam , 1 Renato A . Mortara , 2 and Norma W . Andrews 1 1 Department of Cell Biology and Molecular Genetics , University of Maryland , College Park , MD 20742 2 Department of Microbiology , Immunology and Parasitology , Federal University of Sao Paulo , 04023 - 062 Sao Paulo , Brazil Upon host cell contact , the protozoan parasite Trypanosoma cruzi triggers cytosolic Ca 2 + transients that induce exocytosis of lysosomes , a process required for cell invasion . How - ever , the exact mechanism by which lysosomal exocytosis mediates T . cruzi internalization remains unclear . We show that host cell entry by T . cruzi mimics a process of plasma mem - brane injury and repair that involves Ca 2 + - dependent exocytosis of lysosomes , delivery of acid sphingomyelinase ( ASM ) to the outer leaflet of the plasma membrane , and a rapid form of endocytosis that internalizes membrane lesions . Host cells incubated with T . cruzi trypomastigotes are transiently wounded , show increased levels of endocytosis , and become more susceptible to infection when injured with pore - forming toxins . Inhibition or deple - tion of lysosomal ASM , which blocks plasma membrane repair , markedly reduces the susceptibility of host cells to T . cruzi invasion . Notably , extracellular addition of sphingomye - linase stimulates host cell endocytosis , enhances T . cruzi invasion , and restores normal invasion levels in ASM - depleted cells . Ceramide , the product of sphingomyelin hydrolysis , is detected in newly formed parasitophorous vacuoles containing trypomastigotes but not in the few parasite - containing vacuoles formed in ASM - depleted cells . Thus , T . cruzi subverts the ASM - dependent ceramide - enriched endosomes that function in plasma membrane repair to infect host cells . © 2011 Fernandes et al . This article is distributed under the terms of an Attribution – Noncommercial – Share Alike – No Mirror Sites license for the first six months after the publication date ( see http : / / www . rupress . org / terms ) . After six months it is available under a Creative Commons License ( Attribution – Noncom - mercial – Share Alike 3 . 0 Unported license , as described at http : / / creativecommons . org / licenses / by - nc - sa / 3 . 0 / ) . T h e J ou r n a l o f E x p e r i m e n t a l M e d i c i n e on O c t obe r 15 , 2015 j e m . r up r e ss . o r g D o w n l oaded f r o m Published May 2 , 2011 http : / / jem . rupress . org / content / suppl / 2011 / 04 / 29 / jem . 20102518 . DC1 . html Supplemental Material can be found at : 910 Cell injury and repair promotes T . cruzi infection | Fernandes et al . numbers of host cells remained attached to the substrate in the presence or absence of Ca 2 + ( unpublished data ) . The re - quirement for extracellular Ca 2 + in T . cruzi invasion is consis - tent with prior studies , which showed that host cell Ca 2 + transients triggered by T . cruzi trypomastigotes are required for infection ( Tardieux et al . , 1994 ) and that Ca 2 + signaling within trypomastigotes is also necessary for cell invasion ( Moreno et al . , 1994 ) . To further document the involvement of host cell Ca 2 + - dependent signaling events in T . cruzi inva - sion , we imaged live HeLa cells expressing fluorescently tagged lysosomal - associated membrane protein 1 ( Lamp1 ) and exposed to trypomastigotes in the presence of Ca 2 + . As shown in Fig . 1 B and Video 1 , over time the parasites in - duced massive translocation of the lysosomal membrane glycoprotein Lamp1 to the plasma membrane of host cells . These results show , for the first time in live cells , the Ca 2 + - dependent recruitment and exocytosis of host cell lysosomes that was previously documented in fixed cells ( Tardieux et al . , 1992 ) . Next , we investigated whether the exocytosis of lyso - somes occurring during interaction of T . cruzi trypomasti - gotes with host cells involved cell wounding by the parasites . When HeLa cells were exposed to trypomastigotes in the presence of Ca 2 + no staining was detected with the membrane - impermeable dye propidium iodide ( PI ) , indicating that the plasma membrane remained intact ( Fig . 1 C , left ) . However , after exposure to trypomastigotes in the absence of Ca 2 + , a condi - tion which does not allow plasma membrane repair , several cells showed nuclear PI staining ( Fig . 1 C , right ) . Given that plasma membrane resealing requires extracellular Ca 2 + and is completed in less than 30 s ( Steinhardt et al . , 1994 ; Idone et al . , 2008 ; Tam et al . , 2010 ) , these results suggest that T . cruzi trypomastigotes injure the plasma membrane of host cells but that when Ca 2 + is present these wounds are rapidly resealed . To compare the extent of host cell wounding ( which can only be detected in the absence of Ca 2 + because of the rapid repair ) and host cell invasion ( which only occurs in the pres - ence of Ca 2 + ) , we performed parallel experiments with the same pool of host cells and parasites in the presence or ab - sence of Ca 2 + . There was a close correlation between the per - centage of infected cells over time under the repair - permissive conditions ( with Ca 2 + ) and the percentage of wounded cells detected under no - repair conditions ( without Ca 2 + ; Fig . 1 D ) . To determine if the ability to wound host cells was a specific property of the infective trypomastigote stages of T . cruzi , we performed similar assays using epimastigotes , the noninfective insect forms of T . cruzi , which are also flagellated and motile . Under Ca 2 + depletion conditions , a markedly higher level of PI influx was detected in cells incubated with trypomasti - gotes , when compared with cells incubated for the same pe - riod of time with epimastigotes ( Fig . 1 E and Fig . S1 ) . This trypomastigote - specific wounding mechanism may be , at least in part , caused by Tc - Tox , the pore - forming protein secreted by T . cruzi trypomastigotes but not epimastigotes ( Andrews and Whitlow , 1989 ; Andrews et al . , 1990 ) . However , secreted established that wounded cells reseal their plasma membrane by a mechanism dependent on the influx of extracellular Ca 2 + ( Heilbrunn , 1956 ; Chambers and Chambers , 1961 ) . The cel - lular mechanism responsible for plasma membrane repair began to be elucidated when a functional link was established between plasma membrane resealing and the exocytosis of intracellular vesicles ( Bi et al . , 1995 ; Miyake and McNeil , 1995 ) . Peripheral lysosomes were subsequently identified as the major population of intracellular vesicles that respond to Ca 2 + influx by fusing with the plasma membrane ( Rodríguez et al . , 1997 ; Jaiswal et al . , 2002 ) , promoting plasma membrane repair ( Reddy et al . , 2001 ) . Despite these advances , the mechanism by which Ca 2 + - triggered lysosomal exocytosis promoted the repair of lesions on the plasma membrane remained obscure . Reduction in plasma membrane tension after Ca 2 + - triggered exocytosis was proposed to play a role ( Togo et al . , 1999 ) , as well as a direct patching of the wound by the Ca 2 + - responsive intra - cellular vesicles ( McNeil et al . , 2000 ) . However , these models failed to explain how stable lesions , such as the ones caused by pore - forming toxins , were also rapidly removed from the plasma membrane in a Ca 2 + - dependent manner ( Walev et al . , 2001 ) . Further investigation of this issue revealed that in addi - tion to lysosomal exocytosis , Ca 2 + influx triggers a rapid form of endocytosis that is required for the restoration of plasma membrane integrity ( Idone et al . , 2008 ) . A recent study showed that injury - dependent endocytosis is functionally linked to the secretion of a specific lysosomal enzyme , acid sphingomyelinase ( ASM ; Tam et al . , 2010 ) . ASM cleaves the phosphorylcholine head group of sphingomyelin , an abundant sphingolipid on the outer leaflet of the plasma membrane ( Koval and Pagano , 1991 ) , generating ceramide ( Gulbins and Kolesnick , 2003 ; Grassmé et al . , 2007 ) . Because ceramide has the property of coalescing in membranes form - ing domains capable of inward budding ( Holopainen et al . , 2000 ; Gulbins and Kolesnick , 2003 ; van Blitterswijk et al . , 2003 ; Grassmé et al . , 2007 ; Trajkovic et al . , 2008 ) , it was sug - gested that secretion of lysosomal ASM promotes plasma membrane repair through ceramide - driven internalization of lesions ( Tam et al . , 2010 ) . Given the functional similarities between host cell invasion by T . cruzi and the resealing of membrane wounds , we investigated whether this parasite takes advantage of the cellular repair mechanism to gain access to the intracellular environment . RESULTS T . cruzi trypomastigotes wound host cells As a first step in determining whether plasma membrane wounding and repair play a role in host cell invasion by T . cruzi , we performed invasion assays in the presence or absence of Ca 2 + in the extracellular medium . HeLa cells incubated with infective trypomastigotes in the presence of Ca 2 + ( repair per - missive condition ) were readily infected . In contrast , without Ca 2 + ( condition nonpermissive for repair ) very few invasion events were detected ( Fig . 1 A ) . This was not a result of host cell loss because during the observation period similar on O c t obe r 15 , 2015 j e m . r up r e ss . o r g D o w n l oaded f r o m Published May 2 , 2011 JEM VOL . 208 , May 9 , 2011 Article 911 Figure 1 . T . cruzi trypomastigotes wound mammalian cells and trigger the Ca 2 + - dependent plasma membrane repair response mediated by lysosomal exocytosis . ( A ) HeLa cells were incubated with trypomastigotes in the presence ( membrane repair condition ) or absence ( nonrepair condition ) of Ca 2 + for 40 min , fixed , and stained for microscopic quantification of intracellular parasites . The data correspond to the mean of triplicates ± SD . * * * , P < 0 . 0001 , Student’s t test . ( B ) Time - lapse live images of cells transduced with Lamp1 - RFP and incubated with trypomastigotes in the presence of Ca 2 + . The images show a single confocal plane of cells expressing Lamp1 - RFP ( green ) during interaction with trypomastigotes . The first time point ( 0 min ) was ac - quired after 20 min incubation of cells with 10 8 trypomastigotes . Bars , 10 µm . ( Video1 . ) ( C ) Cell permeabilization and PI ( red ) influx in response to trypo - mastigotes in the absence ( nonrepair condition ) or presence ( repair condition ) of Ca 2 + . Live cells were imaged by phase contrast and epifluorescence 40 min after trypomastigote addition . Bars , 20 µm . ( D ) Quantification of the percentage of PI - positive cells ( in Ca 2 + free medium ) in comparison with the percentage of cells infected with trypomastigotes ( in Ca 2 + - containing medium ) . Trypomastigotes were allowed to invade cells for the indicated time peri - ods and fixed coverslips were examined to determine the percentage of infected cells or PI - positive cells . Error bars show mean of triplicates ± SD . ( E ) Fixed cells after incubation with noninfective epimastigotes ( Epi ) or trypomastigotes ( Trypo ) in Ca 2 + - free medium in the presence of PI ( red ) . Cell nuclei were stained with DAPI ( blue ) . Bars , 20 µm . These results are representative of three independent experiments . on O c t obe r 15 , 2015 j e m . r up r e ss . o r g D o w n l oaded f r o m Published May 2 , 2011 912 Cell injury and repair promotes T . cruzi infection | Fernandes et al . in plasma membrane wounding . In support of this possibility , imaging of the early interaction of trypo - mastigotes with HeLa cells revealed plasma membrane deformations caused by the active gliding motility of parasites firmly attached to host cells ( Fig . 2 A and Video 2 ) . Intriguingly , trypomastigotes become strongly attached and enter cells through their poste - rior end ( Fig . 2 , B and C ) , whereas their active fla - gellar motility propels them in the opposite direction ( Hill , 2003 ) . This unique situation , in which the par - asite’s motility exerts forces on the plasma membrane which are opposed to their gradual movement into cells , may also be a source of plasma membrane injury . Host cell injury with a bacterial pore - forming toxin promotes invasion by T . cruzi The findings discussed in the previous section suggested that injury inflicted in host cells by T . cruzi trypomastigotes is only detected in the absence of Ca 2 + because the wounds are rapidly Tc - Tox permeabilizes cell membranes only at acidic pH and was implicated in the escape of trypomastigotes from their parasitophorous vacuole after invasion ( Ley et al . , 1990 ) . Thus , it is likely that other factors , such as mechanical forces exerted on host cells by attached trypomastigotes may also play a role Figure 2 . Interaction of T . cruzi trypomastigotes with host cells before invasion causes mechanical deformations on the plasma membrane . ( A ) Time - lapse phase - contrast live images of trypomastigotes interacting with a HeLa cell ( Video 2 ) . The gliding movement of attached trypomastigotes ( arrow ) cause reversible plasma membrane deformations ( arrowhead ) . Bars , 10 µm . ( B and C ) Scanning electron micros - copy images of trypomastigotes during early stages ( 10 min ) of interaction with host cells . Trypomastigotes are observed gliding under cells ( B ) or in close contact with the plasma membrane at the cell periphery ( C ) . Bars , 5 µm . These results are representative of two independent experiments . Figure 3 . Host cell wounding and repair modulates T . cruzi invasion . ( A ) HeLa cells were exposed to trypomasti - gotes in the absence ( white column ) or presence ( black col - umns ) of increasing concentrations of SLO for 20 min , fixed , and processed for quantification of intracellular parasites . The data correspond to the mean of triplicates ± SD . * , P = 0 . 0149 , Student’s t test comparing control and 38 ng / ml SLO - treated cells ; * * * , P < 0 . 0001 , Student’s t test comparing control and 50 ng / ml SLO - treated cells . ( B ) Cells were pre - treated for 20 min with increasing concentrations of SLO , washed , further incubated for 20 min , and exposed to trypo - mastigotes for 20 min followed by fixation and quantifica - tion of intracellular parasites . The data correspond to the mean of triplicates ± SD . * , P = 0 . 0182 , Student’s t test com - paring control and 25 ng / ml SLO - treated cells ; * * * , P < 0 . 0006 , Student’s t test comparing control and 38 ng / ml or 50 ng / ml SLO - treated cells . ( C ) HeLa cells were treated with the indicated concentrations of the ASM inhibitor desipra - mine for 1 h , washed and exposed to trypomastigotes for 30 min , fixed , and processed for determination of the num - ber of intracellular parasites . The data correspond to the mean of triplicates ± SD . * , P = 0 . 0125 , Student’s t test ; * * , P = 0 . 0016 , Student’s t test comparing control ( white bars ) and treated ( black bars ) bars . ( D ) Cells preincubated with 30 µM desipramine for 1 h were exposed to trypomastigotes for the indicated periods of time , washed , and processed for quantification of intracellular parasites . The data correspond to the mean of triplicates ± SD . * * , P < 0 . 0014 , Student’s t test ; * * * , P < 0 . 0001 , Student’s t test comparing control ( white bars ) and treated ( black bars ) cells . These re - sults are representative of four independent experiments . on O c t obe r 15 , 2015 j e m . r up r e ss . o r g D o w n l oaded f r o m Published May 2 , 2011 JEM VOL . 208 , May 9 , 2011 Article 913 reduced the susceptibility of host cells to invasion by T . cruzi ( Fig . 4 B ) . Importantly , trypomastigote entry was restored to control levels by addition of Bacillus cereus sphingomyelinase during the infection period ( Fig . 4 C ) . These results show that the role of lysosomal ASM in the T . cruzi invasion process can be bypassed by the extracellular addition of sphingo - myelinase , suggesting that generation of ceramide in the outer leaflet of the plasma membrane by this enzyme directly pro - motes parasite entry . repaired in the presence of Ca 2 + . To determine whether wounding followed by repair influenced the cell invasion process , we added the pore - forming bacterial toxin Strepto - lysin O ( SLO ) to host cells during their incubation with the parasites . Permeabilization of HeLa cells by SLO was detected through PI influx under no repair conditions ( without Ca 2 + ; Fig . S2 A ) , whereas T . cruzi trypomastigotes remained intact ( Fig . S2 B ) . This was expected because trypanosome mem - branes contain ergosterol but not cholesterol , which is essen - tial for SLO pore formation ( Tweten , 2005 ) . Addition of SLO increased host cell invasion by T . cruzi trypomastigotes in a dose - dependent manner ( Fig . 3 A ) . At 50 ng / ml SLO ( a toxin concentration which allows Ca 2 + - dependent repair of the entire population of permeabilized cells ; Idone et al . , 2008 ; Tam et al . , 2010 ) invasion was increased by  60 % ( Fig . 3 A ) . Interestingly , when cells were preincubated with SLO for 20 min before exposure to the parasites , T . cruzi invasion was reduced , also in a toxin dose - dependent manner ( Fig . 3 B ) . These results suggest that the cellular machinery for plasma membrane wounding and repair is used by T . cruzi during host cell invasion and that host cell factors required for this process are depleted if the wounding and repair steps occur before exposure to the parasites . Inhibition of lysosomal exocytosis and ASM activity block T . cruzi invasion Recently , our laboratory demonstrated that bromoenol lac - tone ( BEL ; Fensome - Green et al . , 2007 ) strongly inhibits lyso - somal exocytosis and plasma membrane resealing after cell wounding ( Tam et al . , 2010 ) . Treatment of HeLa cells with BEL also strongly inhibited invasion by T . cruzi trypomasti - gotes ( Fig . S3 , A and B ) , in agreement with prior studies which demonstrated a critical role for lysosomes in the T . cruzi invasion process ( Tardieux et al . , 1992 ; Andrade and Andrews , 2004 ) . Next , we investigated whether the lysosomal enzyme ASM , which was previously shown to promote plasma mem - brane repair ( Tam et al . , 2010 ) , was also required for T . cruzi invasion . HeLa cells were treated with the ASM inhibitor de - sipramine ( Hurwitz et al . , 1994 ; Kölzer et al . , 2004 ) and analyzed for susceptibility to T . cruzi infection . A strong dose - dependent inhibition of trypomastigote entry was observed after de - sipramine treatment ( Fig . 3 , C and D ) , suggesting a role for secreted ASM in the T . cruzi invasion mechanism . The inhibition in T . cruzi invasion observed after transcriptional silencing of ASM is reversed by extracellular addition of sphingomyelinase To directly determine if trypomastigote entry requires ASM , we used small interfering ( si ) RNA to transcriptionally silence SMPD1 , the gene encoding for ASM . A marked reduction in ASM expression was detected in HeLa cells treated with SMPD1 siRNA when compared with cells without lipo - fectamine or cells treated with control siRNA ( Fig . 4 A ) . Under similar conditions , ASM activity in HeLa cells is reduced by  85 % ( Tam et al . , 2010 ) . As observed in desipramine - treated cells ( Fig . 3 , C and D ) , transcriptional silencing of ASM strongly Figure 4 . RNAi - mediated silencing of lysosomal ASM inhibits host cell invasion by T . cruzi , and exposure to extracellular sphingo - myelinase restores parasite entry . ( A ) Immunoblot with anti - ASM antibodies in extracts of HeLa cells treated with control or ASM siRNA . The arrow points to the band corresponding to ASM ; the higher additional band is an unspecific reaction . Immunoblot was probed with anti - actin antibodies for loading control . ( B ) Quantification of trypomasti - gote invasion in siRNA - treated HeLa cells . After siRNA treatment , cells were incubated with trypomastigotes for the indicated periods , fixed , and processed for quantification of intracellular parasites . The data correspond to the mean of triplicates ± SD . * * , P = 0 . 0073 , Student’s t test ; * * * , P < 0 . 0001 , Student’s t test comparing control ( gray bars ) and ASM siRNA - treated cells ( black bars ) . ( C ) siRNA - treated HeLa cells were incubated with trypomastigotes in the presence or absence of the indicated concentrations of bacterial sphingomyelinase for 30 min , fixed , and processed for quantification of intracellular parasites . The data correspond to the mean of triplicates ± SD . * * , P < 0 . 0014 ; * * * , P = 0 . 0003 , Student’s t test comparing control ( gray bars ) and treated cells ( black bars ) . These results are representative of four independent experiments . on O c t obe r 15 , 2015 j e m . r up r e ss . o r g D o w n l oaded f r o m Published May 2 , 2011 914 Cell injury and repair promotes T . cruzi infection | Fernandes et al . in HeLa cells exposed to T . cruzi trypomastigotes ( Fig . 6 C ) . Confirming earlier results ( Woolsey et al . , 2003 ) , a fraction of recently internalized T . cruzi try - pomastigotes was detected within EEA1 - enriched parasitophorous vacuoles ( Fig . 6 D ) . Interestingly , the fraction of recently internalized trypomastigotes observed within parasitophorous vacuoles positive for EEA1 increased proportionally to the amount of exogenously added sphingomyelinase ( Fig . 6 E ) . These observations support a role for lysosomal ASM , released during Ca 2 + - triggered exocytosis , in generating the EEA1 - positive compartments where T . cruzi trypomastigotes reside shortly after entering cells . In agreement with this view , Lamp1 - contain - ing lysosomes were consistently observed in the vi - cinity of EEA1 - positive vacuoles containing recently internalized parasites ( Fig . 6 F ) . ASM secretion promotes T . cruzi internalization through ceramide - enriched compartments Collectively with the earlier demonstration that exocytosis of lysosomal ASM promotes plasma membrane repair ( Tam et al . , 2010 ) , the results described in the previous section sup - port the hypothesis that T . cruzi subverts the plasma mem - brane injury and repair pathway for invading host cells . The role of sphingomyelinase in promoting T . cruzi invasion sug - gests that ceramide generation in the plasma membrane con - tributes to the formation of the early parasitophorous vacuole in a manner analogous to the internalization of membrane lesions during cell resealing ( Idone et al . , 2008 ) . To test this hypothesis , we used anti - ceramide monoclonal antibodies to localize areas of ceramide accumulation in HeLa cells recently infected with T . cruzi . As shown in Fig . 5 , surface staining with this antibody increased markedly after HeLa cells were treated with Bacillus cereus sphingomyelinase , confirming its specific - ity for ceramide . Isotype control antibodies did not stain HeLa cells or T . cruzi trypomastigotes ( Fig . S4 , A and B ) . Although T . cruzi also contains free ceramide , biochemical analysis showed that trypomastigotes contain lower amounts when compared with the intracellular replicative stages , amastigotes ( Bertello et al . , 1996 ) . In agreement with these findings , T . cruzi amas - tigotes stained strongly with the anti - ceramide monoclonal anti - bodies ( unpublished data ) , whereas trypomastigotes showed a weak staining , which was further reduced after extraction of the fixed parasites with 0 . 2 % Triton X - 100 ( Fig . S5 B ) . In con - trast , anti - ceramide antibodies still strongly reacted with ce - ramide present in HeLa cells permeabilized with 0 . 1 or 0 . 2 % To directly demonstrate the expected increase in ceramide levels promoted by exogenous addition of sphingomyelinase , nonpermeabilized HeLa cells pretreated with different concen - trations of sphingomyelinase were incubated with anti - ceramide monoclonal antibodies and imaged ( Fig . 5 ) . The increase in plasma membrane immunofluorescence was proportional to the sphingomyelinase concentration , consistent with a role for newly generated ceramide in restoring T . cruzi invasion in ASM - depleted cells ( Fig . 4 C ) . The Bacillus cereus sphingomy - elinase used for these experiments is fully active at neutral pH , but earlier work demonstrated that extracellularly released lysosomal ASM also has sufficient extracellular activity for triggering plasma membrane repair ( Tam et al . , 2010 ) and signaling events that depend on ceramide generation in the outer leaflet of the plasma membrane ( Schissel et al . , 1998 ; Zha et al . , 1998 ) . Thus , our results suggest a role for secreted lysosomal ASM in the mechanism by which T . cruzi trypo - mastigotes invade host cells . Sphingomyelinase stimulates endocytosis and promotes T . cruzi invasion Exogenously added sphingomyelinase also increased the sus - ceptibility to T . cruzi invasion of untreated HeLa cells in a dose - dependent manner ( Fig . 6 A ) . Examination of the cells after exposure to sphingomyelinase revealed a marked in - crease in the number of early endosome antigen 1 ( EEA1 ) – positive endocytic compartments ( Fig . 6 B ) , similar to what was observed in cells permeabilized by SLO ( Idone et al . , 2008 ) . An increase in EEA1 - positive endosomes was also seen Figure 5 . Anti - ceramide monoclonal antibodies detect sphingomyelinase - induced increase in surface ceramide . Hela cells were treated with the indicated concentrations of Bacillus cereus sphingomyelinase for 30 min . After fixation with PFA , coverslips were labeled with 15B4 anti - ceramide monoclonal antibodies for 1 h followed by secondary antibodies . Ceramide labeling is shown in red . Bars , 20 µm . These results are representative of three independent experiments . on O c t obe r 15 , 2015 j e m . r up r e ss . o r g D o w n l oaded f r o m Published May 2 , 2011 JEM VOL . 208 , May 9 , 2011 Article 915 membrane . This topology was evident in immunofluorescence images , showing that the protruding parasite portion was sur - rounded by Lamp1 ( delivered through lysosomal fusion with the parasitophorous vacuole ) and a plasma membrane marker , YFP – glycosyl phosphatidylinositol ( GPI ; Fig . 7 C ) . Scan - ning electron micrographs confirmed that the membrane enveloping the long protrusions was continuous with the plasma membrane ( Fig . 7 , D – F ) , and occasional breaches in these electron microscopy preparations revealed the pres - ence of trypomastigotes inside the plasma membrane – derived sleeves ( Fig . 7 G ) . This phenomenon provided an excellent opportunity to examine recently formed parasitophorous vacuoles for the presence of ceramide , away from the abun - dant ceramide present in the host cell cytosol . Using laser - scanning confocal fluorescence microscopy , parasitophorous Triton X - 100 ( Fig . S5 A ) . Having established conditions to reduce detection of trypomastigote endogenous ceramide , we proceeded to examine the distribution of host cell cer - amide in HeLa cells recently infected with T . cruzi . Although ceramide - enriched parasitophorous vacuoles containing T . cruzi trypomastigotes could be detected , the abundant cyto - plasmic staining for ceramide in host cells made quantification difficult . Unexpectedly , we observed that the highly motile recently internalized trypomastigotes often caused a marked deformation of the plasma membrane , protruding from the host cell with their anterior end oriented toward the outside ( Video 3 ; Video 4 ; and Fig . 7 , A and B ) . Although protruding , trypomastigotes were surrounded by two membranes , one corresponding to the parasitophorous vacuole formed dur - ing invasion and another derived from the deformed plasma Figure 6 . Exposure to T . cruzi trypomastigotes or to exogenous sphingomyelinase induces formation of EEA1 - positive endosomes in host cells . ( A ) After exposure to trypomastigotes for 20 min , HeLa cells were fixed and processed for quantification of intracellular parasites . The data correspond to the mean of tripli - cates ± SD . * * , P = 0 . 0078 , Student’s t test comparing control ( white bar ) and 10 µU / ml sphingomyelinase – exposed cells ( black bar ) ; * * * , P < 0 . 0001 , Student’s t test comparing control and 20 µU / ml sphingomyelinase – treated cells . ( B ) EEA1 - positive endosomes in HeLa cells incubated ( SMase ) or not ( control ) with 20 µU / ml sphingomyelinase for 20 min . DAPI DNA stain ( blue ) , anti - EEA1 antibodies ( red ) . Bars = 20 µm . ( C ) EEA1 - positive endosomes in HeLa cells incubated ( T . cruzi ) or not ( control ) with trypomastigotes for 20 min . DAPI , blue ; anti - EEA1 antibodies , red . Bars , 20 µm . ( D ) After 20 min of infection , HeLa cells were incubated with anti – T . cruzi antibodies ( green ) to stain extracellular parasites , followed by permeabilization and staining with anti - EEA1 ( red ) . Arrows point to EEA1 staining associated with the intracellular region of partially internalized parasites . DAPI ( blue ) . Bars , 10 µm . ( E ) Quantification of the number of intracellular trypomasti - gotes in EEA1 positive vacuoles 20 min after invasion in the presence of sphingo - myelinase . After infection , cells were incu - bated with anti – T . cruzi antibodies to stain extracellular parasites , followed by permea - bilization and staining with anti - EEA1 . The data correspond to the mean of tripli - cates ± SD . * , P < 0 . 04 , Student’s t test ; * * , P = 0 . 002 , Student’s t test , comparing con - trol and treated cells . ( F ) After 20 min of infection , HeLa cells were fixed , permeabilized and stained with anti - EEA1 ( red ) and anti - Lamp1 ( green ) antibodies . DAPI , blue . Arrows indicate intra cellular parasites within EEA1 - enriched parasitophorous vacuoles and closely associated with Lamp1 - containing lysosomes . Bars , 10 µm . These results are representative of three independent experiments . on O c t obe r 15 , 2015 j e m . r up r e ss . o r g D o w n l oaded f r o m Published May 2 , 2011 916 Cell injury and repair promotes T . cruzi infection | Fernandes et al . siRNA . As shown in Fig . 4 , the siRNA treatment conditions we used reduced the ASM content of HeLa cells in  85 % and caused a similar inhibi - tion in trypomastigote invasion . The residual par - asite invasion still observed in ASM - depleted cells allowed us to compare the levels of staining with anti - ceramide antibodies in cells depleted or not of ASM . After 20 min of infection , 60 % of the intra - cellular trypomastigotes observed in cells treated with control siRNA were detected in ceramide - enriched parasitophorous vacuoles , whereas in ASM - depleted cells only 24 % of the parasite - containing vac - uoles stained with the antibodies . In both groups of cells , treated with control or ASM siRNA , lysosomes were ob - served in close association with recently internalized parasites ( Fig . 9 ) . Collectively , these results establish a link between T . cruzi – induced plasma membrane injury , Ca 2 + - dependent exocytosis of lysosomes , ASM secretion , and the generation of ceramide - enriched endocytic compartments , which fa - cilitate parasite internalization . DISCUSSION The mechanism by which T . cruzi trypomastigotes invade host cells depends on their ability to trigger intracellular free Ca 2 + transients in host cells ( Burleigh et al . , 1997 ; Burleigh and Andrews , 1998 ; Burleigh and Woolsey , 2002 ; Yoshida and Cortez , 2008 ) . T . cruzi - induced Ca 2 + signaling triggers the recruitment and fusion of host lysosomes with the plasma membrane at the site of parasite entry , and it triggers para - sitophorous vacuole formation ( Tardieux et al . , 1992 , 1994 ) . A similar process of Ca 2 + - dependent exocytosis of lysosomes is vacuoles were imaged at various time points after para - site invasion after staining with anti - ceramide monoclonal antibodies . At 15 min after infection , imaging of cells over - expressing fluorescently tagged Lamp1 showed that protrud - ing parasites often appeared to be surrounded by a punctate staining with the anti - ceramide antibodies ( Fig . 8 A , arrows ) , whereas only a fraction of the parasitophorous vacuoles con - tained Lamp1 ( Fig . 8 , B and C ) . After increasing periods of in - fection , ceramide enrichment in the parasitophorous vacuoles decreased , whereas Lamp1 increased ( Fig . 8 B ) , suggesting a process in which ceramide is gradually metabolized / removed while lysosomes continue to fuse with the parasitophorous vacuole . Lysosomes were frequently detected in close asso - ciation with the ceramide - enriched parasitophorous vacuoles ( Fig . 8 C ) , consistent with early lysosomal fusion events being responsible for ASM release , and ceramide generation at the site of parasite invasion . To directly establish a link between ceramide enrichment in parasitophorous vacuoles and the release of ASM from lysosomes , we imaged cells treated with control or SMPD1 Figure 7 . Recently internalized parasites are highly motile and protrude from host cells . ( A ) Time lapse of T . cruzi internalization and intracellular movement in a HeLa cell ( Video 3 ) . The arrow indicates the invading trypomasti - gote . Bars , 10 µm . ( B ) Time - lapse images of the same cell in A ( initiated  15 min after the last frame of the previous video ) , showing that the trypomastigote remains highly motile and then protrudes from the host cell . The arrow indicates the intracellular trypomastigote . Bars , 10 µm . ( C ) Confocal images of a trypomastigote protruding from the host cell surface 30 min after invasion of a HeLa cell transduced with the plasma membrane marker GPI - YFP ( red ) and Lamp1 - RFP ( green ) . After infection , cells were fixed and DNA was stained with DAPI ( blue ) . The arrow indicates an internalized parasite already within a Lamp1 - positive compartment , protruding from the GPI - labeled host cell plasma membrane . Bar , 10 µm . ( D – G ) Scanning EM images of protruding trypomastigotes . HeLa cells ex - posed to trypomastigotes for 20 min were washed and incubated for an additional 15 min before fixation and processing for scanning electron microscopy . Bars , 5 µm . Arrowheads indicate the continuity between the plasma membrane and the protrusion , and arrows indicate sites where the plasma membrane was fractured , revealing the parasitophorous vacuole membrane . These results are rep - resentative of two independent experiments . on O c t obe r 15 , 2015 j e m . r up r e ss . o r g D o w n l oaded f r o m Published May 2 , 2011 JEM VOL . 208 , May 9 , 2011 Article 917 to T . cruzi invasion . Importantly , addition of purified sphingomyelinase restored parasite invasion in cells depleted of ASM , directly linking sphingomyelin hydrolysis and cer - amide generation to the T . cruzi entry process . Fourth , ceramide accumulation was detected in recently formed parasitophorous vacuoles , suggesting that this lipid plays an important role in the plasma membrane deformation process that is required to allow the large trypomastigotes ( 10 – 15 µm long ) to enter host cells . These results significantly expand the previously reported role of lysosomal exocytosis in host cell invasion by T . cruzi ( Tardieux et al . , 1992 ; Andrade and Andrews , 2004 ) by showing that a lysosomal enzyme released extracellularly can promote parasite internalization . Before this study , T . cruzi – induced membrane damage had only been detected after host cell invasion , during the process of disruption of the parasitophorous vacuole which allows the par - asites to escape to replicate in the cytosol ( Ley et al . , 1990 ) . Our current results show that the infective trypomastigote forms of T . cruzi , but not the noninfective epimastigotes , can also wound the plasma membrane of host cells . The capacity of trypomasti - gotes to injure host cells may be a result of the residual activity of Tc - Tox , the acid - active pore - forming protein secreted by the infective stages of T . cruzi ( Andrews and Whitlow , 1989 ; Andrews et al . , 1990 ) , and / or to the active motility of trypomas - tigotes when attached to host cells ( Video 2 and Fig . 2 ) . observed during the process of plasma membrane injury and repair ( Reddy et al . , 2001 ) . Plasma membrane wounding , ly - sosomal exocytosis , and a rapid form of endocytosis that fol - lows cell injury were all shown to be functionally linked and dependent on secretion of the lysosomal enzyme ASM ( Idone et al . , 2008 ; Tam et al . , 2010 ) . These findings led us to hypoth - esize that membrane damage and extracellular Ca 2 + influx might also represent an early step in the interaction of T . cruzi trypomastigotes with host cells and that the steps of lysosomal exocytosis and endocytosis involved in the plasma membrane repair process are subverted by the parasites for invasion . In this study , we provide several lines of evidence in support of this view . First , host cell wounding was detected in cells ex - posed to infective trypomastigotes , but not to noninfective epimastigotes , when plasma membrane repair was blocked by removing Ca 2 + from the extracellular medium . Second , injur - ing host cells with SLO during interaction with trypomasti - gotes enhanced infection . Third , blocking lysosomal exocytosis or release of the lysosomal enzyme ASM , interventions which inhibit plasma membrane repair ( Reddy et al . , 2001 ; Tam et al . , 2010 ) , markedly reduced the susceptibility of host cells Figure 8 . Vacuoles containing recently inter - nalized parasites are enriched in ceramide while gradually acquiring Lamp1 . ( A ) Single optical section of a HeLa cell expressing Lamp1 - RFP ( green ) infected with trypomastigotes for 15 min , fixed , permeabilized , and stained with anti - ceramide anti - bodies ( red ) . Trypomastigotes ( arrows ) can be ob - served in vacuoles enriched in ceramide ( red ) , of which one has already fused with Lamp1 - RFP – containing lysosomes ( green ) . The arrowhead indi - cates a Lamp1 - positive parasite vacuole that is negative for ceramide . Bar , 10 µm . ( B ) Quantification of intracellular parasites found in ceramide or Lamp1 - enriched vacuoles over time . After 10 or 20 min of exposure to trypomastigotes , cells were washed and either fixed or incubated for an addi - tional 30 min before fixation ( 50 - min time point ) . Cells were then permeabilized , stained with antibodies to ceramide ( red ) or Lamp1 ( green ) , and confocal Z series were obtained in 15 fields for each condition , followed by quantification of parasites associated with ceramide and Lamp1 . The data represents mean ± SD of the percentage of positive parasites per field ( n = 15 ) . ( C ) Representative images ( single optical sections ) of each time point in B . At 10 and 20 min , protruding parasites were often observed in ceramide - enriched vacuoles ( arrows ) . Ceramide , red ; Lamp1 , green ; DAPI , blue . The arrowheads indicate a Lamp1 - positive parasite vacuole that is negative for ceramide . Bars , 5 µm . These results are representa - tive of three independent experiments . on O c t obe r 15 , 2015 j e m . r up r e ss . o r g D o w n l oaded f r o m Published May 2 , 2011 918 Cell injury and repair promotes T . cruzi infection | Fernandes et al . inhibited by cholesterol depletion ( Fernandes et al . , 2007 ) . Trypanosomes move unidirectionally , with their anterior end oriented forward ( Hill , 2003 ) . Intriguingly , T . cruzi trypomastigotes attach and invade host cells by their posterior end , where the base of the flagellum is located . This implies that the driving force for parasitophorous vac - uole formation must be provided by the host cell , because the parasite is hauled into the intracellu - lar environment despite its own motility , which propels it in the opposite direction . T . cruzi inva - sion is independent of host cell actin polymeriza - tion ( Schenkman and Mortara , 1992 ; Tardieux et al . , 1992 ) but requires intact microtubules ( Tardieux et al . , 1992 ) . These findings emphasize a role for the gradual fusion of lysosomes with the parasitophorous vacuole as a mechanism for the strong association of nascent parasi - tophorous vacuoles with microtubules , resulting in an inter - nalization and intracellular retention process dependent on microtubule motors ( Tardieux et al . , 1992 ; Andrade and Andrews , 2004 ) . The model we propose in this study intro - duces an important additional element in the T . cruzi invasion mechanism . Our model suggests that secretion of host lysosomal hydrolases , followed by lipid remodeling at the outer leaflet of the plasma membrane , plays a major role in the initial forma - tion of T . cruzi – containing intracellular vacuole . Important steps of this process that still remain to be clarified include the na - ture of the strong attachment that occurs between the poste - rior end of trypomastigotes and the host cell surface and how the nascent parasitophorous vacuole pinches off from the plasma membrane . Unexpectedly , when imaging trypomastigotes shortly after host cell invasion , we observed that their active motility often led them to collide with the plasma membrane and protrude from the cell with their anterior end pointing outwards ( Video 4 and Fig . 7 B ) . Scanning electron micrographs re - vealed fully internalized trypomastigotes surrounded by a We found that interaction with T . cruzi trypomastigotes stimulates formation of EEA1 - positive endocytic vesicles in host cells , similar to what is observed in cells exposed to puri - fied sphingomyelinase ( Zha et al . , 1998 ; Tam et al . , 2010 ) . ASM cleaves the head group of the abundant plasma membrane lipid sphingomyelin , generating ceramide in the outer leaflet of the plasma membrane ( Schissel et al . , 1998 ) . Ceramide - enriched membrane microdomains have the property of coalescing and budding inwards ( Holopainen et al . , 2000 ; Gulbins and Kolesnick , 2003 ; van Blitterswijk et al . , 2003 ; Trajkovic et al . , 2008 ) , providing a mechanism for endosome formation ( Tam et al . , 2010 ) . EEA1 and ceramide were also found to accumulate in the trypomastigote - containing re - cently formed parasitophorous vacuoles , strongly suggesting that T . cruzi subverts this ASM - dependent Ca 2 + - triggered endocytic process to form its intracellular compartment . Consis - tent with this scenario , cells treated with the cholesterol - sequestering agent M  CD ( methyl -  - cyclodextrin ) show a significant reduction in the number of Ca 2 + - dependent en - dosomes formed after injury and fail to efficiently repair their plasma membrane after wounding . This finding is similar to what is observed for the T . cruzi invasion process , which in - volves sphingolipid and cholesterol - enriched lipid rafts and is Figure 9 . Ceramide - enriched T . cruzi - containing vac - uoles are dependent on ASM activity . HeLa cells treated with control or ASM siRNA were exposed to trypomasti - gotes for 20 min , fixed , and processed as described in Fig . 7 . Confocal Z series analysis performed in 15 fields for each condition revealed a smaller percentage of ceramide posi - tive vacuoles in cells treated with ASM siRNA ( 24 % ) when compared with control siRNA ( 60 % ) . Representative images of single optical planes for each condition are shown ( two examples of control siRNA and two examples of ASM - siRNA ) . Ceramide , red ; Lamp1 , green ; DAPI , blue . The arrows indicate parasites within vacuoles positive for ceramide staining in cells treated with the control siRNA . Arrowheads point to the DAPI - stained kinetoplasts of trypomastigotes within vacuoles negative for ceramide staining , in cells treated with ASM siRNA . Bars , 5 µm . These results are rep - resentative of three independent experiments . on O c t obe r 15 , 2015 j e m . r up r e ss . o r g D o w n l oaded f r o m Published May 2 , 2011 JEM VOL . 208 , May 9 , 2011 Article 919 with Bouin solution ( 71 . 4 % saturated picric acid , 23 . 8 % formaldehyde , and 4 . 8 % acetic acid ) , stained with Giemsa , and sequentially dehydrated in ace - tone , followed by a graded series of acetone / xylol ( 9 : 1 , 7 : 3 , and 3 : 7 ) and , finally , xylol . This technique allows microscopic distinction between intra - cellular parasites , which are seen surrounded by a halo , from attached para - sites . The number of intracellular parasites was determined by counting at least 300 cells per coverslip in triplicate in a microscope ( E200 ; Nikon ) with a 100× 1 . 3 N . A . oil immersion objective . For immunofluorescence , cover - slips were fixed in 4 % paraformaldehyde ( PFA ) diluted in PBS for 15 min and processed as described in the next section . Immunofluorescence . PFA - fixed cells were washed with PBS , quenched with 15 mM NH 4 Cl for 15 min , and incubated with PBS containing 2 % BSA for 1 h . When processed for an inside / outside immunofluorescence assay ( Tardieux et al . , 1992 ) , samples were incubated with rabbit anti – T . cruzi polyclonal antibodies for 1 h , followed by 1 h of anti – rabbit IgG conjugated to Alexa Fluor 594 secondary antibodies , to stain extracellular parasites . Cells were then permeabilized with 0 . 1 % saponin for 30 min and incubated with mouse monoclonal antibodies to EEA1 ( BD ) for 1 h , followed by anti – mouse Alexa Fluor 488 secondary antibodies . For double labeling of EEA1 and Lamp1 , coverslips permeabilized with 0 . 1 % saponin were incubated with rabbit anti - EEA1 monoclonal antibodies and H4A3 anti – human Lamp1 mouse monoclonal antibodies ( Developmental Studies Hybridoma Bank ) for 1 h , followed by anti – rabbit IgG Alexa Fluor 488 and anti – mouse IgG Alexa Fluor 594 . The number of internalized parasites ( negative for anti – T . cruzi antibody staining ) that were positive or negative for EEA1 staining was determined using an epifluorescence microscope ( E200 ) with a 100× 1 . 3 N . A . oil immersion objective in at least 300 cells . Images in Fig . 6 are maxi - mum projections of optical sections ( 0 . 13 µm Z step ) acquired on a confocal system ( SPX5 ; Leica ) with a 63× 1 . 4 N . A . oil objective . Ceramide and Lamp1 double staining was performed by sequential incubation with antibodies after blocking with 2 % BSA as described . Samples were then permeabilized with 0 . 1 % saponin for 30 min and incubated with H4A3 anti – human Lamp1 monoclonal antibodies ( Developmental Studies Hybridoma Bank ) for 1 h followed by anti – mouse IgG Alexa Fluor 488 secondary antibodies . Cells were then permeabilized with 0 . 2 % Triton X - 100 for 5 min ( a condition which extracts ceramide more efficiently from T . cruzi than from host cells ; Fig . S5 ) and incubated with anti - ceramide IgM monoclonal antibodies ( clone 15B4 ; Sigma - Aldrich ) or IgM isotope control ( Sigma - Aldrich ) for 1 h , fol - lowed by anti – mouse IgM Alexa Fluor 594 secondary antibodies . After trans - ferring images to Volocity suite ( PerkinElmer ) , the total fluorescence intensity of the channel was divided by the number of cells present in the field to de - termine the mean fluorescence intensity per cell ( Fig . S5 ) . For the quantifica - tion of ceramide - and Lamp1 - positive parasites ( Figs . 8 and 9 ) , Z stacks ( 0 . 13 µm Z step between optical sections ) of 15 random fields ( at least 200 cells ) were imaged with a confocal system ( SPX5 ) with a 63× 1 . 4 N . A . oil objective . Stacks of individual channels ( 2 , 048 × 2 , 048 pixels ) were imported to Voloc - ity Suite ( PerkinElmer ) , and parasites were considered ceramide - or Lamp1 - positive when staining outlining trypomastigotes could be visualized through several optical sections . To label ceramide present on the outer leaflet of the plasma membrane ( Fig . 5 ) , nonpermeabilized fixed cells were incubated for 1 h with 15B4 anti - ceramide monoclonal antibodies , followed by Alexa Fluor 488 – labeled secondary antibodies . Images were acquired using a microscope ( E200 ) with a 40× 0 . 7 N . A . objective , equipped with a camera ( DS - Fi1 ; Nikon ) and Digital Sight . All samples were incubated with 10 µM DAPI ( Sigma - Aldrich ) for nuclei staining . Secondary antibodies were pur - chased from Invitrogen . For Lamp1 and GPI double labeling ( Fig . 7 ) , subcon - fluent cells were transduced using adenovirus encoding Lamp1 - RFP and GPI - YFP , as described previously ( Flannery et al . , 2010 ) , and imaged using a confocal system ( SPX5 ) with a 63× 1 . 4 N . A . oil objective . Drug , enzyme , and toxin treatments . Cells were treated with the indi - cated concentrations of BEL ( Sigma - Aldrich ) for 30 min or Desipramine ( Sigma - Aldrich ) for 60 min before invasion experiments . Histidine - tagged SLO ( carrying a cysteine deletion which eliminates the need for thiol activation ) tight membrane layer that was continuous with the plasma membrane and that stretched outwards for the full length of the parasite . In some cases , these protruding trypomastigotes also showed the presence of Lamp1 in their parasitophorous vacuole , in agreement with the early fusion of lysosomes ob - served during the T . cruzi entry process ( Tardieux et al . , 1992 ) . This protrusion phenomenon facilitated the detection of ceramide enrichment in parasitophorous vacuoles surrounding recently internalized trypomastigotes by allowing imaging at sites separated from the ceramide - rich intracellular environ - ment . The frequency by which trypomastigotes protrude and stretch the host cell membrane from the inside after invasion suggests that this could be another form of parasite - induced wounding . Rupture of the plasma membrane extensions cre - ated during this process would allow Ca 2 + entry , activating plasma membrane repair and increasing host cell susceptibil - ity to additional invasion events . Interestingly , this scenario may explain why T . cruzi infection of mammalian cells does not follow a random Poisson distribution but corresponds more closely to a negative binomial prediction ( Hyde and Dvorak , 1973 ) . Wounding by protruding trypomastigotes may make host cells more susceptible to additional invasion events by triggering plasma membrane repair . These protruding events also offer an alternative explanation to earlier results of trypomastigotes that appeared to be enveloped by plasma membrane markers , after short periods of interaction with host cells ( Woolsey et al . , 2003 ) . The demonstration that ASM induces formation of ceramide - enriched endocytic vesicles that can facilitate try - pomastigote entry significantly advances our understanding of the molecular mechanism that renders lysosomes essential players during the invasion of host cells by T . cruzi . Our results indicate that , by wounding host cells , T . cruzi trypomastigotes trigger plasma membrane repair , lysosomal exocytosis , ASM release , and formation of ceramide - enriched endosomes that facilitate parasite entry . Importantly , our findings also suggest that the tissue tropism exhibited by T . cruzi within its verte - brate host , with the strong preference of the parasites to in - vade cardiomyocytes and smooth muscle , may be related to the frequency by which these cell types are injured in vivo ( McNeil and Steinhardt , 2003 ) . MATERIALS AND METHODS Host cells and parasites . HeLa cells CCL - 2 . 1 ( American Type Culture Collection ) were grown in DME ( Sigma - Aldrich ) supplemented with 10 % FBS at 37°C with 5 % CO 2 . Trypomastigotes from the Trypanosoma cruzi Y strain were obtained from the supernatant of infected monolayers of LLC - MK 2 cells , as previously described ( Andrews et al . , 1987 ) . Epimastigotes from T . cruzi Y strain were cultured in liver infusion tryptose medium containing 10 % FBS at 28°C ( Nogueira and Cohn , 1976 ) . Invasion assays and quantification of parasite invasion . 1 . 8 × 10 5 HeLa cells / well were plated on glass coverslips placed in 35 - mm wells 24 h before experiments . Trypomastigotes were washed twice with PBS and resus - pended in 2 % FBS - DME or 2 % FBS - DME Ca 2 + free ( Invitrogen ) with 2 mM EGTA . Coverslips with attached HeLa cells were then incubated with 10 8 T . cruzi trypomastigotes per well ( final concentration of 5 × 10 7 / ml ) for the indicated periods of time at 37°C and washed five times with PBS to re - move extracellular parasites . Samples were fixed for 5 min at room temperature on O c t obe r 15 , 2015 j e m . r up r e ss . o r g D o w n l oaded f r o m Published May 2 , 2011 920 Cell injury and repair promotes T . cruzi infection | Fernandes et al . is extracted more efficiently from trypomastigotes than host cells after Triton X - 100 permeabilization . Video 1 shows exocytosis of host cell lysosomes during interaction with T . cruzi trypomastigotes . Video 2 shows that extracel - lular trypomastigotes cause mechanical deformations in the host cell mem - brane before invasion . Video 3 shows invasion and intracellular motility of T . cruzi . Video 4 shows protrusion of motile intracellular trypomastigotes from the surface of host cells . Online supplemental material is available at http : / / www . jem . org / cgi / content / full / jem . 20102518 / DC1 . We are grateful to Dr . Leonardo de Andrade Rodrigues and Dr . Bechara Kachar ( both from the National Institute on Deafness and Other Communication Disorders , National Institutes of Health [ NIH ] ) for generously providing technical help and access to the field emission – scanning electron microscope , and Amy Beaven and the Department of Cell Biology and Molecular Genetics Imaging Core for assistance with confocal microscopy . This work was supported by the NIH grant R37 AI34867 to N . W . Andrews . The authors do not have any competing financial interests . Submitted : 3 December 2010 Accepted : 28 March 2011 REFERENCES Andrade , L . O . , and N . W . Andrews . 2004 . Lysosomal fusion is essential for the retention of Trypanosoma cruzi inside host cells . J . Exp . Med . 200 : 1135 – 1143 . doi : 10 . 1084 / jem . 20041408 Andrews , N . W . , and M . B . Whitlow . 1989 . Secretion by Trypanosoma cruzi of a hemolysin active at low pH . Mol . Biochem . Parasitol . 33 : 249 – 256 . doi : 10 . 1016 / 0166 - 6851 ( 89 ) 90086 - 8 Andrews , N . W . , K . S . Hong , E . S . Robbins , and V . Nussenzweig . 1987 . Stage - specific surface antigens expressed during the morphogenesis of verte - brate forms of Trypanosoma cruzi . Exp . Parasitol . 64 : 474 – 484 . doi : 10 . 1016 / 0014 - 4894 ( 87 ) 90062 - 2 Andrews , N . W . , C . K . Abrams , S . L . Slatin , and G . Griffiths . 1990 . A T . cruzi - secreted protein immunologically related to the complement compo - nent C9 : evidence for membrane pore - forming activity at low pH . Cell . 61 : 1277 – 1287 . doi : 10 . 1016 / 0092 - 8674 ( 90 ) 90692 - 8 Bertello , L . E . , N . W . Andrews , and R . M . de Lederkremer . 1996 . Develop - mentally regulated expression of ceramide in Trypanosoma cruzi . Mol . Biochem . Parasitol . 79 : 143 – 151 . doi : 10 . 1016 / 0166 - 6851 ( 96 ) 02645 - X Bi , G . Q . , J . M . Alderton , and R . A . Steinhardt . 1995 . Calcium - regulated exo - cytosis is required for cell membrane resealing . J . Cell Biol . 131 : 1747 – 1758 . doi : 10 . 1083 / jcb . 131 . 6 . 1747 Burleigh , B . A . , and N . W . Andrews . 1995 . A 120 - kDa alkaline peptidase from Trypanosoma cruzi is involved in the generation of a novel Ca ( 2 + ) - signaling factor for mammalian cells . J . Biol . Chem . 270 : 5172 – 5180 . doi : 10 . 1074 / jbc . 270 . 10 . 5172 Burleigh , B . A . , and N . W . Andrews . 1998 . Signaling and host cell invasion by Trypanosoma cruzi . Curr . Opin . Microbiol . 1 : 461 – 465 . doi : 10 . 1016 / S1369 - 5274 ( 98 ) 80066 - 0 Burleigh , B . A . , and A . M . Woolsey . 2002 . Cell signalling and Trypanosoma cruzi invasion . Cell . Microbiol . 4 : 701 – 711 . doi : 10 . 1046 / j . 1462 - 5822 . 2002 . 00226 . x Burleigh , B . A . , E . V . Caler , P . Webster , and N . W . Andrews . 1997 . A cytosolic serine endopeptidase from Trypanosoma cruzi is required for the gen - eration of Ca2 + signaling in mammalian cells . J . Cell Biol . 136 : 609 – 620 . doi : 10 . 1083 / jcb . 136 . 3 . 609 Chambers , R . , and E . L . Chambers . 1961 . Explorations into the nature of the living cell . Harvard University Press , Cambridge , MA . 352 pp . Falkow , S . , R . R . Isberg , and D . A . Portnoy . 1992 . The interaction of bacteria with mammalian cells . Annu . Rev . Cell Biol . 8 : 333 – 363 . doi : 10 . 1146 / annurev . cb . 08 . 110192 . 002001 Fensome - Green , A . , N . Stannard , M . Li , S . Bolsover , and S . Cockcroft . 2007 . Bromoenol lactone , an inhibitor of Group V1A calcium - independent phospholipase A2 inhibits antigen - stimulated mast cell exocytosis with - out blocking Ca2 + influx . Cell Calcium . 41 : 145 – 153 . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . ceca . 2006 . 06 . 002 Fernandes , M . C . , M . Cortez , K . A . Geraldo Yoneyama , A . H . Straus , N . Yoshida , and R . A . Mortara . 2007 . Novel strategy in Trypanosoma cruzi was provided by R . Tweeten ( University of Oklahoma , Norman , OK ) and purified as described previously ( Idone et al . , 2008 ) . SLO was added to the media at indicated concentrations either before or during invasion assays . Bacillus cereus sphingomyelinase ( Sigma - Aldrich ) was incubated with HeLa cells at the indicated concentrations for the indicated time periods either before or during incubation with trypomastigotes ( described in figure legends ) . ASM transcriptional silencing and Western blots . 1 . 4 × 10 5 HeLa cells plated in 35 - mm wells were transfected with Lipofectamine and 160 pmol of control ( medium GC content , 12935300 ) or SMPD1 ( HSS143988 – ( RNA ) – GCCCUGCCGUCUGGCUACUCUUUGU ) stealth siRNA duplexes ac - cording to the manufacturer’s instruction ( Invitrogen ) . Cells were used for invasion assays 72 h after transfection . Western blot for ASM was performed on cell lysates separated by SDS - PAGE , transferred to nitrocellulose , and in - cubated with affinity - purified anti - ASM rabbit antibodies ( provided by Y . Hannun [ Medical University of South Carolina , Charleston , SC ] and pre - pared as previously described [ Zeidan and Hannun , 2007 ] ) . Live cell imaging . For live time - lapse fluorescence imaging , subconfluent cells were plated on 35 - mm glass - bottom dishes ( Mattek ) and transduced using adenovirus encoding Lamp1 - RFP as described previously ( Flannery et al . , 2010 ) . 20 min after addition of trypomastigotes , dishes were transferred to an environmental chamber ( Pathology Devices ) at 37°C with 5 % CO 2 and humidity control . Spinning disk confocal images were acquired for 13 h at 1 frame / 100 s for the initial 96 min and 1 frame every 10 min for the remain - ing period using the UltraVIEW VoX system ( PerkinElmer ) attached to an inverted microscope ( Eclipse Ti ; Nikon ) with a 60× 1 . 4 N . A . objective and equipped with a camera ( C9100 - 50 ; Hamamatsu ) . Acquisition and image processing was performed using Volocity Suite ( PerkinElmer ) . For live time - lapse phase - contrast imaging , subconfluent cells were plated on glass - bottom dishes ( Mattek ) and incubated with 5 × 10 7 / ml try - pomastigotes for 10 min . Cells were then washed three times with PBS before addition of fresh DME containing 20 mM Hepes at pH 7 . 2 . Dishes were placed on a heated stage ( 37°C ) and imaged in a 200 microscope ( Axiovert ; Carl Zeiss ) with a 63× 1 . 3 N . A . objective , equipped with a Cool Snap HQ camera and MetaMorph software . Image processing was performed using Volocity Suite ( PerkinElmer ) . Scanning electron microscopy . Samples attached to glass coverslips were fixed at the indicated time periods in 2 % glutaraldehyde , 2 % paraformalde - hyde , and 0 . 1 M Hepes , pH 7 . 0 , for 1 h at room temperature . Samples were postfixed in 1 % OsO 4 in 0 . 1 M Hepes , pH 7 . 4 , for 1 h and then exposed to 1 % tannic acid for another hour before dehydration in an ethanol series , crit - ical point dried from CO 2 , and gold sputtered ( Goldberg and Allen , 1992 ) . Images were acquired on a field emission scanning electron microscope ( S - 4800 ; Hitachi ) operated at 5 kV . All reagents were obtained from Electron Microscopy Sciences . Flow cytometry and PI staining . To determine plasma membrane integ - rity during trypomastigote entry and SLO incubation , assays were performed as described in the previous sections in the presence or absence of Ca 2 + , in DME containing 25 µg / ml PI ( Sigma - Aldrich ) , and followed by microscopic quantification and epifluorescence imaging using a microscope ( E200 ) with a 63× 1 . 3 N . A . objective , equipped with a camera ( DS - Fi1 ) and Digital Sight . When specified in legends , cells were fixed with PFA and stained with 10 µM DAPI prior imaging . For flow cytometry , HeLa cells in 35 - mm wells exposed to T . cruzi trypomastigotes or epimastigotes were trypsinized , fixed with PFA , and at least 10 , 000 cells were analyzed in a FACSCanto ( BD ) . The data were processed using FlowJo software ( version 6 . 3 ; Tree Star ) . Online supplemental material . Fig . S1 shows that infective T . cruzi trypo - mastigotes wound host cells . Fig . S2 shows that SLO permeabilizes the plasma membrane of mammalian cells but not T . cruzi trypomastigotes . Fig . S3 shows that inhibition of lysosomal exocytosis blocks trypomastigote entry . Fig . S4 shows control assays for ceramide immunolabeling . Fig . S5 shows that ceramide on O c t obe r 15 , 2015 j e m . r up r e ss . o r g D o w n l oaded f r o m Published May 2 , 2011 JEM VOL . 208 , May 9 , 2011 Article 921 cell invasion : implication of cholesterol and host cell microdomains . Int . J . Parasitol . 37 : 1431 – 1441 . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . ijpara . 2007 . 04 . 025 Flannery , A . R . , C . Czibener , and N . W . Andrews . 2010 . Palmitoylation - dependent association with CD63 targets the Ca2 + sensor synaptotagmin VII to lyso - somes . J . Cell Biol . 191 : 599 – 613 . doi : 10 . 1083 / jcb . 201003021 Goldberg , M . W . , and T . D . Allen . 1992 . High resolution scanning electron microscopy of the nuclear envelope : demonstration of a new , regular , fibrous lattice attached to the baskets of the nucleoplasmic face of the nuclear pores . J . Cell Biol . 119 : 1429 – 1440 . doi : 10 . 1083 / jcb . 119 . 6 . 1429 Grassmé , H . , J . Riethmüller , and E . Gulbins . 2007 . Biological aspects of ceramide - enriched membrane domains . Prog . Lipid Res . 46 : 161 – 170 . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . plipres . 2007 . 03 . 002 Gulbins , E . , and R . Kolesnick . 2003 . Raft ceramide in molecular medicine . Oncogene . 22 : 7070 – 7077 . doi : 10 . 1038 / sj . onc . 1207146 Heilbrunn , L . 1956 . The dynamics of living protoplasm . Academic Press , New York . 327 pp . Hill , K . L . 2003 . Biology and mechanism of trypanosome cell motility . Eukaryot . Cell . 2 : 200 – 208 . doi : 10 . 1128 / EC . 2 . 2 . 200 - 208 . 2003 Holopainen , J . M . , M . I . Angelova , and P . K . Kinnunen . 2000 . Vectorial budding of vesicles by asymmetrical enzymatic formation of ceramide in giant lipo - somes . Biophys . J . 78 : 830 – 838 . doi : 10 . 1016 / S0006 - 3495 ( 00 ) 76640 - 9 Hurwitz , R . , K . Ferlinz , and K . Sandhoff . 1994 . The tricyclic antidepres - sant desipramine causes proteolytic degradation of lysosomal sphingo - myelinase in human fibroblasts . Biol . Chem . Hoppe Seyler . 375 : 447 – 450 . doi : 10 . 1515 / bchm3 . 1994 . 375 . 7 . 447 Hyde , T . P . , and J . A . Dvorak . 1973 . Trypanosoma cruzi : interaction with verte - brate cells in vitro . 2 . Quantitative analysis of the penetration phase . Exp . Parasitol . 34 : 284 – 294 . doi : 10 . 1016 / 0014 - 4894 ( 73 ) 90088 - X Idone , V . , C . Tam , J . W . Goss , D . Toomre , M . Pypaert , and N . W . Andrews . 2008 . Repair of injured plasma membrane by rapid Ca2 + - dependent endocytosis . J . Cell Biol . 180 : 905 – 914 . doi : 10 . 1083 / jcb . 200708010 Jaiswal , J . K . , N . W . Andrews , and S . M . Simon . 2002 . Membrane proximal lyso - somes are the major vesicles responsible for calcium - dependent exocytosis in nonsecretory cells . J . Cell Biol . 159 : 625 – 635 . doi : 10 . 1083 / jcb . 200208154 Kölzer , M . , K . Ferlinz , O . Bartelsen , S . L . Hoops , F . Lang , and K . Sandhoff . 2004 . Functional characterization of the postulated intramolecular sphingolipid activator protein domain of human acid sphingomyelinase . Biol . Chem . 385 : 1193 – 1195 . doi : 10 . 1515 / BC . 2004 . 154 Koval , M . , and R . E . Pagano . 1991 . Intracellular transport and metabolism of sphingomyelin . Biochim . Biophys . Acta . 1082 : 113 – 125 . Ley , V . , E . S . Robbins , V . Nussenzweig , and N . W . Andrews . 1990 . The exit of Trypanosoma cruzi from the phagosome is inhibited by raising the pH of acidic compartments . J . Exp . Med . 171 : 401 – 413 . doi : 10 . 1084 / jem . 171 . 2 . 401 McNeil , P . L . , and R . A . Steinhardt . 2003 . Plasma membrane disruption : repair , prevention , adaptation . Annu . Rev . Cell Dev . Biol . 19 : 697 – 731 . doi : 10 . 1146 / annurev . cellbio . 19 . 111301 . 140101 McNeil , P . L . , S . S . Vogel , K . Miyake , and M . Terasaki . 2000 . Patching plasma membrane disruptions with cytoplasmic membrane . J . Cell Sci . 113 : 1891 – 1902 . Miyake , K . , and P . L . McNeil . 1995 . Vesicle accumulation and exocytosis at sites of plasma membrane disruption . J . Cell Biol . 131 : 1737 – 1745 . doi : 10 . 1083 / jcb . 131 . 6 . 1737 Moreno , S . N . , J . Silva , A . E . Vercesi , and R . Docampo . 1994 . Cytosolic - free calcium elevation in Trypanosoma cruzi is required for cell invasion . J . Exp . Med . 180 : 1535 – 1540 . doi : 10 . 1084 / jem . 180 . 4 . 1535 Moulder , J . W . 1985 . Comparative biology of intracellular parasitism . Microbiol . Rev . 49 : 298 – 337 . Nogueira , N . , and Z . Cohn . 1976 . Trypanosoma cruzi : mechanism of entry and intracellular fate in mammalian cells . J . Exp . Med . 143 : 1402 – 1420 . doi : 10 . 1084 / jem . 143 . 6 . 1402 Reddy , A . , E . V . Caler , and N . W . Andrews . 2001 . Plasma membrane repair is mediated by Ca ( 2 + ) - regulated exocytosis of lysosomes . Cell . 106 : 157 – 169 . doi : 10 . 1016 / S0092 - 8674 ( 01 ) 00421 - 4 Rodríguez , A . , M . G . Rioult , A . Ora , and N . W . Andrews . 1995 . A trypano - some - soluble factor induces IP3 formation , intracellular Ca2 + mobili - zation and microfilament rearrangement in host cells . J . Cell Biol . 129 : 1263 – 1273 . doi : 10 . 1083 / jcb . 129 . 5 . 1263 Rodríguez , A . , P . Webster , J . Ortego , and N . W . Andrews . 1997 . Lysosomes behave as Ca2 + - regulated exocytic vesicles in fibroblasts and epithelial cells . J . Cell Biol . 137 : 93 – 104 . doi : 10 . 1083 / jcb . 137 . 1 . 93 Schenkman , S . , and R . A . Mortara . 1992 . HeLa cells extend and internalize pseudopodia during active invasion by Trypanosoma cruzi trypomasti - gotes . J . Cell Sci . 101 : 895 – 905 . Schenkman , S . , E . S . Robbins , and V . Nussenzweig . 1991 . Attachment of Trypanosoma cruzi to mammalian cells requires parasite energy , and inva - sion can be independent of the target cell cytoskeleton . Infect . Immun . 59 : 645 – 654 . Schissel , S . L . , X . Jiang , J . Tweedie - Hardman , T . Jeong , E . H . Camejo , J . Najib , J . H . Rapp , K . J . Williams , and I . Tabas . 1998 . Secretory sphin - gomyelinase , a product of the acid sphingomyelinase gene , can hy - drolyze atherogenic lipoproteins at neutral pH . Implications for atherosclerotic lesion development . J . Biol . Chem . 273 : 2738 – 2746 . doi : 10 . 1074 / jbc . 273 . 5 . 2738 Steinhardt , R . A . , G . Bi , and J . M . Alderton . 1994 . Cell membrane resealing by a vesicular mechanism similar to neurotransmitter release . Science . 263 : 390 – 393 . doi : 10 . 1126 / science . 7904084 Tam , C . , V . Idone , C . Devlin , M . C . Fernandes , A . Flannery , X . He , E . Schuchman , I . Tabas , and N . W . Andrews . 2010 . Exocytosis of acid sphin - gomyelinase by wounded cells promotes endocytosis and plasma mem - brane repair . J . Cell Biol . 189 : 1027 – 1038 . doi : 10 . 1083 / jcb . 201003053 Tardieux , I . , P . Webster , J . Ravesloot , W . Boron , J . A . Lunn , J . E . Heuser , and N . W . Andrews . 1992 . Lysosome recruitment and fusion are early events required for trypanosome invasion of mammalian cells . Cell . 71 : 1117 – 1130 . doi : 10 . 1016 / S0092 - 8674 ( 05 ) 80061 - 3 Tardieux , I . , M . H . Nathanson , and N . W . Andrews . 1994 . Role in host cell invasion of Trypanosoma cruzi - induced cytosolic - free Ca2 + transients . J . Exp . Med . 179 : 1017 – 1022 . doi : 10 . 1084 / jem . 179 . 3 . 1017 Togo , T . , J . M . Alderton , G . Q . Bi , and R . A . Steinhardt . 1999 . The mechanism of facilitated cell membrane resealing . J . Cell Sci . 112 : 719 – 731 . Trajkovic , K . , C . Hsu , S . Chiantia , L . Rajendran , D . Wenzel , F . Wieland , P . Schwille , B . Brügger , and M . Simons . 2008 . Ceramide triggers budding of exosome vesicles into multivesicular endosomes . Science . 319 : 1244 – 1247 . doi : 10 . 1126 / science . 1153124 Tweten , R . K . 2005 . Cholesterol - dependent cytolysins , a family of versa - tile pore - forming toxins . Infect . Immun . 73 : 6199 – 6209 . doi : 10 . 1128 / IAI . 73 . 10 . 6199 - 6209 . 2005 van Blitterswijk , W . J . , A . H . van der Luit , R . J . Veldman , M . Verheij , and J . Borst . 2003 . Ceramide : second messenger or modulator of membrane structure and dynamics ? Biochem . J . 369 : 199 – 211 . doi : 10 . 1042 / BJ20021528 Walev , I . , S . C . Bhakdi , F . Hofmann , N . Djonder , A . Valeva , K . Aktories , and S . Bhakdi . 2001 . Delivery of proteins into living cells by reversible mem - brane permeabilization with streptolysin - O . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA . 98 : 3185 – 3190 . doi : 10 . 1073 / pnas . 051429498 Woolsey , A . M . , L . Sunwoo , C . A . Petersen , S . M . Brachmann , L . C . Cantley , and B . A . Burleigh . 2003 . Novel PI 3 - kinase - dependent mechanisms of try - panosome invasion and vacuole maturation . J . Cell Sci . 116 : 3611 – 3622 . doi : 10 . 1242 / jcs . 00666 Yoshida , N . , and M . Cortez . 2008 . Trypanosoma cruzi : parasite and host cell signaling during the invasion process . Subcell . Biochem . 47 : 82 – 91 . doi : 10 . 1007 / 978 - 0 - 387 - 78267 - 6 _ 6 Zeidan , Y . H . , and Y . A . Hannun . 2007 . Activation of acid sphingomyelin - ase by protein kinase Cdelta - mediated phosphorylation . J . Biol . Chem . 282 : 11549 – 11561 . doi : 10 . 1074 / jbc . M609424200 Zha , X . , L . M . Pierini , P . L . Leopold , P . J . Skiba , I . Tabas , and F . R . Maxfield . 1998 . Sphingomyelinase treatment induces ATP - independent endo - cytosis . J . Cell Biol . 140 : 39 – 47 . doi : 10 . 1083 / jcb . 140 . 1 . 39 on O c t obe r 15 , 2015 j e m . r up r e ss . o r g D o w n l oaded f r o m Published May 2 , 2011