Please cite this article in press as : Gurniak , C . B . , et al . , Severe protein aggregate myopathy in a knockout mouse model points to an essential role of coﬁlin2 in sarcomeric actin exchange and muscle maintenance . Eur . J . Cell Biol . ( 2014 ) , http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . ejcb . 2014 . 01 . 007 ARTICLE IN PRESS G Model EJCB - 50764 ; No . of Pages 15 European Journal of Cell Biology xxx ( 2014 ) xxx – xxx Contents lists available at ScienceDirect European Journal of Cell Biology jo ur nal homepage : www . elsevier . co m / locate / ejcb Severe protein aggregate myopathy in a knockout mouse model points to an essential role of coﬁlin2 in sarcomeric actin exchange and muscle maintenance Christine B . Gurniak a , Frédéric Chevessier b , Melanie Jokwitz a , Friederike Jönsson c , Emerald Perlas d , Hendrik Richter e , Gabi Matern a , Pietro Pilo Boyl a , Christine Chaponnier f , Dieter Fürst g , Rolf Schröder b , Walter Witke a , ∗ a University of Bonn , Institute of Genetics , Cell Migration Unit , Germany b University of Erlangen , Institute of Neuropathology , Germany c Institut Pasteur , Département d’Immunologie , Laboratoire Anticorps en Thérapie et Pathologie , Inserm , U . 760 , 75015 Paris , France d EMBL Monterotondo , Italy e University of Bonn , Institute of Cellular and Molecular Botany , Germany f University of Geneva , Department of Pathology and Immunology , Switzerland g University of Bonn , Institute of Cell Biology , Germany a r t i c l e i n f o Article history : Received 20 September 2013 Received in revised form 20 January 2014 Accepted 22 January 2014 Keywords : Coﬁlin2 Protein aggregate myopathy Muscle development Sarcomere structure Actin isoform exchange a b s t r a c t Mutations in the human actin depolymerizing factor coﬁlin2 result in an autosomal dominant form of nemaline myopathy . Here , we report on the targeted ablation of murine coﬁlin2 , which leads to a severe skeletal muscle speciﬁc phenotype within the ﬁrst two weeks after birth . Apart from skeletal muscle , coﬁlin2 is also expressed in heart and CNS , however the pathology was restricted to skeletal muscle . The two close family members of coﬁlin2 – ADF and coﬁlin1 – were co - expressed in muscle , but unable to compensate for the loss of coﬁlin2 . While primary myoﬁbril assembly and muscle development were unaffected in coﬁlin2 mutant mice , progressive muscle degeneration was observed between postnatal days 3 and 7 . Muscle pathology was characterized by sarcoplasmic protein aggregates , ﬁber size dis - proportion , mitochondrial abnormalities and internal nuclei . The observed muscle pathology differed from nemaline myopathy , but showed combined features of actin - associated myopathy and myoﬁbrillar myopathy . In coﬁlin2 mutant mice , the postnatal expression pattern and turnover of sarcomeric (cid:2) - actin isoforms were altered . Levels of smooth muscle (cid:2) - actin were increased and remained high in developing muscles , suggesting that coﬁlin2 plays a crucial role during the exchange of (cid:2) - actin isoforms during the early postnatal remodeling of the sarcomere . © 2014 Elsevier GmbH . All rights reserved . Introduction During striated muscle development , the assembly and the precise alignment of actin ﬁlaments into sarcomeric structures is a critical part of the formation of myoﬁbrils , which provide the molecular basis for the generation of contractile force . However , the mechanisms of assembly and in particular the maintenance of sarcomeric actin ﬁlaments are not well understood . It remains enigmatic how during development the exchange of smooth muscle (cid:2) - actin via cardiac to ﬁnally skeletal muscle (cid:2) - actin is ∗ Corresponding author at : Institute of Genetics , Karlrobert - Kreiten Strasse 13 , 53115 Bonn , Germany . Tel . : + 49 228 73 4210 / 11 ; fax : + 49 228 73 4263 . E - mail address : w . witke @ uni - bonn . de ( W . Witke ) . orchestrated , while at the same time sarcomere structure and con - tractility are perfectly maintained ( McHugh et al . , 1991 ; Tondeleir et al . , 2009 ) . In the last two decades a large number of gene mutations affect - ing sarcomeric proteins have been associated with myopathies . In this context it is puzzling that different mutations in the same gene can cause a broad spectrum of clinical and myopathological phenotypes , while on the other hand a deﬁned clinical condition may be caused by mutations in different genes . For example , mutations in the skeletal muscle (cid:2) - actin gene ( ACTA1 ) give rise to various forms of congenital myopathies and a broad range of distinct myopathological features like actin accumulations , nemaline rods , intranuclear bodies or zebra bodies ( Nowak et al . , 2012 ) . Conversely , the myopathological presentation of a nemaline myopathy , can be caused by mutations in genes coding for various http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . ejcb . 2014 . 01 . 007 0171 - 9335 / © 2014 Elsevier GmbH . All rights reserved . Please cite this article in press as : Gurniak , C . B . , et al . , Severe protein aggregate myopathy in a knockout mouse model points to an essential role of coﬁlin2 in sarcomeric actin exchange and muscle maintenance . Eur . J . Cell Biol . ( 2014 ) , http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . ejcb . 2014 . 01 . 007 ARTICLE IN PRESS G Model EJCB - 50764 ; No . of Pages 15 2 C . B . Gurniak et al . / European Journal of Cell Biology xxx ( 2014 ) xxx – xxx Fig . 1 . Generation of a conditional knockout mouse model for coﬁlin2 . ( A ) Targeting of the coﬁlin2 gene . Schematic outline of the coﬁlin2 wildtype allele ( cof2 wt ) , the targeting construct and the targeted allele ( cof2 FRTneo - flx allele ) , which carries loxP sites ( open triangles ) in the ﬁrst intron and downstream of the coﬁlin2 gene , respectively . The FRT ( black boxes ) - ﬂanked neomycin resistance cassette was inserted upstream of the second loxP site . Flp mediated removal of the neomycin resistance cassette leads to the conditional coﬁlin2 allele cof2 flx ( bottom right ) . Cre mediated deletion of exons 2 – 4 including the neomycin resistance cassette results in the knockout allele cof2 − ( bottom left ) . The probe for Southern blot hybridization is indicated . The location of the diagnostic PacI restriction sites and the size of the respective restriction fragments are shown . ( B ) Southern blot analysis of mouse genomic DNA from wildtype ( cof2 wt ) and different transgenic animals after PacI digestion and probing with a fragment from the 3 (cid:3) UTR as indicated in ( A ) . Cof2 wt / wt DNA ( lane 1 ) , cof2 wt / FRTneo - flx DNA ( lane 2 ) , cof2 wt / flx DNA ( lane 3 ) , and cof2 wt / − DNA ( lane 4 ) were loaded , the sizes of the different alleles are indicated in ( A ) . ( C ) Western blot analysis of wildtype ( wt ) and coﬁlin2 knockout ( cof2 − / − ) tissue lysates from muscle , heart and brain at postnatal day 7 were incubated with the coﬁlin2 speciﬁc antibody FHU1 . The same membrane was probed for proﬁlin1 to normalize for loading . ( D ) Conditional deletion of coﬁlin2 in brain using nestin - cre . Western blot of muscle and brain lysates from adult wildtype ( wt ) , coﬁlin2 conditional ( cof2 flx / flx ) , and coﬁlin2 conditionally deleted ( cof2 flx / flx , nestin - cre ) animals were probed for coﬁlin2 ( FHU1 ) . (cid:2) - Tubulin and actin were used for normalization , respectively . ( E ) Morphology of neuromuscular junctions . Sections of the diaphragm from control and cof2 − / − mice at P7 were stained for acetylcholine receptor ( AChR , red ) and neuroﬁlament ( NF , green ) . ( F ) Heart analysis of cof2 − / − mice . Heart weight to body weight index for Please cite this article in press as : Gurniak , C . B . , et al . , Severe protein aggregate myopathy in a knockout mouse model points to an essential role of coﬁlin2 in sarcomeric actin exchange and muscle maintenance . Eur . J . Cell Biol . ( 2014 ) , http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . ejcb . 2014 . 01 . 007 ARTICLE IN PRESS G Model EJCB - 50764 ; No . of Pages 15 C . B . Gurniak et al . / European Journal of Cell Biology xxx ( 2014 ) xxx – xxx 3 actin binding proteins including (cid:2) - and (cid:3) - tropomyosin ( Donner et al . , 2002 ; Laing et al . , 1995 ; Wattanasirichaigoon et al . , 2002 ) , nebulin ( Pelin et al . , 1999 ) , troponin T1 ( Johnston et al . , 2000 ) , as well as (cid:2) - actin ( Nowak et al . , 1999 ) . Recently , the human actin depolymerizing factor coﬁlin2 was found mutated in patients suffering from nemaline myopathy ( Agrawal et al . , 2007 ; Ockeloen et al . , 2012 ) . This highlights the functional importance of an F - actin depolymerizing activity for the structural integrity of skeletal muscle tissue . One set of patients carrying a heterozygous A35T point mutation , exhibited reduced coﬁlin2 protein levels and solubility ( Agrawal et al . , 2007 ) . The observed disease spectrum comprised nemaline rods , minicores , concentric laminated bodies and areas of F - actin accumulation , which has been attributed to coﬁlin2 haploinsufﬁciency . Other patients with a homozygous V7M missense mutation , showed a mixed phenotype between nemaline and myoﬁbrillar myopathy ( Ockeloen et al . , 2012 ) . These ﬁndings suggested that expression of mutated forms of coﬁlin2 is causal to sarcomeric and extrasarcom - eric cytoskeletal pathologies . In terms of physiological functions , coﬁlin2 is the least under - stood member of the ADF / coﬁlin family of F - actin depolymerizing factors . Coﬁlin1 , Coﬁlin2 and ADF are the three actin depolymeriz - ing factors expressed in mouse and human . All three differ in their activities and expression pattern ( Gurniak et al . , 2005 ; Nakashima , 2005 ; Vartiainen et al . , 2002 ) . ADF and coﬁlin1 play a critical role in actin ﬁlament dynamics ( Bamburg et al . , 1999 ) by regulating the rate constant of depolymerization and polymerization at ﬁlament ends ( Carlier et al . , 1997 ) , by severing ﬁlaments ( Maciver et al . , 1991 ) and by changing the twist of ﬁlaments ( McGough et al . , 1997 ) . Coﬁlin2 was shown to have similar biochemical activities towards actin , however it possesses a higher afﬁnity for ﬁlamentous actin than ADF and coﬁlin1 , but has a slightly reduced actin ﬁlament depolymerization activity ( Nakashima , 2005 ; Vartiainen et al . , 2002 ) . By in situ hybridization , the coﬁlin2 mRNA was detected in terminally differentiated myogenic cells in the myotome and limb buds of mouse embryos ( Mohri et al . , 2000 ) . Also ADF and coﬁlin1 were found expressed in the myotome of mouse embryos ( Gurniak et al . , 2005 ) . In adult mouse tissues the highest levels of coﬁlin2 protein were found in skeletal muscle , heart , and brain ( see Suppl . Fig . 1A ) . Mouse mutants for ADF are viable ( Bellenchi et al . , 2007 ; Ikeda , 2003 ) , whereas a knockout of coﬁlin1 is embryonic lethal ( Gurniak et al . , 2005 ) . Caenorhabditis elegans has two ADF / coﬁlin isoforms of which UNC - 60B is speciﬁcally expressed in striated muscle . Loss of function and null mutations of unc - 60B showed that its severing activity is required for assembly of sarcomeric actin ﬁlaments ( Ono et al . , 1999 ) . Likewise , the genome of birds contains genes encoding ADF and coﬁlin . Studies in chicken suggested that coﬁlin might play a role in myoﬁbrillogenesis in vitro ( Abe et al . , 1993 ) and in vivo ( Abe et al . , 1989 ; Ono et al . , 1994 ) . In cell culture , depletion of coﬁlin1 and coﬁlin2 from rat cardiac myocytes by RNA interference caused dis - organization of sarcomeric actin ﬁlaments ( Skwarek - Maruszewska et al . , 2009 ) , suggesting some overlapping function of ADF / coﬁlin isoforms during the establishment of sarcomeric structures . The activity of ADF / coﬁlin isoforms is controlled by phosphorylation at Serine 3 ( Van Troys et al . , 2008 ) , by binding to phosphoinosi - tides ( Hosoda et al . , 2007 ; Nagaoka et al . , 1995 ) , and by Muscle LIM protein ( MLP ) ( Papalouka et al . , 2009 ) . In cultured muscle cells the formation of nuclear and cytoplas - mic ADF / coﬁlin - actin rods can be triggered by heat shock or stress ( Abe et al . , 1993 ; Bamburg and Wiggan , 2002 ; Munsie and Truant , 2012 ; Ono et al . , 1996 ) . In tissues co - localization of ADF / coﬁlin with rods has so far only been shown for Hirano bodies in brains of patients suffering from neurodegenerative diseases ( Maciver and Harrington , 1995 ) . Rods are the pathological hallmark of nema - line myopathies . Vandebrouck et al . analyzed the composition of myopathic rods in vitro and concluded that ATP depletion or actin mutations resulted in different rod phenotypes showing a unique ﬁngerprint of actin binding proteins and differences in actin dynamics ( Vandebrouck et al . , 2010 ) . According to this study coﬁlin is present in cytoplasmic rods of various nemaline myopathies originating from mutations in actin . In humans , point mutations in coﬁlin2 were shown to lead to myopathic phenotypes includ - ing rod - like nemaline bodies ( Agrawal et al . , 2007 ; Ockeloen et al . , 2012 ) . In the sarcomere , the presence of proteins that disassemble F - actin appears to be counterintuitive in terms of structural integrity . It also raises the interesting question , why an almost crystalline array of actin ﬁlaments in the sarcomere requires the activity of an F - actin severing protein to maintain the overall organiza - tion . Conceivably , one explanation is linked to the ‘actin history’ of a differentiated muscle . The development of striated muscle ﬁbers is characterized by the sequential expression and exchange of smooth muscle - , cardiac muscle - and ﬁnally skeletal mus - cle (cid:2) - actin isoforms ( Lyons et al . , 1991 ; Tondeleir et al . , 2009 ; Vandekerckhove et al . , 1986 ; Woodcock - Mitchell et al . , 1988 ) , and coﬁlin2 might play an important role in this process . In rat tran - scriptional analysis of actin isoforms at different developmental stages has been performed ( McHugh et al . , 1991 ) . In early embry - onic development cardiac (cid:2) - actin appears to be the predominant striated muscle isoactin , which shows a continuous increase until early postnatal development and then decreases , while smooth muscle (cid:2) - actin transcripts show a biphasic pattern of expression during embryonic development with a drop right before birth . Skeletal muscle (cid:2) - actin is expressed at very low levels during pre - natal development , however after birth a striking up - regulation in skeletal muscle isoactin expression can be seen in the matur - ing skeletal muscle , which is then maintained into adulthood . Basically , during muscle development a sequential exchange of (cid:2) - actin isoforms has to occur in the sarcomere from smooth muscle (cid:2) - actin to cardiac muscle (cid:2) - actin and ﬁnally to skeletal mus - cle (cid:2) - actin . One important aspect of this exchange could be the coordinated release of monomeric (cid:2) - actin from the ﬁlaments , however the mechanisms of (cid:2) - actin isoform exchange are largely unknown . Our data suggest an essential role of coﬁlin2 in the exchange of (cid:2) - actin isoforms . Coﬁlin2 knockout mice develop a skeletal muscle phenotype characterized by marked pathological protein aggregation , mitochondrial abnormalities and degeneration of the myoﬁbrillar apparatus . This pathology was associated with an altered expression pattern of smooth muscle and skeletal mus - cle (cid:2) - actin isoforms . Interestingly , other tissues with high coﬁlin2 expression were unaffected by the knockout of the coﬁlin2 gene . We conclude that the pathogenesis is related to an essential func - tion of coﬁlin2 in orchestrating the exchange of (cid:2) - actin isoforms in the postnatal period of skeletal muscle development . cof2 − / − mice ( dark grey ) and control ( light grey ) animals ( n = 8 ) was determined at P7 ( top panel ) . The Student’s t - test did not show any signiﬁcant difference . Middle panel : Heart morphology was comparable in cross sections from cof2 − / − and control animals ( P7 ) when stained with hematoxilin and eosin . Bottom panel : Immunoﬂuorescence microscopy of heart muscle using different markers . Sections of heart muscle from controls and coﬁlin2 mutants at P7 were stained for (cid:2) - actinin ( red ) and desmin ( green ) . Enlargements are shown to better illustrate the intact sarcomeric structure . Please cite this article in press as : Gurniak , C . B . , et al . , Severe protein aggregate myopathy in a knockout mouse model points to an essential role of coﬁlin2 in sarcomeric actin exchange and muscle maintenance . Eur . J . Cell Biol . ( 2014 ) , http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . ejcb . 2014 . 01 . 007 ARTICLE IN PRESS G Model EJCB - 50764 ; No . of Pages 15 4 C . B . Gurniak et al . / European Journal of Cell Biology xxx ( 2014 ) xxx – xxx Results Targeted ablation of coﬁlin2 results in early postnatal lethality To determine the role of coﬁlin2 in muscle physiology , we gen - erated a knockout mouse model . Mutant mice with a conditional coﬁlin2 allele ( cof2 ﬂx ) were engineered by gene targeting in ES cells , blastocyst injection , and germline passage of the mutated allele ( Fig . 1A ) . LoxP sites were placed in the ﬁrst intron and the 3 (cid:3) UTR of the coﬁlin2 gene , allowing removal of all three coding exons by cre - mediated deletion ( Fig . 1A and B ) . Subsequent crossing to a germline cre - deleter line ( Schwenk et al . , 1995 ) resulted in the null allele for coﬁlin2 in heterozygosity ( cof2 wt / − ) . Heterozygous cof2 wt / − animals were viable , had a normal life - span , and showed no overt clinical phenotype . Cof2 wt / − mice were fertile and heterozygous crosses produced cof2 − / − mutants at the expected Mendelian ratio . At birth , homozygous cof2 − / − mutants were indistinguishable from their heterozygous or wildtype lit - termates . Around postnatal day 5 cof2 − / − mutants were notably smaller in size and showed reduced activity ( Suppl . Fig . 1B ) . Between P10 - P12 cof2 − / − mutant mice were lost . To analyze coﬁlin2 protein expression , we generated an isoform - speciﬁc polyclonal antibody , which did not crossreact with ADF or coﬁlin1 ( Suppl . Fig . 1A ) . Using the coﬁlin2 speciﬁc anti - body on wildtype mouse tissues , we found coﬁlin2 to be mainly expressed in skeletal muscle , heart , and brain ( Suppl . Fig . 1A ) . West - ern blot analysis conﬁrmed the complete absence of coﬁlin2 protein in different tissues from homozygous cof2 − / − mutant mice ( Fig . 1C ) . It is conceivable that the coﬁlin2 deletion in cardiac , skeletal muscle and brain could contribute to a systemic failure and post - natal lethality . To address a neuronal contribution to the observed phenotype , we speciﬁcally deleted coﬁlin2 in the entire nervous system by crossing nestin - cre into the conditional cof2 ﬂx back - ground . Nestin - cre was shown to delete in all neuronal cell types starting at embryonic day E10 . 5 ( Tronche et al . , 1999 ) . Western blot analysis conﬁrmed efﬁcient deletion of coﬁlin2 in c of2 ﬂx / ﬂx , nestin - cre brains , while coﬁlin2 protein levels in skeletal muscle ( Fig . 1D ) and heart ( data not shown ) were unaffected . C of2 ﬂx / ﬂx , nestin - cre mutants were viable and reached adulthood without any signs of muscular deﬁciencies . Morphological analysis of neuromuscular junctions in cof2 − / − mutants did not reveal any pathological alterations , further suggesting that the neuronal function of coﬁlin2 is independent from the observed muscular phenotype ( Fig . 1E ) . To address a potential cardiac phenotype , we performed a detailed histological examination . Taking into account the smaller body size of mutant mice , the cof2 − / − mutants did not show a dif - ference in heart / body ratio at P7 , and morphologically the heart of c of2 − / − mutants was indistinguishable from controls ( Fig . 1F ) . Also at the microscopic level , heart muscle structure was normal as judged by immunostaining for (cid:2) - actinin and desmin ( Fig . 1F ) . These ﬁndings strongly suggested a skeletal muscle defect as the primary cause for the observed postnatal phenotype of c of2 − / − mutants . Ablation of coﬁlin2 leads to a severe protein aggregate myopathy At postnatal day 3 cof2 − / − mutants were indistinguishable from control littermates , however at P7 skeletal muscle alter - ations became evident . Histological analyses revealed a rapidly progressive skeletal muscle phenotype . In contrast to P3 , hema - toxilin / eosin staining of leg muscles ( primarily gastrocnemius ) from P7 mutant animals indicated a severe myopathic pheno - type with atrophic and hypertrophic myoﬁbers , internalization of myonuclei and degenerating muscle ﬁbers ( Fig . 2A ) . The diameter of muscle ﬁbers was found highly irregular and expanded in P7 cof2 − / − mutants ( Fig . 2A , and Suppl . Fig . 1C ) . Frequently , mutant myoﬁbers showed an unevenly stained sarcoplasm with areas of increased eosinophilia . The latter ﬁnding is indicative for the presence of pathological protein aggregates within these muscle ﬁbers ( Schröder and Schoser , 2009 ) . In Gomori trichrome stain - ing , green - blueish deposits were observed in cof2 − / − muscle ﬁbers , reminiscent of a protein aggregate myopathy ( Fig . 2A ) . Nema - line bodies have been reported in muscle biopsies of patients and mice carrying coﬁlin2 mutations ( Agrawal et al . , 2007 ; Ockeloen et al . , 2012 ) . In our coﬁlin2 knockout mouse model we could not detect any structures that could be classiﬁed as nemaline bodies at the light microscope level as well as by electron microscopy ( see Fig . 2B ) . Human protein aggregate myopathies are often accompanied by mitochondrial abnormalities ( Schröder and Schoser , 2009 ) . Muscle ﬁbers in P7 cof2 − / − mutants showed pathological NADH ( mitochondria ) and cytochrome oxidase ( oxidative metabolism ) staining patterns with areas of attenuated or even absent staining in conjunction with areas of accentuated enzyme activity ( Fig . 2A ) . This staining pattern strongly resembles the observations made in patients with various subforms of myoﬁbrillar myopathies ( Kley et al . , 2007 ; Schröder and Schoser , 2009 ) . Stainings for myosin ATPase at pH9 . 4 ( fast , type II ﬁbers ) and pH4 . 2 ( slow , type I ﬁbers ) , as well as immunohistochemistry for slow and fast myosin ( Suppl . Fig . 2A and B ) , showed a checkerboard - like distribution of type I and type II ﬁbers , both in wild - type and mutant muscle . The hypertrophic mutant muscle ﬁbers were exclusively of type I , i . e . of the slow ﬁber type , even though immunohistochemistry revealed coﬁlin2 expression in both , type I and type II ﬁbers of skeletal muscle . However , no predominance of type I ﬁbers , another classi - cal feature of nemaline myopathies , was observed in our coﬁlin2 mutant mice . Notably , with the described histological staining methods no signiﬁcant myopathological alterations were seen in coﬁlin2 mutant mice at P3 ( Fig . 2A ) . Also at electron microscopy resolution , sarcomeric structures appeared grossly intact in P3 cof2 − / − mutants , although signs of a beginning sarcomere disruption could be sporadically found at ﬁber margins ( Fig . 2B ) . Overall , the size of mutant sarcomeres and the length of the respective actin ﬁlaments were comparable to control animals . In cross sections of cof2 − / − P3 muscle the pack - ing of myoﬁlaments appeared normal , conﬁrming that coﬁlin2 is dispensable for the initial fusion of myoblasts into myotubes , their assembly into myoﬁbrils and their organization into sarcom - eres . Already at P3 the density of granules and vesicles was found increased in the sub - sarcolemmal regions of cof2 − / − mutant muscle ( Fig . 2B ) . At P7 , vesicles had disappeared and myoﬁbrillar integrity was lost . Sarcomeric organization was disrupted and frequently parts of the A - band and Z - line were missing . In mutants the space between myoﬁbrils was enlarged and occupied by accumulating mitochondria . This ﬁnding is in agreement with the observed clus - tering of mitochondria in the histological NADH staining ( see also Fig . 2A ) . By electron microscopy nemaline bodies could not be iden - tiﬁed in cof2 − / − skeletal muscle . In summary , our data show that myoﬁbers and sarcomeric struc - tures were initially formed correctly even in the absence of coﬁlin2 . However , within a few days after birth , sarcomeric structures start to disintegrate , pathological protein aggregates appear and mitochondria cluster abnormally at the sarcolemma . The coﬁlin2 mouse model therefore shows all hallmarks of a protein aggregate myopathy similar to what has been described in human patients with certain coﬁlin2 mutations ( Ockeloen et al . , 2012 ) . Absence of coﬁlin2 leads to disruption of the sarcomeric and extrasarcomeric cytoskeleton In order to characterize the protein aggregate and myoﬁbrillar myopathy in more detail , we performed immunostainings against Please cite this article in press as : Gurniak , C . B . , et al . , Severe protein aggregate myopathy in a knockout mouse model points to an essential role of coﬁlin2 in sarcomeric actin exchange and muscle maintenance . Eur . J . Cell Biol . ( 2014 ) , http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . ejcb . 2014 . 01 . 007 ARTICLE IN PRESS G Model EJCB - 50764 ; No . of Pages 15 C . B . Gurniak et al . / European Journal of Cell Biology xxx ( 2014 ) xxx – xxx 5 Fig . 2 . Histological analysis of skeletal muscle . ( A ) At postnatal days 3 and 7 ( P3 and P7 ) gastrocnemius skeletal muscle was sectioned from control and cof2 − / − mutant animals and stained with hematoxilin and eosin ( H & E ) and Gomori Trichrome ( Gomori ) . Mitochondria were stained for oxidative metabolism by NADH - tetrazolium reductase ( NADH ) and cytochrome oxidase ( COX ) . Inserts of enlarged ﬁbers illustrate sarcoplasmatic pathology in mutant samples at P7 . ( B ) Ultrastructure of coﬁlin2 knockout skeletal muscles . i . and ii . show longitudinal sections of day 3 leg muscles with massive , mainly subsarcolemmal accumulation of granular and vesicular material ( asterisk ) . “Z” and “M” mark Z - discs and M - bands , “m” indicate mitochondria , respectively . Arrows in ii . point at sites where the progression of myoﬁbril degradation is evident . iv . illustrates destruction of both myoﬁbrillar and vesicular compartments in a day 7 leg muscle . The arrow points at an autophagosome at a site of degradation . iii . shows an image of a control specimen . sarcomeric and extra - sarcomeric key proteins . In sections of P7 cof2 − / − hindlimb muscles the staining pattern of the Z - disc protein (cid:2) - actinin was dramatically changed ( Fig . 3A ) . In cof2 − / − mutants the distribution of (cid:2) - actinin was irregular within the sarcoplasm of individual muscle ﬁbers with areas of focally increased or dimin - ished immunoreactivity . F - actin staining by phalloidin depicted multiple ﬁbers with strong accumulations of F - actin ( Fig . 3B ) . How - ever , we did not detect evidence for nemaline rods . Taken together , these ﬁndings suggested a severely disordered actin cytoskeleton and in particular a disruption of the thin myoﬁlament and Z - disc structures , reminiscent of actin - associated myopathies ( Nowak et al . , 2012 ) . Apart from the disrupted actin organization , the striated muscle of cof2 − / − mutant mice displayed severe alterations of the extrasarcomeric cytoskeleton , which interlinks neighboring myoﬁbrils and connects the entire myoﬁbrillar apparatus of the muscle ﬁber to the nuclear and sarcolemmal compartments . Longitudinal sections from hindlimb muscles from P7 cof2 − / − mice illustrated the absence of the typical cross - striated staining pattern of desmin , indicating the disruption of the extrasarcomeric desmin - associated cytoskeleton ( Fig . 3A ) . Staining for the sarcom - eric protein (cid:2) - actinin furthermore illustrated the distorted muscle structure . Desmin and (cid:2) - actinin were both found to accumulate in sub - sarcolemmal areas of individual mutant ﬁbers . The presence Please cite this article in press as : Gurniak , C . B . , et al . , Severe protein aggregate myopathy in a knockout mouse model points to an essential role of coﬁlin2 in sarcomeric actin exchange and muscle maintenance . Eur . J . Cell Biol . ( 2014 ) , http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . ejcb . 2014 . 01 . 007 ARTICLE IN PRESS G Model EJCB - 50764 ; No . of Pages 15 6 C . B . Gurniak et al . / European Journal of Cell Biology xxx ( 2014 ) xxx – xxx Fig . 3 . Immunoﬂuorescence microscopy of skeletal muscle sections for sarcomeric and extrasarcomeric markers at postnatal day 7 . ( A ) Longitudinal ( top ) and cross sections ( below ) of gastrocnemius muscle from control and coﬁlin2 mutants ( cof2 − / − ) at P7 were stained for desmin ( green ) and (cid:2) - actinin ( red ) . The corresponding merged images are shown in the last column . ( B ) F - actin was labeled with phalloidin in cross sections of control and coﬁlin2 mutant skeletal muscle . ( C ) Localization of ﬁlamin C ( red ) and (cid:2) - actinin ( green ) on longitudinal sections of control and coﬁlin2 mutant skeletal muscle . Merged images are shown in the last column . of hypertrophic - and atrophic - like ﬁbers was conﬁrmed by a longitudinal view of cof2 − / − ﬁbers where deformation resulted in shrinking and ballooning ( Fig . 3A middle ) . However , the sar - colemma of mutant ﬁbers was intact as depicted by stainings for (cid:2) - dystroglycan and dystrophin ( Suppl . Fig . 2C ) . Aggregates were also observed with antibodies directed against ﬁlamin C ( Fig . 3C ) as well as other sarcomeric and extra - sarcomeric markers such as Xin , myotilin , plectin and synemin ( data not shown ) . The presence of desmin - , ﬁlamin C - and Xin - positive pro - tein aggregates are well established morphological hallmarks of Please cite this article in press as : Gurniak , C . B . , et al . , Severe protein aggregate myopathy in a knockout mouse model points to an essential role of coﬁlin2 in sarcomeric actin exchange and muscle maintenance . Eur . J . Cell Biol . ( 2014 ) , http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . ejcb . 2014 . 01 . 007 ARTICLE IN PRESS G Model EJCB - 50764 ; No . of Pages 15 C . B . Gurniak et al . / European Journal of Cell Biology xxx ( 2014 ) xxx – xxx 7 Fig . 4 . ( A ) Autophagy in skeletal muscle based on immunoﬂuorescence microscopy . Sections of gastrocnemius muscle from controls and coﬁlin2 mutants ( cof2 − / − ) at P7 were analyzed for the autophagy marker LC3B ( green ) in combination with (cid:2) - actinin ( red ) . The enlarged merged images ( bottom panel ) illustrate the (cid:2) - actinin aggregates and the lack of co - localization with LC3B . ( B ) Immunoblot analysis of skeletal muscle lysates from different postnatal stages . Equal amounts of skeletal muscle lysates from wildtype ( wt ) and coﬁlin2 mutants ( cof2 − / − ) were probed for coﬁlin2 , coﬁlin1 , ADF , proﬁlin1 , and (cid:2) - tubulin as loading control . The dashed boxes highlight the expression pattern of ADF / coﬁlin family members in two day old animals ( P2 ) and adult animals , respectively . myoﬁbrillar myopathies ( Schröder and Schoser , 2009 ) . At postna - tal time points , overall expression levels of (cid:2) - actinin and desmin protein were not altered in cof2 − / − mutant muscle , while the expression of ﬁlamin C protein was found slightly increased at P4 , based on Western blot analyses ( Suppl . Fig . 1D ) . Cytoplasmic aggregates can be removed by autophagy , a path - way which controls protein and organelle turnover ( Levine and Kroemer , 2008 ) . F - actin aggregates were shown to activate lyso - somal degradation and to induce the formation and maturation of autophagosomes and autolysosomes ( Lázaro - Diéguez et al . , 2008 ) . In cof2 − / − mutant muscle we found enhanced activation of the autophagic pathway , as shown by the marker LC3B . In control mus - cle , LC3B positive ﬁbers were hardly detectable , while in cof2 − / − mutants a signiﬁcant number of ﬁbers stained for LC3B and (cid:2) - actinin - positive aggregates ( Fig . 4A ) . LC3B did not co - colocalize with sarcomeric (cid:2) - actinin aggregates , a ﬁnding that might explain the inability of mutant muscle ﬁbers to clear protein aggregates . Autophagic vacuoles in cof2 − / − mutant muscle could also be seen by electron microscopy ( see Fig . 2B ) . Expression and functional overlap of the ADF / coﬁlin family members during muscle development During muscle development the ratio of monomeric G - actin and ﬁlamentous F - actin changes dramatically , with a pronounced increase in F - actin towards later stages of development ( Shimizu and Obinata , 1986 ) . One conceivable mechanism for controlling sarcomeric F - actin levels could involve the ADF / coﬁlin family of actin depolymerizing factors . Expression of ADF / coﬁlin in muscle was mainly studied in chicken , while the expression pattern in mouse and human skeletal muscle have not been investigated in detail . Also , it is unclear whether ADF , coﬁlin1 and coﬁlin2 have overlapping or speciﬁc functions in muscle . Using isoform speciﬁc antibodies , which exclusively recognize ADF , coﬁlin1 and coﬁlin2 Please cite this article in press as : Gurniak , C . B . , et al . , Severe protein aggregate myopathy in a knockout mouse model points to an essential role of coﬁlin2 in sarcomeric actin exchange and muscle maintenance . Eur . J . Cell Biol . ( 2014 ) , http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . ejcb . 2014 . 01 . 007 ARTICLE IN PRESS G Model EJCB - 50764 ; No . of Pages 15 8 C . B . Gurniak et al . / European Journal of Cell Biology xxx ( 2014 ) xxx – xxx ( see also Suppl . Fig . 1A ) , we could demonstrate that all three actin depolymerizing factors were expressed in skeletal muscles during early postnatal life ( Fig . 4B ) . The expression of ADF and coﬁlin1 was fairly constant during the early postnatal days , and then grad - ually decreased . In adult skeletal muscle ( P42 ) ADF and coﬁlin1 expression was undetectable ( Fig . 4B ) . In contrast , the expres - sion of coﬁlin2 remained high in adult skeletal muscle , suggesting an essential role throughout life . Using recombinant proteins , we were able to normalize the antibodies and to estimate the abso - lute amounts of ADF , coﬁlin1 and coﬁlin2 expression in skeletal muscle . According to these experiments the ratio of coﬁlin2 to ADF to coﬁlin1 at birth was 6 : 2 : 1 . Although all three family members were expressed at signiﬁcant levels during early postnatal stages , the expression of ADF and coﬁlin1 did not rescue the cof2 − / − phe - notype . Also , no compensatory up - regulation of ADF and coﬁlin1 levels was observed in cof2 − / − muscle . These data suggested that all three ADF / coﬁlin family members must also have independent functions in muscle development and maintenance . Together with previously published data on ADF and coﬁlin1 in embryonic devel - opment ( Bellenchi et al . , 2007 ; Gurniak et al . , 2005 ) our data suggest that coﬁlin1 and ADF play an important role during embryonic stages of muscle differentiation , while coﬁlin2 provides a differ - ent function during postnatal muscle growth and maintenance . In the course of our experiments , we discovered that other classical non - muscle actin binding proteins ( e . g . proﬁlin1 ) were expressed in early postnatal skeletal muscle , but not in adult skeletal muscle ( Fig . 4B ) . Distinct subcellular localization of ADF / coﬁlins in myoblasts and myotubes To better distinguish the roles of ADF , coﬁlin1 and coﬁlin2 in skeletal muscle , we investigated their subcellular distribu - tion in primary muscle cells . Primary myoblasts were cultured from newborn wildtype mice , differentiated into myotubes , and stained for the three ADF / coﬁlin family members . All three iso - forms were found to be expressed in myoblasts , however their subcellular distribution was found to be different ( Fig . 5A ) . ADF and coﬁlin1 showed a rather diffuse staining throughout the cytoplasm of myoblasts , without enrichment in a particular compartment . Coﬁlin2 on the other hand showed a preferential localization to F - actin rich structures , in particular to vinculin - positive focal contact sites . Right behind the leading edge of myoblasts , coﬁlin2 was found to colocalize with vinculin in focal adhesion plaques ( Fig . 5A ) . For all three ADF / coﬁlin isoforms we saw a partial nuclear localization . We should also note that the morphology of cof2 − / − mutant myoblast cells was indistinguishable from wildtype myoblasts ( data not shown ) . Myoblasts can be differentiated into myotubes , which then form sarcomeric structures . In the sarcomere actin ﬁlaments are anchored to the Z - line via the fast growing end , while the slow growing end points towards the A - band . In primary mouse myotube cultures , we found coﬁlin1 excluded from the (cid:2) - actinin - positive Z - disc region , suggesting that coﬁlin1 rather localized with thin myoﬁlaments in the overlap zone ( A band ) ( Fig . 5B ) . Coﬁlin2 showed localization mainly next to (cid:2) - actinin , but relatively little overlap , suggesting that coﬁlin2 might preferentially localize to the area of pointed ends of actin ﬁlaments . In contrast to coﬁlin1 and coﬁlin2 , ADF was uniformly distributed throughout the sarcomere . Our ﬁndings that all three actin depolymerizing factors localize to distinct sarcomeric structures support the notion of speciﬁc func - tions for each ADF / coﬁlin isoform . Interestingly , coﬁlin2 is not essential for myoblast fusion and myotube differentiation since we could culture myoblasts from cof2 − / − mutant mice and differentiate them into myotubes showing the characteristic striated staining pattern for (cid:2) - actinin ( Fig . 5C ) . The ˛ - actin isoform switch is impaired in coﬁlin2 mutants Our data show that embryonic muscle differentiation , myotube fusion and sarcomere formation is not dependent on coﬁlin2 , however sarcomere structure starts to disintegrate during early postnatal life when coﬁlin2 is deleted . This raises the question , by which mechanism coﬁlin2 supports the maintenance of sarcom - eric structures . In early postnatal life the most striking remodeling of sarcomeric organization concerns the exchange of (cid:2) - actin iso - forms ( Lyons et al . , 1991 ; Tondeleir et al . , 2009 ; Vandekerckhove et al . , 1986 ; Woodcock - Mitchell et al . , 1988 ) , and we hypothesized that coﬁlin2 is a critical component in catalyzing this exchange . In early development , a sequential exchange of (cid:2) - actin isoforms from smooth muscle (cid:2) - actin to cardiac muscle (cid:2) - actin and ﬁnally to skeletal muscle (cid:2) - actin occurs in the sarcomere ( McHugh et al . , 1991 ) . If coﬁlin2 functions as an actin exchange factor for switch - ing the (cid:2) - actin isoforms during perinatal muscle development , we would expect to see an accumulation of the early (cid:2) - actin isoforms upon deletion of coﬁlin2 . We compared the expression of the different (cid:2) - actin isoforms in wildtype and cof2 − / − mutant skeletal muscle . Smooth muscle and skeletal muscle (cid:2) - actins could be distinguished by Western blot , whereas the relative expression of cardiac muscle (cid:2) - actin could only be determined by real - time PCR , due to the lack of cardiac (cid:2) - actin - speciﬁc antibodies . In control mice the expres - sion of smooth muscle and skeletal muscle (cid:2) - actin showed the expected sequential expression pattern with smooth muscle (cid:2) - actin being expressed at E18 and then declining at P8 , while the skeletal muscle (cid:2) - actin isoform was low at E18 and subsequently increased during the post - natal period ( Fig . 6A ) . In contrast , cof2 − / − skeletal muscle showed a 4 - 5fold accumulation of smooth mus - cle (cid:2) - actin , starting as early as E18 . Skeletal muscle (cid:2) - actin was slightly increased in cof2 − / − mutants between P2 - P8 ( Fig . 6A ) . Inter - estingly , in cof2 − / − heart no accumulation of smooth muscle (cid:2) - actin was observed ( Fig . 6B ) , suggesting that coﬁlin2 activity is speciﬁ - cally required in skeletal muscle . This is also in agreement with our ﬁnding that heart morphology and function is not affected in cof2 − / − mutants . Two possible mechanisms could explain the accumulation of smooth muscle and skeletal muscle (cid:2) - actins in coﬁlin2 mutants . One is that the (cid:2) - actin isoforms , in particular smooth muscle (cid:2) - actin , are not cleared from the postnatal muscle and therefore accumulate in the sarcomere . Second , (cid:2) - actin protein produc - tion could be augmented due to a differently regulated mRNA expression of the (cid:2) - actin isoforms in coﬁlin2 mutants . We there - fore measured the expression of each (cid:2) - actin isoform at the mRNA level using quantitative real - time PCR and (cid:2) - actin isoform - speciﬁc TaqMan - probes . Skeletal muscle cytoplasmic RNA from P7 was analyzed for smooth muscle - , cardiac muscle - and skeletal muscle (cid:2) - actin mRNA and calibrated to GAPDH mRNA ( Fig . 6C ) . The amount of smooth muscle (cid:2) - actin mRNA was essentially unchanged between control and cof2 − / − mice , suggesting that the control of smooth muscle (cid:2) - actin expression occurs at the protein level and not by transcriptional regulation . Cardiac muscle (cid:2) - actin mRNA of cof2 − / − mice was comparable to control levels . Skeletal muscle (cid:2) - actin mRNA , however , was found to be up - regulated sim - ilar to the protein level ( Fig . 6C ) , possibly as a stress response to skeletal muscle dysfunction ( Fuchs et al . , 2008 ) . One important question is , whether the increased (cid:2) - actin levels in the cof2 − / − skeletal muscle are accompanied by an increase of the ratio between G - actin and F - actin , which would indicate that over - expressed actin is possibly not incorporated into ﬁlaments . We therefore performed biochemical fractionation experiments based on TritonX - 100 solubility of G - actin . These experiments showed that the ratios of TritonX - 100 insoluble F - actin to soluble G - actin were similar in control and cof2 − / − skeletal muscle , as highlighted Please cite this article in press as : Gurniak , C . B . , et al . , Severe protein aggregate myopathy in a knockout mouse model points to an essential role of coﬁlin2 in sarcomeric actin exchange and muscle maintenance . Eur . J . Cell Biol . ( 2014 ) , http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . ejcb . 2014 . 01 . 007 ARTICLE IN PRESS G Model EJCB - 50764 ; No . of Pages 15 C . B . Gurniak et al . / European Journal of Cell Biology xxx ( 2014 ) xxx – xxx 9 Fig . 5 . Localization of ADF / coﬁlin family members in wildtype primary myoblasts ( A ) , and myotubes ( B ) . ( A ) Immunoﬂuorescence of myoblasts for coﬁlin1 ( top ) , coﬁlin2 ( middle ) and ADF ( bottom ) is shown in green , vinculin staining is shown in red . Higher magniﬁcation is shown in the bottom rows to better illustrate the focal adhesions . The respective merged images are represented in the last column . ( B ) The distribution of coﬁlin1 ( top panel ) , coﬁlin2 ( middle panel ) and ADF ( bottom panel ) in cultured myotubes is shown in green , (cid:2) - actinin staining ( red ) was used to visualize the Z - line . The corresponding merged images are depicted in the bottom rows , respectively . ( C ) Differentiation of control and cof2 − / − myoblast into myotubes . In culture primary myoblasts from skeletal muscle of control and coﬁlin2 mutant animals can fuse and differentiate into myotubes . (cid:2) - actinin staining ( red ) indicates the Z - lines . Nuclei are marked by DAPI staining in blue . for smooth muscle (cid:2) - actin as well as skeletal muscle (cid:2) - actin ( Suppl . Fig . 2D ) . Taken together , the data from mRNA and protein expression studies suggest that smooth muscle (cid:2) - actin protein accumulates in cof2 − / − skeletal muscle because it cannot be efﬁciently removed from the sarcomeric actin ﬁlaments . Hence , postnatal clearance of smooth muscle (cid:2) - actin from the sarcomere is an essential process for muscle growth and maintenance . Discussion Skeletal muscle myopathies have devastating consequences due to the loss of muscle integrity and contractile response . A wide set of mutations affecting different genes cause myopathies , however the precise underlying molecular mechanisms have largely remained elusive ( Clarkson et al . , 2004 ) . Among the mutations in various cytoskeletal elements two family traits with distinct mutations Please cite this article in press as : Gurniak , C . B . , et al . , Severe protein aggregate myopathy in a knockout mouse model points to an essential role of coﬁlin2 in sarcomeric actin exchange and muscle maintenance . Eur . J . Cell Biol . ( 2014 ) , http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . ejcb . 2014 . 01 . 007 ARTICLE IN PRESS G Model EJCB - 50764 ; No . of Pages 15 10 C . B . Gurniak et al . / European Journal of Cell Biology xxx ( 2014 ) xxx – xxx Fig . 6 . (cid:2) - actin isoform expression in skeletal muscle . ( A ) Western blot analysis of skeletal muscle lysates from embryonic day 18 ( E18 ) and different postnatal stages ( P2 - adult ) . Equal loading was ensured by Bradford quantitation and conﬁrmed again by Coomassie staining of gels ( not shown ) . Protein lysates from wildtype ( wt ) and coﬁlin2 mutants ( cof2 − / − ) were analyzed for the expression of (cid:2) - actin isoforms using antibodies speciﬁc for smooth muscle ( top ) and skeletal muscle ( bottom ) (cid:2) - actin . ( B ) Expression pattern of smooth muscle (cid:2) - actin in heart . Equal amounts of protein lysates of hearts from postnatal day 2 to 11 and adult animals were probed with an antibody speciﬁc for smooth muscle (cid:2) - actin . ( C ) mRNA expression levels of (cid:2) - actin isoforms in skeletal muscle . Relative transcript levels of smooth muscle , cardiac muscle and skeletal muscle (cid:2) - actin were determined in cDNA samples from P7 controls and cof2 − / − animals ( n = 6 ) . All samples were normalized to GAPDH . Standard errors are shown , P - values were calculated using the Student’s t - test ( * * * P < 0 . 001 ) . in the F - actin depolymerizing factor coﬁlin2 have been described ( Agrawal et al . , 2007 ; Ockeloen et al . , 2012 ) . One family showed an exchange of alanine to threonine at amino acid position 35 , which resulted in reduced protein amount and solubility ( Agrawal et al . , 2007 ) . Presumably , this mutation destabilizes the coﬁlin2 protein , resulting in haploinsufﬁciency in affected individuals . As a conse - quence , patients developed a spectrum of myopathic phenotypes , including nemaline type myopathy with minicores and concentric laminated bodies as well as areas of F - actin accumulation . In another family , a homozygous missense mutation in the coﬁlin2 gene ( V7M ) mainly caused features of myoﬁbrillar myopathy ( Ockeloen et al . , 2012 ) . Common to both mutations appears to be a severe reduction of coﬁlin2 activity , however the biochemical properties of the respective mutations have not been examined yet . In order to explore the physiological function of coﬁlin2 , we gen - erated a mouse model in which coﬁlin2 expression was abrogated . Interestingly , embryonic muscle development and early postna - tal life was not affected in coﬁlin2 mutant mice , suggesting that initial skeletal muscle formation is not coﬁlin2 - dependent . This is further supported by our ﬁndings that myoblasts from coﬁlin2 mutant mice have a normal cytoskeletal organization and are capa - ble to differentiate into mature myotubes . However , within the ﬁrst postnatal week coﬁlin2 mutant mice developed striking features of a protein aggregate myopathy . Like in the patients , the critical defect of coﬁlin2 mouse mutants occured in skeletal muscle and Please cite this article in press as : Gurniak , C . B . , et al . , Severe protein aggregate myopathy in a knockout mouse model points to an essential role of coﬁlin2 in sarcomeric actin exchange and muscle maintenance . Eur . J . Cell Biol . ( 2014 ) , http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . ejcb . 2014 . 01 . 007 ARTICLE IN PRESS G Model EJCB - 50764 ; No . of Pages 15 C . B . Gurniak et al . / European Journal of Cell Biology xxx ( 2014 ) xxx – xxx 11 not in other tissues with coﬁlin2 expression . Patients show normal cardiac development and physiology , and also our coﬁlin2 mouse mutants showed normal anatomy , relative size and organization of the heart . This is very interesting , given that in adult heart muscle coﬁlin2 is the only expressed ADF / coﬁlin isoform ( see also Suppl . Fig . 1A ) . This indicates that , unlike in skeletal muscle , coﬁlin2 is not essential in heart . Indeed , we showed that in skeletal muscle , but not heart , smooth muscle (cid:2) - actin accumulates , suggesting that in the early postnatal heart (cid:2) - actin subunit exchange is not criti - cal or that coﬁlin2 - independent pathways exist . The mortality of coﬁlin2 mutant mice steeply increased after postnatal day 10 . His - tological analysis revealed a strong hypertrophic diaphragm ( data not shown ) , similar to what has been described in patients with muscular dystrophies . Histological analyses of coﬁlin2 mutant mice at P7 revealed typical signs of myoﬁbrillar disintegration . Striated muscle ﬁbers showed a high degree of size variation with pathological hyper - trophic ﬁbers of type I ( slow ﬁbers ) , suggesting that slow ﬁbers are more dependent on coﬁlin2 activity . In contrast to previous reports on a different coﬁlin2 mouse model ( Agrawal et al . , 2012 ) , we did not observe a ﬁber type disproportion in our coﬁlin2 mutants . In cof2 − / − skeletal muscle the sarcomeric structure was disrupted and cytoskeletal components such as ﬁlamin C , (cid:2) - actinin and desmin were found in protein aggregates . In coﬁlin2 mutants the structural integrity of myoﬁbrils and the extra - sarcomeric cytoskeleton are compromised as indicated by abnormal (cid:2) - actinin and desmin patterns . Desmin , the main inter - mediate ﬁlament protein in skeletal and cardiac muscle cells forms a three - dimensional scaffold around myoﬁbrillar Z - discs , thereby interlinking neighboring myoﬁbrils and connecting the myoﬁb - rillar apparatus to nuclei , the subsarcolemmal cytoskeleton and cytoplasmic organelles such as mitochondria ( Li et al . , 1996 ; Milner et al . , 2000 ; Reipert et al . , 1999 ) . In coﬁlin2 mutant mice the desmin network was disrupted , leading to the clustering of mitochondria and mislocalization of nuclei . In contrast , the integrity of the sar - colemma was preserved in coﬁlin2 mutants as suggested by the regular pattern of dystroglycan and dystrophin , which as part of the sarcoglycan heteromeric complex links the extracellular matrix to the cytoskeleton ( Böhm and Roberts , 2009 ; Wheeler , 2003 ) . Using phalloidin staining , F - actin was seen accumulated along the muscle ﬁber . Given that phalloidin should only stain ﬁl - amentous actin with a regular F - actin conformation , but not unstructured , denatured actin , we propose that the observed pro - tein aggregates in the disrupted sarcomeres of coﬁlin2 mutants represent collapsed F - actin ﬁlaments , which then coalesce into larger bundles and aggregates , containing multiple sarcomeric and extrasarcomeric proteins . However , we found no evidence for nemaline rods , which are deﬁned as Z - disc protein - containing myoﬁbrillar remnants ( Vandebrouck et al . , 2010 ) . It should be men - tioned that the phenotype of our mouse model differs in several aspects from a previously described coﬁlin2 mouse model , in which nemaline bodies , minicores and slow ﬁber predominance have been described ( Agrawal et al . , 2012 ) . We did not observe these changes , but instead found pathologically hypertrophic slow ﬁbers , internal nuclei , subsarcolemmal vesicles and increased autophagy . These differences could be due to genetic background variations or a variable penetrance of symptoms . The situation in human patients also showed , that identical coﬁlin2 point mutations could lead to variable phenotypes ( Ockeloen et al . , 2012 ) , suggesting that certain aspects of the phenotype might also depend on modiﬁer genes . Given the fact that initial myoﬁbril formation is not coﬁlin2 - dependent and that the observed phenotype reﬂects progressive muscle degeneration , the question occurred which molecular pro - cesses are controlled by coﬁlin2 that are essential for sarcomere maintenance . And second , why are ADF and coﬁlin1 not able to rescue the coﬁlin2 deﬁciency , even though they are co - expressed during the critical early postnatal stage . In embryonic muscle , depolymerizing factors such as ADF / coﬁlins as well as proﬁlin and (cid:3) - thymosin are abundantly expressed to maintain high concentrations of G - actin , while their levels decrease when actin polymerizes at later stages of muscle development ( Ono , 2010 ) . This view might be oversimplifying the complex process of initial sarcomeric actin assembly and subse - quent isoform switching , since we could show high expression of G - actin binding proteins ( proﬁlin1 , ADF , coﬁlin1 ) even in postnatal skeletal muscle , at a time point when sarcomeric structures have already been formed . It seems more likely that these G - actin binding proteins continue to have supporting functions ( such as buffering G - actin levels or promoting nucleation ) as long as actin ﬁlaments have to turn over , e . g . during (cid:2) - actin isoform switch or regeneration . Previous reports had stated that coﬁlin2 was not detectable in adult muscle cells ( Mohri et al . , 2000 ) , and that ADF is not present in postnatal skeletal muscle ( Agrawal et al . , 2012 ) . To resolve these conﬂicting results , we generated isoform - speciﬁc and high afﬁnity antibodies ( Jönsson et al . , 2012 ) , which enabled us to study the expression and localization of ADF , coﬁlin1 and coﬁlin2 in myoblasts and postnatal skeletal muscle development . Our data clearly show that coﬁlin2 is expressed in adult skeletal muscle and that coﬁlin1 and ADF are also expressed in early postnatal skeletal muscle . Genetically we demonstrated that ADF is not required for skeletal muscle formation ( Bellenchi et al . , 2007 ) . Coﬁlin1 , in contrast , controls epithelial - mesenchymal tran - sition and migration of muscle precursor cells , and early muscle development therefore critically depends on coﬁlin1 ( Gurniak et al . , 2005 ) . It remains puzzling , why ADF and coﬁlin1 are not able to substitute the functions of coﬁlin2 , since biochemically all three depolymerizing factors are similar . Small , but signiﬁcant quanti - tative differences in their activities and regulation might account for these ﬁndings . For example Vartiainen et al . showed that coﬁlin2 has a higher afﬁnity for ATP - actin monomers than ADF and coﬁlin1 and therefore displays a weaker actin depolymeriz - ing activity ( Vartiainen et al . , 2002 ) . Also at steady state , coﬁlin2 rather promotes actin ﬁlament assembly , an activity that might also be important for the postnatal maintenance of sarcomeric structures . Nevertheless , we hypothesize that additional important biochemical differences must exist among the ADF / coﬁlin family members , which have not yet been resolved . Possibly , the different ADF / coﬁlins can distinguish different (cid:2) - actin isoforms or even ﬁla - ment conformations , and our localization studies in myoblasts and myotubes might shed some light on this question . In myoblasts only coﬁlin2 , but not ADF and coﬁlin1 co - localized with vinculin - positive F - actin structures , and especially in myotubes the localization was different for all three ADF / coﬁlin iso - forms . We found coﬁlin1 localizing to the overlap zone and coﬁlin2 next to the Z - line where it might interact with the pointed ends of actin ﬁlaments . ADF on the other hand showed a rather dif - fuse staining throughout the sarcomere . In the literature there is some controversy concerning the localization of muscle coﬁlins . In chicken it was found at the I - band ( Nakashima , 2005 ) , while in cul - tured mouse and human cells it was diffusely distributed ( Mohri et al . , 2000 ) , or localized to the Z - band ( Papalouka et al . , 2009 ) . The different sarcomeric localization of ADF , coﬁlin1 , and coﬁlin2 could be due to unknown third party binding partners , or perhaps locally different F - actin properties ( conformation , ATP loading , modiﬁcations ) . Recent work has suggested , that in cells actin ﬁl - aments can have locally distinct conformation domains dependent on mechanical stress or on side binding proteins . For example , ten - sion applied to actin ﬁlaments can inhibit the severing activity by coﬁlin ( Hayakawa et al . , 2011 ) . Along the same lines , tropomyosins covering the side of actin ﬁlaments might either inhibit coﬁlin / ADF Please cite this article in press as : Gurniak , C . B . , et al . , Severe protein aggregate myopathy in a knockout mouse model points to an essential role of coﬁlin2 in sarcomeric actin exchange and muscle maintenance . Eur . J . Cell Biol . ( 2014 ) , http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . ejcb . 2014 . 01 . 007 ARTICLE IN PRESS G Model EJCB - 50764 ; No . of Pages 15 12 C . B . Gurniak et al . / European Journal of Cell Biology xxx ( 2014 ) xxx – xxx binding , or synergize in promoting ﬁlament turnover ( Gunning et al . , 2008 ; Kuhn and Bamburg , 2008 ; Yu and Ono , 2006 ) . It is possible that different tropomyosins mark actin ﬁlaments for the different coﬁlin / ADF isoforms . In striated muscle , actin ﬁlaments have to remain dynamic . The half - life of actin in the rat myocardium was reported on the order of days ( Zak et al . , 1977 ) , while the exchange rate of actin subunits within myoﬁbrils was estimated to be on the order of hours ( Martonosi et al . , 1960 ) . Importantly , during late embry - onic and early postnatal life sarcomeric actin ﬁlaments are ﬁrst built from smooth muscle (cid:2) - actin , are then exchanged to car - diac muscle (cid:2) - actin and ﬁnally to skeletal muscle (cid:2) - actin ( Lyons et al . , 1991 ; Tondeleir et al . , 2009 ; Vandekerckhove et al . , 1986 ; Woodcock - Mitchell et al . , 1988 ) . It is still an open question , how (cid:2) - actin isoforms can be released from and incorporated into existing ﬁlaments . In muscle , gelsolin and the ADF / coﬁlin family are abun - dantly expressed F - actin severing and depolymerizing proteins . Gelsolin can be excluded as an essential player , since in muscle it is mainly secreted from muscle cells to generate plasma gelsolin ( Kwiatkowski et al . , 1988 ; Yin et al . , 1984 ) , and gelsolin knockout mice did not show any muscle defects ( Witke et al . , 1995 ) . Our data rather support the assumption that coﬁlin2 is the critical ‘ (cid:2) - actin exchange factor’ in the sarcomere . In our coﬁlin2 mutants the amount of smooth muscle (cid:2) - actin protein accu - mulates , while the respective mRNA levels were unchanged with respect to controls . This suggests that smooth muscle (cid:2) - actin requires coﬁlin2 to be released from the sarcomere . As a consequence , the non - physiological actin isoform remains in the sarcomere and thereby deterioration of the structure and function of myoﬁbrils initiates . Data by Skwarek - Maruszewska et al . showed that during sarcomere assembly an excess of actin ﬁlaments is produced and that contractility is required to rec - ognize non - productive ﬁlaments that are subsequently destined for depolymerization by ADF / coﬁlin ( Skwarek - Maruszewska et al . , 2009 ) . The small increase of skeletal muscle (cid:2) - actin protein in coﬁlin2 mutant muscle correlated with an increased transcription rate , suggesting that the underlying mechanism of up - regulation is different from smooth muscle (cid:2) - actin . Conceivably , an increase of skeletal muscle (cid:2) - actin is a stress response due to the progressive degeneration of myoﬁbrils ( Fuchs et al . , 2008 ) . With respect to the disturbed ‘ (cid:2) - actin isoform exchange’ our observations on F - actin / G - actin ratios were also informative . Nei - ther for smooth muscle (cid:2) - actin , nor for skeletal muscle (cid:2) - actin did we see a signiﬁcant difference of F / G - actin ratios between coﬁlin2 mutants and controls . This result shows that the F / G - actin balance is maintained even in the absence of coﬁlin2 , possibly due to the activities of ADF and coﬁlin1 . Another explanation would be that in vivo coﬁlin2 indeed functions as an ‘ (cid:2) - actin exchange factor’ , rather than a simple F - actin depolymerizing factor . In summary , our data provide a mechanism how the ADF / coﬁlin family members and in particular coﬁlin2 participate in the remod - eling of sarcomeric F - actin by exchanging (cid:2) - actin isoforms and thereby contribute to muscle maintenance . Methods Mice The conditional targeting construct for coﬁlin2 was generated by Red / ET - recombination , based on genomic C57BL / 6J DNA from BAC clone RP23 - 226D14 . One loxP site was inserted into the ﬁrst intron 600 bp downstream of the ATG start codon of coﬁlin2 , the second loxP site was placed 4 . 6 kbp downstream of the stop codon of coﬁlin2 , about 200 bp after the transcription termination site ( see Fig . 1A ) . The neomycin resistance cassette , ﬂanked by FRT sites , was inserted upstream just next to the second loxP site . The targeting construct was transfected into J1 - ES cells ( 129Sv ) ( Li et al . , 1992 ) . Positive clones were identiﬁed by Southern blotting after diges - tion of genomic DNA with PacI using a probe from the 3 (cid:3) UTR of coﬁlin2 . Recombined ES clones were injected into C57BL / 6J blas - tocysts and transferred to foster mothers ( EMBL Monterotondo , transgenic facility ) . Heterozygous ( cof2 wt / FRTneo - ﬂx ) germline off - spring were crossed to transgenic mice expressing Flp recombinase ( Dymecki , 1996 ) to excise the neomycin resistance cassette . The resulting heterozygous mice ( cof2 wt / ﬂx ) were crossed to Cre - deleter ( Schwenk et al . , 1995 ) mice . Deletion of exons 2 to 4 generated the coﬁlin2 knockout allele ( cof2 − ) . Heterozygous ( cof2 wt / − ) mice were crossed to produce homozygous coﬁlin2 knockout mice ( cof2 − / − ) . To delete coﬁlin2 speciﬁcally in brain , conditional cof2 ﬂx / ﬂx mice were crossed with the Nestin - cre driver line ( Tronche et al . , 1999 ) . Primers used for genotyping of the cof2 wt , cof2 ﬂx and cof2 − alleles were Cof2F1 ( GCAGCCGTGGCTAAGACG ) , Cof2R1 ( CATACT - GCTCATTCATCCTTC ) and Cof2R2 ( GCCTACTCCCCGCCTTAGTTTC ) . Genotyping primers Cof2F1 and Cof2R1 amplify 256 bp from the wildtype allele and 338 bp from the ﬂoxed allele , oligonucleotides Cof2F1 and Cof2R2 generate a 560 bp band from the coﬁlin2 knock - out allele . Mice used for this study were maintained on a mixed J1xC57BL / 6J background . Permission for generating and analysing the mutant mice was granted by the Italian health ministry through ‘Decreto n . 19 / 2005 - B’ . Southern blotting Southern blotting was performed using the Church buffer sys - tem . As probe a 450 bp PCR fragment derived from the 3 (cid:3) UTR of coﬁlin2 was used ( 3 (cid:3) UTR forward primer : GTTTGTTGAACTGCAGTG , 3 (cid:3) UTR reverse primer : GCCAATTAAGCTATGCC ) . PacI restriction digestion yielded signals at 23kbp for the coﬁlin2 wildtype allele , 10 . 2kbp for the cof2 FRTneo - ﬂx allele , 8 . 3kbp for the conditional cof2 ﬂx allele and 4 . 6 kbp for the knockout cof2 − allele . Western blot analysis and F / G - actin ratios Skeletal muscle and organs were isolated and snap frozen in liq - uid nitrogen . Tissue lysates were prepared on ice in PEB lysis buffer ( 20 mM Tris pH 8 . 0 , 100 mM NaCl , 5 mM EGTA , 2 mM EDTA , 0 . 5 % ( v / v ) Triton ® X - 100 , protease inhibitors ) using a Dounce homoge - nizer . Lysates were cleared by a centrifugation at 16 . 100 × g . Protein concentrations of the cleared lysates were determined by Brad - ford assays , proteins were separated by SDS - PAGE , transferred to Immobilon - P membrane and probed with antibodies . Signals were developed using ECL reaction and exposed to ﬁlm or recorded dig - itally on a LAS4000 ( General Electric ) . In order to determine the ratios of F - actin to G - actin , after the clear spin pellets were resus - pended in a volume of SDS loading buffer adequate to the respective supernatants . Equivalent amounts were loaded on SDS - PAGE and the (cid:2) - actin isoforms detected using the respective antibodies . Quantitative real - time PCR analysis Skeletal muscle was shock frozen in liquid nitrogen . RNA was prepared using the RNeasy Kit ( Qiagen ) , quantiﬁed with NanoVue plus ( General Electric ) , DNase digested ( Promega RQ1 ) and used for cDNA synthesis ( Invitrogen ) . qPCR was performed on a BioRad CFX96 system using Life Technologies TaqMan Probes for cardiac - , smooth muscle - and skeletal muscle (cid:2) - actin labeled with FAM ® ; all samples were individually calibrated to GAPDH ( labeled with VIC ® ) using a multiplexing approach . All biological samples were run in triplicates in the same plate . To control for potential DNA contamination control reactions were run on samples without reverse transcription . qPCR data ( Cq ) were processed following the Pfafﬂ - method for relative quantiﬁcation , taking into account Please cite this article in press as : Gurniak , C . B . , et al . , Severe protein aggregate myopathy in a knockout mouse model points to an essential role of coﬁlin2 in sarcomeric actin exchange and muscle maintenance . Eur . J . Cell Biol . ( 2014 ) , http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . ejcb . 2014 . 01 . 007 ARTICLE IN PRESS G Model EJCB - 50764 ; No . of Pages 15 C . B . Gurniak et al . / European Journal of Cell Biology xxx ( 2014 ) xxx – xxx 13 the efﬁciency of ampliﬁcation of each probe calculated by a serial dilution curve . Antibodies Primary antibodies used for Western blot and immuno - ﬂuorescence : Anti - coﬁlin2 FHU1 ( Witke lab , rabbit polyclonal ) , anti - coﬁlin1 KG60 ( Witke lab , rabbit polyclonal ) , anti - ADF 7D10 ( Witke lab , mouse monoclonal ) , anti - ADF FIZ6 ( Witke lab , rab - bit polyclonal ) , anti - smooth muscle actin 224 – 236 ( provided by Jan Faix , Hannover , mouse monoclonal ) , anti - skeletal muscle actin SKA1 ( Chaponnier lab , rabbit polyclonal ) , anti - (cid:2) - actinin ( Abcam ) , anti - desmin ( Sigma , Dako ) , anti - vinculin ( Sigma ) , anti - slow skeletal myosin ( Abcam ) , anti - fast skeletal myosin ( Abcam ) , anti - proﬁlin1 ( Witke lab , rabbit polyclonal ) , anti - (cid:2) - tubulin ( Sigma ) , anti - LC3B ( Cell Signalling ) , anti - dystrophin ( Novocastra ) , anti - (cid:2) - dystroglycan ( Novocastra ) , anti - ﬁlamin C ( provided by Peter van der Ven , Bonn , rabbit polyclonal ) , anti - neuroﬁlament ( Pierce ) . Secondary antibodies : Alexa - Fluor488 Goat anti - Rabbit , Alexa - Fluor488 Goat anti - Mouse , Alexa - Fluor594 Goat anti - Mouse , Alexa - Fluor594 Goat anti - Rabbit and Alexa - Fluor647 Goat anti - Mouse ( all Invitrogen ) ; HRP labeled anti - Mouse and anti - Rabbit antibodies ( Dianova ) . F - actin was stained with Texas Red - phalloidin ( Life Tech - nologies ) , acetylcholin receptor with speciﬁc FITC - conjugated (cid:2) - bungarotoxin ( Molecular Probes ) . Histology and immunohistochemistry For cryosections hind legs or gastrocnemius muscles were diss - ected , dried on tissue , embedded in Tissue Tek and frozen in isopentane cooled in liquid nitrogen . For parafﬁn sections tissues were ﬁxed in 4 % paraformaldehyde in PBS ( phosphate buffered saline ) , incubated in PBS and dehydrated before embedding . For histochemistry 5 (cid:4) m sections were cut and stained using rou - tine procedures . Diaphragm muscles were ﬁxed for 1 h with 1 % paraformaldehyde in PBS , incubated in 0 . 1 M glycine in PBS , washed in PBS and then incubated for 5 h in 1 % Triton - X100 in PBS . Stained sections were mounted in Mowiol for microscopic analysis . Con - focal image series were performed and recorded with a LSM 780 microscope and ZEN Software ( Carl Zeiss , Germany ) . Muscle ﬁber analysis Quadriceps muscles were parafﬁn embedded , cross sectioned and stained with hematoxilin and eosin . Areas of individual ﬁbers were manually measured using Metamorph software . Electron microscopy Leg muscles were dissected and tied immediately under stretch to wooden supports . Specimens were ﬁxed in 100 mM phosphate buffer , pH 7 . 2 , containing 2 % glutaraldehyde for 12 h and dissected into 1 mm × 1 mm × 5 mm strips . After osmication and en bloc con - trasting with 1 % aqueous uranyl acetate , samples were embedded in epon . Ultrathin sections were stained with uranyl acetate and lead citrate . Electron micrographs were taken on a Philips electron microscope CM120 at an accelerating voltage of 80 kV . Myoblast culture Skeletal muscle from P3 animals was collected in HBSS on ice , cut with razor blades into slurry and incubated in 1 ml dispase ( 240 (cid:4) g / ml ) for 30 min at 37 ◦ C / 5 % CO 2 , resuspended vigorously with a Pasteur pipette and incubated for another 15 min . After addition of 1 ml 0 . 125 % Trypsin / EDTA the suspension was homog - enized with a narrow Pasteur pipette and incubated for 15 min at 37 ◦ C / 5 % CO 2 . Enzyme digestion was stopped by the addition of 5 ml growth medium ( 20 % fetal calf serum ( FCS ) , 40 mM l - glutamine , 5 U / ml penicillin - streptomycin , 2 % chick embryo extract in DMEM ) , the cell suspension was ﬁltered through a 70um strainer and plated for 45 min on collagen to remove ﬁbroblasts . Finally , non - adherent cells were grown on gelatine ( 1 % ) coated glass coverslips in growth medium . After about one week in culture differentiation of myoblasts into myotubes was induced by addition of differenti - ation medium ( 10 % horse serum , 5 U / ml penicillin - streptomycin in DMEM ) . Immunoﬂuorescence Cells were ﬁxed for 10 min with 4 % paraformaldehyde in PBS , washed with PBS , permeabilized with 0 . 1 % Triton in PBS for 10 min and blocked with 5 % normal goat serum in PBS o . n . at 4 ◦ C . Primary and secondary antibodies were diluted in 0 . 5 % normal goat serum in PBS and incubated for 3 h and 1 h at RT , respectively . Washing steps were performed with PBS . Nuclei were stained with DAPI . Coverslips were mounted with gelvatol . Cryosections were ﬁxed in acetone for 10 min and air - dried . After saturation using 5 % FCS and 1 % goat serum in PBS , primary antibodies were diluted in 10 % FCS in PBS and incubated at 4 ◦ C o . n . Sections were washed three times in PBS for 5 min each and incu - bated for 1 h with the secondary antibodies diluted in 10 % FCS in PBS . After a second washing step , slides were mounted in Mowiol . Images were acquired using the upright microscope Olympus BX51 / DP70 digital camera system and analyzed with analySIS ® software ( Olympus , Hamburg , Germany ) or a Leica DFC 420C . Acknowledgement We would like to thank Jeanette Rientjes for the cloning of the targeting construct , the EMBL Monterotondo transgenic mouse facility for blastocyst injection and animal care . We would also like to thank Prof . Dr . C . Alzheimer and Dr Tobias Huth ( Institut für Phys - iologie und Pathophysiologie , Erlangen ) for access to the confocal laser microscope . This work was supported by funding from the EMBL to W . W . F . J is a Chargé de Recherche at the CNRS . The work of R . S . and D . O . F . related to myoﬁbrillar myopathies was supported by grants from the DFG ( FOR1228 ) . Appendix A . Supplementary data Supplementary data associated with this article can be found , in the online version , at http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . ejcb . 2014 . 01 . 007 . References Abe , H . , Ohshima , S . , Obinata , T . , 1989 . A coﬁlin - like protein is involved in the regula - tion of actin assembly in developing skeletal muscle . J . Biochem . 106 , 696 – 702 . Abe , H . , Nagaoka , R . , Obinata , T . , 1993 . Cytoplasmic localization and nuclear trans - port of coﬁlin in cultured myotubes . Exp . Cell Res . 206 , 1 – 10 . Agrawal , P . B . , Greenleaf , R . S . , Tomczak , K . K . , Lehtokari , V . - L . , Wallgren - Pettersson , C . , Wallefeld , W . , Laing , N . G . , Darras , B . T . , Maciver , S . K . , Dormitzer , P . R . , Beggs , A . H . , 2007 . Nemaline myopathy with minicores caused by mutation of the CFL2 gene encoding the skeletal muscle actin - binding protein - coﬁlin - 2 . Am . J . Hum . Genet . 80 , 162 – 167 . Agrawal , P . B . , Joshi , M . , Savic , T . , Chen , Z . , Beggs , A . H . , 2012 . Normal myoﬁbrillar development followed by progressive sarcomeric disruption with actin accu - mulations in a mouse Cﬂ2 knockout demonstrates requirement of coﬁlin - 2 for muscle maintenance . Hum . Mol . Genet . 21 , 2341 – 2356 . Bamburg , J . R . , Wiggan , O . P . , 2002 . ADF / coﬁlin and actin dynamics in disease . Trends Cell Biol . 12 , 598 – 605 . Bamburg , J . R . , McGough , A . , Ono , S . , 1999 . Putting a new twist on actin : ADF / coﬁlins modulate actin dynamics . Trends Cell Biol . 9 , 364 – 370 . Please cite this article in press as : Gurniak , C . B . , et al . , Severe protein aggregate myopathy in a knockout mouse model points to an essential role of coﬁlin2 in sarcomeric actin exchange and muscle maintenance . Eur . J . Cell Biol . ( 2014 ) , http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . ejcb . 2014 . 01 . 007 ARTICLE IN PRESS G Model EJCB - 50764 ; No . of Pages 15 14 C . B . Gurniak et al . / European Journal of Cell Biology xxx ( 2014 ) xxx – xxx Bellenchi , G . C . , Gurniak , C . B . , Perlas , E . , Middei , S . , Ammassari - Teule , M . , Witke , W . , 2007 . N - coﬁlin is associated with neuronal migration disorders and cell cycle control in the cerebral cortex . Genes Dev . 21 , 2347 – 2357 . Böhm , S . V . , Roberts , R . G . , 2009 . Expression of members of the dystrophin , dystro - brevin , and dystrotelin superfamily . Crit . Rev . Eukaryot . Gene Expr . 19 , 89 – 108 . Carlier , M . F . , Laurent , V . , Santolini , J . , Melki , R . , Didry , D . , Xia , G . X . , Hong , Y . , Chua , N . H . , Pantaloni , D . , 1997 . Actin depolymerizing factor ( ADF / coﬁlin ) enhances the rate of ﬁlament turnover : implication in actin - based motility . J . Cell Biol . 136 , 1307 – 1322 . Clarkson , E . , Costa , C . F . , Machesky , L . M . , 2004 . Congenital myopathies : diseases of the actin cytoskeleton . J . Pathol . 204 , 407 – 417 . Donner , K . , Ollikainen , M . , Ridanpää , M . , Christen , H . - J . , Goebel , H . H . , de Visser , M . , Pelin , K . , Wallgren - Pettersson , C . , 2002 . Mutations in the beta - tropomyosin ( TPM2 ) gene – a rare cause of nemaline myopathy . Neuromuscul . Disord . 12 , 151 – 158 . Dymecki , S . M . , 1996 . Flp recombinase promotes site - speciﬁc DNA recombination in embryonic stem cells and transgenic mice . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . U . S . A . 93 , 6191 – 6196 . Fuchs , B . , Zumstein , M . , Regenfelder , F . , Steinmann , P . , Fuchs , T . , Husmann , K . , Heller - mann , J . , Jost , B . , Hodler , J . , Born , W . , Gerber , C . , 2008 . Upregulation of (cid:2) - skeletal muscle actin and myosin heavy polypeptide gene products in degenerating rota - tor cuff muscles . J . Orthop . Res . 26 , 1007 – 1011 . Gunning , P . , O’Neill , G . , Hardeman , E . , 2008 . Tropomyosin - based regulation of the actin cytoskeleton in time and space . Physiol . Rev . 88 , 1 – 35 . Gurniak , C . B . , Perlas , E . , Witke , W . , 2005 . The actin depolymerizing factor n - coﬁlin is essential for neural tube morphogenesis and neural crest cell migration . Dev . Biol . 278 , 231 – 241 . Hayakawa , K . , Tatsumi , H . , Sokabe , M . , 2011 . Actin ﬁlaments function as a tension sensor by tension - dependent binding of coﬁlin to the ﬁlament . J . Cell Biol . 195 , 721 – 727 . Hosoda , A . , Sato , N . , Nagaoka , R . , Abe , H . , Obinata , T . , 2007 . Activity of coﬁlin can be regulated by a mechanism other than phosphorylation / dephosphorylation in muscle cells in culture . J . Muscle Res . Cell Motil . 28 , 183 – 194 . Ikeda , S . , 2003 . Aberrant actin cytoskeleton leads to accelerated proliferation of corneal epithelial cells in mice deﬁcient for destrin ( actin depolymerizing fac - tor ) . Hum . Mol . Genet . 12 , 1029 – 1037 . Johnston , J . J . , Kelley , R . I . , Crawford , T . O . , Morton , D . H . , Agarwala , R . , Koch , T . , Schäffer , A . A . , Francomano , C . A . , Biesecker , L . G . , 2000 . A novel nemaline myopathy in the Amish caused by a mutation in troponin T1 . Am . J . Hum . Genet . 67 , 814 – 821 . Jönsson , F . , Gurniak , C . B . , Fleischer , B . , Kirfel , G . , Witke , W . , 2012 . Immunological responses and actin dynamics in macrophages are controlled by N - coﬁlin but are independent from ADF . PLoS ONE 7 , e36034 . Kley , R . A . , Hellenbroich , Y . , van der Ven , P . F . M . , Fürst , D . O . , Huebner , A . , Bruchert - seifer , V . , Peters , S . A . , Heyer , C . M . , Kirschner , J . , Schröder , R . , Fischer , D . , Muller , K . , Tolksdorf , K . , Eger , K . , Germing , A . , Brodherr , T . , Reum , C . , Walter , M . C . , Lochmüller , H . , Ketelsen , U . P . , Vorgerd , M . , 2007 . Clinical and morphological phenotype of the ﬁlamin myopathy : a study of 31 German patients . Brain 130 , 3250 – 3264 . Kuhn , T . B . , Bamburg , J . R . , 2008 . Tropomyosin and ADF / coﬁlin as collaborators and competitors . Adv . Exp . Med . Biol . 644 , 232 – 249 . Kwiatkowski , D . J . , Mehl , R . , Izumo , S . , Nadal - Ginard , B . , Yin , H . L . , 1988 . Muscle is the major source of plasma gelsolin . J . Biol . Chem . 263 , 8239 – 8243 . Laing , N . G . , Wilton , S . D . , Akkari , P . A . , Dorosz , S . , Boundy , K . , Kneebone , C . , Blum - bergs , P . , White , S . , Watkins , H . , Love , D . R . , 1995 . A mutation in the alpha tropomyosin gene TPM3 associated with autosomal dominant nemaline myopa - thy . Nat . Genet . 9 , 75 – 79 . Lázaro - Diéguez , F . , Aguado , C . , Mato , E . , Sánchez - Ruíz , Y . , Esteban , I . , Alberch , J . , Knecht , E . , Egea , G . , 2008 . Dynamics of an F - actin aggresome generated by the actin - stabilizing toxin jasplakinolide . J . Cell Sci . 121 , 1415 – 1425 . Levine , B . , Kroemer , G . , 2008 . Autophagy in the pathogenesis of disease . Cell 132 , 27 – 42 . Li , E . , Bestor , T . H . , Jaenisch , R . , 1992 . Targeted mutation of the DNA methyltransferase gene results in embryonic lethality . Cell 69 , 915 – 926 . Li , Z . , Colucci - Guyon , E . , Pinc¸ on - Raymond , M . , Mericskay , M . , Pournin , S . , Paulin , D . , Babinet , C . , 1996 . Cardiovascular lesions and skeletal myopathy in mice lacking desmin . Dev . Biol . 175 , 362 – 366 . Lyons , G . E . , Buckingham , M . E . , Mannherz , H . G . , 1991 . (cid:2) - Actin proteins and gene transcripts are colocalized in embryonic mouse muscle . Development 111 , 451 – 454 . Maciver , S . K . , Harrington , C . R . , 1995 . Two actin binding proteins , actin depoly - merizing factor and coﬁlin , are associated with Hirano bodies . Neuroreport 6 , 1985 – 1988 . Maciver , S . K . , Zot , H . G . , Pollard , T . D . , 1991 . Characterization of actin ﬁlament severing by actophorin from Acanthamoeba castellanii . J . Cell Biol . 115 , 1611 – 1620 . Martonosi , A . , Gouvea , M . A . , Gergely , J . , 1960 . Studies on actin III . G - F transforma - tion of actin and muscular contraction ( experiments in vivo ) . J . Biol . Chem . 235 , 1707 – 1710 . McGough , A . , Pope , B . , Chiu , W . , Weeds , A . , 1997 . Coﬁlin changes the twist of F - actin : implications for actin ﬁlament dynamics and cellular function . J . Cell Biol . 138 , 771 – 781 . McHugh , K . M . , Crawford , K . , Lessard , J . L . , 1991 . A comprehensive analysis of the developmental and tissue - speciﬁc expression of the isoactin multigene family in the rat . Dev . Biol . 148 , 442 – 458 . Milner , D . J . , Mavroidis , M . , Weisleder , N . , Capetanaki , Y . , 2000 . Desmin cytoskeleton linked to muscle mitochondrial distribution and respiratory function . J . Cell Biol . 150 , 1283 – 1298 . Mohri , K . , Takano - Ohmuro , H . , Nakashima , H . , Hayakawa , K . , Endo , T . , Hanaoka , K . , Obinata , T . , 2000 . Expression of coﬁlin isoforms during development of mouse striated muscles . J . Muscle Res . Cell Motil . 21 , 49 – 57 . Munsie , L . N . , Truant , R . , 2012 . The role of the coﬁlin - actin rod stress response in neu - rodegenerative diseases uncovers potential new drug targets . BioArchitecture 2 , 204 – 208 . Nagaoka , R . , Kusano , K . , Abe , H . , Obinata , T . , 1995 . Effects of coﬁlin on actin ﬁlamen - tous structures in cultured muscle cells : intracellular regulation of coﬁlin action . J . Cell Sci . 108 ( Pt 2 ) , 581 – 593 . Nakashima , K . , 2005 . Two mouse coﬁlin isoforms , muscle - type ( MCF ) and non - muscle type ( NMCF ) , interact with F - actin with different efﬁciencies . J . Biochem . 138 , 519 – 526 . Nowak , K . J . , Wattanasirichaigoon , D . , Goebel , H . H . , Wilce , M . , Pelin , K . , Donner , K . , Jacob , R . L . , Hübner , C . , Oexle , K . , Anderson , J . R . , Verity , C . M . , North , K . N . , Iannaccone , S . T . , Müller , C . R . , Nürnberg , P . , Muntoni , F . , Sewry , C . , Hughes , I . , Sutphen , R . , Lacson , A . G . , Swoboda , K . J . , Vigneron , J . , Wallgren - Pettersson , C . , Beggs , A . H . , Laing , N . G . , 1999 . Mutations in the skeletal muscle alpha - actin gene in patients with actin myopathy and nemaline myopathy . Nat . Genet . 23 , 208 – 212 . Nowak , K . J . , Ravenscroft , G . , Laing , N . G . , 2012 . Skeletal muscle (cid:2) - actin diseases ( actinopathies ) : pathology and mechanisms . Acta Neuropathol . ( Berl . ) 125 , 19 – 32 . Ockeloen , C . W . , Gilhuis , H . J . , Pfundt , R . , Kamsteeg , E . J . , Agrawal , P . B . , Beggs , A . H . , Dara Hama - Amin , A . , Diekstra , A . , Knoers , N . V . A . M . , Lammens , M . , van Alfen , N . , 2012 . Congenital myopathy caused by a novel missense mutation in the CFL2 gene . Neuromuscul . Disord . 22 , 632 – 639 . Ono , S . , 2010 . Dynamic regulation of sarcomeric actin ﬁlaments in striated muscle . Cytoskeleton 67 , 677 – 692 . Ono , S . , Minami , N . , Abe , H . , Obinata , T . , 1994 . Characterization of a novel coﬁlin isoform that is predominantly expressed in mammalian skeletal muscle . J . Biol . Chem . 269 , 15280 – 15286 . Ono , S . , Abe , H . , Obinata , T . , 1996 . Stimulus - dependent disorganization of actin ﬁla - ments induced by overexpression of coﬁlin in C2 myoblasts . Cell Struct . Funct . 21 , 491 – 499 . Ono , S . , Baillie , D . L . , Benian , G . M . , 1999 . UNC - 60B , an ADF / coﬁlin family protein , is required for proper assembly of actin into myoﬁbrils in Caenorhabditis elegans body wall muscle . J . Cell Biol . 145 , 491 – 502 . Papalouka , V . , Arvanitis , D . A . , Vaﬁadaki , E . , Mavroidis , M . , Papadodima , S . A . , Spiliopoulou , C . A . , Kremastinos , D . T . , Kranias , E . G . , Sanoudou , D . , 2009 . Mus - cle lim protein interacts with coﬁlin 2 and regulates F - actin dynamics in cardiac and skeletal muscle . Mol . Cell . Biol . 29 , 6046 – 6058 . Pelin , K . , Hilpelä , P . , Donner , K . , Sewry , C . , Akkari , P . A . , Wilton , S . D . , Wattanasirichai - goon , D . , Bang , M . L . , Centner , T . , Hanefeld , F . , Odent , S . , Fardeau , M . , Urtizberea , J . A . , Muntoni , F . , Dubowitz , V . , Beggs , A . H . , Laing , N . G . , Labeit , S . , la Chapelle , de , A . , Wallgren - Pettersson , C . , 1999 . Mutations in the nebulin gene associated with autosomal recessive nemaline myopathy . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . U . S . A . 96 , 2305 – 2310 . Reipert , S . , Steinböck , F . , Fischer , I . , Bittner , R . E . , Zeöld , A . , Wiche , G . , 1999 . Associa - tion of mitochondria with plectin and desmin intermediate ﬁlaments in striated muscle . Exp . Cell Res . 252 , 479 – 491 . Schröder , R . , Schoser , B . , 2009 . Myoﬁbrillar myopathies : a clinical and myopatho - logical guide . Brain Pathol . 19 , 483 – 492 . Schwenk , F . , Baron , U . , Rajewsky , K . , 1995 . A cre - transgenic mouse strain for the ubiquitous deletion of loxP - ﬂanked gene segments including deletion in germ cells . Nucleic Acids Res . 23 , 5080 – 5081 . Shimizu , N . , Obinata , T . , 1986 . Actin concentration and monomer – polymer ratio in developing chicken skeletal muscle . J . Biochem . 99 , 751 – 759 . Skwarek - Maruszewska , A . , Hotulainen , P . , Mattila , P . K . , Lappalainen , P . , 2009 . Contractility - dependent actin dynamics in cardiomyocyte sarcomeres . J . Cell Sci . 122 , 2119 – 2126 . Tondeleir , D . , Vandamme , D . , Vandekerckhove , J . , Ampe , C . , Lambrechts , A . , 2009 . Actin isoform expression patterns during mammalian development and in pathology : insights from mouse models . Cell Motil . Cytoskeleton 66 , 798 – 815 . Tronche , F . , Kellendonk , C . , Kretz , O . , Gass , P . , Anlag , K . , Orban , P . C . , Bock , R . , Klein , R . , Schütz , G . , 1999 . Disruption of the glucocorticoid receptor gene in the nervous system results in reduced anxiety . Nat . Genet . 23 , 99 – 103 . Van Troys , M . , Huyck , L . , Leyman , S . , Dhaese , S . , Vandekerkhove , J . , Ampe , C . , 2008 . Ins and outs of ADF / coﬁlin activity and regulation . Eur . J . Cell Biol . 87 , 649 – 667 . Vandebrouck , A . , Domazetovska , A . , Mokbel , N . , Cooper , S . T . , Ilkovski , B . , North , K . N . , 2010 . In vitro analysis of rod composition and actin dynamics in inherited myopathies . J . Neuropathol . Exp . Neurol . 69 , 429 – 441 . Vandekerckhove , J . , Bugaisky , G . , Buckingham , M . , 1986 . Simultaneous expression of skeletal muscle and heart actin proteins in various striated muscle tissues and cells . A quantitative determination of the two actin isoforms . J . Biol . Chem . 261 , 1838 – 1843 . Vartiainen , M . K . , Mustonen , T . , Mattila , P . K . , Ojala , P . J . , Thesleff , I . , Partanen , J . , Lap - palainen , P . , 2002 . The three mouse actin - depolymerizing factor / coﬁlins evolved to fulﬁll cell - type - speciﬁc requirements for actin dynamics . Mol . Biol . Cell 13 , 183 – 194 . Wattanasirichaigoon , D . , Swoboda , K . J . , Takada , F . , Tong , H . - Q . , Lip , V . , Iannaccone , S . T . , Wallgren - Pettersson , C . , Laing , N . G . , Beggs , A . H . , 2002 . Mutations of the slow muscle alpha - tropomyosin gene , TPM3 , are a rare cause of nemaline myopathy . Neurology 59 , 613 – 617 . Please cite this article in press as : Gurniak , C . B . , et al . , Severe protein aggregate myopathy in a knockout mouse model points to an essential role of coﬁlin2 in sarcomeric actin exchange and muscle maintenance . Eur . J . Cell Biol . ( 2014 ) , http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . ejcb . 2014 . 01 . 007 ARTICLE IN PRESS G Model EJCB - 50764 ; No . of Pages 15 C . B . Gurniak et al . / European Journal of Cell Biology xxx ( 2014 ) xxx – xxx 15 Wheeler , M . , 2003 . Sarcoglycans in vascular smooth and striated muscle . Trends Cardiovasc . Med . 13 , 238 – 243 . Witke , W . , Sharpe , A . H . , Hartwig , J . H . , Azuma , T . , Stossel , T . P . , Kwiatkowski , D . J . , 1995 . Hemostatic , inﬂammatory , and ﬁbroblast responses are blunted in mice lacking gelsolin . Cell 81 , 41 – 51 . Woodcock - Mitchell , J . , Mitchell , J . J . , Low , R . B . , Kieny , M . , Sengel , P . , Rubbia , L . , Skalli , O . , Jackson , B . , Gabbiani , G . , 1988 . Alpha - smooth muscle actin is transiently expressed in embryonic rat cardiac and skeletal muscles . Differentiation 39 , 161 – 166 . Yin , H . L . , Kwiatkowski , D . J . , Mole , J . E . , Cole , F . S . , 1984 . Structure and biosyn - thesis of cytoplasmic and secreted variants of gelsolin . J . Biol . Chem . 259 , 5271 – 5276 . Yu , R . , Ono , S . , 2006 . Dual roles of tropomyosin as an F - actin stabilizer and a regulator of muscle contraction in Caenorhabditis elegans body wall muscle . Cell Motil . Cytoskeleton 63 , 659 – 672 . Zak , R . , Martin , A . F . , Prior , G . , Rabinowitz , M . , 1977 . Comparison of turnover of several myoﬁbrillar proteins and critical evaluation of double isotope method . J . Biol . Chem . 252 , 3430 – 3435 .