http : / / arj . sagepub . com Action Research DOI : 10 . 1177 / 1476750306063992 2006 ; 4 ; 205 Action Research Marcus Foth Network action research http : / / arj . sagepub . com / cgi / content / abstract / 4 / 2 / 205 The online version of this article can be found at : Published by : http : / / www . sagepublications . com can be found at : Action Research Additional services and information for http : / / arj . sagepub . com / cgi / alerts Email Alerts : http : / / arj . sagepub . com / subscriptions Subscriptions : http : / / www . sagepub . com / journalsReprints . nav Reprints : http : / / www . sagepub . com / journalsPermissions . nav Permissions : http : / / arj . sagepub . com / cgi / content / refs / 4 / 2 / 205 SAGE Journals Online and HighWire Press platforms ) : ( this article cites 12 articles hosted on the Citations © 2006 SAGE Publications . All rights reserved . Not for commercial use or unauthorized distribution . at PENNSYLVANIA STATE UNIV on February 12 , 2008 http : / / arj . sagepub . com Downloaded from Network action research Marcus Foth Queensland University of Technology , Australia ABSTRACT Current literature stresses the significance of networks and net - work theory in both social as well as technical domains . Not only is the role of networked technologies ( such as mobile phones and the internet ) in everyday life being scrutinized , but network theory is re - shaping an understanding of how social change and community interaction occurs . In this article , I build on these developments to propose network action research as a method - ological variant of the action research family . I propose that network action research is a timely and appropriate research methodology to guide studies that involve people , place and technology and to meet the challenges that stem from the changing nature of community interaction and social formations within a network society . I outline how technology can be used to operationalize and support network action research . Examples from two case studies are used to illustrate key aspects of the methodology . Action Research Volume 4 ( 2 ) : 205 – 226 Copyright© 2006 SAGE Publications London , Thousand Oaks CA , New Delhi www . sagepublications . com DOI : 10 . 1177 / 1476750306063992 A R T I C L E KEY WORDS • action research • communicative ecology • community informatics • networked individualism • research ethics • research methodology • social networks 205 © 2006 SAGE Publications . All rights reserved . Not for commercial use or unauthorized distribution . at PENNSYLVANIA STATE UNIV on February 12 , 2008 http : / / arj . sagepub . com Downloaded from Introduction Current literature draws attention to the significance of networks ; social net - works ; technical networks ; the process of networking ; and the design of network applications in almost all areas of society including science , economy and com - munity . Scientists such as Barabási ( 2003 ) and Watts ( 2003 ) extend the field of application for network theory beyond pure science and technology by offering an extensive overview of how processes such as market transactions , business operations , viral infections and social behaviour between people can be described as networks . Castells ( 2000 ) coins the term ‘network society’ for the changing zeitgeist of this era . Based on the notion that network concepts are a fundamen - tal paradigm for achieving a deeper understanding in areas other than science and technology , scholars have started to acknowledge the significance of networks in the epistemology of their home disciplines , such as in the arts and humanities ( Keane , 2004 ) , urban studies ( Mitchell , 2003 ) , and community development ( Gilchrist , 2004 ) . Technology and networks , especially the internet , have become part of everyday life – at least in more developed parts of the world ( Wellman & Haythornthwaite , 2002 ) . The ubiquity of the internet and the spread of mobile phones and other network technologies afford communication patterns that change the character and quality of community interaction and engagement . In this article , I suggest that action researchers will benefit from a debate around the view that considers the network qualities of community and the implications it has on action research . I expose the relevance and capacity of using action research in the nexus of people , place and technology and discuss the shifting quality of community as networks as well as the challenges for action researchers that emerge from this shift . I propose network action research as a methodological variation that has the potential to address some of those chal - lenges . To provide empirical support , I introduce examples drawn from two case studies : an investigation of social networks in inner - city apartment buildings , and a multi - site research project on ICT for poverty reduction . The purpose of this article is to introduce and illustrate with examples a methodological variation of action research , rather than report the research projects in detail . People , place and technology in social networks The traditional view that the effects of globalization have been made possible through the global spread of information and communication networks has been refined by a notion that Robertson ( 1995 ) and later Wellman and his colleagues ( Hampton , 2001 ; Wellman , 2001 , 2002 ) popularize with the term ‘glocalization’ . The internet and other forms of global networks enable the exchange of business information and the real - time communication between corporate players across Action Research 4 ( 2 ) 206 • © 2006 SAGE Publications . All rights reserved . Not for commercial use or unauthorized distribution . at PENNSYLVANIA STATE UNIV on February 12 , 2008 http : / / arj . sagepub . com Downloaded from nations , but there is a noticeable trend towards using the global network for local interaction ( Fallows , 2004 ; Horrigan , 2001 ; Horrigan , Rainie & Fox , 2001 ; Rice , 2002 ) and social interaction ( Huysman & Wulf , 2004 ; Thurlow , Lengel & Tomic , 2004 ; Wellman et al . , 2003 ) . The majority of communication and inter - action facilitated by global networks can be categorized as social and informal and takes place within the geographic vicinity of the actors . The majority of phone calls and emails connect people within the same city , company or commu - nity . Although the widespread significance of localness in online communication and interaction is just starting to be fully realized , websites such as community networks have been used for some time in various forms to enable local inter - action , provide local information and support local activism ( Harrison & Stephen , 1999 ; Schuler , 1996 ) . These systems are usually implemented by re - appropriating existing technology that was originally designed with a different – usually commercial – context in mind . However , technology designers and devel - opers are quick to create purpose - built solutions that integrate place - based func - tions and features ( Rheingold , 2002 ) . Mobile phone manufacturers and network carriers are in the process of implementing location - aware services that range from interactive directory assistance that suggests nearby cafés and restaurants , to sending discount vouchers for a store that the mobile phone owner is physi - cally close to via SMS ( short message service ) . Location - aware applications and so - called ‘locative’ media on the internet have started to emerge , such as local grass - roots amateur journalism sites ( indymedia . org ) and neighbourhood discus - sion boards that indicate the user’s physical distance from the origin of the discussion ( upmystreet . com ) . Similarly , the new location - based service by a major search engine that is currently in beta testing ( local . google . com ) , evidences the rise of local interaction mediated by networked technology . Research that situates itself within the nexus of people , place and tech - nology has to cope with the complex sum of the individual characteristics that each variable brings to the study . The human dimension of ‘people’ contributes a fuzzy and indeterministic quality . ‘Place’ adds the imperative to ground and delimit intervention in the local context . Notions of ‘technology’ expand consid - erations around design , access , effective and ethical usage , training , maintenance and sustainability . The flexible , practice - led and local nature of action research makes it a well - suited starting point that easily adapts to changing situations in this multifaceted and cross - disciplinary environment ( Hearn & Foth , 2005 ) . At the same time , the characteristics that make action research in a sense predestined for this purpose also call for an appropriation and customization of methods for the specific context in which it is applied . Action research is an umbrella paradigm , a family of approaches of inquiry , or as Dick ( 2003 , p . 260 ) calls it , a ‘meta - methodology’ which allows a variety of underlying methods to be used under its guiding principles . Foth Network action research • 207 © 2006 SAGE Publications . All rights reserved . Not for commercial use or unauthorized distribution . at PENNSYLVANIA STATE UNIV on February 12 , 2008 http : / / arj . sagepub . com Downloaded from A couple of methodologies , some of them influenced by or related to action research , have been proposed to study the interrelationship between people and technology , including : • network ethnography ( Howard , 2002 ) ; • virtual ethnography ( Hine , 2000 ) ; • ethnographic action research ( Tacchi , Slater , & Hearn , 2003 ) ; • action research in user - centred product development ( Brandt , 2003 ) ; • participatory design ( Greenbaum & Kyng , 1991 ; Schuler & Namioka , 1993 ) ; and • interaction design ( Cooper , 1999 ; Cooper & Reimann , 2003 ) . This article points in the direction of significant developments and challenges for these human - centred methodologies and proposes a variation of action research that integrates key aspects of people , place and technology research . It is both network action research and networking action research in that it uses technology to network participants and stakeholders and takes into account the shifting quality of community as networks . The shifting quality of community as networks and emerging challenges for action researchers The focus on people in most action research usually requires a debate and defini - tion of the term ‘community’ . Over the years , social scientists have come up with a plethora of definitions for community with ‘people’ being the only common denominator . Tönnies’ ( 1887 ) image of community as ‘Gemeinschaft’ resembles small - scale , neighbourhood - based , village - like collective groups of residents which show a high level of social capital . The communication and social inter - action in this type of community is mainly from door - to - door and place - to - place ( Wellman , 2001 ) . However , with the introduction of readily available and cheap means of transportation and the rise of information and communication tech - nology , people are able to connect with a diverse range of other communication partners outside the immediate vicinity of the neighbourhood and beyond their own physical reach . Within the concept of the ‘space of flows’ , Castells ( 2001 , p . 132 ) speaks of private ‘portfolios of sociability’ that people create and maintain which now not only include family and kinship ties but also a variety of other social ties – both strong and weak – with friends , co - workers , peers and other acquaintances . The composition of the portfolio is flexible , varies according to personal circumstances , and is adjusted and shaped through the use of mobile phones , email and SMS . The use of such communication devices affords person - alization of social interaction to a degree that enables people to shift from door - to - door and place - to - place relationships to person - to - person and role - to - role relationships ( Wellman , 2001 , 2002 ) . Action Research 4 ( 2 ) 208 • © 2006 SAGE Publications . All rights reserved . Not for commercial use or unauthorized distribution . at PENNSYLVANIA STATE UNIV on February 12 , 2008 http : / / arj . sagepub . com Downloaded from People operate a variety of roles in diverse networks . The roles that people act in and switch between seamlessly can include family roles , job positions , committee and volunteer memberships , and informal roles such as friends , sup - porters , counsellors , neighbours , etc . Each of these roles is a node that is linked to a wider social network in which the person may also fulfill bridging functions between networks . These networks make up a communicative ecology that is very unlike a collective ‘Gemeinschaft’ and resembles more a swarm ( Satchell , 2003 ) or an urban tribe ( Watters , 2003b ) . As such , they present a challenge to collectivist images of ‘community’ that are sometimes found in action research . Action researchers try to reach out and interact with members of a commu - nity in order to animate participation and engagement in cycles of critical inquiry , reflection and action . The shifting quality of community as networks means that action researchers need to be aware of the networked , swarming and fluid com - municative behaviour of community members . The imperative of action research to feed the results of inquiry and reflection back into the community action cycle requires a process of information dissemination that works within and across networks . Therefore , the capacity of community members to operate as nodes and along links of social networks has direct implications for the communication strategies that action researchers and community participants apply in their day to day operations . A collective approach may entail the distribution of information flyers and newsletters , liaison with community leaders , setting up community steering committees and focus groups , and information evenings for the wider com - munity . Although action research projects that follow such procedures can certainly demonstrate the rigour and academic validity of their interventions , actions and findings , the question remains whether the community engagement process is in fact representative of the community at large . It also needs to be demonstrated that ‘communities of inquiry within communities of practice’ ( Reason & Bradbury , 2001 , p . 2 ) have been formed that are indicative not just of the symptomatic and apparent issues and problems in the community but of the actual causes and underlying circumstances . Table 1 provides an overview of the emerging challenges that arise from a conventional approach towards action research that regards community as col - lective only and thus ignores the network dimension of community interaction . This view is contrasted with potential responses by a network approach towards action research . Action research challenges and responses These are just some of the questions that action researchers face on an ongoing basis . Network action research is not the holy grail that will answer them all , but it is a valuable exercise to consider and appropriate network strategies that may Foth Network action research • 209 © 2006 SAGE Publications . All rights reserved . Not for commercial use or unauthorized distribution . at PENNSYLVANIA STATE UNIV on February 12 , 2008 http : / / arj . sagepub . com Downloaded from Action Research 4 ( 2 ) 210 • Table 1 Action research challenges and responses Emerging challenges of a collective Responses from a network approach approach towards action research towards action research How can action researchers ensure that Network action research maps existing the views of community leaders and informal social networks and seeks to members of focus groups are in fact integrate them into the communication representative of all community members ? mix . Are recruiting and communication strategies Instead of one - to - many and many - to - many suitable for all personality types found within ‘broadcast - style’ information exchange the community , or is there a chance that media , network action research harnesses some members of the community will be informal peer - to - peer channels that provide intimidated by large open discussion forums a more private , intimate and ethnographic or put off by time intensive workshops way of communicating with community and thus will their voices remain unheard ? members . Will previously unheard community voices Network action research taps into the remain unheard because collective communi - capillary communicative structure of cation strategies are not finely grained communities and provides means to enough to recognize marginalized voices ? channel information ‘upwards’ . Members of social clusters and their Network action research is wary of the notion immediate surrounds usually show a very that the most motivated volunteers are the homogenous set of political opinions and best suited participants and encourages attitudes . Yet , is there a process to mediate other community members to make between opinion leaders that also informs themselves heard by allowing them to discussion by integrating less well participate despite little effort or time represented but perhaps crucial and commitment . ethical points of view ? How can action researchers ensure that the Network action research taps into the open learning and inquiry process and capillary communicative structure of subsequent results that community leaders communities and provides means to and volunteers are encouraged to engage channel information ‘downwards’ . in will spread through the community at large and reach members that are not actively participating in the project ? What factors influence participation and Network action research is weaved into engagement and how could levels of existing communicative structures that are participation and engagement be already in place for existing purposes , so it increased through different outreach and usually does not require an additional communication strategies ? work commitment . Does the action research process try to Network action research allows members elicit tacit knowledge from community to participate in their natural work and members by allowing them to act and living environment . It also encourages reflect in their natural work and living creative expression beyond the written environment instead of reporting on their word or verbal speech , thus allowing a action outside of it ? Can they easily and wider range of data formats and tacit conveniently participate in the project forms of knowledge to be considered . whilst pursuing their day to day activities ? © 2006 SAGE Publications . All rights reserved . Not for commercial use or unauthorized distribution . at PENNSYLVANIA STATE UNIV on February 12 , 2008 http : / / arj . sagepub . com Downloaded from contribute a first step towards a solution to some of these issues . Communication is key in action research , and network action research may bring about an addi - tion to , or variation of , existing communication strategies that are more suitable to dealing with communities and other social formations in the network society . Operationalizing network action research In the following , ways to operationalize network action research are suggested . Network action research does not mean that the entire research momentum is driven by technology . Technology is more and more becoming part of everyday life , and action researchers certainly have to take this into account , but some communities may still be in the process of coming to terms with issues of ICT access and usage . However , in any case , it is necessary to first focus on strategies that acknowledge the human - to - human ties and social networks that are formed and sustained in the community through existing means of communication and then look at how tools may be employed to support those strategies . Strategies are illustrated in a case study examining social networks of residents in an inner - city apartment complex in Australia . Tools are illustrated in a study of action research for poverty alleviation via ICTs conducted in conjunction with UNESCO . Strategies The following strategies are illustrated with examples drawn from a case study that examines the social and technical dimension of networks in inner - city apart - ment buildings ( Foth , 2004a , 2004b , 2004c , 2006b ) . The site for this case study is a residential building complex in a major capital of Australia which comprises of 94 one - , two - and three - bedroom units with a total of approximately 160 tenants . This case study has been running since late 2002 . The tenants in the building are mostly international students between 17 and 24 years of age who study at nearby tertiary institutions . They come from a variety of national and cultural backgrounds including Asia ( mostly Singapore , Japan , China , Taiwan , Korea , India , Saudi Arabia , Oman ) , North America , and Europe ( mostly Scandinavia , Germany , UK ) . The agenda of the action research approach in this case is guided by specific objectives to analyse and understand the social fabric of residents in urban neigh - bourhoods and how information and communication technology , especially internet - based tools and applications , can be used to facilitate neighbourhood connections and social networks between residents . The study also looks at ( a ) the process of installing and customizing existing , mostly open source tools to facilitate community building and to establish an online community network , and Foth Network action research • 211 © 2006 SAGE Publications . All rights reserved . Not for commercial use or unauthorized distribution . at PENNSYLVANIA STATE UNIV on February 12 , 2008 http : / / arj . sagepub . com Downloaded from – in a more advanced stage – at ( b ) the design and development process , both online and offline , to create purpose - built solutions that take into account the specific requirements of a place - based community , as opposed to a virtual com - munity . The research in the case study looks at each sub - network found . Initially , through an online survey and follow - up interviews , it involved participants in a critical reflection of how their current activities can be improved and possibly contribute to making the apartment complex a better place to live for everyone . Barbecue nights are organized to welcome new residents and to provide an informal opportunity for all residents to meet each other . The goal is to raise awareness for what different residents contribute to the community and how this implicit pool of interests , skills and cultural backgrounds can be harnessed by the community . This process also involves reflecting upon the variety of social networks present in the building and their activities , and promoting openness and social permeability to join other networks . The term ‘community’ is often used as a convenient container by researchers and external stakeholders to refer collectively to a more or less well defined group of people . However , members of this so - called ‘community’ may or may not feel inclined to play an active part in it . Or they may refer to this group that they are apparently a part of , as ‘community’ , too , without being able to specify in any more detail what constitutes membership to this community . 1 The residents I interact with in my case study may be part of a neighbourhood community for the purpose of defining and delimiting a research group , but they may not know their neighbours nor feel a sense of belonging to the building , street , block or suburb they live in . Moreover , in interviews it became clear that they feel more strongly about the social networks they actively create and main - tain themselves and which include social ties to others who may not be part of the neighbourhood community . The guiding principle of network action research moves away from a pure homogenous model of community and acknowledges the fluid , dynamic , swarm - ing , chaotic qualities of social networks that are present in communities . The primary objective of network action research is to map the existing ( formal and informal ) networks that operate within the community and initiate small partici - patory action research projects within each of them . The task of the action researcher is then to link and harness each of these sub - networks of inquiry to form a larger networked community of practice . Several smaller social networks already existed at the case study site . Some residents know each other through attending the same classes at university . Others meet to play table tennis , pool or soccer . The local area network in the building facilitates multi - user network games to be played by some tenants across floors and apartments . Some participants also reported that they like to share video games , DVDs and CDs with other residents in the building . In addition , Action Research 4 ( 2 ) 212 • © 2006 SAGE Publications . All rights reserved . Not for commercial use or unauthorized distribution . at PENNSYLVANIA STATE UNIV on February 12 , 2008 http : / / arj . sagepub . com Downloaded from most two - and three - bedroom apartments in the building are shared , and so their inhabitants represent small networks of flatmates who may in turn be connected to other residents in the building through other kinds of social ties . The communicative structure that network action research acts upon , resembles less the conventional image of a ‘battalion’ that is collective , highly structured and formalized , and more the image of an ‘anthill’ that appears to be chaotic and unstructured from the outside , but is highly efficient and networked on the inside . The process of critical inquiry , reflection and action takes place in multiple instances within multiple networks . Instead of multiple volunteers participating in one action research project , network action research encourages participants to initiate multiple action research sub - projects that are networked to form a larger action research project on the level of the meta - network . Figure 1 illustrates this concept by contrasting the communicative ecology of conven - tional action research initiatives with that of network action research . The principles and processes of fostering social ( non - technical ) networking in communities have been well documented by Gilchrist ( 2004 ) . Some of these principles include : establishing a warm rapport with representatives of all net - works that are present in the community , creating opportunities for networking to occur , forming bridging links between those networks , and negotiating access and trust in order to encourage participation through flat , comforting and informal communication procedures that easily feed information across other networks and into the meta - network with a minimum amount of distracting informational noise . The action researcher’s task is to monitor the communica - tive ecology of the community and provide additional meta - networking nodes that act as an interface between different stakeholders to allow the free flow of information and experience exchange . The action researcher involves the community of residents in a mapping exercise to create a rough inventory of the social networks that live in the build - ing . Some of these social networks do not have a strong self - awareness and Foth Network action research • 213 Figure 1 Communicative structures in conventional versus network action research © 2006 SAGE Publications . All rights reserved . Not for commercial use or unauthorized distribution . at PENNSYLVANIA STATE UNIV on February 12 , 2008 http : / / arj . sagepub . com Downloaded from members may be affiliated with a network ‘ex officio’ due to their national origin or study programme without feeling a strong sense of belonging . Some examples of the social networks identified within the communicative ecology of the apart - ment building are as follows : • National groupings are the most obvious form of informal syndication . Some residents , especially from the USA , move into the building as part of a group booking by the university . They then form networks on the basis of their common national origin which provide peer support to help during the initial phase of orientation or even culture shock . Apart from the Americans , other strong groupings in the building are the Singaporeans and the Scandinavians . • Study clusters are based on similar degree programmes and academic disci - plines , such as IT , engineering and business . Participants explained that they think study groups would be beneficial to set up to prepare for exams and assignments and to exchange study notes . However , without help it is diffi - cult to identify other residents who study in similar fields . • A number of residents who either study IT or are highly computer literate volunteer to support other residents in hardware and software issues and look after the maintenance of the building’s IT infrastructure . This group is paramount in developing an online community network that provides a resident directory and facilitates interaction and networking amongst resi - dents as well as between residents and the on - site managers . This group is also well connected technically , through online games and instant messenger applications . • Other networks form around interest - based commonalities , such as the ‘rugby league fans’ or the ‘movie buffs’ who re - purpose the common room as a social space to watch sports broadcasts and host themed movie nights ( the theme of the first series for example was ‘movies made in Australia’ ) . Selected members of these and other social networks become action researchers in their own right who pursue their individual project initiatives ( study groups , movie nights , travel excursions , website design , etc . ) by looking at the situation and context not just from one global perspective top - down , but from their per - sonal perspective within their own terms of reference ( Hearn & Foth , 2005 ) . The personal take that every participant brings to the networked effort ensures that participants see the relevance of their commitment at all times and that their reflection and action is not seen as additional work but an ongoing way to improve their quality of life . They also connect with the lead researcher to form a broader network of inquiry through individual face - to - face interaction , emails and social gatherings . This meta - network drives the concerted effort towards cycles of community action and reflection and is key in operationalizing network action research . Action Research 4 ( 2 ) 214 • © 2006 SAGE Publications . All rights reserved . Not for commercial use or unauthorized distribution . at PENNSYLVANIA STATE UNIV on February 12 , 2008 http : / / arj . sagepub . com Downloaded from Figure 2 is a rough sketch of a rich picture ( Monk & Howard , 1998 ) of some of the networks in the communicative ecology of the building . It is impor - tant to note that the membership depicted here is an abstraction ; for it is over - lapping and residents are in fact members of multiple networks . A tenant from Singapore who studies IT and enjoys watching movies would be – for the purpose of describing the research process – a member of four or more social networks in the communicative ecology of the building . The thought bubbles represent con - cerns or issues of a particular network . The action researcher establishes a rapport with each social network to form the meta - network of inquiry . Instead of imposing formal communication procedures , network action research utilizes existing communicative structures in place within each network to facilitate an exchange of information between the meta - network and sub - networks and within sub - networks . The dialogic nature of network action research recognizes the hybrid quali - ties of networked individualism ( Castells , 2001 ; Wellman , 2001 , 2002 ; Wellman et al . , 2003 ) as well as the social capital in , and value of , informal social gather - ings such as a chat between flatmates , neighbours or friends over a cup of tea , or the small talk between parents whilst waiting to pick up their children from school . If community members are aware of the options available to them to feed results easily back into the meta - network , these types of interaction can be inte - Foth Network action research • 215 Figure 2 Rich picture of social networks and action research meta - network © 2006 SAGE Publications . All rights reserved . Not for commercial use or unauthorized distribution . at PENNSYLVANIA STATE UNIV on February 12 , 2008 http : / / arj . sagepub . com Downloaded from grated in critical inquiry and reflection and harnessed for the benefit of a more representative , agile , current and inclusive action research process . Although some scholars such as Putnam ( 2000 ) do not seem to recognize the value of informal communication and engagement , others acknowledge the power that slumbers in weak ties and informal social networks ( Fischer , 1982 ; Florida , 2003 ; Granovetter , 1973 ; Sobel , 2002 ; Watters , 2003a ) . Instead of relying solely on formal structures such as focus groups , steering committees and workshops , a network action researcher seeks to also map , main - tain and harness informal social networks and thus fulfils the role of a community or neighbourhood worker who not only connects the community with researchers and sponsors but also networks the networks in an effort to develop the infra - structure necessary for sustainability and ongoing learning networks . These tasks and activities may resemble the labour - intense groundwork that an ethnographer performs in the initial phases of community immersion , asset mapping and trust building ( Tacchi , Slater & Hearn , 2003 ) . The use of technology tools may come to aid and should be assessed to supplement existing communication channels and to document progress . Tools Trying to establish and maintain rapport not just with one steering committee but with a meta - network that comprises a variety of members representing different social networks and interests in the community may look like an immense and unfeasible undertaking . However , introducing flat and informal communication structures at the base and allowing participants to self - report and self - document the process of action and reflection helps in sharing responsibility and fosters a sense of achievement and social ownership . Furthermore , technology can come to the aid in communities that have access . The following section focuses on the internet and web applications , although other technologies may be appropriated such as radio or mobile phones . The internet is a technical network that is no longer used by commercial enterprises for e - business and e - commerce alone . With the emergence of social software such as wikis , discussion boards , news and recommendation systems , community networks , electronic mailing lists and blogs ( Bashaw & Gifford , 2004 ; Rheingold , 2002 ; Surman & Diceman , 2004 ) , the internet follows a very people - centred trend as a platform that allows humans to create and sustain inter - active social networks ( Davies , 2003 ; Wellman et al . , 2003 ) . Some of these tools , especially email and instant messengers , may already be in use in some com - munities , and it is essential for action researchers to be aware of the preferred communication channels that are used by members of the community to exchange information and to network ( Foth & Brereton , 2004 ) . Furthermore , technology allows us to visualize or illustrate ideas and con - Action Research 4 ( 2 ) 216 • © 2006 SAGE Publications . All rights reserved . Not for commercial use or unauthorized distribution . at PENNSYLVANIA STATE UNIV on February 12 , 2008 http : / / arj . sagepub . com Downloaded from cepts that may be too difficult to describe in words alone . Explicit speech and language and written reports may not appropriately capture action research true to the original context . The debate about recognizing the importance of tacit knowledge ( Polanyi , 1966 ) is an ongoing theme in action research , design and community literature ( Hearn & Foth , 2005 ; Rust , 2004 ) . The demand for practi - cal tools and methods to elicit , document and interpret expressions of tacit knowledge may be met through acts of sociocultural animation that provide com - munity members with opportunities for creative expression ( Foth , 2006a ) . With readily available tools for amateur and non - professional users to create images , music and videos , digital storytelling ( Falzone , 2004 ; Freidus & Hlubinka , 2002 ) is an excellent method to mobilize the tacit , non - verbal , non - written , emotional , metaphorical , playful dimensions of activity and knowledge in action research and to capture the ‘richness of events’ as postulated by Arnkil ( 2004 ) . Moreover , technical networks allow for the distribution and exchange of the products of creative expression along social networks which blurs the boundaries between producers and consumers and stimulates critical reflection and discussion across the meta - network of the community . The following case study illustrates the use of tools in network action research . It is a UNESCO - sponsored project that examines information and com - munication technologies for poverty reduction ( Foth & Tacchi , 2004 ; Slater & Tacchi , 2004 ; Tacchi , 2004 ) . Since late 2002 , a collaborative community web - site 2 supports a network of action researchers across South Asia . The site is a first step towards building a set of tools to support the exchange and communication between the lead researchers who train and support the action researchers located at different community - based media initiatives sites . It is intended to optimize such exchange for rigorous and productive research . The site is hosted in Australia and is used by a total of 43 members that include lead researchers , local action researchers , project coordinators and the team at UNESCO . Members access the site from New Delhi , Kolkata , Baduria , Bangalore , Budikote , Chennai and other places in Tamil Nadu , Darjeeling , and Uttaranchal in India ; Sitakund in Bangladesh ; Tansen and Lumbini in Nepal , Jakar in Bhutan , Uva and other places in Sri Lanka ; Brisbane in Australia ; and London in the UK . The current website offers advantages of collaborating online in that it allows the team to explore the potential of an online space for the archiving of research data from across the local initiatives ; it allows the lead researchers to support and train local researchers ; and it allows for exchanges and discussions on the data being collected and the development and application of the research . The research website provides the core of the online interaction with local net - works of field workers , supplemented by emails and online chats using instant messaging . The website integrates the functionality of the technical dimension of network action research . The four main sections of the site are a user directory , Foth Network action research • 217 © 2006 SAGE Publications . All rights reserved . Not for commercial use or unauthorized distribution . at PENNSYLVANIA STATE UNIV on February 12 , 2008 http : / / arj . sagepub . com Downloaded from an online journal , a discussion board and a file - sharing area . These are now dis - cussed in turn . Realizing the idea of networking community members has to start with offering ways for community members to find out about each other and to raise awareness of the informal networks as well as skills and experiences that are present across the community . Integrated into an asset - based community develop - ment approach ( Kretzmann & McKnight , 1993 ) , the generation and population of a community directory presents an opportunity to create a ‘white pages’ list with contact details of participants and stakeholders which may increase levels of community efficacy ( Carroll & Reese , 2003 ) . The directory can be categorized according to individual and group ( that is , social network ) membership . Com - bined with separate mailing lists for each of these entities , the directory acts as a starting point for networking the networks and can be used to broadcast or specifically channel information between participants and feed results back to the community at large . The process of critical inquiry and reflection on an individual level is supported through online journals or blogs to write up , or paste in , field notes that are an important research tool in this project . Each researcher has their own journal to submit their postings . They act as a personal diary that participants use to record notes , events , experiences and observations , and copy and paste information into from email , instant messaging or chat communication . Journals support both private and public entries , the latter can be used to share thoughts and reflection with other participants who can then comment on these public entries . The online journal is also a means of documenting progress that is driven by community participants . Instead of interview recordings and meeting minutes that require a dedicated transcriber or secretary , journals involve users in the documentation process itself which in turn helps to share ownership and responsibility , support transparency and accountability , and maintain rigour by collecting rich accounts of personal reflections . Whereas the journal is the preferred communication tool on the individual and social network level , the discussion board provides a communicative outlet for the collective meta - network of inquiry and practice . As shown in Figure 3 , it is divided into multiple discussion forums according to research themes or com - munity issues and documents network as well as collective action and progress . Postings are of research data such as interview transcripts and also , of analysis and draft papers . Results from the individual and group reflections are fed into the discussion forums for wider circulation and debate . A discussion board is a very public and broadcast - style medium and some members of the community may not feel confident to contribute to a large unknown audience online – nor offline for that matter . Hence , it is crucial to combine it with more private and intimate communication facilities such as journals but also email , instant messag - ing and offline face - to - face interaction . Action Research 4 ( 2 ) 218 • © 2006 SAGE Publications . All rights reserved . Not for commercial use or unauthorized distribution . at PENNSYLVANIA STATE UNIV on February 12 , 2008 http : / / arj . sagepub . com Downloaded from The last major function that plays a crucial role in this project is a file - sharing area that is used to collect , store and archive all sorts of digital artefacts including written documents such as reports , meeting minutes , invitations and audiovisual files such as images , maps , photos , diagrams , recordings , songs and videos . The file - sharing area becomes a gallery to showcase the wealth of know - ledge , skills and experience and the progress made by the community . In this sense , it functions as a central online repository that reflects the virtual composi - tion of the project’s community memory . The sites have been contributing research data for more than two years . The data is posted on the website in different sections and other action researchers comment upon and critique the data , thus adding new dimensions to Foth Network action research • 219 Figure 3 Discussion board divided into forum sections and topics © 2006 SAGE Publications . All rights reserved . Not for commercial use or unauthorized distribution . at PENNSYLVANIA STATE UNIV on February 12 , 2008 http : / / arj . sagepub . com Downloaded from the analysis and new directions to the project . The research has proved important locally for individual project development and at the same time comparison of research across the meta - network has helped the research team to learn from each other’s experiences . More than this , the process of training all the researchers in the same methodology ( Tacchi et al . , 2003 ) , and storing and discussing research data in a centralized location has given us the opportunity to compare and con - trast research , and develop significant insights into the potential role of ICTs in poverty reduction . Ethics Network action research is a variation that is suitable to applying action research principles in virtual networks ( Howard , 2002 ) , but it is also a way of conducting action research in place - based communities by acknowledging , mapping and harnessing the social networks inherent in the local community . As such , network action research calls for a dual awareness of both the human and the technical dimension of social networks . Recognizing , interpreting and acting on the net - worked quality of the communicative ecology found in these communities will help action researchers in adhering to broader ethical imperatives that form the basis for any kind of action research initiative ( Reason , 1998 ) . Instead of rigid and formal communication structures , the dispersed and intricate quality of operationalizing network action research seeks to provide more natural and convenient means to engage the entire community . However , this process of engagement is not collectivistic in that it would try to capture everyone with the same message through the same channel ; rather , it is about introducing a more democratic process that supports reflection and action out - side the traditional knowledge - generating institutions , entities and individuals . The bridge from critical inquiry and reflection towards action requires informed decision making and a way to allow the wider community to bear and take responsibility for the decisions made . With the backing of the meta - network and tools that raise awareness for issues faced by the community at large , the networking quality brings about much more transparent procedures . It helps to focus insofar as the dialectic thread in the informal , messy and sometimes chaotic day - to - day operations within the social networks remains visible and meaningful . Traditional communication structures in action research require a certain amount of confidence and willingness for public appearance from community members in order to participate and be heard . Such practice has the potential to discriminate against disenfranchized members of the community who arguably ought to have a say in the action research process to overcome any form of deprivation . The more organic structures that network action research advocates allows minorities and quiet community groups to participate in ways in which they may feel more familiar and comfortable . Informality , flat hierarchy and Action Research 4 ( 2 ) 220 • © 2006 SAGE Publications . All rights reserved . Not for commercial use or unauthorized distribution . at PENNSYLVANIA STATE UNIV on February 12 , 2008 http : / / arj . sagepub . com Downloaded from the strategic channelling of information also enables participants to remain anonymous and to keep their input confidential to a degree that a public hearing or group discussion cannot . In addition , attributes of the communication strategies of network action research assist in maintaining a credible level of accountability and rigour by making the research process , observations and interpretations public to , and discussable and challengeable by , community participants . The history , process and causal interrelationships are visible and illustrated through oral , written and audiovisual narratives that provide a rich backdrop which action and research reports can be derived from . Action research is sometimes confused with con - sulting services . Having a rich ethnographic repository available that is generated through the process and by community participants will set network action research clearly apart from mere consulting . Conclusion Action research puts a strong focus on people - centred and participatory methods and emphasizes the evaluation of practical outcomes and achievements as measures of quality and rigour as opposed to publication outcomes and the abil - ity to transfer and theorize research findings . Technology is practice - oriented and has in recent years advanced to offer more ergonomic interfaces , broader human interaction , and better user - centred applications . Many technologies that support human communication and social interaction have become ubiquitous in most developed parts of the world with associated effects on community and soci - ability . Yet , literature that reports on the potential methodological challenges and opportunities that recent technological advancements and societal changes pose for action research is rare . This article hopes to be a contribution to this field . Network action research is a methodological variation of action research that responds to the shifting quality of community interaction and that is enacted by the same set of tools that initiated and sustains the societal shift towards networks in the first place . However , as Gilchrist ( 2004 , p . 66 ) rightly points out , ‘networks in them - selves do not guarantee improved decision making or better access to informa - tion’ , but – when keeping the imperative of inclusive and diverse networks in mind – they do provide an opportunity to interact with community members in a more contemporary and rewarding fashion that is more compatible with net - worked individualism . It is important to understand network action research not as a technical methodology , but as a way to recognize the significance of human networks with - in communities and society . Technology can be a great aid to support the process , but this is not as essential as understanding and implementing the different strate - Foth Network action research • 221 © 2006 SAGE Publications . All rights reserved . Not for commercial use or unauthorized distribution . at PENNSYLVANIA STATE UNIV on February 12 , 2008 http : / / arj . sagepub . com Downloaded from gic approach that network action research follows to facilitate critical inquiry , reflection and action . Furthermore , the debate around case study research in action research , the distribution of knowledge beyond the community , the transferability of findings and interventions , and the re - appropriation of prior findings to new contexts remains current ( Arnkil , 2004 ; Dick , 2003 ; Greenwood , 2002 ; Gustavsen , 2003a ) . Scholars who question the transferability of action research outcomes have made the argument that the individual context found in a particular com - munity renders action research results and solutions idiographic . However , this does not deny the fact that new knowledge is generated in rigorous case study research . Gustavsen concludes that : To learn from practices , research needs to develop social relationships ; internally within the research community as well as in relation to other actors . ‘The new production of knowledge’ as identified by Gibbons and colleagues ( Gibbons et al . , 1994 ) is above all a network activity , and research cannot stay outside this process and remain as isolated individuals looking at the world from up above . ( 2003b , pp . 162 – 163 , emphasis added ) The formation of a sustainable meta - network and the collection of ethnographic evidence in network action research can support analytical comparison across cases and the derivation of theory in a networked community of practice of action researchers ( Keane , 2004 ) . If it is easy to set up mini case studies and initiate multiple micro action research projects within each case , the process of connect - ing the micro sites to a larger meta - network will contribute to exchanging valu - able insights , experiences and narratives that ultimately promote action research as a viable research paradigm . Acknowledgments This work is supported by ACID ( the Australasian CRC for Interaction Design ) estab - lished and supported under the Cooperative Research Centres Programme through the Australian Government’s Department of Education , Science and Training . I would like to thank Greg Hearn , Robbie Spence , Lucienne Camenzuli , Jean Burgess , Jo Tacchi , Tanya Notley , Peter Reason and the anonymous reviewers for valuable comments on earlier versions of this article . Notes 1 Another typical example is the term ‘government’ that is informally used to refer to local , state or national government agencies and entities of state power . Similar to the term ‘community’ , the usage of the term ignores the intricate networks of public agencies and associated power relationships that are mostly hidden or too complex to easily explain in the daily usage of the term . Action Research 4 ( 2 ) 222 • © 2006 SAGE Publications . All rights reserved . Not for commercial use or unauthorized distribution . at PENNSYLVANIA STATE UNIV on February 12 , 2008 http : / / arj . sagepub . com Downloaded from 2 Some tools that are valuable in supporting or supplementing existing communi - cation strategies are available in easy to install and maintain open source pack - ages ( for examples , see www . opensource . com ) . These software applications create a secure online environment with networking features to support the formation of interconnected action research clusters . It is possible to build a tiered infrastructure , that is , a separate instance of the online environment , which can be set up for each cluster with flexible levels of access privileges . In addition , they allow people to use everyday tools and applications with interfaces which they may already be familiar with from other contexts . References Arnkil , R . ( 2004 ) . Action research : Keeping up with the times ? Concepts and Trans - formation , 9 ( 1 ) , 75 – 84 . Barabási , A . - L . ( 2003 ) . Linked : How everything is connected to everything else and what it means for business , science , and everyday life . New York : Plume . Bashaw , D . , & Gifford , M . ( 2004 , 7 January ) . Top 10 open source tools for eActivism . Retrieved 7 February 2004 from http : / / www . mail - archive . com / do - wire @ lists . umn . edu / msg00121 . html Brandt , E . ( 2003 ) . Action research in user - centred product development . AI & Society , 18 ( 2 ) , 113 – 133 . Carroll , J . M . , & Reese , D . D . ( 2003 , 6 – 9 January ) . Community collective efficacy : Structure and consequences of perceived capacities in the Blacksburg electronic village . Paper presented at the 36th Hawaii International Conference on System Sciences ( HICSS ) , Big Island , Hawaii . Castells , M . ( 2000 ) . The rise of the network society ( 2nd ed . ) . Oxford : Blackwell . Castells , M . ( 2001 ) . Virtual communities or network society ? In The internet galaxy : Reflections on the internet , business , and society ( pp . 116 – 136 ) . Oxford : Oxford University Press . Cooper , A . ( 1999 ) . The inmates are running the asylum . Indianapolis , IN : Sams . Cooper , A . , & Reimann , R . M . ( 2003 ) . About face 2 . 0 : The essentials of interaction design . Indianapolis , IN : Wiley . Davies , W . ( 2003 ) . You don’t know me , but . . . Social capital & social software . London : The Work Foundation . Dick , B . ( 2003 ) . Rehabilitating action research : A response to Davydd Greenwood’s and Björn Gustavsen’s papers on action research perspectives in Concepts and Transformation , 7 ( 2 ) , 2002 and 8 ( 1 ) , 2003 . Concepts and Transformation , 8 ( 3 ) , 255 – 263 . Fallows , D . ( 2004 ) . The internet and daily life . Washington , DC : Pew Internet & American Life Project . Falzone , P . ( 2004 ) . Transcendent ethnography : Designing an action research approach to ethnographic film within cultures of conflict . Action Research , 2 ( 3 ) , 326 – 344 . Fischer , C . S . ( 1982 ) . To dwell among friends : Personal networks in town and city . Chicago , IL : University of Chicago Press . Florida , R . L . ( 2003 ) . Cities and the creative class . City and Community , 2 ( 1 ) , 3 – 19 . Foth , M . ( 2004a ) . Animating personalised networking in a student apartment complex through participatory design . In A . Bond , A . Clement , F . de Cindio , D . Schuler & P . van den Besselaar ( Eds . ) , Proceedings of the participatory design confer - Foth Network action research • 223 © 2006 SAGE Publications . All rights reserved . Not for commercial use or unauthorized distribution . at PENNSYLVANIA STATE UNIV on February 12 , 2008 http : / / arj . sagepub . com Downloaded from ence , Toronto , Canada , July 27 – 31 ( Vol . 2 , pp . 175 – 178 ) . Palo Alto , CA : CPSR . Foth , M . ( 2004b ) . Designing networks for sustainable neighbourhoods : A case study of a student apartment complex . In G . Johanson & L . Stillman ( Eds . ) , Com - munity informatics research network ( CIRN ) 2004 colloquium and conference proceedings . 29 Sep – 1 Oct 2004 ( Vol . 1 , pp . 161 – 172 ) . Prato , Italy . Foth , M . ( 2004c , 31 March – 2 April ) . Encouraging residents to take social ownership of an online community network through PAD : Participation , animation , design . Paper presented at the Community Network Analysis ( CNA ) Con - ference , Brighton , UK . Foth , M . ( 2006a ) . Sociocultural animation . In S . Marshall , W . Taylor & X . Yu ( Eds . ) , Encyclopedia of developing regional communities with information and com - munication technology ( pp . 640 – 645 ) . London : Idea Group Reference . Foth , M . ( 2006b , forthcoming ) . Analysing the factors influencing the successful design and uptake of interactive systems to support social networks in urban neigh - bourhoods . International Journal of Technology and Human Interaction , 2 ( 2 ) . Foth , M . , & Brereton , M . ( 2004 ) . Enabling local interaction and personalised net - working in residential communities through action research and participatory design . In P . Hyland & L . Vrazalic ( Eds . ) , Proceedings of OZCHI 2004 : Supporting community interaction . 20 – 24 Nov 2004 . Wollongong , NSW : University of Wollongong . Foth , M . , & Tacchi , J . ( 2004 ) . Ethnographic action research website . In I . Pringle & S . Subramanian ( Eds . ) , Profiles and experiences in ICT innovation for poverty reduction ( pp . 27 – 32 ) . New Delhi , India : UNESCO . Retrieved 5 September 2005 from : http : / / cirac . qut . edu . au / ictpr / downloads / unesco _ profile . pdf Freidus , N . , & Hlubinka , M . ( 2002 ) . Digital storytelling for reflective practice in com - munities of learners . ACM SIGGROUP Bulletin , 23 ( 2 ) , 24 – 26 . Gibbons , M . , Limoges , C . , Nowotny , H . , Schwartzmann , S . , Scott , P . , & Trow , M . ( 1994 ) . The new production of knowledge : The dynamics of science and research in contemporary societies . London : Sage . Gilchrist , A . ( 2004 ) . The well - connected community : A networking approach to com - munity development . Bristol : The Policy Press . Granovetter , M . ( 1973 ) . The strength of weak ties . American Journal of Sociology , 78 ( 6 ) , 1360 – 1380 . Greenbaum , J . M . , & Kyng , M . ( Eds . ) . ( 1991 ) . Design at work : Cooperative design of computer systems . Hillsdale , NJ : Lawrence Erlbaum Associates . Greenwood , D . J . ( 2002 ) . Action research : Unfulfilled promises and unmet challenges . Concepts and Transformation , 7 ( 2 ) , 117 – 139 . Gustavsen , B . ( 2003a ) . Action research and the problem of the single case . Concepts and Transformation , 8 ( 1 ) , 93 – 99 . Gustavsen , B . ( 2003b ) . New forms of knowledge production and the role of action research . Action Research , 1 ( 2 ) , 153 – 164 . Hampton , K . N . ( 2001 ) . Living the wired life in the wired suburb : Netville , glocaliza - tion and civil society . Unpublished Doctoral dissertation , University of Toronto . Harrison , T . M . , & Stephen , T . ( 1999 ) . Researching and creating community net - works . In S . G . Jones ( Ed . ) , Doing internet research : Critical issues and methods for examining the net ( pp . 221 – 241 ) . London : Sage . Hearn , G . , & Foth , M . ( 2005 ) . Action research in the design of new media and ICT systems . In K . Kwansah - Aidoo ( Ed . ) , Topical issues in communications and media research ( pp . 79 – 94 ) . New York : Nova Science . Action Research 4 ( 2 ) 224 • © 2006 SAGE Publications . All rights reserved . Not for commercial use or unauthorized distribution . at PENNSYLVANIA STATE UNIV on February 12 , 2008 http : / / arj . sagepub . com Downloaded from Hine , C . ( 2000 ) . Virtual ethnography . London : Sage . Horrigan , J . B . ( 2001 ) . Cities online : Urban development and the internet . Washing - ton , DC : Pew Internet & American Life Project . Horrigan , J . B . , Rainie , L . , & Fox , S . ( 2001 ) . Online communities : Networks that nurture long - distance relationships and local ties . Washington , DC : Pew Internet & American Life Project . Howard , P . N . ( 2002 ) . Network ethnography and the hypermedia organization : New media , new organizations , new methods . New Media & Society , 4 ( 4 ) , 550 – 574 . Huysman , M . , & Wulf , V . ( Eds . ) . ( 2004 ) . Social capital and information technology . Cambridge , MA : MIT Press . Keane , M . ( 2004 ) . Network or perish ? In R . Wissler , B . Haseman , S . A . Wallace & M . Keane ( Eds . ) , Innovation in Australian arts , media , and design : New challenges for the tertiary sector ( pp . 135 – 147 ) . Flaxton : Post Press . Kretzmann , J . P . , & McKnight , J . L . ( 1993 ) . Building communities from the inside out : A path toward finding and mobilizing a community’s assets . Chicago , IL : Institute for Policy Research . Mitchell , W . J . ( 2003 ) . Me + + : The cyborg self and the networked city . Cambridge , MA : MIT Press . Monk , A . , & Howard , S . ( 1998 ) . The rich picture : A tool for reasoning about work context . ACM SIGCHI interactions , 5 ( 2 ) , 21 – 30 . Polanyi , M . ( 1966 ) . The tacit dimension . Gloucester , MA : Peter Smith . Putnam , R . D . ( 2000 ) . Bowling alone : The collapse and revival of American com - munity . New York : Simon & Schuster . Reason , P . ( 1998 ) . Political , epistemological , ecological and spiritual dimensions of participation . Studies in Cultures , Organizations and Societies , 4 ( 2 ) , 147 – 167 . Reason , P . , & Bradbury , H . ( Eds . ) ( 2001 ) . Handbook of action research : Participative inquiry and practice . London : Sage . Rheingold , H . ( 2002 ) . Smart mobs : The next social revolution . Cambridge , MA : Perseus . Rice , R . E . ( 2002 ) . Primary issues in internet use : Access , civic and community involvement , and social interaction and expression . In L . A . Lievrouw & S . M . Livingstone ( Eds . ) , Handbook of new media : Social shaping and consequences of ICTs ( pp . 105 – 129 ) . London : Sage . Robertson , R . ( 1995 ) . Glocalization : Time - space and homogeneity - heterogeneity . In M . Featherstone , S . Lash & R . Robertson ( Eds . ) , Global modernities ( pp . 25 – 44 ) . London : Sage . Rust , C . ( 2004 ) . Design enquiry : Tacit knowledge and invention in science . Design Issues , 20 ( 4 ) , 76 – 85 . Satchell , C . ( 2003 ) . The swarm : Facilitating fluidity and control in young people’s use of mobile phones . In S . A . Viller & P . Wyeth ( Eds . ) , Proceedings of OZCHI 2003 : New directions in interaction , information environments , media and technology . 26 – 28 Nov 2003 . Brisbane , QLD : Information Environments Program , University of Queensland . Schuler , D . ( 1996 ) . New community networks : Wired for change . New York : ACM Press . Schuler , D . , & Namioka , A . ( Eds . ) . ( 1993 ) . Participatory design : Principles and prac - tices . Hillsdale , NJ : Lawrence Erlbaum Associates . Slater , D . , & Tacchi , J . ( 2004 ) . Research : ICT innovations for poverty reduction . New Foth Network action research • 225 © 2006 SAGE Publications . All rights reserved . Not for commercial use or unauthorized distribution . at PENNSYLVANIA STATE UNIV on February 12 , 2008 http : / / arj . sagepub . com Downloaded from Delhi : UNESCO . Retrieved 5 September 2005 from : http : / / cirac . qut . edu . au / ictpr / downloads / research . pdf Sobel , J . ( 2002 ) . Can we trust social capital ? Journal of Economic Literature , XL , 139 – 154 . Surman , M . , & Diceman , J . ( 2004 ) . Choosing open source : A decision making guide for civil society organizations . Retrieved 13 February 2004 from : http : / / www . commonsgroup . com / ideas / opensourceguide . html Tacchi , J . ( 2004 ) . Researching creative applications of new information and commu - nication technologies . International Journal of Cultural Studies , 7 ( 1 ) , 91 – 103 . Tacchi , J . , Slater , D . , & Hearn , G . ( 2003 ) . Ethnographic action research handbook . New Delhi : UNESCO . Retrieved 5 September 2005 from : http : / / cirac . qut . edu . au / ictpr / downloads / handbook . pdf Thurlow , C . , Lengel , L . B . , & Tomic , A . ( 2004 ) . Computer mediated communication : Social interaction and the internet . Thousand Oaks , CA : Sage . Tönnies , F . ( 1887 ) . Gemeinschaft und Gesellschaft ( 3rd ed . ) . Darmstadt , Germany : Wissenschaftliche Buchgesellschaft . Watters , E . ( 2003a ) . How tribes connect a city . In Urban tribes : Are friends the new family ? ( pp . 95 – 118 ) . London : Bloomsbury . Watters , E . ( 2003b ) . Urban tribes : Are friends the new family ? London : Bloomsbury . Watts , D . J . ( 2003 ) . Six degrees : The science of a connected age . New York : Norton . Wellman , B . ( 2001 ) . Physical place and cyberplace : The rise of personalized network - ing . International Journal of Urban and Regional Research , 25 ( 2 ) , 227 – 252 . Wellman , B . ( 2002 ) . Little boxes , glocalization , and networked individualism . In M . Tanabe , P . van den Besselaar & T . Ishida ( Eds . ) , Digital cities II : Second Kyoto workshop on digital cities ( LNCS 2362 , pp . 10 – 25 ) . Heidelberg , Germany : Springer . Wellman , B . , & Haythornthwaite , C . A . ( Eds . ) . ( 2002 ) . The internet in everyday life . Oxford : Blackwell . Wellman , B . , Quan - Haase , A . , Boase , J . , Chen , W . , Hampton , K . N . , Díaz de Isla Gómez , I . , et al . ( 2003 ) . The social affordances of the internet for networked individualism . Journal of Computer - Mediated Communication , 8 ( 3 ) . Marcus Foth is an Australian Postdoctoral Fellow . He is leading the development of network action research in the context of social networks in urban neighbourhoods and master - planned communities . His online resume is available at www . vrolik . de . Address : Institute of Creative Industries and Innovation , Queensland University of Technology , Creative Industries Precinct , Brisbane QLD 4059 , Australia . [ Email : m . foth @ qut . edu . au ] Action Research 4 ( 2 ) 226 • © 2006 SAGE Publications . All rights reserved . Not for commercial use or unauthorized distribution . at PENNSYLVANIA STATE UNIV on February 12 , 2008 http : / / arj . sagepub . com Downloaded from