, & im . Behav . , 1995 , 50 , 1219 - 1232 Visual search for cryptic stimuli in pigeons : implications for the search image and search rate hypotheses K . C . PLAISTED & N . J . MACKINTOSH Department of Experimental Psychology , University of Cambridge ( Received 27 October 1994 ; initial acceptance IO February 199 . 5 ; final acceptance 24 February 1995 ; MS . number : 4767 ) Abstract . In three experiments , detection of cryptic ‘prey’ was examined in pigeons , Columba livia , using an operant discrimination procedure and complex computer - generated stimuli . The first exper - iment manipulated the frequency with which each of two target types appeared within a session and found evidence for Tinbergen’s claims that a high - frequency target is better detected than a low - frequency target . The second experiment suggested that an uninterrupted ‘run’ of encounters with one cryptic target facilitates performance and that this facilitation does not appear when two targets appear intermixed . This is consistent with previous findings , although the experiment indicated that improve - ments in detection occur only at a certain point during learning about the features of the stimuli . Experiment 3 confirmed this and showed that the improvement in detection following a run of encounters was temporary . Since the two targets were equally cryptic , these experiments refute the idea that improved detection results from a reduction in search rate , and provide evidence consistent with the search image hypothesis . 0 1995 The Association for the Study of Animal Behaviour Camouflaged prey present a problemof discrimi - nation for predators . The problem , of course , is to discriminate the prey from the background and it is a difficult problem because many of the prey’s features will be shared by the background and there will be only a few features that distinguish prey from background . Yet , under certain circum - stances , predators sometimes show a remarkable ability to detect cryptic prey . For example , Tinbergen ( 1960 ) observed that insectivorous birds would find only a small proportion of an infrequently occurring prey , but when the density of the prey increased the predator’s efficiency increased sharply , with the consequence that although infrequent prey were selected less than their relative frequency in the patch , abundant prey were overselected . Tinbergen suggested that following several chance encounters with a fre - quent prey , predators would form a ‘searching image’ ( page 316 ) which facilitated its detection . He argued that the specific search image was abandoned when the density of that particular prey type dropped , implying that the increase in predation of that prey type was temporary . Correspondence : K . C . Plaisted , Department of Exper - imental Psychology , Downing Street , Cambridge CB2 3EB , U . K . 0003 - 3472 / 95 / 111219 + 14 $ 12 . 0010 8’ The term ‘search image’ has been used in such a variety of ways by different biologists that it is in danger of becoming theoretically meaningless . Very often the term is used to describe a change in response by the predator to camouflaged prey with little reference to the mechanism that might explain the behavioural change . It is important to distinguish between behavioural observations and possible theoretical explanations . There seem to be three critical observations . First , frequent recent chance encounters with a camou - flaged prey species result in increased predation of that type . According to Tinbergen’s hypoth - esis , this is because the adoption of a specific search image of the prey’s visual characteristics enhances its detectability . Second , there is a decrease in the predation of other available but less abundant prey types within the same feeding patch . According to the search image hypothesis , this occurs because the adoption of a search image for the abundant prey type interferes with incoming perceptual information regarding those alternative , less abundant types . Finally , the high predation of a particular prey when it is abundant will not persist if its density drops . This is assumed to be because when the rate of encounter decreases , the search image is abandoned . 1995 The Association for the Study of Animal Behaviour 1219