Molecular Biology of the Cell Vol . 16 , 2891 – 2902 , June 2005 Clues to CD2 - associated Protein Involvement in Cytokinesis □ D □ V Pascale Monzo , * Nils C . Gauthier , † Fre´de´rique Keslair , * Agne ` s Loubat , ‡ Christine M . Field , § Yannick Le Marchand - Brustel , * and Mireille Cormont * * Institut National de la Sante´ et de la Recherche Me´dicale U568 , † Institut National de la Sante´ et de la Recherche Me´dicale U627 , and ‡ Institut Fe´de´ratif de Recherche 50 , Faculte´ de Me´decine , 06107 Nice Cedex 02 , France ; and § Department of Systems Biology , Harvard Medical School , Boston , MA 02115 Submitted September 3 , 2004 ; Revised March 11 , 2005 ; Accepted March 17 , 2005 Monitoring Editor : Anne Ridley Cytokinesis requires membrane trafﬁcking coupled to actin remodeling and involves a number of trafﬁcking molecules . CD2 - associated protein ( CD2AP ) has been implicated in dynamic actin remodeling and membrane trafﬁcking that occurs during endocytosis leading to the degradative pathway . In this study , we present several arguments for its implication in cytokinesis . First , endogenous CD2AP was found concentrated in the narrow region of the midzone microtubules during anaphase and in the midbody during late telophase . Moreover , we found that CD2AP is a membrane - and not a microtubule - associated protein . Second , the overexpression of the ﬁrst two Src homology 3 domains of CD2AP , which are responsible for this localization , led to a signiﬁcant increase in the rate of cell multinucleation . Third , the CD2AP small interfering RNA interfered with the cell separation , indicating that CD2AP is required for HeLa cells cytokinesis . Fourth , using the yeast two - hybrid system , we found that CD2AP interacted with anillin , a speciﬁc cleavage furrow component , and the two proteins colocalized at the midbody . Both CD2AP and anillin were found phosphorylated early in mitosis and also CD2AP phosphorylation was coupled to its delocalization from membrane to cytosol . All these observations led us to propose CD2AP as a new player in cytokinesis . INTRODUCTION Cytokinesis is a fundamental cellular process that leads to the separation of daughter cells after mitosis . This mecha - nism involves microtubules and actin remodeling that are , in part , controlled by phosphorylation , degradation , and membrane fusion events ( Robinson and Spudich , 2000 ; Straight and Field , 2000 ; Glotzer , 2001 ) . During this process , dividing cells form a plasma membrane invagination or cleavage furrow , which is created by an actomyosin - based contractile ring that assembles under the plasma membrane . At a late stage of cytokinesis a narrow cytoplasmic bridge , deﬁned as the midbody , connects the two daughter cells . This bridge is ultimately resolved and the two cells separate , thus completing cytokinesis . Furrow ingression is accompanied by fusion of membrane vesicles with the ingressing plasma membrane ( O’Halloran , 2000 ; Finger and White , 2002 ) . A number of membrane trafﬁcking proteins were found at the division site . Septins are required for cytokinesis as well as for exocytosis in neuron ( Beites et al . , 1999 ; Field and Kellogg , 1999 ) . Several proteins needed for internalization and endocytosis also are required for cytokinesis and / or cellularization in different species , such as syntaxins ( t - SNARE ) , dynamin , clathrin , the clathrin adaptor AP - 2 , and some Rab proteins , Rab3 in sea urchin , and Rab11 and the Rab11 effector Nuf in Drosophila ( O’Halloran , 2000 ; Finger and White , 2002 ; Strickland and Burgess , 2004 ) . Furthermore , it seems that membrane fusion events are possibly linked with actin remodeling ( Burgess et al . , 1997 ; Niswonger and O’Halloran , 1997 , Emoto and Umeda , 2000 ) . Indeed , in cellularizing Drosophila embryo mutants for syntaxin 1 , a protein that is essential for cellu - larization , the lack of membrane changes is accompanied with a complete absence of the organized actin cytoskeleton associated with the furrow canals ( Burgess et al . , 1997 ) . Moreover , Dictyostelium mutants that lack clathrin fail to construct a robust contractile ring ( Niswonger and O’Halloran , 1997 ) . CD2AP , for CD2 - associated protein ( Dustin et al . , 1998 ) , plays roles in endocytic degradative pathway and actin re - modeling . In the immunological synapse of T - cells , its inter - action with the CD2 receptor was found associated with cytoskeleton reorganization ( Dustin et al . , 1998 ) . The inter - action of CD2AP with actin ( Lehtonen et al . , 2002 ) and several actin binding proteins ( Hutchings et al . , 2003 ; Lynch et al . , 2003 ) reinforced the role of CD2AP in dynamic actin remodeling process . This is also supported by its colocaliza - tion with the actin nucleation Arp2 / 3 complex and cortactin ( Welsch et al . , 2001 ) in actin dynamic - rich structures ( leading edge of lamellipodia and comet tails ) . The implication of CD2AP in degradation has been shown at different steps of the endocytic pathway . The interaction of CD2AP with en - dophilin and potentially with AP - 2 has been implicated in internalization of epidermal growth factor ( EGF ) receptors ( Brett et al . , 2002 ; Lynch et al . , 2003 ) . Recently , we have shown that interaction of CD2AP with Rab4 and c - Cbl was implicated in platelet - derived growth factor receptor traf - ﬁcking between early and late endosomes ( Cormont et al . , This article was published online ahead of print in MBC in Press ( http : / / www . molbiolcell . org / cgi / doi / 10 . 1091 / mbc . E04 – 09 – 0773 ) on March 30 , 2005 . □ D □ V The online version of this article contains supplemental mate - rial at MBC Online ( http : / / www . molbiolcell . org ) . Address correspondence to : Mireille Cormont ( cormont @ unice . fr ) . © 2005 by The American Society for Cell Biology 2891 http : / / www . molbiolcell . org / content / suppl / 2005 / 09 / 22 / E04 - 09 - 0773 . DC1 Supplemental Material can be found at : 2003 ) . In accordance with this observation , Lee et al . ( 2003 ) have shown that T - cells isolated from CD2AP (cid:1) / (cid:1) mice failed to down - regulate the T - cell receptor , although inter - nalization was not affected ( Lee et al . , 2003 ) . Finally , electron microscopic analysis of podocytes from CD2AP haploinsuf - ﬁcient mice revealed defects in the formation of multivesicu - lar bodies ( Kim et al . , 2003 ) . The interaction of CD2AP with CAPZ and cortactin , two actin binding proteins , has been involved in the down - regulation of the activated T - cell re - ceptor and EGF receptor , suggesting a link between receptor endocytosis and actin polymerization ( Hutchings et al . , 2003 ; Lynch et al . , 2003 ) . Thus , similarly to cytokinesis , membrane trafﬁc events in endocytosis seem tightly linked to actin dynamic remodeling . Because cytokinesis requires both membrane trafﬁcking and actin remodeling and because CD2AP has been in - volved in these two processes , we wondered whether CD2AP also plays a role in cytokinesis . To address this question , we looked for CD2AP distribution in dividing HeLa cells , the effect of modulating its expression , the de - termination of potential CD2AP - interacting molecules in - volved in cytokinesis and the CD2AP behavior during cell cycle . MATERIALS AND METHODS Antibodies Polyclonal antibodies against CD2AP ( H - 290 ) , monoclonal anti - Myc ( 9E10 ) , and anti - Rho GDI ( A20 ) were obtained from Santa Cruz Biotechnology ( Santa Cruz Biotechnology , CA ) . Anti - CD2AP recognizes the overexpressed CD2AP but not its homologue CIN85 ( Supplemental Figure 1 ) . Polyclonal antibodies against anillin has been described previously ( Oegema et al . , 2000 ) . Anti - (cid:1) - tubulin - Cy3 conjugate ( TUB 2 . 1 ) monoclonal antibody ( mAb ) was from Sig - ma - Aldrich ( St . Louis , MO ) . Anti - histone mAb ( clone H11 - 4 ) and anti - green ﬂuorescent protein ( GFP ) antibodies were from Roche Diagnostics ( Mann - heim , Germany ) . Fluorescein isothiocyanate ( FITC ) , Cy5 , and Texas Red - conjugated as well as horseradish peroxidase - conjugated secondary antibod - ies were from Jackson ImmunoResearch Laboratories ( West Grove , PA ) . Texas Red - conjugated phalloidin was from Molecular Probes ( Eugene , OR ) . Anti - (cid:2) - tubulin mAb ( clone DM1A ) and anti - FLAG mAb ( clone M2 ) were from Sigma - Aldrich ( St . Louis , MO ) . Polyclonal anti - Polo like kinase 1 ( Plk1 ) antibodies ( 06 - 813 ) were obtained from Upstate Biotechnology ( Lake Placid , NY ) . Anti - human transferrin receptor mAb ( H68 , 4 ) was obtained from Zymed Laboratories ( South San Francisco , CA ) . Anti - hemagglutinin ( HA ) mAb was obtained from Covance ( Berkeley , CA ) . cDNA Constructs The CD2AP and anillin full - length cDNAs ( Oegema et al . , 2000 ; Cormont et al . , 2003 ) were subcloned into the yeast two - hybrid pLexA and pACT2 vectors ( BD Biosciences Clontech , Palo Alto , CA ) . The cDNA sequences encoding for the N - terminally truncated forms of CD2AP and anillin were ampliﬁed by PCR and subcloned in frame with the sequence encoding the Gal4 - DNA binding domain of pACT2 . Various C - terminally truncated forms of CD2AP and anillin were obtained by introducing a stop codon at the desired position into pACT2 - anillin or pACT2 - CD2AP by using site - directed mutagenesis ( QuickChange kit , Stratagene , La Jolla , CA ) . Full - length CD2AP cDNA as well as sequences encoding for various truncated CD2AP forms were ampliﬁed by PCR and subcloned into pEGFP - C1 ( BD Biosciences Clontech , Palo Alto , CA ) , in frame with the sequence coding for the GFP or into pCDNA3myc . pEGFP - CD2AP - 1 - 175 was obtained by introducing a stop codon for the amino acid at position 175 by using site - directed mutagenesis . A similar approach was used to make the GST - fusion CD2AP construct into pGEX - 2T vector ( Amersham Biosciences , Piscataway , NJ ) . Cells transfection HeLa cells were grown in Dulbecco’s modiﬁed Eagle’s medium containing glutamine and supplemented with 10 % fetal bovine serum in 5 % CO 2 at 37°C . For cDNA transfections , HeLa cells were transiently transfected with Fu - GENE 6 ( Roche Diagnostics ) , as indicated by the manufacturer . For time - lapse experiments , cells were transfected by electroporation . Brieﬂy , 6 – 8 (cid:2) 10 6 HeLa cells were resuspended in 250 (cid:3) l of DMEM containing 10 (cid:3) g of DNA and 40 mM NaCl , placed in a 0 . 4 - cm gap cuvette and electroporated ( 1050 (cid:3) F , 290 V ) using an EasyJet electroporator system ( Equibio , Ashford , United Kingdom ) . This transfection procedure led to 80 – 90 % of GFP - transfected cells . For CD2AP small interfering RNA ( siRNA ) transfections , 40 – 50 % con - ﬂuent HeLa cells cultivated in DMEM 10 % fetal calf serum were used for transfection with Oligofectamine ( Invitrogen Cergy Pontoise , France ) , as in - dicated by the manufacturer . Brieﬂy , for each 35 - mm dish , 10 (cid:3) l of 10 (cid:3) M CD2AP siRNA ( sc - 29984 ; Santa Cruz Biotechnology ) was diluted into 175 (cid:3) l of Opti - MEM I ( Invitrogen SARL ) and incubated for 5 min . In parallel , 4 (cid:3) l of Oligofectamine was diluted in 11 (cid:3) l of Opti - MEM I . Diluted Oligofectamine and siRNA were mixed and incubated at room temperature for 15 min . The medium was replaced with 800 (cid:3) l of medium and the siRNA / Oligofectamine mix was added onto the cells . Cells were incubated for 36 h at 37°C in a CO 2 incubator before time - lapse observations . Cell Synchronization For synchronization experiments , HeLa cells were incubated for 16 – 20 h with 2 mM hydroxyurea or with 0 . 1 (cid:3) g / ml colcemid ( Invitrogen SARL ) leading to a G 1 / S boundary arrest and prometaphase arrest , respectively ( Dulic et al . , 1998 ; Alvarez et al . , 2001 ) . Cells were then released into the cell cycle by extensive washings , ﬁrst with phosphate - buffered saline ( PBS ) , and then with complete medium . Cell cycle analysis was performed by quantifying the DNA content using propidium iodide in a ﬂow cytometry analysis by using a FACScan apparatus ( BD Biosciences , San Jose , CA ) , as described previously ( Vindelov et al . , 1983 ) . Time - Lapse Imaging Cells were ﬁlmed for 20 h under constant conditions ( 5 % CO 2 , 37°C ) and observed by phase - contrast optics by using fully motorized Axiovert 200 microscope ( Carl Zeiss , Go¨ttingen , Germany ) and a cooled , digital charge - coupled device ( CCD ) camera ( Roper Scientiﬁc , Evry , France ) by using a 20 (cid:2) lens . Images were recorded at 1 frame / 2min and processed using MetaMorph 2 . 0 image analysis software ( Universal Imaging , Downingtown , PA ) and QuickTime pro5 software ( Apple Computer , Cupertino , CA ) . CD2AP Immunoprecipitation and (cid:1) Phosphatase Treatment HeLa cells ( synchronized or not in prometaphase ) were harvested and lysed in 500 (cid:3) l of cold 20 mM Tris - HCl , pH 7 . 4 , lysis buffer containing 137 mM NaCl , 10 mM EDTA , 1 % Triton X - 100 , 2 mM Na 3 VO 4 , 100 mM NaF , 10 mM Na 4 P 2 O 7 , and a protease inhibitor cocktail ( Complete ; Roche Diagnostics ) . The cell lysate proteins ( 1 mg ) were incubated with 10 (cid:3) g of anti - CD2AP antibody that was previously adsorbed on protein A - Sepharose beads . The immunoprecipitate was treated or not for 90 min at 30°C with 800 U of (cid:4) phosphatase ( New England BioLabs , Beverly , MA ) in the provided (cid:4) phos - phatase buffer supplemented with 2 mM MnCl 2 . Immunoprecipitated pro - teins were resuspended in 3 % SDS - containing buffer , resolved by SDS - PAGE , transferred onto polyvinylidene diﬂuoride membrane ( Immobilon - P ; Milli - pore , Bedford , MA ) , and CD2AP was immunodetected using the appropriate antibody . For (cid:4) phosphatase treatment on lysate , prometaphase - synchronized cells were harvested and homogenized in the (cid:4) phosphatase buffer and incubated with (cid:4) phosphatase for 30 min at 30°C . Proteins were denatured with SDS and resolved by SDS - PAGE as described above . HeLa Cells Fractionation Procedures Synchronized cells were harvested and homogenized in cold sucrose contain - ing buffer ( 3 mM imidazole , pH 7 . 4 , 250 mM sucrose , Complete ) . Cells were broken by 20 passages through a 22 - gauge needle and centrifuged for 10 min at 10 , 000 (cid:2) g in a cooled microcentrifuge to generate a postnuclear superna - tant . A high - speed supernatant and a membrane pellet were obtained after centrifugation of the postnuclear supernatant fo r 1 h at100 , 000 (cid:2) g at 4°C ( Optima X100 ultracentrifuge ; Beckman Coulter , Fullerton , CA ) . Membranes and cytosolic fractions were analyzed by immunoblotting using anti - CD2AP , anti - anillin , and anti - (cid:2) - tubulin antibodies . Anti - Rho GDI and anti - transferrin receptor antibodies were used as cytosolic and membrane controls for the fractionation procedure , respectively . Cytoskeletal fractions were obtained after extraction of cytosolic proteins as described previously ( Scaife et al . , 2003 ) . Brieﬂy , HeLa cells were incubated 2 min at 37°C in extraction buffer containing 80 mM PIPES , pH 6 . 7 , 1 mM EGTA , 1 mM MgCl 2 , 10 % glycerol , 0 . 3 % Triton X - 100 , 5 % polyethylene glycol , and Complete . Buffer containing cytosolic proteins was recovered , whereas insoluble material that remained attached on the Petri dishes was scrapped in the same volume of extraction buffer to obtain cytoskeletal proteins . Both fractions were analyzed as described above . In vitro microtubule binding assay was performed using the microtubule binding protein spin down assay kit ( Cytoskeleton , Denver , CO ) following the manufacturer’s instructions . Brieﬂy , in vitro polymerized microtubules were incubated for 30 min at room temperature with 8 (cid:3) g of puriﬁed MAP2 , 3 (cid:3) g of bovine serum albumin ( BSA ) , or 100 (cid:3) l of cytosol ( 200 (cid:3) g of proteins ) from mitotic HeLa cells . As control , the proteins were incubated in the absence of microtubules . Microtubules and soluble proteins were then sepa - rated and analyzed for the presence of MAP2 , tubulin , and BSA in the pellet and soluble fraction by coloration with Coomassie Blue or for the presence of CD2AP by immunoblotting . P . Monzo et al . Molecular Biology of the Cell 2892 Fixation , Immunoﬂuorescence , and Microscopy For analysis of the endogenous CD2AP , HeLa cells grown on collagen ( Vitro - gen 100 ; Cohesion , Palo Alto , USA ) coated cover slips were ﬁxed with methanol for 5 min at – 20°C and then washed in Tris - buffered saline ( TBS ) ( TBS containing 20 mM Tris - HCl , pH 7 . 4 , 150 mM NaCl ) . Cells were perme - abilized in TBS containing 0 . 5 % Triton X - 100 for 10 min , washed with TBS 0 . 1 % Triton X - 100 before being saturated in TBS containing 0 . 1 % Triton X - 100 , 2 % BSA , and 0 . 1 % sodium azide . Coverslips were then incubated for 1 h at room temperature with the primary antibodies diluted in saturation buffer i . e . , 1 (cid:3) g / ml anti - CD2AP antibody and 1 (cid:3) g / ml anti - histone mAb . After washing , the coverslips were incubated with FITC - conjugated anti - rabbit antibodies and Texas Red - conjugated anti - mouse IgG for 45 min at room temperature . For microtubule costaining , 1 (cid:3) g / ml anti - (cid:1) - tubulin - Cy3 conju - gate mAb was added together with the secondary antibodies . To analyze the GFP - fusion proteins , transfected HeLa cells grown on collagen - coated cover - slips were ﬁxed for 15 min in 4 % paraformaldehyde in PBS and then neu - tralized using 10 mM NH 4 Cl in PBS for 15 min . Cells were subsequently washed three times with PBS , blocked , and permeabilized using PBS contain - ing 0 . 1 % Triton X - 100 and 0 . 5 % BSA for 15 min . The coverslips were incu - bated for 1 h inblocking buffer containing 1 (cid:3) g / ml anti - histone antibodies and 1 (cid:3) g / ml anti - anillin antibodies . After washes , they were incubated with Cy5 or Texas Red - conjugated secondary antibodies for 45 min at room tem - perature . For microtubules costaining , 1 (cid:3) g / ml anti - (cid:1) - tubulin - Cy3 - conju - gated mAb was incubated together with the secondary antibodies . Coverslips were ﬁnally mounted in Mowiol 4 - 88 ( Calbiochem , Darmstadt , Germany ) on glass slides . Standard cell imaging was performed on an Axiovert 200 micro - scope ( Carl Zeiss ) equipped with a Plan - Neoﬂuar 100 (cid:2) 1 . 3 numerical aper - ture oil immersion lens and a cooled digital CCD CoolSnap HQ camera ( Roper Scientiﬁc ) by using MetaMorph image analysis software ( Universal Imaging ) . For colocalization analysis , cells were examined using scanning Figure 1 . Localization of CD2AP during cell division . Endogenous CD2AP localization was studied along the mitotic process in ran - domly growing HeLa cells . The cells were ﬁxed with methanol , as described in Materials and Methods and incubated with anti - CD2AP and anti - histone antibodies to detect chromo - somes ( a – i ) , or anti - (cid:1) - tubulin antibody cou - pled to Cy3 for the detection of microtubules ( j – o ) . CD2AP labeling was revealed using an - ti - rabbit FITC - conjugated antibody ( a , d , g , j , and m ) . Histone labeling was revealed using anti - mouse Texas Red - conjugated antibody ( b , e , and h ) . The green and red images for each mitotic ﬁgure were merged using the Adobe Photoshop software ( overlay c , f , i , l , and o ) . Bar , 10 (cid:3) m . A Role for CD2AP in Cytokinesis Vol . 16 , June 2005 2893 confocal ﬂuorescence microscopy with a PL APO 63 (cid:2) 1 . 40 oil objective ( TCS SP ; Leica Microsystems , Deerﬁeld , IL ) . The images were combined and merged using Photoshop software ( Adobe Systems , Mountain View , CA ) . Two - Hybrid Screening and Interaction Measurements in Yeast The yeast two - hybrid screening was performed as described previously ( Cor - mont et al . , 2001 , 2003 ) . Brieﬂy , the yeast reporter strain L40 was ﬁrst trans - formed with pLexA - CD2AP by using a lithium acetate - based method and grown in synthetic medium lacking tryptophan before a second transforma - tion with a mouse cDNA library made in pVP16 plasmid . Cells were plated on synthetic medium lacking leucine , tryptophan , and histidine . Growing colonies were tested for (cid:1) - galactosidase activity . Library plasmids from pos - itive clones were rescued into Escherichia coli HB101 cells plated on leucine - free medium and analyzed by transformation tests in L40 yeast and DNA sequencing . For interaction measurements , cotransformed L40 yeasts were selected on medium lacking leucine and tryptophan . The induction of the reporter gene LacZ that reveals protein – protein interaction was determined on replicate ﬁlters by using 5 - bromo - 4 - chloro - 3 - indolyl - (cid:1) - d - galactoside ( X - Gal ) as sub - strate ( Cormont et al . , 2001 ) . In Vitro Binding Assays Glutathione S - transferase ( GST ) - fused CD2AP - 1 - 175 was expressed in E . coli and puriﬁed as described previously ( Bortoluzzi et al . , 1996 ) . Ten micrograms of GST - fusion proteins was immobilized on glutathione - Sepharose beads and incubated with 45 (cid:3) l of anillin ( 1 – 300 ) transcribed and translated in vitro in the presence of [ 35 S ] methionine by using the TnT - coupled transcription - translation kit ( Promega , Madison , WI ) and pcDNA3 - myc - anillin ( 1 – 300 ) as template . After 2 - h incubation at 4°C in 20 mM HEPES buffer , pH 7 . 8 , containing 50 mM NaCl and 1 mM dithiothreitol , beads were washed twice with 20 mM HEPES buffer , pH 7 . 8 , 50 mM NaCl , and twice with 20 mM HEPES buffer containing 250 mM NaCl . Proteins still associated with beads were eluted using 3 % SDS and were then analyzed by SDS - PAGE and autoradiography . RESULTS Localization of CD2AP during Cell Division To examine a potential role of CD2AP in cytokinesis , we ﬁrst looked at its intracellular localization during cell division ( Figure 1 ) . HeLa cells were ﬁxed and coimmunolabeled for the endogenous CD2AP and chromosomes ( Figure 1 , a – i , ) or microtubules ( Figure 1 , j – o ) . During metaphase , anti - CD2AP antibody showed a diffuse labeling throughout the cell ( Figure 1 , a – c ) . During late anaphase and telophase , CD2AP was concentrated in the vicinity of the midzone microtubules ( Figure 1 , d – i ) . Moreover , CD2AP was concen - trated in the middle of the midbody during late telophase ( Figure 1 , j – l ) , and numerous interphase cells contained a bright CD2AP dot that likely corresponds to the midbody remnant ( Figure 1 , m – o ) . Similarly to the endogenous pro - tein , the full - length GFP - CD2AP protein was found local - ized in the vicinity of the midzone microtubules during late anaphase and concentrated in the middle of the midbody Figure 2 . Localization of GFP - CD2AP con - structs during cell division . ( A ) HeLa cells were transfected with the GFP - CD2AP con - struct , ﬁxed with paraformaldehyde , and costained for chromosomes by using anti - hi - stone antibodies or microtubules by using an - ti - (cid:1) - tubulin antibody coupled to Cy3 ( red ) . ( B ) HeLa cells were transfected with the GFP constructs as indicated and costained for mi - crotubules by using anti - (cid:1) - tubulin antibody coupled to Cy3 ( red ) . Images were merged using the Adobe Photoshop software . An en - largement of the midbody region is shown ( zoom / overlay ) . Bars , 10 (cid:3) m . P . Monzo et al . Molecular Biology of the Cell 2894 during late telophase . Likewise , numerous interphase cells were found to contain a bright GFP - CD2AP dot that may correspond to the midbody remnant ( Figure 2A ) . The First Two Src Homology ( SH ) 3 Domains of CD2AP Are Required for Its Localization to the Midbody Because CD2AP is a multidomain adaptor protein , we wanted to determine which CD2AP domain is required for its midbody localization during cell division . Several CD2AP constructs were generated in fusion with GFP and transfected in HeLa cells . We ﬁrst looked at the level of overexpression of the proteins , which seemed to be less than two - to threefold the level of the endogenous protein , taking into account the 50 % transfection level of the cells ( Supple - mental Figure 2A ) . Furthermore , no protein fragments of lower size were generated ( Supplemental Figure 2B ) . As shown in Figure 2B , GFP - CD2AP - ( 1 - 175 ) , a construct corre - sponding to the ﬁrst two SH3 domains of the protein , was concentrated in the middle of the midbody , as indicated by the colabeling with microtubules . By contrast , GFP - CD2AP - ( 194 - 639 ) , corresponding to the converse construct , was dis - tributed all over the cell with no particular concentration at the midbody . This experiment suggested that the ﬁrst two SH3 domains of CD2AP were responsible for its targeting to the middle of the midbody . Overexpression of CD2AP or of Its First Two SH3 Domains Affects Cytokinesis CD2AP localization at the midbody suggested that CD2AP could play a role during cytokinesis in HeLa cells . To exam - ine this possibility , we looked for the effects of overexpress - ing CD2AP or its deletion mutants on cytokinesis . HeLa cells were transfected with GFP - CD2AP , GFP - CD2AP - ( 1 - 175 ) , GFP - CD2AP - ( 194 - 639 ) , or GFP alone ( as control ) . Cells were ﬁxed 48 h posttransfection , labeled for chromosomes , and multinucleated transfected cells were counted . As shown in Figure 3 , the full - length protein or the GFP - CD2AP - ( 1 - 175 ) overexpression led to an increase in the rate of multinucle - ation , compared with the control condition . This effect was modest albeit signiﬁcant when the total population of the transfected cells was taken into account ( Figure 3B ) . To substantiate this observation , we determined the fraction of multinucleated cells as a function of protein expression lev - els by checking the ﬂuorescence intensity of the cells ( Figure 3C ) . Higher number of multinucleation events was observed with higher expression levels of GFP CD2AP or 1 - 175 mu - tant proteins . By contrast , the expression of the SH3 domains of intersectin , used as a control , did not lead to increased rate of multinucleation , nor was this construct localized within the midbody ( our unpublished observations ) . Fur - thermore , numerous cells in late telophase were counted upon GFP - CD2AP and GFP - CD2AP - ( 1 - 175 ) overexpression ( Figure 3B ) , as determined using the typical tubulin labeling . These results further substantiated our hypothesis that CD2AP plays a role in cytokinesis , and indicated that CD2AP may be involved in the latest step , the scission . To test this proposal , cells overexpressing the CD2AP mutant 1 - 175 were analyzed by time - lapse videomicroscopy ( Sup - plemental Movie 1 ) . We observed an increased number of cytokinetic failures leading to binucleated mutant cells com - pared with control cells : 10 % of failed divisions in the GFP - 1 - 175 – transfected cells versus 2 . 5 % for the GFP - transfected cells were observed in a ﬁlm of 20 - h duration . CD2AP Knockdown by siRNA Leads to a Late Defect in Cytokinesis To gain insight into a role of CD2AP in cytokinesis , the expression of the endogenous protein was decreased by siRNA transfection ( Figure 4A ) . Cells were observed 36 h ( Figure 4B and Supplemental Movie 2 ) or 72 h ( Supplemen - tal Figure 3 and Movie 3 ) posttransfection by time - lapse videomicroscopy for 20 h . Although a normal division ap - parently occurred in a large number of cells , a careful ex - amination showed that in some cases the two daughter cells were not completely separated . The complete process can be followed on the movies ( Supplemental Movies 2 and 3 ) , and Figure 4 ( and Supplemental Figure 3 ) shows a selection of frames . As stated above , mitosis seemed to proceed nor - mally ( 0 – 5 h ) , because at 6 h 00 , the two daughter cells seemed to be totally separated . However , the images ob - tained at later time points clearly show that it is not the case . Indeed , a small common cytosolic region was visible at 6 h 54 and rapidly enlarged , leading to appearance of one binucleated cell at 7 h 10 . This observation has been con - ﬁrmed by a quantitative analysis of the siRNA - treated cells Figure 3 . Overexpression of CD2AP affects cytokinesis . HeLa cells were transfected to overexpress GFP proteins as indicated . Forty - eight hours posttransfection , cells were ﬁxed and labeled for chro - mosomes to count the number of nuclei per cell or for microtubules to count midbodies . ( A ) Representative ﬁelds of cells transfected with GFP , GFP - CD2AP , and GFP - CD2AP - ( 1 - 175 ) costained for nu - clei ( in red ) . The arrows point out multinucleated cells . The exper - iment was reproduced three times , and at least 100 transfected cells were analyzed for each condition . ( B ) Fold increase in the number of multinucleated cells ( (cid:2) ) or cells linked by a midbody ( f ) , among the transfected cells , compared with the GFP conditions expressed as 1 . Results are presented as means (cid:3) SEM of three to ﬁve different experiments . ( C ) Rate of multinucleation as a function of GFP pro - teins expression level . Images of HeLa cells transfected with GFP and GFP fusion proteins were acquired using a cooled digital cam - era with constant exposure parameters . The level of expression of the GFP proteins was estimated by quantiﬁcation of pixels in a constant square displaced from cell to cell . This allows us to classify transfected cells in three groups : a group that expresses low level of GFP proteins ( (cid:4) 1 ) , a group that expressed high levels of GFP proteins ( (cid:5) 10 ) , and an intermediary group . Cells from each group were analyzed for the presence of one or more nuclei . The ﬁgure represents the mean of two independent experiments , and results are expressed as the percentage of multinucleated cells among the transfected cells . A Role for CD2AP in Cytokinesis Vol . 16 , June 2005 2895 ( Figure 5 ) . A 3 - d treatment of HeLa cells with the CD2AP siRNA led to a signiﬁcant increase in the percentage of multinucleated cells compared with a nonrelevant siRNA treatment ( 10 . 7 (cid:3) 0 . 7 vs . 1 . 8 (cid:3) 0 . 5 ) ( Figure 5 , A and B ) and in the percentage of cells at the midbody stage ( 14 . 4 (cid:3) 1 . 0 vs . 2 . 1 (cid:3) 0 . 8 ) ( Figure 5B ) . Identiﬁcation of Anillin as a CD2AP Interacting Protein The structure of CD2AP as a multidomain adaptor protein led us to search for potential interacting proteins , which could participate in its function in cytokinesis . We per - formed a yeast two - hybrid screening by using a full - length CD2AP as bait . L40 yeast was transformed with a plasmid encoding CD2AP in fusion with the DNA binding domain of LexA , which binds to speciﬁc DNA sequences upstream of HIS3 and LacZ reporter genes . The established strain was transformed with a yeast two - hybrid mouse library fused to the VP16 transcriptional activation domain . The screening led to the isolation of three clones that strongly interacted with CD2AP , but not with lamin , and that encoded for the sequence of the ﬁrst 110 amino acids of the actin binding protein anillin . Interestingly , anillin , initially identiﬁed in Drosophila melanogaster ( Field and Alberts , 1995 ) , is an evo - lutionary conserved protein required for cytokinesis ( Field and Alberts , 1995 ; Oegema et al . , 2000 ; Somma et al . , 2002 ; Berlin et al . , 2003 ; Tasto et al . , 2003 ) . The cDNAs of anillin and CD2AP were subsequently subcloned into the two - hybrid vectors pLexA and pAct2 to ensure that full - length proteins were able to interact with each other . Figure 6A shows that CD2AP interacted with anillin , independent of the vector used . Lamin was hereby used as a negative con - trol . Using various constructs , we furthermore determined that the ﬁrst two SH3 domains of CD2AP were crucial for interaction of CD2AP with anillin ( Figure 6A ) . To determine which anillin domains are involved in the interaction with CD2AP , several pAct – anillin constructs were tested for their ability to bind CD2AP . We found that the anillin N - terminal fragment ( 1 - 155 ) , which contains a proline - rich region , was required to interact with CD2AP . The PX ( P / A ) XXR consensus site has been recently identiﬁed as the target of SH3 domains of CD2AP or CIN85 ( for c - Cbl interacting protein of 85 kDa ) , which is a closely related CD2AP protein ( Kurakin et al . , 2003 ) . A careful examination of the anillin sequence led us to propose its 26 - PTAAPR - 31 sequence as a likely candidate for this interaction . Accord - ingly , substitution of arginine - 31 to alanine ( anillin - R31A ) was sufﬁcient to abolish the interaction between anillin and CD2AP in the yeast two - hybrid system ( Figure 6A ) . Using a pull - down experiment with the GST fusion containing the ﬁrst two SH3 domains of CD2AP ( GST - 1 - 175 ) , we observed an interaction with the radiolabeled in vitro translated anil - Figure 4 . CD2AP knockdown by siRNA in HeLa cells leads to a late defect in cytokinesis . HeLa cells were transfected with CD2AP siRNA by using Oligofectamine as described in Materials and Methods . ( A ) Expression of CD2AP was determined by Western blot in cell extracts prepared 60 h after transfection with CD2AP siRNA ( (cid:6) ) or Oligofectamine alone ( (cid:1) ) . We observed no change in the expression of CD2AP when cells were treated with a nonrelevant siRNA , Oligofectamine alone , or remained untreated ( our unpub - lished observation ) . A similar decrease in CD2AP expression has been observed 36 h after transfection ( our unpublished observa - tion ) . ( B ) Thirty - six hours after transfection , cells were submitted to time - lapse phase con - trast videomicroscopy for 20 h . The ﬁgure visualized HeLa cells transfected with siRNA CD2AP at 20 different time points selected from Video 2 . P . Monzo et al . Molecular Biology of the Cell 2896 lin ( 1 - 300 ) in accordance with the yeast two - hybrid results ( Figure 6B ) . We then looked whether CD2AP and anillin interaction could occur in dividing cells . We thus studied the extent of colocalization of CD2AP and anillin during mitosis . HeLa cells transfected with GFP - CD2AP cDNA were labeled for the endogenous anillin ( Figure 6D , red ) and chromosomes ( Figure 6D , blue ) . During anaphase , anillin was concen - trated into the contractile ring in the cell cortex ( Figure 6D , b ) , whereas CD2AP was localized in the vicinity of the midzone ( Figure 6D , a ) . During the late telophase , CD2AP was surrounded by an anillin ring and both proteins were colocalized at the edge of the ring ( Figure 6D , e – h ) . This result suggested that both proteins could interact during the last step of cytokinesis . To comfort this hypothesis , we de - tected an interaction between the two proteins by using a coimmunoprecipitation experiment with cells synchronized in telophase ( Figure 6C ) . After cytokinesis , the midbody anillin ring disappeared , and some anillin labeling occurred , resembling beads on a string ( 6D , i – l ) . CD2AP and Anillin Are Phosphorylated during Mitosis Because CD2AP seems to be implicated in cytokinesis , we investigated the expression of the protein throughout the cell cycle with respect to anillin ( Figure 7A ) . HeLa cells were synchronized at G 1 / S boundary and prometaphase by using hydroxyurea and colcemid treatment , respectively , and re - leased in the cell cycle after an extensive washout ( Dulic et al . , 1998 ; Alvarez et al . , 2001 ) . After hydroxyurea release , cells were synchronized in G 1 ( H0 ) , G 1 / S transition ( 6 h of release , H6 ) , and S / G 2 transition ( 10h of release , H10 ) phases , as controlled by ﬂow cytometry analysis ( Supple - mental Figure 4 ) . They were mainly in metaphase after 1 h of colcemid release ( lane C1 ) and in late telophase after 3 – 4 h ( C3 - C4 ) , as conﬁrmed by ﬂuorescence microscopy by using an anti - (cid:1) - tubulin to detect mitotic spindles and midbodies ( our unpublished data ) . Afte r 6 h ofrelease ( C6 ) , cells started to return in G 1 phase as controlled by ﬂow cytometry anal - ysis ( Supplemental Figure 4 ) . The synchronization process was validated using Plk1 expression , which markedly in - creased during mitosis , as reported previously ( Golsteyn et al . , 1994 ) . Although the overall expression level of CD2AP did not change throughout the cycle ( Figure 7A ) , the anillin expression was cell cycle regulated . Anillin was low in G 0 / G 1 phase , its expression increased as cells entered the S phase , and then progressively decreased when cells reen - tered G 1 phase ( Figure 7A , lanes C6 – C8 ) . This expression proﬁle of anillin is in agreement with the proposed model ( Field and Alberts , 1995 ) that describes a cell cycle - depen - dent anillin expression and localization . Indeed , anillin ex - pression increases with the age of the nucleus . It is very low after cell division ( early G 1 ) and increases when the cell gets closer to mitosis ( S / G 2 ) . Furthermore , in prometaphase ( C0 ) , CD2AP and anillin migrated as different species . These supplementary bands disappeared as cells entered telophase . The electrophoretic shift of both proteins was cell cycle dependent and not a result of microtubule depolymerization by colcemid treat - ment . Indeed , when cells were treated with colcemid for 1 h , a duration sufﬁcient to observe microtubules modiﬁcation , no change was observed in the mobility of either protein ( Figure 7A , control lane ) . To determine whether the mobility shift of CD2AP and anillin was due to phosphorylation , CD2AP immunoprecipitates or lysates from mitotic cells were treated with the serine / threonine / tyrosine (cid:4) phospha - tase . The mobility shift of both proteins was suppressed after (cid:4) phosphatase treatment ( Figure 7 , B and C ) leading to the conclusion that CD2AP and anillin were phosphorylated speciﬁcally in early mitosis . We further examined the CD2AP and anillin subcellular distribution along the cell cycle . HeLa cells were synchro - nized , as described above , and homogenized . Membrane fractions were separated from the cytosol , as described in experimental procedures . In untreated or S phase - synchro - nized cells ( H0 ) , CD2AP was mostly associated with mem - branes ( Figure 8A , lanes H0 and untreated ) , whereas in prometaphase - synchronized cells ( lane C0 ) CD2AP was en - riched in the cytosol fraction . By the end of mitosis , CD2AP progressively reassociated with the membrane fraction ( C1 , C3 , and C6 ) . Moreover , the CD2AP present in the cytosolic fraction of mitotic cells ( C0 , C1 , and C3 ) migrated with a higher apparent molecular weight , suggesting that phos - phorylated form of CD2AP predominantly delocalized to the cytosol . Moreover , anillin was found mostly associated with membranes during the whole cell cycle . Rho GDI and transferrin receptor used as cytosolic and membrane con - trols , respectively , for the fractionation procedure did not change during the cell cycle ( Figure 8A ) . Tubulin was found in the cytosolic fraction , a result likely due to the fact that the fractionation procedure was performed at 4°C , a tempera - ture known to induce microtubule depolymerization . Because CD2AP was found enriched as the central spindle midzone , we wondered whether CD2AP could associate with microtubule . To this aim , cytosols were separated at 37°C from insoluble material as described previously ( Scaife et al . , 2003 ) ( Figure 8B ) . CD2AP was mainly found in the insoluble fraction in control condition , whereas (cid:2) - tubulin was found both in the insoluble fraction ( polymerized mi - Figure 5 . Quantitative analysis of the effect of CD2AP knockdown by siRNA in HeLa cells . HeLa cells were transfected every 3 d with siRNA ( against CD2AP or a nonrelevant siRNA ) by using Oligo - fectamine as described in legend to Figure 4 and in Materials and Methods . The percentage of multinucleated cells and of cells at the midbody stage was determined as described in Figure 3 . ( A ) Rep - resentative ﬁelds of control cells ( treated with Oligofectamine alone ) and siRNA - treated cells in phase contrast microscopy . ( B ) Percent - age of binucleated cells or of cells at a midbody stage 3 d ( means (cid:3) SEM of 3 experiments ) or 6 d ( means (cid:3) the range of 2 determina - tions ) after the siRNA treatment . Two hundred to 350 cells were analyzed in each condition of independent experiments . A Role for CD2AP in Cytokinesis Vol . 16 , June 2005 2897 crotubules ) and in the soluble fraction ( unpolymerized tu - bulin ) . When cells were treated with colcemid for 1 h ( a duration sufﬁcient to induce microtubule depolymeriza - tion ) , CD2AP remained in the insoluble fraction , whereas (cid:2) - tubulin was shifted to the soluble fraction , suggesting that CD2AP was not bound to microtubules in interphasic cells . Last , we searched for a possible interaction of the cytosolic phosphorylated CD2AP with microtubules . To this end , a microtubule binding assay was performed using the cytosol from mitotic cells as a source of phosphorylated CD2AP ( Figure 8C ) . MAP2 , used as a control , bound to microtu - bules , but CD2AP did not . DISCUSSION In this report , we present several clues that CD2AP is im - plicated in cytokinesis in HeLa cells . The CD2AP localiza - tion in the middle of the midzone microtubules and the midbody , the signiﬁcant increase in the rate of multinucle - ation in cells overexpressing CD2AP or its ﬁrst two SH3 domains , the defect in late cytokinesis induced by CD2AP siRNA , the mitotic CD2AP phosphorylation , and its interac - tion with anillin , a speciﬁc cleavage furrow element are all in favor of this implication . Localization of CD2AP in the Midzone Microtubules Implies a Potential Role in Cytokinesis We found that CD2AP was recruited to the narrow region of the midzone . Only a restricted number of proteins typically required for cell division are normally found in this region . Among them are some kinesin isoforms , chromosomal pas - senger molecules ( such as the inner centromere molecule INCENP and the telophase disk antigen TD - 60 ) , the mitotic kinases of the Plk and Aurora families , and the regulators of the Rho / Rac GTPases ECT2 and MgcRacGAP ( Straight and Field , 2000 ; Glotzer , 2001 , 2003 ) . Unlike these molecules , we have never observed CD2AP associated either with centro - mere , kinetochores , or mitotic spindle in metaphase and early anaphase , indicating that CD2AP likely plays a role late in cytokinesis . The localization of CD2AP in the mid - zone microtubules implies that it interacts , through its two ﬁrst SH3 domains , with this specialized microtubular struc - Figure 6 . CD2AP interacts with anillin and partially colocalizes with anillin in late telo - phase . ( A ) The interacting regions of CD2AP and anillin were deﬁned using yeast two - hy - brid system . L40 reporter yeast cells were co - transformed with pLex - anillin and the indi - cated pAct2 - CD2AP domain constructs or with pLex - CD2AP and the indicated pAct2 - anillin domain constructs . Yeast cells were grown in the absence of leucine and trypto - phan , and (cid:1) - galactosidase activity was deter - mined on replicate ﬁlters using X - Gal as sub - strate . (cid:6)(cid:6)(cid:6) , blue coloration occurred within 45 min ; (cid:1) , no coloration was obtained within 8 h . The expression of all constructs was ver - iﬁed by immunodetection ( our unpublished data ) . ( B ) The ﬁrst two SH3 domains of CD2AP interact with anillin 1 - 300 fragment in vitro . GST or GST - CD2AP - ( 1 - 175 ) bound to glutathione - sepharose beads were incubated with [ 35 S ] methionine - labeled in vitro - trans - lated anillin 1 - 300 . Bound proteins were eluted , analyzed by SDS - PAGE , and sub - jected to autoradiography . ( C ) HeLa cells ex - pressing or not Myc - CD2AP were synchro - nized in late telophase , lysates were prepared , and Myc - CD2AP was immunoprecipitated using an anti - myc antibody . The presence of anillin and CD2AP was detected by immuno - blotting in immunoprecipitates ( IP myc ) . ( D ) GFP - CD2AP transfected cells ( a , e , and i ) were colabeled for anillin ( b , f , and j ) by using an anti - anillin antibody , followed by a Texas Red - coupled anti - rabbit antibody , and for chromosome detection with anti - histone anti - body followed by a Cy5 - coupled anti - mouse antibody ( c , g , and k ) . The green , blue , and red images were merged using the Adobe Photoshop software ( d , h , and l ) . Each picture represents the projection of eight serial con - focal sections . Bars , 10 (cid:3) m . P . Monzo et al . Molecular Biology of the Cell 2898 ture . However , CD2AP did not directly bind to microtubules in vitro and was neither colocalized with microtubules in interphasic cells nor with the microtubule spindle in mitotic cells . These observations suggest that CD2AP localization in the vicinity of the midzone microtubules requires speciﬁc microtubule binding proteins . Another possibility would be that CD2AP is associated with the membrane that surrounds the central spindle . An attractive idea is that this membrane could correspond to the leading edge of the ingressing cleav - age furrow , because CD2AP has been localized in the lead - ing edge of migrating cells ( Kirsch et al . , 1999 ; Welsch et al . , 2001 ; Lehtonen et al . , 2002 ) . Mitotic Phosphorylation of CD2AP Implies a Potential Role in Cell Division The mitotic phosphorylation of CD2AP supports the exis - tence of a role of CD2AP during cell division . Mitosis re - quires a complex succession of events that are highly regu - lated by phosphorylation / dephosphorylation ( Straight and Field , 2000 ; Glotzer , 2001 , 2003 ) . Furthermore , the mitotic kinases are essential for cytokinesis ( Carmena and Earn - shaw , 2003 ; Dai et al . , 2003 ; Ohkura , 2003 ) . At least two roles for mitotic CD2AP phosphorylation can be envisioned . First , it could be important for inhibition of CD2AP function in endocytosis . The phosphorylation of CD2AP is associated with its delocalization from membranes to cytosol , as de - scribed for Rab4 ( Bailly et al . , 1991 ; van der Sluijs et al . , 1992 ) . This would lead to an efﬁcient inactivation of the trafﬁcking pathway controlled by Rab4 and CD2AP during the ﬁrst step of mitosis . Second , CD2AP phosphorylation could serve to activate a particular mitotic function of the CD2AP protein . For example , the mitotic phosphorylation of the Rho - GEF ECT2 is required for its exchange activity ( Tatsumoto et al . , 1999 ) . The phosphorylation of MgcRac - GAP by Aurora B converts its RacGAP activity toward a RhoGAP activity ( Minoshima et al . , 2003 ) . Rab6KIFL , the human homologue of Rabkinesin 6 , plays a role in retro - grade trafﬁc along the Golgi in interphasic cells . Similarly , its phosphorylation by the kinase Plk1 during mitosis is required for the proper localization of Plk1 in the midzone ( Neef et al . , 2003 ) . Figure 7 . CD2AP is phosphorylated in mitosis . ( A ) HeLa cells were arrested using colcemid ( C0 - C8 ) or hydroxyurea ( H0 - H10 ) treatment for 16 – 20h , and then , released into the cell cycle with fresh drug - free medium for the indicated time . Example : H6 (cid:7) 6 h after hydroxyurea release . Cells extracts ( 20 (cid:3) g ) were analyzed by western blotting with antibodies to CD2AP and anillin . Control cells were treated for one hour with colcemid . Untreated cells are ran - domly growing cells . Plk1 was used as a synchronization control and (cid:2) - tubulin was used as a loading control . ( B ) HeLa cells were arrested in prometaphase with 0 . 1 (cid:3) g / ml colcemid , washed , and incubated in drug - free medium to permit their exit from mitosis . Samples were collected up to 3 h after colcemid removal and lysed in detergent . CD2AP was immunoprecipitated and incubated in the presence or absence of (cid:4) phosphatase , as described in Materials and Methods , before immunodetection . ( C ) Prometaphase arrested HeLa cells were lysed and incubated with (cid:4) phosphatase as described in Materials and Methods . Figure 8 . CD2AP and anillin subcellular distribution along the cell cycle . ( A ) Cells were synchronized at different points of the cell cycle using hydroxyurea ( H0 ) and colcemid ( C0 – C6 ) treatment and released into cell cycle . The anillin and CD2AP subcellular distri - bution was monitored by immunoblotting of membrane ( Mb ) and cytosolic ( Cyt ) fractions prepared from postnuclear supernatants . Untreated cells are randomly growing cells . Rho GDI was used as a cytosolic control and transferrin receptor ( TfR ) as a membrane control for the fractionation procedure . Tubulin was immunode - tected in parallel . ( B ) CD2AP did not associate with microtubules during interphase . Cells were treated or not with colcemid for 1 h , and cytosolic proteins ( Sol ) were separated from insoluble material ( Ins ) as described in Materials and Methods . Fifty micrograms of total lysates ( T ) , soluble and insoluble proteins were immunodetected for the presence of CD2AP and tubulin . ( C ) Cytosolic CD2AP from mitotic synchronized HeLa cells does not associate with microtu - bules in vitro . In vitro polymerized microtubules ( MT ) were incu - bated with 8 (cid:3) g of puriﬁed MAP2 , 3 (cid:3) g of BSA , or 100 (cid:3) l of cytosol ( 200 (cid:3) g ) for 30 min at room temperature . As control , the proteins were incubated in the absence of microtubules ( (cid:1) ) . Microtubules and soluble proteins were then separated by centrifugation through a cushion buffer . The presence of MAP2 , tubulin and BSA in the pellet ( P ) and soluble fractions ( S ) were detected by Coomassie Blue coloration , whereas the presence of CD2AP was analyzed by im - munoblotting . A Role for CD2AP in Cytokinesis Vol . 16 , June 2005 2899 CD2AP Seems to Play a Role in the Late Phase of Cytokinesis The phenotype induced by silencing of CD2AP expression is in favor of a role for this protein in a late phase of cytoki - nesis , because we observed that the scission of the daughter cells was markedly hampered . This scission step succes - sively requires the formation of a stable intercellular bridge between dividing daughter cells , the disassembly of the contractile ring , membrane remodeling events , and mid - body abscission ( Schweitzer and D’Souza - Schorey , 2004 ) . Because CD2AP seems to be involved in actin and mem - brane trafﬁcking in interphase cells , it is difﬁcult to pinpoint the exact function of CD2AP in cytokinesis . CD2AP interacts with anillin in the yeast two - hybrid system , and the two proteins are in part colocalized in intact cells . Furthermore , the two proteins were shown to interact in vitro and in the cell . Anillin is a speciﬁc furrow component involved with cytokinesis , whereas other cleavage furrow components such as septins , actin , and myosin localize elsewhere and are involved in other processes ( Field and Alberts , 1995 ; Oegema et al . , 2000 ) . The fact that PX ( P / A ) XXR motif re - quired for the interaction of anillin with CD2AP is con - served between mammals , Xenopus laevis , and D . melano - gaster strengthens an important role for this interaction . Anillin , like CD2AP , is phosphorylated in mitosis , and de - phosphorylation of both follows a similar time course . The exact role of anillin phosphorylation and its potential impli - cation in the binding to CD2AP are unknown . Taking into account their known molecular properties , at least three putative roles for their interaction could be proposed . First , the interaction between CD2AP and anillin could play a role in actin remodeling necessary for cytokinesis . In vitro , anil - lin binds and bundles ﬁlamentous actin and recruits septin proteins to actin bundles ( Field and Alberts , 1995 ; Oegema et al . , 2000 ; Kinoshita et al . , 2002 ) , whereas CD2AP is involved in the reorganization of actin in several cellular processes ( Dustin et al . , 1998 ; Schafer et al . , 2000 ; Welsch et al . , 2001 ; Lehtonen et al . , 2002 ; Hutchings et al . , 2003 ; Lynch et al . , 2003 ) . The interaction between CD2AP and anillin in late telophase could thus bring together all the multiprotein complexes necessary for the control of actin dynamics at the midbody . Second , this interaction could be involved in membrane trafﬁcking events that are required for cell cleav - age ( O’Halloran , 2000 ; Finger and White , 2002 ) . Important defects in late telophase are observed both in S2 cells lacking anillin ( Somma et al . , 2002 ) and in HeLa cells overexpressing CD2AP and CD2AP ( 1 - 175 ) or lacking CD2AP ( this study ) . Anillin - deﬁcient cells show abnormal membrane organiza - tion in the cleavage area that could be due to defective membrane trafﬁc events of intracellular vesicles to the mem - brane of the cleavage furrow ( Somma et al . , 2002 ) . Interest - ingly , syntaxin 2 and endobrevin , the two proteins involved in membrane fusion events that have been implicated in the scission ( Low et al . , 2003 ) , are associated , like CD2AP , with endosomal compartments in interphasic cells ( Wong et al . , 1998 ; Quinones et al . , 1999 ; Antonin et al . , 2000 ) . Further - more , in budding yeast , Sla1p , the orthologue of CD2AP / CIN85 , couples actin dynamics to endocytosis ( Dewar et al . , 2002 ; Warren et al . , 2002 ) , and Sla1p - deﬁcient yeast show defect in cell division , possibly due to a defect in polarized secretion toward the site of budding ( Tang et al . , 2000 ; Li et al . , 2002 ) . The interaction between anillin and CD2AP could thus be needed for a correct coordination of vesicular mem - brane trafﬁc and fusion at the level of the midbody , a process required for the scission . Third , the interaction of anillin with CD2AP could help to target anillin to a degradative pathway . Indeed , anillin expression rapidly decreased when cells went through mitosis . This is probably due to its deg - radation by a ubiquitin - mediated proteolysis ( Straight et al . , 2003 ) . Because CD2AP as well as CIN85 are involved in protein degradation in interphasic cells , and because they bind ubiquitin ligase ( Dikic , 2002 ) , they could bring ubiq - uitination machinery to anillin allowing for its degradation . No cytokinetic defect has been reported in the CD2AP knockout ( KO ) mice , although a phenotype has not been carefully looked at yet ( Shih et al . , 1999 ) , suggesting that other ( s ) protein ( s ) could compensate for the mitotic function of CD2AP . CD2AP belongs to the same family as CIN85 ( Dikic , 2002 ) . The two proteins share similar domain orga - nization and binding partners , although CD2AP ( but not CIN85 ) interacts with Rab4 ( unpublished data ) and actin ( Lehtonen et al . , 2002 ) . CIN85 , which also interacted with anillin in the yeast two - hybrid system ( our unpublished data ) , could replace CD2AP in KO mice . In accordance with this hypothesis , both CIN85 and CD2AP can compensate their roles in mediating endocytosis of receptor tyrosine kinases both in vitro and in vivo ( Dikic , personal commu - nication ) . Moreover mice lacking citron kinase , a protein involved in cytokinesis , can be obtained , and they display a cytokinesis defect only in some speciﬁc cells ( Di Cunto et al . , 2000 ) . A careful analysis of the CD2AP KO mice would be necessary to exclude that such a defect is not occurring in some cell types . Foot Process and Cleavage Furrow Similarity CD2AP is a ubiquitously expressed protein , but its expres - sion is up - regulated in specialized cells of the kidney named podocytes . Podocytes are unique cells with a complex cel - lular organization . They form particular actin - rich structures named foot processes that are needed for the glomerular ﬁltration apparatus ( Pavenstadt et al . , 2003 ) . CD2AP is in - volved in the foot process maintenance as revealed by the regression of these specialized structures in the kidney of CD2AP (cid:1) / (cid:1) mice ( Shih et al . , 1999 ) . Interestingly , in podo - cyte foot processes a complete actin - based contractile appa - ratus is present ( Asanuma and Mundel , 2003 ) . The same protein composition ( actin , myosin II , and (cid:2) - actinin ) is found in this podocyte apparatus and in the contractile ring apparatus of dividing cells . Moreover , CHO1 / MKLP1 is required to establish the antiparallel microtubule network in podocytes necessary for process formation ( Kobayashi et al . , 1998 ) as well as to form antiparallel microtubule bundles needed in the midzone for the advancement and stable closure of the cleavage furrow ( Glotzer , 2004 ) . This suggests that the molecular mechanisms involving CD2AP in both cytokinesis and the process formation in podocytes might be , at least in part , similar . ACKNOWLEDGMENTS We thank Dr . Hollenberg ( Fred Hutchison Cancer Research Center , Seattle , WA ) for the gift of mouse cDNA yeast two - hybrid library , Dr . K . Kirsch ( Boston University , School of Medicine , Boston , MA ) for the gift of human FLAG - CD2AP cDNA , Dr . S . Giordano ( Institute for Cancer Research and Treatment , Turino , Italy ) for the gift of CIN85 cDNA , and Dr . P . McPherson for the gift of the GFP - intersectin - SH3 . We thank P . Boquet , E . Lemichez , C . Treins , J . Vukmirica , V . Kaddai , and P . Gual for stimulating discussions and critical reading of manuscript and A . Doye , T . Gonzalez , and L . Boyer for technical assistance . This work was supported by the Institut National de la Sante´ et de la Recherche Me´dicale , the University of Nice - Sophia Antipolis , The Association pour la Recherche contre le Cancer ( ARC Grants 5634 and 3240 ) , the French Association against the Myopathy ( Grant 7989 ) , the Re´gion Provence Alpes Coˆte d’Azur , and the Conseil Ge´ne´ral des Alpes Maritimes . The support of Fondation Bettencourt - Schueller is gratefully acknowledged . P . M . received fellowships successively from La Ligue contre le Cancer , The P . Monzo et al . Molecular Biology of the Cell 2900 Association pour la Recherche contre le Cancer , and Fondation Bettencourt - Schueller . N . G . received support from the French Education Ministry . REFERENCES Alvarez , B . , Martinez , A . C . , Burgering , B . M . , and Carrera , A . C . ( 2001 ) . Forkhead transcription factors contribute to execution of the mitotic pro - gramme in mammals . Nature 413 , 744 – 747 . Antonin , W . , Holroyd , C . , Tikkanen , R . , Honing , S . , and Jahn , R . ( 2000 ) . The R - SNARE endobrevin / VAMP - 8 mediates homotypic fusion of early endo - somes and late endosomes . Mol . Biol . Cell 11 , 3289 – 3298 . Asanuma , K . , and Mundel , P . ( 2003 ) . The role of podocytes in glomerular pathobiology . Clin . Exp . Nephrol . 7 , 255 – 259 . Bailly , E . , McCaffrey , M . , Touchot , N . , Zahraoui , A . , Goud , B . , and Bornens , M . ( 1991 ) . Phosphorylation of two small GTP - binding proteins of the Rab family by p34cdc2 . Nature 350 , 715 – 718 . Beites , C . L . , Xie , H . , Bowser , R . , and Trimble , W . S . ( 1999 ) . The septin CDCrel - 1 binds syntaxin and inhibits exocytosis . Nat . Neurosci . 2 , 434 – 439 . Berlin , A . , Paoletti , A . , and Chang , F . ( 2003 ) . Mid2p stabilizes septin rings during cytokinesis in ﬁssion yeast . J . Cell Biol . 160 , 1083 – 1092 . Bortoluzzi , M . N . , Cormont , M . , Gautier , N . , Van Obberghen , E . , and Le Marchand - Brustel , Y . ( 1996 ) . GTPase activating protein activity for Rab4 is enriched in the plasma membrane of 3T3 – L1 adipocytes . Possible involve - ment in the regulation of Rab4 subcellular localization . Diabetologia 39 , 899 – 906 . Brett , T . J . , Traub , L . M . , and Fremont , D . H . ( 2002 ) . Accessory protein recruitment motifs in clathrin - mediated endocytosis . Structure 10 , 797 – 809 . Burgess , R . W . , Deitcher , D . L . , and Schwarz , T . L . ( 1997 ) . The synaptic protein syntaxin1 is required for cellularization of Drosophila embryos . J . Cell Biol . 138 , 861 – 875 . Carmena , M . , and Earnshaw , W . C . ( 2003 ) . The cellular geography of aurora kinases . Nature Rev . Mol . Cell . Biol . 4 , 842 – 854 . Cormont , M . , Mari , M . , Galmiche , A . , Hofman , P . , and Le Marchand - Brustel , Y . ( 2001 ) . A FYVE ﬁnger - containing protein , Rabip4 , is a Rab4 effector in - volved in early endosomal trafﬁc . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA 98 , 1637 – 1642 . Cormont , M . , Meton , I . , Mari , M . , Monzo , P . , Keslair , F . , Gaskin , C . , McGraw , T . E . , and Le Marchand - Brustel , Y . ( 2003 ) . CD2AP / CMS regulates endosome morphology and trafﬁc to the degradative pathway through its interaction with Rab4 and c - Cbl . Trafﬁc 4 , 97 – 112 . Dai , W . , Huang , X . , and Ruan , Q . ( 2003 ) . Polo - like kinases in cell cycle checkpoint control . Front . Biosci . 8 , d1128 – d1133 . Dewar , H . , Warren , D . T . , Gardiner , F . C . , Gourlay , C . G . , Satish , N . , Rich - ardson , M . R . , Andrews , P . D . , and Ayscough , K . R . ( 2002 ) . Novel proteins linking the actin cytoskeleton to the endocytic machinery in Saccharomyces cerevisiae . Mol . Biol . Cell 13 , 3646 – 3661 . Di Cunto , F . , et al . ( 2000 ) . Defective neurogenesis in citron kinase knockout mice by altered cytokinesis and massive apoptosis . Neuron 28 , 115 – 127 . Dikic , I . ( 2002 ) . CIN85 / CMS family of adaptor molecules . FEBS Lett . 529 , 110 – 115 . Dulic , V . , Stein , G . H . , Far , D . F . , and Reed , S . I . ( 1998 ) . Nuclear accumulation of p21Cip1 at the onset of mitosis : a role at the G2 / M - phase transition . Mol . Cell . Biol . 18 , 546 – 557 . Dustin , M . L . , et al . ( 1998 ) . A novel adaptor protein orchestrates receptor patterning and cytoskeletal polarity in T - cell contacts . Cell 94 , 667 – 677 . Emoto , K . , and Umeda , M . ( 2000 ) . An essential role for a membrane lipid in cytokinesis . Regulation of contractile ring disassembly by redistribution of phosphatidylethanolamine . J . Cell Biol . 149 , 1215 – 1224 . Field , C . M . , and Alberts , B . M . ( 1995 ) . Anillin , a contractile ring protein that cycles from the nucleus to the cell cortex . J . Cell Biol . 131 , 165 – 178 . Field , C . M . , and Kellogg , D . ( 1999 ) . Septins : cytoskeletal polymers or signal - ling GTPases ? Trends Cell Biol . 9 , 387 – 394 . Finger , F . P . , and White , J . G . ( 2002 ) . Fusion and ﬁssion : membrane trafﬁcking in animal cytokinesis . Cell 108 , 727 – 730 . Glotzer , M . ( 2001 ) . Animal cell cytokinesis . Annu . Rev . Cell Dev . Biol . 17 , 351 – 386 . Glotzer , M . ( 2003 ) . Cytokinesis : progress on all fronts . Curr . Opin . Cell Biol . 15 , 684 – 690 . Glotzer , M . ( 2004 ) . Cleavage furrow positioning . J . Cell Biol . 164 , 347 – 351 . Golsteyn , R . M . , Schultz , S . J . , Bartek , J . , Ziemiecki , A . , Ried , T . , and Nigg , E . A . ( 1994 ) . Cell cycle analysis and chromosomal localization of human Plk1 , a putative homologue of the mitotic kinases Drosophila polo and Saccharo - myces cerevisiae Cdc5 . J . Cell Sci . 107 , 1509 – 1517 . Hutchings , N . J . , Clarkson , N . , Chalkley , R . , Barclay , A . N . , and Brown , M . H . ( 2003 ) . Linking the T cell surface protein CD2 to the actin - capping protein CAPZ via CMS and CIN85 . J . Biol . Chem . 278 , 22396 – 22403 . Kim , J . M . , Wu , H . , Green , G . , Winkler , C . A . , Kopp , J . B . , Miner , J . H . , Unanue , E . R . , and Shaw , A . S . ( 2003 ) . CD2 - associated protein haploinsufﬁciency is linked to glomerular disease susceptibility . Science 300 , 1298 – 1300 . Kinoshita , M . , Field , C . M . , Coughlin , M . L . , Straight , A . F . , and Mitchison , T . J . ( 2002 ) . Self - and actin - templated assembly of mammalian septins . Dev . Cell . 3 , 791 – 802 . Kirsch , K . H . , Georgescu , M . M . , Ishimaru , S . , and Hanafusa , H . ( 1999 ) . CMS : an adapter molecule involved in cytoskeletal rearrangements . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA 96 , 6211 – 6216 . Kobayashi , N . , Reiser , J . , Kriz , W . , Kuriyama , R . , and Mundel , P . ( 1998 ) . Nonuniform microtubular polarity established by CHO1 / MKLP1 motor pro - tein is necessary for process formation of podocytes . J . Cell Biol . 143 , 1961 – 1970 . Kurakin , A . V . , Wu , S . , and Bredesen , D . E . ( 2003 ) . Atypical recognition consensus of CIN85 / SETA / Ruk SH3 domains revealed by target - assisted iterative screening . J . Biol . Chem . 278 , 34102 – 34109 . Lee , K . H . , et al . ( 2003 ) . The immunological synapse balances T cell receptor signaling and degradation . Science 302 , 1218 – 1222 . Lehtonen , S . , Zhao , F . , and Lehtonen , E . ( 2002 ) . CD2 - associated protein di - rectly interacts with the actin cytoskeleton . Am . J . Physiol . 283 , F734 – F743 . Li , H . , Page , N . , and Bussey , H . ( 2002 ) . Actin patch assembly proteins Las17p and Sla1p restrict cell wall growth to daughter cells and interact with cis - Golgi protein Kre6p . Yeast 19 , 1097 – 1112 . Low , S . H . , Li , X . , Miura , M . , Kudo , N . , Quinones , B . , and Weimbs , T . ( 2003 ) . Syntaxin 2 and endobrevin are required for the terminal step of cytokinesis in mammalian cells . Dev . Cell . 4 , 753 – 759 . Lynch , D . K . , Winata , S . C . , Lyons , R . J . , Hughes , W . E . , Lehrbach , G . M . , Wasinger , V . , Corthals , G . , Cordwell , S . , and Daly , R . J . ( 2003 ) . A Cortactin - CD2 - associated protein ( CD2AP ) complex provides a novel link between EGF receptor endocytosis and the actin cytoskeleton . J . Biol . Chem . 278 , 21805 – 21813 . Minoshima , Y . , et al . ( 2003 ) . Phosphorylation by aurora B converts MgcRac - GAP to a RhoGAP during cytokinesis . Dev . Cell 4 , 549 – 560 . Neef , R . , Preisinger , C . , Sutcliffe , J . , Kopajtich , R . , Nigg , E . A . , Mayer , T . U . , and Barr , F . A . ( 2003 ) . Phosphorylation of mitotic kinesin - like protein 2 by polo - like kinase 1 is required for cytokinesis . J . Cell Biol . 162 , 863 – 876 . Niswonger , M . L . , and O’Halloran , T . J . ( 1997 ) . A novel role for clathrin in cytokinesis . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA 94 , 8575 – 8578 . Oegema , K . , Savoian , M . S . , Mitchison , T . J . , and Field , C . M . ( 2000 ) . Func - tional analysis of a human homologue of the Drosophila actin binding protein anillin suggests a role in cytokinesis . J . Cell Biol . 150 , 539 – 552 . O’Halloran , T . J . ( 2000 ) . Membrane trafﬁc and cytokinesis . Trafﬁc 1 , 921 – 926 . Ohkura , H . ( 2003 ) . Phosphorylation : polo kinase joins an elite club . Curr . Biol . 13 , R912 – R914 . Pavenstadt , H . , Kriz , W . , and Kretzler , M . ( 2003 ) . Cell biology of the glomer - ular podocyte . Physiol . Rev . 83 , 253 – 307 . Quinones , B . , Riento , K . , Olkkonen , V . M . , Hardy , S . , and Bennett , M . K . ( 1999 ) . Syntaxin 2 splice variants exhibit differential expression patterns , biochemical properties and subcellular localizations . J . Cell Sci . 112 , 4291 – 4304 . Robinson , D . N . , and Spudich , J . A . ( 2000 ) . Towards a molecular understand - ing of cytokinesis . Trends Cell Biol . 10 , 228 – 237 . Scaife , R . M . , Job , D . , and Langdon , W . Y . ( 2003 ) . Rapid microtubule - depen - dent induction of neurite - like extensions in NIH 3T3 ﬁbroblasts by inhibition of ROCK and Cbl . Mol . Biol . Cell 14 , 4605 – 4617 . Schafer , D . A . , D’Souza - Schorey , C . , and Cooper , J . A . ( 2000 ) . Actin assembly at membranes controlled by ARF6 . Trafﬁc 1 , 892 – 903 . Schweitzer , J . K . , and D’Souza - Schorey , C . ( 2004 ) . Finishing the job : cytoskel - etal and membrane events bring cytokinesis to an end . Exp . Cell Res . 295 , 1 – 8 . Shih , N . Y . , Li , J . , Karpitskii , V . , Nguyen , A . , Dustin , M . L . , Kanagawa , O . , Miner , J . H . , and Shaw , A . S . ( 1999 ) . Congenital nephrotic syndrome in mice lacking CD2 - associated protein . Science 286 , 312 – 315 . Somma , M . P . , Fasulo , B . , Cenci , G . , Cundari , E . , and Gatti , M . ( 2002 ) . Molec - ular dissection of cytokinesis by RNA interference in Drosophila cultured cells . Mol . Biol . Cell 13 , 2448 – 2460 . A Role for CD2AP in Cytokinesis Vol . 16 , June 2005 2901 Straight , A . F . , Cheung , A . , Limouze , J . , Chen , I . , Westwood , N . J . , Sellers , J . R . , and Mitchison , T . J . ( 2003 ) . Dissecting temporal and spatial control of cytoki - nesis with a myosin II Inhibitor . Science 299 , 1743 – 1747 . Straight , A . F . , and Field , C . M . ( 2000 ) . Microtubules , membranes and cyto - kinesis . Curr . Biol . 10 , R760 – R770 . Strickland , L . I . , and Burgess , D . R . ( 2004 ) . Pathways for membrane trafﬁcking during cytokinesis . Trends Cell Biol . 14 , 115 – 118 . Tang , H . Y . , Xu , J . , and Cai , M . ( 2000 ) . Pan1p , End3p , and S1a1p , three yeast proteins required for normal cortical actin cytoskeleton organization , associ - ate with each other and play essential roles in cell wall morphogenesis . Mol . Cell . Biol . 20 , 12 – 25 . Tasto , J . J . , Morrell , J . L . , and Gould , K . L . ( 2003 ) . An anillin homologue , Mid2p , acts during ﬁssion yeast cytokinesis to organize the septin ring and promote cell separation . J . Cell Biol . 160 , 1093 – 1103 . Tatsumoto , T . , Xie , X . , Blumenthal , R . , Okamoto , I . , and Miki , T . ( 1999 ) . Human ECT2 is an exchange factor for Rho GTPases , phosphorylated in G2 / M phases , and involved in cytokinesis . J . Cell Biol . 147 , 921 – 928 . van der Sluijs , P . , Hull , M . , Huber , L . A . , Male , P . , Goud , B . , and Mellman , I . ( 1992 ) . Reversible phosphorylation – dephosphorylation determines the local - ization of rab4 during the cell cycle . EMBO J . 11 , 4379 – 4389 . Vindelov , L . L . , Christensen , I . J . , and Nissen , N . I . ( 1983 ) . Standardization of high - resolution ﬂow cytometric DNA analysis by the simultaneous use of chicken and trout red blood cells as internal reference standards . Cytometry 3 , 328 – 331 . Warren , D . T . , Andrews , P . D . , Gourlay , C . W . , and Ayscough , K . R . ( 2002 ) . Sla1p couples the yeast endocytic machinery to proteins regulating actin dynamics . J . Cell Sci . 115 , 1703 – 1715 . Welsch , T . , Endlich , N . , Kriz , W . , and Endlich , K . ( 2001 ) . CD2AP and p130Cas localize to different F - actin structures in podocytes . Am . J . Physiol . 281 , F769 – F777 . Wong , S . H . , Zhang , T . , Xu , Y . , Subramaniam , V . N . , Grifﬁths , G . , and Hong , W . ( 1998 ) . Endobrevin , a novel synaptobrevin / VAMP - like protein preferen - tially associated with the early endosome . Mol . Biol . Cell 9 , 1549 – 1563 . P . Monzo et al . Molecular Biology of the Cell 2902