Ternary Phase Diagram of Dipalmitoyl - PC / Dilauroyl - PC / Cholesterol : Nanoscopic Domain Formation Driven by Cholesterol Gerald W . Feigenson and Jeffrey T . Buboltz Field of Biophysics , Biotechnology Building , Cornell University , Ithaca , New York 14853 USA ABSTRACT A ternary phase diagram is proposed for the hydrated lamellar lipid mixture dipalmitoylphosphatidylcholine / dilauroylphosphatidylcholine / cholesterol ( DPPC / DLPC / cholesterol ) at room temperature . The entire composition space has been thoroughly mapped by complementary experimental techniques , revealing interesting phase behavior that has not been previously described . Confocal fluorescence microscopy shows a regime of coexisting DPPC - rich ordered and DLPC - rich fluid lamellar phases , having an upper boundary at apparently constant cholesterol mole fraction x chol ; 0 . 16 . Fluorescence resonance energy transfer experiments confirm the identification and extent of this two - phase regime and , furthermore , reveal a 1 - phase regime between x chol ; 0 . 16 and 0 . 25 , consisting of ordered and fluid nanoscopic domains . Dipyrene - PC excimer / monomer measurements confirm the new regime between x chol ; 0 . 16 and 0 . 25 and also show that rigidly ordered phases seem to disappear around x chol ; 0 . 25 . This study should be considered as a step toward a more complete understanding of lateral heterogeneity within biomembranes . Cholesterol may play a role in domain separation on the nanometer scale . INTRODUCTION The physical properties of biomembranes have intrigued researchers for many years . In this report , we focus on one particular aspect of these properties , the composition depen - dence of equilibrium phase behavior . Distinct , localized membrane environments could play an important role in nature , so the study of membrane biochemistry would be advanced by an improved understanding of the lateral het - erogeneities that form within lamellar lipid mixtures . A composition - dependent phase diagram can serve as a start - ing point for modeling studies at the molecular level , and can therefore reveal the underlying physical properties that give rise to lateral heterogeneity . Here we describe a strat - egy for determining the phase diagram of a three - compo - nent lipid mixture . We then report interesting phase behav - ior , summarized on a ternary phase diagram , for the particular lipid mixture that we have studied , dipalmi - toylphosphatidylcholine / dilauroylphosphatidylcholine / cho - lesterol ( DPPC / DLPC / cholesterol ) . The accumulated evidence for lateral heterogeneity is strong , in both biological membranes and experimental model mixtures . Observations made on real biomembranes indicate the presence of compositionally distinct membrane domains , especially in studies that are based on fluorescence microscopy or resistance to detergent solubilization ( Brown and Rose , 1992 ; Thomas et al . , 1994 ; Mayor and Maxfield , 1995 ; Edidin , 1997 ; Simons and Ikonen , 1997 ; Brown and London , 1998 ; Varma and Mayor , 1998 ; Sheets et al . , 1999 ; Viola et al . , 1999 ; Jacobson and Dietrich , 1999 ; Pralle et al . , 2000 ; Schu¨tz et al . , 2000 ) . In an effort to understand the molecular basis for detergent - insoluble domains , Xu and London ( 2000 ) have shown that , in binary model mixtures , tight packing of saturated lipid chains and certain sterols can be correlated with resistance to detergent insolubility . Other model studies have focused on a variety of two - component lipid mixtures ( Marsh , 1990 ; Caffrey , 2000 ) . In particular , the temperature dependence of DPPC / cholesterol mixtures has been studied by various spectroscopic and calorimetric methods ( Ladbrooke et al . , 1968 ; Estep et al . , 1978 ; Mabrey et al . , 1978 ; Rechtenwald and McConnell , 1981 ; Sankaram and Thompson , 1990a ; Vist and Davis , 1990 ; Huang et al . , 1993 ; Guo and Hamilton , 1995 ; McMullen and McElhaney , 1995 ) . A consistent result has been that lateral heterogeneities can be observed using a range of physical and chemical probes , even in simple two - component mixtures . Unfortu - nately , the spatial and temporal scales that characterize these heterogeneities have generally been poorly defined ( reviewed by Edidin , 1997 ) , and , therefore , quantitative descriptions of membrane lipid domains have remained elusive , as have their underlying physical origins . Although model membrane studies offer the advantages of chemically well - defined mixtures , they generally have been limited by at least two factors . First , most systematic research has focused on two - component mixtures . It may well be that the study of more complex systems will reveal important properties that are not present in binary mixtures . Second , most analyses of model membrane phase behavior have been constrained to consider only classical first - order phase transitions . Experimental data have been interpreted to be consistent with this constraint , rather than to consider explanations based on other general models ( e . g . , non - ideal mixing or second - order transitions ) . Studies of ternary mix - tures containing cholesterol have illustrated this interpretive limitation ( Almeida et al . , 1993 ; Silvius et al . , 1996 ) . For Received for publication 13 November 2000 and in final form 23 March 2001 . Address reprint requests to Gerald W . Feigenson , Cornell Univ . , 201 Biotechnology Bldg . , Ithaca , NY 14853 - 2703 . Tel . : 607 - 255 - 4744 ; Fax : 607 - 255 - 6249 ; E - mail : gwf3 @ cornell . edu . © 2001 by the Biophysical Society 0006 - 3495 / 01 / 06 / 2775 / 14 $ 2 . 00 2775 Biophysical Journal Volume 80 June 2001 2775 – 2788 example , Silvius and coworkers placed their results from infrared spectroscopy and fluorescence quenching on a clas - sical ternary phase diagram . However , these experiments are sensitive to the local membrane environment only , so these data could reflect marked deviations from ideal mix - ing or higher order transitions in the absence of first - order phase separation . An experimental strategy to establish the composition - dependent phase behavior in a model biomembrane mixture should observe at least three considerations . 1 ) The mixture chosen for study should be complex enough to mimic im - portant features of phase behavior that could play a role in real biomembranes . 2 ) The experimental techniques should be complementary , so that several independent parameters are evaluated , each sensitive to either different physical properties or different spatial and temporal scales . 3 ) A large number of samples should be examined , thoroughly mapping the entire composition space , so that phase behav - ior will be revealed , whatever its nature and without regard to preconceptions . Because phase behavior depends on the chemical nature and concentration of each mixture component , we note that the major lipids of mammalian plasma membranes are cho - lesterol , phosphatidylcholine ( PC ) , sphingomyelin ( Sph ) , phosphatidylethanolamine ( PE ) , phosphatidylserine ( PS ) , and lesser fractions of numerous other lipids ( Devaux and Seigneuret , 1985 ; Zachowski , 1993 ) . Associated proteins account for about 50 weight % of the membrane , with much of this protein extramembranal . Although membrane pro - teins can influence the lipid phases ( Ja¨hnig , 1981b ; Epand , 1997 ) , we do not consider these effects here . We plan to examine protein effects after the lipid phase behavior has been established . As the subject of this study , we have chosen a three - component lipid mixture that can be expected to mimic some features of phase behavior in mammalian plasma membranes . Based on analyses of the outer leaflet of mam - malian plasma membranes ( Zachowski , 1993 ; Roelofsen and Op den Kamp , 1994 ) , one such candidate mixture would be the ternary system Sph / palmitoyloleoylphosphati - dylcholine ( POPC ) / cholesterol . ( Because water and various ions are present , this is a pseudoternary system . We neglect any changes in water or ion content of the phases ( Johann et al . , 1996 . ) This mixture includes one lipid that forms an ordered phase in water at room temperature ( Sph ) , one that forms a fluid phase in water ( POPC ) , and the most abundant single chemical species in mammalian plasma membranes , cholesterol . However , to obtain the advantage of comparing a ternary phase diagram to the larger available literature of binary phase diagrams , it is reasonable to choose a ternary mixture for which the phase behavior has been examined in all three binary mixtures . DPPC / DLPC / cholesterol offers this advantage . Like Sph / POPC / cholesterol , DPPC / DLPC / cholesterol mixtures should manifest ordered , fluid , and coexistence phase regimes , as well as any cholesterol - rich phase behavior . Moreover , this ternary mixture has well - established phase behavior along the entire binary axis DPPC / DLPC ( Van Dijck et al . , 1977 ) , and along both DPPC / cholesterol and DLPC / cholesterol axes in the regime of very high cholesterol mole fraction x chol ( Huang et al . , 1999 ) . Here we report that our study of DPPC / DLPC / cholesterol by complementary experimental techniques , together with a strategy of thoroughly mapping the entire composition space , has revealed interesting phase behavior that has not been previously described . Confocal fluorescence micros - copy reveals a regime of coexisting DPPC - and DLPC - rich phases , having an upper boundary at apparently constant x chol ; 0 . 16 . Fluorescence resonance energy transfer exper - iments confirm the identification and extent of this two - phase regime and , furthermore , reveal a one - phase regime between x chol ; 0 . 16 and 0 . 25 , consisting of DPPC - and DLPC - rich “nanoscopic” domains : as DPPC content in - creases , the DPPC - rich domains increase in extent contin - uously but without macroscopic phase separation until the entire sample consists of an ordered DPPC - rich phase . Dipyrene - PC excimer / monomer measurements confirm the new regime between x chol ; 0 . 16 and 0 . 25 and also show that rigidly ordered phases seem to disappear around x chol ; 0 . 25 . Overall , this study should be considered as a step toward a more complete understanding of lateral heteroge - neity within biomembranes . In particular , we suggest a role for cholesterol in domain separation on the nanometer scale . MATERIALS AND METHODS Materials Phospholipids were purchased from Avanti Polar Lipids , Inc . ( Alabaster , AL ) with the exception of the fluorescently labeled probes . The fluorescent probes 1 , 1 9 - dieicosanyl - 3 , 3 , 3 9 , 3 9 - tetramethylindocarbocyanine perchlorate ( DiI - C20 : 0 ) , 3 , 3 9 - dilinoleyloxacarbocyanine perchlorate ( DiO - C18 : 2 ) , and 1 - hexadecanoyl - 2 - ( 4 , 4 - difluoro - 5 , 7 - dimethyl - 4 - bora - 3a , 4a - diaza - s - inda - cene - 3 - pentanoyl ) - sn - glycero - 3 - phosphocholine ( Bodipy - PC ) were ob - tained from Molecular Probes ( Eugene , OR ) . The fluorescent probe 1 , 2 - ( 1 - pyrenenonanoyl ) - sn - glycero - 3 - phosphocholine ( dipyrene - PC ) was synthesized as described in Hinderliter et al . , ( 1994 ) . Cholesterol was purchased from Nu Chek Prep ( Elysian , MN ) . Purity of . 99 . 5 % was confirmed by thin - layer chromatography on washed , activated silica gel plates ( Alltech , Deerfield , IL ) , developed with chloroform / methanol / water ( 65 : 25 : 4 ) for all phospholipids , chloroform / methanol ( 9 : 1 ) for DiI - C20 : 0 and DiO - C18 : 2 , and with petroleum ether / diethyl ether / chloroform ( 7 : 3 : 3 ) for cholesterol analysis . Phospholipid stock solutions were quantitated by phosphate assay ( Kingsley et al . , 1979 ) . Confocal fluorescence microscopy of giant unilamellar vesicles Giant unilamellar vesicles ( GUVs ) were prepared essentially according to Akashi et al . , ( 1996 ) , except that sample incubation was at ; 50°C . Stock chloroform solutions of DLPC and DPPC contained 10 mol % DLPG or DPPG , respectively , because charged phospholipids are necessary to obtain GUVs by this method . PG was chosen to serve as the charged lipid because main transition temperatures are nearly identical for PG and PC having the 2776 Feigenson and Buboltz Biophysical Journal 80 ( 6 ) 2775 – 2788 same acyl chains ( Findlay and Barton , 1978 ) . For visualization by confocal fluorescence microscopy ( CFM ) , fluorescent probes were added to the lipid mixtures at a concentration of ; 0 . 1 mol % . The aqueous buffer was 50 mM KCl , 5 mM Pipes , and 1 mM EDTA , pH 7 . 0 . After incubation at 50°C for 10 – 20 h , samples were slowly ( ; 1 – 2°C / h ) cooled to room temperature . Image acquisition was carried out at ambient temperature , ; 24°C . Har - vested GUVs were placed on a no . 1 coverslip , then enclosed by a glass microscope slide within a ring of silicone high - vacuum grease , and allowed to settle for ; 10 min , where they remained stationary over the course of the experiment . CFM images were obtained with an MRC600 confocal microscope ( Bio - Rad , Hercules , CA ) at 488 - nm excitation , with a 560 - nm dichroic beamsplitter , and emission filters of 522 / 35BP for Bodipy - PC and 585LP for DiI - C20 : 0 . The objective was 40 3 water immersion , numerical aper - ture 0 . 75 . For three - dimensional image projection of a vesicle , z - scans in 1 - m m increments were taken through the upper half of a GUV . These scans were then combined and color - merged using the software application NIH Image . Fluorescence resonance energy transfer Vesicles were prepared by injecting an ethanolic solution of the lipids into buffer , essentially as described by Batzri and Korn ( 1973 ) . Stock chloro - form solutions were measured into 75 3 100 - mm glass tubes . A stock solution of DiO - C18 : 2 / DiI - C20 : 0 ; 1 / 4 in ethanol was added to each sample to give a DiO / PC ratio of ; 1 / 1000 . After mixing , solvent was evaporated under N 2 gas , followed by brief pumping under high vacuum . The dry lipid films were redissolved in 20 m L of ethanol and injected into vortexing buffer ( 200 mM KCl , 5 mM Pipes , 1 mM EDTA , pH 7 . 0 ) at 50°C . Each sample was then sealed under argon until the fluorescence measurement . Final PC aqueous concentration was 30 m M . Samples were then incubated at 42°C for 10 – 20 h , gradually cooled to room temperature ( ; 23°C ) over 24 h , and held at this temperature for another 12 – 24 h before measurement . Some samples were prepared by a different method , Rapid Solvent Exchange ( Buboltz and Feigenson , 1999 ) , and produced compa - rable results . Fluorescence was measured with a Hitachi ( San Jose , CA ) 3010 spec - trofluorimeter , exciting at 470 nm using a 470 - nm interference filter and a 5 - nm slit width . Emission was measured at 505 nm ( DiO ) and 568 nm ( DiI ) , with a 10 - nm slit width . Cuvet temperature was 23°C . The fluores - cence ratio , F 568 / F 505 , was used as a measure of the energy transfer efficiency , rather than either the sensitized acceptor fluorescence F 568 or the donor fluorescence F 505 alone . Use of this ratio corrects the data for sample - to - sample variations in total lipid concentration . To examine quantitatively whether reduced fluorescence resonance energy transfer ( FRET ) efficiency within a regime of coexisting ordered and fluid membrane phases is caused by differential probe partitioning ( see Results ) , FRET profiles were fit to a simple probe partitioning model : Given a probe’s overall concentration within the lipid mixture , its concen - tration within the coexisting phases will be determined by its partition coefficient , K p . If the FRET profile follows a thermodynamic tie line , then , at any given composition within the two - phase region , the relative quan - tities of the coexisting phases will be determined by the Lever Rule . Therefore , we measured the fluorescence intensities ( both F 505 and F 568 ) as a function of the probe concentrations ( x DiO , x DiI ) within both of the coexisting phases , so that a FRET ratio could be computed for any given pair of probe K p . In this way , we determined a unique K pDiO , K pDiI pair , which best fit the experimental FRET profile . Dipyrene - PC excimer / monomer ratio Samples were prepared by injection of ethanolic solutions as described above , except that dipyrene - PC was added to the ternary mixture at a ratio of ; 1 / 1000 to PC . Excitation was at 340 nm using a 340 - nm interference filter and a 3 - nm slit width . Emission was measured at 398 nm ( monomer ) and 480 nm ( excimer ) with a 10 - nm slit width . The ratio of these uncor - rected fluorescence readings is referred to as excimer / monomer ( E / M ) . Care was taken to minimize exposure of samples to air during incubation and during fluorescence measurement . RESULTS AND DISCUSSION Confocal fluorescence microscopy In DPPC / DLPC GUVs at 25°C , coexisting DPPC - rich or - dered and DLPC - rich fluid lamellar phases of macroscopic dimensions ( greater than ; 300 3 300 nm ) can be reliably visualized by CFM ( Korlach et al . , 1999 ; see Bagatolli and Gratton , 2000 , for a two - photon version of this experiment ) . For this purpose , we use two dyes with similar excitation maxima and significantly different emission maxima , and which partition differentially between the coexisting phases : DiI - C20 : 0 , which favors DPPC - rich phases over coexisting fluid phases ( Spink et al . , 1990 ) , and Bodipy - PC , which favors the fluid phase . These complementary probes pro - duce clear visualizations of coexisting phases in GUV of DPPC / DLPC . Figure 1 illustrates the form of the data , showing Bodipy - PC fluorescence ( upper left ) , DiI - C20 : 0 fluorescence ( upper right ) , and the merged , colorized image below . Orange fluorescence from DiI - C20 : 0 identifies the DPPC - rich ordered phase , and green fluorescence from Bodipy - PC identifies the DLPC - rich fluid phase . A great advantage of using complementary dyes is that common artifacts , such as bound small vesicles or patches of addi - tional lipid , can easily be recognized and therefore not interpreted as actual phase separation . Representative im - ages from a systematic examination of GUVs prepared over a range of DPPC / DLPC / cholesterol compositions are shown in Fig . 2 . In this and other experiments , sample composi - tions are described by a pair of numbers , the mole fraction of all of the lipid that is cholesterol ( x chol ) and the fraction of all of the PC that is DPPC ( x DPPCPC ) . GUV compositions were examined from 0 . 0 # x DPPCPC # 1 . 0 and from 0 . 0 # x chol # 0 . 40 . Consider the data for x chol 5 0 shown as the bottom row of Fig . 2 . Consistent with the published temperature – com - position phase diagram for DPPC / DLPC ( Van Dijck et al . , 1977 ) , uniform fluorescence for each dye is observed over the entire vesicle for x DPPCPC , 0 . 3 and x DPPCPC . 0 . 85 , at 23° . As expected , coexistence of macroscopic ordered and fluid domains is evident for 0 . 3 , x DPPCPC , 0 . 85 . We briefly note that confocal fluorescence microscopy seems to be a good way to determine the connectivity of coexisting phases . For example , at x chol 5 0 . 0 the Bodipy - PC and C20 : 0DiI fluo - rescence images show the fluid phase to be continuous at x DPPCPC 5 0 . 3 and 0 . 4 , whereas only the ordered phase is continuous from x DPPCPC 5 0 . 5 to 0 . 8 . As cholesterol is added to DPPC / DLPC mixtures , solidus and fluidus phase boundaries can be detected up to an overall cholesterol concentration x chol ; 0 . 16 . However , DPPC / DLPC / Cholesterol Phase Diagram 2777 Biophysical Journal 80 ( 6 ) 2775 – 2788 precise location of these boundaries was not achieved due to the gradual appearance or disappearance of the minor phase as sample compositions were varied . Rather , for a given x DPPCPC , the boundary was established by the lowest x chol above which only uniform fluorescence was observed , and below which coexisting phases were evident , in replicated , independent experiments . These data are summarized in Fig . 3 . Remarkable behavior was observed for the compositions 0 . 6 , x DPPCPC , 0 . 85 . In this range , coexistence of DPPC - and DLPC - rich macroscopic phases persists up to x chol ; 0 . 16 , as seen in Fig . 3 . However , at this critical cholesterol concentration , macroscopic phase coexistence is suddenly abolished . As x chol is gradually increased in increments of 0 . 003 , visual detection of phase coexistence disappears abruptly at x chol 5 0 . 16 6 0 . 003 . That is , for 0 . 6 , x DPPCPC , 0 . 85 , the phase boundary appears to be horizontal , with all samples prepared above x chol ; 0 . 16 showing uniform fluorescence . This surprisingly abrupt disappearance of coexisting lamellar phases does not imply , however , that composi - tionally distinct ( i . e . , DPPC - and DLPC - rich ) domains have suddenly been abolished on every spatial scale . Our inability to resolve any such domains by CFM implies only that the spatial scale of any such domains , should they exist , must be smaller than ; 300 nm . Any such submicrometer - scale ( i . e . , nanoscopic ) domains would be invisible by CFM , and their detection would require another technique . Fluorescence resonance energy transfer Pedersen et al . ( 1996 ) proposed a suitable method for de - tecting coexisting membrane domains near a first - order thermotropic phase transition . Two fluorescent probes were used , which must form an efficient donor – acceptor pair and also partition differentially between the phases . Here we report that this method can be especially pow - erful in revealing the presence of both coexisting microme - ter - scale and nanometer - scale membrane domains . For such a pair of probes , a regime of phase coexistence must be manifest as a regime of reduced FRET as the dyes become spatially separated . The fluorescent dyes DiI - C20 : 0 and DiO - C18 : 2 serve as a suitable pair of probes for our exper - iments . When a series of DPPC / DLPC / cholesterol samples are prepared , such that their compositions traverse a two - phase region , the measured FRET will pass through a marked regime of reduced efficiency ( which we abbreviate as RRE ) in a manner consistent with simple differential probe partitioning . To illustrate this , two FRET profiles , containing RREs and traversing the two - phase region , have been fit with a simple probe - partition model , as shown in Fig . 4 . At x chol 5 0 ( Fig . 4 , h ) , the RRE is fit best by K pDiO 5 8 . 0 6 0 . 5 ; K pDiI 5 0 . 20 6 0 . 05 , with DiO - 18 : 2 favoring the fluid - phase and DiI - 20 : 0 favoring the ordered phase , as expected . Upon increasing the cholesterol concentration to just below the threshold for abolishing macroscopic phase coexistence , the differential partitioning seems to be but slightly reduced : the RRE at x chol 5 0 . 15 ( Fig . 4 , E ) is fit best by K pDiO 5 7 . 0 6 0 . 5 ; K pDiI 5 0 . 3 6 0 . 05 . Because the FRET profiles across the two - phase region are fit so well by this simple model , yielding K p consis - tent with expectations , we interpret RREs as signifying demixing of DiI - C20 : 0 and DiO - C18 : 2 due to differential partitioning . With this in mind , consider Fig . 5 , which shows an offset series of FRET profiles at increasing cholesterol concentrations . Each of these profiles shows a marked RRE . The boundaries of these regimes change FIGURE 1 The principle of lipid phase identification , showing confocal fluorescence microscopy images of a GUV . The lipid composition of this GUV was DPPC / DLPC 5 1 / 1 , with DiI - C20 : 0 and Bodipy - PC dyes at mole fraction ; 0 . 001 . Excitation was at 488 nm . The upper right image is the fluorescence emission through a 585 nm LP filter , thus almost exclu - sively from DiI - C20 : 0 . The upper left image is the emission through a 522 nm 35 - nm BP filter , thus almost exclusively from Bodipy - PC . The bottom image is color - merged , using the public domain NIH Image program ( developed at the U . S . National Institutes of Health and available on the Internet at http : / / rsb . info . nih . gov / nih . gov / nih - image / ) . The bar represents 5 m m . 2778 Feigenson and Buboltz Biophysical Journal 80 ( 6 ) 2775 – 2788 smoothly with composition , with RREs persisting up to x chol ; 0 . 25 . Apart from RREs , we have not tried to interpret any other features of our FRET profiles ( e . g . , either steep or more gradual x DPPCPC - dependence of FRET outside these regimes ) . These features of the FRET pro - files do not imply domain formation and could perhaps be the result of nonideal mixing of the probe molecules or probe orientation changes . To reveal better any patterns in the FRET data , it is useful to view the entire data set together : a set of profiles corresponding to 18 values of x chol . Examining these in a two - dimensional ( 2D ) stacked plot is problematic , how - ever , due in part to compression of the ordinate data . Therefore , consider Fig . 6 , a three - dimensional ( 3D ) plot , which shows two views of an entire FRET data set up to x chol 5 0 . 50 . Figure 6 A shows that the distinctive pattern of RRE extends from x chol 5 0 . 0 to ; 0 . 25 . Figure 6 B shows that this regime terminates abruptly at x chol ; 0 . 26 . Although RREs are to be expected for x chol , ; 0 . 16 , it is noteworthy to observe RREs for x chol . ; 0 . 16 , because GUVs of this composition show no evi - dence of coexisting phases by CFM . However , this re - gime of reduced FRET efficiency ( ; 0 . 16 , x chol , ; 0 . 25 ; ; 0 . 6 , x DPPCPC , ; 0 . 85 ) is unmistakable when the FRET data are viewed in either 2D ( Fig . 5 ) or 3D ( Fig . 6 ) . Therefore , we interpret this regime to be one of nanoscopic domain formation . Finally , Fig . 6 B shows that , for all higher cholesterol concentrations that were examined ( ; 0 . 25 , x chol , ; 0 . 5 ) , the FRET data are free of any RREs . Based on this observation we do not infer that other domain - forming regimes are absent from this large region of composition space , but only that none have been detected by this partic - ular pair of DiO / DiI probes . FIGURE 2 Composition dependence of phase behavior in giant unilamellar vesicles of DPPC / DLPC / cholesterol is visualized using confocal fluorescence microscopy . Each image is color - merged from the simultaneously collected fluorescence emission from DiI - C20 : 0 ( orange ) and Bodipy - PC ( green ) , with both dyes at mole fraction ; 0 . 001 . Images were constructed from confocal microscopy z - scans in 1 - m m increments . Coexisting fluid phases ( green ) and solid - like phases ( orange ) are observed over a range of compositions . This phase coexistence disappears abruptly at cholesterol mole fraction x chol ; 0 . 16 . Fluorescence quantum yield of Bodipy - PC is low in mixtures with x DPPCPC 5 1 . 0 , so these uniform GUV appear to be depleted of green fluorescence . Bars are 5 m m . Temperature was 24°C . DPPC / DLPC / Cholesterol Phase Diagram 2779 Biophysical Journal 80 ( 6 ) 2775 – 2788 Dipyrene - PC excimer / monomer ratio Domain formation is not the only possible type of compo - sition - dependent phase behavior . For this reason , we exam - ined the behavior of DPPC / DLPC / cholesterol mixtures by a different method that is based on the properties of a dipyrene - PC probe . The intramolecular E / M ratio is sensi - tive to local molecular motion , order , and “free volume” ( Vauhkonen et al . , 1990 ) . Dipyrene - PC offers good signal / noise ( S / N ) at low concentration , and its E / M ratio can change dramatically with the phase state of the bilayer . This is illustrated by Fig . 7 , in which a series of offset E / M profiles are shown at increasing cholesterol concentrations . As x DPPCPC increases , a precipitous drop in E / M at x DPPCPC ; 0 . 85 signals the formation of an ordered lamellar phase . Figure 8 plots dipyrene - PC E / M over the full range of lamellar phase compositions . The same data are shown from three alternative perspectives : Fig . 8 B is a 90° clockwise rotation of Fig . 8 A ; Fig . 8 C is an expanded view of one region shown in Fig . 8 B . Consider Fig . 8 B . For x DPPCPC ; 1 . 0 , E / M is relatively constant ( at the low value ; 0 . 5 ) for x chol , 0 . 25 , and then increases rather steeply up to the highest x chol examined . Similarly , Sunamoto et al . ( 1980 ) observed low E / M for a dipyrene - PC probe in cholesterol - free gel phase bilayers of DPPC at 25°C , with an approxi - mately three - fold increase in E / M upon mixing with cho - lesterol at x chol ; 0 . 4 . These researchers also found an increase in E / M upon heating pure DPPC bilayers above the main transition temperature . Therefore , E / M is lowest in the DPPC - rich ordered lamellar phase ( a rigid lattice inhibits excimer formation ) , higher in the fluid phase ( a fluid lattice is more permissive for excimer formation ) , and highest in the fluid - ordered phase ( s ) , which forms at high x chol ( a fluid - ordered lattice favors the highest rate of excimer for - mation ) . With this in mind , consider the remarkable wedge - shaped feature that is revealed clearly in Fig . 8 C . At high DPPC content , x DPPCPC ; 0 . 85 , this wedge - shaped region is bounded by ; 0 . 16 , x chol , ; 0 . 25 . At lower x DPPCPC , the boundaries vary from x chol ; 0 . 25 at x DPPCPC ; 0 . 4 to x chol ; 0 . 16 at x DPPCPC ; 0 . 7 . Given the observations summarized in the preceding paragraph , this region of locally - elevated E / M could indicate a composition regime that is fluid yet or - dered . However , when x chol . 0 . 25 , Fig . 8 B illustrates that E / M increases smoothly with cholesterol concentration up to cholesterol saturation of the bilayer . This implies that any composition - dependent phase transitions that may occur at higher cholesterol concentrations are unlikely to be accom - panied by sudden changes in either the acyl chain order or motional state of the membrane . Spatial scales of membrane domains The CFM images of coexisting membrane phases ( Figs . 1 and 2 ) show that they are easily resolved by optical micros - copy . Therefore , we can set a relatively firm minimum size FIGURE 3 GUV images from confocal fluorescence microscopy plotted according to lipid composition show that phase coexistence disappears for x chol . 0 . 16 . Images of GUV composed of DPPC / DLPC / cholesterol ob - tained as in Fig . 1 are scored as showing uniform fluorescence ( E ) , coexisting phases ( F ) , or borderline ( ) . FIGURE 4 Regimes of reduced efficiency of fluorescence resonance energy transfer are fit by a simple model of probe partitioning between coexisting phases . Donor and acceptor probes were DiO - C18 : 2 and DiI - C20 : 0 , respectively . Temperature was 23°C , excitation was at 470 nm , and the ratio of F 568 / F 505 was used to measure FRET in this and other figures . When fluid and ordered phases coexist , fluorescence resonance energy transfer between DiO - C18 : 2 and DiI - C20 : 0 is reduced by differential probe partitioning between the phases . Experimental profiles ( open symbols ) are shown together with best fits by a simple probe partitioning model ( lines ) . For x chol 5 0 . 0 ( h ) , the experimental data are best fit by K pDiO 5 8 . 0 6 0 . 5 ; K pDiI 5 0 . 20 6 0 . 05 . For x chol 5 0 . 15 ( E ) , the data are best fit by K pDiO 5 7 . 0 6 0 . 5 ; K pDiI 5 0 . 3 6 0 . 05 . 2780 Feigenson and Buboltz Biophysical Journal 80 ( 6 ) 2775 – 2788 for these separated phase domains : ; 300 3 300 nm or ; 150 , 000 lipids , while noting that essentially all domains observed are actually much larger . This optical resolution limit could be reduced somewhat further with a more so - phisticated image analysis ( Kenworthy and Edidin , 1998 ; Schu¨tz et al . , 2000 ) . Membrane domains that cause RREs in FRET ( Figs . 4 – 6 ) must also be greater than some minimum size for the probes to be photophysically separated . Assuming ran - domly distributed donors and acceptors , Wolber and Hud - son ( 1979 ) analyzed the distance dependence of FRET in the bilayer phase . More recently , Zimet et al . ( 1995 ) con - sidered a similar system , in which a fluorescently - labeled lipid acceptor is effectively excluded by protein from an area surrounding a protein - bound donor . In this case , very little reduction in FRET occurs for protein diameters smaller than the Fo¨rster distance ( R 0 ) , whereas nearly max - imal reduction occurs for diameters . 4 R 0 . For FRET be - tween DiO and DiI , we estimate R 0 to be ; 50 – 60 Å , based on DiO - DiI quenching curves and on the calculated spectral overlap integral for the fluorophors . R 0 , the distance at which FRET is 50 % of maximum ( Fo¨rster , 1948 ) , was determined in two ways . First , following Fung and Stryer ( 1978 ) and Wolber and Hudson ( 1979 ) , the quenching of DiO as a function of DiI concentration in the bilayer yielded a value R 0 ; 80 Å if only DiI in one leaflet quenches , or R 0 ; 60 Å if DiI quenches equally from both leaflets ( data not shown ) . Second , following Fo¨rster ( 1948 ) and comput - ing the spectral overlap integral , R 0 ; 50 Å . So , we can set a minimum domain diameter on the order of R 0 ; 50 – 60 Å , which would be composed of ; 40 – 60 lipids . Note that this minimum size is comparable to the maximum possible cluster size for nonideal mixing without phase separation ( Huang and Feigenson , 1993 ) . If the domain size is larger than ; 50 – 60 Å , then RRE would be detected in FRET experiments using a donor and acceptor pair having an even larger R 0 . In contrast , to detect smaller domains by FRET , a less efficient donor and acceptor pair should be chosen . To evaluate lateral heterogeneity on even smaller spatial scales , a technique is needed having an extremely short and well - defined scale of distance dependence . One such tech - nique is fluorescence quenching by spin - labels ( London and Feigenson , 1981 ) . Fluorescent probes of a variety of types can be quenched when they are within ; 10 Å of a nitroxide free radical . Thus , fluorescence quenching experiments ( Sil - vius et al . , 1996 ; Ahmed et al . , 1997 ; Xu and London , 2000 ) are sensitive to very small separations between fluorophor and quencher , perhaps only 1 – 2 lipids ( i . e . , smallest - scale heterogeneities ) . Information at this spatial scale is impor - tant to studies of lateral heterogeneity , but it should be emphasized that the results of such experiments should not be taken as diagnostic of first - order phase separation . Finally , a brief comment regarding the temporal scales of membrane domains is warranted . The FRET - based strategy for domain detection must average any lateral heterogene - ities on the timescale of the DiO / DiI lifetimes . These are on the order of 10 2 9 s , whereas nearest - neighbor lipid ex - change occurs on a timescale of 10 2 7 s . For this reason , we can say nothing of the characteristic lifetimes of nanoscopic domains . However , we can report that the macroscopic phase domains observed by fluorescence microscopy persist for at least an hour at 24°C , our longest continuous obser - vation time . This can be compared with the recent reports by Schu¨tz et al . ( 2000 ) that micrometer - scale domains persist for minutes in the plasma membrane of muscle cells , and by Dietrich et al . ( 2001 ) that GUV composed of Sph / DOPC / cholesterol show similar persistence of fluid but ordered macroscopic domains . Ternary phase diagram As a summary description , we have placed all of the results above on a triangular diagram , Fig . 9 , which describes the observed phase behavior as a function of composition . Each region in this ternary phase diagram is now discussed . A DLPC - rich fluid lamellar phase , L a . This region has the following properties characteristic of an L a phase . 1 ) FIGURE 5 Regimes of reduced efficiency of FRET indicate lipid com - position - dependent spatial separation of fluorescent donors from acceptors . Offset plots of fluorescence resonance energy transfer between DiO - C18 : 2 and DiI - C20 : 0 show RREs indicating coexisting membrane domains throughout the two - phase regime ( 0 , x chol , ; 0 . 16 ) . RREs are also observed at higher cholesterol concentrations , throughout a regime of nanoscopic domain coexistence , ; 0 . 16 , x chol , ; 0 . 25 . DPPC / DLPC / Cholesterol Phase Diagram 2781 Biophysical Journal 80 ( 6 ) 2775 – 2788 The translational diffusion coefficient of DiI - C20 : 0 is ; 3 3 10 2 8 cm 2 s 2 1 ( Korlach et al . , 1999 ) . 2 ) E / M values are near those for pure DLPC hydrated fluid lamellae . 3 ) The fluid - preferring probes DiO - C18 : 2 and Bodipy - PC partition pref - erentially into this phase , whereas DiI - C20 : 0 partitions out of this phase . B Coexisting L a and DPPC - rich ordered phases . This assignment is based on several observations . 1 ) CFM shows separated macroscopic phase domains , and the expected probe partitioning behavior : DiI - C20 : 0 preferring the DPPC - rich ordered phase and BODIPY - PC the DLPC - rich fluid . 2 ) Within this region , FRET data are fit by a simple model of differential probe partitioning , with K p values consistent with coexisting DLPC - and DPPC - rich phases . 3 ) D T analysis of DiI - C20 : 0 yields two components , a fast one characteristic of diffusion in a fluid bilayer and a slower one characteristic of diffusion in ordered bilayers ( Korlach et al . , 1999 ) . 4 ) L a and DPPC - rich phase coexistence is quan - titatively consistent , at both the fluidus and solidus bound - aries , with the well - established L a and L b coexistence for x chol 5 0 ( Van Dijck et al . , 1977 ; Buboltz and Feigenson , 2000 ) . Note that , because the upper boundary of this region is effectively horizontal , a small change in x chol acts as a switch between one - and two - phase regimes . Moreover , because both the upper and lower boundaries are horizontal , it may well be that all the thermodynamic tie lines in region B are horizontal . If so , then cholesterol must partition equally well into both the fluid and ordered phases . C DPPC - rich ordered phase . E / M values are ; 0 . 5 up to x chol ; 0 . 25 , characteristic of a rigid ordered phase . CFM images are uniform . At x DPPCPC 5 1 . 0 , this is the L b 9 phase , an ordered phase with acyl chains tilted relative to the bilayer normal . However , there must be a transition between the L b 9 and L b phases in this region , because the chain tilt characteristic of pure DPPC is abolished by the presence of low concentrations of cholesterol ( Hui and He , 1983 ) . D A single phase that changes continuously from a DPPC - rich ordered phase at the C / D boundary to a fluid - ordered phase at the D / E boundary . According to CFM , this is a one - phase region , but RREs in FRET indicate differen - tial probe partitioning , consistent with DLPC - rich ( L 02 ) and DPPC - rich domains . Region D is part of the wedge - shaped region of locally elevated E / M seen in Fig . 8 C . The bound - aries are defined by the loss of macroscopic phase coexist - ence at x chol ; 0 . 16 , the rise in E / M at x chol ; 0 . 16 , the abrupt drop in E / M at x chol ; 0 . 25 , and the RRE boundaries at x DPPCPC 5 ; 0 . 62 and 0 . 85 . The high value of E / M through - out region D implies that the dipyrene - PC probe favors the fluid - ordered domains , although we have not attempted to determine its partition coefficient . It seems likely that , start - ing from the D / E boundary and increasing the DPPC con - centration , the first nanoscale domains that form are prob - ably “rigid - ordered - like” within a less rigid lattice . In contrast , starting from the C / D boundary and decreasing the DPPC concentration , the nanoscale domains that first start to form would be “fluid - ordered - like” within a more rigid lattice . E L 02 , a fluid - ordered phase . This region , as well as region D , is demarcated by a region of locally elevated E / M values seen in Fig . 8 C , suggesting a fluid - ordered phase . FIGURE 6 3D Views of FRET data , as a function of composition , reveal the characteristic patterns that reflect phase behavior . x chol ranges from 0 . 0 to 0 . 505 , x DPPCPC from 0 . 0 to 1 . 0 . ( B ) is a 90° counter - clockwise rotation of ( A ) . The regime of reduced energy transfer between DiO - C18 : 2 and DiI - C20 : 0 , characteristic of coexisting membrane domains , is seen from x chol 5 0 . 0 to ; 0 . 26 . FRET then decreases monotonically for all higher x chol , at all values of x DPPCPC . Data shown correspond to 600 independently prepared samples , at 23°C . Data scatter was reduced by three - point smoothing in both x chol and x DPPCPC coordinate - spaces . 2782 Feigenson and Buboltz Biophysical Journal 80 ( 6 ) 2775 – 2788 We have not established precisely where region A ends and region E begins . F L 01 , a fluid - ordered phase . At least a portion of the lower boundary of F is at x chol ; 0 . 25 where E / M begins a smooth rise that continues all the way to x chol 5 0 . 66 , the maximum cholesterol concentration that can be accommo - dated within DLPC / DPPC bilayers ( Huang et al . , 1999 ) . We have not yet established the boundary between region F and region E . There might be a continuous transition between L 02 and L 01 , based on the nearly seamless change in E / M between these regimes . At high cholesterol content , the properties of this phase change little between the extremes in composition : D T is 3 3 10 2 9 cm 2 s 2 1 at x chol 5 0 . 60 , x DPPCPC 5 0 . 0 as compared with 1 . 5 3 10 2 9 cm 2 s 2 1 at x chol 5 0 . 60 , x DPPCPC 5 1 . 0 ( Korlach et al . , 1999 ) . G Coexisting crystalline cholesterol and a cholesterol - saturated lamellar phase . In this regime , all cholesterol in excess of x chol 5 0 . 66 spontaneously phase separates to form crystals of cholesterol monohydrate ( Huang et al . , 1999 ) . Continuous phase transitions In region D of our ternary phase diagram , the phases at the boundaries are different but do not separately coexist . In this region , addition of DPPC to compositions along the D / E boundary causes a continuous change of the phase , with the transition complete at the C / D boundary . Therefore , this transition is not first - order . Such transitions are variously termed second - order , higher order , or order – disorder tran - sitions ( Denbigh , 1981 ) or continuous transitions . We are not the first to argue that continuous phase tran - sitions occur in bilayer lipid mixtures containing choles - terol . Ja¨hnig ( 1981a , b ) considered that , in certain PC / cho - lesterol mixtures , the latent heat associated with the main ( i . e . , gel – fluid ) transition decreases with increasing choles - terol content and ultimately disappears at a critical choles - terol concentration , x chol ; 0 . 2 . Moreover , fluctuations in order parameter are maximal at x chol ; 0 . 2 , as is lateral compressibility . According to Ja¨hnig’s theoretical treat - ment , the particular value of this critical cholesterol con - centration depends upon the cross - sectional areas of phos - pholipid and cholesterol , and the coherence length of phospholipid interactions . In this connection , it is interest - ing to note that Blume and Hillmann ( 1986 ) reported that bilayers and monolayers of dimyristoylphosphatidic acid / cholesterol have a critical point at x chol ; 0 . 12 , as indicated by light scattering . In other liquid crystalline mixtures , higher - order transi - tions have been described for smectic - A to hexatic - B ( Huang et al . , 1989 ) , smectic - A to smectic - C ( Huang and Lien , 1985 ) , for an aqueous equimolar mixture of 1 - palmi - toyllysoPC / dipalmitoylphosphatidylethanolamine ( Chec - chetti et al . , 1996 ) , for DPPC ( Mitaku et al . , 1983 ) , and for dimyristoylPC , distearoylPC and their bilayer mixtures ( Suga´r et al . , 1999 ) . Studies of higher - order transitions have been an exciting experimental and theoretical topic in condensed matter physics for many years ( see reviews by Strandburg , 1988 ; Dash , 1999 ) . Indeed , the second - order thermotropic transi - tions of copper – zinc mixtures ( b - brass ) were the subject of active study more than 60 years ago ( Jones and Sykes , 1937 ) . Comparisons may even be drawn between our pro - posed phase diagram and the broader literature . For exam - ple , because the chemical potential of cholesterol is a func - tion of its mole fraction , x chol could be viewed as a surrogate thermodynamic field variable . Given this point of view , one feature of our tentative phase diagram , the termi - nation of a locus of second - order transitions ( D / E boundary ) at a first - order coexistence curve ( region B boundary ) , is FIGURE 7 Excimer / monomer ratios of a dipyrene - PC probe drop to markedly low values in the rigid ordered phase at x DPPCPC ; 0 . 85 . F 480 / F 398 is used as a measure of E / M , in this and the following figure . Offset E / M profiles as a function of x DPPCPC are stacked at increasing values of x chol . Up to x chol ; 0 . 25 , E / M falls to ; 0 . 5 at x DPPCPC ; 0 . 85 , indicating a rigid - ordered phase . Samples at ; 0 . 001 mole fraction probe were prepared by ethanol injection at 50°C , followed by slow cooling to room temperature . DPPC / DLPC / Cholesterol Phase Diagram 2783 Biophysical Journal 80 ( 6 ) 2775 – 2788 reminiscent of the thermotropic phase behavior in 4 He - 3 He mixtures ( Isihara , 1991 ) . Moreover , in terms of this view , a distinctive feature of our phase diagram , the pronounced flatness of the coexistence curve near the critical point ( i . e . , x chol ; 0 . 16 ) , may simply reflect the effective two - dimen - sionality of the DPPC / DLPC / cholesterol system ( Rowlin - son and Widom , 1989 ) . Molecular - level model Now we speculate about the molecular interactions that may characterize DPPC / DLPC / cholesterol mixtures and the physical origin of these interactions . In an earlier Monte Carlo study ( Huang and Feigenson , 1999 ) , Huang suggested that a dominant feature of phos - pholipid – cholesterol mixing is that the largely nonpolar cross - section of cholesterol must be shielded from con - tact with bulk water by neighboring phospholipid head - groups . Indeed , this requirement is reflected in a well - defined feature of our ternary phase diagram , the phase boundary at x chol 5 0 . 66 ( Huang et al . , 1999 ) . This is the maximum cholesterol concentration for these bilayer mixtures , above which all additional cholesterol precip - itates as the monohydrate crystal . Throughout the re - maining discussion , we will elaborate on the role that phospholipid – cholesterol shielding could play at lower values of x chol , as we describe our provisional model for FIGURE 8 3D Views of E / M data , as a function of composition , reveal the patterns that reflect phase behavior . x chol ranges from 0 . 0 to 0 . 65 , x DPPCPC ranges from 0 . 0 to 1 . 0 . ( B ) is a 90° clockwise rotation of ( A ) . Plots reveal a region of locally elevated E / M , consistent with distinctive phase behavior phase ( see “wedge” feature in each image ) . ( C ) an expanded view to show the wedge feature more clearly . The wedge of elevated E / M terminates abruptly at x chol ; 0 . 25 . The low E / M values characteristic of a DPPC - rich ordered phase , front edge of ( B ) , begin to rise at x chol ; 0 . 25 , indicating a fluid - ordered phase . Data shown correspond to 990 independently prepared samples , at 23°C . 2784 Feigenson and Buboltz Biophysical Journal 80 ( 6 ) 2775 – 2788 composition - dependent phase behavior in DPPC / DLPC / cholesterol mixtures . First we focus on the regime of coexisting DPPC - rich ordered and DLPC - rich fluid lamellar phases ( region B , Fig . 9 ) , noting that the addition of cholesterol up to mole fraction x chol ; 0 . 16 has a relatively modest effect on the phase boundaries . Cholesterol addition from x chol 5 0 . 0 to 0 . 16 does shift the fluidus boundary from ; 0 . 3 to ; 0 . 6 , but hardly shifts the solidus , as seen by CFM ( Fig . 3 ) , FRET ( Fig . 5 ) , and E / M ( Fig . 7 ) . Furthermore , calorimetric mea - surements from many different laboratories are in agree - ment that the gel – fluid phase transition is only modestly influenced by cholesterol at low concentrations . For binary DPPC / cholesterol mixtures , the gel – fluid transition is some - what broadened , by about 1°C , and shifted , also by about 1°C , when x chol is increased from 0 . 0 to ; 0 . 15 ( Mabrey et al . , 1978 ; Estep et al . , 1978 ; Huang et al . , 1993 ; McMullen and McElhaney , 1995 ) . According to our provisional model ( and consistent with calorimetric data ) , when cholesterol is dilute , its nonpolar cross section can be shielded from water by very slight rearrangements of the nearest - neighbor PC headgroups . However , when every PC headgroup in the mixture has accommodated one nearest - neighbor cholesterol , then any additional cholesterol must suffer some exposure to water unless the lattice changes . Each PC would have a single cholesterol nearest - neighbor when the cholesterols have be - tween 5 and 6 PC nearest - neighbors , depending upon lattice details . This critical cholesterol concentration corresponds to x chol ; 0 . 143 – 0 . 167 . Therefore , we propose that the fluid bilayer lattice un - dergoes a phase transition at x chol ; 0 . 16 to provide shield - ing of additional cholesterol from water . The lattice could rearrange either by collapsing the cross - sectional area of the acyl chains , by expanding the cross - sectional area of the headgroups , or both . Because the dipyrene - PC probe expe - riences an environment of increased acyl chain order above x chol ; 0 . 16 , we propose that the fluid lattice rearranges with a sharp reduction in the cross - sectional area of the PC acyl chains . Each PC headgroup would then have a greater capacity to shield neighboring cholesterols from bulk water . As an example , consider that a PC that occupies 70 Å 2 in the L a phase would occupy about 30 Å 2 less upon switching to all - trans acyl chains . This is nearly equal to the estimated 37 - Å 2 cross - sectional area of cholesterol ( Small , 1986 ) . Further characterization of this putative chain - ordering tran - sition at x chol ; 0 . 16 would require measurements of the acyl chain order parameter over a large range of composi - tions . However , this physical picture is consistent with the well - known cholesterol - induced increase in phospholipid acyl chain order parameter , and the so - called “condensing effect” ( Leathes , 1925 ; Demel et al . , 1967 ; Stockton and Smith , 1976 ; Vist and Davis , 1990 ) . But why should a transition of fluid - phase acyl chains to smaller cross - sectional area be coupled to the disappearance of macroscopic phase coexistence ? FRET indicates that compositionally distinct domains persist well above x chol ; 0 . 16 , even though macroscopic phases cannot be resolved by CFM . We speculate that the DPPC - rich ordered domains interact more favorably with the L 02 phase ( i . e . , are “wet - ted” better ) than with the more chain - disordered L a phase , resulting in a dramatically reduced interfacial free energy . This is consistent with the general principle that interfacial tension vanishes when approaching a critical point ( Row - linson and Widom , 1989 ) . What happens if the cholesterol concentration increases further ? The wedge - shaped region in Fig . 8 is sharply bounded at x chol ; 0 . 25 , with the locally - elevated E / M characteristic of regions D and E abruptly dropping back down to a lower value at this cholesterol concentration . This suggests that the disappearance of the L 02 phase is due to its inability to accommodate more cholesterol . Just above x chol ; 0 . 25 , E / M begins to rise again , for all x DPPCPC , and FRET begins a monotonic decrease ( Fig . 6 ) . Because x chol 5 0 . 25 corresponds to exactly 3 PC per cholesterol , we speculate that , at x chol 5 0 . 25 , each cholesterol is sur - FIGURE 9 Ternary phase diagram for DPPC / DLPC / cholesterol , at 24°C . Each vertex represents a pure component in excess buffer . The numbers labeling the DLPC – DPPC axis correspond to x DPPCPC , whereas the numbers labeling the PC – cholesterol axes correspond to x chol and indicate the values associated with various horizontal phase boundaries . To find the location in the diagram that corresponds to a given lipid composition , find the intersection of the x DPPCPC - line ( connects the cholesterol vertex to the appropriate point on the DLPC - DPPC axis ) and the x chol - line ( a horizontal line corresponding to the appropriate cholesterol mole fraction ) . The la - beled regions of the diagram , described in more detail in the text , are : A , DLPC - rich fluid lamellar phase ; B , coexisting fluid lamellar phase and DPPC - rich ordered phase ; C , DPPC - rich ordered phase ; D , a single phase that changes continuously from a rigid ordered phase at the C / D boundary to a fluid - ordered phase at the D / E boundary ; E , a fluid - ordered phase ; F , a fluid - ordered phase different from E ; G , coexisting crystalline cholesterol monohydrate and a cholesterol - saturated lamellar phase . This phase dia - gram in entirely phenomenological , derived from confocal fluorescence microscopy , fluorescence resonance energy transfer , and fluorescence ex - cimer / monomer ratios . Since the composition - space does not reflect other system components ( i . e . , water , buffer and ions ) , this diagram should be considered as a pseudo - ternary phase diagram ( see Introduction ) . DPPC / DLPC / Cholesterol Phase Diagram 2785 Biophysical Journal 80 ( 6 ) 2775 – 2788 rounded by exactly six all - trans acyl chains . The further addition of cholesterol would cause the free energy of this lattice to rise steeply , because a different lattice of PC headgroups would be necessary to shield any additional cholesterols from water . Such a headgroup reorientation would actually increase the area available for each acyl chain and for the additional cholesterol . Experiments sen - sitive to order parameter might yield evidence of these changes . Other published studies of the ordered DPPC - rich phase are consistent with a key role for phospholipid - cholesterol shielding . At 22°C , with x DPPCPC 5 1 . 0 and x chol 5 0 . 0 , the DPPC - rich phase is the chain - tilted L b 9 phase ( Tardieu , 1973 ) . Wide - angle x - ray diffraction indicates that addition of cholesterol to the L b 9 phase results in a change of chain packing from orthorhombic to hexagonal ( McIntosh , 1978 ) , and low - angle diffraction shows a loss of chain tilt and a dramatic increase in interlamellar repeat distances ( Hui and He , 1983 ) . These lattice changes ( and perhaps others ) en - able each cholesterol to be accommodated in the ordered DPPC - rich lattice up to x chol ; 0 . 25 , or 3 PC per choles - terol . According to our CFM studies of GUV , the Bodipy - PC and DiI - C20 : 0 probes were uniformly distributed through - out the DPPC - rich region . It should be noted , however , that these probes have not been selected for their ability to distinguish between coexisting DPPC - rich phases . Other researchers studying DPPC / cholesterol have interpreted spectroscopic changes that begin at x chol ; 0 . 08 and con - tinue to x chol ; 0 . 25 as indicating the separation of a cholesterol - rich phase ( Recktenwald and McConnell , 1981 ; Ipsen et al . , 1987 ; Sankaram and Thompson , 1990a , b ; Vist and Davis , 1990 ; Risbo et al . , 1995 ) . 13 C - NMR studies ( Huang et al . , 1993 ; Guo and Hamilton , 1995 ) have shown that , just beyond x chol ; 0 . 06 – 0 . 08 , a narrowed component appears in the spectrum of sn 2 - carbonyl - labeled DPPC . This narrowed component has been interpreted as a change in conformation of the sn 2 carbonyl , to approximately the magic angle ( u ’ 55° ) , together with fast axial reorientation ( Wittebort et al . , 1982 ) . In a pure phospholipid , this sharp component corresponds to the appearance of the fluid L a phase , so the interpretation of the DPPC / cholesterol results has been that a new , cholesterol - rich “liquid – gel” phase ( also termed the L 0 or b phase ) has appeared . However , to rationalize observed line broadening in the supposed two - phase region , Huang et al . ( 1993 ) suggested that the data could indicate molecular exchange between coexisting do - mains on the order of ; 100 lipids . Therefore , we would emphasize that our failure to observe coexisting DPPC - rich phases by CFM might be due to non - optimal probes , nano - scopic phase - domain scales , or both . Finally , we note that McConnell and coworkers ( Keller et al . , 2000 ) have used monolayer studies of phospholipid / cholesterol mixtures at relatively low film pressures to propose that stoichiometric “condensed complexes” of 2 phospholipids / 1 cholesterol form , by a cooperative mass action mechanism , in lipid bilayers . Apparently , the exper - imental conditions used for these monolayer studies are sensitive to formation of this 2 / 1 complex , but not to the cholesterol - induced phase changes that we observe in bilay - ers at x chol 5 0 . 16 and 0 . 25 . Implications and considerations The system we have studied , DPPC / DLPC / cholesterol at 22°C , is not the best model for a mammalian plasma mem - brane . Now that we have established the basic features of this ternary phase diagram , studies of a better model , Sph / POPC / cholesterol at various temperatures , are underway . In region D of our proposed ternary phase diagram , a phase transition occurs without macroscopic phase separa - tion . We refer to this as a region of “continuous phase transition , ” having thermodynamic characteristics that re - quire further study . For example , spatial correlation lengths should be evaluated throughout this region ( e . g . , by neutron scattering ) and Monte Carlo simulations should be pursued in an effort to reproduce this hypothesized phase behavior based on a well - defined molecular - level model . All the regions of our proposed phase diagram must be character - ized further ( e . g . , in terms of diffusion coefficient , order parameter , packing , and motional details ) . The insights thus provided will inform molecular dynamics calculations and Monte Carlo simulations . One implication of the studies reported here is that mul - ticomponent lipid mixtures are capable of a rich variety of phase behavior , including the coexistence of chemically distinct membrane environments . Regardless of whether these domains are manifest as either coexisting phases or as a single nanocomposite phase , it would be interesting to know how other components redistribute between these membrane environments ( e . g . , into ordered domains , fluid domains , or at domain boundaries ) . In general , we would like to understand the partitioning behavior of various mem - brane proteins , gangliosides , and lipid species . For example , consider the protein – protein interactions that are early events in signaling pathways ( Incardona and Eaton , 2000 ) . Are all such interactions to be understood purely in terms of protein – protein contacts ? Or might there be groups of pro - teins that share similar partitioning behavior , being concen - trated in certain types of lipid domains or at domain inter - faces ? In this study , we have not addressed the issue of overall phase behavior in real mammalian plasma membranes . However , if there are coexisting ordered and fluid environ - ments in mammalian plasma membranes , then membrane - bound molecules will partition between these environments and will be either concentrated with , or isolated from , certain other membrane - bound molecules . In addition , the diffusion of membrane - bound molecules will reflect the connectivity of these membrane environments . Therefore , 2786 Feigenson and Buboltz Biophysical Journal 80 ( 6 ) 2775 – 2788 our understanding of membrane biochemistry will be greatly informed by any fundamental advances in our un - derstanding of lateral heterogeneity within biomembranes . Based on the arguments presented earlier , we suggest that cholesterol could serve to ramify coexisting phases , creating “nanocomposite” phases , ( e . g . , region D of Fig . 9 ) . A highly ramified system of membrane environments would enhance the partitioning and diffusion kinetics of membrane com - ponents , so the biochemical implications of such a nano - scopic phase seem considerable . Perhaps these nanocom - posite phases are related to “membrane rafts , ” cholesterol - and sphingomyelin - rich plasma membrane domains having characteristic protein content ( Simons and Ikonen , 1997 ) . If so , then perhaps raft terminology will need to be expanded : in region D , the isolated domains vary from rigid - ordered - like within a less rigid environment , to fluid - ordered - like within a more rigid environment . For x chol . 0 . 25 , no more rigid - ordered phase exists at any DPPC concentration . Any nanoscale domains that might exist with x chol . 0 . 25 must be fundamentally different from those detected in region D . This work was supported by National Science Foundation Grant MCB - 0077630 . The authors acknowledge the Donors of the Petroleum Research Fund , administered by the American Chemical Society , for partial support of this research . The authors would like to thank B . Widom for helpful discussions . REFERENCES Ahmed , S . N . , D . A . Brown , and E . London . 1997 . On the origin of sphingolipid / cholesterol - rich detergent - insoluble cell membranes : phys - iological concentrations of cholesterol and sphingolipid induce forma - tion of a detergent - insoluble , liquid - ordered lipid phase in model mem - branes . Biochemistry . 36 : 10944 – 10953 . Akashi , K . - I . , H . Miyata , H . Itoh , and K . Kinosita , Jr . 1996 . Preparation of giant liposomes in physiological conditions and their characterization under an optical microscope . Biophys . J . 71 : 3242 – 3250 . Almeida , P . F . F . , W . L . C . Vaz , and T . E . Thompson . 1993 . Percolation and diffusion in three - component lipid bilayers : effect of cholesterol on an equimolar mixture of two phosphatidylcholines . Biophys . J . 64 : 399 – 412 . Bagatolli , L . A . , and E . Gratton . 2000 . Two - photon fluorescence micros - copy of coexisting lipid domains in giant unilamellar vesicles of binary phospholipid mixtures . Biophys . J . 78 : 290 – 305 . Batzri , S . , and E . D . Korn . 1973 . Single bilayer liposomes prepared without sonication . Biochim . Biophys . Acta . 298 : 1015 – 1019 . Blume , A . , and M . Hillmann . 1986 . Dimyristoylphosphatidic acid / cholesterol bilayers . Eur . Biophys . J . 13 : 343 – 353 . Brown , D . A . , and E . London . 1998 . Structure and origin of ordered lipid domains in biological membranes . J . Membr . Biol . 164 : 103 – 114 . Brown , D . A . , and J . K . Rose . 1992 . Sorting of GPI - anchored proteins to glycolipid - enriched membrane subdomains during transport to the apical cell surface . Cell . 68 : 533 – 544 . Buboltz , J . T . , and G . W . Feigenson . 1999 . A novel strategy for the preparation of liposomes : rapid solvent exchange . Biochim . Biophys . Acta . 1417 : 232 – 245 . Buboltz , J . T . , and G . W . Feigenson . 2000 . Detection of coexisting bilayer gel and fluid phases by equilibrium surface pressure analysis . Langmuir . 16 : 3606 – 3611 . Caffrey , M . 2000 . The Lipid Data Bank . http : / / www . ldb . chemistry . ohio - state . edu . Checchetti , A . , A . Golemme , G . Chidichimo , C . LaRosa , D . Grasso , and P . W . Westerman . 1996 . Effect of 1 - palmitoyl lysophosphatidylcholine on phase properties of 1 , 2 - dipalmitoyl phosphatidylethanolamine : a thermodynamic and NMR study . Chem . Phys . Lipids . 82 : 147 – 162 . Dash , J . G . 1999 . History of the search for continuous melting . Rev . Mod . Phys . 71 : 1737 – 1743 . Demel , R . A . , L . L . M . van Deenen , and B . A . Pethica . 1967 . Monolayer interactions of phospholipids and cholesterol . Biochim . Biophys . Acta . 135 : 11 – 19 . Denbigh , K . 1981 . The Principles of Chemical Equilibrium . 4th ed . , Cambridge Univ . Press , Cambridge , U . K . 207 – 212 . Devaux , P . F . , and M . Seigneuret . 1985 . Specificity of lipid – protein interaction as determined by spectroscopic techniques . Biochim . Bio - phys . Acta . 822 : 63 – 125 . Dietrich , C . , L . A . Bagatolli , Z . N . Volovyk , N . L . Thompson , M . Levi , K . Jacobson , and E . Gratton . 2001 . Lipid rafts reconstituted in model membranes . Biophys . J . 80 : 1417 – 1428 . Edidin , M . 1997 . Lipid microdomains in cell surface membranes . Curr . Opin . Struct . Biol . 7 : 528 – 532 . Epand , R . M . 1997 . Modulation of lipid polymorphism by peptides . Curr . Top . Membr . 44 : 237 – 252 . Estep , T . N . , D . B . Mountcastle , R . L . Biltonen , and T . E . Thompson . 1978 . Studies on the anomalous thermotropic behavior of aqueous dispersions of dipalmitoylphosphatidylcholine - cholesterol mixtures . Biochemistry . 17 : 1984 – 1989 . Findlay , E . J . , and P . G . Barton . 1978 . Phase behavior of synthetic phos - phatidylglycerols and binary mixtures with phosphatidylcholines in the presence and absence of calcium ions . Biochemistry . 17 : 2400 – 2405 . Fo¨rster , T . 1948 . Zwischenmolekulare energiewanderung und fluoreszenz . Ann . Physik . 2 : 55 – 75 . Fung , B . K . - K . , and L . Stryer . 1978 . Surface density determination in membranes by fluorescence energy transfer . Biochemistry . 17 : 5241 – 5248 . Guo , W . , and J . A . Hamilton . 1995 . A multinuclear solid - state NMR study of phospholipid – cholesterol interactions . Dipalmitoylphosphatidylcho - line - cholesterol binary system . Biochemistry . 34 : 14174 – 14184 . Hinderliter , A . K . , J . Huang , and G . W . Feigenson . 1994 . Detection of phase separation in fluid phosphatidylserine / phosphatidylcholine mix - tures . Biophys . J . 67 : 1906 – 1911 . Huang , C . C . , and S . C . Lien . 1985 . Effect of the smectic - A temperature range on the behavior of the smectic - A – smectic - C transition . Phys . Rev . A . 31 : 2621 – 2627 . Huang , C . C . , G . Nounesis , R . Geer , J . W . Goodby , and D . Guillon . 1989 . Calorimetric study of the smectic - A – hexatic - B phase transition of a liquid – crystal binary mixture . Phys . Rev . A . 39 : 3741 – 3744 . Huang , J . , and G . W . Feigenson . 1993 . Monte Carlo simulation of lipid mixtures : finding phase separation . Biophys . J . 65 : 1788 – 1794 . Huang , J . , and G . W . Feigenson . 1999 . A microscopic interaction model of maximum solubility of cholesterol in lipid bilayers . Biophys . J . 76 : 2142 – 2157 . Huang , J . , J . T . Buboltz , and G . W . Feigenson . 1999 . Maximum solubility of cholesterol in phosphatidylcholine and phosphatidylethanolamine bi - layers . Biochim . Biophys . Acta . 1417 : 89 – 100 . Huang , T . - H . , C . W . B . Lee , S . K . Das Gupta , and R . G . Griffin . 1993 . A 13 C and 2 H nuclear magnetic resonance study of phosphatidylcholine / cholesterol interactions : characterization of liquid – gel phases . Biochem - istry . 32 : 13277 – 13287 . Hui , S . W . , and N . - B . He . 1983 . Molecular organization in cholesterol – lecithin bilayers by x - ray and electron diffraction measure - ments . Biochemistry . 22 : 1159 – 1164 . Incardona , J . P . , and S . Eaton . 2000 . Cholesterol in signal transduction . Curr . Opin . Cell Biol . 12 : 193 – 203 . Ipsen , J . H . , G . Karlstrom , O . G . Mouritsen , H . Wennerstrom , and M . J . Zuckermann . 1987 . Phase equilibria in the phosphatidylcholine – cholesterol system . Biochim . Biophys . Acta . 905 : 162 – 172 . Isihara , A . 1991 . Condensed Matter Physics . Oxford Univ . Press , New York , 277 . DPPC / DLPC / Cholesterol Phase Diagram 2787 Biophysical Journal 80 ( 6 ) 2775 – 2788 Jacobson , K . , and C . Dietrich . 1999 . Looking at rafts ? Trends Cell . Biol . 9 : 87 – 91 . Ja¨hnig , F . 1981a . Critical effects from lipid – protein interaction in mem - branes . I . Theoretical description . Biophys . J . 36 : 329 – 345 . Ja¨hnig , F . 1981b . Critical effects from lipid – protein interaction in mem - branes . II . Interpretation of experimental results . Biophys . J . 36 : 347 – 357 . Johann , C . , P . Garidel , L . Mennicke , and D . Blume . 1996 . New approaches to the simulation of heat - capacity curves and phase diagrams of pseudo - binary phospholipid mixtures . Biophys . J . 71 : 3215 – 3228 . Jones , F . W . , and C . Sykes . 1937 . The superlattice in b brass . Proc . Roy . Soc . 161 : 440 – 446 . Keller , S . L . , A . R . Radhakrishan , and H . M . McConnell . 2000 . Saturated phospholipids with high melting temperatures form complexes with cholesterol in monolayers . J . Phys . Chem . B . 104 : 7522 – 7527 . Kenworthy , A . K . , and M . Edidin . 1998 . Distribution of a GPI - anchored protein at the apical surface of MDCK cells examined at a resolution of , 100 Angstroms using imaging fluorescence resonance energy transfer . J . Cell Biol . 142 : 69 – 84 . Kingsley , P . B . , and G . W . Feigenson . 1979 . The synthesis of a perdeu - terated phospholipid : 1 , 2 - dimyristoyl - sn - glycero - 3 - phosphocholine - d 72 . Chem . Phys . Lipids . 24 : 135 – 147 . Korlach , J . , P . Schwille , W . W . Webb , and G . W . Feigenson . 1999 . Characterization of lipid bilayer phases by confocal microscopy and fluorescence correlation spectroscopy . Proc . Nat . Acad . Sci . U . S . A . 96 : 8461 – 8466 . Ladbrooke , B . D . , R . M . Williams , and D . Chapman . 1968 . Studies on lecithin – cholesterol interactions by differential scanning calorimetry and x - ray diffraction . Biochim . Biophys . Acta . 150 : 333 – 340 . Leathes , J . B . 1925 . Role of fats in vital phenomena . Lancet . 208 : 853 – 856 . London , E . , and G . W . Feigenson . 1981 . Fluorescence quenching in model membranes . 1 . Characterization of quenching caused by a spin - labeled phospholipid . Biochemistry . 20 : 1932 – 1938 . Mabrey , S . , P . L . Mateo , and J . M . Sturtevant . 1978 . High - sensitivity scanning calorimetric study of mixtures of cholesterol with dimyristoyl - and dipalmitoyl - phosphatidylcholines . Biochemistry . 17 : 2464 – 2468 . Marsh , D . 1990 . Handbook of Lipid Bilayers . CRC Press , Boca Raton , FL . Mayor , S . , and F . R . Maxfield . 1995 . Insolubility and redistribution of GPI - anchored proteins at the cell surface after detergent treatment . Mol . Biol . Cell . 6 : 929 – 944 . McIntosh , T . J . 1978 . The effect of cholesterol on the structure of phos - phatidylcholine bilayers . Biochim . Biophys . Acta . 513 : 43 – 58 . McMullen , T . P . W . , and R . N . McElhaney . 1995 . New aspects of the interaction of cholesterol with dipalmitoylphosphatidylcholine bilayers as revealed by high - sensitivity differential scanning calorimetry . Bio - chim . Biophys . Acta . 1234 : 90 – 98 . Mitaku , S . , T . Jippo , and R . Kataoka . 1983 . Thermodynamic properties of the lipid bilayer transition . Biophys . J . 42 : 137 – 144 . Pedersen , S . , K . Jorgensen , T . R . Baekmark , and O . G . Mouritsen . 1996 . Indirect evidence for lipid domain formation in the transition region of phospholipid bilayers by two - probe fluorescence energy transfer . Bio - phys . J . 71 : 554 – 560 . Pralle , A . , P . Keller , E . - L . Florin , K . Simons , and J . K . H . Ho¨rber . 2000 . Sphingolipid - cholesterol rafts diffuse as small entities in the plasma membrane of mammalian cells . J . Cell Biol . 148 : 997 – 1008 . Rechtenwald , D . J . , and H . M . McConnell . 1981 . Phase equilibria in binary mixtures of phosphatidylcholine and cholesterol . Biochemistry . 20 : 4505 – 4510 . Risbo , J . , M . Sperotto , and O . G . Mouritsen . 1995 . Theory of phase equilibria and critical mixing points in binary lipid membranes . J . Chem . Phys . 103 : 3643 – 3656 . Roelofsen , B . , and J . A . F . Op den Kamp . 1994 . Plasma membrane phospholipid asymmetry and its maintenance : the human erythrocyte as a model . Curr . Top . Membr . 40 : 7 – 46 . Rowlinson , J . S . , and B . Widom . 1989 . Molecular Theory of Capillarity . Chap . 9 . Clarendon Press , Oxford , U . K . 249 – 306 . Sankaram , M . B . , and T . E . Thompson . 1990a . Interaction of cholesterol with various glycerophospholipids and sphingomyelin . Biochemistry . 29 : 10670 – 10675 . Sankaram , M . B . , and T . E . Thompson . 1990b . Modulation of phospholipid acyl chain order by cholesterol . A solid - state 2 H nuclear magnetic resonance study . Biochemistry . 29 : 10676 – 10684 . Schu¨tz , G . J . , G . Kada , V . Ph . Pastushenko , and H . Schindler . 2000 . Properties of lipid microdomains in a muscle cell membrane visualized by single molecule microscopy . EMBO J . 19 : 892 – 901 . Sheets , E . D . , D . Holowka , and B . Baird . 1999 . Critical role for cholesterol in Lyn - mediated tyrosine phosphorylation of Fc « RI and their association with detergent - resistant membranes . J . Cell Biol . 145 : 877 – 887 . Silvius , J . R . , D . del Giudice , and M . Lafleur . 1996 . Cholesterol at different bilayer concentrations can promote or antagonize lateral segregation of phospholipids of differing chain length . Biochemistry . 35 : 15198 – 15208 . Simons , K . , and E . Ikonen . 1997 . Functional rafts in cell membranes . Nature . 387 : 569 – 572 . Small , D . M . 1986 . Sterols and sterol esters . In The Physical Chemistry of Lipids . Plenum Press , New York . 407 . Spink , C . H . , M . D . Yeager , and G . W . Feigenson . 1990 . Partitioning behavior of indocarbocyanine probes between coexisting gel and fluid phases in model membranes . Biochim . Biophys . Acta . 1023 : 25 – 33 . Stockton , B . W . , and I . C . P . Smith . 1976 . A deuterium NMR study of the condensing effect of cholesterol on egg phosphatidylcholine bilayer membranes . Chem . Phys . Lipids . 17 : 251 – 261 . Strandburg , K . J . 1988 . Two - dimensional melting . Rev . Mod . Physics . 60 : 161 – 207 . Suga´r , I . P . , T . E . Thompson , and R . L . Biltonen . 1999 . Monte Carlo simulation of two - component bilayers : DMPC / DSPC mixtures . Biophys . J . 76 : 2099 – 2110 . Sunamoto , J . , H . Kondo , T . Nomura , and H . Okamoto . 1980 . Liposomal membranes . 2 . Synthesis of a novel pyrene - labeled lecithin and struc - tural studies on liposomal bilayers . J . Am . Chem . Soc . 102 : 1146 – 1152 . Tardieu , A . , V . Luzzati , and F . C . Reman . 1973 . Structure and polymor - phism of the hydrocarbon chains of lipids : a study of lecithin – water phases . J . Mol . Biol . 75 : 711 – 733 . Thomas , J . L . , D . Holowka , B . Baird , and W . W . Webb . 1994 . Large - scale co - aggregation of fluorescent lipid probes with cell surface proteins . J . Cell Biol . 125 : 795 – 802 . Van Dijck , P . W . M . , A . J . Laper , M . A . J . Oonk , and J . de Gier . 1977 . Miscibility properties of binary phosphatidylcholine mixtures . Biochim . Biophys . Acta . 470 : 58 – 69 . Varma , R . , and S . Mayor . 1998 . GPI - anchored proteins are organized in submicron domains at the cell surface . Nature . 394 : 798 – 801 . Vauhkonen , M . , M . Sassaroli , P . Somerharju , and J . Eisinger . 1990 . Dipyrenephosphatidylcholines as membrane fluidity probes . Biophys . J . 57 : 291 – 300 . Viola , A . , S . Schroeder , Y . Sakakibara , and A . Lanzavecchia . 1999 . T lymphocyte costimulation mediated by reorganization of membrane microdomains . Science . 283 : 680 – 682 . Vist , M . R . , and J . H . Davis . 1990 . Phase equilibria of cholesterol / dipalmitoylphosphatidylcholine mixtures . Biochemistry . 29 : 451 – 464 . Wittebort , R . J . , A . Blume , T . - H . Huang , S . K . Das Gupta , and R . G . Griffin . 1982 . Carbon - 13 nuclear magnetic resonance investigations of phase transitions and phase equilibria in pure and mixed phospholipid bilayers . Biochemistry . 21 : 3487 – 3502 . Wolber , P . K . , and B . S . Hudson . 1979 . An analytic solution to the Fo¨rster energy transfer problem in two dimensions . Biophys . J . 28 : 197 – 210 . Xu , X . , and E . London . 2000 . The effect of sterol structure on membrane lipid domains reveals how cholesterol can induce lipid domain forma - tion . Biochemistry . 39 : 843 – 849 . Zachowski , A . 1993 . Phospholipids in animal eukaryotic membranes : transverse asymmetry and movement . Biochem . J . 294 : 1 – 14 . Zimet , D . B . , B . J . - M . Thevenin , A . S . Verkman , S . B . Shohet , and J . R . Abney . 1995 . Calculation of resonance energy transfer in crowded biological membranes . Biophys . J . 68 : 1592 – 1603 . 2788 Feigenson and Buboltz Biophysical Journal 80 ( 6 ) 2775 – 2788