Cell , Vol . 94 , 151 – 154 , July 24 , 1998 , Copyright ª 1998 by Cell Press Dynamin : A Molecular Motor Minireview with Pinchase Action and Schmid ( 1995 ) providedgraphic imagesof dynamin , under low salt conditions , assembling into rings and spirals . These structures were of similar dimensions to Mark A . McNiven Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology The Center for Basic Research the “collars” about the membrane invaginations ob - in Digestive Diseases served at the nerve terminals of mutant shibire ts flies Mayo Foundation ( Kosaka and Ikeda , 1983 ; Koenig and Ikeda , 1996 ) . This Rochester , Minnesota 55905 self association of dynamin was shown not to require GTP binding or hydrolysis . Thus , dynamin is the second structural protein , after clathrin , known to undergo self The large GTPase dynamin , originally isolated from calf assembly to mediate coated vesicle formation . At nearly brain as a putative microtubule - associated motor en - the same time Tuma and Collins ( 1995 ) demonstrated zyme nearly a decade ago ( Shpetner and Vallee , 1989 ) , that dynamin has anintrinsic capacity to formpolymeric has recently been implicated in the liberation of endo - complexes along lipid vesicles . Together these groups cyticvesicles fromthe plasma membrane . Aculmination provided the first predictions of how dynamin polymer - of studies using either the temperature - sensitive mutant ization could facilitate the fission of an endocytic mem - fruit fly shibire ts , which possesses a point mutation near brane tubule from the cell surface . Takei and coworkers the GTP - binding domain of dynamin , or overexpression ( 1995 ) provided the first demonstration that membranes of mutant dynamin in mammaliancells is consistentwith from hypotonically lysed rat brain synaptosomes , incu - the concept that dynamin participates in clathrin - based bated with brain cytosol and GTP (cid:103) S , could support the endocytic processes . From these observations we had formation of tubular invaginations decorated with dense originally proposed that dynamin may act as a “molecu - staining rings of dynamin . The physical similarity be - lar pinchase” ( Urrutia et al . , 1997 ) that could generate tween these dynamin - coated membrane structures and a mechanochemical force used to sever membranes . those foundeither in the mutant shibire ts nerve terminals Appropriately , this concept has been challenged ( Roos in vivo or in the cell - free studies of dynamin spirals and Kelly , 1997 ) . As recently reported by Sweitzer and ( Hinshaw and Schmid , 1995 ) , could not have been more Hinshaw ( 1998 ) and Takei and coworkers ( 1998 ) , dy - striking . namin alone is capable of transforming spherical lipo - Despite the initial appeal of the important observa - somes into long constricted tubules . Upon addition of tions described above , additional experimentation was GTP , dynamin subsequently severs these tubules into required to confirm their physiological relevance . First , discrete vesicles of a consistent diameter ( Sweitzer and did the collared invaginationsformed in the lysed synap - Hinshaw , 1998 ) . These studies make two substantial tosomal preparations represent an ungoverned assem - contributions . First , dynamin appears to meet the basic bly of dynamin induced by GTP (cid:103) S ? Second , why were criteria of a molecular motor . Whereas the in vivo inter - low salt conditions ( (cid:44) 50 mM ) required for the cell - free actionsbetween dynamin andcytoskeletal filaments are formation of polymeric dynamin ring structures ? Finally , currently unresolved , it is now known that dynamin can can dynamin sever membranes alone , or does it play a bind and hydrolyze nucleotide to generate a motive secondary function asacofactoror a “molecularswitch” force and do work , which , in this case , represents the characteristic of mostGTPases ? Thefirst of these ques - compression and severing of a membrane tubule . Sec - tions is addressed by Takei and coworkers ( 1998 ) who ond , although it was thought that dynamin acted subse - have extended their original findings using rat synapto - quently to the recruitment of coat proteins at the site of vesicle budding , both of these studies suggest that , at somal membrane to include membranes and lipids from least under in vitro conditions , this is not the case . several cellular and synthetic sources . The modifica - Constricting Membranes into Tubules tions included the use of a highly enriched prepara - The dynamin family of proteins is encoded by three tion of dynamin - deficient coat proteins stripped from distinct genes and has several conserved motifs ( Figure brain - purified clathrin - coated vesicles and / or purified 1 ) that provide insight into its function . These include a highly conserved tripartite GTP - binding domain in the first N - terminal 300 amino acids ; a pleckstrin homology domain ( PHD ) of 100 amino acids , which may mediate membrane binding ; and a proline - rich domain ( PRD ) at the C terminus , which is modestly conserved and be - Figure 1 . The Dynamin Proteins Possess Specific Domains That Perform Distinct Functions lieved to mediate interactions between dynamin and other proteins ( reviewed by Urrutia et al . 1997 ) . Illustration depicting percent homology between the different do - mains of dynamin 1 , 2 , and 3 . A highly conserved tripartite GTP - The first mechanistic insights into how dynamin might binding domain is located at the N terminus , while a membrane - interact with either itself or membranes to form invagi - binding , pleckstrin homology domain ( PHD ) is more centrally nations was provided by seminal studies using cell - free situated . A region , weakly predicted to be a coiled - coil ( cc ) , may systems . Tuma and Collins ( 1994 ) were the first to dem - act as an effector domain to activate the dynamin GTPase activity onstrate that the GTPase activity of dynamin exhibits and lies just before a proline - rich domain ( PRD ) thathas been dem - positive cooperativity with regard to enzyme concentra - onstrated to interact with numerousother proteins . This figure does tion , andthat direct interactionsbetweendynamin mole - not represent the dynamin - related proteins that do not have a PHD or a PRD . cules may regulate function . Subsequently , Hinshaw Cell152 recombinant dynamin 1 . These protein components were tubules into vesicles even after the proteolytic removal of the C - terminal PRD . This informative experiment is combined with lipid membranes under a variety of con - consistentwitha modelin whichthe PHDand N - terminal ditions , most notably , either ATP with GTP , or ATP with portions of dynamin provide membrane and nucleotide GTP (cid:103) S . From these variations of a central theme several binding as well as a pinchase function . The C - terminal surprising and important observations were made . First , PRD may protrude outward from the membrane tubule the membrane requirements for dynamin to make con - to bindtargeting proteins , such asSH3 domain – contain - stricted multicollared tubules is not as specific as was ing proteins or the membranes of specific organelles . originallypredicted . Althoughdynamin did notassociate Correlating the Action of Dynamin In Vitro with mitochondrial or nuclear membranes , collared with Vesicle Formation in Living Cells structures formed , not only on membranes ofperforated From the cell - free studies described above we have CHO cells in culture , but also along inside - out red blood gained additional insights into how dynamin and coat cell membranes and even on protein - free liposomes . proteins interact to form membrane tubules and vesi - Second , in addition to participating in the incorporation cles . Are there parallels between the in vitro observa - of internalized cargo and contributing to both curvature tions and vesicle biogenesis in an intact cell ? One is and constriction of a forming tubular vesicle , coat pro - inclined to say yes based on the comparative images teins may also act as governors to either facilitate or of vesicle formation in vivo and in vitro shown in Figure limit the association of dynamin and other proteins with 2 . Thisfigure showssimilar imagesofmembrane tubules an organelle surface . Thus , an additional function for observed in intact neurons and epithelial cells in which clathrin might be to provide a structural barrier to pre - dynamin function has , or has not , been impaired . The vent the rapid and unchecked polymerization of dy - common theme conveyed by these images is that these namin onto a forming tubule . Perhaps most importantly , complex and transient tubular networks may normally the recent study by Takei and coworkers ( 1998 ) demon - reside at the cell cortex but are accentuated when dy - strates that collared tubules can form in vitro without namin function is disrupted , either by antibodies or a the nonhydrolyzable analog GTP (cid:103) S or even ATP or GTP . temperature - sensitive point mutation . It is attractive to Although GTP (cid:103) S clearly enhances the visualization of predict that these dynamin - and coat - laden reticular dynamin - collared tubules , such structures clearly form membrane tubules provide a template from which na - under other conditions . Thus , nucleotide is not required scent vesicles are generated . Rather than a single for either dynamin - coat recruitment to membranes or coated vesicle assembling and releasing from a donor subsequent tubule formation . membrane , compartments may form tubular reticuli , Pinching Tubules into Vesicles which are subsequently constricted by coat proteins The findings of Takei and coworkers ( 1998 ) are comple - into segmentsor links . Activationof dynamin would pro - mentary to the observations of Sweitzer and Hinshaw vide a terminal scission event transforming the tubule ( 1998 ) , which established dynamin’s “pinchase” func - into multiple vesicles . This tubule model for vesicle bio - tion . Although the experimental conditions in the Takei genesis has been proposed to occur at the trans - Golgi study supported the formation of long dynamin - coated network ( Rambourg et al . , 1981 ) . tubules , with or without clathrin , liberation of individual The models described here are perhaps best sup - vesicles did notoccur under any condition tested . Steps ported bythe elegant studiesof Koenig and Ikeda ( 1996 ) toward defining the conditions for optimal dynamin who have examined the formation and vesiculation of function were achieved by a recent study ( Carr and Hin - tubular membrane intermediates in retinula cell termi - shaw , 1997 ) in which addition of GDP and (cid:103) - phosphate nals from shibire ts flies . When these flies are held for analogs promoted the assembly of recombinant dy - 30 – 60 s at the restrictive temperature followed by a 5 namin 1 into long spirals under physiological salt con - min recovery at the permissive temperature , constricted centrations . In the current study ( Sweitzer and Hinshaw , membrane tubules are formed in these cells ( Figure 2d ) . 1998 ) these conditions were refined further so that dy - As the recovery period is extended , these tubules be - namin 1 , when combined with synthetic liposomescom - come increasingly constricted until the reticulum is posed of phosphatidylserine , formed a regular pattern consumed and transformed into a cluster of vesicles of helicalcoatedmembranes , whichnotonlyconstricted ( Figures 2e and 2f ) . This vesiculation of a reticular inter - spherical liposomes into tubules but vesiculated these mediate , which occurs away from the active zone at the tubules upon addition of GTP . Remarkably , dynamin terminal , is believed to be slower than the tubule - to - alone can bind , constrict , and sever membranes into vesicle transition at the active zone , which may occur individual vesicles . Whereas the first two steps of this too quickly to capture using conventional chemical fixa - process canoccur in a nucleotide - independentmanner , tion methods . Thus , it is attractive to predict that this the final fission step requires GTP . This observation is process in the intact shibire ts cells is represented by the consistent with the early observations made both in the constriction of tubules observed in the cell - free assays . mutant shibire ts flies ( Koenig and Ikeda , 1996 ) and in the Howthismechanism couldproducevesicles ofa consis - in vitro studies using GTP (cid:103) S ( Takei et al . , 1995 ) . Either tent size without the participation of clathrin coats is because of a point mutation in or near the GTP - binding unclear . motif of the fly dynamin or the presence of the GTP (cid:103) S An additional parallel between tubule - vesicle forma - analog , GTP hydrolysis is prevented , thereby facilitating tion in vitro and in shibire ts nerve terminals is the appar - the accumulation of yet more collared invaginations . ent lack of a clathrin requirement . Clathrin coats may Subsequent liberation of nascent vesicles cannot occur aid vesicle formation in vitro by budding membrane and until dynamin hydrolyzes GTP . In addition to this striking providing a curvature of consistent dimensions . The observation , Sweitzer and Hinshaw ( 1998 ) demonstrate most striking observation , however , is that nascent syn - aptic vesicles at retinula cell terminals of shibire ts , either that dynamin can bind , constrict , and sever membrane Minireview153 Figure 2 . Dynamin Mediates the Formation of Tubular - Vesicular Complexes in Cells or in Cell - Free Assays A gallery of electron micrographs collected from studies demonstrating a role for dy - namin in the formation of membrane reticuli and discrete vesicles . ( a – c ) Formation of tubular - vesicular com - plexes in vitro . ( a ) Liposomes comprised of brain lipids form a tubular reticulum in the presence of brain cytosol , ATP , and GTP . ( b ) Recombinant dynamin 1 is assembled into spiral structures , which constrict phosphoti - dyl serine liposomes into extended tubules of uniform diameter in the absence of GTP . ( c ) Addition of 1 mM GTP to the dynamin - liposome tubule preparation depicted in ( b ) induces vesiculation . ( d – g ) Disruption of dynamin function in living cells induces membrane morphologies simi - lar to those observed in vitro . ( d – f ) Membrane dynamics in retinula nerve cell terminals from the shibire ts mutant flies during recovery from the restrictive temperature . ( d ) A 5 min recovery allows the formation of numerous branching reticular tubules . ( e ) By 15 min , clumps of markedly vesiculated tubules form . ( f ) These membrane tubule clumps resolve into discrete vesicles by 25 min of recovery . This process appears to mimic the in vitro vesiculation of liposomes by dynamin shown in ( c ) . ( g ) Inhibition of dynamin function in a cultured hepatocyte microinjected with purified dynamin antibodies . Several hours after injection , reticular plasma membrane invaginations , resembling those observed in vitro and in the shibire ts neurons , are formed . ( h ) Untreated mammalian photoreceptor nerve terminals in situ reveal a tubular reticulum . ( i ) A model , incorporating the morphological observations shown above , predicts that newly formed membrane buds , coated or noncoated , grow and extend from a donor compartment . The assembly of dynamin on these tubules may generate a membrane reticulum from which nascent vesicles bud . ( a ) Reproduced with permission from Takei et al . ( copyright 1998 , Cell Press ) . ( b and c ) Reproduced with permission from Sweitzer and Hinshaw ( copyright 1998 , Cell Press ) . ( d , e , and f ) Reproduced with permission from Koenig and Ikeda ( Rockefeller University Press , 1996 ) . ( g ) Reproduced with permission as modified from Henley et al . ( Rockefeller University Press , 1998 ) . ( h ) Courtesy of Takei and De Camilli . at or away from the active zone , are not clathrin - coated . ture and subsequent membrane scission to form sealed endocytic vesicles . Although these observations do not This lack of clathrin coats is likely to be biologically significant because many aberrant clathrin - coated pits obviate the requirement for any particular coat protein in vesicle biogenesis , they do indicatethat cells may use are observed in epithelial cells from the same mutant flies ( Kosaka and Ikeda , 1983 ) . This suggests that coat several different mechanisms to form nascent vesicles . Compressing , Slicing , or Dicing components in the neurons are not lost due to the fixa - tion process , and thatformation of atleast some vesicu - Membrane Tubules ? Our understanding of dynamin function is based on the lar populations at the synapse is clathrin - independent . Lipids , Coats , and Dynamin initial biochemical observations made by Hinshaw and Schmid ( 1995 ) and Tuma and Collins ( 1994 , 1995 ) . From Although it is generally assumed that dynamin and clathrin work together to form nascent vesicles from the these findings dynamin action can be organized into at least three distinct processes : binding / assembly , se - plasma membrane , there are several examples in which vesicles may be generated without either protein . Mat - vering , and disassembly . During the binding / assembly reaction , a dynamin ho - suoka et al . ( 1998 ) have identified the components of the COPII complex that are competent to form vesicles modimer or homomultimer may be targeted to aspecific membrane compartment through the binding of its PRD from purified liposomes in a defined assay . The COPII coat has been implicated in the formation of nascent tail to the SH3 domain of a specific protein on the target membrane . Concomitant with , or subsequent to , this vesicles from the endoplasmic reticulum . Remarkably , the combinationofonly threeCOPII components , Sar1p , protein – protein bindingis anassociation of the dynamin PHD with a negativelychargedlipid surface . Upon mem - Sec13 / 31p , and Sec23 / 24p , with phosphoinositol 4 - phos - phate and specific phospholipids supports the forma - brane binding and without a nucleotide requirement , dynamin adopts an orientation that promotes self as - tion of coated buds and vesicles at both 30 (cid:56) C and 4 (cid:56) C . Thus , only five proteins appear to be required to gener - semblyinto spirals ( Figure 2b ) whichmayact to constrict flat membrane surfaces into tubules . This binding and ate lipid vesicles in vitro without the aid of dynamin . To reduce the requirements of vesicle formation further , constriction process is likely to be enhanced or regu - lated substantially through the synergistic assembly of Zha et al . ( 1998 ) have recently demonstrated that cul - tured cells , depleted of ATP and incubated with exoge - various coat proteins . Theseveringreaction mayoccur asfollows . Asa result nous sphingomyelinase , rapidly form numerous non - coated , ligand - containing vesicles that bud from the of self assembly the GTPase activity of dynamin is in - creased dramatically inducing a predicted conforma - plasma membrane . Theseauthors speculate thathydro - lysis of sphingomyelin alone may cause inward curva - tional change in the dynamin polymer . Although this Cell154 Selected Reading active , nucleotide - dependent constriction may account for only a 20 % – 30 % reduction in the circumference of Carr , J . F . , andHinshaw , J . E . ( 1997 ) . J . Biol . Chem . 272 , 28030 – 28035 . a membrane tubule ( Sweitzer and Hinshaw , 1998 ) , it is Henley , J . R . , Krueger , E . W . , Oswald , B . J . , andMcNiven , M . A . ( 1998 ) . possible that this change exceeds the curvature limit J . Cell Biol . 141 , 85 – 99 . permitted for a stable lipid bilayer . Thus , the membrane Hinshaw , J . E . , and Schmid , S . L . ( 1995 ) . Nature 374 , 190 – 192 . may be snapped or broken in distinct locations rather Jones , S . M . , Howell , K . E . , Henley , J . R . , Cao , H . , and McNiven , M . A . than being cut . ( 1998 ) . Science 279 , 573 – 577 . Finally , following a conformational change in the dy - Koenig , J . H . , and Ikeda , K . ( 1996 ) . J . Cell Biol . 135 , 797 – 808 . namin polymer and the liberation of nascent vesicles , Kosaka , T . , and Ikeda , K . ( 1983 ) . J . Cell Biol . 97 , 499 – 507 . dynamin may release GDP and P i to disassemble into Llorente , A . , Rapak , A . , Schmid , S . L . , van Deurs , B . , and Sandvig , smaller oligomers and detach from the membrane sur - K . ( 1998 ) . J . Cell Biol . 140 , 553 – 563 . face . Alternatively , dynamin may remain associatedwith Matsuoka , K . , Orci , L . , Amherdt , M . , Bednarek , S . Y . , Hamamoto , S . , a newly formed vesicle for transport to another target Schekman , R . , and Yeung , T . ( 1998 ) . Cell 93 , 263 – 275 . membrane . Munn , A . L . , Stevenson , B . J . , Geli , M . I . , and Riezman , H . ( 1995 ) . Mol . Although simplifiedandincomplete , thisscenario pro - Biol . Cell 6 , 1721 – 1742 . vides a model that can be tested in the future . The cell - Mu¨sch , A . , Cohen , D . , and Rodriguez - Boulan , E . ( 1997 ) . J . Cell Biol . free studies described here demonstrate that dynamin 138 , 291 – 306 . alone can compress and sever membrane tubules . It Oh , P . , McIntosh D . P . , and Schnitzer , J . E . ( 1998 ) . J . Cell Biol . 141 , will be of interest to test how this reaction is governed 101 – 114 . in living cells . In particular , understanding the physical Rambourg , A . , Clermont , Y . , and Hermo , L . ( 1981 ) . Methods Cell Biol . 23 , 155 – 166 . interactions between dynamin , an invaginating mem - brane tubule , andthe cytoskeleton willproveparticularly Roos , J . , and Kelly , R . B . ( 1997 ) . Trends Cell Biol . 7 , 257 – 258 . important . It is attractive to predictthat either the micro - Salisbury , J . L . , Condeelis , J . S . , and Satir , P . ( 1980 ) . J . Cell Biol . 87 , 132 – 141 . tubule - or actin - based cytoskeleton could participate in Shpetner , H . S . , and Vallee , R . B . ( 1989 ) . Cell 59 , 421 – 432 . a dynamin - mediated vesicle budding event by pulling on a forming membrane tubule . Such a force would Sweitzer , S . M . , and Hinshaw , J . E . ( 1998 ) . Cell 93 , 1021 – 1029 . place the invaginatingmembrane undertension , thereby Takei , K . , McPherson , P . S . , Schmid , S . L . , and De Camilli , P . ( 1995 ) . Nature 374 , 186 – 189 . facilitating adynamin - based compression andsevering . Takei , K . , Haucke , V . , Slepnev , V . , Farsad , K . , Salazar , M . , Chen , H . , Although vesicle formation in cells is generally believed and De Camilli , P . ( 1998 ) . Cell 94 , 131 – 141 . not to be directly dependent upon microtubules , it is Tuma , P . L . , and Collins , C . A . ( 1994 ) . J . Biol . Chem . 269 , 30842 – possible that such interactions may enhance the effi - 30847 . ciency of this process . Furthermore , the actin - myosin Tuma , P . L . , and Collins , C . A . ( 1995 ) . J . Biol . Chem . 270 , 26707 – cytoskeleton has been implicated in the formation of 26714 . nascent secretory and endocytic vesicles from the Urrutia , R . , Henley , J . R . , Cook , T . , and McNiven , M . A . ( 1997 ) . Proc . trans - Golgi network ( Mu¨sch et al . , 1997 ) and the plasma Natl . Acad . Sci . USA . 94 , 377 – 384 . membrane ( Salisbury et al . , 1980 ; Munn et al . , 1995 ) , Zha , X . , Pierini , L . M . , Leopold , P . L . , Skiba , P . J . , Tabas , I . , and Max - respectively . Thus , vesicle formation may proceed by field , F . R . ( 1998 ) . J . Cell Biol . 140 , 39 – 47 . the synergistic efforts of multiple force generating en - zymes pulling , pushing , andpinching membranessimul - taneously . Future Directions Although our understanding of how dynamin generates a compression force is currently embryonic , rapid prog - ress should be madebyutilizing the biochemical , molec - ular , andcell biological methods applied to other molec - ular motor enzymes . Whether dynamin performs other functions viaitsinteractionwith numerous signalingSH3 domain – containing proteins also needs to be defined . Finally , it will be important to understand how dynamin assembly and activity are regulated , and how the differ - ent dynamin proteins might be targeted to distinct mem - brane compartments . With the number of identified dy - namin family members increasing , it is attractive to draw a parallel with other molecular motor families that are known to function at distinct membrane compartments . Indeed , dynamin has been shown to participate in the liberation of caveloae ( Henley et al . , 1998 ; Oh et al . , 1998 ) and in vesicle trafficking to and from the Golgi apparatus ( Jones et al . , 1998 ; Llorente et al . 1998 ) . How the activity of different dynamin molecules at distinct membrane compartments might be modulated is unde - fined . So , the dynamin founders were on target from the start : it appears to be a motor after all .