This article was downloaded by : [ Aalto - yliopiston kirjasto ] On : 22 December 2014 , At : 07 : 07 Publisher : Taylor & Francis Informa Ltd Registered in England and Wales Registered Number : 1072954 Registered office : Mortimer House , 37 - 41 Mortimer Street , London W1T 3JH , UK Click for updates CoDesign : International Journal of CoCreation in Design and the Arts Publication details , including instructions for authors and subscription information : http : / / www . tandfonline . com / loi / ncdn20 What difference does a living lab make ? Comparing two health technology innovation projects Sampsa Hyysalo a & Louna Hakkarainen a a Department of Design , School of Art , Design and Architecture , Aalto University , Helsinki , Finland Published online : 03 Dec 2014 . To cite this article : Sampsa Hyysalo & Louna Hakkarainen ( 2014 ) What difference does a living lab make ? Comparing two health technology innovation projects , CoDesign : International Journal of CoCreation in Design and the Arts , 10 : 3 - 4 , 191 - 208 , DOI : 10 . 1080 / 15710882 . 2014 . 983936 To link to this article : http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1080 / 15710882 . 2014 . 983936 PLEASE SCROLL DOWN FOR ARTICLE Taylor & Francis makes every effort to ensure the accuracy of all the information ( the “Content” ) contained in the publications on our platform . However , Taylor & Francis , our agents , and our licensors make no representations or warranties whatsoever as to the accuracy , completeness , or suitability for any purpose of the Content . Any opinions and views expressed in this publication are the opinions and views of the authors , and are not the views of or endorsed by Taylor & Francis . The accuracy of the Content should not be relied upon and should be independently verified with primary sources of information . Taylor and Francis shall not be liable for any losses , actions , claims , proceedings , demands , costs , expenses , damages , and other liabilities whatsoever or howsoever caused arising directly or indirectly in connection with , in relation to or arising out of the use of the Content . This article may be used for research , teaching , and private study purposes . Any substantial or systematic reproduction , redistribution , reselling , loan , sub - licensing , systematic supply , or distribution in any form to anyone is expressly forbidden . Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at http : / / www . tandfonline . com / page / terms - and - conditions D o w n l o a d e d by [ A a lt o - y li op i s t on k i r j a s t o ] a t 07 : 07 22 D ece m b e r 2014 What difference does a living lab make ? Comparing two health technology innovation projects Sampsa Hyysalo * and Louna Hakkarainen Department of Design , School of Art , Design and Architecture , Aalto University , Helsinki , Finland ( Received 7 March 2014 ; accepted 31 October 2014 ) Living laboratories are increasingly common and promising arrangements in collaborative design . Their strength lies in being real life , open ended , sustained and complex coproduction arrangements , but these characteristics also make it hard to research what difference a living lab collaboration would make – after all the project within a living lab should be quite different to one conducted without it . This paper reports on a rare opportunity to compare two unusually similar innovation projects , one of which relied on a living lab and the other that did not . Contrary to what one might have predicted , the living lab collaboration did not make the development paths very different , and the key challenges regarding design collaboration remained closely similar . Extensive redesign in pilot use , an extended learning period between developers and users , consciously built collaboration arrangements , effective boundary spanners and investment in conﬂict resolution were equally paramount to success in both cases . The living laboratory did make meeting these challenges quicker , and lessened the strain that redesigns caused to customer relations . Keywords : living lab ; collaborative design ; case study comparison ; health technology ; innovation Introduction The ﬁeld of collaborative design has grown to feature a wide range of approaches by which designers and users can collaborate in the creation of new technologies and services . Further , it has become salient that in more demanding contexts any one - time measure is unlikely to be sufﬁcient . Most codesign approaches rely on some form of iterative development , but many now argue that design collaboration needs to continue also after the initial launch . The full potential of an innovation and its eventual best shape becomes visible only after being explored in its real - life settings by both users and designers ( Voss et al . 2009 ; Hess and Pipek 2012 ; Simonsen and Hertzum 2012 ; Botero and Hyysalo 2013 ) . This is where many see promise in real - life exploratory settings such as living laboratories . Deﬁned as ‘a real - life test and experimentation environment where users and producers co - create innovations’ ( ENoLL [ European Network of Living Labs ] website 2014 ) , living labs are seen as an opportunity to give shape to new technology in real - life contexts and turn end users to active coproducers ( Ballon , Pierson , and Delaere 2005 ; Hillgren , Seravalli , and Emilson 2011 ; Manzini and Rizzo 2011 ) ; embed complex product ideas and prototypes in everyday life ; and to enrich the description and the evolution of q 2014 Taylor & Francis * Corresponding author . Email : sampsa . hyysalo @ aalto . ﬁ CoDesign , 2014 Vol . 10 , Nos . 3 – 4 , 191 – 208 , http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1080 / 15710882 . 2014 . 983936 D o w n l o a d e d by [ A a lt o - y li op i s t on k i r j a s t o ] a t 07 : 07 22 D ece m b e r 2014 behaviour , motives , attitudes and knowledge of the persons involved ( Pierson and Lievens 2005 ) . Living labs have been further endorsed as offering a governance and structure to user involvement and user contributions , helping sense user insights , providing solutions to the user input ﬁltering problem , creating societal involvement and promoting user entrepreneurship ( Almirall and Wareham 2008 ) . By now , over 340 living labs worldwide are listed by ENoLL website ( 2014 ) . Yet , to our knowledge , there is little detailed empirical assessment of the merits of living labs as settings for collaboration in innovation projects . As is typical to the early years of a research area , most of the over 200 key research papers we have identiﬁed on living labs focus on what can or potentially could be done in them and how it should happen . The papers that seek to assess living labs or practices therein combine practitioner reﬂection and conceptual comparisons with other collaborative design settings and means , or have compared differences between various living labs ( e . g . Mulder and Stappers 2009 ; Almirall , Lee , and Wareham 2012 ; Leminen , Westerlund , and Nystro¨m 2012 ) . The lack of empirical assessments is likely owed to it being considerably more difﬁcult to undertake such assessment than it may ﬁrst appear . Unlike relatively simple and short codesign techniques , such as card sorting or collaborative walkthroughs ( Bødker , Kensing , and Simonsen 2004 ) , the effects of living labs are hard to assess in experimental set - ups or through comparing project experiences . This is because a living lab is an open ended , sustained and complex coproduction arrangement that brings together technology providers , users , researchers and other social actors such as cities . By deﬁnition , living labs are not just test beds ; they turn users to active co - creators and explorers of emerging ideas , scenarios and innovative concepts ( Manzini and Rizzo 2011 ; Leminen , Westerlund , and Nystro¨m 2012 ) . Research on innovation processes has shown how such exploratory projects tend to be affected by tens or even hundreds of signiﬁcant events and decisions made by partisan actors as well as external stakeholders ( Van de Ven et al . 1999 ) . The resulting project trajectories are highly particular , and it is rare that one can sensibly compare high contingency processes with regard to the relative merits of this or that complex arrangement ( Russell and Williams 2002 ; Garud and Gehman 2012 ) . In the course of running a 15 - year research programme of longitudinal studies on designer – user collaboration in innovation projects , however , we gained access to two health care information and communication technology ( ICT ) projects that appear to provide grounds for sensible comparison of the merits of a living lab . These two projects – wrist monitoring and ﬂoor monitoring system for elderly care – used roughly similar basic technology , had a technology - driven start - up history , originated in the same city , were targeted at the same users and use contexts , had struggled similarly to succeed but are both up and running , although without as yet making it very big . One project evolved within the ENoLL listed Helsinki living lab , the other did not . The wrist monitoring system refers to a device worn on the wrist , which collects data about elderly user’s physical activity . In addition to regular nurse call feature , the system is able to automatically call for help when the user is unconscious . The ﬂoor monitoring system is based on a sensor network that is installed under the ﬂooring material and it is used primarily in elderly care institutions . The system allows the monitoring of user’s motion and position on the ﬂoor , and it can inform nurses , e . g . when an elderly person is fallen down , getting out of bed or spending unusually long time in the toilet . The alarms are received through cell phones in both technologies . The ﬂoor monitoring innovation that evolved in a living lab matches , as an emblematic case , how living lab collaboration has been envisioned : it evolved in a living lab that is formally listed among ENoLL living labs , and we selected it from among several projects S . Hyysalo and L . Hakkarainen 192 D o w n l o a d e d by [ A a lt o - y li op i s t on k i r j a s t o ] a t 07 : 07 22 D ece m b e r 2014 therein because it exempliﬁed the most in - depth co - creation between developers , users and third parties in a real - life context to develop both the new technology and its applications . Indeed , upon starting to follow this project , our hypothesis was that its development path would be strikingly different than that of the wrist monitoring project we had studied before . The two paths continued , however , to resemble each other , and particularly the challenges they faced in collaborative design appeared roughly similar . Assessing the merits of living lab for health technology innovation projects In - depth case studies have become the state of the art for researching innovation projects , which tend to be complex and contingent ; their outcomes are a result of many events , decisions and responses to the particularities of the then current situation . A given event in collaboration tends to be part of the conﬁguration of other events that together have effects on the next steps . Some events may become negated later ; for instance , the results emerging from user collaboration may be disregarded amidst other concerns . Thus , tens of interviews , rich document materials and observations are typically needed to form a mesh of observational units that covers the analysis units sufﬁciently ( Van de Ven et al . 1999 ; Russell and Williams 2002 ; Ho¨yssa¨ and Hyysalo 2009 ; Garud and Gehman 2012 ) . Both of our cases were studied using the biography of technologies and practices approach ( Pollock and Williams 2008 ; Hyysalo 2010 ; Johnson et al . 2014 ; Pollock & Hyysalo , 2014 ) . The approach means deploying long - term investigation into the biography of an innovation by following the development of technology as well as the practices of both developers and users related to it , as well as the inﬂuences of other stakeholders insofar as they are relevant . With regard to the development project , the changes in the material make up , visions of its future states and the business models are charted as a changing nexus throughout its development . The organisation of the design activities , collaborative network , knowledge base , company organisation and size are mapped and linked to the biography of the project . Regarding user practices , the development paths of key user - organisations are investigated both prior to and after implementation . The evolution of use of the technology is then enquired for an extended period of time , in both studies reported here , encompassing from earliest ideas to more than one version of the technology being deployed . Other stakeholders’ are investigated insofar as they play a major role , but are not given as much attention than developers and users , which form the key parties in the coproductive arrangement . Longitudinal follow - up research has been realised by combining different research materials . The main data types were semi - structured interviews , documents and ﬁeld observations . In both projects discussed in this paper , interviews were utilised to reconstruct the course of the innovation project prior to our entry as well as to make periodical updates on events and actor perspectives . In both cases , we also had access to rich documentary material both prior to and after our entry . Field observations were substantial in the wrist monitoring case , but remained as supportive data in the ﬂoor monitoring case . In both cases , the authors have been impartial outside researchers . In the document analysis , we followed the principles of historiographic source criticism ( Tosh 1991 ) . Open coding of content was used to sort interviews . In the wrist monitoring study , we used ATLAS . ti , which led to 758 entries in 132 categories . In the ﬂoor monitoring case , the interviews were coded manually ( Glaser and Strauss 1967 ) . The source criticism of documents and the initial interview analyses were complemented by data triangulation and across - method triangulation ( Denzin 1989 ) . Interview data , such as informants’ accounts of the development process , and document sets , such as the series of CoDesign 193 D o w n l o a d e d by [ A a lt o - y li op i s t on k i r j a s t o ] a t 07 : 07 22 D ece m b e r 2014 business plans , were compared and cross - validated to complement one another . The case analyses and methods are reported in detail in prior articles and book length reports : on wrist monitoring – Hyysalo 2003 , 2006 , 2010 ; on ﬂoor monitoring – Hakkarainen 2013 ; Hakkarainen and Hyysalo 2013 . The above research provides us with fair conﬁdence on the processes of design collaboration within both cases . Because of the same research approach and similarities in the project contexts , it also became sensible to seek further comparison ( Russell and Williams 2002 ; Hyysalo 2010 ) . This additional comparative analysis was conducted for the study presented here . It rests on coding and comparing key events and interactions following Van de Ven et al . ’s ( 1999 ) event mapping technique of the innovation journey . Key ideas , key outcomes , changes in people or technology , key interactions between designers and users , and issues about markets and in the contexts of the two innovations were mapped and then compared . Both authors read the detailed case descriptions and then sought to identify the events to be compared . After the initial mappings , 69 key points for comparison were found . These could be consolidated into 52 points of comparison that were directly relevant for understanding the role of the living lab for designer – user relations and are examined in Figures 1 – 5 . Data - based discussion between the authors was then used to evaluate the degree of difference or resemblance of each event . In the following we ﬁrst recount the ﬂoor monitoring project in ﬁve project stages , followed by the wrist monitoring case . In doing so we provide , in brackets , numbers related to events we compare for resemblance / difference in Figures 1 – 5 . As an example , a marking ( 1 , 3 , 11 ) would point to three comparison events in Figure 1 . Case overviews : ﬂoor monitoring and wrist monitoring Floor monitoring case Initiation stage The ﬁrst innovation project , which we call ‘ﬂoor monitoring’ , has its roots at Helsinki School of Technology , where a motion tracking technique was discovered in the late 1990s . The suggestion to advance the techniques from intelligent environment demonstrations ( Kyma¨la¨inen 2015 ) into a gerontechnological device came from a manager of a large public nursing home ( 2 ) . Because of this impetus , a group of researchers and students began to develop a system for detecting residents’ falls in a nursing home environment ( 1 , 3 , 11 ) . The students won a business idea competition with their concept in 2005 , and set up a company around it with the prize money . The nursing home manager was disappointed in the quality of elderly care technologies on the market and wanted to bring living lab activities to the nursing home in order to achieve better , more reliable and more ethical care technologies . She developed Data type / case Floor monitoring Wrist monitoring Semi - structured Interviews 16 95 Internal documents ( memos , plans , project descriptions , correspondence , etc . ) 90 meeting memos and plans , reports , etc . Approx . 150 documents altogether Approx . 400 pages Field observation Several site visits 120 site visits between 1999 and 2007 S . Hyysalo and L . Hakkarainen 194 D o w n l o a d e d by [ A a lt o - y li op i s t on k i r j a s t o ] a t 07 : 07 22 D ece m b e r 2014 the nursing home into a living lab with the help of a municipal innovation fund and partnered with technology companies , one of which was the ﬂoor monitoring start - up . The nursing home living lab was established in 2006 as part of Helsinki Living Lab , an early and active living lab in the ENoLL . Within the nursing home living lab , four innovation projects were started , all of which aimed at developing new care arrangements and improving treatments along with technical testing and further technological development . These projects were a telecare remote rehabilitation service , a novel music service for elders , a safety monitoring carpet and the safety ﬂoor project examined in this paper . Out of the four projects , the safety ﬂoor project saw the most extensive collaboration between developers and users as well as the greatest technological development and expansion in the business case during the living lab . The safety ﬂoor thus represents a project done within the ENoLL living lab context formally , and within it it forms an emblematic case sample ( Gobo 2004 ; Flick 2008 ) . The ﬁrst version of the ‘safety ﬂoor’ was developed prior to the living lab based on the designers’ implicit assumptions about the users and the context of use ; the system would inform the nurses when a resident had fallen down , so that they could come to pick them up ( 4 ) . The developers drew on their previous experience from surveillance technologies , and no formal market or user studies were carried out ( 5 ) . The early effort was targeted at technical development and the system seemed to work well in the university laboratory where it had been thoroughly tested ( 6 , 7 , 8 ) . The product had already been sold to a couple of institutions . The living lab development started in 2006 and the municipal innovation fund allowed the care actors to hire project workers to support the implementation in the user site and to organise collaboration ( 9 ) . Whilst the start - up company mostly had only technical expertise , the health care side had expertise in the development and assessment of care practices . Realities faced in early use : leading to redesign The safety ﬂoor experienced real - life problems soon after the living lab collaboration started in 2006 . In the university laboratory test , subjects had been lying on the ﬂoor , whereas in reality the elderly persons rarely ended up in that position as they grabbed the back of a chair or bedside rail when falling down ( 15 ) . Also , the nurses behaved in unexpected ways ; they , for example , placed dirty laundry piles on the ﬂoor , which the system identiﬁed as a person ( 21 ) . In turn , the technology meant a new kind of monitoring of nurses work , for instance , placing laundry on the ﬂoor was against the nursing home’s hygiene regulations ( 39 ) . In general , the residents were in weaker shape and the care work was more laborious than the engineers had expected ( 16 ) . In creating the ﬁrst version of the system , the developers had invested large amounts of time in creating unneeded technical features based on their assumptions about the nurses’ work ( 13 ) . One example of this was a ﬂoor plan function in the user interface . Based on their previous experience with surveillance technologies , the engineers assumed that it would be useful to monitor movements of the residents from the computer screen ( 13 ) . In reality , the nurses neither had the time to sit in the ofﬁce nor were they interested in the movements of the residents . If the nurses wanted to ﬁnd out what was going on in the rooms , they would pay a visit . In spite of this , the users were active in coming up with unexpected ways to use the technology . When a resident fell down in her room , the nurses would use the data recorded by the ﬂoor plan function to analyse events that had led to the accident so as to prevent future falls from happening ( 14 ) . In general nurses did not need a fall detector , but rather something else ( 14 ) . CoDesign 195 D o w n l o a d e d by [ A a lt o - y li op i s t on k i r j a s t o ] a t 07 : 07 22 D ece m b e r 2014 When the ﬂoor monitoring system was put to use in three units , it was possible to assess how the system affected daily care practices , which had to be redesigned together with the system . In addition , the system had to be integrated to the units’ existing equipment ( 17 , 18 ) and the nursing home building , e . g . ﬁre safety regulations had to be taken into consideration in the installation phase . Moreover , IT ofﬁcials from the municipal social and health care ofﬁce had demands for the components , especially with regard to information security . In all , the installation and repair turned out to be moredemanding and costly than anticipated in , for instance , the internationalisation plans ( 19 , 20 , 22 ) . Early developer – user collaboration The original goal of the project was to discover sensible ways to utilise the system in the nursinghome . Several project workerswerehired bytheusersitetoorganisethecollaboration and implementation of the safety ﬂoor . The project plan was loose and the project workers could , to a large extent , work as they saw best ( 24 ) . Pilot costs were thus shared between the publicand private partners ; the project workers in chargeofthe pilot werehired bythe nursing home , and the technical development was ﬁnanced by the company ( 26 ) . From the user perspective , the initial system was at best a prototype , whereas the company saw their product as more or less ready and was in a hurry to get to the market ( 8 ) . Developing the system further and quickly getting it to work reliably became the new objective of the project ( 10 , 23 , 12 , 27 ) , albeit tension remained between the nursing home’s wish to have a tailored system and the company’s wish to have a generic and proﬁtable product ( 25 ) . The care professionals were also displeased with the initial interface ( 28 ) . False alarms , technical bugs and integration problems began to frustrate the nurses and project workers , who went as far as to exclaim that the safety ﬂoor was a raw prototype , not a product ( 29 ) . The developers were perceived as arrogant with respect to the problems , which made the collaboration even more complicated ( 30 ) . Eventually , the project workers’ wishes turned into demands , and the user side refused to continue with the implementation until their requirements were met ( 31 ) . The situation ﬁnally became so inﬂamed that the project coordinator , one project worker and the CEO of the company quit over a period of six months ( 32 ) . Maturing of collaboration and concept Version 2 . 0 of the user interface was launched a year after the beginning of the original implementation ( 6 ) . The care professionals were pleased , since their ideas and concerns had now been taken into consideration ( 33 ) . A new kind of project coordinator was looked for : a negotiator rather than an advocate , someone capable of mediating between the participants , albeit one having a nursing background rather than being a neutral outside facilitator ( 34 , 35 ) . After the staff changes , the functioning form of collaboration started to develop and the new project coordinator started to actively observe problems and to seek new development ideas ( 36 ) . The reason for project workers becoming responsible in ideation and problem spotting by observinguselieinmanynurses’reluctancetodoso . Somewentasfarasboycottingthesystem by ‘accidentally’ forgetting to carry the phone with them during the work shifts . The nursing home management decided to make the use of the system and participation in the feedback meetings obligatory ; not using the system was declared to be a mistreatment ( 37 , 38 ) . When use became more widespread , the company got to more profoundly understand the system’s impact on work processes and its key beneﬁts . The night shift seemed to be S . Hyysalo and L . Hakkarainen 196 D o w n l o a d e d by [ A a lt o - y li op i s t on k i r j a s t o ] a t 07 : 07 22 D ece m b e r 2014 the biggest beneﬁciary : the nurse on - call did not have to go around checking the residents all night as had previously been the case , because she was informed if someone got up during the night ( 40 ) . The sleeping elderly were not disturbed by the checks , bedside rails were not needed and they no longer needed to communicate to the nurses that they wanted to get up . Floor monitoring allowed the nurses to help the residents when they put their feet on the ground and an alarm was sent . A new kind of care and work practices started to take shape , and it was because of the care professionals that the system had evolved from a fall detection system to a fall prevention system , which allowed more ﬂexible ‘just - in - time’ care rather than rigid routines and support for the night shift , and its reliability had been worked on by both parties ( 41 , 42 , 43 ) . Extending from pilots During the project the start - up company merged with an established electronics company ( 47 ) , and after the project the merged company started to gain new customers ( 44 ) . The ﬁrm hired the project coordinator ; her new job was to train new users and act as a link between company and customers . With new customers , new contextual challenges arose , which required some redesign . There were minor differences in the work practices of different institutions . Due to heavy installation costs , sales were limited to new rest homes ( 45 ) , albeit newer buildings created new kinds of technical problems , e . g . the concrete had more humidity in the newer buildings , which initially messed up the algorithms of the system ( 49 , 50 ) . The company adopted a tailoring strategy , and the system was ﬁtted to each customer institutions’ needs , which meant , e . g . integration to existing equipment ( 48 ) . After a while , this was found to be unviable and a more generic product was needed ( 22 , 51 ) . Hence , the company sought to repackage its offering as a more standard product with servicing ( 46 ) and developed an installation ﬂoor version ( 52 ) . By 2014 the ﬂoor had been introduced in over 2000 apartments and it was a stable product in the market . Wrist monitoring case Initiation stage The second technology , we here call ‘wrist monitoring’ , was equally a gerontechnology project that departed from new technical possibilities in monitoring elderly users . This concept took shape during the years 1992 – 1994 and a start - up company made up of engineers was founded to develop it . The idea arose from its inventor’s experience with the engineering and marketing of safety phones and alarm - systems ( 1 ) . The technology was designed to monitor users’ physiological state from their wrist movement , temperature and electroconductivity sensing , and thereby to generate an automatic alarm in case of medical emergency . It included a manual alarm - button and a receiver unit . Alarms were relayed to a predetermined end , for example , to a nurse on call , an alarm centre or to relatives . This person then made the decision on the appropriate action , for instance , calling the user , her neighbours , maintenance or an ambulance . After the project initiation , there were internal and external studies that assisted in deﬁning the concept : technical feasibility and monitoring were studied within the technical research centre , European markets were investigated in two small marketing researches and the concept was ‘test - marketed’ in interviews with the inventor’s elderly relatives . All of these indicated demand for this kind of technology ( 2 , 3 , 5 ) . During the years 1995 – 1997 , the prime concern for product development was ﬁnding the right CoDesign 197 D o w n l o a d e d by [ A a lt o - y li op i s t on k i r j a s t o ] a t 07 : 07 22 D ece m b e r 2014 sensors , ways of measurement and adequate algorithms for quick detection of illness attacks and for proactive measures . Further insight about users was generated in a design and usability study that was conducted during 1995 – 1996 . This had hardly any immediate effects , even though it warned against some of the core assumptions made about the use of the device ( 4 ) . The designers had already proceeded far with the design , and believed in it , albeit a technical setback made them lose a year ( 6 , 7 ) . The product was launched and ﬁrst pilots started in early 1998 ( 6 ) . The product developers regarded the device to be a success in technical terms and an achievement in terms of getting to market launch with just the personal assets of the company founder ( 8 , 9 , 10 ) . Realities faced in early use : leading to redesign The ﬁrst pilot uses revealed an unexpected number of false alarms that had to be worked on , along with other technical bugs . To work ﬂawlessly , the device required speciﬁc procedures in wearing , removing and storing the device ; cancelling false alarms , cleaning , et cetera . These instructions grew from 7 to 25 pages during the two ﬁrst years of use . Even though some users were happy with the device , many had problems ( 11 , 12 , 20 , 21 ) . In institutions , much of the reliability of the device was on the shoulders of nurses . The system required them to be readily awaiting for and reacting to the information provided by the system ; yet this was a poor ﬁt with their work practices and existing instrumentations , whilst their care rounds also gave them a fair understanding of the elderly residents’ condition ( 13 , 17 , 18 ) . Between 1998 and 1999 , the company made numerous adjustments and new developments , ranging from adjusting the algorithms and reducing features , to user - training ( 14 ) . The product was expanded to include diagnostic software for alarms , which was soon complemented with online graphical monitoring , following a suggestion from the users ( 13 ) . Use of wrist monitoring in rest homes was augmented by developing an integrated system with a number of receiver units and wrist devices , in part due to difﬁculties in integrating the wrist monitoring devices to extant infrastructure and device stock both in rest homes and in alarm centres that received home sector emergency calls ( 17 , 18 , 19 ) . During this period , experience from usage led to a questioning of many of the previous assumptions , such as who the users and clients were , how they worked the technology , how the technology ﬁt the infrastructure and how the condition of the elderly could be monitored , given they were in ﬂuctuating health and more frail than was assumed in the initial algorithms and instrumentation ( 15 , 16 , 18 , 19 ) . In the midst of struggling to ﬁx and improve the technology , the company sold about 1000 devices and won both domestic and international innovation awards , received positive press coverage and attracted new investments . Early developer – user collaboration The pilots were set so as to only verify the technical feasibility and beneﬁts derived from a technology along with ﬁxing small remaining bugs . The developers and elderly care actors both expected a readily functioning technology ( 23 ) . There were few preparations in place for handling the piloting phase such as what to do with continued technical problems ( 24 ) . After the ﬁrst pilot study , the sites were now paying - customers and both parties resented allotting time and money to techical bug ﬁxing . The developers wanted to concentrate on marketing , internationalisation of business and development of the next product version , even though they became forced to create different versions and additions to the product in order to close deals with institutions ( 25 ) . Elderly care actors ended up spending time on S . Hyysalo and L . Hakkarainen 198 D o w n l o a d e d by [ A a lt o - y li op i s t on k i r j a s t o ] a t 07 : 07 22 D ece m b e r 2014 complaints and working around the early system that had frustrating interfaces and generated false alarms , albeit they did not formally provide resourcing or funding for the pilots ( 26 , 28 , 29 ) . The company’s ﬁrst approach to the situation was to seek to train the elderly care staff to operate the technology better , but gradually they realised they needed to start ﬁtting the technology to nursing work and increase its reliability to soothe the rising pressure from pilot sites . There were also a growing number of redesign wishes ( 30 , 31 ) and the position of the mediating personnel between R & D and customers was difﬁcult to bear : over a period of ﬁve years , ﬁve people quit this position regardless of how the position was deﬁned ( e . g . as product manager , marketing manager and customer manager ( 32 ) ) . Maturing of collaboration and concept During the years 1999 – 2002 the company built , tested and iterated the second version of the product ( 33 ) . Attention was paid to the appeal and usability of both the wrist device and the monitoring software . Partnerships were developed with several user - organisations and they began to be used explicitly for testing and gaining ideas for improving the design ( 36 ) . Strategies were changed with regard to how the technology was presented in marketing , user - training and in dealing with the medical community . Reliability was emphasised along the user - identiﬁed key value points in diagnosing and monitoring of elderly patients and restructuring care work particularly in the night shift . A key value point emerged from users ﬁnding care - work use for the ‘activity curve’ illustration , which the designers had originally created as a gimmick for a fair to visualise what their device monitored ( 39 , 40 , 41 , 42 , 43 ) . User - organisations , in turn , began to charge rent for the device irrespective of whether it was in use ( 37 , 38 ) . Inside the company , all installations , user - training and feedback to R & D were placed under a single person who had extensive experience with safety phone systems in elderly care ( 34 , 35 ) . The change in strategy in relating to users enabled the company to improve all aspects of the product system , particularly its control - software , which was a key feature for users to recover from false alarms , and overcome difﬁculties in ﬁtting work practices into different rest homes and alarm centres ( 22 ) . Extending from pilots The 2 . 0 version increased company sales to several thousands of units ( 44 ) . In 2003 , the nature of the user partnerships changed , as the company sought to build locally conﬁgurable but generic product packages to improve economic viability . As part of this , slowness and complex steps in public sector purchacing cycles became evident , along with difﬁculties of selling equipment beyond new nursing homes under construction ( 45 , 46 , 48 , 49 , 50 ) . The company had to seek repeated rounds of further funding ( 47 ) . The company still sought and received information from the key user sites , but ceased to alter the existing design , and channeled the improvements into the next release 3 . 0 ( / 2 . 0 ) , which they launched in 2007 ( 50 , 51 , 52 ) . At this point , there was was a stable and proﬁtable product in the market . Comparing the key project items in developer – user interaction The comparative mapping of key events clariﬁes the resemblances between the two projects ( Figures 1 – 5 ) . As abbreviations we use OUT for outcome , TECH for technology , INT for interaction , CTXT for contextual event , MKT for market , PPL for people , ID for ideas . Of the 11 comparison items in the initiation stage ( Figure 1 ) , three bear a strong resemblance and four a moderate resemblance , mostly resulting from the engineering CoDesign 199 D o w n l o a d e d by [ A a lt o - y li op i s t on k i r j a s t o ] a t 07 : 07 22 D ece m b e r 2014 starting point of both projects . Two of the three differences result from the fact that ﬂoor monitoring gained the idea of viability from elderly care actors , whilst wrist monitoring relied on the developers’ own assessment , veriﬁed by market studies . With ﬂoor monitoring the user side also ended funding of the initial development , which gave them more say over the project in the ensuing stages . Figure 1 . Resemblances and differences in the key events in the initiation stage . S . Hyysalo and L . Hakkarainen 200 D o w n l o a d e d by [ A a lt o - y li op i s t on k i r j a s t o ] a t 07 : 07 22 D ece m b e r 2014 Figure 2 . Resemblances and differences in the key events in the redesign stage . CoDesign 201 D o w n l o a d e d by [ A a lt o - y li op i s t on k i r j a s t o ] a t 07 : 07 22 D ece m b e r 2014 Strong similarities become evident when the projects move from technical development to ﬁrst deployment at the user site ( Figure 2 ) . In both cases , this led to major redesigns and many early assumptions about use and system features becoming questioned . In 10 data items , the only difference was that the ﬂoor monitoring project evolved within the living lab , whilst for wrist monitoring the pilot sites were also paying - customers . The extent of continued development in use was an equal surprise in both projects . The earliest designer – user collaboration happened in pilots in both cases . Here the differences induced by the living lab are visible through the collaboration arrangement and plan as well as in sharing costs ( Figure 3 ) . The strain caused by the redesigns and Figure 3 . Resemblances and differences in the key events related to early collaboration . S . Hyysalo and L . Hakkarainen 202 D o w n l o a d e d by [ A a lt o - y li op i s t on k i r j a s t o ] a t 07 : 07 22 D ece m b e r 2014 reorientation of the project also affected the users in the living lab setting as user side mediating personnel quit , and not only staff within the company . However , in light of claims made in living lab literature , one would expect greater differences between the two projects already here . The maturing of collaboration is where one would , at the latest , expect a decisive difference between the projects ( Figure 4 ) , but out of 11 events six bear close resemblance , Figure 4 . Resemblances and differences in the key events in the stage of matured collaboration . CoDesign 203 D o w n l o a d e d by [ A a lt o - y li op i s t on k i r j a s t o ] a t 07 : 07 22 D ece m b e r 2014 Figure 5 . Resemblances and differences in the key events after the living lab / piloting phase of the project . S . Hyysalo and L . Hakkarainen 204 D o w n l o a d e d by [ A a lt o - y li op i s t on k i r j a s t o ] a t 07 : 07 22 D ece m b e r 2014 two a moderateresemblance and the only differing ones concern the issue of use and feedback becoming mandatory within the living lab . The explanation for resemblances appears to be that the wrist monitoring project had to , in effect , establish the similar kind of real - world partnering arrangements that the living lab development helped to build for ﬂoor monitoring . It is worth noting that in both cases it was users that ideated the new key value points for the project and that both projects ended up with somewhat similar beneﬁts – more proactive care given by the nursing staff ( not through automation as it was originally envisioned in both ) . The road from the pilot stages bears close resemblance in both projects ( Figure 5 ) . In both , it became evident that the amount of customisation and partnering was unfeasible as a long - term business strategy , and they suffered funding shortages . In both cases , the company opted for a mix of occasional collaborations and more arm’s length user relations . Also , in both , the company sought to have a generic product with a ready set of accumulated functionality that it then could just conﬁgure to each setting , and in both these conﬁgurationality needs were higher than expected after the pilot years . When comparing the overall trajectories of these two projects , 63 % of events have close resemblance , 19 % feature some resemblance , 12 % have moderate difference and 6 % strong difference . Two things stand out as particularly salient as explanations for these high resemblances . First , the challenges in making monitoring technology work reliably in care homes were equally formidable as was the need to reiterate the working principles and value points of the technology . Second , the direction of events appears not to have been ‘the living lab is not that different’ but rather that the wrist monitoring , in fact , had to revert to establishing similar collaboration affording arrangements ; in other words , collaboration that resembled the living lab was required to succeed . Conclusions Living lab advocates and research literature alike stress how these real - life environments for design collaboration offer a unique environment for exploratory collaboration between developers , users and third parties , seen as vital for improving the success of innovation ( Niitamo et al . 2006 ; Almirall and Wareham 2008 ) . Our study of two technology - driven health projects underscores that such collaboration , indeed , is vital for the success of these kinds of innovation projects . In both projects , it was hard for developers to grasp the health care context and to reiterate the concept and its material realisation sufﬁciently . Interaction and learning between developers and users was paramount for changes and for achieving a well - received product in the market . In neither project did collaboration emerge without high levels of frustration and conﬂicts of interests , purposeful efforts to build the collaboration arrangements and intermediary actors to champion it . These are all facets that research and practice on participatory design has stressed for a long time ( e . g . Schuler and Namioka 1993 ; Bødker , Kensing , and Simonsen 2004 ) . The literature would add that for both projects , more intensive collaboration at the very outset might have been beneﬁcial . The extended living lab collaboration appears to have speeded up the redesign process that both projects had to suffer . The living lab also spread some of the ensuing costs to users and mitigated the strain on early customer relations in the company . The eventual difference appears , however , to be of degree rather than kind in the shape of the innovation trajectory . As noted above , this is explained not so much by the failure of the living lab development , but by the necessity of the wrist monitoring case to move to a similar kind of collaboration arrangement in the course of the project . This interpretation ﬁnds support from the other similarly detailed case studies of Finnish health ICTs ( diabetes software , CoDesign 205 D o w n l o a d e d by [ A a lt o - y li op i s t on k i r j a s t o ] a t 07 : 07 22 D ece m b e r 2014 brain imaging technology , e - grocery service for elderly , information infrastructure for elderly ) : both developer and user visions of the eventual working technology have been questioned , and only those projects where the visions and material form of the technology have been altered collaboratively have survived ( Hasu 2001 ; Hyysalo and Lehenkari 2003 ; Hyppo¨nen 2007 ; Hyysalo 2010 ; Botero and Hyysalo 2013 ) . The case comparison can thus be taken to question the uniqueness of the effects of the living lab as a collaborative setting , but highlights the importance of this kind of collaborative setting and co - creation between developers and users . To cap our analysis , through this comparison we argue that extensive collaboration between designers and users is paramount for the success of complex new health technology projects , but this can be achieved without a formal living lab arrangement , albeit such arrangement does appear to help in achieving it . The metaphor of the ‘quadruple helix’ is often used in living lab discussions , and conveys an image of a ( genetic ) formula for effortless and joyful multiparty collaboration . When the collaboration is examined in depth , as in the case here , the nature of collaboration is not effortless or automatic . A living lab , as such , appears to be no panacea for collaborative design efforts between designers and users . Rather , the question is whether the parties engaged in living lab collaboration are willing to go through all the work needed to create the speciﬁc and particular relationships by which the relevant information can be made visible and transferred to the other party . A living lab arrangement appears to offer a legitimate rationale for trying such engagement and the resources it requires . Perhaps creating a living lab may be best seen as shorthand for the collaboration processes , in which the partners in innovation processes have to partake in real - life settings in order to aide project success . In terms of further research , the present study exempliﬁes the state - of - the - art innovation process research comparison on projects conducted in living labs . Living labs are open ended , sustained and complex coproduction arrangements , which typically affect even more complex , multi - causally formed and long - term innovation journeys . As Van de Ven et al . ( 1999 ) , Garud and Gehman ( 2012 ) and Russell and Williams ( 2002 ) have shown , these characteristics limit the valid types of comparative research . Operating on variance epistemology and ontology is ill - suited for such complex process research and comparison . Less process - oriented and coarser - level comparisons can , however , be used to contextualise and generalise the ﬁndings from the present study ( Gobo 2004 ) . Our ﬁndings are most generalisable to innovative health care technologies , to projects in publicly hosted living labs ( Leminen , Westerlund and Nystro¨m 2012 ) , to projects where co - creation is extensive ( and not just testing ) and to engineer - driven start - up technology companies . The further the distance from these primary contextual characteristics of these currently investigated projects , the lesser the likelihood that the patterns observed here would be found or play out similarly ( Gobo 2004 ) . The ﬁndings indicate four recommendations for practitioners . First , at least in health technology innovation projects it is imperative to invest in creating a real - life collaboration setting with or without formal living lab . Second , even if living lab setting is used , targeted action needs to be taken to build up the collaboration and reconciling different interests of participants . Third , it is advisable to retain relatively open agreement on what the collaborative relationship may hold , but inform all parties realistically of the uncertainties and development needs both in technology and in user practices . Fourth , it is advisable to prepare for changes in collaboration as the innovation process evolves ; the need for collaboration between developers and user will not disappear with ending of living lab collaboration , but the topics and forms will change when the product becomes sold to wide clientele . S . Hyysalo and L . Hakkarainen 206 D o w n l o a d e d by [ A a lt o - y li op i s t on k i r j a s t o ] a t 07 : 07 22 D ece m b e r 2014 Funding The authors have received funding from Academy of Finland project User Innovation Pathways to Utility [ grant number 138187 ] . References Almirall , E . , M . Lee , and J . Wareham . 2012 . “Mapping Living Labs in the Landscape of Innovation Methodologies . ” Technology Innovation Management Review , September : 12 – 8 . Almirall , E . , and J . Wareham . 2008 . “Living Labs and Open Innovation : Roles and Applicability . ” eJov : The Electronic Journal for Virtual Organizations and Networks 10 ( 3 ) : 21 – 46 . Ballon , P . , J . Pierson , and S . Delaere . 2005 . “Test and Experimentation Platforms for Broadband Innovation : Examining European Practice . ” Paper presented at the 16th European Regional Conference by the International Telecommunications Society ( ITS ) , September 4 – 6 , in Porto , Portugal . Botero , A . , and S . Hyysalo . 2013 . “Ageing Together : Steps Towards Evolutionary Co - design in Everyday Practices . ” CoDesign 9 ( 1 ) : 37 – 54 . Bødker , K . , F . Kensing , and J . Simonsen . 2004 . Participatory IT Design : Designing for Business and Workplace Realities . Cambridge , MA : MIT Press . Denzin , N . K . 1989 . The Research Act : A Theoretical Introduction to Sociological Methods . 3rd ed . Englewood Cliffs , NJ : Prentice Hall . Flick , O . 2008 . An Introduction to Qualitative Research . Sage : London . Garud , R . , and J . Gehman . 2012 . “Metatheoretical Perspectives on Sustainability Journeys : Evolutionary , Relational and Durational . ” Research Policy 41 ( 6 ) : 980 – 995 . Glaser , B . , and A . Strauss . 1967 . The Discovery of Grounded Theory : Strategies for Qualitative Research . Chicago : Aldine . Gobo , G . 2004 . “Sampling , Representativeness and Generalizability . ” In Qualitative Research Practice , edited by C . Seale , G . Gobo , J . F . Gubrium , and D . Silverman , 435 – 456 . London : Sage . Hakkarainen , L . 2013 . Paremman Teknologian Pera¨ssa¨ – Turvalattia ja Ka¨ytta¨ja¨la¨hto¨isyyden Lupaus [ Quest for Better Technology : Safety Floor and the Promise of User Centrism ] . Helsinki : Lisensiaatin tutkimus , Helsingin yliopisto , valtiotieteellinen tiedekunta . Hakkarainen , L . , and S . Hyysalo . 2013 . “How Do We Keep the Living Laboratory Alive ? Learning and Conﬂicts in Living Lab Collaboration . ” Technology Innovation Management Review , December : 16 – 23 . Hasu , M . 2001 . Critical Transition from Developers to Users . Academic Dissertation . Helsinki : Department of Education , University of Helsinki . Hess , J . , and V . Pipek . 2012 . “Community - driven Development : Approaching Participatory Design in the Online World . ” Design Issues 28 ( 3 ) : 62 – 76 . doi : 10 . 1162 / DESI _ a _ 00162 . Hillgren , P . - A . , A . Seravalli , and A . Emilson . 2011 . “Prototyping and Infrastructuring in Design for Social Innovation . ” CoDesign 7 ( 3 – 4 ) : 169 – 183 . Hyppo¨nen , H . 2007 . “eHealth Services and Technology : Challenges for Co - development . ” Human Technology : An Interdisciplinary Journal on Humans in ICT Environments 3 ( 2 ) : 188 – 213 . Hyysalo , S . 2003 . “Some Problems in the Traditional Approaches to Predicting the Use of a Technology - driven Invention . ” Innovation 16 ( 2 ) : 118 – 137 . Hyysalo , S . 2006 . “The Role of Learning - by - using in the Design of Healthcare Technologies : A Case Study . ” Information Society 22 ( 2 ) : 89 – 100 . Hyysalo , S . 2010 . Health Technology Development and Use : From Practice - bound Imaginations to Evolving Impacts . New York : Routledge . Hyysalo , S . , and J . Lehenkari . 2003 . “An Activity - theoretical Method for Studying User - participation in IS - design . ” Methods of Information in Medicine 42 ( 4 ) : 398 – 404 . Ho¨yssa¨ , M . , and S . Hyysalo . 2009 . “The Fog of Innovation : Innovativeness and Deviance in Developing New Clinical Testing Equipment . ” Research Policy 38 ( 6 ) : 984 – 993 . Johnson , M . , H . Mozaffar , G . M . Campagnolo , S . Hyysalo , N . Pollock , and R . Williams . 2014 . “The Managed Prosumer : Evolving Knowledge Strategies in the Design of Information Infrastructures . ” Information , Communication and Society 17 ( 7 ) : 795 – 813 . Kyma¨la¨inen , T . 2015 . “Science Fiction Prototypes as Design Outcome of Research . ” Academic dissertation , Aalto University , School of Art , Design and Architecture . CoDesign 207 D o w n l o a d e d by [ A a lt o - y li op i s t on k i r j a s t o ] a t 07 : 07 22 D ece m b e r 2014 Leminen , S . , M . Westerlund , and A . - G . Nystro¨m . 2012 . “Living Labs as Open - innovation Networks . ” Technology Innovation Management Review , September : 6 – 11 . Manzini , E . , and F . Rizzo . 2011 . “Small Projects / large Changes : Participatory Design as an Open Participated Process . ” CoDesign 7 ( 3 – 4 ) : 199 – 215 . Mulder , I . , and P . J . Stappers . 2009 . “Co - creating in Practice : Results and Challenges . ” Paper presented at the 15th International Conference on Concurrent Enterprising : ICE 2009 , ‘Collaborative Innovation : Emerging Technologies , Environments and Communities’ , June 22 – 24 , Leiden , The Netherlands . Niitamo , Veli - Pekka , Seija Kulkki , Mats Eriksson , and Karl A . Hribernik . 2006 . “State - of - the - Art and Good Practice in the Field of Living Labs . ” In International Conference on Concurrent Enterprising : Innovative Products and Services through Collaborative Networks , Milan , Italy , 349 – 357 . Pierson , Jo , and Bram Lievens . 2005 . “Conﬁguring Living Labs for a ‘Thick’ Understanding of Innovation . ” Ethnographic Praxis in Industry Conference Proceedings 2005 ( 1 ) : 114 – 127 . Pollock , N . , and S . Hyysalo . 2014 . “The Business of Being A User : The Role of The Reference Actor in Shaping Packaged Enterprise System Acquisition and Development . ” MIS Quarterly 38 ( 2 ) : 473 – 496 . Pollock , N . , and R . Williams . 2008 . Software and Organizations : The Biography of The Packaged Enterprize System , or , How SAP Conquered The World . London : Routledge . Russell , S . , and R . Williams . 2002 . “Social Shaping of Technology : Frameworks , Findings and Implications for Policy With Glossary of Social Shaping Concepts . ” In Shaping Technology , Guiding Policy : Concepts , Spaces and Tools , edited by Knut Sorensen and Robin Williams , 37 – 132 . Cheltenham , UK : Edward Elgar . Schuler , D . , and A . Namioka . 1993 . Participatory Design : Principles and Practices . Boca Raton , FL : CRC Press . Simonsen , J . , and M . Hertzum . 2012 . “Sustained Participatory Design : Extending The Iterative Approach . ” Design Issues 28 ( 3 ) : 10 – 21 . Tosh , J . 1991 . The Pursuit of History : Aims , Methods & New Directions in The Study of Modern History . 2nd ed . London : Longman . Van de Ven , A . H . , D . E . Polley , R . Garud , and S . Venkataraman . 1999 . The Innovation Journey . Oxford : Oxford University Press . Voss , A . , M . Hartswood , R . Procter , M . Rounceﬁeld , R . S . Slack , and M . Bu¨scher . 2009 . Conﬁguring User - designer Relations : Interdisciplinary Perspectives . London : Springer . S . Hyysalo and L . Hakkarainen 208 D o w n l o a d e d by [ A a lt o - y li op i s t on k i r j a s t o ] a t 07 : 07 22 D ece m b e r 2014