Variations in University Students ’ Scientific Reasoning Skills Across Majors , Years , and Types of Institutions Lin Ding 1 & Xin Wei 2 & Xiufeng Liu 3 Published online : 4 March 2016 # Springer Science + Business Media Dordrecht 2016 Abstract This study investigates three aspects — university major , year , and institution type — in relation to student scientific reasoning . Students from three majors ( science , engineering , and education ) , four year levels ( years 1 through 4 ) , and two tiers of Chinese universities ( tiers 1 and 2 ) participated in the study . A large - scale written assessment was conducted using the Lawson ’ s Classroom Test of Scientific Reasoning ( LCTSR ) . A series of analysis of variance showed that , although science and engineering majors exhibited higher reasoning skills than education majors and first - tier university attendees higher than second - tier university at - tendees , student reasoning skills measured by the LCTSR remained nearly constant across the four year levels of higher education , a recurring pattern for all majors and university tiers . Results suggest that current higher education in China has little influence on student scientific reasoning , regardless of what students learn , how long they receive higher education , and what type of institutions they attend . Implications of the study call our attention to the status quo and urge us to rethink meaningful ways that can help students increase key proficiencies needed in scientific practices , such as successful reasoning skills . Keywords Scientific reasoning . Content learning . Lawson classroom test of scientific reasoning . Discipline , quantity , and quality of learning Res Sci Educ ( 2016 ) 46 : 613 – 632 DOI 10 . 1007 / s11165 - 015 - 9473 - y Electronic supplementary material The online version of this article ( doi : 10 . 1007 / s11165 - 015 - 9473 - y ) contains supplementary material , which is available to authorized users . * Lin Ding lding @ mps . ohio - state . edu 1 Department of Teaching and Learning , The Ohio State University , Columbus , OH 43210 , USA 2 Physics Editorial Department , People ’ s Education Press , Beijing 100081 , People ’ s Republic of China 3 Department of Learning and Instruction , State University of New York , Buffalo , NY 14260 , USA Introduction Scientific reasoning is a central focus of science education in that it not only affects students ’ academic achievement in school learning , but also influences their everyday decision - making and life success . In the recent reports of a new framework for K - 12 science standards published by the National Research Council ( NRC 2011 ) , skills such as seeking and evaluating empirical evidence to make valid inferences are unequivocally deemed as an essential component of science practices that students are expected to engage in for their life - long learning and problem solving . With an accumulating body of relevant literature , it becomes abundantly clear that increased scientific reasoning can account for , to a large extent , successful learning of content knowledge ( BouJaoude et al . 2004 ; Chang 2010 ; Ding 2014b ; Kuhn 2002 ; Nieminen et al . 2012 ; Oliva 2003 ; Tsitsipis et al . 2010 ; Zimmerman 2000 ) . However , what remains intriguing or perhaps even controversial is the extent to which content learning can contribute to the advancement of scientific reasoning . Prior studies painted a mixed picture in this regard . On the one hand , scientific reasoning and learning content knowledge are viewed as two inseparable cognitive aspects , going hand - in - hand with a mutually corroborative relationship in development ( Kuhn 2002 ; Schauble 1996 ) . Studies along this line have suggested , either explicitly or implicitly , that learning of content knowledge is conducive to the development of scientific reasoning skills . On the other hand , it is well received that essential skills required for scientific reasoning are highly unlikely to develop naturally ( Kuhn 2009 ) . Some empirical investigations tracking students in typical school settings over a period of time have documented that content - oriented learning often results in little or no growth in student reasoning skills ( Marusic and Slisko 2012 ; Moore and Rubbo 2012 ) . It is worth noting that content learning is a multifaceted construct , and even at a crude level of analysis , it can include , for example , learning different disciplines , amounts , and depths of content knowledge . In prior studies , examination of this topic was by - and - large coarse - grained and was treated as a single dimension without explicating multiple layers of content learning . In the present study , we examine scientific reasoning of tertiary - level students across different majors , years , and university tiers . These students have been exposed to content learning in different disciplines , have taken different amounts of course work ( with later - year students completing more courses than their early - year peers ) , and have been situated in different types of institutions ( theory - driven top - tiered institutions or vocational institutions ; see “ Methodology ” for more details ) . By seeking variations across majors , years , and institu - tions , we attempt to investigate from multiple perspectives the relations between content learning and scientific reasoning . Given the fact that prior studies in this area were conducted predominantly with students in Western countries and yet little is known about their Asian counterparts , we chose , in this study , Chinese university students as our subjects of interest to investigate this under - researched population . Since formal education in China is notably content - oriented , students and teachers alike understandably place more emphasis on achieving high scores on standard - ized tests than on achieving high levels of proficiency in crucial skills of scientific reasoning ( Liu et al . 2012 ; Zhang and Ding 2013 ) . With the increasing need for better improvement of formal education , it is therefore both interesting and pressing to uncover the current status among Chinese students and particularly the inter - student variations on this matter . What also motivates us to focus on this group of students is the recent study by Bao et al . ( 2009 ) in which the researchers compared U . S . and Chinese first - year university students in their physics 614 ( 2016 ) 46 : 613 – 632 content knowledge and scientific reasoning skills . It was found that , although Chinese students outperformed their U . S . peers on content learning , their scientific reasoning showed no advantage over those of U . S . students . In light of these results , our study seeks to expand prior research by looking into Chinese students beyond their first - year of higher education to further investigate the extent to which content learning across different majors , year levels , and universities may yield different levels of scientific reasoning . Moreover , Chinese students ’ outstanding performance on international assessments such as the Program for International Student Assessment ( PISA ) has raised a general interest in this student population . Our study provides such a lens through which we can better examine Chinese students ’ scientific reasoning in relation to different aspects of content learning , thereby laying a foundation for future cross - nation comparisons . Research Goals and Theoretical Background Research Goals This study draws on the neo - Piagetian perspective of scientific reasoning in relation to content learning ( Case 1992 ; Demetriou et al . 2006 ) . According to this perspective , scientific reason - ing is not a set of cognitive skills independent of content , experience , or environment . Instead , the ways individuals develop and deploy such skills may vary with the different content domains , education levels , and learning settings in which the individuals are situated . In other words , content learning and scientific reasoning are often interrelated . While research drawing on this framework has by - and - large yielded confirmative results of the intimate relationship between content learning and scientific reasoning , some studies have revealed a rather different outcome suggesting a mismatch between them ( Bao et al . 2009 ; Marusic and Slisko 2012 ; Moore and Rubbo 2012 ) . In this study , the overarching research question we seek to investigate is : How do Chinese university students ’ scientific reasoning skills compare across different majors , years of education , and types of higher institutions ? Answers to this research question can help explicate the relationship between scientific reasoning and content learning , particularly at the university level . Moreover , findings from the study can inform future improvement of undergraduate curriculum and instruction in order to better promote students ’ scientific reasoning at the same time as they develop discipline - specific content expertise . Scientific Reasoning Reasoning , in general , is portrayed as a process of deriving inferences ( conclusions ) from some initial information ( premises ) ( Holyoak and Morrison 2005 ; Kuhn 2002 ; Lawson 2004 ) . This process is frequently invoked by most people in nearly all areas of investigation . In science , it is more specifically referred to as scientific reasoning primarily for the purpose of highlighting its direct bearings on science inquiries ( Kuhn 2002 ; Zimmerman 2000 ) . Despite its specific name , scientific reasoning is not deliberately sought to be separate from general reasoning . As emphasized by Kuhn ( 2002 ) and colleagues ( Kuhn and Dean 2004 ) , scientific reasoning is not restricted to a rarified few but common among regular people . Einstein ( 1950 ) put it more directly , which was cited by Dunbar and Klahr ( 2012 ) to illustrate the kinship between the two , that “ [ t ] he scientific way of forming concepts differs from that which we use ( 2016 ) 46 : 613 – 632 615 in our daily life , not basically , but merely in the more precise definition of concepts and conclusions , more painstaking and systematic choice of experimental material , and greater logical economy . ” In the present study , unless otherwise stated , our focus is intended to remain on scientific reasoning , or simply put , reasoning in the context of any science - related inquiry . Scientific reasoning is a complex construct , and researchers have not yet reached a complete consensus on its exact definition . According to Lawson ( 2004 , 2005 ) , scientific reasoning involves mental strategies , plans , and rules that are used to process information and devise causal conclusions about a phenomenon that is beyond direct observation . Within this view , constructing and evaluating hypotheses to make valid inferences is a vital component . Operationally , as Lawson argues , scientific reasoning is a hypothetical – deductive process , in which an individual makes observations of a puzzling phenomenon , generates tentative theories ( i . e . , “ working ” hypotheses ) , and then deduces specific predictions to test these hypotheses through experimentation ( Lawson 2004 , 2005 ) . In planning and implementing experiments , individuals need to properly identify and control multiple variables pertinent to the phenomenon under investigation . In analyzing and evaluating empirical evidence ( in the form of data ) , skills of proportional , probabilistic , and correlation thinking are frequently required . Although this evidence - based hypothetical – deductive view of reasoning has been broadly recognized , many researchers maintain that inductive processes are also part of scientific reasoning ( Allchin 2003 ; Hogan and Fisherkeller 2005 ; Holyoak and Morrison 2005 ; Lee 2000 ; Nickerson 2004 ) . The basis of this position is predicated on a view that inductive reasoning can be a useful tool for identifying regularities , patterns , and associations from experiences , particularly when limited theory or prior concepts exist to guide initial observations . Kuhn and colleagues further expanded the meaning of scientific reasoning to include any conscious and purposeful knowledge - seeking endeavor embedded in a social context ( Kuhn 2002 ) . From this standpoint , investigation of scientific reasoning focuses primarily on the ways that individuals coordinate evidence and theory , two distinct cognitive objects . In other words , what emerges as a focal point for study , in Kuhn ’ s ( 2002 ) view , is how an individual carries out the interplay between personal beliefs ( theory ) and empirical data ( evidence ) . Presumably , theory should guide and direct strategies for evidence collection in an un - confounding manner , whereas empirical evidence should inform and revise one ’ s theory in an objective fashion . This approach to scientific reasoning not only highlights the skills of generating and evaluating evidence - based inferences , but also encompasses epistemological appreciation of the functions of evidence and theory ( Zeineddin and Abd - El - Khalick 2010 ) . Despite the different framings of scientific reasoning , some commonalities emerge . These include making observations , identifying evidence , generating and testing hypothesis , and drawing conclusions ( Hogan and Fisherkeller 2005 ; Kuhn 1992 ; Kuhn and Dean 2004 ; Schunn and Anderson 1999 ) . Simply put , scientific reasoning is characterized as a process of seeking causal mechanisms for empirical scientific observations ( Kuhn 2002 ; Zimmerman 2007 ) . It involves hypothetical – deductive thinking for hypothesis generation , identifying and controlling variables for experimentation , and probabilistic , proportional , and correlation thinking for evidence evaluation . These skills , albeit incomplete in the broader context of scientific practices ( which , for instance , also extends to communication and argumentation ) , do form an important nucleus for the reasoning processes that are frequently encountered by scientists ( NRC 2011 ) . In fact , researchers , including Dunbar and Klahr ( 2012 ) , Kuhn and Dean ( 2004 ) , Lawson ( 2004 , 2005 ) , and Zimmerman ( 2007 ) , all considered these skills to be important components subsumed under scientific reasoning . 616 ( 2016 ) 46 : 613 – 632 Drawing on these core commonalities , we therefore regard scientific reasoning as a construct that consists of key aspects involved in inquiry , experimentation , evidence evalua - tion , and inferences . More specifically , we choose to investigate the aforementioned skills of hypothetical – deductive reasoning , control of variables , and proportional , probabilistic , and correlational reasoning as a focal point for the current study . Amount of Content Learning in Relation to Scientific Reasoning Studies of scientific reasoning in the education research realm have suggested that a sufficient body of content knowledge is profitable for successful scientific reasoning . Kuhn , Schauble , and coworkers ( Kuhn 2002 ; Schauble 1996 ) conducted a series of studies , in which students were repeatedly engaged in the same inquiry over a period of time to uncover some causal mechanisms of a phenomenon . After a recurrent exposure to the same problem , the participants began to gain an increased understanding of the phenomenon , and this in turn facilitated their experimentation and reasoning strategies for control of variables and evaluation of covariance . In another study , Kuhn ( 2007 , 2009 ) surveyed a range of participants at different levels of education measured by the years of formal education they received in school . Each participant was given a list of combinations of different fund - raising activities with corresponding sale outcomes and was asked to judge which activities caused the best sale — a task requiring proper identification and control of variables . It was found that participants who experienced greater amounts of content learning with college education background outperformed those with lesser education in nearly all respects . In contrast to the above findings , results from some studies have suggested otherwise . Marusic and Slisko ( 2012 ) followed a group of last - grade high school students in Croatia and found that those who learned a semester of physics in a conventional class showed little gain in scientific reasoning measured by the Lawson Classroom Test of Scientific Reasoning ( LCTSR , Lawson 1978 ) . In a similar vein , Moore and Rubbo ( 2012 ) investigated scientific reasoning skills of non - STEM ( science , technology , engineering , and mathematics ) university students in the U . S . and found that a semester of learning in an inquiry - based physics course yielded nearly no improvement in student scientific reasoning measured by the LCTSR . These results indicated that accumulation of content knowledge over a period of one semester contributed little to the development of scientific reasoning . Quality ( Level of Abstractness ) of Content Learning in Relation to Scientific Reasoning Studies have also suggested that the extent to which content learning is geared toward mastering abstract fundamentals is largely related to the levels of scientific reasoning . Lawson and coworkers postulated a framework of categorizing content knowledge into three qualita - tively different classes : descriptive , hypothetical , and theoretical ( Lawson et al . 2000 ) . De - scriptive concepts primarily consist of observable agents that can be identified and physically manipulated . Conversely , theoretical concepts are anchored in abstract postulations that are beyond direct perception . Between the two categories lies hypothetical knowledge , which from the practical perspective is difficult to observe but is feasible if an extended temporal and spatial frame is given . For example , the concepts of evolution and light - year belong to this category . ( 2016 ) 46 : 613 – 632 617 Lawson et al . ( 2000 ) empirically tested the three categories of concepts and found that theoretical knowledge is significantly more difficult than hypothetical knowledge , which in turn is more difficult than descriptive knowledge . Furthermore , learning these concepts was found to be linked to scientific reasoning skills . Specifically , students who performed well on theoretical concepts also exhibited a higher level of scientific reasoning than those who only mastered hypothetical concepts . Similarly , those with only descriptive concepts demonstrated the lowest reasoning skills . Following this framework , Moore and Rubbo ( 2012 ) measured the quality of non - STEM university students ’ content knowledge in physics using a set of concept inventories and also measured their scientific reasoning skills using the LCTSR . The re - searchers found that , while content learning in general correlated with scientific reasoning , the correlation was strongest for theoretical content and weakest for descriptive content . However , these results are in some way confounded by a recent study conducted by Bao et al . ( 2009 ) . They found that , although Chinese first - year university students outperformed their U . S . peers on theory - laden physics knowledge , their scientific reasoning skills were not demonstrably superior . It is worth noting that , in Bao et al . ’ s study , student participants from multiple universities were collapsed into one group for grand comparison ; so , what the researchers overlooked are the variations in the quality of content learning across different institutions . This issue perhaps blurred the image of scientific reasoning in relation to content learning , which could have been sharper had a stratification of university tiers been taken into consideration . Disciplines of Content Learning in Relation to Scientific Reasoning There is a dearth of research on discipline learning in relation to scientific reasoning . Nevertheless , results of a few studies have indicated that exposure to different disciplines of learning can influence students ’ experimentation and reasoning strategies . Schauble et al . ( 1991 ) distinguished two models of approaches to scientific reasoning , namely the science approach and the engineering approach . The former ( science approach to rea - soning ) aims at capturing and understanding the causal relationships between precedents and outcomes of a phenomenon , whereas the latter ( engineering approach to reasoning ) focuses on replicating and optimizing desired products . Simply put , the former invests interest in “ means ” and the latter in “ ends ” . To examine these two approaches , Schauble et al . ( 1991 ) designed a set of inquiry tasks for students . Some of these tasks were science - oriented , requiring participants to explore causal relations , and the others were engineering - oriented , aimed at prompting participants to attend to desirable end products . Findings suggested that those working on science - oriented tasks were more likely to draw valid inferences through systematic control of variables than those exposed to engineering - oriented tasks . In other words , exposing students to different domain tasks can influence their approaches to reasoning . It was also found that initial exposure to engineering tasks followed by science - oriented tasks was more beneficial for inducing causal investigations than a switch from science - oriented to engineering - oriented tasks . However , the researchers cautioned that the two models of scientific reasoning were not strictly dichotomous . While the end goal of engineering is different from that of science , it by no means implies that engineers do not need abstract knowledge to reason like scientists . In reality , some engineers , who are trained to conduct fundamental research and whose work draws on foundational insights to best generate and optimize products , strive to understand causal mechanisms just as much as scientists . 618 ( 2016 ) 46 : 613 – 632 At the university level , Moore and Rubbo ( 2012 ) compared students ’ scientific reasoning skills gauged by the LCTSR between those in STEM fields and those in non - STEM fields . It was found that STEM majors in general outperformed non - STEM majors . Although it is possible that students with stronger scientific reasoning skills tend to choose STEM fields , what remains unclear is whether a differentiation among STEM students exists . Perhaps more important , in view of the two models of reasoning approaches , is whether science major students differ from engineering students in their performance on scientific reasoning tasks . In sum , scientific reasoning skills are reportedly to be interrelated with knowledge acquisition and can vary considerably with different disciplines , levels of education and quality of content learning in which students are situated . Although prior studies exam - ined these aspects individually , no results have been reported to look into the differences of students ’ scientific reasoning skills across these factors in a collective manner . Our study is aimed to fill in this gap . Methodology Participants and Settings Participants of interest in the study are Chinese tertiary - level students across different majors , year levels , and universities . Three categories of majors , consisting of science , engineering , and education , were selected . Specifically , students from physics and chemistry programs made up the science category ; those from electrical and computer engineering programs constituted the engineering category ; and those from science education who intended to become science teachers formed the education category . Within each major , students at all four year levels ( years 1 through 4 ) participated in the study . Note that the Chinese higher education system is overseen and regulated by the federal government ( Ministry of Education ( MOE ) ) . In order for any higher institution to have the authority of conferring degrees in a specific area , the curriculum content , course numbers , and credit hours must meet the standardized criteria set forth by the government ( MOE 1999 , 2004 ) . This entails the numbers and hours of course work required of students in different institutions to be comparable at a specific year level ( MOE 1999 , 2004 ) . Since students in later years have completed progressively more course work than those in earlier years , it is reasonable to consider early - year students to have a lesser amount of exposure to content learning ( at least intended to be so ) than those in later - years . All participants were enrolled in five comprehensive universities selected randomly from two tiers of higher institutions located in major cities of China , two from the first tier , and three from the second tier ( see Supplementary Materials for geopolitical and economic demographics of these institutions ) . First - tier universities in our study are those ranked as top 30 institutions in China , directly overseen by the MOE to prepare students for leading - edge research positions in their respective academic disciplines ( MOE 2012b ) . The STEM and STEM education programs at these universities emphasize theoretical and foundational in - sights through technology - aided inquiry - based classroom experiences ( MOE 2012b ) . Where possible , students at these institutions are encouraged to participate in undergraduate research projects funded by government or private agencies to deepen their learning . Second - tier universities in our study are those ranked between 100 and 150 nationally . Their STEM - related programs , although held accountable to the same requirements of course offerings and ( 2016 ) 46 : 613 – 632 619 credit hours as mandated by the government , are aimed primarily at vocational preparation with a focus on less abstract but more practical or applied knowledge . In other words , with the amount of course work similar to that in the first - tier institutions , less emphasized in teaching and learning at these universities are abstract or theoretical insights that are stressed for training scholars of foundational research ( MOE 2012b ) . In this sense , the intended higher education in the first - tier institutions is qualitatively different from that in the second - tier institutions , with the former emphasizing more abstract learning than the latter ( also see Supplementary Materials for educational goals and curriculum requirements of the two tiers of institutions ) . A total of 1 , 637 students participated in the study . A breakdown of the participants in terms of major , year level , and university tier is shown in Table 1 . Instrument and Analysis Methods Given the broad range of student participants , we used the latest version of LCTSR ( Lawson 1978 ; 2000 ) to conduct a large - scale written measurement . According to the designers ( Lawson 1978 ; 2000 ) , the LCTSR is aimed to measure key sub - skills of scientific reasoning , including hypothetical – deductive reasoning , control of variables , correlational reasoning , proportional reasoning , and probabilistic reasoning . As evident from the literature , this instrument is suitable for use with students at various academic levels , including those at the tertiary level ( Carmel and Yezierski 2013 ; Ding 2014b ; Fencl 2010 ; Jensen and Lawson 2011 ; Nieminen et al . 2012 ) . We chose this instrument for the study primarily because of the following considerations . First , although the LCTSR questions are not intended to cover all of the important aspects of scientific reasoning ( such as distinguishing the functions of evidence and theory ) , they target core skills commonly recognized as essential for successful scientific reasoning and match closely the focus of the current study . Secondly , the questions on the LCTSR are designed in physical and natural contexts ; hence , disentangling reasoning skills from potential affective factors which could be a confounder if socio - scientific questions were used ( Greenhoot et al . 2004 ; Sadler and Donnelly 2006 ) . Moreover , the questions on LCTSR are designed in pairs ; within each pair , the first question asks for responses to a phenomenon , and the second requires students to select a proper explanation to justify their responses . This design is capable of eliciting student thought processes while still maintaining the efficiency needed for large - scale investigation ( see Supplementary Materials for LCTSR question examples ) . The English LCTSR was first translated into Mandarin by a group of bilingual scientists and science education experts . Two additional bilingual researchers who were not familiar with Table 1 A breakdown of student participants in terms of majors , year levels , and school tiers Tier 1 university Tier 2 university Science Engineering Education Science Engineering Education Year 1 105 63 55 50 47 59 Year 2 74 83 60 45 62 57 Year 3 70 85 65 45 93 95 Year 4 65 69 54 51 91 94 620 ( 2016 ) 46 : 613 – 632 the test at that time translated the Mandarin version back to English . The back - translated version was then compared against the original test for further refinement of the Mandarin test . Moreover , we interviewed a dozen Chinese students to check if they interpreted the translated questions as intended . No misinterpretation was detected , and the translation was then finalized . The LCTSR was administered as an in - class written test to all participating students within a period of 2 weeks in the middle of a 20 - week - long Autumn semester . In each class , students were given a maximum of 45 min to complete the test . No incentive was provided ; however , students were encouraged to take the test seriously and were asked to give their honest responses without guessing . Because the LCTSR was initially developed through classical test theory and since then has undergone multiple revisions , the latest version is yet to be examined for its validity and reliability . In this study , we use Rasch analysis ( Bond and Fox 2007 ; Ding 2014a ; Liu 2010 ) to establish validity and reliability evidence for LCTSR . To avoid deviation from the main focus of the study , we allocate details of Rasch analysis to the Supplementary Materials . Here , we briefly provide summative descriptions to justify the use of LCTSR for our subsequent investigation . Overall , the person and item reliability of the LCTSR are 0 . 76 and 0 . 98 , respectively , indicating a sufficient consis - tency in the outcomes . In addition , the Rasch analysis indicates a reasonably good model fit of our collected raw data ( see Supplementary Materials ) . Moreover , it is found that , while the various key skills intended by the LCTSR ( hypothetical – deductive reasoning , control of variables , proportional reasoning , probabilistic reasoning , and correlation reasoning ) can each represent a meaningful subscale with reliabilities rang - ing from 0 . 69 to 0 . 80 , they can collectively form a broader scale for the overall construct of scientific reasoning . In other words , these five skills , albeit targeting various sub - aspects of scientific reasoning , can collectively morph into a unified construct . Put more specifically , these five skills can be considered as constituting elements ( or sub - skills ) subsumed under scientific reasoning . Note that this collectiveness is not contradictory to the individuality of these skills . Instead , it confirms the richness and complexity of the construct of scientific reasoning . As discussed in the literature , it is common to examine composite constructs at both the aggregate and individual levels ( see , for example , Brandt and Duckor 2013 ; Briggs and Wilson 2003 ) . For instance , in analyzing science assessments , Briggs and Wilson ( 2003 ) defined “ science ability ” as a higher - order construct containing four disaggre - gated components ( design and conduct investigations , exam evidence , understand concepts , and communicate information ) . Based on this framework , the researchers used both unidimensional and multidimensional analyses to investigate respectively the composite construct of “ science ability ” and its individual components . Similarly , many international assessments such as PISA are regularly examined through both unidimensional and multidimensional analyses for evaluation of aggregate assessment scales as well as individual subscales ( OECD 2012 ) . In the study , Rasch - generated person estimates — representing student scientific reasoning skills — were used for three - way analysis of variance ( ANOVA ) with the three variables of major , year level , and university tier . Main effects of each variable were examined . However , in case of interactions , two - and one - way ANOVAs were performed separately at the individ - ual levels of each variable to circumvent broad - brush comparisons that are no longer valid ( Agresti and Finlay 2009 ) . ( 2016 ) 46 : 613 – 632 621 Results Overall Scientific Reasoning Skills Across Majors , Year Levels , and Institution Tiers To address the question of how students ’ scientific reasoning may vary in terms of different disciplines , levels of education , and qualitatively dissimilar content learning , we compared Rasch - generated student ability estimates of scientific reasoning across various majors , year levels , and university tiers . For each of the total 24 student groups derived from 3 majors× 4 year levels×2 university tiers , an average score is calculated and plotted in Fig . 1 . As seen , within the first - tier universities , students in science majors demonstrated the highest level of scientific reasoning at all year levels , followed by the engineering majors who outperformed their education counterparts . Within each major , the fluctuation across the four year levels was noticeably small . A similar pattern was observed in the second - tier universities , except that the engineering majors outperformed science peers . Overall , students from the first - tier universi - ties consistently showed a higher level of scientific reasoning than those from the second - tier universities , regardless of major and year level . We conducted a three - way ANOVA using the three factors of major , year level , and institution tier as independent variables , including their interactions . Two prerequisites for ANOVA regarding data normality and homogeneity of variance were first evaluated . Results from Kolmogorov – Smirnov tests showed no sign of violation of normality in the datasets ( all p ’ s > 0 . 10 ) ; also , a Levene ’ s test revealed no significant difference in variance among the groups ( p > 0 . 20 ) . Given these findings , we proceeded with ANOVA ( summarized in Table 2 ) . As evident from Table 2 , all interactions are insignificant ; thus , comparisons for the main effects are permitted . Fig . 1 Student overall scientific reasoning skills measured by the LCTSR . Each data point represents the average Rasch score of each group . Error bars represent standard deviations 622 ( 2016 ) 46 : 613 – 632 For the main effect of year level , no statistical significance was detected ( p = 0 . 742 ) . However , the effects of the two other factors — major and university tier — were found to be significant ( both p ’ s < 0 . 001 ) . This means that there is a significant difference in student scientific reasoning across the three different majors and between the two university tiers . To identify what caused the significance in major ( as more than two categories were involved ) , we conducted Bonferroni pair - wise comparisons among the three majors ( using the adjusted significance level of α ’ = 0 . 05 / 3 = 0 . 017 ) , collapsing year levels while keeping the two univer - sity tiers separate . Results showed that the performance of education majors was statistically lower than that of science and engineering majors , but no significant difference was found between the latter two — a consistent pattern across both university tiers ( For tier 1 , science / engineering vs . education , both p ’ s < 0 . 01 , effect sizes ≥ 0 . 61 ; science vs . engineering , p > 0 . 03 > α ’ , effect size = 0 . 35 . For tier 2 , science / engineering vs . education , both p ’ s < 0 . 005 , effect sizes ≥ 0 . 56 ; science vs . engineering , p > 0 . 03 > α ’ , effect size = 0 . 34 ) . For convenience , we use a schematic plot in Fig . 2 — mimicking an atomic fine structure — to concatenate the above findings . Here , all lines are horizontally plotted , denoting no significant effect across the year levels . The thick lines indicate a collapse of science and engineering majors due to insignificant differences between them . A fine structure splitting the two majors is displayed immediately beside each of the two thick lines to show the detailed fine - grained configuration . Sub - skills of Scientific Reasoning Across Majors , Year Levels , and Institution Types As mentioned earlier , the LCTSR measures various sub - skills of scientific reasoning , which include hypothetical – deductive reasoning , control of variables , proportional reasoning , corre - lational reasoning , and probabilistic reasoning . To examine their relations to different disci - plines , various years of exposure to higher education and qualitatively dissimilar content learning , we compared student performance on these sub - skills across majors , year levels , and institution tiers . Student ability estimates on each of the reasoning sub - skills were derived from multidi - mensional Rasch analysis ( see “ Methodology ” for justification of using multidimensional analysis ) . As before , these Rasch abilities are averaged for each of the 24 groups and plotted in Fig . 3 . Interestingly enough , except for the sub - skill of hypothetical – deductive reasoning , all Table 2 Three - way ANOVA for overall scientific reasoning measured by the LCTSR Source Type III sum of squares df Mean square F Sig . Corrected model 172 . 827 23 7 . 514 9 . 972 < 0 . 001 Error 1 , 215 . 502 1 , 613 0 . 754 Corrected total 1 , 388 . 329 1 , 636 University 120 . 871 1 120 . 871 160 . 399 < 0 . 001 Major 22 . 899 2 11 . 45 15 . 194 < 0 . 001 Year 0 . 939 3 0 . 313 0 . 415 0 . 742 University×major 2 . 24 2 1 . 12 1 . 486 0 . 227 University×year 0 . 747 3 0 . 249 0 . 33 0 . 803 Major×year 1 . 621 6 0 . 27 0 . 358 0 . 905 University×major×year 3 . 781 6 0 . 63 0 . 836 0 . 542 ( 2016 ) 46 : 613 – 632 623 data points appear to cluster together , displaying a close similarity between majors , year levels , and even university tiers . Conversely , the pattern emerging from hypothetical – deductive reasoning resembles strikingly that of the overall scientific reasoning in Fig . 1 . We conducted a three - way ANOVA for each of the sub - skills using major , year level , and institution tier as independent variables . As before , the assumptions of normality and homo - geneity were evaluated through Kolmogorov – Smirnov ( K - S ) tests and Levene ’ s tests , and no violation of either assumption was found ( all p ’ s > 0 . 09 for K - S tests and p ’ s > 0 . 08 for Levene ’ s test ) . With respect to the four sub - skills of control of variables and proportional , correlational , and probabilistic reasoning , the three - way ANOVA all reported significant interactions , thus disallowing broad - brush comparisons for the main effects . Similar significance was also detected in two - way ANOVA for various combinations of two variables . Given these condi - tions , one - way ANOVA was carried out separately for each major , year level , and university tier . It was found that , although significant differences were present in some cases , our follow - up pair - wise comparisons showed that none of the detected differences revealed an effect size greater than 0 . 07 ( appreciably smaller than what is typically considered as a small effect with a size of 0 . 2 ) . This result resonates with the plots in Fig . 3 , in which the lines linking year levels are all intertwined among the majors and in close vicinity between the two institution tiers , yielding no interpretable patterns of practical meaning . On the other hand , a three - way ANOVA for the sub - skill of hypothetical – deductive reasoning ( summarized in Table 3 ) revealed a salient resemblance to that of overall scientific reasoning ( c . f . Table 2 ) . Specifically , no significant interactions or year - level effect were detected , but the effects of major and university tier appeared to be significant . Moreover , pair - wise comparisons among the three majors ( using the adjusted significance level of α ’ = 0 . 017 ) suggested that the difference derived solely from the education majors who performed statistically lower than those in the science and engineering majors ( For tier 1 , science / engineering vs . education , both p ’ s < 0 . 001 , effect sizes ≥ 0 . 64 ; science vs . engineering , p > 0 . 10 , effect size = 0 . 22 . For tier 2 , science / engineering vs . education , both p ’ s < 0 . 001 , effect sizes ≥ 0 . 55 ; science vs . engineering , p > 0 . 03 > α ’ , effect size = 0 . 23 ) . To this end , the schematic plot in Fig . 2 applies here as well . Science Engineering Education Engineering Science Education Year 1 Year 2 Year 3 Year 4 Tier 2 University Tier 1 University S c i e n ti f i c r ea s on i ng Fig . 2 A schematic plot of student scientific reasoning skills across different majors , year levels , and school tiers 624 ( 2016 ) 46 : 613 – 632 Discussion Differences in Scientific Reasoning Across Year Levels of Higher Education As evident from the above findings , students ’ overall scientific reasoning skills measured by the LCTSR varied little across the four year levels . In fact , this was a recurring pattern for all Fig . 3 Student sub - skills of scientific reasoning measured by the LCTSR : a control of variables ; b proportional reasoning ; c correlation reasoning ; d probabilistic reasoning ; and e hypothetical — deductive reasoning . Each point represents the average Rasch score of each group . Error bars represent standard deviations ( 2016 ) 46 : 613 – 632 625 the three majors and two institution tiers . In other words , regardless of other factors , students who completed more tertiary - level courses did not necessarily show an advantage in scientific reasoning over their early - year peers who took a lesser amount of course work . A further look at the results of the reasoning sub - skills revealed a similar picture . Although some cross - year fluctuations were noted and shown to be significant for the four sub - skills of control of variables and proportional , correlational , and probabilistic reasoning , none of them represented an effect that could be remotely considered as a small size . Moreover , these fluctuations as manifested in Fig . 3 revealed no regularities or practical meaning and therefore could , to a large extent , be envisioned as confined in a horizontal band ( as depicted in Fig . 2 ) . To that end , it is reasonable to infer from the results that the increased body of content knowledge that students presumably accumulated by the later years of higher education did not place them at a better position than their early - year counterparts in terms of the measured scientific reasoning skills . These results also suggest a possible lack of association between year levels of higher education and scientific reasoning . We recognize that our cross - year comparisons are cross - sectional , not longitudinal . In other words , we took a snapshot of different years of students rather than tracking the same student cohort over multiple years . In light of this research approach , our claims are not intended to address causal relations between scientific reasoning and content learning . Instead , we focus primarily on the variations ( or more precisely , the lack of variations in some cases ) in scientific reasoning . Results from our cross - sectional study , although not derived directly from calcula - tions of correlation , can cast interesting light on the possible associations ( or lack thereof ) between scientific reasoning and content learning [ see , for example , Cohen et al . ( 2003 ) ; Lavrakas ( 2008 ) for discussion of cross - sectional comparisons as a legitimate research ap - proach to uncovering information on association ; also see , for example , Agresti and Finlay ( 2009 ) for discussion of using ANOVA to test association between variables , as was done in the current study ] . That said , given the following considerations about the unique settings of the study as well as some supporting evidence , it could perhaps be reasonable to take our cross - sectional results as an approximation of a growth pattern for student scientific reasoning in Chinese higher education . As mentioned earlier , public universities in China are directly overseen by the government . The Chinese Ministry of Education has long established a set of standards and evaluation Table 3 Three - way ANOVA for hypothetical – deductive reasoning measured by the LCTSR Source Type III sum of squares df Mean square F Sig . Corrected model 68 . 136 23 2 . 962 54 . 852 < 0 . 001 Error 87 . 025 1613 0 . 054 Corrected total 155 . 161 1636 University 49 . 527 1 49 . 527 917 . 167 < 0 . 001 Major 13 . 149 2 6 . 575 121 . 760 < 0 . 001 Year 0 . 072 3 0 . 024 0 . 444 0 . 725 University×major 0 . 284 2 0 . 142 2 . 630 0 . 072 University×year 0 . 153 3 0 . 051 0 . 944 0 . 419 Major×year 0 . 496 6 0 . 083 1 . 537 0 . 162 University×major×year 0 . 539 6 0 . 090 1 . 664 0 . 125 626 ( 2016 ) 46 : 613 – 632 criteria to rank higher institutions nationwide every 4 years ( MOE 2012a ) . Many universities closely adhere to these standards and criteria in order to maintain their national standings . In a sense , this provides stability to the design and implementation of undergraduate programs in Chinese higher education . Also , radical changes in Chinese education rarely occur within a short time scale of several years . So , it is fair to say that what early - year university students are experiencing nowadays in their undergraduate programs is similar to what senior - year students experienced a few years ago . In this study , the participating institu - tions and programs have consistently maintained their national rankings in the past decade ( MOE 2012a ) . Because of their relatively stable national standings , these institutions have likely attracted and admitted students with similar academic backgrounds over the years . To this end , there is also a sense of stability in student backgrounds across time . In a separate research effort following the year in which the current study was carried out , we administered the LCTSR to a new cohort of first - year science and engineering students at the same participating first - tier universities in the middle of the autumn semester . We found that the overall averages for science and engineering majors were 1 . 33 ( S . E . = 0 . 12 ) and 1 . 28 ( S . E . = 0 . 11 ) , respectively , comparable to what was reported for their counterparts in the current study ( both p values > 0 . 20 ) . This empirical information provides some supporting evidence for our arguments about the stability in the incoming students ’ backgrounds over the years . Moreover , in our study , we deliberately drew students from each year for every selected major and institution . This further ensures that student participants across different years in each category share comparable educational settings in their undergraduate studies . Given these above considerations , the cross - sectional comparisons among different year levels in our study , although should not be taken exactly the same as longitudinal results , by - and - large sketch out a general picture of what the development pattern of student scientific reasoning may look like at the tertiary level . Certainly , more systematic studies are needed to test this postulation . Differences in Student Scientific Reasoning Across Tiers of Higher Institution As mentioned before , the intended content learning at the two tiers of universities was qualitatively dissimilar ( see “ Instrument and Analysis Methods ” ) . The first - tier universities placed great emphasis on training students to gain theoretical and fundamental insights , while the second - tier universities gave precedence to applied knowledge and occupational prepara - tion . In light of the aforementioned knowledge categorization model ( Lawson et al . 2000 ) , students in the former institutions would have a greater opportunity to master theoretical or hypothetical concepts than those in the second tier universities and , hence , were likely to exhibit a higher level of scientific reasoning . At a first glimpse , the results of students ’ overall performance on the LCTSR seemingly appear to conform to this postulate , as those in the first - tier universities performed significantly better than their peers in the second - tier universities , a consistent pattern for all majors and year levels . Interestingly , as our analysis of sub - skills shows , the divergence between the two tiers can be attributed primarily to the difference in hypothetical – deductive reasoning but little to the differences in the other sub - skills ( c . f . Fig . 3 ) . This perhaps indicates that tertiary - level students may have reached some sort of uniformity in their skills of control of variables and proportional , correlational , and probabilistic reasoning , but differ noticeably in hypothetical – deductive reasoning between the two tiers . ( 2016 ) 46 : 613 – 632 627 Nevertheless , a careful look at the above results suggests that the qualitatively different content learning as intended by the two university tiers in fact produced equally little effect on scientific reasoning . Put more directly , regardless of university tier , student reasoning skills seemed to be equally unrelated to the years of higher education . Had more theoretically oriented content learning in the first - tier institutions benefited scientific reasoning , we would have seen at least some meaningful divergence in student performance on the LCTSR among the 4 years , with higher LCTSR outcomes for students at the later years . The fact that we observed nearly flat lines in both university tiers implied that learning theory and insight - focused knowledge did not make the relation between scientific reasoning and content learning any stronger than did studying practical and applied knowledge . Differences in Student Scientific Reasoning Across Disciplines of Higher Education While exposing students to science - oriented settings may affect their reasoning approaches differently than exposing them to engineering - oriented settings ( Schauble et al . 1991 ) , our results showed that both science and engineering undergraduates demonstrated similar perfor - mance on LCTSR . This perhaps is not surprising because , after all , science and engineering are not two dichotomous fields . Although they differ in their ultimate goals , students in both fields need to rely on valid reasoning strategies to understand or reproduce causal relations . That said , a difference was detected between the students in the education major and those in science and engineering majors , with the former exhibiting a consistently lower performance than the latter . Similarly to the above discussion , this result may seemingly imply that content learning in different disciplines can impose differing influences on students ’ scientific reasoning skills . But in fact all the majors yielded nearly identical results , as none created a situation in which later - year students exhibited higher scientific reasoning skills than their early - year peers ; or put more succinctly , in none of the three majors did scientific reasoning seem to associate with the years of content learning . Since none of the three variables appeared to show meaningful relations with scientific reasoning and yet we observed some significant differences between majors and university tiers , a question worth asking is : Where did the differences come from ? One possible account is that this is a result of student self - selection . ( Note that around the time of University Entrance Examinations , students have the opportunity to fill out a wish list of several universities they hope to attend based on self - evaluation of their academic capabilities . Final admission is determined by balancing a student ’ s wish list and their actual performance on the Examinations . ) In other words , those capable of higher - level reasoning ( or more specifically hypothetical – deductive reasoning in our case ) perhaps tend to choose first - tier universities and pursue science or engineering majors , whereas those with lower reasoning skills may select second - tier universities and non - STEM majors . This implies that students may have developed a sense of self - efficacy about their reasoning skills by the end of high school , which essentially leads them to different paths of academic studies . Alternatively , this can also be a result of elimination . Since first - tier universities are more competitive than second - tier universities and science and engineering majors are more competitive than education majors , only those with sufficient scientific reasoning skills may reach the minimum requirements ( such as high enough math and science scores on their University Entrance Examinations ) to enter top institutions and programs . From these perspectives , it seems that it is not what , how much , or where students learn in university that can influence their scientific reasoning , but rather it is 628 ( 2016 ) 46 : 613 – 632 students ’ reasoning skills prior to university entry that can determine what and where they study for higher education . The result that student scientific reasoning does not seem to associate with learning in higher education calls for our attention . It is worth noting that the stagnancy in student scientific reasoning we observed is not due to a ceiling effect ( see Supplementary Materials ) . In other words , there is still room for students to make improvement in their performance on the LCTSR . However , current higher education produces little benefit in this matter perhaps mainly because there is a lack of explicit and reflective instruction in scientific reasoning ( Marusic and Slisko 2012 ; Moore and Rubbo 2012 ) . As pointed out by Kuhn ( 2009 ) , successful reasoning skills do not emerge naturally . If no explicit efforts are made to link content knowledge with scientific reasoning , even inquiry - based instruction that is predicated on providing learners with scientific practices may yield little success in helping them gain needed skills ( Moore and Rubbo 2012 ) . In addition , other factors such as lack of deliberate cultivation of epistemic beliefs , mismatch between learning goals and classroom practices , or even institutional norms and sociocultural influences perhaps can play a role in our observed results . As Kuhn ( 2002 ) mentioned , the ways students approach formal thinking can be constrained by their views of what counts as valid evidence . Since scientific reasoning requires frequent coordination between evidence and theory , deficient epistemic views about the nature of evidence - based hypothesis testing can be a major impediment in this regard . Similarly , a lack of process and meta - strategic knowledge may also limit students ’ deployment of needed skills for carrying out scientific reasoning . In principle , our tertiary - level education has long attended to these issues and has already included them into the prescribed broader goals of teaching and learning ( MOE 2004 , 2012b ) . In practice , however , the level of success for actual enactment of these goals , particularly in the context of institutional and sociocultural norms , is still moot . This , to a certain extent , may contribute to the stagnancy of student scientific reasoning that we observed in our study and is indeed an interesting research topic that warrants future long - term investigations . Limitations and Implications It is worth noting that the focal point of our study on the topic of scientific reasoning , which draws on evidence - based hypothesis formation and evaluation , is by no means ( or intended to be ) comprehensive . As mentioned before ( see the subsection of “ Scientific Reasoning ” in “ Research Goals and Theoretical Background ” ) , other aspects such as inductive thinking , epistemological beliefs of theory and evidence , or even creativity can conceivably have bearings on fruitful reasoning in many scientific investigations . As a limitation of our current study , these aspects are not addressed herein and worth future research efforts . Indeed , scientific reasoning is such a complex arena that a shared definition among researchers is yet to be coined . That said , our choice of several key skills in this regard as an entry point for the current study , although not all - inclusive , represents some convergent perspectives that recognize the important role of hypothesis formation and testing in scientific reasoning ( also see the subsection of “ Scientific Reasoning ” ) . Also noted as a limitation of our study is that we have only looked into content learning at different majors , years , and institutions in relation to scientific reasoning , leaving out other potentially important topics such as socio - cultural and epistemic influences on this matter . Future research along this line can shed useful light on the complex nature of scientific ( 2016 ) 46 : 613 – 632 629 reasoning and particularly its dynamic interplay with a broader range of factors that are beyond formal education . Despite these limitations , our study draws some useful implications for teaching and learning at the tertiary level . In the Chinese education system , a pursuit of scientific knowledge is often more heavily emphasized than a pursuit of the making of scientific knowledge . In the wake of the results , a shift from teaching end products to teaching the process of making end products needs to take place . This means that the design of the tertiary - level curricula needs to give more weight to engaging students ’ in the authentic knowledge - making processes , instead of perpetuating the unbalanced focus on knowledge acquisition . Pedagogically , this requires not only inquiry - oriented learning environments , but also instructional scaffolding that can explicitly help students bring to the fore the underpinnings of scientific inquiry , including their often implicitly invoked reasoning strategies . More specifically , in terms of the curriculum arrangements at our surveyed institutions , new courses aimed at explicit instruction of scientific methods perhaps need to be created and implemented across different disciplines at all levels of university . Such courses , if properly designed and enacted , should expose students to deliberate training and reflection on the skills that are valued in the broad context of scientific inquiries . Also important is the cultivation of student epistemological appreciation of science and scientific reasoning ( Zeineddin and Abd - El - Khalick 2010 ; Zhang and Ding 2013 ) . At the tertiary level , highly specialized undergraduate programs often require students to gain much depth within a narrow field . While students can become increasingly skillful at using valid reasoning strategies to solve problems in their own respective areas , they may not realize that many strategies hold a universal value and can be transferred to other areas with equal success ( Kuhn 1992 ; Schunn and Anderson 1999 ) . This , maybe , also explains , as yet another alternative interpretation , why little association was detected between scientific reasoning and learning in our study . Perhaps , had the LCTSR tasks been designed to more closely resemble what students had previously encountered in their own respective disciplines , we might have been able to see some positive outcomes — a postulation worth further empirical studies . That said , it is critically essential that students be able to flexibly transfer what they have acquired to deal with novel situations . In that sense , increasing students ’ awareness regarding the nature of science and scientific reasoning can be a useful pathway to solidifying their acquired skills in a broader context of learning and development . Finally , it is worth mentioning that instruction in scientific reasoning must be consistently linked to assessment at every stage of students ’ academic life . If assessment is viewed as an approximation of what is expected of students , then scientific reasoning — an important learning goal — must take presence in it . Otherwise , not only important information of student status on this respect is lost , but also it sends an inconsistent message to students of what is actually valued in the scientific enterprise . Acknowledgments The authors thank Katherine Mollohan for many useful discussions . This study is partially supported by the National Science Foundation ( Award # 1252399 ; Principal Investigator : Ding , L . ) . References Agresti , A . , & Finlay , B . ( 2009 ) . Statistical methods for the social sciences ( 4th ed . ) . Upper Saddle River : Pearson Education . Allchin , D . ( 2003 ) . Lawson ’ s shoehorn , or should the philosophy of science be rated ‘ x ’ ? Science & Education , 12 ( 3 ) , 315 – 329 . 630 ( 2016 ) 46 : 613 – 632 Bao , L . , Cai , T . , Koenig , K . M . , Fang , K . , Han , J . , Wang , J . , et al . ( 2009 ) . Learning and scientific reasoning . Science , 323 ( 5914 ) , 586 – 587 . Bond , T . G . , & Fox , C . M . ( 2007 ) . Applying the Rasch model : fundamental measurement in the human sciences ( 2nd ed . ) . Routledge : Taylor & Francis . BouJaoude , S . , Salloum , S . , & Abd - El - Khalick . ( 2004 ) . Relationships between selective cognitive variables and students ’ ability to solve chemistry problems . International Journal of Science Education , 26 ( 1 ) , 63 – 84 . Brandt , S . , & Duckor , B . ( 2013 ) . Increasing unidimensional measurement precision using a multidimensional item response model approach . Psychological Test and Assessment Modeling , 55 ( 2 ) , 148 – 161 . Briggs , D . , & Wilson , M . ( 2003 ) . An introduction to multidimensional measurement using Rasch models . Journal of Applied Measurement , 4 ( 1 ) , 87 – 100 . Carmel , J . H . , & Yezierski , E . J . ( 2013 ) . Are we keeping the promise ? Investigation of students ’ critical thinking growth . Journal of College Science Teaching , 42 ( 5 ) , 71 – 81 . Case , R . ( 1992 ) . The mind ’ s staircase : exploring the conceptual underpinnings of children ’ s thought and knowledge . Hillsdale : Erlbaum Associates . Chang , C . - Y . ( 2010 ) . Does problem solving = prior knowledge + reasoning skills in earth science ? An exploratory study . Research in Science Education , 40 ( 2 ) , 103 – 116 . Cohen , L . , Manion , L . , & Morrison , K . ( 2003 ) . Research methods in education . New York : Routledge . Demetriou , A . , Shayer , M . , & Efklides , A . ( 2006 ) . Neo - Piagetian theories of cognitive development : implications and applications for education . London : Taylor & Francis . Ding , L . ( 2014a ) . Seeking missing pieces in science concept assessments : reevaluating the brief electricity and magnetism assessment through Rasch analysis . Physical Review Special Topics - Physics Education Research , 10 ( 1 ) , 010105 . doi : 10 . 1103 / PhysRevSTPER . 10 . 010105 Ding , L . ( 2014b ) . Verification of causal influences of reasoning skills and epistemology on physics conceptual learning . Physical Review Special Topics - Physics Education Research , 10 ( 2 ) , 023101 . doi : 10 . 1103 / PhysRevSTPER . 10 . 023101 Dunbar , K . , & Klahr , D . ( 2012 ) . Scientific thinking and reasoning . In K . Holyoak & R . Morrison ( Eds . ) , The Oxford handbook of thinking and reasoning ( pp . 701 – 718 ) . New York : Oxford University Press , Inc . Einstein , A . ( 1950 ) . Out of my late years . New York : Philosophical Library . Fencl , H . S . ( 2010 ) . Development of students ’ critical - reasoning skills through content - focused activities in a general education course . Journal of College Science Teaching , 39 ( 5 ) , 56 – 62 . Greenhoot , A . F . , Semb , G . , Colombo , J . , & Schreiber , T . ( 2004 ) . Prior beliefs and methodological concepts in scientific reasoning . Applied Cognitive Psychology , 18 ( 2 ) , 203 – 221 . Hogan , K . , & Fisherkeller , J . ( 2005 ) . Dialogue as data : assessing students ' scientific reasoning with interactive protocols . In J . J . Minizes , J . Wandersee H , & J . D . Novak ( Eds . ) , Assessing science understanding : a human constructivist view ( pp . 95 – 127 ) . Burlington : Elsevier Academic Press . Holyoak , K . J . , & Morrison , R . G . ( 2005 ) . Thinkingandreasoning : areader ’ sguide . InK . J . Holyoak & R . G . Morrison ( Eds . ) , The Cambridge handbook of thinking and reasoning ( pp . 1 – 7 ) . Cambridge : Cambridge University Press . Jensen , J . L . , & Lawson , A . E . ( 2011 ) . Effects of collaborative group composition and inquiry instruction on reasoning gains and achievement in undergraduate biology . CBE — Life Sciences Education , 10 ( 1 ) , 64 – 73 . Kuhn , D . ( 1992 ) . Cross - domain development of scientific reasoning . Cognition and Instruction , 9 ( 4 ) , 285 – 327 . Kuhn , D . ( 2002 ) . What is scientific thinking and how does it develop ? In U . Goswami ( Ed . ) , Blackwell handbook of childhood cognitive development ( pp . 371 – 393 ) . Malden : Blackwell Publishers . Kuhn , D . ( 2007 ) . Jumping to conclusions — can people be counted on to make sound judgments ? Scientific American Mind , 18 ( 1 ) , 44 – 51 . Kuhn , D . ( 2009 ) . Do students need to be taught how to reason ? Educational Research Review , 4 ( 1 ) , 1 – 6 . Kuhn , D . , & Dean , D . ( 2004 ) . Connecting scientific reasoning and causal inferences . Journal of Cognition and Development , 5 ( 2 ) , 261 – 288 . Lavrakas , P . ( 2008 ) . Encyclopedia of survey research methods . Thousand Oaks : Sage Publications . Lawson , A . E . ( 1978 ) . The development and validation of a classroom test of formal reasoning . Journal of Research in Science Teaching , 15 ( 1 ) , 11 – 24 . Lawson , A . E . D 2000 ] . Classroom test of scientific reasoning : multiple choice version . Based on a . E . Lawson , " development and validation of the classroom test of formal reasoning " . Journal of Research in Science Teaching , 5 D 1 ] , 11 – 24 . 1978 . Lawson , A . E . ( 2004 ) . The nature and development of scientific reasoning . International Journal of Science and Mathematics Education , 2 ( 3 ) , 307 – 338 . Lawson , A . E . ( 2005 ) . What is the role of induction and deduction in reasoning and scientific inquiry ? Journal of Research in Science Teaching , 42 ( 6 ) , 716 – 740 . Lawson , A . E . , Alkhoury , S . , Benford , R . , Clark , B . R . , & Falconer , K . A . ( 2000 ) . What kinds of scientific concepts exist ? Concept construction and intellectual development in college biology . Journal of Research in Science Teaching , 37 ( 9 ) , 996 – 1018 . ( 2016 ) 46 : 613 – 632 631 Lee , J . A . ( 2000 ) . The scientific endeavor : a primer on scientific principles and practice . San Francisco : Addison - Wesley Longman . Liu , X . ( 2010 ) . Using and developing measurement instruments in science education : a Rasch modeling approach : Information Age Publishing . Liu , X . , Liang , L . , & Liu , E . ( 2012 ) . Science education research in China : challenges and promises . International Journal of Science Education , 34 ( 13 ) , 1961 – 1970 . Marusic , M . , & Slisko , J . ( 2012 ) . Influence of three different methods of teaching physics on the gain in students ’ development of reasoning . International Journal of Science Education , 34 ( 2 ) , 301 – 326 . MOE . ( 1999 ) . Higher education law of the People ' s Republic of China . Beijing : Ministry of Education of the People ' s Republic of China ( MOE - PRC ) . MOE . ( 2004 ) . Regulations on academic degrees of the People ' s Republic of China . Beijing : Ministry of Education of the People ' s Republic of China ( MOE - PRC ) . MOE . ( 2012a ) . 2012 National ranking of higher education . Beijing : Ministry of Education of the People ' s Republic of China ( MOE - PRC ) . MOE . ( 2012b ) . National evaluation of highereducation . Beijing : Ministry of Education of the People ' s Republic of China ( MOE - PRC ) . Moore , J . C . , & Rubbo , L . J . ( 2012 ) . Scientific reasoning abilities of nonscience majors in physics - based courses . Physical Review Special Topics - Physics Education Research , 8 ( 1 ) , 010106 . doi : 10 . 1103 / PhysRevSTPER . 8 . 010106 Nickerson , R . S . ( 2004 ) . Teaching reasoning . In J . P . Leighton & R . J . Sternberg ( Eds . ) , The nature of reasoning ( pp . 410 – 442 ) . New York : Cambridge University Press . Nieminen , P . , Savinainen , A . , & Viiri , J . ( 2012 ) . Relations between representational consistency , conceptual understanding of the force concept , and scientific reasoning . Physical Review Special Topics - Physics Education Research , 8 ( 1 ) , 010123 . doi : 10 . 1103 / PhysRevSTPER . 8 . 010123 NRC . ( 2011 ) . A framework for K - 12 science education : practices , crosscutting concepts , and core ideas . Washington : National Research Council , Board on Science Education , Division of Behavioral and Social Sciences and Education . OECD . ( 2012 ) . PISA 2009 technical report : OECD Publishing . Oliva , J . ( 2003 ) . The structural coherence of students ’ conceptions in mechanics and conceptual change . International Journal of Science Education , 25 ( 5 ) , 539 – 561 . Sadler , T . D . , & Donnelly , L . A . ( 2006 ) . Socioscientific argumentation : the effects of content knowledge and morality . International Journal of Science Education , 28 ( 12 ) , 1463 – 1488 . Schauble , L . ( 1996 ) . The development of scientific reasoning in knowledge - rich contexts . Developmental Psychology , 32 ( 1 ) , 102 – 119 . Schauble , L . , Klopfer , L . E . , & Raghavan , K . ( 1991 ) . Students ’ transition from an engineering model to a science model of experimentation . Journal of Research in Science Teaching , 28 ( 9 ) , 859 – 882 . Schunn , C . , & Anderson , J . R . ( 1999 ) . The generality / specificity of expertise in scientific reasoning . Cognitive Science , 23 ( 3 ) , 337 – 370 . Tsitsipis , G . , Stamovlasis , D . , & Papageorgiou , G . ( 2010 ) . The effect of three cognitive variables on students ’ understanding of the particulate nature of matter and its changes of state . International Journal of Science Education , 32 ( 8 ) , 987 – 1016 . Zeineddin , A . , & Abd - El - Khalick , F . ( 2010 ) . Scientific reasoning and epistemological commitments : coordina - tion of theory and evidence among college science students . Journal of Research in Science Teaching , 47 ( 9 ) , 1064 – 1093 . Zhang , P . , & Ding , L . ( 2013 ) . Large - scale survey of Chinese precollege students ’ epistemological beliefs about physics : a progression or a regression ? Physical Review Special Topics - Physics Education Research , 9 ( 1 ) , 1 – 9 . doi : 10 . 1103 / PhysRevSTPER . 9 . 010110 . Zimmerman , C . ( 2000 ) . The development of scientific reasoning skills . Developmental Review , 20 ( 1 ) , 99 – 149 . Zimmerman , C . ( 2007 ) . The development of scientific thinking skills in elementary and middle school . Developmental Review , 27 ( 2 ) , 172 – 223 . 632 ( 2016 ) 46 : 613 – 632