261 Vol . 35 , No . 4 Providing care for our patients that is based on the best available evi - dence , and integrating that evidence with our patients’ values in the con - text of family and community , should be the goal of every family physician . In two studies in this is - sue of Family Medicine , Ramos et al and Schwartz et al 1 , 2 study how we do ( and too often do not ) apply the best available evidence . Their work builds on that of Gorman et al , Covell et al , Ely et al , and others by studying how we answer ques - tions at the point of care . 3 - 6 Ramos et al directly observed an average of six patient visits per phy - sician among the residents and fac - ulty of a family practice training program . 1 Not surprisingly , they found that residents ask more ques - tions than their teachers do ( 1 . 5 ver - sus . 8 ) and that residents are more likely to attempt to immediately answer their questions ( 74 % versus 39 % ) but that faculty place more value on the “left - over” questions that remain unanswered at the end of clinic . This makes sense—resi - dents presumably had fewer pa - tients per clinic and more time to answer questions and therefore had fewer important questions left at the end of the day . The traditional approach to evi - dence - based medicine ( EBM ) , as described by Ramos et al , involves a laborious process of formulating a question ; identifying , appraising , and synthesizing the best evidence in the primary literature or system - atic reviews ; and then applying the answer to patient care . In the Ramos et al study , less than 1 % of ques - tions were answered using the pri - mary literature , which is consistent with work by Ely et al in a group of more than 100 Iowa family physi - cians , most of whom were in pri - vate practice . 6 Information Mastery , Not EBM And can you blame them ? While sources of primary literature such as MEDLINE are rich and impor - tant resources , they were designed for researchers , not clinicians . Al - though the “Clinical Queries” fea - ture of MEDLINE is somewhat helpful , it is not fully realized and is unknown to most physicians . MEDLINE should be a reference of last resort . Shaughnessy et al have pio - neered a much more practical ap - proach called Information Mastery 7 that is really the second generation of EBM . Central to Information Mastery is the “usefulness equa - tion : ” Usefulness of medical in - formation = ( relevance x validity ) / work . Thus , the most useful informa - tion is highly relevant and highly valid , and little work is needed to obtain the information . MEDLINE provides much irrelevant informa - tion that is of highly variable valid - ity , and it takes a great deal of work to obtain it . Is it any wonder , there - Poin t - of - Care In form ation Th at Ch an ges Practice : It’s Closer Th an We Th in k Mark H . Ebell , MD , MS fore , that physicians in practice don’t use MEDLINE ? Information Mastery is much more practical be - cause it argues that physicians should first look to “predigested” sources of information that have evaluated the relevance and valid - ity of information and made it avail - able at the point of care . 8 W hile these references exist ( Info - Retriever , Clinical Evidence , the Cochrane Library , and the Ameri - can College of Physicians Journal Club are the best examples , al - though only the former has formal criteria for relevance to primary care physicians ) , they were appar - ently not available in the training program studied by Ramos et al . That’s too bad , because Information Mastery , not EBM , is what most physicians should be striving to practice . The work of Ramos et al also has some other limitations . The sources used by the physicians to answer their questions are grouped into five categories : another person , a pocket text , a comprehensive text , a pre - appraised source of evidence , and the primary medical literature . These categories , however , are not mutually exclusive . For example , InfoRetriever is a pocket text in that it runs on handheld computers , it includes pre - appraised sources of evidence such as POEMs and the Cochrane Library , and also includes Griffith’s 5 - minute Clinical Con - sult , a comprehensive text . As new references blur boundaries , we will need new categories and terms to describe them . From the Department of Family Practice , Michigan State University . ( Fam Med 2003 ; 35 ( 4 ) : 261 - 3 . ) Special Articles : Point - of - Care Medical Information 262 April 2003 Family Medicine What is EBM , Anyway ? W hile Ramos et al state that “Physicians rarely apply evidence - based medicine , ” several of the ref - erences cited to support this state - ment predate the development and dissemination of the principles of EBM . This statement also begs the question : what does it mean to “practice EBM” ? Hopefully it doesn’t mean formulating a ques - tion , searching MEDLINE , criti - cally appraising the studies that you find , and then applying an answer based on the best available evi - dence . This is wildly impractical , even for academic physicians and residents . It also does not mean only ordering a test or recommending a treatment if there are data from a randomized controlled trial to sup - port it—if that were the case , we would find ourselves paralyzed by lack of information too often . It also doesn’t mean using algorithms or “cookbook medicine , ” although good evidence - based guidelines can be a helpful aid to reducing inap - propriate variation and applying the best evidence . Rather than trying to practice EBM , I believe that physicians should practice the eminently more practical approach of Information Mastery . 7 Information Mastery in - volves attitudes , knowledge , and skills . This attitude includes a will - ingness to question the traditional wisdom and a healthy skepticism about new tests and treatments . It requires knowledge of the limita - tions of human cognition and ob - servational skills , the basic prin - ciples of clinical epidemiology , and the ability to read critical apprais - als of others . When choosing an in - formation source , an “information master” asks three questions : ( 1 ) Is there a filter for relevance that helps weed out the disease - oriented evi - dence ? ( 2 ) Is the information evalu - ated for validity and labeled with a “strength of recommendation” or “level of evidence” so I can quickly find the best evidence and know when the evidence is weak ? and ( 3 ) Does the information source reduce work by making it easy to find the evidence at the point of care ? Suc - cessfully answering these questions requires good information manage - ment skills ( including use of handheld computers and the Internet ) and a regular diet of “Pa - tient - Oriented Evidence That Mat - ters” ( POEMs ) , the most useful in - formation for clinicians . In the second study in this issue of Family Medicine , Schwartz et al studied the questions generated by three residency faculty at an urban family practice training program in Michigan . 2 The researchers seemed to be setting themselves up to fail . The physicians were not skilled computer users , did not appear to particularly value EBM , and had slow Internet access . Nevertheless , despite these limitations , they found that the physicians were able to an - swer most of their questions with an evidence - based source of infor - mation . Different Physicians , Different Approaches to Information Wyszewianski and Green have described four kinds of physicians with regard to their attitude toward new information . 9 “Seekers” are the prototypical “EBM junkies” who value evidence , carry handheld computers , and are willing to prac - tice differently than their colleagues if they believe the evidence sup - ports it . Schwartz et al note that only 5 % of physicians are willing to take the time to search the primary lit - erature or systematic reviews to answer their questions , and this cor - responds to the percentage of seek - ers in the physician population . The remaining 95 % of physicians are split fairly evenly between “recep - tives , ” “traditionalists , ” and “prag - matists . ” Like seekers , receptives value evidence over anecdote , but they also “have a life” and prefer that someone else does the work of sifting through the evidence for them . The traditionalists value the opinion of trusted authorities , while pragmatists are focused on getting through the day as efficiently as possible , usually not stopping to reflect on their practice . Wyszewianski and Green em - phasized that each group requires a different strategy to help them change practice and apply the best evidence to patient care . 9 While all you have to do is give seekers a computer and turn them loose , the other groups need sources that rec - ognize the importance of filtering for relevance , evaluating and label - ing the validity of each item or rec - ommendation , and reducing the work . The physicians in Schwartz’s study probably fell into the recep - tive or perhaps the traditionalist category and would therefore have less patience for slow Internet con - nections and might have more trouble interpreting the language of EBM , such as “number needed to treat” or “likelihood ratio . ” Current Efforts to Deliver Evidence - based Information Three efforts within the specialty of family practice are notable for their work to create evidence - based resources . The Family Practice In - quiries Network ( FPIN ) is a con - sortium of universities and resi - dency programs dedicated to iden - tifying the questions of family phy - sicians , answering them concisely with the best available evidence , and disseminating the answers to practitioners ( www . fpin . org ) . This grass - roots effort began as part of an AAFP - funded Research Center and is now growing into a national effort . InfoRetriever was originally written for the Apple Newton in 1995 and now exists in versions for the PocketPC , Palm , desktop Win - dows , and Web browser . It inte - grates a variety of evidence - based resources ( POEMs , the Cochrane Database of Systematic Reviews , evidence - based guidelines from the National Guidelines Clearinghouse , a database of diagnostic test infor - mation , and more than 100 clinical 263 Vol . 35 , No . 4 decision rules ) with a traditional textbook and a drug database ( www . infopoems . com ) . DynaMed is an electronic text - book developed largely by a single family physician . While not strictly evidence based ( evidence is not clearly labeled ) , it certainly has an “EBM attitude” ( www . dynamicmedical . com ) . It was ini - tially free but is now moving to a subscription - based model . Unfortunately , too many physi - cians expect that this sort of infor - mation should be free or at least that they shouldn’t have to pay for it themselves . However , developing truly useful information sources for use at the point of care is not cheap , and all three of these references will require significant funding over the next few years to develop new con - tent , disseminate it , and provide technical support to users . Funding will have to come from either foun - dations , family medicine organiza - tions , “sweat equity” for contribut - ing content , site licenses from hos - pitals and universities , or individual subscriptions . Relying on industry to supply our information is too dangerous ; we can have free infor - mation or we can have unbiased information , but we usually can’t have both . Where Should We Go From Here ? We’re already headed in the right direction , but much remains to be done . While EBM is nicely inte - grated into the curriculum of most medical schools , many faculty and community preceptors continue to practice “anecdote - based medi - cine , ” providing poor role models for our learners . If you fall into this category , attend an Information Mastery course , read POEMs every month , buy a handheld computer , and spend a few hours learning to use it and stocking it with evidence - based references . Don’t let the adoption of EBM be something that occurs only after the current gen - eration of faculty and preceptors grows older and retires from prac - tice . Fast , comprehensive information resources such as Clinical Evi - dence , the Cochrane Library , Dynamed , and InfoRetriever exist today and deserve the support of the family medicine community so they can become even more useful . The culture of training programs and private practices must change to foster an atmosphere of inquiry rather than authority . Instead of a monthly journal club that is litera - ture driven , start a Q & A Club that is driven by questions from prac - tice . Each physician can bring one question and an evidence - based answer to the meeting and share it with his or her colleagues . Question authority , and don’t be afraid to question your own practice . I truly believe that our future as a specialty is at stake—unless we become ex - perts at answering our questions with the best available evidence , the quality of our care will suffer , and our patients will go elsewhere . Competing Interests : Dr Ebell is the author of InfoRetriever and has served as a consultant to the Family Practice Inquiries Network . He was also the editor of the Journal of Family Practice , which publishes POEMs each month , and is a former colleague of Drs Schwartz and Lauder at Wayne State University . Corresponding Author : Address correspondence to Dr Ebell , 330 Snapfinger Drive , Athens , GA 30605 . 706 - 549 - 9195 . Fax : 706 - 549 - 8121 . ebell @ msu . edu . R EFERENCES 1 . Ramos K , Linscheid R , Schafer S . Real - time information - seeking behavior of residency physicians . Fam Med 2003 ; 35 ( 4 ) : 257 - 60 . 2 . Schwartz K , Northrup J , Israel N , Crowell K , Lauder N , Neale AV . Use of on - line evi - dence - based resources at the point of care . Fam Med 2003 ; 35 ( 4 ) : 251 - 6 . 3 . Covell DG , Uman GC , Manning PR . Infor - mation needs in office practice : are they be - ing met ? Ann Intern Med 1985 ; 103 : 596 - 9 . 4 . Woolf S , Benson DA . The medical informa - tion needs of internists and pediatricians at an academic medical center . Bull Med Libr Assoc 1989 ; 77 : 372 - 80 . 5 . Gorman PN , Ash J , Wykoff L . Can primary care physicians’ questions be answered us - ing the medical journal literature ? Bull Med Libr Assoc 1994 ; 82 : 140 - 6 . 6 . Ely J , Osheroff J , Ebell M , et al . Analysis of questions asked by family doctors regard - ing patient care . Br Med J 1999 ; 319 ( 7206 ) : 358 - 61 . 7 . Shaughnessy AF , Slawson DC , Bennett JH . Becoming an information master : a guide - book to the medical information jungle . J Fam Pract 1994 ; 39 : 489 - 99 . 8 . Ebell MH . Information at the point of care : answering clinical questions . J Am Board Fam Pract 1999 ; 12 : 225 - 35 . 9 . Wyszewianski L , Green LA . Strategies for changing clinicians’ practice patterns : a new perspective . J Fam Pract 2000 ; 49 : 461 - 4 . Special Articles : Point - of - Care Medical Information