Preprint of Visser , W . ( 1995 ) . Use of episodic knowledge and information in design problem solving . Design Studies , 16 ( 2 ) , 171 - 187 . Also in N . Cross , H . Christiaans & K . Dorst ( Eds . ) ( 1996 ) , Analysing design activity ( Ch . 13 , pp . 271 - 289 ) . Chichester , England : Wiley . 1 Use of episodic knowledge and information in design problem solving Willemien VISSER Projet de Psychologie Ergonomique INRIA - Rocquencourt 78153 LE CHESNAY Cedex Francetel : + ( 33 ) ( 1 ) 39 63 52 09 fax : + ( 33 ) ( 1 ) 39 63 53 30 email : visser @ nuri . inria . fr Abstract . In the study examined in this paper , intended at the start to analyse the reuse of problem - solving elements in design , what came to light is that the use of other types of " episodic " data , especially knowledge , also plays an important role in this activity . The paper presents various interesting results and raises different questions . Some of the results concern the contribution of different types and aspects of episodic knowledge to the construction of problem representations and to the development and evaluation of solutions ; the types of information sources consulted and the modes employed ; and the interest of data gathering from human informants rather than from non - human information sources . Some of the questions concern the distinction between the " reuse " of problem - solving elements and the " use " of other types of episodic data ; and differences and distances between knowledge " domains " . The paper closes with design - reuse assistance specification , a difficult question given the present state of knowledge on use of episodic data . Keywords . Design . Protocol analysis . Episodic Knowledge . Episodic Data . Reuse . Problem solving . Cognition . Case - Based Reasoning Problem solving based on " reuse " of problem - solving elements , i . e . particular solutions to particular problems , rather than on the use of general problem - solving knowledge ( " problem - solving reuse " , or " design reuse " in this text ) , is considered to play an important role in design 1 , 2 , 3 ( cf . Case - Based Reasoning 4 ) . This affirmation which is often made , is generally based on introspection by authors who are design methodologists , A . I . researchers or designers themselves . The conclusion which may be drawn from their papers is that designers may have good reasons to proceed to design reuse . A question which may be asked however is : do designers indeed proceed to reuse , and , if they do , why , and how do they proceed ? Only a few empirical studies have been conducted on this question , nearly exclusively in the domain of software design 5 , 6 . The study presented in this paper intended to examine the question of design reuse in order to identify requirements for reuse support tools through a characterisation of the actual reuse activities . The analysis conducted and the first results obtained led to a change of perspective : we discovered that , in addition to the reuse of problem - solving elements , the use - or reuse - of other types of " episodic " data , particularly knowledge , also played an important role in the design problem solving examined . This paper will present the questions and hypotheses formulated at the start of the study and the elements which led to modify the original perspective ( first section ) , the results on actual problem - i n r i a - 00633727 , v e r s i on 1 - 19 O c t 2 0 11 Author manuscript , published in " Design Studies 16 , 2 ( 1995 ) 171 - 187 " DOI : 10 . 1016 / 0142 - 694X ( 94 ) 00008 - 2 Preprint of Visser , W . ( 1995 ) . Use of episodic knowledge and information in design problem solving . Design Studies , 16 ( 2 ) , 171 - 187 . Also in N . Cross , H . Christiaans & K . Dorst ( Eds . ) ( 1996 ) , Analysing design activity ( Ch . 13 , pp . 271 - 289 ) . Chichester , England : Wiley . 2 solving reuse ( second section ) , and the results concerning the role played in design by episodic data not specifically linked to problem solving ( third section ) . The Discussion will review and discuss these results and present some suggestions for design assistance . 1 Protocol analysis in search for problem - solving reuse : identification of episodic data At the start of the study , we intended to analyse the protocol of an individual designer ( Dan ) with respect to problem - solving reuse . The paper does not present the technique adopted for the protocol analysis . Its rather informal quality seems justified to us given its exploratory character and its aim , i . e . to examine if designers proceed to reuse , and if so , to identify possibly different reuse modes and / or types of knowledge reused . The analysis was guided by several questions based on results obtained in three previous empirical design studies 7 . Although these previous studies on designers working in different domains ( software 8 , mechanical 9 , and aerospace - structure 10 design ) were not especially conducted in order to examine reuse , Visser 3 , 6 identified several characteristics of design reuse . Two of them are related to aspects of reuse identified in the present study and will be discussed in the final section of this paper . • Target - source relationships . First , the association between the design problem under hand ( the " target " problem ) and a reusable problem - solution association ( a " source " ) is often one of similarity ( analogy or another kind of similarity ) , but also other relationships may be exploited by designers , especially opposition 7 . Second , the source can come from a more or less remote domain ( even if the " distance " in question is difficult to measure ) . • Authors of the sources . Designers refer to both sources developed by themselves and to solutions designed by colleagues or anonymous authors ( e . g . designs presented in the literature , such as famous architectural projects ) . 1 . 1 When does one call use of problem - solving knowledge " reuse " ? Knowledge , i . e . data collected , processed and / or elaborated in the past , and integrated into memory , always plays an important role in problem solving . The knowledge used in problem solving which has been studied most is abstract knowledge ( problem - solving schemas or rules ) referring to types , or categories , of problems and solutions . Recently , researchers have started to discover the importance of problem solving reuse : the use of " episodic " , i . e . particular , experience - linked sources which are at the same abstraction level as the target problem ( " cases " ) , rather than general knowledge structures at a more abstract level . Notice that both can be applied in one and the same problem - solving situation 11 . 1 . 2 Different types of episodic data We use the term " episodic data " as an extension of Tulving ' s 12 notion of " episodic knowledge " . Next to knowledge , i . e . data from an internal source , a problem solver may indeed use information on particular experiences coming from external sources . In order to identify elements reused by the designer , we analysed the protocol in search for references to the use of episodic data exploited in order to solve the design problem . Looking for this kind of data , the analysis indeed led to the discovery of episodic problem - solving elements , but we also identified examples of episodic data not especially linked to a problem - solving context , but still very important for the resolution of the design problem . When referring to these data , often the designer verbalises a link relating them to a particular episode which was their " experiential " source . i n r i a - 00633727 , v e r s i on 1 - 19 O c t 2 0 11 Preprint of Visser , W . ( 1995 ) . Use of episodic knowledge and information in design problem solving . Design Studies , 16 ( 2 ) , 171 - 187 . Also in N . Cross , H . Christiaans & K . Dorst ( Eds . ) ( 1996 ) , Analysing design activity ( Ch . 13 , pp . 271 - 289 ) . Chichester , England : Wiley . 3 For example , the knowledge that , " in pack - to - bike attachments , the centre of gravity must be kept as low as possible " or " the pack should be attached in the centre " can be considered general rules applicable to designs involving bike and pack combinations . The way in which Dan , however , evokes this knowledge as related to - because based on - his personal biking experience , leads to qualify the knowledge he refers to as " episodic " : 00 : 55 " That sorta looks classy , having a backpack in the centre ; in fact when I biked around Hawaii as a kid , that ' s how I mounted my backpack . It was a framepack and I have to admit that , if there ' s any weight up here , this thing does a bit of wobbling and I remember that as an issue . " ( Boxes contain quotations from Dan ' s protocol , where these can be found on the basis of the time indication , such as 00 : 55 . ) In addition to the reuse of problem - solving elements , we therefore analysed the use of such other episodic elements . This " use " could have been called " reuse " , and could have been not distinguished from the " pure " problem - solving reuse . We will come back to this point in the Discussion . 2 Reuse of problem - solving elements We first present briefly a global analysis of the activity and the ideas Dan has about reuse . We then characterise the problem - solving sources reused and the different types of their use . • Global analysis of the activity . In order to relate the use of data to the main components of the design activity , two " stages " were distinguished in the design process analysed , according to the activity which played the major role in the stage . 00 : 16 - 00 : 52 ( 36 minutes ) Stage 1 . Construction of a problem representation ; 00 : 52 - 02 : 18 ( 86 minutes ) Stage 2 . Solution development and evaluation . Two remarks should be made concerning this decomposition : • We have many reservations concerning decompositions of cognitive activity into separate , independent , consecutive stages 13 . • The distinction between problem - representation construction and solution development and evaluation is particularly ambiguous in design where the progressive construction of a problem representation is a very important component of solution development . • Dan ' s ideas about reuse . At several occasions , Dan ' s remarks on his activity , translating his metaknowledge - which we ( try to ) distinguish from the verbalisations of particular traces of his activity - may make us think that reuse is playing an important role in his activity . Five minutes after he has begun the design session , Dan asserts : 00 : 21 " There ' s no sense in starting from scratch if you can start at square two instead of square one or square zero " . A few minutes later , he states : 00 : 21 " My general philosophy is : don ' t try to reinvent the state of the art if it already exists " . At 00 : 35 , he reminds this philosophy : i n r i a - 00633727 , v e r s i on 1 - 19 O c t 2 0 11 Preprint of Visser , W . ( 1995 ) . Use of episodic knowledge and information in design problem solving . Design Studies , 16 ( 2 ) , 171 - 187 . Also in N . Cross , H . Christiaans & K . Dorst ( Eds . ) ( 1996 ) , Analysing design activity ( Ch . 13 , pp . 271 - 289 ) . Chichester , England : Wiley . 4 00 : 35 " Don ' t redesign things " . 2 . 1 Characteristics of the sources Sources may be qualified with respect to many features . Five have been selected to be used here , because of their interest in the study . • Two families : Batavus and Blackburn . Data on particular designs and devices play an important role in Dan ' s construction of his problem representation . These data mainly come from two families . One is the design of a carrying / fastening device and a corresponding prototype elaborated by the client , Batavus . The other comprises various carrying devices developed and commercialised by a concurrent company , Blackburn . • Two aspects : descriptive and evaluative . Dan examines these sources from two angles : a descriptive one ( technical - commercial presentations ) and an evaluative one ( users ' evaluations , manufacturer ' s tests and judgements by an expert , a Blackburn employee ) . • Different status : from preliminary design to validated product . The solutions have different status in the design - validation cycle : Batavus ' solutions are a preliminary design and a prototype ; Blackburn ' s devices are final products , i . e . validated solutions . • Different degrees of " satisfactoriness " . The Assignment mentions that " the user ' s test performed on [ the ] prototype … showed some serious shortcomings " . Thus , the prototype design is an existing , unsatisfactory solution to the present design problem . The Blackburn solutions are more or less satisfactory : the main object of the phone call is to identify the degree of " satisfactoriness " of different solutions and the underlying factors . • Availability . The existence - and thus possible availability - of the Batavus solutions and evaluations has been referred to explicitly in the design assignment ; that of the devices by Blackburn or other companies had not . 2 . 2 Use of the sources The different ways in which Dan uses the sources are going to be detailed under two headings translating the two global objectives corresponding to the two " stages " , construction of a problem representation , and solution development and evaluation . 2 . 2 . 1 Construction of a problem representation Three examples of the way in which sources are clearly used to construct a problem representation are given in this sub - section , but a more equivocal example may be found in the next section ( " Solution shift or problem - representation shift ? " ) . • Examine data : first descriptive , then evaluative . In order to construct his problem representations , Dan analyses the sources , going from preliminary design to final product , and from descriptive to evaluative data . After he has read the Assignment , he asserts his general goal , translating one of his first problem representations : i n r i a - 00633727 , v e r s i on 1 - 19 O c t 2 0 11 Preprint of Visser , W . ( 1995 ) . Use of episodic knowledge and information in design problem solving . Design Studies , 16 ( 2 ) , 171 - 187 . Also in N . Cross , H . Christiaans & K . Dorst ( Eds . ) ( 1996 ) , Analysing design activity ( Ch . 13 , pp . 271 - 289 ) . Chichester , England : Wiley . 5 00 : 19 " OK , so I am going to make a concept design for the device and this is a … ' carrying / fastening ' ' device ' … and it is to attach to a … mountainbike " . • Examine " what exists already " : a " quick way of getting started " . An examination of the Batavus prototype and its users ' evaluation are considered a " quick way " of getting some ideas of " what exists already " ( descriptive data ) and " what ' s not acceptable " ( evaluative data ) . 00 : 27 " OK . This is the part of the process where I ' m sort of just getting some familiarity with the design and with the design issues and state of the art . " • Examine similar , existing solutions . After a quick analysis of the " home - made " solutions , Dan asks for information on " any other backpack , framepack / backpack or carrier devices [ of which ] the Company [ has ] done any market surveys " . The experimenter presents him with " comparable products available in the US " , from Blackburn and another company , Winchester . Dan examines the Blackburn documentation , then skips through the Winchester material , which he judges as not relevant for his present task . After these descriptive data , Dan asks for " user evaluations of the different types of any of these products " ( see above , " Examine data : first descriptive , then evaluative " ) . When the experimenter cannot provide these , Dan tries to obtain them from another source , i . e . a Blackburn employee , whom he is going to question by telephone , a usual information - collection mode to Dan . 2 . 2 . 2 Solution development and evaluation The first three uses of the sources described below are presented as mainly contributing to solution development , but the second one , e . g . , illustrates the arbitrary character of the distinction between problem - representation construction and solution development and evaluation . • Solution proposal . Source analysis and evaluation , mediated by a more or less elaborated problem representation , lead to solution formulation . As soon as he has looked through the three drawings of the prototype , Dan evaluates , negatively , the device : 00 : 23 " [ It ] doesn ' t directly take advantage of the frame . " One of the two key features of his own solution is exactly going to take advantage of the frame : 01 : 54 " That is going to be the feature : … [ four ] clips holding the backpack . " His quick examination of the prototype drawings also leads Dan to formulate his first solution idea : 00 : 22 " Put it on the front handlebars . " This solution proposal may be explained as the result of a particularly strong expectation - driven processing of the source : the Batavus carrier is a frame mounted on the rear of the bike . • Solution shift or problem - representation shift ? Mainly because of information gathered during the phone call with Blackburn , the " front - handlebars " idea ( see above ) is abandoned . Dan i n r i a - 00633727 , v e r s i on 1 - 19 O c t 2 0 11 Preprint of Visser , W . ( 1995 ) . Use of episodic knowledge and information in design problem solving . Design Studies , 16 ( 2 ) , 171 - 187 . Also in N . Cross , H . Christiaans & K . Dorst ( Eds . ) ( 1996 ) , Analysing design activity ( Ch . 13 , pp . 271 - 289 ) . Chichester , England : Wiley . 6 opens the solution - development stage asserting : 00 : 51 " My first thought is : ' Hey , the place to put it is back here ' . " One might analyse the observed shift as leading to , either a " new " solution to " the " problem , or a solution to a " new " version , i . e . another representation , of the problem . • Solution - attribute assessment . The importance attributed to the solution constraints " heel and thigh clearance " ( as Dan reports during debriefing ) is based on data gathered on the Blackburn solutions during the phone call . This importance leads Dan to calculate , approximately , the distance required between the pedal and the backpack . The following three uses of the sources contribute to solution evaluation . • Anticipation of possible problems and solutions . Dan questions the Blackburn employee , consecutively , on a great number of characteristics of the carriers and their evaluation ( 00 : 39 - 00 : 44 ) , in order to anticipate the things " people can complain about " and to try to find out " what problems I am going to have and pick the right option " . So he asks very precise questions about the possible positions of the carriers : front vs . rear ; above the wheel ( top - mounted ) vs . alongside the wheel ( side - mounted ) ; if side - mounted : on one or on both sides ; if high above the bike : front vs . rear . • Proposal of two solution options , but elaboration of only one . The side - mounted location is considered by the Blackburn employee as one of two possible options ; the other is the top - mounted location . Dan does not elaborate , however , both options . Mainly for reasons of making what - he thinks - " everybody likes " , he privileges the central top position : 00 : 57 " There is that issue of it being off the side : you know , from the aesthetics standpoint , everybody likes things symmetric . " During debriefing , Dan notices that , due to bad scheduling , he did not have time enough to elaborate both options : " I probably woulda wanted to make two designs or something like that , try the side - mounted one and the back , [ but ] scheduling my time on these things like this , that ' s the hardest part " . • Confirmation of the possibility and / or validity of a solution proposal . Based on the use of both problem - solving sources and personal experience , Dan develops a solution to the " parallelogram " problem in the form of a triangular structure . In order to evaluate his idea , he examines if Blackburn had implemented such an option , i . e . he uses previous problem - solving elements to confirm the possibility and / or validity of his idea . When he discovers that Blackburn indeed did , Dan elaborates the idea , which is going to become one of the key features of his final solution , " a triangular rigid structure with no bends in it " " providing the lateral stability for the rear of the bike " . i n r i a - 00633727 , v e r s i on 1 - 19 O c t 2 0 11 Preprint of Visser , W . ( 1995 ) . Use of episodic knowledge and information in design problem solving . Design Studies , 16 ( 2 ) , 171 - 187 . Also in N . Cross , H . Christiaans & K . Dorst ( Eds . ) ( 1996 ) , Analysing design activity ( Ch . 13 , pp . 271 - 289 ) . Chichester , England : Wiley . 7 3 Use of other episodic data As noted above , not all episodic data used in order to solve a problem come in the form of problem - solving elements . The analysis of the protocol shows various interesting examples of other episodic data used in order to solve the design problem . Episodic data can come from an internal source - a person ' s own memory - or from external , other sources . Both were exploited by the designer . 3 . 1 Exploiting one ' s own experience Personal experience in cycling with or without a backpack , on a mountainbike or another bike , plays an important role in the construction of a problem representation , in addition to the previous problem - solving elements whose reuse has been presented above . The personal episodic knowledge based on this experience can be used in different ways . • Solution proposal . In order to determine a distance of the backpack to the frame that he wants to base on foot size , Dan takes his own body as the reference : 00 : 52 - 00 : 53 " I have about a 12 inch foot : I would assume that you probably don ' t wanna have a foot which is any more . " N . B . This " bodily " " objects - at - hand " - based knowledge might be considered as different from episodic knowledge ( for the " objects - at - hand " and its pervasive use in Dan ' s design problem solving , see 24 ) . • Solution evaluation . Dan also uses his biking experience to corroborate users ' evaluations from the test report : 00 : 26 " I ' ve read the Users ' trials / evaluation . I have some agreements with that : the fact that the backpack is handled in a vertical position puts its centre of gravity very high : having used a backpack on a bike in the past and having ridden over many mountains … . " • Solution - attribute assessment . The importance attributed to a solution attribute may be based on episodic data . An example is the experience - based knowledge that the rigidity of the backpack - bike attachment is very important : 01 : 00 " The biggest thing that I remember in backpack mounting is that it ' s gotta be rigid , very rigid ! " The great importance of the rigidity attribute contributes to the choice of one of the design ' s key features , a " triangular rigid structure " . • Attribute - value choice . Personal experience may be a unique source for the adjustment of a theoretically developed value to reality . A possibility which " holds " " in theory " may be considered not " realistic " because of what may happen . Personal experience may have shown that what " might happen " indeed happens in real life - or that the risk that it happens is great . This may lead a designer to adapt the theoretical value : i n r i a - 00633727 , v e r s i on 1 - 19 O c t 2 0 11 Preprint of Visser , W . ( 1995 ) . Use of episodic knowledge and information in design problem solving . Design Studies , 16 ( 2 ) , 171 - 187 . Also in N . Cross , H . Christiaans & K . Dorst ( Eds . ) ( 1996 ) , Analysing design activity ( Ch . 13 , pp . 271 - 289 ) . Chichester , England : Wiley . 8 01 : 58 " OK now the reason I ' m also gonna do that is because I ' m sure that people are gonna try and misuse it ; in fact kids are gonna sit on this thing so it ' s probably gonna have to be able to handle a little bit more than that . " • Signal possible problems . This function is more general than those presented above . The analysis shows that an important , possibly unique role played by episodic - data use is to point to possible problems ( cf . the examples presented above , and especially the use of personal experience to adjust a theoretical value ) . Personal experience may make designers become sceptical concerning certain characteristics of a " theoretical " design , and not base their final design on it : 01 : 35 " [ Being ] in line is something that I never believe fully and not only that : if you got into your first little bike accident and you ever bent this frame , you might very well not have them in line , so … . " 3 . 2 Exploiting the experience of other people The experience of other people is as well an information source used in problem solving ( cf . also the use of the phone call with the Blackburn employee whose expertise was exploited to gather design problem - solving elements ) . This experience can be accessed and exploited in several ways . The interest of data gathering from human informants rather than from non - human information sources will also be discussed below . 3 . 2 . 1 Using other people ' s experience in problem solving Other people ' s experience may be referred to explicitly as coming from them , or implicitly - or not at all - if the experience is considered a shared one . • Using friends and colleagues as informants . Dan often uses - or under normal conditions would use - friends as informants . 00 : 33 " What I would do at this time if I was [ at my office ] : I would get on the phone , call up some friends … . I have a friend who happens to have worked in the bicycle business for many years and I would probably call him and pick his brain a bit . " Designers often use colleagues as informants - or colleagues present themselves as such without being requested explicitly 14 , 15 . • Using other people ' s experience as " shared " experience . One can also use other people ' s experience without perceiving the need to refer to them as source . This may be due to the fact that one considers that one also possesses the knowledge in question on the basis of one ' s own experience . For example , without having asked , Dan knows how packing is done by " many people " : 00 : 51 " Framepacks : many people don ' t carry their sleeping bags inside : they would carry it outside . " Thus , designers use other people ' s experience as " shared " experience when they attribute to these other people knowledge , beliefs , appreciations or other experiences that they ( also ) have had themselves . In these cases , there is no distinction between one ' s own personal episodic knowledge and that of other people . i n r i a - 00633727 , v e r s i on 1 - 19 O c t 2 0 11 Preprint of Visser , W . ( 1995 ) . Use of episodic knowledge and information in design problem solving . Design Studies , 16 ( 2 ) , 171 - 187 . Also in N . Cross , H . Christiaans & K . Dorst ( Eds . ) ( 1996 ) , Analysing design activity ( Ch . 13 , pp . 271 - 289 ) . Chichester , England : Wiley . 9 An example is Dan ' s decision that the weight " one " would carry on a mountainbike is going to constrain the weight one would put into one ' s backpack : 00 : 51 " You wouldn ' t carry that much on a mountain - bike . I would say probably in the order of 20 pounds … ; I think that that ' s more like it of what a person might have . " ( where " that much " refers to the " theoretically " possible weight , which is going to be adjusted , see above ) 3 . 2 . 2 Interest of human compared to non - human information sources Human informants may often provide information which could also be found in other , non - human sources ( books and other technical documents or data - bases ) . There may be several reasons to prefer to refer to human rather than to other information sources . • Access is " direct " . This point may be related to something Dan notes twice concerning calling up informants : it is " a way of getting up to speed quickly " : 00 : 46 " In fact I might very well call up a few local bicycle stores and get some information too if I were doing this and I had to really get up to speed high . " • Access to the underlying history and justifications . Informants , if they have been involved personally in the experience on which the data they provide are based , may be able to provide , next to these " pure " data , the history and / or reasons concerning the adoption or rejection of certain choices underlying these data . • Access to other expertises . If the informant is an expert in a domain in which oneself is not , she or he can present or combine information in an expert way . The telephone call with the Blackburn employee is a good example : this person knows the Blackburn devices , and the information that he can present Dan with is incomparable with the information which Dan alone could get from the technical - commercial presentations received . Dan exploits this possibility with great ability : he is also an expert in design , even if not of bike and / or backpack devices ( see below Berlin ' s 14 remarks concerning knowledge on information sources as an aspect of expertise ) . • Access to other viewpoints . Other people may have had the same information sources , and / or possess information on the same objects as I , but they probably have processed this information from another viewpoint - or they simply have processed it , whereas I did not ( yet ) . • Trade off between the gain and the cost of using human informants . The fact that referring to human informants has a particular interest does not mean that Dan decides to exploit all human informants available : the interest of referring to people is generally a trade off between the gain of the information which can be collected from them and the cost of what has to be given to them in return , e . g . personal attention , interest in the other , which , in addition , both also take time . 00 : 45 " I had considered calling another friend . I ' m not gonna do that right now because in the interests of time here … . : I ' m gonna have to ask about his wife and his kids and all these other things and also how the bicycle business is . … If I were normally designing this thing , rather than calling him during the day , I might call in the evening . " i n r i a - 00633727 , v e r s i on 1 - 19 O c t 2 0 11 Preprint of Visser , W . ( 1995 ) . Use of episodic knowledge and information in design problem solving . Design Studies , 16 ( 2 ) , 171 - 187 . Also in N . Cross , H . Christiaans & K . Dorst ( Eds . ) ( 1996 ) , Analysing design activity ( Ch . 13 , pp . 271 - 289 ) . Chichester , England : Wiley . 10 4 Discussion A discussion of the results will be followed by a reflection on their repercussions for design assistance . 4 . 1 Discussion of the results After a paragraph on the frequency of the use of episodic data in the design process , the results will be related to two important aspects of reuse identified in previous design studies ( presented in the first section of this text ) . 4 . 1 . 1 Is the use of episodic data frequent in design problem solving ? Explicit references in the protocol to problem - solving reuse and other use of episodic data not necessarily exhaust the effective use of these data , so these ( re ) use activities probably are more frequent than protocol analysis may suggest . Secondly , we did not measure the proportion of the various design solutions elaborated by Dan based on episodic data compared to solutions based on general knowledge , often called " solutions developed ' from scratch ' " . Given these restrictions , the only conclusion on this point can be that this study has presented evidence for a multifaceted contribution of episodic - data use to design . One may formulate the hypothesis that the use of other than strictly problem - solving linked episodic data has had such a great importance in the present design activity because Dan had never designed bike and / or backpack devices . 4 . 1 . 2 Target - source relationships : Reuse indeed , but what about analogical reasoning ? The relationships between the sources exploited and the target problem which they contribute to solve , can all be considered to be relationships of rather " close " similarity : the two families of previous designs reused were , the one the solution to a first version of the target problem ( Batavus ' prototype ) , and the other the solutions to a very close problem ( Blackburn ' s devices designed for carrying packs , without a specific fastening device and not especially for mountainbikes ) . The other episodic knowledge exploited came from the domain of biking , with and without a backpack . One might thus conclude that no analogies from " completely different " or " remote " domains were evoked . Two remarks , at least , may be formulated concerning this conclusion . First , as noticed already , " distances " between domains are difficult to measure . Second , and more importantly , what delimits a domain ? The target problem , i . e . the design of a bike - backpack carrying / fastening device , may circumscribe as the relevant target domains , those of " bikes " , " backpacks " , and " carrying / fastening devices " . Many questions might be raised concerning this circumscription . The only one we want to evoke briefly is the following . Is the domain of " biking " , from which emanate several instances of episodic data evoked by Dan , this domain of " bikes " that we considered one of the three target domains ? The knowledge concerning the everyday activity of biking , with or without a backpack , on a mountainbike or not ( " general " or " common - sense " knowledge ) , can it be considered as pertaining to the same " domain " as the knowledge involved in designing devices for bikes ( " technical " or " scientific " knowledge ) ? Does the knowledge on the everyday use of an object pertain to the domain containing the technical - scientific knowledge on this object ? Does a designer of an artefact proceed to an inter - domain shift when he or she refers to his or her everyday knowledge on the use of this artefact , and does she or he thus use analogical reasoning ? This question is related to the following : which kind of knowledge is necessary , or even only i n r i a - 00633727 , v e r s i on 1 - 19 O c t 2 0 11 Preprint of Visser , W . ( 1995 ) . Use of episodic knowledge and information in design problem solving . Design Studies , 16 ( 2 ) , 171 - 187 . Also in N . Cross , H . Christiaans & K . Dorst ( Eds . ) ( 1996 ) , Analysing design activity ( Ch . 13 , pp . 271 - 289 ) . Chichester , England : Wiley . 11 relevant , for design ? Is it - only or especially - technical - scientific knowledge ? As far as we know , the research literature on design does not seem to consider that the role of common - sense knowledge is important - even if it may mention this role 16 . Secondly , even if simulation in the " application domain " is often attributed an important role in design , the contribution of everyday knowledge in this simulation is never underlined . Still , in order to simulate mentally the use of a device , often the knowledge required is everyday knowledge . What about the present design if Dan had never ridden a bike ? Among the three other design projects we have analysed until now 8 , 9 , 10 , the Visser 10 study was the only one showing a frequent exploitation of what we considered " analogies " from rather " remote " domains : for the design of an unfurling antenna , the designer studied in 10 referred to conceptual solutions such as " umbrella " and other " folding " objects . The project analysed in 10 was , of all three , the one requiring most innovation : " unfurling " was a new concept for antennas . This may perhaps explain the importance of the use of analogs : researchers have often suggested that there is a close link between analogical reasoning and creativity , and that creativity is crucial in innovative design 17 . The present design project may be qualified as rather innovative , so the question concerning the possible dependence of creativity on analogical reasoning remains open to further examination . 4 . 1 . 3 Authors of the sources The previous problem - solving elements which Dan reuses come from various authors , different , from the designer himself . The episodic data Dan uses is both based on his own , and on other people ' s , experience . 4 . 2 Design assistance Do the results of this study have repercussions for design tools - other than the ideas already often suggested in the literature on design , and on design reuse 3 ? Which were the specific problems encountered by the observed designer in proceeding - or trying to proceed - to reuse ? After some remarks about repercussions of the results which are not specific to reuse , we will discuss the difficulty to assist reuse . 4 . 2 . 1 General design assistance Three problematic aspects of Dan ' s design activity are discussed , all three having been discussed already in other design studies , but all three not ( yet ) having received a real " solution " . • Visualisation aids . When the experimenter asks Dan if there were any " things which were particularly difficult " , Dan refers to two problems . The first one is visualisation , which he considers as " one of the biggest problems " he had , " at least in the preliminary design " . The problem is known from the design literature , but this does not necessarily mean that tools providing effective assistance on this point are available 18 , 19 . • Scheduling aids . The other problem Dan refers to is " scheduling my time on these things like this " . Visser 20 has discussed the problems involved in planning during design and in assisting the activity of organising one ' s design activity . Most existing design support tools are ( still ! ) backed up by hierarchical - planning models of the design task which does not correspond at all to the actual activity of design organisation 7 , 13 , 20 ; and they do not support conceptual design . • Assisting alternative - solution development . Dan says that he would have followed up longer i n r i a - 00633727 , v e r s i on 1 - 19 O c t 2 0 11 Preprint of Visser , W . ( 1995 ) . Use of episodic knowledge and information in design problem solving . Design Studies , 16 ( 2 ) , 171 - 187 . Also in N . Cross , H . Christiaans & K . Dorst ( Eds . ) ( 1996 ) , Analysing design activity ( Ch . 13 , pp . 271 - 289 ) . Chichester , England : Wiley . 12 than he did with two options , were it not his scheduling and other time problems . Several design studies have shown that designers generally stick to their first solution idea 21 , 22 , amending and patching it , and that they neither change it for another , nor develop it in parallel with other solution candidates . Tools assisting working - memory management may be an aid on this point , but other factors than memory limitations certainly play a role and might require specific support modalities . 4 . 2 . 2 Design - reuse assistance : Providing access to the state of the art As long as we has so few data on the activities implemented in reuse , it will be difficult to specify assistance tools . Given the results of the present study , what can be said about needs for assistance ? Dan considers that " there ' s no sense in starting from scratch if you can start at square two instead of square one or square zero " : one should take advantage of " what exists already " . Traces of previous designs exist , on paper and in computerised data - bases ; books , documentation and catalogues are manifold ; colleagues possess information on " what exists already " - but they are not always there , especially in technical domains where there is a considerable turn - over . However , providing designers with enormous bases , containing all possible information on " what exists already " , is not a solution . The difficulty is indeed the access to the data ( for the support of analogical reasoning , in particular in the form of access to analogs and other candidates for reuse , see 23 ) . Berlin 14 points out that an aspect of expertise is knowledge about information sources : if these are human , experts know their areas of expertise and their " approachability " ; concerning documentation , experts know " its reliability , location and tricks of use " ( p . 14 ) . As Berlin notices , " this type of information is rarely documented , yet is essential for proficiency " ( ibid . ) . 4 . 2 . 3 Do designers need assistance in use of , and access to " other " episodic data ? This study has shown the use of other than problem - solving linked data , but - as noticed above - not its absolute contribution to the solution process . Concerning real design situations , we still know less about this contribution - only some anecdotal information that may be glimpsed through introspection . And if the use of episodic data plays indeed an important role in design problem solving , do designers need support in this use ? One may suppose that the difficulties involved are similar to those of problem - solving elements reuse , but they are perhaps greater , or more complex , because of the " private " character of episodic data . Educators worry about the difficulty to provide students with " reference information " : how can they manage to familiarise beginning designers with the enormous richness of experience in their field ? Even if they possess ( elements of ) " libraries of past designs " , these are not documented with respect to important questions for - not only - novices in a domain , such as solution procedures and alternatives which have been taken into consideration , and choices made and their underlying justifications . In addition , also here the question of access and exploitation is an enormous problem ( see above ) . These considerations lead us to conclude that , in the present state of knowledge on use of episodic data , design - reuse assistance specification remains a difficult question . As defended already , here and elsewhere 7 , we judge that the main way to advance on this point is to analyse empirical data collected on actual reuse activities , in experimental contexts , but definitely also in real , professional work situations . i n r i a - 00633727 , v e r s i on 1 - 19 O c t 2 0 11 Preprint of Visser , W . ( 1995 ) . Use of episodic knowledge and information in design problem solving . Design Studies , 16 ( 2 ) , 171 - 187 . Also in N . Cross , H . Christiaans & K . Dorst ( Eds . ) ( 1996 ) , Analysing design activity ( Ch . 13 , pp . 271 - 289 ) . Chichester , England : Wiley . 13 Acknowledgements The author wishes to thank Laurence Perron - Bouvier for several embarrassing comments on the first version of this paper : we did not manage to take all of them into account . Thanks also to Jean - Marie Burkhardt and Françoise Détienne . References 1 Pu , P . Introduction : Issues in case - based design systems . AI EDAM , 1993 , 7 ( 2 ) , 79 - 85 , and the other papers in this special journal issue . 2 Trousse , B . , & Visser , W . Use of case - based reasoning techniques for intelligent computer - aided - design systems . Proceedings of the IEEE / SME ' 93 International Conference on Systems , Man and Cybernetics - Systems Engineering in the Service of Humans , Le Touquet , France , October 17 - 20 , 1993 . 3 Visser , W . , & Trousse , B . Reuse of designs : desperately seeking an interdisciplinary approach . In W . Visser ( Ed . ) , Proceedings of the Workshop of the Thirteenth International Joint Conference on Artificial Intelligence " Reuse of designs : an interdisciplinary cognitive approach " , Chambéry ( France ) , August 29 , 1993 . Rocquencourt : INRIA , 1993 . 4 Kolodner , J . L . Case - based reasoning . San Mateo , Calif . : Morgan Kaufmann , 1993 . 5 Visser , W . ( Ed . ) . Proceedings of the Workshop of the Thirteenth International Joint Conference on Artificial Intelligence " Reuse of designs : an interdisciplinary cognitive approach " , Chambéry ( France ) , August 29 , 1993 . Rocquencourt : INRIA , 1993 . 6 Visser , W . Raisonnement basé sur des cas : une thématique transversale en psychologie et ergonomie cognitives . In S . Rougegrez ( Ed . ) , Séminaire " Raisonnement à partir de cas " ( Rapport interne du LAFORIA n° 93 / 42 ) . Paris : Institut Blaise Pascal , LAFORIA , 1993 . 7 Visser , W . Designers’ activities examined at three levels : organization , strategies & problem - solving . Knowledge - Based Systems , 1992 , 5 ( 1 ) , 92 - 104 . 8 Visser , W . Strategies in programming programmable controllers : a field study on a professional programmer . In G . Olson , S . Sheppard & E . Soloway ( Eds . ) , Empirical Studies of Programmers : Second Workshop . Norwood , N . J . : Ablex , 1987 . 9 Visser , W . More or less following a plan during design : opportunistic deviations in specification . International Journal of Man - Machine Studies . Special issue : What programmers know , 1990 , 33 , 247 - 278 . 10 Visser , W . Evocation and elaboration of solutions : Different types of problem - solving actions . An empirical study on the design of an aerospace artifact . In T . Kohonen & F . Fogelman - Soulié ( Eds . ) , COGNITIVA 90 . At the crossroads of Artificial Intelligence , Cognitive science , and Neuroscience . Proceedings of the third COGNITIVA symposium . Amsterdam : Elsevier , 1991 . 11 Détienne , F . Reasoning from a schema and from an analog in software code reuse . Fourth Workshop on Empirical studies of programmers , New Brunswick , N . J . , December 6 - 8 , 1991 . 12 Tulving , E . Episodic and semantic memory . In E . Tulving & W . Donaldson ( Eds . ) , Organization of memory . New York : Academic Press , 1972 . 13 Visser , W . Giving up a hierarchical plan in a design activity ( Research Report N° 814 ) . Rocquencourt : INRIA , 1988 . 14 Berlin , L . M . Beyond program understanding : a look at programming expertise in industry . In C . R . Cook , J . C . Scholtz and J . C . Spohrer ( Eds . ) , Empirical Studies of Programmers : Fifth Workshop . i n r i a - 00633727 , v e r s i on 1 - 19 O c t 2 0 11 Preprint of Visser , W . ( 1995 ) . Use of episodic knowledge and information in design problem solving . Design Studies , 16 ( 2 ) , 171 - 187 . Also in N . Cross , H . Christiaans & K . Dorst ( Eds . ) ( 1996 ) , Analysing design activity ( Ch . 13 , pp . 271 - 289 ) . Chichester , England : Wiley . 14 Norwood , N . J . : Ablex , 1993 . 15 Visser , W . Collective design : A cognitive analysis of cooperation in practice . In N . F . M . Roozenburg ( Ed . ) . Proceedings of ICED 93 . 9th International Conference on Engineering Design ( Volume 1 ) , The Hague , August 17 - 19 , 1993 . Zürich : HEURISTA , 1993 . 16 Eder , W . Creativity demands knowledge - - Types for purposes . In W . Eder , V . Hubka , A . Melezinek & S . Hosnedl ( Eds . ) , Engineering design education . Zürich : Heurista , 1992 . 17 Visser , W . Use of analogical relationships between design problem - solution representations : Exploitation at the action - execution and action - management levels of the activity . Studia Psychologica , 1992 , 34 ( 4 - 5 ) , 351 - 357 . 18 Candy , L . , & Edmonds , E . Artefacts and the designer ' s process : implications for computer support to design . Revue Sciences et Techniques de la Conception , 1994 , 3 ( 1 ) , 11 - 32 . 19 Guindon , R . Requirements and design of DesignVision , an object - oriented graphical interface to an intelligent software design assistant . CHI ' 92 , 499 - 506 . 20 Visser , W . The organisation of design activities : opportunistic , with hierarchical episodes . Interacting with Computers , 1994 , 6 ( 3 ) , 235 - 274 . 21 Kant , E . Understanding and automating algorithm design . IEEE Transactions on Software Engineering , 1985 , SE - 11 , 1361 - 1374 . 22 Ullman , D . , Dietterich , T . G . , & Staufer , L . A . A model of the mechanical design process based on empirical data . AI EDAM , 1988 , 2 , 33 - 52 . 23 Falzon , P . , & Visser , W . Variations in expertise : implications for the design of assistance systems . In G . Salvendy & M . Smith ( Eds . ) , Designing and using human - computer interfaces and knowledge based systems . Amsterdam : Elsevier , 1989 . 24 Harrison , S . , & Minneman , S . A bike in hand : a study of 3 - D objects in design . Pre - prints of the Delft Protocols Workshop " Analysing Design Activity " , Delft , The Netherlands , September 20 - 22 , 1994 . i n r i a - 00633727 , v e r s i on 1 - 19 O c t 2 0 11