Coupling of cytoplasm and adhesion dynamics determines cell polarization and locomotion Wolfgang Alt 1 , 2 Martin Bock 2 Christoph M¨ohl 3 July 29 , 2009 Observation of epidermal cells or cell fragments on ﬂat adhesive substrates has revealed two distinct morphological and functional states : A non - migrating symmetric ”unpolarized state” and a migrating asymmetric ”polarized state” . They are characterized by diﬀerent spatial distributions and dynamics of impor - tant molecular components as F - actin and myosin - II within the cytoplasm , and integrin receptors at the plasma membrane contacting the substratum , thereby inducing so - called focal adhesion complexes . So far , mathematical models have reduced this phenomenon either to gradients in regulatory control and signaling molecules or to diﬀerent mechanics of the polymerizing and contracting actin ﬁlament system in diﬀerent regions of the cell edge . Here we oﬀer an alternative self - organizational model in order to reproduce and explain the emergence of both functional states for a certain range of dy - namical and kinetic model parameters . We apply an extended version of a two - phase , highly viscous cytoplasmic ﬂow model with variable force balance equations at the moving edge , coupled to a 4 - state reaction - diﬀusion - transport system for the bound and unbound integrin receptors beneath the spreading cell or cell fragment . In particular , we use simulations of a simpliﬁed 1 - D model for a cell fragment of ﬁxed extension to demonstrate characteristic changes in the concentration proﬁles for actin , myosin and doubly bound integrin , as they 1 corresponding author , eMail wolf . alt @ uni - bonn . de 2 Universit¨at Bonn , Theoretische Biologie , Kirschallee 1 - 3 , 53115 Bonn , Germany 3 Forschungszentrum J¨ulich , Institut f¨ur Bio - und Nanosysteme ( IBN ) , Institut 4 : Biomechanik ( IBN4 ) , 52425 J¨ulich , Germany a r X i v : 0 9 07 . 5078v1 [ phy s i c s . b i o - ph ] 2 9 J u l 2009 occur during transition from the symmetric stationary state to the polarized migrating state . In the latter case the substratum experiences a low magnitude ”pulling force” within the larger front region , and an opposing high magnitude ”disruptive force” at the shorter rear region . Moreover , simulations of the cor - responding 2 - D model with free boundary show characteristic undulating pro - trusions and retractions of the cell ( fragment ) edge , with local accumulation of doubly bound adhesion receptors behind it , combined with a modulated retro - grade F - actin ﬂow . Finally , for a stationary model cell ( fragment ) of symmetric round shape , larger ﬂuctuations in the circumferential protrusion activity and adhesion kinetics can break the radial symmetry and induce a gradual polar - ization of shape and concentration proﬁles , leading to continuous migration in direction of the leading front . The aim of the chapter is to show how relatively simple laws for the small - scale mechanics and kinetics of participating molecules , responsible for the en - ergy consuming steps as ﬁlament polymerization , pushing and sliding , binding and pulling on adhesion sites , can be combined into a non - linearly coupled sys - tem of hyperbolic , parabolic and elliptic diﬀerential equations that reproduce the emergent behavior of polarization and migration on the large - scale cell level . 1 Biology of cell polarization and migration Cell polarization and migration plays a central role in the development and maintenance of tissues in multicellular organisms . During ontogenesis , new tissues are formed by the coordinated division and locomotion of single cells . The polarization of a cell not only deﬁnes the direction of migration [ 30 ] but also the cell division axis [ 61 ] and thus the three - dimensional structure of tissues , organs and ﬁnally the whole organism . 1 . 1 Asymmetry of actin polymerization and substrate adhesion The coordinated development and release of focal adhesions ( FAs ) is a basic requirement for directed cell migration . Migrating cells feature pronounced adhesion dynamics and a struc - tural polarity with a clearly distinguishable frontal and rear area . Actin polymerization predominates at the cell front resulting in a protruding lamella in direction of migration . New focal adhesions composed of clustered protein complexes develop at the lower mem - brane of the lamella near the leading edge and couple the F - actin - network mechanically to extracellular matrix proteins . Simultaneously , the matured FAs residing at the opposed trailing edge are dissolved while myosin driven contraction of F - actin moves the cell body forward [ 10 , 36 ] . Arising from the process described above , the polarity of the cell can be referred to two structural asymmetries , which are key requirements for eﬀective cell migration : asymmetry of actin polymerization and asymmetry of adhesion strength . The growth of actin ﬁlaments 2 has to predominate at the cell front for pushing the leading edge in direction of migration [ 63 , 58 ] . To move the cell body forward , it has to be released from the substrate during contraction by dissolving the FAs at the back ( rear release ) while the FAs at the cell front have to remain stable to provide a mechanical attachment for the contractile machinery pulling the cell body . In absence of rear release , traction forces could be dominated by adhesion forces and the cell would get stuck [ 54 ] . In this regard , the spatial distribution of adhesion strength and actin polymerization deﬁnes the direction of migration and could be speciﬁcally regulated due to directed cell movement . 1 . 2 Flow of actin ﬁlaments and myosin gradient The mechanisms underlying the structural polarity of migrating cells are still under discus - sion , particularly what concerns an intrinsic directionality of the cytoplasm . For example , the ﬁnding that asymmetric adhesive structures deﬁne polarization of a touching cell [ 30 ] suggests that directional ﬂow of the actin cytoskeleton is involved in the process of cell polarization . Moreover , recent studies on ﬁsh keratocytes have revealed that polarization occurs spontaneously and is accompanied by a reorganization of the actin cytoskeleton , which ﬁnally leads to cell locomotion [ 64 ] . In these experiments , unpolarized solitary cells feature a circular shape with a radially symmetric actin distribution . Although the cells do not move , transient protrusions and retractions appear at the cell edge , and actin ﬂows centripetally with a decreasing ﬂow gradient from the cell edge to the center . In this ap - parently unstable state spontaneous symmetry breaking results in a faster inward ﬂow and in an increased concentration of actin at the rear region of the cell . On the opposed front edge , the reduced inward actin ﬂow causes protrusion and the development of a lamel - lipodium . In this polarized state , the cell starts to migrate while attaining a more or less constant shape . A similar behavior was observed with cell fragments extracted from the lamella of ﬁsh keratocytes [ 63 ] , see Fig . 1 . Since these fragments were lacking most cell organelles and the microtubule system , they were mainly limited to the actin - myosin machinery . They appeared either in an unpolarized , non - migrating state with homogeneous actin - myosin distribution or a polarized , migrating state with a rising myosin concentration from front to rear . Interestingly , polarization of fragments could be induced by mechanical stimula - tion , e . g . by shear ﬂow or stress release leading to a transition from the stationary to the migrating state . Cell polarization is discussed to result from the local activation of GTPases by the rho - family [ 62 , 54 , 43 ] . These proteins are known to regulate actin polymerization , myosin activity and FA assembly , whereas it remains unclear how the distribution of the GTPases is controlled . Recent experiments have revealed that by inhibition of myosin activating signalling pathways the cell’s ability to polarize is reduced [ 64 ] . However , the observations of cells or cell fragments to polarize either spontaneously or due to mechanical pertur - bations , raise doubts that biochemical signalling is the primary reason for inducing and 3 Figure 1 : Cell fragment experiments ( from [ 63 ] ) , where the mechanical stress ( release ) in - duces a transition from a circular non - migrating state ( a ) to a polarized migrating state ( b , c ) . The cell fragment was labelled with ﬂuorescent myosin II . Time scale is min : sec and length scale of bar is 2 µ m . maintaining polarity . Experiments focussing on cell mechanics rather show that direction and strength of locomotion forces are inherently connected with the retrograde F - actin ﬂow [ 53 , 22 ] . This suggests that the mechanical action of myosin , namely to induce cytoplasmic contraction , ﬂow and force transduction at adhesive sites , plays a key role in explaining the ubiquitously observed phenomena of cell polarization and locomotion . 2 Previous models of cytoplasm and adhesion dynamics The ﬁrst detailed mathematical model coupling cytoskeleton and adhesion dynamics was developed by Lauﬀenburger and coworkers almost two decades ago [ 17 ] . Here , the con - tractile actin - myosin network and its interaction with bound adhesion sites is represented as a mechanical system of connected viscoelastic units of generalized Kelvin - Voigt type , which constitute the ( three ) inner segments as well as a front segment ( lamellipod ) and a tail segment ( uropod ) for a rectangular model cell of ﬁxed width and length . A coupled system of reaction - diﬀusion equations for free and substrate bound integrins or adhesion receptors on the dorsal ( upper ) and ventral ( lower ) part of the model cell is solved un - der pseudo steady - state assumptions . This dynamically provides the number of adhesion bonds in both end segments , lamellipod and uropod , whereby their rupture ( dissociation ) kinetics exponentially increases with force load onto a bound adhesion site . The resulting non - linear dynamics for the local ( forward or backward ) displacement of each viscoelastic unit produces a persistent forward translocation of the whole model cell . However , this is achieved only if a front - tail asymmetry is presupposed , either by exposing more free adhesion receptors , or by assuming higher adhesion bond aﬃnity at the front compared to the tail . The authors present a series of results on how the simulated cell migration 4 speed depends on various model parameters as , for example , cytoskeletal contractility or adhesion strength . A later variant of this model presents a more explicit study of adhesion bond disruption kinetics at the rear of the cell and already uses a four - state model for integrin binding to the cytoskeleton and to the substratum [ 51 ] . In recent years a series of more elaborate models have been developed , accounting for details of the meanwhile discovered molecular regulation mechanisms for the chemical and mechanical processes , particularly at the free boundary of a moving cell . One model type is based on spatially discrete algorithms ( cellular Pott’s model ) using the deﬁnition of local energies to determine the protrusion and retraction of boundary elements via the stochastic Metropolis rule , e . g . [ 39 , 46 , 47 ] . Another class of mechanical cell models takes into account branching and anisotropy of actin ﬁlaments in the cytoskeleton at various times and in various regions of the cell , see e . g . [ 65 , 23 , 28 ] . Besides explicit constructions of an elastically cross - linked network in the leading edge [ 48 , 32 ] biophysical models have been developed to capture diﬀerent dynamics of Arp2 / 3 - induced branching and myosin - induced contraction of F - actin networks by Mogilner and coworkers [ 44 , 25 , 33 ] . The last article is particularly devoted to explain the mentioned polarization experiments with cell fragments ( see Fig . 1 ) by assuming a diﬀerent actin - myosin network organization at the rear in comparison to the front region . Based on the ‘reactive ﬂow’ model by Dembo and coworkers [ 13 , 12 , 3 ] , the so far most elaborate model extension has been presented by Oliver et al . [ 49 ] : they use full 3 - D two - phase ﬂow equations with free ventral boundary and with two additional rapidly diﬀusing messenger concentrations that regulate actin network contractility and ( de - ) polymerization . Moreover , cell adhesion is modeled by a Navier - slip boundary condition at the substratum , in which only constant adhesive properties are taken into account . The analysis of this complex model , being performed in the thin ﬁlm limit , is restricted to linear - stability ar - guments for ruﬄe generation and to local expansion analyses at the moving tip ; there , phenomenological equations for boundary mass ﬂuxes are considered without specifying the types of molecular mechanisms for tip protrusion . Finally , quantitative estimations for the pseudopod protrusion and cell translocation speed under various sub - limit assumptions are given , which turn out to be consistent with observed values , particularly for osteoblasts , though no numerical simulations are given that would re - insure the analytic results . A sim - ilar thin - ﬁlm approximation of the 2 - D equations under incompressibility assumptions for a ‘viscous polar gel’ has been used in [ 34 ] to derive explicit expressions for the advancing speed of a cell lamella , but again by predeﬁning its polarity . Except the last one , all so - far mentioned models do not explicitly quantify the varying force ﬁeld , which is applied by the cytoskeleton onto the substrate covered by a migrating cell and which has been approximately reconstructed by diﬀerent inverse methods from experimental assays of cells , e . g . moving on ﬂexible substrata [ 15 , 38 , 56 , 40 , 6 ] . A ﬁrst model implementing force transduction to the substrate has been proposed by Gracheva and Othmer [ 24 ] by specifying a spatially one - dimensional system of viscoelastic equations for cytoskeleton dynamics , whose polymerization , contractility and adhesive binding is reg - 5 ulated by signalling molecules . However , they make a pseudo - steady - state assumption for the binding kinetics of myosin polymers to actin ﬁlaments , and of transmembrane integrin proteins to the substratum . Moreover , they impose artiﬁcially deﬁned gradients from tail to front of certain regulatory proteins in order to stimulate polarized cell translocation . Recently , adhesion kinetics has also been implemented into an extended cytoplasm ﬂow model [ 4 , 5 ] describing the F - actin dynamics in an annular domain and its coupling to lamel - lipodial protrusions and retractions [ 59 ] . Force dependent maturation of FA complexes and active polymerization of F - actin enable the simulation model to reproduce characteristics of ﬁbroblast shape deformation and translocation . In an earlier publication we have presented another extension of the basic two - phase ﬂow model for the 2 - dimensional viscous cytoplasm dynamics [ 2 ] by coupling the constitutive hyperbolic - elliptic equations to a system of four reaction - diﬀusion - transport equations for the integrins beneath the cell or cell fragment [ 35 ] . Here we propose a generalized contin - uum model , in which we couple cytoplasm and adhesion dynamics with mechanical tension and transport of the plasma membrane , in order to reproduce spontaneous and induced cell polarization leading to migration , with assembly of adhesion sites at the cell front and adhesion release at the cell’s rear end . Moreover , the model exhibits typical features of migrating cells as protrusion / retraction cycles , rearward actin ﬂow and pulling forces at the front and a concentration of disruptive forces at the rear . In the model , the cytoplasm is described as a viscous and contractile ﬂuid of polymers representing the actin cytoskele - ton interpenetrated by an aqueous phase . This actin ﬁlament network is preferentially assembled at the cell edge , and can be contracted by cross - linking with diﬀusing myosin oligomers . The moving actin ﬁlaments then couple to transmembrane adhesion proteins that are freely diﬀusing in the membrane or bound to the substrate on the extracellular domain . Thus , the cytoskeleton mechanically connects to the substrate through dynamic binding processes which results in force transduction and ﬁnally cell locomotion . Throughout our model presentation we rely on continuum descriptions , in which macro - scopic mass and momentum laws are combined with mesoscopic submodels for fast molec - ular kinetics due to adequate pseudo - steady - state assumptions . 3 Two - phase ﬂow model for cytoplasm coupled to reaction , diﬀusion and transport for myosin - II and integrin proteins For simplicity , we restrict our model derivation and analysis to a ﬂat two - dimensional ge - ometry , so that cells or cell fragments are assumed to be homogeneously spread on the substrate without considerable change of cell height . Thereby , three - dimensional eﬀects around the cell nucleus ( e . g . due to cell rolling ) or along the ventral ( upper ) plasma mem - brane are neglected . In order to reproduce the main biophysical mechanisms and biochem - ical processes that enable a cell to polarize and translocate on an adhesive substratum , we nevertheless distinguish between the cytoplasm and the exterior plasma membrane : On the 6 Figure 2 : Schematic longitudinal section through a cell fragment ( or a cell lamella ) of con - stant height with involved proteins . For further explanation and model derivation see the following sections . one hand , F - actin assembly , myosin kinetics and viscous network ﬂow take place within the cytoplasmic interior of the cell . On the other hand , integrin binding to substrate or cytoskeleton and its transport or diﬀusion are conﬁned to the dorsal ( lower ) plasma membrane , where forces are transduced to or generated at the cell periphery , leading to tip protrusion or retraction . Thus , the moving cell ( fragment ) is simply represented by a time - dependent connected domain Ω ( t ) ⊂ R 2 , over which the cytoplasmic volume ex - tends with ﬁxed constant height , and any ruﬄes or blebs on top of the cell are neglected . We rather assume that the cell dynamics is completely determined by a ﬂat cytoskeleton sheet of F - actin network , see Fig . 2 . This cross - linked ﬁlament phase with volume fraction θ ( t , x ) , x ∈ Ω ( t ) is of constant thickness and connected to the upper and lower plasma membrane in such a way that also the cytosol , i . e . the solvent phase with volume fraction ( 1 − θ ( t , x ) ) , is conﬁned to the same volume space . By suitable model simpliﬁcations , we aim to capture the self - organizational power of the cytoplasm as a two - phase ﬂuid coupled with the reaction , transport and diﬀusion of a series of chemical ingredients . We explicitly model the kinetics and dynamics of only those F - actin associated proteins that induce the main bio - mechanical processes of force generation and transduction to the substratum , namely myosin oligomers and transmembrane integrin proteins . All other regulatory proteins such as e . g . Rac , Rho or the branching protein Arp2 / 3 or smaller substrate molecules , e . g . monomeric G - actin , are assumed to rapidly diﬀuse within the cytosol under fast regeneration , so that they attain constant reservoir concentrations serving as parameters in the model . 7 3 . 1 Mass balance and ﬂow equations In the chosen two - dimensional continuum description , cell deformation and transloca - tion with respect to the ﬁxed substratum is represented by movement of the cell edge Γ ( t ) = ∂ Ω ( t ) which , however , is induced by three distinguished mass ﬂows with poten - tially diﬀerent transport velocity ﬁelds on Ω , namely the mean velocities v of the F - actin cytoskeleton ( θ ) and w of the aqueous cytosol ( 1 − θ ) plus the transport velocity u of the lower dorsal plasma membrane . Thereby both v and w are averaged over the constant cell height . For the membrane area ﬂux u we make the simplifying assumption that the lipid bilayer between the ﬂat substratum and an adhering cell is always stretched out to its maximal extension with constant area concentration of the lipid - protein mixture , thus constituting an incompressible two - dimensional Newtonian ﬂuid . Thus , freely diﬀusing transmembrane integrin proteins are additionally transported by the membrane velocity u , myosin oligomers by the cytosol velocity w , and F - actin bound myosin - II motor molecules by the cytoskeleton velocity v . The detailed mass balance equations are discussed in the following paragraphs . Mass conservation for the two phases cytoskeleton and cytosol . Cytoskeleton and cytosol in the ﬂat two - dimensional geometry can experience counteracting ﬂows due to local contraction , assembly or relaxation of the F - actin network , while the bulk cytoplasmic ﬂuid with constant volume fraction 1 can be assumed to be incompressible , at least in the range of occurring pressure diﬀerences (cid:46) kPa . Compare the analogous situation of a water - ﬁlled sponge that is internally condensing without changing its shape . Then , because of the ﬁxed height assumption , the total two - dimensional volume ﬂux W = θ v + ( 1 − θ ) w is divergence free at any time t , yielding the ﬁrst local mass conservation law ∇ · (cid:16) θ v + ( 1 − θ ) w (cid:17) = 0 . ( 1 ) Therefore , also the total cell volume ( i . e . the 2 - dimensional cell area ) is conserved over time , so that the ‘bulk’ ﬂuid moves together with the free boundary Γ ( t ) , meaning that the total volume ﬂux W has to fulﬁll the natural free boundary condition ν Γ · W = ˙Γ ( 2 ) with ν Γ denoting the exterior normal of Γ and ˙ Γ quantifying the normal speed of the cell edge . In addition to possible convection , the F - actin network can locally be assembled by ﬁlament polymerization from the pool of monomeric G - actin within the cytosol and it can be disassembled by the reverse process of severing or depolymerization . This mass exchange between the two phases is given by a second conservation law , which for the ﬁlament volume fraction θ can be written as ∂ t θ + ∇ · ( θ v ) = R ( θ ) ( 3 ) 8 with a net assembly rate R ( θ ) to be modeled . According to our simplifying assumption , the dependence on G - actin , Arp2 / 3 and possible regulatory proteins enters only via constant parameters : R ( θ ) = ( k on a g − k oﬀ ) B ( θ ) − rθ ( 4 ) with concentration of globular actin a g , polymerization rate k on and depolymerization rate k oﬀ at the ﬁlaments’ plus ( barbed ) ends , as well as another lumped disassembly rate r , see e . g . [ 42 ] . Due to relatively fast nucleation and capping of actin ﬁlaments , the relative number B of barbed ends is assumed to stay in pseudo - equilibrium with the local F - actin concentration a = θ · a max , where we suppose a maximal condensation of actin ﬁlaments in the order of a max = 800 µ M . Following [ 42 ] we write B ( θ ) = 1 ω (cid:18) ε + ν 0 θ K a / a max + θ (cid:19) ( 5 ) with capping rate ω , a basic nucleation rate ε and an induced branching rate ν 0 = ν a Arp0 , proportional to the concentration Arp0 [ µ M ] of activated Arp2 / 3 , together with a half - saturation concentration K a for its primary actin binding site . Reaction - transport - diﬀusion equations for myosin oligomers . Myosin - II oligomers are the most important actin binding proteins that are responsible for the generation of con - tractile forces within cross - linked F - actin networks . Thus , their spatial distribution within a polarizing or moving cell plays a key role for the cytoplasm dynamics . In a most simple way we only distinguish between freely diﬀusing myosin oligomers ( m f ) and those that are bound to cytoskeletal actin ﬁlaments ( m b ) and , therefore , are convected with velocity v . Since free myosin tetramers ﬁrst have to attach to the actin network at one binding site , we consider this bimolecular reaction ( m f with a ) as the rate limiting step . Correspondingly we assume , that the relatively faster processes of double binding ( m b with a ) and power stroke formation are in a pseudo - steady state . Thereby the contractile stress ψ = ψ 0 m b θ with θ = a / a max in the network is determined , see equation ( 25 ) in the following section . Finally , we suppose a constant diﬀusivity D m for free myosin oligomers , embedded into the cytosol ﬂow w . Under these assumptions the local mass balance equations for the corresponding myosin concentrations are : ∂ t m f = ∇ · (cid:16) D m ∇ m f − m f w (cid:17) − α m · a · m f + δ m ( a ) · m b ( 6 ) ∂ t m b = −∇ · (cid:0) m b v (cid:1) + α m · a · m f − δ m ( a ) · m b . ( 7 ) For the association rate α m we assume a constant parameter , whereas the dissociation rate is supposed to increase quadratically with increasing network concentration a because of steric inhibition or competition for binding sites : δ m ( a ) = δ 0 m (cid:18) 1 + a 2 a 2opt (cid:19) = δ 0 m (cid:18) 1 + θ 2 θ 2opt (cid:19) , ( 8 ) 9 with an optimal actin network concentration a opt = a max θ opt . Moreover , in the case of fast diﬀusion and no transport , the constant equilibrium concentrations m ∗ f and m ∗ b satisfy the equality m ∗ b = α m a δ m ( a ) m ∗ f , ( 9 ) so that the resulting contractile stress ψ ( θ ) becomes optimal for θ = θ opt , Fig . 5 below . Mass conserving ﬂow of the dorsal plasma membrane . As mentioned before , we will assume that the dorsal plasma membrane beneath an adhering cell ( fragment ) is stretched and that small ﬂuctuations can be neglected . On the contrary top side , the ventral plasma - membrane usually shows extensive wrinkles or folds , which most probably are induced by the contractile action of the cytoskeleton itself , indicating that the plasma membrane tip at the cell edge stays under a positive tension τ Γ . Before discussing the corresponding dynamics of the dorsal membrane , we state the two extreme possibilities , namely whether the membrane moves together with the cell or not : 1 . Membrane sticking to substrate : During cell translocation over the substratum the whole dorsal membrane stays ﬁxed and no slip may occur due to relatively strong interaction forces with the substratum , e . g . via the glykocalix , so that u ≡ 0 . 2 . Membrane sticking to cell edges : The dorsal membrane is pulled along the substratum due to cytoplasm protrusions at the leading front , but with no slip around the lamellar tips due to strong membrane curvature . In this way the membrane area ﬂux satisﬁes the mass conservation law together with a boundary condition analogous to ( 2 ) , namely ∇ · u = 0 on Ω ( t ) ν Γ · u = ˙Γ on Γ ( t ) . ( 10 ) In the latter case , the membrane can slip over the substratum , thereby experiencing a ﬁnite frictional drag force , see ( 40 ) below , whereas in the ﬁrst case this force is inﬁnitely large to suppress slipping – but then the membrane has to slip around the tips at moving cell edges . Clearly , a certain mixture of both possibilities is physically realizable but not considered here . Moreover , frictional drag onto the dorsal membrane can also occur at its cytoplasmic side . Whereas the relative ﬂow of cytosol will have negligible eﬀects , the horizontal F - actin ﬂow develops a vertical ﬂow proﬁle . This proﬁle depends on the amount of ‘Navier - slip’ in a cortical layer on top of the dorsal membrane and emerges due to frictional forces between actin ﬁlaments and membrane proteins . In analogy to the more explicit thin ﬁlm approximation [ 49 ] we only consider the averaged proﬁle velocity v . In this way we can introduce a simplifying cortical slip parameter , 0 < κ < 1 , so that the eﬀective relative velocity between cytoskeleton and dorsal membrane is reduced to κ ( v − u ) . Thus , the 10 resulting eﬀective velocity of cortical F - actin in a thin layer above dorsal membrane and substratum is given by v c = κ v + ( 1 − κ ) u . ( 11 ) Here the factor κ , which clearly depends on the viscous shear properties of the cytoskeleton , should be larger than 0 . 5 to reﬂect observations of a generally slippy behavior ( see e . g . [ 29 , 22 ] ) . Moreover , we suppose that the vertical proﬁle , thus v c , is not changed if some of the cortical actin ﬁlaments are ( transiently ) bound to integrins in the dorsal membrane , see Fig . 3 and the following paragraph : Either those bound integrins or integrin complexes are passively pulled through the lipid - protein bilayer with relative velocity v c − u or , in case of substrate - ﬁxed adhesion bonds , with relative velocity − u . The whole F - actin network above such a bond is slowed down by a certain local frictional force per adhesion site , F c = Φ 0 θ v c , ( 12 ) entering into the corresponding force balance law , see ( 23 ) below . In any case , the fric - tional drag onto the dorsal membrane , induced by the relative motion of singular integrin complexes , will be neglected in our model . Reaction - transport - diﬀusion equations for membrane integrins . The mechanical con - nection between the actin cytoskeleton and extracellular matrix proteins is provided by transmembrane integrins appearing in four diﬀerent states [ 51 , 35 ] , see Fig . 3 . In the freely diﬀusing state f , integrins are neither coupled to the substrate nor to the actin cytoskeleton and move according to a simple diﬀusion - transport law within the dorsal membrane . These integrins can change their state by binding to the actin cytoskeleton ( a ) or to the substrate ( s ) . In state a , the integrins move with the cortical F - actin velocity v c , whereas integrins in state s remain stationary with respect to the substrate . Actin - or substrate - bound integrins can switch back into the freely diﬀusing state f by unbinding , or into the state sa by coupling to the cytoskeleton and the extracellular matrix . Cell ad - hesion occurs only in this double bound state s representing a focal adhesion ( FA ) , where the frictional force F c ( 12 ) of the moving actin - network is transduced to the substrate . The concentration of integrins c # in the diﬀerent states is described by the following cou - pled system of diﬀerential equations consisting of terms for spatial movement and binding kinetics . ∂ t c f = ∇ · (cid:0) D f ∇ c f − c f u (cid:1) + α − c s + δ − c a − (cid:0) δ + 0 a + α + (cid:1) c f ( 13 ) ∂ t c a = −∇ · (cid:0) c a v c (cid:1) + δ 0 + ac f − (cid:0) δ − + γ + (cid:1) c a + γ − 0 exp (cid:0) ρ γ | F c | (cid:1) c sa ( 14 ) ∂ t c s = α + c f − (cid:0) α − + β + 0 a (cid:1) c s + β − 0 exp (cid:0) ρ β | F c | (cid:1) c sa ( 15 ) ∂ t c sa = γ + c a + β + 0 ac s − (cid:16) β − 0 exp (cid:0) ρ β | F c | (cid:1) + γ − 0 exp (cid:0) ρ γ | F c | (cid:1)(cid:17) c sa ( 16 ) The bonds of the force - transducing integrins ( c sa ) can break when they experience a me - chanical stress by the cytoskeleton , in our model given by the modulus of the force vector 11 f α + α − γ + γ − δ + δ − β − β + sa a s Figure 3 : Scheme of four states of the transmembrane adhesion protein integrin . ( f ) : un - bound and freely diﬀusing within the dorsal membrane , ( s ) : bound to the sub - strate , ( a ) : bound to the actin network and thus moving with the actin - ﬂow , ( sa ) : bound to actin and substrate ( force - transducing state ) . Integrins can switch be - tween these states due to reversible binding kinetics with binding / unbinding rates α , β , γ and δ . F c deﬁned in ( 12 ) . Then , according to the theory of Bell [ 7 , 57 ] the dissociation rates γ − and β − depend exponentially on the mechanical load | F c | , see equations ( 14 – 16 ) above , with γ − 0 and β − 0 describing the basic dissociation rates without load and the exponential coeﬃcients ρ # = ζ # / k B T measuring potentially diﬀerent rupture rates from the substrate or cytoskeleton binding site , respectively . Mass ﬂux conditions at the free boundary . In addition to the already mentioned bulk ﬂux conditions ( 2 ) and ( 11 ) related to the normal speed of the cell edge Γ ( t ) , we have to impose compatible boundary conditions onto the concentrations of those molecular species that are not ﬁxed to the substratum . For the two parabolic diﬀusion equations ( 6 ) and ( 13 ) we impose , respectively , natural zero - ﬂux boundary conditions onto freely diﬀusing myosin ( m f ) and ﬁxed Dirichlet conditions ( c f = c 0 f ) onto freely diﬀusing integrin . Thereby we suppose a constant reservoir of fresh adhesion receptors expressed in the upper ventral membrane and diﬀusing ( or eventually being transported ) from there around the lamellar tip into the lower dorsal part of the membrane . The F - actin ﬂux θ v cannot leave the cell , meaning that on the free boundary Γ the relative inward normal F - actin velocity always has to satisfy the inequality V = ˙Γ − ν Γ · v ≥ 0 . ( 17 ) If the strong inequality V > 0 holds at a certain boundary point , then two diﬀerent modeling situations may arise for the cell edge : 12 1 . No - stick condition at the lamellar tip : Local disruption of the actin network from the edge is allowed , e . g . under suitable load conditions [ 35 ] , so there is no new F - actin production directly at plasma membrane edge . Therefore we have to impose zero - Dirichlet condition for the F - actin concentration θ = 0 if V > 0 holds at a non - sticky point x ∈ Γ . ( 18 ) 2 . Network sticking to the lamellar tip : As indicated in Fig . 4 , active polymerization of actin ﬁlaments directly at the plasma membrane is allowed either ( a ) at ﬂuctuating free ﬁlament ends touching the tip membrane [ 43 ] , or ( b ) at ﬁlaments that are bound to clamp - motor proteins anchored in the tip membrane [ 16 ] . Both cases could occur simultaneously in a local region , but whether active polymerization with inward mass ﬂux θV > 0 can take place depends on local force balance conditions , see Section 3 . 2 and ( 36 ) below . Figure 4 : Schematic top view onto the lamellar tip of a cell ( fragment ) showing three pos - sibilities for actin ﬁlament ends to interact with the free plasma membrane ( and corresponding molar concentrations ) : Anchored at a membrane protein , e . g . in - tegrin , ( a b ) , freely ﬂuctuating with polymerization by a ‘brownian ratchet’ mech - anism ( a f ) , or bound to a ‘clamp - motor’ protein , e . g . WASP - complex , with in - duced polymerization ( a c ) . See equations ( 31 ) , ( 33 ) for a quantitative model . Finally , also the two hyperbolic equations ( 7 ) and ( 14 ) require zero - inﬂux conditions , so that for the transported concentrations m b and c a we have to impose zero - Dirichlet condi - tions only in cases of V > 0 or V c > 0 , respectively . In the latter case the inward normal velocity of v c is deﬁned in analogy to ( 17 ) , noting that under the modeling hypothesis ( 10 ) we anyway have V c = κV . 13 3 . 2 Force balance equations Two - phase ﬂow equations for cytoskeleton and cytosol . Since cell movement usually occurs on a time scale of minutes , and cell sizes usually are in the order of tens of mi - crons , already the cytosol , with its consistency similar to an aqueous viscous ﬂuid , has low Reynolds number . The more this is true for the cytoskeleton with consistency similar to a dense viscoelastic gel . The viscoelastic properties of the cytoplasm have been experi - mentally studied [ 18 , 19 ] and also mathematically modeled [ 11 , 49 ] , whereby the simple model of a Maxwell ﬂuid seems to serve as a quite good description . This means , that elastic properties are mainly eﬀective on a shorter time scale of seconds and dominated by viscous eﬀects on a medium scale of minutes . Moreover , in contrast to a passive elastic material , the cytoplasm mostly stays under active contractile stress as exerted by myosin - II oligomers ( in the order of kPa ) , which is able to break weaker cross - links of the F - actin network e . g . by α - actinin or ﬁlamin , so that the contraction forces are equilibrated only by viscous and frictional forces . Under these assumptions , the highly viscous two - phase creeping ﬂow model for cyto - plasm , originally proposed 25 years ago by Dembo et al . [ 14 ] and so far extensively ap - plied , see e . g . [ 1 , 26 ] , can be condensed into a pseudo - stationary linear elliptic system for the mean F - actin velocity v and the eﬀective hydrostatic pressure p on Ω ( t ) : ∇ · µθ (cid:101) ∇ v + ∇ (cid:16) S ( θ , m b ) − p (cid:17) = Φ ( θ , c sa ) v c , ( 19 ) ∇ p = ϕθ ( v − w ) . ( 20 ) Here the generalized ( elliptic ) Stokes equation ( 19 ) involves the eﬀective stress S ( θ , m b ) as deﬁned in equation ( 24 ) and the symmetrized displacement rate (cid:101) ∇ v ( see e . g . [ 35 ] ) . Moreover , v c is deﬁned in ( 11 ) , and µ , Φ denote the coeﬃcients of bulk viscosity and substratum friction , see ( 23 ) . Because of negligible cytosol viscosity the simple Darcy law ( 20 ) suﬃces as a model description , where the coeﬃcient ϕ measures the internal two - phase ﬂow friction . From the last equation one explicitly solves for the cytosol velocity w = v − ( 1 / ϕθ ) ∇ p , so that the total volume ﬂux is W = v + ( 1 − θ ) ( w − v ) = v − 1 − θ ϕθ ∇ p . ( 21 ) Insertion into the mass - balance equation ( 1 ) then yields the generalized ( elliptic ) Laplace equation ∇ · 1 − θ ϕθ ∇ p = ∇ · v . ( 22 ) Notice that here the ellipticity degenerates for marginal volume fractions 0 < θ < 1 , which can be relevant in cases where θ → 0 at boundary points of cytoskeleton disruption , see ( 18 ) above . 14 We remark that together with the hyperbolic mass balance equation ( 3 ) the linear elliptic system ( 19 , 22 ) constitutes generalized pseudo - stationary Navier - Stokes equations for the F - actin network as a compressible , highly viscous and reactive ﬂuid . It is mutually coupled to the mass concentrations in equations ( 7 ) and ( 16 ) via a myosin - mediated contractile stress term appearing in S ( θ , m b ) , see eq . ( 24 ) below , and an adhesion - mediated friction coeﬃcient Φ ( θ , c sa ) = Φ 0 c sa θ . ( 23 ) In this way the right hand side of ( 19 ) reads F v = Φ v c = c sa F c , with the frictional force F c per doubly bound integrin deﬁned in ( 12 ) above . Tracing these model equations back to their derivation [ 12 , 2 , 35 ] provides us not only with precise biophysical conditions on v and p at the moving boundary Γ ( see next para - graph ) , but also with genuine nonlinear parameter functions being based on thermody - namical reasoning at the molecular scale : The function S in ( 19 ) represents the eﬀective stress in the network phase , which is induced by molecular interactions between the F - actin ﬁlaments themselves as well as by thermic interactions with solvent molecules in the cytosol . It is generally expressed as the weighted negative sum S = − θP a − ( 1 − θ ) P s of corresponding pressures P a and P s which are applied to any network volume element and any cytosol element , respectively . Passive elastic stresses may be neglected since these are already relaxed on the creeping ﬂow timescale . When ﬁnding a free binding site on ﬁlaments , previously singly bound myosin - II tetramers exert power stroke motor forces with their free myosin heads , cf . Figs . 2 and 4 . Thus , an attractive stress − P a = ψ 0 m b is applied , where the simple coeﬃcient ψ 0 comprises binding aﬃnity , power stroke probability and the mean applied force per stroke . On the other hand , standard Gibbs free energy arguments suggest a molecular solvent pressure P s = − σ 0 ln ( 1 − θ ) / ( 1 − θ ) , see [ 2 ] . Then we arrive at expressions for the eﬀective stress S = S ( θ , m b ) = ψ ( θ , m b ) − σ ( θ ) ( 24 ) contractile stress ψ ( θ , m b ) = ψ 0 θm b ( 25 ) swelling pressure σ ( θ ) = σ 0 | ln ( 1 − θ ) | , ( 26 ) see Fig . 5 for corresponding plots with m b = m ∗ b in ( 9 ) . We emphasize that the eﬀective stress function ( 24 ) sums up the contributions from the cytoskeleton and the cytosol , so that both phases are not separated anymore . However , when deriving the corresponding natural boundary conditions for the elliptic problem , then the two phases have to be considered separately again . Stress and pressure balance conditions at the free boundary . Recall that according to ( 2 ) the cell edge Γ ( t ) always moves together with the normal component of the total cytoplasm ﬂux W as quantiﬁed in ( 21 ) . Then , from ( 17 ) also the relative inward normal 15 0 0 . 02 0 . 04 0 . 06 0 . 08 −1 0 1 2 3 4 θ : F−actin volume fraction R [ min −1 ] : assembly ψ [ kPa ] : contraction σ [ kPa ] : swelling S [ kPa ] : stress Figure 5 : Plots of F - actin model func - tions . Bold curves : net assembly rate R ( θ ) ( 4 ) and eﬀective stress S ( θ ) = ψ ( θ ) − σ ( θ ) ( 24 ) . Light curves : contractile stress ψ de - ﬁned in ( 41 ) and swelling pres - sure σ ( 26 ) . F - actin ﬂux is determined as proportional to the inward normal pressure gradient on Γ ( t ) θV = θ (cid:16) ˙Γ − ν Γ · v (cid:17) = − 1 − θ ϕ ν Γ · ∇ p . ( 27 ) This explicit linear relation between free boundary speed , normal F - actin velocity and pressure gradient serves as an extra free boundary condition in addition to the set of boundary conditions that are necessary for uniquely solving the linear elliptic system ( 19 ) and ( 22 ) on the given domain Ω ( t ) . These depend on the particular model choice of boundary pressure functions at the cell edge membrane , but also on the outcome of the F - actin ﬂow requirement V ≥ 0 in ( 17 ) . Using the general derivations in [ 2 ] , eqs . ( 58 - 62 ) , one obtains separate pressure balance conditions for each of the two phases at all free boundary points of Γ ( t ) satisfying V > 0 , cytoskeleton pressure balance − ν Γ · T a · ν Γ + θp = θP Γ a ( 28 ) and cytosol pressure balance ( 1 − θ ) p + σ ( θ ) = ( 1 − θ ) P Γ s ( 29 ) with the intrinsic stress tensor T a = µθ (cid:101) ∇ v + ψ ( θ , m b ) I . These equations mean that at those parts of the tip plasma membrane , which are exposed to the cytoskeleton network ( θ ) or to the cytosol ( 1 − θ ) , respectively , the sum of internal pressures is in balance with a certain boundary cytoskeleton pressure P Γ a or boundary cytosol pressure P Γ s at each volume element . Modeling expressions for these pressures will be given in the following paragraph . Summing up both pressure balance equations ( 28 ) and ( 29 ) yields the general Neumann - type condition for v on Γ ( t ) ν Γ · T a · ν Γ − (cid:0) σ ( θ ) + p (cid:1) + θP Γ a + ( 1 − θ ) P Γ s = 0 , ( 30 ) which now is valid without restriction , see [ 2 ] , eq . ( 58 ) , i . e . also in boundary points where the condition V = 0 holds . However , then the Dirichlet - type boundary condition ( 29 ) for p 16 has to be replaced by a corresponding inequality , and insertion of V = 0 into ( 27 ) provides a Neumann condition for p instead . In particular we have ν Γ · ∇ p = 0 , which also holds in case of disruption with V > 0 and θ = 0 . Thus , in any constellation of the mentioned conditions on Γ ( t ) , for ﬁxed time t and given proﬁle of all protein concentrations , we obtain a well - posed elliptic boundary value problem for v and p to be solved on Ω ( t ) ( eventually by numeric iteration and / or conjugate gradient method , cf . [ 35 ] ) . Finally , the normal speed ˙Γ of the free boundary can be calculated by using equation ( 27 ) . This is also possible in the case of network disruption at some boundary point x 0 ∈ Γ ( t ) with θ ( t , x 0 ) = 0 , since then V ( t , x 0 ) > 0 is obtained as the L’Hospital - limit of − 1 − θ ( t , x ) θ ( t , x ) ν Γ · ∇ p ( t , x ) as x → x 0 from the interior . Boundary pressure functions at the cell edge . We only consider creeping cell migration in a medium that is not under external pressure or stress . Therefore , in a purely physical model , the boundary pressures P Γ a and P Γ s along the cell edge Γ ( t ) should be set to zero . However , the edge is physically deﬁned as the lamellar tip , where the ventral and dorsal part of the surrounding plasma membrane meet . Thus , if τ Γ denotes the scalar tension value of the dorsal plasma membrane at the cell edge ( see the following paragraph ) then this tension appears as a boundary tip pressure acting on both phases , the cytoskeleton and the cytosol . Moreover , in addition to the counteracting cytoskeleton and cytosol pressure at the left hand sides of eqs . ( 28 ) and ( 29 ) , there could be extra pressures due to active polymerization forces , which usually are generated at barbed actin ﬁlament ends that can become exposed to the tip membrane in two variants , see Fig . 4 above : • Brownian ratchet model : Assume that at a point of the lamellar tip Γ ( t ) a frac - tion a B of ﬁlaments is bound to membrane proteins in a fast pseudo - steady state equilibrium with the actual F - actin concentration a = θa max . Then from the remain - ing network with concentration a F ( a ) = a − a B ( a ) , Arp2 / 3 induced branching can occur . The barbed ﬁlament ends are more or less normally exposed to the tip mem - brane with concentration a f = a f ( a ) = α f 0 Arp0 · a F / ( K a + a F ) with suitably chosen coeﬃcients , see also ( 5 ) . Then , due to insertion of G - actin in - between ﬂuctuating ﬁlament and membrane there appears a free polymerization pressure p f = π f 0 · a f ( a ) ( 31 ) with some ratchet coeﬃcient π f 0 > 0 depending on the free energy of one monomer addition , see relevant force estimations e . g . in [ 41 ] . • Clamp - motor model : Alternatively or additionally , a certain fraction of tip bound actin ﬁlaments with concentration a c = a c ( a ) < a B ( a ) can be bound to WASP - like membrane proteins , which serve as ﬁlament - end - tracking motors . By means of an en - ergy consuming polymer elongation process at the clamped end of the ﬁlament , these 17 proteins push the bound ﬁlament outward , thus leading to a clamp polymerization pressure p c = π c 0 · a c ( a ) . ( 32 ) Here again , the clamp - motor coeﬃcient π c 0 > 0 depends on the energy of one monomer translocation , see [ 16 ] . The sum of these active polymerization pressures would induce an averaged relative normal inward mass ﬂux θV ≥ 0 of the whole cytoskeleton , based on the particular inﬂows of a f - and a c - ﬁlaments satisfying θV = a f V f = a c V c . However , this ﬂow experiences a viscous resistance from the remaining ﬁxed ﬁlaments ( concentration a B − a c ) , with a viscosity coeﬃcient that could increase in the presence of bound myosin molecules . Thus we get the total tip polymerization pressure P poly = p f + p c − µ Γ ( m b ) (cid:0) a B − a c (cid:1) a max V . ( 33 ) Clearly , here the relative inward velocity V is the one deﬁned by the normal component of v in relation to ˙Γ , see ( 17 ) . For a similar resistance model based on elastic cross - linking see [ 23 ] . Finally , since this intrinsic boundary pressure P poly acts onto the cytoskeleton volume fraction , while simultaneously inducing a corresponding counter - pressure onto the cytosol volume fraction , we can state the following distribution for the boundary pressures gener - ated at the membrane θP Γ a = θ ( 1 − κ Γ ) τ Γ + P poly , ( 34 ) ( 1 − θ ) P Γ s = ( 1 − θ + θκ Γ ) τ Γ − P poly , ( 35 ) where we introduce a weight factor , 0 ≤ κ Γ < 1 , measuring the relative eﬀect of membrane tension τ Γ onto the cytosol phase and possibly depending on the not - explicitly modeled tip geometry . Then , by substituting p from ( 29 ) into ( 30 ) we obtain the generalized Neumann - type boundary condition for v in all points of Γ ( t ) where the network is attached , a B > 0 , and where V > 0 holds : ν Γ · T a · ν Γ − σ ( θ ) − a max 1 − θ µ Γ ( m b ) (cid:16) a B − a c (cid:17) V + 1 1 − θ (cid:16) σ ( θ ) + p f + p c − θκ Γ τ Γ (cid:17) = 0 . ( 36 ) This means , that the mean inward F - actin polymerization speed V ≥ 0 on the moving cell edge Γ ( t ) is implicitly determined by solving the linear elliptic system ( 19 ) and ( 22 ) for v and p and satisfying all boundary conditions . Thereby the Neumann condition above contains all membrane protruding pressure terms in series , namely the swelling pressure σ , the polymerization pressures p f and p c induced by a Brownian ratchet or an clamp - motor mechanism , as well as a counteracting stress due to dorsal membrane tension τ Γ . 18 Global force balance at the adhesive substratum . There are two kinds of forces exerted by the migrating cell ( fragment ) onto the ﬁxed ﬂat substratum : the integrin - adhesion mediated active frictional force represented by the vector ﬁeld F v on the right hand side of Stokes’ equation ( 19 ) , and an analogous passive frictional force F u due to motion of the dorsal plasma membrane along the substratum : F v = c sa F c = c sa Φ 0 v c , ( 37 ) F u = Φ u u , ( 38 ) with Φ as in ( 23 ) and an assumed friction constant Φ u ≥ 0 . Supposing that on the substratum no other forces are applied than these , then their integral sum has to vanish , so that the zero force balance holds : 0 = (cid:90) Ω ( t ) ( F v + F u ) . ( 39 ) Furthermore , if we assume that the dorsal membrane , viewed as a 2 - dimensional incom - pressible ﬂuid satisfying the zero - divergence condition ( 10 ) , has relatively low viscosity , then the membrane tension τ u induced by the frictional ﬂow can be deﬁned according to Darcy’s law ∇ τ u = Φ u u ( 40 ) and thus determined as solution of the Laplace equation ∆ τ u = 0 with Neumann boundary condition ν Γ · ∇ τ u = 0 , see ( 10 ) . Then the zero force balance ( 39 ) together with ( 19 ) implies that the boundary tension values τ Γ = τ u | Γ ( t ) , which are uniquely determined up to a constant , necessarily fulﬁll the integrability condition (cid:82) Γ ( t ) ( µθ (cid:101) ∇ v + S ( θ , µ b ) − p + τ Γ ) ν Γ = 0 , which by insertion of the Neumann boundary condition ( 30 ) and by using the symmetry of (cid:101) ∇ v reduces to the equivalent necessary condition (cid:82) Γ ( t ) ( θP Γ a + ( 1 − θ ) P Γ s − τ Γ ) ν Γ = 0 . Indeed , this condition is fulﬁlled for the boundary pressure model functions that were chosen in the preceding paragraph , ( 34 ) and ( 35 ) , because then the integrand in the previous condition even vanishes . 4 Results of model simulations 4 . 1 Spontaneous cell polarization in the 2 - D model We have simulated the adhesive motion of a ﬂat cell or cell fragment represented by a 2 - dimensional domain , Ω ( t ) , with moving cell edge or lamellar tip , Γ ( t ) = ∂ Ω ( t ) , under certain simplifying assumptions : 1 . The lower dorsal membrane sticks to the substratum ( u = 0 ) and there exists a small membrane tension τ Γ > 0 , constant over the whole cell edge . 19 2 . There occurs no active polymerization pressure at the cell edge ( p f = p c = 0 ) , only the similar swelling pressure σ ( θ ) and the hydrostatic pressure p can push the boundary . 3 . Disruption of the F - actin network from the lamellar tip Γ ( t ) can locally occur if the network tension exceeds a certain threshold that might depend on the fraction of membrane - bound actin ﬁlaments a B = A a K B + a . 4 . The free myosin - II concentration is at a ﬁxed constant level m 0 f > 0 and the amount of F - actin bound myosin - II oligomers is in a pseudo - steady equilibrium m ∗ b ( a ) according to ( 9 ) , so that the contractile stress is only a function of θ = a / a max : ψ ( θ ) = ψ 0 θm ∗ b = ψ 0 α m m 0 f a max δ 0 m θ 2 1 + θ 2 / θ 2opt . ( 41 ) More details and a list of chosen parameters can be found in [ 35 ] ( Section 1 and Table 2 ) . Since unpolarized cells and cell fragments , as observed under various conditions [ 63 , 64 ] , attain a quite regular circular shape , we choose as initial condition a circle Ω ( 0 ) of radius 6 µ m . Moreover , in order to mimic the radial spreading of cells after exposure onto a ﬂat substratum , we start with constant integrin densities and radially symmetric initial conﬁguration for the volume fraction θ , with slightly larger values closer to the center . Due to this initial perturbation , the F - actin concentration rapidly condenses into a central region of high θ , surrounded by a lamella - kind region of low θ , see Fig . 6 ( a , b ) . Later , also the actin - and surface - bound integrin adhesion proteins c sa concentrate around this center , see Fig . 6 ( e ) . Both phenomena are supported by a strong retrograde F - actin ﬂow , which collects actin ﬁlaments and actin bound integrins c a in radial direction from almost everywhere in the periphery . Moreover , the hydrodynamic pressure has its maximum within the center region ( data not shown ) , so that its negative outward gradient represents the squeezed ﬂow of cytosol out of the contracting F - actin network . At the free cell edge with relatively low F - actin concentration , there occurs a meta - stable equilibration between a positive swelling pressure pushing the lamellar tip outwards and a resisting viscous network tension pulling the tip inwards . For some time , see Fig . 6 ( b ) after 5 minutes , local regions of protrusion or retraction can be observed , which point into varying directions along the cell periphery . Notice that these spatiotemporal ﬂuctu - ations are not due to the tiny stochastic perturbations that are imposed to the F - actin polymerization rate , but represent the emergent chaotic dynamics of the cytoplasm as a reactive and contractile two - phase ﬂuid [ 11 , 3 ] . Furthermore , behind a cyclically protrud - ing and retracting free edge we can observe a layer with slightly increased concentration of substrate - and - actin bound integrin c sa , see Fig . 6 ( e ) . This is the onset of polarization : fresh free integrin proteins are appearing at the protruding part of the edge from the upper membrane , thus also increasing c sa in this region . As a consequence , a larger frictional force of the retrograde F - actin is generated in that direction , inducing a bias into the force 20 ( a ) ( b ) ( c ) ( d ) ( e ) ( f ) 0 0 . 1 0 . 2 0 . 3 0 . 4 0 50 100 150 Figure 6 : 2 - D simulation of a spontaneously polarizing cell ( fragment ) starting with radially symmetric initial conditions : Spatial distributions shown as pseudocolor plots of F - actin volume fraction θ in ( a , b , c ) , and concentration of actin - and - surface bound integrin proteins c sa in ( d , e , f ) at three diﬀerent time instants : ( a , d ) 1 min , ( b , e ) 5 min , and ( c , f ) 10 min after initialization . The width of the shown region is 22 µ m . 21 vector ﬁeld transduced to the substratum . Thus , the whole cell fragment starts to move in this direction , which later becomes the leading edge of the migrating cell fragment , see Fig . 6 ( c , f ) . The emerging polarization of the cell is most clearly expressed in the c sa dis - tributions of Fig . 6 ( e , f ) , where an increasingly dense band is formed behind the leading edge and the central region of focal adhesions is slowly shifted rearwards with increasing migration speed , while becoming deformed in shape similarly to the whole cell fragment . This simulation is an example for the autonomous formation of a meta - stable unpolar - ized , almost circular state and its spontaneous transition into a polarized , migrating state of a ﬂat cell fragment . By changing some of the model parameters we can inﬂuence the degree of this symmetry - breaking instability , but so far we were not able to reproduce the observed longer - time stability of circular cell fragments , see again [ 63 ] . One reason for this failure seems to be , that in our model simpliﬁcations we assumed a constant distribution of freely diﬀusing myosin - II oligomers , contradicting experimental results on clearly expressed gradients of myosin - II concentration decaying towards the cell edge , see e . g . [ 60 ] . Therefore we have started to investigate the full coupled model system by including active tip poly - merization and the kinetics for myosin - II diﬀusion , binding and transport , in addition to the already implemented analogous kinetics and dynamics of integrin adhesion molecules . The next section presents the so far achieved results in the most simple but nevertheless quite instructive 1 - dimensional situation . 4 . 2 Induced onset of cell polarization and migration in the 1 - D model We have simulated adhesion , polarization and migration of an idealized ﬂat cell fragment having a ﬁxed extension and only one degree of freedom to move , as can be observed experimentally , for example in Fig . 1 ( c ) . Thus , in a 1 - D cross - section along its moving direction , the fragment is represented by an interval Ω ( t ) = [ x b ( t ) , x b ( t ) + L ] of ﬁxed length L , moving with body speed v b ( t ) = ˙ x b ( t ) , so that the whole kinetics and dynamics within cytoplasm and dorsal membrane can be described by the corresponding 1 - dimensional equations and conditions as in Section 3 . 2 , but now written in cell - centric coordinates , for example ˜ θ ( t , y ) = θ ( t , x b ( t ) + y ) or ˜ v ( t , y ) = v ( t , x b ( t ) + y ) − v b ( t ) . Then , assuming the following particular restrictions , we have solved a simpliﬁed system of boundary value problems : 1 . The actin network is always sticky at the lamellar tips ( no disruption ) , so that ˜ θ > 0 on the whole closed interval [ 0 , L ] . 2 . We assume active tip polymerization with a simultaneous parallel eﬀect of the brown - ian ratchet ( π f 0 = 5 Pa / µ M ) and the clamp - motor mechanism ( π c 0 = 5 Pa / µ M ) . More - over , we suppose that the membrane - bound cortex shear viscosity strongly increases if myosin - II oligomers are bound : µ Γ ( m b ) = 0 . 1 ( 1 + 45 m b ) Pa min / µ m . For the actin - binding membrane proteins at the tip with maximal concentration A = 50 µ M and 22 ( a ) Figure 7 : Symmetric unpolarized state of a model cell ( fragment ) with length 10 µ m showing the con - centration proﬁles of ( a ) F - actin a , free and bound myosin - II m f and m b , the force F onto the substrate and the ef - fective cortical F - actin velocity v c ( b ) of integrin proteins in the four diﬀerent states , namely substrate - and actin - bound c sa , substrate - bound c s , freely diﬀus - ing c f , and actin - bound c a . self - enhanced binding with dissociation constant K = 158 . 1 µ M we use the pseudo - equilibrium 2 a B ( a ) = A − (cid:112) ( A − a ) 2 + 2 ( A + a ) K 2 / a + ( K 2 / a ) 2 + K 2 / a + a and a c = 0 . 1 a B . 3 . The dorsal membrane moves together with the cell ( no slip at the tips ) , so that ˜ u ≡ 0 and v c = v = ˜ v + v b . The tip membrane tension diﬀerence is [ τ Γ ] L 0 = Φ u Lv b with the minimum always equal to a ﬁxed positive constant τ 0 = 25 Pa . Finally , the substrate force balance ( 39 ) reads Φ u Lv b = (cid:90) L 0 Φ 0 (cid:102) c sa ˜ θ ( ˜ v + v b ) . ( 42 ) This is an implicit equation to be solved for the migration speed v b , since the Neu - mann boundary conditions and the right hand side of the elliptic equation ( 19 ) ) for ˜ v ( after eliminating the pressure ˜ p ) contain expressions that depend ( linearly ) on v b . Starting with the same unpolarized initial condition as in the previous Section 4 . 1 , we obtain a similar 1 - dimensional symmetric conﬁguration with no cell translocation and a central F - actin plateau , a central maximum of FA ( focal adhesion ) sites , i . e . c sa - integrins , as well as a centripetal F - actin ﬂow , see Fig . 7 . In addition , also the concentration of total myosin - II is enriched in the central region , with actin - bound myosin forming a central plateau , consistent with ﬂuorescence pictures of unpolarized keratinocyte fragments , see 23 [ 63 ] . Moreover , the F - actin ﬂow is highest at the boundary ( with values V ∼ 0 . 5 µ m / min ) due to the assumed active tip polymerization . In contrast to the previous 2 - D model simulations , here we ﬁnd robust parameter con - stellations yielding stability of this symmetric unpolarized state : even quite strong but still subthreshold perturbations of the F - actin concentration at one side induce only transient locomotion together with shifts in most concentration proﬁles : after some delayed over - shooting , the cell fragment returns to its non - moving non - polarized stable state in Fig . 7 . However , if F - actin polymerization is continuously stimulated at one side ( mimicking the eﬀect of a chemo - or haptotactic gradient ) then , not surprisingly , the cell fragment slowly polarizes and starts to persistently translocate in this direction ( data not shown ) . Similarly , in order to mimic the mechanical stimulation experiments with keratinocyte fragments as performed in [ 63 ] , we locally increased the activation ( and F - actin - binding ) of myosin - II at the left hand side for a certain time ( up to 30 sec ) , which is thought to be analogous to the experimental push by a micropipette ﬂow pulse , since by local compression of the cytoskeleton , ﬁlament alignment and thus myosin action will be enhanced . If time span or amplitude of this myosin - pulse stays subthreshold , the model cell responses only by a transient migration as described above and asymptotically returns to its stable resting state , see the speed curve in Fig . 8 ( a ) . However , if the pulse strength exceeds a certain ( b ) Figure 8 : Plots of cell migration velocity v b over time after a perturbation of the unpolarized state in Fig . 7 by imposing an additional activation rate α + m for actin - bound myosin - II oligomers over an induction period of 0 . 5 min locally at the left cell side : ( a ) with rate α + m = 20 / min , showing a stable convergence of v b towards the unpolarized speed zero , and ( b ) with rate α + m = 50 / min , showing the convergence towards a positive polarized speed ∼ 0 . 012 µ m / min . threshold , myosin - II and F - actin is condensed at the rear , whence active tip polymerization ( V ) is drastically reduced at this side , so that the cell rapidly starts to migrate in the other direction , see Fig . 8 ( b ) . After cessation of the pulse , the migration speed is reduced , but the cell maintains its polarized locomotion state . This induced polarization , as a non - linear threshold behavior , is supported by a further positive feedback mechanism : Due to cell translocation , the focal adhesion sites ( c sa ) are successively shifted rearwards relative to 24 the cell , which stabilizes the asymmetric polarization and later increases the locomotion speed to a constant asymptotic value ( v b ∼ 0 . 12 µ m / min ) . ( a ) Figure 9 : Migrating polarized state show - ing stable concentration proﬁles ( a ) of F - actin , a , free and bound myosin - II , m f and m b , the trans - duced locomotion force F and the eﬀective cortical F - Actin ve - locity v c ; ( b ) of integrin - concentrations as in Fig . 7 . Only FA integrins in the sa state are able to transduce force from the contractile actin network to the substrate . The migration speed is v b = 0 . 125 µ m / min . In this migration state the cell ( fragment ) attains characteristic concentration proﬁles , see Fig . 9 . Besides the already mentioned polar gradients of F - actin and myosin - II , the most impressive distribution is that of the FA sites : the c sa proﬁle shows a characteristic broad peak behind the leading edge ( as in the 2 - D case above ) , followed by a slight decrease and a second plateau of even more condensed adhesion sites in the back part of the cell ( fragment ) which , however , rapidly decays at the very rear , see Fig . 9 ( b ) . This last phenomenon is the theoretically expected and experimentally observed rear release of adhesion sites or integrins , not induced by any directed regulatory protein , but only by the fact that the rear part experiences a steep increase of the force F transduced to the substratum , see the plot in Fig . 9 ( a ) . By ( 37 ) this is proportional to the F - actin mass ﬂow θ v c with respect to the substratum : While in the major front part of the migrating cell ( fragment ) the F - actin ﬂow is retrograde and the centripetally pulling force is modest in amplitude , near the trailing edge the direction of ﬂow reverses and the force becomes very strong , now centripetally pulling oﬀ the focal adhesion sites . Thus , the reason for cell translocation is not that there is “more adhesion” or “stronger force” at the front compared to the rear , as it is asserted in some models , cf . [ 17 ] . Indeed , for vanishing passive friction Φ u due to ( 42 ) the total force integral even vanishes . The true physical reason for cell migration rather is the aforementioned asymmetry in the polarized cell state , expressed by a wide front region with modest rearward force and short rear region with strong forward force . 25 We ﬁnally investigate the dependence of migration speed on two cell physiologically important parameters , namely the adhesiveness of the substratum quantiﬁed by the relative number of available adhesion sites Adh0 , and the responsiveness of the F - actin network measured , for instance , by the concentration Arp0 of activated Arp2 / 3 proteins . These are mainly responsible for controlling F - actin polymerization by available free ﬁlament ends as they appear in the net assembly rate ( 4 ) and the ratchet polymerization pressure ( 31 ) . ( a ) ( b ) Figure 10 : Migration speed v b of a model cell in its stable polarized state , plotted over varied parameters ( a ) of adhesiveness Adh0 , relative amount of adhesion binding sites on the substratum ( e . g . ﬁbronectin coating ) ( b ) of F - actin responsiveness expressed by Arp0 [ µ M ] , the cytoplasmic concentration of activated Arp2 / 3 complexes . The results depicted in Fig . 10 reveal the existence of optimal ranges for both parameters , consistent with earlier modeling results , see [ 17 , 24 ] , and with experimental observations , see e . g . [ 27 , 52 ] . Particularly , the migration response curve of Fig . 10 ( a ) has been performed for ﬁxed parameter Arp0 = 10 µ M and for adhesion values 0 ≤ Adh0 ≤ 20 , where according to Table 2 the adhesiveness proportionally inﬂuences not only the two adhesion rates α + = γ + = Adh0 · α but also the passive membrane friction coeﬃcient Φ u = Adh0 · 6 Pa · min · µ m − 2 . This is based on the idealizing assumption that there are no other relevant exterior forces that would resist locomotion relative to the substratum , than those due to friction of the dorsal membrane with respect to an adhesive coating of e . g . ﬁbronectin or collagen . Under these hypotheses and parameter choices our model simulations predict a minimal migration speed of v b ∼ 0 . 035 µ m / min for Adh0 ∼ 1 , which increases towards the doubled speed when lowering the adhesiveness to almost zero . This surprising phenomenon is consistent with own experimental measurements of human keratinocyte polarization and migration [ 37 ] revealing slightly increased motility of polarized cells on glass compared to those on a low density ﬁbronectin coat . The reason for this can be seen from the 26 corresponding proﬁles of FA concentration ( c sa ) and substrate force distribution ( F ) for the two adhesiveness values Adh0 = 0 . 01 , 0 . 2 , see Fig . 11 ( a , b ) . Due to ongoing retrograde Figure 11 : Substrate force distribution F and integrin concentrations in the four diﬀerent states , plotted for varying adhesiveness parameter Adh0 with corresponding migration speed v b as in Fig . 10 ( a ) : ( a ) 0 . 01 , speed 0 . 06 µ m / min , ( b ) 0 . 2 , speed 0 . 04 µ m / min , ( c ) 3 . 0 , speed 0 . 125 µ m / min , and ( d ) 20 . 0 , speed 0 . 138 µ m / min . ﬂow of F - actin , working against internal viscosity and drag , the polarized cell ( fragment ) gathers the few FA sites on the back side in a way that the local FA and force distributions are almost symmetric ( for almost vanishing adhesiveness Adh0 = 0 . 01 ) but still with an additional negative ( pulling ) force plateau on the front side ( though of tiny absolute value | F | ∼ 0 . 05 P a ) . For increased but still small adhesiveness ( Adh0 = 0 . 2 ) , the much more frequent FA sites start to accumulate at the rear , the asymmetry of forces is more expressed and the increased friction reduces the migration speed . On the other hand , for further increasing adhesiveness , Adh0 > 1 , the front plateau of pulling forces at the enriched FA ‘carpet’ is proportionally increased , see Fig . 11 ( c , d ) . However , the dominant reason for the non - linear speeding - up response is the prominent increase of disruptive forces | F c ( rear ) | up to values of Adh0 ∼ 2 , leading to a drastic reduction of resistive FA sites at the very rear , see the corresponding indicator curves in Fig . 12 ( a ) . Only for very large adhesiveness , Adh0 ∼ 20 , the FA sites again start to accumulate at the very rear in spite of a strong disruptive force there , as can be seen in Fig . 11 ( d ) , then causing a slight decrease in migration speed . Thus , while an adhesiveness between 5 and 12 leads to a saturated optimality in its migration speed , within the range 1 < Adh0 < 4 the cell ( fragment ) has a high sensitivity for responding to an increase of 27 Figure 12 : Variation of migration speed v b and certain indicator functions at the cell edge in dependence of ( a ) adhesiveness Adh0 and ( b ) F - actin responsiveness Arp0 [ µ M ] : Plotted are the load | F c | per FA site at the cell rear ( bold ) and tip ( light ) , and the FA concentration c sa at the rear ( bold , dashed ) and tip ( light , dashed ) . Ripples in the force curves reﬂect the slight stochastic noise that was added in the force equation ( 19 ) . 28 adhesiveness with an up to 4 - fold increase of speed . Carried over to the mean forward speed of competing leading lamellae in a whole cell model ( as for the 2 - D simulations in Fig . 6 ) , this could be used to explain polarization and haptotaxis of cells in spatial adhesion gradients , cf . [ 20 ] . In order to understand the analogous optimal migration performance for responsive - ness parameters in the range between 4 µ M and 10 µ M of Arp2 / 3 concentration Arp0 , see Fig . 10 ( b ) , we plot the same indicator curves for FA concentrations and substrate forces in Fig . 12 ( b ) . Again , with increasing Arp2 / 3 - induced actin polymerization there is an almost linear increase in pulling force at the tip ( due to increased polymerization velocity V there ) while the concave migration speed curve directly corresponds to the proportional curve for the disruptive forces at the rear and the resulting convex curve for the accumulated FA sites there . For larger Arp0 values the growing accumulation of FA sites again leads to a slight speed reduction . Finally , the about 50 % gain of speed for increasing responsiveness in the range 1 µ M < Arp0 < 4 µ M could again be carried over to a competing lamellar protrusion response in spatial chemotactic gradients , which are known to stimulate F - actin polymerization at the leading front . 4 . 3 Migration speed in a simpliﬁed 1 - D model In order to explore , which properties of our coupled cytoplasm - adhesion model are essential for obtaining the 1 - D simulation results in the preceding section , we simpliﬁed the model by freezing the following variables and parameters , cf . [ 45 ] : 1 . Assuming fast diﬀusion and F - actin binding of free myosin - II oligomers , we take the pseudo - steady state condition ( 9 ) for bound myosin - II , but with the equivalent dissociation rate δ m ( a ) = δ 0 m exp ( − 2 a / a opt ) instead of ( 8 ) , and obtain as contractility ψ ( θ ) = (cid:102) ψ 0 · θ 2 exp ( − 2 θ / θ opt ) with a coeﬃcient (cid:102) ψ 0 analogous to ( 41 ) . 2 . Except the FA friction function Φ v we set all other friction coeﬃcients ( ϕ , Φ u ) to zero . Thus , the cell migration speed is determined by the zero integral in ( 42 ) . 3 . All ‘exterior’ pressures or tensions at the free membrane tip ( π f 0 , π c 0 , τ Γ ) are assumed to vanish , in particular , there occurs no active polymerization ( V ≡ 0 ) . Starting with uniform FA concentration and a minor asymmetry in the distribution of actin , the system reaches a polarized and migrating state and the distributions of the various concentrations exhibit the same characteristics as in the full model ( see . Fig 9 ) . We again analyze the eﬀect of substratum adhesiveness and F - actin responsiveness on the migration speed , see Fig . 13 . In contrast to the observations for the full model ( see Fig . 10 ) , a saturation behavior of the migration velocity emerges with increasing adhesiveness instead of an optimal range . However , the responsiveness of the F - actin - network has an optimal value as in the full model . 29 Symbol Meaning Units θ ( t , x ) Volume fraction of F - actin dimensionless a ( t , x ) Concentration of F - actin µ M m f ( t , x ) Concentration of free myosin - II µ M m b ( t , x ) Concentration of F - actin bound myosin - II µ M c f ( t , x ) Concentration of free integrin µ m − 2 c s ( t , x ) Concentration of substrate bound integrin µ m − 2 c a ( t , x ) Concentration of actin bound integrin µ m − 2 c sa ( t , x ) Concentration of substrate - and - actin bound integrin µ m − 2 R ( θ ) F - actin net polymerization rate min − 1 ψ ( θ , m b ) Contractile stress Pa σ ( θ ) Swelling pressure Pa S ( θ , m b ) Eﬀective cytoplasmic stress Pa p ( t , x ) Eﬀective two - phase ﬂow pressure Pa τ u ( t , x ) Dorsal membrane tension Pa v ( t , x ) Mean F - actin velocity µ m / min v c ( t , x ) Cortical F - actin velocity µ m / min u ( t , x ) Dorsal membrane velocity µ m / min v b ( t ) Migration velocity of cell ( fragment ) body µ m / min Φ ( θ , c sa ) Adhesional friction Pa · min / µ m 2 F v Active frictional force Pa / µ m F c Local frictional force per adhesion site Pa · µ m F u Passive frictional force at dorsal membrane Pa / µ m ˙Γ Normal speed of the free boundary Γ ( t ) µ m / min V Relative inward F - actin velocity at boundary µ m / min P Γ a Boundary cytoskeleton pressure Pa P Γ s Boundary cytosol pressure Pa τ Γ Membrane tension at boundary ( lamellar tips ) Pa a B ( a ) Concentration of tip - bound F - actin µ M a c ( a ) Concentration of F - actin bound to clamp - motor proteins µ M a f ( a ) Concentration of free ﬁlaments exposed to the tip µ M µ Γ ( m b ) F - actin shear viscosity relative to a B ﬁlaments Pa · min / µ m p f Free polymerization pressure at tip membrane Pa p c Clamp - motor polymerization pressure Pa Table 1 : List of model variables and functions 30 ( a ) ( b ) Figure 13 : Migration speed v b for a simpliﬁed model cell in its stable polarized state in dependence of ( a ) adhesiveness or ( b ) F - actin responsiveness as described in Fig . 10 . Further simulations after successive variation of the frozen parameters ( see above ) reveal , that an optimal range of adhesiveness could be gained only if a passive frictional load Φ u > 0 was chosen to increase monotonically with adhesion strength Adh0 , as it was assumed in the full model , see Table 2 and Fig . 10 ( a ) . Though such a friction appears to be physically realistic , the question remains whether such an optimal velocity response is of general biological relevance . For , the response of living systems is typically guided by adaptation : Migrating cells show the capability to dissolve their focal adhesions by proteolytic cleavage of integrins [ 55 ] which could be an adaptive strategy to optimize cellular adhesiveness on various substrates . On the other hand , the adhesiveness could be raised by active segregation of extracellular matrix proteins . Nevertheless , the universal optimality curve in dependence of F - actin responsiveness , seen in both Figs . 10 ( b ) and 13 ( b ) , seems to hold for any mechanical model , which imple - ments a saturating F - actin polymerization by association of regulating proteins as Arp2 / 3 . This indicates that an optimal control of migration velocity by tuning certain chemical processes as F - actin polymerization , is more easy to be realized than tuning adhesion , and thus may have evolved as a generally eﬀective strategy to regulate such mechanical processes as cell adhesion and locomotion . 5 Discussion and outlook to further modeling Based on a larger set of interwoven mass and force balance equations for mechano - chemical processes within the cytoplasm and the surrounding plasma membrane , the presented con - tinuum model is a simpliﬁed though already suﬃciently complex version of a more com - prehensive 3 - dimensional whole - cell model . From the 1 - D and 2 - D simulation results we 31 Symbol Meaning Value Units a g Concentration of G - actin 30 µ M a max Maximal concentration of F - actin 800 µ M k on F - actin polymerization rate at plus ends 696 ( min · µ M ) − 1 k oﬀ F - actin depolymerization rate at plus ends 258 min − 1 ω F - actin capping rate 1250 min − 1 r F - actin disassembly rate 0 . 2 min − 1 ε Basal F - actin nucleation rate 0 . 75 min − 1 Arp0 Concentration of activated Arp2 / 3 complexes 10 µ M ν a Arp2 / 3 - induced nucleation rate 60 ( min · µ M ) − 1 K a Half - saturation concentration for nucleation 3 µ M m 0 f Equilibrium reservoir concentration of free myosin - II 10 µ M D m Diﬀusion coeﬃcient for free myosin - II 0 . 5 µ m 2 · min − 1 α m F - actin binding rate of myosin - II 0 . 5 ( min · µ M ) − 1 δ 0 m Dissociation rate of bound myosin - II 3 min − 1 a opt Optimal F - actin concentration for myosin - II binding 40 µ M c 0 f Reservoir concentration of free integrin at lamellar tips 50 µ m − 2 D f Diﬀusion coeﬃcient for free integrin 0 . 5 µ m 2 · min − 1 Adh0 Number of available substrate sites per integrin 3 dimensionless Talin F - actin association factor 0 . 0125 dimensionless Fifactor Focal complex factor ( intracellular ) 50 dimensionless Fefactor Focal adhesion factor ( extracellular ) 50 dimensionless α − Dissociation rate for substrate bound integrin α = 5 min − 1 α + Free integrin binding rate to substrate Adh0 · α min − 1 β + 0 F - actin binding rate for substrate bound integrin α · Talin ( min · µ M ) − 1 β − 0 FA dissociation of the F - actin link α / Fifactor min − 1 δ + 0 Free integrin binding rate to F - actin α · Talin ( min · µ M ) − 1 δ − Dissociation rate for F - actin bound integrin α min − 1 γ + Substrate binding rate for F - actin bound integrin Adh0 · α min − 1 γ − 0 FA dissociation rate of the substrate link α / Fefactor min − 1 ρ β Exponential FA - rupture coeﬃcient for F - actin link 11 . 7 ( Pa · µ m ) − 1 ρ γ Exponential FA - rupture coeﬃcient for substrate link 11 . 7 ( Pa · µ m ) − 1 A Total free F - actin binding sites on boundary Γ ( t ) 50 µ M π f 0 Ratchet polymerization pressure coeﬃcient 0 . 0125 Pa · µ M − 1 π c 0 Clamp - motor polymerization pressure coeﬃcient 0 . 0125 Pa · µ M − 1 κ Γ Tip curvature weight factor for membrane tension 0 . 5 dimensionless α f 0 Relative amount of exposed barbed ends per Arp2 / 3 2 dimensionless ψ 0 Contractile stress per bound myosin - II 0 . 0163 Pa · µ M − 1 e ψ 0 Strength of contractile stress ( simpliﬁed model ) 0 . 625 Pa σ 0 Strength of the swelling pressure 0 . 125 Pa µ Viscosity of the F - actin network phase 0 . 625 Pa · min κ Cortical slip parameter for the F - actin ﬂow 0 . 5 dimensionless ϕ Drag coeﬃcient between network and solvent 2 Pa · min · µ m − 2 Φ 0 Friction per actin - substrate bound integrin 0 . 02 Pa · min Φ u Additional friction associated to the cell body Adh0 · 6 Pa · min · µ m − 2 L Length of the cell ( fragment ) 10 µ m Table 2 : List of parameters for the 1 - D simulations , if not otherwise speciﬁed . 32 conclude that even without organizing centers ( as the cell nucleus or microtubuli , cf . [ 31 ] ) or regulating systems ( as the Rho / Rac control cascades , cf . [ 54 ] ) the F - actin cytoskeleton and its associated proteins having mechanical functions ( myosin and integrin ) constitute a self - organizing biophysical system with the ability of autonomous polarization and loco - motion . The transition form a symmetric , unpolarized stationary state into a polarized migrating state can be mechanically induced or spontaneous due to stochastic or chaotic ﬂuctuations , depending on the ( meta - ) stability of the stationary state . Clearly , for repro - ducing the mentioned experimental data , the 2 - dimensional system oﬀers a wider spectrum of possibilities , one of which has been elaborated by Kozlov and Mogilner [ 33 ] . They prove a deﬁned bi - stability between the radially symmetric cell shape and a polarized , circu - larly indented shape by allowing for diﬀerent anisotropic organization of the actin - myosin cytoskeleton . In comparison to this , further numerical ‘experiments’ using our coupled vis - cous ﬂow - transport - diﬀusion - reaction system with free boundary should be performed to explore the capability of isotropic continuum models . Though local orientation or alignment of actin ﬁlaments will have an enforcing eﬀect onto the dynamics , interactions and feedback between F - actin , cross - linkers , motor - proteins and adhesion complexes ( for a 1 - dimensional model see [ 21 ] ) , already the presented simulation results show that internal concentration gradients and directional ﬂow , leading to persistent polarization , can emerge from local ﬂuc - tuations . Thereby super - threshold pattern formation arises , not as in common excitable media by a purely reaction - diﬀusion feedback , rather by a spatially distributed coupling between chemically induced force generation / relaxation and mechanically induced bond formation / dissociation . More than one decade ago , Bereiter - Hahn and L¨uers [ 8 ] claimed that , based on their ex - periments and measurements with migrating keratocytes , polarization and directionality of cells are determined by local variations in actin network stiﬀness and hydrostatic pressure . Together with the more recent high - resolution measurements of dynamic vector ﬁeld ( as F - actin velocity , forces onto pliable substrates , or directionality of FA shape deformations ) , it could soon be possible to probe and evaluate the various assumptions and hypotheses on mass and force balance conditions , which we postulated in Sections 3 . 1 and 3 . 2 . For example , the biphasic correlations between retrograde actin ﬂow speed and traction stress detected by Gardel et al . [ 22 ] could well be resolved by the measured and simulated FA gradient away from an advancing lamellar tip , and by our central modeling assumption that the local traction force F v is proportional to the product c sa · v c of FA concentration and cortical F - actin velocity . Moreover , the distribution of ﬂow and force , extensively discussed for the 1 - dimensional case ( in Section 4 . 2 ) , has to be quantitatively characterized for the 2 - dimensional free boundary situation ( Section 4 . 1 ) , where the overall picture is the same : Wider distribu - tion of traction forces in the leading front region ( with maximum ﬂow speed at the tip , depending on the active polymerization pressure ) and strong disruptive counter - forces in a conﬁned region of ‘rear release’ . The actin ﬂow patterns of our 2 - D simulations show in principle the same characteristics as experimental data by Yam et al . [ 64 ] for ﬁsh kerato - 33 cytes . During the process of polarization , the simulated cell looses its radial symmetry of a uniform inward ﬂow pattern , leading to a stronger inward ﬂow in the rear region , whereby the most pronounced forces come from the two sides relative to the establishing locomotion direction , see Fig . 6 ( c ) . Indeed , traction force experiments on polarized ﬁsh keratocytes have revealed the same pattern , with major traction forces from the two ﬂanks at the rear and weaker retrograde forces at the front [ 50 ] . Further evaluation of the presented model has compare the simulated integrin concen - tration proﬁles with more precise quantitative data on the temporal turnover and spatial distribution of FAs in migrating cells , as already mentioned above . For this reason , the model has to be extended to include stochastic clustering dynamics of integrins , which probably is an essential feature of FAs determining the detailed patterns of F - actin ﬂow and traction forces . We emphasize , that our model results do not depend on the speciﬁc mechanisms of myosin - II contraction . Essential for the emergence of coupled ﬂow and mass gradients is the bimodal ( cubic - like ) stress function S = S ( θ ) in Fig . 5 which similarly ap - pears in a modiﬁed mechanical situations as , for example , the nematode sperm motility system , see [ 9 ] . Also the experimental response curves for the migration speed of polarized cells depend - ing on adhesiveness [ 52 ] show a broad optimum range with a logarithmic slow decay for larger Adh0 values and a steep decay for lower ones , similar to the curves found in our 1 - D model , Fig . 10 , and in analogous earlier simulation results using alternative visco - elastic mechanics [ 17 , 24 ] . The deviating behavior for very low adhesiveness values hat still to be investigated with a more precise quantiﬁcation of other ( weaker ) substrate - mediated forces that may come into account . An optimum curve for the protrusion speed in dependence of the barbed end density B , thus also of the concentration Arp0 , has been obtained by Mogilner and Edelstein - Keshet [ 42 ] with the aid of 1 - dimensional diﬀusion - reaction - transport systems , including membrane resistance and the brownian ratchet mechanism . However , they do not model retrograde actin ﬂow or force transduction to the substratum , so that the shape of their curve ( [ 42 ] , Fig . 6 ) essentially diﬀers from our results in Figs . 10 ( b ) and 12 ( b ) . Finally , in generalization of the model simulations by St´ephanou et al . [ 59 ] and in compar - ison to other modeling approaches mentioned before , our full 2 - dimensional model should be used for reproducing the experimentally observed translocation paths and deformation structures of single blood or tissue cells in culture , which show well - expressed phases of persistent polarization and locomotion , interrupted by events of speed reduction , contrac - tile rounding , successive re - polarization and migration . Statistical analysis , in the same spirit as having been performed for the original annual lamella model [ 4 ] , could help to reveal the microscopic mechanisms that are responsible for cell motility behavior on the macroscopic level . Acknowledgments : This joint work has been generously supported by a grant on ”Simu - lation models for cell motility” ( I / 80543 , Volkswagen - Stiftung ) . Moreover , the hospitality 34 of the Soft Matter Physics group at Leipzig University during the ﬁnal preparation of this chapter is highly appreciated . Finally we thank our colleagues at Bonn University and the Research Center J¨ulich for helpful discussions and critical remarks . References [ 1 ] W . Alt . Biomechanics of actomyosin - dependent mobility of keratinocytes . Bioﬁzika , 41 : 169 – 177 , 1996 . [ 2 ] W . Alt . Nonlinear hyperbolic systems of generalized Navier - Stokes type for interactive motion in biology . In S . Hildebrandt and H . Karcher , editors , Geometric Analysis and Nonlinear Partial Diﬀerential Equations , pages 431 – 461 . Springer , 2003 . [ 3 ] W . Alt and M . Dembo . Cytoplasm dynamics and cell motion : two - phase ﬂow models . Math . Biosci . , 156 : 207 – 228 , 1999 . [ 4 ] W . Alt and R . Tranquillo . Basic morphogenetic system modeling shape changes of migrating cells : how to explain ﬂuctuating lamellipocial dynamics . J . Biol . Syst . , 3 : 905 – 916 , 1995 . [ 5 ] W . Alt and R . Tranquillo . Protrusion - retraction dynamics of an annular lamellipodial seam . In W . Alt , A . Deutsch , and G . Dunn , editors , Dynamics of Cell and Tissue Motion , pages 73 – 81 . Birkh¨auser , 1997 . [ 6 ] D . Ambrosi , A . Duperray , V . Peschetola , and C . Verdier . Traction patterns of tumor cells . J . Math . Biol . , 58 : 163 – 181 , 2009 . [ 7 ] G . I . Bell . Models for the speciﬁc adhesion of cells to cells . Science , 200 : 618 – 627 , 1978 . [ 8 ] J . Bereiter - Hahn and H . L¨uers . Subcellular tension ﬁelds and mechanical resistance of the lamella front related to the direction of locomotion . Cell Biochem . Biophys . , 29 : 243 – 262 , 1998 . [ 9 ] D . Bottino , A . Mogilner , T . Roberts , M . Stewart , and G . Oster . How nematode sperm crawl . J . Cell . Sci . , 115 : 367 – 384 , 2002 . [ 10 ] K . Burridge , M . Chrzanowska - Wodnicka , and C . Zhong . Focal adhesion assembly . Trends Cell Biol . , 7 : 342 – 347 , 1997 . [ 11 ] M . Dembo . The mechanics of motility in dissociated cytoplasm . Biophys . J . , 50 : 1165 – 1183 , 1986 . [ 12 ] M . Dembo . Field theories of the cytoplasm . Comments Theor . Biol . , 1 : 159 , 1989 . 35 [ 13 ] M . Dembo and F . W . Harlow . Cell Motion , contractile networks , and the physics of penetrating reactive ﬂow . Biophys . J . , 50 : 109 – 121 , 1986 . [ 14 ] M . Dembo , F . W . Harlow , and W . Alt . The biophysics of cell surface mobility . In A . D . Perelson , Ch . DeLisi , and F . W . Wiegel , editors , Cell Surface Dynamics , Concepts and Methods , pages 495 – 542 . Marcel Dekker , 1984 . [ 15 ] M . Dembo and Y . L . Wang . Stresses at the cell - to - substrate interface during locomotion of ﬁbroblasts . Biophys . J . , 76 : 2307 – 2316 , 1999 . [ 16 ] R . B . Dickinson . Models for actin polymerization motors . J . Math . Biol . , 58 : 81 – 103 , 2009 . [ 17 ] P . A . DiMilla , K . Barbee , and D . A . Lauﬀenburger . Mathematical model for the eﬀects of adhesion and mechanics on cell migration speed . Biophys . J . , 60 : 15 – 37 , 1991 . [ 18 ] E . Evans and A . Yeung . Apparent viscosity and cortical tension of blood granulocytes determined by micropipet aspiration . Biophys . J . , 56 : 151 – 160 , 1989 . [ 19 ] W . Feneberg , M . Westphal , and E . Sackmann . Dictyostelim cells’ cytoplasm as an active viscoplastic body . Eur . Biophys . J . , 30 : 284 – 294 , 2001 . [ 20 ] D . E . Frank and W . G . Carter . Laminin 5 deposition regulates keratinocyte polarization and persistent migration . J . Cell . Sci . , 117 : 1351 – 1363 , 2004 . [ 21 ] J . Fuhrmann , J . K¨as , and A . Stevens . Initiation of cytoskeletal asymmetry for cell polarization and movement . J . Theor . Biol . , 249 : 278 – 288 , 2007 . [ 22 ] M . L . Gardel , B . Sabass , L . Ji , G . Danuser , U . S . Schwarz , and C . M . Waterman . Trac - tion stress in focal adhesions correlates biphasically with actin retrograde ﬂow speed . J . Cell Biol . , 183 : 999 – 1005 , 2008 . [ 23 ] A . Gholami , , M . Falcke , and E . Frey . Velocity oscillations in actin - based motility . New J . Phys . , 10 : 033022 ( 12pp ) , 2008 . [ 24 ] M . E . Gracheva and H . G . Othmer . A continuum model of motility in ameboid cells . Bull . Math . Biol . , 66 : 167 – 193 , 2004 . [ 25 ] H . P . Grimm , A . B . Verkhovsky , A . Mogilner , and J . J . Meister . Analysis of actin dy - namics at the leading edge of crawling cells : implications for the shape of keratocyte lamellipodia . Eur . Biophys . J . , 32 : 563 – 577 , 2003 . [ 26 ] M . Herant , W . A . Marganski , and M . Dembo . The mechanics of neutrophils : synthetic modeling of three experiments . Biophys . J . , 84 : 3389 – 3413 , 2003 . 36 [ 27 ] B . Hinz , W . Alt , C . Johnen , V . Herzog , and H . W . Kaiser . Quantifying lamella dy - namics of cultured cells by SACED , a new computer - assisted motion analysis . Exp . Cell Res . , 251 : 234 – 243 , 1999 . [ 28 ] F . Huber , J . K¨as , and B . Stuhrmann . Growing actin networks form lammelipodium and lamellum by self - assembly . Biophys . J . , 95 : 5508 , 2008 . [ 29 ] G . Jiang , G . Giannone , D . R . Critchley , E . Fukumoto , and M . P . Sheetz . Two - piconewton slip bond between ﬁbronectin and the cytoskeleton depends on talin . Na - ture , 424 : 334 – 337 , 2003 . [ 30 ] X . Jiang , D . A . Bruzewicz , A . P . Wong , M . Piel , and G . M . Whitesides . Directing cell migration with asymmetric micropatterns . PNAS , 102 : 975 – 978 , 2005 . [ 31 ] I . Kaverina , O . Krylyshkina , and J . V . Small . Regulation of substrate adhesion dy - namics during cell motility . Int . J . Biochem . Cell Biol . , 34 : 746 – 761 , 2002 . [ 32 ] S . A . Koestler , S . Auinger , M . Vinzenz , K . Rottner , and J . V . Small . Diﬀerentially oriented populations of actin ﬁlaments generated in lamellipodia collaborate in pushing and pausing at the cell front . Nat . Cell Biol . , 10 : 306 – 313 , 2008 . [ 33 ] M . M . Kozlov and A . Mogilner . Model of polarization and bistability of cell fragments . Biophys . J . , 93 : 3811 – 3819 , 2007 . [ 34 ] K . Kruse , J . F . Joanny , F . J¨ulicher , and J . Prost . Contractility and retrograde ﬂow in lammelipodium motion . Phys . Biol . , 3 : 130 – 137 , 2006 . [ 35 ] E . Kuusela and W . Alt . Continuum model of cell adhesion and migration . J . Math . Biol . , 58 : 135 – 161 , 2009 . [ 36 ] D . A . Lauﬀenburger and A . F . Horwitz . Cell migration : A physically integrated molec - ular process . Cell , 84 : 359 – 369 , 1996 . [ 37 ] T . Libotte , H . W . Kaiser , W . Alt , and T . Bretschneider . Polarity , protrusion - retraction dynamics and their interplay during keratinocyte cell migration . Exp . Cell Res . , 270 : 129 – 137 , 2001 . [ 38 ] C . M . Lo , H . B . Wang , M . Dembo , Y . L . Wang , and Y . L . Wang . Cell movement is guided by the rigidity of the substrate . Biophys . J . , 79 : 144 – 152 , 2000 . [ 39 ] A . F . Mar´ee , A . Jilkine , A . Dawes , V . A . Grieneisen , and L . Edelstein - Keshet . Polar - ization and movement of keratocytes : a multiscale modelling approach . Bull . Math . Biol . , 68 : 1169 – 1211 , 2006 . [ 40 ] R . Merkel , N . Kirchgessner , C . M . Cesa , and B . Hoﬀmann . Cell force microscopy on elastic layers of ﬁnite thickness . Biophys . J . , 93 : 3314 – 3323 , 2007 . 37 [ 41 ] A . Mogilner . Mathematics of cell motility : have we got its number ? J . Math . Biol . , 58 : 105 – 134 , 2009 . [ 42 ] A . Mogilner and L . Edelstein - Keshet . Regulation of actin dynamics in rapidly moving cells : a quantitative analysis . Biophys . J . , 83 : 1237 – 1258 , 2002 . [ 43 ] A . Mogilner and G . Oster . Cell motility driven by actin polymerization . Biophys . J . , 71 : 3030 – 3045 , 1996 . [ 44 ] A . Mogilner and G . Oster . Polymer motors : pushing out the front and pulling up the back . Curr . Biol . , 13 : R721 – 733 , 2003 . [ 45 ] C . M¨ohl . Modellierung von Adh¨asions - und Cytoskelett - Dynamik in Lamellipodien migratorischer Zellen . Diploma thesis , Universit¨at Bonn , Germany , 2005 . [ 46 ] S . I . Nishimura and M . Sasai . Modulation of the reaction rate of regulating protein induces large morphological and motional change of amoebic cell . J . Theor . Biol . , 245 : 230 – 237 , 2007 . [ 47 ] S . I . Nishimura , M . Ueda , and M . Sasai . Cortical factor feedback model of cellular locomotion and cytoﬁssion . PLoS Comp . Biol . , ( to appear ) , 2009 . [ 48 ] D . Oelz , C . Schmeiser , and A . Soreﬀ . Multistep navigation of leukocytes : a stochastic model with memory eﬀects . Math . Med . Biol . , 22 : 291 – 303 , 2005 . [ 49 ] J . M . Oliver , J . R . King , K . J . McKinlay , P . D . Brown , D . M . Grant , C . A . Scotchford , and J . V . Wood . Thin - ﬁlm theories for two - phase reactive ﬂow models of active cell motion . Math . Med . Biol . , 22 : 53 – 98 , 2005 . [ 50 ] T . Oliver , M . Dembo , and K . Jacobson . Separation of propulsive and adhesive traction stresses in locomoting keratocytes . J . Cell Biol . , 145 : 589 – 604 , 1999 . [ 51 ] S . P . Palecek , A . F . Horwitz , and D . A . Lauﬀenburger . Kinetic model for integrin - mediated adhesion release during cell migration . Ann . Biomed . Eng . , 27 : 219 – 235 , 1999 . [ 52 ] S . P . Palecek , J . C . Loftus , M . H . Ginsberg , D . A . Lauﬀenburger , and A . F . Horwitz . Integrin - ligend binding properties govern cell migration speed through cell - substratum adhesiveness . Nature , 385 : 537 – 540 , 1997 . [ 53 ] A . Ponti , M . Machacek , S . L . Gupton , C . M . Waterman - Storer , and G . Danuser . Two distinct actin networks drive the protrusion of migrating cells . Science , 305 : 1782 – 1786 , 2004 . 38 [ 54 ] A . J . Ridley , M . A . Schwartz , K . Burridge , R . A . Firtel , M . H . Ginsberg , G . Borisy , J . T . Parsons , and A . R . Horwitz . Cell migration : integrating signals from front to back . Science , 302 : 1704 – 1709 , 2003 . [ 55 ] L . Satish , H . C . Blair , A . Glading , and A . Wells . Interferon - inducible protein 9 ( CXCL11 ) - induced cell motility in keratinocytes requires calcium ﬂux - dependent ac - tivation of mu - calpain . Mol . Cell . Biol . , 25 : 1922 – 1941 , 2005 . [ 56 ] U . S . Schwarz , N . Q . Balaban , D . Riveline , A . Bershadsky , B . Geiger , and S . A . Safran . Calculation of forces at focal adhesions from elastic substrate data : the eﬀect of lo - calized force and the need for regularization . Biophys . J . , 83 : 1380 – 1394 , 2002 . [ 57 ] U . Seifert . Rupture of multiple parallel molecular bonds under dynamic loading . Phys . Rev . Lett . , 84 : 2750 – 2753 , 2000 . [ 58 ] J . V . Small , T . Stradal , E . Vignal , and K . Rottner . The lamellipodium : where motility begins . Trends Cell Biol . , 12 : 112 – 120 , 2002 . [ 59 ] A . St´ephanou , E . Mylona , M . Chaplain , and P . Tracqui . A computational model of cell migration coupling the growth of focal adhesions with oscillatory cell protrusions . J . Theor . Biol . , 253 : 701 – 716 , 2008 . [ 60 ] T . M . Svitkina , A . B . Verkhovsky , K . M . McQuade , and G . G . Borisy . Analysis of the actin - myosin II system in ﬁsh epidermal keratocytes : mechanism of cell body translo - cation . J . Cell Biol . , 139 : 397 – 415 , 1997 . [ 61 ] M . Th´ery , V . Racine , A . P´epin , M . Piel , Y . Chen , J . B . Sibarita , and M . Bornens . The extracellular matrix guides the orientation of the cell division axis . Nat . Cell Biol . , 7 : 947 – 953 , 2005 . [ 62 ] C . E . Turner . Paxillin and focal adhesion signalling . Nat . Cell Biol . , 2 : E231 – 236 , 2000 . [ 63 ] A . B . Verkhovsky , T . M . Svitkina , and G . G . Borisy . Self - polarization and directional motility of cytoplasm . Curr . Biol . , 9 : 11 – 20 , 1999 . [ 64 ] P . T . Yam , C . A . Wilson , L . Ji , B . Hebert , E . L . Barnhart , N . A . Dye , P . W . Wiseman , G . Danuser , and J . A . Theriot . Actin - myosin network reorganization breaks symmetry at the cell rear to spontaneously initiate polarized cell motility . J . Cell Biol . , 178 : 1207 – 1221 , 2007 . [ 65 ] C . Zhu and R . Skalak . A continuum model of protrusion of pseudopod in leukocytes . Biophys . J . , 54 : 1115 – 1137 , 1988 . 39