Effects of Analogical Learning Approaches and Presentation Modalities on Ninth Graders ’ Learning Outcome and Eye Movements : a Preliminary Study Sheng - Chang Chen 1 & Hsiao - Ching She 1 # Springer Nature B . V . 2020 Abstract This study analyzed the impact of different analogical learning approaches ( analogies or metaphors ) integrated with different presentation modalities ( pictures or texts ) on middle school students ’ learning performance of electricity with supporting evi - dence from their eye movement behaviors . Eighty ninth - grade middle school students were randomly assigned into four groups to receive four different versions of an online electricity learning program , including pictorial analogies , textual analogies , pictorial metaphors , and textual metaphors . Data regarding students ’ eye movement behaviors were collected simultaneously during their online learning . All the students took a pre - test , post - test , and retention test covering their comprehension of electricity concepts . Our results revealed that the analogy group provided more mapping and integration behaviors between the analog and target concepts about electricity , resulting in gaining better performance than the metaphor group . Additionally , students receiving pictorial modality generated more mapping and integration behaviors between the analog and target concepts , resulting in a better understanding of electricity concepts than students learning with textual modality . The associated implica - tions for analogical learning approaches and presentation modalities concerning science learning and eye movement behaviors are also discussed in the paper . Keywords Analogies . Metaphors . Presentation modality . Eye movements Abbreviations ECT Electricity concept test NOM Numbers of mapping TMD Total mapping duration MMD Mean mapping duration NOI Numbers of integration TID Total integration duration MID Mean integration duration Introduction There is lack of consensus on whether analogies are equiva - lent to metaphors in science education ( Aubusson et al . 2004 ; Celik 2016 ; Niebert et al . 2012 ) . Over the past three decades , it has been confirmed that scientific analogies not only facilitate students ’ science learning successfully but also build up their sophisticated mental models ( Chiu and Lin 2005 ; Shipstone 1984 ) . In addition , other studies report that scientific analogies support students to comprehend these difficult scientific con - cepts through a series of analogical learning processes ( Chuang and She 2013 ; Glynn et al . 1989 ; Zeitoun 1984 ) . Metaphors are also considered to provide an efficient way for learners to project the meaning of a given piece of infor - mation from a more familiar and specific domain to an unfa - miliar and abstract domain ( Wolff and Gentner 2011 ) . Similarly , some studies report that students generate self - ex - planations , including metaphors , to describe and explain sci - entific concepts ( Cameron 2003 ; Daane et al . 2018 ; Venville et al . 2005 ) or utilize metaphors to improve their metacogni - tion ( Thomas and McRobbie 2001 ) . Therefore , analogies and metaphors play an essential role in promoting students ’ sci - ence learning . Some studies , however , suggest that there are some important differences between analogies and metaphors ( Aubusson et al . 2004 ; Duit 1991 ; Gentner et al . 2001 ) . Therefore , this study investigates the effect of analogies and metaphors on students ’ learning of scientific concepts . * Sheng - Chang Chen sengechen @ nctu . edu . tw 1 Institute of Education , National Chiao - Tung University , No . 1001 Ta - Hsueh Rd . , Hsinchu City 300 , Taiwan , Republic of China https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1007 / s10956 - 020 - 09835 - 7 Journal of Science Education and Technology ( 2020 ) 29 : 547 – 560 Published online : 15 May 2020 Comparing Analogies with Metaphors in Terms of Commonalities and Differences Analogies require a cognitive process of matching a familiar base system with an unfamiliar target system and carrying over and transferring the characteristics and functions from a base system to a target system ( Duit 1991 ; Gentner and Gentner 1983 ; Gilbert 1989 ) . Other studies state that analogies rely on a process of searching the resemble characteristics by comparing familiar concepts with unfamiliar concepts and inferring the common characteristics of familiar and unfamiliar concepts , i . e . , a process of effectively attributing the functions or characteristics of the source domain to the target domain ( Gentner 1989 ; Glynn 1991 ; Rumelhart and Norman 1981 ) . Metaphors are also a wide - ly used linguistic tool relying on the human cognitive process of looking at how one conceptual system corresponds with another , wherein the process fosters the comprehension of the target do - main from a person ’ s existing understanding of the source do - main ( Amin 2015 ; Lakoff and Johnson 1980 ) . Therefore , analo - gies and metaphors are basic parts of language used by humans to communicate their thoughts with others ; explain unfamiliar objects , concepts , or ideas ; and enhance students ’ science learn - ing ( Aubusson et al . 2004 ; Daane et al . 2018 ; Duit 1991 ; Gentner 1989 ; Irish and Kang 2017 ; Olander et al . 2018 ) . However , analogies are different from metaphors in the usage of relationships and correspondence between the base and target domains ( Aubusson et al . 2004 ; Gentner et al . 2001 ) . Some studies assumed that analogies indicate more relationships and alignments between the two domains than metaphors ( Gentner et al . 2001 ; Gentner et al . 1988 ) . Similarly , Gust et al . ( 2008 ) assessed that analogies provide clear corresponding components and relationships between the source and target domains , whereas metaphors tend to only imply the corresponding components in the two do - mains . Due to the limitations of metaphors in facilitating stu - dents ’ comprehension of scientific concepts , few studies fo - cused on exploring students ’ learning of scientific concepts with metaphors ( Daane et al . 2018 ) . These studies suggest that analogies and metaphors share similarities to some extent while also having certain differences ; however , none of the empirical studies provided any relevant evidence to demon - strate whether there are any differences between them in their degree of effectiveness for scientific concept learning . Specifically , this study designed an analogical learning pro - gram and a metaphorical learning program on the concepts of electricity and focused on exploring the differences between and impact of analogies and metaphors on students ’ electricity concept learning . Presentation Modality Since the 1960s , many psychologists focused on studying human working memory and long - term memory , specifically examining how the human brain registers , encodes , retrieves , and consolidates information from the external environment ( Atkinson and Shiffrin 1968 ; Baddeley 2000 ; Flavell 1971 ; Hacker et al . 1998 ) . Others focused on exploring how humans process external representations via different modalities and the associated processing mechanisms , such as by proposing various theories and models , including the dual coding theory ( Paivio 1975 ) , the cognitive theory of multimedia learning ( Mayer 2005 ) , and the integrated model of text and picture comprehension ( Schnotz and Bannert 2003 ) . The scholars proposing these theories assumed that two separate cognitive systems handle the verbal information and visual information processes . Paivio ( 1991 ) postulated that humans receive ex - ternal stimuli , including verbal ( e . g . , language , voices , and text ) and nonverbal ( e . g . , pictures , objects , and events ) infor - mation and convert them into verbal and pictorial codes , which are then stored in textual and pictorial memory , respec - tively ( Paivio 1986 ) . Mayer ( 2005 ) proposed that humans not only passively receive external information but also actively process it to produce further information for cognition . Humans actively process information by selecting the relevant information ( words / pictures ) , organizing the selected pieces of information ( words / images ) , transforming them into their mental representations ( verbal model / pictorial model ) , and fi - nally integrating them with their existing knowledge . Schnotz and Bannert ( 2003 ) proposed an integrated model of text and picture comprehension that specifically includes two different processes of symbol - structure analysis ( description represen - tation ) and analog structure mapping ( depiction representa - tion ) . Humans in the symbol - structure process transform tex - tual information into internal textual surface representations and construct their propositional representations through se - mantic processing . Humans in the analog structure - mapping process convert pictures / diagrams into internal visual perceptions / images and build up their mental models through the process of structural mapping ( Dutke and Rinck 2006 ; Hochpöchler et al . 2013 ) . Analogies are usually presented in the form of a picture , image , or model to facilitate learners ’ structure mapping from the base system to the target system . Symbolic tools , such as analogies and metaphors , are applied by students to explain scientific concepts and refine their views about these concepts by operating the cycles of activi - ties , as revealed by Olander et al . ( 2018 ) . Examination of the effects of presenting metaphors in textual or pictorial repre - sentations on students ’ science learning is rare . This study thus sought to present analogical and metaphorical learning mate - rials in textual and pictorial representations to explore their respective effects on students ’ science learning . Eye Movements and Science Learning Eye trackers were widely used in the last decade to investigate the processes through which humans learn about science , J Sci Educ Technol ( 2020 ) 29 : 547 – 560 548 mathematics , social studies , and other fields of knowledge ( Alemdag and Cagiltay 2018 ; Rayner 2009 ) . The reason for the recent popularity of this approach is that human eye move - ment behaviors can express how they comprehend various concepts as well as the interactive process when gazing at learning materials ( Hofstein and Lunetta 2004 ; Kim et al . 2007 ; Méheut and Psillos 2004 ) . Previous studies explore how students ’ eye movement behaviors reflect their science learning processing ( Mason et al . 2013 ; Yang 2017 ) , whereas others have examined the relationship between students ’ learning performance and their eye movement behaviors when using different instructional materials ( Author 2015 ; Cook 2006 ; De Koning et al . 2010 ) . One such previous study that designed two different 3D materials about atomic orbital concepts indicated that dynamic 3D representations attracted increased attention of students and gained better comprehen - sion about comparing with static 3D representations ( Author 2015 ) . Similarly , some studies report that different presenta - tion modalities have a critical effect on students ’ science learn - ing performance ( Author , 2009 ; Cook et al . 2008 ; Scheiter and Eitel 2015 ) . Another study focuses on exploring how the integration of pictorial and textual materials impacts high school students ’ learning of cellular transportation by tracking their eye movement behaviors . The findings revealed that stu - dents with high prior knowledge spent more time on the areas of interest in the graphic images , whereas students with low prior knowledge spent more time on either the headlines or other non - relevant cues ( Cook et al . 2008 ) . This study thus focuses on examining the effects of analogies or metaphors presented via different representational modalities and adopts an eye tracker to detect important data during students ’ learn - ing process . It was expected that tracking students ’ eye move - ment behaviors would provide a better understanding of their underlying cognitive processes as they learned about the con - cepts of electricity through analogies or metaphors presented via different representational modalities . Aims of the Study This study focuses on the effects of different analogical learn - ing approaches ( analogies vs . metaphors ) and presentation modalities ( pictures vs . texts ) on students ’ constructions of the concept of electricity . We provided an online electricity learning program for middle school students designed in four versions : pictorial analogies , textual analogies , pictorial met - aphors , and textual metaphors . Moreover , the patterns of stu - dents ’ eye movement behaviors , either with analogies or met - aphors in pictorial or textual representations , when learning about online electricity units were also correctly observed and analyzed . The following research objectives served as the guidelines for this study . First , this study uncovers the impact on students ’ construction of the concept of electricity by ap - plying four different versions of the online electricity learning program . It also investigates the students ’ underlying cogni - tive processes in each group by tracking their eye movement behaviors . In addition , this study examines whether students ’ science learning processes in pictorial presentations differ from that in textual presentations according to the designs of analogies or metaphors . Finally , we explore whether students with high or low achievement in learning electricity concepts exhibit correlations with their eye movement behaviors when learning with different analogical learning approaches or pre - sentation modalities . Methods Participants and Procedures Eighty ninth - grade middle school students , consisting of 37 males and 43 females , were recruited from four classes in a school in Taiwan . Regardless of which classes students belonged to , all of them were randomly assigned to four groups . Groups of 20 students used one of the four versions of the online electricity learning program ( i . e . , the versions using pic - torial analogies , textual analogies , pictorial metaphors , and tex - tual metaphors ) . Each student took turns to individually learn the electricity concepts using a computer , and an eye - tracking system detected their eye movements . The students acquired some basic electricity concepts in elementary school before learning with the online electricity learning program designed for this study ; however , the students faced various obstacles in learning about electricity because the subject involves many abstract concepts , relationships , and various calculations indi - cating the relationships among voltage , current , and resistance . To understand whether their prior knowledge were different before learning , an analysis of variance ( ANOVA ) test was performed to compare the four groups by their science scores in the pre - semester . The results revealed that there was no sta - tistically significant difference between the four groups ( F ( 3 , 76 ) = . 14 , p = . 998 ) . Each group of students took a pre - test regarding their understanding of the electricity concepts at the beginning of experiment . Next , they entered the laboratory one person at a time and sat facing a computer with internet and an eye - tracking system . Before starting the electricity learning pro - gram , students had a nine - point calibration to ensure the eye - tracking system detected the precise location and duration of their eye movements . Students ’ eye movement behaviors were noted simultaneously during their online learning processes . Subsequently , students individually participated in online learn - ing program for about 40 min and immediately took a post - test on the electricity concepts . A retention test on the electricity concepts was subsequently administered to the four groups of students at the end of the 4 - week online electricity learning program . Data regarding the three types of tests and students ’ eye movements were further analyzed . J Sci Educ Technol ( 2020 ) 29 : 547 – 560 549 Design of Learning Materials Our design of the analogical learning materials regarding the electricity concepts sought to provide one - to - one correspon - dence among the objects in the base and target domains ; thus , the analogies specified many more alignments between two domains than the metaphors . Additionally , we reviewed that the analogies not only emphasized the relationships among the objects in the base or target domain more explicitly than the metaphors but also facilitated more projections of the relation - ships in the base domain to the ones in the target domain . A water wheel system ( including a pump and a water wheel ) was applied to map onto an electric circuit system ( including a bat - tery and a light bulb ) to achieve these two goals , explicitly stating that a pump is like a battery and a water wheel is analo - gous to a light bulb . These analogical learning materials were presented using two different presentation modalities ’ pictorial format ( Fig . 1a ) and textual format ( Fig . 1b ) . In pictorial presen - tation , we arranged the upper - left textual panel and upper - right pictorial panel to describe the objects and concepts in an electric circuit system , placing the bottom - left textual panel and bottom - right pictorial panel to address those in a water wheel system . There are two considerations for designing it . One reason is that analogical materials are represented with the introduction of the target concepts before reminding students of these analog con - cepts ( Glynn 1991 ) . The basis is that students are comfortable in figuring out the corresponding relationships between the known analog concepts and target concepts after they give rise to an initial target concept . In addition , although we adopted the Chinese language to edit the pictorial analogies , students ’ read - ing sequence was similar in being from left to right and from top to bottom to English readers . Hence , they probably first gazed at an electric circuit system on the upper - left textual panel and the upper - right pictorial panel to construct the basic target concepts , followed by fixating at a water wheel system on the bottom - left textual panel and the bottom - right pictorial panel . Subsequently , they tried to comprehend an electric circuit system by processing the correspondence and relationships between the water wheel system and the electric circuit system . The textual analogies were designed by matching students ’ reading habits and the mentioned above principles . We also adopted the descriptions to construct the one - to - one correspondence that represented the target concepts at first , followed by the analog concepts , to build the relationships within the analog or target concepts and to project these relationships within the analog concepts on the target concepts . For example , in an electric circuit system , a relationship that a battery owning electric potential difference leads to a light bulb glowing . Similarly , another one wherein a water pump generating water - level difference gives rise to a water wheel turning was performed . The relationship from the water wheel system also projected to the other one from the electric circuit system , which revealed that a battery owning electric potential difference is like a water pump generating water - level difference , and electric potential difference leading Fig 1 The online learning materials of a pictorial analogies , b textual analogies , c pictorial metaphors , and d textual metaphors J Sci Educ Technol ( 2020 ) 29 : 547 – 560 550 to a light bulb glowing is analogous to water - level difference , leading to a water wheel turning . Additionally , the content of two batteries or two light bulbs in serial and parallel circuits was also considered in the analogical learning unit . These concepts were constructed on the same situation that a water wheel sys - tem resembles an electric circuit system , such as two batteries in parallel circuit being like two water pumps in a parallel system , two batteries in a serial circuit being like two water pumps in a serial system , two light bulbs in parallel circuit being like two water wheels in a parallel system , and two batteries in a serial circuit being like two water wheels in a serial system . For ex - ample , in two batteries in a parallel circuit , as shown as Fig . 1a , the materials revealed that a water wheel system ( including two water pumps in parallel and a water wheel ) is analogous to an electric circuit system ( including two batteries in parallel and a light bulb ) . Our pictorial materials constructed many alignments between two domains , such as connecting two batteries in par - allel being like connecting two water pumps in parallel , and electric potential difference being like water - level difference . We also explicitly built the relationships among the objects or concepts in the water wheel system ( e . g . , the water - level differ - ence generated by two water pumps in parallel is the same as that generated by one water pump ) or in the electric circuit system ( e . g . , the electric potential difference generated by two batteries in parallel is the same as that generated by one battery ) and attempted to project the relationships from the water wheel system to the electric circuit system ( e . g . , electric potential dif - ference generated by connecting two batteries in parallel is like water - level difference generated by connecting two water pumps in parallel ) . Regarding textual analogies , we adopted the textual descriptions to represent the alignments and relation - ships between the two systems , and the projections of the rela - tionships from the water wheel system to the electric circuit system instead of the schematic diagrams ( Fig . 1b ) . The design of the metaphors also used the relationships as the core characteristics without emphasizing any one - to - one corre - spondence between the base and target systems . Additionally , although the metaphors constructed the relationships among the objects within the base or target domain , they not only lacked more explanation to depict the relationships but also implicitly projected the relationships from the base domain to the ones in the target domain . Hence , the metaphorical materials employed a water wheel system ( including a person applying his force on the water pedal machine and a water wheel ) as a base system anal - ogous to the electric circuit system ( including a battery and a light bulb ) . They implicitly revealed , however , that a water pedal ma - chine resembles a battery or a water wheel resembles a light bulb ; thus , learners had to take effort to figure out the corresponding objects between the base and target domains when comprehending the metaphorical materials . These metaphors were also presented in two different presentation modalities , shown as pictorial format ( Fig . 1c ) and textual format ( Fig . 1d ) . We arranged the pictorial metaphors on the left textual panel and the bottom - right pictorial panel to describe the objects and con - cepts in an electric circuit system , placing the upper - right picto - rial panel to address those in a water wheel system . Students were assumed to be gazing the left textual panel and the upper - right pictorial panel according to their reading habits , but they did not correspond to the objects and concepts between them and then searched the bottom - right pictorial panel , transforming the left textual panel into connecting the right pictorial panel . The upper - right pictorial panel did not map any other panels despite itself . Additionally , we adopted the descriptions to establish the less one - to - one correspondence in the arrangement of the textual metaphors to set up the relationships within the analog or target concepts with less explanation and to implicitly project these relationships within the analog concepts on the target concepts . The metaphor , for example , in the water wheel system described that a person applies force on the water pedal machine , making the water wheel turn . It neither explains how the water pedal machine influences the turning of water wheel nor clearly pro - jects the relationship between a water pedal machine and a water wheel to the one between a battery and a light bulb . Furthermore , like analogical materials , we designed the content of two batteries or two light bulbs in serial and parallel circuits in the metaphor - ical learning unit . For example , take two batteries in a parallel circuit , as shown as Fig . 1c , the materials revealed that a water wheel system ( including two people applying force on the water pedal machine and a water wheel ) is similar to an electric circuit system ( including two batteries in parallel and a light bulb ) . However , there was a shortage of direct one - to - one correspon - dence , such as two people applying force on the water pedal machine being like connecting two batteries in parallel , a water wheel being like a light bulb , and so on . Our pictorial metaphors clearly constructed the relationships within the electric circuit system , regardless of the textual highlights or the schematic dia - gram ( e . g . , connecting two batteries in parallel has the same electric potential difference as a battery ) . Meanwhile , they im - plicitly projected the relationships from the water wheel system to the electric circuit system . Textual metaphorical materials are to establish the framework by textual descriptions expressing the relationships and reducing direct one - to - one correspondence be - tween the two domains ( Fig . 1d ) . Two key points are to be noted in designing these learning materials . First , our learning materials revealed where the cor - responding relationships between the analog and target con - cepts broke down by the unmatched features according to the teaching - with - analogy model to avoid misconceptions among students ( Glynn 1991 ) . For example , water will flow out if we cut off the pipe , while current will not flow out if we cut off the wire . In addition , taking the consistency and balance of infor - mation into consideration , we provided the highlights of the major concepts with the textual descriptions in the pictorial modality but without further describing their attributes or the relationships between the base and target systems . The textual highlights not only increased the students ’ comprehension of J Sci Educ Technol ( 2020 ) 29 : 547 – 560 551 the pictorial analogies and metaphors but also balanced the information between the pictorial and textual presentations . We also tried to limit the textual highlights to avoid any con - founding effects due to deriving non - equivalent information from the pictures or textual materials . Apparatus and Measurements of Eye Movement Behaviors An EyeLink 1000 Desktop Mount eye - tracking system with a sampling rate of 1000 Hz was used to record the students ’ eye movement behaviors . A nine - point calibration was performed before their online learning . The analogical or metaphorical learning engaged in by the students comprises a dynamic cog - nitive process that included searching for the corresponding objects , identifying the attributes of these objects , organizing these attributes to ascertain the shared relationships , and inte - grating these relationships to infer the commonality between the two domains . To reflect the process of analogical or met - aphorical learning , two major eye movement indicators , namely , structure mapping and integration , were specifically developed to measure and reflect the students ’ analogical or metaphorical learning processes in this study . The structure mapping indicators establish the isomorphic corresponding objects between the base and target domains , i . e . , a mapping is a cross - domain process that contains similar or identical objects . As shown as Fig . 2a , for example , the student allocat - ed attention to the highlights of major concepts regarding “ two batteries in parallel ” in the upper - left textual panel , which was immediately followed by mapping onto the lower - right picto - rial panel or the lower - left textual panel regarding “ two water pumps in parallel . ” Similarly , other students also performed such analogical or metaphorical mapping between cross - domain concepts for textual analogical materials ( Fig . 2b ) , pictorial metaphorical materials ( Fig . 2c ) , and textual meta - phorical materials ( Fig . 2d ) . The structure mapping indicators included the following sub - indicators : numbers of mapping ( NOM ) , total mapping duration ( TMD ) , and mean mapping duration ( MMD ) . The NOM sub - indicator is used to calculate how often the students look from a pump corresponding to a battery or from the water - level difference corresponding to the electrical potential difference . Hence , the TMD sub - indicator is used to count how long students fixate at such paired ob - jects , and the MMD sub - indicator reflects how long students fixate at these paired objects per mapping . Integrating the relationships among objects or concepts with - in a domain can assist learners in comprehending the whole systematicity of the base or target domain and providing the basis of searching the similarities between the base and target domains . The integration indicators measured to what extent learners ’ eye movements try to make integrations within the same domain to show learners how to integrate these objects and concepts . In the electric circuit system , for example , the student focused on the highlights of major concepts regarding “ two batteries in parallel ” in the upper - left textual panel , which was immediately followed by viewing the upper - right pictorial panel of the same or relevant objects , such as “ two batteries in parallel , ” “ electric potential difference , ” and “ light bulb ” ( Fig . 3a ) . The student in the water wheel system also focused on “ two water pumps in parallel ” in the lower - left textual panel and then looked “ two water pumps in parallel ” or “ electric potential difference ” in the lower - right pic - torial panel . The orange - red and blue - purple circles represent the student ’ s eye movements from earliest to latest times between the same or relevant objects or concepts in the electric circuit system or in the water wheel system , respectively . According to the distribution of these colorful circles , the student probably looked back and forth between the highlights of the textual panel and the objects of the pictorial panel to integrate the relevant knowledge in the electric circuit system or in the water wheel system . Similarly , such integration patterns from the students were also observed in viewing the textual analogical materials ( Fig . 3b ) , pictorial metaphorical materials ( Fig . 3c ) , and textual metaphorical materials ( Fig . 3d ) . The integration indicators in - cluded the following sub - indicators : numbers of integration ( NOI ) , total integration duration ( TID ) , and mean integration duration ( MID ) . For example , the NOI sub - indicator is used to count the numbers of attempts to integrate information regarding the pump , water wheel , and water - level difference within the water wheel system as well as to calculate the numbers of at - tempts to integrate information regarding the battery , light bulb , and electric potential difference within the electric circuit system . Meanwhile , the TID sub - indicator is used to count how long students fixate on these objects within the water wheel system or within the electric circuit system , whereas the MID sub - indicator indicates the time for which students fixate on these objects per integration attempt . Electricity Concept Test The electricity concept test ( ECT ) is a multiple - choice diag - nostic instrument that examines students ’ understanding re - garding electricity - related concepts . It was developed by a panel of five experts , including three middle school science teachers and two science education researchers . Thirty ques - tions were developed , and one point was given for each cor - rectly answered question . The Cronbach ’ s α values of the pre - test , post - test , and retention test of the ECT in this study were . 80 , . 89 , and . 90 , respectively . Results Analysis of Students ’ Electricity Concept Test Results Dependent t tests were performed to examine whether the students made progress on the ECT based on their scores J Sci Educ Technol ( 2020 ) 29 : 547 – 560 552 Fig . 2 The structure mapping indicators of a pictorial analogies , b textual analogies , c pictorial metaphors , and d textual metaphors Fig . 3 The integration indicators of a pictorial analogies , b textual analogies , c pictorial metaphors , and d textual metaphors J Sci Educ Technol ( 2020 ) 29 : 547 – 560 553 before , 1 week after , and 1 month after participating in the online electricity learning program with either analogies or metaphors in pictorial or textual representations ( Table 1 ) . Additionally , Cohen ’ s d was adopted as an indicator of mea - suring effect size , considering d = 0 . 2 as a small effect size , d = 0 . 5 as a medium effect size , d = 0 . 8 as a large effect size ( Cohen 1988 ) . Regardless of pictorial modality , the results showed that the students who engaged in analogical online learning made statistically significant progress from the pre - test to post - test of the ECT and from the pre - test to retention test of the ECT ( t ( 19 ) = 9 . 62 , p < . 001 , d = 2 . 15 ; t ( 19 ) = 3 . 85 , p = . 001 , d = 0 . 86 ) or textual modality ( t ( 19 ) = 5 . 12 , p < . 001 , d = 1 . 15 ; t ( 19 ) = 3 . 95 , p = . 001 , d = 0 . 88 ) . Students who re - ceived metaphorical materials with pictorial modality also made statistically significant progress from the pre - test to post - test of the ECT ( t ( 19 ) = 8 . 13 , p < . 001 , d = 1 . 82 ) and from the pre - test to retention test of the ECT ( t ( 19 ) = 4 . 30 , p < . 001 , d = 0 . 96 ) . However , the students who received metaphorical materials with textual modality only made statistically signif - icant progress from the pre - test to post - test of the ECT ( t ( 19 ) = 2 . 36 , p = . 029 , d = 0 . 53 ) . No statistically significant difference was found between the pre - test and retention test of the ECT ( t ( 19 ) = 0 . 91 , p = . 374 , d = 0 . 20 ) . Two - factor multivariate analysis of variance was per - formed to examine the effects of the analogical learning ap - proaches and presentation modalities on the students ’ perfor - mance on the post - test and retention test of the ECT while taking their pre - test scores of the ECT as the covariate . Additionally , partial eta squared was measured as an indicator of measuring effect size , considering partial η 2 = . 01 as a small effect size , partial η 2 = . 06 as a medium effect size , and partial η 2 = . 14 as a large effect size ( Cohen 1988 ) . The results re - vealed that both the analogical learning approaches ( Wilk ’ s Λ = . 91 , F ( 2 , 74 ) = 3 . 73 , p = . 029 , partial η 2 = . 09 ) and presen - tation modalities ( Wilk ’ s Λ = . 85 , F ( 2 , 74 ) = 6 . 63 , p = . 002 , par - tial η 2 = . 15 ) had a statistically significant effect on the perfor - mance of the post - test and retention test of the ECT , but no interaction effect was found between the analogical learning approaches and presentation modalities ( Wilk ’ s Λ = . 97 , F ( 2 , 74 ) = 1 . 28 , p = . 284 , partial η 2 = . 03 ) ( Table 2 ) . Regardless of the analogical learning approaches , two separate one - factor multivariate analyses of variance were performed and revealed statistically significant effects on the post - test scores of the ECT ( F ( 1 , 75 ) = 7 . 03 , p = . 010 , partial η 2 = . 09 ) and presentation methods used ( F ( 1 , 75 ) = 11 . 20 , p = . 001 , partial η 2 = . 13 ) . Regardless of the analogical learning approaches , however , no statistically significant effects were observed on the retention test scores of the ECT ( F ( 1 , 75 ) = 1 . 46 , p = . 231 , partial η 2 = . 02 ) and presentation methods used ( F ( 1 , 75 ) = 1 . 20 , p = . 276 , partial η 2 = . 02 ) . The post hoc analysis revealed that the analogy group outperformed the metaphor group ( p = . 010 ) and the picture group outperformed the text group ( p = . 001 ) . Analyses of Students ’ Eye Movement Behaviors According to Analogical Learning Approaches and Presentation Modalities To better understand how the analogical learning approaches and presentation modalities impacted the students ’ underlying cognitive process , the students ’ eye movement behaviors in terms of area of interest were analyzed based on the NOM , TMD , MMD , NOI , TID , and MID . A two - factor ANOVA was performed to examine the effects of the analogical learning approaches and presentation modalities on students ’ eye move - ment behaviors in the area of interest . The results revealed that the analogical learning approaches reached a statistically signif - icant difference in terms of NOM ( F ( 1 , 76 ) = 16 . 82 , p < . 001 , partial η 2 = . 18 ) , TMD ( F ( 1 , 76 ) = 4 . 73 , p = . 033 , partial η 2 = . 06 ) , MMD ( F ( 1 , 76 ) = 6 . 22 , p = . 015 , partial η 2 = . 08 ) , and TID ( F ( 1 , 76 ) = 5 . 36 , p = . 023 , partial η 2 = . 07 ) ( Table 3 ) . The post hoc results revealed that the group of students ’ learning with analogies exhibited more frequent NOM , longer TMD , and longer TID than the group of students ’ learning with met - aphors . Figure 4a and c also support the conclusion that the analogy group students provided greater amounts of TMD than the metaphor group students when both were learned with pic - torial representations . The results revealed that the pictorial analogies attracted the longest TMD at “ the two batteries in the parallel circuits , ” followed by “ the electric potential differ - ence ” and “ the brightness of the light bulb remaining constant , ” and “ the water - level difference ” ( Fig . 4a ) . The results implied that students learning with the pictorial analogies not only tended to comprehend the reasonable commonalities between Table 1 The results of students ’ performance in electricity concept test Pre - test Post - test Retention test t post - pre t reten - pre N Mean SD Mean SD Mean SD Pictorial analogies 20 13 . 40 4 . 68 25 . 25 3 . 43 20 . 15 5 . 60 9 . 62 * * * 3 . 85 * * * Textual analogies 20 15 . 20 7 . 15 23 . 65 7 . 36 21 . 25 7 . 24 5 . 12 * * * 3 . 95 * * Pictorial metaphors 20 13 . 85 4 . 53 24 . 00 5 . 69 20 . 70 6 . 63 8 . 13 * * * 4 . 30 * * * Textual metaphors 20 15 . 40 5 . 66 18 . 85 5 . 63 17 . 25 7 . 91 2 . 36 * 0 . 91 * p < . 05 ; * * p < . 01 ; * * * p < . 001 J Sci Educ Technol ( 2020 ) 29 : 547 – 560 554 the water wheel system and the electric circuit system but also focused on projecting the relationship from the water - level dif - ference to the electric potential difference and on inferring that the brightness of the light bulb remained constant . The MMD , in contrast , was longer in the metaphor group than in the anal - ogy group . It revealed that students learned with the pictorial metaphors utilized greater effort on extracting the commonali - ties between the water wheel system and the electric circuit system , especially focusing on projecting the relationship from “ two people applying force individually on the water pedal machine ” to “ the two batteries in parallel circuits generating the same electric potential difference ” ( Fig . 4c ) . The presentation methods reached a statistically significant difference in terms of TMD , as shown in the ANOVA results ( F ( 1 , 76 ) = 9 . 98 , p = . 002 , partial η 2 = . 12 ) , MMD ( F ( 1 , 76 ) = 14 . 96 , p < . 001 , partial η 2 = . 17 ) , NOI ( F ( 1 , 76 ) = 94 . 45 , p < . 001 , partial η 2 = . 55 ) , and TID ( F ( 1 , 76 ) = 93 . 60 , p < . 001 , partial η 2 = . 55 ) ( Table 3 ) . The post hoc analyses revealed that Table 2 MANCOVA results of students ’ electricity concept test in different analogical learning approaches and presentation modalities Source of variance Wilk ’ s Λ F Univariate F Post hoc Post - test Retention test Covariate Pre - test . 86 6 . 27 * * Analogical learning approaches . 91 3 . 73 * 7 . 03 * 1 . 46 Post - test : analogies > metaphors Presentation modalities . 85 6 . 63 * * 11 . 20 * * 1 . 20 Post - test : pictures > text Interaction . 97 1 . 28 * p < . 05 ; * * p < . 01 Table 3 ANOVA results of students ’ eye movement behaviors in different analogical learning approaches and presentation modalities Indicator Source SS df MS F Post hoc NOM ( count ) Analogical learning approaches 10 , 328 . 51 1 10 , 328 . 51 16 . 82 * * * Analogies > metaphors Presentation modalities 1288 . 01 1 1288 . 01 2 . 10 Interaction 63 . 01 1 63 . 01 0 . 10 TMD ( ms ) Analogical learning approaches 137 , 248 , 702 . 81 1 137 , 248 , 702 . 81 4 . 73 * Analogies > metaphors Presentation modalities 289 , 845 , 945 . 31 1 289 , 845 , 945 . 31 9 . 98 * * Pictures > text Interaction 49 , 598 , 326 . 01 1 49 , 598 , 326 . 01 1 . 71 MMD ( ms ) Analogical learning approaches 104 , 682 . 49 1 104 , 682 . 49 6 . 21 * Metaphors > analogies Presentation modalities 252 , 065 . 24 1 252 , 065 . 24 14 . 96 * * * Pictures > text Interaction 6806 . 76 1 6806 . 76 0 . 40 NOI ( count ) Analogical learning approaches 918 . 01 1 918 . 01 0 . 48 Presentation modalities 198 , 104 . 51 1 198 , 104 . 51 104 . 08 * * * Pictures > text Interaction 6863 . 51 1 6863 . 51 3 . 61 TID ( ms ) Analogical learning approaches 606 , 695 , 185 . 80 1 606 , 695 , 185 . 80 5 . 36 * Analogies > metaphors Presentation modalities 10 , 586 , 671 , 051 . 25 1 10 , 586 , 671 , 051 . 25 93 . 60 * * * Pictures > text Interaction 1 , 154 , 379 , 345 . 80 1 1 , 154 , 379 , 345 . 80 10 . 21 * * Analogies : pictures > text Metaphors : pictures > text Pictures : analogies > metaphors MID ( ms ) Analogical learning approaches 17 , 896 . 59 1 17 , 896 . 59 1 . 19 Presentation modalities 28 , 616 . 62 1 28 , 616 . 62 1 . 90 Interaction 11 , 290 . 14 1 11 , 290 . 14 0 . 75 NOM numbers of mapping , TMD total mapping duration , MMD mean mapping duration , NOI numbers of integration , TID total integration duration , MID mean integration duration * p < . 05 ; * * p < . 01 ; * * * p < . 001 J Sci Educ Technol ( 2020 ) 29 : 547 – 560 555 the students who learned with pictorial materials provided longer TMD , MMD , and TID as well as more frequent NOI than the students who learned with textual materials . Only the parameters of TID reached a statistically significant interac - tion between the analogical learning approaches and the pre - sentation modalities ( F ( 1 , 76 ) = 10 . 21 , p = . 002 , partial η 2 = . 12 ) . The simple main effect was further tested , and the results revealed that the students who learned with pictorial representations exhibited a longer TID than those who learned with textual representations , regardless of whether they learned with the analogical or metaphorical learning approach . The results also showed that students who learned with the analogical learning approach had a longer TID than those who learned with the metaphorical learning approach when view - ing the pictorial presentation modality . Figure 4b and d sup - port the conclusion that the analogy group students provided greater amounts of TMD than the metaphor group students when both groups learned with textual representations . The results also revealed that the textual analogies attracted the longest mapping durations at “ the same water - level difference as one water pump , ” followed by “ two water pumps in paral - lel , ” “ the same electric potential difference as one battery , ” and “ the water wheel turns at a constant speed ” ( Fig . 4b ) . Hence , the textual metaphors attracted the longest mapping durations at “ total force is same as one person applying ” , ” followed by “ two batteries in parallel ” ( Fig . 4d ) . Regardless of being in the analogy or metaphor group , the students who learned with the picture modality allocated greater TMD than those learned with the text modality ( Fig . 4 ) . The results also showed that students learning with the textual analogies not only provided more frequent mapping behaviors and longer mapping durations but also built more complete relationships between the water wheel system and the electric circuit system than those learning with the textual metaphors . Relationships Between Analogical Learning Approaches / Presentation Modalities and Eye Movement Behaviors Comparing the High - ECT with Low - ECT Students To get a better understanding of whether the students with high - and low - ECT scores different eye movement behaviors had , the analysis of point - biserial correlations was adopted to examine the relationships between analogical learning ap - proaches ( analogies vs . metaphors ) or presentation modalities ( pictures vs . texts ) and the eye movement indicators . The di - chotomized variables included whether the students learned with analogies ( scored 1 ) or metaphors ( scored 0 ) as well as whether they were learned with pictures ( scored 1 ) or texts ( scored 0 ) . The students were classified into the high - and low - ECT groups according to their post - test ECT scores , and we used 50 % median scores for each test as the cutoff points to determine the group in which to classify them . With regard to the effects of the analogical learning approaches , the high - and low - ECT students ’ NOM had significant positive correla - tions ( r = . 42 , p = . 007 ; r = . 42 , p = . 008 ) , respectively ( Table 4 ) . The MMD values , however , revealed a significant negative influence ( r = − . 37 , p = . 017 ) in the high - ECT group . Additionally , the TMD and TID values of the low - ECT stu - dents were significantly and positively correlated with the Fig . 4 Students ’ fixation points in each group of a pictorial analogies , b textual analogies , c pictorial metaphors , and d textual metaphors J Sci Educ Technol ( 2020 ) 29 : 547 – 560 556 analogical learning approaches ( r = . 33 , p = . 012 ; r = . 39 , p = . 036 ) . With regard to the effects of the presentation mo - dalities , the high - or low - ECT students exhibited significant positive correlations in terms of NOI ( r = . 78 , p < . 001 ; r = . 72 , p < . 001 ) , TID ( r = . 76 , p < . 001 ; r = . 68 , p < . 001 ) , and MMD ( r = . 34 , p = . 034 ; r = . 46 , p = . 003 ) , respectively . Moreover , the low - ECT students exhibited significantly positive correla - tions of TMD with pictorial representations ( r = . 38 , p = . 015 ) , respectively . Discussion and Conclusions This study sought to respond to ongoing debates as to whether analogies or metaphors combined with pictorial or textual representations are superior for fostering students ’ electricity concept construction . To provide a greater understanding of the attendant issues , our study specifically considered stu - dents ’ eye movement behaviors to provide supporting evi - dence aimed at better unveiling students ’ cognitive processes during analogical learning . This study overcomes the limita - tions of related previous studies and sheds new light on how to enhance students ’ learning regarding electricity concepts while taking different analogical learning approaches and pre - sentation modalities into consideration . Analogical Learning Approaches with Students ’ Eye Movement Behaviors Our findings indicated that the students who learned with analogies exhibited more frequent mapping behaviors , longer mapping duration , and longer integration duration than those who learned with metaphors . One possible explanation is that analogies begin with analogical mapping and then establish structural alignments between the two domains , while meta - phors do not emphasize such one - to - one correspondence and only implicitly indicate the relationships between the two do - mains ( Gentner 1989 ) . These results were supported by pre - vious studies that the successful organization and integration of information in the materials can foster students ’ learning outcomes ( Mason et al . 2013 ) and that learners ’ frequency of integrative transitions was related to their performance in terms of comprehension ( Bauhoff et al . 2012 ) . The students learning with metaphors in this study provided a longer MMD than those learning with analogies . A potential explanation is that the students learning with metaphors spent more time on each mapping to search out and identify the corresponding objects in the implicit structure between two domains to over - come the difficulties of comprehension . Previous studies have similarly reported that learners tend to look longer at materials when they have difficulty processing the information present - ed by them ( Jacob and Karn 2003 ) , which offers a potential explanation for why metaphors cause learners to provide lon - ger MMDs . Presentation Modalities with Students ’ Eye Movement Behaviors Our study further demonstrated that the students learned with pictorial materials provided longer mapping duration , longer MMD , more frequent integration behaviors , and longer inte - gration duration than those learned with textual materials . It is in close proximity to the previous finding that there were more transitions between the learning task and the pictorial mate - rials than between the learning task and the textual materials during constructing their elaborative mental models ( Schnotz and Wagner 2018 ) . These results imply that these students provided more attention to identifying , organizing , and inte - grating the key elements in the pictorial presentations than in the textual presentation when learning with analogies or met - aphors . This is in line with previous studies that college stu - dents had longer mean fixation durations for pictorial presen - tations than textual presentations , resulting in higher accuracy regarding the retrieved concepts ( Author 2014 ) , and that re - vealed that learners focused on pictures than on text when viewing pictures connected with text in scientific materials ( Mason et al . 2013 ) . Therefore , our results demonstrated that the pictorial representations benefitted the students ’ structural mapping and integration between the elements in the source and target domains and conveyed the structural relationship of the source domain to the target domain , regardless of whether they learned with analogies or metaphors . Table 4 The relationships between analogical learning approaches / presentation modali - ties and eye movement behaviors comparing the high - ECT with low - ECT students Variables NOM TMD MMD NOI TID MID High ECT students Analogical learning approaches . 42 * * . 08 − . 37 * − . 23 − . 10 . 24 Presentation modalities − . 23 . 26 . 34 * . 78 * * * . 76 * * * − . 22 Low ECT students Analogical learning approaches . 42 * * . 33 * − . 14 . 29 . 39 * . 03 Presentation modalities − . 07 . 38 * . 46 * * . 72 * * * . 68 * * * − . 07 * p < . 05 ; * * p < . 01 ; * * * p < . 001 J Sci Educ Technol ( 2020 ) 29 : 547 – 560 557 Comparison Between Analogical Learning and Metaphorical Learning Our findings also revealed that the students learned with the analogies outperformed those learned with the metaphors in terms of their electricity concept construction . A possible rea - son is that analogies can indicate the corresponding objects and the relationship between the source domain and the target domain , resulting in students immediately searching for the corresponding objects ; identifying the relationships between these correspondence ; and carrying over all the attributes , structures , and relationships from the source domain to the target domain to further enhance their understanding of any new concepts ( Falkenhainer et al . 1989 ) . With such similarity very often being determined by whether learners can easily access the structural relationships or functions between the two systems , Vosniadou and Ortony ( 1989 ) also argued that salient similarity is critical for analogical learning . Metaphors , however , provide no clear one - to - one correspondence or rela - tionships between two domains ; thus , people generally require more time to search and comprehend any similarities when comparing two domains ( Duit 1991 ) . Comparison Between Pictorial Materials and Textual Materials The findings revealed that the students who learned with the pictorial materials built more complete constructions of the electricity concepts than those who learned with the textual materials as measured by the post - test and retention test . It supports the previous result that learners attained the informa - tion from the pictorial materials more than from the textual materials during elaborating on their mental model construc - tion ( Schnotz and Wagner 2018 ) . This implies that pictorial representations can better trigger learners to extract and infer the relevant information than textual representations , thus resulting in better conceptual comprehension ( Issing 1990 ; Olander et al . 2018 ) . Some studies suggested that pictorial representations can help students develop better performance in analogical reasoning and problem - solving ability ( Larkin and Simon 1987 ; Lin et al . 1996 ) . In summary , regardless of whether they learned with analogies or metaphors , students learning with pictorial representations perform better than those learning with textual representations in terms of their electricity concepts because they can search and integrate the features in pictures more quickly than in text . Comparison Between the High - ECT with Low - ECT Students Analogical materials , according to the results of the point - biserial correlations , were more likely to attract the high - or low - ECT students ’ mapping behaviors . The results showed that analogical materials made all students generate more fre - quent mapping behaviors between the base and target domain to comprehend the electricity concepts . Metaphorical mate - rials , however , were more likely to attract the high - achievement students more MMD than analogical materials . A possible reason is that the students with high achievement had more capacity to overcome the difficult reasoning situa - tions and took more time to search , identify , map , and inte - grate the one - to - one correspondence and the higher - order re - lationships when learning with the metaphorical materials . Analogical materials were more likely to attract the low - ECT students ’ TMD and TID in particular . This finding was similar to that of a previous study that the eye movement behaviors of students with low spatial ability were positively correlated with their performance on an atomic orbital concept test and their mental model construction as learning with the 3D materials ( Author 2015 ) . Additionally , it revealed that pic - torial representations were more likely to attract the high - or low - ECT students ’ attention than textual representations . These findings were also similar to the findings of previous studies that found that making an inference about elements in pictures was easier than making an inference about elements in text ( Goldstone and Son 2005 ) . Hence , pictorial materials attracted students more attention than textual materials , re - gardless of whether they had high or low achievement . This study has two limitations . First , this study was consid - ered as a preliminary study as it developed different aspects of courses about analogical learning approaches integrating with presentation modalities , as well as collecting data to validate the preliminary research ideas . It is also limited to only one high - resolution eye - tracking system to collect students ’ eye movements during their learning , resulting in insufficient number of participants in each group through experiment one by one . Hence , our results addressed that not only did analogies have an advantage over metaphors but also picture modality outperformed text modality when students learned with the concepts of electricity . Future studies can adopt an eye - tracking system to explore whether reversing the left - right location of representing the diagrams or textual highlights would influence students ’ eye movement behaviors and their academic performance . Additionally , this is worth a trial to investigate whether flipping the top - bottom location of representing the diagrams or textual highlights can lead to different effects of comprehension between the base or target domain . The results of this study suggest that eye movement behaviors could potentially detect students ’ immediate learn - ing processes and probably reflect their performance in the future . Acknowledgments This work was supported by the Ministry of Science and Technology ( MOST ) , Taiwan , ROC , under Grant Number NSC - 101 - 2511 - S - 009 - 003 – MY3 . J Sci Educ Technol ( 2020 ) 29 : 547 – 560 558 Compliance with Ethical Standards Ethical Approval All procedures performed in studies involving human participants were in accordance with the ethical standards of the institu - tional and / or national research committee and with the 1964 Helsinki declaration and its later amendments or comparable ethical standards . Informed Consent Informed consent was obtained from all individual participants included in the study . Conflict of Interest The authors declare that they have no conflict of interest . References Alemdag , E . , & Cagiltay , K . ( 2018 ) . A systematic review of eye tracking research on multimedia learning . Comput Educ , 125 , 413 – 428 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . compedu . 2018 . 06 . 023 . Amin , T . G . ( 2015 ) . Conceptual metaphor and the study of conceptual change : research synthesis and future directions . Int J Sci Educ , 37 ( 5 – 6 ) , 966 – 991 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1080 / 09500693 . 2015 . 1025313 . Atkinson , R . C . , & Shiffrin , R . M . ( 1968 ) . Human memory : a proposed system and its control processes . In K . W . Spence ( Ed . ) , The psy - chology of learning and motivation : advances in research and theory ( Vol . 2 , pp . 89 – 195 ) . New York : Academic Press . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / S0079 - 7421 ( 08 ) 60422 - 3 . Aubusson , P . , Harrison , A . , & Ritchie , S . M . ( 2004 ) . Metaphor and anal - ogy in science education . Dordrecht , the Netherlands : Kluwer Publishing https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1007 / 1 - 4020 - 3830 - 5 . Chen , T . C . , & She , H . C . ( 2012 ) . Research of on - line learning for con - ceptual change and scientific reasoning . In C . B . Lee & D . Jonassen , ( Eds . ) , Fostering conceptual change with technology : Asia perspective ( pp . 141 – 172 ) . Singapore : Cengage Learning Asia Pte Ltd . Chen , S . C . , She , H . C . , Chuang , M . H . , Wu , J . Y . , Tsai , J . L . & Jung , T . P . ( 2014 ) . Eye movements predict students ' computer - based assess - ment performance of physics concepts in different presentation mo - dalities . Computers & Education , 74 , 61 – 72 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . compedu . 2013 . 12 . 012 . Chen , S . C . , Hsiao , M . S . , & She , H . C . ( 2015 ) . The effectsofstatic versus dynamic 3D representations on 10th grade students ' atomic orbital mental model construction : Evidence from eye movement behav - iors . Computers in Human Behavior , 53 , 169 – 180 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . chb . 2015 . 07 . 003 . Baddeley , A . D . ( 2000 ) . The episodic buffer : a new component of work - ing memory ? Trends Cogn Sci , 4 ( 11 ) , 417 – 423 . 10 . 1016 / S1364 - 6613 ( 00 ) 01538 - 2 . Bauhoff , V . , Huff , M . , & Schwan , S . ( 2012 ) . Distance matters : spatial contiguity effects as trade - off between gaze switches and memory load . Appl Cogn Psychol , 26 ( 6 ) , 863 – 871 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1002 / acp . 2887 . Cameron , L . ( 2003 ) . Metaphor in educational discourse . London : Continuum . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 5040 / 9781474212076 . Celik , H . ( 2016 ) . An examination of cross sectional change in student ’ s metaphorical perceptions towards heat , temperature and energy con - cepts . International Journal of Education in Mathematics , Science and Technology , 4 ( 3 ) , 229 – 245 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 18404 / ijemst . 86044 . Chiu , M . H . , & Lin , J . W . ( 2005 ) . Promoting fourth graders ' conceptual change of their understanding of electric current via multiple analo - gies . J Res Sci Teach , 42 ( 4 ) , 429 – 464 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1002 / tea . 20062 . Chuang , M . H . , & She , H . C . ( 2013 ) . Fostering 5th grade student ’ s un - derstanding of science via salience analogical reasoning in on - line and classroom learning environments . Educ Technol Soc . 16 ( 3 ) , 102 – 118 . Cohen , J . ( 1988 ) . Statistical power analysis for the behavioral sciences ( 2nd ed . ) . Hillsdale : Lawrence Earlbaum Associates . Cook , M . P . ( 2006 ) . Visual representations in science education : the in - fluence of prior knowledge and cognitive load theory on instruction - al design principles . Sci Educ , 90 ( 6 ) , 1073 – 1091 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1002 / sce . 20164 . Cook , M . , Carter , G . , & Wiebe , E . N . ( 2008 ) . The interpretation of cel - lular transport graphics by students with low and high prior knowl - edge . Int J Sci Educ , 30 ( 2 ) , 239 – 261 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1080 / 09500690601187168 . Daane , A . R . , Haglund , J . , Robertson , A . D . , Close , H . G . , & Scherr , R . E . ( 2018 ) . The pedagogical value of conceptual metaphor for second - ary science teachers . Sci Educ , 102 ( 5 ) , 1051 – 1076 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1002 / sce . 21451 . De Koning , B . , Tabbers , H . , Rikers , R . , & Paas , F . ( 2010 ) . Attention guidance in learning from a complex animation : seeing is under - standing ? Learn Instr , 20 ( 2 ) , 111 – 122 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . learninstruc . 2009 . 02 . 010 . Duit , R . ( 1991 ) . On the role of analogies and metaphors in learning science . Sci Educ , 75 ( 6 ) , 649 – 672 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1002 / sce . 3730750606 . Dutke , S . , & Rinck , M . ( 2006 ) . Multimedia learning : working memory and the learning of word and picture diagrams . Learn Instr , 16 ( 6 ) , 526 – 537 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . learninstruc . 2006 . 10 . 002 . Falkenhainer , B . , Forbus , K . D . , & Gentner , D . ( 1989 ) . The structure - mapping engine : algorithm and examples . Artif Intell , 41 ( 1 ) , 1 – 63 . 10 . 1016 / 0004 - 3702 ( 89 ) 90077 - 5 . Flavell , J . H . ( 1971 ) . Stage - related properties of cognitive development . Cogn Psychol , 2 ( 4 ) , 421 – 453 . 10 . 1016 / 0010 - 0285 ( 71 ) 90025 - 9 . Gentner , D . ( 1989 ) . The mechanisms of analogical learning . In S . Vosniadou & A . Ortony ( Eds . ) , Similarity and analogical reasoning ( pp . 199 – 241 ) . New York : Cambridge University Press . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1017 / CBO9780511529863 . 011 . Gentner , D . , & Colhoun , J . ( 2010 ) . Analogical processes in human think - ing and learning . In B . Glatzeder , V . Goel , & A . von Müller ( Eds . ) , Towards a theory of thinking ( pp . 35 – 48 ) . Berlin : Springer - Verlag . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1007 / 978 - 3 - 642 - 03129 - 8 _ 3 . Gentner , D . , & Gentner , D . R . ( 1983 ) . Flowing water or teeming crowds : mental models of electricity . In D . Gentner & A . L . Stevens ( Eds . ) , Mental models ( pp . 99 – 120 ) . Hillsdale , NJ : Lawrence Erlbaum . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 4324 / 9781315802725 - 10 . Gentner , D . , Falkenhainer , B . , & Skorstad , J . ( 1988 ) . Viewing metaphor as analogy . In D . H . Helman ( Ed . ) , Analogical reasoning : perspec - tives of artificial intelligence , cognitive science and philosophy ( pp . 171 – 177 ) . Dordrecht : Kluwer . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1007 / 978 - 94 - 015 - 7811 - 0 _ 8 . Gentner , D . , Bowdle , B . , Wolff , P . , & Boronat , C . ( 2001 ) . Metaphor is like analogy . In D . Centner , K . J . Holyoak , & B . N . Kokinov ( Eds . ) , The analogical mind : Perspectives from cognitive science ( pp . 199 – 253 ) . Cambridge : MIT Press . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 7551 / mitpress / 1251 . 003 . 0010 . Gilbert , S . W . ( 1989 ) . An evaluation of the use of analogy , simile , and metaphor in science texts . J Res Sci Teach , 26 ( 4 ) , 315 – 327 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1002 / tea . 3660260405 . Glynn , S . M . ( 1991 ) . Explaining science concepts : a teaching - with - anal - ogies - model . In S . Glynn , R . Yeany , & B . Britton ( Eds . ) , The psy - chology of learning science ( pp . 219 – 240 ) . Hillsdale , NJ : Erlbaum . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 4324 / 9780203052396 . Glynn , S . M . , Britton , B . K . , Semrud - Clikeman , M . , & Muth , K . D . ( 1989 ) . Analogical reasoning and problem solving in science text - books . In J . A . Glover , R . R . Ronning , & C . R . Reynolds ( Eds . ) , A handbook of creativity : Assessment , research and theory ( pp . 383 – J Sci Educ Technol ( 2020 ) 29 : 547 – 560 559 398 ) . New York : Plenum . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1007 / 978 - 1 - 4757 - 5356 - 1 _ 21 . Goldstone , R . L . , & Son , J . Y . ( 2005 ) . The transfer of scientific principles using concrete and idealized simulations . J Learn Sci , 14 ( 1 ) , 69 – 110 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1207 / s15327809jls1401 _ 4 . Gust , H . , Krumnack , U . , Kühnberger , K . U . , & Schwering , A . ( 2008 ) . Analogical reasoning : a core of cognition . Künstl Intell , 22 ( 1 ) , 8 – 12 . Hacker , D . J . , Dunlosky , J . , & Graesser , A . C . ( 1998 ) . Metacognition in educational theory and practice . Mahwah : Lawrence Erlbaum Associates . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 4324 / 9781410602350 . Hochpöchler , U . , Schnotz , W . , Rasch , T . , Ullrich , M . , Horz , H . , McElvany , N . , & Baumert , J . ( 2013 ) . Dynamics of mental model construction from text and graphics . Eur J Psychol Educ , 28 ( 4 ) , 1105 – 1126 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1007 / s10212 - 012 - 0156 - z . Hofstein , A . , & Lunetta , V . N . ( 2004 ) . The laboratory in science educa - tion : foundations for the twenty - first century . Sci Educ , 88 ( 1 ) , 28 – 54 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1002 / sce . 10106 . Irish , T . , & Kang , N . - H . ( 2017 ) . Connecting classroom science with ev - eryday life : teachers ’ attempts and students ’ insights . Int J Sci Math Educ , 16 ( 7 ) , 1227 – 1245 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1007 / s10763 - 017 - 9836 - 0 . Issing , L . J . ( 1990 ) . Learning from pictorial analogies . Eur J Psychol Educ , 5 ( 4 ) , 489 – 499 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1007 / BF03173134 . Jacob , R . J . K . , & Karn , K . S . ( 2003 ) . Eye tracking in human - computer interaction and usability research : ready to deliver the promises . In J . Hyönä , R . Radach , & H . Deubel ( Eds . ) , The Mind ’ s eye : Cognitive and applied aspects of eye movement research ( pp . 573 – 605 ) . Amsterdam : Elsevier Science . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / b978 - 044451020 - 4 / 50031 - 1 . Just , M . A . , & Carpenter , P . A . ( 1976 ) . Eye fixations and cognitive pro - cesses . Cogn Psychol , 8 ( 4 ) , 441 – 480 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / 0010 - 0285 ( 76 ) 90015 - 3 . Kim , M . C . , Hannafin , M . J . , & Bryan , L . A . ( 2007 ) . Technology - enhanced inquiry tools in science education : an emerging pedagog - ical framework for classroom practice . Sci Educ , 91 ( 6 ) , 1010 – 1030 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1002 / sce . 20219 . Lakoff , G . , & Johnson , M . ( 1980 ) . Metaphors we live by . Chicago : The University of Chicago Press . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 7208 / chicago / 9780226470993 . 001 . 0001 . Larkin , J . H . , & Simon , H . A . ( 1987 ) . Why a diagram is ( sometimes ) worth ten thousand words . Cogn Sci , 11 ( 1 ) , 65 – 99 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1111 / j . 1551 - 6708 . 1987 . tb00863 . x . Lin , H . S . , Shiau , B . R . , & Lawrenz , F . ( 1996 ) . The effectiveness of teaching science with pictorial analogies . Res Sci Educ , 26 ( 4 ) , 495 – 511 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1007 / BF02357457 . Mason , L . , Tornatora , M . C . , & Pluchino , P . ( 2013 ) . Do fourth graders integrate text and picture in processing and learning from an illus - trated science text ? Evidence from eye - movement patterns . Comput Educ , 60 ( 1 ) , 95 – 109 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . compedu . 2012 . 07 . 011 . Mayer , R . E . ( 2005 ) . Cognitive theory of multimedia learning . In R . E . Mayer ( Ed . ) , The Cambridge handbook of multimedia learning ( pp . 31 – 48 ) . New York : Cambridge University Press . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1017 / CBO9780511816819 . 004 . Méheut , M . , & Psillos , D . ( 2004 ) . Teaching – learning sequences : aims and tools for science education research . Int J Sci Educ , 26 ( 5 ) , 515 – 535 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1080 / 09500690310001614762 . Niebert , K . , Marsch , S . , & Treagust , D . F . ( 2012 ) . Understanding needs embodiment : a theory - guided reanalysis of the role of metaphors and analogies in understanding science . Sci Educ , 96 ( 5 ) , 849 – 877 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1002 / sce . 21026 . Olander , C . , Wickman , P . O . , Tytler , R . , & Ingerman , Å . ( 2018 ) . Representations as mediation between purposes as junior secondary science students learn about the human body . Int J Sci Educ , 40 ( 2 ) , 204 – 226 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1080 / 09500693 . 2017 . 1407464 . Paivio , A . ( 1975 ) . Perceptual comparisons through the mind ’ s eye . Mem Cogn , 6 ( 3 ) , 635 – 647 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 3758 / BF03198229 . Paivio , A . ( 1986 ) . Mental representations : a dual coding approach . Oxford : Oxford University Press . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1093 / acprof : oso / 9780195066661 . 001 . 0001 . Paivio , A . ( 1991 ) . Dual coding theory : retrospect and current status . Can J Psychol , 45 ( 3 ) , 255 – 287 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1037 / h0084295 . Rayner , K . ( 1998 ) . Eye movements in reading and information process - ing : 20 years of research . Psychol Bull , 124 ( 3 ) , 372 – 422 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1037 / 0033 - 2909 . 124 . 3 . 372 . Rayner , K . ( 2009 ) . The thirty fifth Sir Frederick Bartlett lecture : eye movements and attention during reading , scene perception , and vi - sual search . Q J Exp Psychol , 62 ( 8 ) , 1457 – 1506 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1080 / 17470210902816461 . Rumelhart , D . E . , & Norman , D . A . ( 1981 ) . Analogical processes in learning . In J . R . Anderson ( Ed . ) , Cognitive skills and their acquisition ( pp . 335 – 359 ) . Hillsdale : Erlbaum . Scheiter , K . , & Eitel , A . ( 2015 ) . Signals foster multimedia learning by supporting integration of highlighted text and diagram elements . Learn Instr , 36 , 11 – 26 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . learninstruc . 2014 . 11 . 002 . Schnotz , W . , & Bannert , M . ( 2003 ) . Construction and interference in learning from multiple representation . Learn Instr , 13 ( 2 ) , 141 – 156 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / S0959 - 4752 ( 02 ) 00017 - 8 . Schnotz , W . , & Wagner , I . ( 2018 ) . Constructionand elaborationofmental models through strategic conjoint processing of text and pictures . J Educ Psychol , 110 ( 6 ) , 850 – 863 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1037 / edu0000246 . Shipstone , D . M . ( 1984 ) . A study of children understands of electricity in simple DC circuits . Eur J Sci Educ , 6 ( 2 ) , 185 – 198 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1080 / 0140528840060208 . Thomas , G . P . , & McRobbie , C . J . ( 2001 ) . Using a metaphor for learning to improve students ’ metacognition in the chemistry classroom . J Res Sci Teach , 38 ( 2 ) , 222 – 259 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1002 / 1098 - 2736 ( 200102 ) 38 : 23 . 0 . CO ; 2 - S . Venville , G . , Gribble , S . J . , & Donovan , J . ( 2005 ) . An exploration of young children ’ s understandings of genetics concepts from ontolog - ical and epistemological perspectives . Sci Educ , 89 ( 4 ) , 614 – 633 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1002 / sce . 20061 . Vosniadou , S . , & Ortony , A . ( 1989 ) . Similarity and analogical reasoning . New York : Cambridge University Press . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1017 / CBO9780511529863 . Wolff , P . , & Gentner , D . ( 2011 ) . Structure - mapping in metaphor compre - hension . Cogn Sci , 35 ( 8 ) , 1456 – 1488 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1111 / j . 1551 - 6709 . 2011 . 01194 . x . Yang , F . Y . ( 2017 ) . Examining the reasoning of conflicting science infor - mation from the information processing perspective - an eye move - ment analysis . J Res Sci Teach , 54 ( 10 ) , 1347 – 1372 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1002 / tea . 21408 . Zeitoun , H . H . ( 1984 ) . Teaching scientific analogies : a proposed model . Res Sci Technol Educ , 2 ( 2 ) , 107 – 125 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1080 / 0263514840020203 . Publisher ’ s Note Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdic - tional claims in published maps and institutional affiliations . J Sci Educ Technol ( 2020 ) 29 : 547 – 560 560