Proceedings of the 28th Annual Hawaii International Conference on System Sciences - 1995 Group Strategic Decision Making : Asynchronous GSS Using Structured Conflict and Consensus Approaches Jerry Fjermestad School of Industrial Management New Jersey Institute of Technology Newirk . New Jersey 07102 jary @ eics njit . edu Robert M . Czech BMC Communications P . O . Box 2843 Clifton , New Jersey 07015 bmc . bi @ . bootsirap . org ABSTRACT S . Roxanne Hiltz Murray Turoff Computer k Information Sciences New Jersey hitilute of Technology N e w d . New Jersey 07102 roxann @ eics . njit . cdu mumy @ eies njit edu This longitudinal experiment investigated the efficienq , effectiveness andgroup member perceptions of dialectical inquiry ( DI ) and constructive consensus ( CC ) approaches to strategic decision making in an asynchronous ( distributed ) Computer - Mediated - Communications ( CMC ) environment . There were no differences between DI and CC groups in terms of decision effectiveness . DI groups required significantly more asynchronous meeting time to complete their recommendations and had higher perceived depth of evaluation than CC groups . CC groups reported greater decision acceptance and willingness to work together again than DI groups . Relatively few experiential effects were observed . The results are discussed in terms of their implications for Group Support Systems research and design . INTRODUCTION Research on face - to - face ( FtF ) groups has indicated that groups that try to reach consensus on a decision without following any specific procedures , often suffer " process losses " such as unequal participation , failure to generate and explore a number of options before reaching a decision , and a lack of critical examination of ideas . In FtF groups procedures such as brainstorming , Nominal Group Technique , and structured conflict procedures such as Dialectical Inquiry ( DI ) can decrease process losses and improve the outcomes of group decision making [ 29 , 31 , 321 . In DI , the group as a whole is divided in half , with one subgroup charged with developing a plan or proposal , and the other sub - group charged with coming up with criticisms and a counter - proposal or counter - plan . Previous studies in the field of organizational strategic decision making have demonstrated that DI and similar structured conflict approaches , such as " devil ' s advocate " ( DA ) procedures can improve the quality of decisions [ 22 , 24 , 31 , 32 , 331 . To what extent do the findings about FtF groups apply to groups supported by computer based Group Cameron Ford Kenneth Johnson DepMncnt of Psychofogy East Orange , New Jersey 07015 Rosalie Ocker Upsala College Frederick Ferront Malcolm Worrell Graduate School of Management Rutgm Univmity Newark , New Jersey 07102 Support Systems ( GSS ) , both in the same - timehame place " decision room " situation , and in the distributed or asynchronous ( different time / different place ) condition ? A study by Tung and Heminger [ 40 ] utilized synchronous GSS technologies in a single experimental session , and found no differences among DA , D1 , and consensus procedures in terms of group performance or subjective perceptions . There have been no studies of distributed ( asynchronous ) GSS ' s that compare conflict and consensus approaches . One reason why Tung and Heminger may have found no differences for a synchronous GSS is that , as Churchman [ 4 ] Manson and Mitroff [ 23 ] and Mitroff et al [ 26 ] suggest , structured decision approaches , especially DI , take time and practice to learn . Thus , the results reported by Tung and Heminger are not surprising ; their groups had to learn the GSS , the decision approach , and organize themselves , all in a single short experimental time period . The purpose of this study was to compare the effectiveness of a structured conflict approach ( DI ) with a structured consensus approach ( which we called " constructive consensus " or CC ) , for strategic decision making tasks , for groups using a distributed , asynchronous GSS embedded in a computer conferencing system . We gave the groups a two - hour training with a practice FtF task first , to make sure that they would have time to learn and adapt to the GSS , the decision approaches , the type of task , and the group itself . Each group then had two different strategic decision tasks , each lasting for two full weeks of communication and decision making . A variable of secondary interest was the effect of " experience ; " Chidambaram [ 2 , 3 ] had found that in a Decision room situation , groups improved significantly over time . Would this also be true in the much more extended Distributed GSS situation ; eg , after extensive initial training , would there be any differences between an initial two - week task and a second two week task ? 222 1060 - 3425 / 95 $ 4 . 00 @ 1995 IEEE Proceedings of the 28th Annual Hawaii International Conference on System Sciences - 1995 BACKGROUND Previous research in the field of organizational strategic decision making has demonstrated that structured conflict can improve the quality of decisions [ 22 , 24 , 25 , 31 , 32 , 34 , 391 and negatively effect both group perceptions and process outcomes [ 31 , 32 , 411 . The two basic structured conflict methods are DA and DI . Schwenk’s meta - analysis [ 33 , 341 indicates that under some conditions DA is more effective than DI ; but both DA and DI are more effective than expert conditions . In studies that focus on groups , the results suggest that the DI has a slight advantage over the DA [ 34 ] . These results are further supported by Fjermestad [ 12 ] , who also suggests that there is no conclusive evidence that the DI is better than the DA , only that they are both superior to expert and consensus techniques . Schweiger et a1 [ 31 , 321 and Tung and Heminger [ 40 ] are the only researchers who have compared structured conflict approaches that use active participation in groups . Under conditions of active participation the groups develop and present their own plans , critiques , andor counter - plans . In contrast , with passive participation the groups are given a plan , critique , and / or counter - plan developed by another source and are asked to choose one of the alternatives [ 12 ] . HYPOTHESES Group Performance Number of Days ( asynchronous meeting time ) : Evidence from previous FtF research [ 32 ] suggests that DI groups take longer to reach a decision than CC groups . Schweiger et a1 [ 32 ] also reported that both DI and devil’s advocacy groups significantly decreased their meeting time between the two experimental sessions . In contrast , the CC groups from this same study did not experience a decrease in their meeting time . CMC research has reported that CMC groups generally take longer to reach a decision [ lo , 361 . They also require more days of work and total time communicating [ 131 , or time discussing the solution [ 43 ] than FtF groups . Integrating the strategic decision making research with the CMC research it can be concluded that DI groups will require more time that the CC groups . Thus , leading to the following hypotheses : H1 . l : DI groups will require more asynchronous meeting time to complete their recommendations than CC groups . H1 . 2 : The amount of asynchronous meeting time will decrease with experience for both conditions . H 1 . 3 : The asynchronous meeting time for DI groups will decrease more between tasks than CC groups . Number of Comments : The strategic decision making research has not addressed the issue of communication , at least not in terms of the number of comments a group makes . Connolly et a1 [ 6 ] suggest that this variable can be very significant . Their results suggest that the total number of comments is positively correlated with the number of new ideas . The GSS results are mixed . Dubrovsky et a1 [ lo ] reported that were no significant difference in total comments between CMC and FtF groups . However , an earlier study [ 36 ] reported that FtF groups did have more comments than CMC . Smith and Vanecek [ 37 ] had similar results , FtF groups generating more comments than CMC groups . Hiltz et a1 [ 17 ] reported that “no statistical feedback groups” generated more comments than groups with feedback and with leaders . Jessup and Tansik [ 22 ] reported that dispersed groups generate the most and shortest comments . The following sets of hypotheses address the total number of comments measures : H2 . 1 : DI groups will generate a greater number of total comments than will CC groups . H2 . 2 : The total number of comments will decrease with experience for both conditions . H2 . 3 : The total number of comments for DI groups will decrease more between tasks than CC groups . Decision Effectiveness : The primary conclusion drawn from the strategic decision making literature is that DI groups demonstrate superior performance in comparison to CC groups [ 12 , 341 . Schwenk and Valacich [ 35 ] report that there are basically no differences between the DI and Expert condition on decision quality and depth of evaluation . Tung and Heminger [ 40 ] had similar results , but in terms of validity of assumptions the DI groups tended to have a higher ( but not significantly different ) validity than CC groups . The CC groups from the Tung and Heminger [ 40 ] study tended to place a greater importance on the assumptions than either DI or DA groups . In contrast , Schweiger et a1 [ 31 , 321 report that both DI and DA groups have significantly better decision quality and place a greater validity and importance on the assumptions than CC groups . In the Schweiger et a1 [ 32 ] FtF study there is a significant effect for experience . In terms of decision quality , and validity and importance of the assumptions , DI groups were significantly better after both sessions than the CC groups . Also , there was a significant improvement on the validity and importance of the assumptions between the two sessions . The difference in the overall number of assumptions between DI , DA , and 223 Proceedings of the 28th Annual Hawaii International Conference on System Sciences - I995 224 CC was not significant . The trend suggests that CC groups develop more assumptions than DI groups ; and there is a trend that suggests that the number of assumptions is higher in the first session than after the second session . This can be interpreted to mean that DI groups , because of the structure , develop better assumptions ( valid and important ) rather than just more assumptions , in comparison to CC groups . This is further supported by Schweiger et al [ 31 , 321 who reported that depth of evaluation tends to be higher in D1 groups than in CC groups . The GSS research suggests that the depth of evaluation and decision effectiveness are improved via the technology [ S , 291 . Chidambaram [ 2 ] reports GSS groups generate significantly more alternatives than manual groups both overall and after sessions two , three and four . The following sets of hypotheses are related to effectiveness measures H3 . 1 : DI groups will have a higher level of decision effectiveness than CC groups . H3 . 2 : The effectiveness levels will increase with experience for both conditions . H3 . 3 : The effectiveness levels for DI groups will increase more between tasks than CC groups . Depth of Evaluation : Pinsonneault and Kraemer [ 30 ] suggest that GSS increases depth of evaluation . Accordingly , many studies have found that GSS groups analyze more altematives or analyze the same number in greater depth [ 14 , 36 , 421 . Steeb and Johnson [ 38 ] define depth of evaluation ( decision breadth ) as a process where groups deliberate and consider a wide range of situational factors , opportunities , and constraint methods in developing potential solutions . Critical evaluations and comments pertaining to an idea or solution fit this operational definition [ 191 . Mason and colleagues [ 22 , 23 , 281 suggest the key to effective high quality decisions is through a critical evaluation process . The process stresses the evaluations of assumptions from diametrically opposed points of view ( dialectical inquiry ) . The evaluation process has been operationalized by Schweiger et al [ 3 1 , 321 to include an assessment of the validity and importance of the assumption . In this study , depth of evaluation is defined to be a composite of the number of facts and assumptions , and the sums of the validity and importance measure for both the facts and assumptions . The following are hypotheses based on depth of evaluation : H4 . 1 : DI groups will have a greater depth of evaluation than CC groups . H4 . 2 : The depth of evaluation will increase with experience for both conditions . H4 . 3 : The depth of evaluation for DI groups will increase more between tasks than for CC groups . Group Perceptions In FtF studies , Schweiger et al [ 31 , 321 found that the consensus approach yielded greater decision acceptance and more willingness to work together in the future than either DI or DA approaches . Conversely , DI and DA approaches had higher perceived depth of evaluation than the consensus approach . Experiential effects [ 32 ] showed that decision acceptance and willingness to work together in the future were significantly higher in the second session than in the first for all conditions . Perceived depth of evaluation improved significantly as a result of experience only for the conflict approaches , there were no differences for the CC approach [ 32 ] . Tung and Heminger [ 40 ] in a decision room GSS study found no difference in group perceptions after one experimental session . The following hypotheses are offered on group perceptions : Decision Accevtance H5 . 1 : CC groups will have higher levels of decision acceptance than DI groups . H5 . 2 : Decision acceptance will improve over the two experimental sessions for both conditions . Perceived Depth of Evaluation H6 . 1 : DI groups will have higher levels of perceived depth of evaluation than CC groups . H6 . 2 : Perceived depth of evaluation will improve over the two experimental sessions for both conditions . Willingness to Work Together Again H7 . 1 : CC groups will have a greater willingness to work together again than DI groups . H7 . 2 : The willingness to work together again will improve over the two experimental tasks for both conditions . METHOD Experimental Design The research design is a 2 X 2 factorial with repeated measures . The factors are decision approach and experience ( Table 1 ) . Groups in each decision approach were given two weeks ( 10 business days ) to complete each of two tasks . Proceedings of the 28th Annual Hawaii International Conference on System Sciences - 1995 Treatments I 1 Task 1 Task 2 Totals DI 15 15 30 Groups Groups Groups Totals Subjects The 160 subjects used in the study were from undergraduate and graduate students in computer science and management information systems at New Jersey Institute of Technology ( NJIT ) . They all had some fluency with the use of E - mail and computers and were given course credit and a grade for participation . All subjects were assigned to groups based upon availability and scheduling constraints . The ideal a priori group size was six subjects per group , but due to the subjects’ scheduling constraints the actual group sizes ranged from four to seven [ 12 ] . Experimental conditions and task orders were randomly assigned to the groups and balanced across conditions . Tasks The three tasks used in this study were developed by Chidambaram [ 2 ] and were tested for internal validity , reliability , flexibility , and appropriateness in two pilot studies and one dissertation . They were modified and updated in order to reflect an asynchronous communications mode instead of a set of discrete FtF meetings . The Threat of Takeover task was used as a training task for all groups and the Issue of Image and Product Line Expansion were the experimental tasks . The tasks were unstructured decision making tasks , with no right or wrong answers , Type 4 based on McGrath’s [ 21 ] task circumplex and fit Schweiger et al’s [ 31 ] requirements for strategic decision making . Facilities Training was conducted in the Collaboration Laboratory ( CO - Lab ) at NJIT , a special computerized meeting room similar to that used in decision - room research [ 8 ] . The subjects in each group were seated at a cluster of computer terminals ( one for each subject ) . The CO - Lab was also equipped with an over - head projector , two white boards and flip charts . The training session lasted approximately two hours . One hour was devoted to CMC training and the other hour integrated the CMC with the decision approach . Following the training , subjects were encouraged to use their own PC’s to connect to the system from home or work , but could use CO - Lab or other NJIT facilities during their normal hours of operation . Software The software was a modified version of the Electronic Information Exchange System ( EIES 2 ) a computerized conferencing system that permits the user to be a member of electronic conferences and to utilize decision tools in the form of electronic activities such as Question , List , and Vote [ l 13 . EIES 2 can be considered to be a Level 2 GSS since it incorporates both communication and decision making features [ 9 , 411 . Decision Approach Procedures The Dialectical Inquiry Approach ( DI ) : The DI approach is based upon the procedures developed by Schweiger et a1 [ 31 , 321 and Tung and Heminger [ 40 ] , modified to support asynchronous communication and decision making [ 12 ] . Briefly , the DI groups were divided into two subgroups denoted as the Plan and Counter - plan subgroups . These groups were in separate conferences on EIES 2 . All members of both groups were to initially develop an individual recommendation ( including supporting facts and assumptions ) within two business days and enter it in a List Activity in the CMC system . The Plan group then had two days to develop a single recommendation . Members read the individual case recommendations and then debated and discussed them in a Question Activity which requires each participant to reply before viewing other’s replies . When complete , the case leader organized and entered the subgroup’s recommendation . This was then submitted to the Counter - plan sub - group which had two days to negate the assumptions and develop a counter - plan . The moderator then created a new conference for the full group and added the plan and counter - plan . The Full group’s objective was to critically evaluate the plan and counter - plan through an electronic debate and discussion , and to develop a single final group recommendation . A Voting Activity was available if the group chose to use it . The time limit for this task was four business days . Constructive Consensus Approach ( CC ) : The CC approach follows the basic method developed by several researchers [ 15 , 16 , 27 , 311 . The CC groups functioned as one group and were in a single conference for the entire task . Their objective was to reach consensus on a single final recommendation . Each individual group 225 Proceedings of the 28th Annual Hawaii Intemational Conference on System Sciences - 1995 Dependent Measures Effectiveness Number of Assumptions Validity of Assumptions Importance of Assumptions Number of Facts Validity of Facts Importance of Facts member had two days to develop an individual recommendation . The group then had eight business days to examine the case situations systematically and logically , in order to develop a final recommendation through debate and discussion . A Voting Activity was available if the group chose to use it . Alpha 0 . 8740 0 . 9355 0 . 7625 0 . 68 19 0 . 9477 0 . 7275 0 . 747 1 Training Procedures The subjects , upon entering the CO - Lab , were assigned randomly to a seat . The subjects were previously informed of the study objective and that they were required to complete a consent form and a background questionnaire . At specific intervals , during the training session , the subjects were asked to complete a task , a system , and a post - case questionnaire . After each experimental task , the subjects completed a post - case questionnaire ; a post - experiment questionnaire was required after the second task . The subjects were first trained in the use of EIES 2 and the decision tools , called List , Question , and Vote . Then they were trained in their respective decision approaches ( D1 or CC ) . A leader , who either volunteered or was selected by the trainer for each task , was responsible for organizing the group’s discussions and for entering the recommendation , at a minimum . The groups then completed a practice task using the system synchronously in the CO - Lab . The groups then were given 10 business days to complete each case , one case at a time . All work was to be performed in the conferences . Group members who were delinquent in meeting the target dates for particular activities were called and / or messaged . Time extensions were given to groups that needed it . DEPENDENT MEASURES Group Performance The performance measures were categorized as either being measures of efficiency ( meeting time and number of comments ) or effectiveness ( decision effectiveness and depth of evaluation , a composite measure of the number , validity and the importance of assumptions and facts ) . Decision effectiveness is an important variable or set of variables that is often difficult to measure . Hirokawa and Poole [ 18 ] and Chidambaram [ 2 ] suggest that expert judges should be utilized to rate tasks that do not have a single correct solution . As discussed by Chidambaram [ 2 ] , the tasks used in this study do not have a single correct solution and a panel of five expert judges was used to rate decision quality . The judges were given a two hour training session with practice recommendations . The final recommendations ( which included the assumption and fact sets ) from each group were reformatted , coded to conceal the group or condition , and given to each judge [ 121 . The inter - rater reliabilities for effectiveness and depth of evaluation are presented in Table 2 . The inter - rater reliabilities were reasonable for the type of decisions that were rated [ 2 , 321 . Group Perception Seven questionnaire items developed by Schweiger et al [ 31 ] were used to measure the group participants’ perceptions . Group members evaluated the degree to which each statement described their feelings on a seven point scale ( 1 , strongly agree ; 4 , neutral ; 7 , strongly disagree ) on three instances ( after the training task , after task one , and after task two ) from the subjects participating in the study . RESULTS Table 3 shows the means and standard deviations for the group performance and perception measures for each condition over the two tasks . Group Performance Asvnchronous Meeting Time : The DI groups required significantly more total asynchronous meeting time than CC groups , overall and during tasks one and two ( F = 43 . 41 , df = 1 , 57 , p = O . OOOl ) . There were no significant effects for experience ( F = 1 . 21 , df = 1 , 57 , p = 0 . 2755 ) or the interaction ( F = 0 . 04 , df = 1 , 57 , p = 0 . 8405 ) . Number of Comments : The DI groups were found to generate a significantly greater number of comments than were the CC groups , overall and during both tasks ( F = 70 . 74 , df = 1 , 57 , p = 0 . 0001 ) . Again , there were no significant effects for experience ( F = 1 . 10 , df = 1 . 57 , p 226 Proceedings of ihe 28th Annual Hawaii International Conference on System Sciences - 1995 Variables Table 3 Means and Standard Deviations for the Decision Approaches Task 1 Task 2 Task 1 Task 2 Means Std . Means Std . Means Std . Means Std . I I Dialectical Inquiry @ I ) I Constructive Consensus ( CC ) 12 . 53 62 . 67 72 . 13 278 . 19 2 . 72 7 . 37 2 . 22 8 . 25 3 . 11 20 . 54 34 . 44 11 . 32 34 . 3 1 11 . 70 12 . 83 70 . 25 19 . 40 72 . 3 1 12 . 83 49 . 48 233 . 08 111 . 74 271 . 16 86 . 63 Group Performance Decision ACCCptiUlW Perceived Depth of Evaluation Willingness to Work Together Again Asynchronous I 11 . 93 I 2 . 31 Meeting time 2 . 52 1 . 21 2 . 46 1 . 21 2 . 17 1 . 13 2 . 36 1 . 02 3 . 05 1 . 26 3 . 15 1 . 38 3 . 29 1 . 38 3 . 41 1 . 32 2 . 80 1 . 44 2 . 51 1 . 28 2 . 32 1 . 16 2 . 39 1 . 17 Number of comments Decision Effdveness Depth of Evaluation 70 . 80 15 . 32 68 . 96 267 . 39 44 . 47 I Grouu Perceptions ( The lower the score the greater the degree of agreement ) = 0 . 2982 ) . A Duncan’s Multiple Range Test indicated that there was a significant decrease ( alpha = 0 . 05 ) in the number of comments between the tasks for the DI groups . Decision Effectiveness and Deuth of Evaluation : As illustrated in Table 3 , no significant effects for condition ( F = 0 . 05 , df = 1 , 57 , p = 0 . 8267 ) , experience ( F = 0 . 59 , df = 1 , 57 , p = 0 . 4474 ) or the interaction ( F = 0 . 02 , df = 1 , 57 , p = 0 . 8829 ) were found for decision effectiveness . In addition , no significant effects due to condition ( F = 1 . 07 , df = 1 , 57 p = 0 . 3060 ) , experience ( F = 0 . 28 , df = 1 , 57 , p = 0 . 2421 ) or the interaction ( F = 0 . 52 , df = 1 , 57 , p = 0 . 4742 ) were found for depth of evaluation . Group Perception For decision acceptance there were no significant effects for condition ( F = 2 . 29 , df = 1 , 62 , p = 0 . 1312 ) or experience ( F = 0 . 20 , df = 1 , 62 , p = 0 . 6574 ) . However , DI groups had significantly greater perceived depth of evaluation than CC groups ( F = 3 . 98 , df = 1 , 62 , p = 0 . 0471 ) . There were no significant effects for experience ( F = 1 . 03 , df = 1 , 62 , p = 0 . 3100 ) . The results for willingness to work together again revealed a significant effect for condition ( F = 5 . 1 1 , df = 1 , 62 , p = 0 . 0247 ) , but not for experience ( F = 0 . 70 , df = 1 , 62 , p = 0 . 4028 ) . Least - Squares Means Test revealed that CC groups had a significantly greater willingness to work together again than did the DI groups after task one and in total . SUMMARY The group performance and perception results and hypotheses are highlighted in Table 4 . There are six basic assessments that can be derived from these results : 1 . There were few significant differences among the experimental conditions . 2 . DI groups expend a greater effort than CC groups as indicated by asynchronous meeting time and number of comments . 3 . DI groups tend to have a greater depth of evaluation ( not significant ) . This was also perceived by the DI groups , in that there was a significant difference between these conditions . 4 . There were relatively few learning experience effects . 5 . CC groups have a greater willingness to work together again than the DI groups , especially after the fu - st task . 227 Proceedings of the 28th Annual Hawaii International Conference on System Sciences - I995 Condition Experience Session 1 Session 2 I Improvement Between Sessions Table 4 No Difference DI > CC Not Supported DI > CC Group Performance HI . 0 Asynchronous Meeting Time No Difference Not Supported No Difference Not Supported H2 . 0 Number Comments DI > CC DI > CC No No Difference Difference No No Difference Difference H3 . 0 Decision Effectiveness CC > DI No Difference CC > DI No Difference Supported Not Supported D1 > CC No Difference No No Difference Supported Not Supported Difference H4 . 0 Depth of Evaluation No Difference No Difference Group Perception CC > DI Supported H5 . O Decision Acceptance No Difference CC > DI No Difference No Difference Not Supported H6 . 0 Perceived Depth of Evaluation H7 . 0 Willingness to Work Together Again DI > CC Supported DI > CC Supported No Difference Not Supported No Difference Not Supported No Difference Not Sumorted No Difference Not Supported 111 Decrease Supported No Difference Not Supported ~ ~ ~ ~ _ _ _ _ _ No Difference Not Supported I I I I 6 . The CC groups tend to have stronger levels of decision acceptance than DI groups . Schweiger et al [ 32 ] reported that in FtF sessions , DI groups required more meeting time than CC groups , but only in the first session . They suggested that the DI groups gained procedural efficiency with experience . However , the results of this study suggest that in a CMC environment , where the medium is less " rich " [ 7 ] than in a FtF environment , there are no efficiency gains for the DI groups , at least when extensive training takes place first . The 111 groups required significantly more asynchronous meeting time than CC groups over both tasks . DI groups generated almost twice as many comments in total and across both tasks than did the CC groups . The DI groups did make significantly fewer comments during task two than they did in task one , suggesting that the groups did have modest procedural efficiency gains with experience . The most compelling finding of this study is the absence of any significant differences between DI and CC with respect to decision effectiveness , in a distributed ( asynchronous ) environment . This is in contrast to the Schweiger et al [ 3 1 , 321 studies of FtF groups , where the DI and the DA groups had significantly higher recommendation quality than did CC groups . In this study , the CC groups had higher values in each task and overall . Furthermore , there were no significant improvements over the two tasks for either condition . However , the mean absolute levels are high for both conditions hovering between 70 % and 75 % . The scales were based on 0 % to loo % , from very little effectiveness to very high at 100 % . In comparison , Chidambaram [ 2 ] reported that GSS groups were at 58 . 3 % and 61 . 0 % for sessions one and two , respectively , in a four session study . The Manual groups ' performances were 62 . 1 % and 61 . O % for the two sessions , respectively . The overall performances were 62 % for the GSS groups and 62 . 5 % for the manual groups [ 2 ] . These levels are considerably lower than the results of this study . It was only during the fourth session in Chidambaram ' s study , that any significant differences between the two conditions started to emerge . The GSS groups were steadily increasing to a high of 65 . 1 % in the fourth session . Manual groups were at their highest in the third session and decreased to 59 . 4 % in the 228 Proceedings of the 28th Annual Hawaii Internatwnal Conference on System Sciences - 1995 fourth session , still less than what is reported in this study . However , since the expert judges were different people , the difference between these studies is not conclusive . Tung and Heminger [ 40 ] report that there were no significant differences between DI and CC groups in a decision room GSS study . They suggest that there was a complex set of interactions that are part of a group ' s process , and even with a GSS providing a structure , there are a myriad of possible factors that can effect the group ' s process and outcome . in this study was a composite measure of the number of facts and assumptions , and their validity , and importance . For depth of evaluation there were no significant differences resulting from the condition , experience over both tasks or as a result of the interaction . However , the DI groups did have higher totals in both tasks and overall . Other studies have reported that conflict techniques produce higher depth of analysis as measured by assumptions and facts ( and validity and importance of each ) or number of alternatives [ 31 , 32 , 35 , 40 , 431 . As in the Schweiger et al studies [ 31 , 321 , the DI groups in this study did have higher levels of perceived depth of evaluation than the CC groups . But having those higher perceived levels of depth of evaluation does not lead to higher decision quality , as it did in the Schweiger et a1 [ 31 , 321 studies of FtF groups . Tung and Heminger [ 40 ] reported that DI groups made assumptions with significantly higher validity than CC groups , but there were no significant differences in the perceived depth of evaluation . Another observation is that there were relatively few significant learning effects in this study in contrast to findings reported by Schweiger et al [ 32 ] and Chidambaram [ 2 ] . From a closer inspection of Table 3 , it is obvious that for what little learning took place , CC groups generally had more improvements than DI groups . The conclusions fiom many GSS studies [ 29 ] suggests that the technology has positive effects on decision and process satisfaction . Schweiger et a1 [ 31 , 321 report that CC groups have significantly greater willingness to work together again and greater decision acceptance than do DI or DA groups . Also , the willingness and decision acceptance improves between the sessions . The results of this study support Schweiger et al ' s [ 31 , 321 findings . The CC process , even in a CMC environment , is more conducive to willingness to work together again and decision acceptance . One of the objectives of GSS is to improve and support the information exchange of groups [ 9 ] . This is accomplished by promoting a positive interpersonal exchange of information . The greater the degree of change in communication ( by providing opportunities to speed up , change the content , or change the direction of the messages ) introduced by the technology , the more dramatic the impact on the decision process and outcomes [ 9 ] . In the FtF conflict research [ 3 1 , 321 , the consensus groups had significantly lower performance than DI and DA groups , but had higher decision acceptance and willingness to work together again . Based on Tung and Heminger ' s results and the findings reported here , it is suggested that the presence of decision support technology ( GSS or CMC ) equalized the consensus group ' s performance to that achieved by the conflict approaches . It is suggested that the technology helped accomplish this by promoting a positive interpersonal exchange of information . In a typical FtF setting for consensus groups , perhaps all of the ideas do not get an equal " airing " ( a process loss ) thus , an incomplete interpretation is made , and perhaps all members do not participate equally [ lo ] . In contrast , the structured conflict groups , DI in particular , work with smaller sets of information which the groups may feel they must defend because of the process . A richer medium ( a FtF setting ) may be required so that the members can get a " feeling " for an individual ' s position . We know fiom the literature [ 3 I , 321 that the conflict groups take longer and are less satisfied with the decision and the process . This is further supported by this study , DI groups took about five days longer to develop the final recommendation and were less satisfied with the decision and process . Conflict , in this study , did not produce more effective decisions . DI and CC groups produced equally effective decisions . DI groups had lower decision acceptance levels and were less willing to work together again . The results of this study suggest that CMC improves the performance of CC groups while maintaining the positive aspects of group development and harmony . DESIGN LIMITATIONS One of the main limitations of this study is the design of the DI CMC structure . The structure was designed for two separate sub - groups ( each a separate conference ) to work independently of each other . Each sub - group contained about one half of the total membership . The CC groups , on the other hand , were set - up as one conference with full membership . Each group member could see when a member was active . The DI sub - groups could only see what was going on in their sub - group and could not communicate with the other sub - group during the Plan and Counter - plan phases . From observations and discussions with the DI group 229 Proceedings of the 28th Annual Hawaii International Conference on System Sciences - I995 members , a better design would have been to have a single conference setup with two private sub - conferences , one for each of the sub - groups . DI members would then be able to communicate directly with the other sub - group and at the same time keep their phase of the dialectical process confidential . In this manner , then , the sub - group members would not " feel " as isolated as some reported . Another design limitation results fi - om the need for a moderator / facilitator . Since the subjects were students , with no significant stakes in the outcomes of their deliberations , they had to be monitored on a daily basis . The moderator used a supportive evaluative tone similar to that used by Connolly et a1 [ 6 ] . As Clawson , Bostrom , and Anson [ 5 ] suggest , the role of a moderator is to help make the outcome easier to achieve . Clawson et a1 [ 5 ] also suggest that a specific role of a moderator may be to encourage and assure participation . In this study , the role of the moderator was crucial ; if the moderator was not on the system daily , the groups would not perform . The moderator clearly was encouraging participation and was using a supportive tone [ 6 ] in all communications . Bostrom et a1 [ l ] ask " Is a facilitator necessary in GSS environments ? " In this study it was crucial to have a moderator ; without the facilitator many groups would have stopped responding . However , the moderator in most instances communicated a standard phrase . This standard phrase could be electronically initiated , as suggested by Connolly et a1 [ 6 ] . Future studies can address critical and supportive " electronic " facilitation . CONCLUSION This study of asynchronous strategic decision making and a study using decision room GSS by Tung and Heminger [ 40 ] report that there are no differences between constructive consensus and dialectical inquiry groups in a GSS environment . Perhaps what is happening is that the GSS technology is significantly improving the consensus groups to the point where the outcomes are as high as the structured conflict processes in a FtF environment . Thus , GSS equalizes consensus groups ' performance to that of the dialectical inquiry groups without affecting decision and process satisfaction and without any of the process losses . Two studies have now reported that there are no significant difference in outcomes between conflict and consensus groups in a GSS environment , this study and Tung and Heminger [ 40 ] . Additional investigations need to be conducted to ascertain the parameters of these findings . From Chidambaram and associates [ 2 , 3 ] work , group cohesiveness and decision quality improvements in a decision room based GSS take time to develop . Further studies need to investigate the longitudinal relationships among group , tasks , technology , and structure . ACKNOWLEDGEMENT This work has been partially supported by the National Science Foundation ( Grant No . 9015236 ) and an SBR grant fi - om NJIT . Special thanks to Shaji Abraham , Javier Florez , Robert Fricano , Jigna Patel , Ashish Shah and Alex Shinker for their research assistance . REFERENCES 1 . Bostrom , R . P . , Anson , R . , and Clawson , K . , Group Facilitation and Group Support Systems , In Jessup , L . , and Valacich , J . ( Eds . ) , Group SupportSystems : New Perspectives , 1993 , Macmillan , New York . 2 . Chidambaram , L . , An Empirical Investigation of the Impact of Computer Support on Group Development and Decision - Making Performance , Unpublished Doctoral Dissertation , Indiana University , 1989 . Longitudinal Study of the Impact of Group Decision Support Systems on Group Development , Journal of Management Information Systems , 7 ( 3 ) , 1990 , 7 - 25 . 4 . Churchman , C . W . , The Design of Inquiring Systems : Basic Concepts of Systems and Organizations , 1971 , Basic Books , 3 . Chidambaram , L . , Bostrom , R . P . , and Wynne , B . E . , A 5 . 6 . 7 . 8 . 9 . Inc . , New York . Clawson , V . K . , Bostrom , R . P . , and Anson , R . , The Role of the Facilitator in Computer - Supported Meetings , Small Group Research , 24 ( 4 ) , 1993 , 547 - 565 . Connolly , T . , Jessup , L . , and Valacich , J . S . , Effects of Anonymity and Evaluative Tone on Idea Generation in Computer - Mediated Groups , Management Science , 36 ( 6 ) , Dat ? , R . L . and Lengel , R . H . , Organizational Information Requirements , Media Richness and Structural Design , Management Science , 32 ( 5 ) , 1986 , 554 - 571 . Dennis , A . R . , George , J . F . Jessup , L . M . , Nunamaker , J . F . , & Vogel , D . R . , Information Technology to Support Electronic Meetings , MIS Quarterly , December , 1988 , 591 - 618 . DeSanctis , G . and Gallupe , R . B . A Foundation for the Study of Group Decision Support Systems , Management Science , 1990 , 689 - 703 . 33 ( 5 ) , 1987 , 589 - 609 . 10 . Dubrovsky , V . J . , Kiesler , S . , and Sethna , B . N . , The Equalization Phenomenon : Status Effects in Computer - Mediated and Face - to - Face Decision Making Groups , Human Computer Interaction , 6 , 1991 , 119 - 146 . 11 . Dufner , D . , Hiltz , S . R . , and Turoff , M . , Distributed Group Support : A Preliminary Analysis of the Effects of the Use of Voting Tools and Sequential Procedures , Proceedings of the Twenty - Seventh Hawaii International Conference on Systems Sciences , IV , 1994 , 1 14 - 1 23 . 12 . Fjermestad , J . , Group Strategic becision Making in a Computer - Mediated - Communications Environment : A Comparison of Dialectical Inquiry and Constructive Consensus Approaches , Unpublished Doctoral Dissertation , 230 Proceedings of the 28th Annual Hawaii International Conference on System Sciences - 1995 Rutgers University , 1994 . 13 . Galegher , J . and Kraut , R . E . , Computer - Mediated Communication for Intellectual Teamwork : An Experiment in Group Writing , Informution Systems Research , 5 ( 2 ) , 1994 , 14 . Gallupe , R . B . , DeSanctis , G . , and Dickson , G . W . , Computer - Based Support for Group Problem - Finding : An Experimental Investigation , MIS Quarterly , June , 1988 , 15 . Hall , J . , Decision , Decisions , Decisions , PsychologV Today , 16 . Hiltz , S . R . , Johnson , K . , and Turoff , M . , The Effects of Formal Human Leadership and Computer - Generated Decision Aids on Problem Solving via Computer : A Controlled Experiment , Research Report Number 18 , Computerized Conferencing and Communication Center , New Jersey Institute of Technology , 1982 . 17 . Hiltz , S . R . , Johnson , K . , and Turoff , M . , Group Decision Support : The Effects of Human Leaders and Statistical Feedback in Computerized Conferences , Journal of Management Information Systems , 8 ( 2 ) , 1991 , 81 - 108 . 18 . Hirokawa , R . , and Poole , M . S . , ( eds . ) , Communication and Group Decision Making , 1986 , Sage Publications , Beverly Hills , Ca . 19 . Jessup , L . M . , Connolly , T . , and Galegher , J . , The Effects of Anonymity on GDSS Group Process With an Idea - Generating Task , MIS Quarterlv , September , 1990 , 3 13 - 321 . 20 . Jessup , L . M . , and Tansik , D . A . , Decision Making in an Automated Environment : The Effects of Anonymity and Proximity with a Group Decision Support System , Decision Sciences , 1991 , 22 , 266 - 279 . 21 . McGrath , J . E . , Groups : Interaction and Performance , 1984 , Prentice - Hall , Englewood Cliffs , NJ . 22 . Mason , R . O . , A Dialectical Approach to Strategic Planning , Management Science , I5 ( 8 ) , 1969 , B403 - B414 . 23 . Mason , R . O . , and Mitroff , I . I . , Challenging Strategic Planning Assumptions , 198 1 , John Wiley , New York . 24 . Mitroff , I . I . , Emshoff , J . R . , and Kilmann , R . H . , Assumptional Analysis : A Methodology for Strategic Problem Solving , Management Science , 25 ( 6 ) , 1979 , 583 - 593 . 25 . Mitroff , 1 . 1 . and Mason , R . O . , Creating A Dialectical Social Science : Concepts , Methods , and Models . 1981 , D . Reidel Publishing Co . , Boston , Ma . 26 . Mitroff , I . I . , Williams , J . , & Rathswohl , E . , Dialectical Inquiring Systems : A New Methodology for Information Science , Journal of the American Society for Informution Science , November - December , 1972 , 365 - 378 . 27 . Nemiroff , P . M . , Pasmore , W . A . , and Ford , D . L . , The Effects of Two Normative Structural Interventions on Established and Ad Hoc Groups : Implications for Improving Decision Making Effectiveness , Decision Sciences , I , 1976 , 841 - 855 . 28 . Nelson , J . A . and Mitroff , I . I . , An Experiment in Dialectical Information Systems , Journal of the American Society for Information Science . July - August , 1974 , 252 - 262 . 29 . Nunamaker , J . F . , Dennis , A . R . , Valacich , J . S . , Vogel , D . R . , and George , J . F . , Electronic Meeting Systems to Support Groupwork , Communications of the , 4CM , 34 ( 7 ) , 1991 , 41 - 110 - 138 . 277 - 296 . 5 , 1971 , 51 - 54 , 86 , 88 . 61 . 30 . Pinsonneault , A . and Kraemer , K . L . , The Impact of Technological Support on Groups : An Assessment of the Empirical Research , Decision Support Systems , 5 , 1989 , 31 . Schweiger , D . M . , Sandberg , W . R . , & Ragan , J . W . , Group Approaches for Improving Strategic Decision Making : A Comparative Analysis of Dialectical Inquiry , Devil’s Advocacy , and Consensus , Academy of Management Journal , 32 . Schweiger , D . M . , Sandberg , W . R . , and Rechner , P . L . , Experiential Effects of Dialectical Inquiry , Devil’s Advocacy , and Consensus Approaches to Strategic Decision Making , Academy of Management Journal , 32 ( 4 ) , 1989 , 745 - 772 . A Meta - Analysis on the Comparative Effectiveness of Devil’s Advocacy and Dialectical Inquiry , Strategic Management Journal , 10 , 1989 , 303 - 306 . 34 . Schwenk , C . R . , Effects of Devil’s Advocacy and Dialectical Inquiry on Decision Making : A Meta Analysis , Organizational Behavior and Human Decision Processes , 47 , 35 . Schwenk C . and Valacich , J . S . , Effects of Devil’s Advocacy and Dialectical Inquiry on Individual Versus Groups , Organizational Behavior and Human Decision Processes , in press . 36 . Siegel , J . , Dubrovsky , V . , Kiesler , S . , and McGuire , T . W . , Group Processes in Computer - Mediated Communication , Organizational Behavior and Human Decision Processes , 37 , 37 . Smith , J . Y . , and Vanecek , M . T . , Dispersed Group Decision Making Using Nonsimultaneous Computer Conferencing : A Report of Research , Journal of Management Information Systems , 7 ( 2 ) , 1990 , 7 1 - 92 . 38 . Steeb , R . , and Johnston , S . C . , A Computer - Based Interactive System for Group Decision Making , IEEE Trans . Systems Man Cybernet , 1 I @ ) , 1981 , 544 - 552 . 39 . Tjosvold , D . , Effects of Approach on Superiors’ Incorporation of Subordinates’ Information in Decision Making , Journal ofApplied Psychology , 1982 , 67 , 189 - 193 . 40 . Tung , L . L . and Heminger , A . R . , The Effects of Dialectical Inquiry , Devil’s Advocacy , and Consensus Inquiry Methods in a GSS Environment , Information & Management , 25 , 41 . TuroK , M . , Computer - Mediated Requirements for Group Support , Journal of Organizational Computing , 1 , 1991 , 85 - 113 . 42 . Turoff , M . and Hiltz , S . R . , Computer Support for Groups Versus Individual Decisions , IEEE Transactions on Communication , 30 ( 1 ) , 1982 , 82 - 90 . 43 . Valacich , J . S . , & Schwenk , C . , Devil’s Advocacy and Dialectical Inquiry Effects on Group Decision Making Using Computer - Mediated Versus Verbal Communication , Graduate School of Business , Indiana Ilniversity , 1993 . 197 - 2 16 . 29 ( 1 ) , 1986 , 51 - 71 . 33 . Schwenk , C . , Research Notes and Communications : 1990 , 161 - 176 . 1986 , 157 - 187 . 1993 , 33 - 41 . 23 1