Collaborative ScratchJr Project Guide What is a collaborative ScratchJr project ? When starting out , children often use one tablet to convey a story on ScratchJr . With a multi - tablet collaborative project , the images and movements can span across multiple screens to tell a story . The images on each tablet can be set to play at the same time or even staggered to make images appear to move between tablets . Each project typically has one overall theme ( e . g . cultural holiday or dance ) or a story ( e . g . cars racing to a finish line ) . Example : Lunar New Year is a festival celebrated in many Asian countries to commemorate the arrival of spring . Using nine synchronized tablets , the ScratchJr project displays various aspects of the festival : the blooming of peach and pear flowers , the traditional Dragon Dance , and the lighting of red lanterns and firecrackers . Watch the full project : https : / / youtu . be / YkoWjRtL4tQ Learning Outcomes for Children : • Engage more deeply in the engineering design process ( ask , imagine , plan , create , test & improve , share ) • Create more complex and dynamic stories • Develop greater communication and collaborative skills • Expand coding potential with ScratchJr The positive technological development ( PTD ) framework developed by Dr . Marina Umaschi Bers outlines six behaviors in children that are supported by using educational technologies : communication , collaboration , community building , content creation , creativity , and choices of conduct . Children can work collaboratively on a multi - tablet ScratchJr project and develop the skills needed to engage in these behaviors . Learn more about PTD in these books by Dr . Bers : Coding as a Playground : Programming and Computational Thinking in the Early Childhood Classroom ( 2018 ) and Designing Digital Experiences for Positive Youth Development : From Playpen to Playground ( 2012 ) . Creating a Multi - Tablet ScratchJr Project : Use the guidelines below to create your own multi - tablet project ! Some ScratchJr tips have also been provided at the end of the guide . 1 . Choose a topic for your project ! Research the topic & brainstorm elements that you could incorporate into your project . a . What images and / or scenarios come to mind when you think about this topic ? b . What activities are happening in the scenario , and where do they happen ? c . Who or what is involved in the activities ? d . What are some cultural elements you might want to consider ? e . Are there particular sounds or music that are relevant to the topic ? Collaborative ScratchJr Project Guide 2 . Pick 4 - 5 ideas from your list that you think would best represent your topic in a creative , playful way . You can of course incorporate more ideas , but it’s best to focus on 4 - 5 things that you can focus on coding uniquely . 3 . Plan out your design by drawing a sketch / map , making a bulleted list , etc . a . How many tablets will your project have ? How will the use of multiple tablets enhance the overall effect of your project ? b . How will you arrange the tablets ? Would all of the tablets start simultaneously on the green flag ? Would any of the tablets be synchronized ( i . e . have the exact same code ) ? c . What characters will you have in your program ? Will you create any new characters that do not currently exist on ScratchJr ? d . How might you code different characters to “move” across multiple tablets ? e . What ScratchJr blocks might you use for the code ? f . What backgrounds might you use ? How many pages will the program have ? g . Are you working individually or with a small group ? How might you divide tasks among your group ? 4 . Create all of your characters on ONE tablet to begin with . a . This is so that if you modify an existing character or create a whole new character , you won’t have to recreate it on each tablet , saving you lots of time and effort ! b . If you know that a particular code will be used for multiple tablets , create the code for that character so that it can be shared with the other tablets . 5 . Share the project with the other tablets using either AirDrop or email . a . It may be helpful to number the tablets in your design plan ( i . e . Tablet # 1 , Tablet # 2 , etc . ) . Once you share the project with the other tablets , you can name each project with that same number to keep it consistent . 6 . Program the rest of your project on the other tablets . 7 . After you finish each page , test it out by running the programs in presentation mode . You may need to go back and adjust the codes , particularly your stop and wait blocks . 8 . Many trial runs later… run your whole program together and make any final adjustments . 9 . Congratulations ! You have successfully created a multi - tablet ScratchJr project . Additional Tips : • Characters do not necessarily have to be animate objects – anything can come to life in ScratchJr ! Create new characters from scratch , or modify an existing character using the paint editor . The shape tools on the left side of the paint editor are particularly useful for adding new features to your characters . The Duplicate stamp tool on the right side allows you to copy a character or shape , so you can program a set of similar characters with a single set of code ( e . g . programming a group of people to cheer on the sidelines ) . • To copy one character’s code to another character , simply drag the code to the character’s box on the left side of the screen . Similarly , to copy a character on one page to another page , drag the character to the page thumbnail on the right side of the screen . Acknowledgements The multi - tablet ScratchJr project was inspired by Andrea Chavarria from Costa Rica and the ScratchJr projects created by the students in her classroom . This guide was developed by Madhu Govind and Anna Kasagawa from the DevTech Research Group at Tufts University headed by Dr . Marina Umaschi Bers .