RESEARCH ARTICLE Trafficking of MHC molecules to the cell surface creates dynamic protein patches Daniel Blumenthal 1 , * , Michael Edidin 2 and Levi A . Gheber 1 , ‡ ABSTRACT Major histocompatibility complex class I ( MHC - I ) molecules signal infection or transformation by engaging receptors on T lymphocytes . The spatial organization of MHC - I on the plasma membranes is important for this engagement . We and others have shown that MHC - I molecules , like other membrane proteins , are not uniformly distributed , but occur in patches in the plasma membrane . Here , we describe the temporal details of MHC - I patch formation and combine them with the spatial details , which we have described earlier , to yield a comprehensive quantitative description of patch formation . MHC - I is delivered to the plasma membrane in clathrin - coated vesicles , arriving at a rate of ∼ 2 . 5×10 − 3 μ m − 1 min − 1 ( or about two arrivals per minute over the whole cell ) . The vesicles dock and fuse at non - random , apparently targeted , locations on the membrane and the newly delivered MHC - I molecules form patches that are a few hundred nanometers in diameter . The patches are maintained at steady state by a dynamic equilibrium between the rate of delivery and the rate of hindered diffusion of MHC - I molecules out of the patches ( caused by components of the actin cytoskeleton ) . KEY WORDS : Major histocompatibility complex class I , MHC - I , Total internal reflection fluorescence microscopy , TIRFM , Fluorescence recovery after photobleaching , FRAP , Obstructed diffusion , Membrane trafficking INTRODUCTION Plasma membrane lipids and proteins are enriched within areas of the plasma membrane to form patches of different sizes ( Vereb et al . , 2003 ; Engelman , 2005 ) . There are likely different mechanisms for patch formation on a variety of scales . Nanometer - scale patches have been variously proposed to arise due to differences in interaction energies among membrane proteins ( Engelman , 2005 ) or to coupling of membrane lipids to the actin - based membrane cytoskeleton ( Gowrishankar et al . , 2012 ) . At scales of 100s of nm , patches might be stabilized by constraints on lateral diffusion of their component molecules . Some of these constraints arise from physical barriers created by the actin mesh of the membrane skeleton ( Sako and Kusumi , 1995 ) , or by anchoring of membrane proteins to that skeleton ( Feder et al . , 1996 ) . In a series of studies , we have explored the propensity of major histocompatibility complex class I ( MHC - I ) molecules to form patches . These type I transmembrane glycoproteins are expressed on virtually all mammalian cells and are a useful model for membrane proteins generally . Patches of MHC - I and MHC - II molecules are also specifically important in activating T - cell responses to antigen - presenting cells ( Fooksman et al . , 2006 ; Turley et al . , 2000 ) . We used super - resolution near - field scanning optical microscopy ( NSOM ) ( Hwang et al . , 1998 ) as well as a deconvolution approach on conventional images ( Tang and Edidin , 2001 ) to directly image immunostained MHC - I on the membrane , and found these patches to be 300 – 700 nm in diameter . We also estimated the number of molecules in a single patch to be 25 – 250 , in good agreement with previous results ( Hwang et al . , 1998 ; Tang and Edidin , 2001 ) . MHC - I molecules diffuse in the plane of the plasma membrane , as measured by fluorescence recovery after photobleaching ( FRAP ) and by single - particle tracking ( SPT ) ( Yechiel and Edidin , 1987 ; Edidin et al . , 1994 ; Kusumi and Sako , 1996 ) . Hence , the persistence of patches containing hundreds of molecules was unexpected . To explain these patches , we proposed a quantitative dynamic model in which patches arise upon delivery of a bolus of newly synthesized MHC - I molecules by fusion of an exocytic vesicle with the cell surface , and disperse by lateral diffusion , hindered by the actin mesh of the membrane ( Gheber and Edidin , 1999 ) . Our model does not require lateral interactions between MHC - I molecules in a patch . Rather , the arrival of vesicles containing newly synthesized MHC - I to the membrane creates a high concentration at the site of vesicle fusion ; this high concentration of MHC - I gradually decays by lateral diffusion of molecules hindered by dynamic barriers , while new vesicle arrivals maintain the distribution of MHC - I in patches at steady state . Computer simulations based on the model predicted that should barriers to diffusion be removed or vesicle trafficking hindered , membrane patches would decay towards a uniform distribution of MHC - I molecules on the cell membrane . Scaling the simulations to biological dimensions ( based on literature values for vesicle trafficking , frequency of actin barriers opening and lateral diffusion ) , the lifetime of a single patch of MHC - I was predicted to be ∼ 20 s . In order to validate our model , we directly measured patch lifetime by total internal reflection fluorescence microscopy ( TIRFM ) imaging of MHC - I – GFP , reporting a mean patch lifetime of ∼ 40 s in good agreement with the model prediction ( Lavi et al . , 2007 ) . In these measurements , formation and dispersion of patches was seen as a sharp increase in fluorescence intensity ( as a result of an exocytic vesicle fusion event ) followed by an exponential decay ( describing the dispersion of labeled molecules by diffusion across dynamic barriers ) . Observations of consecutive delivery events in the same position on the cell membrane pointed to the possibility that delivery might occur at specific , nonrandom sites on the membrane ; such a scenario favors patching over the random Received 4 February 2016 ; Accepted 21 July 2016 1 The Avramand Stella Goldstein - GorenDepartmentof Biotechnology Engineering , Ben Gurion University of the Negev , Beer - Sheva , 8410501 Israel . 2 Department of Biology , Johns Hopkins University , Baltimore , MD 21218 , USA . * Presentaddresses : Departmentof PathologyandLaboratory Medicine , Children ’ s Hospital of Philadelphia Research Institute , Philadelphia , PA , USA and Department ofPathologyandLaboratoryMedicine , UniversityofPennsylvaniaPerelmanSchool of Medicine , Philadelphia , PA , USA ‡ Author for correspondence ( glevi @ bgu . ac . il ) D . B . , 0000 - 0002 - 9207 - 5848 ; L . A . G . , 0000 - 0002 - 7909 - 100X 3342 © 2016 . Published by The Company of Biologists Ltd | Journal of Cell Science ( 2016 ) 129 , 3342 - 3350 doi : 10 . 1242 / jcs . 187112 J o u r n a l o f C e ll S c i e n c e location assumption of our model . We demonstrated the role of the actin cytoskeleton in maintaining MHC - I patches by treating the cells with actin - modulating toxins ( Lavi et al . , 2012 ) . Stabilization and destabilization of actin filaments resulted in increased and decreased MHC - I patch lifetimes , respectively . Supporting evidence for the importance of vesicle trafficking came from an experiment in which clathrin - mediated vesicle traffic was reduced by introducing a dominant - negative dynamin ( a GTPase important for clathrin - mediated endocytosis ) into cells ( Tang and Edidin , 2001 ) . The logic here was that cells in culture generally maintain a constant surface area at steady state , therefore internalization of membrane by endocytosis is compensated for by increased exocytosis ( Houy et al . , 2013 ; Patzak and Winkler , 1986 ; Smith and Neher , 1997 ) . This is also seen at neuronal synapses ( Haucke et al . , 2011 ) . Hence , inhibiting endocytosis was expected to decrease the rate of exocytosis of MHC - I molecules . Although the methods used previously only partially blocked vesicle traffic , they resulted in more diffuse patches , which could be attributable to MHC - I molecule diffusion away from a site of vesicle fusion in the absence of further delivery of more MHC - I to the cell surface . Although providing supporting evidence for the predicted importance of vesicle traffic in maintaining MHC - I patches at steady state , those measurements were performed on immunostained , fixed cells . In order to directly link the vesicle arrival rate and apparent size of patches , here , we use GFP - tagged MHC - I molecules and live imaging [ in total internal reflection fluorescence microscopy ( TIRFM ) , to exclude fluorescence from the cell cytoplasm ] , in order to count the number of delivery events in real time . After quantifying the arrival rate of vesicles trafficking MHC - I to the membrane in normal cells , we then reduce it by treating cells with increasing doses of the dynamin inhibitor Dynasore ( Macia et al . , 2006 ) . Using Dynasore or a dominant - negative dynamin mutant ( as in Tang and Edidin , 2001 ) has the same logic – slowing of the trafficking rate . However , using Dynasore in combination with live imaging and counting of delivery events allows us to unequivocally establish a dose - dependent control of the MHC - I delivery rate to the plasma membrane . Using this delivery - rate modulation approach , we further demonstrate that the reduction of delivery rate results in a proportional dispersion of patches . Direct measurements of both the arrival rate of vesicles trafficking MHC - I and patch size demonstrates for the first time the existence of an inverse correlation between these two parameters . It demonstrates the prediction of the simulation - assisted model , according to which barriers to lateral diffusion alone are not sufficient to maintain MHC - I patches at steady state . A continuous delivery of new MHC - I molecules to the plasma membrane , at a specific rate , is essential . The size of observed patches at steady state is thus determined by a combination of delivery rate and escape rate over barriers to lateral diffusion . We also present evidence that , as is found in neuronal cells ( Robinson et al . , 1995 ) , vesicles fuse with the surface membrane at specific hotspots . RESULTS Quantification of vesicle arrival at the plasma membrane To quantify the arrival rate of vesicles trafficking MHC - I to the plasma membrane , a series of time - lapse images ( a stack ) was acquired , with equal exposure time per frame and a total sampling time of 8 – 12 min . Exposure time varied between 2 to 3 s per frame depending on the brightness of the cells under investigation ; the time interval between consecutive frames was usually 1 s . To decrease the vesicle arrival rate , we used Dynasore , a potent inhibitor of dynamin - dependent endocytic pathways ( clathrin - coated vesicles ) ( Macia et al . , 2006 ) recently shown to also affect exocytosis ( Jaiswal et al . , 2009 ; Anantharam et al . , 2011 , 2012 ) . Dynasore concentrations of 15 µM , 22 µM and 30 µM were used . The lowest concentration has been reported as the median inhibitory Fig . 1 . Distributions of vesicle arrival rates for control and Dynasore - treated cells . Distributions are positively skewed ; lines represent fits to log - normal distributions , and serve as a guide to the eye . ( A ) Distribution of arrival rates of cells treated with 30 µM Dynasore ( Dyn ) ( n = 29 ) . ( B ) Distribution of arrival rates of cells treated with 22 µM Dynasore ( n = 15 ) . ( C ) Distribution of arrival rates of cells treated with 15 µM Dynasore ( n = 31 ) . ( D ) Distribution of arrival rates of control ( untreated ) cells ( n = 37 ) . ( E ) Means and modes of vesicle arrival rates for the four treatment groups . ( F ) Means of log transformed distributions ( shown in E ) are significantly different from each other . Error bars represent s . e . m . * P < 0 . 05 , * * * * P < 0 . 0001 ( one - way ANOVA , Holm - Sidak all - pairwise test ) . 3343 RESEARCH ARTICLE Journal of Cell Science ( 2016 ) 129 , 3342 - 3350 doi : 10 . 1242 / jcs . 187112 J o u r n a l o f C e ll S c i e n c e concentration ( IC 50 ) of 15 µM ( Macia et al . , 2006 ) ; the highest is less than the concentration , 40 µM , known to disrupt cell functions , for instance by destabilizing F - actin ( Yamada et al . , 2009 ) . We analyzed the four different treatment groups ( see Materials and Methods , arrival rate analysis ) and produced distributions of arrival rates for each group ( Fig . 1A – D ) . All four distributions were positively skewed ; the means and modes of the distributions are given in Fig . 1F . From these distributions the mean vesicle arrival rate was calculated as 2 . 67×10 − 3 arrivals / μ m 2 min with an average sampled cell area of ∼ 700 µm 2 , or ∼ 2 . 0 arrivals per cell every minute . The skewed distributions were log transformed to obtain approximately normal distributions ( Fig . S1A ) . The means of the transformed data for the four treatment groups were compared and found to be significantly different from each other ( one - way ANOVA , followed by Holm - Sidak multiple comparison test , P < 0 . 0001 , Fig . 1E ) . Assessment of patch size To measure patch size , we used an image ( 2D ) autocorrelation approach , as described in the Materials and Methods . The distribution of patch sizes for each of the four treatment groups is presented in Fig . 2A – D . The mean patch size in cells treated with 30 µM Dynasore is significantly larger than that of all other groups ( P < 0 . 0001 ) ; the mean patch size in cells treated with 15 µM Dynasore group is significantly larger than that of the untreated cells ( P < 0 . 05 ) ( one - way ANOVA followed by Holm - Sidak multiple comparison test , Fig . 2E ) . The difference between the observed mean patch sizes of cells treated with 15 µM Dynasore and cells treated with 22 µM Dynasore is not statistically significant , consistent with the fact that patch sizes approach the diffraction limit of our system , so that small changes cannot be resolved . However , the trend of increased patch size with increased Dynasore concentration is evident . Sites of MHC - I delivery In order to determine whether delivery of MHC - I to the surface occurs at random positions , or specific ‘ hotspots ’ , we photobleached a large area of a cell , ‘ erasing ’ the MHC - I present on the plasma membrane , and followed the appearance of patches of newly delivered GFP – MHC - I . About one - third of an imaged cell was photobleached , and fluorescence recovery was monitored for a total of 20 min , at 20 - s intervals ( Fig . 3A ) . In the recovered image ( representing the maximal recovery after bleaching ) , it is easy to observe that the MHC - I is still distributed in patches . To qualitatively assess whether the newly formed patches are located at the same positions as the old ( photobleached ) ones , we aligned the image of the cell after full recovery ( ‘ recovered ’ image ) to the image of the cell prior to photobleaching ( ‘ prebleach ’ image ) . Alignment was achieved by implementing a cross - correlation procedure yielding the relative displacement between the two images ( see Materials and Methods ) . Then , the ‘ prebleach ’ image was pseudo - colored red , and the ‘ recovered ’ image was pseudo - colored green ( Fig . 3B , C ) . The two images were then superimposed , creating a colocalization image ( Fig . 3D ) . The overlaid image shows red , green and yellow areas corresponding to non - recovered ( existed before but do not exist after photobleaching ) , newly formed ( did not exist before but do exist after photobleaching ) and recovered patches Fig . 2 . Distributions of patch sizes for control and Dynasore - treated cells . ( A – D ) Each cell image was cropped into multiple smaller images , to exclude background , then each crop was spatially ( 2D ) auto - correlated to extract the size of a typical patch in that crop ( see Materials and Methods for details ) . The distributions of these typical patch sizes in each crop are presented in A – D for the indicated Dyansore ( Dyn ) concentration . Cell and crop numbers as follows : A , control ( untreated ) cells , n = 37 cells , n = 202 crops ; B , 15 µM Dynasore , n = 31 cells , n = 508 crops ; C , 22 µM Dynasore , n = 15 cells , n = 257 crops ; D , 30 µM Dynasore , n = 29 cells , n = 500 crops . The peaks of the distributions are visibly shifted to the right ( mean patch size increases ) as Dynasore concentration increases . ( E ) Means of log transformed distributions are significantly different from each other . Error bars represent s . e . m . * P < 0 . 05 , * * * * P < 0 . 0001 ( one - way ANOVA , Holm - Sidak all - pairwise test ) . 3344 RESEARCH ARTICLE Journal of Cell Science ( 2016 ) 129 , 3342 - 3350 doi : 10 . 1242 / jcs . 187112 J o u r n a l o f C e ll S c i e n c e ( existed before and exist after photobleaching ) . To quantitatively describe the extent of recovery , the number of recovered patches in the recovered image that colocalize with a mask obtained from the prebleach image was counted . Having analyzed 21 different series in such a way , we obtained a distribution of the ‘ percentage recovery ’ of patch positions . Fitting a normal distribution to our data , we obtain a mean recovery fraction of 85 . 2±7 . 7 % ( mean±s . d . ) ( Fig . 3E ) . These results strongly indicate that the majority of MHC - I - containing vesicles are targeted to specific , non - random locations on the plasma membrane . Assessing the diffusion coefficient for GFP - tagged H - 2L d molecules by recovery simulations We used our recently developed FRAP analysis method , ‘ simFRAP ’ ( Blumenthal et al . , 2015 ) , to extract the diffusion coefficient of tagged MHC - I molecules on the cell membrane using the same 21 series acquired for the analysis described in the above section . The resulting mean±s . d . diffusion coefficient was 1 . 13±0 . 1×10 − 9 cm 2 / s , in good agreement with obstructed diffusion regime ( D Macro ) of MHC - I molecules in the plasma membrane ( Edidin , 1987 ) . The simFRAP algorithm receives a multiple - frame TIFF file , representing the experiment as input and simulates the ( pure ) diffusion of the fluorescent probes ( 2D random walk ) starting with the first post - bleach frame of the actual data as its implicit boundary and initial conditions . Comparing the real recovery data ( Fig . 4 , closed circles ) with simulated data ( Fig . 4 , blue dots ) it is clear that the first ∼ 9 min of recovery are very well described by pure lateral diffusion ( of unbleached molecules from the approximate two - thirds of the cell that was unbleached , into the approximate one - third of the cell that was bleached ) . The experimental data after ∼ 9 min ( 9 . 1±2 . 3 min , n = 9 ) show higher recovery of fluorescence than predicted by pure diffusion . DISCUSSION The mechanism behind the formation and persistence of dynamic MHC - I patches allows control over immune - presentation to T - cells . Although past work has unraveled major parts of the mechanism behind patching , allowing the formation of a model explaining the creation and persistence of MHC - I patches in steady - state , several parameters of the model were not examined experimentally . Here , we have measured these parameters and further expanded our model . As predicted by our model , the trafficking of MHC - I to the membrane via vesicles is crucial for the dynamics of MHC - I patch Fig . 3 . Patch location and recovery analysis . ( A ) Part of a recovery stack . ( B ) Crop of the bleached area only in the ‘ prebleach ’ and ‘ recovered ’ images . The recovered image was scaled to the dynamic range of the prebleach image . ( C ) The prebleach image was pseudo - colored red and the recovered image pseudo - coloredgreen . ( D ) Thecolocalizationimageshowsred ( forexample , arrow1 ) , green ( forexample , arrow2 ) andyellow ( forexample , arrow3 ) areascorresponding to non - recovered , newly formed and recovered patches . ( E ) The recovery fraction is normally distributed with a mean±s . d . of 85 . 2±7 . 7 % ( n = 21 ) . 3345 RESEARCH ARTICLE Journal of Cell Science ( 2016 ) 129 , 3342 - 3350 doi : 10 . 1242 / jcs . 187112 J o u r n a l o f C e ll S c i e n c e formation . Vesicle arrival events were quantified and found to be ∼ 2 arrivals per cell every min . Previously reported data suggests an expected vesicle arrival rate of ∼ 30 arrivals per cell every min for all exocytic vesicles ( Jaiswal et al . , 2009 ) . Comparison of the two values suggests that a substantial fraction of exocytic vesicles are trafficking MHC - I molecules in our transfected cells . The effects of Dynasore , a small molecule that inhibits the activity of dynamin , on patch dynamics was determined and it was found to be an effective tool for manipulating ( reducing ) vesicle arrival rate . Quantification of vesicle arrival rates allowed for a direct measurement of the effects of Dynasore , clearly showing that the arrival rate of MHC - I decreases as the concentration of Dynasore increases . Dynasore is a drug that inhibits the clathrin - coated vesicle mechanism , thus is implicated in hindering endocytosis . However , results from a number of laboratories implicate dynamin in exocytic events ( Jaiswal et al . , 2009 ; Anantharam et al . , 2011 , 2012 ) . Hence , Dynasore - mediated modulation of vesicle traffic might be both indirect , through its effects on endocytosis , and direct , through its effects on exocytosis . Regardless of the mechanism involved , our model assumed equal exocytosis and endocytosis rates , to ensure a constant cell surface , and this phenomenon is supported by the fact that no increase in the cell surface is observed over the timecourse of our measurements , and that fluorescence intensity does not continuously increase ( which would be the case if MHC - I is delivered at higher rates than it is internalized ) . We chose to count only exocytosis events because of technical considerations : detection of a sharp local increase in fluorescence intensity is much more reliable than a local decrease , which might easily drop into the experimental noise of the system . We postulate , however ( based on the arguments presented above ) that endocytosis occurs at the same rates as exocytosis . Measuring apparent patch sizes following treatment with different Dynasore concentrations showed that the mean patch size increases with Dynasore concentration , in agreement with previously reported data using other methods to slow vesicle traffic ( Tang and Edidin , 2001 ) . Here , a spatial ( 2D ) autocorrelation procedure was used to measure the average size of patches in a cropped image . Each single cell image was cropped into several smaller images ( crops ) , in order to exclude background ( which tremendously influences the results of autocorrelation ) . Consequently , the graphs in Fig . 2A – D depict a distribution of patch sizes obtained from hundreds of different crops made from tens of cell images , averaging thousands of patches for each treatment . The ability to average such numbers of patches makes the autocorrelation approach much more reliable and bias - free compared to manually measuring individual patches . The resulting patch size distributions show heterogeneity of patch sizes , similar for all treatments . The comparison between the means of these distributions shows a statistical difference between them , when cells are treated with different Dynasore concentrations . Our model predicts that there is a relationship between MHC - I arrival rate and patch size . Although this was discussed previously ( Tang and Edidin , 2003 ) , the effect was demonstrated using either Fig . 4 . Typical comparison between simulated and real FRAP data . A fitting ofthe2D diffusion simulationto experimental FRAP data . The first part of recovery is in excellent agreement with the simulation of pure lateral diffusion . After a lag time ( red arrow ) , recovery diverges from the simulation and the two data sets reach a different final value , pointing to the arrival of new fluorescent material to the membrane . Fig . 5 . Vesicle arrival rate directly determines apparent size of MHC - I patches . As arrival rate of MHC - I to the membrane decreases ( A ) , the patch size increases ( B ) . This measurement is consistent with the prediction of our simulation - based model and constitutes its experimental validation . Results are mean±s . e . m . n values are as given in Figs 1 and 2 for graphs in A and B , respectively . 3346 RESEARCH ARTICLE Journal of Cell Science ( 2016 ) 129 , 3342 - 3350 doi : 10 . 1242 / jcs . 187112 J o u r n a l o f C e ll S c i e n c e hypertonic medium treatment or dynamin mutant cells , and in both cases cells were fixed and immunostained for MHC - I . Given that in fixed cells , one cannot quantify the arrival rate , these results can only be considered indirect supporting evidence forour model prediction . Here , we imaged live cells that express GFP - tagged MHC - I molecules using real - time TIRFM , allowing a direct measurement of both arrival rate and patch size on the same sample . Furthermore , replacing the hypertonic medium treatment or dynamin mutant with Dynasore treatment permits a dose – response measurement of the effect of arrival rate reduction on patch size . These changes in the experimental design allow us to show for the first time , the ( inverse ) correlation between these parameters ( Fig . 5 ) . The persistence of MHC - I patches at steady state was predicted to be a result of a combination of vesicle trafficking and escape over transient barriers to free diffusion ( Gheber and Edidin , 1999 ) . In the absence of an active mechanism that replenishesthe local concentration , as MHC - I molecules diffuse away from the patches they disperse towards a uniform distribution on the membrane ( Fig . S2 ) . These results corroborate the prediction of our model and are the last step in the validation of our model . Along with our previous results ( Lavi et al . , 2007 , 2013 ) , we present a complete , comprehensive view on the spatio - temporal dynamics of MHC - I patches . Our model assumes that sites of vesicle fusion are randomly distributed across the cell surface . Though this constitutes a worst - case scenario , given that it is the least favorable for maintaining patches at a steady state , simulations showed that patches form and persist even under these conditions . It is clear , however , that a non - random distribution of delivery sites will be a more favorable scenario for MHC - I patch formation . We used FRAP in order to compare patch distributions in the same large membrane area at two different time points , imaging patches , then ‘ erasing ’ the fluorescence by prolonged bleaching and then allowing patches to reform . We found that that ∼ 80 % of MHC - I patches recover to the same location that patches were seen before bleaching . This means that vesicle traffic is targeted to specific locations on the membrane . The data from our experiments contains information on diffusion of the MHC - I molecules . Though the experiment violates a number of the boundary conditions for conventional FRAP , we were able to use our recently developed simulation approach ‘ simFRAP ’ ( Blumenthal et al . , 2015 ) to extract diffusion coefficients . ( The simFRAP algorithm is freely available as an ImageJ plugin at : http : / / imagej . nih . gov / ij / plugins / sim - frap / index . html ) . We found that recovery of patches after bleaching has two temporally separated components , diffusion in the early stages of recovery followed by an increase in intensity that is larger than expected from pure diffusion . We propose that the latter is a result of new fluorescent MHC - I molecules delivered to the cell surface . The delay in this component of recovery , which is detectable at ∼ 9 min after bleaching , is due to the fact that the laser beam bleaches the whole depth of a cell . Therefore , besides surface molecules , trafficking vesicles loaded with fluorescent MHC - I molecules are bleached . Hence , new molecules arriving at the cell surface immediately after bleaching are not fluorescent and so do not contribute to the recovery of fluorescence measured by our probe beam . On the other hand , GFP – MHC - I molecules synthesized after photobleaching , or in areas not reached by the bleaching beam , once introduced into the delivery pathway make their way towards the plasma membrane . Therefore , the vesicles arriving to the membrane following the photobleaching event form a train of increasingly fluorescent vesicles ( Fig . 6 ) . This mechanism is also supported by the fact that we do not observe ‘ blinking ’ ( sudden appearance ) of patches after photobleaching , but instead a gradual increase in their intensity , as they form anew . The observed recovery curve is therefore a sum of two increasing intensity profiles : one represents recovery by lateral diffusion from the unbleached portion of the cell and the second represents the gradual increase in fluorescence of delivered vesicles . The ‘ knee ’ at ∼ 9 min is the cross - over point from the predominant ( fast ) recovery by diffusion that is almost saturating ( Fig . 7 , red line ) , to the ( slower ) increase in fluorescence due to delivery of vesicles ( Fig . 7 , green line ) . The time for synthesis of H2 - L d exogenously expressed in L - cells and its traffic to the trans - Golgi network is in the order of tens of minutes ( Zuniga and Hood , 1986 ) . Analysis of the bleached Fig . 6 . Schematic representation of Gaussian bleaching effects on the cell . Green and black regions correspond to fluorescing and bleached areas , respectively , of the membrane . Given that bleaching is Gaussian , some areas are partially bleached , represented by dark green . The train of dots , changing from black to green , represents vesicles carrying GFP – MHC - I , with increasing fluorescence intensity . Fig . 7 . The fluorescence recovery curve is a sum of two increasing intensity profiles . Recovery is a sum of two components : recovery by lateral diffusion from the unbleached portion of the cell ( red line ) and increase in fluorescence due todeliveryofvesicles ( green line ) . The simulation ( blue dots ) compares nicely to the diffusion recovery component , and yields a well - established lateral diffusion coefficient of 9 . 18±0 . 15×10 − 8 cm 2 / s ( mean±s . d . ) . 3347 RESEARCH ARTICLE Journal of Cell Science ( 2016 ) 129 , 3342 - 3350 doi : 10 . 1242 / jcs . 187112 J o u r n a l o f C e ll S c i e n c e area recovery suggests that the time scale for trafficking matured ( endoH - resistant ) MHC - I molecules to the plasma membrane is ∼ 10 min . Overall , our results estimate the time for trafficking newly synthesized MHC - I molecules to the surface , the requirement for this trafficking to maintain patches of MHC - I molecules at the cell surfaces , and the selectivity , non - randomness , of sites for exocytosis . MHC - I molecules are typical type - I membrane proteins , and we suggest that our results for this molecule can be generalized for other transmembrane proteins , accounting for their distribution on the cell surface . MATERIALS AND METHODS Cell culture All reagents were purchased from Biological Industries ( Kibbutz Beit Haemek , Israel ) unless otherwise noted . Normal mouse fibroblasts [ L - M ( tk ) , ATCC CCL - 1 . 3 ] expressing MHC - I , H - 2L d tagged with GFP ( Marguet et al . , 1999 ) , were cultured in 250 - ml tissue culture flasks ( Cellstar , GrenierBio - One , Frickenhausen , Germany ) at 37°C and 5 % CO 2 in Roswell Park Memorial Institute medium ( RPMI - 1640 ) without L - glutamine , with 10 % fetal bovine serum and 0 . 22 mg / ml G418 ( geneticin ; Sigma , St Louis , MO ) . Cells were screened for contamination of mycoplasma . For microscopy , flasks were washed with 10 ml of phosphate - buffered saline ( PBS ) , then cells were detached from flasks by incubating in 2 ml trypsin EDTA 0 . 25 % for 2 min at 37°C and centrifuging for 5 min at 280 g . Cells , in 5 ml medium , were then transferred to plastic petri dishes with glass coverslip inserts . After overnight incubation , medium was removed and dishes were gently rinsed three times with 5 ml of warmed ( 37°C ) Hepes - buffered Hank ’ s balanced salt solution . Cells treated with Dynasore ( Sigma ) were later incubated with warmed ( 37°C ) 15 µM , 22 µM or 30 µM Dynasore solution for 30 min and then imaged for a maximum time of 45 min . Imaging TIRFM We used a homemade prism - based TIRFM system to image vesicle traffic . The system uses an argon ion laser ( 35 MAP 321 , Melles Griot laser group , Carlsbad , CA ) at 488 nm as the excitation light source . Cells were imaged with a SPOT charge - coupled device camera ( Diagnostic Instruments , Sterling Heights , MI ) , mounted on a Zeiss ( Oberkochen , Germany ) Axioplan2 upright fluorescence microscope with a 40×0 . 8 N . A . water objective . Total internal reflection illumination creates an evanescent field at the interface between glass and the cell membrane . The field decays exponentially into the cell with a penetration depth of ∼ 100 nm ( Axelrod , 2008 ) , thus exciting fluorescence primarily in the cell plasma membrane . In our instrument , fluorescence is excited in the lower membrane adhered to the glass , and emitted light is collected by an upright microscope . Fig . 8 comparesthe images obtained on the same cell in epi - fluorescence ( Fig . 8A ) and TIRFM ( Fig . 8B ) . MHC - I patches are clearly visible in Fig . 8C , owing to the exclusion of fluorescence from within the cell volume . Both images are taken at the same focal plane . However , the exposure in Fig . 8A is much shorter , due to the bright fluorescence from the whole cell volume , which causes the cell edges to appear fuzzier . FRAP Photobleaching was performed using a 100 mW solid - state laser ( Laserglow technologies , Toronto , Ontario , Canada ) emitting at 473 nm . The laser beam was attenuated by a neutral density filter ( T = 30 % ) to avoid damage to the cells , and entered the upright microscope through the epi - illumination port and was concentrated through the objective onto the sample . Laser burst Fig . 8 . A cell expressing GFP - tagged MHC - I imaged in two different modes . Both images are taken at the same focal distance . ( A ) Conventional epi - fluorescence image where the dark nucleus is visible surrounded bya bright region corresponding to the endoplasmic reticulum and Golgi . ( B ) TIRFM image where the MHC - I patches on the plasma membrane are clearly observed as bright dots , and no fluorescence from the cell volume is excited . ( C ) Magnification of the indicated area in B showing ( diffraction limited ) fluorescent patches ( some examples are marked by yellow arrows ) . ( D , E ) Examples of arrival events . Plots of intensity as a function of time ( frames in a time - lapse series ) of single patches ; each plot refers to a single region on the membrane – i . e . a single patch . Peaks in intensity ( marked by arrows ) suggest arrival of new molecules to the membrane , vesicle arrival events ; a fusion event will be followed by an exponential decay in intensity ( grayboxinthefigure ) . ( D ) Singlearrival event . ( E ) Two consecutive arrival events at the same location . 3348 RESEARCH ARTICLE Journal of Cell Science ( 2016 ) 129 , 3342 - 3350 doi : 10 . 1242 / jcs . 187112 J o u r n a l o f C e ll S c i e n c e time was controlled by a Transistor – Transistor Logic ( TTL ) 5 V signal created byafunction generator ( Tabor Electronics , Tel Hanan , Israel ) set to a 1 Hz square wave . Alignment using cross - correlation In order to align an image series , we have calculated the 2D spatial cross correlation between consecutive frames . First , the ( x , y ) displacement of its maximum with respect to the origin ( 0 , 0 ) was determined . This displacement represents the spatial shift between the two images , therefore the second image was shifted by the ( x , y ) displacement values , thus aligning it to the first one . The procedure was repeated for the next pair of frames , until reaching the end of the stack . In the bleaching experiments , the same approach was implemented , using the unbleached part of the cell only . Then , these values are used to properly align the pre - bleach and post - bleach frames . Arrival rate analysis A sequence of images was taken ; exposure time , frame number and total time of sampling were recorded . Individual cropped series were created for each cell and inputted into the image sequence time derivative algorithm ( see below ) . The algorithm result was scanned frame by frame for suspected arrival events ( SAEs ) . Given that fluorescence intensity reports the relative number of molecules , a peaking of intensity describes a vesicle arrival event , delivering new MHC - I molecules to the cell surface . In order to determine if a SAE is an arrival event , intensity versus time profiles were extracted from the SAE position . Following photobleaching and background correction , the time profile of each SAE was inspected against an arrival pattern ( Lavi et al . , 2007 ) , a peak in intensity , suggesting an arrival event , followed by an exponential decay , characteristic of the obstructed diffusion of molecules outside the patch , with a previously reported characteristic decay time ( ‘ patch lifetime ’ ) of ∼ 40 s ( Lavi et al . , 2007 ) ( see examples in Fig . 8D , E ) . Only arrival events verified according to this procedure were counted , and included in the calculation of arrival rate ( arrivals / μ m 2 min ) . Image sequence time derivative algorithm A custom IDL algorithm ( Interactive Data Language , Exelis , Boulder , CO , USA ) was employed to produce a time derivative stack from an acquired stack of consecutive frames . The algorithm receives a stack ( Fig . S3A ) as input and implements three procedures on it : ( 1 ) alignment of all stack frames to the first one using a cross - correlation procedure ; ( 2 ) reduction of peaking noise by implementation of a median filter on trios of frames ; and ( 3 ) production of a new stack in which each frame is the difference of two consecutive frames ( Fig . S3B ) . Implementing a time derivative procedure on a stack of frames eliminates unchanged fluorescent areas from each frame , therefore removing static background . The newly created stack shows only the differences between two original consecutive frames , allowing the detection of low - signal arrival events ( Fig . S3C ) . The algorithm can be obtained from the authors upon request . Patch size algorithm A custom IDL algorithm was employed to quickly extract the mean patch size from an image ( Fig . S4A ) , using a procedure similar to in Hwang et al . ( 1998 ) . The input frame is first cropped to several small images , in order to exclude background . Then , each individual crop is ( 2D ) space - autocorrelated ( Fig . S4B ) , and the result is radially averaged around the center of the frame ( Fig . S4C ) . The intensity profile along the diameter of the averaged frame ( Fig . S4C , red line ) is extracted and fitted to a Gaussian curve ( Fig . S4D , Gaussian curve in red ) . The full width at half maximum ( FWHM ) of the fitted Gaussian curve is representative of the typical object size in the original crop ( patch size ) and is extracted in pixels . In order to receive the actual typical size , the algorithm uses a built - in calibration curve to translate the extracted FWHM ( in pixels ) to the actual typical object size ( in µm ) . The ( linear ) calibration curve ( Fig . S4E ) was achieved by running the algorithm on synthetic images created with different known object sizes . Hindering MHC - I vesicle trafficking to the membrane increases the apparent patch size MHC - I molecules diffuse away from the patches byescaping past barriers to free diffusion . In the absence of an active mechanism that replenishes the local concentration of molecules in the patch ( i . e . vesicle traffic ) , patches disperse towards a uniform distribution on the membrane . Comparison between synthetic spatial intensity profiles of typical patches from the four different groups ( Fig . S2 ) shows the changes in patch profile once vesicle trafficking is reduced ( as a result of Dynasore treatment ) . The synthetic intensity profiles are shown as Gaussian curves , approximating circular MHC - I patches on the membrane . As patches disperse , the same amount of MHC - I molecules is spread over a larger area , by diffusion . The Gaussian curves all cover the same area ; however , their peak intensity decreases and their FWHM increases with increased Dynasore concentration . Competing interests The authors declare no competing or financial interests . Author contributions D . B . performed the experiments , wrote the algorithms , analyzed the data , interpreted the experiments and wrote the manuscript . M . E . provided the fibroblast cells , provided experimental advice and support , and contributed to writing the manuscript . L . A . G . provided experimental advice , wrote the manuscript and provided funding support . Funding The authors gratefully acknowledge a grant from the United States - Israel Binational Science Foundation [ grant number 2009345 ] ; this work wasalso partiallysupported by the Focal Technological Area program of the Israeli National Nanotechnology Initiative ( INNI ) . Supplementary information Supplementary information available online at http : / / jcs . biologists . org / lookup / doi / 10 . 1242 / jcs . 187112 . supplemental References Anantharam , A . , Bittner , M . A . , Aikman , R . L . , Stuenkel , E . L . , Schmid , S . L . , Axelrod , D . and Holz , R . W . ( 2011 ) . A new role for the dynamin GTPase in the regulation of fusion pore expansion . Mol . Biol . Cell 22 , 1907 - 1918 . Anantharam , A . , Axelrod , D . and Holz , R . W . ( 2012 ) . Real - time imaging of plasma membrane deformations reveals pre - fusion membrane curvature changes and a role for dynamin in the regulation of fusion pore expansion . J . Neurochem . 122 , 661 - 671 . Axelrod , D . ( 2008 ) . Total internal reflection fluorescence microscopy . Method Cell Biol . 89 , 169 - 221 . Blumenthal , D . , Goldstien , L . , Edidin , M . and Gheber , L . A . ( 2015 ) . Universal approach to FRAP analysis of arbitrary bleaching patterns . Sci . Rep . 5 . Edidin , M . ( 1987 ) . Rotational and lateral diffusion of membrane proteins and lipids : phenomena and function . 29 , 91 - 127 . Edidin , M . , Zuniga , M . C . and Sheetz , M . P . ( 1994 ) . Truncation mutants define and locate cytoplasmic barriers to lateral mobility of membrane glycoproteins . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA 91 , 3378 - 3382 . Engelman , D . M . ( 2005 ) . Membranes are more mosaic than fluid . Nature 438 , 578 - 580 . Feder , T . J . , Brust - Mascher , I . , Slattery , J . P . , Baird , B . and Webb , W . W . ( 1996 ) . Constrained diffusion or immobile fraction on cell surfaces : a new interpretation . Biophys . J . 70 , 2767 - 2773 . Fooksman , D . R . , Gronvall , G . K . , Tang , Q . and Edidin , M . ( 2006 ) . Clustering class I MHC modulates sensitivity of T cell recognition . J . Immunol . 176 , 6673 - 6680 . Gheber , L . A . and Edidin , M . ( 1999 ) . A model for membrane patchiness : lateral diffusion in the presence of barriers and vesicle traffic . Biophys . J . 77 , 3163 - 3175 . Gowrishankar , K . , Ghosh , S . , Saha , S . , C , R . , Mayor , S . and Rao , M . ( 2012 ) . Active remodeling of cortical actin regulates spatiotemporal organization of cell surface molecules . Cell 149 , 1353 - 1367 . Haucke , V . , Neher , E . and Sigrist , S . J . ( 2011 ) . Protein scaffolds in the coupling of synaptic exocytosis and endocytosis . Nat . Rev . Neurosci . 12 , 127 - 138 . Houy , S . , Croise ́ , P . , Gubar , O . , Chasserot - Golaz , S . , Tryoen - To ́ th , P . , Bailly , Y . , Ory , S . , Bader , M . F . and Gasman , S . Exocytosis and Endocytosis in Neuroendocrine Cells : Inseparable Membranes ! Front . Endocrinol . 4 , 135 . Hwang , J . , Gheber , L . A . , Margolis , L . and Edidin , M . ( 1998 ) . Domains in cell plasma membranes investigated by near - field scanning optical microscopy . Biophys . J . 74 , 2184 - 2190 . 3349 RESEARCH ARTICLE Journal of Cell Science ( 2016 ) 129 , 3342 - 3350 doi : 10 . 1242 / jcs . 187112 J o u r n a l o f C e ll S c i e n c e Jaiswal , J . K . , Rivera , V . M . and Simon , S . M . ( 2009 ) . Exocytosis of post - golgi vesicles is regulated by components of the endocytic machinery . Cell 137 , 1308 - 1319 . Kusumi , A . and Sako , Y . ( 1996 ) . Cell surface organization by the membrane skeleton . Curr . Opin . Cell Biol . 8 , 566 - 574 . Lavi , Y . , Edidin , M . A . and Gheber , L . A . ( 2007 ) . Dynamic patches of membrane proteins . Biophys . J . 93 , L35 - L37 . Lavi , Y . , Gov , N . , Edidin , M . and Gheber , L . A . ( 2012 ) . Lifetime of major histocompatibility complex class - I membrane clusters is controlled by the actin cytoskeleton . Biophys . J . 102 , 1543 - 1550 . Lavi , Y . , Edidin , M . and Gheber , L . A . ( 2013 ) . Lifetime of major histocompatability complex class I membrane clusters is controlled by the actin cytoskeleton . Biophys . J . 104 , 392a . Macia , E . , Ehrlich , M . , Massol , R . , Boucrot , E . , Brunner , C . and Kirchhausen , T . ( 2006 ) . Dynasore , a cell - permeable inhibitor of dynamin . Dev . Cell 10 , 839 - 850 . Marguet , D . , Spiliotis , E . T . , Pentcheva , T . , Lebowitz , M . , Schneck , J . and Edidin , M . ( 1999 ) . LateraldiffusionofGFP - taggedH2L ( d ) moleculesandofGFP - TAP1 reports on the assembly and retention of these molecules in the endoplasmic reticulum . Immunity 11 , 231 - 240 . Patzak , A . andWinkler , H . ( 1986 ) . Exocytoticexposureandrecycling ofmembrane antigens of chromaffin granules : ultrastructural evaluation after immunolabeling . J . Cell Biol . 102 , 510 - 515 . Robinson , I . M . , Finnegan , J . M . , Monck , J . R . , Wightman , R . M . and Fernandez , J . M . ( 1995 ) . Colocalization of calcium entry and exocytotic release sites in adrenal chromaffin cells . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA 92 , 2474 - 2478 . Sako , Y . and Kusumi , A . ( 1995 ) . Barriers for lateral diffusion of transferrin receptor intheplasmamembraneascharacterizedbyreceptordraggingbylasertweezers : fence versus tether . J . Cell Biol . 129 , 1559 - 1574 . Smith , C . and Neher , E . ( 1997 ) . Multiple forms of endocytosis in bovine adrenal chromaffin cells . J . Cell Biol . 139 , 885 - 894 . Tang , Q . and Edidin , M . ( 2001 ) . Vesicle trafficking and cell surface membrane patchiness . Biophys . J . 81 , 196 - 203 . Tang , Q . and Edidin , M . ( 2003 ) . Changes in the patchiness of a membrane protein after inhibiting vesicle traffic imaged by total internal reflection fluorescence microscopy . Biophys . J . 84 , 211a . Turley , S . J . , Inaba , K . , Garrett , W . S . , Ebersold , M . , Unternaehrer , J . , Steinman , R . M . and Mellman , I . ( 2000 ) . Transport of peptide - MHC class II complexes in developing dendritic cells . Science 288 , 522 - 527 . Vereb , G . , Szollosi , J . , Matko , J . , Nagy , P . , Farkas , T . , Vigh , L . , Matyus , L . , Waldmann , T . A . and Damjanovich , S . ( 2003 ) . Dynamic , yet structured : the cell membrane three decades after the Singer - Nicolson model . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA 100 , 8053 - 8058 . Yamada , H . , Abe , T . , Li , S . - A . , Masuoka , Y . , Isoda , M . , Watanabe , M . , Nasu , Y . , Kumon , H . , Asai , A . and Takei , K . ( 2009 ) . Dynasore , a dynamin inhibitor , suppresses lamellipodia formation and cancer cell invasion by destabilizing actin filaments . Biochem . Biophys . Res . Commun . 390 , 1142 - 1148 . Yechiel , E . and Edidin , M . ( 1987 ) . Micrometer - scale domains in fibroblast plasma membranes . J . Cell Biol . 105 , 755 - 760 . Zuniga , M . C . and Hood , L . E . ( 1986 ) . Clonal variation in cell surface display of an H - 2 protein lacking a cytoplasmic tail . J . Cell Biol . 102 , 1 - 10 . 3350 RESEARCH ARTICLE Journal of Cell Science ( 2016 ) 129 , 3342 - 3350 doi : 10 . 1242 / jcs . 187112 J o u r n a l o f C e ll S c i e n c e