Productive Failure Manu Kapur National Institute of Education , 1 Nanyang Walk , Singapore 637616 , manu _ kapur @ hotmail . com Abstract : Contrary to the fairly established notion in the learning sciences that un - scaffolded processes rarely lead to meaningful learning , this study reports a hidden efficacy of such processes and a method for extracting it . Compared to scaffolded , well - structured problem - solving groups , un - scaffolded , ill - structured problem - solving groups struggled with defining and solving the problems . Their discussions were chaotic and divergent , resulting in poor group performance . However , despite failing in their problem - solving efforts , these participants outperformed their counterparts in the well - structured condition on transfer measures , suggesting a latent productivity in the failure . The study’s contrasting - case design provided participants in the un - scaffolded condition with an opportunity to contrast the ill - structured problems that they had solved in groups with the well - structured problems they solved individually afterwards . This contrast facilitated a spontaneous transfer , helping them perform significantly better on the individual ill - structured problem - solving tasks subsequently . Implications of productive failure for the development of adaptive expertise are discussed . Introduction Scaffolding learners so that they accomplish what they may not in the absence of the scaffold is both a profilic and prolific area of research in the learning sciences ( also see the 2004 special issue on scaffolding in volume 13 ( 3 ) of The Journal of the Learning Sciences ) . In such research , “what can be accomplished” generally refers to an expert task that is often complex and ill - structured , and one that is beyond the existing skill set and abilities of the learner ( Brown et al . , 1989 ) . A careful examination of this research surfaces a deeply - ingrained belief : learners need to be scaffolded while engaged in authentic , ill - structured tasks for , without such scaffolding , they may fail . This belief implies that there is little efficacy embedded in un - scaffolded , ill - structured problem - solving processes . While this belief is well - supported by empirical evidence , can another possibility co - exist ? Is it conceivable that by not scaffolding learners—leaving them to struggle and fail at tasks that are ill - structured and beyond their skills and abilities—may in fact be a productive exercise in failure ? If this is a feasible possibility , the challenge for research would be to conceptualize ways of extracting the hidden efficacies in the un - scaffolded and seemingly unproductive production . In this paper , I invoke the adage “failure is a stepping stone to success” to make a case for productive failure . I support it with empirical evidence from a large - scale study of problem - solving groups in a computer - supported collaborative learning ( CSCL ) setting . Generally speaking , research on scaffolding problem - solving processes focuses on what is gained from scaffolding but not on what is lost . In CSCL research , these scaffolds come in a variety of forms but typically operate within a problem - solving activity system ( Leont’ev , 1978 ) , e . g . , scaffolding the object of the activity ( e . g . , Kapur & Kinzer , 2005 ) ; interactional support through prompts ( e . g . , Lin et al . , 1999 ) ; argumentation tools ( e . g . , Cho & Jonassen , 2002 ) ; the division of labor ( e . g . , Schellens et al . , 2004 ) etc . The argument for scaffolding is that it helps learners accomplish what they might not otherwise be able to in the absence of the scaffold – a Vygotskian ( 1978 ) zone of proximal development ( ZPD ) argument . However , it is also reasonable to argue that in providing structure and support , scaffolds impose a certain amount of order on the problem and solution spaces , and in doing so , limit their exploration . Indeed , Reiser ( 2004 ) makes a timely argument that scaffolds should not only function to structure the task but also to problematize it . However , it seems that the proposed problematizing is itself structured , scripting conditions for learners to explore areas of the problem space that they may not otherwise . Nonetheless , Reiser’s proposition presents a valuable contribution in the function of scaffolds ( Pea , 2004 ) , but it ironically also implies a resistance against simply allowing learners to explore , struggle , and even fail at tasks that are beyond their ZPD . In fact , the tension between scaffolded and un - scaffolded processes can be situated in the larger tension between ordered and chaotic processes and systems . Sometimes it helps to step back and examine a phenomenon at a higher level of abstraction and through a pair of new eyes . Kauffman’s work ( 1995 ) on the laws of self - organization and complexity provides such a view . Assuming Kauffman ' s perspective , scaffolds provide order , thus scaffolded processes can be conceived as systems placed toward the ordered end of a continuum and un - scaffolded processes as systems placed toward the chaotic end of the continuum . Further , scaffolded processes may lead to more efficient learning in the shorter - term , but this learning may not be sufficiently flexible , adaptive , and innovative in the longer - term . On the other hand , un - scaffolded processes may be less efficient in the shorter - term , but may result in learning that may potentially prove more flexible , adaptive , and innovative in the longer - term . The challenge , as argued earlier , is to extract this potentiality . Schwartz & Bransford’s ( 1998 ) contrasting - cases method may be leveraged to extract this potentiality of un - scaffolded processes . In their oft - cited article , “A Time for Telling , ” they showed that having students examine the similarities and differences among contrasting cases representing a target concept prepared them to derive greater benefit from a subsequent lecture or reading on that concept . By extending the contrasting cases method , one might conceive scaffolded processes as a contrast to un - scaffolded processes . Within an activity system , an ill - structured problem without the provision of scaffolds can serve as an un - scaffolded condition whereas a well - structured version of the same problem can serve as the scaffolded condition ( see Jonassen ( 2000 ) for the difference between well - and ill - structured problems ) . This conception of scaffolding via structuring is central to scaffolding theory as captured in Wood et al . ’s ( 1976 ) articulation of scaffolding as a “reduction in degrees of freedom” in a problem ( also see Reiser , 2004 ; Pea , 2004 ) . Thus , it would be reasonable to argue that contrasting ill - followed by well - structured problems might help learners separate the relevant from the irrelevant components of an ill - structured problem . In turn , this may help them become better solvers of both well - and ill - structured problems ; the latter being the ultimate goal . This way , the contrasting mechanism can be seen as a scaffolding mechanism . However , this scaffolding mechanism operates at a higher level across activity systems , as opposed to operating within them , thereby setting up conditions for testing the hypothesis of productive failure . If this conception of the contrasting - case mechanism holds up to an empirical examination , then it is hard not to argue , albeit tongue - in - cheek , that just as there is “a time for telling , ” there is also “a time for failure”—productive failure . Purpose The purpose of this study was to test the hypothesis of productive failure : whether or not there is a hidden efficacy in un - scaffolded , ill - structured problem - solving processes and if it can be extracted using a contrasting - case mechanism . Method Participants Participants were N = 309 , 11 th - grade science students ( 197 male , 112 female ) from seven co - educational , English - speaking high schools in the National Capital Region of India . Research Design A randomized experimental design was used . Within each school , participants were first randomly grouped into triads , resulting in n = 103 groups . These groups were then randomly assigned to an un - scaffolded ( 50 groups ) or a scaffolded problem condition ( 53 groups ) . Groups in the un - scaffolded problem condition were asked to solve two ill - structured problems without the provision of any scaffolds . Groups in the scaffolded problem condition were given the same problems but in a more structured format ( Wood et al . , 1976 ) . All problems dealt with car - accident scenarios requiring students to apply concepts in Newtonian kinematics and were content validated by physics teachers . Before group work , all participants individually took a 25 - item multiple - choice pre - test on concepts in Newtonian kinematics ( Cronbach’s alpha = . 74 ) . The study was carried out in the schools’ computer laboratories , where group members communicated with each other only through synchronous , text - only chat . The chat application automatically archived the transcript of their discussion and group solutions . Groups were given 1 . 5 hours per group problem ; each group solved two ill - or well - structured problems ( their order counter - balanced ) as appropriate to their assigned condition . No other help or support was provided . After group work , all participants individually solved well - structured problems ( post - test 1 ) , creating a contrast for participants from the un - scaffolded , ill - structured problem - solving groups . This is because participants in these groups solved ill - structured problems first , and then contrasted that with solving well - structured problems individually . Finally , the scaffolding was removed and all participants individually solved ill - structured problems ( post - test 2 ) . Both post - tests dealt with two car accident scenarios each , and were content validated as well . The scaffolded ( well - structured ) problems in post - test 1 were similar to the group problems . The un - scaffolded ( ill - structured ) problems in post - test 2 required participants to apply more advanced concepts in Newtonian mechanics . Note that this design also provided a comparison against a typical scaffolding sequence , i . e . , fading away from a scaffolded condition ( Pea , 2004 ) . Participants from the well - structured groups ( hereinafter referred to as WS groups ) experienced such fading as they remained in a scaffolded condition right through post - test 1 , and only then was the scaffold removed in post - test 2 . However , participants from ill - structured groups ( hereinafter referred to as IS groups ) went from an un - scaffolded to a scaffolded condition , and then back to an un - scaffolded condition . Data Coding Quantitative Content Analysis ( QCA ) ( Chi , 1997 ) was used to segment and code interactions . The unit of analysis was semantically defined as the function ( s ) that an intentional utterance served in the problem - solving process . Thus , every utterance was segmented into one or more interaction unit ( s ) , and coded into categories adapted from the Functional Category System ( FCS ) —an interaction coding scheme developed by Poole and Holmes ( 1995 ) . Accordingly , each interaction unit was coded into one of seven categories : 1 . PA : Problem Analysis ( e . g . , “ I think the man was driving too fast ” ) , 2 . PC : Problem Critique ( e . g . , “ how can you be sure that the man was driving fast ” ) , 3 . OO : Orientation ( e . g . , “ lets take turns giving our opinions ” ) , 4 . CD : Criteria Development ( e . g . , “ we need to find the initial speed of the car ” ) , 5 . SD : Solution Development ( e . g . , “ use the 2 nd equation of motion ” ) , 6 . SE : Solution Evaluation ( e . g . , “ yes , but how do we get acceleration ” ) , or 7 . NT : Non - Task ( e . g . , “ lets take a break ! ” ) . Two trained doctoral students independently coded the interactions with an inter - rater reliability ( Krippendorff’s alpha ) of . 84 . The researcher and a physics teacher independently rated the quality of all group solutions as well as the individual post - test performances of all participants . Raters were blind to the treatment conditions . Krippendorff’s alphas of . 86 , . 92 , and . 88 were achieved for rating group solutions , well - structured problems post - test 1 , and ill - structured problems post - test 2 respectively . Data Analysis Due to space constraints , data analysis procedures are described together with the results in the following section . It is important to note that in all the results reported in this paper—at the group and the individual levels— the effects of confounding factors ( e . g . , school , gender , counter - balanced problem order , etc . ) and covariates ( e . g . , individual pre - test score , group prior knowledge as measured by mean pre - test score , etc . ) were controlled for . Results & Discussion Group - Level Analysis Functional Content A MANOVA ( with proportion of interactional activity in the 7 functional categories as the dependent variables ) revealed that IS groups had significantly greater proportion of problem analysis ( F = 18 . 20 , p < . 001 , partial η 2 = . 16 , power = . 99 ) , problem critique ( F = 11 . 91 , p = . 001 , partial η 2 = . 11 , power = . 93 ) , and criteria development activity ( F = 4 . 09 , p = . 046 , partial η 2 = . 04 , power = . 52 ) . In contrast , WS groups had significantly greater proportion of solution development ( F = 7 . 23 , p = . 008 , partial η 2 = . 07 , power = . 76 ) and solution evaluation activity ( F = 10 . 66 , p = . 002 , partial η 2 = . 10 , power = . 90 ) . As a rule of thumb , partial η 2 = . 01 is considered a small , . 06 medium , and . 14 a large effect size ( Cohen , 1977 ) . Sequential Patterns in Group Discussion Lag - sequential analysis ( LSA ) revealed how certain types of interactions followed others more often than what one would expect by chance ( Wampold , 1992 ) . The software program Multiple Episode Protocol Analysis ( MEPA ) developed by Gijsbert Erkens was used for carrying out the LSA ( see http : / / edugate . fss . uu . nl / mepa / index . htm ) . LSA revealed significant differences between the discussions of WS vs . IS groups ( see Figure 1 ) . A circled category means that groups in that condition were at least twice as likely to sustain that type of activity , i . e . , the activity was at least twice as likely to appear in coherent clusters rather than be spread throughout the discussion . For example , WS groups were at least twice as likely to sustain problem analysis ( PA ) activity . An arrow represents a directed transition . For example , in IS groups , problem critique ( PC ) was at least twice as likely to occur after problem analysis ( PA ) . With regard to how groups sustained different types of activities , IS groups were more likely to sustain PC , SE , and NT activities . In contrast , WS groups were more likely to sustain PA , CD , and SD activities . With regard to transitions , SD - SE transition was the only significant transition that WS groups were more likely to exhibit . In contrast , the discussions of IS groups were more likely to exhibit many significant transitions ( PA - PC , PA - CD , CD - SD ) as well as feedback loops ( SE - PA , SE - PC ) . Figure 1 . Likely sequential patterns in the discussions of well - vs . ill - structured problem - solving groups Convergence & Group Performance Convergence is a measure of how group members interact and develop a shared understanding of the problem , select a strategy , develop a solution , and manage the process ( Fischer & Mandl , 2005 ) . As such , convergence in group discussion was modeled as an emergent property of the interactions between group members , using methods developed by Kapur et al . ( 2005 ) . An ANOVA showed that WS groups exhibited , on average , greater convergence in their group discussions than IS groups ( F = 10 . 01 , p = . 002 , partial η 2 = . 09 , power = . 88 ) . Linear regression showed that convergence , in turn , was a significant predictor of group performance , as evidenced by the quality of group solutions ( t = 12 . 253 , p < . 001 ) . As a result , WS groups produced , on average , solutions of a higher quality than IS groups ( F = 7 . 20 , p = . 009 , partial η 2 = . 07 , power = . 76 ) . Discussion Differences between groups on the various process and outcome measures can easily be explained in terms of the affordances of well - vs . ill - structured problems . Because ill - structured problems do not provide a clear problem definition , IS groups spent proportionally greater amounts of interactional activity on problem analysis , problem critique , and criteria for developing a solution . LSA further revealed that this lack of clarity in problem definition also resulted in sustained critiquing of problem analysis attempts . The larger solution space afforded by ill - structured problems resulted in sustained evaluation of attempts at solution development , which , in turn , fed back into problem analysis and critique . Thus , the discussions of IS groups were , on average , more complex and chaotic , and exhibited greater numbers and variety of transitions and feedback loops . Because of this , IS groups found it difficult to converge on the causes of the problem , set appropriate criteria for a solution , and develop a solution . This lack of convergence in group discussion drove down group performance . WS groups , on the other hand , solved problems that offered more defined problem and solution spaces . Thus , their discussions were , on average , more coherent , less complex , and less likely to exhibit complex transitions or feedback loops . As a result , these groups found it relatively easier to converge on the causes of the problem , set appropriate criteria , and develop a solution , which , in turn , resulted in higher group performance . Thus , on many counts , IS groups failed compared to WS groups . Group - to - Individual Transfer : Multi - level Analyses Given the nested structure of the data with students nested within groups within experimental condition , hierarchical linear modeling was carried out . Two hierarchical models were gradually built ( space constraints restrict Well - Structured Ill - Structured PA CD PC SD NT SE PA CD PC SD NT SE PA : Problem Analysis PC : Problem Critique NT : Non - Task CD : Criteria Development SD : Solution Development SE : Solution Evaluation a fuller description of the two models , which appears in the complete paper ) , corresponding to performance on the well - and ill - structured post - tests . In addition to controlling for confounding factors ( e . g . , gender , school , problem order etc . ) , several individual - and group - level predictors were entered , one - by - one . Single degree - of - freedom log - likelihood tests determined the significance of each predictor in the model . For modeling the performance on the well - structured post - test , individual - level variables included pre - test score and the level of participation in group discussion ( operationalized as the proportion of all interaction units contributed by a group member ) . Group - level predictors included problem type , group prior knowledge , and group solution quality . Results suggested that participants from IS groups performed significantly better on the well - structured post - test than their counterparts from the WS groups ( 2 χ = 22 . 82 , p < . 001 ) . The hierarchical model for performance on the ill - structured problems post - test was the same except that the performance on the preceding well - structured post - test was included as an individual - level predictor . Again , findings suggested that participants from IS groups outperformed their counterparts from the WS groups on the ill - structured post - test ( 2 χ = 27 . 21 , p < . 001 ) . Importantly , individual performance on well - structured post - test was a significant predictor of performance on ill - structured post - test ( 2 χ = 30 . 76 , p < . 001 ) . Discussion As hypothesized , the contrast between ( un - scaffolded ) ill - structured followed by ( scaffolded ) well - structured problems helped participants separate the relevant from the irrelevant components of ill - structured problems , thereby facilitating a spontaneous transfer of problem - solving skills , which , in the absence of the contrast , might have remained unrealized . Therefore , despite the greater struggle , complexity , and divergence in the discussions of IS groups resulting in failure , participants from IS groups outperformed those in WS groups on both the well - structured problems and ill - structured problems post - test . This demonstrated that the productive failure hypothesis holds up . To assuage a possible concern that this could very well be a chance finding , one must note the scale of the study and the fact that the same research design was replicated 7 times ( in the 7 participating schools ) . Productive Failure : Implications for the Development of Adaptive Expertise This study’s data provide evidence that one need not necessarily scaffold processes within ill - structured , problem - solving activities because such processes , even if they lead to failure , have a hidden efficacy embedded in them . Not scaffolding learners and leaving them to struggle and fail at tasks that are ill - structured and beyond their skills and abilities can be a productive exercise in failure . The implication is not that ill - structured problem - solving groups should not be scaffolded , but that scaffolding is not necessarily the only option . Of course , believing in the efficacy of scaffolding what might otherwise be a complex , divergent , and unproductive process is indeed well - placed . However , allowing for the concomitant possibility that even un - scaffolded , complex , divergent , and unproductive processes have a hidden efficacy about them requires a paradigm shift . In other words , both possibilities may co - exist . Both possibilities may co - exist , but are they equally good ? One must wonder . Could it be that one is better than the other , especially in the longer run ? Given an ill - structured problem , would it be better to scaffold the problem - solving process or let it evolve naturally without any scaffolds , and extract the hidden efficacy later ? Asked more generally , on the continuum between ordered and chaotic problem - solving processes , where are the optimal compromises made ? Again , Kauffman’s ( 1995 ) laws of self - organization and complexity may be leveraged to provide insight . Kauffman ( 1995 ) presents strong theoretical and empirical arguments to support the following claim : In any sufficiently complex system ( e . g . , chemical , social , cognitive , economic , etc . ) , optimal compromises on the continuum between complete order and total chaos are made on the edge of chaos . The reason for this , Kauffman argues , is that sufficient levels of complexity provide systems with the flexibility to adapt and evolve toward increasing fitness levels . In the shorter - term , such systems may be inefficient , but in the longer - term , they are more flexible , adaptive , and innovative . On the other hand , systems that lean on the ordered side of the continuum tend to be highly efficient , but they lose out in the longer run as they lack the flexibility to adapt and innovate . Assuming this perspective , scaffolded processes can be conceived of systems toward the ordered end of the continuum and un - scaffolded processes as systems toward the chaotic end of the continuum . Thus , in the shorter - term , scaffolded processes may lead to more efficient learning , but this learning may not be sufficiently flexible and adaptive in the longer - run . In contrast , un - scaffolded processes may be less efficient ( and seemingly unproductive ) in the shorter - term , but may result in learning that may prove more flexible and adaptive in the longer - term . Thus , when Kauffman’s laws of self - organization and complexity are applied to the question of whether or not scaffolding ill - structured , problem - solving processes is better in the longer run , the answer leans in favor of not scaffolding them and extracting the efficacy later on ( provided , of course , that this is possible ) . This study shows that one way in which this may be done is by contrasting ill - with well - structured problems ; the contrast not only extracts the hidden efficacy but also helps move the activity system near the edge of chaos , without which the system might have remained nothing more than a chaotic , unproductive problem - solving effort . Therefore , if optimality ( of learning experiences and processes ) is defined in terms of shorter - term gains , then scaffolded processes that are more efficient may be employed . If , however , optimality takes a longer - term view , then un - scaffolded processes that are more flexible , adaptive , and innovative may be more suitable , provided there are means to extract the hidden efficacies in these processes . If this argument holds up , then un - scaffolded processes in the longer term may provide a more optimal compromise between efficiency and innovation . I believe this presents a significant theoretical and paradigmatic shift in the learning sciences , especially with regard to the development of adaptive expertise ( Hatano & Inagaki , 1986 ) . This is because Hatano and Inagaki’s theorizations of “ adaptive expertise ” vs . “ routine expertise ” have also recently been characterized as a tension between efficiency and innovation ( Schwartz , Bransford , & Sears , 2005 ) . Hatano and Inagaki ( 1986 ) characterized “routine experts” as ones trained more heavily along the efficiency dimension . “Adaptive experts” are those whose learning experiences incorporate a balance between the efficiency and the innovation dimensions . Schwartz et al . ( 2005 ) propose that achieving this balance between efficient and innovative experiences is critical to the development of adaptive expertise . To advance this proposal , Schwartz et al . ( 2005 ) hypothesized an optimal adaptability corridor ( OAC ) ( see Figure 2 adapted from Schwartz et al . , 2005 , p . 28 & p . 38 ) . By plotting learning experiences in the innovation - efficiency space , they suggest that the development of adaptive expertise is cultivated by designing learning experiences that fall within the OAC . For instance , novices start out with little experience along either dimension . Subsequently , if their experiences lean toward the efficiency dimension , they are more likely to become routine experts . However , if they experience a more balanced set of opportunities for engaging in efficient as well as innovative processes , they are more likely to become adaptive experts . Figure 2 . Balancing innovation with efficiency by designing learning experiences in the OAC Schwartz et al . ( 2005 ) make a compelling argument that there has been an overemphasis in educational research on efficiency outcomes , often at the expense of innovation . However , their proposal does well not to eliminate the emphasis on efficiency , but to balance it with an equal emphasis on innovation , thereby ensuring a trajectory in the learning and performance space that falls within the OAC . This study agrees with the view that both innovation and efficiency dimensions are important , but it does not agree that they are about equally important . As a result , it presents a departure from Schwartz et al . ’s ( 2005 ) balanced view to one that favors the innovation dimension . In other words , learning experiences that provide greater opportunities for innovation over efficiency will be better off in the longer run than those that provide a balanced set of opportunities . At first , this shift may seem to come at the expense of efficiency . After all , if learning experiences provided more opportunities for innovative experiences , then learners may not develop the necessary efficient processes and mechanisms . The development of these efficient mechanisms is important in reducing cognitive load when faced with a non - routine situation or problem , potentially freeing learners to be more adaptive and innovative . Indeed , as Schwartz et al . ( 2005 ) succinctly allude , “innovation favors the prepared mind . ” However , while efficiency certainly bolsters the potential for innovation , innovation in turn drives efficiency . For example , in this study , participants in the un - scaffolded , IS groups outperformed their counterparts in the WS groups on the well - structured problems post - test—a measure of efficiency . It is a significant finding that participants who engaged in innovative ( un - scaffolded ) processes beat those engaged in efficient ( scaffolded ) Efficiency Innovation OAC Routine Experts Adaptive Experts Novices processes at their own game ! Thus , the study provides empirical evidence , on a fairly large scale , showing that innovation drives efficiency , resulting in a co - evolutionary trajectory through the learning and performance space . If it is true that “innovation favors the prepared mind , ” then it is also true that “innovation prepares the favored mind . ” Perhaps an even more compelling argument for shifting the emphasis toward innovation comes from Kauffman’s work ( 1995 ) on the laws of self - organization and complexity . Recall that , in the long run , optimal compromises between order and chaos happen not in the middle but closer to the edge of chaos . Equivalently , it may be argued that , in the longer run , optimal compromises between efficiency and innovation may happen not by designing for a balanced set of experiences , but by designing for more innovative experiences than efficient ones , although designing for a balanced set of experiences is better than designing for efficiency - dominant experiences . Schwartz et al . ’s ( 2005 ) work is very timely , as it provides a much needed shift from the efficiency - dominant paradigm to a balanced paradigm . Based on the laws of self - organization and complexity and this study’s data , I propose an even greater shift ( and possibly an uncomfortable one ) from the balanced paradigm to an innovation - dominant paradigm articulated in the following working hypothesis : in the longer run , designing for innovation - dominant experiences is more optimal for the development of adaptive expertise than the balanced approach . References Brown , J . S . , Collins , A . , & Duguid , P . ( 1989 ) . Situated cognition and the culture of learning . Educational Researcher , 18 ( 1 ) , 32 - 42 . Chi , M . T . H . ( 1997 ) . Quantifying qualitative analyses of verbal data : A practical guide . The Journal of the Learning Sciences , 6 ( 3 ) , 271 - 315 . Cho , K . L . , & Jonassen , D . H . ( 2002 ) . The effects of argumentation scaffolds on argumentation and problem solving . Educational Technology , Research and Development , 50 ( 3 ) , 5 - 22 . Cohen , J . ( 1977 ) . Statistical power analysis for the behavioral sciences . New York : Academic Press . Fischer , F . , & Mandl , H . ( 2005 ) . Knowledge convergence in computer - supported collaborative learning : The role of external representation tools . The Journal of the Learning Sciences , 14 ( 3 ) , 405 - 441 . Hatano , G . , & Inagaki , K . ( 1986 ) . Two courses of expertise . In H . Stevenson , H . Azuma , & K . Hakuta ( Eds . ) , Child Development and Education in Japan ( pp . 262 - 272 ) . New York : Freeman . Jonassen , D . H . ( 2000 ) . Towards a design theory of problem solving . Educational Technology , Research and Development , 48 ( 4 ) , 63 - 85 . Kapur , M . , & Kinzer , C . ( 2005 , April ) . The effect of problem type on collaborative problem solving in a synchronous computer - mediated environment . Paper presented at the annual meeting of the American Educational Research Association , Montreal , Canada . Kapur , M . , Voiklis , J . , & Kinzer , C . ( 2005 ) . Problem solving as a complex , evolutionary activity . Proceedings of the CSCL conference 2005 , Taipei , Taiwan . Kauffman , S . ( 1995 ) . At home in the universe . New York : Oxford University Press . Leont’ev , A . N . ( 1978 ) . Activity , consciousness , and personality . Englewood Cliffs , NJ : Prentice - Hall . Lin , X . , Hmelo , C . , Kinzer , C . , & Secules , T . J . ( 1999 ) . Designing technology to support reflection . Educational Technology , Research and Development , 47 ( 3 ) , 43 - 62 . Pea , R . D . ( 2004 ) . The social and technological dimensions of scaffolding and related theoretical concepts of learning , education , and human activity . The Journal of the Learning Sciences , 13 ( 3 ) , 423 - 451 . Reiser , B . J . ( 2004 ) . Scaffolding complex learning : The mechanisms of structuring and problematizing student work . The Journal of the Learning Sciences , 13 ( 3 ) , 423 - 451 . Schellens , T . , Van Keer , H . , & Valcke , M . ( 2004 ) . Learning in asynchronous discussion groups : A multilevel approach to study the influence of student , group , and task characteristics . Manuscript submitted for publication . Schwartz , D . L . , & Bransford , J . D . ( 1998 ) . A time for telling . Cognition and Instruction , 16 ( 4 ) , 475 - 522 . Schwartz , D . L . , Bransford , J . D . , & Sears , D . ( 2005 ) . Efficiency and innovation in transfer . In J . P . Mestre ( Ed . ) , Transfer of learning from a modern multidisciplinary perspective ( pp . 1 - 52 ) . Greenwich , CT : Information Age Publishing . Vygotsky , L . S . ( 1978 ) . Mind in society . Cambridge , MA : Harvard University Press . Wampold , B . E . ( 1992 ) . The intensive examination of social interaction . In T . R . Kratochwill & J . R . Levin ( Eds . ) , Single - case research design and analysis : New directions for psychology and education ( pp . 93 - 131 ) . Hillsdale , NJ : Erlbaum . Wood , D . , Bruner , J . S . , & Ross , G . ( 1976 ) . The role of tutoring in problem solving . Journal of Child Psychology and Psychiatry and Allied Disciplines , 17 , 89 - 100 .