The Effects of Surface and Structural Feature Matches on the Access of Story Analogs Richard Catrambone Georgia Institute of Technology Competing theories of analogical reasoning have disagreed on the relative contributions of surface and structural features to the access of previously read base stories when one is reading a current cue story . A key limitation of the prior work was that surface and structural feature overlap between bases and cues was not manipulated precisely . The present study systematically manipulated the number of surface and structural matches to determine their relative effect on access . Results involving reminding and reading - time measures suggest that surface and lower - order structural features affected access about equally , at least when a higher - order relation ( HOR ) was shared between a base and cue story . When a HOR was not shared , surface feature overlap continued to affect access while lower - order structural features had a less reliable effect . Models of access might need to be adjusted to account for these phenomena . We are often reminded of a prior problem or example when we are working on a current problem or just learning about a new situation . However , the problem or example that comes to mind might or might not be all that relevant . The factors that influence which prior cases one is reminded of have been of interest to a variety of researchers , particularly those who study analogical reasoning . Unfortunately , the research regarding which factors mediate this reminding is equivocal in its results and disparate in its methodology . Although most theories and results show a strong effect of surface features of examples and problems on reminding , they have varied on the relative contribution of structural features . Surface features are features that , when changed , do not affect the solution procedure for a problem or do not affect relationships , such as causal relationships , in a story . Structural features are those that , if changed , can affect the solution procedure or relationships . The goal of the present research was to do a systematic and careful manipulation of the surface and structural feature overlap between a story one is currently reading and a story that had been read earlier to examine the relative contributions of these features on reminding . The results suggest a more equal role of surface and structural features than had been previously claimed . Surface and Structural Features Consider a story about a hunter who shoots an arrow at a hawk but misses because the arrow does not have any feathers on it to help stabilize its flight . The hawk then gives the hunter some of its feathers and the hunter is so pleased he promises not to hunt hawks anymore . Consider a second story about an aggressive country that attacks its neighbor with missiles ; the missiles fail to do any damage because they were poorly guided and missed their targets . The neighbor , which makes supercomputers , offers to sell some to the aggressive country . The aggressive country is appreciative and pledges never to attack its neighbor again . These two stories share a similar structure but differ in terms of surface features ( e . g . , hawk and arrow vs . countries and missiles ) . Now consider a revision of the second story . A nervous country offers to sell some computers to its aggressive neighbor to obtain a promise that the aggressive country will not attack it . The aggressive country then equips its missiles with the purchased computers and proceeds to attack the country that sold them the computers . The attack succeeds because of the computers . Like the first story about the countries , this story has about the same minimal degree of surface overlap with the hawk story . However , the degree of structural overlap has also been reduced ; in partic - ular , the causal relationships have changed . Finally , consider a fourth story about an eagle that offers to provide tailfeathers to a sportsman who uses a crossbow on his outings . The eagle wishes to extract a promise from the sportsman that she will not be attacked . After giving the sportsman the tailfeathers , the eagle is later shot by the sportsman , and the bolt that did the damage had the eagle’s tailfeathers to help its flight . This story has a number of surface similarities to the hawk story ( e . g . , eagle and sportsman ; hawk and hunter ) , but , as with the second country story , the structural feature overlap is less relative to the first country story . If a person were to read a large number of base stories and then , perhaps after a delay of a week , were to read a large number of cue stories , a question of interest is which base story ( ies ) , if any , would the reader be reminded of when reading a particular cue story . Would the reminding be driven by surface feature overlap between a particular base and cue , or would it be affected also , or instead , by structural feature overlap ? More concretely , if the hawk story A subset of the results from Experiment 1 was reported at the 19th Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society , Palo Alto , August 1997 . Experiment 2 was reported at the 39th Annual Meeting of the Psychonomic Society , Dallas , November 1998 . This research was supported by Air Force Office of Scientific Research Grant F49620 - 98 - 1 - 0362 . I thank Cathy Clement and Art Markman for helpful comments on earlier versions of this article . I thank the members of the Human Communication Research Centre at the University of Edin - burgh for providing a great environment during my visit . I also thank Bharath Aiyer for help with the data collection in Experiment 3 . Correspondence concerning this article should be addressed to Richard Catrambone , School of Psychology , Georgia Institute of Technology , At - lanta , Georgia 30332 - 0170 . E - mail : rc7 @ prism . gatech . edu Journal of Experimental Psychology : Copyright 2002 by the American Psychological Association , Inc . Learning , Memory , and Cognition 2002 , Vol . 28 , No . 2 , 318 – 334 0278 - 7393 / 02 / $ 5 . 00 DOI : 10 . 1037 / / 0278 - 7393 . 28 . 2 . 318 318 were one of the base stories , would the first country story be as good a cue as the story about the eagle ? Recent research has been equivocal on this issue . Gentner , Rattermann , and Forbus ( 1993 ) found that reminding in such a situation tended to be driven largely by surface feature overlap , whereas judgments of how “soundly” stories matched were driven more by structural features . In a typical experiment from their study , participants would read a collection of base stories , of the type summarized above , and then a week later would read a collection of cue stories . A given cue story would have a matched base story where the match could be at several levels . A first - order relation ( FOR ) match between stories would be one in which certain similar low - level predicates would be present in both stories ( e . g . , x SHOOT y ; a FIRE - ON b ) , but there would be minimal surface feature overlap of the entities involved in those relations ( e . g . , hunter , hawk , arrow vs . country1 , country2 , mis - sile ) . A surface feature match would be one in which the stories would share FORs as well as some entities involved in those relations ( e . g . , hunter and hawk vs . sportsman and eagle ) . A higher - order relation ( HOR ) match would be one in which both stories share FORs but not surface features , as well as sharing a higher - order structure that relates the FORs . A HOR—in this case , a causal relation—shared by the original hawk and country stories could be summarized as : An attack is made but fails ; this causes the one being attacked to offer to provide an item to the attacker to help the attacker ; this offer causes the attacker to be grateful and to promise not to attack again . See Gentner ( 1983 , 1989 ) for a more complete discussion of entities , FORs , and HORs . Gentner et al . ( 1993 ) found that a cue story that shared surface features with a base would be more likely to lead a person to recall that base compared with a cue that shared only FORs with the base . In addition , Gentner et al . found that a cue that shared a HOR with a base would be more likely to lead to a reminding compared with a cue that shared only FORs . However , the effect due to HOR overlap was much smaller than the effect due to surface feature overlap . Taken together , the results suggest that surface features play a large role in affecting access while the contribution of structural features is relatively minor . Keane ( 1987 ) obtained similar results . He manipulated whether a base story and cue problem had matching terms ( e . g . , ray ) or terms that were merely similar ( ray and laser ) and found that both types of matches produced better reminding than a cue story that had dissimilar terms ( e . g . , army ) . Thus , the surface feature advan - tage does not appear to be due simply to matching keywords but rather to similarity in the meaning of various surface features . However , other results indicate that structural features might play a reliable role in access . Wharton et al . ( 1994 ) suggested that a difficulty with the design used in typical “access” studies ( e . g . , Gentner et al . , 1993 ) is that for any given cue story , there is usually at most only one base story that has a strong semantic similarity to the cue . In this case , the likelihood of accessing that base story compared with any other base story is probably already close to a maximum because semantic similarity plays such a large role in reminding . Thus , access might not receive much of a boost even with the addition of structural similarity to the relevant base because there was relatively little competition from the other base stories to start with . Wharton et al . ( 1994 ) argued that a more sensitive way to determine whether structural features would have a significant impact on access would be to create a “competition” condition in which people read two base stories that match a particular cue story in terms of surface features but differ in structural overlap . For instance , consider two base “stories” ( taken from Wharton et al . , 1994 ) : ( a ) “Having just been fired from a high level job , he decided to go to his church for counseling . The pastor calmed the businessman” ; ( b ) “The church was having trouble approaching local corporations for contributions to the shelter . The executive soothed the priest . ” These two vignettes have roughly the same semantic overlap with the following cue sentence : “The rabbi reassured the chairman . ” However , the first story has more struc - tural overlap with the cue in that it is the religious person helping the business person , not the other way around . In this situation , if the base story with greater structural overlap with the cue tends to be the one that is recalled by a person when reading the cue , this would indicate that structural features play a larger role in access than suggested by prior studies . Wharton et al . obtained such a result . Other work also suggests that structural features can have an effect in access , even with minimal surface feature similarity ( Clement , Mawby , & Giles , 1994 ; Read & Cesa , 1991 ) . Ham - mond , Seifert , and Gray ( 1991 , pp . 127 – 131 ) argued that with few examples in memory that share content features , abstract similar - ities may be expected to play a larger role in remindings . This would be consistent with Wharton et al . ’s ( 1994 ) claim that the competition condition would produce remindings from a cue based more on structural features if two base stories , and only those two base stories , have about the same degree of surface overlap with the cue . Comparing Prior Studies It is difficult to compare the results of Gentner et al . ( 1993 ) , Wharton et al . ( 1994 ) , and others because the terminology , mate - rials , and methodologies differ . One aim of the current study is to create a single , consistent framework for discussing prior work and for characterizing the present experiments . Terminology issues will be considered first . Terminology Because the structure - mapping framework used by Gentner et al . ( 1993 ) has been used in a variety of other studies ( e . g . , Reed , 1987 ) , its vocabulary will serve as the basis for characterizing prior work as well as for describing the manipulations used in this article . A pair of base and cue stories can have the following sorts of matches . First , they can match at a surface level in terms of similar entities , the specific objects in the stories ( e . g . , hawk and eagle ) . Second , they can match structurally in terms of FORs that specify a relationship between two entities . Examples would be SHOOT ( hunter , hawk ) and FIRE - ON ( country1 , country2 ) . For two FORs to match , the relation need only be similar ; it does not have to be an exact match . Third , a base and cue can match structurally on HORs . HORs can take entities and lower - order relations ( FORs and other , less syntactically complex HORs ) as arguments . An example would be CAUSE [ LACK ( arrow , feathers ) , MISS ( arrow , 319 SURFACE AND STRUCTURAL FEATURES hawk ) ] , which roughly translates into “the lack of feathers on the arrow caused it to miss the hawk . ” 1 Differences in Materials Gentner et al . ( 1993 ) used stories of about 75 – 110 words in length , whereas Wharton et al . ( 1994 ) mostly used stories consist - ing of two sentences and a cue of one sentence ( although in one experiment they used materials closer in length to those used by Gentner et al . ) . There was only one base story that matched a given cue story in Gentner et al . , whereas in Wharton et al . there were two base stories that matched a particular cue . It is not clear what the effect of the length of the material might be . Delay Between Reading Base and Cue Participants in Gentner et al . ’s ( 1993 ) study read the cue stories a week after reading the base stories ; participants in Wharton et al . ’s ( 1994 ) study typically read the cue stories during the same experimental session with an interpolated task between the base and cue stories . Participants in Keane’s ( 1987 ) study read the base as part of a classroom exercise and read the cue as part of a separate experimental session a few days later . A delay between reading the base and cue presumably reduces the effect of exper - imental demand and provides a more realistic assessment of reminding . Processing Instructions Prior studies varied in how deeply participants presumably processed the materials , and this may have played a role in the relative prominence of surface and structural features in memory and as cues for remindings . Hammond et al . ( 1991 ) found equal reminding by two cue stories that shared surface features with a base story , even though one of the cue stories had scrambled wording . This result would suggest that Gentner et al . ’s ( 1993 ) results do not necessarily show that surface is “preferred” over structure by the human memory system . Rather , perhaps because of shallow processing in Gentner et al . ’s experiments ( participants were typically simply asked to read the base stories so that they would be able to remember them a week later ) , the surface features were the ones primarily available for matching . That is , with minimal processing , or scrambled text , a coherent story structure is unlikely to be constructed by the learner , thereby making structural features less prominent in any representation . Surface features , however , may be more tightly connected to certain individual words in a text ( e . g . , hawk , arrow ) —even text that is processed shallowly or is scrambled—and therefore are more available as potential matches when a cue story with similar words ( e . g . , eagle , crossbow ) is read ( see Hammond et al . , 1991 ) . Wharton et al . ’s ( 1994 ) participants were given more elaborate exercises to do with the base stories compared with Gentner et al . ’s ( 1993 ) participants . Wharton et al . ’s participants rated each base and cue story on a six - point scale for plausibility , meaningfulness , and imageability . This difference in processing instructions could have led to deeper representations of the materials that could have produced the access results different from those of Gentner et al . ( cf . Clement , 1987 ) . Thus , we must take into account learners’ orientation to the material , because this will influence the features of the stories that are encoded as well as the salience of those encoded features . The Need for a More Systematic Approach for Assessing the Effects of Surface and Structural Features on Access It is unclear whether the manipulations to the materials used by Gentner et al . ( 1993 ) , Wharton et al . ( 1994 ) , and others provided a sufficiently systematic test of relative effects on access of surface and structural features . Typically , the manipulations were more of a “kind” than “degree . ” That is , the manipulations in such studies were not all that precise and , as a result , may have affected more features in the stories than just the intended ones . For instance , consider the previously introduced stories from Gentner et al . ( 1993 ) . The ones involving animals provided the animals with the ability to talk and reason . Does this fable - like quality have an effect on access when one reads the stories about the countries ? Wharton et al . stated that in the first two experiments in their study they “varied the relational similarity between cues and targets while holding element similarity constant at a relatively high level , ” and that in another experiment they “varied system simi - larity between cues and targets while holding relational similarity constant at a moderate level” ( p . 75 ) . The concern here is what is meant by “relatively high” and “moderate” levels . There does not appear to be any way of accurately specifying or quantifying the similarity levels . The present work proposes a more fine - grained approach that allows a better test of the contributions of surface and structural features . For a given base story , different versions of a cue story were created such that the number of surface and structural matches between the base and a version of the cue story varied while the other features of the cue story were essentially held constant . We can then ask whether an increase in matches of one or both types leads to increased access . Although it might not be completely appropriate to treat each surface match—or each struc - tural match of a certain order—as being equally salient , and to propose that a simple addition of matches will predict reminding , such an approach with a tightly controlled set of materials is a strong step towards systematically investigating the access issue . Given that the analogical reasoning and problem - solving liter - atures have tended to find a larger effect for surface features on access , I used relatively elaborate processing instructions in the access experiments of this article , similar to Wharton et al . ’s ( 1994 ) , to encourage deeper processing of the base stories . If participants are encouraged to process base stories relatively deeply , then it is possible that structural features of the stories will be more salient than if learners simply read the stories with no particular instructions other than perhaps to “remember the sto - ries . ” If instructions designed to encourage deeper processing do not lead to a clear effect of structural features on access , this would provide evidence that surface features dominate access , except perhaps under special circumstances such as expertise in the domain . 1 Structure - mapping also uses functions that allow a value on some psychologically plausible dimension to be specified ( e . g . , COLOR ( ball ) (cid:1) red ) . However , functions will not be needed to characterize the various studies discussed here . 320 CATRAMBONE Experiment 1 Experiment 1 was designed to examine whether a systematic variation in the number of entity and FOR matches between a base story and cue story would affect the likelihood of a person being reminded of the base while reading the cue . Method Participants . Participants were 120 students at the Georgia Institute of Technology who participated in the experiment for course credit . Materials . We used 15 base stories and 15 cue stories used in the study . Three base and cue stories were the ones of interest , whereas the other 12 base and 12 cue stories were taken from Gentner et al . ( 1993 ) , slightly edited , and used as fillers . The fillers were selected to share little content with the base and cue stories of interest and were held constant across all conditions . The base and cue stories of interest will henceforth be referred to simply as the base and cue stories , respectively , while the other stories will be referred to as base - fillers and cue - fillers . One base story and one cue story will be described below to demonstrate how the manipula - tions were implemented . Each base story and its matched cue story shared a HOR ( e . g . , dealing with an obstacle using a strong force split into smaller forces ) and a story line ( e . g . , medical / dental ) . The story lines were shared because , as Ham - mond et al . ( 1991 ) noted , experiments that measure access by creating a database of episodes depend , as a result , on the degree of overlapping features versus distinctive features included in the examples . By having a particular base – cue pair share a story line , and then manipulating a set of entities and FORs in those stories , it was possible to tightly control the wording of the various versions of each cue story . As a result , findings obtained in this experiment will have a reduced chance of being due to random characteristics of the specific stories . 2 The three base stories were held constant across conditions , whereas the versions of the cue stories were manipulated . There were four versions of each cue story . A participant in a given condition saw only one version of each cue story . The different versions of a cue story were created by manipulating the number of surface and structural features that matched those in the base story . More specifically , the number of entity and FOR matches was manipulated . One of the base stories was a story about a doctor treating a patient with a tumor and was adapted from Gick and Holyoak ( 1983 ) and provided with an ending ( see Appendix A ) . The cue story that matched this base story was a story about a dentist . Appendix B presents the four versions of the dentist story produced by crossing the number of manipulated entity and FOR matches with the doctor story . For all base – cue pairs , care was taken to make sure that various distinctive words that appeared in the base story did not also appear in the various versions of the cue story ( e . g . , “simulta - neously” was used in the doctor base story whereas “at the same time” was used in the dentist cue story ) . The entity and FOR matches that were manipulated between the doctor story and the different versions of the dentist story are listed in Table 1 . There were three entities and three FORs that were manipulated for a given base – cue pair . For a given pair , either all three entities matched or only one matched . The same was true for FORs . It should be noted that a match does not have to be exact ( e . g . , ray matches with laser ; SEND matches with DIRECT ) . The higher - order causal relation , not represented in Table 1 , was held constant across the base story and the different versions of the cue story . For the doctor – dentist pair , this relation could be thought of roughly as : The desire not to affect something near a target causes simultaneous low - strength forces to be sent towards the target . A pilot study had previously been conducted to check whether the manipulations to the materials to be used in Experiment 1 would actually affect participants’ perceptions of the similarity of the entities and FORs in the stories . Participants in the pilot study were asked to make similarity judgments between various entities and between various FORs in the base and cue stories . The judgments were made in the context of the stories . That is , a given participant would read a particular base – cue story pair and then provide the ratings for the various entity comparisons and various FOR comparisons . It was assumed that this approach would produce ratings that would best reflect the ways participants thought about the entities and relations as they were instantiated in the stories . The results from the pilot study indicated that participants appeared to agree with the experimenter’s designation of matches and non - matches . Entity and FOR matches were given ratings above the middle of the similarity scale , whereas non - matches were given ratings below the middle of the scale , and the ratings of matches were significantly higher than the ratings of non - matches . In addition , the absolute ratings given to entity matches and non - matches were roughly equivalent to those given to FOR matches and non - matches . Thus , overall , it appears that participants were sensitive to the matches and non - matches of entities and FORs in the base and cue stories , and that the degree of the manipulation of entities was on par with the degree of manipulation of FORs . 3 Interestingly , the pilot study may have served as more than just a validation of the materials . The results suggest that it might be possible to construct a “metric of analogy” ( Keane , 1987 ) that can provide meaning - fully countable units ( i . e . , number of entity and FOR matches ) that are useful for predicting reminding . The fact that participants’ judgments mapped onto those of the experimenter provides some reassurance that “amount” or “degree” of analogy might be measured , and that attempts to integrate this information into cognitive models of access and analogical reasoning ( particularly the mapping stage ) can be viewed as psychologi - cally plausible . It should be mentioned that the manipulations of entities and FORs produced stories with certain implausible aspects , such as the notion that ultrasound could be used to strengthen a tooth ( see the “1 entity match , 1 FOR match” version of the cue story in Appendix B ) . Although it is not clear whether plausibility had any effect , the stories used in Experiment 2 seem free from this problem , and the results in Experiment 2 are consistent with those in Experiment 1 . Procedure . During Phase 1 , participants read 15 base stories and were told to try to remember the stories because they would be coming back the following week to read more stories . The base stories of interest occurred in the 3rd , 8th , and 12th positions . In addition , after reading each base story , participants rated it for imageability and plausibility—each on a scale from 1 ( not very imageable / plausible ) to 10 ( very imageable / plausi - ble ) —to increase the depth of processing of the stories ( cf . Wharton et al . , 1994 ) . During Phase 2 , which occurred 1 week after Phase 1 to reduce demand characteristics , participants performed an unrelated task for approxi - mately 20 min and then read 15 cue stories . The cue stories of interest occurred in the 2nd , 6th , and 14th positions . After reading each cue , story participants were asked to write down any stories from the prior week of which they were reminded . They were told that if they were reminded of more than one story , they were to indicate each story . They were asked to write a brief summary that they felt would be sufficient to allow another person to unambiguously determine to which story , or stories , they were referring . None of the stories had titles ; this is consistent with the approach used by Gentner et al . ( 1993 ) and Wharton et al . ( 1994 ) . Remindings to the cue fillers were not systematic and will not be discussed . Rather , the focus was on the likelihood of participants being reminded of base stories as a function of the version of the cue stories they read . 2 As will be seen , Experiment 2 replicates and generalizes the reminding results from Experiment 1 with bases and cues that do not share story lines . 3 Details of the pilot study can be obtained from the author . 321 SURFACE AND STRUCTURAL FEATURES Participants were randomly assigned to one of four conditions : Match33 , Match13 , Match31 , or Match11 . The first number refers to the number of entity matches , from the set of three entities that were manipulated , between each base – cue story pair . The second number refers to the number of FOR matches from the set of three that were manipulated . For instance , for participants in the Match31 condition , each cue story shared three entity matches and one FOR match with the relevant base story . For a given participant , the number of entity and FOR matches in each base – cue pair was held constant . There were 30 participants per condition . Scoring . If a participant reported being reminded of a base story that went with the cue story being read ( e . g . , being reminded of the doctor story when reading a version of the dentist story ) , he or she received one point . Thus , a participant could receive a maximum score of three points . This value was then divided by three to produce the proportion of remindings . Participants’ responses were fairly easy to score , that is , in all cases it was clear to which base story a participant was referring , as evidenced by the fact that two raters independently scored the summaries and agreed on which base story was being referenced 100 % of the time . Design . Experiment 1 was a 2 (cid:2) 2 between - subjects design . The independent variables were number of entity ( 1 or 3 ) and FOR ( 1 or 3 ) matches between each base – cue story pair , resulting in four experimental groups . The dependent measure was the proportion of remindings of the base stories that occurred to the cue stories . Predictions . If surface feature overlap systematically affects access , then as the number of entity matches between a base and cue increase , the proportion of remindings of that base should increase . The analogous argument applies for structural feature ( FOR ) matches . It is unclear whether an interaction should be expected . For instance , perhaps an in - crease in FOR matches will improve access only if the number of entity matches is over some threshold . This would be consistent with a feature of the Analog Retrieval by Constraint Satisfaction ( ARCS ) model ( Thagard , Holyoak , Nelson , & Gochfeld , 1990 ) used to model the empirical results in Wharton et al . ( 1994 ) . The ARCS model predicts that effects of structural overlap between stories will affect access only if the base and cue have sufficient connections ( i . e . , taxonomic links ) between the individual con - cepts , such as entities , in the stories . Results Table 2 shows the proportion of remindings as a function of the number of entity and FOR matches between a base and cue ( collapsed across the three base – cue pairs because there was no effect of specific pair ; e . g . , the doctor – dentist pair produced sim - ilar results to the other two base – cue pairs ) . There were more remindings when the number of entity matches increased from one to three , F ( 1 , 116 ) (cid:1) 9 . 49 , MSE (cid:1) 0 . 20 , p (cid:3) . 01 . Similarly , there were more remindings when the number of FOR matches in - creased from one to three , F ( 1 , 116 ) (cid:1) 8 . 66 , p (cid:3) . 01 . There was no interaction between the two factors , F ( 1 , 116 ) (cid:1) 0 . 0 , p (cid:1) . 95 . Pairwise comparisons show that the proportion of remindings for the Match11 condition was less than the proportion for the other conditions ( one - tailed tests ; all p s less than the required probability of . 017 or . 025 , depending on the comparison , using Shaffer , 1986 , sequential Bonferroni pairwise comparisons for providing a familywise alpha of . 05 for multiple comparisons ; see also Seaman , Levin , & Serlin , 1991 ) . The Match33 condition outperformed the two conditions that had three matches of either only entities or FORs ( one - tailed tests ; both p s less than the required probability of . 017 ) . Finally , there was no reliable differ - ence ( p (cid:4) . 92 ) in performance between the two middle conditions , Match13 and Match31 . Discussion The results from this experiment suggest that both surface features and lower - level structural features may influence access roughly equally or at least more equally than suggested by prior studies . At the very least , the present results suggest that method - ologies that seek to examine this issue through manipulations of “kind”—in which whole stories constitute the manipulation ( e . g . , Gentner et al . , 1993 ; Wharton et al . , 1994 ) —may produce different results compared with manipulations of “degree , ” such as the Table 1 Manipulated Entity and FOR Matches and Non - Matches Between Doctor Base Story and Versions of Dentist Cue Story Matches / non - matches a Story Doctor Match33 Match13 Match31 Match11 Entities doctor dentist dentist dentist dentist ray laser ( ultrasound ) laser ( ultrasound ) tumor cyst ( tooth ) cyst ( tooth ) FORs NOT - HURT NOT - DAMAGE NOT - DAMAGE ( NOT - ENLARGE ) ( NOT - ENLARGE ) DESTROY BREAK UP BREAK UP ( STRENGTHEN ) ( STRENGTHEN ) SEND DIRECT DIRECT DIRECT DIRECT Note . The numbers following the name for each cue story reflect the number of manipulated entity and first - order relation ( FOR ) matches , respectively , with the base story . Thus , Match13 has one entity match and three FOR matches with the doctor base story . a Entities and FORs in the dentist stories that did not match their counterparts in the doctor story are shown in parentheses . Table 2 Proportion of Remindings of Base Stories as a Function of Entity and FOR Matches No . of entity matches No . of FOR matches 1 3 1 . 16 . 39 3 . 40 . 64 Note . FOR (cid:1) first - order relation . 322 CATRAMBONE manipulations in the present study in which the story structure is held relatively constant and the number of matches are manipulated . The reminding proportions in Table 2 for the Match13 and Match31 conditions suggest that an increase in the number of entity matches produced about the same effect as a corresponding increase in the number of FOR matches . However , there is no clear way to equate the “units” involved in an entity match with the units in a FOR match . Is the increase in entity matches from one to three a similar increment , psychologically , as an increase in the number of FOR matches from one to three ? A related concern is that the definition of a match either between entities or FORs was decided intuitively by the experimenter , although at least partially validated through the pilot study . For instance , in the doctor – dentist story pair it was assumed that tumor matches cyst but does not match tooth ( see Table 1 ) . This intuitive approach also apparently characterized prior studies . That is , there was no empirical measure of the manipulations to the stories to determine if the specific changes made to base and cue stories were perceived by participants as truly affecting overlap ( although Gentner et al . , 1993 , did have participants provide overall similar - ity ratings between stories ) . This issue could potentially be addressed through a computa - tional model that explicitly represents the primitives that make up the entities and FORs . It seems likely such primitives could be represented in the ARCS model used by Wharton et al . ( 1994 ; see Thagard et al . , 1990 ) as well as the Many are Called / Few are Chosen ( MAC / FAC ) model used by Gentner et al . ( 1993 ; see also Forbus , Gentner , & Law , 1995 ) . These primitives could literally be counted , or aggregated by some other direct technique , as a way of measuring degree of overlap or strength of manipulation . For instance , in an ARCS model , the model builder must create a network of relations for , say , the entities in the stories . Thus , one could presumably develop a metric for measuring the similarity of an entity in a base story and the matching entity in a cue story . In this way , one could , in principle , calculate measures of similarity for entities , FORs , and HORs between a given base and cue and test whether these model - based measures predict reminding . However , there is a difficulty with this approach : Where do the model - based measures come from ? The networks might be built from the modelers’ intuitions rather than data collected from humans . This problem could presumably be addressed through the use of pilot studies ( similar to the one done to develop the mate - rials for Experiment 1 ) in which experimenters collect ratings on the perceived similarity of pairs of entities , FORs , and HORs and use those ratings to guide the representations used in the models . Experiment 2 Experiment 1 manipulated a subset of entities and FORs while maintaining the story line and the primary HOR for each base – cue story pair . A clear extension to Experiment 1 would be to manip - ulate the degree of HOR overlap . It may be that if the degree of HOR overlap is reduced , then the relative contributions of entities and FORs may change . One possibility is that if the higher - order structure between two stories is reduced , then the effect of FORs on access may decrease . That is , perhaps FORs are unlikely to influence the reminding process unless they are imbedded in similar higher - order structures ; otherwise the required rerepresen - tation to “align” the FORs would require too much effort ( cf . Clement et al . , 1994 ) . Such a claim is consistent with computa - tional models such as MAC / FAC ( Forbus et al . , 1995 ) in which structurally consistent combinations of matches ( including FOR matches ) are preferred over isolated matches through a calculation of structural consistency . ARCS ( Wharton et al . , 1994 ) also im - plements this notion through the use of excitatory connections among “mapping units” that can represent episodic structures and thus favor larger systems of relational matches over isolated , “smaller” relational matches . Gentner et al . ( 1993 ) found that if two stories shared FORs and a HOR , the likelihood of access was greater than if they shared only FORs . This would suggest that FORs can have an increased effect on access when the higher - order structure matches . Con - versely , entity overlap may produce remindings without the benefit of much higher - order structural similarity ( cf . Gentner et al . , 1993 , Experiment 3 ; also Hammond et al . , 1991 ) . Such an interaction between entities , FORs , and HORs has not been examined sys - tematically . This was the goal of Experiment 2 . An additional extension in Experiment 2 was to reduce the story line overlap between the base and cue stories to determine whether the reminding results due to entity and FOR overlap found in Experiment 1 are replicated in a situation in which the base and cue have reduced semantic similarity . Method Participants . Participants were 270 students at the Georgia Institute of Technology who participated in the experiment for course credit . Materials . We used 15 base stories and 15 cue stories in the study . As in Experiment 1 , 12 base and 12 cue stories were taken from Gentner et al . ( 1993 ) and were used as fillers and were held constant across all condi - tions . The three other base and cue stories were the ones of interest and were highly modified versions of stories used in Gentner et al . As in Experiment 1 , the base and cue stories of interest will be referred to as the base and cue stories , respectively , whereas the other stories will be referred to as base - fillers and cue - fillers . Unlike Experiment 1 , the story lines of a particular base – cue pair were not shared . One base story and one cue story will be described below to demonstrate how the manipulations were implemented . Three factors were manipulated between each base and cue story : the number of entity matches ( 2 , 4 , or 6 ) , the number of FOR matches ( 2 , 4 , or 6 ) , and whether or not there was a HOR match . Thus , there were 18 versions of each cue story . The three base stories were held constant across conditions whereas the versions of the cue stories were manipulated . A participant in a given condition saw only one version of each cue story . One of the base stories was a story about a king whose obsession with bridge building conflicted with his desire to carry out wars ( see Appendix C , “Base story” ) . The cue story that went with this base story was a story about an astronomer whose focus on remodeling his home conflicted with his need to perform his astronomy duties . Appendix C presents nine versions of the astronomer story produced by crossing the number of manipulated entity and FOR matches ( for instance , Column 2 in Appendix C shows the version of The Astronomer that shares six entity matches , six FOR matches , and a HOR with the base story ) . The other nine versions that would be produced by removing the HOR match are described in the Appendix C note ( which also describes how to parse the materials in Appendix C ) . Procedure . The procedure was identical to the one used in Experi - ment 1 including the positioning of the base and cue stories . Participants were randomly assigned to one of 18 conditions representing one of the 18 possible relationships between the three base and cue stories ( entity 323 SURFACE AND STRUCTURAL FEATURES matches [ 2 , 4 , or 6 ] (cid:2) FOR matches [ 2 , 4 , or 6 ] (cid:2) HOR match [ 0 or1 ] ) . For a given participant , all three base stories had the same number of entity , FOR , and HOR matches with their respective cue stories . There were 15 participants per condition . Design . Experiment 2 was a 3 (cid:2) 3 (cid:2) 2 between - subjects design . The independent variables were number of entity ( 2 , 4 , or 6 ) , FOR ( 2 , 4 , or 6 ) , and HOR ( 0 or 1 ) matches for each base – cue story pair , resulting in 18 experimental groups . The dependent measure was the proportion of re - mindings of the base stories that occurred to the cue stories . Scoring was the same as in Experiment 1 . Predictions . Consistent with the results of Experiment 1 , one possible prediction is that remindings will increase as the number of entity and FOR matches between a base and cue increase . On the basis of prior research ( e . g . , Gentner et al . , 1993 ; Wharton et al . , 1994 ) , it seems less likely that HOR overlap will influence reminding as much as entity and FOR overlap . Another possibility may be that an interaction between FOR and HOR overlap is found . That is , FOR overlap might affect reminding only when there exists a HOR relating some or all of the FORs . Thus , one might predict an interaction between FOR and HOR overlap such that FOR overlap increases reminding primarily when there is a HOR in common between a base and cue . Conversely , the effect of entity overlap between a base and cue is more likely to be independent of the presence of a shared HOR . Such a prediction is consistent with prior work suggesting that surface similarity plays a strong , and possibly independent , role in remind - ing ( Catrambone , 1998 ; Gentner et al . , 1993 ; Hammond et al . , 1991 ; Keane , 1987 ; Reeves & Weisberg , 1994 ) . Results Table 3 shows the proportion of remindings as a function of the number of entity , FOR , and HOR matches between the base – cue pairs ( collapsed across the three base – cue pairs because there was no effect of specific pair ) . There was a main effect on remindings due to the number of entity matches , F ( 2 , 252 ) (cid:1) 5 . 06 , MSE (cid:1) 0 . 56 , p (cid:3) . 01 , but there was no reliable main effect due to the number of FOR matches , F ( 2 , 252 ) (cid:1) 2 . 43 , p (cid:1) . 09 , or due to the presence / absence of a HOR match , F ( 1 , 252 ) (cid:1) 2 . 69 , p (cid:1) . 10 . As the number of entity matches increased , so did the likelihood of being reminded of the relevant base story . An increase in FOR matches , or the presence of a HOR match , did not seem to directly aid reminding . There was a significant interaction between FORs and HORs , F ( 2 , 252 ) (cid:1) 3 . 17 , p (cid:3) . 05 , whereas the other two - way interactions were not significant—Entity (cid:2) FOR : F ( 4 , 252 ) (cid:1) 0 . 13 , p (cid:1) . 97 ; Entity (cid:2) HOR : F ( 2 , 252 ) (cid:1) 0 . 32 , p (cid:1) . 72 . An examination of the means in Table 3 indicates that when there was a HOR match between a base and cue , then reminding was more likely as the number of FOR matches increased . When there was not a HOR match between a base and cue , then the number of FOR matches did not have a clear effect on reminding . Conversely , the presence or absence of a HOR match did not appear to strongly influence how changes in the number of entity matches affected reminding . Finally , the three - way interaction among entity , FOR , and HOR matches was not significant , F ( 4 , 252 ) (cid:1) 0 . 37 , p (cid:1) . 83 . 4 Discussion The aim of Experiment 2 was to examine whether the finding from Experiment 1—that surface and lower - order structural fea - tures seem to have about the same effect on reminding—is found in a situation in which the base and cue do not share a HOR . The results from this experiment suggest that surface features aid reminding regardless of the presence and number of structural features and in the absence of a similar story line . However , lower - order structural features ( FORs ) seem to aid reminding primarily when at least one higher - order structural feature is present . This finding is consistent with both the MAC / FAC and ARCS models in which lower - order relational overlap plays a larger role in reminding if the relations are tied together by a HOR ( Forbus et al . , 1995 ; Wharton et al . , 1994 ) . When a HOR is shared between a base and a cue , the relative effect on reminding by surface features and lower - order relations seems reasonably close . In the portion of Table 3 showing remind - ings in the cases for which there was a HOR match , the proportion of remindings as a function of the increase in the number of entity matches from 2 to 4 to 6 ( . 35 , . 52 , and . 53 , respectively ) is close to the proportions as a function of the increase in the number of FOR matches from 2 to 4 to 6 ( . 30 , . 51 , and . 59 , respectively ) . Thus , as in Experiment 1 , entity and FOR matches seemed to contribute about equally to reminding when a HOR was present , even in the absence of similar story lines . Experiment 3 The results of Experiments 1 and 2 suggest two conclusions : ( a ) entity and FOR matches can be used as predictors of access , and ( b ) FOR matches seem to require a HOR to connect them in order to affect access while entity matches do not . However , the measure used in Experiments 1 and 2—remindings reported by participants as they read cue stories—provides just one line of evidence for the effect of entities , FORs , and HORs on access . Experiment 3 was conducted to find converging evidence through the use of another measure of access : reading time . Reading time may provide a more natural , sensitive , and spon - taneous measure of access compared with direct questions about 4 There was a virtually uninterpretable four - way interaction among story , number of entity matches , number of FOR matches , and presence / absence of a HOR match . However , no other interaction involving story was significant . Table 3 Proportion of Remindings of Base Stories as a Function of Entity , FOR , and HOR Matches in Experiment 2 No . of entity matches No . of FOR matches Two Four Six M No HOR match Two . 31 . 29 . 20 . 27 Four . 40 . 33 . 40 . 38 Six . 47 . 47 . 53 . 49 M . 39 . 36 . 38 . 38 HOR match Two . 16 . 36 . 53 . 35 Four . 40 . 58 . 58 . 52 Six . 33 . 58 . 67 . 53 M . 30 . 51 . 59 . 46 Note . FOR (cid:1) first - order relation ; HOR (cid:1) higher - order relation . 324 CATRAMBONE which base stories participants claim to recall when they read cue stories . In the latter approach , a conscious memory search is invoked which may or may not reflect spontaneous reminding . Conversely , reading time may reflect spontaneous reminding be - cause it is hypothesized to be influenced by several relatively rapid and , in some cases , automatic processes . For present purposes , the most relevant prior research on factors influencing reading time focuses on the construction of on - line inferences and the effects of background knowledge . A variety of studies have found evidence that readers construct inferences while reading a text ( e . g . , Duffy , 1986 ; Graesser , Singer , & Tra - basso , 1994 ; McKoon & Ratcliff , 1986 ) . Although specific models of text comprehension differ on the conditions under which the inferences are made ( e . g . , Graesser et al . , 1994 ; Keefe & Mc - Daniel , 1993 ; McKoon & Ratcliff , 1992 ) and the precise timing of the inferences ( Calvo , Castillo , & Estevez , 1999 ) , it is generally agreed that the process of making an inference slows reading . As mentioned earlier , researchers have proposed different ac - counts of the conditions under which inferences occur . For in - stance , one model claims that inferences occur primarily if they are based on easily available information or are needed to make the present text locally coherent ( McKoon & Ratcliff , 1992 ) . Other models propose that a richer set of inferences occur on - line and reflect the on - line construction of a situation model of a narrative text ( Graesser et al . , 1994 ) . Recent studies have seemed consistent with the claim that forward inferences are constructed quite often ( e . g . , Klin , Murray , Levine , & Guzma´n , 1999 ) . Some studies have indicated that if a reader elaborates on the currently read text , then reading time will increase . The nature of the elaboration seems to center around gap filling and increasing coherence . For instance , if a reader encounters a difficult piece of text , the reader is often likely to attempt to reprocess earlier parts of the text in an attempt to improve understanding of the currently read text ( e . g . , O’Brien & Myers , 1985 ; O’Brien , Shank , Myers , & Rayner , 1988 ) . This reprocessing takes effort and can slow down reading . Similarly , if a reader encounters a text that requires inferences in order to be sufficiently coherent , the necessary in - ferencing—assuming the reader has the knowledge to do it— appears to be done on - line and adds to the reading time ( Mc - Namara & Kintsch , 1996 ) . This initial slow down may be offset by advantages in subsequent processing because of a better situation model that is formed at this point . Thus , if a learner possesses appropriate background knowledge—either through an experi - mental manipulation or by knowledge possessed prior to the study—for helping him or her understand some new text , then the reader will tend to spend longer on that text if it is challenging and thus requires elaboration . If the text is relatively simple or if the text is challenging and the reader has little relevant background knowledge , the reader will tend not to slow down because elabo - ration is not required or not worth attempting . With respect to the present experiment , the key finding in this prior work on text comprehension is that when a reader elaborates on the currently read text , reading time increases . It is conjectured here that if a reader is reminded of a prior story when reading a current one , then he or she might be more likely to do additional inferencing / elaboration ( to be referred to here as elaboration ) because of the reminding and thus slow down when reading the new text compared with someone who is not reminded of a prior story . This conjecture was the basis for the present experiment . While a reminding might not always lead to elaboration , and thus increased reading time , presumably a reminding is more likely to lead to elaboration—other things being equal—than if a remind - ing did not occur . Although it was expected that reminding , as a function of entity , FOR , and HOR matches , would lead to elabo - ration and thus , longer reading times , it was felt that it would be prudent to additionally examine reading performance of two con - trol conditions . Participants in the explicit - reminding control condition read 3 base stories and 12 base - fillers during Phase 1 . During Phase 2 they read 3 cue stories and 12 cue - fillers . However , prior to reading each cue story they were explicitly reminded of the rele - vant base story and encouraged to use the base story to help them understand the cue story . 5 As in Experiment 2 , the base and cue stories shared a certain number of entity , FOR , and HOR matches . Reading times for the cues and cue - fillers were collected . Participants in the No - Base control condition did not read the 3 base stories during Phase 1 , just the 12 base - fillers . During Phase 2 they read the 3 cue stories and the 12 cue - fillers . Participants in the spontaneous - reminding experimental condi - tion read the same stories as the explicit - reminding participants in Phases 1 and 2 but were not given explicit reminders about the base stories . The reading times for the cue stories for the two control groups ( No - Base and explicit - reminding ) were compared in order to test the assumption that elaborations due to thinking of a prior story would lead to longer reading times . The logic was to allow a comparison of reading times for the cue stories among participants who could not access the base stories because they had not read them ( No - Base ) —although they presumably could access other stories they had read in the past , this would also be true for other participants—and participants who presumably accessed the base stories because they were given explicit instructions to think of them ( explicit - reminding ) . If such a comparison showed consis - tently longer reading times for the explicit - reminding participants for the cue stories , this would provide support for the assumption that elaboration leads to longer reading times . This would then allow a more confident conclusion about the meaning of the expected effects of entity , FOR , and HOR matches on remindings , and thus reading times , for participants in the spontaneous - reminding condition . The stories from Experiment 2 were used in Experiment 3 , and sentence - by - sentence reading times for the cue stories were col - lected . Recall that in Experiment 2 , the version of the cue story varied from condition to condition while the base stories stayed constant . The base and cue stories from Experiment 2 were now used as cue and base stories , respectively . This reversal was done to enable participants in all conditions to read the same version of the cue stories in Phase 2 so that reading times on the same 5 In retrospect , a more appropriate condition might have been one in which participants were asked to use the base story to help them predict what would happen next in the cue story . This would have been the sort of instruction McKoon and Ratcliff ( 1992 ) would argue would be needed to make readers most likely to form inferences that go beyond those needed for local coherence or beyond world knowledge that is readily available . Nevertheless , the instructions actually used may have been sufficient to encourage participants in this condition to actively use the base story to produce forward inferences . 325 SURFACE AND STRUCTURAL FEATURES sentences could be compared . Thus , it was the versions of the base stories that varied from condition to condition for spontaneous - reminding and explicit - reminding participants . It is important to consider the number of entity , FOR , and HOR matches that have occurred by the time a spontaneous - reminding or explicit - reminding participant has finished reading each partic - ular sentence in a cue story . Because the stories used in Experi - ment 2 were not designed originally with the reading - time measure in mind , it is the case that as a reader moves from sentence to sentence , the cumulative number of entity and FOR matches that have occurred does not necessarily evenly increase . Although this is unfortunate for design purposes , we thought it was best to not change the stories themselves to maximize comparisons with Ex - periment 2 . A participant in the 6 - entity match condition ( regard - less of the number of FOR matches ) would have encountered a total of three entity matches with the Cornelius story ( now used as a base story ) by the end of the first sentence of the King Otto story ( now used as a cue story ) , a total of four entity matches by the end of the second sentence , a total of five entity matches by the end of the third sentence , and would have reached the sixth and final entity match by the end of the fifth sentence . The number of FOR matches encountered by a participant in the 6 - FOR match condi - tion ( regardless of the number of entity matches ) increases by one FOR by the end of each sentence . Table 4 lists the number of entity and FOR matches encountered by participants in the spontaneous - reminding and explicit - reminding conditions as a function of the entity , FOR , and HOR conditions they were in . The HOR match , if there was one , occurred during the sixth sentence . It turns out , luckily enough , that this pattern holds for each of the three cue stories used in Experiment 3 . One approach for analyzing the reading - time data would be to compare reading times for the spontaneous - reminding participants on key sentences that have a large spread across conditions in the cumulative number of matches that have occurred by the end of those sentences . To assess the effect of entity matches on remind - ing , reading times on Sentence 2 could be compared because this sentence provides a spread of one versus three versus five cumu - lative entity matches across conditions ( see the second row under the “2 Entity matches , ” “4 Entity matches , ” and “6 Entity matches” subheadings in Table 4 ) . Similarly , to assess the effect of FOR matches on reminding , reading times on Sentence 5 could be compared because it provides a spread of one versus three versus five cumulative FOR matches across conditions ( see Table 4 ) . Finally , to assess the effect of a HOR match , reading times on Sentence 6 could be compared because it is during Sentence 6 that the HOR match occurs ( if it occurs at all ) . An alternative approach to the one described above would be to conduct a regression on the sentence - by - sentence reading times using the cumulative number of entity , FOR , and HOR matches at each sentence as predictors . Both types of analyses described above were conducted and provided converging outcomes . For simplicity , the results from the first analysis approach—analyses of variance on the reading times for key sentences—are provided in the Results section . Method Participants . Participants were 585 students at the Georgia Institute of Technology who participated in the experiment for course credit . Materials . The stories from Experiment 2 were used . However , the stories used as cues in Experiment 2 were now used as the base stories , and the stories used as bases in Experiment 2 were now used as cues . This allowed reading times to be compared because all participants would read the same cue stories . There were 18 versions of the 3 base stories ( e . g . , 18 versions of the Cornelius story ) while the 12 base - fillers were held con - Table 4 Cumulative Number of Entity and FOR Matches That Occurred by the End of Each Sentence in the Cue Stories in Experiment 3 Condition Sentenceno . Cumulative no . of entity matches Condition Sentenceno . Cumulative no . of FOR matches 2 Entity matches a 2 FOR matches b 1 1 1 1 2 1 2 1 3 2 3 1 4 2 4 1 5 2 5 1 6 2 6 2 4 Entity matches a 4 FOR matches b 1 3 1 1 2 3 2 1 3 4 3 2 4 4 4 2 5 4 5 3 6 4 6 4 6 Entity matches a 6 FOR matches b 1 4 1 1 2 5 2 2 3 6 3 3 4 6 4 4 5 6 5 5 6 6 6 6 Note . The higher - order relation match always occurred in the sixth sentence . FOR (cid:1) first - order relation . a Regardless of the number of FOR matches . b Regardless of the number of entity matches . 326 CATRAMBONE stant . The 3 cue stories were held constant across all conditions ( e . g . , there was a single version of the King Otto story ) as were the 12 cue - fillers . Procedure . The overall procedure , including the 1 - week delay be - tween reading the base and cue stories and the positioning of the base and cue stories among the fillers , was the same as in Experiment 2 . The primary differences were that the cues and bases from Experiment 2 were now bases and cues , respectively . Participants in the spontaneous - reminding condition were randomly assigned to 1 of 18 subconditions representing 1 of the 18 possible relationships between the three base and cue stories . For a given partici - pant , all three base stories had the same number of entity , FOR , and HOR matches with their respective cue stories . There were 15 participants per experimental subcondition , for a total of 270 participants in the spontaneous - reminding condition . Participants in the explicit - reminding condition read the same base and cue stories as those in the spontaneous - reminding condition . However , prior to reading each cue story , they were explicitly reminded through a one - sentence prompt ( on the computer screen ) of the base story that was related to the cue story and asked to try to recall that story to themselves and then , when they had done so , to keep it in mind because it would help them understand the cue story they were about to read . There were 18 explicit - reminding subconditions to match the 18 spontaneous - reminding subconditions . There were 15 participants per experimental subcondition , for a total of 270 participants in the explicit - reminding condition . Participants in the No - Base condition ( n (cid:1) 45 ) read the same 12 base - fillers as participants in the other conditions , but they did not read the 3 base stories ( e . g . , they did not read the Cornelius story ) . They read the same 3 cue stories and 12 cue - fillers as the other participants . Participants read all base and base - fillers in Phase 1 on paper , as in the prior experiments , but read the cue and cue - fillers in Phase 2 on a computer screen . They were told they would be reading the stories sentence by sentence . When participants first sat in front of the computer , the screen contained instructions telling them to press the space bar to make a row of asterisks appear , and that they should stare at the asterisks when pressing the bar again to make the first sentence appear on the screen . The instruc - tions also stated that each time they were done reading a sentence , they should press the space bar to read the next sentence . Each sentence appeared alone in the middle of the screen . When a particular story was finished , the next space - bar press produced a screen indicating that the story was complete and that the next space - bar press would bring up the first sentence of the next story ( for explicit - reminding participants , that space - bar press would first bring up a reminder of the relevant base story and the next space - bar press would bring up the first sentence of the next story ) . For each cue story , the first text that appeared was actually the first two sentences of that story because of the brevity of those sentences for each cue story . Because all cue stories contained seven sentences , and the first two sentences were always combined ( as is shown in Appendix C ) , the term first sentence will henceforth mean the combined first two sentences of each story , second sentence will mean the next sentence , and so on . Participants were asked to read the stories “naturally” and were asked to be prepared to summarize some of the stories if requested . This latter instruction was an attempt to encourage participants to read the stories reasonably carefully without making them feel they had to read the stories much more closely than normal . Participants were also told they were free to take a break whenever they wanted as long as it was prior to beginning a new story . Participants were run in groups of anywhere from 4 to 15 and they knew that reading times were being collected . Design . Experiment 3 was a 2 (cid:2) 3 (cid:2) 3 (cid:2) 2 between - subjects design . The first between - subjects variable was whether participants were explic - itly told ( explicit - reminding ) or not told ( spontaneous - reminding ) of the connection between each cue story and its matching base story prior to reading each of the three cue stories . The other independent variables were number of entity ( 2 , 4 , or 6 ) , FOR ( 2 , 4 , or 6 ) , and HOR ( 0 or 1 ) matches between each base – cue story pair , resulting in 18 experimental groups for both the explicit - reminding and spontaneous - reminding conditions . Fi - nally , participants in the No - Base control condition did not read the base stories but did read the base - fillers . The dependent measure was sentence - by - sentence reading times for the cue stories . Predictions . If an increase in the number of entity matches makes spontaneous access of the base story more likely when reading a cue story , and this access leads to elaboration and thus , longer reading time , then reading times for the key sentence of the cue stories ( Sentence 2 ) should increase as the number of entity matches increases for participants in the spontaneous - reminding condition . A similar argument can be made for FOR matches ( Sentence 5 ) with the caveat , on the basis of the results from Experiment 2 , that the FOR matches may have an effect only if there is a HOR match to tie them together . However , because the HOR match , if there is one , occurs in the final sentence of each cue story ( Sentence 6 ) , there may be no effect of FOR matches until the final sentence . The explicit - reminding condition should show longer reading times compared with the No - Base condition on all key sentences because , pre - sumably , explicit - reminding participants were continuously trying to relate the cue story to the relevant base story . Results To decrease the number of statistical tests conducted , reading times ( for the groups involved in the comparison ) for each sen - tence in each cue story were converted to standardized times and then averaged . For example , suppose a comparison was to be made between explicit - reminding and No - Base participants of the read - ing times for Sentence 2 of the cue stories . In this case , an average reading time and standard deviation for Sentence 2 collapsed across these two groups would be calculated separately for each of the cue stories . The average would then be subtracted from each participant’s reading time for Sentence 2 and the result would then be divided by the standard deviation to produce a z - score on Sentence 2 for each cue story for each participant . The z - scores for Sentence 2 for the three cue stories would then be averaged for each participant . It is this average z - score on Sentence 2 that would be compared . Two initial comparisons were made to establish that reading time would be likely to increase if a participant was reminded of a base story while reading a cue story . First , consider participants in the explicit - reminding and No - Base conditions . If the explicit - reminding participants were think - ing of the base stories while reading the cue stories , then explicit - reminding participants should have read the sentences in the cue stories more slowly . Collapsing across the entity / FOR / HOR match manipulation for explicit - reminding participants ( because this ma - nipulation was irrelevant for the No - Base participants ) , the average standardized time to read the second , fifth , and sixth sentences of the cue stories was longer for explicit - reminding participants than for No - Base participants ( explicit - reminding (cid:1) . 06 , . 05 , and . 05 s and No - Base (cid:1) (cid:5) . 36 , (cid:5) . 30 , and (cid:5) . 29 s , for the second , fifth , and six sentences , respectively ) . The corresponding analyses are : F ( 1 , 313 ) (cid:1) 6 . 87 , MSE (cid:1) 0 . 98 , p (cid:3) . 01 ; F ( 1 , 313 ) (cid:1) 4 . 75 , MSE (cid:1) 0 . 99 , p (cid:1) . 03 ; F ( 1 , 313 ) (cid:1) 4 . 48 , MSE (cid:1) 0 . 99 , p (cid:1) . 04 . This result is consistent with the assumption that thinking about a prior story when reading a current story can increase reading time . Second , if participants in the explicit - reminding condition were thinking of the base stories when reading the cue stories , then for these participants there should have been no effect of the match manipulation . That is , presumably all explicit - reminding partici - pants were thinking of the relevant base stories because they were told specifically which story was relevant for each cue story . Table 327 SURFACE AND STRUCTURAL FEATURES 5A shows the standardized reading times for Sentence 2 ( calcu - lated on the raw times from only explicit - reminding participants ) as a function of the number of entity matches encountered by the end of that sentence . There was no significant effect of number of entity matches , F ( 2 , 252 ) (cid:1) 1 . 98 , MSE (cid:1) 1 . 03 , p (cid:1) . 14 . Table 5B shows the reading times for Sentence 5 as a function of the number of FOR matches encountered by the end of that sentence . There was no significant effect of number of FOR matches , F ( 2 , 252 ) (cid:1) 0 . 05 , MSE (cid:1) 1 . 04 , p (cid:1) . 95 . Table 5C shows the reading times for Sentence 6 as a function of the number of FOR matches encountered by the end of that sentence and whether the HOR match occurred . There was no significant effect of number of FOR matches , F ( 2 , 252 ) (cid:1) 0 . 91 , MSE (cid:1) 1 . 00 , p (cid:1) . 40 , or the presence of a HOR match , F ( 1 , 252 ) (cid:1) 0 . 81 , p (cid:1) . 37 . The interaction was also not significant , F ( 2 , 252 ) (cid:1) 1 . 21 , p (cid:1) . 30 . While null results should not be taken as strong support , those results , coupled with the significant effects mentioned above , suggest that participants’ reading times were affected when they thought of a prior story while reading a current one . The results of most interest for present purposes involved par - ticipants in the spontaneous - reminding condition . If these partici - pants were reminded of base stories as a function of the number and / or type of matches , then reading times for the critical sen - tences should be longer if remindings were more likely . Table 6A shows the reading times for Sentence 2 ( calculated on the raw times from only spontaneous - reminding participants ) as a function of the number of entity matches encountered by the end of that sentence . There was a significant effect of number of entity matches , F ( 2 , 252 ) (cid:1) 3 . 05 , MSE (cid:1) 1 . 00 , p (cid:3) . 05 . There was no effect of number of FOR matches , F ( 2 , 252 ) (cid:1) 0 . 11 . Pairwise comparisons indicated that the 6 - entity match condition was sig - nificantly slower than the 2 - entity match condition ( p (cid:3) . 05 ) but not the 4 - entity match condition , and the 2 - and 4 - entity match conditions did not reliably differ . Table 6B shows the reading times for Sentence 5 as a function of the number of FOR matches encountered by the end of that sentence . There was a significant effect of number of FOR matches , F ( 2 , 252 ) (cid:1) 3 . 26 , MSE (cid:1) 1 . 03 , p (cid:1) . 04 . There was no effect of number of entity matches , F ( 2 , 252 ) (cid:1) 0 . 15 . Pairwise comparisons indicate that the 6 - FOR match condition was signif - icantly slower than the 2 - FOR match condition ( p (cid:3) . 05 ) but not the 4 - FOR match condition , and the 2 - and 4 - FOR match condi - tions did not reliably differ . Table 6C shows the reading times for Sentence 6 as a function of the number of FOR matches encountered by the end of that sentence and whether the HOR match occurred . The effect of number of FOR matches did not quite reach significance , F ( 2 , 252 ) (cid:1) 2 . 64 , MSE (cid:1) 1 . 02 , p (cid:1) . 07 . There was no effect due to the presence / absence of a HOR match , F ( 1 , 252 ) (cid:1) 1 . 03 , p (cid:1) . 31 , nor was there an interaction between FORs and HORs , F ( 2 , 252 ) (cid:1) 0 . 73 , p (cid:1) . 48 . There was no effect due to number of entity matches , F ( 2 , 252 ) (cid:1) 0 . 01 . Discussion The intent of Experiment 3 was to examine whether a reading time measure would be sensitive to the hypothesized remindings that would occur as a function of entity , FOR , and HOR overlap and whether such remindings would mirror the results from the prior experiments . The results from this experiment provide con - verging evidence that first - order structural matches can lead to Table 5 Standardized Reading Times by Explicit - Reminding Participants for Key Sentences Averaged Across Cue Stories ( Experiment 3 ) Number of entity matches reached by the end of Sentence 2 Standardized reading time ( s ) A . Sentence 2 : Reading times collapsed across FOR and HOR match conditions 1 ( Two entity match condition ) (cid:5) 0 . 17 3 ( Four entity match condition ) 0 . 07 5 ( Six entity match condition ) 0 . 10 Number of FOR matches reached by the end of Sentence 5 B . Sentence 5 : Reading times collapsed across entity and HOR match conditions 1 ( Two FOR match condition ) 0 . 01 3 ( Four FOR match condition ) 0 . 02 5 ( Six FOR match condition ) (cid:5) 0 . 03 Number of FOR matches reached by the end of sentence 6 C . Sentence 6 : Reading times collapsed across entity match conditions No HOR match HOR match 2 ( Two FOR match condition ) (cid:5) 0 . 03 (cid:5) 0 . 18 4 ( Four FOR match condition ) (cid:5) 0 . 08 0 . 10 6 ( Six FOR match condition ) (cid:5) 0 . 06 0 . 25 Note . FOR (cid:1) first - order relation ; HOR (cid:1) higher - order relation . 328 CATRAMBONE remindings . In addition , the results suggest that a reading - time measure might be more sensitive to overlap compared with a direct query about whether one is reminded of a particular story . That is , in Experiment 2 , the explicit - reminding measure suggested that FOR overlap influences reminding only when a HOR is present to tie together the lower - order relations . However , in Experiment 3 , a reading - time measure suggested that FOR overlap is sufficient to lead to remindings without a HOR present . Future experiments might need to use both explicit and indirect ( e . g . , reading time ) approaches to assess reminding and to determine whether the different results are primarily a function of the sensitivity of the reminding measures . General Discussion The goal of the present work was to examine the effects on access due to surface and structural overlap between stories . A second goal was to address a perceived shortcoming in the meth - odologies used in prior studies in which surface and structural overlap was not manipulated systematically . The apparently con - flicting results of such studies may have been partly due to differ - ences in the strength , as well as type , of their manipulations . To address this issue , the present study sought to manipulate systematically , within a single experimental framework , the num - ber of surface and structural features that overlapped between a base and cue story and to examine the effects on access . Across two experiments ( Experiments 1 and 3 ) , it was found that when the number of surface ( entity ) and lower - order structural ( FOR ) matches increased between a base story and a cue story , partici - pants were more likely to be reminded of the base when reading the cue . The findings summarized above suggest that the number of overlapping features , surface or lower - order structural , may be the major determinant of access rather than the type of features that overlap . However , the results from Experiment 2 suggest that the structural effect is strengthened if a higher - order structural simi - larity is also present , whereas the surface effect seems to be independent of structural characteristics . Lower - order relations apparently benefit from the presence of a “glue”—the HOR—to organize them to reliably produce an above - threshold effect on reminding . This conjecture is perhaps captured in the notion of alignability , the idea that a series of lower - level structural matches between a base and cue need to have matching arguments ( relations ) and one - to - one correspondence of the elements that are in the argu - ments ( Gentner & Markman , 1997 ) . The alignability between two stories is increased if HORs are shared that organize the lower - order relations in similar ways . This would be consistent with Keane’s ( 1997 ) finding that when causal relations—as one type of glue—between a base and cue are emphasized ( such as through problem content or processing instructions ) , then subsequent map - ping of other features of the base and cue becomes easier ( see also Lassaline , 1996 ) . Although the alignability of lower - order structural features may play a role in access , the representation of those features is also important for access . Clement et al . ( 1994 ) argued that lower - order relations and HORs within a story can be represented in a way that makes their similarity to other stories easy to notice—and there - Table 6 Standardized Reading Times By Spontaneous - Reminding Participants for Key Sentences Averaged Across Cue Stories in Experiment 3 No . of entity matches reached by the end of Sentence 2 Standardized reading time ( s ) A . Sentence 2 : Reading times collapsed across FOR and HOR match conditions 1 ( Two entity match condition ) (cid:5) 0 . 20 3 ( Four entity match condition ) 0 . 04 5 ( Six entity match condition ) 0 . 16 No . of FOR matches reached by the end of Sentence 5 B . Sentence 5 : Reading times collapsed across entity and HOR match conditions 1 ( Two FOR match condition ) (cid:5) 0 . 22 3 ( Four FOR match condition ) 0 . 07 5 ( Six FOR match condition ) 0 . 15 No . of FOR matches reached by the end of Sentence 6 C . Sentence 6 : Reading times collapsed across entity match conditions No HOR match HOR match 2 ( Two FOR match condition ) (cid:5) 0 . 160 (cid:5) 0 . 23 4 ( Four FOR match condition ) (cid:5) 0 . 030 0 . 15 6 ( Six FOR match condition ) (cid:5) 0 . 001 0 . 27 Note . FOR (cid:1) first - order relation ; HOR (cid:1) higher - order relation . 329 SURFACE AND STRUCTURAL FEATURES fore more likely to affect access—or in a way that makes their similarity difficult to notice . Clement et al . ( 1994 ) used base and cue passages that differed in story line and entity similarity . They manipulated the degree to which the similarity of the corresponding lower - order relations or HORs were immediately apparent . For example , a base and cue might share a HOR but the lower - order relations within this structure were expressed in ways that would either make their similarity difficult to detect or easy to detect . In the difficult case , corresponding lower - order relations were expressed with domain - specific terms . Clement et al . referred to the relational similarity in this condition as “latent” because the reader would need to rerep - resent or generalize the terms to detect the similarity . In the easy case , corresponding lower - order relations were expressed with domain - general terms . Clement et al . referred to the relational similarity in this condition as “manifest” because the similarity should already be transparent and little or no rerepresentation should be required to detect the similarity . For instance , in one pair of stories , the base involved a crab - like creature that “robs” claws from an opponent it kills in battle , and in the cue , a political candidate either “plagiarizes” ( latent condi - tion ) ideas from an opponent defeated in a race or “steals” ideas from the opponent ( manifest condition ) . Presumably “robbing” is similar to both “plagiarizing” and “stealing , ” but the similarity to “stealing” is more immediately apparent . “Plagiarize” is a more domain - specific term that would need to be rerepresented to be seen as similar to “robbing . ” Clement et al . ( 1994 ) assumed that successful access requires matches that can be directly made ; that is , the access process depends on the form of already - existing representations , and therefore would miss similarity requiring any rerepresentation . Consequently , access would be relatively poor in the latent condition and stronger in the manifest condition . This is what they found . The conditions in the present study with few matching FORs ( but shared HORs ) could be viewed as an extreme form of Clement et al . ’s ( 1994 ) latent conditions . In Clement et al . ’s latent conditions , the similarity between two lower - order rela - tions would be revealed through rerepresentation . Non - matching FORs in the present study have little or no inde - pendent similarity . They are similar only by virtue of their role in the higher - order structure . That is , DESTROY and STRENGTHEN are not similar except in the context of the higher - order structure in which they are each embedded . They both represent the “desired effect on the target . ” As with Clement et al . ’s latent materials , access should be more difficult in such cases because to see the similarity the reasoner may have to rerepresent destroy and strengthen and view them in terms of their common structural role in the higher - order struc - ture . This requires greater effort on the part of the reader than what might be considered the default level of effort . Even when FORs match between two stories , if there is not a HOR to help put those FORs into some sort of alignment , then access does not get a reliable boost . Surface features apparently do not need such an alignment aid to reliably impact access . Implications for Models of Analogical Access Models of access have been proposed in the analogical reason - ing literature—for example , ARCS , Thagard et al . , 1990 ; Incre - mental Analogy Machine , Keane , Ledgeway , & Duff , 1994 ; MAC / FAC , Forbus et al . , 1995—and have been used to simulate the reminding results from various experiments ( Gentner et al . , 1993 ; Keane , 1997 ; Wharton et al . , 1994 ) . A primary empirical result that such models have attempted to simulate is that surface features play a much stronger role than structural features in access . The models use a variety of mechanisms to produce this phenomena . For instance , Forbus et al . ’s ( 1995 ; Gentner et al . , 1993 ) MAC / FAC model uses a two - stage model of retrieval in which the second stage uses the Structure Mapping Engine in “literal simi - larity” mode to produce the bias for access on the basis of surface features . If the results from the present studies provide a more valid indication than prior studies of the relative effects of surface and structural features on access , then it would seem that models of access need to be adjusted . For example , in the MAC / FAC model , the second stage of the retrieval process might be tuned to a lesser emphasis on literal similarity . In the ARCS model ( Whar - ton et al . , 1994 ) , the “similarity constraint” ( concerning taxonomic links of concepts ) might be relaxed to account for the results in the present study . The results from the present experiments suggest that it might be acceptable to simply count the number of surface and structural matches between stories—particularly if a standardized approach for representing the entities , lower - order relations , and HORs can be developed—as a way of measuring similarity , and that there may be reasonable agreement among individuals as to what con - stitutes a match . This is an important observation because most models of analogical access do in fact compute matches and purport to be psychologically plausible . An interesting question to examine in future work is whether the type of HOR , and the number of lower - order relations involved in that HOR , play a reliable role in access . For example , perhaps a causal HOR affects access more than a taxonomic one . Effects of Processing Instructions and Learners’ Goals on Access While the present results found roughly equivalent effects on access due to surface features and lower - order relations ( particu - larly when a HOR was present ) , this may have been partly due to the relatively elaborate processing participants were led to do . Hammond et al . ( 1991 ) suggested that surface features , by defini - tion , require less inferential processing to identify and extract from text . Therefore , surface features might have an advantage in re - minding when readers process stories at a shallow level . When deeper processing is encouraged then structural features can play a bigger role in reminding and analogical reasoning more generally ( Catrambone & Holyoak , 1989 ) . In a task that presumably required fairly deep processing , Blanchette and Dunbar ( 2000 ) found that when participants were asked to produce analogies , the analogs participants created were dominated by structural feature overlap with the sample and had relatively little surface overlap . If less - elaborate instructions , such as those used in Gentner et al . ( 1993 ) , were used in Experiments 1 and 3 ( e . g . , participants just read the base stories and were simply encouraged to remember them ) , then perhaps the results would have favored surface fea - tures in access . Such a condition could be examined in future work and compared with one using more elaborate processing under a single , consistent experimental framework . 330 CATRAMBONE Converging Evidence for the Role of Surface and Structural Features on Access : Parallel Reminding and Problem - Solving Studies Analogical reasoning research in the early 1980s tended to focus on problem solving ( e . g . , Gentner & Gentner , 1983 ; Gick & Holyoak , 1983 ) . One of the reasons that more direct reminding measures have been the focus in recent research is that problem - solving performance is an imperfect measure of whether a person has accessed a prior story , problem , or example . For instance , Ross ( 1987 , 1989 ) manipulated surface and structural features of prob - ability examples and test problems and found that surface features tended to have an effect on which examples were used when learners solved problems but had less apparent effect on access ( see also Bassok , Wu , & Olseth , 1995 ; Catrambone , 1998 ) . Clearly , a person could be reminded of a prior example when working on a current problem , but then dismiss the example as not being helpful for solving the current problem or be unable to adapt the solution from the prior example ( Chen , 1995 ; Novick & Holyoak , 1991 ) . In such situations , problem - solving performance would underestimate reminding . Nevertheless , problem - solving studies might be critical for studying access . Hammond et al . ( 1991 ) noted that experiments for which the purpose is to retrieve an analog “lack the organizing constraints of actual cognitive tasks” and that “ [ s ] eparating re - trieval from the task context may qualitatively change the cogni - tive processes we would like to observe . ” If problem - solving studies can be run in parallel with access studies , then the results can be compared and the unique contributions of access and adaptation on analogical problem - solving performance can be more accurately and reliably assessed ( cf . Holyoak & Koh , 1987 ) . Prior studies that have shown an inconsistent influence of struc - tural features on access may have been affected by miscellaneous factors in the story materials , processing instructions , and so on . It seems that the debate about the relative effects of surface and structural features on access can be best addressed by using a consistent framework that allows systematic manipulations of fea - tures of the materials , processing instructions , and other factors . References Bassok , M . , Wu , L . L . , & Olseth , K . L . ( 1995 ) . Judging a book by its cover : Interpretive effects of content on problem - solving transfer . Memory & Cognition , 23 , 354 – 367 . Blanchette , I . , & Dunbar , K . ( 2000 ) . How analogies are generated : The roles of structural and superficial similarity . Memory & Cognition , 28 , 108 – 124 . Calvo , M . G . , Castillo , M . D . , & Estevez , A . ( 1999 ) . On - line predictive inferences in reading : Processing time during versus after the priming context . Memory & Cognition , 27 , 834 – 843 . Catrambone , R . ( 1998 ) . The subgoal learning model and problem - solving transfer : Creating better examples so that students can solve novel problems . Journal of Experimental Psychology : General , 127 , 355 – 376 . Catrambone , R . , & Holyoak , K . J . ( 1989 ) . Overcoming contextual limita - tions on problem - solving transfer . Journal of Experimental Psychology : Learning , Memory , and Cognition , 15 , 1147 – 1156 . Chen , Z . ( 1995 ) . Analogical transfer : From schematic pictures to problem solving . Memory & Cognition , 23 , 255 – 269 . Clement , C . ( 1987 ) . Applying general principles to novel problems as a function of learning history : Learning from examples vs . studying gen - eral statements . In Proceedings of the Ninth Annual Conference of the Cognitive Science Society ( pp . 922 – 933 ) . Hillsdale , NJ : Erlbaum . Clement , C . A . , Mawby , R . , & Giles , D . E . ( 1994 ) . The effects of manifest relational similarity on analog retrieval . Journal of Memory and Lan - guage , 33 , 396 – 420 . Duffy , S . ( 1986 ) . Role of expectations in sentence integration . Journal of Experimental Psychology : Learning , Memory , and Cognition , 12 , 208 – 219 . Forbus , K . D . , Gentner , D . , & Law , K . ( 1995 ) . MAC / FAC : A model of similarity - based retrieval . Cognitive Science , 19 , 141 – 205 . Gentner , D . ( 1983 ) . Structure - mapping : A theoretical framework for anal - ogy . Cognitive Science , 7 , 155 – 170 . Gentner , D . ( 1989 ) . Mechanisms of analogical learning . In S . Vosniadou and A . Ortony ( Eds . ) , Similarity and analogical reasoning ( pp . 199 – 241 ) . London : Cambridge University Press . Gentner , D . , & Gentner , D . R . ( 1983 ) . Flowing waters or teeming crowds : Mental models of electricity . In D . Gentner & A . L . Stephens ( Eds . ) , Mental models . Hillsdale , NJ : Erlbaum . Gentner , D . , & Markman , A . B . ( 1997 ) . Structure mapping in analogy and similarity . American Psychologist , 52 , 45 – 56 . Gentner , D . , Rattermann , M . J . , & Forbus , K . D . ( 1993 ) . The roles of similarity in transfer : Separating retrievability from inferential sound - ness . Cognitive Psychology , 25 , 431 – 467 . Gick , M . L . , & Holyoak , K . J . ( 1983 ) . Schema induction and analogical transfer . Cognitive Psychology , 15 , 1 – 38 . Graesser , A . C . , Singer , M . , & Trabasso , T . ( 1994 ) . Constructing infer - ences during narrative text comprehension . Psychological Review , 101 , 371 – 395 . Hammond , K . J . , Seifert , C . M . , & Gray , K . C . ( 1991 ) . Functionality in analogical transfer : A hard match is good to find . The Journal of the Learning Sciences , 1 , 111 – 152 . Holyoak , K . J . , & Koh , K . ( 1987 ) . Surface and structural similarity in analogical transfer . Memory & Cognition , 15 , 332 – 340 . Keane , M . T . ( 1987 ) . On retrieving analogues when solving problems . The Quarterly Journal of Experimental Psychology : Human Experimental Psychology , 39 ( A ) , 29 – 41 . Keane , M . T . ( 1997 ) . What makes an analogy difficult ? The effects of order and causal structure on analogical mapping . Journal of Experi - mental Psychology : Learning , Memory , and Cognition , 23 , 946 – 967 . Keane , M . T . , Ledgeway , T . , & Duff , S . ( 1994 ) . Constraints on analogical mapping : A comparison of three models . Cognitive Science , 18 , 387 – 438 . Keefe , D . E . , & McDaniel , M . A . ( 1993 ) . The time course and durability of predictive inferences . Journal of Memory and Language , 32 , 446 – 463 . Klin , C . M . , Murray , J . D . , Levine , W . H . , & Guzma´n , A . E . ( 1999 ) . Forward inferences : From activation to long - term memory . Discourse Processes , 27 , 241 – 260 . Lassaline , M . E . ( 1996 ) . Structural alignment in induction and similarity . Journal of Experimental Psychology : Learning , Memory , and Cogni - tion , 22 , 754 – 770 . McKoon , G . , & Ratcliff , R . ( 1986 ) . Inferences about predictable events . Journal of Experimental Psychology : Learning , Memory , and Cogni - tion , 12 , 82 – 91 . McKoon , G . , & Ratcliff , R . ( 1992 ) . Inference during reading . Psycholog - ical Review , 99 , 440 – 466 . McNamara , D . S . , & Kintsch , W . ( 1996 ) . Learning from texts : Effects of prior knowledge and text coherence . Discourse Processes , 22 , 247 – 288 . Novick , L . R . , & Holyoak , K . J . ( 1991 ) . Mathematical problem solving by analogy . Journal of Experimental Psychology : Learning , Memory , and Cognition , 17 , 398 – 415 . O’Brien , E . J . , & Myers , J . L . ( 1985 ) . When comprehension difficulty improves memory for text . Journal of Experimental Psychology : Learn - ing , Memory , and Cognition , 11 , 12 – 21 . O’Brien , E . J . , Shank , D . M . , Myers , J . L . , & Rayner , K . ( 1988 ) . Elabo - rative inferences during reading : Do they occur on - line ? Journal of 331 SURFACE AND STRUCTURAL FEATURES Experimental Psychology : Learning , Memory , and Cognition , 14 , 410 – 420 . Read , S . J . , & Cesa , I . L . ( 1991 ) . This reminds me of the time when . . . : Expectation failures in reminding and explanation . Journal of Experi - mental Social Psychology , 27 , 1 – 25 . Reed , S . K . ( 1987 ) . A structure - mapping model for word problems . Jour - nal of Experimental Psychology : Learning , Memory , and Cognition , 13 , 124 – 139 . Reeves , L . M . , & Weisberg , R . W . ( 1994 ) . The role of content and abstract information in analogical transfer . Psychological Bulletin , 115 ( 3 ) , 381 – 400 . Ross , B . ( 1987 ) . This is like that : The use of earlier problems and the separation of similarity effects . Journal of Experimental Psychology : Learning , Memory , and Cognition , 13 , 629 – 639 . Ross , B . ( 1989 ) . Distinguishing types of superficial similarities : Different effects on the access and use of earlier problems . Journal of Experimen - tal Psychology : Learning , Memory , and Cognition , 15 , 456 – 468 . Seaman , M . A . , Levin , J . R . , & Serlin , R . C . ( 1991 ) . New developments in pairwise multiple comparisons : Some powerful and practical procedures . Psychological Bulletin , 110 , 577 – 586 . Shaffer , J . P . ( 1986 ) . Modified sequentially rejective multiple test procedures . Journal of the American Statistical Association , 81 , 826 – 831 . Thagard , P . , Holyoak , K . J . , Nelson , G . , & Gochfeld , D . ( 1990 ) . Analog retrieval by constraint satisfaction . Artificial Intelligence , 46 , 259 – 310 . Wharton , C . M . , Holyoak , K . J . , Downing , P . E . , Lange , T . E . , Wickens , T . D . , & Melz , E . R . ( 1994 ) . Below the surface : Analogical similarity and retrieval competition in reminding . Cognitive Psychology , 26 , 64 – 101 . Appendix A Sample Base Story ( the Doctor ) A tumor developed in Mr . Johnson’s stomach and had to be dealt with . The doctor had available a kind of ray that could be used to destroy the tumor . If the rays reached the tumor at a sufficiently high intensity , the tumor would be destroyed . Unfortunately , at this intensity the healthy tissue that the ray passed through on the way to the tumor would be badly hurt . The doctor decided to use multiple ray machines to send low - intensity rays at the tumor simultaneously from different directions . In this way the rays would add up to a sufficient intensity to destroy the tumor without hurting the surrounding tissue . Appendix B Versions of a Sample Cue Story ( the Dentist ) 3 Entity Matches , 3 FOR Matches The dentist wanted to extract a small cyst from his patient’s mouth while he did some other needed dental work near it . He was going to use a device that sent out a laser that would cause the cyst to break up and then could be painlessly removed . However , if the laser was used at the appropriate level , it would damage the area of the gums near the cyst besides breaking up the cyst . The dentist chose to use several laser devices each at a reduced setting and direct the lasers at the cyst from a few positions all at the same time . The combined lasers hitting the cyst would be sufficient to break it up while the gums would not be affected since only a reduced level would be passing through any particular part of them . 1 Entity Match , 3 FOR Matches The dentist wanted to extract a tooth from his patient while he did some other needed dental work near it . He was going to use a device that sent out ultrasound that would cause the tooth to break up and then could be painlessly removed . However , if the ultrasound was used at the appropriate level , it would damage the area of the gums near the tooth besides breaking up the tooth . The dentist chose to use several ultrasound devices each at a reduced setting and direct the ultrasound at the tooth from a few positions all at the same time . The combined ultrasound hitting the tooth would be sufficient to break it up while the gums would not be affected since only a reduced level would be passing through any particular part of them . 3 Entity Matches , 1 FOR Match The dentist wanted to protect a small cyst in his patient’s mouth while he did some other needed dental work near it . He was going to use a device that sent out a laser that would temporarily strengthen the outside of the cyst . However , if the laser was used at the appropriate level , it would enlarge the area of the gums near the cyst besides strengthening the cyst . The dentist chose to use several laser devices each at a reduced setting and direct the lasers at the cyst from a few positions all at the same time . The combined lasers hitting the cyst would be sufficient to strengthen it while the gums would not be affected since only a reduced level would be passing through any particular part of them . 1 Entity Match , 1 FOR Match The dentist wanted to protect his patient’s tooth while he did some other needed dental work near it . He was going to use a device that sent out ultrasound that would temporarily strengthen the outside of the tooth . However , if the ultrasound was used at the appropriate level , it would enlarge the area of the gums near the tooth besides strengthening the tooth . The dentist chose to use several ultrasound devices each at a reduced setting and direct the ultrasound at the tooth from a few positions all at the same time . The combined ultrasound hitting the tooth would be sufficient to strengthen it while the gums would not be affected since only a reduced level would be passing through any particular part of them . 332 CATRAMBONE Appendix C Manipulated Entity , FOR , and HOR Matches and Nonmatches Between King Otto Base Story and Versions of Astronomer Cue Story Base story 6 entity , 6 FOR , 1 HOR 6 entity , 4 FOR , 1 HOR King Otto was obsessed with battles and riches . One year he decided to start rebuilding all the bridges of the kingdom to make them strong enough for all his armies . King - Rebuild - Bridges Cornelius was an astronomer who worked for the royal family as a war forecaster and predictor of troop movements . He was always thinking about stars and galaxies ; gradually he was remodeling his home into an observatory . Astronomer - Remodel - House ( FOR match ) Cornelius was an astronomer who worked for the royal family as a war forecaster and predictor of troop movements . He was always thinking about stars and galaxies ; gradually he was remodeling his home into an observatory . Astronomer - Remodel - House ( FOR match ) Otto’s counselor , the chamberlain , complained that he was spending excessive money on the bridges and not enough on actual military campaigns . Chamberlain - ComplainAbout - Expenses But before he was finished , his advisor objected that he was using too much time renovating the house and an insufficient amount of time on his job as royal astronomer . Advisor - Object - Renovation ( FOR match ) But before he was finished , he began to realize , and his advisor agreed , that he was using too much time renovating the house and an insufficient amount of time on his job as royal astronomer . Astronomer - Realize - Renovation ( FOR non - match ) Because of all the construction too many of the bridges being worked on were out of commission . Construction - Decreases - BridgeAvailability As a result of the haphazard renovations , the house was becoming less and less livable . Remodeling - Reduces - Livability ( FOR match ) As a result of the haphazard renovations , the house was becoming less and less livable . Remodeling - Reduces - Livability ( FOR match ) Otto decided that the chamberlain was right , and he abandoned the bridge project to plan a full - scale invasion of a neighboring country . King - Plan - Invasion Cornelius figured that his advisor was correct and he went back to thinking about nothing but astronomy . Astronomer - ThinkAbout - Astronomy ( FOR match ) Cornelius figured that his advisor was correct and he cut back on the time he spent remodeling the house . Astronomer - CutBack - Remodeling ( FOR non - match ) Then one day when King Otto was traveling through his kingdom his carriage crashed through an incomplete bridge . King - CrashThrough - Bridge One evening when Cornelius was walking through his house , a temporary walkway collapsed under his weight . Astronomer - CollapseThrough - Walkway ( FOR match ) One evening when Cornelius was walking through his house , a temporary walkway collapsed under his weight . Astronomer - CollapseThrough - Walkway ( FOR match ) He was severely injured , but the mishap made it clear to him that he needed to balance his military and domestic expenditures . King - Balance - Expenditures The accident showed him that he should try to better coordinate his time between astronomy and maintaining his home . Astronomer - Coordinate - Time ( FOR match ) The accident showed him that he should try to better coordinate his time between astronomy and maintaining his home . Astronomer - Coordinate - Time ( FOR match ) 6 entity , 2 FOR , 1 HOR 4 entity , 6 FOR , 1 HOR 4 entity , 4 FOR , 1 HOR Cornelius was an astronomer who worked for the royal family as a war forecaster and predictor of troop movements . He was always thinking about stars and galaxies ; gradually he was remodeling his home into an observatory . Astronomer - Remodel - House ( FOR match ) Cornelius was an astronomer who worked for the royal family as a war forecaster and predictor of troop movements . He was always thinking about stars and galaxies ; gradually he was remodeling his home into an observatory . Astronomer - Remodel - House ( FOR match ) Cornelius was an astronomer who worked for the royal family as a war forecaster and predictor of troop movements . He was always thinking about stars and galaxies ; gradually he was remodeling his home into an observatory . Astronomer - Remodel - House ( FOR match ) But before he was finished , he began to realize , and his advisor agreed , that he was using too much time renovating the house and an insufficient amount of time on his job as royal astronomer . Astronomer - Realize - Renovation ( FOR non - match ) But before he was finished , his wife Agatha objected that he was using too much time renovating the house and an insufficient amount of time on his job as royal astronomer . Agatha - Object - Renovation ( FOR match ) But before he was finished , he began to realize , and his wife Agatha agreed , that he was using too much time renovating the house and an insufficient amount of time on his job as royal astronomer . Astronomer - Realize - Renovation ( FOR non - match ) As a result of the time spent on renovations , his astronomy career was doing less and less well . Remodeling - Hurts - Career ( FOR non - match ) As a result of the haphazard renovations , the house was becoming less and less livable . Remodeling - Reduces - Livability ( FOR match ) As a result of the haphazard renovations , the house was becoming less and less livable . Remodeling - Reduces - Livability ( FOR match ) Cornelius figured that his advisor was correct and he cut back on the time he spent remodeling the house . Astronomer - CutBack - Remodeling ( FOR non - match ) Cornelius figured that Agatha was correct and he went back to thinking about nothing but astronomy . Astronomer - ThinkAbout - Astronomy ( FOR match ) Cornelius figured that Agatha was correct and he cut back on the time he spent remodeling the house . Astronomer - CutBack - Remodeling ( FOR non - match ) One evening when Cornelius was walking through his house , he tripped on some tools left around to create a temporary walkway . Astronomer - TripOn - Tools ( FOR non - match ) One evening when Cornelius was walking through his house , an unfinished floor collapsed under his weight . Astronomer - CollapseThrough - Floor ( FOR match ) One evening when Cornelius was walking through his house , an unfinished floor collapsed under his weight . Astronomer - CollapseThrough - Floor ( FOR match ) The accident showed him that he should try to better coordinate his time between astronomy and maintaining his home . Astronomer - Coordinate - Time ( FOR match ) The accident showed him that he should try to better coordinate his time between astronomy and maintaining his home . Astronomer - Coordinate - Time ( FOR match ) The accident showed him that he should try to better coordinate his time between astronomy and maintaining his home . Astronomer - Coordinate - Time ( FOR match ) ( Appendix continues ) Appendix C ( continued ) 4 entity , 2 FOR , 1 HOR 2 entity , 6 FOR , 1 HOR 2 entity , 4 FOR , 1 HOR Cornelius was an astronomer who worked for the royal family as a war forecaster and predictor of troop movements . He was always thinking about stars and galaxies ; gradually he was remodeling his home into an observatory . Astronomer - Remodel - House ( FOR match ) Cornelius was an astronomer who worked for the royal family . He was always thinking about stars and galaxies ; gradually he was remodeling his home into an observatory . Astronomer - Remodel - House ( FOR match ) Cornelius was an astronomer who worked for the royal family . He was always thinking about stars and galaxies ; gradually he was remodeling his home into an observatory . Astronomer - Remodel - House ( FOR match ) But before he was finished , he began to realize , and his wife Agatha agreed , that he was using too much time renovating the house and an insufficient amount of time on his job as royal astronomer . Astronomer - Realize - Renovation ( FOR non - match ) But before he was finished , his wife Agatha objected that he was using too much time renovating the house and an insufficient amount of time on his job as royal astronomer . Agatha - Object - Renovation ( FOR match ) But before he was finished , he began to realize , and his wife Agatha agreed , that he was using too much time renovating the house and an insufficient amount of time on his job as royal astronomer . Astronomer - Realize - Renovation ( FOR non - match ) As a result of the time spent on renovations , his astronomy career was doing less and less well . Remodeling - Hurts - Career ( FOR non - match ) As a result of the haphazard renovations , the house was becoming less and less livable . Remodeling - Reduces - Livability ( FOR match ) As a result of the haphazard renovations , the house was becoming less and less livable . Remodeling - Reduces - Livability ( FOR match ) Cornelius figured that Agatha was correct and he cut back on the time he spent remodeling the house . Astronomer - CutBack - Remodeling ( FOR non - match ) Cornelius figured that Agatha was correct and he went back to thinking about nothing but astronomy . Astronomer - ThinkAbout - Astronomy ( FOR match ) Cornelius figured that Agatha was correct and he cut back on the time he spent remodeling the house . Astronomer - CutBack - Remodeling ( FOR non - match ) One evening when Cornelius was walking through his house , he tripped on some tools left around due to an unfinished floor repair job . Astronomer - TripOn - Tools ( FOR non - match ) One evening when Cornelius was walking through his house , an unfinished floor collapsed under his weight . Astronomer - CollapseThrough - Floor ( FOR match ) One evening when Cornelius was walking through his house , an unfinished floor collapsed under his weight . Astronomer - CollapseThrough - Floor ( FOR match ) The accident showed him that he should try to better coordinate his time between astronomy and maintaining his home . Astronomer - Coordinate - Time ( FOR match ) The accident showed him that he should try to better coordinate his time between astronomy and maintaining his home . Astronomer - Coordinate - Time ( FOR match ) The accident showed him that he should try to better coordinate his time between astronomy and maintaining his home . Astronomer - Coordinate - Time ( FOR match ) 2 entity , 2 FOR , 1 HOR Cornelius was an astronomer who worked for the royal family . He was always thinking about stars and galaxies ; gradually he was remodeling his home into an observatory . Astronomer - Remodel - House ( FOR match ) But before he was finished , he began to realize , and his wife Agatha agreed , that he was using too much time renovating the house and an insufficient amount of time on his job as royal astronomer . Astronomer - Realize - Renovation ( FOR non - match ) As a result of the time spent on renovations , his astronomy career was doing less and less well . Remodeling - Hurts - Career ( FOR non - match ) Cornelius figured that Agatha was correct and he cut back on the time he spent remodeling the house . Astronomer - CutBack - Remodeling ( FOR non - match ) One evening when Cornelius was walking through his house , he tripped on some tools left around due to an unfinished floor repair job . Astronomer - TripOn - Tools ( FOR non - match ) The accident showed him that he should try to better coordinate his time between astronomy and maintaining his home . Astronomer - Coordinate - Time ( FOR match ) Note . The base story and the cue story ( The Astronomer ) are meant to be read vertically . Each box contains the text that corresponds to a unit representing a first - order relation ( FOR ) match or non - match . The FOR for a given box is listed as a three - term summary following the story text in the box ( e . g . , “Astronomer - Remodel - House” ) . In parentheses following the summary is a listing of whether that FOR is a match or non - match with a FOR from the base story . Entity matches are underlined . The stories participants read did not , of course , contain boxes , three - term summaries , indications of FOR matches or non - matches , or underlining of entity matches . The versions of The Astronomer that do not contain the higher - order relation ( HOR ) match with the base story are identical to the nine HOR match versions presented here , except that the HOR non - match versions have a final sentence that reads , instead of the current final sentence : “Cornelius’ friends suggested to him that for the good of his career he needed to try to better coordinate his time between astronomy and maintaining his home . ” This sentence maintains the final FOR match but not the HOR match of the causal link between the accident and Cornelius’ realizing that he needed to better coordinate his activities . Received November 8 , 2000 Revision received July 2 , 2001 Accepted July 19 , 2001 (cid:1)