G . Russo , M . Horta Ribeiro , G . Casiraghi , L . Verginer : Understanding Online Migration ( Submitted for publication ) Understanding Online Migration Decisions Fol - lowing the Banning of Radical Communities Giuseppe Russo 1 ∗ , Manoel Horta Ribeiro 2 , Giona Casiraghi 1 , Luca Verginer 1 1 Chair of Systems Design , ETH Zurich , Switzerland 2 Data Science Laboratory , EPFL , Switzerland Abstract The proliferation of radical online communities and their violent oﬀshoots has sparked great societal concern . However , the current practice of banning such communities from mainstream platforms has unintended consequences : ( i ) the further radicalization of their members in fringe platforms where they migrate ; and ( ii ) the spillover of harmful content from fringe back onto mainstream platforms . Here , in a large observational study on two banned subreddits , r / The _ Donald and r / fatpeoplehate , we examine how factors associated with the RECRO radicalization framework relate to users’ migration decisions . Speciﬁcally , we quantify how these factors aﬀect users’ decisions to post on fringe platforms and , for those who do , whether they continue posting on the mainstream platform . Our results show that individual - level factors , those relating to the behavior of users , are associated with the decision to post on the fringe platform . Whereas social - level factors , users’ connection with the radical community , only aﬀect the propensity to be coactive on both platforms . Overall , our ﬁndings pave the way for evidence - based moderation policies , as the decisions to migrate and remain coactive amplify unintended consequences of community bans . ? Post on FP ? 2 nd Step 1 st Step MP ? FP FP Only Coactive MP Only Mainstream Platform ( MP ) Fringe Platform ( FP ) Also post on MP ? Yes N o Yes N o Figure 1 : When a community is banned from a mainstream platform for harmful conduct ( in - dicated by an × in the ﬁgure ) , users have to decide whether to ( i ) migrate to fringe platforms where the community migrated toward ; and ( ii ) remain active in other communities in the mainstream platform . In this paper , we study factors associated with these two decisions . ∗ Corresponding author , russog @ ethz . ch 1 / 19 a r X i v : 2212 . 04765v1 [ c s . S I ] 9 D e c 2022 G . Russo , M . Horta Ribeiro , G . Casiraghi , L . Verginer : Understanding Online Migration ( Submitted for publication ) 1 Introduction Online platforms enforce strict moderation policies to prevent the spread of content deemed harmful [ 10 , 29 ] . Consequently , they ban communities breaching their guidelines [ 4 ] , often re - sulting in the migration of these communities to fringe , alternative platforms with little to no content moderation [ 9 ] . Previous work suggests that the migration of banned communities radicalizes their members [ 1 , 42 ] . For example , after the prominent Reddit community r / The _ Donald migrated to a self - hosted website , thedonald . win , its users became signiﬁcantly more toxic [ 14 ] . Further , toxic behavior accepted on fringe platforms spills back onto the mainstream platforms through coactive users , i . e . , users that remain active on both [ 32 ] . For example , users migrating to thedonald . win and continuing to post on Reddit became more toxic also on the latter . Therefore , users of banned communities decide ( i ) whether to participate on the fringe platform ( migration decision ) and ( ii ) whether to participate in both platforms or abandon the original one ( coactivity decision ) . Understanding the factors driving these decisions informs stakeholders of the externalities of community bans , paving the way for more evidence - based moderation policies . To identify these factors , we build on RECRO , a theoretical model for internet - mediated rad - icalization proposed by Neo [ 24 ] . RECRO deﬁnes ﬁve phases of radicalization : Reﬂection , Ex - ploration , Connection , Resolution , and Operational . Only the ﬁrst three phases describe online activity . The latter two describe real - world actions that are not observed in online data . For this reason , we focus on studying factors related to Reﬂection , Exploration , and Connection . Reﬂection factors describe needs and vulnerabilities that render individuals more receptive to alternate belief systems . Exploration factors quantify how individuals make sense of information put forth by the radical community . Finally , Connection factors describe the inﬂuence of com - munity members on each other . We hypothesize that factors associated with how users reﬂect , explore , and connect ( REC ) with radical communities explain their migration decisions following bans . Our analysis conﬁrms that REC factors are indicative of migration and coactivity decisions . Interestingly , the factors associated with each decision diﬀer . While reﬂection factors correlate mostly with the decision to migrate to the fringe platform , Connection factors are mainly as - sociated with the coactivity decision . Since Reﬂection describes an individual’s online behavior while Connection describes an individual’s social environment , we conclude that individual mo - tives drive the decision to engage with the new platform , whereas social factors drive coactivity . 2 / 19 G . Russo , M . Horta Ribeiro , G . Casiraghi , L . Verginer : Understanding Online Migration ( Submitted for publication ) 2 Related Work Antisocial online communities Various online communities consistently engage in antisocial behavior [ 21 ] , often harassing minorities and sympathizing with extremist ideologies [ 31 ] . These communities have disproportionate inﬂuence over memes and news shared on the web [ 39 ] . Fur - ther , they have been closely associated with medical misinformation [ 41 ] , conspiracy theories [ 35 ] , and extremist ideologies [ 22 ] . Among those communities on Reddit , we consider r / The _ Donald and r / fatpeoplehate . The subreddit r / The _ Donald was created in June 2015 to support the then - presidential candidate Donald Trump’s bid for the U . S . Presidential election . This community has been closely linked with the rise of the “alt - right” movement hosting racist , sexist and islamophobic discussions [ 20 ] , and spreading conspiracy theories [ 26 ] . Flores - Saviaga et al . [ 8 ] have studied how active partici - pants in r / The _ Donald mobilized the community to engage in “political trolling . ” The subreddit r / fatpeoplehate was created in June 2015 to promote collective actions of body shaming and violence against overweight people . In 2015 , Reddit banned r / fatpeoplehate following a newly - introduced policy to ban subreddits targeting and harassing speciﬁc groups [ 3 ] . Online Migration Both r / The _ Donald and r / fatpeoplehate have been “de - platformed , ” i . e . , banned from Reddit for breaching their guidelines . In response to the banning , users of these communities migrated to fringe platforms where they continued their discussions . For exam - ple , users of r / The _ Donald migrated en masse to thedonald . win , a self - hosted website where users of r / The _ Donald could continue discussing and behaving as before . Similarly , users of r / fatpeoplehate migrated to the Reddit - like platform , voat . co , where they re - established their community . Previous work has studied the eﬀects of deplatforming , ﬁnding that after a ban , users reduce their activity on mainstream platforms [ 15 ] , but also that users often migrate to other fringe platforms , where they become more toxic [ 1 ] . These studies imply that user migration , as an outcome of community deplatforming , might isolate users and expose them to more extreme content . Addi - tionally , Russo et al . [ 32 ] identiﬁed a ‘radicalization spillover’ from fringe to mainstream platforms caused by users that migrated to the fringe but remained active on the mainstream platform ( referred to as coactive users ) . Therefore , previous research concludes that online migration of radical communities yields consequences at community and platform levels . At the community level , migration to fringe platforms can push users to further radicalize and participate in real - world violent events . At the platform level , users that have decided to migrate but remain active on the mainstream platform , coactive users , can undermine the eﬃcacy of moderation policies such as banning . 3 / 19 G . Russo , M . Horta Ribeiro , G . Casiraghi , L . Verginer : Understanding Online Migration ( Submitted for publication ) Online Radicalization Radicalization is deﬁned as the adoption of extreme political , social , or religious ideals and aspirations that reject or undermine the status quo of society ( e . g . , accep - tance of diﬀerences ) , which can lead to violence to achieve these goals [ 6 ] . Multiple radicalization models have been proposed [ 18 , 19 ] . However , they either ignore internet - mediated radicalization or focus on psychological predispositions [ 24 ] . The RECRO model proposed by Neo is a theo - retical model for internet - mediated radicalization . It has been used to study anti - vaccination discussions [ 36 ] and engagement with conspiracy theories [ 27 ] . The RECRO model consists of ﬁve phases : Reﬂection , Exploration , Connection , Resolution , and Operational ( RECRO ) . As noted by Neo [ 24 ] , these phases may overlap and occur multiple times in the radicalization pro - cess . Therefore , we consider these phases simultaneously to include such an overlap feature of the RECRO model . Similarly to Phadke et al . [ 27 ] , we focus on the ﬁrst three phases—Reﬂection , Exploration , and Connection—based on how individuals engage with radical online content . The R eﬂection phase describes an individual’s emotional state , making them susceptible to radical narratives . Neo [ 24 ] qualitatively ﬁnd that heightened emotions like aggressiveness and anxiety are linked to reﬂection . The E xploration phase describes how individuals consume content , look for new information , and get exposed to radical narratives . Finally , C onnection describes how interactions with members of radical communities inﬂuence the individual . Relation to prior work Previous work has found that community - level bans can have nega - tive externalities : users can migrate to other , more toxic communities [ 14 ] and may cause ‘radical - ization spillovers’ from fringe to mainstream platforms [ 32 ] . As these consequences arise mainly from user decisions to migrate and to remain coactive , we build upon the RECRO radicalization framework [ 24 ] to investigate the factors associated with these decisions . 3 Materials and Methods 3 . 1 Data To study migration decisions , we use data from two subreddits ( r / The _ Donald and r / fatpeoplehate ; see Section 2 ) and the fringe platforms their users migrated en masse af - ter they were banned ( thedonald . win and voat . co ) We collect the entire posting history relevant to the two communities on Reddit and the fringe platforms . Reddit Using the Push API [ 2 ] , we collect the posts made on the two subreddits , starting six months before they were banned . Speciﬁcally , for r / fatpeoplehate , we collect from February 1 , 4 / 19 G . Russo , M . Horta Ribeiro , G . Casiraghi , L . Verginer : Understanding Online Migration ( Submitted for publication ) 2015 , to August 1 , 2015 ; for r / The _ Donald , from November 11 , 2019 , to February 26 , 2020 . For each subreddit , we also collect all contributing users’ entire Reddit posting history . Fringe Platforms We obtain thedonald . win data using custom Web crawlers and voat . co data from Mekacher and Papasavva [ 23 ] . For each platform , we collect posts made in the 36 weeks around the ban . We discard users with low activity to ensure that our analysis is not biased by users with low engagement within the analyzed communities ( similarly to [ 33 ] ) . Precisely , we discard users who made less than ten posts on r / The _ Donald or r / fatpeoplehate before the ban . Further , among those users that post on reddit after the ban we discard those that contributed with less that ten posts on the whole Reddit after the ban . Finally , we assume users were active on the fringe platforms after the ban only if they made at least ﬁve posts . Overall , we collect 2 . 5 million posts from r / The _ Donald and r / fatpeoplehate . These , combined with the data obtained from the other 4 , 786 subreddits , yield a total of 91 . 2 million posts by ∼ 140 , 000 users ( 91 , 244 for r / The _ Donald , 49 , 765 for r / fatpeoplehate ) . Moreover , we collect over 2 . 5 million posts by 38 , 510 users from thedonald . win , and 1 . 3 million posts from 26 , 223 users from voat . co . Reddit - Only Keep posting on Reddit ? Migrate ? No Yes Coactive Fully - Migrated No Yes Figure 2 : Mapping migration decisions to users’ labels . Users labeling After the ban , users decide whether to post on the fringe platform or not . We label users that post on the fringe platform as migrated ( MG ) . Those users that keep posting on Reddit but never post on the fringe platform are labeled as Reddit - Only ( RO ) . In the second step of the migration , users that posted on the fringe platform may decide if posting on both platforms or to post exclusively on the fringe . We label those who continue posting on Reddit and the fringe platform as coactive ( CA ) . Diﬀerently , users who stop posting on Reddit after the ban and post exclusively on the fringe platform are labeled as Fully - Migrated ( FM ) . To track users across platforms , we apply exact string matching on their usernames , following previous works [ 14 , 25 ] . 5 / 19 G . Russo , M . Horta Ribeiro , G . Casiraghi , L . Verginer : Understanding Online Migration ( Submitted for publication ) This strategy emphasizes precision over recall : users who have changed their usernames during the migration are not considered migrated . We account for this fact while interpreting our results . Importantly , r / The _ Donald had a system to facilitate username continuity across platforms [ 7 ] . In ﬁg . 2 , we show how these labels are mapped to the diﬀerent migration decisions . 3 . 2 Modelling Migration We investigate how radicalization factors drive migration decisions following community banning . To answer this question , we formalize platform migration as a two - step decision process ( see ﬁg . 1 ) . In the ﬁrst step , users become active on the fringe platform and start posting there . In the second step , users posting on the fringe platform choose whether to post on both platforms or to cease all activity on the mainstream platform . Previous work suggests that users explore fringe platforms and decide whether to participate based on a variety of reasons [ 25 ] , e . g . , the abundance of niche content in the mainstream platform and the permissive moderation style of fringe platforms . We model the migration process with a Heckman two - stage regression [ 13 ] . The ﬁrst stage models the propensity s i of the user i to post on the fringe platform after the ban ( ﬁrst migration decision ) . The second stage models the likelihood that the user i remains coactive , accounting for their propensity s i to post on the fringe platform ( coactivity decision ) . For both stages , for a given user i , we consider various factors related to Reﬂection , Exploration , and Connection referred to as vectors R i , E i , and C i ( see section 4 ) . Formally , s i ∼ γ 0 + REC variables ‡„„„„„„„„„„„„„„„„„„„„„„„„„„„„„„„„„„„„„„„„„„„„„„„„„„„„„„„„•„„„„„„„„„„„„„„„„„„„„„„„„„„„„„„„„„„„„„„„„„„„„„„„„„„„„„„„„(cid:181) γ 1 R i + γ 2 E i + γ 3 C i + γ 4 ER i ( 1 ) CA i ∼ β 0 + β 1 R i + β 2 E i + β 3 C i ·„„„„„„„„„„„„„„„„„„„„„„„„„„„„„„„„„„„„„„„„„„„„„„„„„„„„„„„„„‚„„„„„„„„„„„„„„„„„„„„„„„„„„„„„„„„„„„„„„„„„„„„„„„„„„„„„„„„„„¶ REC variables + ψ ( s i ) , ( 2 ) where ( 2 ) is the main equation and ( 1 ) is the selection equation . Note that ψ ( s i ) accounts for the propensity s i of user i to post on the fringe platform . Also , to improve the error estimates , we include an exclusion restriction , as suggested by Puhani [ 28 ] . The exclusion restriction is a variable aﬀecting the selection propensity ( s ) but not the main outcome ( CA i ) . Precisely this is the variable ER in ( 1 ) . In our case , the variable must aﬀect the decision to migrate but only weakly aﬀect coactivity . To this end , we choose language coherence ( see section 4 ) , measured as the ability to conform to the language used by the focal community . Continuing to use the language of the focal community may drive users to follow the group on the fringe platform . However , language usage does not preclude continued activity on the mainstream platform . 6 / 19 G . Russo , M . Horta Ribeiro , G . Casiraghi , L . Verginer : Understanding Online Migration ( Submitted for publication ) Importantly , if we were to model these stages without the Heckman correction , i . e . , considering all users in the ﬁrst stage and only migrating users in a second , separate regression , we would esti - mate the regression parameters incorrectly . Moreover , we would not answer the general question : what is the probability of any user becoming coactive if their community was banned ? Instead , we would estimate which factors increase the probability that a migrated user ( MG ) becomes coactive ( CA ) . The reason for this is selection bias . Indeed , we only observe coactivity for a subset of the population and not a random and representative sample of the banned community ( see ﬁg . 2 ) . 4 Operationalizing RECRO We operationalize the R eﬂection , E xploration , and C onnection stages of the RECRO frame - work using language , activity , and interaction features . These are calculated on the pre - banning activities on Reddit of users of r / The _ Donald and r / fatpeoplehate . 4 . 1 Operationalizing Reﬂection Neo [ 24 ] describes R eﬂection as the emotional state making individuals receptive to radical narratives . To operationalize it , we compute a set of features quantifying the usage of toxic language , emotionality , anger , and anxiety in users’ posts . Language Toxicity ( TOX ) Users of radical communities are prone to use toxic language and engage in antisocial behavior , such as harassment , trolling , and cyberbullying [ 40 ] . Following Grover and Mark [ 12 ] suggestion that antisocial behavior can be captured through automated text analysis , we use the Perspective API [ 16 ] to measure language toxicity . We compute a user’s toxicity ( TOX ) as the mean toxicity score of all their posts written before the ban on Reddit . Formally , the toxicity of a user i is ( TOX ) i = 1 / ∣ P i ∣ ∑ p ∈ P i t ( c ) , where P i is the set of posts of user i and t ( ⋅ ) is the toxicity score of a post . Emotionality ( EMO ) We measure the intensity of emotions a user expresses as the average VADER score of their posts before the ban . VADER is a lexical rule - based sentiment analysis toolkit designed to identify sentiment in social media . It assigns a score to each word based on its positivity ( negativity ) , and emotional charge . For example , the word “good” is less emo - tional than “awesome” even though both are positive . Formally , we deﬁne ( EMO ) i of a user i as 1 / ∣ P i ∣ ∑ p ∈ P i VADER ( p ) . Where P i is the set of posts of user i and VADER ( ⋅ ) is the VADER score of a post . 7 / 19 G . Russo , M . Horta Ribeiro , G . Casiraghi , L . Verginer : Understanding Online Migration ( Submitted for publication ) Anger ( ANG ) and Anxiety ( ANX ) Users of extreme online groups express anger and anxiety in their posts [ 38 ] . We rely on the Linguistic Inquiry and Word Count ( LIWC ) dictionary , counting the proportion of anger ( ANG ) and anxiety ( ANX ) words a user i uses in their post written before the ban on Reddit . 4 . 2 Operationalizing Exploration Neo [ 24 ] deﬁnes the E xploration as the period in which individuals make sense of the online information put forth by radical communities . We operationalize it by measuring ( i ) the diversity of interests and ( ii ) the engagement towards subreddits hosting discussions similar to those of r / The _ Donald and r / fatpeoplehate . Diversity of interests ( DIV ) To capture how frequently users of radical communities interact with other subreddits , we obtain the frequency of posts across subreddits and quantify how diverse user activity is with the Gini coeﬃcient . The Gini coeﬃcient measures the inequality among values of a frequency distribution . Thus , users contributing to a few subreddits have a low Gini coeﬃcient , while those contributing to many have a higher score . Engagement with radical communities ( ENG ) As measured by ( DIV ) , users of radical communities can post in multiple subreddits . However , they may gravitate towards subreddits similar to their radical community , engaging with it outside a speciﬁc subreddit . To measure this engagement , we compute what proportion of the user’s pre - ban activity is dedicated to posting in subreddits similar to the two focal subreddits ( i . e . , r / The _ Donald and r / fatpeoplehate ) . We refer to this measure as ( ENG ) , and we formalize it as ( ENG ) i = ( ∑ s ij ∈ S ∖ s b n j sim ( s b , s j ) ) / ∣ P i ∣ where S is the set of all subreddits , P i is the set of all posts made by users i , n j is the number of posts made by user i on the j - th subreddit s j , and s b . sim ( s b , s j ) is the similarity between the banned subreddit s b ( i . e . , r / The _ Donald and r / fatpeoplehate ) and subreddit s j ( see ap - pendix A . A high ( ENG ) score indicates that the user contributes primarily to subreddits close to their radical community . 4 . 3 Operationalizing Connection The last factor we consider in users’ radicalization is their C onnection to the radical online community , i . e . , their inﬂuence on the user . We operationalize the concept by characterizing interactions with other community members . 8 / 19 G . Russo , M . Horta Ribeiro , G . Casiraghi , L . Verginer : Understanding Online Migration ( Submitted for publication ) Diversity of Interactions ( DVI ) Interactions with users exhibiting an exclusive interest in the radical communities might increase their sense of belonging to it [ 30 ] . We operationalize the magnitude of these interactions on a user i as the average Gini coeﬃcient of users j they directly replied to , weighted by the number of comments exchanged between users i and j . Formally , we deﬁne diversity of interactions ( DVI ) as ∑ j ∈N i w ij ( DIV ) ( j ) / ∣N i ∣ . Where N i is the set of those users that directly replied to user i , w ij is the number of replies between user j and i . Finally , ( DIV ) ( j ) is computed as described in section 4 . 2 Inﬂuence of Seniority ( SEN ) Senior members of radical communities may exert pressure on users to conform to their views . We proxy the seniority on Reddit using the account’s age ( the number of days that elapsed from the ﬁrst post on the community to the ban ) . We deﬁne ( SEN ) as the weighted average of the age diﬀerences between user i and the other users they directly replied to , i . e . , 1 ∣ N i ∣ ∑ n ∈ N i w ij [ α ( i ) − α ( n ) ] . Where N i is the set of those users that directly replied to user i , w ij is the number of replies between user j and i . Finally , α ( ⋅ ) is a function returning a user account’s age . Interactions with pre - ban migrated users Interactions with other users who have joined the fringe platform might be before the ban ( pre - ban migrated users ) may create cross - platform ties that , following the ban , increase the odds of migrating to the fringe platform . We characterize these interactions in two ways : Active Interaction with pre - ban migrated users ( APB ) : Active interactions are pairwise interac - tions between users of the radical community not yet posting on the fringe platform , with users already posting there and vice - versa . This exchange might be a user’s ﬁrst connection with the fringe platform through users already posting there . Therefore , we count the proportion of such dyadic interactions with pre - ban migrated users normalized by the user’s dyadic interactions on Reddit before the ban . Passive Interaction with pre - ban migrated users ( PPB ) : Users not yet posting on the fringe platform may post on threads where already migrated users also post . If a user posts on such a thread , we say that they interact passively . By posting on the same thread , users may passively consume the content written by pre - ban migrated users without directly engaging with them . Speciﬁcally , we calculate the user’s co - presence with pre - ban migrated users in threads by count - ing the threads with posts by pre - ban migrated users . We normalize this measure by the total number of threads the user participates in the pre - ban period , i . e . , before the ban . 9 / 19 G . Russo , M . Horta Ribeiro , G . Casiraghi , L . Verginer : Understanding Online Migration ( Submitted for publication ) 4 . 4 Other Variables Language Coherence Language Coherence is a concept proposed by Crossett and Spitaletta [ 5 ] , Phadke et al . [ 27 ] expressing how well users align with the language of their community . Especially in discussions in radical communities , members might express their belonging to the community via their language [ 17 , 34 ] . We measure language coherence using a language model capturing the linguistic state of the community . In particular , we ﬁne - tune BERT on a dataset of posts written before the ban ( we do not use these posts to measure language coherence ) . Then , given all pre - ban user posts on Reddit P i , we estimate how unexpected the text is according to the language model ﬁne - tuned on the community language . Speciﬁcally , we compute language coherence as the cross - entropy of all posts P i for each user i given the language model . Activity and Account Age We add extra variables to eq . ( 2 ) and eq . ( 1 ) to control for self selection . Indeed , users who post on the fringe platform might be more active on the mainstream platform to begin with . Similarly , more senior users might be more motivated to post on the fringe platform as they develop a stronger attachment to the community . Therefore we use as control variables ( i ) user activity measured as the number of posts that the user made in the six months before the banning , and ( ii ) user seniority measured as the number of days elapsed from the ﬁrst post on the community to the ban of the focal subreddit . 5 Results We show how radicalization factors aﬀect users’ migration with the regression analysis intro - duced in section 3 . We perform separate analyses for r / The _ Donald and r / fatpeoplehate . In both cases , we ﬁnd that : ( i ) Reﬂection - related factors aﬀects the ﬁrst migration step , i . e . , the decision to post on the fringe platform ( FP ) after the ban and ( ii ) Connection - related factors have a prominent role in the second migration step , i . e . , the decision to be coactive on both the mainstream platform ( MP ) and fringe platform ( FP ) . We conclude that individual factors primarily aﬀect the ﬁrst migration step , while coactivity is primarily aﬀected by social factors . Table 1 and table 2 report the coeﬃcients for the factors operationalizing Reﬂection , Exploration , and Connection for r / The _ Donald and r / fatpeoplehate , respectively . 5 . 1 First Step : Migration to Fringe Platforms Reﬂection Higher toxicity and emotionality on the MP are associated with more posts on the FP , as both ( TOX ) and ( EMO ) have positive coeﬃcients for r / The _ Donald ( β TD TOX = 0 . 78 , β TD EMO = 1 . 03 ) , and r / fatpeoplehate ( β FPH TOX = 1 . 12 , β FPH EMO = 0 . 73 ) , respectively . In ﬁg . 3 , we show 10 / 19 G . Russo , M . Horta Ribeiro , G . Casiraghi , L . Verginer : Understanding Online Migration ( Submitted for publication ) Table 1 : Regression table for r / The _ Donald . We show the parameters’ estimates for the ﬁrst and second stages of the Heckman regression . 1st Step 2nd Step Selection Eq . Outcome Eq . ( Intercept ) − 1 . 02 ( 0 . 34 ) ∗∗ 1 . 56 ( 0 . 70 ) ∗ Reﬂection Toxicity ( TOX ) 0 . 78 ( 0 . 15 ) ∗∗∗ − 0 . 91 ( 0 . 37 ) ∗ Emotionality ( EMO ) 1 . 03 ( 0 . 20 ) ∗∗∗ 0 . 42 ( 0 . 44 ) Anger ( ANG ) − 1 . 79 ( 1 . 46 ) − 0 . 29 ( 1 . 03 ) Anxiety ( ANX ) − 0 . 50 ( 1 . 12 ) 0 . 57 ( 0 . 97 ) Exploration Diversiﬁcation ( DIV ) − 2 . 93 ( 0 . 16 ) ∗∗∗ 4 . 72 ( 1 . 15 ) ∗∗∗ Engagement ( ENG ) 1 . 25 ( 0 . 25 ) ∗∗∗ 0 . 11 ( 0 . 51 ) Connection Passive Int . ( PPB ) 0 . 23 ( 0 . 37 ) 1 . 56 ( 0 . 72 ) ∗ Active Int . ( APB ) − 0 . 01 ( 0 . 32 ) 7 . 56 ( 0 . 49 ) ∗∗∗ Neigh . Seniority ( SEN ) 0 . 37 ( 0 . 29 ) 4 . 22 ( 1 . 23 ) ∗∗∗ Neigh . Div . ( DVI ) − 0 . 09 ( 0 . 33 ) 2 . 44 ( 0 . 66 ) ∗∗∗ Controls Coherence − 5 . 22 ( 0 . 25 ) ∗∗∗ Numb . Posts 2 . 39 ( 1 . 67 ) 0 . 55 ( 1 . 32 ) Seniority 1 . 54 ( 0 . 63 ) ∗ 0 . 54 ( 0 . 25 ) ∗ Rho ( ρ ) 0 . 28 ( 0 . 01 ) ∗∗∗ Sigma ( σ ) 0 . 32 ( 0 . 26 ) AIC 8681 . 89 1433 . 90 Num . obs . 12053 2740 ∗∗∗ p < 0 . 001 ; ∗∗ p < 0 . 01 ; ∗ p < 0 . 05 the marginal eﬀects on the probability of posting on the FP . For example , we observe that , for r / The _ Donald , a 20 % increase in ( TOX ) increases the probability of becoming active on the FP by 8 % ( c . f . , ﬁg . 3 ( a ) ) . An analysis of emotionality yields similar results . Reﬂection factors de - scribing users’ individual characteristics are signiﬁcant predictors of the ﬁrst migration decision . Interestingly , we ﬁnd that the eﬀect of ( ANG ) and ( ANX ) is not statistically signiﬁcant . Exploration We ﬁnd that Exploration factors , engagement ( ENG ) and diversity ( DIV ) , are associated with the ﬁrst migration decision . Speciﬁcally , the lower users’ ( DIV ) is ( β TD ( DIV ) = − 2 . 93 , β FPH ( DIV ) = − 2 . 43 ) , the more likely they are to post on the FP . For example , a 30 % decrease in ( DIV ) 11 / 19 G . Russo , M . Horta Ribeiro , G . Casiraghi , L . Verginer : Understanding Online Migration ( Submitted for publication ) Table 2 : Regression table for r / fatpeoplehate . We show the parameters’ estimates for the ﬁrst and second stages of the Heckman regression . 1st Step 2nd Step Selection Eq . Outcome Eq . ( Intercept ) − 2 . 72 ( 0 . 57 ) ∗∗ 2 . 06 ( 1 . 2 ) ∗ Reﬂection Toxicity ( TOX ) 1 . 12 ( 0 . 14 ) ∗∗∗ − 1 . 06 ( 0 . 64 ) Emotionality ( EMO ) 0 . 73 ( 0 . 20 ) ∗∗ 0 . 34 ( 0 . 52 ) Anger ( ANG ) 0 . 53 ( 1 . 82 ) − 0 . 12 ( 0 . 41 ) Anxiety ( ANX ) − 0 . 05 ( 1 . 30 ) 0 . 41 ( 0 . 76 ) Exploration Diversiﬁcation ( DIV ) − 2 . 43 ( 0 . 21 ) ∗∗∗ 3 . 52 ( 0 . 54 ) ∗∗∗ Engagement ( ENG ) 1 . 48 ( 0 . 52 ) ∗∗ 0 . 17 ( 0 . 58 ) Connection Passive Int . ( PPB ) 0 . 36 ( 0 . 23 ) 1 . 96 ( 0 . 46 ) ∗ Active Int . ( APB ) − 0 . 05 ( 0 . 41 ) 5 . 56 ( 0 . 88 ) ∗∗∗ Neigh . Seniority ( SEN ) 1 . 17 ( 1 . 09 ) 3 . 27 ( 1 . 01 ) ∗∗ Neigh . Div . ( DVI ) − 0 . 22 ( 0 . 19 ) 1 . 92 ( 0 . 66 ) ∗∗ Controls Coherence − 4 . 87 ( 0 . 45 ) ∗∗ Numb . Posts 3 . 21 ( 2 . 72 ) 1 . 88 ( 1 . 52 ) Seniority 0 . 07 ( 0 . 39 ) 0 . 51 ( 0 . 27 ) ∗ Rho ( ρ ) 0 . 36 ( 0 . 02 ) ∗∗∗ Sigma ( σ ) 0 . 44 ( 0 . 12 ) ∗ AIC 7953 . 34 1681 . 89 Num . obs . 8168 916 ∗∗∗ p < 0 . 001 ; ∗∗ p < 0 . 01 ; ∗ p < 0 . 05 increases the probability of posting on the FP by 18 % ( c . f . , ﬁg . 3 ( b ) ) . Since ( DIV ) characterizes the heterogeneity of user interests , it acts as a ‘pull factor’ hindering the tendency to post on the FP . This result is in line with the survey study by Newell et al . [ 25 ] . Additionally , we ﬁnd that users participating in other subreddits related to r / The _ Donald or r / fatpeoplehate ( engagement ) are more likely to post on the fringe platform after the ban on the MP . In synthesis , Exploration , interpreted as the utilization of the mainstream platform , predicts the ﬁrst migration step well . Connection . We ﬁnd that factors characterizing the connection to other community members are not statistically signiﬁcant and , thus , do not correlate to the ﬁrst migration decision . This 12 / 19 G . Russo , M . Horta Ribeiro , G . Casiraghi , L . Verginer : Understanding Online Migration ( Submitted for publication ) R eﬂection E xploration C onnection ( a ) ( b ) ( c ) ( 1 s t S t e p ) ( d ) ( e ) ( f ) ( 2 nd S t e p ) Figure 3 : Marginal eﬀects of REC factors for r / The _ Donald . Solid lines represent factors with a signiﬁcant eﬀect . Dashed lines represent factors that do not have a signiﬁcant eﬀect . The shaded areas show the 95 % conﬁdence intervals . The marginals have been estimated assuming all other parameters are kept constant to their observed average values . ( top row ) Marginal eﬀects for the ﬁrst migration step . ( bottom row ) Marginal eﬀects for the second migration step . is also shown in ﬁg . 3 ( c ) , the marginal eﬀects of the features characterizing the social factors do not aﬀect the probability of posting on FP . 5 . 2 Second step : Coactivity across Platforms Reﬂection Reﬂection factors determine users’ coactivity to a minor extent . Toxicity ( TOX ) is the only signiﬁcant reﬂection factor in the case of r / The _ Donald , users that are less toxic in the mainstream platform have a higher chance of being coactive after the ban ( β TDTOX = − 0 . 91 ) . For r / fatpeoplehate , no reﬂection factor is statistically signiﬁcant . In ﬁg . 3 ( d ) , we show that both ( TOX ) and ( EMO ) do not increase the probability of being coactive . Exploration Diversiﬁcation aﬀect users’ coactivity as in the ﬁrst migration step . The lower the users’ ( DIV ) , the more they behave as coactive users ( β TDDIV = 4 . 72 , β FPHDIV = 3 . 52 ) . For instance , in ﬁg . 3 ( e ) , we show for r / The _ Donald that a 30 % decrease in ( DIV ) increases by 22 % the probability of coactivity . Unlike the ﬁrst migration step , ( ENG ) does not aﬀect coactivity . 13 / 19 G . Russo , M . Horta Ribeiro , G . Casiraghi , L . Verginer : Understanding Online Migration ( Submitted for publication ) Connection All Connection’s factors become statistically signiﬁcant and strongly aﬀect users’ coactivity . In particular , from table 1 and table 2 , we observe that the more users directly interact with pre - ban migrated users ( APB ) , the less they tend to stay coactive . Further , we ﬁnd that users interacting with more recent members are more likely to be active on both platforms after the ban ( SEN ) . In ﬁg . 3 ( f ) , we observe that directly interacting with pre - migrated users increases the probability of coactivity by up to 70 % in the case of r / The _ Donald subreddit . 6 Discussion This article studies the post - ban migration of users of radical communities from mainstream to fringe platforms . Migrating users of radical communities , i . e . , those who become active on fringe platforms , either abandon the mainstream platform or remain coactive on both . Previous work has shown that the migration decision following radical community bans has negative externalities . Namely ( i ) the creation of more toxic communities elsewhere [ 14 ] ( if many users decide to migrate ) ; and ( ii ) the spillover of toxic behaviour from the fringe onto the mainstream platform ( if many users decide to be coactive ) . To understand the factors associated with each decision ( migration and coactivity ) , we con - duct a two - step regression analysis . The ﬁrst step estimates the probability of users posting on the fringe platform ( migration decision ) . The second step estimates the propensity of users to be coactive ( coactivity decision ) . Speciﬁcally , we examine two subreddits , r / The _ Donald and r / fatpeoplehate , associated with toxic behavior . Our analysis reveals how factors of the RECRO radicalization framework relate to users’ mi - gration decisions . Our ﬁndings are threefold . First , individuals’ online behavior , described by Reﬂection , capturing the needs and vulnerabilities of users , is linked with the decision to post on the fringe platform . For example , users that exhibit higher toxicity ( TOX ) or emotionality ( EMO ) migrated more often . Second , interactions with the social environment described by Con - nection relate primarily to the decision to be coactive on both platforms . Surprisingly , we ﬁnd that interactions with pre - ban migrated users ( APB ) / ( PPB ) increase the propensity to post on the fringe platform . Instead , users with more such interactions are more likely to remain coactive . Third , the diversity of users’ interests , captured by Exploration , hinders them from abandoning the mainstream platform altogether and increases their propensity to remain coactive . This is in accordance with previous ﬁndings suggesting that the diversity of content on mainstream plat - forms like Reddit is a pull factor that limits full migration [ 25 ] . These ﬁndings suggest that the decision to engage with the new platform is linked to individual motives , whereas social factors are associated with coactivity . 14 / 19 G . Russo , M . Horta Ribeiro , G . Casiraghi , L . Verginer : Understanding Online Migration ( Submitted for publication ) Implications Our work has two implications . First , our analysis sheds light on how migration decisions mediate the beneﬁts of banning . Thus , paving the way for moderators to take more informed decisions on banning . For instance , platforms like Reddit could estimate how users will react before carrying out community bans . Second , our ﬁndings contribute to a growing literature on understanding online radicalization . Fringe platforms have been tightly linked with terrorist attacks and extremist ideologies [ 41 ] , and therefore , studying what makes users migrate to fringe platforms advances our understanding of radicalization . Limitations Our classiﬁcation of users according to their posting activity on fringe platforms may be inaccurate and thus bias our results . For example , some users may change their user - name or only read posts on the fringe platform , and we would erroneously classify them as Reddit - only when they are participating or consuming content from the FP . Our result remains unbiased , however , if there is no systematic diﬀerence between users keeping their usernames across platforms and those changing them . References [ 1 ] Ali , S . ; Saeed , M . H . ; Aldreabi , E . ; Blackburn , J . ; De Cristofaro , E . ; Zannettou , S . ; Stringhini , G . ( 2021 ) . Understanding the Eﬀect of Deplatforming on Social Networks . In : 13th ACM Web Science Conference 2021 . WebSci ’21 , New York , NY , USA : Association for Computing Machinery , p . 187 – 195 . [ 2 ] Baumgartner , J . ; Zannettou , S . ; Keegan , B . ; Squire , M . ; Blackburn , J . ( 2020 ) . The pushshift reddit dataset . In : Proceedings of the international AAAI conference on web and social media . vol . 14 , pp . 830 – 839 . [ 3 ] Chandrasekharan , E . ; Pavalanathan , U . ; Srinivasan , A . ; Glynn , A . ; Eisenstein , J . ; Gilbert , E . ( 2017 ) . You can’t stay here : The eﬃcacy of reddit’s 2015 ban examined through hate speech . Proceedings of the ACM on Human - Computer Interaction 1 ( CSCW ) , 1 – 22 . [ 4 ] Collins , B . ; Zadrozny , B . ( 2020 ) . Facebook bans QAnon across its platforms . https : / / www . nbcnews . com / tech / tech - news / facebook - bans - qanon - across - its - platforms - n1242339 . [ 5 ] Crossett , C . ; Spitaletta , J . ( 2010 ) . Radicalization : Relevant psychological and sociological concepts . The John Hopkins University . [ 6 ] Dalgaard - Nielsen , A . ( 2010 ) . Violent radicalization in Europe : What we know and what we do not know . Studies in conﬂict & terrorism 33 ( 9 ) , 797 – 814 . [ 7 ] Doggoes ( 2020 ) . ‘I hope if you came from T _ D you reserved your reddit username even if you don’t plan to useit’ . [ 8 ] Flores - Saviaga , C . I . ; Keegan , B . C . ; Savage , S . ( 2018 ) . Mobilizing the trump train : Understanding collective action in a political trolling community . In : Twelfth International AAAI Conference on Web and Social Media . [ 9 ] Freelon , D . ; Marwick , A . ; Kreiss , D . ( 2020 ) . False equivalencies : Online activism from left to right . Science 369 ( 6508 ) , 1197 – 1201 . 15 / 19 G . Russo , M . Horta Ribeiro , G . Casiraghi , L . Verginer : Understanding Online Migration ( Submitted for publication ) [ 10 ] Google ( 2022 ) . YouTube Community Guidelines enforcement . https : / / transparencyreport . google . com / youtube - policy / removals . [ 11 ] Grover , A . ; Leskovec , J . ( 2016 ) . node2vec : Scalable feature learning for networks . In : Proceedings of the 22nd ACM SIGKDD international conference on Knowledge discovery and data mining . pp . 855 – 864 . [ 12 ] Grover , T . ; Mark , G . ( 2019 ) . Detecting potential warning behaviors of ideological radicalization in an alt - right subreddit . In : Proceedings of the International AAAI Conference on Web and Social Media . vol . 13 , pp . 193 – 204 . [ 13 ] Heckman , J . J . ( 1979 ) . Sample Selection Bias as a Speciﬁcation Error . Econometrica 47 ( 1 ) , 153 . [ 14 ] Horta Ribeiro , M . ; Jhaver , S . ; Zannettou , S . ; Blackburn , J . ; Stringhini , G . ; De Cristofaro , E . ; West , R . ( 2021 ) . Do platform migrations compromise content moderation ? evidence from r / the _ donald and r / incels . Proceedings of the ACM on Human - Computer Interaction 5 ( CSCW2 ) , 1 – 24 . [ 15 ] Jhaver , S . ; Boylston , C . ; Yang , D . ; Bruckman , A . ( 2021 ) . Evaluating the eﬀectiveness of deplatform - ing as a moderation strategy on Twitter . Proceedings of the ACM on Human - Computer Interaction 5 ( CSCW2 ) , 1 – 30 . [ 16 ] Jigsaw ( 2022 ) . Perspective API . https : / / perspectiveapi . com / . [ 17 ] Koehler , D . ( 2014 ) . The radical online : Individual radicalization processes and the role of the Internet . Journal for Deradicalization ( 1 ) , 116 – 134 . [ 18 ] Kruglanski , A . W . ; Gelfand , M . J . ; Bélanger , J . J . ; Sheveland , A . ; Hetiarachchi , M . ; Gunaratna , R . ( 2014 ) . The psychology of radicalization and deradicalization : How signiﬁcance quest impacts violent extremism . Political Psychology 35 , 69 – 93 . [ 19 ] Laquer , W . ( 1998 ) . Origins of terrorism : Psychologies , ideologies , theologies , states of mind . Woodrow Wilson Center Press . [ 20 ] Lyons , M . N . ( 2017 ) . Ctrl - alt - delete : The origins and ideology of the alternative right . Political Research Associates 20 . [ 21 ] Marwick , A . E . ; Caplan , R . ( 2018 ) . Drinking male tears : Language , the manosphere , and networked harassment . Feminist Media Studies 18 ( 4 ) , 543 – 559 . [ 22 ] McIlroy - Young , R . ; Anderson , A . ( 2019 ) . From “welcome new gabbers” to the pittsburgh synagogue shooting : The evolution of gab . In : Proceedings of the international aaai conference on web and social media . vol . 13 , pp . 651 – 654 . [ 23 ] Mekacher , A . ; Papasavva , A . ( 2022 ) . " I Can’t Keep It Up . " A Dataset from the Defunct Voat . co News Aggregator . In : Proceedings of the International AAAI Conference on Web and Social Media . vol . 16 , pp . 1302 – 1311 . [ 24 ] Neo , L . S . ( 2019 ) . An Internet - mediated pathway for online radicalisation : RECRO . In : Violent Extremism : Breakthroughs in Research and Practice , IGI Global . pp . 62 – 89 . [ 25 ] Newell , E . ; Jurgens , D . ; Saleem , H . M . ; Vala , H . ; Sassine , J . ; Armstrong , C . ; Ruths , D . ( 2016 ) . User migration in online social networks : A case study on reddit during a period of community unrest . In : Tenth International AAAI Conference on Web and Social Media . [ 26 ] Paudel , P . ; Blackburn , J . ; De Cristofaro , E . ; Zannettou , S . ; Stringhini , G . ( 2021 ) . Soros , child sacriﬁces , and 5G : understanding the spread of conspiracy theories on web communities . arXiv preprint arXiv : 2111 . 02187 . [ 27 ] Phadke , S . ; Samory , M . ; Mitra , T . ( 2022 ) . Pathways through Conspiracy : The Evolution of Conspir - 16 / 19 G . Russo , M . Horta Ribeiro , G . Casiraghi , L . Verginer : Understanding Online Migration ( Submitted for publication ) acy Radicalization through Engagement in Online Conspiracy Discussions . In : Proceedings of the International AAAI Conference on Web and Social Media . vol . 16 , pp . 770 – 781 . [ 28 ] Puhani , P . ( 2000 ) . The Heckman correction for sample selection and its critique . Journal of economic surveys 14 ( 1 ) , 53 – 68 . [ 29 ] Reddit ( 2020 ) . Update to our content policy . https : / / www . reddit . com / r / announcements / comments / hi3oht / update _ to _ our _ content _ policy / . [ 30 ] Reedy , J . ; Gastil , J . ; Gabbay , M . ( 2013 ) . Terrorism and small groups : An analytical framework for group disruption . Small group research 44 ( 6 ) , 599 – 626 . [ 31 ] Rieger , D . ; Kümpel , A . S . ; Wich , M . ; Kiening , T . ; Groh , G . ( 2021 ) . Assessing the extent and types of hate speech in fringe communities : a case study of alt - right communities on 8chan , 4chan , and Reddit . Social Media + Society 7 ( 4 ) , 20563051211052906 . [ 32 ] Russo , G . ; Verginer , L . ; Ribeiro , M . H . ; Casiraghi , G . ( 2022 ) . Spillover of Antisocial Behavior from Fringe Platforms : The Unintended Consequences of Community Banning . arXiv preprint arXiv : 2209 . 09803 . [ 33 ] Samory , M . ; Mitra , T . ( 2018 ) . Conspiracies online : User discussions in a conspiracy community following dramatic events . In : Proceedings of the International AAAI Conference on Web and Social Media . vol . 12 . [ 34 ] Scrivens , R . ; Davies , G . ; Frank , R . ( 2018 ) . Searching for signs of extremism on the web : an intro - duction to Sentiment - based Identiﬁcation of Radical Authors . Behavioral sciences of terrorism and political aggression 10 ( 1 ) , 39 – 59 . [ 35 ] Sipka , A . ; Hannak , A . ; Urman , A . ( 2022 ) . Comparing the Language of QAnon - related content on Parler , Gab , and Twitter . In : 14th ACM Web Science Conference 2022 . pp . 411 – 421 . [ 36 ] Van Raemdonck , N . ( 2019 ) . The echo chamber of anti - vaccination conspiracies : mechanisms of radicalization on Facebook and Reddit . Institute for Policy , Advocacy and Governance ( IPAG ) Knowledge Series , Forthcoming . [ 37 ] Waller , I . ; Anderson , A . ( 2021 ) . Quantifying social organization and political polarization in online platforms . Nature 600 ( 7888 ) , 264 – 268 . [ 38 ] Wollebæk , D . ; Karlsen , R . ; Steen - Johnsen , K . ; Enjolras , B . ( 2019 ) . Anger , fear , and echo chambers : The emotional basis for online behavior . Social Media + Society 5 ( 2 ) , 2056305119829859 . [ 39 ] Zannettou , S . ; Caulﬁeld , T . ; Blackburn , J . ; De Cristofaro , E . ; Sirivianos , M . ; Stringhini , G . ; Suarez - Tangil , G . ( 2018 ) . On the origins of memes by means of fringe web communities . In : Proceedings of the Internet Measurement Conference 2018 . pp . 188 – 202 . [ 40 ] Zannettou , S . ; ElSherief , M . ; Belding , E . ; Nilizadeh , S . ; Stringhini , G . ( 2020 ) . Measuring and char - acterizing hate speech on news websites . In : 12th ACM Conference on Web Science . pp . 125 – 134 . [ 41 ] Zeng , J . ; Schäfer , M . S . ( 2021 ) . Conceptualizing “dark platforms” . Covid - 19 - related conspiracy the - ories on 8kun and Gab . Digital Journalism 9 ( 9 ) , 1321 – 1343 . [ 42 ] Zuckerman , E . ; Rajendra - Nicolucci , C . ( 2021 ) . Deplatforming Our Way to the Alt - Tech Ecosystem . Knight First Amendment Institute at Columbia University , January 11 . 17 / 19 G . Russo , M . Horta Ribeiro , G . Casiraghi , L . Verginer : Understanding Online Migration ( Submitted for publication ) A Appendix A . 1 Subreddit Similarity We deﬁne a similarity between all subreddits and the two focal subreddits ( r / The _ Donald and r / fat peoplehate ) considering their polar opposites ( r / HillaryClinton and r / fatlogic , respectively ) . Given a focal subreddit s i , we deﬁne a subreddit s j to be relevant for s i if at least ten users of either the focal subreddit s i or its polar opposite s ˆ i posted at least ﬁve times on s j before the ban . We then construct a weighted graph for a focal subreddit s i and its polar opposite s ˆ i ( e . g . , r / fatpeoplehate - r / fatlogic ) . The nodes of the graphs consist of ( i ) s i and s ˆ i , and ( ii ) all relevant subreddits for the two polar opposites . We draw a weighted edge between two nodes if the corresponding subreddits share at least ﬁve active users . The weight corresponds to the number of users shared . As a next step , we train the Node2Vec [ 11 ] algorithm on the graphs built for the pairs r / The _ Donald - r / HillaryClinton and r / fatpeoplehate - r / fatlogic . As a result , we obtain embeddings speciﬁcally catered towards ﬁnding subreddits hosting discussions similar to the focal subreddits . We use the cosine similarity to map subreddits’ similarity on a scale from - 1 to + 1 , where + 1 represents the higher similarity to the focal subreddits . To validate our similarity scale , we calculate Spearman’s rank - order correlation between the 1 , 000 subreddits most similar to r / The _ Donald , and r / fatpeoplehate and the ranking of publicly available subreddit embeddings by Waller and Anderson [ 37 ] . The embeddings from Waller and Anderson [ 37 ] are not explicitly trained towards ﬁnding similarities between speciﬁc communities , but they provide a general measure of subreddit similarity . We ﬁnd a correlation of 0 . 64 with p < 0 . 05 , indicating that our scale successfully measures similarity to r / The _ Donald and r / fatpeoplehate . We manually inspect the top 50 subreddits on the similarity scale and conﬁrm that they host discussions similar to r / The _ Donald and r / fatpeoplehate , respectively . A . 2 Predicting Migration Steps Table 3 : F1 - Scores for the diﬀerent classiﬁcation models . The ﬁrst column reports the classiﬁ - cation scores on the three labels RO , CA , and FM . The second and third column report the classiﬁcation scores of the ﬁrst ( RO ↔ MG ) and second step ( CA ↔ FM ) respectively of the 2STEP classiﬁer . F1 - Score ( All ) F1 - Score ( 1st step ) F1 - Score ( 2nd Step ) SVM 0 . 44 ∼ ∼ Random Forest 0 . 52 ∼ ∼ XGB 0 . 65 ∼ ∼ AdaBoost 0 . 41 ∼ ∼ 2STEP ( Our ) 0 . 74 0 . 84 0 . 88 In the analysis presented in section 3 and section 5 , we show how reﬂection , exploration , and connection factors aﬀect user migration . Here , we investigate if and how well we can predict users’ migration deci - sions in reaction to a ban . To answer these questions , we deﬁne a hierarchical classiﬁcation model . This 18 / 19 G . Russo , M . Horta Ribeiro , G . Casiraghi , L . Verginer : Understanding Online Migration ( Submitted for publication ) classiﬁer ﬁrst distinguishes users who post on a fringe platform from those who will not ( ﬁrst decision ) . Subsequently , a second classiﬁer predicts if they become co - active or not . This second classiﬁer is trained with those users that , according to the ﬁrst classiﬁer , will post on the fringe platform . We use for both the ﬁrst and second classiﬁer a Gradient Boosting Classiﬁer . To correct the high imbalance that primarily aﬀects the ﬁrst classiﬁer , we downsample the users that did not post on the fringe platform as they are ten times more common than those that post on the fringe . We evaluate our hierarchical classiﬁer against other models using multiple metrics testing prediction capacities . All the experiments have been conducted by running a ﬁve - fold cross - validation using a 60 % - 20 % - 20 % training - validation - test split . Our results show that our model outperforms other baselines that do not consider the two - step structure of online migration . Speciﬁcally , we compare the performance of our classiﬁer against baselines that directly predict the ﬁnal user decision in a single step ( Reddit - Only , Coactive , or Fully - Migrated ) . Unlike our classiﬁer , these baselines predict users’ migration decisions in a single step . In our experiments , the 2STEP classiﬁer outperforms all baselines by a maximum of 12 % using f1 - score accuracy . These results provide solid evidence that our two - step characterization of the migration process is a valid assumption . We report the results of our classiﬁcation in table 3 . Such results provide additional support to the analysis that we conducted in section 3 . 2 19 / 19