21st DMI : Academic Design Management Conference Next Wave London , UK , 1 - 2 August , 2018 Copyright © 2018 . Copyright in each paper on this conference proceedings is the property of the author ( s ) . Permission is granted to reproduce copies of these works for purposes relevant to the above conference , provided that the author ( s ) , source and copyright notice are included on each copy . For other uses , including extended quotation , please contact the author ( s ) . Beyond the Scope of Design thinking : DesignCommunication Dóra HORVATH a * , Attila COSOVAN b , Tamas CSORDAS c , Daniella HORVATH d , Ariel MITEV e Design thinking as an everyday tool in managerial practice provides a systematic framework for generating new and creative ideas , therefore opening up the practice of design not only to designers ( educated in art schools ) but anyone who intends to create something with a purpose in an organization . The purpose of current paper is to enrich the design - related academic and managerial discussion with the concept and methodology of designcommunication , DIS . CO , which provides an intuitive and emphatic frame of thought for solving open , ill - structured problems . Designcommunication = communication integrated into development . The authors use the compound noun ‘design communication’ as ‘designcommunication’ written in one word as by DESIGNCOMMUNICATION they want to refer to the phenomenon : ‘communication integrated into development . ’ Designcommunication is not merely a function or a form , but it is also content , message , style and culture together . It is an approach that strives to connect design , everyday economies , strategic communication and their real status . Communication in this form is not an additional frippery , but communication is created simultaneously with research and problem solving and is coded into the development of the given product , service or process . While thinking implies a conscious human activity to solve , interpret things around us , communication is an evolutionary necessity – which immediately describes a core difference and relation of design thinking and designcommunication . a Corvinus University of Budapest * Corresponding author : Dora Horvath | e - mail : dora . horvath @ uni - corvinus . hu b Corvinus University of Budapest c Corvinus University of Budapest d Corvinus University of Budapest e Corvinus University of Budapest DORA HORVATH , ATTILA COSOVAN , TAMÁS CSORDÁS , DANIELLA HORVATH , ARIEL MITEV 2 In the current paper the authors describe designcommunication and design thinking according to Dorst’s ( 2011 ) schemes of closed and open problem - solving situations and Johansson - Sköldberg et al . ’s ( 2013 ) framework . Participant reflections on designcommunication that took place in an educational training setting in a regional development project is presented . The authors’ argumentation is supported by participant narratives ( n = 171 ) . Findings show that solving design tasks for non - designers , especially in management areas , help opening up new perspectives , give a new point of view of leadership , and increase self - knowledge . Designcommunication is an alternative to design thinking , which facilitates the solution of ill structured problems ( Simon , 1973 ) . Keywords : Designcommunication , design thinking , ill - structured problems , leadership training Introduction Life - long learning is an evidence for today’s leaders and designers . If leaders would approach emerging problems like designers , many products , services and procedures would become more functional , and would be able to create long - lasting values for the organization and society . Such an approach has to be learned and steadily trained . The act of authentic learning takes place by only leaving one’s comfort zone . Designcommunication is built on the interaction of different disciplines and the collaboration of different professions , and places business professionals into designer and artist roles , while designers and representatives of the creative disciplines are enforced to become leaders . Purpose of present article is to enrich the design - related managerial discussion with the concept and methodology of designcommunication , DIS . CO , which provides an intuitive and emphatic frame of thought for solving open development problems . Designcommunication - DIS . CO Designcommunication by definition is communication integrated into development ( HIPO , 2018 ) . The authors use the compound noun ‘design communication’ as ‘designcommunication’ written in one word as by DESIGNCOMMUNICATION they intend to refer to the patented expression and phenomenon : ‘communication integrated into development . ’ Beyond the Scope of Design thinking : DesignCommunication 3 Designcommunication is compounded of two inseparable notions : design and communication . Design is not equal to form - giving . Form - giving is one component of the holistic human constant that we call design . Design in this case implies design art , creative planning and creative behavior ( Papanek , 1971 ) . Planning and establishing a business activity is designing a business . As Herbert Simon states ‘engineering , medicine , business , architecture , and painting are concerned not with the necessary but with the contingent – not how things are but how they might be – in short with design’ ( Simon , 1996 , p . xii ) . A leader’s responsibility is not to discover the rules of the universe , but to act with responsibility , so as to turn current situations and capabilities better or preferable . In that sense , a leader is a form giver , who shapes the organization and its economic processes . If leaders approached emerging problems as the best designers , many products , services and procedures would become more functional , and would be able to create long lasting values for the organization and society ( Boland and Collopy , 2004 , p . xi ) . More briefly : DESIGN = DO GOOD ( Cosovan , 2009 ) . Design is complemented with communication , which is a creative way of connecting both at the level of self - reflection ( inner conversation ) and the human interaction phenomenon . Therefore , DESIGNCOMMUNICATION represents such an initiative for connection that serves as a BRIDGE between different disciplines and discourses , phenomena of society and economy . Designcommunication creates a real - time connection among classroom learning , research and entrepreneurship . It takes the time factor into consideration with respect of the apparently multidimensional and objective digital and expectedly later conceptual age . Designcommunication is not merely a function or a form , but it is also content , message , style and culture together . Designcommunication is an approach that strives to connect design , everyday economies , strategic communication and their real status . Communication in this form is not an additional frippery , but communication is created simultaneously with research and problem solving and is coded into the development of the given product , service or process . In a brief expression : COMMUNICATION = SAY GOOD . Each object , product , service , procedure is information itself , but formulation of the problem in the first phase of the design process does not communicate , and usually , most think the right moment of communication will come after all at the end . However , this may not be right . The act of DORA HORVATH , ATTILA COSOVAN , TAMÁS CSORDÁS , DANIELLA HORVATH , ARIEL MITEV 4 formulating the design problem already comprises essential communication codes . Imagine a good joke teller . We all like those joke tellers who are funny from the beginning of the joke , not only at the punch line . A good object , product , procedure is also able to show this communication evolution . It is the formulation of a new domain through which creative behavior becomes the general approach . Design is a job , a profession , — while in reality , it should be and also could be more , if design as an information node was in line with its communication ( Cosovan , 2015 , p . 98 ) . Designcommunication ( DIS . CO ) is a design process approach . It is at the same time a philosophy and a methodology ( theory and praxis ) – communication integrated into development : it is an approach that builds on intuition and empathy in the exploration of design problems . Designcommunication as an alternative to design thinking Design thinking is a widely spread creative tool not only in the domain of design , but also in management and management education as well ( Johansson ‐ Sköldberg , Woodilla & Çetinkaya , 2013 ) . In the general managerial practice the expression of design thinking not always referred to the actual stepwise process of design thinking ( i . e . Brown , 2008 ) , but to associations of creative problem solving tools . In an ill - structured problem solving case design thinking ( Dorst , 2006 ) and designcommunication as an alternative could be the applied design approach . Design thinking is an approach for enhancing systematic creativity by offering consecutive planning steps , an applied research based methodology . Design thinking in all its alternative models is composed of successive linear planning steps . The simplest of all is the three planning steps of inspiration , ideation and implementation ( Brown , 2008 ) , this steps are further unfolded to more phases i . e . defining , exploring , interpreting , ideating , prototyping , iterating , implementing , enhancing ( Feher & Varga , 2017 ) . These linear planning approaches serve as efficient tools in managerial planning situations ( Johansson ‐ Sköldberg , et al . , 2013 ) . One of humans’ capability , opportunity and at the same time obligation is to plan or to create with respect to the interaction of societal invariables ( permanent elements ) and variables . Our capability to design since the Beyond the Scope of Design thinking : DesignCommunication 5 existence of the human race determines the triplicate of survival – subsistence – development . The act or process of creation is the coefficient of societal invariable ( permanent ) and variable elements ( Cosovan & Horvath , 2016 ) . Therefore , design , communication and their business alternative - design management is a result of a differentiated and integrated , in other words , complex design thinking process ( Csikszentmihalyi , 1998 ; Brown , 2008 ) . Instead of describing consecutive planning steps , designcommunicaiton offers a holistic view for finding the optimal solution by taking maximum and minimum requirements into consideration through the complementary and opposing notions of : material – immaterial , survival – subsistence – development , constant ( invariable ) – variable . These complementary notions , opposites increase the boundaries of creative thought and also serve as metaphorical guiding principles and evaluation criteria during the design process . For illustration authors describe designcommunication notions in the case of RedDot Design Award winner Inhalo DSI dry natural salt inhaler f ( Figure 1 ) . The notions of constant ( invariable ) – variable may be interpreted at the level of form , which in this case is a natural archetype ( a universal code ) , it is like an oval flat gravel that is thrown on water for multiple jumps . It is an ellipsoid shape on the one hand , a very simple shape cliché on the other . The design team elevated this simple shape cliché and gave a new meaning to it through DSI . The notions of subsistence - survival - development mean that this archetype of shape will exist as long as nature and gravels will exist , therefore this code of shape is independent of time , sentenced to eternity . The notion of material - immaterial in this case has a spiritual aspect , the oval , flat gravel shape resembles mediation pebbles ( mediation tools ) at the same time it also holds simple everyday stories like throwing stones into a river . f http : / / www . inhalodsi . eu / blog - en / news / red - dot - design - award - winning - product DORA HORVATH , ATTILA COSOVAN , TAMÁS CSORDÁS , DANIELLA HORVATH , ARIEL MITEV 6 Figure 1 . Natural archetype , a universal code : the oval flat gravel shaped DSI salt inhaler Source : http : / / coandco . cc Design thinking as a broadly accepted design methodology is one aspect of designers’ creative behavior , recognition and solution of the essence of an actual problem ( Johansson ‐ Sköldberg et al . , 2013 ) . Complexity and integrity of the design process have been already mentioned a lot earlier i . e . ‘wicked problems in design thinking’ ( Buchanan , 1992 ) . According to Dorst ( 2011 ) problem solving in the design process is to be approached as ill - structured and clearly structured situations . Basic problem - solving may described as WHAT ( thing ) + HOW ( working principle ) - > RESULT ( observed ) . In this case a clear vision of the expected result and a working principle such as the consecutive steps of design thinking are available . In this case ‘we know the ‘what’ ( the ‘players’ in a situation we need to attend to ) , and we know ‘how’ they will operate together . ’ ( Dorst , 2011 , p . 523 . ) Many of the classic education situations are about preparing learners for closed problem solving cases by providing tools and frameworks that are applicable in different conditions – as Thomas & Brown ( 2009 ) states it is ‘learning about’ . If the outcome is conceived in terms of value and the working principle is established – this is a routine case for designers and engineers , within a set scenario of value is created : Beyond the Scope of Design thinking : DesignCommunication 7 ? ? ? + HOW ( working principle ) - > leads to VALUE . There are cases where only the aspired end value is known ( Dorst , 2011 ) . This as an open - problem solving situation where only the intended end value is known . This ‘open’ form of reasoning is more closely associated with ( conceptual ) design ( Dorst , 2011 , p . 524 ) that is the essence of designcommunication : ? ? ? ( thing ) + ? ? ? ( working principle ) - > leads to aspired VALUE . In this situation the thing ( aspired solution ) determines the working principle which is communication integrated into development . In the authors’ view , design thinking and designcommunication may be connected and compared . Authors believe that design thinking is more efficient in well - defined problem situations , where the planning process is structured , and rules are well - known . Designcommunication on the contrary would be a considerable approach for situations where boundaries , domains are unclear . Therefore authors would argue that design thinking be described by the notions of systematic creativity , inquiry and exploration , routines . Designcommunication approach would further facilitate identifying and discovering new domains that lead to exponential progression ( Figure 2 , Table 1 ) . DORA HORVATH , ATTILA COSOVAN , TAMÁS CSORDÁS , DANIELLA HORVATH , ARIEL MITEV 8 Figure 2 . Complementary and interrelating notions of design thinking Source : own elaboration The role of designcommunication in leadership and management education DESIGNCOMMUNICATION represents such an initiative for connection that serves as a bridge between different disciplines and discourses , phenomena of society and economy . Designcommunication creates a real time connection among classroom learning , research and entrepreneurship . It takes the time factor into consideration with respect of the apparently multidimensional and objective digital and expectedly later conceptual age . TIME has a ruthless impact on our lives , especially this is the case for generations Y and Z . The multitasking generation painfully have to experience that they have to study at the expense of work practice and work at the expense of their study time , so we have to admit the time factor is not yet multitasking compatible . Aspiring to gain a degree and working experience at the same time generations Y and Z are under a big pressure , in certain cases close to burnout . Beyond the Scope of Design thinking : DesignCommunication 9 Our objective is not to increase today’s pace of living , instead we strive to optimize career paths of the Y and Z generations , where we do not make a quality difference between differentiated and integrated ways of thinking , where there will be time for studying , research , work ( career and entrepreneurship ) , cooperation , building one’s own individual identity , there will remain time for relaxing , taking inside and outside perspectives . In sum , having time for as many things as possible , which we all need in the age of renaissance complexity concerning the relations of permanent and variable , survival - subsistence - development , material and immaterial . ( Cosovan & Horvath , 2016 ) . Thomas and Brown ( 2009 ) expressed that the classical education format could not keep up with the fast economic , societal and technological changes . While the 20 th century education is about ‘ learning about ’ , that is acquiring sufficient information , which in the 21 st century turns ‘ learning to be ’ that today becomes ‘ learning as a as a practice of becoming over and over again ’ . In the age of new media , learning and education develop its new formats accordingly : i . e . making and playing . The authors describe new forms as ( 1 ) hanging out , ( 2 ) playing / knowing / messing around , ( 3 ) playing / knowing / making : geeking out ( Thomas & Brown , 2009 , p . 10 ) . Designcommunication in an education setting where participants solve ill - structured problems may be described as learning as a practice of becoming over and over again in a playing / knowing / messing around setting . Education today is to decrease hierarchy and control and to increase autonomy and responsibility , by extending collaborations ( Jerald , 2009 ) . Education is to make learners capable of coping with ill - structured problems . According to ( Hackman , 2002 ; 2009 ) small learning groups are less efficient than undefined big working groups . Participant reflections – the role of design experience in learning Students were tasked at multiple instances to solve a group project in the form of full cooperation and in a designcommunication perspective at a master’s course ( Design management ) at Corvinus University of Budapest . At the end of the course , participants were asked to write a short essay about their experience of the process , what difficulties they had perceived , what they had considered as a success , achievement , and pleasurable DORA HORVATH , ATTILA COSOVAN , TAMÁS CSORDÁS , DANIELLA HORVATH , ARIEL MITEV 10 experience throughout the process . The sample of 171 participant essays thus gathered results from 8 such courses organized between Fall 2016 and January 2018 ( 4 regular courses , held on a weekly basis throughout a semester , and 4 block seminars , that took place over the course of a one - week period ) ( see Annex ) . One of the most important aspects in training future leaders is to make students live through situations that foreshadow the tasks they will be led to solve as leaders , and make them learn how to create a more favorable situation ( Boland - Collopy , 2004 ) , how to embrace available opportunities ( Simon , 1996 ) , and how to become designer - leaders ( Cosovan - Horvath , 2016 ) . The task of instructors in executive programs is to create a framework for learning , where participants can face their own leadership skills , their unexpected reactions – and learn from these . A wikinomical cooperation ( Tapscott & Williams , 2008 ) within the classroom is unique in the sense that instructors do not set the framework of cooperation in advance , and full cooperation is established in full agreement between all participants . This way , they can experience the meaning of change without control : The course was , in fact , a process of learning and development . This process was different for all of us : we did not start from , nor did arrive to the same position , everybody made something different out of it . This was probably one of the best things in it . [ LLL , 2017 ] The distance covered mattered and matters a lot more , that is , the ways we went through to achieve the goals we had set . It was also important to feel that [ the project ] belongs to us , and that we be able to describe it in our own words , without which we wouldn’t have been able to throw ourselves into solving it this eagerly – by the way , that’s also true for all areas of life . [ LLL , 2017 ] All in all , this course was for me the one that offered the ‘most lifelike’ experience – despite all the uncertainties – for the future among my master’s classes . [ LLL , 2017 ] Both the literature and the experience of the authors support that group cooperation is largely influenced by the individual’s attitude towards the group , the group’s acceptance of the individual , and the individual’s ability to assert their interests within the group . Participants unanimously related group identification and the realization of cooperation as a success : Beyond the Scope of Design thinking : DesignCommunication 11 During the whole of the project I had the feeling that this ‘for everyone’ is really ‘for everyone’ . [ DISCO2 , 2017 ] An invisible bond had formed between us that was based on helping each other’s thoughts , to make them advance , which required a great deal of patience , concentration . There were some moments when we almost abandoned , but there were always one or two group members who shook us , and reminded us that it’s not what we have to do that’s important , but the way that we get there . [ DISCO2 , 2017 ] we crossed our own borders together , paying attention to each other in mass , thereby developing ourselves . [ LIB3 , 2016 ] All participant’s own identity is at least as much important as group identity . By participating to a similar cooperative project , an individual , parallel to developing their own ideas , is able to accept others and keep the interests of the group in mind : I was willing to give up my own ideas for the sake of the community , which is an achievement in personality development . ( LLL , 2017 ) Successful cooperation is a learning experience that can , at the same time , assert participants’ professional identities , and can , as such , be considered as a form of self - development in leadership : After six years of studying marketing , I met new approaches , and after a long time managed to be enthusiastic about a university project . And not least , it gave me a personal motivation and inspiration ( during and also since the project ) to find my own way , and go ahead with my lifelong dreams lost in the process . [ LIB3 , 2016 ] The possibility of professional co - operation within the group is provided by the creative design process , the feeling of success , or simply the flow ( Csikszentmihalyi , 1998 ) . The creative leadership by example of professional leaders or instructors is essential . This can engender an active design coordination , which , in turn , contributes to directly or indDorsHIPirectly stimulating the design flow ( Cosovan , 2015 ) . This was maybe the only class I attended so far at the university where I felt that I actually learn instead of simply being taught , and DORA HORVATH , ATTILA COSOVAN , TAMÁS CSORDÁS , DANIELLA HORVATH , ARIEL MITEV 12 where it mattered less what I , as a person , achieve , rather the way we , as a small group , had developed together . [ DISCO2 , 2017 ] Groups supervised during the sampling period were able to perceive the importance of the emergence and rotation of various roles during the resolution of the project . They actively required the intervention or moderation of the instructor along the optimal or sub - optimal functioning of the group thereby creating a cooperation of peers : I was motivated to contribute in the tasks and to not accept everything as is and not hesitate to question everything I disagree with since this is what propels everything forward and helps one’s development . I believe that we managed to do good and do well . Thank you . [ DISCO2 , 2017 ] As a conclusion , I can say that the methods of designcommunication and wikinomic cooperation helped me get out of my comfort zone , and be able to think differently and think together with a group . [ DISCO1 , 2017 ] Conclusion : designcommunication a leadership tool in ill - structured problem solving Managerial thinking emphasizes rationality and control . Whether it is about objectives , resources , organizations , structures , or people , managers are conceptualized to solve problems . Managers ask the following question : ‘What problems need to be solved , and how can we achieve the best results in a way that everybody contribute to corporate success ? ’ Managerial objectives derive from constraints rather than desires , and root in organizational culture and traditions ( Zaleznik , 1992 : 127 ) . Most leadership and management training programs are geared to transmit ready - made methods and frames , thereby training experts in closed problem solving ( see e . g . Dorst , 2011 ) . Leaders operate in high - risk environments , they are prone to face high risks and danger , especially where these represent a potential source of advantage . Leaders can cope with chaos and disorganization , and they are able to assess problems in non - trivial situations ( Zaleznik , 1992 : 128 ) . Designcommunication provides an approach for coping with ill - structured challenges and tasks , which in a training setting provides Beyond the Scope of Design thinking : DesignCommunication 13 leadership simulation where training participants can create their working principles and solution at the same time : The usual , clear rules of the game – that we were well used to during our 19 - 20 years of studies – were not present . I felt quite uncomfortable with the situation at the beginning , but from the moment I realized the freedom it gives , I started to enjoy it . [ LLL , 2017 ] Providing freedom to students , supporting student’s novel or even extreme ideas , professional and personal humility were all examples set for us that , first , offered an appropriate background for self - development , value creation , the understanding of added value and underlying connections between concepts , and second , helped us cooperate without rivalry , to get the most out of ourselves and to give space to what we consider important and enjoyable . [ LLL , 2017 ] According to classical , conservative managerial approaches ( Martin , 2007 ) less attractive , but secure and risk - averse corporate choices are favored . Representatives of leadership approaches and integrative thinking , on the contrary , face complex situations and are able to start over and over again . Integrative thinkers look for new options and solutions . Traditional , managerial thinkers concentrate on potential solutions . A conventional thinker would accept the word as it is , while an integrative thinker would take on the challenge of improving the world ( Martin ( 2007 , p . 67 ) – DOING GOOD in a designcommunication sense . In the context of leadership training designcommunication is an alternative approach to design thinking that provides an emotionally filled , highly involving working experience for coping with ill - structured problem cases . The authors believe that understanding of designcommunication is further elaborated in a comparison to design thinking ( Table 1 ) . Table 1 . Design thinking and DIS . CO DESIGN THINKING DIS . CO to design useful products PHILOSOPHY do good and say good DORA HORVATH , ATTILA COSOVAN , TAMÁS CSORDÁS , DANIELLA HORVATH , ARIEL MITEV 14 integrates human needs , technological opportunities , and success criteria in business in strategy , organizational , and product development using a design toolbox DEFINITION design / creative approach , philosophy , methodology ; creative designer interaction , communication integrated into development three iterative steps : inspiration ( investigation and understanding of problem )  ideation ( idea generation )  implementation GUIDELINES OF THE DESIGN PROCESS holistic view for finding the optimal solution by taking maximum and minimum requirements into consideration through the complementary and opposing notions of : material – immaterial + survival – subsistence – development + constant ( invariable ) – variable systematic creativity NATURE OF THE CREATIVE PROCESS creativity influencing domains recognition NATURE OF KNOWLEDGE ACQUISITION AND SOLUTION discovery linear IMPLEMENTED DEVELOPMENT exponential convention - bound routine ( permanent accessories , participants remain in their previous roles ) MAIN FEATURE OF THE DESIGN PROCESS rite of process ( roles and artifacts generated through a value - oriented process ) coaches never , participants hardly get out of their comfort zone COMFORT ZONE both the facilitators and participants get out of their comfort zone Source : own collection Beyond the Scope of Design thinking : DesignCommunication 15 Annex : Sample composition and attributes Date and description of course ; number of participants Project description Output of cooperation Citation reference in text Aug . 2016 . Intensive week ( before start of regular classes ) . Participants from 3 Hungarian universities ( UCB , BME , MOME ) ( n = 28 ) Experience - and emotion - based approach to the library of CUB ; concept proposals for spatial , material , visual , service and procedural systems Interdisciplinary cooperation ; A few students quit the course because of the form of cooperation , for those who stayed , mostly a successful experience LIB3 , 2016 Oct . 2016 . Block seminar ( Marketing MA students of CUB ) ( n = 26 ) Further development of results of LIB3 , 2016 . Experience - and emotion - based approach to the library of CUB ; improved concept proposals for spatial , material , visual , service and procedural systems The group successfully solved the task , but strong intra - group conflicts developed on the basis of the varying levels of individual participation ; the group required a top - down moderation from the lecturers LIB1 , 2016 Fall 2016 semester . Regular course ( Marketing MA students of CUB ) ( n = 18 ) “The future” . Creation of a product / idea / service / solution having a decisive influence in survival / subsistence / development ( cf . TFF Idea , Cosovan , 2009 , p . 130 . ) solution : Game of Care application Strong autonomous group work where the group found the way to manage itself and created an own communication platform ; No observable intra - group conflicts . GOC , 2016 Jan . 2017 . Intensive week ( before start of regular classes ) ( Marketing MA students of CUB ) ( n = 28 ) “The future” . TFF Idea solution : LLL ( live and let live ) poem / song / manifesto Strong autonomous group work where the group found the way to manage itself ; Group members overcame initial disagreements . Group manifesto available at : http : / / bit . ly / 2ED0rZe LLL , 2017 Spring 2017 semester . Regular course ( Marketing MA students of CUB ) ( n = 17 ) “The future” . TFF Idea solution : Mindful May Strong autonomous group work where the group found the way to manage itself : http : / / bit . ly / 2ED0SCQ MIND , 2017 Aug . 2017 . Intensive week ( before start of regular classes ) Relating designcommunication and design thinking in Initial lack of self - confidence in group , followed by a dynamic DISCO1 , 2017 DORA HORVATH , ATTILA COSOVAN , TAMÁS CSORDÁS , DANIELLA HORVATH , ARIEL MITEV 16 ( Marketing MA students of CUB ) ( n = 19 ) theory and in practice group work : http : / / bit . ly / 2vcIUYP Fall 2017 semester . Regular course ( Marketing MA students of CUB ) ( n = 16 ) Relating designcommunication and design thinking in theory and in practice , starting from individual interpretation of given articles Lack of interest for each other ' s individual works ; Compromises in group work ( dropping ideas ) ; Finding group cohesion ; Animated film on flow with 5 characters ( impersonations of design , communication , thinking , designcommunication , and design thinking ) : http : / / bit . ly / 2qossjc DISCO2 , 2017 Jan . 2018 . Intensive week ( before start of regular classes ) ( Marketing MA students of CUB ) ( n = 19 ) Communication vs . thinking : - > communication independent of culture and civilization - > changing / saving the life of a homeless person Group couldn’t wait for teachers leave them alone to work – Autonomous group ; Strong emotional involvement of participants Initiative and film ( “Pass on ! ” ) : http : / / bit . ly / 2EAi38l PASSON , 2018 References Boland , R . J . , & Collopy , F . ( 2004 ) : Design Matters for Management . In R . J . Boland , & F . Collopy ( Eds . ) ( 2004 ) : Managing as designing . , Stanford , California : Stanford University Press , 3 - 18 . Brown , T . ( 2008 ) . Design thinking . Harvard Business Review , 86 ( 6 ) , 84 - 93 . Buchanan , R . ( 1992 ) . Wicked problems in design thinking . Design Issues , 8 ( 2 ) , 5 - 21 . Cosovan , A . ( 2009 ) : DISCO . Retrieved 10 Apr , 2018 , from : https : / / issuu . com / cosovan / docs / ca _ disco _ synopsis _ theses _ en Cosovan , A . ( 2015 ) : The Sustainable Identity of Clichés . In K . German ( Ed ) : Sustainable Identities . Published on the occasion of the exhibition at the 56 . International Art Exhibition – La Biennale di Venezia , Hungarian Pavilion , 9 May – 24 November , 2015 . Exhibiting artist : Szilárd Cseke . First Edition April 2015 , 94 – 99 . Beyond the Scope of Design thinking : DesignCommunication 17 Cosovan A . , & Horvath D . ( 2016 ) : The DIS . CO EXPERT Program on Designcommunication and Leadership . Arts Management Network . Retrieved 10 Apr , 2018 , from : http : / / artsmanagement . com / index . php ? module = News & func = displ ay & sid = 1730 Csikszentmihalyi M . ( 1998 ) : Creativity . Flow and the Psychology of Discovery and Invention . Oxford : Oxford University Press . Dorst , K . ( 2006 ) . Design problems and design paradoxes . Design Issues , 22 ( 3 ) , 4 - 17 . Dorst , K . ( 2011 ) . The core of ‘design thinking’and its application . Design Studies , 32 ( 6 ) , 521 - 532 . Feher , P . , & Varga , K ( 2017 ) : Using Design Thinking to Identify Banking Digitization Opportunities – Snapshot of the Hungarian Banking System . Conference : 30th Bled eConference : Digital Transformation – From Connecting Things to Transforming Our Lives ( June 18 – 21 , 2017 , Bled , Slovenia ) ( Conference Proceedings ) , pp . 151 - 168 . , DOI 10 . 18690 / 978 - 961 - 286 - 043 - 1 . 12 Hackman , J . R . ( 2002 ) . Why teams don’t work . In Theory and research on small groups 245 - 267 . , Springer US . Hackman , J . R . ( 2009 ) . Why teams don ' t work . Interview by Diane Coutu . Harvard Business Review , 87 ( 5 ) , 98 - 105 . HIPO ( Hungarian Intellectual Property Office ) ( 2008 ) . Hungarian Gazette for Patents and Trade Marks , 113 ( 12 . / I . , 2008 . 12 . 15 . ) Registration number : 196961 Jerald , C . D . ( 2009 ) . Defining a 21st century education . Center for Public education , 16 . Johansson‐Sköldberg , U . , Woodilla , J . , & Çetinkaya , M . ( 2013 ) . Design thinking : past , present and possible futures . Creativity and Innovation Management , 22 ( 2 ) , 121 - 146 . Martin , R . ( 2007 ) . How Successful Leaders Think . ( cover story ) . Harvard Business Review , 85 ( 6 ) , 60 - 67 . Papanek , V . ( 1971 ) , Design for the Real World . Human Ecology and Social Change . New York : Pantheon Books . Simon , H . A . ( 1973 ) : The Structure of Ill Structured Problems . Artificial Intelligence , 4 ( 3 - 4 ) : 181 - 201 . Simon , H . A . ( 1996 ) . The Sciences of the Artificial . Cambridge , MA : MIT press . Tapscott , D . , & Williams , A . D . ( 2008 ) . Wikinomics : How mass collaboration changes everything . Penguin . DORA HORVATH , ATTILA COSOVAN , TAMÁS CSORDÁS , DANIELLA HORVATH , ARIEL MITEV 18 Thomas , D . , & Brown , J . S . ( 2009 ) . Learning for a world of constant change : Homo sapiens , homo faber & homo Ludens revisited . Retrieved 10 Apr , 2018 , from : http : / / blog . intuyuconsulting . com . au / wp - content / uploads / 2012 / 03 / Learning - for - a - world - of - constant - change - revisited . pdf Zaleznik , A . ( 1992 ) . Managers and Leaders : Are They Different ? Harvard Business Review , 70 ( 2 ) , 126 - 135 .