A creative intelligence tool for journalists Konstantinos Zachos JECT . AI Limited kos @ ject . ai Neil A . M . Maiden JECT . AI Limited neil @ ject . ai ABSTRACT JECT . AI is a research - based digital tool that was developed to aug - ment journalist creative thinking . It integrates natural language pro - cessing , creative search and interactive creative thinking guidance to support journalists to discover novel ideas , angles and voices when writing new articles . This technical demonstration paper summarises JECT . AI’s architecture , algorithms and key interactive features . CCS CONCEPTS • Human - centered computing → Human computer interaction ( HCI ) . KEYWORDS digital creativity support , news , journalists , journalism ACM Reference Format : Konstantinos Zachos and Neil A . M . Maiden . 2022 . A creative intelligence tool for journalists . In Creativity and Cognition ( C & C ’22 ) , June 20 – 23 , 2022 , Venice , Italy . ACM , New York , NY , USA , 7 pages . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3527927 . 3535201 1 CREATIVE INTELLIGENCE TOOLS FOR JOURNALISTS Journalism involves the search for and critical analysis of information . [ 6 ] How journalists discover and select sources of this information is important , to avoid bias , to be credible and trusted , and to create angles with which to generate new stories of value to readers . Journalist creative thinking , to discover and generate new associations during this search and analysis of information , contributes to the generation of new articles and stories . Journalists are known to seek opportunities to develop new creative skills with which to discover information [ 5 ] . However , discovering and examining information sources about complex stories takes time – time that journalists increasingly lack as news organizations reduce staff numbers [ 9 ] . One potential means of providing new creative skills and information sources from which to discover sources in digital creativity support . However , at the moment , few such tools exist . In response , the authors researched and developed a new tool called JECT . AI to support journalists to discover new content , angles and voices more effectively [ 4 ] . Permission to make digital or hard copies of part or all of this work for personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation on the first page . Copyrights for third - party components of this work must be honored . For all other uses , contact the owner / author ( s ) . C & C ’22 , June 20 – 23 , 2022 , Venice , Italy © 2022 Copyright held by the owner / author ( s ) . ACM ISBN 978 - 1 - 4503 - 9327 - 0 / 22 / 06 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3527927 . 3535201 2 THE JECT . AI TOOL JECT . AI is a research - based tool designed to augment the abilities of journalists by automating the discovery of novel content , an - gles and voices for new articles . It is a co - creative AI tool ( e . g . , [ 3 ] ) that implements machine intelligence to augment human creative thinking . To deliver this intelligence , it integrates natural language processing , multi - language creative search and interactive creativ - ity guidance to discover information in published news articles , then to support journalists to form new associations with this infor - mation during creative thinking [ 4 ] . It is implemented to be used by journalists with different client applications , including as sidebar plug - ins to text editors such as Google Docs , Wordpress and Adobe InCopy , and to the CUE content publishing platform [ 10 ] used in newspapers such as Die Welt and the New York Times . It is designed to contribute to journalist engagement in professional - level creative work , i . e . , work that generated income and provided them with a living [ 2 ] , and so is evolving into a commercial product . 3 THE JECT . AI ARCHITECTURE JECT . AI is implemented with the three - tier architecture shown in Figure 1 . The interaction layer is a webpage or a text editor sidebar designed to fit with existing work practices . The application layer is composed of different machine - reasoning services designed to generate large numbers of possible associations between informa - tion that journalists are writing about using indexed news content from published articles . These services retrieve the content from JECT . AI’s data layer , called the Creative Content Index , which is designed so that the Discoverer service can undertake different forms of creative search of it . The index is populated by the Presser service , which indexed millions of verified news stories as possible starting points for discovering novel angles for new articles . It is used to generate rich news landscapes that correspond to what journalists are writing about . It is composed of terms describing from over 23million articles published over the last 4 years in 8 different European languages , as well as from 175 , 000 scientific arti - cles published in English . The Text processor service was invoked by the Presser service to make sense of and generated indexed content from published news , and by the discoverer to expand creative search queries . 4 HOW JECT . AI SUPPORTS JOURNALIST CREATIVE THINKING An example of JECT . AI’s interactive guidance to journalists is de - picted in Figure 2 . A journalist starts a session by entering natural language terms describing the topic of interest ( e . g . , “ Venice Italy floods ” ) into the top search bar . In response , JECT . AI ’s application - layer services automatically generate guidance to augment the journalist’s creative thinking about the topic . The journalist can direct this guidance using interactive features shown beneath the 612 C & C ’22 , June 20 – 23 , 2022 , Venice , Italy Neil Maiden and Konstantinos Zachos Figure 1 : The JECT . AI product’s three - tier architecture , showing its layers , external services and external information sources search bar that control the , e . g . , strategies ( e . g . , evidence - based or human angles ) , time periods ( e . g . , over the last month or year ) , and types of information to manipulate ( e . g . , published news sources or scientific publications ) . It then presents its computed guidance according to the selected strategies using different interactive cards depicted in Figure 2 4 . 1 The landing card The landing card presents different possible angles on the topic – Venice Italy floods – generated from a news landscape discovered for the entered topic terms . It reports the total number of discovered articles out of a sample total of up to 500 , those that are rated to have positive sentiment , and the angles covered in most discovered articles ( e . g . , Venice , lagoon ) , some of these articles ( e . g . , water taxi , Florence ) , and just a few of these articles ( e . g . , Dolomites , French Riviera ) . The angles that only a few write about represent the ones with the greatest creative potential . If the journalist clicks on one of these angles , JECT . AI presents sets of automatically - generated creative ideas that the s / he can use to discover more specific ideas based on the angle . Figure 3 shows how JECT . AI responds to clicking on the lagoon angle . The pop - up on the left - side presents three machine - generated ideas . E . g . , asking what is essential about the lagoon could lead the journalist to explore Venice’s water ecosystem , while asking about the timing of the lagoon could encourage the journalist to explore the importance of daily tides . Each idea is also a hyperlink that , if clicked , launches a tailored Google search for information related to that idea in a new browser tab . Finally , if the journalist clicks the Explore More option , the larger pop - up shown in Figure 3 presents a definition of the angle based on Wikipedia content , then up to 5 already - published news articles that report both the selected angle and entered topic terms . The title of each of these articles is also a hyperlink that will open directly at source in a new browser tab if clicked . JECT . AI also presents different forms of information visualisa - tion to communicate different perspectives on each discovered news landscape . Figure 4 depicts how the frequencies of reporting of dif - ferent angles discovered in the news landscape change over time . The example reveals different peaks of coverage that correspond to periods of flooding in Venice that might direct the journalist to write about e . g . , periods in Venice without flooding . Figure 5 depicts the average sentiment of the discovered articles over time , and reveals that most news coverage is negative . In response , the journalist could develop more positive articles that report how the flooding is being resolved . 4 . 2 The intelligence card The intelligence card supports journalists to discover new voices dis - covered in the news landscape to write about in articles . It presents the names of up to 20 journalists who have published articles and up to 20 scientists who have published scientific papers . A bespoke JECT . AI algorithm extracts proper names explicitly designated as author ( s ) in a discovered news article to provide an unordered set of names composed of first name and surname . The names of sci - entific authors are extracted from retrieved academic papers using SerpApi’s Google Scholar service . The result is also an unordered set of names composed of first name and surname . If the journalist clicks on a presented name , JECT . AI presents a pop - up with the title of the publication as a hyperlink that opens the article or paper at source , see Figure 6 . Clicking the Explore More option opens the journalist’s online profile and scientist’s Google Scholar page , to enable further creative searching . In addition , rather than list journalists and scientists according to relevance or number of publications , the intelligence card presents lists computed to have an equal number of both male and female first names and European and non - European surnames . Science re - porting has continued to exhibit biases in both gender and ethnicity . Recent studies [ 1 ] have revealed that women continue to be quoted 613 A creative intelligence tool for journalists C & C ’22 , June 20 – 23 , 2022 , Venice , Italy Figure 2 : The JECT . AI tool showing the creative guidance generated for the topic term Venice Italy floods . The top row cards , from left to right , are the landing card , intelligence card and combination card . Second row cards are different individual news cards Figure 3 : Different journalist interactions with the landing card to provide directed creative guidance on one or more discov - ered angles 614 C & C ’22 , June 20 – 23 , 2022 , Venice , Italy Neil Maiden and Konstantinos Zachos Figure 4 : A machine - generated visualisations of news landscapes , showing frequencies of reporting of different angles over time Figure 5 : A machine - generated visualisations of news landscapes , showing and average sentiment of the discovered published articles over time less often than men in high - profile journals , and that authors with non - British - origin names were significantly less likely to be men - tioned or quoted than comparable British - origin named authors ( e . g . , [ 8 ] ) . The card is designed to counter these biases . Another third - party service called NamSor [ 7 ] attributes the probabilities of the gender and cultural origin of each name in each list using a dataset of over 5million names . Using the most probable gender and cultural origin of each name , the algorithm generates two lists , one of retrieved journalists and one of retrieved scientific authors . Each list is composed of equal numbers of female and male first names , and equal numbers of surnames that originated from Eu - rope and names that did not . JECT . AI supplements these different information visualisations to communicate different perspectives of the discovered landscape of voices to enage with . E . g . , Figure 7 shows a machine - generated pie chart of the ethnicities of different journalists and scientists writing about the flooding in Venice . 615 A creative intelligence tool for journalists C & C ’22 , June 20 – 23 , 2022 , Venice , Italy Figure 6 : Interactions with the JECT . AI intelligence card Figure 7 : A pie chart generated by JECT . AI showing the ethnicities of different journalists and scientists writing about the topic of flooding in Venice 4 . 3 Indvidual news cards Each individual article card presents content from one published article or paper in the news landscape . It presents the title , pub - lication , date , summary text and automatically - generated angles that the s / he can use to discover new ideas , see Figure 8 . As with the landing card , the journalist can click on an angle a pop - up of machine - generated ideas that are hyperlinks which , if clicked , launch tailored Google search for information related to that idea . Likewise , clicking the Explore More option presents a definition of the angle and up to 5 hyperlinked news articles that report both the selected angle and the topic terms . 4 . 4 Multi - language support Furthermore , JECT . AI is implemented to support journalists work - ing in different European languages including English , French , Ger - man , Norwegian and Greek . An example of this multi - language support in Greek is shown in Figure 9 616 C & C ’22 , June 20 – 23 , 2022 , Venice , Italy Neil Maiden and Konstantinos Zachos Figure 8 : Three individual news cards providing creative guidance to journalists based on discovered published articles Figure 9 : A journalist using JECT . AI in the Greek language 4 . 5 The text editor sidebar Moreover , to fit with journalist workflows , JECT . AI is implemented as sidebar plug - ins to text editors such as Google Docs , Wordpress and Adobe InCopy , and to the CUE content publishing platform [ 10 ] . The plug - ins have limited screen real - estate , so each presents creative guidance generated for the landing and intelligence cards . Figure 10 shows examples of the Wordpress and CUE plug - ins . 5 JOURNALIST JECT . AI USE AND NEXT STEPS The JECT . AI tool has been used in different newsrooms by jour - nalists working in Norwegian [ 4 ] and Greek . Its current evolution towards a product is one of the first attempts to commercialise digital creativity support tools and address gaps identified in [ 11 ] . 617 A creative intelligence tool for journalists C & C ’22 , June 20 – 23 , 2022 , Venice , Italy Figure 10 : Examples of the Wordpress and CUE plug - ins of JECT . AI ACKNOWLEDGMENTS The research reported in this paper was supported by the EU - funded H2020 723328 INJECT innovation action , and the reported prod - uct development was funded by the EIT Digital’s investment pro - gramme under grant agreement No 20084 . REFERENCES [ 1 ] Natalie R . Davidson and Casey S . Greene . 2021 . Analysis of scientific journalism in Nature reveals gender and regional disparities in coverage . bioRxiv preprint , accessed on 17 th August 2021 , at https : / / www . biorxiv . org / content / 10 . 1101 / 2021 . 06 . 21 . 449261v1 . full . pdf , doi : 10 . 1101 / 2021 . 06 . 21 . 449261 [ 2 ] James C . Kaufman , and Ronald A . Beghetto . 2009 . Beyond Big and Little : The Four c - model of Creativity . Review of General Psychology 13 , 1 . [ 3 ] Long , D . , Padiyath , A . , Teachey , A . , & Magerko , B . , ( 2021 ) . The Role of Collabora - tion , Creativity , and Embodiment in AI Learning Experiences . Proceedings of 12th ACM Creativity & Cognition Conference . ACM Press , Article 28 , 1 – 10 . doi : 10 . 1145 / 3450741 . 3465264 . [ 4 ] Maiden N . , Zachos K . , Brown A . , Apostolou D . , Holm B . , Nyre L . , Tonheim A . , & van den Beld A . , ( 2020b ) . Digital Creativity Support for Original Journalism , Communications of the ACM , 63 ( 8 ) , 46 - 53 . doi : 10 . 1145 / 3386526 [ 5 ] Malmelin N . & Virta S . 2016 . Managing creativity in change : Motivations and constraints of creative work in a media organization . Journalism Practice 10 , 6 : https : / / 1041 - 1054 . doi 10 . 1080 / 17512786 . 2015 . 1074864 [ 6 ] McNair B . , 1998 . The Sociology of Journalism . London : Arnold . [ 7 ] Namsor . https : / / www . namsor . com , accessed 17 th August 2021 . [ 8 ] Hao Peng , Misha Teplitskiy and David Jurgens . 2020 . Author Mentions in Science News Reveal Wide - Spread Ethnic Bias . arXiv : 2009 . 01896 [ cs . CY ] , accessed on 17 th August 2021 . [ 9 ] Sjøvaag H . . 2014 . Homogenisation or Differentiation ? The Effects of Consolida - tion in the Regional Newspaper Market . Journalism Studies 15 , 5 : 511 - 521 . [ 10 ] Stibo DX . 2022 . Multichannel CMS for media and enterprises . Re - trieved January 2022 from https : / / www . stibodx . com / solutions / publishing - platform ? gclid = CjwKCAiAxJSPBhAoEiwAeO _ fP93HTNK - 49z3ZbmTAa2 _ qCjvfwy6AEqydC5 _ 6 _ c - j5TV9LVCxYJndhoCpUkQAvD _ BwE [ 11 ] Remy , C . , Vermeulen , L . D . , Frich , J . , Biskjaer , M . B . & Dalsgaard , P . , ( 2020 ) . Evaluat - ing Creativity Support Tools in HCI Research . Proceedings of ACM Designing In - teractiveSystemsConference . ACMPress , 457 – 476 . doi : 10 . 1145 / 3357236 . 3395474 618