Supporting Collaborative Information Seeking in Online Community Engagement Feng Sun ∗ , Ye Tian † and Guoray Cai ‡ College of Information Sciences and Technology Pennsylvania State University University Park , PA 16802 USA ∗ fzs122 @ psu . edu , † yxt157 @ psu . edu , ‡ cai @ ist . psu . edu Abstract —Complex social issues can be better addressed collaboratively by stakeholders through democratic decision - making . A key prerequisite for engaging the public is the ability to gather what we know about a public issue and present such knowledge in a concise fashion . This is commonly done through a citizen’s panel who performs collaborative information seeking and analysis . The outcome of such process is to inform other local citizens to form perspectives and opinions . This work focuses on understanding collaborative information seeking behaviors in this process , and design of awareness support to collaboration . Speciﬁcally , we describe an ethnographic study that observes community practices and identiﬁes requirements for supporting awareness in collaborative information seeking . Based on these ﬁndings , we developed a web - based visual analytic tool that supports activity awareness to encourage collaborations in seeking issue - based knowledge . Keywords —Component ; formatting ; style ; styling ; insert ( key words ) I . INTRODUCTION Making decisions together through a democratic process often involves engaging stakeholders in a community through informed deliberation [ 1 ] , [ 2 ] . A common barrier to effective civic engagement is the lack of a body of knowledge that represents the comprehensive understanding of an issue . Such body of knowledge is rarely accessible directly from the available data sources , but it has to be discovered through information seeking and knowledge crystallization . When a public issue is controversial , complex , and long - standing , knowledge about the issue could be scattered and buried in a large amount of data ( documents , media , reports , etc ) that must be carefully analyzed . This creates a data deluge on the one hand , and information overload on the other . Common ways to address this challenge is to organize some sort of randomly assembled citizen panel that performs the information seeking and analysis on behalf of their community [ 3 ] . In our research , we have developed a special version of such process , called “Community Issue Review” ( CIR ) [ 4 ] , which is designed for engaging citizens around public issues in local communities . This CIR process involves a randomly assembled citizen panel ( 10 - 24 people ) collaboratively making sense of documents concerning an issue , extracting information nuggets from doc - uments , and using extracted nuggets to assemble statements as ﬁndings . Finalized statements are shared with other local citizens to enable their formation and expression of opinions . Deliberative democracy theorists argue that a valid opinion must be based on a full consideration of all the facts and points of views [ 5 ] . Therefore , the information need of this task is unique in the sense that it requires the outcome of information seeking to be comprehensive about an issue under consideration . When the source data is large , information seeking to achieve comprehensive outcome becomes difﬁcult to do by individuals . It will be likely to beneﬁt from divide - and - conquer and coordinated actions . Collaboration is a way to alleviate the data deluge in big data era , and information seeking with big data is most often collaborative [ 6 ] . Collaboration is an indispensable part in CIR process . First of all , this process is essentially democratic and deliberative that requires collaboration to ensure the outcome can reﬂect collective intelligence . Secondly , CIR as an analytic task is cognitively difﬁcult and time - consuming for individual to handle . It can beneﬁt from divide - and - conquer in collaborative work . Third , recognizing information nuggets from documents requires deep interpretation of data from diverse perspectives , which can beneﬁt from joint work of multiple minds . Collaboration is capable of facilitating information seeking in CIR process , but it also comes with additional costs of communication and coordination . Collaboration could even be harmful if group members have conﬂicts of interest , lack intention for collaboration , or encounter trust problem [ 7 ] . [ 8 ] points out group - based work suffers from misunderstandings , decision biases , and conﬂicts , and proposes that boundary ob - jects could help overcome these barriers . Therefore , one goal of enabling collaborative information seeking is to minimize the additional costs of communication and coordination by providing boundary objects and awareness among participants . This paper frames information seeking within community issue review as a collaborative task . Drawing from exist - ing literature concerning information seeking , social search , sensemaking , and collaboration , as well as our own practices and experiments , we are able to provide the insights of how collaboration should be supported in such context . We particularly focus on developing a visual analytic tool that manages and promotes the awareness of information and task environments . We illustrate the features of the system through 2016 International Conference on Collaboration Technologies and Systems 978 - 1 - 5090 - 2300 - 4 / 16 $ 31 . 00 © 2016 IEEE DOI 10 . 1109 / CTS . 2016 . 53 241 2016 International Conference on Collaboration Technologies and Systems 978 - 1 - 5090 - 2300 - 4 / 16 $ 31 . 00 © 2016 IEEE DOI 10 . 1109 / CTS . 2016 . 53 241 several scenarios of use and discuss future work in improving collaborative information seeking of political knowledge in communities . II . B ACKGROUND A . Collaborative Information Seeking ( CIS ) Information seeking is a process of attempting to obtain information purposely in order to satisfy certain information needs ( either discovering patterns or ﬁlling in recognized information gaps ) [ 9 ] , [ 10 ] . It differs from other information behavior in its emphasis on purposeful activity and close relation to the information need . Human information seeking behavior remains to be poorly understood and seems to be ad hoc at times . However , researchers have discovered some recognizable patterns of information seeking process and captured such understanding into various conceptual models of information seeking [ 11 ] – [ 17 ] . They vary from each other in terms of structure , purposes , assumptions and application domains . One set of models describes the sequence and relationships of activities involved in information seeking as procedures that can be represented in ﬂowcharts [ 14 ] , [ 18 ] . Such models are more applicable to professional information seekers ( such as students and lawyers ) who have developed some structured methods of information seeking . In other application ﬁelds , rigid structures of information seeking may not exist , but still , there are certain recognizable “stages” and actions . For exam - ple , Kuhlthau’s model includes stages of initiation , selection , exploration , formulation , collection , and presentation . Ellis’s model identiﬁes a list of actions involved in information seek - ing activity , including starting , browsing , chaining , monitoring , differentiating , extracting , verifying and ending [ 11 ] . Stage - based models tend to be more ﬂexible and adaptive . Both stage - based models and procedural models charac - terized information seeking as somewhat a linear process , and they failed to consider human factors that can inﬂuence both the process and products of information seeking . In response to such criticisms , Kuhlthau [ 12 ] argued for enriching stage - based models with user’s feelings and thoughts . Ellis’s model was also enriched with more iterative ﬂexibility by incor - porating the modes of exploration and hierarchical natural of goals [ 15 ] . Foster [ 17 ] proposed a non - linear model of information seeking . It is worth noting that earlier models of information seeking usually conceptualize it primarily from the individual perspective . With the increasing and more accessible user - generated content , online sharing , and other types of in - formation , information sources , volumes , and complexities have grown exponentially which makes information seeking so challenging and demanding that goes beyond individual’s capacity . As a way forward , researchers turned their attention to collaborative aspects of information seeking . Collaborative information seeking ( CIS ) concerns the understanding of how individuals work together in seeking information for satisfying a goal and how to support such activities using technologies Foster [ 19 ] [ 20 ] . Collaboration has beneﬁts in information seeking process in terms of division of labor , diversity of skills , and reducing information complexity [ 21 ] . Collaborative infor - mation seeking differs from individual one in terms of the trig - ger , and the roles of communication and information retrieval technology [ 22 ] . The triggers of collaboration in information seeking include the complexity of information , distributed information resources , lack of expertise , and requirements imposed by tasks . In addition , communication plays a more important role in collaborative information seeking for coor - dination and promote awareness [ 22 ] . Information seeking practices are normally embedded within certain application domain which deﬁnes the nature of the data , the goals of information seeking , and the participants . Collaborative information seeking has been studied in a num - ber of applications domains such as health care [ 22 ] , software design [ 23 ] , web search [ 24 ] , and patent processing [ 25 ] . The application domain of this paper is in democratic decision - making in local communities , which is different from other domains in three aspects : ( 1 ) the data environment is messy with varying degree of truth or trustworthiness , because public opinions are value - driven human judgment and perceptions of the controversial issue ; ( 2 ) the goal of information seeking is to inform considered opinions , which requires seeking to capture critical knowledge in the data without much loss ; ( 3 ) the participants are citizens which are normally not as sophisticated information seekers as those professionals . B . Systems and Tools for CIS Systems and tools dedicated to supporting collaborative Information Seeking in a speciﬁc domain , setting , or task are still limited . Tools designed for web search tasks have received the most attention . For example , Paul and Morris [ 26 ] developed a tool , called CoSense , that support multiple users to perform investigative web search tasks collaboratively . CoSense focuses on the representation of activities about a given search session and supports the handoff of sensemaking between asynchronous information seekers . Paul and Morris argued that a group of collaborative information seekers should make sense of not only products of searching results , but also the process . Based on such understanding , they further designed a collaborative web searching prototype : SearchTo - gether [ 24 ] . Through analyzing an example usage scenario , they demonstrated that collaborative features of SearchTo - gether support awareness , division of labor , and persistence of knowledge repository , and can help avoid undesired duplicates of work . Going beyond web search tasks , Coagmento [ 27 ] supports interactive and collaborative writing using found information by providing a workspace in which users can interact with 242 242 collected information , including organizing , sharing , and vi - sualizing for better sensemaking and reusing of information . It was later extended to incorporate new methods for captur - ing users action ( activity history ) in online search to which collaborators can refer [ 28 ] . Collaborative information seeking ( CIS ) has also been investigated under the umbrella of social information seeking , and several systems have been designed to utilize social ac - tivities and relationships to prompt users to seek information , such as Footprint [ 29 ] , MrTaggy [ 30 ] , and Dogear [ 31 ] . These systems keep track of users’ activities and their social relation - ships , and this information serves as the clues to which users can refer for more effective and efﬁcient information seeking . Footprint [ 29 ] transforms interaction history into navigation tool based on the idea of history - enriched digital objects . MrTaggy [ 30 ] and Dogear [ 31 ] utilize social bookmarking and tagging techniques for information retrieval and information discovery . Some systems and tools have been developed for CIS , but they have not “enjoyed widespread success” by far [ 32 ] . On the one hand , systems and tools that were developed for traditional application contexts can not address new scenarios of infor - mation seeking in novel applications [ 32 ] . Second , a number of features are still missing from existing CIS tools [ 33 ] . The missing features mentioned above are summarized as follows : • bring awareness of what has already been gathered , viewed , and gathered by anyone in the group , enabling easy comparison of them to avoid duplicate and re - dundant work by providing a clear depiction of both the covered and yet - to - be - explored information landscape ( F1 ) ; • support tracking knowledge development and corre - sponding activities , enhancing human cognitive capabil - ity in awareness interpretation and use by providing not only produces but also processes ( F2 ) ; • offer the analyst a sense of accomplishment , a feeling of walking over the information landscape , and have their bearing on the terrain as they work , enabling them to choose strategies about who is to do what next appropri - ate to the situation of the information environment ( F3 ) ; • provide efﬁcient ways of organizing , structuring and prioritizing collected information to alleviate people’ internal cognitive burden ( F4 ) . III . I NFORMATION SEEKING IN CIR A . Community Issue Review Community issue review ( CIR ) process consists of ﬁve phases : comprehension of documents , extracting information nuggets , assembling claims , improving claims , and represent - ing ﬁnal statements . Participants are randomly selected citizens that form a review penal . However , panelists have difﬁculties Figure 1 : Task structure in conducting CIR effectively and efﬁciently . First of all , com - munity issue is usually too complicated and covers a variety of aspects . The complexity of the available data requires an in - depth understanding and interpretation of the data , which is too difﬁcult for an individual to handle . Secondly , CIR brings additional requirements of ensuring comprehensiveness and completeness in collaborative information seeking , which differs CIR from many settings of which the information space appears to be inﬁnite ( e . g . , library database , the internet ) . Thirdly , the amount of data ( documents in particular ) can be so large for an individual to handle and the number of themes to be considered can go beyond what one can handle with active memory . Therefore , being able to evaluate the completeness of information with regards to the given issue becomes more important in CIR than search . This paper focuses on the second phase in which panelists collaboratively seek and gather relevant information nuggets that have the potential to be useful for assembling claims . The nugget extraction task in CIR involves activities of navigating through a collection of documents , reading the documents , recognizing relevant information contents ( as nuggets ) , and extracting nuggets from the documents ( see Fig . 1 ) . Each extracted nugget is assigned to one of the predeﬁned themes . These themes and the relationships among them constitute the knowledge schema about the public issue that CIR is analyzing . During nugget extraction process , panelists need to make several decisions : ( 1 ) decide if a piece of data is relevant ; ( 2 ) decide which theme should be assigned to an extracted nugget ; ( 3 ) decide where to look for more nuggets next ; ( 4 ) decide if all the information nuggets have been found . They need to constantly manage what they have found and where are unexplored opportunities , and keep in touch with each other to monitor the progress of their collaborative work . Collaborative information seeking in CIR can be better understood using information foraging theory [ 34 ] . This the - ory suggests that people typically use a variety of information seeking strategies when navigating through documents for seeking information nuggets . Speciﬁc strategies are chosen at 243 243 a certain situation for the purpose of optimizing rate - of - return and minimizing costs . One important concept in information foraging theory is that relevant information nuggets exist in documents ( information space ) as “patches” . Information foragers have to adopt appropriate strategies concerning inter - patch and intra - patch moves for better exploring the space . Much of the costs in information seeking is involved in inter - patch and intra - patch moves for relocating oneself from one document area to another . Such costs can be reduced when collaborator carefully divide their work into different areas of the patchy information environment . It allows individuals who are knowledgeable about certain patches to maximize chances of completeness in a shorter time . Second , collaborators bring into the process a diversity of expertise , experiences , and perspectives about a public issue . Such knowledge is critical because the issue under consid - eration can be deep and long - standing community concern that is complex and multi - faceted . They may disagree on how to interpret data and they can jointly create the contextual knowledge necessary for understanding and insight . B . Challenges of Supporting CIS Although collaboration can beneﬁt CIR information seek - ing process in theory , certain difﬁculties exist that prevent effective and efﬁcient collaboration from happening . For ex - ample , it is challenging for a panelist to evaluate collaborators’ work quickly and accurately due to lack of access to the most up - to - date knowledge about their collaborative workspace . To manage such awareness information depending on the limited human cognitive resource is not viable . These challenges call for additional technological support . IV . U NDERSTANDING THE N EEDS FOR A WARENESS S UPPORT As we target designing tools for supporting awareness for collaborative information seeking in CIR , we realize that there is a lack of understanding on what kinds of aware - ness information that are necessary for making decisions and choosing strategies for information foraging . In order to elicit requirements of supporting CIS in CIR , we conducted an ethnographic study of real collaboration involving nugget extraction task . We expected this formative study to answer the following questions : When is there a need for collaboration ? What shared artifacts can be used to coordinate collaboration ? What are beneﬁts and additional costs introduced by collaboration per - ceived by users ? A . Study Design 1 ) Participants : Six participants are recruited from un - dergraduate students majored in Information Sciences and Technology at Penn State University . At the time when this Figure 2 : User Interface of NuggetExtractor ethnographic study was conducted , they were enrolled in an undergraduate course on “visual analytics” in the middle of the semester . 2 ) Data preparation : The issue we chose for this study is “Collegiate Housing Overlay ( CHO ) ” , which was around a pending ordinance that attempts to incentivize commercial builders to include housing features ( diverse apartment sizes , commercial areas on the ﬁrst ﬂoor , etc ) . 3 ) Tool environment : For conducting this experiment , we developed and deployed a web - based tool called NuggetEx - tractor . The user interface consists of several components , as shown in Fig . 2 . Document panel is the workspace where users can read documents and extract information nuggets . Collected nuggets are listed in the information panel , where users can make claims and discuss them . Users can browse all the documents in sequence or quickly access a relevant one by navigating through the table of contents available in the document panel . Once a piece of texts is selected , a context menu will pop up , allowing users to extract it as an information nugget , raise a question or comment . After that , other collaborators’ document views will be updated accordingly . Extracted nuggets are stored in nugget list panel in which all nuggets are collected and sorted by time . Once a nugget is newly extracted , it will immediately appear in the top of the list . Context menu associated with each nugget allows individual to use it to construct a new claim or trace back to the document where the nugget is from . Users are enabled to comment and discuss these objects . Since the system allows panelists to work on nugget extrac - tion individually , there is a tendency for the panel to generate nuggets that contain duplication of similar information . To address this concern , the system provides three features : ( 1 ) highlights the extracted nuggets in documents to alert other late visitors ; ( 2 ) allows the panel to use a divide - and - conquer strategy to distribute efforts to different parts of the data space ; ( 3 ) supports coordination through instant communication ( chat 244 244 room ) . 4 ) Experimental protocol : Before performing tasks speci - ﬁed in Fig . 1 , each participant is given a short introduction to the issue ( Collegiate Housing Overlay ) and a training session on how to use the tool environment . A researcher introduced the community issue review in general and particularly de - scribed the nugget extraction task in terms of its process , expected outcome , as well as the themes that help organize the knowledge on CHO issue . In the training session , the researcher ﬁrstly explained to the participants the user interface and available functionalists . After that , the participants were given about 10 minutes to interact with the system using sample data with the help of the instructor . Then , participants started to perform tasks . Although seated in the same room , they were required to use the chat room provided by the system to communicate as if in a distributed situation . During the process , we used standard ethnographic techniques for observing people . 5 ) Observations and analysis : Participants’ physical ac - tivities were video recorded . Their online activities were logged in the system , including their contributions , communi - cation , and active patterns . After the system logs , observations and interviews were transcribed . Their activities were coded as making choices of staying within the current place , selecting another document , hesitating to move , communicating with other collaborators . The formative study combines observa - tions , system logs , and semi - structured interview to dive deep into the intentions behind their activities . B . Findings The pilot CIR revealed the need for collaboration support in many activities , including identifying information needs , making sense of documents , extracting information nuggets , communicating about information needs and sharing retrieved information , and coordinating information retrieval activities . 1 ) Task Structure : Information seeking task is an iterative process in which a set of subtasks interleave with each other . For example , we noticed that some participants extracted a nugget and immediately made a claim based on the extracted nugget they work mostly individually since there are no currently available relevant nuggets from other collaborators . 1 ) Dynamic Roles : We found that in CIR the roles of the participants are dynamically and socially negotiated depending on different strategies of the division of labor , which is dif - ferent from some collaboration settings in which participants come with predetermined roles . All of the participants were newbies towards a community issue ( though they had heard about the issue before ) . They started from a different set of documents at the beginning , and as time proceeded , each indi - vidual gained more diverse knowledge about the same issue as if they were equipped with different expertise . Some of them served as major drivers while others evaluated and examined completed work . As the process continued , each participant became an immediately accessible information resource to the rest . 2 ) Seeking Beyond Search : Our observations and inter - views show that the participants sought information and judged the relevance by scanning titles and skimming contents , rather than by reading them fully . However , due to people’s lim - ited cognitive resources , they failed to remember all of the information , let alone organizing perceived contents well . This led to a misunderstanding of information and an omission of information . 3 ) Situation Awareness : The participants tended to work on their own during online setting since they had asynchronous focuses and could not receive immediate feedback from others , resulting in the problems of duplicate work and inaccurate judgments . However , during the interview , they expressed interests in knowing how other collaborators navigate the documents and identify relevant information . Observation con - ﬁrmed that the same information nuggets were being used and re - used by different participants for assembling different claims . 4 ) Question and Answer : By reviewing online chatting messages , we found that valuable questions raised in our system usually received answers of high quality , compared to the immediate answers received in face - to - face CIR . This is because the system forwarded questions to the right persons and allowed them to have enough time to collect and organize evidence , and then respond with conﬁdence . C . Design implications In order to better streamline the process , a phase - based design is desired ( D1 ) so that the participants can work rela - tively synchronously and their contributions can be evaluated and utilized collaboratively . The quality of extracted nuggets is expected to be increased for their receiving contributions from multiple sources . To achieve this , each phase is carefully deﬁned in terms of expected input , process , and output . Only when participants feel that the time is right for evaluating and using the found information , CIR will move to the next phase and adopt output from the previous phase as input . Given the dynamic roles played by the participants , divid - ing the participants into smaller groups that cover different documents and themes is considered a more efﬁcient strategy than asking all of them to do all work since it encourages them to engage by leveraging their developing knowledge and avoids potential lurking and redundant work ( D2 ) . Due to the limitation of human memory and attention , the system should take advantages of its capability of storing data , visualizing information , and computational power to augment participants’ capacity in managing work histories , changes in workspace , and communication artifacts ( D3 ) . 245 245 ( a ) Nugget extraction workspace ( b ) NuggetLens Figure 3 : User interface ( the latest version ) In terms of situation awareness , information forager is expected to be aware of various aspects of the searching and sensemaking processes , including the task and its context , past and present actions , and various attributes of the information objects and the system [ 35 ] . This is a salient aspect of a CIS process when the information landscape is complex and dynamically changing , and the task lasts several sessions , while an individual only has limited cognitive resources and is typically only involved in a part of them . In CIR , information nuggets extraction phase is considered complete when participants feel that the time is right for evaluating and using the extracted information nuggets . But what is the right time ? If it is not the right time yet , what is the current progress ? Answering these frequently asked questions requires an immediate evaluation of progress in terms of in - formation development , both the activities associated with and the outcome of the process ( D4 ) . This led to further questions , how to take advantage of the traces left by participants as navigation tools ( D5 ) , and how to provide this information as context for communication and coordination ( D6 ) . A prioritization mechanism might work to ensure irrelevant questions are ignored ( D7 ) in terms of question - and - answer process . V . S YSTEM D ESIGN Findings identiﬁed in the pilot CIR suggest a set of design implications that inform the design of our system . We extended the previous online platform by incorporating an interactive visualization dashboard , NuggetLens , to promote awareness , support collaboration , and improve the usability and efﬁciency . A . NuggetLens NuggetLens consists of a DocuMap , a Sankey diagram , a Document Preview panel , a zoomable bar chart , and a set of ﬁlters , as shown in Fig . 3 . To be aligned with the design goals of supporting situation awareness , we adopt a Sankey diagram [ 36 ] representation for depicting the task environment , while the DocuMap is customized to represent information environment based on parallel heatmaps [ 37 ] . The bar chart not only shows the trends of nugget extraction activities but also allows users to specify a time range that enables them to investigate environments over time . The interactive Sankey diagram is designed for displaying and highlighting who has done what during nugget extraction . It uses three sets of nodes to represent documents , panelists , and themes , respectively . We use distinct colors to encode different categories of elements : green is used for encoding document , red for panelist and yellow for themes . Links ( representing nuggets ) connect nodes of document , panelist , and theme , making it easy to ﬁnd where a nugget came from and which theme is associated with . The height of each node represents the total number of nuggets related that node , and the thickness of a link signals the number of nuggets that were processed through that pipe . Sankey diagram in Fig . 3b shows the overview of progress at a glance . A panelist can analyze a node and its connections by clicking on the node . As a result , all links , including the related edges and nodes , are all highlighted , allowing a user to analyze the development of information concerning the selected node . Sankey diagram also supports ﬂow tracing . For example , as a panelist node is selected , all the documents he has worked on and all the themes he has contributed to will be highlighted . The Sankey diagram also features detail on demand . When hovering the mouse over either a node or an edge , additional information is provided . For each node / link , hovering leads to a customized tooltip shows the basic information about the node / link depending on the category . If a panelist ﬁnds a document node interesting , a link to the corresponding document will be provided . DocuMap is made up of a collection of parallel heatmaps . A parallel heatmap is a visualization technique that placed the partial representations of the same datasets in parallel [ 37 ] . In NuggetLens , each heatmap represents a document and can be 246 246 subdivided vertically into two parts . The larger left part shows the distribution of extracted nuggets within the document , and the smaller right part shows a heatmap that visualizes how individual sensemaking time is allocated across each part of a document . The parallel heatmap enables users to make sense of the patterns and properties of the changing information landscape in order to rapidly assess the task progress . Besides , all members of a group are represented as icons and positioned at the latest focused area by default and users’ names are positioned alongside icons . Figure 4 : DocuMap The zoomable bar chart shows the number of nuggets in an user - adjustable time interval . The smaller bar chart shows the overview of the number of nuggets , while a user can select a speciﬁc time range through click - and - drag action within the overview bar chart . After the time window is set , the bigger detail bar chart will only show the number of nugget within that time range . The views described above are coordinated . When a document node within Sankey diagram is clicked , the corresponding bar with DocuMap is highlighted , and vice versa . After clicking another category of nodes in Sankey diagram , the bar chart will be updated by showing only activities related to the selected entity . If a user ﬁnds a part of documents and clicks that part within in heatmap bar , the document will be opened in a preview panel with word cloud and is direly scrolled to the corresponding region . In addition , the zoomable bar chart serves as time slider as well . B . Awareness Support Through NuggetLens NuggetLens provides a set of features for supporting awareness that is necessary for users to adjust information seeking strategies . Information about the changing information environment and activity context are available through inter - acting with visualization without having to request explicitly . It creates a sense of presence in asynchronous collaboration with more accurate , accessible and just - in - time context , and supports coordination in terms of division of lab and job pick - up . NuggetLens can be used by panelists to evaluate task progress in terms of both processes and products . There is a constant need for evaluating whether the ongoing phase is complete and ready to proceed to the next . If further work needs to be done within the current phase , where spend efforts are spent . DocuMap shows the coverage of extracted nuggets , as well as received attention . If some contents have not been looked at yet , more attention will be made to that place . Or if most of the information space is covered , panelists can proceed with conﬁdence . Sankey diagram provides information about each panelist’s contributions to documents and themes by a certain moment , enabling communication in context ( D3 ) . When initiating a contact with a collaborator , a panelist can know the collab - orator’s latest progression ; or when replying a collaborator in an asynchronous setting , the panelist is able to know the collaborator’s status when posting chatting messages . NuggetLens allows users to explore information nugget extraction activities in both spatial ( DocuMap ) and temporal ( time sliders ) dimension ( D4 , D5 , D6 ) , it could be super useful for job pick - up and handover by building links among elements and making rationale behind actions more explicit . No matter a panelist need to delegate his work to somebody else or he need to pick up someone else’ work , he can easily do so by interacting with NuggetLens to learn about the activity history and resulting outcomes . C . Discussion Supporting awareness through interactive visual interfaces to visual representations of the information environment and activity context has a lot of potentials to reduce the barriers of collaboration in collaborative information seeking . Individuals have control on when to access awareness information and how to use them , therefore presenting little disruptions to the main work . It was clear that users can interpret the visualizations provided by NuggetLens and derive insight about their task status . However , it remains unclear whether NuggetLens eventually results in any improvement in the quality of the extracted nuggets . We also observed that the level of motivation and commitment to the CIR tasks can make a huge difference in the outcome In addition , different participants have various contribution pattern . Due to the nature of the task , all participants are self - motivated . However , some of them prefer to make explicit contributions ( as much coverage as possible ) while others tend to focus on certain aspects in more depth . Future systems are expected be able to capture and represent various types of contributions . VI . C ONCLUSION This study explores the collaboration needs within a spe - cial form of knowledge crystallization process . A formative study was conducted and the design implications derived from both the ﬁndings and literature led to a prototype application . While this work advances the understanding of collaboration in nugget extraction tasks and leads to some promising ﬁndings and a workable system , further experiments with panelists in real CIR setting are required to demonstrate the effectiveness of our design . This work , if successfully accomplished , will enable a more effective analysis of complex community is - sues and thus provide a better approach of opinion - formation among communities . 247 247 A CKNOWLEDGMENTS We would like to acknowledge funding support from National Science Foundation under award # IIS - 1211059 . R EFERENCES [ 1 ] S . Chambers , “Deliberation and mass democracy , ” in Deliberative Systems : Deliberative Democracy at the Large Scale . Cambridge University Press , 2012 , pp . 52 – 71 . [ 2 ] T . Nabatdni , Democracy in motion : evaluating the practice and impact of deliberative civic engagement . Oxford ; New York : Oxford University Press , 2012 . [ 3 ] J . Gastil and R . Richards , “Making Direct Democracy Deliberative through Random Assemblies , ” Politics & Society , vol . 41 , no . 2 , pp . 253 – 281 , 2013 . [ 4 ] J . N . Kropczynski , G . Cai , and J . M . Carroll , “Understanding the Roles of Artifacts in Democratic Deliberation from the Citizens’ Initiative Review , ” Journal of Social Media for Organizations , vol . 3 , no . 2 , pp . 1 – 22 , 2015 . [ 5 ] D . Hicks , “The Promise ( s ) of Deliberative Democracy , ” Rhetoric & Public Affairs , vol . 5 , no . 2 , pp . 223 – 260 , 2002 . [ 6 ] D . Fisher , R . DeLine , M . Czerwinski , and S . Drucker , “Interactions with big data analytics , ” Interactions , vol . 19 , no . 3 , pp . 50 – 59 , 2012 . [ 7 ] S . London , “Collaboration and community , ” Retrieved July , vol . 12 , p . 2011 , 1995 . [ 8 ] M . J . Eppler and S . Kernbach , “Supporting knowledge - intensive col - laboration through interactive dynamic diagrams , ” in 2015 International Conference on Collaboration Technologies and Systems ( CTS ) , vol . 1 . Cambridge : IEEE , jun 2015 , pp . 272 – 279 . [ 9 ] D . O . Case , Looking for information : A survey of research on informa - tion seeking , needs and behavior . Emerald Group Publishing , 2012 . [ 10 ] T . D . Wilson , “Human information behavior , ” Informing science , vol . 3 , no . 2 , pp . 49 – 56 , 2000 . [ 11 ] D . Ellis , “A behavioural approach to information retrieval system de - sign , ” Journal of documentation , vol . 45 , no . 3 , pp . 171 – 212 , 1989 . [ 12 ] C . C . Kuhlthau , “Inside the search process : Information seeking from the user’s perspective , ” Journal of the American society for information science , vol . 42 , no . 5 , p . 361 , 1991 . [ 13 ] D . Ellis , “Modeling the information - seeking patterns of academic re - searchers : A grounded theory approach , ” The Library Quarterly , pp . 469 – 486 , 1993 . [ 14 ] T . D . Wilson , “On user studies and information needs , ” Journal of documentation , vol . 37 , no . 1 , pp . 3 – 15 , 1981 . [ 15 ] —— , “Models in information behaviour research , ” Journal of documen - tation , vol . 55 , no . 3 , pp . 249 – 270 , 1999 . [ 16 ] B . Dervin , “Sense - making theory and practice : an overview of user inter - ests in knowledge seeking and use , ” Journal of knowledge management , vol . 2 , no . 2 , pp . 36 – 46 , 1998 . [ 17 ] A . Foster , “A nonlinear model of information - seeking behavior , ” Journal of the American society for information science and technology , vol . 55 , no . 3 , pp . 228 – 237 , 2004 . [ 18 ] J . Krikelas , “Information - seeking behavior : Patterns and concepts . ” Drexel library quarterly , vol . 19 , no . 2 , pp . 5 – 20 , 1983 . [ 19 ] J . Foster , “Collaborative information seeking and retrieval , ” Annual Review of Information Science and Technology , vol . 40 , no . 1 , pp . 329 – 356 , sep 2007 . [ 20 ] A . Karunakaran , M . C . Reddy , and P . R . Spence , “Toward a model of collaborative information behavior in organizations , ” Journal of the American Society for Information Science and Technology , vol . 64 , no . 12 , pp . 2437 – 2451 , dec 2013 . [ 21 ] C . Shah , “Collaborative information seeking : From what ? and why ? to how ? and so what ? , ” in Collaborative Information Seeking . Springer , 2015 , pp . 3 – 16 . [ 22 ] M . C . Reddy and B . J . Jansen , “A model for understanding collaborative information behavior in context : A study of two healthcare teams , ” Information Processing & Management , vol . 44 , no . 1 , pp . 256 – 273 , jan 2008 . [ 23 ] S . Poltrock , J . Grudin , S . Dumais , R . Fidel , H . Bruce , and A . M . Pejtersen , “Information seeking and sharing in design teams , ” in Pro - ceedings of the 2003 international ACM SIGGROUP conference on Supporting group work . ACM , 2003 , pp . 239 – 247 . [ 24 ] M . R . Morris and E . Horvitz , “Searchtogether : an interface for collabo - rative web search , ” in Proceedings of the 20th annual ACM symposium on User interface software and technology . ACM , 2007 , pp . 3 – 12 . [ 25 ] P . Hansen and K . J¨arvelin , “Collaborative Information Retrieval in an information - intensive domain , ” Information Processing & Management , vol . 41 , no . 5 , pp . 1101 – 1119 , sep 2005 . [ 26 ] S . a . Paul and M . R . Morris , “CoSense : Enhancing Sensemaking for Collaborative Web Search , ” in Proceedings of the 27th international conference on Human factors in computing systems - CHI 09 . New York , New York , USA : ACM Press , 2009 , p . 1771 . [ 27 ] C . Shah , “Coagmento - a collaborative information seeking , synthesis and sense - making framework , ” Integrated demo at CSCW , pp . 6 – 11 , 2010 . [ 28 ] R . Gonz´alez - Ib´a˜nez and C . Shah , “Coagmento : A system for supporting collaborative information seeking , ” proceedings of the American Society for Information Science and Technology , vol . 48 , no . 1 , pp . 1 – 4 , 2011 . [ 29 ] A . Wexelblat and P . Maes , “Footprints : history - rich tools for information foraging , ” in Proceedings of the SIGCHI conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems . ACM , 1999 , pp . 270 – 277 . [ 30 ] Y . Kammerer , R . Nairn , P . Pirolli , and E . H . Chi , “Signpost from the masses : learning effects in an exploratory social tag search browser , ” in Proceedings of the 27th international conference on Human factors in computing systems - CHI 09 . New York , New York , USA : ACM Press , 2009 , p . 625 . [ 31 ] D . R . Millen , J . Feinberg , and B . Kerr , “Dogear : Social bookmarking in the enterprise , ” in Proceedings of the SIGCHI conference on Human Factors in computing systems . ACM , 2006 , pp . 111 – 120 . [ 32 ] M . A . Hearst , “What’s missing from collaborative search ? ” Computer , vol . 47 , no . 3 , pp . 58 – 61 , Mar . 2014 . [ 33 ] Y . Tao and A . Tombros , “Investigating Collaborative Sensemaking Behavior in Collaborative Information Seeking , ” Computer , vol . 47 , no . 3 , pp . 38 – 45 , mar 2014 . [ 34 ] P . Pirolli and S . Card , “Information foraging . ” Psychological review , vol . 106 , no . 4 , p . 643 , 1999 . [ 35 ] C . Shah , “Effects of awareness on coordination in collaborative informa - tion seeking , ” Journal of the American Society for Information Science and Technology , vol . 64 , no . 6 , pp . 1122 – 1143 , jun 2013 . [ 36 ] P . Riehmann , M . Hanﬂer , and B . Froehlich , “Interactive sankey di - agrams , ” in Information Visualization , 2005 . INFOVIS 2005 . IEEE Symposium on . IEEE , 2005 , pp . 233 – 240 . [ 37 ] R . M . Podowski , B . Miller , and W . W . Wasserman , “Visualization of complementary systems biology data with parallel heatmaps , ” IBM journal of research and development , vol . 50 , no . 6 , pp . 575 – 581 , 2006 . 248 248