241 Copyright © 2014 , IGI Global . Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written permission of IGI Global is prohibited . Chapter 14 DOI : 10 . 4018 / 978 - 1 - 4666 - 5129 - 6 . ch014 How Interface Design and Search Strategy Influence Children’s Search Performance and Evaluation ABSTRACT This chapter presents an experiment with 158 children , aged 10 to 12 , in which search performance and attitudes towards an informational Website are investigated . The same Website was designed in 3 different types of interface design varying in playfulness of navigation structure and in playfulness of visual design . The type of interface design did not have an effect on children’s search performance , but it did influence children’s feelings of emotional valence and their evaluation of “goodness . ” Children felt most positive about the Website with a classical navigation structure and playful aesthetics . They found the playful image map Website least good . More importantly , children’s search performance was much more effective and efficient when using the search engine than when browsing the menu . Furthermore , this chapter explores the challenge of measuring affective responses towards digital interfaces with children by presenting an elaborate evaluation of different methods . Hanna Jochmann - Mannak University of Twente , The Netherlands Leo Lentz Utrecht University , The Netherlands Theo Huibers University of Twente , The Netherlands Ted Sanders Utrecht University , The Netherlands 242 How Interface Design and Search Strategy Influence Children’s Search Performance and Evaluation INTRODUCTION There is a trend in digital media for children to design digital products that are ‘cool’ and ‘playful’ . Part of taking a ‘playful’ approach in designing digital products for children is creating age - appropriate graphics , or graphics that children can relate to ( Meloncon , Haynes , Varelmann & Groh , 2010 ) . In a corpus study of 100 informa - tional Websites for children , we recognized this playful design approach in many of the analyzed interfaces ( Jochmann - Mannak , Lentz , Huibers & Sanders , 2012 ) . More specifically , we identified three types of interface design for children , ranging from 1 ) classical interface design with a classical interaction style and without playful graphics , 2 ) interface design with playful graphics , but a classical interaction style and 3 ) playful interface design with playful graphics and a playful inter - action style . In this study , we analyzed what the effects are of these different design approaches of an informational Website on children’s interaction with these interfaces and on children’s affective responses towards these interfaces . The second important objective in this experi - ment , is to explore the effects of children’s use of a search engine on children’s search performance and affective responses . Conducting an experiment by letting children interact with digital interfaces is a big challenge . However , measuring children’s affective responses towards these interfaces is an even greater challenge , as will be described in this chapter . THEORETICAL BACKGROUND Children’s Informational Interface Design Interactive products for children can be classi - fied in entertainment , educational and enabling products ( Markopoulos , Read , MacFarlane & Hoysniemi , 2008 ) . Websites for children as a specific group of interactive products can also be classified in these three genres . Most Websites for children are aimed at entertaining children , for example by providing computer games . For our study with children’s informational Websites , both educational and enabling Websites are rel - evant , because most informational Websites are educational and search engines that help children in finding relevant information , can be classified as enabling . Researchers propose some guidelines for children’s Web design ( Nielsen & Gilutz , 2002 ; Meloncon , et al . , 2010 ) . Most of these guidelines were tested and validated with children , but many of the guidelines are not specifically aimed at children , and similar to standard Web design practices for adult Websites . In a large corpus study with children’s informational Websites we identified current design conventions for children ( Jochmann - Mannak et al . , 2012 ) . This study also showed that designers of children’s Websites often follow general Web design guidelines . A closer look at the data in this study did reveal three categories of informational Websites espe - cially designed for children . The first category is a Classic design type in which the layout of the pages is kept minimal and the design is aimed at simplicity , consistency and focus . We called the second category ‘the Classical Play design type’ in which a classic design approach for the naviga - tion structure is combined with a playful , visual design approach . More effort is spent on the design of graphics , colors and games ( Meloncon et al . , 2010 ) . The third category was called the ‘Image Map design type’ in which no classic Web design characteristics are used . The visual design and navigation structure on the Websites of this type are based on Image maps that incorporate objects or locations that children know from real life or from fiction . Children can explore this tableau of real life or fictional objects , which makes infor - mation - seeking a playful experience ( Meloncon et al . , 2010 ) . This Image map web design can be compared to ‘spatial metaphors’ , which can be 45 more pages are available in the full version of this document , which may be purchased using the " Add to Cart " button on the product ' s webpage : www . igi - global . com / chapter / how - interface - design - and - search - strategy - influence - childrens - search - performance - and - evaluation / 97036 ? camid = 4v1 This title is available in InfoSci - Books , InfoSci - Computer Science and Information Technology , Science , Engineering , and Information Technology , Advances in Web Technologies and Engineering , InfoSci - Select , Communications , Social Science , and Healthcare , InfoSci - Social Sciences and Humanities , InfoSci - Select , InfoSci - Select . Recommend this product to your librarian : www . igi - global . com / e - resources / library - recommendation / ? id = 1 Related Content Web Development Effort Estimation : An Empirical Analysis Emilia Mendes and Silvia Abrahão ( 2008 ) . Handbook of Research on Web Information Systems Quality ( pp . 26 - 56 ) . www . igi - global . com / chapter / web - development - effort - estimation / 21964 ? camid = 4v1a Hierarchical Scheduling in Heterogeneous Grid Systems Khaldoon Al - Zoubi ( 2007 ) . International Journal of Information Technology and Web Engineering ( pp . 1 - 16 ) . www . igi - global . com / article / hierarchical - scheduling - heterogeneous - grid - systems / 2620 ? camid = 4v1a A Novel Architecture for Deep Web Crawler Dilip Kumar Sharma and A . K . Sharma ( 2018 ) . The Dark Web : Breakthroughs in Research and Practice ( pp . 334 - 358 ) . www . igi - global . com / chapter / a - novel - architecture - for - deep - web - crawler / 185881 ? camid = 4v1a Image Mining : A Case for Clustering Shoe prints Wei Sun , David Taniar and Torab Torabi ( 2008 ) . International Journal of Information Technology and Web Engineering ( pp . 70 - 84 ) . www . igi - global . com / article / image - mining - case - clustering - shoe / 2642 ? camid = 4v1a