Curvature of co - links uncovers hidden thematic layers in the World Wide Web Jean - Pierre Eckmann * † and Elisha Moses ‡ * De´partement de Physique The´orique and Section de Mathe´matiques , Universite´ de Gene ` ve , 32 Boulevard D’Yvoy , CH - 1211 Gene ` ve 4 , Switzerland ; and ‡ Department of Physics of Complex Systems , Weizmann Institute of Science , Rehovot 76100 , Israel Communicated by Joel L . Lebowitz , Rutgers , State University of New Jersey at New Brunswick , Piscataway , NJ , February 14 , 2002 ( received for review October 4 , 2001 ) Beyond the information stored in pages of the World Wide Web , novel types of ‘‘meta - information’’ are created when pages con - nect to each other . Such meta - information is a collective effect of independent agents writing and linking pages , hidden from the casual user . Accessing it and understanding the interrelation be - tween connectivity and content in the World Wide Web is a challenging problem [ Botafogo , R . A . & Shneiderman , B . ( 1991 ) in Proceedings of Hypertext ( Assoc . Comput . Mach . , New York ) , pp . 63 – 77 and Albert , R . & Baraba´si , A . - L . ( 2002 ) Rev . Mod . Phys . 74 , 47 – 97 ] . We demonstrate here how thematic relationships can be located precisely by looking only at the graph of hyperlinks , gleaning content and context from the Web without having to read what is in the pages . We begin by noting that reciprocal links ( co - links ) between pages signal a mutual recognition of authors and then focus on triangles containing such links , because triangles indicate a transitive relation . The importance of triangles is quan - tiﬁed by the clustering coefﬁcient [ Watts , D . J . & Strogatz , S . H . ( 1999 ) Nature ( London ) 393 , 440 – 442 ] , which we interpret as a curvature [ Bridson , M . R . & Haeﬂiger , A . ( 1999 ) Metric Spaces of Non - Positive Curvature ( Springer , Berlin ) ] . This curvature deﬁnes a World Wide Web landscape whose connected regions of high curvature characterize a common topic . We show experimentally that reciprocity and curvature , when combined , accurately capture this meta - information for a wide variety of topics . As an example of future directions we analyze the neural network of Caenorhab - ditis elegans , using the same methods . T he World Wide Web ( WWW ) is a graph ( 1 , 2 ) that is continuously being expanded by an enormous number of independent agents . Millions of users add pages in an uncoordi - nated way , but in doing so they must obey clear rules on how to address other pages ( 3 ) . Beyond the information placed by users directly in individual pages , their unified action creates a coop - erative meta - information whose location is in the connectivity of the network . By meta - information we mean information that is based solely on the graph structure of the WWW , and which reveals strong contextual grouping . This type of information should be contrasted to that of a very informative but secluded page that is an archive of information ( a ‘‘wise hermit’’ ) . Further on , we will compare our new meta - information to earlier work . The billions of pages and links of the WWW create a maze of confusing and almost unmanageable complexity . To navigate through it and to find pages of interest , users rely on the help of search engines ( 4 ) . These send out small , automated programs ( robots ) that roam the Web , retrieve links , and note keywords as they create a mirror image of the Web that can be stored within one room of storage data , ready for easy access . The Web remains intelligible to its human users precisely because it is constantly analyzed and monitored by these automatic agents . Robot activity dominates Web traffic and accounts for up to 70 % of the total queries made at certain sites we studied . § Because of the breadth of their search , robots obtain a clearer view of the Web than the common user . It is therefore useful to adopt the perspective of robots , without having to define meaning or content , looking only at the identification tag of pages ( URL addresses ) and their links ( 5 ) . To avoid the difficulty of having to know the complete Web graph , we use robots that explore some locally visible pieces that can be found by starting from a given page and progressing along its links . An analogy may be drawn with classical neurobiology ( 6 ) , where a neuron takes up dye that then traces out its connections . Defining a Curvature on the Web Having defined our aim of revealing meta - information in the form of hidden thematic structures , we implement it by a novel combination of a number of key ideas : clustering , co - links , triangles , and curvature . The clustering regroups a ‘‘home’’ page with the pages in its subdirectories . The co - links are then the result of independent agents linking their pages . Triangles capture transitivity , which we measure by the associated notion of curvature . By using curvature , we show that practically all the connective information depends on co - links . Thus , our method reveals a new geometric view of the locus of information in networks , which is not ‘‘put there’’ but ‘‘happens’’ as a collective effect . In detail , we proceed as follows : The first step of our method is clustering . ¶ Once a certain number of pages have been found by our robot , we regroup them into a node by lumping together a ‘‘home’’ page with the pages in its subdirectories . This clus - tering is useful because ( i ) information within a given home site belongs to one contextual heading ; ( ii ) the size of the graph is reduced by a factor of 10 2 - 10 3 ; and ( iii ) connective links that arise from physical proximity are eliminated , leaving the more rele - vant remote links . Working henceforth exclusively with the clustered graph ( like the one on the right of Fig . 1 ) , we introduce the pivotal notion of co - link for a reciprocal connection between two nodes , A and B ( A points to B and B points to A , the red link in Fig . 1 ) . They are then deemed to be ‘‘congruent’’ ( friends , or members in the same interest group ) . Co - links are special because , whereas we can point to your page we cannot ( in general ) cause you to point to ours . Con - gruence therefore indicates an awareness by both nodes of the other’s existence and content , and a recognition of the other’s value to their own interests . Because congruence involves mutual recognition , we expect it to be a transitive property , i . e . , if sites A and B are congruent and B and C are congruent , then A and C will be congruent with high probability , forming a triangle . Such triangles signal strong cooperative content , and would be extremely rare in any large random graph whose average number of links per node is bounded ( 7 ) . To quantify the aggregation of triangles with congruent edges , we define the local curvature at † To whom reprint requests should be addressed . E - mail : eckmann @ physics . unige . ch . § These ﬁndings are based on a random spot check of trafﬁc in three sites : the molecular biology database ( www . expasy . ch ) , the Weizmann Institute ( www . weizmann . ac . il ) , and the mathematical physics archive ( www . ma . utexas . edu (cid:1) mp (cid:1) arc ) . ¶ Note this is a different kind of cluster than that described by the ‘‘clustering coefﬁcient’’ of Watts and Strogatz ( 8 ) . www . pnas . org (cid:1) cgi (cid:1) doi (cid:1) 10 . 1073 (cid:1) pnas . 032093399 PNAS (cid:2) April 30 , 2002 (cid:2) vol . 99 (cid:2) no . 9 (cid:2) 5825 – 5829 P H Y S I C S a node n by c n (cid:1) 2 t n (cid:1) ( ( v n (cid:2) 1 ) v n ) . This quantity was termed the clustering coefficient in ref . 8 . Here , t n is the number of triangles containing n as a corner , v n is the number of links leaving n ( the valence ) , and ( v n (cid:2) 1 ) v n (cid:1) 2 is the maximal number of possible triangles . We ignore in this the directionality of one - way links . If the graph is a tree , there are no triangles , and c n (cid:1) 0 everywhere , whereas for any complete graph ( where all nodes are mutually connected ) , c n (cid:1) 1 everywhere . To see that c n is indeed a quantity that can be called a curvature , we regard the simple geometric picture of Fig . 2 : One way to detect that we are on a curved surface by using local measurements is to walk a unit distance on a straight line in two different directions separated by a constant angle (cid:1) . Connecting the two endpoints completes a triangle , and the length of the third edge is determined by the curvature . On surfaces this relation of triangles to curvature is a natural generalization of the law of cosines , relating the angle at the apex and the three sides . For general metric spaces , such as infinite graphs , this relation is the basis of a mathematical definition of curvature ( 9 ) obtained by comparing triangles in a continuous metric to their counterparts embedded in standard manifolds . The average number of triangles c n at a node n is related to the average distance between any two of its nearest neighbors ( say n (cid:3) and n (cid:4) ) . This distance is measured by counting links in the shortest path from one node to another , namely n (cid:3) and n (cid:4) . Because for co - links this is either 1 ( n (cid:3) and n (cid:4) directly connected , triangle exists ) or 2 ( no triangle , need to go through node n ) , c n (cid:1) 2 (cid:2)(cid:5) r ( n (cid:3) , n (cid:4) ) (cid:6) , where r is the distance . The average (cid:5) (cid:2) (cid:6) is taken over all pairs of nearest neighbors so that the average triangle has sides 1 , 1 , (cid:5) r (cid:6) . In principle , for one - way links the distance r may be a large number and can range all the way to infinity ( no connection ) . Experimentally , we can measure triangles not only in the co - links but also in the one - way links . In that case , we ignore the direction of the link when measuring the distance r , and we shall still use c n as measured by triangles to give us an upper bound on the connectivity . We are not aware of a definition similar to the one of ref . 9 for finite graphs with discrete metric , but it is still useful to view c n as the curvature of triangles with apex at n ( though c n is normalized to take values between 0 and 1 ) , (cid:3) with c n being perhaps closer to a dimension measurement ( 10 ) . Equipped with a metric ( minimal number of hops between nodes ) and a curvature , the graph of the WWW can be visualized geometri - cally . We shall say that it looks like a hyperboloid when it is tree - like , with exponential separation of branches that ‘‘fan out’’ ( ref . 11 ; see Fig . 3 ) . In contrast , a highly connected region looks more like a sphere that is ‘‘closed’’ on itself . Alternately , a (cid:3) A very accessible exposition of these ideas can be found in the Balzan Lectures of M . Gromov : http : (cid:1)(cid:1) www . balzan . it (cid:1) english (cid:1) pb1999 (cid:1) gromov (cid:1) paper . htm . Fig . 1 . The reduction of a set of pages and links by clustering . On the left , local links are black and remote links are blue . On the right , black links are one - way and the red one is a co - link . Clustering clariﬁes connectivity because it allows the links to go through different pages within the nodes . Fig . 2 . Illustration of the law of cosines on a sphere ( positive curvature ) and a hyperboloid ( negative curvature ) . The triangles have sides 1 and 1 and the same angle (cid:1) , but the distances between the ends are different : d (cid:7) d (cid:3) . Fig . 3 . ( Top ) Thenodes ( 2 , 125 ) andlinks ( 2 , 755 ) ofasitespecializingintango ( speciﬁcallythemusicofPiazzolla ) . Theco - linksareshowninred , congruence triangles are enhanced , and one - way links are black . The anchor is red . The sparsity and high connectivity of the congruence graph are striking . ( Bottom ) A view of the curvature for the 947 nodes and the 1 , 307 links of a notorious Swiss revisionist ( anti - Semitic ) site . Height above the blue surface is propor - tionaltocurvature ( ofcongruencetriangles ) . Theone - waygraphisclearlyless connected , its links are more likely to be dangling ends , and it is generally dominated by the appearance of hubs . 5826 (cid:2) www . pnas . org (cid:1) cgi (cid:1) doi (cid:1) 10 . 1073 (cid:1) pnas . 032093399 Eckmann and Moses random walk by the robot in the graph will tend to get trapped somewhat longer in highly curved regions . Triangles tend to aggregate , creating interest groups of widely varying size ( in terms of the number of members ) , but of small diameter . In general , the border of interest groups is expected to be a sharp interface , but sometimes different interest groups will connect one to another , typically via a single link ( e . g . , the member of the ‘‘butterfly collection’’ interest group who also belongs to the ‘‘origami’’ interest group ) . Our definition of curvature implies that such connecting nodes tend to be hubs and are characterized by a low curvature . The meta - information of the graph has been noted before ( 12 ) and has been used for data mining in the influential works ( 13 , 14 ) . These approaches view a link as conferring ‘‘authority’’ and search the WWW for ‘‘Authorities’’ and ‘‘Hubs’’ that point at them . Based on these ideas the successful search engine Google was designed ; it also led to the notion of ‘‘Community’’ ( 15 , 16 ) . Similar investigations of the information content of linkages are common in other fields , such as studies of social ( 17 ) or paper citation ( 18 ) networks . Our approach , however , emphasizes different features . Indeed , note that ‘‘authorities’’ as defined above tend to have low curvature , because belonging to two interest groups basically halves the curvature for the connecting node . On the other hand , nodes that are mutually recognized by peers get high curvature . Thus , curvature captures contextual vicinity rather than notoriety of a set of pages . Experimental Implementation We tested our general ideas in several Web crawls , encompassing over 1 million URLs of which over 300 , 000 were actually accessed . The database is stored for offline analysis , whereas intermediate results are used to direct the further action of the robot . Large numbers of links in a page ( indicating the page is a hub ) tend to stall the crawl , and we followed at most 35 links per page ( neither . cgi nor . jpg was explored ) . As an aside , we note that . com sites seem to make little contribution to ‘‘cooperative content’’ and connect badly to others . As the crawl proceeds , clustering according to Fig . 1 is implemented . To that end , links are determined to be local or remote . A local link is basically one inside a given site and any other link is remote . This decision is usually made by looking at the URL and using the known conventions for naming of pages inside a home directory ( details can be obtained from the authors at http : (cid:1)(cid:1) mpej . unige . ch (cid:1) (cid:8) eckmann ) . The algorithm explores a page it encounters by following the local links down to depth d ( and perhaps u upward , links like ‘‘back to home page’’ ) . Crawls are initialized by choosing a first site ( the anchor ) and fetching it . The links in a fetched page are identified and entered into the database . Our robot then fetches all the pages to which these links point . After exhausting the search down and up , the database is clustered and the robot is sent out along the first remote link . It explores that node in a similar way , going down and up the newly found local links as before . Once that is done , the robot returns to the first node and follows the next remote link , until all remote links at distance r (cid:1) 1 from the anchor have been followed . The robot can then be directed to explore r (cid:1) 2 or sequentially larger distances , if needed . The breadth of crawls is shown in Table 1 , whereas results from specific crawls are shown in Fig . 4 . The curvature was calculated for all nodes within a distance r (cid:1) 1 of the anchor , and for three types of graphs . The ‘‘full’’ graph includes all links that were found in the crawl , the ‘‘congruence’’ graph is composed solely of co - links ( the red link of Fig . 1 ) , and the ‘‘one - way’’ subgraph is obtained from the full graph by removing all co - links ( leaving only the black links ) . Results Our main result , shown in Fig . 4 , is that the average curvatures of the congruence and full graphs are very similar , whereas that of the one - way graph is lower by a factor ranging between 2 . 5 and 21 . This finding means that removal of the co - links results in a dramatic decrease of the curvature . The curvature of the full graph is carried predominantly by triangles containing at least one reciprocal side . This curvature is not produced by triangles with three co - links alone , because of their small relative number , but rather from triangles that have a combination of co - and one - way links . To put the results of Fig . 4 in perspective , we note that the density of triangles ( and average curvature as well ) of a random graph tends to zero with the size of the graph ( 7 ) . For all experiments , the distribution of curvatures c among the nodes of the full graphs obeys a power law , c (cid:1) ( 2 . 0 (cid:9) 0 . 2 ) v (cid:2) 1 , where v is the valence of the node . Although the scaling is striking , we are not certain of its origin . It does cause highly connected nodes with high v such as hubs and authorities to have , Table 1 . Data collected in 5 experimental Web crawls Anchor URL encountered URL read in Clusters Total links Co - links Shakespeare 277 , 114 69 , 982 1 , 560 3 , 730 321 Needlework 341 , 398 102 , 895 1 , 498 4 , 440 727 Revisionist 66 , 771 22 , 933 947 1 , 307 67 Piazzolla 47 , 978 20 , 404 2 , 125 2 , 577 70 Mol . Biol . 318 , 705 110 , 286 1 , 518 6 , 351 868 Our protocol ensures that nodes within distance r (cid:2) 1 of the anchor are fully explored to a given depth d (cid:2) 3 . The crawls started at sites of literary studies of Shakespeare , instructions for needlework , a notorious Swiss revi - sionist ( anti - Semitic ) site , tango ( speciﬁcally the music of Piazzolla ) , and a site for molecular biology ( Mol . Biol . ) . A URL has been ‘‘read in’’ if our robot has fetched and analyzed the corresponding page . We deem a URL as ‘‘encoun - tered’’ if it appeared in any page we have read in . The link counts are for the clustered graphs . Fig . 4 . CurvatureforthedataofTable1 . Thequantitiesarethemeanofthe curvatureoftheanchoranditsnearestneighbors . Full , alllinks , irrespectiveof direction ; congruence , only triangles with three co - links ; one - way , only tri - angles without co - links . Note that the curvature is carried basically only by triangles with at least one co - link . Eckmann and Moses PNAS (cid:2) April 30 , 2002 (cid:2) vol . 99 (cid:2) no . 9 (cid:2) 5827 P H Y S I C S on average , a low curvature . This finding agrees with our intuition that such nodes contribute perhaps to global connec - tivity but not to the local interest groups that curvature identifies . Although we consistently avoided any reference to content of sites in the crawl itself , to check our method a separate , objective criterion was needed . We therefore checked manually whether the co - links reveal contextual linkages , by reading in 784 nodes from our crawls ( in most cases checking the name of the node sufficed ) . Indeed , we found that no less than 75 – 100 % of nodes congruent to the anchor relate to the same topic . Extensions and Discussion Going beyond the WWW , we examined the efficiency of curva - ture as a measure of thematic cohesion by studying three other networks . These are the neuronal network of the nematode Caenorhabditis elegans , the protein – protein interaction network of the yeast Saccharomyces cerevisiae , and the citation network of the mathematical physics archive ( http : (cid:1)(cid:1) www . ma . utexas . edu (cid:1) mp (cid:1) arc ) . In each case we used an existing database to access and reconstruct the network , and as a control each had a separate , objective criterion by which related nodes were grouped into ‘‘themes . ’’ Our analysis of the neural network of the worm relies on classic work ( 19 ) that used about 8 , 000 electron microscopy sections to trace directed neuronal connections ( R . Durbin , http : (cid:1)(cid:1) elegans . swmed . edu (cid:1) parts (cid:1) neurodata . txt ) . The control classification is the currently accepted association of neurons with organs found by both morphological and connective data ( 19 , 20 ) , where the existence of triangles was indeed noted , though only incidentally . In Fig . 5 we present the network of the brain of the nematode . We immediately note three connected components of high curvature , color - coded to display the association with the major neural circuits or organs . The elevated groups are the amphids , the motor neurons of the nerve ring , and ‘‘other’’ sensory neurons of the head . The other circuits are either low - curvature ( egg - laying and motor neurons of the ventral cord ) or absent from the compilation ( tail ganglia ) . The amphids and nerve ring are particularly well separated into connected components of the congruence graph . Furthermore , we find that interneurons [ neurons that act like central processing units ( CPU ) ] carry more curvature than sensory ( input ) or motor ( output ) neurons , which agrees with our intuition of how connections should distribute within the brain . Most co - links ( 61 % ) connect neurons that are within the same functional circuit ( 72 % for co - links within triangles ) whereas most of the one - way links ( 58 % ) connect between two different organs . For the protein – protein interactions of the yeast we took the protein – protein interaction database ( http : (cid:1)(cid:1) dip . doe - mbi . ucla . edu (cid:1) dip (cid:1) Download . cgi ) , treating any interaction as a co - link ( i . e . , there are no one - way links ) . The control was taken from the functional classification given in the Yeast Protein Databank ( YPD ) ( http : (cid:1)(cid:1) www . proteome . com (cid:1) databases (cid:1) YPD (cid:1) YPDcategories (cid:1) Functional (cid:1) Categories . html ) . We found that proteins within the same connected groups of high curva - ture almost always ( 77 % of the cases ) belonged to the same functional grouping of the YPD . At c n (cid:3) 0 . 15 there are 34 such Fig . 5 . The worm brain . The height is proportional to curvature . The red nodes are amphid cells , the yellow nodes are other sensory neurons of the head , and blue nodes are motor neurons of the nerve ring . Only co - links are shown , and triangles are enhanced . 5828 (cid:2) www . pnas . org (cid:1) cgi (cid:1) doi (cid:1) 10 . 1073 (cid:1) pnas . 032093399 Eckmann and Moses groups , that include between 3 to 18 members , with an average of 5 proteins per group ( data not shown ; see supporting infor - mation , which is published on the PNAS web site , www . pnas . org ) . In the case of the mathematical physics archive , we used the archive ( http : (cid:1)(cid:1) www . ma . utexas . edu (cid:1) mp (cid:1) arc ) to define a net - work of citations between authors in the same field . A co - link exists if author A cites author B ( in any paper within the archive ) and author B cites author A in any paper of his (cid:1) hers , while co - authors are automatically co - linked . Note that our definition of co - links is fundamentally different from the co - citations defined in ref . 18 , because there no reciprocal recognition exists . The control we used here was more problematic , relying on scanning manually all conference pages listed at the Interna - tional Mathematical Physics Association homepage , and includ - ing an author in a group ( e . g . , ‘‘Quantum mechanics’’ , ‘‘Field theory’’ or ‘‘Statistical mechanics’’ ) if she (cid:1) he spoke under that topic in any of the conferences . However , we were able to classify only about 400 of the 1 , 700 authors ( because not every author is talking at these conferences ) . As before , high curvature selected out the groups we found manually , with 5 of the 20 or so topic groups we defined very strongly represented and clearly identi - fied ( data not shown ; see supporting information ) . Again , au - thorities , which in this case are very polyvalent scientists , have lower curvature than specialists in a small field and serve rather as hubs . Conclusion Our discovery opens a number of new possibilities for studying highly assembled complex structures in general , perhaps even the brain . First , the introduction of geometry frees us from the subjectivity of contextual concepts , such as meaning , content , and the like . The locality develops a different direction than global notions like scaling in the WWW and the ‘‘small - world’’ effect . Second , the concept of congruence shows the usefulness of combining geometry with selective action in probing sophis - ticated structures , including C . elegans . In particular , we have seen how a very simple dynamical rule—the search for congru - ence—radically changes our global view of the Web , replacing statistical aspects with unsuspected relations that can be found only by looking at combined , independently built pathways in the Web . Our approach can certainly be refined and extended in the Web but should prove useful in many other contexts . Our study further shows that robots perceive the Web differ - ently than the people who actually write and use the pages . Our robots go back and forth between various sites , gaining a more coherent view of their relations . We have shown that the geometric properties of the space in which they roam and the landscape that they reconstruct reveal new connective meta - information , hidden from the common user . What can one expect in the future ? Other forms of meta - information , not necessarily arising from connectivity , will cer - tainly be found in the WWW and other complex networks . The dynamics of developing interest groups is also an important issue ( 21 ) that may involve rapid fusion processes ( 22 ) . From a mathematical perspective , we have demonstrated the need for concepts of local curvature in graphs . Our definition of curva - ture seems a useful beginning to elicit Web properties and is easily generalized to balls of radius r (cid:1) 2 ( next - nearest neigh - bors ) or more , as well as to simplices like tetrahedra . More advanced geometric concepts , however , such as measuring non - commutativity in the order of visiting sites , might be needed in the future . We are grateful for numerous discussions with our colleagues in Geneva and Rehovot , and for special help from A . Haefliger and D . Ruelle . We also thank P . Blekken for help with Coin . This work was partially supported by the Fonds National Suisse and the Minerva Foundation ( Munich ) . 1 . Kleinberg , J . L . , Kumar , R . , Raghavan , P . , Rajagopalan , S . & Tomkins , A . S . ( 1999 ) in Proceedings of the Fifth Annual International Conference CO - COON’99 , Lecture Notes in Computer Science ( Springer , New York ) , Vol . 1627 , pp . 1 – 17 . 2 . Broder , A . , Kumar , R . , Naghoul , F . , Raghavan , P . , Rajagopalan , S . , Stata , R . , Tomkins , A . & Weiner , J . ( 2000 ) Proc . 9th Int . WWW Conf . ( Elsevier , Amsterdam ) , pp . 309 – 320 . 3 . Baraba´si , A . - L . & Albert , R . ( 1999 ) Science 286 , 509 – 512 . 4 . Lawrence , S . & Giles , C . L . ( 1999 ) Nature ( London ) 400 , 107 – 109 . 5 . Pirolli , P . , Pitkow , J . & Rao , R . ( 1996 ) Proc . Assoc . Comput . Mach . SIGCHI Conf . Hum . Factors Comput . ( Assoc . Comput . Mach . , Vancouver ) , pp . 118 – 125 . 6 . Cajal , R . ( 1928 ) Degeneration and Regeneration of the Nervous System ( Oxford Univ . Press , London ) . 7 . Bollobas , B . ( 1985 ) Random Graphs ( Academic , New York ) . 8 . Watts , D . J . & Strogatz , S . H . ( 1999 ) Nature 393 , 440 – 442 . 9 . Bridson , M . R . & Haefliger , A . ( 1999 ) Metric Spaces of Non - Positive Curvature ( Springer , Berlin ) . 10 . Eckmann , J . - P . & Ruelle , D . ( 1985 ) Rev . Mod . Phys . 57 , 617 – 656 . 11 . Albert , R . , Jeong , H . & Baraba´si , A . - L . ( 2000 ) Nature ( London ) 406 , 378 – 381 . 12 . Botafogo , R . A . & Shneiderman , B . ( 1991 ) in Proceedings of Hypertext ( Assoc . Comput . Mach . , New York ) , pp . 63 – 74 . 13 . Kleinberg , J . M . ( 1999 ) J . Assoc . Comput . Mach . 46 , 604 – 632 . 14 . Brin , S . & Page , L . ( 1998 ) Proc . 7th Int . World Wide Web Conf . ( Elsevier , Amsterdam ) , pp . 107 – 117 . 15 . Gibson , D . , Kleinberg , J . M & Raghavan , P . ( 1998 ) Proc . 9th Assoc . Comput . Mach . Conf . Hypertext ( Assoc . Comput . Mach . , New York ) , pp . 225 – 234 . 16 . Flake , G . W . , Lawrence , C . & Lee Giles , C . ( 2000 ) Proc . 6th Int . Conf . Knowl . Discov . DataMining ( Assoc . Comput . Mach . , Boston ) , pp . 150 – 160 . 17 . Wasserman , S . & Faust , K . ( 1994 ) Social Network Analysis ( Cambridge Univ . Press , Cambridge , U . K . ) . 18 . Small , H . ( 1973 ) J . Am . Soc . Inf . Sci . 24 , 265 – 269 . 19 . White , J . G . , Southgate , E . , Thomson , J . N . & Brenner , S . ( 1986 ) Philos . Trans . R . Soc . London B 314 , 1 – 340 . 20 . Wood , W . B . , ed . ( 1988 ) The Nematode Caenorhabditis elegans ( Cold Spring Harbor Lab . Press , Plainview , NY ) . 21 . Huberman , B . A . & Adamic , L . A . ( 1999 ) Nature ( London ) 401 , 131 . 22 . Derrida , B . , Manrubia , S . C . & Zanette , D . H . ( 2000 ) J . Theor . Biol . 203 , 303 – 315 . Eckmann and Moses PNAS (cid:2) April 30 , 2002 (cid:2) vol . 99 (cid:2) no . 9 (cid:2) 5829 P H Y S I C S