This article was downloaded by : [ Universite De Paris 1 ] On : 21 May 2013 , At : 18 : 06 Publisher : Routledge Informa Ltd Registered in England and Wales Registered Number : 1072954 Registered office : Mortimer House , 37 - 41 Mortimer Street , London W1T 3JH , UK Creativity Research Journal Publication details , including instructions for authors and subscription information : http : / / www . tandfonline . com / loi / hcrj20 Models of the Creative Process : Past , Present and Future Todd I . Lubart Published online : 08 Jun 2010 . To cite this article : Todd I . Lubart ( 2001 ) : Models of the Creative Process : Past , Present and Future , Creativity Research Journal , 13 : 3 - 4 , 295 - 308 To link to this article : http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1207 / S15326934CRJ1334 _ 07 PLEASE SCROLL DOWN FOR ARTICLE Full terms and conditions of use : http : / / www . tandfonline . com / page / terms - and - conditions This article may be used for research , teaching , and private study purposes . Any substantial or systematic reproduction , redistribution , reselling , loan , sub - licensing , systematic supply , or distribution in any form to anyone is expressly forbidden . The publisher does not give any warranty express or implied or make any representation that the contents will be complete or accurate or up to date . The accuracy of any instructions , formulae , and drug doses should be independently verified with primary sources . The publisher shall not be liable for any loss , actions , claims , proceedings , demand , or costs or damages whatsoever or howsoever caused arising directly or indirectly in connection with or arising out of the use of this material . Models of the Creative Process : Past , Present and Future T . I . Lubart Models of the Creative Process : Past , Present and Future Todd I . Lubart Université René Descartes – Paris V Laboratoire Cognition et Développement ABSTRACT : The creative process , one of the key topics discussed in Guilford’s ( 1950 ) address to the American Psychological Association and his subsequent work , re - fers to the sequence of thoughts and actions that leads to novel , adaptive productions . This article examines con - ceptions of the creative process that have been advo - cated during the past century . In particular , stage - based models of the creative process are discussed and the evo - lution of these models is traced . Empirical research sug - gests that the basic 4 - stage model of the creative process may need to be revised or replaced . Several key ques - tions about the creative process are raised , such as how the creative process differs from the noncreative process and how process - related differences may lead to differ - ent levels of creative performance . New directions for fu - ture research are identified . The creative process—the sequence of thoughts and ac - tions that leads to a novel , adaptive production—has been one of the key topics of creativity research during the past century . In his presidential address to the American Psychological Association , Guilford ( 1950 ) noted that there was “considerable agreement that the complete creative act involves four important steps” ( p . 451 ) , traditionally identified as ( a ) preparation , ( b ) in - cubation , ( c ) illumination , and ( d ) verification . Guilford ( 1950 ) , however , was not very satisfied by the four - stage description of the creative process . He wrote , “Such an analysis is very superficial from the psychological point of view . It is more dramatic than it is suggestive of testable hypotheses . It tells us almost nothing about the mental operations that actually oc - cur” ( p . 451 ) . He went on to identify certain abilities that may be involved in creativity , including a sensitiv - ity to problems , a capacity to produce many ideas ( flu - ency ) , an ability to change one’s mental set ( flexibil - ity ) , an ability to reorganize , an ability to deal with complexity , and an ability to evaluate . He proposed a program of research concerning the identification , measurement , and validation of these creativity - rele - vant abilities . After 50 years of research , our compre - hension of the abilities and basic cognitive processes involved in creativity has grown a great deal . Starting with a brief description of the classic four - stage model , I then examine how this model has fared during the past half - century . Following this re - view , some fundamental questions about the creative process are raised . Research that illustrates how these questions may be addressed is discussed . The Classic Four - Stage Model of the Creative Process Thebasicelementsofthefour - stagemodelofthecre - ativeprocesswereevokedearlyoninsomeintrospectiveaccountsofthecreativeact . For example , at the end of the19thcentury , HermannvonHelmholtz , thephysicist and physiologist , described how after investigating a problem thoroughly , “happy ideas came unexpectedly without effort , like an inspiration” ( cited in Wallas , 1926 , p . 80 ) . Ideas did not come if he was tired or at his working table , but rather when he was taking a break such as a walk outside ( Ochse , 1990 ; Wallas , 1926 ) . Poincaré’s ( 1908 / 1985 ) description of his discovery of Fuchsian functions is particularly noteworthy . Creativity Research Journal 295 Creativity Research Journal Copyright 2000 – 2001 by 2000 – 2001 , Vol . 13 , Nos . 3 & 4 , 295 – 308 Lawrence Erlbaum Associates , Inc . ManuscriptreceivedApril27 , 1999 ; acceptedNovember15 , 1999 . Correspondence and requests for reprints should be sent to Todd I . Lubart , Université René Descartes - Paris V , Laboratoire Cognition etDéveloppement ( CNRSUMR8605 ) , 71AvenueEdouardVaillant , 92100 Boulogne - Billancourt Cedex , France . E - mail : lubart @ psy - cho . univ - paris5 . fr . D o w n l o a d e d by [ U n i v e r s it e D e P a r i s 1 ] a t 18 : 06 21 M a y 20 1 3 Poincaré , a French mathematician , began with days of conscious work , trying to prove that Fuchsian func - tions could not exist . He “tried a great number of com - binations and reached no results” ( p . 26 ) . After drink - ing coffee one evening , he could not sleep : “Ideas rose in crowds ; I felt them collide until pairs interlocked , so to speak , making a stable combination . … I had estab - lished the existence of a class of Fuchsian functions” ( p . 26 ) . Poincaré formalized his results in writing , elabo - rated on his initial idea , and guided by an “analogy with elliptic functions , ” explored the mathematical properties of Fuchsian functions . He then had to travel and “forgot” about his work . At one moment during his trip he stepped on a bus and an idea came to him “with - out anything … seeming to have paved the way for it” : The transformations involved in Fuchsian functions were the same as those in non - Euclidean geometry ( p . 26 ) . After returning from his trip , Poincaré verified his idea and then began work on some seemingly unrelated mathematical issues without much success . He de - cided to take a break for a few days near the sea . There , during a walk , another idea concerning non - Euclidean geometry came with “brevity , suddenness , and imme - diate certainty” ( p . 26 ) . On his return , he thought about this idea , exploring systematically its implications for Fuchsian functions . His work , however , led him to re - alize that there was one difficulty that remained . At this point he went away for his military service . Although his mind was “very occupied” by his duties , one day an idea of how to solve his mathematical problem “sud - denly appeared . ” After returning from his military ser - vice he had “all the elements and had only to arrange them and put them together” ( p . 26 ) . He wrote his fi - nalized ideas in a single stroke . Poincaré went on in his essay to note that the creative process seems to start with conscious work on a prob - lem . This is followed by unconscious work , which if successful , results in a “sudden illumination . ” Then an - other phase of conscious work follows “to put in shape the results of this inspiration , ” to explore the conse - quences , to formalize and to verify the idea ( p . 27 ) . Based on this kind of introspective evidence , Wallas ( 1926 ) formalized the four - stage model of the creative process . Preparationinvolvesapreliminaryanalysisofa problem , defining and setting up the problem . Prepara - tioninvolvesconsciousworkanddrawsonone’seduca - tion , analyticalskills , andproblem - relevantknowledge . The incubation phase follows . During incubation , there is no conscious mental work on the problem . A person may be working consciously on other problems or sim - ply relaxing , taking a break from the problem . Uncon - sciously , however , the mind continues to work on the problem , forming trains of associations . Many associa - tions or idea combinations are believed to occur during incubation . The unconscious mind rejects most of these combinations as useless but occasionally finds a prom - isingidea . Poincaréreferredtoaestheticcriteriathatun - consciously allowed promising ideas to be selected and the vast majority of useless ideas to be rejected . A third phase , called illumination , occurs when the promising idea breaks through to conscious awareness . Illumina - tion can be characterized by a “flash , ” a sudden enlight - enment . Wallassuggestedthatilluminationisoftenpro - ceeded by an intuitive feeling that an idea is coming . He called this “intimation , ” which occurs at the “fringe” of consciousness ( p . 97 ) . The illumination phase is hy - pothesized to be somewhat delicate , easily disturbed by outsideinterruptionsortryingtorushtheemergingidea . Followingtheillumination , thereisaphaseofconscious work called verification , which involves evaluating , re - fining , and developing one’s idea . Wallas ( 1926 ) noted that during creative problem solving a person could re - turn to earlier phases in the process . For example , if an ideaprovestobeflawedduringverification , onemayin - cubateonhowtoresolvethisdifficulty . Also , thephases could co - occur if a person was , for example , engaged in preparation for one aspect of a problem and incubation for another aspect of the problem . Some early empirical research on the creative pro - cess lent support to the four - stage model . For example , Patrick ( 1935 , 1937 , 1938 ) conducted a series of stud - ies with poets , visual artists , scientists , and laypeople . The participants thought aloud as they composed a poem , produced a painting , or solved scientific prob - lems . Patrick observed their actions , noted their verbal - izations , and divided each protocol into four parts based on the total length of the protocol . She con - cluded that her observations of the creative process fit well within the four - stage model . For example , incuba - tion ( noted when a previously expressed idea recurred while thinking about another idea ) was observed for more than two thirds of the participants . Instances of revision and a critical survey of the whole work tended to occur in the third or fourth quarters of each partici - pant’s work , supporting the idea of a verification phase . Some overlap between the stages was noted , such as preparation and incubation co - occurring . In her 296 Creativity Research Journal T . I . Lubart D o w n l o a d e d by [ U n i v e r s it e D e P a r i s 1 ] a t 18 : 06 21 M a y 20 1 3 studies , Patrick also compared the creative process in experts and novices , examining , for example , proto - cols from established visual artists and nonartists . She found that the same basic process seemed to hold across levels of expertise and across task domains . In his observations on mathematical creativity , Hadamard ( 1945 ) also supported the four - stage model ( see also Rossman , 1931 , for a study of inventors ) . Stage - Based Models : Alive and Well ? The Four - Stage Model : An Update For a number of researchers , the four - stage model or avariantofithasservedandcontinuestoserveastheba - sis for understanding the creative process ( Busse & Mansfield , 1980 ; Cagle , 1985 ; Goswami , 1996 ; Ochse , 1990 ; Osborn , 1953 ; Stein , 1974 ; Taylor , 1959 ; Taylor , Austin , & Sutton , 1974 ) . For example in a relatively re - centproposal , Amabile ( 1996 ) incorporatedaversionof the basic stage model into her componential model of creativity . The creative process is described as consist - ing of several phases : ( a ) problem or task identification , ( b ) preparation ( gathering and reactivating relevant in - formation and resources ) , ( c ) response generation ( seekingandproducingpotentialresponses ) , and ( d ) re - sponse validation and communication ( testing the pos - sibleresponseagainstcriteria ) . Afinalphaseofdecision making about further work is proposed ; based on the outcome of response validation and communication , a person may either stop because a successful product is achieved , stop due to failure , or return to one or more phases in the process for further work . These stages , which do not necessarily occur in a fixed sequence , de - scribe the creative process in individuals and small groups . In organizational settings , similar stages are proposed ( Amabile , 1988 ) . Amabile ( 1996 ) noted that incubation may occur during the creative process and may involve selective forgetting or changes in motiva - tion . As in many creative process models framed in termsofproblemsolving , theterm problem isconceived broadly as any task that an individual seeks to accom - plish . Thus , artists who seek to express their feelings , scientists who seek to understand a complex phenome - non , and people who seek to solve conflicts in their ev - erydaylivesareallconsideredtobeengagedinproblemsolving ( see Runco & Dow , 1999 ) . Some relatively recent empirical work also draws clearly on the four - stage model . For example , Moriarty and Vandenbergh ( 1984 ) surveyed creative people in ad - vertising agencies who had won awards in a national competition . They found support for the four - stage model in the obtained descriptions of the creative process . In a series of studies , Gustafson and Norlander ( 1994 ; Norlander & Gustafson , 1996 , 1997 , 1998 ) explored how alcohol consumption influences the preparation , incuba - tion , illumination , and verification phase of the creative process . These studies used Patrick’s ( 1935 ) methodol - ogy with some modifications and analyzed prob - lem - solving protocols for specific indicators of prepara - tion , incubation , illumination , and verification . In terms of extending or enhancing the basic four - stage model , several authors have suggested that it is important to distinguish a problem - finding or prob - lem - formulation phase from the preparatory phase in which relevant information is gathered and prelimi - nary ideas are advanced ( Amabile , 1996 ; Getzels & Csikszentmihalyi , 1976 ; Osborn , 1953 ) . Problem find - ing involves recognizing that a problem exists , finding gaps , inconsistencies , or flaws with the current state of the art . Einstein and Infeld ( 1938 ) noted the impor - tance of raising new questions , formulating a problem and seeing old problems from new angles . In a related vein , Isaksen and Treffinger ( 1985 ) proposed that cre - ative problem solving begins with a “mess finding” stage from which problems are defined . Some authors distinguish problem finding ( noticing that something is not right , not good , or lacking ) from problem posing ( expressing the problem ) and problem construction ( developing a detailed representation of the problem ; Mumford , Reiter - Palmon , & Redmond , 1994 ) . Empir - ical studies on problem finding have operationalized this activity either in terms of the time spent manipulat - ing or exploring problem elements before proposing an initial idea or in terms of question - asking behaviors ( Getzels & Csikszentmihalyi , 1976 ; Glover , 1979 ; Jay & Perkins , 1997 ; Kay , 1991 ; Rostan , 1994 ) . With regard to other phases of the creative process , some authors have suggested that a phase of frustration occurs after the preparatory phase when the analytic mind reaches its limit on dealing with the problem ; frustration may provoke incubation ( Goleman , Kaufman , & Ray , 1992 ; Hutchinson , 1949 ) . Sapp ( 1992 ) proposed that between incubation and the mo - ment of illumination there may often be a “point of cre - ative frustration” ( p . 24 ) . A person may become Creativity Research Journal 297 Models of the Creative Process : Past , Present and Future D o w n l o a d e d by [ U n i v e r s it e D e P a r i s 1 ] a t 18 : 06 21 M a y 20 1 3 blocked or fail to find creative ideas during incubation . At this point of frustration one can either start over and fall into the same traps , accept a less - than - optimal so - lution ( perhaps rationalizing that it is creative ) , or push ahead , exploring further alternatives or moving in a new direction , perhaps reconceptualizing the problem . Thus , the point of creative frustration involves making a decision on how to deal with difficulties encountered during problem solving . The nature of incubation—a period during which a problem is “put aside” often due to an impasse in prob - lem solving—has also been explored ( Guilford , 1979 ; Smith & Dodds , 1999 ) . Incubation may involve auto - matic spreading of activation in memory , passive for - getting of problem details or entrenched ideas that do not work , broad attention and use of serendipitous cues from the environment , or associative thinking through a random or directed combination process ( Ochse , 1990 ; Olton , 1979 ; Smith & Dodds , 1999 ) . Concerning the final part of the creative process , some authors have proposed an implementation phase or communication phase in which the creative production is presented in a social environment ( Amabile , 1996 ; Stein , 1974 ) . Moving Away From the Basic Four - Stage Model Eindhoven and Vinacke ( 1952 ) criticized Wallas’s ( 1926 ) conceptionofthecreativeprocess . Intheirstudy , artists and nonartists were observed while producing a picture that illustrated a poem presented at the begin - ning of the study . Indexes such as the amount of time spent reading the poem , time spent formulating the ini - tial picture , and the number of different sketches made were noted . Participants completed their pictures over several sessions of work and recorded their thoughts or sketches between sessions in a notebook . Eindhoven andVinackefoundnoevidencesupportingfourdiscretestagesinthecreativeprocess ; they described the cre - ativeprocessasadynamicblendofprocessesthatco - oc - cur , in a recursive way throughout the work . In addition , the creative process varied from one individual to an - other . Patrick’s ( 1935 , 1937 , 1938 ) earlier studies , which supported the four - stage model , can be criticized on several points ( Bailin , 1988 ; Eindhoven & Vinacke , 1952 ; Vinacke , 1952 ; Weisberg , 1986 ) . Patrick’s obser - vations may have been biased by an a priori theoretical conception of the four - stages and her specific operationalizationofWallas’sstageswasdebatable . For example , preparation was noted when thought changes led to new sentences in participants’think - aloud proto - cols , incubation was noted when a person returned to an idea that had been mentioned earlier in his or her work , and illumination was defined as the moment when the basicideaforapainting , poem , orscientificproblemso - lution was first formulated . Patrick’s division of each protocolintofourequalsectionscanalsobecriticized . After analyzing descriptions of the creative process by contemporary novelists , Ghiselin ( 1952 / 1985 , 1956 , 1963 ) rejected“superficial”stage - baseddescriptionsof the creative process , favoring an integrated approach . Thismorecomplexviewofthecreativeprocesshasbeen evokedinanumberofotherstudies . Forexample , Doyle ( 1998 ) , basedoninterviewsoffictionwriters , described the creative process of writing fiction as beginning with a “seed incident” that interests or provokes an author , which is followed by “navigating” between different “spheresofexperience”todevelopastory ( e . g . , moving betweenafictionalsphere , thewrittenwork , andarevis - ing mode ) . Studies of the creative process in art through introspection , interviews , observations , and examina - tions of sketchbooks and finished works show that the creativeprocessinvolvesaseriesofhigh - speedshortin - teractions between productive and critical modes of thinking , as well as planning and compensatory actions ( Israeli , 1962 , 1981 ) . Based on interviews with artists , Calwelti , Rappaport , and Wood ( 1992 ) found evidence for the simultaneity of processes such as centering on a topic , working on new ideas , expanding ideas , evaluat - ing , andtakingdistancefromone’swork . InGetzelsand Csikszentmihalyi’s ( 1976 ) seminalstudyofartstudents makingastill - lifedrawing , activitiesinvolvedinformu - lating or defining the artistic problem were observed both in the predrawing phase and the drawing produc - tion phase . Getzels and Csikszentmihalyi noted , “In a creative process , stages of problem definition and prob - lem solution need not be compartmentalized” ( p . 90 ) . Finally , through protocol analysis of the sketching pro - cess in architectural designers , an overall conception of an architectural design emerged in which new designs were formed in parts with deletions , transformations , a dialectic movement between general design qualities and issues in the specific task , and moments of active sketching mixed with moments of contemplation ( Goldschmidt , 1991 ) . Thesestudiessuggestthatthebasicfour - stagemodel of the creative process may need to be revised or re - 298 Creativity Research Journal T . I . Lubart D o w n l o a d e d by [ U n i v e r s it e D e P a r i s 1 ] a t 18 : 06 21 M a y 20 1 3 placed . In Guilford’s ( 1950 ) address we can see the be - ginningofanewlineofworkonthecreativeprocess : re - search on key processes that are involved in creative thinking . Forexample , Guilfordnoted , “Itisnotincuba - tion itself that we find of great interest . It is the nature of theprocessesthatoccurduringthelatentperiodofincu - bation , as well as before it and after it” ( p . 451 ) . These processes may include problem definition and redefini - tion , divergentthinking , synthesis , reorganization , anal - ysis , and evaluation ( Guilford , 1950 , 1967 ) . Thus , ac - cording to Guilford ( 1950 ) , the creative process may be effectively studied , at least for a start , by examining the subprocesses that play a role in creative work . Multiple Subprocesses Involved in Creativity During the past 50 years , a large number of studies haveexploredthenatureofthesubprocessesinvolvedincreativity ( Lubart , 1994a ; Ochse , 1990 ; Sternberg , 1999 ; Sternberg & Lubart , 1995 ) . Forexample , problem finding , problemformulation , andproblemredefinition processes have been extensively investigated ( Getzels & Csikszentmuhalyi , 1976 ; Jay & Perkins , 1997 ; Mumford , Baughman , Threlfall , Supinski , & Costanza , 1996 ; Reiter - Palmon , Mumford , O’Connor Boes , & Runco , 1997 ; Runco , 1994 ; Smilansky , 1984 ) . Diver - gent thinking—the process of generating many alterna - tive ideas—has been another key topic in the creativity literature ( e . g . , Guilford , 1967 ; Khandwalla , 1993 ; Runco , 1991 ) . Concerningthesynthesisorcombination of information , there has been research on several pro - cesses such as bisociation ( Koestler , 1964 ) , Janusian thinking ( Rothenberg , 1979 , 1996 ) , homospatial think - ing ( Rothenberg , 1979 , 1986 ) , articulation ( Rothenberg , 1979 ) , analogy and metaphor ( Ward , Smith , & Vaid , 1997 ; Weisberg , 1993 ) , remote associa - tion ( Mednick , 1962 ) , emotional resonance ( Lubart & Getz , 1997 ) , and feature mapping ( Baughman & Mumford , 1995 ; Boden , 1992 ; Mumford , Baughman , Maher , Costanza , & Supinski , 1997 ) . The process of forming idea combinations through random or chance - based processes has also been developed ( Campbell , 1960 ; Simonton , 1988 ) . Furthermore , the process of reorganizing information as part of creative thinking has been studied , with special attention to pro - cesses involved in insight ( Baughman & Mumford , 1995 ; Sternberg & Davidson , 1995 ) . In terms of ana - lytic - evaluative processes , work has been conducted on artistic , literary , and organizational problem solving ( Basadur , 1995 ; Houtz , Montgomery , Kirkpatrick , & Feldhusen , 1979 ; Lubart , 1994b ; Mumford , Supinski , Threlfall , & Baughman , 1996 ; Osborn , 1953 ; Perkins , 1981 ) . Othersubprocesseshypothesizedtoplayarolein creativity have also been investigated , such as percep - tion and information encoding ( Mumford , Baughman , Supinski , & Maher , 1996 ; Smith & Carlsson , 1990 ) , us - ing heuristics ( Langley , Simon , Bradshaw , & Zytkow , 1987 ) and the process of forgetting , which has been found to play a role in changing one’s approach to a problemandovercominginitialmentalblocks ( Smith & Dodds , 1999 ) . Some authors have proposed creative process mod - els that organize the subprocesses involved . For exam - ple , Mumford , Mobley , Uhlman , Reiter - Palmon , and Doares ( 1991 ) specified a set of core processes for cre - ativitythatoperateoninformationorganizedincategor - ical structures . These processes , which occur in the fol - lowing loosely structured sequence , are problem construction , information encoding ( and retrieval ) , cat - egory search ( specifying relevant information schemas ) , specification of best fitting categories , com - bination and reorganization of category information to find new solutions , idea evaluation , implementation of ideas , andmonitoring . Themodelisdynamicandallows for cycling between different processes as deemed nec - essary during problem solving . The core processes for creativity are themselves complex and involve more specific processes . For example , combination and reor - ganization involve reasoning , analogy use , and diver - gent thinking processes . Mumford and his colleagues examinedseveraloftheproposedprocessesinaseriesof studies and showed that beyond general ability mea - sures ( e . g . , grade point average , Scholastic Assessment Test scores , divergent thinking ) , different processes mentioned here ( problem construction , information en - coding , category selection , and category combination ) explained variance in creative performance on prob - lem - solving tasks concerning advertising and manage - rial or public policy issues ( Mumford , Supinski , Baughman , Costanza , & Threlfall , 1997 ) . Focusing on two sets of creative processes , Finke , Ward , and Smith ( 1992 ) advanced the geneplore model , in which creativity involves generative and ex - ploratory processes . The generative processes concern the construction of loosely formulated ideas called preinventive structures . Generative processes include Creativity Research Journal 299 Models of the Creative Process : Past , Present and Future D o w n l o a d e d by [ U n i v e r s it e D e P a r i s 1 ] a t 18 : 06 21 M a y 20 1 3 knowledge retrieval , idea association , synthesis , trans - formation , and analogical transfer . The exploratory processes concern the examination , elaboration , and testing of the preinventive structures . Exploratory pro - cesses include interpretation of preinventive structures , hypothesis testing , and searching for limitations . These two sets of processes are combined together in cyclical sequences that lead to creative products . Other diverse proposals about the creative process have focused on the processes of idea generation and idea evaluation ( e . g . , Hitt , 1965 , Runco , in press ) . Basadur ( 1995 ) characterized creative problem solving in terms of ideation – evaluation cycles that vary in their frequency according to the nature of the problem to be solved and the point in problem solving ( e . g . , at the be - ginningvs . inafinalimplementationphase ) . Runcoand Chand ( 1995 ) proposed that ideation and evaluation to - gether with problem finding are the primary compo - nentsofthecreativeprocess ; knowledgeandmotivation influence these processes . In the psychodynamic ap - proach to the creative process , primary and secondary processes and their interaction are discussed ( Kris , 1952 ; Kubie , 1958 ; Suler , 1980 ) . The primary process operates on unstructured , illogical , subjective thoughts and yields ideational material that is then shaped by the reality - based , controlled , evaluativesecondaryprocess . In the chance - based theories of the creative process , thereisaprocessofideaformationthroughrandomvari - ationsandcombinationsandaprocessofevaluationthatleadstoselectiveretentionofthebestideas ( Campbell , 1960 ; Simonton , 1988 ) . Some models that initially proposed a stage - based view of the creative process have been revised , reflect - ing more emphasis on subprocesses . For example , the creative problem solving framework , which developed from Osborn’s ( 1953 ) work , proposed a stage - based view of the creative process ( Isaksen & Treffinger , 1985 ; Parnes , 1967 ) . However , a recent reformulation of the model moves away from the idea of a fixed se - quence of activities in favor of three sets of processes ( Treffinger , 1995 ) . These are understanding the prob - lem , generating ideas , and planning for action . Under - standing the problem includes the processes of mess finding , data finding ( which includes information search ) , and problem finding ( which involves generat - ing many possible questions and then focusing ) . Gen - erating ideas is concerned with idea finding through di - vergent thinking , elaboration of ideas , and convergent thinking with evaluation of ideas . Planning for action concerns developing and implementing ideas through solution finding ( evaluating , selecting , and refining op - tions ) and acceptance finding ( promoting an idea , seeking support , and noting resistance ) . Within each set of processes , both divergent and convergent think - ing play a role . The sequence in which these processes occur can vary across problem tasks or problem solv - ers . For example , processes involved in understanding the problem may be invoked toward the start of prob - lem solving , after initial attempts to generate solutions , or after attempts to implement a potential solution . Finally , is interesting to note that Guilford ( 1967 ) proposed a model of problem solving that addressed creativeproduction ( Michael , 1999 ; seealsoMerrifield , Guilford , Christensen , & Frick , 1962 ) . Based on his structure of intellect framework , Guilford’s model con - sisted of an initial stage of filtering ( attention aroused anddirected ) , astageofcognition ( theproblemissensed and structured ) , a stage of production ( ideas are gener - ated with divergent and convergent thinking involved ) , with , eventually , another stage of cognition ( new infor - mation is obtained ) followed by another stage of pro - duction , inacyclethatcancontinueuntilthetaskiscom - pleted . A process of evaluation is hypothesized to occur betweeneachofthestagesjustdescribed . Theprocesses operate on information coming from both internal and external sources . There is a hypothesized progression between the stages , as well as some flexibility on the or - derofthestagesandthepossibilitytocycleseveraltimesthroughasubsetofstages . Problem solving may termi - nate at several points in the model : ( a ) early on the prob - lem may be rejected , or deemed unimportant ; ( b ) after someworktheproblemmaybedroppedbecauseitisun - solvable ; or ( c ) workontheproblemmaybepostponed , which allows for incubation ( drawing on subprocesses suchasthetransformationofinformationduetointerac - tions between stored knowledge and new information from the external world ; Guilford , 1979 ) . Finally , work will stop once a satisfying solution is obtained . This model seems to represent a blend between the earlier stage models of the creative process and the view that emphasizes subprocesses . Moving Toward a New Conception of the Creative Process After examining the work on the four - stage model , revisions of this model , subprocesses involved in the 300 Creativity Research Journal T . I . Lubart D o w n l o a d e d by [ U n i v e r s it e D e P a r i s 1 ] a t 18 : 06 21 M a y 20 1 3 creative act , and theories of the creative process based on groups of subprocesses , several key questions about the creative process remain . The first and perhaps most fundamental question is what makes the creative pro - cess creative . In the following section , I examine possi - ble responses to this question , drawing on existing the - oretical proposals and relevant empirical evidence . Then , further questions about the creative process are raised , such as whether the creative process is domain or task specific . What Makes the Creative Process Creative ? Does the problem - solving process that leads to cre - ative results differ from the process that leads to noncreative , run - of - the - mill results ? If so , how does it differ ? One response to these questions involves postu - lating qualitatively different process models , one for creative work and another for noncreative work . If there is such a dichotomy , then a subsidiary question can be raised : Within the creative process , how can we account for different levels of creativity ( from highly creative to minimally creative ) ? Perhaps the creative process itself comes in two varieties : the creative pro - cess that leads to eminent work and the creative pro - cess that leads to more “everyday” levels of creativity . A second possible response to the question of how the creative and noncreative processes differ focuses on a continuum rather than a dichotomy . A single basic process may yield highly creative , moderately creative , slightly creative , and noncreative productions . The dif - ferences in the outcome arise by varying certain pro - cess - relevant parameters ( e . g . , the time spent on a par - ticular subprocess ) . This kind of model would parsimoniously account for a range of differences in the creativity of the final production . A third response is that there is no specifically pro - cess - related difference between creative and noncreative work . The same sequence of thoughts and actions can lead to more or less creative or noncreative outcomes . What is important for creative work is the quality of the material ( e . g . , knowledge ) used in each part of the process . Metaphorically , the engine is the same but some people use better grade fuel than others . Given these alternatives , it is interesting to return first to the classic four - stage model of the creative pro - cess to see how it can be positioned . An examination of the literature reveals that proponents of the four - stage model have not taken a clear stand on the fundamental issues raised here . In fact , the four - stage model can fit with each of the previously evoked views . The four - stage model can fit with a dichotomy between the creative and noncreative process ; a certain stage of the process , such as incubation , may be present in the cre - ative process and absent from the noncreative process . Alternatively , the four - stage model can fit with the “continuum” view . For example , the four stages may always be present but more time is spent on a certain stage in the creative process than in the less creative or noncreative process . Another possibility is that the stages are sequenced differently during creative , less creative , and noncreative problem solving ; however , this possibility does not fit easily within the four - stage model . Finally , the creative and noncreative processes may involve the same four stages , in the same se - quence , with the same time devoted to each stage , with the only difference being the quality with which each stage is executed . Thus creative productions would re - sult from preparing well , incubating effectively , and verifying well the quality of one’s ideas . In this vein , Taylor ( 1959 ) suggested that ’during the incubation stage , experiences mill and flow freely about for the highly creative person … [ whereas ] for the non - cre - ative person it is merely a matter of sorting experiences into tight , comfortable mental compartments” ( p . 64 ) . Similar propositions could be formulated concern - ing a creative process composed of an array of subprocesses . Ifwetakethe“specialprocess”view , cer - tain subprocesses essential for creativity may be absent fromlesscreativeornoncreativework . Forexample , the creative process may involve bisociation or Janusian thinking , whereas the noncreative process does not . Al - ternatively , if we take the “continuum” view , certain subprocesses may be used more frequently or for a lon - ger time in the creative process as compared to the less creative or noncreative processes ( or , inversely , some subprocesses may be used less frequently in the highly creative process than in the less creative process ) . For example , creative work may involve frequent episodes of divergent thinking , which help to increase the variety of considered ideas . Another possibility is that the cre - ative , less creative , and noncreative work involve the same subprocesses used with the same frequency but these processes are combined in different sequences . Thuscreativeworkmayproceedbyasearchforrelevant information followed by a clear definition of the prob - Creativity Research Journal 301 Models of the Creative Process : Past , Present and Future D o w n l o a d e d by [ U n i v e r s it e D e P a r i s 1 ] a t 18 : 06 21 M a y 20 1 3 lem to be solved , whereas less creative or noncreative work begins with clearly defining the problem ( Jay & Perkins , 1997 ) . Osborn ( 1953 ) proposed that one of the hallmarks of the creative process is deferred judgment because early evaluation can kill new ideas that need timetodevelopandbeelaborated . Thusthecreativepro - cess may be characterized by avoiding evaluation early in the problem - solving process . Finally , the hypothesis can be advanced that the creativity of the outcome of problem solving depends simply on the quality with which each subprocess is executed ( see Newell , Shaw , & Simon , 1962 ; Weisberg , 1986 , 1993 ) . Existing Theoretical Proposals There is relatively little work that addresses specifi - cally how the creative process as a whole differs from the noncreative or less creative processes . Guilford ( 1967 ) was , for example , rather vague on this point , claiming that “there is something creative about all genuine problem solving” ( p . 312 ) . His model did not , however , specify whether certain subprocesses were present in highly creative problem solving and absent or reduced in less creative problem solving , whether the sequence of subprocesses differed , whether the skill with which each subprocess was accomplished differed , or whether a combination of these led to dif - ferences in the creativity of the problem solution . From the earliest models of problem solving the specificity of creative work has been unclear . Dewey’s ( 1910 ) model , comprising stages of perceiving a difficulty , lo - cating or defining the problem , suggesting possible so - lutions , elaborating implications of these solutions , and testing the validity of the solutions , is often cited as an early model of the creative process even though it was meant to describe problem solving in general . In terms of more recent theoretical proposals , Amabile’s ( 1996 ) componentialmodelaccountsfordif - ferences in the level of creative productions through in - dividual differences in task motivation ( interest and commitment to the task ) , domain - relevant skills ( knowledge , technical skills ) , and creativity - relevant processes ( ability to break mental sets , heuristics for idea generation ) . These three components may influ - ence the quality with which a particular process stage is accomplished or perhaps the time devoted to a certain stage of problem solving . For example , task motivation ( especially intrinsic motivation ) influences particularly the problem identification and response - generation phases , domain - relevantskillsinfluencethepreparation and response - validation phases , and creativity - relevant processes influence the response - generation phase . Amabile indicated also how her model can account for bothheuristictasks , inwhichthepathtoasolutionisun - known , and algorithmic tasks , for which there is a known sequence of operations that will solve the prob - lem . During the preparation stage a person may identify analgorithmthatcansolvetheproblem ( availableinthe person’s domain - relevant skills ) ; this algorithmic pro - cedure then will be applied during the response - genera - tion phase , without any exploration of other possible pathways . Thus , the response - generation phase is re - ducedinnoncreativeworktotheroteexecutionofapre - existing algorithm . Mumford et al . ( 1991 ) indicated that the creative problem solving process and the standard , noncreative process differ in four main ways . First , creative prob - lem solving involves ill - defined problems more than routine problem solving . This places an emphasis on the problem - construction phase in creative work . Sec - ond , in the creative process people must generate new , alternative solutions that involve divergent and conver - gent thinking . In routine problem solving , people ap - ply previously acquired procedures , search for ready - made solutions , and tend to satisfice , all of which involve mainly convergent thinking ( see also Mayer , 1999 ) . Third , the creative process involves ac - tive , attention - demanding processing with multiple cy - cles of divergent and convergent thought , whereas the standard process proceeds in an additive fashion , with more direct activation , generation , and application . Fourth , in the creative process information from exist - ing category structures is combined or reorganized . In standard problem solving , information is recalled and understood using existing category structures . Thus the core processes of combination and reorganization of category information as well as problem construction differentiate creative and standard problem solving . Within the creative process , different levels of creativ - ity result , in part , from the skill or quality with which each of the involved subprocesses is executed . Empirical Evidence Somerecentstudiescanbehighlightedwithregardto empirical work on the potentially special nature of the 302 Creativity Research Journal T . I . Lubart D o w n l o a d e d by [ U n i v e r s it e D e P a r i s 1 ] a t 18 : 06 21 M a y 20 1 3 creative process . Weisberg ( 1986 , 1993 ) , for example , explored the nature of the creative process , drawing on introspective reports , laboratory experiments , and case studiesofartists , scientists , andinventors . Hefoundthat creative productions can be explained using relatively ordinary cognitive processes , such as analogical think - ing . It seems that even great works such as Calder’s mo - biles , Watson and Crick’s discovery of DNA , and the Wright brothers’first airplane involve a series of small steps , none of which require some special process . Insomestudiesthecreativeprocesswasobservedus - ing specific laboratory tasks . For example , in a study that was briefly mentioned earlier , Getzels and Csikszentmihalyi ( 1976 ) observed art students as they made a drawing based on a set of objects that were pro - vided ( e . g . , a mannequin , a book , a hat , a glass prism ) . The number of objects manipulated , exploration of the objects , andtheunusualnessoftheobjectsselectedwere noted as indexes of the problem - finding process in the predrawing phase of work . Once the drawing began , photographsoftheworkinprogressweretakentodeter - minewhentheessentialstructureofthedrawingbecame clear . Changes in the still - life composition and further exploration of the objects were noted . A panel of expert judges rated the originality of the drawings . Originality ratings correlated positively with most of the indexes of problem finding . For example , in the predrawing phase , the number of objects manipulated and the extent to which each object was explored in detail correlated sig - nificantly ( r > . 50 ) with originality . Significant positive correlations were also observed between problem for - mulation behaviors during the drawing phase and origi - nality of the final product . Given the nature of the draw - ing task , all the art students had to handle the objects to set up their still - life composition . However , some stu - dents manipulated only a few objects and did not exam - ine these in detail , whereas other students explored in detailmanyoftheproposedobjects . Furthermore , some students reengaged the problem - finding process after beginning to draw the still - life composition that they had arranged . Thus differences in the quality and quan - tity of problem finding , as well as when it occurred dur - ing the drawing task , influenced originality . Using a think - aloud methodology , Goor and Sommerfeld ( 1975 ) examined differences in the subprocesses used by creative and noncreative students who were preselected based on performance on diver - gent thinking tasks . The students thought aloud while solving three insight - type problems ( making four trian - gles with six matches , killing a tumor without destroy - ing healthy cells , a problem concerning the selection of colored pebbles by chance ) . Problem - solving protocols were divided into brief intervals and seven categories of verbalbehaviorswerenoted ( e . g . , generatingnewinfor - mation or hypotheses , self - reference or self - criticism , silence ) . Thehighlycreativegroupspentmoretimethan thelesscreativegroupongeneratingnewinformationor hypotheses , working on these hypotheses , and self - ref - erence or self - criticism . There were also some group differences on the sequences of activities . For example , following self - reference or self - criticism , the highly creativegrouptendedtoengageingeneratingnewinfor - mation or developing hypotheses , whereas the less cre - ative group entered a period of silence . Other pro - cess - related differences were noted that depended on the specific task . Although the criterion for identifying highandlowcreativegroupsaswellasthechoiceofcre - ative performance tasks may be criticized , this study il - lustrates a direction that further research on the creative process may pursue . Finally , using an experimental methodology , Lubart ( 1994b ) studied the role of idea evaluation during the creative process . University students composed short stories and made still - life drawings , which were judged for creativity by graduate - level teaching assis - tants in , respectively , literary composition or studio art . During task production , students were instructed to evaluate their work in progress . The moment when the evaluations occurred , the number of evaluations , and the way that evaluations were prompted were system - atically varied . For the writing task , the results showed that participants who evaluated their ideas early in their work tended to have higher mean creativity than those who evaluated relatively later in their work or distrib - uted their evaluations throughout the work . The early - evaluation group showed significantly higher creativity than a control group that was not prompted explicitly to evaluate . These results were replicated , in general , across different instructional methods for prompting evaluation and with a different story com - position task . For the drawing task , no clear effect of the timing of evaluations was found . For both tasks , no effect of the quantity of evaluations was observed . Ac - knowledging that the experimental conditions used in this study may have influenced the creative process , the findings suggest that relatively early autoevaluations of one’s story in progress led to higher creativity than did evaluations conducted at other mo - Creativity Research Journal 303 Models of the Creative Process : Past , Present and Future D o w n l o a d e d by [ U n i v e r s it e D e P a r i s 1 ] a t 18 : 06 21 M a y 20 1 3 ments . Thus , the timing of the evaluation subprocess during short - story writing seemed to have an effect on the creativity of the final production . Further Questions About the Creative Process In addition to the questions raised earlier about the basic nature of the creative process , several other ques - tions can be raised . For example , to what extent is the creative process recursive ? A number of authors , in both theoretical and empirical reports , have noted that the subprocesses involved in creativity recur over and over in complex sequences ( Eindhoven & Vinacke , 1952 ; Mumford et al . , 1991 ; Runco , 1994 ) . For exam - ple , problem definition may occur at the beginning of one’s work and recur in the middle of problem solving when inconsistencies in one’s problem representation prevent further progress ( Dudek & Côté , 1994 ; Jay & Perkins , 1997 ) . There is potentially an interaction be - tween initial ideas and the developing work that is sometimes referred to as a dynamic , evolving process rather than a static process in which one step follows another toward problem solution . Several authors have also proposed a recursive application of idea genera - tion and idea evaluation in cyclic , dynamic sequences . Assuming that recursion does occur in the creative pro - cess , the key question is how exactly this recursion is organized . What provokes recursion ? What metacognitive functions control the choice of certain subprocesses and their recursive application ? In gen - eral , due to the number of subprocesses potentially in - volved in creative work and the possibility of re - cursion , existing process models seem underspecified and , hence , difficult to test empirically . Several other questions concern the generality of the creative process . Does the creative process vary ac - cording to the nature of the task ? Is there a creative pro - cess for work in the visual arts that differs from the cre - ative process involved in literary or scientific work ? Some models of the creative process for specific types of work have been formulated . For scientific creativity , Busse and Mansfield ( 1980 ) proposed the stages of ( a ) selecting a problem to solve among several possible problems , ( b ) engaging in efforts to solve the problem , ( c ) setting constraints on the problem solution , ( d ) changing the constraints and restructuring the problem ( which if successful leads to an illumination ) , and ( e ) verifying and elaborating the proposed solution . Nemiro ( 1997 ) explored the creative process in actors , linking general preparation , rehearsal , and perfor - mance activities to the stages described in Amabile’s ( 1996 ) model . Sapp ( 1995 ) proposed a process model for artistic creativity based on the general creative problem - solving model developed by Osborn , Parnes , Isaksen , and Treffinger ( see Treffinger , 1995 ) . Some authors have , furthermore , proposed that the nature it - self of a given subprocess involved in the creative pro - cess may differ according to the domain of work . For example , Dudek and Côté ( 1994 ) characterized prob - lem finding in art as an internally oriented effort to come to terms with a topic , express one’s emotions , point to a new social reality , or externalize an inner state . Problem finding in science , in contrast , has been characterized as discovering gaps or discrepancies in existing knowledge , sensing difficulties when one’s expectations are not met , when observations do not match with an existing mental model of a phenomenon ( Ochse , 1990 ) . Thus , the subprocess of problem find - ing may be quite different depending on the kind of task . Other differences between tasks may also lead to differences in the creative process . For example , there may be a difference between the creative process in - volved in online productions , such as acting or playing improvisational jazz , and offline productions , such as writing a script for a play or composing a symphony ( see Nemiro , 1997 ; Sawyer , 1992 ) . There may also be different creative processes for tasks in the same do - main of work , such as writing a novel and writing a short story or writing a haiku and writing a sonnet . Related to the generality of the creative process is the question of whether there is one generic process model that fits everyone . In fact , nearly all the work on the creative process has sought the model , or , a small set of domain - specific models . A growing body of work in cognitive psychology suggests that there are often several valid paths for solving both simple and complex cognitive tasks ( Reuchlin , 1999 ) . In this vein , there may be several paths that lead to a creative pro - duction . We may find , for example , that an individual could sequence the subprocesses for creativity in sev - eral different ways . Certain sequences would lead to a highly creative product . A great number of other possi - ble sequences would lead to less creative or noncreative productions . Thus , we may learn a great deal more about the creative process by studying 304 Creativity Research Journal T . I . Lubart D o w n l o a d e d by [ U n i v e r s it e D e P a r i s 1 ] a t 18 : 06 21 M a y 20 1 3 intraindividual and interindividual variability in the creative process while holding constant the creative level of the final product . A final set of questions that could be posed about the creative process concerns the articulation between the sequence of activities that leads to a final product and person - centered or context - centered variables . For example , how does a person’s level of perseverance or intrinsic motivation impact on the creative process ? Does motivation enhance the use of certain creative subprocesses or influence more fundamentally which subprocesses are used altogether ? Does the nature of creative process differ if one is a novice or expert in a task domain ? Do contextual variables such as time pressure , external evaluation , or competition lead to modifications in the creative process ? Therehasbeensomeresearchonthesequestions . For example , comparisons between the creative process of artists and nonartists in a painting task indicated quanti - tative and qualitative differences in some studies , such as artists spending more time on planning their painting than nonartists ( Eindhoven & Vinacke , 1952 ; Patrick , 1935 , 1937 ) . In one study , Kay ( 1991 ) found that nonartists , semiprofessional artists , and professional artistsdifferedoncertainprocess - relatedvariablessuch as time spent exploring and arranging elements of artis - ticpuzzle - liketasks . Theseresultssuggestthatthesame task may involve problem - finding processes for some people ( semiprofessional artists ) and not for others ( professionalswhohaveanartisticvisionalreadydevel - oped that can be applied to open - ended tasks ) . A related study by Rostan ( 1994 ) suggests that the relation be - tween variables such as the time spent in problem - find - ing activities and expertise level may vary also with the specific task employed . Finally , Mumford et al . ( 1991 ) suggested that the use of subprocesses involved in cre - ativity may be limited by the quality of the information on which these processes can draw . Thus it is clear that thestudiesofthecreativeprocessmusttakeintoaccountthequalityofthecognitiverawmaterialsthatareavail - able as well as the process itself . Conclusion There has been notable progress during the past half - century in specifying the subprocesses involved in the creative process . However , in terms of a compre - hensive understanding of the creative process , there are good reasons to echo Guilford’s ( 1950 ) discontent . Theories of the creative process need to specify in much greater detail how the subprocesses can be se - quenced to yield creative productions . This issue should be central to any model of the creative process . Furthermore , the ways in which such models account for differences in creativity and distinguish between creative and noncreative work are essential . Variations on a modal creative process depending on the domain of the work or characteristics of the individual need also to be considered in both theoretical and empirical work . A revised , enhanced perspective on the creative process will have implications for practical issues such as creativity training and the identification of creative people . For both of these issues , the subprocesses in - volved in creativity as well as the ways that these subprocesses can be best used together , which may vary with the nature of the problem - solving task , need to be taken into account . Creativity training or selec - tion procedures may not be effective , according to the current view , if people master specific skills but do not know how to combine these when working on a task . References Amabile , T . M . ( 1988 ) . A model of creativity and innovation in orga - nizations . Research in Organizational Behavior , 10 , 123 – 167 . Amabile , T . M . ( 1996 ) . Creativityincontext . Boulder , CO : Westview . Bailin , S . ( 1988 ) . Achievingextraordinaryends : Anessayoncreativ - ity . Boston : Kluwer Academic . Basadur , M . ( 1995 ) . Optimal ideation - evaluation ratios . Creativity Research Journal , 8 , 63 – 75 . Baughman , W . A . , & Mumford , M . D . ( 1995 ) . Process - analytic models of creative capacities : Operations influencing the com - bination - and - reorganization process . Creativity Research Jour - nal , 8 , 37 – 62 . Boden , M . ( 1992 ) . The creative mind : Myths and mechanisms . New York : Basic Books . Busse , T . V . , & Mansfield , R . S . ( 1980 ) . Theories of the creative pro - cess : A review and a perspective . Journal of Creative Behavior , 14 , 91 – 103 , 132 . Cagle , M . ( 1985 ) . A general abstract – concrete model of creative thinking . Journal of Creative Behavior , 19 , 104 – 109 . Calwelti , S . , Rappaport , A . , & Wood , B . ( 1992 ) . Modeling artistic creativity : An empirical study . Journal of Creative Behavior , 26 , 83 – 94 . Campbell , D . T . ( 1960 ) . Blind variation and selective retention in creative thought as in other knowledge processes . Psychologi - cal Review , 67 , 380 – 400 . Dewey , J . ( 1910 ) . How we think . New York : Heath . Doyle , C . L . ( 1998 ) . Thewritertells : Thecreativeprocessinthewrit - ing of literary fiction . Creativity Research Journal , 11 , 29 – 37 . Creativity Research Journal 305 Models of the Creative Process : Past , Present and Future D o w n l o a d e d by [ U n i v e r s it e D e P a r i s 1 ] a t 18 : 06 21 M a y 20 1 3 Dudek , S . , & Côté , R . ( 1994 ) . Problem finding revisited . In M . A . Runco ( Ed . ) , Problem finding , problem solving , and creativity ( pp . 130 – 150 ) . Norwood , NJ : Ablex . Eindhoven , J . E . , & Vinacke , W . E . ( 1952 ) . Creative processes in painting . Journal of General Psychology , 47 , 165 – 179 . Einstein , A . , & Infeld , L . ( 1938 ) . The evolution of physics . New York : Simon & Schuster . Finke , R . A . , Ward , T . B . , & Smith , S . M . ( 1992 ) . Creativecognition : Theory , research , and applications . Cambridge , MA : MIT Press . Getzels , J . , & Csikszentmihalyi , M . ( 1976 ) . The creative vision : A longitudinal study of problem finding in art . New York : Wiley Interscience . Ghiselin , B . ( 1956 ) . The creative process and its relation to the iden - tificationofcreativetalent . InC . W . Taylor ( Ed . ) , The1955Uni - versity of Utah research conference on the identification of cre - ative scientific talent ( pp . 195 – 203 ) . Salt Lake City : University of Utah Press . Ghiselin , B . ( 1963 ) . Automatism , intention , and autonomy in the novelist’s production . Daedalus , 92 , 297 – 311 . Ghiselin , B . ( Ed . ) . ( 1985 ) . The creative process : A symposium . Berkeley : University of California Press . ( Original work pub - lished 1952 ) Glover , J . A . ( 1979 ) . Levelsofquestionsaskedininterviewandread - ing sessions by creative and relatively non - creative college stu - dents . Journal of Genetic Psychology , 135 , 103 – 108 . Goldschmidt , G . ( 1991 ) . The dialectics of sketching . Creativity Re - search Journal , 4 , 123 – 143 . Goleman , D . , Kaufman , P . , & Ray , M . ( 1992 ) . The creative spirit . New York : Plume . Goor , A . , & Sommerfeld , R . E . ( 1975 ) . A comparison of prob - lem - solving processes of creative students and noncreative stu - dents . Journal of Educational Psychology , 67 , 495 – 505 . Goswami , A . ( 1996 ) . Creativity and the quantum : A unified theory of creativity . Creativity Research Journal , 9 , 47 – 61 . Guilford , J . P . ( 1950 ) . Creativity . AmericanPsychologist , 5 , 444 – 454 . Guilford , J . P . ( 1967 ) . The nature of human intelligence . New York : McGraw - Hill . Guilford , J . P . ( 1979 ) . Some incubated thoughts on incubation . Jour - nal of Creative Behavior , 13 , 1 – 8 . Gustafson , R . , & Norlander , T . ( 1994 ) . Effects of alcohol on persis - tent effort and deductive thinking during the preparation phase of the creative process . Journal of Creative Behavior , 28 , 124 – 132 . Hadamard , J . ( 1945 ) . An essay on the psychology of invention in the mathematical field . Princeton , NJ : Princeton University Press . Hitt , W . D . ( 1965 ) . Toward a two - factor theory of creativity . Psycho - logical Record , 15 , 127 – 132 . Houtz , J . C . , Montgomery , C . , Kirkpatrick , L . , & Feldhusen , J . F . ( 1979 ) . Relationships among measures of evaluation ability , creative thinking , and intelligence . Contemporary Educational Psychology , 4 , 47 – 54 . Hutchinson , E . D . ( 1949 ) . How to think creatively . New York : Abingdon - Cokesbury . Isaksen , S . G . , & Treffinger , D . J . ( 1985 ) . Creative problem solving : The basic course . Buffalo , NY : Bearly Limited . Israeli , N . ( 1962 ) . Creative processes in painting . Journal of General Psychology , 67 , 251 – 263 . Israeli , N . ( 1981 ) . Decisioninpaintingandsculpture . AcademicPsy - chology Bulletin , 3 , 61 – 74 . Jay , E . S . , & Perkins , D . N . ( 1997 ) . Problem finding : The search for mechanism . In M . A . Runco ( Ed . ) , The creativity research handbook ( Vol . 1 , pp . 257 – 293 ) . Cresskill , NJ : Hampton . Kay , S . ( 1991 ) . The figural problem solving and problem finding of professional and semiprofessional artists and nonartists . Cre - ativity Research Journal , 4 , 233 – 252 . Khandwalla , P . N . ( 1993 ) . An exploratory investigation of divergent thinking through protocol analysis . Creativity Research Jour - nal , 6 , 241 – 259 . Koestler , A . ( 1964 ) . The act of creation . New York : Macmillan . Kris , E . ( 1952 ) . Psychoanalytic exploration in art . New York : Inter - national Universities Press . Kubie , L . S . ( 1958 ) . Neuroticdistortionofthecreativeprocess . Law - rence : University of Kansas Press . Langley , P . , Simon , H . , Bradshaw , G . L . , & Zytkow , J . M . ( 1987 ) . Scientific discovery : Computational explorations of the cre - ative process . Cambridge , MA : MIT Press . Lubart , T . I . ( 1994a ) . Creativity . In R . J . Sternberg ( Ed . ) , Thinking and problem solving ( pp . 289 – 332 ) . New York : Academic . Lubart , T . I . ( 1994b ) . Product - centered self - evaluation and the cre - ative process . Unpublished doctoral dissertation , Yale Univer - sity , New Haven , CT . Lubart , T . I . , & Getz , I . ( 1997 ) . Emotion , metaphor and the creative process . Creativity Research Journal , 10 , 285 – 301 . Mayer , R . ( 1999 ) . Problem solving . In M . A . Runco & S . R . Pritzker ( Eds . ) , Encyclopedia of creativity ( Vol . 2 , pp . 437 – 447 ) . San Diego , CA : Academic . Mednick , S . A . ( 1962 ) . The associative basis of the creative process . Psychological Review , 69 , 220 – 232 . Merrifield , P . R . , Guilford , J . P . , Christensen , P . R . , & Frick , J . W . ( 1962 ) . The role of intellectual factors in problem solving . Psy - chological Monographs , 76 ( 10 ) , 1 – 21 . Michael , W . B . ( 1999 ) . Guilford’s view . In M . A . Runco & S . R . Pritzker ( Eds . ) , Encyclopedia of creativity ( Vol . 1 , pp . 785 – 797 ) . San Diego , CA : Academic . Moriarty , S . E . , & Vandenbergh , B . G . ( 1984 ) . Advertising creatives look at creativity . Journal of Creative Behavior , 18 , 162 – 174 . Mumford , M . D . , Baughman , W . A . , Maher , M . A . , Costanza , D . P . , & Supinski , E . P . ( 1997 ) . Process - based measures of creative problem - solving skills : IV . Category combination . Creativity Research Journal , 10 , 59 – 71 . Mumford , M . D . , Baughman , W . A . , Supinski , E . P . , & Maher , M . A . ( 1996 ) . Process - based measures of creative problem - solving skills : II . Informationencoding . CreativityResearchJournal , 9 , 77 – 88 . Mumford , M . D . , Baughman , W . A . , Threlfall , K . V . , Supinski , E . P . , & Costanza , D . P . ( 1996 ) . Process - based measures of creative problem - solving skills : I . Problem construction . Creativity Re - search Journal , 9 , 63 – 76 . Mumford , M . D . , Mobley , M . I . , Uhlman , C . E . , Reiter - Palmon , R . , & Doares , L . M . ( 1991 ) . Process analytic models of creative capacities . Creativity Research Journal , 4 , 91 – 122 . Mumford , M . D . , Reiter - Palmon , R . , & Redmond , M . R . ( 1994 ) . Problem construction and cognition : Applying problem repre - sentations in ill - defined domains . In M . A . Runco ( Ed . ) , Prob - 306 Creativity Research Journal T . I . Lubart D o w n l o a d e d by [ U n i v e r s it e D e P a r i s 1 ] a t 18 : 06 21 M a y 20 1 3 lem finding , problem solving , and creativity ( pp . 3 – 39 ) . Norwood , NJ : Ablex . Mumford , M . D . , Supinski , E . P . , Baughman , W . A . , Costanza , D . P . , & Threlfall , V . ( 1997 ) . Process - based measures of creative problem - solving skills : V . Overall prediction . Creativity Re - search Journal , 10 , 73 – 85 . Mumford , M . D . , Supinski , E . P . , Threfall , K . V . , & Baughman , W . A . ( 1996 ) . Process - based measures of creative problem - solving skills : III . Category selection . Creativity Research Journal , 9 , 395 – 406 . Nemiro , J . ( 1997 ) . Interpretive artists : A qualitative exploration of the creative process of actors . Creativity Research Journal , 10 , 229 – 239 . Newell , A . , Shaw , J . C . , & Simon , H . A . ( 1962 ) . The processes of creative thinking . In H . Gruber , C . Terrell , & M . Wertheimer ( Eds . ) , Contemporary approaches to creative thinking ( pp . 63 – 119 ) . New York : Atherton . Norlander , T . , & Gustafson , R . ( 1996 ) . Effects of alcohol on scien - tificthoughtduringtheincubationphaseofthecreativeprocess . Journal of Creative Behavior , 30 , 231 – 248 . Norlander , T . , & Gustafson , R . ( 1997 ) . Effects of alcohol on picture drawing during the verification phase of the creative process . Creativity Research Journal , 10 , 355 – 362 . Norlander , T . , & Gustafson , R . ( 1998 ) . Effects of alcohol on a diver - gent figural fluency test during the illumination phase of the creative process . Creativity Research Journal , 11 , 265 – 274 . Ochse , R . ( 1990 ) . Before the gates of excellence : The determinants of creative genius . New York : Cambridge University Press . Olton , R . M . ( 1979 ) . Experimental studies of incubation : Searching for the elusive . Journal of Creative Behavior , 13 , 9 – 22 . Osborn , A . F . ( 1953 ) . Applied imagination . New York : Scribners . Parnes , S . J . ( 1967 ) . Creativebehaviorguidebook . NewYork : Scribners . Patrick , C . ( 1935 ) . Creative thought in poets . Archives of Psychol - ogy , 178 , 1 – 74 . Patrick , C . ( 1937 ) . Creativethoughtinartists . JournalofPsychology , 4 , 35 – 73 . Patrick , C . ( 1938 ) . Scientific thought . Journal of Psychology , 5 , 55 – 83 . Perkins , D . N . ( 1981 ) . The mind’s best work . Cambridge , MA : Har - vard University Press . Poincaré , H . ( 1985 ) . Mathematical creation . In B . Ghiselin ( Ed . ) , The creative process : A symposium ( pp . 22 – 31 ) . Berkeley : Uni - versity of California Press . ( Original work published 1908 ) Reiter - Palmon , R . , Mumford , M . D . , O’Connor Boes , J . , & Runco , M . A . ( 1997 ) . Problem construction and creativity : The role of ability , cue consistency , and active processing . Creativity Re - search Journal , 10 , 9 – 23 . Reuchlin , M . ( 1999 ) . Evolution de la psychologie différentielle [ The evolution of differential psychology ] . Paris : Presses Universitaires de France . Rossman , J . ( 1931 ) . The psychology of the inventor . Washington , DC : Inventors Publishing . Rostan , S . M . ( 1994 ) . Problem finding , problem solving , and cogni - tive controls : An empirical investigation of critically acclaimed productivity . Creativity Research Journal , 7 , 97 – 110 . Rothenberg , A . ( 1979 ) . The emerging goddess : The creative process in art , science and other fields . Chicago : University of Chicago Press . Rothenberg , A . ( 1986 ) . Artistic creation as stimulated by super - im - posed versus combined - composite visual images . Journal of Personality and Social Psychology , 50 , 370 – 381 . Rothenberg , A . ( 1996 ) . The janusian process in scientific creativity . Creativity Research Journal , 9 , 207 – 231 . Runco , M . A . ( 1991 ) . Divergent thinking . Norwood , NJ : Ablex . Runco , M . A . ( Ed . ) . ( 1994 ) . Problem finding , problem solving , and creativity . Norwood , NJ : Ablex . Runco , M . A . ( Ed . ) . ( in press ) . Critical creative processes . Cresskill , NJ : Hampton . Runco , M . A . , & Chand , I . ( 1995 ) . Cognition and creativity . Educa - tional Psychology Review , 7 , 243 – 267 . Runco , M . A . , & Dow , G . ( 1999 ) . Problem finding . In M . A . Runco & S . R . Pritzker ( Eds . ) , Encyclopedia of creativity ( Vol . 2 , pp . 433 – 435 ) . San Diego , CA : Academic . Sapp , D . D . ( 1992 ) . The point of creative frustration and the creative process : A new look at an old model . Journal of Creative Be - havior , 26 , 21 – 28 . Sapp , D . D . ( 1995 ) . Creative problem - solving in art : A model for idea inception and image development . Journal of Creative Be - havior , 29 , 173 – 185 . Sawyer , K . ( 1992 ) . Improvisational creativity : An analysis of jazz performance . Creativity Research Journal , 5 , 253 – 263 . Simonton , D . K . ( 1988 ) . Scientific genius : A psychology of science . New York : Cambridge University Press . Smilansky , J . ( 1984 ) . Problem solving and the quality of invention : Anempiricalinvestigation . JournalofEducationalPsychology , 76 , 377 – 386 . Smith , G . J . W . , & Carlsson , I . M . ( 1990 ) . The creative process : A functional model based on empirical studies from early child - hood to middle age ( Psychological Issues , Monograph No . 57 ) . Madison , CT : International Universities Press . Smith , S . M . , & Dodds , R . A . ( 1999 ) . Incubation . In M . A . Runco & S . R . Pritzker ( Eds . ) , Encyclopedia of creativity ( Vol . 2 , pp . 39 – 43 ) . San Diego , CA : Academic . Stein , M . I . ( 1974 ) . Stimulating creativity : Individual procedures . New York : Academic . Sternberg , R . J . ( Ed . ) . ( 1999 ) . Handbook of creativity . New York : Cambridge University Press . Sternberg , R . J . , & Davidson , J . E . ( Eds . ) . ( 1995 ) . The nature of in - sight . Cambridge , MA : MIT Press . Sternberg , R . J . , & Lubart , T . I . ( 1995 ) . Defying the crowd : Culti - vating creativity in a culture of conformity . New York : Free Press . Suler , J . R . ( 1980 ) . Primary process thinking and creativity . Psycho - logical Bulletin , 88 , 144 – 165 . Taylor , I . A . ( 1959 ) . The nature of the creative process . In P . Smith ( Ed . ) , Creativity : An examination of the creative process ( pp . 51 – 82 ) . New York : Hastings House . Taylor , I . A . , Austin , G . A . , & Sutton , D . F . ( 1974 ) . A note on “in - stant creativity” at CPSI . Journal of Creative Behavior , 8 , 208 – 210 . Treffinger , D . J . ( 1995 ) . Creative problem solving : Overview and ed - ucational implications . Educational Psychology Review , 7 , 301 – 312 . Vinacke , W . E . ( 1952 ) . The psychology of thinking . New York : McGraw - Hill . Wallas , G . ( 1926 ) . The art of thought . New York : Harcourt Brace . Creativity Research Journal 307 Models of the Creative Process : Past , Present and Future D o w n l o a d e d by [ U n i v e r s it e D e P a r i s 1 ] a t 18 : 06 21 M a y 20 1 3 Ward , T . B . , Smith , S . M . , & Vaid , J . ( 1997 ) . Creativethought : Anin - vestigation of conceptual structures and processes . Washing - ton , DC : American Psychological Association . Weisberg , R . W . ( 1986 ) . Creativity : Genius and other myths . New York : Freeman . Weisberg , R . W . ( 1993 ) . Creativity : Beyond the myth of genius . New York : Freeman . 308 Creativity Research Journal T . I . Lubart D o w n l o a d e d by [ U n i v e r s it e D e P a r i s 1 ] a t 18 : 06 21 M a y 20 1 3