ResouRces Research - Technology Management • May—June 2023 | 71 Generative AI Jim euchner Wow ! That was fast ! ChatGPT reached one million users in five days , much faster than any previous online tool . OpenAI . org released ChatGPT to the public in November 2022 , just four months before the writing of this article . In many ways , it seems premature to provide a set of resources for something that is still so new . Yet it is also necessary to do so . ChatGPT and its fellow gener - ative AI applications are already being applied in a dizzying array of applica - tions , so leaders of innovation , R & D , and IT need to engage . I write this with the knowledge that many specific ref - erences in this article will be superseded by newer articles but with the confi - dence that they will help those who are interested to get started . Where to start The best place to start is likely with understanding what generative AI is and what it is not . In brief , generative AI uses a very large corpus of data— text , images , or other labelled data—to create , at the request of users , new ver - sions of text , images , or predicted data . Much of the recent buzz has been around the large language models ( LLMs ) used by ChatGPT and Bing AI , and of image - generation models like DALL - E and Stable Diffusion . These generative AI tools let users create professional sounding text and interest - ing images using an English - language prompt . These applications , though much in the news , are only a part of generative AI . There are also applications closer to R & D in science and design . Autodesk has , for many years , incorporated fea - tures into its design software that use goals and constraints set by users to generate and test physical designs . Some of the tests include strength test - ing and modelling of thermal flows ( see Autodesk . com’s “Generative Design” ) . Moderna has applied some of the same principles to generate potential pharmaceutical molecules and to filter which of these should be explored in the laboratory . Competing in the Age of AI by Marco Iansiti and Karim Lakhani pro - vides detail on this case study . It explains , in part , how Moderna was able to respond so quickly to the COVID - 19 virus . You may also want to read my interview with Marco Iansiti , “Corporate Operating Models in the Age of AI , ” pub - lished in Research Technology - Management ( RTM ) . Generative AI has also been very suc - cessful in complex domains that can be explicitly modelled . Demis Hassabis dis - cusses the topic in his IRI Medalist paper , “DeepMind : From Games to Scientific Discovery , ” also published in RTM . AlphaGo , one of the products of the lab ( now owned by Alphabet , Inc ) , learned to play and win Go using deep learning techniques trained through games with people . AlphaGo Zero , its successor , used generative AI : it became a world champion by generating moves for an opponent and playing against itself . Similar technology has been used , for example , to solve the complex biol - ogy problem of protein folding . These are exciting R & D applications of generative AI . In her article “Beyond ChatGPT : The Future of Generative AI for Enterprises” for Gartner , Jackie Wiles provides several other examples , including generative AI in drug design , material science , chip design , and the design of parts . You can learn about generative AI and LLMs from various sources . ChatGPT , when prompted to provide “The top 10 resources to understand generative AI , ” led with the book Generative Deep Learning : Teaching Machines to Paint , Write , Compose , and Play by David Foster . ChatGPT notes that “This book is an excellent introduc - tion to generative AI and covers a wide range of topics , including deep learning , GANs [ generative adversarial networks ] , and VAEs [ variational autoencoders ] . ” ChatGPT also recommends the Coursera Deep Learning Specialization , taught by Andrew Ng , a well - known AI researcher . Currently , 744 , 435 people have already enrolled . There are many more resources , which let you can dig into the technology at whatever level of depth you desire . Text Generation and Image Generation ChatGPT and Bing AI are based on LLMs . Their underlying machine learn - ing algorithms are trained on massive amounts of text and are designed to predict what the next word or phrase in a sentence or paragraph might be . They do not search and synthesize but use mathematical models to select the best next word . The prompt seeds the generation . In the case of images , generative algo - rithms use past images of cats or space ships or trees , together with labels about styles or schools of art , to generate images Copyright © 2023 , Innovation Research Interchange . Published by Taylor & Francis . All rights reserved . DOI : 10 . 1080 / 08956308 . 2023 . 2188861 In this space , we offer a series of summaries on key topics , with pointers to important resources , to keep you informed of new developments and help you expand your repertoire of tools and ideas . We welcome your contributions , in the form of suggestions for topics and of column submissions . 72 | Research - Technology Management Resources of , for example , “a cat flying a space ship over trees , in surrealist style . ” Again , the key is the training of immense amounts of tagged data to generate new images from an amalgam of related old images . Much has been written about these systems in the past few months , in all kinds of popular media , most of it based on experiments that reveal both the potential and the limitations of the tools . Here are a few that I found inter - esting . New York Times technology col - umnist Kevin Roose wrote a now famous column—“Bing’s A . I . Chat : ‘I Want to Be Alive . 😈 ‘”—about his interaction with Bing’s AI chatbot , Sydney . The dialog became strange and almost creepy , but it was illuminating about how these LLMs work . Cade Matz , also of the New York Times , provides background on the underlying technology . In an article “Why Chatbots Sometimes Act Weird and Spout Nonsense , ” he notes that these tools are part of an evolution of capabilities . “Most people use neural networks every day , ” he observes . “It’s the technology that identifies people , pets and other objects in images posted to internet services like Google Photos . It allows Siri and Alexa . . . to recognize the words you speak . And it’s what translates between English and Spanish on services like Google Translate . ” The space is moving quickly . Bing’s AI , which integrates ChatGPT with the Internet , brings significant advantages over ChatGPT alone . Ethan Mollick , in a post titled “Power and Weirdness : How to Use Bing AI , ” gives tips for framing prompts ( and sequences of prompts ) to get good results . He sug - gests asking Bing AI to do some Internet research as part of the project . We will learn over time about the idiosyncra - sies of these tools , and they will learn ways that make us less needful of this learning . PRINT David Foster . 2019 . Deep Generative Learning : Teaching Machines to Paint , Write , Compose , and Play . 1 st ed . Sebastopol , CA : O’Reilly Media . Marco Iansiti and Karim Lakhani . 2020 . Competing in the Age of AI : Strategy and Leadership When Algorithms and Networks Run the World . Cambridge , MA : Harvard Business Review Press . oNLINe Autodesk . 2023 . Generative Design . https : / / www . autodesk . com / solutions / generative - design Nicky Case . 2018 . How to become a centaur . Journal of Design and Science January 8 . Doi : 10 . 21428 / 61b2215c Michael Chui , Roger Roberts , and Lareina Yee . 2022 . Generative AI is here : How tools like ChatGPT could change your business . McKinsey , December 20 . https : / / www . mckinsey . com / capabilities / quantumblack / our - insights / generative - ai - is - here - how - tools - like - chatgpt - could - change - your - business Andri Peetso . 2023 . Unlock the potential of ChatGPT . https : / / conturata . com / ai Demis Hassabis . 2021 . DeepMind : From games to scientific discovery . Research - Technology Management 64 ( 6 ) : 18 – 23 . doi : 10 . 1080 / 08956308 . 2021 . 1972390 OpenAI . 2022a . ChatGPT . https : / / chat . openai . com / chat / OpenAI . 2022b . DALL - E - 2 . https : / / openai . com / dall - e - 2 / Jim Euchner . 2023 . Almost human . Research - Technology Management 66 ( 2 ) : 10 – 11 . doi : 10 . 1080 / 08956308 . 2023 . 2164831 Marco Iansiti and Jim Euchner . Competing in ecosystems . Research - Technology Management 61 ( 2 ) : 10 – 16 . doi : 10 . 1080 / 08956308 . 2018 . 1421378 Kevin Kelly . 2023 . Engines of Wow . Wired ( Digital ) , February . Henry Kissinger , Eric Schmidt , and Daniel Huttenlocher . 2023 . ChatGPT heralds an intellectual revolution . ” Wall Street Journal , February 24 . https : / / www . wsj . com / articles / chatgpt - heralds - an - intellectual - revolution - enlightenment - artificial - intelligence - homo - technicus - technology - cognition - morality - philosophy - 774331c6 Gideon Lichfield . 2023 . How WIRED will use generative AI tools . Wired , March 2 . https : / / www . wired . com / story / how - wired - will - use - generative - ai - tools / Cade Matz . 2023 . Why chatbots sometimes act weird and spout nonsense . New York Tiimes , February 16 . https : / / www . nytimes . com / 2023 / 02 / 16 / technology / chatbots - explained . html Ethan Mollick . 2023a . All of my classes suddenly became AI classes . One Useful Thing , January 17 . https : / / oneusefulthing . substack . com / p / all - my - classes - suddenly - became - ai Ethan Mollick . 2023b . Power and weirdness : How to use Bing AI . One Useful Thing , March 2 . https : / / oneusefulthing . substack . com / p / power - and - weirdness - how - to - use - bing Zulie Rane . 2023 . I paid a professional to edit a ChatGPT - written article – hilarity ensued . Medium , February 2 . https : / / medium . com / geekculture / i - asked - a - professional - to - edit - a - chatgpt - written - article - hilarity - ensued - 40440c35cbf3 Kevin Roose . 2023 . Bing’s A . I . chat : ‘I want to be alive . 😈 ‘ New York Times , February 17 . https : / / www . nytimes . com / 2023 / 02 / 16 / technology / bing - chatbot - transcript . html Jackie Wiles . 2023 . Beyond ChatGPT : The future of generative AI for enterprises . Gartner , January 26 . https : / / www . gartner . com / en / articles / beyond - chatgpt - the - future - of - generative - ai - for - enterprises Wikipedia . 2023 . ChatGPT . Wikipedia , March 1 . https : / / en . wikipedia . org / wiki / ChatGPT couRses Andrew Ng . 2023 . Deep learning specialization . Coursera . https : / / www . coursera . org / specializations / deep - learning Resources Resources May—June 2023 | 73 But bloggers beware ! Zulie Rane , a tech writer , tried to use ChatGPT on a client assignment . Her essay “I Paid a Professional to Edit a ChatGPT - Written Article – Hilarity Ensued , ” points out the many ways in which the work was below her professional standards . Experiments like these are exposing the limitations of ChatGPT but also the ways that humans can work with it to good effect . Image generation tools seem more mature , perhaps because the results are inherently subjectively judged . Kevin Kelly , Wired Magazine’s founding execu - tive editor , wrote “Engines of Wow” about the current collection of image gen - eration AI tools like DALL - E ( OpenAI ) , Stable Diffusion , Imagen ( Google ) , Parti ( Google ) , and Mindjourney . Kelly paints an enchanting picture of augmented human intelligence enabled by these models and how they will help our cre - ativity . He notes something that is import - ant : “ ( T ) he best applications . . . are the result not of typing in a single prompt but of very long conversations between humans and machines . ” experiments Once you have some idea of how these tools work ( and maybe , even before you do ) , experiment with them . You will be amazed both at their capabilities and at their limitations . As I noted in a recent editorial “Almost Human” in the last issue of RTM , I first experimented with these tools by writing a four - paragraph essay comparing The Sun Also Rises with Babbitt ( a high school assignment I once had ) . I thought that it did passably well , but my son , who teaches English to 10 th graders , was not impressed . Next , I tried creating a Christmas card using a combination of ChatGPT and DALL - E . The text was clichéd and lacking authenticity , but it was written in good English and might have worked on a Hallmark card . The image for “an outside in Christmas tree” created a much better design than I could have— creative and unpredictable . My third experiment was to attempt to use ChatGPT to find a thread among disparate articles published in RTM’s March – April 2023 . The results were interesting but weak . I decided that the tool could be useful in creating a col - umn but not in writing it . Out of curiosity , for a fourth experi - ment , I asked ChatGPT , “What are the best articles written by Jim Euchner ? ” It gave me a list of five “notable arti - cles . ” Here is the thing . I did not author any of the articles it cited ( though they are the kind of articles I might have writ - ten ) . I thought that I might have been cited in the articles it lists , but I cannot even find these articles . They seem to be entirely made up . This is an example of what some people call ChatGPT’s hallucinations . The latter experiment put a tempo - rary damper on my enthusiasm for ChatGPT . It helped me to understand that ChatGPT generates text ; it doesn’t look up facts to instantiate that text . It really doesn’t care . It reflects , in many cases , what might be true rather than what is factual . The fact that it writes so well makes it more believable than it should be . use cases A key question for those considering these tools is to understand what they are good for and what they are unable to do . At this point , you will have to figure some of this out for yourself through your own experiments . ChatGPT itself makes bold claims as to its utility : I am ChatGPT , a large language model trained by OpenAI . I am designed to understand natural lan - guage and generate human - like responses to text - based questions or prompts . I have been trained on a vast corpus of text data and can gen - erate responses on a wide range of topics , including science , technology , business , entertainment , and more . I use machine learning algorithms and deep neural networks to under - stand the meaning behind text - based inputs and generate responses that are both informative and coherent [ italics added ] . My goal is to provide helpful and accurate information to users and assist them in their quest for knowledge . ChatGPT’s ambitions are clear . What is not clear , however , is the claim that it understands meaning ( as we might understand meaning ) or that its responses are “both informative and coherent” ( at least not yet ) . The potential applications of these tools are nevertheless broad—if they are used in the proper way . According to Andri Peetso , who created Conturata and teaches a seminar on the topic , ChatGPT has been used successfully • To write routine correspondence ( for example , from a doctor to appeal compensation decisions to insurance companies ) ; • To brainstorm characters or plot ideas for stories or headlines ; • To write code or to translate code from one language to another ; • To improve the grammar of written text ; • To summarize a longer article ; and • To write in the voice of a particular persona . It runs into problems when • It is asked to provide specific factual information ( though Bing AI is attempting to address this ) ; • It is drawn into error by its user ; • It is anthropomorphized ; or • It is used as a blind substitute for a writing task . Michael Chui , Robert Roberts , and Lareina Yee of McKinsey take a more macro perspective . In “Generative AI is here : How tools like ChatGPT could change your business , ” they discuss the potential uses of generative AI across business functions , including marketing and sales , operations , engineering , legal , and R & D . They provide an extensive list of potential use cases . To get the most use out of these tools , people are beginning to develop skills in what Andri Peetso calls “prompt engi - neering . ” Good prompts get better results , and prompt sequences ( frame - works ) can be developed and reused . Peetso provides a list of useful prompt sequences at www . conturata . com / ai . He notes that job descriptions for “prompt engineers” are starting to appear . All of these tools , at present , seem to work best in collaboration with people . That is the thread that runs through the success stories . Nicki Case wrote about this kind of collaboration in a piece on 74 | Research - Technology Management Resources chess several years ago in “How to Become a Centaur , ” which chronicled the superiority of good chess players working with good computers over world chess champions and chess super - computers , Case made the point , at least for this instance , of the benefits of human / machine collaboration . ethics One of the first reactions of people upon using ChatGPT is that it will lead to cheat - ing , whether at school or at work . It is certainly causing a reassessment of what it means to create . People have responded in diametrically opposed ways—by seek - ing to prevent unauthorized use of the tools or by embracing them . The first school has created AI detec - tors , developed less to catch cheating students than to prevent bots from post - ing on the net and getting crawled by search engines . Andri Peetso teaches how to work around such detectors in order to make the text more human , but the AI detector group continues its quest and seeks to detect the work - arounds . It is like Dr . Seuss’ story of the Sneetches . Ethan Mollick takes a different approach . He expects his students to use AI in their work but to disclose that they are doing so , including the prompts that they have used along the way . In his post on the topic , “All my classes suddenly became AI classes , ” he discusses how AI should be integrated into curricula . Gideon Lichfield of Wired wrote , “How WIRED Will Use Generative AI Tools , ” which lays out how at least one publisher will and will not use tools like ChatGPT and what disclosure they will make to readers when they do . Others have pointed out that these tools have residual biases , especially political biases . These seem to be embed - ded in the filters rather than in the LLMs themselves . Elon Musk , who was one of the original investors in OpenAI , is so concerned about this he has announced the intent to build new AI tools that are not biased . What’s Next with Generative AI ? As Kevin Kelly has pointed out , all new technologies go through a cycle . Today many people see the limitations of these technologies more than they envision their eventual benefit . But the pace of innovation and their breadth of applicability promises a significant future impact . Some even see generative AI as defin - ing a new era . The article “ChatGPT Heralds an Intellectual Revolution , ” pub - lished in the Wall Street Journal , for exam - ple , is one example , authored by Henry Kissinger , Eric Schmidt , and Daniel Huttenlocher . They believe that the core technology will “transform the human cognitive process as it has not been shaken up since the invention of print - ing , ” which is no small claim coming from these authors . It is time to explore their applicability in your industry .