Visualizing Common Ground Mei C . Chuah Accenture Technology Labs 1661 Page Mill Road , Palo Alto , CA 94304 mei . chuah @ accenture . com Steven F . Roth MAYA Viz 2100 Wharton Street Pittsburgh , PA 15208 roth @ mayaviz . com Abstract The process of analyzing and using information is often collaborative in nature especially given the broad and multi - disciplinary tasks that we must support today . Collaboration requires people to share “common ground” , which is the knowledge that enables them to communicate and , more generally , to coordinate their activities . Common ground has been explored in a variety of systems , domains , and disciplines . Of particular interest are the new developments in online social environments ( instant messaging , SMS , multi - player virtual worlds ) that have become quite popular . Collaborative information visualization environments can benefit from common ground advances that are not only in the collaborative visualization area but also from advances in online social environments . In this paper we expand the notion of common ground for visualization systems based on our experiences with two systems we have developed . CoMotion is a collaborative information visualization environment . Reality Instant Messaging is a system that provides lessons from new interactive online social environments . 1 : Introduction Information use is increasingly becoming a collaborative process at every stage in its life cycle : (cid:120)(cid:3) acquiring information (cid:120)(cid:3) analyzing and interpreting information (cid:120)(cid:3) sharing the interpretations and results of analysis (cid:120)(cid:3) making decisions and taking actions Visualization tools that support information use , therefore , must help people communicate and coordinate their activities by establishing common ground . Common ground has been explored by linguists such as Grice [ 8 ] and Clark [ 3 ] , as well as applied in a variety of disciplines [ 9 ] , [ 13 ] . It is the context created by collaborators due to their mutual awareness of each other ' s experiences , expertise and knowledge , and current cognitive , emotional , and physical states . It includes one’s ongoing activities , including the people and objects with which one is interacting . In this paper we explore “common ground” within visualization systems and expand it by integrating it with “common ground” advances in online social environments . Early online social environments such as MUDs and MOOs [ 4 ] explored the notions of identity , presence , awareness and task collaboration . This continues in the massively multiplayer online gaming worlds , which grew out of MUDs , but are highly visual in nature and growing extremely popular [ 11 ] . In this paper we lay out a set of common ground features based on our collaborative visualization system CoMotion , and integrate it with the common ground features from our online social system , Reality Instant Messaging . We believe that collaborative visualization environments can benefit from the concepts of “common ground” that have been and are currently being explored in online social environments . Our set of common ground features consists of : (cid:120)(cid:3) Explicitly shared objects and events . These are the physical objects , sights , sounds , activities , and occurrences that are directly referred to by participants as the central focus of a communication . In a virtual world , people send each other data , visualizations , images , text , and other objects as the focal elements of their communication ( e . g . photos and graphs in a slide presentation ) . (cid:120)(cid:3) Implicitly shared objects and events . Electronic spaces lack the context that people always share in a physical space where they jointly perceive all the surrounding physical cues that make up the common ground for communication . When people collaborate electronically , they only share the messages , images , and other objects that they explicitly send to each other . They do not share a song playing in the background , an ongoing CNN news story , the books on the shelves , and other potentially important context in one’s Proceedings of the Seventh International Conference on Information Visualization ( IV’03 ) 1093 - 9547 / 03 $ 17 . 00 © 2003 IEEE environment . In a shared online space , systems must somehow make up for this loss of implicit context . Furthermore , collaboration in online environments may involve new media that have no physical counterpart and therefore require new techniques to establish context ( e . g . the fact that thousands of people are buying online or viewing a website ) . Common ground depends on a system’s ability to inject properties of the information space into the experience of online users . These objects and events are therefore implicitly part of the common ground because no participant actively inserts them in a communication . (cid:120)(cid:3) Goals for analyzing objects and events . These are the reasons people have interest in data , including the analytical tasks they are performing and the questions they are asking . (cid:120)(cid:3) Interpretations and thoughts . This is the meaning collaborators find in the data they jointly view . People see different patterns in data due to different perspectives and expertise . Current visualizations do not provide a medium for capturing a viewer’s thoughts about data and therefore do not support making these thoughts a part of the common ground . (cid:120)(cid:3) Level of attention on the objects . While analyzing information , people attend to objects with varying levels of intensity . Knowing what a person is attending to reveals priorities , important questions , and what is unexpected or confusing in data . Awareness of others’ attentional focus may reveal important information worth exploring – reducing our own information overload . It also reveals information they missed ( e . g . changes ) . (cid:120)(cid:3) History of objects . As information moves through an analysis space , it is touched by many people and systems . This “history of objects” includes : who created them , who else is aware of them , whose expertise has contributed to their interpretation , and whose goals and tasks are served . Thus , object history provides common ground to judge the quality of data and conclusions and exposes social connections ( groups having common focus ) . (cid:120)(cid:3) People’s emotional reactions and personal characteristics . Text - based messaging , email , and existing online collaboration tools poorly convey people’s feelings because they lack cues available in voice , gestures , and facial expressions . Also , they lack cues to judge people’s fatigue , capacity , certainty , availability for interruption or for assuming new tasks , and many other personal characteristics of common ground . We believe that collaborative visualization should go beyond portraying structured data . It should capture and make visible these elements of common ground that occur in physical environments and take advantage of unique properties of virtual information spaces to provide new levels of common ground . The goal is for people to : (cid:120)(cid:3) spend less time transferring information ( efficient communicating or otherwise acquiring information about each other visually or virtually ) (cid:120)(cid:3) be more accurate in understanding each other (cid:120)(cid:3) be less disruptive of each other’s work , by engaging opportunistically (cid:120)(cid:3) act synergistically to shift attention , tasks , and resources to manage workload dynamically . Awareness of others’ skills and workloads enables them to act with the effectiveness of large groups yet retain the flexibility and agility of small groups . Large organizations enforce structure and procedures because of lack of common ground [ 5 ] . Perhaps visualizing common ground can increase the size of groups that can still act synergistically . We illustrate visualizing common ground in two systems . CoMotion is a collaborative visualization environment that captures users’ thoughts , goals , interpretations , plans , and states [ 6 ] . Reality Instant Messaging ( RIM ) [ 7 ] address common ground in areas other than information visualization , suggesting new directions for the field . RIM is a general framework for capturing context about objects and events that are implicitly in one’s awareness . RIM provides ways to inject properties of the information space into the experience of online users . In addition , RIM is built upon popular messaging platforms that allow collaborative participants to better convey emotions and other personal characteristics . 2 : CoMotion™ CoMotion is a collaborative visualization environment for creating information analysis and decision - support applications [ 6 ] . CoMotion is a descendant of the Visage system [ 12 ] and provides a highly interactive “information - centric” approach to visualization . This means that every data object visualized in the environment can be manipulated using the same set of operations : drilldown to navigate to other data , drag and drop to remove or copy data among visualizations , brushing to produce highlighting across all visualizations ( linked views ) , and creating dynamic links among objects . Proceedings of the Seventh International Conference on Information Visualization ( IV’03 ) 1093 - 9547 / 03 $ 17 . 00 © 2003 IEEE Collaboration in CoMotion occurs when users share frames , window - like containers that give appearance and behavior to data . Frames are visualizations , tables , sticky notes , charts , forms , and application interfaces . Some act as pasteboards to embed , organize and share groups of frames . CoMotion coordinates both the data content and appearance of frames across multiple users . Unlike most current collaborative environments , which share pixels ( that is , screen grabs that are transmitted from a master to other clients ) , CoMotion’s shared frames are completely interactive on every collaborator’s desktop . Thus , all users can drag data out of a shared frame . Further , a shared frame remains active even if the original user’s workspace is closed , providing both synchronous and asynchronous collaboration . The Command Post of the Future is a research project to provide collaborative visualization tools to crisis action teams responding to natural emergencies and combat situations . Distributed team members interpret large amounts of intelligence and status data expressed as structured and textual data to understand events in chaotic situations . Based on their interpretations , they create and choose from among alternative plans and coordinate numerous resources during their execution . Teams act continuously in crises for days or weeks and must continuously maintain common ground . We have run 8 exercises with 6 to 20 distributed participants . Figure 1 illustrates a CPOF scenario . The left side of the desktop in Figure 1 illustrates the frames a commander is working on and that he has made shareable to his team members . It contains a map frame visualizing data objects : intelligence sightings ( small triangles ) and units ( rectangles ) , assertions – data objects he has created reflecting his interpretations of the sightings ( diamonds ) , line drawings indicating suspected paths of populations and problematic regions , and tasks he expects his team to perform ( circles ) . Collectively , these reflect a commander’s understanding of the situation and his evolving plans . When shared , these convey his thinking about a crisis . To the right of the commander’s primary work area are a set of 10 - 20 other frames that he has arranged from other users’ workspaces because they provide visibility into their data and activities . By tabbing to expose each shared frame , a commander can quickly gain “topsight” on the thinking of his staff and peers . As a result , when a voice ( radio ) contact is initiated , the team members are already familiar with each other’s ongoing work ( they have common ground ) and can discuss areas of it efficiently . Common ground is achieved not only by sharing the visualizations of the data that are the focus of a collaboration , but by creating visibility into much adjunct information as well . In the CPOF application , these are : Explicitly shared objects and events . Intelligence sightings ( triangles ) and their attributes are often the focus of a collaboration and include types of objects and events ( e . g . vehicles , people , military units , damage to buildings , river levels , quantities of people and vehicles , direction of movement , activities ) . They are sent to each user by a dispatcher who performs informational triage . Data appears automatically on maps and tables and users exchange data by sharing the visualizations that contain them . Others can then copy individual data objects to their own visualizations and contribute to analysis , still retaining links to the database . Communication is expedited because they share common reference points . However , there can be thousands of sightings during an exercise , so filtering and interpretation are difficult . Level of attention on the objects . Each triangle representing an intelligence report conveys whether it has been explored by a user mousing over or selecting it to reveal its attributes . An intelligence object has a yellow dot on it until it has been reviewed . By viewing this information , a collaborator can determine which intelligence data the other team members have not examined – whether due to information overload or prioritization . Knowing what a collaborator doesn’t know presents opportunities for others to help out by exploring the unexamined data and by calling attention to it if it is important . Goals for analyzing objects and events . The analysis process occurs primarily to answer key questions that serve the team’s goals and enable its tasks . Team members outline their goals in critical - question frames ( see left Figure 1 ) . A commander’s critical questions exposes what is important to him , why he is attending to some intelligence data over others , and which additional data would be valuable to share with him . Further , data can be associated with the goal boxes through drag and drop , so it is possible to see all the data that has been considered relevant to important questions . Thus both data and goals are made explicit and enter the common ground . Interpretations and thoughts . In order to capture their conclusions about ambiguous , inconsistent , or incomplete intelligence data , team members add Proceedings of the Seventh International Conference on Information Visualization ( IV’03 ) 1093 - 9547 / 03 $ 17 . 00 © 2003 IEEE F i gu r e 1 : A po r t i o n o f a C o M o t i on d esk t op i n t h e C o mm a nd P o s t o f t h e Fu t u r e p r o j ec t . Th e l e ft s i d e c on t a i n s a s i ng l e p as t e bo a r d f r a m e t h a t e m b e d s a m a p , 4 c r i t i ca l - qu es t i on f r a m es , a nd a t i m e li n e . Th e r i gh t s i d e c on t a i n s 11 s h a r e d c o ll a bo r a t i ve p as t e bo a r d f r a m es ( e m b e d d i ng seve r a l o t h e r f r a m es ) t h a t h ave b ee n s h a r e d b y o t h e r u se r s a nd ca n b e t a bb e d t h r ough qu i ck l y . Th e v i s i b l e f r a m e c on t a i n s t w o m a p s , a t a b l e a n d a c h a r t t h a t i s c oo r d i n a t e d w i t h i d e n t i ca l f r a m es on o t h e r u se r s w o r ks p aces . D a t a ob j ec t s ( t r i a ng l es , d i a m ond s , r ec t a ng l es , c i r c l es , a nd t ex t ) as w e ll as sk e t c h es ca n b e d r a gg e d ac r o ss a ll f r a m es , c o ll a b o r a t i ve o r o t h e r w i se . Proceedings of the Seventh International Conference on Information Visualization ( IV’03 ) 1093 - 9547 / 03 $ 17 . 00 © 2003 IEEE assertions ( diamonds ) to the map and associate intelligence triangles with them ( via drag and drop ) . Users add summaries of conclusions and sketch paths indicating predicted movements . As a result , the common ground includes what the user is thinking about the data . It often provides a filtering function in that users can rely on each other’s interpretations of data to avoid attending to less important information . History of objects . Each data object created by a user has a creation , modification , and copy history . Therefore , on any frame , it is possible to trace the actions being planned , the interpretations motivating them , the data on which interpretations are based , and the goals they all serve . It is possible to determine for any object , who first received it , annotated it , and transferred it to their own frames . Disagreements can be acknowledged and understood and corrections efficiently propagated because common ground includes the evolution and migration of information throughout the team . Histories can be the basis for collaboration - they reveal who has contributed to problem solving . To summarize , whereas conventional collaborative visualizations might share views of data , CoMotion aims for creating common ground by sharing objects , goals , tasks , interpretations and the thoughts one can infer about them . However , achieving common ground completely requires focusing on social interaction and the implicit context in which it occurs . We have explored this problem in work that supports and enhances online social environments and discuss its relation to information visualization in the next sections . 3 . Reality Instant Messaging The Reality Instant Messaging system [ 7 ] bridges the real / physical world and the digital data world through the social network that interacts with both . Specifically , Figure 2 : A reality IM application featuring a play - by - play sports service . The IM session on the right is synced on a play - by - play basis to the real - time golf stream on the left . As events occur on the left , the IM window on the right automatically updates with those events . The system also allows users to interact with the real - time stream . In the example above , the user is given the opportunity to guess how well the current player is going to perform . Proceedings of the Seventh International Conference on Information Visualization ( IV’03 ) 1093 - 9547 / 03 $ 17 . 00 © 2003 IEEE Reality IM shows how online environments may be enhanced by linking them to reality streams ( e . g . a sports game , a television program , a concert ) . It emphasizes the importance of actively capturing , augmenting , and introducing implicit objects and events into collaborative sessions to achieve common ground . Figure 2 shows a play - by - play interactive sports service that is delivered to consumers through instant messaging . Sports - spectating lends itself well to Reality IM because it is a widespread social activity , it occurs in real - time , and it encourages audience participation . When users subscribe to the Reality IM bot , they receive a list of their friends who are also currently watching the event ( Figure 2 , buddy surfing ) . Buddy surfing allows us to quickly skim through different television channels , determining not just what content is currently available for viewing , but also which individuals in our buddy list are experiencing the different channels . In addition to tying the real - time sports stream to our online social network , we can also make that stream interactive . As shown in Figure 2 , activity - synced information download , the IM session is synced to a real - time golf stream on a play - by - play or event - by - event basis . As events occur in the stream , they transmit to each user’s reality IM window as text . When a new player comes up to the tee , users receive synced information about the player , such as ranking and average score . Users also receive a summary of the current equipment the player is using . Users may interact with a real - time stream whenever they desire . For example , they may request more information on the player and his equipment . Users also have the opportunity to compete with other users engaged with the same stream – for instance , by guessing whether that player will be able to make par on the current hole ( Figure 2 , activity - synced interactivity ) . Once the play has begun , users may still interact at any time to request more information or cancel their existing guess . However , participation is not required . Users may actively interact with the service or choose to stay passive - let the messages scroll by , focus on the game , and only participate occasionally . Note that the interaction is also linked to users’ social context . In particular , whenever users make a guess , that information may be broadcast to their buddies ( Figure 2 , social interactivity ) . Friends may also shop together or show - off recently purchased items ( Figure 2 , social shopping ) . Reality IM services like this allow social groups to come together around an activity that is of interest to all participants , wherever they are . The Reality IM system underscores several significant functionalities that can be effectively integrated into a visualization system to facilitate common ground : Implicit objects and events . A visualization system should not only support the active sharing of views of data but also automatically introduce relevant implicit objects and events into the collaborative session . Using Reality IM , all user actions in a collaboration group can be captured and shared perhaps together with some of the surrounding physical context . Awareness of a group’s activities enables its members to better understand the surrounding context of their collaborators ( e . g . the level of activity ) , to eliminate duplicate tasks and to find opportunities to partner in related , difficult work ( thereby doing dynamic workload balancing ) . For example , consider enhancing the CoMotion application discussed earlier with such a Reality IM capability . Awareness of others’ ongoing activities would reveal appropriate times to interrupt ( e . g . when people are not in critical planning activities , not currently collaborating , or when they are addressing goals , tasks , data sets , regions , or time - periods in a schedule close to one’s own work ) . This portrayal of others’ activity information could take the form of an information mural or montage [ 10 ] . In the CoMotion crisis action application discussed earlier , it is often necessary to coordinate the activities of viewing aerial video of events on the ground among numerous analysts interpreting it , people exploring other more structured intelligence data about the same regions , and with people who might be moving through that area and need the information for their activities . The Reality IM system could automatically stream text event summaries of what is being observed to people who are looking at the same video stream , to people who are looking at map visualizations focused on the same region , and to people on the ground who might need that data ( perhaps receiving it on cellular PDAs as text ) . Any of these participants could use a version of the buddy - list feature to seek or offer collaborative help with others viewing related material . Likewise , any of the participants could contribute interactively to the stream , adding their questions or interpretations or weaving structured data with the video streams . It might also be possible to automatically introduce new topics or data relevant to analyses and invite people into collaborations based on their common informational or activity focus . Finally , an important aspect of the Reality IM system is that the implicit objects and events are presented as a peripheral stream , so that users may attend to it if there is Proceedings of the Seventh International Conference on Information Visualization ( IV’03 ) 1093 - 9547 / 03 $ 17 . 00 © 2003 IEEE information that catches the eye , but otherwise not be distracted by it . History of objects . The Reality IM system also naturally collects the history of objects and events . User interactions on the objects can be easily captured and stored , as well as which users participated in the events ( e . g . for buddy surfing ) , their level of participation , and with whom they participated . This information is useful for creating accurate and dynamic user profiles so that a system can understand and better support the work of a particular user and indicate which team members may work well together . New visions of collaborative analysis argue that team members should have dynamic roles rather than fixed functions to respond to the nature of expertise required by a problem ( e . g . familiarity with data or problems ) or the time and work demands of the situation . Historical information about each person and information set will be useful to support dynamic team creation and the resulting social interaction . Object histories also enable analysis team leaders to be aware of the focus of a team’s ongoing work , their blind spots , and their availability for new tasks . Level of attention on the objects . The Reality IM system also allows participants to filter the information they must attend to based on social networks . The Reality IM system tracks who is currently attending to events to provide buddy surfing capabilities . Buddy surfing lets users pick content not just based on relevance but also on the social context surrounding that content . Similarly in data analysis it would be very helpful to know where one’s current collaborators are located in the information space . This could help you focus one’s analysis and not duplicate effort and provide points of collaboration that might not have been apparent . People’s emotional reactions and personal characteristics . Reality IM is built upon instant messaging technologies that are beginning to combine visual representations and animation with text , audio , and music ( e . g . ThreeDegrees [ 14 ] , Yahoo IMvironments [ 15 ] , AIM Expressions [ 1 ] ) . These new advancements in the IM environment can support the collaborative analysis process by making perceptible the emotional and cognitive states of participants ( with sight and sound ) as well as their personal characteristics . It can also be used to expand a user’s collaborative vocabulary to include social expressions in addition to the data expressions that participants commonly use in a collaborative visualization session . In fact , many users today already actively use IM to gain continuous awareness of whether their co - workers are available or not . Effective collaborative analysis , decision - making , and other activities requires groups to form and evolve to address the unique and evolving information analysis needs of situations . In crisis action scenarios like the one we described earlier , people may be involved in many simultaneous groups and therefore need to convey : (cid:120)(cid:3) how much attention they are contributing to a problem ( especially if a decision is to be made with the assumption they are attending to it ) . (cid:120)(cid:3) their capacity to take on more work or be interrupted . (cid:120)(cid:3) their level of fatigue . (cid:120)(cid:3) the strength of their understanding of the problem or data . (cid:120)(cid:3) their level of confidence in the validity of an information source . (cid:120)(cid:3) the role they are playing in the group process ( e . g . assuming the lead for addressing a key analysis question , supporting someone else , observing to gather information or coordinate with other activities , merely observing for exploratory purposes , etc ) . In summary , Reality Instant Messaging suggests novel approaches to integrating so - called reality streams with more conventional information analysis activities . Media that provide physical world contexts ( like video ) and information about the ongoing activities and informational foci of users can be used by a system to enhance common ground and support collaborative processes . Summary The goal of this paper is to establish the importance of achieving common ground in collaborative information visualization systems and to illustrate many elements of common ground that need to be achieved . Our CoMotion applications share many explicitly created artifacts that convey common ground , including the visualizations of data on which one is working . They also convey context reflecting people’s cognition – their goals , interpretations , tasks , and attentional focus . We expanded on this notion of common ground by integrating it with features from our Reality Instant Messaging system , which is work more centrally in the area of online social environments . RIM explored establishing implicit objects and events and much more contextual information about people’s activities , interests , and emotions . RIM also demonstrates the potential for systems to take a much more active role to inject information about the immediate collaborative group as well as a much broader social group . RIM demonstrates how social groups can be formed Proceedings of the Seventh International Conference on Information Visualization ( IV’03 ) 1093 - 9547 / 03 $ 17 . 00 © 2003 IEEE dynamically by virtue of their common interests and activities . Our current research is exploring ways to incorporate lessons learned from RIM and other online environments into the CoMotion collaborative visualization environment . We have also been conducting exercises to assess the impact of these capabilities on analysis and decision - making teams . In a recent user study , a team experiencing common ground in this way was much more efficient at communicating , analyzing and forwarding intelligence data to appropriate recipients as well as planning , making decisions , and initiating actions based on data . References [ 1 ] AIM Expressions , http : / / www . aim . com / help _ faq / using / expressions . adp ? aolperm = [ 2 ] Clark , H . Using Language , Cambridge University Press , Cambridge , England , 1996 . [ 3 ] Clark , H . H . and Wilkes - Gibbs , D . , Referring as a collaborative process , Cognition 22 : 1 - 39 , 1986 . [ 4 ] Curtis , Pavel , Mudding : Social Phenomena in Text - Based Virtual Realities , Conference on the Directions and Implications of Advanced Computing , 1992 . [ 5 ] Dunbar , R . , Neocortex size as a constraint on group size in primates , Journal of Human Evolution ( 1992 ) , vol . 20 , p . 469 - 493 [ 6 ] CoMotion Product Description . MAYA Viz LLC , Pittsburgh , PA : , 2002 www . mayaviz . com [ 7 ] Chuah , M . C . , Reality Instant Messenger : The Promise of iTV Delivered Today , Second Workshop on Personalization in Future TV ( TV ' 02 ) at the Second International Conference on Adaptive Hypermedia and Adaptive Web - based Systems ( AH 2002 Malaga , Spain ) , 28 May 2002 . [ 8 ] Grice , H . P . , Logic Conversation , Cole , P . , and Morgan , J . , eds . , Syntax and Semantics , vol . 3 , Academic Press , p . 41 - 58 . [ 9 ] Grosz , B . , and Kraus , S . , Collaborative plans for complex group actions , Artificial Intelligence , 86 , 1996 , p . 269 - 358 . [ 10 ] Helfman , J . Mandala : An Architecture for Using Images to Access and Organize Web Information . In Proceedings of the 1999 International Conference on Visual Information Systems ( VISUAL 99 ) , June 1999 . [ 11 ] Kogutt , Todd , Jones , Scott , Wu , Eric , Do Massively Multiplayer Online Games Represent an Evolution in Virtual Community ? , http : / / citeseer . nj . nec . com / 402338 . html [ 12 ] Roth , S . F . , Chuah , M . C . , Kerpedjiev , S . , Kolojejchick , J . A . , and Lucas , P . Towards an Information Visualization Workspace : Combining Multiple Means of Expression . Human - Computer Interaction Journal , Volume 12 , Numbers 1 & 2 , 1997 , p . 131 - 185 . [ 13 ] Thomason , R . , Desires and defaults : A framework for planning with inferred goals . In Proceedings of Seventh International Conference on Knowledge Representation and Reasoning ( KR ' 2000 ) , 2000 , p . 702 - - 713 . [ 14 ] ThreeDegrees , www . threedegrees . com [ 15 ] Yahoo IMvironments , http : / / messenger . yahoo . com / messenger / imv / Proceedings of the Seventh International Conference on Information Visualization ( IV’03 ) 1093 - 9547 / 03 $ 17 . 00 © 2003 IEEE