RESEARCH ARTICLE Expert knowledge creation in policy - making : a research perspective from sociological ﬁ eld theory Artem Antonyuk a , b , Vera N . Minina b and Olga Nikiforova b a Centre for German and European Studies , St . Petersburg State University , St . Petersburg , Russia ; b Faculty of Sociology , St . Petersburg State University , St . Petersburg , Russia ABSTRACT The article proposes a conceptual framework for exploring processes of expert knowledge creation in policy ﬁ elds using recent advances in the sociological ﬁ eld theory . It rests on an observation that policy ﬁ elds are no longer autonomous , but increasingly embedded in public life , and include actors from other ﬁ elds who create knowledge for policy - making . While existing research clari ﬁ es many aspects of the relationship between expertise and policy - making , little is known about how multiple interrelated actors create expert knowledge and how this knowledge is institutionalized in policy ﬁ elds . Addressing this gap , the article outlines mechanisms of expert knowledge creation in policy ﬁ elds . It argues that actors mediating between di ﬀ erent ﬁ eld domains succeed in creating in ﬂ uential expert knowledge , as they combine knowledge from disconnected areas and in ﬂ uence the operation of ﬁ eld - level mechanisms . Drawing on examples from the literature , the authors demonstrate the application of the theoretical framework to examine di ﬃ cult - to - observe knowledge creation mechanisms operating in policy ﬁ elds . ARTICLE HISTORY Received 22 September 2020 Accepted 5 March 2022 KEYWORDS Expert knowledge ; policy ﬁ eld ; policy advisory system ; science - policy interaction ; co - production ; social mechanisms Introduction The role of expert knowledge in political decision - making is widely discussed in research on policy - making and governance . Since the 1990s , studies of this topic have focused on the formation of policy advisory systems involving internal and external advisory organ - izations . Halligan was one of the ﬁ rst scholars to systematically analyze di ﬀ erent aspects of policy advisory systems , showing that they evolve based on two variables : composition of actors engaged in consulting and government control of advisory activity ( Craft and Halligan 2015 ) . Advisory systems face increasingly complex challenges , e . g . emerging problems requiring wide - scale cooperation ( Weber and Khademian 2008 ; Daviter 2019 ) , demands for participation by previously excluded actors ( Krick , Christensen , and Holst 2019 ) , and lack of authoritative knowledge ( Weingart 1999 ) . Policy - makers face the need to develop new solutions and integrate previously unrelated areas of expertise ( Weber and Khademian 2008 ) . So far , researchers have focused on studying relationship © 2022 Informa UK Limited , trading as Taylor & Francis Group CONTACT Artem Antonyuk a . antonyuk @ spbu . ru Centre for German and European Studies , St . Petersburg State University , 7 / 9 Universitetskaya nab . , St . Petersburg 199034 , Russia POLICY STUDIES 2023 , VOL . 44 , NO . 4 , 535 – 552 https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1080 / 01442872 . 2022 . 2051466 structures emerging between actors who create knowledge for policy - making . At the same time , there are studies that look speci ﬁ cally at framing processes in policy - making ( van Hulst and Yanow 2016 ) . However , these studies do not examine the mech - anisms of expert knowledge creation and how this knowledge is institutionalized in policy ﬁ elds . Addressing this gap , we propose the research question : how is expert knowledge for policy - making created and institutionalized by social actors involved in policy ﬁ elds ? To lay the groundwork for an answer to this question , the article suggests a theor - etical framework of expert knowledge creation in policy ﬁ elds based on the sociological ﬁ eld theory . We develop our argument as follows . In the ﬁ rst section , we recount key ideas about the concept of social ﬁ eld , paying attention to its development in contem - porary sociological theory . In the second section , we describe the general logic and mechanisms – the “ how ” – of expert knowledge creation . Finally , in the third section , we apply the framework to examine expert knowledge creation based on descriptions of several environmental policy - making cases found in the literature . Sociological ﬁ eld theory : key concepts and principles Sociologists employ the concept of social ﬁ eld to understand how social actors operate in a social setting , to analyze the relationships formed between them , and to identify factors in ﬂ uencing relationship formation . The concept of social ﬁ eld refers to historically devel - oping interaction of social actors – would these be individual agents , groups , or organ - izations , – expressing their perspectives on social reality and the nature of social relations developing between them ( in ﬂ uence , competition , cooperation , etc . ) . In sociology , the concept of social ﬁ eld was introduced by Pierre Bourdieu . He con - sidered the ﬁ eld as an invisible structure , “ a ﬁ eld of forces within which the agents occupy positions that statistically determine the positions they take with respect to the ﬁ eld , these position - takings being aimed either at conserving or transforming the struc - ture of relations of forces that is constitutive of the ﬁ eld ” ( Bourdieu 2005 , 30 ) . According to Bourdieu , social ﬁ elds consist of objective connections between various positions , interests , and people in the context of their confrontation or cooperation with each other for the bene ﬁ ts speci ﬁ c for a ﬁ eld ( e . g . possession of power , economic or intellec - tual resources , occupation of dominant positions , etc . ) . To explain the di ﬀ erences and inequalities between actors , Bourdieu introduced the notion of capital indicating a resource ( such as social relationships , education , money , power ) accessible to ﬁ eld members . Actors with di ﬀ erent amounts of capital occupy di ﬀ erent positions in a ﬁ eld and have di ﬀ erent opportunities for action . The key ﬁ nding of Bourdieu ’ s theory is that an application of the ﬁ eld concept allows describing and explaining the space of invisible social relationships that arise as a result of interaction of visible and directly observable actors in a particular sociocultural context . Bourdieu ’ s ideas have been further developed in organization studies and neo - institutionalism . Organization studies employ the notion of capital to provide a new perspective on the functioning of ﬁ rms and enterprises . Researchers show that social relationships ( social capital ) and knowledge ( intellectual capital ) are important resources used to improve an organization ’ s standing in a ﬁ eld ( Nahapiet and Ghoshal 1998 ) . Moreover , 536 A . ANTONYUK ET AL . organization studies highlight that knowledge creation is a fundamentally social process ( Cross , Borgatti , and Parker 2001 ; Carley 1986 ) . To clarify the interrelationship between social and intellectual capital , researchers addressed the problem of how social relation - ships in ﬂ uence knowledge creation ( Nahapiet and Ghoshal 1998 ) . Social capital consists of several components ( Nahapiet and Ghoshal 1998 ) : relation - ship structure ( social connections grounded in interactions ) , relationship quality ( trust , reciprocity ) , and common cognitive base ( shared values , language , frames , and narra - tives ) . Intellectual capital is the knowledge possessed by individuals and whole organizations . Relationship structure connects individuals within organizational units , or between units or organizations ( Uzzi and Lancaster 2003 ; Yli - Renko , Autio , and Sapienza 2001 ; Nieves and Osorio 2013 ; Ortiz , Donate , and Guadamillas 2017 ) . Studies clarify how relationship structure and characteristics in ﬂ uence knowledge creation . External relationships are appropriate channels for ﬁ nding and reproducing new unfamiliar knowledge ( Ortiz , Donate , and Guadamillas 2017 ; Nahapiet and Ghoshal 1998 ; Gibbons 2004 ; Nieves and Osorio 2013 ) , while internal relationships are best suited for combining newly adopted knowledge with existing knowledge ( Hansen 1999 ; Harga - don and Sutton 1997 ; Levin and Cross 2004 ; Granovetter 1973 ; Krackhardt 1992 ; Uzzi and Lancaster 2003 ) . Yet , the in ﬂ uence of relationships is not uniform and depends on their characteristics ( Nieves and Osorio 2013 ) . For instance , close relationships characterized by high level of trust and mutual understanding may inhibit information transfer ( Yli - Renko , Autio , and Sapienza 2001 ) , as they stimulate shared norms and similar interpretations , while reducing uptake of novel information ( Perry - Smith 2006 ; McFadyen and Cannella 2004 ; Nieves and Osorio 2013 ; Nahapiet and Ghoshal 1998 ) . Moreover , an individual ’ s position in an overall network of relationships in ﬂ uences knowledge creation outcomes ( Nieves and Osorio 2013 ) , and , consequently , his or her social status . For example , individuals mediating between disconnected others can ﬁ lter and shape meanings passing through them ( Burt 2004 ) . Moreover , they have access to di ﬀ erent knowledge areas and can develop a more encompassing perspective on a problem ( e . g . consider its economic and legal aspects ) . Neo - institutionalism adopted the concept of ﬁ eld to explain how social order is formed and changed . In particular , it considered the process of creation and promotion of knowledge about rules governing everyday practices . DiMaggio and Powell ( 1983 ) , Fligstein ( 2001 ) , Scott ( 2014 ) , and others employed the concept of ﬁ eld to study institutional orders in markets . DiMaggio and Powell ( 1983 , 148 ) consider an organizational ﬁ eld and de ﬁ ne it as “ a recognized area of institutional life : key suppliers , resource and product consumers , regulatory agencies and other organ - izations that produce similar services or products ” which draws our attention to “ the totality of relevant actors ” . Field members are actors who play roles according to certain rules . A ﬁ eld can join participants from di ﬀ erent social groups , sectors , industries , governmental agencies , and NGOs who have common meanings , interests , and goals , and attempt to pursue them through collective action . Neo - institutionalists have identi ﬁ ed and addressed several drawbacks in Bourdieu ’ s conception of social ﬁ eld . According to them , Bourdieu placed too much emphasis on the di ﬀ erence between competing ﬁ eld actors endowed with varying amounts of econ - omic , political , and cultural capital , failing to account for observed similarities in ﬁ elds POLICY STUDIES 537 ( Benson 2006 ) . Consequently , Powell and DiMaggio stressed that once a ﬁ eld is estab - lished , there is homogeneity of organizational forms and practices in the ﬁ eld driven by di ﬀ erent forms of isomorphism ( DiMaggio and Powell 1991 ) . They argue that hom - ogenization emerges when ﬁ eld members follow common rules and depend on the same providers of resources , copy organizational models and behaviour of successful actors in a ﬁ eld , or share common professional and educational backgrounds . The concept of iso - morphism allows explaining how similarities emerge in seemingly autonomous organiz - ations in an organizational ﬁ eld , regardless of historical , cultural , or geographical speci ﬁ cities . Another way to look at this phenomenon is to describe the meanings that actors in a ﬁ eld use and express . Neo - institutionalist scholars have emphasized that common meanings are constitu - tive of ﬁ elds . According to Scott , an organizational ﬁ eld is “ a collection of diverse , inter - dependent organizations that participate in a common meaning system ” ( Scott 2014 , 106 ) . Similarly , Zietsma and colleagues argue that ﬁ elds are made up of actors maintain - ing relationships with each other and that those relationships are structured around common meanings and common interests ( Zietsma et al . 2017 ) . Ho ﬀ man ( 1999 ) points out that ﬁ elds are structured around central issues and consist of members who are also embedded in other ﬁ elds . The meaning of an issue is often contested based on di ﬀ erent sets of “ material practices and symbolic constructions ” which lie at the basis of an institutional order of a ﬁ eld ( Friedland and Alford 1991 , 248 ) . Thus , it can be assumed that common meanings are elements of an invisible structure that connects actors in a ﬁ eld . In a neo - institutionalist account , common meanings link individual actions with reproduction and change of institutional order . According to Fligstein ( 2001 ) , dominant actors compete over in ﬂ uence and position within and between ﬁ elds . In this struggle , they engage in production of meanings through framing to ﬁ nd resonance with other ﬁ eld members and establish social contacts ( Fligstein and McAdam 2012 ) . Although a repertoire of framings is available in a ﬁ eld , “ individual framings are distributed within a ﬁ eld according to social positions and identities ” ( Meyer and Höllerer 2010 , 1242 ) . The distribution of frames in a ﬁ eld follows the demarcation of di ﬀ erent domains in a ﬁ eld . Successful framing requires the usage of social skills ( Fligstein 2001 ) . Fligstein de ﬁ nes social skills as “ the ability to induce cooperation among others . Skilled social actors empathetically relate to the situations of other people and , in doing so , are able to provide those people with reasons to cooperate ” ( Fligstein 2001 , 112 ) . Skilled social actors understand how members of ﬁ elds view their interests and identities and how they act inside and outside of their domains . This allows them to frame problems in a way appealing to actors from the same or di ﬀ erent ﬁ elds . Some actors utilize their social skills to a larger degree than others and have more resources to stimulate cooperation and promote their ideas . Thus , we can assume that skilled social actors play an active role in supporting and transforming social order . They achieve this by creating shared understandings necessary for interaction and delineating the boundaries of ﬁ elds and the roles of actors within them , including civil society representatives , poli - ticians , administrators , economic agents , etc . ( Guston 2001 ) . To summarize the brief overview of sociological ideas related to social ﬁ elds , the ﬁ eld concept allows one to explain how invisible relationships between observable actors 538 A . ANTONYUK ET AL . create and transform social orders . Contemporary sociological ﬁ eld theory allows one to combine macro - and micro - levels of analysis of social relationships in a given social order by considering how meanings are created , disseminated , and adopted in ﬁ elds , resulting in knowledge used in everyday practices . A social order a ﬀ ords many di ﬀ erent , some - times con ﬂ icting , meanings and interpretations of rules , norms , and roles . In this sense , knowledge production is a dynamic process of meaning - making about social reality , rules of behaviour , and success strategies . This process involves many actors whose behaviour and relationships become dependent on the knowledge that is recog - nized as relevant and practically applicable in the ﬁ eld . Further , we analyze how expert knowledge is created in a social ﬁ eld . Expert knowledge creation in a social ﬁ eld The general process of knowledge creation can be understood as institutionalization of meanings ( Berger and Luckmann 1991 ) in a social ﬁ eld . Institutionalization of meanings consists of the stages of typi ﬁ cation and legitimation . Typi ﬁ cation occurs when interacting actors produce meanings of typical actions , situ - ations , and persons according to ﬁ eld - speci ﬁ c rules ( Meyer 2008 ; cf . van Hulst and Yanow 2016 ) . Although all social actors produce typical meanings , expert actors have more resources , skills , and power to do this . They typify meanings based on extensive experiences and specialized vocabularies . Expert typi ﬁ ed meanings include concepts , models , and theories expressed in reports , policy proposals , public announcements , and other similar forms . Further , institutionalization of expert typi ﬁ cations depends on several ﬁ eld - level factors . First of all , knowledge obtains expert status largely when its author is recognized as an expert by other ﬁ eld members ( Lazega 1992 ; Grundmann 2017 ) . For this reason , actors who wish to in ﬂ uence others in a ﬁ eld strive to play the role of an expert . Usually , an expert is required to have extensive knowledge of an area of interest , have a history of advising others , and be associated with reputable actors in a ﬁ eld . At the same time , the role of expert may di ﬀ er depending on the ﬁ eld . In addition , actors recognized as experts strive to create relevant knowledge . To ensure relevance , they create knowledge about problems identi ﬁ ed by in ﬂ uential actors in a ﬁ eld ( Grundmann 2017 ) . Increasingly , they also need to access multiple knowledge areas and combine their elements . Last , to maintain expert status and to create relevant knowledge , expert actors utilize social skills ( Bandola - Gill 2019 ; Fligstein 2001 ) . Often , they act as brokers or institutional entrepreneurs ( Fernandez and Gould 1994 ; Hardy and Maguire 2008 ) . They present themselves as neutral , actively represent collective identity , and emphasize that they play a mediating role between several groups . They collect information about di ﬀ erent groupings of interests in a ﬁ eld and cultural frames they use to frame an agenda that helps induce interaction within and across groups ( Fligstein 2001 ) . At the stage of typi ﬁ cation , experts contribute to reproduction and transformation of knowledge . Typi ﬁ ed concepts , models , reports , and other forms of expert meanings add to reproduction to the extent that they address a pre - existing body of social knowledge . They contribute to transformation when they recon ﬁ gure elements of existing knowledge or add new elements . Ordinary experts specializing in an issue and predominantly POLICY STUDIES 539 interacting within one ﬁ eld domain mostly contribute to reproduction of meanings , while expert actors mediating between di ﬀ erent domains or ﬁ elds are capable of trans - forming knowledge . Here and further , we use the term “ mediating actors ” to highlight the structural aspect of actors ’ involvement in policy - making , i . e . their position at the intersection of di ﬀ erent social groups and knowledge areas . Alternatively , such actors can be described as “ policy entrepreneurs ” who “ seek the right opportunity to utilize expert - based information to place an issue on an agenda , match an idea to a problem , and advocate for policy change ” ( Weible 2008 , 617 ; Kingdon 2014 ) . However , this term emphasizes agency ( Béland and Howlett 2016 ) and discounts the role of social structure ( Kingdon 2014 ) in policy - making . Hence , for the purposes of this article , the term “ mediating actor ” is more ﬁ tting . The second stage of institutionalization of meanings is legitimation that “‘ explains ’ the institutional order by ascribing cognitive validity to its objecti ﬁ ed meanings ” ( Berger and Luckmann 1991 , 111 ) . Legitimation protects meanings from potential challenging by competing actors . Since expert typi ﬁ cations address groups with di ﬀ erent stocks of knowledge , the same meanings can be legitimized in di ﬀ erent ways . Legitimations include a rich arsenal of theories , myths , and frames used in programmatic documents , narratives circulated in the media , public lectures , and so on . Legitimation requires extensive resources , and skilled social actors or boundary organizations are the most capable of supporting it . Building on the presented arguments , we de ﬁ ne expert knowledge as a system of typi ﬁ ed meanings providing a description of a fragment of reality corresponding to a par - ticular ﬁ eld of expertise ; created by actors recognized as experts ; addressing problems identi ﬁ ed by in ﬂ uential actors in a ﬁ eld ; legitimized in at least one ﬁ eld domain . Expert knowledge is distinguished from local ( or community ) knowledge “ which is based on trial - and - error learning about a topic in relation to a speci ﬁ c place ” ( Weible 2008 , 616 ) . Expert knowledge in a policy ﬁ eld : the process of meaning institutionalization Expert knowledge plays a crucial role in policy ﬁ elds . 1 Contemporary policy ﬁ elds di ﬀ er in an important way from those analyzed by Bourdieu . Bourdieu described the ﬁ eld of power as an autonomous political universe , with all its institutions and parties , rules of operation and agents selected according to speci ﬁ c pro - cedures ( Bourdieu 2005 ) . Field logic generates the desire to concentrate political means in the hands of a political elite to impose its vision of society and political relations on the audience . Bourdieu noted that politics was increasingly predisposed to close on itself and its own interests . Contrary to this observation , today the situation is changing . Policy ﬁ elds are no longer autonomous , but increasingly embedded in public life , interacting with other ﬁ elds : economic , social , cultural , scienti ﬁ c , and others ( Hoppe 2005 ; Krick , Christensen , and Holst 2019 ; Mangez and Hilgers 2012 ) . As a result of democratization and internationalization of politics , policy ﬁ elds include actors from other ﬁ elds , among which scientists play the most active role . Science becomes relevant for policy - makers when they are pressed to compete in developing rel - evant and e ﬃ cient policies ( Mangez and Hilgers 2012 ) . In response to the new challenge 540 A . ANTONYUK ET AL . to policy - makers , there emerge policy advisory systems that create knowledge supporting the development of new policies and legitimizing existing policies ( Halligan 1995 ; Crowley and Head 2017 ; Veselý 2013 ; Craft and Howlett 2013 ) . Policy advisory systems include di ﬀ erent actors : scientists , professional consultants , civic activists , NGOs , investors , media , and businesses , which increasingly impact policy development through their ability to in ﬂ uence policy agenda and mobilize resources needed to in ﬂ uence public and elite opinion ( Weible 2008 ; Woo 2021 ) . In the recon ﬁ gured policy ﬁ eld , the tasks of promoting common understanding of problems , managing competition , and resolving con ﬂ icts become pertinent . Two types of organizations , boundary organizations and think tanks , address these tasks by mediat - ing between di ﬀ erent actors in a ﬁ eld and establishing ties with other ﬁ elds . Guston ( 2001 ) introduced the concept of boundary organization as a speci ﬁ c form of organiz - ation mediating between science and policy . A boundary organization allows for the co - production of expert knowledge related to policy - making which promotes shared understanding of problems and solutions . Through this process , knowledge becomes credible , relevant , and legitimate for both policy and science ( Guston 2001 ) . At the same time , a boundary organization helps to resolve con ﬂ icts , guaranteeing each party its legitimacy ( Guston 2001 ) . A similar concept is that of think tank . Think tanks are organizations that conduct research in the ﬁ eld of politics . They are nonpartisan and non - governmental units ( Keudel and Carbou 2021 ; Medvetz 2012 ) . Think tanks , as elements of a policy advisory system , play an important role in the dissemination of knowledge because governments , public services , and other actors making political decisions often lack internal analytical capacity ( Veselý 2013 ; Fraussen and Halpin 2017 ) . Using empirical research , opinion polls , cost - bene ﬁ t analysis , and various forecasting techniques , think tanks develop pro - posals to improve public policy . The importance of think tanks is rooted in their ability to accumulate diverse types of resources ( academic , political , economic , and media capital ) in multiple ﬁ elds and to e ﬀ ectively convert and reinvest these resources to create policy - relevant knowledge ( Keudel and Carbou 2021 ) . As seen from the discussion above , actors in policy ﬁ elds create expert knowledge for policy - making in multiple ways while occupying a variety of roles . There remains the question of how this knowledge is institutionalized . Oberg , Kor ﬀ , and Powell ( 2017 ) o ﬀ er a conceptual and methodological approach that can be helpful for understanding expert knowledge institutionalization happening in a ﬁ eld . The core idea of their approach is that a ﬁ eld includes “ co - constitutive systems of relations and meaning ” that form “ a speci ﬁ c organizational ﬁ eld ’ s con ﬁ guration ” ( 2017 , 18 – 19 ) . They identify di ﬀ erent mechanisms leading to three “ ideal types ” of ﬁ eld con ﬁ gurations . Following their approach , we describe the mechanisms of expert knowledge creation in policy ﬁ elds . Di ﬀ erentiation , recombination , and integration mechanisms We recognize three ﬁ eld - level mechanisms of expert knowledge creation for policy - making : di ﬀ erentiation , recombination , and integration . Di ﬀ erentiation mechanism is based on the low propensity of ﬁ eld members to adopt new meanings . It reproduces a ﬁ eld with relatively autonomous knowledge areas that enable interaction between groups within a ﬁ eld domain and hinder interaction POLICY STUDIES 541 between groups from di ﬀ erent domains ( Oberg , Kor ﬀ , and Powell 2017 ) . Di ﬀ erentiation appears in the context of functional specialization , e . g . between decision - making and scienti ﬁ c research , when di ﬀ erent groups develop specialized knowledge to perform their tasks ( Berger and Luckmann 1991 ) . Di ﬀ erentiation tends to be self - reinforcing because most group members tend to conform to existing norms and rules rather than face sanctions ( Oberg , Kor ﬀ , and Powell 2017 ) . As a result , most social actors seeking to be recognized as members of a ﬁ eld endowed with a role and status seek to demon - strate the possession of knowledge prescribed to this role in the ﬁ eld . The lack of common ground between representatives of di ﬀ erent ﬁ elds , in turn , hinders interaction and exchange of ideas that could change the ﬁ eld con ﬁ guration . Recombination mechanism is based on the increased capacity to adopt new meanings and consists in mixing of meaning structures between di ﬀ erent ﬁ eld domains . For example , groups engaged in interdisciplinary collaboration incorporate knowledge of groups from other domains to stimulate problem - solving and creativity ( Cohen and Levinthal 1990 ; Comfort 1994 ; Nahapiet and Ghoshal 1998 ) . In addition , a small number of groups with high - status positions as well as those marginalized in a ﬁ eld are less susceptible to sanctions ( Oberg , Kor ﬀ , and Powell 2017 ; Nieves and Osorio 2013 ) and , as a result , more willing to disobey the dominant rules , interact with groups from other ﬁ eld domains , and adopt their knowledge . As Oberg , Kor ﬀ , and Powell outline , “ [ t ] his transposition and translation activity alters the discursive pattern of a ﬁ eld , which becomes diversi ﬁ ed rather than being segregated ” ( 2017 , 26 ) . Through extensive and prolonged recombination , organizations and groups across ﬁ eld domains form communities sharing common language that may serve as a conver - sational bridge and stimulate interaction ( Furnari 2014 ; Oberg , Kor ﬀ , and Powell 2017 ) . Recombination of expert meanings may require extra resources as these meanings are quite elaborate . Experts utilize vast intellectual , organizational , and economic resources to get acquainted with a di ﬀ erent meaning system and use some of its elements . Here , actors mediating between di ﬀ erent ﬁ eld domains , such as skilled social actors , boundary organizations , or think tanks play a major role . These actors are acquainted with di ﬀ erent knowledge systems and have special resources and skills needed for recombining expert knowledge from di ﬀ erent areas . In this process , they help other ﬁ eld members to inte - grate new knowledge in their knowledge systems by creating metaphors , concepts , models , actionable scripts , storylines , and framings that describe a problem in a way that appeals to di ﬀ erent groups ( Feldman and Ingram 2009 ; Lejano , Ingram , and Ingram 2018 ; Miller 2007 ) . Integration is based on the varying propensity to adopt new meanings in a ﬁ eld and “ fosters the prominence of an overarching narrative ” which a ﬀ ects participants “ irrespec - tive of their original orientation and form , thereby creating a radial convergence on a common interpretation ” ( Oberg , Kor ﬀ , and Powell 2017 , 26 ) . It is a form of extensive mutual adoption or one - sided imposition of knowledge . Integration is signi ﬁ cantly more di ﬃ cult to achieve than recombination , as actors from di ﬀ erent ﬁ eld domains may develop the same knowledge only when they are highly coordinated and have access to a considerable amount of resources . For this purpose , skilled social actors acting on behalf of boundary organizations may engage actors from di ﬀ erent ﬁ elds in large - scale projects devoted to research , learning , and dissemination of information on an issue . Yet , even large - scale projects do not guarantee that all involved actors adopt 542 A . ANTONYUK ET AL . the same knowledge ( Vadera and Aguilera 2015 ) . Therefore , it is more realistic to assume that only partial integration can be observed in practice . Institutionalization of meanings in environmental policy - making through di ﬀ erentiation , recombination , and integration The mechanisms of di ﬀ erentiation , recombination , and integration facilitate typi ﬁ cation and legitimation of experts ’ meanings in policy ﬁ elds . To demonstrate the functioning of these mechanisms , we use examples from the literature on environmental policy - making at national and international levels . Di ﬀ erentiation at the stage of typi ﬁ cation of meanings occurs when expert groups develop context - speci ﬁ c meanings of their experiences , practices , or identities . Expert groups can achieve di ﬀ erentiation by describing di ﬀ erent areas of reality or by describing the same area using di ﬀ erent frames , concepts , ideas , narratives , theories , etc . which are often speci ﬁ c to a political orientation , area of expertise , professional community , school of thought , or religious a ﬃ liation . Di ﬀ erentiation operates in environmental policy - making when policy - makers and other parties disagree on scienti ﬁ c assessments or pro - posed policies ( Crowley and Head 2017 ; Pielke 2007 ) , e . g . when problem understanding and proposed solutions are in ﬂ uenced by political orientations ( Fisher , Waggle , and Leifeld 2013 ) , political cultures ( Hoppe , Wesselink , and Cairns 2013 ) , or dominant frames ( Grundmann 2007 ) . Moreover , di ﬀ erentiation happens when problematic view - points and arguments are suppressed ( Lejano , Ingram , and Ingram 2018 ; Crowley and Head 2017 ) . Let us examine how di ﬀ erentiation based on political orientation happens . Fisher , Waggle , and Leifeld ( 2013 ) in their study of debates on climate change in the US Con - gress uncovered politicians ’ disagreement on political and economic consequences of carbon dioxide emission reduction policies along party lines . In general , almost all Republicans were against emission regulations claiming they would harm the economy , while Democrats supported the regulations and disagreed that they would entail economic losses . From the point of view of our framework , di ﬀ erentiation along political orientation happened for two reasons . First , Democratic and Republican party members , their constituents , and allies used di ﬀ erent dominant frames to make sense of problems and used di ﬀ erent criteria for determining optimal policies . In other words , they assessed proposed policies based on di ﬀ erent stocks of knowledge about the values and interests of their parties , desired policies , and the state of competition in the policy ﬁ eld . To ensure success , politicians considered the likely assessment of their arguments , and developed di ﬀ erent stances on the policy that would ﬁ t di ﬀ erent stocks of knowledge . The second reason is connected to the ﬁ rst one . Politicians devel - oped their positions on emission reduction policies in a competitive setting of the US policy ﬁ eld . This means that their positions should have aligned with party agendas , and they were expected to win arguments about proposed policies . Politicians debating at the US Congress were competing over the framing of the problem and proposed pol - icies . They used di ﬀ erent frames expected to resonate with diverse audiences and ensure their political support . Third , di ﬀ erentiation was reinforced by conformity to expec - tations from party members , media , and constituents . Politicians followed expected stances on the issue as they risked facing social sanctions . POLICY STUDIES 543 Di ﬀ erentiation at the stage of meaning legitimation is evident when experts use diver - gent or even con ﬂ icting explanations and justi ﬁ cations of their activities and perspectives on reality . This often happens when they interact with new group members and groups from other ﬁ elds , justifying their ideas or persuading others to join them ( Berger and Luckmann 1991 ) . Under di ﬀ erentiation , legitimations are based on di ﬀ erent cultural frames , rules , and norms across groups . In environmental policy - making di ﬀ erentiation operates when there is a strict boundary between types of expertise ( Hoppe 2005 ; Wein - gart 1999 ) , when di ﬀ erent dominant frames are used to legitimize decisions ( Grundmann 2007 ) , or when experts are accountable to several actors and maintain o ﬃ cial and uno ﬃ cial narratives about their activities ( Hoppe , Wesselink , and Cairns 2013 ) . To better understand why di ﬀ erentiation of legitimations takes place , consider the di ﬀ erence in the US and EU approaches to climate change policies . Grundmann ( 2007 ) shows that in the period from 1990s to mid - 2000s the US climate change policy was based on the frame “ prevent the harm to the economy ” , while the EU policy was based on the frame “ prevent the harm to the environment ” . These frames were used to justify , respect - ively , rejection and support of policies aimed at the reduction of greenhouse gas emis - sions . In terms of our framework , this process is explained similarly to politically polarized debates . The primary reason is that US and EU policy - makers addressed actors with di ﬀ erent stocks of knowledge . In the US , climate change scepticism was pro - minent , while actors in the EU widely accepted the need to reduce emissions to tackle climate change . Moreover , di ﬀ erentiation was supported by conformity to existing national political agendas and power structures . Recombination at the stage of typi ﬁ cation is when expert groups from di ﬀ erent ﬁ elds interact with each other and borrow each other ’ s meanings . A paradigmatic example of large - scale recombination of knowledge from di ﬀ erent ﬁ elds is the interaction between science and policy ( Hoppe 2005 ; Pielke 2007 ; Spruijt et al . 2014 ; Weingart 1999 ) . Research on science - policy interaction analyzes di ﬀ erent ways in which policy - makers draw on scienti ﬁ c knowledge to develop and promote policies ( Forsyth 2003 ; Grund - mann 2007 ; Hoppe , Wesselink , and Cairns 2013 ; Spruijt et al . 2014 ; Weingart 1999 ; Hoppe 2005 ; Craft and Halligan 2015 ) . Recombination manifests itself in many forms , e . g . creation of shared concepts , storylines , or boundary objects ( Lejano , Ingram , and Ingram 2018 ; Forsyth 2003 ; Kemp and Rotmans 2009 ) , adaptation of scienti ﬁ c knowl - edge for usage in policy - making ( Crowley and Head 2017 ; Hoppe , Wesselink , and Cairns 2013 ; Daviter 2019 ; Cairney and Oliver 2017 ) , mutual learning ( Halligan 1995 ; Spruijt et al . 2014 ) , and commissioning of scienti ﬁ c research by policy - makers ( Forsyth 2003 ; Hoppe , Wesselink , and Cairns 2013 ) . To examine recombination , we con - sider how adaptation of scienti ﬁ c knowledge for policy - making happens at the Intergo - vernmental Panel on Climate Change ( IPCC ) , an international organization devoted to presenting the best available scienti ﬁ c knowledge on climate change to policy - makers and the wider public . A major contribution of IPCC is that it has made scienti ﬁ c knowl - edge relevant to policy - makers by framing climate change as a global rather than local issue ( Hoppe , Wesselink , and Cairns 2013 ) . This new framing successfully promoted climate change in an international agenda . In this case , from the point of view of our fra - mework , recombination happened because IPCC functioned as a boundary organization mediating between di ﬀ erent ﬁ elds to stimulate cooperation on the issue of emissions regulation . To do so , IPCC drew on its knowledge of the international policy ﬁ eld and 544 A . ANTONYUK ET AL . utilized the dominant “ global ” frame to describe the issue of emissions in a way that was ﬁ t for international politics . This framing appealed to policymakers and other actors who prioritized global over local problems . Recombining meanings during legitimation , an expert group explains and justi ﬁ es its knowledge , actions , and position by adopting cultural frames , claims , or ideas from other ﬁ elds . Speaking about the relationship between science and politics around the issue of climate change , Grundmann ( 2007 , 416 ) outlines that “ the more scientists engage in politics , the more they will stress the validity of their knowledge claims ” and the more politicians “ engage in science debates , the more they will claim that they make decisions based on the best available knowledge ” . Here , scientists and poli - ticians legitimize their positions by making claims not associated with their respective ﬁ elds . Applying our framework , the reasons for the emergence of recombined legitima - tions become more evident . Generally , the need for legitimation arises when the science - policy boundary becomes blurred , enabling evaluation of actors ’ knowledge on foreign grounds . While scienti ﬁ c knowledge continues to be legitimate for scientists , politicians evaluate its relevance for policy based on speci ﬁ c criteria , e . g . viability , align - ment with the political agenda , and authoritativeness . At the same time , scientists evalu - ate policies based on their level of incorporation of scienti ﬁ c arguments . Why do both actors adopt legitimations from each other ’ s ﬁ elds rather than use legitimations accepted in their own ﬁ eld ? One reason for this is that , through interaction , scientists and politicians learn about each other ’ s stocks of knowledge and start to draw on them to build a better basis for legitimacy . Another reason for recombination is the need to e ﬀ ectively solve problems . Both parties risk losing their status in the ﬁ eld if they con - tribute to poor policies . They are motivated to accept novel types of assessments to establish trust by testing each other ’ s knowledge claims ( Craft 2013 ; Hoppe , Wesselink , and Cairns 2013 ) . When the mechanism of integration is operative at the typi ﬁ cation stage , groups make sense of actors , practices , and situations using the same knowledge and the same voca - bulary . Integration re ﬂ ects wide - ranging agreement on the nature of a policy issue and measures needed to address it . Large - scale societal agreement on emission reduction pol - icies in Germany may serve as a rare example of integration of knowledge on climate change and e ﬀ orts to tackle it ( Grundmann 2007 ) . In terms of the ﬁ eld framework , inte - gration is explained by the following . First , there is agreement in the German policy ﬁ eld that climate change is real , caused by human activity , and requires urgent actions . This typi ﬁ cation constitutes the common stock of knowledge of actors in the ﬁ eld . In addition , alternative positions lack legitimacy , what contributes to securing the dominant view . Third , the proposed policy is perceived as a successful solution to the climate change problem , because it promotes meaningful and productive cooperation ( e . g . through plans , programmes , and citizen participation ) . Integration of legitimating meanings implies that experts in di ﬀ erent ﬁ elds use the same cultural frames , language , rules , and norms for explaining and justifying typi ﬁ ed meanings . The processes of creation of integrated legitimations could be formal and informal , supported by political decisions , norms , and widely shared cultural values , or prolonged interaction and mutual trust . The possibility to achieve integration is increased by participatory decision - making when there is a need for wide - ranging agree - ment on a policy ( Abels 2002 ; Forsyth 2003 ; Hoppe , Wesselink , and Cairns 2013 ; Spruijt POLICY STUDIES 545 et al . 2014 ; Krick , Christensen , and Holst 2019 ) . To illustrate the emergence of integrated legitimation , we again draw on the wide support for emission reduction policies in Germany . In this case , environmental policies are legitimized using the “ prevent the harm to the environment ” frame shared among most actors in the national policy ﬁ eld . This frame encompasses the ﬁ eld for the following reasons . Similar to other examples , it corresponds to the shared stock of knowledge about the problem of climate change . Moreover , an alternative frame that could be potentially used for legit - imation , “ prevent the harm to the economy ” , lacks legitimacy in the European policy ﬁ eld , since major European oil companies which could support this frame ( if they behaved similarly to their US counterparts ) have supported emission reduction policies despite their apparent harm to business ( Grundmann 2007 ) . Summarizing , the functioning of the mechanisms of knowledge creation results in di ﬀ erent types of institutionalized expert knowledge . Each of these types serves a func - tion in policy - making . Di ﬀ erentiation results in several autonomous spheres of specialized expert knowledge largely unrelated to each other . This type of knowledge supports routine activities in ﬁ eld domains , such as research , planning , and administration . It expresses and reproduces established rules , norms , and values , helping maintain the ways individuals relate to their tasks , other actors in a ﬁ eld , and material reality . Recombination produces mediating knowledge that spans boundaries between pre - viously unrelated knowledge areas and stimulates new interactions between di ﬀ erent ﬁ eld domains or di ﬀ erent ﬁ elds . This kind of knowledge supports institutional change by de ﬁ ning new goals or ways to achieve them , introducing novel ideas , and connecting groups in unexpected yet productive ways . Creation of mediating knowledge predomi - nantly happens in periods of fast policy change , when unexpected changes in the environment demand innovative solutions based on diverse knowledge of actors across ﬁ eld domains or even di ﬀ erent ﬁ elds . Integration results , if seen realistically , in a widespread yet incomplete agreement on a policy . It means that the majority of stakeholders share a satisfactory solution to a problem and that disagreement is marginal . Conclusion In this article , we have presented a theoretical framework describing how expert knowl - edge for policy - making is created and institutionalized . First , expert knowledge is devel - oped in ﬁ elds where actors collaborate and compete to preserve or gain symbolic power . Powerful ﬁ eld actors develop and use expert knowledge to de ﬁ ne the rules of a ﬁ eld and stimulate interaction between actors in a ﬁ eld and across ﬁ elds , bringing about bene ﬁ ts of collective action . Expert knowledge is associated with high symbolic bene ﬁ ts and is related to the social structure of a ﬁ eld . Second , the structure and features of social relationships in a ﬁ eld in ﬂ uence the pro - cesses of knowledge creation . Patterns and strength of relationships between actors in ﬁ elds in ﬂ uence what knowledge is accessible and whether actors can create in ﬂ uential expert knowledge . Third , expert authority is not established once and for all . Instead , actors competing for power may in ﬂ uence what being an expert means in a given policy ﬁ eld . 546 A . ANTONYUK ET AL . Fourth , expert knowledge is an ensemble of typi ﬁ ed and legitimating meanings . This means that expert knowledge owes its status not only to being an elaborate perspective on an area of reality , but also to its legitimization in a ﬁ eld . An analysis of expert knowledge creation can consider both components of expert knowledge to better understand the mechanisms of its formation , maintenance , and usage in policy - making . Fifth , ﬁ eld - level mechanisms of di ﬀ erentiation , recombination , and integration in ﬂ uence the way actors in a ﬁ eld create expert knowledge to secure a desired position . In accordance with these mechanisms , ﬁ eld members reproduce knowledge accepted by actors in their domain , use ideas of actors in other domains or ﬁ elds to create new knowl - edge , or promote ideas that can in ﬂ uence knowledge across several domains . Powerful ﬁ eld actors may in ﬂ uence the functioning of these mechanisms to develop knowledge that suits their interests . Overall , expert knowledge creation does not happen in isolation , but instead relates directly or indirectly to other expert knowledge already used within a ﬁ eld or across ﬁ elds . To conclude , the framework enhances a conceptual understanding of knowledge cre - ation in policy ﬁ elds , allowing researchers to gain new insights into creation and institu - tionalization of expert knowledge on policy issues . It enables discovery and analysis of trends in knowledge creation , especially regarding competition and cooperation between di ﬀ erent actors . In addition , it allows identifying con ﬂ icts and contradictions arising in this process . The framework also reveals the role of mediating actors in producing expert knowl - edge . This makes it possible to address an existing gap in research on science and policy ( Spruijt et al . 2014 ) and link the macro - scale dynamics to the meso - level of inter - action between di ﬀ erent groups by empirically studying how expert groups from di ﬀ erent domains or ﬁ elds ( such as policy - makers and scientists ) interact and develop knowledge in speci ﬁ c settings . The framework can be used to plan and carry out organized expert knowledge cre - ation e ﬀ orts during policy development . For instance , one can analyze whether successful implementation of a policy requires di ﬀ erentiation , recombination , or integration of knowledge from di ﬀ erent domains or ﬁ elds and then plan activities to support an optimal mechanism or their combination . The present study of expert knowledge creation using the sociological ﬁ eld theory has several limitations . First , it does not address creation of expert knowledge in terms of content , i . e . arguments , history of their development and underlying norms and values . However , it can complement these kinds of analyzes . For example , one can perform an in - depth analysis of arguments produced by expert actors and interpret them in the context of ﬁ eld - level mechanisms of knowledge creation . Next , this approach may lead to conclusions that di ﬀ er from or even contradict results obtained by conventional approaches to measuring agreement in policy - making , e . g . by analyzing voting patterns . For instance , if policy - makers agree on scienti ﬁ c arguments about an issue such as climate change , they may still vote for di ﬀ erent policies on the issue ( Pielke 2007 ) . For a conventional approach , this outcome signals disagreement between policy - makers . However , if one looks at how knowledge is used in a ﬁ eld , one would capture agreement as long as policy - makers use the same arguments . Although for some research purposes this conclusion might be considered inaccurate , we see it as a feature of the approach for the following reason . While votes may be in ﬂ uenced POLICY STUDIES 547 by political ideology or vested interests which inhibit policy adoption based on the best available knowledge , the proposed approach allows us to see behind apparent disagree - ment re ﬂ ected in voting patterns and uncover actual agreement on substantive argu - ments related to a policy . Finally , in this article , we have not applied our framework to study how expert knowl - edge is created within ﬁ elds of science or policy , as well as how non - expert knowledge is implicated in policy - making . Addressing these topics within the proposed framework can be a fruitful enterprise and may serve to advance our understanding of expert knowl - edge creation . Overall , given these limitations , the sociological ﬁ eld theory provides fresh insights on expert knowledge creation and may constitute a valuable addition to research on policy - making . Notes 1 . We use the term “ policy ﬁ eld ” rather than “ policy subsystem ” due to a terminological di ﬀ er - ence between sociology and public policy studies . Both terms describe similar phenomena , but in sociology the notions of “ system ” and “ ﬁ eld ” emphasize di ﬀ erent aspects of social phenomena . The notion of “ system ” is used to describe a stable con ﬁ guration of elements , while the notion of “ ﬁ eld ” highlights changes occurring through interaction of competing and cooperating actors with varying amounts of resources . Since we emphasize the dynamic rather than static aspects of knowledge creation in policy - making and the role of power in this process , using the term “ policy subsystem ” would be confusing . Therefore , we prefer to use the term “ policy ﬁ eld ” . Acknowledgements Authors would like to thank Nikita Basov for comments on the draft of the article , and Kseniia Puzyreva , Irina Kretser , and Alexander Pivovarov for discussing the ideas explored in this article . We would also like to thank two anonymous reviewers for their useful suggestions . Disclosure statement No potential con ﬂ ict of interest was reported by the author ( s ) . Funding This work was supported by the Russian Science Foundation [ grant number 19 - 18 - 00394 ] “ Cre - ation of knowledge on ecological hazards in Russian and European local communities ” ( 2019 – 2021 ) . Notes on contributors Artem Antonyuk is an associate researcher at the Centre for German and European Studies , St . Petersburg State University , St . Petersburg , Russia and a junior researcher at the Faculty of Soci - ology , St . Petersburg , Russia . He holds an MA degree in sociology of culture and communications . His research interests include freedom of expression , internet governance , and applications of network analysis to the study of knowledge creation . Vera N . Minina is a Professor of Sociology and the academic director of the MA programme “ Human Resources Management ” , St . Petersburg State University , St . Petersburg , Russia . She is 548 A . ANTONYUK ET AL . also Chief Editor of the academic journal “ Vestnik of Saint Petersburg University . Sociology ” . She has a PhD in Economics and a Doctor of Sciences degree in Sociology . Her ﬁ elds of expertise are management , human resource management , sociology of organizations , and sociology of trust . Olga Nikiforova is the head of science of the MA programme “ Studies in European Societies ” and an Associated Professor at the Department of Economic Sociology at the Faculty of Sociology , St . Petersburg State University , St . Petersburg , Russia . She holds a PhD in Sociology from St . Petersburg State University . Her research interests include economic sociology , sociology of labour , and education for sustainable development . References Abels , Gabriele . 2002 . “ Experts , Citizens , and Eurocrats – Towards a Policy Shift in the Governance of Biopolitics in the EU . ” European Integration Online Papers 6 ( 19 ) : 27 . Bandola - Gill , Justyna . 2019 . “ Between Relevance and Excellence ? Research Impact Agenda and the Production of Policy Knowledge . ” Science and Public Policy 46 ( 6 ) : 895 – 905 . doi : 10 . 1093 / scipol / scz037 . Béland , Daniel , and Michael Howlett . 2016 . “ The Role and Impact of the Multiple - Streams Approach in Comparative Policy Analysis . ” Journal of Comparative Policy Analysis : Research and Practice 18 ( 3 ) : 221 – 227 . doi : 10 . 1080 / 13876988 . 2016 . 1174410 . Benson , Rodney . 2006 . “ News Media as a ‘ Journalistic Field ’ : What Bourdieu Adds to New Institutionalism , and Vice Versa . ” Political Communication 23 ( 2 ) : 187 – 202 . doi : 10 . 1080 / 10584600600629802 . Berger , Peter L . , and Thomas Luckmann . 1991 . The Social Construction of Reality : A Treatise in the Sociology of Knowledge . London : Penguin . Bourdieu , Pierre . 2005 . “ The Political Field , the Social Science Field , and the Journalistic Field . ” In Bourdieu and the Journalistic Field , edited by Rodney Benson and Erik Neveu , 29 – 47 . Cambridge : Polity . Burt , Ronald S . 2004 . “ Structural Holes and Good Ideas . ” American Journal of Sociology 110 ( 2 ) : 349 – 399 . doi : 10 . 1086 / 421787 . Cairney , Paul , and Kathryn Oliver . 2017 . “ Evidence - based Policymaking is not Like Evidence - based Medicine , So How Far Should You Go to Bridge the Divide Between Evidence and Policy ? ” Health Research Policy and Systems 15 ( 1 ) : 35 . doi : 10 . 1186 / s12961 - 017 - 0192 - x . Carley , Kathleen . 1986 . “ Knowledge Acquisition as a Social Phenomenon . ” Instructional Science 14 ( 3 – 4 ) : 381 – 438 . doi : 10 . 1007 / BF00051829 . Cohen , Wesley M . , and Daniel A . Levinthal . 1990 . “ Absorptive Capacity : A New Perspective on Learning and Innovation . ” Administrative Science Quarterly 35 ( 1 ) : 128 – 152 . Comfort , Louise K . 1994 . “ Risk and Resilience : Inter - organizational Learning Following the Northridge Earthquake of 17 January 1994 . ” Journal of Contingencies and Crisis Management 2 ( 3 ) : 157 – 170 . doi : 10 . 1111 / j . 1468 - 5973 . 1994 . tb00038 . x . Craft , Jonathan . 2013 . “ Appointed Political Sta ﬀ s and the Diversi ﬁ cation of Policy Advisory Sources : Theory and Evidence from Canada . ” Policy and Society 32 ( 3 ) : 211 – 223 . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . polsoc . 2013 . 07 . 003 . Craft , Jonathan , and John Halligan . 2015 . “ Looking Back and Thinking Ahead : 30 Years of Policy Advisory System Scholarship . ” Second International Conference on Public Policy , Catholic University of Sacro Cuore , Milan . https : / / www . ippapublicpolicy . org / ﬁ le / paper / 1433946881 . pdf . Craft , Jonathan , and Michael Howlett . 2013 . “ The Dual Dynamics of Policy Advisory Systems : The Impact of Externalization and Politicization on Policy Advice . ” Policy and Society 32 ( 3 ) : 187 – 197 . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . polsoc . 2013 . 07 . 001 . Cross , Rob , Stephen P . Borgatti , and Andrew Parker . 2001 . “ Beyond Answers : Dimensions of the Advice Network . ” Social Networks 23 ( 3 ) : 215 – 235 . doi : 10 . 1016 / S0378 - 8733 ( 01 ) 00041 - 7 . Crowley , Kate , and Brian W . Head . 2017 . “ Expert Advisory Bodies in the Policy System . ” In Routledge Handbook of Comparative Policy Analysis , edited by Marleen Brans , Iris Geva - May , and Michael Howlett , 181 – 198 . New York : Routledge . doi : 10 . 4324 / 9781315660561 - 12 . POLICY STUDIES 549 Daviter , Falk . 2019 . “ Policy Analysis in the Face of Complexity : What Kind of Knowledge to Tackle Wicked Problems ? ” Public Policy and Administration 34 ( 1 ) : 62 – 83 . doi : 10 . 1177 / 0952076717733325 . DiMaggio , Paul J . , and Walter W . Powell . 1983 . “ The Iron Cage Revisited : Institutional Isomorphism and Collective Rationality in Organizational Fields . ” American Sociological Review 48 ( 2 ) : 147 – 160 . doi : 10 . 2307 / 2095101 . DiMaggio , Paul J . , and Walter W . Powell . 1991 . “ Introduction . ” In The New Institutionalism in Organizational Analysis , edited by Walter W . Powell and Paul J . DiMaggio , 1 – 38 . Chicago : University of Chicago Press . Feldman , David L . , and Helen M . Ingram . 2009 . “ Making Science Useful to Decision Makers : Climate Forecasts , Water Management , and Knowledge Networks . ” Weather , Climate , and Society 1 ( 1 ) : 9 – 21 . doi : 10 . 1175 / 2009WCAS1007 . 1 . Fernandez , Roberto M . , and Roger V . Gould . 1994 . “ A Dilemma of State Power : Brokerage and In ﬂ uence in the National Health Policy Domain . ” American Journal of Sociology 99 ( 6 ) : 1455 – 1491 . doi : 10 . 1086 / 230451 . Fisher , Dana R . , Joseph Waggle , and Philip Leifeld . 2013 . “ Where Does Political Polarization Come From ? Locating Polarization Within the U . S . Climate Change Debate . ” American Behavioral Scientist 57 ( 1 ) : 70 – 92 . doi : 10 . 1177 / 0002764212463360 . Fligstein , Neil . 2001 . “ Social Skill and the Theory of Fields . ” Sociological Theory 19 ( 2 ) : 105 – 125 . doi : 10 . 1111 / 0735 - 2751 . 00132 . Fligstein , Neil , and Doug McAdam . 2012 . A Theory of Fields . Oxford : Oxford University Press . Forsyth , Timothy . 2003 . Critical Political Ecology : The Politics of Environmental Science . London : Routledge . doi : 10 . 4324 / 9780203017562 . Fraussen , Bert , and Darren Halpin . 2017 . “ Think Tanks and Strategic Policy - making : The Contribution of Think Tanks to Policy Advisory Systems . ” Policy Sciences 50 ( 1 ) : 105 – 124 . doi : 10 . 1007 / s11077 - 016 - 9246 - 0 . Friedland , R . , and R . R . Alford . 1991 . “ Bringing Society Back in : Symbols , Practices and Institutional Contradiction . ” In The New Institutionalism in Organizational Analysis , edited by Walter W . Powell and Paul J . DiMaggio , 232 – 263 . Chicago : University of Chicago Press . Furnari , Santi . 2014 . “ Interstitial Spaces : Microinteraction Settings and the Genesis of New Practices Between Institutional Fields . ” Academy of Management Review 39 ( 4 ) : 439 – 462 . doi : 10 . 5465 / amr . 2012 . 0045 . Gibbons , Deborah E . 2004 . “ Friendship and Advice Networks in the Context of Changing Professional Values . ” Administrative Science Quarterly 49 ( 2 ) : 238 – 262 . doi : 10 . 2307 / 4131473 . Granovetter , Mark S . 1973 . “ The Strength of Weak Ties . ” American Journal of Sociology 78 ( 6 ) : 1360 – 1380 . doi : 10 . 1086 / 225469 . Grundmann , Reiner . 2007 . “ Climate Change and Knowledge Politics . ” Environmental Politics 16 ( 3 ) : 414 – 432 . doi : 10 . 1080 / 09644010701251656 . Grundmann , Reiner . 2017 . “ The Problem of Expertise in Knowledge Societies . ” Minerva 55 ( 1 ) : 25 – 48 . doi : 10 . 1007 / s11024 - 016 - 9308 - 7 . Guston , David H . 2001 . “ Boundary Organizations in Environmental Policy and Science : An Introduction . ” Science , Technology , & Human Values 26 ( 4 ) : 399 – 408 . doi : 10 . 1177 / 016224390102600401 . Halligan , John . 1995 . “ Policy Advice and the Public Service . ” In Governance in a Changing Environment , edited by B . Guy Peters and Donald J . Savoie , 138 – 172 . Montreal : McGill - Queen ’ s University Press . Hansen , Morten T . 1999 . “ The Search - Transfer Problem : The Role of Weak Ties in Sharing Knowledge Across Organization Subunits . ” Administrative Science Quarterly 44 ( 1 ) : 82 – 111 . doi : 10 . 2307 / 2667032 . Hardy , Cynthia , and Steve Maguire . 2008 . “ Institutional Entrepreneurship . ” In The SAGE Handbook of Organizational Institutionalism , edited by Royston Greenwood , Christine Oliver , Kerstin Sahlin , and Roy Suddaby , 198 – 217 . London : SAGE Publications . 550 A . ANTONYUK ET AL . Hargadon , Andrew , and Robert I . Sutton . 1997 . “ Technology Brokering and Innovation in a Product Development Firm . ” Administrative Science Quarterly 42 ( 4 ) : 716 – 749 . doi : 10 . 2307 / 2393655 . Ho ﬀ man , Andrew J . 1999 . “ Institutional Evolution and Change : Environmentalism and the U . S . Chemical Industry . ” Academy of Management Journal 42 ( 4 ) : 351 – 371 . doi : 10 . 5465 / 257008 . Hoppe , Robert . 2005 . “ Rethinking the Science - Policy Nexus : From Knowledge Utilization and Science Technology Studies to Types of Boundary Arrangements . ” Poiesis & Praxis 3 ( 3 ) : 199 – 215 . doi : 10 . 1007 / s10202 - 005 - 0074 - 0 . Hoppe , Robert , Anna Wesselink , and Rose Cairns . 2013 . “ Lost in the Problem : The Role of Boundary Organisations in the Governance of Climate Change . ” WIREs Climate Change 4 ( 4 ) : 283 – 300 . doi : 10 . 1002 / wcc . 225 . Kemp , René , and Jan Rotmans . 2009 . “ Transitioning Policy : Co - production of a New Strategic Framework for Energy Innovation Policy in the Netherlands . ” Policy Sciences 42 ( 4 ) : 303 – 322 . doi : 10 . 1007 / s11077 - 009 - 9105 - 3 . Keudel , Oleksandra , and Olena Carbou . 2021 . “ Think Tanks in a Limited Access Order : The Case of Ukraine . ” East European Politics and Societies : And Cultures 35 ( 3 ) : 790 – 811 . doi : 10 . 1177 / 0888325420937810 . Kingdon , John W . 2014 . Agendas , Alternatives , and Public Policies . 2nd ed . Harlow : Pearson . Krackhardt , David . 1992 . “‘ The Strength of Strong Ties : The Importance of Philos in Organizations ’ . ” In Networks and Organizations : Structure , Form , and Action , edited by Nitin Nohria and Robert G . Eccles , 216 – 239 . Boston : Harvard Business School Press . Krick , Eva , Johan Christensen , and Cathrine Holst . 2019 . “ Between ‘ Scientization ’ and a ‘ Participatory Turn ’ . Tracing Shifts in the Governance of Policy Advice . ” Science and Public Policy 46 ( 6 ) : 927 – 939 . doi : 10 . 1093 / scipol / scz040 . Lazega , Emmanuel . 1992 . The Micropolitics of Knowledge : Communication and Indirect Control in Workgroups . New York : Aldine de Gruyter . Lejano , Raul , Mrill Ingram , and Helen Ingram . 2018 . “ Narrative in the Policy Process . ” In Handbook on Policy , Process and Governing , edited by H . K . Colebatch and Robert Hoppe , 309 – 326 . Cheltenham : Edward Elgar Publishing . Levin , Daniel Z . , and Rob Cross . 2004 . “ The Strength of Weak Ties You Can Trust : The Mediating Role of Trust in E ﬀ ective Knowledge Transfer . ” Management Science 50 ( 11 ) : 1477 – 1490 . doi : 10 . 1287 / mnsc . 1030 . 0136 . Mangez , Eric , and Mathieu Hilgers . 2012 . “ The Field of Knowledge and the Policy Field in Education : PISA and the Production of Knowledge for Policy . ” European Educational Research Journal 11 ( 2 ) : 189 – 205 . doi : 10 . 2304 / eerj . 2012 . 11 . 2 . 189 . McFadyen , M . Ann , and Albert A . Cannella . 2004 . “ Social Capital and Knowledge Creation : Diminishing Returns of the Number and Strength of Exchange Relationships . ” Academy of Management Journal 47 ( 5 ) : 735 – 746 . doi : 10 . 5465 / 20159615 . Medvetz , Thomas . 2012 . “ Murky Power : ‘ Think Tanks ’ as Boundary Organizations . ” In Rethinking Power in Organizations , Institutions , and Markets , edited by David Courpasson , Damon Golsorkhi , and Je ﬀ rey J . Sallaz . Research in the Sociology of Organizations , Vol . 34 , 113 – 133 . Bingley : Emerald Group Publishing . doi : 10 . 1108 / S0733 - 558X ( 2012 ) 0000034007 . Meyer , Renate E . 2008 . “ New Sociology of Knowledge : Historical Legacy and Contributions to Current Debates in Institutional Research . ” In The SAGE Handbook of Organizational Institutionalism , edited by Royston Greenwood , Christine Oliver , Thomas B . Lawrence , and Renate E . Meyer , 519 – 538 . London : SAGE Publications . doi : 10 . 4135 / 9781849200387 . n22 . Meyer , Renate E . , and Markus A . Höllerer . 2010 . “ Meaning Structures in a Contested Issue Field : A Topographic Map of Shareholder Value in Austria . ” Academy of Management Journal 53 ( 6 ) : 1241 – 1262 . doi : 10 . 5465 / amj . 2010 . 57317829 . Miller , Clark A . 2007 . “ Democratization , International Knowledge Institutions , and Global Governance . ” Governance 20 ( 2 ) : 325 – 357 . doi : 10 . 1111 / j . 1468 - 0491 . 2007 . 00359 . x . Nahapiet , Janine , and Sumantra Ghoshal . 1998 . “ Social Capital , Intellectual Capital , and the Organizational Advantage . ” Academy of Management Review 23 ( 2 ) : 242 – 266 . doi : 10 . 5465 / amr . 1998 . 533225 . POLICY STUDIES 551 Nieves , Julia , and Javier Osorio . 2013 . “ The Role of Social Networks in Knowledge Creation . ” Knowledge Management Research & Practice 11 ( 1 ) : 62 – 77 . doi : 10 . 1057 / kmrp . 2012 . 28 . Oberg , Achim , Valeska P . Kor ﬀ , and Walter W . Powell . 2017 . “ Culture and Connectivity Intertwined : Visualizing Organizational Fields as Relational Structures and Meaning Systems . ” In Structure , Content and Meaning of Organizational Networks : Extending Network Thinking , edited by Peter Groenewegen , Julie E . Ferguson , Christine Moser , John W . Mohr , and Stephen P . Borgatti . Research in the Sociology of Organizations , Vol . 53 , 17 – 47 . Bingley : Emerald Publishing . doi : 10 . 1108 / S0733 - 558X20170000053001 . Ortiz , Beatriz , Mario J . Donate , and Fátima Guadamillas . 2017 . “ Relationships Between Structural Social Capital , Knowledge Identi ﬁ cation Capability and External Knowledge Acquisition . ” European Journal of Management and Business Economics 26 ( 1 ) : 48 – 66 . doi : 10 . 1108 / EJMBE - 07 - 2017 - 004 . Perry - Smith , Jill E . 2006 . “ Social Yet Creative : The Role of Social Relationships in Facilitating Individual Creativity . ” Academy of Management Journal 49 ( 1 ) : 85 – 101 . doi : 10 . 5465 / amj . 2006 . 20785503 . Pielke , Roger A . 2007 . The Honest Broker : Making Sense of Science in Policy and Politics . Cambridge : Cambridge University Press . Scott , W . Richard . 2014 . Institutions and Organizations : Ideas , Interests , and Identities . 4th ed . Thousand Oaks , CA : SAGE Publications . Spruijt , Pita , Anne B . Knol , Eleftheria Vasileiadou , Jeroen Devilee , Erik Lebret , and Arthur C . Petersen . 2014 . “ Roles of Scientists as Policy Advisers on Complex Issues : A Literature Review . ” Environmental Science & Policy 40 : 16 – 25 . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . envsci . 2014 . 03 . 002 . Uzzi , Brian , and Ryon Lancaster . 2003 . “ Relational Embeddedness and Learning : The Case of Bank Loan Managers and Their Clients . ” Management Science 49 ( 4 ) : 383 – 399 . doi : 10 . 1287 / mnsc . 49 . 4 . 383 . 14427 . Vadera , Abhijeet K . , and Ruth V . Aguilera . 2015 . “ The Evolution of Vocabularies and Its Relation to Investigation of White - collar Crimes : An Institutional Work Perspective . ” Journal of Business Ethics 128 ( 1 ) : 21 – 38 . doi : 10 . 1007 / s10551 - 014 - 2079 - x . van Hulst , Merlijn , and Dvora Yanow . 2016 . “ From Policy ‘ Frames ’ to ‘ Framing ’ : Theorizing a More Dynamic , Political Approach . ” The American Review of Public Administration 46 ( 1 ) : 92 – 112 . doi : 10 . 1177 / 0275074014533142 . Veselý , Arno š t . 2013 . “ Externalization of Policy Advice : Theory , Methodology and Evidence . ” Policy and Society 32 ( 3 ) : 199 – 209 . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . polsoc . 2013 . 07 . 002 . Weber , Edward P . , and Anne M . Khademian . 2008 . “ Wicked Problems , Knowledge Challenges , and Collaborative Capacity Builders in Network Settings . ” Public Administration Review 68 ( 2 ) : 334 – 349 . doi : 10 . 1111 / j . 1540 - 6210 . 2007 . 00866 . x . Weible , Christopher M . 2008 . “ Expert - based Information and Policy Subsystems : A Review and Synthesis . ” Policy Studies Journal 36 ( 4 ) : 615 – 635 . doi : 10 . 1111 / j . 1541 - 0072 . 2008 . 00287 . x . Weingart , Peter . 1999 . “ Scienti ﬁ c Expertise and Political Accountability : Paradoxes of Science in Politics . ” Science and Public Policy 26 ( 3 ) : 151 – 161 . doi : 10 . 3152 / 147154399781782437 . Woo , J . J . 2021 . “ The Politics of Policymaking : Policy Co - creation in Singapore ’ s Financial Sector . ” Policy Studies 42 ( 2 ) : 210 – 227 . doi : 10 . 1080 / 01442872 . 2019 . 1634185 . Yli - Renko , Helena , Erkko Autio , and Harry J . Sapienza . 2001 . “ Social Capital , Knowledge Acquisition , and Knowledge Exploitation in Young Technology - based Firms . ” Strategic Management Journal 22 ( 6 – 7 ) : 587 – 613 . doi : 10 . 1002 / smj . 183 . Zietsma , Charlene , Peter Groenewegen , Danielle M . Logue , and C . R . Hinings . 2017 . “ Field or Fields ? Building the Sca ﬀ olding for Cumulation of Research on Institutional Fields . ” Academy of Management Annals 11 ( 1 ) : 391 – 450 . doi : 10 . 5465 / annals . 2014 . 0052 . 552 A . ANTONYUK ET AL .