Chemistry & Biology 14 Supplemental Data Cofilin Activity Downstream of Pak1 Regulates Cell Protrusion Efficiency by Organizing Lamellipodium and Lamella Actin Networks Violaine Delorme , Matthias Machacek , Celine DerMardirossian , Karen L . Anderson , Torsten Wittmann , Dorit Hanein , Clare Waterman - Storer , Gaudenz Danuser , and Gary M . Bokoch Figure S1 . PAK1 Regulates Cofilin Phosphorylation at the Cell Leading Edge ( A ) Immunolocalization of phosphorylated - cofilin ( pcofilin , green ) and F - actin phalloidin staining ( red ) in cells expressing the control empty vector , active PAK1 ( PAK HLTE ) , active LIMK ( LIMK TE ) , PID or RacQL in combination with CIN ( RacQL + CIN ) . Bar = 10 μ m . Of note , cells expressing a low amount of active PAK1 display the same phenotype as an active Rac1 - expressing cell , i . e . a rounded protrusion with increased phosphorylated cofilin at the leading edge . ( B ) Fluorescence intensity ratio of pcofilin in injected / control cells at the cell edge ( ± SEM ) . The experiment was repeated at least three times ; n cells ≥ 22 for each condition . * , P < 0 . 05 compared to RacQL - expressing cells . Figure S2 . Active Cofilin Displaces High Molecular Weight Tropomyosin from the Leading Edge ( Α ) Immunolocalization of tropomyosin ( TM ) ( green ) and F - actin phalloidin staining ( red ) in control cell , cell expressing RacQL alone or in combination with PID , LIMK DN or CFL SA . Bar = 10 μ m . The F - actin staining allows the detection of the leading edge ( white lines in TM panel ) . ( B ) Tropomyosin / F - actin fluorescence intensity ratio in control ( black ) , RacQL ( pink ) , RacQL + PID ( green ) , RacQL + LIMK DN ( red ) and RacQL + CFL SA ( blue ) cells , measured from the cell edge ( 0 μ m ) into the cell center ( 7 . 5 μ m ) . ( C , D ) Fluorescence intensity of tropomyosin ( C ) and F - actin ( D ) in injected cells ( control : black , RacQL : pink , RacQL + PID : green , RacQL + LIMK DN : red and RacQL + CFL SA : blue ) , measured from the leading edge ( 0 μ m ) into the cell center ( 7 . 5 μ m ) . In B - D , data shown represent one experiment and are averaged from n ≥ 7 cells for each condition . The experiment has been repeated at least three times . Figure S3 . Active Cofilin Displaces Myosin II from the Leading Edge ( A ) Immunolocalization of myosin IIA heavy chain ( MHC ) ( green ) and F - actin phalloidin staining ( red ) in control cell , cell expressing RacQL alone or in combination with PID , LIMK DN or CFL SA . Bar = 10 μ m . The F - actin staining allows the detection of the leading edge ( white lines in MHC panel ) . ( B ) MHC / F - actin fluorescence intensity ratio in control ( black ) , RacQL ( pink ) , RacQL + PID ( green ) , RacQL + LIMK DN ( red ) and RacQL + CFL SA ( blue ) cells , measured from the cell edge ( 0 μ m ) into the cell center ( 7 . 5 μ m ) . ( C , D ) Fluorescence intensity of MHC ( C ) and F - actin ( D ) in injected cells ( control : black , RacQL : pink , RacQL + PID : green , RacQL + LIMK DN : red and RacQL + CFL SA : blue ) , measured from the leading edge ( 0 μ m ) into the cell center ( 7 . 5 μ m ) . In B - D , data shown represent one experiment and are averaged from n ≥ 12 cells for each condition . The experiment has been repeated at least three times . Figure S4 . Active Cofilin Regulates Lamellipodium and Lamella Network Organization - Stereo Views Anaglyph views of column B in Figure 8 , showing the actin network organization at the leading edge of control cells , PtK1 cells expressing RacQL , RacQL + CFL SA or CFL SA . Bar = 2 . 4 μ m . Anaglyph images are used to provide a stereoscopic three - dimensional effect , when viewed with 2 color glasses ( red / cyan color ) . Figure S5 . Model of Cofilin - Based Regulation of Lamellipodium / Lamella Organization ( A , B ) In control conditions , lamellipodium and lamella networks present little overlap within the tip of the lamella , adjacent to the cell edge ( A ) . Coordination between these two actin networks leads to efficient protrusion ( B ) . ( C , D ) Enhancement of cofilin activity widens the lamellipodium and accelerates its F - actin treadmilling rate . The lamella , completely covered by the lamellipodium , extends to the leading edge ( C ) . We propose that increased cofilin activity decouples the two modules . By this mechanism , enhanced cofilin activity reduces the dynamics of edge movements and net protrusion rates ( D ) . Figure S6 . Substrate Adhesions Form Close to the Leading Edge in Cells with Enhanced Cofilin Activity ( A ) Immunolocalization of paxillin ( green ) and F - actin phalloidin staining ( red ) in control cell , cell expressing RacQL alone or in combination with PID , LIMK DN or CFL SA . Bar = 5 μ m . ( B ) Frequency histogram of the distance of the distal - most border of paxillin foci from the leading edge in control cells ( black , n = 33 cells ) , cells expressing RacQL alone ( pink , n = 41 cells ) or in combination with PID ( green , n = 47 cells ) , LIMK DN ( red , n = 30 cells ) or CFL SA ( blue , n = 41 cells ) ( 55 measurements per cell per condition ) .