Since January 2020 Elsevier has created a COVID - 19 resource centre with free information in English and Mandarin on the novel coronavirus COVID - 19 . The COVID - 19 resource centre is hosted on Elsevier Connect , the company ' s public news and information website . Elsevier hereby grants permission to make all its COVID - 19 - related research that is available on the COVID - 19 resource centre - including this research content - immediately available in PubMed Central and other publicly funded repositories , such as the WHO COVID database with rights for unrestricted research re - use and analyses in any form or by any means with acknowledgement of the original source . These permissions are granted for free by Elsevier for as long as the COVID - 19 resource centre remains active . Contents lists available at ScienceDirect Journal of Clinical Virology journal homepage : www . elsevier . com / locate / jcv COVID - 19 and telemedicine : Immediate action required for maintaining healthcare providers well - being Bobak Moazzami a , Niloofar Razavi - Khorasani a , Arash Dooghaie Moghadam a , Ermia Farokhi a , Nima Rezaei a , b , * a Network of Immunity in Infection , Malignancy and Autoimmunity ( NIIMA ) , Universal Scienti ﬁ c Education and Research Network ( USERN ) , Tehran , Iran b Research Center for Immunode ﬁ encies , Children ’ s Medical Center , Tehran University of Medical Sciences , Tehran , Iran A R T I C L E I N F O Keywords : COVID - 19 Epidemiology Causes Triage Telemedicine A B S T R A C T The well - being of the health care workforce is the cornerstone of every well - functioning health system . As a result of the pandemic , medical healthcare providers are under an enormous amount of workload pressure along with increased total health expenditures . The overwhelming burden of COVID - 19 illness could lead to caregiver burnout . Direct - to - consumer telemedicine can enable patients to connect with their healthcare provider at a distance . This virtual platform could be used by smartphones or webcam - enabled computers and allows phy - sicians to e ﬀ ectively screen patients with early signs of COVID - 19 before they reach to hospital . To editor , Since the ﬁ rst case of the novel coronavirus SARS ‐ CoV ‐ 2 , also known as coronavirus disease 2019 ( COVID - 2019 ) was identi ﬁ ed in Wuhan , Hubei province , China at the end of 2019 , the number of new cases out of China has risen rapidly day to day . On 11th March 2020 , the WHO Emergency Committee declared COVID - 19 a global pandemic that will a ﬀ ect all countries on the globe [ 1 ] . To date , con ﬁ rmed cases of COVID - 19 have surpassed 240 , 000 cases and global death toll ex - ceeds 10 , 000 people [ 2 ] . The well - being of the health care workforce is the cornerstone of every well - functioning health system . As a result of the pandemic , medical healthcare providers are under an enormous amount of workload pressure along with increased total health expenditures . The overwhelming burden of COVID - 19 illness could lead to caregiver burnout . The major causes of psychological distress among healthcare workers are including long work hours , sleep disturbances , debilitating fatigue , and the risk of getting infection and put their family at risk of a life - threatening condition . According to the China ' s National Health Commission , more than 3300 healthcare workers had been infected and at least 22 have died . Unfortunately , in Iran , at least 40 healthcare workers have died due to COVID - 19 infection and dozens have re - portedly been put under observation after experiencing signs and symptoms of COVID - 19 infection . Physicians ’ burnout and shortage of health care workforce has a serious consequences for patients and could cause medical system on the verge of a devastating collapse [ 3 ] . In times of outbreak , emergency departments can be an over - whelming , chaotic places when a large number of patients arriving at local health care facilities . The most important aspect of being prepared is planning ahead . The concept of “ forward triage ” was designed for response to various types of crisis scenarios such as virus epidemics and catastrophes . Forward triage is the process of determining the patients ’ condition before they arrive in the emergency department . Direct - to - consumer telemedicine can enable patients to connect with their healthcare provider at a distance [ 4 ] . This virtual platform could be used by smartphones or webcam - enabled computers and allows phy - sicians to e ﬀ ectively screen patients with early signs of COVID - 19 be - fore they reach to hospital . As a result , this could lead to a substantial decline in unnecessary patients visit , promoting self - quarantine and reducing emergency department overuse . Moreover , this approach provides remote monitoring of recently discharged patients , which is a crucial step in containing the outbreak . In addition , providing care from afar can help reduce the risk of clinicians ’ exposure to infections . The use of telemedicine had been largely evaluated by numbers of hospital systems such as Je ﬀ erson Health , Cleveland Clinic , and the University of Pittsburgh that provide online neurologic assessment in patients need an emergency neurologic care [ 5 ] . China has also im - plemented real - time virtual consultation services that addresses the home health care needs for patients . Although limitations including payment , credentialing , ethical consideration , and sta ﬃ ng of specialists https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . jcv . 2020 . 104345 Received 21 March 2020 ; Accepted 29 March 2020 ⁎ Corresponding author at : Research Center for Immunode ﬁ ciencies , Children ’ s Medical Center , Tehran University of Medical Sciences , Dr . Gharib St , Keshavarz Blvd , Tehran , Iran . E - mail address : rezaei _ nima @ tums . ac . ir ( N . Rezaei ) . Journal of Clinical Virology 126 ( 2020 ) 104345 1386 - 6532 / © 2020 Elsevier B . V . All rights reserved . T are also exist that needs to be taken into account . The decline in workforce capacity of physicians and nurses raise serious concerns about diminishing the quality of health care delivery system . This fact will emphasize another important aspect of using telemedicine which is the ability to reinforce those health care workers that have been quarantined at home after exposure to COVID - 19 and employ quarantined physicians to communicate with patients remotely via computer . It should be noted that telemedicine cannot replace in - person patient care , but could bene ﬁ t other frontline physicians by reducing their workload and optimizing their time to attending to pa - tients being in a critically - ill condition . Creating telemedicine program takes time and does not happen overnight . It requires sources , funding and precise guidelines . Many countries have been already invested in telemedicine and received promising results . The chaotic ﬂ ow of patients in the emergency de - partments pose a unique challenge to the maintenance of quality of care especially in times of crisis and pandemics . Forward triage via tele - medicine can turn these obstacles into an opportunity and provide a pathway to overcoming patient ﬂ ow and reducing the workload of physicians as well as minimizing the risk of exposure of healthcare providers . It should be remembered that planning ahead can drastically improve our crisis management capabilities . It is time for our experts from di ﬀ erent ﬁ elds to start addressing this issue and put their sug - gestions into practice . Authors ’ contributions BM and NRK highlighted the potential use of telemedicine for triage of patients with COVID - 19 and drafted the manuscript . ADM and EF contributed to the discussion and revised and formatted the manuscript . NM contributed to the discussion and revised the draft . All authors read and approved the ﬁ nal manuscript . Declarations of Competing Interest None . Acknowledgement This is dedicated to honoring the memory of our brave fallen doc - tors and nurses who fought against COVID - 19 . References [ 1 ] https : / / www . who . int / emergencies / diseases / novel - coronavirus - 2019 ( Accessed on 21 March 2020 ) . [ 2 ] https : / / coronavirus . jhu . edu / map . html ( Accessed on 21 March 2020 ) . [ 3 ] R . S . Patel , R . Bachu , A . Adikey , M . Malik , M . Shah , Factors related to physician burnout and its consequences : a review , Behav . Sci . Basel ( Basel ) 8 ( 11 ) ( 2018 ) 98 . [ 4 ] N . Lurie , B . G . Carr , The role of telehealth in the medical response to disasters , JAMA Intern . Med . 178 ( 2018 ) 745 – 746 . [ 5 ] L . R . Wechsler , J . W . Tsao , S . R . Levine , et al . , Teleneurology applications : report of the telemedicine work group of the american academy of neurology , Neurology . 80 ( 7 ) ( 2013 ) 670 – 676 . B . Moazzami , et al . Journal of Clinical Virology 126 ( 2020 ) 104345 2