1 Induced Arp2 / 3 complex depletion increases FMNL2 / 3 formin expression and filopodia formation Vanessa Dimchev 1 , 2 , Ines Lahmann 1 , 3 , Stefan A . Koestler 2 , 4 , Frieda Kage 1 , 2 , 5 , Georgi Dimchev 1 , 2 , 6 , Anika Steffen 2 , Theresia E . B . Stradal 2 , Franz Vauti 1 , Hans - Henning Arnold 1 * , and Klemens Rottner 1 , 2 , 7 * 1 Zoological Institute , Technische Universität Braunschweig , Spielmannstrasse 7 , 38106 Braunschweig , Germany 2 Department of Cell Biology , Helmholtz Centre for Infection Research , Inhoffen Strasse 7 , 38124 Braunschweig , Germany 3 Present address : Developmental Biology , Max - Delbrück - Center for Molecular Medicine , Robert - Rössle - Strasse 10 , 13125 Berlin , Germany 4 Present address : Department of Physiology , Development and Neuroscience , University of Cambridge , Downing Street , Cambridge , CB2 3DY , UK 5 Present address : Department of Biochemistry and Cell Biology , Geisel School of Medicine at Dartmouth , Hanover , NH 03755 , USA 6 Present address : Institute of Science and Technology Austria ( IST Austria ) . Am Campus 1 , 3400 Klosterneuburg , Austria 7 Braunschweig Integrated Centre of Systems Biology ( BRICS ) , Rebenring 56 , 38106 Braunschweig , Germany * Correspondence : Klemens Rottner klerottn @ tu - braunschweig . de or Hans - Henning Arnold h . arnold @ tu - braunschweig . de Keywords : F - actin branching , lamellipodium , filopodium , migration , chemotaxis , F - actin turnover , cell division , nuclear envelope breakdown Running title : Actr3 gene deletion induces filopodia 2 Abstract The Arp2 / 3 complex generates branched actin filament networks operating in cell edge protrusion and vesicle trafficking . Here we employ a novel , conditional knockout mouse model permitting tissue - or cell - type specific deletion of the murine Actr3 gene ( encoding Arp3 ) . A functional Actr3 gene appeared essential for fibroblast viability and growth . Thus , we developed cell lines for exploring the consequences of acute , tamoxifen - induced Actr3 deletion causing near - complete loss of Arp / 3 complex function as well as abolished lamellipodia formation and membrane ruffling , as expected . However , Arp3 - depleted cells displayed enhanced rather than reduced cell spreading , employing numerous filopodia , and showed little defects in individual cell migration . Reduction of collective cell migration as observed for instance in wound healing assays likely derived from defects in maintaining directionality during migration , while the principal ability to chemotax was only moderately affected . Analyses of actin turnover at the cell periphery revealed reduced actin turnover rates in Arp2 / 3 - deficient cells , clearly deviating from previous sequestration approaches . Most surprisingly , induced removal of Arp2 / 3 complexes reproducibly increased FMNL formin expression , which correlated with the explosive induction of filopodia formation . Our results thus highlight both direct and indirect effects of acute Arp2 / 3 complex removal on actin cytoskeleton regulation . 3 Introduction Actin filament ( F - actin ) assembly and turnover in cells is tightly regulated by various actin monomer and filament binding proteins , with diverse functions . The generation of actin filaments de novo is referred to as nucleation , a complex process that received increasing attention over the past two decades ( Campellone and Welch , 2010 ; Dominguez , 2010 ; Rottner et al . , 2017 ) . In living cells , spontaneous nucleation is likely prohibited by kinetic barriers , imposed for instance by actin monomer binding proteins , to avoid de - regulated , ectopic filament assembly . Cells overcome these barriers by different classes of filament assembly factors each operating at specific subcellular locations and time , allowing respective physiologic processes to occur . These F - actin assembly factors include the Arp2 / 3 complex plus various different activators , formins as well as the Spire / Cobl / Leiomodin type of actin binding proteins thought to enhance nucleation through simple actin monomer clustering ( Chesarone and Goode , 2009 ; Qualmann and Kessels , 2009 ) . Some members of these classes were also found to function cooperatively , as exemplified by Spire - or APC - formin couples combining Spire / APC - mediated nucleation with formin - mediated elongation of generated actin filaments ( Kerkhoff , 2011 ; Breitsprecher et al . , 2012 ) , although the precise modes of action of such cooperative complexes are still to be unraveled ( Montaville et al . , 2014 ) . Other studies have implied antagonistic functions between actin assembly classes , e . g . between Arp2 / 3 complex and formins ( Suarez et al . , 2015 ; Kadzik et al . , 2020 ) , with the actin monomer - binding profilin operating as gatekeeper for Arp2 / 3 - dependent versus – independent actin assembly ( Rotty et al . , 2015 ) . This complexity thus requires development of individual and combined loss of function approaches and systematic and careful side - by - side analysis . The first and best characterized complex considered today as bona fide generator of rapidly - growing , barbed ends of actin filaments is the Arp2 / 3 complex ( Goley and Welch , 2006 ) , which amplifies actin filament assembly by branching daughter filaments off mother filaments that both continue to grow . In recent years , the Arp2 / 3 complex turned out to be of fundamental importance for numerous cellular processes , including actin - based cell edge protrusion during migration and various additional actin assembly processes at both plasma and intracellular membranes ( Rotty et al . , 2013 ; Molinie and Gautreau , 2018 ) , as well as specific interactions of viral or bacterial pathogens with their host cells ( Welch and Way , 2013 ) . Interestingly , many of these processes , in particular those occurring at the plasma membrane , involve adaptive responses orchestrated by Arp2 / 3 complex to mechanical forces ( Mueller et al . , 2017 ; Akamatsu et al . , 2020 ) , as recently emphasized ( Papalazarou and Machesky , 2020 ) . Although the canonical complex is comprised of seven subunits throughout eukaryotic cell evolution , expression of functionally diverse or incomplete complexes - even within the same cell type – have also been described ( Chorev et al . , 2014 ; Abella et al . , 2016 ) . However , our understanding of their physiological relevance is still scarce ( Pizarro - Cerda et al . , 2017 ) . Canonical Arp2 / 3 complexes are activated to form actin filament branches by a family of so called nucleation promoting factors ( NPFs ) , the name giving member of which , WASp , causes the rare , X - linked Wiskott - Aldrich - Syndrome , and contains the WCA - module ( W H2 plus C onnector plus A cidic ) at its C - terminal end operating in actin binding ( W ) and Arp2 / 3 complex activation ( CA ) . Although it comes in various forms , such as multiple copies of W - domains , this module constitutes the minimal sequence necessary for Arp2 / 3 activation ( Campellone and Welch , 2010 ) , and is thus common to all class I NPFs . We generally agree today that the specificity of Arp2 / 3 complex functions in cells is largely mediated by temporal and spatial control through NPFs , potentially explaining how Arp2 / 3 complex activity can be precisely coordinated throughout cells and tissues . Activation of Arp2 / 3 complex in specialized 4 protrusive structures termed lamellipodia , for instance , is generally thought to be mostly accomplished through the Rac GTPase - effector W AVE R egulatory C omplex ( WRC ) ( Krause and Gautreau , 2014 ; Alekhina et al . , 2017 ; Schaks et al . , 2018 ; Schaks et al . , 2019 ) . Various distinct experimental approaches have previously been utilized to interfere with Arp2 / 3 complex function directly , including classical approaches like RNA interference ( Rogers et al . , 2003 ; Steffen et al . , 2006 ; Nicholson - Dykstra and Higgs , 2008 ) , inhibition by small molecules ( Nolen et al . , 2009 ) or even cytosolic Arp2 / 3 complex sequestration ( Machesky and Insall , 1998 ; Hufner et al . , 2001 ; Koestler et al . , 2013 ) . Yet , we are still falling short on tools for complete and reproducible elimination of Arp2 / 3 complex function in living cells , likely due to its vital role in cells ( see below ) . Aside from stable , simultaneous RNAi - mediated suppression of Arp2 and ArpC2 ( p34 ) in fibroblasts ( Wu et al . , 2012 ) , genetic elimination of the ArpC3 ( p21 ) subunit allowed studying its consequences on ES cell - derived fibroblasts , albeit only for a limited number of cell divisions ( Suraneni et al . , 2012 ) . These studies uncovered both , commonly shared and divergent views concerning Arp2 / 3 function in lamellipodia formation versus migration efficiency or chemotaxis , which could not be resolved in respective follow - up studies ( Wu et al . , 2013 ; Suraneni et al . , 2015 ) . Here , we introduce the tamoxifen - inducible elimination of Arp2 / 3 function in several , independently - generated fibroblast cell lines , derived from a mouse mutant harboring a conditional Arp3 allele that can be removed by Cre - recombinase ( Papalazarou et al . , 2020 ) . As opposed to previous studies employing Rac - or WRC - deficient cell lines ( Steffen et al . , 2013 ; Schaks et al . , 2018 ) and in line with recent data analyzing dendritic cell migration in environments of varying complexity ( Leithner et al . , 2016 ) , our results suggest that efficient , mesenchymal migration does not always involve lamellipodia , but that these structures become particularly relevant during processes requiring plasticity and establishment and / or maintenance of the direction of migration . Moreover , and distinct from previously published work on knockdown or knockout of the Arp2 / 3 complex ( Suraneni et al . , 2012 ; Wu et al . , 2012 ) , we confirm here , as already suggested by previous , independent studies ( Steffen et al . , 2013 ) , that lamellipodia are dispensable for cell spreading . Finally , our analyses uncover that acute elimination of Arp2 / 3 complex function leads to upregulation of FMNL formin expression , which is largely responsible for the induced burst of filopodia formation . 5 Materials and methods Mice and cell lines Mice homozygous for the loxP - site flanked Act3r allele were generated as described previously ( Papalazarou et al . , 2020 ) . For generation of fibroblast cell lines used in this study , E13 . 5 - embryos lacking head and intestines were cut into pieces , digested with trypsin and single cells separated by thorough squeezing through a pipet tip before seeding into fibroblast growth medium . Cells were spontaneously immortalized through continuous passaging . Subsequently , cells were transfected with Cre - ERT2 - plasmid , kindly provided by Pierre Chambon ( Feil et al . , 1997 ) , leading to stable expression of the inducible Cre - recombinase variant in the cytoplasm of clonal cell lines selected by puromycin treatment ( 2µg / ml ) . Tamoxifen treatment causes nuclear translocation of Cre - recombinase ( Metzger and Chambon , 2001 ) , and subsequent disruption of floxed Act3r alleles . Three clones with comparable growth rates were selected for further analyses , termed clones 5 , 7 and 19 ( Lahmann , 2011 ) . Following selection , cell lines were maintained in DMEM , 4 . 5 g / l glucose ( Gibco ) supplemented with 10 % FCS ( Sigma ) , 2 mM L - glutamine ( Gibco ) , 2 mM penicillin / streptomycin ( Gibco ) , 0 . 1 mM non - essential amino acids ( Gibco ) , 1 mM sodium pyruvate ( Gibco ) and 5µg / ml of puromycin ( Sigma ) , unless indicated otherwise , and gene disruption routinely induced by treatment with ( Z ) - 4 - Hydroxytamoxifen for 96 hours ( stock solution in DMSO / EtOH and used in a final concentration of 2µg / ml ) . Plasmids and transfections Spontaneously immortalized fibroblast cell lines were transfected with Cre - ERT2 using Lipofectamine 2000 ( ThermoFisher Scientific ) following manufacturer’s instructions . All other transfections were done with jetPRIME transfection reagent ( Polyplus ) according to manufacturer’s protocol . For shRNA - mediated knockdown of FMNL2 and FMNL3 , corresponding psiRNA - h7SK - GFPzeo vectors ( InvivoGen ) harboring knockdown sequences 5’ - GGAAGTCTGCGGATGAGATAT - 3’ ( FMNL2 ) and 5’ - GGTGCAGATTCAAGCGTACCT - 3’ ( FMNL3 ) were co - transfected in a 1 : 1 ratio , and subjected to FACS - sorting prior to tamoxifen / vehicle treatment . For FRAP ( see below ) , EGFP - tagged human β - actin ( Clontech , Mountain View , CA , USA ) was used , as described previously ( Steffen et al . , 2013 ) , and pRK5 - myc - Rac1 - L61 obtained from Laura Machesky ( Cancer Research UK , Beatson Institute , UK ) . EGFP - tagged Arp3 was as described ( Stradal et al . , 2001 ) , and for generation of EGFP - C2 - Arp3B plasmid , the mRNA transcript variant 1 encoding murine actin - related protein 3B ( Actr3b ) ( Jay et al . , 2000 ) was synthesized ( GenScript Biotech ) and cloned into pEGFP - C2 vector ( Clontech ) . 6 Western Blotting and intensity quantifications Detergent - soluble cell extracts were routinely used for all Western blots , and prepared as described ( Kage et al . , 2017 ) . Soluble protein concentrations were measured using Pierce TM BCA Protein Assay Kit ( Thermo Scientific ) and determined using a MRX microplate reader ( Dynatech Laboratories ) . Western Blotting was performed according to standard procedures . Glyceraldehyde - 3 - Phosphate Dehydrogenase ( GAPDH ) levels were used as loading controls . Primary antibodies were : GAPDH ( clone 6C5 , # CB1001 , Calbiochem ) , p16A ( ArpC5A , clone 323H3 ; homemade , undiluted hybridoma supernatant ) ( Olazabal et al . , 2002 ) , Arp2 ( clone FMS69 , Sigma ; at a concentration of 1 µg / ml ) , Arp3 ( clone FMS338 , Sigma , at a concentration of 1 µg / ml ) , p34 ( Arpc2 , # ab205718 , Abcam , 1 : 1000 dilution ) , FMNL2 / 3 ( # ab57963 , Abcam , 1 : 1000 dilution ) , Rac1 / 3 ( clone 23A8 , Upstate , 1 : 2000 dilution ) , ß - actin ( AC - 15 , # A1978 , Sigma , 1 : 10000 dilution ) , Sra - 1 ( rabbit polyclonal 4955B , 1 : 2000 dilution ) and Nap1 ( rabbit polyclonal 4953B , 1 : 5000 dilution ) ( Steffen et al . , 2004 ) . Polyclonal rabbit antisera to Abi - 1 ( 1 : 2000 dilution ) and ArpC1 ( p40 , 1 : 500 dilution ) were raised ( by Eurogentec Deutschland GmbH , Köln , Germany ) against the synthetic peptides PPVDYEDEEAAVVQYNDPYADGDPAWAPKNYI derived from the human Abi - 1 sequence and TARERFQNLDKKASSEGGTAAG derived from the human ArpC1B sequence , respectively , and affinity - purified using corresponding peptides immobilized on CNBr‐ sepharose 4B ( Amersham Biosciences , Sweden ) . Specificity of the antisera was confirmed by Western blot detection of the endogenous and ectopically expressed GFP‐tagged proteins . As secondary antibodies , we used peroxidase - coupled anti - mouse IgG ( # 111 - 035 - 062 , 1 : 10000 dilution ) and anti - rabbit IgG ( # 111 - 035 - 045 , 1 : 10000 dilution ) , which were purchased from Dianova . Protein bands were visualized using chemiluminescent , peroxidase substrate ( Lumi - Light Western Blotting Substrate # 12015200001 , Roche ) and an ECL Chemocam Imager ( Intas ) . Quantifications of protein levels from exposed Western blot membranes were done as described ( Kage et al . , 2017 ) . Immunolabelings For immunolabellings , MEFs were seeded subconfluently o / n ( unless indicated otherwise ) onto coverslips acid - washed and coated with human fibronectin ( 25 µg / ml , # 11051407001 , Roche ) , as described ( Dimchev and Rottner , 2018 ) . For spreading assays , fibroblasts were fixed after different times indicated in Fig . 4 . For timepoint 0 , coverslips were coated with poly - L - lysin ( PLL , Sigma , 0 . 1 mg / ml ) followed by three PBS - washes , and fibroblasts centrifuged onto coverslips for 2 minutes at 1200 rpm prior to fixation . After brief washing with PBS , cells were routinely fixed with 4 % paraformaldehyde ( PFA ) in PBS for 20 min , and permeabilized with 0 . 1 % Triton X - 100 ( Sigma ) in PBS for 60 sec , unless indicated otherwise . For phalloidin stainings , glutaraldehyde ( EM Grade ) was added to fixative . For vinculin stainings , fibroblasts were permeabilized with 0 . 3 % Triton X - 100 / PBS for one minute prior to fixation with 4 % PFA / PBS for 20 minutes . All solutions were pre - warmed to 37°C . Focal adhesions were stained with monoclonal anti - vinculin antibody ( # V9131 , Sigma , 1 : 250 dilution ) , centrosomes with polyclonal anti - gamma tubulin antibody ( PA1 - 28042 , ThermoFisher , 1 : 1500 dilution ) , and WRC at the cell periphery ( Fig . S3 ) using monoclonal anti - Abi - 1 ( supernatant of clone 8 . 3 , 1 : 50 dilution , kindly provided by Giorgio Scita , IFOM Milano ) . Secondary reagents were Alexa Fluor 594 - coupled anti - mouse IgG ( # A11032 , 7 Invitrogen , 1 : 200 dilution ) and Alexa Fluor 488 - coupled anti - rabbit IgG ( # A11034 , Invitrogen , 1 : 400 dilution ) . Phalloidins were either ATTO488 - coupled ( # AD488 - 81 , ATTO - TEC , 1 : 200 dilution ) , ATTO594 - coupled ( # AD594 - 81 , ATTO - TEC , 1 : 200 dilution ) or ATTO390 - coupled ( # AD390 - 81 , ATTO - TEC , 1 : 200 dilution ) , dependent on experiment and the combinations with antibodies . Nuclei were routinely stained with DAPI , already present in the mounting medium ( ProLong Gold , # P36941 , Invitrogen ) or , for SIM - experiments , with TO - PRO - 3 ( # T3605 , ThermoFisher , 1 : 1000 dilution ) . Conventional fluorescence and superresolution microscopy and FRAP Images of immunolabelings were acquired on an inverted Axiovert 100TV epifluorescence microscope ( Zeiss ) using a 40x / 1 . 3 NA Plan - Neofluar oil immersion objective . The microscope was equipped with an HXP 120 light source for widefield fluorescence illumination , and a Coolsnap - HQ2 camera ( Photometrics ) as well as electronic shutters ( Uniblitz Corporate ) driven by VisiView software ( Visitron Systems GmbH , Puchheim , Germany ) . Structured illumination microscopy ( SIM ) data were captured using a CFI Apochromat TIRF 100x / 1 . 49 NA oil immersion objective ( Nikon ) on a Nikon SIM - E superresolution microscope equipped with a LU - N3 - SIM 488 / 561 / 640 laser unit mounted on a Nikon Ti eclipse . Image acquisition was enabled using a NIS - Elements software ( Nikon ) - driven N - SIM motorized quad band filter combined with N - SIM 488 and 561 bandpass emission filters and a Hamamatsu Orca flash 4 . 0 LT camera . Fluorescence recovery after photobleaching ( FRAP ) experiments were performed as described ( Dimchev and Rottner , 2018 ) . Specifically here , vehicle control or tamoxifen - treated MEFs were transfected with EGFP - ß - actin followed by o / n seeding onto fibronectin - coated coverslips , and subjected to FRAP experiments the following day . Random migration , chemotaxis and wound healing assays For random migration assays , DMSO / EtOH - and respective tamoxifen - treated fibroblast clones were seeded subconfluently into µ - Slide 4 Well Ph + Glass Bottom chambers ( Ibidi ) coated with human fibronectin ( 25µg / ml ) six hours prior to time - lapse , phase - contrast microscopy . Prior to chemotaxis assays , respective cell populations were starved overnight in DMEM . Chemotaxis experiments towards 2 . 5 % FCS and 100 ng / ml HGF ( # H9661 , Sigma ) in DMEM were performed with µ - slide chemotaxis chambers ( Ibidi ) according to manufacturer’s instructions . Wound healing assays were performed on cell monolayers grown on fibronectin - coated glass bottom dishes upon removal of standardized , wound - creating silicone culture - inserts ( Ibidi ) or wounding with a disposable pipet tip . Time - lapse microscopy data were generated on an inverted Axio Observer ( Zeiss ) utilizing a 10x / 0 . 3NA Plan - Neofluar air objective for random migration and chemotaxis or a 20x / 0 . 4NA LD Achroplan objective for wound - healing assays . Cells were kept at 37°C and a CO 2 concentration of 7 . 5 using an incubation chamber ( Incubator XL multi S1 , Zeiss ) connected to 8 a heating and CO 2 control unit ( PeCon ) , and maintained in full medium ( except for chemotaxis assays ) . Random migration and chemotaxis were acquired over a time - period of 20 hours and at a frame rate of 4 / hour , whereas wound - healing data were also recorded for up to 20 hours with a frame rate of 12 / hour . Data analysis and processing Numbers of cells with lamellipodia and numbers of filopodia or concave edges per cell were counted manually from phalloidin images . DAPI and gamma tubulin stainings were employed to manually quantify the number of nuclei and centrosomes , respectively . The length of concave edges was also assessed manually but aided by ImageJ Software . Analysis of spreading behavior and quantification of adhesion numbers and sizes were performed as described in ( Steffen et al . , 2013 ) and ( Kage et al . , 2017 ) , respectively . ImageJ plugins ‘manual tracking’ and ‘chemotaxis tool’ were used to analyze random migration and chemotaxis . DiPer software ( Gorelik and Gautreau , 2014 ) was utilized to investigate direction autocorrelation in random migration experiments ( Fig . 6B ) . Collective migration speed of control and tamoxifen - treated fibroblast populations in wound healing assays was assessed as follows : In order to obtain the distance migrated by the cell monolayer , the area engaged was measured at the beginning and after 720 minutes ( 12 hours ) of the wound closure process , as described previously ( Steffen et al . , 2013 ) , and divided by the width of the camera chip to normalize for employment of distinct setups in the course of time . Migration distances from individual experiments were then divided by time to obtain migration velocities , averaged and displayed as bar charts . Data obtained from FRAP experiments were analyzed as follows : Half - times of recovery were derived from fluorescence recovery curves as previously described ( Koestler et al . , 2013 ; Steffen et al . , 2013 ; Dimchev and Rottner , 2018 ) . Due to the comparably narrow lamellipodia formed by these fibroblasts and in control conditions , fluorescence intensities within a region of 1 µm at the lamellipodium front of control or the corresponding cell periphery of tamoxifen - treated cells were measured using MetaMorph Software ( Molecular Devices ) . Fitted curves were generated in Sigma plot 12 . 0 ( Systat Software ) by applying dynamic curve fits for exponential rise to maximum using     x b e a y x f       1 0 . For calculation of the treadmilling factors ( TMF ) ( Lai et al . , 2008 ) , the 1 µm region of intensity measurements described above was subdivided into two regions of identical depths ( 0 . 5 µm each ) , referred to as front and back ( see Figs 3 and S6 ) . Two separate recovery curves for front and back regions were generated and , in case of control cells , fitted employing a dynamic curve fit for exponential rise to maximum :     x b e a y x f       1 0 for data derived from the front part , and following a sigmoidal curve :   b x x e a y x f 0 1 0      for data derived from the rear part . In contrast , recovery curves from tamoxifen - treated cells were best fitted using equation     x b e a y x f       1 0 for both front and back region . The treadmilling factor was derived from these curves as described ( Lai et al . , 2008 ) . 9 MetaMorph Software was used to adjust brightness and contrast levels of all images assembled into final figure panels employing Adobe Photoshop CS5 software . Raw data were analyzed and processed in ImageJ , MetaMorph , Excel 2016 ( Microsoft ) and Sigma plot 12 . 0 . Statistics Statistical significance was assessed using t - test or non - parametric Mann - Whitney rank sum test ( Sigma plot 12 . 0 ) if datasets were not normally distributed ( according to Anderson - Darling normality test ) , as indicated in individual figure legends . Statistical significance is expressed by the number of asterisks , with * corresponding to a p value smaller than 0 . 05 , and * * and * * * corresponding to p < 0 . 01 and p < 0 . 001 , respectively . 10 Results and discussion Acute removal of Arp3 suppresses the Arp2 / 3 complex and lamellipodia formation . In our initial efforts to generate fibroblast cell lines completely devoid of the Arp2 / 3 complex subunit Arp3 , MEFs homozygous for the conditional Actr3 allele described previously ( Lahmann , 2011 ; Papalazarou et al . , 2020 ) were both SV40 - LT - antigen - or spontaneously immortalized , and subjected to clone isolation and analysis following expression of Cre - recombinase . However , in spite of numerous attempts to isolate homozygously - deleted Actr3 clones , as successfully achieved for instance in case of the Rho - GTPase Rac1 ( Steffen et al . , 2013 ) , we were unable to obtain viable Actr3 null MEFs ( data not shown and see below ) . This indicated that Actr3 is essential for cell viability and growth , as suggested previously for ArpC2 and Arp2 in fibroblasts , at least in the presence of tumor suppressors ( Ink4a / Arf ) ( Wu et al . , 2012 ) , and unlike the recent description of Arp2 null HL - 60 promyeloblasts ( Graziano et al . , 2019 ) . We thus turned to exploring the effects of acute Actr3 disruption , which was achieved in spontaneously - immortalized cell lines stably expressing tamoxifen - inducible Cre recombinase . Three independent cell clones were isolated ( termed Arp3 . 5 , 7 and 19 ) and analysed separately for Arp3 expression after 3 , 4 and 5 full days of treatment with tamoxifen or DMSO / EtOH as vehicle control ( Fig . 1A ) . This allowed to determine 4 days ( 96h ) of tamoxifen treatment as optimal compromise between Arp3 elimination and cell viability ( condition boxed red in Fig . 1A ) . The severe reduction of Arp3 expression after 96 hours correlated well with reduced expression of other Arp2 / 3 complex subunits tested , i . e . Arp2 , Arp - C1 , Arp - C2 and Arp - C5 in all three clones ( Fig . 1B ) , confirming the notion that Arp2 / 3 complex subunits are largely dependent on each other . To start examining the consequences of acute Arp3 suppression , we quantified the frequency of lamellipodium formation , one of the most prominent structures considered to require functional Arp2 / 3 complexes ( Suraneni et al . , 2012 ; Wu et al . , 2012 ; Suraneni et al . , 2015 ; King et al . , 2016 ) . Not unexpectedly , lamellipodia formation was strongly suppressed in all three clonal fibroblast cell lines growing on fibronectin ( Fig . 2A , and 2B for quantification ) . Notably , aside from the elimination of lamellipodia , cells were also significantly increased in size under these conditions ( note size bars in Fig . 2A ) , suggesting that loss of lamellipodia does not necessarily interfere with the expansion of cell area on 2D - surfaces ( see also below ) . Canonical lamellipodia formation is well established to require Rac GTPase signalling to WRC - mediated Arp2 / 3 complex activation ( Steffen et al . , 2013 ; Schaks et al . , 2018 ; Rottner and Schaks , 2019 ) , so to confirm that loss of lamellipodia in these conditions was due to lack of Arp2 / 3 complex expression , and not due to loss of upstream components of the signalling pathway , several control experiments were performed . 96 hours of tamoxifen treatment did not reduce Rac expression in any of the cell lines employed , as shown using an antibody cross - reactive with Rac1 and - 3 ( Steffen et al . , 2013 ) ; instead , a trend towards increased Rac1 / 3 expression was observed , statistically significant at least in two out of three cell lines ( Fig . S1 ) . Interestingly , the Sra - 1 / PIR121 and Nap1 subunits of the Rac downstream effector WRC were virtually unchanged in expression , whereas the Abl interactor Abi - 1 was reduced to about half of controls , for unknown reasons ( Fig . S2 ) . However , immunolabeling experiments confirmed the presence of Abi - 1 at the cell edges of both vehicle control and tamoxifen - treated cells ( Fig . S3 ) , strongly suggesting that the loss of lamellipodia in tamoxifen - treated cells was not caused by the elimination of Abi - 1 or other WRC subunits . Finally , the loss of actin filament - rich lamellipodia also did not correlate with a reduction in actin expression , at least as assessed for 11 the prominent , cytoplasmic β - actin isoform ( Fig . S4 ) . All this suggested that the loss of lamellipodia upon 96h tamoxifen treatment was caused by suppression of Arp3 and consequently Arp2 / 3 complex . As final confirmation of this , we found transfection with EGFP - tagged Arp3 to rescue lamellipodia formation in tamoxifen - treated cells in a fashion that was similar in extent to transfection with the related Arp3B ( Fig . S5 ) . Notably , using antibodies that could clearly distinguish Arp3 from Arp3B encoded in murine cells by the Actr3b gene , we found that Arp3B was undetectable at the protein level with and without Actr3 deletion ( Fig . S5A ) . This confirmed that Arp3B is not relevant for the cell type and experiments used here , and was consistent with the nearly complete loss of lamellipodia formation upon induced , sole Actr3 deletion ( Figs . 1 and S5B ) . Arp3 depletion abrogates both peripheral actin network treadmilling and F - actin turnover Lamellipodia are driven by continuous activation and incorporation of Arp2 / 3 complex into the actin filament network polymerizing at the edge ( Lai et al . , 2008 ) . This actin network treadmilling behaviour in the lamellipodium was previously disrupted in our lab by the alternative approach of acute inhibition of Arp2 / 3 complex via its sequestration by microinjection of Scar / WAVE1 - WCA ( Koestler et al . , 2013 ) . In those WCA injection experiments , the network treadmilling behaviour was abolished , but the rate of actin turnover was largely maintained ( Koestler et al . , 2013 ) , quite distinct from genetic removal of Rac , which strongly reduced F - actin turnover at the cell periphery as well ( Steffen et al . , 2013 ) . Here we demonstrate a nearly complete elimination of actin network treadmilling at the periphery of cells upon suppression of Arp3 expression ( Fig . 3A , B ) , but also a severe reduction of actin network turnover ( Fig . 3C for representative clone 19 ) to more than double of the fluorescence half time of recovery rate in the KO as compared to control . Essentially the same pattern was observed when cells were transfected with myc - tagged , constitutively active Rac1 ( Fig . S6 ) , which entirely failed to stimulate lamellipodia formation in Arp3 - deficient cells . Highly comparable results were obtained with clones 5 and 7 both with and without stimulation by constitutively active Rac1 ( data not shown ) . Although the differential response of actin turnover at the cell periphery upon Rac1 - KO and Arp2 / 3 complex sequestration was noted and discussed previously , it remained unclear whether it derived from choice of target protein or experimental approach employed ( Steffen et al . , 2014 ) . The data shown here clearly establish aforementioned differential response not to derive from choice of protein . Although we cannot exclude that the differences in effects observed upon Arp2 / 3 complex sequestration ( Koestler et al . , 2013 ) versus depletion may at least in part reflect the differential timing in development of the phenotype ( seconds and minutes in case of sequestration versus hours and days in case of induced depletion ) , the data provided here confirm that sustained interference with Rac signalling and downstream lamellipodial Arp2 / 3 complex activation abrogates both actin network treadmilling and F - actin turnover . Arp2 / 3 complex is not required for fibroblast cell spreading Previous studies unanimously concluded that Arp2 / 3 complex and Arp2 / 3 complex - dependent lamellipodia are relevant for cell spreading ( Suraneni et al . , 2012 ; Wu et al . , 2012 ) . However , this view was challenged by our data on Rac - deficient fibroblasts that are also completely devoid of lamellipodia ( Steffen et al . , 2013 ) , indicating that previous observations derived from 12 specific , Arp2 / 3 abrogation - dependent roles in spreading rather than a general , lamellipodia - dependent effect . Interestingly , acute suppression of Arp3 expression dramatically increased cell size , but did not reduce spreading efficiency , as assessed from comparing the cell area covering the substratum surface at various time points after seeding ( Fig 4A , B ) . Even if we normalized to the dramatic increase in cell size after 96h of tamoxifen treatment , no substantial relative difference in spreading was recorded at any time point after seeding , neither for clone 19 ( Fig . 4C ) nor clone 7 ( Fig . S7 ) . Only clone 5 slightly lagged behind at early spreading times if considering differences in cell size ( Fig . S8C ) , but this difference was eliminated when data from all three clones were pooled ( Fig . S8D ) . This strongly suggests that clonal variation in this case might explain the observation rather than a genotype - specific effect . We conclude that by and large , the loss of Arp3 and thus Arp2 / 3 function in actin remodelling and lamellipodia formation can be compensated for by cells in order to explore new space during spreading . As deduced from earlier research , this process likely involved filopodia formation ( Wu et al . , 2012 ; Steffen et al . , 2013 ; Suraneni et al . , 2015 ) . To confirm this , we performed phase contrast video microscopy of cells immediately after seeding on fibronectin ( Video S1 ) . Whereas wildtype cells spread using both , short filopodia and lamellipodia , Arp3 - deficient cells initially protruded numerous , prominent and long filopodia , which then served as tracks for the advancement of cytoplasm in between them ( Video S1 ) . Together , these data clearly suggest that at least in fibroblasts , cell spreading can be entirely uncoupled from both lamellipodia formation and Arp2 / 3 complex function . Arp2 / 3 complex promotes directional migration , but is not essential for chemotaxis Arp2 / 3 complex is commonly agreed to be crucial for haptotaxis in which cells follow gradients of ECM components or surface - attached chemoattractants ( King et al . , 2016 ; Swaney and Li , 2016 ) , but whether or not Arp2 / 3 - depleted cells display a cell - autonomous defect in chemotaxis has remained controversial ( Suraneni et al . , 2012 ; Wu et al . , 2012 ; Wu et al . , 2013 ; Suraneni et al . , 2015 ) . In classical wound healing experiments , our three cell lines displayed a significant defect in collective wound closure velocity upon acute Arp3 depletion as compared to EtOH - treated controls ( Fig . 5 and Video S2 ) . These data were highly reminiscent of previous data obtained with ArpC3 - KO , ES cell - derived fibroblastoid cells ( Suraneni et al . , 2012 ) . However , we were not able to explain this defect by general reduction of migration efficiency , as migration speed was not or only moderately reduced in random migration assays performed with clones 5 and 7 / 19 , respectively ( Fig . 6A ) . Interestingly , assessment of directional migration , which can be done in a fashion unbiased by cell speed ( Dang and Gautreau , 2018 ) , was consistently and dramatically impaired upon Arp3 depletion in all three cell lines ( Fig . 6B ) . So Arp2 / 3 complex activity in our fibroblasts appears more important for maintaining directionality of migration than for rate of motility , consistent with the finding that the Arp2 / 3 inhibitor Arpin promotes cell turning ( Dang et al . , 2013 ; Dang and Gautreau , 2018 ) . This also fits the observation of more compromised performance concerning directional migration in order to close a wound ( Fig . 5 and Video S2 ) . To what extent does the observed inability to maintain directionality of migration in random migration assays affect chemotactic performance in our cell lines both with and without Arp2 / 3 complex ? For this , we probed for chemotactic migration towards HGF and 2 , 5 % serum , as used previously for Rac1 - deficient fibroblasts ( Steffen et al . , 2013 ) . In this previous study , we concluded that cells lacking this prominent upstream GTPase , which is considered essential for WRC - and Arp2 / 3 complex - driven , lamellipodial actin assembly , are incapable of chemotactic migration ( Steffen et al . , 2013 ) . Thus , it was reasonable to assume that similar results would be obtained with its 13 prominent , direct downstream effector of actin nucleation , the Arp2 / 3 complex , in spite of clearly conflicting data in this respect with alternative , Arp2 / 3 complex - depleted fibroblast cell models ( Wu et al . , 2012 ; Wu et al . , 2013 ) . Importantly , however , the findings described here largely confirm aforementioned data published by the Bear - lab , as the capability to chemotax was still observed upon Arp3 depletion ( Fig . 7 , clone 19 ) , with the forward migration index ( FMI ) being only moderately reduced and the defect being more severe if considering overall chemotactic migration rate ( Fig . 7D ) . Nevertheless , our data also shed more light on this long - standing controversy on the precise function of Arp2 / 3 complex in chemotaxis , as we do find a partial contribution of the presence of Arp2 / 3 complex in such assays , even though it does not appear to be obligatory , as concluded from other previous data ( Suraneni et al . , 2012 ; Suraneni et al . , 2015 ) . Virtually identical results were obtained in independent experiments using clones 5 ( Fig . S9 ) and 7 ( Fig . S10 ) . Defective directional migration coincides with altered focal adhesion patterns Previous studies have suggested effects of Arp2 / 3 complex - depletion on certain focal adhesion features , in particular concerning their alignment with each other , which is promoted by functional Arp2 / 3 complex and the presence of lamellipodia ( Wu et al . , 2012 ) . Apart from this apparent phenotype ( Fig . 8A ) , we saw a significant increase in overall adhesion numbers per cell ( Fig . 8B ) , but this was reverted to the opposite if the large increase in cell area effected by acute Arp2 / 3 complex removal was considered ( Fig . 8C ) . Finally , we also found a significant increase in average sizes of individual focal adhesions ( Fig . 8D ) . It is commonly agreed upon that proper focal adhesion turnover is crucial for effective migration . Thus , the strong defects in directional migration that we observed may well be due to a combination of increased cell size and de - alignment as well as increased size of focal adhesions . Acute Arp3 loss of function increases expression of FMNL subfamily formins that operate in filopodia formation Our previous studies have established both Arp2 / 3 complex and FMNL subfamily formins to co - operate in the efficiency of lamellipodia formation ( Block et al . , 2012 ; Kage et al . , 2017 ) . However , in the absence of lamellipodia , such as upon Rac1 deletion , FMNL formins can only trigger filopodia but not rescue lamellipodia formation ( Kage et al . , 2017 ) . In these experiments , active FMNL3 , which can promote actin filament nucleation independent of Arp2 / 3 complex in vitro , prominently induced the formation of filopodia with club - shaped appearance ( Kage et al . , 2017 ) , a feature that had previously also been attributed to active actin filament nucleation in cells ( Yang et al . , 2007 ; Block et al . , 2008 ) . Interestingly , FMNL3 knockdown was recently also found to suppress filopodia formation in U2OS osteocarcoma cells ( Young et al . , 2018 ) . In a screen for potentially compensatory upregulation of prominent actin binding proteins , both FMNL2 and FMNL3 appeared significantly enhanced in expression upon induced Arp3 suppression ( Fig . 9A , B ) . Since tamoxifen - induced Arp3 depletion clearly increased cell edge complexity , with numerous , small , concave - shaped regions at the cell periphery ( Fig . 2A , Fig . S11A ) , and strongly - increased filopodia numbers ( Fig . S11B ) , we asked whether RNAi - mediated depletion of induced FMNL formins would revert these effects . First , we confirmed the efficiency of combined FMNL2 and - 3 knockdown with and without tamoxifen treatment ( Fig . 9C ) . We noted that FMNL formin expression was weak in DMSO / EtOH - treated cells , and knockdown efficiency admittedly moderate . For filopodia quantification , we chose conditions 14 in which filopodia numbers were maximal , which was the case during spreading ( Fig . 9D , E ) . Interestingly , filopodia numbers seen in the presence of Arp2 / 3 complex in these conditions , were not affected by FMNL2 / 3 knockdown ( for quantification see Fig . 9E ) , but the increase in filopodia numbers effected by Arp3 removal appeared abolished ( Fig . 9E ) . We should note that additional actin polymerases have previously been implicated in filopodia formation , foremost of all Ena / VASP family members ( Dent et al . , 2007 ) , although they are certainly not obligatory for these structures ( Damiano - Guercio et al . , 2020 ) . It is tempting to speculate that during spreading in the presence of Arp2 / 3 complex , Ena / VASP proteins are more relevant for the formation of the filopodia formed under these conditions than FMNL2 / 3 proteins . Interestingly , the Ena / VASP members VASP and Mena were also found to be upregulated in expression in a previous Arp2 / 3 - KO model ( Rotty et al . , 2015 ) , and we were able to confirm this for VASP upon induced Arp3 removal ( data not shown ) . Thus , the precise relative contributions of both FMNL formin and Ena / VASP families to filopodia formation in the presence or absence of Arp2 / 3 complex remains to be established in the future . Notwithstanding this , we show here that FMNL formin upregulation has clear effects on the changes of features of protrusion and cell morphology seen upon acute Arp3 removal ( Fig . 9 ) . In spread cells of regular cultures , filopodia formation was virtually absent in the presence of Arp2 / 3 - complex , but the increase effected by Arp3 removal was again almost entirely eliminated through additional FMNL2 / 3 knockdown ( Fig . S11B ) . Alongside with this , cell edge complexity was also severely reduced upon FMNL2 / 3 knockdown in Arp3 - depleted cells , as evidenced by a strong reduction of the numbers of concave edges ( Fig . S11C ) , which of course correlated with an increased size of remaining concave edges upon additional FMNL2 / 3 knockdown ( Fig . S11D ) . Finally , spreading cells ( 15 minutes ) suppressed in expression of both , Arp2 / 3 complex and FMNL2 / 3 displayed severe defects in overall cell shape and actin filament distribution at the cell periphery ( Fig . 9D bottom right ) , nicely illustrated by SIM superresolution imaging ( Fig . S12 bottom right panel ) . Both epifluorescence ( Fig . S13A ) and SIM imaging ( Fig . S13B ) in Arp3 - KO / FMNL2 / 3 knockdown cells often showed distinct , oval - shaped regions of very low F - actin content and likely mediating cell - substratum adhesion , which did not coincide with the shape of the nucleus ( Fig . S14 ) . Most strikingly , 3D - projections of SIM imaging data of control ( Video S3 ) versus Arp3 / FMNL2 / 3 - depleted cells ( for representative examples without and with nucleus see Videos S4 / 5 and 6 , respectively ) clearly revealed a drastic shape change upon loss of both Arp3 and FMNL2 / 3 formins , the latter of which frequently adopted the shape of thick disks during spreading instead of the flat cone - shaped cells observed in control cells . The physics behind this phenomenon requires further , thorough investigation , including potential effects on stability and nature of the actin cortex in these conditions ( Bovellan et al . , 2014 ) . Notwithstanding this , our data unequivocally show that the drastic changes in cell morphology effected by acute Arp3 removal , e . g . the observed increase of the numbers of filopodia or of concave regions formed along the cell edge , are to a large extent mediated by the induced upregulation of FMNL2 / 3 formin expression . Acute Arp3 removal increases centrosome and nucleus numbers and causes nuclear deformation . As described above , we have been unable to generate clones of immortalized fibroblast cell lines lacking Arp3 . This suggested that expression of Arp3 was essential for cell division or perhaps cytokinesis . Indeed , Arp2 / 3 complex function has previously been linked to proper cell division and mitotic spindle formation ( Plessner et al . , 2019 ) , perhaps through actin - dependent tuning of centrosomal microtubule nucleation ( Farina et al . , 2019 ) , although it is already clear 15 that Arp2 / 3 complex cannot be obligatory for cell division in all cell types and conditions ( Graziano et al . , 2019 ) . Here we found that induced , acute Arp3 removal in fibroblasts causes dramatic increase in average centrosome numbers from roughly 2 to > 5 on average in interphase cells ( Fig . 10A - C , Fig . S14 , Fig . S15 ) . Severe problems with cytokinesis were also suggested by the increase of average nuclei numbers observed in all three cell clones after acute Arp3 reduction ( Fig . 10D ) . Finally , many nuclei appeared swollen , fragmented or deformed , with frequent “budshape - like” protrusions , which were very rarely seen in control DMSO / EtOH - treated cells . In contrast , the percentage of cells displaying at least one deformed nucleus was increased to roughly 70 - 80 % upon tamoxifen treatment , dependent on the clone treated ( Fig . 10B , E ) . To what extent Arp2 / 3 - dependent actin assembly might contribute to nuclear envelope rupture as previously established in starfish oocytes ( Wesolowska et al . , 2020 ) and as pre - requisite for cells to enter metaphase of mitosis , remains to be established in future studies . Clearly , a potential , specific function in nuclear envelope rupture and breakdown would at least be consistent with the deformed nucleus phenotype observed here ( Fig . 10B , Fig . S14B , Fig . S15B ) . However , future research is needed to dissect whether the obligatory function in cell division and growth observed for the Actr3 gene studied here reflects a cell type - or condition - dependent function in these processes for Arp2 / 3 complex - dependent actin remodeling or a more general , Arp2 / 3 complex - independent function of the Actr3 gene in all cells and tissues ( Vauti et al . , 2007 ) . Author Contributions VD performed all experiments except for the wound healing assays , which were done by SK . FK helped with SIM data generation and cloned FMNL knockdown constructs . IL generated the mouse model harboring loxP site - flanked Actr3 alleles , established and provided spontaneously immortalized Actr3 fl / fl cell lines and performed initial experiments . GD , AS and TS provided essential reagents and supported data analysis and interpretation . FV aided construct generation for homologous recombination and all experiments involving generation of the mouse mutant . HA conceptualized the Arp3 knockout study , supervised all stages of the project , and helped developing the cellular work . KR supervised all cell experiments , interpreted data and wrote the paper . All authors contributed to data interpretation and development of conclusions , and revised , read and approved the manuscript text . Funding This work was supported in part by the Deutsche Forschungsgemeinschaft ( DFG ) , grants Ar115 / 6 - 2 ( to H - HA ) , RO2414 / 3 - 2 and RO2414 / 5 - 1 ( to KR ) as well as the Seventh Framework Programme grant FORCEFULACTIN of the European Research Council ( to Marie - France Carlier and KR ) . 16 Acknowledgments We thank Sophia Leschik for experimental help during early stages of the project , Pierre Chambon , Laura Machesky and Giorgio Scita for reagents , Lothar Gröbe ( HZI Braunschweig ) for cell sorting , and Gerd Landsberg ( University of Bonn ) and Brigitte Denker ( HZI Braunschweig ) for excellent technical assistance . Abbreviations used in this paper AOTF , Acousto - optical tunable filter Arp2 / 3 , actin - related protein 2 / 3 FMNL2 , formin - like family member 2 FMNL3 , formin - like family member 3 MEFs , mouse embryonic fibroblasts Rho , Ras homolog gene family Rac , ras - related C3 botulinum toxin substrate RNAi , RNA interference Scar , Suppressor of cAMP receptor WAVE , WASP family verprolin - homologous WRC , WAVE regulatory complex VASP , Vasodilator - stimulated phosphoprotein Ena / VASP , Enabled / vasodilator - stimulated phosphoprotein EGFP , Enhanced Green Fluorescent Protein FRAP , fluorescence recovery after photobleaching 17 Figure legends Figure 1 . Tamoxifen treatment suppresses expression of Arp2 / 3 complex subunits . ( A , B ) Western blot analysis of Arp2 / 3 complex subunit levels in individual Actr3 fl / fl clones after tamoxifen treatment ( 72h , 96h or 120h ) or DMSO / EtOH used as vehicle control . GAPDH and vinculin served as loading controls , dependent on the molecular weight of explored Arp2 / 3 complex subunit . ( A ) Although the extent of Arp3 protein decrease correlated with prolonged tamoxifen treatment , a treatment of 96 hours ( red box ) was determined as best compromise between efficient protein run down and cell viability , which was significantly compromised upon 120 hours ( not shown ) . The 96h - time point was thus used for all future experiments . ( B ) Tamoxifen - induced removal of Arp3 ( 96h ) concomitantly reduced all additional Arp2 / 3 complex subunits tested , as indicated . Figure 2 . Arp3 - depleted MEFs are devoid of lamellipodia . ( A ) Phalloidin - stained examples of distinct Actr3 fl / fl clones ( Arp3 . 5 , Arp3 . 7 and Arp3 . 19 ) stably expressing tamoxifen - inducible Cre recombinase , with ( tamoxifen ) or without ( DMSO / EtOH ) tamoxifen induction ( 96h ) causing disruption of the Actr3 gene . Tamoxifen treatment causes near to complete elimination of lamellipodia in representative cells shown . Scale bars as indicated in individual panels . Note the strong increase of spread cell area upon Arp3 disruption . ( B ) Quantification of lamellipodia formation efficiency upon treatments as shown in A . Data are arithmetic means and standard errors of means from three independent experiments ; n = total number of cells analyzed ; data were statistically compared using two - sided , two - sample t - test ( * * * p < 0 . 001 ) . Figure 3 . Loss of the Arp2 / 3 complex interferes with treadmilling and F - actin turnover at the cell periphery . ( A ) Time - lapse images of representative FRAP experiments in Actr3 fl / fl cells with or without tamoxifen treatment ( clone Arp3 . 19 ) expressing EGFP - actin . Regions of interest ( ROI ) are marked with white rectangles in overview images on the left . Different time points of enlarged ROI on right - hand panels display fluorescence signals of EGFP - actin immediately pre and after bleach as well as at different time points of fluorescence recovery . White polygons highlight photobleached regions at the cell periphery . Changes in signal intensities over time for calculations of treadmilling factors ( TMF ) were quantified within a region of 0 . 5 µm at the front part ( blue rectangle ) as well as back part ( red rectangle ) of the lamellipodium in the Actr3 fl / fl cell or the corresponding periphery of the cell following Arp3 depletion . ( B ) Average fitted recovery curves of front ( blue ) and back ( red ) regions of Arp3 - expressing ( left ) and Arp3 - depleted cells ( right ) used to calculate the TMF utilizing the illustrated equation . Data were collected from 9 control and 11 tamoxifen - treated cells acquired in three independent experimental days . The treadmilling factor is defined as average difference in fluorescence recovery in the distal versus proximal half of the lamellipodium . Note that this difference is absent in tamoxifen - treated cells , demonstrating that presence of a functional Arp2 / 3 complex is essential for bona fide treadmilling at the cell periphery . ( C ) EGFP - actin FRAP recovery curves within a 1 µm deep peripheral region of DMSO / EtOH ( blue ) versus tamoxifen - treated ( red ) Arp3 . 19 cells . Analysis was performed on the same time - lapse movies as used for the analysis in ( B ) ; data are arithmetic means and SEMs from movies the pre - bleach intensities of which were normalized to 1 . Right panel shows fitted curves derived from raw 18 data depicted on the left . Bar chart displays half times of fluorescent recovery as calculated from fitted curves . Note the marked decrease of F - actin turnover ( increase of half - time of EGFP - actin fluorescence recovery ) upon Arp3 depletion . Figure 4 . The Arp2 / 3 complex is not required for cell spreading . ( A ) Phalloidin stainings of Actr3 fl / fl cells ( clone Arp3 . 19 ) with or without tamoxifen treatment ( 96h ) and subjected to cell spreading for different time points ( 0 min , 15 min , 60 min and 24 hours ) . Except for the 0 - min time point , for which poly - L - lysine was used ( see Methods ) , cells were allowed to spread on 25 µg / ml fibronectin . ( B ) Box and whiskers plots displaying quantification of spreading area using images as shown in ( A ) . Boxes include 50 % ( 25 - 75 % ) and whiskers 80 % ( 10 - 90 % ) of all measurements . Outliers are shown as dots . Median values are given in red . n = total number of cells analyzed from three independent experiments . Differences in average cell area of control and tamoxifen - treated cells at different time points of spreading were confirmed to be statistically significant using non - parametric Mann - Whitney rank sum test ( * * * p < 0 . 001 ) . ( C ) Spreading kinetics of Actr3 fl / fl ( EtOH / DMSO , blue ) and tamoxifen - treated cells ( red ) reported as fold change after normalization to cell size at time point 0 . Data taken from ( B ) . Data are arithmetic means and error bars represent SEMs . Note that Arp3 knockout cells spread with kinetics highly similar to corresponding control cells , but adopt a much larger area 24 hours after seeding , due perhaps to continuous increase in cell size effected by Arp3 removal . Figure 5 . Acute Arp2 / 3 complex removal reduces wound closure capacity . ( A ) Selected frames from wound healing , time - lapse microscopy ( 24 hours ) of control - and tamoxifen - treated Actr3 fl / fl clones . Wounds closed on average after roughly 18 hours in controls , but failed to do so in Arp3 null cells . ( B ) Quantification of collective migration velocity during wound closure utilizing movies as displayed in ( A ) . Bar charts show arithmetic means and SEMs . n = number of movies analyzed , generated from three independent experiments . Differences in wound closure speed between individual control - and tamoxifen - treated clones were confirmed to be statistically significant using two - sided two - sample t - test ( * * * p < 0 . 001 ) . Figure 6 . Arp2 / 3 complex depletion has little effect on the rate of random cell migration , but diminishes its directionality . ( A ) Random migration speed of Actr3 fl / fl clones ( Arp3 . 5 , Arp3 . 7 and Arp3 . 19 , as indicated ) with or without treatment with tamoxifen causing acute gene disruption . Data obtained from time - lapse microscopy ( 20 hours ) followed by manual tracking of individual cells . Box and whiskers plots were as described for Fig . 4B , and data derived from three independent experiments . n = total number of cells analyzed . Non - parametric Mann - Whitney rank sum test was used for statistical comparison of respective groups ( * * * p < 0 . 001 ) . ( B ) Analysis of directional migration utilizing trajectories from ( A ) . An autocorrelation of 1 corresponds to strictly directed movement whereas an autocorrelation of 0 corresponds to pure random walk . Note the consistent loss of directional migration upon Arp2 / 3 complex removal ( tamoxifen ) in these experimental conditions in all three clones . Data are displayed as direction autocorrelation curves with error bars representing standard errors of means . 19 Figure 7 . Arp2 / 3 complex contributes to , but is not essential for chemotaxis . ( A ) Trajectory plots of control ( DMSO / EtOH ) - and tamoxifen - treated MEFs ( Actr3 fl / fl clone Arp3 . 19 ) migrating towards a gradient of 2 . 5 % serum and 100ng / ml HGF . Data obtained from time - lapse microscopy ( 20 hours ) followed by manual tracking of cells in three independent experiments . ( B ) Rose plots with each 10° segment showing the frequency of migratory tracks in that particular direction . Note that both DMSO / EtOH - and tamoxifen - treated fibroblasts migrate towards the given gradient with increased frequencies . ( C ) Forward migration index ( FMI ) obtained from the two experimental conditions . The FMI is defined as displacement of the cell in the direction of the gradient divided by the total distance migrated . Again , Arp3 - depleted fibroblasts display a slightly impaired directional persistence . ( D ) Quantification of rates of chemotactic migration . Velocity of chemotactic migration of Arp3 - depleted cells is reduced to an extent similar to that observed in directed , wound healing migration assays . Box and whiskers plots in ( C , D ) were as described for Fig . 4B . Statistics : Non - parametric Mann - Whitney rank sum test ( * * * p < 0 . 001 ) . Figure 8 : Arp2 / 3 complex removal alters focal adhesion patterns . ( A ) Representative images of fibroblasts ( clone Arp3 . 19 ) with or without tamoxifen treatment and stained with anti - vinculin antibodies . A binarized threshold was applied to these stainings in order to facilitate automated analysis of adhesion numbers and sizes within distinct regions of interest ( yellow outlines , defined manually ) . Note the exclusion of the cell centre and perinuclear area due to the lack of staining resolution in these areas . ( B ) Calculation of adhesion number / cell , ( C ) adhesion number / cell area and ( D ) adhesion size were all based on data obtained from three independent experiments as described in ( A ) . Box and whiskers plots were as described for Fig . 4B . n = total number of cells analyzed . Statistics were performed utilizing the non - parametric Mann - Whitney rank sum test ( * * * p < 0 . 001 ) . Note that Arp3 - deficient cells display more adhesions that are also bigger in size than Arp3 - expressing controls . However , the adhesion number per cell area is reduced upon acute Arp2 / 3 complex removal as compared to control cells . Figure 9 : Acute Arp3 removal up - regulates FMNL formin expression enhancing filopodia formation . ( A ) Representative Western blot of Arp3 as well as FMNL2 and FMNL3 protein levels in Actr3 fl / fl clones with and without tamoxifen treatment , as indicated . GAPDH served as loading control . ( B ) Quantification of FMNL2 and FMNL3 protein levels from Western blots as shown in ( A ) . Bar charts display arithmetic means of FMNL2 and - 3 protein levels normalized to GAPDH , with each FMNL variant ( shades of red ) being presented as fold - change to its respective control ( blue ) . Error bars represent SEMs ; data obtained from at least five independently generated cell extracts . Statistics were performed utilizing non - parametric Mann - Whitney rank sum test ( * * * p < 0 . 001 ; * * < 0 . 01 ) . Note the significant elevation of FMNL2 and - 3 protein levels upon Arp3 suppression in all three clones . ( C ) Western blot analysis of FMNL2 and FMNL3 protein amounts in DMSO / EtOH - and tamoxifen - treated Actr3 fl / fl cells ( clone Arp3 . 19 ) after co - transfection with RNAi plasmids individually downregulating FMNL2 and FMNL3 expression or mock - plasmid as control , as indicated . Again , note the elevation of FMNL2 and - 3 levels upon Arp3 depletion , which was partially counteracted by combined FMNL2 / 3 RNAi . ( D ) Representative phalloidin stainings of Actr3 fl / fl cells ( clone Arp3 . 19 ) control or tamoxifen - treated , and combined with mock - or FMNL2 / 3 - RNAi after 15 minutes of spreading on fibronectin - coated coverslips . ( E ) Quantification of filopodia in cells as presented in ( D ) ; box and whiskers plots as described for Fig . 4B . n = total number of cells 20 analyzed from three independent experiments . Statistics were performed utilizing non - parametric , Mann - Whitney rank sum test ( * * * p < 0 . 001 ; n . s . not significant ) . Note that Arp3 knockout is accompanied by a pronounced increase in filopodia numbers that are significantly reduced upon FMNL2 / 3 RNAi . Figure 10 . Arp3 depletion causes an increase of centrosome and nucleus numbers as well as nuclear deformation . ( A / B ) Representative fluorescence microscopy images of Actr3 fl / fl cells ( clone Arp3 . 19 ) stained for the actin cytoskeleton with phalloidin ( a ) , nuclei using DAPI ( b ) and  - tubulin for centrosomes ( c ) . Merged images ( d ) display actin filaments in red , nuclei in blue and centrosomes in green . White rectangles in ( d ) mark regions of interest enlarged in ( e ) displaying centrosomes , the quantification of which is illustrated in ( f ) . ( C / D ) Box and whiskers plots ( as described for Fig . 4B ) displaying numbers of centrosomes ( C ) or of nuclei ( D ) . For statistics , non - parametric , Mann - Whitney rank sum tests were used ( * * * p < 0 . 001 ) . ( E ) Analysis of nuclear morphologies . Cells were categorized according to the morphological integrity of their nuclei ( intact nuclei in grey ; deformed nuclei in green ) , represented as a fraction of all cells analyzed in individual cell populations . Results are depicted as stacked columns representing arithmetic means and SEMs from three independent experiments ; non - parametric , Mann - Whitney rank sum test for statistics ( * * * p < 0 . 001 ) , n = total number of cells analyzed in ( C - E ) . 21 References Abella , J . V . , Galloni , C . , Pernier , J . , Barry , D . J . , Kjaer , S . , Carlier , M . F . , and Way , M . ( 2016 ) . Isoform diversity in the Arp2 / 3 complex determines actin filament dynamics . Nat Cell Biol 18 , 76 - 86 . Akamatsu , M . , Vasan , R . , Serwas , D . , Ferrin , M . A . , Rangamani , P . , and Drubin , D . G . ( 2020 ) . Principles of self - organization and load adaptation by the actin cytoskeleton during clathrin - mediated endocytosis . Elife 9 . Alekhina , O . , Burstein , E . , and Billadeau , D . D . ( 2017 ) . Cellular functions of WASP family proteins at a glance . J Cell Sci 130 , 2235 - 2241 . Block , J . , Breitsprecher , D . , Kuhn , S . , Winterhoff , M . , Kage , F . , Geffers , R . , Duwe , P . , Rohn , J . L . , Baum , B . , Brakebusch , C . , Geyer , M . , Stradal , T . E . , Faix , J . , and Rottner , K . ( 2012 ) . FMNL2 drives actin - based protrusion and migration downstream of Cdc42 . Curr Biol 22 , 1005 - 1012 . Block , J . , Stradal , T . E . , Hanisch , J . , Geffers , R . , Kostler , S . A . , Urban , E . , Small , J . V . , Rottner , K . , and Faix , J . ( 2008 ) . Filopodia formation induced by active mDia2 / Drf3 . J Microsc 231 , 506 - 517 . Bovellan , M . , Romeo , Y . , Biro , M . , Boden , A . , Chugh , P . , Yonis , A . , Vaghela , M . , Fritzsche , M . , Moulding , D . , Thorogate , R . , Jegou , A . , Thrasher , A . J . , Romet - Lemonne , G . , Roux , P . P . , Paluch , E . K . , and Charras , G . ( 2014 ) . Cellular control of cortical actin nucleation . Curr Biol 24 , 1628 - 1635 . Breitsprecher , D . , Jaiswal , R . , Bombardier , J . P . , Gould , C . J . , Gelles , J . , and Goode , B . L . ( 2012 ) . Rocket launcher mechanism of collaborative actin assembly defined by single - molecule imaging . Science 336 , 1164 - 1168 . Campellone , K . G . , and Welch , M . D . ( 2010 ) . A nucleator arms race : cellular control of actin assembly . Nat Rev Mol Cell Biol 11 , 237 - 251 . Chesarone , M . A . , and Goode , B . L . ( 2009 ) . Actin nucleation and elongation factors : mechanisms and interplay . Curr Opin Cell Biol 21 , 28 - 37 . Chorev , D . S . , Moscovitz , O . , Geiger , B . , and Sharon , M . ( 2014 ) . Regulation of focal adhesion formation by a vinculin - Arp2 / 3 hybrid complex . Nat Commun 5 , 3758 . Damiano - Guercio , J . , Kurzawa , L . , Mueller , J . , Dimchev , G . , Schaks , M . , Nemethova , M . , Pokrant , T . , Bruhmann , S . , Linkner , J . , Blanchoin , L . , Sixt , M . , Rottner , K . , and Faix , J . ( 2020 ) . Loss of Ena / VASP interferes with lamellipodium architecture , motility and integrin - dependent adhesion . Elife 9 . Dang , I . , and Gautreau , A . ( 2018 ) . Random Migration Assays of Mammalian Cells and Quantitative Analyses of Single Cell Trajectories . Methods Mol Biol 1749 , 1 - 9 . Dang , I . , Gorelik , R . , Sousa - Blin , C . , Derivery , E . , Guerin , C . , Linkner , J . , Nemethova , M . , Dumortier , J . G . , Giger , F . A . , Chipysheva , T . A . , Ermilova , V . D . , Vacher , S . , Campanacci , V . , Herrada , I . , Planson , A . G . , Fetics , S . , Henriot , V . , David , V . , Oguievetskaia , K . , Lakisic , G . , Pierre , F . , Steffen , A . , Boyreau , A . , Peyrieras , N . , Rottner , K . , Zinn - Justin , S . , Cherfils , J . , Bieche , I . , Alexandrova , A . Y . , David , N . B . , Small , J . V . , Faix , J . , Blanchoin , L . , and Gautreau , A . ( 2013 ) . Inhibitory signalling to the Arp2 / 3 complex steers cell migration . Nature 503 , 281 - 284 . 22 Dent , E . W . , Kwiatkowski , A . V . , Mebane , L . M . , Philippar , U . , Barzik , M . , Rubinson , D . A . , Gupton , S . , Van Veen , J . E . , Furman , C . , Zhang , J . , Alberts , A . S . , Mori , S . , and Gertler , F . B . ( 2007 ) . Filopodia are required for cortical neurite initiation . Nat Cell Biol 9 , 1347 - 1359 . Dimchev , G . , and Rottner , K . ( 2018 ) . Micromanipulation Techniques Allowing Analysis of Morphogenetic Dynamics and Turnover of Cytoskeletal Regulators . J Vis Exp . Dominguez , R . ( 2010 ) . Structural insights into de novo actin polymerization . Curr Opin Struct Biol 20 , 217 - 225 . Farina , F . , Ramkumar , N . , Brown , L . , Samandar Eweis , D . , Anstatt , J . , Waring , T . , Bithell , J . , Scita , G . , Thery , M . , Blanchoin , L . , Zech , T . , and Baum , B . ( 2019 ) . Local actin nucleation tunes centrosomal microtubule nucleation during passage through mitosis . EMBO J 38 . Feil , R . , Wagner , J . , Metzger , D . , and Chambon , P . ( 1997 ) . Regulation of Cre recombinase activity by mutated estrogen receptor ligand - binding domains . Biochem Biophys Res Commun 237 , 752 - 757 . Goley , E . D . , and Welch , M . D . ( 2006 ) . The ARP2 / 3 complex : an actin nucleator comes of age . Nat Rev Mol Cell Biol 7 , 713 - 726 . Gorelik , R . , and Gautreau , A . ( 2014 ) . Quantitative and unbiased analysis of directional persistence in cell migration . Nat Protoc 9 , 1931 - 1943 . Graziano , B . R . , Town , J . P . , Sitarska , E . , Nagy , T . L . , Fosnaric , M . , Penic , S . , Iglic , A . , Kralj - Iglic , V . , Gov , N . S . , Diz - Munoz , A . , and Weiner , O . D . ( 2019 ) . Cell confinement reveals a branched - actin independent circuit for neutrophil polarity . PLoS Biol 17 , e3000457 . Hufner , K . , Higgs , H . N . , Pollard , T . D . , Jacobi , C . , Aepfelbacher , M . , and Linder , S . ( 2001 ) . The verprolin - like central ( vc ) region of Wiskott - Aldrich syndrome protein induces Arp2 / 3 complex - dependent actin nucleation . J Biol Chem 276 , 35761 - 35767 . Jay , P . , Berge - Lefranc , J . L . , Massacrier , A . , Roessler , E . , Wallis , D . , Muenke , M . , Gastaldi , M . , Taviaux , S . , Cau , P . , and Berta , P . ( 2000 ) . ARP3beta , the gene encoding a new human actin - related protein , is alternatively spliced and predominantly expressed in brain neuronal cells . Eur J Biochem 267 , 2921 - 2928 . Kadzik , R . S . , Homa , K . E . , and Kovar , D . R . ( 2020 ) . F - Actin Cytoskeleton Network Self - Organization Through Competition and Cooperation . Annu Rev Cell Dev Biol 36 , 35 - 60 . Kage , F . , Winterhoff , M . , Dimchev , V . , Mueller , J . , Thalheim , T . , Freise , A . , Bruhmann , S . , Kollasser , J . , Block , J . , Dimchev , G . A . , Geyer , M . , Schnittler , H . J . , Brakebusch , C . , Stradal , T . E . , Carlier , M . F . , Sixt , M . , Kas , J . , Faix , J . , and Rottner , K . ( 2017 ) . FMNL formins boost lamellipodial force generation . Nat Commun accepted . Kerkhoff , E . ( 2011 ) . Actin dynamics at intracellular membranes : the Spir / formin nucleator complex . Eur J Cell Biol 90 , 922 - 925 . King , S . J . , Asokan , S . B . , Haynes , E . M . , Zimmerman , S . P . , Rotty , J . D . , Alb , J . G . , Jr . , Tagliatela , A . , Blake , D . R . , Lebedeva , I . P . , Marston , D . , Johnson , H . E . , Parsons , M . , Sharpless , N . E . , Kuhlman , B . , Haugh , J . M . , and Bear , J . E . ( 2016 ) . Lamellipodia are crucial for haptotactic sensing and response . J Cell Sci 129 , 2329 - 2342 . 23 Koestler , S . A . , Steffen , A . , Nemethova , M . , Winterhoff , M . , Luo , N . , Holleboom , J . M . , Krupp , J . , Jacob , S . , Vinzenz , M . , Schur , F . , Schluter , K . , Gunning , P . W . , Winkler , C . , Schmeiser , C . , Faix , J . , Stradal , T . E . , Small , J . V . , and Rottner , K . ( 2013 ) . Arp2 / 3 complex is essential for actin network treadmilling as well as for targeting of capping protein and cofilin . Mol Biol Cell 24 , 2861 - 2875 . Krause , M . , and Gautreau , A . ( 2014 ) . Steering cell migration : lamellipodium dynamics and the regulation of directional persistence . Nat Rev Mol Cell Biol 15 , 577 - 590 . Lahmann , I . ( 2011 ) . Konditionelle Mutagenese des Arp3 - Gens in der Maus : Untersuchungen zur Funktion in der Skelettmuskelentwicklung in vivo und in embryonalen Fibroblasten in vitro . Dissertation , Technical University of Braunschweig . Lai , F . P . , Szczodrak , M . , Block , J . , Faix , J . , Breitsprecher , D . , Mannherz , H . G . , Stradal , T . E . , Dunn , G . A . , Small , J . V . , and Rottner , K . ( 2008 ) . Arp2 / 3 complex interactions and actin network turnover in lamellipodia . EMBO J 27 , 982 - 992 . Leithner , A . , Eichner , A . , Muller , J . , Reversat , A . , Brown , M . , Schwarz , J . , Merrin , J . , De Gorter , D . J . , Schur , F . , Bayerl , J . , De Vries , I . , Wieser , S . , Hauschild , R . , Lai , F . P . , Moser , M . , Kerjaschki , D . , Rottner , K . , Small , J . V . , Stradal , T . E . , and Sixt , M . ( 2016 ) . Diversified actin protrusions promote environmental exploration but are dispensable for locomotion of leukocytes . Nat Cell Biol 18 , 1253 - 1259 . Machesky , L . M . , and Insall , R . H . ( 1998 ) . Scar1 and the related Wiskott - Aldrich syndrome protein , WASP , regulate the actin cytoskeleton through the Arp2 / 3 complex . Curr Biol 8 , 1347 - 1356 . Metzger , D . , and Chambon , P . ( 2001 ) . Site - and time - specific gene targeting in the mouse . Methods 24 , 71 - 80 . Molinie , N . , and Gautreau , A . ( 2018 ) . The Arp2 / 3 Regulatory System and Its Deregulation in Cancer . Physiol Rev 98 , 215 - 238 . Montaville , P . , Jegou , A . , Pernier , J . , Compper , C . , Guichard , B . , Mogessie , B . , Schuh , M . , Romet - Lemonne , G . , and Carlier , M . F . ( 2014 ) . Spire and Formin 2 synergize and antagonize in regulating actin assembly in meiosis by a ping - pong mechanism . PLoS Biol 12 , e1001795 . Mueller , J . , Szep , G . , Nemethova , M . , De Vries , I . , Lieber , A . D . , Winkler , C . , Kruse , K . , Small , J . V . , Schmeiser , C . , Keren , K . , Hauschild , R . , and Sixt , M . ( 2017 ) . Load Adaptation of Lamellipodial Actin Networks . Cell 171 , 188 - 200 e116 . Nicholson - Dykstra , S . M . , and Higgs , H . N . ( 2008 ) . Arp2 depletion inhibits sheet - like protrusions but not linear protrusions of fibroblasts and lymphocytes . Cell Motil Cytoskeleton 65 , 904 - 922 . Nolen , B . J . , Tomasevic , N . , Russell , A . , Pierce , D . W . , Jia , Z . , Mccormick , C . D . , Hartman , J . , Sakowicz , R . , and Pollard , T . D . ( 2009 ) . Characterization of two classes of small molecule inhibitors of Arp2 / 3 complex . Nature 460 , 1031 - 1034 . Olazabal , I . M . , Caron , E . , May , R . C . , Schilling , K . , Knecht , D . A . , and Machesky , L . M . ( 2002 ) . Rho - kinase and myosin - II control phagocytic cup formation during CR , but not FcgammaR , phagocytosis . Curr Biol 12 , 1413 - 1418 . Papalazarou , V . , and Machesky , L . M . ( 2020 ) . The cell pushes back : The Arp2 / 3 complex is a key orchestrator of cellular responses to environmental forces . Curr Opin Cell Biol 68 , 37 - 44 . 24 Papalazarou , V . , Swaminathan , K . , Jaber - Hijazi , F . , Spence , H . , Lahmann , I . , Nixon , C . , Salmeron - Sanchez , M . , Arnold , H . H . , Rottner , K . , and Machesky , L . M . ( 2020 ) . The Arp2 / 3 complex is critical for colonisation of the mouse skin by melanoblasts . Development . Pizarro - Cerda , J . , Chorev , D . S . , Geiger , B . , and Cossart , P . ( 2017 ) . The Diverse Family of Arp2 / 3 Complexes . Trends Cell Biol 27 , 93 - 100 . Plessner , M . , Knerr , J . , and Grosse , R . ( 2019 ) . Centrosomal Actin Assembly Is Required for Proper Mitotic Spindle Formation and Chromosome Congression . iScience 15 , 274 - 281 . Qualmann , B . , and Kessels , M . M . ( 2009 ) . New players in actin polymerization - - WH2 - domain - containing actin nucleators . Trends Cell Biol 19 , 276 - 285 . Rogers , S . L . , Wiedemann , U . , Stuurman , N . , and Vale , R . D . ( 2003 ) . Molecular requirements for actin - based lamella formation in Drosophila S2 cells . J Cell Biol 162 , 1079 - 1088 . Rottner , K . , Faix , J . , Bogdan , S . , Linder , S . , and Kerkhoff , E . ( 2017 ) . Actin assembly mechanisms at a glance . J Cell Sci 130 , 3427 - 3435 . Rottner , K . , and Schaks , M . ( 2019 ) . Assembling actin filaments for protrusion . Curr Opin Cell Biol 56 , 53 - 63 . Rotty , J . D . , Wu , C . , and Bear , J . E . ( 2013 ) . New insights into the regulation and cellular functions of the ARP2 / 3 complex . Nat Rev Mol Cell Biol 14 , 7 - 12 . Rotty , J . D . , Wu , C . , Haynes , E . M . , Suarez , C . , Winkelman , J . D . , Johnson , H . E . , Haugh , J . M . , Kovar , D . R . , and Bear , J . E . ( 2015 ) . Profilin - 1 serves as a gatekeeper for actin assembly by Arp2 / 3 - dependent and - independent pathways . Dev Cell 32 , 54 - 67 . Schaks , M . , Giannone , G . , and Rottner , K . ( 2019 ) . Actin dynamics in cell migration . Essays Biochem 63 , 483 - 495 . Schaks , M . , Singh , S . P . , Kage , F . , Thomason , P . , Klunemann , T . , Steffen , A . , Blankenfeldt , W . , Stradal , T . E . , Insall , R . H . , and Rottner , K . ( 2018 ) . Distinct Interaction Sites of Rac GTPase with WAVE Regulatory Complex Have Non - redundant Functions in Vivo . Curr Biol 28 , 3674 - 3684 e3676 . Steffen , A . , Faix , J . , Resch , G . P . , Linkner , J . , Wehland , J . , Small , J . V . , Rottner , K . , and Stradal , T . E . ( 2006 ) . Filopodia formation in the absence of functional WAVE - and Arp2 / 3 - complexes . Mol Biol Cell 17 , 2581 - 2591 . Steffen , A . , Koestler , S . A . , and Rottner , K . ( 2014 ) . Requirements for and consequences of Rac - dependent protrusion . Eur J Cell Biol 93 , 184 - 193 . Steffen , A . , Ladwein , M . , Dimchev , G . A . , Hein , A . , Schwenkmezger , L . , Arens , S . , Ladwein , K . I . , Margit Holleboom , J . , Schur , F . , Victor Small , J . , Schwarz , J . , Gerhard , R . , Faix , J . , Stradal , T . E . , Brakebusch , C . , and Rottner , K . ( 2013 ) . Rac function is crucial for cell migration but is not required for spreading and focal adhesion formation . Journal of cell science 126 , 4572 - 4588 . Steffen , A . , Rottner , K . , Ehinger , J . , Innocenti , M . , Scita , G . , Wehland , J . , and Stradal , T . E . ( 2004 ) . Sra - 1 and Nap1 link Rac to actin assembly driving lamellipodia formation . EMBO J 23 , 749 - 759 . Stradal , T . , Courtney , K . D . , Rottner , K . , Hahne , P . , Small , J . V . , and Pendergast , A . M . ( 2001 ) . The Abl interactor proteins localize to sites of actin polymerization at the tips of lamellipodia and filopodia . Curr Biol 11 , 891 - 895 . 25 Suarez , C . , Carroll , R . T . , Burke , T . A . , Christensen , J . R . , Bestul , A . J . , Sees , J . A . , James , M . L . , Sirotkin , V . , and Kovar , D . R . ( 2015 ) . Profilin regulates F - actin network homeostasis by favoring formin over Arp2 / 3 complex . Dev Cell 32 , 43 - 53 . Suraneni , P . , Fogelson , B . , Rubinstein , B . , Noguera , P . , Volkmann , N . , Hanein , D . , Mogilner , A . , and Li , R . ( 2015 ) . A mechanism of leading - edge protrusion in the absence of Arp2 / 3 complex . Mol Biol Cell 26 , 901 - 912 . Suraneni , P . , Rubinstein , B . , Unruh , J . R . , Durnin , M . , Hanein , D . , and Li , R . ( 2012 ) . The Arp2 / 3 complex is required for lamellipodia extension and directional fibroblast cell migration . J Cell Biol 197 , 239 - 251 . Swaney , K . F . , and Li , R . ( 2016 ) . Function and regulation of the Arp2 / 3 complex during cell migration in diverse environments . Curr Opin Cell Biol 42 , 63 - 72 . Vauti , F . , Prochnow , B . R . , Freese , E . , Ramasamy , S . K . , Ruiz , P . , and Arnold , H . H . ( 2007 ) . Arp3 is required during preimplantation development of the mouse embryo . FEBS Lett 581 , 5691 - 5697 . Welch , M . D . , and Way , M . ( 2013 ) . Arp2 / 3 - mediated actin - based motility : a tail of pathogen abuse . Cell host & microbe 14 , 242 - 255 . Wesolowska , N . , Avilov , I . , Machado , P . , Geiss , C . , Kondo , H . , Mori , M . , and Lenart , P . ( 2020 ) . Actin assembly ruptures the nuclear envelope by prying the lamina away from nuclear pores and nuclear membranes in starfish oocytes . Elife 9 . Wu , C . , Asokan , S . B . , Berginski , M . E . , Haynes , E . M . , Sharpless , N . E . , Griffith , J . D . , Gomez , S . M . , and Bear , J . E . ( 2012 ) . Arp2 / 3 is critical for lamellipodia and response to extracellular matrix cues but is dispensable for chemotaxis . Cell 148 , 973 - 987 . Wu , C . , Haynes , E . M . , Asokan , S . B . , Simon , J . M . , Sharpless , N . E . , Baldwin , A . S . , Davis , I . J . , Johnson , G . L . , and Bear , J . E . ( 2013 ) . Loss of Arp2 / 3 induces an NF - kappaB - dependent , nonautonomous effect on chemotactic signaling . J Cell Biol 203 , 907 - 916 . Yang , C . , Czech , L . , Gerboth , S . , Kojima , S . , Scita , G . , and Svitkina , T . ( 2007 ) . Novel roles of formin mDia2 in lamellipodia and filopodia formation in motile cells . PLoS Biol 5 , e317 . Young , L . E . , Latario , C . J . , and Higgs , H . N . ( 2018 ) . Roles for Ena / VASP proteins in FMNL3 - mediated filopodial assembly . J Cell Sci 131 . 26 Figure 1 . 27 Figure 2 . 28 Figure 3 . 29 Figure 4 . 30 Figure 5 . 31 Figure 6 . 32 Figure 7 . 33 Figure 8 . 34 Figure 9 . 35 Figure 10 . 36 Supplementary Information Legends to supplementary figures Figure S1 . Arp3 depletion increases Rac expression levels . ( A ) Representative Western blot showing Rac protein levels using an antibody cross - reactive with Rac1 and - 3 on cell extracts from Actr3 fl / fl cells with and without Tamoxifen treatment . GAPDH served as loading control . ( B ) Quantification of Rac protein levels from Western blots as described in ( A ) . Bar charts display arithmetic means of Rac protein normalized to protein levels of GAPDH , with each knockout cell population ( red ) being presented as fold - change to its respective control ( blue ) . Error bars represent standard error of means . Data were obtained from four independent experiments . Statistics were performed using non - parametric , Mann - Whitney rank sum test . Increase of Rac levels upon Arp3 removal were confirmed to be statistically significant in Arp3 . 5 and Arp3 . 19 cells ( * p < 0 . 05 ) , and at least followed the same trend in clone Arp3 . 7 ( n . s . not significant ) . Figure S2 . Expression levels of the WRC subunit Abi1 are decreased upon acute Arp3 knockout . ( A ) Representative Western blot for WRC subunits Sra - 1 , Abi1 and Nap1 in Actr3 fl / fl clones with and without tamoxifen treatment , as indicated . For Nap1 expression , lysates used were identical to the ones used for Rac protein quantification in Fig . S1 , hence Arp3 and GAPDH bands are identical . GAPDH served as loading control . ( B / C / D ) Quantification of protein levels from Western blots as shown in ( A ) . Bar charts display arithmetic means + / - SEMs for Sra - 1 ( B ) , Nap1 ( C ) and Abi1 ( D ) protein levels , as indicated , and normalized to GAPDH , with each knockout ( red ) being presented as fold - change to its respective control ( blue ) . Data were obtained from three independent experiments , and statistics performed using non - parametric , Mann - Whitney rank sum test , confirming differences for Abi1 protein levels to be statistically significant ( * p < 0 . 05 , * * * p < 0 . 001 , n . s . not significant ) . Figure S3 . Loss of lamellipodia upon Arp3 removal does not coincide with displacement of Abi from the cell periphery . Immunolabeling with anti - Abi1 antibodies and counterstaining for the actin cytoskeleton of Actr3 fl / fl clones with or without tamoxifen treatment , as indicated . Note the association of the WRC subunit Abi1 with peripheral F - actin bundles despite the absence of lamellipodia in tamoxifen - treated cells , implying that lamellipodia cannot form due to the absence of Arp2 / 3 complex , and not WRC . Figure S4 . Acute Arp3 knockout does not alter ß - actin levels . ( A ) Representative Western blot of ß - actin levels in Arp3 fl / fl clones with or without tamoxifen treatment , as indicated . GAPDH served as loading control . Note efficient Arp3 protein rundown after tamoxifen treatment . ( B ) Quantification of ß - actin levels form Western blots as shown in ( A ) . Bar charts are arithmetic means + / - SEMs of ß - actin levels normalized to GAPDH , with each knockout ( red ) being presented as fold - change to its respective control ( blue ) . Data were obtained from 37 four independent experiments , and statistics done using non - parametric , Mann - Whitney rank sum test ( n . s . not significant ) . Figure S5 . Overexpression of both Arp3 and Arp3B restores lamellipodia formation upon removal of endogenous Arp3 . ( A ) Representative Western blot analysis of Arp3 and Arp3B expression in Actr3 fl / fl cells ( clone Arp3 . 19 ) in control conditions ( DMSO / EtOH ) or after induction of Actr3 knockout ( tamoxifen ) . Arp3 - specific antibody confirmed endogenous expression of Arp3 in DMSO / EtOH - treated cells as well as its successful depletion upon tamoxifen treatment . In contrast , anti - Arp3B antibody is specific for Arp3B protein , as illustrated by overexpression of EGFP - tagged Arp3B , but does not appear to be expressed ( with or without Arp3 removal ) from its endogenous locus ( Actr3b ) . Anti - GFP antibodies served as control for EGFP - Arp3B transfection , as indicated . ( B ) Phalloidin stainings ( left panels ) of Arp3 . 19 cells following tamoxifen treatment and transient transfection with either EGFP - C2 - blank , EGFP - C2 - Arp3 or EGFP - C2 - Arp3B ( right panels ) , the two latter of which targeted to the cell periphery , as expected ( red arrowheads ) . Note the restoration of lamellipodia ( red arrowheads ) with both EGFP - tagged Arp3 and Arp3B , but not EGFP alone , strongly suggesting the absence of expression of functional protein levels from the endogenous Actr3b gene upon Actr3 disruption . Figure S6 . Loss of the Arp2 / 3 complex interferes with treadmilling and F - actin turnover even upon expression of constitutively active Rac . Experiments and analyses shown were as described for Figure 3 , except that clone Arp3 . 19 cells were co - transfected with EGFP - actin and constitutively active Rac1 . Movies from 10 control and 6 tamoxifen - treated cells acquired on three independent experimental days were analyzed . Figure S7 . The Arp2 / 3 complex is not required for cell spreading , clone Arp3 . 7 . Data generated and analyzed in analogy to those shown for clone Arp3 . 19 in Fig . 4 . Figure S8 . The Arp2 / 3 complex is not required for cell spreading , clone Arp3 . 5 . Data generated and analyzed in analogy to those shown for clone Arp3 . 19 in Fig . 4 . In ( C ) , cells corresponding to clone Arp3 . 5 display a slight delay in spreading efficiency if normalized to the strong differences in cell size at the onset of spreading ( 0 min - time point ) , which was interpreted as clonal variation as opposed to genotype - dependent difference , because not seen for clones Arp3 . 19 ( Fig . 4 ) and Arp3 . 7 ( Fig . S7 ) treated with tamoxifen . This view is confirmed when pooling data from all three clones , as shown in ( D ) . Figure S9 . Arp2 / 3 complex contributes to , but is not essential for chemotaxis , clone Arp3 . 5 . Data generated and analyzed in analogy to those shown for clone Arp3 . 19 in Fig . 7 . 38 Figure S10 . Arp2 / 3 complex contributes to , but is not essential for chemotaxis , clone Arp3 . 7 . Data generated and analyzed in analogy to those shown for clone Arp3 . 19 in Fig . 7 . Figure S11 . Depletion of FMNL formins reduces cell edge complexity in Arp3 knockout fibroblasts . ( A ) Representative phalloidin stainings of spread , DMSO / EtOH - and tamoxifen - treated Actr3 fl / fl MEFs ( clone Arp3 . 19 ) subjected to either mock - RNAi or FMNL2 + 3 - RNAi . ( B ) Quantification of filopodia numbers / cell in conditions as depicted in ( A ) . Data are presented as box and whiskers plots as described for Fig . 4B . n equals total number of cells analyzed from three independent experiments . Differences in filopodia numbers / cell between experimental conditions were confirmed to be statistically significant using non - parametric , Mann - Whitney rank sum test ( * p < 0 . 05 ; * * * p < 0 . 001 ) . Note the induction of filopodia formation by acute Arp3 removal even in readily spread cells , which appears largely effected by elevated FMNL protein levels , as quantified in Fig . 9B . ( C / D ) Box and whiskers plots displaying manual quantification of the number of concave edges defining the cell periphery of tamoxifen - treated Arp3 fl / fl cells ( C ) and length measurements of those concave edges ( D ) using images as displayed in ( A ) . n corresponds to the total number of cells analyzed ( C ) and total number of measured concave edges ( D ) from three independent experiments . Statistics was done using non - parametric , Mann - Whitney rank sum test ( * * * p < 0 . 001 ) . Note that upon depletion of Arp3 , the cell edge is not only characterized by an increase in filopodia numbers , but also by the formation of many concave edges of short length ( A ) . However , the number of these concave edges is significantly reduced with the length of each concave edge being significantly increased once Arp3 removal is combined with RNAi - mediated suppression of FMNL2 / 3 formin expression . As a result , cells reduced for both Arp3 and FMNL2 / 3 expression display less complex cell edges ( C ) with concave edges being increased in length ( D ) as compared to cells lacking Arp3 alone . Figure S12 . Morphological consequences of individual and combined interference with Arp3 and FMNL2 / 3 formin function . Structured illumination microscopy ( SIM ) images of phalloidin - stained cells allowed to spread for 15 minutes following genetic as well as combined RNAi treatments , as indicated . Figure S13 . Morphology of the actin cytoskeleton in spreading cells simultaneously suppressed for Arp3 and FMNL2 / 3 expression . ( A ) Widefield fluorescence and ( B ) SIM imaging of Arp3 and FMNL2 / 3 - depleted , spreading cells stained with phalloidin ( F - actin ) and the nucleus , as indicated . Note the formation of an adhesion area of reduced F - actin intensity , which did not simply coincide with the position of the nucleus . Figure S14 . Arp3 depletion causes an increase of centrosome and nucleus numbers as well as nuclear deformation , clone Arp3 . 5 . Representative raw data for clone Arp3 . 5 corresponding to quantifications shown in Fig . 10C - E . 39 Figure S15 . Arp3 depletion causes an increase of centrosome and nucleus numbers as well as nuclear deformation , clone Arp3 . 7 . Representative raw data for clone Arp3 . 7 corresponding to quantifications shown in Fig . 10C - E . Legends to supplementary videos Video S1 . Arp2 / 3 complex knockout fibroblasts efficiently spread using numerous filopodia . Time - lapse microscopy of Actr3 fl / fl MEFs ( clone Arp3 . 7 ) with ( right ) or without ( left ) tamoxifen treatment , and allowed to spread on fibronectin . Time is given in minutes and seconds . Video S2 . Wound healing migration with and without acute reduction of Arp2 / 3 complex function . Time - lapse microscopy of Actr3 fl / fl MEFs ( clone Arp3 . 5 ) with ( right ) or without ( left ) tamoxifen treatment , and stimulated to migrate upon cell monolayer wounding . Time is given in hours and minutes ( bottom right of each panel ) , and bars at the bottom left correspond to 50µm . Video S3 . 3D SIM projection of phalloidin - stained control cell . DMSO / EtOH - treated Actr3 fl / fl cell ( clone Arp3 . 19 ) transfected with mock - RNAi vector and allowed to spread for 15 minutes . Video S4 . 3D SIM projection of phalloidin - stained Arp3 / FMNL2 / 3 - depleted cell . Tamoxifen - treated Actr3 fl / fl cell ( clone Arp3 . 19 ) transfected with FMNL2 + 3 - RNAi vectors and allowed to spread for 15 minutes . Cells suppressed for both Arp2 / 3 complex and FMNL2 / 3 formins appear to adopt a highly peculiar shape ( thick flattened disks ) , likely caused by actin assembly deficiencies at the cell periphery caused by this treatment . Video S5 . 3D SIM projection of phalloidin - stained Arp3 / FMNL2 / 3 - depleted cell , representative example 2 . Tamoxifen - treated Actr3 fl / fl cell ( clone Arp3 . 19 ) transfected with FMNL2 + 3 - RNAi vectors and allowed to spread for 15 minutes . Note that in this case , the optical sectioning allows a view from inside the cell , revealing the typical F - actin - deficient area ( see also legend to Fig . S13 ) to be positioned at the ventral cell surface . Video S6 . 3D SIM projection of Arp3 / FMNL2 / 3 - depleted cell co - stained with phalloidin ( green ) and the nucleus with TO - PRO - 3 ( pink ) . Tamoxifen - treated Actr3 fl / fl cell ( clone Arp3 . 19 ) transfected with FMNL2 + 3 - RNAi vectors and allowed to spread for 15 minutes . Again , the F - actin - deficient zone at the ventral cell surface does not fully co - inside with the position of the nucleus . 40 Figure S1 . 41 Figure S2 . 42 Figure S3 . 43 Figure S4 . 44 Figure S5 . 45 Figure S6 . 46 Figure S7 . 47 Figure S8 . 48 Figure S9 . 49 Figure S10 . 50 Figure S11 . 51 Figure S12 . 52 Figure S13 . 53 Figure S14 . 54 Figure S15 .