Developmenlal Psychology Copyright 1990 by the American Psychological Association , Inc . 1990 , Vol . 26 , No . 5 , 796 - 804 0012 - 1649 / 90 / $ 00 . 75 The Importance of Knowing a Dodo Is a Bird : Categories and Inferences in 2 - Year - Old Children Susan A . Gelman and John D . Coley University of Michigan This study examined 2 - year - old children ' s ability to make category - based inferences . Subjects were asked a series of questions that they could answer based on category membership , appearances , or both . In one condition , all pictures were named ; in a second condition , none were named . Children performed well on prototypical pictures regardless of whether they were named ; on atypical pic - tures , they performed better when category labels were provided . A control study demonstrated that children ignored the label when it named a transient property rather than a stable category . Contrary to standard views of young children , these results indicate an early - emerging capacity to overlook salient appearances . However , one important development still to take place is the ability to use subtle perceptual cues to determine category membership in the absence of language . Are young children ' s categories based on appearances alone , or are children aware that categories can reflect deeper com - monalities ? Many years of developmental research and theory have suggested that children cannot look beyond the obvious ( Wellman & Gelman , 1988 ) . Children are highly attentive to perceptual similarities on a range of important tasks ( e . g , Fen - son , Cameron , & Kennedy , 1988 ; Gentner , 1988 ; L . B . Smith , 1989 ) . At the same time , growing evidence suggests that surface similarity alone cannot adequately describe adult concepts and that theories play an important role in the organization of knowledge for adults ( Murphy & Medin , 1985 ) . Accordingly , a number of researchers have suggested that conceptual develop - ment reflects a shift from categories based on perceptual simi - larity to categories based on theories that reflect deeper under - lying commonalities among category members ( e . g . , Neisser , 1987 , p . 6 ) . Recently , the notion of a developmental shift has been chal - lenged by studies demonstrating that preschool children can overlook misleading perceptual information when reasoning about categories ( S . A . Gelman & Markman , 1986 ) . The impe - tus for this work was the assumption that categories function to extend knowledge beyond what is obvious or already known . If we learn certain facts about one category member , we are likely to infer that they are true of other category members as well . For example , if we learn that one dog has leukocytes inside it , we are likely to infer that other dogs also have leukocytes inside This research was supported by National Institute of Mental Health Grant 1 - R29 - HD23378 and a Spencer Fellowship to Susan A . Gelman and by a University of Michigan Regent ' s Fellowship to John D . Coley . We thank Stacey Watkins and Michelle Wecksler for their assistance . We are grateful to the children , parents , and teachers of the following schools for their generous cooperation : Ann Arbor " Y " Child Care Center , Humpty Dumpty Day Care , Jack and Jill Nursery School , the University of Michigan Children ' s Center , and the University of Michi - gan Children ' s Center for Working Families . Correspondence concerning this article should be addressed to Su - san A . Gelman , Department of Psychology , 3433 Mason Hall , Univer - sity of Michigan , Ann Arbor , Michigan 48109 - 1027 . 796 them . Although children often have difficulty constructing certain kinds of categories ( Inhelder & Piaget , 1964 ) , S . A . Gel - man and Markman hypothesized that once children are told the category membership of an object , they might be able to use the category as the basis of further inferences . To test this idea , S . A . Gelman and Markman ( 1986 ) gave preschool children a task in which category membership was put into conflict with superficial appearances and children were asked to make a series of inductive inferences . For exam - ple , On one item children saw a brontosaurus , a rhinoceros , and a triceratops , which were labeled as " dinosaur ; ' " rhinoceros " and " dinosaur " respectively Category labels and outward ap - pearances conflicted : The brontosaurus and triceratops are members of the same category , whereas the rhinoceros and tri - ceratops look more alike outwardly . Then children learned a new property of the brontosaurus and the rhinoceros ( that they had cold blood and warm blood , respectively ) and were asked which property was true of the triceratops . Children reported that the triceratops has cold blood like the brontosaurus , even though it more closely resembled the rhinoceros . The results of this and other related experiments ( S . A . Gelman , Collman , & Maccoby , 1986 ; S . A . Gelman & Markman , 1987 ) indicated that by 31 / 2 years of age , children chose to base inferences on cate - gory membership despite conflicting surface appearances . Control studies showed that these effects were not simply a response bias that was due to hearing the same word for the two category members . First , when category membership was con - veyed by synonymous rather than identical labels ( e . g , " rock " and " stone " rather than " rock " and " rock " ) , children still drew inferences from one category member to another ( S . A . Gelman & Markman , 1986 ) . Second , when children learned properties that should not generalize ( e . g . accidental properties such as an animal ' s age ) , they did not generalize from one category member to another ( S . A . Gelman , 1988 ; S . A . Gelman & Mark - man , 1986 ) . Thus , children do not draw inferences blindly as a consequence of hearing the category label . Finally , on some items , preschool children drew category - based inferences even in the absence of labels . For example , even when none of the INFERENCES IN 2 - YEAR - OLDS 797 pictures were named , children drew more inferences from a green leaf - insect to a black beetle than from a green leaf - insect to a green leaf ( S . A . Gelman & Markman , 1987 ) . Follow - up analyses suggest that children were able to determine that the leaf - insect was an insect and not a leaf on the basis of subtle properties of the appearance ( e . g , the animal ' s legs and head ) . Although misleading appearances often do trick children into thinking that anomalous objects are not what they are , children do not always require the experimenter ' s label in order to deter - mine category membership and to use it to draw the appro - priate inference . In the present studies , we examined the inferences of 21 / 2 - year - old children to determine whether these younger children also make use of categories to infer important , nonobvious properties . It is important to extend past findings to younger children because relatively little is known about the conceptual capabilities of children this age . Few studies have compared the performance of 2 - year - olds to that of older children . By study - ing inferential processes in children between 2 and 3 years old , we can begin to bridge the gap between what is known about the early accomplishments of infancy ( cf . Cohen & Younger , 1983 ) and the developments of later childhood . The present studies help fill this gap and thus expand our knowledge of the skills of a relatively understudied age group . For example , data from 2 - year - olds could help address the question of a possible developmental shift from similarity - based to theory - based categories . If2 - year - olds are restricted to similarity - based categories , then they should be unable to draw inferences that contradict an object ' s appearances . However , if we find evidence for category - based inferences at age 2 , either there is no developmental shift or it must be taking place before this age . There is already evidence that by age 2 children expect labels to refer to coherent categories ( S . A . Gelman & Taylor , 1984 ; Katz , Baker , & Macnamara , 1974 ; Markman & Hutchin - son , 1984 ) . However , it is not known when children realize that category membership can be a better basis than perceptual ap - pearances for drawing certain inferences . In addition , a study of younger children promises eventually to provide insight concerning the mechanisms that could un - derlie children ' s ability to draw category - based inferences . There are vast changes in early preschool in a variety of cogni - tive domains , including knowledge ( Carey , 1985 ) , vocabulary ( Anglin , 1977 ) , metacognition ( Flavell , 1985 ) , and the kinds of classifications children spontaneously construct ( R . Gelman & Baillargeon , 1983 ; Sugarman , 1982 ) . If children ' s category - based inferences depend on these skills , then 2 - year - olds , be - cause of their relatively limited abilities in these areas , should experience more difficulties than older children . However , if 2 - year - olds perform well , then presumably such skills are not critical prerequisites for category - based inferences . Studying these issues required developing appropriate tech - niques to uncover younger children ' s understanding . Our major challenge was to devise a procedure that would not overtax the attentional capacity of 2 - year - olds . Previous studies of induc - tion placed relatively heavy information - processing demands on young children , requiring them to focus on two or three pictures at a time and to learn one or two new facts for every picture set . In the present study , we used a simpler procedure to reduce processing demands on the younger subjects . We asked children to consider only one picture at a time . They were also asked to make inferences concerning familiar properties , given typical and atypical ( novel ) exemplars of known categories . Thus we imposed fewer memory demands on subjects while still allowing a comparison between category - based and appear - ance - based inferences to be made . Study 1 Method Subjects Twenty - two children ( ages 2 years , 1 month - 3 years , 1 month , M = 2 years , 8 months ) participated in the main experiment . Of these , 11 children ( M = 2 years , 8 months ) were randomly assigned to the label condition ; the remaining I l ( M = 2 years , 8 months ) were assigned to the no - label condition ( see Procedure ) . An additional 11 children ( 2 years , 6 months - 3 years , 0 months , M = 2 years , 10 months ) partici - pated in a preselection of the materials ( described later ) . Eighteen adults provided several measures as a basis of comparison . Items Each child saw nine picture sets , listed in Table 1 , each consisting of one target picture and four test pictures . All were brightly colored drawings ) A sample set is provided in Figure 1 ( without the details provided by color and shading ) . In every set , the target picture was a typical instance of a familiar category ( e . g . , a typical bird ) . The test pictures varied in their category membership and typicality Two test pictures were from the same category as the target picture , and two were from a contrasting category In the example cited , two of the test pictures were birds and two were dinosaurs . Within each category , one of the test pictures was a typical category member and the other was an atypical category member that was likely to be unfamiliar to the child . For example , within the bird category , the test pictures were a bluebird ( typical bird ) and a dodo bird ( atypical bird ) ; within the dinosaur cate - gory , the test pictures were a stegosaurus ( typical ) and a pterodactyl 2 ( atypical ) . Finally , for each picture set , the typical member of the same category as the target strongly resembled the target , and the atypical member of the contrasting category also strongly resembled the target picture . For example , the bluebird test picture and the pterodactyl both looked very much like the target bird . In this way , half of the atypical pictures posed a direct conflict between category identity and appearances . Although the notion of " similarity " is notoriously difficult to pin One possible concern with the stimuli was that , for children , pic - tures would provide relatively meager perceptual information com - pared with real objects . However , much of the evidence in the litera - ture suggesting that children rely heavily on perceptual similarity is basetl on two - dimensional pictures such as the present stimuli ( e . g , Melkman , Tversky , & Baratz , 1981 ; Olver & Hornsby , 1966 ) . Moreover , in a recent study of classification in 2 - year - olds , Fenson , Vella , and Kennedy ( 1989 ) found that children " were able to match pictures with pictures as accurately as they were able to match objects with pictures " ( p . 915 ) , which again suggests that pictures are highly salient to young preschoolers . 2 Although a pterodactyl is not actually a dinosaur , informal pretest - ing with adults revealed that most adult subjects believed it to be a dinosaur . We included the item because it is consistent with adults ' folk classifications , although we note here that it does conflict with current scientific taxonomies . 798 SUSAN A . GELMAN AND JOHN D . COLEY Table 1 Pictures and Properties Used in Study 1 Target / instance Category I Category 2 Property Within ontological category Worm Worm Snake Eats dirt Typical Brown worm Black snake Atypical Planarian Worm - like snake Rabbit Rabbit Squirrel Eats carrots Typical Rabbit Squirrel Atypical Short - eared pika Long - eared kaibab Bird Bird Dinosaur Lives in a nest Typical Bluebird Stegosaurus Atypical Dodo bird Pterodactyl Dog Dog Lamb Barks Typical Golden retriever White lamb Atypical Chihuahua Dog - like lamb Bird Bird Fish Says tweet - tweet Typical Swallow Turquoise fish Atypical Kiwi bird Flying fish Across ontological categories Leaf Leaf Bug Grows on a tree Typical Green leaf Black beetle Atypical Pine needle Green leaf - insect Snake Snake Stick Moves by itself Typical Green snake Brown stick Atypical Horned snake Curved , green stick Rock Rock Fish Sits on the ground Typical Brown rock Trout Atypical Spotted cube Lumpfish Flower Flower Fish Grows in a garden Typical Flower Gray fish Atypical Jack - in - the - pulpit Starfish down precisely ( Goodman , 1983 ; Murphy & Medin , 1985 ) and there are clearly a range of different kinds of similarity relations ( L . B . Smith , 1989 ) , here we consider salient perceptual similarities to include color , size , shape , and prominent parts ( e . g . , wings ) . In addition , to make certain that our intuitions about similarity were accurate , we asked ! 8 adult subjects to rate the similarity of each picture to the target ( " how much the two pictures look like one another " ) on a scale from 1 ( not at all alike ) to 7 ( almost identical ) . As predicted , for the typical items , adults rated the pictures that belonged to the same category as the target pictures as much more similar to the target pictures ( M = 6 . 39 ) than they rated the pictures from a different category ( M = 1 . 76 ) , t ( 17 ) = 31 . 85 , p < . 001 . For example , the bluebird appeared to be more similar to the target bird than did the stegosaurus . Conversely , for the atypical items , adults rated the pictures that belonged to a category different from that of the target pictures ( which were drawn to resem - ble the target pictures ) as substantially more similar to the targets ( M = 4 . 52 ) than they rated the pictures from the same category as the target ( M = 2 . 32 ) , t ( 17 ) = 8 . 38 , p < . 001 . For example , the pterodactyl ap - peared to be more similar to the target bird than did the dodo . We manipulated typicality for two reasons . First , it allowed us to construct a situation in which categories and appearances conflicted with one another . For example , the dodo does not much resemble a typical bird ( although it is a bird ) , whereas the pterodactyl does resem - ble a bird ( although it is not one ) . Second , by including atypical pic - tures we ensured that children had not seen these pictures before and so were drawing new inferences beyond what they already knew with certainty . In five of the sets , all pictures in the set came from within the same ontological category , or " basic category of existence " ( Keil , 1979 ) . The bird / dinosaur set described above is such a set ; all exemplars are ani - mals . For the remaining items , categories depicted within a set crossed an ontological boundary and so were conceptually more distinct . For example , one set consisted of snakes ( which are animals ) and sticks ( which are inanimate objects ) . We hypothesized that children would grasp the importance of the category label for the cross - boundary sets ( e . g , snakes / sticks ) more readily than for the within - boundary sets ( e . g , birds / dinosaurs ) because the distinction between categories would be more obvious in the former ( see Keil , 1979 ) . Property Preselection To ensure that the properties we used were ones that young children would find familiar when applied to typical category members , we pretested a larger set of properties on 11 children . Two subjects were dropped from this preselection task because they answered " yes " to each question , leaving 9 subjects ( mean age = 2 years , 10 months ) . Each child was shown one of the two typical pictures for each of nine picture sets and was asked a series of yes / no questions concerning each pic - INFERENCES IN 2 - YEAR - OLDS 799 TARGET " BIRD " TYPICAL " B I R D " TYPICAL " DINOSAUR " ATYPICAL " BIRD " Figure L Sample item used in Studies I and 2 . ATYPICAL " DINOSAUR " ture . The pictures were not labeled . For example , a child was shown either the bluebird or the stegosaurus and was asked each of the follow - ing questions : Does it live in a nest ? Does it have big teeth ? Does it say " tweet tweet " ? Does it eat worms ? The properties used were chosen from among those that children most often answered correctly for both typical pictures in the set . 3 For example , the 4 children who saw the bluebird each answered that it lived in a nest , and the 5 children who saw the stegosaurus answered that it did not live in a nest . " Lives in a nest " was therefore deemed a familiar property for the typical pictures of this set ( bluebird and stegosaurus ) and was included in the subsequent studies . Procedure The nine picture sets were presented in randomized order in picture - book format . All of the targetpictures were in one book ; all of the test pictures were in a different book . For every picture set , each child first saw the target picture and was reminded of one property that was true of that object . For example , they were shown the target picture of a bluebird and were reminded that it lives in a nest . The target picture was left in view , although the experimenter made no reference to the target picture after reminding the child of that initial fact . Children were then shown the four test pictures , one at a time , in random order . For each picture , children were asked whether or not the picture had the property that was given for the target picture . For example , chil - dren were shown the bluebird , dodo , stegosaurus , and pterodactyl one at a time and were asked , for each one , " Does this live in a nest ? " There were two conditions in Study 1 . In the label condition , each picture was labeled for the child with the category name as it was presented . For example , the experimenter said , " This is a bird " as the picture book was opened to the target bird . The name of the test pic - ture was also supplied when the experimenter asked the test question ( e . g . , " This is a bird . Does this bird live in a nest ? " while pointing to the dodo ) . In the no - label condition , none of the pictures was labeled . If children answered on the basis of category membership , they would judge that the bluebird and the dodo each live in a nest and that the dinosaurs do not . If they answered based on overall appearances , they would judge that the bluebird and the pterodactyl each live in a nest and that the stegosaurus and dodo bird do not . Or , children could have shown an inconsistent response ( e . g . , judging that only the dodo lives in a nest ) or a response bias ( e . g . , saying " yes " on all items ) . Adult tasks . Adult subjects completed a paper - and - pencil version o f the same task that children received . Half of the adults were randomly assigned to the label condition ; the remainder were assigned to the no - label condition . For each yes / no question ( these were identical to those that children received ) , subjects circled their response and then rated how confident they were that their answer was correct on a scale from 1 ( not at all confident ) to 7 ( extremely confident ) . Then they com - pleted the similarity ratings ( see Items , above ) . Finally , subjects in the no - label condition wrote down what they thought was the name of each picture . 3 On seven of the properties , pretest subjects were 100 % correct ; on the remaining two properties , pretest subjects were 89 % correct . 800 SUSAN A . GELMAN AND JOHN D . COLEY Table 2 Study 1 : Mean Percentage Correct as a Function of Labeling Condition and Typicality Group Typical Atypical 2 - year - olds Label 74 * * * 69 * * No label 76 * * * 42 * Adults Label 98 * * * 75 * * * No label 94 * * * 76 * * * * Below chance , p < . 05 . * * Above chance , p < . 01 . * * * Above chance , p < . 001 . Results Children ' s responses were scored for accuracy , with 1 indicat - ing a correct answer and 0 indicating an incorrect answer . The data were summed across items and entered into a 2 ( condition : label vs . no label ) x 2 ( picture typicality : typical vs . atypical instance ) x 2 ( within - vs . across - ontological boundary ) analysis of variance ( ANOVA ) . The results are shown in Table 2 . As pre - dicted , children were more accurate on the typical than atypi - cal instances , F ( 1 , 20 ) = 33 . 39 , p < . 0001 , and more accurate in the label than the no - label condition , F ( I , 20 ) = 6 . 11 , p < . 05 . Moreover , the predicted Condition x Typicality interaction oc - curred , F ( 1 , 20 ) = 17 . 92 , p < . 001 . 4 Whereas performance on the typical items was unaffected by labeling ( 75 % correct over - all ) , performance on the atypical items was better when the pictures were named ( 69 % correct ) than when they were un - named ( 42 % correct ) . Thus , on the typical pictures , children correctly inferred the relevant property regardless of whether the pictures were labeled . But on the atypical pictures , the pres - ence or absence of a label significantly affected performance . There were no differences between the within - versus across - ontological - boundary items . No other significant main effects or interactions were found . We also analyzed the results of individual children ( see Table 3 ) . Children were scored as showing a category - based pattern if on 26 or more of the 36 trials ( binomial p < . 005 ) they answered correctly ( " yes " to pictures of the same category as the target , " no " to pictures of a category different from that of the target ) . Children were scored as showing an appearance - based pattern if on 26 or more of the 36 trials they answered based on appear - ances ( correct on the typical instances and incorrect on the atypical instances ) . Children were scored as showing response bias if on at least 34 trials out of 36 they answered " yes " to every Table 3 Study 1 : Response Patterns for Individual Children Category Appearance Response Group based based bias Inconsistent Label 6 0 3 2 No label l 6 2 2 question or " no " to every question . Finally , all other children were scored as having inconsistent patterns . Note that the responses of individual children mirror the results of the group as a whole : Category - based responses are found primarily when the label is provided . When a Fisher exact test was performed on just those children showing either a category - based or an appearance - based pattern , the effect for labeling condition was significant , p < . 005 . Also , response bias was fairly common . This result is not surprising , given the diffi - culty that children below age 3 have with yes / no questions ( S . A . Gelman & Taylor , 1984 ) . The response bias suggests that we have reached the lower age limit that can be tested with this procedure . 5 We also examined individual items and discovered that on eight of the nine items , children performed better in the label than the no - label condition when responses to all four pictures in each set were considered . ( On the ninth item children per - formed equally across conditions . ) When we examined re - sponses to the atypical pictures separately , we found that chil - dren performed better in the label than the no - label condition on all nine items . Thus , these results are fairly general across a range of different items . Adults . The data from adults are presented in Table 2 . Adults performed extremely well regardless of whether they were given the category labels . The yes / no data were scored as for children and entered into a 2 ( label ) x 2 ( typicality ) ANOVA . Adults were correct more often on the typical than the atypical items , F ( 1 , 16 ) = 91 . 23 , p < . 0001 . There were no effects for labeling . Similarly , although subjects were highly confident overall that their answers were correct ( mean rating of 6 . 06 on a scale ofl to 7 ) , they were more confident when judging typical ( M = 6 . 40 ) than atypical ( M = 5 . 72 ) pictures , F ( I , 16 ) = 70 . 62 , p < . 0001 . We suspected that one reason adults were able to perform so well in the no - label condition was that they often were able to figure out the category to which the pictures belonged on the basis of the perceptual information alone . For example , based on the animal ' s face and fins , they could tell that the flying fish was a fish and not a bird , despite its wings and bird - like shape and coloration . To take a closer look at this issue , we examined the labels that adults in the no - label condition provided on the naming task . For each subject , we noted whether the label they gave for each test picture was the same as the label they gave for the target picture for that set . For test pictures of the same category as the target , subjects correctly gave the same label on 78 % of all trials ( combining typical and atypical items ) . For test pictures of a category different from that of the target , subjects correctly produced a different label on 94 % of all trials . Thus , adults were highly successful in determining category labels on the basis of subtle perceptual features alone . Furthermore , to determine more directly whether knowledge 4 All of these findings were reproduced using multivariate statistical tests . Univariate tests are reported here for clarity . 5 When the 5 children with response bias are removed from the main analyses , we obtain the same pattern of results as when all subjects are included : a main effect for label , F ( l , 15 ) = 16 . 26 , p < . 001 , a main effect for typicality , F ( l , 15 ) = 56 . 10 , p < . 0001 , and a Label x Typical - ity interaction , F ( 1 , 15 ) = 29 . 51 , p < . 0001 . INFERENCES IN 2 - YEAR - OLDS 801 of the label predicted adults ' ability to draw the appropriate inferences , we computed Spearman nonparametric correla - tions between the naming scores ( as calculated above ) and the scores on the inference task on a subject - by - subject basis . The correlation was nonsignificant on the typical items , as would be predicted by subjects ' near - ceiling performance on both tasks . However , on the atypical items , the two tasks correlated . 73 ( df = 8 ) , p < . 05 . Adults ' ability to categorize the atypical items predicts their performance on the inference task . Discussion These results suggest that for children as young as age 21 / 2 years , categories extend beyond salient perceptual similarity . Children show an early attention to the importance of names and an early ability to overlook salient appearances when draw - ing inferences . In this respect , the 2 - year - olds in the present study are similar to 4 - year - olds and adults in previous research . On the basis of this finding , we suggest that if there is a develop - mental shift away from similarity - based categories , it must oc - cur below age 2lb . However , it could be that children were not drawing infer - ences about important underlying properties in this experi - ment . An alternative explanation for the results of Study 1 is that children may have had a bias to answer in accord with the experimenter ' s labels without consideration of the questions being asked . That is , because the target and test pictures re - ceived identical labels , children may have assumed that they should give the same answer for both . We believe it is unlikely that children were simply showing this sort of response bias . They were asked about only one pic - ture at a time , and the experimenter never made explicit com - parison to the target after its initial presentation . Both of these factors should minimize any tendency toward response bias . Furthermore , performance on typical items was no better in the label condition than in the no - label condition . More impor - tant , performance was not at ceiling in either condition . Thus , if children were simply answering on the basis of words paired with pictures , performance should also have improved when the typical pictures were labeled . Nonetheless , we wanted to rule out this possibility as an ex - planation of the findings of Study 1 . To this end , we conducted a control study in which the pictures were paired with words that would not promote inferences for adults ( e . g , simple adjec - tives such as " dirty " ) . If children have a tendency simply to say that two objects paired with the same word share other proper - ties , then they should say that two things that are " dirty " are alike in other ways as well ( e . g , they eat the same food ) . How - ever , if the results of Study I reflect not response bias but rather children ' s beliefs about category structure , then children should not base their inferences on adjective labels such as " dirty " be - cause such adjectives indicate neither category identity nor the associated deeper properties . Study 2 Method Subjects and Items Eleven children ( ages 2 years , 6 months - 3 years , 1 month , M = 2 years , 10 months ) participated in the study . None of these children had participated in Study 1 . Each child saw the same picture sets used in Study 1 . Procedure The procedure was identical to that of the label condition of Study 1 , with one exception : Rather than supplying category labels , the experi - menter described each picture with a familiar adjective or adjectival phrase that denoted a transient property of the object under consider - ation . As in Study 1 , each target picture was " named " as it was pre - sented and was then followed by the reminder fact . For example , as the experimenter opened the picture book to the target bird , she said , " This is wide awake . It lives in a nest ' . " Each test picture was also named with an adjective that either matched or contrasted with the adjective given to the target ( e . g , " This pointing to the dodo is wide awake " or " This pointing to the pterodactyl is sleepy " ) . As in Study 1 , after a picture was named , children were asked whether or not it had the property that was given for the target picture , for example , " This is wide awake . Does it live in a nest ? " The full list of adjectives used is shown in Table 4 . ~ If children answer based on the adjectives , they will judge that the bluebird ( " wide awake " ) and the dodo ( " wide awake " ) live in nests and that the dinosaurs ( " sleepy " ) do not . If they ignore the adjectives and answer based on overall appearances , they will judge that the bluebird and the pterodactyl live in nests and that the stegosaurus and dodo bird do not . Results Children ' s responses were scored for accuracy , with 1 indicat - ing a correct ( category - based ) answer and 0 indicating an incor - rect answer . The data were summed across items and entered into a 2 ( picture typicality : typical vs . atypical instance ) × 2 ( within - vs . across - ontological boundary ) ANOVA . As in the no - label condition of Study 1 , children performed much better on the typical items ( M = 74 % correct ) than on the atypical ( M = 49 % correct ) items , F ( I , 10 ) = 19 . 58 , p < . 002 . Performance on the typical items was significantly above chance , t ( 10 ) = 4 . 81 , p < . 002 , whereas performance on the atypical items did not differ from chance , tOO ) = 0 . 377 , p > . 50 . Children also per - formed better on items that crossed ontological boundaries ( such as the snakes / sticks item ; M = 68 % correct ) than they did on items that did not cross ontological boundaries ( such as the birds / dinosaurs item ; M = 57 % correct ) , F ( I , 10 ) = 8 . 52 , p < . 02 . There were no significant interactions . Finally , we compared children ' s performance in Study 2 di - rectly to that in Study 1 . Linear contrasts revealed that perfor - mance in the adjective control condition did not differ from performance in the no - label condition and that both differed from performance in the label condition , but only on the atypi - cal items ( as expected ) , F ( I , 30 ) = 29 . 14 , p < . 001 . In short , children did not use familiar adjectives as the basis As is apparent in Table 4 , most of the adjectives used in this experi - ment refer to properties that vary over time fora given individual and so dearly do not indicate stable category membership . Other adjectives ( e . g . , " pregnant ; ' " dead ; ' " smart " ) would probably function more like nouns , at least for adults , and so were deliberately excluded from the study . See Markman ( 1989 ) for evidence suggesting that adjectives and nouns generally differ in the extent to which they refer to stable catego - ries , although counterexamples can also be found . 802 SUSAN A . GELMAN AND JOHN D . COLEY Table 4 Pictures , Adjectives , and Properties Used in Study 2 Target / instance Category I Category 2 Property Within ontological category Wet Wet Dry Eats dirt Typical Brown worm Black snake Atypical Planarian Worm - like snake Nearby Nearby Far away Eats carrots Typical Rabbit Squirrel Atypical Short - eared pika Long - eared kaibab Wide awake Wide awake Sleepy Lives in a nest Typical Bluebird Stegosaurus Atypical Dodo bird Pterodactyl Dirty Dirty Clean Barks Typical Golden retriever White lamb Atypical Chihuahua Dog - like lamb Full Full Hungry Says tweet - tweet Typical Swallow Turquoise fish Atypical Kiwi bird Flying fish Across ontological categories Cold Cold Warm Grows on a tree Typical Green leaf Beetle Atypical Pine needle Green leaf - insect Little Little Big Moves by itself Typical Green snake Brown stick Atypical Horned snake Curved , green stick Pretty Pretty Ugly Sits on the ground Typical Brown rock Trout Atypical Spotted cube Lumpfish Good Good Bad Grows in a garden Typical Flower Gray fish Atypical Jack - in - the - pulpit Starfish of their inferences . Thus , these results rule out the possibility that children in Study 1 simply had a response bias to say " yes " when the experimenter provided matching labels and " no " when different labels were provided . Children were selective in their inferences , making a distinction between category names , which promote inferences ( Study l , label condition ) , and words labeling transient properties , which do not ( Study 2 ) . General Discussion In Study 1 , 21 / 2 - year - old children relied on language ( in partic - ular , category labels ) for inferring the identity and further prop - erties of novel objects . They reported , for example , that a ptero - dactyl does not live in a nest but that a dodo bird does . When the same pictures were labeled with adjectives rather than nouns in Study 2 ( e . g . , " This is sleepy " rather than " This is a dinosaur " ) , the results mirrored those from when the pictures were not named . Children did not use temporary - state adjec - tives as the basis of their inferences ; they paid special attention to labels only when they named the object category . ( See also Waxman , 1990 , for evidence that adjectives do not highlight category relations for young children . ) Thus , by age 21 / 2 years , children expect categories to promote rich inductive inferences concerning important properties , and they can overlook conflicting perceptual appearances in doing so . The children in the present studies were approximately l year younger than those previously reported to base inferences on category membership ( conveyed by the label ) when it con - flicts with perceptual similarity ( S . A . Gelman & Markman , 1987 ) . Thus , the present results suggest that if there is a develop - mental shift away from similarity - based categories , it has taken place by age 21 / 2 . The present results provide even stronger evidence that chil - dren ' s belief in the power of language for their inferences is not dependent on extensive scientific knowledge . That is , young children apparently do not require detailed knowledge of biol - ogy in order to use words such as " bird " and " dog " as the basis of their inferences . ( See Cares 1985 , for evidence of clear mis - conceptions about biology throughout the preschool years . ) The children in this study were only 2 years old , too young to have been taught the particulars of why pterodactyls are not birds . Rather , children learn the system of language taught by adults and draw inductive inferences in accordance with that system . Thus , children ' s inferences are consistent with adult INFERENCES IN 2 - YEAR - OLDS 803 theories without necessarily being based on them . We suggest that children have an early - emerging expectation that does not itself constitute a theory but that will pave the way for later theory building . In particular , the category name sets up an expectation on the part of the child that there is much more in common to members of the category than meets the eye . Children ~ Inferences : Induction or Deduction ? The design of this study differs from previous work ( S . A . Gelman , 1988 ; S . A . Gelman & Markman , 1986 , 1987 ) in that all of the questions concerned properties that children knew to be true or false of prototypical category instances ( e . g ~ " Does this rabbit eat carrots ? " vs . " Does this dog have leukocytes all through it ? " ) . This raises the issue of whether children were actually making inductive or deductive inferences . That is , one might argue that children were not drawing inductive inferences ( which , by definition , mean that children can use categories to extend their knowledge beyond what they already know ; Skyrms , 1975 ) but rather were drawing deductive inferences that follow directly from their prior knowledge . Whether chil - dren are making inductions or deductions is of great theoretical importance because it tells us whether children expect catego - ries to capture important new information ( as revealed by their inductions ) or whether they are simply reporting facts that they have been taught directly ( indicating use of deductions ) . Our position is that children were making inductive inferences . In the following , we explain why . In order for their inferences to have been deductively valid , children in the label condition would have had to start with the premise that , for example , " all rabbits eat carrots " Coupled with the information provided in the experiment that " this ani - mal x is a rabbits the premise would lead to the conclusion that animal x eats carrots . Therefore , in order to argue that children were reasoning deductivelj¢ , one would need to account for how children obtained the premise that " all rabbits eat carrots : One possibility is that children could have been told explic - itly that all rabbits eat carrots . We did not provide this informa - tion . We simply reminded children that the property in ques - tion was true for the target picture . Furthermore , it seems im - probable that parents or other adults would have done so for all of the property - category pairings in the study ( ' all worms eat dirt " " all snakes move by themselves " " all leaves grow on trees " etc . ) . But even if they had , preschoolers do not seem to understand the word " all " as a universal quantifier ( Inhelder & Piaget , 1964 ) , often confusing " all " with " some " and not under - standing that " all " implicates the entire category . Similar mis - understandings arise with " always " ( Braine & Rumain , 1983 ) . Thus , even if the input consistently included statements with " all " or " always " ( which seems unlikely ) , children would not necessarily know that such statements warrant deductive infer - ences . Indeed , older preschoolers have difficulty drawing ap - propriate deductive inferences even when the premises are clearly stated ( C . L . Smith , 1979 ) . A second possibility is that children may have constructed the premise " all rabbits eat carrots " themselves . Notice , how - ever , that this proposition would itself have had to be con - structed by means of an induction : From a limited number of exemplars ( Rabbit 1 eats carrots , Rabbit 2 eats carrots , etc . ) , the child could have induced that all rabbits eat carrots . It is also important to note here that children could have formed a very different kind of induction based on their prior experience . Considering the rabbit example again , children could have in - duced that " animals that look like rabbits eat carrots7 There is no logical or empirical necessity for children to have preferred the induction ` ` all rabbits eat carrots " over the induction " all animals that look like rabbits eat carrots " because , in the past , children found equally strong evidence for both inductions . Thus , even if children had formed inductions prior to partici - pating in the present experiment , that in itselfwould not tell us what kind of inductions had been formed . From the present experiment , we cannot determine when children ' s inductions took place . In other words , the present task could be assessing either the inductions that children made spontaneously outside of the laboratory or inductions made during the experiment itself . Whichever is the case , the results are valuable for telling us which kinds of inductions children find most reasonable or natural . In particular , the results indi - cate that 21 / 2 - year - olds are willing to overlook appearances in the inferences they draw ( either spontaneously or in response to the experimental questions ) . Conclusions For 2 - year - old children , category membership can be more powerful than surface appearances in guiding inferences about important properties . However , we do not wish to underesti - mate the role of appearances in children ' s concepts . Perceptual clues are still the primary means of discovering category mem - bership for unlabeled objects . For example , when shown atypi - cal instances that were not labeled , children performed signifi - cantly below chance , suggesting that they were answering on the basis of appearances . An important question we have not addressed is when children begin to sort out which of the many available perceptual cues reliably indicate category member - ship . Children in the present study apparently had difficulty determining the category membership of the atypical items . In contrast , adults performed well even when pictures were not named ; in fact , there were no differences in performance be - tween the two conditions . This finding suggests that one important development still to take place is the ability to focus on subtle perceptual cues to determine category membership in the absence of language . Which cues are used to determine category membership may be partly a function of the theories one holds . For example , to someone with biological training , the presence of a blowhole is a critical clue that a sea creature is a mammal and not a fish ; the biologist knows that a blowhole indicates that the animal breathes air with lungs . But to a naive observer who is unaware of the theoretical link between blowholes and lungs , the same creature may be classed as a fish ( of . the classification of whales before Linnaeus ) . Thus it is important that even before children can make use of subtle perceptual cues to determine category membership , 7 they readily use category labels as the basis of their inferences ( see also S . A . Gelman , Collman , & Maccoby , 1986 ; Keil , 1986 ) . In sum , for children as young as age 21 / 2 , 804 SUSAN A . GELMAN AND JOHN D . COLEY language conveys important information beyond that which meets the eye . 7 We do not wish to imply that these children are wholly incapable of attending to subtle cues to category membership , however . In recent pilot data , we found that 2 - year - olds could detect the category mem - bership of some novel pictures on the basis of subtle perceptual cues ( e . g . , a lamb - like dog was recognized as a dog on the basis of its nose , feet , and tail , despite its overall color and fur ) . However , children clearly gain much sophistication along these lines as they grow older . References Anglin , J . M . ( 1977 ) . Word , object , and conceptual development . New York : Norton . Braine , M . D . S . , & Rumain , B . ( 1983 ) . Logical reasoning . In J . H . Flavell & E . M . Markman ( Eds . ) , Handbook of child psychology : VoL 3 . Cognitive development ( pp . 263 - 340 ) . New York : Wiley . Carey , S . ( 1985 ) . Conceptualchangein childhood . Cambridge , MA : MIT Press . Cohen , L . B , & Younger , B . A . ( 1983 ) . Perceptual categorization in the infant . In E . E Scholnick ( Ed . ) , New trends in conceptual representa - tion : Challenges to Piaget ~ theory ? ( pp . 197 - 220 ) . Hi llsdale , N J : Erl - banm . Fenson , L . , Cameron , M . S . , & Kennedy , M . ( 1988 ) . Role of perceptual and conceptual similarity in category matching at age two years . Child Development , 59 , 897 - 907 . Fenson , L . , Vella , D , & Kennedy , M . ( 1989 ) . Children ' s knowledge of thematic and taxonomic relations at two years of age . Child Develop - ment , 60 , 911 - 919 . Flavell , J . H . ( 1985 ) . Cognitive development ( 2nd ed . ) . Englewood Cliffs , NJ : Prentice - Hall . Gelman , R . & Baillargeon , R . ( 1983 ) . A review of some Piagetian concepts . In J . H . Flavell & E . M . Markman ( Eds . ) , Handbook of child psychology . " Vol . 3 . Cognitive development ( pp . 167 - 230 ) . New York : Wiley Gelman , S . A . ( 1988 ) . The development of induction within natural kind and artifact categories . Cognitive Psychology , 20 , 65 - 95 . Gelman , S . A . , Collman , P . , & Maccoby , E . E . ( 1986 ) . Inferring proper - ties from categories versus inferring categories from properties : The case of gender . Child Development , 5 7 , 396 - 404 . Gelman , S . A . , & Markman , E . M . ( 1986 ) . Categories and induction in young children . Cognition , 23 , 183 - 209 . Gelman , S . A . , & Markman , E . M . ( 1987 ) . Young children ' s inductions from natural kinds : The role of categories and appearances . Child Development , 58 , 1532 - 1541 . Gelman , S . A . , & Taylor , M . ( 1984 ) . How two - year - old children inter - pret proper and common names for unfamiliar objects . Child Devel - opment , 55 , 1535 - 1540 . Gentner , D . ( 1988 ) . Metaphor as structure - mapping : The relational shift . Child Development , 59 , 47 - 59 . Goodman , N . ( 1983 ) . Fact , fiction , and forecast ( 4th ed . ) . Cambridge , MA : Harvard University Press . Inhelder , B . , & Piaget , J . ( 1964 ) . The early growth of logic in the child . New York : Norton . Katz , N . , Baker , E , & Macnamara , J . ( 1974 ) . What ' s in a name ? Child Development , 45 , 469 - - 473 . Keil , F . C . ( 1979 ) . Semantic and conceptual development . Cambridge , MA : Harvard University Press . Keil , E C . ( 1986 ) . The acquisition of natural kind and artifact terms . In W Demopoulos & A . Marras ( Eds . ) , Language learning andconcept acquisition ( pp . 133 - 153 ) . Norwood , NJ : Ablex . Markman , E . M . ( 1989 ) . Categorization and naming in children . Cam - bridge , MA : MIT Press . Markman , E . M . , & Hutchinson , J . E . ( 1984 ) . Children ' s sensitivity to constraints on word meaning : Taxonomic vs . thematic relations . Cognitive Psychology , 16 , 1 - 27 . Melkman , R . , Tversky , B . , & Baratz , D . ( 1981 ) . Developmental trends in the use of perceptual and conceptual attributes in grouping , clus - tering , and retrieval . Journal of Experimental ChiM Psychology , 31 , 470 - 486 . Murphy , G . L . , & Medin , D . L . ( 1985 ) . The role of theories in concep - tual coherence . Psychological Review , 92 , 289 - 316 . Neisser , U . ( 1987 ) . Introduction : The ecological and intellectual bases of categorization . In U . Neisser ( Ed . ) , Concepts and conceptual devel - opment : Ecological and intellectual factors in categorization ( pp . 1 - 24 ) . New York : Cambridge University Press . Olver , R . R . , & Hornsby , J . R . ( 1966 ) . On equivalence . In J . S . Bruner , R . R . Olver , & P . M . Greenfield ( Eds . ) , Studies in cognitive growth ( pp . 68 - 85 ) . New York : Wiley . Skyrms , B . ( 1975 ) . Choice and chance : An introduction to inductive logic ( 2nd ed . ) . Encino , CA : Dickenson . Smith , C . L . ( 1979 ) . Children ' s understanding of natural language hier - archies . Journal of Experimental Child Psychology , 27 , 437 - 458 . Smith , L . B . ( 1989 ) . From global similarities to kinds of similarities : The construction of dimensions in development . In S . Vosniadou & A . Ortony ( Eds . ) , Similarity and analogical reasoning ( pp . 146 - 178 ) . New York : Cambridge University Press . Sugarman , S . ( 1982 ) . Developmental change in early representational intelligence : Evidence from spatial classification strategies and re - lated verbal expressions . Cognitive Psychology , 14 , 410 - 449 . Waxman , S . R . ( 1990 ) . Linguistic biases and the establishment of con - ceptual hierarchies : Evidence from preschool children . Cognitive De - velopment , 5 , 123 - 150 . Wellman , H . M . , & Gelman , S . A . ( 1988 ) . Children ' s understanding of the nonobvious . In R . J . Sternberg ( Ed . ) , Advances in the psychology of human intelligence ( Vol . 4 , pp . 99 - 135 ) . Hillsdale , NJ : Edbaum . Received May 19 , 1989 Revision received December 27 , 1989 Accepted January 5 , 1990 •