Structural History of Human SRGAP2 Proteins Michael Sporny , † , 1 Julia Guez - Haddad , † , 1 Annett Kreusch , 2 Sivan Shakartzi , 1 Avi Neznansky , 1 Alice Cross , 3 Michail N . Isupov , 3 Britta Qualmann , 2 Michael M . Kessels , 2 and Yarden Opatowsky * , 1 1 The Mina & Everard Goodman Faculty of Life Sciences , Bar - Ilan University , Ramat Gan , Israel 2 Institute for Biochemistry I , Jena University Hospital , Friedrich Schiller University Jena , Jena , Germany 3 Department of Biosciences , College of Life and Environmental Sciences , University of Exeter , Exeter , United Kingdom † These authors contributed equally to this work . * Corresponding author : E - mail : yarden . opatowsky @ biu . ac . il . Associate editor : Banu Ozkan Abstract In the development of the human brain , human - speciﬁc genes are considered to play key roles , conferring its unique advantages and vulnerabilities . At the time of Homo lineage divergence from Australopithecus , SRGAP2C gradually emerged through a process of serial duplications and mutagenesis from ancestral SRGAP2A ( 3 . 4 – 2 . 4 Ma ) . Remarkably , ectopic expression of SRGAP2C endows cultured mouse brain cells , with human - like characteristics , speciﬁcally , in - creased dendritic spine length and density . To understand the molecular mechanisms underlying this change in neuronal morphology , we determined the structure of SRGAP2A and studied the interplay between SRGAP2A and SRGAP2C . We found that : 1 ) SRGAP2A homo - dimerizes through a large interface that includes an F - BAR domain , a newly identiﬁed F - BAR extension ( Fx ) , and RhoGAP - SH3 domains . 2 ) SRGAP2A has an unusual inverse geometry , enabling associations with lamellipodia and dendritic spine heads in vivo , and scaffolding of membrane protrusions in cell culture . 3 ) As a result of the initial partial duplication event ( (cid:2) 3 . 4 Ma ) , SRGAP2C carries a defective Fx - domain that severely compromises its solubility and membrane - scaffolding ability . Consistently , SRGAP2A : SRAGP2C hetero - dimers form , but are insoluble , inhibiting SRGAP2A activity . 4 ) Inactivation of SRGAP2A is sensitive to the level of hetero - dimerization with SRGAP2C . 5 ) The primal form of SRGAP2C ( P - SRGAP2C , existing between (cid:2) 3 . 4 and 2 . 4 Ma ) is less effective in hetero - dimerizing with SRGAP2A than the modern SRGAP2C , which carries several substitutions ( from (cid:2) 2 . 4 Ma ) . Thus , the genetic mutagenesis phase contributed to modulation of SRGAP2A’s inhibition of neuronal expansion , by introducing and improving the formation of inactive SRGAP2A : SRGAP2C hetero - dimers , indicating a stepwise involvement of SRGAP2C in human evolutionary history . Key words : SRGAP2 , X - ray crystallography , F - BAR domain , human evolution , structural biology . Introduction Emergence of new genes is a powerful driving force of evolu - tion and speciation . Gene duplication allows daughter copies to acquire function - altering mutations , without compromis - ing the original activity of the mother gene . In recent years , comparing the modern human genome sequences to those of archaic hominins and great apes has allowed the discovery of duplicated genes unique to the Homo lineage . These genes are considered to have played key roles in human speciation , particularly in the development of the highly advanced human brain ( Zhang and Long 2014 ; Dennis and Eichler 2016 ) . One of these human - specific genes is SRGAP2C , which encodes for a functional protein , and originated from the ancestral SRGAP2A ( fig . 1 ) ( Sudmant et al . 2010 ; Dennis et al . 2012 ) . Slit - Robo GTPase Activating Protein ( SRGAPs ) couple the plasma membrane topology to remodeling of the actin cyto - skeleton , thereby regulating neuronal migration , axon guid - ance and branching , and dendritic spine maturation . To achieve this task SRGAPs utilize a unique domain composi - tion : an amino - terminal extended F - BAR ( F - BARx ) , followed by RhoGAP and SH3 domains ( fig . 1 B ) , which mediate membrane association , cytoskeleton remodeling and pro - tein – protein interactions , respectively . A model for the SRGAP2A mechanism of action can be deduced from recent ( Fritz et al . 2015 ; Guez - Haddad et al . 2015 ) and previous stud - ies ( Wong et al . 2001 ; Pertz et al . 2008 ; Guerrier et al . 2009 ; Endris et al . 2011 ; Yamazaki et al . 2013 ) as well as from our current work . According to this model , SRGAP2A acts as an inhibitor of cell migration and protrusion extension . The ac - tivation of SRGAP2A begins with its recruitment to the vicin - ity of the plasma membrane by one of several target proteins ( e . g . Robo1 ; Wong et al . 2001 ) . Through its F - BARx domain , SRGAP2A directly binds to the plasma membrane , specifically at sites of protruding curvatures ( Guerrier et al . 2009 ; Coutinho - Budd et al . 2012 ; Yamazaki et al . 2013 ) . There , in an elegant example of negative feedback , the RhoGAP do - main inactivates local pools of Rac1 and CDC42 , which in turn , leads to the subsequent breakdown of nearby actin cytoskeleton , and the retraction of membrane protrusions ( Wong et al . 2001 ; Fritz et al . 2015 ) . SRGAP2C interacts with SRGAP2A and inhibits its activities ( Charrier et al . 2012 ; Fossati et al . 2016 ) . Expression of human SRGAP2C in cultured murine cortical neurons phenocopies SRGAP2A A rt i c l e (cid:2) The Author 2017 . Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the Society for Molecular Biology and Evolution . This is an Open Access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution Non - Commercial License ( http : / / creativecommons . org / licenses / by - nc / 4 . 0 / ) , which permits non - commercial re - use , distribution , and reproduction in any medium , provided the original work is properly cited . For commercial re - use , please contact journals . permissions @ oup . com Open Access Mol . Biol . Evol . 34 ( 6 ) : 1463 – 1478 doi : 10 . 1093 / molbev / msx094 Advance Access publication February 21 , 2017 1463 knock down , resulting in an increased density of longer - necked dendritic spines ( Charrier et al . 2012 ) , a neuronal trait considered to be human - specific ( Elston et al . 2001 ; Bianchi et al . 2013 ) . It seems that like in many other cases , the inhi - bition ( by SRGAP2C ) of an inhibitor ( SRGAP2A ) drives evo - lutionary developmental processes ( Gilbert and Barresi 2016 ) . F IG . 1 . Evolutionary history and domain organization of SRGAP2 proteins . ( A ) Evolutionary history diagram detailing the duplication ( Dup . ) and mutagenesis ( Mut . ) events in human SRGAP2 genes and their current status in modern - day humans . A genetic approximate timeline and parallel stone tools technology archaeological dating ( Harmand et al . 2015 ) shows correlation between the ﬁrst and second mutagenesis events with the ﬁrst and second generations of stone tools , (cid:2) 3 . 3 and (cid:2) 2 . 4 Ma , respectively . The missing carboxy - segment of the Fx in all the duplicated copies is indicated as a zig - zag tear followed by a seven - residue ( VRECYGF ) carboxy - terminal addition . Also indicated and detailed are the nonsynonymous mutations in the modern duplicated proteins . The primal forms of SRGAP2B and SRGAP2C , which existed prior to the accumulation of mutations are named with the preﬁx “ P - . ” ( B ) Human SRGAP2A , SRGAP2C , and deletion mutants used in this study . In the scheme , the extended F - BAR ( F - BARx ) is subdivided into the F - BAR and the newly identiﬁed Fx domains . The RhoGAP and SH3 domains are also indicated and appear as yellow colored shapes . The ﬁve arginine alterations in the F - BAR domain of SRGAP2C are indicated by ticks . Sporny et al . . doi : 10 . 1093 / molbev / msx094 MBE 1464 SRGAP2C reached its current form after several evolution - ary steps , determined by ( Dennis et al . 2012 ) and are elabo - rated here in figure 1 A . First , SRGAP2A underwent incomplete segmental duplication from chromosome 1q32 . 1 into 1q21 . 1 , and then from 1q21 . 1 into 1p12 . Later , nonsynonymous mutations accumulated on the duplicated copies : R79C and V366L on 1q21 . 1 giving rise to the contem - porary SRGAP2B , and R73H , R108W , R205C , R235H , R250Q on the 1p12 copy , giving rise to the contemporary SRGAP2C . Here , we refer to the duplicated copies prior to the accumu - lation of the nonsynonymous mutations as “primal” or P - SRGAP2B and P - SRGAP2C . SRGAP2B was later duplicated once more into 1q21 . 1 , to give rise to SRGAP2D . The emer - gence of SRGAP2 B , C , and D are estimated to have occurred (cid:2) 3 . 4 , (cid:2) 2 . 4 , and (cid:2) 1 Ma , respectively . The function of F - BAR ( FES - CIP4 homology ) domains , as well as those of the other members of the BAR superfamily [ i . e . , BAR ( Bin / amphiphysin / RVS ) , I - BAR ( inverse BAR ) , and N - BAR ( N - terminal BAR ) domains ] , is thought to be directly linked to their three - dimensional shape and oligomeric orga - nization . BAR - superfamily domains form anti - parallel dimers that interact with membranes through their “N - surface” , which is either concave , convex , or flat , and includes the amino - terminal helix ( “helix 1” ) from the two anti - parallel BAR protomers . In this way , BAR , N - BAR , and certain F - BAR domains that have a concave N - surface associate with cellular membrane invaginations , while I - BARs that have con - vex N - surfaces associate with membrane protrusions . Consistent with their functions in endocytic processes , the crystal structures of membrane invagination - associating F - BAR family members , for example , FBP17 , Syndapin , and FCHo2 ( PDB codes 2EFL , 3HAH , and 2V0O , respectively ) , dis - play a concave N - surface ( Kessels and Qualmann 2015 ) . It is therefore surprising to see that the endogenous SRGAP2A is localized to and active in cellular protrusions , such as den - dritic spine heads and lamellipodia , and scaffold membrane protrusions , when overexpressed in COS - 7 cells [ ( Guerrier et al . 2009 ; Charrier et al . 2012 ; Fritz et al . 2015 ) and this work ] . Here , we show that dimeric SRGAP2A has an inverted , convex curvature that can promote membrane protrusions . We further show that SRGAP2A dimers exhibit a domain - swapping Fx coiled - coil extension domain , and that the RhoGAP - SH3 domains also participate in dimeric interac - tions . We found that in spite of its smaller size and reduced dimerization interface , SRGAP2C forms stable hetero - dimers with SRGAP2A , which are insoluble , cannot scaffold mem - branes , and have a reduced affinity for Robo1 . We show that SRGAP2C acquired its full dominant negative function over time ; while P - SRGAP2C was already insoluble due to a critical carboxy - truncation in the Fx , it was by the later mutagenesis stage that SRGAP2C gained its ability to form more stable SRGAP2A : SRGAP2C hetero - dimers . Results To reveal the molecular mechanism , by which SRGAP2A as - sociates with membrane protrusions such as dendritic spine heads , and to understand how SRGAP2C inhibits SRGAP2A’s activity during human brain development , we first deter - mined the X - ray structure of the F - BARx , and used the re - sulting atomic coordinates to study the interplay between SRGAP2A and SRGAP2C . We docked the separate crystal structures of the F - BARx , RhoGAP ( homology model ) , and SH3 domains into our previously determined SAXS structure of intact SRGAP4 ( Guez - Haddad et al . 2015 ) , and measured SRGAP2A inter - domain interactions to map the structural arrangement and dimeric interface within intact SRGAP2A homo - dimers . We employed liposome sedimentation assays to quantitate membrane binding affinity , single - turnover GTPase assay to measure GAP catalysis , and surface plasmon resonance ( SPR ) to measure SRGAP - Robo1 interactions . We used expression in Sf9 cells to evaluate protein solubility , and expression in COS - 7 cells to assess the impact of SRGAP2A mutations on membrane - binding and remodeling activities , a method previously applied by other groups ( Guerrier et al . 2009 ; Coutinho - Budd et al . 2012 ; Yamazaki et al . 2013 ) . F - BARx Crystallography We solved the F - BARx crystal structure by applying a varia - tion of an exhaustive molecular symmetry search approach that took advantage of the 2 - fold anti - parallel F - BAR con - served symmetry ( Sporny et al . 2016 ) . This allowed solution of a structure ( refined to 2 . 7 A˚ resolution ) using a remote search model [ FBP17 , PDB 2EFL ( Shimada et al . 2007 ) ] with only 19 % sequence identity , which represented 13 % ( as a poly - ala model ) of the asymmetric unit contents . This mo - lecular symmetry - constrained systematic search approach was vital for structure solution as it enabled the resolution of characteristic problems common for coiled coil proteins ( Dauter 2015 ) . The exhaustive search was followed by elec - tron density modification procedures and cycles of model refinement and re - building ( table 1 ) . The quality of the re - sulting electron density has allowed us to ensure correct as - signment of all amino acid side chains . Crystal Structure of F - BARx The crystal structure reveals that the F - BARx ( residues 1 – 484 , supplementary fig . S1 , Supplementary Material online ) is composed of a noncanonical F - BAR ( residues 1 – 355 ) domain followed by a coiled - coil domain extension ( residues 356 – 484 ) , designated here as the F - BAR extension ( Fx ) . The F - BARx is the largest BAR superfamily member characterized thus far . The tip - to - tip distance of the F - BARx dimer is ap - proximately 275 A˚ [ electron density in the tip regions is weak due to high B - factor values ( supplementary fig . S2 B , Supplementary Material online ) , and cannot be defined ac - curately ] , reaching a width of 55 A˚ . The buried surface inter - face ( BSI ) between the two protomers is 8370 A˚ 2 . In comparison , the F - BAR domain of FBP17 has 288 residues , a dimeric tip - to - tip distance of 222 A˚ , a width of 36 A˚ , and a BSI of 4647 A˚ 2 . Regardless of the size difference , the same structural com - ponents that form the F - BAR domains of FBP17 , CIP4 , and FCHo2 , are also found in SRGAP2A . These include three pri - mary helices ( a 1 , a 2 , and a 3 ) and one short helix ( a 4 ) ( fig . 2 A and B and supplementary figs . S1 and S2 , Supplementary Structure – Function of SRGAP2 Proteins . doi : 10 . 1093 / molbev / msx094 MBE 1465 Material online ) . In SRGAP2A , the carboxy - half of a 1 from each protomer , together with approximately one third of each a 2 and a 3 , form a six - helix bundle at the center of the dimer , in which a 1 and a 3 are engaged in homotypic inter - actions with their dimeric counterpart . Two arms protrude from the central helix bundle ; each includes the long amino - half of a 1 , and a coiled - coil com - posed by the remaining two - thirds of a 2 and a 3 . The membrane - binding N - surface is composed by a 1 and most of a 2 , together with small portions of a 3 and a 6 . On the opposing side to the N - surface , the short a 4 extends directly from a 3 and further continues as a long random - coil towards the tip of the second protomer . A Homer - EVH1 binding motif , 339 PPMKF , is located on the a 4 – a 5 connecting loop ( supplementary figs . S1 and S3 , Supplementary Material online ) . It was recently demon - strated that through this motif , SRGAP2A directly interacts with the Homer protein in excitatory synapses ( Fossati et al . 2016 ) . However , our structural data reveals that because the Phe343 side - chain is buried in a cleft formed between the three main a 1 , 2 , and 3 helices of the reciprocal protomer , it can actually not be engaged with EVH1 domain binding , un - less a considerable conformational change takes place in this region . On the Homer side , this assessment is based on the crystal structure and analysis of the Homer EVH1 domain complexed with a peptide from mGluR ( TPPSPF ) ( PDB 1DDV ) ( Beneken et al . 2000 ) . The Fx , a 72 A˚ long coiled - coil composed by a 5 and a 6 , extends from one SRGAP2A protomer and packs against the a 2 – a 3 arm of the reciprocal protomer in the SRGAP2A dimer ( fig . 2 and supplementary fig . S2 , Supplementary Material online ) . The Fx is arranged in such a way that a 5 is predom - inantly surface exposed , and has only minor direct interac - tions with the F - BAR , while a 6 is mostly buried between a 5 and the a 2 – a 3 coiled - coil arm . Similar coiled - coil extension with reminiscent packing is also observed in the crystal struc - ture of the Fes - kinase F - BAR domain ( PDB 4DYL ) . SRGAP2A Has an Extended Dimerization Interface Like other BAR - superfamily members , the isolated F - BAR do - main ( F - BARA , residues 1 – 355 ) of SRGAP2A is dimeric , as can be demonstrated by size - exclusion chromatography ( SEC ) ( supplementary fig . S4 , Supplementary Material online ) . The F - BARx crystal structure reveals an elaborated dimerization interface that involves the Fx in addition to the F - BAR . Furthermore , we found that the RhoGAP - SH3 domains are also likely to be involved in dimerization ( fig . 2 C and D ) . With the F - BARx crystal structure at hand , we could fit it into the low resolution Small Angle X - ray Scattering ( SAXS ) structure of the full - length SRGAP4 that we determined recently ( Guez - Haddad et al . 2015 ) ( fig . 2 D ) . Adjustment of the F - BARx arms angle by 10 (cid:3) and docking of RhoGAP ( the ho - mologous RhoGAP of Beta2 - chimaerin , PDB 1XA6 ; Canagarajah et al . 2004 ) and SH3 ( from our recent work , PDB 4RUG ; Guez - Haddad et al . 2015 ) crystal structures into the densities next to the tips of the F - BARx arms results in a very good fit , using the fit - in - map application in Chimera ( Yang et al . 2012 ) , with real - time mean correla - tion ¼ 9 . 0438e (cid:4) 05 , SD ¼ 0 . 00066913 , RMS ¼ 0 . 00067521 . Domain fitting was also guided by distance constraints be - tween the carboxy end of the Fx , which is visible in the crystal structure , and the amino terminus of the RhoGAP model . The resulting domain arrangement implies that the RhoGAP and SH3 domains interact directly with the F - BAR arms of the reciprocal protomers . To confirm this observation , we measured the binding affinity of an isolated RhoGAP - SH3 to a fluorescently labeled F - BAR and F - BARx using microscale thermophoresis ( MST ) ( fig . 2 C ) . Our measurements show that the RhoGAP - SH3 do - mains specifically bind the F - BAR domain with K D ¼ 3 m M and the F - BARx with K D ¼ 3 . 5 m M . This shows that the RhoGAP - SH3 directly interacts with the F - BAR and that the Fx does not contribute to the binding affinity . These results are also consistent with our recent binding measurements of Robo1 to SRGAP2A ( Guez - Haddad et al . 2015 ) . Therein , we discovered that the F - BARx , RhoGAP , and SH3 domains co - operatively participate in Robo1 binding , further supporting direct interactions between the three domains . In conclusion , the dimerization interface in SRGAP2A ex - tends beyond the F - BARs , and includes the Fx and probably the RhoGAP - SH3 domains of one SRGAP2 protomer that wrap around the F - BAR domain of the reciprocal SRGAP2A ( fig . 2 D ) . SRGAP2A Inverse Curvature As mentioned earlier , it is typical for F - BAR proteins to asso - ciate with membrane invaginations , however , in concordance Table 1 . Summary of Crystallographic Statistics . Data Collection Statistics Crystal SRGAP2A F - BARx Beamline ID - 29 ESRF Wavelength ( A˚ ) 0 . 976 Space group C2 Unit Cell Parameters ( A˚ ) a ¼ 203 . 2 , b ¼ 29 . 9 , c ¼ 94 . 8 , b ¼ 91 . 9 (cid:3) Total reﬂections a 64 , 564 ( 2 , 660 ) Unique reﬂections a 16 , 118 ( 726 ) Completeness ( % ) a 98 . 8 ( 92 . 2 ) R meas ( % ) a , b 12 . 6 ( 121 . 1 ) Mean I / r a 8 . 1 ( 1 . 1 ) Resolution range ( A˚ ) 47 . 36 – 2 . 70 CC1 / 2 a 0 . 99 ( 0 . 62 ) Reﬁnement Statistics R work ( % ) a 0 . 21 ( 0 . 38 ) R free ( % ) a 0 . 26 ( 0 . 40 ) Number of nonhydrogen atoms 3386 Macromolecules 3367 Water 19 Protein residues 409 RMS bond lengths ( A˚ ) 0 . 013 RMS bond angles ( (cid:3) ) 1 . 68 Ramachandran favored ( % ) 93 Ramachandran outliers ( % ) 0 . 2 Clashscore 2 . 8 Average B - factor 80 . 05 RCBS PDB code 5I6J a Values for the highest resolution shell are given in parentheses . b R meas ¼ R h ½ m = ð m (cid:4) 1 Þ(cid:5) 1 = 2 R j i I h ; i (cid:4) < I h > j = R h R i I h ; i : Sporny et al . . doi : 10 . 1093 / molbev / msx094 MBE 1466 F IG . 2 . SRGAP2A structure and dimerization . ( A ) Domains ofSRGAP2A and focus on F - BARx . TheF - BARx helices and encoding exons aredrawn in scale and designated by their numbers . The carboxy - half of helix 6 , encoded by exon 10 , which is missing in SRGAP2C , is depicted in black . ( B ) Ribbon diagrams and cartoons of the dimeric SRGAP2A F - BARx crystal structure , in which the two identical protomers are colored in yellow andincyan . Labelsindicatingstructuralelementsofthecyanprotomerareunderscored . ThelargeribbondiagramrepresentsaviewfacingtheN - surface , and delineates the 6 - helix core , arms , and tip regions . ( C ) The RhoGAP - SH3 domains bind directly to the F - BAR domain . Microscale thermophoresis ( MST ) titration curves and apparent K D values for RhoGAP - SH3 binding to the F - BAR or the F - BARx that were ﬂuorescently labeled . Measured Structure – Function of SRGAP2 Proteins . doi : 10 . 1093 / molbev / msx094 MBE 1467 with prior studies , we find that the F - BAR - containing SRGAP2A associates with membrane protrusions ( fig . 3 B and C ) ( Frost et al . 2008 ; Guerrier et al . 2009 ; Yamazaki et al . 2013 ; Fritz et al . 2015 ) . In order to explain how this might be , it is necessary to look at the structures of the SRGAP2A F - BAR domain in comparison to that of other F - BAR proteins . In general , the six - helix core region of F - BAR domains is essentially flat , and the overall curved shape of F - BAR dimers is generated by the direction and angle of the a 2 – a 3 arms relative to the central region . In FBP17 , CIP4 , Syndapins , and FCHo2 the a 2 - a 3 arms are bent towards the direction of the N - surface , thereby generating a concave membrane binding surface . Unlike these , our structural data for SRGAP2A reveal that the a 2 – a 3 arms are bent in the opposite direction , away from the N - surface , resulting in a convex membrane binding surface ( fig . 3 A ) . Structure - based sequence comparison between the F - BAR domain of SRGAP2A and its closest available F - BAR homolog , FBP17 ( PDB 2ELF , 19 % sequence identity ) , revealed a 25 - residue long helical insertion ( residues 127 RFV . . . LQD 151 ) into a 2 at the point that links the central region and the a 2 – a 3 arm . Since the bases of the a 2 – a 3 arms are held with a 1 in the six - helix core region , the 25 aa insertion would push the a 2 – a 3 arm to point away from the insertion . Indeed , when we re - moved the 25 - residue helix from the F - BARx of SRGAP2A and expressed the truncated construct in COS - 7 cells , no membrane protrusions were observed ( supplementary fig . S5 , Supplementary Material online ) . Taken together , such inverse geometry of the membrane - binding surface readily explains how , contrary to other F - BAR proteins , SRGAPs as - sociate with membrane protrusions rather than with invag - inations ( fig . 3 ) . Membrane Binding Is Driven and Maintained by Electrostatic Interactions In most BAR superfamily domains , membrane association is driven by electrostatic interactions between negatively charged membrane surfaces and positively charged residues on the membrane - binding surface of the protein ( Mim and Unger 2012 , Kessels and Qualmann 2015 ) . For the SRGAP2A F - BARx , the convex N - surface is predominantly electropositive , while the opposite concave surface is electronegative ( fig . 4 A ) . We identified 46 lysine and arginine side chains that contribute to the electropositive potential of the dimeric N - surface ( 23 on each protomer ) . These positively charged residues are spread throughout the N - surface , with higher concentrations around the six - helix center and the two tip regions ( fig . 4 A and sup - plementary fig . S1 , Supplementary Material online ) . The Fx does not encroach upon the membrane - binding N - surface . In contrast , it constitutes a lateral addition that generates a transverse curvature , in addition to the more conspicuous longitudinal F - BARx curvature . To evaluate whether , and to what extent , the Fx contributes to mem - brane binding we compared liposome cosedimentation with F - BARA ( residues 1 – 355 , fig . 1 B ) to that of the F - BARx ( res - idues 1 – 484 ) . The results show that the presence of the Fx increases liposome binding by (cid:2) 25 % ( fig . 4 B and supplemen - tary fig . S6 , Supplementary Material online ) . This result dem - onstrates that although the F - BAR is sufficient for membrane binding , the Fx strengthens membrane - association for SRGAP2A . In order to experimentally test whether membrane bind - ing is indeed mediated by electrostatic interactions , we first measured SRGAP2A F - BARx binding to liposomes under dif - ferent conditions of phosphate concentration . In line with electrostatic interactions , binding was weaker as phosphate concentrations in the reaction buffer increased . About 140 mM phosphate almost completely dissociated F - BARx from liposomes after their prior association ( fig . 4 C ) . These experiments show that the F - BARx membrane association is primarily driven and maintained by electrostatic interactions . To confirm that the convex N - surface is the membrane - binding surface , we substituted five arginine and lysine resi - dues with glutamates . The resulting RKKKR 54 , 55 , 234 , 235 , 238 EEEEE ( designated F - BARx - R5E ) contains charge alterations of three residues on each of the tips , and four in the six - helix center of the dimer ( fig . 4 A and supplementary fig . S1 , Supplementary Material online ) . Liposome cosedimentation assays demonstrated that membrane binding of F - BARx - R5E was abolished ( fig . 4 B and supplementary fig . S6 , Supplementary Material online ) , as was its ability to form membrane protrusions when expressed in COS - 7 cells ( fig . 4 D ) . Taken together , these experiments verify that the principle of membrane binding through the N - surface is retained in SRGAP2A , and demonstrate that membrane binding is a pre - requisite for membrane scaffolding . SRGAP2C Is Insoluble and Inflicts Insolubility on Coexpressed SRGAP2A With the SRGAP2A F - BARx crystal structure at hand , we could readily investigate the molecular mechanism by which SRGAP2C antagonizes the activity of SRGAP2A . SRGAP2C roughly spans the F - BARx of SRGAP2A , with three differences ( fig . 1 ) . First , SRGAP2C is missing exon 10 onwards . The F - BARx crystal structure now reveals that this leaves a carboxy truncation that disturbs the Fx fold . Second , it has a seven - residue ( VRECYGF ) carboxy - terminal addition , translated from intron 9 . Third , it has five arginine alterations ( R73H , R108W , R205C , R235H , and R250Q ) , all located on the F - BAR domain and none on the Fx . The first two F IG . 2 Continued thermophoresis values ( symbols ) ﬁtted to a one - to - one binding model ( solid lines ) . ( D ) 3D domain organization of SRGAP2A homo - dimers ( left and center ) and SRGAP2A : SRGAP2C hetero - dimers ( right ) . SAXS 3D volume of full - length SRGAP4 ( ﬁrst shown in Guez - Haddad et al . [ 2015 ] ) is represented as atransparent envelopeinto whichthe crystalstructures of theF - BARxand theRhoGAP - SH3 domains weredockedafterbeing reduced toa 25 A˚ resolution 3D volumes by CHIMERA ( Yang et al . 2012 ) . SRGAP2C is colored in red and ismissingthe RhoGAP - SH3domains as well as part of the Fx . Therefore , it forms an asymmetric hetero - dimer with SRGAP2A that has lesser dimeric interface than the SRGAP2A homo - dimer . Sporny et al . . doi : 10 . 1093 / molbev / msx094 MBE 1468 modifications were inflicted simultaneously by the partial du - plication of SRGAP2A ( (cid:2) 3 . 4 Ma ) ( Dennis et al . 2012 ; Dennis and Eichler 2016 ) and were therefore present in the primal forms : P - SRGAP2B and P - SRGAP2C ( fig . 1 A ) . Because each of the contemporary forms ( SRGAP2B and SRGAP2C ) have dif - ferent nonsynonymous substitutions , we conclude that all their substitutions ( two on SRGAP2B and five on SRGAP2C ) were introduced after SRGAP2C duplication from SRGAP2B ( (cid:2) 2 . 4 Ma ) . As the contemporary F - BARx re - gion in the human SRGAP2A sequence is 100 % identical to those of chimpanzees ( supplementary fig . S1 , Supplementary Material online ) , bonobos and orangutans , we also conclude that SRGAP2A was unchanged at least in the past 6 My of human evolution ( fig . 1 A ) . We first expressed SRGAP2C alone in COS - 7 and Sf9 cells . SRGAP2C failed to induce membrane protrusions in COS - 7 cells , displaying a granulated distribution in the cells’ cyto - plasm , and unlike SRGAP2A , was insoluble in the Sf9 culture ( fig . 5 A – C ) . We re - created P - SRGAP2C , which is an SRGAP2C that lacks the five arginine substitutions and is identical to P - SRGAP2B ( fig . 1 B and supplementary fig . S1 , Supplementary Material online ) . P - SRGAP2C was also insoluble in Sf9 culture ( fig . 5 D ) . Consistently with our findings , Polleux and col - leagues showed that an F - BARx that is missing exon 10 , but lacks the five arginine substitutions does not generate mem - brane protrusions in COS - 7 cells ( Guerrier et al . 2009 ) . Analysis of the F - BARx crystal structure explains the reason for SRGAP2C and P - SRGAP2C insolubility . Since the part of helix 6 that is encoded by exon 10 supports the Fx structure , its absence in SRGAP2C ( and P - SRGAP2C ) would inflict Fx misfolding and insolubility due to exposure of significant hydrophobic patches ( fig . 5 E ) . The insolubility of SRGAP2C and P - SRGAP2C is in sharp contrast to the full solubility of SRGAP2A ( fig . 5 ) . However , when coexpressed with either SRGAP2C or P - SRGAP2C , 60 % and 40 % of the SRGAP2A are found in the insoluble fraction , respectively ( fig . 6 A – C ) . It seems that SRGAP2C and P - SRGAP2C interact with SRGAP2A to pull it out of solubility . We next investigated the properties of these interactions . Guided by the propencity of the SRGAP2A F - BAR domain to F IG . 3 . An inverse F - BAR curvature in SRGAP2A . ( A ) The crystal struc - tures of the SRGAP2A F - BARx homodimer ( yellow and cyan ) and the FBP17 F - BAR ( PDB code 2EFL , both protomers colored in gray ) are superimposed . While the six - helix core segments are well aligned , the arms of the SRGAP2A F - BARx point in opposite directions to those of the FBP17 , thereby generating a convex N - surface . This view of the superimposed a 2 - a 3arms shows a (cid:2) 30 (cid:3) inversion in the SRGAP2A F - BARx arm curvature . Colored in red is the 25 aa insertion segment in helix a 2 that imposes the curvature inversion . Residue Val100 of FBP - 17 is colored in green . ( B ) Maximum intensity projections of COS - 7 F IG . 3 Continued cells transfected with GFP and GFP - fusion of the SRGAP2A F - BARx . Upper panel is a magniﬁcation of an area boxed in the image . Note that F - BARx - expressing cells are marked by high frequencies of pro - trusions from the plasma membrane . Bars , 10 m m . Quantitative de - terminations of protrusion frequencies at the perimeter of cells transfected as indicated . Data are mean þ SEM . Statistical signiﬁ - cances were tested using one - way ANOVA with Kruskal – Wallis andDunn’spost - tests . * P < 0 . 05 ; * * * P < 0 . 001 . ( C ) Maximumintensity projectionsofCOS - 7cellstransfectedwithGFP - fusionoftheFBP17F - BAR domain shows formation of membrane invaginations , a typical phenotype of canonical F - BAR domains . ( D ) While canonical F - BAR domains ( e . g . , FBP - 17 ) that have a concave membrane binding sur - faces associate with membrane invaginations and participate in endocytic processes , SRGAP proteins have an inverse , convex mem - brane binding surface that allows them to associate with membrane protrusions , for example , lamellipodia and dendritic spine heads . Structure – Function of SRGAP2 Proteins . doi : 10 . 1093 / molbev / msx094 MBE 1469 form dimers , the underlying assumption is that native SRGAP2C protomers associate to form hetero - dimers with SRGAP2A protomers ( Charrier et al . 2012 ; Dennis et al . 2012 ) . Indeed , Polleux and coworkers coexpressed SRGAP2A and SRGAP2C in HEK293T cells and demonstrated that the two proteins interact , observed through coprecipitation ( Charrier et al . 2012 ) , suggesting direct interactions between the two proteins , but does not necessarily prove hetero - dimerization . Notably , the experiment by Charrier et al . does not contradict our finding that both SRGAP2C and the SRGAP2A : SRGAP2C complex are insoluble , since they used RIPA buffer containing denaturing ionic detergents ( SDS and sodium - deoxycholate ) , capable of solubilizing the SRGAP2A : SRGAP2C complex . The SRGAP2A : SRGAP2C Hetero - Dimerization Conundrum Considering SRGAP2C’s smaller dimeric contact interface and size ( fig . 2 D ) , the mechanism of hetero - dimerization that out - competes the SRGAP2A homo - dimerization is not straight - forward . We sought to investigate whether SRGAP2C interaction with SRGAP2A involves hetero - dimerization , and to further characterize the biochemical properties of SRGAP2C and the SRGAP2A : SRGAP2C complex . Because SRGAP2C and the complex that it forms with SRGAP2A are insoluble and therefore cannot be thoroughly investi - gated , we truncated the residual Fx of SRGAP2C , leaving a soluble F - BAR portion ( residues 1 – 355 , designated F - BARC , fig . 1 B ) . This construct differs from its F - BARA counterpart by the five SRGAP2C arginine substitutions . We then coex - pressed F - BARA and F - BARC ( separately ) with SRGAP2A ( a construct spanning residues 1 – 799 , the F - BARx - RhoGAP - SH3 domains , fig . 1 B ) in E . coli , and purified the SRGAP2A : F - BARA and SRGAP2A : F - BARC complexes using metal - chelate and size exclusion chromatography ( supplementary fig . S7 , Supplementary Material online ) . Strikingly , SEC - MALS ( SEC in - line with multi - angle light scattering ) analysis ( fig . 6 D – F ) showed that while the SRGAP2A : F - BARA complexes tend to dissociate during elution ( fig . 6 E ) , F - BARC forms stable hetero - dimers with SRGAP2A ( fig . 6 F ) , that even withstand stringent ion exchange MonoQ chromatography conditions ( supple - mentary fig . S7 E , Supplementary Material online ) . Only coex - pressed proteins form hetero - dimers , while proteins that were expressed and purified separately , could not exchange F IG . 4 . SRGAP2A - membrane electrostatic interactions . ( A ) Electrostatic surface potential of F - BARx homodimer , projected onto its molecular surface using PyMOL ( Schro¨dinger LLC ) . Note the contrast between the predominantly electropositive N - surface and the electronegative opposite surface . Key residues are indicated , and residues from one protomer are underlined while those of the second protomer are not . Fx regions are circled . ( B ) SRGAP2A F - BARx association with membranes is mediated by electrostatic F IG . 4 Continued interactions , as SRGAP2A F - BARx cosedimentation with liposomes is reduced by increasing concentrations of phosphate . Moreover , a pre - bound F - BARx is released by addition of phosphate ( right panel ) . Supernatant ( S ) and pellet ( P ) fractions are indicated . ( C ) Gel densi - tometry quantiﬁcation of liposome - bound fractions from cosedi - mentation experiments of SRGAP2A and SRGAP2C proteins , incubated with increasing concentrations of 400nm sized liposomes composed from porcine whole brain extract lipids . The error bars indicate SEM ; see supplementary ﬁgure S6 , Supplementary Material online for SDS - PAGE Coomassie stained gels . ( D ) COS - 7 cells express - ing the F - BARx - R5E mutant show smooth surfaces , when compared with the F - BARx - WT in ﬁgure 3 B . Quantitative protrusion analysis as in ﬁgure 3 B . Sporny et al . . doi : 10 . 1093 / molbev / msx094 MBE 1470 F IG . 5 . SRGAP2CisinsolubleduetoFxtruncation . ( A ) GFPfusionofSRGAP2CexpressedinCOS - 7cellsdoesnotformmembraneprotrusionswhen compared with F - BARx , and shows a granulated cytosolic distribution . ( B ) When expressed alone in Sf9 cells , SRGAP2A is found exclusively in the soluble fraction . Coomassie - stained SDS - PAGE ( left ) and anti - SRGAP2A ( abcam , ab124958 directed against the carboxy - tail of the protein that is notpresent intheSRGAP2C ) western - blot analysis . SRGAP2Amigrates nexttothe135kDa marker . His - tagged SRGAP2Awasexpressedin Sf9cells using the Bac - to - Bac system . P3 infected Sf9 cells ( from one 2 - l roller bottle , Greiner Bio - One ) were harvested 72h postinfection and lyzed in phosphate lysis buffer . The cell extract was centrifuged and the soluble fraction loaded onto a Ni - chelate column . Imidazole gradient was applied and the His - tagged SRGAP2A eluted at 100 mM imidazole . ( C and D ) His - tagged SRGAP2C ( C ) and His - tagged P - SRGAP2C ( D ) are found exclusively in the insoluble fraction . Both proteins were expressed as in ( B ) and analyzed using Coomassie - stained SDS - PAGE and anti - His Structure – Function of SRGAP2 Proteins . doi : 10 . 1093 / molbev / msx094 MBE 1471 protomers when mixed , as evident from SEC analysis ( sup - plementary fig . S7 F , Supplementary Material online ) , indicat - ing that pre - formed SRGAP2A homo - dimers dissociate very weakly , if at all . These results are consistent with our observation that P - SRGAP2C ( which does not have the five arginine substitu - tions , and is represented by F - BARA ) is less effective than SRGAP2C ( represented by F - BARC ) in insolubilizing coex - pressed SRGAP2A ( fig . 6 A – C ) . In conclusion , the five arginine substitutions that were introduced to SRGAP2C in the later phase of its evolution facilitate tighter hetero - dimerization between F - BARC and SRGAP2A . In the case of the full - length SRGAP2C , these substitutions allow more effective insolubilization of coex - pressed SRGAP2A . SRGAP2C Substitutions Are Destabilizing , and Facilitate Tight Hetero - Dimerization We considered three possible mechanisms by which the arginine substitutions of SRGAP2C may promote hetero - dimerization with SRGAP2A : ( 1 ) creation of new , direct interactions with SRGAP2A , ( 2 ) elimination of repulsive forces that may exist in an SRGAP2A homo - dimer , and ( 3 ) indirect effects . AnalysisoftheF - BARxcrystalstructuredoesnotsupportthe possibility that the substitutions are engaged in new hetero - dimeric contacts with SRGAP2A . However , because we do not have an SRGAP2A : SRGAP2C crystal structure ( the complex is insoluble ) wecannotruleoutthispossibility . Thesecondmech - anism , that is , eliminating repulsive forces , appears more plau - sible . As homo - dimerization may involve overcoming same - charge repulsive forces , elimination of positive charges ( inter - estingly , all five substitutions are of arginine residues ) from SRGAP2Cwouldpromotehetero - dimerization . Thethirdpos - sibility , indirecteffects , concernsalteredstructuralpropertiesof SRGAP2C itself . To investigate the structural changes that the arginine substitutions may inflict , we compared the observed solubilities andstabilities ofF - BARC andF - BARAafterexpress - ing them individually in E . coli ( fig . 7 A and B ) . While F - BARA is mostlyfoundinthesolublefraction , F - BARCismostly ( butnot entirely ) insoluble . Nevertheless , onceisolatedtohomogeneity , F - BARA and F - BARC show similar SEC elution and CD spectra profiles ( supplementary fig . S4 , Supplementary Material online and fig . 7 C , respectively ) , demonstrating that both have the same general fold and dimeric arrangement . We next measured the thermal stability of purified F - BARC and F - BARA and found that they have profoundly different denaturation profiles ( fig . 7 D ) . The F - BARC denaturation slope is wider and is considerably less thermo - stable than F - BARA , with denaturation temperature values of 32 and 38 (cid:3) C , respectively ( fig . 7 E ) . The wider denaturation slope of F - BARC demonstrate a loss of cooperativity in the F - BARC structure ( Kuwajima 1989 ) , in which the F - BARC retains an F - BARA - like fold , but with a looser packing of the three long helices in the tertiary structure . We next introduced each one of the five arginine substitu - tions separately into F - BARA , and found that the greatest de - stabilization effect is inflicted by the R108W mutation ( fig . 7 F ) . We next showed thatR108K , R108L , and R108S substitutions did not have the same effect , which implies that the destabilizing effect of R108W is due not only to loss of arginine interactions , but is rather inflicted by a tryptophan - specific contribution ( sup - plementary fig . S8 , Supplementary Material online ) . Taken together , these results reveal a fundamental bio - chemical property of SRGAP2C : structural instability of the F - BAR fold . This property was acquired at the final stage of SRGAP2C evolution , with the mutagenesis of R108 to tryp - tophan , and is not present in P - SRGAP2B and P - SRGAP2C . SRGAP2A : F - BARC Hetero - Dimers Are Also Defective in Membrane Binding and Robo1 Association , but Not in RhoGAP Activity Up to this point , we showed that SRGAP2C hetero - dimerizes with SRGAP2A , and that once formed , these hetero - dimers do not dissociate and are insoluble , which explains SRGAP2A inactivation by SRGAP2C . Next , we investigated whether ad - ditional properties of SRGAP2A ( critical for its cell biological functions ) are modulated by hetero - dimer formation with SRGAP2C . Since SRGAP2C and SRGAP2A : SRGAP2C hetero - dimers are insoluble , and cannot be isolated for biochemical investigations , SRGAP2A : F - BARC heterodimers were used for measurements of membrane binding and scaffolding , RhoGAP catalysis activity and Robo1 - CC3 binding , as these are soluble . Liposome cosedimentation experiments showed that F - BARC and SRGAP2A : F - BARC hetero - dimers have a reduced affinity for membranes in comparison to F - BARA , F - BARx , and SRGAP2A ( fig . 4 B and supplementary fig . S6 , Supplementary Material online ) . In addition , while F - BARA shows some mem - brane scaffolding activity in COS - 7 cells , F - BARC does not ( supplementary fig . S9 A , Supplementary Material online ) . We considered that the SRGAP2C arginine substitutions , in particular those engaged in direct electrostatic contacts with the negatively charged membrane , inflict weaker SRGAP2C membrane binding . Mapping the five substituted arginine residues of SRGAP2C onto the F - BARx crystal struc - ture ( supplementary fig . S10 , Supplementary Material online ) reveals that two of them : R73 and R235 point at the mem - brane binding surface . The third arginine residue ( R250 ) is positioned on the opposite surface , the fourth ( R108 ) is packed against the molecule’s side , and the fifth ( R205 ) is lo - cated at the arm tip region , where electron density is not F IG . 5 Continued western - blot analysis . Both SRGAP2C and P - SRGAP2C migrates below the 63 kDa marker . ( E ) Cartoon , ribbon , and electron density map repre - sentationofthemissing - in - SRGAP2Cexon10structure . Exon10encodesforthecarboxy - halfofhelix a 6thatmediatestheFxinteractionswiththe F - BAR a 2 – a 3 arm and is thereby essential for the Fx fold integrity . In its absence , the amino - half of helix a 6 and the entire a 5 helix loses their hold on the F - BAR arm and the structural integrity of the Fx . Fx misfolding due to the missing exon 10 readily explains SRGAP2C and P - SRGAP2C insolubility . Asimulatedannealingcompositeomitelectrondensitymapcontouredto1 . 3 r , highlightingtheclosecontactsofhelix6withhelix5of the Fx , and with the F - BAR portion of the reciprocal F - BAR protomer . Sporny et al . . doi : 10 . 1093 / molbev / msx094 MBE 1472 F IG . 6 . SRGAP2A : SRGAP2C hetero - dimerization . ( A – C ) Coomassie - stained SDS - PAGE ( A ) and western - blot analysis ( B ) show that , in sharp contrast to SRGAP2A solubility ( ﬁg . 5 B ) , large amounts of ( nontagged ) SRGAP2A are in the insoluble fraction when coexpressed with either His - tagged SRGAP2C or His - tagged P - SRGAP2C in Sf9 cells . Important to note that the nonHis - tagged SRGAP2A binds to the Ni - chelate column and elutes at 50 mM imidazole . SRGAP2C and P - SRGAP2C remain insoluble under coexpression conditions . ( C ) Gel densitometry quantiﬁcation of SRGAP2A soluble fraction ( calculated from [ A ] and ﬁg . 5 B ) , as the ratio between the total amount of protein in the Ni - column elution and the insolublefraction . TheerrorbarsindicateSEM . ( D – F ) CoomassiestainedSDS - PAGEofsuperose610 / 300elutionproﬁles , andSEC - MALSanalysisof SRGAP2A ( residues 1 – 799 , F - BARx - RhoGAP - SH3 ) alone ( D ) , coexpressed with F - BARA ( SRGAP2A residues 1 – 355 ) ( E ) , or coexpressed with F - BARC ( SRGAP2C residues 1 – 355 ) ( F ) . Note that while the SRGAP2A : F - BARA complex dissociates into a homo - and hetero - dimers mixture under Structure – Function of SRGAP2 Proteins . doi : 10 . 1093 / molbev / msx094 MBE 1473 clearly visible . The SRGAP2C substitutions R73H and R235H deprive the membrane binding surface of two of its positive charges , and are therefore likely to reduce the protein’s affinity for negatively charged membranes . We introduced SRGAP2C’s R73H and R235H substitutions to the F - BARx construct ( termed F - BARx - R2H ) and compared the mutant’s membrane binding to that of F - BARx - WT . F - BARx - R2H showed mildly re - duced binding to liposomes ( fig . 4 B and supplementary fig . S6 , Supplementary Material online ) and reduced protrusion forma - tion in COS - 7 cells ( supplementary fig . S9 B , Supplementary Material online ) . We next measured and compared the binding affinity of Robo1 for SRGAP2A and the SRGAP2 : F - BARC hetero - dimer . Previously , we have found that the SRGAP2A SH3 domain is necessary , but not sufficient for an effective Robo1 – SRGAP2A interaction , and that the addition of the RhoGAP and F - BARx domains change the binding kinetics and greatly strengthen Robo1 – SRGAP2A association ( Guez - Haddad et al . 2015 ) . Specifically , measured K D values for Robo1 – CC3 association with SH3 , RhoGAP – SH3 , and F - BARx – RhoGAP – SH3 were 13 , 4 . 5 , and 0 . 6 m M , respectively . We concluded that the F - BARx , RhoGAP , and SH3 domains form a composite surface that binds the Robo1 - CC3 better than the isolated SH3 domain . Surface plasmon resonance ( SPR ) studies of the SRGAP2A : F - BARC hetero - dimer interactions with Robo1 - CC3 , revealed a kinetic profile significantly different to that of SRGAP2A . The Robo1 interaction was significantly weaker and the obtained kinetic profile merely reached that of a RhoGAP - SH3 fragment , with a calculated K D value of 5 . 6 m M ( supplementary fig . S11 A , Supplementary Material online ) . These results indicate that the composite F - BARx – RhoGAP – SH3 Robo1 binding surface in the SRGAP2A : SRGAP2C hetero - dimer is disturbed , thus hampering potential to be recruited to Robo1 signaling sites . In contrast , the enzymatic GAP activity ( Rac1 GTP hydro - lysis rate , evaluated using the single - turnover GTPase assay ) of an isolated SRGAP2A RhoGAP domain was similar to that of SRGAP2A : F - BARC hetero - dimers ( supplementary fig . S11 B , Supplementary Material online ) . Taken together , these experiments show that arginine sub - stitutions in SRGAP2C reduce its affinity for negatively charged membranes , and that a soluble truncation of SRGAP2C ( F - BARC ) is incapable of membrane scaffolding in COS7 cells . A soluble version of the SRGAP2A : SRGAP2C hetero - dimer ( SRGAP2A : F - BARC ) also shows weaker affinity for membranes . Furthermore , this SRGAP2A : F - BARC hetero - dimer has a weaker affinity for Robo1 , which reflects a defective F - BARx – RhoGAP – SH3 domain arrangement , disturbing the ligand - binding mech - anism , and thereby effectively antagonizing SRGAP2A functions . Discussion and Conclusions In 2012 , Polleux and colleagues ( Charrier et al . 2012 ) showed that SRGAP2C ectopic expression in cultured mouse neurons has a similar effect to SRGAP2A knock down , suggesting that this antagonizing function played a key role in the develop - ment of unique features of the human brain . In this work , we present and analyze the structure of SRGAP2A , the interplay between SRGAP2A with the human specific paralog SRGAP2C , and unveil a molecular mechanism by which the human specific SRGAP2C progressively acquired the ability to antagonize SRGAP2A . A New BAR Domain Fold Our work reveals a new BAR domain fold : the “inverse F - BAR” , which explains how SRGAP2A interacts with mem - branes in protruding sub - cellular regions as opposed to in - vaginated endocytic sites , the typical interaction for canonical F - BAR proteins ( fig . 3 ) . The crystal structure of the extended F - BAR domain ( F - BARx ) of SRGAP2A also reveals domain - swapped coiled - coil F - BAR extensions ( Fx ) that pack on the lateral sides of the reciprocal F - BAR protomers . Direct MST binding measure - ments and fitting of crystal structures into the 3D SAXS en - velope of full - length SRGAP4 shows that the RhoGAP - SH3 domains are also likely to participate in dimeric interactions , revealing a large SRGAP2A dimerization interface that in - cludes the F - BAR , Fx , and RhoGAP - SH3 domains ( fig . 2 ) . SRGAP2C Hetero - Dimerization with and Inactivation of SRGAP2A We show that the antagonism of SRGAP2A by SRGAP2C has two separate , yet equally imperative components . One is the hetero - dimerization of the two proteins , and the second is the inactivation of the hetero - dimerized SRGAP2A . We demonstrate that unlike the soluble SRGAP2A , SRGAP2C is insoluble and that consequently , SRGAP2A : SRGAP2C hetero - dimers are also insoluble . SRGAP2C’s insolubility is inflicted by a carboxy - truncation in the Fx that most likely results in Fx misfolding . As an insoluble complex , SRGAP2A : SRGAP2C hetero - dimers aggre - gate , unable to reach designated recruitment sites , an imped - iment that by itself renders the SRGAP2A : SRGAP2C complex inactive . Nonetheless , by engineering a soluble version of SRGAP2C ( F - BARC ) we could , to some extent , probe the biochemical properties of the SRGAP2A : F - BARC hetero - dimers and show that these hetero - dimers are additionally impaired in other aspects besides solubility : they have weaker membrane - and Robo1 - binding affinities . SRGAP2A – SRGAP2C hetero - dimerization poses a thermo - dynamic puzzle . Evidence for the contribution of the Fx and RhoGAP – SH3 domains to dimerization , raises the question of how does SRGAP2C , that lacks the RhoGAP – SH3 domains and has an impaired Fx , form hetero - dimers while competing with the larger and seemingly favorable SRGAP2A homo - dimers ? We show that unlike the stable SRGAP2A : F - BARC hetero - dimers , dimers between SRGAP2A and F - BARA are F IG . 6 Continued gel - ﬁltration conditions , the SRGAP2A : F - BARC hetero - dimers are remarkably stable . An elaborate description of the SRGAP2A : F - BARC and SRGAP2A : F - BARAhetero - dimersproductionispresentedinsupplementaryﬁgureS7 , SupplementaryMaterialonline . ( G ) CoomassiestainedSDS - PAGE of superose6 10 / 300 elution proﬁles , and SEC - MALS analysis of F - BARC . Sporny et al . . doi : 10 . 1093 / molbev / msx094 MBE 1474 F IG . 7 . TheSRGAP2CR108Wsubstitutioninﬂictsstructuralinstability . F - BARA ( A ) andF - BARC ( B ) wereexpressedas - TEV - His - Trxfusionsin E . coli . The proteinswereelutedbyanimidazolegradientfromNi - NTAcolumn , digestedbyTEVprotease , andfurtherpuriﬁedbyasuperdex20020 / 60gelﬁltration column . ( C ) The puriﬁed F - BARA and F - BARC , as well as each one of the SRGAP2C point mutants introduced to the F - BARA template ( which were expressed and puriﬁed like F - BARA and F - BARC ) were analyzed by circular dichroism ( CD ) spectroscopy in 10 (cid:3) C . All seven F - BAR constructs show similarCDspectra , withapredominantlyalphahelicalsecondarystructurecontent . ( D ) TemperaturegradientCDanalysis ( averageofthreeruns ) shows a reduced thermal stability and structural cooperativity of F - BARC and the R108W mutant in comparison to F - BARA . ( E ) Calculated denaturation temperatures ( T d ) and denaturation slopes are presented for each F - BAR construct . ( F ) Zoom in on the R108 region and interactions . Structure – Function of SRGAP2 Proteins . doi : 10 . 1093 / molbev / msx094 MBE 1475 not stable and dissociate into separate SRGAP2A and F - BARA populations during SEC elution ( fig . 6 and supplementary fig . S7 , Supplementary Material online ) . Evidently , F - BARC and F - BARA behave very differently in respect to association with SRGAP2A . We found that this difference stems from the five arginine substitutions present in SRGAP2C . R108W , which has a dramatic effect on the thermal stability of the F - BAR in SRGAP2C , causes loosening of structural cooperativity and a decrease in the denaturation temperature of the F - BAR ( fig . 7 ) . We suggest that the stabilization of SRGAP2C in the SRGAP2A : SRGAP2C hetero - dimers brings a thermodynamic gain that allows SRGAP2C , despite its smaller dimerization surface , to compete with thermodynamically favorable SRGAP2A homo - dimerization . Were the Primal P - SRGAP2B / P - SRGAP2C Biochemically Different to Modern SRGAP2C , and If So , How ? The five arginine substitutions in modern SRGAP2C ( includ - ing R108W ) were acquired in the final stage of SRGAP2C evolution ( fig . 1 ) . Thus , we propose that the primal forms of SRGAP2C , if they were indeed active during the period of their existence , were less effective in SRGAP2A hetero - dimerization and therefore in antagonizing SRGAP2A functions . Throughout an estimated 1 My ( (cid:2) 3 . 4 – 2 . 4 Ma ) , SRGAP2B and SRGAP2C existed in their primal forms . The amino acid sequences of these partially duplicated SRGAP2A copies were identical to each other , free from nonsynonymous substitu - tions ( fig . 1 A ) . Later , each acquired a different set of non - synonymous mutations , giving rise to the modern forms : SRGAP2B and SRGAP2C ( Dennis et al . 2012 ) . An interesting question is whether the primal copies differed from the mod - ern ones . In this work , we show that the biochemical prop - erties of P - SRGAP2B / P - SRGAP2C were different from those of modern SRGAP2C . Although both SRGAP2C and P - SRGAP2B / P - SRGAP2C appear insoluble on isolation , the pri - mal forms are less effective in bringing coexpressed SRGAP2A out of solubility ( fig . 6 A – C ) . As a result , more SRGAP2A homo - dimers were able to form and signal effectively , while presence of coexpressed modern SRGAP2C brought about stronger attenuation of SRGAP2A functions . The final question is : could it be possible that SRGAP2C mutants designed to make stronger heterodimeric contacts with SRGAP2A , would further attenuate activity , and what might be the physiological effects of this . Experimental Design and Cloning of SRGAP Constructs The human SRGAP2A full - length cDNA clone ( KIAA0456 ) was purchased from ImaGenes GmbH , and its internal BamHI digestion site was mutated by polymerase cycling as - sembly . SRGAP2C was cloned from a human cDNA library , and P - SRGAP2C was prepared using the SRGAP2A cDNA template for PCR amplification ( SRGAP2A 1 – 452 ) with re - verse primer that adds the carboxy - extension 453 VRECYGF 459 ( primal sequences derived from Dennis et al . 2012 ) . Mutants were generated by PCR with appropriate primers introducing the mutations . Multiple mutations were intro - duced by multiple rounds of mutagenesis using templates already carrying some of the desired mutations . All constructs generated by PCR were checked by sequencing . For E . coli expression , SRGAP2 constructs were digested with BamHI and XhoI and ligated into a modified pHis - parallel2 vector ( Novagen ) , with an amino - terminal His - Tag , TRX fusion protein , and TEV cleavage sequence . The RhoGAP - SH3 - C’ term ( SRGAP2A 485 – 1071 ) construct was digested with BamHI and XhoI and ligated into a His - tag deleted pET28 vector ( Novagen ) . The F - BARx – RhoGAP – SH3 ( SRGAP2A 1 – 799 ) construct was digested with BamHI and NotI and ligated into a modified pRSFDuet - 1 vector ( Novagen ) , with the N - terminal His - tag replaced by a SUMO fusion protein . For Sf9 expression , full length SRGAP2A , SRGAP2C , and P - SRGAP2C cDNA was digested with BamHI and XhoI and ligated into the pFastBac - HTB vector ( Invitrogen ) with a carboxy - terminal His – Tag . The pFastBac Dual vector ( Invitrogen ) was used to coexpress SRGAP2A ( no tag , ligated at the EcoRI and SalI sites ) under the polyhedrin promoter , with either SRGAP2C or P - SRGAP2C ( both His - Tagged , li - gated at the XhoI and NheI sites ) under the p10 promoter . For COS - 7 expression , SRGAP2constructs were GFP - fusions encoded by pEGFP . Expression and Purification For bacterial expression , all constructs were expressed in E . coli BL21 Tuner strain ( Novagen ) , also expressing the RIL Codon Plus plasmid ( Barak and Opatowsky 2013 ) . Transformed cells were grown for 3 – 4 h at 37 (cid:3) C in 2xYT media containing 100 l g / mL ampicillin and 34 – 50 l g / mL chloramphenicol . Protein expression was induced with 200 l M IPTG over a 16 h period at 16 (cid:3) C . Cells were harvested and frozen prior to lysis and centrifugation . For in vitro assays , F - BARx - RhoGAP - SH3 , F - BARx , F - BARA , F - BARC , and coexpressed protein constructs were purified by the following steps : su - pernatant was loaded onto a pre - equilibrated Ni - chelate col - umn ( HisTrap , GE Healthcare ) with buffer A [ 50 mM Phosphate buffer , pH 8 , 400 mM NaCl , 5 % glycerol , 5 mM b - MercaptoEthanol ( b ME ) ] , washed and eluted with a buffer B gradient ( 50 mM Phosphate buffer , pH 8 , 400 mM NaCl , 5 % glycerol , 500 mM imidazole , 5 mM b ME ) . Protein - containing fractions were pooled , incubated with TEV protease ( 1 : 50 v / v ) and dialyzed O / N at 4 (cid:3) C against buffer A . The protein was then passed through a Ni - chelate column and further isolated by SEC ( HiLoad 26 / 60 Superdex 200 column , GE Healthcare ) , pre - equilibrated with buffer C ( 120 mM NaCl , 50 mM phos - phate buffer pH 8 , 1 mM DTT ) . Proteins were concentrated using Vivaspin 20 ( Sartorius ) . When required , SUMO and TRX fusions were removed by TEV and / or SENP proteolysis . For quality control , purified proteins were analyzed by SEC and circular dichroism . Baculoviruses ware generated using the Bac - to - Bac V R system ( Invitrogen ) . Proteins were expressed in baculovirus - infected Sf9 cells grown in 50ml ESF 921 culture medium ( Expression systems ) using a 2L roller bottle ( Greiner Bio - One ) . P3 infected Sporny et al . . doi : 10 . 1093 / molbev / msx094 MBE 1476 Sf9 cells were grown at 27 (cid:3) C and harvested after 72 h by centrifugation ( 200 (cid:6) g , 10 min ) , then frozen in liquid N 2 . Cell pellets were thawed and re - suspended in 10 ml buffer D ( 50 mM Phosphate buffer , pH 7 . 5 , 200 mM NaCl , 5 mM b ME , 5 % glycerol ( w / v ) , 0 . 5 mM EDTA ) . About 2 mM PMSF was added after lysis using a dounce homogenizer . Cell lysates were clarified by centrifugation at 20 , 000 (cid:6) g for 20 min and the supernatant treated as above for Ni - chelate column purification using buffer D for equilibration and buffer E for a gradient elution [ 50 mM Phosphate buffer , pH 7 . 5 , 200 mM NaCl , 5 mM b ME , 5 % glycerol ( w / v ) , 0 . 5M imidazole ] . Eluted fractions were analyzed by SDS - PAGE and immunoblotting with anti - His ( Santa Cruz ) and anti - SRGAP2A ( abcam , ab124958 ) antibodies . Cell Culture , Transfection , and Staining HEK293 cells and COS - 7 cells were maintained in 10 ml DMEM containing 2 mM L - glutamine , 10 % ( v / v ) fetal bovine serum and gentamycin at 37 (cid:3) C and 5 % CO 2 . HEK293 cells were seeded in six - well plates and transfected with TurboFect according to manufacturer’s instructions ( Thermo Scientific ) 12 h later . Twenty - four hours after trans - fection , cells were harvested , resuspended in homogenization buffer [ 5 mM HEPES pH7 . 4 , 0 . 32 M sucrose , 1 mM EDTA supplemented with Complete V R protease inhibitor ( Roche ) ] , and homogenized by passing through a syringe and pottering ( 12 strokes ) . The lysates were centrifuged for 10 min at 1000 (cid:6) g at 4 (cid:3) C to remove cell debris and nuclei . The supernatant was then spun at 11 , 700 (cid:6) g for 20 min at 4 (cid:3) C to obtain a crude membrane fraction . The membrane fraction was then resuspended in homogenization buffer and again spun to yield a washed membrane fraction as a pellet . Aliquots were analyzed by anti - GFP immunoblotting . COS - 7 cells were seeded in 24 - well plates and transfected (cid:2) 8 h later using TurboFect ( Thermo Scientific ) . After 18 h , the cells were fixed with 4 % PFA for 7 min and processed for immunofluorescence microscopy ( Schneider et al . 2014 ) , with Phalloidin AlexaFluor V R 568 ( Molecular Probes ) . Light Microscopy and Quantitative Assessment of COS7 Cell Membrane Topology Confocal images were recorded using a Zeiss AxioObserver . Z1 microscope equipped with an ApoTome and AxioCam MRm CCD camera ( Zeiss ) . Digital images were acquired as a z - series ( 0 . 2 – 0 . 3 m m intervals ) by AxioVision Software ( Vs40 4 . 8 . 2 . 0 ) . Transfected cells with perimeters available for quantitative analysis of membrane topology were imaged in systematic sweeps across the coverslips using a Plan - Apochromat 63x / 1 . 4oil objective . Quantitative image processing was done by ImageJ 1 . 46r software using maximum intensity projections of confocal image stacks at high magnification . The perimeter of each cell was outlined ( segmented line tool ) and the length determined ( ROI manager ) . The number of protrusions from the cell perimeter ( irrespective of their varying individual length ) was determined and expressed per m m cell perimeter . In most cases , 15 – 27 cells were analyzed per condition in 3 – 4 assays reaching sum n - numbers of cells evaluated ranging from 54 to 87 . The analyses of the srGAP2 F - BARdel25 mutant in comparison to wild - type and GFP control include only two assays and 32 – 34 cells per condition . Data is pre - sented as mean þ SEM . Statistical significance was calculated using Prism 5 . 03 software ( GraphPad ) . Nonquantitative im - age processing was done by Adobe Photoshop . Docking of Crystal Structures and Molecular Graphics Docking of crystal structures into SAXS densities was per - formed manually using COOT ( Emsley et al . 2010 ) and UCSF Chimera ( Yang et al . 2012 ) . Images were produced us - ing Pymol ( http : / / www . pymol . org ) and UCSF Chimera . Supplementary Material Supplementary data are available at Molecular Biology and Evolution online . Acknowledgments We thank Adam Frost and Eckart Gundelfinger for valuable advice on the manuscript , Michaela Vogel , Lada Gevorkyan - Airapetov , Rinat Vasserman and Tomer Orevi for technical assistance , and Hadar Amartely and Mario Lebendiker for help with SEC - MALS experiments and analysis . Thanks to the staff of beamlines ID14 , ID23 , and ID29 of ESRF , and the staff of BESSY II BL14 . 1 . This work was supported by funds from the ISF ( Grants no . 182 / 10 and 1425 / 15 to Y . O . ) and BSF ( Grant no . 2013310 , to Y . O . and Adam Frost ) as well as by the DFG grants QU116 / 6 - 2 to B . Q . and KE685 / 4 - 2 to M . M . K . References Barak R , Opatowsky Y . 2013 . Expression , derivatization , crystallization and experimental phasing of an extracellular segment of the human Robo1 receptor . Acta Crystallogr Sect F Struct Biol Cryst Commun . 69 : 771 – 775 . Beneken J , Tu JC , Xiao B , Nuriya M , Yuan JP , Worley PF , Leahy DJ . 2000 . Structure of the Homer EVH1 domain - peptide complex reveals a new twist in polyproline recognition . Neuron 26 : 143 – 154 . Bianchi S , Stimpson CD , Bauernfeind AL , Schapiro SJ , Baze WB , McArthur MJ , Bronson E , Hopkins WD , Semendeferi K , Jacobs B , et al . 2013 . Dendritic morphology of pyramidal neurons in the chim - panzee neocortex : regional specializations and comparison to hu - mans . Cereb Cortex . 23 : 2429 – 2436 . Canagarajah B , Leskow FC , Ho JY , Mischak H , Saidi LF , Kazanietz MG , HurleyJH . 2004 . StructuralmechanismforlipidactivationoftheRac - specific GAP , beta2 - chimaerin . Cell 119 : 407 – 418 . Charrier C , Joshi K , Coutinho - Budd J , Kim JE , Lambert N , de Marchena J , Jin WL , Vanderhaeghen P , Ghosh A , Sassa T , Polleux F . 2012 . Inhibition of SRGAP2 function by its human - specific paralogs indu - ces neoteny during spine maturation . Cell 149 : 923 – 935 . Coutinho - Budd J , Ghukasyan V , Zylka MJ , Polleux F . 2012 . The F - BAR domains from srGAP1 , srGAP2 and srGAP3 regulate membrane deformation differently . J Cell Sci . 125 : 3390 – 3401 . Dauter Z . 2015 . Solving coiled - coil protein structures . IUCr J . 2 : 164 – 165 . Dennis MY , Eichler EE . 2016 . Human adaptation and evolution by seg - mental duplication . Curr Opin Genet Dev . 41 : 44 – 52 . Dennis MY , Nuttle X , Sudmant PH , Antonacci F , Graves TA , Nefedov M , Rosenfeld JA , Sajjadian S , Malig M , Kotkiewicz H , et al . 2012 . Evolution of human - specific neural SRGAP2 genes by incomplete segmental duplication . Cell 149 : 912 – 922 . Elston GN , Benavides - Piccione R , DeFelipe J . 2001 . The pyramidal cell in cognition : a comparative study in human and monkey . J Neurosci . 21 : RC163 . Structure – Function of SRGAP2 Proteins . doi : 10 . 1093 / molbev / msx094 MBE 1477 Emsley P , Lohkamp B , Scott WG , Cowtan K . 2010 . Features and devel - opment of Coot . Acta Crystallogr D Biol Crystallogr . 66 : 486 – 501 . Endris V , Haussmann L , Buss E , Bacon C , Bartsch D , Rappold G . 2011 . SrGAP3 interacts with lamellipodin at the cell membrane and reg - ulates Rac - dependent cellular protrusions . J Cell Sci . 124 : 3941 – 3955 . Fossati M , Pizzarelli R , Schmidt ER , Kupferman JV , Stroebel D , Polleux F , Charrier C . 2016 . SRGAP2 and its human - specificparalog co - regulate the development of excitatory and inhibitory synapses . Neuron 91 : 356 – 369 . Fritz RD , Menshykau D , Martin K , Reimann A , Pontelli V , Pertz O . 2015 . SrGAP2 - dependent integration of membrane geometry and slit - Robo - repulsive cues regulates fibroblast contact inhibition of loco - motion . Dev Cell . 35 : 78 – 92 . Frost A , Perera R , Roux A , Spasov K , Destaing O , Egelman EH , De Camilli P , Unger VM . 2008 . Structural basis of membrane invagination by F - BAR domains . Cell 132 : 807 – 817 . Gilbert SF , Barresi MJF . 2016 . Developmental biology , Chapter 26 . 11th ed . Sunderland ( MA ) : Sinauer Associates , Inc . Guerrier S , Coutinho - Budd J , Sassa T , Gresset A , Jordan NV , Chen K , Jin WL , Frost A , Polleux F . 2009 . The F - BAR domain of srGAP2 induces membrane protrusions required for neuronal migration and mor - phogenesis . Cell 138 : 990 – 1004 . Guez - Haddad J , Sporny M , Sasson Y , Gevorkyan - Airapetov L , Lahav - Mankovski N , Margulies D , Radzimanowski J , Opatowsky Y . 2015 . The neuronal migration factor srGAP2 achieves specificity in ligand binding through a two - component molecular mechanism . Structure 23 : 1989 – 2000 . Harmand S , Lewis JE , Feibel CS , Lepre CJ , Prat S , Lenoble A , Boes X , Quinn RL , Brenet M , Arroyo A , et al . 2015 . 3 . 3 - million - year - old stone tools from Lomekwi 3 , West Turkana , Kenya . Nature 521 : 310 – 315 . Kessels MM , Qualmann B . 2015 . Different functional modes of BAR domain proteins in formation and plasticity of mammalian post - synapses . J Cell Sci . 128 : 3177 – 3185 . Kuwajima K . 1989 . The molten globule state as a clue for understanding the folding and cooperativity of globular - protein structure . Proteins 6 : 87 – 103 . Mim C , Unger VM . 2012 . Membrane curvature and its generation by BAR proteins . Trends Biochem Sci . 37 : 526 – 533 . Pertz OC , Wang Y , Yang F , Wang W , Gay LJ , Gristenko MA , Clauss TR , Anderson DJ , Liu T , Auberry KJ , et al . 2008 . Spatial mapping of the neurite and soma proteomes reveals a functional Cdc42 / Rac regulatory network . Proc Natl Acad Sci USA . 105 : 1931 – 1936 . Schneider K , Seemann E , Liebmann L , Ahuja R , Koch D , Westermann M , Hubner CA , Kessels MM , Qualmann B . 2014 . ProSAP1 and mem - brane nanodomain - associated syndapin I promote postsynapse for - mation and function . J Cell Biol . 205 : 197 – 215 . Shimada A , Niwa H , Tsujita K , Suetsugu S , Nitta K , Hanawa - Suetsugu K , Akasaka R , Nishino Y , Toyama M , Chen L , et al . 2007 . Curved EFC / F - BAR - domain dimers are joined end to end into a filament for mem - brane invagination in endocytosis . Cell 129 : 761 – 772 . Sporny M , Guez - Haddad J , Waterman DG , Isupov MN , Opatowsky Y . 2016 . Molecular symmetry - constrained systematic search approach to structure solution of the coiled - coil SRGAP2 F - BARx domain . Acta Crystallogr D Struct Biol . 72 : 1241 – 1253 . Sudmant PH , Kitzman JO , Antonacci F , Alkan C , Malig M , Tsalenko A , Sampas N , Bruhn L , Shendure J , Genomes P , Eichler EE . 2010 . Diversity of human copy number variation and multicopy genes . Science 330 : 641 – 646 . Wong K , Ren XR , Huang YZ , Xie Y , Liu G , Saito H , Tang H , Wen L , Brady - Kalnay SM , Mei L , et al . 2001 . Signal transduction in neuronal mi - gration : roles of GTPase activating proteins and the small GTPase Cdc42 in the Slit - Robo pathway . Cell 107 : 209 – 221 . Yamazaki D , Itoh T , Miki H , Takenawa T . 2013 . srGAP1 regulates lamel - lipodial dynamics and cell migratory behavior by modulating Rac1 activity . Mol Biol Cell . 24 : 3393 – 3405 . Yang Z , Lasker K , Schneidman - Duhovny D , Webb B , Huang CC , Pettersen EF , Goddard TD , Meng EC , Sali A , Ferrin TE . 2012 . UCSF Chimera , MODELLER , and IMP : an integrated modeling system . J Struct Biol . 179 : 269 – 278 . Zhang YE , Long M . 2014 . New genes contribute to genetic and pheno - typic novelties in human evolution . Curr Opin Genet Dev . 29 : 90 – 96 . Sporny et al . . doi : 10 . 1093 / molbev / msx094 MBE 1478