208 VOLUME 11 , NUMBER 6 , DECEMBER 2002 Published by Blackwell Publishing Inc . Notes 1 . Address correspondence to G . Daniel Lassiter , Department of Psy - chology , Ohio University , Athens , OH 45701 ; e - mail : lassiter @ ohio . edu . 2 . Additional factors responsible for miscarriages of justice identified by Dwyer et al . ( 2000 ) include egregiously incompetent defense lawyers , errone - ous eyewitness accounts , scientifically unreliable evidence , and prosecutorial misconduct . References Bornstein , B . H . ( 1999 ) . The ecological validity of jury simulations : Is the jury still out ? Law and Human Behavior , 23 , 75 – 91 . Carpenter , S . ( 2001 , October ) . Technology gets its day in court . Monitor on Psychology , 32 , 30 – 32 . Diamond , S . S . ( 1997 ) . Illuminations and shadows from jury simulations . Law and Human Behav - ior , 21 , 561 – 571 . Dwyer , J . , Neufeld , P . , & Scheck , B . ( 2000 ) . Actual innocence . New York : Doubleday . Gilbert , D . T . ( 1995 ) . Attribution and interpersonal perception . In A . Tesser ( Ed . ) , Advanced social psy - chology ( pp . 99 – 147 ) . New York : McGraw - Hill . Kassin , S . M . , & Kiechel , K . L . ( 1996 ) . The social psychology of false confessions : Compliance , internalization , and confabulation . Psychologi - cal Science , 7 , 125 – 128 . Koffka , K . ( 1935 ) . Principles of gestalt psychology . New York : Harcourt Brace . Lassiter , G . D . , Geers , A . L . , Handley , I . M . , Wei - land , P . E . , & Munhall , P . J . ( 2002 ) . Videotaped interrogations and confessions : A simple change in camera perspective alters verdicts in simulated trials . Journal of Applied Psychology , 87 , 867 – 874 . Lassiter , G . D . , Geers , A . L . , Munhall , P . J . , Handley , I . M . , & Beers , M . J . ( 2001 ) . Videotaped confes - sions : Is guilt in the eye of the camera ? In M . P . Zanna ( Ed . ) , Advances in experimental social psy - chology ( Vol . 33 , pp . 189 – 254 ) . New York : Aca - demic Press . Lassiter , G . D . , Geers , A . L . , Munhall , P . J . , Ploutz - Snyder , R . J . , & Breitenbecher , D . L . ( 2002 ) . Illu - sory causation : Why it occurs . Psychological Science , 13 , 299 – 305 . Leo , R . A . ( 1996 ) . Inside the interrogation room . The Journal of Criminal Law and Criminology , 86 , 266 – 303 . McArthur , L . Z . ( 1980 ) . Illusory causation and illu - sory correlation : Two epistemological accounts . Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin , 6 , 507 – 519 . Newtson , D . , Rindner , R . J . , Miller , R . , & LaCross , K . ( 1978 ) . Effects of availability of feature changes on behavior segmentation . Journal of Experimental Social Psychology , 14 , 379 – 388 . Taylor , S . E . , & Fiske , S . T . ( 1975 ) . Point of view and perceptions of causality . Journal of Personality and Social Psychology , 32 , 439 – 445 . Making Group Brainstorming More Effective : Recommendations From an Associative Memory Perspective Vincent R . Brown and Paul B . Paulus 1 Department of Psychology , Hofstra University , Hempstead , New York ( V . R . B . ) , and Department of Psychology , University of Texas at Arlington , Arlington , Texas ( P . B . P . ) Abstract Much literature on group brainstorming has found it to be less effective than individ - ual brainstorming . However , a cognitive perspective suggests that group brainstorming could be an effective technique for gen - erating creative ideas . Computer simulations of an associative memory model of idea genera - tion in groups suggest that groups have the potential to generate ideas that individuals brainstorming alone are less likely to generate . Exchanging ideas by means of writing or computers , alternating solitary and group brainstorming , and using heterogeneous groups ap - pear to be useful approaches for enhancing group brain - storming . Keywords brainstorming ; cognitive stimu - lation ; groups ; group creativity There is a general belief in the efficacy of collaboration for projects involving innovation or problem solving ( Bennis & Bieder - man , 1997 ; Sutton & Hargadon , 1996 ) . Although there is some evi - dence for the effectiveness of col - laborative science and teamwork ( Paulus , 2000 ) , the enthusiasm for collective work may not always be justified . Controlled studies of idea sharing in groups have shown that groups often overestimate their ef - fectiveness ( Paulus , Larey , & Ortega , 1995 ) . Experiments comparing in - teractive brainstorming groups with sets of individuals who do not interact in performing the same task have found that groups gener - ate fewer ideas and that group members exhibit reduced motiva - tion and do not fully share unique information ( e . g . , Mullen , Johnson , & Salas , 1991 ) . The strongest inhib - itory effect of groups may be pro - duction blocking , which is a reduc - tion in productivity due to the fact that group members must take turns in describing their ideas ( Diehl & Stroebe , 1991 ) . One area in which these prob - lems are most evident is the study of group creativity . Most research on creativity has examined indi - vidual creativity because it is typi - cally seen as a personal trait or skill . However , today much creative work requires collaboration of peo - ple with diverse sets of knowledge and skills . How can such groups overcome the inevitable liabilities of group interaction to reach their creative potential ? Is it possible to demonstrate that group interaction can lead to enhanced creativity ? Examining these questions has been the aim of our program of re - Copyright © 2002 American Psychological Society CURRENT DIRECTIONS IN PSYCHOLOGICAL SCIENCE 209 search on the cognitive potential of brainstorming groups ( Brown , Tumeo , Larey , & Paulus , 1998 ; Paulus & Brown , in press ; Paulus , Dugosh , Dzindolet , Coskun , & Put - man , 2002 ) . COGNITIVE BASES FOR IDEATIONAL CREATIVITY : A MODEL AND SUPPORTING EVIDENCE Intuitively , the cognitive benefits of brainstorming in a group seem clear : People believe that they come up with ideas in a group that they would not have thought of on their own . The potential for mutual stimulation of ideas is one of the reasons for the popularity of group brainstorming . Semantic Networks and an Associative Memory Model of Group Brainstorming Clearly , the retrieval of relevant information from one’s long - term conceptual memory is an important part of the brainstorming process because one cannot effectively brainstorm on a topic one knows nothing about . The concepts stored in long - term memory can be thought of as being associated in a semantic network in such a way that related concepts are more strongly connected than unrelated concepts and thus more likely to activate each other ( e . g . , Collins & Loftus , 1975 ) . Thus , concepts that are more closely connected to those that are currently active should be more accessible than concepts that are less strongly connected to cur - rently active ideas . To use the semantic network representation as a basis for explor - ing group brainstorming , many de - tails need to be specified . Rather than explicitly representing four , six , eight , or more semantic net - works and the interactions among them—which would be cumber - some—our approach is to repre - sent a brainstormer’s knowledge of a given problem as a matrix of cate - gory transition probabilities : Each entry in this matrix represents the probability of generating one’s next idea from the same category as the previous idea or from a dif - ferent category ( Brown et al . , 1998 ) . A number of individual differ - ences affecting brainstorming per - formance are captured by this framework . Fluency , or the amount of knowledge one has about the brainstorming problem , is repre - sented by the probabilities in the main body of the matrix relative to the null category , which represents the likelihood of coming up with no idea in a given time interval . Convergent and divergent think - ing styles also fit nicely into the framework . On the one hand , a convergent thinker is likely to stick with a category and explore it deeply before moving on to gener - ate ideas from other categories . Thus , a convergent thinker is rep - resented by a matrix with rela - tively high within - category transi - tion probabilities . On the other hand , a divergent thinker is more likely to jump around between cat - egories , and so is represented by a matrix with lower within - category transition probabilities ( and corre - spondingly higher between - cate - gory transition probabilities ) . Be - cause individual differences can be represented in this framework , the effects of different group composi - tions can be examined . Accessibility The property of the individual’s semantic network that is crucial to determining the effectiveness of group brainstorming is category accessibility . People are generally unlikely to explore on their own relevant categories of ideas that have relatively weak connections with other categories in their per - sonal semantic networks . Genera - tion of ideas from these categories requires the spark of input from other brainstormers . For example , a student who lives on campus in a dormitory may be unlikely to gen - erate ideas about parking when brainstorming on ways to improve the university . But if a student who commutes from off campus men - tions parking , the dorm dweller may be able to come up with a few thoughts on the matter , perhaps re - calling the parking difficulties his or her parents had when they vis - ited . Simulations of the associative memory matrix model show that presenting a brainstormer with ideas from low - accessible catego - ries not only increases the number of ideas generated from those cate - gories , but also increases the total number of ideas generated overall , thus making the individual a more productive brainstormer . This pre - diction is supported by Leggett ( 1997 ) , who studied individual brainstormers to evaluate how in - put of ideas in the absence of a group context ( i . e . , without inhibi - tory social influences ) might provide cognitive stimulation . Participants listened to audiotapes containing ideas generated by participants who worked on the Thumbs Problem ( “What would be the advantages and disadvantages of having an ex - tra thumb on each hand ? ” ) in pre - vious studies . Although all brain - stormers benefited from being primed with relevant ideas , the amount of benefit depended on whether the ideas came from a cat - egory that was frequently or infre - quently represented in the re - sponses in the previous studies . Individuals who were primed with ideas from common categories ob - tained less benefit than those who were primed with ideas from unique categories . In other words , priming categories that were al - ready likely to be utilized did not enhance performance as much as 210 VOLUME 11 , NUMBER 6 , DECEMBER 2002 Published by Blackwell Publishing Inc . priming categories unlikely to be utilized by someone brainstorm - ing on his or her own . Attention Individuals will be influenced by other group members to the ex - tent that they pay attention to those other members’ ideas . In the framework of the model , attention is represented as the probability that an individual group member uses the current speaker’s idea as the basis for generating his or her next idea ( as opposed to simply continuing his or her own internal train of thought ) . Simulations predict that , in gen - eral , the more attention each indi - vidual pays to fellow group mem - bers , the better the performance of the group . Conversely , the more each individual’s attention is dis - tracted from the ideas of others , per - haps by concern for the social as - pects of group brainstorming , the more the performance of the group declines . In particular , the more one attends to fellow brainstormers , the more one is likely to be primed to consider ideas from one’s own low - accessible categories . In fact , the model predicts that , in general , if it were not for production blocking , the number of ideas generated by each group member would increase ( at least up to a point ) as group size increases ( Brown et al . , 1998 ) . One way to enhance the effects of attention on brainstorming per - formance is to instruct brainstorm - ers that at the end of the brain - storming session they will be asked to recall the ideas that were pre - sented during the session . Without memorization instructions , partici - pants may be more likely to focus on the generation of their own ideas and to some extent ignore the ideas being presented by others . Interestingly , the effectiveness of memory instructions appears to be mixed . When participants are lis - tening to audiotapes or exchanging ideas by computer , instructions to memorize facilitate idea generation ( Dugosh , Paulus , Roland , & Yang , 2000 ) . However , when partici - pants are asked to exchange writ - ten ideas in a round - robin format ( Paulus & Yang , 2000 ) , memory in - structions inhibit performance . Be - cause the instructions to read the ideas as they are passed from per - son to person may already ensure that participants attend to the ideas , instructions to memorize may simply add an unnecessary addi - tional processing demand and im - pede the brainstorming effort . ENHANCING GROUP BRAINSTORMING The goal of creating circum - stances that optimize group perfor - mance requires maximizing the ben - efits of cognitive facilitation while at the same time minimizing the in - hibitory processes that reduce group productivity . We have stud - ied three brainstorming proce - dures that appear promising for theoretical reasons , and that have garnered some empirical support . These are combining group and sol - itary brainstorming , having group brainstormers interact by writing instead of speaking ( “brainwriting” ) , and using networked computers on which individuals type their ideas and read the ideas of others ( elec - tronic brainstorming ) . Individual and Group Brainstorming At face value , the goal of maxi - mizing the benefits of group ex - change while minimizing inhibi - tory group processes suggests literally combining group and indi - vidual brainstorming . Of course , a person cannot brainstorm alone while at the same time brainstorm - ing in a group . But one can alter - nate group and solitary idea - gener - ation sessions . Preliminary data from our laboratory show that brain - storming in a group before brain - storming alone on the same topic produces more ideas over the course of the two sessions than does brainstorming alone in the first session and then brainstorm - ing in a group the following ses - sion ( Leggett , Putman , Roland , & Paulus , 1996 ) . Model simulations make clear the mechanisms that produce this ad - vantage for the group - solitary se - quence . The cognitive facilitation that occurs in the group session carries over into the solitary session , during which the brainstormer continues generating ideas without being hin - dered by production blocking . This effect shows up as a large “produc - tivity spike” for solitary brainstorm - ers in the second session in both model simulations and empirical studies . This order effect should be particularly strong when the initial group consists of heterogeneous members whose knowledge of the task differs . Simulations also indi - cate that a solitary brainstormer whose idea generation takes place following a group session is likely to sample more categories from the brainstorming topic than a similar brainstormer working in two soli - tary sessions . This suggests that the group - solitary sequence has an ad - vantage over and above possible increases in overall productivity . Brainwriting Another way to take advantage of group priming effects while re - ducing production blocking would be to have group members interact by writing and reading rather than speaking and listening . This does not seem to be a technique that is often attempted . Perhaps people are so used to communicating orally when they are face to face that re - searchers do not consider the alter - Copyright © 2002 American Psychological Society CURRENT DIRECTIONS IN PSYCHOLOGICAL SCIENCE 211 natives . In a study of group brain - writing ( Paulus & Yang , 2000 ) , group members wrote their ideas on a piece of paper and passed them on to the next group member , who read the ideas , added his or her own ideas , and passed the pa - per on . These interactive groups of brainwriters outproduced sets of equal numbers of writers who did not interact in performing the task . This result may be the first labora - tory example of face - to - face inter - active groups outperforming an equal number of solitary brain - stormers . Although model simulations support the observation that inter - active brainwriters can outperform an equal number of solitary brain - writers ( Paulus & Brown , in press ) , the simulation results are complex in some interesting ways . First , simulations predict that interac - tive brainwriting is not universally superior to individual brainwrit - ing , but is most effective for hetero - geneous groups whose members have differing knowledge of the brainstorming problem . Second , up to a point , performance of simu - lated brainwriting groups im - proves as the group members pay increasing attention to the written ideas , but performance decreases when attention to the written ideas becomes excessive . Obviously , brainwriters who do not read any of the ideas that are passed along to them will not benefit from the thoughts of their fellow brain - writers . Brainwriters who attend predominantly to the ideas of oth - ers will benefit from them to some extent , but not as greatly as those who optimally balance the two goals of attending to the ideas of others and following their own in - ternal train of thought . Electronic Brainstorming The effectiveness of brainwrit - ing suggests that using computers for exchanging ideas might be an - other useful way of tapping the creative potential of groups . Using computers , individuals can be ex - posed to a broad range of ideas without the verbal “traffic jams” that are problematic for face - to - face groups . In fact , because production blocking is greatly reduced , the larger the group the better—larger groups will increase one’s exposure to a broad range of ideas . One of the most consistent findings in the electronic - brainstorming literature is that the benefits are most evident for groups of eight or more ( Dennis & Williams , in press ) . Unfortunately , it is also easier to ignore the inputs of others in the electronic format than in face - to - face situations . Instructing individ - uals to attend carefully to ideas shared electronically ( e . g . , because of an impending memory test ) in - creases the impact of the shared in - formation ( Dugosh et al . , 2000 ) . Al - though electronic brainstormers do not have to apply extensive intel - lectual resources to try to remem - ber the shared ideas because they are available on the computer , for large groups the number of avail - able ideas can become rather over - whelming . It may be important to provide an opportunity for indi - viduals to continue processing the ideas after the interactive session in order to gain full associative ad - vantage of the shared information . The benefits of idea sharing in elec - tronic groups are in fact most evi - dent if individuals are provided such a solitary session after group interaction . CONCLUSIONS It is clear that unstructured groups left to their own devices will not be very effective in developing cre - ative ideas . However , a cognitive perspective points to methods that can be used so that group exchange of ideas enhances idea generation . Groups of individuals with diverse sets of knowledge are most likely to benefit from the social exchange of ideas . Although face - to - face in - teraction is seen as a natural modal - ity for group interaction , using writ - ing or computers can enhance the exchange of ideas . The interaction should be structured to ensure careful attention to the shared ideas . Alternating between indi - vidual and group ideation is help - ful because it allows for careful re - flection on and processing of shared ideas . There are still a number of sig - nificant empirical gaps that need to be addressed . Given that much group exchange consists of verbal interaction in face - to - face groups , studies need to determine the spe - cific extent to which the perfor - mance of these groups can be en - hanced by using insights from the associative memory perspective . In particular , it will be important to demonstrate that groups that con - tain members with diverse knowl - edge bases can effectively use this knowledge interactively for cre - ative purposes . There are also no controlled studies of creativity in groups or teams in organizations outside the laboratory , so that it is not possible to draw definitive con - clusions about the effectiveness of groups in the real world . Because group interaction can be a source of social and cognitive interference as well as social and cognitive stimulation , one of the main theo - retical challenges will be to inte - grate the cognitive and social per - spectives of group brainstorming . A careful delineation of how these processes interact will be of great benefit to practitioners . Recommended Reading Brown , V . , Tumeo , M . , Larey , T . S . , & Paulus , P . B . ( 1998 ) . ( See References ) Osborn , A . F . ( 1957 ) . Applied imagina - tion ( 1st ed . ) . New York : Scribner . 212 VOLUME 11 , NUMBER 6 , DECEMBER 2002 Published by Blackwell Publishing Inc . Paulus , P . B . , & Nijstad , B . A . ( Eds . ) . ( in press ) . Group creativity . New York : Oxford University Press . Note 1 . Address correspondence to Paul B . Paulus , Department of Psychology , Uni - versity of Texas at Arlington , Arlington , TX 76019 ; e - mail : paulus @ uta . edu . References Bennis , W . , & Biederman , P . W . ( 1997 ) . Organizing genius : The secrets of creative collaboration . Read - ing , MA : Addison Wesley . Brown , V . , Tumeo , M . , Larey , T . S . , & Paulus , P . B . ( 1998 ) . Modeling cognitive interactions during group brainstorming . Small Group Research , 29 , 495 – 526 . Collins , A . M . , & Loftus , E . F . ( 1975 ) . A spreading - activation theory of semantic processing . Psy - chological Review , 82 , 407 – 428 . Dennis , A . R . , & Williams , M . L . ( in press ) . Elec - tronic brainstorming : Theory , research , and future directions . In P . B . Paulus & B . A . Nijstad ( Eds . ) , Group creativity . New York : Oxford University Press . Diehl , M . , & Stroebe , W . ( 1991 ) . Productivity loss in idea - generating groups : Tracking down the blocking effect . Journal of Personality and Social Psychology , 61 , 392 – 403 . Dugosh , K . L . , Paulus , P . B . , Roland , E . J . , & Yang , H . - C . ( 2000 ) . Cognitive stimulation in brain - storming . Journal of Personality and Social Psy - chology , 79 , 722 – 735 . Leggett , K . L . ( 1997 ) . The effectiveness of categorical priming in brainstorming . Unpublished master’s thesis , University of Texas at Arlington . Leggett , K . L . , Putman , V . L . , Roland , E . J . , & Paulus , P . B . ( 1996 , April ) . The effects of training on per - formance in group brainstorming . Paper presented at the annual meeting of the Southwestern Psychological Association , Houston , TX . Mullen , B . , Johnson , C . , & Salas , E . ( 1991 ) . Produc - tivity loss in brainstorming groups : A meta - analytic integration . Basic and Applied Social Psychology , 12 , 3 – 23 . Paulus , P . B . ( 2000 ) . Groups , teams and creativity : The creative potential of idea generating groups . Applied Psychology : An International Review , 49 , 237 – 262 . Paulus , P . B . , & Brown , V . ( in press ) . Ideational creativity in groups : Lessons from research on brainstorming . In P . B . Paulus & B . A . Nijstad ( Eds . ) , Group creativity . New York : Oxford University Press . Paulus , P . B . , Dugosh , K . L . , Dzindolet , M . T . , Coskun , H . , & Putman , V . L . ( 2002 ) . Social and cognitive influences in group brainstorming : Predicting production gains and losses . Euro - pean Review of Social Psychology , 12 , 299 – 325 . Paulus , P . B . , Larey , T . S . , & Ortega , A . H . ( 1995 ) . Performance and perceptions of brainstormers in an organizational setting . Basic and Applied Social Psychology , 18 , 3 – 14 . Paulus , P . B . , & Yang , H . - C . ( 2000 ) . Idea generation in groups : A basis for creativity in organiza - tions . Organizational Behavior and Human Deci - sion Processes , 82 , 76 – 87 . Sutton , R . I . , & Hargadon , A . ( 1996 ) . Brainstorming groups in context . Administrative Science Quar - terly , 41 , 685 – 718 . Regret in Decision Making Terry Connolly 1 and Marcel Zeelenberg Department of Management and Policy , University of Arizona , Tucson , Arizona ( T . C . ) , and Department of Economic and Social Psychology , Tilburg University , Tilburg , the Netherlands ( M . Z . ) Abstract Decision research has only recently started to take seri - ously the role of emotions in choices and decisions . Regret is the emotion that has received the most attention . In this arti - cle , we sample a number of the initial regret studies from psy - chology and economics , and trace some of the complexities and contradictions to which they led . We then sketch a new theory , decision justification theory ( DJT ) , which synthe - sizes several apparently con - flicting findings . DJT postulates two core components of deci - sion - related regret , one associ - ated with the ( comparative ) evaluation of the outcome , the other with the feeling of self - blame for having made a poor choice . We reinterpret several existing studies in DJT terms . We then report some new studies that directly tested ( and support ) DJT , and pro - pose a number of research is - sues that follow from this new approach to regret . Keywords regret ; decision making ; emo - tion ; decision justification theory Decision researchers have only recently started to take seriously an aspect of making choices that every lay person already knows about : Making a choice , whether of a va - cation destination , a spouse , a med - ical treatment , or a career , can be an intensely emotional experience . Of course , most people give such decisions careful thought : What are the options ? What consequences might each lead to ? How likely are they ? How desirable are they ? But , in addition to these important cog - nitive considerations , there are strong emotional factors . At the time of the decision , the person has feel - ings about the decision itself ( fear of surgery , anxiety about a career choice ) and expectations about feelings he or she may experience later ( relief at a good outcome , sad - ness at a poor one ) . After the fact , the individual experiences emotions , which may or may not track with the earlier expectations . The emotion that has received the most research attention from decision theorists is regret . Most people can readily recall or imag - ine situations in which a poor deci - sion led to painful regret . In the early 1980s , researchers in both lab - oratory and field settings started to produce elegant theories and vivid demonstrations of the antecedents and consequences of regret . Contin - ued research through the 1990s overturned some of these early