A Framework to Support Scientific Knowledge Management : a Case Study in Agro - meteorology Gustavo da Rocha B . Pinto ' , Julia Celia Mercedes Strauch2 , Jan0 Moreira de So ~ za ' , ~ , Jonice Oliveira ' , Leonard0 F . Cardoso ' , Lucio Rogerio Botelho ' , Lutieta Guerreiro Martorano2 , Emerson Cordeiro Morais ' , Manuel Antonio de Castro Junior ' , Sergio Palma da Justa Medeiros ' ' Computer Science Department , Graduate School of Engineering , COPPE / UFRJ PO Box 68513 , ZIP 21945 - 970 , Rio de Janeiro , RJ , Brazil 2EMBRAPA / Solos - Brazilian Agricultural Research Corporation Rua Jardim Botrinico , 1024 , ZIP 22460 - 000 , Rio de Janeiro , RJ , Brazil ' Mathematics Institute , UFW , Rio de Janeiro , Brazil Federal Universiry of Rio de Janeiro . Post Ofice 6851 I ZIP . : 21945 - 970 , Rio de Janeiro , RJ , Brazil ( gpinto , jano , jonice , cardoso , lucio , emerson , manuel , palma } @ cos . ufj . br & diu , luty } @ cnps . embrapa . br . Abstract This work presents the development of the AGROMET environment : a platform that supports scientijic work in a cooperative way providing the reutilization of data , metadaia , models , programs and workflow definitions . To reach this goal this environment is composed of five modules that are responsible for : i ) data integration ; ii ) support to the scientific wor ! $ lows ; iii ) support to the collaborative decision ; iv ) scientifc knowledge management . and v ) document and content management . To understand the questions involved in the scientific work a study case is accomplished in the Agro - Meteorology area in the Brazilian Agricultural Research Enterprise ( Emhrapa Solos ) . With this collaborative platform the access , sharing and consequent innovation of the scientific knowledge will be berter disseminated in the environment work . 1 . Introduction In the scientific domain , as in any other area , a process consists of a sequence of activities , and every activity needs input data and produces output information , and each activity can be dismembered into another sequence of steps , which needs new input data and generates as output other information . Scientific processes have their own dynamics and are characterized by the use of data and documents applying development methods in an appropriate workflow . In this context , scientific knowledge can be characterized by a formal part , that can be explicit , and an informal part denominated tacit . The formal part is constituted by data , metadata and documents that describe the development methods and workflows . The tacit knowledge is formed by experiences , values , context information and creativity applied to the evaluation of new experiences and information . Knowledge revolutionizes the research process because its reuse permits the execution of tasks and experiments in a faster way . Knowing a process or successful case , and applying this knowledge in a similar context reduces significantly the number of errors . We can perfect what we already know , innovating it . Innovation , which consists of arduous and systematic periodic analysis of results , services , technology , market and distribution channels , is what determines science survival . Today , researchers create and exchange information and knowledge faster and in a much greater volume , than we could imagine in the past , using a global network in a way to reduce acquisition costs . Even though a great part of this interchange occurs in documental form like technical reports , articles , specialized magazines by area , and books , there is also a great exchange of informal or tacit knowledge in the interactions between people . We can characterize the scientific community by being composed of knowledge supplier users and knowledge consumer users . The knowledge supplier users try to make available integrant parts of the knowledge , while the consumer users need to find these sets of integrant formal parts of the knowledge , according to certain criteria , in order to visualize them , 320 query them , and eventually extract some interesting information ( TOMASIC et ai . , 1997 ) . The difficulties of the integration of hundreds of scientists , in an inter - institutional effort , can be considered a technological Babel , presenting various difficulties because ofthe following : Heterogeneity - the knowledge necessary to a certain user can be stored by different platforms ( hardwarelsoftware ) , stored in the most various forms of storage ( archives , databases , etc ) , besides presenting themselves in different types and formats ( text , tables , objects , etc ) , and possessing different capacities of querying . Distribution - the knowledge is found stored in different servers distributed throughout the network with different access protocols . Knowledge selection - because of the huge amount of data , different document types , development method diversity and workflows that should be taken into consideration and the fact that they have different quality levels , the selection process of the knowledge becomes a difficult task . An examde of these difficulties was found in the scientific software development experience , where the reuse of software was needed for High Energy Physics environments , in the European Organization for Nuclear Research ( CERN ) . In that occasion , the objective was the development of configurable workstations for scientific software development environments , in relation to the construction , evaluation , documentation and management of this categoly of systems , resulting in the TABA - HEP project ( SOUZA et al . , 1990 ; SOUZA et al . , 1991 ; WERNER et al . , 1990 ) . The need for the use of Software Engineering and Artificial Intelligence techniques , especially Specialist Systems , was conscious in the construction of heuristics , which permitted the reuse of software sections ( SOUZA et al . , 1990 ) . In the literature we find some works , which demonstrate the high complexity involved in the use of conventional data models ( relational or archive system ) , for the representation of data and scientific experiments ( CHEN et al . , 1995 ; JOHNSON et al . , 1994 ) . In CHEN et al . ( 1995 ) the object - oriented model , which offers greater semantic richness , is discarded for it isn’t able to map all of the experiment’s phases including recursivity . alternatives , sequences and optional experiments . In ZEMANKOVA et aL ( l994 ) the author alerts on the importance of databases with a more scientific approach . In his article , he says , “scientific . databases can be viewed as important knowledge repositories , the already existent and the one that has to be discovered” . HARS ( 2001 ) describes the acquisition of scientific knowledge applying epistemology concepts to create a conceptual model of the scientific knowledge , implemented in a Web site . The effective reuse of scientific knowledge and the synergy between scientists require an infrastructure based on Information Technology and on the World Wide Web ( WWW ) , which offen support to the interconnection and to distributed computation , materializing communication between scientific knowledge supplier and consumer institutions . In this intention , this work presents a proposal of a platform , which supports scientific work in a collaborative form supplying the reuse of data , metadata , models and workflow definitions . For the better comprehension of the requisites of a platform that supports scientific work in a collaborative manner , we selected the agro - meteorology area of Embrapa Solos . This area of scientific knowledge in this institution uses meteorological data collected from various institutions like the National Institute of Meteorology ( INMET ) , the Ministry of the Aeronautics through its Electronics and Flight Protection Administrations , the Navy Ministry , the Meteorological System of Parana ( SIMEPAR ) , the Agronomic Institute of Parana ( IAPAR ) , the Agronomic Institute of Si70 Paulo ( IAC ) , the National Agency of Electric Energy ( ANEEL ) , the Cearence Foundation of Meteorology and Hydric Resources , and others of a more regional matrix . The development of these studies requires great effort from the professionals in data localization , election of the homogeneous series , accomplishment of statistical analyses and use of agro - meteorological models . This work is organized as follows . In the second section we present the main characteristics of the scientific knowledge area chosen for the case study : agro - meteorology . In the third section we present the AGROMET environment developed to aid the researchers during their tasks execution and to support a scientific knowledge management . In the fourth section we present the final considerations on this work . 2 . Characteristics of scientific knowledge in agro - meteorology The Agro - Meteorology area provides information for managing the agricultural activity . Its main objective consists of leading the agricultural production through weather conditions forecast . Nowadays , the great variability of the environmental factors , besides the accentuated reduction of technical and financial resources indispensable to the scientific investigation , has been causing a change in the research planning in Agro - Meteorology projects . In this way , two aspects are observed . The first is the multidisciplinary group formation and inter - institutional , national , and even international , that work in the area and with correlated areas . The second is the employment of applied simulation models to agriculture . 32 1 The Agro - Meteorology studies involve physics components of the climate and it uses spatial scales that vary from small experimental areas to macro areas . Those works manipulate a great data set and numeric forecast models of time and climate . The data express the spatial and temporaly observations of the energy and water flows , and they are used in the analyses of the climate variations and in the answer of the system soil - air - water in daily and seasonal time scales . The numeric forecast models used in research routines , usually employ for the observations analysis , the resulting data of researches in climatology , agricultural zoning and climatic risks , such as : agro - climatic zoning of a certain culture for a specific area , determination of frosts risk , high temperatures risk for a certain culture , excess rain in the crop of certain grain knowledge management , workflow management and data integration . The AGROMET environment and its components are presented in Figure 1 . This hmework employs SPECS ( MEDEIROS et al . , 2000 ) and X - ARC ( PINTO et al . , 2001 ) features with other modules to compose the architecture . Each module , presented in the architecture , is described as follows . AGROMETSPeCS Wl AGROMET - XARC culture , water deficiency and others . 1 I It’s observed in Agro - Meteorology , as in many scientific domains , that the activities request data sharing and services from public or private institutions that are specialized in the collection and processing of that data . In general , these data present different information granularity . The data can be observed in manual or automatic ways : daily , monthly , or annual . The data are not in a standard format , being stored in a great variety of data sources , in different formats and dispersed in different computers in several institutions . The data are used in development methods and analysis in agreement with the projects’ purposes and they are used in various ways to execute different workflows . To reach a result , it’s necessary the management of the received documents and the appropriate understanding of development methods and workflows . Hence , to aid the researchers in their tasks execution it is necessary a framework , which components provide : Support to decision activities and group consensus . Data integration of heterogeneous data sources with transparency . Document content and management . Scientific workflow management and ; Knowledge Management . In order to achieve all of these requirements , we propose the AGROMET 6amework that will be explained in the next section . Figure 1 - AGROMET Environment AGROMET - XA RC The AGROMET - XARC intends to integrate data sources using mediation technology , providing interoperability among the data repositories spread over the web , while maintaining their autonomy . It encapsulates mediation systems in its components to provide integration , publishing and searching services to its users . Furthermore , the availability and computing capabilities of data sources are explored by the components and its services , as well as , the heterogeneity of its data ( structure , format , type and metadata ) is minimized , in order to provide a uniform access to the data . This module is a X - ARC ( PINTO et al . , 2001 ) extension for the Agro - Meteorology area and provides uniform data access for the upper components of the AGROMET architecture . X - ARC is based on mediator architecture and ontology concept to provide the binding of heterogeneous data to their domain applications . To assist the identification of related data sources and their appropriate domain application , each data source is associated to metadata , which provides the domain ontology . 3 . The AGROMET Environment Through the AGROMET - XARC users can share The AGROMET project joins several technologies scalar and spatial agro - meteorological data through the that aid cooperation amongst users , providing web , using XML as a standard for information interaction during the planning and execution of projects interchange . The metadata managed by this architecture in the agro - meteorological area . AGROMET is helps the localization , the access and the sharing of data . composed of five modules , which provide cooperative Through AGROMET - XARC services , a user can locate , decision tools , document and content management , 322 access and retrieve all data available in the architecture in an easy , flexible and agile way . With AGROMET - XARC , researchers have the autonomy and agility provided by the mediation - based integration to share their data with each other , as well as achieving cooperation and data sharing between heterogeneous and distributed databases . AGROMET - BOE This module aims at ago - meteorological scientific workflow management and design , providing cooperation among scientific data provider and consumer institutions . Its main objective is to provide data , models , programs , workflow definitions and data of all the above elements h m scientific experiments , and if they don’t exist , to guide and help the researcher on how to obtain them , becoming a tool to improve the access , sharing and consequent innovation of the scientific knowledge . The AGROMET - BOE ( Bill of Experiments ) is based on the Bill of Materials ( BOM ) concept , but instead of material pieces , there are scientific data and workflows proposed according to cost , quality and purchasing time criteria . BOE is a collaborative environment for scientific experiment reuse , in which the researchers’ and institutions’ participation is fundamental . The reuse is motivated because researchers of common areas can optionally share their workflows and know other people’s work in progress . Three layers compose the AGROMET - BOE : web access , control and database . The first layer is responsible for providing the interface with the user , recording and spreading scientific knowledge to users . The control layer is responsible for inference , search and quality control of scientific data , while the third layer is responsible for experiments’ storage described by the researchers . AGROMET - SPeCS This module offers a set of decision support tools to be applied in collaborative analysis and cooperative work in agro - meteorological projects . These tools represent and coordinate the activities involved in a decision making process and offer an environment where members of a group can prioritize issues , perform different types of voting ( yesho , multiple choice and weighed choice ) , evaluate different criteria , elaborate documents in a group , perform brainstorming , analyze projects , rank solutions , etc . This module is a SPeCS extension for the Agro - Meteorology area ( MEDEIROS et al . , 2000 ; MEDEIROS et al . , 2001 ) . SPeCS is Spatial Decision Collaborative Support system which integrates Geographic Information Systems ( CIS ) , Group Decision Support Systems ( GDSS ) , Electronic Meeting Systems ( EMS ) , and Workflow concepts in a framework based on Coordination premises . The coordination features should aid design team members to cope with their activities supporting the aspects of multi - criteria spatial analysis , within a distributed GIS . SPeCS offers a common , flexible and easy to use cooperative work environment where the members of a group may be geographically distributed in heterogeneous environments and still interact during a decision making process . AGROMET - Epistheme This module is responsible for the knowledge management involved in the Agro - Meteorology area , which is used by researchers during the planning and execution of projects . The AGROMET - Epistheme is able to provide knowledge related to research areas during the execution of the researchers’ tasks . It is a proactive module capable of taking initiatives according to the researcher’s profile and performance area , as well as a reactivate module , answering to requests and environment changes , and in this way , providing certain new and relevant knowledge to aid the researchers in their tasks . Amongst the existent components in its architecture , the main tasks executed are knowledge acquisition , knowledge identification , knowledge integration , knowledge validation and knowledge creation . AGROMET - Doc The Ago - Meteorology area is characterized hy managing a large volume of documents as agricultural bulletins , technical reports and electronic spreadsheets . This module is responsible for the Electronic Management of Scientific Documents in the agro - meteorology area , providing document and content management tools . Four modules compose the ACROMET - DOC : administration ; collaboration ; search and storage ; and document and content management . The environment proposed contains a module for Electronic Management of Scientific Documents in the agro - meteorology area . It offers tools to organize and to support the materials exchange amongst researchers . It is made up of components for the administration , the collaboration , the searchlstorage of documents and images , as well as , document and content management . This module is a non - traditional system that can be understood as a middleware layer over documents sources . It needs specific requirements not provided by traditional DBMS and uses metadata to aid system activities execution . 323 4 . Final Considerations This work presents an environment , which supports scientific work in a cooperative way . This environment aims to provide data , metadata , models , applications and workflows definitions reuse in order to aid researchers during their tasks ' execution . To understand the framework requirements that aid cooperative work in scientific domains , the Agro - Meteorology domain was chosen in the Agricultural Research Enterprise ( Embrapa Solos ) projects ' context . It has been chosen due to high heterogeneity and explicit knowledge distribution . According to Agro - Meteorology requirements , an environment was constructed to support the collaborative work amongst the researchers during their tasks ' execution . The following components compose it : AGROMET - XARC - responsible for data integration . AGROMET - BOE - responsible for scientific workflows support . AGROMET - Specs - responsible for collaborative support decision . AGROMET - Epistheme - responsible for scientific knowledge management . AGROMET - Doc - responsible for content and document management . Amongst the main contributions made by the AGROMET environment , we can emphasize cost reduction in data acquisition , data duplication avoidance , knowledge exchange , time optimization in data treatment and selection ; and process management of agro - meteorological data analysis . 5 . References [ I ] CHEN , I . - M . A . . MARKOWITZ . V . M . , 1995 . Modeling Scientific Experiments with an Object Data Model . In : Proceedings of the Eleventh International Conference on Data Engineering . pp . 391 - 400 . Taipei . Taiwan . 121 HARS . A . , 2001 . Designing scientific knowledge infrastructures : The contribution of epistemology . Philosophical Reasoning in Information Systems Research . v . 3 . n . I . [ 3 ] JOHNSON , A . , FOTOUHI , F . , LEIGH , J . , et al , 1994 . " SANDBOX : an interface to scientific data based on experimentation " . In : Proceedings of the Fifth Euro Graphics Workshop on Visualization in Scientific Computing , Rostock , Germany , May . [ 4 ] MEDEIROS , S . et al . , 2000 , " SPeCS - A Spatial Decision Support Collaborative System for Environment Design " . Proceedings of Fifth International Workshop in CSCW in Design . Hong Kong . Nov . [ SI MEDEIROS , S . , SOUZA , J . , STRAUCH , J . , PINTO . G . , 2001 , " Coordination Aspects in a Spatial Group Decision Support Collaborative System " , Proceedings from ACMiSAC 2001 . Las Vegas . Mar . [ 6 ] PINTO , G . , STRAUCH , J . , SOUZA , J . , MEDEIROS , S . , MARQUES , C . , 2001 , " X - Arc Spatial Data Integration in the SPeCS Collaborative Design Framework , In Proceedings of Sixth International Workshop in CSCW in Design . London , CA . July . [ 7 ] SOUZA , 1 . M . , ROCHA , A . R . C . , 1990 . TABA - HEP : a Heuristic Workstation for Developing HEP Software . In : Proceedings of the first International Workshop on SoAware Engineering , Artificial Intelligence and Expert Systems in High Energy Physics , pp . 109 - 1 15 , Lyon Villeurbanne , France , March . [ 8 ] SOUZA , JAN0 MOREIRA de ; SULAIMAN , ALBERTO ; OLIVEIRA , JONICE ; CARDOSO , LEONARDO , 2001 . Gestao de Conhecimento para Experimentos Cientificos : Bill of Experiments ( Portuguese ) . In : Proceedings of ISKMJDM 2001 , International Symposium on Knowledge and Data Management , Curitiba , July . [ 9 ] TOMASIC , A . , RASCHID , L . , VALDURIEZ , P . , 1997 . Scaling Access to Heterogeneous Data Sources with DISCO . In : IEEE Transaction on Knowledge and Data Engineering , pp . 808 - 823 , v . lO ( 5 ) . [ IO ] WERNER , C . L . , PIMENTA , M . , VARELA , J . , et al , 1990 . Fado Tagging system : Decoupling Logic from Code . In : Proceedings of the first International Workshop on Software Engineering , Artificial Intelligence and Expert Systems in High Energy Physics , pp . 103 - 108 , Lyon Villeurbanne , France , March . [ I I ] ZEMANKOVA , M . , IOANNIDIS , Y . E . , 1994 . " Scientific Databases - State of the Art and Future Directions " . In : VLDB94 , Proceedings of 20th International Conference on Very Large Data Bases , pp . 752 - 753 . Santiago de Chile . Chile , September . 324