RESEARCH ARTICLE SUMMARY ◥ PROTEOMICS Tissue - based map of the human proteome Mathias Uhlén , * Linn Fagerberg , Björn M . Hallström , Cecilia Lindskog , Per Oksvold , Adil Mardinoglu , Åsa Sivertsson , Caroline Kampf , Evelina Sjöstedt , Anna Asplund , IngMarie Olsson , Karolina Edlund , Emma Lundberg , Sanjay Navani , Cristina Al - Khalili Szigyarto , Jacob Odeberg , Dijana Djureinovic , Jenny Ottosson Takanen , Sophia Hober , Tove Alm , Per - Henrik Edqvist , Holger Berling , Hanna Tegel , Jan Mulder , Johan Rockberg , Peter Nilsson , Jochen M . Schwenk , Marica Hamsten , Kalle von Feilitzen , Mattias Forsberg , Lukas Persson , Fredric Johansson , Martin Zwahlen , Gunnar von Heijne , Jens Nielsen , Fredrik Pontén INTRODUCTION : Resolving the molecular details of proteome variation in the different tissues and organs of the human body would greatly increase our knowledge of human bi - ology and disease . Here , we present a map of the human tissue proteome based on quantita - tive transcriptomics on a tissue and organ level combined with protein profiling using micro - array - based immunohistochemistryto achieve spatial localization of proteins down to the single - cell level . We provide a global analysis of the secreted and membrane proteins , as well as an analysis of the expression profiles for all proteins targeted bypharmaceu - tical drugs and proteins impli - cated in cancer . RATIONALE : We have used an integrative omics approach to study the spatial human pro - teome . Samplesrepresenting all major tissues and organs ( n = 44 ) inthehumanbodyhavebeen analyzed based on 24 , 028 anti - bodies corresponding to 16 , 975 protein - encodinggenes , comple - mented with RNA - sequencing data for 32 of the tissues . The antibodies have been used to produce more than 13 million tissue - basedimmunohistochemis - try images , each annotated by pathologists for all sampled tis - sues . To facilitate integration with other biological resources , all data are available for down - load and cross - referencing . RESULTS : Wereportagenome - wide analysis of the tissue specificity of RNA and protein expression covering more than 90 % of the putative protein - coding genes , complemented with analyses of various subproteomes , such as predicted secreted proteins ( n = 3171 ) and membrane - bound proteins ( n = 5570 ) . The analysis shows that almost half of the genes are expressed in all analyzed tissues , which suggests that the gene products are needed in all cells to main - tain “ housekeeping ” functions such as cell growth , energy generation , and basic metab - olism . Furthermore , there is enrichment in metabolism among these genes , as 60 % of all metabolic enzymes are expressed in all ana - lyzed tissues . The largest number of tissue - enriched genes is found in the testis , followed by the brain and the liver . Analysis of the 618 pro - teins targeted by clinically approved drugs unexpect - edly showed that 30 % are expressed in all analyzed tissues . An analysis of me - tabolic activity based on genome - scale meta - bolic models ( GEMS ) revealed liver as the most metabolically active tissue , followed by adipose tissue and skeletal muscle . CONCLUSIONS : A freely available interactive resource is presented as part of the Human Protein Atlas portal ( www . proteinatlas . org ) , of - fering the possibility to explore the tissue - elevated proteomes in tissues and organs and to analyze tissue profiles for specific protein classes . Comprehensive lists of proteins ex - pressed at elevated levels in the different tis - sues have been compiled to provide a spatial context with localization of the proteins in the subcompartments of each tissue and organ down to the single - cell level . ▪ RESEARCH 394 23 JANUARY 2015 (cid:127) VOL 347 ISSUE 6220 sciencemag . org SCIENCE ON OUR WEB SITE ◥ Read the full article at http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1126 / science . 1260419 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . The list of author affiliations is available in the full article online . * Corresponding author . E - mail : mathias . uhlen @ scilifelab . se Cite this article as M . Uhlén et al . , Science 347 , 1260419 ( 2015 ) . DOI : 10 . 1126 / science . 1260419 The human tissue – enriched proteins . All tissue - enriched proteins are shown for 13 representative tissues or groups of tissues , stratified according to their predicted subcellular localization . Enriched proteins are mainly intracellular in testis , mainly membrane bound in brain and kidney , and mainly secreted in pancreas and liver . RESEARCH ARTICLE ◥ PROTEOMICS Tissue - based map of the human proteome Mathias Uhlén , 1 , 2 , 3 * Linn Fagerberg , 1 Björn M . Hallström , 1 , 2 Cecilia Lindskog , 4 Per Oksvold , 1 Adil Mardinoglu , 5 Åsa Sivertsson , 1 Caroline Kampf , 4 Evelina Sjöstedt , 1 , 4 Anna Asplund , 4 IngMarie Olsson , 4 Karolina Edlund , 6 Emma Lundberg , 1 Sanjay Navani , 7 Cristina Al - Khalili Szigyarto , 2 Jacob Odeberg , 1 Dijana Djureinovic , 4 Jenny Ottosson Takanen , 2 Sophia Hober , 2 Tove Alm , 1 Per - Henrik Edqvist , 4 Holger Berling , 2 Hanna Tegel , 2 Jan Mulder , 8 Johan Rockberg , 2 Peter Nilsson , 1 Jochen M . Schwenk , 1 Marica Hamsten , 2 Kalle von Feilitzen , 1 Mattias Forsberg , 1 Lukas Persson , 1 Fredric Johansson , 1 Martin Zwahlen , 1 Gunnar von Heijne , 9 Jens Nielsen , 3 , 5 Fredrik Pontén 4 Resolving the molecular details of proteome variation in the different tissues and organs of the human body will greatly increase our knowledge of human biology and disease . Here , we present a map of the human tissue proteome based on an integrated omics approach that involves quantitative transcriptomics at the tissue and organ level , combined with tissue microarray – based immunohistochemistry , to achieve spatial localization of proteins down to the single - cell level . Our tissue - based analysis detected more than 90 % of the putative protein - coding genes . We used this approach to explore the human secretome , the membrane proteome , the druggable proteome , the cancer proteome , and the metabolic functions in 32 different tissues and organs . All the data are integrated in an interactive Web - based database that allows exploration of individual proteins , as well as navigation of global expression patterns , in all major tissues and organs in the human body . T here is much interest in annotating all hu - man genes at the level of DNA ( 1 , 2 ) , RNA ( 3 , 4 ) , and proteins ( 5 , 6 ) , with the ultimate goal of defining structure , function , local - ization , expression , and interactions of all proteins . This hasresultedin large - scaleprojects , such as ENCODE ( 7 ) and the Human Proteome Project ( 8 ) , aimed to integrate results from many research groups and technical platforms to reach a detailed understanding of each of the ~ 20 , 000 human protein - coding genes predicted from the human genome and their corresponding protein isoforms . Recently , draftsofthehumanproteome based on proteogenomics efforts have been de - scribed ( 9 , 10 ) , focusing on recent advances in mass spectrometry that allow comprehensive analyses using both isotope - labeled analysis sys - tems ( 11 ) and deep proteomics methods ( 12 ) or genome - wide targeted proteomics efforts ( 13 ) . A complement to these efforts is the Human Protein Atlas program ( 14 ) , which is exploring the human proteome using genecentric and genome - wide antibody - based profiling on tissue micro - arrays . This allows for spatial pathology - based annotationofproteinexpression , incombination withdeep - sequencing transcriptomics of the same tissue types . The strategy is based on the quan - titative assessment of transcript expression in complex tissue homogenates , involving a mix - ture of cell types combined with the precise lo - calization of the corresponding proteins down to the single - cell level , using immunohistochemis - try . Recently , we performed a transcriptomics study of 27 different tissues using this approach ( 15 ) , followed by subsequent in - depth studies of the global proteome in a number of these tissues and organs , such as liver ( 16 ) , testis ( 17 ) , and the gastrointestinal ( GI ) tract ( 18 ) . Here , wehaveused this approach and extended the analysis to 32 tissue types , representing all major tissues and organs in the human body , to create a genome - wide map of the human tissue – based proteome , with a focus on the analysis of the tissue - elevated proteins and all secreted and membrane proteins . Particular emphasis has been placed on analyses ofproteinstargetedbypharmaceuticaldrugs ( 19 ) and proteins implicated in cancer ( 20 ) . We used the data to generate comprehensive metabolic maps for all 32 tissue types in order to identify differences in metabolism between tissues . In addition , new transcriptomics data from 36 hu - man cell lines allowed us to compare the pro - teomesbetweencelllinesandnormalcellsderivedfromthesametissuetypes . Finally , the protein isoforms generated by differential splicing be - tween different tissues were studied with a focus on splice variants with predicted differential sub - cellular localization . All data are presented in an interactive database ( www . proteinatlas . org ) . Results Classification of all human protein - coding genes Samples representing all major tissues and or - gans ( n = 44 ) in the human body were analyzed ( Fig . 1A ) by using 20 , 456 antibodies generated “ in - house , ” as well as 3572 antibodies provided by external suppliers . The antibodies have been used to produce more than 13 million tissue - based immunohistochemistry images , with each image annotated on the single - cell level for all sampledtissuesbypathologists . Theanalysiswas complemented with RNA sequencing ( RNAseq ) data for 32 out of the 44 tissue types . We inves - tigated global expression profiles using hierar - chicalclusteringbasedonthecorrelationbetween122biologicalreplicatesfromthe32organsandtissues ( Fig . 1Bandfig . S1 ) . Theresultsrevealtestis and brain as outliers and a clear connectivity between the samples from the GI tract ( stomach , duodenum , small intestine , colon , and rectum ) , the hematopoietic tissues ( bone marrow , lymph node , spleen , tonsil , and appendix ) and the two striatedmusclesamples ( cardiacandskeletalmus - cle ) . A principal component analysis ( fig . S2A ) confirms a close resemblance between cardiac and skeletal muscle but also suggests similarities inglobalexpressionbetweenpancreasandsalivarygland , as well as differences between the primary lymphoid tissue ( bone marrow ) and the second - ary lymphoid tissues , such as tonsil and spleen . The transcriptomics study allowed us to refine the classification performed earlier ( 15 ) of all the 20 , 344 putative protein - coding genes with RNA - seq data into categories based on their expression across all 32 tissue types ( Fig . 1C , Table 1 , and tables S1 to S4 ) . Indirectly , this also provides an estimate of the relative protein levels correspond - ing to each gene , because proteogenomics analy - ses have shown that the translation rate , in most cases , is constant for a specific transcript across different human cells and tissues at both a cel - lularlevel ( 21 ) andatissuelevel ( 9 ) . Althoughitis still a matter of scientific debate ( 22 ) whether protein degradation rates could , in some cases , varyfor an individual protein in differenttissues , an overall concurrence between mRNA and pro - teinlevelsforagivengeneproductacrossvarious tissues isgenerally expected ( 9 , 21 ) . A large fraction ( 44 % ) of the protein - coding genes were detected in all analyzed tissues , and these ubiquitously expressed genes include known “ housekeeping ” genes encoding mitochondrial proteins and pro - teins involved in overall cell structure , transla - tion , transcription , and replication . Of all the protein coding genes , 34 % showed an elevated expression in at least one of the analyzed tissues , RESEARCH SCIENCE sciencemag . org 23 JANUARY 2015 (cid:127) VOL 347 ISSUE 6220 1260419 - 1 1 Science for Life Laboratory , KTH — Royal Institute of Technology , SE - 171 21 Stockholm , Sweden . 2 Department of Proteomics , KTH — Royal Institute of Technology , SE - 106 91 Stockholm , Sweden . 3 Novo Nordisk Foundation Center for Biosustainability , Technical University of Denmark , DK - 2970 Hørsholm , Denmark . 4 Department of Immunology , Genetics and Pathology , Science for Life Laboratory , Uppsala University , SE - 751 85 Uppsala , Sweden· 5 Department of Chemical and Biological Engineering , Chalmers University of Technology , SE - 412 96 Gothenburg , Sweden . 6 Leibniz Research Centre for Working Environment and Human Factors ( IfADo ) at Dortmund TU , D - 44139 Dortmund , Germany . 7 Lab Surgpath , Mumbai , India . 8 Science for Life Laboratory , Department of Neuroscience , Karolinska Institute , SE - 171 77 Stockholm , Sweden . 9 Center for Biomembrane Research , Department of Biochemistry and Biophysics , Stockholm University , Stockholm , Sweden . * Corresponding author . E - mail : mathias . uhlen @ scilifelab . se and these were further subdivided into ( i ) en - riched geneswithmRNA levelsin onetissuetype atleastfivetimesthemaximumlevelsofallotheranalyzedtissues , ( ii ) group - enriched genes with enriched expressionin asmallnumber of tissues , and ( iii ) enhanced genes with only a moderately elevated expression . The use of the word “ tissue - specific ” has been avoided because this defini - tion depends on arbitrary cut - off levels , and many proteins described in the literature as “ tissue - specific ” are here shown to be expressed in severaltissues . This is exemplified by albumin , which we , as expected , identified as enriched in liver but also found at high levels , albeit much lower than for liver , in kidney and pancreas . Evidence for the human protein - coding genes We have determined the number of genes for which evidence is available at a protein level by combining our antibody - based data with the manual annotation of literature by the UniProt consortium ( 5 ) and the results from the recent mass spectrometry – based proteogenomics analy - ses ( 9 , 10 , 12 ) . The analysis shows that there are 17 , 132 protein - coding genes with proteins identi - fied from at least one of the three efforts and 13 , 841 genes with experimental evidence from at least two of the efforts ( Fig . 1D ) . Furthermore , there is evidence , at the RNA level , for 2546 ad - ditional genes based on either our data or an - notations by UniProt . Although proteins not yet detected by one of the three methods should be further investigated to establish them as true human proteins , it is noteworthy that out of the 20 , 356 putative protein - coding genes ( in Ensembl release 75 ) there are only 677 genes ( 3 . 3 % ) for which there is no experimental evidence ( table S5 ) . Many of these genes were removed in the 1260419 - 2 23 JANUARY 2015 (cid:127) VOL 347 ISSUE 6220 sciencemag . org SCIENCE t e s t i s b r a i n li v e r hea r t m u sc l e sk e l e t a l m u sc l e bone m a rr o w t on s il s p l een append i x l y m ph node e s ophagu s sk i n k i dne y s t o m a c h c o l on r e c t u m duodenu m s m a ll i n t e s t i ne p l a c en t a ad r ena l g l ando v a r y t h y r o i d g l and f a ll op i an t ube l ung ad i po s e t i ss ue s m oo t h m u sc l e endo m e t i r u m ga ll b l adde r u r i na r y b l adde r pan c r ea s p r o s t a t e s a li v a r y g l and salivary gland prostatepancreasurinary bladder gallbladderendometriumsmooth muscle adipose tissue lungfallopian tube thyroid gland ovaryadrenal gland placentasmall intestine duodenumrectumcolonstomachkidneyskinesophaguslymph node appendixspleentonsilbone marrow skeletal muscle heart muscle liverbraintestis 0 . 7 0 . 8 0 . 9 1 Correlation 44 % 13 % 17 % 5 % 12 % 9 % Expressed in all tissues MixedTissue enhanced Group enriched Tissue enriched Not detected RNA - based classification Lateral ventricle Cerebellum Thyroid gland Parathyroid gland Breast Liver Pancreas Kidney Urinary bladder Ovary Fallopian tube Endometrium Placenta Vagina Skin Bone marrow Oral mucosa Tonsil Esophagus Lung Heart muscle Spleen Stomach Colon Rectum Prostate Testis Cervix , uterine Hippocampus Cerebral cortex Salivary gland Gallbladder Adrenal gland Nasopharynx Smooth muscle Lymph node Bronchus Duodenum Small intestine Appendix Seminal vesicle Soft tissue * Epididymis Skeletal muscle RNA and protein data Only protein data 3 % 3 % 9 % 5 % 5 % 6 % 6 % 4 % 16 % 42 % No evidence RNA evidence HPA RNA evidence HPA & UniProt Protein evidence HPA Protein evidence UniProt Protein evidence Proteogenomics Protein evidence HPA & Proteogenomics Protein evidence HPA & UniProt Protein evidence UniProt & Proteogenomics Protein evidence HPA & UniProt & Proteogenomics 1097 1161 1033 1191 816 3301 8533 Human Protein Atlas ( HPA ) UniProtProteogenomics Protein evidence N o t de t e c t ed T i ss ue en r i c hed G r oup en r i c hed T i ss ue enhan c ed M i x ed E x p r e ss ed i n a ll t i ss ue s N u m be r o f gene s 0 2000 4000 6000 8000 Protein evidence RNA evidence No evidence Evidence summary Fig . 1 . Classification and protein evidence of the human protein - coding genes . ( A ) The tissues analyzed in this study , including tissues studied both by RNAseqandantibody - basedprofilingandthoseanalyzedonlybyantibody - based profiling . For details see table S1 . ( B ) Heat map showing the pairwise correlation betweenall32tissuesbasedontranscriptexpressionlevelsof20 , 344genes . The average FPKM values for each gene and tissue are used in the analysis . For correlation results of all individual samples , see fig . S1 . ( C ) The number of genes classifiedineachexpressioncategoryaccordingtothedefinitionstatedinTable1 . ( D ) Venn diagram showing the overlap between protein evidence on the basis of three sources : Human Protein Atlas , UniProt , and Proteogenomics . ( E ) The distribution of genes classified as having protein evidence , evidence only at the transcriptlevel , andgeneswithoutanyexperimentalevidence . ( F ) Thenumberof genes with protein evidence , RNAevidence , and no evidence stratified according to their transcriptomics - based classification into six categories . RESEARCH | RESEARCH ARTICLE later update of Ensembl ( release 76 ) ( fig . S2B ) , and others have been suggested to be noncoding genes on the basis of the lack of correlation in gene family age and cross - species conservation studies . Thus , it is possible that most of these “ missing genes ” will be removed from the list of protein - coding genes in the future . These genes and the genes with evidence only at the RNA level are obvious targets for more in - depth functional protein studies . A summary of the supporting data is shown in Fig . 1E . Few ( 2 % ) of the ubiquitously expressed genes lack protein evidence ( Fig . 1F ) ; however , protein evidence is lacking for 18 % of the genes identified here by RNA analysis as elevated ( tissue enriched , group enriched , or enhanced ) . Examples of genes with no previous evidence on the protein level accord - ingto UniProt , butnow confirmedusing antibody - based profiling and proteogenomics ( 9 , 10 ) , are chromosome 2 open reading frame 57 ( C2orf57 ) , shown here with an enriched expression in testis localized to the sperm ( Fig . 2A ) , and chromo - some 8 open reading frame 47 ( C8orf47 ) , with expression in a subset of endocrine islet cells and ductal cells of the exocrine pancreas ( Fig . 2B ) . The tissue - elevated proteome A network plot shows the number of tissue - enriched genes for each tissue type , as well as the number of genes enriched in different groups of tissues and organs ( fig . S4 ) . An analysis of se - lected tissuesand organs ( Fig . 2O ) reveals a large number of elevated genes in male tissue , brain , SCIENCE sciencemag . org 23 JANUARY 2015 (cid:127) VOL 347 ISSUE 6220 1260419 - 3 Table 1 . Classification of all human protein - coding genes based on transcript expression levels in 32 tissues . Category Description No . of genes Fraction of genes ( % ) Tissue enriched mRNA levels in a particular tissue at least five times those in all other tissues 2 , 355 12 Group enriched mRNA levels at least five times those in a group of 2 – 7 tissues 1 , 109 5 Tissue enhanced mRNA levels in a particular tissue at least five times average levels in all tissues 3 , 478 17 Expressed in all Detected in all tissues ( FPKM > 1 ) 8 , 874 44 Mixed Detected in fewer than 32 tissues but not elevated in any tissue 2 , 696 13 Not detected FPKM < 1 in all tissues 1 , 832 9 Total Total number of genes analyzed with RNAseq 20 , 344 100 Total elevated Total number of tissue - enriched , group - enriched , and tissue - enhanced genes 6 , 942 34 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 91011 12 13 1 . Brain Transmission of nerve impulse Neurological system process 2 . Endocrine tissue Regulation of hormone levels Neurological system process 7 . Adipose tissue Fatty acid metabolic process Response to hormone stimulus 4 . Blood and immune system Immune response Cell activation 5 . Liver Oxidation reduction Steroid metabolic process Coagulation 6 . Male tissue Sexual reproduction Spermatogenesis 11 . Kidney Transmembrane transport Excretion 12 . Female tissue Female pregnancy Embryonic morphogenesis 13 . Skin Epidermis development Cell adhesion 3 . Lung Respiratory gaseous exchange Immune response 8 . Heart and skeletal muscle Muscle contraction Heart development DigestionChemical homeostasis 9 . GI - tract 10 . Pancreas ProteolysisSecretion male brain female GI−tract immune muscle liver endocrine skin kidney lung pancreas adipose Number of genes 0 500 1000 1500 2000 Fraction of transcripts ( % ) 0 20 40 60 80 EnhancedGroup enriched Tissue enriched Fig . 2 . Tissuemicroarray – basedproteinexpression , andanalysisoftissue - elevated genes in the different organ systems . ( A to N ) Tissue expression and localization fora selection of human proteins . Larger images corresponding to ( A ) to ( N ) of the figure are shown in fig . S3 . The levels of the corresponding mRNA ( FPKM ) are displayed as bars foreach of the 13 organ systems analyzed ( from left : brain , endocrine tissue , lung , blood and immune system , liver , male tissue , adipose tissue , heart and skeletal muscle , GI tract , pancreas , kidney , female tissue , and skin ) . Examples include testis with C2orf57 expression in sperm ( A ) , pancreas with cytoplasmic C8orf47 expression in both a subset of endocrine cells and ductal cells ( B ) , duodenum with CDHR2 expression in microvilli ( C ) , lymphnodewithcytoplasmicFCRLAexpressioningerminalcenter cells ( D ) , skeletal muscle with cytoplasmic MYL3 expression in slow muscle fibers ( E ) , fallopian tube with ROPN1L expression in cilia ( F ) , kidney with SUN2 expression in all nuclear membranes ( G ) , pancreas with GATM expression in mitochondria throughout the exocrine compartment ( H ) , skin with GRHL1 ex - pression in nuclei of the upper epidermal layer ( I ) , stomach with nuclear PAX6 expression in endocrine cells ( J ) , adrenal gland with cytoplasmic expression of CYP11B1incorticalcells ( K ) , lungwithcytoplasmicCOMTexpressioninasubset of pneumocytes and macrophages ( L ) , colon with nuclear ATF1 expression in glandular cells ( M ) , and prostate with nuclear FOXA1 expression in glandular cells ( N ) . ( O ) The number of elevated genes in the 13 organ systems , as de - scribed in ( P ) , and the fraction of all transcripts ( FPKM ) encoded by these elevated genes for each of these organ systems . ( P ) An analysis of major GO terms for each tissue on the basis of the tissue - elevated genes in 13 selected tissues orgroups of tissues , as described in supplementary methods . For more details of the GO analysis , see table S6 . RESEARCH | RESEARCH ARTICLE andliverand relativelyfewinlung , pancreas , and fat ( adipose tissue ) . The transcriptomics analy - sis also allowed us to determine the fraction of elevated transcripts in each tissue ( Fig . 2O ) . For most tissues , only ~ 10 % of the transcripts are en - codedbytissue - elevatedgenes , withtheexception of pancreas and liver , where elevated genes en - code 70 % and 35 % of the transcripts , respectively . A functional Gene Ontology ( GO ) analysis for 13 tissues or groups of tissues is summarized in Fig . 2P ( see table S6 for details ) , and the terms identified are consistent with the function of the respective tissues . The largest number of en - riched genes is found in the testis ( n = 999 ) , with many of the corresponding testis - specific pro - teins involved in the reproductive process and spermatogenesis . It is not unlikely that many of these genes will show a shared expression with oocytes in the female ovaries , which are difficult to analyze because of the different kinetics of germcelldevelopment , including first roundsof meiosis at the embryonic stages during female life . The tissue with the second largest number of enriched genes is the brain ( n = 318 ) . The num - ber of genes with expression restricted to neu - ronal tissue is relatively small , but it is likely that moreenriched geneswouldbeadded to thelistif additional regions , such as the various special - ized regions of the brain , were sampled . Genes elevated in liver encode secreted plasma and bile proteins , detoxification proteins , and proteins as - sociated with metabolic processes and glycogen storage , whereas genes elevated in adipose tissue encode proteins involved in lipid metabolic pro - cesses , secretion , and transport . Genes elevated in skin encode proteins associated with func - tions related to the barrier function ( squamous cell differentiation and cornification ) , skin pig - mentation , and hairdevelopment . In theGI tract , elevated genes predominantly encode proteins involved in nutrient breakdown , transport , and metabolism ; hostprotection ; andtissuemorphol - ogy maintenance . As expected , many of the genes enriched in groups of tissues are common for the GI tract and the hematopoietic tissues , respectively , as exemplified on the protein level by cadherin - related family member 2 ( CDHR2 ) , expressed inthemicrovilliofduodenumandsmallintestine ( Fig . 2C ) , andFcreceptor - likeA ( FCRLA ) , expressed in lymph node , tonsil , appendix , and spleen ( Fig . 2D ) . A large number of group - enriched genes involved in contraction are observed in striated ( cardiac and skeletal ) muscle , as exemplified by the fiber type – specific expression of myosin light chain 3 ( MYL3 ) ( Fig . 2E ) , whereas many genes shared between testis and the fallopian tube , as well as testis and lung , are involved in cell mo - tility , as exemplified by rophilin - associated tail protein – like ( ROPN1L ) , which is expressed in 1260419 - 4 23 JANUARY 2015 (cid:127) VOL 347 ISSUE 6220 sciencemag . org SCIENCE 0 2 , 000 4 , 000 6 , 000 8 , 000 10 , 000 12 , 000 440 1 , 912 2 , 804 12 , 457 1 , 153 412 1 , 166 soluble membrane secreted membrane and secretedisoforms Number of genes 61 % 23 % 11 % 4 % secreted membrane soluble Fraction of genes ( % ) 0 20 40 60 80 100 membrane and secretedisoforms ad i po s e t i ss ue ad r ena l g l and append i x bone m a rr o w b r a i n c o l on duodenu m endo m e t r i u m e s ophagu s f a ll op i an t ube ga ll b l adde r hea r t m u sc l e k i dne y li v e r l ung l y m ph nodeo v a r y pan c r ea s p l a c en t a p r o s t a t e r e c t u m s a li v a r y g l and sk e l e t a l m u sc l e sk i n s m a ll i n t e s t i ne s m oo t h m u sc l e s p l een s t o m a c h t e s t i s t h y r o i d g l and t on s il u r i na r y b l adde r F r ac t i on o f t r a n sc r i p t s ( % ) 0 20 40 60 80 1 , 000 20 , 000 40 , 000 60 , 000 ad i po s e t i ss ue ad r ena l g l and append i x bone m a rr o w b r a i n c o l on duodenu m e s ophagu s f a ll op i an t ube ga ll b l adde r hea r t m u sc l e k i dne y li v e r l ung l y m ph nodeo v a r y pan c r ea s p l a c en t a p r o s t a t e r e c t u m s a li v a r y g l and sk e l e t a l m u sc l e sk i n s m a ll i n t e s t i ne s m oo t h m u sc l e s p l een s t o m a c h t e s t i s t h y r o i d g l and t on s il u r i na r y b l adde r endo m e t r i u m F P K M PRSS1 CTRB1 PRR4 CTRB2CELA3A PRH2 HTN3 SMR3B PNLIP AMY2A STATH HTN1 CPA1 CELA2A DEFA1DEFA1B CLPS HP PGA3PGA4 ALB DEFA3 ZG16B CEL CELA3BCTRCPLA2G1B CPB1 MT - C01 MT - C01 MT - APT8 HBB MT - C03 MT - ND4 solublemembranesecretedmembane and secreted isoforms mitochondrial - encoded genes not detected expressed in all tissues mixedelevated RNA - based class membranesecretedmembane and secreted isoforms solublemembranesecreted Highly abundant genes Tissue enriched genes solublemembranesecretedmembane and secreted isoforms F P K M 1 100 10 , 000 ad i po s e t i ss ue ad r ena l g l and bone m a rr o w b r a i n e s ophagu s f a ll op i an t ube hea r t m u sc l e k i dne y li v e r l ung pan c r ea s p l a c en t a p r o s t a t e s a li v a r y g l and sk e l e t a l m u sc l e sk i n s t o m a c h t e s t i s t h y r o i d g l and 1 , 000 10 100 , 000 Fig . 3 . Prediction and analysis of the human secreted and membrane - spanning proteins . ( A ) The number and fraction of all human genes ( n = 20 , 356 ) classified into the categories soluble , membrane - spanning , and secreted , as well as genes with isoforms belonging to two or all three cat - egories . ( B ) Venn diagram showing the number of genes in each of the three main subcellular location categories : membrane , secreted , and solu - ble . The overlap between the categories gives the number of genes with isoforms belonging to two or all three categories . ( C ) The fraction of genes in the various protein expression classes for the soluble , secreted , and membrane - spanning proteins , as well as genes with both secreted and membrane - spanning isoforms . ( D ) The fraction of transcripts based on FPKM values from each of the three secreted or membrane - spanning cat - egories across the 32 analyzed tissues . ( E ) The 370 most - abundant genes ( FPKM > 1000 ) in the different tissues , stratified according to their pre - dicted localization on the basis of ( C ) , as well as an additional category of the 13 genes encoded by the mitochondrial genome . The gene names for a selection of the most abundant genes are shown . ( F ) The transcript levels ( FPKM ) on a log 10 scale for all genes identified as tissue - enriched are shown for a few selected tissues , with each gene stratified according to predicted localization . RESEARCH | RESEARCH ARTICLE sperm ( testis ) , ciliated cells in respiratory epithe - lia ( lung ) , and ciliated cells in the fallopian tube ( Fig . 2F ) . The human secretome and membrane proteome Both secreted and membrane - bound proteins play crucial roles in many physiological and pathological processes . Important secreted pro - teins include cytokines , coagulation factors , hor - mones , and growth factors , whereas membrane proteins include ion channels or molecular trans - porters , enzymes , receptors , andanchorsforother proteins . Here , we performed a whole - proteome scan to predict the complete set of human se - creted proteins ( “ secretome ” ) using three meth - ods for signal - peptide prediction : SignalP4 . 0 ( 23 ) , Phobius ( 24 ) , and SPOCTOPUS ( 25 ) . In addition , the human membrane proteome was predicted using seven membrane – protein topology predic - tion methods as described ( 21 ) , which resulted in a majority decision – based method ( MDM ) . For each protein - coding gene , all protein isoforms wereannotatedforpredictedlocalization : secreted , membrane spanning , or soluble ( intracellular proteins without a predicted signal peptide or membrane - spanning region ) ( table S1 ) . Some of the proteins predicted to be membrane - spanning are intracellular , e . g . , in the Golgi or mitochon - drial membranes , and some of the proteins pre - dicted to be secreted could potentially be retained in a compartment belonging to the secretory pathway , suchastheendoplasmicreticulum ( ER ) , or remain attached to the outer face of the cell membrane by a GPI anchor . About 3000 human genes are predicted to encode secreted proteins , with another 5500 encoding membrane - bound proteins ( Fig . 3A ) . In the interactive database ( www . proteinatlas . org ) , many of the secreted proteins are detected at the RNA level in tis - sues , butno protein expression is observed in the antibody - based analysis in the same tissue — most likely because the steady - state levels of proteins in the cell during the secretion process are too low to be detected . A large fraction ( 72 % ) of human genes encode multiple splice variants with different protein se - quences . In Fig . 3B , all genes have been classified according to the presence of protein isoforms that are intracellular , membrane - spanning , and / or secreted . Note that two - thirds of the genes encoding secreted proteins have at least one splice variant with alternative localization . All protein isoforms ( n = 94 , 856 ) with their predicted localization based on the three signal - peptide – prediction methods , as well as the number of predictedtransmembranesegments , arelistedin table S7 . An analysis across the 32 tissues ( Fig . 3C ) supports earlier suggestions ( 21 , 26 ) that a larger fraction of tissue - enriched proteins are secreted or membrane - spanning proteins than are intracellular proteins . Furthermore , we investigated the fraction of the transcriptome that codes for each class of proteins across the 32 tissues ( Fig . 3D and fig . S4 ) . In most cases , the secreted proteins account for between 10 and 20 % of the transcripts . In contrast , more than 70 % of the transcripts from the pancreas and ~ 60 % from the salivary gland encode secreted proteins . This demonstrates the extreme specialization of these two tissues for pro - duction of secreted proteins into the duodenum SCIENCE sciencemag . org 23 JANUARY 2015 (cid:127) VOL 347 ISSUE 6220 1260419 - 5 ad i po s e t i ss ue ad r ena l g l and append i x bone m a rr o w b r a i n c o l on duodenu m endo m e t r i u m e s ophagu s f a ll op i an t ube ga ll b l adde r hea r t m u sc l e k i dne y li v e r l ung l y m ph nodeo v a r y pan c r ea s p l a c en t a p r o s t a t e r e c t u m s a li v a r y g l and sk e l e t a l m u sc l e sk i n s m a ll i n t e s t i ne s m oo t h m u sc l e s p l een s t o m a c h t e s t i s t h y r o i d g l and t on s il u r i na r y b l adde r F r ac t i on o f t r a n sc r i p t s ( % ) 0 10 20 30 40 Nuclear - encoded mitochondrial genes ( n = 768 ) Mitochondrial - encoded genes ( n = 13 ) t a r ge t s f o r app r o v ed d r ug s t r an sc r i p t i on f a c t o r s c an c e r m u t a t i on gene s F r ac t i on o f g e n es ( % ) 0 20 40 60 80 100 Not detected Tissue enriched Group enriched Tissue enhanced MixedExpressed in all tissues 510 83 25 small molecule drugs biotech drugs 38 % 16 % 1 % 12 % 4 % 30 % Targets for approved drugs ( n = 618 ) multi - pass membrane protein single - pass membrane protein multi - pass and single - pass membrane protein secretedmembrane and secreted isoforms soluble , intracellular protein Transcription factors ( n = 1 , 508 ) l og 2 F P K M + 1 0 2 4 6 8 10 ad i po s e t i ss ue bone m a rr o w b r a i n c o l on hea r t m u sc l e k i dne y li v e r l ung o v a r y pan c r ea s sk i n t e s t i s ad r ena l g l and ElevatedMixedExpressed in all tissues Not detected 0 5 10 15 0 5 10 15 log2 FPKM + 1 liver l og 2 F P K M + 1 H e p - G 2 Correlation : 0 . 8 0 5 10 15 0 5 10 15 log2 FPKM + 1 pancreas l og 2 F P K M + 1 C a p a n - 2 Correlation : 0 . 8 Fig . 4 . The human transcriptome in different tissues and organs . ( A ) The fraction of transcripts encoded by mitochondrial genes for each of the different tissues and organs , subdivided by genes encoded by the mitochondrial genome and chromosomes , respectively . ( B ) The fraction of genes classified according to tissueexpressionpatternandanalyzedforalltargetsofapproveddrugs ( n = 618 ) , alltranscriptionfactors ( n = 1508 ) , andproteinsimplicatedincancer ( n = 525 ) . ( C ) The transcript levels ( FPKM ) for all genes encoding transcription factors in some selected tissues , color - coded according to their global expression category . ( D ) The number of pharmaceutical drugs approved by FDA , according to Drugbank ( 19 ) , that are chemical ( small - molecule ) or biotech drugs . ( E ) The number of pharmaceutical drugs approved by FDA ( 19 ) stratified according to the predicted localization of the target protein . ( F ) Pairwise comparison showing all genes expressed in liver tissue and the liver cell line Hep - G2 , color - coded according to proteinexpressioncategoryasshownin ( B ) . ( G ) Pairwisecomparisonshowingall genes expressed in pancreas tissue and the pancreas cell line Capan - 2 , color - coded according to protein expression category as shown in ( B ) . RESEARCH | RESEARCH ARTICLE 1260419 - 6 23 JANUARY 2015 (cid:127) VOL 347 ISSUE 6220 sciencemag . org SCIENCE TMED2 - 001 TMED2 - 003 TMED2 - 004 bone marrow heart muscle skeletal muscle thyroid gland LYNX1 - 001 LYNX1 - 002 LYNX1 - 003 LYNX1 - 004 LYNX1 - 005 LYNX1 - 007 LYNX1 - 008 LYNX1 - 009 LYNX1 - 201 brain heart muscle esophagus skin Predicted membrane - spanning isoform Predicted secreted isoform Protein - coding UTR F P K M 0 50 100 150 F P K M 0 10 20 30 F P K M 05101520 Thyroid gland Heart muscle Bone marrow Other tissues Skeletal muscle EsophagusHeart muscle Skin Other tissues Brain TMED2 - 001 Membrane TMED2 - 004 Membrane TMED2 - 003 Secreted 5 10 15 20 25 30 5 10 15 20 25 30 5 10 15 20 25 30 F P K M 0 50 100 150 5 10 15 20 25 30 F P K M 05101520 5 10 15 20 25 30 LYNX1 - 201 Membrane F P K M 051015 20 25 5 10 15 20 25 30 LYNX1 - 003 Membrane LYNX1 - 002 Secreted 0 20 40 60 80 100 F r ac t i on o f t r a n sc r i p t s e n c od i ng sec r e t e d p r o t e i n s ( % ) Majority of membrane isoforms per gene Majority of secreted isoforms per gene Equal amounts of membrane and secreted isoforms per gene Genes 0 100 300 200 Fig . 5 . Differential splicing analysis of transcripts . ( A ) Dot plot of genes with multiple isoforms , where at least one isoform is classified as membrane - spanning and another classified as secreted . The x axis shows 366 genes expressedat > 5FPKMinoneormoretissues ; the y axisshowsthesumofFPKM valuesforallsecretedisoformsdividedbythetotalsumofFPKMvaluesforeach tissue expressed at > 5 FPKM . For each gene , the number of tissues where the secreted transcripts are more abundant than the membrane - spanning tran - scripts is calculated to define a majority fraction - type as membrane ( red ) , secreted ( blue ) , or equal number for both categories ( purple ) . Each tissue is representedbyacircle , andthecoloristhesameacrossall tissuesforthesame gene . ( B ) Example ofdifferentialsplicingforthegene TMED2 , with twoisoforms predicted as membrane - spanning and one isoform predicted as secreted . The exon - intron structure ( with pure intronic sites removed ) , as well as the location of the untranslated regions ( UTR ) of three splice variants of TMED2 , are shown on top . Normalized read coverage plots for cardiac muscle , skeletal muscle , thyroid gland , and bone marrow highlight the differential use of exons in the selected tissues . ( C ) Transcript abundance ( FPKM values ) plotted across all 32 tissues for each isoform . The predicted membrane - spanning transcript ( top ) is expressed in all tissues , with thyroid gland as the most abundant tissue ; a secretedisoform ( middle ) isonlydetected in cardiac and skeletal muscle ; anda second membrane - spanning isoform ( bottom ) is expressed at very low levels , withbonemarrowasmostabundant . ( D ) Examplesofdifferentialsplicingforthe gene LYNX1 , with three isoforms predicted as membrane - spanning and six isoforms predicted as secreted from thevisualization used in ( B ) . ( E ) Transcript abundance ( FPKM values ) for three isoforms of LYNX1 detected at > 5 FPKM . The secreted isoform ( top ) is expressed at high levels in esophagus and skin , whereas the two membrane - spanning isoforms ( middle and bottom ) are most abundant in brain and cardiac muscle . RESEARCH | RESEARCH ARTICLE and oral cavity , respectively . About 40 % of the transcripts in liver encode secreted proteins . Oth - er tissues with relatively high levels of transcripts encoding secreted proteins include gallbladder , bonemarrow , placenta , anddifferentpartsofthe GI tract , such as stomach , duodenum , and small intestine . The most abundant genes , normalized as frag - mentsper kilobaseofexon per million fragments mapped ( FPKM ) with a value > 1000 , in the dif - erent tissues are shown in Fig . 3E , and the pre - diction of the localization of the corresponding proteins reveals that many ( 53 % ) are secreted pro - teins . Among the predicted membrane - spanning proteins , 13 proteins encoded in the mitochon - drial genome are the most highly expressed . In Fig . 3F , tissue - enrichedgenesareshownstratified according to their predicted subcellular localiza - tion . Many of the tissue - enriched genes in testis are intracellular , whereas a large number of the tissue - enriched genes in brain and kidney are membrane - bound . In contrast , in many other tis - sues , suchaspancreas , salivarygland , liver , stom - ach , and bone marrow , most tissue - enriched genes are secreted ( fig . S5 ) . The housekeeping proteome Transcriptomics analysis shows that close to 9000 genes ( table S1 ) are expressed in all ana - lyzed tissues , which suggests that the gene pro - ducts are needed in all cells to maintain basic cellular structure and function . These housekeep - ing proteins include ribosomal proteins involved in protein synthesis , enzymes essential for cell metabolism and gene expression , and mitochon - drial proteins needed for energy generation , as well as proteins responsible for the structural integrity of the cell . Most of these proteins are expressed at similar levels throughout the hu - man body , as exemplified in kidney by the ex - pression of the nuclear membrane protein SUN2 present in all cells ( Fig . 2G ) , whereas a few pro - teins show great variability in expression levels — for example , the mitochondrial protein glycin amino transferase ( GATM ) , with high expression in exocrine pancreas ( Fig . 2H ) , kidney , and liver but relatively low expression levels in all other tissues . An interesting class of proteins is encoded by mitochondrial genes , and in Fig . 4A , the tran - scriptional load of these genes is shown across dif - ferent tissues . The highest fractions of transcripts encoding mitochondrial proteins are found in car - diac muscle ( 32 % of all transcripts ) and skeletal muscle ( 28 % ) , whichdemonstratestheimportance of energy metabolism for striated muscle tissue . The regulatory proteome Transcription factors , of which ~ 1 , 500 have been identified in humans ( 27 ) , comprise an impor - tant class of regulatory proteins as they function as on / off switches for gene expression . The frac - tion of transcription factor genes classified accord - ing to tissuespecificityis shownin Fig . 4B , which suggests a tissue distribution similar to that of the complete proteome , with as many as 41 % of the genes expressed in all tissues and only 29 % identified as elevated ( enriched , group enriched , or enhanced ) . Many of the more - abundantly ex - pressed transcription factors are found in all tissues ( Fig . 4C ) . However , there are examples of abundanttranscription factors thatbelong to the tissue - elevated categories , such as ( i ) grainyhead - like1 ( GRHL1 ) withenhancedexpressioninesoph - agus and skin ( squamous epithelia ) and selective localization to the uppermost nucleated epider - mal keratinocytes ( Fig . 2I ) and ( ii ) paired box 6 ( PAX6 ) involved in eye and brain development and differentiation of pancreatic islet cells , with group - enrichedexpressioninbrain , pancreas , and stomach , selectively localized to a subset of glan - dular cells in the stomach mucosa ( Fig . 2J ) and to islet cells in the pancreas . The tissue - enriched transcription factorsidentified here ( table S8 ) will enable new insights into the regulatory pattern of the different tissues . The druggable proteome Most pharmaceutical drugs act by targeting pro - teinsandmodulatingtheiractivity . Targetproteins belong to four main families : enzymes , trans - porters , ion channels , and receptors . The U . S . Food and Drug Administration ( FDA ) has ap - proved drugs targeting human proteins from 618genes , accordingtoDrugbank ( 19 ) , withmost drugs acting on signal transduction proteins that convert extracellular signals into intracellular re - sponses . Antibody - based drugs are usually un - able to penetrate the plasma membrane , and therefore , they target cell surface proteins , such SCIENCE sciencemag . org 23 JANUARY 2015 (cid:127) VOL 347 ISSUE 6220 1260419 - 7 0 500 1000 1500 2000 2500 3000 3500 0 1000 2000 3000 4000 5000 6000 7000 1 3 5 7 9 11 13 15 17 19 21 23 25 27 29 31 Number of tissue models Number of tissue models N u m b e r o f g e n es N u m b e r o f r eac t i on s 1 3 5 7 9 11 13 15 17 19 21 23 25 27 29 31 li v e r ad i po s e . t i ss ue sk e l e t a l . m u sc l e b r a i n bone . m a rr o w s p l een p l a c en t a sk i n endo m e t r i u m o v a r y s t o m a c h hea r t . m u sc l e l y m ph . node c o l on s m a ll . i n t e s t i ne duodenu m r e c t u m s m oo t h . m u sc l e t on s il pan c r ea s p r o s t a t e k i dne y ad r ena l . g l and ga ll b l a dde r ap p end i x e s ophagu s f a ll op i a n . t ube s a li v a r y . g l and l ung u r i na r y t e s t i s t h y r o i d . g l and Present metabolic function Absent metabolic function THF de novo synthesis Homocysteine de novo synthesis GSH de novo synthesis Cysteine de novo synthesis CoA de novo synthesis Tricosanoic acid de novo synthesis Henicosanoic acid de novo synthesis Nonadecylic acid de novo synthesis 9−heptadecylenic acid de novo synthesis 10Z−heptadecenoic acid de novo synthesis Margaric acid de novo synthesis Tridecylic acid de novo synthesis Pentadecylic acid de novo synthesis ATP salvage from Hypoxanthine Lignocerate ( complete oxidation ) Cerotic acid ( complete oxidation ) Gluconeogenesis from Glycerol Gluconeogenesis from Glycerol & optionally FAs N−Acetylglucosamine de novo synthesis Proline de novo synthesis Gluconeogenesis from Alanine & FAs Gluconeogenesis from Lactate Gluconeogenesis from Lactate & optionally FAs Bilirubin conjugation Tricosanoic acid ( complete oxidation ) Tyrosine de novo synthesis ( R ) −3−Hydroxybutanoate de novo synthesis 6Z , 9Z , 12Z , 15Z , 18Z , 21Z−THA ( complete oxidation ) DHA de novo synthesis 9Z , 12Z , 15Z , 18Z , 21Z−TPA ( complete oxidation ) 9−heptadecylenic acid ( complete oxidation ) 9Z , 12Z , 15Z , 18Z−TTA ( complete oxidation ) 6Z , 9Z , 12Z , 15Z , 18Z−TPA ( complete oxidation ) Gluconeogenesis from Alanine Urea from Alanine NH3 import & degradation Arginine de novo synthesis Urea from Glutamine Cystine de novo synthesis Creatine de novo synthesis Taurochenodeoxycholate de novo synthesis & excretion Taurocholate de novo synthesis & excretion Glycochenodeoxycholate de novo synthesis & excretion Ornithine degradation Glycocholate de novo synthesis & excretion Thioredoxin de novo synthesis PI de novo synthesis beta−Alanine de novo synthesis Triacylglycerol de novo synthesis Pyridoxal−P de novo synthesis NADP de novo synthesis NAD de novo synthesis Lactosylceramide de novo synthesis Ceramide de novo synthesis SM de novo synthesis Cardiolipin de novo synthesis PS de novo synthesis dTTP salvage from Thymine PE de novo synthesis PC de novo synthesis Adrenic acid de novo synthesis 9Z , 12Z , 15Z , 18Z−TTA de novo synthesis 6Z , 9Z , 12Z , 15Z , 18Z−TPA de novo synthesis 4Z , 7Z , 10Z , 13Z , 16Z−DPA de novo synthesis Fig . 6 . Reconstruction of the tissue - specific GEMs . The cumulative number of the ( A ) reactions and ( B ) genes shared between the 32 tissue - specific GEMs . ( C ) Clusteringof the tissue - specific metabolic tasks . Out of 256metabolic tasks evaluated , 192 tasks were found to operate in all tissues ( housekeeping tasks ) . The remaining 64 tasks were clustered on the basis of Euclidian distance . Red is present for and blue is absent of the metabolic task in a given tissue . RESEARCH | RESEARCH ARTICLE as receptors , whereas small - molecule drugs can diffuse into cells and act also on intracellular tar - gets . Ananalysisoftheproteinsencodedfromthe 618 genes shows that 535 proteins are targeted by small chemical molecules , whereas 108 proteins are targeted by biotech drugs ( Fig . 4D ) . The pre - dicted subcellular localization ( Fig . 4E ) shows that 59 % of the targets are predicted membrane proteins and that 16 % are secreted , including those with both secreted and membrane - bound isoforms . The genes corresponding to these drug targets were classified according to tissue spec - ificity , and theresults ( Fig . 4Band tableS9 ) show a biasfor tissue - elevated proteins ( enriched , group enriched , or enhanced ) , although as many as 30 % of the approved drugs target proteins expressed in all analyzed tissues . One example of a target withenrichedexpressioniscytochromeP45011B1 ( CYP11B1 ) , which is involved in the conversion of progesterone to cortisol in the adrenal gland ( Fig . 2K ) , whereas a ubiquitously expressed proteinisthecatechol - O - methyltransferase ( COMT ) , which is associated with degradation of neuro - transmittors and is important in the metabolism of drugs used in treatment of Parkinson ’ s dis - ease . COMT displays cytoplasmic expression in all analyzed tissues , including lung ( Fig . 2L ) . The ubiquitous expression may have implications for treatments using these proteins as drug targets . The cancer proteome Genesimplicatedincancerareoftenessentialfororderlygrowth , survival , and basic cell functions in normal cells and tissues , whereas overexpres - sion , loss of expression , or expression of a mu - tated protein contributes to dysfunction and tumor growth . The number of genes implicated in cancer is dependent on definitions ; however , 259 genes have been shown to be mutated across 21 tumortypes ( 28 ) ; 290geneshavebeenreported as cancer driver genes across 12 tumor types ( 29 ) ; and 525 genes have been implicated in malig - nant transformation , according to a catalog of somatic mutations in cancer ( COSMIC ) ( 20 ) . Ex - pression analysis based on our transcriptomics data shows that a majority ( 60 % ) of these last - mentioned genes ( Fig . 4B and table S10 ) is ex - pressed in all tissues , with only a fraction of genes expressed in a tissue - or group - enriched manner . Examples are the activating transcription factor 1 ( ATF1 ) ( Fig . 2M ) , a protein expressed in all tis - sueswithknowntranslocationsinsarcomas , and the forkhead box A1 ( FOXA1 ) ( Fig . 2N ) , a protein with enhanced expression where somatic muta - tions in a subset of prostate cancers have been reported ( 30 ) . The lack of tissue specificity for many of these genes is not surprising because many of the corresponding proteins are involved in normal growth regulation and cell cycle con - trol , but it also emphasizes the possible adverse effects of treatment with drugs targeting pro - teins expressed in all tissues . Tissue versus cell lines Human biology and diseases are often explored using cell lines as model systems . We compared the body - wide expression in human tissues with expression in cancer cell lines derived from cor - responding tissue types . The transcriptomes for 11 cell lines were described earlier ( 31 ) , whereas the transcriptomes for an additional 36 cell lines were generated as part of this study ( see table S11 ) . Genome - wide expression patterns compar - ing normal tissues with corresponding human cell lines are shown in fig . S6 , as exemplified by thelivercancer – derived cellline Hep - G2 ( Fig . 4F ) , andthepancreascancer – derivedcelllineCapan - 2 ( Fig . 4G ) . Many of the tissue - enriched genes iden - tified in normal tissues are down - regulated or completely “ turned off ” in the corresponding cell lines , and in contrast , the housekeeping proteins areexpressed atthesamelevelinbothtissuesand corresponding cell lines . These results support earlier studies ( 32 ) suggesting that cell lines are “ dedifferentiated , ” with shared characteristics and lack oftissue - specific featuresdueto down - regulation oftissue - enrichedgenes . Thisimpliesthatconclu - sions from cell line studies should only be con - ferred on the corresponding tissue with caution . The isoform proteome Protein isoforms endow the structural space of the human proteome with breadth and complexity ( 33 ) . Isoforms are produced through alternative splicing , posttranslational modifications , proteo - lytic cleavage , somatic recombination , or genetic variations in protein - coding regions . We explored genesencodingisoformswithdifferentpredictedlocalization ( secreted or membrane spanning ) ( table S12 ) . A large number of these genes ( n = 366 ) are displayed together with the fraction of all transcripts ( mRNA molecules ) in Fig . 5A , with splice variants that yield secreted proteins . Most of the genes ( 67 % ) have more than 80 % of the transcripts encoding only one of the two localizations across all 32 tissues , but there are some proteins for which the majority of the transcripts encode a secreted form in one tissue , whereas the majority of the transcripts encode a membrane protein in another tissue . As an ex - ample , the expression levels for different iso - forms of the poorly understood transmembrane emp24 domain – trafficking protein 2 ( TMED2 ) are shown in Fig . 5 , B and C . Cardiac muscle has a tissue - specific expression of the secreted form , whereas the membrane - bound form is detected in all other tissue types , although at variable levels . Similarly , the protein Ly6 or neurotoxin 1 ( LYNX1 ) shows a selective expression of the secreted isoform in the esophagus and the skin , whereas the membrane - bound form is found in other tissue types and is most abundantly ex - pressed in the brain and the cardiac muscle ( Fig . 5 , DandE ) . The different localizations of the isoforms are consistent with the predicted func - tions of the different isoforms . In most cases , one of the isoforms dominates across all tissues , which is also consistent with earlier studies ( 34 ) . These are starting points to explore the relation between tissue - specific expression and function . Tissue - based map of human metabolism Genome - scale metabolic models ( GEMs ) provide not only the best representation of the metabolic capabilitiesofcelland / ortissuetypesbutalsoquan - titative descriptions of the genotype - phenotype relationship ( 35 ) . Using the RNAseq data , we reconstructed tissue - specific GEMs for 32 differ - ent tissues using the generic metabolic model , HMR2 ( 36 ) , and generated a map of the com - pletehuman metabolism . Allmodelsweregener - ated such that they can carry out 56 metabolic tasks identified to be present in all human cell types ( 37 ) . The numbers of the reactions , metab - olites , and genes incorporated into each tissue - specific GEM are presented ( table S13 ) , and the models are provided in SBML format at the Human Metabolic Atlas portal ( 38 ) . In order to confirm that none of the models have futile cycles , we ensured that high - energy compounds cannot be generated from low - energy compounds using metabolic tasks including rephosphoryl - ation of adenosine triphosphate or the genera - tion of a proton gradient over the membranes ( table S14 ) . A total of 6627 reactions , 3040 genes , and 4847 metabolites were present in at least one of the tissue models , and 4912 reactions , 1822 genes , and 3984 metabolites were present in all models . This shows that about 75 % of all metabolic re - actions in the human body are operating in all key tissues , which clearly illustrates the central role metabolism is playing for basic cellular func - tion . At a gene level , the consensus expression in all tissues is , however , less ( i . e . , about 60 % ) , which shows that , even though differenttissues have the same metabolic reactions , it is different isoforms of the enzymes that are responsible for catalyzing these reactions . Our analysis is the first genome - wide illustration of this wide variation in enzyme usage for catalyzing the same reaction between human tissues . Wefoundthatonly207ofthereactions ( Fig . 6A ) and 74 of the genes ( Fig . 6B ) were unique to any of the tissues , and notable differences be - tween the genes ( fig . S7 ) and reactions ( fig . S8 ) based on pairwise comparisons of the various tissues were observed . Between 57 and 632 genes differed in these comparisons of the tis - sue models , representing 9 to 21 % of the genes shared in all models . Bonemarrowhasthelowest number of genes and reactions , whereas liver has a large number of genes and reactions not present in any other tissue . Many of the meta - bolic reactions in liver involve specialized lipid metabolism , e . g . , denovosynthesisand secretion of bile acids including glycocholate , taurocholate , glycochenodeoxycholate , and taurochenodeoxy - cholate , buttherearealsoothermetabolicfunctions specifictoliversuchasornithinedegradation . To further investigate the metabolic capability of each tissue - specific GEM , we defined 256 meta - bolic tasks ( table S15 ) that are known to occur in humans . The analysis shows that 192 of these metabolic tasks can be performed in all analyzed tissues , whereas the remaining 64 metabolic tasks were performed by some GEMs and clus - tering of these 64 metabolic tasks is shown in Fig . 6C ( see also table S16 ) . The analysis dem - onstrates liver as the most metabolically ac - tive tissue , followed by adipose and skeletal 1260419 - 8 23 JANUARY 2015 (cid:127) VOL 347 ISSUE 6220 sciencemag . org SCIENCE RESEARCH | RESEARCH ARTICLE muscle . For all the remaining tissues , there are variations in the metabolic activities , but with clustering of activities in tissues with similar function and morphology , e . g . , stomach , duode - num , and small intestine . Discussion Here , we present a tissue - based map of the hu - man proteome from analysesof32 tissuesand 47 cell lines , with gene expression data on both the RNA and protein level and with supplementary analyses on the protein level for an additional 12 tissues . An interactive resource is presented as part of the Human Protein Atlas portal ( www . proteinatlas . org ) . This allows exploration of the tissue - elevated proteomes in these tissues and organs and analysis of tissue profiles for specific protein classes , including proteins involved in housekeepingfunctionsinthehumanbody , such as cell growth , energy generation , and metabolic pathways ; groups of proteins involved in dis - eases ; and proteins targeted by pharmaceutical drugs . Comprehensive lists of genes expressed at elevated levels in these tissues have been com - piled , withquantitativeexpressionprofilesprovided by the deep - sequencing transcriptomics comple - mentedwithimmunohistochemistry . Thisprovides localization of the proteins in the subcompart - ments of each tissue and organ down to the single - cell level . To facilitate integration with oth - er biological resources , all data are available for downloadandthroughcollaborationscross - linked with efforts such as UniProt ( 5 ) , NextProt ( 6 ) , ProteomicsDB ( 9 ) , Metabolic Atlas ( 38 ) , and the pan - European ELIXIR project ( 39 ) . An important short - term objective is to facilitate international efforts ( 5 , 7 , 8 , 40 ) toexplorethe “ missingproteins , ” with the aim to provide a finite list of human protein - codinggenesandtogeneratefirmprotein evidence and expression characteristics for all of these genes . In addition , the primary data here canbeusedtoexpandtheanalysisoftheisoformproteometobetterunderstandtheroleofthisdiverseproteomeforthefunctionalbiologyofhumans . REFERENCES AND NOTES 1 . P . Flicek et al . , Ensembl 2013 . Nucleic Acids Res . 41 ( Database ) , D48 – D55 ( 2013 ) . doi : 10 . 1093 / nar / gks1236 ; pmid : 23203987 2 . K . D . Pruitt , T . Tatusova , G . R . Brown , D . R . Maglott , NCBI Reference Sequences ( RefSeq ) : Current status , new features and genome annotation policy . Nucleic Acids Res . 40 ( Database ) , D130 – D135 ( 2012 ) . doi : 10 . 1093 / nar / gkr1079 ; pmid : 22121212 3 . H . Kawaji et al . , Update of the FANTOM web resource : From mammalian transcriptional landscape to its dynamic regulation . Nucleic Acids Res . 39 ( Database ) , D856 – D860 ( 2011 ) . doi : 10 . 1093 / nar / gkq1112 ; pmid : 21075797 4 . A . Brazma et al . , ArrayExpress — a public repository for microarray gene expression data at the EBI . Nucleic Acids Res . 31 , 68 – 71 ( 2003 ) . doi : 10 . 1093 / nar / gkg091 ; pmid : 12519949 5 . M . Magrane , U . Consortium , UniProt Knowledgebase : A hub of integrated protein data . Database ( Oxford ) 2011 , bar009 ( 2011 ) . doi : 10 . 1093 / database / bar009 ; pmid : 21447597 6 . P . Gaudet et al . , neXtProt : Organizing protein knowledge in the context of human proteome projects . J . Proteome Res . 12 , 293 – 298 ( 2013 ) . doi : 10 . 1021 / pr300830v ; pmid : 23205526 7 . I . Dunham et al . , An integrated encyclopedia of DNA elements in the human genome . Nature 489 , 57 – 74 ( 2012 ) . doi : 10 . 1038 / nature11247 ; pmid : 22955616 8 . Y . K . Paik et al . , The Chromosome - Centric Human Proteome Project for cataloging proteins encoded in the genome . Nat . Biotechnol . 30 , 221 – 223 ( 2012 ) . doi : 10 . 1038 / nbt . 2152 ; pmid : 22398612 9 . M . Wilhelm et al . , Mass - spectrometry - based draft of the human proteome . Nature 509 , 582 – 587 ( 2014 ) . pmid : 24870543 10 . M . S . Kim et al . , A draft map of the human proteome . Nature 509 , 575 – 581 ( 2014 ) . doi : 10 . 1038 / nature13302 ; pmid : 24870542 11 . M . Mann , Functional and quantitative proteomics using SILAC . Nat . Rev . Molec . Cell Biol . 7 , 952 – 958 ( 2006 ) . doi : 10 . 1038 / nrm2067 ; pmid : 17139335 12 . I . Ezkurdia et al . , Multiple evidence strands suggest that there may be as few as 19 , 000 human protein - coding genes . Hum . Mol . Genet . 23 , 5866 – 5878 ( 2014 ) . doi : 10 . 1093 / hmg / ddu309 ; pmid : 24939910 13 . V . Lange , P . Picotti , B . Domon , R . Aebersold , Selected reaction monitoring for quantitative proteomics : A tutorial . Mol . Syst . Biol . 4 , 222 ( 2008 ) . doi : 10 . 1038 / msb . 2008 . 61 ; pmid : 18854821 14 . M . Uhlen et al . , Towards a knowledge - based Human Protein Atlas . Nat . Biotechnol . 28 , 1248 – 1250 ( 2010 ) . doi : 10 . 1038 / nbt1210 - 1248 ; pmid : 21139605 15 . L . Fagerberg et al . , Analysis of the human tissue - specific expression by genome - wide integration of transcriptomics and antibody - based proteomics . Mol . Cell . Proteomics 13 , 397 – 406 ( 2014 ) . doi : 10 . 1074 / mcp . M113 . 035600 ; pmid : 24309898 16 . C . Kampf et al . , The human liver - specific proteome defined by transcriptomics and antibody - based profiling . FASEB J . 28 , 2901 – 2914 ( 2014 ) . doi : 10 . 1096 / fj . 14 - 250555 ; pmid : 24648543 17 . D . Djureinovic et al . , The human testis - specific proteome defined by transcriptomics and antibody - based profiling . Mol . Hum . Reprod . 20 , 476 – 488 ( 2014 ) . doi : 10 . 1093 / molehr / gau018 ; pmid : 24598113 18 . G . Gremel et al . , The human gastrointestinal tract - specific transcriptome and proteome as defined by RNA sequencing and antibody - based profiling . J . Gastroenterol . 50 , 46 – 57 ( 2014 ) . doi : 10 . 1007 / s00535 - 014 - 0958 - 7 ; pmid : 24789573 19 . V . Law et al . , DrugBank 4 . 0 : Shedding new light on drug metabolism . Nucleic Acids Res . 42 ( D1 ) , D1091 – D1097 ( 2014 ) . doi : 10 . 1093 / nar / gkt1068 ; pmid : 24203711 20 . COSMIC catalogue of somatic mutations in cancer ( 2014 ) ; http : / / cancer . sanger . ac . uk / cancergenome / projects / census . 21 . E . Lundberg et al . , Defining the transcriptome and proteome in three functionally different human cell lines . Mol . Syst . Biol . 6 , 450 ( 2010 ) . doi : 10 . 1038 / msb . 2010 . 106 ; pmid : 21179022 22 . Y . Taniguchi et al . , Quantifying E . coli proteome and transcriptome with single - molecule sensitivity in single cells . Science 329 , 533 – 538 ( 2010 ) . doi : 10 . 1126 / science . 1188308 ; pmid : 20671182 23 . T . N . Petersen , S . Brunak , G . von Heijne , H . Nielsen , SignalP 4 . 0 : Discriminating signal peptides from transmembrane regions . Nat . Methods 8 , 785 – 786 ( 2011 ) . doi : 10 . 1038 / nmeth . 1701 ; pmid : 21959131 24 . L . Käll , A . Krogh , E . L . Sonnhammer , Advantages of combined transmembrane topology and signal peptide prediction — the Phobius web server . Nucleic Acids Res . 35 ( Web server ) , W429 – W432 ( 2007 ) . doi : 10 . 1093 / nar / gkm256 ; pmid : 17483518 25 . H . Viklund , A . Bernsel , M . Skwark , A . Elofsson , SPOCTOPUS : A combined predictor of signal peptides and membrane protein topology . Bioinformatics 24 , 2928 – 2929 ( 2008 ) . doi : 10 . 1093 / bioinformatics / btn550 ; pmid : 18945683 26 . D . Ramsköld , E . T . Wang , C . B . Burge , R . Sandberg , An abundance of ubiquitously expressed genes revealed by tissue transcriptome sequence data . PLOS Comput . Biol . 5 , e1000598 ( 2009 ) . doi : 10 . 1371 / journal . pcbi . 1000598 ; pmid : 20011106 27 . E . Wingender , T . Schoeps , J . Dönitz , TFClass : An expandable hierarchical classification of human transcription factors . Nucleic Acids Res . 41 ( D1 ) , D165 – D170 ( 2013 ) . 28 . D . Tamborero et al . , Comprehensive identification of mutational cancer driver genes across 12 tumor types . Sci . Rep . 3 , 2650 ( 2013 ) . pmid : 24084849 29 . D . M . Muzny et al . , Comprehensive molecular characterization of human colon and rectal cancer . Nature 487 , 330 – 337 ( 2012 ) . doi : 10 . 1038 / nature11252 ; pmid : 22810696 30 . C . S . Grasso et al . , The mutational landscape of lethal castration - resistant prostate cancer . Nature 487 , 239 – 243 ( 2012 ) . doi : 10 . 1038 / nature11125 ; pmid : 22722839 31 . F . Danielsson et al . , RNA deep sequencing as a tool for selection of cell lines for systematic subcellular localization of all human proteins . J . Proteome Res . 12 , 299 – 307 ( 2013 ) . doi : 10 . 1021 / pr3009308 ; pmid : 23227862 32 . M . Schnabel et al . , Dedifferentiation - associated changes in morphology and gene expression in primary human articular chondrocytes in cell culture . Osteoarthritis Cartilage 10 , 62 – 70 ( 2002 ) . doi : 10 . 1053 / joca . 2001 . 0482 ; pmid : 11795984 33 . E . Birney et al . , Identification and analysis of functional elements in 1 % of the human genome by the ENCODE pilot project . Nature 447 , 799 – 816 ( 2007 ) . doi : 10 . 1038 / nature05874 ; pmid : 17571346 34 . M . Gonzàlez - Porta , A . Frankish , J . Rung , J . Harrow , A . Brazma , Transcriptome analysis of human tissues and cell lines reveals one dominant transcript per gene . Genome Biol . 14 , R70 ( 2013 ) . doi : 10 . 1186 / gb - 2013 - 14 - 7 - r70 ; pmid : 23815980 35 . A . Mardinoglu , J . Nielsen , Systems medicine and metabolic modelling . J . Intern . Med . 271 , 142 – 154 ( 2012 ) . doi : 10 . 1111 / j . 1365 - 2796 . 2011 . 02493 . x ; pmid : 22142312 36 . A . Mardinoglu et al . , Genome - scale metabolic modelling of hepatocytes reveals serine deficiency in patients with non - alcoholic fatty liver disease . Nat . Commun . 5 , 3083 ( 2014 ) . doi : 10 . 1038 / ncomms4083 ; pmid : 24419221 37 . R . Agren et al . , Identification of anticancer drugs for hepatocellular carcinoma through personalized genome - scale metabolic modeling . Mol . Syst . Biol . 10 , 721 ( 2014 ) . doi : 10 . 1002 / msb . 145122 ; pmid : 24646661 38 . Human Metabolic Atlas ( 2014 ) ; www . metabolicatlas . org / . 39 . L . C . Crosswell , J . M . Thornton , ELIXIR : A distributed infrastructure for European biological data . Trends Biotechnol . 30 , 241 – 242 ( 2012 ) . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . tibtech . 2012 . 02 . 002 ; pmid : 22417641 40 . J . F . Rual et al . , Towards a proteome - scale map of the human protein - protein interaction network . Nature 437 , 1173 – 1178 ( 2005 ) . ACKNOWLEDGMENTS We acknowledge the entire staff of the Human Protein Atlas program ; the Science for Life Laboratory ; and the pathology team in Mumbai , India , for valuable contributions . We thank the Department of Pathology at the Uppsala Akademiska Hospital , Uppsala , Sweden , and Uppsala Biobank for kindly providing clinical diagnostics and specimens used in this study . We also acknowledge support from Science for Life Laboratory , the National Genomics Infrastructure ( NGI ) , and Uppmax for providing assistance in massive parallel sequencing and computational infrastructure . Funding was provided by the Knut and Alice Wallenberg Foundation . The authors declare that they have no conflict of interest . Correspondence and requests for materials should be addressed to M . U . The mRNA levels of all genes in each tissue sample ( n = 122 ) are available in table S18 . The supplementary Excel tables are available in the supplementary material and at www . proteinatlas . org / about / publicationdata . The raw sequencing data are available at ArrayExpress ( www . ebi . ac . uk / arrayexpress / experiments / E - MTAB - 2836 / ) and BioProject ( NIH ) ( www . ncbi . nlm . nih . gov / bioproject / PRJNA183192 ) . All Protein Atlas ( protein ) data are available in structured XML format and can be downloaded from www . proteinatlas . org / about / download . SUPPLEMENTARY MATERIALS www . sciencemag . org / content / 347 / 6220 / 1260419 / suppl / DC1 Materials and Methods Figs . S1 to S8 Tables S1 to S18 References ( 41 – 61 ) 25 August 2014 ; accepted 5 December 2014 10 . 1126 / science . 1260419 SCIENCE sciencemag . org 23 JANUARY 2015 (cid:127) VOL 347 ISSUE 6220 1260419 - 9 RESEARCH | RESEARCH ARTICLE