Membrane Tension Maintains Cell Polarity by Conﬁning Signals to the Leading Edge during Neutrophil Migration Andrew R . Houk , 1 Alexandra Jilkine , 2 , 6 Cecile O . Mejean , 3 Rostislav Boltyanskiy , 4 Eric R . Dufresne , 3 Sigurd B . Angenent , 5 Steven J . Altschuler , 2 Lani F . Wu , 2 and Orion D . Weiner 1 , * 1 Cardiovascular Research Institute and Department of Biochemistry , University of California San Francisco , San Francisco , CA 94143 , USA 2 Green Center for Systems Biology and Department of Pharmacology , University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center , Dallas , TX 75390 , USA 3 Department of Mechanical Engineering and Material Science 4 Department of Physics Yale University , New Haven , CT 06520 , USA 5 Department of Mathematics , University of Wisconsin , Madison , WI 53706 , USA 6 Present address : Department of Molecular and Cellular Biology , University of Arizona , Tucson , AZ 85721 , USA * Correspondence : orion . weiner @ ucsf . edu DOI 10 . 1016 / j . cell . 2011 . 10 . 050 SUMMARY Little is known about how neutrophils and other cells establish a single zone of actin assembly during migration . A widespread assumption is that the leading edge prevents formation of additional fronts by generating long - range diffusible inhibitors or by sequestering essential polarity components . We use morphological perturbations , cell - severing ex - periments , and computational simulations to show that diffusion - based mechanisms are not sufﬁcient for long - range inhibition by the pseudopod . Instead , plasma membrane tension could serve as a long - range inhibitor in neutrophils . We ﬁnd that membrane tension doubles during leading - edge protrusion , and increasing tension is sufﬁcient for long - range inhibi - tion of actin assembly and Rac activation . Further - more , reducing membrane tension causes uniform actin assembly . We suggest that tension , rather than diffusible molecules generated or sequestered at the leading edge , is the dominant source of long - range inhibition that constrains the spread of the existing front and prevents the formation of secondary fronts . INTRODUCTION The ability of cells to generate polarized distributions of signaling molecules enables numerous biological processes including asymmetric cell division , neurite speciﬁcation , tissue formation , and cell motility . The Rac GTPase drives actin polymerization and protrusion at the leading edge in a wide range of migrating cells ( Ridley et al . , 1992 ; Sun et al . , 2004 ) . Efﬁcient migration requires conﬁning Rac activity to the leading edge : spatially uniform Rac activation abolishes movement ( Allen et al . , 1998 ; Inoue and Meyer , 2008 ; Srinivasan et al . , 2003 ) . In neutrophils , Rac activity is highly polarized both in response to external gradients and in the presence of uniform chemoat - tractant ( Gardiner et al . , 2002 ; Weiner et al . , 2007 ) . Linked posi - tive and negative feedback loops are thought to enable many cell types to polarize during chemotaxis or random migration ( Jilkine and Edelstein - Keshet , 2011 ; Meinhardt , 1999 ; Neilson et al . , 2011 ; Turing , 1952 ; Xiong et al . , 2010 ) . Positive feedback ampliﬁes small , transient ﬂuctuations into large , temporally per - sistent asymmetries . GTPase and / or phosphoinositide - based positive feedback loops have been implicated in the polarization of neutrophils ( Inoue and Meyer , 2008 ; Weiner et al . , 2002 , 2006 ) , neurons ( Fivaz et al . , 2008 ) , Dictyostelium ( Sasaki et al . , 2004 ) , and budding yeast ( Butty et al . , 2002 ; Wedlich - Soldner et al . , 2003 ) . Positive feedback loops require a balancing mechanism of inhibition to prevent them from overtaking the entire cell . The positive feedback reaction can limit itself by generating long - range inhibition , which constrains the spread of the existing front and prevents the formation of secondary fronts . The inhibi - tion is thought to arise either from the production of rapidly diffusing inhibitory molecules by the front ( Figure 1A ) or from the sequestration of limiting polarity components by the front ( Figure 1B ) . These mechanisms of long - range inhibition depend on rapid diffusion of signaling components through the cytosol . In contrast to the components that participate in the positive feedback loops at the leading edge , the molecules responsible for long - range inhibition are unknown . It has not even been experimentally determined whether this inhibition is a diffusion - based process . Signaling - centered positive and negative feedback loops are not the only potential mechanisms of polarization . A model consisting entirely of mechanical interactions between the actin cytoskeleton , myosin , and plasma membrane accurately pre - dicts the polarized morphologies of keratocytes ( Kozlov and Mo - gilner , 2007 ) as well as the relation between cell shape and speed ( Keren et al . , 2008 ) without considering upstream signals . This model is insufﬁcient to explain neutrophil polarity because cytoskeletal polarization and migration require Rac to be Cell 148 , 175 – 188 , January 20 , 2012 ª 2012 Elsevier Inc . 175 polarized ( Inoue and Meyer , 2008 ; Srinivasan et al . , 2003 ) . Thus , for force to play a dominant role in neutrophil polarity , it must participate in the spatial patterning of signaling cascades , for example by acting as a long - range inhibitor of Rac activation ( Figure 1C ) . A signiﬁcant challenge in discriminating between the many classes of models for cell polarity is that many of the underlying positive and negative feedback components have notbeen iden - tiﬁed , and even for the known components , the key biophysical parameters are unknown . We performed experiments that discriminate between models of long - range inhibition without requiring detailed knowledge of the underlying molecular com - ponents . We used morphological perturbations and cell severing to push neutrophils into situations where existing diffusion - based long - range inhibition models break down , as veriﬁed by computational simulations . Mechanical tension is one mode of Diffusible Inhibitor A I Membrane Cytosol A S Membrane Cytosol Limiting component Position C on c en t r a t i on Position C on c en t r a t i on Mechanical tension A T Membrane Cytosol Position C on c en t r a t i on A B C Figure1 . ConceptualMechanismsforLong - Range Inhibition ( A ) Diffusible inhibitor . An autocatalytic activator ( A , green ) produces an inhibitory molecule ( I , red ) that diffuses throughout the cytoplasm to act as a long - range inhibitor of leading - edge formation . ( B ) Limiting component . An autocatalytic activator in the front inhibits activation elsewhere by consuming essential substrates ( S , gold ) of the positive feedback loop , rather than generating a diffusible inhibitor ( as in A ) . ( C ) Mechanical tension . Protrusion at the leading edge generates mechanical tension ( T , depicted as red springs ) in either the plasma membrane or the underlying cyto - skeleton . This tension acts as a long - range inhibitor of protrusion . long - range inhibition that could explain our observations on stretched and severed cells . Consistent with this hypothesis , we ﬁnd that membrane tension nearly doubles during leading - edge protrusion , tension increases suf - ﬁce for long - range inhibition of Rac activation , and reducing membrane tension activates actin assembly throughout the cell . Our data suggest that long - range inhibition is not solely based on diffusible molecules generated or sequestered at the leading edge ( as has been widely assumed ) but rather requires protrusion - based increases in plasma membrane tension to con - strain the spread of the existing front and prevent the formation of secondary fronts . RESULTS Distinguishing between Neutrophil Polarity Mechanisms with Cell Stretching and Severing We sought to distinguish between long - range inhibition mechanisms without requiring a detailed knowledge of the molecular players involved in the process . Due to their widely proposed roles in developmental patterning ( Gierer and Meinhardt , 1972 ; Nakamura et al . , 2006 ; Sick et al . , 2006 ; Turing , 1952 ) , diffusion - basedsystemsarethemostpopular of the numerous hypothetical inhibition mechanisms in polarizing cells ( Jilkine and Edelstein - Keshet , 2011 ) . These usually involve a positive feedback reaction that either produces inhibitory mole - cules ( Figure 1A ) or depletes essential polarity components ( Fig - ure 1B ) . Importantly , to generate cell polarity , the inhibitory mole - cules or limiting components must diffuse more rapidly than the products of the positive feedback reactions . These models were typically developed for cells with spherical morphologies or assumed a one - dimensional ( 1D ) spatial geometry to denote the ‘‘front - back’’ axis . To test whether existing mathematical models are consistent with cell behavior , we devised novel experimental settings in which cellular morphologies attenuate diffusion . If long - range inhibition depends on diffusion , then we can interfere with it by creating a thin neck between the pseudopod 176 Cell 148 , 175 – 188 , January 20 , 2012 ª 2012 Elsevier Inc . and the rest of the cell . In contrast , tension - based inhibition should still function in this context . Following brief heat shock in the presence of uniform chemoattractant , neutrophils adopt a stretched , growth - cone - like morphology ( Malawista and De Boisﬂeury Chevance , 1982 ) ( Figure 2A ) . Despite this altered morphology , a single zone of actin assembly ( tethered pseu - dopod ) is observed with the cell body remaining inactive in 91 % of these cells during the 250 s period of observation ( n = 31 ; Figure 2B ; Movie S1 available online ) . The inactivity of the cell body is remarkable given that its communication with the pseudopod is restricted by a tether that is typically 1 micron in diameter and 25 microns long . We simulated how three classes of diffusion - based polarity models responded in a tethered morphology : Turing ( Otsuji et al . , 2007 ) , wave - pinning ( WP ) ( Mori et al . , 2008 ) , and neutral drift ( Altschuler et al . , 2008 ; Jilkine et al . , 2011 ) . These models are conceptual , rolling many as - yet poorly characterized details of the polarity network into generic mechanisms of interaction and feedback . They share several common properties , namely the following : the total amount of molecules is assumed to be constant during the observed duration of polarization ; molecules transition between two states , either at the membrane ( active ) or at the cytosol ( inactive ) ; and diffusion on the membrane is much slower than in the cytosol . In our simulations , recruitment of molecules to the membrane is autocatalytic and ultimately con - strained by depletion of the cytoplasmic species . All three models predict that the cell body will remain inactive despite the tethered morphology ( Figure 2C , left panels ; Figure S1 ) . This either could reﬂect ongoing long - range inhibition of the cell body by the pseudopod or could be a consequence of deple - tion that occurred prior to tether formation and persisted indeﬁ - nitely due to the lack of resynthesis of limiting components . To distinguish between these possibilities , we analyzed the behavior of the models when the cell body is severed from the pseudopod ( Figure 2C , right panels ; Figure S1 ) . All three models predict that the cell body remains inactive despite being discon - nected from the pseudopod . Thus the inactivity of the cell body is not due to ongoing inhibition from the pseudopod . If it were , the cell body would have reanimated upon pseudopod removal . All of the long - range inhibition mechanisms under consider - ation make strong predictions about the behavior of the cell body after it is severed from the pseudopod ( Figure 3A ) . Diffu - sion - based competition for a ﬁxed pool of molecules ( limiting component ) predicts that the cell body will remain inactive after pseudopod removal unless the limiting component is rapidly resynthesized . Similarly , if diffusible inhibitory molecules are responsible for long - range inhibition , then the cell body will also remain inactive unless the inhibitory molecules have a short lifetime . Both diffusion - based inhibition mechanisms predict that the cell body will remain inactive after severing unless the resyn - thesis / turnover rate is high . In contrast , a tension - based inhibi - tion mechanism would allow the cell body to reanimate because the cell could relax into a reduced - tension morphology after severing . Thus , severing experiments discriminate between current long - range inhibition mechanisms . The tethered morphology enabled us to cut the tether with a focused laser beam without destroying either the cell body or the pseudopod . We ﬁnd that the cell body becomes highly protrusive within 70 s of pseudopod removal in 47 % of the cells ( n = 36 ; Figure 3B ; Movie S2 ) . Two sets of controls demonstrate that the reanimation of the cell body is not due to laser - induced generation of chemoattractant . Using cells containing a sensitive readout of actin assembly ( SCAR / WAVE complex recruitment ; Weiner et al . , 2007 ) , we observed activation of adjacent cells upon cell destruction with lasers but no detectable response following tether severing ( Figure S2 ) . We also studied sponta - neous cleavage of tethers , which occurs at a low frequency in the absence of laser cutting . Similar to laser - based severing , spontaneous cleavage of the tether also resulted in reanimation of the cell body within 1 min of severing in 26 % of the cells ( n = 64 ; Figure 3C ; Movie S2 ) . Rapid reanimation of the cell body after severing is inconsistent with an inhibition mechanism involving slowly resynthesized limiting components . Our experi - ments suggest that the pseudopod continuously inhibits the cell body by either sequestering rapidly synthesized limiting compo - nents , producing short - lived diffusible inhibitory molecules , or generating mechanical tension . Tethered Morphologies Dramatically Attenuate Diffusion - Based Exchange between Pseudopod and Cell Body We reasoned that the tether should severely attenuate diffu - sion - based communication between the pseudopod and cell body . We used ﬂuorescence recovery after photobleaching ( FRAP ) to experimentally determine the mixing rate between the pseudopod and the cell body ( Figure 4 ) . We ﬁrst measured the rate of recovery following GFP photobleaching in the cell bodies of tethered cells ( Figure 4B ; Movie S3 ) . To control for reversible bleaching and new GFP synthesis , we also per - formed photobleaching experiments in cells that lacked a teth - ered pseudopod ( Figure S3 ) . We subtracted the recovery rate due to reversible bleaching from the overall recovery rate for tethered cells to determine the amount of recovery that was due to diffusion of GFP from the pseudopod through the tether ( Figures 4B and S3 ) . Our data demonstrate that the tethered morphology slows down the exchange of GFP between pseu - dopod and cell body by approximately 840 - fold ( n = 24 , Fig - ure 4C ) compared to untethered cells . The experimentally determined mixing rates correlate very well with our computa - tionally predicted mixing rates for measured cell tether lengths and diameters ( R 2 = 0 . 8 , Figure 4D ; Extended Experimental Procedures ) . We investigated whether inclusion of synthesis and degrada - tion of the limiting component could enable this mechanism to replicate our experimental observations in tethered and severed cells . We chose to analyze the limiting component in the context of the neutral drift model because it is the most analytically trac - table . For the cell body to reanimate within 35 s of severing , the limiting component must be resynthesized at a rate of at least 6 particles / s ( Extended Experimental Procedures ) . For the cell body to remain quiescent in the tethered state in the absence of severing , resynthesis must be balanced by loss through the tether . Because the tethered morphology dramatically reduces the rate at which molecules diffuse from the cell body to the pseudopod , the limiting component would require a diffusion coefﬁcient of 330 m m 2 / s to maintain quiescence of the cell Cell 148 , 175 – 188 , January 20 , 2012 ª 2012 Elsevier Inc . 177 Early Late 0 s 60 s 120 s 180 s * * Tether formation in heat - treated HL - 60 cells Maintenance of polarity in tethered HL - 60 cells Simulation of published diffusion - based inhibition models following cell stretching and severing perturbations 0 s 20 s 40 s 60 s 80 s 100 s 120 s Concentrationof active species Low High Wave Pinning Model Tethered geometry Severing Turing Model Tethered geometry Severing Neutral Drift Model D mix > 0 Tethered geometry Severing D mix = 0 A B C Figure 2 . Maintenance of Polarity in Tethered Cells ( A ) Tether formation in heat - treated HL - 60 cells . The cell initially forms a pseudopod ( black arrowhead ) . The pseudopod crawls away from the ﬁxed cell body , causing a tether ( white arrowhead ) to form between them . The scale bar is 5 microns . ( B ) Maintenance of polarity in tethered HL - 60 cells . Left : The cell body ( black arrow ) remains completely ﬁxed as the pseudopod ( black arrowhead ) migrates asigniﬁcantdistance . The asterisk intheﬁrstframe denotes aneighboring cellthat lacks atether . Right : Celloutlines fromsuccessive timepoints aredepicted in blue , green , orange , and red , respectively . The morphology of the cell body stays constant over the 250 sobservationtime in 91 % of the uncut cells ( n = 27 ) . The scale bar is 5 microns . ( C ) Simulation of published diffusion - based inhibition models following cell stretching and severing perturbations . The top , middle , and bottom panels depict simulation results of a WP model ( top ) , Turing model ( middle ) , and neutral drift model ( bottom ) following cell stretching or severing . The concentration of the activator species ( u ) is represented as grayscale with black being the highest concentration . In the left panels , spherical or cylindrical cells were allowed to develop polarized signals . We simulated the subsequent time evolution of this polarized signaling distribution in cells that were stretched into dumb - bell geometries , similar to our experimental tethers . In the right panels , the signals in spherical or cylindrical cells were polarized as before . We simulated the time evolutionofthesignalsincellsthatwereseveredinto twoequalhalves . Steady - state distributions ofmembrane - bound activators forallthreemodels areshown . See also Figure S1 and Movie S1 . 178 Cell 148 , 175 – 188 , January 20 , 2012 ª 2012 Elsevier Inc . body ( Extended Experimental Procedures ) . This diffusion rate is an order of magnitude larger than those reported for cytosolic proteins ( Swaminathan et al . , 1997 ) and approximately 2 - fold greater than that for metabolites in the cytoplasm ( Garcı´a - Pe´rez et al . , 1999 ) . Similar constraints make a diffusible inhibitor emanating from the pseudopod unlikely because the inhibitor requires a short lifetime to enable rapid reanimation from the cell body following severing , but such a short - lived inhibitor cannot survive the slow journey through the tether to prevent cell body activity in the tethered morphology . C Pseudopod production after spontaneous tether cleavage * * - 20s * * 0s * * 20s * * - 40s * * 40s * * 60s * * 80s * * 100s * * 120s * * 140s B Pseudopod production after laser severing - 20s 0s 20s 40s 60s 80s 100s 120s 140s - 40s A Outline of Severing Experiments Diffusion - based inhibition without resynthesis Diffusion - based inhibition with resynthesis Mechanical Tension Sever cell ? Figure 3 . Cells Generate a New Pseudopod after Severing ( A ) Outline of severing experiments . Following cell polarization , the pseudopod is removed , and the behavior of the cell body is observed . If the pseudopod had sequesteredanonregeneratinglimitingcomponentrequiredforpolarization , thecellbodyshouldnothavethematerialtoreanimate . Reanimationofthecellbody following severing of the pseudopod would be consistent with a short - lived inhibitor generated at the leading edge . This short - lived inhibitor could be due to mechanical tension , a rapidly synthesized limiting component , or a diffusible inhibitor with a short half - life . ( B ) Pseudopodproductionafterlasersevering . DICimagesshowingatetheredHL - 60cellthatisseveredwithalaserbeamjustbefore0s . Followingsevering , the previouslyquiescentcellbodygeneratesanewpseudopod ( whitearrowhead ) . Thecellbodymakesapseudopodafterseveringin47 % ofcells ( n = 36 ) . Thescale bar is 2 . 5 microns . ( C ) Pseudopod production after spontaneous tether cleavage . Phase images of a cell whose pseudopod ( black arrowhead ) spontaneously breaks free from the cell body ( black arrow ) at 0 s . The cell body makes a new pseudopod within 50 s of severing ( white arrowhead ) and begins to migrate . The asterisks denote neighboring cells . There is signiﬁcant reanimation of the cell body following spontaneous tether cleavage in 26 % of cells ( n = 62 ) . The scale bar is 10 microns . See also Figure S2 and Movie S2 . Cell 148 , 175 – 188 , January 20 , 2012 ª 2012 Elsevier Inc . 179 In summary , the reanimation of the cell body after severing demonstrates that the pseudopod actively inhibits protrusions elsewhere . However , our FRAP experiments on tethered cells indicate that diffusion is too highly attenuated for efﬁcient diffu - sion - based long - range inhibition . Even with resynthesis , the neutral drift model requires the limiting component to diffuse at Bleach Diffusion - based Exchange Tether Retraction Complete Mixing Outline of FRAP experiment Typical FRAP profile for a tethered cell Time ( s ) N o r m a li z ed R e c o v e r y 1 0 . 8 0 . 6 0 . 4 0 . 2 0 0 50 100 150 200 250 Tether retraction Pre 0s 90s 200s 160s 0 1 0 . 25 0 . 75 0 . 5 0 % 2 . 5 % 5 % Overlaid FRAP profiles for tethered cells Time ( sec ) P e r c en t R e c o v e r y Predicted vs . measured mixing rates between pseudopod and cell body for tethered cells Predicted D mix ( sec - 1 ) O b s e r v ed D m i x ( s e c - 1 ) 0 . 001 0 . 01 0 . 1 0 . 01 0 . 1 A B C D Figure 4 . The Tethered Morphology Dramatically Attenuates Diffusion ( A ) Outline of FRAP experiment . A GFP - expressing HL - 60 cell is heated to generate a tethered pseudopod . We bleached the GFP in the cell body , and the recovery in the cell body was measured to monitor diffusion - based mixing through the tether . Retraction of the pseudopod causes the contents of the cell body and the pseudopod to mix completely . ( B ) Typical FRAP proﬁle for a tethered cell . The graph shows the normalized ﬂuorescence recoverydue todiffusion for the cell whose GFP ﬂuorescenceis shown intheinsetimages ( withcelloutlines inyellow ) . There isslowlinearrecoveryuntil160s , whenthetetheredpseudopodretracts , andtheGFP fromthepseudopod rapidly mixes with the cell body . ( C ) OverlaidFRAP proﬁlesfor tethered cells . Themeasured ﬂuorescence recoveries for all ofthetethered cellsduringtheﬁrst secondafterbleachingare overlaid in red . The expected initial ﬂuorescence recovery for a nontethered spherical cell ( mixing rate constant = 1 . 2 / s ) is shown in blue . ( D ) Predicted versus measured mixing rates between pseudopod and cell body for tethered cells . Each black dot represents the diffusion - based mixing rate constant for an individual photobleached cell . The y coordinate for each cell is the experimentally measured mixing rate constant ( D mix , obs ) . The x coordinate for each cell is the predicted mixing rate constant using the formula : D mix ; pred = D GFP = V tether = L 2 V cell , where D mix , pred is the predicted mixing rate constant ; D GFP is the known diffusion coefﬁcient of GFP in cytoplasm ( 27 m m 2 / s ; Swaminathan et al . , 1997 ) ; L is the tether length ; and V cell and V tether are the volumes of the cell and the tether , respectively . The values L , V cell , and V tether were measured for each cell from bright - ﬁeld images . The predicted mixing rates correlate with the measured values ( R 2 = 0 . 8 , n = 24 , red line is y = x ) . The tethered geometry reduces mixing rate by 134 - to 4472 - fold for all of the cells in the experiment . See also Figure S3 and Movie S3 . 180 Cell 148 , 175 – 188 , January 20 , 2012 ª 2012 Elsevier Inc . a rate that is over an order of magnitude larger than with cyto - plasmic proteins . In fact , the necessary diffusion coefﬁcient is comparable to that of water itself . Our data are inconsistent with long - range inhibition mechanisms based solely on diffusion . The leading edge must inhibit activation of the cell body through more rapid modes of communication such as active transport , propagating waves , or mechanical forces . Membrane Tension Increases during Cellular Protrusion Because mechanical propagation of information ( such as tension ) and diffusion - based communication do not share the same geometrical limitations , we hypothesized that pseudopod protrusion could generate tension in the plasma membrane that rapidly propagates to inhibit protrusive activity in the rest of the cell . This hypothesis requires tension to increase during polariza - tion . Consistent with this hypothesis , aspiration experiments on suspended neutrophils have shown that the cellular cortical tension increases during polarization ( Zhelev et al . , 1996 ) . However , it is unknown whether the cortical tension represents tension in the cytoskeleton , plasma membrane , or both ( Hoch - muth , 2000 ) . We used optical traps ( Dai and Sheetz , 1999 ) to measure plasma membrane tension during chemoattractant - stimulated polarization ( Figure 5 ; Movie S4 ) . Addition of chemoattractant caused a signiﬁcant increase in cell protrusion accompanied by a signiﬁcant increase in mem - brane tension ( n = 8 , Figures 5B and 5C , p = 0 . 0006 ; Movie S4 ) . On average , the pulling force nearly doubled ( from 8 . 5 to 16 . 6 pN ) during protrusion ( Figure 5D ) in a manner that closely correlated with cell spreading ( Figure 5B , inset ) . We suggest that cellular protrusion is responsible for the signiﬁcant ( roughly 4 - fold ) increase in plasma membrane tension . The pulling force was not a response to the mechanical forces associated with ﬂuid exchange ( n = 8 ; Figure 5C ) . Pretreatment with blebbistatin , which causes a highly elongated morphology , also causes basal membrane tension to increase ( Figure S4 ) . Cellular Deformation Induces Long - Range Inhibition of Protrusion Signals If tension is a long - range inhibitor of protrusion and leading - edge signaling , then increases in cell tension ( even when they are not a result of pseudopod generation ) should inhibit protrusion and leading - edge signals throughout the cell . To test this hypothesis , we used micropipette aspiration to mimic the mechanical in - creases in tension that accompany protrusion ( Herant et al . , 2005 ) . This perturbation likely increases tension in both the cyto - skeleton and plasma membrane when performed on migrating neutrophils . We used total internal reﬂection ﬂuorescence ( TIRF ) - based imaging readouts of Rac activity and SCAR / WAVE complex recruitment to assay the effects of tension increases on cell morphology as well as leading - edge signals . Rac and the SCAR / WAVE complex localize to the leading edge of neutro - philsandare essential for actin assembly in thesecells ( Sun et al . , 2004 ; Weiner et al . , 2006 ) . We brought a micropipette into contact with the cell surface and applied suction to cause the cell to bulge into the micro - pipette , thereby increasing cell tension ( Figure 6A ) . Within seconds , this mechanical deformation inhibited leading - edge protrusion . Following aspiration , the pseudopod retracts into the cell body , leading to a signiﬁcant reduction in spread area ( Figure 6B ; Movie S5 ) . Aspiration also inhibited SCAR / WAVE complex recruitment ( Figure 6C ; Movie S5 ) and Rac activation ( Figure 6D ; Movie S5 ) . Aspiration - induced inhibition of protrusion and leading - edge signals was reversible ( Figures 6B and 6D , late time points ; Movie S5 ) . Thus , inhibition was not due to trivial reasons such as irreversible cell damage following aspiration . We also moni - tored plasma membrane integrity during aspiration with cyto - plasmic dyes . We did not detect leakage of cytosolic GFP or the entrance of extracellular rhodamine phalloidin , indicating that our aspirations left the plasma membrane intact ( Fig - ure S5 ) . Thus , mechanical tension sufﬁces to act as a long - range inhibitor of protrusion and leading - edge signals in migrating neutrophils . Membrane Tension Restricts Signals to the Front of Migrating Neutrophils Our aspiration data show that tension increases are sufﬁcient for long - range inhibition of protrusion , but two important questions remain . First , does the cell require tension to spatially conﬁne signals to the front ? Second , which structures transmit the inhib - itory tension : cytoskeleton , plasma membrane , or both ? To answer these questions we monitored leading - edge signaling while reducing membrane tension with hypertonic buffers ( Keren , 2011 ) or cytoskeletal tension with myosin inhibition ( Lee et al . , 2011 ; Pasternak et al . , 1989 ) . Treating neutrophils with the myosin inhibitor blebbistatin causes cytoskeletal tension to decrease ( Lee et al . , 2011 ) but plasma membrane tension to increase ( Figure S4 ) . Blebbistatin treatment caused cell elonga - tion due to a defect in tail retraction but did not cause an expan - sion of signals beyond the leading edge ( Figures 7A and 7C ) . Elongation often led to reduced SCAR / WAVE complex recruit - ment at later time points ( Figures 7A and 7C ) , possibly because of increased membrane tension . After several minutes of bleb - bistatin treatment , the cells often developed a stellate mor - phology with multiple arm - like projections that appeared to be leading edges . However , close inspection revealed that only one of these projections actively protrudes at a time ( Figure S6 ) ; the others are inanimate husks of previous leading edges that were not retracted after they died . The addition of hypertonic buffer ( 150 mM sucrose ) to blebbistatin - treated cells caused an immediate and spatially uniform accumulation of SCAR / WAVE complex at the plasma membrane and resulted in a loss of cell polarity ( Figures 7B and 7C ; Movie S6 ) , whereas the addition of hypotonic buffer resulted in cell rounding and a disappearance of SCAR / WAVE complex recruitment ( Figure S6 ) . Hypertonic buffer in the absence of blebbistatin also caused SCAR / WAVE complex accumulation , although the effect was smaller ( Figures 7C and S6 ) . At later time points , neutrophils in hypertonic buffer often spread uniformly with wider leading edges and exhibited multiple pseudopodia for long periods of time ( Figure S6 ) . These behaviors are consistent with ectopic leading - edge signaling throughout the cell . Based on the signif - icant expansion of SCAR / WAVE complex recruitment in cells treated with hypertonic buffer but minimal effect of blebbistatin alone , we conclude that membrane tension plays the dominant role in restricting signals to the leading edge . Cell 148 , 175 – 188 , January 20 , 2012 ª 2012 Elsevier Inc . 181 Schematic outline of membrane tension measurement experiment Inactive cell Low Tension Protrusive cell High Tension Low pulling force on bead High pulling force on bead fMLP Inactive cell Low Tension Inactive cell Low Tension Buffer Pulling force over time for individual cells following buffer addition or fMLP stimulation 20 sec 20 p N after buffer after fmlp Pulling force at different stages of the experiment p = 0 . 0001 p = 0 . 0006 Pull1 Hold1 Pull2 Hold2 PreSpread PostSpread 5 10 15 20 25 30 F o r c e ( p N ) Pulling force over time for a representative cell 0 10 20 30 40 50 60 70 80 90 0 5 10 15 20 25 30 100 Tubebreaks AddfMLP Pull membrane tube Extend membrane tube 80 90 0 1 70 Time ( s ) N o r m . C hange Time ( s ) F o r c e ( p N ) Pull 1 Pull 2 Hold 1 Hold 2 Pre - spread Post - spread 4s 8s 20s 60s 70s 84s C A B D 182 Cell 148 , 175 – 188 , January 20 , 2012 ª 2012 Elsevier Inc . DISCUSSION We used microdissection and perturbations of cell morphology to push neutrophils into regimes where existing diffusion - based polarity models break down . Our results support a polarity mech - anisminwhichmembranetensionprovidesalong - rangeinhibitory signalthatrestrictssignalstotheleadingedge . Incontrasttodiffu - sion - based inhibition , tension can effectively propagate through the cell even when the cellular cross - section is small . This ability could be physiologically important as leukocytes frequently have small cross - sections as they crawl through tight spaces in vivo , for example duringtransendothelial migration ( Peters et al . , 2008 ) . We suggest that tension acts as a long - range inhibitor in the following manner . First , pseudopod protrusion increases tension in the plasma membrane ( as we observe with our optical trap measurements in Figure 5 ) . This tension rapidly propagates throughout the cell to act as a long - range inhibitor of leading - edge formation . In support of this hypothesis , increases in tension sufﬁce for long - range inhibition of Rac activation and protrusion ( Figure 6 ) , and decreases in tension expand leading - edge activities ( Figure 7 ) . During cell polarization , tension only becomes signiﬁcant after the front has formed , by which point positive feedback enables the existing front to maintain itself . Furthermore , because the front is the source of tension , any ﬂuc - tuations in front size are immediately balanced by compensatory changes in tension levels . The observation that tension spatially restricts signals such as Rac to the leading edge differentiates our model from purely mechanical ( signaling - independent ) models of polarity . Fortensiontobeaneffectivelong - rangeinhibitor , itmustremain highfortheentiredurationofneutrophilmigration . Ifremodelingof the membrane ( due to exocytosis ) dissipates tension over time , thentheinhibitionshoulddecay , andpolarizationwouldeventually fail . Importantly , others have shown that neutrophil membrane tension remains high long after stimulation ( Shao and Xu , 2002 ) and that persistent deformations cause persistent increases in membrane tension ( Herant et al . , 2005 ) . Resting neutrophils , like many immune cells , have numerous small wrinkles in their plasma membrane that act as a reservoir that doles out plasma membrane as membrane tension increases during cellular defor - mation ( Hallettand Dewitt , 2007 ; Herantetal . , 2005 ) . Because the unfolding of wrinkles is energetically unfavorable yet reversible , membrane tension remains high as the cell tries to restore its wrinkles ( Herant et al . , 2005 ) . Thus , the membrane can transmit long - range inhibitory tension in the neutrophil as in other highly motile cells like keratocytes ( Keren et al . , 2008 ) . Tension Could Collaborate with Diffusion - Based Systems to Guide Migration We have shown that membrane tension restricts protrusion to the leading edge , thereby allowing the neutrophil to polarize and migrate . However , it is likely that other signaling systems align migration with external cues . Latrunculin - treated cells , which cannot polymerize actin and protrude , can still align internal signals such as PIP 3 with external chemoattractant gradients ( Janetopoulos et al . , 2004 ; Servant et al . , 2000 ) . Thus , cells can interpret chemical gradients without protrusion - based increases in tension . However , neutrophils require F - actin to polarize leading - edge signals such as PIP 3 production in response to uniform chemoattractant ( Wang et al . , 2002 ) . Fur - thermore , multiple patches of front signals coexist in latruncu - lin - treated Dictyostelium cells exposed to multiple sources of chemoattractant , whereas a single patch of activity dominates in untreated cells ( Devreotes and Janetopoulos , 2003 ; Janeto - poulos et al . , 2004 ) . Thus , although gradient alignment can occur without actin , important parts of the polarity program ( polarity in response to uniform chemoattractant , single site of polarity in response to multiple cues ) depend on the actin network , possibly reﬂecting the role of tension . Although diffusion - based inhibitors may collaborate with tension for polarity in response to uniform chemoattractant , we suggest that tension is the dominant inhib - itor . Tension canoperate under conditions where diffusive mech - anisms fail ( tethered cells ) , and decreasing tension interferes with the restriction of protrusive signals to the leading edge . Tension Antagonizes Protrusion in Many Cell Types Both cytoskeletal and membrane tension are capable of trans - mitting forces over long range ( Dai and Sheetz , 1999 ; Keren Figure 5 . Membrane Tension Increases during Protrusion ( A ) Schematic outlineof membrane tension measurementexperiment . Thetensionintheplasmamembrane canbemeasured bypullingathintubeof membrane from the cell surface with an adhesive polystyrene bead in an optical trap . Increases in membrane tension result in higher pulling forces on the bead . We hypothesizedthat cell spreading , induced by uniform fMLPaddition , should cause themembrane tension to increase . As acontrol , we ﬂowin buffer , which does not induce spreading and should not increase membrane tension . ( B ) Pullingforceovertimeforarepresentativecell . Forprimaryhumanneutrophils , thetubewasﬁrstpulledtoalengthof (cid:1) 2microns ( pull1 , arrow , lightgreenbar ) andheldtherebrieﬂy ( hold1 , lightbluebar ) . Thetubewasthenextendedtoalengthof (cid:1) 10microns ( pull2 , arrow , darkgreenbar ) andheldthere ( hold2 , darkblue bar ) before fMLP ( arrow ) was ﬂowed in . The colored bars denote the time period over which the forces were averaged for the graph in ( D ) ; these regions were selected to avoid sudden force jumps . Addition of fMLP caused the cell to spread and the pulling force to increase dramatically ( red bar ) . The inset graph shows theincreaseinspreadarea ( green ) andtheincreaseintetherforce ( blue ) , bothofwhichwerenormalizedtothetotalareaorforceincreasethatoccurredduringthe response . Bright - ﬁeldimagesofthecell , withtheoutlinesuperimposedinyellow , areshownbelow . Thetetherposition , determinedwithaﬂuorescentmembrane dye ( DiI ) , is also superimposed in yellow . The scale bar is 5 microns . ( C ) PullingforceovertimeforindividualcellsfollowingbufferadditionorfMLPstimulation . Theleftpanelshowstheforcetracesoftubesheldatconstantlengthas bufferisﬂowedthroughthechambertocontrolfortheeffectsofﬂowontheforcemeasurements . Therightpanelshowstheforcetracesoftubesheldatconstant length as the cells were stimulated by ﬂowing fMLP through the chamber . In both panels , ﬂow begins at the beginning of each trace . ( D ) Pullingforceatdifferentstagesoftheexperiment . Thegraphshowstheforcesatdifferenttimesduringtheexperiment ( denotedbythecoloredbarsinB ) forthe eightfMLP - stimulatedcellsdepictedin ( C ) . Eachblackdotrepresentstheforcemeasurementofanindividualcell . Thelargeandsmallmaroonbarsindicatemean force values and standard errors , respectively . After fMLP addition , the cell spreads and the force increases dramatically ( p = 0 . 0006 ) and brieﬂy plateaus ( post - spread , red bar in B ) before the tube detaches from the bead . See also Figure S4 and Movie S4 . Cell 148 , 175 – 188 , January 20 , 2012 ª 2012 Elsevier Inc . 183 Figure 6 . Increasing Tension with Aspiration Reversibly Inhibits Leading - Edge Protrusion and Signaling ( A ) Outline of experiment . Schematic showing the predicted results of aspiration experiments for a long - range inhibitor based on cell tension . The deformation of the cell due to aspiration increases tension , which would be predicted to inhibit protrusion and reduce SCAR / WAVE complex recruitment . 184 Cell 148 , 175 – 188 , January 20 , 2012 ª 2012 Elsevier Inc . et al . , 2008 ; Mayer et al . , 2010 ) to inhibit cell protrusion . Membrane tension is the loading force that growing actin ﬁla - ments ﬁght in order to protrude the membrane ( Keren et al . , 2008 ) . Tension in the cytoskeleton ( arising from myosin contrac - tion ) can also antagonize actin - based protrusion by pulling actin ﬁlaments away from the membrane , thereby reducing the amount of protrusion generated by a given amount of actin assembly ( Cai et al . , 2010 ) . In ﬁbroblasts , both cytoskeletal and membrane tension limit cell protrusion . Increasing membrane tension halts spreading , whereas decreasing membrane tension enhances the rate of la - mellipodial protrusion and transiently causes uniform spreading ( Raucher and Sheetz , 2000 ) . Decreasing cytoskeletal tension ( through myosin inhibition ) causes faster spreading and a larger ﬁnal spread area ( Cai et al . , 2010 ) . Furthermore , increasing tension with biaxial cellular stretching downregulates Rac activity ( Katsumi et al . , 2002 ) . For ﬁsh keratocytes , membrane tension acts as a long - range coupling mechanism for cell polarization ( Keren et al . , 2008 ; Kozlov and Mogilner , 2007 ) . Protrusion in one location pro - motes retraction in other locations and vice versa due to changes in membrane tension . Actin polymerization in a mem - brane bag reproduces the wide range of morphologies ob - served by keratocytes and accurately predicts quantitative relationships between migration speed and morphology without requiring free parameter ﬁtting ( Keren et al . , 2008 ) . Decreases in cytoskeletal tension ( through the myosin inhibitor blebbistatin ) do not destroy keratocyte polarity and only slightly reduce their speed , suggesting that the plasma membrane ( not the cytoskeleton ) carries the important tension in this system . Although keratocyte motility has been primarily considered as a pure mechanical system ( with no need for signaling inputs ) , a graded distribution of actin assembly is necessary for the ex - isting models of keratocyte motility ( Barnhart et al . , 2011 ; Keren et al . , 2008 ) . In light of our ﬁndings , it will be interesting to examine leading - edge signals in keratocytes and deter - mine whether membrane tension restricts them to the front as well . In Dictyostelium , cytoskeletal tension plays an important role in restricting signals to the leading edge . Traction - force micros - copy experiments have identiﬁed large myosin - based cytoskel - etal tension increases during Dictyostelium migration ( Meili et al . , 2010 ) . Genetic deletion of Myosin II reduces cytoskeletal tension dramatically ( Pasternak et al . , 1989 ) and increases lateral pseudopod production ( Wessels et al . , 1988 ) and Ras activation ( Lee et al . , 2010 ) . These data strongly support a role for cytoskeletal tension in Dictyostelium polarity . Whether plasma membrane tension also plays a role in Dictyostelium polarity is unknown . In neutrophils , membrane tension appears to be the dominant inhibitory mechanism for cell polarization . We ﬁnd that mem - brane tension increases during neutrophil protrusion and that decreasing membrane tension results in the expansion of leading - edge signals and a loss of polarity . In contrast , we ﬁnd that decreasing cytoskeletal tension with myosin inhibition has no effect on leading - edge signals , though myosin inhibition potentiates leading - edge signaling increases observed in hyper - tonic buffer , suggesting that cytoskeletal tension may be partially redundant with membrane tension in restricting leading - edge activities . Possible Mechanism of Tension Sensing Our experiments suggest that membrane tension acts as a long - range inhibitor of protrusion in migrating neutrophils . How do cells sense and respond to tension ? Tension - gated ion channels in the plasma membrane could transduce membrane tension into an inhibitory signal . Another potential mode of tension sen - sation relies on the properties of the actin nucleation machinery in neutrophils . The SCAR / WAVE complex forms multiple propa - gating waves that organize the neutrophil leading edge ( Weiner et al . , 2007 ) and extinguish if mechanical barriers prevent them from protruding . Increases in membrane tension could similarly extinguish waves by antagonizing protrusion . As the SCAR / WAVE complex is required for Rac activation in neutrophils ( Weiner et al . , 2006 ) , the destruction of waves by membrane tension also inhibits Rac activation . Because cytoskeletal ten - sion also antagonizes protrusion , it might inhibit signaling via SCAR / WAVE complex dynamics as well . Why don’t protrusions at the leading edge extinguish themselves through increases in tension ? Perhaps waves at the leading edge preferentially survive because of their high density , which could enhance survival by activating Rac or by creating a strong actin network that can protrude against the load provided by membrane tension , similar to how membrane tension limits protrusion to areas of high actin density in keratocytes ( Keren et al . , 2008 ) . Tension - based polarization mechanisms appear to operate in a wide range of migratory cells , although though the sources of the tension ( protrusion versus contraction ) and structures bearing the tension ( membrane versus cytoskeleton ) can vary from one cell type to the next . ( B ) Aspiration induces pseudopod retraction . Aspiration of the trailing edge acts as a long - range inhibitor of protrusion . Left : a graph of the spread area over time during aspiration . The spread area decreases dramatically upon aspiration and then eventually rebounds after release . Tick marks indicate bright - ﬁeld frames shownatright . Right : bright - ﬁeldimagesofthesamecell . Thetipoftheaspiratedcytoplasmisshownwithablackarrowhead . Thepseudopod ( whitearrowhead ) dies and retracts shortly after aspiration . When the aspirated cytoplasm is released , a new pseudopod forms with a delay of about 100 s . ( C ) Aspiration inhibits SCAR / WAVE complex recruitment . Top : A crawling neutrophil expressing the SCAR / WAVE complex reporter Hem - 1 - YFP is shown before ( (cid:3) 15 s and 0 s ) and during micropipette aspiration . The black arrowhead in the bright - ﬁeld image denotes the portion of the cell aspirated into the pipette . IncreasingtensionviaaspirationinhibitsSCAR / WAVEcomplexrecruitmentthroughoutthecell . Bottom : QuantitationofHem - 1 - YFPrecruitmentduringaspiration experiments ( n = 10 ) ; aspiration begins at frame seven ( arrow ) . Error bars depict the standard errors of the mean ( SEM ) . ( D ) Aspiration inhibits Rac activity . A crawling neutrophil expressing the Rac activation reporter PAK - PBD - YFP is shown . The ﬂuorescence channel shows PAK - PBD - YFP visualized in TIRF mode . Each bright - ﬁeld frame shows the portion of the cell aspirated into the pipette for the current ( black arrowhead ) and previous ( white arrowhead ) frames . Aspiration - mediated increases in cell tension result in a dramatic decrease in Rac activation in 85 % of cells ( n = 27 ) . Rac activation returns upon the release of aspiration pressure 65 % of the time . The micropipette diameter is approximately 3 microns . See also Figure S5 and Movie S5 . Cell 148 , 175 – 188 , January 20 , 2012 ª 2012 Elsevier Inc . 185 C Quantification of tension reduction effects on signaling 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 0 10 20 30 40 50 60 F o l d i n c r ea s e i n w a v e a r ea Blebbistatin + Hypertonic Hypertonic alone Blebbistatin alone Time ( s ) B Combination of hypertonic buffer and blebbistatin causes uniform SCAR / WAVE complex recruitment - 10s 5s 15s 475s - 20s A Blebbistatin treatment causes cellular elongation but no enhancement of leading edge signaling 5s 25s 55s - 10s Figure 7 . Membrane Tension Reduction Causes Expansion of Leading - Edge Signaling ( A ) Blebbistatin treatment causes cellular elongation but no enhancement of leading - edge signaling . Top : A crawling neutrophil expressing the SCAR / WAVE complexreporterHem - 1 - YFP ( visualizedinTIRFmode , shownasaheatmap ) isshownbefore ( (cid:3) 10s ) andduring ( 5s , 25s , 55s ) applicationofblebbistatin , which reduces cytoskeletal tension . The cells become elongated , but SCAR / WAVE complex recruitment does not expand beyond the leading edge . SCAR / WAVE complexrecruitmentdecreasesatlatertimepoints , likelyduetoelongation - inducedincreasesinmembranetension . Bottom : Bright - ﬁeldimagesofthesamecell to visualize morphology . The scale bar is 10 microns . ( B ) Combination of hypertonic buffer and blebbistatin causes uniform SCAR / WAVE complex recruitment . Top : A blebbistatin - treated ( 100 m M ) neutrophil ex - pressing the SCAR / WAVEcomplex reporter Hem - 1 - YFP ( visualized in TIRF mode , shown as a heat map ) is shown before ( (cid:3) 20 s and (cid:3) 10 s ) and during ( 5 s , 15 s and 475 s ) application of hypertonic buffer ( 150 mM sucrose + 100 m M blebbistatin ) , which reduces membrane tension . Reduction in membrane tension causes SCAR / WAVEcomplexrecruitmentthroughoutthecell . Bottom : Bright - ﬁeldimagesofthesamecelltovisualizemorphology . Notetheuniformspreadingbetween the 15 s and 475 s time points . The scale bar is 10 microns . ( C ) Quantiﬁcation of tension reduction effects on signaling . Quantitation of Hem - 1 - YFP recruitment during treatment with either hypertonic buffer + blebbistatin ( red , n = 24 ) , hypertonicbufferalone ( blue , n = 28 ) , orblebbistatinalone ( green , n = 12 ) . ThenumberofpixelscontainingHem - 1signalwerequantiﬁedateachtime point ( see Experimental Procedures ) and normalized to the pretreatment signal . Error bars depict SEM . See also Figure S6 and Movie S6 . 186 Cell 148 , 175 – 188 , January 20 , 2012 ª 2012 Elsevier Inc . EXPERIMENTAL PROCEDURES Cell Culture HL - 60 cells were generated , cultured , and differentiated as described in Weiner et al . ( 2007 ) . Primary neutrophils were obtained by pinprick as described in Weiner et al . ( 2006 ) . Cell Severing and FRAP Tethered cells were generated by brief heat shock as in Malawista and De Boisﬂeury Chevance ( 1982 ) . Cell severing and FRAP were performed with a 435 nm dye cell laser ( Manually Controlled Micropoint System , Photonic Instruments ) . Cell Aspiration Cell aspiration was performed with a heat - polished microneedle ( 3 m m diam - eter ) positioned with a Narishige MM - 89 micromanipulator with ﬁne hydraulic control . Suction pressure was controlled with a Narishige IM - 300 microinjec - tion system . Microscopy Bright - ﬁeld , epiﬂuorescence , and TIRF experiments were performed on Nikon TE - 2000 and Ti microscopes . Membrane Tension Measurements Membrane tubes were pulled with 2 m m ConA - coated beads positioned by a1064nmholographicopticaltrap . Tocalculatethetetherforce , wemeasured the distance between the bead and the center of the trap ( see Extended Experimental Procedures ) . Cytoskeletal and Membrane Tension Perturbations For hypertonic treatment experiments , we added an equal volume of buffer + 300 mM sucrose . To inhibit myosin , we added blebbistatin to 66 m M ﬁnal concentration . For combined treatment , we pretreated with 100 m M bleb - bistatin for 10 min prior to adding hypertonic buffer . For hypotonic treatment experiments , we added an equal volume of hypotonic buffer ( H 2 O + 1 mM MgCl 2 + 1 . 2 mM CaCl 2 ) . Computational Simulations Described in the Extended Experimental Procedures . Statistical Analysis Data are presented as mean ± standard error of the mean ( SEM ) , and a Student’s t test ( two - tailed distribution , two - sample unequal variance ) was used to calculate p values . SUPPLEMENTAL INFORMATION Supplemental Information includes Extended Experimental Procedures , six ﬁgures , and six movies and can be found with this article online at doi : 10 . 1016 / j . cell . 2011 . 10 . 050 . ACKNOWLEDGMENTS We thank our labs , Henry Bourne , John Clements , Robert Hochmuth , Dyche Mullins , and Michael Springer for helpful discussion and a critical reading of the manuscript . Support : AHA Predoctoral Fellowship ( A . R . H . ) , NSERC PostdoctoralFellowship ( A . J . ) , DBI - 0619674 ( E . R . D . ) , U54RR022232 ( O . D . W . , E . R . D . ) , NSF - DMS0705431 ( S . B . A . ) , GM081549 and WelchFoundation I - 1644 ( L . F . W . ) , R01 GM071794 and Welch Foundation I - 1619 ( S . J . A . ) , and Searle Scholars Award and GM084040 ( O . D . W . ) . Received : June 17 , 2011 Revised : September 15 , 2011 Accepted : October 24 , 2011 Published : January 19 , 2012 REFERENCES Allen , W . E . , Zicha , D . , Ridley , A . J . , and Jones , G . E . ( 1998 ) . A role for Cdc42 in macrophage chemotaxis . J . Cell Biol . 141 , 1147 – 1157 . Altschuler , S . J . , Angenent , S . B . , Wang , Y . , and Wu , L . F . ( 2008 ) . On the spon - taneous emergence of cell polarity . Nature 454 , 886 – 889 . Barnhart , E . L . , Lee , K . C . , Keren , K . , Mogilner , A . , and Theriot , J . A . ( 2011 ) . An adhesion - dependent switch between mechanisms that determine motile cell shape . PLoS Biol . 9 , e1001059 . Butty , A . C . , Perrinjaquet , N . , Petit , A . , Jaquenoud , M . , Segall , J . E . , Hofmann , K . , Zwahlen , C . , and Peter , M . ( 2002 ) . A positive feedback loop stabilizes the guanine - nucleotide exchange factor Cdc24 at sites of polarization . EMBO J . 21 , 1565 – 1576 . Cai , Y . , Rossier , O . , Gauthier , N . C . , Biais , N . , Fardin , M . A . , Zhang , X . , Miller , L . W . , Ladoux , B . , Cornish , V . W . , and Sheetz , M . P . ( 2010 ) . Cytoskeletal coher - ence requires myosin - IIA contractility . J . Cell Sci . 123 , 413 – 423 . Dai , J . , and Sheetz , M . P . ( 1999 ) . Membrane tether formation from blebbing cells . Biophys . J . 77 , 3363 – 3370 . Devreotes , P . , and Janetopoulos , C . ( 2003 ) . Eukaryotic chemotaxis : distinc - tions between directional sensing and polarization . J . Biol . Chem . 278 , 20445 – 20448 . Fivaz , M . , Bandara , S . , Inoue , T . , and Meyer , T . ( 2008 ) . Robust neuronal symmetry breaking by Ras - triggered local positive feedback . Curr . Biol . 18 , 44 – 50 . Garcı´a - Pe´rez , A . I . , Lo´pez - Beltra´n , E . A . , Klu¨ner , P . , Luque , J . , Ballesteros , P . , and Cerda´n , S . ( 1999 ) . Molecular crowding and viscosity as determinants of translational diffusion of metabolites in subcellular organelles . Arch . Biochem . Biophys . 362 , 329 – 338 . Gardiner , E . M . , Pestonjamasp , K . N . , Bohl , B . P . , Chamberlain , C . , Hahn , K . M . , and Bokoch , G . M . ( 2002 ) . Spatial and temporal analysis of Rac activation during live neutrophil chemotaxis . Curr . Biol . 12 , 2029 – 2034 . Gierer , A . , and Meinhardt , H . ( 1972 ) . A theory of biological pattern formation . Kybernetik 12 , 30 – 39 . Hallett , M . B . , and Dewitt , S . ( 2007 ) . Ironing out the wrinkles of neutrophil phagocytosis . Trends Cell Biol . 17 , 209 – 214 . Herant , M . , Heinrich , V . , and Dembo , M . ( 2005 ) . Mechanics of neutrophil phagocytosis : behavior of the cortical tension . J . Cell Sci . 118 , 1789 – 1797 . Hochmuth , R . M . ( 2000 ) . Micropipette aspiration of living cells . J . Biomech . 33 , 15 – 22 . Inoue , T . , and Meyer , T . ( 2008 ) . Synthetic activation of endogenous PI3K and Rac identiﬁes an AND - gate switch for cell polarization and migration . PLoS ONE 3 , e3068 . Janetopoulos , C . , Ma , L . , Devreotes , P . N . , and Iglesias , P . A . ( 2004 ) . Chemoat - tractant - induced phosphatidylinositol 3 , 4 , 5 - trisphosphate accumulation is spatially ampliﬁed and adapts , independent of the actin cytoskeleton . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA 101 , 8951 – 8956 . Jilkine , A . , and Edelstein - Keshet , L . ( 2011 ) . A comparison of mathematical models for polarization of single eukaryotic cells in response to guided cues . PLoS Comput . Biol . 7 , e1001121 . Jilkine , A . , Angenent , S . B . , Wu , L . F . , and Altschuler , S . J . ( 2011 ) . A density - dependent switch drives stochastic clustering and polarization of signaling molecules . PLoS Comput . Biol . 7 , e1002271 . Katsumi , A . , Milanini , J . , Kiosses , W . B . , del Pozo , M . A . , Kaunas , R . , Chien , S . , Hahn , K . M . , and Schwartz , M . A . ( 2002 ) . Effects of cell tension on the small GTPase Rac . J . Cell Biol . 158 , 153 – 164 . Keren , K . ( 2011 ) . Cell motility : the integrating role of the plasma membrane . Eur . Biophys . J . 40 , 1013 – 1027 . Keren , K . , Pincus , Z . , Allen , G . M . , Barnhart , E . L . , Marriott , G . , Mogilner , A . , and Theriot , J . A . ( 2008 ) . Mechanism of shape determination in motile cells . Nature 453 , 475 – 480 . Kozlov , M . M . , and Mogilner , A . ( 2007 ) . Model of polarization and bistability of cell fragments . Biophys . J . 93 , 3811 – 3819 . Cell 148 , 175 – 188 , January 20 , 2012 ª 2012 Elsevier Inc . 187 Lee , C . Y . , Herant , M . , and Heinrich , V . ( 2011 ) . Target - speciﬁc mechanics of phagocytosis : protrusive neutrophil response to zymosan differs from the uptake of antibody - tagged pathogens . J . Cell Sci . 124 , 1106 – 1114 . Lee , S . , Shen , Z . , Robinson , D . N . , Briggs , S . , and Firtel , R . A . ( 2010 ) . Involve - ment of the cytoskeleton in controlling leading - edge function during chemo - taxis . Mol . Biol . Cell 21 , 1810 – 1824 . Malawista , S . E . , and De Boisﬂeury Chevance , A . ( 1982 ) . The cytokineplast : puriﬁed , stable , and functional motile machinery from human blood polymor - phonuclear leukocytes . J . Cell Biol . 95 , 960 – 973 . Mayer , M . , Depken , M . , Bois , J . S . , Ju¨licher , F . , and Grill , S . W . ( 2010 ) . Anisot - ropies in cortical tension reveal the physical basis of polarizing cortical ﬂows . Nature 467 , 617 – 621 . Meinhardt , H . ( 1999 ) . Orientation of chemotactic cells and growth cones : models and mechanisms . J . Cell Sci . 112 , 2867 – 2874 . Meili , R . , Alonso - Latorre , B . , del Alamo , J . C . , Firtel , R . A . , and Lasheras , J . C . ( 2010 ) . Myosin II is essential for the spatiotemporal organization of traction forces during cell motility . Mol . Biol . Cell 21 , 405 – 417 . Mori , Y . , Jilkine , A . , and Edelstein - Keshet , L . ( 2008 ) . Wave - pinning and cell polarity from a bistable reaction - diffusion system . Biophys . J . 94 , 3684 – 3697 . Nakamura , T . , Mine , N . , Nakaguchi , E . , Mochizuki , A . , Yamamoto , M . , Yashiro , K . , Meno , C . , and Hamada , H . ( 2006 ) . Generation of robust left - right asymme - try in the mouse embryo requires a self - enhancement and lateral - inhibition system . Dev . Cell 11 , 495 – 504 . Neilson , M . P . , Veltman , D . M . , vanHaastert , P . J . , Webb , S . D . , Mackenzie , J . A . , and Insall , R . H . ( 2011 ) . Chemotaxis : a feedback - based computational model robustly predicts multiple aspects of real cell behaviour . PLoS Biol . 9 , e1000618 . Otsuji , M . , Ishihara , S . , Co , C . , Kaibuchi , K . , Mochizuki , A . , and Kuroda , S . ( 2007 ) . A mass conserved reaction - diffusion system captures properties of cell polarity . PLoS Comput . Biol . 3 , e108 . Pasternak , C . , Spudich , J . A . , andElson , E . L . ( 1989 ) . Cappingofsurfacerecep - tors and concomitant cortical tension are generated by conventional myosin . Nature 341 , 549 – 551 . Peters , N . C . , Egen , J . G . , Secundino , N . , Debrabant , A . , Kimblin , N . , Kamhawi , S . , Lawyer , P . , Fay , M . P . , Germain , R . N . , and Sacks , D . ( 2008 ) . In vivo imaging reveals an essential role for neutrophils in leishmaniasis transmitted by sand ﬂies . Science 321 , 970 – 974 . Raucher , D . , and Sheetz , M . P . ( 2000 ) . Cell spreading and lamellipodial exten - sion rate is regulated by membrane tension . J . Cell Biol . 148 , 127 – 136 . Ridley , A . J . , Paterson , H . F . , Johnston , C . L . , Diekmann , D . , and Hall , A . ( 1992 ) . The small GTP - binding protein rac regulates growth factor - induced membrane rufﬂing . Cell 70 , 401 – 410 . Sasaki , A . T . , Chun , C . , Takeda , K . , and Firtel , R . A . ( 2004 ) . Localized Ras signaling at the leading edge regulates PI3K , cell polarity , and directional cell movement . J . Cell Biol . 167 , 505 – 518 . Shao , J . Y . , andXu , J . ( 2002 ) . Amodiﬁedmicropipetteaspirationtechniqueand its application to tether formation from human neutrophils . J . Biomech . Eng . 124 , 388 – 396 . Sick , S . , Reinker , S . , Timmer , J . , and Schlake , T . ( 2006 ) . WNT and DKK deter - mine hair follicle spacing through a reaction - diffusion mechanism . Science 314 , 1447 – 1450 . Servant , G . , Weiner , O . D . , Herzmark , P . , Balla , T . , Sedat , J . W . , and Bourne , H . R . ( 2000 ) . Polarization of chemoattractant receptor signaling during neutro - phil chemotaxis . Science 287 , 1037 – 1040 . Srinivasan , S . , Wang , F . , Glavas , S . , Ott , A . , Hofmann , F . , Aktories , K . , Kalman , D . , and Bourne , H . R . ( 2003 ) . Rac and Cdc42 play distinct roles in regulating PI ( 3 , 4 , 5 ) P3 and polarity during neutrophil chemotaxis . J . Cell Biol . 160 , 375 – 385 . Sun , C . X . , Downey , G . P . , Zhu , F . , Koh , A . L . , Thang , H . , and Glogauer , M . ( 2004 ) . Rac1 is the small GTPase responsible for regulating the neutrophil chemotaxis compass . Blood 104 , 3758 – 3765 . Swaminathan , R . , Hoang , C . P . , and Verkman , A . S . ( 1997 ) . Photobleaching recoveryand anisotropy decayofgreen ﬂuorescentproteinGFP - S65T insolu - tion and cells : cytoplasmic viscosity probed by green ﬂuorescent protein translational and rotational diffusion . Biophys . J . 72 , 1900 – 1907 . Turing , A . M . ( 1952 ) . The chemical basis of morphogenesis . Philos . Trans . R . Soc . Lond . 237 , 37 – 72 . Wang , F . , Herzmark , P . , Weiner , O . D . , Srinivasan , S . , Servant , G . , and Bourne , H . R . ( 2002 ) . Lipid products of PI ( 3 ) Ks maintain persistent cell polarity and directed motility in neutrophils . Nat . Cell Biol . 4 , 513 – 518 . Wedlich - Soldner , R . , Altschuler , S . , Wu , L . , andLi , R . ( 2003 ) . Spontaneouscell polarization through actomyosin - based delivery of the Cdc42 GTPase . Science 299 , 1231 – 1235 . Weiner , O . D . , Neilsen , P . O . , Prestwich , G . D . , Kirschner , M . W . , Cantley , L . C . , and Bourne , H . R . ( 2002 ) . A PtdInsP ( 3 ) - and Rho GTPase - mediated positive feedback loop regulates neutrophil polarity . Nat . Cell Biol . 4 , 509 – 513 . Weiner , O . D . , Rentel , M . C . , Ott , A . , Brown , G . E . , Jedrychowski , M . , Yaffe , M . B . , Gygi , S . P . , Cantley , L . C . , Bourne , H . R . , and Kirschner , M . W . ( 2006 ) . Hem - 1 complexes are essential for Rac activation , actin polymerization , and myosin regulation during neutrophil chemotaxis . PLoS Biol . 4 , e38 . Weiner , O . D . , Marganski , W . A . , Wu , L . F . , Altschuler , S . J . , and Kirschner , M . W . ( 2007 ) . An actin - based wave generator organizes cell motility . PLoS Biol . 5 , e221 . Wessels , D . , Soll , D . R . , Knecht , D . , Loomis , W . F . , De Lozanne , A . , and Spu - dich , J . ( 1988 ) . Cell motility and chemotaxis in Dictyostelium amebae lacking myosin heavy chain . Dev . Biol . 128 , 164 – 177 . Xiong , Y . , Huang , C . H . , Iglesias , P . A . , and Devreotes , P . N . ( 2010 ) . Cells navi - gate with a local - excitation , global - inhibition - biased excitable network . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA 107 , 17079 – 17086 . Zhelev , D . V . , Alteraiﬁ , A . M . , and Hochmuth , R . M . ( 1996 ) . F - actin network formation in tethers and in pseudopods stimulated by chemoattractant . Cell Motil . Cytoskeleton 35 , 331 – 344 . 188 Cell 148 , 175 – 188 , January 20 , 2012 ª 2012 Elsevier Inc .