IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY IN BIOMEDICINE , VOL . 9 , NO . 3 , SEPTEMBER 2005 295 Electroactive Polymer - Based Devices for e - Textiles in Biomedicine Federico Carpi and Danilo De Rossi ( Review Paper ) Abstract— This paper describes the early conception and latest developments of electroactive polymer ( EAP ) - based sensors , actu - ators , electronic components , and power sources , implemented as wearable devices for smart electronic textiles ( e - textiles ) . Such tex - tiles , functioning as multifunctional wearable human interfaces , are today considered relevant promoters of progress and useful tools in several biomedical ﬁelds , such as biomonitoring , rehabili - tation , and telemedicine . After a brief outline on ongoing research and the ﬁrst products on e - textiles under commercial development , this paper presents the most highly performing EAP - based devices developed by our lab and other research groups for sensing , actua - tion , electronics , and energy generation / storage , with reference to their already demonstrated or potential applicability to electronic textiles . Index Terms— Biomonitoring , electroactive polymers ( EAPs ) , electronic textiles , e - textiles , polymer actuators , polymer bat - teries , polymer electronics , polymer sensors , rehabilitation and telemedicine , smart textiles , wearable sensors . I . I NTRODUCTION I T is accepted opinion today that in order to provide people with personalized healthcare , support , and information , technological advances should be brought closer to the subject by means of easy - to - use wearable interfaces between devices and humans [ 1 ] , [ 2 ] . This can be achieved through multi - functional fabrics , commonly referred to as electronic textiles ( e - textiles ) or smart textiles ( these terms will be interchangeable in this paper ) , capable of making daily life healthier , safer , and more comfortable [ 2 ] – [ 16 ] . Such fabrics are conceived as innovative and high knowledge - content garments , integrating sensing , actuation , electronic , and power functions [ 2 ] , [ 3 ] , [ 8 ] – [ 13 ] . Due to their multifunctional interactivity , enabled by wearable devices that are ﬂexible and conformable to the human body , e - textiles are considered rel - evant promoters of a higher quality of life [ 4 ] and progress in biomedicine , as well as in several health - focused disciplines , such as biomonitoring , rehabilitation , telemedicine , teleassis - tance , ergonomics , and sport medicine [ 2 ] , [ 5 ] – [ 16 ] . Biomonitoring , meaning both body kinematics and health monitoring ( including vital signs detection ) , would consider - Manuscript received May 15 , 2004 ; revised January 27 , 2005 . This work was supported by the EU Commission under Contract IST - 2002 - 507816 MY - HEART - IP . The authors are with the Interdepartmental Research Centre “E . Pi - aggio , ” University of Pisa , 56126 Pisa , Italy ( e - mail : f . carpi @ ing . unipi . it ; d . derossi @ ing . unipi . it ) . Digital Object Identiﬁer 10 . 1109 / TITB . 2005 . 854514 ably beneﬁt from the implementation of wearable sensorized systems . In particular , garments with strain - and stress - sensing capabilities would enable the tracking of posture and ges - tures of a subject , and would permit the precise analyses of kinematic variables of interest . Likewise , the integration into skin - adherent clothes of several kinds of biosensors for health monitoring would provide a daily disease prevention through a continuous , personalized , and self - made detection of vital signs and physiological variables . This is considered a crucial point , for instance , in the diagnosis and treatment of cardiovascular diseases [ 6 ] , [ 15 ] . In addition to sensors , the comfortable embedding into tex - tile substrates of actuators represents a further potentially useful tool for rehabilitation [ 6 ] . Actuators may provide enduring me - chanical support to lost motor functions ( compensation of dis - abilities ) or to their physiotherapeutic restoration . These actions could be performed either by following predeﬁned tasks or by exploiting the strain and stress information produced by cointe - grated sensors . The active support offered by wearable actuators could also favor the improvement of sports training techniques or the prevention of risks related to abnormal stress distributions and overloading . Sensors and actuators used in textiles may be electrically powered and controlled by power and electronic devices ad - vantageously embedded in the fabrics . The integration of active electronic components would enable the implementation of closed - loop controls of the system . Furthermore , the possibility of simultaneously detecting a large set of physiological signals and variables and of processing and teletransmitting data would offer a valid tool capable of supporting health professionals in telemedicine and telerehabilitation for remote assistance [ 6 ] – [ 8 ] , [ 11 ] , [ 12 ] . Home care of sick or elderly persons , or treatment of individuals in extreme conditions , such as soldiers or astronauts , are just a few examples of possible ﬁelds of application . Wearable multifunctional textiles may open new avenues of development not only in biomonitoring , rehabilitation , and telemedicine , but also in several emerging - technology markets , such as wearable wireless communication systems ( integrating into clothes resources for transmitting information , e . g . , earphones , microphones , or entire mobile phones ) , people telecontrol [ e . g . , localizing and tracking persons through local networks or the global positioning system ( GPS ) ] , teleassis - tance ( e . g . , embedding into garments accidental fall sensors for elders and automatic help request ) , ergonomics ( integration of 1089 - 7771 / $ 20 . 00 © 2005 IEEE 296 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY IN BIOMEDICINE , VOL . 9 , NO . 3 , SEPTEMBER 2005 devices for comfort and safety ) , and virtual - augmented reality ( simulation wearable systems for professional training and interactive entertainment ) . Most noticeable implementations of wearable systems in - spired by the “e - textile theme” reported in the literature or even approaching the market will be brieﬂy described in Section II . As it will be shown , most of these systems deal with integrating conventional off - the - shelf devices into fabrics . In our perspective , alternative routes leading to the future of truly wearable e - textiles are possible . They pass through the de - velopment and the use of devices based on organic materials and , precisely , on different types of the so - called electroactive polymers ( EAPs ) , presented in Section III . Several materials be - longing to this class of polymers are , in fact , capable of showing all the required active functionalities , such as sensing , actuation , computation , and electrical energy generation / storage . More - over , they also offer advantageous passive properties in terms of mechanical ﬂexibility and ease of processing , typically supe - rior to those of commonly used inorganic materials . The aim of this paper is to describe how these features , and others mentioned later in the paper , make EAPs very promising materials for wearable ﬂexible devices , as demonstrated by pro - totype components developed by our lab and other research groups . II . S TATE OF THE A RT IN E LECTRONIC T EXTILES : A B RIEF O UTLINE Several attempts to design and build prototypes of wearable functional devices have been proposed in the last few years . As introduced above , most of them take the approach of at - taching conventional off - the - shelf electrical / electronic devices and components to clothes , such as microcontrollers , LEDs , op - tical ﬁbers , piezoelectric transducers , etc . [ 1 ] , [ 3 ] , [ 5 ] , [ 17 ] – [ 25 ] . This approach has been led by the well - established high performances of readily available conventional electronics . Fur - thermore , the consolidated textile technology for the integration of woven metallic yarns into clothes [ 23 ] , [ 24 ] has encouraged their use as a suitable means of connection , data communi - cation , and power transfer [ 26 ] for chip packages sewn into textiles . We mention here those systems , proposed by several research groups , representing the most relevant contributions to the e - tex - tile ﬁeld , taking into account the degree of device integration , the resulting wearability , and demonstrated performances . At the end of the 1990s , Georgia Institute of Technology ( Atlanta , GA ) has proposed what they have called the Wear - able Motherboard [ 5 ] , [ 27 ] – [ 30 ] . It consists of a wearable fabric ( e . g . , a shirt ) embedded with metal ﬁbers , working as a data bus , and woven optical ﬁbers . The system is conceived to work as a motherboard structure , where off - the - shelf devices can be reversibly attached . The last developed versions permit plug - ging in diverse conventional sensors used to monitor several vital signs , such as heart rate , respiration rate , electrocardio - gram ( ECG ) , pulse oximetry , and skin temperature [ 4 ] , [ 5 ] , [ 31 ] . This system is under commercial development in the form of a product called SmartShirt ( Fig . 1 ) by the company Sensatex [ 32 ] . The use of optical ﬁbers in fabrics as strain / stress sensors has been proposed by Drexel University ( Philadelphia , PA ) [ 33 ] , [ 34 ] . This technology consists of the integration of multimode optical ﬁbers in a preferably nonwoven textile substrate , in order to facilitate the embedding [ 34 ] . Deformations of the ﬁbers in - duced by mechanical stresses exerted on the fabric alter the ﬁber boundary conditions and modify the internal propagation of op - tical signals . In particular , the occurring modal coupling pro - duces a detectable modulation of the modal power distribution [ 33 ] , [ 34 ] . Vivometrics Inc . produces the so - called LifeShirt [ 35 ] ( Fig . 2 ) , consisting of a Lycra vest endowed with sensors detecting respiration , ECG , posture , and movement [ 36 ] , [ 37 ] . Monitoring of respiratory activity and postural changes is performed by means of sinusoidally shaped electrical wires , sewn into the garment . A high - frequency current ﬂowing through the wires generates a magnetic ﬁeld , used to measure the self - inductance of the wire coils , which varies according to the deformation of the supporting structure [ 37 ] . A T - shirt with integrated breathing - rate sensors , a shock / fall detector , temperature sensors , and electrodes for ECG ( Fig . 3 ) has been developed within the French project called VTAM ( Vêtement de Télé - Assistance Médicale Nomade ) [ 38 ] , [ 39 ] . The breathing - rate sensing is performed by sinusoid - like con - ductors integrated into a textile band , whereas the shock / fall identiﬁcation is enabled by an electronic monitoring of the three - component acceleration of the body [ 39 ] . A sensorized baby pajama ( Fig . 4 ) , called the Mamagoose pajama , is produced by Verhaert . The garment is conceived as a prevention tool for sudden infant death syndrome [ 40 ] . In par - ticular , it is endowed with heartbeat and respiration ( capacitive ) sensors , whose data are collected by an electronic processor , which can operate an alarm in case of potential danger [ 40 ] . ETH of Zürich , Switzerland , has proposed smart textiles em - bedding electrodes for functional electrical stimulation ( FES ) , capable of providing electrically induced muscular contractions in patients affected by neuromuscular disorders [ 41 ] . Electrodes are fabricated by using an embroidery technique for the integra - tion into a textile substrate of conducting yarns , consisting of silver coated ﬁbers [ 41 ] . Completely ﬂexible devices embedded into truly wearable smart textiles have been proposed by our Research Centre and developed by Smartex [ 42 ] ( Fig . 5 ) and UTEC ( Umana Tec - nologia ) ( Fig . 6 ) . Sensorized garments capable of monitoring body kinematic variables , such as position and movement of articulation segments , and physiological activities , such as res - piration , ECG , and electromiogram , have been developed . The principle of operation , materials , and performances of sensors used in these fabrics will be described in Section IV . III . E LECTROACTIVE P OLYMERS AS E LIGIBLE F UNCTIONAL M ATERIALS FOR e - T EXTILES Materials employed for wearable devices in electronic tex - tiles should be characterized by intrinsic high compliance , low weight , and ease of processing in several shapes and conﬁgura - tions ( possibly in ﬁber form ) , in order to preserve the wearer’s comfort . Most of these properties are not typically found in CARPI AND DE ROSSI : ELECTROACTIVE POLYMER - BASED DEVICES FOR e - TEXTILES IN BIOMEDICINE 297 Fig . 1 . SmartShirt developed by Sensatex ( images from [ 32 ] ) . Fig . 2 . LifeShirt developed by Vivometrics ( image adapted from [ 35 ] ) . Fig . 3 . Sensorized T - shirt developed within the VTAM project ( photo adapted from [ 38 ] ) . Fig . 4 . Mamagoose pajama developed by Verhaert ( photo from [ 40 ] ) . Fig . 5 . Sensorized shirt developed by Smartex within the European integrated project WEALTHY ( photo : courtesy of Smartex ) . Fig . 6 . Sensorized leotard developed by our lab in collaboration with UTEC ( photo : courtesy of UTEC ) . commonly used sensors , actuators , electronic components , and power sources , despite their continuous miniaturization . Differently , very promising developments in organic mate - rials science and technology , as well as in functional design , encourage , in our opinion , the realization of “all - organic” wear - able devices for e - textiles . In fact , as it will be discussed in the following sections , all the different functionalities required for such interactive systems ( sensing , actuation , computation , and energy generation / storage ) can today be exerted by devices based on organic polymers . 298 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY IN BIOMEDICINE , VOL . 9 , NO . 3 , SEPTEMBER 2005 TABLE I M OST - U SED EAP S AND M ACROMOLECULAR O RGANICS FOR P ASSIVE S ENSORS AND T HEIR C ONVENTIONAL I NORGANIC C OUNTERPARTS They offer several advantages , compared with their inorganic counterparts , in that they are light , highly elastic , and resilient , mechanically ﬂexible , inexpensive , and easy to process . They can be manufactured into many shapes , printed , sewn , or knitted into fabrics , or even woven in ﬁber forms directly into tex - tile structures . Additionally , the insulating , conducting , or semi - conducting intrinsic properties of different types of EAPs pro - vide advantages , in comparison with conventional inorganics , for the realization of sensors , actuators , electronic components , and power supplies . EAPs are deﬁned as organic materials capable of responding to an applied electrical stimulus with a change of shape and / or dimensions [ 43 ] . This characteristic has enabled their use for polymer - based electrically driven actuation mechanisms ( Sec - tion V ) , investigated for the development of “artiﬁcial muscles” [ 43 ] . However , despite the actuation mode , several kinds of EAPs can also work as sensors , electronic components , and electrical power sources ( Sections IV , V , and VI , respectively ) . Therefore , the term EAP is today typically used to refer to a class of materials which have multifunctional properties , rather than the actuating one only . With respect to their actuating capabilities , EAPs can be clas - siﬁed in two major categories : ionic EAPs ( activated by an elec - trically induced diffusion of ions or molecules ) and electronic EAPs ( activated by an external electric ﬁeld and by Coulom - bian forces ) [ 43 ] . Polyelectrolyte gels [ 44 ] , ionic polymer - metal composites ( IPMCs ) [ 45 ] , [ 46 ] , conducting polymers [ 47 ] – [ 49 ] , and carbon nanotubes [ 50 ] , [ 51 ] are examples belonging to the ﬁrst class , whereas piezoelectric polymers [ 52 ] , electrostrictive polymers [ 53 ] , [ 54 ] , ferroelectric liquid - crystalline elastomers [ 55 ] , and dielectric elastomers [ 56 ] , [ 57 ] are electronic EAPs . We underline that carbon nanotubes are currently classiﬁed as EAPs [ 43 ] , even though they have a nonpolymeric macromolec - ular organic structure . In the following sections , EAP materials and EAP - based de - vices with several smart functions currently under development TABLE II A CTIVE S ENSORS will be described , with reference to their already demonstrated or potential applicability to electronic textiles . IV . EAP - B ASED S ENSORS Most useful devices for wearable sensorized systems can be divided into active sensors and passive sensors . We classify as active sensors those that intrinsically convert the input energy into a useful electrical potential difference . Conversely , those sensors that require an external power source to convert the input into a usable output are deﬁned as passive ; they typically work according to a variation of their electrical resistance in response to an applied stimulus . Table I presents a nonexhaustive list of EAPs and conven - tional inorganic counterparts currently used for the indicated types of passive sensing . Physical effects and related devices for active sensing are listed in Table II . Organic and inorganic materials with suitable sensing functions are not listed in this table , since they will be presented in Section VII , in relation to their advantageous use for wearable power sources . There is no doubt that monitoring several variables of interest by means of the passive and active sensing strategies listed in Tables I and II may ﬁnd useful applications in e - textiles . For in - stance , the detection of deﬁnite chemicals ( both in gas or liquid form ) , by exploiting chemioresistive sensors integrated into fab - rics , could be useful for people at risk of coming into contact with dangerous substances , such as chemistry professionals , or CARPI AND DE ROSSI : ELECTROACTIVE POLYMER - BASED DEVICES FOR e - TEXTILES IN BIOMEDICINE 299 TABLE III B ODY S IGNALS OR V ARIABLES U NDER M ONITORING IN e - T EXTILES , AND P ROPOSED S ENSING D EVICES / C OMPONENTS W ITH T HEIR F ABRIC I MPLEMENTATION even soldiers . Similarly , wearable thermoresistive , thermoelec - tric , or pyroelectric sensors would perform a continuous tem - perature measurement , while photoelectric sensors would offer a means of monitoring overexposure to electromagnetic radia - tions ( e . g . , UV rays ) . The detection of these and other variables is certainly useful in various ﬁelds of application . However , in this section and re - lated subsections , we will concentrate on devices that enable a sensing of fundamental signals and variables related to mechan - ical or physiological activities of a human body ( including vital signs ) . They are listed in the ﬁrst column of Table III . Their con - tinuous monitoring is diffusely recognized as one of the primary tasks for the advantageous use of e - textiles in biomedicine and in health - focused disciplines [ 3 ] – [ 7 ] , [ 9 ] , [ 11 ] – [ 15 ] . In the following subsections , we will describe the three types of sensing devices / components we consider more relevant for such purposes : piezoresistive sensors , piezoelectric sensors , and bioelectrodes . Particular attention will be paid to piezoresistive and piezoelectric sensors . In fact , although the feasible textile application of different types of sensing devices , such as piezo - capacitive transducers [ 58 ] , has been reported , in our opinion , piezoresistivity and piezoelectricity represent a very practical and efﬁcient means of monitoring body signals and variables ( Table III ) . This is motivated by the particular suitability of the principles of operation of such kinds of sensors , and by their possible fabrication with EAP materials and conﬁgurations suit - able for wearable applications ( Table III ) . A . EAP - Based Piezoresistive Sensors In order to endow garments with strain - sensing capabilities for the monitoring of body kinematics , such as position and movement of articulation segments , and for the detection of some vital signs , such as respiration , piezoresistive strain sen - sors ( also known as strain gauges ) can be advantageously used . These sensors work according to the piezoresistive effect : their electrical resistance is modiﬁed by an imposed strain of the material . The most highly performing piezoresistive EAPs and conventional inorganic counterparts are listed in Table I . In recent years , an innovative technology for wearable EAP - based sensors has been developed by our lab , in order to confer strain - sensing properties to garments . In particular , two types of piezoresistive polymer materials have been integrated into elastic fabrics : - electron conjugated conducting polymers and carbon - loaded elastomers ( CLRs ) . The main areas of merit of the developed sensors will be separately described below . Conducting Polymer Sensors : Conducting polymers are a class of organic materials able to transport electricity . Since their discovery in the early 1970s , several conducting polymers , such as polypyrrole ( PPy ) , polyaniline ( PAni ) , and polythiophene , have been synthesized , and their quality has been continuously improved [ 59 ] , [ 60 ] . Our Research Centre has investigated their use for the de - velopment of organic piezoresistive sensors . To this aim , con - ducting polymer sensors have been fabricated by epitaxial deposition of a thin layer of PPy on a Lycra / cotton fabric [ 2 ] , [ 61 ] – [ 63 ] . These sensors , showing both piezoresistive and thermoresistive properties [ 2 ] , [ 63 ] , have been used by our lab to sensorize a glove and a leotard [ 63 ] . Similarly , CSIRO ( Canberra , Australia ) and the University of Wollongong ( Wollongong , Australia ) have integrated this kind of fabric - based sensors into a knee sleeve [ 64 ] . The quasi - static characterization of our PPy - coated fabrics has indicated an average gauge factor ( GF ) of about 12 [ 10 ] , [ 12 ] , [ 63 ] . Furthermore , they have shown a temperature coefﬁ - cient of resistance ( TCR ) of about 0 . 018 C [ 10 ] , [ 12 ] , [ 63 ] . Despite the fact that the reported high absolute value of GF is suitable for strain gauge implementations , two serious problems typically affect PPy - coated fabric sensors . The ﬁrst one resides in the strong variation with time of their resistance ( chemical instability ) [ 63 ] . The second problem is represented by the high response time . Following the application of a sudden mechan - ical stimulus , the sensor resistance reaches a steady state in a few minutes , strictly limiting the applicability of such devices [ 63 ] . Moreover , conducting polymer - based sensors are not easily amenable to textile technology . In fact , they would require the problematic insertion in textile processes of tanks for the mate - rial synthesis and deposition / coating on fabrics . CLR Sensors : A new generation of high - performance strain sensors has been obtained by coating yarns and fabrics with CLRs , typically consisting of a silicone matrix ﬁlled with carbon black powder . Sensors are fabricated on a Lycra / cotton textile by masked smearing of the conducting mixture . The same polymer / con - ductor composite is also used as material for the tracks of connection between sensors and an acquisition electronic unit , avoiding the stiffness of conventional metal wires . A GF of about 2 . 5 , quite similar to those of metals , has been measured for CLR - coated fabrics , making this kind of device suitable for high - performance sensing [ 10 ] , [ 12 ] . Moreover , 300 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY IN BIOMEDICINE , VOL . 9 , NO . 3 , SEPTEMBER 2005 Fig . 7 . Sensorized sleeve developed by our lab in collaboration with UTEC ( photo : courtesy of UTEC ) . Fig . 8 . Comparison of respitrace monitored via CLR sensors ( solid line ) and conventional sensors ( dotted line ) . CLR sensors show , as for PPy sensors , thermoresistive proper - ties , with reported TCR values of about 0 . 08 C [ 10 ] , [ 12 ] . Such devices have been used by us to demonstrate prototype sensorized garments , including gloves , leotards ( Fig . 6 ) , knee bands , and sleeves ( Fig . 7 ) [ 8 ] – [ 13 ] , [ 65 ] , [ 66 ] . All these systems are truly wearable fabrics , incorporating compliant polymer sensors , capable of recording body posture and gesture , with no discomfort to the subject wearing the gar - ment and with negligible motion artifacts . Our carbon - loaded rubber sensors integrated in the abdom - inal region of a shirt have also permitted the monitoring of respi - ratory activity ( respitrace ) with an accuracy comparable to that of conventional sensors in clinical use , as presented in Fig . 8 . Sensorized garments based on this operation principle have been developed also by Smartex , working with our Research Centre within a European integrated project called WEALTHY ( Wearable Health Care System ) [ 67 ] . They have sensorized a Lycra / cotton shirt ( Fig . 5 ) , which integrates polymer strain sensors and fabric bioelectrodes , enabling the monitoring of respiration , ECG , electromyogram ( EMG ) , and body posture / movement [ 14 ] – [ 16 ] . In particular , respiration and body + section movements are detected by means of piezore - sistive sensors made of carbon - loaded rubbers . Metal - based yarns are used as electrodes to detect ECG and EMG signals ( Section IV - C ) . Sensors , electrodes , and insulated conductive tracks ( con - necting such devices / components to an acquisition unit ) are integrated into the fabric by using ﬂat - knitting technology , making the fabrication of the garment compatible with conven - tional textile industrial processes [ 14 ] – [ 16 ] . Sensorized jackets embedding piezoresistive sensors are in the course of development by Philips [ 68 ] , which is also in - vestigating the application of strain - sensing fabrics for exercise monitoring [ 69 ] . Finally , we mention here that fabric - based piezoresistive sensors made of carbon - ﬁlled polymers are being studied also by UMIST at the University of Manchester ( Manchester , U . K . ) . Their approach is based on the use of knitted fabric structures consisting of electroconductive polymer ﬁbers ( working as piezoresistive sensing elements ) and insulating ﬁbers [ 70 ] . B . EAP - Based Piezoelectric Sensors As outlined in Table III , the embedding of piezoelectric sen - sors into garments may provide a useful tool for expanding the range of biomechanical and physiological variables contin - uously detectable by an electronic textile . According to the well - known direct piezoelectric effect , the application of a stress along one of the main axes of a piezo - electric material causes its polarization , generating net opposite charges on opposite surfaces . The electric potential difference produced by the opposite charge distribution can be detected by embedding the material between two electrodes . The most exploited piezoelectric inorganic materials for several commercial applications are titanate ceramics , such as lead zirconate titanate ( PZT ) , whereas polyvinylidene ﬂuoride ( PVDF ) is the most commonly used piezoelectric polymer , having a typical piezoelectric coefﬁcient of 24 – 27 pC / N [ 52 ] . A list of common piezoelectric organic and inorganic mate - rials is presented in Section VII , with reference to their possible use for electrical energy generation as wearable power sources . PVDF , which has been used for many years as a privileged piezoelectric polymer for diverse sensing applications , may be applied in e - textiles for the needs outlined in Table III ( vital signs monitoring ) : detection of carotid pulse , radial artery pulse , heart apex pulse , and sound . Furthermore , PVDF - based trans - ducers could be employed as general - purpose contact sensors ( e . g . , fall detectors ) or active keys for textile keyboards , inter - facing the wearer with electronic devices . Although PVDF small strips can be incorporated into fabric matrices [ 71 ] , the development and textile embedding of piezo - electric ﬁbers would be preferable , in order to ensure a higher ﬂexibility of the structure and a higher comfort for the wearer . Furthermore , textile - grade ﬁbers would ﬁt with textile man - ufacturing processes better than strips . In this regard , we are working on the realization of PVDF sensing ﬁbers fabricated by extrusion . Such ﬁbers are conceived as wearable sensors capable of detecting local pressures on fabrics . For this purpose , we have designed the row - by - column conﬁguration shown in Fig . 9 . In this scheme , a textile structure is endowed with PVDF cylindrical ﬁbers extruded onto metal wires ( columns ) in contact with orthogonally arranged metal wires ( rows ) . The application of a local pressure on a row – column crossing lo - cally compresses the PVDF ﬁber between the two metal wires , which work as electrodes . The resulting electric potential dif - ference locates ( row - by - column ) and quantiﬁes the external stimulus . C . Bioelectrodes Although bioelectrodes used for the monitoring of body elec - trical signal ( biopotentials ) , such as ECG and EMG ( Table III ) , CARPI AND DE ROSSI : ELECTROACTIVE POLYMER - BASED DEVICES FOR e - TEXTILES IN BIOMEDICINE 301 TABLE IV M OST - U SED EAP S AND M ACROMOLECULAR O RGANICS FOR A CTUATION AND T HEIR C ONVENTIONAL I NORGANIC C OUNTERPARTS Fig . 9 . Row - by - column conﬁguration for PVDF - based ﬁber piezoelectric sensors . are not sensors as such , they are brieﬂy mentioned here , since they are fundamental components for vital - sign sensing by means of wearable devices . Conventional electrodes used for bioelectric monitoring usu - allyconsist of ﬂatAg / AgCl electrodescoupledto gels , employed to improve the skin / electrode impedance matching . Attempts to develop completely wearable bioelectrodes fully integrated into textile substrates for bioelectrical signal and variable de - tection ( Table III ) are in the course of development by Smartex [ 14 ] – [ 16 ] . New smart electrodes are conceived as textile - woven yarns with conducting properties , such as fully metal yarns or yarns made of natural / synthetic ﬁbers mixed with conductive ﬁbers ( e . g . , stainless steel ) . Despite their mechanical ﬂexibility , yarns containing electro - conductive organic ﬁbers ( e . g . , carbon or conducting polymers ﬁbers ) are not used , since they do not typically guarantee the necessary conductivity and sensitivity required by this application . V . EAP - B ASED A CTUATORS In order to endow fabrics with motor functions , ﬂexible actu - ating devices are needed . They share with sensors the necessity of overcoming several technological problems toward textile implementations . The most noticeable challenging issues in - clude the identiﬁcation of efﬁcient principles of operation and suitable conﬁgurations , selection of high - performance mate - rials , and implementation of custom fabrication processes . Fabrics with shape - recovery capabilities have been developed by D’Appolonia , by integrating shape memory alloy ( Nitinol ) ﬁbers with thermal memory effect [ 72 ] . Despite this , no suc - cesses toward an effective and comfortable embedding of actu - ating functions into textiles have been substantially reported so far . EAP - based actuators may be used for such a purpose . Dif - ferent EAP classes currently under investigation for ﬂexible actuation are listed in Table IV , as well as their inorganic counterparts , largely used in commercial applications . Ionic EAPs can be activated , within a surrounding electrolyte medium , by very low voltages ( on the order of 1 V ) . On the con - trary , electronic EAPs require typically high driving voltages ( electric ﬁelds on the order of 10 – 100 V m for electrostrictive polymers and dielectric elastomers ) . However , progress con - cerning the reduction of their driving ﬁelds is currently occur - ring , as it will be shown farther on . Electronic EAPs show , in comparison with the ionic ones , lower response time and higher efﬁciency , stability , reliability , and durability . In order to describe the potential applicability of EAP - based actuators to electronic textiles , we will select here only one rep - resentative material per class among the electronic and ionic EAPs . In particular , we will brieﬂy analyze the current state of the art on two of the most highly performing types of materials : conducting polymers and dielectric elastomers . In fact , among ionic EAPs , polyelectrolyte gels and IPMCs hold poor mechanical properties [ 44 ] – [ 46 ] in comparison with conducting polymers , whereas carbon nanotubes are too stiff , and show low strains [ 50 ] , [ 51 ] . Moreover , among electronic 302 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY IN BIOMEDICINE , VOL . 9 , NO . 3 , SEPTEMBER 2005 EAPs , ferroelectric liquid - crystalline elastomers still do not have any practical use for macroscopic applications , whereas piezoelectric and electrostrictive polymers show active strains , typically on the order of 0 . 1 % [ 52 ] and 1 % [ 53 ] , [ 54 ] . These values are very low in comparison with those enabled by dielectric elastomers ( 10 % – 100 % ) [ 56 ] , [ 57 ] . Principles of operation and main ﬁgures of merit of con - ducting polymer and dielectric elastomer actuators will be separately described below . Conducting Polymer Actuators : For many years , conducting polymers have been studied as materials for polymer actua - tion [ 47 ] – [ 49 ] , [ 73 ] – [ 81 ] . For such a purpose , they are used as one component of an electrochemical cell , whose base structure includes two electrodes immersed in an electrolyte ( electrochemical cells will be described in general terms in Section VII - A ) . In particular , the active conducting polymer material constitutes one of the two electrodes of the cell . By applying a potential difference between the electrodes , the one made of conducting polymer shows a dimensional variation and works as an actuator . The commonly accepted explanation of the phenomenon at - tributes the observed deformation to the input / output diffusion of ions ( exchanged with the surrounding electrolyte ) into / from the polymer sample , driven by the applied voltage . In fact , the voltage produces a variation of the polymer oxidation state , which causes , in order to maintain the global electroneutrality , the necessary modiﬁcation of the number of ions associated with each polymer chain ( doping and dedoping processes ) . The resulting intercalation ( or deintercalation ) of doping ions and solvent molecules causes structural and dimensional changes of the material [ 48 ] , [ 79 ] , [ 82 ] , with a strongly anisotropic volume variation [ 83 ] , [ 84 ] . Conducting polymer actuators typically exhibit active strains on the order of 1 % – 10 % , high active stresses ( up to tens of MPa ) , and low driving electrical potential differences ( order of 1 V ) . Nevertheless , the use of conducting polymers as actuators is typically limited by their short lifetimes and high response times . However , several attempts to overcome these limits are in progress . In fact , it has been demonstrated that lifetime and actu - ating performances can be enhanced , by replacing ordinary elec - trolytes with room - temperature ionic liquids [ 85 ] , [ 86 ] . These electrolytes , such as 1 - butyl - 3 - methylimidazolium tetraﬂuo - roborate ( BMIM BF ) , will be described in Section VII - A , with respect to their use in general - purpose electrochemical cells . Furthermore , conducting polymer actuators with higher response speeds and higher power - to - mass ratios have been obtained by applying very short impulses of unusually high voltages ( resistance compensation ) [ 87 ] . As an observation , we mention here that this technique has also been applied to carbon nanotube actuators [ 88 ] . With respect to the achievable active deformations of con - ducting polymer actuators , expansion – contraction ratios higher than 12 % for one red - ox cycle have been recently reported [ 89 ] . High active strains have also been reported with conﬁgurations exploiting smart electrodes . In particular , the use of compliant gold electrodes , providing good electrical contact over the entire material , as well as permitting the deformation of the material , has enabled strains greater than 12 % [ 90 ] . Fig . 10 . Schematic drawing of a conducting polymer ﬁber actuator . Fig . 11 . PAni ﬁber - based actuator developed by Santa Fe Science and Technology Inc . ( image adapted from [ 95 ] ) . In order to endow fabrics with actuating functions , ﬁber - shaped actuators may be particularly useful . Our Re - search Centre proposed , at the end of the 1990s , conducting polymer ﬁber actuators having the structure represented in Fig . 10 . An extruded PAni ﬁber is coated with a thin layer of solid polymer electrolyte ( SPE ) ( e . g . , ethylene carbonate ( EC ) / polyacrilonitrile ( PAN ) / sodium perchlorate ( NaClO d ) and an outer layer of PPy acts as a counterelectrode . Alterna - tively , the counterelectrode can consist of a metal wire twisted around the ﬁber [ 91 ] . Actuators with such a ﬁber - like structure have shown strains of about 0 . 3 % and active stresses of about 3 MPa , for driving voltages lower than 1 V [ 91 ] . As mentioned above , the deformation of a conducting polymer is strongly anisotropic . In this regard , our lab has re - cently investigated the anisotropic volume change of a PPy ﬁlm grown onto a stainless steel wire . This ﬁber - like conﬁguration has revealed dimensional changes , in the radial direction , one order of magnitude higher than in the axial one [ 84 ] . Such anisotropic deformations shown by conducting polymer ﬁbers are not of practical use , since applications frequently require high strains along the axial direction ( instead of the radial one ) . This disadvantage may be overcome by using mechanisms capable of transforming radial strains into axial strains . A useful tool for such a purpose is represented by the so - called McKibben braided mesh [ 92 ] . In this regard , in order to amplify the axial strain generated by a bundle of conducting polymer ﬁber actuators , our lab has conceived the use of a McKibben - like conﬁguration , able to convert the ﬁber radial expansion in the longitudinal direction [ 84 ] , [ 93 ] . Conducting polymer ﬁbers have today become more readily available . For instance , Santa Fe Science and Technology Inc . produces PAni ﬁbers under the trademark of Panion . They have been used to fabricate linear actuators ( Fig . 11 ) : a bundle of Panion ﬁbers ( operating as an actuating electrode ) is inserted into a Panion hollow ﬁber ( counterelectrode ) with a sepa - rator / electrolyte medium . This kind of actuator , tested with a BMIM BF ionic liquid electrolyte , has reported strains of about 0 . 3 % , stresses of about CARPI AND DE ROSSI : ELECTROACTIVE POLYMER - BASED DEVICES FOR e - TEXTILES IN BIOMEDICINE 303 1 . 8 MPa , and red - ox cycle lifetimes in excess of cycles [ 85 ] , [ 94 ] . These strain and stress values are nearly equal to those re - ported by our group [ 91 ] , whereas the achieved higher lifetimes are a demonstration of the above - mentioned beneﬁcial effect of ionic liquid electrolytes . More recently , tubular conducting polymer actuators with improved actuating capabilities have been proposed by using smart electrical interconnects [ 85 ] , [ 96 ] – [ 98 ] . The principle exploited by these actuators to achieve higher performances is substantially the same as used in [ 90 ] and mentioned above ( distributed electrical contact with high compliance ) , even though it is implemented differently . In fact , its use as working electrode has been proposed , within a typical electrochemical cell conﬁguration , of a conducting polymer hollow tube , having as electrical interconnect a helical platinum wire embedded in the inner wall . Due to its helical shape , this interconnect does not limit the deformation of the conducting polymer , while providing efﬁcient electrical connection on the entire length of the tube . This enables improved performances , so that strains of 5 % have been reported [ 96 ] . Similarly , the deposition of PPy on a tungsten coil resulted in expansion – contraction ratios for one red - ox cycle of about 12 % [ 99 ] . However , despite these new results , much more work has to be done in order to endow textiles with efﬁcient and reliable actuating functions . Dielectric Elastomers Actuators : Dielectric elastomers rep - resent the EAP class with the highest achievable active strains ( order of 100 % ) , as well as considerably high active stresses ( up to 1 MPa ) [ 56 ] . They consist of insulating rubbery polymers , having a low elastic modulus . When a thin ﬁlm of such materials is sandwiched between two compliant electrodes ( e . g . , made of carbon conductive grease ) , and a high voltage difference is ap - plied between them , the polymer undergoes an electric ﬁeld sus - tained deformation , consisting of a thickness squeezing and a related surface expansion [ 56 ] , [ 100 ] . The achievable large de - formations are mainly due to a Coulombian effect , established by means of the electrostatic interactions occurring among free charges on the electrodes . In principle , any kind of dielectric material can be subjected to such an electrostatic squeezing . However , it is evident that the corresponding deformations are markedly emphasised by both the compliance of the electrodes and the polymer soft - ness . These two key features macroscopically distinguish ac - tuating devices made of dielectric elastomers from those based on different electric - ﬁeld - driven dielectrics , such as piezoelec - tric or electrostrictive materials , whose principle of operation is different . Acrylic and silicone rubbers are the most representative ma - terials of the dielectric - elastomer class for actuation purposes ( Table IV ) . Acrylic polymers ( or acrylates ) can exhibit high - level actuating capabilities : thickness strains up to 60 % – 70 % at 400 V m , area strains up to 200 % at 200 V m , and corresponding stresses of some MPa have been demonstrated [ 56 ] . Such performances are enabled by low elastic moduli and high dielectric strengths ( dielectric breakdown can occur at electric ﬁelds of about 500 V m ) , which permit the ap - plication of high electric ﬁelds . Material prestretching , before Fig . 12 . Dielectric elastomer actuators with ( a ) roll , ( b ) tube , and ( c ) new double _ helix electroded conﬁguration . the application of an electric ﬁeld , has been demonstrated to increase active performance , due to the improved elasticity and dielectric strength of the polymer [ 56 ] . Silicones are easily processable ( by spin coating , casting , etc . ) and permit the realization of good rubber - like dielectrics , owing to the high mobility of the Si - O bonds of their molec - ular chains , which confer on them high ﬂexibility . Reported dielectric breakdown of silicones occurs at electric ﬁelds ranging from 100 to 350 V m , enabling thickness strains up to 40 % – 50 % and area strains up to 100 % , with related stresses of 0 . 3 – 0 . 4 MPa [ 56 ] . The excellent ﬁgures of merit possessed by dielectric elas - tomers in several respects ( high actuation strains and stresses , fast response times , high efﬁciency , stability , reliability , and durability ) make them the most highly performing mate - rials currently available for polymer actuation . The price for achieving these high - level capabilities is represented by the high driving electric ﬁelds required ( order of 100 V m ) . For a deﬁnite polymer thickness , such ﬁeld levels can be reached by applying high voltages , which may have disadvantages in many applications . In order to reduce the driving electric ﬁelds , polymers with a high dielectric constant ( or permittivity ) are necessary . In fact , the strain generated by a dielectric elastomer actuator is propor - tional to both the square of the applied electric ﬁeld and the ma - terial dielectric constant [ 56 ] , [ 100 ] . Therefore , elastomers with higher permittivity can be advantageously driven with lower ﬁelds . To this aim , we are currently developing new highly dielec - tric elastomers by using a composite approach . By ﬁlling an ordinary elastomer ( e . g . , silicone ) with a component having a greater dielectric permittivity , it is possible to obtain a re - sulting material showing the fruitful combination of the matrix elasticity and the ﬁller permittivity . For instance , by dispersing 30 wt % titanium dioxide powder into a silicone matrix , a driving ﬁeld reduction of more than 1 / 3 and 1 / 4 has been obtained for the generated strain and stress , respectively [ 101 ] . So far , many conﬁgurations for dielectric elastomer actua - tors have been proposed and demonstrated , including planar , tube , roll , extender , diaphragm , and benders [ 56 ] , [ 57 ] , [ 100 ] , [ 102 ] – [ 107 ] . Tube , and mainly , roll actuators [ Fig . 12 ( a ) and ( b ) ] are ﬂexible devices potentially suitable to endow fabrics with linear ( along a line ) actuation functionalities . These actuators elongate under electrical stimulation . There - fore , they are not useful if electrically activated contractions are 304 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY IN BIOMEDICINE , VOL . 9 , NO . 3 , SEPTEMBER 2005 TABLE V M OST - U SED EAP S AND M ACROMOLECULAR O RGANICS FOR E LECTRONICS AND T HEIR C ONVENTIONAL I NORGANIC C OUNTERPARTS requested . For this purpose , we have developed a new type of dielectric elastomer actuator [ 108 ] , based on a conﬁguration re - cently patented [ 109 ] and represented in Fig . 12 ( c ) . It consists of a hollow cylinder of dielectric elastomer ( e . g . , silicone ) , having two helical compliant electrodes integrated within its wall . By applying a voltage difference between them , the attraction be - tween opposite charges causes an axial contraction of the ac - tuator [ 108 ] . The electromechanical performances of this new type of actuator are currently being studied in our lab . The three kinds of actuators represented in Fig . 12 can be advantageously used for each application requiring high axial elongations or contractions activated and modulated by an electrical signal . Therefore , they represent suitable candidate ﬂexible components for the embedding of “artiﬁcial muscle” functions into garments . However , ﬁber - like implementations of such devices are particularly challenging ( except for the tube conﬁguration ) , and have never been realized . For this reason , the potential use of these actuators for smart textiles has to be regarded , at present , in terms of a low - grade integration of macroscopic devices into textile substrates . VI . EAP - B ASED E LECTRONIC C OMPONENTS Organics with semiconducting electrical properties are fore - cast as materials capable of carrying out , in the near future , most of the electronic functions required by electronic textiles and , more generally , by any sort of ﬂexible structure endowed with electronic components . Flexible electronics for device control and data processing in smart textiles , ﬂexible displays providing different kinds of personal and environmental information , and ﬂexible keyboards for active interaction with wearable devices are just a few examples of possible ﬁelds of application of or - ganic electronics . The replacement of conventional electronic devices with functional plastics for such purposes is encouraged by the mechanical ﬂexibility offered by several organic polymers , overcoming the stiffness of inorganic crystals ( as silicon ) , and by the progressive improvement of their electronic per - formances as semiconductors . Products integrating organic devices , such as displays , are already approaching the market [ 110 ] – [ 112 ] . Organic semiconductors , mainly - electron oligomers and polymers [ 59 ] , [ 60 ] , [ 113 ] , [ 114 ] , have found applications as electronic and optoelectronic ﬂexible components , such as ﬁeld - effect transistors ( FETs ) [ 115 ] – [ 122 ] , LEDs and pho - todiodes [ 123 ] – [ 130 ] , matrix circuits for “electronic paper displays” [ 131 ] , [ 132 ] , etc . Besides oligomers and polymers , carbon nanotubes repre - sent a third kind of organics , with macromolecular structures showing semiconducting properties , which have so far enabled the implementation of high - performance FETs [ 133 ] – [ 142 ] , data storage memories [ 135 ] , [ 143 ] , [ 144 ] , and infrared light emitters [ 145 ] . Table V presents a nonexhaustive list of organic materials mostly studied for electronics in the last decades . Organic elec - troluminescent devices , known as organic light emitting diodes CARPI AND DE ROSSI : ELECTROACTIVE POLYMER - BASED DEVICES FOR e - TEXTILES IN BIOMEDICINE 305 Fig . 13 . Schematic drawing of the structure of an OLED . ( OLEDs ) , can be made of several types of materials , which de - pend on the selection of different emission wave lengths in the visible spectrum . They typically consist of multilayer structures , where organic emitters are embedded between an evaporated metal electrode and a ﬁlm of indium tin oxide ( ITO ) coupled to a plastic or glass substrate ( Fig . 13 ) . Tin - doped indium oxide thin ﬁlms are widely used as trans - parent electrodes , owing to their low electrical resistivity and high transmittance of visible light . By applyinga potentialdiffer - ence between the electrodes , injected charge carriers ( electrons from the cathode , and holes from the anode ) are transported in the emission organic layer , where they recombine , triggering light emission . An additional conducting polymer layer [ e . g . , poly ( 3 , 4 - ethylene dioxythiophene ) ( PEDOT ) ] can be inserted to help hole conduction . These devices are gaining an increasing industrial interest for multicolor ﬂexible displays [ 110 ] , [ 112 ] , owing to their high brightness enabled by low driving voltages ( e . g . , cd / m up to 6 V have been reported [ 124 ] ) . Displays are typically matrices of pixels , consisting of LEDs ( in colored displays , red , green , and blue diodes are positioned very closely ) . Each diode can be activated by means of high - current rows - by - columns electrodes ( passive matrix displays ) or through a dedicated nearby tran - sistor , interrogated via low - current rows - by - columns electrodes ( active matrix displays ) . Several organic semiconductors have shown promising FET performances in terms of both charge carrier mobility ( average drift velocity per unit electric ﬁeld ) and on / off ratio ( ratio of cur - rents of the “on” and “off” states ) . Room - temperature values of 2 . 7 cm Vs and at 10 V , respectively , have been reported for pentacene - based devices [ 119 ] , while carbon nanotube transis - tors have marked record mobilities of cm Vs [ 135 ] , exceeding those of silicon ( about cm Vs [ 146 ] ) , and on / off ratios of [ 133 ] . Organic FETs are typically investigated in the form of thin ﬁlms . The structure of a thin ﬁlm transistor ( TFT ) made of or - ganic materials is reported in Fig . 14 . The insulator consists of dielectric polymers , while graphite - based inks or conducting polymers can be used as ﬂexible elec - trode materials . However , unlike this conﬁguration , transistors Fig . 14 . Schematic drawing of the structure of an organic TFT . are typically fabricated onto substrates ; they consist of silicon for inorganic devices , and glass or plastic for organic implemen - tations different from the one reported above . Although fabri - cation techniques enabling the use of soft substrate materials , such as silicone rubbers , have been recently introduced [ 147 ] , the feasibility of substrateless TFTs has been reported [ 115 ] . Due to their higher ﬂexibility , they can be advantageously used as self - supporting devices for wearable applications . As for conventional FETs , organic TFTs are switched on by the application of an opportune potential difference between gate and source , which establishes a conduction channel be - tween drain and source and controls the occurring ﬂow of cur - rent . The electric ﬁeld responsible for the channel “opening” can be regarded as acting as a sort of capacitor , whose plates are represented by the gate and the conducting channel , sepa - rated by the insulating layer . In order to favorably increase the capacitance of this conﬁguration , the insulator should have the highest possible dielectric constant . Therefore , efforts devoted to the development of high - permittivity polymers for different applications , such as dielectric elastomer actuation ( Section V ) , may be useful in this ﬁeld , too . In order to embed ﬂexible organic TFTs in fabrics for e - tex - tiles , two approaches can be taken into consideration , in prin - ciple . The simpler one foresees the direct application ( e . g . , by printing or sewing ) of these devices onto a textile substrate . The second strategy is more challenging , and aims at realizing tex - tile ﬁbers with endowed electronic functions ( ﬁber electronics ) . Our lab is involved in an ongoing research project funded by the European Commission [ 148 ] , which is following the second approach . Fig . 15 presents a conﬁguration currently under development [ 148 ] , [ 149 ] . It consists of a ribbon - like structure where the gate , the insulating , and the semiconducting layers of several ﬂat TFTs are fabricated onto textile ribbons [ Fig . 15 ( a ) ] , whereas source and drain contacts are provided by thin conducting wires , arranged as described in Fig . 15 ( a ) and ( b ) . Since this conﬁgura - tion is currently under study , characterization data are not avail - able yet . With respect to the development of ﬁber - like ﬂexible struc - tures with semiconducting electronic properties , future results are expected from the use of high - performance organic semi - conductors , such as conjugated polymers and carbon nanotubes , in ﬁber form ( e . g . , by extrusion , electrospinning , wet - or dry - spinning ) . Such ﬁbers may be integrated directly into textile substrates or into polymer matrices , leading , in this latter case , to a modulation of the semiconducting properties , as reported for carbon ﬁber / polymer composites [ 150 ] . Although attempts to develop ﬂexible electronic ﬁbers with inorganic semiconductors ( e . g . , silicon ) have been reported 306 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY IN BIOMEDICINE , VOL . 9 , NO . 3 , SEPTEMBER 2005 Fig . 15 . Textile - based TFTs with ribbon - like structure . ( a ) Lateral view . ( b ) Top view . [ 151 ] , the deﬁnitely superior mechanical compliance and pro - cessability of semiconducting organic materials impose their prominent role in future ﬂexible electronics . VII . EAP - B ASED P OWER S OURCES Any kind of EAP - based sensor , actuator , or electronic com - ponent presented so far requires electrical energy for its use . From the viewpoint of the development of completely ﬂexible wearable systems , the “all - organic paradigm” implies that the electrical energy generation and storage should be performed by devices still based on polymers . Therefore , EAPs with power - source functions are demanded . Such organic power supplies are intended to provide and / or store electrical energy , generated by exploiting different energy sources , such as chemical phenomena , mechanical actions , thermal gradients , or electromagnetic radiation . In order to transduce these forms of energy into useful electricity , several devices can be used , such as electrochemical cells , piezoelec - tric transducers , thermocouples , pyroelectric transducers , and photovoltaic cells , whereas rechargeable batteries and super - capacitors can be adopted as components for electrical energy storage . Among these devices , a particular relevance for e - textiles may be attributed to those capable of harvesting energy from a human body ( comfortably and unobtrusively ) , in order to serve as main or auxiliary energy suppliers for body - powered wearable electrical devices , and for energy storage components . Examples of such generators are represented by piezoelectric transducers ( converting body mechanical energy ) , thermoelec - tric transducers ( converting thermal gradients ) , and pyroelectric transducers ( directly converting body heat ) [ 152 ] , [ 153 ] . The potential beneﬁts of body - power transducers are evident : readily , always available , and ever - lasting energy sources , at no cost , with no need of recharging and with no waste products ( aside from the manufacturing processes of the devices ) . Physical effects , devices , and organic / inorganic materials currently employed for electrical energy generation and storage , and potentially useful for electronic textiles , are listed in Tables VI and VII , and will be separately described in the following sections . A . EAP - Based Electrochemical Cells Electrochemical cells are the most relevant devices for the generation of electrical energy from chemical energy . In their usual implementation , they are composed of two electrodes ( anode and cathode ) dipped into an electrolyte and separated by an ion - conducting separator ( e . g . , salt bridge ) . Frequently , electrodes can be bonded to further conductors working as current collectors , providing lower resistivities . Table VI lists several electrode and electrolyte materials com - monly employed in electrochemical cells based on either all - in - organic , all - organic , or hybrid structures . An electrochemical cell is able to generate a voltage until the red - ox reactions among the electrodes and the electrolyte reach their equilibrium . If a cell does not permit its recharging , it is deﬁned as a primary cell , whereas , if rechargeable , it is called a secondary cell . Although the term battery should properly be reserved to a series connection of several electrochemical cells , from here on , the two terms will be used interchangeably , as it happens in common use . Battery electrodes can consist of metals , transition metal ox - ides , carbon - based materials , or conducting polymers . Metals are typically employed as anodes , metal oxides as cathodes , carbon materials as cathodes and / or current collectors , while polymers can act as both cathodes or anodes [ 154 ] . Due to their high speciﬁc charge , lithium anodes are fre - quently used , and have been widely studied [ 155 ] . The most common nonrechargeable lithium - based battery is the lithium - manganese dioxide cell , which generates about 3 V , whereas the most common rechargeable one is the lithium - ion cell , which can produce about 3 . 6 V and is typically made of a carbon anode , a manganese dioxide cathode , and a solution of lithium salts as the electrolyte . Most commercial batteries typically have inorganic elec - trodes ( metals and transition metal oxides ) or present hybrid structures composed of both inorganic and carbon - based elec - trodes . However , the use of conducting polymers ( electronic , as well as an ionic conductors ) as cathode materials , in combina - tion with a lithium or magnesium anode , has been demonstrated by many authors [ 156 ] – [ 162 ] . Furthermore , several attempts have been reported in order to develop all - organic batteries [ 163 ] – [ 165 ] . As it has been partially shown in the previous sections , and as it will be further discussed in the following ones , electrochem - ical cells have been found , beyond their former use as batteries , to have several kinds of applications , such as actuators , super - capacitors , photovoltaic cells , or electrochromic devices . Elec - trolytes typically used for all these devices can be divided into the following four main classes : aqueous electrolytes , organic liquid electrolytes , SPEs , and ionic liquids . They are brieﬂy de - scribed below . CARPI AND DE ROSSI : ELECTROACTIVE POLYMER - BASED DEVICES FOR e - TEXTILES IN BIOMEDICINE 307 TABLE VI M OST - U SED EAP S AND M ACROMOLECULAR O RGANICS FOR E LECTRICAL E NERGY G ENERATION AND T HEIR C ONVENTIONAL I NORGANIC C OUNTERPARTS Common liquid electrolytes are aqueous and consist of acids ( e . g . , sulphuric acid ( H SO ) or bases [ e . g . , potassium hydroxide ( KOH ) ] . Several cells also use organic liquid elec - trolytes , such as propylene carbonate ( PC ) , EC , dimethyl carbonate ( DMC ) , or diethyl carbonate ( DEC ) . Moreover , in order to improve their electrochemical properties , such organic electrolytes can be employed as solvents for metal salts , such as lithium perchlorate ( LiClO ) , NaClO , or lithium hexaﬂuo - rophosphate ( LiPF ) ( Table VI ) . Certain applications may require solid - state electrolytes , more practical than the liquid ones . Such materials are called SPE ( or polymer ionics ) and typically consist of ion - con - ducting polymers or gels . For instance , composite electrolytes obtained from the immobilization into a polymer matrix of solutions of metal salts in organic liquid solvents are largely used as SPE materials . A typical example is represented by the EC / PAN / NaClO composite , which has also been used by our lab to fabricate ﬁber - like all - polymer electrochemical cells 308 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY IN BIOMEDICINE , VOL . 9 , NO . 3 , SEPTEMBER 2005 TABLE VII M OST - U SED EAP S AND M ACROMOLECULAR O RGANICS FOR E LECTRICAL E NERGY S TORAGE AND T HEIR C ONVENTIONAL I NORGANIC C OUNTERPARTS [ 91 ] . A commercially available SPE is represented by a perﬂu - orosulfonate ionomer , produced by Du Pont under the name of Naﬁon ; this electrolyte has shown performance capabilities in diverse applications , such as supercapacitors ( Section VII - H ) and IPMCs actuators [ 46 ] . More generally , according to Wright [ 166 ] , four main classes of polymer electrolytes can be identiﬁed : 1 ) systems in which a liquid electrolyte solution is fully mixed with a polymer ma - trix or is impregnated in its pores ; 2 ) solvent - free ion - coupled systems in which both cations and ions are free to move within a polymer network ; 3 ) solvent - free single - ion systems in which anions are ﬁxed to the polymer matrix or have limited mobility ; 4 ) decoupled systems in which network channels drive the mo - bility of ions . SPEs are particularly interesting EAPs , since they permit the realization of solid - state batteries [ 166 ] – [ 182 ] . Recently , it has been reported that the use of a particular class of electrolytes , the so - called ionic liquids , can improve life - times and response speeds of diverse types of electrochemical devices , such as actuators , electrochromic devices , and numeric displays [ 85 ] . Typical ionic liquids , such as ethyl ammonium ni - trate ( EtNH NO ) , 1 - butyl - 3 - methylimidazolium tetraﬂuorob - orate ( BMIM BF ) , or 1 - butyl - 3 - methylimidazolium hesaﬂuo - rophosphate ( BMIM PF ) , are salts consisting of organic cations and inorganic anions , ﬂuid at room temperature [ 85 ] , [ 183 ] . In order to couple the attractive performances of ionic liq - uids with the advantages of a solid - state medium , composite electrolytes have been fabricated by mixing ionic liquids with polymer or gel matrices [ 168 ] , [ 169 ] . However , the application of ionic liquids as high - performance electrolytes for electro - chemical devices is very recent ( although they have been known for many decades ) . Therefore , polymer / ionic - liquid composites are not widely studied , and most of the literature in the ﬁeld of all - solid electrochemical cells concerns electrolytes of the polymer type . In this regard , the latest generations of lithium cells are called lithium - polymer cells , since they employ SPEs [ 166 ] , [ 170 ] – [ 173 ] , [ 175 ] , [ 177 ] , [ 180 ] , [ 182 ] . The use of solid electrolytes has permitted building up thin ﬂat batteries , which can have interesting applications as ﬂexible power sources . These devices show typically a ﬁve - layer struc - ture , consisting of a conductor layer working as a current col - lector , an anode layer , an electrolyte / separator layer , a cathode layer , and a further conducting collector layer . Reported exam - ples of such ﬂat batteries , capable of energy densities higher than 100 Wh / kg , employ different SPEs , such as LiPF salts in EC / PC organic liquid mixed with a matrix of PAN [ 173 ] or of poly ( vinylidene ﬂuoride - hexaﬂuoropropylene ) ( P ( VDF - HFP ) ) [ 182 ] . Thin and ﬂexible ﬂat batteries are commercialized by a com - pany called Power Paper [ 184 ] ( Fig . 16 ) . These 1 . 5 - V batteries , which can be printed ( by proprietary ink - like materials ) or pasted onto diverse substrates , have a thickness of 0 . 6 – 0 . 7 mm and are fabricated using zinc and manganese dioxide as anode and cathode materials , respectively ( PowerPaper ) . Similar but thinner , ﬂexible , and ﬂat rechargeable batteries , having a LiCoO cathode , a lithium anode , and lithium phosphorus oxynitride Li PO N ( known as LiPON ) [ 185 ] as a solid electrolyte , are produced by three companies : Front Edge CARPI AND DE ROSSI : ELECTROACTIVE POLYMER - BASED DEVICES FOR e - TEXTILES IN BIOMEDICINE 309 Fig . 16 . Schematic drawing of a ﬂat ﬂexible battery . Fig . 17 . Schematic drawing of the multilayer structure of a ﬁber battery ( from [ 189 ] ) . Fig . 18 . Proposed conﬁguration for textile - based ﬁber batteries ( from [ 191 ] ) . Technology [ 186 ] , Inﬁnite Power Solutions [ 187 ] , and ITN Energy Systems Inc . [ 188 ] . If fabricated directly onto textile substrates , such thin - ﬁlm ﬂexible batteries may ﬁnd future applications in electronic tex - tiles . Nevertheless , in order to ensure a superior grade of integra - tion into textiles and a higher working surface , the ﬁber shaping of electrochemical cells ( such as the one in Fig . 10 , proposed by our lab for actuation ) is preferable to the ﬂat structure . Since 2001 , ITN Energy Systems Inc . has been developing ﬁber bat - teries ( PowerFiber ) , having a conﬁguration inevitably similar to our ﬁber actuators ( owing to the electrochemical nature of both devices ) , as indicated by Fig . 17 [ 189 ] . These ﬁber cells are fabricated by coating a ﬁber with thin ﬁlm layers , consisting of the same materials typically used in ﬂat batteries , such as LiCoO as cathode , lithium as anode , and LiPON as solid electrolyte [ 189 ] , [ 190 ] . ITN Energy Systems Inc . is planning to exploit for textile applications both the struc - tural and energy functions of this kind of ﬁber batteries , ac - cording to the scheme represented in Fig . 18 [ 191 ] . B . EAP - Based Piezoelectric Generators Piezoelectric materials ( Table VI ) , able to convert mechanical energy into electrical energy , can be used for energy harvesting from human actions . Transducers made of such materials can , in fact , be advantageously employed to generate electricity from loads applied by daily activities and movements of a human body ( e . g . , gestures , respiration , or locomotion ) . In particular , one of the possible strategies for the implemen - tation of a comfortable , lightweight , and unobtrusive harvesting of energy from gesture and body - segment movements consists of the insertion of piezoelectric transducers into clothes , prefer - ably corresponding to articulation joints ( e . g . , elbow , knee , shoulder ) . The movement - induced stretching of an electroded piezoelectric strip or ﬁber will cause the generation of a useful electric potential difference across the device . Similarly , energy can be harvested from breathing , by embed - ding into clothes band - like transducers around the chest , capable of exploiting the rhythmic variation of its circumference . These examples indicate that , for these tasks , piezoelectric polymers can be better candidate materials than piezoceramics , because of their higher ﬂexibility ( e . g . , the elastic modulus of PVDF is one order of magnitude lower than that of PZT ) . However , the price for achieving a better ﬁtting of mechan - ical requirements with piezopolymers is paid with a weaker piezoelectric effect result than in piezoceramics ( e . g . , the piezo - electric constant of PVDF is one order of magnitude lower than that of PZT ) . Therefore , the choice in favor of polymer materials with re - spect to ceramics can be motivated mainly when a high degree of ﬂexibility is required . Due to the compliance of the human body , this happens very often for the harvesting of any form of human energy , but not always . For example , in order to generate electricity from locomotion , MIT Media Lab has proposed the integration of piezoelectric transducers into shoes [ 192 ] , [ 193 ] . In this case , involved deformations are lower than those implied by the examples mentioned above , and thus , the high piezoelec - tric response of the employed material can have priority with respect to this ﬂexibility . Therefore , in this application , piezo - ceramics can play a relevant role . In fact , in the MIT Media Lab tests , both a PZT unimorph bender and a PVDF stave , in - serted between the sole and the insole of a shoe , have been investigated . These devices have been able to generate peak powers of 80 and 20 mW , respectively , with average power of 1 . 8 and 1 . 1 mW , respectively [ 192 ] , [ 193 ] . Further develop - ments of such so - called heel - strike generators embedded into insoles of shoes have demonstrated the possibility of achieving average power of 8 . 4 mW with PZT [ 194 ] . C . Dielectric Elastomer Generators A different kind of heel - strike generator capable of harvesting energy from walking has been proposed by Stanford Research Institute ( SRI ) , by using dielectric elastomers [ 57 ] , [ 195 ] , [ 196 ] . The operation principle underlying this kind of transducer is the following . Compliant electrodes ( e . g . , made of carbon grease ) are fabricated on a dielectric elastomer ﬁlm ( typically an acrylic polymer or a silicone rubber ) in order to realize a com - pliant capacitor . When the deformable capacitor is compressed , 310 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY IN BIOMEDICINE , VOL . 9 , NO . 3 , SEPTEMBER 2005 an external generator supplies a bias high voltage , which charges the electrodes . After the removal of the mechanical pressure , the ﬁlm elastically relaxes toward the original dimensions , de - creasing the device capacitance ( the thickness increases , while the electrode area decreases ) . As a result , the voltage across the device is increased ( with respect to its original bias value ) , and the related electrical energy can be delivered to a load . There - fore , this transducer is capable of converting mechanical elastic energy into electrical energy . Based on this principle , the generation of energy densities up to 0 . 4 J / g has been demonstrated [ 57 ] , [ 195 ] , [ 196 ] . How - ever , these interesting performances ( superior to those achiev - able with piezoelectric generators ) have their price ; such devices require additional external generators of bias high voltages . This feature can limit the usefulness of dielectric elastomer genera - tors with respect to the piezoelectric ones . D . Inertial ( or Kinetic ) Generators For the sake of completeness in the panorama of human mechanical energy - transduction systems potentially useful in smart textiles , we focus here our attention on devices able to transduce kinetic energy into electricity ( inertial power generators ) . As an example , they are used in self - powered wristwatches , which take energy from the arm motion of the user during daily activities [ 197 ] . These watches typically embed small mechanical components , having a spindle - mounted magnetic mass , whose rotation , activated by the wearer’s movements , induces electrical currents . More generally , inertial generators ( either rotational or linear ) exploit inertial - forces - induced accelerations of a mass with respect to its housing , which originate electrical energy by electromagnetic induction ( if magnetized ) , or by stressing a piezoelectric material [ 198 ] – [ 200 ] . The ﬁrst feasibility studies for applications of this kind of power sources in the ﬁeld of electronic textiles are on course [ 201 ] . E . EAP - Based Thermoelectric Generators Thermoelectric transducers , known as thermocouples , are devices capable of generating electricity from a temperature gradient . They work according to the Seebeck effect , which consists of the generation of an electric potential difference within a circuit including two different metals , or semicon - ductors ( p - n couples ) , whose junctions are kept at different temperatures ( Fig . 19 ) . The most - used organic and inorganic materials for thermo - couples are listed in Table VI . The thermoelectric effect in or - ganic materials has been studied , mostly in conducting polymers [ 202 ] – [ 206 ] and in carbon / polymer composites [ 207 ] , [ 208 ] . The ﬁgure of merit conventionally used to evaluate the thermoelectric properties of a thermocouple is the product , where is the absolute temperature and is a material parameter , deﬁned as , where is the Seebeck coefﬁcient , is the electrical conductivity , and is the thermal conductivity . High - performance inorganic thermoelectric power genera - tors made of Bi Te Sb Te have demonstrated values of about 2 . 4 [ 209 ] , while nanocomposites of conjugated polymers Fig . 19 . Schematic drawing of a thermoelectric generator working between two different temperatures ( T and T ) . have shown recently very competitive values of about 1 [ 202 ] . Thermoelectric generators can be regarded as one of the pos - sible means of providing power easily to wearable devices by harvesting energy from thermal differences generated by several heat sources , such as the external environment ( natural or arti - ﬁcial ambient heating ) , nearby operating electric devices / com - ponents ( Joule - effect heating ) , or the wearer’s own body ( body heating ) . The human body’s heat , in particular , is a very interesting po - tential source of energy . Body - heat power dissipated with daily activities varies from about 80 W during sleeping , up to about 1500 W while running [ 152 ] , [ 153 ] . Although these numbers would strongly spur the exploitation of this resource of energy with thermoelectric materials , it is opportune to take into consideration some aspects related to this phenomenon , which can be crucial for its successful use . First , one should consider that about 25 % of the total body heat is lost in water evaporation ( e . g . , expulsion of water dif - fused through the skin by sweating , and of water - saturated air by respiration ) . Therefore , only a portion of the total heat ( for example , the one exchanged by radiation ) may be directly ex - ploited for power generation . Second , the amount of heat exchanged by a body with its sur - rounding environment depends on the temperature difference between the two systems ; this modulates the heat ﬂow and the efﬁciency of the harvesting of this energy . In this regard , it has been underlined [ 152 ] , [ 153 ] that , by modeling ( with a very rough approximation ) the energy - recovery process with an ideal Carnot cycle , for a body temperature of C and an ambient temperature of C , the recovery efﬁ - ciency ( represented by the quantity ) drops to the very low value of 3 . 9 % . Despite such low estimates , energy harvesting from body heat represents a very attractive resource for low - power devices , so that it is gaining considerable interest [ 210 ] . Seiko has been the ﬁrst producer of thermoelectric wristwatches powered by a module able to convert the skin / air temperature difference into useful electrical energy [ 211 ] , [ 212 ] . Applied Digital Solutions commercializes a thermoelectric generator having a 1 . 5 cm surface capable of generating 10 W at a few volts from body heat [ 213 ] . Furthermore , industrial efforts directed toward the integration of thermoelectric generators into clothes are repre - sented by the jacket developed by Inﬁneon [ 18 ] , [ 19 ] , [ 21 ] . CARPI AND DE ROSSI : ELECTROACTIVE POLYMER - BASED DEVICES FOR e - TEXTILES IN BIOMEDICINE 311 These examples demonstrate that the generation of electricity from human heat can be considered as a realistic power source for future wearable systems . F . EAP - Based Pyroelectric Generators A material is deﬁned “pyroelectric” if it shows a tempera - ture - dependent spontaneous polarization ( pyroelectric effect ) . Therefore , a pyroelectric material subjected to a temperature variation modiﬁes the amount of opposite charges located on opposite surfaces . As for piezoelectric generators , these charges can be harvested by two electrodes applied to the material ( ca - pacitor - like conﬁguration ) . All pyroelectric materials are also piezoelectric . Therefore , the most - used organic and inorganic pyroelectric materials men - tioned in Table VI are common in the piezoelectric list too . Py - roelectric properties are shown by several EAPs [ 214 ] – [ 216 ] . PVDF and P ( VDF - TrFE ) are the most highly performing ones , having typical pyroelectric coefﬁcients of about 25 C / m K and 40 C / m K , respectively [ 215 ] . For comparison with in - organic materials , we mention that PZT offers a coefﬁcient of 380 C / m K [ 215 ] . Interesting performances have been ob - tained by mixing pyroelectric ceramics with pyroelectric poly - mers , in order to develop ﬂexible active composite structures [ 217 ] – [ 219 ] . Since a variation in the spontaneous polarization of pyroelec - tric materials occurs when they are heated , they may ﬁnd po - tential applications for the harvesting of energy from body heat . However , this use has not been developed yet , and they are typ - ically employed as thermal ( infrared ) radiation sensors [ 215 ] , [ 220 ] , [ 221 ] . G . EAP - Based Photoelectric Generators The photoelectric effect can be exploited for the development of photovoltaic cells able to produce electric energy from elec - tromagnetic radiation . This effect consists of a light - induced dislodging of electrons from atoms . In particular , light absorbed by a photoelectric material generates a pair of negative and pos - itive electric charges ( electrons and holes , respectively ) , which can be collected by two electrodes , originating an electric po - tential difference . The typical structure of an organic photovoltaic cell is iden - tical to that of an OLED ( Section VI ) . A slightly different struc - ture is presented by the so - called photoelectrochemical cells , which include an electrolyte layer coupled to the photoelectric polymer layer [ 222 ] , [ 223 ] . Solar cells are a common example of photovoltaic cells em - ployed to transduce solar energy into electricity [ 224 ] , [ 225 ] . The ﬁrst photovoltaic cells fabricated onto ﬂexible plastic supports have reached the market [ 226 ] . However , the higher ﬂexibility offered by all - organic cells is encouraging the devel - opment of photovoltaic generators based on several EAP semi - conductors , such as conjugated polymers [ 222 ] . Nevertheless , due to their lower efﬁciency of charge carrier photogeneration and higher electrical resistivity ( lower mobility of charge car - riers ) , the energy - conversion efﬁciency of organic photovoltaic devices is still lower than that of the best inorganic semiconduc - tors . In particular , the highest reported conversion efﬁciencies for organic cells are lower than 3 % [ 222 ] , [ 227 ] , corresponding to about 1 / 10 of those enabled by the best solar cells available today , made of inorganic semiconductors [ 228 ] . Organic and inorganic semiconductors most used in photo - voltaic cells are listed in Table VI . Although studies on the fabrication of ﬂexible photovoltaic devices by coating ﬁbers with inorganic semiconductors have been reported , such as cadmium - sulﬁde - coated trylene threads [ 229 ] , [ 230 ] , the advantageous union of the interesting mechan - ical and semiconducting properties shown by organic materials spur their use for ﬂexible photovoltaic generators . Therefore , it is not surprising that , as for organic electroluminescent devices or organic transistors , the development of organic photovoltaic cells is collecting considerable attention and ﬁnancial resources [ 112 ] . Existing devices today make it realistic to foresee for this kind of technology potential applications in electronic textiles for energy harvesting from both natural or artiﬁcial environmental light sources . H . EAP - Based Supercapacitors Electrical energy storage is commonly operated by recharge - able batteries and capacitors . Due to the different means of energy storing ( static charge separation in capacitors , electrochemical accumulation in bat - teries ) , capacitors can typically store low energy densities and supply high power densities , whereas batteries offer inverse per - formances ( high energy densities and low power densities ) . Therefore , these two devices are frequently coupled in par - allel for applications requiring both high energy and power . In such cases , a battery , used as a primary energy source , charges a capacitor , employed as a pulse power supply . However , in consideration of the small amounts of electrical energy den - sity storable by capacitors , this solution reveals its insufﬁciency whenever pulsed high energy is needed , as it happens , for in - stance , in systems compensating sudden and short power inter - ruptions or supplying load - requested current boosts . Aimed at overcoming the intrinsic energy - storage limitation of traditional capacitors and covering the gap between them and batteries , the so - called electrochemical supercapacitors ( or ul - tracapacitors ) are energy - storage devices providing the typical high powers proper of capacitors , as well as high amounts of en - ergy , by means of a high capacitance per unit electrode weight . The structure of a supercapacitor is close to that of batteries , since it consists of two electrodes in contact with an electrolyte and separated by an ion - permeable separator . The supercapac - itance is enabled mainly by the particularity of the electrodes , which are typically porous and have a high area per unit weight . In order to reduce the resistivity of each electrode , contact resis - tances among its constitutive elements ( e . g . , particles or ﬁbers ) are lowered by bonding it to a metal current collector . The high values of capacitance held by these devices can be due to either double - layer capacitances or to red - ox pseudoca - pacitances [ 231 ] – [ 233 ] . The former kind of capacitance originates from two separated layers of charges accumulated at the interface between the elec - trolyte and high - area porous carbon - based electrodes ( such as activated carbons , carbon nanotubes and carbon ﬁbers , or pow - ders , felts , foams , or aerogels [ 232 ] , [ 234 ] – [ 237 ] ) . 312 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY IN BIOMEDICINE , VOL . 9 , NO . 3 , SEPTEMBER 2005 Differently , red - ox pseudocapacitances arise with electrodes made of either conducting polymers ( such as PAni , PPy , and polythiophene derivatives [ 232 ] , [ 238 ] – [ 241 ] ) , transition metal oxides ( such as RuO , Co O and IrO [ 231 ] , [ 232 ] , [ 235 ] ) , or both such materials operating with / within carbon - based struc - tures ( hybrid devices ) [ 232 ] , [ 242 ] – [ 244 ] . Supercapacitors with carbon - based electrodes have shown values of capacitance per unit electrode weight of 75 – 175 F / g with aqueous electrolytes , and 40 – 100 F / g with organic elec - trolytes [ 231 ] , [ 235 ] . Organic solid composite electrolytes consisting of gels or polymers matrices ﬁlled with ion conductors have been studied for the development of all - organic supercapacitors [ 245 ] – [ 247 ] . Very recently , the use of Naﬁon as an SPE for supercapaci - tors has permitted the achievement of a speciﬁc capacitance of 130 F / g with electrodes made of activated carbon and having a speciﬁc area of 1500 m g [ 248 ] . In comparison with batteries , supercapacitors show typically higher power densities ( 300 – 500 W / kg [ 231 ] ) , but still lower energy densities ( 3 – 5 Wh / Kg [ 231 ] ) . Furthermore , they present lower charging or self - discharging times and extremely high lifetimes , being very little affected by cycling and age . In fact , unlike rechargeable batteries , supercapacitors can be recharged and discharged millions of times without performance degrada - tion ( high service life ) , and retain their capacitance even if left unused for long periods ( high shelf life ) . Particularly interesting for electronic textiles is the recent development of super - tough carbon nanotube ﬁbers , which have been used to build ﬁber supercapacitors woven into a textile substrate ( Fig . 20 ) [ 249 ] . Each ﬁber - shaped device has been realized by twisting together two 100 m - diameter carbon nanotube composite ﬁbers , separately dipping - coated with aqueous polyvinyl alcohol / phosphoric acid electrolyte . Following the twisting , both ﬁbers have been recoated with the electrolyte . Such supercapacitors have shown a speciﬁc capacitance of 5 F / g and an energy density of 0 . 6 Wh / kg at 1 V [ 249 ] . VIII . E LECTRICAL W IRING M ATERIALS In order to electrically interconnect devices within an e - tex - tile , several kinds of conductive tracks are currently under in - vestigation by many research groups . These tracks should be , of course , electroconductive and as ﬂexible as possible , in order to ensure the wearability of the system . The intrinsic compliance of - electron conjugated con - ducting polymers , such as PAni and PPy , would make them potentially useful for this purpose . In fact , chemical doping of such polymers can drastically improve their conductivity , so that values approaching those of metals are available today [ 59 ] , [ 60 ] . However , despite this , conducting polymers have not found applications as electrical wiring materials for e - textiles so far . Carbon / elastomer composites over the percolation threshold can be useful , as well . For instance , they are currently employed in our lab not only for strain sensing , but also as materials for electrical reading of sensors ( Section IV - A ) . However , with the Fig . 20 . Photograph of two carbon nanotube ﬁber supercapacitors integrated into a textile ( adapted from [ 249 ] ) . Fig . 21 . Woven metallic organza ( from [ 23 ] ) . exception of this example , they are generally not used for elec - trical wiring . Conversely , metal conductors have been largely adopted so far . In particular , several textile - based electrical interconnects have been reported as a means of device interconnection for both data and power transmission , such as woven gold helixes wrapped with textile threads [ 23 ] , silk organza fabrics having threads wrapped with thin copper foils ( Fig . 21 ) [ 23 ] , [ 24 ] , woven stainless steel conductors [ 26 ] , polyester yarns twisted with copper thin wires [ 5 ] , narrow woven copper wires suitable for the integration of USB connectors [ 250 ] , or polyester fabric ribbons with embedded conductive warp parallel threads where circuit boards can be soldered [ 5 ] , [ 18 ] , [ 19 ] . As an observation , we stress here that conductive ﬁbers integrated into textiles have been also proposed as wearable antennas [ 18 ] – [ 20 ] . With respect to future developments of interconnection tech - nology for e - textiles , we underline , in addition to fancy pro - posals of intrabody transport of data and low power [ 251 ] , two very recent results that are potentially useful . The ﬁrst one con - cerns the new super - tough carbon nanotube ﬁbers mentioned in Section VII - H , which could be employed as ﬁber conductors [ 249 ] ; the second one refers to new highly stretchable tortuous metal wires , working as spring - like conductors [ 252 ] . IX . C ONCLUSIONS AND F UTURE D EVELOPMENTS Smart electronic textiles are investigated as wearable man – machine interfaces . Such systems are conceived to bring technological achievements closer to users , by embedding smart functions into everyday clothes , with recognized beneﬁts for , but not restricted to , several biomedical disciplines . In this context , advantages derived from the exploitation of intrinsic multifunctional properties of several EAPs have been shown . In particular , most highly performing EAP - based sensors , CARPI AND DE ROSSI : ELECTROACTIVE POLYMER - BASED DEVICES FOR e - TEXTILES IN BIOMEDICINE 313 actuators , electronic components , and power sources currently under development have been described , with reference to their potential or demonstrated implementation in fabric - based conﬁgurations . The near - future developments of such EAP - based e - textiles open new challenges . One of them concerns the improvement of the wearability of EAP devices by means of textile - compatible conﬁgurations and shapes , preferably in ﬁber form . This implies the develop - ment of device manufacturing processes ( extrusion , electrospin - ning , wet - or dry - spinning , casting , etc . ) and textile technologies ( weaving , coweaving , knitting , jacquard , coating , printing , etc . ) for their integration into fabrics . Furthermore , new engineering approaches are required in order to properly manage such new devices and systems . As an example , we just mention here that reading strategies for strain sensors should take into account the compliance of these de - vices and their distributed embedding in large and deformable surfaces . This requires the deﬁnition of ad hoc mathematical algorithms for the reconstruction of body dynamics from sets of acquired data ( “inversion” techniques ) . Our lab is currently adopting “functional” strategies , aimed at the identiﬁcation of a resulting gesture held by a subject wearing the sensorized system , regardless of the state of individual sensors [ 65 ] . Despite these and other challenges ( such as improvement of device reliability and efﬁciency ) , whose analysis is not intended here , the integration into fabrics of EAP - based dis - tributed sensing , actuating , electronic , and power functions represents , in our opinion , one of the means of having great potentialities for the development of completely wearable electronic textiles . R EFERENCES [ 1 ] M . Billinghurst and T . Starner , “Wearable devices : New ways to manage information , ” IEEE Computer , vol . 32 , no . 1 , pp . 57 – 64 , 1999 . [ 2 ] D . De Rossi , A . Della Santa , and A . Mazzoldi , “Dressware : Wearable hardware , ” Mat . Sci . Eng . C , vol . 7 , pp . 31 – 35 , 1999 . [ 3 ] R . F . Service , “Electronic textiles charge ahead , ” Science , vol . 301 , pp . 909 – 911 , 2003 . [ 4 ] S . Park and S . Jayaraman , “Enhancing the quality of life through wear - able technology , ” IEEE Trans . Eng . Med . Biol . , vol . 22 , no . 3 , pp . 41 – 48 , Mar . 2003 . [ 5 ] D . Marculescu et al . , “Electronic textiles : A platform for pervasive com - puting , ” Proc . IEEE , vol . 91 , no . 12 , pp . 1995 – 2018 , Dec . 2003 . [ 6 ] P . F . Binkley , “Predicting the potential of wearable technology , ” IEEE Trans . Eng . Med . Biol . , vol . 22 , no . 3 , pp . 23 – 27 , Mar . 2003 . [ 7 ] J . M . Winters , Y . Wang , and J . M . Winters , “Wearable sensors and tel - erehabilitation , ” IEEE Trans . Eng . Med . Biol . , vol . 22 , no . 3 , pp . 56 – 65 , Mar . 2003 . [ 8 ] D . De Rossi , F . Lorussi , A . Mazzoldi , P . Orsini , and E . P . Scilingo , “Ac - tive dressware : Wearable kinesthetic systems’ , ” in Sensors & Sensing in Biology & Engineering , J . Secomb , Ed . New York : Springer - Verlag , 2003 , pp . 381 – 394 . [ 9 ] D . De Rossi , F . Carpi , F . Lorussi , A . Mazzoldi , R . Paradiso , E . P . Scilingo , and A . Tognetti , “Electroactive fabrics and wearable biomon - itoring devices , ” AUTEX Res . J . , vol . 3 , no . 4 , pp . 180 – 185 , 2003 . [ 10 ] D . De Rossi , F . Carpi , F . Lorussi , R . Paradiso , E . P . Scilingo , and A . Tognetti , “Electroactive fabrics and wearable man - machine interfaces , ” in Wearable Electronics and Photonics , X . - M . Tao , Ed . Cambridge , U . K . : Woodhead , 2005 . [ 11 ] A . Tognetti , F . Carpi , F . Lorussi , A . Mazzoldi , P . Orsini , E . P . Scilingo , M . Tesconi , andD . DeRossi , “Wearablesensory - motororthosesfortele - rehabilitation , ”in Proc . 25thAnnu . Int . Conf . IEEEEng . Med . Biol . Soc . , Cancun , Mexico , Sep . 2003 , pp . 3724 – 3727 . [ 12 ] D . DeRossi , F . Lorussi , andE . P . Scilingo , “Artiﬁcialkinestheticsystems for telerehabilitation , ” in Proc . Int . Workshop New Generation Wear - ableSyst . fore - Health : TowardRevolutionofCitizens’Health , LifeStyle Management ? , Lucca , Italy , 2003 , pp . 129 – 133 . [ 13 ] D . De Rossi , F . Carpi , F . Lorussi , A . Mazzoldi , E . P . Scilingo , and A . Tognetti , “Electroactive fabrics for distributed , conformable and inter - active systems , ” presented at the IEEE Sensors Conf . , Orlando , FL , Oct . 2002 . [ 14 ] R . Paradiso , “Wearable health care system for vital signs monitoring , ” in Proc . 4th Annu . IEEE Conf . Inf . Technol . Applic . Biomed . , Birmingham , U . K . , Apr . 2003 , pp . 283 – 286 . [ 15 ] R . Paradiso , A . Gemignani , E . P . Scilingo , and D . De Rossi , “Knitted bioclothes for cardiopulmonary monitoring , ” in Proc . 25th Annu . Int . Conf . IEEE Eng . Med . Biol . Soc . , Cancun , Mexico , Sep . 2003 , pp . 3720 – 3723 . [ 16 ] R . Paradiso , G . Loriga , N . Taccini , M . Pacelli , and R . Orselli , “Wearable system for vital signs monitoring , ” in Proc . Int . Workshop New Genera - tion WearableSyst . fore - Health : TowardRevolution ofCitizens’Health , Life Style Management ? , Lucca , Italy , 2003 , pp . 161 – 168 . [ 17 ] D . I . Lehn , C . W . Neely , K . Schoonover , T . L . Martin , and M . T . Jones , “Ettachments for e - textiles , ” presented at the 7th IEEE Int . Symp . Wear - able Computers , Boulder , CO , Nov . 5 – 8 , 2003 . [ 18 ] W . Weber , “Electronics in textiles : The next stage in man machine interaction , ” presented at the 2nd CREST Workshop Adv . Computing Commun . Tech . Wearable Inf . Playing , Nara , Japan , May 23 – 24 , 2003 . [ 19 ] S . Jung , C . Lauterbach , M . Strasser , and W . Weber , “Enabling technolo - gies for disappearing electronics in smart textiles , ” in Proc . IEEE Int . Solid - State Circuits Conf . , vol . 1 , 2003 , pp . 386 – 387 . [ 20 ] C . Winterhalter , J . Slade , J . Teverovsky , B . Farrell , J . Bowman , M . Ag - paoa - Kraus , P . Wilson , J . Pederson , J . Merenda , W . Horowitz , and E . Tierney , “Textile - based antennas , ” in Proc . Mat . Res . Soc . Symp . , vol . 736 , 2002 , pp . 91 – 97 . [ 21 ] Inﬁneon Technologies . Wearable Electronics . [ Online ] . Available : http : / / www . wearable - electronics . de / intl / fotos _ presse . asp [ 22 ] K . VanLaerhoven , A . Schmidt , andH . - W . Gellersen , “Multi - sensorcon - text aware clothing , ” in Proc . 6th Int . Symp . Wearable Computers , 2002 , pp . 49 – 56 . [ 23 ] E . R . Post , M . Orth , P . R . Russo , and N . Gershenfeld , “E - broidery : De - sign and fabrication of textile - based computing , ” IBM Syst . J . , vol . 39 , no . 3 / 4 , pp . 840 – 860 , 2000 . [ 24 ] E . R . Post and M . Orth , “Smart fabric , or ‘wearable clothing’ , ” in Proc . 1st IEEE Int . Symp . Wearable Computers , 1997 , pp . 167 – 168 . [ 25 ] E . J . Lind , R . Eisler , G . Burghart , S . Jayaraman , P . Sungmee , R . Ra - jamanickam , and T . McKee , “A sensate liner for personnel monitoring applications , ” in Proc . 1st IEEE Int . Symp . Wearable Computers , 1997 , pp . 98 – 105 . [ 26 ] M . M . Gorlick , “Electric suspenders : A fabric power bus and data net - work for wearable digital devices , ” in Proc . 3rd IEEE Int . Symp . Wear - able Computers , 1999 , pp . 114 – 121 . [ 27 ] The Georgia Tech Wearable Motherboard . [ Online ] . Available : http : / / www . smartshirt . gatech . edu [ 28 ] S . Park , K . Mackenzie , and S . Jayaraman , “The wearable motherboard : A framework for personalized mobile information processing ( PMIP ) , ” presented at the ACM / IEEE 39th Des . Autom . Conf . , New Orleans , LA , Jun . , 10 – 14 2002 . [ 29 ] C . Gopalsamy , S . Park , R . Rajamanickam , andS . Jayaraman , “Thewear - able motherboard : The ﬁrst generation of adaptive and responsive tex - tile structures ( ARTS ) for medical applications , ” J . Virtual Reality , vol . 4 , pp . 152 – 168 , 1999 . [ 30 ] R . Rajamanickam , S . Park , and S . Jayaraman , “A structured method - ology for the design and development of textile structures in a concur - rent engineering environment , ” J . Textile Inst . , vol . 89 , no . 3 , pp . 44 – 62 , 1998 . [ 31 ] S . Park , C . Gopalsamy , R . Rajamanickam , and S . Jayaraman , “The wearable motherboard : An information infrastructure or sensate liner for medical applications , ” Stud . Health Technol . Informatics , vol . 62 , pp . 252 – 258 , 1999 . [ 32 ] Sensatex SmartShirt . . [ Online ] . Available : http : / / www . sensatex . com [ 33 ] M . El - Sherif , K . Fidanboylu , R . Gafsi , J . Yuan , K . Richards , and C . Lee , “A novel ﬁber optic system for measuring the dynamic structural be - havior of parachutes , ” J . Intell . Mat . Syst . Struct . , vol . 11 , no . 5 , pp . 351 – 359 , 2000 . [ 34 ] M . El - Sherif , “Smartfabrics : Integratingﬁberopticsensorsandinforma - tion networks , ” in Proc . Int . Workshop New Generation Wearable Syst . for e - Health : Toward Revolution of Citizens’ Health , Life Style Manage - ment ? , Lucca , Italy , 2003 , pp . 250 – 257 . 314 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY IN BIOMEDICINE , VOL . 9 , NO . 3 , SEPTEMBER 2005 [ 35 ] Vivometrics Inc . . LifeShirt . [ Online ] . Available : http : / / www . vivomet - rics . com / site / index . html [ 36 ] P . Grossman , “The LifeShirt : A multi - function ambulatory system that monitors health , disease , and medical intervention in the real world , ” in Proc . Int . Workshop New Generation Wearable Syst . for e - Health : Toward Revolution of Citizens’ Health , Life Style Management ? , Lucca , Italy , 2003 , pp . 73 – 80 . [ 37 ] F . H . Wilhelm , W . T . Roth , and M . A . Sackner . The LifeShirt : An Advanced system for ambulatory measurement of respiratory and cardiac function . [ Online ] . Available : http : / / www . vivometrics . com / site / res _ whitepapers . html [ 38 ] VTAM Project . [ Online ] . Available : http : / / www . medes . fr / VTAMN . html [ 39 ] J . - L . Weber , D . Blanc , A . Dittmar , B . Comet , C . Corroy , N . Noury , R . Baghai , S . Vayasse , and A . Blinowska , “Telemonitoring of vital param - eters with newly designed biomedical clothing VTAM , ” in Proc . Int . Workshop New Generation Wearable Syst . for e - Health : Toward Revo - lution of Citizens’ Health , Life Style Management ? , Lucca , Italy , 2003 , pp . 169 – 174 . [ 40 ] Verhaert . Mamagoose Pajama . [ Online ] . Available : www . ver - haert . com / pdfs / Verhaert % 20mamagoose . pdf [ 41 ] T . Kirstein , M . Lawrence , and G . Tröster , “Functional electrical stimu - lation ( FES ) with smart textile electrodes , ” in Proc . Int . Workshop New Generation Wearable Syst . for e - Health : Toward Revolution of Citizens’ Health , Life Style Management ? , Lucca , Italy , 2003 , pp . 201 – 208 . [ 42 ] Smartex S . r . l . . [ Online ] . Available : http : / / www . smartex . it [ 43 ] Y . Bar - Cohen , Ed . , Electroactive Polymer ( EAP ) Actuators as Artiﬁcial Muscles . Reality , Potential , and Challenges . Washington , DC : SPIE , p . 2001 . [ 44 ] D . De Rossi , K . Kajiwara , A . Yamauchi , and Y . Osada , Eds . , Polymer Gels—Foundamentals and Biomedical Applications . London , U . K . : Plenum , 1990 . [ 45 ] S . Tadokoro , T . Takamori , and J . Oguro , “Modeling IPMC for design of actuation mechanisms , ” in Polymer Sensors and Actuators , Y . Osada and D . De Rossi , Eds . Berlin , Germany : Springer , 2000 . [ 46 ] M . Shahinpoor , Y . Bar - Cohen , J . O . Simpson , and J . Smith , “Ionic polymer - metal composites ( IPMCs ) as biomimetic sensors , actuators and artiﬁcial muscles—a review , ” Smart Mat . Struct . , vol . 7 , pp . R15 – R30 , 1998 . [ 47 ] A . Mazzoldi , A . Della Santa , and D . De Rossi , “Conducting polymer actuators : Properties and modeling , ” in Polymer Sensors and Actuators , Y . Osada and D . De Rossi , Eds . Berlin , Germany : Springer , 2000 , pp . 207 – 244 . [ 48 ] R . H . Baughman and L . V . Shacklette , Science and Application of Con - ducting Polymers , W . R . Salaneck , D . T . Clark , and E . J . Samuelsen , Eds . New York : Adam Hilger , 1990 . [ 49 ] R . H . Baughman , “Conducting polymer artiﬁcial muscles , ” Synth . Met . , vol . 78 , pp . 339 – 353 , 1996 . [ 50 ] R . H . Baughman , C . Cui , A . A . Zakhidov , Z . Iqbal , J . N . Barisci , G . M . Spinks , G . G . Wallace , A . Mazzoldi , D . De Rossi , A . G . Rinzler , O . Jaschinski , S . Roth , and M . Kertesz , “Carbon nanotube actuators , ” Science , vol . 284 , pp . 1340 – 1344 , 1999 . [ 51 ] G . M . Spinks , G . G . Wallace , L . S . Fiﬁeld , L . R . Dalton , A . Mazzoldi , D . De Rossi , I . I . Khayrullin , and R . H . Baughman , “Pneumatic carbon nanotube actuators , ” Adv . Mater . , vol . 14 , no . 23 , pp . 1728 – 1732 , 2002 . [ 52 ] H . Singh Nalwa , Ed . , Ferroelectric Polymers—Chemistry , Physics and Applications . . New York : Marcel Dekker , 1995 . [ 53 ] Q . M . Zhang , V . Bharti , and X . Zhao , “Giant electrostriction and relaxor ferroelectric behavior in electron - irradiated poly ( vinylidene ﬂuoride - triﬂuoroethylene ) copolymer , ” Science , vol . 280 , pp . 2101 – 2104 , 1998 . [ 54 ] Q . M . Zhang , H . Li , M . Poh , F . Xia , Z . - Y . Cheng , H . Xu , and C . Huang , “An all - organic composite actuator with a high dielectric constant , ” Na - ture , vol . 419 , pp . 284 – 287 , 2002 . [ 55 ] W . Lehmann , H . Skupin , C . Tolksdorf , E . Gebhard , R . Zentel , P . Krüger , M . Lösche , and F . Kremer , “Giant lateral electrostriction in ferroelectric liquid - crystalline elastomers , ” Nature , vol . 410 , pp . 447 – 450 , 2001 . [ 56 ] R . Pelrine , R . Kornbluh , Q . Pei , and J . Joseph , “High - speed electrically actuated elastomers with strain greater than 100 % , ” Science , vol . 287 , pp . 836 – 839 , 2000 . [ 57 ] S . Ashley , “Artiﬁcial muscles , ” Sci . Amer . , pp . 52 – 59 , Oct . 2003 . [ 58 ] M . Sergio , N . Manaresi , M . Tartagni , R . Guerrieri , and R . Canegallo , “A textile based capacitive pressure sensor , ” in Proc . IEEE Sensors , vol . 2 , 2002 , pp . 1625 – 1630 . [ 59 ] A . G . MacDiarmid , “‘Synthetic metals’ : A novel role for organic poly - mers , ” Current Appl . Phys . , vol . 1 , pp . 269 – 279 , 2001 . [ 60 ] A . J . Heeger , “Semiconducting and metallic polymers : The fourth gen - eration of polymeric materials , ” J . Phys . Chem . B , vol . 105 , no . 36 , pp . 8475 – 8491 , 2001 . [ 61 ] D . De Rossi , F . Lorussi , A . Mazzoldi , P . Orsini , and E . P . Scilingo , “Monitoring body kinematics and gesture through sensing fabrics , ” in Proc . 1st Annu . Int . IEEE - EMBS Special Topic Conf . Microtechnol . Med . Biol . , Lyon , France , Oct . 2000 , pp . 587 – 592 . [ 62 ] D . De Rossi , F . Lorussi , A . Mazzoldi , E . P . Scilingo , and P . Orsini , “Ac - tive dressware : Wearable proprioceptive systems based on electroactive polymers , ” in Proc . 5th Int . IEEE Symp . Wearable Computers , 2001 , pp . 161 – 162 . [ 63 ] E . P . Scilingo , F . Lorussi , A . Mazzoldi , and D . De Rossi , “Strain - sensing fabrics for wearable kinaesthetic - like systems , ” IEEE Sensors J . , vol . 3 , no . 4 , pp . 460 – 467 , Apr . 2003 . [ 64 ] B . J . Muro , J . R . Steele , T . E . Campbell , and G . G . Wallace , “Wearable textile biofeedback systems : Are they too intelligent for the wearer ? , ” in Proc . Int . Workshop New Generation Wearable Syst . for e - Health : Toward Revolution of Citizens’ Health , Life Style Management ? , Lucca , Italy , 2003 , pp . 187 – 193 . [ 65 ] F . Lorussi , W . Rocchia , E . P . Scilingo , A . Tognetti , and D . De Rossi , “Wearable , redundant fabric - based sensor arrays for reconstruction of body segment posture , ” IEEE Sensors J . , vol . 4 , no . 6 , pp . 807 – 818 , Jun . 2004 . [ 66 ] F . Lorussi , A . Tognetti , M . Tesconi , P . Pastacaldi , and D . De Rossi , “Strain sensing fabric for hand posture and gesture monitoring , ” in Proc . Int . Workshop New Generation Wearable Syst . for e - Health : Toward Revolution of Citizens’ Health , Life Style Management ? , Lucca , Italy , 2003 , pp . 175 – 180 . [ 67 ] WEALTHY Project . [ Online ] . Available : http : / / www . wealthy - ist . com [ 68 ] J . Farringdon , A . J . Moore , N . Tilbury , J . Church , and P . D . Biemond , “Wearable sensor badge and sensor jacket for context awareness , ” in Proc . 3rd Int . Symp . Wearable Computers , 1999 , pp . 107 – 113 . [ 69 ] M . Bickerton , P . Gough , and R . Pibworth , “Dance like a star , ” in Proc . Int . Workshop New Generation Wearable Syst . for e - Health : Toward Revolution of Citizens’ Health , Life Style Management ? , Lucca , Italy , 2003 , pp . 181 – 186 . [ 70 ] R . Wijesiriwardana , T . Dias , and S . Mukhopadhyay , “Resistive ﬁber - meshed transducers , ”in Proc . 7th IEEE Int . Symp . WearableComputers , 2003 , pp . 200 – 209 . [ 71 ] J . Edmison , M . Jones , Z . Nakad , and T . Martin , “Using piezoelectric materials for wearable electronic textiles , ” in Proc . 6th IEEE Int . Symp . Wearable Computers , 2002 , pp . 41 – 48 . [ 72 ] S . Carosio and A . Monero , “Smart and hybrid materials : Perspectives for their use in textile structures for better health care , ” in Proc . Int . Workshop New Generation Wearable Syst . for e - Health : Toward Rev - olution of Citizens’ Health , Life Style Management ? , Lucca , Italy , 2003 , pp . 271 – 280 . [ 73 ] T . F . Otero and M . T . Cortes , “Artiﬁcial muscles with tactile sensitivity , ” Adv . Mater . , vol . 15 , no . 3 , pp . 279 – 282 , 2003 . [ 74 ] G . M . Spinks , L . Liu , G . G . Wallace , and D . Zhou , “Strain response from polypyrrole actuators under load , ” Adv . Funct . Mater . , vol . 12 , no . 6 – 7 , pp . 437 – 440 , 2002 . [ 75 ] T . W . Lewis , G . M . Spinks , G . G . Wallace , A . Mazzoldi , and D . De Rossi , “Investigationoftheappliedpotentiallimitsforpolypyrrolewhen employed as the active components of a two - electrode device , ” Synth . Met . , vol . 122 , pp . 379 – 385 , 2001 . [ 76 ] E . E . H . Jager , E . Smela , and O . Inganas , “Microfabricating conjugated polymer actuators , ” Science , vol . 290 , pp . 1540 – 1545 , 2000 . [ 77 ] D . De Rossi , A . Della Santa , and A . Mazzoldi , “Performance and work capacity of a polypyrrole conducting polymer linear actuator , ” Synth . Met . , vol . 90 , pp . 93 – 100 , 1997 . [ 78 ] A . Della Santa , D . De Rossi , and A . Mazzoldi , “Characterization and modeling of a conducting polymer muscle - like linear actuator , ” Smart Mater . Struct . , vol . 6 , no . 1 , pp . 23 – 34 , 1997 . [ 79 ] M . R . Gandhi , P . Murray , G . M . Spinks , and G . G . Wallace , “Mechanism of electromechanical actuation in polypyrrole , ” Synth . Met . , vol . 73 , pp . 247 – 256 , 1995 . [ 80 ] K . Kaneto , M . Kaneko , Y . Min , and A . G . MacDiarmid , “’Artiﬁcial muscle’ : Electromechanical actuators using polyaniline ﬁlms , ” Synth . Met . , vol . 71 , pp . 2211 – 2212 , 1995 . [ 81 ] P . Chiarelli , D . De Rossi , A . Della Santa , and A . Mazzoldi , “Doping in - duced volume change in a (cid:25) - conjugated conducting polymer , ” Polymer Gels Netw . , vol . 2 , pp . 289 – 297 , 1994 . [ 82 ] L . Bay , T . Jacobsen , S . Skaarup , and K . West , “Mechanism of actuation in conducting polymers : Osmotic expansion , ” J . Phys . Chem . B . , vol . 105 , no . 36 , pp . 8492 – 8497 , 2001 . CARPI AND DE ROSSI : ELECTROACTIVE POLYMER - BASED DEVICES FOR e - TEXTILES IN BIOMEDICINE 315 [ 83 ] E . Smela and N . Gadegaard , “Surprising volume change in PPY ( DBS ) : An atomic force microscopy study , ” Adv . Mater . , vol . 11 , no . 11 , pp . 953 – 957 , 1999 . [ 84 ] A . Mazzoldi , F . Carpi , and D . De Rossi , “Polymers responding to elec - trical or electrochemical stimuli for linear actuators , ” Ann . Chim . - Sci . Mat . , vol . 29 , no . 6 , pp . 55 – 64 , 2004 . [ 85 ] W . Lu , A . G . Fadeev , B . Qi , E . Smela , B . R . Mattes , J . Ding , G . M . Spinks , J . Mazurkiewicz , D . Zhou , G . G . Wallace , D . R . MacFarlane , S . A . Forsyth , and M . Forsyth , “Use of ionic liquids for (cid:25) - conjugated polymerelectrochemicaldevices , ” Science , vol . 297 , pp . 983 – 987 , 2002 . [ 86 ] J . Ding , D . Zhou , G . Spinks , G . Wallace , S . Forsyth , M . Forsyth , and D . MacFarlane , “Use of ionic liquids as electrolytes in electromechan - ical actuator systems based on inherently conducting polymers , ” Chem . Mater . , vol . 15 , pp . 2392 – 2398 , 2003 . [ 87 ] J . D . Madden , R . A . Cush , T . S . Kanigan , and I . W . Hunter , “Fast con - tractingpolypyrroleactuators , ” Synth . Met . , vol . 113 , pp . 185 – 192 , 2000 . [ 88 ] J . N . Barisci , G . M . Spinks , G . G . Wallace , J . D . Madden , and R . H . Baughman , “Increased actuation rate of electromechanical carbon nan - otube actuators using potential pulses with resistance compensation , ” Smart Mat . Struct . , vol . 12 , pp . 549 – 555 , 2003 . [ 89 ] S . Hara , T . Zama , S . Sewa , W . Takashima , and K . Kaneto , “Highly stretchable and powerful polypyrrole linear actuators , ” Chem . Lett . , vol . 32 , no . 7 , pp . 576 – 577 , 2003 . [ 90 ] L . Bay , K . West , and P . Sommer - Larsen , “A conducting polymer ar - tiﬁcial muscle with 12 % linear strain , ” Adv . Mat . , vol . 15 , no . 4 , pp . 310 – 313 , 2003 . [ 91 ] A . Mazzoldi , C . Degl’Innocenti , M . Michelucci , andD . DeRossi , “Actu - ativepropertiesofpolyaniline ﬁbersunderelectrochemicalstimulation , ” Mat . Sci . Eng . C , vol . 6 , pp . 65 – 72 , 1998 . [ 92 ] C . P . Chou and B . Hannaford , Proc . IEEE Int . Conf . Robot . Autom . . San Diego , CA , 1994 , p . 281 . [ 93 ] D . De Rossi , F . Lorussi , A . Mazzoldi , W . Rocchia , and E . P . Scilingo , “A strain ampliﬁed electroactive polymer actuator for haptic interfaces , ” in Proc . of the SPIE Electroactive Polymer Actuators Devices Conf . , Smart Struct . Mat . Symp . , vol . 4329 , Newport Beach , CA , 2001 , pp . 43 – 53 . [ 94 ] B . Mattes , “Electronic textiles based on intrinsically conducting polymer ﬁber , ” in Proc . Int . Workshop New Generation Wearable Syst . for e - Health : Toward Revolution of Citizens’ Health , Life Style Management ? , Lucca , Italy , 2003 , pp . 245 – 247 . [ 95 ] Jet Propulsion Lab . . [ Online ] . Available : http : / / ndeaa . jpl . nasa . gov / nasa - nde / lommas / eap / EAP - material - n - products . htm [ 96 ] J . Ding , L . Liu , G . M . Spinks , D . Zhou , G . G . Wallace , and J . Gillespie , “High performance conducting polymer actuators utilising a tubular geometry and helical wire interconnects , ” Synth . Met . , vol . 138 , pp . 391 – 398 , 2003 . [ 97 ] J . Ding , D . Zhou , G . Spinks , G . Wallace , S . Forsyth , M . Forsyth , and D . MacFarlane , “Use of ionic liquids as electrolytes in electromechan - ical actuator systems based on inherently conducting polymers , ” Chem . Mater . , vol . 15 , pp . 2392 – 2398 , 2003 . [ 98 ] G . G . Wallace , T . E . Campbell , P . C . Innis , G . M . Spinks , C . O . Too , J . Wang , B . Xi , D . Zhou , J . Steele , and B . Munro , “Intelligent textiles : Wearable sensors , actuators and energy storage systems , ” in Proc . Int . Workshop New Generation Wearable Syst . for e - Health : Toward Revo - lution of Citizens’ Health , Life Style Management ? , Lucca , Italy , 2003 , pp . 241 – 244 . [ 99 ] S . Hara , T . Zama , S . Sewa , W . Takashima , and K . Kaneto , “Polypyrrole - metal coil composites as ﬁbrous artiﬁcial muscles , ” Chem . Lett . , vol . 32 , no . 9 , pp . 800 – 801 , 2003 . [ 100 ] R . E . Pelrine , R . D . Kornbluh , and J . P . Joseph , “Electrostriction of polymer dielectrics with compliant electrodes as a means of actuation , ” Sensor Actuat . A—Phys . , vol . 64 , pp . 77 – 85 , 1998 . [ 101 ] F . Carpi and D . De Rossi , “Improvement of electromechanical actuating performances of silicone dielectric elastomer by dispersion of titanium dioxide powder , ” IEEE Trans . Dielectr . Electr . Insul . , submitted for pub - lication . [ 102 ] R . Pelrine , R . Kornbluh , J . Joseph , R . Heydt , Q . Pei , and S . Chiba , “High - ﬁeld deformation of elastomeric dielectrics for actuators , ” Mater . Sci . Eng . C , vol . 11 , pp . 89 – 100 , 2000 . [ 103 ] R . Pelrine , R . Kornbluh , and G . Kofod , “High - strain actuator mate - rials based on dielectric elastomers , ” Adv . Mater . , vol . 12 , no . 16 , pp . 1223 – 1225 , 2000 . [ 104 ] Q . Pei , R . Pelrine , S . Stanford , R . Kornbluh , and M . Rosenthal , “Elec - troelastomer rolls and their application for biomimetic walking robots , ” Synth . Met . , vol . 135 – 136 , pp . 129 – 131 , 2003 . [ 105 ] G . Kofod , P . Sommer - Larsen , R . Kornbluh , and R . Pelrine , “Actuation response of polyacrylate dielectric elastomers , ” J . Intell . Mater . Syst . Struct . , vol . 14 , no . 12 , pp . 787 – 793 , 2003 . [ 106 ] F . Carpi , P . Chiarelli , A . Mazzoldi , andD . De Rossi , “Electromechanical characterization of dielectric elastomer planar actuators : Comparative evaluation of different electrode materials and different counterloads , ” Sensor . Actuat . A—Phys . , vol . 107 , pp . 85 – 95 , 2003 . [ 107 ] F . Carpi and D . De Rossi , “Dielectric elastomer cylindrical actuators : Electromechanical modeling and experimental evaluation , ” Mater . Sci . Eng . C , vol . 24 , no . 4 , pp . 555 – 562 , 2004 . [ 108 ] , “Theoretical description and fabrication of a new dielectric elas - tomer actuator showing linear contractions , ” presented at the Actuator 2004 , Jun . , 15 2004 . [ 109 ] , “Attuatore elettromeccanico contrattile a polimero elettroattivo con elettrodi deformabili elicoidali , ” Italian Patent , PI / 2003 / A / 000043 , 2003 . [ 110 ] S . R . Forrest , “The path to ubiquitous and low - cost organic electronic appliances on plastic , ” Nature , vol . 428 , pp . 911 – 918 , 2004 . [ 111 ] R . F . Service , “Printableelectronicsthatstickaround , ” Science , vol . 304 , p . 675 , 2004 . [ 112 ] Cambridge Display Technology ( CDT ) . . [ Online ] . Available : http : / / www . cdtltd . co . uk [ 113 ] J . M . Shaw and P . F . Seidler , “Organic electronics : Introduction , ” IBM J . Res . Dev . , vol . 45 , no . 1 , pp . 3 – 9 , 2001 . [ 114 ] Y . Shirota , “Organic materials for electronic and optoelectronic de - vices , ” J . Mater . Chem . , vol . 10 , no . 1 , pp . 1 – 25 , 2000 . [ 115 ] A . Bonﬁglio , F . Mameli , and O . Sanna , “A completely ﬂexible organic transistor obtained by a one - mask photolithographic process , ” Appl . Phys . Lett . , vol . 82 , no . 20 , pp . 3550 – 3552 , 2003 . [ 116 ] C . D . Dimitrakopoulos and P . R . L . Malenfant , “Organic thin ﬁlm tran - sistors for large area electronics , ” Adv . Mater . , vol . 14 , no . 2 , pp . 99 – 117 , 2002 . [ 117 ] C . D . DimitrakopoulosandD . J . Mascaro , “Organicthin - ﬁlmtransistors : A reviewof recent advances , ” IBMJ . Res . Dev . , vol . 45 , no . 1 , pp . 11 – 27 , 2001 . [ 118 ] B . Crone , A . Dodabalapur , Y . - Y . Lin , R . W . Filas , Z . Bao , A . LaDuca , R . Sarpeshkar , H . E . Katz , and W . Li , “Large - scale complementary integrated circuits based on organic transistors , ” Nature , vol . 403 , pp . 521 – 523 , 2000 . [ 119 ] J . H . Schön , S . Berg , C . Kloc , and B . Batlogg , “Ambipolar pentacene ﬁeld - effect transistors and inverters , ” Science , vol . 287 , pp . 1022 – 1023 , 2000 . [ 120 ] G . Horowitz , “Organic ﬁeld - effect transistors , ” Adv . Mater . , vol . 10 , no . 5 , pp . 365 – 377 , 1998 . [ 121 ] F . Garnier , “Thin - ﬁlm transistors based on organic conjugated semicon - ductors , ” Chem . Phys . , vol . 227 , no . 1 – 2 , pp . 253 – 262 , 1998 . [ 122 ] H . E . Katz , “Organic molecular solids as thin ﬁlm transistor semicon - ductors , ” J . Mater . Chem . , vol . 7 , no . 3 , pp . 369 – 376 , 1997 . [ 123 ] S . Beaupré and M . Leclerc , “Fluorene - based copolymers for red - light - emitting diodes , ” Adv . Funct . Mater . , vol . 12 , no . 3 , pp . 192 – 196 , 2002 . [ 124 ] D . Braun , “Semiconducting polymer LEDs , ” Mater . Today , vol . 5 , no . 6 , pp . 32 – 39 , 2002 . [ 125 ] M . D . McGehee and A . J . Heeger , “Semiconducting ( conjugated ) poly - mers as materials for solid - state lasers , ” Adv . Mater . , vol . 12 , no . 22 , pp . 1655 – 1668 , 2000 . [ 126 ] R . H . Friend , R . W . Gymer , A . B . Holmes , J . H . Burroughes , R . N . Marks , C . Taliani , D . D . C . Bradley , D . A . Dos Santos , J . L . Brédas , M . Lögdlund , and W . R . Salaneck , “Electroluminescence in conjugated polymers , ” Nature , vol . 397 , pp . 121 – 128 , 1999 . [ 127 ] P . K . H . Ho , D . S . Thomas , R . H . Friend , and N . Tessler , “All - polymer optoelectronic devices , ” Science , vol . 285 , pp . 233 – 236 , 1999 . [ 128 ] M . R . Andersson , O . Thomas , W . Mammo , M . Svensso , M . Theander , andO . Inganäs , “Substitutedpolythiophenesdesignedforoptoelectronic devices and conductors , ” J . Mater . Chem . , vol . 9 , no . 9 , pp . 1933 – 1940 , 1999 . [ 129 ] H . Sirringhaus , N . Tessler , and R . H . Friend , “Integrated optoelec - tronic devices based on conjugated polymers , ” Science , vol . 280 , pp . 1741 – 1744 , 1998 . [ 130 ] L . S . Roman , W . Mammo , L . A . A . Pettersson , M . R . Andersson , and O . Inganaes , “High quantum efﬁciency polythiophene / C60 photodiodes , ” Adv . Mater . , vol . 10 , no . 10 , pp . 774 – 777 , 1998 . [ 131 ] J . A . Rogers , Z . Bao , K . Baldwin , A . Dodabalapur , B . Crone , V . R . Raju , V . Kuck , H . Katz , K . Amundson , J . Ewing , and P . Drzaic , “Paper - like electronic displays : Large - area rubber - stamped plastic sheets of elec - tronics and microencapsulated electrophoretic inks , ” in Proc . Nat . Acad . Sci . , vol . 98 , 2001 , pp . 4835 – 4840 . [ 132 ] J . A . Rogers , “Toward paperlike displays , ” Science , vol . 291 , pp . 1502 – 1503 , 2001 . [ 133 ] A . Javey , J . Guo , D . B . Farmer , Q . Wang , D . Wang , R . G . Gordon , M . Lundstrom , and H . Dai , “Carbon nanotube ﬁeld - effect transistors with integrated ohmic contacts and high - k gate dielectrics , ” Nano Lett . , vol . 4 , no . 3 , pp . 447 – 450 , 2004 . 316 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY IN BIOMEDICINE , VOL . 9 , NO . 3 , SEPTEMBER 2005 [ 134 ] D . J . FrankandJ . Appenzeller , “High - frequencyresponseincarbonnan - otube ﬁeld - effect transistors , ” IEEE Electron Device Lett . , vol . 25 , no . 1 , pp . 34 – 36 , 2004 . [ 135 ] T . Durkop , S . A . Getty , E . Cobas , and M . S . Fuhrer , “Extraordinary mo - bility in semiconducting carbon nanotubes , ” Nano Lett . , vol . 4 , no . 1 , pp . 35 – 39 , 2004 . [ 136 ] E . S . Snow , J . P . Novak , P . M . Campbell , andD . Park , “Randomnetworks of carbon nanotubes as an electronic material , ” Appl . Phys . Lett . , vol . 82 , no . 13 , pp . 2145 – 2147 , 2003 . [ 137 ] K . Bradley , J . C . P . Gabriel , and G . Gruener , “Flexible nanotube elec - tronics , ” Nano Lett . , vol . 3 , no . 10 , pp . 1353 – 1355 , 2003 . [ 138 ] K . Xiao , Y . Liu , P . Hu , G . Yu , X . Wang , and D . Zhu , “High - mobility thin - ﬁlm transistors based on aligned carbon nanotubes , ” Appl . Phys . Lett . , vol . 83 , no . 1 , pp . 150 – 152 , 2003 . [ 139 ] A . Javey , H . Kim , M . Brink , Q . Wang , A . Ural , J . Guo , P . McIntyre , P . McEuen , M . Lundstrom , and H . Dai , “High - kappa dielectrics for ad - vanced carbon - nanotube transistors and logic gates , ” Nature Mater . , vol . 1 , no . 4 , pp . 241 – 246 , 2002 . [ 140 ] R . Martel , “Nanotube electronics . High - performance transistors , ” Na - ture Mater . , vol . 1 , no . 4 , pp . 203 – 204 , 2002 . [ 141 ] P . Avouris , “Carbon nanotube electronics , ” Chem . Phys . , vol . 281 , no . 2 – 3 , pp . 429 – 445 , 2002 . [ 142 ] A . Bachtold , P . Hadley , T . Nakanishi , and C . Dekker , “Logic circuits with carbon nanotube transistors , ” Science , vol . 294 , pp . 1317 – 1320 , 2001 . [ 143 ] M . S . Fuhrer , B . M . Kim , T . Dürkop , and T . Brintlinger , “High - mobility nanotube transistor memory , ” Nano Lett . , vol . 2 , no . 7 , pp . 755 – 759 , 2002 . [ 144 ] M . Radosavljevic , M . Freitag , K . V . Thadani , and A . T . Johnson , “Non - volatile molecular memory elements based on ambipolar nanotube ﬁeld effect transistors , ” Nano Lett . , vol . 2 , no . 7 , pp . 761 – 764 , 2002 . [ 145 ] J . A . Misewich , P . Avouris , R . Martel , J . C . Tsang , S . Heinze , and J . Tersoff , “Electrically induced optical emission from a carbon nanotube FET , ” Science , vol . 300 , pp . 783 – 786 , 2003 . [ 146 ] S . - H . Takagi , A . Toriumi , M . Iwase , and H . Tango , “On the universality of inversion layer mobility in Si MOSFET’s : Part I - effects of substrate impurity concentration , ” IEEE Trans . Electron Devices , vol . 41 , no . 12 , pp . 2357 – 2362 , Dec . 1994 . [ 147 ] V . C . Sundar , J . Zaumseil , V . Podzorov , E . Menard , R . L . Willett , T . Someya , M . E . Gershenson , and J . A . Rogers , “Elastomeric transistor stamps : reversible probing of charge transport in organic crystals , ” Sci - ence , vol . 303 , pp . 1644 – 1646 , 2004 . [ 148 ] DIEE - Univ . Cagliari , Interdepartmental Centre “E . Piaggio” - Univ . Pisa , Wearable Computing Lab , First periodic progress report of the project ARIANNE . [ 149 ] A . Bonﬁglio , D . De Rossi , T . Kirstein , I . Locher , F . Mameli , R . Paradiso , and G . Vozzi , “A feasibility study of yarns and ﬁbers with annexed elec - tronic functions : The ARIADNA project , ” in Proc . Int . Workshop New Generation Wearable Syst . for e - Health : Toward Revolution of Citizens’ Health , Life Style Management ? , Lucca , Italy , 2003 , pp . 258 – 264 . [ 150 ] D . D . L . Chung and S . Wang , “Carbon ﬁber polymer - matrix structural composite as a semiconductor and concept of optoelectronic and elec - tronic devices made from it , ” Smart Mater . Struct . , vol . 8 , pp . 161 – 166 , 1999 . [ 151 ] T . Healy , J . Donnelly , B . O’Neill , J . Alderman , A . Mathewson , F . Clemens , J . Heiber , T . Graule , A . Ullsperger , W . Hartmann , C . Papadas , and N . Venios , “Technology development for building ﬂexible silicon functional ﬁbers , ” in Proc . 7th IEEE Int . Symp . Wearable Computers , New York , NY , Oct . 2003 , pp . 210 – 213 . [ 152 ] T . Starner and J . A . Paradiso , “Human generated power for mobile elec - tronics , ” in Low Power Electronics Design , C . Piguet , Ed . Boca Raton , FL : CRC Press , 2004 . [ 153 ] T . Starner , “Human - poweredwearablecomputing , ” IBMSyst . J . , vol . 35 , no . 3 , pp . 618 – 629 , 1996 . [ 154 ] P . Novák , K . Müller , K . S . V . Santhanam , and O . Haas , “Electrochem - ically active polymers for rechargeable batteries , ” Chem . Rev . , vol . 97 , no . 1 , pp . 207 – 282 , 1997 . [ 155 ] G . Pistoia , Ed . , Lithium Batteries : New Materials , Developments and Perspectives . Amsterdam , The Netherlands : Elsevier , 1994 . [ 156 ] A . Mirmohseni and R . Solhjo , “Preparation and characterization of aqueous polyaniline battery using a modiﬁed polyaniline electrode , ” Eur . Pol . J . , vol . 39 , no . 2 , pp . 219 – 223 , 2003 . [ 157 ] M . Morita , S . Miyazaki , M . Ishikawa , Y . Matsuda , H . Tajima , and K . Adachi et al . , “Layered polyaniline composites with cation - exchanging properties for positive electrodes of rechargeable lithium batteries , ” J . Electrochem . Soc . , vol . 142 , no . 1 , pp . 3 – 5 , 1995 . [ 158 ] Y . Lang - Sheng , S . Zhong - Qiang , H . Pei - Min , C . Wei - Xiang , and L . Li , “Polyaniline used as a positive in solid - state lithium battery , ” J . Power Sources , vol . 44 , pp . 499 – 503 , 1993 . [ 159 ] K . S . Ryu , K . M . Kim , S . G . Kang , G . J . Lee , and S . H . Chang , “Charge / discharge mechanism of polyaniline ﬁlms doped with LiBF as a polymer electrode in a Li secondary battery , ” Solid State Ionics , vol . 135 , pp . 229 – 234 , 2000 . [ 160 ] K . S . Ryu , K . M . Kim , S . G . Kang , J . Joo , and S . H . Chan , “Comparison of lithium polyaniline secondary batteries with different dopants of HCl and lithium ionic salts , ” J . Power Sources , vol . 88 , no . 2 , pp . 197 – 201 , 2000 . [ 161 ] S . Kuwabata , S . Masui , and H . Yoneyama , “Charge - dischargeproperties of composites of LiMn O and polypyrrole as positive electrode mate - rials for 4 V class of rechargeable Li batteries , ” Electrochim . Acta , vol . 44 , pp . 4593 – 4600 , 1999 . [ 162 ] A . G . MacDiarmid , L . S . Yan , W . S . Huang , and B . D . Humphrey , “Polyaniline : Electrochemistry and application to rechargeable bat - teries , ” Synth . Met . , vol . 18 , pp . 393 – 398 , 1987 . [ 163 ] H . H . Rehan , “A new polymer / polymer rechargeable battery : Polyani - line / LiClO4 ( MeCN ) / poly - 1 - naphthol , ” J . Power Sources , vol . 113 , no . 1 , pp . 57 – 61 , 2003 . [ 164 ] M . D . Levi , Y . Gofer , and D . Aurbach , “A synopsis of recent attempts toward construction of rechargeable batteries utilizing conducting polymer cathodes and anodes , ” Polymer Adv . Technol . , vol . 13 , no . 10 – 12 , pp . 697 – 713 , 2002 . [ 165 ] Y . Gofer , H . Sarker , J . G . Killian , J . Giaccai , T . O . Poehler , and P . C . Searson , “Fabrication of an all - polymer battery based on derivatized polythiophenes , ” Biomed . Instrum . Technol . , vol . 32 , no . 1 , pp . 33 – 38 , 1998 . [ 166 ] P . V . Wright , “Developments in polymer electrolytes for lithium bat - teries , ” MRS Bull . , vol . 27 , no . 8 , pp . 597 – 602 , 2002 . [ 167 ] M . Morita , A . Tanaka , N . Yoshimoto , and M . Ishikawa , “Polymeric gel electrolytes using a network matrix with carbonyl groups for recharge - able lithium batteries , ” Solid State Ionics , vol . 152 – 153 , pp . 161 – 167 , 2002 . [ 168 ] C . Tiyapiboonchaiya , J . M . Pringle , D . R . MacFarlane , M . Forsyth , and J . Sun , “Polyelectrolyte - in - ionic - liquid electrolytes , ” Macromolecular Chem . Phys . , vol . 204 , no . 17 , pp . 2147 – 2154 , 2003 . [ 169 ] C . Tiyapiboonchaiya , D . R . MacFarlane , J . Sun , and M . Forsyth , “Polymer - in - ionic - liquid electrolytes , ” Macromolecular Chem . Phys . , vol . 203 , no . 13 , pp . 1906 – 1911 , 2002 . [ 170 ] S . S . Zhang , K . Xu , D . L . Foster , M . H . Ervin , and T . R . Jow , “Microp - orous gel electrolyte Li - ion battery , ” J . Power Sources , vol . 125 , no . 1 , pp . 114 – 118 , 2004 . [ 171 ] Q . Li , T . Itoh , N . Imanishi , A . Hirano , Y . Takeda , and O . Yamamoto , “All solid lithium polymer batteries with a novel composite polymer electrolyte , ” Solid State Ionics , vol . 159 , no . 1 – 2 , pp . 97 – 109 , 2003 . [ 172 ] H . - S . Kim , G . - Y . Choi , S . - I . Moon , and S . - P . Kim , “Electrochemical properties of Li ion polymer battery with gel polymer electrolyte based on polyurethane , ” J . Appl . Electrochem . , vol . 33 , no . 6 , pp . 491 – 496 , 2003 . [ 173 ] H . Akashi , K . Tanaka , and K . Sekai , “A ﬂexible Li polymer primary cell with a novel gel electrolyte based on poly ( acrylonitrile ) , ” J . Power Sources , vol . 104 , no . 2 , pp . 241 – 247 , 2002 . [ 174 ] K . Murata , S . Izuchi , andY . Yoshihisa , “Anoverviewoftheresearchand development of solid polymer electrolyte batteries , ” Electrochim . Acta , vol . 45 , no . 8 – 9 , pp . 1501 – 1508 , 2000 . [ 175 ] H . - T . Kim , K . - B . Kim , S . - W . Kim , and J . - K . Park , “Li - ion polymer bat - tery based on phase - separated gel polymer electrolyte , ” Electrochim . Acta , vol . 45 , pp . 4001 – 4007 , 2000 . [ 176 ] W . H . Meyer , “Polymer electrolytes for lithium - ion batteries , ” Adv . Mater . , vol . 10 , no . 6 , pp . 439 – 448 , 1999 . [ 177 ] F . Boudin , X . Andrieu , C . Jehoulet , and I . I . Olsen , “Microporous PVdF gelforlithium - ionbatteries , ” J . PowerSources , vol . 81 – 82 , pp . 804 – 807 , 1999 . [ 178 ] A . Nishimoto , M . Watanabe , Y . Ikeda , and S . Kohjiya , “High ionic con - ductivity of new polymer electrolytes based on high molecular weight polyether comb polymers , ” Electrochim . Acta , vol . 43 , pp . 1177 – 1184 , 1998 . [ 179 ] H . R . Allcock , M . E . Napierala , D . L . Olmeijer , C . G . Cameron , S . E . Kuharcik , C . S . Reed , and S . J . M . O’Connor , “New macromolecules for solid polymeric electrolytes , ” Electrochim . Acta , vol . 43 , no . 10 – 11 , pp . 1145 – 1150 , 1998 . [ 180 ] M . Morita , M . Ishikawa , and K . Asanomi , “New polymeric gel elec - trolytes consisting of oligo ( ethylene oxide ) - grafted polymethacrylate matrices for rechargeable lithium batteries , ” Solid State Ionics , vol . 113 – 115 , pp . 117 – 122 , 1998 . CARPI AND DE ROSSI : ELECTROACTIVE POLYMER - BASED DEVICES FOR e - TEXTILES IN BIOMEDICINE 317 [ 181 ] H . S . Choe , B . G . Carroll , D . M . Pasquariello , and K . M . Abraham , “Characterization of some polyacrylonitrile - based electrolytes , ” Chem . Mater . , vol . 17 , pp . 369 – 379 , 1997 . [ 182 ] J . M . Tarascon , A . S . Gozdz , C . Schmutz , F . Shokoohi , and P . C . Warren , “Performance of Bellcore’s plastic rechargeable Li - ion batteries , ” Solid State Ionics , vol . 86 – 88 , pp . 49 – 54 , 1996 . [ 183 ] S . A . Forsyth , J . M . Pringle , and D . R . MacFarlane , “Ionic liquids—An overview , ” Chem . Informatics , vol . 35 , no . 20 , 2004 . [ 184 ] Power Paper Ltd . . [ Online ] . Available : http : / / www . power - paper . com / 3 _ technology / 1main . htm [ 185 ] X . Yu , J . B . Bates , G . E . Jellison , Jr . , and F . X . Hart , “A stable thin - ﬁlm lithium electrolyte : lithium phosphorous oxynitride , ” J . Electrochem . Soc . , vol . 144 , p . 524 , 1997 . [ 186 ] Front Edge Technology . . [ Online ] . Available : http : / / www . fronted - getechnology . com [ 187 ] Inﬁnite Power Solutions . . [ Online ] . Available : http : / / www . inﬁnitepow - ersolutions . com [ 188 ] ITN Energy Systems , Inc . . . [ Online ] . Available : http : / / www . itnes . com [ 189 ] SMFM DARPA Program . [ Online ] . Available : http : / / www . darpa . mil / dso / thrust / matdev / smfm / Present . html [ 190 ] Univ . Virginia , IPM Lab . Development and optimization of power ﬁbers for synthetic multi - functional materials ( SMFM ) appli - cations . [ Online ] . Available : http : / / www . ipm . virginia . edu / newre - search / ﬁber / home . php # currentliPON [ 191 ] SMFM DARPA Program . [ Online ] . Available : http : / / www . darpa . mil / dso / thrust / matdev / smfm / itn . html [ 192 ] J . Kymissis , C . Kendall , J . Paradiso , and N . Gershenfeld , “Parasitic power harvesting in shoes , ” in Proc . 2nd IEEE Int . Symp . Wearable Computers , 1998 , pp . 132 – 139 . [ 193 ] DARPA Energy Harvesting Program . [ Online ] . Available : http : / / www . darpa . mil / dso / trans / energy / brieﬁng . html [ 194 ] N . S . ShenckandJ . A . Paradiso , “Energyscavengingwithshoe - mounted piezoelectrics , ” IEEE Micro , vol . 21 , no . 3 , pp . 30 – 42 , 2001 . [ 195 ] R . Pelrine , R . Kornbluh , J . Eckerle , P . Jeuck , S . Oh , Q . Peei , and S . Stan - ford , “Dielectric elastomers : Generator mode fundamentals and appli - cations , ” in Proc . SPIE Electroactive Polymer Actuators Devices Conf . , Smart Struct . Mater . Symp . , vol . 4329 , Newport Beach , CA , 2001 , pp . 148 – 156 . [ 196 ] DARPA Energy Harvesting Program . [ Online ] . Available : http : / / www . darpa . mil / dso / trans / energy / brieﬁng . html [ 197 ] Seiko Kinetic Watches . ( 2003 ) . [ Online ] . Available : http : / / www . seiko - kinetic - watches . com [ 198 ] M . El - Hami , P . Glynne - Jones , N . M . White , M . Hill , S . Beeby , E . James , A . D . Brown , and J . N . Ross , “Design and fabrication of a new vibration - based electromechanical power generator , ” Sensor Actuat . A—Phys . , vol . 92 , pp . 335 – 342 , 2001 . [ 199 ] S . Meninger , J . O . Mur - Miranda , R . Amirtharajah , A . Chandrakasan , and J . H . Lang , “Vibration - to - electric energy conversion , ” IEEE Trans . VLSI Syst . , vol . 9 , no . 1 , pp . 64 – 76 , Jan . 2001 . [ 200 ] C . Shearwood and R . B . Yates , “Development of an electromagnetic microgenerator , ” Electron . Lett . , vol . 33 , no . 22 , pp . 1883 – 1884 , 1997 . [ 201 ] T . Büren , P . Lukowicz , and G . Tröster , “Kinetic energy powered com - puting—Anexperimentalfeasibilitystudy , ”in Proc . 7thIEEEInt . Symp . Wearable Computers , 2003 , pp . 22 – 24 . [ 202 ] J . Feng and T . W . Ellis , “Feasibility study of conjugated polymer nano - composites for thermoelectrics , ” Synth . Met . , vol . 135 – 136 , pp . 55 – 56 , 2003 . [ 203 ] H . Yan , N . Sada , and N . Toshima , “Thermal transporting properties of electrically conductive polyaniline ﬁlms as organic thermoelectric ma - terials , ” J . Therm . Anal . Calorim . , vol . 69 , no . 3 , pp . 881 – 887 , 2002 . [ 204 ] N . T . Kemp et al . , “Thermoelectric power and conductivity of different types of polypyrrole , ” J . Polymer Sci . B—Polymer Phys . , vol . 37 , no . 9 , pp . 953 – 960 , 1999 . [ 205 ] A . Shakouri and S . Li , “Thermoelectric power factor for electrically conductive polymers , ” in Proc . Int . Conf . Thermoelectrics , 1999 , pp . 402 – 406 . [ 206 ] M . Morsli , A . Bonnet , F . Samir , V . Jousseaume , and S . Lefrant , “Elec - trical conductivity and thermoelectric power of polybithiophene - poly - styrene composites , ” Synth . Met . , vol . 76 , pp . 273 – 276 , 1996 . [ 207 ] D . D . L . Chung and V . H . Guerrero , “Enhancement of the absolute thermoelectric power of carbon ﬁber polymer - matrix composite in the through - thickness direction , ” Compos . Interace . , vol . 9 , no . 4 , pp . 395 – 401 , 2002 . [ 208 ] S . Wang and D . D . L . Cung , “Carbon ﬁber polymer - matrix composite interfaces as thermocouple junctions , ” Compos . Interace . , vol . 6 , no . 6 , pp . 519 – 529 , 1999 . [ 209 ] R . Venkatasubramanian , E . Siivola , T . Colpitts , and B . O’Quinn , “Thin - ﬁlm thermoelectric devices with high room - temperature ﬁgures of merit , ” Nature , vol . 413 , pp . 597 – 602 , 2001 . [ 210 ] C . Lauterbach , M . Strasser , S . Jung , and W . Weber , “Smart clothes self - powered by body heat , ” presented at the Avantex Symp . , Frankfurt , Ger - many , 2002 . [ 211 ] M . Kishi , H . Nemoto , T . Hamao , M . Yamamoto , S . Sudou , M . Mandai , and S . Yamamoto , “Micro - thermoelectric modules and their applica - tion to wristwatches as an energy source , ” in Proc . Int . Conf . Thermo - electrics , 1999 , pp . 301 – 307 . [ 212 ] Seiko Thermic . . [ Online ] . Available : http : / / www . roachman . com / thermic / [ 213 ] Applied Digital Solutions . Thermo Life Generator . [ Online ] . Available : http : / / www . adsx . com / prodservpart / thermolife . html [ 214 ] R . Schwodiauer , G . S . Neugschwandtner , K . Schrattbauer , M . Lindner , M . Vieytes , S . Bauer - Gogonea , and S . Bauer , “Preparation and char - acterization of novel piezoelectric and pyroelectric polymer electrets , ” IEEE Trans . Dielectr . Electr . Insul . , vol . 7 , no . 4 , pp . 578 – 586 , 2000 . [ 215 ] S . Bauer and S . B . Lang , “Pyroelectric polymer electrets , ” IEEE Trans . Dielectr . Electr . Insul . , vol . 3 , no . 5 , pp . 647 – 676 , 1996 . [ 216 ] V . McGinniss , “Determinationofthepiezoelectric / pyroelectricresponse of polytriﬂuorovinyl acetate and other piezoelectric materials , ” Polymer , vol . 36 , no . 6 , pp . 1127 – 1131 , 1995 . [ 217 ] L . F . Malmonge , J . A . Malmonge , and W . K . Sakamoto , “Study of pyro - electric activity of PZT / PVDF - HFP composite , ” Mater . Res . , vol . 6 , no . 4 , pp . 469 – 473 , 2003 . [ 218 ] W . K . Sakamoto , D . H . F . Kanda , and D . K . Das - Gupta , “Dielectric and pyroelectric properties of a composite of ferroelectric ceramic and polyurethane , ” Mater . Res . Innov . , vol . 5 , no . 6 , pp . 257 – 260 , 2002 . [ 219 ] W . K . Sakamoto , E . de Souza , and D . K . Das - Gupta , “Electroactive properties of ﬂexible piezoelectric composites , ” Mater . Res . , vol . 4 , no . 3 , pp . 201 – 204 , 2001 . [ 220 ] D . Setiadi , H . Weller , and T . D . Binnie , “Apyroelectricpolymer infrared sensor array with a charge ampliﬁer readout , ” Sensor Actuat . A—Phys . , vol . 76 , pp . 145 – 151 , 1999 . [ 221 ] P . C . A . Hammes and P . P . L . Regtien , “An integrated infrared sensor using the pyroelectric polymer PVDF , ” Sensor Actuat . A—Phys . , vol . 32 , pp . 396 – 402 , 1992 . [ 222 ] G . G . Wallace , P . C . Dastoor , D . L . Ofﬁcer , and C . O . Too , “Conjugated polymers : New materials for photovoltaics , ” Chem . Innov . , pp . 15 – 21 , Apr . 2000 . [ 223 ] T . Yohannes , T . Solomon , and O . Inganäs , “Polymer - electrolyte - based photoelectrochemical solar energy conversion with poly ( 3 - methylthio - phene ) photoactive electrode , ” Synth . Met . , vol . 85 , pp . 215 – 220 , 1997 . [ 224 ] J . Hogan , “Now we can soak up the rainbow , ” New Scientist , vol . 176 , p . 24 , 2002 . [ 225 ] J . P . BennerandL . Kazmerski , “Photovoltaicsgaininggreatervisibility , ” IEEE Spectrum , vol . 36 , no . 9 , pp . 34 – 42 , 1999 . [ 226 ] Konarka Technologies . [ Online ] . Available : http : / / www . konarkatech . com / tech _ photovoltaics . php [ 227 ] S . E . Shaheen , C . J . Brabec , N . S . Sariciftci , F . Padinger , T . Fromherz , and J . C . Hummelen , “2 . 5 % efﬁcient organic plastic solar cells , ” Appl . Phys . Lett . , vol . 78 , pp . 841 – 843 , 2001 . [ 228 ] M . A . Green , K . Emery , D . L . King , W . Warta , andS . Igari , “Solarcellef - ﬁciency tables ( Version 22 ) , ” Prog . Photovoltaics , vol . 11 , pp . 347 – 352 , 2003 . [ 229 ] M . S . Shur , S . L . Rumyantsev , and R . Gaska , “Semiconductor thin ﬁlms and thin ﬁlm devices for electrotextiles , ” Int . J . High - Speed Electron . Syst . , vol . 12 , no . 2 , pp . 371 – 390 , 2002 . [ 230 ] M . S . Shur , G . Gaskiene , S . L . Rumyantsev , R . Rimeika , R . Gaska , and J . Sinius , “Photovoltaic effect in threads covered with CdS , ” Electron . Lett . , vol . 37 , no . 16 , pp . 1036 – 1038 , 2001 . [ 231 ] A . Burke , “Ultracapacitors : Why , how , and where is the technology , ” J . Power Sources , vol . 91 , pp . 37 – 50 , 2000 . [ 232 ] E . Frackowiak and F . Béguin , “Carbon materials for the electrochemical storage of energy in capacitors , ” Carbon , vol . 39 , no . 6 , pp . 937 – 950 , 2001 . [ 233 ] B . E . Conway , V . Birss , and J . Wojtowicz , “The role and utilization of pseudocapacitance for energy storage by supercapacitors , ” J . Power Sources , vol . 66 , pp . 1 – 14 , 1997 . [ 234 ] C . V . Guterl , S . Saadallah , K . Jurewicz , E . Frackowiak , M . Reda , J . Par - mentier , J . Patarin , and F . Beguin , “Supercapacitor electrodes from new ordered porous carbon materials obtained by a templating procedure , ” Mater . Sci . Eng . B , vol . 108 , pp . 148 – 155 , 2004 . [ 235 ] W . G . PellandB . E . Conway , “VoltammetryatadeLeviebrushelectrode as a model for electrochemical supercapacitor behavior , ” J . Electroanal . Chem . , vol . 500 , pp . 121 – 133 , 2001 . 318 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY IN BIOMEDICINE , VOL . 9 , NO . 3 , SEPTEMBER 2005 [ 236 ] E . Frackowiak , K . Metenier , V . Bertagna , and F . Beguin , “Supercapac - itor electrodes from multiwalled carbon nanotubes , ” Appl . Phys . Lett . , vol . 77 , no . 15 , pp . 2421 – 2423 , 2000 . [ 237 ] D . Qu and H . Shi , “Studies of activated carbons used in double - layer capacitors , ” J . Power Sources , vol . 74 , no . 1 , pp . 99 – 107 , 1998 . [ 238 ] K . S . Ryu , K . M . Kim , N . Park , Y . J . Park , and S . H . Chang , “Symmetric redox supercapacitor with conducting polyaniline electrodes , ” J . Power Sources , vol . 103 , no . 2 , pp . 305 – 309 , 2002 . [ 239 ] M . Mastragostino , C . Arbizzani , and F . Soavi , “Conducting polymers as electrode material in supercapacitor , ” Solid State Ionics , vol . 148 , pp . 493 – 498 , 2002 . [ 240 ] , “Polymer - based supercapacitors , ” J . Power Sources , vol . 97 – 98 , pp . 812 – 815 , 2001 . [ 241 ] A . Rudge , J . Davey , J . Raistrick , S . Gottesﬁeld , and J . P . Ferraris , “Con - ducting polymers as active materials in electrochemical capacitors , ” J . Power Sources , vol . 47 , pp . 89 – 107 , 1994 . [ 242 ] K . H . An , K . K . Jeon , J . K . Heo , S . C . Lim , D . J . Bae , and Y . H . Lee , “High - capacitance supercapacitor using a nanocomposite electrode of single - walled carbon nanotube and polypyrrole , ” J . Electrochem . Soc . , vol . 149 , no . 8 , pp . A1058 – A1062 , 2002 . [ 243 ] C . Arbizzani , M . Mastragostino , and F . Soavi , “New trends in electro - chemical supercapacitors , ” J . Power Sources , vol . 100 , pp . 164 – 170 , 2001 . [ 244 ] M . Mastragostino , R . Parventi , and A . Zanelli , “Supercapacitors based on composite polymer electrodes , ” J . Electrochem . Soc . , vol . 147 , no . 9 , pp . 3167 – 3170 , 2000 . [ 245 ] S . Mitra , A . K . Shukla , and S . Sampath , “Electrochemical capacitors with plasticized gel - polymer electrolytes , ” J . Power Sources , vol . 101 , no . 2 , pp . 213 – 218 , 2001 . [ 246 ] A . Matsuda , H . Honjo , K . Hirata , M . Tatsumisago , and T . Minami , “Electric double - layer capacitor using composites composed of phos - phoric acid - doped silica gel and styrene - ethylene - butylene - styrene elastomer as a solid electrolyte , ” J . Power Sources , vol . 77 , no . 12 , pp . 12 – 16 , 1999 . [ 247 ] T . Osaka , X . Liu , and M . Nojima , “Acetylene black / poly ( vinylidene ﬂu - oride ) gel electrolyte composite electrode for an electric double - layer capacitor , ” J . Power Sources , vol . 74 , no . 1 , pp . 122 – 128 , 1998 . [ 248 ] F . Lufrano and P . Staiti , “Performance improvement of Naﬁon based solid state electrochemical supercapacitor , ” Electrochim . Acta , vol . 49 , no . 16 , pp . 2683 – 2689 , 2004 . [ 249 ] A . B . Dalton , S . Collins , E . Muñoz , J . M . Razal , V . H . Ebron , J . P . Fer - raris , J . N . Coleman , B . G . Kim , and R . H . Baughman , “Super - tough carbon - nanotube ﬁbers , ” Nature , vol . 423 , p . 703 , 2003 . [ 250 ] C . Winterhalter et al . , “Development of electronic textiles for U . S . mil - itary protective clothing systems , ” in Proc . Int . Workshop New Genera - tion WearableSyst . fore - Health : TowardRevolution ofCitizens’Health , Life Style Management ? , Lucca , Italy , 2003 , pp . 151 – 156 . [ 251 ] E . R . Post , M . Reynolds , M . Gray , J . Paradiso , and N . Gershenfeld , “In - trabodybusesfordataandpower , ”in Proc . 1stIEEEInt . Symp . Wearable Computers , 1997 , pp . 52 – 55 . [ 252 ] D . S . Gray , J . Tien , andC . S . Chen , “High - conductivityelastomericelec - tronics , ” Adv . Mater . , vol . 16 , pp . 393 – 397 , 2004 . Federico Carpi was born in Italy on February 10 , 1975 . He received the Laurea degree in electronic en - gineering in 2001 from the University of Pisa , Pisa , Italy , where he is currently working toward the Ph . D . degree in bioengineering . He works on polymer devices for biomedical engi - neering and robotics . He is the author of several tech - nical and scientiﬁc publications . Danilo De Rossi graduated from University of Genova , Genova , Italy , with the Ph . D . degree in chemical engineering in 1976 . From 1976 to 1981 , he was a Researcher with the Institute of Clinical Physiology of CNR . He worked inFrance , USA , Brazil , andJapan . Since1982 , hehas been with the School of Engineering , University of Pisa , Pisa , Italy , wherepresentlyheisaFullProfessor of Bioengineering and President of the Biomedical Engineering Teaching Track . Since 1999 , he has also been an Adjunct Professor of Material Science with Wollongong University , Wollongong , Australia . His scientiﬁc activities are re - lated to the physics of organic and polymeric materials , and to the design of sensors and actuators for bioengineering and robotics . He is the author of over 150 technical and scientiﬁc publications , and is co - author of seven books .