Erving Goffman ( 1922 – 1982 ) developed a dramaturgical theory of the self and society inspired by Mead’s basic conception of social interaction . In the selection below , excerpted from the book The Presentation of Self in Everyday Life , Goffman presents a theory that likens social interaction to the theater . Individuals can be seen as performers , audience members , and outsiders that operate within particular “stages” or social spaces . Goffman suggests that how we present our selves to others is aimed toward “impression management , ” which is a conscious decision on the part of the individual to reveal certain aspects of the self and to conceal others , as actors do when performing on stage . T HE P RESENTATION OF S ELF IN E VERYDAY L IFE Erving Goffman The Framework A social establishment is any place surrounded by fixed barriers to perception in which a particular kind of activity regularly takes place . I have suggested that any social establishment may be studied profitably from the point of view of impression management . Within the walls of a social establishment we find a team of performers who cooperate to present to an audience a given definition of the situation . This will include the conception of own team and of audience and assumptions concerning the ethos that is to be maintained by rules of politeness and decorum . We often find a division into back region , where the performance of a routine is prepared , and front region , where the performance is presented . Access to these regions is controlled in order to prevent the audience from seeing backstage and to prevent outsiders from coming into a performance that is not addressed to them . Among members of the team we find that familiarity prevails , solidarity is likely to develop , and that secrets that could give the show away are shared and kept . A tacit agreement is maintained between performers and audience to act as if a given degree of opposition and of accord existed between them . Typically , but not always , agreement is stressed and opposition is underplayed . The resulting working consensus tends to be contradicted by the attitude toward the audience which the performers express in the absence of the audience and by carefully controlled communication out of character conveyed by the performers while the audience is present . We find that discrepant roles develop : some of the individuals who are apparently teammates , or audience , or outsiders acquire information about the performance and relations to the team which are not apparent and which complicate the problem of putting on a show . Sometimes disruptions occur through unmeant gestures , faux pas , and scenes , thus discrediting or contradicting the definition of the situation that is being maintained . The mythology of the team will dwell upon these disruptive events . We find that performers , audience , and outsiders all utilize techniques for saving the show , whether by avoiding likely disruptions or by correcting for unavoided ones , or by making it possible for others to do so . To ensure that these techniques will be employed , the team will tend to select members who are loyal , disciplined , and circumspect , and to select an audience that is tactful . These features and elements , then , comprise the framework I claim to be characteristic of much social interaction as it occurs in natural settings in our Anglo - American society . This framework is formal and abstract in the sense that it can be applied to any social establishment ; it is not , however , merely a static classification . The framework bears upon 1 dynamic issues created by the motivation to sustain a definition of the situation that has been projected before others . The Analytical Context This report has been chiefly concerned with social establishments as relatively closed systems . It has been assumed that the relation of one establishment to others is itself an intelligible area of study and ought to be treated analytically as part of a different order of fact—the order of institutional integration . It might be well here to try to place the perspective taken in this report in the context of other perspectives which seem to be the ones currently employed , implicitly or explicitly , in the study of social establishments as closed systems . Four such perspectives may be tentatively suggested . An establishment may be viewed “technically , ” in terms of its efficiency and inefficiency as an intentionally organized system of activity for the achievement of predefined objectives . An establishment may be viewed “politically , ” in terms of the actions which each participant ( or class of participants ) can demand of other participants , the kinds of deprivations and indulgences which can be meted out in order to enforce these demands , and the kinds of social controls which guide this exercise of command and use of sanctions . An establishment may be viewed “structurally , ” in terms of the horizontal and vertical status divisions and the kinds of social relations which relate these several groupings to one another . Finally , an establishment may be viewed “culturally , ” in terms of the moral values which influence activity in the establishment—values pertaining to fashions , customs , and matters of taste , to politeness and decorum , to ultimate ends and normative restrictions on means , etc . It is to be noted that all the facts that can be discovered about an establishment are relevant to each of the four perspectives but that each perspective gives its own priority and order to these facts . It seems to me that the dramaturgical approach may constitute a fifth perspective , to be added to the technical , political , structural , and cultural perspectives . 1 The dramaturgical perspective , like each of the other four , can be employed as the end - point of analysis , as a final way of ordering facts . This would lead us to describe the techniques of impression management employed in a given establishment , the principal problems of impression management in the establishment , and the identity and interrelationships of the several performance teams which operate in the establishment . But , as with the facts utilized in each of the other perspectives , the facts specifically pertaining to impression management also play a part in the matters that are a concern in all the other perspectives . It may be useful to illustrate this briefly . The technical and dramaturgical perspectives intersect most clearly , perhaps , in regard to standards of work . Important for both perspectives is the fact that one set of individuals will be concerned with testing the unapparent characteristics and qualities of the work - accomplishments of another set of individuals , and this other set will be concerned with giving the impression that their work embodies these hidden attributes . The political and dramaturgical perspectives intersect clearly in regard to the capacities of one individual to direct the activity of another . For one thing , if an individual is to direct others , he will often find it useful to keep strategic secrets from them . Further , if one individual attempts to direct 1 Compare the position taken by Oswald Hall in regard to possible perspectives for the study of closed systems in his “Methods and Techniques of Research in Human Relations” ( April , 1952 ) , reported in E . C . Hughes et . al . , Cases on Field Work ( forthcoming ) 2 the activity of others by means of example , enlightenment , persuasion , exchange , manipulation , authority , threat , punishment , or coercion , it will be necessary , regardless of his power position , to convey effectively what he wants done , what he is prepared to do to get it done and what he will do if it is not done . Power of any kind must be clothed in effective means of displaying it , and will have different effects depending upon how it is dramatized . ( Of course , the capacity to convey effectively a definition of the situation may be of little use if one is not in a position to give example , exchange , punishment , etc . ) Thus the most objective form of naked power , i . e . , physical coercion , is often neither objective nor naked but rather functions as a display for persuading the audience ; it is often a means of communication , not merely a means of action . The structural and dramaturgical perspectives seem to intersect most clearly in regard to social distance . The image that one status grouping is able to maintain in the eyes of an audience of other status groupings will depend upon the performers’ capacity to restrict communicative contact with the audience . The cultural and dramaturgical perspectives intersect most clearly in regard to the maintenance of moral standards . The cultural values of an establishment will determine in detail how the participants are to feel about many matters and at the same time establish a framework of appearances that must be maintained , whether or not there is feeling behind the appearances . Personality - Interaction - Society In recent years there have been elaborate attempts to bring into one framework the concepts and findings derived from three different areas of inquiry : the individual personality , social interaction , and society . I would like to suggest here a simple addition to these inter - disciplinary attempts . When an individual appears before others , he knowingly and unwittingly projects a definition of the situation , of which a conception of himself is an important part . When an event occurs which is expressively incompatible with this fostered impression , significant consequences are simultaneously felt in three levels of social reality , each of which involves a different point of reference and a different order of fact . First , the social interaction , treated here as a dialogue between two teams , may come to an embarrassed and confused halt ; the situation may cease to be defined , previous positions may become no longer tenable , and participants may find themselves without a charted course of action . The participants typically sense a false note in the situation and come to feel awkward , flustered , and , literally , out of countenance . In other words , the minute social system created and sustained by orderly social interaction becomes disorganized . These are the consequences that the disruption has from the point of view of social interaction . Secondly , in addition to these disorganizing consequences for action at the moment , performance disruptions may have consequences of a more far - reaching kind . Audiences tend to accept the self projected by the individual performer during any current performance as a responsible representative of his colleague - grouping , of his team , and of his social establishment . Audiences also accept the individual’s particular performance as evidence of his capacity to perform the routine and even as evidence of his capacity to perform any routine . In a sense these larger social units—teams , establishments , etc . —become committed every time the individual performs his routine ; with each performance the legitimacy of these units will tend to be tested anew and their permanent reputation put at stake . This kind of 3 commitment is especially strong during some performances . Thus , when a surgeon and his nurse both turn from the operating table and the anesthetized patient accidentally rolls off the table to his death , not only is the operation disrupted in an embarrassing way , but the reputation of the doctor , as a doctor and as a man , and also the reputation of the hospital may be weakened . These are the consequences that disruptions may have from the point of view of social structure . Finally , we often find that the individual may deeply involve his ego in his identification with a particular part , establishment , and group , and in his self - conception as someone who does not disrupt social interaction or let down the social units which depend upon that interaction . When a disruption occurs , then , we may find that the self - conceptions around which his personality has been built may become discredited . These are consequences that disruptions may have from the point of view of individual personality . Performance disruptions , then , have consequences at three levels of abstraction : personality , interaction , and social structure . While the likelihood of disruption will vary widely from interaction to interaction , and while the social importance of likely disruptions will vary from interaction to interaction , still it seems that there is no interaction in which the participants do not take an appreciable chance of being slightly embarrassed or a slight chance of being deeply humiliated . Life may not be much of a gamble , but interaction is . Further , in so far as individuals make efforts to avoid disruptions or to correct for ones not avoided , these efforts , too , will have simultaneous consequences at the three levels . Here , then , we have one simple way of articulating three levels of abstraction and three perspectives from which social life has been studied . Comparisons and Study In this report , use has been made of illustrations from societies other than our Anglo - American one . In doing this I did not mean to imply that the framework presented here is culture - free or applicable in the same areas of social life in non - Western societies as in our own . We lead an indoor social life . We specialize in fixed settings , in keeping strangers out , and in giving the performer some privacy in which to prepare himself for the show . Once we begin a performance , we are inclined to finish it , and we are sensitive to jarring notes which may occur during it . If we are caught out in a misrepresentation we feel deeply humiliated . Given our general dramaturgical rules and inclinations for conducting action , we must not overlook areas of life in other societies in which other rules are apparently followed . Reports by Western travelers are filled with instances in which their dramaturgical sense was offended or surprised , and if we are to generalize to other cultures we must consider these instances as well as more favorable ones . We must be ready to see in China that while actions and décor may be wonderfully harmonious and coherent in a private tearoom , extremely elaborate meals may be served in extremely plain restaurants , and shops that look like hovels staffed with surly , familiar clerks may contain within their recesses , wrapped in old brown paper , wonderfully delicate bolts of silk . 1 And among a people said to be careful to save each other’s face , we must be prepared to read that : 1 Macgowan , J . Sidelights on Chinese Life ( Philadelphia . Lippincott , 1908 ) . 4 Fortunately the Chinese do not believe in the privacy of a home as we do . They do not mind having the whole details of their daily experience seen by everyone that cares to look . How they live , what they eat , and even the family jars that we try to hush up from the public are things that seem to be common property , and not to belong exclusively to this particular family who are most concerned . 2 And we must be prepared to see that in societies with settled inequalitarian status systems and strong religious orientations , individuals are sometimes less earnest about the whole civic drama than we are , and will cross social barriers with brief gestures that give more recognition to the man behind the mask than we might find permissible . Furthermore , we must be very cautious in any effort to characterize our own society as a whole with respect to dramaturgical practices . For example , in current management - labor relations , we know that a team may enter joint con sultation meetings with the opposition with the knowledge that it may be necessary to give the appearance of stalking out of the meeting in a huff . Diplomatic teams are sometimes required to stage a similar show . In other words , While teams in our society are usually obliged to suppress their rage behind a working consensus , there are times when teams are obliged to suppress the appearance of sober opposition behind a demonstration of outraged feelings . Similarly , there are occasions when individuals , whether they wish to or not , will feel obliged to destroy an interaction in order to save their honor and their face . It would be more prudent , then , to begin with smaller units , with social establishments or classes of establishments , or with particular statuses , and document comparisons and changes in a modest way by means of the case - history method . For example , we have the following kind of information about the shows that businessmen are legally allowed to put on : The last half - century has seen a marked change in the attitude of the courts toward the question of justifiable reliance . Earlier decisions , under the influence of the prevalent doctrine of “caveat emptor , ” laid great stress upon the plaintiff’s “duty” to protect himself and distrust his antagonist , and held that he was not entitled to rely even upon positive assertions of fact made by one with whom he was dealing at arm’s length . It was assumed that anyone may be expected to overreach another in a bargain if he can , and that only a fool will expect common honesty . Therefore the plaintiff must make a reasonable investigation , and form his own judgment . The recognition of a new standard of business ethics , demanding that statements of fact be at least honestly and carefully made , and in many cases that they be warranted to be true , has led to an almost complete shift in this point of view . It is now held that assertions of fact as to the quantity or quality of land or goods sold , the financial status of the corporations , and similar matters inducing commercial transactions , may justifiably be relied on without investigation , not only where such investigation would be burdensome and difficult , as where land which is sold lies at a distance , but likewise where the falsity of the representation might be discovered with little effort by means easily at hand . 3 2 Ibid . , pp . 180 – 81 . 3 Prosser , William L . , Handbook of the Law of Torts . ( St . Paul , Minnesota , West Publishing , 1941 ) , pp . 749 – 50 . 5 And while frankness may be increasing in business relations , we have some evidence that marriage counselors are increasingly agreed that an individual ought not to feel obliged to tell his or her spouse about previous “affairs , ” as this might only lead to needless strain . Other examples may be cited . We know , for example , that up to about 1830 pubs in Britain provided a backstage setting for workmen , little distinguishable from their own kitchens , and that after that date the gin palace suddenly burst upon the scene to provide much the same clientele with a fancier front region than they could dream of . 4 We have records of the social history of particular American towns , telling us of the recent decline in the elaborateness of domestic and avocational fronts of the local upper classes . In contrast , some material is available which describes the recent increase in elaborateness of the setting that union organizations employ , 5 and the increasing tendency to “stock” the setting with academically - trained experts who provide an aura of thought and respectability . 6 We can trace changes in the plant layout of specific industrial and commercial organizations and show an increase in front , both as regards the exterior of the head - office building and as regards the conference rooms , main halls , and waiting rooms of these buildings . We can trace in a particular crofting community how the barn for animals , once backstage to the kitchen and accessible by a small door next the stove , has lately been removed a distance from the house , and how the house itself , once set down in an unprotected way in the midst of garden , croft equipment , garbage , and grazing stock , is becoming , in a sense , public - relations oriented , with a front yard fenced off and kept somewhat clean , presenting a dressed - up side to the community while debris is strewn at random in the unfenced back regions . And as the connected byre disappears , and the scullery itself starts to become less frequent , we can observe the up - grading of domestic establishments , wherein the kitchen , which once possessed its own back regions , is now coming to be the least presentable region of the house while at the same time becoming more and more presentable . We can also trace that peculiar social movement which led some factories , ships , restaurants , and households to clean up their backstages to such an extent that , like monks , Communists , or German aldermen , their guards are always up and there is no place where their front is down , while at the same time members of the audience become sufficiently entranced with the society’s id to explore the places that had been cleaned up for them . Paid attendance at symphony orchestra rehearsals is only one of the latest examples . We can observe what Everett Hughes calls collective mobility , through which the occupants of a status attempt to alter the bundle of tasks performed by them so that no act will be required which is expressively inconsistent with the image of self that these incumbents are attempting to establish for themselves . And we can observe a parallel process , which might be called “role enterprise , ” within a particular social establishment , whereby a particular member attempts not so much to move into a higher position already established as to create a new position for himself , a position involving duties which suitably express attributes that are congenial to him . We can examine the process of specialization , whereby many performers come to make brief communal use of very elaborate social settings , being content to sleep alone in a cubicle of no pretension . We can follow the diffusion of crucial fronts—such as the 4 M . Gorham and H . Dunnett , Inside the Pub ( London : The Architectural Press , 1950 ) , pp . 23 - 24 . 5 See , for example , Floyd Hunter , Community Power Structure ( Chapel Hill : University of North Carolina Press , 1953 ) , p . 19 . 6 See Wilensky , op . cit . , chap . iv , for a discussion of the “window - dressing” function of staff experts . 6 laboratory complex of glass , stainless steel , rubber gloves , white tile , and lab coat—which allow an increasing number of persons connected with unseemly tasks a way of self - purification . Starting with the tendency in highly authoritarian organizations for one team to be required to spend its time infusing a rigorously ordered cleanliness in the setting the other team will perform in , we can trace , in establishments such as hospitals , air force bases , and large households , a current decline in the hypertrophic strictness of such settings . And finally , we can follow the rise and diffusion of the jazz and “West Coast” cultural patterns , in which terms such as bit , goof , scene , drag , dig , are given currency , allowing individuals to maintain something of a professional stage performer’s relation to the technical aspects of daily performances . The Role of Expression Is Conveying Impressions of Self Perhaps a moral note can be permitted at the end . In this report the expressive component of social life has been treated as a source of impressions given to or taken by others . Impression , in turn , has been treated as a source of information about unapparent facts and as a means by which the recipients can guide their response to the informant without having to wait for the full consequences of the informant’s actions to be felt . Expression , then , has been treated in terms of the communicative role it plays during social interaction and not , for example , in terms of consummatory or tension - release function it might have for the expresser . 1 Underlying all social interaction there seems to be a fundamental dialectic . When one individual enters the presence of others , he will want to discover the facts of the situation . Were he to possess this information , he could know , and make allowances for , what will come to happen and he could give the others present as much of their due as is consistent with his enlightened self - interest . To uncover fully the factual nature of the situation , it would be necessary for the individual to know all the relevant social data about the others . It would also be necessary for the individual to know the actual outcome or end product of the activity of the others during the interaction , as well as their innermost feelings concerning him . Full information of this order is rarely available ; in its absence , the individual tends to employ substitutes—cues , tests , hints , expressive gestures , status symbols , etc . —as predictive devices . In short , since the reality that the individual is concerned with is unperceivable at the moment , appearances must be relied upon in its stead . And , paradoxically , the more the individual is concerned with the reality that is not available to perception , the more must he concentrate his attention on appearances . The individual tends to treat the others present on the basis of the impression they give now about the past and the future . It is here that communicative acts are translated into moral ones . The impressions that the others give tend to be treated as claims and promises they have implicitly made , and claims and promises tend to have a moral character . In his mind the individual says : “I am using these impressions of you as a way of checking up on you and your activity , and you ought not to lead me astray . ” The peculiar thing about this is that the individual tends to take this stand even though he expects the others to be unconscious of 1 A recent treatment of this kind may be found in Talcott Parsons , Robert F . Bales , and Edward A . Shils , Working Papers in the Theory of Action ( Glencoe , Ill . : The Free Press , 1953 ) , Chap . II , “The Theory of Symbolism in Relation to Action . ” 7 many of their expressive behaviors and even though he may expect to exploit the others on the basis of the information he gleans about them . Since the sources of impression used by the observing individual involve a multitude of standards pertaining to politeness and decorum , pertaining both to social intercourse and task - performance , we can appreciate afresh how daily life is enmeshed in moral lines of discrimination . Let us shift now to the point of view of the others . If they are to be gentlemanly , and play the individual’s game , they will give little conscious heed to the fact that impressions are being formed about them but rather act without guile or contrivance , enabling the individual to receive valid impressions about them and their efforts . And if they happen to give thought to the fact that they are being observed , they will not allow this to influence them unduly , content in the belief that the individual will obtain a correct impression and give them their due because of it . Should they be concerned with influencing the treatment that the individual gives them , and this is properly to be expected , then a gentlemanly means will be available to them . They need only guide their action in the present so that its future consequences will be the kind that would lead a just individual to treat them now in a way they want to be treated ; once this is done , they have only to rely on the perceptiveness and justness of the individual who observes them . Sometimes those who are observed do , of course , employ these proper means of influencing the way in which the observer treats them . But there is another way , a shorter and more efficient way , in which the observed can influence the observer . Instead of allowing an impression of their activity to arise as an incidental by - product of their activity , they can reorient their frame of reference and devote their efforts to the creation of desired impressions . Instead of attempting to achieve certain ends by acceptable means , they can attempt to achieve the impression that they are achieving certain ends by acceptable means . It is always possible to manipulate the impression the observer uses as a substitute for reality because a sign for the presence of a thing , not being that thing , can be employed in the absence of it . The observer’s need to rely on representations of things itself creates the possibility of misrepresentation . There are many sets of persons who feel they could not stay in business , whatever their business , if they limited themselves to the gentlemanly means of influencing the individual who observes them . At some point or other in the round of their activity they feel it is necessary to band together and directly manipulate the impression that they give . The observed become a performing team and the observers become the audience . Actions which appear to be done on objects become gestures addressed to the audience . The round of activity becomes dramatized . We come now to the basic dialectic . In their capacity as performers , individuals will be concerned with maintaining the impression that they are living up to the many standards by which they and their products are judged . Because these standards are so numerous and so pervasive , the individuals who are performers dwell more than we might think in a moral world . But , qua performers , individuals are concerned not with the moral issue of realizing these standards , but with the amoral issue of engineering a convincing impression that these standards are being realized . Our activity , then , is largely concerned with moral matters , but as performers we do not have a moral concern with them . As performers we are merchants of morality . Our day is given over to intimate contact with the goods we display and our minds are filled with intimate understandings of them ; but it may well be that the more attention we give to these goods , then the more distant we feel from them and from those who are believing 8 enough to buy them . To use a different imagery , the very obligation and profitability of appearing always in a steady moral light , of being a socialized character , forces one to be the sort of person who is practiced in the ways of the stage . Staging and the Self The general notion that we make a presentation of ourselves to others is hardly novel ; what ought to be stressed in conclusion is that the very structure of the self can be seen in terms of how we arrange for such performances in our Anglo - American society . In this report , the individual was divided by implication into two basic parts : he was viewed as a performer , a harried fabricator of impressions involved in the all - too - human task of staging a performance ; he was viewed as a character , a figure , typically a fine one , whose spirit , strength , and other sterling qualities the performance was designed to evoke . The attributes of a performer and the attributes of a character are of a different order , quite basically so , yet both sets have their meaning in terms of the show that must go on . First , character . In our society the character one performs and one’s self are somewhat equated , and this self - as - character is usually seen as something housed within the body of its possessor , especially the upper parts thereof , being a nodule , somehow , in the psychobiology of personality . I suggest that this view is an implied part of what we are all trying to present , but provides , just because of this , a bad analysis of the presentation . In this report the performed self was seen as some kind of image , usually creditable , which the individual on stage and in character effectively attempts to induce others to hold in regard to him . While this image is entertained concerning the individual , so that a self is imputed to him , this self itself does not derive from its possessor , but from the whole scene of his action , being generated by that attribute of local events which renders them interpretable by witnesses . A correctly staged and performed scene leads the audience to impute a self to a performed character , but this imputation—this self—is a product of a scene that comes off , and is not a cause of it . The self , then , as a performed character , is not an organic thing that has a specific location , whose fundamental fate is to be born , to mature , and to die ; it is a dramatic effect arising diffusely from a scene that is presented , and the characteristic issue , the crucial concern , is whether it will be credited or discredited . In analyzing the self then we are drawn from its possessor , from the person who will profit or lose most by it , for he and his body merely provide the peg on which something of collaborative manufacture will be hung for a time . And the means for producing and maintaining selves do not reside inside the peg ; in fact these means are often bolted down in social establishments . There will be a back region with its tools for shaping the body , and a front region with its fixed props . There will be a team of persons whose activity on stage in conjunction with available props will constitute the scene from which the performed character’s self will emerge , and another team , the audience , whose interpretive activity will be necessary for this emergence . The self is a product of all of these arrangements , and in all of its parts bears the marks of this genesis . The whole machinery of self - production is cumbersome , of course , and sometimes breaks down , exposing its separate components : back region control ; team collusion ; audience tact ; and so forth . But , well oiled , impressions will flow from it fast enough to put us in the grips of one of our types of reality—the performance will come off and the firm self accorded each performed character will appear to emanate intrinsically from its performer . 9 10 Let us turn now from the individual as character performed to the individual as performer . He has a capacity to learn , this being exercised in the task of training for a part . He is given to having fantasies and dreams , some that pleasurably unfold a triumphant performance , others full of anxiety and dread that nervously deal with vital discreditings in a public front region . He often manifests a gregarious desire for teammates and audiences , a tactful considerateness for their concerns ; and he has a capacity for deeply felt shame , leading him to minimize the chances he takes of exposure . These attributes of the individual qua performer are not merely a depicted effect of particular performances ; they are psychobiological in nature , and yet they seem to arise out of intimate interaction with the contingencies of staging performances . And now a final comment . In developing the conceptual framework employed in this report , some language of the stage was used . I spoke of performers and audiences ; of routines and parts ; of performances coming off or falling flat ; of cues , stage settings and backstage ; of dramaturgical needs , dramaturgical skills , and dramaturgical strategies . Now it should be admitted that this attempt to press a mere analogy so far was in part a rhetoric and a maneuver . The claim that all the world’s stage is sufficiently commonplace for readers to be familiar with its limitations and tolerant of its presentation , knowing that at any time they will easily be able to demonstrate to themselves that it is not to be taken too seriously . An action staged in a theater is a relatively contrived illusion and an admitted one ; unlike ordinary life , nothing real or actual can happen to the performed characters—although at another level of course something real and actual can happen to the reputation of performers qua professionals whose everyday job is to put on theatrical performances . And so here the language and mask of the stage will be dropped . Scaffolds , after all , are to build other things with , and should be erected with an eye to taking them down . This report is not concerned with aspects of theater that creep into everyday life . It is concerned with the structure of social encounters—the structure of those entities in social life that come into being whenever persons enter one another’s immediate physical presence . The key factor in this structure is the maintenance of a single definition of the situation , this definition having to be expressed , and this expression sustained in the face of a multitude of potential disruptions . A character staged in a theater is not in some ways real , nor does it have the same kind of real consequences as does the thoroughly contrived character performed by a confidence man ; but the successful staging of either of these types of false figures involves use of real techniques—the same techniques by which everyday persons sustain their real social situations . Those who conduct face to face interaction on a theater’s stage must meet the key requirement of real situations ; they must expressively sustain a definition of the situation : but this they do in circumstances that have facilitated their developing an apt terminology for the interactional tasks that all of us share .