Emergence and maintenance of variable - length actin ﬁlaments in a limiting pool of building blocks Deb Sankar Banerjee 1 and Shiladitya Banerjee 1 , * 1 Carnegie Mellon University , Department of Physics , Pittsburgh , PA 15213 , USA * Correspondence : shiladtb @ andrew . cmu . edu ABSTRACT Actin is one of the key structural components of the eukaryotic cytoskeleton that regulates cellular architecture and mechanical properties . Dynamic regulation of actin ﬁlament length and organization is essential for the control of many physiological processes including cell adhesion , motility and division . While previous studies have mostly focused on the mechanisms controlling the mean length of individual actin ﬁlaments , it remains poorly understood how distinct actin ﬁlament populations in cells maintain diﬀerent lengths using the same set of molecular building blocks . Here we develop a theoretical model for the length regulation of multiple actin ﬁlaments by nucleation and growth rate modulation by actin binding proteins in a limiting pool of monomers . We ﬁrst show that spontaneous nucleation of actin ﬁlaments naturally leads to heterogeneities in ﬁlament length distribution . We then investigate the eﬀects of ﬁlament growth inhibition by capping proteins and growth promotion by formin proteins on ﬁlament length distribution . We ﬁnd that ﬁlament length heterogeneity can be increased by growth inhibition , whereas growth promoters do not signiﬁcantly aﬀect length heterogeneity . Interestingly , a competition between ﬁlament growth inhibitors and growth promoters can give rise to bimodal ﬁlament length distribution as well as a highly heterogeneous length distribution with large statistical dispersion . We quantitatively predict how heterogeneity in actin ﬁlament length can be modulated by tuning F - actin nucleation and growth rates in order to create distinct ﬁlament subpopulations with diﬀerent lengths . SIGNIFICANCE Actin ﬁlaments organize into diﬀerent functional network architectures within eukaryotic cells . To maintain distinct actin network architectures , it is essential to regulate the lengths of actin ﬁlaments . While the mechanisms controlling the lengths of individual actin ﬁlaments have been extensively studied , the regulation of length heterogeneity in actin ﬁlament populations is not well understood . Here we show that the modulation of actin ﬁlament growth and nucleation rates by actin binding proteins can regulate actin length distribution and create distinct sub - populations with diﬀerent lengths . In particular , by tuning concentrations of formin , proﬁlin and capping proteins , various aspects of actin ﬁlament length distribution can be controlled . Insights gained from our results may have signiﬁcant implications for the regulation of actin ﬁlament length heterogeneity and architecture within a cell . INTRODUCTION In eukaryotic cells , actin ﬁlament growth and turnover are tightly regulated for coordinating a diverse set of physiologi - cal processes including cell motility ( 1 – 3 ) , protrusion forma - tion ( 4 – 6 ) , endocytosis ( 7 ) , wound healing ( 8 , 9 ) , synaptic activity ( 10 ) , cytokinesis ( 11 , 12 ) , and embryonic develop - ment ( 13 – 16 ) . These diﬀerent functions often require distinct subpopulations of actin ﬁlaments organized into diﬀerent lengths and architectures ( 17 ) . Study of length control mech - anisms of intracellular structures has been an active area of research . Traditionally , these studies mostly focus on under - standing the physical principle and molecular mechanism that give rise to structures of a typical length ( 18 – 23 ) , with a relatively narrow length distribution . The origin of length heterogeneity and the mechanisms to create and maintain a heterogeneous population is not well understood . Here we study mechanisms of controlling heterogeneity in length of a population of actin ﬁlaments . The molecular processes underlying actin ﬁlament growth have been extensively studied both theoretically and experi - mentally . Existing models for actin ﬁlament growth can be categorized into two main classes according to the avail - ability of monomers ( 24 ) : growth in an open system where the monomer concentration remains unchanged in time , and growth in a closed system where free monomer concentration decreases as ﬁlaments increase in length ( keeping the total amount of monomers conserved ) . Length control mechanisms have been proposed for actin ﬁlaments in both the above cases to understand how ﬁlaments of a typical length can be achieved ( 22 , 25 – 27 ) . But , how ﬁlaments of diﬀerent lengths can be obtained is much less understood ( 28 ) . This is relevant for a cell where actin ﬁlaments are found in a wide diversity of lengths . In this study we consider actin ﬁlament growth in a closed system , where the monomer pool is limited ( 29 ) . Though it is not well established if in vivo actin systems can be considered to be assembled from a limiting monomer pool , recent studies show that diﬀerent actin structures in a cell often compete for the same limiting pool of monomeric Banerjee and Banerjee actin ( 30 , 31 ) . In this study , we use theory and simulations to demonstrate how actin ﬁlament length heterogeneity can be regulated and we demonstrate how distinct actin ﬁlament subpopulations may emerge in a limiting pool of monomers and actin binding proteins , speciﬁcally formin , proﬁlin and capping proteins . Since we limit our study to interactions between actin and only a few actin regulatory proteins , the results from our theoretical model can be best captured with an in vitro experimental system , where the concentrations of actin and its regulatory proteins can be precisely controlled . Previous theoretical studies have shown that nucleation and polymerization of actin ﬁlaments in a limiting monomer pool results in an exponential length distribution at steady - state ( 24 , 32 – 34 ) , with the standard deviations in length ﬂuctuations as large as the mean . The timescale for reaching such a steady - state length distribution is found to be > 3 hours in vitro ( 32 , 35 ) , while simulations predicted the timescale to be on the order of days ( 26 , 33 , 34 ) under physiological conditions ( e . g . , cell volume ∼ 1000 𝜇𝑚 3 and total monomer concentration 20 − 100 𝜇 M ) , making the steady - state length distribution less relevant for many of the physiological pro - cesses that occur within a timescale of minutes to hours . It has been previously shown that the dynamics of actin length distri - bution can be segregated into a fast regime of nucleation and growth , and a slow regime of length rearrangement between actin ﬁlaments via exchanging monomers ( 33 ) . In the initial regime , the length distribution dynamics has a convective nature ( mean of the distribution increases ) , while in the later regime the ﬁlament lengths undergo a diﬀusive dynamics ( variance increases keeping mean constant ) ( 33 ) ( Fig S1 ) . We are , however , interested in actin length distribution during an intermediate regime where the number of ﬁlaments and the mean ﬁlament length has reached a steady state . This intermediate regime is attained within minutes and the re - sulting length distribution remains approximately invariant over a timescales of hours , making it physiologically rele - vant as many actin structures such as ﬁlopodia , lamellipodia turns over within or before an hour ( 36 – 38 ) . In this regime , the growth of the actin ﬁlament population can be regulated by both spontaneous ﬁlament nucleation and actin binding proteins such as formin , proﬁlin and capping proteins . It is important to note that actin ﬁlament turnover by spontaneous fragmentation , annealing , and coﬁlin - mediated severing may aﬀect the long - time actin dynamics in an actin concentration - dependent manner , thereby altering the time evolution of ﬁlament length distribution . Here we do not consider such eﬀects and restrict our study to smaller actin concentrations , focusing on timescales short compared to the timescales over which fragmentation or annealing eﬀects become prominent ( see Methods ) . We show that spontaneous nucleation of actin ﬁlaments and interactions with speciﬁc actin binding proteins ( ABPs ) can induce signiﬁcant heterogeneity in actin ﬁlament length , persisting for several hours . We speciﬁcally study the eﬀects of growth promoting ABPs like formin and growth inhibiting ABPs like capping proteins on the regulation of actin ﬁlament length distribution . We show that formin and capping protein concentrations can be tuned to regulate the heterogeneity in actin ﬁlament length in the ﬁlament population . In particular , we ﬁnd that formin and capping proteins , when present in similar concentrations , can give rise to a bimodal length distribution that represent two distinct subpopulations of long and short actin ﬁlaments . METHODS Computational model We ﬁrst describe the computational model for the nucleation and growth of actin ﬁlaments in the presence of actin binding proteins . All the chemical reactions involved in F - actin growth and nucleation are listed in Fig . 1 , with the parameter values given in Table . 1 . We use a stochastic reaction network frame - work based on Gillespie’s ﬁrst algorithm ( 39 ) to simulate the length dynamics of actin ﬁlaments . Spontaneous nucleation of actin ﬁlaments involves sequential formation of polymeriza - tion intermediates , actin dimers and trimers , with the trimers acting as the seed for nucleation ( 40 – 42 ) ( Reactions 2 - 5 in Fig . 1 and Fig . 2a ) . We consider the growth of ﬁlamentous actin ( F - actin ) via association and dissociation of globular actin ( G - actin ) from the barbed end ( Reaction 6 in Fig . 1 and Fig . 2a ) , with the association and dissociation rates 𝐾 on and 𝐾 oﬀ ( see Supplemental Methods ) . For simplicity , we do not consider the nucleotide state of the monomers in the ﬁlament and assume that free monomers in the pool are ATP - bound . In the presence of capping proteins , the ﬁlament growth dynamics are described by Reactions 2 - 6 and Reaction 15 ( Fig . 1 ) . The capping bound ﬁlaments do not add or lose any monomers ( i . e . , 𝐾 on , 𝐾 oﬀ = 0 ) and remain unchanged in length . Here we have ignored the assembly dynamics via pointed end of the F - actin and we shall discuss the eﬀect of pointed end growth later in the study . In the presence of proﬁlin and formin , the growth dynamics are given by Reactions 1 - 14 and Reaction 16 ( Fig . 1 ) . For simplicity , we ﬁrst adopt an eﬀective description where formin - bound ﬁlaments assemble with increased rate , given by 𝐾 on = 𝛼𝐾 + [ 𝐴 1 ] and disassemble with the same rate as the free barbed end ( Fig . 4 ) . Later , we discuss the eﬀect of proﬁlin and formin - mediated nucleation on ﬁlament length dynamics ( Fig . 5 ) . To simulate the combined eﬀect of capping , formin and proﬁlin proteins on actin ﬁlament growth , we used an eﬀective description ( Reactions 2 - 6 and 15 - 18 in Fig . 1 ) in Fig . 6 and a complete description using all the reactions ( 1 - 18 in Fig . 1 ) is presented in Fig S9 . The dimer and proﬁlin - actin dynamics ( Reaction 1 and 2 in Fig . 1 ) are computed using deterministic evolution of concentration of the constituent reactants . We evolve the deter - ministic equations multiple times to attain equilibrium dimer and proﬁlin - actin concentration between two stochastically chosen reactions 𝜏 time apart . This treatment of dimer dynam - Length regulation of actin ﬁlaments . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . ( 1 ) ( 2 ) ( 3 ) ( 4 ) ( 5 ) ( 8 ) ( 9 ) ( 10 ) ( 11 ) ( 12 ) ( 15 ) ( 16 ) ( 17 ) ( 18 ) G - actin Actin dimer Capping Protein Formin Profilin Profilin - actin F - actin n - mer ( 6 ) ( 7 ) ( 13 ) ( 14 ) Figure 1 : Model schematic . Schematic diagram showing all the chemical species and reactions involving the F - actin nucleation and growth in a limiting G - actin pool . Here 𝐴 1 , 𝐴 2 , . . . , 𝐴 𝑛 denote actin monomer , dimer and 𝑛 - mer ﬁla - ments ( 𝑛 > 4 ) , respectively . The assembly and disassembly rates are deﬁned in the schematic with the accompanying reaction numbers . The abbreviation XA 𝑛 stands for a ﬁlament with X - bound barbed end and PA 1 - X stands for proﬁlin - actin monomer bound to the X species . FCA 𝑛 and CFA 𝑛 denote the two possible cases of the " decision - complex” formed via subsequent capping and formin ( or formin and capping for CFA 𝑛 ) binding to a barbed end . The corresponding rate constants and parameters are listed in Tables 1 and Table 2 . ics is similar to previous studies ( 34 ) . Deterministic evolution of these reactions were adopted to avoid the computationally costly simulation of dimers and proﬁlin - actin dynamics . The ﬁlament length distributions presented in this study are computed from the ﬁlament length recorded during the last one minute of the simulation , unless speciﬁed otherwise . For most of the study , we consider a representative system with total actin concentration 10 𝜇 M and system volume 200 𝜇 m 3 . In our study we have not taken spontaneous fragmentation and annealing of ﬁlaments into account as these slow processes may not aﬀect the early time ( ∼ 30 min ) dynamics of ﬁlament length at 10 𝜇 M actin concentration . It is also not well under - stood how spontaneous fragmentation and annealing aﬀect actin ﬁlament growth dynamics in vivo ( 43 ) , and in vitro in the presence of other actin binding proteins . There are conﬂicting reports from in vitro experiments showing exponential ( 32 ) and unimodal - like ( 44 ) size distribution of actin ﬁlaments , observed over a few hours in the absence of any other actin binding proteins . . Table 1 : Rate constants used in model simulations Reaction Rate constant Value Reference ( 1 ) K + 𝑃𝐴 40 𝜇𝑀 − 1 𝑠 − 1 ( 45 ) ( 1 ) K − 𝑃𝐴 0 . 75 𝑠 − 1 ( 45 ) ( 2 ) K + ( 2 ) 35 . 7 𝜇𝑀 − 1 𝑠 − 1 ( 42 ) ( 2 ) K − ( 2 ) 1 . 63 × 10 8 𝑠 − 1 ( 42 ) ( 3 ) K + ( 3 ) 2 . 18 𝜇𝑀 − 1 𝑠 − 1 ( 42 ) ( 3 ) K − ( 3 ) 1 . 3 × 10 3 𝑠 − 1 ( 42 ) ( 4 − 6 ) K + 11 . 6 𝜇𝑀 − 1 𝑠 − 1 ( 46 ) ( 4 − 6 ) K − 1 . 4 𝑠 − 1 ( 46 ) ( 7 ) K + 𝑃 11 𝜇𝑀 − 1 𝑠 − 1 ( 47 ) ( 7 ) K − 𝑃 50 𝑠 − 1 ( 47 ) ( 8 − 9 ) K 𝐹𝑁 10 − 6 𝜇𝑀 − 2 𝑠 − 1 ( 48 ) ( 13 − 14 ) K − 𝑃 ( 2 ) 1450 𝑠 − 1 ( 45 ) ( 15 ) K + 𝐶 12 . 8 𝜇𝑀 − 1 𝑠 − 1 ( 49 ) ( 15 ) K − 𝐶 2 × 10 − 4 𝑠 − 1 ( 49 ) ( 16 ) K + 𝐹 29 . 1 𝜇𝑀 − 1 𝑠 − 1 ( 49 ) ( 16 ) K − 𝐹 8 . 1 × 10 − 5 𝑠 − 1 ( 49 ) ( 17 ) K + 𝐹𝐶 0 . 21 𝜇𝑀 − 1 𝑠 − 1 ( 49 ) ( 17 ) K − 𝐹𝐶 1 . 8 × 10 − 3 𝑠 − 1 ( 49 ) ( 17 ) K − 𝐹𝐶 ( 2 ) 4 . 2 × 10 − 3 𝑠 − 1 ( 49 ) ( 18 ) K + 𝐶𝐹 1 . 6 𝜇𝑀 − 1 𝑠 − 1 ( 49 ) ( 18 ) K − 𝐶𝐹 6 . 2 × 10 − 3 𝑠 − 1 ( 49 ) ( 18 ) K − 𝐶𝐹 ( 2 ) 6 . 2 × 10 − 3 𝑠 − 1 ( 49 ) Table 2 : Parameter values Figure Values Fig . 2b 𝑉 = 10 𝜇𝑚 3 , 𝑛 𝑓 = 4 , 𝜌 0 = 1 𝜇𝑀 Fig . 2c - f 𝑉 = 200 𝜇𝑚 3 , 𝑛 𝑓 = 153 , 𝜌 0 = 10 𝜇𝑀 Fig . 3 , 4 , 6 𝑉 = 200 𝜇𝑚 3 , 𝜌 0 = 10 𝜇𝑀 , 𝛼 = 5 Fig . 5 𝑉 = 200 𝜇𝑚 3 , 𝜌 0 = 10 𝜇𝑀 , 𝜆 = 6 , 𝛾 = 3 RESULTS AND DISCUSSION Spontaneous nucleation promotes F - actin length heterogeneity We ﬁrst study the length distribution of actin ﬁlaments emerg - ing from spontaneous nucleation in a limiting monomer pool without any actin binding proteins , where the ﬁlament number and length both evolve in time . The dimers and the trimers have a high dissociation rate , making spontaneous nucleation of actin ﬁlaments an ineﬃcient process . In addition , the actin binding protein proﬁlin is known to suppress spontaneous actin nucleation in vivo . However , spontaneous ﬁlament assem - bly may play a signiﬁcant role in vitro situations where only actin is present , or when proﬁlin and formin concentrations are relatively low compared to actin . The growth dynamics for the 𝑖 th ﬁlament ( i . e . , for length > 3 monomers ) is described by the following chemical master Banerjee and Banerjee 0 10 20 30 0 0 . 02 0 . 04 0 . 06 0 . 08 0 . 1 0 0 . 5 1 1 . 5 2 without spontaneous nucleationwith spontaneous nucleation 0 5 10 15 0 0 . 05 0 . 1 0 . 15 0 . 2 0 0 . 5 1 1 . 5 2 2 . 5 12 days 30 min A 1 + A 1 A 2 A 3 A 2 + A 1 A 3 + A 1 A 4 . . . A n + A 1 A n + 1 G - actin Pool A 1 dimer tetramer seed filament A 2 A 3 A 4 ( a ) ( b ) 0 200 400 600 0 5 10 15 20 25 30 without spontaneous nucleation with spontaneous nucleation 1720 1740 1760 1780 1800 0 . 2 0 . 4 0 . 6 0 . 8 1 1 . 2 1 . 4 0 0 . 5 1 0 . 5 hr1 hr 5 hr ( f ) 0 50 100 150 0 . 6 0 . 8 1 1 . 2 1 . 4 without spontaneous nucleation with spontaneous nucleation old new ( c ) c o rr e l a t i on c oe ff i c i en t P ( L ) L ( μm ) L ( μm ) P ( L ) ( d ) ( e ) L ( μ m ) t ( sec ) filament ID age ( sec ) L / L _ L / L _ Figure 2 : Spontaneous nucleation promotes heterogeneity in actin ﬁlament lengths . ( a ) Schematic diagram of spontaneous nucleation and growth of F - actin in a limiting G - actin pool . Here 𝐴 1 , 𝐴 2 , . . . , 𝐴 𝑛 stand for actin monomer , dimer and 𝑛 - mer ﬁlaments , respectively . The assembly and disassembly rates are deﬁned by the accompanying reaction diagrams . ( b ) Length distribution of actin ﬁlaments growing in a limiting monomer pool without spontaneous nucleation , showing a narrow length distribution at 𝑡 = 30 min ( red ) , and exponential - like distribution at 𝑡 = 12 days . ( c ) The length dynamics in presence of spontaneous nucleation ( blue ) leads to a signiﬁcantly broader length distribution as compared to growth of ﬁxed number of F - actin from a limiting monomer pool ( red ) . The broader length distribution originates from the underlying heterogeneity in ﬁlament length . ( d ) Time evolution of the mean ﬁlament length , with ( blue ) and without ( red ) spontaneous nucleation . ( e ) Length of ﬁlaments , ordered according to their age with ’0’ being the oldest , i . e . the ﬁrst ﬁlament nucleated . The result is presented in terms of length ( 𝐿 ) divided by mean ﬁlament length ( ¯ 𝐿 ) . There is negligible length heterogeneity in ﬁlament population growing without spontaneous nucleation ( red ) as compared to ﬁlaments growing with spontaneous nucleation ( blue ) . ( f ) Filament length and age are highly correlated in presence of spontaneous nucleation . ( inset ) The emergent correlation is long - lived and remains almost unaltered for hours . We have used 100 ensembles to produce the length distribution and related statistical quantities . For additional parameter values see Table 1 and Table 2 . equation d 𝑃 𝑖𝑛 d 𝑡 = 𝐾 + 𝜌 av 𝑃 𝑖𝑛 − 1 + 𝐾 − 𝑃 𝑖𝑛 + 1 − ( 𝐾 + 𝜌 𝑎𝑣 + 𝐾 − ) 𝑃 𝑖𝑛 , ( 1 ) where 𝑃 𝑖𝑛 is the probability of the 𝑖 th ﬁlament having a length 𝑛 ( in monomer units ) and 𝐾 + ( 𝐾 − ) is the bare assembly ( disassembly ) rate . The instantaneous monomer density 𝜌 av is given by 𝜌 av = 𝜌 0 − 1 𝑉 (cid:205) 𝑛 𝑓 𝑖 = 1 𝑛 𝑖 where 𝜌 0 is the total actin concentration , 𝑉 is the system volume , 𝑛 𝑖 is the length of the 𝑖 𝑡ℎ ﬁlament ( in monomer numbers ) , and 𝑛 𝑓 is the number of actin ﬁlaments . The growth of all the ﬁlaments can be described by a set of such master equations written according to the polymerization kinetics deﬁned in Fig . 1 and Fig . 2a . With the parameters listed in Table 2 , the nucleation pro - cess ends within a few minutes and the mean ﬁlament length reaches equilibrium in 10 - 15 min . Over longer timescales , the ﬁlaments can only exchange monomers with other ﬁla - ments via disassembly and assembly , such that the ﬁlament population dwells in a long - lived dynamic state . In the absence of spontaneous nucleation , when there is a ﬁxed number of ﬁlaments simultaneously growing from a limiting monomer pool ( i . e . , instantaneous nucleation ) , the resulting length distribution is narrow with a very small coeﬃcient of variation that is maintained over a timescale of 30 min to few hours ( Fig . 2b ) . This early - time length distribution then evolves to become broader , keeping the mean length constant . The distribution eventually becomes exponential over a very long timescale of several days ( Fig . 2b ) . Thus Length regulation of actin ﬁlaments having a large enough G - actin pool can be suﬃcient to achieve a well regulated length for multiple ﬁlaments growing from a shared subunit pool , which is maintained over physiologically relevant timescales of tens of minutes to a few hours . By contrast , the length distribution is signiﬁcantly broader when the ﬁlaments nucleate via spontaneous formation of trimer seeds ( Fig . 2c ) , with all other conditions being the same . The mean length is the same in both cases ( Fig . 2d ) as it is a property of the pool size and growth rates . This broadness of length distribution originates from the heterogeneity in length in the ﬁlament population ( Fig . 2e ) and not from temporal ﬂuctuations in individual ﬁlament length ( see Fig . S2 ) . Emergence of ﬁlament length heterogeneity can be un - derstood from the interplay between sequential nucleation of ﬁlaments and their subsequent growth . After nucleation , ﬁlaments start growing with a growth rate proportional to the instantaneous monomer pool density and all ﬁlaments keep growing until the monomer pool density has reached the critical value 𝐾 − / 𝐾 + (cid:39) 0 . 12 𝜇 M . Thus , the ﬁlaments that nucleated earlier attain a much larger length compared to the ﬁlaments that are nucleated later ( see Movie S1 ) . Once the monomer density has reached its critical value , the ﬁla - ments can only change their length by exchanging monomers between each other . This diﬀusive process of length rear - rangement is very slow for a large actin pool . This leads to the long - lived dynamic state that retains the heterogeneity in ﬁlament length . This consequently results in ﬁlament length being correlated with their age ( Fig . 2f ) , which is retained for a very long time ( Fig . 2f , inset ) . This age - length correlation is noteworthy because it presents a possible regulatory mech - anism where ABPs ( such as ADF / coﬁlin ) that interact with ﬁlaments in an age - dependent manner ( 50 ) ( e . g . , nucleotide phosphorylation state dependent ) can exploit this correlation to build a length - dependent regulation of ﬁlament growth . The length heterogeneity decreases ( increases ) with increas - ing ( decreasing ) rate of nucleation , as we have shown by changing dimer production rate ( see Fig . S2 ) . Thus , cellular processes that can aﬀect the nucleation rate can regulate the length heterogeneity of the resulting ﬁlament population . It is important to note that the timescale of relaxation of ﬁlament length distribution ( shown in Fig . 2b ) is much diﬀerent in a cell where numerous factors contribute to faster turnover of actin ﬁlaments . Spontaneous fragmentation and annealing of actin ﬁlaments , observed in in vitro systems ( 32 ) , may also decrease this relaxation timescale . However , the rates of fragmentation and annealing being very small ( order of 10 − 7 𝜇 M / s ) ( 32 ) , length relaxation via fragmentation and annealing will take much longer than the typical timescales associated with the turnover of actin - based structures ( ∼ 30 min - 1 hr ) . F - actin capping increases ﬁlament length heterogeneity We next investigate how the length distribution of actin ﬁl - aments are regulated by actin binding proteins that inhibit ﬁlament growth . Capping proteins ( CP ) act as F - actin growth inhibitors by binding to F - actin barbed ends and blocking the assembly and disassembly of monomers from that end ( Fig . 3a ) ( 51 , 52 ) . Here capping proteins are modeled as coarse - grained moieties that associate F - actin barbed ends at a rate 𝐾 + 𝐶 and dissociate at a rate 𝐾 − 𝐶 ( Reaction 15 in Fig . 1 ) . Capping - bound ﬁlaments will stall ﬁlament growth ( 𝐾 + , 𝐾 − → 0 ) until the capping protein unbinds . We have used Reactions 2 - 6 and Reaction 15 ( Fig . 1 ) to model the eﬀect of capping proteins , with parameters benchmarked for the well studied capping protein CapZ ( Table 1 ) . In presence of capping proteins , the mean ﬁlament length decreases ( Fig . 3b ) with increasing capping concentration ( 𝜌 𝑐 ) . The mean length ( ¯ 𝐿 ) is approximately inversely proportional to 𝜌 𝑐 ( Fig . 3c - inset ) . The reduction in average length of F - actin with increasing CapZ concentration cannot be explained without considering the eﬀect of capping proteins on ﬁlament nucleation . By inhibiting the growth of the nucleated ﬁlaments , the capping proteins induce a slower depletion of the monomer pool and promote nucleation of more ﬁlaments ( Fig . 3c ) . The ﬁlament density increases approximately linearly with increasing capping concentration ( Fig . 3c ) . This increase in ﬁlament abundance decreases the mean length of the ﬁlament population . In the absence of spontaneous ﬁlament nucleation ( i . e . , growing a ﬁxed number of ﬁlaments ) , capping proteins can only slow down the growth of the existing ﬁlaments . This will lead to the same mean ﬁlament length and cannot explain a permanent decrease in average length ( Fig . S3 ) . The ﬁlament length distribution loses the unimodal nature in the presence of capping proteins by becoming exponential ( Fig . 3d ) , with the coeﬃcient of variation in length approach - ing 1 ( Fig . 3e ) . This heterogeneity in length does not arise from exchange of monomers between ﬁlaments . Rather , the capping proteins slow down the ﬁlament rearrangement dy - namics in the diﬀusive growth regime even further ( Fig . S3 ) . The exponential length distribution arises from the interplay between the initial growth of ﬁlaments and the dynamics of capping protein binding to the newly created ﬁlaments . In the initial period of growth , the ﬁlament length grows almost linearly and the waiting time for capping binding to occur has an exponential distribution ( as the binding reaction is a Poisson process , independent of ﬁlament length ) . Thus at high enough capping concentration , the ﬁlaments captured by the capping proteins will acquire an exponential length distribution . The capping unbinding rate being slow , this nucleation - growth - capture process will deplete the monomer pool and give rise to a long - lived state with large length heterogeneity and an exponential distribution ( Movie S2 ) . The process of nucleation - growth - capture does not preserve the information of ﬁlament age in their length ( Fig . 3f ) . The capping proteins bind to all free barbed ends with equal prob - ability regardless of the ﬁlament age . Hence the diﬀerence in ﬁlament length emerging previously from the diﬀerence in their age , cannot be retained in the presence of capping proteins . The correlation of length with age progressively Banerjee and Banerjee 0 10 20 30 40 50 10 - 4 10 - 3 10 - 2 10 - 1 10 0 0 1000 2000 0 5 10 15 20 25 0 nM 0 . 5 nM 1 . 0 nM 5 . 0 nM 10 nM 20 nM 50 nM 0 25 50 0 . 2 0 . 4 0 . 6 0 . 8 1 [ CP ] ( nM ) 0 20 40 0 5 10 15 F il a m en t den s i t y ( μ m - 3 ) 0 20 40 0 10 20 [ CP ] ( nM ) C o rr e l a t i on c oe ff i c i en t 0 0 . 2 0 . 4 0 . 6 0 . 8 1 0 0 . 1 0 . 25 0 . 5 1 . 0 2 . 5 5 . 0 CP F - a c t i n ( a ) ( b ) ( c ) ( d ) ( e ) ( f ) C oe ff i c i en t o f v a r i a t i on [ CP ] ( nM ) [ CP ] ( nM ) t ( sec ) L ( μ m ) - L ( μm ) P ( L ) L ( μ m ) Figure 3 : F - actin growth inhibition and length control by capping proteins . ( a ) Schematic diagram showing capping protein binding to F - actin barbed ends . Capping bound ﬁlaments do not grow or shrink in length . ( b ) Average F - actin length vs time for diﬀerent concentrations of capping proteins . Increasing capping concentration decreases the mean ﬁlament length . ( c ) Filament number density increases with increasing capping concentration as inhibition of F - actin growth leaves excess amount of actin monomers for spontaneous nucleation . ( inset ) Mean length of F - actin vs capping protein concentration . The mean length being inversely proportional to capping concentration is a consequence of linear increase in ﬁlament numbers with capping concentration . ( d ) F - actin length distribution for diﬀerent values of capping protein concentration . The length distribution becomes exponential with increasing capping concentration . The color code is same as shown in panel ( b ) . ( e ) The coeﬃcient of variation ( CV ) in ﬁlament length vs capping concentration , showing that CV increases with increasing capping concentration and saturates close to one as the distribution becomes exponential . ( f ) The correlation coeﬃcient between ﬁlament age and ﬁlament length as a function of capping protein concentration . The ﬁlament length and age becomes completely uncorrelated in higher capping concentration . We have used 100 ensembles and collected length for the last one minute to produce the length distribution and related quantities . For additional parameter values see Table 1 and Table 2 . diminish with increasing capping concentration ( Fig . 3f ) . In summary , growth inhibition by capping protein en - hances heterogeneity in length and we do not observe the long - lived unimodal length distribution that resulted with spontaneous F - actin nucleation ( Fig . 2c ) . Our results are in good agreement with the experimentally measured dynamics of mean ﬁlament length ( 35 , 53 ) , length distribution ( 35 ) and ﬁlament nucleation ( 54 ) in the presence of capping proteins . While we neglected actin assembly from the pointed end , pointed - end assembly qualitatively changes actin length dis - tribution in the presence of capping proteins ( Fig . S4 ) . In particular , pointed end assembly increases the mean ﬁlament length , introduces a peak in the length distribution , while retaining the exponential tail of the distribution . Role of Formin on F - actin length control Assembly of actin ﬁlaments in cells is enhanced by growth promoting factors such as formin proteins that bind to the barbed end of the F - actin ﬁlament , increasing F - actin poly - merization rate up to a few folds ( 55 , 56 ) . Formin proteins not only regulate F - actin organization ( 30 ) and actomyosin dy - namics ( 57 ) , but also play important roles in cell motility ( 58 ) and cell adhesion ( 59 ) . While many diﬀerent types of formins with varied eﬀects on barbed end assembly rate are present in cells , we parametrize our simulations based on mDia1 ( 49 ) . We model formins as coarse - grained moieties that bind to the barbed end of F - actin at a rate 𝐾 + 𝐹 and dissociate at a rate 𝐾 − 𝐹 ( Fig . 4a ) , with 𝐾 − 𝐹 (cid:28) 𝐾 + 𝐹 . Formin proteins act as growth promoters in the presence of proﬁlin proteins . First , we consider an eﬀective model without explicitly accounting Length regulation of actin ﬁlaments ( a ) 0 10 20 0 . 2 0 . 4 0 . 6 0 . 8 1 1 . 2 [ Formin ] ( nM ) C oe ff i c i en t o f v a r i a t i on 0 1000 2000 0 10 20 30 40 50 t ( sec ) 0 nM 1 nM 5 nM 10 nM 20 nM 50 nM ( b ) ( c ) ( f ) 0 20 40 60 80 10 - 4 10 - 3 10 - 2 10 - 1 ( d ) ( e ) C o rr e l a t i on c oe ff i c i en t 0 0 . 2 0 . 4 0 . 6 0 . 8 1 0 0 . 025 0 . 1 0 . 250 . 512 . 5510203550 0 . 050 [ Formin ] ( nM ) 0 20 40 0 . 3 0 . 4 0 . 5 0 . 6 0 . 7 0 . 8 [ Formin ] ( nM ) F il a m en t den s i t y ( μ m - 3 ) 0 20 40 20 30 40 50 [ Formin ] ( nM ) F - a c t i n F o r m i n + L ( μm ) P ( L ) L ( μ m ) - L ( μ m ) - Figure 4 : Role of F - actin growth promoters on length control . ( a ) Schematic diagram of formin binding to F - actin barbed ends , leading to an increase in polymerization rate . ( b ) The mean ﬁlament length increases with increasing formin concentration . ( c ) The ﬁlament number density decreases with increasing formin concentration as promotion of ﬁlament growth depletes the monomer pool quicker , leaving less monomers for nucleation . ( inset ) Increasing ﬁlament mean length saturates at higher formin concentration as the ﬁlament number density saturates . ( d - e ) Enhanced polymerization of F - actin by formin retains the unimodality of the ﬁlament length distribution but the mean increases . The length heterogeneity is non - monotonic , increasing at lower formin concentration while decreasing later at higher formin concentration . The non - monotonic change in coeﬃcient of variation captures the increased heterogeneity in length at small formin concentration . The color code is same as shown in panel - b . ( f ) The correlation between ﬁlament age and length is non - monotonic , with a decrease at an intermediate range of formin concentrations . We have used 100 ensembles and collected length for the last one minute to produce the length distribution and related quantities . For additional parameter values see Table . 1 and Table . 2 . for proﬁlins . In this simpliﬁed model , formin - mediated elon - gation is captured via an enhanced assembly rate 𝛼𝐾 + , with 𝛼 > 1 ( 55 , 56 ) , allowing us to study the eﬀect of increased elongation rate on ﬁlament length distribution . For simplic - ity , we also neglect the eﬀects of formin - mediated F - actin nucleation . This is a reasonable assumption for some types of formins ( e . g . , DAAM1 , FMNL2 and FMNL3 ) that have a very low eﬃciency of nucleating ﬁlaments ( ∼ 1 % ) and rather promote barbed end elongation at a higher rate ( 60 – 63 ) . We use Reactions ( 2 ) - ( 6 ) and Reaction ( 16 ) ( Fig . 1 ) to model ﬁlament growth driven by formin - mediated elongation in the ﬁrst part of this section ( Fig . 4a ) . We study the role of proﬁlin and formin - mediated nucleation later in this section , where we use Reactions ( 1 ) - ( 14 ) and Reaction ( 16 ) ( Fig . 1 ) to model the ﬁlament growth in the presence of both proﬁlin and formin . Role of Formin - mediated elongation – We ﬁnd that the mean length ( ¯ 𝐿 ) of growing actin ﬁlaments increase with increasing formin concentration ( Fig . 4b ) , while eventually saturating at higher values of formin concentration ( Fig . 4c - inset ) . This sat - uration of mean length occurs as nucleated ﬁlaments remain formin - bound most of the time at high formin concentration , making the eﬀective actin assembly rate ∼ 𝛼𝐾 + . Presence of formins can change the critical concentration for actin growth in a concentration - dependent manner ( see Fig . S5 ) . Depending on the change in elongation rate mediated by dif - ferent types of formin proteins , the critical concentration may increase or decrease compared to the critical concentration in the presence of only actin . However , these estimates of critical concentration are based on our eﬀective description may not accurately capture the critical concentration in real experimental systems where non - equilibrium processes regu - late various aspects of actin assembly . The enhanced growth of the formin - bound ﬁlaments leads to an accelerated deple - tion of the monomer pool , thereby suppressing spontaneous nucleation . Filament density decreases with increasing formin Banerjee and Banerjee concentration , approximately scaling inversely ( Fig . 4c ) . With increasing formin concentration , ﬁlament length distribution shifts to a higher mean but remains unimodal and qualitatively similar to the case without formin ( Fig . 4d ) . At high enough formin concentration , formins strongly pro - mote growth of the ﬁlaments , preserving the unimodality of length distribution without increasing length heterogene - ity ( Fig . 4d , e and Movie S3 ) . However , the coeﬃcient of variation in ﬁlament length changes non - monotonically with formin concentration , indicating higher heterogeneity at lower formin concentration ( Fig . 4e ) . This increased heterogeneity in length is caused by the competition between formin - bound and free ﬁlaments in absence of enough formins to bind all the ﬁlaments that are being nucleated ( see Fig . S5 ) . This non - monotonicity is also present in the correlation between ﬁlament length and age , with a loss of correlation at small formin concentration , while regaining the correlation back at higher concentration of formins ( Fig . 4f ) . The similarity in length - age correlation at high and low formin concentrations arises from the fact that at high formin concentration the actin growth can be eﬀectively represented as growth of only F - actin with an enhanced assembly rate ( ∼ 𝛼𝐾 + ) . Role of proﬁlin and Formin - mediated nucleation – Formin is known to increase the assembly rate of F - actin in the presence of proﬁlin proteins that bind to actin monomers to create a proﬁlin - actin ( PA ) pool ( 64 ) . PA selectively takes part in the assembly of formin - bound ﬁlaments with higher assembly rate . In the above , we did not explicitly consider proﬁlin dynamics and implicitly assumed that formin - bound ﬁlaments incorporate PA to increase their assembly rates . We also assumed that spontaneous nucleation can proceed in the presence of proﬁlin . These assumptions are reasonable if the amount of actin monomers is much larger than proﬁlin - actin amount in the pool . Actin - proﬁlin ratios in cells are typically larger than 2 : 1 ( 45 ) , leaving enough free monomers for spontaneous nucleation in the beginning . However , with the growth of formin - bound ﬁlaments the proﬁlin - actin subunits quickly become dominant over free actin monomers . To study the role of proﬁlin - actin on F - actin length con - trol , we explicitly modeled proﬁlins and their interaction with actin ( Fig . 1 ) . In addition , we modeled irreversible dimer formation ( from either two G - actin or one G - actin and one proﬁlin - actin ) by formins at a rate 𝐾 FN ( see Supplemental Methods for details ) to study the role of formin - mediated nucleation on F - actin length distribution . We considered three diﬀerent proﬁlin concentrations of 2 𝜇 M , 5 𝜇 M and 10 𝜇 M , corresponding to the physiologically relevant actin - proﬁlin ratios 5 : 1 , 2 : 1 , and 1 : 1 , respectively . We ﬁnd that the mean ﬁlament length shows a non - monotonic dependence on formin concentration , results from a competition between sponta - neous nucleation and formin - mediated F - actin nucleation ( Fig . 5a ) . Filament length is maximum at an intermediate formin concentration , when formin - mediated nucleation is not prevalent but most of the ﬁlaments are formin - bound and grow to be large . At a ﬁxed formin concentration , mean length increases with increasing proﬁlin concentrations due to less spontaneous nucleation and faster elongation rate of formin - bound ﬁlaments ( Fig . 5a , b ) . While the length distributions are more spread - out at higher actin - proﬁlin ratios ( Fig . 5b ) , length heterogeneity remains almost invariant for changing formin concentration and actin - proﬁlin ratio . At very low formin concentration , length heterogeneity is high due to competing subpopulations of ﬁlaments with formin - bound and free barbed ends ( Fig . 5c and Fig . S6 ) . At high proﬁlin concentrations ( 10 𝜇 M with actin - proﬁlin concentration ratio 1 : 1 ) , the mean length decreases with increasing formin con - centration as more ﬁlaments are created via formin - mediated nucleation ( Fig . 5d ) . As reported in previous studies ( 48 ) , a stronger formin - mediated nucleation leads to an increase in ﬁlament density ( Fig . 5e ) and a reduction in mean ﬁlament length ( Fig . 5f ) with increasing formin concentration . At lower formin concentrations and smaller rate of formin - mediated nu - cleation , 𝐾 FN , mean ﬁlament length increases due to reduced nucleation of ﬁlaments ( see Fig . S7 & S8 ) . This is similar to the case where formins act eﬀectively as growth promoters ( Fig . 4 ) . Overall , our results predict the eﬀects of ﬁlament elon - gation and nucleation by formins on the emergent length distribution of actin ﬁlaments . The predicted Filament length dynamics in the presence of formin - mediated nucleation ( Fig . 5 ) are in good agreement with the recently reported role of formin in limiting actin ﬁlament length in an in vitro as - say ( 48 ) . The results from our eﬀective description of formins as growth promoters ( Fig . 4 ) may be relevant in vivo where formin - mediated nucleation often requires other co - factors or nucleation promoting factors . In the absence of such cofactors , formins only play an essential role in barbed - end elongation . For mDia1 the co - factor required for nucleation is adenoma - teous polyposis coli ( APC ) and without APC , mDia1 hardly nucleates new ﬁlaments in the presence of proﬁlin ( 65 ) . Competition between Formin and Capping proteins results in bimodal F - actin length distribution In the previous sections , we studied how F - actin growth inhibitors and growth promoters maintain ﬁlament length heterogeneity and retain unimodality of length distribution . Here we study their combined eﬀect on ﬁlament growth and length control . To model the interactions between formin and capping proteins , we adopt an eﬀective description for formin - driven F - actin elongation as before ( Reactions 2 − 6 , 15 − 18 in Fig . 1 ) , without explicitly accounting for proﬁlin and formin - mediated nucleation . Formin and capping proteins both compete for the F - actin barbed end and this competition was previously thought to be exclusive ( 66 ) . Recent studies ( 49 , 67 ) have uncovered the interaction between free formins ( F ) and capping bound to ﬁlaments ( BC ) and vice - versa . When bound to a barbed end , formin and capping proteins can form a Length regulation of actin ﬁlaments 200 400 600 800 1000 0 5 10 15 20 25 30 A : P = 1 : 1 A : P = 2 : 1 A : P = 5 : 1 [ Formin ] ( nM ) P ( L ) [ Formin ] = 25 nM P ( L ) [ F o r m i n ] ( n M ) ( a ) ( b ) ( c ) ( d ) 100 60 20 0 . 2 0 . 4 0 . 6 0 . 8 0 5 10 15 20 25 30 A : P = 1 : 1 A : P = 2 : 1 A : P = 5 : 1 C oe ff i c i en t o f v a r i a t i on [ Formin ] ( nM ) 1 2 10 20 30 [ Formin ] ( nM ) F il a m en t den s i t y ( μ m - 3 ) ( e ) ( f ) 0 0 . 01 0 . 02 0 200 400 600 800 1000 1200 0 nM 5 nM 10 nM 20 nM 0 0 . 02 0 . 04 0 . 06 200 400 600 A : P = 1 : 1 A : P = 2 : 1 A : P = 5 : 1 L ( μm ) L ( μ m ) L ( μm ) K FN = 10 - 3 μM - 2 s - 1 K FN = 10 - 4 μM - 2 s - 1 L ( μm ) Log K FN - 5 . 0 - 4 . 5 - 4 . 0 - 3 . 5 - 3 . 0 - 2 . 5 10 30 20 [ Formin ] _ _ Figure 5 : Eﬀects of actin sequestration by proﬁlin and formin - mediated nucleation on actin ﬁlament growth . ( a ) Mean length of ﬁlaments as a function of formin concentration for three diﬀerent actin - proﬁlin concentration ratios . ( b ) Length distribution of actin ﬁlaments for diﬀerent actin - proﬁlin concentration ratios at a ﬁxed formin concentration . ( c ) Length heterogeneity , measured by coeﬃcient of variation , changes non - monotonically with formin concentration with a higher length heterogeneity at very small formin concentration . Length heterogeneity at larger formin concentrations is small and becomes independent of formin or proﬁlin concentrations . ( d ) Length distribution of actin ﬁlaments for diﬀerent formin concentrations at the actin - proﬁlin ratio 1 : 1 ( i . e . , actin and proﬁlin concentrations are same and equal to 10 𝜇 M ) . ( e ) Filament density increases with formin concentration in the presence of strong formin - mediated nucleation . ( f ) Dependence of mean actin ﬁlament length as a function of formin - mediated dimerization rate ( 𝐾 𝐹𝑁 ) and formin concentration . The heatmap shows that mean length decreases with increasing 𝐾 𝐹𝑁 and formin concentration . The actin - proﬁlin concentration ratio is chosen to be 2 : 1 in panels ( e ) and ( f ) . For additional parameter values see Tables 1 and 2 . ternary complex , referred to as BFC or BCF depending on the order of the complex formation ( Fig . 6a ) . For instance , capping protein binding to a formin - bound barbed end forms a BFC complex , while formin binding to a capping - bound barbed end forms a BCF complex . These complexes can disassemble in two diﬀerent ways leaving the barbed end either formin - bound or capping - bound ( Fig . 6a ) . The disassembly rate of this complex is larger than the very small disassembly rate of capping and formin proteins from the barbed end ( Table 1 ) . Thus this interaction enables actin ﬁlaments to switch from a capping - bound non - growing state to a formin - bound fast growing state . By varying the amount of formin and capping proteins , we ﬁnd four distinct types of F - actin length distributions that emerge via the interaction of capping and formin proteins with the F - actin ﬁlaments ( Fig . 6b ) . When formin concentration is considerably higher than the capping protein concentration , the resulting length distribution is unimodal ( Fig . 6c ) . Here , the formin proteins outcompete the eﬀect of capping proteins and retain unimodality of length distribution . We ﬁnd the characteristic exponential length distribution emerging from capping - induced inhibition of F - actin growth , but this eﬀect fades away in the presence of even small amount of formin ( Fig . 6b ) . In the regionwhere concentration ofcapping proteins is much higher than formin proteins we ﬁnd that the ﬁlament population has a high amount of heterogeneity in length and the coeﬃcient of variation is large ( 𝐶𝑉 > 1 ) ( Fig . 6b and Fig . 6e ) . We refer to these length distributions with power - law tails followed by an eventual exponential decay ( Fig . 6e , Fig . S9 ) as fat - tailed distributions . This broadness in length distribution appears where amount of capping is higher than formin but it is noteworthy that capping proteins alone cannot produce such high amount of heterogeneity in length and the competition between capping and formin proteins plays a role Banerjee and Banerjee ( a ) ( b ) Formin CP G - actin + + BC BF BCF BFC C P F o r m i n BC BF + C P F o r m i n + 1 2 3 4 [ CP ] ( nM ) [ F o r m i n ] ( n M ) Fat - tailed Exponential Unimodal Bimodal C V = 0 . 35 C V = 0 . 8 CV 0 0 . 5 1 1 . 5 2 0 0 . 05 [ CP ] = 2 . 5 nM , [ Formin ] = 5 nM 0 0 . 5 1 1 . 5 2 0 0 . 05 [ CP ] = 0 . 5 nM , [ Formin ] = 25 nM 10 - 1 10 0 10 - 4 10 - 2 10 0 [ CP ] = 25 nM , [ Formin ] = 10 nM 30 min 5 hr10 hr Bimodal Unimodal Fat - tailed - 0 . 8 ( c ) ( d ) ( e ) [ CP ] ( nM ) [ F o r m i n ] ( n M ) 10 20 30 40 0 40 80 20 10 0 filaments 0 40 80 20 10 0 B BF BC BCF / BFC t = 8 s t = 14 s filaments ( f ) ( g ) ( h ) U n i m oda l P ( L ) P ( L ) P ( L ) L / L _ L / L _ L / L _ L ( μ m ) L ( μ m ) L ( μ m ) Figure 6 : Emergence of bimodal F - actin length distribution by competition between formin and capping proteins . ( a ) Schematic diagram of the interaction between actin , formin and capping proteins . The capping - formin complex may form in two diﬀerent ways , either by formin binding to a capping - bound barbed end ( BC ) or vice - versa , with diﬀerent rates of association and dissociation . ( b ) A state - diagram showing the diﬀerent F - actin length distributions resulting at diﬀerent values of formin and capping protein concentration . Four qualitatively diﬀerent distributions emerge : Unimodal , exponential , bimodal and fat - tailed distribution . The fat - tailed length distribution has very broad power - law tails and a large heterogeneity in length . ( c - e ) Representative plots for the three types of length distributions ( left to right ) : ( c ) unimodal , ( d ) bimodal and ( e ) fat - tailed distributions computed at the indicated values of formin and capping protein concentrations . The bimodal length distribution ( at [ Capping ] = 2 . 5 nM and [ Formin ] = 5 nM ) remains almost unchanged over a long time period spanning minutes to tens of hours . ( f - g ) Segregation of ﬁlaments during early growth period into subpopulations of ﬁlaments of large and small length by formin and capping , respectively . Shown here are the ﬁlament length distributions at ( f ) 𝑡 = 8s and ( g ) 𝑡 = 14s . The parameters used are [ Capping ] = 4 nM and [ Formin ] = 5 nM . ( h ) Mean ﬁlament length as a function of formin and capping protein concentrations . Increasing formin ( capping ) concentration increases ( decreases ) the mean length of the ﬁlament population . Additional parameter values are given in Table 1 and Table 2 . in promoting this large heterogeneity in length . When formin and capping protein concentrations are com - parable , we see the emergence of a bimodal length distribution , where the ﬁlament population has two clearly segregated sub - populations of small and large ﬁlaments ( Fig . 6b and Fig . 6d ) . The bimodal length distribution is long - lived , being stable without any signiﬁcant changes over a timescale of tens of minutes to tens of hours ( Fig . 6d ) . The origin of the bimodal - ity lies in the early time segregation of ﬁlaments either by growth promoters in the subpopulation of large ﬁlaments or Length regulation of actin ﬁlaments by growth inhibitors in the subpopulation of small ﬁlaments ( Fig . 6f - g and Movie S4 ) . These segregated subpopulations are stable over a timescale of many hours , as the monomer pool reaches critical concentration when it is in equilibrium with the ﬁlaments . After this initial period of growth , formin and capping proteins cannot signiﬁcantly alter the ﬁlament length distribution , as in this long - lived diﬀusive growth regime a small ﬁlament cannot grow fast to become large even if it is formin - bound . In addition to modulating the nature of length distributions , the mean length of the ﬁlament population can also be tuned by changing formin and capping protein con - centrations ( Fig . 6h ) . Increase in formin concentration and decrease in capping protein concentration increases the mean ﬁlament length as expected from the results of the previous sections . We tested the validity of our assumption of neglecting the role of proﬁlin and formin - mediated nucleation by explicitly modeling these eﬀects . Our results show that the qualitative na - ture of the ﬁlament length distribution and the phase diagram do not change in the presence of proﬁlin and formin - mediated nucleation , such that we can obtain both bimodal and fat - tailed length distributions ( see Fig . S6 & S10 ) . CONCLUSIONS In this article , we developed a stochastic model of actin ﬁlament nucleation and assembly from a shared limiting pool of monomers and binding partners . Using this model , we delineate the conditions under which actin ﬁlaments of variable lengths can be built and maintained . Although we ignore many important actin regulators relevant in vivo , our model provides valuable insights into how actin length can be dynamically controlled by tuning concentrations of F - actin nucleators , growth promoters and growth inhibitors . Our model can thus be better realized in an in vitro setup , where the concentrations of actin and its binding partners can be precisely controlled . Our computational model can be extended further by incorporating F - actin fragmentation and annealing , which have shown to aﬀect F - actin length distribution over longer timescales in vitro ( 32 ) . While the role of spontaneous F - actin fragmentation and annealing remains unclear in vivo ( 43 ) , models can shed light into how these slow processes may regulate ﬁlament length distribution in the presence of growth promoters and growth inhibitors . We show that spontaneous nucleation can induce signif - icant length heterogeneity in the ﬁlament population . This heterogeneity in length is an emergent property of spontaneous nucleation that cannot result from the growth of a ﬁxed number of ﬁlaments from specialized nucleators ( 26 , 27 ) . In addition , spontaneous nucleation results in a strong age - length correla - tion in the ﬁlament population . A recent study by Rosenbloom et al ( 68 ) reports much slower formation and degradation of actin dimers than was previously reported by Sept and McCammon ( 42 ) . With slower nucleation rates , we ﬁnd that the mean length of actin ﬁlaments increases ( resulting from smaller ﬁlament density ) , while the qualitative features of the ﬁlament length distribution remained unchanged ( Fig S11 ) . Filament length heterogeneity and distribution can be controlled by tuning the interaction between F - actin and its growth promoters and inhibitors . We ﬁnd that strong growth inhibition leads to increased length heterogeneity within physi - ologically relevant timescales . In this case , length - independent growth inhibition by capping proteins reduces the age - length correlation in the ﬁlament population and a complete loss of correlation is seen at higher concentration of capping pro - teins . Our results agree well with in vitro studies reporting exponential length distribution and decreasing mean ﬁlament length with increasing capping concentration ( 35 ) . Enhanced F - actin elongation by formin reveals a non - monotonic be - haviour in ﬁlament length distribution with increasing formin concentration . The heterogeneity in length increases for small concentration of formin due to a competition between formin - bound and formin - free ﬁlaments . This heterogeneity goes away at higher concentration of formins when there are enough formin to bind all the ﬁlaments . Thus , a strong enhancement of growth rate does not result in any signiﬁcant change in length heterogeneity and retains the unimodality of length distribution . Motivated by recent in vitro studies reporting the inter - actions between formin and capping proteins ( 49 , 67 ) , we studied actin ﬁlament growth in the presence of formin and capping proteins . We show that formin and capping protein concentrations can be tuned to regulate the heterogeneity in length in the ﬁlament population . We ﬁnd a bimodal length distribution in a regime where the concentration of formin and capping proteins are comparable such that their competition is enhanced . Bimodal length distribution may originate from an underlying bistability due to autocatalytic growth ( 27 ) , as observed in vitro for microtubules growing in the presence of Kip3 motors ( 69 ) . However , the bimodal length distribution we report here does not originate from any underlying bistability in the ﬁlament growth dynamics . Here bimodality is an emer - gent collective eﬀect that arises from competition between actin growth promoters and growth inhibitors . This mecha - nism for maintaining subpopulations of short and long actin ﬁlaments may play an important role in assembling distinct actin network organizations with variable lengths ( 70 , 71 ) . The ﬁlaments observed in vivo are often much smaller than the range of ﬁlament lengths reported in our simulations ( Fig . 6h ) . This is because actin density inside the cell are much higher than what we considered , and numerous other actin regulators in the cell may further reduce ﬁlament lengths by enhanced nucleation ( e . g . by Arp - 2 / 3 ) or via F - actin severing ( e . g . via ADF / coﬁlin ) . We show that explicit modeling of proﬁlin in physiolog - ically relevant concentrations does not alter the qualitative results but changes the overall length of the formin - bound subpopulation of ﬁlaments ( see Fig . S6 ) . By accounting for formin - mediated ﬁlament nucleation , we ﬁnd that the depen - dence of ﬁlament length on formin concentration is altered , Banerjee and Banerjee depending on the formin nucleation eﬃciency . But the qualita - tive features of the ﬁlament length distributions do not change in diﬀerent growth regimes . Interestingly , while formin re - tains length heterogeneity and capping proteins increase it , proﬁlins are able to reduce ﬁlament length heterogeneity by limiting nucleation ( see Fig . S12 ) . Our model predicts a monotonic increase in actin elongation rate with increasing proﬁlin concentration ( Fig . S12 ) , which is in good agreement with experimental data for proﬁlin concentrations lower than that of actin ( 72 ) . At even higher proﬁlin concentrations , actin elongation rate is found to decrease with proﬁlin concentra - tion ( 72 ) , which is not captured by our current model since we do not consider the interaction between free proﬁlins and formin . To the best of our knowledge , bimodality in actin length distribution has not yet been experimentally observed in the presence of formin and capping . The recent studies on capping - formin interaction ( 49 , 67 ) are done in ﬂow channels where the monomer pool may not be conserved and data on ﬁlament length distribution is not reported . Interestingly , Zigmond et al ( 66 ) found unimodal length distribution in the presence of 0 . 5 𝜇 M actin , 10 nM capping and 200 nM formin , which is in good agreement with our prediction that the length distribution is unimodal when formin concentration is much larger than that of capping proteins ( Fig . 6b ) . Two kinetically distinct ( diﬀerent turnover rates ) actin ﬁlament subpopulations regulated by arp - 2 / 3 and formin were reported in cortical actin network ( 73 , 74 ) , but the average lengths of these subpopulations was found to be independent of the concentration of the regulators in the simulations ( 73 ) . The formin - nucleated ﬁlaments were reported to be longer and was found to play an essential role in determining mechanical properties of the cortical network in comparison with the shorter ﬁlaments ( 73 ) . This highlights the signiﬁcant role that ﬁlament length heterogeneity may play in regulating the mechanical properties of actin networks , opening doors to future studies on this topic . CODE AVAILABILITY Custom simulation codes used to generate each ﬁgure are available at https : / / github . com / BanerjeeLab / Actin _ Length _ Simulations . AUTHOR CONTRIBUTIONS D . S . B . and S . B . designed and developed the study . D . S . B . carried out simulations and analyzed the data . D . S . B . and S . B . wrote the article . DECLARATION OF INTEREST The authors declare no competing interests . ACKNOWLEDGMENTS SB acknowledges funding from the Human Frontier Science Program ( HFSP RGY0073 / 2018 ) , and the National Science Foundation ( NSF MCB - 2203601 ) . SB and DSB thank Darius Köster and Markus Deserno for useful inputs . DSB thanks Amit Das and Suman G Das for helpful discussions . REFERENCES 1 . Mogilner , A . , and G . Oster , 1996 . Cell motility driven by actin polymerization . Biophysical journal 71 : 3030 – 3045 . 2 . Olson , M . F . , and E . Sahai , 2009 . The actin cytoskeleton in cancer cell motility . Clinical & experimental metastasis 26 : 273 . 3 . Cooper , J . A . , 1991 . The role of actin polymerization in cell motility . Annual review of physiology 53 : 585 – 605 . 4 . Martinez - Quiles , N . , R . Rohatgi , I . M . Antón , M . Medina , S . P . Saville , H . Miki , H . Yamaguchi , T . Takenawa , J . H . Hartwig , R . S . Geha , et al . , 2001 . WIP regulates N - WASP - mediated actin polymerization and ﬁlopodium formation . Nature cell biology 3 : 484 – 491 . 5 . Vasioukhin , V . , C . Bauer , M . Yin , and E . Fuchs , 2000 . Directed actin polymerization is the driving force for epithelial cell – cell adhesion . Cell 100 : 209 – 219 . 6 . Faix , J . , and K . Rottner , 2006 . The making of ﬁlopodia . Current opinion in cell biology 18 : 18 – 25 . 7 . Schafer , D . A . , 2002 . Coupling actin dynamics and mem - brane dynamics during endocytosis . Current Opinion in Cell Biology 14 : 76 – 81 . 8 . Ajeti , V . , A . P . Tabatabai , A . J . Fleszar , M . F . Staddon , D . S . Seara , C . Suarez , M . S . Yousafzai , D . Bi , D . R . Kovar , S . Banerjee , et al . , 2019 . Wound healing coordinates actin architectures to regulate mechanical work . Nature physics 15 : 696 – 705 . 9 . Conrad , P . A . , K . A . Giuliano , G . Fisher , K . Collins , P . T . Matsudaira , and D . L . Taylor , 1993 . Relative distribution of actin , myosin I , and myosin II during the wound healing response of ﬁbroblasts . The Journal of Cell Biology 120 : 1381 – 1391 . 10 . Cingolani , L . A . , and Y . Goda , 2008 . Actin in action : the interplay between the actin cytoskeleton and synaptic eﬃcacy . Nature Reviews Neuroscience 9 : 344 – 356 . 11 . Pelham , R . J . , and F . Chang , 2002 . Actin dynamics in the contractile ring during cytokinesis in ﬁssion yeast . Nature 419 : 82 – 86 . 12 . Yang , H . - C . , and L . A . Pon , 2002 . Actin cable dynamics in budding yeast . Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 99 : 751 – 756 . Length regulation of actin ﬁlaments 13 . Martin , P . , and J . Lewis , 1992 . Actin cables and epidermal movement in embryonic wound healing . Nature 360 : 179 – 183 . 14 . Latacha , K . S . , M . C . Rémond , A . Ramasubramanian , A . Y . Chen , E . L . Elson , and L . A . Taber , 2005 . Role of actin polymerization in bending of the early heart tube . Developmental dynamics : an oﬃcial publication of the American Association of Anatomists 233 : 1272 – 1286 . 15 . Daggett , D . F . , C . A . Boyd , P . Gautier , R . J . Bryson - Richardson , C . Thisse , B . Thisse , S . L . Amacher , and P . D . Currie , 2004 . Developmentally restricted actin - regulatory molecules control morphogenetic cell movements in the zebraﬁsh gastrula . Current Biology 14 : 1632 – 1638 . 16 . Kim , H . Y . , and L . A . Davidson , 2011 . Punctuated actin contractions during convergent extension and their permissive regulation by the non - canonical Wnt - signaling pathway . Journal of cell science 124 : 635 – 646 . 17 . Banerjee , S . , M . L . Gardel , and U . S . Schwarz , 2020 . The actin cytoskeleton as an active adaptive material . Annual review of condensed matter physics 11 : 421 – 439 . 18 . Varga , V . , J . Helenius , K . Tanaka , A . A . Hyman , T . U . Tanaka , and J . Howard , 2006 . Yeast kinesin - 8 depolymer - izes microtubules in a length - dependent manner . Nature cell biology 8 : 957 – 962 . 19 . Howard , J . , and A . A . Hyman , 2007 . Microtubule poly - merases and depolymerases . Current opinion in cell biology 19 : 31 – 35 . 20 . Ludington , W . B . , L . Z . Shi , Q . Zhu , M . W . Berns , and W . F . Marshall , 2012 . Organelle size equalization by a constitutive process . Current Biology 22 : 2173 – 2179 . 21 . Marshall , W . F . , 2002 . Size control in dynamic organelles . Trends in cell biology 12 : 414 – 419 . 22 . Erlenkämper , C . , and K . Kruse , 2009 . Uncorre - lated changes of subunit stability can generate length - dependent disassembly of treadmilling ﬁlaments . Physi - cal Biology 6 : 046016 . 23 . Kremneva , E . , M . H . Makkonen , A . Skwarek - Maruszewska , G . Gateva , A . Michelot , R . Dominguez , and P . Lappalainen , 2014 . Coﬁlin - 2 controls actin ﬁla - ment length in muscle sarcomeres . Developmental cell 31 : 215 – 226 . 24 . Edelstein - Keshet , L . , and G . B . Ermentrout , 1998 . Mod - els for the length distributions of actin ﬁlaments : I . Simple polymerization and fragmentation . Bulletin of mathemat - ical biology 60 : 449 – 475 . 25 . Erlenkämper , C . , and K . Kruse , 2013 . Treadmilling and length distributions of active polar ﬁlaments . The Journal of chemical physics 139 : 10B625 _ 1 . 26 . Mohapatra , L . , T . J . Lagny , D . Harbage , P . R . Jelenkovic , and J . Kondev , 2017 . The limiting - pool mechanism fails to control the size of multiple organelles . Cell systems 4 : 559 – 567 . 27 . Banerjee , D . S . , and S . Banerjee , 2020 . Size regulation of multiple organelles competing for a shared subunit pool . bioRxiv . 28 . Suarez , C . , P . M . McCall , M . L . Gardel , and D . R . Kovar , 2017 . When Is “Enough” Enough ? Cell systems 4 : 480 – 482 . 29 . Goehring , N . W . , and A . A . Hyman , 2012 . Organelle growth control through limiting pools of cytoplasmic components . Current Biology 22 : R330 – R339 . 30 . Burke , T . A . , J . R . Christensen , E . Barone , C . Suarez , V . Sirotkin , and D . R . Kovar , 2014 . Homeostatic actin cytoskeleton networks are regulated by assembly factor competition for monomers . Current Biology 24 : 579 – 585 . 31 . Suarez , C . , and D . R . Kovar , 2016 . Internetwork compe - tition for monomers governs actin cytoskeleton organiza - tion . Nature reviews Molecular cell biology 17 : 799 – 810 . 32 . Sept , D . , J . Xu , T . D . Pollard , and J . A . McCammon , 1999 . Annealing accounts for the length of actin ﬁlaments formed by spontaneous polymerization . Biophysical journal 77 : 2911 – 2919 . 33 . Hu , J . , A . Matzavinos , and H . G . Othmer , 2007 . A theoretical approach to actin ﬁlament dynamics . Journal of Statistical Physics 128 : 111 – 138 . 34 . Fass , J . , C . Pak , J . Bamburg , and A . Mogilner , 2008 . Stochastic simulation of actin dynamics reveals the role of annealing and fragmentation . Journal of theoretical biology 252 : 173 – 183 . 35 . Xu , J . , J . F . Casella , and T . D . Pollard , 1999 . Eﬀect of capping protein , CapZ , on the length of actin ﬁlaments and mechanical properties of actin ﬁlament networks . Cell motility and the cytoskeleton 42 : 73 – 81 . 36 . Wang , Y . - L . , 1985 . Exchange of actin subunits at the lead - ing edge of living ﬁbroblasts : possible role of treadmilling . The Journal of cell biology 101 : 597 – 602 . 37 . Mallavarapu , A . , and T . Mitchison , 1999 . Regulated actin cytoskeleton assembly at ﬁlopodium tips controls their extension and retraction . The Journal of cell biology 146 : 1097 – 1106 . 38 . Fraley , S . I . , Y . Feng , R . Krishnamurthy , D . - H . Kim , A . Celedon , G . D . Longmore , and D . Wirtz , 2010 . A distinctive role for focal adhesion proteins in three - dimensional cell motility . Nature cell biology 12 : 598 – 604 . Banerjee and Banerjee 39 . Gillespie , D . T . , 1977 . Exact stochastic simulation of coupled chemical reactions . The Journal of Physical Chemistry 81 : 2340 – 2361 . 40 . Oosawa , F . , S . Asakura , et al . , 1975 . Thermodynamics of the Polymerization of Protein . Academic Press . 41 . Tobacman , L . S . , and E . D . Korn , 1983 . The kinet - ics of actin nucleation and polymerization . Journal of Biological Chemistry 258 : 3207 – 3214 . 42 . Sept , D . , and J . A . McCammon , 2001 . Thermodynamics and kinetics of actin ﬁlament nucleation . Biophysical journal 81 : 667 – 674 . 43 . Schmoller , K . M . , T . Niedermayer , C . Zensen , C . Wurm , and A . R . Bausch , 2011 . Fragmentation is crucial for the steady - state dynamics of actin ﬁlaments . Biophysical journal 101 : 803 – 808 . 44 . Käs , J . , H . Strey , J . Tang , D . Finger , R . Ezzell , E . Sack - mann , and P . Janmey , 1996 . F - actin , a model polymer for semiﬂexible chains in dilute , semidilute , and liquid crystalline solutions . Biophysical journal 70 : 609 – 625 . 45 . Funk , J . , F . Merino , L . Venkova , L . Heydenreich , J . Kier - feld , P . Vargas , S . Raunser , M . Piel , and P . Bieling , 2019 . Proﬁlin and formin constitute a pacemaker system for robust actin ﬁlament growth . Elife 8 : e50963 . 46 . Fujiwara , I . , D . Vavylonis , and T . D . Pollard , 2007 . Poly - merization kinetics of ADP - and ADP - Pi - actin determined by ﬂuorescence microscopy . Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 104 : 8827 – 8832 . 47 . Courtemanche , N . , and T . D . Pollard , 2013 . Interac - tion of proﬁlin with the barbed end of actin ﬁlaments . Biochemistry 52 : 6456 – 6466 . 48 . Zweifel , M . E . , L . A . Sherer , B . Mahanta , and N . Courte - manche , 2021 . Nucleation limits the lengths of actin ﬁlaments assembled by formin . Biophysical Journal . 49 . Shekhar , S . , M . Kerleau , S . Kühn , J . Pernier , G . Romet - Lemonne , A . Jégou , and M . - F . Carlier , 2015 . Formin and capping protein together embrace the actin ﬁlament in a ménage à trois . Nature communications 6 : 1 – 12 . 50 . Wioland , H . , B . Guichard , Y . Senju , S . Myram , P . Lap - palainen , A . Jégou , and G . Romet - Lemonne , 2017 . ADF / coﬁlin accelerates actin dynamics by severing ﬁla - ments and promoting their depolymerization at both ends . Current Biology 27 : 1956 – 1967 . 51 . Wear , M . A . , A . Yamashita , K . Kim , Y . Maéda , and J . A . Cooper , 2003 . How capping protein binds the barbed end of the actin ﬁlament . Current Biology 13 : 1531 – 1537 . 52 . Pollard , T . D . , L . Blanchoin , and R . D . Mullins , 2000 . Molecular mechanisms controlling actin ﬁlament dynam - ics in nonmuscle cells . Annual review of biophysics and biomolecular structure 29 : 545 – 576 . 53 . Köster , D . V . , K . Husain , E . Iljazi , A . Bhat , P . Bieling , R . D . Mullins , M . Rao , and S . Mayor , 2016 . Actomyosin dynamics drive local membrane component organization in an in vitro active composite layer . Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 113 : E1645 – E1654 . 54 . Akin , O . , and R . D . Mullins , 2008 . Capping protein increases the rate of actin - based motility by promoting ﬁlament nucleation by the Arp2 / 3 complex . Cell 133 : 841 – 851 . 55 . Higashida , C . , T . Miyoshi , A . Fujita , F . Oceguera - Yanez , J . Monypenny , Y . Andou , S . Narumiya , and N . Watanabe , 2004 . Actin polymerization - driven molecular movement of mDia1 in living cells . Science 303 : 2007 – 2010 . 56 . Kovar , D . R . , and T . D . Pollard , 2004 . Insertional assembly of actin ﬁlament barbed ends in association with formins produces piconewton forces . Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 101 : 14725 – 14730 . 57 . Dehapiot , B . , R . Clément , H . Alégot , G . Gazsó - Gerhát , J . - M . Philippe , and T . Lecuit , 2020 . Assembly of a persistent apical actin network by the formin Frl / Fmnl tunes epithelial cell deformability . Nature cell biology 22 : 791 – 802 . 58 . Yang , C . , L . Czech , S . Gerboth , S . - i . Kojima , G . Scita , and T . Svitkina , 2007 . Novel roles of formin mDia2 in lamellipodia and ﬁlopodia formation in motile cells . PLoS biology 5 : e317 . 59 . Krneta - Stankic , V . , M . E . Corkins , A . Paulucci - Holthauzen , M . Kloc , A . B . Gladden , and R . K . Miller , 2021 . The Wnt / PCP formin Daam1 drives cell - cell adhesion during nephron development . Cell Reports 36 : 109340 . 60 . Li , F . , and H . N . Higgs , 2003 . The mouse Formin mDia1 is a potent actin nucleation factor regulated by autoinhibition . Current biology 13 : 1335 – 1340 . 61 . Breitsprecher , D . , and B . L . Goode , 2013 . Formins at a glance . Journal of cell science 126 : 1 – 7 . 62 . Vaillant , D . C . , S . J . Copeland , C . Davis , S . F . Thurston , N . Abdennur , and J . W . Copeland , 2008 . Interaction of the N - and C - terminal autoregulatory domains of FRL2 does not inhibit FRL2 activity . Journal of Biological Chemistry 283 : 33750 – 33762 . 63 . Block , J . , D . Breitsprecher , S . Kühn , M . Winterhoﬀ , F . Kage , R . Geﬀers , P . Duwe , J . L . Rohn , B . Baum , C . Brakebusch , et al . , 2012 . FMNL2 drives actin - based Length regulation of actin ﬁlaments protrusion and migration downstream of Cdc42 . Current Biology 22 : 1005 – 1012 . 64 . Romero , S . , C . Le Clainche , D . Didry , C . Egile , D . Pan - taloni , and M . - F . Carlier , 2004 . Formin is a processive motor that requires proﬁlin to accelerate actin assembly and associated ATP hydrolysis . Cell 119 : 419 – 429 . 65 . Breitsprecher , D . , R . Jaiswal , J . P . Bombardier , C . J . Gould , J . Gelles , and B . L . Goode , 2012 . Rocket launcher mechanism of collaborative actin assembly deﬁned by single - molecule imaging . Science 336 : 1164 – 1168 . 66 . Zigmond , S . H . , M . Evangelista , C . Boone , C . Yang , A . C . Dar , F . Sicheri , J . Forkey , and M . Pring , 2003 . Formin leaky cap allows elongation in the presence of tight capping proteins . Current Biology 13 : 1820 – 1823 . 67 . Bombardier , J . P . , J . A . Eskin , R . Jaiswal , I . R . Corrêa , M . - Q . Xu , B . L . Goode , and J . Gelles , 2015 . Single - molecule visualization of a formin - capping protein ‘de - cision complex’at the actin ﬁlament barbed end . Nature communications 6 : 1 – 9 . 68 . Rosenbloom , A . D . , E . W . Kovar , D . R . Kovar , L . M . Loew , and T . D . Pollard , 2021 . Mechanism of actin ﬁlament nucleation . Biophysical Journal 120 : 4399 – 4417 . 69 . Rank , M . , A . Mitra , L . Reese , S . Diez , and E . Frey , 2018 . Limited resources induce bistability in microtubule length regulation . Physical review letters 120 : 148101 . 70 . Vignaud , T . , C . Copos , C . Leterrier , M . Toro - Nahuelpan , Q . Tseng , J . Mahamid , L . Blanchoin , A . Mogilner , M . Théry , and L . Kurzawa , 2021 . Stress ﬁbres are embed - ded in a contractile cortical network . Nature materials 20 : 410 – 420 . 71 . Lehtimäki , J . I . , E . K . Rajakylä , S . Tojkander , and P . Lap - palainen , 2021 . Generation of stress ﬁbers through myosin - driven reorganization of the actin cortex . eLife 10 : e60710 . 72 . Kovar , D . R . , E . S . Harris , R . Mahaﬀy , H . N . Higgs , and T . D . Pollard , 2006 . Control of the assembly of ATP - and ADP - actin by formins and proﬁlin . Cell 124 : 423 – 435 . 73 . Fritzsche , M . , C . Erlenkämper , E . Moeendarbary , G . Char - ras , and K . Kruse , 2016 . Actin kinetics shapes cortical network structure and mechanics . Science advances 2 : e1501337 . 74 . Fritzsche , M . , R . A . Fernandes , V . T . Chang , H . Colin - York , M . P . Clausen , J . H . Felce , S . Galiani , C . Erlenkäm - per , A . M . Santos , J . M . Heddleston , et al . , 2017 . Cy - toskeletal actin dynamics shape a ramifying actin network underpinning immunological synapse formation . Science advances 3 : e1603032 . SUPPORTING MATERIAL An online supplement to this article can be found by visiting the preprint website . Movie title and legends Movie S1 . Actin ﬁlament growth by spontaneous nucleation . The y - axis denotes ﬁlament length in 𝜇 m and the ﬁlaments are ordered according to their age , i . e . , the right - most ﬁlament is the youngest . The correlation in ﬁlament age and length can be clearly seen to be emerging from spontaneous nucleation of ﬁlaments . The blue dots represent free barbed end . Parameter values used are same as in Fig . 2c Movie S2 . Actin ﬁlament growth by spontaneous nucleation in the presence of capping proteins . The y - axis denotes ﬁla - ment length in 𝜇 m and the ﬁlaments are ordered according to their age , i . e . , the right - most ﬁlament is the youngest . The emergence of heterogeneity , due to capping proteins block - ing the growth of newly nucleated ﬁlaments , can be seen . The blue and red dots represent the free barbed ends and capping bound barbed ends respectively . Parameter values used are same as in Fig . 3 with capping concentration of 2 nM . Movie S3 . Actin ﬁlament growth by spontaneous nucleation in the presence of formin proteins . The y - axis denotes ﬁla - ment length in 𝜇 m , and the ﬁlaments are ordered according to their age , i . e . , the right - most ﬁlament is the youngest . The length heterogeneity and the correlation in ﬁlament age and length can be seen to be very similar with the case of spon - taneous growth without any ABPs . The blue and green dots represent the free barbed end and formin bound barbed ends , respectively . Parameter values used are same as in Fig . 5 with proﬁlin and formin concentration of 1 𝜇 M and 0 . 5 nM respectively . The formin mediated nucleation rate was taken to be 𝐾 𝐹𝑁 = 10 − 5 𝜇𝑀 − 2 𝑠 − 1 . Movie S4 . Actin ﬁlament growth by spontaneous nucleation , in the presence of formin and capping proteins . The y - axis denotes the ﬁlament length in 𝜇 m and the ﬁlaments are ordered according to their age , i . e . , the right - most ﬁlament is the youngest . The emergence of two subpopulations of short and long ﬁlaments can be seen . The subpopulations arise due to the capture of ﬁlaments by formin ( grows long ) and capping ( remains small ) during the early period of their growth . The blue , green and red dots represent the free barbed end , formin - bound barbed ends , capping - bound or capping - formin complex bound barbed ends , respectively . Parameter values used are same as in Fig . 5 with proﬁlin , capping and formin concentration of 1 𝜇 M , 8 nM and 5 nM respectively . The formin mediated nucleation rate was taken to be 𝐾 𝐹𝑁 = 10 − 5 𝜇𝑀 − 2 𝑠 − 1 .