Copyright © 2012 by the Association for Computing Machinery , Inc . Permission to make digital or hard copies of part or all of this work for personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed for commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation on the first page . Copyrights for components of this work owned by others than ACM must be honored . Abstracting with credit is permitted . To copy otherwise , to republish , to post on servers , or to redistribute to lists , requires prior specific permission and / or a fee . Request permissions from Permissions Dept , ACM Inc . , fax + 1 ( 212 ) 869 - 0481 or e - mail permissions @ acm . org . TEI 2012 , Kingston , Ontario , Canada , February 1 9 – 22 , 2012 . © 2012 ACM 978 - 1 - 4503 - 1174 - 8 / 12 / 0002 $ 10 . 00 Exploring Tabletops as an Effective Tool to Foster Creativity Traits Alejandro Catala 1 , Javier Jaen 1 , Betsy van Dijk 2 , Sergi Jordà 3 1 ISSI - Departamento de Sistemas Informáticos y Computación Universitat Politècnica de València Camí de Vera s / n , 46022 , Valencia Spain { acatala , fjaen } @ dsic . upv . es 2 Human Media Interaction University of Twente Faculty EEMCS PO Box 217 7500 AE Enschede The Netherlands e . m . a . g . vandijk @ utwente . nl 3 Music Technology Group Universitat Pompeu Fabra Roc Boronat 138 , 08018 Barcelona Spain sergi . jorda @ upf . edu ABSTRACT Creativity is a relevant characteristic for people ' s development as it facilitates the generation of new ideas and innovation processes . Although technology has played an important role on creativity stimulation , it still needs to be explored for a better understanding and support in the context of information and communication technologies . In this paper a basic creativity assessment model is presented and an empirical study has been conducted whose aim is to get insight into whether an interactive surface as base technology for collaborative creative tasks is promising in terms of both collaboration and creativity traits . In the study two tabletop - based platforms ( a digitally - augmented , and a physical - only without computer mediation ) were involved to solve a problem consisting of creating Rube - Goldberg machines . From these experiments , we have observed that in terms of creativity traits , interactive surfaces seem promising as groups working in the digital platform showed significantly more performance in fluency of thinking , were more motivated , and novelty was found near to significance . Also some issues related to collaboration and interaction were analyzed . In particular , the co - operation , the retrial fine adjustment , and the dominance showed that the properties of an interactive surface tabletop suits better for facilitating the sharing of objects and participation in conditions of co - operation by co - located participants . Author Keywords Interactive Surface ; Tabletop Displays , Tangible User Interface ( TUI ) ; Creativity ; Creativity Assessment ; Co - operation ; Empirical Study . ACM Classification Keywords H5 . m . Information interfaces and presentation : Miscellaneous . H . 5 . 3 Group and Organization Interfaces : Collaborative computing ; Computer - supported cooperative work ; Evaluation . General Terms Experimentation , Human Factors INTRODUCTION People are continuously solving problems in their everyday activities . Some of these are " routine " problems , which are easy to solve and have obvious and well - known criteria for identifying the solution by applying knowledge directly . Conversely , other problems are more difficult to address and their solutions are not directly identifiable [ 6 ] , in which case other factors should be considered in order to come up with a solution to " complex " or " intractable " problems . The first relevant factor here is intelligence , which is commonly considered to be the ability of an individual to solve problems . In general , the more problems an individual can solve the more intelligent she is considered to be . Intelligence has been widely studied and is traditionally measured by IQ tests , which are actually concerned with convergent aspects of thinking [ 12 ] . In many cases , people are unable to solve these “complex” problems even if they are considered to have an adequate level of intelligence . Such problems are complex precisely because they are difficult to define , which in turn makes the solution even more difficult to obtain due to the complex mental processes involved . Divergent thinking is a desirable characteristic and is often associated with highly creative abilities . In that sense , creativity can be considered to be directly linked to problem solving and is even a special form of problem solving [ 12 , 16 ] , because of the mental processes involved in creating ideas , which include preparation , incubation , illumination and verification [ 19 ] . Creativity is therefore important for learning and personal development . How it can be fostered as well as evaluated in Information and Communications Technologies ( ICT ) settings seems to be a key issue for research . However , although studies have been published on the evaluation of creativity in ICT contexts [ 8 , 25 ] , most have focused on systems development ( whose design is rooted in creativity theories ) , which is thought to foster creativity because it is 143 used to address creative tasks [ 15 , 14 ] , and / or the support of typical creative processes , such as the creation of concept maps from brainstorming sessions [ 4 , 9 ] . If we look at the different computer - mediated approaches used to address creativity in these studies , we see that even if some do consider remote and text - based communication , most of them have been designed to support single - user interactions and so fail to consider other important dimensions of creativity , such as collaboration , reflection and divergent thinking in group face - to - face scenarios . However , recent advances in tabletops have opened up new lines of research to validate the suitability of these new computing environments to support creative learning in group - based scenarios . The research presented in this paper is motivated by the expectation that tabletop technology and the evaluation of creativity will lead us to a better understanding of the creative process itself and will allow us to generate better creativity support systems in computing in the future . Hence , with the aim of exploring if interactive surface technology for creative tasks in the context of creative learning with teenagers is promising , this paper contributes by using a creativity assessment model and conducting an empirical study that measures creativity traits on two tabletop settings as an approach to evaluate how the environment can influence creativity . The study compares a tool implemented in interactive tabletop technology versus a completely physical and traditional tangible setting ( i . e . with no computer mediation ) . The creative collaborative task supported by both platforms is inspired by the idea of solving problems by means of Rube Goldberg Machines ( RGMs ) [ 23 ] , which are mechanical systems mainly composed of building blocks connected to actionable devices , normally providing a complex solution to a simple problem . The rest of the paper is organized as follows : related work is described in the following section . The notion of creativity is then revisited and the creativity assessment model is presented . The experimental study is then described and the results are discussed . The conclusions are presented in the final section . RELATED WORK Several works present a challenging technological development founded on creativity theories to support aspects related to creativity . However , these studies do not usually focus on the evaluation of creativity itself but on usability or collaboration design issues that correspond to more general and broader studies in the field such as the ones by Hornecker et al [ 13 ] and Rogers et al [ 20 ] . Remarkable works with non - tabletop technology are Scratch [ 15 ] and Topobo [ 17 ] . Scratch is a programming language designed to foster the elements of Resnick’s creative spiral [ 18 ] . It enables children to create programmable media such as games and interactive stories . Although it is a desktop - based application that uses a block - like visual programming language , currently there exists an on - line community which promotes sharing , collaboration and discussion among its members . In [ 3 ] , an empirical study is conducted which explores the use of communications in distributed users using Scratch for effective collaboration in creative work . The authors concluded that socio - emotional communication is important for successful creative work and emphasized that systems supporting social creativity must facilitate sharing and play . Topobo is a 3D constructive assembly system that allows the creation of biomorphic forms like animals and skeletons . This is achieved by means of pieces embedded with kinetic memory , and the ability to record and playback physical motion . Topobo is designed to be a user interface that encourages creativity , discovery and learning through active experimentation with the system . Studies with children and early adolescents are reported . In the case of teenagers , the study explores how the system supports design , concluding that Topobo can help students to learn about several educational concepts on physics such as balance , center of mass , coordination and relative motion . In the context of tabletop technology , TurTan is a tangible programming language for creative exploration that has successfully combined the main Logo concepts with the interaction mechanisms offered by interactive tabletops [ 11 ] . The work does not report on user evaluation on either learning or creativity , although the authors do mention the necessity to explore these dimensions as the system is oriented towards young children . Buisine et al [ 4 ] present a tabletop interface enabling groups to build mind - maps as a tool for associative thinking and group creativity . The study compared this interface to traditional paper - and - pencil mind - mapping sessions . Questionnaires were used to evaluate subjective perception on ease - of - use and usefulness of the system , and video analysis was included to evaluate participants’ collaboration . The results showed no difference in the production of ideas , but the tabletop condition significantly improved gestural and verbal interactions , as well as the perceived efficiency and pleasure of working in groups . Friess et al [ 9 ] present a multi - touch based tabletop application including a study on the use of the interface by considering several creative techniques . The results showed that the subjects positively assessed the realistic behavior physically - based simulated objects as this provided a more intuitive interaction . They also felt they participated more actively as a consequence of using the tabletop application , which is important to foster collaboration . The application is designed to generically support a range of creativity techniques as established in a previous study [ 10 ] . IncreTable is a mixed reality tabletop game based on the idea of Rube - Goldberg machines [ 14 ] . Each level presents a puzzle requiring multi - modal interaction to encourage user 144 creativity . The general objective of the platform is to arrange a given collection of items in a complex way in order to solve a puzzle . Subsequent evaluation of the platform explored the relationship of certain interaction aspects with flow [ 5 ] . Finally , there are also some studies that are focused on creativity evaluation . Farooq et al [ 8 ] performed a study aimed at detecting breakdowns in creativity by using the BRIDGE system , a desktop - based prototype of a collaborative infrastructure that provide integrated support for the process of creativity of graduate students in computer and information science . Four breakdowns were identified : under - consideration of minority ideas ; loss of novel ideas ; lack of critical evaluation of perspectives ; and weak reflexivity during convergence . Another study that includes creativity assessment is the one by Wang et al [ 25 ] . In this work , although participants were asked to collaborate and communicate , no particular medium was specified nor was specific software developed . The study explores the relationship between the design rationale in software design and creativity . The task required participants to solve specific software design problems by capturing design rationale and implementing the design in Java . As they progressed , students produced design rationale documents following a uniform format . These documents described design issues found in the exercises , design alternatives considered , along with a tradeoff assessment for each alternative and , finally , a report on the selected alternative . An assessment of design rationale quality and design creativity based on three creativity traits ( novelty of design alternatives , persuasiveness of tradeoffs , and insightfulness of tradeoffs ) was performed on the documents handed in by students . The authors concluded that it is possible to foster design creativity by enhancing the quality of design rationale . CREATIVITY ASSESSMENT MODEL The term creativity is very difficult to define , as shown by the many different definitions offered in the literature [ 24 ] by adults and even children [ 1 ] . Despite this wide range of definitions , most rely on the idea of innovation and others such as originality , novelty , surprising , unusual , or uncommon but effective . In general , definitions from the field of psychology are the most complex . A concise but simple definition is given by Amabile , who maintains that creativity arises as a combination of knowledge , creative thinking , and motivation [ 2 ] . Of these three factors , the one that clearly makes a difference is the term creative thinking . This is related to the idea of thinking differently to other people when solving problems , by exploring different alternative solutions . This divergent thinking skill is especially important in innovation and creative processes , since it allows addressing complex problems which probably do not have an optimal solution , or require more than just knowledge or well - known problem - solving techniques . Given the difficulty of establishing a precise definition , creativity is normally considered as a construct composed of several traits , as described by psychologists [ 12 ] . In this respect , a range of different adjectives and traits have been jointly used as indications of creativity . Some typical examples are originality , trade - off assessment , independence , elaboration , curiosity , frustration tolerance , establishing remote relationships , to be open to new experiences , and many others . In addition , confluence theories nowadays consider besides these traits more complex and multi - component approaches to creativity , since it is thought to emerge from several interrelated factors [ 22 ] . To some extent they also include external variables from the environment since several factors in it may influence and be supportive for creativity . Our creativity assessment model is based on this view on traits , considering a representative core set used in the psychology field . This model contains novelty , fluency and flexibility of thinking , elaboration , and motivation . The most important trait is undoubtedly novelty , which is defined as the characteristic conferring something unusual , unique or surprising . The fluency of thinking refers to the ability to generate new ideas and / or formulate significant problems and hypothesis ( i . e . ability to provide a range of valid solutions ) ; flexibility of thinking refers to a wide range of possible solutions and to the ability to change from one category or point of view to another . Elaboration is the ability to increase the complexity of ideas , including more details ( although too much elaboration may have undesired effects by limiting the development of ideas ) . Finally , Motivation was included as it is also important in human development and many other learning activities [ 7 ] and it is also included in one of the seminal definitions given by Amabile . This creativity model will be used in the empirical study presented in this paper with the aim of assessing the influence of using a platform in the environment . EMPIRICAL STUDY The present exploratory study was designed to get an insight into whether interactive surfaces show promise as the base technology for collaborative creative tasks in terms of creativity traits . The study compares the performance of two different testing platforms used by teenagers in an experimental design that considers individual thinking - reflection , collective discussion , and action processes in an iterative task to foster creativity . Equipment Two tabletop platforms were developed for the construction of Rube Goldberg machines . One is digitally - augmented based on an interactive surface that allows multi - touch and tangible input , whereas the other is completely physical and tangible without computer mediation . 145 The digital platform provides for the creation and operation of RGMs based on blocks and joints and the software was developed in C # using the Microsoft Surface SDK v . 1 . 0 , running in a Microsoft Surface Unit . Interaction with the construction elements is based on both multi - touch and tangible input by means of pucks . The environment is designed to support 360 º interactions by interacting co - located users around the tabletop . Touch input is used to position and rotate blocks and joints , while several tangible tools are used for a range of different operations , described below ( see Figure 1 ) . The “magic wand” tool gives access to the creation menus , which allow the creation of new blocks and joints in the workspace . The “clone” tool allows the copy - and - paste of blocks already existing in the workspace , by simply placing the tool on a block and then returning to the space where the copy is required . This tool also allows the fine adjustment of blocks in terms of position and rotation , as position and rotation are directly used to establish these properties . Another important tool is the “eraser” , which deletes any block or joint when the tool is applied on an element in a zig - zag movement . The “friction modifier” tool allows the adjustment of the friction coefficient of the blocks to be used when block surfaces touch each other . The “slope” tool controls the angles that allow the simulation of a slanting plane as is the case in the physical - only platform . Finally , the “simulation” tool alternates between the editor and the simulator . When this tool is present on the surface , the simulation starts to run and allows users to observe the structures evolving according to physical principles and also to introduce forces and impulses into the system to move blocks as desired . Figure 2 shows a Rube Goldberg machine under construction . The aim is to make a box fall from a shelf located in the center of the tabletop . The alternative physical - only platform is made entirely from hardware with no software simulation . It consists of a conglomerate 590x700 mm . tabletop with a regular grid of 28x32 holes with a separation of 2 cm . ( see Figure 3 ) . Several wooden blocks of similar size proportion to the ones in the digital platform are available . These blocks can be fixed and assembled as needed by using the holes drilled on them by means of screws , bolts and other joint elements such as elastic bands and pieces of string . The tabletop has four legs to keep it horizontal and also a stand to configure it as a slanting plane to simulate similar conditions in the digital platform . The choice of a physical - only tangible platform instead of a platform based on a desktop application was made in order to have two similar platforms in terms of co - located user involvement and participation . A desktop - based application relying on WIMP ( Windows - Icons - Menus - Pointers ) interaction techniques would not have provided a fair comparison , since the degree - of - collaboration and participation had been limited to non - parallel manipulation by mono - user input interfaces such as keyboard and mouse . Participants Twenty - two ( 14 male and 8 female ) teenage students from several local secondary schools participated in the experiment . Two participants were left - handed and two were ambidextrous . Their ages ranged from 15 to 18 ( m = 16 . 23 , sd = 1 . 6 ) . Almost all of them declared they used personal computers regularly . Regarding using touch - enabled devices , fourteen reported using them daily , four almost every day , three said seldom , and one never . None had any previous experience of surface computers . Participants had previously taken part in a short course on Figure 1 . Pucks as tangibles to operate the digital platform Figure 2 . Users creating an RGM in the digital platform . Figure 3 . Users testing an RGM in the physical - only platform . 146 new and emerging technologies designed to motivate teenagers to study core subjects such as physics and computing . The course was organized by a club dependent on the Education & Culture department of the local city council . Since the course was completely free and voluntary , there was no kind of participant pre - selection according to school performance profiles . Task Participants were requested to design as many creative RGMs as possible to solve a given problem , consisting of making a box fall from a shelf located in the center of the tabletop ( see Figure 2 and Figure 3 ) . Tools and Instrumentation The experiment used the two platforms previously described . Participants were given answer forms to report proposed solutions by means of a sketch and notes before implementation on the platforms . Additionally , two video cameras were used to record the sessions to support video analysis . For that purpose , colored cards and pucks were used to identify participant groups and switches between workspaces , and colored strips were also tied around users’ wrists for identifying participants’ hands in the video . Method and Procedure The test sessions were carried out at the end of the technology course . Participants were assigned in sessions according to their availability and age , with a limit of 8 people per session and avoiding large differences although all were teenagers . They were grouped in pairs randomly , but always trying to balance the assignment to the experimentation platform ( i . e . digitally - augmented or physical - only ) following a between - subjects experimental design . After pairing , the average age difference between members was about 0 . 9 ( group age : m = 16 . 27 , sd = 1 . 14 ) . This resulted in 6 mixed groups ( i . e . composed of members from each gender ) , 4 formed by two male teenagers and 1 by two female . From these , only a group of friends were coincidentally paired , while other 6 groups declared to casually know the partner but only in the context of previous courses in the club , and 4 groups reported that they did not know the partner before the current course . Each group received an introductory talk on each experiment platform , followed by a live demo of how platforms could be used to solve a demo problem , and finally , they were required to give an alternative solution . Their proposals were implemented on each platform on their own under supervision . This introduction and training session took about 40 minutes . Three distinguished places were considered in an iterative process . In the individual thinking place , subjects had to generate solutions to the problem on paper . Once each member had produced various solutions , they discussed improvements and possible new solutions and decided what solutions to implement on the testing platform . As they had discussed the ideas on paper , they already knew what parts were needed to be constructed and could collaborate on implementing them . The first two stages are thus also important , as they promote divergent thinking , which is important for creativity , since the production of sketches supported by the traditional paper and pencil may facilitate a greater generation of proposals , and also as they set the basis for collaboration on experimentation platform . Participants were encouraged to perform as well as possible , and two prizes were awarded for the two best groups . They were told that performance would be judged based on the creativity and originality of the solutions . They were reminded that it was important to give expression to as many solution proposals as they could on paper , in order to promote divergent thinking and solution diversity . Participants were obliged to go to the next place if the 10 - minute time limit was reached . These three places were put in a loop until the 60 minutes experiment time was reached . Results and Discussion Eleven groups were formed , six working with the digitally - augmented platform and five with the physical - only . A total of 122 solutions were proposed of which 38 were tested on the digital platform and 26 on the tangible . The traits in the creativity model presented above have been measured as follows . The fluency of thinking , which is the ability to generate new ideas , was considered to be related to number of proposals produced by the group in each cycle of the thinking - discussion - testing loop . On average the groups in the digital platform produced almost twice as many solution proposals than in physical ( Digital : m = 5 . 57 , sd = 2 . 59 ; Physical : m = 3 . 14 , sd = 2 . 45 ) . A t - test comparing means showed these differences on fluency are significant ( t ( 26 ) = 2 . 55 , p - value = 0 . 017 ) . Trait elaboration was measured as the complexity in terms of number of blocks and joints used to implement the solution . Solutions were slightly more complex in the physical condition ( Digital : m = 7 . 76 , sd = 3 . 6 ; Physical : m = 8 . 38 , sd = 4 . 5 ) . However , the t - test comparison did not find significant differences . Motivation was broadly considered by measuring the actual participation . Considering this objective approach may give us an estimation of how motivated the subjects were on using the platform , this measure was operationalized as the user manipulation time over implementation time . Participants using the digital platform actively participated about 63 % of the time on average , while in the physical - only platform this ratio was about 52 % ( Digital : m = 0 . 6372 , sd = 0 . 239 ; Physical : m = 0 . 5216 , sd = 0 . 260 ) . The corresponding t - test found that participants were significantly more participative when using the digital platform ( t ( 126 ) = 2 . 587 , p - value = 0 . 011 ) . In addition , in a user questionnaire , participants rated on a 5 - point scale their agreement with the statement “The platform keep me 147 motivated to participate” . This subjective user perception consistently showed that self - rated motivation in the digital platform was on average higher ( m = 3 . 83 , sd = 1 . 030 ) than physical ( m = 3 . 22 , sd = 0 . 833 ) . Finally , since novelty is difficult to assess and no clear objective measures can be found , we opted for ratings by experts . Two people with background in creativity studies were asked to rate each solution on a 5 - point scale obtained as a cumulative assessment on several inner features . Each feature was described in a single scale of 3 levels ( + 0 , + 0 . 5 , + 1 ) . These features concerned how unusual the creation was , whether the idea was useful or pointless , whether there was any surprising element , whether there were elements better suited to represent the idea or the mechanism , and whether the way of assembling pieces was commonplace or unexpected but advantageous . To check whether both judges agreed on the meaning of novelty and therefore on rating consistently the solutions , an inter - rater agreement test based on Kappa statistics was run and showed good agreement ( K = 0 . 733 ) . The average rating for each solution was therefore taken from both judges . On average , the digital solutions were rated a little higher ( Digital : m = 2 . 68 , sd = 1 . 07 ; Physical : m = 2 . 16 , sd = 0 . 93 ) . However the t - test comparison of novelty showed that this difference cannot be considered significant , although it comes close ( t ( 61 ) = 1 . 996 , p - value = 0 . 05 ) . Besides creativity traits , the experiment is also useful to evaluate some interaction aspects primarily related to collaboration . An interesting measure is co - operation time , which is the time that both participants in a group were effectively co - manipulating the platform during the time needed to complete the RGM . As Figure 4 shows , on average participants co - operated over 38 . 19 % of the implementation time on the digital platform , while on the physical - only it was about 20 . 21 % . The corresponding t - test found that differences are highly significant ( t ( 62 ) = 3 . 770 , p - value = 0 . 000 ) . Participants had to implement and then simulate to check whether their solutions were working . In this process , they were allowed to make small adjustments to tune up the implemented RGM . The number of trials per solutions was similar in both platforms ( around 4 ) ( Digital : m = 3 . 47 , sd = 2 . 7 ; Physical : m = 4 , sd = 2 . 6 ) . However an interesting issue is what happened in those trials and how the platform was used . Having a look at the number of retrials that either involved an actual adjustment of RGM elements or just activated the machine again without any fine adjustment , the digital platform better supported the fine adjustment of the solutions before a retrial was run . In the physical - only , adjustments were hardly introduced ( m = 0 . 46 , sd = 0 . 706 , median = 0 . 00 ) , and trials just involved testing the solution again with the hope of an eventual success . In contrast , the trials in the digital platform were mostly used to make adjustments rather than starting the simulation again ( m = 1 . 95 , sd = 2 . 092 , median = 1 . 5 ) . As normality assumption was not met a Mann - Whitney test was run . This found significant differences ( z = - 3 . 473 , p - value = 0 . 001 ) . Since individual thinking - reflection , and collective discussion processes have been considered to foster creativity , and proposals were normally created by a single participant , another interesting point to analyze is how the original author of the proposal finally implemented influenced interaction on the testing platform . Dominance measures the relative differences in the participation between the members in a group creating a solution . A dominance value close to zero means that both members participated equally . However , if the magnitude dominance is about 50 , it means that the difference in participation was 50 % of the implementation time for that solution . The Figure 4 . Co - operation ratio means . Figure 5 . Dominance in the digital platform . Figure 6 . Dominance in the physical - only platform . 148 dominance value is used to indicate whether the most active member is the author of the solution ( positive sign ) , i . e . the one that originally designed it on paper , or not ( negative sign ) . Figure 5 and Figure 6 illustrate the relationship between dominance and authorship of solutions in the digital and physical - only platforms respectively . Figure 6 shows that in the physical platform , 18 out of 26 solutions have a positive value of dominance , which means that the author of the proposal also contributed more to implementation . However , in the digital platform , 15 out of 38 solutions have positive value , which show that dominance is more equally balanced between participants , and non - authors also have a fairer participation . Moreover the strength of author - dominance is higher in the physical - only , since on average the dominance is about 49 . 9 % while in the digital is about 38 % . The previous results on comparing the set of creativity traits in both platforms show that using interactive tabletops can have a positive effect on creativity . Firstly , according to the estimated motivation , we can establish that in this case the digital platform motivated users more than using the non - technological approach . As this trait is directly based on user interaction times , it could also indicate a better facilitation of participation in the digital platform , despite both being tabletops . Secondly , as the thinking - reflection as well as the collective discussion places are not computer mediated , and the testing platforms are based on tabletops , it could be reasonably expected that measures for novelty , fluency of thinking and elaboration are similar in both platforms with corresponding parts . This has been the case for elaboration , but not for fluency and nor even novelty . With respect to fluency , the experimental results show that participants using the digital platform , produced a higher number of proposals on paper than the ones using the physical - only . This suggests that the use of the digital platform triggers on users a higher cognitive activity for creating proposals . Moreover , the tested solutions have a higher degree of novelty if the digital platform is used . Thirdly , co - operation also gives us an idea of how the platform facilitates cooperation . Although interaction on both platforms is natural and tabletop based , manipulation still has differences . On the physical - only platform the elements can be physically grasped and easily moved to the personal working space . In addition , interaction avoidance is possible by physically pushing away a partner’s hand , as seen in the video recordings . In the digital , the phenomena of territoriality [ 21 ] and interaction avoidance or interference [ 13 ] are also observed but are not as stressed as in the physical platform . They seem to be better managed , as blocks remain on the surface level and are therefore reachable by two participants , also facilitating equable object sharing . However , as co - operation time is partly based on participation time , and participants interacted more in the digital platform , it is more likely that co - operation happens then . It is therefore difficult to establish to what extent the effect on the co - operation ratio is due to the suitability of the digital tabletop and how much is due to the higher motivation . In this respect , further experiments would be needed to precisely clarify this relationship . Regarding dominance in the digital , the number of non - author dominants is more balanced , which suggests that the digital platform based on an interactive surface in combination with a discussion process facilitates the sharing and manipulation of objects by the non - author member . The existence of dominance in favor of non - authors in both platforms indicates that dedicating time to the discussion process , including explanation of solutions to the other partner , is useful and advantageous in terms of promoting collaborative interaction . Limitations The experimental design and results obtained must be considered in the context of the limitations and constraints being faced . Apart from the number of subjects involved , the first thing to be aware of is that the technology course in which the experiment took place was organized by a club dependent on the Education & Culture section of the local city council and not by a school . This may have several implications . As the origin of participants was not homogeneous and school performance profiles ( or similar assessments ) were not available , there may still have been differences between groups despite being randomly paired taking ages into account . A way to face this issue would be to obtain this kind of profile information to try to control it by forming groups accordingly . On this assumption , it would be interesting in further work to correlate the information profile with creativity traits in order to explore their relationships and the validation of the creativity model . Another issue is the time limit available to run each session , which made us opt for a between subjects design considering only the RGM building task . CONCLUSIONS This paper is based on the idea that creativity is important for human development and should therefore be studied to be properly managed in future systems . In particular , the paper discusses the way creativity is considered in the context of research on ICT and how evaluation of technology is usually focused only on collaboration and usability issues rather than creativity traits . The paper includes a creativity assessment model and an empirical study that operationalizes and measures the traits included in the model . This is conducted with the aim of exploring whether an interactive surface as base technology for collaborative creative tasks is promising in terms of both collaboration and creativity traits . In the experiment , two tabletop - based platforms were involved in an experimental loop based on individual thinking - reflecting , collective discussion and testing processes to foster divergent thinking and idea generation to solve a problem 149 consisting of creating Rube - Goldberg machines . The digital platform consisted of an interactive tabletop operated by means of multi - touch input and pucks . The physical - only platform relies on a conglomerate tabletop and a toolbox with wooden blocks and connecting elements . The choice of using a pure tangible platform instead of one based on a desktop application was made on the assumption that , firstly , this non - technological platform is similar to some construction kits that are widely used during childhood , and secondly , it is better to have two similar platforms in terms of co - located user involvement and participation possibilities . In terms of creativity traits , interactive surfaces seem promising , as groups working on the digital platform showed significantly better performance in fluency of thinking , and motivation . Novelty was found to be near to significance . Other issues related to collaboration and interaction were also analyzed , including co - operation , retrial fine adjustment and dominance , which showed that the properties of an interactive surface tabletop are better suited to facilitating the sharing of objects and participation in conditions of co - operation by co - located participants . Some interesting aspects are being considered for future work , including improving the creativity model by including more traits . The relationship among creativity traits should also be explored , as well as the relationship with other common indicators based on school performance . To explore this , additional experiments are being arranged in the context of a local secondary school . ACKNOWLEDGMENTS This work was funded by the Spanish Ministry of Education under project TSI2010 - 20488 . Our thanks to the Alaquas city council , the clubhouse’s managers , and also to Polimedia for the support in computer hardware . A . Catalá is supported by a FPU fellowship with reference AP2006 - 00181 . REFERENCES 1 . Aleinikov , A . , Kackmeister S . , and Koenig R . Creating creativity : 101 definitions . Midland , MI : Alden B . Dow Creativity Center , Northwoods University , 2000 . 2 . Amabile , T . M . The social psychology of creativity . New York : Springer - Verlag ( 1983 ) . 3 . Aragon , C . R . , Poon , S . S . , Monroy - Hernández , A . , and Aragon , D . A tale of two online communities : fostering collaboration and creativity in scientists and children . In Proc . C & C 2009 . ACM Press ( 2009 ) , 9 - 18 . 4 . Buisine , S . , Besacier , G . , Najm , M . , Aoussat , A . , and Vernier , F . Computer - supported creativity : Evaluation of a tabletop mind - map application . In Proc . In Proc . EPCE ' 07 . Springer - Verlag ( 2007 ) , 22 - 31 . 5 . Chen , V . H . H . , Lin . , W . , Haller , M . , Leitner , J . , and Duh , H . B . L . Communicative behaviors and flow experience in tabletop gaming . In Proc . ACE’09 , ACM Press ( 2009 ) , 281 - 286 . 6 . Cropley A . J . Creativity in Education and Learning : A Guide for Teachers and Educators , Kogan Page , 2001 . 7 . Csikszentmihalyi M . , and Csikszentmihalyi I . , Optimal Experience . Psychological Studies of Flow in Consciousness . Cambridge University Press , 1988 . 8 . Farooq , U . , Carroll , J . M . , and Ganoe , C . H . Supporting creativity with awareness in distributed collaboration . In Proc . GROUP ' 07 . ACM Press ( 2007 ) , 31 - 40 . 9 . Friess , M . R , Kleinhans , M . , Forster , F . , Echtler , F . , and Groh , G . A Tabletop Interface for Generic Creativity Techniques . In Proc . MCCSIS ‘10 . IADIS ( 2010 ) , 203 - 210 . 10 . Forster , F . Improving creative thinking abilities using a generic collaborative creativity support system . In Proc . M - ICTE’09 , ( 2009 ) , 539 - 543 . 11 . Gallardo , D . , Julia , C . F . , and Jordà , S . TurTan : A tangible programming language for creative exploration . In Proc . Tabletops’08 . IEEE CS ( 2008 ) , 89 - 92 . 12 . Guilford , J . P . Traits of creativity . In P . E . Vernon ( Ed . ) , Creativity . Baltimore : Penguin , 1970 , 167 - 188 . 13 . Hornecker , E . , Marshall , P . , Sheep Dalton , N . , and Rogers , Y . Collaboration and Interference : Awareness with Mice or Touch Input . In Proc . CSCW08 , ACM ( 2008 ) , 167 - 176 14 . Leitner , J . , Haller , M . , Yun , K . , Woo , W . , Sugimoto , M . , Inami , M . , Cheok , A . D . and Been - Lirn , H . D . Physical interfaces for tabletop games . ACM Comput . Entertain . 7 , 4 , Article 61 ( December 2009 ) . 15 . Maloney , J . , Resnick , M . and Rusk , N . Scratch : A Sneak Preview . In ProcC5’04 , IEEE CS ( 2004 ) , 104 - 109 . 16 . Newell , A . and Simon , H . A . Human Problem Solving . Englewood Clifs : Prentice - Hall , 1972 . 17 . Raffle , H . S . , Parkes , A . J . , Ishii , H . Topobo : a constructive assembly system with kinetic memory . In Proc . CHI ' 04 , ACM ( 2004 ) , 647 - 654 18 . Resnick , M . All I Really Need to Know ( About Creative Thinking ) I Learned ( By Studying How Children Learn ) in Kindergarten . In Proc . C & C’07 , ACM ( 2007 ) , 1 - 6 . 19 . Rhodes , M . An analysis of creativity . Phi Delta Kappan , 42 : 305 - 310 , 1961 . 20 . Rogers , Y . , Lim , Y - K . , Hazlewood , W . R . , Marshall , P . Equal opportunities : Do shareable interfaces promote more group participation than single users displays ? Human - Computer Interaction , 24 ( 1 - 2 ) , ( 2009 ) , 79 – 116 21 . Scott , S . D . , Sheelagh , M . , Carpendale , T . , Inkpen . K . Territoriality in collaborative tabletop workspaces . In Proc . CSCW ' 04 , ACM ( 2004 ) , 294 - 303 . 22 . Sternberg , R . J . , Lubart , T . I . , 1996 . Investing in creativity . American Psychologist 51 , 7 , ( 1996 ) , 677 – 688 . 23 . The Official Rube - Goldberg Machine website : http : / / www . rubegoldberg . com / ? page = bio 24 . Treffinger , D . J . Creativity , creative thinking , and critical thinking : In search of definitions . Sarasota , FL : Center for Creative Learning , 1996 . 25 . Wang , J . , Farooq , U . and Carroll , J . M . Does Design Rationale Enhance Creativity ? Human Technology , 6 , 1 , ( 2010 ) 129 - 149 150