Expertise in design : an overview Nigel Cross , Department of Design and Innovation , Faculty of Technology , The Open University , Milton Keynes MK7 6AA , UK This is a review paper of the ﬁeld of research in expertise in design . There has been a growth of empirical and formalised study of designer behaviour , and this paper focuses speciﬁcally on expert performance . Some background information from the study of expertise in other ﬁelds is introduced . The studies of design expertise that are reviewed refer to expert vs . novice performance , expert designer behaviour and outstanding designers . It seems that expertise in design has some aspects that are signiﬁcantly diﬀerent from expertise in other ﬁelds . # 2004 Elsevier Ltd . All rights reserved . Keywords : design behaviour , design cognition , design process , expertise T he focus of this review paper is the nature of expert perform - ance in design . The topic of expertise has been receiving increasing attention in the design research community . There has been a rapidly growing development of protocol and other empirical studies of design cognition , amongst which have been stu - dies of expert , or experienced designers , comparisons of the processes of novice and expert designers , and some interview studies on out - standing or exceptional designers . A signiﬁcant addition to work in this area was the recent Design Thinking Research Symposium on Expertise in Design 1 . 1 Expertise There is , of course , a substantial and long history of work on under - standing expertise in some other ﬁelds and contexts , including chess , music and sports . From these studies , there is a general view that expertise develops over time as a person matures , but that there comes a point when a peak of performance is reached , and then an inevitable decline begins . This performance peak will be reached at diﬀerent ages in diﬀerent ﬁelds—for physical sports , it may be around the age of middle - twenties , whereas in mental activities it may not be until much later in life : in the sciences , people seem to produce their 1 Cross , N and Edmonds , E ( eds . ) Expertise in Design , Creativity and Cognition Press , University of Technology , Syd - ney , Australia ( 2003 ) www . elsevier . com / locate / destud 0142 - 694X / $ - see front matter Design Studies 25 ( 2004 ) 427 – 441 doi : 10 . 1016 / j . destud . 2004 . 06 . 002 427 # 2004 Elsevier Ltd . All rights reserved . Printed in Great Britain best work in their thirties , whilst in the arts it may be in their forties . Some outstanding individuals seem to defy the general picture , and to continue producing great work well into later years . But one aspect that seems agreed from studies of expertise is that it requires a mini - mum period of practice and sustained involvement before perform - ance reaches an international peer - level of achievement—at least 10 years from ﬁrst involvement 2 . Expertise is not simply a matter of possessing ‘talent’ , but is the result of a dedicated application to a chosen ﬁeld . According to Ericsson 3 , who is an expert in the study of expertise , ‘Superior expert perform - ance is primarily acquired . . . Many thousands of hours of deliberate practice and training are necessary to reach the highest levels of per - formance . ’ He comments that ‘Most international masters emphasise the role of motivation , concentration , and the willingness to work hard on improving performance . ’ Ericsson 4 suggests that deliberate practice ( i . e . practice deliberately guided towards improvement of per - formance ) is one of the key factors in the acquisition of expertise : ‘The attained level of performance of many types of experts , such as musicians , chess players and athletes , is closely related to their accu - mulated amount of deliberate practice . ’ Usually , a child may display a certain aptitude or interest , and parents or teachers then encourage and guide their development . But without the dedicated application of the individual , levels of performance will remain modest . The development of expertise probably passes through diﬀerent pha - ses . We are all familiar with the concepts of the novice and the expert—and that something happens in the development from one to the other . A novice undergoes training and education in their chosen ﬁeld , and then at some later point becomes an expert . The accumu - lation of experience is a vital part of the transformation to expert . For some people , the ‘expert’ level of achievement is where they remain , perhaps with some continued moderate improvement before reaching their peak and beginning their decline . A few manage to go beyond the level of their peers , into a further phase of development , reaching outstanding levels of achievement and eminence . At the other end of the scale of maturity , at a young age , all of us are introduced to a var - iety of human activities , whether it be playing football or playing the violin . We all improve a little , but some , as noted above , will begin to practice with a dedication—and probably a joy—that sets them apart . In areas such as sports and music and chess , there are established pro - grammes of training for these neophytes ; perhaps the design com - 2 Ericsson , K A , Krampe , R and Tesch - Ro¨mer , C ‘The role of deliberate practice in the acquisition of expert perform - ance’ Psychological Review Vol 100 ( 1993 ) 363 – 406 3 Ericsson , K A ‘Attaining excellence through deliberate practice : insights from the study of expert performance’ in M Fer - rari ( ed . ) The Pursuit of Excel - lence Through Education , Erlbaum , Hillsdale , NJ , USA ( 2001 ) 4 Ericsson , K A ‘Expertise’ in R A Wilson and F C Keil ( eds . ) in The MIT Encyclopedia of the Cognitive Sciences , MIT Press , Cambridge , MA , USA ( 1999 ) 428 Design Studies Vol 25 No . 5 September 2004 munity also needs to focus some attention on this earliest phase in the development of expertise . 2 Expert vs . novice designers Novice behaviour is usually associated with a ‘depth - ﬁrst’ approach to problem solving , i . e . sequentially identifying and exploring sub - solu - tions in depth , whereas the strategies of experts are usually regarded as being predominantly top - down and breadth - ﬁrst approaches . Many of the classic studies of expertise have been based on examples of game - playing ( e . g . chess ) , or on comparisons of experts versus novices in solving routine problems ( e . g . physics ) . These are all well - deﬁned problems , whereas designers characteristically deal with ill - deﬁned problems . Ho 5 , in a protocol study of a novice and an expert product designer , found that their problem - solving strategies did not conform with the ‘standard’ expectations derived from studies in well - deﬁned problem domains . The expert designer used explicit problem decom - posing strategies , which the novice appeared not to possess , but both expert and novice used similar , bottom - up , or working - backward , problem solving strategies . Some studies of expertise in ﬁelds such as creative writing and com - puter programming 6 , 7 , where problems are ill - deﬁned , also suggest that some of the standard results from studies of expertise do not match with results from studies of expertise in creative domains . For example , creative experts will deﬁne the given task so that it is prob - lematic—i . e . deliberately treat it as ill - deﬁned—which is contrary to the assumption that experts will generally solve a problem in the ‘easi - est’ way , or certainly with more ease than novices . In some ways , therefore , creative experts treat problems as ‘harder’ problems than novices do . This was also suggested in observations of expert design - ers 8 . Education in design has well - established practices that are assumed to help the progression from novice to expert ; but there is still precious little real understanding of the diﬀerences between novice and expert performance in design , and how to help students move from one to the other . Research questions to address here include : What are the key diﬀerences between expert and novice behaviour and cognition ? How is the transition made from novice to expert ? Can certain edu - cational methods assist the transition more eﬀectively or eﬃciently ? 5 Ho , C - H ‘Some phenomena of problem decomposition strat - egy for design thinking : dier - ences between novices and experts’ Design Studies Vol 22 ( 2001 ) 27 – 45 6 Holyoak , K J ‘Symbolic con - nectionism : toward third - gener - ation theories of expertise’ in K A Ericsson and J Smith ( eds . ) Toward a General Theory of Expertise : Prospects and Limits , Cambridge University Press , Cambridge , UK ( 1991 ) 7 Adelson , B and Solway , E ‘A Model of Software Design’ in M Chi , R Glaser and M Farr ( eds . ) The Nature of Expertise , Erlbaum , Hillsdale , NJ , USA ( 1988 ) 8 Cross , N and Clayburn Cross , A ‘Expertise in Engineer - ing Design’ Research in Engin - eering Design Vol 10 ( 1998 ) 141 – 149 Expertise in design : an overview 429 Christiaans and Dorst 9 , from protocol studies of junior and senior industrial design students , found that some students became stuck on information gathering , rather than progressing to solution generation . Interestingly , they found that this was not such a signiﬁcant diﬃculty for junior students , who did not gather a lot of information , and ten - ded to ‘solve a simple problem’ , being unaware of a lot of potential criteria and diﬃculties . But they found that senior students could be divided into two types . The more successful group , in terms of the creativity quality of their solutions , ‘asks less information , processes it instantly , and gives the impression of consciously building up an image of the problem . They look for and make priorities early on in the process . ’ The other group gathered lots of information , but for them ‘gathering data was sometimes just a substitute activity for actu - ally doing any design work’ 10 . A similar ﬁnding was reported by Atman et al . 11 , who found from their protocol analysis studies of engineering students that , for novices ( freshmen with no design experience ) , ‘ . . . those subjects who spent a large proportion of their time deﬁning the problem did not produce quality designs . ’ However , with senior students , Atman et al . did ﬁnd that attention to ‘problem scoping’ ( i . e . ‘adequately setting up the problem before analysis begins’ , including gathering a larger amount and wider range of problem - related information ) did result in better designs . As with the industrial design students , some of the freshmen engineering students , it seemed , simply became stuck in problem - deﬁ - nition and did not progress satisfactorily into further stages of the design process . Atman et al . found that , in comparison to the fresh - men , senior students gathered more information , considered more alternative solutions , and transitioned more frequently between types of design activities . In further , longitudinal studies of freshman vs . senior student beha - viours , Adams et al . 12 found that changes in individual students’ behaviours over time can be quite complex and variable . As well as those for whom there was deﬁnite change , some of the students did not appear to change their behaviours at all and some simply spent more time on design projects but without any qualitative behavioural changes . It also appeared that students exhibited diﬀerent behavioural changes for diﬀerent types of design projects . Diﬀerences between the behaviour of novice and experienced design - ers in engineering were studied by Ahmed et al . 13 . They found clear diﬀerences between the behaviours of new ( graduate ) entrants to the 9 Christiaans , H and Dorst , C ‘Cognitive Models in Industrial Design Engineering : a protocol study’ in D L Taylor and D A Stauer ( eds . ) Design Theory and Methodology - DTM92 , American Society of Mechanical Engineers , New York , USA ( 1992 ) 10 Cross , N , Christiaans , H and Dorst , K ‘Design Expertise Amongst Student Designers’ Journal of Art and Design Edu - cation Vol 13 ( 1994 ) 39 – 56 11 Atman , C J and Chimka , J , et al . ‘A Comparison of Freshman and Senior Engineer - ing Design Processes’ Design Studies Vol 20 ( 1999 ) 131 – 152 12 Adams , R S , Turns , J and Atman , C ‘What Could Design Learning Look Like ? ’ in N Cross and E Edmonds ( eds . ) Expert - ise in Design , Creativity and Cognition Press , University of Technology , Sydney , Australia ( 2003 ) 13 Ahmed , S , Wallace , K M and Blessing , L ‘Understanding the Dierences Between How Novice and Experienced Designers Approach Design Tasks’ Research in Engineering Design Vol 14 ( 2003 ) 1 – 11 430 Design Studies Vol 25 No . 5 September 2004 engineering design profession and much more experienced colleagues . The novices used ‘trial and error’ techniques of generating and imple - menting a design modiﬁcation , evaluating it , then generating another , and so on through many iterations . Experienced engineers were observed to make a preliminary evaluation of their tentative decisions before implementing them and making a ﬁnal evaluation . They con - sidered whether it seemed worthwhile to move further into the implementation stage of a design decision . In contrast to the novices’ trial - and - error approach , the experienced designers employed inte - grated design strategies . Protocol studies of two novice and two expert designers in the ﬁeld of wea - ving design were made by Seitamaa - Hakkarainen and Hakkarainen 14 . They found that the experts integrated the visual and technical elements of weaving , and generally considered them in a parallel way during the design process . Iteration between the ‘composition space’ and the ‘con - struction space’ was a signiﬁcant aspect of the experts’ design process ; they ‘continuously moved from one design space to another to carry out very detailed processes of search for design solutions . ’ In contrast , the novices organised their process around the composition space and only occasionally jumped to the construction space to explore how visual ideas could be realised in weaving . Kavakli and Gero 15 compared the cognitive performances of a novice and an expert architect , using data from protocol studies . Over a simi - lar time period , there were signiﬁcant diﬀerences in output between the two . Analysis of the expert’s protocol showed 2916 actions , divided into 348 segments of simultaneous cognitive actions , whilst the novi - ce’s showed 1027 actions , with 122 segments of simultaneous cognitive actions . Thus , the speed of cognitive processes was much higher for the expert , and the expert’s rate of cognitive activity continuously rose throughout the experiment , whilst the novice’s cognitive activity star - ted at a peak and declined continuously . Kavakli and Gero found a structured organisation and systematic expansion in the expert’s cogni - tive activity , as opposed to an exhaustive search strategy in the novi - ce’s : ‘The expert seems to have control of his cognitive activity and governs his performance in a more eﬃcient way than the novice , because his cognitive actions are well organised and clearly structured . ’ 3 Expert behaviour in design Clearly , part of the development of expertise lies in the accumulation of experience . Something that distinguishes experts from novices is 14 Seitamaa - Hakkarainen , P and Hakkarainen , K ‘Compo - sition and Construction in Experts’ and Novices’ Weaving Design’ Design Studies Vol 22 ( 2001 ) 44 – 66 15 Kavakli , M and Gero , J ‘The Structure of Concurrent Cognitive Actions : a case study on novice and expert designers’ Design Studies Vol 23 ( 2002 ) 25 – 40 Expertise in design : an overview 431 that the experts have been exposed to a large number of examples of the problems and solutions that occur in their domain . But a key competency of an expert is the ability mentally to stand back from the speciﬁcs of the accumulated examples , and form more abstract con - ceptualisations pertinent to their domain of expertise . Experts are believed to be able to store and access information in larger cognitive ‘chunks’ than novices can , and to recognise underlying principles , rather than focussing on the surface features of problems . One problem - solving strategy used by expert designers seems to be diﬀerent from that employed by other kinds of problem solvers , who usually attempt to deﬁne or understand the problem fully before mak - ing solution attempts . Many studies of expert design behaviour sug - gest that designers move rapidly to early solution conjectures , and use these conjectures as a way of exploring and deﬁning problem - and - solution together . Lloyd and Scott 16 , from protocol studies of experi - enced engineering designers , found that this solution - focused approach ( identiﬁed by Lawson 17 ) appeared to be related to the degree and type of previous experience of the designers . They found that more experienced designers used more ‘generative’ reasoning , in contrast to the deductive reasoning employed more by less - experi - enced designers . In particular , designers with speciﬁc experience of the problem type tended to approach the design task through solution conjectures , rather than through problem analysis . They concluded that ‘It is the variable of speciﬁc experience of the problem type that enables designers to adopt a conjectural approach to designing , that of framing or perceiving design problems in terms of relevant solu - tions . ’ This kind of ‘problem setting’ is a characteristic of reﬂective practice identiﬁed by Scho¨n 18 : ‘Problem setting is the process in which , inter - actively , we name the things to which we will attend and frame the context in which we will attend to them . ’ This seems to characterise well what has been observed of the problem formulation aspects of expert designer behaviour . Designers select features of the problem space to which they choose to attend ( naming ) and identify areas of the solution space in which they choose to explore ( framing ) . Scho¨n 19 suggested that : ‘In order to formulate a design problem to be solved , the designer must frame a problematic design situation : set its bound - aries , select particular things and relations for attention , and impose on the situation a coherence that guides subsequent moves . ’ 16 Lloyd , P and Scott , P ‘Dis - covering the Design Problem’ Design Studies Vol 15 ( 1994 ) 125 – 140 17 Lawson , B ‘Cognitive Stra - tegies in Architectural Design’ Ergonomics Vol 22 ( 1979 ) 59 – 68 18 Scho¨n , D A The Reﬂective Practitioner Temple - Smith , London , UK ( 1983 ) 19 Scho¨n , D A ‘Designing : rules , types and worlds’ Design Studies Vol 9 ( 1988 ) 181 – 190 432 Design Studies Vol 25 No . 5 September 2004 Scho¨n 19 also pointed out that ‘the work of framing is seldom done in one burst at the beginning of a design process . ’ This was conﬁrmed in Goel and Pirolli’s 20 protocol studies of several types of designers ( architects , engineers and instructional designers ) . They found that ‘problem structuring’ activities not only dominated at the beginning of the design task , but also re - occurred periodically throughout the task . The occurrence of problem framing activities has been noted often in studies of architects . Lloyd and Scott 21 , from studies of ( mostly senior - student ) architects , reported that ‘In each protocol there comes a time when the designer makes a statement that summarises how he or she sees the problem or , to be more speciﬁc , the structure of the situation that the problem presents . ’ They referred to this ‘way of see - ing the design situation’ as the designer’s ‘problem paradigm’ . As with their studies of engineers , Lloyd and Scott found that the architects who had speciﬁc prior experience of the problem type had diﬀerent approaches from their less - experienced colleagues : the experienced architects’ approaches were characterised by strong problem para - digms , or ‘guiding themes’ . This approach was also identiﬁed in expert architects by Darke 22 , who referred to their use of guiding principles or ‘primary generators’ . Although designers change goals and constraints as they design , they appear to hang on to their principal solution concept for as long as possible , even when detailed development of the scheme throws up unexpected diﬃculties and shortcomings in the solution concept . Some of the changing of goals and constraints during designing is associated with resolving such diﬃculties without having to start again with a major new concept . For example , from case studies of professional architectural design , Rowe 23 observed that : ‘A dominant inﬂuence is exerted by initial design ideas on subsequent problem - solving directions . . . Even when severe problems are encountered , a considerable eﬀort is made to make the initial idea work , rather than to stand back and adopt a fresh point of departure . ’ The same phenomenon was observed by Ullman et al . 24 , in protocol studies of experienced mechanical engineering designers . They found that ‘designers typically pursue only a single design proposal’ , and that ‘there were many cases where major problems had been identiﬁed in a proposal and yet the designer preferred to apply patches rather than to reject the proposal outright and develop a better one . ’ A simi - lar observation was also made by Ball et al . 25 , from their studies of 20 Goel , V and Pirolli , P ‘The Structure of Design Problem Spaces’ Cognitive Science Vol 16 ( 1992 ) 395 – 429 21 Lloyd , P and Scott , P ‘Dif - ference in Similarity : interpreting the architectural design process’ Planning and Design Vol 22 ( 1995 ) 383 – 406 22 Darke , J ‘The Primary Gen - erator and the Design Process’ Design Studies Vol 1 ( 1979 ) 36 – 44 23 Rowe , P Design Thinking MIT Press , Cambridge , MA , USA ( 1987 ) 24 Ullman , D G and Dietter - ich , T G , et al . ‘A Model of the Mechanical Design Process Based on Empirical Data’ Arti - ﬁcial Intelligence in Engineering Design and Manufacturing Vol 2 ( 1988 ) 33 – 52 25 Ball , L and Evans , J , et al . ‘Cognitive Processes in Engin - eering Design : a longitudinal study’ Ergonomics Vol 37 ( 1994 ) 1753 – 1786 Expertise in design : an overview 433 senior students conducting ‘real - world’ , ﬁnal - year design projects in electronic engineering : ‘When the designers were seen to generate a solution which soon proved less than satisfactory , they actually seemed loath to discard the solution and spend time and eﬀort in the search for a better alternative . Indeed the subjects appeared to adhere religiously to their unsatisfactory solutions and tended to develop them laboriously by the production of various slightly improved ver - sions until something workable was attained . ’ Ball et al . regarded this behaviour as indicating a ‘ﬁxation’ on initial concepts , and a reliance on a simple ‘satisﬁcing’ design strategy in contrast to any more ‘well - motivated’ process of optimisation . They found it diﬃcult to account for this apparently unprincipled design behaviour . Nevertheless , adherence to initial concepts and a satisﬁcing strategy seem to be normal expert design behaviour . Guindon 26 , in a study of experienced software designers , found that ‘designers adop - ted a kernel solution very early in the session and did not elaborate any alternative solutions in depth . If designers retrieved alternative solutions for a sub - problem , they quickly rejected all but one alterna - tive by a trade - oﬀ analysis using a preferred evaluation criterion . ’ Designers tend to use solution conjectures as the means of developing their understanding of the problem . Since ‘the problem’ cannot be fully understood in isolation from consideration of ‘the solution’ , it is natural that solution conjectures should be used as a means of helping to explore and understand the problem formulation . As Kolodner and Wills 27 observed , from a study of senior student engineering designers : ‘Proposed solutions often directly remind designers of issues to con - sider . The problem and solution co - evolve . ’ This interpretation of design as a co - evolution of solution and prob - lem spaces has also been proposed by others , and has been found by Dorst and Cross 28 in protocol studies of experienced industrial design - ers . They reported that : ‘The designers start by exploring the [ problem space ] , and ﬁnd , discover , or recognise a partial structure . That partial structure is then used to provide them also with a partial structuring of the [ solution space ] . They consider the implications of the partial structure within the [ solution space ] , use it to generate some initial ideas for the form of a design concept , and so extend and develop the partial structuring . . . They transfer the developed partial structure back into the [ problem space ] , and again consider implications and extend the structuring of the [ problem space ] . Their goal . . . is to cre - ate a matching problem - solution pair . ’ 26 Guindon , R ‘Knowledge Exploited by Experts During Software System Design’ Inter - national Journal of Man - Machine Studies Vol 33 ( 1990 ) 279 – 304 27 Kolodner , J L and Wills , L M ‘Powers of Observation in Creative Design’ Design Studies Vol 17 ( 1996 ) 385 – 416 28 Dorst , K and Cross , N ‘Creativity in the Design Pro - cess : co - evolution of problem - solution’ Design Studies Vol 22 ( 2001 ) 425 – 437 434 Design Studies Vol 25 No . 5 September 2004 It may be that good designers produce good early concepts that do not need to be altered radically during further development ; or that good designers are able to modify their concepts rather ﬂuently and easily as diﬃculties are encountered during development , without recourse to exploration of alternative concepts . Either way , it seems that designers are reluctant to abandon early concepts , and to gener - ate ranges of alternatives . This does seem to be in conﬂict with a more ‘principled’ approach to design , as recommended by design theorists , and even to conﬂict with the idea that it is the exploration of solution concepts that assists the designer’s problem understanding ; having more than one solution concept in play should promote a more com - prehensive assessment and understanding of the problem . Fricke 29 , from protocol studies of engineering designers , found that both generating few alternative concepts and generating a large num - ber of alternatives were equally weak strategies , leading to poor design solutions . Where there was ‘unreasonable restriction’ of the search space ( when only one or a very few alternative concepts were generated ) , designers became ‘ﬁxated’ on concrete solutions too early . In the case of ‘excessive expansion’ of the search space ( generating large numbers of alternative solution concepts ) , designers were then forced to spend time on organising and managing the set of variants , rather than on careful evaluation and modiﬁcation of the alternatives . Fricke identiﬁed successful designers to be those operating a ‘balanced search’ for solution alternatives . There have also been some reports from studies that have emphasised the ‘opportunistic’ behaviour of designers . This emphasis has been on designers’ deviations from a structured plan or methodical process into the ‘opportunistic’ pursuit of issues or partial solutions that catch the designer’s attention . For example , Visser 30 made a longitudinal study of an experienced mechanical engineer , preparing a design speciﬁcation . The engineer claimed to be following a structured approach , but Visser found frequent deviations from this plan . ‘The engineer had a hierarchically structured plan for his activity , but he used it in an opportunistic way . He used it only as long as it was prof - itable from the point of view of cognitive cost . If more economical cognitive actions arose , he abandoned it . ’ Thus , Visser regarded reducing ‘cognitive cost‘—i . e . the cognitive load of maintaining a principled , structured approach—as a major reason for abandoning planned actions and instead delving into , for example , conﬁrming a partial solution at a relatively early stage of the process . 29 Fricke , G ‘Successful Indi - vidual Approaches in Engineer - ing Design’ Research in Engineering Design Vol 8 ( 1996 ) 151 – 165 30 Visser , W ‘More or Less Following a Plan During Design : opportunistic deviations in speci - ﬁcation’ International Journal of Man - Machine Studies Vol 33 ( 1990 ) 247 – 278 Expertise in design : an overview 435 From protocol studies of three experienced software system designers , Guindon 31 also emphasised the ‘opportunistic’ nature of design activi - ties . Guindon stressed that ‘designers frequently deviate from a top - down approach . These results cannot be accounted for by a model of the design process where problem speciﬁcation and understanding precedes solution development and where the design solution is elabo - rated at successively greater levels of detail in a top - down manner . ’ Guindon observed the interleaving of problem speciﬁcation with sol - ution development , ‘drifting’ through partial solution development , and jumps into exploring suddenly - recognised partial solutions , which were categorised as major causes of ‘opportunistic solution develop - ment’ . Guindon also referred to ‘cognitive cost’ as one possible expla - nation for such behaviour : ‘Designers ﬁnd it advantageous to follow a train of thought temporarily , thus arriving at partial solutions at little cognitive cost . ’ Ball and Ormerod 32 criticised a too - eager willingness to emphasise ‘opportunism’ in design activity . In studies of expert electronics engi - neers , they found very few deviations from a top - down , breadth - ﬁrst design strategy . But they did ﬁnd some signiﬁcant deviations occur - ring , when designers made a rapid depth - ﬁrst exploration of a sol - ution concept in order to assess its viability . Ball and Ormerod did not regard such occasional depth - ﬁrst explorations as implying the abandonment of a structured approach . Instead , they suggested that expert designers will normally use a mixture of breadth - ﬁrst and depth - ﬁrst approaches : ‘Much of what has been described as oppor - tunistic behaviour sits comfortably within a structured top - down design framework in which designers alternate between breadth - ﬁrst and depth - ﬁrst modes . ’ Ball and Ormerod were concerned that ‘opportunism’ seemed to imply unprincipled design behaviour , ‘a non - systematic and heterarchical process’ in contrast to the assumed ideal of a systematic and hierarchical process . However , rather than regard - ing opportunism as unprincipled design behaviour , Guindon had sug - gested it might be inevitable in design : ‘These deviations are not special cases due to bad design habits or performance breakdowns but are , rather , a natural consequence of the ill - structuredness of pro - blems in the early stages of design . ’ An aspect of cognitive strategy that emerges from some studies is that , especially during creative periods of conceptual design , expert design - ers alternate rapidly in shifts of attention between diﬀerent aspects of their task , or between diﬀerent modes of activity . Akin and Lin 33 , in their protocol study of an experienced engineering designer , ﬁrst ident - 31 Guindon , R ‘Designing the Design Process : exploiting opportunistic thoughts’ Human - Computer Interaction Vol 5 ( 1990 ) 305 – 344 32 Ball , L and Ormerod , T ‘Structured and Opportunistic Processing in Design : a critical discussion’ International Journal of Human - Computer Studies Vol 43 ( 1995 ) 131 – 151 33 Akin , O ¨ . and Lin , C ‘Design Protocol Data and Novel Design Decisions’ Design Stu - dies Vol 16 ( 1995 ) 211 – 236 436 Design Studies Vol 25 No . 5 September 2004 iﬁed the occurrence of ‘novel design decisions’ ( NDDs ) . These , in con - trast to routine design decisions , are decisions that are critical to the development of the design concept . Akin and Lin also segmented the designer’s activities into three modes : drawing , examining and think - ing . Then , allowing for some implicit overlap or carry - over of the designer’s attention from one segment to another , they represented the designer’s activities in terms of single - , dual - or triple - mode periods . They found a signiﬁcant correlation between the triple - mode periods and the occurrence of the NDDs : ‘Six out of a total of eight times a novel design decision was made , we found the subject alternating between these three activity modes ( examining – drawing – thinking ) in rapid succession . ’ Akin and Lin are cautious about drawing any infer - ence of causality , concluding only that ‘Our data suggest that designers explore their domain of ideas in a variety of activity modes . . . when they go beyond routine decisions and achieve design breakthroughs . ’ Several of these features of expert designer behaviour were conﬁrmed and clariﬁed by Suwa , Gero and Purcell 34 from a protocol study of an experienced architect . They concentrated on the occurrence of ‘unex - pected discoveries’ during the design process—that is , those instances when a designer perceives something ‘new’ in a previously - drawn element of a solution concept—and related these to the ‘invention’ of further issues or requirements within the design problem . They found a strong , bi - directional correlation between unexpected discoveries and the invention of issues and requirements : ‘Not only did unexpec - ted discoveries become the driving force for the invention of issues or requirements , but also the occurrence of invention , in turn , tended to cause new unexpected discoveries . ’ This helps to explain the oppor - tunistic nature of design activity , as the designer pursues issues and requirements in an evolving solution concept . Suwa , Gero and Purcell suggest that their ﬁndings provide empirical evidence both for the co - evolution of problem space and solution space and for designing as a ‘situated’ act—that is , that designers invent design issues or require - ments in a way situated in the environment in which they design . Their analysis also conﬁrms the importance of rapid alternation between diﬀerent modes of activity : ‘drawing sketches , representing the visual ﬁeld in the sketches , perceiving visuo - spatial features in sketches , and conceiving of design issues or requirements are all dyna - mically coupled with each other . ’ 4 Outstanding designers The reality of design practice seems to be that some individuals have outstanding design abilities . Highly creative or talented individuals 34 Suwa , M , Gero , J and Pur - cell , T ‘Unexpected Discoveries and S - Invention of Design Requirements : important vehi - cles for a design process’ Design Studies Vol 21 ( 2000 ) 539 – 567 Expertise in design : an overview 437 become successful and highly - regarded designers , with international reputations both within and beyond their professional peer groups . However , many studies of designer behaviour have been based on novices ( usually students ) or , at best , designers of relatively modest talents . This is because it is easier to obtain such people as subjects for study . But if studies of designer behaviour are limited to studies of rather inexpert designers , then our understanding of design ability will also be limited . Studying outstanding or exceptional designers may give us diﬀerent , and more relevant , insights and understanding of design expertise . Lawson 35 made a series of interview and observational studies of out - standing architects . He found many similarities in their ways of work - ing , and also some diﬀerences . For example , some of the architects prefer to generate a range of alternative solution concepts , whilst oth - ers will focus on a narrow range or just one concept . Something they all seem to have is an ability to work along ‘parallel lines of thought’—that is , to maintain an openness , even an ambiguity , about features and aspects of the design at diﬀerent levels of detail , and to consider these levels simultaneously , as the designing proceeds . Law - son suggests that ‘a degree of bravery is required to allow these lines of thought to remain parallel rather longer than might seem reason - able to the inexperienced designer . ’ He also concludes that ‘one simple message’ that recurred from his studies was ‘the extremely demanding standards set by the designers themselves’ . Outstanding expertise is fuelled by personal commitment . Many ﬁndings in Lawson’s studies of outstanding architects resonate with those from studies of outstanding designers in the ﬁelds of engin - eering and product design by Cross 36 . Cross reported protocol and interview studies with three outstanding designers , and drew conclu - sions on the common aspects of their design strategies . Firstly , all three designers either explicitly or implicitly relied upon ‘ﬁrst princi - ples’ in both the origination of their concepts and in the detailed development of those concepts . Secondly , all three designers explored the problem space from a particular perspective in order to frame the problem in a way that stimulated and pre - structured the emergence of design concepts . In some cases , this perspective was a personal one that the designers seem to bring to most of their designing . Finally , it appeared from these three examples that creative design solutions arise especially when there is a conﬂict to be resolved between the designer’s own high - level problem goals ( their personal commitment ) 35 Lawson , B Design In Mind Butterworth - Heinemann , Oxford , UK ( 1994 ) 36 Cross , N ‘The Expertise of Exceptional Designers’ in N Cross and E Edmonds ( eds . ) Expertise in Design , Creativity and Cognition Press , University of Technology , Sydney , Australia ( 2003 ) 438 Design Studies Vol 25 No . 5 September 2004 and the criteria for an acceptable solution established by client or other requirements . From the analysis of the case studies , there appeared to be similar aspects to the creative strategies adopted by all three outstanding designers . However , although there are similarities in creative strate - gies across domains , this does not necessarily mean that experts can successfully switch practice between domains . Ericsson and Leh - mann 37 found that the superior performance of experts is usually domain - speciﬁc , and does not transfer across domains . Extensive training within a domain still seems to be crucial to professional expertise . More studies of expert and exceptional designers might lead to a more informed consensus about how design skills are exercised by experts , and on the nature of expertise in design . 5 Conclusions Expert designers appear to be ‘ill - behaved’ problem solvers , especially in terms of the time and attention they spend on deﬁning the problem . However , this seems to be appropriate behaviour , since some studies have suggested that over - concentration on problem deﬁnition does not lead to successful design outcomes . It appears that successful design behaviour is based not on extensive problem analysis , but on adequate ‘problem scoping’ and on a focused or directed approach to gathering problem information and prioritising criteria . Processes of structuring and formulating the problem are frequently identiﬁed as key features of design expertise . The concept of ‘problem framing’ seems to capture best the nature of this activity . Successful , experienced and—especially—outstanding designers are found in vari - ous studies to be pro - active in problem framing , actively imposing their view of the problem and directing the search for solution con - jectures . Expert designers are solution - focused , not problem - focused . This appears to be a feature of design cognition which comes with edu - cation and experience in designing . In particular , experience in a spe - ciﬁc problem domain enables designers to move quickly to identifying a problem frame and proposing a solution conjecture . Generating a wide range of alternative solution concepts is an aspect of design behaviour which is recommended by theorists and educa - tionists but appears not to be normal practice for expert designers . 37 Ericsson , K A and Leh - mann , A ‘Expert and Excep - tional Performance : evidence on maximal adaptations on task constraints’ Annual Review of Psychology Vol 47 ( 1996 ) 273 – 305 Expertise in design : an overview 439 Most expert designers become readily attached to single , early sol - ution concepts and are reluctant to abandon them in the face of diﬃ - culties in developing these concepts into satisfactory solutions . This might appear to be a weak feature of design behaviour , which may be susceptible to change through education . However , trying to change the ‘unprincipled’ and ‘ill - behaved’ nature of conventional design activity may be working against aspects that are actually eﬀective and productive features of design expertise . Generating a very wide range of alternatives may not be a good thing : some studies have suggested that a relatively limited amount of generation of alternatives may be the most appropriate strategy . It has been noticed in some studies that creative , productive design behaviour seems to be associated with frequent switching of types of cognitive activity . There is no clear explanation for this observation , but it may be related to the need to make rapid explorations of prob - lem and solution in tandem , in the co - evolution of problem and sol - ution . Conventional wisdom about the nature of problem - solving expertise seems often to be contradicted by the behaviour of expert designers . In design education , we must therefore be very wary about importing models of behaviour from other ﬁelds . Studies of design activity have frequently found ‘intuitive’ features of design behaviour to be the most eﬀective and relevant to the intrinsic nature of design . Some aspects of design theory , however , have tried to develop counter - intuitive models and prescriptions for design behaviour . We still need a much better understanding of what constitutes expertise in design , and how we might assist novice students to gain that expertise . In this review paper , I have concentrated mainly on protocol and similar formalised methods of study , and I have therefore omitted a range of other kinds of studies that also have relevant and important contributions to make to the understanding of design expertise . Proto - col analysis has some severe limitations as a research method for investigating design activity—for instance , it is extremely weak in cap - turing non - verbal thought processes , which are so important in design work 38 . Protocol analysis oﬀers a valuable but highly speciﬁc research technique , capturing a few aspects of design cognition in detail , but failing to encompass many of the broader realities of designing in context . ‘Designing in Context’ was the topic of the Design Thinking Research Symposium held in Delft in 2001 , with papers featuring in a special issue of Design Studies 39 . Other kinds of study , which attempt 38 Lloyd , P , Lawson , B and Scott , P ‘Can Concurrent Ver - balisation Reveal Design Cog - nition ? ’ Design Studies Vol 16 ( 1995 ) 237 – 259 39 P . Lloyd ( ed . ) Designing in Context , Design Studies 24 ( 3 ) ( 2003 ) ( special issue ) . 440 Design Studies Vol 25 No . 5 September 2004 to capture a broader view , include detailed observation of industrial practice , such as Badke - Schaub and Frankenberger 40 and Busby 41 , and ethnographic methods , such as Bucciarelli 42 . Ethnographic approaches to the study of engineering design was also the topic of a special issue of Design Studies 43 . The range and number of studies surveyed in this paper suggest that the ﬁeld of studies of expertise in design is growing , and a variety of similar observations and a number of common issues have been ident - iﬁed . In many cases , the issues remain unresolved , and there is there - fore still considerable work to be done to establish a robust and reliable understanding of expertise in design . 40 Badke - Schaub , P and Frankenberger , E ‘Analysis of Design Projects’ Design Studies Vol 20 ( 1999 ) 465 – 480 41 Busby , J ‘Error and Dis - tributed Cognition in Design’ Design Studies Vol 22 ( 2001 ) 233 – 254 42 Bucciarelli , L Designing Engineers MIT Press , Cam - bridge , MA , USA ( 1994 ) 43 Jagodzinski , P , Reid , F and Culverhouse , P ( eds . ) Eth - nographic Approaches to the Study of Engineering Design , Design Studies 21 ( 4 ) ( 2000 ) ( special issue ) . Expertise in design : an overview 441