Routine as Resource for the Design of Learning Systems Scott Davidoff Human - Computer Interaction Institute Carnegie Mellon scott . davidoff @ cs . cmu . edu ABSTRACT Even though the coordination of kids’ activities is largely successful , the modern dual income family still regularly experiences breakdowns in their practices . Families often rely on routines to help them coordinate when plans prove less effective . Routines , however , are rarely documented , challenging to express in detail , and frequently evolving , making them cumbersome to manually describe and so largely unavailable to computational systems as input . This work proposes that this disconnect can be overcome , and argues that unsupervised models of family routine can be learned using a single , lightweight sensor . This way , the successful but tacit knowledge of the routine might be captured and exploited by learning systems , providing a new kind of information for families and computational systems alike . A method is proposed to develop a Bayesian Network to reason about the state of family coordination . This model relies on learned routines of pickup and drop - off at kids’ activities . Author Keywords Machine learning , data mining , unsupervised learning , statistical modeling , family coordination . ACM Classification Keywords H5 . m . Information interfaces and presentation ( e . g . , HCI ) : Miscellaneous . General Terms Human Factors , Algorithms , Design . INTRODUCTION Despite the success of many of the coordination practices of the modern dual income family , a still significant number of coordination incidents transpire . At one end we find costly successes , where , for example , a flurry of phone calls and some cashed - in social capital might help a parent persuade a friend to manage a pickup for them . At the other extreme , we find more dramatic failures , where , for example , mom asks dad to take over a pickup she usually manages but cannot because of a business trip . One the day of the pickup , dad might simply forget , stressing and humiliating all involved . In this work , I propose the creation of a new resource that , if made available to families , could help them avoid and more efficiently respond to coordination failures . This new resource is a computational model of family routine . In their coordination practice , families often use routine to supplement information shortfalls and streamline communications . When , for example , dad has to decide which parent can take a child to the orthodontist , even if dad does not know mom’s or the child’s precise availability , dad can make a decision based on where he believes they usually are , or how busy they usually are , how much time they usually have between places , and even the things they usually take with them . In this situation , knowledge of routine helps dad reason in the absence of complete information . Learning systems often face the same problems as coordinating parents : they often must make decisions when faced with incomplete information . In this paper , I argue that we can supplement the information available to reasoning systems by providing instead of precise information about what is happening at any one time , access to what usually happens – in other words , what is routine about a particular situation . While routines prove useful to families as they coordinate , they are rarely documented , challenging to express in detail , and frequently evolving , making them cumbersome to manually describe and so largely unavailable to computational systems as input . I proposes that this disconnect can be overcome with unsupervised models of family routine that are learned using a single , lightweight sensor . We can use a detailed knowledge of the ways in which routines ( work and ) break down to create new opportunities for interactive systems , and we can make routine the subject of learning algorithms to extract valuable but undocumented information that could then be made available through , or proactively delivered by the new interactive systems during needed moments . This automated approach both lowers the burden of user input Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation on the first page . To copy otherwise , or republish , to post on servers or to redistribute to lists , requires prior specific permission and / or a fee . UbiComp’10 , September 26 – 29 , 2010 , Copenhagen , Denmark . Copyright 2010 ACM 978 - 1 - 4503 - 0283 - 8 / 10 / 09 . . . $ 10 . 00 . 457 and introduces new capabilities that no manual system could possess . To achieve the agenda described above , I propose to pursue the following research trajectory : 1 . Demonstrate that family routines can be learned without supervision using commercial hardware 2 . Demonstrate that learned routine information can be embedded into useful applications 3 . Reveal that learning routines will create insight into formerly - invisible behavioral patterns 4 . Demonstrate that learning routines can enable the automatic creation and suppression of reminders In this paper I situate my work within a broader context , describe proposed technical and applications , and describe the implications of the work . I begin with the related work . RELATED WORK Existing research has highlighted both the value of routines in support of everyday living , and their insufficiency in the face of unexpected adversity . Working as a form of habituated memory [ 22 ] , routines liberate human attention [ 24 ] , helping people to feel more in control over their environment [ 1 , 6 , 21 ] , and enabling the enjoyment of everyday experience [ 21 ] . Routines are often complemented by articulated logistical plans [ 6 ] . Faced with complex logistical challenges to arrange the transportation and coordination of people and “equipment” related to school , work , family , and enrichment activities [ 1 , 6 , 13 ] , dual - income families rely especially on routines to structure their otherwise dynamic days . Even well articulated , well - practiced and well - executed , plans and routines , however , cannot help families respond to the many unexpected changes that often shape their day . These deviations in plans and routines , like when a child is unexpectedly ill , create some of the most stressful and demanding situations for parents [ 1 , 7 , 8 , 11 , 23 ] , and can degrade effective coordination practices [ 12 , 13 ] , which can even lead to cascading failures [ 7 ] . Even when faced with diversity , families often rely on knowledge of the plans and routines of others to improvise solutions when [ 6 , 8 , 12 ] . A number of ubicomp systems have explored ways to support family coordination . Projects like Motion Presence [ 3 ] and the Whereabouts Clock [ 4 ] demonstrate that family members can leverage their rich knowledge of each other’s routines to make meaning out of minimal information like a controlled set of places , or even just that they are in motion . The applications I propose complement these systems , enabling family members not only to view not the current location of family members , but make available their usual locations . Researchers have principally explored support for family coordination through novel artifacts and reminder systems . For example LINC [ 18 ] , a digitized calendar , extends calendaring capabilities both remotely and throughout the home . Evolved reminder systems can deliver pre - defined information to pre - specified places [ 16 ] , to mobile phones [ 19 ] , or even when specific situations unfold [ 17 ] . One shortcoming of reminder systems is that they require users to know in advance , what actions they might forget , and the information they would need at those times . Research on family routines , however , shows that many breakdowns are unanticipated [ 6 , 7 , 13 ] , making the task of manually creating an appropriate reminder effectively impossible . An underlying model of routine could extend the capabilities of these systems so that observed but non - routine behavior could be treated as an anomaly even though no reminder has been explicitly stated . Models of routine are appearing in support of applications in various domains . Begole and Tang , for example , demonstrated that visualizations of the learned routines of office workers could be used to help remote workers coordinate [ 2 ] . Liao et al . showed that learned models of transportation routines could be used to help people with cognitive impairments [ 15 ] . Eagle demonstrated that learned models of social relationships can function as lens for cultural analysis [ 10 ] . My proposed work extends this work into the domain of the dual - income family , and adds support for planning applications not yet explored in other domains . PROPOSED WORK My proposed work bridges the gap between the ethnographic and technological . First , I demonstrate that a detailed understanding of the mechanics of family routines can serve as a resource for the design of novel technologies . Second , it demonstrates that routines of family coordination around kids’ activities can be learned . And third , it demonstrates the utility of these learned models through their influence in novel applications . This proposed work builds upon four years of study into the routines of dual income families [ 7 ] , and provides substantial evidence to validate the first facet of the proposed thesis . Two years of ethnographic observation of dual - income families inform my detailed understanding of the mechanics of family routines , and the ways in which they serve and under - serve families [ 9 ] . These observations fed into the development of novel experience prototyping techniques for ubiquitous computing [ 8 ] , which generated a litany of novel design concepts that might leverage this computational knowledge of routine [ 14 , 9 ] . The stated agenda requires the collection of a dataset upon which to do machine learning . I conducted a six - month field data - capture study to document the daily movement and coordination practices of the twenty - five members of six dual - income families [ 9 ] . All family members carried a GPS - enabled mobile phone throughout the length of the study . Every night , a researcher would phone participating families , capturing and marrying a ground truth to the sensor data . During the interview , the researcher would ask 458 family members to list the places they went , and their various plans as they moved throughout the day . Over the course of the six - month study , 528 unique interviews were completed [ sic ] cataloging the location and plans of family members across 2112 person - days , or 5 . 78 person - years . Moving forward , I will use this highly - detailed and unique dataset to develop a family of algorithms for the unsupervised learning of family routine . In particular I will demonstrate that a simple heuristic can be applied to location data to accurately sense when children have been dropped off at and picked up from their activities . I will also demonstrate that this learned model of ride ownership can then be linked through a Dynamic Bayesian Network to create a graphical model that can accurately infer when a parent has forgotten their pickup responsibility . I will then develop a suite of application concepts that use routine abstractions to create new capabilities to help families with the many problems they face . For example , this probabilistic output could then be passed to coordination applications such as reminder systems to help them determine if a reminder about a pickup is warranted . These enhanced capabilities will help families adapt their coordination process , make better decisions , and ultimately enhance their perception of control over their lives . In this section I describe each issue in detail , and describe how it will be achieved Learn family routines This work will demonstrate that simple GPS sensors can generate accurate statistical models of family routine , which can , in turn , provide valuable planning assistance for families . The system will mine the dataset to determine logistical responsibilities , including activity time and location , which parent is responsible for pickup and drop - off . The system will then combine these world facts into higher - level predictions about the state of the coordination process such as detecting discrete pickup and drop - off events . This data can further be abstracted to generate a probabilistic model to determine if a parent is on their way to pick up a child , effectively developing a technique that can be used to monitor the coordination practice as it unfolds in real time , and assign a probability that a parent has forgotten to pick up a child . A probabilistic , predictive calendar This work will demonstrate that learned routine information has value by using it as part of a novel , probabilistic , predictive calendaring application . This new calendaring application will add inference to manually - input information , making input a more collaborative process than its current form . Transportation routines , for example , are often not listed on the family calendar . By showing learned transport routines information ( see Figure 1 ) , a learning system knows that the daughter , Jane , usually goes swimming , and that the parent with that usual responsibility has a scheduled conflict , then a mobile device application could , for example , make this unclaimed responsibility more salient . Access to the routines of other family members can make it much easier to predict where and when they might be , allowing one family member to plan for the near future participation of the others and to improvise even when the others are not available to coordinate with . Automatic creation and suppression of reminders This work will demonstrate that learned models of family routine can find useful application by expanding the capabilities of current reminder systems . In their current manifestations , reminder systems suffer from two flaws . First , they can only remind their users about things they have specifically stated a priori , which is only a subset of all things that are forgotten . Second , reminder systems deliver reminders even if their users’ behavior demonstrates that they have not forgotten anything . These two issues affect the adoption of reminder systems . A model of routine will enhance the capabilities of reminder systems , casting it as a more active collaborator in family members’ lives . Reminders could be triggered when users deviate unexpectedly from their routine activities . This could indicate that an unscheduled deviation was taking place or that the person simply forgot to follow their routine . Such a proposed system would also be able to dampen the salience of reminders when it believes that you have remembered ( e . g . an ambient status that says , “I am aware of what you are doing” ) when reminders are not necessary . CONTRIBUTIONS This proposal outlines two main contributions around the use of routines as a resource for the design of novel interactive systems . First , it outlines a set of design opportunities that detail where a system’s knowledge of a family’s routines would specifically make ubicomp systems more valuable . In particular , this knowledge could help Figure 1 . Small device UI sketch for family coordination application that leverages routine information to foreground a potential breakdown 459 family members plan more effectively , more quickly observe the enactment of breakdowns , and more effectively improvise solutions . This information could also be used to improve reminder systems , both in the dynamic construction of appropriate reminders and in the dynamic suppression of inappropriate ones . Second , the work demonstrates the application of machine learning techniques towards the accomplishment of the agenda described above using only commercially - available hardware . The proof - of - concept validates the thesis that the above - described applications are both possible and valuable . While this work describes a research agenda focused on dual - income families , and so offer them practical and measurable benefits , this work also generalizes into other contexts , offering the potential for contributions in a larger scale . Because routines can be observed in many places – from the office , to the bathroom , to the health club , to the ball field , to the garage – an understanding of both their integration into daily life , and the development of algorithms that can capture and exploit their properties , promises to extend the same capabilities into these varied domains . REFERENCES 1 . Beech , S . , Geelhoed , E . , Murphy , R . , Parker , J . , Sellen , A . & Shaw , K . ( 2004 ) Lifestyles of working parents : Implications and opportunities for new technologies , HP Tech report HPL - 2003 - 88 ( R . 1 ) . 2 . Begole , J . , Tang , J . C . & Hill , R . ( 2003 ) . Rhythm modeling , visualizations and applications . Proc . UIST 2003 , 11 - 20 . 3 . Bentley , F . & Metcalf , C . ( 2007 ) . Sharing motion information with close family and friends . Proc . CHI 2007 , 1361 - 1370 . 4 . Brown , B . , Taylor , A . S . , Izadi , S . , Sellen , A . , Kaye , J . & Eardley , R . ( 2007 ) . Locating family values : A field trial of the Whereabouts Clock . Proc . UbiComp 2007 , 354 - 371 . 5 . Crabtree A . & Rodden , T . ( 2004 ) . Domestic routines and design for the home . Computer Supported Cooperative Work , 13 ( 2 ) , 191 - 220 . 6 . Darrah , C . N . , Freeman , J . M . & English - Lueck , J . A . ( 2007 ) . Busier than ever : Why American families can’t slow down , Palo Alto : Stanford University Press . 7 . Davidoff , S . , Lee , M . K . , Yiu , C . M . , Zimmerman , J . & Dey , A . K . ( 2006 ) Principles of smart home control . Proc . UbiComp 2006 , 19 - 34 . 8 . Davidoff , S . , Lee , M . K . , Dey , A . K . & Zimmerman , J ( 2007 ) . Rapidly exploring application design with Speed Dating . Proc . UbiComp 2007 , 429 - 446 . 9 . Davidoff , S . , Dey , A . K . & Zimmerman , J . ( 2010 ) . How routine learners can support family coordination , Proc . CHI 2010 . 10 . Eagle , N . ( 2008 ) . Behavioral inference across cultures : Using telephones as a cultural lens , IEEE Intelligent Systems , 23 ( 4 ) : 62 - 64 . 11 . Fiese , B . H . , Tomcho , T . J . , Douglas , M . , Josephs , K . , Poltrock , S . & Baker , T . ( 2002 ) . A review of 50 years of research on naturally occurring family routines and rituals : Cause for celebration ? Journal of Family Psychology , 16 ( 4 ) : 381 - 390 . 12 . Fleuriot , C . ( 2001 ) . An Investigation into the management of time in complex lifestyles , Ph . D thesis , University of the West of England . 13 . Frissen , V . A . J . ( 2000 ) ICTs in the rush hour of life , The Information Society , 16 : 65 - 75 . 14 . Lee , M . K . , Davidoff , S . , Zimmerman , J . , and Dey , A . K . ( 2008 ) . Designing for control : Finding roles for smart homes . In P . Desmet , J . van Erp , and M . Karlsson ( eds . ) , Design & Emotion Moves ( pp . 246 - 266 ) . UK Cambridge Scholars Publishing . 15 . Liao , L . , Patterson , D . J . , Fox , D . , & Kautz , H . A . ( 2007 ) . Learning and inferring transportation routines . Artificial Intelligence . 171 , 311 - 331 . 16 . Ludford , P . J . , Frankowski , D . , Reily , K . , Wilms , K . & Terveen , L . ( 2006 ) . Because I carry my cell phone anyway : Functional location - based reminder applications . Proc . CHI 2006 , 889 - 898 . 17 . Marmasse , N . & Schmandt , C . ( 2000 ) . Location - aware information delivery with ComMotion . Proc . Handheld and Ubiquitous Computing , 64 - 73 . 18 . Neustaedter , C . , & Brush , A . J . , ( 2006 ) “LINC - ing” the family : The Participatory design of an inkable family calendar . Proc . CHI 2006 , 141 - 150 . 19 . Sellen , A . , Harper , R . , Eardley , R . , Izadi , S . , Regan , T . , Taylor , A . S . and Wood , K . R . ( 2006 ) . HomeNote : Supporting situated messaging in the home . Proc . CSCW 2006 , 383 - 392 . 20 . Taylor , A . S . & Swan , L . ( 2005 ) . Artful Systems in the Home . Proc . CHI 2005 , 641 - 650 . 21 . Tolmie , P . , Pycock , J . , Diggins , T . , MacLean , A . & Karsenty , A . ( 2002 ) . Unremarkable computing . Proc . CHI 2002 , 399 - 406 . 22 . Wakkary , R . & Maestri , L . ( 2007 ) . The resourcefulness of everyday design . Proc . Creativity and Cognition 2007 , 163 - 172 . 23 . Wolin , S . J . & Bennett , L . A . ( 1984 ) . Family rituals . Family Process , 23 : 401 - 420 . 24 . Zerubavel , E . ( 1981 ) . Hidden rhythms : schedules and calendars in social life , Chicago : The University of Chicago Press , 1981 . 460