1 Lee S , et al . Ann Rheum Dis 2023 ; 0 : 1 – 14 . doi : 10 . 1136 / ard - 2022 - 223625 Rheumatoid arthritis TRANSLATIONAL SCIENCE Identification of MYH9 as a key regulator for synoviocyte migration and invasion through secretome profiling Saseong Lee , 1 Eunbyeol Choi , 1 , 2 Sehyun Chae , 3 Jung Hee Koh , 1 , 4 Yoolim Choi , 5 Jung Gon Kim , 1 , 6 Seung - Ah Yoo , 1 , 7 Daehee Hwang , 5 Wan - Uk Kim 1 , 4 To cite : Lee S , Choi E , Chae S , et al . Ann Rheum Dis Epub ahead of print : [ please include Day Month Year ] . doi : 10 . 1136 / ard - 2022 - 223625 Handling editor Josef S Smolen ► Additional supplemental material is published online only . To view , please visit the journal online ( http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1136 / ard - 2022 - 223625 ) . For numbered affiliations see end of article . Correspondence to Professor Wan - Uk Kim , Department of Internal Medicine , Catholic University of Korea School of Medicine , Seoul , 06591 , Korea ( the Republic of ) ; wan725 @ catholic . ac . kr , Professor Daehee Hwang , Department of Biological Sciences , Seoul National University , Seoul , Korea ( the Republic of ) ; daehee @ snu . ac . kr and Professor Seung - Ah Yoo , Department of Medical Life Sciences , The Catholic University of Korea , Seoul , Korea ( the Republic of ) ; youcap78 @ hanmail . net SL , EC and SC are joint first authors . Received 14 November 2022 Accepted 30 April 2023 © Author ( s ) ( or their employer ( s ) ) 2023 . Re - use permitted under CC BY . Published by BMJ . ABSTRACTObjectives ’Invasive pannus’ is a pathological hallmark of rheumatoid arthritis ( RA ) . This study aimed to investigate secretome profile of synovial fibroblasts of patients with RA ( RA - FLSs ) , a major cell type comprising the invasive pannus . Methods Secreted proteins from RA - FLSs were first identified using liquid chromatography - tandem mass spectrometry analysis . Ultrasonography was performed for affected joints to define synovitis severity at the time of arthrocentesis . Expression levels of myosin heavy chain 9 ( MYH9 ) in RA - FLSs and synovial tissues were determined by ELISA , western blot analysis and immunostaining . A humanised synovitis model was induced in immuno - deficient mice . Results We first identified 843 proteins secreted from RA - FLSs ; 48 . 5 % of the secretome was associated with pannus - driven pathologies . Parallel reaction monitoring analysis of the secretome facilitated discovery of 16 key proteins related to ’invasive pannus’ , including MYH9 , in the synovial fluids , which represented synovial pathology based on ultrasonography and inflammatory activity in the joints . Particularly , MYH9 , a key protein in actin - based cell motility , showed a strong correlation with fibroblastic activity in the transcriptome profile of RA synovia . Moreover , MYH9 expression was elevated in cultured RA - FLSs and RA synovium , and its secretion was induced by interleukin - 1 β , tumour necrosis factor α , toll - like receptor ligation and endoplasmic reticulum stimuli . Functional experiments demonstrated that MYH9 promoted migration and invasion of RA - FLSs in vitro and in a humanised synovitis model , which was substantially inhibited by blebbistatin , a specific MYH9 inhibitor . Conclusions This study provides a comprehensive resource of the RA - FLS - derived secretome and suggests that MYH9 represents a promising target for retarding abnormal migration and invasion of RA - FLSs . INTRODUCTION Rheumatoid arthritis ( RA ) is characterised by synovial proliferation and extensive angiogenesis called pannus formation , 1 which has been consid - ered a pathological hallmark of RA . In particular , fibroblast - like synoviocytes ( FLSs ) exhibiting resis - tance to apoptosis , abnormal proliferation and pro - migratory capacity are a major cell type comprising the invasive pannus . 2 The FLSs from patients with RA ( RA - FLSs ) secrete various disease - aggravating factors . These factors are crucial to the pathogen - esis of RA owing to their roles in perpetuation of synovial inflammation , chemoattraction of immune cells , promotion of neo - vascularisation , generation of auto - antigens and infliction of permanent damage to joints . 3 Therefore , a variety of secreted molecules from RA - FLSs may serve as useful biomarkers that represent disease severity of RA and can potentially represent therapeutic targets . 4 Nevertheless , global and systematic profiles of secretory molecules origi - nating from RA - FLSs remain to be clarified . Identification of new molecules derived from the ‘invasive pannus’ is important since the current biomarkers for RA activity , including erythrocyte sedimentation rate and C reactive protein ( CRP ) level , often show non - specificity , and there is an unmet need for alternative biomarkers that can adequately reflect disease activity , synovitis severity and therapeutic responses . Proteomics - based approaches have been widely used to obtain biomarkers from various biological materials and diseases . 5 Previously , Brescia et al investigated the cyto - kines and chemokines secreted from FLSs of patients with juvenile idiopathic arthritis ( JIA ) and their synovial fluids ( SFs ) using cytokine antibody arrays . 6 They identified 29 differ - entially expressed proteins ( DEPs ) between JIA and controls in both SFs and FLS culture supernatants , suggesting that these cytokines serve as potential biomarkers for FLS - mediated synovial inflammation . However , this anal - ysis was limited to cytokines and chemokines without providing the global information of the whole secretome of RA - FLSs . Parallel reac - tion monitoring ( PRM ) has recently emerged as a promising tool to categorise key proteins among the whole proteome profiled using global proteomic analysis . Accordingly , global proteomic profiling and PRM can be combined to evaluate the RA - FLS - derived secretome and WHAT IS ALREADY KNOWN ON THIS TOPIC ⇒ ‘Invasive pannus’ is a pathological hallmark of rheumatoid arthritis ( RA ) . ⇒ Various proteins secreted from fibroblast - like synoviocytes of patients with RA ( RA - FLSs ) critically drive such pathology ; however , they have not been globally and systematically investigated . 2 Lee S , et al . Ann Rheum Dis 2023 ; 0 : 1 – 14 . doi : 10 . 1136 / ard - 2022 - 223625 Rheumatoid arthritis subsequently discover key secreted proteins associated with invasive pannus . We hypothesised that extracellular and / or secretory mole - cules from RA - FLSs can reflect the pathological severity of RA , such as synovial proliferation and neovascularisa - tion , and that these molecules may serve as new diagnostic and therapeutic targets . Therefore , we first characterised 843 proteins secreted from RA - FLSs via global proteome profiling of RA - FLS culture supernatants . Using PRM anal - ysis , we then selected the 16 key proteins differentially expressed in the SFs of patients with active RA , including myosin heavy chain 9 ( MYH9 ) , which well represented the sonographic severity of synovial proliferation and angio - genesis as well as the level of systemic inflammation of RA . Among the 16 proteins , we particularly focused on MYH9 , a component of actin - based cell motility , as a key regulator of ‘invasive pannus’ based on its novelty and the excellent representativeness of pannus pathology on ultra - sonography ( US ) . Molecular and functional experiments revealed that the level of MYH9 was increased in RA inva - sive pannus , and increased MYH9 level promoted RA - FLS migration and invasion in vitro and in vivo . Collectively , our study first provides a comprehensive resource of secre - tome of RA - FLSs to better understand RA pathogenesis , and suggests that MYH9 is a potential therapeutic target for RA , representing pro - invasive and pro - migratory prop - erties of RA - FLSs . MATERIALS AND METHODS Please see online supplemental materials 1 . RESULTS Secretome profiling of RA - FLSs To evaluate the pro - inflammatory secretome of RA - FLSs , we cultured FLSs isolated from synovial tissues of patients with RA without treatment ( control ) or with treatment of tumour necrosis factor ( TNF ) α + interleukin ( IL ) - 1 β that mimics inflammatory conditions in RA joints ( figure 1A , RA - FLS culture ) . After pooling the culture supernatants , we fractionated the pooled sample into 24 fractions and performed proteomic profiling of the individual fractions using liquid chromatography - tandem mass spectrom - etry ( LC - MS / MS ) analysis ( figure 1A , secretome profiling ) . Using the LC - MS / MS datasets , we identified 843 secretory proteins ( online supplemental dataset S1 ) of RA - FLSs that had more than three unique sibling peptides with false discovery rate < 1 % via database search using MS - GF + with UniProt human reference proteome database ( figure 1A , RA - FLS secretome ) . Enrichment analysis of Gene Ontology cellular components showed that the 843 proteins were most significantly enriched with proteins localised in the extracellular region ( 747 proteins ) and extracellular vesicles ( EVs ; 597 proteins ) ( figure 1B ) . Addi - tionally , 94 . 3 % of the 843 proteins overlapped with extracel - lular proteins or secretory proteins detected in human plasma ( figure 1C ) . Collectively , these data support the validity of our RA - FLS secretome obtained via LC - MS / MS analysis . We next examined the cellular processes associated with the 843 proteins released from RA - FLSs by performing enrichment analysis of Gene Ontology Biological Processes ( GOBPs ) using DAVID software . 7 The RA - FLS secretome was mainly associated with metabolism ( 27 . 4 % ) , developmental process ( 19 . 2 % ) , signal transduction ( 17 . 4 % ) , cell adhesion / migration ( 15 . 7 % ) , cell proliferation ( 8 . 7 % ) and immune response ( 7 . 0 % ) ( figure 1D ) . The metabolism - related RA - FLS secretome most significantly represented glucose metabolism ( online supplemental figure S1A ) , which was consistent with a previous finding . 8 Notably , the RA - FLS secretome most strongly represented the cellular processes related to pannus formation ; overall , 48 . 5 % ( 409 proteins ) of the secretome was associated with pannus - mediated RA pathologies , which included cell migration / invasion ( 179 proteins ) , extracellular matrix organisation ( 177 proteins ) , cell proliferation / apoptosis ( 178 proteins ) , angiogenesis ( 46 proteins ) and pannus - related signalling pathways ( 21 proteins ) ( figure 1E , online supplemental figure S1B and table S1 ) . More - over , the RA - FLS secretome related to signal transduction signifi - cantly represented transforming growth factor ( TGF ) β , bone morphogenic protein ( BMP ) , Wnt , 9 RhoA and vascular endothe - lial growth factor ( VEGF ) signalling , 10 as well as signal transduc - tion involved in immune responses ( nuclear factor kappa B , Fc receptor and TNF signalling ) ( figure 1F and online supplemental figure S1C ) . Therefore , the RA - FLS secretome can provide a comprehensive list of RA - FLS secretory factors contributing to pannus formation , which is the pathological hallmark of RA . 11 Targeted profiling of pannus - related RA - FLS secretome in SFs To further characterise the secretome profiles in RA - FLSs , we performed targeted protein quantification using the PRM method and attempted to determine the clinical correlations . Briefly , we selected 493 of the 843 proteins that were involved in the pannus - related cellular processes ( figure 2A ) . Among them , we selected 151 proteins that contained two or three quantotypic peptides with high quality of MS / MS spectra based on previously WHAT THIS STUDY ADDS ⇒ We newly identified the 16 key proteins from RA - FLSs , which well represented pannus - driven pathologies , via global secretome analysis and named the proteins ‘synoviocyte secretome signature’ ( SSS ) . ⇒ Among the 16 proteins of SSS , we particularly focused on myosin heavy chain 9 ( MYH9 ) , a component of actin - based cell motility , as a key regulator of ‘invasive pannus’ based on its novelty and the excellent representativeness of pannus pathology . ⇒ Interestingly , MYH9 showed a strong correlation with fibroblastic activity in the transcriptome profile of RA synovia . ⇒ Moreover , MYH9 was highly expressed in cultured RA - FLSs and RA synovium , and it promoted migration and invasion of RA - FLSs in vitro and in a severe combined immunodeficiency mouse - xenograft ( RA - FLSs ) model . ⇒ Of note , blebbistatin , an inhibitor of MYH9 , substantially mitigated the aggressiveness of RA - FLSs in vitro and in vivo , thereby leading to less cartilage destruction in a humanised synovitis model and in mouse models of chronic inflammatory arthritis . HOW THIS STUDY MIGHT AFFECT RESEARCH , PRACTICE OR POLICY ⇒ We provide a comprehensive resource of RA - FLS - derived secretome , which can be used as a fundamental resource in diverse studies and can ultimately help to discover novel regulators for pathological processes mediated by secreted proteins from RA - FLSs . ⇒ Our study also demonstrates that MYH9 is essential to migration and invasion of RA - FLSs and that MYH9 inhibition by blebbistatin could be an effective strategy to retard FLS - driven migration / invasion and cartilage degradation in RA . 3 Lee S , et al . Ann Rheum Dis 2023 ; 0 : 1 – 14 . doi : 10 . 1136 / ard - 2022 - 223625 Rheumatoid arthritis described criteria , 12 and we then constructed a spectral library including the MS / MS spectra of 436 quantotypic peptides for the 151 proteins ( see figure 1A , pannus - related secretome ) . To test the biological relevance of the 151 proteins , we performed PRM analysis of the 151 pannus - related secretory proteins in the SFs , a representative biological fluid in the joints , obtained from patients with RA ( n = 117 ) and osteoarthritis ( OA ) ( n = 45 , non - RA control ) via arthrocentesis . Clinical characteristics of patients with RA are summarised in online supplemental table S2 . After removing 14 abundant proteins using IgY14 deple - tion columns , the 151 proteins were quantified in individual SF samples using PRM analysis ( figure 2B ) . The abundances of 277 quantotypic peptides corresponding to 121 proteins were iden - tified in at least one SF sample . We next investigated which of the 121 pannus - related secretory proteins correlate with the pathological severity Figure 1 Characteristics of RA - FLS secretome . ( A ) Overall scheme illustrating experimental steps for RA - FLS culture , secretome profiling , RA - FLS secretome and pannus - related secretome . For pro - inflammatory stimulation , 10 different RA - FLSs were treated with IL - 1 β ( 10 ng / mL , n = 5 ) , TNF α ( 10 ng / mL , n = 5 ) or medium alone ( n = 10 ) for 24 hours in DMEM containing 1 % insulin - transferrin - selenium used as an alternative of FBS . ( B ) Relative proportions of RA - FLS secretory proteins localised in the indicated Gene Ontology cellular components . The size and colour of dots represent the number of proteins localised in the cellular components and the enrichment p value from DAVID software , respectively . ( C ) Relationships among RA - FLS secretome , proteins localised in extracellular region and human plasma proteome . ( D ) Relative proportions of RA - FLS secretory proteins involved in cellular processes related to the indicated processes . ( E ) GOBPs significantly enriched in RA - FLS secretory proteins . Enrichment significance ( p value ) was displayed as −log 10 ( p value ) . Bar colours represent the corresponding cellular processes in D . ( F ) Signalling pathways represented by RA - FLS secretory proteins . Enrichment significance ( p value ) was displayed as −log 10 ( p value ) . The dotted line indicates the cut - off of p value ( 0 . 05 ) . DMEM , dulbecco ' s modified eagle medium ; FASP , filter aided sample preparation ; FBS , fetal bovine serum ; FLS , fibroblast - like synoviocyte ; GOBPs , gene ontology biological processes ; IL , interleukin ; NF - κ B , nuclear factor kappa B ; PRM , parallel reaction monitoring ; RA , rheumatoid arthritis ; TGF , transforming growth factor ; TNF , tumour necrosis factor ; VEGF , vascular endothelial growth factor . 4 Lee S , et al . Ann Rheum Dis 2023 ; 0 : 1 – 14 . doi : 10 . 1136 / ard - 2022 - 223625 Rheumatoid arthritis Figure 2 Differential expression of proteins in the pannus - related RA - FLS secretome . ( A ) GOBP network showing relationships among RA - FLS secretory proteins involved in pannus - related GOBPs . Node side and edge thickness denote the number of proteins involved in each GOBP and the number of overlapping proteins between the connected GOBPs , respectively . Node colours represent the corresponding processes in figure 1D . ( B ) Overall scheme illustrating experimental steps for PRM analysis . ( C ) Relationships among the DEPs in the comparisons of GSUS 0 and 1 vs GSUS 2 and 3 , PDUS 0 vs PDUS 1 – 3 , and active synovitis versus no active synovitis . ( D – F ) Differential abundance distributions of eight representative DEPs depending on sonographic severity of synovitis and inflammatory activity of RA . Graphs showing differential expression of the DEPs among OA and the indicated two groups of RA , which were separated by cut - off criteria for sonographic severity ( D ) , SF WBC ( 5000×10 3 cells / mL ) ( E ) and blood CRP level ( 0 . 5 mg / dL ) ( F ) . Top , middle and bottom lines in the dot graphs represent 75th , 50th ( median ) and 25th percentile values of abundance distributions of the indicated protein . * P < 0 . 05 vs OA group , # p < 0 . 05 vs milder status in RA group . * * P < 0 . 01 , * * * p < 0 . 001 , # # p < 0 . 01 , # # # p < 0 . 001 . The p values were determined as described in online supplemental material 1 . ANXA1 , annexin A1 ; APOA1 , apolipoprotein A1 ; ARHGDIA , rho GDP dissociation inhibitor alpha ; CAP1 , cyclase - associated actin cytoskeleton regulatory protein 1 ; CFL1 , cofilin 1 ; COL5A2 , collagen type V alpha 2 chain ; CRP , C - reactive protein ; DEPs , differentially expressed proteins ; FASP , filter aided sample preparation ; FLS , fibroblast - like synoviocyte ; FN1 , fibronectin 1 ; GOBPs , Gene Ontology biological processes ; GPI , glucose - 6 - phosphate isomerase ; GSTP1 , glutathione S - transferase pi 1 ; GSUS , grey - scale ultrasonography ; MSN , moesin ; MYH9 , myosin heavy chain 9 ; OA , osteoarthritis ; PARK7 , parkinsonism - associated deglycase ; PDUS , power Doppler ultrasonography ; PRDX3 , peroxiredoxin 3 ; PRM , parallel reaction monitoring ; RA , rheumatoid arthritis ; S100A6 , S100 calcium binding protein A6 ; S100A9 , S100 calcium binding protein A9 ; SF , synovial fluid ; SOD2 , superoxide dismutase . 5 Lee S , et al . Ann Rheum Dis 2023 ; 0 : 1 – 14 . doi : 10 . 1136 / ard - 2022 - 223625 Rheumatoid arthritis of RA , including synovial proliferation and angiogenesis , as simultaneously assessed via musculoskeletal US at the time of SF sampling ; US has been widely used for studying RA as it closely reflects the pathological severity of the affected joints in a non - invasive manner . 13 Therefore , we performed US to compare the abundances of PRM peptides in three groups of patients , including OA ( pathological control ) , mild RA and severe RA . 14 We identified DEPs that showed increased expression in the severe RA group compared with that in both OA and mild RA groups based on the following severity criteria ( figure 2C and online supplemental figure S2A ) : ( 1 ) nine DEPs ( annexin A1 ( ANXA1 ) , rho GDP disso - ciation inhibitor alpha ( ARHGDIA ) , cyclase - associated actin cytoskeleton regulatory protein 1 ( CAP1 ) , collagen type V alpha 2 chain ( COL5A2 ) , fibronectin 1 ( FN1 ) , glucose - 6 - phosphate isomerase ( GPI ) , moesin ( MSN ) , MYH9 and S100 calcium binding protein A6 ( S100A6 ) ) in grey - scale US ( GSUS ) grades of 0 and 1 vs GSUS grades of 2 and 3 ( mild vs severe synovial hypertrophy ) and ( 2 ) 10 DEPs ( ANXA1 , CAP1 , COL5A2 , FN1 , GPI , MSN , MYH9 , parkinsonism - associated deglycase 7 ( PARK7 ) , S100A6 and superoxide dismutase 2 ( SOD2 ) ) in power Doppler US ( PDUS ) grade of 0 vs PDUS grades of 1 – 3 . In addition , when active synovitis was defined as GSUS grade of 2 or 3 or PDUS grade of 1 – 3 , nine DEPs ( ANXA1 , ARHGDIA , CAP1 , COL5A2 , FN1 , GPI , MSN , MYH9 and S100A6 ) were identified in RA samples with active synovitis compared with those with inactive synovitis ( figure 2C and online supplemental figure S2A ) . Differential expression of eight representative DEPs reflecting synovial hypertrophy , vascularity and active synovitis is shown in figure 2D . We also sought to determine the correlation of the 121 proteins with inflammatory activity of RA . Subse - quently , we identified ten DEPs ( APOA1 , ARHGDIA , CAP1 , cofilin 1 ( CFL1 ) , GPI , glutathione S - transferase P1 ( GSTP1 ) , MSN , MYH9 , thioredoxin - dependent peroxide reductase ( PRDX3 ) and S100A9 ) via the comparison of SF WBC count ≥5000×10 3 cells / mL versus SF WBC < 5000×10 3 cells / mL and identified five DEPs ( GPI , GSTP1 , MSN , MYH9 and S100A9 ) via comparison of blood CRP level ≥0 . 5 mg / dL vs < 0 . 5 mg / dL ( figure 2E , F and online supplemental figure S2B , C ) . We ultimately selected 16 DEPs that were strongly correlated with at least one of the aforementioned four measures for RA severity ( based on US ) and inflammatory activity ( based on SF WBC count and blood CRP level ) . Among the 16 DEPs , APOA1 , FN1 , GPI and S100A9 have been previously associated with RA pathogenesis as auto - antigens , inflammatory mediators , proliferation inducers or apoptosis inhibitors . 15 – 18 Moreover , certain DEPs are known to be produced by RA - FLSs ( GPI and S100A9 ) , 19 20 and other DEPs are involved in proliferation ( MSN ) and invasiveness of RA - FLSs ( ANXA1 and CFL1 ) and involved in inflamma - tory cytokine production ( CAP1 ) , 10 21 – 23 indicating that our PRM analysis results were consistent with previous find - ings . 10 15 – 23 Of note , levels of some DEPs , including GPI , S100A9 and SOD2 , showed a positive correlation with RA activity ( online supplemental figure S2D , E ) , assessed by disease activity score 28 ESR . 24 In addition , all 16 DEPs have been demonstrated to be detectable in the serum when inves - tigated using the human protein atlas database and / or previ - ously published data , suggesting that they can be studied as potential circulating biomarkers of RA ( online supplemental table S3 ) . Collectively , the PRM analysis led to the identifi - cation of 16 critical DEPs indicative of ‘invasive pannus’ and ‘inflammatory activity’ of RA , which are thereafter referred to ‘synoviocyte secretome signature’ ( SSS ) ’ . Identification of MYH9 as a novel candidate indicative of invasive and inflammatory activity of RA - FLSs Among the SSS , three proteins including GPI , MYH9 and MSN satisfied all criteria used for selecting the SSS ( figure 3A ) . While GPI and MSN are implicated in RA pathogenesis , 15 21 the role of MYH9 in RA has been rarely investigated . Thus , we decided to further study this novel target . We first compared MYH9 levels in RA and OA SFs using ELISA and found that RA SFs had considerably higher levels of MYH9 than those in OA SFs ( figure 3B ) . Furthermore , the levels of CCL2 , IL - 6 , IL - 8 , TGF β and IL - 1 β , which are major chemokines and cytokines produced by RA - FLSs , and the level of TNF α , a central acti - vator of RA - FLSs , 25 were correlated with MYH9 levels in RA SFs ( figure 3C ) . These findings were consistent with our PRM anal - ysis results showing that MYH9 levels increased depending on the severity of synovitis and systemic inflammation ( figure 2D , F ) . RA is a heterogeneous disease in which diverse immune cells and cellular processes are involved , and its major pathology , although the presence of commonality of pannus formation , can differ depending on disease stage and phenotype . 1 We questioned whether MYH9 expression is particularly reflected in a subgroup preferentially exhibiting a pathology of ‘invasive pannus’ . Therefore , we first obtained a previously reported bulk RNA - seq dataset generated using synovial tissues of 152 patients with RA , 26 and identified three major subtypes ( Sub1 , Sub2 and Sub3 ) of RA using orthogonal non - negative matrix factorization clustering ( figure 3D and online supplemental figure S3A , B ) as previously described . 27 To further characterise the features of each subtype , we attempted to define the major cellular pathways that were represented by the genes predominantly upregulated in each subtype by performing gene set enrichment analysis using ConsensusPathDB . 28 Sub1 was mainly associated with cellular pathways related to cell proliferation ( eg , cell cycle and G2 / M checkpoint in figure 3E ) , Sub2 was associated with pathways related to cell metabolism ( eg , pyruvate , amino acid and lipid metabolism in figure 3E ) and Sub3 was associated with pathways related to cell migration and invasion ( eg , collagen formation , extracellular matrix - receptor interaction and TGF β / BMP / Hippo signalling in figure 3E ) , indicating that Sub3 is unique to the invasive pannus . Notably , MYH9 showed the highest expression level in Sub3 ( figure 3F ) , which is consistent with our findings from the PRM analysis and suggests that MYH9 is related to pro - migratory and pro - invasive pathology to a greater extent than that of its relation with other cellular processes ( cell prolif - eration and metabolism ) . We further analysed the cell types enriched in synovial tissues of the three subtypes identified from the bulk RNA - seq data . Briefly , we obtained previously reported single cell RNA - seq data 26 and identified five cell types , including fibro - blasts , monocytes , T cells , B cells and plasmablasts , as well as the genes predominantly upregulated in each cell type ( online supplemental figure S3C , D ) . We then estimated proportions of the five cell types in each synovial tissue of the three subgroups by performing cell - type deconvolution for the corresponding bulk RNA - seq data using CIBERSORTx . 29 We found that Sub3 contained a predominantly high proportion of fibroblasts , which correspond to RA - FLSs , relative to the proportions of the other four immune cell types ( figure 3G ) . These data , together with increased MYH9 expression in Sub3 ( figure 3F ) , suggest that MYH9 is closely related to fibroblast - dominant pathology 6 Lee S , et al . Ann Rheum Dis 2023 ; 0 : 1 – 14 . doi : 10 . 1136 / ard - 2022 - 223625 Rheumatoid arthritis Figure 3 MYH9 as a crucial member of SSS representing the invasiveness of RA - FLSs . ( A ) A schematic diagram of selection criteria for MYH9 as the most potential constituent of SSS . ( B ) A quantitative comparison of MYH9 protein levels measured in RA ( n = 80 ) and OA ( n = 40 ) SFs using ELISA . Bars indicate the mean±SEM . * * * P < 0 . 001 . The Mann - Whitney U test was used . ( C ) Correlations of MYH9 level with pro - inflammatory cytokine and chemokine levels in RA SFs ( n = 80 ) measured via ELISA . Spearman’s correlation coefficient and the corresponding p value are shown on each plot . ( D ) Three subtypes ( Sub1 , Sub2 and Sub3 ) of patients with RA ( n = 152 ) identified by clustering the data obtained from bulk RNA sequencing analysis of their synovial biopsies ( GSE89408 ) . The gene numbers included in each cluster are indicated on the left side of the heat map . Sex , age and disease state ( early or established ) are shown in the top bars . Log 2 - fold - changes of expression levels for each gene in individual samples with respect to the median levels are displayed in the heat map . Colour bar indicates gradient of log 2 - fold - changes . ( E ) Heat map showing significance of pathways enriched by the signature genes predominantly upregulated in each subtype . The significance is indicated as −log10 ( p value ) where the p value is the enrichment p value from ConsensusPathDB . ( F ) Violin plot indicating the distribution of MYH9 expression level in Sub1 to Sub3 . The line indicates the average level of MYH9 expression in each subtype . * P < 0 . 05 , * * * p < 0 . 001 . ( G ) Box plots showing proportions of the indicated cell types in synovial tissues of patients with RA belonging to Sub1 to Sub3 . FLS , fibroblast - like synoviocyte ; IL , interleukin ; MYH9 , myosin heavy chain 9 ; OA , osteoarthritis ; PESC , primary endometrial stromal cell ; RA , rheumatoid arthritis ; SF , synovial fluid ; SSS , synoviocyte secretome signature ; TGF , transforming growth factor ; TNF , tumour necrosis factor ; WBC , white blood cell . 7 Lee S , et al . Ann Rheum Dis 2023 ; 0 : 1 – 14 . doi : 10 . 1136 / ard - 2022 - 223625 Rheumatoid arthritis Figure 4 MYH9 expression in RA - FLSs and RA synovium . ( A and B ) Induction of MYH9 mRNA expression ( A ) and secretion ( B ) by pro - inflammatory cytokines and ER stimuli in RA - FLSs . IL - 1 β ( 10 ng / mL ) , TGF β ( 10 ng / mL ) , TNF α ( 10 ng / mL ) , IL - 6 ( 10 ng / mL ) , TM ( 10 μg / mL for A ; 50 μg / mL for B ) and TG ( 10 μM ) were used to treat RA - FLSs ( n = 6 to 9 ) for 6 hours ( A ) or 24 hours ( B ) . MYH9 mRNA expression in the cells and protein levels in culture supernatants were determined via real - time PCR analysis and ELISA , respectively . ( C ) Intracellular MYH9 protein levels in RA - FLSs ( n = 4 ) treated with TGF β ( 1 ng / mL ) or IL - 6 ( 1 ng / mL ) for 24 hours were determined by immuno - blotting . ( D – F ) MYH9 induction in human peripheral blood monocytes . CD14 + cells ( n = 6 ) isolated from blood mononuclear cells using magnetic beads were treated with LPS ( 100 and 1000 ng / mL ) , TNF α ( 10 ng / mL ) or IL - 1 β ( 1 ng / mL ) for 12 hours for mRNA induction or 24 hours for analysis of protein expression . MYH9 mRNA expression in the cells was determined by qRT - PCR ( D ) . Levels of MYH9 in the culture supernatants and in the cells were determined by ELISA ( E ) and western blot analysis ( F ) , respectively . ( G ) Immunohistochemical staining of MYH9 in RA and OA synovial tissues . An isotype control antibody was used as a control . Scale bar , 100 μm . ( H ) Immunofluorescence staining of RA synovium using anti - MYH9 Ab ( green ) , anti - CD55 Ab for RA - FLSs ( red ) and anti - CD68 Ab for macrophages ( red ) . Co - localisation of MYH9 with CD55 ( top panel ) or with CD68 ( bottom panel ) is visualised in yellow in the merged images . Nuclei were stained with DAPI ( blue ) . The rectangular area with a white dashed line was magnified to the merged image . Scale bars , 100 μm ( for a magnified image , 20 μm ) . Data show representatives of more than three independent experiments or the mean±SEM . * P < 0 . 05 and * * p < 0 . 01 . The p values were determined via the Mann - Whitney U test . DAPI , 4 ′ , 6 - diamidino - 2 - phenylindole ; FLS , fibroblast - like synoviocyte ; IL , interleukin ; LPS , lipopolysaccharide ; MYH9 , myosin heavy chain 9 ; ns , not significant ; OA , osteoarthritis ; RA , rheumatoid arthritis ; TG , thapsigargin ; TGF , transforming growth factor ; TM , tunicamycin ; TNF , tumour necrosis factor . 8 Lee S , et al . Ann Rheum Dis 2023 ; 0 : 1 – 14 . doi : 10 . 1136 / ard - 2022 - 223625 Rheumatoid arthritis in RA synovia , which is in accordance with US analysis results presented in figure 2D . MYH9 expression in FLSs and synovia of patients with RA Based on PRM and cell - type deconvolution analysis , we validated whether MYH9 is actually expressed in RA - FLSs , contributing to FLS migration and invasion . As expected , MYH9 mRNA was expressed in RA - FLSs based on qPCR analysis and its expres - sion was increased on stimulation with pro - inflammatory cyto - kines , including IL - 1 β and TGF β ( figure 4A ) . MYH9 protein was similarly secreted by RA - FLSs stimulated with IL - 1 β and TNF α , but not with TGF β , as measured using ELISA ( figure 4B ) . We previously demonstrated that RA - FLSs are heavily exposed to endoplasmic reticulum ( ER ) stimuli , such as hypoxic and pro - inflammatory stimuli . 30 Notably , treatment of RA - FLSs with tunicamycin , an ER stressor , 31 substantially increased MYH9 secretion without affecting MYH9 mRNA levels ( figure 4A , B ) ; another ER stressor , thapsigargin , failed to induce MYH9 secre - tion ( figure 4B ) . Interestingly , TGF β and IL - 6 treatment did not instigate ( extracellular ) MYH9 secretion from RA - FLSs ( figure 4B ) , but it did substantially upregulate ( intracellular ) MYH9 expression in the RA - FLSs as determined by western blot analysis ( figure 4C ) . These data suggest that MYH9 secretion by RA - FLSs can be induced by pro - inflammatory cytokine IL - 1 β and TNF α as well as tunicamyin and that it does not seems to be necessarily correlated with its expression levels in the cells . RA synoviocytes are composed of not only FLSs , but also macrophage - like synoviocytes ( MLSs ) . 32 MLSs and recruited monocytes from blood are required for perpetuation of chronic inflammation in RA joints . 33 We found that both MYH9 mRNA expression and MYH9 protein secretion were substantially increased in human blood - derived monocytes after treatment with LPS ( figure 4D , E ) . TNF α also modestly increased MYH9 mRNA expression in the monocytes but failed to elevate MYH9 secretion markedly like LPS ( figure 4D , E ) . Of note , MYH9 secretion by cultured monocytes was considerably higher than that by RA - FLSs ( see ELISA results in figure 4B vs E ) . More - over , stimulation of the peripheral monocytes with LPS , TNF α and IL - 1 β significantly increased ( intracellular ) MYH9 expres - sion as determined by western blot analysis ( figure 4F ) . These data suggest that TLR4 ligation and pro - inflammatory cytokine TNF α and IL - 1 β can increase MYH9 secretion and / or expres - sion in human monocytes . Immunohistochemistry revealed that MYH9 expression was higher in RA synovia than in OA synovia , particularly in the lining layer and sublining leucocytes ( figure 4G ) . Immunofluo - rescence staining similarly demonstrated that MYH9 - expressing cells were considerably co - localised with anti - CD55 + and anti - CD68 + cells , confirming that FLSs and MLSs represented the major MYH9 - expressing cells in the RA synovium ( figure 4H ) . Collectively , MYH9 is expressed in FLSs and MLSs in the RA synovium and can be secreted ( or excreted ) from these cells on stimulation with pro - inflammatory cytokines , toll - like receptor agonist ( LPS ) or ER stress . Essential role of MYH9 in migration and invasion of RA - FLSs MYH9 encodes the heavy chain of non - muscle myosin IIA . 34 Non - muscle myosin IIA , which is composed of MYH9 and MLC , is an indispensable factor in cell adhesion and migration . 34 As enhanced migration and invasion of FLSs represent one of the critical pathologies of RA , we investigated the role of MYH9 in these cellular processes . We found that MLC phosphoryla - tion , by which non - muscle myosin can transform into an active form , 34 was significantly increased in RA - FLSs treated with TNF α and TGF β , suggesting that pro - inflammatory cytokine stimulation enhances the MYH9 - dependent activity of RA - FLSs ( figure 5A ) . It is well known that activated non - muscle myosin IIA binds to F - actin through its head domain . 34 In cell - spreading assay ( figure 5B ) , we found that 20 min after attachment of suspended RA - FLSs to cover glasses coated with fibronectin , MYH9 was diffusely distributed in the cytoplasm while F - actin was predominantly localised in the cell edges , where actin cytoskeleton undergoes extensive remodelling , as determined by double immuno - staining of F - actin and MYH9 . Over time , MYH9 was detected primarily in the cell edges and co - localised with F - actin 60 min and 120 min after the incubation of RA - FLSs onto fibronectin - coated glasses . Moreover , after a stable attach - ment of RA - FLSs overnight , most MYH9 was diffusely redistrib - uted in the cytoplasm , but with TGF β stimulation , some MYH9 molecules were found in the cell edges and co - localised with F - actin in the actin cytoskeleton ( figure 5C ) . Together , these results support the earlier reports that MYH9 activity can be induced by TGF β and binds to F - actin in tumour cells . 35 36 To determine the effects of MYH9 on migration and inva - sion of RA - FLSs , MYH9 was knocked down using siRNAs ( figure 6A ) . RA - FLS migration ( figure 6B ) , real - time wound migration ( figure 6C , online supplemental figure S4A and online supplemental movies S1A – D ) , and invasion ( figure 6D ) were all significantly reduced after MYH9 knockdown ; mean - while , the MYH9 knockdown did not affect cell viability ( online supplemental figure S5A ) . Moreover , the number of RA - FLSs containing lamellipodia , which are well - known subcellular struc - tures representing actin reorganisation of migrating cells , 37 was correspondingly decreased via MYH9 knockdown ( figure 6E ) . In parallel , MYH9 deficiency significantly impaired paxillin phos - phorylation ( figure 6F ) , which is an essential step of focal adhe - sion and is indispensable for cell migration dynamics . 38 Taken together , these observations , along with earlier reports , 39 – 41 suggest that MYH9 activity and expression can be increased by TGF β stimulation , which induces the phosphorylation of paxillin as well as MYH9 binding to F - actin , ultimately promoting adhe - sion , migration and invasion of RA - FLSs ( online supplemental figure S6 ) . To further investigate the role of MYH9 in RA - FLS aggres - siveness in vivo , we developed an SCID mouse - xenograft model , which is a humanised synovitis model in which human carti - lages are implanted with RA - FLSs in the left flank of SCID mice and without RA - FLSs in the right flank of the same mice . The cartilages implanted with MYH9 - deficient RA - FLSs showed significantly decreased levels of destruction and degradation in both ipsilateral ( left flank ) and contralateral ( right flank ) sides ( figure 6G ) , indicating that MYH9 knockdown suppresses the local invasiveness of RA - FLSs and may retard distant migration of RA - FLSs from the affected joint to the unaffected cartilages . The in vitro and in vivo findings using siRNAs strongly suggest that MYH9 represents an excellent target to regulate FLS migration and invasion . Therefore , we tested whether bleb - bistatin , a specific MYH9 inhibitor that hinders the activity of non - muscle myosin II , 42 can reverse cartilage destruction in vivo and suppress the pro - migratory and pro - invasive phenotype of RA - FLSs in vitro . The migration , invasion , lamellipodium formation and real - time wound migration of RA - FLSs were all substantially suppressed via blebbistatin treatment without affecting cell viability in vitro ( figure 7A – D , online supplemental figure S4B and S5B and online supplemental movies S1E – G ) , which is consistent with the findings of the knockdown experi - ment using MYH9 siRNAs . 9 Lee S , et al . Ann Rheum Dis 2023 ; 0 : 1 – 14 . doi : 10 . 1136 / ard - 2022 - 223625 Rheumatoid arthritis Moreover , in the in vivo humanised synovitis model using SCID mice , intraperitoneal injection of blebbistatin ( 10 mg / kg twice a week ) significantly reduced RA - FLS - mediated cartilage degradation in both ipsilateral and contralateral sides ( figure 7E ) . These results indicate that blebbistatin inhibited the local inva - siveness of RA - FLSs in the ipsilateral side , and it prevented their migration to the contralateral side , where RA - FLSs were not originally implanted . To further confirm these findings in more complex models of arthritis , where diverse immune cells , in addition to FLSs , are involved in disease progression , we introduced two different mouse models of chronic inflam - matory arthritis , including methylated bovine serum albumin ( BSA ) / IL - 1 β - induced arthritis and collagen - induced arthritis . The result showed that intraperitoneal injection of blebbistatin ( 10 mg / kg daily ) remarkably reduced bone and cartilage destruc - tion in mice with BSA / IL - 1 β - induced arthritis , although its effect on inflammatory cell infiltration in the affected joints was modest ( figure 7F ) ; most mice tolerated even repetitive treat - ment of blebbistatin , and there were no apparent adverse effects or toxicity , including thrombocytopenia ( data not shown ) . The severity of collagen - induced arthritis also was significantly lower in mice treated with blebbistatin ( 10 mg / kg twice a week ) than in mice with vehicle alone ( online supplemental figure S7A , B ) . In parallel , inflammatory cell infiltration and bone / cartilage destruction in these mice were substantially diminished by intra - peritoneal injection of blebbistatin ( online supplemental figure S7C ) . These data demonstrate that blebbistatin treatment is effective in ameliorating joint destruction by diverse immune / inflammatory cells as well as in retarding joint destruction and disease spread mediated predominantly by RA - FLSs . Collectively , these data confirm that MYH9 is essential for the migration and invasion of RA - FLSs and demonstrated that MYH9 inhibition by blebbistatin successfully represses local invasion and cartilage degradation mediated by RA - FLSs in vitro and in vivo . DISCUSSION The abnormal activation and proliferation of FLSs are consid - ered a pathological hallmark of RA . In the RA joints , proteins secreted from FLSs may critically induce the development of such pathology ; however , they have never been globally and systematically explored . To address these gaps in knowledge , we determined the secretome profile of RA - FLSs , the major cell type comprising the invasive pannus , via LC - MS / MS anal - ysis . We then attempted to evaluate the invasive pannus - related secretome using PRM analysis ; we selected the 16 proteins on the basis of sonographic severity of synovial proliferation and angiogenesis as well as the level of systemic inflammation of RA , after which they were called ‘SSS’ . Particularly , MYH9 , one of the previously unidentified SSS in RA , showed a strong relationship with inflammatory activity in the SF and strong relation with fibroblastic activity in the transcriptome profile of RA synovia . MYH9 expression was elevated in RA - FLSs and RA synovium and it was induced by pro - inflammatory cyto - kines ( eg , IL - 1 , TNF α , TGF β and IL - 6 ) , TLR ligation and ER stimuli . Finally , we functionally validated that MYH9 was co - lo - calised with F - actin and promoted the migration and invasion of RA - FLSs in vitro and in vivo . Collectively , this study may represent substantial advances in our understanding of chronic inflammatory diseases in that it first introduces the concept of secretome to inflammatory arthritis , provides a list of ‘SSS’ related to pannus formation and suggest potential new targets , including MYH9 , for the evaluation and management of human diseases where fibroblasts play a pivotal role ( online supple - mental figure S8 ) . Figure 5 MYH9 activation by TGF β and its co - localisation with F - actin in RA - FLSs . ( A ) Increase in levels of MLC phosphorylation ( at Thr18 / Ser19 ) in RA - FLSs stimulated with TNF α ( 10 ng / mL ) , TGF β ( 10 ng / mL ) and IL - 1 β ( 1 ng / mL ) for 15 min as determined via western blot analysis . Data show representatives of more than three independent experiments or the as mean±SEM . * P < 0 . 05 . The p value was calculated using Mann - Whitney U test . ( B ) Cell - spreading assay of RA - FLSs . RA - FLSs were seeded onto cover glasses coated with fibronectin , incubated to attach to the glasses for the indicated times and then fixed with paraformaldehyde . The cells undergoing spreading were double - immunostained using phalloidin for F - actin ( green ) and anti - MYH9 Ab ( red ) . ( C ) Co - localisation of MYH9 and F - actin in RA - FLSs stimulated with TGF β . RA - FLSs ( 5×10 3 cells per well ) were incubated overnight onto the 8 - well chamber slides ( with no fibronectin ) , stimulated by medium alone or TGF β ( 10 ng / mL ) for 6 hours , and then stained with phalloidin ( green ) and anti - MYH9 Ab ( red ) . The rectangular areas with a white dashed line in each merged image were magnified and shown in the adjacent panel . The confocal images are representatives of more than three experiments . FLS , fibroblast - like synoviocyte ; IL , interleukin ; MLC , myosin light chain ; MYH9 , myosin heavy chain 9 ; RA , rheumatoid arthritis ; TGF , transforming growth factor ; TNF , tumour necrosis factor . 10 Lee S , et al . Ann Rheum Dis 2023 ; 0 : 1 – 14 . doi : 10 . 1136 / ard - 2022 - 223625 Rheumatoid arthritis Figure 6 Effect of MYH9 on migration and invasion of RA - FLSs . ( A ) Reduction of MYH9 expression in RA - FLSs via MYH9 siRNA transfection . RA - FLSs ( n = 4 ) were transfected with 50 nM of MYH9 siRNA for 48 hours . MYH9 mRNA expression ( top panel ) and protein levels ( bottom panel ) were determined via real - time PCR and western blot analysis , respectively . ( B – D ) Decrease in migration and invasion of RA - FLSs via knockdown of MYH9 . RA - FLSs ( n = 3 ) were transfected with MYH9 siRNA ( 50 nM ) for 24 hours . The cells were then wounded using pipette tips ( B and C ) or loaded onto a Matrigel chamber ( D ) . IL - 1 β ( 1 ng / mL ) and TGF β ( 10 ng / mL ) in DMEM containing 1 % FBS were added to wounded cells ( B and C ) or to lower chambers of Matrigel - coated Transwell ( D ) for 12 hours . Migrated ( B ) and invaded cells ( D ) were stained using crystal violet solution and then manually counted . The wounding closure areas were also monitored in real time ( C ) . Scale bar , 200 μm . ( E ) Lamellipodium formation suppression by MYH9 siRNA in RA - FLSs . RA - FLSs ( n = 4 ) were transfected with MYH9 siRNA ( 50 nM ) in DMEM supplemented with 10 % FBS for 24 hours and subsequently incubated with IL - 1 β ( 1 ng / mL ) or TGF β ( 10 ng / mL ) in DMEM containing 1 % FBS for 24 hours . The cells were then stained with Alexa Fluor 488 - conjugated phalloidin ( green ) for F - actin visualisation . Nuclei were stained with DAPI ( blue ) . White triangles indicate lamellipodia . Scale bar , 20 μm . ( F ) MYH9 - dependent regulation of focal adhesions in RA - FLSs . RA - FLSs ( n = 4 ) were transfected with MYH9 siRNA ( 50 nM ) for 48 hours and then incubated in the absence or presence of TGF β ( 10 ng / mL ) for 12 hours . Protein levels of MYH9 , total paxillin and phosphorylated paxillin at Y118 site ( p - paxillin ) were measured via western blot analysis . The data are representatives of more than three experiments . ( G ) Suppression of RA - FLS invasion into cartilages via MYH9 knockdown in a humanised synovitis model . RA - FLSs were transfected with control siRNA ( 50 nM ) ( n = 4 ) or MYH9 siRNA ( 50 nM ) ( n = 5 ) for 24 hours . Human cartilages were implanted into the left flank ( primary , ipsilateral ) with RA - FLSs for 60 days in SCID mice . In the right flank ( contralateral ) , the cartilages of the same size were implanted without RA - FLSs . At day 60 , the implants were harvested and subjected to H & E staining . The red and black arrows indicate invaded regions and perichondrocytic degradation , respectively . Scale bar , 100 μm . Data are presented as the mean±SEM . * P < 0 . 05 , * * p < 0 . 01 and * * * p < 0 . 001 vs control siRNA - treated groups . The p values were calculated using Mann - Whitney U test ( A , B , D , E and G ) or two - way analysis of variance followed by Sidak’s post - test ( C ) . DMEM , dulbecco ' s modified eagle medium ; FBS , fetal bovine serum ; FLS , fibroblast - like synoviocyte ; MYH9 , myosin heavy chain 9 ; RA , rheumatoid arthritis ; SCID , severe combined immunodeficiency ; siRNA , small interfering RNA ; TGF , transforming growth factor . 11 Lee S , et al . Ann Rheum Dis 2023 ; 0 : 1 – 14 . doi : 10 . 1136 / ard - 2022 - 223625 Rheumatoid arthritis Figure 7 Reduction of migration and invasion of RA - FLSs by blebbistatin , a specific inhibitor of non - muscle myosin II . ( A and B ) Repression of wound migration and invasion of RA - FLSs by blebbistatin . RA - FLSs were wounded ( A , n = 5 ) using pipette tips or loaded onto upper chambers of Matrigel - coated Transwell ( B , n = 4 ) . They were then treated with vehicle alone ( containing dimethyl sulfoxide ) or blebbistatin at the indicated concentrations . After 12 hours of incubation , the cells were stained with crystal violet solution and the migrating cells were manually counted . ( C ) Decrease in lamellipodium formation in RA - FLSs by blebbistatin . RA - FLSs ( n = 4 ) were cultured in DMEM supplemented with 5 % FBS in the absence or presence of blebbistatin at the indicated concentrations for 12 hours . The cells were stained with Alexa Fluor 488 - conjugated phalloidin ( green ) to visualise F - actin . Nuclei were stained with DAPI ( blue ) . The number of lamellipodium - containing cells was manually counted . Scale bar , 20 μm . ( D ) Wounding migration of RA - FLSs ( n = 3 ) was evaluated in the same manner as shown in ( A ) and monitored in real - time for 16 hours . ( E ) Blebbistatin - mediated repression of RA - FLS invasion into cartilages in a humanised synovitis model . Human cartilages were implanted in the left flank ( primary , ipsilateral ) with RA - FLSs for 60 d in SCID mice . In the right flank ( contralateral ) , cartilages of the same size were implanted without RA - FLSs . The mice were injected with vehicle alone ( n = 5 ) or blebbistatin ( n = 5 ) at a dose of 10 mg / kg twice a week for 60 days . At day 60 , the implants were harvested and subjected to H & E staining . The red arrows and black arrows indicate invaded regions and perichondrocytic degradation , respectively . Scale bar , 100 μm . The bar graphs indicate severity of cartilage invasion and degradation . ( F ) Amelioration of methylated bovine serum albumin ( BSA ) plus IL - 1 β - induced arthritis by blebbistatin . The mice were injected intraperitoneally with blebbistatin ( 10 mg / kg , n = 10 ) or vehicle alone ( n = 10 ) daily from 4 days after arthritis induction . The images in the left panel are representative of H & E and safranin O - stained joints . The rectangular areas with a black dashed line in each H & E - stained image were magnified and shown in the adjacent panel . Scale bars , 500 μm ( for magnified images , 200 μm ) . Black arrows indicate bone destruction . The bar graphs in the right panel are presented as mean±SEM . * P < 0 . 05 , * * p < 0 . 01 , and * * * p < 0 . 001 vs vehicle - treated groups . The p values were determined via Mann - Whitney U test ( A , B , C , E and F ) or two - way analysis of variance followed by Sidak’s post - test ( D ) . DMEM , Dulbecco ' s Modified Eagle Medium ; FBS , fetal bovine serum ; FLS , fibroblast - like synoviocyte ; MYH9 , myosin heavy chain 9 ; RA , rheumatoid arthritis ; SCID , severe combined immunodeficiency . 12 Lee S , et al . Ann Rheum Dis 2023 ; 0 : 1 – 14 . doi : 10 . 1136 / ard - 2022 - 223625 Rheumatoid arthritis Functional enrichment analysis revealed that 27 . 4 % of the RA - FLS - derived secretome was involved in metabolic processes , and glycolysis - related proteins were the most abundant , including GPI , triose phosphate isomerase and aldolase A . The RA - FLS - derived secretome also included pyruvate kinases and GAPDH , which are rate - limiting enzymes of glycolysis . These proteins are upregulated under hypoxic conditions in RA syno - vial tissues . 43 In addition , 19 . 2 % of the RA - FLS - derived secre - tome was involved in developmental processes . RA - FLSs show characteristics of dedifferentiated cells resembling mesenchymal stem cells . 44 Therefore , our secretome profile may reflect such cellular processes as embryonic synovial development and dedif - ferentiation of RA - FLSs . Notably , the RA - FLS - derived secretome highly represented angiogenesis , cell adhesion / migration and proliferation , which are closely related to the pathology of inva - sive pannus ; 48 . 5 % ( 409 proteins ) of the secretome was asso - ciated with pannus - driven pathologies . Collectively , the global profiling of RA - FLS secretome further confirmed the essential role of RA - FLSs in RA pathogenesis . Our secretome data also provide novel perspectives on secreted proteins from RA - FLSs . Specifically , we sorted 16 proteins of the SSS characterising the invasive pannus using PRM analysis . Since the 16 proteins covered several autoantigens and were located in an extracellular region , the SSS may function as autoanti - gens : FN1 as an autoantigen and a disease - facilitating factor in a citrullinated form 16 ; GPI as one of the autoantigens in RA 15 and COL5A2 as a potential inducer of autoimmune responses . 45 The SSS also included diverse damage - associated molecular patterns ( DAMPs ) derived from stressed , damaged or dying cells ( eg , FN1 , S100A9 , APOA1 and PARK7 ) , 46 – 48 which may contribute to the persistence of joint inflammation . Notably , MYH9 plays a role in both autoantigen cross - presentation of dendritic cells 49 and inflammatory responses driven by immune complex of MYH9 and natural IgM . 50 Collectively , previous studies 15 16 45 – 50 suggest that the SSS may be involved in facilitating autoimmune responses as a self - antigen as well as in perpetuating chronic inflammation as a DAMP , which needs to be further studied . Among the 16 proteins of the SSS , we investigated MYH9 as a key regulator of the invasive pannus based on its novelty and correlation with pathology related to US . MYH9 is a key factor in actin - based cell motility . Especially , the migration and extrav - asation of leucocytes , including neutrophils and T lymphocytes , are largely dependent on MYH9 . 34 MYH9 function is also crucial to epithelial - to - mesenchymal transition induced by TGF β . 51 MYH9 involvement in the enhanced motility of cancer cells has been reported in certain types of cancer . 52 Here , we demon - strated that IL - 1 β - induced and TGF β - induced RA - FLS migration and invasion were severely suppressed on MYH9 knockdown . Moreover , MYH9 depletion induced a marked decrease in inva - sion and cartilage destruction mediated by RA - FLSs in the in vivo humanised synovitis model . Overall , our data , together with previous findings , 34 51 52 suggest that MYH9 is a key regu - lator of tumour - like invasion and migration of RA - FLSs . Similar to MYH9 , future studies should investigate the role of other SSS proteins whose functions are not fully understood in RA , including S100A6 , ARHGDIA , GSTP1 and PRDX3 . Notably , non - muscle myosin IIA promotes the release of EVs . 53 EVs are crucial in cell - cell communication 54 and have been implicated in the pathogenesis of RA . 55 The number of EVs is significantly increased in patients with RA and they can activate RA - FLSs to induce pro - inflammatory mediators and cartilage - degrading enzymes . 55 In our study , approximately 70 % of the secretome of RA - FLSs represented EV - associated proteins , which implies that a substantial portion of the SSS can be transferred to neighbouring FLSs and other types of immune cells via EVs in RA joints and may explain why MYH9 secre - tion is not always correlated with its expression level in RA - FLSs ( figure 4A – C ) . Moreover , pro - inflammatory stimuli and TLR ligation enhanced MYH9 release and induced MLC phosphor - ylation that presumably further accelerates the release of EVs . 53 Given the crucial role of MYH9 in the invasiveness of RA - FLSs , these EVs harbouring MYH9 , which are possibly secreted from relatively more aggressive FLSs , can be delivered to other FLSs and make them more aggressive , which may represent a poten - tial mechanism underlying the spreading of transformed pheno - type of RA - FLSs ( online supplemental figure S6 ) . Therapeutic approaches targeting RA - FLSs have been devel - oped to treat RA ; however , there are no clinically approved drugs available at present . 56 Suppression of RA - FLSs using monoclonal antibodies against cadherin - 11 has failed to show sufficient therapeutic efficacy in a phase II clinical trial . 56 Selici - clib , a cyclin - dependent kinase inhibitor , has been reported to suppress proliferation of RA - FLSs ; however , it currently only satisfies the toxicity requirements in a phase I clinical study . 56 Targeting non - muscle myosin to regulate RA - FLSs has never been attempted in RA treatment . Here , we showed that blebbistatin , an inhibitor of non - muscle myosin II , remarkably suppressed the aggressiveness of RA - FLSs in vitro and in vivo , thereby reducing cartilage destruction in an SCID mouse - xenograft ( RA - FLSs ) model . Blebbistatin treatment is also effective in retarding joint destruction by diverse immune cells in more complex mouse models of chronic arthritis , including methylated BSA / IL - 1 β - in - duced arthritis and collagen - induced arthritis . These findings suggest that the development of myosin - targeted therapeutics while focusing on RA - FLS - driven pathologies can provide an alternative strategy for RA treatment . Given the modest effect of blebbistatin on cartilage destruction in SCID mouse model , further studies , including dose - dependent experiments using MYH9 inhibitors , will be required to clarity this issue . In conclusion , our study provides a comprehensive resource of an RA - FLS - derived secretome that can be applied in various studies to help discover novel regulators of pathological processes mediated by proteins secreted by RA - FLSs . More - over , PRM analysis of the RA - FLS - derived secretome revealed 16 secretory proteins comprising the SSS which represented the pathology of the invasive pannus . Similar PRM analyses should be applied to identify the key secretory proteins respon - sible for other processes underlying RA pathogenesis , including altered metabolism , abnormal proliferation and de - differentia - tion of RA - FLSs since it successfully sorted the invasive pannus - related SSS . Finally , we propose MYH9 as a promising target for retarding abnormal migration and invasion of RA - FLSs and also suggest potential therapeutic candidates of the SSS , for which detailed functional experiments can be designed . Author affiliations 1 Center for Integrative Rheumatoid Transcriptomics and Dynamics , The Catholic University of Korea , Seoul , The Republic of Korea 2 Department of Biomedicine & Health Sciences , College of Medicine , The Catholic University of Korea , Seoul , The Republic of Korea 3 Neurovascular Unit Research Group , Korea Brain Research Institute , Daegu , The Republic of Korea 4 Department of Internal Medicine , The Catholic University of Korea , School of Medicine , Seoul , The Republic of Korea 5 Department of Biological Sciences , Seoul National University , Seoul , The Republic of Korea 6 Department of Internal Medicine , Inje University Ilsan Paik Hospital , Goyang , The Republic of Korea 7 Department of Medical Life Sciences , The Catholic University of Korea , Seoul , The Republic of Korea 13 Lee S , et al . Ann Rheum Dis 2023 ; 0 : 1 – 14 . doi : 10 . 1136 / ard - 2022 - 223625 Rheumatoid arthritis Acknowledgements We thank members of the Center for Integrative Rheumatoid Transcriptomics and Dynamics at the Catholic University of Korea for their assistance . Contributors W - UK and DH designed the study . SL , EC and S - AY performed in vitro and in vivo experiments . SC and DH performed proteomics experiments and data analysis . JHK and JGK performed clinical data analysis of patients with RA . YC and DH performed transcriptome data analysis . DH and W - UK interpreted the results from data analyses and experiments . SL , EC , SC , DH and W - UK wrote the manuscript . The order of the co - first authors was assigned based on the relative contributions to this study and approved by all other authors . W - UK is acting as a guarantor . Funding This work was supported by grants ( No . 2015R1A3A2032927 to W - UK and 2021R1I1A2059487 to SL ) from the National Research Foundation funded by the Ministry of Education , Science and Technology , Republic of Korea . Competing interests None declared . Patient and public involvement Patients and / or the public were not involved in the design , or conduct , or reporting , or dissemination plans of this research . Patient consent for publication Not applicable . Ethics approval This study was approved by the Institutional Review Board of Seoul St . Mary’s Hospital , The Catholic University of Korea ( approval number : KC14TASI0898 ) . Participants gave informed consent to participate in the study before taking part . Provenance and peer review Not commissioned ; externally peer reviewed . Data availability statement Data are available in a public , open access repository . Data are available on reasonable request . The proteomics data and PRM analysis data were deposited to the ProteomeXchange with accession ID : PXD041077 . Other data are available on reasonable request . Supplemental material This content has been supplied by the author ( s ) . It has not been vetted by BMJ Publishing Group Limited ( BMJ ) and may not have been peer - reviewed . Any opinions or recommendations discussed are solely those of the author ( s ) and are not endorsed by BMJ . BMJ disclaims all liability and responsibility arising from any reliance placed on the content . Where the content includes any translated material , BMJ does not warrant the accuracy and reliability of the translations ( including but not limited to local regulations , clinical guidelines , terminology , drug names and drug dosages ) , and is not responsible for any error and / or omissions arising from translation and adaptation or otherwise . Open access This is an open access article distributed in accordance with the Creative Commons Attribution 4 . 0 Unported ( CC BY 4 . 0 ) license , which permits others to copy , redistribute , remix , transform and build upon this work for any purpose , provided the original work is properly cited , a link to the licence is given , and indication of whether changes were made . See : https : / / creativecommons . org / licenses / by / 4 . 0 / . ORCID iDs Jung Gon Kim http : / / orcid . org / 0000 - 0002 - 3661 - 4974 Wan - Uk Kim http : / / orcid . org / 0000 - 0001 - 8224 - 8496 REFERENCES 1 Smolen JS , Aletaha D , Barton A , et al . Rheumatoid arthritis . Nat Rev Dis Primers 2018 ; 4 : 18001 . 2 You S , Koh JH , Leng L , et al . The tumor - like phenotype of rheumatoid synovium : molecular profiling and prospects for precision medicine . Arthritis Rheumatol 2018 ; 70 : 637 – 52 . 3 Asif Amin M , Fox DA , Ruth JH . Synovial cellular and molecular markers in rheumatoid arthritis . Semin Immunopathol 2017 ; 39 : 385 – 93 . 4 Niu X , Chen G . Clinical biomarkers and pathogenic - related cytokines in rheumatoid arthritis . J Immunol Res 2014 ; 2014 : 698192 . 5 Amiri - Dashatan N , Koushki M , Abbaszadeh H - A , et al . Proteomics applications in health : biomarker and drug discovery and food industry . Iran J Pharm Res 2018 ; 17 : 1523 – 36 . 6 Brescia AC , Simonds MM , Sullivan KE , et al . Secretion of pro - inflammatory cytokines and chemokines and loss of regulatory signals by fibroblast - like synoviocytes in juvenile idiopathic arthritis . Proteomics Clin Appl 2017 ; 11 : 1600088 . 7 Huang DW , Sherman BT , Lempicki RA . Bioinformatics enrichment tools : paths toward the comprehensive functional analysis of large gene Lists . Nucleic Acids Res 2009 ; 37 : 1 – 13 . 8 de Oliveira PG , Farinon M , Sanchez - Lopez E , et al . Fibroblast - like synoviocytes glucose metabolism as a therapeutic target in rheumatoid arthritis . Front Immunol 2019 ; 10 : 1743 . 9 Brescia AC , Simonds MM , McCahan SM , et al . The role of transforming growth factor β signaling in fibroblast - like synoviocytes from patients with oligoarticular juvenile idiopathic arthritis : dysregulation of transforming growth factor β signaling , including overexpression of bone morphogenetic protein 4 , may lead to a chondrocyte phenotype and may contribute to bony hypertrophy . Arthritis Rheumatol 2014 ; 66 : 1352 – 62 . 10 Laragione T , Harris C , Gulko PS . TRPV2 suppresses Rac1 and RhoA activation and invasion in rheumatoid arthritis fibroblast - like synoviocytes . Int Immunopharmacol 2019 ; 70 : 268 – 73 . 11 Firestein GS . Evolving concepts of rheumatoid arthritis . Nature 2003 ; 423 : 356 – 61 . 12 Peterson AC , Russell JD , Bailey DJ , et al . Parallel reaction monitoring for high resolution and high mass accuracy quantitative , targeted proteomics . Mol Cell Proteomics 2012 ; 11 : 1475 – 88 . 13 Di Matteo A , Mankia K , Azukizawa M , et al . The role of musculoskeletal ultrasound in the rheumatoid arthritis continuum . Curr Rheumatol Rep 2020 ; 22 : 41 . 14 Terslev L , Naredo E , Aegerter P , et al . Scoring ultrasound synovitis in rheumatoid arthritis : a EULAR - OMERACT ultrasound taskforce - part 2 : reliability and application to multiple joints of a standardised consensus - based scoring system . RMD Open 2017 ; 3 : e000427 . 15 Matsumoto I , Staub A , Benoist C , et al . Arthritis provoked by linked T and B cell recognition of a glycolytic enzyme . Science 1999 ; 286 : 1732 – 5 . 16 Chang X , Yamada R , Suzuki A , et al . Citrullination of fibronectin in rheumatoid arthritis synovial tissue . Rheumatology ( Oxford ) 2005 ; 44 : 1374 – 82 . 17 Vuilleumier N , Bratt J , Alizadeh R , et al . Anti - apoA - 1 IgG and oxidized LDL are raised in rheumatoid arthritis ( RA ) : potential associations with cardiovascular disease and RA disease activity . Scand J Rheumatol 2010 ; 39 : 447 – 53 . 18 Foell D , Roth J . Proinflammatory S100 proteins in arthritis and autoimmune disease . Arthritis Rheum 2004 ; 50 : 3762 – 71 . 19 Zong M , Lu T , Fan S , et al . Glucose - 6 - Phosphate isomerase promotes the proliferation and inhibits the apoptosis in fibroblast - like synoviocytes in rheumatoid arthritis . Arthritis Res Ther 2015 ; 17 : 100 . 20 Kang KY , Woo JW , Park SH . S100A8 / A9 as a biomarker for synovial inflammation and joint damage in patients with rheumatoid arthritis . Korean J Intern Med 2014 ; 29 : 12 – 9 . 21 Huang H , Xiao Y , Lin H , et al . Increased phosphorylation of ezrin / radixin / moesin proteins contributes to proliferation of rheumatoid fibroblast - like synoviocytes . Rheumatology ( Oxford ) 2011 ; 50 : 1045 – 53 . 22 Zhang W , Yin G , Zhao H , et al . Secreted KIAA1199 promotes the progression of rheumatoid arthritis by mediating hyaluronic acid degradation in an ANXA1 - dependent manner . Cell Death Dis 2021 ; 12 : 102 . 23 Sato H , Muraoka S , Kusunoki N , et al . Resistin upregulates chemokine production by fibroblast - like synoviocytes from patients with rheumatoid arthritis . Arthritis Res Ther 2017 ; 19 : 263 . 24 Prevoo ML , van ’t Hof MA , Kuper HH , et al . Modified disease activity scores that include twenty - eight - joint counts . development and validation in a prospective longitudinal study of patients with rheumatoid arthritis . Arthritis Rheum 1995 ; 38 : 44 – 8 . 25 Nygaard G , Firestein GS . Restoring synovial homeostasis in rheumatoid arthritis by targeting fibroblast - like synoviocytes . Nat Rev Rheumatol 2020 ; 16 : 316 – 33 . 26 Zhang F , Wei K , Slowikowski K , et al . Defining inflammatory cell states in rheumatoid arthritis joint synovial tissues by integrating single - cell transcriptomics and mass cytometry . Nat Immunol 2019 ; 20 : 928 – 42 . 27 Mun D - G , Bhin J , Kim S , et al . Proteogenomic characterization of human early - onset gastric cancer . Cancer Cell 2019 ; 35 : 111 – 24 . 28 Herwig R , Hardt C , Lienhard M , et al . Analyzing and interpreting genome data at the network level with consensuspathdb . Nat Protoc 2016 ; 11 : 1889 – 907 . 29 Newman AM , Steen CB , Liu CL , et al . Determining cell type abundance and expression from bulk tissues with digital cytometry . Nat Biotechnol 2019 ; 37 : 773 – 82 . 30 Yoo S - A , You S , Yoon H - J , et al . A novel pathogenic role of the ER chaperone GRP78 / BiP in rheumatoid arthritis . J Exp Med 2012 ; 209 : 871 – 86 . 31 Xu C , Bailly - Maitre B , Reed JC . Endoplasmic reticulum stress : cell life and death decisions . J Clin Invest 2005 ; 115 : 2656 – 64 . 32 Tu J , Hong W , Zhang P , et al . Ontology and function of fibroblast - like and macrophage - like synoviocytes : how do they talk to each other and can they be targeted for rheumatoid arthritis therapy ? Front Immunol 2018 ; 9 : 1467 . 33 Yang X , Chang Y , Wei W . Emerging role of targeting macrophages in rheumatoid arthritis : focus on polarization , metabolism and apoptosis . Cell Prolif 2020 ; 53 : e12854 . 34 Vicente - Manzanares M , Ma X , Adelstein RS , et al . Non - muscle myosin II takes centre stage in cell adhesion and migration . Nat Rev Mol Cell Biol 2009 ; 10 : 778 – 90 . 35 Li F , shi J , Xu Z , et al . S100A4 - MYH9 axis promote migration and invasion of gastric cancer cells by inducing TGF - β - mediated epithelial - mesenchymal transition . J Cancer 2018 ; 9 : 3839 – 49 . 36 Wang G , Wang T , Hu Y , et al . NMMHC IIA triggers neuronal autophagic cell death by promoting F - actin - dependent ATG9A trafficking in cerebral ischemia / reperfusion . Cell Death Dis 2020 ; 11 : 428 . 37 Ridley AJ . Life at the leading edge . Cell 2011 ; 145 : 1012 – 22 . 38 Parsons JT , Horwitz AR , Schwartz MA . Cell adhesion : integrating cytoskeletal dynamics and cellular tension . Nat Rev Mol Cell Biol 2010 ; 11 : 633 – 43 . 39 Sun X , Zhu M , Chen X , et al . MYH9 inhibition suppresses TGF - β 1 - stimulated lung fibroblast - to - myofibroblast differentiation . Front Pharmacol 2020 ; 11 : 573524 . 40 Pecci A , Ma X , Savoia A , et al . MYH9 : structure , functions and role of non - muscle myosin IIA in human disease . Gene 2018 ; 664 : 152 – 67 . 14 Lee S , et al . Ann Rheum Dis 2023 ; 0 : 1 – 14 . doi : 10 . 1136 / ard - 2022 - 223625 Rheumatoid arthritis 41 Pasapera AM , Schneider IC , Rericha E , et al . Myosin II activity regulates vinculin recruitment to focal adhesions through FAK - mediated paxillin phosphorylation . J Cell Biol 2010 ; 188 : 877 – 90 . 42 Straight AF , Cheung A , Limouze J , et al . Dissecting temporal and spatial control of cytokinesis with a myosin II inhibitor . Science 2003 ; 299 : 1743 – 7 . 43 Biniecka M , Canavan M , McGarry T , et al . Dysregulated bioenergetics : a key regulator of joint inflammation . Ann Rheum Dis 2016 ; 75 : 2192 – 200 . 44 Li X , Makarov SS . An essential role of NF - kappaB in the " tumor - like " phenotype of arthritic synoviocytes . Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 2006 ; 103 : 17432 – 7 . 45 Callado MRM , Viana VST , Vendramini MBG , et al . Autoantibody profile in the experimental model of scleroderma induced by type V human collagen . Immunology 2007 ; 122 : 38 – 46 . 46 Roh JS , Sohn DH . Damage - associated molecular patterns in inflammatory diseases . Immune Netw 2018 ; 18 : e27 . 47 Nakamura K , Sakai S , Tsuyama J , et al . Extracellular DJ - 1 induces sterile inflammation in the ischemic brain . PLoS Biol 2021 ; 19 : e3000939 . 48 de Seny D , Cobraiville G , Charlier E , et al . Apolipoprotein - A1 as a damage - associated molecular patterns protein in osteoarthritis : ex vivo and in vitro pro - inflammatory properties . PLoS One 2015 ; 10 : e0122904 . 49 Schulz O , Hanč P , Böttcher JP , et al . Myosin II synergizes with F - actin to promote DNGR - 1 - dependent cross - presentation of dead cell - associated antigens . Cell Rep 2018 ; 24 : 419 – 28 . 50 Lee H , Green DJ , Lai L , et al . Early complement factors in the local tissue immunocomplex generated during intestinal ischemia / reperfusion injury . Mol Immunol 2010 ; 47 : 972 – 81 . 51 Beach JR , Hussey GS , Miller TE , et al . Myosin II isoform switching mediates invasiveness after TGF - β – induced epithelial – mesenchymal transition . Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 2011 ; 108 : 17991 – 6 . 52 Wang Y , Liu S , Zhang Y , et al . Myosin heavy chain 9 : oncogene or tumor suppressor gene ? Med Sci Monit 2019 ; 25 : 888 – 92 . 53 Chang WH , Cerione RA , Antonyak MA . Extracellular vesicles and their roles in cancer progression . Methods Mol Biol 2021 ; 2174 : 143 – 70 . 54 van Niel G , Carter DRF , Clayton A , et al . Challenges and directions in studying cell - cell communication by extracellular vesicles . Nat Rev Mol Cell Biol 2022 ; 23 : 369 – 82 . 55 Fu H , Hu D , Zhang L , et al . Role of extracellular vesicles in rheumatoid arthritis . Mol Immunol 2018 ; 93 : 125 – 32 . 56 Chu C - Q . Highlights of strategies targeting fibroblasts for novel therapies for rheumatoid arthritis . Front Med ( Lausanne ) 2022 ; 9 : 846300 .