Engaging Teachers to Co - Design Integrated AI Curriculum for K - 12 Classrooms JESSICA VAN BRUMMELEN ∗ , Massachusetts Institute of Technology , USA PHOEBE LIN ∗ , Harvard University , USA Fig . 1 . Representations of the four integrated curricula [ 6 , 9 , 20 ] . Left : The “exemplar” physics and AI curriculum . Mid - left : Social studies and AI curriculum . Mid - right : ESL and AI curriculum . Right : Literacy and AI curriculum for students with learning disabilities . Artificial Intelligence ( AI ) education is an increasingly popular topic area for K - 12 teachers . However , little research has investigated how AI education can be designed to be more accessible to all learners . We organized co - design workshops with 15 K - 12 teachers to identify opportunities to integrate AI education into core curriculum to leverage learners’ interests . During the co - design workshops , teachers and researchers co - created lesson plans where AI concepts were embedded into various core subjects . We found that K - 12 teachers need additional scaffolding in the curriculum to facilitate ethics and data discussions , and value supports for learner engagement , collaboration , and reflection . We identify opportunities for researchers and teachers to collaborate to make AI education more accessible , and present an exemplar lesson plan that shows entry points for teaching AI in non - computing subjects . We also reflect on co - designing with K - 12 teachers in a remote setting . CCS Concepts : • Human - centered computing → Participatory design ; User centered design . Additional Key Words and Phrases : Artificial intelligence , K - 12 education , co - design workshop ACM Reference Format : Jessica Van Brummelen and Phoebe Lin . 2020 . Engaging Teachers to Co - Design Integrated AI Curriculum for K - 12 Classrooms . 1 , 1 ( September 2020 ) , 12 pages . 1 INTRODUCTION Artificial intelligence ( AI ) education is becoming an increasingly popular subject in the eyes of educators due to the rapid integration of AI technologies in user - facing services and products [ 16 , 34 , 41 ] . Researchers have called for formal K - 12 education to prioritize AI literacy and teach children to interact with AI using a critical lens [ 42 ] . The AI4K12 research community has also published guidelines for what AI concepts K - 12 curriculum should cover , known as the Big AI ∗ Both authors contributed equally to this research . Authors’ addresses : Jessica Van Brummelen , Massachusetts Institute of Technology , 77 Massachusetts Avenue , Cambridge , MA , USA , jess @ csail . mit . edu ; Phoebe Lin , Harvard University , 13 Appian Way , Cambridge , MA , USA , phoebelin @ gsd . harvard . edu . a r X i v : 2 0 09 . 11100v1 [ phy s i c s . e d - ph ] 22 S e p 2020 2 Jessica Van Brummelen and Phoebe Lin Ideas , and calls for AI researchers to help teachers and students understand AI [ 35 ] . As children interact more with AI technologies , it is critical that they are able to recognize AI , understand how AI algorithms work , use those algorithms to solve problems meaningful to them , and evaluate the impact of AI technologies on society [ 5 ] . Teachers of all subjects should feel empowered to teach AI curriculum , yet teachers often feel they lack sufficient understanding to teach AI or the capacity to include more curriculum on top of their existing curriculum [ 39 ] . Despite the proliferation of tools and AI curriculum in response to the recent calls to action , few are widely implemented due to challenges in the classroom that prevent these curricula from being accessible [ 27 ] . In order to introduce new practices , researchers and developers should consider the contexts of teachers and invest in additional supports to facilitate the accessibility of AI resources for teachers . Similarly , AI as a discipline can span many other topics , such as government , journalism , and art [ 10 , 18 , 32 ] , therefore AI should not be confined to just computing subjects such as computer science or data science . Tools and curriculum today often teach AI as an extension of computer science curricula or as standalone curricula that is difficult to adjust to other contexts [ 8 , 25 , 33 ] . Adapting those tools and curriculum then becomes especially difficult for teachers who teach core subjects , including English , math , social studies , and science , and may not have any AI experience . The lack of integrated AI curricula in core subjects has become one of the barriers to exposing AI to students with little access to computing disciplines . In this paper , we partner with K - 12 teachers to design AI curriculum that is integrated with core subjects . We aim to empower all teachers to incorporate AI into their classrooms and leverage learners’ interests for other subjects through a two - day co - design workshop with 15 teachers from different schools . We set out to understand what is necessary and valuable to K - 12 teachers to effectively implement integrated AI curricula , and co - create lesson plans that address those needs and values . Specifically , our research questions are : RQ1 : How might we address K - 12 teachers’ values and considerations when designing AI curriculum ? ( Teaching needs ) RQ2 : How might AI be integrated into core subject curriculum ? ( Integrated curriculum design ) To answer these research questions , we organized a multi - session workshop that spanned two days with fifteen teachers who teach various subjects . The first day of the workshop involved presentations and group discussions to level set everyone’s basic understanding of AI . Between the first and second day of the workshop , participants were asked to complete a brainstorming assignment where they identified curriculum of their own to use as a potential base for an integrated AI curriculum . During the second day of the workshop , we split participants into three small groups to work together and design a lesson plan that integrates AI into a non - computing subject curriculum . The co - design process revealed when teachers design curriculum , they consider four practical needs : evaluation , engagement , logistics , and collaboration . Furthermore , our analysis of the co - designed lesson plans showed opportunities for connections between AI and a core subject , with three points of integration : data , reflection , and scaffolding for ethics . The contributions of this work are ( 1 ) identifying the values and needs of K - 12 teachers teaching AI in the classroom and opportunities to address them , ( 2 ) showing an exemplar integrated AI curriculum as an output of the co - design session [ 6 ] , and ( 3 ) reflecting on co - design sessions involving K - 12 teachers in a remote setting to solicit design considerations of AI curriculum . 2 RELATED WORK To the authors’ knowledge , there are no papers describing a co - design process with teachers to integrate AI concepts into core curriculum , and few papers that purposefully integrate AI concepts Engaging Teachers to Co - Design Integrated AI Curriculum for K - 12 Classrooms 3 into core curriculum . Other related research includes the development of AI education tools and curricula , as well as co - design of other course materials with teachers . 2 . 1 AI Education for K - 12 Many K - 12 AI tools and curricula exist as standalone products or extend computer science curricu - lum . Two widely - used AI teaching tools are Teachable Machine [ 9 ] and Machine Learning for Kids [ 20 ] , which empower learners to develop classification models without needing to program . Other standalone AI teaching tools include Any - Cubes , which are toys to teach machine learning ( ML ) concepts [ 29 ] ; Calypso for Cozmo , which is AI curriculum for a toy robot [ 37 ] ; and extensions for MIT App Inventor , which enable students to develop AI - powered mobile apps [ 23 ] . Each of these tools could be integrated and taught in core classes ; however , are presented as standalone AI tools . In terms of K - 12 AI education research involving instructors , most involve researchers rather than K - 12 teachers as the instructors , and likely miss valuable expertise and feedback from professionals who have worked in the classroom . Nevertheless , some works involving K - 12 teachers include an AI summer program for high school girls [ 38 ] , an AI engineering course for high school students [ 31 ] , and a STEM workshop for middle school students [ 28 ] . Each of these studies saw value in engaging with K - 12 teachers . Other works have also integrated core curriculum content into AI tools and curricula ; however , most of these involve researchers as instructors and are often not in regular classroom settings . For example , one physical education curriculum involves students developing sports gesture classi - fication models with researchers as facilitators [ 43 ] . Another science - based curriculum involves students teaching a conversational agent about animals , and observing it classify the animals into ecosystems with researchers as facilitators [ 21 ] . Although these works are state - of - the - art in K - 12 AI education , it is unknown whether they are suitable for K - 12 classrooms , since they have not been tested in regular classrooms and teachers were not involved in the design process . In our literature review , we found one example of AI curriculum that was both integrated into a core course and designed or taught by K - 12 teachers alongside researchers . This curriculum involved AI and science concepts , and was taught in Australian K - 6 classrooms [ 17 ] . Although this example is insightful , much further research is needed to integrate teacher expertise and address widespread , integrated AI curriculum in K - 12 classrooms [ 39 ] . 2 . 2 Co - Design in Education Although K - 12 AI education has not yet benefited from tools and curriculum co - designed with K - 12 teachers , other areas of education have . For example , in one study , researchers collaborated with teachers to develop new science curriculum materials . Researchers recognized the value in teachers’ K - 12 expertise and in promoting their agency throughout the design process [ 30 ] . Another science curriculum co - design study argued that the process of working with teachers had substantial effects on adoption of the tools and curricula , in addition to bringing social value and innovative ideas [ 13 ] . In order to catalyze such benefits , one paper presents key considerations to co - designing with teachers . These include addressing a “concrete , tangible innovation challenge” , investigating “current practice and classroom contexts” , and involving a “central accountability for the quality of the products of the co - design” , among others [ 27 ] . In our study , we utilize these considerations and present a co - design for AI - integrated core curricula development . 3 METHOD We conducted a two - day co - design workshop with fifteen instructors , ranging from K - 12 teachers to educational directors . Participants completed pre - work before each day’s activities , as well as pre - and post - workshop surveys . The co - design activity was split into three smaller group sessions 4 Jessica Van Brummelen and Phoebe Lin to enable us to better identify differences in value and process of different teachers . This study was approved by the universityâĂŹs Institutional Review Board ( IRB ) . 3 . 1 Participants Fifteen teachers participated in the study , whom we recruited from a mailing list and our personal network . The only inclusion criteria was that they teach or previously taught in a K - 12 classroom and were able to commit to the time and pre - work for the two - day workshop . Seven participants identified as female , four participants identified as male , and the remaining did not say . Their age ranged from 25 to 50 ( M = 40 . 6 , SD = 11 . 6 ) . In our selection process , we prioritized participants who primarily taught non - computing subjects , such as English language arts ( ELA ) , and then participants who taught computer science , with the idea that small group sessions could have diverse perspectives . Their work background is detailed in Tab . 1 . All participants provided informed consent to participate in compliance with our institutionâĂŹs IRB . As the workshop was conducted in groups , we collected participants’ availability and selected times where the greatest number of participants could join . Each day of the workshop lasted 2 . 5 hours . Every workshop session involved two researchers . Table 1 . Participants were selected to represent diverse profiles and / or subject areas . ID Grade taught Subject taught Location P1 6th grade English Language Arts ( ELA ) North Carolina , USA P2 5th grade Science Connecticut , USA P3 6th - 8th grade Computer Science Tunisia , North Africa P4 9th - 12th grade Computer Science Cuneo , Italy P5 9th - 12th grade Chemistry and Math British Columbia , Canada P6 6th - 8th grade STEM Florida , USA P7 6th - 8th grade STEM Florida , USA P8 - STEM Pennsylvania , USA P9 6th - 8th grade Computer Science California , USA P10 9th - 12th grade Career Exploration Rhode Island , USA P11 9th - 12th grade Computer Science Massachusetts , USA P12 9th - 12th grade Library Science Rome , Italy P13 6th grade History California , USA P14 6th - 9th grade Computer Science Turkey P15 6th - 12th grade English as a Second Language ( ESL ) Pennsylvania , USA 3 . 2 Co - Design Workshop The entire co - design workshop spanned two days , Session 1 on the first day and Session 2 on the second day . Session 1 consisted of discussions and a " What is AI " presentation to level set all participants ( see Tab . 2 ) , and Session 2 consisted of the co - design activity and an ethics presentation ( see Tab . 3 ) . Here , we describe our rationale and the activities in detail . 3 . 2 . 1 Session 1 . Before the first session , we asked participants to complete a pre - workshop question - naire asking about participants’ familiarity with AI , whether they have taught AI in the classroom before , and if so , what their experience was . This was to understand their backgrounds and enable us to tailor the content of Session 1 appropriately . Participants were also given detailed instructions on how to install and use Zoom [ 3 ] , Slack [ 4 ] , and Miro [ 2 ] —the tools used throughout the entire workshop . We started Session 1 with breaking participants into small groups on Zoom to discuss why participants thought AI is or is not important to teach their students . Having them describe Engaging Teachers to Co - Design Integrated AI Curriculum for K - 12 Classrooms 5 what and why AI was important allowed us to understand their preconceptions about AI and their priorities as teachers . During the “Let’s learn AI” presentation , participants learned the Big AI Ideas [ 36 ] , categories of AI , and how to recognize what is and is not AI . During the “Let’s learn AI tools” presentation , we demoed four distinct AI learning tools and provided participants with resources and links to explore further . We then used Miro for a card sorting activity [ 40 ] , where we asked participants to generate categories for Google’s A to Z of AI cards [ 1 ] , where categories were limited to subjects taught in the classroom . The card sorting activity showed participants’ enthusiasm for integrating AI topics into every classroom subject , including English language arts ( ELA ) , writing and reading , social studies , math , science , economics , and social - emotional learning . Table 2 . Schedule for Session 1 Time Activity 15 min Introduction 20 min Why AI ? ( Discussion ) 50 min Let’s learn AI ! ( Presentation ) 15 min Break 25 min Card sorting activity 25 min Let’s learn AI tools ! ( Presentation ) 3 . 2 . 2 Session 2 . Participants were asked to complete “pre - work” before Session 2 . Participants had two days to complete their pre - work between Session 1 and Session 2 . The pre - work asked participants to explore the rest of the AI learning tools , select one of the tools to go along with a curriculum they currently use or have used in their classrooms , and identify areas where they see potential to teach AI using the selected tool . Participants uploaded their submissions into a shared Google Drive folder . Participants had access to the workshop Google Drive folder , which contained all of the presentations and resources from Session 1 , at all times , and could also post questions in the workshop Slack group , which was monitored closely by the researchers . From the pre - work submissions , we selected one idea to develop into an exemplar curriculum ( see [ 6 ] ) . For Session 2 , participants were split into three groups of 4 - 5 . Each group was asked to analyze the exemplar curriculum and discuss what they noticed . The co - design activity part 1 then began with each group responding to a prompt asking them to devise integrated AI curricula for specific subjects . We created the prompts from the pre - work submissions and organized the groups such that each would have a domain expert . For example , the group responding to the prompt asking participants to create a curriculum for students who are learning English as a Second Language ( ESL ) had an ESL teacher , who would be familiar with ESL students’ needs . Each group was also paired with a researcher , who provided technical input and answered participants’ questions about AI or learning tools . During the “Ethics & Diversity” presentation , we presented definitions of AI ethics , diversity statistics within the field , and resources for teaching and learning AI ethics . Participants then continued working in their groups on their integrated curriculum in co - design activity part 2 . Every group was successful in producing a first draft of an implementable AI curriculum that integrated with a core subject . The drafts can be found in the appendices [ 6 ] . Lastly , participants discussed why they thought AI was or was not important to teach for a second time , which acted as a reflection and a way to see if their mindset or preconceptions changed after the workshop . Participants were asked to complete a post - workshop questionnaire that asked how familiar they were with AI , how comfortable they felt teaching AI in their class , as well as feedback on the workshop itself and their demographics ( i . e . age , gender , ethnicity ) . 6 Jessica Van Brummelen and Phoebe Lin Table 3 . Schedule for Session 2 Time Activity 60 min Co - design activity part 1 15 min Break 40 min Ethics & Diversity ( Presentation ) 20 min Co - design activity part 2 15 min Why AI ? ( Discussion ) 3 . 3 Data Analysis Our dataset consists of the audio recordings of the entire co - design workshop , participant ques - tionnaires , and the deliverables of each participant , which include their pre - work submissions and their group work during the co - design activity . All audio recordings were transcribed to text and thematically coded by two researchers using open coding . We specifically examined their process , priorities , and challenges . Nine out of 15 participants had never taught AI in the classroom . While some participants had had experience teaching AI , they were interested in learning how to allow non - CS students experience AI and integrate AI into their teaching . Participants came into the workshop rating their own familiarity with AI an average of 4 . 8 out of 7 , and finished the workshop with an average rating of 5 . 8 out of 7 . Teachers also rated their confidence about integrating AI into their own curriculum with an average rating of 5 . 6 out of 7 . 4 RESULTS AND DISCUSSION Our teacher participants teach students with diverse needs . The co - design activity prompted rich discussion with three groups completing three curriculum drafts that integrated AI with a topic of their choice . The topics were : ( 1 ) “How Does Data Affect Government Policy ? ” ( Social Studies Curriculum ) , ( 2 ) “Learn Vocabulary with an AI” ( Literacy curriculum for students with learning disabilities ) , and ( 3 ) “Build an AI - powered Pronunciation Application” ( ESL curriculum ) , as shown in the appendices [ 6 ] . During the co - designing process , all groups shared certain considerations for the curriculum , though each group addressed them differently . In the first section of results , we answer the first research question by outlining what the shared values and considerations were and showing how each group addressed them . We then answer the second research question by showing how each curriculum effectively integrated AI . 4 . 1 RQ1 : How might we address the values and considerations of K - 12 teachers when designing AI curriculum ? We identified four categories of values and considerations that our teachers had while creating the curriculum drafts : Evaluation , Engagement , Logistics , and Collaboration . 4 . 1 . 1 Evaluation . All groups considered student evaluation to be critical to a curriculum . Teachers wanted to see evidence for learning and know their students understand relevant concepts correctly . To do so , teachers first considered their own objectives : “Do we have an end goal in mind , or like , what do we consider a success ? ” ( P9 ) . In the ESL curriculum , P12 referred to the Big AI Ideas to identify the what the group called the “AI objective” . P12 and P15 also frequently referred to the exemplar curriculum , suggesting that teachers require frameworks and scaffolding to devise the AI objective . To evaluate students , P5 and P12 both suggested non - traditional forms of evaluation , such as an “exit interview or on - the - fly assessments where students talk through all of the details , so we get a really good idea from a conversation with them whether they understand what they Engaging Teachers to Co - Design Integrated AI Curriculum for K - 12 Classrooms 7 were doing” ( P5 ) and “an engineer’s log where you’ve got their design and you’ve got to do it all official” ( P12 ) . In these drafts , teachers wanted to evaluate students on their conceptual knowledge , and not on their technical knowledge . 4 . 1 . 2 Engagement . In a K - 12 setting , engagement tends to be particularly challenging , which was a concern for our teachers . P8 and P10 grounded the Social Studies curriculum in law and government discourse by having students review an article around the Crown Act . Introducing context to the project gives students an “anchor” ( P8 ) or hook to prompt further inquiry . Other anchors included asking students the “hard questions” about real - world applications of AI , such as “how do Siri and other personal assistants get to be at that point ? ” and “who used the machine learning and designed the app ? ” ( P7 ) . P5 and P15 both mentioned student - driven learning as a way to leverage students’ interests . For example , “I can see a sixth grader coming in and going , I went to the baseball game and I couldn’t say all these words . And they decide they’re going to do baseball that day” ( P12 ) . Lastly , multiple groups brought up competition and gamification as effective methods of engagement : “the class creates a game that students use to quiz themselves on vocab by trying to be better than the system” and “module 1 can be a rock paper scissors game so that students get familiar with the interface” ( P2 ) . 4 . 1 . 3 Logistics . By logistics , we mean factors that enable the curriculum to be smoothly run in the classroom . Teachers tended to think about how the lesson itself would take shape before addressing which core standards the lesson intended to cover . For example , at the beginning of the co - design , P10 explained that what would be most beneficial was “thinking of how to structure the lesson and what resources we can use to pull in to have the engagement component” . Most teachers struggled with identifying which technology resources and learning tools to use , for example , whether to use Machine Learning for Kids [ 20 ] or Google Quick Draw [ 19 ] . Our teacher participants generally looked to the researcher for guidance , suggesting that tools can be more explicit about when and how they can be applied in K - 12 classrooms . Teachers also paid close attention to grade - level considerations . They felt more comfortable having older students drive their own learning , but recognized even younger students are capable of deep reflection : “posing some challenging questions will vary a little depending on age , but you can get pretty deep with some—even fifth graders . They can get into this , and I think it’s a good way of opening the door” ( P15 ) . 4 . 1 . 4 Collaboration . All groups discussed the value of collaboration . In the ESL curriculum , teach - ers had their students collect data in groups and input the data into multiple models using Machine Learning for Kids . In the literacy curriculum , teachers had every student contribute 10 images to a class dataset to input into Google Teachable Machine . The presence of group work not only helps overcome the need to create many training examples for a machine learning model , but also provides students with opportunities to discuss design and ethics decisions with their peers and teacher . This also aligns with Long and Magerko’s design consideration for Social Interaction [ 22 ] . Teachers also consider how collaboration can be implemented most effectively when designing curricula . For example , P8 described how “it’s important to think about the group size because you want to make sure that students have a voice in the work . And when you start doing large group things those kids that process information internally never get to be heard . ” She went on to describe how , in her experience , “duos [ of students ] work really , really well” and how it is generally better to “go with smaller groups [ of students in the classroom ] , but if you’re using technology [ . . . ] you’re bound by what you have . ” Thus , it is important to consider how AI tools can best facilitate group work to ensure all students have a chance to contribute and learn . 8 Jessica Van Brummelen and Phoebe Lin 4 . 2 RQ2 : How might AI curricula support teachers when they teach AI ? During the co - design , teachers made connections between the core subject material ( e . g . , social studies ) and AI in three main ways : ( 1 ) relating an AI tool or concept to the core subject , ( 2 ) relating content from the core subject to AI , and ( 3 ) noticing overlapping concepts in AI and the core subject . For example , P14 related the AI tool , Arbitrary Style Transfer [ 24 ] , to the core subject of history when he said , “If we give an image as input and try to modify [ it ] according to the old art [ using ] Style [ Transfer ] [ . . . ] This can give us an idea about the history when we look at the picture , [ . . . ] but if you change the picture , the students may understand how people thought in the past” . Other teachers related real - life applications of AI to core subjects , like how YouTube suggestion algorithms can be “tunnel visioned” in what they suggest , similar to how people can be “tunnel visioned” when considering politics or how recidivism risk analysis algorithms [ 7 ] can be related to social studies concepts ( P10 ) . Teachers also often made connections by starting with a core subject concept and relating it to AI . For instance , one teacher connected physics data from one of their student’s 3D printing projects to an AI flight prediction algorithm ( P12 ) . The same teacher also started with an English unit and asked , “What tools do we know that we [ can ] connect to language ? ” , ultimately connecting English to a Shakespeare natural language processing algorithm . Another teacher began with the ELA concept of “argumentation” and connected it to the reflection and “data analysis” processes in AI ( P8 ) . In terms of overlapping concepts between AI and core subjects , teachers often found connections using the Big AI Ideas [ 36 ] . For instance , the Big AI Ideas of Societal Implications and Representation and Reasoning are also core concepts in social studies . The AI concept of iterative development in ML was also directly connected to the social studies concept of iterative opinion making through “go [ ing ] back and forth” ( P8 ) and adjusting beliefs . Using these methods of connection , participants co - designed integrated curricula containing AI concepts and supports for teaching core subject requirements . The curricula contained three main points of integration : ( 1 ) data , ( 2 ) reflection , and ( 3 ) ethics . 4 . 2 . 1 Data . Educational activities often produce data , and AI systems often require data . This provides an obvious access point for AI systems to be integrated into ready - made educational activities . In our co - design workshops , participants used this fact to generate integrated curriculum . For instance , in the exemplar curriculum ( see Fig . 1 and [ 6 ] ) ( which was based on a teacher’s idea during the workshops ) students would produce data as they construct airplanes for a physics activity . The paper airplane dimensions and time - of - flight data would then be used to train a ML model to predict the effectiveness of other potential paper airplanes , combining AI systems and physics concepts into a single curriculum . For the ESL integrated curriculum , students produced data as they were practicing word pro - nunciation , which was then utilized in a pronunciation teaching app . For example , students would create data by recording saying a word correctly ( as guided by a teacher ) and incorrectly , which would then train a classification model for an app developed in MIT App Inventor [ 23 ] . This app would then be used to further help students learn correct pronunciation . Future AI - integrated curricula might consider utilizing the data inherent in core curricula activities , such as speech pronunciation data , to teach AI . This may be through teaching data - related AI competencies , like Data Literacy , Learning from Data , and Critically Interpreting Data [ 22 ] , or through using data to train ML models , which can teach other AI competencies . For the literacy curriculum for students with learning disabilities , participants also used data from core curriculum—vocabulary words—to integrate AI concepts . From the vocabulary words , students would find relevant images , generating further data , and use this to train a classification model . Engaging Teachers to Co - Design Integrated AI Curriculum for K - 12 Classrooms 9 This addressed the aforementioned data - related AI competencies , as well as other competencies , including the ML Steps and Human Role in AI , in addition to relevant English literacy concepts . 4 . 2 . 2 Reflection . Another point of AI integration was student reflection on core curriculum content and AI methods . Many common core standards as well as AI competencies can be addressed through student reflection . For example , the common core standard , 1 - ESS1 - 1 : “Use observations of the sun , moon , and stars to describe patterns that can be predicted . ” [ 26 ] , and the AI concept , “Learning from Data” , could be addressed by reflecting on patterns in a constellation classification model’s input and output . In the exemplar curricula , students were asked to reflect on what did and did not work and why , and on the real - world implications of a biased dataset in airplane development . This reflection addressed both a standard from the common core , 3 - 5 - ETS1 - 3 : “Plans and carries out fair tests in which variables are controlled and failure points are considered to identify aspects of a model or prototype that can be improved” as well as a number of AI literacy competencies , including AI Strengths & Weaknesses , Critically Interpreting Data , and Ethics [ 22 ] . Teachers also used this method to integrate AI concepts into the social studies curriculum . For example , students were asked to reflect on the amount of data in each image category , social norms and peer opinion , people’s ability to access resources , and consensus agreement in this curriculum . These reflection questions address a number of the AI competencies , including Data Literacy , Critically Interpreting Data , and Ethics [ 22 ] , as well as core social studies and English language arts standards , including NSS - EC . 5 - 8 . 1 : Scarcity , NSS - C . 5 - 8 . 3 : Principles of Democracy , NL - ENG . K - 12 . 4 : Communication Skills , and NL - ENG . K - 12 . 7 : Evaluating Data [ 14 ] . 4 . 2 . 3 Ethics . The final point of integration we present is through ethics , which is one of the AI literacy competencies [ 22 ] . Ethics can also be found in many common core standards [ 14 , 26 ] . For example , environmental ethics can be found in life science standards ( K - ESS3 - 3 : “Communicate solutions that will reduce the impact of humans on the land , water , air , and / or other living things in the local environment . ” ) , and engineering standards ( MS - ETS1 - 1 : “Define the criteria and constraints of a design problem [ . . . ] taking into account [ . . . ] potential impacts on people and the natural environment” ) [ 26 ] . Furthermore , social justice principles , which are highly related to AI ethics , are commonly advocated for within standards - based K - 12 education [ 11 , 12 ] . By teaching ethical principles with respect to AI , teachers can also address standards related to the common core . Each curricula designed in the workshops had an ethics component . In the exemplar , students would engage in a brainstorming session about how AI bias affected the accuracy of ML models and relevant implications in the real world . Similarly , the ESL curriculum addressed ethics through discussing AI bias , socioeconomic norms for “correct” pronunciations , and the implications of an AI system judging people’s pronunciations in the real - world . The social studies curriculum was developed around the ethics of the “CROWN Act” [ 15 ] , what it means for students to design AI algorithms to classify outfits and hairstyles as “professional” or “unprofessional” , and how this might affect different people groups . The literacy curriculum for students with learning disabilities addressed ethics through discussion about the accuracy of the image classification system and reasons for any bias observed . Each of these curricula touched on environmental , social justice or other ethical issues , addressing both AI and common core ethics standards . From the workshops , we found that teachers were highly interested in teaching ethics ( e . g . , the social studies curricula was entirely focused on ethics ) ; however , they also seemed apprehensive about actually implementing ethics activities in the classroom . For example , P5 described how there is a “barrier that comes up for teachers” when “ kids often bring ethics up with questions and sometimes teachers will avoid it because theyâĂŹre afraid to say something wrong [ . . . ] even though those discussions would be so rich . ” Nevertheless , P5 also mentioned how if it was in a “planned lesson” , it would be “less scary because you know what youâĂŹre going to say” . Designing 10 Jessica Van Brummelen and Phoebe Lin scaffolding for AI ethics lessons would not only enable core curricula integration , but would also empower teachers to more confidently teach students about ethics . 4 . 3 Reflecting on Remote Co - design Due to Covid - 19 , we organized and ran this co - design workshop completely remotely . Among our activities , the perceived helpfulness from most to least helpful was : Presentations ( 11 votes ) , Co - design activity ( 9 votes ) , Why AI ? and Ethics discussions ( both 7 votes ) , and the Card sorting activity ( 4 votes ) . Participants also indicated meeting like - minded educators from around the world and having access to the list of tools and links to be particularly rewarding takeaways . Overall , we noticed a slight increase in familiarity with AI after the workshop and a high level of confidence for integrating AI into their classrooms , though we did not establish that baseline . When asked if the workshop changed their opinion about teaching AI , teachers cited “introducing AI is the gateway to so much learning . . . now I am seeing and starting to understand the vast world of opportunities that exist for coding beyond being video game designers” ( anonymous ) , as well as seeing the necessity of teaching AI and understanding that AI can be accessible to not “just the computery people” ( anonymous ) . At the beginning of the workshop , we established norms as an entire group to make facilitating easier . For example , setting expectations for “warm” calling to ensure equal representation of voices in the room meant participants expected to be called on to share their thoughts . Other norms included being present , having discussions in breakout rooms , and keeping cameras on . Since most teachers were unfamiliar with teaching AI , we grouped them into smaller groups of 4 - 5 so that each group could have a researcher co - designing with them . However , this meant some teachers worked on curriculum that was unrelated to their discipline . We believed this trade off was necessary given the complexity of the task , and was mitigated by the benefits of collaboration . This setup may have worked better if teachers from the same school joined , and groups could be formed by school . Several teachers also requested more time to play with the AI learning tools and digest the presentations . This could have been addressed by scheduling more time between Session 1 and 2 , so teachers would have more time to complete the pre - work for Session 2 . One suggestion from a participant was to introduce the AI tools using a jigsaw game where every teacher explores an assigned AI tool and presents it back to the group . 4 . 4 Broader Implications and Limitations The above findings contribute to the under - explored need to collaborate with teachers when designing AI curriculum , as well as the potential for AI to be integrated into K - 12 core curriculum . Combining teaching expertise with research expertise through co - design allowed for thinking beyond the context of a research study and into actual classrooms . The adoption of learning tools and AI curriculum is influenced by complex factors outside the locus of control of the people creating the tools ( i . e . designers and researchers ) and the people using the tools ( i . e . teachers ) . However , without teacher buy - in , adoption in the classroom would be impossible , and understanding their contexts is necessary and often understated . Through this co - design , teachers experienced the potential for AI to be embedded in subjects like social studies and English , which could allow non - CS and non - technical learners to experience AI in new classrooms . This method also leverages students’ existing interests in non - technical subjects as a pathway into AI . This work serves as a push for further explorations to expose a wider range of students to AI . While the above findings could provide useful insights to AI education researchers and designers , we acknowledge the limitations of our study . Because our explorations focused on integrating AI with non - technical subjects with a small group of teachers , applying and extending general implications beyond this context should be done with caution . Engaging Teachers to Co - Design Integrated AI Curriculum for K - 12 Classrooms 11 5 CONCLUSION In this paper , we explored the needs of teachers in K - 12 classrooms and how AI education can be integrated with existing core curriculum . We engaged K - 12 teachers and researchers in a two - day co - design workshop , where we co - created lesson plans that embedded AI concepts into curricula for social studies , ESL , and literacy for students with learning disabilities . We found that teachers value curriculum that address evaluation and engagement of students , which could be built into the learning tool or curriculum . Teachers also successfully connected AI with their subject by having students examine subject - related datasets , as well as reflect on real - world implications and AI ethics . Our work highlights an opportunity to increase accessibility of K - 12 AI education by embedding AI into core subjects ( e . g . , English , social studies ) , and reaching students outside of CS and technology classrooms . ACKNOWLEDGMENTS We thank the teachers who were a part of this study ; Randi Williams , who provided co - design guidance ; and Hal Abelson , who made this work possible . REFERENCES [ 1 ] [ n . d . ] . A to Z of AI with Google . https : / / atozofai . withgoogle . com / intl / en - US / about / . Accessed : 2020 - 08 - 13 . [ 2 ] 2011 . Miro . https : / / miro . com / . Accessed : 2020 - 08 - 13 . [ 3 ] 2011 . Zoom . https : / / zoom . us / . Accessed : 2020 - 08 - 13 . [ 4 ] 2013 . Slack . https : / / slack . com / . Accessed : 2020 - 08 - 13 . [ 5 ] Safinah Ali , Blakeley H Payne , Randi Williams , Hae Won Park , and Cynthia Breazeal . [ n . d . ] . Constructionism , Ethics , and Creativity : Developing Primary and Middle School Artificial Intelligence Education . [ 6 ] Anonymous Authors . 2020 . Appendix . http : / / anonymized . for . peer . review . Accessed : 2020 - 09 - 16 . [ 7 ] Richard Berk . 2017 . An impact assessment of machine learning risk forecasts on parole board decisions and recidivism . Journal of Experimental Criminology 13 , 2 ( 2017 ) , 193 – 216 . [ 8 ] Harald Burgsteiner , Martin Kandlhofer , and Gerald Steinbauer . 2016 . IRobot : Teaching the basics of artificial intelligence in high schools . In Proceedings of the Thirtieth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence . 4126 – 4127 . [ 9 ] Michelle Carney , Barron Webster , Irene Alvarado , Kyle Phillips , Noura Howell , Jordan Griffith , Jonas Jongejan , Amit Pitaru , and Alexander Chen . 2020 . Teachable Machine : Approachable Web - Based Tool for Exploring Machine Learning Classification . In Extended Abstracts of the 2020 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems . 1 – 8 . [ 10 ] H . Chen . 2009 . AI , E - government , and Politics 2 . 0 . IEEE Intelligent Systems 24 , 5 ( 2009 ) , 64 – 86 . [ 11 ] Andrea L Dixon , Catherine Tucker , and Mary Ann Clark . 2010 . Integrating social justice advocacy with national standards of practice : Implications for school counselor education . Counselor Education and Supervision 50 , 2 ( 2010 ) , 103 – 115 . [ 12 ] Alison G Dover . 2013 . Getting âĂĲup to codeâĂİ : Preparing for and confronting challenges when teaching for social justice in standards - based classrooms . Action in Teacher Education 35 , 2 ( 2013 ) , 89 – 102 . [ 13 ] Eva Durall , Merja Bauters , Iida Hietala , Teemu Leinonen , and Evangelos Kapros . 2020 . Co - creation and co - design in technology - enhanced learning : Innovating science learning outside the classroom . Interaction Design and Architecture ( s ) 42 ( 2020 ) , 202 – 226 . [ 14 ] Education World Inc . 2020 . U . S . Education Standards . https : / / www . educationworld . com / standards / national / . Accessed : 2020 - 09 - 15 . [ 15 ] Torrie K Edwards . 2020 . From the Editorial Board : Tangled Discrimination in Schools : Binding Hair to Control Student Identity . The High School Journal 103 , 2 ( 2020 ) , 53 – 56 . [ 16 ] Ashok Goel . 2017 . AI Education for the World . AI Magazine 38 , 2 ( 2017 ) , 3 – 4 . [ 17 ] Clint Heinze , Janet Haase , and Helen Higgins . 2010 . An action research report from a multiyear approach to teaching artificial intelligence at the K - 6 level . In 1st symposium on educational advances in artificial intelligence . [ 18 ] Aaron Hertzmann . 2020 . Visual Indeterminacy in GAN Art . Leonardo 53 , 4 ( 2020 ) , 424 – 428 . [ 19 ] Jonas Jongejan , Henry Rowley , Takashi Kawashima , Jongmin Kim , and Nick Fox - Gieg . 2017 . Google Quick , Draw ! https : / / quickdraw . withgoogle . com / . Accessed : 2020 - 09 - 16 . [ 20 ] Dale Lane . 2020 . Machine Learning for Kids . https : / / machinelearningforkids . co . uk / . Accessed : 2020 - 09 - 05 . [ 21 ] Phoebe Lin , Jessica Van Brummelen , Galit Lukin , Randi Williams , and Cynthia Breazeal . 2020 . Zhorai : Designing a Conversational Agent for Children to Explore Machine Learning Concepts . . In AAAI . AAAI , New York , NY , USA , 12 Jessica Van Brummelen and Phoebe Lin 13381 – 13388 . [ 22 ] Duri Long and Brian Magerko . 2020 . What is AI Literacy ? Competencies and Design Considerations . In Proceedings of the 2020 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems ( Honolulu , HI , USA ) ( CHI âĂŹ20 ) . Association for Computing Machinery , New York , NY , USA , 1âĂŞ16 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3313831 . 3376727 [ 23 ] MIT App Inventor . 2020 . Artificial Intelligence with MIT App Inventor . https : / / appinventor . mit . edu / explore / ai - with - mit - app - inventor . Accessed : 2020 - 09 - 10 . [ 24 ] Reiichiro Nakano . 2019 . Arbitrary Style Transfer in the Browser . https : / / reiinakano . com / arbitrary - image - stylization - tfjs / . Accessed : 2020 - 09 - 16 . [ 25 ] Taro Narahara and Yoshihiro Kobayashi . 2018 . Personalizing homemade bots with plug & play AI for STEAM education . In SIGGRAPH Asia 2018 Technical Briefs . 1 – 4 . [ 26 ] NSTA . 2014 . Access the Next Generation Science Standards by Topic . https : / / ngss . nsta . org / AccessStandardsByTopic . aspx . Accessed : 2020 - 09 - 14 . [ 27 ] Jeremy Roschelle , William Penuel , and Nicole Shechtman . 2006 . Co - design of innovations with teachers : Definition and dynamics . In Proceedings of the 7th international conference on Learning sciences . International Society of the Learning Sciences , 606 – 612 . [ 28 ] Bawornsak Sakulkueakulsuk , Siyada Witoon , Potiwat Ngarmkajornwiwat , Pornpen Pataranutaporn , Werasak Surare - ungchai , Pat Pataranutaporn , and Pakpoom Subsoontorn . 2018 . Kids making AI : Integrating Machine Learning , Gamification , and Social Context in STEM Education . In 2018 IEEE International Conference on Teaching , Assessment , and Learning for Engineering ( TALE ) . IEEE , 1005 – 1010 . [ 29 ] Alexander Scheidt and Tim Pulver . 2019 . Any - Cubes : A Children’s Toy for Learning AI : Enhanced Play with Deep Learning and MQTT . In Proceedings of Mensch und Computer 2019 . 893 – 895 . [ 30 ] Samuel Severance , William R Penuel , Tamara Sumner , and Heather Leary . 2016 . Organizing for teacher agency in curricular co - design . Journal of the Learning Sciences 25 , 4 ( 2016 ) , 531 – 564 . [ 31 ] Ahuva Sperling and Dorit Lickerman . 2012 . Integrating AI and machine learning in software engineering course for high school students . In Proceedings of the 17th ACM annual conference on Innovation and technology in computer science education . 244 – 249 . [ 32 ] Jonathan Stray . 2019 . Making artificial intelligence work for investigative journalism . Digital Journalism 7 , 8 ( 2019 ) , 1076 – 1097 . [ 33 ] Danny Tang , Yuria Utsumi , and Natalie Lao . 2019 . PIC : A Personal Image Classification Webtool for High School Students . In Proceedings of the 2019 IJCAI EduAI Workshop . IJCAI . [ 34 ] David Touretzky , Christina Gardner - McCune , Cynthia Breazeal , Fred Martin , and Deborah Seehorn . 2019 . A year in K - 12 AI education . AI Magazine 40 , 4 ( 2019 ) , 88 – 90 . [ 35 ] David Touretzky , Christina Gardner - McCune , Fred Martin , and Deborah Seehorn . 2019 . Envisioning AI for K - 12 : What should every child know about AI ? . In Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence , Vol . 33 . 9795 – 9799 . [ 36 ] David Touretzky , Christina Gardner - McCune , Fred Martin , and Deborah Seehorn . 2019 . Envisioning AI for K - 12 : What should every child know about AI ? . In Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence , Vol . 33 . AAAI , Honolulu , Hawaii , USA , 9795 – 9799 . [ 37 ] David S Touretzky and Christina Gardner - McCune . 2018 . Calypso for Cozmo : Robotic AI for everyone . In Proceedings of the 49th ACM Technical Symposium on Computer Science Education . ACM , Baltimore , MD , USA , 1110 – 1110 . [ 38 ] Marie E Vachovsky , Grace Wu , Sorathan Chaturapruek , Olga Russakovsky , Richard Sommer , and Li Fei - Fei . 2016 . Toward more gender diversity in CS through an artificial intelligence summer program for high school girls . In Proceedings of the 47th ACM Technical Symposium on Computing Science Education . 303 – 308 . [ 39 ] A . Vazhayil , R . Shetty , R . R . Bhavani , and N . Akshay . 2019 . Focusing on Teacher Education to Introduce AI in Schools : Perspectives and Illustrative Findings . In 2019 IEEE Tenth International Conference on Technology for Education ( T4E ) . 71 – 77 . [ 40 ] Jed R . Wood and Larry E . Wood . 2008 . Card Sorting : Current Practices and Beyond . 4 , 1 ( Nov . 2008 ) , 1âĂŞ6 . [ 41 ] Xiaozhe Yang . 2019 . Accelerated Move for AI Education in China . ECNU Review of Education 2 , 3 ( 2019 ) , 347 – 352 . [ 42 ] Michelle Zimmerman . 2018 . Teaching AI : Exploring New Frontiers for Learning . International Society for Technology in Education ( 12 2018 ) . [ 43 ] Abigail Zimmermann - Niefield , R Benjamin Shapiro , and Shaun Kane . 2019 . Sports and machine learning : How young people can use data from their own bodies to learn about machine learning . XRDS : Crossroads , The ACM Magazine for Students 25 , 4 ( 2019 ) , 44 – 49 .