REGULAR ARTICLE Adhesion structures and their cytoskeleton - membrane interactions at podosomes of osteoclasts in culture Toshitaka Akisaka & Hisaho Yoshida & Reiko Suzuki & Keiko Takama Received : 20 June 2007 / Accepted : 5 November 2007 / Published online : 18 December 2007 # Springer - Verlag 2007 Abstract The organization of the cytoskeleton in the podosomes of osteoclasts was studied by use of cell shearing , rotary replication , and fluorescence cytochemical techniques . After shearing , clathrin plaques and particles associated with the cytoskeleton were left behind on the exposed cytoplasmic side of the membrane . The cytoskel - eton of the podosomes was characterized by two types of actin filaments : relatively long filaments in the portion surrounding the podosome core , and highly branched short filaments in the core . Individual actin filaments radiating from the podosomes interacted with several membrane particles along the length of the filaments . Many lateral contacts with the membrane surface by the particles were made along the length of individual actin filaments . The polarity of actin filaments in podosomes became oriented such that their barbed ends were directed toward the core of podosomes . The actin cytoskeletons terminated or branched at the podosomes , where the membrane tightly adhered to the substratum . Microtubules were not usually present in the podosome structures ; however , certain microtubules ap - peared to be morphologically in direct contact with the podosome core . Most of the larger clathrin plaques consisted of flat sheets of clathrin lattices that interconnected neigh - boring clathrin lattices to form an extensive clathrin area . However , the small deeply invaginated clathrin plaques and the podosomal cytoskeleton were located close together . Thus , the clathrin plaques on the ventral membrane of osteoclasts might be involved in both cell adhesion and the formation of receptor - ligand complexes , i . e . , endocytosis . Keywords Osteoclast . Podosome . Clathrin plaque . Cytoskeleton . Cell shearing . Quick - freezing . Rabbit Introduction Osteoclasts are highly polarized cells from morphological and functional viewpoints . During bone resorption , their plasma membrane facing the bone surface differentiates into two different domains , i . e . , the ruffled border and at - taching clear zone . Under in vitro conditions , osteoclasts are able to adhere to various substrates including glass , plastic , bone , dentin , or synthetic crystals . When the cells are plated onto an artificial substratum , they do not organize the ruffled border , which is a complicated membranous apparatus involved in bone resorption . The organization of podosomes , which are defined and described below , has been previously documented ; the cytoskeletal structures in the podosomes and actin belts seem to be crucial for cell adhesion to the substratum ( Evans and Matsudaira 2006 ) . Podosomes on glass are well known to evolve from clusters to belts organized at the cell periphery during osteoclast differentiation ( Teti et al . 1991 ; Aubin 1992 ) . On bone , dentin , or synthetic apatites , osteoclasts form resorption lacunae beneath the ruffled border region , where a dense continuous belt encloses the resorption lacunae ( Turksen Cell Tissue Res ( 2008 ) 331 : 625 – 641 DOI 10 . 1007 / s00441 - 007 - 0552 - x This work was supported by the following grants to T . A . : Grants - in - Aid for Scientific Research ( C ) ( 18592020 ) from the Ministry of Education , Science , and Culture of Japan and the Miyata Research Fund of Asahi University . T . Akisaka ( * ) : H . Yoshida : R . Suzuki Department of Oral Anatomy , Asahi University School of Dentistry , Hozumi 1851 , Mizuho , Gifu 501 - 0296 , Japan e - mail : takisaka @ dent . asahi - u . ac . jp K . Takama Department of Oral Anatomy , Osaka Dental University , Hirakata 573 - 1121 Kuzuhahanazono 8 - 1 , Osaka , Japan et al . 1988 ; Lakkakorpi et al . 1989 ; Vaananen and Horton 1995 ) . This characteristic F - actin belt seems to correspond to the morphological accumulation of individual podo - somes . The organization of this type of peculiar adhesion site in vivo seems to be analogous to the in vitro situation . Consequently , podosomes are not an artifact that is induced under artificial culture conditions . The recruitment of podosomes to the lamellipodium of moving osteoclasts also suggests that they have an important function in cell adhesion . The formation of podosomes adjacent to mem - brane could allow the establishment of new contact sites that anchor the cell to its substratum . Podosomes are considered to be specialized adhesion structures referred to as modified focal adhesions ( Marchisio et al . 1984 ; Teti et al . 1991 ) . Podosomes are the most promi - nent part of the actin cytoskeleton of monocyte - derived cells , such as macrophages , dendritic cells , and osteoclasts , although they were initially observed in certain virus - transformed cells and only later were termed podosomes ( David - Pfeuty and Singer 1980 ; Tarone et al . 1985 ) . These structures are similar in the all the cell types just mentioned . Unlike most typical focal adhesions , podosomes are special - ized structures in which actin filaments converge and ter - minate at the plasma membrane , and the membrane adheres to the substratum . Interactions between the membrane and cytoskeleton are concentrated at podosomes , which contain a wide variety of actin - regulating proteins ( Jurdic et al . 2006 ) . Motile osteoclasts are characterized by a lamellipodium and scattered podosomes . With spreading onto the substrate , the cell loses its lamellipodium and establishes a firm attachment between the facing membrane and substrate via an actin belt comprising coalesced podosomes . A dynamic cycle of actin assembly and disassembly that remodels the actin network in the podosomes under the control of transmembrane signals is central to the attachment of osteoclasts to a substratum ( Marchisio et al . 1984 ; Teti et al . 1991 ; Buccione et al . 2004 ; Linder and Kopp 2005 ; Jurdic et al . 2006 ) . Despite various models to explain the interrelationship between podosomes and plasma membrane having been proposed , little informa - tion about it is available ( Linder and Aepfelbacher 2003 ) because of the dynamic complexity and the difficulty in preserving this association . One disadvantage is that podo - somal actin cytoskeletons are labile and highly dynamic , moving , changing in size , appearing , and disappearing with a life span that varies in length . They are mostly clustered into ordered groups , which undergo constant reorganization during osteoclast maturation . To visualize the cytoskeleton of podosomes as a faithful representation of their true nature ( Nermut 1989 ) , we have presently employed cell shearing combined with quick - freezing , freeze - drying , and rotary replication techniques to obtain high - resolution topography of podosomes and apposing membranes . Materials and methods Cell preparations Osteoclasts from newborn rabbits ( 3 – 6 days of age ) were used for this study . Long bones were dissected free of ad - herent soft tissues and cut into two pieces . The osteoclasts were then mechanically liberated from the bone fragments into medium 199 by using a dental spoon excavator . The cell suspensions were incubated for 30 – 60 min at 37°C in medium 199 containing 10 % fetal bovine serum ( FBS ) and 100 μ l Fungizon in tissue - culture wells containing glass coverslips . The cultures were then washed vigorously to remove non - adherent cells and incubated for an additional 24 h in the same medium at 37°C in a water - saturated atmosphere containing 95 % air - 5 % CO 2 . Some living osteo - clasts cultured on glass were observed by reflection in - terference microscopy . All the animal experiments were approved by the animal welfare committee of our university . Chemicals and reagents The chemicals and reagents used and their sources are listed in Table 1 . Immunofluorescence procedures Substrate - attached cells were fixed with 4 % paraformalde - hyde buffered with 0 . 01 M phosphate - buffered saline ( PBS ) at room temperature for 30 min , permeabilized with 0 . 1 % Triton X - 100 in this buffer for 15 min , incubated with pri - mary antibody for 60 min at room temperature , rinsed in PBS , and further incubated with fluorescein isothiocyanate ( FITC ) - conjugated second antibody . To visualize F - actin distribution , we incubated the fixed cells with rhodamine - phalloidin for 30 min . Intermediate filaments were stained with monoclonal mouse anti - vimentin antibody . For the demonstration of clathrin plaques , rabbit anti - clathrin was used as a primary antibody . Secondary antibodies were goat anti - mouse and anti - rabbit antibodies coupled to FITC . The samples were then mounted by using an antifading agent kit , and images were obtained by means of a Biorad MRC 1024 confocal laser microscope . Green fluorescent protein Cultured osteoclasts in 2 ml opti - MEM medium were trans - fected with 2 . 5 μ g plasmid DNA coding for F actin - green fluorescent protein ( GFP ) by using 6 μ l Lipofectamine reagent according to the manufacturer ’ s instructions . After transfection , the cells were further maintained in opti - MEM medium supplemented with 10 % heat - inactivated FBS . At 626 Cell Tissue Res ( 2008 ) 331 : 625 – 641 24 h post - transfection , GFP - actin - expressing cells were examined under a conventional fluorescence microscope , and time - lapse recordings of cells were performed at 10 - min intervals . After 30 – 36 h of transfection , the osteoclasts showed spot - like podosomes in which fluorescence was clearly visible by conventional fluorescence microscopy . After the time - lapse recording , the cells were fixed with 4 % paraformaldehyde in PBS for 1 h and then permeabilized for 30 min with 0 . 5 % Triton X - 100 in PBS . For controls , transfected cells were stained with rhodamine - phalloidin for F - actin or immunolabeled with anti - GFP antibody . Cell shearing A modified method with zinc chloride ( ZnCl 2 ) according to Avnur and Geiger ( 1981 ) was employed to expose the cy - toplasmic face of the attachment membrane of osteoclasts adhering to glass . The samples were rinsed briefly with ice - cold 10 mM PIPES and then incubated for 3 – 5 min at room temperature in the same buffer , pH 6 . 0 , supplemented with 3 mM ZnCl 2 , 60 mM NaCl , and 0 . 67 mM KCl . To shear cells open by chemical means , we sprayed ice - cold 50 mM PIPES buffer , pH 6 . 0 ( containing 10 mM MgCl 2 ) onto the entire surface of coverslips or apatite pellets by use of a syringe . In some cases , actin filaments and microtubules were stabilized by immersing the samples in the same buffer containing 10 μ g / ml phalloidin and 10 μ M paclitaxel . For mechanical cell shearing , samples were exposed to a jet of tiny cavitation bubbles for ~ 20 s from a microtip probe with a disruptor horn , which , when coupled to a converter , increased the amplitude of the ultrasonic vibrations and transitted them to the cytosolic buffer . An ultrasonic cell disruptor ( Branson Sonifier model 250D , Mo . , USA ) operated at a gentle setting of 30 W was used to apply an ultrasonic burst straight from the microtip probe held at 2 – 3 cm above and an angle of 45° to the samples . After the cells had been sheared open chemically or mechanically , the ventral membrane and its related cyto - skeletons , which were left behind , were fixed in 2 % glutaraldehyde for 30 min . Fixed samples were quickly rinsed in PIPES buffer and finally in double - distilled water and immediately frozen by use of an MF - 2 freezing device ( Eiko , Mito , Japan ) . Quick - freezing The quick - freezing procedure was performed by using the MF - 2 freezing device . After having been washed briefly with double - distilled water , coverslips or apatite pellets were blotted with paper to remove excess water . Osteoclasts adhering to the glass coverslips or apatite pellets were then placed on beta gel , a shock absorbent sheet ( Seagel , Tokyo , Japan ) and mounted at the end of the plunger of the freezing device . The cells were rapidly frozen without cryo - protectant by apposing them , via a spring - driven device , against a mirror - faced copper block precooled with liquid nitrogen . After quick - freezing , the specimens were trans - ferred directly to liquid nitrogen for storage . Freeze - drying and rotary replication Quick - frozen cells were freeze - dried at − 85°C for 2 h at a vacuum below 10 − 5 Pa in a VFD - 300 vacuum device ( Vacuum Device , Mito , Japan ) . Freeze - dried specimens were rotary - shadowed with platinum ( to a 2 - nm thickness ) at an angle of 45° and with carbon ( to a 20 - nm thickness ) at an angle of 90° to the rotating stage of an Eiko FD - 5A freeze - etching unit ( Eiko ) and then examined with a Hitachi H - 7100 electron microscope equipped with a goniometer stage . Stereo pairs of electron micrographs were taken at ±5° or ±10° of tilt . Images from black - white films were converted into digital images by using Adobe Photoshop Table 1 Chemicals and reagents used Chemicals and reagents Source Rabbit anti - clathrin Sigma Immunochemicals , St . Louis , Mo . , USA Mouse anti - beta - tubulin Sigma Mouse anti vimentin Sigma Goat anti - rabbit IgG - FITC Jackson Laboratories , West Grove , Pa . , USA Goat anti - mouse IgG - FITC Jackson F - actin - GFP Clontech , Mountain View , Calif . , USA Green fluorescent protein ( GFP ) mouse IgG Santa Cruz Biotechnology , Santa Cruz , Calif . , USA Goat anti - mouse IgG - rhodamine Santa Cruz Biotechnology Antifading agent kit Molecular Probes , Eugene , Ore . , USA Rhodamine - phalloidin Molecular Probes , Lipofectamine GibcoBRL , Life Technologies , Grand Island , N . Y . , USA Phalloidin Sigma Paclitaxel Sigma Myosin subfragment - 1 Sigma Cell Tissue Res ( 2008 ) 331 : 625 – 641 627 software . All images of replicas were photographically reversed to aid interpretation ; thus , platinum deposits looked white on a dark background . For three - dimensional ( 3D ) visualization , we used faithful representations pro - duced by three different methods : stereo pairs , anaglyph stereo , or the reconstruction of 3D models by using Mex software ( Alicona Imaging , Austria ) . The anaglyph stereo - scopic images were processed by use of Adobe Photoshop software . Each original black / white image was converted to green / blue for the right eye and to red for the left eye . Anaglyph images were obtained by viewing through eye - glasses equipped with blue / red filters . Mex software can calculate the depth image based on the disparity in the stereo pair images . The stereoscopic images were the basis for the creation of the digitally elevated 3D model . These 3D images were rotated in order to obtain highly realistic 3D images of interest to us . Myosin subfragment - 1 decoration for quick - freezing and freeze - drying Sheared - open osteoclasts were incubated for 10 – 15 min at room temperature in a cytoskeleton buffer ( 100 mM PIPES , pH 6 . 9 , containing 1 mM MgCl 2 , ) supplemented with 0 . 5 mg / ml myosin subfragment - 1 ( S - 1 ) . After a brief wash in the same buffer , the coverslips with attached osteoclasts were fixed for 10 min with 2 % glutaraldehyde in PBS . The samples were then washed in PBS , rinsed in double - distilled water , and frozen . Actin filament polarity was determined , according to Svitkina et al . ( 1997 ) , in replica images based on the asymmetry of S1 - decorated actin fila - ments that displayed the helical rope appearance . The thin tapered end of an individual rope segment is directed toward the barbed end , whereas the rounded end points toward the other end , of the actin filament ( Svitkina et al . 1997 ) . Procedure for freeze - substitution of thin sections Quick - frozen samples were transferred directly from liquid nitrogen into the substitution medium in a programmable Leica EM AFS automatic freeze - substitution device ( Vienna , Austria ) . Freeze substitution was performed at − 85°C for 12 h in a 0 . 2 % tannic acid in absolute acetone , and the samples were then transferred into 2 % osmium tetroxide in absolute acetone and kept there for for an additional 24 h ( Akisaka et al . 1997 ) . The temperature was raised gradually to − 35°C , kept at this temperature for several hours , and then raised finally to room temperature . Following several quick washes in absolute acetone , the samples were flat - embedded in an Epon - Araldite mixture . Ultrathin sections were doubly stained with 2 % uranyl acetate and lead citrate and examined with a Hitachi 7100 TEM operating at 100 kV . Results At an early stage of cell culture , osteoclasts exhibit high motility without morphological polarity . Protruding at the leading edge of moving osteoclasts is a broad lamellipo - dium , which is a flat sheet - like peripheral region of the cell filled with a network of actin filaments . According to the degree of proximity of the ventral membrane to the substratum , reflection microscopy showed podosomes or actin belts as gray images , corresponding to the regions closest to the substratum in living osteoclasts ( Fig . 1a ) . Nomarski interference microscopy of living cells also clearly distinguished the podosomes and actin belts from other cytoplasmic structures ( Fig . 1b ) . A few scattered dot - like F - actin adhesion sites , viz . , podosomes , appeared within the lamellipodium where it was devoid of organelles . Fig . 1 a Images of live osteo - clasts . Podosomes in the region ofthe lamellipodiumare observed as black dots in this phase - contrast image ( arrowheads ) . b Podosomes are concentrated in the lamellipodia by Nomarski differential interference optics . Each dot - like podosome ( arrowheads ) becomes clearly identifiable . Bar 10 μ m 628 Cell Tissue Res ( 2008 ) 331 : 625 – 641 Thereafter , the lamellipodium faded gradually , whereas the podosomes increased in number and coalesced to form an actin ring in the paramarginal cytoplasm . Loss of the lamellipodium allowed the lamella F - actin array to extend to the cell edge . With the loss of the lamellipodium , spread osteoclasts exhibiting the actin belt eventually became stationary osteoclasts . To study podosome dynamics , we used rabbit primary osteoclasts transfected with an actin - GFP plasmid . After a 30 - h transfection , we observed GFP fluorescence in scattered podosomes in the peripheral rim of the cytoplasm ; this fluorescence had a pattern similar to that obtained when rhodamine - phalloidin was used to stain F - actin . The time - lapse recording of osteoclasts on glass coverslips showed the podosomes to be highly dynamic , as indicated by the assembly and disassembly that took place with a variable life span that averaged approximately 15 min ( Fig . 2 ) . Once isolated osteoclasts were plated onto the glass coverslips , the moving cells settled down and adhered to the sub - stratum via podosomes that appeared in clusters or were distributed continuously around the actin ring . In the loco - motive stage , the osteoclasts exhibited several morphologi - cal features including cell protrusion , a lamellipodium , filopodia , and developing podosomes . Toward the stationary stage , the cells lost their cell protrusions and lamellipodia but formed peripheral concentric rings of podosomes . The changes in the distribution pattern of podosomes were clearly demonstrated by visualizing actin - GFP . The distribution pattern of F - actin obtained by staining with rhodamine - phalloidin was the same as that seen for actin - GFP . Podo - somes with actin - GFP expression were of various sizes and shapes , ranging from 0 . 5 to 1 . 0 μ m in diameter and being 0 . 5 μ m in height . Assembly or disassembly of podosomes occurred at the periphery of the lamellipodium . Individual podosomes fused with each other to form larger clusters , indicating the beginning of actin - ring formation . At an early stage of cell culture , podosomes in osteoclasts were grouped in several clusters of various sizes and shapes . At the leading edge of the lamellipodium , podosomes assembled de novo . Podosome clusters in osteoclasts evolved into dynamic rings during maturation , finally ending up as peripheral podosome belts in firmly attached cells ( Fig . 2 ) . From our observations , actin rings were derived from podosome belts formed by the fusion of individual podosomes . For a faithful representation of the actin cytoskeleton of podosomes , we employed the quick - freezing / freeze - substitution method . Cytoskeletal structures in cells that had been well quick - frozen and freeze - substituted exhibited a fine interconnecting meshwork of filamentous elements embedded in a granular ground substance ( Fig . 3a ) . These cytoplasmic structures , when contained in podosomes , differed from those in cells processed by conventional electron microsco - py . The density and orientation of actin filaments of the podosomes were clearly distinguishable from those of the other regions of cytoskeleton in the cytoplasm . In parallel freeze - substituted ultrathin sections cut to include the sub - stratum , two different substructures were identifiable : the core and its surrounding portions ( Fig . 3a , b ) . The core components appeared to be a densely packed , branched network of actin filaments containing an electron - dense material . The difference in filament length and organization of the two filament populations allowed the filaments to be classified as ( 1 ) the shorter actin filaments of the meshwork within the core and ( 2 ) the relatively long actin filaments of the surrounding ring portion . Directly frozen cells should allow the precise relationship of podosomes to other parts of the cytoskeleton . Some single podosomes appeared to be interconnected with neighboring podosomes by actin filaments . Radiating actin filaments of the podosomes were incorporated into the cytoskeleton of the lamellipo - dium . Others showed no interrelation with other pre - existing parts of the actin cytoskeleton . The podosomes varied in terms of size , shape , and diameter . In thin sections cut perpendicularly to the surface of the substra - tum ( Fig . 3c ) , actin filaments appeared to terminate on the ventral membrane of the podosome where the membrane was separated from the substratum by a uniform gap of 10 nm . In comparison with chemically fixed cells before freezing , the directly frozen and freeze - substituted cells were superior with respect to the preservation of the fine meshwork of filaments . Conventional chemical fixation appears to destroy the cytoskeletal elements , especially the actin filaments . Fig . 2 Podosome dynamics during actin belt formation revealed by transfection of living osteoclasts with GFP - tagged actin . Fluorescence images were acquired by time - lapse fluorescence microscopy at time 0 ( a ) , 20 min ( b ) , and 30 min ( c ) . The exposure times were chosen to avoid photo - toxicity on observation by fluorescence microscopy . Note that , in the region near the leading edge of the cell , some small podosomes have fused together to form larger podosomes , and that others have formed clusters by the fission of large podosomes . Bar 10 μ m Cell Tissue Res ( 2008 ) 331 : 625 – 641 629 To clarify the membrane modifications of the apposing membrane of osteoclasts on glass coverslips , we used the method of cell shearing combined with quick - freezing and rotary replication to afford panoramic views of an extensive area of the cytoplasmic face of the ventral membrane and its related osteoclast cytoskeleton . Whereas the dorsal membrane , nucleus , and most of the upper layers of organelles and cytoskeleton had been removed to various degrees , the surface of the cytoplasmic side of the ventral membrane and related cytoskeleton including podosomes and actin rings were left behind . Only the ventral mem - branes , podosomes , and their related cytoskeletons re - mained . To compare intact cells with sheared - open cells , we used F - actin staining and clearly observed the fluores - cence of podosomes and actin belts ( Fig . 4a , b ) . Individual podosomes consisted of a dot - shaped F - actin - rich spot , which appeared as being 0 . 5 – 1 μ m in diameter and 0 . 5 μ m in height by fluorescence microscopy ( Fig . 4 ) . In sheared - open replicas , the typical podosome looked to be densely packed with highly branched and short actin filaments surrounded by less densely packed , relatively long actin filaments radiating from its core of up to a 1 – 2 μ m in diameter . Many actin filaments radiating from the core portion of the center of podosomes appeared to have their termini embedded in a globular material that had not been removed by physical or chemical shearing ( Fig . 5a ) . Actin filaments to the ventral membranes usually appeared as linear arrays radiating from the core portion of each podosome . At the early stage of podosomal formation , an individual podosome appeared to be independent of the cytoskeleton of the lamellipodium and not interconnected with other podosomes . As judged from fluorescence images , podosomes were regularly spaced with 1 – 2 μ m between neighbouring podosomes . However , actin fila - ments were seen to be connecting most of the separated podosomes at the electron - microscopic level ( Fig . 5a , b ) . Fig . 3 Quick - frozen and freeze - substituted sections of osteoclasts . a This section was cut close to the underlying substratum and shows several podosomes of various sizes and shapes interconnected by long actin filaments radiating from them . Note that the podosomes contain a core of highly branched actin filaments with electron - dense materials and long actin filaments radiating from their core . b In this section cut parallel to the adhesion surface , the single podosome contains a core of branched actin filaments and actin filaments radiating from it . c This section cut perpendicular to the podosome shows the relationship between the actin cytoskeleton and the membrane . Actin filaments of the podosomes are connected to both the ventral and basolateral aspects of the membranes . Bar 1 μ m Fig . 4 Comparison of F - actin staining ( red ) with rhodamine phalloidin in intact ( a ) and sheared - open cells ( b ) . After the shearing step , F - actin still labels dot or belt - like podo - somes indicating that the podo - somal cytoskeletons are retained on the ventral mem - brane . Bar 20 μ m 630 Cell Tissue Res ( 2008 ) 331 : 625 – 641 With maturation , the clustered podosomes coalesced to the peripheral cytoplasm , assembled into dense continuous actin belts , and formed the highly organized cytoskeleton of the lamellipodium . Vigorous shearing removed almost all of the cytoskele - ton except for that part attached to the cell membrane . With moderately strong shearing , however , cytoskeletal struc - tures involved in cell adhesion such as podosomes or actin rings were retained . This observation was confirmed by F - actin staining on comparison of intact cells with sheared - open cells ( Fig . 4b ) . Actin filaments were closely associated with the membrane particles throughout the ventral mem - brane surface . The exposed cytoplasmic surface of ventral membranes clearly exhibited membrane particles that lay in direct contact with the membrane . In favorable views , the relationship between the underlying membrane and cyto - skeleton in areas of the podosomes was well preserved ( Fig . 6 ) . Actin filaments were not attached to the membrane at their terminal ends . Before terminating in the podosome core , many lateral contacts with the membrane surface appeared to be made along the length of individual actin filaments . Most of the actin filaments were closely associated with and lying above membrane particles and were resistant to shearing , suggesting that they were attached to these particles of heterogeneous appearance ( Fig . 6 ) . These membrane particles became evident in areas of the membrane surface that lacked overlying actin filaments . Actin filaments were approximately 7 – 10 nm in diameter ( corrected for the platinum coating of 2 nm in thickness ) and showed specific patterns of periodic band - ing . Single elongated membrane particles were approxi - mately 8 – 15 nm in diameter and occurred in groups of two or three particles . The actin filaments included in podo - somes or actin belts in the upper layer were thicker than those in the deeper layers , because the deeper filaments could not receive the platinum coating . One disadvantage of the present shearing method was that it was unable to preserve the dorsal membrane of the osteoclasts , which was on the side of the cell opposite that having the attaching ventral membrane . In some specimens in which the dorsal membrane had not been swept away by the shearing , we observed that a part of the cytoskeleton in podosomes was intimately related with the dorsal membrane ( Fig . 7 ) . Podosomal cytoskeletons appeared to adhere to both sides Fig . 5 Cytoplasmic surface of the ventral membrane of an osteoclast after cell shearing and corresponding to the section shown in Fig . 3a . a When the organelles and cytoskeleton are mostly sheared away , only podosomes and their association with fibrous structures remain . Note that the long actin fila - ments radiating from the podo - somes are interconnected with each other , and that a part of the dorsal membrane is retained . The close proximity of podo - somes with remnants of the dorsal membrane can also be seen ( arrows ) . b Three - dimensional ( 3D ) view of a reconstruction showing the same podosomes as in a . The core of each podosome appears to be standing out from the surface of the membrane ( arrows ) . Bar 2 μ m Cell Tissue Res ( 2008 ) 331 : 625 – 641 631 of the ventral and dorsal membranes . Similar observations were made on freeze - substituted cross sections as shown in Fig . 3c . No direct contacts of the end of the actin filaments with the membrane surface was observed in this study . As seen in the freeze - substituted sections , the core portion of the podosomes appeared to consist of branching filaments with amorphous material resistant to physical cell - shearing or detergent treatments . One end of the actin cytoskeleton seemed to be embedded in the podosome core . The material in the core corresponded to the electron - dense structures that appeared in thin sections observed electron microscop - ically . Actin microfilaments , intermediate filaments , and microtubules could be recognized by their sizes and distinctive appearance in the replicas of sheared - open osteoclasts . In the area of the attachment zone , in which the podosomes and actin rings were present , actin fila - ments , microtubules , and vimentin intermediate filaments were widely distributed . Such a distribution pattern was also demonstrated by fluorescence microscopy by using antibodies ( Fig . 8a , b ) . Whereas most of the cytoskeleton was composed of actin filaments , microtubules and inter - mediate filaments were observed less frequently in this area . Immunofluorescence by using a tubulin antibody showed that most microtubules extended from their organizing center into the cell margin , where podosomes were situated . Therefore , the free end of microtubules was directed toward podosomes in the cell margins . However , a few solitary microtubules were located in the vicinity of the podosomes . Several podosomes were distributed along the length of a single microtubule , or just one podosome was targeted by single microtubule during podosome assembly ( Fig . 8a ) . The vimentin network of filaments was distrib - uted throughout the cytoplasm , especially in the lamellipo - dium . Double - fluorescence for F - actin and vimentin showed a clearly different distribution pattern . Vimentin was not colocalized with the F - actin dots representing podosomes ( Fig . 8b ) . In these replicas , microtubules were recognizable by their larger size and distinctive appearance . Although microtubules were not in direct contact with the ventral membrane , they appeared to run through the cytoskeletal structures and make contact with cytoplasmic structures along their length ( Fig . 9a ) . Whereas some Fig . 6 View of the cytoplasmic side of the ventral membrane of a sheared - open osteoclast . Most of the actin filaments of the podosomes have been sheared away , but the remaining actin filaments and membrane - associated particles on the cytoplasmic surface of the ventral membrane can be seen ( arrowheads ) . Individual filaments along their length are connected with the membrane via membrane particles . Bar 1 μ m Fig . 7 A digitally elevated 3D model of the podosomes on the ventral membranes . The podo - somes are connected with each other by actin filaments . Note the close relationships between the cytoskeleton of the podo - somes and the ventral and dorsal ( D ) membranes ( arrows ) . Bar 3 μ m 632 Cell Tissue Res ( 2008 ) 331 : 625 – 641 podosomes were associated with microtubules , a physical interaction appeared to occur between the cytoskeleton of other podosomes and microtubules ( Fig . 9b , c ) . The interac - tion between microtubules and podosomes was retained in a well - preserved form on the ventral membrane ( Fig . 9c ) . To determine the polarity of actin filaments in the podosomes , we employed the method of decorating with S - 1 after cell shearing ( Fig . 10a , b ) . An accurate relation - ship between the underlying membrane and cytoskeleton could not be shown , because this protocol included the use of Triton X , which caused the loss of membranes . Moreover , cytoskeletal components may also have been partially displaced or removed from the membrane , a result of the cytoskeleton having been anchored to the membrane surface . However , the organization of the podosome cytoskeleton appeared to be intact , judging from its morphology in replicas ( Fig . 10a ) . S - 1 - decorated actin filaments displayed a helical rope - like appearance . Actin filaments were oriented with their barbed end pointing inward , and their pointed end facing outward , in the podosomes ( Fig . 10b ) . As mentioned above , thin sectioning was not suitable for the visualization of structures on the cytoplasmic surface of the ventral membrane . However , cell shearing combined with quick - freezing and rotary replication provided valu - able information not available from ultrathin sections . The physically sheared - open cells contained clathrin , as detected by immunofluorescence ( Fig . 11a ) . In sheared - open replicas , clathrin lattices exhibited various shapes and sizes in hexagonal and pentagonal arrays ( Fig . 11b ) . Cultured osteoclasts had two morphologically distinct substrate adhesion sites : ( 1 ) the cytoskeletal podosome and ( 2 ) the part of the plasma membrane coated with clathrin lattices . Clathrin - coated domains were distributed throughout the cytoplasmic surface of the ventral mem - brane of osteoclasts . These domains were coated with cytoplasmic plaques having an array of clathrin polygons . Especially small clathrin lattices or pits were distributed in the region of podosomes and lay close together among the actin filaments ( Fig . 12 ) . Stereoscopic views of replicas clearly showed the clathrin lattice curvature and the coated pits that had formed . Coated vesicles had probably been removed by shearing . In contrast , plenty of the larger clathrin sheets were seen in other regions ; these sheets varied in size , shape , and degree of curvature . Stereoscopic views of membranes without podosomes showed that the majority of these clathrin lattices were flat or slightly curved . The larger clathrin lattices could be subdivided into multiple domains showing different degrees of curvature from each other ( Fig . 11c ) . With vigorous shearing , most of the ventral membrane with its associated cytoskeleton was swept away , with only clathrin plaques being retained on the substratum . The network of the actin cytoskeleton of the podosomes was close to and overlying the clathrin lattices but did not end at the clathrin domains . Usually , clathrin lattices interconnected with each other and formed a larger clathrin - coated membrane region . These observations were made on the ventral membrane surfaces at the marginal area of firmly attached osteoclasts . In sections cut parallel to the substrate , we saw typical extended arrays of polygons composed of hexagon or pentagon substructures . In cross - sectioned images , projections extended at regular intervals , coinciding with the clathrin polygons seen in parallel sections ( data not shown ) . With the loss of the lamellipo - dium , an extensive area of flat clathrin lattices was frequently encountered inside or outside of the actin belts ( Figs . 11b , 13 ) . Actin with an almost network - like appearance in the cytoplasm overlay clathrin plaques but did not anchor the clathrin lattices . Clathrin plaques and podosome cytoskeletons seemed to be independently Fig . 8 a F - actin staining ( fluorescent phalloidin , red ) and immunolo - calization of alpha tubulin antibody ( green ) . Most microtubules are derived from the organization center , but a few of them are free . Some microtubules appear to be closely associated with podosomes and , in some cases , to have targeted them . b Immunofluorescence staining with vimentin antibody ( green ) reveals a widely distributed network of intermediate filaments . Podosomes with actin dots ( red ) exhibit interactions with these vimentin intermediate filaments . Bar 10 μ m Cell Tissue Res ( 2008 ) 331 : 625 – 641 633 stabilized . Under careful observation of thin sections , we could find clathrin lattices in regions where the cytoplasmic surface of the membrane was closely apposed to the substratum . In thin sections , close to the surface of the cytoplasmic face of the ventral membrane , a wide variety of sizes and shapes of clathrin lattices was revealed . In sections cut parallel to the substrate , typical extended arrays of polygons composed of hexagon or pentagon substructures were seen . In their cross - sectioned images , projections extended at regular intervals , coinciding with clathrin polygons seen in parallel sections ( data not shown ) . Discussion Podosomes are well established as being organelles important for not only cell adhesion , but also signal transduction . During the migration of osteoclasts in culture , Fig . 9 a In this sheared - open cell , podosomes , microtubules , and other cytoskeletal elements within the lamellipodium can be clearly identified ( for a similar pattern of microtubule distribu - tion , see Fig . 8 ) . b Microtubules lie above the membrane par - ticles without any contact with them ( arrowheads ) . Note the clathrin plaques ( arrows ) . c Two microtubules cross over each other and appear to target the podosomes . Clathrin plaques are not in direct contact with microtubules in this digitally elevated 3D model . A free mi - crotubule ( arrowheads ) appears to be in direct contact with the core portion of a podosome ( P ) . Bar 1 μ m 634 Cell Tissue Res ( 2008 ) 331 : 625 – 641 podosomes are initially formed adjacent to membrane protrusions from the lamellipodium and can allow the establishment of new contact sites that anchor the cells . This suggestion is supported by the finding that the absence of the podosome regulator WASp or gelsolin in osteoclasts results in motility defects ( Linder et al . 2000a , b ) . The actin belts are relatively stable , but as a whole , the individual podosomes are short - lived . Podosome are also highly dynamic structures with a half - life of approximately 2 min ( Destaing et al . 2003 ) . Fluorescence recovers completely in photobleached podosomes within 2 min , and actin turnover in the core is two to three times higher than the life span of podosomes . Individual podosomes fuse to give rise to a continuous actin belt . Whether the organization of the actin belt on bone is derived from podosomes is controversial . The actin belt on bone comprises structural units clearly related to individual podosomes , which differ mainly in their densities and degree of inter - connectivity from the podosome belt observed on glass . Our GFP study has also confirmed that podosomes appear or disappear within a few minutes , as seen in macrophages transfected by GFP - tagged actin ( Destaing et al . 2003 ; Saltel et al . 2004 ) . Shearing cells open by jet - streaming of the buffer or sonication removes the basolateral membrane and cytoplas - mic structures , yet appears to leave the podosomal and related cytoskeletons reasonably intact . The presence of the membrane left behind after shearing is required to retain the cytoskeleton , and its removal leads to the loss of the cyto - skeleton ( Nermut 1989 ; Nermut et al . 1991 ) . After vigorous shearing , only the podosome or actin belt cytoskeleton can be retained in osteoclasts . The underlying membrane and podosomes or actin belts are also well preserved . As to the relationship between actin filaments and the underlying membrane , similar results have been obtained for typical focal contacts in fibroblasts ( Samuelsson et al . 1993 ) . Our results show that most actin filaments radiating from the core of podosomes connect the underlying membrane via aggregates of membrane particles distributed on the cytoplasmic surface of the apposing membrane of osteo - clasts . These membrane particles are heterogeneous in appearance and form groups of two or three particles . In regions of membrane devoid of filaments , a linear array of membrane particles has often been observed , strongly suggesting that these particles had been in contact with an individual actin filament . These particles might therefore represent structures that remain at podosomes when the actin filaments have been removed by shearing . Although most of the organized cytoskeleton in podosomes is intermingled with the actin network of the lamellipodium , some podosomes are independent of the pre - existing actin network . In the lamellipodium of well - spread osteoclasts , the newly polymerized actin network occurs de novo . This de novo polymerization does not appear to extend the pre - existing actin network of the lamellipodium . Even neigh - boring podosomes are clearly separated from each other , as seen in fluorescence images obtained by F - actin staining ; however , these podosomes are actually interconnected via thin actin filaments when viewed at the electron - microscopic level . Previous studies of the molecular organization of podosomes have led to various models for actin cytoskel - eton - membrane interactions at the podosomes , but the relationship to the ventral membrane has not been eluci - Fig . 10 Polarity of actin filaments decorated with myosin S1 . a The polarity of the actin filaments in the podosomes can be clearly seen . The decorated actin filaments have a helical rope - like appearance . Bar 1 μ m . b Individual actin filaments are oriented with their barbed end directed toward the center of the podosomes ( arrowheads ) . Bar 0 . 5 μ m Cell Tissue Res ( 2008 ) 331 : 625 – 641 635 dated at the molecular level ( Gavazzi et al . 1989 ; Teti et al . 1991 ; Linder and Aepfelbacher 2003 ; Jurdic et al . 2006 ; Spinardi and Marchisio 2006 ) . Podosomes are recognized as dot - like structures by rhodamine - phallodin staining for F - actin . Further , immunofluorescence studies have shown that podosomes appear to consist of a central core of F - actin with actin - regulated proteins surrounding this core in a ring - like fashion ( Marchisio et al . 1984 ; Luxenburg et al . Fig . 11 a F - actin staining ( fluorescent phalloidin , red ) and clathrin immunolocalization ( green ) . After cell shearing , clathrin labeling can be seen near the podosomes , outside and inside the actin belts . The clathrin labeling sometimes appears as continuous lines . Bar 10 μ m . b Numerous clathrin plaques are observed on the ventral membranes of the lamellipodium . The narrow cytoplasmic spaces of the membrane among flat clathrin lattices provide the attachment sites for the actin filaments and membranous structures . Bar 1 μ m . c A pleomorphic and larger clathrin plaque . Each domain appeared to have a different degree of curvature . Lattices ( arrows ) can be observed planar to deeply invaginated clathrin . Several pre - existing clathrin plaques appear to have merged into one large clathrin . In addition , incomplete polygons are found at the margin of the clathrin lattice ; this suggests the progressive assembly of new polygons and the growth in the size of the lattice . Bar 1 μ m Fig . 12 a Small clathrin pits or vesicles are often encountered on the membrane among the actin filaments radiating from the podosome core . Seven podosomes ( P1 – P7 ) were iden - tified in this figure . Bar 1 μ m . b Enlarged view of the boxed area in a showing one slightly curved clathrin lattice and two deeply invaginated clathrin pits . The actin filaments do not ter - minate at the clathrin lattices . Bar 0 . 1 μ m 636 Cell Tissue Res ( 2008 ) 331 : 625 – 641 2007 ) . Actin microfilaments terminate at the cytoplasmic surface of these adhesion sites . The cytoplasmic part of the adhesion site contains many different components , but the major constituents are multiple cell - surface molecules that include several members of the integrin super family , which mediate the adhesion of cells to extracellular matrix proteins ( Lakkakorpi et al . 1993 ; Luxenburg et al . 2006 ) . The integrin subunit or its isolated cytoplasmic domain binds to talin and actinin , suggesting that either or both connections provide a linkage between matrix proteins and cytoplasmic components and , thereby , with the actin cytoskeleton ( Zambonin - Zallone et al . 1989 ; Luxenburg et al . 2006 ) . Various molecules , such as actin - binding or cross - linking proteins , are present in the core and ring portion of the podosomes . The molecular interrelationship between the core and ring is still controversial . Arp2 / 3 , alpha actinin , vinculin , talin , paxillin , integrin , and other proteins are expected to localize at the site of podosomes ( review by Linder and Aepfelbacher 2003 ; Linder and Kopp 2005 ; Evans and Matsudaira 2006 ) . Therefore , membrane particles revealed by quick - freezing and rotary replication may represent transmembrane proteins such as actin - associated proteins . At the focal contact of fibroblasts , vinculin , talin , and beta integrin are assembled into membrane particles ( Samuelsson et al . 1993 ) . At this point , we are currently trying to conduct immunolabeling com - bined with shearing methods to determine the nature of these membrane particles in osteoclasts . The interaction of actin filaments with the ventral membrane surface occurs along the length of the filaments via membrane - associated particles in the lamellipodium of nerve growth cones ( Lewis and Bridgman 1992 ) . Similar actin filaments associated with membrane particles have been described in Xenopus focal contacts ( Samuelsson et al . 1993 ) , myocytes ( Samuelsson et al . 1996 ) , and neuromus - cular junctions ( Luther et al . 1996 ) . At the leading edge of the lamellipodium , the filament tips appear to interact with the membrane . Filaments radiating from the leading edge appear to have their free ends embedded in Triton - insoluble globular materials ( Lewis and Bridgman 1992 ) . Our results show that most podosomal actin filaments are anchored to membrane - associated particles , which appear to mediate several lateral attachments of actin filaments to the ventral membrane at podosomes . Presumably , the attachment laterally to the membrane via membrane particles at the podosomes suggests that their barbed ends may be free to branch or elongate . To our knowledge , the polarity of actin filaments within the podosome core has not been previously established . This polarity has been presently defined by visualization of sheared - open replicas after having decorat - ed them with myosin subfragment S - 1 ( Heuser and Cooke 1983 ; Verhovsky et al . 1997 ) . As regarding the polarity of actin filaments in the podosomes , one prediction is that their barbed ends may be oriented toward the membrane . Therefore , we would expect that the actin filaments would provide the tension to push the membrane and to create cell - surface protrusions . Our observations , however , show that the barbed ends of S - 1 - decorated actin filaments are actually oriented toward the core of the podosomes in which actin polymerization drives protrusions at the site of Fig . 13 Cytoplasmic membrane surface of podosomes , actin belts , and other membrane domains . Shearing procedures removed most of the cytoskele - tons inside the actin belt , but the cytoskeletons of podosomes and the other membrane domains were retained . After removal of the cytoskeletons , the mem - brane - associated particles be - came evident on the exposed cytoplasmic surface of the membranes ( arrowheads pe - ripheral region of the cell ) . Bar 1 μ m Cell Tissue Res ( 2008 ) 331 : 625 – 641 637 podosomes . In this process , actin subunits would be added to the barbed end of a filament that pushes against the podosome core . The formation and maintenance of the actin cytoskeleton at podosomes require the dynamic equilibrium between the polymerization and depolymerization of actin filaments . A large number of actin - binding proteins control the length and intensity of actin filaments within the podosomes . The localization of actin regulators such as Arp2 / 3 at the core portion indicates that actin branching occurs within it ( Linder et al . 2000a , b ; Burns et al . 2001 ; Kaverina et al . 2003 ) . The initial nucleation step of actin filaments is driven by the activation of the Arp2 / 3 complex and results in the formation of new branches on pre - existing filaments . The localization of this type of actin regulator at the core portion is consistent with dynamic actin reorganization . The actin ring in the surrounding portion of the core contains G - and F - actin and would thus be expected to serve as storage site for rapid actin filament formation ( Akisaka et al . 2001 ; Destaing et al . 2003 ) . Such a surrounding portion may represent an actin reservoir from which G - actin can be released and then re - incorporated into filaments of the podosome . Gelsolin also binds to actin filaments and shortens them . The difference in filament length and organization of the two filament populations that we have observed suggests that they may differ in stability . Long actin filaments appear to be more stable than shorter ones in filament networks ( Cooper 1991 ) . Actin filaments can form parallel bundles and branching networks . In two treadmil - ling models for actin turnover in lamellipodial protrusions , actin filaments are oriented with their barbed ends toward the cell margin ; polymerization is expected to occur at the front of the cell edge , and depolymerization toward the rear of the lamellipodium ( Svitkina et al . 1997 ) . In the case of the podosome , podosomes can be clearly distinguished from an F - actin - rich core and are surrounded by G - actin monomers and , to a lesser extent , by F - actin on a molecular basis ( Akisaka et al . 2001 ; Destaing et al . 2003 ) . The highest density of actin filaments is at the podosome core , and the barbed ends of these filaments point toward the core portion , thus forming an actin density gradient within the podosome . Actin - rich podosomes are observed con - stantly during cell adhesion and display an actin concen - tration gradient . This finding seems to be more consistent with the treadmilling model . Morphological similarity is seen between the membrane - substratum interaction at podosomes and lamellipodium . We postulate that treadmil - ling also occurs at the podosomal attachment of osteoclasts . In a wide variety of cells , microtubules and actin filament networks cooperate functionally during cell adhe - sion and migration . Various molecules have been implicat - ed in the relationship between microtubules and the actin cytoskeleton ( Goode et al . 2000 ; Kaverina et al . 2002 ) . Microtubules seem to be correlated with adhesion - complex turnover and adhesion release ( Kaverina et al . 1999 ) . Previous studies have ruled out that podosomal formation , patterning , and fusion or fission rates of precursors are regulated by the microtubular system ( Babb et al . 1997 ; Linder et al . 2000a , b ; Destaing et al . 2003 ; Evans et al . 2003 ) . Although most microtubules were derived from the microtubule organizing center , where the centrosome is located near the nucleus , a few are derived from non - centrosomal microtubules ( Keating et al . 1997 ; Vorobjev et al . 1997 ) . The presence of free microtubules indicates the rapidity of microtubule turnover . In the case of osteoclasts , similar non - centrosomal free microtubules are distributed in the podosomal and lamellipodial regions . Although direct interactions of microtubules with podosomes have never been observed , Linder et al . ( 2000a , b ) have reported that the assembly of podosomes is dependent on an intact microtubule system in macrophages . Judging from the functional similarity between focal adhesions and podo - somes , microtubule “ plus ” ends may target podosomes ( Vorobjev et al . 1997 ; Kaverina et al . 1999 ; Linder et al . 2000a , b ) . Evans et al . ( 2003 ) have also found that many podosomes are distributed along the length of a single microtubule , or a single podosome is intersected by several microtubules . Microtubule acetylation is highly regulated with respect to podosome patterning or stabiliza - tion during osteoclastgenesis ( Destaing et al . 2005 ) . In our present study , not only were several podosomes distributed along the length of a microtubule , but also microtubules were bound to the actin network of the podosomes , as seen in the ultrastructural stereoscopic images of sheared - open osteoclasts . These observations indicate the direct interac - tion of microtubules and the actin cytoskeleton of the podosomes . The present study has shown that vimentin intermediate filaments are organized in the dense network in the lamellipodia . Similar results have been obtained in previous investigations ( Marchisio et al . 1984 ; Tarone et al . 1985 ) . Double - fluorescence staining for F - actin and vincu - lin has shown a clearly different distribution pattern . Vimentin filaments are not directly involved in the the podosome structure as an F - actin spot . On the other hand , Correia et al . ( 1999 ) have reported that the fimbrin - vimentin interaction in which fimbrin binds a vimentin subunit , and not a filament , might play an early role in the assembly of actin and vimentin in podosomes . Therefore , the interaction with vimentin filaments remains unresolved . Nitsch et al . ( 1989 ) and Ochoa et al . ( 2000 ) have reported a narrow tubular invagination of the ventral membrane at podosomes ; this invagination is directed perpendicularly to the substratum and surrounded by an actin cytoskeleton , suggesting a functional link between the cells and their substratum . Consequently , this tubular invagination in the core of podosomes may be a site of 638 Cell Tissue Res ( 2008 ) 331 : 625 – 641 endocytosis . In contrast , from our careful observations , we have been unable to detect , in either directly quick - frozen freeze - substituted thin sections or rotary shadowing repli - cas , such tubular invaginations within the podosomes in rabbit osteoclasts . As is well known , the quick - freezing technique is superior to chemical fixation for the preserva - tion of cell structures and is the method of choice for the preservation of osteoclasts for ultrastructural studies . In sheared - open osteoclasts , small clathrin - coated pits or lattices are constantly observed on the ventral membrane underlying the podosomal cytoskeleton . These clathrin - coated membrane patches and podosomal attachment sites are located close together . The presence of these clathrin patches indicates their additional functional role in podo - somes in which endocytosis is an active process . In addition , our previous studies have shown a clathrin lattice in the peripheral region of osteoclasts cultured on glass or synthetic apatite ( Akisaka et al . 2003 , 2006 ) . Similar obser - vations have been made at the sites of typical focal adhesion ( Larkin et al . 1986 ; Nicol and Nermut 1987 ; Felice et al . 1990 ) and in other types of cells ( Aggeler et al . 1983 ; Maupin and Pollard 1983 ; Woods et al . 1983 ; Robertson and Papadimitriou 1986 ; Pumplin and Bloch 1990 ) . Although clathrin - coated pits play a major role in receptor - mediated endocytosis , various other possible roles of clathrin - coated membranes have been suggested . In receptor - mediated endocytosis , clathrin plaques induce the formation of coated pits and vesicles ( Moore et al . 1987 ; Heuser and Anderson 1989 ) . Under in vitro conditions , the accumulation of clathrin plaques may indicate that receptor - mediated endocytosis ceases because of the strong interaction of receptors with the substratum . Simple receptor - ligand - mediated phenomena observed in “ frustrated ” macrophages included the induction of clathrin assembly on the ventral membrane ( Takemura et al . 1986 ; Nicol and Nermut 1987 ) . In addition , there is a possibility that the association of clathrin lattices with sites of attachment might make them preferential sites for the turnover of membrane proteins and might thereby direct components necessary for differentia - tion to sites of cell attachment ( Pumplin 1989 ) . In sheared cells , extensive areas of clathrin patches appear at the ventral membrane lying close to the substratum , indicating their resistance to shearing . The present study has also confirmed the accumulation of a large number of clathrin patches within the peripheral cytoplasmic membrane inside and / or outside of actin belts . These patches are considerably larger than the small patches in the podosomes . Although the site of clathrin assembly usually controls the size of clathrin plaques , the margins of the extensive arrays of clathrin sheets indicate the potential for supporting the polymeriza - tion of an unlimited number of their polygon substructures ( Mahaffey et al . 1989 ) . These clathrin polygons are too lage to be converted into a single coated pit or vesicle and seem to be the actual sites of adhesion of the osteoclast to the substratum . The presence of clathrin plaques may also pro - vide a site on the membrane for the formation of receptor - ligand complexes . References Aggeler J , Takemura R , Werb Z ( 1983 ) High - resolution three - dimensional views of membrane - associated clathrin and cytoskel - eton in critical - point - dried macrophages . J Cell Biol 97 : 1452 – 1458 Akisaka T , Miyaji T , Yoshida H , Inoue M ( 1997 ) Ultrastructure of quick - frozen and freeze - substituted chick osteoclasts . J Anat 190 : 433 – 445 Akisaka T , Yoshida H , Inoue S , Shimizu K ( 2001 ) Organization of cytoskeletal F - actin , G - actin , and gelsolin in the adhesion structures in cultured osteoclast . J Bone Miner Res 16 : 1248 – 1255 Akisaka T , Yoshida H , Suzuki R , Shimizu K , Takama K ( 2003 ) Clathrin sheets on the protoplasmic surface of ventral membranes of osteoclasts in culture . J Electron Microsc 52 : 535 – 543 Akisaka T , Yoshida H , Suzuki R ( 2006 ) The ruffled border and attachment regions of the apposing membrane of resorbing osteoclasts as visualized from the cytoplasmic face of the membrane . J Electron Microsc 55 : 53 – 61 Aubin JE ( 1992 ) Osteoclast adhesion and resorption : the role of podosomes . J Bone Miner Res 7 : 365 – 368 Avnur Z , Geiger B ( 1981 ) Substrate - attached membranes of cultured cells : isolation and characterization of ventral cell membranes and the associated cytoskeleton . J Mol Biol 153 : 361 – 379 Babb SG , Matsudaira P , Sato M , Correia I , Lim SS ( 1997 ) Fimbrin in podosomes of monocyte - derived osteoclasts . Cell Motil Cyto - skelet 37 : 308 – 325 Buccione R , Orth JD , McNiven MA ( 2004 ) Foot and mouth : podosomes , invadopodia and circular dorsal ruffles . Nat Rev Mol Cell Biol 5 : 647 – 657 Burns S , Thrasher AJ , Blundell TM , Machesky L , Jones GE ( 2001 ) Configurationofhumandendritic cell cytoskeletonbyRhoGTPases , the WAS protein , and differentiation . Blood 98 : 1142 – 1149 Cooper JA ( 1991 ) The role of actin polymerization in cell motility . Annu Rev Physiol 53 : 585 – 605 Correia I , Chu D , Chou Y - H , Goldman RD , Matsudaira P ( 1999 ) Integrating the actin and vimentin cytoskeletons : adhesion - dependent formation of fimbrin - vimentin complexes in macro - phages . J Cell Biol 146 : 831 – 842 David - Pfeuty T , Singer SJ ( 1980 ) Altered distributions of the cyto - skeletal proteins vinculin and alpha - actinin in cultured fibroblasts transformed by Rous sarcoma virus . Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 77 : 6687 – 6691 Destaing O , Saltel F , Geminard J - C , Jurdic P , Bard F ( 2003 ) Podosomes display actin turnover and dynamic self - organization in osteoclasts expressing actin - green fluorescent protein . Mol Biol Cell 14 : 407 – 416 Destaing O , Saltel F , Gilquin B , Chabadel A , Khochbin S , Ory S , Jurdic P ( 2005 ) A novel Rho - mDia2 - HDAC6 pathway controls podosome patterning through microtubule acetylation in osteo - clasts . J Cell Sci 118 : 2901 – 2911 Evans JG , Matsudaira P ( 2006 ) Structure and dynamics of macro - phage podosomes . Eur J Cell Biol 85 : 145 – 149 Evans JG , Correia I , Krasavina O , Watson N , Matsudaira P ( 2003 ) Macrophage podosomes assemble at the leading lamella by growth and fragmentation . J Cell Biol 161 : 697 – 705 Felice GR , Eason P , Nermut MV , Kellie S ( 1990 ) pp60 v - src association with the cytoskeleton induces actin reorganization without affecting polymerization status . Eur J Cell Biol 52 : 47 – 59 Cell Tissue Res ( 2008 ) 331 : 625 – 641 639 Gavazzi I , Nermut MV , Marchisio PC ( 1989 ) Ultrastructure and gold - immunolabelling of cell - substratum adhesions ( podosomes ) in RSV - transformed BHK cells . J Cell Sci 94 : 85 – 99 Goode BL , Drubin DG , Barness G ( 2000 ) Functional cooperation between the microtubule and actin cytoskeletons . Curr Opin Cell Biol 12 : 63 – 71 Heuser JE , Anderson RGW ( 1989 ) Hypertonic media inhibit receptor - mediated endocytosis by blocking clathrin - coated pit formation . J Cell Biol 108 : 389 – 400 Heuser JE , Cooke R ( 1983 ) Actin - myosin interactions visualized by the quick - freeze , deep - etch replica technique . J Mol Biol 169 : 97 – 122 Jurdic P , Saltel F , Chabadel A , Destaing O ( 2006 ) Podosome and sealing zone : specificity of the osteoclast model . Eur J Cell Biol 85 : 195 – 202 Kaverina I , Krylyshkina O , Small JV ( 1999 ) Microtubule targeting of substrate contacts promotes their relaxation and dissociation . J Cell Biol 146 : 1033 – 1044 Kaverina I , Krylyshkina O , Small JV ( 2002 ) Regulation of substrate adhesion dynamics during cell motility . Int J Biochem Cell Biol 34 : 746 – 761 Kaverina I , Stradal TEB , Gimona M ( 2003 ) Podosome formation in cultures A7r5 vascular smooth muscle cells requires Arp2 / 3 - dependent de - novo actin polymerization at discrete microdo - mains . J Cell Biol 116 : 4915 – 4924 Keating TJ , Peloquin JG , Rodionov VI , Momcilovic D , Borisy GG ( 1997 ) Microtubule release from the centrosome . Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 94 : 5078 – 5083 Lakkakorpi P , Tuukkanen J , Hentunen T , Jarvelin K , Vaananen HK ( 1989 ) Organization of osteoclast microfilaments during the attachment to bone surface in vitro . J Bone Miner Res 4 : 817 – 825 Lakkakorpi PT , Helfrich MH , Horton MA , Vaananen HK ( 1993 ) Spatial organization of microfilaments and vitronectin receptor , alpha v beta 3 , in osteoclasts . J Cell Sci 104 : 663 – 670 Larkin JM , Donzell WC , Anderson RGW ( 1986 ) Potassium - dependent assembly of coated pits : new coated pits form as planar clathrin lattices . J Cell Biol 103 : 2619 – 2627 Lewis AK , Bridgman PC ( 1992 ) Nerve growth cone lamellipodia contain two populations of actin filaments that differ in organiza - tion and porality . J Cell Biol 119 : 1219 – 1243 Linder S , Aepfelbacher M ( 2003 ) Podosomes : adhesion hot - spots of invasive cells . Trends Cell Biol 13 : 376 – 385 Linder S , Kopp P ( 2005 ) Podosomes at a glance . J Cell Sci 118 : 2079 – 2082 Linder S , Higgs H , Hufner K , Schwarz K , Pannicke U , Aepfelbacher M ( 2000a ) The polarization defect of Wiskott - Aldrich syndrome macrophages is linked to dislocalization of the Arp2 / 3 complex . J Immunol 165 : 221 – 225 Linder S , Hufner K , Wintergerst U , Apefelbacher M ( 2000b ) Microtubule - dependent formation of podosomal adhesion struc - tures in primary human macrophages . J Cell Sci 113 : 4165 – 4176 Luther PW , Samuelsson SJ , Bloch RJ , Pumplin DW ( 1996 ) Ctoskeleton - membrane interactions at the postsynaptic density of Xenopus neuromuscular junctions . J Neurocytol 25 : 417 – 427 Luxenburg C , Addadi L , Geiger B ( 2006 ) The molecular dynamics of osteoclast adhesions . Eur J Cell Biol 85 : 203 – 211 Luxenburg C , Geblinger D , Klein E , Anderson K , Hanein D , Geiger B , Addadi L ( 2007 ) The architecture of the adhesive apparatus of cultured osteoclasts : from podosome formation to sealing zone assembly . PLos One 2 : e179 Mahaffey DT , Moore MS , Brodsky FM , Anderson RGW ( 1989 ) Coat proteins isolated from clathrin coated vesicles can assemble into coated pits . J Cell Biol 108 : 1615 – 1624 Marchisio PC , Cirillo D , Naldini L , Primavera MV , Teti A , Zambonin - Zallone A ( 1984 ) Cell - substratum interaction of cultured avian osteoclasts is mediated by specific adhesion structures . J Cell Biol 99 : 1696 – 1705 Maupin P , Pollard TD ( 1983 ) Improved preservation and staining of HeLa cell actin filaments , clathrin - coated membranes , and other cytoplasmic structures by tannic acid - glutaraldehyde - saponin fixation . J Cell Biol 96 : 51 – 62 Moore MS , Mahaffey DT , Brodsky FM , Anderson RGW ( 1987 ) Assembly of clathrin - coated pits onto purified plasma mem - branes . Science 236 : 558 – 563 Nermut MV ( 1989 ) Strategy and tactics in electron microscopy of cell surfaces . Electron Microsc Rev 2 : 171 – 196 Nermut MV , Eason P , Hirst EMA , Kellie S ( 1991 ) Cell / substratum adhesions in RSV - transformed rat fibroblasts . Exp Cell Res 193 : 382 – 397 Nicol A , Nermut MV ( 1987 ) A new type of substratum adhesion structure in NRK cells revealed by correlated interference reflection and electron microscopy . Eur J Cell Biol 43 : 348 – 357 Nitsch L , Gionti E , Cancedda R , Marchisio PC ( 1989 ) The podosomes of Rous sarcoma virus transformed chondrocytes show a peculiar ultrastructural organization . Cell Biol Int Rep 13 : 919 – 926 Ochoa GC , Slepnev VI , Neff L , Ringstad N , Takei K , Daniell L , Kim W , Cao H , McNiven M , Baron R , De Camilli P ( 2000 ) A functional link between dynamin and the actin cytoskeleton at podosomes . J Cell Biol 150 : 377 – 389 Pumplin DW ( 1989 ) Acetylcholine receptor clusters of rat myotubes have at least three domains with distinctive cytoskeletal and membranous components . J Cell Biol 109 : 739 – 753 Pumplin DW , Bloch RJ ( 1990 ) Clathrin - coated membrane : a distinct membrane domain in acetylcholine receptor clusters of rat myotubes . Cell Motil Cytoskelet 15 : 121 – 134 Robertson TA , Papadimitriou JM ( 1986 ) A morphometric study of coated pit formation on the subplasmalemmal surface of murine peritoneal macrophages after adhesion to glass . J Ultrastruct Mol Struct Res 96 : 125 – 135 Saltel F , Destaing O , Bard F , Eichert D , Jurdic P ( 2004 ) Apatite - mediated actin dynamics in resorbing osteoclasts . Mol Biol Cell 15 : 5231 – 5241 Samuelsson SJ , Luther PW , Pumplin DW , Bloch RJ ( 1993 ) Structures linking microfilament bundles to the membrane at focal contacts . J Cell Biol 122 : 485 – 496 Samuelsson SJ , Luther PW , Bloch RJ ( 1996 ) Microfilament - membrane interactions in Xenopus myocytes . Cell Motil Cyto - skelet 35 : 68 – 80 Spinardi L , Marchisio PC ( 2006 ) Podosomes as smart regulators of cellular adhesion . Eur J Cell Biol 85 : 191 – 194 Svitkina TM , Verkhovsky AB , McQuade KM , Borisy GG ( 1997 ) Analysis of the actin - myosin II system in fish epidermal keratocytes : mechanism of cell body translocation . J Cell Biol 139 : 397 – 415 Takemura R , Stenberg PE , Bainton DF , Werb Z ( 1986 ) Rapid redistribution of clathrin onto macrophage plasma membranes in response to Fc receptor - ligand interaction during frustrated phagocytosis . J Cell Biol 102 : 55 – 69 Tarone G , Cirillo D , Giancotti FG , Comoglio PM , Marchisio PC ( 1985 ) Rous sarcoma virus - transformed fibroblasts adhere pri - marily at discrete protrusions of the ventral membrane called podosomes . Exp Cell Res 159 : 141 – 157 Teti A , Marchisio PC , Zambonin - Zallone A ( 1991 ) Clear zone in osteoclast function : role of podosomes in regulation of bone - resorbing activity . Am J Physiol 261 : C1 – C7 Turksen K , Kanehisa J , Opas M , Heersche JNM , Aubin JE ( 1988 ) Adhesion patterns and cytoskeleton of rabbit osteoclasts on bone slices and glass . J Bone Miner Res 3 : 389 – 400 640 Cell Tissue Res ( 2008 ) 331 : 625 – 641 Vaananen HK , Horton M ( 1995 ) The osteoclast clear zone is a specialized cell - extracellular matrix adhesion structure . J Cell Sci 108 : 2729 – 2732 Verhovsky AB , Svitkina TM , Borisy GG ( 1997 ) Polarity sorting of actin filaments in cytochalasin - treated fibroblasts . J Cell Sci 110 : 1693 – 1704 Vorobjev IA , Svitkina TM , Borisy GG ( 1997 ) Cytoplasmic assembly of microtubules in cultured cells . J Cell Sci 110 : 2635 – 2645 Woods A , Smith CG , Rees DA , Wilson G ( 1983 ) Stages in specialization of fibroblast adhesion and deposition of extracel - lular matrix . Eur J Cell Biol 32 : 108 – 116 Zambonin - Zallone A , Teti A , Grano M , Rubinacci A , Abbadini M , Gaboli M , Marchisio PC ( 1989 ) Immunocytochemical distribu - tion of extracellular matrix receptors in human osteoclasts : a beta 3 integrin is colocalized with vinculin and talin in the podosomes of osteoclastoma giant cells . Exp Cell Res 182 : 645 – 652 Cell Tissue Res ( 2008 ) 331 : 625 – 641 641