Actin Interacting Protein1 and Actin Depolymerizing Factor Drive Rapid Actin Dynamics in Physcomitrella patens W Robert C . Augustine , a Kelli A . Pattavina , a Erkan Tu¨zel , b Luis Vidali , c and Magdalena Bezanilla a , 1 a Biology Department , University of Massachusetts , Amherst , Massachusetts 01003 b Department of Physics , Worcester Polytechnic Institute , Worcester , Massachusetts 01609 c Department of Biology and Biotechnology , Worcester Polytechnic Institute , Worcester , Massachusetts 01609 The remodeling of actin networks is required for a variety of cellular processes in eukaryotes . In plants , several actin binding proteins have been implicated in remodeling cortical actin ﬁlaments ( F - actin ) . However , the extent to which these proteins support F - actin dynamics in planta has not been tested . Using reverse genetics , complementation analyses , and cell biological approaches , we assessed the in vivo function of two actin turnover proteins : actin interacting protein1 ( AIP1 ) and actin depolymerizing factor ( ADF ) . We report that AIP1 is a single - copy gene in the moss Physcomitrella patens . AIP1 knockout plants are viable but have reduced expansion of tip - growing cells . AIP1 is diffusely cytosolic and functions in a common genetic pathway with ADF to promote tip growth . Speciﬁcally , ADF can partially compensate for loss of AIP1 , and AIP1 requires ADF for function . Consistent with a role in actin remodeling , AIP1 knockout lines accumulate F - actin bundles , have fewer dynamic ends , and have reduced severing frequency . Importantly , we demonstrate that AIP1 promotes and ADF is essential for cortical F - actin dynamics . INTRODUCTION The actin cytoskeleton is critical for a wide variety of cellular processes , ranging from cell division and morphogenesis to cell polarity and motility ( Pollard and Cooper , 2009 ) . In plants , actin is required for the polarized cell expansion termed tip growth . Tip - growing cells are found in all land plants ( Hepler et al . , 2001 ; Menand et al . , 2007 ) . In mosses , protonemal cells and rhizoids colonize and anchor the plant to the growth surface while acquiring nutrients from the environment . In ﬂowering plants , pollen tubes are necessary for transmission of the male game - tophyte to the ovule for sexual reproduction , and root hairs enhance the surface area of the root to promote nutrient uptake ( Hepleret al . , 2001 ) . Tipgrowth isthereforeacritical processinall land plants because these tissues are required for overall plant ﬁtness and species propagation . The actin cytoskeleton plays an integral role in promoting tip growth ( Hepler et al . , 2001 ) . In particular , constant remodeling of the actin ﬁlament ( F - actin ) network is required . Remodeling is a dynamic process whereby F - actin turnover occurs via polymer - ization , depolymerization , severing , nucleation , as well as large - scale translocation events . Pharmacological studies show that alterations to the equilibrium between F - actin and monomeric actin inhibit the expansion of pollen tubes and root hairs ( Gibbon et al . , 1999 ; Miller et al . , 1999 ; Vidali et al . , 2001 ) , demonstrating that a ﬁne balance of actin assembly and disassembly is required for tip growth . More recently , time - lapse imaging of the cortical actin cytoskeleton in planta provides further support for rapid remodeling of the actin cytoskeleton ( Era et al . , 2009 ; Staiger et al . , 2009 ; Vidali et al . , 2009a ; Smertenko et al . , 2010 ) . Individual actin ﬁlaments undergo stochastic dynamics whereby rapid elon - gation of ﬁlaments is interspersed by severing events ( Michelot et al . , 2007 ; Staiger et al . , 2009 ) that result in the dramatic re - organization of the actin cytoskeleton on the order of seconds . The biochemical properties of actin alone are not sufﬁcient to account for the rapid F - actin remodeling observed in vivo . Thus , it is likely that other factors , notably actin binding proteins , are required to regulate actin’s behavior . Indeed genetic studies support the requirement for a number of actin binding proteins in the expansion of tip - growing cells ( Blanchoin et al . , 2010 ) . These include actin - nucleating proteins , such as formins ( Vidali et al . , 2009c ; Ye et al . , 2009 ; Cheung et al . , 2010 ) and the Arp2 / 3 complex ( Harries et al . , 2005 ; Perroud and Quatrano , 2006 ; Finka et al . , 2008 ) , the ﬁlament - stabilizing ﬁmbrins ( Wu et al . , 2010 ) , actin monomer binding proteins like proﬁlin ( Ramachandran et al . , 2000 ; Vidali et al . , 2007 , 2009b ) , andactin turnover proteins like actin depolymerizing factor ( ADF ) ( Augustine et al . , 2008 ; Vidali et al . , 2009b ) , villin ( Zhang et al . , 2010 ; Zhang et al . , 2011 ) , and actin interacting protein1 ( AIP1 ) ( Ketelaar et al . , 2004 ) . It is tempting to suggest that these actin binding proteins are impor - tant for tip growth by promoting the reorganization of F - actin . However , a recent loss - of - function study demonstrated that my - osin XI is critical for tip growth but does not alter actin dynamics ( Vidalietal . , 2010 ) . Therefore , itisimperativetoquantifytheeffects of actin binding protein loss of function on actin dynamics to understand the mechanism by which these proteins function . The ADF / coﬁlin family is widely regarded as a major cellular mediator of actin turnover ( Bamburg , 1999 ; Maciver and Hussey , 2002 ) . ADF / coﬁlins sever actin ﬁlaments ( Maciver et al . , 1991 ; 1 Address correspondence to bezanilla @ bio . umass . edu . The author responsible for distribution of materials integral to the ﬁndings presented in this article in accordance with the policy described in the Instructions for Authors ( www . plantcell . org ) is : Magdalena Bezanilla ( bezanilla @ bio . umass . edu ) . W Online version contains Web - only data . www . plantcell . org / cgi / doi / 10 . 1105 / tpc . 111 . 090753 The Plant Cell , Vol . 23 : 3696 – 3710 , October 2011 , www . plantcell . org ã 2011 American Society of Plant Biologists . All rights reserved . Andrianantoandro and Pollard , 2006 ; Pavlov et al . , 2007 ) . Sev - ering events can result in rapid disassembly and recycling of actin monomer pools ( Hotulainen et al . , 2005 ) or generation of new barbed ends capable of elongation ( Ghosh et al . , 2004 ) . In budding yeast , severing - defective coﬁlin alleles are less sensi - tive to latrunculin A – mediated disassembly of actin patches ( Lappalainen and Drubin , 1997 ) , demonstrating that coﬁlin’s sev - ering activityisnecessaryfortheturnoverofthesestructures . ADF / coﬁlin proteins are also required for generation of dynamic actin structures , such as lamellipodia ( Chan et al . , 2000 ) and comet tails in Listeria monocytogenes ( Rosenblatt et al . , 1997 ; Loisel et al . , 1999 ) , supporting their role in the remodeling of actin networks . AIP1 , a conserved eukaryotic protein , enhances ADF / coﬁlin’s actin ﬁlament disassembly activity ( Ono , 2003 ) . It is well estab - lished that AIP1 and ADF / coﬁlin interact in animals , plants , and fungi based on yeast two - hybrid screens ( Rodal et al . , 1999 ; Allwood et al . , 2002 ) , genetic interactions ( Iida and Yahara , 1999 ; Rodal et al . , 1999 ) , and afﬁnity chromatography ( Okada et al . , 1999 ) , demonstrating the broad conservation of this interaction . AIP1 has negligible effects on actin ﬁlaments . However , in the presence of ADF / coﬁlin , disassembly occurs at a higher rate than either protein alone ( Aizawa et al . , 1999 ; Okada et al . , 1999 ; Rodal et al . , 1999 ) . While the mechanism of cooperative disas - sembly is still unclear , evidence supports a role for AIP1 in capping the barbed end of ADF / coﬁlin - severed actin ﬁlaments ( Okada et al . , 1999 , 2002 , 2006 ; Balcer et al . , 2003 ; Mohri et al . , 2004 ) , enhancing actin ﬁlament severing by ADF / coﬁlins ( Aizawa et al . , 1999 ; Mohri et al . , 2004 ) , or a combination of these mech - anisms . AIP1’s activity ultimately results in further fragmenta - tion of ADF / coﬁlin - severed actin ﬁlaments ( Aizawa et al . , 1999 ; Okada et al . , 1999 ; Okreglak and Drubin , 2010 ) , showing that AIP1 functions in the turnover of F - actin . Consistent with its biochemical activities , AIP1 is important for actin - dependent processes in a variety of organisms . In Dictyostelium discoideum , AIP1 knockouts grow slower with defects in cytokinesis , endocytosis , and cell migration ( Konzok et al . , 1999 ) . AIP1mutantsin Caenorhabditis elegans are severely defective in motility arising from disorganized F - actin in muscles ( Ono , 2001 ) . The AIP1 gene in Drosophila melanogaster is essential and required for cell proliferation and the proper as - sembly of polarized epidermal hair cells ( Ren et al . , 2007 ) . While AIP1 deletion in budding yeast does not result in any growth defects ( Rodal et al . , 1999 ) , AIP1 is clearly involved in actin turnover . AIP1 nulls are synthetic lethal with viable coﬁlin mutant alleles placing them in a common genetic pathway ( Iida and Yahara , 1999 ; Rodal et al . , 1999 ) . Furthermore , AIP1 nulls aber - rantly accumulate coﬁlin along actin cables ( Iida and Yahara , 1999 ; Rodal et al . , 1999 ) , and these cables are less sensitive to turnover by latrunculin A ( Okada et al . , 2006 ) . Collectively , these studies highlight a functional link between AIP1 and actin , demonstrating that AIP1 has evolved variable roles and require - ments in fungi , animals , and slime molds . In Arabidopsis thaliana , inducible knockdown of AIP1 reduces the growth of diffusely expanding intercalary cells and tip - growing root hairs ( Ketelaar et al . , 2004 ) . Under robust AIP1 knockdown conditions , shoot and ﬂower development fails and plants exhibit cell senescence , demonstrating that AIP1 is es - sential ( Ketelaar et al . , 2004 ) . Like AIP1 homologs in other eukaryotes , plant AIP1 interacts with ADF to enhance actin ﬁla - ment disassembly in vitro ( Allwood et al . , 2002 ) . This biochemical activity is manifested in vivo by enhanced actin bundling in AIP1 knockdown plants . In lily ( Lilium longiﬂorum ) pollen , AIP1 and ADF colocalize to the subapical actin fringe ( Lovy - Wheeler et al . , 2006 ) , suggesting that they interact to remodel this dynamic F - actin network . While the biochemical activities and in vivo roles of AIP1 and ADF are consistent with a role in actin remodeling , the extent to which these proteins are required for promoting F - actin turnover has not been established in planta . The moss Physcomitrella patens is an excellent model system for studying actin binding proteins . The cortical F - actin array in tip - growing protonemal cells is readily accessible for high - resolution imaging and dramatically rearranges as a result of growth , shrinkage , buckling , and translocation of actin ﬁlaments ( Vidali et al . , 2009a ) . Furthermore , the moss genome has been sequenced ( Rensing et al . , 2008 ) , and homologous recombina - tion occurs efﬁciently upon transformation ( Schaefer and Zry¨d , 1997 ) , making targeted knockout and allele replacement studies feasible . Finally , moss possesses a single ADF gene ( Augustine et al . , 2008 ) , precluding the need to dissect isovariant - speciﬁc effectsontheactincytoskeleton . Inthisstudy , we showthatAIP1 promotes tip growth and demonstrate that AIP1 and ADF are critical for promoting cortical actin dynamics in planta . RESULTS Moss Has a Single AIP1 Gene We used the amino acid sequences of the two AIP1 genes ( AIP1 - 1 and AIP1 - 2 ) from Arabidopsis in BLAST searches of the P . patens genome ( Rensing et al . , 2008 ) to identify AIP1 in P . patens . We found a single AIP1 locus . To determine the full - length open reading frame , we generated cDNA from moss protonemal tissue and ampliﬁed the predicted AIP1 coding sequence . The coding region of Pp AIP1 is composed of six exons of similar size to the exons of AIP1 - 1 and AIP1 - 2 from Arabidopsis ( Figure 1 ) . Furthermore , moss and Arabidopsis AIP1 genes share common exon / intron boundaries , indicating that the gene structure has been conserved through the ; 400 million years of evolution separating bryophytes and ﬂowering plants . The moss AIP1 protein sequence is also conserved , sharing 57to 58 % identity and 78 % similarity with the two Arabidopsis AIP1 proteins ( see Supplemental Table 1 online ) . Figure 1 . Schematic of P . patens and Arabidopsis AIP1 Gene Struc - tures . Exons are thick black boxes ; introns are black lines . Intron - exon bound - aries were determined by comparing genomic and cDNA sequences . The sequence used for the AIP1 coding sequence - RNAi ( AIP1 - RNAi ) is indicated by a dashed line above the ﬁrst exon . AIP1 and ADF Drive Rapid Actin Dynamics 3697 AIP1 Is Important for Tip Growth To assess the role of AIP1 in plant growth , we used homologous recombination to remove the moss AIP1 gene . The AIP1 knockout construct contains a resistance cassette ﬂanked by a region of sequence upstream of the AIP1 start codon and a region down - stream of the stop codon as targeting arms for homologous recombination ( Figure 2A ) . We transformed this construct into protoplasts from a variety of different moss lines and selected for stable integrants . We conﬁrmed proper targeting of the locus at both 5 9 and 3 9 ends and stable integration of a single copy of the AIP1 knockout construct using PCR ampliﬁcation ( see Supplemen - tal Figure 1 online ) . Two independent stable AIP1 knockout ( D aip1 ) lines were isolated in each moss background for further analysis . To examine differences in plant growth , we made protoplasts of wild - type and D aip1 lines and allowed the protoplasts to regenerate into plants . Tip - growing protonemal cells emerge from the protoplast , forming a dense network of ﬁlamentous tissue that eventually gives rise to the leaf - like gametophores that expand by diffuse growth . In comparison to the wild type , 3 - week - old D aip1 plants have severe defects in expansion of tip - growing protonemal cells ( Figures 2B and 2C ) . Interestingly , we did not observe differences in the timing of gametophore emer - gence ( Figures 2B and 2C ) . After 3 months of growth from protoplasts , we found no obvious defects in the development of gametophores in the D aip1 lines ( Figures 2D and 2E ) . However , we found that the tip - growing rhizoids that emerge from the base of the gametophores are severely stunted ( Figures 2D and 2E ) . These results indicate that AIP1 contributes to tip growth but not diffuse growth in P . patens . Since the primary defect in D aip1 plants appears to be growth of tip - growing tissues , we examined this more closely . The tip - growing protonemata are subdivided into two cell types : slow - growing chloronemal cells and faster growing caulonemal cells ( Menand et al . , 2007 ) . These cell types are readily distinguishable because chloronemal cells have transverse cell plates , whereas caulonemal cells have oblique cell plates with respect to the ﬁlament axis . To determine the relative composition of caulone - mal and chloronemal cells , we regenerated plants from proto - plasts and after 8 d ﬁxed and stained wild - type and D aip1 plants with calcoﬂuor to image cell walls . While the wild type and D aip1 have many chloronemal cells ( Table 1 , Figures 2F and 2G ) , we observed caulonemal cells in the wild type only ( Table 1 , Figure 2F ) . Additionally , we measured the length of apical cells and found that D aip1 tip cells were shorter than wild - type chloronemal and caulonemal cells ( Table 1 ) . These data suggest that AIP1 is important for normal tip cell expansion and for the formation of caulonemal cells . To test whether D aip1 plants are capable of forming caulone - mal cells , we grew the wild type and D aip1 in the dark for 18 d to Figure 2 . AIP1 Promotes the Growth and Formation of Tip - Growing Cells . ( A ) The AIP1 knockout construct was generated by PCR amplifying a sequence upstream of the start codon ( 5 9 region ) and downstream of the stop codon ( 3 9 region ) as targeting arms for homologous recombination . The targeting arms ﬂank a resistance cassette to select for AIP1 knockout plants . ( B ) and ( C ) Wild - type ( WT ) ( B ) or D aip1 ( C ) plants were grown on cellophane - overlain agar plates for 3 weeks . Arrowheads point to emerging gametophores . Bar = 1 mm . ( D ) and ( E ) Wild - type ( D ) or D aip1 ( E ) plants weregrown on agar platesfor 3 months . Plants were removed from the agar and laid on an agar plate to display the growth of the gametophores and rhizoids . Bar = 2 mm . ( F ) and ( G ) Plants were stained with calcoﬂuor and DAPI to image cell walls and nuclei , respectively , and then visualized by epiﬂuorescence microscopy . Apical cell length in 8 - d - old wild type ( F ) and D aip1 ( G ) plants was measured from ﬂuorescence images ( Table 1 ) . The arrow - head points to an oblique cell plate of a caulonemal cell . Bar = 50 m m . ( H ) and ( I ) Wild - type ( H ) and D aip1 ( I ) plants were grown on a cellophane - overlaid agar plate for 18 d in the dark . Bar = 2 mm . ( J ) and ( K ) The number of cells per plant was measured in 5 - d - old plants stained with calcoﬂuor and DAPI to image cell walls and nuclei , respec - tively . Wild - type ( J ) and D aip1 ( L ) plants were visualized by epiﬂuo - rescence microscopy . Bar = 50 m m . 3698 The Plant Cell induce caulonemal cell production ( Cove et al . , 1978 ) . Both the wild type and D aip1 formed caulonemal cells , although there was a striking reduction in the growth of these cells in the D aip1 lines ( Figures 2H and2I ) . Collectively , these results suggest that the tip growth phenotype in D aip1 is due , in part , to the limited formation and expansion of caulonemal cells . Growth in moss protonemal cells is a combination of directed cell expansion at the cell apex and cell division . Therefore , it is possible that reduced tip growth in D aip1 results from a delay or defects in cell division . To investigate this , we stained 5 - d - old plants with 4 9 , 6 - diamidino - 2 - phenylindole ( DAPI ) and calcoﬂuor to simultaneously visualize nuclear DNA and cell walls . D aip1 plants had a similar number of cells per plant compared with the wild type ( Figures 2J and 2K ; the wild type = 14 . 5 6 6 . 3 , n = 59 ; wild - type D aip1 # 1 = 15 . 1 6 5 . 9 , n = 53 ; wild - type D aip1 # 2 = 14 . 0 6 5 . 9 , n = 57 ; all comparisons not signiﬁcant ) . Furthermore , we did not observe any obvious cell division defects , such as binucleate cells or incomplete cell plates , which are associated with mis - segregation of nuclei , suggesting that reduced tip growth is the result of a cell expansion defect rather than aberrant or delayed cell division . We further examined the growth of protonemal cells by gen - erating wild - type and D aip1 protoplasts and imaging plants after 1 week of regeneration ( Figure 3A ) . We quantiﬁed the growth phenotype by measuring plant area of chlorophyll autoﬂuores - cence . The area of D aip1 plants was reduced by approximately 60 % compared with the wild type ( Figures 3A and 3B ) . We also observed that control lines had many branched protonomal ﬁlaments , whereas D aip1 plants appeared as clusters of cells that had severe defects in forming polarized outgrowths . We quantiﬁed the morphological differences by measuring plant solidity , a ratio of the total plant area divided by its convex hull area . Plants that expand into their environment and have large spaces between protonemal ﬁlaments have lower solidity values than plants that are compact and form few polarized outgrowths . In comparison to the wild type , D aip1 lines have larger solidity values ( Figure 3B ) , corresponding to their lack of branched outgrowths and stubby appearance . AIP1 knockouts were also generated in the background of a stablemossline , NLS4LA , whichcoexpressesanuclear - localized green ﬂuorescent protein – b - glucuronidase ( GFP - GUS ) fusion and Lifeact - mEGFP ( LA ) . The GFP - GUS fusion protein serves as an internal reporter for RNA interference ( RNAi ) – mediated gene silencing , as previously described ( Bezanilla et al . , 2005 ) , whereas LA is a useful probe for time - lapse imaging of actin in moss ( Vidali et al . , 2009a ) . The two independent , stable D aip1 lines in NLS4 LA were similar to D aip1 lines generated in the wild - type background ( Figures 3A and 3B ) . To independently verify whether the D aip1 lines we analyzed were knockouts , we performed RT - PCR from total RNA extracts of control and D aip1 lines . While the controls robustly ampliﬁed AIP1 , we could not detect AIP1 in D aip1 ( Figure 3C ) , supporting our genotyping results and conﬁrming that these lines are AIP1 knockouts . AIP1 Is Cytosolic To investigate the localization of AIP1 , we integrated mCherry in frame at the C terminus of the endogenous AIP1 locus ( Figure 3D ) . Stable AIP1 - mCherry lines were tested by PCR to ensure proper targeting at both the 5 9 and 3 9 ends of the locus and for integration of a single copy of the knock - in construct ( see Supplemental Figure 2 online ) . The size and morphology of AIP1 - mCherry plants was quantiﬁed 7 d after regeneration from protoplasts . We found that AIP1 - mCherry lines are indistinguish - able in both area and solidity from control lines ( Figures 3A and 3B ) , indicating that AIP1 - mCherry is fully functional and does not interfere with tip growth or plant morphology . AIP1 - mCherry lines were generated in the NLS4 LA back - ground to permit simultaneous imaging of actin and AIP1 . Actinis mostly cortical with enrichment near the cell apex ( Figure 4A ) . The apical enrichment is dynamic both in intensity and position ( Vidali et al . , 2009a ) . Unlike other actin binding proteins , such as class II formins ( Vidali et al . , 2009c ) and myosin XI ( Vidali et al . , 2010 ) , AIP1 - mCherry does not become enriched at the cell apex ( Figure 4A ) . Instead , AIP1 - mCherry remains diffusely cytosolic . This localization is similar to the localization reported for ADF ( Augustine et al . , 2008 ) . Furthermore , we did not ﬁnd any obvious association of AIP1 with actin ﬁlaments at the cortex ( Figure 4A ) . We performed immunoblotting with a polyclonal dsRed anti - body that recognizes mCherry to ensure that the cytosolic localization of AIP1 - mCherry is not a result of proteolytic release of the mCherry . We observed the anticipated ; 92 - kD gene product for full - length AIP1 - mCherry in both NLS4 LA AIP1 - mCherry lines ( Figure 4B ) . AIP1 Requires ADF for Function We performed transient complementation to ensure that the D aip1 phenotype is a result of knockout of the AIP1 locus and not a result of integration into a secondary locus . D aip1 was trans - formed with an AIP1 expression plasmid or an empty vector Table 1 . Analysis of Apical Cell Number and Length in AIP1 Knockout Plants Line No . of Tip Cells Average Tip Cell Length ( m m ) Chloronema Caulonema Chloronema Caulonema Wild type 310 167 81 . 1 6 27 . 7 120 . 9 6 37 . 9 Wild - type D aip1 # 1 374 0 65 . 3 6 19 . 1 * NA Wild - type D aip1 # 2 239 0 63 . 7 6 20 . 5 * NA The number and average length of chloronemal and caulonemal tip cells was determined from 8 - d - old plants in ImageJ . Standard deviation is reported after the 6 sign . The asterisk indicates that the values are signiﬁcantly different from wild type with a P value < 0 . 001 . Alpha signiﬁcance level is set at 0 . 05 . NA , not applicable . AIP1 and ADF Drive Rapid Actin Dynamics 3699 control . Inaddition , thewildtypewastransformedwiththeempty vector as a control for normal growth . Unlike the empty vector control , the AIP1 plasmid restored solidity to nearly wild - type levels when transformed into D aip1 ( Figure 5A ) , demonstrating the speciﬁcity of the AIP1 loss - of - function phenotype . AIP1 is known to enhance ADF’s actin ﬁlament disassembly activity ( Ono , 2003 ) . Thus , we hypothesized that overexpres - sion of ADF might bypass the requirement for AIP1 . To test this , we transformed D aip1 with an ADF expression vector . Inter - estingly , ADF provided a partial rescue of the D aip1 phenotype Figure 3 . Growth and Morphology Are Affected in AIP1 Knockout Plants . ( A ) Representative images of 1 - week - old plants visualized by epiﬂuorescence stereomicroscopy . Two independent D aip1 lines are compared with their respective control plants : the wild type ( WT ) or a line stably coexpressing NLS - GFP - GUS and LA ( NLS4 LA ) . Green nuclei are a result of the NLS - GFP - GUS signal . Two independent lines expressing a C - terminal fusion of AIP1 - mCherry at the endogenous locus in the NLS4 LA line are shown . Bar = 100 m m . ( B ) Quantiﬁcation of normalized area and solidity in control and allele replacement lines . Normalization was done in relation to the appropriate control ( the wild type or NLS4 ) . Letters above the bars indicate statistical groupings . Numbers of plants analyzed : the wild type , 75 ; wild - type D aip1 # 1 , 52 ; wild - type D aip1 # 2 , 74 ; NLS4 LA , 175 ; NLS4 LA D aip1 # 1 , 100 ; NLS4 LA D aip1 # 2 , 100 ; NLS4 LA AIP1 - mCherry 1 , 75 ; NLS4 LA AIP1 - mCherry 2 , 75 . Error bars indicate SE . ( C ) RNA expression analysis of control and D aip1 lines . Representative ethidium bromide – stained gel of RT - PCR analysis using protonemal RNA samples from the indicated lines . Ubiquitin10 is a loading control . Two biological replicates and four technical replicates were performed . ( D ) Schematic of the AIP1 - mCherry replacement locus . Exons are thick black boxes . Introns are black lines . The stop codon was removed from the end of original coding sequence and moved to the end of the mCherry sequence to generate an in - frame C - terminal fusion protein . Light - gray lines are regions upstream of the start codon ( AIP1 5 9 region ) and downstream of the stop codon ( AIP1 3 9 region ) in the unaltered PpAIP1 locus . 3700 The Plant Cell ( Figure 5A ) . Since ADF overexpression partially compensates for loss of AIP1 , it is possible that endogenous ADF levels are elevated in the AIP1 knockout lines . To test this , we performed immunoblot analysis of extracts from AIP1 knockout and control lines . We found that , on average , ADF is upregulated two - to fourfold in AIP1 knockouts compared with the wild type ( see Supplemental Figure 3 online ) . These results show that ADF can partially compensate for loss of AIP1 , suggesting that AIP1 enhances ADF’s activity by a mechanism partly depen - dent on ADF . As a complementary approach to validate that ADF res - cues loss of AIP1 , we used a previously described transient RNAi complementation assay ( Bezanilla et al . , 2005 ) . Brieﬂy , we transformed protoplasts expressing nuclear - localized GFP : GUS ( NLS4 ) with an RNAi plasmid that simultaneously silences GUS and a target gene of interest . After 7 d , plants actively silencing the gene of interest can be readily distinguished from nonsilenc - ing plants by identifying plants that lack the nuclear GFP : GUS reporter . We used the coding sequence of the ﬁrst exon of AIP1 to generate an AIP1 - RNAi construct ( Figure 1 ) . AIP1 - RNAi plants exhibit a similar phenotype to D aip1 ( Figure 5B ) . The AIP1 - RNAi plants have signiﬁcant morphology defects , as quantiﬁed by higher solidity values compared with GUS - RNAi controls ( Figure 5B ) . The AIP1 - RNAi morphology defect was rescued by co - transforming AIP1 - RNAi with an ADF expression construct in a concentration - dependent manner ( Figure 5B ) . Since ADF was able to rescue the AIP1 phenotype , we tested the reciprocal experiment to see if AIP1 could compensate for loss of ADF . Using RNAi , ADF was shown to be essential for tip growth and plant viability , and this loss - of - function phenotype was fully rescued by cotransformation with an ADF expression construct ( Augustine et al . , 2008 ; Vidali et al . , 2009b ) . We found that cotransformation of ADF - RNAi with an AIP1 expression plasmid was unable to suppress the ADF loss - of - function phenotype ( Figure 5C ) , demonstrating that AIP1 cannot com - pensate for loss of ADF . Collectively , these results demon - strate that AIP1 works through ADF in vivo , presumably by enhancing ADF activity , and this activity is required to promote normal tip growth . AIP1 Knockout Plants Accumulate Actin Bundles AIP1 knockdown was reported to induce actin bundle formation in Arabidopsis ( Ketelaar et al . , 2004 ) . To test whether bundling occurs in D aip1 , we used spinning disc confocal microscopy to image livecells expressing LA . Wild - type cells expressing LA had ﬁne actin ﬁlaments throughout the cell cortex , whereas D aip1 plants had highly bundled cortical actin arrays ( Figure 6A ) . To quantify the amount of bundling , we measured three perpendic - ular line scans at ; 20 , 40 , and 60 m m from the cell tip . The peaks in the line scan represent actin ﬁlaments and / or bundles . Inte - gration of the area under the peak corresponds to the intensity of the actin structure . With this analysis , we observed that D aip1 cells have actin ﬁlament structures that are on average 8 . 7 times brighter than those of wild - type cells ( Figure 6B ) , demonstrating that D aip1 cells have highly bundled actin structures . D aip1 cells containing LA were generated in the NLS4 back - ground . To ensure that the nuclearly localized GFP : GUS fusion does not affect actin ﬁlament structure , we also imaged NLS4 cells expressing LA ( NLS4 LA ) . We found that the actin bundling state is indistinguishable from that in wild - type cells ( see Sup - plemental Figure 4 online ) . Furthermore , we stained actin with ﬂuorescent phalloidin in wild - type and D aip1 cells and conﬁrmed that D aip1 cells have highly bundled actin ﬁlaments ( see Sup - plemental Figure 5 online ) . Together , these data suggest that F - actin is stabilized into bundles in the absence of AIP1 . AIP1 and ADF Drive Rapid Actin Dynamics in Vivo Since AIP1 and ADF work together in vitro to enhance actin ﬁlament disassembly , they have been widely regarded to Figure 4 . AIP1 Is Diffusely Cytosolic . ( A ) Z - projections of four NLS4 LA AIP1 - mCherry protonemal cells imaged with spinning disc confocal microscopy . LA ( a marker for actin ) , AIP1 - mCherry , and merge of both channels are shown . Bar = 10 m m . ( B ) Fifteen micrograms of protonemal cell protein extracts from control and NLS4 LA AIP1 - mCherry replacement lines were immunoblotted with a polyclonal dsRed antibody . The arrowhead points to the AIP1 - mCherry protein band , while asterisks indicate cross - reactive bands present in all samples . AIP1 and ADF Drive Rapid Actin Dynamics 3701 promote the turnover of F - actin in vivo . Interestingly , the contri - bution of these proteins to F - actin dynamics in live cells has not been directly tested . To examine F - actin behavior , we imaged cells expressing LA at the cell cortex with spinning disc confocal microscopy or variable angle epiﬂuorescence microscopy ( VAEM ) . We chose the cortical plane for imaging because it contains a population of rapidly rearranging F - actin ( Vidali et al . , 2009a ) . For the transient RNAi experiments , there are a limited number of ADF - RNAi plants for each transformation . Furthermore , few RNAi plants are close enough to the cover slip to enable imaging with VAEM . Therefore , spinning disc confocal microscopy was used for ADF - RNAi and GUS - RNAi samples . By merging three time points from a time - lapse series , it is possible to visualize changes in cortical F - actin organization . Alterations in F - actin due to polymerization , depolymerization , and / or translocation at any of the time points will appear colored in the merge , whereas F - actin that is static throughout the time course appears white in the merge . In the control lines ( NLS4 LA and LA ) , with or without transformation of GUS - RNAi , we observed robust F - actin dynamics ( Figure 7A ) . By contrast , the F - actin in the NLS4 LA D aip1 line was more static , and in the NLS4 LAline transformedwith ADF - RNAi , the F - actinwas almost completely stationary ( Figure 7A , stills from Supplemental Movies 1 to 5 online ) . We quantiﬁed the changes in F - actin organization in these time series using a previously described algorithm ( Vidali et al . , 2010 ) that calculates the correlation of the intensity of the LA signal at all pixel locations between time points . Dynamic F - actin has a low correlation coefﬁcient with subsequent time points . In this analysis , we measured the correlation coefﬁcient over all time intervals ( change in time between analyzed frames ) . The Figure 5 . AIP1 Functions through ADF . ( A ) Representative images of 1 - week - old plants imaged with epiﬂuorescence microscopy . On each panel , the top left - hand corner indicates the stable line , and the transformed plasmid is indicated in the bottom left - hand corner . Ten micrograms of plasmid was used in the transformation of each line . The number of plants analyzed is as follows : the wild type ( WT ) + Vector , 75 ; D aip1 + Vector , 100 ; D aip1 + AIP1 , 75 ; D aip1 + ADF , 75 . ( B ) Representative images of 1 - week - old plants imaged with epiﬂuorescence microscopy . AIP1 - RNAi was cotransformed with various concentrations of the complementing ADF plasmid , indicated after the plus sign . The number of plants analyzed is 75 for all samples . ( C ) Representative images of 1 - week - old plants imaged with epiﬂuorescence microscopy . ADF - RNAi was cotransformed with various concentrations of the complementing AIP1 plasmid indicated after the plus sign . The number of plants analyzed is as follows : GUS - RNAi , 75 ; ADF - RNAi , 75 ; + AIP1 5 m g , 75 ; + AIP1 10 m g , 75 ; + AIP1 15 m g , 50 ; + AIP1 30 m g , 75 . In ( A ) to ( C ) , the red channel , representing chlorophyll autoﬂuorescence , was extracted from the color image and converted to gray scale . Solidity values for each rescue are indicated in the graph on the right . Error bars represent SE . Letters to the right of the bar indicate statistical groupings . For all images , bar = 100 m m . 3702 The Plant Cell correlation coefﬁcient of F - actin that rapidly rearranges will decay more quickly over the analyzed time intervals compared with a population of static F - actin . Using this analysis , we found that the control lines ( NLS4 LA , LA , and GUS - RNAi ) had the lowest correlation coefﬁcient values ( Figure 7B ) , corresponding to rapid F - actin rearrangements . The NLS4 LA line transformed with ADF - RNAi had the highest cor - relation coefﬁcient , and these values were similar to those observed when treating control plants with the F - actin stabilizing drug jasplakinolide ( Vidali et al . , 2010 ) . The NLS4 LA D aip1 line showed intermediate correlation coefﬁcient values with respect to the control and the ADF - RNAi transformed plants . These data demonstrate that , invivo , AIP1 isimportant andADFisabsolutely critical for actin dynamics . The correlation analysis provides a global view of changes in actin organization over time , including growth , shrinkage , and translocation events . To provide insights into the speciﬁc changes that affect a reduction in actin turnover , we manually inspected time - lapse image series of the cell cortex acquired with VAEM . F - actin remodeling at the cell cortex in moss is extremely rapid and requires continuous imaging with 30 - to 60 - ms exposure times to enable tracking of individual ﬁlaments . Since we observed little to no changes in the time - lapse acqui - sitions of ADF - RNAi cells , we focused on analyzing cortical F - actin ﬁlament events in thewild type and D aip1 . The correlation ( Figure 7B ) and bundling ( see Supplemental Figure 4 online ) analyses showed that LA lines in the wild - type and NLS4 back - grounds wereindistinguishable from oneanother , demonstrating that the nuclearly localized GFP : GUS fusion does not affect F - actin organization or dynamics . We found that cortical F - actin remodeling is dominated by ﬁlament translocations ( Figure 8A , stills from Supplemental Movies 6 and 7 online ) within the cortical plane as well as into the imaging plane from the cytoplasm . We also observed clus - ters of ﬁlaments , often with a bundled ﬁlament in the center , from which many rearrangements were observed ( Figure 8B , stills from Supplemental Movies 8 and 9 online ) . Both translocations and rearrangements around ﬁlament clusters occurred faster in control compared with D aip1 cells . At lower frequencies , we observed elongation , shrinkage , and severing of single ﬁlaments . Examples of elongation and shrinkage are shown in Supplemen - tal Movie 8 online . An example of severing is shown in Figure 8C , which show stills from Supplemental Movies 10 and 11 online . Rates of elongation and shrinkage were similar between control and D aip1 cells ( Table 2 ) . Although severing events were un - common , we found that control cells exhibited 3 . 52 times more severing events than D aip1 cells for a given cortical area and time ( Table 2 ) . The decrease in severing frequency was also reﬂected in the number of ﬁlament ends undergoing either elongation or shrinkage . Control cells also had 3 . 58 times more dynamic ﬁlament ends compared with D aip1 cells ( Table 2 ) . These data demonstrate that in the absence of AIP1 , the cortical F - actin array experiences fewer severing events , which translates to a decrease in the number of available dynamic ends . Ultimately , this may lead to an increase in bundled ﬁlaments , since with reduced severing frequency the lifetime of an individual ﬁlament will lengthen , enabling time for bundling proteins to access the ﬁlament . DISCUSSION Here , we show that AIP1 is required for optimizing expansion of the tip - growing protonemal and rhizoid cells in the moss P . patens . Knockout of the single conserved AIP1 gene results in stunted plants with smaller cells . These plants are viable with no apparent defects in the formation of gametophores . The AIP1 knockout phenotype is most reminiscent of Arp2 / 3 complex mutants in moss , which are also viable and have reduced tip growth . However , the Arp2 / 3 complex mutants display more Figure 6 . Actin Is Highly Bundled in AIP1 Knockout Cells . ( A ) Three representative images of LA obtained with spinning disc confocal microscopy from LA wild - type ( LA ) and LA D aip1 plant ( D aip1 ) cells . Note the enhanced bundling of actin ﬁlaments in AIP1 knockout cells . Images are maximal projections of 0 . 5 - m m sections spanning the cortex to the medial plane . All images were acquired using the same imaging settings . Bar = 5 m m . ( B ) Quantiﬁcation of the extent of bundling is shown for control ( LA ) and D aip1 lines . The amount of bundling was measured by taking three perpendicular line scans at ; 20 , 40 , and 60 m m from the cell tip . The peaks in the line scan represent actin ﬁlaments / bundles . Integration of the area under the peak corresponds to the ﬂuorescence intensity of the labeled actin structure . The number of images analyzed is as follows : LA , 8 ; D aip1 8 . Error bars represent SE . AIP1 and ADF Drive Rapid Actin Dynamics 3703 penetrant defects with complete inhibition in the formation of caulonemal cells and rhizoids and mild to severe defects in game - tophore development ( Harries et al . , 2005 ; Perroud and Quatrano , 2006 ; Finka et al . , 2008 ) . It is interesting that AIP1 ( a depolymerizer with ADF ) and the Arp2 / 3 complex ( a nucleator ) share a similar phenotype . This suggests that Arp2 / 3 may also be involved in promoting rapid reorganization of F - actin arrays in plants . With such critical roles in tip growth and plant development , it is intriguing that both ADF ( Augustine et al . , 2008 ) and AIP1 are single - copy genes in moss . Other essential proteins critically required for tip growth , such as proﬁlin ( Vidali et al . , 2007 ) , class II formin ( Vidali et al . , 2009c ) , and myosin XI ( Vidali et al . , 2010 ) , are present in small gene families . Since moss is predominately haploid , having multiple redundant copies of essential genes may be a safeguard in the event of mutation of one of the gene copies or a way to ensure sufﬁcient expression levels . In either case , it is likely that a duplication event occurred in the moss genome ( Rensinget al . , 2008 ) . Why AIP1 and ADF haveremained as single - copy genes remains mysterious . One possible expla - nation is that genome duplication was incomplete and excluded the ADF and AIP1 genes . Alternatively , gene duplication of ADF and AIP1 resulted in overexpression that was detrimental and was quickly selected against . In support of this , overexpression of ADF and AIP1 has been shown to result in the inhibition of tip growth ( Dong et al . , 2001 ; Chenet al . , 2002 ; Ketelaar et al . , 2007 ) , further emphasizing that aﬁnebalanceof monomeric andF - actin is required to efﬁciently promote actin - dependent processes such as tip growth . AIP1 and ADF are critical for tip growth in moss . By comparing the loss - of - function phenotype in moss versus Arabidopsis , it appears that over the course of land plant evolution , AIP1 has become essential for plant growth and development . Strong knockdown of AIP1 results in lethality in Arabidopsis , whereas modest knockdown results in expansion defects in tip - growing and diffusely expanding cells , but not guard cells or trichomes ( Ketelaar et al . , 2004 ) . In moss , however , AIP1 nulls are viable . The differences in phenotype between Arabidopsis and moss could be accounted for by the fact that ADF is upregulated in moss D aip1 lines , and higher levels of ADF are sufﬁcient to partially suppress the AIP1 phenotype . Additionally , since AIP1 functions with ADF , the pleiotropic effects observed in Arabi - dopsis may result from isovariant - speciﬁc interactions between the nine vegetatively expressed ADFs ( Ruzicka et al . , 2007 ) and the vegetative AIP1 - 2 ( Allwood et al . , 2002 ) . By contrast , AIP1 and ADF are single - copy genes in moss , precluding the need to dissect isovariant - speciﬁc interactions ( Mohri and Ono , 2003 ) . Furthermore , theexpansion ofboth AIP1 and ADF genes overthe course of land plant evolution could account for phenotypic differences between AIP1 knockouts in moss compared with Arabidopsis AIP1 RNAi plants . Nevertheless , these studies in moss and Arabidopsis show that AIP1 provides a critical function for growth and development in land plants . Figure 7 . AIP1 and ADF Promote in Vivo Actin Dynamics . ( A ) Actin dynamics at the cortex of protonemal cells were visualized by time - lapse spinning disc confocal microscopy ( GUS - RNAi and ADF - RNAi ) or VAEM ( LA , NLS4 LA , and D aip1 ) using the actin probe LA . Representative images of actin are shown as grayscale images rep - resenting red , green , and blue for the 0 - , 3 - , and 6 - s time points , respectively . The merge combines all time points as separate color channels projected onto one RGB image . White indicates overlap of actin in all time points ; color indicates that actin has changed in at least one of the three time points . All images were equivalently adjusted through background subtraction , enhanced contrast , and smoothing in ImageJ . Bars = 2 . 5 m m . ( B ) The correlation coefﬁcient between images was calculated at all temporal spacings ( time interval ) . Low correlation values correspond with higher actin dynamics . The number of plants analyzed is as follows : LA , 18 ; NLS4 LA , 13 ; NLS4 LA D aip1 , 24 ; NLS4 LA GUS - RNAi , 18 ; NLS4 LA ADF - RNAi , 18 . Error bars represent SE . 3704 The Plant Cell Numerous biochemical and genetic studies demonstrate that AIP1 interacts with ADF ( Iida and Yahara , 1999 ; Okada et al . , 1999 ; Rodal et al . , 1999 ; Allwood et al . , 2002 ) , and we provide in vivo evidence that the cooperation of ADF and AIP1 activities is critical for tip growth in moss . We showed that ADF overexpres - sion partially suppresses the AIP1 knockout phenotype . How - ever , AIP1 overexpression cannot overcome loss of ADF . These results demonstrate that ADF and AIP1 coordinate their activities to promote tip growth in moss . Speciﬁcally , AIP1 and ADF function in a common pathway where AIP1 requires ADF for its function . This is strongly supported by biochemical data showing that AIP1 alone has minimal effects on actin ﬁlaments ; however , in combination with ADF it synergistically enhances actin ﬁla - ment disassembly ( Aizawa et al . , 1999 ; Okada et al . , 1999 ; Rodal et al . , 1999 ) . We also show AIP1 - mCherry is diffusely cytosolic , similar to ADF ( Augustine et al . , 2008 ) . Thus , it is feasible that AIP1 and ADF could interact with one another in vivo . We did not observe AIP1associated withactin ﬁlaments , whichis consistent with observations from Narcissus pseudonarcissus where AIP1 decorated actin bundles in dormant pollen grains but became diffusely cytosolic upon germination and pollen tube expansion ( Allwood et al . , 2002 ) . These results suggest that AIP1 may interact transiently with dynamic F - actin networks . Although ADF provided a partial rescue of the AIP1 loss - of - function phenotype , overexpression of ADF never fully restored plant morphology in the absence of AIP1 . This could be because overexpression of ADF results in suppression of tip growth . Alternatively , it suggests that AIP1 possesses an important and distinct activity from ADF . Importantly , we show that AIP1 promotes and ADF is abso - lutely required for F - actin dynamics in plants . Recent character - izations of the cortical actin cytoskeleton in plants revealed that ﬁlament severing is the predominant means of disassembling the actin network ( Staiger et al . , 2009 ; Smertenko et al . , 2010 ) . Therefore , two conserved families of actin ﬁlament – severing proteins , ADF / coﬁlin and villin / gelsolin , were hypothesized to be likely candidates for mediating actin turnover ( Staiger et al . , 2009 ) . Our loss - of - function study strongly supports a role for both AIP1 and ADF in promoting the rapid reorganization of cortical F - actin in plants . In particular , we found that AIP1 and ADF are critical factors that mediate F - actin translocation , the dominant form ofF - actin dynamics in the P . patens cortical array . Since bundled actin ﬁlaments are prevalent in both ADF - RNAi ( Augustine et al . , 2008 ) and D aip1 plants , these higher - order actin structures might be a major factor contributing to the inhibition of ﬁlament translocation . We also found that AIP1 promotes F - actin severing in vivo . Combined with our genetic data , these ﬁndings support a mechanism by which AIP1 en - hances actin severing by ADF . By contrast , we found that AIP1 loss of function had no effect on F - actin growth or shrinkage , Figure 8 . Cortical F - Actin Remodeling Is Slower in the AIP1 Knockout Than in the Wild Type . ( A ) Translocation event . Dotted red line shows position of the ﬁlament of interest at each time point . Dotted yellow line shows the position of the ﬁlament at 0 s . ( B ) Rearrangements near a cluster of ﬁlaments . Dotted red lines show the position of the ﬁlaments at 0 s in the ﬁnal time point . ( C ) Severing event . Red arrows indicate severed ﬁlament and ﬁlament ends . Bar = 2 . 5 m m . Table 2 . F - Actin Dynamic Parameters Dynamic Parameters LA NLS4 LA D aip1 Growth rate ( m m / s ) 2 . 32 6 1 . 23 2 . 34 6 1 . 94 Shrinkage rate ( m m / s ) 2 . 81 6 2 . 19 3 . 68 6 1 . 91 Severing frequency ( events / m m 2 s ) 0 . 00325 * 6 0 . 00155 0 . 000922 * 6 0 . 000609 Number of dynamic ends ( ends / m m 2 s ) 0 . 00419 * * 6 0 . 00131 0 . 00117 * * 6 0 . 000844 The cortical region of ﬁve cells was imaged with VAEM . Images were analyzed for growth , shrinkage , and severing events . Number of growth events is as follows : LA , 30 ; D aip1 , 10 . Number of shrinkage events is as follows : LA , 16 ; D aip1 , 5 . Standard deviation is reported after the 6 sign . The single and double asterisks indicate that the values are signiﬁcantly different from the wild type with a P value of 0 . 025 and 0 . 0036 , respectively . Alpha signiﬁcance level is set at 0 . 05 . AIP1 and ADF Drive Rapid Actin Dynamics 3705 suggesting that AIP1 is not required for modulating the actin monomer pool . This further supports that AIP1 and ADF regulate actin severing to drive actin dynamics in the cortical F - actin array . Our results demonstrate that rapid actin cytoskeletal remod - eling is essential for tip growth . ADF silencing results in a static cortical F - actin array and a total arrest of tip growth , whereas a reduction in F - actin reorganization in the AIP1 knockout plants leads to a concomitant decrease in the expansion of tip - growing cells . Since the AIP1 knockout lines remain viable despite having impaired F - actin dynamics , these lines will serve as excellent tools for identifying cellular processes in plants that depend on fast F - actin reorganization . METHODS Plasmid Construction Total RNA was isolated from Physcomitrella patens ( Gransden isolate ) protonemal tissue using the RNeasy plant mini kit ( Qiagen ) , followed by DNase I treatment , according to the manufacturer’s recommendations . Synthesis of cDNA was performed using oligo ( dT ) primers and Super - script II reverse transcriptase ( Invitrogen ) , according to the manufac - turer’s protocol . The predicted AIP1 coding region was ampliﬁed with primers ( seeSupplementalTable2online ) andclonedintopENT / D - TOPO ( Invitrogen ) to generate pENT - AIP1 . All entry clones in this study were veriﬁed by sequencing . To identify the intron - exon borders , the pENT - AIP1 sequence was compared with the genomic sequence ( Rensing et al . , 2008 ) . Three - fragmentmultisiteGatewayrecombination ( Invitrogen ) wasused to generatethe AIP1 knockout construct . Toamplify the AIP1 5 9 and AIP1 3 9 regions , wild - type genomic DNA was used as a template for PCR ampliﬁcation with primers ( see Supplemental Table 2 online ) . The resis - tance cassette was generated by amplifying a fragment containing the NOS terminator and hygromycin resistance cassette from pTHUBIGate ( Vidali et al . , 2007 ) . All primers ( see Supplemental Table 2 online ) contained the appropriate attB sites , and BP clonase reactions were performed to introduce the PCR products into their respective pDONR vectors to generate the entry clones L1L4 - SwaI - AIP - 5 9 , R4R3 - NOSter - Lox - Hygro - Lox , and L3L2 - AIP - 3 9 - SwaI . The entry clones were recom - bined into pGEM - gate ( Vidali et al . , 2009c ) using an LR clonase reaction . Swa I sites were engineered at the 5 9 and 3 9 ends of the knockout construct to linearize the knockout construct before transformation into moss . The AIP1 - mCherry replacement construct was cloned using four - fragment multisite Gateway recombination . The 3 9 end of AIP1 spanning the last two exons and intervening intron , but excluding the stop codon was ampliﬁed from wild - type genomic DNA using primers ( see Supple - mental Table 2 online ) . We ampliﬁed mCherry from pRTL2 - mCherry ( Lee et al . , 2008 ; ABRC , Ohio State University ; stock CD3 - 1062 ) . BP clonase reactions introduced the PCR products into their respective pDONR vectors to generate the entry clones : L1R5 - SwaI - AIP - Up - for - 3 9 tagging and L5L4 - mCherry - cTer . These clones together with R4R3 - NOSter - Lox - Hygro - Lox and L3L2 - AIP - 3 9 - SwaI were recombined in an LR clonase reaction with the pGEM - gate destination vector to generate the AIP1 - mCherry replacement construct . Swa I restriction sites at the 5 9 and 3 9 ends of the allele replacement construct were used to linearize the replacement cassette prior to moss transformations . To generate expression constructs , LR clonase reactions ( Invitrogen ) recombined the pENT - AIP1 and pENT - ADF ( Augustine et al . , 2008 ) clones into the pTH - UbiGate ( Vidali et al . , 2007 ) and pMK - UbiGate destination vectors . pMK - UbiGate was generated by modifying pMBL5 ( Bezanilla et al . , 2003 ) toincludethe maize ( Zeamays ) ubiquitin promoter , Gateway cassette , and NOS terminator . To generate the AIP1 - RNAi construct , the ﬁrst exon of AIP1 was ampliﬁed from genomic DNA and cloned into pENT / D - TOPO . The resulting entry vector was transferred into the destination vector pUGGi ( Bezanilla et al . , 2005 ) by an LR clonase reaction to generate AIP1 - RNAi . The ADF - RNAi construct is ADF - UTRi ( Augustine et al . , 2008 ) . Growth Media PpNH4 medium [ 1 . 03 mM MgSO 4 , 1 . 86 mM KH 2 PO 4 , 3 . 3 mM Ca ( NO 3 ) 2 , 2 . 72 mM ( PPNH4 ) 2 - tartrate , 45 m M FeSO 4 , 9 . 93 m M H 3 BO 4 , 220 nM CuSO 4 , 1 . 966 m M MnCl 2 , 231 nM CoCl 2 , 191 ZnSO 4 , 169 nM KI , and 103 nM Na 2 MoO 4 ] supplemented with 0 . 7 % agar was used to make growth plates for plant propagation . PpNH4 medium plus 0 . 7 % agar and anti - biotics constituted selection plates . Protoplasts were regenerated on plates containing PRMB medium ( PpNH4 medium supplemented with 6 % mannitol , 10 mM CaCl 2 , and 0 . 8 % agar ) . Before plating , protoplasts wereresuspendedineither1mLtopagar ( PpNH4mediumsupplemented with 6 % mannitol , 10 mM CaCl 2 , and 0 . 3 % agar ) or 0 . 5 mL liquid plating medium ( PpNH4 medium supplemented with 8 . 5 % mannitol and 10 mM CaCl 2 ) . All growth plates were overlaid with cellophane unless otherwise noted . Isolating Stable Lines and Genotyping Restriction enzyme – digested AIP1 knockout and AIP1 - mCherry replace - ment constructs wereethanolprecipitated , dissolved in TE buffer ( 10 mM Tris , pH 8 , and 1 mM EDTA ) , and transformed into various stable moss lines . All transformations were performed as previously described ( Vidali et al . , 2007 ) , with the following modiﬁcation : protoplasts were trans - formed at a concentration of 2 . 0 3 10 6 protoplasts / mL . Transformations forstablelineswereplatedintopagar . PlantswereregeneratedonPRMB plates for 4 d , and transformants were selected by transferring plants to PpNH4 medium supplemented with hygromycin ( 15 m g / mL ) . To select for stable integrants , transformants were cycled on and off antibiotic plates for three 1 - week intervals . Potential stable integrants were grown on PpNH4 until enough tissue could be acquired for genomic DNA isolation . Plant tissue was transferred to a microcentrifuge tube containing ; 15 1 . 0 - to 2 . 0 - mm diameter ZrSiO beads ( Next Advance ) and 200 m L water . Plants were homogenized in a Bullet Blender ( Next Advance ) on high speed for 3 min and then mixed with 200 m L of 2 3 DNA extraction buffer ( 0 . 4 M Tris , pH 9 . 0 , 0 . 8 M LiCl , 50 mM EDTA , and 2 % SDS ) . The homogenatewasmovedtoanewtube , andcelldebriswaspelletedusing a tabletop centrifuge . The supernatant was moved to a new tube , and an equal volume of isopropanol was added to precipitate the DNA . Samples were spun , dried , and resuspended in TE buffer . PCR ampliﬁcation was performed with Phusion DNA polymerase ( Finnzymes ) following the manufacturer’s recommendations . Growth Assays and Cell Wall and Nuclear Staining Protoplastswereisolatedfromstablelinesaspreviouslydescribed ( Vidali et al . , 2007 ) . For each line , 20 , 000 protoplasts were transferred to a microcentrifuge tube . After the protoplasts settled , all but 50 to 100 m L of the supernatant was removed . Plants were resuspended in liquid plating media and plated on PRMB media for 4 d and then transferred to PpNH4 plates for 1 , 3 , 4 , or 17 d . Plants grown for 7 d were imaged with a 3 1 lens at 3 63 zoom on a ﬂuorescence stereomicroscope ( Leica MZ16FA ) equipped with a color camera ( Leica DF300FX ) using the GFP2 ﬁlter set ( Leica ) . Bright - ﬁeld images of 3 - week - old plants were acquired with a 3 1 lens at 3 7 . 11 zoom on the stereomicroscope ( Leica MZ16FA ) equipped with a color camera ( Leica DF300FX ) . Alternatively , these plants were transferred to a 12 - well plate containing PpNH4 medium without 3706 The Plant Cell cellophane and grown for an additional 9 weeks . Gametophores from 12 - week - old plants were carefully removed from the agar with forceps and laid on their side . Bright - ﬁeld images were acquired with a 3 1 lens at 3 7 . 11 zoom . Calcoﬂuor ( ﬂuorescentbrightener28 ; Sigma - Aldrich ) andDAPIstaining was used to determine apical cell length , cell type , and number of cells per plant . To collect plants for staining , 15 mL of water was added to plates containing 5 - or 8 - d - old plants , and gentle agitation was used to detach plants from the cellophane . Plants were carefully transferred to a microcentrifuge tube by pipetting with a cut pipette tip . After the plants settled in the microcentrifuge tube , all but 50 m L of supernatant was removed . Plants were resuspended in 500 m L of stain solution ( 100 mM PIPES , pH6 . 8 , 10 m g / mLcalcoﬂuor , 0 . 2 m g / mLDAPI , 0 . 1 % NonidetP - 40 , and 2 % paraformaldehyde ) and kept inthe darkforat least30 min . Plants plusstainsolutionwerecarefullypipettedontoamicroscopeslideusinga cut pipette tip . The slide was covered with a cover slip and sealed with a 1 : 1 : 1 mixture of Vaseline , lanolin , and parafﬁn . Pictures were captured as 24 - bit red - green - blue ( RGB ) images with a 3 5 lens at 3 30 zoom on the ﬂuorescence stereomicroscope ( Leica MZ16FA ) equipped with a color camera ( LeicaDF300FX ) andtheUVﬁlterset ( Leica ) . Theapicalcelllength of 8 - d - old plants was measured in ImageJ using the segmented line tool to manually trace the center of the cell from the cell plate to the apex . The number of cells per plant and number of chloronema / caulonema were counted from images of 5 - and 8 - d - old plants , respectively . Caulonemata Dark Growth Assay To assess caulonemal cell formation , plants from tissue that had been homogenized in water 7 d earlier were placed together in a line ; 1 cm long on a cellophane - overlaid plate containing 2 % Suc - supplemented PpNH4 medium . The plate was sealed , placed ﬂat in a light - impenetrable blackbox , andthenwrappedinaluminumfoil . Theboxwasturnedsothat the plates were upright with the plants located near the bottom of the plate . After 18 d in the dark , the plates were imaged in bright ﬁeld with a 3 1lensat 3 7 . 11zoom on astereomicroscope ( Leica MZ16FA ) equipped with a color camera ( Leica DF300FX ) . RNA Expression Analysis To ensure that the AIP1 knockout plants do not express AIP1 , RNA was isolated from knockout lines 1 week after homogenization . cDNA was prepared from 1 m g of RNA that was quantiﬁed using a Nanodrop 1000 ( Thermoscientiﬁc ) . Primers for RT - PCR analysis are listed in Supplemental Table 2 online . Ampliﬁcation of Ubiquitin10 was used as a loading control . Imaging Imaging of AIP1 - mCherry localization was performed in 35 - mm Petri plates with a glass cover slip glued to the bottom . A 1 - mL pipette tip ( Rainin ) placed in the center of the plate over the cover slip was surrounded with 7 to 10 mL of PpNH4 medium . When the medium set , the pipette tip was removed , generating a well that was subsequently ﬁlled with 65 to 75 m L of PpNH4 medium , forming a chamber . Small pieces of sample tissue were placed into the middle of the chamber well . Plates were moved into a growth chamber until the plants grew down to the cover slip . Plants were imaged with a Nikon Ti Eclipse inverted microscope equipped with a Yokogawa CSU - X1 spinning disk head and a 512 3 512 Andor iXON electron multiplying charged coupled device ( CCD ) camera . Plants were imaged with a 488 - nm laser , 525 / 50 - nm band - pass ﬁlter , and a 3 100 oil immersion lens ( 1 . 4 numerical aperture ; Nikon ) . Imaging of cortical F - actin with VAEM and spinning disc confocal microscopy was performed on 1 % agar pads as previously described ( Vidali et al . , 2010 ) . GUS - RNAi and ADF - RNAi plants were transferred to hygromycin - supplemented PpNO3 medium ( Vidali et al . , 2009a ) on day 4 andtransferredtoagarpadsandimagedondays5to6insteadofday7to avoid lethality that becomes prevalent with increasing time in ADF - RNAi plants . For all other lines , plants were transferred to agar pads . To image cortical F - actin for quantiﬁcation of actin dynamics , images of LA were acquired at a single cortical plane . VAEM imaging was performed on a Nikon Ti Eclipse inverted microscope equipped with total internal reﬂec - tion ﬂuorescence illumination and imaged with a 3 60 oil immersion objective ( numerical aperture 1 . 45 ; Nikon ) . The 3 1 . 5 optivar was used for all images to increase magniﬁcation . Movies were manually inspected and scored for severing , growth , and shrinkage events . Growth and shrinkage events are considered dynamic ends . Change in ﬁlament length for calculating growth and shrinkage rates was determined using the straight or segmented line tools in ImageJ . Severing frequency was calculatedby the total number ofsevering events observed in a particular time - lapse series divided by the VAEM imaging area and the total time of the time - lapse series . Similarly , the number of dynamic ends was calcu - lated by dividing the total number of elongating and shortening ﬁlaments by the VAEM imaging area and the total time of the time - lapse series . Spinning disc confocal microscopy was performed on a Nikon Ti Eclipse inverted microscope equipped with a Yokogawa CSU - X1 spinning disk head and a 512 3 512 Andor iXON electron multiplying CCD camera . Plantswereimagedwitha488 - nmlaser , 525 / 50 - nmband - passﬁlter , and a 3 100 oil immersion lens ( 1 . 4 numerical aperture ; Nikon ) . The 3 1 . 5 optivar was used for all images to increase magniﬁcation . Quantiﬁcation ofactindynamicsfromLAmovieswasperformedaspreviouslydescribed ( Vidali et al . , 2010 ) . To investigate bundling and F - actin organization throughout the cell , we prepared LA , NLS4 LA , and NLS4 LA D aip1 samples using the 1 % agar pad method ( Vidali et al . , 2010 ) . Optical sections were taken at 0 . 5 - m m intervals from the cortex to the medial plane with a Nikon Ti Eclipse inverted microscope equipped with a Yokogawa CSU - X1 spinning disk head and a 512 3 512 Andor iXON electron multiplying CCD camera . Plants were imaged with a 488 - nm laser , 525 / 50 nm band - pass ﬁlter , and a 3 100 oil immersion lens ( 1 . 4 numerical aperture ; Nikon ) . Phalloidin staining and imaging were performed as previously de - scribed ( Vidali et al . , 2007 ) . To quantify the amount of F - actin bundling present in a cell , the total intensity of individual bundles was calculated as follows : Z - stacks ac - quired with the spinning disk confocal microscope from the cortical section to themedial plane at 0 . 5 - m mintervalsweremaximally projected . Using ImageJ , the maximal projection was background subtracted ( rolling ball radius : 20 pixels ) . Three line scans perpendicular to the axis of the cell at ; 20 , 40 , and 60 m m from the cell apex were collected . The proﬁle of each scan was imported to the program OriginPro 8 . 1 for analysis with the peak analyzer function ( default parameters ) . Each individual peak was automatically identiﬁed and the area under each peakintegrated . Thepeaksidentiﬁedinthiswaycorrespondtobundlesin the cell , and the integrated area under each peak corresponds to the intensity of the corresponding bundle . The integrated values for all the peaks from all three measurements for each cell were averaged . For comparison , independent values obtained fromdifferent cells were used . Protein Extraction and Immunoblotting For AIP1 - mCherry immunoblot , moss protonemal tissue was dried on a papertowelandrapidly frozeninamicrocentrifugetubeinliquidnitrogen . Frozen tissue was ground in the microcentrifuge tube using a plastic pestle and then vortexed in grinding buffer ( 100 mM sodium phosphate , pH 7 . 0 , 10 mM DTT , 20 % glycerol , 5 mM EDTA , 1 mM PMSF , and 20 m g / mL leupeptin ) . For analysis of ADF levels in wild - type and D aip1 lines , moss protonemal tissue was ground in liquid nitrogen in a mortar with a pestle and then vortexed in extraction buffer ( 50 mM HEPES - NaOH , pH 7 . 5 , 150mMNaCl , 2mMPMSF , 20 m g / mLleupeptin , 10 mMEDTA , and 2 AIP1 and ADF Drive Rapid Actin Dynamics 3707 mM DTT ) . All samples were centrifuged at 4 8 C on a benchtop centrifuge , quantiﬁed using a Bradford assay ( Bio - Rad ) , and separated by SDS - PAGE . The protein separation was transferred to a nitrocellulose mem - brane and immunoblotted for AIP1 - mCherry using rabbit anti - dsRed polyclonalantibody ( Clontech ) orforADFusingrabbitanti - ADFpolyclonal antibody ( Augustine et al . , 2008 ) and mouse anti - tubulin monoclonal antibody ( Sigma - Aldrich ) . Chemiluminescence emission from horserad - ish peroxidase fused to polyclonal goat anti - rabbit secondary antibodies was detected on a gel dock system equipped for chemiluminescence detection ( Bio - Rad ) . Complementation Analyses In the wild - type and AIP1 knockout lines , transient rescue was performed by cotransformation of 5 m g of pTH - Ubi - GFP ( Vidali et al . , 2009a ) with 10 m g of pMK - Ubi , pMK - Ubi - AIP1 , or pMK - Ubi - ADF . The GFP expression plasmid was used as a marker to identify transformed plants . For RNAi complementation analysis in the NLS4 line , 30 m g of AIP1 - or ADF - RNAi plasmid were cotransformed with various concentrations of pTH - Ubi - ADF and pTH - Ubi - AIP1 , respectively . Transformations were performed as previously described ( Augustine et al . , 2008 ) , with the following exception . Protoplasts were transformed at 2 . 0 3 10 6 protoplasts / mL , grown for 4 d on PRMB medium , and then transferred to PpNH4 plates supplementedwithG418 ( 30 m g / mL ) forcomplementationinthewildtype and D aip1 or hygromycin ( 15 m g / mL ) for complementation in NLS4 lines . On day 7 , plants were imaged with a 3 1 objective at 3 63 zoom on a ﬂuorescence stereomicroscope ( Leica MZ16FA ) equipped with a color camera ( Leica DF300X ) using the GFP2 ﬁlter set ( Leica ) . Morphometric Analyses and Statistics Plant area and solidity were measured as described previously ( Vidali et al . , 2009b ) . Brieﬂy , a 24 - bit RGB image of 1 - week - old plants was manually cropped , and the red channel corresponding to the chlorophyll autoﬂuorescence was separated . Total plant area and solidity were determined from the images . Solidity is the plant area divided by the convex hull area . Statistical analyses were performed as previously described ( Vidali et al . , 2007 ) . Analysis of variance for multiple comparisons was done on KaleidagraphusingTukey’shonestlysigniﬁcantdifferenceposthoctests . The alpha for statistical signiﬁcance was set to 0 . 05 . Accession Numbers The Arabidopsis AIP1 - 1 and AIP1 - 2 sequences were acquired from The Arabidopsis Information Resource with the accession numbers At2g01330 and At3g18060 , respectively . The accession number for P . patens AIP1 is JF510465 in GenBank . Supplemental Data The following materials are available in the online version of this article . Supplemental Figure 1 . Genotyping AIP1 Knockout Lines . Supplemental Figure 2 . Genotyping AIP1 - mCherry Replacement Lines . Supplemental Figure 3 . ADF Protein Levels in Wild - Type and AIP1 Knockout Lines . Supplemental Figure 4 . Bundling Analysis of NLS4 LA and LA Lines . Supplemental Figure 5 . Fluorescent Phalloidin Staining of F - Actin in Wild Type and AIP1 Knockout Lines . Supplemental Table 1 . Plant AIP1 Protein Sequence Comparisons . Supplemental Table 2 . Primers Used in This Study . Supplemental Movie 1 . Dynamic Behavior of Cortical F - Actin in a Representative LA Cell . Supplemental Movie 2 . Dynamic Behavior of Cortical F - Actin in a Representative NLS4 LA Cell . Supplemental Movie 3 . Dynamic Behavior of Cortical F - Actin in a Representative NLS4 LA GUS - RNAi Cell . Supplemental Movie 4 . Dynamic Behavior of Cortical F - Actin in a Representative NLS4 LA D aip1 Cell . Supplemental Movie 5 . Dynamic Behavior of Cortical F - Actin in a Representative NLS4 LA ADF - RNAi Cell . Supplemental Movie 6 . Example of Filament Translocation Events in the Wild Type ( LA ) . Supplemental Movie 7 . Example of Filament Translocation Events in D aip1 . Supplemental Movie 8 . Example of Rearrangements of Filaments around Bundled Cluster in the Wild Type ( LA ) . Supplemental Movie 9 . Example of Rearrangements of Filaments around Bundled Cluster in D aip1 . Supplemental Movie 10 . Example of Severing Event in the Wild Type ( LA ) . Supplemental Movie 11 . Example of Severing Event in D aip1 . Supplemental Movie Legends . Text Descriptions of Supplemental Movies . ACKNOWLEDGMENTS We thank Peter Hepler and members of the Bezanilla lab for careful reading of the manuscript . We thank Graham Burkart and Paula Franco for technical assistance and Ming Li for assistance with spinning disc confocal microscopy . This work was supported by National Science Foundation Grants MCB - 0747231 ( M . B . ) , DGE - 065412 ( R . C . A . ) , and IOS - 1002837 ( L . V . ) and the David and Lucille Packard Foundation ( M . B . ) . The spinning disc confocal and VAEM microscopes are university facilities funded by a National Science Foundation Major Research Instrumentation Development award ( 0923318 ) . AUTHOR CONTRIBUTIONS R . C . A . and M . B . designed the research and wrote the article . R . C . A . and K . A . P . performed the research . R . C . A . , L . V . , and M . B . analyzed the data . E . T . contributed new computational tools . Received August 19 , 2011 ; revised September 20 , 2011 ; accepted October 2 , 2011 ; published October 14 , 2011 . REFERENCES Aizawa , H . , Katadae , M . , Maruya , M . , Sameshima , M . , Murakami - Murofushi , K . , and Yahara , I . ( 1999 ) . Hyperosmotic stress - induced reorganization of actin bundles in Dictyostelium cells over - expressing coﬁlin . Genes Cells 4 : 311 – 324 . Allwood , E . G . , Anthony , R . G . , Smertenko , A . P . , Reichelt , S . , Drobak , B . K . , Doonan , J . H . , Weeds , A . G . , and Hussey , P . J . ( 2002 ) . Regu - lation of the pollen - speciﬁc actin - depolymerizing factor LlADF1 . Plant Cell 14 : 2915 – 2927 . 3708 The Plant Cell Andrianantoandro , E . , and Pollard , T . D . ( 2006 ) . Mechanism of actin ﬁlament turnover by severing and nucleation at different concentra - tions of ADF / coﬁlin . Mol . Cell 24 : 13 – 23 . Augustine , R . C . , Vidali , L . , Kleinman , K . P . , and Bezanilla , M . ( 2008 ) . Actin depolymerizing factor is essential for viability in plants , and its phosphoregulation is important for tip growth . Plant J . 54 : 863 – 875 . Balcer , H . I . , Goodman , A . L . , Rodal , A . A . , Smith , E . , Kugler , J . , Heuser , J . E . , and Goode , B . L . ( 2003 ) . Coordinated regulation of actin ﬁlament turnover by a high - molecular - weight Srv2 / CAP com - plex , coﬁlin , proﬁlin , and Aip1 . Curr . Biol . 13 : 2159 – 2169 . Bamburg , J . R . ( 1999 ) . Proteins of the ADF / coﬁlin family : Essential regulators of actin dynamics . Annu . Rev . Cell Dev . Biol . 15 : 185 – 230 . Bezanilla , M . , Pan , A . , and Quatrano , R . S . ( 2003 ) . RNA interference in the moss Physcomitrella patens . Plant Physiol . 133 : 470 – 474 . Bezanilla , M . , Perroud , P . F . , Pan , A . , Klueh , P . , and Quatrano , R . S . ( 2005 ) . An RNAi system in Physcomitrella patens with an internal marker for silencing allows for rapid identiﬁcation of loss of function phenotypes . Plant Biol . ( Stuttg . ) 7 : 251 – 257 . Blanchoin , L . , Boujemaa - Paterski , R . , Henty , J . L . , Khurana , P . , and Staiger , C . J . ( 2010 ) . Actin dynamics in plant cells : A team effort from multiple proteins orchestrates this very fast - paced game . Curr . Opin . Plant Biol . 13 : 714 – 723 . Chan , A . Y . , Bailly , M . , Zebda , N . , Segall , J . E . , and Condeelis , J . S . ( 2000 ) . Role of coﬁlin in epidermal growth factor - stimulated actin polymerization and lamellipod protrusion . J . Cell Biol . 148 : 531 – 542 . Chen , C . Y . , Wong , E . I . , Vidali , L . , Estavillo , A . , Hepler , P . K . , Wu , H . M . , and Cheung , A . Y . ( 2002 ) . The regulation of actin organization by actin - depolymerizing factor in elongating pollen tubes . Plant Cell 14 : 2175 – 2190 . Cheung , A . Y . , Niroomand , S . , Zou , Y . , and Wu , H . M . ( 2010 ) . A transmembrane formin nucleates subapical actin assembly and con - trols tip - focused growth in pollen tubes . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA 107 : 16390 – 16395 . Cove , D . J . , Schild , A . , Ashton , N . W . , and Hartmann , E . ( 1978 ) . Genetic and physiological studies of the effect of light on the devel - opment of moss , Physcomitrella patens . Photochem . Photobiol . 27 : 249 – 254 . Dong , C . H . , Xia , G . X . , Hong , Y . , Ramachandran , S . , Kost , B . , and Chua , N . H . ( 2001 ) . ADF proteins are involved in the control of ﬂowering and regulate F - actin organization , cell expansion , and organ growth in Arabidopsis . Plant Cell 13 : 1333 – 1346 . Era , A . , Tominaga , M . , Ebine , K . , Awai , C . , Saito , C . , Ishizaki , K . , Yamato , K . T . , Kohchi , T . , Nakano , A . , and Ueda , T . ( 2009 ) . Appli - cation of Lifeact reveals F - actin dynamics in Arabidopsis thaliana and the liverwort , Marchantia polymorpha . Plant Cell Physiol . 50 : 1041 – 1048 . Finka , A . , Saidi , Y . , Goloubinoff , P . , Neuhaus , J . M . , Zry¨d , J . P . , and Schaefer , D . G . ( 2008 ) . The knock - out of ARP3a gene affects F - actin cytoskeleton organization altering cellular tip growth , morphology and development in moss Physcomitrella patens . Cell Motil . Cytoskeleton 65 : 769 – 784 . Ghosh , M . , Song , X . , Mouneimne , G . , Sidani , M . , Lawrence , D . S . , and Condeelis , J . S . ( 2004 ) . Coﬁlin promotes actin polymerization and deﬁnes the direction of cell motility . Science 304 : 743 – 746 . Gibbon , B . C . , Kovar , D . R . , and Staiger , C . J . ( 1999 ) . Latrunculin B has different effects on pollen germination and tube growth . Plant Cell 11 : 2349 – 2363 . Harries , P . A . , Pan , A . , and Quatrano , R . S . ( 2005 ) . Actin - related pro - tein2 / 3 complex component ARPC1 is required for proper cell mor - phogenesis and polarized cell growth in Physcomitrella patens . Plant Cell 17 : 2327 – 2339 . Hepler , P . K . , Vidali , L . , and Cheung , A . Y . ( 2001 ) . Polarized cell growth in higher plants . Annu . Rev . Cell Dev . Biol . 17 : 159 – 187 . Hotulainen , P . , Paunola , E . , Vartiainen , M . K . , and Lappalainen , P . ( 2005 ) . Actin - depolymerizing factor and coﬁlin - 1 play overlapping roles in promoting rapid F - actin depolymerization in mammalian nonmuscle cells . Mol . Biol . Cell 16 : 649 – 664 . Iida , K . , and Yahara , I . ( 1999 ) . Cooperation of two actin - binding proteins , coﬁlin and Aip1 , in Saccharomyces cerevisiae . Genes Cells 4 : 21 – 32 . Ketelaar , T . , Allwood , E . G . , Anthony , R . , Voigt , B . , Menzel , D . , and Hussey , P . J . ( 2004 ) . The actin - interacting protein AIP1 is essential for actin organization and plant development . Curr . Biol . 14 : 145 – 149 . Ketelaar , T . , Allwood , E . G . , and Hussey , P . J . ( 2007 ) . Actin organiza - tion and root hair development are disrupted by ethanol - induced overexpression of Arabidopsis actin interacting protein 1 ( AIP1 ) . New Phytol . 174 : 57 – 62 . Konzok , A . , Weber , I . , Simmeth , E . , Hacker , U . , Maniak , M . , and Mu¨ller - Taubenberger , A . ( 1999 ) . DAip1 , a Dictyostelium homologue of the yeast actin - interacting protein 1 , is involved in endocytosis , cytokinesis , and motility . J . Cell Biol . 146 : 453 – 464 . Lappalainen , P . , and Drubin , D . G . ( 1997 ) . Coﬁlin promotes rapid actin ﬁlament turnover in vivo . Nature 388 : 78 – 82 . Lee , L . Y . , Fang , M . J . , Kuang , L . Y . , and Gelvin , S . B . ( 2008 ) . Vectors for multi - color bimolecular ﬂuorescence complementation to investi - gate protein - protein interactions in living plant cells . Plant Methods 4 : 24 . Loisel , T . P . , Boujemaa , R . , Pantaloni , D . , and Carlier , M . F . ( 1999 ) . Reconstitution of actin - based motility of Listeria and Shigella using pure proteins . Nature 401 : 613 – 616 . Lovy - Wheeler , A . , Kunkel , J . G . , Allwood , E . G . , Hussey , P . J . , and Hepler , P . K . ( 2006 ) . Oscillatory increases in alkalinity anticipate growth and may regulate actin dynamics in pollen tubes of lily . Plant Cell 18 : 2182 – 2193 . Maciver , S . K . , and Hussey , P . J . ( 2002 ) . The ADF / coﬁlin family : Actin - remodeling proteins . Genome Biol . 3 : reviews3007 . Maciver , S . K . , Zot , H . G . , and Pollard , T . D . ( 1991 ) . Characterization of actin ﬁlament severing by actophorin from Acanthamoeba castellanii . J . Cell Biol . 115 : 1611 – 1620 . Menand , B . , Calder , G . , and Dolan , L . ( 2007 ) . Both chloronemal and caulonemal cells expand by tip growth in the moss Physcomitrella patens . J . Exp . Bot . 58 : 1843 – 1849 . Michelot , A . , Berro , J . , Gue´rin , C . , Boujemaa - Paterski , R . , Staiger , C . J . , Martiel , J . L . , and Blanchoin , L . ( 2007 ) . Actin - ﬁlament stochas - tic dynamics mediated by ADF / coﬁlin . Curr . Biol . 17 : 825 – 833 . Miller , D . D . , de Ruijter , N . C . A . , Bisseling , T . , and Emons , A . M . C . ( 1999 ) . The role of actin in root hair morphogenesis : Studies with lipochito - oligosaccharide as a growth stimulator and cytochalasin as an actin perturbing drug . Plant J . 17 : 141 – 154 . Mohri , K . , and Ono , S . ( 2003 ) . Actin ﬁlament disassembling activity of Caenorhabditis elegans actin - interacting protein 1 ( UNC - 78 ) is de - pendent on ﬁlament binding by a speciﬁc ADF / coﬁlin isoform . J . Cell Sci . 116 : 4107 – 4118 . Mohri , K . , Vorobiev , S . , Fedorov , A . A . , Almo , S . C . , and Ono , S . ( 2004 ) . Identiﬁcation of functional residues on Caenorhabditis elegans actin - interacting protein 1 ( UNC - 78 ) for disassembly of actin depoly - merizing factor / coﬁlin - bound actin ﬁlaments . J . Biol . Chem . 279 : 31697 – 31707 . Okada , K . , Blanchoin , L . , Abe , H . , Chen , H . , Pollard , T . D . , and Bamburg , J . R . ( 2002 ) . Xenopus actin - interacting protein 1 ( XAip1 ) enhances coﬁlin fragmentation of ﬁlaments by capping ﬁlament ends . J . Biol . Chem . 277 : 43011 – 43016 . Okada , K . , Obinata , T . , and Abe , H . ( 1999 ) . XAIP1 : A Xenopus homologue of yeast actin interacting protein 1 ( AIP1 ) , which induces disassembly of actin ﬁlaments cooperatively with ADF / coﬁlin family proteins . J . Cell Sci . 112 : 1553 – 1565 . AIP1 and ADF Drive Rapid Actin Dynamics 3709 Okada , K . , Ravi , H . , Smith , E . M . , and Goode , B . L . ( 2006 ) . Aip1 and coﬁlin promote rapid turnover of yeast actin patches and cables : A coordinated mechanism for severing and capping ﬁlaments . Mol . Biol . Cell 17 : 2855 – 2868 . Okreglak , V . , and Drubin , D . G . ( 2010 ) . Loss of Aip1 reveals a role in maintaining the actin monomer pool and an in vivo oligomer assembly pathway . J . Cell Biol . 188 : 769 – 777 . Ono , S . ( 2001 ) . The Caenorhabditis elegans unc - 78 gene encodes a homologue of actin - interacting protein 1 required for organized as - sembly of muscle actin ﬁlaments . J . Cell Biol . 152 : 1313 – 1319 . Ono , S . ( 2003 ) . Regulation of actin ﬁlament dynamics by actin depoly - merizing factor / coﬁlin and actin - interacting protein 1 : New blades for twisted ﬁlaments . Biochemistry 42 : 13363 – 13370 . Pavlov , D . , Muhlrad , A . , Cooper , J . , Wear , M . , and Reisler , E . ( 2007 ) . Actin ﬁlament severing by coﬁlin . J . Mol . Biol . 365 : 1350 – 1358 . Perroud , P . F . , and Quatrano , R . S . ( 2006 ) . The role of ARPC4 in tip growth and alignment of the polar axis in ﬁlaments of Physcomitrella patens . Cell Motil . Cytoskeleton 63 : 162 – 171 . Pollard , T . D . , and Cooper , J . A . ( 2009 ) . Actin , a central player in cell shape and movement . Science 326 : 1208 – 1212 . Ramachandran , S . , Christensen , H . E . , Ishimaru , Y . , Dong , C . H . , Chao - Ming , W . , Cleary , A . L . , and Chua , N . H . ( 2000 ) . Proﬁlin plays a role in cell elongation , cell shape maintenance , and ﬂowering in Arabidopsis . Plant Physiol . 124 : 1637 – 1647 . Ren , N . , Charlton , J . , and Adler , P . N . ( 2007 ) . The ﬂare gene , which encodes the AIP1 protein of Drosophila , functions to regulate F - actin disassembly in pupal epidermal cells . Genetics 176 : 2223 – 2234 . Rensing , S . A . , et al . ( 2008 ) . The Physcomitrella genome reveals evo - lutionary insights into the conquest of land by plants . Science 319 : 64 – 69 . Rodal , A . A . , Tetreault , J . W . , Lappalainen , P . , Drubin , D . G . , and Amberg , D . C . ( 1999 ) . Aip1p interacts with coﬁlin to disassemble actin ﬁlaments . J . Cell Biol . 145 : 1251 – 1264 . Rosenblatt , J . , Agnew , B . J . , Abe , H . , Bamburg , J . R . , and Mitchison , T . J . ( 1997 ) . Xenopus actin depolymerizing factor / coﬁlin ( XAC ) is responsible for the turnover of actin ﬁlaments in Listeria monocyto - genes tails . J . Cell Biol . 136 : 1323 – 1332 . Ruzicka , D . R . , Kandasamy , M . K . , McKinney , E . C . , Burgos - Rivera , B . , and Meagher , R . B . ( 2007 ) . The ancient subclasses of Arabidopsis Actin Depolymerizing Factor genes exhibit novel and differential expression . Plant J . 52 : 460 – 472 . Schaefer , D . G . , and Zry¨d , J . P . ( 1997 ) . Efﬁcient gene targeting in the moss Physcomitrella patens . Plant J . 11 : 1195 – 1206 . Smertenko , A . P . , Deeks , M . J . , and Hussey , P . J . ( 2010 ) . Strategies of actin reorganisation in plant cells . J . Cell Sci . 123 : 3019 – 3028 . Staiger , C . J . , Sheahan , M . B . , Khurana , P . , Wang , X . , McCurdy , D . W . , and Blanchoin , L . ( 2009 ) . Actin ﬁlament dynamics are dominated by rapid growth and severing activity in the Arabidopsis cortical array . J . Cell Biol . 184 : 269 – 280 . Vidali , L . , Augustine , R . C . , Fay , S . N . , Franco , P . , Pattavina , K . A . , and Bezanilla , M . ( 2009b ) . Rapid screening for temperature - sensitive alleles in plants . Plant Physiol . 151 : 506 – 514 . Vidali , L . , Augustine , R . C . , Kleinman , K . P . , and Bezanilla , M . ( 2007 ) . Proﬁlin is essential for tip growth in the moss Physcomitrella patens . Plant Cell 19 : 3705 – 3722 . Vidali , L . , Burkart , G . M . , Augustine , R . C . , Kerdavid , E . , Tu¨zel , E . , and Bezanilla , M . ( 2010 ) . Myosin XI is essential for tip growth in Phys - comitrella patens . Plant Cell 22 : 1868 – 1882 . Vidali , L . , McKenna , S . T . , and Hepler , P . K . ( 2001 ) . Actin polymeriza - tion is essential for pollen tube growth . Mol . Biol . Cell 12 : 2534 – 2545 . Vidali , L . , Rounds , C . M . , Hepler , P . K . , and Bezanilla , M . ( 2009a ) . Lifeact - mEGFP reveals a dynamic apical F - actin network in tip growing plant cells . PLoS ONE 4 : e5744 . Vidali , L . , van Gisbergen , P . A . , Gue´rin , C . , Franco , P . , Li , M . , Burkart , G . M . , Augustine , R . C . , Blanchoin , L . , and Bezanilla , M . ( 2009c ) . Rapid formin - mediated actin - ﬁlament elongation is essential for po - larized plant cell growth . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA 106 : 13341 – 13346 . Wu , Y . , Yan , J . , Zhang , R . , Qu , X . , Ren , S . , Chen , N . , and Huang , S . ( 2010 ) . Arabidopsis FIMBRIN5 , an actin bundling factor , is required for pollen germination and pollen tube growth . Plant Cell 22 : 3745 – 3763 . Ye , J . , Zheng , Y . , Yan , A . , Chen , N . , Wang , Z . , Huang , S . , and Yang , Z . ( 2009 ) . Arabidopsis formin3 directs the formation of actin cables and polarized growth in pollen tubes . Plant Cell 21 : 3868 – 3884 . Zhang , H . , Qu , X . , Bao , C . , Khurana , P . , Wang , Q . , Xie , Y . , Zheng , Y . , Chen , N . , Blanchoin , L . , Staiger , C . J . , and Huang , S . ( 2010 ) . Arabidopsis VILLIN5 , an actin ﬁlament bundling and severing protein , is necessary for normal pollen tube growth . Plant Cell 22 : 2749 – 2767 . Zhang , Y . , Xiao , Y . , Du , F . , Cao , L . , Dong , H . , and Ren , H . ( 2011 ) . Arabidopsis VILLIN4 is involved in root hair growth through regulating actin organization in a Ca2 + - dependent manner . New Phytol . 190 : 667 – 682 . 3710 The Plant Cell DOI 10 . 1105 / tpc . 111 . 090753 ; originally published online October 14 , 2011 ; 2011 ; 23 ; 3696 - 3710 Plant Cell Robert C . Augustine , Kelli A . Pattavina , Erkan Tüzel , Luis Vidali and Magdalena Bezanilla Physcomitrella patens Actin Interacting Protein1 and Actin Depolymerizing Factor Drive Rapid Actin Dynamics in This information is current as of July 8 , 2017 Supplemental Data / content / suppl / 2011 / 10 / 04 / tpc . 111 . 090753 . DC1 . html References / content / 23 / 10 / 3696 . full . html # ref - list - 1 This article cites 63 articles , 37 of which can be accessed free at : Permissions https : / / www . copyright . com / ccc / openurl . do ? sid = pd _ hw1532298X & issn = 1532298X & WT . mc _ id = pd _ hw1532298X eTOCs http : / / www . plantcell . org / cgi / alerts / ctmain Sign up for eTOCs at : CiteTrack Alerts http : / / www . plantcell . org / cgi / alerts / ctmain Sign up for CiteTrack Alerts at : Subscription Information http : / / www . aspb . org / publications / subscriptions . cfm is available at : Plant Physiology and The Plant Cell Subscription Information for ADVANCING THE SCIENCE OF PLANT BIOLOGY © American Society of Plant Biologists