Endocytosis : Actin in the Driving Seat Dispatch Kathryn R . Ayscough Endocytosis is an essential eukaryotic process which has been reported to require a functional actin cytoskeleton . New data obtained using the model yeast Saccharomyces cerevisiae significantly advances our understanding of the interface bet - ween the endocytic machinery and actin . Endocytosis has a number of important functions in eukaryotic cells : it is critical for controlling the protein – lipid composition of the plasma membrane and the uptake of nutrients as well as pathogens , and it also plays an important role in the regulation of cell signaling . While a number of pathways for endocytosis have been characterised , all of these require remodelling of the cell cortex . The impor - tance of a dynamic actin cytoskeleton for facilitating endocytosis has been recognized for many years from work on the budding yeast Saccharomyces cerevisiae , and the generality of this role is increas - ingly supported by studies in mammalian cells [ 1 ] . In yeast , the first evidence for a link between endocytosis and the actin cytoskeleton came from genetic screens for endocytic mutants [ 2 – 4 ] . Many of these endocytic ( end ) mutants were subsequently found to have defects in the actin cytoskeleton or to be the result of mutations in genes encoding proteins known to associate with actin . However , the mechanis - tic details of how the actin cytoskeleton acts in endo - cytosis in yeast have been unclear . Indeed , following electron microscopy studies localising the Ste2p pheromone receptor to sites distinct from those con - taining actin [ 5 ] , there was speculation as to whether the actin cytoskeleton played a direct role in endocyto - sis at all . These doubts , including other longstanding contradictions among published data , now appear to have been laid to rest by several recent studies . The new data , most notably those reported by Kaksonen et al . [ 6 ] , give a clear idea of how actin is coupled to endo - cytosis in yeast , and reveal significant similarities to the role of actin during endocytosis in mammalian cells . In their elegant study , Kaksonen et al . [ 6 ] used real - time fluorescence microscopy to localize a number of GFP - tagged proteins previously implicated in endocy - tosis or the organization of the actin cytoskeleton . The life cycle of an actin patch in yeast has been previously described [ 7 ] , but the new work of Kaksonen et al . [ 6 ] has added an important functional dimension . Their data show that , rather than being generated de novo , the actin patches form at pre - existing sites containing endo - cytic machinery . A cortical actin patch appears to be generated in order to support the process of endocyto - sis . Actin polymerisation at this site is then proposed to drive the endocytic vesicles into the cell . In this respect , the process may be extremely similar to that in mammalian cells , where evanescent field microscopy revealed the recruitment of actin at late stages of vesicle formation and apparent movement of the vesicle into the cell coupled to polymerisation of actin [ 8 ] . Kaksonen et al . [ 6 ] measured the life - time of several GFP - tagged protein patches and recorded their kinetic behavior . The proteins studied were : Las17p , a homo - logue of the actin regulator WASP ; Sla2p , homologous to Huntingtin interacting protein HIP1 - R ; Sla1p , an endocytic adaptor protein ; Pan1p , an Eps15 homo - logue ; Abp1p , an actin - binding protein with a mam - malian homologue ; and Arc15p , a component of the Arp2 / 3 complex which nucleates actin polymerisation . The authors observed changes in the composition of a cortical patch through its life - time and found that the behavior of the patch correlates with its specific protein composition . While patches containing Abp1p and Arc15p were seen to be short lived , they displayed distinctive motility : slow movement followed by rapid movement . Patches containing the proteins Sla1p , Pan1p and Sla2p had a longer life - time and showed restricted movement followed by slow movement . Las17p - containing patches were the longest lived , but these showed relatively little movement at any point in their life - time ( Figure 1 ) . Warren et al . [ 9 ] had previously shown that Abp1p and Sla1p patches can exist separately , but also co - localize , and they postulated that this association is required for endocytosis . Kaksonen et al . [ 6 ] investi - gated localisation of these and several other pairs of tagged proteins and were able to show that the patches evolve in such a way as to explain many earlier findings . Their model proposes that Las17p is a component of early patches , which then recruit other proteins of the endocytic machinery : Sla1p , Sla2p and Pan1p . At this stage the patches are relatively immotile . Actin and its associated proteins — marked by Abp1p and Arc15p — are then recruited , and this is signified by an initial slow rate of patch movement while the endocytic pro - teins are present . It is thought that these proteins are then disassembled from the patch , and there is rapid movement of the endocytosed vesicle into the cell . Interestingly , different Arp2 / 3 - activating activities are present during the immotile , slow and rapid movement stages ( Las17 , Pan1p and Abp1p , respectively ) , a first indication these different activator proteins have dis - tinct roles . In the model [ 6 ] , Las17p is the earliest acti - vator in the patch . Given that actin is not detected in the patch until a later stage , it seems likely that Las17p has additional roles at this early stage , which might include recruitment of other proteins such as Sla1p [ 10 ] . Within the later - stage patches , Las17p is thought to remain at the plasma membrane as the patch invagi - nates and moves inwards . This localisation might indi - cate that Las17p has a role in driving polymerisation of actin immediately adjacent to the membrane . Pan1p is the second activator that localises to a developing actin patch , and this activator is found on Current Biology , Vol . 14 , R124 – R126 , February 3 , 2004 , ©2004 Elsevier Science Ltd . All rights reserved . DOI 10 . 1016 / j . cub . 2004 . 01 . 021 Department of Molecular Biology and Biotechnology , University of Sheffield , Sheffield S10 2TN , UK . E - mail : k . ayscough @ sheffield . ac . uk patches as they move into the cell . Pan1p might there - fore participate in driving this movement ; alternatively it might be involved in membrane scission events , as pan1 mutants accumulate long plasma membrane invaginations [ 11 ] . Lastly , Abp1p localises to patches at the late stage , when they are proposed to be moving into the cell and when the recruitment of actin to the patches is maximal . This late role , proposed to follow invagination and possibly scission , would explain why lack of Abp1p does not effect endocytosis per se . This notion of sequentially functioning Arp2 / 3 activators has also been suggested from work on the activators cor - tactin and WASP in mammalian cells [ 12 ] . One final aspect of the new study by Kaksonen et al . [ 6 ] came from analysing a strain lacking Sla2p , a com - ponent of the endocytosis machinery . As previously noted [ 13 ] , in the absence of Sla2p , cortical patches appear elongated , giving the appearance of actin tails overlapping the fluorescence signal from the endocytic adaptors . At this arrested stage , a cargo protein ( the yeast pheromone receptor Ste2p ) , adaptors and actin were seen to colocalise , the first definitive demonstra - tion that these components do all come together . Strikingly , while these patches contain both actin and early endocytic patch markers , they do not move , indi - cating that they represent an intermediate step in the endocytic process . The Sla2p - deficient strain was used to address the important question of whether the actin filaments recruited to endocytic sites are pre - formed or nucleated at the site . By applying the technique of fluorescence recovery after photobleaching ( FRAP ) to Current Biology R125 Figure 1 . A schematic model of cortical patch development in budding yeast . From their visualization of GFP - tagged proteins , Kaksonen et al . [ 6 ] propose dis - tinct stages in the life cycle of a cortical patch . Las17p characterises stage one patches , which are relatively long lived ( > 30 sec ) but almost static . Other proteins ( designated ? ) that are likely to be local - ized at this stage include verprolin ( Vrp1p ) , which is required for localisation of Las17p itself [ 7 ] . It is not yet clear whether the patches at this stage recog - nize any specific cargoes . Stage two patches exist for an intermediate amount of time ( ~ 30 sec ) ; they are initially static but then show some limited slow move - ment . This stage of the patch is charac - terised by the presence of the endocytic proteins Sla1p , Sla2p and Pan1p . At this stage there are known interactions with cargoes , such as the pheromone receptor Ste2p [ 14 ] . The final stage of patch devel - opment is characterised by recruitment of actin and associated proteins . These patches at first move slowly , while the endocytic proteins are still present , but then they lose endocytic proteins and exhibit a short rapid burst of movement , as actin polymerisation drives internalisa - tion of the endocytic vesicle into the cell . L , Las17p ; S1 , Sla1p ; S2 , Sla2p ; P , Pan1p ; C , cargo ; A , actin ; A1 Abp1p ; A2 / 3 Arp2 / 3 complex ( incorporating the tagged protein Arc15p ) . Stage 4 Slow movement Fast movement A1 A1 A1 A2 / 3 A2 / 3 A A A Stage 1 L ? ? L Non - motile S2 S1 L ? ? L Stage 2 P S2 S1 L L A2 / 3 A2 / 3 A A Stage 3 P C C C Current Biology DispatchR126 the actin tails in Sla2p - deficient cells , it was clearly demonstrated that actin is nucleated at the endocytic sites . Furthermore , the rate of polymerisation was found to be comparable to that observed in highly motile cells , indicating that a capacity for high actin polymerisation rates is fundamental to eukaryotic cells . Despite the considerable step forward reported by Kaksonen et al . [ 6 ] , there are still important aspects of the endocytic process that remain unresolved , most strikingly the mechanistic contributions of the plethora of proteins that localize to cortical patches . Kaksonen et al . [ 6 ] discuss the localisation and behavior of six proteins within cortical patches . But more than 20 other proteins have been reported to have at least overlap - ping localisation with cortical actin . The molecular func - tions of these are largely unknown , though genetic studies point to redundancy among many of the patch components . The ease of genetic exploitation in yeast however , means that studies as performed by Kakso - nen et al . [ 6 ] may soon reveal further insights into this essential eukaryotic process . References 1 . Engvist - Goldstein , A . E . , and Drubin , D . G . ( 2003 ) . Actin assembly and endocytosis : from yeast to mammals . Annu . Rev . Cell Dev . Biol . 19 , 287 – 332 . 2 . Kübler , E . , and Riezman , H . ( 1993 ) . Actin and fimbrin are required for the internalization step of endocytosis in yeast . EMBO J . 12 , 2855 – 2862 . 3 . Munn , A . L . , Stevenson , B . J . , Geli , M . I . , and Riezman , H . ( 1995 ) . end5 , end6 , and end7 : mutations that cause actin delocalisation and block the internalisation step of endocytosis in Saccharomyces cerevisiae . Mol . Biol . Cell 6 , 1721 – 1742 . 4 . Raths , S . , Rohrer , J . , Crausaz , F . , and Riezman , H . ( 1993 ) . end3 and end4 : two mutants defective in receptor - mediated endocytosis in Saccharomyces cerevisiae . J . Cell Biol . 120 , 55 – 65 . 5 . Mulholland , J . , Konopka , J . , Singer - Kruger , B . , Zerial , M . , and Bot - stein , D . ( 1999 ) . Visualization of receptor - mediated endocytosis in yeast . Mol . Biol . Cell 10 , 799 – 817 . 6 . Kaksonen , M . , Sun , Y . , and Drubin , D . G . ( 2003 ) . A pathway for Asso - ciation of receptors , adaptors , and actin during endocytic internal - ization . Cell 115 , 475 – 487 . 7 . Smith , M . G . , Swamy , S . R . , and Pon , L . A . ( 2001 ) . The life cycle of actin patches in mating yeast . J . Cell Sci . 114 , 1505 – 1513 . 8 . Merrifield , C . J . , Feldman , M . E . , Wan , L . , and Almers , W . ( 2002 ) . Imaging actin and dynamin recruitment during invagination of single clathrin - coated pits . Nat . Cell Biol . 4 , 691 – 698 . 9 . Warren , D . T . , Andrews , P . D . , Gourlay , C . G . , and Ayscough , K . R . ( 2002 ) . Sla1p couples the yeast endocytic machinery to proteins regulating actin dynamics . J . Cell Sci . 115 , 1703 – 1715 . 10 . Li , R . ( 1997 ) . Bee1 , a yeast protein with homology to Wiscott - Aldrich syndrome protein , is critical for the assembly of cortical actin cytoskeleton . J . Cell Biol . 136 , 649 – 658 . 11 . Wendland , B . , McCaffery , J . M . , Xiao , Q . , and Emr , S . D . ( 1996 ) . A novel fluorescence - activated cell sorter - based screen for yeast endocytosis mutants identified a yeast homologue of mammalian Eps15 . J . Cell Biol . 135 , 1485 – 1500 . 12 . Urono , T . , Liu , J . , Li , Y . , Smith , N . , and Zhan , X . ( 2003 ) . Sequential interaction of Actin - related proteins 2 and 3 ( Arp2 / 3 ) complex with Neural Wiscott - Aldrich Syndrome Protein ( N - WASP ) and Cortactin during branched actin filament network formation . J . Biol . Chem . 278 , 26086 – 26093 . 13 . Gourlay , C . W . , Dewar , H . , Warren , D . T . , Costa , R . , Satish , N . , and Ayscough , K . R . ( 2003 ) . An interaction between Sla1p and Sla2p plays a role in regulating actin dynamics and endocytosis in budding yeast . J . Cell Sci . 116 , 2551 – 2564 . 14 . Howard , J . P . , Hutton , J . L . , Olson , J . M . , and Payne , G . S . ( 2002 ) . Sla1p serves as the targeting signal recognition factor for NPFX ( 1 , 2 ) D - mediated endocytosis . J . Cell Biol . 157 , 315 – 326 .