BISNIS & BIROKRASI : Jurnal Ilmu Administrasi dan Organisasi BISNIS & BIROKRASI : Jurnal Ilmu Administrasi dan Organisasi Volume 29 Number 3 Volume 29 No . 3 ( September 2022 ) Article 3 9 - 30 - 2022 Determinants of Entrepreneurial Intention : A Study on Indonesian Determinants of Entrepreneurial Intention : A Study on Indonesian Students Students Satriadi Satriadi STIE Pembangunan Tanjungpinang Abu Muna Almaududi Ausat Universitas Subang D . Yadi Heryadi Universitas Siliwangi Warkianto Widjaja Universitas Kebangsaan Republik Indonesia Ade Risna Sari Universitas Tanjungpura Follow this and additional works at : https : / / scholarhub . ui . ac . id / jbb Part of the E - Commerce Commons , and the Entrepreneurial and Small Business Operations Commons Recommended Citation Recommended Citation Satriadi , Satriadi ; Almaududi Ausat , Abu Muna ; Heryadi , D . Yadi ; Widjaja , Warkianto ; and Sari , Ade Risna ( 2022 ) " Determinants of Entrepreneurial Intention : A Study on Indonesian Students , " BISNIS & BIROKRASI : Jurnal Ilmu Administrasi dan Organisasi : Vol . 29 : No . 3 , Article 3 . DOI : 10 . 20476 / jbb . v29i3 . 1323 Available at : https : / / scholarhub . ui . ac . id / jbb / vol29 / iss3 / 3 This Article is brought to you for free and open access by the Faculty of Administrative Science at UI Scholars Hub . It has been accepted for inclusion in BISNIS & BIROKRASI : Jurnal Ilmu Administrasi dan Organisasi by an authorized editor of UI Scholars Hub . Determinants of Entrepreneurial Intention : A Study on Indonesian Students Determinants of Entrepreneurial Intention : A Study on Indonesian Students Cover Page Footnote Cover Page Footnote The authors thanks all participants involved for helping to compile , providing various data and information so that this research can be completed This article is available in BISNIS & BIROKRASI : Jurnal Ilmu Administrasi dan Organisasi : https : / / scholarhub . ui . ac . id / jbb / vol29 / iss3 / 3 BISNIS & BIROKRASI : Jurnal Ilmu Administrasi dan Organisasi , September 2022 Volume 29 , Number 3 INTRODUCTION Entrepreneurship is typically considered a means to make ends meet and earn a living independently of employment status . To become an entrepreneur , one must have the mentality and characteristics of being diligent , thorough , creative , innovative , and willing to take calculated risks . Indonesia , a develop - ing country with a growing population , has a scarcity of employment opportunities ( Putri & Zulfa , 2020 ) . This situation is particularly challenging for uni - versity graduates , as the number of job openings is not proportional to the number of graduates or new workers at all education levels ( Maryanti et al . , 2022 ; Ausat , 2023 ) . According to the Badan Pusat Statistik ( Statistics Agency ) , the number of unemployed indi - viduals in Indonesia was 4 . 15 million in August 2022 ( bps . go . id ) . Combined with the COVID - 19 epidemic , the depletion of employment opportunities becomes even more apparent . This condition requires uni - versity students to think more creatively to look for employment opportunities . The role of universities in providing entrepreneurship education is a crucial factor in the rise of entrepreneurship in a country ( Chimucheka , 2013 ) . Universities must offer students ample opportunities to develop into individuals with trusted integrity who can be entrepreneurial , com - municate effectively , collaborate , and possess an entrepreneurial personality ( Devi , 2020 ) . Almost all universities in Indonesia include an entrepreneurship unit in their curriculum . The government is continuing to support Micro , Small , and Medium Enterprises , particularly during the Covid - 19 pandemic , by expanding access to financing . One concrete step Determinants of Entrepreneurial Intention : A Study on Indonesian Students Satriadi 1 , Abu Muna Almaududi Ausat 2 , D . Yadi Heryadi 3 , Warkianto Widjaja 4 , Ade Risna Sari 5 STIE Pembangunan Tanjungpinang , Indonesia 1 Universitas Subang , Indonesia 2 Universitas Siliwangi , Indonesia 3 Universitas Kebangsaan Republik Indonesia , Indonesia 4 Universitas Tanjungpura , Indonesia 5 satriadi @ stie - pembangunan . ac . id 1 , abumuna742 @ gmail . com 2 , heryadiday63 @ yahoo . co . id 3 , warkiw @ yahoo . com 4 , a . risna . sari @ fisip . untan . ac . id5 Abstract . Finding jobs for university graduates is becoming more difficult as the number of job opportunities available is not proportional to the number of graduates . This situation is aggravated by the low interest of the Indonesian population in entrepreneurship , which is at roughly 3 . 1 % . This study aims to investigate the effect of entrepreneurial self - efficacy , creativity , attitude toward entrepreneurship , social media , entrepreneurial culture , and motivation on student’s entrepreneurial intentions . Social media is warranted in the study as the respondents are in the group of millennials . A quantitative method was used . The data analysis employed Structural Equation Modelling ( SEM ) with Partial Least Squares ( PLS ) . The participants were undergraduate students from universities in Malang City and Surabaya , Indonesia , recruited using an online questionnaire . The research sample included 315 respondents . This study used self - efficacy , creativity , attitude , culture , and motivation as the determinants of student’s entrepreneurial intention . It proposed six hypotheses that reflect the impact of each determinant on entrepreneurial intentions . The study revealed that of the six hypotheses tested , all had a significant impact on explaining the determinants of student’s entrepreneurial intention . Social media is proven to be the catalyst for student entrepreneurial intention . Educated students recognize and assume that social media can help run a business without requiring a large investment . This study also suggests that lecturers ' involvement enables students to acquire entrepreneurial skills in classroom learning and organizations . Thus , students with a greater level of entrepreneurial insight will find it easier to foster an entrepreneurial attitude and think more imaginatively to commercialize new ideas in the form of product development before they realize their entrepreneurial potential . Keywords : Self - efficacy , creativity , attitude , social media , culture , motivation , student’s entrepreneurial intention DOI : 10 . 20476 / jbb . v29i3 . 1323 Copyright © Author ( s ) 2022 . Re - use permitted under CC BY SA 4 . 0 . You must give appropriate credit , provide a link to the license , and indicate if changes were made . Published by Faculty of Administrative Science , Universitas Indonesia . See rights and permissions at https : / / creativecommons . org / licenses / by / 4 . 0 Corespondence to : Abu Muna Almaududi Ausat abumuna742 @ gmail . com BISNIS & BIROKRASI : Jurnal Ilmu Administrasi dan Organisasi , September 2022 Volume 29 , Number 3 152 taken is to embrace entrepreneurs from the univer - sity academic community . Government support in the form of cheap and easily accessible financing for business players , particularly students , is expected to mobilize entrepreneurial spirit and create job oppor - tunities to accelerate national economic recovery . Additionally , the Higher Education Service Institution has an Entrepreneurial Student Development pro - gram ( Program Pembinaan Mahasiswa Wirausaha / P2MW ) . This program provides business develop - ment coaching and funding to students who already have a business . P2MW is intended to help universi - ties design an entrepreneurial coaching process that fosters the development of creative technopreneurs traits , including collaborative leadership , creative problem - solving , technology - based innovation , and the courage to take measurable risks . Organized by the Ministry of Education and Culture , P2MW hones stu - dent’s entrepreneurship skills and provides a platform for young entrepreneurs . This program enables stu - dents to develop and introduce their products to gain wider recognition while also fostering their entrepre - neurial interests . It is expected to motivate students to start businesses from an early age , encouraging them to implement creativity as educated individuals with the support of academic self - efficacy . By doing so , universities can create a culture of entrepreneur - ship that has a positive impact on student’s attitudes toward the benefits of entrepreneurship . Establishing P2MW is one way to increase universities ' capacity to foster entrepreneurship through character develop - ment . To further encourage the entrepreneurial spirit among students , the Ministry of Youth and Sports of the Republic of Indonesia is actively providing entre - preneurship lectures as part of its priority program , Kemenpora 2020 - 2024 , which aims to empower youth to be creative , innovative , and competitive , and foster entrepreneurial interests . The purpose of this program is to equip and prepare students with entrepreneurship skills so that , after graduating from college , they have the necessary tools to become inde - pendent and competitive in addition to their academic qualifications . The government aims to cultivate this entrepreneurial spirit while students are still on campus rather than having it be seen as a last resort after failing to secure employment in various agen - cies . This approach aims to make entrepreneurship a priority choice and mindset among students from an early stage . Finally , the Indonesian government has implemented the Merdeka Belajar policy , aimed at encouraging students to master various fields of knowledge before entering the workforce , particu - larly in entrepreneurship . The Independent Campus or Merdeka Belajar policy promotes the development of student’s entrepreneurial interests through appropriate learning programs . The objectives of the entrepre - neurial program include providing opportunities for students interested in entrepreneurship to develop their businesses early on and to address the problem of intellectual unemployment among graduates . To encourage and facilitate student entrepreneurship , the Merdeka Belajar Kampus Merdeka ( MBKM ) program launched the Wirausaha Merdeka ( WMK ) program in 2022 . This program aims to enable students to learn and develop themselves into prospective entrepre - neurs through activities outside the classroom . The Wirausaha Merdeka program invites students to col - laborate , take action , and contribute to the economic development of Indonesian society . The program aims to develop students into change agents who help improve the quality of the community ' s econ - omy and provide innovative solutions to create jobs through student business opportunities and foster new entrepreneurial potential in Indonesia . This flagship program of the Indonesian Ministry of Education and Culture is designed to hone student’s entrepreneur - ial spirit , soft skills , and managerial skills , thereby increasing their employability and experience , which can be recognized and credited in the form of semester units . According to the Global Entrepreneurship Index ( GEI ) , in 2018 , Indonesia only scored 21 % in terms of entrepreneurs from various fields of work , placing the country at rank 94 out of 137 surveyed countries . However , research by the IDN Research Institute in 2019 showed that 69 . 1 % of Indonesian millennials have an interest in entrepreneurship . Unfortunately , the entrepreneurial potential of the millennial genera - tion has not been well managed thus far . The Merdeka Campus Policy aims to encourage the development of student’s entrepreneurial interests with appropriate learning activity programs . When examining entrepreneurship on a global scale , it is more interesting to analyze the topic among university students . Liu et al . ( 2023 ) investigated how characteristics of entrepreneurship programs encour - aged student learning engagement and entrepreneurial career intentions of 154 Dutch students . The study found that program resources such as teacher - student and student - student relationships were positively related to study engagement , which subsequently increased entrepreneurial career intentions . This high - lights the important role that lecturers ' knowledge and skills play in creating student’s entrepreneur - ial interests . It is logical that students need practical motivation , not just theoretical knowledge in entrepre - neurship , to develop ideal self - efficacy . In addition , Emmanuel et al . ( 2022 ) conducted research to explore entrepreneurial opportunities for 241 young female students in China through the impact of social media . The study found that respondents were more likely to utilize entrepreneurial opportunities if social media offered convenience and sophistication . This suggests that social media positively influences female entre - preneurs in China . On the other hand , the pedagogical characteristics of teachers in the form of entrepreneur - ial motivation aspects were found to be determinants of entrepreneurial interest for 670 university students in Spain ( San - Martín et al . , 2022 ) . According to the results of the study , students tended to view their entrepreneurship teachers as role models if students received an in - depth exploration of the literature . Thus , the personal characteristics , professionalism , SATRIADI , AUSAT , ET AL , DETERMINANTS OF ENTREPRENEURIAL INTENTION 153 and pedagogical characteristics of teachers through motivational aspects can create great opportunities for students in entrepreneurship . Entrepreneurial inten - tion is not always developed automatically at birth or grows and develops on its own ; rather , there is an urge that affects a person ( Ngoc Khuong & Huu An , 2016 ) . Entrepreneurial self - efficacy , creativity , attitude toward entrepreneurship , social media , entre - preneurial culture , and motivation are all elements that influence student’s entrepreneurial intentions . Entrepreneurial self - efficacy refers to a person ' s belief in their ability to function in specific conditions , and it is related to the perception of being capable of performing expected activities ( Newman et al . , 2019 ) . The lack of confidence in facing competition can be an obstacle for students in starting entrepreneurship . However , if students possess strong entrepreneurial self - efficacy , along with entrepreneurial knowledge and experience , it can encourage their intention to pursue entrepreneurship ( Ningsih , 2017 ) . Entrepreneurial self - efficacy is a crucial term used to describe a person ' s inclination toward pursuing a career in entrepreneurship , and several studies have emphasized its significance in influencing entrepre - neurial intentions ( Aragon - Sanchez et al . , 2017 ; Nowiński & Haddoud , 2019 ; Sidratulmunthah et al . , 2018 ) . It has been reported that entrepreneurial self - efficacy has a significant positive impact on entrepreneurial intention ( Peng et al . , 2012 ) . Studies have also found that there exists a positive relation - ship between entrepreneurial self - efficacy and student’s entrepreneurial intention ( Austin & Nauta , 2015 ) . Additionally , Lee et al . ( 2011 ) suggest that an individual ' s entrepreneurial self - efficacy is a crucial component in predicting their entrepreneurial inten - tion . Creativity plays an essential role in individual cognitive functioning as it enables the development of new and valuable ideas by utilizing appropriate information and knowledge ( Zampetakis & Moustakis , 2006 ) . Creativity is defined as a person ' s capacity and talent by Rodrigues et al . ( 2019 ) . Previous studies emphasized the importance of creativity in entrepre - neurial activities and recognized entrepreneurship as a creative activity in itself ( Kumar & Shukla , 2019 ; Shi et al . , 2020 ) . Hu et al . ( 2018 ) conducted a study on creativity and entrepreneurial alertness among Chinese university students and found significant results . Moreover , a recent study of 390 university students in Pakistan revealed that creativity has a significant impact on the relationship between entre - preneurial desire and entrepreneurial intention ( Murad et al . , 2021 ) . In a study that used undergraduate busi - ness students to examine the association between creativity and entrepreneurial intent , it was found that those with higher levels of creativity are more inclined to become entrepreneurs ( Zampetakis et al . , 2011 ) . Similarly , a study that investigated the impact of cre - ativity on entrepreneurial intention among university tourism students in Taiwan found that students with high originality were more likely to establish their own businesses ( Chia & Liang , 2016 ) . Using a survey of 523 university students in China , Shi et al . ( 2020 ) studied the relationship between creativity and the theory of planned behavior ( TPB ) on entrepreneurial intention and found that those with high levels of creativity can develop good attitudes and confidence in terms of entrepreneurship . Additionally , Javier Miranda et al . ( 2017 ) examined the impact of atti - tudes , subjective norms , and perceived behavioral control on creativity and entrepreneurial intentions in a group of 1 , 178 Spanish university students and found that people with strong creative minds are more likely to pursue entrepreneurial ventures . The major - ity of previous studies reported a positive relationship between creativity and entrepreneurial intent . Therefore , we expect creativity to have a positive impact on entrepreneurial intent . Attitude refers to a person ' s mental or emotional readiness to take action on something that is considered right ( Rosmiati et al . , 2015 ) . Furthermore , it can be interpreted as something learned and how individuals respond to experiences and select what they desire in life , whether positive or negative ( Ajzen , 1991 ) . According to Kabir et al . ( 2017 ) , attitude is closely related to personal inten - tion , which leads directly to behavioral intention . Kabir et al . ( 2017 ) provided additional insight into how individuals ' attitudes and intentions can be shaped and influenced to participate as entrepreneurs . In other words , people create businesses based on their reactions to people ' s attitudes , whether positive or negative ( Taha et al . , 2017 ) . Gitaka ( 2018 ) found that students have a favorable attitude toward entre - preneurial intentions . Another study by Gitonga ( 2017 ) discovered that students at the United States International University ( USIU ) in Africa had a good and significant attitude toward the entrepreneurial intention . Furthermore , a similar study was conducted by Usman ( 2016 ) , which found that Muslim under - graduate students who took entrepreneurship courses at USIU had a positive and significant attitude toward entrepreneurial intention . If university students have a positive attitude toward entrepreneurial activities , they are more likely to become entrepreneurs ( Hong et al . , 2020 ; Winarsih , 2014 ) . University graduates are known for their entrepreneurial views ( Ardiyani & Kusuma , 2016 ) . Consumers and businesses use social media to share text , images , audio , and video content with each other and with enterprises ( Kotler & Keller , 2016 ) . Social media can change student’s mindsets toward entrepreneurship , reducing the risk of failure and making it easier to sell items widely without incurring significant costs ( Prasetio , 2020 ) . To become successful entrepreneurs , students must be able to expand their network and become more adept at interacting online ( Hariyani , 2020 ) . The use of social media has a significant and positive impact on entrepreneurial creativity ( Utomo , 2017 ) , and stu - dents who use social media effectively are more likely to have a strong intention to pursue entrepreneurship ( Prasetio , 2020 ) . Additionally , the use of social media is positively correlated with student’s entrepreneurial intentions ( Hariyani , 2020 ) . The importance of social BISNIS & BIROKRASI : Jurnal Ilmu Administrasi dan Organisasi , September 2022 Volume 29 , Number 3 154 media in improving corporate performance is increas - ingly recognized ( Rahayu & Laela , 2018 ) , and small businesses can use social media to transform the way they communicate with customers , sell products and services , and connect with clients to establish positive relationships ( Fauzi , 2016 ) . Based on this research , we anticipate that social media will have a favorable impact on student’s entrepreneurial intentions . The formation of an entrepreneurial culture among stu - dents has become a major priority in entrepreneurship research . Entrepreneurial culture is defined as a set of attitudes , behaviors , and abilities within a com - munity or an individual that encourage creativity and innovation ( Danish et al . , 2019 ) . Entrepreneurial cul - ture in educational institutions contributes to an increase in student’s confidence and creativity ( Bogatyreva et al . , 2019 ) , as well as their awareness of the benefits of entrepreneurship over being an employee in the future ( Arranz et al . , 2019 ) . Previous research and empirical evidence have supported the notion that an entrepreneurial culture might increase student’s intention to become entrepreneurs ( Chukwuma - Nwuba , 2018 ; Fragoso et al . , 2020 ; Sesen & Pruett , 2014 ; Mukhtar et al . , 2021 ) . Motivation refers to the desire to learn or perform an activity and can generate intrinsic motivation in stu - dents ( Abdullaha & Yih , 2014 ) . It can also be defined as a person ' s drive to perform an activity and reach personal goals , such as accomplishment ( Ajiwibawani et al . , 2017 ) . Entrepreneurial motivation stems from personal objectives and the belief in one ' s ability to succeed ( Farhangmehr et al . , 2016 ) . Individuals who are motivated are more likely to succeed and can resist unfavorable competition when starting a business ( Huggins et al . , 2017 ) . Previous research has shown that motivation has a significant and positive impact on student’s entrepreneurial intention ( A . Lestari et al . , 2016 ) . Motivation is one of the factors that influ - ence student’s entrepreneurial intention ( Cardinawati , 2010 ) ; ( Hendrawan & Sirine , 2017 ) . Motivation indi - rectly influences student’s intention to become entrepreneurs by providing knowledge on how to run a business , deal with challenges , sell products or ser - vices , access finance , and more ( Munawar et al . , 2018 ) . The aim of this research is to identify the fac - tors that influence student’s entrepreneurial intention . To achieve this goal , students from universities in Malang and Surabaya were selected due to the diver - sity of their learning experiences , which incorporate entrepreneurship as an integral part of the universities ' educational programs . Brawijaya University Malang is committed to providing space for students to realize their independent entrepreneurial potential through the Merdeka Learning Campus activities . One of these activities is the government - run Merdeka Student Entrepreneurial Academy , which is an exhibition of the results of practical learning carried out in entre - preneurial academy activities on campus . This government program has been carried out by students in Malang area universities in Malang , which are the object of study , making it one of the main criteria for selecting the research locus . In Surabaya , the oppor - tunities for students to become young entrepreneurs are increasing , with many government and university programs available to increase knowledge , skills , and entrepreneurial spirit . One such program is the UNESA Student Entrepreneurship Program 2022 , which is implemented by the Unesa Career Center Unit . The program ' s goal is to provide knowledge , skills , attitudes , and entrepreneurial spirit to realize educated , resilient , and globally competitive young entrepreneurs . Not only Universitas Brawijaya and UNESA , other campuses in Malang and Surabaya also implement entrepreneurship programs for their students , such as the State University of Malang , Raden Rahmat Islamic University of Malang , Widyagama University of Malang , Agricultural Development Polytechnic of Malang , Muhammadiyah University of Malang , University of August 17 , 1945 , Surabaya , University of Surabaya , STIESIA Surabaya , Sepuluh November Institute of Technology , Wijaya Kusuma University Surabaya , and others . Therefore , the aim of this study is to analyze the determinants of entrepreneurial intention among university students Figure 1 . Model of the relationship between measurement models and structural models SATRIADI , AUSAT , ET AL , DETERMINANTS OF ENTREPRENEURIAL INTENTION 155 Table 1 . Classification of factors affecting student’s entrepreneur intention BISNIS & BIROKRASI : Jurnal Ilmu Administrasi dan Organisasi , September 2022 Volume 29 , Number 3 156 in Surabaya and Malang by addressing the following research questions : 1 ) Does entrepreneurial self - efficacy have a positive and significant impact on student’s entrepre - neurial intention ? . 2 ) Does creativity have a positive and significant impact on student’s entrepreneurial intentions ? . 3 ) Does attitude toward entrepreneurship has a positive and significant impact on student’s entrepreneurial intention ? . 4 ) Does social media have a positive and significant impact on student’s entre - preneurial intention ? . 5 ) Does entrepreneurial culture have a positive and significant impact on student’s entrepreneurial intentions ? . 6 ) Does motivation have a positive and significant impact on student’s entre - preneurial intention ? RESEARCH METHOD The research employed a quantitative approach . It collected data in numerical form and analyzed it with statistics to meet scientific principles , which are empirical , objective , measurable , rational , and sys - tematic ( Purba et al . , 2021 ) . Six exogenous variables were used : entrepreneurial self - efficacy ( X1 ) , creativ - ity ( X2 ) , attitude toward entrepreneurship ( X3 ) , social media ( X4 ) , entrepreneurial culture ( X5 ) , and motiva - tion ( X6 ) , while the endogenous variable is student’s entrepreneurial intention ( Y1 ) . The research employed a purposive sampling technique with specific criteria , namely undergraduate students from 2017 to 2020 who had completed entrepreneurship courses and participated in campus entrepreneurship activities in Malang City and Surabaya . Students who are engaged in campus entrepreneurship activities are known to apply their entrepreneurial knowledge beyond their academic boundaries . The survey was conducted online , with 334 respondents initially participating . However , 19 respondents had to be excluded due to not meeting the criteria , resulting in a final sample size of 315 respondents . The data in this study were analyzed using the Structural Equation Model - Partial Least Square ( SEM - PLS ) , a statistical technique that enables the construction of outer ( convergent validity , discriminant validity , and reliability ) and inner models ( R - square test , Q - square test , and hypothesis testing ) . SmartPLS software 3 . 2 . 9 was used to assist in con - structing these models . The research model used a unidimensional construct , which was formed directly from the manifest variable , and the direction of the indicator was in the form of reflexive confirmatory factor analysis . To test the validity of the construct , a first - order construct was directly reflected by the indi - cators ( Ghozali & Latan , 2015 ) . Figure 1 represents the first - order model for a unidimensional construct . Based on the previous studies , the proposed hypotheses for this study are as follows : H1 : Entrepreneurial self - efficacy has a positive and significant impact on student’s entrepreneurial intention . H2 : Creativity has a positive and significant impact on student’s entrepreneurial intention H3 : Attitude toward entrepreneurship has a positive and significant impact on student’s entrepreneurial intention H4 : Social media has a positive and significant impact on student’s entrepreneurial intention H5 : Entrepreneurial culture has a positive and sig - nificant impact on student’s entrepreneurial intention H6 : Motivation has a positive and significant impact on student’s entrepreneurial intention RESULT AND DISCUSSION The research findings represent a reassessment of the validity of the research . The discussion of research results can be understood as the original ideas of the researchers aimed at providing explanations and inter - pretations of the research results , which have been Table 2 . Characteristics of the Respondents SATRIADI , AUSAT , ET AL , DETERMINANTS OF ENTREPRENEURIAL INTENTION 157 analyzed to address the research questions . Thus , the discussion of research results constitutes an explora - tion of the findings obtained , commonly referred to as the interpretation of research results in relation to the hypotheses . In this section , the researchers present a step - by - step account of the research calculations and subsequently interpret them . The data in Table 2 describes the characteristics of the 315 selected respondents . Among them , 138 were male , and 177 were female . In terms of univer - sity entry year , 32 respondents entered in 2017 , 118 in 2018 , 127 in 2019 , and 38 in 2020 . The respon - dents were from various study programs , with 64 in business administration , 58 in economics , 50 in management , 49 in entrepreneurship , 41 in account - ing , 32 in public administration , and 21 in other study programs . These results suggest that students in the business study program have a greater entrepreneurial intention during the COVID - 19 pandemic . In terms of campus location , 188 respondents were from cam - puses in Malang City , while 127 respondents were from campuses in Surabaya City , according to the research criteria . The SEM - PLS analysis test comprises two stages : the initial stage involves the outer model test , which includes the convergent validity test , discriminant validity test , and reliability test . The next stage is the inner model test ( Ghozali & Latan , 2015 ) . The results of the outer model tests are presented in the follow - ing section . Both the convergent and discriminant validity tests indicate that all indicators are valid . The convergent validity test for the reflexive indicators , as analyzed using SmartPLS 3 . 0 , shows that the loading factor value for each mandatory construct manifest variable is higher than 0 . 60 , as recommended by Hair et al . ( 2011 ) . As shown in Table 3 , all construct indica - tors to produce a loading factor value > 0 . 60 , which indicates that they are valid and have met the criteria for convergent validity . The discriminant validity is determined by cal - culating the square root of the Average Variance Extracted ( AVE ) and comparing it to the correlation between constructs . The discriminant validity is con - sidered to be achieved if the square value of AVE is greater than the correlation value between constructs ( Hair et al . , 2011 ) . The results , as shown in Table 4 , indicate that the model is valid . Cronbach ' s Alpha and Composite Reliability are used to test the reliability of the constructs . If the value exceeds 0 . 60 , then the variable with reflec - tive indicators is considered to have passed the test ( Rakhmawati et al . , 2019 ) . The results of the reli - ability test are presented in Table 5 , which indicates that all values of Cronbach ' s Alpha and Reliability exceed 0 . 60 . Therefore , all research constructs are considered reliable . Table 3 . Convergent Validity Test BISNIS & BIROKRASI : Jurnal Ilmu Administrasi dan Organisasi , September 2022 Volume 29 , Number 3 158 Table 4 . Discriminant Validity Test Table 5 . Reliability Test SATRIADI , AUSAT , ET AL , DETERMINANTS OF ENTREPRENEURIAL INTENTION 159 The next stage of the SEM - PLS analysis involves testing the inner model , which includes the R - square test , Q - square test , and hypothesis testing . The R - square value is used to determine the contribu - tion of the exogenous construct to the endogenous construct . The results of the R - square test are sum - marized in Table 6 . The R - square ( R2 ) value of 0 . 988 indicates that the variables of entrepreneurial self - efficacy , creativ - ity , attitude toward entrepreneurship , social media , entrepreneurial culture , and motivation are able to explain 98 . 8 % of the variance in the student’s entre - preneurial intention variable . The remaining 1 . 2 % is contributed by other factors not included in this study . An R2 value greater than 0 . 33 indicates that the SEM models are both appropriate and strong when tested simultaneously ( Hair et al . , 2011 ) . The testing of the structural model is based on the value of Q2 ( Predictive Relevance ) . The model is considered to have good predictive relevance if the value of Q2 is greater than 0 ( Ghozali & Latan , 2015 ) . The formula for calculating Q2 is as follows : Q2 = 1 – ( 1 – R12 ) Q2 = 1 – ( 1 – 0 . 988 ) Q2 = 1 – 0 . 012 Q2 = 0 . 988 The calculation of Q2 yields a value of 0 . 988 , indi - cating that the model is sufficiently good and has predictive relevance . To test the hypothesis , a posi - tive correlation is assumed when the path coefficient is greater than 0 . 1 and significant at the P - value < 0 . 05 or T - value > 1 . 96 ( Ausat et al . , 2022 ) . Table 7 presents the results of the hypothesis testing , while Figure 2 shows the T - statistical value of each vari - able ' s indicators as additional evidence to discuss the study ' s findings The first hypothesis indicates a positive and signifi - cant relationship between entrepreneurial self - efficacy and student’s entrepreneurial intention . This finding is consistent with previous research by Sandi and Nurhayati ( 2020 ) and Adam et al . ( 2020 ) , which dem - onstrate that entrepreneurial self - efficacy positively influences entrepreneurial intention . This is because students with higher levels of self - confidence tend to have greater talent and exhibit a stronger drive to engage in entrepreneurship . Moreover , strong entre - preneurial self - efficacy can enhance self - confidence , encourage risk - taking , and foster a resilient attitude when encountering problems ( Janse van Rensburg & Tjano , 2020 ) . These results are presented in Table 7 , and the T - statistic values of each indicator variable are shown in Figure 2 to provide additional insights for the discussion of the study ' s findings . These findings suggest that students have confidence in their ability to generate innovation or creativity that can lead to entrepreneurship opportunities , as a high level of self - efficacy in entrepreneurs instills strong confidence in their decision - making abilities . The authors sug - gest that stronger self - efficacy in individuals leads to greater belief in the actions necessary to address spe - cific situations , and it is likely that lecturers played a role in encouraging students to develop their entrepre - neurial skills , both within the classroom and through organizations . Higher levels of entrepreneurial self - efficacy facilitate the cultivation of entrepreneurial Table 6 . R - square Table 7 . Hypothesis Testing Results BISNIS & BIROKRASI : Jurnal Ilmu Administrasi dan Organisasi , September 2022 Volume 29 , Number 3 160 attitudes and creative thinking to commercialize new ideas in the form of product development . This is evident in the highest T - statistic value of the X2 . 1 indicator , " I have faith in my abilities to create new goods . " Entrepreneurial self - efficacy is considered a key component that has a positive and significant influence on entrepreneurial intention , according to several studies ( Aragon - Sanchez et al . , 2017 ; Nowiński & Haddoud , 2019 ; Sidratulmunthah et al . , 2018 ; A . Lestari et al . , 2016 ; Jiatong et al . , 2021 ) . It is suggested that this study ' s findings indicate that student’s confidence in their ability to create inno - vation and creativity for entrepreneurship has been enhanced through their academic experiences and organizational involvement . The second hypothesis suggests a positive and significant relationship between creativity and stu - dent’s entrepreneurial intention . This finding is consistent with previous studies by Hu et al . ( 2018 ) and Anjum et al . ( 2021 ) , which found that individuals with high levels of creative thinking are more likely to pursue entrepreneurship . Creative thinking involves the ability to generate novel and innovative ideas , and individuals with such minds are better equipped to turn these ideas into tangible outcomes , leading to a greater intention to become entrepreneurs ( Lefebvre , 2018 ) . Therefore , creativity can be seen as a valuable resource that can promote the cultivation of entrepre - neurial aspirations among students in Malang and Surabaya by enhancing their understanding and skills in entrepreneurship , including opportunity identifica - tion and exploitation . Creative thinking is fostered by having an interest in activities or tasks at hand ( such as active participation in the campus entrepreneurship activity unit ) , the ability to generate numerous and diverse ideas , and the willingness to experiment and test ideas to capture the attention of entrepreneurial opportunities and talents . The highest T - statistical value of the X2 . 4 indicator , " I ' m always thinking of new and unique ideas , " reflects the importance of creativity in developing entrepreneurial intentions among students . Creativity can be fostered by increas - ing student’s commitment , interest , passion , and expertise in campus entrepreneurial activities or prac - tices . Generating ideas becomes more effortless when students become more involved , and this can lead to enhanced entrepreneurial intentions and talents . Previous research has shown that creativity has a sig - nificant influence on student’s entrepreneurial intentions ( Murad et al . , 2021 ) . Additionally , students with high levels of creativity can develop a positive attitude and strong self - confidence through entrepre - neurial activities ( Shi et al . , 2020 ; Javier Miranda et al . , 2017 ) . The third hypothesis demonstrates a posi - tive and significant relationship between attitudes toward entrepreneurship and student’s entrepreneurial intentions . The respondents believe that entrepreneur - ship is a favorable career path . This implies that students are prepared to engage in entrepreneurship due to receiving theoretical learning in class and par - ticipating in entrepreneurial activities within organizations . Therefore , they perceive it as an essen - tial activity to pursue while young , which will provide them with the confidence to take risks and lay the foundation for future business opportunities after graduation . This positive attitude is reflected in the highest T - statistic value of the X3 . 1 indicator , " I am interested in pursuing a career as an entrepreneur . " A positive mindset is a key trait for successful entrepre - neurship ( Gitaka , 2018 ) ; ( Gitonga , 2017 ) . Prior research has confirmed the positive impact of stu - dent’s attitudes toward entrepreneurship on their Figure 2 . T - statistical value of each variable ' s indicators SATRIADI , AUSAT , ET AL , DETERMINANTS OF ENTREPRENEURIAL INTENTION 161 entrepreneurial intentions ( Adi et al . , 2017 ) ; ( Doanh & Bernat , 2019 ) ; ( Octaviani , 2019 ) ; ( Hong et al . , 2020 ) . Hence , developing a positive attitude toward entrepreneurship is crucial to fostering strong entre - preneurial intentions ( Nowiński & Haddoud , 2019 ) . Campus - based learning experiences that cultivate positive attitudes toward entrepreneurship ( such as achievement , self - esteem , personal control , and inno - vation ) can enhance student’s entrepreneurial intentions ( Mahfud et al . , 2020 ) . Research has shown that hands - on learning in business operations can inculcate an entrepreneurial mindset in students and stimulate their intention to pursue entrepreneurial opportunities ( Mahfud & Pardjono , 2012 ) . Building a positive individual mindset is crucial to achieving entrepreneurial objectives ( Munawar et al . , 2018 ) , and student’s entrepreneurial intentions are higher when they have favorable attitudes toward entrepre - neurship ( Sah , 2013 ) . The fourth hypothesis reveals a negative and significant association between social media usage and student’s entrepreneurial intention . The explanation for this negative finding is that stu - dents may not have a complete understanding of how to use social media as a tool to acquire information and gather references related to entrepreneurship in order to enhance their entrepreneurial intentions . Given that social media is more commonly used among the millennial participants of this study , it is likely that they use it more extensively for socializing and entertainment purposes rather than for networking and knowledge acquisition ( Subagja et al . , 2022 ) . This is reflected in the X4 . 3 indicator , " Conversation , " which has the smallest T - statistical value . This situ - ation is in line with the findings of previous studies , which revealed that social media platforms are pre - dominantly used for developing relationships , making acquaintances , and for entertainment purposes ( Alfaruk , 2017 ) . Students who use social media pri - marily view it as a lifestyle necessity rather than a tool for seeking information about entrepreneurship - related topics , such as fashion , food , or gossip ( Hariyani , 2020 ) . As a result , social media may not significantly contribute to the development of traits associated with entrepreneurial intention . However , the study ' s significant findings suggest that social media can facilitate communication and deepen rela - tionships among students and also serve as a platform for sharing experiences with peers who have previ - ously been entrepreneurs . Through this platform , students can learn about all areas of entrepreneurship and bridge the gap between theory and practice . As a result , students can become more aware of the potential benefits of using social media as a form of business access that can stimulate the formation of entrepreneurial intention , particularly in the era of the Fourth Industrial Revolution . Students who have been exposed to entrepreneurial knowledge on campus must understand that social media can play a crucial role in informing potential buyers about the products or services being offered . Effective communication through social media can encourage both existing and new customers to engage in a mutually beneficial exchange relationship , while all marketing and pro - motional activities can contribute to creating a consistent brand image . This understanding of the role of social media has a significant impact on stu - dent’s entrepreneurial intentions . The fifth hypothesis of this study investigates the relationship between entrepreneurial culture and entrepreneurial intention among students . The research indicates that entrepre - neurial culture can help to explain why students are motivated to establish their own businesses . The underlying idea is that the culture of a university fos - ters an environment that enables students to learn and grow , which in turn builds their confidence ( Yang & Chau , 2011 ) . The indicator with the highest T - statistical value for this hypothesis is X5 . 3 , " At my institution , the academic community puts organiza - tional goals over personal ones " . This suggests that the positive attitude cultivated within institutions encourages students to be more receptive to acquiring new knowledge and gaining the skills necessary for entrepreneurship . The results demonstrate that the university has been successful in cultivating a culture that encourages students to consider entrepreneurship as a viable career option . The university ' s emphasis on entrepreneurship education has equipped students with the necessary skills and knowledge to succeed in the business world , which in turn enhances their cognitive abilities for entrepreneurship . This finding is consistent with the hypothesis that there is a posi - tive relationship between entrepreneurial culture , entrepreneurial intention , and entrepreneurship educa - tion . One potential explanation for this is that a supportive entrepreneurial culture promotes social legitimacy and creates an environment that is condu - cive to learning and teaching entrepreneurship . When students are exposed to such an environment , they become more receptive to new information and knowledge about entrepreneurship ( Amalia & von Korflesch , 2021 ) . The sixth hypothesis of this study reveals a positive and significant relationship between motivation and student’s entrepreneurial intention . The outcome suggests that individuals with a high level of education and entrepreneurial knowledge / practices believe that they can elevate their family ' s status by establishing a business after graduation . This is due to their exposure to an entrepreneurial spirit , characterized by creativity and innovation , as well as the business practices they have acquired while being active in campus entrepreneurship organizations . The highest T - statistical value for indicator X6 . 3 , " I aspire to be a businessman since I believe I can provide value to a product , " reflects the positive influence of motiva - tion and innovation on entrepreneurial performance and capabilities development ( Kusa et al . , 2021 ) . Motivation is a crucial factor in business development as it can serve as a driving force for individuals or groups . This finding aligns with previous studies sug - gesting that motivation significantly impacts entrepreneurial intention ( Gerba , 2012 ; Y . P . Lestari & Sukirman , 2020 ) . The results demonstrate that BISNIS & BIROKRASI : Jurnal Ilmu Administrasi dan Organisasi , September 2022 Volume 29 , Number 3 162 higher motivation is associated with a greater inten - tion to engage in entrepreneurship ( Bharata , 2019 ) CONCLUSION The results of this study suggest that fostering entrepreneurial interest among students in Indonesia can be accomplished through seven variables , includ - ing entrepreneurial self - efficacy , creativity , attitude towards entrepreneurship , social media , entrepreneur - ial culture , and motivation , of which six factors have been found to have a significant impact on student’s entrepreneurial intentions . However , the scope of this research is limited to Surabaya and Malang and , there - fore , cannot fully represent Indonesian students . The study also highlights the important role of lecturers in encouraging students to develop their entrepreneurial skills through both classroom learning and organiza - tional involvement . Consequently , students with a higher level of entrepreneurial insight are more likely to adopt entrepreneurial attitudes and think creatively to commercialize new ideas in the form of product development , ultimately leading to the creation of jobs as entrepreneurs . Future research investigating entrepreneurial intentions could use the current study as a reference . The research should use a larger sample size and be conducted in major cities such as Jakarta or even cities in West Java province . This approach would allow for the identification of various potentials that can be leveraged as opportunities to cultivate young entrepreneurs in every region of Indonesia , particularly among university graduates . REFERENCES Abdullaha , A . , & Yih , T . Y . ( 2014 ) . Implementing Learning Contracts in a Computer Science Course as a Tool to Develop and Sustain Student Motivation to Learn . Procedia - Social and Behavioral Sciences , 123 , 256 – 265 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . sbspro . 2014 . 01 . 1422 Adam , E . R . , Lengkong , V . , & Uhing , Y . ( 2020 ) . Influence of Attitude , Motivation , and Self - Effication Towards the Interest of Business FEB Unsrat Students ( Case Study on Management Students . EMBA , 8 ( 1 ) , 596 – 605 . Adi , F . , Sumarwan , U . , & Fahmi , I . ( 2017 ) . The Influence of Attitude , Subjective Norm , Demography , Socioeconomic and Shariah and Conventional Financial Literacy Toward Entrepreneurship Intention Among College Students . Jurnal Al - Muzara’ah , 5 ( 1 ) , 1 – 20 . Ajiwibawani , M . P . , Harti , & Subroto , W . T . ( 2017 ) . The Effect of Achievement Motivation , Adversity Quotient , and Entrepreneurship Experience on Students Entrepreneurship Attitude . International Journal of Academic Research in Business and Social Sciences , 7 ( 9 ) , 441 – 450 . Ajzen , I . ( 1991 ) . The theory of planned behav - ior . Organizational Behavior and Human Decision Processes , 50 ( 2 ) , 179 – 211 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / 0749 - 5978 ( 91 ) 90020 - T Alfaruk , M . H . ( 2017 ) . Pengaruh Pemanfaatan Sosial Media , Motivasi Dan Pengetahuan Terhadap Minat Berwirausaha Pada Mahasiswa Ekonomi Di Universitas Muhammadiyah Sidoarjo . Jurnal Ekonomi Pendidikan Dan Kewirausahaan , 4 ( 2 ) , 164 – 172 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 26740 / jepk . v4n2 . p164 - 172 Amalia , R . T . , & von Korflesch , H . F . O . ( 2021 ) . Entrepreneurship education in Indonesian higher education : mapping literature from the Country ' s perspective . Entrepreneurship Education , 4 ( 3 ) , 291 – 333 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1007 / s41959 - 021 - 00053 - 9 Anjum , T . , Farrukh , M . , Heidler , P . , & Tautiva , J . A . D . ( 2021 ) . Entrepreneurial Intention : Creativity , Entrepreneurship , and University Support . Journal of Open Innovation : Technology , Market , and Complexity , 7 ( 11 ) , 1 – 13 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 3390 / joitmc7010011 Aragon - Sanchez , A . , Baixauli - Soler , S . , & Carrasco - Hernandez , A . J . ( 2017 ) . A missing link : the behavioral mediators between resources and entrepreneurial intentions . International Journal of Entrepreneurial Behaviour and Research , 23 ( 5 ) , 752 – 768 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1108 / IJEBR - 06 - 2016 - 0172 / FULL / XML Ardiyani , N . P . P . , & Kusuma , A . A . ( 2016 ) . Pengaruh Sikap , Pendidikan dan Lingkungan Keluarga Terhadap Minat Berwirausaha . E - Jurnal Manajemen Unud , 5 ( 8 ) , 5155 – 5183 . Arranz , N . , Arroyabe , M . F . , & Fdez . De Arroyabe , J . C . ( 2019 ) . Entrepreneurial intention and obstacles of undergraduate students : The case of the univer - sities of Andalusia . Studies in Higher Education , 44 ( 11 ) , 2011 – 2024 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1080 / 0307 5079 . 2018 . 1486812 Ausat , A . M . A . ( 2023 ) . The Application of Technology in the Age of Covid - 19 and Its Effects on Performance . Apollo - Journal of Tourism and Business , 1 ( 1 ) , 14 – 22 . Ausat , A . M . A . , Suherlan , S . , Peirisal , T . , & Hirawan , Z . ( 2022 ) . The Effect of Transformational Leadership on Organizational Commitment and Work Performance . Journal of Leadership in Organizations , 4 ( 4 ) , 61 – 82 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 22146 / jlo . 71846 Austin , M . J . , & Nauta , M . M . ( 2015 ) . Entrepreneurial Role - Model Exposure , Self - Efficacy , and Women ' s Entrepreneurial Intentions . Journal of Career Development , 43 ( 3 ) , 260 – 272 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1177 / 0894845315597475 Bharata , W . ( 2019 ) . Pengaruh Pendidikan Kewirausahaan dan Motivasi Usaha terhadap Minat Berwirausaha ( Studi pada Mahasiswa Fakultas Ekonomi Universitas Muhammadiyah Ponorogo ) . CAPITAL ( Jurnal Ekonomi Dan Manajemen , 2 ( 2 ) , 99 – 114 . http : / / e - journal . unipma . ac . id / index . php / capital Bogatyreva , K . , Edelman , L . F . , Manolova , T . S . , Osiyevskyy , O . , & Shirokova , G . ( 2019 ) . When do SATRIADI , AUSAT , ET AL , DETERMINANTS OF ENTREPRENEURIAL INTENTION 163 entrepreneurial intentions lead to actions ? The role of national culture . Journal of Business Research , 96 , 309 – 321 . https : / / doi . org / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . jbusres . 2018 . 11 . 034 Cardinawati . ( 2010 ) . Minat Berwirausaha Mahasiswa Pendidikan Ekonomi Fakultas Keguruan dan Ilmu Pendidikan UKSW . Repository UKSW . Chia , C . - C . , & Liang , C . ( 2016 ) . Influence of Creativity and Social Capital on the Entrepreneurial Intention of Tourism Students . Journal of ENTREPRENEURSHIP , MANAGEMENT and INNOVATION , 12 ( 2 ) , 1 . Chimucheka , T . ( 2013 ) . The Impact of Entrepreneurship Education on the Establishment and Survival of Small , Micro and Medium Enterprises ( SMMEs ) . Journal Economics , 4 ( 2 ) , 157 – 168 . Chukwuma - Nwuba , E . O . ( 2018 ) . The influence of culture on entrepreneurial intentions : A Nigerian university graduates ' perspective . Transnational Corporations Review , 10 ( 3 ) , 213 – 232 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1080 / 19186444 . 2018 . 1507877 Danish , R . Q . , Asghar , J . , Ahmad , Z . , & Ali , H . F . ( 2019 ) . Factors affecting " entrepreneurial cul - ture " : The mediating role of creativity . Journal of Innovation and Entrepreneurship , 8 ( 1 ) , 1 – 12 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 186 / s13731 - 019 - 0108 - 9 Devi , D . A . O . ( 2020 ) . Pengaruh Sikap dan Motivasi terhadap Minat Berwirausaha Mahasiswa Universitas Muhammadiyah Surakarta Angkatan 2016 . Universitas Muhammadiyah Surakarta . Doanh , D . C . , & Bernat , T . ( 2019 ) . Entrepreneurial self - efficacy and intention among Vietnamese students : A meta - analytic path analysis based on the theory of planned behavior . Procedia Computer Science , 159 , 2447 – 2460 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . procs . 2019 . 09 . 420 Emmanuel , C . P . , Qin , S . , Hossain , S . F . A . , & Hussain , K . ( 2022 ) . Factors influencing social - media - based entrepreneurship prospect among female students in China . Heliyon , 8 ( 12 ) , 1 – 9 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . heliyon . 2022 . e12041 Farhangmehr , M . , Gonçalves , P . , & Sarmento , M . ( 2016 ) . Predicting entrepreneurial motivation among university students : The role of entre - preneurship education . Education + Training , 58 ( 7 / 8 ) , 861 – 881 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1108 / ET - 01 - 2016 - 0019 Fauzi , V . P . ( 2016 ) . Pemanfaatan instagram sebagai social media marketing er - corner boutique dalam membangun brand awareness di kota pekanbaru . JOM FISIP , 3 ( 1 ) , 1 – 15 . Fragoso , R . , Rocha - Junior , W . , & Xavier , A . ( 2020 ) . Determinant factors of entrepreneurial intention among university students in Brazil and Portugal . Journal of Small Business & Entrepreneurship , 32 ( 1 ) , 33 – 57 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1080 / 08276331 . 2018 . 1551459 Gerba , D . T . ( 2012 ) . The context of entrepreneurship education in Ethiopian universities . Management Research Review , 35 ( 3 / 4 ) , 225 – 244 . Ghozali , I . , & Latan , H . ( 2015 ) . Partial Least Square Konsep , Teknik dan Aplikasi Menggunakan Program SmartPLS 3 . 0 Untuk Penelitian Empiris ( 2nd ed . ) . Universitas Diponegoro . Gitaka , J . G . ( 2018 ) . The role of entrepreneurship education in developing student’s entrepreneur - ial intentions among Kenyan University Students . Doctoral dissertation , United States International University - Africa . Gitonga , A . N . ( 2017 ) . Factors influencing entre - preneurial motivation on university student ' s intentions of becoming entrepreneurs : A case of United States International University – Africa ( USIU - A ) . Doctoral dissertation , United States International University - Africa . Hair , J . F . , Sarstedt , M . , Ringle , C . M . , & Mena , J . A . ( 2011 ) . An assessment of the use of partial least squares structural equation modeling in marketing research . Journal of the Academy of Marketing Science , 40 ( 3 ) , 414 – 433 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1007 / S11747 - 011 - 0261 - 6 Handayati , P . , Wulandari , D . , Soetjipto , B . E . , Wibowo , A . , & Narmaditya , B . S . ( 2020 ) . Does entrepreneurship education promote vocational student’s entrepreneurial mindset ? . Heliyon , 6 ( 11 ) , 1 – 7 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . heliyon . 2020 . e05426 Hariyani , R . ( 2020 ) . Pengaruh Pemanfaatan Media Sosial , Motivasi dan Pengetahuan Bisnis Terhadap Minat Berwirausaha . SEMINAR NASIONAL Dinamika Informatika 2020 Universitas PGRI Yogyakarta , 112 – 118 . Hendrawan , J . S . , & Sirine , H . ( 2017 ) . Pengaruh Sikap Mandiri , Motivasi , Pengetahuan Kewirausahaan Terhadap Minat Berwirausaha ( Studi Kasus pada Mahasiswa FEB UKSW Konsentrasi Kewirausahaan ) . AJIE - Asian Journal of Innovation and Entrepreneurship , 02 ( 03 ) , 291 – 292 . Hong , L . M . , Azim , M . , Hassan , A . , Farha , W . , Zulkiffli , W . , & Che , R . ( 2020 ) . Determinan Factors that Influence Entrepreneurial Intention Among Students in Malaysia . Jurnal Manajemen Dan Kewirausahaan , 22 ( 1 ) , 80 – 86 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 9744 / jmk . 22 . 1 . 80 Hu , R . , Wang , L . , Zhang , W . , & Bin , P . ( 2018 ) . Creativity , proactive personality , and entrepreneur - ial intention : The role of entrepreneurial alertness . Frontiers in Psychology , 9 ( June ) , 951 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 3389 / FPSYG . 2018 . 00951 / BIBTEX Huggins , R . , Prokop , D . , & Thompson , P . ( 2017 ) . Entrepreneurship and the determinants of firm survival within regions : human capital , growth motivation and locational conditions . Entrepreneurship & Regional Development , 29 ( 3 – 4 ) , 357 – 389 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1080 / 0898 5626 . 2016 . 1271830 Janse van Rensburg , L . J . , & Tjano , R . N . ( 2020 ) . The relationship of self - efficacy and entrepreneurial intentions on the commitment of the next generation in family - owned agribusinesses . ActaCommercii , 20 ( 1 ) , 1 – 12 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 4102 / ac . v20i1 . 742 Javier Miranda , F . , Chamorro - Mera , A . , & Rubio , BISNIS & BIROKRASI : Jurnal Ilmu Administrasi dan Organisasi , September 2022 Volume 29 , Number 3 164 S . ( 2017 ) . Academic entrepreneurship in Spanish universities : An analysis of the determinants of entrepreneurial intention . European Research on Management and Business Economics , 23 ( 2 ) , 113 – 122 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . iedeen . 2017 . 01 . 001 Jiatong , W . , Murad , M . , Bajun , F . , Tufail , M . S . , Mirza , F . , & Rafiq , M . ( 2021 ) . Impact of Entrepreneurial Education , Mindset , and Creativity on Entrepreneurial Intention : Mediating Role of Entrepreneurial Self - Efficacy . Frontiers in Psychology , 12 ( August ) , 1 – 13 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 3389 / fpsyg . 2021 . 724440 Kabir , S . M . , Haque , A . , & Sarwar , A . ( 2017 ) . Factors Affecting the Intention to Become an Entrepreneur : A Study from Bangladeshi Business Graduates Perspective . International Journal of Engineering and Information System , 1 ( 6 ) , 10 – 19 . Kotler , P . , & Keller , K . ( 2016 ) . Marketing Management . Pearson . Kumar , R . , & Shukla , S . ( 2019 ) . Creativity , Proactive Personality and Entrepreneurial Intentions : Examining the Mediating Role of Entrepreneurial Self - efficacy . Global Business Review , 23 ( 1 ) . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1177 / 0972150919844395 Kusa , R . , Duda , J . , & Suder , M . ( 2021 ) . Explaining SME performance with fsQCA : The role of entre - preneurial orientation , entrepreneur motivation , and opportunity perception . Journal of Innovation and Knowledge , 19 ( June ) , 1 – 12 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . jik . 2021 . 06 . 001 Lee , L . , Wong , P . K . , Foo , M . der , & Leung , A . ( 2011 ) . Entrepreneurial intentions : The influence of organizational and individual factors . Journal of Business Venturing , 26 ( 1 ) , 124 – 136 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / J . JBUSVENT . 2009 . 04 . 003 Lefebvre , Q . ( 2018 ) . Inspiring Entrepreneurship through Creative Thinking . KnE Social Sciences , 3 ( 10 ) , 131 – 137 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 18502 / kss . v3i10 . 2890 Lestari , A . , Hasiolan , A . B . , & Minarsih , M . M . ( 2016 ) . Pengaruh Sikap Mandiri , Lingkungan Keluarga Dan Motivasi Terhadap Minat Berwirausaha Para Remaja ( Studi Empiris di Desa Jamus Kecamatan Mranggen Kabupaten Demak ) . Journal of Management , 2 ( 2 ) . Lestari , Y . P . , & Sukirman . ( 2020 ) . Pengaruh Self Efficacy Sebagai Mediasi dari Pengaruh Kewirausahaan dan Lingkungan Keluarga ter - hadap Minat Berwirausaha . Economic Education Analysis , 2 ( 9 ) , 615 – 633 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 15294 / eeaj . v9i1 . 39469 Liu , M . , Gorgievski , M . J . , Zwaga , J . , & Paas , F . ( 2023 ) . How entrepreneurship program charac - teristics foster student’s study engagement and entrepreneurial career intentions : A longitudi - nal study . Learning and Individual Differences , 101 ( 102249 ) , 1 – 10 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . lindif . 2022 . 102249 Mahfud , T . , & Pardjono . ( 2012 ) . The praxis of entre - preneurship learning in food production units ( Indonesian version ) . Pendidikan Vokasi , 2 ( 3 ) , 27 – 40 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 21831 / JPV . V2I1 . 1014 Mahfud , T . , Triyono , M . B . , Sudira , P . , & Mulyani , Y . ( 2020 ) . The influence of social capital and entre - preneurial attitude orientation on entrepreneurial intentions : the mediating role of psychological capital . European Research on Management and Business Economics , 26 ( 1 ) , 33 – 39 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . iedeen . 2019 . 12 . 005 Maryanti , S . , Lubis , N . , & Widayat , P . ( 2022 ) . Peran Perguruan Tinggi dalam Optimalisasi Penyerapan Tenaga Kerja di Kota Pekanbaru . Jurnal Indragiri Penelitian Multidisiplin , 2 ( 2 ) , 62 – 72 . Mukhtar , S . , Wardana , L . W . , Wibowo , A . , & Narmaditya , B . S . ( 2021 ) . Does entrepreneur - ship education and culture promote student’s entrepreneurial intention ? The mediating role of entrepreneurial mindset . Cogent Education , 8 ( 1 ) , 1 – 18 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1080 / 23311 86X . 2021 . 1918849 Munawar , A . , Supriatna , N . , & Si , M . ( 2018 ) . Pengaruh sikap dan motivasi terhadap minat berwirausaha siswa . Oikos : Jurnal Kajian Pendidikan Ekonomi Dan Ilmu Ekonomi , 2 ( 1 ) , 14 – 23 . Murad , M . , Li , C . , Ashraf , S . F . , & Arora , S . ( 2021 ) . The Influence of Entrepreneurial Passion in the Relationship Between Creativity and Entrepreneurial Intention . International Journal of Global Business and Competitiveness , 16 ( 1 ) , 51 – 60 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1007 / S42943 - 021 - 00019 - 7 Newman , A . , Obschonka , M . , Schwarz , S . , Cohen , M . , & Nielsen , I . ( 2019 ) . Entrepreneurial self - efficacy : A systematic review of the literature on its theo - retical foundations , measurement , antecedents , and outcomes , and an agenda for future research . Journal of Vocational Behavior , 110 , 403 – 419 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . jvb . 2018 . 05 . 012 Ngoc Khuong , M . , & Huu An , N . ( 2016 ) . The Factors Affecting Entrepreneurial Intention of the Students of Vietnam National University — A Mediation Analysis of Perception toward Entrepreneurship . Journal of Economics , Business and Management , 4 ( 2 ) , 104 – 111 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 7763 / joebm . 2016 . v4 . 375 Ningsih , J . I . ( 2017 ) . Pengaruh Tingkat Self Efficacy Terhadap Tingkat Minat Berwirausaha Program Studi Manajemen Fakultas Ekonomi dan Bisnis Universitas Muhammadiyah Gresik . Psikosains , 12 ( 2 ) , 71 – 82 . Nowiński , W . , & Haddoud , M . Y . ( 2019 ) . The role of inspiring role models in enhancing entrepre - neurial intention . Journal of Business Research , 96 ( November ) , 183 – 193 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . jbusres . 2018 . 11 . 005 Octaviani , V . A . ( 2019 ) . Pengaruh Sikap dan Motivasi Terhadap Minat Berwirausaha Mahasiswa . Fokus , 17 ( 2 ) , 250 – 259 . Peng , Z . , Lu , G . , & Kang , H . ( 2012 ) . Entrepreneurial Intentions and Its Influencing Factors : A Survey of the University Students in Xi ' an China . Creative Education , 03 ( 08 ) , 95 – 100 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 4236 / ce . 2012 . 38B021 SATRIADI , AUSAT , ET AL , DETERMINANTS OF ENTREPRENEURIAL INTENTION 165 Prasetio , T . ( 2020 ) . Analysis the Influence Use of Social Media , Intrinsic Motivation , and Entrepreneurship Knowledge on Students Entrepreneurial Interest . Jurnal Sekretari & Administrasi ( Serasi ) , 18 ( 1 ) , 35 – 46 . Purba , B . , Elidawaty , P . , Ahmad , S . F . K . , Darwin , D . , Valentine , S . A . M . G . , Hery , P . S . N . F . , Arfandi SN , & Revi , E . ( 2021 ) . Metode Penelitian Ekonomi ( W . Ronal , Ed . ; 1st ed . ) . Yayasan Kita Menulis . https : / / www . researchgate . net / publication / 353767732 Putri , J . , & Zulfa . ( 2020 ) . Analysis of Motivation and Attitudes on Entrepreneurial Interest of FEBI Students IAIN Lhokseumawe . AT - TIJARAH : Jurnal Penelitian Keuangan Dan Perbankan Syariah , 2 ( 1 ) , 66 – 83 . Rahayu , E . S . , & Laela , S . ( 2018 ) . Pengaruh Minat Berwirausaha Dan Penggunaan Sosial Media Terhadap Kewirausahaan Mahasiswa . Jurnal Pengembangan Wiraswasta , 20 ( 3 ) , 203 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 33370 / jpw . v20i3 . 246 Rakhmawati , A . , Rahardjo , K . , Kusumawati , A . , & Nizar , M . ( 2019 ) . The Role of Strategic Orientations , Goverment Regulation on Green Supply Chain Management ( GSCM ) And Enviromental Performace . AdBispreneur : Jurnal Pemikiran Dan Penelitian Administrasi Bisnis Dan Kewirausahaan , 4 ( 3 ) , 181 – 192 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 24198 / adbispreneur . v4i3 . 19175 Rodrigues , A . P . , Jorge , F . E . , Pires , C . A . , & António , P . ( 2019 ) . The contribution of emotional intelli - gence and spirituality in understanding creativity and entrepreneurial intention of higher educa - tion students . Education & Training , 6 , 870 – 894 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1108 / ET - 01 - 2018 - 0026 Rosmiati , Junias , D . T . S . , & Munawar . ( 2015 ) . Sikap , Motivasi , dan Minat Berwirausaha Mahasiswa . Jurnal Manajemen Dan Kewirausahaan , 17 ( 1 ) , 21 – 30 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 9744 / jmk . 17 . 1 . 21 – 30 Sah , M . P . ( 2013 ) . Hubungan Antara Big Five Personality , Sikap , dan Entrepreneurial Intention di Kalangan Mahasiswa . Jurnal Ilmiah Universitas Surabaya , 2 ( 2 ) , 1 – 13 . Sandi , A . , & Nurhayati , M . ( 2020 ) . Effect of Entrepreneurship Education , Family Environment and Self Efficacy on Students Entrepreneurship Intention . 120 ( Icmeb 2019 ) , 9 – 12 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 2991 / aebmr . k . 200205 . 003 San - Martín , P . , Pérez , A . , & Fernández - Laviada , A . ( 2022 ) . Turning teachers into entrepreneurship role models : Development of a measurement scale of useful characteristics . The International Journal of Management Education , 20 ( 3 ) , 1 – 16 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . ijme . 2022 . 100721 Sesen , H . , & Pruett , M . ( 2014 ) . The impact of edu - cation , economy and culture on entrepreneurial motives , barriers and intentions : A comparative study of the United States and Turkey . The Journal of Entrepreneurship , 23 ( 2 ) , 231 – 261 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1177 / 0971355714535309 Shi , Y . , Yuan , T . , Bell , R . , & Wang , J . ( 2020 ) . Investigating the Relationship Between Creativity and Entrepreneurial Intention : The Moderating Role of Creativity in the Theory of Planned Behavior . Frontiers in Psychology , 11 ( May ) , 1209 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 3389 / FPSYG . 2020 . 01209 / BIBTEX Sidratulmunthah , Hussain , S . , & Imran Malik , M . ( 2018 ) . Towards nurturing the entrepreneurial intentions of neglected female business students of Pakistan through proactive personality , self - effi - cacy and university support factors . Asia Pacific Journal of Innovation and Entrepreneurship , 12 ( 3 ) , 363 – 378 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1108 / apjie - 03 - 2018 - 0015 Subagja , A . D . , Ausat , A . M . A . , & Suherlan . ( 2022 ) . The Role of Social Media Utilization and Innovativeness on SMEs Performance . Jurnal IPTEK - KOM ( Jurnal Ilmu Pengetahuan Dan Teknologi Komunikasi ) , 24 ( 2 ) , 85 – 102 . https : / / doi . org / https : / / doi . org / 10 . 17933 / iptekkom . 24 . 2 . 2022 . 85 - 102 Taha , K . A . S . , Ramlan , S . N . , & Noo , I . M . ( 2017 ) . The Factors Affecting Entrepreneurial Intentions of University Students in Malaysia . International Journal of Business and Technopreneurship , 7 ( 2 ) , 189 – 202 . Usman , B . ( 2016 ) . A Glimpse of Entrepreneurial Intention : Empirical Finding of International Student’s Perspectives in Turkey . International Students Social Sciences Congress , 29 April - 1 May , 2016 Konya - Turkey . https : / / ssrn . com / abstract = 2822927 Utomo , P . W . ( 2017 ) . Pengaruh Penggunaan Media Sosial dan Lingkungan Keluarga terhadap Kreativitas Berwirausaha Siswa Kelas XI Jurusan Pemasaran SMK Muhammadiyah 1 Wonosobo . Universitas Muhammadiyah Purworejo . Winarsih , P . ( 2014 ) . Minat Berwirausaha Ditinjau dari Motivasi dan Sikap Kewirausahaan pada Mahasiswa Program Studi Pendidikan Akuntansi Fakultas Keguruan dan Ilmu Pendidikan Universitas Muhammadiyah Surakarta Angkatan 2011 / 2012 . Universitas Muhammadiyah Surakarta . Yang , M . , & Chau , A . W . L . ( 2011 ) . Social involve - ment and development as a response to the campus student culture . Asia Pacific Education Review , 12 ( 3 ) , 393 – 402 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1007 / s12564 - 011 - 9149 - x Zampetakis , L . A . , Gotsi , M . , Andriopoulos , C . , & Moustakis , V . ( 2011 ) . Creativity and Entrepreneurial Intention in Young People : Empirical Insights from Business School Students . The International Journal of Entrepreneurship and Innovation , 12 ( 3 ) , 189 – 199 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 5367 / IJEI . 2011 . 0037 Zampetakis , L . A . , & Moustakis , V . ( 2006 ) . Linking creativity with entrepreneurial intentions : A struc - tural approach . The International Entrepreneurship and Management Journal , 2 ( 3 ) , 413 – 428 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1007 / S11365 - 006 - 0006 - Z