Penultimate draft , to appear in The Philosophy of Creativity . Ed . E . Paul and S . B . Kauffman ( Oxford : Oxford University Press ) . Please do not cite without permission . The role of imagination in creativity Dustin Stokes University of Toronto It is perhaps an uncontroversial truth that the imagination is important for creative thought . The terms ‘creative’ and ‘imaginative’ are often used interchangeably , at least in popular contexts . And volumes have been written on the imaginations of creative artists , not to mention poems , films , paintings , and other depictions of the same phenomenon . Kant recognized a connection between imagination and creativity . So the mental powers whose combination ( in a certain relation ) constitutes genius are imagination and understanding . One qualification is needed , however . When the imagination is used for cognition , then it is under the constraint of the understanding and is subject to the restriction of adequacy to the understanding’s concept . But when the aim is aesthetic , then the imagination is free , so that , over and above that harmony with the concept , it may supply , in an unstudied way , a wealth of undeveloped material for the understanding which the latter disregarded in its concept ( Kant [ 1790 ] 1987 : 185 ) . A number of important insights can be gleaned from this passage . Consider Kant’s distinction between imagination used for conceptual understanding and imagination used for artistic ends . By way of this distinction , Kant intimates two features of imagination endorsed today . First , imagination provides a kind of cognitive freedom important for creative thought and action . 1 Second , imagination can be used in more or less constrained ways . Kant’s thesis is about aesthetic ideas and the special service that imagination provides for that particular kind of mental engagement but it can—contrary to what Kant suggests—be 1 Imagination for Kant was , by most interpretations , something different than it is for philosophers and psychologists today . The Kantian imagination was the activity of both apprehending and reproducing the ideas and percepts from the manifold of experience . So ‘imagination’ for Kant , it seems , denoted what today we would probably call understanding and perceptual belief , in addition to imagery and propositional imagination . 2 generalized . Indeed , the thesis generalizes both beyond the aesthetic to creative scientific theorizing and problem solving , and beyond radical creativity or genius to more mundane , everyday creativity . The thesis advanced here is that imagination is important for even the most minimally creative thought . This general claim may also be a truism . But it would be nice to have in hand some reasons for thinking it so . Very few philosophical analyses have been offered to this or some similar end . And though psychologists have researched both imagination and creativity , studies which attempt identification or testing of a link between the two phenomena have been sparse . 2 So , how might creative thought and imagination be connected in an architecture of the mind ? This paper addresses this question , centrally from the perspective of philosophy , but with empirical assistance from cognitive and developmental psychology . In addition to illuminating the connection between the two phenomena , consideration of recent work on imagination helps us to better understand creative processes . I . Artistic creativity and truth - boundedness Kant was right : imagination , when used to aesthetic ends , provides a free play of ideas , a “wealth of undeveloped material for the understanding . ” And contrary to Kant , imagination has this feature whether or not it is used for aesthetic ends . With respect to the 2 Philosophical exceptions include Carruthers 2002 and Polanyi 1981 . For analysis from psychology , see Cacciari 1997 ; Ward 1994 . Worth special mention is a paper by Berys Gaut ( 2003 ) . Gaut provides an analysis that explores and advances insights from Kant , in particular on artistic creativity and aesthetic ideas . The analysis offered below is generally compatible with Gaut’s , since Gaut too argues that imagination is important to “active creativity” ( he claims the connection to be an a priori constitutive one ) . However , Gaut’s analysis is distinct in at least the following ways : ( a ) he focuses on rich creativity , explicitly committing to a value condition for creativity ; ( b ) he focuses very little on non - artistic creativity , e . g . creativity in theory or science ; ( c ) he focuses on metaphor - making as a paradigm of the creative use of the imagination , maintaining that study of the former is especially revealing of the structure of the latter . As the reader will discover , the present analysis is distinct from Gaut’s analysis in at least these three ways . 3 range of contents that one can take a certain cognitive attitude towards , imagination enjoys a freedom that most ( perhaps all ) other attitudes or capacities lack . 3 One can imagine situations that have not and will never happen . One can imagine the truth of propositions of which one is uncertain . One can imagine consequences to an action before performing it . And so on . This cognitive play is important if not essential to creative art making . This is for the simple reason that creative things are , in part , new things . And new things are , sometimes , new combinations of old things , combinations of concepts , ideas , skills , knowledge , and so on . Or stronger , creativity may involve thoughts or actions that are radically novel , not merely conceptual combinations of existing materials . It may involve a radical transformation of a conceptual space ( Boden 2004 ) . The strongest traditional account of novelty and creativity endorses a creation ex nihilo thesis : truly creative ideas come from nowhere . Whatever the case , a capacity like imagination—even as sparsely described here— is needed for this kind of conceptual combination , transformation , and formation . Consider Bach’s famous work , The Well - Tempered Clavier . The work consists of Book I and Book II , each one comprising a set of one prelude and one fugue devoted to each of the twelve major and minor keys . Grant a few simple assumptions . First , this is a creative work of art , whatever other properties one may or may not attribute to the work . Second , Bach was responsible for this creation ; it was not , as ancient and romantic theories might have it , merely a product of a muse or divine inspiration . Finally , part of Bach’s goal , as evidenced by the title of the work , was to explore the possibilities of two musical technologies new to his day : tempered tuning for keyboard instruments and the tonal scale system . 4 Conjoining these assumptions : this is an instance of rich creativity , but one that was highly constrained in 3 This is not to imply that imagination is always unconstrained . A more precise clarification of imagination , including this qualification , is offered in section IV below . 4 In fact , some theorists hold that he created these works for largely didactic purposes ( Tomita 1996 , 1998 ) . 4 identifiable ways . A natural question to ask is , simply , how did Bach do it ? Tough question . One way to make headway on such a question is to identify the constraints on the artist and what sorts of cognitive manoeuvring these constraints necessitated ( in order for the work to be created ) . As will become clear , even in constrained circumstances the creative process required the cognitive play mentioned above . Bach knew a lot about the tempered tuning technologies and , more broadly , music technologies . But he didn’t know everything ( he was a genius but he was , after all , human ) . So let’s imagine a Super - Bach , one who knew everything there was to know—both in terms of all of the facts and all of the relevant skills—about the clavier , tempered tuning , and the twelve - tone scale . This would not have been sufficient for the creation of The Well - Tempered Clavier . Indeed , Super - Bach might be an omniscient being , with complete knowledge of all of the music - theoretical space of the time and would not yet have knowledge of the musical structure of The Well - Tempered Clavier . Super - Bach’s knowledge ( just like actual Bach’s knowledge ) of the space would indeed constrain his composition , but this knowledge alone would not amount to , afford , or even imply the musical work in question . This is for the simple reason that there is nothing in this conceptual domain , or cluster of domains , that includes or entails ( by itself ) The Well - Tempered Clavier . The general point is about how far states like knowledge ( or justified true belief , if one prefers ) can take us towards thinking creatively . And the suggestion is this , any cognitive state that functions to faithfully represent the information of some conceptual space—be that cognitive state a true belief , propositional or procedural knowledge , a memory—can at best play a necessary but insufficient role in the thinking required for an accomplishment like The Well - Tempered Clavier . 5 Truth - bound cognitive states , as they will be called here and as will be clarified below , are rarely sufficient for creative thought . 5 The same point can be made in simple terms of information . Given some set of information { I } , different agents will acquire different knowledge about { I } . The content of the knowledge had with respect to { I } derives solely from { I } , since to be knowledge of { I } some belief or skill will have to accurately represent some element of { I } . Of course , not all thoughts about { I } amount to knowledge . Some will be false beliefs , some true but unjustified , others false and unjustified . Still others will be non - doxastic : one might have entertainings , desires , intentions , curiosities , doubts , and imaginings , among other states , with respect to { I } . Among these latter states , many are non truth - bound . ‘Truth - boundedness’ denotes the accuracy function of a class of cognitive state . And so ‘truth’ is here used in a broader , stipulated sense since , in addition to propositional states , it must accommodate procedural kinds of knowledge or skills—one learns more or less accurately , not truly , how to make an omelette or fix a flat tire . 6 Beliefs of course can be false , and we can inaccurately learn skills . But when properly functioning , these kinds of states accurately represent whatever features of the world they aim to represent . They are essentially inflexible in this way . 7 The same goes , on recent philosophical accounts , for remembering and seeing . This implies a working schema for truth - boundedness . Truth - boundedness : A cognitive state Φ is truth - bound if a proper function of Φ is to accurately represent ( some part of ) the world . 5 This claim is apparently supported by empirical study on practice and expertise . See Meinz and Hambrick 2010 ; Campitelli and Gobet 2011 ; and Hambrick and Meinz 2011 . 6 We might instead say ‘accuracy bound’ or ‘accuracy functioning’ , but these terms simply aren’t as snappy . And there are a number of terms in current philosophical usage : ‘factive’ , ‘truth - aptness’ , ‘truth - functional’ , ‘truth tracking’ , ‘truth committal . ’ Each of these terms may be related to the notion that ‘truth - bound’ aims to capture . But each is certainly distinct , and with connotations that would likely distract from present purposes . So , ‘truth - bound’ it shall be . 7 For one important discussion of this feature of belief , see Velleman’s ‘The Aim of Belief’ in Velleman 2000 . 6 This definition , although perhaps unhappily imprecise , provides a sufficient mode of distinction , useful enough to demarcate two classes of cognitive states and capacities . Any type of state that satisfies this condition is truth - bound . States that do not satisfy the condition , that lack this representational function and are relevantly flexible , are non truth - bound . 8 Although not a complete catalogue , the following states all appear to be non truth - bound : imaginings , suppositions ( many philosophers take supposition to be just an impoverished form of imagining ) , curiosities , desires , hopes , wishes , fears , and many other emotions . Perhaps all of the states just mentioned lack a ( exclusive ) mind - to - world direction of fit . Desires , hopes and wishes , for example , instead have a world - to - mind fit ( Searle 1983 ) . But to be clear , ‘non truth - bound’ does not just mean states with world - to - mind fit , as opposed to the mind - to - world fit of doxastic states . Following some cognitive accounts of emotion , we might think of emotions as having both directions of fit , since ( on such accounts ) the emotional state is ( partly ) constituted by both a belief and a desire - like state ( De Sousa 1987 ; Oatley 1992 ; Oatley and Johnson - Laird 1987 ) . Fear , for example , may be constituted by a belief that there is some danger to oneself and a desire to remove oneself from that very threat . So fear would be characterized by both mind - to - world and world - to - mind fit . 8 We might hesitate to call many skills ‘states’ , let alone ‘cognitive states . ’ And their being truth - bound , even in the broad way specified , implies they are representational to some degree . This is somewhat orthogonal , since we are primarily interested in creative cognition , which will surely involve representational cognitive states if anything does . But to be clear , one only need grant that in learning and executing some skills , certain states of the learning or executing agent represent features of the environment . In learning how to read music , I form beliefs and acquire concepts which represent the musical theory and notation before me . These representations may not exhaust the skill , but they are partly constitutive of it . And even an apparently “non - cognitive” skill , can be similarly described . In practicing my tennis backhand , my motor actions ( aim to ) mirror those of my instructor ( and I certainly think about it this way , as I practice ) . This skilful activity may be explained without appeal to mental representation , but nonetheless some states of the system , namely my physical body , mirror features of my environment ( even if those states are described in purely physiological , non - mentalistic terms ) . And so on . The point is just that some skilful activity involves states which function to represent their environments , where these states may be more or less accurate in performing this function . 7 Imaginings are not inherently constrained in either direction , instead possessing a direction of fit ( or not ) relative to the context of imagination . So , for example , if one is reading a fictional narrative and one is attempting to follow the imaginative prescriptions of that narrative , one will imagine just the propositions that the story makes ( fictionally ) true . One’s imaginative states , in such instances , have a kind of mind - to - world fit , where the world is just the fictional world of the story ( Walton 1990 ) . Alternatively , if one thinks that some imaginative states can be desire - like , then perhaps they enjoy a ( fictional ) - world - to - mind direction of fit ( Currie 2002 ; Currie and Ravenscroft 2002 ; Stokes 2006 ; Doggett and Egan 2007 ) . So the notion of truth - boundedness is not captured by simply distinguishing directions of fit . In Kant’s terms , then , non truth - bound states are not “subject to the restriction of adequacy to the understanding’s concept . ” These states are necessary for richly creative thinking—for novel conceptual combinations , transformations , and formations—since truth - bound states fail to do the relevant work . Non truth - bound states do not function to accurately represent the world ; these states potentially , and without malfunction , involve ( at least ) minimal manipulation of the information they carry or ( re ) present . Put another , hopefully familiar , way , these states ( by contrast with truth - bound states ) do not aim for objectivity . As such these states do not purport to tell us about the mind - independent world ( or the facts about some subject matter ) , and so do not “go wrong” when they do not match the world ( or those facts ) . Creativity , it should be no surprise , is not after all an intrinsically truth - seeking enterprise . 9 9 A couple of important qualifications need to be made . First , the claim is that imagination is not truth - bound , in the sense that imagination does not qua imagination , properly function to accurately represent the world . This is compatible with the claim , maintained by many modern and contemporary philosophers , that imagination can be used to determine or reason about modal truths . Indeed , if one maintains the strong position that imagination is , by its nature , bound to provide information about modal truth , then the mention of ‘world’ 8 All of this motivates hypothesizing a certain functional role as part of creative cognition . Creativity , at least of the sort that Kant had in mind and of which Bach provides one example , requires non truth - bound cognitive states in the process that enables it ( or just is it ) . Call this the cognitive manipulation role . It specifies not just the allowance for but indeed the need for non truth - bound states in the creative process . 10 This is the lesson of the Super - Bach thought experiment : all of the relevant musical - theoretical knowledge ( all of the relevant truth - bound states ) would not suffice for the composition of The Well - Tempered Clavier . Imagination serves this cognitive manipulation role . Bach presumably imagined , working from within the constraints that he imposed upon himself , how certain musical combinations and structures would achieve certain goals . He did not , as it were , simply read off or abstract from the relevant music - theoretic information . He had to manipulate , by use of the imagination , that information ( and perhaps add to it ) in ways unbound to accurately representing it . This oversimplifies Bach’s creative process , but the general point should be clear . There is , for richly creative achievement in the arts and sciences , a cognitive manipulation role , and imagination serves it well . This is part of Kant’s insight . This insight is extended to more mundane creativity in § II , and then made more precise in § III and § IV . II . Minimal creativity and cognitive manipulation in the definition of ‘truth - boundedness’ becomes importantly operative : present interest is in a distinction between mental states that are bound vs . not bound to accurately represent truths about the actual world . ( A reason to doubt this strong position is that , as some have argued , imagination in the context of fiction appears to allow for contradiction , incoherence , and incompleteness . See Walton 1990 : 57 - 67 ) . The second qualification concerns the claim that creativity is not intrinsically truth - seeking . One may worry here about creative processes and products in the theoretical and scientific domains . The scientist is , after all , aiming at truth . Does the present account preclude her thoughts and behaviours from being creative ? This concern raises big issues about discovery vs . creation , some of which will have to be skirted here . But the first thing to say is that some of scientific discovery is presumably not creative . However , much of it is creative , and the present analysis is committed to the claim that when theorizing is creative , even if the broad enterprise is a truth - seeking one , some of the process that leads to the theory or result will involve cognitive manipulation and , necessarily , inclusion of non - truth bound states . This implication will hopefully become clearer in the sections that follow . 10 This role will be further characterized in section II . 9 A reason for thinking that creative processes require cognitive manipulation is that the creativity of Bach and other geniuses involved a cognitive breakthrough ( or several ) . Bach began with a conceptual space—in this case a new music - theoretic space—and had to do something with it , importantly , something that had never been done before . In this way Bach’s creativity is radical , since at the very least his work is novel relative to the entire history of music and in a way that is exciting , valuable , and instructive . This kind of change is not possible using inflexible , truth - bound cognition . Cognitive breakthroughs , however , can be much more banal . But even the everyday breakthrough , as will now be argued , implies that some cognitive faculty play the role of cognitive manipulation . 11 From the standpoint of philosophy , psychology , and cognitive science , radical creativity does not exhaust theoretical interest . It may in fact be the last place to look if giving a cognitivist or naturalistic analysis of creativity . A number of theorists have acknowledged this general point . Margaret Boden , for example , makes an influential distinction between historical and psychological creativity ( Boden 2004 ) . The first is just as the name implies : an idea or act is novel if it is new relative to the history of ideas ( or , broadening the notion , relative to some class of behaviour or culture ) . Psychological creativity involves ideas that are novel relative to some individual mind . Others too have suggested weaker , mundane , or minimal senses of creativity . 12 The thread common to these analyses is this : creativity is not exclusive to minds like Bach or Beethoven . All human thinkers have some capacity for thinking in ways that are relatively original , for taking on novel skills and information , for solving problems in surprising and unexpected ways . What conditions , then , are there on a more everyday sense of creativity ? 11 See Stokes 2011 for more on cognitive breakthroughs . 12 See Barsalou and Prinz 1997 ; Prinz and Barsalou 2002 ; Bird and Stokes 2006 ; Carruthers 2002 ; Nanay , this volume ; Stokes 2007 , 2008 , 2011 ; Weisberg 1986 , 1999 10 Boden’s distinction is really one between two different types of novelty : an F is historically or psychologically creative by virtue of being , respectively , historically novel or psychologically novel . A novelty condition captures our most basic of intuitions about creativity : creative F s are novel F s . Boden’s important insight is that our interest in creative thought outstrips historical novelty or novelty simpliciter . A child who works out a difficult mathematical theorem in a surprising way , even if the theorem is well known and established ( but unbeknownst to the child ) , has done something we rightly acknowledge as importantly novel , namely , novel for the child . If Borges’ character , Menard , manages to re - write parts of Cervantes’ Don Quixote without copying the text , then he has done something psychologically novel ( Borges 1964 ) . 13 In both of these cases , the thoughts and actions of the agent are , even if not novel relative to the history of ideas , novel relative to the cognitive histories of the relevant agents . This difference in novelty needn’t be one in kind , but instead a difference in the scope of the comparison class : the child’s mathematical solution is novel relative to a narrow class of ideas ( namely , that child’s ) , while Godel’s incompleteness proofs were novel relative to a much broader class ( say , all ideas before Godel ) . In any case , psychological ( or , we might say , behavioural ) novelty provides one necessary condition for a minimal concept of creativity . A second plausible condition is agency , which captures the fact that creative thoughts and behaviours are ones for which we are responsible , as evidenced by their general praiseworthiness . Sunsets and cloud figures may be aesthetically interesting , but they are not the kinds of things that we count as creative . One withholds an attribution of creativity here by the same token as one grants it for an artwork or scientific thesis : creative F s are the 13 Psychologically novel at the very least : were Menard to accomplish such a task , he may well have done something historically novel . And , if Borges’ theorizing is accurate , Menard would thus have created an entirely distinct work and one with different aesthetic properties . For discussion of the ontological implications of a case like this see , among others , Goodman and Elgin 1986 ; Currie 1991 ; Davies 2004 . 11 results of agency . Moreover , creative F s have to be linked with agency in the right way : we don’t judge happy accidents creative , even if interesting and valuable . An agency condition , suitably sharpened , is thus a necessary condition for minimal creativity . Conjoining these two conditions : MC * : Some thought ( or action ) x is minimally creative only if , for some agent A , x is the non - accidental result of the agency of A and x is psychologically ( or behaviourally ) novel relative to A 14 It will be assumed here that a novelty condition and an agency condition are conditions on any sense , minimal or rich , of creativity . These conditions are necessary , but unlikely sufficient even for mundane , everyday creativity . 15 But they are sufficient to characterize creativity for present purposes . That is , even with this incomplete definition , we can ask important questions about creative cognition . We can ask what kinds of cognitive faculties are needed to generate thoughts and action that meet these two basic conditions . So grant that MC * provides a working characterization of minimally creative thought , and grant further that minimal creativity is a common phenomenon . Even minimally creative thought and behaviour requires cognitive manipulation . To see this , consider two independent sets of studies in experimental psychology , both of them on figurative thought . First consider three related studies on drawing capacities . Annette Karmiloff - Smith solicited drawings of nonexistent houses , people , and animals from children ranging in age from 4 to 11 ( Karmiloff - Smith 1990 ; 1992 : 155 - 61 ) . Christina Cacciari and colleagues 14 ‘MC * ’ is used here to flag a weaker characterization of my MC ( Stokes 2011 ) . See that discussion for extended analysis of an agency condition plus a third ( modal ) condition , argued to be conjointly sufficient for minimal creativity . And see Gaut 2009 for related discussion of agency and skill . 15 For alternative , additional conditions ( or simply , alternative analyses ) , see Boden 2004 ; Gaut 2003 ; Gaut and Livingston 2003 ; Nanay ( this volume ) ; Novitz 1999 , and for analyses from an empirical perspective , see Sternberg 1999 . One condition commonly posited ( indeed by most if not all of the just mentioned theorists ) as necessary for rich creativity is a value condition : an x is richly creative only if it is valuable ( or useful ) . See my 2008 ; 2011 for worries about the theoretical value of a value condition . 12 solicited drawings of nonexistent houses and animals from children in the same age range ( Cacciari et . al 1997 ) . Thomas Ward performed similar studies on adults , asking them to imagine and draw nonexistent creatures ( Ward 1994 , 1995 ) . One hypothesis , motivated by all three sets of data , is that children and adults alike are highly constrained by their existing concepts : concepts , like HOUSE , PERSON , or ANIMAL , significantly constrain how a person is able to depict novel instances of such concepts . Although frequency of cross - category combination increases with age , the properties from any one category are relatively stable . Ostensibly then , individuals “retrieve a specific instance of a given category and pattern the new creation after it , regardless of whether they were required to imagine and draw an artefact such as a house or a natural kind such as an animal” ( Cacciari et al . 1997 : 157 ) . So even given invitations to create nonexistent things , the drawings were quite predictable—largely generated in line with the relevant conceptual schemes . Nothing radically novel here . However , a question remains : are any of these drawings possibly enabled merely by the relevant conceptual knowledge ? We know that the subjects consistently deployed their concepts of HOUSE , PERSON , etc . , to make their drawings ; was this knowledge sufficient ? No . The concepts of HOUSE and PERSON , no matter how rich , will not ( by themselves ) enable a child to draw a house with eyes for windows , a mouth for a front door , and arms and legs . These cross - category changes require the child to cognitively manipulate , rather than faithfully mirror , the conceptual space in particular , albeit minimal , ways . These drawings require non truth - bound cognitive states . Consider a second set of studies on the development and acquisition of figurative linguistic competence—comprehension of metaphors , idioms , proverbs and the like . Children as young as 7 years of age are able to understand and use figurative language . The 13 development of this competence is not based in rote learning mechanisms . One plausible reason for this is that metaphoricity co - varies with abstraction : As with nouns , verbs that are understood at a higher level of abstraction are rated as more metaphorical than when the same verbs could be interpreted at the basic ( literal ) level . Furthermore , this effect is graded : the higher the level of abstraction , the higher the rated metaphoricity . These findings suggest that people use level of abstraction as a cue to metaphoricity for both nominal and predicative metaphors ( Torreano , Cacciari , and Glucksberg 2005 : 259 ) And recognizing metaphors , as abstractions , is not accomplished simply by observing adult usage of metaphor . 16 Instead one must suspend the literal meanings of the relevant terms and phrases . 17 Learning and recognizing metaphors thus consists in the acquisition of what some call figurative competence . This suite of abilities includes the apprehension of a variety of meanings for a single lexical item , suspension of purely literal or referential linguistic strategies , awareness of linguistic conventions , and the importance of the context of utterance ( Cacciari et al 1997 : 159 ) . 18 The relevant moral is that learning figurative linguistic types is not enabled by straightforward rote learning : one does not just memorize a meaning and syntactic role for the lexical item ( s ) . This learning requires more than truth - bound cognitive states , more than entertaining and assenting to the information contained in the relevant conceptual space . It requires some consideration of and simple hypothesis formation about the potential for multiple meanings , multiple syntactic roles , conventional and contextual factors , among other factors . These considerations involve more than the formation of true beliefs and 16 See Levorato et al ( 2004 : 304 ) , which cites the following studies in support of this thesis : Kempler , Van Lancker , Marchman , & Bates , 1999 ; Levorato & Cacciari , 1992 , 1995 ; Nippold & Martin , 1989 ; Nippold & Rudzinski , 1993 ; Van Lancker & Kempler , 1987 . 17 As Levorato et al ( 2004 : 304 ) puts it , what’s required is “the ability to suspend , if not suppress , contextually inappropriate meanings . In the case of idioms , the reader has to suppress the constituent word meanings that are irrelevant to the figurative interpretation . According to Gernsbacher and Faust ( 1991 ; Gernsbacher , Varner , & Faust , 1990 ) , poorer performances in reading for comprehension in adults ( and children ) might be due to the deficient suppression mechanisms possessed by less skilled readers…” 18 See also Cacciari and Levorato 1989 ; Gibbs 1987 , 1991 , 1994 ; Levorato and Cacciari 1992 , 1995 , 1999 , 2002 . 14 accurate skills . Or better put , even if the development of beliefs and skills—and thus the acquisition of propositional and procedural knowledge of figurative language—is the end result , this result involves as its means some non truth - bound states . The lesson of this rich set of research is that this result is not enabled by “merely reading off” the information contained in the conceptual space . The drawing and figurative language behaviours possess two marks of creativity : agency and novelty . The cognitive behaviours of the subjects are effortful and involve thoughts that are ( some of them ) novel relative to the minds of those subjects . Behaviours that , in this way , meet the conditions of MC * are not richly creative , but if there is a continuum of creative cognition , they lie at the end opposite the cognitive behaviours of Bach and Beethoven . In simple terms , they involve doing something with the information in the relevant spaces , and in ( agent - relative ) psychologically novel ways . Note that this is consistent with resisting an attribution of any rich sense of ‘creative’ in these instances . Both the drawing behaviour and the figurative language behaviour require non truth - bound cognitive states . The subjects must manipulate the information in that space and use it in cross - categorical ways , even if only in the minimal ways required to humanize a house or comprehend a phrase like ‘Lawyers are sharks . ’ And so these cognitive behaviours , like Bach’s composition , require cognitive manipulation . From here , we might derive an empirical generalization . If these cognitive behaviours are minimally creative , then minimally creative cognition requires cognitive manipulation . The inference here is an inductive one : a generalization from two classes of novel cognitive behaviour to all minimally creative cognition . As an empirical generalization , the inference is strong to the degree that the novelty in these behaviours typifies ( psychologically ) novel behaviour . The cognition involved—concept deployment and combination in the first set of studies , and non - literal 15 linguistic learning in the second set—is general and basic , and so any psychological novelty that emerges would also be basic . Another way of putting the point is this . The degree or quantity of non truth - bound resources needed to behave in psychologically novel ways— either in the drawing tasks or the figurative learning tasks—is quite low . And so , plausibly , any minimally creative cognition would require at least this much of the same non truth - bound resources . This empirical generalization may be combined with the earlier conceptual considerations . Novel cognition—be it radical historical novelty or mere psychological novelty—requires more of an agent than accurately representing a conceptual space , even when the tasks are simple and mundane . Novelty implies cognitive manipulation . It is thus the novelty in the studied behaviours that does the work of motivating the claimed need for cognitive manipulation . Creative behaviours qua novel behaviours reasonably require whatever resources enable the psychologically novel behaviours in these studies ( even if one denies creativity of the latter ) . These resources have been distinguished as non truth - bound cognitive manipulation , by contrast with truth - bound beliefs and skills . So , if these behaviours require cognitive manipulation , and creative cognition requires at least this much ( by way of non truth - bound cognitive resources ) of its agents , then creative cognition requires cognitive manipulation . This generates a thesis : Cognitive manipulation thesis ( T ) : Creative thought and behaviour ( rich or minimal ) requires cognitive manipulation . Cognitive manipulation involves thinking about the contents of some conceptual space in non truth - bound ways . This thesis is so far pretty thin : only the notions of truth - boundedness and minimal creativity have been adequately clarified . And so in order to better hone in on the best candidate 16 cognitive faculty or faculties for the cognitive manipulation role , a more thorough analysis of the cognition typical of creative processes is needed . III . Enriching the cognitive manipulation role Whether it is creativity in the category of genius or the everyday , a number of cognitive ( or at least mental ) features typify a creative process . Although these features may not be possessed by every instance of creativity , they do ( and usually in some combination ) typify a great deal of creativity . Indeed , very plausibly , any instance of creativity will involve some combination of this cluster of cognitive features . Here is the strategy : Identify a cluster of typifying cognitive features . To identify this cluster of features is to enrich the cognitive manipulation role . In terms of explanation , it is to identify desiderata for any theory of creative cognition , features that on balance should be explained by the mechanisms posited or invoked by the theory . And if one type of cognitive faculty best serves this role , then that faculty is plausibly necessary for much if not all of creativity . As should be clear by this point , the concluding thesis ( § IV ) is that imagination is the relevant faculty . A brief qualification before proceeding . The central explanandum for this paper is the active , conscious component / s of the creative cognitive process . The term ‘cognitive manipulation’ , is intended to make this perspicuous . Although much of the traditional literature on creativity focuses instead on either ( or both ) ( a ) implicit cognition ( sometimes called incubation or , less technically , insight ) or ( b ) free association , a great deal of creativity results from deliberate and active cognitive effort . Indeed , if it is minimal creativity in question , it is plausible that active creativity is ( part of ) the norm . That said , the analysis given below is compatible with the inclusion of these other , less active and / or less conscious , cognitive aspects in a complete explanation of the creative process . Indeed , the 17 present analysis can work in tandem with explanations of ( a ) and ( b ) , if not partly explain the importance of ( a ) and / or ( b ) . More on this below . Begin by considering an uncontroversial instance of creativity , Picasso’s Guernica . If one visits the Museo Reina Sofía in Madrid , one will find displayed in conjunction with the massive piece itself over 300 of Picasso’s preparatory sketches and ( at least this was true a few years ago ) a photojournalistic study of Picasso creating the piece . From these photos one quickly learns that Picasso’s process included removing or covering components that he had already painted on the final canvass . The process involved not just exhaustive prepping before painting but , essentially , erasing . A case like this reveals the silliness of traditional divine inspiration theories of creativity . Picasso’s execution was long , deliberate , and arduous . 19 So unless the traditional theory explains this case by positing a divinely inspired Picasso - automaton ( and moreover , where the inspiring deity was apparently regularly changing its mind ) , the traditional theory cannot explain a paradigm case of creativity . Kicking dead theories to one side , the lesson to glean here is that Picasso produced his work through careful , deliberate thought . This suggests the first desideratum . Voluntariness : The creative process typically involves a cognitive faculty or faculties that may be engaged voluntarily by the creating agent . Very often , even if not always , a person decides to take on a certain project—produce a painting or poem or melody , introduce a new scientific thesis or a new way of testing it , improve or invent a technology , identify a new way of solving a puzzle—and in taking on this project must deliberate , hypothesize , scrutinize , test , try , tweak , and revise . The same is true , even if to lesser degree , for instances of minimal creativity ( or , if one prefers , psychological novelty ) . For example , the subjects of the studies on figurative language had to actively play with the contents of the 19 For related debate in the psychological literature , see Weisberg 1995 ; 2004 and Simonton 1999 ; 2007 ( and the critical commentary accompanying the latter target article ) . 18 relevant linguistic or conceptual space . In all such cases , the cognition involved was ostensibly under the will of the agent : whatever cognitive faculty or faculties she uses , at least a significant portion needs to be the sort that she can voluntarily , and relatively immediately , control . To be clear , this imposes no requirement that the relevant faculty always be under voluntary control . And indeed , given so - called Eureka moments and free - associative insight , a faculty that is generally but not always under voluntary control may be preferable . 20 Affect and motivation : Creative products , especially artworks , are often emotional in character , both in what they express and what they evoke in their audience . And artists ( and generally , any person acting creatively ) are emotionally moved by their creative productions and , importantly , before these productions are finished . The point here is not just one about being motivated , and emotionally affected , by “getting the job done . ” Of course the creative person feels this . But plausibly , in working through the creative process , a person gets emotionally caught up with and in turn motivated by , the deliberation , hypothesis - generation , attempts and failures , and so on . This provides another desideratum for a theory of creative cognition : creative processes often involve mental mechanisms that causally interact with affective and motivational systems . Inference and decision making : Although the creative process ( typically ) requires flexibility in the form of non truth - bound cognition , it also requires cognition that can contribute to decision - making and inference . After testing and deliberation , the scientist will draw certain conclusions about how the theorizing should proceed , or about what methods of testing are possible . After considering a variety of possible media or techniques for this or that element 20 Working memory is plausibly relevant here . Information must be made available for manipulation and further processing , and this is generally how psychologists understand the theoretical role of working memory . However , the latter is not going to do the work of explaining ( or serving ) the cognitive manipulation role as it is understood here , in particular given the features of non truth - boundedness , affect , and free association . At most , working memory will be a necessary but insufficient condition for cognitive manipulation . 19 of a work , an artist will ultimately select the medium or technique she deems best ( by some criterion ) . Consider the child who is learning the metaphor ‘Lawyers are sharks’ . After reflecting on relevant contextual factors and non - literal possibilities for these words , while suppressing distracting literal meanings , the child will infer an interpretation . So the output of an inference or decision is , typically and respectively , a belief or an action . One forms a belief that ‘ This hypothesis / testing method is possible’ , or ‘The phrase can be used this way” . Or one forms an intention on how to proceed at a juncture in the process . But the output does not exhaust the inferential or decision making process : there is always some cognitive means that fills out the inferential or decisional procedure . The suggestion here is that creative processes are no exception : insofar as these processes often involve inferences drawn and decisions made , whether intermediary or final , these processes will need to involve cognitive faculties that connect in appropriate ways with inferential systems . Free association : This may just be an extension of the non truth - boundedness already identified . But the notion of free association has figured so largely in philosophical and psychological theorizing about creativity that it deserves separate mention . Here a romantic characterization is instructive rather than distracting . Kekulé’s discovery of the benzene molecule may be the most popular of anecdotes in creativity theorizing . One of Kekulé’s own descriptions of the discovery goes as follows . Again the atoms were gambolling before my eyes . This time the smaller groups kept modestly in the background . My mental eye , rendered more acute by repeated visions of this kind , could now distinguish larger structures , of manifold conformation ; long rows , sometimes more closely fitted together ; all twining and twisting in snakelike motion . But look ! What was that ? One of the snakes had seized hold of its own tail , and the form whirled mockingly before my eyes . As if by a flash of lightning I awoke ( qtd . Boden 2004 , 26 ) . A common and reasonable way to describe Kekulé’s mental activity here is as free - associative : he was allowing , without much mental effort , ideas and concepts to combine 20 without active direction or correction . Atoms mingled with snakes , twisting , turning , biting , and so on . If one introspects one’s own mundanely novel behaviour—say , if one is asked to draw a humanized house—one will sometimes plausibly find similar free - associative activity . The idea to turn some hedges into a beard or some opened window shutters into ears might come simply by randomly mixing house concepts and person concepts , letting these “ideas float around in one’s head” as we might say . This provides another desideratum : creative processes often involve this kind of conceptual freedom , and so a faculty suitable for free association should plausibly be part of an explanation of creativity . In addition to these four desiderata , non truth - boundedness has already been identified and defined . Conjoining these five features of creative processes provides a more robust job description , a richer characterization of cognitive manipulation . The enriched thesis is this : Cognitive manipulation thesis ( R ) : Creative thought and behaviour ( rich or minimal ) requires cognitive manipulation . Cognitive manipulation typically involves voluntarily thinking about the contents of some conceptual space in non truth - bound ways . In creative processes , this cognitive activity often causally interacts with affective , motivational , inferential , and free associative capacities . While perhaps not every instance of creativity will be enabled by or require this cognitive profile in full , much ( perhaps all ) of creativity seems typified by some combination of these features . 21 To the degree that a cognitive faculty is capable of possessing all of these features , this faculty is a good candidate to fill the role of cognitive manipulation ( now more richly understood ) . And if there is one type of faculty that possesses more ( or all ) of these features , by contrast with other cognitive faculties , then that faculty very plausibly is the faculty to play the role . 21 Two additional putative aspects of creativity , insight ( understood as resulting , apparently unwilled , from unconscious or subconscious thought ) and free association , will be discussed at the end of section IV . 21 IV . Creativity , cognitive manipulation , and imagination Imagination is the best candidate for serving the cognitive manipulation role . This claim is motivated by considering two contrasting aspects of imagination : cognitive playfulness and cognitive workfulness . 22 Understanding these two aspects of the imagination reveals how an imagination - based account of creative process satisfies the theoretical desiderata identified in the previous section . Arguing for the playfulness of imagination is fairly easy work . Imagination answers to names such as ‘pretence’ , ‘pretend play’ , ‘role - playing’ , and ‘make - believe’ . 23 To engage in imaginative activity is to engage in a cognitive activity that generally , as it were , carries smaller stakes for epistemic and bodily action . In fact , on one plausible model of imagination , this is one of the very features that distinguishes it from other cognitive states like belief , desire , and intention . Imaginings do not , qua imaginings , immediately cause action . Neither do imaginative states function to accurately represent the world . Simple conceptual analysis suffices for this point . As contrasted with beliefs and intentions , imaginings lack intrinsic commitment to truth and ends . It is a conceptual fact 22 There are other candidate mental faculties that may serve the role of non truth - bound cognition . For examples of relevant naturalistic accounts , see Campbell 1960 , 1965 ; Martindale 1989 , 1995 , 1999 ; Simonton 1999 ; Thornton 2002 ) . There isn’t space to carefully analyze these theories here , but the main worry is that they all posit mechanisms that plausibly enough explain creativity when it ostensibly results from unconscious or subconscious mental activity , but seem to fall short of explaining creativity that occurs during conscious , deliberate mental activity . Although many traditional accounts would indicate otherwise , the latter phenomenon , not the former , is by far the most prevalent . But even if one resists this claim , the central explanandum for this paper is the latter phenomenon . 23 There may be important differences between the states or capacities that such terms denote . Differences to one side , and for present purposes , all of these capacities are similar enough in the relevant way—namely , with respect to cognitive freedom or flexibility—to be categorized under the general kind ‘imagination . ’ It should also be noted that philosophers distinguish ( and debate ) various forms of the imagination and related capacities : sensory imagery vs . propositional imagination , rich or engaged imagination vs . mere supposition , and so on . Various features of the imagination are to be clarified below . But again , the working assumption here will be that in spite of putative differences between these distinguished types , they all fall broadly under a general capacity ( or perhaps a family of capacities ) that can be reasonably be called ‘imagination’ . For discussion , see Currie and Ravenscroft 2002 ; Gendler 2000 , 2003 , 2011 ; Kind 2001 ; McGinn 2004 ; Nichols 2004 , 2006 ; Walton 1990 , among others . 22 that beliefs aim for the end of truth , and a conceptual fact that intentions aim for the end of action . These types of states are , in some sense , bound to these ends or results : to believe that P is to be committed to the truth of P and to intend to do Q is to be committed , ceteris paribus , to doing Q . Similarly , perceptual experience is assertoric . Although perception can go awry , as it does in cases of illusion and hallucination , it properly functions to provide information about the world . Barring some special reason for doubt , perceptual experience purports to show one features and objects in the world . Imagination bears , by itself , no such commitments . Berys Gaut ( 2003 ) offers a compelling test case to this end . Moore’s paradox tells us that it is problematic to assert “I believe that it is Tuesday , but it isn’t Tuesday . ” Analogously , an assertion like the following is problematic : “I intend to go to the islands , but I won’t go to the islands if given the chance . ” By contrast , there is nothing paradoxical about either of the following : “I imagine that it is Tuesday , but it isn’t Tuesday” ; “I imagine going to the islands , but I won’t go to the islands if given the chance . ” Imagination thus enjoys a freedom that other states lack . Therefore , imagination possesses the first feature of cognitive manipulation as characterized above ; imaginative states are non truth - bound . This feature of imagination likely explains another : one generally can control one’s imagination at will . Imagine your favourite fictional character sitting beside you as you read this . Imagine s / he ( or it ) speaking to you about the philosophy of creativity and then offering you a cup of tea . Now that you are off and running , carry on the imagining however you wish . So , one can imagine objects , properties , and events that one has never perceived and the existence of which one does not believe . One can wilfully imagine propositions one believes to be false . One can imagine doing certain actions that one has no intention of doing . And so on . The voluntariness of imagination is explained by its non truth - boundedness . Here also the contrast with belief is useful : one does not , with any immediacy , 23 decide to believe . And this involuntariness is explained by the fact that belief is committed to truth . In this way , belief is sensitive to evidence . And though the irresponsible epistemic agent may do her best to attend to this evidence , ignore that , if the evidence is before her , she forms the belief ( or not ) unwillingly . Imagination , by contrast , is not committed to truth . It is “evidence - indifferent” ( McGinn 2004 : 132 ) . And so we can imagine with a freedom of will that belief and perception do not enjoy . Imagination is therefore suitably voluntary to serve the cognitive manipulation role . 24 Just as imaginings are decoupled from truth , imaginings are , typically , decoupled from action . Some have argued that some imaginative states , say in a child’s game of pretence , may result directly in action . 25 However , imaginative states do not , by contrast with intentions , stand in any deep conceptual relation with ( bodily ) action . The analogous behavioural point is that imaginings often , perhaps most typically , result in no relevant action . This feature may be connected with another important feature of imagination , its relation to affect . Consider one compelling explanation for our affective response to fictions . I seem to fear the vampire as I watch the horror film . In spite of my apparent fear , I do not flee the theatre in self - defence but squirm in cinematic enjoyment . The fact that I do not flee is taken as evidence for an imagination - based explanation . I do not believe that the vampire is a real threat nor desire to remove myself from danger , since if I did I would flee . Instead , I form some imaginative states about the fictional vampire that result in an affective response . 24 There is a lot to be said here . One issue concerns whether it is a mere psychological fact or a stronger conceptual fact that beliefs are not under voluntary control . On this issue —doxastic involuntarism—see see classic papers by Alston 1989 , Bennett 1990 , Williams 1973 . A second related qualification is this . Assuming that beliefs are not under voluntary control ( at least as a psychological fact about humans ) , this does not imply that beliefs cannot sometimes play something like the cognitive manipulation role . We can and do form false beliefs . And these sometimes may be the ( indirect ) result of fanciful or wishful thinking . But the latter kinds of beliefs deviate from norms of epistemic rationality . And so unless creativity is regularly the result of irrational thought processes or malfunctioning reason , belief is an implausible candidate to explain cognitive manipulation in the bulk of creative processes . 25 On this debate , see Currie and Ravenscroft 2002 ; Funkhouser and Spaulding 2009 ; Nichols and Stich 2000 , 2003 ; Velleman 2000 . 24 The physiology of this affect is often adequately characterized in ways similar to a reality - directed fear : my heart rate rises , my muscles tense , I cling to my chair , and so on . The same can be said for imagining past events , possible future events , or counter - actual events : I may feel temporarily sad upon imagining the death of a loved one , even as she simultaneously sits across the table from me . Imaginative states , then , causally interact with affective systems . 26 There is an apparent tension here . The suggestion is that imaginative states can engage with affective systems . But part of the motivation for this explanation , in the context of fictional - directed affect , is that the relevant affective responses do not result in action , and imagination ( unlike belief , desire , and intention ) is conceptually and behaviourally decoupled from action . This threatens to discount imagination from possessing the affective and motivational features of cognitive manipulation as it typifies creative processes . However , the apparent problem dissolves if one acknowledges that the claim about affect depends upon the denial of a universal claim about imagination and action : imagination does not always ( perhaps not even typically ) immediately cause action . This is the conceptual point brought out above . And this is consistent with a corresponding existential claim : imagination may cause action . Here there are a variety of options : perhaps imagination may cause action directly 27 . It may cause affect that is sufficient to motivate action , perhaps not in fiction - directed cases , but in future - directed or counter - actual directed cases . ( Is it a belief , or merely an imagining that causes the apparent fear that gets me to check behind the shower curtain for the bogey - man ? ) And , finally , imagination may cause other mental states that themselves 26 Fiction - directed affect has received considerable philosophical attention in the past few decades . An imagination - based explanation is perhaps the most popular extant view . A related debate concerns whether these affective responses are genuine emotions . But this question is ontological ( some say terminological , see Currie 1997 ) , concerning not whether imagination can engage affective systems but instead whether the resultant affect is of the same psychological kind as reality - directed emotion , or of a separate kind . See , among others , Currie 1990 ; Gaut 2003 ; Gendler and Kovakovich 2005 ; Walton 1990 ; Weinberg and Meskin 2006 ; and Harris 2000 for related empirical work . To be clear , the present claims are neutral with regard to this ontological question . 27 See fn26 . 25 typically cause action : belief , desire , intention . If one or more of these suggestions is true , then imagination can also meet the affective and motivational desideratum . These last suggestions imply that imagination causally interacts with a rich variety of mental states and processes . Making good on these suggestions requires a careful discussion of the second aspect of imagination : cognitive workfulness . In spite of the playfulness of imagination as just established—non truth - bound , under voluntary control , capable of generating ( non - reality directed ) affect—imagination can do a great deal of work for us . Philosophers have always implicitly indicated this by using the imagination ( and appealing to what is imaginable ) to construct arguments , thought experiments , and counter - examples . More recently philosophers have begun to explicitly analyze these valuable features of the familiar capacity . According to one recently defended thesis , in spite of functional differences , imagination and belief carry information in a single code . Thus systems that take input from belief can take isomorphic inputs from imagination , and will process that input in broadly similar ways . A system receiving the input from an imagining that P or a belief that P will produce similar ( though not identical ) output . The framework inspired by this thesis is supposed to solve a number of philosophical problems about the imagination and fiction , and enjoys both philosophical and empirical support . 28 One can take a lesson from this approach without commitment to the single code thesis : the representational ( or information - carrying ) nature of imaginative states is such that these states can be processed by a variety of mental and cognitive systems . And those systems are , at least some of them , the same systems that process belief representations . 28 See Harris 2000 ; Leslie 1987 ; Nichols 2004 ; Nichols and Stich 2000 ; Weinberg and Meskin 2006 . 26 Imaginings can , in a familiar way , drive or serve as premises in inference . We often subject our imaginings to ordinary inferential practice , drawing inferences about what is imagined in the same ways we would if we had beliefs with the same contents . If I imagine that P , and I imagine that if P then Q , then I am disposed to imagine Q just as I would in actual circumstances of reasoning . And we often supplement our imaginings with actual beliefs in order to render the imaginative project coherent and consistent . If I am told by a narrative that Holmes has blood on his shirt and the story has been ( at least implicitly ) a realistic one about humans , I am disposed to infer that Holmes has red stains on his shirt , given my beliefs about the actual world . 29 Imaginings can also be used to supplement reasoning about the actual world . One theory of folk mindreading ability requires precisely this : in explaining or predicting another person’s behaviour , I imaginatively simulate the ( relevant ) mental states I take the person to have . From this simulation I draw inferences about her actions , why she did what she did or what she may do next ( Currie 1995 , 1996 ; Goldman 1989 , 1992 ; Gordon 1986 ) . In the theoretical domain , there is a long tradition of supposing an important relation between conceivability—understood broadly as imagination—and possibility . So while few today would maintain that P ’s being imaginable is constitutive of P ’s being possible , many do maintain an inferential relation between the two . Imagining that P is , in some importantly qualified sense , a guide to modal truth ; the first gives one good reason to believe that possibly P . Here again , we are using imaginings alongside beliefs to draw inferences , in this case about possible worlds ( Chalmers 2002 ; McGinn 2004 ; Van Inwagen 1998 ; Yablo 1993 ) . 29 Nichols and Stich ( 2000 , 2003 ) call this ‘non - inferential elaboration’ ; Gendler ( 2003 ) calls this ‘mirroring . ’ 27 These considerations suffice to show that imagination displays another feature identified in § III above : it figures in theoretical and everyday inference . 30 But the connections between the imagination and other elements of the mind go deeper , and some of them show how imaginings may drive decision and action . Beliefs and perceptual experience on the one hand , and propositional imaginings and mental images on the other , have the same type of content . But we typically keep these mental states appropriately distinguished . For example , we generally do not confuse imaginings with beliefs ; introspectively , we identify imaginings as imaginings . Imaginings are in this way weakly quarantined from other mental states . Further , imaginings are often strongly quarantined insofar as they do not cause perceptions , actual beliefs or desires or a change in intentions , values , or other cognitive states . 31 However , there are exceptions to both sorts of quarantine , more commonly to the strong sort . Imaginings do influence or cause other mental states . I might vividly imagine that it will rain , and come to believe that it will rain . I might visually image the sofa fitting through the doorway and judge that the sofa will fit through the doorway ( and then act upon this judgment ) . I might imagine a bowl of ice cream and quickly find myself , driven by a newly formed desire , on the way to the ice cream shop . In spite of weak cognitive quarantine , imaginings are causally efficacious in these respects , enjoying a kind of cognitive contagion . And even weak quarantine can sometimes be violated . For instance , people sometimes mistake mental images for perceptions , or have trouble determining if a perceptual memory is one of 30 Both Nichols and Stich ( 2000 , 2003 ) and Gendler ( 2003 ) use ‘inferential elaboration’ to describe these general relations . It should also be noted that , none of this is meant to imply that imaginative states are always subject to rational rules of inference . We can and do use imagination in ways immune or blocked from normal inferential practice . 31 ‘Cognitive quarantine’ and ‘cognitive contagion’ are the terms of Gendler ( 2003 , 2006 ) . ‘Weak quarantine’ and ‘strong quarantine’ are my terms . 28 something perceived or something merely imagined ( Segal 1970 ; Kosslyn 1994 : 55 ; Reisberg et al . 1986 ; see Currie and Ravenscroft 2002 for further discussion ) . 32 Imaginative states thus integrate with other states in inference , causally influence our doxastic commitments , desires , and intentions , and in turn influence ( even if indirectly ) how we decide and act . Given its voluntary nature , there is significant freedom in how one uses and directs the imagination . One can use the imagination in a playful way , potentially engaging affective systems ; or one can use it in a more thin and constrained way , making suppositions only as robust as is needed for hypothesis generation . This is evident in the quotation from Kant given earlier : imagination may be constrained by the cognitive task and conceptual domain for which it is employed , and will accordingly connect with inferential and other mental mechanisms . Thus imaginative states may play a rigorous and purposive role in human cognition . Imagination is not all play and no work . To this point , the conclusion is that imagination has four of the identified features of cognitive manipulation typical of creative cognitive processes : non truth - boundedness , voluntariness , affect and motivation , and inference and decision - making , as they were named above . The final feature , free association , must now be discussed . How should one think about the relation between imagination and free association ? On a liberal account of the imagination , free association is just imagination in one of its many guises . Imagination bears no intrinsic commitment to truth or action . So one might think that free association is just imagination that is unconstrained and , relative to deliberate imaginative projects , undirected . This encourages a distinction between active and passive 32 Currie and Ravenscroft ( 2002 ) propose another exception to weak quarantine , arguing that schizophrenics and other patients experiencing so - called delusional beliefs suffer from a failure to recognize imaginings as imaginings , treating them in ways more like belief ( Currie and Ravenscroft 2002 : 161 - 84 ) . Gendler offers an extended analysis of the phenomenon of imaginative contagion ( Gendler 2006 ) . For recent and possibly relevant research in neuroscience , see Buda et . al 2011 . 29 imagination , and keeps both free association and deliberate pretence under the same general category of mental process . However , on a more conservative account of imagination , imagining involves actively doing something ( mentally ) : imagining a counterfactual proposition and then actively filling out details around that proposition , forming rich visual images of how one will construct a snow fort , and so on . Recalling Kekulé’s story , free association is comparatively passive : one does not control the ideas and images , one let’s them “gambol” before one’s mind’s eye . But even if , as this analysis would have it , the two faculties are distinct , they are not incompatible . And importantly , they plausibly may work together . So , even granting the difference in deliberate control , both mental activities are non truth - bound . This similarity is crucial since imagination may then be used , in a truth and evidence insensitive way , to seize upon ideas that result from free association . Plausibly , this is what Kekulé did : when certain images from his reverie surprised or interested him , he continued to actively use and play with them in imagination . It is the combination of the two faculties that helped enable his final inferences about his task , namely , the nature of the benzene molecule . 33 So even if imagination does not subsume free association , it suitably engages with free associative activity and in the ways typical of creative cognition . This last point generalizes to address some possible worries . At least part of the ordinary conception of creativity , one might urge , involves something very different from deliberate , conscious thought . Instead , creativity involves free association ( as in Kekulé’s reverie ) , or insight which results from some kind of subconscious or implicit cognition ( sometimes called ‘incubation’ ) , or both . And many traditional theories of creativity have placed greater emphasis on these features of creativity . This could motivate various worries : The present account fails to explain important features of creativity . Or , the present account 33 This line of thought is compatible with a recent model of creative processes—the Geneplore model . See Finke , Ward , and Smith ( 1992 ) . 30 fails to explain a large sample of paradigmatic creative acts and persons . Or , the present account misses the core of creativity : the non - deliberate and unconscious stuff is where the action is ! First a note of caution and then a response . There is an assumption that often underlies worries and theses like the ones just articulated , namely , that creative thought or behaviour is a single act , occurring at one time ( or small window of time ) . This assumption is misguided . Of course , we might accept that important insights come at a moment , or that some particular daydream or free associative episode is essential to a creative breakthrough . But by the same token , we should insist that some conscious , deliberate thought ( and / or action ) is essential to a creative breakthrough . Kekulé , for example , would not have had his famous insight at all , had he not already done a great deal of thinking , deliberating , hypothesizing , and indeed imagining about the chemistry of his day and the problem at hand . Some of these cognitive events , then , are necessary to Kekulé’s creative process ( in addition to his reverie - induced insight ) . The general lesson is that it is far more plausible to think of creativity in terms of a multi - faceted cognitive process , which occurs over time , and often involves the cognitive manipulation that is the focus here , and the insight and free association that has been the focus in much of the creativity literature . 34 Finally , can the present account offer any explanation of these additional , putative aspects of creativity ? Although it is unclear what psychological mechanisms are supposed to constitute insight and free association , these processes are , prima facie , good candidates for non truth - bound cognitive states or processes . And so one advantage of the present account is that it identifies the need for processes like these : non truth - bound cognition is needed for 34 For a naturalized explanation of incubation ( or insight ) in creativity , see Stokes 2007 . For a metaphysics of creativity that treats creativity as a process , see Stokes 2008 . For an empirically grounded process - model of creativity , see Finke et al ( 1992 ) , who argue that “of creativity not as a single unitary process but as a product of many types of mental processes” ( 1992 : 2 ) 31 creativity since creativity involves novelty . And these two processes can , in addition to imagination , provide non truth - bound content . Beyond this , the present emphasis on cognitive manipulation highlights conscious , deliberate thought and its role in the creative process . But this too , as the discussion three paragraphs back should suggest , is compatible with acknowledging the importance of insight and free association . Rarely does an artist or scientist gain a breakthrough by insight or free association without both some important antecedent and consequent cognitive work . Preparation must precede the breakthrough ( here one might think of Picasso’s preparatory sketches for Guernica or Kekulé’s arduous research prior to his famous insight ) . And after the insight , the agent will explore and further consider the apparent breakthrough prior to committing to it ( e . g . prior to putting brush back to canvas , or to articulating a decisive scientific thesis ) . In these cases , cognitive manipulation , performed by the imagination , is ( part of ) the rest of the story . It is important both prior to , and after , the insight . So while the present account does not fully explain these other putative aspects of creativity , it does provide some explanation for their importance , and encourages a general account of the creative process , whereby the creative process is broadly individuated , and in a way that may include a variety of non truth - bound states and processes . To conclude , imagination serves , and plausibly best serves , the cognitive manipulation role . According to the richer thesis offered in § III , this role as it is typically found in a creative process is typified by at least five features . Imagination—at least when broadly characterized as above - - displays all of these features . Imagination is non truth - bound , and this ( partly ) explains why it is generally under immediate voluntary control . Directly or indirectly , it engages with affective and motivational systems . And it is cognitively rigorous enough to drive inference and decision making . Finally , even if it is not itself free associative , 32 both mental activities are similarly non truth - bound , such that imagination can interact with ideas generated by free association . Taken together , this provides a powerful explanation for what we may take to be an obvious truth : imagination is important if not necessary for creative thought . This is true , it has been argued above , for both the creativity of genius , and everyday minimal creativity . IV . A concluding worry and a general lesson The analysis offered above , which attempts to provide reasons for the commonly assumed connection between creativity and imagination and , in turn , explain part of the creative process in terms of imagination , may evoke the following pair of worries . Simplifying the analysis and focusing just on truth - boundedness for the moment , the basic suggestion is that given the novelty of creative thought , creative processes require ( at least typically ) non truth - bound cognition . And so the first worry is that the explanation is one of novel cognition and not of creativity more broadly understood . Novel cognition , the worry would proceed , is a relatively mundane phenomenon . And what we thought we were getting was an explanation of something far more elusive , namely , creative cognition . The second worry builds on the first . The proposal is that imagination best serves the role of cognitive manipulation . And , again focusing just on non truth - boundedness , it serves this role ( at least in part ) because it allows for the cognitive freedom that seems needed in even the most mundane of novel thought . But then we are saddled with the conclusion that imagination is needed for much of ( if not all of ) novel thought . Forming new beliefs and concepts , learning , acquiring new skills , and so on , are partly explained in terms of imaginative activity . And these commonplace mental acts , we might have expected , are simply not particularly imaginative . 33 These are not challenges to but instead virtues of the present account . Assuaging the first worry does require granting the claim that creativity , or at least a central component of it , is an everyday phenomenon . Human beings all have the capacity for frequent , creative thought qua novel thought , for what above was termed ‘minimal creativity’ . Once this is granted , the worry disappears with the following qualification . The above explanation does not attempt to explain all features of creativity . It attempts to explain a central one , novel creative thought ( that appropriately depends upon agency ) , by appeal to imagination . And , in addition to this , a number of features typical of creative processes—voluntariness , affect and motivation , and so on—fill out the cognitive manipulation role and further support the claim that imagination is deeply important , if not necessary , for creative thought and behaviour . This does not , to be clear , explain all features or degrees of creativity . But it does explain some central features , and in a way that is broadly naturalistic and ripe for future research in philosophy and cognitive science . What of the second worry , that on this account the imagination is important for a remarkable variety of mental acts ? This should be no problem . First , recall that imagination can vary significantly in richness . One can imagine an entire scenario in rich perceptible detail , or one can baldy imagine a proposition and mechanically run it through a process of inference . So while it may seem initially surprising that mundane cognitive acts like forming a belief or desire , acquiring a concept , or learning a simple skill may require imaginative activity , the proposal does not require rich imagination in its explanans : some of these mundane acts of novel cognition presumably involve more bald imagination . This is a point echoed in contemporary epistemology . On one standard line of reasoning , skeptical doubts are generated by considering possibilities that are incompatible with a proposition P believed ( or under consideration for belief ) . From the first person 34 perspective , whether these skeptical possibilities are salient , and thus whether one recognizes a threat to one’s certainty that P , depends upon imagination . Belief deliberation , formation , and maintenance , if it involves any of this kind of consideration , involves the cognitive manipulation that imagination offers us . Of course the degree of imaginative engagement shifts with both the epistemic agent and the context : given certain contexts some epistemic agents let their imaginations rip ( Lewis 1996 ) . Given other contexts , the imaginings are fewer in number and narrower in scope . Some agents let their imaginations rip all the time ; some just aren’t very imaginative , ever . Moreover , as mentioned above , imagination plausibly plays a central role in the formation of modal beliefs . Upon clearly imagining that P ( perhaps above some threshold for clarity , consistency , completeness , etc . ) one may well form the belief that Possibly P ; and oppositely upon failure to ( suitably ) imagine that P . The point here is that we should be happy to accept that rational processes of belief - formation and maintenance involve imagination . The point generalizes : there is nothing particularly special about belief in this regard . Desires , intentions , and other propositional attitudes are often the result , in part , of imaginative activity . Cross - categorical concept application and skill - acquisition require imagination—this was one of the morals of the empirical studies discussed in § II . So one should not take the mundaneness of a mental state to be an indication that it did not require for its formation the use of imagination . 35 To conclude , recognizing that imagination and creativity ( of at least some limited richness ) are commonplace , does not strip them of their value . Nor is the claim incompatible with what seem to be obvious facts : some people are more imaginative than others and some people are more creative than others . Instead , the analysis proposed here identifies 35 Indeed , on one recent account , imagination is fundamental to all of cognition , since it is fundamental to grasping meaning ( McGinn 2004 ) . 35 connections between imagination and more minimal creativity . This is something that we can study without appeal to the romantic traditions that have so often thwarted good explanations of creativity ; the analysis instead encourages explanations from contemporary philosophy and cognitive science . These attempts at explanation , one would hope , may ultimately contribute to explaining the presumed target of those romantic theories , namely , our most imaginative and creative minds . But the first step , taken here , is to identify architectural features common to the minds of Bachs , Picassos , and ( perhaps ) more ordinary minds like yours and mine . Bibliography Alston , W . ( 1989 ) , ‘The Deontological Conception of Epistemic Justification , ’ in Epistemic Justification ( Ithaca : Cornell University Press ) . Barsalou , L . W . and Prinz , J . ( 1997 ) , ‘Mundane Creativity in Perceptual Symbol Systems , ’ in T . Ward , S . Smith , and J . Vaid ( eds . ) Creative Thought : An Investigation of Conceptual Structures and Processes ( Washington , D . C . , American Psychological Association ) . Bennett , J . ( 1990 ) , ‘Why Is Belief Involuntary ? ’ Analysis , 50 : 87 – 107 . Bird , J . and Stokes , D . ( 2006 ) , ‘Evolving Minimally Creative Robots’ , in S . Colton and A . Pease ( eds . ) Proceedings of The Third Joint Workshop on Computational Creativity , 36 European Conference on Artificial Intelligence , 1 - 5 . Boden , M . ( 2004 ) , The Creative Mind , 2 nd Edn . ( London : Routledge ) . Borges , J . L . ( 1964 ) , ‘Pierre Menard , Author of Quixote ’ , in D . A . Yates , and J . E . Irby ( eds . ) , Labyrinths : Selected Stories and Writings ( New York : New Directions ) . Buda , M . , Fornito , A . , Bergström , Z . M . , and Simons , J . S . ( 2011 ) , ‘A Specific Brain Structural Basis for Individual Differences in Reality Monitoring , ’ Journal of Neuroscience , 31 ( 40 ) : 14308 - 14313 . Cacciari , C . and Levorato , M . ( 1989 ) , ‘How children understand idioms in discourse’ , Journal of Child Language , 16 : 387 - 405 . Cacciari , C . , Levorato , M . , and Cicogna , P . ( 1997 ) , ‘Imagination at Work : Conceptual and Linguistic Creativity in Children , ’ in T . Ward , S . Smith , and J . Vaid ( eds . ) Creative Thought : An Investigation of Conceptual Structures and Processes ( Washington , D . C . , American Psychological Association ) . Campbell , D . ( 1960 ) , ‘Blind variation and selective retention in creative thoughts as in other knowledge processes’ , Psychological Review , 67 : 380 - 400 . _ _ _ _ _ ( 1965 ) ‘Variation and selective retention in socio - cultural evolution’ , in H . Barringer , G . Blanksten , R . Mack ( eds . ) Social Change in Developing Areas ( Cambridge : Schenkman ) . Campitelli , G . and Gobet , F . ( 2011 ) , ‘Deliberate Practice : Necessary But Not Sufficient’ , Current Directions in Psychological Science , 20 : 280 - 85 . Carruthers , P . ( 2002 ) , ‘Human Creativity : Its Cognitive Basis , its Evolution , and its Connections with Childhood Pretence’ , British Journal for the Philosophy of Science , 53 : 225 - 49 . Chalmers , D . ( 2002 ) , ‘Does Conceivability Entail Possibility ? ’ in T . Gendler and J . Hawthorne ( eds . ) Conceivability and Possibility ( Oxford : Oxford University Press ) . Currie , G . ( 1990 ) , The Nature of Fiction ( Cambridge : Cambridge University Press ) . _ _ _ _ _ ( 1991 ) , ‘Work and Text’ , Mind , 100 : 326 - 40 . _ _ _ _ _ ( 1995 ) , ‘Imagination and Simulation : Aesthetics Meets Cognitive Science’ , in M . Davies and T . Stone ( eds . ) Folk Psychology ( Oxford : Blackwell ) . _ _ _ _ _ ( 1996 ) , ‘Simulation - theory , Theory - theory , and the Evidence From Autism’ , in P . Carruthers and S . Smith ( eds . ) Theories of Theories of Mind ( Cambridge : Cambridge University Press ) . _ _ _ _ _ ( 1997 ) , ‘The Paradox of Caring : Fiction and the Philosophy of Mind’ , in M . Hjort and S . Laver ( eds . ) Emotion and the Arts ( Oxford : Oxford University Press ) . _ _ _ _ ( 2002 ) , ‘Desire in Imagination’ , in T . Gendler & J . Hawthorne ( eds . ) Conceivability and Possibility ( Oxford : Oxford University Press ) . Currie , G . and Ravenscroft , I . ( 2002 ) , Recreative Minds ( Oxford : Oxford University Press ) . 37 Davies , D . , ( 2004 ) , Art as Performance ( Oxford : Blackwell ) . De Sousa , R . ( 1987 ) , The Rationality of Emotion ( Cambridge : MIT Press ) . Doggett , T . and Egan , A . ( 2007 ) , ‘Wanting things you don’t want : The case for an imaginative analogue to desire’ , Philosopher’s Imprint , 9 : 1 - 17 . Finke , R . , Ward , T . , and Smith , S . ( 1992 ) , Creative Cognition ( Cambridge : MIT Press ) . Funkhouser , E . and Spaulding , S . ( 2009 ) , ‘Imagination and Other Scripts’ , Philosophical Studies , 143 : 291 - 314 . Gaut , B . ( 2009 ) , ‘Creativity and Skill’ , in M . Krausz , D . Dutton , K . Bardsley ( eds . ) The Idea of Creativity ( The Netherlands : Brill ) . _ _ _ _ _ ( 2003 ) , ‘Creativity and Imagination’ , in B . Gaut and P . Livingston ( eds . ) , The Creation of Art ( Cambridge : Cambridge University Press ) . Gaut , B . , and Livingston , P . ( 2003 ) , ‘The Creation of Art : Issues and Perspectives’ , in B . Gaut and P . Livingston ( eds . ) The Creation of Art ( Cambridge : Cambridge University Press ) . Gendler , T . ( 2000 ) , ‘The Puzzle of Imaginative Resistance’ , Journal of Philosophy , 97 : 55 - 81 . _ _ _ _ _ ( 2003 ) , ‘On the Relation Between Pretense and Belief’ , in D . Lopes and M . Kieran ( eds . ) Imagination , Philosophy and the Arts ( London : Routledge ) . _ _ _ _ _ ( 2006 ) , ‘Imaginative Contagion’ , Metaphilosophy , 37 : 183 - 203 . _ _ _ _ _ ( 2011 ) , ‘Imagination , ’ in E . Zalta ( ed . ) , The Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy http : / / plato . stanford . edu / archives / fall2011 / entries / imagination / Gendler , T . S . , and K . Kovakovich ( 2006 ) , ‘Genuine Rational Fictional Emotions’ , in M . Kieran ( ed . ) , Contemporary Debates in Aesthetics and the Philosophy of Art ( Oxford : Blackwell ) . Gernsbacher , M . A . , & Faust , M . ( 1991 ) , ‘The mechanism of suppression : A component of general comprehension skill’ , Journal of Experimental Psychology : Learning , Memory , and Cognition , 17 ( 2 ) : 245 – 262 . Gernsbacher , M . A . , Varner , K . R . , & Faust , M . ( 1990 ) , ‘Investigating differences in general comprehension skill’ , Journal of Experimental Psychology : Learning , Memory , and Cognition , 16 : 430 – 445 . Gibbs , W . ( 1987 ) , ‘Linguistic Factors in Children’s Understanding of Idioms’ , Journal of Child Language , 14 : 569 - 586 . _ _ _ _ _ ( 1991 ) , ‘Semantic Analyzability in Children’s Understanding of Idioms’ , Journal of Speech and Hearing Research , 34 : 613 - 620 . _ _ _ _ _ ( 1994 ) , The Poetics of the Mind : Figurative Thought , Language , and Understanding ( Cambridge : Cambridge University Press ) . Goldman , A . ( 1989 ) , ‘Interpretation psychologized’ , Mind and Language , 4 : 161 - 85 . 38 _ _ _ _ _ ( 1992 ) , ‘In defense of simulation theory’ , Mind and Language , 7 : 104 - 19 . Goodman , N . and Elgin , C . ( 1986 ) , ‘Interpretation and Identity : Can the Work Survive the World ? ’ Critical Inquiry , 12 : 567 - 74 . Gordon , R . ( 1986 ) , ‘Folk psychology as simulation’ , Mind and Language , 1 : 158 - 70 . Hambrick , D . and Meinz , E . ( 2011 ) , ‘Limits on the Predictive Power of Domain - Specific Experience and Knowledge in Skilled Performance’ , Current Directions in Psychological Science , 20 : 275 - 79 . Harris , P . ( 2000 ) , The Work of the Imagination ( Oxford : Blackwell ) . Kant , I . ( 1987 [ 1790 ] ) , Critique of Judgment , trans . W . S . Pluhar ( Indianapolis , IN : Hackett ) . Karmiloff - Smith , A . ( 1990 ) , ‘Constraints on representational change’ , Cognition , 34 : 57 - 83 . _ _ _ _ _ ( 1992 ) , Beyond Modularity ( Cambridge : MIT Press ) . Kempler , D . , Van Lancker , D . , Marchman , V . , & Bates , E . ( 1999 ) , ‘Idiom comprehension in children and adults with unilateral brain damage’ , Developmental Neuropsychology , 15 ( 3 ) : 327 – 349 . Kind , A . ( 2001 ) , ‘Putting the Image Back in Imagination’ , Philosophy and Phenomenological Research , 62 : 85 – 109 . Kosslyn , S . ( 1994 ) , Image and Brain : The Resolution of the Imagery Debate ( Cambridge : MIT Press ) . Levorato , M . , Nesi , B . and Cacciari , C . ( 2004 ) , ‘Reading comprehension and understanding idiomatic expressions : A developmental study’ , Brain and Language , 91 : 303 - 14 . Levorato , M . and Cacciari , C . ( 1992 ) , ‘Children’s Comprehension and Production of Idioms : The Role of Context and Familiarity’ , Journal of Child Language , 19 : 415 - 33 . _ _ _ _ _ ( 1995 ) , ‘The Effects of Different Tasks on the Comprehension and Production of Idioms in Children’ , Journal of Experimental Child Psychology , 60 : 261 - 83 . _ _ _ _ _ ( 1999 ) , ‘Idiom comprehension in children : are the effects of semantic analisability and context separable ? ’ European Journal of Cognitive Psychology , 11 : 51 - 66 . _ _ _ _ _ ( 2002 ) , ‘The creation of new figurative expressions : Psycholinguistic evidence on children , adolescents and adults’ , Journal of Child Language , 29 : 127 – 150 . Leslie , A . , ( 1987 ) , ‘Pretense and Representation : The Origins of ‘Theory of Mind’’ , Psychological Review , 94 ( 4 ) : 412 – 26 . Lewis , D . ( 1996 ) , ‘Elusive Knowledge’ , Australasian Journal of Philosophy , 74 : 549 - 567 . Lopes , D . ( 2004 ) , ‘Directive Pictures’ , Journal of Aesthetics and Art Criticism , 62 : 189 - 96 . Martindale , C . ( 1989 ) , ‘Personality , Situation , and Creativity’ , in J . Glover , R . Ronning , and C . 39 Reynolds ( eds . ) Handbook of Creativity ( New York : Plenum ) . _ _ _ _ _ ( 1995 ) , ‘Creativity and Connectionism’ , in S . Smith , T . B . Ward , and R . Finke ( eds . ) , The Creative Cognition Approach ( Cambridge : MIT Press ) . _ _ _ _ _ ( 1999 ) , ‘Biological bases of creativity’ , in R . Sternberg ( ed . ) Handbook of creativity ( Cambridge : Cambridge University Press ) . McGinn , C . ( 2004 ) , Mindsight : Image , Dream , Meaning ( Cambridge , MA : Harvard University Press ) . Meinz , E . , and Hambrick , D . ( 2010 ) , ‘Deliberate practice is necessary but not sufficient to explain individual differences in piano sight - reading skill : The role of working memory capacity’ , Psychological Science , 21 : 914 – 919 . Nichols , S . ( 2004 ) , ‘Imagining and Believing : The Promise of a Single Code’ , The Journal of Aesthetics and Art Criticism , 62 : 129 – 139 . _ _ _ _ _ ( ed . ) ( 2006 ) , The Architecture of the Imagination : New Essays on Pretense , Possibility , and Fiction ( Oxford : Oxford University Press ) . Nichols , S . and Stich , S . ( 2000 ) , ‘A Cognitive Theory of Pretence’ , Cognition , 74 : 115 - 47 . _ _ _ _ _ ( 2003 ) , Mindreading ( Oxford : Oxford University Press ) . Nippold , M . A . , & Martin , S . T . ( 1989 ) , ‘Idiom interpretation in isolation versus context . A developmental study with adolescents’ , Journal of Speech and Hearing Research , 32 : 59 – 66 . Nippold , M . A . , & Rudzinski , M . ( 1993 ) , ‘Familiarity and transparency in idiom explanations : A developmental study of children and adolescents’ , Journal of Speech , Language and Hearing Research , 36 : 728 – 737 . Novitz , D . ( 1999 ) , ‘Creativity and Constraint’ , Australasian Journal of Philosophy , 77 : 67 – 82 . Oatley , K . ( 1992 ) , Best Laid Schemes : The Psychology of Emotions ( Cambridge : Cambridge University Press ) . Oatley , K . and Johnson - Laird , P . ( 1987 ) , ‘Towards a cognitive theory of the emotions’ , Cognition and Emotion , 1 : 29 - 50 . Polanyi , M . ( 1981 ) , ‘The Creative Imagination’ , in D . Dutton and M . Krausz ( eds . ) , The Concept of Creativity in Science and Art ( Boston : Martinus Nijhoff ) . Prinz , J . and Barsalou , L . ( 2002 ) , ‘Acquisition and Productivity in Perceptual Symbol Systems : An Account of Mundane Creativity’ , in T . Dartnall ( ed . ) , Creativity , Cognition , and Knowledge ( Westport , Conn . : Praeger ) . Reisberg , D . , Culver , L . , Heuer , F . , and Fischman , D . ( 1986 ) , ‘Visual Memory : When Imagery Vividness Makes a Difference’ , Journal of Mental Imagery , 10 : 51 - 74 . 40 Searle , J . ( 1983 ) , Intentionality : An Essay in the Philosophy of Mind ( New York : Cambridge University Press ) . Segal , S . ( 1970 ) , ‘Imagery and Reality : Can they be Distinguished ? ’ in W . Keup ( ed . ) , Origins and Mechanisms of Hallucinations ( New York : Plenum Press ) . Simonton , D . ( 1999 ) Origins of Genius , Oxford : Oxford University Press . _ _ _ _ _ ( 2007 ) , ‘The Creative Process in Picasso’s Guernica Sketches : Monotonic Improvements versus Nonmonotonic Variants’ , Creativity Research Journal , 19 : 329 - 44 . Sternberg , R . ( ed . ) ( 1999 ) , Handbook of Creativity ( Cambridge : Cambridge University Press ) . Stokes , D . ( 2006 ) , ‘The evaluative character of imaginative resistance’ , The British Journal of Aesthetics , 46 : 247 - 405 . _ _ _ _ _ ( 2007 ) , ‘Incubated Cognition and Creativity’ , Journal of Consciousness Studies , 14 : 83 - 100 . _ _ _ _ _ ( 2008 ) , ‘A Metaphysics of Creativity’ , in K . Stock and K . Thomson Jones ( eds . ) , New Waves in Aesthetics ( London : Palgrave Macmillan ) . _ _ _ _ _ ( 2011 ) , ‘Minimally creative thought’ , Metaphilosophy , 42 : 658 - 81 . Thornton , C . ( 2002 ) , ‘Creativity and Runaway Learning’ , in T . Dartnall ( ed . ) , Creativity , Cognition and Knowledge ( Westport , CT : Praeger ) . Tomita , Y . ( 1998 ) , ‘The Sources of J . S . Bach ' s Well - Tempered Clavier II in Vienna , 1777 - 1801’ , Bach , 29 / 2 : 8 - 79 . _ _ _ _ _ ( 1996 ) , ‘The Well - Tempered Clavier , Book 1’ , http : / / www . music . qub . ac . uk / ~ tomita / essay / wtc1 . html . Torreano , L . , Cacciari , C . and Glucksberg , S . ( 2005 ) , ‘When Dogs Can Fly : Level of Abstraction as a Cue to Metaphorical Use of Verbs’ , Metaphor and Symbol , 20 : 259 - 74 . Van Inwagen , P . ( 1998 ) , ‘Modal Epistemology’ , Philosophical Studies , 92 : 67 - 84 . Van Lancker , D . , & Kempler , D . ( 1987 ) , ‘Comprehension of familiar phrases by left but not by right hemishere damaged patients’ , Brain and Language , 32 : 265 – 277 . Velleman , D . ( 2000 ) , The Possibility of Practical Reason ( Oxford : Oxford University Press ) . Walton , K . ( 1990 ) , Mimesis as Make - Believe ( Cambridge : Harvard University Press ) . Ward , T . B . ( 1994 ) , ‘Structured Imagination : The role of category structure in exemplar generation’ , Cognitive Psychology , 27 : 1 - 40 . _ _ _ _ _ ( 1995 ) , ‘What’s old about new ideas ? ’ in S . M . Smith , T . B . Ward , and R . A . Finke ( eds . ) , The Creative Cognition Approach ( Cambridge : MIT Press ) . Weinberg , J . , and Meskin , A . ( 2006 ) , ‘Puzzling Over the Imagination : Philosophical Problems , Architectural Solutions’ , in S . Nichols ( ed . ) , The Architecture of the 41 Imagination : New Essays on Pretense , Possibility , and Fiction ( Oxford : Oxford University Press ) . Weisberg , R . ( 1986 ) , Creativity : Genius and Other Myths ( New York : W . H . Freeman ) . _ _ _ _ _ ( 1995 ) , ‘Case studies of creative thinking : Reproduction versus restructuring in the real world’ , in S . M . Smith , T . B . Ward , & R . A . Finke ( eds . ) , The creative cognition approach ( Cambridge , MA : MIT Press ) 53 – 72 . _ _ _ _ _ ( 1999 ) , ‘Creativity and Knowledge : A Challenge to Theories , ’ in R . Sternberg ( ed . ) , Handbook of Creativity ( Cambridge : Cambridge University Press ) . _ _ _ _ _ ( 2004 ) , ‘On structure in the creative process : A quantitative case - study of the creation of Picasso’s Guernica’ , Empirical Studies of the Arts , , 22 : 23 – 54 . Williams , B . ( 1973 ) , ‘Deciding to Believe’ , In The Problems of the Self ( Cambridge : Cambridge University Press ) . Yablo , S . ( 1993 ) , ‘Is Conceivability a Guide to Possibility ? ’ Philosophy and Phenomenological Research , 53 : 1 - 42 .