The ScratchPad : Sensemaking Support for the Web David Gotz IBM T . J . Watson Research Center 19 Skyline Drive , Hawthorne , New York 10532 USA dgotz @ us . ibm . com ABSTRACT The World Wide Web is a powerful platform for a wide range of information tasks . Dramatic advances in technology , such as improved search capabilities and the AJAX application model , have enabled entirely new web - based applications and usage patterns , making many tasks easier to perform than ever before . However , few tools have been developed to assist with sensemaking tasks : complex research behav - iors in which users gather and comprehend information from many sources to answer potentially vague , non - procedural questions . Sensemaking tasks are common and include , for example , researching vacation destinations or deciding how to invest . This paper presents the ScratchPad , an extension to the standard browser interface that is designed to cap - ture , organize , and exploit the information discovered while performing a sensemaking task . Categories and Subject Descriptors : H . 5 . 2 [ Informa - tion Systems ] : User Interfaces General Terms : Algorithms , Design , Human Factors Keywords : Sensemaking , Visual Analytics , Web Browser , WWW 1 . INTRODUCTION Today’s web tools are designed to eﬃciently support brows - ing and information seeking tasks . Web users can user their browsers to quickly locate train schedules or retail locations , leaf through digital product catalogs , or browse blogs and videos via large collections assembled via crawling , tagging , or other methods . Additionally , users can perform procedu - ral tasks , such as purchasing a book , paying bills , or getting directions , directly from their web browser . However , there is a class of behaviors , sensemaking tasks , which is not well supported with today’s tools . Sensemaking is a complex process where users gather , comprehend , and connect nuggets of information from many sources to answer potentially vague , non - procedural questions . For example , business intelligence and exploring vacation destinations are both sensemaking tasks . Such information tasks demand more than the eﬃcient information retrieval and presentation oﬀered by today’s browsers . They require additional tools that enable the mar - shaling of discovered data , the expression of new insights , Copyright is held by the author / owner ( s ) . WWW 2007 , May 8 – 12 , 2007 , Banff , Alberta , Canada . ACM 978 - 1 - 59593 - 654 - 7 / 07 / 0005 . ( a ) ( b ) Figure 1 : ( a ) A ScratchPad - enhanced web browser and ( b ) a close - up of the ScratchPad sidebar . and the exploitation of previously synthesized knowledge in future stages of analysis . 2 . THE SCRATCHPAD The ScratchPad , shown in Figure 1 , is an extension to the standard browser interface designed speciﬁcally to as - sist in sensemaking tasks . The ScratchPad provides tools for users to capture both user - created insight as well as informa - tion found on the web while completing a sensemaking task . Captured information is visually displayed to the user for their own review and re - access . More importantly , the cap - tured information is exploited algorithmically to help users “connect the dots” as they go about their research activities . The ScratchPad oﬀers two primary contributions . First , it provides a set of visual interaction tools which allow a user to easily capture , represent , and manipulate information at various granularities . Second , it deﬁnes both an algorithm and user interface technique for calculating and conveying the relevance of previously captured information to a user’s current browsing behavior . 2 . 1 Visual Presentation and Interaction The ScratchPad is designed to store , organize , and display the information collected over the course of a sensemaking task . The ScratchPad is presented to the user as a re - sizable vertical sidebar to the left of the main browser display area . The side - by - side display of the ScratchPad and browser al - lows users to quickly move between the two spaces . Users of the ScratchPad have access to several tools for interactively creating and manipulating objects within the workspace . Capturing Information . The ﬁrst method for creating a new object in the ScratchPad is snapshotting . Snapshots record a page’s URL together with ( 1 ) a graphical image of ( a ) ( b ) Figure 2 : ( a ) Snapshots are created by dragging the link icon from the URL bar to the ScratchPad . ( b ) Data at ﬁner granularities can be captured by drag - ging speciﬁc page elements , such as snippets of text . the browser’s rendering of the page , and ( 2 ) a copy of the page’s textual content . Snapshots are created by dragging an icon from the URL bar above the browser and drop - ping it on the ScratchPad ( see Figure 2 [ a ] ) . Once captured , the snapshot is displayed graphically , similar to other visual bookmarking tools [ 1 , 3 ] . Alternatively , users can collect in - formation at a much ﬁner granularity using “drag - and - drop” from a web page . This technique can capture individual links , images , or text fragments ( see Figure 2 [ b ] ) . Users are also able to create new objects in the Scratch - Pad from scratch , without selecting and dragging anything from the browser . A toolbar at the top of the ScratchPad allows users to create arbitrary new objects using a dialog box . These objects can be used to help organize informa - tion captured from the browser ( e . g . creating folders ) , or to express insight created by the users themselves as the sensemaking task evolves ( e . g . text notes ) . Manipulating Information . Users are provided with two tools for the manipulation of ScratchPad objects . First , objects can be modiﬁed by altering stored properties . The modiﬁcation capability of the ScratchPad is roughly analo - gous to the functionality of traditional bookmark organiza - tion tools which allow you to modify titles and contents of bookmarked items . Second , objects can be linked ( and unlinked ) to express relationships to other objects on the ScratchPad . For ex - ample , a user might decide that two web pages are related to each other , or that a particular text note is related to a captured image . Links are created by a simple drag - and - drop gesture . Implicit links between objects are also created based on the set of folders used to organize the ScratchPad . Links allow users to record relationships between entities in the ScratchPad as they are discovered , the same way they might using pencil and paper . This behavior is patterned after the hand - written notes shown in Figure 3 which show actual notes observed during a user study exploring sense - making behavior [ 2 ] . Links are also exploited by a rele - vance detection algorithm that helps detect overlooked con - nections between a user’s ScratchPad notes and the current web page being displayed in the browser . 2 . 2 Information Relevance One of the key features of the ScratchPad is relevance detection . As a user browses the web in search of new information related to their task , the ScratchPad employs an algorithm that compares the information stored in the tool’s graph - based data model with the content of the web browser . As connections are found , a numerical measure of the relevance is computed and conveyed visually to the user . The ScratchPad provides two mechanisms for displaying the estimated relevance values . First , parameterized object highlighting within the graphical ScratchPad display enables ( a ) ( b ) Figure 3 : ( a ) Hand - drawn notes from a user study examining analyst behavior during sensemaking tasks . ( b ) The ScratchPad’s interface design was motivated in part by the study’s ﬁndings . qualitative , “at - a - glace” detection of relevant regions of the context graph . Second , a sortable table presentation of the of the ScratchPad objects allows users to examine the rele - vance score assigned to each node quantitatively . Parameterized Object Highlighting . The Scratch - Pad interface displays the relevance score assigned to each node by highlighting the graphical objects in various shades of green . Stronger green tones indicate qualitatively that a node has a stronger relevance to the content displayed within the web browser . In contrast , less intense highlights indicate a weaker relevance score . The highlight intensity is updated dynamically each time a user browses from one web page to the next . The highlighting behavior is evident in Figure 1 , where a user is reading a web page about winter sports in the Cana - dian rockies as part of their research task exploring a trip to Banﬀ for the WWW 2007 conference . The ScratchPad ob - jects scored as most relevant deal with Banﬀ National Park , a gondola attraction , and some hiking trails . Also shaded green is a node for the Fairmont Banﬀ Springs Hotel . Just as importantly , nodes corresponding to the conference web page and dates are not highlighted , indicating at a glance which portion of the user’s previous work is most relevant to the page currently being viewed . Tabular Relevance Presentation . The ScratchPad also provides a quantitative presentation of the relevance data to complement the qualitative nature of the highlight - based graphical display . Below the graphical note - taking area , the ScratchPad provides a tabular presentation of the relevance data . 3 . FUTURE WORK The ScratchPad is only an initial prototype and several areas would beneﬁt from additional research . In particular , improving the selectivity of the relevance metric , perhaps by incorporating text analytics , would make the visual rel - evance presentation even more eﬀective . In addition , user studies to examine the value of such a tool are required . 4 . REFERENCES [ 1 ] B . Amento , L . G . Terveen , W . C . Hill , and D . Hix . Topicshop : enhanced support for evaluating and organizing collections of web sites . In UIST , pages 201 – 209 , 2000 . [ 2 ] D . Gotz , M . X . Zhou , and Z . Wen . A study of information gathering and result processing in intelligence analysis . In IUI 2006 Workshop on IUI for Intelligence Analysis , 2006 . [ 3 ] N . Jhaveri and K . - J . Raiha . The advantages of a cross - session web workspace . In CHI Extended Abstracts , pages 1949 – 1952 , New York , NY , USA , 2005 . ACM Press .