B R I E F R E P O R T Back on Track : The challenges of implementing a small place - based Collective Impact initiative Abstract Issues addressed : Back on Track ( BoT ) was developed as pilot to provide an integrated service response to twenty at - risk young peo - ple residing in a metro Melbourne housing estate . For this cohort , traditional welfare sector interventions were proving ineffective , with the siloed nature of the sector identified as a key barrier to effective engagement . Methods : Developed as an offshoot of an established CI project , the Education Engagement Partnership ( EEP ) , BoT used Collective Impact ( CI ) methodology to inform project development . CI was con - sidered a means to implement systematic change whilst increasing positive health , education and justice outcomes for the target cohort . Results : BoT was abandoned after start - up due to a lack of CI model buy - in on the part of one stakeholder . Conclusions : BoT ’ s initial success can be directly attributed to stakeholder experience of the EEP . The project ’ s break down illumi - nates challenges that can emerge when the welfare sector attempts interagency collaborative practices . BoT highlights the centrality of relationship - building for successful CI implementation and flags potential issues in collaborations between small place - based initia - tives and large statewide agencies constrained by non - negotiable internal policies . So what ? CI methodology is increasing popular in health promotion work , and there is a need to examine how the methodology trans - lates into local level practice . 1 | INTRODUCTION The past decade has witnessed an increased interest in Collective Impact ( CI ) as an effective methodology for implementing a long - term community change . Under the CI model , key community stakeholders , such as welfare services , businesses and schools , coordinate activities to systematically address their community ’ s most challenging issue / s . The CI focus has been fuelled by Kania & Kramer ’ s Stanford Social Innovation Review article Collective Impact , which sets out five CI implementation conditions : “ a common agenda , shared measurement systems , mutually reinforcing activities , continuous communication and a backbone support organisation . ” 1 Negating long - standing issues of service duplication through the collaborative activities of participat - ing parties , CI responds to and is shaped by a community ’ s specific conditions . Combined learnings , in the form of ongoing data feedback and stakeholder reporting on community needs , resources and ideas , result in responsive collaborative action — a process Kania & Kramer call “ feedback loop . ” 2 In recent years , the term CI has been broadly applied to partner - ship work and popularised with online forums and conferences . 3 , 4 Despite this , there remains a paucity of literature on CI implementa - tion and researchers have highlighted need for further investigation into the methodology ’ s effectiveness , particularly regarding health promotion work . 4 With community development projects increas - ingly informed by CI , there is a need to critically examine how CI methodology translates to local practice . This study reports on Back on Track ( BoT ) , a pilot developed to respond to the complex needs of young people living in an inner - metro Melbourne housing estate . Developed as an offshoot of an established CI project , the Education Engagement Partnership ( EEP ) , BoT aimed to use CI ’ s central tenets to increase positive health , edu - cation and justice outcomes for these youth . Despite initial success , BoT was abandoned when implementation challenges became seem - ingly intractable barriers to project delivery . By outlining BoT ’ s development processes , this report aims to inform the delivery of future small - scale CI initiatives , along with other youth sector health promotion collaborations . 2 | PROJECT BACKGROUND In 2014 , following funding cuts to the youth , housing , alcohol and other drugs ( youth ) and mental health sectors , EEP held community consultations between service providers and schools in an inner - metro municipality . The consultations highlighted the inadequacy of the service sector ’ s response to a youth cohort residing on a local housing estate . With frequent Child Protection and Criminal Justice System contact , these young people had multiple , complex barriers to positive societal engagement . The service system structure was itself recognised as a barrier due to siloed services , restrictive fund - ing , poor communication , lack of targeted support and duplication ; issues well recognised in the literature . 5 – 7 The service system ’ s capacity to meaningfully respond to these young people was identi - fied as ineffective and underpinned by a lack of formal collaboration , noted elsewhere as a long - standing issue for this community . 8 Despite the lack of coordinated support to the discussed cohort , successful collaborations were taking place in this community for young people with low - to - moderate risk through EEP . Bringing together 19 agencies across two municipalities , EEP coordinates the Received : 26 September 2017 | Accepted : 12 January 2018 DOI : 10 . 1002 / hpja . 36 360 | © 2018 Australian Health Promotion Association wileyonlinelibrary . com / journal / hpja Health Promot J Austral . 2018 ; 29 : 360 – 362 . support of young people at risk of or disengaging from education , employment and training . Participating EEP agencies provide data on youth disengagement , and an action group formed from the part - ners provides interagency follow - up to meaningfully respond to the data . 9 Through the lived experience of this successful CI project , the 2014 community consultations identified CI as a best - practice model to manage the service system barriers faced by the identified cohort . 3 | PROJECT DEVELOPMENT — A PRACTICE IN CI METHODOLOGY Building on EEP ’ s success , a working group formed comprising of mental health , drug treatment and housing services , the Police , local government and the Department of Health and Human Services and the Department of Education , Employment and Training . As current EEP members , the working group established BoT as a model to leverage off the existing EEP CI mechanisms , with EEP serving as BoT ’ s backbone organisation , including a dedicated project worker . Involvement in the EEP provided stakeholders with fertile ground to develop BoT . Central to CI is the development of trust , equity and a shared vocabulary , the latter essential for creating a common agenda and measurement systems . 1 The BoT steering committee had met regularly through the EEP for several years , apart from one introduced stakeholder . This meeting process , along with regular communications from the EEP project officer , helped develop trust between the long - standing parties and a shared vocabulary in rela - tion to BoT ’ s agenda , service needs , measurement systems and data collection . BoT ’ s agenda was defined as a commitment to work together to effect meaningful interventions to the community ’ s 20 identified most vulnerable 10 - to 19 - year - olds . To achieve this , the working group proposed an interagency shared - care case management model as a best - practice response . This model aimed to overcome tradi - tional service system barriers with case managers acting as a conduit of support between the young person and the service system . Young people from the target cohort would be recruited and assigned a case manager from the current EEP action team . The project would draw on the action team ’ s established community of practice ; case managers would sit within a broader team of service representatives who would together assess needs and supports for each young per - son , with client involvement where possible . Delegated actions would be reported back to the care team regularly to ensure timely , consistent information sharing . It was envisaged BoT would simplify information sharing and illu - minate and redress practice issues specific to the target cohort . An information sharing protocol was developed , and common measures and outcome tools would track client service , education and training engagement . Ethical considerations were to be guided by participat - ing agencies ’ established policies and procedures relating to data col - lection , consent and research . The pilot was to be trialled for 6 months and evaluated . A university research body was to be engaged for the evaluation , with ethics approval sought through the university ’ s Research Ethics Committee . With EEP established as the backbone organisation , the project was viewed to have great poten - tial for seeing immediate change in outcomes for at - risk youth , whilst concurrently implementing systematic change in interagency collaborative processes ( for similar project design see 10 ) . 4 | DISCUSSION — THE CHALLENGES OF IMPLEMENTATION BoT ’ s development can be seen as prototypical CI “ feedback loop ” ; as EEP provided ongoing local data to and continuous consultation with stakeholders , and stakeholders in - turn responded with ideas and resources to address identified needs , BoT emerged organically . BoT duplicated this community of practice process with the feed - back loop coming from a dedicated case management team assigned to the identified young people . These workers reported on anecdotal data and practice issues . The project came unstuck , however , when BoT came up against , what Cohen & Price call the “ myopic perspec - tives ” of those opposing programming change . 5 ( p31 ) BoT ’ s interagency case management model required stakeholders to rethink long - standing privacy and confidentiality processes . This central mutually reinforcing activity saw the project reach an impasse with a lack of agreement / participation in discussions around what these changes could look like . The core group of long - term stakehold - ers became disheartened with perceived inaction / poor commitment from the newly engaged stakeholder . For their part , this stakeholder reported being constrained by seemingly non - negotiable statewide agency policies . Meetings became a source of frustration with long - term stakeholders continually faced with no - shows . This saw an end to the rich qualitative anecdotal data being fed to the group , feedback central to shaping the project and driving momentum . 5 | CONCLUSION At the outset , BoT represented , what Kania and Kramer call , the “ power of collective impact . ” 2 Community stakeholders were able to draw on EEP infrastructure , data and resources allowing for BoT ’ s emergence with its common agenda , proposed activities and mea - surement tools . However , community readiness on the part of all stakeholders for CI was misread . Here , there are important learning opportunities . Firstly , the weakening of the data feedback loop , along with the perceived inaction of a key stakeholder , can be directly linked to BoT ’ s inability to continue . Learnings from the successful EEP CI model demonstrate that continuous feedback allows projects to remain dynamic , relevant and maintain stakeholder engagement . Secondly , BoT was ambitious in aiming for mutually reinforcing activ - ities that required large statewide agencies to review information sharing and confidentiality procedures . This was a challenge for the newly engaged stakeholder who had little understanding or ability to commit to a CI model without the shared history and trust other BRIEF REPORT | 361 stakeholders had developed . Without unanimous stakeholder com - mitment to local place - based CI initiatives , pilots like BoT are unable to succeed . The experience of BoT illuminates how successful CI projects such as the EEP can create space for the emergence of new projects to respond to identified community needs . The experience also high - lights the challenges of implementing small place - based CI projects , along with health promotion practice issues relating to negotiating issues of confidentiality and privacy . These issues will continue to need attention as the health promotion sector more frequently rejects siloed approaches and seeks more effective ways of working together . As a sector made up of multiple , varied and sometimes competing players , CI is a methodology that can bridge difference and coordinate health promotion practice to provide targeted approaches that see real , sustained and broad community impact . However , for CI projects to be successful a common agenda is not enough ; it is critical community stakeholder readiness , capacity and willingness is assessed , the methodology communicated and buy - in developed to ensure all stakeholders fully engage and participate in the process . This process can be time - consuming , but is essential for ensuring effective implementation of CI methodology . Further , it should be recognised that not all community stakeholders are inter - ested in collaborative work , and in this instance , alternative frame - works can be drawn on for service delivery coordination . CONFLICT OF INTEREST The authors declare that there are no conflicts of interest in connec - tion with this article . Keywords adolescents , community based intervention , community development ORCID Lucy Demant http : / / orcid . org / 0000 - 0003 - 1214 - 1479 Lucy Demant BA Honours , Dip Com . Services 1 Jessica Lawrence BA , MAF 2 1 Odyssey House Victoria , Melbourne , VIC , Australia 2 Stonington Youth Services , Cities of Stonnington and Port Phillip , Melbourne , VIC , Australia Correspondence Lucy Demant , Odyssey House Victoria , Melbourne , VIC , Australia . Email : ldemant @ odyssey . org . au REFERENCES 1 . Kania J , Kramer M . Collective Impact . Stanford social innovation review . 2011 ; Winter : 36 – 41 . 2 . Kania J , Kramer M . Embracing emergence : how Collective Impact addresses complexity . Stanford social innovation review [ Internet ] . 2013 [ cited 2017 March 27 ] . Available from : http : / / ssir . org / articles / entry / embracing _ emergence _ how _ collective _ impact _ addresses _ comp lexity 3 . LeChasseur K . Re - examining power and privilege in Collective Impact . J Community Develop . 2016 ; 47 : 225 – 40 . 4 . Flood J , Minkler M , Hennessey L , Estrada J , Falbe J . The Collective Impact model and its potential for health promotion : overview and case study of a healthy retail initiative in San Francisco . Health Educ Behav . 2015 ; 42 : 654 – 68 . 5 . Cohen J , Price H . Driving youth outcomes through collective impact . Kennedy school review [ Internet ] . 2015 Oct [ cited 2017 March 27 ] . Available from : http : / / harvardkennedyschoolreview . com / driving - youth - outcomes - through - collective - impact / 6 . Grogan P , Colvin K , Rose J , Morstyn L , Alkins C . Building the scaf - folding . Strengthening support for young people in Victoria . Mel - bourne : Victorian Council of Social Service and Youth Affairs Council of Victoria ; 2013 ; p . 148 . 7 . Ungar M , Liebenberg L , Ikeda J . Young people with complex needs : designing coordinated interventions to promote resilience across Child Welfare , Juvenile Corrections , Mental Health And Education Services . Br J Soc Work . 2014 ; 44 : 675 – 93 . 8 . Demant L , McLean C , SYPP Consortium Working Group . Stonning - ton Youth Partners Project . Service integration and the City of Stonnington . Melbourne : Stonnington Youth Partners Project ; 2009 . p . 28 . 9 . City of Port Phillip , City of Stonington . Education engagement part - nership across Cities of Stonnington and Port Phillip . Strategic plan . 2016 - 2020 . Melbourne : City of Port Phillip and City of Stonnington ; 2016 . p . 11 . 10 . Graham K . A Collective Impact Learning Lab . Social Ventures Aus - tralia [ Internet ] . 2016 [ cited 2017 June 15 ) . Available from : http : / / www . socialventures . com . au / sva - quarterly / collective - impact - learning - lab How to cite this article : Demant L , Lawrence J . Back on Track : The challenges of implementing a small place - based Collective Impact initiative . Health Promot J Austral . 2018 ; 29 : 360 – 362 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1002 / hpja . 36 362 | BRIEF REPORT