ARTICLE Rockefeller University Press https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1083 / jcb . 201711178 4164 J . Cell Biol . 2018 Vol . 217 No . 12 4164 – 4183 Rockefeller University Press Kinesin - 1 , the founding member of the kinesin superfamily of proteins , is known to use only a subset of microtubules for transport in living cells . This biased use of microtubules is proposed as the guidance cue for polarized transport in neurons , but the underlying mechanisms are still poorly understood . Here , we report that kinesin - 1 binding changes the microtubule lattice and promotes further kinesin - 1 binding . This high - affinity state requires the binding of kinesin - 1 in the nucleotide - free state . Microtubules return to the initial low - affinity state by washing out the binding kinesin - 1 or by the binding of non - hydrolyzable ATP analogue AMP PNP to kinesin - 1 . X - ray fiber diffraction , fluorescence speckle microscopy , and second - harmonic generation microscopy , as well as cryo - EM , collectively demonstrated that the binding of nucleotide - free kinesin - 1 to GDP microtubules changes the conformation of the GDP microtubule to a conformation resembling the GTP microtubule . Kinesin - binding – triggered conformation switching of microtubules contributes to polarized transport Tomohiro Shima 1 *  , Manatsu Morikawa 2 * , Junichi Kaneshiro 3 , Taketoshi Kambara 1 , Shinji Kamimura 4 , Toshiki Yagi 5  , Hiroyuki Iwamoto 6  , Sotaro Uemura 7 , Hideki Shigematsu 8  , Mikako Shirouzu 8 , Taro Ichimura 3 , Tomonobu M . Watanabe 3 , Ryo Nitta 8 , 9  , Yasushi Okada 1 , 10  , and Nobutaka Hirokawa 2 , 11  Introduction Kinesin - 1 ( KIF5 ) , the founding member of the kinesin superfam - ily proteins , plays essential roles by transporting various cargoes such as organelles and protein complexes in the cell ( Hirokawa et al . , 2010 ) . For efficient intracellular transport , each cargo should be transported properly to its cognate destination in the cell . For example , axonal plasma membrane proteins such as amyloid precursor proteins and GAP43 are transported to the axon , but not to dendrites in neurons ( Nakata and Hirokawa , 2003 ) . As the molecular basis for this polarized transport , microtubules at the initial segment of the axon were found to have higher affinity to kinesin - 1 than other microtubules in the neuronal cell body and dendrites . Application of Taxol interferes with the preferential binding of kinesin - 1 to initial segment microtubules as well as polarized transport into the axon , suggesting that microtubules provide the directional cues for axonal transport . Similar preferential use of subsets of microtubules was also reported in nonneuronal cells ( Reed et al . , 2006 ) . Constitutively active kinesin - 1 often shows asymmetric distribution in various cells when the expression level is comparable to that of authentic kinesin - 1 ( Fig . S1 A ) . Subsequent studies showed that this func - tional specification of cellular microtubules can be transient in immature neurons or nonneuronal cells . In juvenile hippocampal neurons , for example , kinesin - 1 shows stochastic cycles of accu - mulation in and disappearance from the growth cones of differ - ent neurites ( Jacobson et al . , 2006 ) . Similar results are obtained with nonneuronal cells ( Fig . S1 B ) . Posttranslational modifications such as acetylation or dety - rosination of tubulin have been initially proposed as underlying mechanisms , but in vitro experiments with purified microtubules showed that these posttranslational modifications have only slight effects on the affinity or landing rate of kinesin - 1 ( Kaul et al . , 2014 ) . Instead , we have proposed that the conformational switch - ing between the GTP and GDP forms of microtubules is recognized by kinesin - 1 ( Nakata et al . , 2011 ; Yajima et al . , 2012 ) based on in vitro experiments with purified microtubules and staining with an antibody that is reported to recognize the GTP form of micro - tubules ( Dimitrov et al . , 2008 ) . However , this was inconsistent with the widely accepted GTP - cap model of microtubule dynamics © 2018 Shima et al . This article is distributed under the terms of an Attribution – Noncommercial – Share Alike – No Mirror Sites license for the first six months after the publication date ( see http : / / www . rupress . org / terms / ) . After six months it is available under a Creative Commons License ( Attribution – Noncommercial – Share Alike 4 . 0 International license , as described at https : / / creativecommons . org / licenses / by - nc - sa / 4 . 0 / ) . 1 Laboratory for Cell Polarity Regulation , RIK EN Center for Biosystems Dynamics Research , Osaka , Japan ; 2 Department of Cell Biology and Anatomy , Graduate School of Medicine , The University of Tokyo , Tokyo , Japan ; 3 Laboratory for Comprehensive Bioimaging , RIK EN Center for Biosystems Dynamics Research , Osaka , Japan ; 4 Department of Biological Sciences , Faculty of Science and Engineering , Chuo University , Tokyo , Japan ; 5 Department of Life Sciences , Faculty of Life and Environmental Sciences , Prefectural University of Hiroshima , Hiroshima , Japan ; 6 Life and Environmental Division , SPring - 8 , Japan Synchrotron Radiation Research Institute , Hyogo , Japan ; 7 Department of Biological Sciences , Graduate School of Science , The University of Tokyo , Tokyo , Japan ; 8 Structural Biology Group , RIK EN Center for Biosystems Dynamics Research , Kanagawa , Japan ; 9 Division of Structural Medicine and Anatomy , Department of Physiology and Cell Biology , Kobe University Graduate School of Medicine , Hyogo , Japan ; 10 Department of Physics , Universal Biology Institute and the International Research Center for Neurointelligence , The University of Tokyo , Tokyo , Japan ; 11 Center of Excellence in Genome Medicine Research , King Abdulaziz University , Jeddah , Saudi Arabia . * T . Shima and M . Morikawa contributed equally to this paper ; Correspondence to Yasushi Okada : y . okada @ riken . jp ; Nobutaka Hirokawa : hirokawa @ m . u - tokyo . ac . jp ; T . Shima’s present address is Dept . of Biological Sciences , Graduate School of Science , The University of Tokyo , Tokyo , Japan . Journal of Cell Biology https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1083 / jcb . 201711178 Shima et al . Cooperative binding of kinesin - 1 to microtubules 4165 ( Mitchison and Kirschner , 1984 ) . In this model , GTP is hydrolyzed in the microtubule lattice , and the body of the microtubule is com - posed of GDP - bound tubulins , while GTP - bound tubulins remain only on the growing ends as the GTP cap . Therefore , the GTP form of microtubules would only be found at the growing plus ends of microtubules as the GTP cap , which cannot explain the presence of GTP - form , stable microtubules in physiological conditions . To clarify these fundamental issues , we have reexamined the interaction between kinesin - 1 and GDP microtubules in vitro and found that there is a positive cooperativity in the binding of kinesin - 1 to GDP microtubules . In a series of biophysical studies as well as cryo - EM reconstructions , we show that binding of kinesin - 1 triggers allosteric conformational changes in GDP microtubules to a conformation resembling GTP microtubules without nucleotide exchange on tubulin . Based on these results , we propose that the binding of kinesin - 1 to the GDP microtubule would increase the affinity by switching the conformation to a GTP - microtubule – like one . This positive feedback mechanism would enable the self - orga - nization of the high - affinity subset of cellular microtubules , which serve as guidance cues for polarized transport . Results In vitro motility assay with a substoichiometric KIF5C dimer To gain insight into the stochastic and selective use of cellular microtubules by KIF5C , a neuronal isoform of kinesin - 1 ( Nakata and Hirokawa , 2003 ; Jacobson et al . , 2006 ; Reed et al . , 2006 ; Nakata et al . , 2011 ; Fig . S1 ) , we have investigated the preferen - tial binding of KIF5C to guanylyl - ( α , β ) - methylene - diphospho - nate ( GMP CPP ) microtubules over GDP microtubules ( Nakata et al . , 2011 ; Morikawa et al . , 2015 ) in quantitative in vitro ex - periments . In these and the following experiments , GMP CPP ( a slowly hydrolyzable GTP analogue ) was used to stabilize the GTP conformation of microtubules . For the stabilization of the GDP microtubules , the buffer was supplemented with 30 % ( vol / vol ) glycerol and kept at 37°C to prevent their depolymerization . Throughout these experiments , we noticed a tendency for KIF5C to stochastically and preferentially move along a subset of GDP microtubules when its motility was examined with a concentra - tion of KIF5C much lower ( < 1 nM ) than that of tubulin ( ∼ 10 nM ) . Fig . 1 A shows the experiment with 0 . 12 nM KIF5C ( truncated dimer aa 1 – 560 ) and a saturating concentration ( 1 mM ) of ATP . The GDP microtubules are immobilized to the cover glass via bio - tin – avidin linkage . In this field of view , one microtubule ( # 2 ) was first used as the substrate for the motility of KIF5C , but another microtubule ( # 3 ) took over . For the next several minutes , only microtubule # 3 was frequently used as the track for the motility of KIF5C ( Video 1 and Fig . 1 , A – C ) . Similar heterogeneity or pref - erential binding of kinesin to a subset of microtubules have been previously reported by several groups ( Vilfan et al . , 2001 ; Muto et al . , 2005 ) , but these studies used Taxol - stabilized microtubules and a much higher concentration of kinesin . In our experimental conditions , however , run events were observed equally among microtubules stabilized with GMP CPP ( Fig . 1 , D – F ) . This apparent heterogeneity among GDP microtubules was examined by observing more than 50 microtubules . The run events were first observed for 100 s with 0 . 12 nM or 1 . 2 nM KIF5C , concentrations much lower than the tubulin dimer con - centration ( ∼ 10 nM ) of the microtubules . There were multiple run events on some microtubules , but no KIF5C run events were observed for ∼ 40 % ( 0 . 12 nM ) or 10 % ( 1 . 2 nM ) of the microtubules during the 60 - s time window of observation ( Fig . 1 , G and H , top ) . The concentration of KIF5C was then increased to 12 nM , which was comparable to the concentration of tubulin in the same ex - perimental chamber . Approximately equal numbers of multiple run events were observed on all microtubules ( Fig . 1 I , top ) , sug - gesting that the heterogeneity was not due to collapse of GDP mi - crotubules during sample preparation or observation . Moreover , this heterogeneity was only observed with GDP microtubules and not with GMP CPP microtubules , even with 0 . 12 nM KIF5C ( Fig . 1 , G – I , bottom ; and Video 1 ) . The run event frequency or the landing rate was further ana - lyzed statistically . The distribution of the landing rate was fitted by expectation - maximization algorithm for Gaussian mixture model ( Scrucca et al . , 2016 ) . When KIF5C was added at a con - centration of 12 nM , approximately equal to the concentration of tubulin dimer ( Fig . 1 I ; see Tables S1 , S2 , and S3 for statistical details ) , the landing rate distributed with a single peak around 0 . 1 molecules per micrometer of microtubule length per sec - ond per nanomolar KIF5C ( hereafter denoted as molecules s −1 µm −1 nM −1 ) for both GDP and GMP CPP microtubules . At much lower concentrations of KIF5C ( 0 . 12 nM ) , the distribution of the landing rate showed broader distributions by stochasticity due to the smaller numbers of landing events ( Fig . 1 G ) . The distri - bution for GMP CPP microtubules was still fitted well to a single Gaussian distribution , but there was a distinct second peak near zero for GDP microtubules . At ∼ 10 times lower concentration of KIF5C ( 1 . 2 nM ) than microtubules , the number of landing events was high enough that the two Gaussian distribution is clear for GDP - microtubules ( Fig . 1 H ) with two peaks around 0 . 01 and 0 . 1 molecules s −1 µm −1 nM −1 . This two - peak distribution could not be attributed to the stochastic noise , because the landing rate to the GMP CPP - microtubules showed a single peak around 0 . 1 mole - cules s −1 µm −1 nM −1 . Here , it should be noted that the observed landing rate of 0 . 01 – 0 . 1 molecules s −1 µm −1 nM −1 is ∼ 100 – 1 , 000 times slower than the diffusion - limited encounter rate of ∼ 10 molecules s −1 µm −1 nM −1 ( Hackney , 1995 ) . This implies that only ∼ 0 . 1 – 1 % of diffusional collision of kinesin to microtubules leads to a run event . Other motility - related parameters were also examined from the same dataset , but off rate , velocity , and run length showed no or only slight ( within 40 % ) differences among the experimental conditions ( Fig . 1 , J – L ; and Tables S1 , S2 , and S3 ) . Measurement of binding affinity of the KIF5C monomeric motor domain on GDP microtubules To quantify this apparently cooperative binding of KIF5C to GDP microtubules , we next measured the binding affinity of KIF5C to GDP and GMP CPP microtubules with substoichiometric concen - trations of KIF5C . To measure the affinity at 1 nM or below , we used a single - molecule assay . Rhodamine - labeled microtubules were anchored to the surface of the flow cell , to which the mono - meric motor domain of KIF5C ( K351 ) fluorescently labeled with DY - 647 was introduced with or without nucleotide . Journal of Cell Biology https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1083 / jcb . 201711178 Shima et al . Cooperative binding of kinesin - 1 to microtubules 4166 During this experiment , we noticed that the GDP microtubules appeared to be heterogeneously labeled with KIF5C monomers in some conditions . This tendency was statistically tested by fitting the distribution of the density of bound KIF5C spots on each mi - crotubule by using the expectation - maximization algorithm for Gaussian mixture model ( Scrucca et al . , 2016 ) . With limited con - centrations ( 10 and 100 pM ) of KIF5C in a nucleotide - free state , there were two populations of GDP microtubules . Some were not bound with KIF5C , but others were bound with multiple KIF5C molecules . GMP CPP microtubules were more uniformly labeled in the same conditions ( Fig . 2 , A and B ) . This heterogeneity or the two - peak distribution was reversed in the presence of ade - nylyl - imidodiphosphate ( AMP PNP ) , a non - hydrolysable ATP an - alogue ( Fig . 2 , C and D ) . These results are apparently consistent with the single motor motility assay ( Fig . 1 ) . Next , we converted this binding frequency data to the affinity ( dissociation constant [ K d ] ) from the number of KIF5C spots on the microtubules and the total length of the microtubules in the view field . As we have reported previously ( Nakata et al . , 2011 ; Morikawa et al . , 2015 ) , KIF5C showed approximately fivefold Figure 1 . Biased use of a subset of GDP microtu - bules in vitro . ( A – F ) GDP microtubules ( GDP - MT ; A – C ) or GMP CPP microtubules ( GMP CPP - MT ; D – F ) were anchored by sparsely ( three or four sites per micrometer microtubule protofilament ) labeled biotin to the avidin - coated glass surface and the dimeric KIF5C moved along the microtubules in the presence of 1 mM ATP . ( B and E ) Kymographs of KIF5C movement along the microtubules in the presence of 0 . 12 nM KIF5C . Each kymograph corre - sponds to the KIF5C movement along the microtu - bules shown in A and D . Note that brightness of the kymographs is inversed . See also Video 1 . ( C and F ) Time courses of the binding frequency of KIF5C to each microtubule in A and D . ( G – I ) Histograms of mean KIF5C binding frequency onto GDP ( top ) and GMP CPP microtubules ( bottom ) during 100 - s incubation with 0 . 12 nM ( G ) , 1 . 2 nM ( H ) , and 12 nM ( J ) KIF5C . GDP microtubules showed lower bind - ing frequency than GMP CPP microtubules under 0 . 12 nM KIF5C ( G ; P < 0 . 00001 , Steel – Dwass test ) . Two - peak distribution with a sharp peak near zero and a broad peak around 0 . 1 molecule s −1 µm −1 nM −1 was evident with GDP microtubules at lower KIF5C concentrations ( G and H ; see Tables S1 , S2 , and S3 for statistical details ) . The peak around zero disappeared with 12 nM KIF5C ( I ) , and the binding frequency distribution was similar in GDP microtu - bules and GMP CPP microtubules ( I ; P = 0 . 53 , Steel – Dwass test ) . It should be noted that these three KIF5C conditions were examined with the same experimental chambers for GDP microtubules and GMP CPP microtubules , respectively . Thus , the zero peak in GDP microtubules with lower KIF5C con - centrations would not be due to collapse of the GDP microtubules . ( J – L ) Histograms of the off rates ( J ) , velocities ( K ) , and run lengths ( L ) of the KIF5C dimer on these microtubules . There were no significant differences in these parameters , as summarized in Tables S1 , S2 , and S3 . Journal of Cell Biology https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1083 / jcb . 201711178 Shima et al . Cooperative binding of kinesin - 1 to microtubules 4167 higher affinity to GMP CPP microtubules than to GDP microtu - bules . This was only seen when the concentration of KIF5C was low ( 1 – 10 pM ) and in the absence of nucleotides ( Fig . 2 E , blue markers ) . By increasing the KIF5C concentration from 1 pM to 10 nM , the K d value decreased steeply at ∼ 100 pM . The Hill constant of this change was 1 . 8 ± 0 . 1 ( mean ± SEM ) , suggesting positive cooperativity as the underlying mechanism . Contrastingly , the K d values were insensitive to the KIF5C concentrations with GMP CPP microtubules ( Fig . 2 E , orange markers ) and in the presence of a saturating concentration of AMP PNP ( Fig . 2 F ) . Furthermore , the application of Taxol increased the affinity even at low concentration of KIF5C , and the dependence to the Figure 2 . Cooperative binding of KIF5C to GDP microtubules . ( A – D ) The binding affinity of the KIF5C motor domain ( monomer ) to GDP or GMP CPP microtubules ( MTs ) was examined using single - molecule assays in the absence of nucleotide ( A and B ) or in the presence of 1 mM AMP PNP ( C and D ) . ( A and C ) Examples of the raw results . Each image shows the KIF5C motor domain ( magenta ) bound on GDP microtubules ( left columns ) or GMP CPP microtubules ( right columns ) in the absence of nucleotide ( A ) or in the presence of 1 mM AMP PNP ( C ) . The concentration of the kinesin used for each experiment is shown on the left side of the columns . ( B and D ) Distribution of the density of bound KIF5C on the microtubules . The results were fitted with a mixed Gaussian model to examine the heterogeneity in binding affinity . Two - peak distribution was evident with nucleotide - free KIF5C and GDP microtubules ( B , left ) . See Tables S4 , S5 , and S6 for details . ( E – H ) K d Dissociation constants of KIF5C . Affinity ( equilibrium K d ) plotted against the concentration of KIF5C monomeric motor domain . Error bars indicate SEM ( see Materials and methods for details ) . ( E – G ) Affinity of the wild - type KIF5C motor domain to GDP , GMP CPP , or Taxol - stabilized GDP microtubules . The nucleotide conditions for kinesin and the microtubule conditions are indicated in each panel . ( H ) Affinity of the L11 mutant KIF5C ( K11C , the L11 - α4 junction was replaced with the corresponding sequence of KIF1A ) . This mutant showed constant affinity to both GDP and GMP CPP microtubules , which is consistent with our previous report that this mutant cannot discriminate axonal microtubules from dendritic microtubules in neurons ( Nakata et al . , 2011 ) . The numbers of the observed microtubules and bound KIF5 molecule are summarized in Tables S4 , S5 , and S6 . Journal of Cell Biology https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1083 / jcb . 201711178 Shima et al . Cooperative binding of kinesin - 1 to microtubules 4168 KIF5C concentrations was reversed ( Fig . 2 G ) , which is consistent with the previous in vivo results ( Nakata and Hirokawa , 2003 ) . In the following assays with neurons ( Nakata et al . , 2011 ) , muta - tions at the L11 - α4 junction reversed the preferential movement of KIF5C on axonal microtubules over dendritic microtubules . Consistently , the same mutation decreased the affinity to GMP CPP microtubules , and the dependence on the KIF5C concentra - tions was lost for GDP microtubules ( Fig . 2 H ) . Binding of KIF5C transiently converts GDP microtubules to a high - affinity state From these results , we surmised a hypothesis that GDP microtu - bules can take two states : a low - affinity state and a high - affinity state . The binding of KIF5C would convert the microtubule from the low - affinity state to the high - affinity state . At limited KIF5C concentrations , only some microtubules might be converted to the high - affinity state , but all microtubules will be converted with sufficiently high concentrations of KIF5C . We tested this hypothesis using the following experiment ( Fig . 3 A ) . GDP microtubules were first attached to the surface of the flow cell . Then , KIF5C ( monomer , without nucleotide ) was added at 10 pM . Most microtubules are not associated with KIF5C at this concentration . The concentration of the KIF5C monomer was further increased to 100 pM so that multiple KIF5C mole - cules were bound to most of the microtubules . The bound KIF5C molecules were then washed out by flushing with 10 mM ATP and 500 mM K - Pipes . After incubating with the observation buf - fer ( 45 mM K - Pipes ) for 1 – 8 min , the KIF5C monomer ( without a nucleotide ) was reintroduced at 10 pM . When 10 pM KIF5C was reintroduced immediately after the washout , many KIF5C signals were found on GDP - microtu - bules , confirming that pretreatment with higher concentration of KIF5C increased the affinity of GDP microtubules . How - ever , this effect was transient and lasted only a few minutes . After an 8 - min incubation , the affinity decayed to the initial level ( Fig . 3 B ) . Binding of KIF5C elongates the axial pitch of the GDP - microtubules These results collectively suggest a positive cooperativity in the binding of KIF5C to GDP microtubules , and this positive cooper - ativity would be mediated by the transient changes in microtu - bules . How can KIF5C binding convert GDP microtubules to the high - affinity state ? Since the high - affinity - state GDP microtubule and GMP CPP microtubules seem to have similar K d values , we surmised that binding of KIF5C might change the microtubule lattice from the GDP conformation to a conformation similar to a GMP CPP mi - crotubule . To examine this hypothesis , we first focused on the axial pitch of the microtubule , because it is well established that GMP CPP microtubules have a 2 % longer axial pitch ( 4 . 2 nm / monomer ) than GDP microtubules ( 4 . 1 nm / monomer ; Hyman et al . , 1995 ; Yajima et al . , 2012 ; Alushin et al . , 2014 ; Kamimura et al . , 2016 ) . We , therefore , examined the axial pitch of KIF5C - dec - orated GDP microtubules with x - ray fiber diffraction , since it gives accurate values for the axial pitch of microtubules in solu - tion ( < 0 . 2 % error ; Kamimura et al . , 2016 ) . GDP microtubules were aligned by the shear flow device ( Kamimura et al . , 2016 ) , and the fiber diffraction pattern was recorded by irradiating the sample with an x - ray beam . Among the layer lines that reflect the ∼ 4 - nm axial tubulin repeat in the microtubule , the stronger fourth - order reflection at ∼ 1 - nm axial spacing ( Kamimura et al . , 2016 ) was used for the measurement of axial pitch ( Fig . 4 A ) . As shown in Fig . 4 B , the layer line shifted inwardly by the addition of KIF5C ( the monomeric motor domain ) . Before the addition of KIF5C , the axial pitch was 4 . 10 ± 0 . 006 nm ( mean ± SEM ; Fig . 4 C ) . The addition of KIF5C to the same sample to the Figure 3 . Transient increase of binding affinity of GDP microtubules by pretreatment with KIF5C . ( A ) Images of the KIF5C ( magenta ) motor domain and GDP microtubules ( green ) in each step of the experiment . First , GDP microtubules were incubated with 10 pM KIF5C in the absence of nucleotide ( left column ) . Following incubation with 100 pM KIF5C ( second left column ) , KIF5C was washed out from the observation chamber using 0 . 5 M Pipes buffer , and microtubules were incubated in the observation solution ( second right column ) . After the incubation time indicated left side of the images , 10 pM KIF5C was reintroduced in the chamber ( right column ) . ( B ) Incubation time dependency of the K d of KIF5C and GDP microtubule after temporal binding of 100 pM KIF5C . Data points are shown in black . K d values before incubation with 100 pM kinesin and during the incubation with 100 pM kinesin are shown in gray for comparison . The time constant for the decay was estimated to be 2 . 1 ± 1 . 1 min ( mean ± SEM ) by fitting with an exponential decay ( gray curve ) . N microtubules are 35 , 43 , 28 , and 34 , and N bound are 74 , 51 , 20 , and 11 for the data points for 1 , 2 , 4 , and 8 min , respectively . Journal of Cell Biology https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1083 / jcb . 201711178 Shima et al . Cooperative binding of kinesin - 1 to microtubules 4169 concentration of 2 % of tubulin ( molar ratio ) did not change the pitch . When the amount of KIF5C was increased to 5 % , the layer line broadened . After the amount of KIF5C was increased to 10 % or more , the layer line sharpened again , and the axial pitch was elongated to 4 . 16 ± 0 . 008 nm . Finally , AMP PNP was added to the same sample after increasing the KIF5C amount to 100 % . Then , Figure 4 . Elongation of the axial pitch of GDP microtubule measured by x - ray fiber diffraction . ( A ) X - ray fiber diffraction patterns of GDP microtubules ( 94 µM ) without KIF5C , with 94 µM KIF5C , and with 94 µM KIF5C plus 1 mM AMP PNP and those of GMP CPP microtubules without KIF5C ( from left to right panels ) . The bottom black circle in each panel is an x - ray beam stop placed around the image center . The arrowheads on the left side of the first panel indicate the first to fourth diffraction peaks ( from bottom to top of the image ) corresponding the axial tubulin periodicity ( ∼ 4 nm ) . The arrowhead on the right side of the third panel indicates the first diffraction peak corresponding to the bound kinesin periodicity ( ∼ 8 nm ) . Without KIF5C , the diffraction peaks of both the GDP and GMP CPP microtubules fit well with the previously reported tubulin axial periodicity ( 4 . 1 nm for GDP microtubules and 4 . 2 nm for GMP CPP microtubules ) . ( B ) The images of the fourth diffraction peak of GDP microtubules . As the KIF5C concentration increased , the peak shifted toward the center ; however , the peak returned to the initial position by addition of 1 mM AMP PNP . ( C ) The relation of KIF5C concentration and axial tubulin periodicity of GDP microtubules in the presence of 1 mM ATP and 1 mM AMP PNP . The Hill coefficient of this reaction was estimated to be 6 . 4 ± 1 . 5 by fitting the data to Hill equation ( gray line ) . ( D ) Time course of the axial tubulin periodicity after adding 19 µM KIF5C to 94 µM GDP microtubule ( the microtubule concentration is expressed as tubulin dimer concentration ) and 1 mM AMP PNP . ( C and D ) Error bars indicate the diffraction peak FWHM . Among the four individual trials , the SDs of the axial tubu - lin periodicity of each data point were below 0 . 1 Å . ( E and F ) The time course of the layer line positions after the addition of mutant KIF5C ( K11C , the L11 - α4 junction was replaced with the corresponding sequence of KIF1A ) . K11C was added at 18 . 7 µM , which corresponds to the 20 % ( molar ratio ) of tubulin in the assay chamber . The lattice of the GDP microtubule was elongated both in magnitude and duration similarly to wild - type KIF5C ( Fig . 4 D ) . Error bars indicate the diffraction peak FWHM . SD of the three independent experiments was below 0 . 1 Å . ( G and H ) The time course after the addition of excess ( 1 mM ) AMP PNP to the K11C – GDP microtubule complex . The microtubule pitch was not shortened . These results suggest that the L11 - α4 junction would be involved in the ATP - dependent shortening of the microtubule lattice , but not in the elongation of the microtubule lattice upon binding of KIF5C . Error bars represent FWHM . SD of three individual experiments was below 0 . 1 Å . Note the presence of the peak at 8 nm −1 ( arrowheads at 1 / 8 in E and G ) , which demonstrates the binding of K11C to the microtubules in these experiments . Journal of Cell Biology https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1083 / jcb . 201711178 Shima et al . Cooperative binding of kinesin - 1 to microtubules 4170 the layer line returned to the initial position ( 4 . 10 nm ) . Here , the 8 nm - layer line remains ( layer lines 1 / 8 in Fig . 4 A ) . This layer line is from KIF5C on each tubulin dimer of the micro - tubule , indicating that KIF5C remains bound to microtubules after the addition of AMP PNP . It should be noted here that the presence of KIF5C does not affect this measurement , because reflections from KIF5C should match those from the tubulin dimer . The eighth - order reflection of the ∼ 8 - nm tubulin dimer periodicity should overlap with the fourth - order reflection of the tubulin monomer repeat . Furthermore , the 10 - fold increase in the amount of KIF5C on the microtubule ( from 10 % to 100 % ) did not change the layer line position . This result experimen - tally confirms that the presence of KIF5C on the microtubule did not affect the measurement . The shorter pitch of GDP microtubules without KIF5C is in agreement with our previous results with GDP microtubules with a substoichiometric concentration of Taxol measured using the same method ( Kamimura et al . , 2016 ) . The longer pitch with KIF5C is closer to the pitch of the GMP CPP microtubules mea - sured at the same temperature ( 37°C ) . Thus , the results of x - ray fiber diffraction are consistent with the hypothesis that KIF5C - bound GDP microtubules take a conformation similar to GMP CPP microtubules . Cooperativity in axial pitch elongation and its time course It should also be noted that the changes in the layer line ( Fig . 4 , B and C ) are very similar to the results of the affinity measurement in Fig . 2 . The layer line broadens at ∼ 5 % , which suggests mixed populations with different pitches . The shift of the layer line at ∼ 5 % KIF5C is steep , with a Hill coefficient of 6 . 4 ± 1 . 5 ( mean ± SEM ) . Furthermore , the addition of AMP PNP to the sample with 100 % KIF5C returned the layer line to the initial position . These results collectively suggest that a substoichiometric amount of bound KIF5C can cooperatively change the conformation of GDP microtubules , but KIF5C in the AMP PNP - bound state would re - verse the conformational changes . We also measured the time course of the response . As shown in Fig . 4 D , it took ∼ 2 min for elongation by KIF5C , which could reflect the slow kinetics of the conformational changes in the mi - crotubule , because the binding kinetics of KIF5C is much faster as judged from the 8 - nm layer line . In contrast , the addition of AMP PNP to bound KIF5C returned the layer line position within 30 s . This kinetics was much faster than the reversal of the mi - crotubule affinity after KIF5C washout experiments in Fig . 3 . However , the corresponding measurements were difficult with this x - ray fiber diffraction experiment , because it requires rapid separation of KIF5C from the floating microtubules in the rotat - ing flow chamber . Here , the L11 - α4 junction mutant KIF5C did induce micro - tubule elongation upon binding ( Fig . 4 , E and F ) , but the pitch was not returned by the addition of AMP PNP ( Fig . 4 , G and H ) . These results suggest that the L11 - α4 junction would be involved in the ATP - dependent shortening of the microtubule lattice , but not in the elongation of the microtubule lattice upon binding of KIF5C . The structural basis for this observation is discussed in the cryo - EM section . Single - molecule measurement of the axial elongation of microtubules The measurements presented in Figs . 1 and 2 are in the regimes where each single microtubule was measured , while the x - ray diffraction represents the average of millions of microtubules in the x - ray spot . Therefore , we further confirmed the axial elon - gation of microtubules at the single microtubule level using flu - orescent speckle microscopy . Each microtubule was polymerized from a small seed of surface - stabilized microtubules and sparsely labeled with DY - 647 fluorescent dye . The labeling density with DY - 647 was titrated so that the average distance between the nearest DY - 647 speckles was ∼ 3 µm . Although the microtubules were attached to the cover glass only at the small seed regions near their minus ends , the high viscosity of solution containing 0 . 5 % methylcellulose suppressed Brownian movement of micro - tubules , so that the positions of the DY - 647 – labeled speckles were precisely measured by Gaussian fitting of the signal with a stan - dard error of ∼ 10 nm . Thus , the length of the microtubule was measured as the distance between the speckles with the precision of 10 nm / 3 µm = 0 . 3 % . Fig . 5 A shows an example of the control experiment . The po - sitions of the three speckles overlapped completely after buffer exchange . The microtubule was then incubated with KIF5C with - out nucleotide ( Fig . 5 B ) . When the position of the central speckle was aligned , the left speckle shifted toward the left and the right speckle shifted toward the right , indicating the elongation of the microtubule . Fig . 5 C shows the summary of the experiments . To avoid biases or errors , speckle pairs were chosen so that the dis - tances distributed equally between 1 and 5 µm . The vertical axis shows the relative elongation of the speckle distance ( ΔL / L in percent ) . Consistent with the results from x - ray fiber diffraction , the distance between two speckles was elongated 1 . 3 % from the initial distance by addition of the KIF5C motor domain ( mono - mer ) in the absence of a nucleotide ( P < 0 . 01 , Steel – Dwass test ) . On the contrary , the distance did not change significantly in the presence of 1 mM AMP PNP . These results confirm that the shift in the layer line position in the x - ray fiber diffraction experiment reflects the elongation of the axial pitch of the microtubule by the binding of KIF5C . We next examined the shortening ( recovery ) of microtubule length after washing out KIF5C . The minus end of the GDP mi - crotubule was attached to the cover glass . After incubating with KIF5C ( nucleotide - free state ) , a constant flow of buffer contain - ing 300 mM K - Pipes , 40 % ( vol / vol ) glycerol , and 1 mM Mg - ATP was applied to wash out the KIF5C motor domain . KIF5C was completely removed from the microtubule within 10 s ( Fig . S3 A ) , while the shortening of the microtubule length was delayed by 30 – 150 s ( Fig . S3 B ) . This result suggests that GDP microtu - bules can keep the KIF5C - induced elongated form on the order of minutes after KIF5C dissociation . While preparing this experiment , we also noted that the sta - bility of the GDP microtubules was strongly affected by the bind - ing of KIF5C , which is consistent with previous observations in HeLa cells and fungi ( Marceiller et al . , 2005 ; Uchida et al . , 2008 ) . The GDP microtubule is known to depolymerize rapidly , espe - cially when free tubulin is washed out from the solution and in Journal of Cell Biology https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1083 / jcb . 201711178 Shima et al . Cooperative binding of kinesin - 1 to microtubules 4171 the absence of glycerol or DMSO . However , we found that the binding of KIF5C slowed depolymerization ( Fig . S2 and Video 2 ) . We measured the depolymerization rate as a function of the rel - ative concentration of KIF5C against the tubulin dimer in the microtubule . The depolymerization rate showed a steep ( 100 - fold ) decrease at ∼ 10 % saturation with KIF5C in the absence of a nucleotide . In contrast , the depolymerization rate showed only 10 - fold decrease , even with full saturation with KIF5C , in the presence of AMP PNP . Thus , the 100 - fold stabilization of the GDP microtubule could not have been caused by physical interference from the presence of bound KIF5C on the micro - tubule surface , but it could have been caused by stabilization of the microtubule itself due to conformational changes in the microtubule lattice induced by the binding of nucleotide - free KIF5C . It should be noted here that the depolymerization rate also changes steeply with nucleotide - free KIF5C at ∼ 10 % satura - tion with KIF5C in the absence of a nucleotide , which is similar to the cooperative effects observed with affinity switching and axial pitch elongation . Conformational changes in GDP microtubules by second - harmonic generation ( SHG ) microscopy The above results collectively suggest that the conformation of the GDP microtubules changes cooperatively with the binding of nucleotide KIF5C at ∼ 10 % saturation . X - ray fiber diffrac - tion and speckle microscopy only demonstrated the elongation of the axial pitch , and it is not clear whether this elongation is accompanied by conformational changes in the tubulin subunits . Therefore , we examined GDP microtubules using SHG microscopy . The nonlinear susceptibility for SHG ( χ ) is represented by a third - rank tensor , which reflects the structure of the mole - cule ( Psilodimitrakopoulos et al . , 2013 ; Kaneshiro et al . , 2018 Preprint ) . For a cylindrically symmetric polymer such as a microtubule , most elements of the SHG tensor vanish , and the nonzero elements are all expressed with two independent components , χ zxx and χ zzz , where z and x are defined as the directions parallel and perpendicular to the microtubule axis , respectively ( Fig . 6 A ) . The two components are related to the mean tilt angle ( φ ) of tubulin subunits from the microtubule axis ( z axis ) as χ zxx = K ( β vvv / 2 ) cos φ sin 2 φ and χ zzz = K β vvv cos 3 φ , where β vvv is the magnitude of the first hyperpolarizability of a tubulin subunit and K is a proportional constant that contains the net molecular number in the focal volume . Hence , the ratio of χ zxx to χ zzz ( hereinafter denoted by ρ ) reflects the mean tilt angle of tubulin subunits in the microtubule lattice as ρ = χ ZXX _ χ ZZZ = 1 _ 2 tan 2 φ . Here , this ratio is sensitive to the angular changes in the tilt angle of the tubulin subunits , but not to the axial pitch . Thus , it gives essentially different information regarding the conformational changes in the microtubule lattice . Here , the ratio ρ can be mea - sured from the polarization dependence of SHG signal intensity by changing the polarization angle θ of incident light ( Fig . 6 A ) with the microscope optics shown in Fig . 6 B , as reported previ - ously ( Psilodimitrakopoulos et al . , 2013 ) . Fig . 6 C shows the dependence of ρ ( right axis ) and φ ( left axis ) on the relative molar concentration of KIF5C to the tubulin dimer . Each dot represents the experimental data value , and the Figure 5 . Single - molecule measurement of the axial elongation of microtubules . Fluorescent speckle microscopy of GDP microtubules showed that KIF5C elongates the microtubule length . Tetramethylrhodamine - labeled microtubules were polymerized from the DY - 647 – labeled seeds , which were anchored on a glass surface via biotin - avidin linkage . The polymerized micro - tubules were sparsely labeled with DY - 647 . ( A ) Images of the microtubule ( green ) with the DY - 647 speckles ( magenta ) before ( top ) and after ( middle ) introducing buffer in the chamber . The bottom graph shows the fluorescent intensity of DY - 647 along the microtubule before ( black line ) and after ( red line ) introducing buffer in the chamber . ( B ) Images of the microtubule ( green ) with the DY - 647 speckles ( magenta ) before ( top ) and after ( middle ) introduc - ing KIF5C in the chamber in the absence of ATP . The bottom graph shows the fluorescent intensity of DY - 647 along the microtubule before ( black line ) and after ( red line ) introducing KIF5C in the chamber . Bars , 1 µm ( A and B ) . ( C ) The elongation rates of the microtubule ( MT ) on introducing buffer ( left , N microtubules = 33 ) , KIF5C without nucleotide ( middle , N microtubules = 24 ) , and KIF5C with 1 mM AMP PNP ( right , N microtubules = 14 ) . The gray dotted lines indi - cate the mean elongation rate . The asterisk indicates significant difference ( P < 0 . 01 , Steel – Dwass test ) . See also Fig . S2 for the hyperstabilization of GDP microtubules by KIF5C and Fig . S3 for the reversal of the microtubule elonga - tion after removal of KIF5C . Journal of Cell Biology https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1083 / jcb . 201711178 Shima et al . Cooperative binding of kinesin - 1 to microtubules 4172 solid line is the theoretical curve obtained by least - squares fitting to a modified Hill equation : ρ ( χ ) = b + c χ n _ a n + χ n , where b and c are constants corresponding to intercept and scaling factor . The parameters n and a , found to be 5 . 1 and 0 . 177 , respectively , were strongly suggestive of positive cooperativity of binding of kinesin . As is shown , ρ rapidly increased at low concentrations ( 10 – 20 % ) of the KIF5C motor domain and no lon - ger increased at higher concentrations ( > 30 % ) . This indicates that conformational change does not linearly progress with in - creasing kinesin concentrations but starts to occur at a specific concentration region . Furthermore , this also indicates that the polarization changes in the SHG signal was most likely caused by the conformational changes in microtubules . KIF5C might not contribute much to the SHG signal , because the increase of KIF5C on the microtubule from 22 % to 56 % did not strongly affect the SHG signal ( Fig . 6 C ) . This is the opposite of the actomyosin system , where SHG signals mostly come from the myosin head ( Plotnikov et al . , 2006 ) . We also compared the tilt angle φ of GDP – KIF5C and GDP – KIF5C – Taxol microtubules with undecorated GDP microtubules . The relative concentration of KIF5C to tubulin dimer was set to be higher than 50 % . The result is shown in Fig . 6 D , where the left , middle , and right boxes are GDP , GDP – KIF5C , and GDP – KIF5C – Taxol microtubules , respectively . The mean values of φ for GDP , GDP – KIF5C , and GDP – KIF5C – Taxol were estimated to be 38 . 5° , 41 . 2° , and 41 . 6° , respectively . Using the Steel – Dwass test , we confirmed significance between GDP and GDP – KIF5C and be - tween GDP – KIF5C and GDP – KIF5C – Taxol , as shown in the graph . This means that those microtubules states might have different conformations associated with the tilt of the dipole moment in a tubulin subunit . It should be noted that the change of φ may contain the tilt of the tubulin subunit not only in the direction normal to the microtubule surface but also in the tangential di - rection . We further assessed the possible effect of small amounts of ATP / ADP contamination in the assay system by adding apy - rase , which catalytically removes nucleotide tri - or diphosphates ( Fig . 6 E ) . The addition of apyrase did not affect tubulin dipole angles , suggesting that apo - KIF5C ( KIF5C without bound nucle - otide ) indeed changes the tubulin dipole in GDP microtubules . Conformational variations of microtubules by cryo - EM analysis All the above experiments collectively support the idea that the binding of nucleotide - free KIF5C triggers cooperative confor - mational changes in GDP microtubules , while AMP PNP - bound KIF5C does not . To confirm this idea directly and to elucidate the underlying atomic mechanisms , we compared the conformations of microtu - bules using cryo - EM . Using a seam search protocol developed by Zhang and Nogales ( 2015 ) , we examined the cryo - EM structures Figure 6 . Microtubule conformational changes examined with SHG . ( A ) Principle of the measurement . Incident polarization θ dependence of SHG signal reflects the orientation of tubulin subunits in the microtubule . ( B ) Schematic drawing of the SHG microscope . BPF , bandpass filter ; PMT , photomultiplier tube . ( C ) The ratio of the SHG polarization angle against the concentration of KIF5C motor domain . Parallel GDP microtubule bundles grown from the mitotic asters without Taxol were measured . The ratio of the polarization factor ( right vertical axes ) reflects the tilt angle ( φ ) of the dipole moment of the tubulin subunit in the microtubule lattice ( left vertical axes ) . ( D ) The box - whisker plot of the SHG signal for GDP microtubules without KIF5C and Taxol , with KIF5C , and with both KIF5C and Taxol . The boxes show the first and third quadrants , and the bars in the boxes indicates the median of each dataset . The bottom and top whiskers in each plot indicate minimum and maximum values of a dataset . ( E ) The effect of apyrase on the SHG signal . Addition of apyrase did not affect the tubulin dipole angle of the GDP - microtubules , suggesting that shift in the SHG signals is induced by the nucleotide free KIF5C . ( D and E ) P values were calculated using a Steel – Dwass test . * , P < 0 . 001 . ( C – E ) The numbers of tested samples are shown in the figures . Journal of Cell Biology https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1083 / jcb . 201711178 Shima et al . Cooperative binding of kinesin - 1 to microtubules 4173 of GDP microtubules ( MT ( GDP ) ) complexed with KIF5C in the various nucleotide states : KIF5C ( ø ) – MT ( GDP ) , KIF5C ( ATP ) – MT ( GDP ) , and KIF5C ( PNP ) – MT ( GDP ) . The GMP CPP microtubule ( MT ( GMP CPP ) ) complexed with apo - KIF5C ( KIF5C ( ø ) – MT ( GMP CPP ) ) was also visualized for comparison with a previous study ( Alushin et al . , 2014 ) . These reconstructions were performed at ∼ 6 Å overall resolution , and the average resolution in the tubulin region was better than 5 Å ( Figs . 7 A and S4 ) . According to the helical parameters iteratively refined and measured from asymmetric ( C1 ) reconstruction , microtubules adopt at least three distinct conformations ( Fig . 7 A ) . The axial periodicity or the tubulin - dimer length was shortest in KIF - 5C ( PNP ) – MT ( GDP ) . It was 0 . 9 Å or 1 % longer in both KIF5C ( ø ) – MT ( GDP ) and KIF5C ( ATP ) – MT ( GDP ) , which quantitatively agrees with the results of the above experiments ( Figs . 4 and 5 ) . KIF5C ( ø ) – MT ( GMP CPP ) was two times longer ( i . e . , 2 Å longer ) Figure 7 . Microtubule conformational changes examined with cryo - EM . ( A ) The estimated resolutions according to the Fourier shell correlation 0 . 143 crite - ria , and pitch distances for tubulin dimer calculated from the helical symmetry parameters . ( B ) Cryo - EM reconstruction of KIF5C ( PNP ) – MT ( GDP ) and the docked atomic model showing only the microtubule surface . ( C ) Cα chain trace models of KIF5C ( PNP ) – MT ( GDP ) and KIF5C ( ø ) – MT ( GDP ) superimposed at α - tubulin on the right end . Note the tilt angle changes ( 1 . 1° ) at the intradimer interface , which leads to the extension of the pitch ( 1 . 0 Å ) . Tubulin subunits and KIF5C in KIF - 5C ( PNP ) – MT ( GDP ) are shown in cyan and blue , and those in KIF5C ( ø ) – MT ( GDP ) are shown in green . Helices and loops involved in the rearrangement of lattice are highlighted in red . ( D ) The Cα chain trace model of KIF5C ( ø ) – MT ( GDP ) colored by root mean square deviation values between the Cα atoms in C , viewing from the left side and the right side . The interface elements of KIF5C were highlighted as in C . See Fig . S4 for resolution and the statistics of cryo - EM maps . Journal of Cell Biology https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1083 / jcb . 201711178 Shima et al . Cooperative binding of kinesin - 1 to microtubules 4174 than KIF5C ( PNP ) – MT ( GDP ) , as reported previously ( Alushin et al . , 2014 ) . Slight discrepancies in the absolute values of the axial pitch between x - ray fiber diffraction and cryo - EM might be caused by the effect of the shear flow during x - ray fiber diffrac - tion measurements or inaccuracies in cryo - EM magnification . Mechanism of conformational changes in microtubule by KIF5C To investigate the atomic mechanisms of the conformational changes by KIF5C binding , the atomic models of α - and β - tubulin monomers ( Protein Data Bank accession no . 3J6F ) were overlaid by rigid - body fitting ( Fig . 7 B ) . The fitting was good for all recon - structions with high cross correlation coefficients ( > 0 . 96 ) . We also docked KIF5C atomic models ( Protein Data Bank accession nos . 4HNA and 4LNU ) to our density maps by rigid - body fitting . We then superimposed KIF5C ( ø ) – MT ( GDP ) and KIF5C ( PNP ) – MT ( GDP ) by using one α - tubulin subunit as the reference point ( Fig . 7 , C and D ; Fig . 8 A ; and Video 3 ) . This representation clearly visualized the relative movement of tubulin subunits in the mi - crotubule lattice . β - Tubulin slightly rotates toward the plus - end side around the T7 loop , so that the helices H11′ and H3′ in the KIF - 5C ( ø ) – MT ( GDP ) approach the neighboring α - tubulin at the plus - end side ( Fig . 7 C ) . As a consequence , the neighboring α - tubulin is pushed toward the plus - end side by 1 . 0 Å , leading to elongation of the tubulin - dimer periodicity . The conformation of KIF5C ( ATP ) – MT ( GDP ) was essentially the same as KIF5C ( ø ) – MT ( GDP ) ( Fig . 8 , B and C ; and Video 4 ) . For KIF5C ( ø ) – MT ( GMP CPP ) , the tubulin subunits moved similarly , but two times greater in angle and two times farther in distance , than those in KIF5C ( ø ) – MT ( GDP ) ( Fig . 8 D and Video 5 ) . Thus , both KIF5C binding and GTP bind - ing to β - tubulin induced similar conformational changes in the microtubule lattice but by twofold different magnitudes . These observations are perfectly consistent with the results of tilt - an - gle changes detected by SHG measurements ( Fig . 6 ) . To elucidate the underlying structural basis for the tubulin ro - tation by KIF5C , the interfaces between the microtubule and KIF5C were examined ( Figs . 7 D and 9 ) . The atomic models of KIF5Cs in KIF5C ( PNP ) – MT ( GDP ) and KIF5C ( ø ) – MT ( GDP ) were compared after rigid - body fitting to the cryo - EM density map ( Fig . 7 D ) . Several structural elements of KIF5C were identified that change their relative positions on the tubulin surface ( hereafter , L and α are used for the loop and helix in kinesin and T and H , correspond - ingly , for tubulin . ) : L11 and α6 , which interact with the α - tubulin on the left side and right side , respectively ; α4 and α5 , which in - teract with α - and β - tubulin near the intradimer interface ; and L8 , which interacts with β - tubulin at the plus - end side ( Fig . 7 D ) . In the KIF5C ( ø ) – MT ( GDP ) structure , as shown in the green rib - bon , the class - specific lysine - valine - serine ( KVS ) sequence of L11 approaches to the H3′ of α - tubulin . These interactions would be mediated by the hydrogen bond between K237 of L11 and Y108 of H3′ ( Fig . 9 F ) . The following V238 - S239 would also make hy - drophobic interactions with H3′ . The L8 and α5 also interact and push the C - domain region of β - tubulin in the KIF5C ( ø ) – MT ( GDP ) , inducing the rotation of β - tubulin around the T7 loop toward the plus - end side ( Fig . 7 D ) . This rotation consequently elongates the periodicity of the tubulin dimer . In contrast , these KIF5C elements were more distant from the microtubule surface in KIF5C ( PNP ) – MT ( GDP ) than in KIF5C ( ø ) - MT ( GDP ) ( blue versus green ribbons in Fig . 7 D ) . This would weaken the rotation of tubulins and restore the curved tubulin - dimer position , triggering the contraction of the axial periodicity . Thus , KIF5C would change the axial pitch of microtubule in a nucleotide - dependent manner . It should be noted here that the conformational changes or rotation of tubulin described above would not take place inde - pendently in the microtubule lattice . If a single tubulin dimer were changed to the GTP - like conformation among GDP - confor - mation tubulins in the microtubule lattice , then many clashes would occur at the interfaces with the surrounding tubulin di - mers ( Fig . 8 E ) . This would suggest that the conformation would change cooperatively . Binding of a small number of KIF5Cs will not be able to trigger conformational changes , but the microtu - bule lattice will be strained . With more KIF5C binding , the strain will exceed a threshold , and conformational rearrangement will be triggered . Similarly , returning to the GDP conformation from the GTP - like lattice will also be cooperative , which might explain the metastability observed in the above experiments ( Figs . 3 and S3 ) and in a previously study ( Yajima et al . , 2012 ) . Sensor region of KIF5C to discriminate microtubules As shown above , the mutation of the L11 - α4 junction ( EGA VLD ) to the corresponding sequence of KIF1A ( KGT RLK ) abolished the high - affinity binding to the longer - pitch microtubules , although it elongated GDP microtubules just as wild - type KIF5C did ( Figs . 9 A and 2 F ; and Fig . 4 , E and F ) . This indicates that the L11 - α4 junc - tion would not be essential to trigger conformational changes in microtubules but would be required to discriminate conforma - tional differences in microtubules . Consistently , there were clear differences at this L11 - α4 junc - tion between KIF5C ( ø ) – MT ( GDP ) and KIF5C ( PNP ) – MT ( GDP ) cryo - EM density maps ( Fig . 9 , B – E ) . The density corresponding to the L11 - α4 junction in KIF5C ( ø ) – MT ( GDP ) is stronger . The L11 - α4 junction is closer to the H3′ of α - tubulin ( Fig . 9 B ) , and its density appears to be connected to the microtubule surface ( arrowhead in Fig . 9 D ) . However , the corresponding density was weaker in KIF5C ( PNP ) – MT ( GDP ) ( Fig . 9 C ) . Quite suggestively , the L11 - α4 junction densities of KIF1A are clearly separated and not con - nected to the H3′ in both the nucleotide - free and AMP PNP - bound conditions ( arrowheads in Fig . S5 , A and B ) . The L11 - α4 junction of KIF5C in the nucleotide - free state and AMP PNP - bound state complexed with GDP - Taxol microtubules also adopt similar con - formations ( arrowheads in Fig . S5 , C and D ) . These observations collectively suggest that the loop L11 - α4 junction region of KIF5C takes a specific conformation in the nucleotide - free state on the GDP microtubule surface , and it would increase the binding af - finity to the longer pitch of microtubules . Namely , this junction region , rather than loop L11 itself , would be the sensor to discrim - inate microtubule conformations . This model also explains why KIF1A does not discriminate GMP CPP microtubules from GDP microtubules , as well as the previously reported results of swap mutants between KIF5C and KIF1A ( Nakata et al . , 2011 ) . In x - ray diffraction and speckle microscopy experiments , the long - pitch microtubule returns to a short - pitch one when KIF5C binds to AMP PNP ( Fig . 4 , C and D ; and Fig . 5 C ) . The observations of cryo - EM structures also suggest the structural basis for the microtubule contraction upon binding of AMP PNP to KIF5C . As Journal of Cell Biology https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1083 / jcb . 201711178 Shima et al . Cooperative binding of kinesin - 1 to microtubules 4175 shown in the previous section , AMP PNP binding to KIF5C induces the upward movement of L11 ( KVS residues ) , and that restores the conformation of the intratubulin – dimer interface to the short - pitch microtubule ( Fig . 7 D ) . The residues E244 and D249 of the L11 - α4 junction would also be responsible for this pitch contrac - tion movement . E244 and D249 presumably interact with K112 of H3 and R105 of H3′ , respectively ( Fig . 9 , F and G ) . Since the residues corresponding to E244 and D249 are changed to lysines in KIF1A , the swap mutant would not be able to shorten the elongated the microtubule by the application of AMP PNP ( Fig . 4 , G and H ) . Figure 8 . Conformational changes among KIF5C – microtu - bule complexes . ( A – D ) Comparisons of positions of the tubu - lin monomers superimposed at α - tubulin on the right end . The translation vectors between Cα coordinate pairs are shown in black . The Cα chain trace model in each panel is KIF5C ( PNP ) – MT ( GDP ) ( A , blue ) , KIF5C ( ATP ) – MT ( GDP ) ( B , pink ) , KIF5C ( ø ) – MT ( GDP ) ( C , green ) , and KIF5C ( ø ) – MT ( GMP CPP ) ( D , orange ) . ( C ) KIF5C ( ø ) – MT ( GDP ) and KIF5C ( ATP ) – MT ( GDP ) adopt similar lattices . Movements of C domains are measured . ( E ) A GTP - like , high - affinity tubulin dimer will clash with the surrounding GDP - conformation tubulins . This shows that small amounts of KIF5C below the threshold cannot induce a conformational rearrangement of the GTP - like high - affinity microtubule . Blue , KIF5C ( PNP ) – MT ( GDP ) ; magenta , KIF5C ( ø ) – MT ( GDP ) . Inter - atomic clashes and contacts were detected and colored in red using Chimera . Journal of Cell Biology https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1083 / jcb . 201711178 Shima et al . Cooperative binding of kinesin - 1 to microtubules 4176 Discussion Recent structural studies have revealed conformational changes in tubulin subunits in the microtubule as the basis for the reg - ulation of polymerization and depolymerization of microtu - bules or dynamic instability ( Yajima et al . , 2012 ; Alushin et al . , 2014 ) . However , tubulin subunits in the microtubule have been regarded as a static “rail” for the movement of kinesin , though many cell biological studies have reported that a small subset of microtubules are preferentially used by kinesin - 1 and that those microtubules themselves serve as a “road sign” to guide transport to cognate destinations , such as the axon ( Nakata and Hirokawa , 2003 ; Jacobson et al . , 2006 ; Reed et al . , 2006 ; Nakata et al . , 2011 ) . These studies consistently suggested that the rail microtubules for kinesin - 1 are more stable than other nonrail microtubules , but the underlying mechanisms have been controversial or unclear . In this study , we report that the binding of kinesin itself can induce conformational changes in GDP microtubules , the domi - nant nucleotide state in cells . The binding of kinesin - 1 to the in - tradimer interface of tubulin subunits in the microtubule lattice pushes and rotates β - tubulin , leading to an increase in the axial Figure 9 . Ability of the L11 - α4 junction to discriminate microtubules examined with cryo - EM . ( A ) Sequence alignment of L11 and α4 region in KIF5C , the L11 - α4 junction mutant , and KIF1A . ( B – E ) Comparison of cryo - EM density maps around the L11 - α4 junction between KIF5C ( ø ) – MT ( GDP ) and KIF5C ( PNP ) – MT ( GDP ) , viewed from the plus end ( B and C ) and left side ( D and E ) . ( F and G ) The candidate amino acid residues proposed to be involved in the interaction between KIF5C and α - tubulin in KIF5C ( ø ) – MT ( GDP ) ( F ) and in KIF5C ( PNP ) – MT ( GDP ) ( G ) . See Fig . S5 for the detailed structures of the L11 - α4 junction of KIF1A and KIF5C . Journal of Cell Biology https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1083 / jcb . 201711178 Shima et al . Cooperative binding of kinesin - 1 to microtubules 4177 pitch ( Fig . 10 A , top , blue and black arrows ) . This conformation is similar to the GMP CPP microtubule , a stable microtubule lattice . KIF5C can recognize these conformational differences through interactions between the L11 - α4 junction of kinesin and the H3′ helix of α - tubulin ( Fig . 10 A , top , green arrow ) and preferen - tially binds to longer - pitch microtubules , as reported here and in a previous study ( Nakata et al . , 2011 ) . This positive feedback loop would explain the cooperative binding of kinesin to micro - tubules , as examined in detail in this study ( Figs . 1 and 2 ) and in previous studies ( Vilfan et al . , 2001 ; Muto et al . , 2005 ) , and the preferential use of the subset of microtubules ( Figs . 1 and 2 ; Nakata and Hirokawa , 2003 ; Reed et al . , 2006 ; Nakata et al . , 2011 ) . Here , it should be noted that conformational changes in mi - crotubules are highly cooperative . As reproduced by different assays ( Figs . 4 C and 6 A ) , there is a switch - like change ( the Hill coefficient for this reaction was around 5 ) with a threshold around 5 – 10 % saturation . In most of these experiments , mono - meric KIF5C - motor domain was used in the nucleotide - free state and was unlikely to hop around multiple tubulin dimers . This high cooperativity would reflect the two - dimensional lattice alignment of tubulin subunits in the microtubule ( Fig . 10 A , bottom ) , which would be similar to the well - studied cooperative binding to oxygen by tetrameric hemoglobin . A single subunit cannot move alone independently from the surrounding sub - units ( Fig . 8 E ) . More kinesin binding above threshold ( ∼ 10 % sat - uration ) would be required to induce the conformational changes globally including tubulin subunits not bound to kinesin to avoid breaking of the lattice ( Fig . 10 A , bottom ) . In more physiological - like conditions , namely with kinesin - 1 dimers and ATP , much smaller number of kinesin - 1 dimers might be able to trigger the conformational changes . During the proces - sive movement of a kinesin - 1 dimer , the leading head bound to the microtubule is mostly in the nucleotide free state ( Fig . 10 B ) . The ATP - bound state lasts a much shorter time ( ∼ 2 ms ) and al - ways in the trailing head . The AMP PNP - bound conformation of kinesin would reflect the isomerization intermediate state , a transient state between the ATP binding and hydrolysis ( Nitta et al . , 2004 ; Chang et al . , 2013 ) . Its duration would be even shorter than 1 ms , and would be too short to reverse the microtubule conformation . In fact , the microtubules remained in the high Figure 10 . Schematic representation of the model . ( A ) Summary of the results . The binding of KIF5C to β - tubulin will push this subunit to rotate around the T7 loop , leading to the elongation of the axial pitch ( top , blue and black arrows ) . The lattice structure of the microtubule will restrict the conformation and the arrangement of tubulin subunits so that the conformational changes of the microtubule will take place in a cooperative manner ( bottom ) . The conformational changes of the microtubule will be recognized by the interaction between kinesin’s L11 - α4 junction and the H3′ helix of α - tubulin ( top , green arrow ) . ( B ) A hypothetical model of the propagation of the conformational changes by the processive run of a kinesin dimer . A single protofilament of microtubule is shown with a kinesin dimer ( a pair of green balls ) . The nucleotide states are shown in each head ( ø , nucleotide - free ; D , ADP ; T , ATP ) . Bluish color shows the tubulin subunits in GDP conformation . Red to purple color shows the strain of the conformational changes propagating from the bound nucleotide - free head . ( C ) A model for the stochastic oscillation of kinesin accumu - lation in juvenile neuron . A gray Y - shaped neu - ron with three neurites is shown with GDP - and GTP - like conformation microtubules in blue and red , respectively . Green small circles represent kinesin molecules . See the main text for details . Journal of Cell Biology https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1083 / jcb . 201711178 Shima et al . Cooperative binding of kinesin - 1 to microtubules 4178 affinity state for several minutes after removal of KIF5C mono - mer by ATP in Fig . 3 . Here , KIF5C monomers will bind and hydro - lyze ATP before detachment from the microtubule . Then , the processive movement of a kinesin - 1 dimer will re - petitively bind to the β - tubulin on the plus - end side in the nucle - otide - free state , ∼ 100 steps before detachment ( Fig . 10 B ) . Thus , a single kinesin - 1 dimer would be able to induce conformational changes to ∼ 100 tubulin dimers along a protofilament , and a few run events would suffice to trigger the conformational changes as observed in the experiments in Fig . 1 . Generally , self - organization or spontaneous symmetry break - ing is driven by such highly cooperative positive feedback loops . In neurons and other cells , tubulin is one of the most abundant proteins . The tubulin concentration in living cells is very high ( ∼ 10 % of the total protein [ Eipper , 1975 ] or ∼ 20 µM concentra - tion in the cytosol [ Gard and Kirschner , 1987 ] , which is more than 1 , 000 times higher than kinesin - 1 [ Kuznetsov and Gelfand , 2001 ] ) . If some microtubules are converted to the higher - affinity state in this limited kinesin - 1 environment , then they will obtain most kinesin - 1 via a winner - take - all mechanism . This mechanism might explain the asymmetric distribution of constitutively active kinesin - 1 in various cell types ( Fig . S1 A ) . For example , stochastic accumulation of KIF5C to a single neurite in an immature neuron ( Jacobson et al . , 2006 ; Nakata et al . , 2011 ) can be explained as fol - lows ( Fig . 10 C ) . Assume all microtubules in the neuron are in the low - affinity , short - pitch conformation ( GDP structure ; Fig . 10 C1 ) . KIF5C will first distribute randomly among multiple neurites , and the microtubules in one neurite with more KIF5C will be triggered to change to the high - affinity , longer - pitch conformation ( Fig . 10 C2 ) . More KIF5C will then bind to those microtubules , and many microtubules in that neurite will be in the high - affinity conforma - tion . The increase of local concentration of KIF5C in this neurite will facilitate the conversion of other microtubules in this neurite into the high - affinity state , which will recruit even more KIF5C . Then , KIF5C will be transported to the end of that neurite , resulting in the stochastic accumulation to one of the neurites ( Fig . 10 C3 ) . When most KIF5C molecules in the cell are accumulating at the end of the neurite , the frequency of the run events will decrease , and the microtubules will return to the low - affinity state ( Fig . 10 C4 ) . Newly synthesized KIF5C molecules or those diffusively ( or retro - gradely ) transported back to the cell body will restart the process ( Fig . 10 C1 ) , so that the process appears like a stochastic oscillation in juvenile neurons ( Jacobson et al . , 2006 ; Nakata et al . , 2011 ) or nonneuronal cells ( Fig . S1 B ) . In neurons , KIF5C conveys cargos containing plasma membrane precursors ( Okada et al . , 1995 ; Deng et al . , 2014 ) as well as the signaling molecules that determine the axonal polarity ( Tahirovic and Bradke , 2009 ) . The biased transport triggered by this cooperative positive feedback loop would specify that neurite into a future axon , especially when external polar - ization cues are not available , such as in low - density dissociation cultures , as observed previously ( Bradke and Dotti , 1997 ) . Similar cooperative conformational changes have recently been reported for F - actin ( Ngo et al . , 2015 , 2016 ; Umeki et al . , 2016 ) . Myosin - 2 binds cooperatively to F - actin by extending the pitch , while cofilin binds cooperatively by shortening the pitch . This allosteric regulation by cooperative conformational changes in actin is proposed to contribute to the establishment of the front – rear polarity of locomoting cells ( cofilin at the leading edge and myosin - 2 at the trailing tail ) . Thus , cooperative con - formational changes in cytoskeletal polymers might be a general strategy used by the cell to establish and maintain polarity . Materials and methods Snapshot analyses of KIF5 localization in various cells Cell lines ( Vero , HeLa , and MDCK ) were obtained from RIK EN cell bank ( RCB0001 , RCB0007 , and RCB0995 , respectively ) and maintained in high - glucose DMEM ( Wako ) supplemented with 10 % FBS ( Thermo Fisher ) and antibiotics ( penicillin - streptomy - cin ; Thermo Fisher ) . The expression plasmid was constructed by inserting the coding sequence for aa 1 – 560 of mouse KIF5C using the EcoRI and SalI sites in the multiple cloning site of pEGFP - N1 ( Clontech ) . The cells were transfected with Transfectin ( Bio - Rad ) or X - treme gene ( Roche ) and plated to the glass bottom dish ( Mat - Tek ) coated with Matrigel ( BD ) for HeLa and MDCK or collagen ( Cellmatrix type - IA , Nitta Gelatin ) for Vero . The transfected cells were observed within 12 – 16 h after transfection , and only cells with low expression levels were selected for the observation , because asymmetric distribution of KIF5 tended to be less clear in cells with higher expression levels , particularly more than 24 h after transfection . The cells were observed under an atmo - spheric CO 2 environment in L15 medium ( Gibco ) supplemented with 10 % FBS . For HeLa and MDCK cells , an inverted microscope IX71 ( Olympus ) was used for observation with a 100× objective lens ( UPlan SApo 100× / 1 . 40 ; Olympus ) and an EMC CD camera Luca ( Andor ) using μManager ( Edelstein et al . , 2010 ) as the controlling software . Images of Vero cells were taken with the same objective lens on an inverted microscope ( IX81 ; Olympus ) . MetaMorph software ( Molecular Devices ) was used to control the microscope and camera ( sCMOS camera ORCA FLA SH 4 . 0 ; Ham - amatsu ) . Images were pseudocolored using ImageJ . Time - course analysis of KIF5 localization in Vero cells Vero cells were transfected and plated to a collagen - coated glass - bottom dish as described above . The cells were observed with a total internal reflection fluorescence microscope with a Plan - Apo 60× / NA 1 . 42 oil objective ( Olympus ) and an sCMOS camera ( Zyla4 . 2 ; Andor ) on an IX83 microscope ( Olympus ) . The system was controlled with MetaMorph . Each cell was examined every 30 min for 6 h . For each time point of observation , 300 frames of images were recorded at 10 Hz for 30 s The trajectories of KIF5C movement were shown as the SD map ( Reed et al . , 2006 ) of each 300 - frame image sequence using ImageJ . Protein sample preparation Tubulin was purified from porcine brain through four cycles of polymerization and depolymerization using 1 M Pipes buffer ( 1 M Pipes - KOH , 1 mM EGTA , and 1 mM MgCl 2 , pH 6 . 8 ) for effective removal of microtubule - associated proteins ( Castoldi and Popov , 2003 ) . The labeled tubulin was prepared by incubating polymer - ized microtubule with tetramethylrhodamine succinimidyl ester ( C - 1171 ; Life Technologies ) , Alexa Fluor 647 NHS Ester ( A - 20106 ; Life Technologies ) , or NHS - LC - biotin ( 21336 ; Life Technologies ) for 30 min at 37°C ( Desai and Mitchison , 1998 ) . Then , we puri - Journal of Cell Biology https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1083 / jcb . 201711178 Shima et al . Cooperative binding of kinesin - 1 to microtubules 4179 fied functional labeled tubulin using two cycles of polymeriza - tion and depolymerization . The K351 KIF5C motor domain and K560 KIF5C dimer recombinants were expressed in BL21 - Co - donPlus ( DE3 ) - RIL ( Agilent ) and Sf9 cells , respectively ( Okada and Hirokawa , 1999 ) . Both expressed KIF5C proteins were then purified using their His 6 tag by TAL ON metal affinity resin ( Clon - tech ) . For fluorescent imaging , K351 was labeled with DY - 647 - maleimide ( Dyomics ; Okada and Hirokawa , 1999 ) . Excess DY - 647 was removed using the Micro Bio - Spin 30 size exclusion column ( Bio - Rad ) . GMP CPP was prepared enzymatically from GMP CP ( M3170 ; Sigma - Aldrich ) together with nucleotide diphosphate kinase ( N0379 ; Sigma - Aldrich ) and then purified using a Mono Q 5 / 50 GL column ( GE Healthcare ; Hyman et al . , 1992 ) . Fluorescent microscopy The nonlabeled tubulin , tetramethylrhodamine - labeled tubulin , and biotin - labeled tubulin were copolymerized to yield microtu - bules with a rhodamine and biotin labeling ratio of 2 % and 3 % , respectively . For GMP CPP microtubules , we repeated three cycles of GMP CPP uptake in the presence of 0 . 2 mM GMP CPP to obtain microtubules with over 90 % occupancy of GMP CPP in β - tubu - lins ( Yajima et al . , 2012 ) . To prepare GDP microtubules , tubulins were copolymerized in the presence of 1 mM GTP . Then , the buf - fer was exchanged for GPEM buffer ( 100 mM Pipes - KOH , 30 % [ vol / vol ] glycerol , 2 mM MgSO 4 , and 1 mM EGTA , pH 6 . 9 ) by cen - trifugation . To ensure GTP hydrolysis in the microtubule , GDP microtubules were used for the experiments after more than 3 h of incubation at room temperature . The glass chambers for ob - servation were prepared as follows . After sonication in 1 N KOH and plasma treatment ( Diener ) , the surface of the cover glasses ( C022221S ; Matsunami Glass ) was silanized with N - 2 - ( aminoeth - yl ) - 3 - aminopropyl - triethoxysilane ( KBE - 603 ; Shin - Etsu Chemi - cal ) and then incubated with 200 mg / ml NHS - PEG ( ME - 050 - TS ; NOF ) with or without 1 mg / ml NHS - PEG - biotin ( BI - 050 - TS ; NOF ) for 3 h at room temperature to make PEG - biotin – coated or PEG - coated glasses ( Yokota et al . , 2009 ) . The PEG - biotin – coated glass and the PEG - coated glass were separated using a 30 - µm layer of double - sided tape ( 5603 ; Nitto - Denko ) to make the flow chamber . Microtubules were immobilized on the PEG - biotin – coated glass surface via Neutravidin ( 31000 ; Thermo Fisher ) , and the glass surface was then blocked with imaging solution ( 45 mM Pipes - KOH , 2 mM MgSO 4 , 1 mM EGTA , 1 % [ wt / vol ] Pluronic F - 127 , 1 mg / ml casein , 1 mM d - biotin , 2 mM dithiothreitol , 0 . 2 mg / ml glucose oxidase , 40 µg / ml catalase , 1 mM glucose , and 30 % [ vol / vol ] glyc - erol , pH 7 . 2 ) . Finally , K351 - DY - 647 or K560 - GFP was added to the imaging solution and introduced into the chamber . The images of microtubules were observed under total internal reflection fluorescence microscopy ( IX81 ) with a 100× objective lens ( UP - lanSApo , NA 1 . 40 , oil ; Olympus ) and recorded at the frame rate of 10 frames per second using an iXon3 EM CCD camera ( Andor ) and MetaMorph software . During observation , the temperature of the chamber was kept at 37°C . The images were processed for background subtraction and further analysis using ImageJ . Statistical analyses The distribution of the landing rates ( Fig . 1 , G – I ) and the bound head density ( Fig . 2 , B and D ) was analyzed using a expecta - tion - maximization algorithm for Gaussian mixture model using mclust package ( Scrucca et al . , 2016 ) in R ( Ihaka and Gentleman , 1996 ) . P values for comparison of motility parameters ( Fig . 1 , G – L ) , microtubule elongation rates ( Fig . 5 C ) , and SHG signals ( Fig . 6 , D and E ) were calculated by a nonparametric multiple comparison test ( Steel – Dwass ) using the pSDCFlig function in the NSM3 package ( Schneider et al . , 2018 ) in R . Fluorescent speckle microscopy GDP microtubules labeled with DY - 647 and biotin were prepared as described above and then shortened to be less than 2 µm long by pipetting . These microtubule seeds were immobilized on a PEG - biotin – coated glass surface via Neutravidin . After washing with the imaging solution , we introduced the solution containing 6 µM tubulin , 120 nM tetramethylrhodamine - labeled tubulin , 1 mM GTP , and 1 mM MgSO 4 into the chamber to polymerize the tubulins at the ends of the immobilized microtubules . Following incubation at 37°C for 2 min , the solution in the chamber was changed to 6 µM tubulin , 120 nM DY - 647 – labeled tubulin , 1 mM GTP , and 1 mM MgSO 4 and then washed out with the imaging solution immediately after the change . To make multiple DY - 647 – labeled speckles in the microtubule , we repeated this tubulin polymerizing procedure four times . Then , the imaging solution containing 0 . 5 % ( wt / vol ) methylcellulose ( Methocel MC ; Sigma - Aldrich ) was introduced in the chamber to suppress fluctuation of the microtubules . The microtubules were observed using the aforementioned microscopy system with 0 . 5 - s exposure . The central positions of the DY - 647 speckles were determined by 2D Gaussian fitting of the image using Mark2 software ( provided by K . Furuta , National Institute of Information and Communica - tions Technology , Kobe , Japan ; Furuta and Toyoshima , 2008 ) . The SD of the determined position was 10 nm . To measure the com - paction of the elongated GDP microtubule , KIF5C was washed out by 0 . 2 - µl / s constant flow of buffer containing 300 mM K - Pipes , 40 % ( vol / vol ) glycerol , 1 mM EGTA , 1 mM ATP , 2 mM MgSO 4 , 2 mM dithiothreitol , 0 . 2 mg / ml glucose oxidase , 40 µg / ml cata - lase , 1 mM glucose , and 0 . 1 % Pluronic F - 127 , pH 7 . 2 , using a Cavro syringe pump ( 30062929 ; Tecan ) . To measure the microtubule depolymerization rate , the solution in the assay chamber was re - placed by imaging solution without glycerol , and microtubules were then observed under microscopy . X - ray fiber diffraction 187 µM tubulin dimer was polymerized in polymerization buffer ( 20 mM Pipes - KOH , 1 mM EGTA , and 2 mM MgSO 4 , pH 6 . 6 ) with 2 mM GTP or 0 . 5 mM GMP CPP and 2 mM MgSO 4 . After incu - bation at 37°C , 10 mM dithiothreitol , 2 mM ATP , 2 mM MgSO 4 and 1 % ( wt / vol ) methylcellulose ( Methocel MC ) were added to the microtubule specimen . After centrifugation at 14 , 000 g for 30 s to remove air bubbles , the specimen was placed in the space between a quartz disc and a ring - shaped coverslip . Micro - tubules were oriented under shear flow by rotating the quartz disc at 10 – 16 rotations per second . A synchrotron radiation x - ray beam at BL45XU beamline ( Fujisawa et al . , 2000 ) of SPring - 8 ( Japan Synchrotron Radiation Research Institute ) irradiated the oriented microtubules ( Kamimura et al . , 2016 ) . The diffraction images were recorded with a Pilatus 300K - W detector system Journal of Cell Biology https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1083 / jcb . 201711178 Shima et al . Cooperative binding of kinesin - 1 to microtubules 4180 ( Dectris ) with 30 - s exposure . KIF5C and 1 mM AMP PNP were added to the space between the disc and the coverslip 20 – 40 s before taking the images . We used a 4 . 97 - nm signal obtained from lead stearate to calibrate the spacing of diffraction peaks . Images were processed for background subtraction using ImageJ . The tu - bulin axial periodicity was determined by fitting the intensity of the fourth - diffraction peak with a Lorentzian function . The error bars in Fig . 4 indicate the full width at half maximum ( FWHM ) of the fitted function . Sample preparations for the SHG microscopy Xenopus laevis egg and sperm were gifts from H . Inomata ( RIK EN , Hyogo , Japan ) . Permeabilized Xenopus sperm nuclei ( Desai et al . , 1999 ) were immobilized on a surface of a KOH - washed quartz cov - erslip . Following wash of the surface by 7 mg / ml casein , aster - like microtubule formation was initiated by incubating the nuclei with the M - phase egg extract ( Field et al . , 2014 ) for 5 min at 37°C . Ex - cess egg extract was washed out with 500 mM Pipes - KOH , 10 mM MgCl 2 , 5 mM EGTA , and 30 % ( vol / vol ) glycerol , pH 6 . 9 . After ex - changing buffer with GPEM50 ( 50 mM Pipes - KOH , 1 mM EGTA , 2 mM MgSO 4 , and 30 % [ vol / vol ] glycerol , pH 6 . 7 ) , 15 µM tubulin ( including 2 % of Alexa Fluor 647 – labeled tubulin ) with 1 mM GTP and 0 . 7 mg / ml casein was introduced into the chamber . The cham - ber was incubated at 37°C for 20 min to polymerize microtubules . Finally , the chamber was washed with GPEM50 , and K351 with or without 1 mM AMP PNP was introduced into the chamber . SHG microscopy The SHG data were acquired using a custom - built microscope based on a Nikon TE2000 - U ( Fig . 6 B ; Kaneshiro et al . , 2018 Preprint ) . The sample was illuminated by a mode - locked Ti / sap - phire laser ( Chameleon Vision II ; Coherent , Inc . ) with an 810 - nm wavelength , 80 - MHz repetition rate , and 200 - fs pulse duration through a Glan - laser polarizing prism ( GL10 - B ; Thorlabs ) , high - speed polarization controller ( 350 - 160 and 350 - 80 ; Conoptics , Inc . ) , and a 40× dry objective lens ( NA 0 . 95 , CFI Apo ; Nikon ) . The emitted light was detected with a photon - counting photomulti - plier tube module ( H10680 - 210 ; Hamamatsu Photonics ) through a 100× objective lens ( NA 1 . 45 , CFI Apo , oil ; Nikon ) and filters ( FF01 - 680 / SP and FF01 - 405 / 10 - 25 ; Semrock ) . The SHG intensity data on the incident polarization angle ( θ ) were fitted with the following theoretical function to obtain three fitting parameters α , χ zzz , and χ zxx : I ( θ ; α , χ zzz , χ zxx ) = [ χ zzz cos 2 ( θ − α ) + χ zxx sin 2 ( θ − α ) ] 2 + [ 2 χ zxx cos ( θ − α ) sin ( θ − α ) ] 2 , where α denotes the angle of average orientation of a microtu - bule bundle and χ zzz and χ zxx are two components of SHG sus - ceptibility tensor ( Psilodimitrakopoulos et al . , 2013 ; Kaneshiro et al . , 2018 Preprint ) . Grid preparation and cryo - EM data collection The KIF5C motor domain ( mouse KIF5C residues 1 – 345 and a His 7 tag ) was purified by immobilized metal affinity chromatogra - phy and cation exchange chromatography ( AKTA Explorer 10S , RES OUR CE S column ; GE Healthcare ) . The purified KIF5C was di - alyzed against and concentrated in a buffer ( 10 mM Hepes - NaOH , pH 7 . 4 , 100 mM NaCl , 1 mM MgCl 2 , and 20 % [ wt / vol ] sucrose ) , frozen in liquid N 2 , and stored at −80°C . For GDP microtubule complexed with KIF5C ( KIF5C – MT ( GDP ) ) , tubulin was diluted to 80 µM by PEM buffer ( 20 mM Pipes - KOH , pH 6 . 6 , 1 mM EGTA , and 2 mM MgSO 4 ) , incubated on ice for 5 min in PEM buffer with 1 mM GTP and 1 mM MgSO 4 , and polymerized at 37°C for 30 min . At the end of polymerization , 0 . 1 mM MgSO 4 , 10 mM DTT , and 0 . 1 mM ATP for KIF5C ( ATP ) – MT ( GDP ) or 0 . 1 mM AMP PNP for KIF5C ( PNP ) – MT ( GDP ) were mixed into the microtubule solution . After 5 min , K351 diluted to 500 µM by a dilution buffer ( 10 mM Hepes - NaOH , pH 7 . 4 , 50 mM NaCl , and 1 mM MgCl 2 ) was added to microtubule solution to a final 20 % molar ratio to tubulin . A 4 - µl drop of KIF5C – MT ( GDP ) ( 40 µM tubulin ) was placed onto a glow - discharging holey carbon grid ( R2 / 2 ; Quantifoil ) and applied in a semiautomated vitrification device ( Vitrobot Mark IV ; FEI ) with 100 % humidity at 27°C . After 30 s , a 9 - µl drop of 40 µM KIF5C solution containing 5 mM ATP or AMP PNP , or 10 U / ml apyrase for KIF5C ( ø ) – MT ( GDP ) , was added on a drop of microtubule . After 60 s , the remaining solution on the grid was wicked away with a piece of Whatman no . 1 filter paper and the grid was plunge - frozen into liquid ethane . GMP CPP microtubule complexed with nucleo - tide - free KIF5C ( KIF5C ( ø ) – MT ( GMP CPP ) ) was prepared as previ - ously described ( Morikawa et al . , 2015 ) using the Vitrobot . Data acquisition was performed using a 200 - kV field emission cryo - EM ( Tecnai Arctica ; FEI ) at 78 , 000 - fold nominal magnification with an FEI Falcon II direct detection camera under low - dose conditions using the data - acquisition software Serial EM ( Mastronarde , 2005 ) . All data were collected as a movie with seven subframes with a total electron dose of 50 e −1 / Å 2 at a pixel size of 1 . 28 Å / pixel . The defocus range of the dataset was set to −1 . 5 to −2 . 5 µm . Image processing and 3D reconstruction of cryo - EM images The movie data were processed for motion correction with the software MotionCorr ( Li et al . , 2013 ) . Motion - corrected and summed images were analyzed its defocus and astigmatism by using CTF FIND3 ( Mindell and Grigorieff , 2003 ) and images without significant drift and astigmatism were used for further analysis . Images of a 14 - protofilament KIF5C - MT complex were selected and semiautomatically straightened using the “un - bend” program of Ruby - Helix ( Metlagel et al . , 2007 ) . Segments were extracted at a spacing of 80 Å using a box size of 768 × 768 pixels . The stack file combined by the addtostack command of IMOD ( Kremer et al . , 1996 ) was then applied to the seam - search scripts ( Zhang and Nogales , 2015 ) . We used EMD - 6353 , the ki - nesin - decorated GDP microtubule , as the 3D reference model to precisely separate α - tubulin and β - tubulin ( Zhang et al . , 2015 ) . Local refinement was performed twice using Frealign version 9 ( Grigorieff , 2007 ) , followed by determination of seam posi - tion . Using refined alignment particles with the correct seam , 3D structures were reconstructed assuming pseudohelical sym - metry ( HP ) and no symmetry ( C1 ) . The helical parameters for three - start tubulin monomers ( twist and rise ) were measured using the Relion helix toolbox program ( Scheres , 2012 ) from the C1 reconstruction and applied to the next HP reconstruction . Two rounds of seam search were performed to obtain the final reconstruction . The resolution was analyzed by Fourier shell correlation ( Van Heel , 1987 ) . Local resolutions were estimated Journal of Cell Biology https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1083 / jcb . 201711178 Shima et al . Cooperative binding of kinesin - 1 to microtubules 4181 with ResMap program ( Kucukelbir et al . , 2014 ) . A negative B - factor ( −120 and −200 ) was applied to sharpen the final map using Bfactor program ( included with the FRE ALI GN distribu - tion ; Grigorieff , 2016 ) . Atomic model fitting For microtubules , the atomic structure of tubulin ( Protein Data Bank accession no . 3J6F ; Alushin et al . , 2014 ) was fit - ted rigidly by monomer into the cryo - EM densities using the Fit in Map tool in UCSF Chimera ( Pettersen et al . , 2004 ; KIF - 5C ( PNP ) – MT ( GDP ) : ccc = 0 . 96 , KIF5C ( ø ) – MT ( GDP ) : ccc = 0 . 96 , KIF5C ( ATP ) – MT ( GDP ) : ccc = 0 . 95 , KIF5C ( ø ) – MT ( GMP CPP ) : ccc = 0 . 94 ) . For KIF5C , the atomic structures of the KIF5 motor domain ( Protein Data Bank accession nos . 4HNA [ ATP form ] and 4LNU [ nucleotide - free form ] ; Gigant et al . , 2013 ; Cao et al . , 2014 ) were rigid - body fitted ( KIF5C ( PNP ) – MT ( GDP ) : ccc = 0 . 92 [ 4HNA ] ; KIF5C ( ø ) – MT ( GDP ) : ccc = 0 . 94 [ 4LNU ] ) . Accession numbers Cryo - EM maps and the fitted atomic coordinates have been de - posited in the Electron Microscopy Data Bank and Protein Data Bank under the accession codes EMD - 6779 and 5XXT ( KIF5C ( ø ) – MT ( GDP ) ) , EMD - 6781 and 5XXV ( KIF5C ( PNP ) – MT ( GDP ) ) , EMD - 6782 and 5XXW ( KIF5C ( ATP ) – MT ( GDP ) ) , and EMD - 6783 and 5XXX ( KIF5C ( ø ) – MT ( GMP CPP ) ) , respectively . Online supplemental material Fig . S1 shows the stochastic and transient asymmetric distribution of kinesin in nonneuronal cells . Fig . S2 shows hyperstabiliza - tion of GDP microtubules by KIF5C . Fig . S3 shows compaction of the elongated GDP microtubule after kinesin removal . Fig . S4 shows resolution and statistics for the cryo - EM reconstructions . Fig . S5 shows the position of the elements of a kinesin – micro - tubule surface . Table S1 lists numbers of samples and events for Fig . 1 ( G – L ) . Table S2 lists statistics for the mixed Gaussian fitting in Fig . 1 ( G – I ) . Table S3 lists multiple comparison statis - tics by Steel – Dwass test . Table S4 lists numbers of microtubules and kinesin molecules for Fig . 2 . Table S5 shows statistics for the mixed Gaussian fitting in Fig . 2 B . Table S6 shows statistics for the mixed Gaussian fitting in Fig . 2 D . Video 1 shows KIF5C dimer molecules ( magenta ) moving along GDP and GMP CPP mi - crotubules ( green ) . Video 2 shows depolymerization kinetics of GDP microtubules in the presence of KIF5C monomer ( K351 ) . Video 3 shows a comparison of the microtubule lattices between KIF5C ( PNP ) – MT ( GDP ) and KIF5C ( ø ) – MT ( GDP ) . Video 4 shows a comparison of the microtubule lattices between KIF5C ( PNP ) – MT ( GDP ) and KIF5C ( ATP ) – MT ( GDP ) . Video 5 shows a comparison of the microtubule lattices between KIF5C ( PNP ) – MT ( GDP ) and KIF5C ( ø ) – MT ( GMP CPP ) . Acknowledgments We thank T . Hikima and M . Yamamoto for the use of SPring - 8 RIK EN beamline BL45XU ( proposal number 20140094 and 20150029 ) ; R . Zhang , T . Imasaki , and T . Osanai for cryo - EM image processing and 3D reconstruction ; and Y . Oguchi for setting up the microfluidic system . We also thank S . Xu , J . Asada , M . Kom - eno , M . Kakiuchi , and K . Ito for their technical and secretarial assistance ; W . Kylius for editing the manuscript ; and T . Ogawa , H . Yajima , H . Sato , T . Akamatsu , H . Fukuda , and all members of the Hirokawa Lab for technical help and valuable discussions . This work was supported by the Ministry of Education , Cul - ture , Sports , Science and Technology through a Grant - in - Aid for Specially Promoted Research ( grant 23000013 to N . Hi - rokawa ) and Grant - in - Aid for Scientific Research ( KAK ENHI grant 16H06372 to N . Hirokawa ; grants 16H05119 , 15H01334 , 26115721 , 26650069 , and 25293046 to Y . Okada ; grants 15H01656 and 17H05897 to H . Shigematsu ; and grant 15K08168 to R . Nitta ) , the Uehara Memorial Foundation ( Y . Okada ) , the Takeda Science Foundation ( Y . Okada and R . Nitta ) , the Mochida Memorial Foun - dation for Medical and Pharmaceutical Research ( R . Nitta ) , the RIK EN Special Postdoctoral Researchers Program ( T . Shima ) , the All RIK EN Research Project on Single Cell ( Y . Okada ) , and the RIK EN Pioneering Project on Dynamic Structural Biology ( Y . Okada , H . Shigematsu , and M . Shirouzu ) . The authors declare no competing financial interests . Author contributions : Y . Okada and N . Hirokawa conceived the idea and designed the project . T . Shima , S . Uemura , and Y . Okada performed the in vitro experiments with fluorescent mi - croscopes , while T . Kambara and Y . Okada did the experiments in living cells . Cryo - EM experiments were done by M . Morikawa , H . Shigematsu , M . Shirouzu , and R . Nitta . J . Kaneshiro , T . Ichimura , and T . Watanabe built the SHG microscope and analyzed the data through discussion with T . Shima and Y . Okada . T . Shima , M . Morikawa , Y . Okada , S . Kamimura , T . Yagi , and H . Iwamoto did the x - ray fiber diffraction experiments at SPring - 8 . All the au - thors discussed the results , and Y . Okada , T . Shima , M . Morikawa , R . Nitta , and N . Hirokawa wrote the manuscript . Submitted : 28 November 2017 Revised : 13 June 2018 Accepted : 14 September 2018 References Alushin , G . M . , G . C . Lander , E . H . Kellogg , R . Zhang , D . Baker , and E . Nogales . 2014 . High - resolution microtubule structures reveal the structural tran - sitions in αβ - tubulin upon GTP hydrolysis . Cell . 157 : 1117 – 1129 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . cell . 2014 . 03 . 053 Bradke , F . , and C . G . Dotti . 1997 . Neuronal polarity : vectorial cytoplasmic flow precedes axon formation . Neuron . 19 : 1175 – 1186 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / S0896 - 6273 ( 00 ) 80410 - 9 Cao , L . , W . Wang , Q . Jiang , C . Wang , M . Knossow , and B . Gigant . 2014 . The structure of apo - kinesin bound to tubulin links the nucleotide cycle to movement . Nat . Commun . 5 : 5364 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1038 / ncomms6364 Castoldi , M . , and A . V . Popov . 2003 . Purification of brain tubulin through two cycles of polymerization - depolymerization in a high - molarity buffer . Protein Expr . Purif . 32 : 83 – 88 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / S1046 - 5928 ( 03 ) 00218 - 3 Chang , Q . , R . Nitta , S . Inoue , and N . Hirokawa . 2013 . Structural basis for the ATP - induced isomerization of kinesin . J . Mol . Biol . 425 : 1869 – 1880 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . jmb . 2013 . 03 . 004 Deng , C . - Y . , W . - L . Lei , X . - H . Xu , X . - C . Ju , Y . Liu , and Z . - G . Luo . 2014 . JIP1 me - diates anterograde transport of Rab10 cargos during neuronal polariza - tion . J . Neurosci . 34 : 1710 – 1723 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1523 / JNE URO SCI . 4496 - 13 . 2014 Desai , A . , and T . J . Mitchison . 1998 . Preparation and characterization of caged fluorescein tubulin . Methods Enzymol . 298 : 125 – 132 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / S0076 - 6879 ( 98 ) 98014 - 4 Journal of Cell Biology https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1083 / jcb . 201711178 Shima et al . Cooperative binding of kinesin - 1 to microtubules 4182 Desai , A . , A . Murray , T . J . Mitchison , and C . E . Walczak . 1999 . The use of Xenopus egg extracts to study mitotic spindle assembly and function in vitro . Methods Cell Biol . 61 : 385 – 412 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / S0091 - 679X ( 08 ) 61991 - 3 Dimitrov , A . , M . Quesnoit , S . Moutel , I . Cantaloube , C . Poüs , and F . Perez . 2008 . Detection of GTP - tubulin conformation in vivo reveals a role for GTP remnants in microtubule rescues . Science . 322 : 1353 – 1356 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1126 / science . 1165401 Edelstein , A . , N . Amodaj , K . Hoover , R . Vale , and N . Stuurman . 2010 . Computer control of microscopes using µManager . Curr . Protoc . Mol . Biol . 14 : 14 – 14 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1002 / 0471142727 . mb1420s92 Eipper , B . A . 1975 . Purification of rat brain tubulin . Ann . N . Y . Acad . Sci . 253 ( 1 The Biology o ) : 239 – 246 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1111 / j . 1749 - 6632 . 1975 . tb19203 . x Field , C . M . , P . A . Nguyen , K . Ishihara , A . C . Groen , and T . J . Mitchison . 2014 . Xenopus Egg Cytoplasm with Intact Actin . Methods Enzymol . 540 : 399 – 415 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / B978 - 0 - 12 - 397924 - 7 . 00022 - 4 Fujisawa , T . , K . Inoue , T . Oka , H . Iwamoto , T . Uruga , T . Kumasaka , Y . Inoko , N . Yagi , M . Yamamoto , and T . Ueki . 2000 . Small - angle x - ray scattering sta - tion at the SPring - 8 RIK EN beamline . J . Appl . Cryst . 33 : 797 – 800 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1107 / S002188980000131X Furuta , K . , and Y . Y . Toyoshima . 2008 . Minus - end - directed motor Ncd exhib - its processive movement that is enhanced by microtubule bundling in vitro . Curr . Biol . 18 : 152 – 157 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . cub . 2007 . 12 . 056 Gard , D . L . , and M . W . Kirschner . 1987 . Microtubule assembly in cytoplasmic extracts of Xenopus oocytes and eggs . J . Cell Biol . 105 : 2191 – 2201 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1083 / jcb . 105 . 5 . 2191 Gigant , B . , W . Wang , B . Dreier , Q . Jiang , L . Pecqueur , A . Plückthun , C . Wang , and M . Knossow . 2013 . Structure of a kinesin - tubulin complex and implications for kinesin motility . Nat . Struct . Mol . Biol . 20 : 1001 – 1007 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1038 / nsmb . 2624 Grigorieff , N . 2007 . FRE ALI GN : high - resolution refinement of single particle structures . J . Struct . Biol . 157 : 117 – 125 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . jsb . 2006 . 05 . 004 Grigorieff , N . 2016 . Frealign : An Exploratory Tool for Single - Particle Cryo - EM . Methods Enzymol . 579 : 191 – 226 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / bs . mie . 2016 . 04 . 013 Hackney , D . D . 1995 . Implications of diffusion - controlled limit for processivity of dimeric kinesin head domains . Biophys . J . 68 : 267S – 269S . Hirokawa , N . , S . Niwa , and Y . Tanaka . 2010 . Molecular motors in neurons : transport mechanisms and roles in brain function , development , and disease . Neuron . 68 : 610 – 638 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . neuron . 2010 . 09 . 039 Hyman , A . A . , S . Salser , D . N . Drechsel , N . Unwin , and T . J . Mitchison . 1992 . Role of GTP hydrolysis in microtubule dynamics : information from a slowly hydrolyzable analogue , GMP CPP . Mol . Biol . Cell . 3 : 1155 – 1167 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1091 / mbc . 3 . 10 . 1155 Hyman , A . A . , D . Chrétien , I . Arnal , and R . H . Wade . 1995 . Structural changes accompanying GTP hydrolysis in microtubules : information from a slowly hydrolyzable analogue guanylyl - ( alpha , beta ) - methylene - diphos - phonate . J . Cell Biol . 128 : 117 – 125 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1083 / jcb . 128 . 1 . 117 Ihaka , R . , and R . Gentleman . 1996 . R : A Language for Data Analysis and Graph - ics . J . Comput . Graph . Stat . 5 : 299 – 314 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1080 / 10618600 . 1996 . 10474713 Jacobson , C . , B . Schnapp , and G . A . Banker . 2006 . A change in the selective translocation of the Kinesin - 1 motor domain marks the initial specifi - cation of the axon . Neuron . 49 : 797 – 804 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . neuron . 2006 . 02 . 005 Kamimura , S . , Y . Fujita , Y . Wada , T . Yagi , and H . Iwamoto . 2016 . X - ray fiber diffraction analysis shows dynamic changes in axial tubulin repeats in native microtubules depending on paclitaxel content , temperature and GTP - hydrolysis . Cytoskeleton ( Hoboken ) . 73 : 131 – 144 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1002 / cm . 21283 Kaneshiro , J . , Y . Okada , T . Shima , M . Tsujii , K . Imada , T . Ichimura , and T . M . Watanabe . 2018 . Second harmonic generation polarization microscopy as a tool for protein structure analysis . bioRxiv . ( Preprint posted June 4 , 2018 ) . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1101 / 338137 Kaul , N . , V . Soppina , and K . J . Verhey . 2014 . Effects of α - tubulin K40 acetylation and detyrosination on kinesin - 1 motility in a purified system . Biophys . J . 106 : 2636 – 2643 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . bpj . 2014 . 05 . 008 Kremer , J . R . , D . N . Mastronarde , and J . R . McIntosh . 1996 . Computer visualiza - tion of three - dimensional image data using IMOD . J . Struct . Biol . 116 : 71 – 76 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1006 / jsbi . 1996 . 0013 Kucukelbir , A . , F . J . Sigworth , and H . D . Tagare . 2014 . Quantifying the local resolution of cryo - EM density maps . Nat . Methods . 11 : 63 – 65 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1038 / nmeth . 2727 Kuznetsov , S . A . , and V . I . Gelfand . 2001 . Purification of kinesin from the brain . Methods Mol . Biol . 164 : 1 – 7 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1385 / 1 - 59259 - 069 - 1 : 1 Li , X . , P . Mooney , S . Zheng , C . R . Booth , M . B . Braunfeld , S . Gubbens , D . A . Agard , and Y . Cheng . 2013 . Electron counting and beam - induced motion correction enable near - atomic - resolution single - particle cryo - EM . Nat . Methods . 10 : 584 – 590 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1038 / nmeth . 2472 Marceiller , J . , A . Drechou , G . Durand , F . Perez , and C . Poüs . 2005 . Kinesin is involved in protecting nascent microtubules from disassembly after re - covery from nocodazole treatment . Exp . Cell Res . 304 : 483 – 492 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . yexcr . 2004 . 12 . 007 Mastronarde , D . N . 2005 . Automated electron microscope tomography using robust prediction of specimen movements . J . Struct . Biol . 152 : 36 – 51 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . jsb . 2005 . 07 . 007 Metlagel , Z . , Y . S . Kikkawa , and M . Kikkawa . 2007 . Ruby - Helix : an implemen - tation of helical image processing based on object - oriented scripting language . J . Struct . Biol . 157 : 95 – 105 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . jsb . 2006 . 07 . 015 Mindell , J . A . , and N . Grigorieff . 2003 . Accurate determination of local defo - cus and specimen tilt in electron microscopy . J . Struct . Biol . 142 : 334 – 347 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / S1047 - 8477 ( 03 ) 00069 - 8 Mitchison , T . , and M . Kirschner . 1984 . Dynamic instability of microtubule growth . Nature . 312 : 237 – 242 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1038 / 312237a0 Morikawa , M . , H . Yajima , R . Nitta , S . Inoue , T . Ogura , C . Sato , and N . Hiro - kawa . 2015 . X - ray and Cryo - EM structures reveal mutual conforma - tional changes of Kinesin and GTP - state microtubules upon binding . EMBO J . 34 : 1270 – 1286 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 15252 / embj . 201490588 Muto , E . , H . Sakai , and K . Kaseda . 2005 . Long - range cooperative binding of kinesin to a microtubule in the presence of ATP . J . Cell Biol . 168 : 691 – 696 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1083 / jcb . 200409035 Nakata , T . , and N . Hirokawa . 2003 . Microtubules provide directional cues for polarized axonal transport through interaction with kinesin motor head . J . Cell Biol . 162 : 1045 – 1055 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1083 / jcb . 200302175 Nakata , T . , S . Niwa , Y . Okada , F . Perez , and N . Hirokawa . 2011 . Preferential binding of a kinesin - 1 motor to GTP - tubulin - rich microtubules under - lies polarized vesicle transport . J . Cell Biol . 194 : 245 – 255 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1083 / jcb . 201104034 Ngo , K . X . , N . Kodera , E . Katayama , T . Ando , and T . Q . Uyeda . 2015 . Cofilin - in - duced unidirectional cooperative conformational changes in actin fila - ments revealed by high - speed atomic force microscopy . eLife . 4 : e04806 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 7554 / eLife . 04806 Ngo , K . X . , N . Umeki , S . T . Kijima , N . Kodera , H . Ueno , N . Furutani - Umezu , J . Nakajima , T . Q . P . Noguchi , A . Nagasaki , K . Tokuraku , and T . Q . P . Uyeda . 2016 . Allosteric regulation by cooperative conformational changes of actin filaments drives mutually exclusive binding with cofilin and my - osin . Sci . Rep . 6 : 35449 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1038 / srep35449 Nitta , R . , M . Kikkawa , Y . Okada , and N . Hirokawa . 2004 . KIF1A alternately uses two loops to bind microtubules . Science . 305 : 678 – 683 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1126 / science . 1096621 Okada , Y . , and N . Hirokawa . 1999 . A processive single - headed motor : kinesin superfamily protein KIF1A . Science . 283 : 1152 – 1157 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1126 / science . 283 . 5405 . 1152 Okada , Y . , H . Yamazaki , Y . Sekine - Aizawa , and N . Hirokawa . 1995 . The neu - ron - specific kinesin superfamily protein KIF1A is a unique monomeric motor for anterograde axonal transport of synaptic vesicle precursors . Cell . 81 : 769 – 780 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / 0092 - 8674 ( 95 ) 90538 - 3 Pettersen , E . F . , T . D . Goddard , C . C . Huang , G . S . Couch , D . M . Greenblatt , E . C . Meng , and T . E . Ferrin . 2004 . UCSF Chimera - - a visualization system for exploratory research and analysis . J . Comput . Chem . 25 : 1605 – 1612 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1002 / jcc . 20084 Plotnikov , S . V . , A . C . Millard , P . J . Campagnola , and W . A . Mohler . 2006 . Char - acterization of the myosin - based source for second - harmonic genera - tion from muscle sarcomeres . Biophys . J . 90 : 693 – 703 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1529 / biophysj . 105 . 071555 Psilodimitrakopoulos , S . , V . Petegnief , N . de Vera , O . Hernandez , D . Artigas , A . M . Planas , and P . Loza - Alvarez . 2013 . Quantitative imaging of micro - tubule alteration as an early marker of axonal degeneration after isch - emia in neurons . Biophys . J . 104 : 968 – 975 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . bpj . 2013 . 01 . 020 Reed , N . A . , D . Cai , T . L . Blasius , G . T . Jih , E . Meyhofer , J . Gaertig , and K . J . Verhey . 2006 . Microtubule acetylation promotes kinesin - 1 binding and trans - port . Curr . Biol . 16 : 2166 – 2172 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . cub . 2006 . 09 . 014 Journal of Cell Biology https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1083 / jcb . 201711178 Shima et al . Cooperative binding of kinesin - 1 to microtubules 4183 Scheres , S . H . W . 2012 . REL ION : implementation of a Bayesian approach to cryo - EM structure determination . J . Struct . Biol . 180 : 519 – 530 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . jsb . 2012 . 09 . 006 Schneider , G . , E . Chicken , and R . Becvarik . 2018 . NSM3 : Functions and Data - sets to Accompany Hollander , Wolfe , and Chicken . Nonparametric Sta - tistical Methods , Third edition , R package version 1 . 12 . https : / / CRAN . R - roject . org / package = NSM3 ( accessed May 7 , 2018 ) . Scrucca , L . , M . Fop , T . B . Murphy , and A . E . Raftery . 2016 . mclust 5 : Clustering , Classification and Density Estimation Using Gaussian Finite Mixture Models . R J . 8 : 289 – 317 . Tahirovic , S . , and F . Bradke . 2009 . Neuronal polarity . Cold Spring Harb . Per - spect . Biol . 1 : a001644 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1101 / cshperspect . a001644 Uchida , M . , R . R . Mouriño - Pérez , M . Freitag , S . Bartnicki - García , and R . W . Roberson . 2008 . Microtubule dynamics and the role of molecular mo - tors in Neurospora crassa . Fungal Genet . Biol . 45 : 683 – 692 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . fgb . 2007 . 10 . 013 Umeki , N . , K . Hirose , and T . Q . P . Uyeda . 2016 . Cofilin - induced cooperative conformational changes of actin subunits revealed using cofilin - actin fusion protein . Sci . Rep . 6 : 20406 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1038 / srep20406 Van Heel , M . 1987 . Similarity measures Between Images . Ultramicroscopy . 21 : 95 – 100 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / 0304 - 3991 ( 87 ) 90010 - 6 Vilfan , A . , E . Frey , F . Schwabl , M . Thormählen , Y . H . Song , and E . Mandel - kow . 2001 . Dynamics and cooperativity of microtubule decoration by the motor protein kinesin . J . Mol . Biol . 312 : 1011 – 1026 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1006 / jmbi . 2001 . 5020 Yajima , H . , T . Ogura , R . Nitta , Y . Okada , C . Sato , and N . Hirokawa . 2012 . Con - formational changes in tubulin in GMP CPP and GDP - taxol microtubules observed by cryoelectron microscopy . J . Cell Biol . 198 : 315 – 322 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1083 / jcb . 201201161 Yokota , H . , Y . - W . Han , J . - F . Allemand , X . G . Xi , D . Bensimon , V . Croquette , Y . Ito , and Y . Harada . 2009 . Single - molecule Visualization of Binding Modes of Helicase to DNA on PEGylated Surfaces . Chem . Lett . 38 : 308 – 309 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1246 / cl . 2009 . 308 Zhang , R . , and E . Nogales . 2015 . A new protocol to accurately determine mi - crotubule lattice seam location . J . Struct . Biol . 192 : 245 – 254 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . jsb . 2015 . 09 . 015 Zhang , R . , G . M . Alushin , A . Brown , and E . Nogales . 2015 . Mechanistic origin of microtubule dynamic instability and its modulation by EB proteins . Cell . 162 : 849 – 859 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . cell . 2015 . 07 . 012