Dynamics of Arabidopsis Dynamin - Related Protein 1C and a Clathrin Light Chain at the Plasma Membrane W OA Catherine A . Konopka , a , 1 Steven K . Backues , b and Sebastian Y . Bednarek a , b , 2 a Program in Cellular and Molecular Biology , University of Wisconsin , Madison , Wisconsin 53706 b Department of Biochemistry , University of Wisconsin , Madison , Wisconsin 53706 Plant morphogenesis depends on polarized exocytic and endocytic membrane trafﬁcking . Members of the Arabidopsis thaliana dynamin - related protein 1 ( DRP1 ) subfamily are required for polarized cell expansion and cytokinesis . Using a combination of live - cell imaging techniques , we show that a functional DRP1C green ﬂuorescent fusion protein ( DRP1C - GFP ) was localized at the division plane in dividing cells and to the plasma membrane in expanding interphase cells . In both tip growing root hairs and diffuse - polar expanding epidermal cells , DRP1C - GFP organized into dynamic foci at the cell cortex , which colocalized with a clathrin light chain ﬂuorescent fusion protein ( CLC - FFP ) , suggesting that DRP1C may participate in clathrin - mediated membrane dynamics . DRP1C - GFP and CLC - GFP foci dynamics are dependent on cytoskeleton organization , cytoplasmic streaming , and functional clathrin - mediated endocytic trafﬁc . Our studies provide insight into DRP1 and clathrin dynamics in the plant cell cortex and indicate that the clathrin endocytic machinery in plants has both similarities and striking differences to that in mammalian cells and yeast . INTRODUCTION Dynamin and dynamin - related proteins ( DRPs ) constitute a structurally related , yet functionally diverse , superfamily of large GTPases ( reviewed in Praefcke and McMahon , 2004 ; Konopka et al . , 2006 ) . Dynamins and DRPs are involved in various aspects of endomembrane and intracellular organelle dynamics , includ - ing endocytosis and post trans - Golgi network ( TGN ) trafﬁcking ( Damke et al . , 1994 ; Henley et al . , 1998 ; Jones et al . , 1998 ; Nicoziani et al . , 2000 ) , mitochondrial fusion and ﬁssion ( Mozdy et al . , 2000 ; Wong et al . , 2000 ) , peroxisome inheritance ( Koch et al . , 2003 ) , chloroplast division ( Gao et al . , 2003 ) , and actin dynamics ( McNiven et al . , 2000 ; Schafer et al . , 2002 ) . Mamma - lian dynamin 1 plays critical roles in several types of endocytosis , including clathrin - mediated endocytosis ( CME ; Damke et al . , 1994 ) . In mammalian cells , CME is mediated by a coordinated inter - play of accessory and regulatory proteins . Invagination of the clathrin - coated bud is thought to occur through the polymeriza - tion of clathrin triskelia , which is composed of heavy chain ( CHC ) and light chain ( CLC ) subunits , the membrane remodeling activ - ities of accessory proteins , and the force generated by actin polymerization ( Conner and Schmid , 2003 ) . Dynamin 1 subunits are recruited to and form rings and spirals around the necks of the invaginating clathrin - coated buds ( Damke et al . , 1994 ) through their lipid - interacting pleckstrin homology ( PH ) domain and protein - interacting Pro - rich ( PR ) domain ( Vallis et al . , 1999 ) . It has been proposed that there is a conformational change of the dynamin oligomer upon GTP hydrolysis ( Roux et al . , 2006 ) that along with actin polymerization ( Merriﬁeld et al . , 2005 ) and the activity of additional membrane modifying proteins promotes the release of the clathrin - coated vesicle from the plasma mem - brane . Similar to mammalian cells , CME in the yeast Saccharo - myces cerevisiae depends on a highly ordered assembly of membrane and cytoskeletal - associated proteins to initiate the recruitment of cargo proteins , budding , and release of endocytic vesicles ( Kaksonen et al . , 2003 , 2005 ; Sun et al . , 2006 ) . However , a few striking differences exist , including the lack of an identiﬁed DRPinyeastCME , whichis required forendocytosisin mammals ( Yu and Cai , 2004 ; Kaksonen et al . , 2005 ) . Clathrin - coated structures at the plasma membrane are evi - dent in electron micrographs of several plant species ( van der Valk and Fowke , 1981 ; Emons and Traas , 1986 ; Derksen et al . , 1995 ; Robinson , 1996 ; Fowke et al . , 1999 ; Dhonukshe et al . , 2007 ) . Apparent homologs for CHC , CLC , AP - 2 subunits , and mammalian accessory proteins are present in the Arabidop - sis thaliana genome ( Barth and Holstein , 2004 ; Holstein and Oliviusson , 2005 ) . Expression of a dominant - negative CHC in - hibits uptake of the lipophilic tracer dye FM4 - 64 and of several plasma membrane proteins ( Dhonukshe et al . , 2007 ; Tahara et al . , 2007 ) . In addition , use of the mammalian AP - 2 adaptor complex inhibitor tyrphostin A23 causes a reduction in endocy - tosis ( Dhonukshe et al . , 2007 ) . Although the existence of CME in plants is now widely accepted , the molecular machinery respon - sible for the regulated uptake of membrane and endocytic cargo ( Russinova et al . , 2004 ; Robatzek et al . , 2006 ; Sutter et al . , 2007 ) is less well characterized . 1 Current address : Department of Pharmacology , University of Washington , Seattle , WA 98195 . 2 Address correspondence to sybednar @ wisc . edu . The author responsible for distribution of materials integral to the ﬁndings presented in this article in accordance with the policy described in the Instructions for Authors ( www . plantcell . org ) is : Sebastian Y . Bednarek ( sybednar @ wisc . edu ) . W Online version contains Web - only data . OA Open Access articles can be viewed online without a subscription . www . plantcell . org / cgi / doi / 10 . 1105 / tpc . 108 . 059428 The Plant Cell , Vol . 20 : 1363 – 1380 , May 2008 , www . plantcell . org ª 2008 American Society of Plant Biologists The Arabidopsis genome contains 16 genes that are predicted to encode DRPs ( Hong et al . , 2003b ; Gao et al . , 2006 ) , which have been assigned to six protein families based on primary sequence , predicted domain structure , and functional analysis . Members of the DRP2 family share the greatest similarity in domain structure to mammalian dynamin 1 , including the PH and PR domains , and are required for Golgi - to - vacuole protein trafﬁcking ( Jin et al . , 2001 ) . DRP2A interacts with the putative Arabidopsis AP - 1 subunit , g - adaptin ( Jin et al . , 2001 ) , which , in turn , interacts with clathrin and the Arabidopsis homolog of epsin ( Song et al . , 2006 ) , an adaptor protein required for clathrin - dependent trafﬁcking at the plasma membrane ( Chen et al . , 1998 ) and TGN ( Duncan et al . , 2003 ) . However , the direct involvement of DRP2 in endocytosis has not been shown . In contrast with DRP2 , members of the plant - speciﬁc DRP1 protein subfamily , which lack the PH and PR domains found in dynamin 1 , are required for plant cell expansion and cytokinesis ( Kang et al . , 2001 , 2003b ) . The DRP1 protein subfamily consists of ﬁve members , designated A through E . In a related study , we havedescribed thedynamics ofDRP1A incomparison toDRP1C and shown that DRP1C is not fully functionally redundant with DRP1A ( Konopka and Bednarek , 2008b ) . Limited work on DRP1C has demonstrated protein localization to the de novo plasma membrane at the cell plate and a striking enrichment in the tips of expanding root hairs . Loss - of - function drp1C mutants are male gametophytic lethal with pollen characterized by large invaginations of the plasma membrane ( Kang et al . , 2003a ) . These early data suggest that DRP1C may be involved in plasma membrane dynamics . Using a combination of confocal laser scanning microscopy ( CLSM ) and variable angle epiﬂuores - cence microscopy ( VAEM ) , we show that DRP1C – green ﬂuores - cent protein ( GFP ) was recruited from the cytoplasm to the plasma membrane ﬂanking the tipin rapidly growing root hairs . In epidermal cells , DRP1C - GFP was organized into discreet , dy - namic foci that colocalized with and displayed similar dynamics to the plasma membrane – associated , ﬂuorescent fusion protein of clathrin light chain ( CLC - FFP ) . These analyses support the hy - pothesis that DRP1C is a component of the clathrin - associated machinery in plants . RESULTS DRP1C - mGFP5 Is Localized to the Division Plane , Plasma Membrane , and Cytoplasm To determine the cellular distribution of DRP1C , a DRP1C - mGFP5 translational fusion ( now referred to as DRP1C - GFP ) was constructed and introduced into DRP1C / drp1C - 1 plants ( Kang et al . , 2003a ) . To ensure normal expression and localiza - tion of GFP - tagged DRP1C , a genomic fragment of DRP1C in - cluding 2 . 9 kb of the native promoter , which is known to complement the drp1C pollen defect ( Kang et al . , 2003a ) , was positioned at the N terminus of GFP ( Figure 1A ) . DRP1C - GFP rescued the development of drp1C - 1 pollen , and drp1C - 1 / drp1C - 1 plants transformed with DRP1C - GFP had no visual defects . Immunoblot analysis oftotalprotein extractsfrom plants expressing DRP1C - GFP conﬁrmed that the fusion protein was intact and expressed at levels similar to native DRP1C ( Figure 1B ) . Together , these data indicated that the DRP1C - GFP fusion protein was functional in vivo . DRP1C - GFP was expressed throughout pollen germination . GFP ﬂuorescence was ﬁrst observed in hydrated pollen and localized to the plasma membrane ( Figure 1D ) but was not de - tected in pollen from untransformed plants ( Figure 1C ) . During pollen grain germination , plasma membrane – localized DRP1C - GFP converged to the region near the aperture through which the pollen tube would emerge ( Figure 1D ) . As the pollen tube continued to grow , DRP1C - GFP remained in the distal end of the pollen tube in the cytoplasm and along the plasma mem - brane ( Figure 1E ; see Supplemental Video 1 online ) . As previously observed in roots using immunoﬂuorescence ( Kang et al . , 2003a ) , DPR1C - GFP localized to the division plane in the transition zone of roots ( Figure 1F ) and to the distal region of elongating root hairs ( Figure 1G ) . In addition , live - cell imaging showed that DRP1C - GFP associated with the plasma mem - brane in these cell types . In aboveground tissue , DRP1C - GFP was expressed in hypocotyls ( see Supplemental Figure 1A online ) , leaf pavement , and socket cells ( Figure 1H ) and in de - veloping leaf trichomes ( Figure 1H ) , where it localized to both the cell cortex and the cytoplasm . DRP1C - GFP was not observed to be associated with any cytoskeletal structures or mitochondria in dividing or nondividing cells as was previously reported ( Hong et al . , 2003a ; Jin et al . , 2003 ) . DRP1C - GFP did not colocalize with the mitochondrial tracer dye MitoTracker Orange CM - H 2 XRos in root epidermal cells ( see Supplemental Figure 1B online ) or cortical cells . To conﬁrm the lack of mitochondrial localization , roots expressing a GFP - tagged mitochondria signal sequence fusion protein ( ss - b - ATPase - GFP ; Logan and Leaver , 2000 ) were ﬁxed and probed with an antibody speciﬁc for DRP1C ( Kang et al . , 2003a ) . Again , a - DRP1C did not associate with the ss - b - ATPase - GFP mito - chondrial marker ( see Supplemental Figure 1C online ) . DRP1C - GFP Is Enriched at the Lateral Tip Plasma Membrane of Growing Root Hairs Previous studies have shown that Arabidopsis DRP1s are in - volved in polarized cell expansion ( Kang et al . , 2003a , 2003b ) . Root hairs are a model cell for the study of polar cell growth as they expand through membrane addition exclusively at the tip . Many signaling and membrane trafﬁcking pathways that are required to establish and maintain this polar cell growth have been characterized ( reviewed in Carol and Dolan , 2002 ; Sˇamaj et al . , 2006 ) . Thus , we analyzed the in vivo dynamics of DRP1C - GFP in these tip - growing cells . DRP1C - GFP ﬂuorescence was not evenly distributed throughout the root hair but was primarily localized at the distal end ( toward the tip ) during all stages of root hair development , beginning with the appearance of the ﬁrst bulge and continuing through to termination of root hair growth ( Figure 2A ) . DRP1C - GFP ﬂuorescence levels at the distal end of the root hair decreased as root hairs stopped growing and eventually reached levels similar to the rest of the root hair plasma membrane . To investigate the dynamics of DRP1C - GFP during root hair growth with greater time resolution , seedlings were grown at a 30 8 horizontal angle through half - strength Murashige and Skoog 1364 The Plant Cell ( MS ) þ 0 . 5 % agar medium ( Murashige and Skoog , 1962 ) on a glasscoverslip ( KonopkaandBednarek , 2008a ) toallowroothairs to elongate in one plane without disturbance . Root hairs that grew along the surface of the glass cover slip were imaged using CLSM . Root hairs appeared morphologically normal throughout the 3 h of imaging . Their growth rate oscillated over time , with rates varying between 0 . 4 and 1 . 7 m m / min , which was consistent with root hair growth dynamics observed previously ( Monshausen et al . , 2007 ) . DRP1C - GFP localized to the plasma membrane primarily at the tip apex , which is the site of membrane addition ( Shaw et al . , 2000 ) , and the lateral plasma membrane within ; 15 m m of the apex ( referred to as tip lateral ﬂanks ) as well as throughout the circulating cytoplasm ( Figure 2B ; see Supple - mental Video 2 online ) . As the root hair elongated , the plasma membrane – associated DRP1C - GFP ﬂuorescence intensity ﬂuc - tuated both at the lateral ﬂanks and at the tip apex throughout the 2hofimaging ( Figure2C ) . ThehighestDRP1C - GFPﬂuorescence intensities at the tip apex were observed when the growth rate of the root hair was lowest ( Figure 2C ) . At the fastest growth rates ( ; 1 . 7 m m / min ) , only 6 % of total membrane - associated DRP1C - GFP ﬂuorescence was located at the tip apex . By contrast , at the slowest rate , 60 % of the total plasma membrane – associated DRP1C ﬂuorescence was present at the root hair tip apex . This analysis suggested an inverse relationship between the locali - zation of DRP1C at the tip apex , where exocytosis occurs , and the rate of root hair growth during expansion ( Figure 2C ) . DRP1C - GFP Is Recruited from a Cytoplasmic Pool to the Plasma Membrane We performed a FRAP analysis to determine how DRP1C is recruited to the plasma membrane at the root hair tips . DRP1C could be recruited directly from the cytoplasm and / or delivered to the tip apex via an exocytic pathway and then diffuse into the root hair tip ﬂanks during periods of rapid growth . To test these models , the diffusion of plasma membrane – associated DRP1C - GFP at the tip lateral ﬂanks of expanding root hairs was analyzed . If DRP1C - GFP were recruited directly from the cytoplasm , the ﬂuorescence in the entire photobleached area would recover at a uniform rate . Alternatively , if DRP1C - GFP localization depended on initial delivery to the root hair apex and subsequent diffusion , the initial ﬂuorescence recovery would occur at the edge of the photobleached area . As a control , the ﬂuorescence recovery rate of the cytoplasmic pool was determined , which recovered to its original intensity ( corrected for photobleaching ) in 17 . 1 6 5 . 1 s ( n ¼ 9 ; Figures 3A , 3C , and 3D , black circles ) . The plasma membrane – associated ﬂuorescence recovered in 47 . 6 6 15 . 8 s ( n ¼ 18 ; Figures 3B to 3D ) , indicating that DRP1C - GFP did not freely diffuse at the plasma membrane . The photobleached area of the root hair tip ﬂank was divided into two regions , one comprising the peripheral two - thirds of the photobleached area ( Figures 3C and 3D , white boxes ) and the other comprising the inner one - third of the bleached area ( Figures 3C and 3D , black Figure 1 . Localization of the Functional DRP1C - GFP Fusion Protein . ( A ) Schematic of the DRP1C - GFP construct . T , Nos terminator . The four – amino acid linker between DRP1C and GFP is shown . ( B ) Immunoblot analysis of total protein extracts from seedlings of wild - type ( lanes 1 and 5 ) , wild - type transformed with DRP1C - GFP ( lanes 2 and 6 ) , DRP1C / drp1C - 1 ( lanes 3 and 7 ) , and drp1C - 1 / drp1C - 1 transformed with DRP1C - GFP ( lanes 4 and 8 ) probed with a - DRP1C antibody ( lanes 1 to 4 ) , a - GFP antibody ( lanes 5 to 8 ) , or a - PUX1 ( lanes 1 to 8 , loading control ) . Relative mobilities of DRP1C , DRP1C - GFP , and PUX1 are indicated . * , breakdown product of DRP1C - GFP ; * * , cross - reactant with either the a - GFP antibody or an endogenous biotin conjugated protein recognized by streptavidin – horseradish peroxidase ( HRP ) . ( C ) to ( E ) Pollen from an untransformed wild - type plant ( C ) or a drp1C - 1 / drp1C - 1 plant transformed with DRP1C - GFP ( [ D ] and [ E ] ) imaged with LCSM . DRP1C - GFP ( green ) and autoﬂuorescence of pollen coat ( red ) are evident . ( D ) DRP1C - GFP is concentrated around the periphery of the vegetative cell and at the germination exit site ( yellow arrow ) . ( E ) Four frames from a CLSM time series ( see Supplemental Video 1 online ) of a growing pollen tube taken from a drp1C - 1 / drp1C - 1 plant transformed with DRP1C - GFP . Times indicate time from start of series . ( F ) to ( H ) Confocal slices of drp1C - 1 / drp1C - 1 plants transformed with DRP1C - GFP , showing the root cortex and epidermal cells ( F ) , growing root hair ( G ) , and an average projection Z - stack reconstruction of a ﬁrst leaf , which includes pavement cells , socket cells , and a stage 4 bibranched trichome ( H ) . Autoﬂuorescence from chloroplasts ( red ) is evident in ( H ) . DRP1C - GFP – labeled cell plates are marked with yellow arrowheads ( [ F ] and [ H ] ) . Bars ¼ 10 m m . Dynamics of Arabidopsis DRP1C and CLC 1365 boxes ) . In 83 % of the root hairs ( n ¼ 18 ) , the peripheral and inner regions recovered with equal kinetics , suggesting that DRP1C - GFP was primarily recruited from the cytoplasm ( Figures 3B to 3D ; see DPR1C - GFP forms discreet foci at the plasma mem - brane below ) . Tip - LocalizedDynamicsofDRP1C - GFPAreAssociatedwith Growth Rate in Inhibitor - Treated Root Hairs Root hair growth has been shown to require calcium gradients andreactiveoxygenspeciesassignalingmodules , phosphatidyl - inositol metabolism , actin dynamics , and a functional secretory pathway ( Carol and Dolan , 2002 ; Sˇamaj et al . , 2006 ) . To deter - mine if these processes are also required for DRP1C - GFP polarity , DRP1C - GFP dynamics in root hairs were analyzed before , during , and after the addition of inhibitors of the above processes , including , 0 . 1 % DMSO ( control treatment ; Figure 4A ) , 20 m M brefeldin A ( secretory trafﬁcking inhibitor ; Figure 4B ; Geldner et al . , 2003 ) , 30 m M cytochalasin D ( F - actin inhibitor ; Figure 4C ; Ketelaar et al . , 2003 ) , or 30 m M tyrphostin A23 ( CME inhibitor ; Figure 4D ; Banbury et al . , 2003 ) . Unlike the control treatment , which did not affect growth ( Figure 4A ) , each inhibitor caused a cessation of root hair growth 10 to 30 min after inhibitor addition ( Figures 4B to 4D ) . With the exception of tyrphostin A23 Figure 2 . DRP1C - GFP Localization to the Tips of Root Hairs Is Dependent on Growth . ( A ) Z - stack reconstructions of one cell ﬁle of root hairs in a drp1C - 1 / drp1C - 1 plant transformed with DRP1C - GFP . Numbers indicate the length of the root hair from the cell base . ( B ) Heat map of DRP1C - GFP ﬂuorescence in growing root hair with white indicating the highest intensity and purple indicating the lowest intensity . Bar ¼ 5 m m . ( C ) Graph plotting threshold area ( i . e . , the number of pixels at or above a set intensity level ; green line ) at the tip of the root hair and growth rate of the root hair ( blue line ) over time . 1366 The Plant Cell Figure 3 . DRP1C - GFP Is Recruited from the Cytoplasm to Sites on the Plasma Membrane . ( A ) and ( B ) Time course of photobleaching and recovery of DRP1C - GFP pools in the cytoplasm ( A ) and lateral tip plasma membrane ( B ) in growing root hairs . Numbers represent time in seconds from the bleach . White shapes indicate bleached areas . Bars ¼ 10 m m . ( C ) Enlarged confocal images of root hairs at time 0 in ( A ) and ( B ) . The photobleached region indicated in ( B ) is subdivided into peripheral and middle areas ( indicated by dashed and solid squares , respectively ) used for the graph in ( D ) . ( D ) GFP ﬂuorescence intensity was measured for regions shown in ( C ) and plotted versus time . The images and graphs shown are representative of 18 separate FRAP experiments . Dynamics of Arabidopsis DRP1C and CLC 1367 ( tyrA23 ) , polarized localization of DRP1C - GFP at the apical and lateral plasma membrane was abolished within 15 min of growth cessation , resulting in a nonpolar distribution of DRP1C - GFP throughout the root hair ( Figures 4B and 4C ) . These results sug - gested that the known requirements for active root hair tip growth are most likely not directly required for DRP1C - GFP recruitment or dynamics at the plasma membrane but that DRP1C - GFP localization at the tip of root hairs is intimately tied with active growth . This is supported by the result that DRP1C - GFP was not mislocalized in several root hair mutants , including the tip growth expansion mutants rhd2 , rhd4 , cow1 , tip1 , cob - 1 , cob - 2 , and erh1 ( see Supplemental Figure 2 online ) . tyrA23 inhibits mammalian AP - 2 binding of endocytic cargo and has been shown to block CME in mammalian cells ( Banbury et al . , 2003 ) and endocytic trafﬁc in plants ( Dhonukshe et al . , 2007 ) . Although CME has not yet been shown to be required for tip growth in Arabidopsis , clathrin - coated structures have been observed at the ﬂanks of root hair tips ( Emons and Traas , 1986 ) . We sought to determine if disrupting CME would alter the dynamics of DRP1C - GFP in root hairs . Within ; 15 min of tyrA23 application , root hair growth slowed and stopped . ( Figure 4D ) . In contrast with the other inhibitor treatments , DRP1C - GFP ﬂuorescence at the apical or lateral plasma membrane de - creased but never completely disappeared upon growth cessa - tion . Instead , DRP1C - GFP remained localized at the tip up to 30 min after growth of the root hair had ceased . A further analysis of the effects of tyrA23 on DRP1C - GFP dynamics is presented below . DPR1C - GFP Forms Discreet Foci at the Plasma Membrane To examine DRP1C - GFP dynamics at the plasma membrane of transformed plants , VAEM was used , which allows for imaging of the plant cell cortex with a high signal - to - noise ratio ( Konopka and Bednarek , 2008a ) . The distribution of DRP1C - GFP was visu - alized usingVAEM in root hairtips and ﬂanks ( Figures 5Aand 5B ) , expanding epidermal cells of the differentiation and elongation zone of the root ( Figures 5E and 5F ; see Supplemental Video 3 online ) , mature atrichoblasts in the root , leaf pavement cells , hypocotyl epidermal cells , and guard cells ( see Supplemental Figure 4 . DRP1C - GFP Apical Localization and Growth Was Uncoupled Using the Clathrin Inhibitor tyrA23 . Root hairs expressing DRP1C - GFP were treated with 0 . 1 % DMSO ( A ) , 20 m M brefeldin A ( B ) , 30 m M cytochalasin D ( C ) , or 30 m M tyrA23 ( D ) . Red arrow indicates time of drug application . DRP1C - GFP ﬂuorescence threshold area at the tip was plotted against the distance grown by the root hair tip . Bars ¼ 10 m m . 1368 The Plant Cell Figure 3 online ) . In all cell types , DRP1C - GFP was prominently organized into discreet cortical - associated foci ( Figures 5A to 5C ; see Supplemental Video 3 online ) . To eliminate any differ - ences that may occur in different cell types , DRP1C - GFP foci were initially analyzed in expanding root epidermal cells . In addition , only foci that had lifetimes ( deﬁned as the length of time that a focus was visible in the imaging plane ) of > 2 s were included in the analysis . Each of the DRP1C - GFP foci that appeared also disappeared during the 5 min of imaging . The averagelifetimeoftheDRP1C - GFPfociwas17 . 7 6 8 . 8s ( n ¼ 175 ; Figure 5 . DRP1C - GFP Forms Discreet , Dynamic Foci at the Plasma Membrane . DRP1C - GFP root hairs ( [ A ] and [ B ] ) and expanding root epidermal cells ( [ E ] to [ G ] ) imaged with VAEM . ( B ) Time series of boxed area in ( A ) . Numbers indicate elapsed time from start of imaging in seconds . ( C ) Fluorescence intensity proﬁle of two foci indicated in ( B ) with arrow ( red ) and arrowhead ( green ) . ( D ) Average normalized ﬂuorescence ( black line ) and SD ( gray lines ) of 22 foci from one cell over time . The peak ﬂuorescence was centered at time 0 . ( E ) and ( F ) Images from a time series , acquired at 0 . 5 - s intervals . Blue arrow indicates the same focus in ( E ) and ( F ) . A focus that split off from the original is indicated by the yellow caret in ( E ) . ( G ) Images from a time series , acquired at 0 . 5 - s invervals . The focus indicated with an orange caret merges with the focus indicated by the green arrow . ( H ) The average density ( 6 SD ) of foci for four expanding ( gray bars ) and four nonexpanding ( white bars ) cells averaged from ﬁve different time points in two locations for each cell . Expanding cells were root epidermal cells just distal ( toward the root tip ) to the ﬁrst root hair bulge . Nonexpanding cells were atrichoblasts ( non - hair cells ) in regions of the root with mature root hairs . ( I ) and ( J ) Roots expressing DRP1C - GFP were incubated in 50 m M tyrA23 for the time indicated and imaged in the presence of the inhibitor . The same root was imaged for the 1 - and 3 - min time points . Numbers indicate time elapsed from addition of inhibitor . Bars ¼ 1 m m in ( A ) , ( B ) , ( E ) to ( G ) , and ( I ) and 10 m m in ( J ) . Dynamics of Arabidopsis DRP1C and CLC 1369 Figure 5C ) . When ﬁrst appearing , the foci had low but detectable ﬂuorescence ( Figures 5B to 5D ) that increased steadily . Upon reaching peak ﬂuorescence intensity , the ﬂuorescence rapidly decreased to background levels and the foci disappeared from the cell cortex ( Figures 5B to 5D ) . This behavior was character - istic of DRP1C - GFP foci as suggested by the average , normal - ized ﬂuorescence intensity of 25 foci , which were centered at peak intensity ( Figure 5D ) . In addition , the foci were largely immobile ( Figure 5B ) , with 55 % of the foci exhibiting no lateral movement in the imaging plane . The remaining foci were immo - bile for > 90 % of their lifetime at the cell cortex but were mobile within the image plane and exhibited additional behaviors , in - cluding foci splitting ( Figure 5E ) , foci fusion ( Figure 5G ) , and dimming without disappearing ( Figure 5F ) . In addition , short - lived ( < 5 s ) foci that did not ﬂuctuate in ﬂuorescence intensity and long - lived ( > 45 s ) foci that underwent several rounds of ﬂuores - cence intensity ﬂuctuations were also present ( Figures 5E and 5F ) . Besides having limited mobility in the image plane , the foci exhibited movement just out of the plane of focus as they disappeared from the cell cortex . Seventy percent ( n ¼ 220 ) of foci were observed moving out of focus , presumably deeper into the cytoplasm , within 1 s of completely disappearing , most likely due to cytoplasmic streaming . Endocytic membrane trafﬁcking is more active in expanding than in nonexpanding cells ( Emons and Traas , 1986 ) . To deter - mine if thedistribution or dynamics of DRP1C - GFP foci were also different , we compared the density and behavior of foci in the expansion zone of root epidermal cells with those in fully ex - panded root epidermal cells . Although the focus lifetimes were quite variable within a single cell , ranging from 2 to 60 s in both expanding and nonexpanding epidermal root cells , the average lifetime of the DRP1C - GFP foci did not vary widely between cell types . The average lifetime was 17 . 7 6 8 . 8 s in expanding root epidermal cells and 24 . 2 6 12 . 4 s in nonexpanding root epider - mal cells . By contrast , the density of DRP1C - GFP foci varied between cell types , with the highest density being measured in actively expanding cells ( Figure 5H ) . In addition , more foci exhibited splitting and fusion in expanding cells ( 45 % , n ¼ 182 ) than in nonexpanding cells ( 28 % , n ¼ 182 ) . Inhibiting CME Disrupts DRP1C - GFP Foci Dynamics To test the hypothesis that DRP1C plays a role in endocytosis , drp1C - 1 / drp1C - 1 seedlings transformed with DRP1C - GFP were treated with 50 m M tyrA23 , which was previously shown to inhibit endocytic trafﬁc in cultured plant cells ( Dhonukshe et al . , 2007 ) . After 3 min of treatment with tyrA23 , ; 15 % of the cortical - associated foci imaged with VAEM began to increase in size and ﬂuorescence intensity ( Figure 5I ) and the cytoplasmic pools of DRP1C - GFP began to amass into immobile structures with high GFP ﬂuorescence as viewed by time - lapse CLSM ( Figure 5J ; see Supplemental Video 4 online ) . Thirty min after the addition of tyrA23 , the cortical and cytoplasmic - associated DRP1C - GFP ﬂuorescent signal was observed in immobile cortical - associated foci and cytoplasmic structures , respectively ( Figures 5I to 5J ) . After 30 min of tyrA23 treatment , < 1 % ( n ¼ 600 ) of the cortical foci entered or disappeared from the cell cortex during 2 min of imaging . By contrast , the phosphotyrosine analog tyrphostin A51 , which does not inhibit mammalian clathrin / AP2 – cargo interaction ( Crump et al . , 1998 ; Banbury et al . , 2003 ) , had no effect on localization or behavior of DRP1C - GFP ( see Supple - mental Figure 4A online ) . The effect of tyrA23 was rapidly reversible , with a complete disappearance of immobile cyto - plasmic DRP1C - GFP structures within 5 min of washout ( see Supplemental Figure 4B online ) . tyrA23 most likely does not inhibit the GTPase activity of DRP1C , as tyrA23 had no inhibitory effect on the GTPase activity of Escherichia coli expressed DRP1A ( Supplemental Figure 4C online ) , which is 88 % identical to DRP1C in its GTPase domain . Dynamics of Cortical - Associated CLC Cortical - associated DRP1C - GFP displayed characteristics that were reminiscent of the dynamics of dynamin 1 during CME ( Merriﬁeld et al . , 2002 ) . Based on this and our ﬁnding that tyrA23 inhibits DRP1C - GFP dynamics , CLC ﬂuorescent fusion proteins were created and expressed in planta for real - time imaging of clathrindynamicsattheplasmamembrane . Fluorescentfusionsof CLC have been successfully used for illuminating clathrin dynam - ics inyeast ( Sunetal . , 2007 ) and mammaliancells ( Merriﬁeldetal . , 2002 ) . C - terminal fusions to mGFP5 ( Konopka and Bednarek , 2008a ) , mOrange , or enhanced cyan ﬂuorescent protein ( ECFP ) were used . All three CLC fusion proteins exhibited similar local - izations ( Figures 6A to 6F ) : to intracellular organelles that colocal - ized with the TGN marker , N - sialyl transferase - YFP ( Figures 6D to 6F ; Batoko et al . , 2000 ) , within the cytoplasm , and at the plasma membraneofrootepidermal cells ( Figures6Ato6C ) and roothairs ( Figure 6G ) . Plasma membrane – associated CLC - GFP exhibited a similar distribution as DRP1C - GFP in growing root hairs . In time - lapse images ( see Supplemental Video 5 online ) , CLC - GFP was localized to the tip ﬂanks in growing root hairs and redistributed to the tip - most region of the plasma membrane as growth ceased . CLC - GFP localization at the plasma membrane was examined using VAEM . Similar to DRP1C - GFP , plasma membrane – associated CLC - FFPs were organized into dynamic , discreet foci ( Figures 6H to 6J ; see Supplemental Video 6 online ) . CLC - GFP foci had a similar lifetime distribution ( Figure 6J ) as DRP1C - GFP in expanding root epidermal cells , with the average lifetime of 19 . 7 6 6 . 8 s . The density of CLC - GFP foci was also similar in expanding root epidermal cells ( 3 . 48 6 0 . 55 foci / m m 2 ) to that of DRP1C - GFP ( 3 . 54 6 0 . 62 foci / m m 2 ) . DRP1C and CLC - FFP Localization in Expanding Root Epidermal Cells Were Perturbed upon Cytoskeleton and Sterol Disruption Actin dynamics and membrane sterols are required for efﬁcient CME in mammals and yeast ( Lamaze et al . , 1997 ; Rodal et al . , 1999 ; Engqvist - Goldstein and Drubin , 2003 ; Toshima et al . , 2006 ) . To determine cellular components that are required for DRP1C - GFP and CLC - FFP dynamics , seedlings were treated with molecular inhibitors of cytoskeletal dynamics , sterol syn - thesis , and membrane and protein trafﬁcking and then imaged with VAEM . Speciﬁcally , 1 and 50 m M latrunculin B ( latB ; F - actin inhibitor ) , 10 m M oryzalin ( microtubule inhibitor ; Kandasamy and Meagher , 1999 ) , 50 mM 2 , 3 - butanedione monoxime ( BDM ; 1370 The Plant Cell myosin inhibitor ; Paves and Truve , 2007 ) , 10 m g / mL fenpropi - morph ( sterol synthesis inhibitor ; He et al . , 2003 ) , 50 m M wortmannin ( Jaillais et al . , 2006 ) , and 50 m M brefeldin A ( Jaillais et al . , 2006 ) were assessed and their effects were compared with mock treatment with 0 . 1 % DMSO ( except for fenpropimorph , which was compared with half - strength MS ) . Inhibitors were used at concentrations previously shown to effectively inhibit their corresponding cellular processes , and where possible , inhibition was visually conﬁrmed as described below . All inhib - itors , except wortmannin and brefeldin A , had signiﬁcant effects on foci dynamics ( Figures 7A to 7C ) . Seedling roots were treated with low ( 1 m M ) and high ( 50 m M ) concentrations of latB for 20 min to inhibit cytoplasmic streaming independent and dependent processes , respectively . F - actin depolymerization was veriﬁed using the actin probe GFP - ABD2 ( Sheahan et al . , 2004 ) . At 1 m M latB , there was no effect on DRP1C - GFP foci dynamics ( data not shown ) and a small , but signiﬁcant increase in CLC - GFP average focus lifetime ( from 19 . 7 6 6 . 8 s in control cells to 31 . 1 6 23 . 8 s ; Figure 7A , striped ) . However , at latB concentrations that inhibited cytoplasmic streaming as viewed in bright - ﬁeld images ( i . e . , 50 m M ) , > 95 % of the cortical - associated immobile DRP1C - GFP and CLC - GFP foci that were present at the beginning of imaging were present after 5 min . Besides this immobile population , ; 30 % of CLC - GFP foci were in constant motion in and out of the plane of focus , which was not observed in mock - treated CLC - GFP seedlings . To determine if the effects of actin inhibition on foci dynamics were due to cytoplasmic streaming , seedlings were incubated with BDM , a myosin inhibitor , for 20 min . Both DRP1C - GFP and CLC - GFP foci became immobile . Foci that were present at the beginning of imaging rarely ( < 1 % ) disappeared from the cell cortex . CLC - GFP also formed constantly mobile foci , similar to those observed after treatment with 50 m M latB . In addition , DRP1C - GFP foci increased in size and ﬂuorescence intensity , similar to those observed after tyrA23 treatment ( Figure 7C ) . Microtubules are the major cytoskeletal component of the cortex of plant cells ( Ehrhardt and Shaw , 2006 ) . Thus , microtu - bule organization may be important for regulating processes at Figure 6 . CLC Localization and Foci Dynamics at the Plasma Membrane . ( A ) to ( G ) Confocal sections of seedling roots ( [ A ] to [ F ] ) or root hair ( G ) expressing CLC - GFP ( [ A ] and [ G ] ) , CLC - mOrange ( B ) , CLC - ECFP ( [ C ] to [ F ] ) , and / or sialyltransferase - YFP ( [ D ] to [ F ] ) , with single color channels ( [ A ] to [ E ] ) and a merged image of the images in ( D ) and ( E ) in ( F ) . Cell plates are indicated with yellow arrowheads ( [ A ] and [ B ] ) . ( H ) Three expanding root epidermal cells expressing CLC - GFP , imaged with VAEM . Cortical Golgi are indicated by yellow arrows , which can be seen circulating in Supplemental Movie 6 online . Individual foci used for analysis are smaller and more stable than the Golgi . ( I ) Time series of boxed area in ( H ) . Numbers indicate elapsed time from start of imaging in seconds . ( J ) Fluorescence intensity proﬁle of two foci indicated in ( I ) with arrow ( blue ) and arrowhead ( red ) . Bars ¼ 10 m m in ( A ) to ( G ) and 1 m m in ( H ) and ( I ) . Dynamics of Arabidopsis DRP1C and CLC 1371 the plasma membrane . To examine the role of the microtubule cytoskeleton on cortical - associated DRP1C and CLC dynamics , expanding epidermal root cells expressing DRP1C - GFP or CLC - GFP were imaged after 20 min incubation with 10 m M oryzalin , which caused complete depolymerization of microtubules , as assessed by a microtubule binding domain – GFP reporter ( Granger and Cyr , 2001 ) . Both DRP1C - GFP and CLC - GFP foci had a wider lifetime distribution than with 0 . 1 % DMSO treatment ( Figures 7A and 7B , white bars ) , and the average focus lifetime of DRP1C - GFP and CLC - GFP with oryzalin treatment was 2 . 6 and 1 . 6 times , respectively , that of mock - treated roots . In addition , DRP1C - GFP and CLC - GFP had a greater mobility within the plane of the cell cortex after treatment with oryzalin . Twice as many cortical - associated DRP1C - GFP foci were observed to split and / or merge , and more than twice as many CLC - GFP foci moved laterally in the cell cortex compared with mock - treated roots . Interestingly , foci dynamics were greatly inhibited in the absence of both the actin and microtubule cytoskeletons ( Fig - ures 7A and 7B , gray bars ) . In seedlings incubated with 10 m M oryzalin and 1 m MlatB for 20 min , DRP1C and CLC foci displayed an average focus lifetime of 135 . 2 6 71 . 3 s and 46 . 2 6 35 . 5 s ( n ¼ 106 ) , respectively ( as opposed to 17 . 7 6 8 . 8 s and 19 . 7 6 6 . 8 s in mock - treated cells , respectively ) . In addition , the mobile DRP1C - GFP and CLC - GFP foci that were present in mock - treated seedlings or with either drug alone were not apparent in seedlings treated with both oryzalin and latB , with < 2 % of DRP1C and CLC foci being mobile within the cell cortex . Plant cell expansion and division are greatly affected by sterols present in the plasma membrane ( He et al . , 2003 ; Schrick et al . , 2004 ) . CME in mammalian cells also requires the presence of sterols in the plasma membrane ( Rodal et al . , 1999 ) . Fenpropi - morph has been used as a sterol synthesis inhibitor to probe the Figure 7 . DRP1C - GFP and CLC - GFP Foci Dynamics Are Inhibited by Cytoskeleton Disruption . Roots expressing CLC - GFP ( A ) or DRP1C - GFP ( [ B ] and [ C ] ) were incubated with inhibitors for 20 min ( [ A ] and [ B ] ) or time indicated ( [ C ] , white numbers ) , transferred to a slide , and imaged in the presence of the inhibitor with VAEM . Roots were incubated with 0 . 1 % DMSO ( [ A ] and [ B ] , black ) , 10 m M oryzalin ( [ A ] and [ B ] , white ) , 1 m M latB ( [ A ] , striped ) , 10 m M oryzalin þ 1 m M latB ( [ A ] and [ B ] , gray ) , or 50 m M BDM ( C ) . The foci dynamics were analyzed for 20 to 30 foci in each of 6 to 10 cells from four different roots and the lifetime distribution was plotted ( [ A ] and [ B ] ) . Seedlings expressing CLC - GFP ( D ) or DRP1C - GFP ( E ) were germinated and grown on either half - strength MS ( black bars ) or half - strength MS þ 10 m g / mL fenpropimorph ( white bars ) , then transferred to a slide and imaged by VAEM in half - strength MS media . The foci dynamics were analyzed for 10 to 20 foci in each of 7 to 10 cells from two to seven different roots , and the lifetime distribution was plotted ( [ D ] and [ E ] ) . Bars ¼ 1 m m . 1372 The Plant Cell effects of altered membrane sterol proﬁles on plant morphology ( He et al . , 2003 ; Schrick et al . , 2004 ) . Seedlings germinated and grown on half - strength MS þ 10 m g / mL fenpropimorph had altered DRP1C - GFP and CLC - GFP foci dynamics ( Figures 7D and 7E ) . The average DRP1C - GFP foci lifetime from seedlings grown on fenpropimorph was 39 . 3 6 20 . 9 s ( n ¼ 200 ) , which was 1 . 9 times that of seedlings grown on 0 . 5 3 MS media ( Figure 7D ) . Likewise , the average lifetime of CLC - GFP foci when seedlings were grown on fenpropimorph was 34 . 0 6 23 . 2 s ( n ¼ 90 ) , which was 1 . 7 times that of seedlings grown on half - strength MS ( Figure 7E ) . Together , these inhibitor studies indicated that the cortical environment was critical for efﬁcient DRP1C - GFP and CLC - GFP foci dynamics . DRP1C - GFP and CLC - GFP Foci Colocalize at the Plasma Membrane As cortical - associated DRP1C - GFP and CLC - GFP foci dis - played very similar dynamics , we decided to test whether these foci colocalize in the cell cortex . Plants expressing both DRP1C - GFP and CLC - mOrange were imaged using dual ﬂuorescence color VAEM imaging ( Figure 8A ; see Supplemental Video 7 online ) . As demonstrated by single ﬂuorophore imaging , both DRP1C and CLC fusion proteins formed discreet foci in the cell cortex ( Figure 8A , yellow arrowheads ) . CLC - mOrange was also found in larger structures that represent TGNs ( Figure 8A , blue arrowhead , and Figures 6D to 6F ) . We found that 48 . 8 % ( n ¼ 3 cells ) of pixels that had green ﬂuorescence above an intensity threshold that included all ﬂuorescence within the cell bound - aries also contained mOrange ﬂuorescence above the intensity threshold . Conversely , only 15 . 3 % ( n ¼ 3 cells ) of pixels that contained orange ﬂuorescence above threshold intensity also contained green ﬂuorescence above the threshold intensity . This was most likely due to the TGN - associated CLC - mOrange ﬂuorescence signal . On the other hand , when only foci were analyzed for the presence of green or orange ﬂuorescence , 95 . 1 % of all CLC - mOrange foci analyzed ( n ¼ 1044 ) overlapped with DRP1C - GFP foci , while 94 . 6 % of all DRP1C - GFP foci analyzed ( n ¼ 1049 ) overlapped with CLC - mOrange foci . The total percentage of overlapping foci was 90 . 4 % ( n ¼ 1100 ) . To eliminate the possibility that the high percentage of colocaliza - tion was due to random overlap of the highly dense foci in the cell cortex of elongating epidermal cells , the red channel image from eight different cells was rotated 180 8 with respect to the green channel , an analysis technique that has been used previously to show nonrandom colocalization ( Delcroix et al . , 2003 ; Dedek et al . , 2006 ) . The average peak distance for the original image ( 3 . 29 pixels ; n ¼ 256 ) was signiﬁcantly different from that of the rotated images ( 6 . 43 pixels ; n ¼ 253 ; P < 0 . 000001 ) , indicating that the colocalization was statistically signiﬁcant . The dynamics of DRP1C - GFP and CLC - mOrange were analyzed for 88 foci from expanding epidermal root cells in 10 in - dividual roots that displayed overlapping DRP1C - GFP and CLC - mOrange localization . In 85 % of these foci , the DRP1C - GFP and CLC - mOrange ﬂuorescence decreased within 1 s of each other ( Figures 8B and 8C ) , suggesting that DRP1C - GFP and CLC - mOrange resided on the same structure in the cell cortex . Of those that displayed simultaneous disappearance , 65 % of foci ( n ¼ 68 ) had simultaneous rise in ﬂuorescence ( Figure 8B ) , indicating that the ﬂuorophores were recruited concurrently , while 28 % of foci were characterized by a peak in CLC - mOrange ﬂuorescence before DRP1C - GFP ( Figure 8C ) , suggesting a stepwise recruitment . Furthermore , 9 % of all foci had concurrent recruitment of the DRP1C - GFP and CLC - mOrange but did not have simultaneous disappearance ( Figure 8D ) . The time differ - ence between the disappearances of the two foci ranged from 2 . 5 to 7 s . Finally , 6 % of foci did not display coordinated dynamics of DRP1C - GFP and CLC - mOrange ( Figure 8E ) . DISCUSSION Members of the DRP1 family are required for cell plate and plasma membrane dynamics during cytokinesis and cell expan - sion , respectively ( Otegui et al . , 2001 ; Kang et al . , 2003a , 2003b ) . However , the speciﬁc processes in which DRP1 isoforms func - tion and their interaction with the molecular machinery required for membrane trafﬁcking are largely uncharacterized ( Backues et al . , 2007 ) . In this study , we used live - cell imaging of a functional DRP1C - GFP to examine its localization and dynamics at the plasma membrane of various plant cell types . DRP1C - GFP was found to be associated with dynamic foci containing CLC . The coordinated dynamics of DRP1C and CLC in the cell cortex suggest that they may function together in CME in plant cells . Similarly , recentstudies havesuggested aroleforDRP1AinCME in Arabidopsis ( Collings et al . , 2008 ; Konopka and Bednarek , 2008b ) . Interestingly , DRP1A , CLC , and DRP2B , a DRP that contains PH and PR domains , were recently shown to form cortical foci when heterologously expressed in tobacco Bright Yellow 2 cells ( Fujimoto et al . , 2007 ) . However , only short - term ( < 6 s ) , single color imaging was performed , so it is not clear whether the dynamics of DRP1A and DRP2B are similar . DRP1C and CLC Colocalize into Foci at Regions of Active Membrane Trafﬁcking Recent studies have begun to elucidate the endocytic molecular machinery in plants . The auxin efﬂux carrier , PIN1 , was shown to be constitutively endocytosed in a clathrin - dependent manner ( Dhonukshe et al . , 2007 ) , while the endocytic pathway for the hormone receptor BRI1 ( Russinova et al . , 2004 ) and plant de - fense receptor FLS2 ( Robatzek et al . , 2006 ) has not been identiﬁed . The central importance of clathrin - dependent trafﬁck - ing in plant cells was demonstrated by the expression of a dominant - negative CHC , which disrupted internalization of sev - eral cargos ( Dhonukshe et al . , 2007 ) . Here , we demonstrated that CLC - GFP was associated with the distal plasma membrane in expanding root hairs ( Figure 6G ) , and at the cell plate in dividing root cells ( Figures 6A to 6C ) , in agreement with previous mor - phological studies ( Emons and Traas , 1986 ; Fowke et al . , 1999 ; Otegui et al . , 2001 ; Segui - Simarro et al . , 2004 ; Segui - Simarro and Staehelin , 2006 ) . Components of the endocytic machinery in yeast and mam - malshavebeen showntocolocalize as punctatestructures at the plasma membrane ( Merriﬁeld et al . , 2002 , 2005 ; Kaksonen et al . , 2003 , 2005 ; Elde et al . , 2005 ; Le Clainche et al . , 2007 ) by total internal reﬂection ﬂuorescence microscopy . Using VAEM , which Dynamics of Arabidopsis DRP1C and CLC 1373 Figure 8 . DRP1C - GFP and CLC - mOrange Foci Colocalize at the Plasma Membrane . ( A ) Expanding root epidermal cells expressing CLC - mOrange and DRP1C - GFP imaged with VAEM . Three foci that had both mOrange and GFP ﬂuorescence are indicated ( yellow arrowheads ) . A larger internal structure that only had mOrange ﬂuorescence is indicated ( blue arrowhead ) . Bars ¼ 1 m m . ( B ) to ( E ) Intensity proﬁles of GFP ( green ) and mOrange ( red ) ﬂuorescence in overlapping foci . Corresponding mOrange ( top ) , GFP ( middle ) , and merged ( bottom ) images for which the intensities were measured are below each time point indicated in the graph . White circles in the ﬁrst frames indicate measured regions for ﬂuorescence intensity . 1374 The Plant Cell gives a comparable signal to noise ratio in plant cells as to - tal internal reﬂection ﬂuorescence microscopy ( Konopka and Bednarek , 2008a ) , we similarly observed that DRP1C - GFP and CLC - FFPs organized into discreet dynamic foci at thecell cortex . Both DRP1C - GFP and CLC - FFP dynamics in these foci were altered by compounds that affect cytoskeletal dynamics ( Figures 7A and 7B ) , membrane sterol content ( Figures 7C and 7D ) , and tyrA23 , further supporting the model that DRP1C and CLC are part of the same machinery . DRP1C - GFP also formed foci at the root hair tip ﬂanks , where clathrin - coated structures are abundant ( Emons and Traas , 1986 ) . Although the density of DRP1C - GFP foci at the root hair tip prevented kinetic imaging of individual foci , FRAP studies suggested that DRP1C - GFP was recruited to the ﬂanks of growing root hairs in the same manner as in expanding root epidermal cells . Arabidopsis DRP1C and CLC Display Distinct Dynamics from Dynamin 1 and Clathrin in Mammals DRP1C - GFP and CLC - GFP dynamics were suggestive of grad - ual accumulation of DRP1C and clathrin network formation at plasma membrane sites ( Figures 5B to 5D , 6I , and 6J ) . Unlike the recruitment of dynamin 1 , which is thought to require an established clathrin network ( Merriﬁeldet al . , 2002 , 2005 ; Conner and Schmid , 2003 ) , DRP1C - GFP and CLC - mOrange were re - cruited concurrently in more than half of the foci where the FFPs colocalize ( Figure 8B ) . Only 30 % of foci exhibited the step - wise recruitment ( Figure 8C ) previously described for dynamin 1 ( Merriﬁeld et al . , 2002 ) . The rapid disappearance of CLC - GFP foci most likely corre - sponds to vesicle release from the plasma membrane ( Merriﬁeld et al . , 2002 , 2005 ; Kaksonen et al . , 2005 ) . In mammalian cells , dynamin 1 foci disappear concomitantly with vesicle ﬁssion ( Merriﬁeld et al . , 2002 ) as a result of dynamin 1 release from the vesicle membrane . DRP1C - GFP disappearance could likewise be due to its release from the vesicle . Alternatively , DRP1C - GFP disappearance may represent movement of the oligomer away from the plasma membrane , possibly on the clathrin - coated structure . In support of the latter model , both CLC - GFP and DRP1C - GFP foci moved laterally out of the plane of focus upon disappearance from the cell cortex . Cytoplasmic streaming did not permit long - term imaging of the internalized structures and so theirsubsequent fateis unknown . DRP1C - GFP also displayed additional behaviors , including foci splitting and fusion , not reported for dynamin 1 ( Merriﬁeld et al . , 2002 ) , but which have been reported for CLC foci in mammalian cultured cells ( Yarar et al . , 2005 ) . Besides differences in the dynamics of CLC in plants and animals , the regulation of CME in plants also differs , especially regarding the role of the cytoskeleton . ARP2 / 3 - dependent actin polymerization is thought to provide the force needed to drive the clathrin - coated vesicle away from the plasma membrane in both yeast ( Kaksonen et al . , 2005 ; Sun et al . , 2006 ) and mammalian cells ( Merriﬁeld et al . , 2005 ; Yarar et al . , 2005 ) . However , directly coupled actin polymerization , if required , is most likely not ARP2 / 3 dependent in plants . Arabidopsis mutants in the ARP2 / 3 complex ( crk , dis1 arp3 , wrm arp2 , and dis2 ) or its nucleators ( dis3 scar2 , grl , pir , sra1 , itb1 , and brk1 ) do not display dramatic morphological defects ( Deeks and Hussey , 2003 ) , which would be expected if ARP2 / 3 - dependent actin polymerization were required for endocytosis . Interestingly , high concentrations of latB ( 50 m M ) were needed to completely disrupt DRP1C - GFP dynamics in epidermal cells . It is possible that vesicle ﬁssion and movement awayfromthe plasmamembrane does not needtobe directly coupled to actin polymerization via an activator of polymerization like cortactin but instead uses the force gener - ated by cytoplasmic streaming . Unlike in mammals and yeast cells , in which there is little evidence of microtubule involvement in CME , microtubules were required for efﬁcient DRP1C and CLC dynamics . This was surprising because neither DRP1C - GFP nor CLC - GFP foci or - ganized in ﬁlamentous - like arrays or moved in a linear fashion , similar to other microtubule - associated proteins ( Paredez et al . , 2006 ; Konopka and Bednarek , 2008a ) . However , clathrin - coated structures clustered around cortical microtubules have been observed in micrographs ( Fowke et al . , 1999 ) . It is plausible that cortical microtubules act as a trellis for stabilization of the endocytic protein network or as a diffusion barrier similar to the cortical actin network in mammalian cells ( Giner et al . , 2007 ) . The local environment , including protein , membranes , and physical forces is likely very different in an epidermal root cell than in mammalian cultured cells ; most striking is the presence of turgor pressure and the force of cytoplasmic streaming . There - fore , it should not be surprising that the proteins facilitating or regulating CME in plants are also different . In fact , two important interactors of mammalian dynamin , amphiphysin , which can remodel membranes , and cortactin , an activator of actin nucle - ation , are not evident in plants . This is consistent with our ﬁnding that CME in plants involves members of the DRP1 subfamily , which do not contain the same identiﬁable lipid or protein binding domains as mammalian dynamin . Together , these observations point to signiﬁcant differences in CME between plants and animals . DRP1A also forms foci that colocalize with CLC and DRP1C , albeit with lower frequency and different dynamics ( Konopka and Bednarek , 2008b ) . Other recent studies have shown that DRP2B also forms foci at the plasma membrane , although its dynamics have not been studied ( Fujimoto et al . , 2007 ) . This suggests the possibility that multiple CME pathways may exist in plants that use different dynamin isoforms , although further research is needed in this area . It may be that the need for multiple dynamin isoforms in plant CME is due to different cortical environments that a cell encounters as it differentiates or the wide variety of intracellular and extracellular stimuli in - volved in plant signaling . The morphological characterization of clathrin - coated struc - tures suggests a structural role for clathrin in plant endocytosis ( van der Valk and Fowke , 1981 ; Emons and Traas , 1986 ; Derksen et al . , 1995 ; Fowke etal . , 1999 ; Dhonuksheet al . , 2007 ) . If DRP1C functions similarly to dynamin 1 in CME in mammals , questions about the nature of the regulatory network arise . DPR1C lacks the PH and PR domains required for the recruitment and function of dynamin 1 during endocytosis . Also , direct homologs of many of the dynamin 1 – associated proteins ( cortactin and amphiphy - sin ) havenot beenidentiﬁedinthe Arabidopsis genome , although proteins with similar domains , such as ANTH , BAR , and SH3 , have been identiﬁed ( Holstein and Oliviusson , 2005 ; Koizumi Dynamics of Arabidopsis DRP1C and CLC 1375 et al . , 2005 ; Jaillais et al . , 2006 ) . If andhow these proteins interact with DRP1C or clathrin is unknown . Identiﬁcation and charac - terization of the putative CME core machinery and endocytic membrane cargo , together with CLC and DRP1C dynamics , will help further advancetheunderstanding ofCMEanditsregulation in plants . METHODS Construction and Transformation of Fluorescent - Tagged DRP1C and CLC The DPR1C - GFP plant expression vector was constructed as follows : A Sal I / Hpa I DRP1C genomic construct from pBK03K ( Kang et al . , 2003a ) , which included 1 . 8 kb of 5 9 untranslated ( UTR ) and promoter elements , and 3 9 UTR of DRP1C were subcloned into pPZP211 ( Hajdukiewicz et al . , 1994 ) containing mGFP5 and the nopaline synthase ( NOS ) terminator ( Kang et al . , 2003b ) using Sma I and Sal I sites ( pSB29 ) . The native 3 9 UTR was removed from pSB29 by restriction digestion using Kpn I and Sac I sites and a DRP1C coding DNA fragment ampliﬁed with primers 5 9 - AGAGAGTCGATATGATT GCTGCACGTAGA - 3 9 and 5 9 - CTAGAGCTC - CTTCCAAGCCACTGCATCGATGTC - 3 9 was inserted after digestion with Kpn I and Sac I ( pSB31 ) . The CLC - mOrange plant expression vector was constructed as fol - lows : The coding sequence for mOrange ( Shaner et al . , 2004 ) was PCR ampliﬁed from pRSET - B mOrange ( a gift from R . Tsien ) using primers 5 9 - TTGAGCTCATGGTGAGCAAGGGCGAGGAGAATAACATGG - 3 9 and 5 9 - TTGAGCTCTTACTTGTACAGCTCGTCCATGCCGCCGGTG - 3 9 , sub - cloned as a Sal I fragment into a pPZP221 - B vector ( Kang et al . , 2001 ) , re - sulting in pPZP221B - mO - NOS . A genomic fragment of At2g40060 ( CLC ) was PCR ampliﬁed from BAC T28M21 ( ABRC ) with primers 5 9 - CTGCAG - GAGTCGGAGATGATGATTATGATG - 3 9 ( CLC for ) and 5 9 - GAGCTCAG - CAGCAGTAACTGCCTCAGTGGGC - 3 9 ( CLCrev ) andsubclonedwith Pst I and Sac I into pPZP221B - mO - NOS . CLC - ECFPwasconstructedasfollows : ThecodingsequenceforECFP was PCR ampliﬁed from pECFP - C1 ( Clontech ) using primers 5 9 - GAGCT - CATGGTGAGCAAGGGCGAGGAG - 3 9 and 5 9 - GAGCTCTTAGTACAGCT - CGTCCATGCCGAGAGTGA - 3 9 , subcloned as a Sac I fragment into a modiﬁed pPZP221 - B vector ( Kang et al . , 2001 ) resulting in pPZP221B - ECFP - NOS . A genomic fragment of At2g40060 ( CLC ) was PCR ampliﬁed from BAC T28M21 ( ABRC ) with primers CLC for and CLC rev and subclonedasa Pst I - Sac IfragmentintopZP221B - ECFP - NOS , resultingin pPZP211B - CLC - ECFP . TheDNAsequenceofallconstructswasveriﬁed . Arabidopsis thaliana ecotype Wassilewskija wild - type or DRP1C / drp1C - 1 ( Kang et al . , 2003a ) plants were transformed with the constructs for CLC - FFP or DRP1C - GFP , respectively , using the Agrobacterium tumefaciens – mediated ﬂoral dip method ( Clough and Bent , 1998 ) . Trans - genic plants were selected either on solid medium ( 0 . 6 % phytagar ) , half - strength MS medium ( Caisson Labs ) containing 40 m g / mL kanamycin ( DRP1C - GFP ) or on soil , sprayed once with 20 m g / mL ammonium glusoﬁnate ( CLC - ECFP ; Liberty ) . Immunoblot Analysis To determine expression level of the transgenic DRP1C - GFP construct , total protein extracts were prepared from wild - type , wild - type trans - formed with DRP1C - GFP , DRP1C / drp1C - 1 , and drp1C - 1 / drp1C - 1 trans - formed with DRP1C - GFP seedlings grown vertically on half - strength MS þ 1 % phytagar . Seven - day - old seedlingswerehomogenizedinSDS - PAGE sample buffer ( Laemmli , 1970 ) , incubated at 65 8 C for 15 min , and insoluble debris was cleared by centrifugation at 16 , 000 g for 10 min at room temperature . The supernatant was separated on a 12 . 5 % ( w / v ) SDS - polyacrylamide gel and analyzed by immunoblotting as described ( Kang et al . , 2001 ) using anti - DRP1C ( Kang et al . , 2003a ) and biotin - conjugated anti - GFP antibodies ( Rockland Immunochemicals ) . HRP - conjugated anti - rabbit secondary antibodies ( GE Healthcare ) and HRP - conjugated streptavidin ( Rockland Immunochemicals ) were used to detect the primary antibodies , and anti - DRP1C and anti - GFP , respec - tively . Immunoﬂuorescence and Live - Cell Confocal Microscopy For indirect immunolocalization of DPR1C in plants expressing ss - b - ATPase - GFP ( Logan and Leaver , 2000 ) , 5 - d - old seedlings that were grown vertically on half - strength MS þ 0 . 6 % phytagar were ﬁxed in 4 % ( w / v ) formaldehyde ( Ted Pella ) in PME ( 55 mM PIPES - KOH , 2 . 5 mM MgSO 4 , and 1 mM EGTA , pH 6 . 9 ) for 1 h under vacuum . All subsequent incubations were conducted at room temperature in a humid chamber unless otherwise noted . Fixed seedlings were washed in PME , placed on Probe - On - Plus slides ( Fisher Scientiﬁc ) , dried on a slide warmer at 55 8 C , incubated in permeabilization buffer ( 0 . 1 % Nonidet P - 40 in PME ) for 10 min , and treated with 0 . 1 % ( w / v ) pectolyase and 0 . 5 % ( w / v ) macro - enzyme in PME for 20 min . The roots were then washed in 0 . 1 % Triton X - 100 in PME and then in PME . For immunolabeling , the roots were blocked with 3 % BSA ( w / v ) in PME for 1 h and probed with anti - DRP1C ( Kang et al . , 2003a ) in PME þ 3 % BSA overnight at 4 8 C . Roots were then washed in PME þ 3 % BSA and incubated with Cy3 - conjugated anti - rabbit antibodies ( Jackson ImmunoResearch ) in PME þ 3 % BSA for 1 h . Afterward , roots were washed with PME þ 3 % BSA , covered with Vectashield ( Vector Laboratories ) , topped with a cover slip , and sealed with ﬁngernail polish . To examine the association of DRP1C with mitochondria , 5 - d - old drp1C - 1 / drp1C - 1 seedlings transformed with DRP1C - GFP were incu - batedwith5 m MMitoTrackerOrangeCM - H 2 TMRos ( MolecularProbes ) in half - strength MS for 30 min at room temperature and rinsed for 2 min in half - strength MS before imaging . All CLSM images , except for those of the FRAP experiments , were captured using a Nikon TE2000 - U inverted confocal laser scanning microscope ﬁtted with a 3 60 / 1 . 4 numerical aperture ( NA ) PlanApo VC objective lens and EZ - C1 acquisition software ( Nikon ) . For colocalization studies in epidermal and cortical cells , DRP1C - GFP and b - ATPase - ss - GFP were excited at 488 nm ( Melles Griot ) while MitoTracker Orange and Cy3 ( anti - DRP1C ) were excited at 543 nm ( Melles Griot ) . CLC - FPs were detected using 488 - nm light ( GFP ) , 543 - nm light ( mOrange ) , or 408 - nm light ( ECFP ; Melles Griot ) . All dual - color imagingwas performed using sequential scans to prevent bleed through ﬂuorescence . For imaging of trichomes expressing DRP1C - GFP , seedlings with one to two pairs of true leaves were selected and the roots were removed . Seedlings were inverted onto a cover slip within water and covered by a glass slide . Pollen was allowed to germinate in vitro as described previously ( Kang et al . , 2003a ) on a glass slide for 0 to 12 h , covered with a cover slip , and imaged with CLSM as described above , except a 3 100 / 1 . 4 NA PlanApo lens was used . For time - lapse imaging of growing root hairs , seedlings were grown on half - strength MS þ 0 . 5 % phytagar coated cover slips as described ( Konopka and Bednarek , 2008a ) and imaged by CLSM with either the 3 60 or 3 100 objective lens . One hundred and ﬁfty microliters of half - strength MS þ 1 % ( w / v ) sucrose was pipetted on top of the agar and covered with paraﬁlm to prevent desiccation during imaging . FRAP experiments were performed on a Zeiss 510 Meta confocal microscope ( Carl Zeiss ) equipped with a 3 63x / 1 . 4 NA PlanApo Chromat objective . Circular or rectangular areas were photobleached using 30 iterations of the 488 - nm line from a 200 - mW argon laser operating at 100 % laserpower . Fluorescencerecoverywasmonitoredat1 - sintervals . 1376 The Plant Cell VAEM Cortical - associated DRP1C - GFP and CLC - FFP dynamics were imaged using variable angle ﬂuorescence microscopy as described ( Konopka and Bednarek , 2008a ) . Brieﬂy , seedlings were transferred from vertically growing plates to a glass slide with 150 m L of half - strength MS and covered with a cover slip . Plants were imaged with a Nikon Eclipse TE2000 - U ﬁtted with the Nikon T - FL - TIRF attachment and a Nikon 3 100 / NA 1 . 45 CFI Plan Apo TIRF objective . For double ﬂuorophore imaging , GFP and mOrange were excited with a 488 - and 543 - nm laser , respec - tively , and the ﬂuorescence emission spectra were separated with a 540LPdichroicmirrorandﬁlteredthrougheithera515 / 30 ( GFP ) or585 / 65 ( mOrange ) ﬁlter in a Dual View ﬁlter system ( Photometrics ) . Image Analysis Fortrichomesandroothairs , z - serieswererecombinedusingtheaverage projection command on Image J 1 . 36b ( National Institutes of Health ; http : / / rsb . info . nih . gov / ij / ) . Root hair length was calculated from XYZ coordinates of the tip and base of the root hair . For growing root hairs , time series images were captured every 8 to 10 s and compiled using Image J . Growth rate was determined using MetaMorph’s ( Molecular Devices ) track points application . An intensity threshold value was assigned to each root hair so that the maximum number of pixels in the plasma membrane was included , and the number of pixels in the cytoplasm was limited . Threshold area was calculated using the region measurementsapplicationinMetamorph ( MolecularDevices ) . Analysisof FRAP , DRP1C - GFP , CLC - GFP , and CLC - mOrange foci dynamics was performed using Image J . Fluorescence recovery in the FRAP experiments was corrected for photobleaching as follows . The percentage of inherent photobleaching ( PIP ) for each frame during recovery was determined by measuring the change in ﬂuorescence intensity of a region that was not initially photo - bleached . This ﬂuorescence intensity in the initial bleached regions was multiplied by ( 1 þ PIP ) for each frame . A focus was identiﬁed by a local increase in intensity above a desig - nated threshold assigned to each time - lapse image for > 2 s . Foci dynamics were analyzed for plants that were grown on half - strength MS solidmediumandimaged inhalf - strength MSliquidmedium . Lifetime was calculated from the ﬁrst frame the focus appeared to the frame that it disappeared from the imaging planes . The intensity proﬁles in Figures 5 , 6 , and 8 were generated using Image J’s Region of Interest ( ROI ) Multi MeasurePlugin . CircularROIsincludedallpixelsofthefocus , andamean intensity for the ROI was recorded . To determine if colocalization was random , thegreenchannelofdual - color images wasrotated 180 8 relative to the red image using Adobe Photoshop CS2 ( Adobe Systems ) . The distance from each focus in the green channel to the nearest focus in the red channel was measured using MetaMorph . All images for ﬁgures were processed in Adobe Photoshop CS2 . Inhibitor Studies tyrA23 , tyrphostin A51 , cytochalasin D , wortmannin , brefeldin A , and latB were purchased from EMD Biosciences ; oryzalin was purchased from Restek ; lanthanum chloride and BDM were purchased from Sigma - Aldrich . StocksolutionsoflanthanumchlorideandBDMwerepreparedin deionized water . All other inhibitors were dissolved initially in 100 % DMSO for a stock solution . Inhibitors were diluted in half - strength MS ( for VAEM imaging ofexpanding root epidermal cells andconfocalimaging of the root tip ) or half - strength MS þ 1 % sucrose ( for confocal imaging of root hairs ) . The ﬁnal DMSO concentration was 0 . 1 % ( v / v ) or less in all working solutions . For VAEM analysis , inhibitor treatment was for 20 min unless otherwise stated . Foci lifetime analysis for inhibitors was com - pared with a mock treatment in 0 . 1 % DMSO , except for fenpropimorph . For treatment of growing root hairs , inhibitors were pipetted on top of agar and allowed to diffuse into the agar to reach the root hairs . Time series imaging was initiated prior to the addition of the inhibitor to conﬁrm thegrowthstatusoftheroothair . Fortreatmentofroottipswithinhibitors , 5 - to 7 - d - old vertically grown seedlings were transferred from 1 % agar plates to 3 mL of ﬁnal working concentration in half - strength MS in a 12 - well culture plate . After the indicated time , seedlings were transferred to a glass slide with 150 m L of inhibitor solution , covered with a glass cover slip , the excess liquid was wicked away , and they were imaged as described above . For tyrA23 washout experiments , seedlings were incubated with 50 m M tyrA23 in half - strength MS for 20 min , transferred to media without the drug for 5 min , and subsequently imaged in half - strength MS . Accession Numbers Sequence data from this article can be found in the Arabidopsis Genome Initiative database under accession numbers At2g40060 ( CLC ) and At1g14830 ( DRP1C ) . Supplemental Data The following materials are available in the online version of this article . Supplemental Figure 1 . DRP1C Localizes to the Plasma Membrane in Hypocotyls and Does Not Associate with Mitochondria . Supplemental Figure 2 . DRP1C - GFP Retains Its Tip Localization in Several Root Hair Expansion Mutants . Supplemental Figure 3 . DRP1C - GFP Forms Cortical Foci in Various Epidermal Cells . Supplemental Figure 4 . tyrA23 , but Not tyrA51 , Reversibly Inhibits DRP1C Dynamics in Vivo but Not DRP1 GTPase Activity in Vitro . Supplemental Video 1 . Time - Lapse Images of a Growing Pollen Tube Expressing DRP1C - GFP . Supplemental Video 2 . Time - Lapse Images of Growing Root Hair Expressing DRP1C - GFP . Supplemental Video 3 . Time - Lapse Images of Expanding Root Epidermal Cell Expressing DRP1C - GFP Imaged with VAEM . Supplemental Video 4 . Time - Lapse Images of Seedling Root Tip Expressing DRP1C - GFP Treated with 50 m M tyrA23 . Supplemental Video 5 . Growing Root Hair from Root Expressing CLC - GFP . Supplemental Video 6 . Time - Lapse Images of Expanding Root Epidermal Cell Expressing CLC - GFP Imaged with VAEM . Supplemental Video 7 . Time - lapse VAEM Images of Expanding Root Epidermal Cell Expressing DRP1C - GFP ( Middle Panel ) and CLC - mOrange ( Left Panel ) , and Merged ( Right Panel ) . ACKNOWLEDGMENTS We thank T . Martin and members of his lab for extensive use of their epiﬂuorescence - TIRF microscope . We thank R . Tsien for his generous gift of the mOrange ﬂuorescent protein construct . The University of Wisconsin - Madison Plant Imaging Facility was partially supported by funding from the National Science Foundation Grant DBI - 0421266 . We thank members of our lab , especially D . Rancour , S . Park , and C . McMichael , for critical reading of the manuscript and helpful discus - sions . This research was supported by funding to S . Y . B . from the USDA National Research Initiative Competitive Grants Program ( Project Dynamics of Arabidopsis DRP1C and CLC 1377 2004 - 03411 ) . C . A . K . was supported by a Howard Hughes Medical Institute Predoctoral Fellowship . C . A . K . and S . K . B . were supported by National Institutes of Health , National Research Service Award T32 GM07215 from the National Institute of General Medical Sciences . Received March 12 , 2008 ; revised April 20 , 2008 ; accepted May 6 , 2008 ; published May 23 , 2008 . REFERENCES Backues , S . K . , Konopka , C . A . , McMichael , C . M . , and Bednarek , S . Y . ( 2007 ) . Bridging the divide between cytokinesis and cell expansion . Curr . Opin . Plant Biol . 10 : 607 – 615 . Banbury , D . N . , Oakley , J . D . , Sessions , R . B . , and Banting , G . ( 2003 ) . Tyrphostin A23 inhibits internalization of the transferrin receptor by perturbing the interaction between tyrosine motifs and the medium chain subunit of the AP - 2 adaptor complex . J . Biol . Chem . 278 : 12022 – 12028 . Barth , M . , and Holstein , S . E . ( 2004 ) . Identiﬁcation and functional characterization of Arabidopsis AP180 , a binding partner of plant alphaC - adaptin . J . Cell Sci . 117 : 2051 – 2062 . Batoko , H . , Zheng , H . Q . , Hawes , C . , and Moore , I . ( 2000 ) . A rab1 GTPase is required for transport between the endoplasmic reticulum and Golgi apparatus and for normal Golgi movement in plants . Plant Cell 12 : 2201 – 2218 . Carol , R . J . , and Dolan , L . ( 2002 ) . Building a hair : Tip growth in Arabidopsis thaliana root hairs . Philos . Trans . R . Soc . Lond . B Biol . Sci . 357 : 815 – 821 . Chen , H . , Fre , S . , Slepnev , V . I . , Capua , M . R . , Takei , K . , Butler , M . H . , Di Fiore , P . P . , and De Camilli , P . ( 1998 ) . Epsin is an EH - domain - binding protein implicated in clathrin - mediated endocytosis . Nature 394 : 793 – 797 . Clough , S . J . , and Bent , A . F . ( 1998 ) . Floral dip : Aa simpliﬁed method for Agrobacterium - mediated transformation of Arabidopsis thaliana . Plant J . 16 : 735 – 743 . Collings , D . A . , Gebbie , L . K . , Howles , P . A . , Hurley , U . A . , Birch , R . J . , Cork , A . H . , Hocart , C . H . , Arioli , T . , and Williamson , R . E . ( 2008 ) . Arabidopsis dynamin - like protein DRP1A : A null mutant with wide - spread defects in endocytosis , cellulose synthesis , cytokinesis , and cell expansion . J . Exp . Bot . 59 : 361 – 376 . Conner , S . D . , and Schmid , S . L . ( 2003 ) . Regulated portals of entry into the cell . Nature 422 : 37 – 44 . Crump , C . M . , Williams , J . L . , Stephens , D . J . , and Banting , G . ( 1998 ) . Inhibition of the interaction between tyrosine - based motifs and the medium chain subunit of the AP - 2 adaptor complex by speciﬁc tyrphostins . J . Biol . Chem . 273 : 28073 – 28077 . Damke , H . , Baba , T . , Warnock , D . E . , and Schmid , S . L . ( 1994 ) . Induction of mutant dynamin speciﬁcally blocks endocytic coated vesicle formation . J . Cell Biol . 127 : 915 – 934 . Dedek , K . , Schultz , K . , Pieper , M . , Dirks , P . , Maxeiner , S . , Willecke , K . , Weiler , R . , and Janssen - Bienhold , U . ( 2006 ) . Localization of het - erotypic gap junctions composed of connexin45 and connexin36 in the rod pathway of the mouse retina . Eur . J . Neurosci . 24 : 1675 – 1686 . Deeks , M . J . , and Hussey , P . J . ( 2003 ) . Arp2 / 3 and ‘the shape of things to come’ . Curr . Opin . Plant Biol . 6 : 561 – 567 . Delcroix , J . D . , Valletta , J . S . , Wu , C . , Hunt , S . J . , Kowal , A . S . , and Mobley , W . C . ( 2003 ) . NGF signaling in sensory neurons evidence that early endosomes carry NGF retrograde signals . Neuron 39 : 69 – 84 . Derksen , J . , Rutten , T . , Lichtscheidl , I . K . , de Win , A . H . N . , Pierson , E . S . , and Rongen , G . ( 1995 ) . Quantitative analysis of the distribution of organelles in tobacco pollen tubes : Implications for exocytosis and endocytosis . Protoplasma 188 : 267 – 276 . Dhonukshe , P . , Aniento , F . , Hwang , I . , Robinson , D . G . , Mravec , J . , Stierhof , Y . D . , and Friml , J . ( 2007 ) . Clathrin - mediated constitutive endocytosis of PIN auxin efﬂux carriers in Arabidopsis . Curr . Biol . 17 : 520 – 527 . Duncan , M . C . , Costaguta , G . , and Payne , G . S . ( 2003 ) . Yeast epsin - related proteins required for Golgi - endosome trafﬁc deﬁne a gamma - adaptin ear - binding motif . Nat . Cell Biol . 5 : 77 – 81 . Ehrhardt , D . W . , and Shaw , S . L . ( 2006 ) . Microtubule dynamics and organization in the plant cortical array . Annu . Rev . Plant Biol . 57 : 859 – 875 . Elde , N . C . , Morgan , G . , Winey , M . , Sperling , L . , and Turkewitz , A . P . ( 2005 ) . Elucidation of clathrin - mediated endocytosis in tetrahymena reveals an evolutionarily convergent recruitment of dynamin . PLoS Genet . 1 : e52 . Emons , A . M . C . , and Traas , J . A . ( 1986 ) . Coated pits and coated vesicles on the plasma membrane of plant cells . Eur . J . Cell Biol . 41 : 57 – 64 . Engqvist - Goldstein , A . E . , and Drubin , D . G . ( 2003 ) . Actin assembly and endocytosis : From yeast to mammals . Annu . Rev . Cell Dev . Biol . 19 : 287 – 332 . Fowke , L . , Dibbayawan , T . , Schwartz , O . , Harper , J . , and Overall , R . ( 1999 ) . Combined immunoﬂuorescence and ﬁeld emission scanning electron microscope study of plasma membrane - associated organ - elles in highly vacuolated suspensor cells of white spruce somatic embryos . Cell Biol . Int . 23 : 389 – 397 . Fujimoto , M . , Arimura , S . , Nakazono , M . , and Tsutsumi , N . ( 2007 ) . Imaging of plant dynamin - related proteins and clathrin around the plasma membrane by variable incidence angle ﬂuorescence micros - copy . Plant Biotechnol . 24 : 449 – 455 . Gao , H . , Kadirjan - Kalbach , D . , Froehlich , J . E . , and Osteryoung , K . W . ( 2003 ) . ARC5 , a cytosolic dynamin - like protein from plants , is part of the chloroplast division machinery . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA 100 : 4328 – 4333 . Gao , H . , Sage , T . L . , and Osteryoung , K . W . ( 2006 ) . FZL , an FZO - like protein in plants , is a determinant of thylakoid and chloroplast morphology . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA 103 : 6759 – 6764 . Geldner , N . , Anders , N . , Wolters , H . , Keicher , J . , Kornberger , W . , Muller , P . , Delbarre , A . , Ueda , T . , Nakano , A . , and Ju¨rgens , G . ( 2003 ) . The Arabidopsis GNOM ARF - GEF mediates endosomal recy - cling , auxin transport , and auxin - dependent plant growth . Cell 112 : 219 – 230 . Giner , D . , Lopez , I . , Villanueva , J . , Torres , V . , Viniegra , S . , and Gutierrez , L . M . ( 2007 ) . Vesicle movements are governed by the size and dynamics of F - actin cytoskeletal structures in bovine chromafﬁn cells . Neuroscience 146 : 659 – 669 . Granger , C . L . , and Cyr , R . J . ( 2001 ) . Spatiotemporal relationships between growth and microtubule orientation as revealed in living root cells of Arabidopsis thaliana transformed with green - ﬂuorescent - protein gene construct GFP - MBD . Protoplasma 216 : 201 – 214 . Hajdukiewicz , P . , Svab , Z . , and Maliga , P . ( 1994 ) . The small , versatile pPZP family of Agrobacterium binary vectors for plant transformation . Plant Mol . Biol . 25 : 989 – 994 . He , J . X . , Fujioka , S . , Li , T . C . , Kang , S . G . , Seto , H . , Takatsuto , S . , Yoshida , S . , and Jang , J . C . ( 2003 ) . Sterols regulate development and gene expression in Arabidopsis . Plant Physiol . 131 : 1258 – 1269 . Henley , J . R . , Krueger , E . W . , Oswald , B . J . , and McNiven , M . A . ( 1998 ) . Dynamin - mediated internalization of caveolae . J . Cell Biol . 141 : 85 – 99 . Holstein , S . E . , and Oliviusson , P . ( 2005 ) . Sequence analysis of Arabidopsis thaliana E / ANTH - domain - containing proteins : Membrane 1378 The Plant Cell tethers of the clathrin - dependent vesicle budding machinery . Proto - plasma 226 : 13 – 21 . Hong , Z . , Bednarek , S . Y . , Blumwald , E . , Hwang , I . , Jurgens , G . , Menzel , D . , Osteryoung , K . W . , Raikhel , N . V . , Shinozaki , K . , Tsutsumi , N . , and Verma , D . P . ( 2003b ) . A uniﬁed nomenclature for Arabidopsis dynamin - related large GTPases based on homology and possible functions . Plant Mol . Biol . 53 : 261 – 265 . Hong , Z . , Geisler - Lee , C . J . , Zhang , Z . , and Verma , D . P . ( 2003a ) . Phragmoplastin dynamics : multiple forms , microtubule association and their roles in cell plate formation in plants . Plant Mol . Biol . 53 : 297 – 312 . Jaillais , Y . , Fobis - Loisy , I . , Miege , C . , Rollin , C . , and Gaude , T . ( 2006 ) . AtSNX1 deﬁnes an endosome for auxin - carrier trafﬁcking in Arabi - dopsis . Nature 443 : 106 – 109 . Jin , J . B . , Bae , H . , Kim , S . J . , Jin , Y . H . , Goh , C . H . , Kim , D . H . , Lee , Y . J . , Tse , Y . C . , Jiang , L . , and Hwang , I . ( 2003 ) . The Arabidopsis dynamin - like proteins ADL1C and ADL1E play a critical role in mitochondrial morphogenesis . Plant Cell 15 : 2357 – 2369 . Jin , J . B . , Kim , Y . A . , Kim , S . J . , Lee , S . H . , Kim , D . H . , Cheong , G . W . , and Hwang , I . ( 2001 ) . A new dynamin - like protein , ADL6 , is involved in trafﬁcking from the trans - Golgi network to the central vacuole in Arabidopsis . Plant Cell 13 : 1511 – 1526 . Jones , S . M . , Howell , K . E . , Henley , J . R . , Cao , H . , and McNiven , M . A . ( 1998 ) . Role of dynamin in the formation of transport vesicles from the trans - Golgi network . Science 279 : 573 – 577 . Kaksonen , M . , Sun , Y . , and Drubin , D . G . ( 2003 ) . A pathway for association of receptors , adaptors , and actin during endocytic inter - nalization . Cell 115 : 475 – 487 . Kaksonen , M . , Toret , C . P . , and Drubin , D . G . ( 2005 ) . A modular design for the clathrin - and actin - mediated endocytosis machinery . Cell 123 : 305 – 320 . Kandasamy , M . K . , and Meagher , R . B . ( 1999 ) . Actin - organelle interac - tion : Association with chloroplast in Arabidopsis leaf mesophyll cells . Cell Motil . Cytoskeleton 44 : 110 – 118 . Kang , B . H . , Busse , J . S . , and Bednarek , S . Y . ( 2003b ) . Members of the Arabidopsis dynamin - like gene family , ADL1 , are essential for plant cytokinesis and polarized cell growth . Plant Cell 15 : 899 – 913 . Kang , B . H . , Busse , J . S . , Dickey , C . , Rancour , D . M . , and Bednarek , S . Y . ( 2001 ) . The Arabidopsis cell plate - associated dynamin - like pro - tein , ADL1Ap , is required for multiple stages of plant growth and development . Plant Physiol . 126 : 47 – 68 . Kang , B . H . , Rancour , D . M . , and Bednarek , S . Y . ( 2003a ) . The dynamin - like protein ADL1C is essential for plasma membrane maintenance during pollen maturation . Plant J . 35 : 1 – 15 . Ketelaar , T . , de Ruijter , N . C . , and Emons , A . M . ( 2003 ) . Unstable F - actin speciﬁes the area and microtubule direction of cell expansion in Arabidopsis root hairs . Plant Cell 15 : 285 – 292 . Koch , A . , Thiemann , M . , Grabenbauer , M . , Yoon , Y . , McNiven , M . A . , and Schrader , M . ( 2003 ) . Dynamin - like protein 1 is involved in peroxisomal ﬁssion . J . Biol . Chem . 278 : 8597 – 8605 . Koizumi , K . , Naramoto , S . , Sawa , S . , Yahara , N . , Ueda , T . , Nakano , A . , Sugiyama , M . , and Fukuda , H . ( 2005 ) . VAN3 ARF - GAP - mediated vesicle transport is involved in leaf vascular network formation . Development 132 : 1699 – 1711 . Konopka , C . A . , and Bednarek , S . Y . ( 2008a ) . Variable - angle epiﬂuo - rescence microscopy : A new way to look at protein dynamics in the plant cell cortex . Plant J . 53 : 186 – 196 . Konopka , C . A . , and Bednarek , S . Y . ( 2008b ) . Comparison of the dynamics and functional redundancy of the Arabidopsis dynamin - related isoforms , DRP1A and DRP1C , during plant development . Plant Physiol . , in press . Konopka , C . A . , Schleede , J . B . , Skop , A . R . , and Bednarek , S . Y . ( 2006 ) . Dynamin and cytokinesis . Trafﬁc 7 : 239 – 247 . Laemmli , U . K . ( 1970 ) . Cleavage of structural proteins during the as - sembly of the head of bacteriophage T4 . Nature 227 : 680 – 685 . Lamaze , C . , Fujimoto , L . M . , Yin , H . L . , and Schmid , S . L . ( 1997 ) . The actin cytoskeleton is required for receptor - mediated endocytosis in mammalian cells . J . Biol . Chem . 272 : 20332 – 20335 . Le Clainche , C . , Pauly , B . S . , Zhang , C . X . , Engqvist - Goldstein , A . E . , Cunningham , K . , and Drubin , D . G . ( 2007 ) . A Hip1R - cortactin com - plex negatively regulates actin assembly associated with endocytosis . EMBO J . 26 : 1199 – 1210 . Logan , D . C . , and Leaver , C . J . ( 2000 ) . Mitochondria - targeted GFP highlights the heterogeneity of mitochondrial shape , size and move - ment within living plant cells . J . Exp . Bot . 51 : 865 – 871 . McNiven , M . A . , Kim , L . , Krueger , E . W . , Orth , J . D . , Cao , H . , and Wong , T . W . ( 2000 ) . Regulated interactions between dynamin and the actin - binding protein cortactin modulate cell shape . J . Cell Biol . 151 : 187 – 198 . Merriﬁeld , C . J . , Feldman , M . E . , Wan , L . , and Almers , W . ( 2002 ) . Imaging actin and dynamin recruitment during invagination of single clathrin - coated pits . Nat . Cell Biol . 4 : 691 – 698 . Merriﬁeld , C . J . , Perrais , D . , and Zenisek , D . ( 2005 ) . Coupling between clathrin - coated - pit invagination , cortactin recruitment , and membrane scission observed in live cells . Cell 121 : 593 – 606 . Monshausen , G . B . , Bibikova , T . N . , Messerli , M . A . , Shi , C . , and Gilroy , S . ( 2007 ) . Oscillations in extracellular pH and reactive oxygen species modulate tip growth of Arabidopsis root hairs . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA 104 : 20996 – 21001 . Mozdy , A . D . , McCaffery , J . M . , and Shaw , J . M . ( 2000 ) . Dnm1p GTPase - mediated mitochondrial ﬁssion is a multi - step process re - quiring the novel integral membrane component Fis1p . J . Cell Biol . 151 : 367 – 380 . Murishige , T . , and Skoog , F . ( 1962 ) . A revised medium for rapid growth and bioassays with tobacco tissue cultures . Physiol . Plant . 15 : 473 – 497 . Nicoziani , P . , Vilhardt , F . , Llorente , A . , Hilout , L . , Courtoy , P . J . , Sandvig , K . , and van Deurs , B . ( 2000 ) . Role for dynamin in late endosome dynamics and trafﬁcking of the cation - independent man - nose 6 - phosphate receptor . Mol . Biol . Cell 11 : 481 – 495 . Otegui , M . S . , Mastronarde , D . N . , Kang , B . H . , Bednarek , S . Y . , and Staehelin , L . A . ( 2001 ) . Three - dimensional analysis of syncytial - type cell plates during endosperm cellularization visualized by high reso - lution electron tomography . Plant Cell 13 : 2033 – 2051 . Paredez , A . R . , Somerville , C . R . , and Ehrhardt , D . W . ( 2006 ) . Visuali - zation of cellulose synthase demonstrates functional association with microtubules . Science 312 : 1491 – 1495 . Paves , H . , and Truve , E . ( 2007 ) . Myosin inhibitors block accumulation movement of chloroplasts in Arabidopsis thaliana leaf cells . Proto - plasma 230 : 165 – 169 . Praefcke , G . J . , and McMahon , H . T . ( 2004 ) . The dynamin superfamily : Universal membrane tubulation and ﬁssion molecules ? Nat . Rev . Mol . Cell Biol . 5 : 133 – 147 . Robatzek , S . , Chinchilla , D . , and Boller , T . ( 2006 ) . Ligand - induced endocytosis of the pattern recognition receptor FLS2 in Arabidopsis . Genes Dev . 20 : 537 – 542 . Robinson , D . G . ( 1996 ) . Clathrin - mediated trafﬁcking . Trends Plant Sci . 1 : 349 – 355 . Rodal , S . K . , Skretting , G . , Garred , O . , Vilhardt , F . , van Deurs , B . , and Sandvig , K . ( 1999 ) . Extraction of cholesterol with methyl - beta - cyclodextrin perturbs formation of clathrin - coated endocytic vesicles . Mol . Biol . Cell 10 : 961 – 974 . Roux , A . , Uyhazi , K . , Frost , A . , and De Camilli , P . ( 2006 ) . GTP - dependent twisting of dynamin implicates constriction and tension in membrane ﬁssion . Nature 441 : 528 – 531 . Russinova , E . , Borst , J . W . , Kwaaitaal , M . , Cano - Delgado , A . , Yin , Y . , Dynamics of Arabidopsis DRP1C and CLC 1379 Chory , J . , and de Vries , S . C . ( 2004 ) . Heterodimerization and endo - cytosis of Arabidopsis brassinosteroid receptors BRI1 and AtSERK3 ( BAK1 ) . Plant Cell 16 : 3216 – 3229 . Sˇamaj , J . , Mu¨ller , J . , Beck , M . , Bo¨hm , N . , and Menzel , D . ( 2006 ) . Vesicular trafﬁcking , cytoskeleton and signalling in root hairs and pollen tubes . Trends Plant Sci . 11 : 594 – 600 . Schafer , D . A . , Weed , S . A . , Binns , D . , Karginov , A . V . , Parsons , J . T . , and Cooper , J . A . ( 2002 ) . Dynamin2 and cortactin regulate actin assembly and ﬁlament organization . Curr . Biol . 12 : 1852 – 1857 . Schrick , K . , Fujioka , S . , Takatsuto , S . , Stierhof , Y . D . , Stransky , H . , Yoshida , S . , and Jurgens , G . ( 2004 ) . A link between sterol biosyn - thesis , the cell wall , and cellulose in Arabidopsis . Plant J . 38 : 227 – 243 . Segui - Simarro , J . M . , Austin II , J . R . , White , E . A . , and Staehelin , L . A . ( 2004 ) . Electron tomographic analysis of somatic cell plate formation in meristematic cells of Arabidopsis preserved by high - pressure freezing . Plant Cell 16 : 836 – 856 . Segui - Simarro , J . M . , and Staehelin , L . A . ( 2006 ) . Cell cycle - dependent changes in Golgi stacks , vacuoles , clathrin - coated vesicles and multivesicular bodies in meristematic cells of Arabidopsis thaliana : A quantitative and spatial analysis . Planta 223 : 223 – 236 . Sheahan , M . B . , Staiger , C . J . , Rose , R . J . , and McCurdy , D . W . ( 2004 ) . A green ﬂuorescent protein fusion to actin - binding domain 2 of Arabidopsis ﬁmbrin highlights new features of a dynamic actin cyto - skeleton in live plant cells . Plant Physiol . 136 : 3968 – 3978 . Shaner , N . C . , Campbell , R . E . , Steinbach , P . A . , Giepmans , B . N . , Palmer , A . E . , and Tsien , R . Y . ( 2004 ) . Improved monomeric red , orange and yellow ﬂuorescent proteins derived from Discosma sp . red ﬂuorescent protein . Nat . Biotechnol . 22 : 1567 – 1572 . Shaw , S . L . , Dumais , J . , and Long , S . R . ( 2000 ) . Cell surface expansion in polarly growing root hairs of Medicago truncatula . Plant Physiol . 124 : 959 – 970 . Song , J . , Lee , M . H . , Lee , G . J . , Yoo , C . M . , and Hwang , I . ( 2006 ) . Arabidopsis EPSIN1 plays an important role in vacuolar trafﬁcking of soluble cargo proteins in plant cells via interactions with clathrin , AP - 1 , VTI11 , and VSR1 . Plant Cell 18 : 2258 – 2274 . Sun , Y . , Carroll , S . , Kaksonen , M . , Toshima , J . Y . , and Drubin , D . G . ( 2007 ) . PtdIns ( 4 , 5 ) P2 turnover is required for multiple stages during clathrin - and actin - dependent endocytic internalization . J . Cell Biol . 177 : 355 – 367 . Sun , Y . , Martin , A . C . , and Drubin , D . G . ( 2006 ) . Endocytic internaliza - tion in budding yeast requires coordinated actin nucleation and myosin motor activity . Dev . Cell 11 : 33 – 46 . Sutter , J . U . , Sieben , C . , Hartel , A . , Eisenach , C . , Thiel , G . , and Blatt , M . R . ( 2007 ) . Abscisic acid triggers the endocytosis of the Arabidopsis KAT1 K þ channel and its recycling to the plasma membrane . Curr . Biol . 17 : 1396 – 1402 . Tahara , H . , Yokota , E . , Igarashi , H . , Orii , H . , Yao , M . , Sonobe , S . , Hashimoto , T . , Hussey , P . J . , and Shimmen , T . ( 2007 ) . Clathrin is involved in organization of mitotic spindle and phragmoplast as well as in endocytosis in tobacco cell cultures . Protoplasma 230 : 1 – 11 . Toshima , J . Y . , Toshima , J . , Kaksonen , M . , Martin , A . C . , King , D . S . , and Drubin , D . G . ( 2006 ) . Spatial dynamics of receptor - mediated endocytic trafﬁcking in budding yeast revealed by using ﬂuorescent alpha - factor derivatives . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA 103 : 5793 – 5798 . Vallis , Y . , Wigge , P . , Marks , B . , Evans , P . R . , and McMahon , H . T . ( 1999 ) . Importance of the pleckstrin homology domain of dynamin in clathrin - mediated endocytosis . Curr . Biol . 9 : 257 – 260 . van der Valk , P . , and Fowke , L . C . ( 1981 ) . Ultrastructural aspects of coated vesicles in tobacco protoplasts . Can . J . Bot . 59 : 1307 – 1313 . Wong , E . D . , Wagner , J . A . , Gorsich , S . W . , McCaffery , J . M . , Shaw , J . M . , and Nunnari , J . ( 2000 ) . The dynamin - related GTPase , Mgm1p , is an intermembrane space protein required for maintenance of fusion competent mitochondria . J . Cell Biol . 151 : 341 – 352 . Yarar , D . , Waterman - Storer , C . M . , and Schmid , S . L . ( 2005 ) . A dy - namic actin cytoskeleton functions at multiple stages of clathrin - mediated endocytosis . Mol . Biol . Cell 16 : 964 – 975 . Yu , X . , and Cai , M . ( 2004 ) . The yeast dynamin - related GTPase Vps1p functions in the organization of the actin cytoskeleton via interaction with Sla1p . J . Cell Sci . 117 : 3839 – 3853 . 1380 The Plant Cell This information is current as of May 18 , 2010 DOI : 10 . 1105 / tpc . 108 . 059428 2008 ; 20 ; 1363 - 1380 ; originally published online May 23 , 2008 ; PLANT CELL Catherine A . Konopka , Steven K . Backues and Sebastian Y . Bednarek Membrane Dynamin - Related Protein 1C and a Clathrin Light Chain at the Plasma Arabidopsis Dynamics of Supplemental Data http : / / www . plantcell . org / cgi / content / full / tpc . 108 . 059428 / DC1 References http : / / www . plantcell . org / cgi / content / full / 20 / 5 / 1363 # BIBL This article cites 88 articles , 39 of which you can access for free at : Permissions https : / / www . copyright . com / ccc / openurl . do ? sid = pd _ hw1532298X & issn = 1532298X & WT . mc _ id = pd _ hw1532298X eTOCs http : / / www . plantcell . org / subscriptions / etoc . shtml at : THE PLANT CELL Sign up for eTOCs for CiteTrack Alerts http : / / www . plantcell . org / cgi / alerts / ctmain at : Plant Cell Sign up for CiteTrack Alerts for Subscription Information http : / / www . aspb . org / publications / subscriptions . cfm is available at : Plant Physiology and The Plant Cell Subscription information for ADVANCING THE SCIENCE OF PLANT BIOLOGY © American Society of Plant Biologists