Accepted Manuscript Clathrin coated pits , plaques and adhesion Marko Lampe , Stéphane Vassilopoulos , Christien Merrifield PII : S1047 - 8477 ( 16 ) 30150 - 2 DOI : http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . jsb . 2016 . 07 . 009 Reference : YJSBI 6956 To appear in : Journal of Structural Biology Received Date : 27 April 2016 Revised Date : 11 July 2016 Accepted Date : 13 July 2016 Please cite this article as : Lampe , M . , Vassilopoulos , S . , Merrifield , C . , Clathrin coated pits , plaques and adhesion , Journal of Structural Biology ( 2016 ) , doi : http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . jsb . 2016 . 07 . 009 This is a PDF file of an unedited manuscript that has been accepted for publication . As a service to our customers we are providing this early version of the manuscript . The manuscript will undergo copyediting , typesetting , and review of the resulting proof before it is published in its final form . Please note that during the production process errors may be discovered which could affect the content , and all legal disclaimers that apply to the journal pertain . Clathrin coated pits , plaques and adhesion . Marko Lampe Advanced Light Microscopy Facility European Molecular Biology Laboratory 69177 Heidelberg Germany E - mail : lampe @ embl . de Stéphane Vassilopoulos Myology Research Center / Institut de Myologie UMRS 974 UPMC - Inserm , FRE 3617 CNRS G . H . Pitié - Salpêtrière 47 , boulevard de l ' Hôpital F - 75 561 Paris Cedex 13 - France E - mail : s . vassilopoulos @ institut - myologie . org Christien Merrifield Institute for Integrative Biology of the Cell Bât . 34 , 1 Avenue de la Terrasse 9198 Gif sur Yvette cedex France E - mail : christien . merrifield @ i2bc . paris - saclay . fr Abstract . Clathrin mediated endocytosis ( CME ) is the main route of receptor internalization in mammalian cells and this well conserved mechanism has been intensively studied for over 40 yrs . In the general or ‘canonical’ model of CME clathrin coated pits form stochastically at the plasma membrane and coated pit curvature develops as the coated pit grows through clathrin polymerization . However , the canonical model of CME does not explain the diversity of endocytically active clathrin coated structures ( CCSs ) found at the plasma membrane by both electron and light microscopy . In this review we examine the canonical model of CME , highlight discrepancies with published experimental data and suggest future avenues of exploration while paying particular attention to the relationship between clathrin coated pits , plaques , sites of adhesion and the formation of endocytic ‘hotspots’ . Introduction . Clathrin coated pits are specialized patches at the plasma membrane that concentrate receptors , curve to form an invagination and bud off with their receptor cargo in the process of clathrin mediated endocytosis ( CME ) ( Robinson , 2015 ) . CME is the main route of receptor internalization in mammalian cells ( Bitsikas et al . , 2014 ; Watts and Marsh , 1992 ) and this well conserved mechanism has been intensively studied for over 40 years ( reviewed in ( Brodsky , 2012 ; Robinson , 2015 ) ) . Before the advent of fluorescent proteins a combination of biochemistry , immunofluorescence and electron microscopy ( EM ) was used to infer a time - line of clathrin coated pit nucleation , coat formation , inward invagination and budding ( Brodsky , 2012 ; Robinson , 2015 ) . However , nearly two decades ago fluorescent proteins were introduced and the dynamics of CME could then be analysed in live cells using fluorescence microscopy ( Gaidarov et al . , 1999 ) . The application of epifluorescence ( Gaidarov et al . , 1999 ) , spinning disc confocal fluorescence ( Ehrlich et al . , 2004 ) and total internal reflection fluorescence microscopy ( TIRFM ) ( Merrifield et al . , 2002 ) prompted a rapid expansion of imaging studies and yielding new insights into the detailed molecular dynamics of CME in mammalian cells . Over the last decade a broad body of biochemical , morphological and more recent live - cell imaging data has been consolidated in the ‘canonical model’ of CME ( Kirchhausen , 2009 ; Saffarian et al . , 2009 ) ( described in detail below ) . Briefly , coated pit nucleation is understood to initiate upon the chance encounter at the plasma membrane between phosphatidylinositol - ( 4 , 5 ) - bisphosphate ( PIP2 ) , adaptor proteins and clathrin to form a small clathrin patch ( Cocucci et al . , 2012 ) . Progressive addition of receptors , adaptors and clathrin to the edge of the clathrin coat leads to the growth and invagination of the coated bud which eventually buds off through the membrane severing activity of the large GTPase dynamin ( reviewed in ( Robinson , 2015 ) ) . Although the canonical model of CME has been a useful framework for understanding CME it is not without flaws because it neither accommodates nor explains the variety of endocytically active clathrin coated structures ( CCSs ) seen in cells . Moreover recently published work has reignited an old debate suggesting a very different model of clathrin coated pit growth and curvature ( Avinoam et al . , 2015 ) . This review focuses on discrepancies between the canonical model of CME and published data . We highlight the ongoing debate surrounding the relationship between CCP curvature and clathrin polymerization . Finally we point to the strong evidence implicating the involvement of clathrin plaques in ‘regular’ CME and the strong circumstantial evidence linking clathrin plaques , cell adhesion and the formation of endocytic ‘hotspots’ . Clathrin coated pit nucleation . Clathrin forms a membrane ‘coat’ when clathrin triskelia interlink to form a highly organized hexagonal lattice , bound to the plasma membrane and receptor cargo by adaptor proteins . To accommodate curvature pentagons must be incorporated in the otherwise hexagonal clathrin lattice as the coat polymerizes ( den Otter and Briels , 2011 ) . Clathrin coated pit nucleation is thought to begin with the chance encounter of phosphatidylinositol - 2 - bisphosphate ( PIP2 ) , the adaptor protein complex AP2 and clathrin triskelia ( Cocucci et al . , 2012 ; Heuser , 1980 ; Kelly et al . , 2014 ) . Single molecule imaging experiments suggested that the minimal nucleation complex for CCP formation consists of one clathrin triskelia and two AP2 molecules ( Figure 1A ) ( Cocucci et al . , 2012 ) . The curved clathrin coat is then understood to propagate and grown through the recruitment of additional cargo / adaptor / clathrin at the edges of the growing coat ( Figure 1B ) . This model fits well with a detailed structural analysis of the AP2 complex which was shown to act as a molecular coincidence detector : simultaneous binding of PIP2 and receptor cargo unfurls AP2 , allowing it to bind clathrin and cargo and to anchor the nascent CCP ‘seed’ to the plasma membrane ( Kelly et al . , 2014 ) . Other proteins have also been proposed to form part of this CCP ‘nucleation complex’ . For instance , the F - BAR domain protein FCHO1 was proposed to play a key role in nucleating CCPs , perhaps by inducing the initial pucker of an invaginated CCP ( Henne et al . , 2010 ) , although this proposal was challenged by the finding that knockdown of FCHO1 did not block CCP nucleation ( Cocucci et al . , 2012 ) , and that FCHO1 - knockout fish were viable , albeit with defects in bone morphogenic protein receptor ( BMPr ) signalling ( Umasankar et al . , 2012 ) . Receptor - cargo also appears to play a direct role in coated pit nucleation . For example , transferrin receptor is constitutively internalized by CME , but when it is artificially oligomerized ( via an elegant biotin / streptavidin based strategy ) CCPs nucleate much more efficiently ( Liu et al . , 2010 ) . It was also shown that activation of β 2 - AR stimulates a burst of CCS nucleation , although the overall rate of scission increased only marginally , at least over short time periods and most likely due to an increase in CCS maturation time ( Lampe et al . , 2014 ) . Thus the general consensus is that receptor cargo helps stabilize nascent clathrin - coat nucleation complexes . The dynamics of clathrin coated pit growth and curvature . One of the predictions of the ' canonical ' model of clathrin mediated endocytosis is that the curvature of forming clathrin coated pits is ' built into ' the clathrin polymerization - process , so that even as the coat grows larger , it maintains a state of constant degree of curvature ( Kirchhausen , 2009 ; Saffarian et al . , 2009 ) ( FIgure 1B ) . An alternative to this model is that the clathrin coat instead grows as a flat lattice , up to some certain size , and only then begins to remodel and become curved , while maintaining a roughly constant area ( Avinoam et al . , 2015 ; Heuser , 1980 ; Larkin et al . , 1986 ) ( Figure 1C ) . The acquisition of curvature of a flat clathrin lattice would imply lattice remodelling and conversion of hexagons to pentagons as it changed curvature and puckered ( den Otter and Briels , 2011 ; Heuser , 1980 ; Larkin et al . , 1986 ) . However , this model was initially rejected on structural and energetic grounds ( Kirchhausen , 2009 ; Saffarian et al . , 2009 ) . Thus it is perhaps surprising , given the ( general ) contemporary acceptance of the constant curvature model , that some of the earliest published evidence supported the constant area model of coated pit budding ( Heuser , 1980 ; Heuser , 1989 ; Larkin et al . , 1986 ) . In the first paper to show clathrin coated pits by freeze - etch EM , a variety of coated intermediates were observed , and arguments were offered for why they could be categorized and used to elucidate a ‘time line’ of coated pit formation ( Heuser , 1980 ) . That data was used to argue for a ' constant - area ' mechanism of coated pit formation , where a patch of clathrin would first grow to a certain size , regardless of its degree of curvature , and only then would develop sufficient curvature to actually pinch off from the plasma membrane ( Heuser , 1980 ; Heuser , 1989 ) . A second compelling piece of evidence that coated pits initially grew as flat or gently curved clathrin lattices was provided by EM analysis of K + depletion experiments ( Larkin et al . , 1986 ) . It had been found that K + depletion leads to loss of CCPs from the cell surface , through some still unknown mechanism ( Larkin et al . , 1986 ) , but that re - addition of medium containing 10mM K + triggered the rapid , synchronized nucleation of a cohort of CCPs . By fixing cells at different time points during this recovery , and analyzing coated pit morphology by EM , these authors assessed the time - course of clathrin coated pit morphology , which showed that they grew initially as flat or gently curved patches that only later became curved ( Larkin et al . , 1986 ) . The sometimes energetic debate between supporters of the ( canonical ) ‘constant curvature model’ and the ‘constant area model’ of CCP curvature thus started some 25 - 30 years ago and the interested reader is referred to essays by Anderson and Heuser which neatly summarized the state of the debate at that time ( Anderson , 1991 ; Steer , 1991 ) . It is perhaps fair to say that the constant curvature model has gained general acceptance in more recent years , but this model has been recently challenged and the old debate reignited by an elegant correlative light and electron microscopy ( CLEM ) study from the Kaksonen and Briggs labs ( Avinoam et al . , 2015 ) which came to essentially the same conclusion as Heuser’s earlier work and supports the constant area model of CCP curvature ( Avinoam et al . , 2015 ; Heuser , 1980 ; Heuser , 1989 ; Larkin et al . , 1986 ) . This study showed clearly that the morphology of coated pits at the plasma membrane is much more variable than dictated by the canonical model of CME , and showed coated pits with a heterogeneous range of sizes , curvatures and states of invagination , even within the same cell ( Avinoam et al . , 2015 ) . Furthermore , clathrin coated intermediates were organized into a ‘time line’ by comparing those with and without cargo or those with or without dynamin ' collars ' indicating incipient pinch off , and thereby showed that the flatter lattices should be considered amongst the ' younger ' coated pits ( Avinoam et al . , 2015 ) . It is important to remember here that the early EM images of clathrin coated pits showed that they were not necessarily isolated structures , but were often intimately linked to each other and / or the edges of larger flat clathrin lattices or ‘plaques’ ( Heuser , 1980 ; Heuser , 1989 ; Heuser and Kirchhausen , 1985 ; Larkin et al . , 1986 ; Steer and Heuser , 1991 ) . Notably , clathrin plaques were often seen to be surrounded by smaller clathrin domes that resembled ‘scars’ or domains that had ‘melted out’ of the otherwise flat lattices ( Maupin and Pollard , 1983 ; Steer and Heuser , 1991 ) . Initially it was difficult to understand , structurally , how a flat clathrin lattice could convert to a domed lattice and eventually bud off of the membrane ( Kirchhausen , 2009 ) . However , recent molecular simulations by den Otter and colleagues elegantly showed how internal stresses can lead to the reorganization of otherwise flat lattices into exactly such curved ‘buds’ or ‘scars’ ( den Otter and Briels , 2011 ) . In these simulations , a change in the shape of clathrin triskelia or in the knee or hub " pucker " in a patch of clathrin introduced strain in the otherwise flat lattice . In turn , strain was relieved as the patch ruptured from the surrounding flat lattice and spontaneously curved into a bud formed of hexagonally packed clathrin . Following rupture additional clathrin polymerization introduced the requisite number of pentagons to complete curvature and budding ( den Otter and Briels , 2011 ) , ( Figure 1D ) . In the molecular simulations from den Otter and colleagues the change in intrinsic curvature of clathrin triskelia was imposed , but how might triskelia curvature change in situ in living cells ? In situ a variety of factors may influence the intrinsic curvature or pucker of clathrin triskelia including binding of clathrin light chain ( Wilbur et al . , 2010 ) and acidic pH ( Heuser , 1989 ) . Adaptor proteins may also play a key role in controlling triskelia curvature - when the AP2 subunit α - adaptin was replaced by a truncated form lacking the C - terminal appendage domain discrete flat clathrin patches accumulated , presumably because curvature inducing endocytic accessory proteins were not properly recruited to developing CCPs ( Aguet et al . , 2013 ) . However precisely which curvature generating mechanism ( s ) operate when and where during CCP bud maturation is a major , unanswered question . Moreover , membrane tension plays an antagonistic role to curvature development as it tends to resist the generation of curved clathrin coats ( Saleem et al . , 2015 ) . The fact that modulating the delicate balance of forces driving and opposing curvature can control the transition from flat to curved clathrin lattices was clearly illustrated by elegant in vitro reconstitution experiments using minimal components ( Dannhauser and Ungewickell , 2012 ) . Here , at 4°C purified clathrin polymerized into flat hexagonal clathrin lattices on the surface of liposomes coated with a ∆ ENTH - epsin adaptor . On warming to 37°C the lattice reorganized into curved buds which could be released as coated vesicles upon the addition of the scission GTPase dynamin ( Dannhauser and Ungewickell , 2012 ) . The authors proposed that the change in temperature made the liposome membrane less rigid , allowing the intrinsic curvature of clathrin triskelia to induce budding , perhaps via a ‘Brownian ratchet’ mechanism ( Hinrichsen et al . , 2006 ) . With the introduction of fluorescent protein tags and the application of live cell imaging it was found that endocytically active clathrin coated pits and plaques ( collectively referred to as clathrin coated structures , CCS ) were every bit as diverse in size and dynamics as suggested by earlier EM data ( Gaidarov et al . , 1999 ; Merrifield et al . , 2005 ; Saffarian et al . , 2009 ) . As predicted by the canonical model of CME discrete spots , presumably corresponding to single clathrin coated pits , were observed which nucleated , grew steadily in fluorescence and disappeared as they endocytosed ( Loerke et al . , 2009 ; Merrifield et al . , 2005 ; Saffarian et al . , 2009 ) ( Figure 2A ) . However , in addition other types of clathrin coated structures ( CCSs ) were also observed which did not behave as predicted . For instance , discrete puncta labelled with clathrin - FP sometimes grew in fluorescence but only partially dimmed and then recovered , often multiple times , before finally disappearing ( Figure 2Bii - iii ) ( Lampe et al . , 2014 ; Merrifield et al . , 2005 ) and the lifetimes of punctate CCS spanned a broad range with a long right hand tail , rather than a simple distribution ( Loerke et al . , 2009 ) ( Figure 2C ) . Decomposition of the lifetime distribution , using a priori assumptions about how a ‘productive’ CCS should behave , were used in a series of studies which concluded that dynamin and cargo most likely regulate CCP maturation ( Loerke et al . , 2009 ) . Nonetheless in addition to diffraction limited punctate CCS , many cell types generate large and apparently stable clathrin plaques at their adherent surfaces ( Figure 2A , D - F ) ( Grove et al . , 2014 ; Merrifield et al . , 2005 ; Saffarian et al . , 2009 ) and overall the heterogeneity of CCS observed by EM was well reflected by the diversity of CCS dynamics observed in living cells . Interpreting live cell imaging data of CCS labelled with clathrin - FP or adaptor - FP thus presented a problem : what does CME look like in live cell imaging data and what should be measured ? In the first attempt to analyse CME activity using time lapse imaging of clathrin - FP or adaptor - FP constructs in live cells the disappearance of discrete , punctate CCS was taken to indicate the endocytosis of individual CCPs ( Gaidarov et al . , 1999 ; Loerke et al . , 2009 ; Merrifield et al . , 2002 ; Saffarian et al . , 2009 ) . However , it was also reported that clathrin coated vesicles ( CCVs ) could be glimpsed emanating repeatedly from larger clathrin patches , hinting that endocytic activity was not restricted to discrete clathrin puncta ( Gaidarov et al . , 1999 ) . Potential endocytic activity at larger clathrin plaques could not be imaged directly or consistently using clathrin - FP or adaptor - FP alone because the fluorescence from the large clathrin lattice usually obscured any budding activity . However , there are hints in single channel GFP - clathrin data that budding occurs at the edges of plaques . For instance , although clathrin plaques are apparently stable over long time periods ( Fig 2D ) a simple fluorescence difference map reveals discrete puncta of clathrin loss and addition of the edges of clathrin plaques , strongly suggesting active endocytosis ( Fig 2E ) and consistent with EM images ( Figure 2F ) ( Anderson , 1991 ; Avinoam et al . , 2015 ; Heuser , 1980 ; Heuser , 1989 ; Heuser and Kirchhausen , 1985 ; Larkin et al . , 1986 ) . Defining what endocytosis ‘should’ look like thus presented a problem : if one relied on fluorescently tagged clathrin or adaptor proteins alone , one might observe discrete , punctate CCS at the plasma membrane – which behave as predicted by the canonical model - and take these ( and only these ) as evidence to support the canonical model of CME while dismissing all the other classes of CCS as potential sites of endocytosis because they do not behave as predicted by the model . Clathrin plaques and endocytic hotspots . To circumvent this type of circular reasoning a ‘pulsed - pH’ protocol was developed to detect productive scission events ( Figure 3Ai - Aiii ) ( Merrifield et al . , 2005 ) . This assay does not rely on the resolution of the light microscope to infer when and where endocytosis happens , but rather finesses information from beyond the resolution barrier by using extracellular pH to repeatedly probe whether CCPs are ‘open’ or ‘closed’ . Briefly , cells expressed a receptor cargo fluorescently tagged on its extracellular domain with a pH sensitive fluorescent protein , typically green fluorescent phluorin ( Sankaranarayanan and Ryan , 2001 ) or more recently red fluorescent proteins ( Lampe et al . , 2014 ; Shen et al . , 2014 ) . Alternating images are acquired at pH 7 . 4 ( physiological pH ) or pH 5 . 2 ( acidic pH ) using a perfusion system slaved to camera acquisition ( Merrifield et al . , 2005 ) . Receptor cargoes concentrated at open coated pits were visible as bright puncta in images acquired at high pH but quenched and disappeared at low pH along with receptors free in the plasma membrane ( Lampe et al . , 2014 ; Merrifield et al . , 2005 ; Taylor et al . , 2011 ) . However , if a vesicle had recently pinched off it would become visible as a bright puncta at low pH thus indicating that scission had occurred , with a temporal resolution of ~ 2s ( Lampe et al . , 2014 ; Merrifield et al . , 2005 ; Taylor et al . , 2011 ) . Using the pulsed pH protocol it was shown that discrete , punctate CCS often nucleated , grew in fluorescence and then disappeared completely in ‘terminal’ scission events , and these observations fitted the canonical model of CME very well ( Figure 3Ai - iii , upper trace ) . Moreover because the majority of CCS host only one scission event ( Figure 3Aiv ) the time taken to form a productive bud could be measured directly as the time between inception of the punctate CCS and the first detected scission event , which yielded an average maturation time of ~ 60s ( Figure 3Av ) ( Taylor et al . , 2011 ; Taylor et al . , 2012 ) , which matches well with estimates of coat maturation time in other cell types ( Grassart et al . , 2014 ; Loerke et al . , 2009 ; Mettlen et al . , 2010 ; Saffarian et al . , 2009 ) . However , it was also found that discrete , punctate CCS did not necessarily completely disappear upon scission but often only partially dimmed and recovered in successive rounds of budding ( Figure 3Aiii , lower trace ) . Such ‘non terminal’ scission events were associated with recruitment of the uncoating protein GAK and so represented productive , rather than aborted scission events ( Taylor et al . , 2011 ) . Indeed the dynamics of endocytic protein recruitment to terminal and non - terminal scission events were indistinguishable , with the exception of coat components ( Taylor et al . , 2011 ) . In addition it was shown that identical , discrete , diffraction limited scission events were detected – in the same cells – at either punctate CCPs or at the edges of large , persistent clathrin plaques ( Taylor et al . , 2011 ) ( Figure 3Bi ) . Again the same repertoire of endocytic proteins were recruited to scission events hosted by either class of CCS scission and scission events internalized , on average , the same amount of cargo ( Taylor et al . , 2011 ) . Of particular note , in 3T3 fibroblasts , actin polymerization was detected at ~ 60 % of scission events hosted by either punctate CCPs or at the edges of clathrin plaques ( Taylor et al . , 2011 ) and contrary to an earlier study ( Saffarian et al . , 2009 ) . These observations clearly demonstrated that discrete , quantized scission events could be hosted by a diverse array of ‘parent’ CCS and were entirely consistent with the earlier published EM data ( Anderson , 1991 ; Avinoam et al . , 2015 ; Heuser , 1980 ; Heuser , 1989 ; Heuser and Kirchhausen , 1985 ; Larkin et al . , 1986 ) but were not consistent with the canonical model of CME , in its simplest form ( Kirchhausen , 2009 ; Saffarian et al . , 2009 ) . The minimum time from inception of a punctate coated pit to a successful scission event was found to be 15 - 20s ( Merrifield et al . , 2005 ) , but beyond this it was almost impossible to define a class of CCS which does not host productive endocytic events based on CCS size or lifetime alone , other than to say that there was a lower limit to the amount of clathrin forming a productive bud ( Loerke et al . , 2009 ) . A prediction of the canonical model of CME is that the spatial distribution of CCP nucleation events , and thus scission events , should be random . This was shown to be true in ( for example ) BSC - 1 cells which predominantly form punctate CCS ( Ehrlich et al . , 2004 ) ( although see ( Nunez et al . , 2011 ) ) . However , in cells which express plaque like structures such as NIH - 3T3 , Hela or HEK293 cells it was found that discrete scission events tended to cluster at the edges of plaques ( Lampe et al . , 2014 ; Merrifield et al . , 2005 ; Taylor et al . , 2011 ) ( Figure 3Bi ) , again consistent with published EM data ( Anderson , 1991 ; Avinoam et al . , 2015 ; Heuser , 1980 ; Heuser , 1989 ; Heuser and Kirchhausen , 1985 ; Larkin et al . , 1986 ) . To understand why budding events might cluster we must look more closely at the relationship between clathrin plaques and adhesion . Large flat clathrin lattices - clathrin ‘plaques’ - have long been associated with sites of strong adhesion in tissue culture cells growing on glass ( Batchelder and Yarar , 2010 ; Ezratty et al . , 2009 ; Lampe et al . , 2014 ; Maupin and Pollard , 1983 ; Merrifield et al . , 2005 ; Saffarian et al . , 2009 ; Taylor et al . , 2011 ) and in a number of physiological contexts involving adhesion including the contact zone between osteoclasts and bone ( Akisaka , 2000 ; Akisaka et al . , 2008 ; Akisaka et al . , 2003 ) and at the surface of myocytes where clathrin plaques play a key role in organizing costameres and thence sarcomeres during myogenesis ( Vassilopoulos et al . , 2014 ) . Clathrin plaques are thus a bona - fide feature of the plasma membrane found in a variety of cellular contexts – both in vitro and in vivo – in the absence of over - expression of any endocytic proteins and while clathrin plaques are often associated with adhesion to a rigid substrate , they need not be , as is the case for many of the clathrin plaques seen in developing myocytes ( Vassilopoulos et al . , 2014 ) as well as non - adherent adipocytes ( Bellve et al . , 2006 ) . Indeed flat clathrin plaques have now been unambiguously observed by light microscopy at the non - adherent surface of various different types of cultured cells ( Grove et al . , 2014 ) . Here we again show that clathrin plaques are both sites of bonafide endocytic events and sites of strong cell adhesion ( Figure Bi - ii ) . In a HEK293 cell expressing TfR - phl and Clc - mCh scission events were localized to a clathrin plaque using the pulsed pH assay ( Figure Bi ) . At the end of image acquisition the entire cell was hydrodynamically sheared from the substrate by a strong pulse of perfusion , leaving behind strongly adherent remnants of the clathrin plaque ( Figure Bi ) . Similarly , when an adherent HeLa cells were ultrasonically sheared from a glass patches of membrane and strongly adherent clathrin plaques were left behind ( Figure Bii ) . Perhaps the earliest published evidence that clathrin plaques are associated with strong cell adhesion came from work published in the 1983 by Maupin and Pollard ( Maupin and Pollard , 1983 ) ( Figure 3C ) . Here , thin section EM of HeLa cells growing on plastic , sectioned orthogonal to the adherent surface , revealed that flat clathrin coated plaques were tightly associated with the cell / substrate interface ( Maupin and Pollard , 1983 ) ( Figure 3C ) . Moreover , the interface between the clathrin plaque , plasma membrane and underlying substrate were seen to be populated with electron dense projections that bridged the cell surface and substrate , strongly suggesting the presence of adhesion molecules ( Maupin and Pollard , 1983 ) ( Figure 3C ) . The link between clathrin and sites of adhesion was again made when it was shown that clathrin plaques colocalized with ‘point contacts’ – sites of strong cell / substrate adhesion identified by interference reflection microscopy ( IRM ) ( Batchelder and Yarar , 2010 ; Nicol and Nermut , 1987 ) and also at the adherent surface of forming phagosomes ( Aggeler and Werb , 1982 ) . Indeed it was the very fact that the clathrin plaques were adherent that facilitated their accessibility and visibility in these and similar studies . What sticks clathrin plaques to the substrate ? The most obvious candidate adhesion molecules are integrins and indeed it was shown that clathrin plaques in myocytes , adherent to vitronectin coated glass , were both adhesive structures and enriched in both β 3 - and β 5 - integrins ( De Deyne et al . , 1998 ) . In support of this earlier work we show here that integrin - β 5 - GFP colocalized with clathrin plaques in HEK293 cells ( Figure 3D ) . Thus , all the available evidence to date indicates that cell adhesion can indeed stabilize flat clathrin plaques and that clathrin patches can be sites of ‘regular’ endocytosis . From the perspective of cell adhesion a functional link between integrins , clathrin and adhesion has long been suspected . Notably , clathrin and adaptors have been repeatedly identified as ‘hits’ in proteomic screens for proteins involved in integrin adhesion ( see ( Caswell et al . , 2009 ) and references therein ) and it has been shown that clathrin and the adaptor protein Dab2 and Numb are essential for integrin endocytosis and turnover ( Ezratty et al . , 2009 ; Teckchandani et al . , 2012 ) . However , the concept that clathrin coated plaques themselves may be important integrin - adhesive structures has not been fully appreciated until recently ( Chetrit et al . , 2009 ) . One outstanding puzzle is how integrins could mediate clathrin plaque adhesion . It is has been proposed that the adaptor protein Dab2 binds only non - adhesive , inactive integrins - consistent with a role in integrin endocytosis - and if this is strictly true then the integrins concentrated at clathrin plaques should be considered to be non - adherent ( Yu et al . , 2015 ) . On the other hand , Dab2 has been strongly implicated in clathrin plaque formation and tellingly overexpression of Dab2 led to the formation of giant clathrin plaques at the adherent surface of cells ( Chetrit et al . , 2009 ; Mettlen et al . , 2010 ) . Curiously , co - expression of the non - adhesive Dab2 cargo low density lipoprotein receptor ( LDLR ) led to the formation of even larger giant clathrin plaques , although it was not clear whether such giant plaques were made adherent and perhaps stabilized by integrins ( Mettlen et al . , 2010 ) . One possible solution to this ‘Dab2 conundrum’ is that another adaptor ( s ) may play a role in recruiting integrins to adhesive clathrin plaques and indeed it was shown that AP2 binds to the integrin α - chain and so clathrin plaque adhesion may be mediated by AP2 ( De Franceschi et al . , 2016 ) . What might be the mechanism by which productive clathrin coated buds nucleate at the edge of a clathrin plaque ? One might imagine that this could occur through essentially the same mechanism by which isolated CCPs nucleate . However , instead of a chance encounter between receptor cargo , adaptors and clathrin on a naked patch of plasma membrane at least one triskelion leg of the nascent nucleation complex would be contributed by the frayed edge of the plaque . Alternatively , curved domains could form when adhesive receptors in a flat lattice relinquish their anchorage to the substrate and the lattice reshapes to acquire curvature and so relieve internal stresses , as suggested in the simulation work of den Otter and by earlier EM evidence ( Anderson , 1991 ; Avinoam et al . , 2015 ; den Otter and Briels , 2011 Heuser , 1985 # 246 ; Heuser , 1980 ; Heuser , 1989 ; Larkin et al . , 1986 ) . Whatever the precise mechanism it is clear that budding events localize to the edge of adherent clathrin plaques which can thereby form endocytic hotspots ( Figure 3E ) . Other potential role ( s ) for flat clathrin plaques . Many aspects of the cell biology of clathrin plaques remain to be explored . As discussed above clathrin plaques may play a role in cell adhesion , but this begs the question of whether they also play a role in force transduction . In man - made structures the problem of fixing a thin , flexible skin to a rigid substrate ( for instance the aluminium ‘skin’ of an aircraft to the rigid fuselage substructure ) traditionally uses rivets ( equivalent to the cells’ adhesion molecules ) and in areas of high stress the thin skin ( viz the plasma membrane ) is stabilized , and mechanical loads distributed more evenly , using a ‘backing plate’ or ‘doubler’ ( viz a clathrin plaque ) . Clathrin plaques may act in a similar way as a ‘doubler’ to distribute mechanical load to the plasma membrane and cortical actin ctyoskeleton , as well as integrating the adhesion of otherwise dispersed adhesion molecules . Indeed we propose that such a mechanical role for clathrin plaques reaches its apotheosis in skeletal muscle ( Vassilopoulos et al . , 2014 ) . Here , structures called costameres act exactly like backing - plates to link underlying sarcomeres to the muscle membrane or sarcolemma and at the same time connect the sarcolemma to the basal lamina surrounding the muscle in the extracellular matrix . Our discovery of organized , striated clathrin plaques at developing costameres strongly suggests that flat lattices can participate in adhesion and force transduction at these large sites . However , how force could be transmitted away from adhesive clathrin plaques into the cell is currently unclear and the relationship between clathrin plaques and ‘classical’ focal adhesions is also poorly defined . It is tempting to speculate there is a functional link since focal adhesions and flat clathrin lattices are often found in close proximity ( Maupin and Pollard , 1983 ) . In addition to a possible role in adhesion and mechano - transduction it has also been suggested that clathrin plaques may act as signalling platforms which concentrate activated , signalling receptors such as the G - protein coupled receptors ( GPCRs ) ( Grove et al . , 2014 ; Pumplin , 1989 ) or receptor tyrosine kinases ( RTKs ) ( Garay et al . , 2015 ) . Potentially , they could do so by sequestering activated receptors and slowing their internalization , a notion that was recently strengthened by evidence that CCSs at the plasma membrane are essential for the robust activation of several signalling pathways . For instance , following EGFr stimulation robust AKT signalling requires CCS but not endocytosis per se ( Garay et al . , 2015 ) . It was shown that AKT signalling was attenuated upon perturbation of clathrin dynamics using a small molecule inhibitor or by knock - down of clathrin . By contrast blocking the scission step of endocytosis by perturbing dynamin function with small molecule inhibitors had little impact on EGFr stimulated AKT signalling ( Garay et al . , 2015 ) . A similar dependence on CCS and AP2 was found for low - density lipoprotein related 5 and 6 ( LRP6 ) dependent signalling and activation of the canonical Wnt pathway ( Kim et al . , 2013 ) . Perhaps even more intriguingly the signalling receptor itself may not even have to visit CCSs to trigger CCS - dependent signalling . The GPCR β 1 - AR is only poorly endocytosed through clathrin mediated endocytosis and most likely internalizes through an endophilin - dependent and clathrin - independent pathway ( Boucrot et al . , 2015 ; Eichel et al . , 2016 ) . However , upon β 1 - AR stimulation the β 1 - AR adaptor β - arrestin - 2 was found to be recruited to CCS where it was essential for mediating ERK signalling ( Eichel et al . , 2016 ) . Thus for at least 3 quite different signalling receptors CCS are important for signalling but at present it is not clear whether ( or how ) adhesion and formation of stable clathrin plaques could enhance AKT , ERK or Wnt signalling . These seem potentially interesting avenues to explore . Conclusions : towards a more holistic model of clathrin mediated endocytosis . The cell biology of membrane trafficking seems at times to be a curious mixture of extraordinary organization and chaotic messiness , sometimes involving the same structures . Generations of cell biologists have been captivated by the beautifully organized clathrin lattices observed using EM ( Robinson , 2015 ) and more recently by the dynamics of CCS observed using live cell imaging . It is very clear that CCSs are highly dynamic , apparently ‘plastic’ and come in a wider range of curvatures and size than suggested by the canonical model of CME . The discrepancies between the canonical model of CME and real - world observations evoke some obvious questions and future directions . One question is how can individual , punctate CCSs host repeated scission events and so form an endocytic hotspot ? Presumably this means there is some factor ( s ) which preferentially and repeatedly nucleates a productive clathrin coated bud at the same site . Perhaps the most obvious candidate is a small clathrin plaque , perhaps stabilized by adhesion , which could ‘seed’ repeated budding events . If this is correct then the budding events observed at the edges of large clathrin plaques are basically the same phenomena , but wherein the stable lattice is simply much larger . This also explains why there is a continuum in size of endocytically active CCS , while the bud size and amount of cargo internalized by budding events is independent of either host CCS size or lifetime ( Lampe et al . , 2014 ; Taylor et al . , 2011 ) This naturally leads to the second , deeper question which is how does clathrin coated pit curvature develop and how quickly ( or slowly ) does this happen ? Although much effort has been spent imaging CCS in live cells we are woefully ignorant of the time course of curvature development and the debate between the ‘constant curvature’ and ‘constant area’ models is ongoing . Perhaps the key to resolving this issue is working out the right type of measurement to make in living cells . Super resolution microscopy may be able to address this problem directly by imaging coated pit maturation and budding ( Li et al . , 2015 ) or polarized TIRF ( p - TIRF ) could be used to directly linking changes in bud geometry to fluorescence changes in CCS coat components using linearly polarized evanescent fields and orientation sensitive lipidic dyes ( Sund et al . , 1999 ) . A third fundamental question that remains unresolved concerns the precise functional relationship between clathrin plaques and cell adhesion . More specifically , should clathrin plaques be thought of as a generalized adhesive structure and what is their dynamic relationship to classical focal adhesions ? It was recognized over 30 years ago that clathrin plaques are sites of strong adhesion and that they are often found close to focal adhesions , but the functional association between these two ubiquitous structures remains unclear . Finally it has been argued that endocytic activity on the ‘dorsal’ membrane of cells adherent to a substrate is more representative of physiological endocytic activity than the endocytic activity at the ‘ventral’ , adherent membrane ( Kural et al . , 2015 ) . However , metazoan cells must stick to other cells , extracellular matrix or bone in order to form the tissues that form an organism and so it could equally be argued that the dorsal surface of a tissue culture cell , which is not adherent to anything , is equally ‘non physiological’ . Clearly , studying these phenomena in tissues or 3D cell models would help resolve these issues and help extend our understanding of the distribution and different functions of clathrin structures at the plasma membrane and although this represents a major experimental challenge , progress has already been made ( Wang and Audhya , 2014 ) . In conclusion it’s safe to say that despite 40 years of intensive study there are still plenty of interesting questions to address in this field . Figure legends Figure 1 . Clathrin coated pit nucleation and alternative models for coat growth and the acquisition of coat curvature . ( A ) Clathrin coated pits nucleate when two AP2 molecules ( cyan ) encounter PIP2 at the plasma membrane , receptor cargo ( green ) and clathrin ( magenta ) . ( B - D ) Different models have been proposed for how coated pits might grow . ( B ) In the constant curvature model curvature develops as a function of clathrin polymerization . ( C ) In the constant area model clathrin coats initially grow as flat plaques which remodel to form a coated invagination . ( D ) In the ‘rupture and grow’ model internal stresses within a flat clathrin lattice are relieved by a hexagonal domain bulging into a dome and simultaneously breaking away from the surrounding flat lattice . Continued clathrin polymerization adds the required pentagons to complete a spheroidal clathrin coat . Note that the models are not mutually exclusive but that model ( B ) alone cannot explain the diversity of endocytic clathrin coated structures observed in cells . Figure 2 . The diversity of morphology and behaviour of CCS in TIRFM and EM . ( A ) Example HEK293 cell expressing Clc - GFP , grown on fibronectin and imaged using TIRFM . Individual , isolated clathrin coated pits appear as puncta and clathrin plaques as large patches or rosettes . Scale bar : 2 . 5 µ m . ( Bi - Biii ) Diverse clathrin coated pit behaviour . ( Bi ) Clathrin coated pits may grow in fluorescence and disappear in one continuous sequence . ( Bii - iii ) Longer lived coated pits may show multiple sequences of growth and dimming , showing a characteristic ‘saw - tooth’ profile suggesting multiple , successive rounds of CME at a ‘hotspot’ with a frequency of ~ 50 - 60s . Grey arrows correspond to the frames shown in the corresponding panels . Scale bar : 1 . 0 µ m . ( C ) The lifetime of all tracked CCS shows a pronounced left hand skew , with a median lifetime of ~ 50s . ( D ) Clathrin plaques are very persistent and superficially appear stable . Scale bar : 1 . 0 µ m . ( Ei - ii ) However a map of averaged fluctuations over a 60s time window reveals this clathrin plaque lost and gained fluorescence in discrete puncta at its periphery . Scale bar : 1 . 0 µ m . ( F ) EM view of an unroofed HeLa cell showing an example clathrin plaque with peripheral buds Scale bar : 500nm . Figure 3 . The relationship between clathrin coated pits , plaques and sites of strong cell adhesion . ( Ai ) An example scission event at a punctate CCS revealed using the pulsed pH protocol ( scale bar 1 . 0 µ m ) . ( Aii ) Interpretation of the images in ( Ai ) . ( Aiii ) Quantified fluorescence from a single CCS ( upper traces , same event as in ( Ai ) ) and a CCS which hosted 2 successive , detected scission events . Arrows indicate scission detected scission events . Asterisked arrow indicates where a scission event most likely happened but was not detected . Scale bar : vertical 100 a . u . , horizontal 20s . ( Aiv ) The frequency distribution of the number of scission events hosted by discrete , punctate CCS . ( Av ) Time between the inception of a de novo CCS and the first detected scission event . The median time is 56s . ( Bi ) A clathrin plaque , labelled with Clc - mCh and TfR - phl , hosted multiple scission events ( white arrows , marked by red crosses in ‘Sc . Map’ , upper right ) and when the cell was sheared away with a strong burst of perfusion the clathrin plaque remained tightly adherent to the glass ( upper panel , ‘Clathrin remnants’ ) . Scale bars : 1 . 0 µ m . ( Bii ) EM view of an adherent patch containing plasma membrane and adherent clathrin plaques left on a glass substrate after a HeLa cell was sheared away by sonication . Scale bar : 1 . 0 µ m . ( C ) Clathrin plaque in section from a HeLa cell ( from ( Maupin and Pollard , 1983 ) , with permission of the authors ) . ( D ) Partial colocalization of integrin - β - 5 - GFP and Clc - GFP at clathrin plaques . Scale bars : 1 . 5 µ m . ( E ) Proposed model for how integrin adhesion may stabilize clathrin plaques which , in turn , host endocytic events and thus form endocytic ‘hotspots’ . References . Aggeler , J . , Werb , Z . , 1982 . Initial events during phagocytosis by macrophages viewed from outside and inside the cell : membrane - particle interactions and clathrin . The Journal of cell biology 94 , 613 - 623 . Aguet , F . , Antonescu , C . N . , Mettlen , M . , Schmid , S . L . , Danuser , G . , 2013 . Advances in analysis of low signal - to - noise images link dynamin and AP2 to the functions of an endocytic checkpoint . Developmental cell 26 , 279 - 291 . Akisaka , T . , 2000 . Ultrastructure of clathrin sheets and cytoskeleton of podosomes on the cytoplasmic side of ventral membranes of cultured osteoclasts . Kaibogaku zasshi . Journal of anatomy 75 , 381 - 386 . Akisaka , T . , Yoshida , H . , Suzuki , R . , Takama , K . , 2008 . Adhesion structures and their cytoskeleton - membrane interactions at podosomes of osteoclasts in culture . Cell and tissue research 331 , 625 - 641 . Akisaka , T . , Yoshida , H . , Suzuki , R . , Shimizu , K . , Takama , K . , 2003 . Clathrin sheets on the protoplasmic surface of ventral membranes of osteoclasts in culture . Journal of electron microscopy 52 , 535 - 543 . Anderson , R . G . W . , 1991 . Molecular motors that shape endocytic membrane . , p . 13 - 35 , in : C . J . Steer and J . A . Hanover , Eds . ) , Intracellular Trafficking of Proteins , Cambridge University Press , Bath Press , Avon , G . B . Avinoam , O . , Schorb , M . , Beese , C . J . , Briggs , J . A . , Kaksonen , M . , 2015 . ENDOCYTOSIS . Endocytic sites mature by continuous bending and remodeling of the clathrin coat . Science 348 , 1369 - 1372 . Batchelder , E . M . , Yarar , D . , 2010 . Differential requirements for clathrin - dependent endocytosis at sites of cell - substrate adhesion . Molecular biology of the cell 21 , 3070 - 3079 . Bellve , K . D . , Leonard , D . , Standley , C . , Lifshitz , L . M . , Tuft , R . A . , Hayakawa , A . , Corvera , S . , Fogarty , K . E . , 2006 . Plasma membrane domains specialized for clathrin - mediated endocytosis in primary cells . The Journal of biological chemistry 281 , 16139 - 16146 . Bitsikas , V . , Correa , I . R . , Jr . , Nichols , B . J . , 2014 . Clathrin - independent pathways do not contribute significantly to endocytic flux . eLife 3 , e03970 . Boucrot , E . , Ferreira , A . P . , Almeida - Souza , L . , Debard , S . , Vallis , Y . , Howard , G . , Bertot , L . , Sauvonnet , N . , McMahon , H . T . , 2015 . Endophilin marks and controls a clathrin - independent endocytic pathway . Nature 517 , 460 - 465 . Brodsky , F . M . , 2012 . Diversity of clathrin function : new tricks for an old protein . Annual review of cell and developmental biology 28 , 309 - 336 . Caswell , P . T . , Vadrevu , S . , Norman , J . C . , 2009 . Integrins : masters and slaves of endocytic transport . Nature reviews . Molecular cell biology 10 , 843 - 853 . Chetrit , D . , Ziv , N . , Ehrlich , M . , 2009 . Dab2 regulates clathrin assembly and cell spreading . The Biochemical journal 418 , 701 - 715 . Cocucci , E . , Aguet , F . , Boulant , S . , Kirchhausen , T . , 2012 . The first five seconds in the life of a clathrin - coated pit . Cell 150 , 495 - 507 . Dannhauser , P . N . , Ungewickell , E . J . , 2012 . Reconstitution of clathrin - coated bud and vesicle formation with minimal components . Nature cell biology 14 , 634 - 639 . De Deyne , P . G . , O ' Neill , A . , Resneck , W . G . , Dmytrenko , G . M . , Pumplin , D . W . , Bloch , R . J . , 1998 . The vitronectin receptor associates with clathrin - coated membrane domains via the cytoplasmic domain of its beta5 subunit . Journal of cell science 111 ( Pt 18 ) , 2729 - 2740 . De Franceschi , N . , Arjonen , A . , Elkhatib , N . , Denessiouk , K . , Wrobel , A . G . , Wilson , T . A . , Pouwels , J . , Montagnac , G . , Owen , D . J . , Ivaska , J . , 2016 . Selective integrin endocytosis is driven by interactions between the integrin alpha - chain and AP2 . Nature structural & molecular biology 23 , 172 - 179 . den Otter , W . K . , Briels , W . J . , 2011 . The generation of curved clathrin coats from flat plaques . Traffic 12 , 1407 - 1416 . Ehrlich , M . , Boll , W . , Van Oijen , A . , Hariharan , R . , Chandran , K . , Nibert , M . L . , Kirchhausen , T . , 2004 . Endocytosis by random initiation and stabilization of clathrin - coated pits . Cell 118 , 591 - 605 . Eichel , K . , Jullie , D . , von Zastrow , M . , 2016 . beta - Arrestin drives MAP kinase signalling from clathrin - coated structures after GPCR dissociation . Nature cell biology 18 , 303 - 310 . Ezratty , E . J . , Bertaux , C . , Marcantonio , E . E . , Gundersen , G . G . , 2009 . Clathrin mediates integrin endocytosis for focal adhesion disassembly in migrating cells . The Journal of cell biology 187 , 733 - 747 . Gaidarov , I . , Santini , F . , Warren , R . A . , Keen , J . H . , 1999 . Spatial control of coated - pit dynamics in living cells . Nature cell biology 1 , 1 - 7 . Garay , C . , Judge , G . , Lucarelli , S . , Bautista , S . , Pandey , R . , Singh , T . , Antonescu , C . N . , 2015 . Epidermal growth factor - stimulated Akt phosphorylation requires clathrin or ErbB2 but not receptor endocytosis . Molecular biology of the cell 26 , 3504 - 3519 . Grassart , A . , Cheng , A . T . , Hong , S . H . , Zhang , F . , Zenzer , N . , Feng , Y . , Briner , D . M . , Davis , G . D . , Malkov , D . , Drubin , D . G . , 2014 . Actin and dynamin2 dynamics and interplay during clathrin - mediated endocytosis . The Journal of cell biology 205 , 721 - 735 . Grove , J . , Metcalf , D . J . , Knight , A . E . , Wavre - Shapton , S . T . , Sun , T . , Protonotarios , E . D . , Griffin , L . D . , Lippincott - Schwartz , J . , Marsh , M . , 2014 . Flat clathrin lattices : stable features of the plasma membrane . Molecular biology of the cell 25 , 3581 - 3594 . Henne , W . M . , Boucrot , E . , Meinecke , M . , Evergren , E . , Vallis , Y . , Mittal , R . , McMahon , H . T . , 2010 . FCHo proteins are nucleators of clathrin - mediated endocytosis . Science 328 , 1281 - 1284 . Heuser , J . , 1980 . Three - dimensional visualization of coated vesicle formation in fibroblasts . The Journal of cell biology 84 , 560 - 583 . Heuser , J . , 1989 . Effects of cytoplasmic acidification on clathrin lattice morphology . The Journal of cell biology 108 , 401 - 411 . Heuser , J . , Kirchhausen , T . , 1985 . Deep - etch views of clathrin assemblies . Journal of ultrastructure research 92 , 1 - 27 . Hinrichsen , L . , Meyerholz , A . , Groos , S . , Ungewickell , E . J . , 2006 . Bending a membrane : how clathrin affects budding . Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America 103 , 8715 - 8720 . Kelly , B . T . , Graham , S . C . , Liska , N . , Dannhauser , P . N . , Honing , S . , Ungewickell , E . J . , Owen , D . J . , 2014 . Clathrin adaptors . AP2 controls clathrin polymerization with a membrane - activated switch . Science 345 , 459 - 463 . Kim , I . , Pan , W . , Jones , S . A . , Zhang , Y . , Zhuang , X . , Wu , D . , 2013 . Clathrin and AP2 are required for PtdIns ( 4 , 5 ) P2 - mediated formation of LRP6 signalosomes . The Journal of cell biology 200 , 419 - 428 . Kirchhausen , T . , 2009 . Imaging endocytic clathrin structures in living cells . Trends in cell biology 19 , 596 - 605 . Kural , C . , Akatay , A . A . , Gaudin , R . , Chen , B . C . , Legant , W . R . , Betzig , E . , Kirchhausen , T . , 2015 . Asymmetric formation of coated pits on dorsal and ventral surfaces at the leading edges of motile cells and on protrusions of immobile cells . Molecular biology of the cell 26 , 2044 - 2053 . Lampe , M . , Pierre , F . , Al - Sabah , S . , Krasel , C . , Merrifield , C . J . , 2014 . Dual single - scission event analysis of constitutive transferrin receptor ( TfR ) endocytosis and ligand - triggered beta2 - adrenergic receptor ( beta2AR ) or Mu - opioid receptor ( MOR ) endocytosis . Molecular biology of the cell 25 , 3070 - 3080 . Larkin , J . M . , Donzell , W . C . , Anderson , R . G . , 1986 . Potassium - dependent assembly of coated pits : new coated pits form as planar clathrin lattices . The Journal of cell biology 103 , 2619 - 2627 . Li , D . , Shao , L . , Chen , B . C . , Zhang , X . , Zhang , M . , Moses , B . , Milkie , D . E . , Beach , J . R . , Hammer , J . A . , 3rd , Pasham , M . , Kirchhausen , T . , Baird , M . A . , Davidson , M . W . , Xu , P . , Betzig , E . , 2015 . ADVANCED IMAGING . Extended - resolution structured illumination imaging of endocytic and cytoskeletal dynamics . Science 349 , aab3500 . Liu , A . P . , Aguet , F . , Danuser , G . , Schmid , S . L . , 2010 . Local clustering of transferrin receptors promotes clathrin - coated pit initiation . The Journal of cell biology 191 , 1381 - 1393 . Loerke , D . , Mettlen , M . , Yarar , D . , Jaqaman , K . , Jaqaman , H . , Danuser , G . , Schmid , S . L . , 2009 . Cargo and dynamin regulate clathrin - coated pit maturation . PLoS biology 7 , e57 . Maupin , P . , Pollard , T . D . , 1983 . Improved preservation and staining of HeLa cell actin filaments , clathrin - coated membranes , and other cytoplasmic structures by tannic acid - glutaraldehyde - saponin fixation . The Journal of cell biology 96 , 51 - 62 . Merrifield , C . J . , Perrais , D . , Zenisek , D . , 2005 . Coupling between clathrin - coated - pit invagination , cortactin recruitment , and membrane scission observed in live cells . Cell 121 , 593 - 606 . Merrifield , C . J . , Feldman , M . E . , Wan , L . , Almers , W . , 2002 . Imaging actin and dynamin recruitment during invagination of single clathrin - coated pits . Nature cell biology 4 , 691 - 698 . Mettlen , M . , Loerke , D . , Yarar , D . , Danuser , G . , Schmid , S . L . , 2010 . Cargo - and adaptor - specific mechanisms regulate clathrin - mediated endocytosis . The Journal of cell biology 188 , 919 - 933 . Nicol , A . , Nermut , M . V . , 1987 . A new type of substratum adhesion structure in NRK cells revealed by correlated interference reflection and electron microscopy . European journal of cell biology 43 , 348 - 357 . Nunez , D . , Antonescu , C . , Mettlen , M . , Liu , A . , Schmid , S . L . , Loerke , D . , Danuser , G . , 2011 . Hotspots organize clathrin - mediated endocytosis by efficient recruitment and retention of nucleating resources . Traffic 12 , 1868 - 1878 . Pumplin , D . W . , 1989 . Acetylcholine receptor clusters of rat myotubes have at least three domains with distinctive cytoskeletal and membranous components . The Journal of cell biology 109 , 739 - 753 . Robinson , M . S . , 2015 . Forty Years of Clathrin - coated Vesicles . Traffic 16 , 1210 - 1238 . Saffarian , S . , Cocucci , E . , Kirchhausen , T . , 2009 . Distinct dynamics of endocytic clathrin - coated pits and coated plaques . PLoS biology 7 , e1000191 . Saleem , M . , Morlot , S . , Hohendahl , A . , Manzi , J . , Lenz , M . , Roux , A . , 2015 . A balance between membrane elasticity and polymerization energy sets the shape of spherical clathrin coats . Nature communications 6 , 6249 . Sankaranarayanan , S . , Ryan , T . A . , 2001 . Calcium accelerates endocytosis of vSNAREs at hippocampal synapses . Nature neuroscience 4 , 129 - 136 . Shen , Y . , Rosendale , M . , Campbell , R . E . , Perrais , D . , 2014 . pHuji , a pH - sensitive red fluorescent protein for imaging of exo - and endocytosis . The Journal of cell biology 207 , 419 - 432 . Steer , C . J . , Heuser , J . H . , 1991 . Clathrin and coated vesicles : critical determinants of intracellular trafficking . , p . 47 - 89 , in : C . J . Steer and J . H . Heuser , Eds . ) , Intracellular trafficking of proteins . , Cambridge University Press , Bath Press , Avon , G . B . Steer , C . J . H . J . , 1991 . Clathrin and coated vesicles : critical determinants of intracellular trafficking . , p . 47 - 102 , in : C . J . H . Steer , J . A . , ( Ed . ) , Intracellular Trafficking of Proteins , Press Syndicate , University of Cambridge . Sund , S . E . , Swanson , J . A . , Axelrod , D . , 1999 . Cell membrane orientation visualized by polarized total internal reflection fluorescence . Biophysical journal 77 , 2266 - 2283 . Taylor , M . J . , Perrais , D . , Merrifield , C . J . , 2011 . A high precision survey of the molecular dynamics of mammalian clathrin - mediated endocytosis . PLoS biology 9 , e1000604 . Taylor , M . J . , Lampe , M . , Merrifield , C . J . , 2012 . A feedback loop between dynamin and actin recruitment during clathrin - mediated endocytosis . PLoS biology 10 , e1001302 . Teckchandani , A . , Mulkearns , E . E . , Randolph , T . W . , Toida , N . , Cooper , J . A . , 2012 . The clathrin adaptor Dab2 recruits EH domain scaffold proteins to regulate integrin beta1 endocytosis . Molecular biology of the cell 23 , 2905 - 2916 . Umasankar , P . K . , Sanker , S . , Thieman , J . R . , Chakraborty , S . , Wendland , B . , Tsang , M . , Traub , L . M . , 2012 . Distinct and separable activities of the endocytic clathrin - coat components Fcho1 / 2 and AP - 2 in developmental patterning . Nature cell biology 14 , 488 - 501 . Vassilopoulos , S . , Gentil , C . , Laine , J . , Buclez , P . O . , Franck , A . , Ferry , A . , Precigout , G . , Roth , R . , Heuser , J . E . , Brodsky , F . M . , Garcia , L . , Bonne , G . , Voit , T . , Pietri - Rouxel , F . , Bitoun , M . , 2014 . Actin scaffolding by clathrin heavy chain is required for skeletal muscle sarcomere organization . The Journal of cell biology 205 , 377 - 393 . Wang , L . , Audhya , A . , 2014 . In vivo imaging of C . elegans endocytosis . Methods 68 , 518 - 528 . Watts , C . , Marsh , M . , 1992 . Endocytosis : what goes in and how ? Journal of cell science 103 ( Pt 1 ) , 1 - 8 . Wilbur , J . D . , Hwang , P . K . , Ybe , J . A . , Lane , M . , Sellers , B . D . , Jacobson , M . P . , Fletterick , R . J . , Brodsky , F . M . , 2010 . Conformation switching of clathrin light chain regulates clathrin lattice assembly . Developmental cell 18 , 841 - 848 . Yu , C . H . , Rafiq , N . B . , Cao , F . , Zhou , Y . , Krishnasamy , A . , Biswas , K . H . , Ravasio , A . , Chen , Z . , Wang , Y . H . , Kawauchi , K . , Jones , G . E . , Sheetz , M . P . , 2015 . Integrin - beta3 clusters recruit clathrin - mediated endocytic machinery in the absence of traction force . Nature communications 6 , 8672 . Acknowledgements . SV was supported by ANR young researcher grant N°ANR - 14 - CE12 - 0001 - 01 ( project EndoMechano ) . CM was supported by Projet Fondation ARC N°PJA20131200440 .