Spatial Hypertext and the Practice of Information Triage Catherine C . Marshall 1 and Frank M . Shipman III Department of Computer Science Texas A & M University College Station , TX 77843 - 3112 ( 415 ) 812 - 4288 marshall @ parc . xerox . com , shipman @ cs . tamu . edu ABSTRACT Information triage is the process of sorting through relevant materials , and organizing them to meet the needs of the task at hand . It is a practice that has become increasingly common with the advent of “at your fingertips” information resources . To explore the characteristics of information triage and its interaction with spatial hypertext , a medium we claim supports the process , we have studied subjects engaged in a time - constrained decision - making task using a large set of relevant documents . We use the study task to investigate information triage under three different conditions : one in which the participants used paper documents , and two others in which the participants used variants of VIKI , a spatial hypertext system . Our findings suggest that during information triage attentional resources are devoted to evaluating materials and organizing them , so they can be read and reread as they return to mind . Accordingly , hypertext tools to support the practice should facilitate the rapid assimilation and assessment of new material , aid in the creation and management of a fluid category structure , allow readers to track their own progress through the information , and use minimum - effort methods to promote the intelligibility of results . KEYWORDS : information triage ; analysis ; information workspaces ; qualitative study ; gathering interfaces , spatial hypertext ; VIKI ; digital libraries . 1 INTRODUCTION An analyst fires off a query to a Web search engine or other on - line information resource and retrieves the 100 top - ranked documents . Most of them appear to be relevant to the task that prompted the search . What does the analyst do next ? In this situation , it is common practice to print the relevant retrieved materials , mark them up with highlighters and the briefest of marginalia , and put them into piles [ 9 ] . In this way , the analyst begins to make sense of the materials , to understand how they add up , and to explore alternative explanations , evaluations , or designs - - to produce the expected results that motivated the query in the first place . We are investigating how spatial hypertext can support this activity as well as other aspects of information - intensive work . The process we describe appears to be a central part of using materials retrieved from large - scale information resources like the Web . Information triage is the process of sorting through ( the possibly numerous ) relevant materials , and organizing them to meet the needs of the task at hand . The term “triage” seems particularly appropriate for this activity , since it is often time - constrained , and requires quick assessment based on insufficient knowledge . It is increasingly true that people do not have enough time to read all the information that they collect - - information that might have always existed , but is now at their fingertips . They must develop and apply strategies to scan , locate , skim , organize , and evaluate , instead of engaging in focused reading . They rely on what Joyce refers to as “successive attendings” to the same materials [ 6 ] , rather than on scholarly reading and note - taking . If a retrieved article is important , it will be read again and again for new levels of detail as the reader’s understanding changes . As Joyce points out , “The value of what we collect is not as much embodied in what it is as in how we found it and why we keep it . ” Because many types of information are becoming readily available through facilities like digital libraries , and because there is an increasing emphasis on the rapid production of results , computer - based tools for information triage ( and other interpretive activities ) are vital . We can see this trend realized in Web workspaces like VIKI [ 12 ] , Eastgate’s Web Squirrel [ 1 ] , or the Web Forager [ 2 ] . The reader is transformed into a gatherer , as Rosenberg suggests [ 16 ] . To better understand the activity of information triage , and the interaction between computer - based tools and the process and results of information triage , we have 1 . Author’s current address : Xerox PARC , 3333 Coyote Hill Road , Palo Alto , CA 94304 USA conducted a qualitative study of people given a fictitious , but realistic , task . In the study described in this paper , we have presented subjects with a task that is modeled after an actual analysis performed in an industrial setting . In the study , subjects use a document corpus formed by culling a representative subset of the materials used in the real analysis . The aspects of the task that we are focusing on are : ( 1 ) Strategies for dealing with too much relevant material over a constrained time period ; ( 2 ) Methods of manipulating documents to make sense of them , including informal mechanisms for category creation and ways people keep track of their own activities ; ( 3 ) Ways people manage the complexity of an evolving information space ; and ( 4 ) How people create intelligible organizations ( that is , organizations that can be apprehended by other readers ) . We plan to use these results in our future development efforts . Our study explores the practice of information triage in two different ways . First , we investigate how people use paper documents while they are sorting through and evaluating information . Second , we use two variations of an experimental spatial hypertext tool , VIKI , to provide a technological substrate for the activity . VIKI is based on a spatial notion of hypertext ; it provides users with visual and spatial affordances for organizing and interpreting information [ 12 ] . The tool’s design is based on previous studies of how people organize information in space [ 13 ] . Using this tool , people manipulate individual lexia ( articles , notes , and other locally coherent units ) as objects , and are able to create hierarchically nested spaces as collections . The relational structure remains largely implicit , and is available through heuristic recognition [ 17 ] . Our study differs from other studies of how people organize materials in their offices [ 8 , 10 , 11 ] , since those studies are not based around a focused task , but rather aimed at general “office life . ” This study also differs from past studies of information - organizing tasks such as [ 14 ] in that we are departing from a scholarly notion of analysis , and investigating the exigencies of a world with fragmented attention , plenty of on - line resources and search tools , and a reported more urgent need for results [ 4 ] . In this paper , we describe our study approach and discuss our qualitative results . We conclude by discussing how hypertext tools for information triage might interact with the existing practice . 2 DESCRIPTION OF STUDY Before describing the study in detail , we will briefly describe VIKI , the spatial hypertext system used by many of the subjects in the study . The description is a condensed version of the document used to train the subjects in the use of the system . 2 . 1 Relevant Features of VIKI VIKI is a tool for organizing and interpreting information . VIKI allows users to create and manipulate visual objects in a 2 dimensional space much like drawing or presentation software ( i . e . MacDraw , PowerPoint ) . Objects can have their color , border width , and geometric shape changed using buttons below the menubar . ( See Figure 1 . 2 ) Each object contains textual materials - - in this case , the initial set of objects that subjects saw contained articles from an on - line service . Double - clicking with the mouse on an object presents the complete contents of the object in a separate window . Users can make virtual copies of objects - - new visual symbols that refer to the same textual content , but which may have different visual properties . VIKI also allows users to create new spaces inside the current space . These new spaces are called collections , since they collect objects together . Objects and other collections may be put inside collections , and collections may be moved , colored , and reshaped like objects . In addition collections can be named . By double clicking on any visible collection border , the user maximizes , or navigates into , the collection . Like Boxer [ 3 ] , this causes the collection to fill the space available in the window . Double clicking on a maximized collection’s border navigates back out of that collection . Other facilities in VIKI helpful to the information triage study task are Search and Zoom . Search performs a full text search and displays the objects it finds in a dialog window , ordered according to a heuristic assessment of their relevance . Zoom scales objects in the space . The “Show all” zoom option resizes all of the objects and collections in the space to fit within the current window , so that no objects or collections are hidden ( unless , of course , the scale is such that they are beyond screen resolution ) . 2 . In this ﬁgure and subsequent ﬁgures , the colors in VIKI are represented as distinct shades of gray . Figure 1 : VIKI screen showing objects and collections . 2 . 2 Subject Selection The 15 subjects of this study were students just beginning an undergraduate Computer - Human Interaction class in a computer science department . The subjects ranged from 3 . 5 to 17 years of experience with computers , and 3 . 5 to 11 years of experience with windowing systems . All subjects had at least some prior experience with drawing programs like MacDraw , MS PowerPoint , or CorelDraw . 2 . 3 Study Task and Conditions Subjects were given a scenario in which they had to recommend a machine translation package for a corporation with operations in Korea , Japan , Mexico , and the U . S . To help them make this recommendation , they were given 75 articles of mixed length related to machine translation , retrieved from a commercial service . Subjects worked alone and had 45 minutes to look through the articles , organizing them as they saw fit . At the end of this time , the subjects were asked to recommend a translation system to their manager . The subjects were also told that their manager would look at their notes and workspaces to better understand their recommendations . The subjects were randomly assigned to one of three conditions : ( 1 ) those using the VIKI system with collections ; ( 2 ) those using the VIKI system without collections ; and ( 3 ) those using paper and standard office supplies . After completing the task , the subjects were given a questionnaire asking about their recommendations , the task itself , and prior experience with computer systems . We gave subjects using either version of VIKI a 10 - 15 minute supervised training session prior to the task . Training involved going through a brief Web document that explained the relevant features of the version of VIKI that they would be using . Subjects were encouraged to try out all of the features described in the documentation during training . After training , the subjects were given the written scenario . When they completed reading the scenario , we started VIKI . Initially , the 75 objects appeared in a list down the left - side of the window ; the “Title” field appeared on each object’s symbol . Figure 2 shows this layout ; the list of articles extended beyond the limit of the window , so subjects needed to scroll or zoom to see the entire list . We then left the subjects alone for 45 minutes , interacting only to restart the system when it crashed or to warn them when the 45 minutes were almost up . Subjects using paper and office supplies sat at a clean 5’ by 2 . 5’ desk ; off to one side of the desk were assorted fasteners post - its , pens , and highlighters . After subjects had read the printed scenario , we gave them the 2 / 3” tall stack of trade press articles and instructed them to use the desk and floor , if necessary , to complete the task . Again we left the subjects alone except to warn them when the 45 minutes were almost up . 2 . 4 Questionnaire We gave each subject an exit questionnaire at the conclusion of the study task . The questionnaire confirmed the subjects’ choice of translation software and how they would support such a decision . The questionnaire was also designed to help us assess how the subjects felt about the task ( whether they were confident in their recommendations , whether they thought that more time would have helped them complete the task , and whether they thought more time would have changed the task’s outcome ) . The questionnaire included a few questions about the subjects’ past experiences with computer systems . This allowed us to determine their familiarity with computers , windowed interfaces , drawing and presentation software , idea processing and brainstorming software , and whether they had used any commercial software they felt would help them in this particular task . 2 . 5 Other Data Collected We collected other data that resulted from each subject performing the task , including the way in which they had organized the articles . In the paper condition , we used a digital camera to record an image of the desk , and fastened together any piles of papers for later examination . In the two conditions using VIKI , we saved the subject’s final layout . During the course of the task , VIKI created a file containing the order of “undoable” actions ( move , create , delete , change visual properties , change text , . . . ) performed by the subject . 3 RESULTS After 45 minutes of work , each subject was able to recommend a machine - translation system for his or her hypothetical corporation . Many of them recommended the same system ( NEC’s Pivot ) to their managers , although there were several others described in the set of articles that would have met the task’s specifications ; a few subjects recommended these variants . Few were very confident with their recommendation , given the sharp time constraints in which the task was performed . This result was constant across the three conditions , although in general , the group using paper felt more confident in their recommendations than the two using the computer - based tool . Figure 2 : Initial layout subjects using VIKI saw . Example results from each of the three conditions are shown below . In the discussion , P < n > refers to the five subjects who used paper copies of the articles ; NCV < n > refers to the five subjects who used VIKI with objects only , no collections ; and FV < n > refers to the five subjects who used VIKI with both objects and collections . Figure 3 shows P1’s desktop after completing the task . The subject has piled materials into different stacks , and has indicated that a small stack of papers pertaining to his recommendation are for his manager ( the papers that are partially hanging off the front edge of the desk ) . Figure 4 shows NCV4’s screen at the close of the task . Once again , the material has been organized , and a small set of articles pertaining to the two candidate translation packages the subject has located are left in evidence . Figure 5 shows FV1’s final screen layout . Objects representing the bulk of the materials remain on the left side of the window . The subject has created collections to show his recommendation and some general articles that his manager might read to better understand machine translation . Some characteristics of task performance held across the three conditions ( paper and the two system variations ) ; others were specific to the medium . Individual differences in strategy were also apparent . The common elements of the three use situations were : ( 1 ) The articles were organized according the nature of the task , rather than by other strategies suggested by their content . For example , many articles were press releases for product announcements or evaluations of specific software packages , yet our subjects often did not choose to cluster them this way ( by system or software package name , or by vendor ) . Pragmatic and rhetorically - oriented categories were also created under each of the three conditions . ( 2 ) Subjects found ways to create categories and subcategories within the confines of the particular medium they were working in . They used the affordances of the medium creatively to transcend its limitations . ( 3 ) Subjects devised a variety of ways to communicate to their hypothetical manager about the information spaces they created . A few left explicit notes , but others relied on the structures themselves as being readily intelligible to their expected reader . 3 . 1 Task - Based Organization Most of the subjects attempted to organize materials into semantic categories based on the constraints of the task , rather than the topic of the article . As Kidd has noted , a knowledge worker’s ability to organize information depends greatly on the role it will fill [ 8 ] . Our subjects created three kinds of task - based organizations : semantic categories ( derived from article content ) ; pragmatic categories ( based on ultimate expected usefulness of the article in performing the task , especially within the 45 minute time period ) ; and rhetorical structures ( based on the explicit requirement to communicate and support their decisions ) . The semantic categories the subjects created are similar in all three conditions . Subjects created categories based on the language pairs that the corporation was posed as needing ( English - - > Korean , for example ) and sorted articles Figure 3 : Desktop after P1 completed task . Piles of paper around sides were used to categorize articles while center pile in front describes recommendation . Figure 4 : NCV4’s organization at end of task . Figure 5 : Final layout for FV1 . accordingly . Several also created subcategories , based on source language , then target language . One subject called his higher - level category “Japanese - - > ? ” and the subcategories beneath that “Japanese - - > English” , “Japanese - - > Korean” , and so forth . Another created categories for language pairs , and subcategories based on additional languages handled . We observed pragmatic categorizations under all three conditions . Most subjects created special categories to contain the longer , multi - topic articles ; these categories were labelled “General Translation Articles” , “background information” , and “general info” for example . Articles that described systems handling extraneous language pairs found their way into categories like “Unneeded translations” . Several subjects considered the age of the materials as a relevance , and grouped them accordingly . One subject , using VIKI without collections , color - coded the older information gray , while several others pushed it off to the side . One of the subjects using paper tossed these articles into a pile on the floor . Subjects outlined simple rhetorical structures to address the directions they were given , to organize the materials well enough that their manager would be able to look through them so she could learn more about their recommendations . One subject using the full system created a presentational structure with PRO and CON collections which both contained longer articles , and a BEST OPTIONS collection that contained a list of relevant articles . ( See Figure 6 . ) Interestingly , the titles of the articles in the PROS and CONS collections also reflect the positive or negative qualities the subject has ascribed to their categories , and the titles of the BEST OPTIONS selections both mention the software providers . Others used an even simpler strategy of simply making a list of the articles of interest or , in the paper case , a distinct pile , set apart from the rest of the materials . 3 . 2 Using the Affordances of the Medium How were categories created ? They were created , regardless of the study conditions , but here we observed some differences based on the affordances of the various media . In the paper condition , subjects were given leave to use the physical space of the desk and floor , a variety of fastening equipment ( paper clips , tape ) , marking devices ( pens and highlighters ) , and post - its . VIKI , used without collections as it is in the NCV condition , allows users to change the color , shape , text style , line width , size , and spatial positioning of objects . With collections , VIKI also allows users to create new subspaces , with varying visual properties of line width , color , and size , which can also be positioned in the space that contains them . Thus each medium provided our subjects with different ways of creating categories - - many of which were used . The subjects using paper copies of the articles generally sorted materials into piles . Several subjects labeled the piles with post - its to describe the contents of the individual piles . To mark “articles to return to” , one of the subjects used post - its as a bookmark or signal . Subjects also used the highlighting pens ( or , in one case , underlines ) to emphasize the words or phrases they used to put the material into the piles . Beyond the post - it labels and within - article Figure 6 : Final organization from FV3 . highlighting , few annotations were observed ; the subjects did not take additional notes , nor did they scribble marginalia . The subjects using VIKI without collections , the NCV condition , made heavy use of spatial structures and color for basic categorization . Each of the five subjects performed the categorization in a slightly different way , but most took advantage of the ability to use color and to manipulate objects in space . A few used object shape to encode category information . Figure 7 shows a portion of a space created by subject NCV5 . Like the other VIKI subjects , this subject has used lists to organize the space . In the lower left corner of the window , the subject has used several other category - creation conventions . First , he has color - coded the articles to match the category label . The article whose title begins “Kodensha develops Japanese - to - Korean . . . ” is the same color and shape as its category label “English / Korean” ( the article mentions the English / Korean translation capabilities of the system ) . The subject has also created subcategory elements that are diamond shaped to match their label “English / Korean Spanish / English” . Each of the articles that is this shape and color describes a software package that handles these language pairs . We saw similar strategies using shape and color in three of the five subjects’ work ; the other two made extensive use of unlabeled lists to sort the articles . One of the subjects , NCV3 , uses his exit questionnaire to explain the organization of the space : “grayed out documents are older ( before 1990 ) columns are : multilanguage E / J J / K E / S not useful important documents are in red , orange , or green” A footnote to the subject’s questionnaire adds : “should have made all documents that talk about Fujitsu and / or Atlas the same color ( all blue documents pertain to Sharp ) ” Once again , under NCV conditions the subjects did not really take notes , although during the training each of the subjects demonstrated that they could create new objects and type into them freely . The two out of five subjects who Figure 7 . Categories and subcategories using color and shape . created new objects did so to label their categories . Thus their use of new objects was directly analogous to the use of post - its by the subjects under the paper condition . The FV condition offered the subjects the ability to create collections , which they invariably did , to categorize materials . The categories were similar in type to the kinds created under the other conditions . Figure 8 shows an interesting contrast to the category / sub - category structure exhibited by Figure 7 . Here hierarchical nesting of collections ( spaces ) is used to create something analogous to Figure 7’s complexly - coded structure . The subjects’ organizational strategies changed over the task’s duration as they became more familiar with the materials . Partial codings were in evidence in many of the VIKI conditions - - for example , an object or two is turned orange because the article covered English / Spanish translation , but then the coding strategy is discontinued as other aspects of the task come to light . Such a change in strategy is evident in the quote from NCV3 ( reported above ) . Many other subjects reported that , given more time , they would have changed their organizing strategy . 3 . 3 Communicating about the Organization of Materials The subjects all responded to the directions that they communicate to their manager not only their decision about which software package to buy , but also about how their materials were organized so she could understand the decision . In fact , the scenario poses that the subject will be at the corporation’s facility in Japan during the software purchase ( and will be called in the middle of the night if there are questions ) . The subjects took three different approaches to this communication . The first was to organize the space ( whether physical or computer - based ) with an eye toward its future intelligibility ; the structure itself is an embodiment of the communication . We see evidence of this strategy in the use of post - its , labelling objects , and named collections ; in fact , the ability that collections offer to help manage space ( the collections can be resized to hide constituent objects ) seems to lead to neater , more visually intelligible structures in the FV condition . Figures 3 , 7 and 8 show examples of communication through structure . In a second approach , subjects left explicit notes for their manager , with the assumption that the process they used to sort the materials and find the appropriate system ( s ) were not of particular interest . Subject P2 left his materials sorted into two piles on his desk - - the materials ancillary to his decision , and a stack with a post - it note on top “Recommend we check into these . ” Figure 9 shows P2’s communication strategy ; Figure 5 above shows the analogous strategy in VIKI with collections ( FV1 ) . Finally , some of the subjects described their codings after the fact ( in the questionnaire ) , as a step toward making their organizations readable . This strategy seemed the most prevalent in NCV , since color and shape were apt to be used as tacit codings . When asked what notes he would leave his manager , Subject NCV5 reported , “A key describing the color coding I used and the shape coding for identifying the important points . ” 4 DISCUSSION This study gives us some new insight into both the practice of information triage and technology to support it . Informal discussions with people who do information - intensive work tells us that the work is changing . A description of “A Day in the Life of . . . ” an information analyst who is responsible for daily report reveals intense time pressures , interruptions , and an hour or two to read through roughly as many ( to twice as many ) articles as we have given our subjects [ 4 ] . Information triage is a real outgrowth of new information technologies . Figure 8 . A category / sub - category structure using collections Figure 9 . Communication strategy in paper condition What are the changes it embodies , and what are the tools it demands ? 4 . 1 Organization vs . Reading Information triage implies changes in reading and attention . Tools to support information triage may change the nature of reading even more , by making quick , partial interpretation of content possible , and multiple readings the order of the day . In general , our subjects who used paper articles and physical space as their organizing medium read more . This result is unsurprising in some ways , since it is still easier to read paper documents than documents on the screen . But we might expect this effect to simply manifest itself in paper subjects getting through more articles . Instead , we observed that organizing became more central than reading when the subjects used computer - based tools ; they relied extensively on appropriate title ( which is what they could see , after all ) , and on the full text search facility the tool provided . What would subjects have done , given additional time ? This is a key question for information triage , since time is assumed to be in short supply , especially in comparison to the sheer volume of information it is possible to obtain at the outset of a task like this . Across all three groups , subjects reported that they thought about supplementing the comparison , or completing what they were doing when time ran out . However , there were some notable differences among the three when it came to how they described further activities . On their exit questionnaires , the subjects who used paper more often reported that they would read for additional detail : P1 : “Read more detailed info . about currently available products ( the BYTE article , p . 177 ) And find out about hardware requirements , software capability , and cost” P2 : “Organize the material and look through it again . This time I would read more and look for detail , about each product in order to organize them better and make a more informed choice . ” P3 : “Read the info that I selected as critical more carefully and perhaps highlight some important text for my boss to help support my decision” By contrast , subjects who used the two variations of the VIKI system ( NCV , the version without collections , and FV , the unmodified version ) focused on searches and structure - building . The subjects who used NCV generally worried about how the documents were organized . When they were asked how they would spend additional time , three of the subjects came up with similar responses : NCV2 : “Finish the organization , then select the best one of each group” NCV3 : “better job of re - organizing the documents : I spent my time coming up with a recommendation , not organizing the documents” NCV4 : “reorganize things into companies & then read all the independent studies . ” Subjects who used the complete system ( FV ) focused even more closely on the structure - building activities suggested by the task . The following three responses to the “extra time” question all seem to arise from the use of the system’s collection mechanism to organize the materials : FV1 : “Try to develop a convenient + easy to follow filing system for the articles - 1 - 1 translation 1 - 2 “ 2 - 1 “ many - many “ FV2 : “Have a box with recommended packages” FV5 : “I would organize each big collection into smaller collections and possibly change some of the names that I currently have on the big collections . Also I would look a little more carefully at some of the articles as some might be misplaced . ” Of course , one of the objectives of the task was to organize the materials , so it is clear that some of the responses arise out of a desire to follow our directions . Yet the paper group seems to have a much clearer focus on reading and the task itself ( hence the desire read for more detail ) , while the computer - based groups have focused on the tool , using full text search capabilities , and producing the visually apparent organization of materials . The group who used paper documents had the advantage of many more cues about the scope of the task . They could easily ascertain the length of individual documents , as well as their progress through the stack of articles . They also could manipulate the documents with far greater facility - - for example , they could highlight text , an activity the computer - based tool doesn’t support . Yet , when we demonstrated the system to the subjects who used paper , they seemed to feel that it would have been useful in performing the task . In all three conditions , the longer articles were retained as potentially valuable , but they were less often used or read . The short , single - topic articles were more often attended to and used in the subject’s decision . Unsurprisingly , many of the subjects felt that additional time would have been valuable , and would have allowed them to take a closer look at these articles ( although several felt it would not have changed their decision , only their ability to support it to their manager ) . In the set of articles we gave the subjects , information about several of the systems was distributed among many articles ; for example , a subject would need to integrate information from multiple articles to know that Fujitsu’s Atlas translation package addressed translations among the scenario’s four languages . Few subjects had the time to do this kind of integration . Thus distributed information was discarded in favor of localized information . Over half of the subjects ( 8 / 15 ) recommended the NEC system , the only one that was described in short articles that mentioned all the languages in question . Subject P1 reported : “Most of the information did not affect my decision . It was simply based on two pieces of information : the NEC articles and the Byte articles . ” Traditional methods of scholarship and analysis would assume a focused reading ; all candidate software packages would have been discovered and evaluated in such a regime . Instead , information triage practices more closely follow pragmatic notions of sufficiency . 4 . 2 System Design Considerations From our observations of subjects engaging in information triage , we arrive at a set of system design refinements for supporting this kind of process . We know from this study , as well as previous studies , that rapid assimilation of new material , category creation and the management of complex information spaces , and easy ways of promoting intelligibility are all vital to the process . How can the additional details of this study’s results be translated into design refinements , given a gathering - style hypertext system as our base . Rapid Assimilation of New Material . The rapid assimilation of new material relies on techniques that both draw on and diverge from information retrieval ; three of our “Paper” subjects noted that they would have liked to use software that would let them search . Unlike most information retrieval settings , we assume that the user is already working within a task - based corpus ; materials have been winnowed down to just those that are potentially relevant to the work at hand . In our observations , most searches that people did were motivated by a desire to cluster documents into specific semantic categories . For example , the searches people performed mostly involved individual language names , language pairs , or system names . Heuristic approaches based on partial representations of domain concepts and instances would help users create such clusters . Subjects also expressed a desire to constrain searches to a designated portion of the space . Since longer , multi - topic articles proved to be such a problem in a time - constrained situation , techniques for topic / subtopic segmentation would support a user’s ability to locate individual text segments of interest in longer articles . Some work , such as Hearst’s TextTiling has already been done in this area [ 5 ] . Better facilities for within - document interpretive marking - - analogous to VIKI’s whole - document marking capabilities - - may help practitioners set off and record impressions of these text segments once they have been identified . Category Creation and the Management of Complexity . The second design aspect , category creation , poses some interesting questions . In VIKI , we assume that structure is hypertextual - - that is , users will refer to content from many different contexts . VIKI’s data model implements this by distinguishing between object and symbol , where the object is the underlying content , and the symbol is a visual reference . In analysis , this distinction is intended to support multiple interpretations and multiple uses of the same material . In information triage , this distinction may not serve the task as well as it does subsequent interpretive activities , since people use the references as feedback for “how far along” they are - - how much they’ve looked at already and how much is left . To take off from Rosenberg’s discussion , they are using VIKI to track their own activity as reader - gatherers [ 16 ] . Hence they are managing the gathering and interpretation process itself using the tool . We observed that few subjects distinguished between objects and symbols , instead preferring to treat the object and symbol as a single unit ( to them , the purple box “is” the article ) . To this end , few even reshaped or changed the visual characteristics of very many of the symbols that referred to the trade journal articles ( although some color - coding was observed , and a few changed their shape ) . Instead , they were used as is - - dragged around in space , or put into collections . Collections , on the other hand , proved to be very useful in managing scale and the complexity of a multiple category triage process . One of the subjects working in VIKI without collections reported that “For me , it might have been easier to use a filing system ( preferably under OS / 2 , but Windows File Manager would have worked ) ” . When subjects could construct a hierarchy ( the FV condition ) , they did . In fact , collections seemed to support the use of symbol - as - object . How can we interpret these results ? We might argue that if symbols are to be regarded as fixed representations of objects , then it might be best to use them to reclaim some of the visual cues lost in an electronic environment . Indications of article length and age would have helped the subjects according to their actions and the questionnaire results . Monty has found that such cues are important to information systems users [ 14 ] . On the other hand , information triage is only the start of a more extended interpretive process , one that is highly fluid in nature . Even during their brief tenure as systems analysts , our subjects experienced meaning changes midstream , as their understanding of the task evolved and familiarity with the materials grew . As Kaplan and Moulthrop point out , semantic spaces need not be limited to the same degree of fixity as architectonic spaces [ 7 ] . Intelligibility of Organizations . Rapid performance of tasks does not bode well for requesting extraneous work in documenting either process or product , or in building complex argument structures . Our subjects left only the briefest indications of how they had organized materials . An automated way to meaningfully document process , such as Reeve’s embedded history [ 15 ] , would have helped our hypothetical manager decode the subjects’ organizations . Structure - building mechanisms that support categorization and space management ( such as collections ) turned out to be a great boon to intelligibility in our study . The meaning of color codings was not always made perspicuous in the space , but collections were , for the most part , self - documenting . 5 CONCLUSIONS In the final regard , what did we learn from performing this study ? We expected a strong influence of hypertext technology on the practice of information triage . One of the strongest influences arises before our technology even enters the picture . The original analysis task - - the task our study was modeled after - - took place in 1992 and used a commercial service . At the time this paper was submitted , a complex query that used Alta Vista to gather like materials returned more than 1000 Web pages 3 ; most look at least as informative as the collection gathered in 1992 . By the time we revised this paper in January , 1997 , the same query returned about 6000 pages ; a more carefully tuned version returned 2000 . Our subjects felt overwhelmed and frustrated with 75 articles ; experienced analysts cite 100 - 150 documents as their limit in a similar situation . The ready availability of the materials and the exigencies of the practice are compelling . Naturally , people take advantage of the medium they are working in , be it paper or a gathering system like VIKI . As Joyce predicted , their main concern is how to assess the materials they have , and how they return to them as the materials return to mind . Although our paper - using subjects did more reading , reading is less central to the practice of triage than quick assessment ; this subset of our subjects immediately warmed to the idea of a hypertext gathering tool for manipulating and structuring the documents . We expect to see more such hypertext gathering tools in the future . Our study confirms that it is important that they include affordances for fluid recording of interpretation , ways of dealing with the great variety of pragmatic issues that arise ( longer documents , for example ) , and the means for triage practitioners to track their own activities within the space . REFERENCES [ 1 ] Bernstein , M . Web Squirrel . http : / / www . eastgate . com / squirrel / [ 2 ] Card , S . , Robertson , G . , and York , W . The WebBook and the Web Forager : An Information Workspace for the World - Wide Web . Proceedings of CHI ‘96 , Vancouver , B . C . ( April 14 - 18 , 1996 ) . 3 . The query was of the form : ( ( language near translation ) and software ) and ( Spanish or Japanese or Korean ) . [ 3 ] diSessa , A . , Abelson , H . “Boxer : A Reconstructible Computational Medium . ” Communications of the ACM , 29 , 9 , ( 1986 ) , pp . 859 - 868 . [ 4 ] Gifford , D . “Life in the Trenches . ” A presentation given at the ARPA Information Science and Technology Superlink Workshop , Arlington , VA , July 19 - 20 , 1995 . [ 5 ] Hearst , M . A . Content and Structure in Automated Full - Text Information Access . Ph . D . Dissertation , Dept . of Computer Science , Univ . of California , Berkeley , 1994 . [ 6 ] Joyce , M . “The lingering errantness of place . ” A talk given at the ACRL / LITA Joint Presidents Program , American Library Association , 114th Annual Conference , Chicago , June 26 , 1995 . [ 7 ] Kaplan , N . and Moulthrop , S . “Where No Mind Has Gone Before : Ontological Design for Virtual Spaces . ” Proceedings of ECHT ‘94 , Edinburgh ( September 18 - 23 , 1994 ) , pp . 206 - 216 . [ 8 ] Kidd , A . “The Marks are on the Knowledge Worker . ” Proc . of CHI ’94 , ( Apr . 24 - 28 , 1994 ) , pp . 186 - 191 . [ 9 ] Levy , D . M . , Marshall , C . C . “Going Digital : A Look at the Assumptions Underlying Digital Libraries . ” Communications of the ACM , 38 , 4 , ( 1995 ) , pp . 77 - 84 . [ 10 ] Malone , T . W . “How do People Organize their Desks ? Implications for the Design of Office Information Systems . ” ACM Transactions on Office Information Systems , 1 , 1 ( Jan . , 1983 ) , pp . 99 - 112 [ 11 ] Mander , R . , Salomon , G . , Wong , Y . Y . “A ‘Pile’ Metaphor for Supporting Organization of Information . ” Proc . of CHI ’92 , ( May 3 - 7 , 1992 ) , pp . 627 - 634 . [ 12 ] Marshall , C . C . , Shipman , F . M . “Spatial Hypertext : Designing for Change . ” Communications of the ACM , 38 , 8 , ( 1995 ) , pp . 88 - 97 . [ 13 ] Marshall , C . C . , Shipman , F . M . “Searching for the Missing Link : Discovering Implicit Structure in Spatial Hypertext . ” Proceedings of Hypertext ‘93 , Seattle , WA ( November 14 - 18 , 1993 ) , pp . 217 - 230 . [ 14 ] Monty , M . L . Issues for Supporting Notetaking and Note Using in the Computer Environment . Ph . D . Dissertation , Department of Psychology , Univ . of California , San Diego , 1990 . [ 15 ] Reeves , B . N . Supporting Collaborative Design by Embedded Communication and History in Design Artifacts . Ph . D . Dissertation , Dept . of Computer Science , Univ . of Colorado , 1993 . [ 16 ] Rosenberg , J . “The Structure of Hypertext Activity . ” Proceedings of Hypertext ‘96 , Washington , D . C . ( March 16 - 20 , 1996 ) , pp . 22 - 30 . [ 17 ] Shipman , F . M . , Marshall , C . C . , Moran , T . P . “Finding and Using Implicit Structure in Human - Organized Spatial Layouts of Information . ” Proc . of CHI ‘95 , ( May 7 - 11 , 1995 ) , pp . 346 - 353 .