Place - Based Policymaking and HCI : Opportunities and Challenges for Technology Design Jennifer Manuel & Clara Crivellaro Open Lab Newcastle University Newcastle upon Tyne , UK j . manuel2 @ ncl . ac . uk , clara . crivellaro @ ncl . ac . uk ABSTRACT There has been a growing interest in HCI in designing and developing technology to support democratic participation , particularly in the domain of urban planning or place - based research . In addition , the HCI field has increasingly considered the intersection of HCI and policymaking to understand how our research can have a broader impact . In this paper , we report on a series of workshops with citizens and city planners to explore place - based policymaking through the case study of neighbourhood planning in the UK . Our analysis highlights the tensions , opportunities and challenges faced by citizens in creating policy . Drawing from our findings , we stress the need for HCI to be actively involved in supporting , innovating and ( re ) designing civic policymaking processes while emphasising design considerations for the development of technological tools . Author Keywords Policymaking ; digital civics ; citizen participation CSS Concepts Human - centered computing  Human computer interaction ( HCI )  HCI design and evaluation  Field studies INTRODUCTION Human - Computer Interaction ( HCI ) has shown a continued interest in technologies for democracy and participation in political processes in domains such as education , public health , social care and urban planning [ 7 , 39 , 90 , 97 ] . The ever - growing body of research is increasingly focused on supporting interaction through increasing civic participation in institutional decision - making processes and the shaping public services [ 36 , 71 ] . Much of the research centres on encouraging more citizens to participate using novel technological developments , rather than focusing on how the views of participants carry through to policymaking . Although true for many domains , here we focus on place - based and urban planning policy . Previous work in HCI and other fields has focused on the design and development of tools and services to encourage participation in government processes , usually through e - gov and e - participation tools [ 17 , 18 , 87 ] . These tools aim to digitise service delivery and find new ways for city planners to communicate with citizens , however , the goal is often to increase efficiency and reduce costs resulting in one - way , tokenistic communication [ 32 ] . However , a civic turn in HCI seeks to address some of these issues , encouraging citizens to envision and advocate for changes in their everyday lives and play a more meaningful role in the shaping of services [ 98 ] . The growth of ‘digital civics’ research has sparked the design and development of technology to support new interactions with place , supporting citizens’ views to be better heard and empowering citizens to ‘do it for themselves’ [ 47 , 65 , 76 , 96 ] . A major challenge in all of this work is the difficulty in civic participation affecting real - world policy changes [ 68 ] . When considering HCI and policymaking , there is a growing interest in how HCI research can link to and affect policy , including how the domains of technology and policy can be brought together to work more closely [ 59 ] . In addition , recent work has centred on the boundary between HCI and policymaking , exploring how research is currently translated to effect policy through intermediary organisations [ 88 ] . Such work provides the foundation as to how HCI can move further into the policy arena , however , there is little work focusing on how HCI can support or effect civic policymaking processes in the digital civics arena and , more specifically , place - based policy . This paper contributes insights from a series of workshops with citizens and city planners , and provides design implications for how HCI research can better support citizen - led policymaking processes . In this paper , we explore the opportunities and challenges for HCI and the design of technology to support democratic place - based policymaking processes . We contextualise this work within a case study of neighbourhood planning in the UK . We report on a series of workshops with citizens and city planners , and we highlight the tensions , requirements and processes that exist in developing policy . Drawing from our findings , we highlight how HCI can better support policymaking processes through the discussion of ( i ) the way in which HCI can support the ( re ) design of policy processes ; and ( ii ) the development of socio - technical tools to support place - based policymaking holistically . Permission to make digital or hard copies of part or all of this work for personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation on the first page . Copyrights for third - party components of this work must be honored . For all other uses , contact the Owner / Author . CHI ' 20 , April 25 – 30 , 2020 , Honolulu , HI , USA © 2020 Copyright is held by the owner / author ( s ) . ACM ISBN 978 - 1 - 4503 - 6708 - 0 / 20 / 04 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3313831 . 3376158 CHI 2020 Paper CHI 2020 , April 25 – 30 , 2020 , Honolulu , HI , USA Paper 31 Page 1 RELATED WORK HCI and Policymaking Policies affect our daily lives directly and indirectly through guiding actions and decisions on matters of importance , from determining land use zoning and the national approach to climate change to regulating social care systems to protect the wellbeing of citizens [ 4 ] . The policymaking process , therefore , is an important aspect of democracy that is inherently political and involves multiple stakeholders that must negotiate conflicts [ 4 ] . Policymaking , as an activity to direct decision - making about the future of social , economic and environmental affairs , is done by gathering data and evidence to influence the future , ensuring it responds to real - world issues , is viable and is realistic [ 77 ] . In recent years , HCI has considered the intersection of public policy and technology . For a long time , work focused on “two facets : ( 1 ) policy influencing science and technology and ( 2 ) science and technology informing policy” [ 59 ] – the first being policy directing ethical considerations , evaluation , research funding and regulations within research ; and the second using findings from research to improve accessibility , usability , ergonomics and increasing standards within policy [ 59 , 60 , 101 ] . Such work was key in supporting technological developments ( including democratic tools ) , and in suggesting the need for a shared language between policymakers and HCI researchers to enable collaboration [ 81 ] . However , little was done to address broader civic public policy . More recently , HCI has witnessed a civic turn with research focusing on citizen empowerment and participation in democracy [ 9 , 15 , 21 ] , but more can be done to focus on policymaking . A call for more involvement by HCI researchers highlighted the beginnings of a movement to further explore public policy more broadly , and research emerged around social networking , e - government , accessibility in the built environment and more [ 30 , 58 , 78 , 82 , 101 ] . Despite this , the majority of research focus remains on increasing participation in consultation processes and developing new innovative methods to engage citizens [ 5 , 9 , 22 , 49 , 85 ] , each of which is only a small part of an overall policymaking process . Although the purpose of this work is to encourage citizens’ voices to be heard in decision - making , there is little focus on how citizens’ voices carry through to and affect policy [ 68 ] . These issues become illuminated through the smart city agenda . HCI has developed a range of tools to support data collection and analysis in smart cities , and there has been an increase in research focusing on how citizens can be more involved in such processes [ 10 , 39 , 52 , 94 ] . Many have reported that something to aim for within the smart city agenda is data - driven policymaking in the hope that policy and evidence gaps could be filled [ 8 , 31 , 70 ] . However , there has been an acknowledgement that such research largely remains focused on technological innovation rather than innovation in policy specifically [ 69 , 99 ] . A further issue with HCI and policymaking is the need by policymakers to use standardised methods and evidence to ensure ‘sound’ policy , particularly in urban planning . It is common for policymakers to focus on evidence to ensure a “pragmatic rather an ideological stance” [ 27 ] . Scientific and quantitative knowledge is privileged despite suggestions that it has limited potential for improving the evidence base of policy [ 49 ] . What counts as evidence can also be a challenge for policymakers and adding to the issue is that HCI “is a diverse field , bringing together many different disciplines , different conceptualisations of evidence” [ 88 ] . When considering civic public policy , it has also been shown that citizens “prioritize evidence of consultation , rather than evidence for policymaking” meaning scientific , data - based knowledge is less important to citizens in policymaking and decision - making [ 48 , 83 ] . HCI and Democratic Participation Although there is limited research focusing on supporting civic policymaking as a whole , there has been a wealth of research aiming to support smaller parts of such processes . HCI research has investigated and developed tools to support activism , opinion gathering , civic discussion and debate , and increasing participation , much of which was within a context of policy changes [ 9 , 15 , 29 , 54 , 73 , 84 , 93 ] . In the field of urban planning , the norm remains for government to produce planning policy with city planners as ‘experts’ using scientific and technical evidence which directs the future of development . Increasingly , citizens are invited to participate and provide their views on proposed changes and HCI research has developed a number of tools to support this [ 23 , 47 ] . Through social media , geographical information systems ( GIS ) and other novel technologies , HCI researchers have sought to mediate civic interactions and increase participation [ 24 , 38 , 55 , 72 , 86 ] . Although positive results have been documented in research , a large body of work shows a low adoption rate of technology by governments due to a lack of skills and the fear of how tools could be abused by the public [ 17 , 18 ] . The result , therefore , is often a policy process which prioritises efficiency , reduced costs , and one - way communication with citizens [ 33 , 51 ] . Although the aim of the tools may be to engage citizens in policy changes , it is unclear how comments are taken into account ; governments complain comments are irrelevant and misinformed , and that citizens are not skilled in interacting with bureaucratic processes ; and systems rarely allow for deliberation and collaboration between citizens and governments together [ 68 , 72 ] . In contrast to this , the digital civics research agenda within HCI sets out to transform services from a traditional transactional model to a relational model supporting new interactions between governments , citizens and local organisations [ 74 ] . Technology has been designed to support improved engagement practices , more citizen - led decision - making , activism , grassroots movements and the empowerment of citizens to take action on their own terms CHI 2020 Paper CHI 2020 , April 25 – 30 , 2020 , Honolulu , HI , USA Paper 31 Page 2 Figure 1 . Simplified description of the neighbourhood planning process stages . [ 1 , 25 , 29 , 35 , 62 ] . Examples of tools that have been developed within this agenda aim to integrate social media platforms to enable sharing of political views [ 86 ] ; to enable cyclists to collect data about their everyday journeys to take action with transport planners [ 66 ] ; and to support citizens in accessing , interpreting and using data for civic advocacy and action [ 80 ] . Focusing on policy specifically , there have been some examples where HCI research has successfully affected policy , including work which focused on the collection and use of data by government and citizens to create a data ecosystem that supports new forms of participation to affect decision - making [ 26 ] . In addition , research into a platform mandated through legislation that gave power to communities in decision - making highlighted the need for greater HCI engagement in policymaking and to better consider how participation is measured [ 30 ] . However , for the most part , tools focusing on collective action and democratic participation still struggle to affect policymaking directly [ 68 ] . It is often unclear how suggestions or actions by citizens have a concrete outcome in policy and efforts to affect policymaking specifically have been disappointing [ 64 ] . This presents a new design space for HCI that can support the creation of new relationships and services between public officials and citizens in policymaking [ 19 ] . There is a need to consider the broad spectrum of democratic tools as part of broader policymaking processes so HCI could contribute to a “holistic system that serves a city” [ 99 ] . CASE STUDY Through four workshops with citizens and city planners we explore the process of place - based policymaking in the context of neighbourhood planning . Research Context In the UK , neighbourhood planning was created by the Localism Act 2011 , an Act of Parliament which sought to give direct power to citizens enabling them to create their own planning policy [ 14 , 42 , 43 ] . The UK Government dispersed power as a “reform to make the planning system more democratic and more effective” [ 28 ] . By the beginning of 2019 , the ability for citizens to plan their own neighbourhoods has been taken up by more than 2500 communities with over 700 plans now in place and this number will have grown [ 14 ] . Communities across the UK are taking on the role of citizen - planners to produce statutory documents that will direct the future of their neighbourhood [ 11 , 53 ] . Citizens are mostly older , retired members of the community , and want to have control over development in their locale and have their voices heard [ 16 , 67 , 75 ] . These citizens must navigate through several key stages to produce a neighbourhood plan ( see Fig . 1 ) . Although many of the stages depicted are necessary to produce policy , how citizens complete each stage is open for them to decide . To begin the process of neighbourhood planning , a group of citizens self - organise to form a steering group to take the plan forward . Their role is to undertake all neighbourhood planning tasks to produce the plan , engage their community , gather evidence to support policies and write their policy document . Participant Recruitment Four workshops were conducted – three with citizens and one with city planners – with a total of 11 participants . Citizen recruitment was focused on those who had completed their neighbourhood plan or who were in the end stages of the process in the North East of England – such information is displayed on local authority websites . This was to ensure we could gain a detailed overview of the whole neighbourhood planning process . Nine groups were identified through desktop research that fit the criteria and all were invited to take part with three groups responding positively . Although the intention was to hold a workshop with the whole steering group from each location , all citizen groups felt that holding a smaller workshop with key members of the group would be more beneficial rather than adding to the already busy workload of the wider group . Key members , such as chair persons and others with a specific role , had been present throughout the process of neighbourhood planning where other membership had fluctuated meaning they would be best placed to provide details of the whole process . A total of six citizens took part – two key members self - selected from each location . Recruitment of the city planners was a result of the lead author’s continuing relationship with the Task Group of Planning Aid North East . Planning Aid , part of the Royal CHI 2020 Paper CHI 2020 , April 25 – 30 , 2020 , Honolulu , HI , USA Paper 31 Page 3 Town Planning Institute , are a volunteer organisation that provide information and guidance to citizens on all aspects of the planning system . The North East Task Group manage the volunteer organisation in the region and is made up of planners from the public and private sector . All those in the Task Group have worked directly with neighbourhood planning groups and have a keen interest in supporting such endeavours . In total five city planners took part . Data Collection and Analysis An interactive three - hour workshop was conducted with each group of participants . Workshops were designed to recall a process , therefore it was felt that the creation of a timeline to recount the journey of neighbourhood planning would both be interesting and supportive in allowing participants to recall tasks . As the experiences of citizens and city planners would be recalled and described differently , the workshops were tailored to meet their needs . The three workshops with citizens encouraged participants to reflect and recall the neighbourhood planning process . Using large sheets of paper , groups began to map their policy journey ( see Fig . 2 ) . To help groups get started , participants began by organising a set of pre - prepared post - it notes that set out key stages of neighbourhood planning as described in online guidance documents . It was made clear that these stages were not complete and were to be personalized to that particular group . Following this , the groups were encouraged to go through each step of the process in detail , recalling the activities they completed and the key outcomes . To further support discussion and prompt reflection , a set of props and prompts were used : stickers were used to represent local government support , when money was spent , and when external support was used ( i . e . consultants ) ; and key outcome postcards were used to prompt groups to note this down at each stage ( see Fig . 3 ) . Finally , as neighbourhood planning is a long process , pre - prepared questions , similar to those used in semi - structured interviews , were used to ensure that all aspects were discussed by participants – these were used as prompts only where necessary . Examples of questions include : ‘how did you go about deciding the boundary of the neighbourhood plan ? ’ ; ‘how supportive did you feel the local authority were ? ’ ; and ‘what kind of evidence did you need to collect for the various topics you were dealing with ? ’ . The workshop with city planners was tailored to help them detail their experiences in supporting multiple groups . The participants still began by arranging a set of pre - prepared post - it notes and were encouraged to personalize these . Stickers and props were not used but prompt questions encouraged participants to note down the key outcomes . The main difference between the workshops reflected that the city planners were not recalling one single journey , but multiple experiences from different groups . Following permission from participants , all workshops were audio recorded resulting in 11 hours of audio , which Figure 1 . Example of material produced in workshops detailing neighbourhood planning process . Figure 2 . Props used within workshops to prompt discussion was then transcribed . Materials created during the workshops were also collected to supplement discussions . Transcriptions and materials were imported into NVivo and coded using thematic analysis [ 12 ] . Following [ 12 ] involved the first author undertaking a process of inductive , qualitative data analysis to generate initial codes . These were further constructed , refined and validated through discussions with the second author until agreement on final codes which created four themes . FINDINGS In the following section we outline our findings : accessing policymaking processes ; citizen - government relationships ; engaging citizens ; and policy , evidence and translation . CHI 2020 Paper CHI 2020 , April 25 – 30 , 2020 , Honolulu , HI , USA Paper 31 Page 4 Accessing Policymaking Processes As previously stated , neighbourhood planning was created through the introduction of legislation , therefore , the opportunity for citizens to undertake the process exists within that framework . In all workshops , initial access to this opportunity and knowledge of the process during the early stages was highlighted as a key issue . All citizens groups reported that they knew about neighbourhood planning through word of mouth on an ad hoc basis . This was usually through one individual within the community with a surface - level knowledge about neighbourhood planning who would attempt to galvanise others to take up the opportunity as with one group who stated “Erm…we had 1 or 2 people within the 5 parishes who knew about it” ( P3 ) . The workshops highlighted that the take - up of neighbourhood planning was patchy as citizens simply do not know about the legislation and opportunity . Following from this initial difficulty , citizens groups would endeavour to find out more information about the process , but further difficulties arose . The citizens groups reported looking for advice and guidance online and finding a wealth of documents from a whole range non - governmental organisations ( NGOs ) . However , they still found the guidance documents to be too complex and filled with jargon despite many stating they were written in ‘plain English’ : “ It was hard translating what you’re reading when we had no real idea what was involved and what we were actually going to do . ” ( P2 ) . It was also felt that much of the guidance was very descriptive and lacked information on how to go about tasks . The sheer amount of information online made it hard for citizens to find trustworthy and useful advice . For example , one website was reported to have over 25 advisory pages , each with its own pdf guidance document of up to 30 pages . Citizens groups felt this did little to simplify the information . In contrast , during the workshop with city planners , a suggestion was made that groups should begin by looking at the legislation and policy before realising this may not be accessible for citizens : “ I was going to say ‘oh , you need to look through the regulations’ and then you think goodness that’s the last thing you want to do to a voluntary community group” ( P8 ) . It became clear through the workshops that these initial difficulties of access to the neighbourhood planning process resulted in fundamental misunderstandings about what could and could not be achieved through the policymaking process . The overriding motivation of all the citizens groups to undertake a neighbourhood plan was to avoid change and protect their neighbourhood : “we all said , ‘what could we do about the development pressure ? ’” ( P3 ) However , the legislation was specifically designed to prevent the policy from become a ‘NIMBY’ charter ( ‘Not In My Back Yard’ ) . Despite these issues , as the groups began to learn more about the process , none stopped to consider whether neighbourhood planning was the right tool for them to achieve their aims as a community . The city planners were keen , and suggested several times , that groups should factor this as a key activity in the early stages , however , in reality this did not happen . The overarching result of the difficulties faced in accessing the neighbourhood planning process was groups of citizens that were embarking on a long , complex process with little information as to what it entails . All of the citizens groups reported that the path to producing a neighbourhood plan was unclear : they did not know how long it would take , how much work was involved and how to move through the process to produce a plan . Citizens groups stated they : “just did what was necessary and crossed our fingers” ( P3 ) . Citizen - Government Relationships Citizens and local government city planners must interact regularly throughout the neighbourhood planning process . The legislation sets out that city planners have a ‘duty to support’ citizens groups , however , without set rules as to what that support should entail , there is ambiguity resulting in issues where the expectation and reality of support provided do not match . All of the citizen groups in this study were part of the same local authority which is seen to be highly supportive of neighbourhood planning . However , all of the citizen groups reported a variety of problems throughout each of their neighbourhood planning journeys . One of the key issues was the difficulty in understanding the support given with advice often being deemed as too technical or filled with jargon : “They gave us project management stuff and…there was so much we didn’t understand which the planners expected you to understand and , I mean , it used to just give me palpitations when they used to give you things like that because you think ‘well , where do you start ? ! ’” ( P6 ) . The citizen groups all discussed that city planners often assumed citizens’ knowledge and were unhelpful in breaking down the advice to be more understandable for the groups . They often felt like they needed more advice and support but were not able to receive that from city planners . In contrast , the city planners felt they were well placed to provide support to citizens . They acknowledged that groups often wanted more advice , but they often spoke of the need to ‘take a step back’ and felt it was important to ensure the policy would remain community - led : “I think it’s sometimes difficult to draw that boundary , looking at it from where he sits , to say , on the one hand , ‘I want to help and guide you’ but on the other hand , it’s the neighbourhood plan . It’s not , kind of , the council’s plan” ( P1 ) . These two very different perspectives highlight the issues between experts and laypeople in complex policymaking processes in that there is a lack of a shared language to allow effective communication . Further to this , all of the citizens groups reported the conflicting nature of the advice they received from city planners : “ We did get conflicting opinions from the planners there…It was getting far too…complicated . ” ( P5 ) . It was often the case that groups would be supported by a number of different city planners , and the advice given by each would often be different with each professional interpreting policy CHI 2020 Paper CHI 2020 , April 25 – 30 , 2020 , Honolulu , HI , USA Paper 31 Page 5 differently . As policies relating to place extend to specialist domains such as transportation , the same issues of differing interpretations between professionals in different departments was also true . The interpretation of policy issues , therefore is a huge issue within policymaking between all involved stakeholders , including between different departments of government . To highlight this , all of the citizens groups reported significant issues in receiving advice during the final consultation of the draft policy prior to submission . At this late stage , groups receive detailed feedback and , despite working closely with city planners throughout the process , they were given extensive feedback which was often contradictory to previous advice – one group received 19 pages of comments and feedback . This type of feedback stems from more than simple miscommunication , and highlights the varied and conflicting interpretations of policy , legislation and policymaking between government professionals : “it’s now opened up to a number of other groups who haven’t directly been involved and you get other comments that you’ve never had before and that change things ” ( P1 ) . Such situations left citizen groups feeling frustrated and unable to trust the judgement of those they had deemed experts . Engaging Citizens Neighbourhood planning steering groups must endeavour to engage with others in their community throughout the process . Engagement in planning has a turbulent history with poor practices carried out by local government of which many citizens are familiar with [ 6 , 63 , 91 ] . The opportunity for citizens to engage other citizens could , in theory , bring a refreshing change , however , the reality shows that steering groups began to replicate many of the traditional practices of local government . All participants in the workshops recognised the need to engage communities , seeing real value in collecting opinions from a wide range of people . They felt that community engagement would strengthen the plan and ensure it was real collaborative policymaking : “ that was the basis of a couple of the meetings is how we would do this consultation because we were very aware that we had to . That was the whole point of it , consulting the community , so we put a lot of effort into this” ( P2 ) . However , the citizen groups’ practices of engagement did not match their values . Almost all the methods used by citizens groups were traditional approaches through town hall meetings and drop - in events . During the workshops , citizen groups acknowledged they were only reaching out to “the same 50 people” ( P1 ) . Citizen groups provided set time periods in which the community were invited to comment on specific proposals , rather than encouraging continuous dialogue : “ They were allowed to write in , and email in and…yeah…and this was a drop - in event at the village hall” ( P5 ) . In their difficulties , all groups turned to city planners for support and replicated the methods commonly used by them . All of the citizens groups and the group of city planners discussed digital engagement and communication as a way to reach out to citizens . The city planners were keen for new , digital methods to be used in policymaking processes to engage those that would not normally engage , despite the challenges we know of with regards to low adoption of technology in local government [ 17 ] . However , the citizens groups’ discussion was significantly limited regarding digital technology , mainly focusing on their website as a tool for engagement . Although all groups discussed this , they also reported that their digital presence was only established halfway through the process and was used as a repository for documents such as agendas and minutes of meetings . They saw technology as a way to give information to others rather than to facilitate two - way dialogue between citizens , again , replicating many of the practices of local government engagement [ 32 ] . A key issue highlighted by all citizen groups was the challenge of engaging young people in neighbourhood planning . Two citizen groups described their approach to engaging young people through local schools , however , the admission that the information received was not useable in policymaking processes made the attempts feel tokenistic and futile : “ We did engage with the infant school which was hilarious ! ” ( P5 ) . In contrast , the group of planners felt that technology would be a good way to engage youth but were unsure how to go about this . Only one citizen group had used a digital form of engagement , paying a large sum to use the commercial platform Commonplace , a map - based tool that allows citizens to use pins to place comments . Although only one group , some of the issues surrounding the decision to use the platform are important to consider within HCI . They saw the commercial platform as a solution to engage young people in the neighbourhood plan , feeling the need to “ modernise their consultation” ( P1 ) , however , they stated “we never got anything from anybody under , sort of , 25 probably I should think” ( P2 ) . They chose that particular platform due to the popularity in some local governments without considering what that particular technology would add to the process or how the configuration of the technology would affect participation . The decision to use Commonplace was based on convenience and a lack of knowledge about alternative methods . During the workshop , the group admitted that such an approach to engaging citizens through technology had not reached any new citizens and only resulted in reaching out to the already engaged . Policy , Evidence and Translation The conclusion of the neighbourhood planning process is the writing of policies which require evidence to support them . Accessing data and evidence is a key issue for citizens and many of the challenges described in previous sections culminate in a range of issues at this final stage . One of the first interactions with policy writing experienced by citizens was the task of producing a vision for their CHI 2020 Paper CHI 2020 , April 25 – 30 , 2020 , Honolulu , HI , USA Paper 31 Page 6 neighbourhood . The group of city planners stressed the importance of the vision as a way to set the direction of policy . Despite this , all of the citizen groups reported difficulties : being uninformed of what a vision statement is , how to produce one and why it matters . It was never a task initiated by the citizens themselves and , for all of the citizen groups , producing a vision statement took over a year : “but the actual agreeing the wording of the vision alone took 16 months” ( P4 ) . Once again , issues are created where government practices are replicated by citizens To support policy writing , citizen groups must collect evidence to ensure the policies they produce are backed by data and facts . The workshops highlighted that groups were unsure what constitutes evidence , feeling that community opinions are enough : “We’d done our residents survey and I said ‘is this the sort of thing that you would put in or is this now out of date ? ’ and they [ planners ] said ‘no that’s out of date now’…we kept getting told we had to gather evidence , then you’d gather it and they’d go ‘well that’s just someone’s opinion’” ( P5 ) . In the workshops , city planners stressed the need for technical evidence to be produced , however , citizen groups reported they were unable to collect such evidence themselves despite a drive to do so . Citizen groups , therefore , often relied on existing datasets or employed experts to produce evidence for them . Further to this , there is a wealth of datasets and evidence produced by and for local government that already exist . Through the ‘duty to support’ , many local authorities make that evidence available to neighbourhood planning groups . However , simply making datasets available still creates difficulties with two citizens groups reporting they did not have the skills needed to be able to understand such data , and that significant support was required before they were able to use the data to evidence policy . In addition , in the early stages , steering groups must decide the geographical boundary for their policy plan . All citizens groups chose to use statutory boundaries , however , city planners were keen to encourage groups to devise their own bespoke geographical boundary which would best represent the community’s identity . By selecting a statutory boundary , access to data is easier as , in the UK , datasets are based around existing statutory boundaries . This is particularly beneficial when considering specialised datasets such as housing needs , transportation , and environmental concerns . However , citizens groups were unaware of the ramifications of their choices in the early stages when making their boundary decisions . Discussing the challenges , city planners stated : “ It can be a lot more difficult at that stage [ collecting evidence ] when it’s a bespoke area boundary , where it’s not a parish boundary where you can easily access stats and facts and census data and all that sort of thing . It can be a lot more difficult to get specific evidence together so there’s pros and cons in terms of doing that . ” ( P7 ) . Therefore , the decision of choosing an existing or bespoke boundary involves trade - offs for the steering groups which are unknown at the time of decision - making : choosing a bespoke boundary that may be more representative of the community , but which does not allow access to data ; or choosing an existing boundary with easy access to data but which may not be representative . Finally , one of the most significant issues in policy writing is the task of translation , both in terms of translating community wishes into realistic policies and translating the intentions of the community into the language of planning . The citizens groups reported the challenges they faced in turning citizens’ comments and ideas into realistic policy ideas and , it was at this point in the process that groups’ progress stalled as they struggled to contend with the task . Then , once citizens groups had policy ideas written , it was often the case that policies would change significantly as advice was taken from city planners and experts . The city planners stressed the importance of translating citizen - written policies into planning jargon to ensure the policy would be useable in day - to - day decision - making and achieve the intended aims . DISCUSSION From our insights , we now develop recommendations for how HCI research can better support genuine citizen participation in citizen - led policymaking processes . We contribute design considerations for tools to support the many tasks involved in policymaking processes as well as stressing the need to connect such tools with one another in order to reduce barriers for citizens in policy processes . HCI and the ( Re ) Design of Civic Policy HCI work concerned with democracy would benefit from considering policymaking processes holistically rather than designing technology to support small aspects of a broader process [ 68 ] . Our contribution builds on research that has called for a greater policy focus alongside technological developments to ensure that new tools are sustainable and embedded within wider policy frameworks rather than novel technology with no link to policy [ 69 ] . HCI , therefore , should consider its work within broader policymaking and we argue that HCI can better support the creation and design of policymaking processes themselves . Firstly , we suggest a change in approach in HCI which calls for more proactive ( re ) design of policymaking processes . It is often the case that HCI research responds to specific challenges to find solutions in a way that is reactive to the context . However , research has shown how technology can disrupt and renew processes that may be outdated by reducing the information deficit between experts and citizens [ 102 ] . Our findings have shown that civic policymaking processes are flawed from the outset with citizens struggling to understand and navigate the process and resorting to replicating flawed government practices resulting in citizens ‘doing things the way they have always been done’ , inevitably leading to the same poor results [ 45 , 57 , 96 ] . In response , we argue that proactive ( co - ) design of policymaking processes with government and citizens could develop new processes that are fit for their intended use – CHI 2020 Paper CHI 2020 , April 25 – 30 , 2020 , Honolulu , HI , USA Paper 31 Page 7 they are accessible , navigable and appropriate . Previous research has suggested that the HCI community should take an interest in developing relationships with policymakers long - term [ 61 ] and that technology could enable citizens to change the power balance “between the information privileged and the information disadvantaged” [ 102 ] . Such proactive design for policymaking and its practices should be viewed as forever incomplete , encouraging reflection on the democratic processes designed to encourage renewal and recalibration to the changing nature of society [ 44 ] . The ( re ) design of such processes can draw on the skills which many of us are engaged in such as participatory design , interaction design and designing through technology . Further to this , there is an opportunity for HCI to consider the ( re ) design of tools to be embedded within policymaking processes rather than reactively responding to issues in a problematic process or without considering policy at all . For example , previous research encouraging participation in urban planning through technology does little to example the policy context and , therefore , does little to show how such participation is taken forward and used to create policy outcomes . We argue that the HCI community should consider the holistic policymaking process and how tools affect it , rather than designing a foray of disconnected tools addressing small parts of the process . We suggest connecting and integrating democratic tools through the development of a ‘go - to’ citizen - friendly resource for policymaking . This could be a platform offering multiple tools working together alongside interactive educational material that support citizens navigating and operating in these processes . Interactive content through the use of massive open online courses ( MOOCs ) could support citizens if delivered in a way which encouraged debate and did not privilege formal educational methods [ 13 ] . Given that policymaking is a complex system , such platforms would facilitate citizens gaining a holistic understanding of how the different strands ( e . g . collecting and understanding data , citizen participation and policy writing ) are interrelated and how related tasks and tools can be used , when and why . Initially , this could involve bringing existing , diverse studies together to help them locate in the wider policy sphere to take stock of the current work and how it could support policymaking [ 37 , 88 ] . This would help to deliver new policymaking processes and methods of participation that are more appropriate for citizens and government and are truly embedded in policymaking . Designing Technology for Policymaking Here , we outline design considerations for digital tools that can facilitate civics in navigating policymaking processes . It is important that the following suggestions should be considered through the lens of our previous discussion point – we are not recommending the design of more isolated tools but would encourage sustainable design embedded within policy processes alongside other technology . Drawing on our findings , below we consider tools to support collecting and understanding data , peer - to - peer support , citizen participation and crowdsourcing . Collecting and Understanding Data Our findings highlighted the issues faced by citizens when attempting to interact with data in policymaking : the inability to access data for a bespoke geographical boundary ; the uncertainty of what constitutes evidence with priority given to technical evidence ; the inability to collect their own evidence to fill data gaps ; the inaccessibility of open data ; and the lack of shared language between citizens and city planners to discuss data . Many previously thought that data - driven policy would open up the policymaking process to the public allowing citizens to conduct their own analysis of data to further support policymaking [ 31 ] , however , this is a simplistic depiction of a complex issue . Focusing on understanding data , we suggest developing a working ontology of data in an accessible format for citizens that could provide examples of common datasets that are usually available , how they could be used and in what circumstances . This could also provide a framework allowing citizens to converse with experts using a shared language in their own context - specific policymaking . Such an ontology would support a better understanding of what data is needed , what datasets exist and encourage reflection to identify potential data gaps . With this foundation of knowledge , citizens could move from simply accessing data to analysing and interpreting as well as collecting their own . This should build upon the idea of ‘effective use’ which can be distinguished from simply having access to data [ 41 ] . Moving to collecting data , we suggest the design of tools that support citizens in knowing what data can be collected , why and how . Previous work has already explored some of these challenges , particularly relating to community capacity [ 26 , 34 , 66 ] , and suggest the need to consider issues from a user’s perspective [ 46 ] . The idea to develop toolkits is not a new one [ 5 , 76 ] , but creating toolkits that can support the collection of relevant , meaningful data by providing educational material , physical components where necessary and support in visualising the data once collected could support citizens in their own evidence creation . Specifically considering large and complex datasets , designing tools to support citizens to put such data into action in policymaking would also enable better evidence - based policy . For example , considering place - based complex technical data , such as transport assessments or housing land supply assessments , data is hard to understand and visualise . However , we do know that where data is contextually tied to place , it can surface structures and boundaries in communities and that data is tied to issues that matter [ 92 ] . Therefore , to support the use of complex data , tools to help interpret and visualise such datasets in a way that allows citizens to connect to the places within the data could create better policy outcomes . Such tools could build on the ‘Data : In Place’ platform which allows access to data for bespoke geographical boundaries , removing the limitations of statutory demarcations of place , therefore , supporting citizens to access data they feel is more representative [ 80 ] . CHI 2020 Paper CHI 2020 , April 25 – 30 , 2020 , Honolulu , HI , USA Paper 31 Page 8 This is particularly important when considering that citizens often disagree with datasets that appear to tell an unrecognisable story of their own neighbourhood [ 48 ] . Therefore , designing flexible and adaptable tools to allow for the interrogation of data but which also enables citizens to input their own experiences of place to supplement technical data would enable more positive policy outcomes . Peer - to - Peer Support Throughout our findings , a myriad of difficulties were faced in accessing guidance and legislation resulting in an unknown policy process ; unsuccessful communication between citizens and city planners ; differing opinions on the support provided and how it was delivered ; and the conflicting nature of advice . Peer - to - peer support tools could go some way to supporting policymaking processes , allowing citizens to support citizens , and policy experts to support policy experts ( in our case , city planners ) . We highlighted in our findings that legislation and guidance is too complex for citizens compared to city planners that rely on such methods . In this disparity , HCI can design and develop peer - to - peer tools , sitting alongside educational material , that would support citizens interacting with legislation on their own terms – that is , support one another to learn what policies and laws mean in practice . With so many citizens embarking on policymaking processes , their knowledge could be used to support one another . Previous work has already suggested the need for tools to support interaction with legislation [ 30 ] , however , there is a need to move beyond that to support citizens to enact legislation . In addition to citizen - to - citizen support , tools could also boost communication between citizens and government ( both as peers in policymaking ) to further support legislative understanding and action . Such peer - to - peer support could go some way to providing shared cultural referents that could create an ontology of policy discourse [ 81 ] . Beyond understanding and enacting legislation , peer - to - peer support could also provide citizens the opportunity to share their broader experiences of policymaking to help others facing similar challenges and develop shared learning . At present , in the case of neighbourhood planning , very little communication occurs between different neighbourhood planning groups leaving each silo to find their own solutions , despite often facing the same , or very similar challenges . Furthermore , the conflicting nature of advice given to citizens seen in our findings often stemmed from the conflict between different professionals , whether within the same or different departments . For example , two city planners may interpret legislation and policy differently , as would experts in different specialist domains ( e . g . transport , environment ) . Peer - to - peer support could also provide experts a venue to share their learning to be able to improve the quality of advice given and , therefore , the overall policymaking process . We propose peer - to - peer tools that provide a space for debate which can focus on specific policy questions that may need answering . Tools such as ‘Wiki . js’ that support collaboration to produce content on specific issues , share best practice or share knowledge about aspects of a policy - making process , could support citizen - to - citizen or expert - to - expert communication [ 100 ] . Citizen Participation Our findings suggest that citizens rely heavily on existing engagement practices in local government , whereby poor engagement methods are replicated and the use of technology is significantly limited . Indeed , it is widely acknowledged that methods of engagement used by government can often be outdated and focus on formal , face - to - face approaches such as town hall meetings [ 6 ] . In this respect , there is an opportunity for HCI researchers to ( co - ) design engagement methods with citizens to support capacity building , encourage innovation and the use of technology on their own terms . Through design workshops , HCI researchers can create collaborative environments to co - design an engagement tool or method using technology that support citizens implementing them . Not only would such workshops create more sustainable civic tools , it further supports citizens engaging other citizens in the process of data collection for policy . As we have seen , many of those who actively take part in such democratic processes are of a particular demographic which is typically unskilled in the use of technology creating issues of digital literacy and fluency [ 45 , 57 , 96 ] . Therefore , we encourage researchers to consider innovative use of ‘off - the - shelf’ technologies in their co - design processes , so citizens are at least familiar with some of the tools in use . Such design could be supported by the pragmatic framework developed through ‘WhatFutures’ , a collaborative future forecasting engagement using WhatsApp deployed with over 450 young people across the globe [ 56 ] . Further to this , we recommend that any tools , whether existing or novel , should be considered and discussed to help citizens understand why and how a tool should be used . As our case study evidenced , citizens struggle to make conscious and considerate decisions about methods of engagement in civic policymaking processes ( with or without technology ) . By co - designing engagement methods with citizens , HCI could offer its expertise in designing engagements and configuring technology to create environments that are engaging and account for a plurality of participation [ 65 ] . This would also entail supporting citizens to think through the consequences of their engagement decisions such as the kind of data that a particular tool would help them to gather . Such co - design of engagement methods could create methodological toolkits that support citizens to run engagement activities with and through technology without the support of external researchers or other experts . As we have seen through our findings , one group of citizens we engaged with turned to a commercial platform in an attempt to modernise their engagement methods . However , the tool did not produce the results they were hoping for and their limited resources were wasted on such efforts . In recent CHI 2020 Paper CHI 2020 , April 25 – 30 , 2020 , Honolulu , HI , USA Paper 31 Page 9 years , there has been a range of tools and methods developed within HCI to support civic participation [ 47 , 54 , 63 , 66 , 73 , 93 ] many of which are open source that could support engagement . The ‘Civic Tech Field Guide’ evidences this with hundreds of tools catalogued in a range of categories such as ‘Engagement tech’ , ‘Govtech’ , and ‘Civic data’ [ 89 ] . However , in many cases open source technology requires a certain level of skill to be able to use and implement it as well as to maintain and manage it , which citizens and government policy experts do not have . With this in mind , open source digital tools may be available but are not accessible to the vast majority of those involved in democratic participation . We suggest that a new approach is needed to enable citizens to use existing open source tools developed in HCI to create a more sustainable long - term impact . Creating toolkits and providing simple but accessible documentation that assumes the most basic knowledge would support the use of open source technology and go some way to support citizens and others . Crowdsourcing The policy writing element was shown , through our findings , to be a particular challenge for citizens . There elements of policy , such as visioning , that were unknown to citizens , there were major challenges in ensuring policy was written in appropriate language and that the policies would achieve what they were intended to do when enacted . Considering the number of citizens involved in policymaking processes ( e . g . over 2500 communities involved in neighbourhood planning alone [ 14 ] ) , along with policy experts in local and central government , and private consultants , a large and significant community of people exist which holds and can contribute various knowledge and ‘know - how’ on policy writing . It must be noted that research in other fields has already explored the potential of policy crowdsourcing at various stages in the policy creation cycle [ 79 ] . In addition , tools already exist for citizens to interact with policymakers , allowing them to comment and contribute to proposed policies [ 3 , 20 , 35 , 40 , 95 ] . However , many of these tools remain consultative platforms that encourage citizen engagement and officials can decide whether to use their comments [ 95 ] . To be able to design crowdsourcing tools , HCI would benefit from engaging and building on this research from other fields , such as law and politics , to support the creation of appropriate tools . More specifically , and continuing to build on previous work , we propose using the knowledge of the crowd to create a database of policy phrases to support citizens in writing their own policy . This could be an ongoing and growing resource that can be continually updated by citizens and professionals to account for and respond to changing political climates over time . Policy phrases could be sourced that relate to all different policy themes and questions . The risk of using generic policy phrases from a database during the task of policy writing is that it removes the locally relevant context ; policies are no longer tailor - made to suit exact needs ; and , therefore , when policies are enacted in a locale , they do not achieve their original aim . In response to this , we suggest that crowdsourced policy phrases could be collected in a way that allows the context to be recorded – what issues and local characteristics are the policies responding to , for example . This could build on ‘PolicyScape’ which has already gone beyond inviting comments on policy by encouraging citizens to say how a policy would affect them [ 50 ] . This type of policy crowdsourcing could provide valuable insights and could help to highlight unintended consequences of policies when they are not fit for purpose [ 2 ] . As this would be a complex endeavour , resources to support these tools could focus on the educational aspects of learning through the use of interactive media ( e . g . MOOCs ) . Finally , such tools could link to the peer - to - peer support , integrating crowdsourcing with advice from experts in the field . CONCLUSION We have shown how place - based policymaking processes are complex and difficult to access for citizens , with a myriad of problems communicating with experts , engaging citizens and writing policy . We have made a number of recommendations for HCI researchers to become actively involved in supporting , innovating and ( re ) designing policy processes , and to design tools embedded within policy enabling citizen voices to carry through to decision - making in a real way . Ultimately , we encourage the field of HCI to consider policy within their research so that rather than designing digital tools in isolation , we can begin to make a stronger impact in public policy . Place - based policy is only one context within which HCI researchers work , and we believe our findings could have broader implications for other policy domains , although we recognise further research is needed to validate this . ACKNOWLEDGMENTS I would like to thank all citizen groups and city planners that took part in this work and were kind enough to share their stories of neighbourhood planning . This research was funded through the EPSRC Centre for Doctoral Training in Digital Civics ( EP / L016176 / 1 ) . ' Data supporting this publication is openly available under an ' Open Data Commons Open Database License ' . Additional metadata are available at : http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 25405 / data . ncl . 11528247 Please contact Newcastle Research Data Service at rdm @ ncl . ac . uk for access instructions . REFERENCES [ 1 ] Nader Afzalan and Jennifer Evans - Cowley . 2015 . Planning and Social Media : Facebook for Planning at the Neighbourhood Scale . Planning Practice & Research . 30 , 3 : 270 – 285 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1080 / 02697459 . 2015 . 1052943 [ 2 ] Tanja Aitamurto and Kaiping Chen . 2017 . The value of crowdsourcing in public policymaking : epistemic , democratic and economic value . The Theory of Practice of Legislation . 5 , 1 : 55 – 72 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1080 / 20508840 . 2017 . 1282665 CHI 2020 Paper CHI 2020 , April 25 – 30 , 2020 , Honolulu , HI , USA Paper 31 Page 10 [ 3 ] Tanja Aitamurto and Landemore ; Hélène . 2015 . Five design principles for crowdsourced policymaking : Assessing the case of crowdsourced off - road traffic law in Finland . Journal of Social Media for Organizations . 2 , 1 : 1 – 19 . [ 4 ] James E . Anderson . 2014 . Public Policymaking . Cengage Learning . [ 5 ] Mariam Asad , Christopher A . Le Dantec , Becky Nielsen , and Kate Diedrick . 2017 . Creating a Sociotechnical API . In Proceedings of the 2017 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems - CHI ’17 . 2295 – 2306 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3025453 . 3025963 [ 6 ] Mark Baker , Jon Coaffee , and Graeme Sherriff . 2007 . Achieving successful participation in the new UK spatial planning system . Planning Practice and Research . 22 , 1 : 79 – 93 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1080 / 02697450601173371 [ 7 ] Madeline Balaam , Rob Comber , Ed Jenkins , Selina Sutton , and Andrew Garbett . 2015 . FeedFinder : A Location - Mapping Mobile Application for Breastfeeding Women . In Proceedings of the ACM CHI’15 Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems . 1709 – 1718 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2702123 . 2702328 [ 8 ] Michael Batty . 2013 . Big data , smart cities and city planning . Dialogues in Human Geography . 3 , 3 : 274 – 279 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1177 / 2043820613513390 [ 9 ] Janak Bhimani , Toshihiro Nakakura , Ali Almahr , Masaaki Sato , Kazunori Sugiura , and Naohisa Ohta . 2013 . Vox Populi : Enabling Community - Based Narratives through Collaboration and Content Creation . In Proceedings of the 11th European Conference on Interactive TV and Video . 31 – 40 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2465958 . 2465976 [ 10 ] Kirsten Boehner and Carl DiSalvo . 2016 . Data , Design and Civics : An Exploratory Study of Civic Tech . In Proceedings of the 2016 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems . 2970 – 2981 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2858036 . 2858326 [ 11 ] Quintin Bradley . 2015 . The political identities of neighbourhood planning in England . Space and Polity . 19 , 2 : 97 – 109 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1080 / 13562576 . 2015 . 1046279 [ 12 ] Virginia Braun and Victoria Clarke . 2006 . Using thematic analysis in psychology . Qualitative research in psychology . 3 , 2 : 77 – 101 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1191 / 1478088706qp063oa [ 13 ] Peter Bryant . 2015 . Harnessing the power of the ‘Massive’ : an innovative approach to participation , digital citizenship and open learning on - line . Learning with MOOCS II . [ 14 ] Tony Burton . 2019 . The State of Neighbourhood Planning in London . Retrieved August 15 , 2019 from https : / / docs . wixstatic . com / ugd / 95f6a3 _ 6ec21bd97b614 e4eac03f4583f154049 . pdf [ 15 ] Nien - Tsu N . Chen , Fan Dong , Sandra J . Ball - Rokeach , Michael Parks , and Jin Huang . 2012 . Building a new media platform for local storytelling and civic engagement in ethnically diverse neighborhoods . New Media & Society . 14 , 6 : 931 – 950 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1177 / 1461444811435640 [ 16 ] Claire Colomb . 2017 . Participation and conflict in the formation of neighbourhood areas and forums in ‘super - diverse’ cities . In Localism and Neighbourhood Planning : Power to the People ? , Sue Brownill and Quintin Bradley ( eds . ) . Policy Press , Bristol , 127 - 144 [ 17 ] Maria Manta Conroy and Jennifer Evans - Cowley . 2006 . E - participation in planning : An analysis of cities adopting on - line citizen participation tools . Environment and Planning C : Government and Policy . 24 , 3 : 371 – 384 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1068 / c1k [ 18 ] Maria Manta Conroy and Jennifer S . Evans - Cowley . 2005 . Informing and Interacting : The Use of E - Government for Citizen Participation in Planning . Journal of E - Government . 1 , 3 : 73 – 92 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1300 / J399v01n03 [ 19 ] Eric Corbett and Christopher A . Le Dantec . 2018 . Exploring Trust in Digital Civics . In Proceedings of the 2018 on Designing Interactive Systems Conference 2018 - DIS ’18 . 9 – 20 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3196709 . 3196715 [ 20 ] Countable . 2019 . Countable : Your government , made simple . Retrieved September 19 , 2019 from https : / / www . countable . us / [ 21 ] Clara Crivellaro , Rob Comber , John Bowers , Peter C . Wright , and Patrick Olivier . 2014 . A Pool of Dreams : Facebook , Politics and the Emergence of a Social Movement . In Proceedings of the 32nd annual ACM conference on Human factors in computing systems - CHI ’14 . 3573 – 3582 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2556288 . 2557100 [ 22 ] Clara Crivellaro , Rob Comber , Martyn Dade - Robertson , Simon J . Bowen , Peter Wright , and Patrick Olivier . 2015 . Contesting the City . In Proceedings of the 33rd Annual ACM Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems - CHI ’15 . 2853 – 2862 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2702123 . 2702176 [ 23 ] Clara Crivellaro , Alex Taylor , Vasilis Vlachokyriakos , Rob Comber , Bettina Nissen , and Peter Wright . 2016 . Re - Making Places : HCI , “Community Building” and Change . In Proceedings of the 2016 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems . 2958 – 2969 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2858036 . 2858332 [ 24 ] Jens Dambruch and Michel Krämer . 2014 . Leveraging public participation in urban planning with 3D web technology . In Proceedings of the 19th International ACM Conference on 3D Web Technologies - Web3D ’14 . 117 – 124 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2628588 . 2628591 [ 25 ] Christopher A . Le Dantec and Sarah Fox . 2015 . Strangers at the Gate : Gaining Access , Building Rapport , and Co - Constructing Community - Based CHI 2020 Paper CHI 2020 , April 25 – 30 , 2020 , Honolulu , HI , USA Paper 31 Page 11 Research . In Proceedings of the 18th ACM Conference on Computer Supported Cooperative Work & Social Computing - CSCW ’15 . 1348 – 1358 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2675133 . 2675147 [ 26 ] Christopher A . Le Dantec , Kari E . Watkins , Russ Clark , and Elizabeth Mynatt . 2015 . Cycle Atlanta and OneBusAway : Driving innovation through the data ecosystems of civic computing . International Conference on Human - Computer Interaction . 327 – 338 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1007 / 978 - 3 - 319 - 21006 - 3 _ 32 [ 27 ] Simin Davoudi . 2006 . Evidence - Based Planning . The Planning Review . 42 , 165 : 14 – 24 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1080 / 02513625 . 2006 . 10556951 [ 28 ] Department for Communities and Local Government . 2011 . A Plain English Guide to the Localism Act . Retrieved March 3 , 2019 from https : / / assets . publishing . service . gov . uk / government / upl oads / system / uploads / attachment _ data / file / 5959 / 189653 4 . pdf [ 29 ] Carl DiSalvo , Illah Nourbakhsh , David Holstius , Ayça Akin , and Marti Luow . 2008 . The Neighborhood Networks Project : A Case Study of Critical Engagement and Creative Expression Through Participatory Design . In Proceedings of the Tenth Anniversary Conference on Participatory Design 2008 . 41 – 50 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 1795234 . 1795241 [ 30 ] Andy Dow , Rob Comber , and John Vines . 2018 . Between Grassroots and the Hierarchy : Lessons Learned from the Design of a Public Services Directory . In Proceedings of the 2018 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems - CHI ’18 . 442 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3173574 . 3174016 [ 31 ] Daniel Etsy and Reece Rushing . 2007 . The Promise of Data - Driven Policymaking . Issues in Science and Technology . 23 , 4 : 67 – 72 . [ 32 ] Jennifer Evans - Cowley and Maria Manta Conroy . 2005 . E - government and Planning : Key Citizen Participation Issues and Applications . [ 33 ] Jennifer Evans - Cowley and Maria Manta Conroy . 2006 . The growth of e - government in municipal planning . Journal of Urban Technology . 13 , 1 : 81 – 107 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1080 / 10630730600752892 [ 34 ] Angela M . Evans and Adriana Campos . 2013 . Open Government Initiatives : Challenges of Citizen Participation . Journal of Policy Analysis and Management . 32 , 1 : 172 – 185 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1002 / pam [ 35 ] Cynthia R . Farina , Dmitry Epstein , Josiah Heidt , and Mary J . Newhart . 2014 . Designing an Online Civic Engagement Platform : Balancing “More” vs . “Better” Participation in Complex Public Policymaking . International Journal of E - Politics . 5 , 1 : 16 – 40 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 4018 / ijep . 2014010102 [ 36 ] Mylynn Felt , Delia Dumitrica , and Rhon Teruelle . 2018 . Social Media Obstacles in Grassroots Civic Mobilizations . In Proceedings of the 9th International Conference on Social Media and Society - SMSociety ’18 . 71 – 81 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3217804 . 3217899 [ 37 ] Verena Fuchsberger , Martin Murer , Alina Krischkowsky , and Manfred Tscheligi . 2016 . Interaction Design Labels : Concepts , Inscriptions , and Concealed Intentions . In Proceedings of the 2016 ACM Conference on Designing Interactive Systems . 108 – 120 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2901790 . 2901846 [ 38 ] David Gogishvili . From Users to Contributors : Participatory Planning in the era of Web 2 . 0 . Retrieved November 3 , 2018 from http : / / iris . cs . aau . dk / tl _ files / volumes / volume15 / no1 / 999 999 _ _ ss . 105 - 108 _ _ Debate _ paper _ BD . pdf [ 39 ] Connie Golsteijn , Sarah Gallacher , Licia Capra , and Yvonne Rogers . 2015 . Sens - Us : Imagining a Citizen - led , Dynamic and Localized Census . In Proceedings of the 2015 British HCI Conference on - British HCI ’15 . 319 – 320 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2783446 . 2783633 [ 40 ] GovRight . 2019 . Legislation Lab . Retrieved September 19 , 2019 from http : / / govright . org / [ 41 ] Michael B . Gurstein . 2011 . Open data : Empowering the empowered or effective data use for everyone ? First Monday . 16 , 2 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 5210 / fm . v16i2 . 3316 [ 42 ] HM Government . 2011 . Localism Act 2011 . HMSO , London . [ 43 ] HM Government . 2017 . Neighbourhood Planning Act 2017 . HMSO , London . [ 44 ] Brenton Holmes . 2011 . Citizens’ engagement in policymaking and the design of public services . Canberra : Parliamentary Library . [ 45 ] Renee a . Irvin and John Stansbury . 2004 . Citizen Participation in Decision Making : Is It Worth the Effort ? Public Administration Review . 64 , 1 : 55 – 65 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1111 / j . 1540 - 6210 . 2004 . 00346 . x [ 46 ] Marijn Janssen , Yannis Charalabidis , and Anneke Zuiderwijk . 2012 . Benefits , Adoption Barriers and Myths of Open Data and Open Government . Information Systems Management . 29 , 4 : 258 – 268 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1080 / 10580530 . 2012 . 716740 [ 47 ] Ian G Johnson , Alistair MacDonald , Jo Briggs , Jennifer Manuel , Karen Salt , Emma Flynn , and John Vines . 2017 . Community Conversational : Supporting and Capturing Political Deliberation in Local Consultation Processes . In Proceedings of the 2017 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems . 2320 – 2333 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3025453 . 3025559 [ 48 ] Ian G Johnson , Aare Puussaar , Jennifer Manuel , and Pete Wright . 2018 . Neighbourhood Data : Exploring the Role of Open Data in Locally Devolved Policymaking Processes . In Proceedings of the ACM on HumanComputer Interaction . 2 , CSCW . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3274352 [ 49 ] Ian G Johnson , John Vines , Nick Taylor , Edward Jenkins , and Justin Marshall . 2016 . Reflections on Deploying Distributed Consultation Technologies with Community Organisations . In Proceedings of the 2016 CHI 2020 Paper CHI 2020 , April 25 – 30 , 2020 , Honolulu , HI , USA Paper 31 Page 12 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems . 2945 – 2957 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2858036 . 2858098 [ 50 ] Hyunwoo Kim , Eun - Young Ko , Sung - chul Lee , Simon T Perrault , Jihee Kim , and Juho Kim . 2019 . Crowdsourcing Perspectives on Public Policy from Stakeholders . Extended Abstracts of the 2019 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems ( CHI EA ’19 ) . LBW1220 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3290607 . 3312769 [ 51 ] Soonhee Kim and Jooho Lee . 2012 . E - Participation , Transparency , and Trust in Local Government . Public Administration Review . 72 , 6 : 819 – 828 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 111 / j . 1540 - 6210 . 2012 . 02593 . x . E - Participation [ 52 ] Sunyoung Kim , Jennifer Mankoff , and Eric Paulos . 2013 . Sensr : Evaluating a Flexible Framework for Authoring Mobile Data - Collection Tools for Citizen Science . In Proceedings of the 2013 conference on Computer supported cooperative work . 1453 – 1462 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2441776 . 2441940 [ 53 ] Ben Kisby . 2010 . The Big Society : Power to the People ? The Political Quarterly . 81 , 4 : 484 – 491 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1111 / j . 1467 - 923x . 2010 . 02133 . x [ 54 ] Lisa Koeman , Vaiva Kalnikaité , and Yvonne Rogers . 2015 . “Everyone is talking about It ! ” : A distributed approach to urban voting technology and visualisations . In Proceedings of the 33rd Annual ACM Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems . 3127 – 3136 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2702123 . 2702263 [ 55 ] Derek Lackaff . 2016 . Better Reykjavik - Open Municipal Policymaking . In Civic media : Technology , design , practice , Eric Gordon and Paul Mihailidis ( eds . ) . MIT Press , 229 – 234 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1111 / jopp . 12032 [ 56 ] Daniel Lambton - howard , Andrew Garbett , John A Sweeney , Robert Anderson , Patrick Olivier , Kyle Montague , and Carlos Alvarez . 2019 . WhatFutures : Designing Large - Scale Engagements on WhatsApp . In Proceedings of the 2019 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems . 159 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3290605 . 3300389 [ 57 ] Lucie Laurian and Mary Margaret Shaw . 2009 . Evaluation of Public Participation : The Practices of Certified Planners . Journal of Planning Education and Research . 28 , 3 : 293 – 309 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1177 / 0739456X08326532 [ 58 ] Jonathan Lazar . 2015 . Public Policy and HCI : Making an Impact in the Future . Interactions . 22 , 5 : 69 – 71 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1177 / 146900470000400404 [ 59 ] Jonathan Lazar , Julio Abascal , Simone Barbosa , Jeremy Barksdale , Batya Friedman , Jens Grossklags , Jan Gulliksen , Jeff Johnson , Tom McEwan , Loïc Martínez - Normand , Wibke Michalk , Janice Tsai , Gerrit van der Veer , Hans Axelson , Ake Walldius , Gill Whitney , Marco Winckler , Volker Wulf , Elizabeth F . Churchill , Lorrie Cranor , Janet Davis , Alan Hedge , Harry Hochheiser , Juan Pablo Hourcade , Clayton Lewis , Lisa Nathan , Fabio Paterno , Blake Reid , Whitney Quesenbery , Ted Selker , and Brian Wentz . 2015 . Human – Computer Interaction and International Public Policymaking : A Framework for Understanding and Taking Future Actions . Foundations and Trends® in Human – Computer Interaction . 9 , 2 : 69 - 149 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1561 / 1100000062 [ 60 ] Jonathan Lazar , Julio Abascal , Janet Davis , Vanessa Evers , Jan Gulliksen , Joaquim Jorge , Tom McEwan , Fabio Paterno , Hans Persson , Raquel Prates , Hans von Axelson , Marco Winckler , and Volker Wulf . 2012 . HCI Public Policy Activities in 2012 : A 10 - Country Discussion . Interactions . 19 , 3 : 78 – 81 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2168931 . 2168947 [ 61 ] Jonathan Lazar , Simone Barbosa , Jan Gulliksen , Tom McEwan , Loic Martinez Normand , Philippe Palanque , Raquel Prates , Janice Tsai , Marco Winckler , and Volker Wulf . 2013 . Workshop on Engaging the Human - computer Interaction Community with Public Policymaking Internationally . CHI ’13 Extended Abstracts on Human Factors in Computing Systems . 3279 – 3282 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2468356 . 2479666 [ 62 ] Yu - Hao Lee and Gary Hsieh . 2013 . Does Slacktivism Hurt Activism ? : The Effects of Moral Balancing and Consistency in Online Activism . In Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems . 811 – 820 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2470654 . 2470770 [ 63 ] Carolyn J . Lukensmeyer and Steve Brigham . 2002 . Taking Democracy to Scale : Creating a Town Hall Meeting for the Twenty - First Century . National Civic Review . 91 , 4 : 351 – 366 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1002 / ncr . 91406 [ 64 ] Riina Lundman . 2016 . Bringing planning to the streets : using site - specific video as a method for participatory urban planning . Planning Theory & Practice . 17 , 4 : 601 – 617 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1080 / 14649357 . 2016 . 1217345 [ 65 ] Jennifer Manuel , Geoff Vigar , Tom Bartindale , and Rob Comber . 2017 . Participatory Media : Creating Spaces for Storytelling in Neighbourhood Planning . In Proceedings of the 2017 SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems . 1688 – 1701 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3025453 . 3025745 [ 66 ] Thomas Maskell , Clara Crivellaro , Robert Anderson , Tom Nappey , Vera Araújo - Soares , and Kyle Montague . 2018 . Spokespeople : Exploring Routes to Action through Citizen - Generated Data . In Proceedings of the 2018 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems - CHI ’18 . 1 – 12 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3173574 . 3173979 [ 67 ] John Mohan . 2011 . Mapping the big society : perspectives from the third sector research centre . Third Sector Research Centre Working Paper , 62 . [ 68 ] Giles Moss and Stephen Coleman . 2014 . Deliberative Manoeuvres in the Digital Darkness : e - Democracy CHI 2020 Paper CHI 2020 , April 25 – 30 , 2020 , Honolulu , HI , USA Paper 31 Page 13 Policy in the UK . British Journal of Politics and International Relations . 16 , 3 : 410 – 427 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1111 / 1467 - 856X . 12004 [ 69 ] Taewoo Nam and Theresa A . Pardo . 2011 . Conceptualizing Smart City with Dimensions of Technology , People , and Institutions . In Proceedings of the 12th Annual International Digital Government Research Conference . 282 – 291 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2037556 . 2037602 [ 70 ] David Niemeijer . 2002 . Developing indicators for environmental policy : data - driven and theory - driven approaches examined by example . Environmental Science & Policy . 5 : 91 – 103 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / S1462 - 9011 ( 02 ) 00026 - 6 [ 71 ] Johanna Nuojua , Antti Juustila , Toni Räisänen , Kari Kuutti , and Leena Soudunsaari . 2008 . Exploring Web - based Participation Methods for Urban Planning . In Proceedings of the Tenth Anniversary Conference on Participatory Design 2008 . 274 – 277 . [ 72 ] Johanna Nuojua , Leena Soudunsaari , and Helka - Liisa Hentilä . 2010 . Boosting web - based public participation in urban planning with a group of key stakeholders . In Pr oceedings of the 11th Biennial Participatory Design Conference on - PDC ’10 . 239 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 1900441 . 1900491 [ 73 ] Sissel Olander , Tau Ulv Lenskjold , Signe Louise Yndigegn , and Maria Foverskov . 2011 . Mobilizing for Community Building and Everyday Innovation . Interactions . 18 , 4 : 28 – 32 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 1978822 . 1978829 [ 74 ] Patrick Olivier and Peter Wright . 2015 . Digital Civics : Taking a Local Turn . Interactions . 22 , 4 : 61 – 63 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2776885 [ 75 ] Gavin Parker . 2017 . The uneven geographies of neighbourhood planning in England . In Neighbourhood Planning : Power to the People ? Sue Brownill and Quintin Bradley ( eds . ) . Policy Press , Bristol , 75 - 92 . [ 76 ] Sean Peacock , Robert Anderson , and Clara Crivellaro . 2018 . Streets for People : Engaging Children in Placemaking Through a Socio - technical Process . In Proceedings of the 2018 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems . 1 – 14 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3173574 . 3173901 [ 77 ] Planning Aid England . 2016 . How to write planning policies . Retrieved November 4 , 2018 from https : / / www . ourneighbourhoodplanning . org . uk / storage / resources / documents / How _ to _ write _ planning _ policie s _ powerpoint . pdf [ 78 ] Sebastian Prost , Johann Schrammel , and Manfred Tscheligi . 2014 . ‘Sometimes it’s the Weather’s Fault’ – Sustainable HCI & Political Activism . CHI ’14 Extended Abstracts on Human Factors in Computing Systems ( CHI EA ’14 ) . 2005 – 2010 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2559206 . 2581358 [ 79 ] John Prpić , Araz Taeihagh , and James Melton . 2015 . The Fundamentals of Policy Crowdsourcing . Policy & Internet . 7 : 340 – 361 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1080 / 01944360008976107 [ 80 ] Aare Puussaar , Ian G Johnson , Kyle Montague , Philip James , and Pete Wright . 2018 . Making Open Data Work for Civic Advocacy . In Proceedings of the ACM on Human - Computer Interaction . 143 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3274412 [ 81 ] Daniel Reed . 2013 . Lost in Translation . Communications of the ACM . 56 , 1 : 16 – 17 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2398356 . 2398361 [ 82 ] Sunil Rodger , John Vines , and Janice Mclaughlin . 2016 . Technology and the Politics of Mobility : Evidence Generation in Accessible Transport Activism . In Proceedings of the 2016 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems ( CHI ’16 ) . 2417 – 2429 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2858036 . 2858146 [ 83 ] Ian Sanderson . 2002 . Evaluation , Policy Learning and Evidence - based Policy Making . Public Administration . 80 , 1 : 1 – 22 . [ 84 ] Wendy Sarkissian . 2010 . “The Beginning of Something” : Using Video as a Tool in Community Engagement . In Multimedia Explorations in Urban Policy and Planning , Leonie Sandercock and Giovanni Attili ( eds . ) . Springer , Dordrecht , 129 – 149 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1007 / 978 - 90 - 481 - 3209 - 6 [ 85 ] Ronald Schroeter and Marcus Foth . 2009 . Discussions in Space . In Proceedings of the 21st Annual Conference of the Australian Computer - Human Interaction Special Interest Group : Design : Open 24 / 7 . 381 – 384 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 1738826 . 1738903 [ 86 ] Bryan Semaan , Heather Faucett , Scott P . Robertson , Misa Maruyama , and Sara Douglas . 2015 . Designing Political Deliberation Environments to Support Interactions in the Public Sphere . In Proceedings of the 33rd Annual ACM Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems - CHI ’15 . 3167 – 3176 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2702123 . 2702403 [ 87 ] Rachel Silcock . 2001 . What is e - Government ? Parliamentary affairs . 54 , 1 : 88 – 101 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1093 / pa / 54 . 1 . 88 [ 88 ] Anne Spaa , Chris Elsden , Abigail Durrant , and John Vines . 2019 . Understanding the Boundaries between Policymaking and HCI . In Proceedings of the 2019 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems ( CHI ’19 ) . 84 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3290605 . 3300314 [ 89 ] Matt Stempeck and Micah Sifry . 2015 . Civic Tech Field Guide . Retrieved Monday 2 , 2019 from https : / / civictech . guide / [ 90 ] Angelika Strohmayer , Rob Comber , and Madeline Balaam . 2015 . Exploring Learning Ecologies among People Experiencing Homelessness . In Proceedings of the 33rd Annual ACM Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems - CHI ’15 . 2275 – 2284 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2702123 . 2702157 CHI 2020 Paper CHI 2020 , April 25 – 30 , 2020 , Honolulu , HI , USA Paper 31 Page 14 [ 91 ] Roger Sykes . 2003 . Planning Reform : A Survey of Local Authorities . Local Government Association , London . [ 92 ] Alex S . Taylor , Siân Lindley , Tim Regan , David Sweeney , Vasilis Vlachokyriakos , Lillie Grainger , and Jessa Lingel . 2015 . Data - in - Place : Thinking through the Relations Between Data and Community . In Proceedings of the 33rd Annual ACM Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems . 2863 – 2872 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2702123 . 2702558 [ 93 ] Nick Taylor , Justin Marshall , Alicia Blum - Ross , John Mills , Jon Rogers , Paul Egglestone , David M . Frohlich , Peter Wright , and Patrick Olivier . 2012 . Viewpoint : Empowering Communities with Situated Voting Devices . In Proceedings of the 2012 ACM annual conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems - CHI ’12 . 1361 – 1370 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2207676 . 2208594 [ 94 ] Matthew Tenney and Renee Sieber . 2016 . Data - Driven Participation : Algorithms , Cities , Citizens , and Corporate Control . Urban Planning . 1 , 2 : 101 – 113 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 17645 / up . v1i2 . 645 [ 95 ] The OpenGov Foundation . 2013 . Madison . Retrieved September 19 , 2019 from https : / / mymadison . io / [ 96 ] Chris Twitchen and David Adams . 2011 . Increasing levels of public participation in planning using web 2 . 0 technology . Birmingham City University : Birmingham , UK . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 3828 / tpr . 2012 . 38 [ 97 ] Vasilis Vlachokyriakos , Rob Comber , Karim Ladha , Nick Taylor , Paul Dunphy , Patrick McCorry , and Patrick Olivier . 2014 . PosterVote . In Proceedings of the 2014 conference on Designing interactive systems - DIS ’14 . 795 – 804 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2598510 . 2598523 [ 98 ] Vasillis Vlachokyriakos , Clara Crivellaro , Christopher A . Le Dantec , Eric Gordon , Peter Wright , and Patrick Olivier . 2016 . Digital Civics : Citizen Empowerment With and Through Technology . In Proceedings of the 2016 CHI Conference Extended Abstracts on Human Factors in Computing Systems - CHI EA ’16 . 1096 – 1099 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2851581 . 2886436 [ 99 ] Ding Wang . 2016 . HCI , policy and the Smart City . In Proceedings of the 30th International BCS Human Computer Interaction Conference : Fusion ! 1 – 10 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 14236 / ewic / HCI2016 . 35 [ 100 ] Wiki . js . 2017 . Wiki . js – The most powerful and extensible open source Wiki software . Retrieved January 3 , 2020 from https : / / wiki . js . org / [ 101 ] Marco Winckler . 2003 . L’Administration Electronique : The French Approach to Interacting with Public Policy . Interactions . 17 , 6 : 52 – 55 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 1865245 . 1865257 [ 102 ] Lihua Yang and G . Zhiyong Lan . 2010 . Internet’s impact on expert - citizen interactions in public policymaking - A meta analysis . Government Information Quarterly . 27 , 4 : 431 – 441 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . giq . 2009 . 12 . 012 CHI 2020 Paper CHI 2020 , April 25 – 30 , 2020 , Honolulu , HI , USA Paper 31 Page 15