Beyond whole - cell motion – reactive interpenetrating ﬂow and elliptic Voronoi tessellation in two dimensions Dissertation zur Erlangung des Doktorgrades ( Dr . rer . nat . ) der Mathematisch - Naturwissenschaftlichen Fakult¨at der Rheinischen Friedrich - Wilhelms - Universit¨at Bonn vorgelegt von Martin Bock aus K¨osching Bonn 2012 Angefertigt mit Genehmigung der Mathematisch - Naturwissenschaftlichen Fakult¨at der Rheinischen Friedrich - Wilhelms - Universit¨at Bonn 1 . Gutachter : Prof . Dr . Wolfgang Alt ( Theoretische Biologie ) 2 . Gutachter : Prof . Dr . Rolf Klein ( Informatik ) Tag der Promotion : 11 . 03 . 2013 Erscheinungsjahr : 2013 Zusammenfassung : Eine wichtige Eigenschaft von h¨oher entwickelten Lebensformen ist ihre F¨ahigkeit zur Erneuerung des K¨orpers . Dazu teilen sich Zellen , die mikrometergroßen , , Atome” des Lebens , und bilden da - raufhin spezialisierte Gewebe . In der Haut , aber auch w¨ahrend der Embryogenese , vollf¨uhren die Zellen gerichtete Bewegungen , um ihren genetisch vorgesehenen Platz einzunehmen . Nur einige wenige Molek¨ule bestimmen die relevanten Kraftgesetze zur Zellmigration , n¨amlich Aktin , Integrin , Cadherin und Myosin . Die Dynamik des Zytoplasmas innerhalb der Zelle kann durch eine hydrodynamische Kontinuumstheorie beschrieben werden , welche , , Re - active Interpenetrating Flow” ( reaktive , sich durchdringende Str¨omung ) genannt wird . Die zentrale Annahme der Theorie lautet , dass das Zyto - plasma im Wesentlichen eine inkompressible Fl¨ussigkeit darstellt , welche aus einer Mischung von Aktin - Netzwerk und w¨assrigem Zytosol besteht . Dabei werden die Synthese des Aktin - Netzwerks durch Polymerisierung , dessen Transport , sowie der dazwischenliegende Fluß des Zytosols ber¨uck - sichtigt . In den isotropen Bewegungsgleichungen ¨uberwiegen die Rei - bungskr¨afte , und es treten sowohl aktive als auch passive Spannungsterme auf . Die passiven Spannungen gr¨unden auf dem Mischungscharakter der Fl¨ussigkeit , und beinhalten den Quelldruck des Netzwerks sowie Reibung aufgrund von Viskosit¨at und der Durchdringung der Komponenten . Die aktiven Spannungen entstehen durch Kontraktionen im Netzwerk , welche von Myosin - Motorproteinen erzeugt werden . Bezieht man Integrin - Molek¨ule mit ein , die Adh¨asionskr¨afte zum Sub - strat vermitteln , so kann man eine eindimensionale Modellzelle konstru - ieren , welche zwei charakteristische dynamische Zust¨ande einnimmt : 1 . im symmetrischen und ruhenden Zustand kompensieren sich die Zugkr¨af - te aus beiden Richtungen , so dass sich die Zelle nicht bewegen kann ; 2 . im polaren und migrierenden Zustand entsteht eine Assymetrie in den Zugkr¨aften , welche die Zelle antreibt und persistent bewegt . Beide Zu - st¨ande sind relativ stabil und autonom in dem Sinne dass sie keine Reg - ulierung außerhalb des bestehenden Modells ben¨otigen , etwa wenn man das vordere oder hintere Zellende k¨unstlich vorschreiben w¨urde . Ein ver - einfachtes , zwei - dimensionales Zellmodel zeigt charakteristische Korrela - tionen , wie sie bei Migrationstrajektorien aus Experimenten an mensch - lichen Hautzellen auftreten . Die Form von wechselwirkenden Einzelzellen innerhalb einer einlagi - gen Schicht l¨aßt sich mathematisch durch eine neue Art von Voronoi - Diagramm beschreiben , wobei Ellipsen als sogenannte Erzeuger fungieren . Diese Ellipsen werden als Parameter gew¨ahlt , und beschreiben Position , bevorzugte Gr¨oße und die Orientierung der betrachteten Zellen . Jeder Erzeuger ordnet einem beliebigen Punkt in der Ebene ein gewisses Gewicht zu , n¨amlich den Quotienten aus dem Abstand Erzeuger - Punkt und dem Radius der Ellipse in diesselbe Richtung . Mit Hilfe der Punktgewichte werden die expliziten Nachbarschaftsbeziehungen sowie die Form der Kon - takte zwischen den einzelnen Modellzellen des Voronoi - Diagramms bes - timmt . Als Vorgabe f¨ur die Erzeugerellipsen l¨aßt sich die Lage von Zellk - ernen verwenden , etwa wie man sie auf g¨angigen Fluoreszenzaufnahmen erkennen kann . Das daraus erstellte Voronoi - Diagramm zeichnet die Zell - Zell Kontakte aus dem Experiment nach . In Gruppen oder im Gewebe vermitteln sogenannte Cadherine auf der Außenseite der Zellmembran die Adh¨asionskr¨afte zwischen den Zellen . Ausgehend vom Voronoi - Diagramm als Modell f¨ur die Zellgeometrie wer - den geeignete Kraftgleichungen aufgestellt , mit denen man die Wechsel - wirkungen von Zellen in Gruppen quantitativ untersuchen kann . Ber¨uck - sichtigt man auftetende Variationen in der Zellgr¨oße sowie stochastische Kr¨afte , so gibt es in kleinen dynamischen Zellgruppen mehrere topologis - iii che M¨oglichkeiten , die Zellen relativ stabil anzuordnen . Die Koh¨asion des Modellgewebes in Bewegung h¨angt essentiell von der relativen Lamellen - breite der Zellen sowie der Homogenit¨at ihrer Gr¨oßenverteilung ab . Diese beiden wichtigen Gr¨oßen sind geometrischer Natur und deswegen mit Hilfe der Phasenkontrastmikroskopie experimentell bestimmbar . Wie es auch an embryonalen Zellextrakten beobachtbar ist , werden die Zellen im Modell langsam in zusammengeh¨orige Gruppen sortiert . Dazu wird der Exprimierungsgrad von Cadherin f¨ur beide Zellarten separat eingestellt . Die sogenannte Elongation des Keimbandes w¨ahrend der Entwicklung der Drosophila - Fliege erw¨achst aus der ¨Anderung der topologischen Nachbar - schaftsbeziehungen zwischen den Zellen . Bereits kleine Anisotropien in der Interaktionskraft zwischen den Zellen reichen aus , um das Gewebe persistent zu verformen . Summary : A crucial property of higher - developed living beings is the ability to continuously exchange and renew their body . This is achieved by division and redistribution of cells , the micron - sized and autonomous “atoms” of life . In the skin and during embryogenesis , these cells un - dergo directed motion to arrive at their native place within dedicated tissue environments . Only few molecular players essentially determine the involved physical force balances , namely actin , integrin , cadherin and myosin . The intracellular dynamics of actin network polymerisation , transport and the interstitial ﬂow of the aqueous cytosol can be described by a two - component hydrodynamical continuum theory called the Reactive Interpenetrating Flow . The central underlying assumption in this theory is , that the cytoplasm is essentially an incompressible ﬂuid , consisting of the dynamic actin network and the aqueous cytosol . The force balances in the ﬂuid are dominated by friction and involve both active and passive isotropic stresses . Passive stresses arise from the presence of two ﬂuid components , leading to network swelling and friction due to viscosity and ﬂuid permeation . Active stresses in the ﬂuid relate to the presence of myosin motor proteins that induce contractions in the actin network . Including the adhesion of the cell towards the substrate by means of integrin molecules , one can construct a one - dimensional model cell that exhibits two characteristic dynamical cell states : 1 . in the symmetric rest - ing state , traction from front and back balances so that the cell adheres to the substratum without moving , and 2 . in the polarized migrating state , an asymmetry in traction drives persistent cell locomotion . These two iv steady states are rather stable and autonomous in the sense that they do not need any out - of - model regulation prescribing front and back of the cell . A simpliﬁed two - dimensional model exhibits the characteristic cor - relation features from trajectories of human epidermal keratinocyte cells as determined in experiments . The shapes of individual interacting cells in a monolayer can be math - ematicaly quantiﬁed by means of a novel type of Voronoi tessellation , which involves ellipses as so - called generators . These generator ellipses are prescribed and encode the positions of the cells , their preferred size and orientation . To every point in the plane each generator attributes a certain power , given by the center distance divided by the colinear lo - cal radius of the ellipse . From these point powers , the proposed Voronoi tessellation constructs explicit neighbor relations and the shape of the cell - cell contacts within groups of model cells . By taking cell nuclei from ﬂuorescence micrographs as model input for the generator ellipses , the resulting Voronoi tesselation is able to recapitulate the corresponding cell - cell contacts as observed simultaneously in the experiment . Central to cell - cell adhesion in groups and tissue are cadherin receptors on the exterior cell membranes , providing for a force link between cells in contact . Employing the Voronoi tesselation as cell geometry model , one can construct compatible in - tissue force balances and thereby elucidate the interactions of cells in groups . The explicit consideration of size variation and stochastic forces leads to several relatively stable topological cell arrangements in small groups . The cohesion of the model tissue crucially depends on the relative lamella width and the homogeneity of the cell size distribution , both of which are geometric quantities accessible in phase - contrast microscopy . As observed in cell extracts from embryos , the model is able to slowly sort mixed cells into matching groups by attributing diﬀerential cadherin expression levels to the individual cells . Finally , the so - called convergent extension during the development of the Drosophila ﬂy relies on topological rearrangements induced by only small anisotropies in the cellular interaction force . v Teile dieser Arbeit sind bereits ver¨oﬀentlicht worden : Parts of this work have already been published : • M . Bock , A . K . Tyagi , J . - U . Kreft , and W . Alt . Generalized Voronoi tessellation as a model of two - dimensional cell tissue dynamics . Bulletin of Mathematical Biology , 72 : 1696 , 2010 . • W . Alt , M . Bock , and C . M¨ohl . Coupling of cytoplasm and adhesion dynamics determines cell polarization and locomotion . In A . Chauvi ` ere , L . Preziosi , and C . Verdier , editors , Cell Mechanics : From Single Scale - Based Models to Multiscale Modeling , pages 86 – 125 . Chapman & Hall / CRC , 2010 . • M . Bock and C . Wollnik . How do biological cells move ? European Communications in Mathematical and Theoretical Biology , 14 : 54 – 69 , Oct . 2011 . vi This work is dedicated to all my teachers . vii Contents 1 . Introduction : how do biological cells move ? 1 1 . 1 . On microscopes , cells and animalculae . . . . . . . . . . . 1 1 . 2 . On proteins , muscle and the cytoskeleton . . . . . . . . . . 3 1 . 3 . On rubber sheets , traction and ﬂuorescence . . . . . . . . . 6 1 . 4 . “Cell migration : a physically integrated molecular process” 8 1 . 5 . Cellular polarization mechanisms . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 12 1 . 6 . Revisiting cellular adhesion and tension . . . . . . . . . . . 16 1 . 7 . Modes of motion of selected kinds of vertebrate cells . . . . 22 2 . Method : Reactive Interpenetrating Flow model of cytoplasm dynamics 29 2 . 1 . Mass balances involve the volume fraction . . . . . . . . . 29 2 . 2 . Both in - phase force balances are friction - dominated . . . . 31 2 . 3 . Force balances include isotropic active stresses and Darcy permeation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 34 2 . 4 . The Active Polar Gel is an alternative cytoplasm theory . 39 2 . 5 . Speciﬁc assumptions inherit intrinsic model limitations . . 41 3 . Model : coupling of cytoplasm and adhesion dynamics deter - mines single cell polarization and locomotion 45 3 . 1 . Myosin leads to cytoskeletal contraction . . . . . . . . . . 46 3 . 2 . Integrin connects cytoskeleton and substratum . . . . . . . 48 3 . 3 . Cytoplasm contractions and adhesion sites join forces in whole - cell migration . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 51 3 . 4 . Boundary conditions describe phenomena close to the plasma membrane . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 55 3 . 5 . Cell - substratum adhesive slip mediates locomotion forces . 60 3 . 6 . Cell polarization is either spontaneous or induced by taxis cues . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 62 3 . 7 . The migration velocity of cells is sensitive to substratum adhesion . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 69 3 . 8 . The cytoplasm ﬂow model can be applied in a quasi two - dimensional geometry . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 72 ix 3 . 9 . Simulations including the cell lamella exhibit cellular shape and trajectory characteristics . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 80 4 . Method : generalized Voronoi tessellations divide space into cellular compartments 91 4 . 1 . Voronoi generators consisting of norm - functions give rise to curved cell - cell contacts . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 91 4 . 2 . Homogeneous coordinates facilitate transformation opera - tions on vectors . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 96 4 . 3 . Matrices in homogeneous coordinates provide for anisotropic Voronoi generators . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 99 4 . 4 . Circular Voronoi diagrams emerge from isotropic axis ma - trices . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 101 4 . 5 . The contact matrix can be diagonalized . . . . . . . . . . . 103 4 . 6 . Generator and diagonalized contact matrices are unique . . 108 4 . 7 . There are several types of degenerate contact border surfaces109 4 . 8 . How to construct Voronoi diagrams from elliptic generators ? 114 4 . 9 . Comparing generalized Voronoi tessellation methods . . . . 121 5 . Model : coupling intracellular stress and cell - cell adhesion determines cooperative cell motion in tissue monolayers 129 5 . 1 . There are several types of multi - cell tissue models . . . . . 130 5 . 2 . Conﬂuent monolayers and epithelial tissues can be described by circular Voronoi tessellations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 133 5 . 3 . Cell pairs interact via cadherin mediated adhesion . . . . . 138 5 . 4 . Small cell groups exhibit several topological arrangements 153 5 . 5 . Tissue stability is favored by starlike cell geometries . . . . 156 5 . 6 . Two - dimensional cell sorting cannot be fully reproduced in cell - center based tissue models . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 160 5 . 7 . Convergent tissue extension is driven by anisotropic cell - cell interactions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 167 6 . Synthesis : mechanical and functional principles of cellular mo - tion 179 A . Appendix 185 A . 1 . Estimating the characteristic dimensions of cytoplasm ﬂow 185 A . 2 . Polymerization pressure and viscosity for the one - dimensional model cell . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 186 A . 3 . Some formulae regarding the transformed contact matrix . 187 x A . 4 . Polar representation of anisotropic Voronoi generators . . . 192 A . 5 . Contact surface parameterizations in polar coordinates . . 194 A . 6 . Model parameters and selected mathematical symbols . . . 198 A . 7 . Accompanying electronic supplementary material . . . . . 203 xi 1 . How do biological cells move ? 1 Summary : Taking a historical perspective , we revisit selected key ex - periments and methods that have lead to the current understanding of the motion of biological cells . As it turns out , only few molecular play - ers essentially determine the involved physical force balances , namely ( i ) actin , ( ii ) myosin , ( iii ) integrin , and ( iv ) cadherin . By identifying their function in isolation and mutual cooperation , we put forward a general conceptual framework , which allows for the classiﬁcation and uniﬁcation of various cell migration phenomena . 1 . 1 . On microscopes , cells and animalculae Back in 1665 , Robert Hooke ( 1635 – 1703 ) 2 delivered his book “Micro - graphia” to his contractors , the “Council of the Royal Society of Lon - don for Improving of Natural Knowledge” [ 108 ] . This groundbreaking work marks the advent of the empirical method – justifying knowledge from repeated observations and measurements . This concept still pro - vides for an essential basis of science today . In this spirit and by his duty as a curator of the scientiﬁc devices of the Royal Society , Robert Hooke had been ordered to make “some physiological descriptions of minute bodies made by magnifying glasses with observations and inquiries there - upon” [ 108 ] . Hooke presented his ﬁndings in 38 schemes , comprising micrographs from cloth to plants , animals , fossils , and even the surface of the moon . In his observation XVIII , “Of the Schematisme or Texture of Cork , and of the Cells and Pores of some other such frothy Bodies” Hooke makes a striking and peculiar observation : 3 “ [ . . . ] I could exceeding plainly perceive it to be all perforated and porous , [ . . . ] but that the pores of it were not regular ; 1 With some modiﬁcations , this chapter appeared as an article in the European Communications in Mathematical and Theoretical Biology [ 32 ] . This article was writ - ten jointly by M . B . and Carina Wollnik . 2 Unless indicated otherwise , all historical dates in this chapter are taken from the book by Ilse Jahn [ 115 ] . For a historical perspective speciﬁcally on cell mechanics , see [ 175 ] . 3 Compare “Schem . XI , Fig : 1” in [ 108 ] . 1 [ . . . ] the Interstitia , or walls ( as I may so call them ) or par - titions of those pores were neer as thin in proportion to their pores , [ . . . ] these pores , or cells , were not very deep , but con - sisted of a great many little Boxes [ . . . ] there were usually about threescore of these small Cells placed end - ways in the eighteenth part of an Inch in length [ . . . ] ” [ 108 , Observ . XVIII ] Apparently without knowing , Hooke had observed plant cells in their typical box - like structure with enforced walls , thereby laying the foun - dation to the current notion of cell in biology . As we know now , the biological implications of his results have proven their signiﬁcance in the subsequent centuries . Another pioneer of early microscopy was Antonie van Leeuwenhoek ( 1632 – 1723 ) . Being clothier by profession , he had – despite of being a layman – constructed optical devices allowing a magniﬁcation of up to 270 fold . In 1677 , he sent a letter to the publisher of the “Philosophical Transactions” , the Royal Society’s scientiﬁc journal . In this letter he reported the observation of little “animulculae” immersed in rain water stored for a few days in a “new earthen pot” [ 220 ] . Moreover , the size of some of these animulculae was about one thousand times smaller than the eye of a louse 4 . He also described that the animulculae use tails and little feets as tool to move about . By using single spherical lenses of very small diameter , van Leeuwen - hoek was able outperform the multi - lens microscopes of contemporary vintage . This is due to the favorable imaging properties of such a simple device : it does not inherit the multiplicative propagation of imaging errors from lens to lens . Indeed , Leeuwenhoek got a glimpse into a new world , for he discovered protozoa and bacteria . However , the lack of independent observations and the diﬃculty of integrating empirical observations into a consistent and comprehensive framework prevented a quicker scientiﬁc progress : it was not before the 19th century , that van Leeuwenhoek’s animalculae could be observed with conventional microscopes of two or more lenses . In 1847 , the English translation of a remarkable treatise by the German researcher Theodor Schwann appeared . Schwann opens his preface with : “It is one of the essential advantages of the present age , that the bond of union connecting the diﬀerent branches of natu - ral science is daily becoming more intimate , and it is to the 4 “Schem . XXXV” in [ 108 ] . 2 Figure 1 . 1 . : Cartilage cells from the from the frog Rana esculenta ( left ) and tadpole pigment cells ( right ) as sketched by Theodor Schwann in [ 195 , Plate II Fig . 8 and Plate II Fig . 1 ] . contributions which they reciprocally aﬀord each other that we are indebted for a great portion to the progress which the physical sciences have lately made . ” [ 195 ] Two years earlier , in 1845 , the Royal society had awarded the Copley Medal to Schwann ( 1810 – 1882 ) . Together with his colleague Matthias Jakob Schleiden ( 1804 – 1881 ) he laid the foundation to the cell theory , essentially stating that life is made of cells . The anecdote goes that the initial spark to this theory came up when Schwann and Schleiden dis - cussed their microscopical observations during dinner . Coming from the formerly distant ﬁelds of physiology and botany , respectively , they found striking coincidences in animals and plants – on the microscopic scale . Apparently there are “elementary particles” in animals that function in several respects like the cells long known in the kingdom of plants . Figure 1 . 1 shows some original sketches of Schwann from his far reaching work . 1 . 2 . On proteins , muscle and the cytoskeleton The advances of microscopy during the 19th century – among the most notable being those made by Ernst Karl Abbe ( 1840 – 1905 ) – lead to the development of microscopes working at the fundamental diﬀraction limit imposed by the wavelength of visual light . In this way , for the ﬁrst time , researchers were able to observe structures on the micron - scale and slightly below . In particular , the cytoskeleton falls into this ‘microscopic’ length - scale . The cytoskeleton comprises protein structures that stabilize a cell’s form , enable the cell to move and help transporting proteins and organelles inside the cell . 3 1 . Intracellular actin and myosin : Contraction in muscle was one of the ﬁrst driving force for the study of cytoskeletal structures . Already in 1864 , Wilhelm K¨uhne described a protein called myosin [ 134 ] . Later , in 1942 , Albert Szent - Gy¨orgyi and co - workers found two myosin - proteins called myosin A and myosin B [ 19 ] , which by now are called myosin and acto - myosin ( i . e . actin bound to myosin ) . Furthermore , they found another protein that was thought to activate myosin and therefore called it actin . It was ﬁrst described in 1942 by F . B . Straub [ 203 ] , a co - worker of Szent - Gy¨orgyi . Actin , however , had already been puriﬁed long before by W . D . Halliburton ( 1887 ) [ 95 , 176 ] , when its signiﬁcance was not yet discovered and it therefore had no name . As we know by now , actin is a central component of the cytoskele - ton : the small actin monomers aggregate into elongated ﬁlaments by converting energy stored in ATP 5 . Importantly , ﬁlamentous actin is of po - lar structure , so that a certain quasi - stationary state called treadmilling may emerge during polymerization and depolymerization [ 34 ] . This state is characterized by the ﬁlament polymerization being faster at the plus ( barbed ) end than at the minus ( pointed ) end . Thus , the chemical re - action kinetics eﬀectively establish a net transport velocity towards the minus end of the ﬁlament , which usually happens to be directed inwards to the cell body . Along these possibly treadmilling actin ﬁlaments , certain types of mo - tor proteins , for example myosin - II ( animals ) or myosin - V ( plants ) , move and transport vesicles or cell organelles throughout the cytoplasm . In muscle cells one observes a complex called acto - myosin or sarcomer . There , the myosin head regions move along opposite directions of aligned actin ﬁlaments , so that tension is created and the whole muscle contracts . In non - muscle cells , actin and myosin play an analogous role and thereby form an integral part of the migration machinery . Speciﬁcally , the cellular contraction force is provided by actin and myosin - II interaction [ 222 ] . 2 . Transcellular receptors : Other proteins are responsible for the cell’s interaction with its surroundings . There are four distinct families of pro - teins which connect a cell to its environment , like substrate , extra - cellular matrix , or other cells . These families are : • the immunoglobulin family of cell adhesion molecules ( Ig - CAMs ) , which are involved in connections to other cells , cell adhesion , signal transduction and regulation of gene expression , 5 ATP = adenosine triphosphate 4 • the cadherin family , which is central to cell adhesion and cell - cell contacts , • the integrin family , which links the cytoskeleton to substrate and activates intracellular signaling pathways , • the selectin family , which is involved in vascular cell adhesion and signalling , Here we give further details on two of these families : ( i ) Cadherin : The force - bearing connections in cell - cell contacts are mostly formed by a certain family of Ca 2 + dependent adhesion proteins , the cadherins . The ﬁrst described member of this family was the E - cadherin . Also known as L - CAM , Warren J . Gallin and co - workers described it as cell adhesion molecule in chicken in 1983 [ 84 ] , whereas Reinhard Schuh and co - workers as uvomorulin in mice in 1986 [ 194 ] . The main cadherin types are E - cadherin ( epidermal ) , N - cadherin ( neural ) and R - cadherin ( retinal tissue ) . All of them are either in - volved in cell adhesion or cell - cell contacts . One usually diﬀerentiates between classical and proto - cadherins . For cell migration and aggregation , the most important ones are certain classical cadherins , like E - and N - cadherin . They participate in so - called strong cell - cell adhesions [ 94 ] . Under normal circumstances , breaking of these strong adhesions occurs only with the help of other molecules , e . g . by means of phosphorylation . ( ii ) Integrin : The integrin family provides the most important cellular receptor molecules for connections of a migrating cell to the sub - strate , and is also involved in transmembrane signaling processes . Integrin was initially described in the 1960s and 1970s as oxyper - tine , a tranquilizing drug against schizophrenia [ 12 , 162 ] . Later on , in 1987 , Richard O . Hynes introduced the name ‘integrin’ [ 112 ] . In - tegrins are composed of two chains termed α and β . These chains vary in their composition , giving rise to multiple types of integrins with distinct properties . In mammals there are 24 diﬀerent kinds of integrins , which are composed of 18 distinct α - subunits and 8 distinct β - subunits [ 113 ] . Despite of this compositional variety , all integrins are approximately horseshoe - shaped . The two leg regions extend side - ways and join at the prominent “head” , where both α - and β - chains are connected . 5 Integrins can be in either of two conformational states , active or in - active . In the inactive state , the head region faces the cell membrane by bending over towards the leg regions , whereas in the active state the head region is freely accessible . The binding sites for other pro - teins are situated in the head region , so that the binding aﬃnity is modulated by the integrins’ activation state . Usually , most integrins are in the inactive state and have to be activated by divalent cations like Mn 2 + or by the attachment of certain ligands [ 185 ] . Before coming to further details of integrin cooperation , we visit some fairly recent methodological advances . 1 . 3 . On rubber sheets , traction and ﬂuorescence Modern microscopic techniques provide many possibilities for the visual - ization of diﬀerent properties of the objects under study . One perhaps surprising yet very exciting imaging technique allows for the quantiﬁ - cation of forces . The basic idea is to measure the deformation of the substrate on which the cell migrates . 1 . Soft substrate traction force microscopy : In the 1980s , Harris in - vented the elastic substrate method , whereby a thin layer of a liquid silicone surface is polymerized [ 97 ] . When seeded on such a substrate , a migrating cell causes the surface to wrinkle . Unfortunately the precise mathematical relation of wrinkles and forces is unknown , and the initially assumed proportionality did not yield consistent results . In a next step , in 1994 , Lee and co - workers stabilized the substrate by connecting the surface edges to a rigid box [ 140 ] . To measure the substrate deformation , silicon beads were added to the polymer sheet . Yet the bulk modulus was quite high , so that the beads would displace only by a very small amount . The breakthrough came in 1997 , when Pelham and Wang im - proved synthesized polyacrylamide substrates [ 174 ] . The crosslinker to monomer ratio of polyacrylamids can be freely adjusted so to match the applied forces of diﬀerent cell types with a suitable substrate stiﬀness . In 1999 , Dembo and Wang used smaller beads and ﬂuorescence to further increase the resolution [ 63 ] . By now , traction force microscopy has seen several modiﬁcations and reﬁnements . Mutual limitations and beneﬁts are discussed in [ 187 ] . 6 2 . Micro - needle traction force microscopy : Other groups measured the forces applied by the cell to the substrate by means of micro - needles . Initially , in 1997 , Galbraith and Sheetz used small needles to measure forces at adhesion sites [ 80 ] . In 2001 , Balaban and co - workers invented stress measurement at focal adhesion sites with micro - patterned surfaces [ 18 ] and ﬁnally in 2003 , Tan used arrays of regularly spaced micro - needles , which made the method more precise [ 209 ] . When employing this method , care has to be taken that the relation between force and elongation or needle displacement is known precisely . 3 . Fluorescing proteins : An important tool to further analyze the cells’ cytoskeleton in - vivo or in - vitro are ﬂuorescent proteins , such as GFP 6 . GFP was ﬁrst discovered in the jellyﬁsh Aequorea victoria , but by now it has been found in several other animals . The ﬁrst description was given by F . H . Johnson and co - workers in 1962 [ 119 ] . As often in science , the true beneﬁt of this discovery has not been identiﬁed until much later . The ﬁrst paper in connection with proteins marked by other ﬂuorescent proteins was written by M . Chalﬁe and co - workers in 1994 [ 44 ] . Already in 2008 , the Nobel prize in chemistry was awarded to O . Shimomura , M . Chalﬁe and R . Y . Tsien for GFP and similar blue and yellow colored ﬂuorescent proteins . Today , a lot of diﬀerent ﬂuorescence protein con - structs are available in various diﬀerent colors , acting as speciﬁc markers for other proteins . It is even possible to employ several distinct ﬂuores - cence markers at the same time , which is useful to distinguish diﬀerent proteins in a cell or even in the same spot . 4 . Comprehensive integration in quantitative models : What set out with the observation of animalculae has now grown into a vivid ﬁeld , in which researchers seek to understand the inner mechanisms of bio - logical cells , be it prokaryotes or eukaryotes . Here we are interested in the phenomena of cellular motion . With the detailed data on intra - and transcellular protein interactions at hand , our task is now to integrate these data into a common and widely applicable theory . Such a theory should be able to account for the behavior observed in selected model systems . In the process of theory building we should generalize , reﬁne or adapt our framework , and reiterate until the cell - level theory describes the motion of various types of cells , possibly with additional specializ - ing modiﬁcations . Since biological phenomena are inherently diverse and 6 GFP = green ﬂuorescent protein 7 mutually interrelated , the process of ﬁnding a suitable theory typically takes a long time – often so long that the impression might arise that there will never be a complete theory for biological systems . With this in mind we turn to the seminal works of the current paradigm , which sorted out the details and assembled a uniﬁed picture of the migration of speciﬁc cells on two - dimensional substrata . 1 . 4 . “Cell migration : a physically integrated molecular process” The title of this section is the one of a famous opinion article by Doug Lauﬀenburger and Alan Horwitz [ 138 ] , of which the science portal http : / / webofknowledge . com lists over 2100 citations by December 2012 . In this article , the authors provide a kind of taxonomic description of the cel - lular migration process , which organizes a plenitude of detailed observa - tions into a single conceptual framework . The key steps of cell migration in this framework are exhibited in the section titles of [ 138 ] : 1 . “Morphological Polarization” provides for the initial starting point , since there should be some direction as to what is forward . This aspect of cell motility is observable in many distinct kinds of cells , e . g . keratinocytes , ﬁbroblasts , neutrophils . 2 . “Membrane Extension” encompasses a kind of forward - step of the cell , and is approximately centered around the forward direction as set by the cell’s morphology . 3 . “Formation and Stabilization of Attachments” mostly at the cell front leads to the transmembrane connection of the cell to the sub - strate . 4 . “Contractile Forces and Traction” due to cytoskeleton and adhe - sions generate a net pulling / pushing eﬀect for the cell in forward direction . 5 . “Rear Release” and breaking of no longer needed attachments at the rear end enables the cell to actually translocate upon traction generation . 6 . “Overall Coordination” somehow has to take place to carry out steps 1 – 5 in a eﬃcient and / or controlled manner . 8 Figure 1 . 2 . : A human epidermal keratinocyte migrates on a ﬁbronectin substrate from right to left . At the front ( left ) , the mem - brane is pushed out to enable subsequent adhesion forma - tion ( green ) . In this way , intracellular forces couple to the substrate and give rise to the translocation of the cell body ( bright , elliptical region in the middle of the cell ) . At the cell’s rear end , retraction ﬁbers form at sites of breaking ad - hesions , hindering the cell in its forward translocation . The ﬂuorescing marker ( green ) is Zyxin , which colocalizes with fo - cal adhesion complexes containing transmembrane integrins . The appeal to this scheme is that it allows to separately investigate the single steps in speciﬁc submodels or experiments . Moreover , it is suﬃciently concise that it can be grasped as a whole . Indeed , the work by Lauﬀenburger and Horwitz [ 138 ] has inspired many cartoons explaining cellular migration in later publications ( e . g . [ 135 , 150 ] ) . In ﬁgure 1 . 2 , some of the elementary steps are already visible from a micrograph of a human epidermal keratinocyte . 1 . Polymerization and tip dynamics : It is perhaps not surprising that many researchers focused on the ﬁrst two steps to further explain cell motility . Somehow , morphology and membrane extension seem to be related concepts , for they both aﬀect the observable outline of the cell . 9 Also , Lauﬀenburger and Horwitz note in their article that “response to migratory stimuli is almost universally found to be coupled with local actin polymerization” [ 138 , Section “Membrane Extension” ] . The result - ing eﬀect on the cell’s morphology can also be seen in ﬁgure 1 . 2 , where the cell exhibits a prominent , wide and ﬂat lamella at the front ( left ) , to - gether with several spike - like ﬁlopodia extending forward . Consequently , in 2003 , Thomas D . Pollard and Gary G . Borisy found that the “Cellular motility [ is ] driven by assembly and disassembly of actin ﬁlaments” [ 179 ] . The rationale for this hypothesis is the following : actin ﬁlaments poly - merize at the cell front in such a way that the membrane is pushed out - ward , away from the central cell body . This process is driven by the orientational polarity inherent in actin ﬁlaments . The spatial regulation of the polymerization zone then leads to the formation of a polarized cell morphology . In order to enhance the overall polymerization rate at the lamella tip , branching proteins like Arp2 / 3 7 and membrane - anchored WASP 8 complexes provide for additional nucleation points for actin ﬁl - aments . These polymerization agents are believed to be produced only at the membrane . Correspondingly , polymerization occurs mostly at the very cell tip . Inhibition of polymerization by capping proteins in an inter - mediate zone and severing of ﬁlaments further back , e . g . by ADF / coﬁlin ( actin depolymerizing factor ) , recycles the actin monomers so that they again may be incorporated into polymerizing ﬁlaments [ 151 , 179 ] . These and other molecular players in the polymerization processes at the lamella tip are summarized in ﬁgure 1 . 3 which was originally proposed in [ 179 , Figure 3 ] . 2 . Cellular adhesion - velocity relation : In this way , key steps 1 & 2 of the scheme above can be explained . A fairly detailed understanding of steps 3 & 5 had already been achieved by the end of the 90s . In 1997 , Palacek and co - workers had found that in CHO 9 cells , the migration speed depends on integrin , such that even small changes in integrin concentra - tion can signiﬁcantly aﬀect the migration speed . If the concentration of available ligands on the substrate is low , speed increases upon increasing the amount of expressed integrin . In contrast , when the concentration of available substrate ligands is high , the migration speed increases with decreasing expression of integrins . In between these two regimes , the 7 Arp2 / 3 = actin related proteins 2 and 3 8 WASP = Wiskott - Aldrich syndrome protein 9 CHO = Chinese hamster ovary 10 Figure 1 . 3 . : Cartoon picture of the dendridic actin nucleation at the tip of migrating cells . The polymerization of actin is faster at the barbed ends of the ﬁlaments , which mostly point towards the cell membrane , in a characteristic pattern of dendritic branches . The Arp2 / 3 complex is activated at the membrane and creates additional branches in the ﬁlament network , which enhances the eﬀective actin polymerization close to the membrane . This polymerization then advances the mem - brane , so that the network falls behind the zone of enhanced polymerization . Due to ﬁlament aging involving the dephos - phorylation in the actin monomers , the network becomes sus - ceptible to depolymerization , which is additionally enhanced by severing agents . The released pool of actin monomers is subsequently again phosphorylated while diﬀusing back to the membrane , which completes the actin polymerization cy - cle . The presented cartoon is reprinted from [ 179 , Figure 3 ] , with kind permission by Thomas D . Pollard . 11 maximum migration speed for these cells was 10 – 20 µ m / h [ 169 ] . These eﬀects can be explained from a 4 - state model of the kinetics of the binding complex , which connects cell - internal F - actin and cell external substrate by intermediate integrin [ 170 ] . Speciﬁcally , the involved binding aﬃnities give rise to inherent reaction time constants , which – depending on cell type and substrate stickiness – inﬂuence the mutual eﬀectiveness of the processes in 3 & 5 . Consequently , some cells are faster than others . 3 . Active contraction and traction : From the traditional results of acto - myosin in muscle , the details of step 4 seem to be reasonably under - stood . As described before , myosin colocalizes with actin , crosslinks the ﬁlaments and creates a net tensile force due its ATP consuming motor activity . Therefore , only step 6 of aforementioned scheme needs further clariﬁcations . To this end , we further review several polarization mech - anisms in a broad sense , which have been implicated to be at work in certain model systems . 1 . 5 . Cellular polarization mechanisms 1 . Mechanisms occurring close to the membrane : The most com - mon theme in cell polarization is certainly the regulatory aspect of the actin polymerization cascade at the lamella tip . Extracellular signals somehow have to make their way inside to initiate certain eﬀects . It is believed , that the Rho / Rac family of proteins processes external chemical signals [ 184 ] , whereby one speciﬁc complex involved in polymerization is WASP . While the molecular details are quite puzzling and not yet com - pletely understood [ 168 ] , the basic working principle goes like this : Being sterically auto - inhibited to actin or Arp2 / 3 binding , WASP gets activated by deformation in the presence of transmembrane PIP2 10 and cytosolic Cdc42 11 . Subsequently , Arp2 / 3 may attach to actin so that polymeriza - tion is induced . Even though not all details of molecular regulation processes on the nano - scale are known completely , there is a common denominator on the whole cell level , which can resemble and summarize various speciﬁc pathways . In fairly abstract mathematical terms , stimulation of poly - merization can be recapitulated from local - excitation global - inhibition models [ 232 ] , or several other mathematically distinct but conceptually 10 PIP2 = phosphatidylinositol biphosphate 11 Cdc42 = cell division control protein 42 12 related schemes [ 116 ] , usually involving actin - polymerizing agents at the membrane . When solving the underlying equations on a roughly cell - like geometry like a circle , these mechanisms give rise to a spatial pattern lo - calizing a leading edge , the region of predominant actin polymerization . For further details we refer to [ 116 ] , which also gives an account on capa - bility and limitations of three model classes on membrane - initiated cell polarization . Once the cell has established a spatial regulation pattern designating the leading edge , actin polymerization has to adapt so that protrusion forces are generated in the corresponding direction . There are two theo - retical frameworks how force generation works at the interior surface of the cell membrane : ( i ) In the Brownian Ratchet model [ 150 , 152 – 154 ] , actin ﬁlaments directly support the membrane with their plus ends . When there is enough space due to thermal ﬂuctuations of membrane or ﬁlament , an actin monomer squeezes in between and the ﬁlament grows . Averaging over many of these polymerization events , a net protrusion force emerges , which pushes the membrane forward . ( ii ) Alternatively or coincidentally , polymerization may be initiated at motor proteins anchored in the cell membrane . Careful force and energy estimates lead to the postulate that such an mechanism is actually at work in migrating cells [ 65 , 66 ] . Originally , this mode of force generation was observed in listeria . These bacteria infect host cells and propel themselves by creating an actin polymerization tail at their rear ends . Since insertion of monomers is an active process , the emerging motion is step - like . Certainly , the phenomena described above play an important role to the cell’s sense of direction . However , to ensure overall and cell - wide coordination , these purely membrane - associated processes do not seem to suﬃce . Taking place mostly at the very tip of the lamella front , the rear release , for example , cannot be inﬂuenced from this regulation cir - cuitry . Indeed , during the last years , some other mechanisms have been implicated to participate in directing a cell . 2 . Mechanisms occurring in the cell bulk : One of those other mecha - nisms depart from the membrane relies on internal processes in the acto - myosin bulk of the cell . Suppose a cell is at rest , entirely symmetric , 13 i . e . circular , and the retrograde ﬂow is directed radially inward , point - ing from the lamella tip to the cell body / nucleus , which is enclosed by a shell of peripheral actin ﬁbers . Initially , all forces are balanced in this system : contractions in the ﬁber shell are compensated by the retrograde ﬂow from the periphery . Thereby , the ﬁber shell around the cell body contracts in centripetal direction , whereas the incoming retrograde ﬂow builds a pressure acting in centrifugal direction . If however contraction is enhanced / decreased in a particular region , the initial symmetry will break and some morphological polarization of the cell will occur . These eﬀects have been observed in ﬁsh keratocytes [ 229 , 233 ] , and suggested to be an eﬀective response to inhibitory extracellular chemical gradients [ 52 ] . Reorientation works as follows : if some repelling stimulus is received , strong contractions are induced in the corresponding region of the cell . These cytoskeletal contractions lead to localized compressions of the cell bulk . At the same time , the cytosol is squeezed away from the contractile region , which aﬀects the overall ﬂow equilibrium . In this way the mem - brane at the opposite end of the cell bulges out , and the overall morphol - ogy starts to change . A similar phenomenon occurs when the contraction is decreased in a particular cell region , except that the membrane then ex - tends in the same place , not at the opposite cell end . These eﬀects can be nicely observed in blebbing cells , for example L929 ﬁbroblasts [ 216 ] . How - ever , the underlying mechanisms have been conceptualized much earlier . Already in the 1970s , Taylor and co - workers developed the idea in a se - ries of papers on certain amoeba and Dictyostelium discoideum [ 212 , 213 ] . Also , experiments on Xenopus laevis from the 1980s seem to support the general idea of contraction - induced polarization [ 204 ] . 3 . Fluctuations and spontaneous polarization : It is important to real - ize that both cell bulk and membrane associated polarization mechanisms can also arise spontaneously , i . e . without relying on external cues . Con - centrations of all involved proteins vary , so that locally there might occur ﬂuctuations , eﬀectively shifting the relevant reaction equilibrium . De - pending on the strength of the ﬂuctuation , the cell system as a whole might be stable or unstable under these perturbations . Notably , close to equilibrium most extracellular signals are in the strong - ﬂuctuation regime , because in this “homeostatic” state there are only very few sig - naling molecules at work . Of course , whether such eﬀects are actually important to the cell’s function should be clariﬁed in experiments . We expect , however , that ubiquitous ﬂuctuations are not only involved in cel - 14 lular regulation , but rather have been explored by nature so to participate in almost all processes that jointly comprise life . 4 . Checking with phenomenology – repetitive protrusion cycles : It was known by the mid - 90s , that cultured human epidermal keratinocytes exhibit characteristic ruﬄe dynamics at their lamella tips . In repeat - ing periods of approximately two minutes , lamellipodia protrude at 2 – 6 µ m / min and subsequently retract again with 1 – 4 µ m / min , whereas ﬁlopodia protrude and retract at slightly higher velocities [ 7 ] . Similar ob - servations had previously been made in the lamellae of amoeboid cells and even cell extracts . If one stimulates human epidermal keratinocytes with epidermal growth factor , the ruﬄe velocity and frequency increases [ 103 ] . This phenomenon is remarkable for several reasons . Apparently , there seems to be an inherent rhythm to the cell’s protrusion / retraction be - havior . Next , the protrusion velocity is similar for both lamellipodia and ﬁlopodia . Finally , the observed dynamics of the leading edge can serve as fairly easy benchmark for protrusion / polarization models , namely by comparing kymographs of lamella tip positions from in - vitro and in - silico cells . Recently , related eﬀects have been observed in the ﬁlament - based leading edge models by Falcke and coworkers [ 75 , 236 ] . By coupling the polymerizing F - actin brush at the lamella tip to a cross - linked gel - like bulk further in the back , they ﬁnd several distinct protrusion phenotypes in their simulations . Notably , these phenotypes share some common char - acteristics with the ruﬄe dynamics reported in [ 7 , 103 ] and already reca - pitulated in simulations [ 8 ] . Our observations of the lamella of human epidermal keratinocytes sug - gest to interpret the rhythmic protrusion cycles of a cell as a way of sens - ing and exploring its environment . Some experimental attempts have already been made to relate a cell’s protrusion dynamics with its mor - phological polarity [ 142 ] . If protrusion indeed constitutes a kind of en - vironmental sensing , one would expect a correlation between protrusive activity and the course of the subsequent migration trajectory . Moreover , one could further test this hypothesis by studying protrusion behavior of cells while controlling the persistence of their migration trajectory [ 173 ] . 5 . Polarization of polymerization , protrusion , and morphology : Here , we argue that steps 1 , 2 and 6 , i . e . “Morphological Polarization” , “Mem - brane Extension” and “Overall Coordination” from the scheme in section 1 . 5 should be combined and understood jointly on the whole - cell level . 15 Protrusion activity is aﬀected both by actin polymerization at the lamella tip and ﬂuid streaming upon local cell contraction . Overall coordination – e . g . from front to back – can be reached by chemical agents , but also directly via the force equilibrium in the cytoskeleton . The cell’s mor - phology ultimately arises from a combination of all these eﬀects , and also depends on the adhesive properties of its environment . The actual loci of membrane extension are a mere consequence of this interplay . 1 . 6 . Revisiting cellular adhesion and tension 1 . Actin , myosin and stress ﬁbers : If actin ﬁlaments align in anti - parallel orientational polarity and connect with the help of cross - linker proteins , the emerging bundles are called stress ﬁbers . Thereby , α - actinin and myosin alternate in linking the ﬁbers , which leads to an overall bundle contractility , similar to the phenomena known from muscle cells . Accord - ing to [ 110 ] , there are three diﬀerent types of stress ﬁbers , cf . ﬁgure 1 . 4 : 1 . Dorsal stress ﬁbers develop through actin polymerization induced by formin proteins , which occurs close to focal adhesions . At the one end , they point to the leading edge of the cell , while their other end extends towards the cell center . In this central region , dorsal stress ﬁbers are sometimes connected to stress ﬁbers of type 2 . 2 . Transverse arcs are bent actin ﬁlament bundles , which are nucleated by the Arp2 / 3 complex and attached to myosin bundles . Transverse arcs are usually not connected to focal adhesion complexes . 3 . Ventral stress ﬁbers are converted dorsal ﬁbers or transverse arcs that end up at the rear end of the cell . These ventral ﬁbers are connected to focal adhesions on both ends . In this light , we may regard stress ﬁbers as a machinery that transduces forces from one position of the cell to another . Furthermore , structures such as the bulk actin network , intermediate ﬁlaments or even micro - tubuli participate in this cell - scale force distribution . The cytoskeleton - mediated force propagation also provides for a direct regulative hook from the cell’s front to its back , and is involved in the stabilization of cell shape [ 41 ] . If only the membrane were to support overall cell cohesion , there would occur instabilities causing rupture , so that fragments of the cell would separate from the rest . In migration models of ﬁbroblasts , this instability has been reported as the “dripping faucet instability” , in analogy to a drop parting from a not entirely closed faucet [ 99 ] . 16 Figure 1 . 4 . : There are diﬀerent kinds of stress ﬁbers distributed at dif - ferent loci of a migrating cell ( picture here : human osteosar - coma cell , “U2OS” ) . 1 . Dorsal stress ﬁbers ( red ) extend radi - ally throughout the lamella and connect cell body and focal adhesions . 2 . Transverse arc stress ﬁbers ( yellow ) provide for lateral tension and are bent in the direction of migration . 3 . Ventral stress ﬁbers ( green ) facilitate rupture of adhesions at the rear end of the cell by propagating tension from trans - verse arcs to the retraction zone . The picture shown here is reproduced from [ 110 ] with permission by P . Hotulainen . 2 . Eﬀective ﬂuidity of the cell bulk : The here postulated analogy of cell bulk and drop is not coincidental . Indeed , we share the opinion that the cytoplasm mostly behaves like a ﬂuid . This perhaps controversial view has a rather simple explanation : the inherent time - scale of chemical processes in the cytoplasm , most notably of the actin cytoskeleton , is much smaller than the relevant time - scale of cellular migration . Actin monomers turn over in seconds , whereas cell motility and translocation happens in minutes to hours . Fluidity arises because there are almost no bonds between actin monomers that would stay connected long enough to determine cellular motion . Instead , due to chemical turnover , the cytoskeleton bulk appears as ﬂuid when investigating the long time - scale of motility . In a similar manner , crosslinkers like myosin attach and dissociate to / from actin ﬁlaments rather quickly – again compared to the time - scale of cell motion of minutes to hours . This “ﬂuid” view becomes more and more common in whole - cell models [ 6 , 118 , 123 ] and is already well established at the tissue - level [ 94 , 145 , 198 ] . Nevertheless , actin and crosslinker bonds do inﬂuence the material properties of the cytoplasm . 17 It is to be expected that their kinetic turnover speed would modulate the eﬀective viscosity of the cytoplasmic ﬂuid . 3 . Integrin and focal adhesions : During migration , it is important for the cell to connect itself to the underlying substrate . To this end , focal adhesion complexes assemble at the interface between cell and sub - stratum , so that locomotion forces can be transmitted . For human epi - dermal keratinocytes it has been reported that initially small adhering connections are assembled below ﬁlopodia , i . e . spike - like thin , and elon - gated cytoskeletal protuberances . This assembly process is mediated by a small protein called VASP 12 [ 190 ] . After that , right behind VASP , slightly larger connecting sites are formed from proteins like tensin , pax - illin , talin , zyxin , β - integrin , vinculin and even VASP itself . These larger connections are called small focal adhesion sites . A small focal adhesion will grow to a larger one as soon as the lamellipodium arrives at the corresponding region [ 190 ] . As the focal adhesion site grows , there is a steady phosphorylation and turnover of vinculin molecules . Subsequent size maintenance and shrinking of the focal adhesion site is modulated by vinculin dephosphorylation [ 158 ] . Apparently , there also seems to be an inherent time - scale in focal ad - hesion formation , maturing and subsequent disassembly . Fluorescence recovery after photo - bleaching ( FRAP ) measurements on the exchange dynamics of vinculin pose a lower boundary of approximately 1 min to this ripening or maturing process [ 156 , 158 ] . In mature focal adhesions , the residence time of integrin is approximately 1 – 3 min [ 180 ] . Moreover , adhesion sites to the substrate also seem to be important for the cell shape . When seeding cells on substrates with localized adhesive spots , they exhibit a characteristic outline , whereby tip - like extensions anchor to the adhesive spots . At the same time , the intermediate arcs sharply curve inward , approximately in a circular fashion [ 28 ] . Based on an energy - minimizing principle , the emerging cell shape can be related to the forces acting on the adhesive spots , and the cell outline thus becomes directly predictable [ 28 ] . This shows that the distribution and strength of adhesion spots contribute to whole - cell shape generation . 4 . Mutual feedback of cytoskeleton and focal adhesions : Finally , fo - cal adhesion sites are also inﬂuenced by stresses in the actin cytoskeleton . Upon ATP hydrolysis , the actomyosin - complex contracts , which creates 12 VASP = Vasodilator - stimulated phosphoprotein 18 a tension in the focal adhesion complexes [ 224 ] . Some of the molecular bonds in the focal complex are sensitive to tensile forces and therefore tend to break upon load , which leads to an incomplete detachment of the focal adhesions . In this way , a crawling cell leaves a so - called migration track behind , which mostly contains integrin clusters [ 124 ] . This suggests to combine steps 4 “Contractile Forces and Traction” and 5 “Rear Re - lease” of the scheme in section 1 . 5 . The inverse phenomenon does occur as well . In nascent focal adhesions , force - induced tensile load as provided e . g . by stress ﬁbers or retrograde actin ﬂow facilitates the further assem - bly and clustering process of the complex [ 81 , 89 , 180 ] . Consistent with these observations , focal adhesions of MDCK 13 cells enlarge on stiﬀer substrates [ 188 ] . 5 . Cadherin and intercellular junctions : Cadherin is an elongated mole - cule , with two characteristic functional groups at its opposite ends , namely the C - terminal region ( ending with a carboxyl group COOH ) and the N - terminal region ( ending with an amino group NH 2 ) [ 139 ] . At the N - terminal domain , there are ﬁve diﬀerent extracellular repeat units EC1 – EC5 , of which the ﬁrst three are believed to dominate the formation of homophilic cadherin - cadherin bonds . These bonds develop in two dis - tinct kinetic phases : In the ﬁrst phase , cadherins mostly form EC1 – EC2 bonds , whereby the corresponding probability of accomplishing the cell - cell contact is relatively low . Then , after a short lag phase , cadherins engage in EC3 bonds , which provides for stronger coupling of the cells and keeps them connected [ 139 ] . Similar to integrin , cadherin forms adhesions in patches involving sev - eral individual molecules . Functionally most important are the so - called adherens junctions , which are composed of clustered cadherins [ 107 , 235 ] . Initially , few E - cadherins connect to those of the other cell in a small number of bonds . Then , other cadherins approach the region by means of diﬀusion , where they engage in dimers and thus become trapped . Sub - sequently , so - called catenins attach to the cell - interior domains of the cad - herins . This enforces the present cluster structure and at the same time provides for connections to the cytoskeleton , so that cohesive stresses may propagate from one cell to the other . Once established , the adherens junc - tion is fairly stable , because there is a certain energy cost for a cadherin to leave the cluster , leading to a half residence time of approximately 2 min - utes [ 107 ] . In ﬁgure 1 . 5 , one can recognize a cadherin - mediated adhesion 13 MDCK = Madin - Darby canine kidney epithelial cells 19 Figure 1 . 5 . : This pair of human epidermal keratinocytes has formed a cadherin - mediated adhesion zone . The ﬂuorescent marker ( green ) is Zyxin , which colocalizes both with focal and trans - cellular adhesion complexes . A possible adhesion mechanism has been suggested in [ 35 ] . Thereby , one cell touches the other with its ﬁlopodia . The other , in turn , responds by generating localized stresses in its actin cytoskeleton . In this way , cadherin adhesion is initiated and a stable cell - cell adhe - sion emerges . In the picture above we see two connected cells with an already mature cell - cell contact zone . The strong fo - cal adhesions towards the substrate ( also green ) show that the cells have been in this constellation for a longer time . 20 zone between two human epidermal keratinocytes . The striking stability of such an adherens junction can be understood in terms of a receptor - ligand binding model on ﬂuctuating membranes [ 225 ] . Thereby , mem - brane ﬂuctuations lead to the preferential formation of receptor / ligand pairs close to existing clusters , which constitutes a positive , self - enhancing feedback of adherens junctions [ 131 ] . There are two distinct kinds of catenins , namely α - catenin and β - catenin [ 33 , 94 ] . Both species are involved in cadherin clustering , whereby the latter forms a complex with E - cadherin . The former can bind in sev - eral states : as a monomer , it attaches to β - catenin in the E - cadherin – β - catenin complex , whereas in its homo - dimer conformation , it only binds to actin ﬁlaments . In this way , actin ﬁlaments may restrain the E - cadherin diﬀusion into the junction . Additionally , α - catenin may also prevent the Arp2 / 3 complex from binding to actin , thereby inhibiting actin polymerization [ 33 , 94 ] . 6 . Clustering and force - induced adhesion modulation : One early and important model of the dynamics at cell - cell contacts has been by by George I . Bell , from 1978 . The central idea is quite simple : connec - tions between adjacent cells are realized by their surface proteins , which eventually bind to one another . Bond disconnection is modulated by the applied force . Thereby , the dissociation rate ( oﬀ rate ) of cell - cell bonds increases exponentially with the applied force ( load ) [ 21 ] . In the late 90s , Evans and Ritchie showed by means of simulations , that under high loading rates the number of rupture events is also high . Conversely , un - der low loading rates , there seem to appear very low bond strengths [ 76 ] . Meanwhile , the measurement of forces on single bonds is quite a standard technique , by which these theoretical predictions have been veriﬁed [ 147 ] . We believe that this force - induced speed up of molecular bond breaking is a very central motif of cellular motility . Ultimately , migration follows force transduction . Therefore , in any motility process leading to translo - cation , there must be some forces involved . Since force aﬀects chemical bonds , this certainly comprises a very direct regulation circuitry . Speciﬁ - cally , the sensed forces can provide for feedback onto the macromolecular aggregates involved in cellular motility processes . The inverse eﬀects may also occur at sites of adhesion . We have already seen that adhesion formation involves clustering of multiple receptors . In the preceding paragraph we have found that actin in cooperation with α - catenin is involved in the cadherin clustering process . When a cadherin 21 molecule close to the cluster is connected to an actin ﬁlament , the forces pulling on that ﬁlament – or even its Brownian ﬂuctuations – might navigate the cadherin into the cluster , which subsequently enhances the local adhesion strength . Similar processes are also at work during the maturation of focal adhesion sites [ 81 ] . Additionally , integrins might be activated by mere pulling in the suitable directions [ 180 , Fig . 1 ] . Finally , imposing tensile load on an immature adhesion complex increases its size [ 158 ] . Altogether , these eﬀects comprise a conceptually simple and power - ful mechanism for a crosstalk of actin and cell - cell and cell - substratum adhesion molecules . In the initial phase of adhesion formation , external load on the adhesion molecules enhances the clustering eﬀect , so that the adhesion matures more quickly . When the adhesion site has aged , fairly strong pulling forces are able to overcome the barrier of the connecting bonds in the adhesion molecules . After some time , this would induce subsequent rupture and disassembly of the adhesion site . 1 . 7 . Modes of motion of selected kinds of vertebrate cells 1 . Length - scale , timescale and molecular key players : Modeling cell migration easily gets complex and considering every single involved pro - tein complicates the matter even more . Therefore , one needs to focus on the main functional themes . Here we identify three important locations for the processes driving cellular motility : • the cell bulk , • the contact zone between two adjacent cells , • the contact zone between cell and substrate or extracellular matrix . When describing whole - cell motility , the corresponding dimensions give rise to approximately three diﬀerent length - scales : • molecular scale ≈ membrane thickness ( ∼ 10 nm ) , • intermediate scale ≈ cell lamellipodium ( ∼ 1 µ m ) , • cell scale ≈ one to few cell radii ( ∼ 50 µ m ) . Similarly , there are three distinct time scales : 22 • chemical reaction scale ( ∼ 5 s ) , • intermediate scale ≈ protrusion , adhesion maturation ( ∼ 2 min ) , • cell translocation scale ( ∼ 1 h ) . These time - and length - scales help to organize and categorize speciﬁc phenomena in the sense of a taxonomy . At the same time , they allow for a certain modularity in the construction of models . Commonly , things that happen at a diﬀerent time - and / or length - scale can be neglected or their eﬀects can be conveniently summarized without resorting to detailed submodel development . According to section 1 . 6 , there are usually four dominant chemical players related to force transduction in cell motility : • actin ( cytoskeleton ) , • myosin ( contraction ) , • integrin ( cell - matrix or cell - substrate adhesion ) , • cadherin ( cell - cell adhesion ) . Here we do not list any upstream or downstream chemical signaling species . Such species ultimately regulate only detailed aspects of the aforementioned force machinery . Any regulation circuitry should there - fore be a modular ingredient to the model and tuned to the speciﬁc cell type at hand . 2 . Physical mechanisms jointly at work : In the light of the previous considerations , there are fairly few mechanisms that jointly constitute the majority of cellular motility phenomena : 1 . actin polymerization ( usually mostly at the tip ) , 2 . motor - induced cytoskeletal contraction ( cell bulk ) , 3 . long range force transduction ( across cell bulk ) , 4 . force - induced molecular clustering and breaking of chemical bonds ( adhesion sites , possibly cytoskeleton ) , 5 . ﬂuid - like behavior of cytoplasm / cytoskeleton ( cell bulk ) . 23 Location and eﬀect of these few mechanisms are combined and explored in - vivo so that many diﬀerent modes of cellular motion and morphology have been developed . Certainly , the item 5 of the preceding list is the most controversial one : it might be diﬃcult to imagine long - range force transduction in wobbling ﬂuids . Central to a ﬂuid’s cohesion , however , are its interior stresses , which jointly contribute to the overall surface tension . In the cell , this function is provided by two players : ( i ) the membrane as ﬂexible container of the cytoplasm , and ( ii ) the cytoskeleton inside of that con - tainer , including but not limited to the cortex underneath the membrane . Importantly , the tension provided by the membrane does not suﬃce in all cases to achieve cohesion of the whole cell . In these cases , the cytoskele - ton serves by enforcing and strengthening the eﬀective cellular surface tension . Our ﬁndings are summarized in table 1 . 1 , and in line with the inspiring work by Denise Montell [ 159 ] . We try to relate the biological phenomena to their location , the underlying physical mechanisms , and the involved chemicals . When idealizing a complex real - live system into a coherent model , not all details can be captured exhaustively . On the other hand , one would like to summarize omitted facts so to at least partially account for them . One summarizing technique is the incorporation of stochastic perturba - tions . Perturbations , however , are not only a useful ingredient to idealized model systems . In fact , ﬂuctuations occur in any system involving the spatial distribution of chemical reactants . Diﬀusion is inherent to such systems , which is a stochastic process driven by Brownian motion of the particles in the surrounding solvent ﬂuid . Eﬀectively , this leads to vari - ations in the concentration proﬁle of the reactants , which constitutes a direct source of ﬂuctuations . It is therefore to be expected that na - ture has somehow explored these ﬂuctuations to help in the ubiquitous self - organization processes that we observe at all stages of life . The con - siderations of ﬂuctuations might even proof to be essential in order to explain certain biological phenomena . Yet to a modeler , the immediate practical beneﬁts of perturbations are more mundane : increasing noise serves as a quick benchmark for the robustness of the system . After all , robustness is a central characteristic of all living beings . 24 Biologicalphenomenon Location Physicalmechanism Chemical players cell - wide coordination whole cell chemical signalling ; force transduction , adhesion modulation by force various ; actin , myosin sensing , polarization lamella tip , cell bulk chemical signalling , polymerization , ﬂuid ﬂow PIP2 , . . . , Arp2 / 3 , actin ; actin , myosin protrusion , membraneextension lamella ; cell bulk ﬂuid ﬂow Arp2 / 3 , actin , actin , myosin cell - matrix adhesion below cell adhesion modulation by force integrin , . . . ; actin , myosin contraction cell bulk , backside motor activity actin , myosin rear release below cell , backside adhesion modulation by force integrin , . . . , actin , myosin cell - cell adhesion between two cells , close to membranes adhesion modulation by force cadherin , . . . ; actin , myosin tissue cohesion cell bulk , between cells trans - cellular adhesion and force - transduction actin , myosin , cadherin , . . . collectivemigration tissue bulk trans - cellular adhesion , force - transduction , substratum tension actin , myosin , cadherin , . . . , integrin , . . . Table 1 . 1 . : Taxonomy of force - involving phenomena in cellular migration . Migration combines the mechanisms in the third column in a modular way . Generic parameters to these mechanisms , e . g . strength , speed / time - scale , and noise - driven ﬂuctuations , need to be ajdusted according to cell type . In this way , typical migrating cell systems , such as keratinocytes and ﬁbroblasts , can be understood within this common conceptual framework ( see also example paragraph 1 . 7 . 3 in the text ) . 25 3 . Some tangible biological examples : Human epidermal keratino - cytes exhibit several typical morphological modes on two - dimensional substrates , see ﬁgure 1 . 6 . In their sessile state A , as attained after spread - ing on a substrate , they are circular . This corresponds to a force equi - librium between radial retrograde ﬂow , adhesion induced expansion and lateral tangential contraction , e . g . by stress ﬁbers around the cell body , cf . also paragraph 1 . 5 . 2 . The migrating state B is polarized and exhibits a broad front of polymerization , with adhesion “carpet” maturing shortly behind the leading edge , so that a lamella develops in the direction where the cell is crawling . At the rear end , stress - ﬁber contractions help in breaking adhesion bonds . Most of these phenomena could already be conceived in whole - cell continuum descriptions [ 6 , 135 ] . Since switching is possible between the two states , the emerging cell trajectories exhibit intervals of persistent and fast locomotion with slow reorientation phases in between . The bimodal morphology C with two protrusion zones on opposite cell ends facilitates these reorientations . Fish keratocytes are in many ways similar to human epidermal ker - atinocytes . In their canoe - shaped migratory mode , the recycling of actin monomers is slightly more eﬃcient , and possibly adhesions are regulated more tightly , so that the leading edge is suﬃciently smooth , as typical for this type of cells . Strongest traction is situated at the lateral parts , i . e . shifted outwards as compared to human keratinocytes . Altogether , this leads to very persistent and fast locomotion [ 123 , 233 ] . Depending on their state , there are one or more distinct tip regions of active actin polymerization in ﬁbroblasts , see e . g . [ 178 , 206 ] . Accord - ingly , there are usually several protruding lamellipodia , giving rise to a multi - modal cell shape . At the same time , removal of remaining adhe - sions at the back is also fairly localized [ 99 ] . Radial stress ﬁbers in long rupture podia are under high tension towards the cell center . In this way , forward traction and backward retraction forces are under continu - ous competition . Thus , ﬁbroblasts reorient frequently during migration , leading to rather slow overall translocation speeds . Neutrophils are morphologically distinct , because they follow a guid - ing chemical cue . They attain a drop - like like shape , with the so - called uropod being the thin part , situated at the back . While hunting a bac - terium 14 , the blob - like front quickly adapts to directional changes . This is achieved by reducing the overall cellular surface tension . Being softer 14 See the famous movie by David Rogers , http : / / www . biochemweb . org / neutrophil . shtml . 26 Figure 1 . 6 . : When seeded on ﬁbronectin substrata , human epidermal ker - atinocytes attain distinct morphological states . In the ses - sile state A , cells are round and attain a fried - egg shape . The migrating state B is characterized by a broad lamella in the direction of the cell’s crawling motion . Sometimes , ker - atinocytes also attain a bimodal shape C , where there are two lamella at opposite ends of the cell . In A and C , the green ﬂuorescence staining is for vinculin , which co - localizes with the cellular focal adhesions involving also integrin . In B , staining is for tubulin , which is a part of the cytoskeletal network and mostly situated within the cell body . The pre - sented micrographs are by courtesy of Carina Wollnik [ 231 ] . 27 and more deformable obviously facilitates the migration through the sur - rounding tissue . However , also the adhesions have to be reorganized very quickly . We speculate that this works by keeping the focal adhesions in the nascent state before maturation . Due to their task , neutrophil trajec - tories are expected to be closely related to the pattern set by the chemical cues . Finally , neuronal growth cones share some of the aforementioned mo - tion principles . Recently , it has been shown that growth cones are excep - tionally soft mechanical structures [ 24 ] . This means that only weak ad - hesions are needed for translocation . At the same time , the protrusional “sensing” is excessive , which could arise from the need of integrating ex - tracellular signals very precisely . Also , the trailing axon certainly plays a role , however it is not clear whether the axon is pulled or rather assem - bled on - the - ﬂy . All in all , a straight growth trajectory emerges , whereby the speed of the cone is very slow [ 23 ] . 28 2 . The Reactive Interpenetrating Flow model describes the dynamics of the cytoplasm Summary : In this chapter we derive a hydrodynamic continuum theory for the cytoplasm of motile cells . The model presented here was origi - nally proposed by Alt and Dembo , and is usually referred to as Reactive Interpenetrating Flow ( RIF ) model [ 6 , 8 , 50 , 58 , 60 , 62 ] . The central un - derlying assumption in this theory is , that the cytoplasm is essentially of ﬂuid nature , where tensile and pressure like forces are generated from active components in the ﬂuid . RIF distinguishes two phases in the cy - toplasm , namely ( i ) the ﬁlamentous cytoskeleton and ( ii ) the aqueous cytosol phase . There is a separate mass and force balance for each of these phases . The mass balances are constructed in a way that the total volume ﬂux is incompressible . Moreover , the Stokes - type force balances contain an isotropic , active , and bistable stress . Also , there is a Darcy type friction between the ﬁlamentous and aqueous phase . Both active stress and inter - phase friction are prescribed as constitutive equations . 2 . 1 . Mass balances involve the volume fraction 1 . Three distinct mass balances in the cytoplasm : In order to repre - sent and quantify the physical cytoplasm mechanisms 1 & 5 from para - graph 1 . 7 . 2 , we treat the cytoplasm as a compound ﬂuid , whereby we initially start with three constituents . 1 To this end , we consider the mass densities of ( i ) ﬁlamentous F - actin ρ f , ( ii ) monomeric G - actin ρ g , and ( iii ) aqueous solvent ρ s . Accordingly , we write the three mass balances , F - actin : ∂ t ρ f + ∇∇∇ · (cid:0) ρ f v f (cid:1) = J (cid:48) , ( 2 . 1 ) G - actin : ∂ t ρ g + ∇∇∇ · (cid:0) ρ g v g + j g (cid:1) = − J (cid:48) , ( 2 . 2 ) solvent : ∂ t ρ s + ∇∇∇ · (cid:0) ρ s v s − j g (cid:1) = 0 . ( 2 . 3 ) 1 This chapter relies heavily on the notions of hydrodynamics . A brief and acces - sible introduction to the matter is given in [ 177 , chapter 12 ] . The classic reference is [ 137 ] , however the treatment of ﬂuid mixtures diﬀers from the approach pursued here . To this end , the underlying ideas are most clearly exposed in the early RIF papers [ 57 , 61 ] . 29 Here , bold symbols indicate vectors , and we have employed the ∇∇∇ - notation familiar from vector analysis , indicating the divergence in the second terms on the left - hand side . Moreover , the three ﬂuid components ρ f , ρ g , ρ s are transported with their respective advection velocities v f , v g , v s . The G - actin diﬀusion current j g is embedded in the advection ﬂow with v g . A similar diﬀusion of F - actin has been neglected , because the ﬁlaments are connected in a cross - linked structure . Importantly , we separately retain a distinct velocity ﬁeld for each phase . Finally , the polymerization rate J (cid:48) describes the chemical reaction ρ f ↔ ρ g and quantiﬁes both F - actin ﬁla - ment assembly and disassembly from / to surrounding G - actin monomers . 2 . Mass density rescaling and volume fractions : Let m a be the mass of a single actin monomer , and V a its volume , both when dissolved and embedded in a ﬁlament . Correspondingly , let m s , V s be mass and volume of one element of solvent . With the help of these quantities , we express the mass densities ρ f , ρ g , ρ s in terms of the respective volume fractions θ f , θ g , θ s , namely θ f = V a m a ρ f , θ g = V a m a ρ g , θ s = V s m s ρ s . ( 2 . 4 ) Accordingly , dividing the actin equations ( 2 . 1 , 2 . 2 ) by m a / V a , and the solvent equation ( 2 . 3 ) by m s / V s gives us the mass balance equations in terms of volume fractions , F - actin : ∂ t θ f + ∇∇∇ · (cid:0) θ f v f (cid:1) = V a m a J (cid:48) , ( 2 . 5 ) G - actin : ∂ t θ g + ∇∇∇ · (cid:0) θ g v g − D g ∇∇∇ θ g (cid:1) = − V a m a J (cid:48) , ( 2 . 6 ) solvent : ∂ t θ s + ∇∇∇ · (cid:0) θ s v s + D g ∇∇∇ θ g (cid:1) = 0 , ( 2 . 7 ) bulk : θ f + θ g + θ s = 1 . ( 2 . 8 ) Speciﬁcally , the G - actin diﬀusion current was assumed to be j g = − D g ∇∇∇ ρ g , and D g denotes the G - actin diﬀusion constant . We stress that both m s and V s are eﬀective quantities . If the solvent were to consist of water only , m s and V s would be precisely the mass and volume of one single H 2 O molecule . However , because the cytosolic solvent contains many diﬀerent molecules , we have to think of m s and V s as average values , without accounting for variations in the cytosolic composition . Of course one could always add additional mass balances if the model is required to resolve further details . Moreover , the molecular actin mass m a and 30 volume V a in solution is not exactly the same as that of a monomer in a ﬁlament . Both might be modiﬁed slightly due to interactions with the solvent . However , such meticulous details are generally neglected in RIF models [ 6 , 8 , 50 , 58 , 60 , 62 ] , since their eﬀect on the ﬂow in a whole - cell level description is expected to be small . 3 . Combination of G - actin and solvent mass balance : Since the actin monomers with volume fraction θ g are distributed throughout the aqueous solvent θ s , we assume the monomer and solvent velocities to coincide , v g = v s = : w . Denoting the combined volume fraction of G - actin and solvent by θ w : = θ g + θ s , we obtain a single eﬀective mass balance by addition of the two relations ( 2 . 6 , 2 . 7 ) . Adding the result to ( 2 . 5 ) yields ∂ t θ f + ∇∇∇ · (cid:0) θ f u (cid:1) = V a m a J (cid:48) , ( 2 . 9 ) ∇∇∇ · (cid:0) θ f u + θ w w (cid:1) = 0 , ( 2 . 10 ) θ f + θ w = 1 , ( 2 . 11 ) where we introduced the abbreviation u : = v f . Here , the second equation expresses the incompressibility of the overall volume ﬂux . Together with the third equation , the solvent velocity w could be expressed in terms of the actin network volume fraction θ g and its velocity u . We stress that there is no simple scaling conversion between the eﬀective cytosol volume fraction θ w and its mass density analogue ρ w . Speciﬁcally we have ρ w : = ρ g + ρ s = m a V a θ g + m s V s θ s , ( 2 . 12 ) θ w : = θ g + θ s = V a m a ρ g + V s m s ρ s , ( 2 . 13 ) which follows from the density scaling relations ( 2 . 4 ) . The reason for this delicacy is that both ρ w and θ w represent the density or volume fraction of a combined quantity , which contains both reactive and non - reactive chemical species . The possibility for writing simple conversion equations involving only one scaling factor like ( 2 . 4 ) requires that all chemically reacting species have their own mass balance equation . 2 . 2 . Both in - phase force balances are friction - dominated 1 . Navier - Stokes ﬂuid force balances : In order to ﬁnd the transport velocities u , w , we have to construct expressions for the momentum bal - ances of the corresponding phases . We have argued in paragraph 1 . 6 . 2 31 that the dynamical behavior of the cellular cytoplasm is essentially that of a ﬂuid . Since there are two ﬂuid phases in RIF ﬂows , we have two separate momentum balances of Navier - Stokes type , ρ f (cid:0) ∂ t + u · ∇∇∇ (cid:1) u − ∇∇∇ · (cid:0) S f + η f (cid:101) ∇∇∇ u (cid:1) = f extf , ( 2 . 14 ) ρ w (cid:0) ∂ t + w · ∇∇∇ (cid:1) w − ∇∇∇ · (cid:0) S w + η w (cid:101) ∇∇∇ w (cid:1) = f extw . ( 2 . 15 ) with the combined G - actin / solvent mass density of the aqueous cytosol ρ w : = ρ g + ρ s . The ﬁrst term in both equations represents the inertia due to the ﬂuid mass . The second term on the left - hand side represents stresses within the respective phase of the compound ﬂuid . Speciﬁcally , we consider the viscous stresses η f (cid:101) ∇∇∇ u , η w (cid:101) ∇∇∇ w in ﬁlament and aqueous phase , respectively . The involved symmetrized velocity gradient has ten - sorial structure and reads (cid:101) ∇∇∇ v : = ( ∂ i v k + ∂ k v i ) for v = u , w in explicit components . Any other in - phase stress is represented by the two tensors S f and S w , which will be speciﬁed later . Forces not arising in the corre - sponding ﬂuid phase are summarized by the external forces f ext f , f ext w on the right hand sides . 2 . Dimensional considerations : In order to simplify these momentum balances , we estimate typical values of several involved key quantities . These values are presented in table 2 . 1 and further discussed in the ap - pendix A . 1 . Using these typical values , we can render the momentum balances ( 2 . 14 , 2 . 15 ) dimensionless . This is achieved by dividing both sides by ρ 0f | u 0 | 2 / L 0 or ρ 0w | w 0 | 2 / L 0 , respectively , where ρ 0f , ρ 0w are the char - acteristic mass densities , and L 0 is the typical length scale of the ﬂow . With the characteristic advection velocities u 0 : = | u 0 | , w 0 : = | w 0 | , the scaled derivatives ∂ ut : = L 0 ∂ t / u 0 , ∂ wt : = L 0 ∂ t / w 0 in time and ∇∇∇ L 0 : = L 0 ∇∇∇ , (cid:101) ∇∇∇ L 0 : = L 0 (cid:101) ∇∇∇ in space we obtain ρ f ρ 0f (cid:16) ∂ u 0 t + u u 0 ∇∇∇ L 0 (cid:17) u u 0 − ∇∇∇ L 0 · (cid:16) S f ρ 0f u 20 + η f L 0 ρ 0f u 0 (cid:101) ∇∇∇ L 0 u u 0 (cid:17) = L 0 f extf ρ 0f u 20 , ( 2 . 16 ) ρ w ρ 0 w (cid:16) ∂ w 0 t + w w 0 ∇∇∇ L 0 (cid:17) w w 0 − ∇∇∇ L 0 · (cid:16) S w ρ 0 w w 2 0 + η w L 0 ρ 0 w w 0 (cid:101) ∇∇∇ L 0 w w 0 (cid:17) = L 0 f extw ρ 0 w w 2 0 . ( 2 . 17 ) The dimensionless viscosities of the F - actin η f / (cid:0) L 0 ρ 0f u 0 (cid:1) and the cytosol phase η w / (cid:0) L 0 ρ 0w w 0 (cid:1) in the last summands on the left - hand side represent the inverse Reynolds numbers of the corresponding ﬂow . If the Reynolds number is very low , the viscosity terms ∝ η will dominate over the mass 32 quantity symbol typical value comment F - actin density ρ 0f ∼ 1 . 5 g / cm 3 slightly higher than water F - actin velocity | u 0 | (cid:46) 0 . 25 µ m / s in ﬁsh keratocytes [ 78 , 192 , 229 , 233 ] F - actin viscosity η 0f ∼ 500 Pa · s in neutrophils [ 101 , 104 ] cell size L 0 ∼ µ m up to 50 µ m cytosol density ρ 0w ≈ 1 . 1 g / cm 3 similar to water cytosol velocity | w 0 | (cid:46) 0 . 7 µ m / s in ﬁsh keratinocytes [ 123 ] cytosol viscosity η 0w ∼ 10 − 3 Pa · s [ 202 , table I ] Table 2 . 1 . : The characteristic dimensions of cytoplasm ﬂow can be esti - mated from various measurements . All these estimates are presented in appendix A . 1 , together with a short critique and further explanations . Note that the mass densities ρ 0f , ρ 0w can also be measured in units of pg / µ m 3 ≡ g / cm 3 . inertia terms ∝ ρ on the left - hand side . In this way , inertia could be neglected , and the preceding equations would be much simpler . Indeed , with the numbers from table 2 . 1 and as discussed in appendix A . 1 , we obtain the Reynolds numbers F - actin network phase : Re f : = L 0 ρ 0f u 0 η f ∼ 10 − 12 , ( 2 . 18 ) aqueous solvent phase : Re w : = L 0 ρ 0w w 0 η w ∼ 10 − 6 . ( 2 . 19 ) In order to ensure that the ﬁrst terms in the equations ( 2 . 16 , 2 . 17 ) can really be neglected safely , we have to take into account possible devia - tions of the dimensionless densities ρ f / ρ 0f , ρ w / ρ 0w from unity . The overall concentration of actin monomers is usually rather low , e . g . some 500 µ M at the leading edge of certain highly motile mouse melanoma cells [ 129 ] . Therefore it is clear that the dimensionless mass density of the cytosol ρ w / ρ 0w is very close to 1 , because the monomers would comprise only a very small part of the cytosolic solvent . 2 However , in the cytoskele - ton phase we have to expect more variation in the concentration ρ f / ρ 0f , 2 Compare the physiological actin concentration of 500 µ M ≡ 0 . 0005 mol / l with the concentration of densely packed “actin monomer” balls with diameter of 2 . 7 nm , 33 because actin ﬁlaments preferentially assemble at the leading edge . Nev - ertheless , considering the value Re f , there is plenty of room for F - actin density variations , even if the inertia term in ( 2 . 16 ) is neglected . Indeed , if the estimated η f were oﬀ by two orders of magnitude , cf . discussions in the appendix A . 1 , neglecting inertia in the cytoskeleton phase would still be valid at least for ρ f / ρ 0f < 10 8 , where we have allowed for an additional safety margin of two orders of magnitude . 3 . Neglecting inertia terms : In conclusion , the force balances ( 2 . 14 , 2 . 15 ) can be treated in the friction - dominated regime , and therefore it is suﬃcient to consider the corresponding Stokes equations , −∇∇∇ · (cid:0) S f + η f (cid:101) ∇∇∇ u (cid:1) = f extf , ( 2 . 20 ) −∇∇∇ · (cid:0) S w + η w (cid:101) ∇∇∇ w (cid:1) = f extw . ( 2 . 21 ) In the following section , we take a closer look at the involved model stresses and forces . 2 . 3 . Force balances include isotropic active stresses and Darcy permeation In order to close the RIF system of equations for cytoplasm ﬂow , we have to make several model assumptions regarding the eﬀective stresses in the force balances . These assumptions are made in the sense of phenomeno - logical constitutive laws , so that most important features of cytoplasm motion can be captured . Therefore , the chosen relations have to prove their usefulness a - posteriori , when comparing RIF theory with experi - ments . 1 . External forces acting on the phases : Apart from possibly other contributions , e . g . due to substratum friction , the external forces on the right - hand side of equations ( 2 . 20 , 2 . 21 ) contain a permeation term which represents the friction forces between ﬁlamentous actin network and aque - ous solvent . According to the phenomenological Darcy law [ 53 , 161 ] , such a permeative friction is proportional to the velocity diﬀerence . Moreover , it is generally assumed in RIF models , that this inter - phase friction is which is approximately 0 . 12 M . Conversely , the mass density of “pure” F - actin of 1 . 5 g / cm 3 quoted in the table is equivalent to a concentration of 0 . 03 M , since a single actin monomer has the approximate mass of 42000 atomic mass units . 34 also proportional to the product of the two volume fractions θ f θ w , which is taken as a measure for the eﬀective drag between the two phases . Not - ing that the inter - phase friction opposes the ﬂow velocity of the respective phase , we write f extf = θ f θ w φ ph (cid:0) w − u (cid:1) + f u , f extw = θ f θ w φ ph (cid:0) u − w (cid:1) , ( 2 . 22 ) with the friction coeﬃcient φ ph . The additional summand f u in the ﬁrst equation represents possible other interactions of the cytoskeleton with the cell exterior , which shall play an important role in the following chap - ter . A similar contribution for the solvent has been dropped . To this end , one could think – for example – of osmotic eﬀects due to ions in and around the cell . However , such contributions can alternatively be absorbed in the boundary conditions . We note that an extension of the present model including external cytosol forces is straight forward , and has already been proposed in [ 5 , cf . F a ] . 2 . Internal stresses in the phases : Now we turn to the in - phase stress tensors S f and S w . Comparing the dimensionless viscosities or inverse Reynolds numbers of the two phases , c . f . equations ( 2 . 18 , 2 . 19 ) , we ﬁnd that the F - actin viscosity exceeds the cytosol viscosity by approximately six orders of magnitude . In this way , F - actin poses a rather rigid ob - stacle for the cytosol . We therefore neglect the viscous term η w (cid:101) ∇∇∇ w in equation ( 2 . 21 ) , because the eﬀective inter - phase friction appears to be much higher . Since the aqueous phase is essentially passive , we do not consider any active contributions to its stresses . Therefore , we write for the corresponding cytosol stress ∇∇∇ · S w = − θ w ∇∇∇ p , ( 2 . 23 ) where we assume that forces arising from gradients in the hydrostatic pressure p split across the two phases according to their volume fraction . Correspondingly , the pressure gradient appears with θ f in the network phase . Next , we clearly have to retain the viscosity term in ( 2 . 20 ) , because η f is rather high . Indeed , the estimated F - actin viscosity as characterized by the dimensional number η f is comparable to that of molten glass [ 59 ] . Moreover , we assume the model stress S f for the network to be isotropic , S f : = S I , where I denotes the identity matrix I : = diag (cid:0) 1 , . . . , 1 (cid:1) , with the model function S to be speciﬁed later . A thermodynamically amenable construction of anisotropic stresses has been undertaken in the so - called Active Polar Gel ( APG ) theory [ 118 ] , which is comparable to the one 35 presented here . In order to derive such anisotropic stresses , one intro - duces the mean orientation of the local F - actin network as new hydro - dynamic variable called polarity [ 133 ] . However , this entails a plethora of cross - couplings , for example between the actin polymerization kinetics J (cid:48) , cf . equation ( 2 . 9 ) , and the F - actin velocity u [ 42 , 117 ] . For simplicity we therefore neglect these anisotropic stresses . In this way , we have ∇∇∇ · S f = ∇∇∇ (cid:2) S ( θ f ) (cid:3) − θ f ∇∇∇ p . ( 2 . 24 ) In the past , various model functions have been considered for S , which all can be summarized by a diﬀerence of two functionally distinct terms , S ( θ f ) = ψ ( θ f ) − σ ( θ f ) , ( 2 . 25 ) where ψ represents contractions in the F - actin network , and σ its osmotic swelling pressure . Even though being termed osmotic , this swelling pres - sure resides exclusively within the cell’s cytoplasm and does not involve the cell membrane in any way . It arises because local regions with high F - actin volume fractions attract surrounding solvent cytosol in the same manner as salt attracts water . Another possible interpretation of the two stress contributions is that ψ includes any active eﬀects arising in the cell due to the consumption of energy in dedicated molecular machines . In contrast , σ encompasses purely passive eﬀects which arise from the presence of concentration gra - dients in thermodynamic systems . A common assumption in RIF - type models is , that the network contraction is proportional to the network volume fraction θ f . Moreover , contraction may be enhanced or inhibited by speciﬁc regulation factors , for example myosin . Again , swelling is gen - erally considered to represent purely passive stress contributions . It has often been omitted from RIF models , or modeled by non - linear expres - sions involving some logarithm of θ f , which arises from a suitably chosen thermodynamic potential . The actual relations that have been published as models for S are summarized in table 2 . 2 . Together with the external and internal model stresses ( 2 . 22 , 2 . 23 , 2 . 25 ) , the resulting Stokes equations ( 2 . 20 , 2 . 21 ) for the momentum balance in the two phases are F - actin : − ∇∇∇ · (cid:0) η f (cid:101) ∇∇∇ u (cid:1) − ∇∇∇ S ( θ f ) + θ f ∇∇∇ p = θ f θ w φ ph (cid:0) w − u (cid:1) + f u , ( 2 . 26 ) cytosol : θ w ∇∇∇ p = θ f θ w φ ph (cid:0) u − w (cid:1) . ( 2 . 27 ) By adding the latter equation to the former , we can eliminate the explicit dependence on the solvent variables θ w , w from the F - actin momentum 36 # contraction ψ swelling σ viscosity η f references 1 . ψ 0 θ f 0 η 0 θ f [ 101 , 136 ] 2 . − ψ 0 θ f m 0 η 0 θ f [ 99 ] 3 . ψ 0 θ f σ 0 (cid:12)(cid:12) θ f + ln ( 1 − θ f ) (cid:12)(cid:12) η 0 θ f [ 57 , 61 ] 4 . ψ 0 θ 2f σ 0 (cid:12)(cid:12) ln ( 1 − θ f / θ σ ) (cid:12)(cid:12) η 0 θ f [ 218 ] 5 . ψ 0 θ f m σ 0 (cid:12)(cid:12) ln ( 1 − θ f ) (cid:12)(cid:12) η 0 θ f [ 6 ] 6 . ψ 0 θ 2f / ( 1 + θ f / θ ψ ) 2 σ 0 (cid:12)(cid:12) ln ( 1 − θ f ) (cid:12)(cid:12) η 0 θ f [ 135 ] 7 . ψ 0 θ 2f exp (cid:0) − θ f / θ ψ (cid:1) σ 0 (cid:12)(cid:12) ln ( 1 − θ f ) (cid:12)(cid:12) η 0 θ f [ 8 ] 8 . ψ 0 θ f ( m − m 0 ) and ψ 0 θ f ln ( m / m 0 ) 0 η 0 θ f exp ( θ f / θ η ) [ 59 ] 9 . ψ 0 θ f and 0 0 η 0 θ f exp ( θ f / θ η ) [ 100 ] 10 . ψ 0 θ 2f exp (cid:0) − θ f / θ ψ (cid:1) 0 η 0 [ 200 ] Table 2 . 2 . : In earlier applications of RIF - type models , various phe - nomenological stress functions have been explored . They are presented in the table without any particular order . Here θ f ≥ 0 indicates the F - actin volume fraction , and m ≥ 0 the dimensionless density of of a messenger modulating network contraction . All other quantities are positive constants in spe - ciﬁc models . Note that by equations ( 2 . 20 , 2 . 25 ) , the contrac - tion ψ has the same sign as the viscosity term η f , whereas the swelling σ has the opposite sign . Speciﬁcally , the “contrac - tion” ψ in 2 . actually represents a polymerization pressure at the leading edge of crawling cells . The non - linear viscosity in 8 . is a necessary ingredient so that separated endo - and ectoplasm zones emerges in a model of the fountain ﬂow in Amoeba proteus . 37 balance , because the φ ph - terms cancel and the volume fractions add up , θ f + θ w = 1 , see equation ( 2 . 11 ) . Moreover , we can solve ( 2 . 27 ) for the velocity w of the aqueous solvent , and insert it into the divergence relation for the total volume ﬂux ( 2 . 10 ) , which yields ∇∇∇ · (cid:16) 1 − θ f φ ph θ f ∇∇∇ p (cid:17) = ∇∇∇ · u , ( 2 . 28 ) where again ( 2 . 11 ) was employed . This represents the compressibility of the F - actin ﬂow as embedded in the solvent . Naturally , compressibility in the network phase does not aﬀect the incompressibility of the bulk cyto - plasm ( 2 . 10 ) , because the aqueous solvent ﬂow is present to compensate . 3 . Reactive interpenetrating ﬂow ﬁeld equations : Putting all the pieces together again , the RIF ﬁeld equations are given by ( 2 . 9 ) , ( 2 . 26 + 2 . 27 ) , and ( 2 . 28 ) for F - actin volume fraction θ : ∂ t θ + ∇∇∇ · (cid:0) θ u (cid:1) = J , ( 2 . 29 ) F - actin transport velocity u : − ∇∇∇ · (cid:0) η f (cid:101) ∇∇∇ u (cid:1) − ∇∇∇ S + ∇∇∇ p = f u , ( 2 . 30 ) Hydrostatic pressure p : ∇∇∇ · (cid:16) 1 − θ f φ ph θ f ∇∇∇ p (cid:17) = ∇∇∇ · u , ( 2 . 31 ) respectively . Here , the index f at F - actin volume fraction θ was dropped for convenience , and the chemical reaction term on the right - hand side of ( 2 . 29 ) has been condensed , J : = V a J (cid:48) / m a , cf . ( 2 . 9 ) . For solving the the preceding system of equations for θ , u , p , the ﬁelds for the aqueous solvent phase do not need to be computed explicitly . Instead , for given θ , u , p they directly follow from the relations ( 2 . 11 ) and ( 2 . 27 ) , namely cytosol volume fraction θ w : θ w = 1 − θ , ( 2 . 32 ) cytosol transport velocity w : w = u − 1 φ ph θ ∇∇∇ p . ( 2 . 33 ) In this way , the quantitative RIF description of the dynamics of the cy - toplasm is closed . Note that the pressure p eﬀectively serves as Lagrange multiplier to enforce the incompressibility constraint ( 2 . 10 ) , stating that the bulk ﬂux velocity θ u + ( 1 − θ ) w is divergence free . This is an im - portant property of most generic liquids like e . g . water , and one of the checkmarks to distinguish ﬂuids from gases , because in general the latter are highly compressible . 38 2 . 4 . The Active Polar Gel is an alternative cytoplasm theory 1 . Active Polar Gel theory : The initial starting point for the RIF the - ory was , that the cytoplasm should be described as a multi - component ﬂuid . During the last couple of years , an alternative theory was devel - oped based on the same underlying idea . This theory is usually called “Active Polar Gel” ( APG ) [ 117 , 118 , 133 ] and based on linear irreversible thermo - hydrodynamics [ 54 ] . In APGs , there is in principle only one independent velocity in the ﬂuid , namely the center - of - mass velocity . This velocity derives from one single force balance , however it appears in the mass balances of all mod - eled molecular species . For the cytoplasm , one typically considers ( i ) polymer / F - actin , ( ii ) monomer / G - actin and ( iii ) aqueous solvent , as in RIF described above . The relative mixing between these three phases is accomplished by augmenting the center - of - mass advection with an ad - ditional so - called diﬀusion ﬂux in each phase . Importantly , these ﬂuxes incorporate all kinds of possible transportation , including diﬀusion due to both thermal and concentration gradients , relative advection of diﬀerent molecular species , and several other mechanisms . Starting from the Helmholtz free energy 3 , one derives source terms of the entropy density . These source terms have a characteristic structure , each being a product of a so - called thermodynamic ﬂux with a so - called conjugate force . For the constitutive equations , one makes a general ansatz by writing ﬂuxes as linear functions of forces and their gradients . Possible coupling coeﬃcients have to obey the Curie principle [ 54 , chap - ters IV , VI ] and Onsager reciprocal relations [ 54 , 165 , 166 ] , which all follow from fundamental symmetry principles , such as the expected behavior un - der time - and / or space inversion . As a result , the emerging entropy source is a non - negative deﬁnite expression in the forces and their gradients , so that Clausius inequality 4 holds . A central prerequisite to express the thermodynamic ﬂuxes as linear ansatz of the forces is the presence of anisotropy in the APG . This is implemented by introducing a new , vector - valued hydrodynamic vari - able called polarity . For example , a thin slab of an Active Polar Gel spontaneously starts to ﬂow in the direction of its polarity [ 42 ] . Active 3 The ( Helmholtz ) free energy is an important quantity in classical thermodynam - ics , see [ 43 ] for an introduction . 4 In a closed thermodynamic system , the entropy S cannot decrease , ∆ S ≥ 0 . 39 contractions in APGs are considered to be eventually driven by chemi - cal fuels like ATP . The dominant contributions to these contractions are , however , mediated by aforementioned polarity vector , because it provides for an inter - conversion instance from scalar - to vector - valued variables in the constructed entropy source . Thus , Active Polar Gels can only be “active” whence they are anisotropic . Without polarity , there cannot be active contractions in the otherwise passive gel . Recently , APG theory has been extended by Callan - Jones and J¨ulicher [ 42 ] to exhibit a permeation term similar to the Darcy law involved in RIF , cf . equation ( 2 . 22 ) . In section 2 . 2 of this paper , they present the RIF - like limit of APG theory . Under several fairly strong assumptions they rewrite the linear ansatz for the polymer / solvent diﬀusion current to yield force balances much akin to the ones of RIF . Naturally , as RIF models are isotropic , the APG in the RIF limit is actually passive , i . e . it does not involve the polarity vector and therefore does not exhibit active contractions of the polymer phase . Surprisingly , and in contrast to RIF , the viscosity and pressure terms appear in the solvent force balance [ 42 , equation ( 37 ) ] . 2 . Diﬀerences between APG and RIF : Even though both theories start from the same basic idea , there seem to be several essential diﬀer - ences between Active Polar Gels and Reactive Interpenetrating Flow : 1 . RIF models are isotropic . Nevertheless , the general assumption is that there are active contractile stresses in the polymer of F - actin phase . 2 . In RIF , each phase has a transport velocity on its own , together with a corresponding force balance . 3 . Diﬀusion currents in RIF are not included in the corresponding in - phase transport velocities . They do not “come out” of the theory by a kind of linear ansatz . Instead , they are explicitly modeled , cf . the D g - terms in equations ( 2 . 6 , 2 . 7 ) . Moreover , one commonly assumes non - linear chemical reactions in RIF - type models , for example for the actin polymerization kinetics J (cid:48) , cf . equa - tion ( 2 . 1 ) . Since the underlying linear irreversible thermo - hydrodynamics [ 54 ] cultivates the linear ansatz as virtue , inclusion of similar eﬀects in APGs is somewhat against the spirit of the theory . Indeed , as pointed out in [ 54 , chapter X , § 2 ] , chemical reactions commonly call for non - linear 40 modeling expressions , which cannot be faithfully represented by linear ir - reversible thermo - hydrodynamics . In order to circumvent this limitation in APGs , one could – of course – choose suitable non - linear coupling coeﬃcients depending e . g . on the actin monomer concentration in the cytosol . In doing so , one then has to ensure that the resulting entropy source obeys to Clausius inequality . 2 . 5 . Speciﬁc assumptions inherit intrinsic model limitations 1 . Main assumptions of RIF models : The central assumptions of the RIF cytoplasm model presented in this chapter can be summarized as follows : ( i ) The total cytoplasm mass is conserved and consists of two phases , (cid:32) equation ( 2 . 32 ) . ( ii ) There is material transport and turnover in both phases , (cid:32) equations ( 2 . 30 , 2 . 33 ) . ( iii ) The total cytoplasm ﬂux is incompressible , (cid:32) equation ( 2 . 31 ) . ( iv ) The cytoskeleton motion eﬀectively comprises a friction - dominated Stokes ﬂow , (cid:32) equation ( 2 . 30 ) . ( v ) There are active and isotropic contractile stresses in the cytoskele - ton phase , (cid:32) equation ( 2 . 25 ) . ( vi ) The friction between cytoskeleton and cytosol is Darcy - like , (cid:32) equation ( 2 . 22 ) . Importantly , the time scale envisioned for such a cytoplasm model is given by typical dynamical features of cellular migration . According to the arguments in paragraph 1 . 7 . 1 , this time scale would range from minutes to hours . On the seconds time - scale , the elastic response of the cytoskeleton would have to be considered . At the other end of the time - scale window , we would have to account for cell reorganization as induced by genetic regulation or the progress of the cell cycle . 41 2 . Coarse - graining of particles into continuum densities : Common to all continuum models is the assumption of a intermediate time - and length - scale , in which averages of particle and momentum densities can be deﬁned in a meaningful way . In order for a model to be useful , the details of common experiments should be clearly resolved . For example , the typical concentration of F - actin on the leading edge of crawling cells is ∼ 500 µ M 5 [ 129 ] . Neglecting advanced techniques involving ﬂuorescence or near - ﬁeld imaging , the typical resolution limit of an optical microscope is ∼ 200 nm . Also , the lamella at the leading edge of the cell is roughly 100 nm high . We have therefore an averaging volume of approximately 200 · 200 · 100 nm 3 at the crucial intermediate - scale averaging of our contin - uum description . Correspondingly , this volume contains around 1200 G - actin monomers . Naturally , if the concentration of the involved molecules is much lower , e . g . in the nM region for typical messenger species , this limitation becomes more severe . However , as a positive side - eﬀect , we can safely choose a simulation grid with fairly wide compartment spac - ing . Not only does this ensure the validity of the continuum description , it also speeds up computations signiﬁcantly . 3 . Number of distinct mass equations : In the derivation of the RIF theory , we had to rescale the initial continuity equations for the mass densities . This rescaling has to be performed using constant scalars , oth - erwise additional terms would arise from the derivatives in the equations . For example , starting from the mass balance equations for ( i ) F - actin den - sity ( ii ) G - actin / solvent density , the rescaling of ( ii ) cannot be done with - out the additional assumption that the local amount of G - actin would be constant in the combined G - actin / solvent density . Luckily , such problems can be circumvented by starting from a suﬃcient number of continuity equations . Speciﬁcally , both educt and product of a chemical reaction in the cytoplasm need to be included as separate mass balances . One can reduce the number of equations after scaling , by simple addition of the relations to be lumped together . 4 . Is the pressure p negligible ? The authors of [ 186 , page 1856 ] argue that one can neglect the pressure term p in equation ( 2 . 30 ) . Indeed , for keratocytes they estimate the corresponding stress to be approximately 10 % of the viscoelastic or contractile contributions of the cytoskeleton 5 The unit µ M indicates the number of micro - moles per liter . 42 phase . Therefore , the additional equation of the Darcy law is not neces - sary in their approach . However , here we model both cytoskeleton and cytoplasm phase , so that the pressure is an essential ingredient to imple - ment the incompressibility of the composite cytoplasm . The latter can be pictured as internally condensing sponge , where actin turnover changes the local two - phase material composition . In this way , each phase is sep - arately compressible . At the same time , when exerting external pressure on a wet sponge , it will respond by releasing some of its contained ﬂuid , so that the total volume of sponge and water remains constant . In the RIF description , the cytoplasm would respond in the same way , and the pressure is required to enforce this dynamical behavior . Note however that the wet sponge analogy is limited , because the network phase in actual cytoplasm is highly diluted as compared to the pores of a sponge . 5 . RIF force balances and their dissipation functional : Both Stokes equation ( 2 . 30 ) , and the divergence relation ( 2 . 31 ) can be derived by minimizing a functional that can be interpreted as the power dissipated in the RIF cytoplasm at each time instant . Moreover , the construction of this functional involves the mathematically weak formulation of ( 2 . 30 , 2 . 31 ) and opens the possibility to construct numerical solutions with the help of ﬁnite elements . The derivation of the RIF equations from such a power dissipation functional was proposed in [ 5 ] . Interestingly , a similar formulation of a so - called two - ﬂuid model of polymer blends and melts has been given by Doi and Onuki in 1992 [ 70 ] . In order to formulate and minimize dissipation functional , they employ the method of Onsager [ 165 , 166 ] which is at the heart of linear irreversible thermo - hydrodynamics [ 54 ] . Recently , these models have been applied to the growth and invasion of skin tumors [ 22 , 46 ] . All these eﬀorts show that two - phase models are a versatile tool and promise a wide applicability in the biological sciences . 43 3 . Coupling of cytoplasm and adhesion dynamics determines single cell polarization and locomotion 1 Summary : In this chapter we describe whole - cell motion by means of a one - dimensional model system . Thereby , we consider both the inter - nal cytoplasm dynamics as well as the exterior adhesion site formation . The cytoplasm dynamics in the cell is represented by the Reactive In - terpenetrating Flow equations from chapter 2 . Cytoskeletal contraction is active and mediated by an additional density variable resembling the role of myosin as tension - inducing agent . Moreover , explicit considera - tion of an adhesion mediator akin to integrin provides for connections to the substratum so that the model cell can exert traction . When all these ingredients are combined in a coupled system of equations , the model cell exhibits two distinct steady states : ( i ) In the symmetric resting state , traction from front and back bal - ances so that the cell adheres to the substratum without moving . ( ii ) In the polarized migrating state , an asymmetry in traction drives persistent cell locomotion . These two steady states are rather stable and autonomous in the sense that they do not need any out - of - model regulation e . g . like prescribing front and back of the cell . Here we induce the transition between rest - ing and migrating state by a super - threshold external stimulus . Various emerging characteristics of the simulation model compare favorably with experimental data obtained from highly motile cells . A simpliﬁed version of the model above can be cast in a quasi two - dimensional form . To this end , we write actin , integrin , substratum lig - ands and the local lamella width as freely evolving ﬁelds on the unit circle , and assume a basic molecular transport mechanism relating to the cellu - lar migration velocity . The resulting model cell is capable of exhibiting shape ﬂuctuations and migration trajectories in the plane . 1 Data presented in sections 3 . 1 – 3 . 7 of this chapter have been published in [ 6 ] , which was jointly written by Wolfgang Alt , M . B . , and Christoph M¨ohl . 45 Figure 3 . 1 . : Certain cells develop characteristic fan - like shape during mi - gration . Speciﬁcally , the anterior - posterior axis of the cell is given by direction of its motion . Here we deﬁne the model variables on the time dependent one - dimensional in - terval Ω ( t ) = [ y 1 ( t ) , y 2 ( t ) ] along the anterior - posterior axis of the cell . Marked by the ﬂuorescence dye are the focal adhesion contacts which connect the cell to the underlying substratum . The presented microscopic picture of a human epidermal keratinocyte is courtesy of Claudia Sch¨afer , Merkel group , Forschungszentrum J¨ulich [ 189 , movie 05 ] . 3 . 1 . Myosin leads to cytoskeletal contraction 1 . Simulation domain : Human epidermal keratinocytes polarize into a fan - like shape with a rather straight posterior retracting end and the roughly semi - elliptical , protruding lamella at the anterior front , cf . ﬁg - ure 3 . 1 . Therefore it is natural to approximate the domain Ω ( t ) of the cytoplasmic equations of motion by the interval Ω ( t ) = (cid:2) y 1 ( t ) , y 2 ( t ) (cid:3) , ( 3 . 1 ) aligned on the posterior - anterior axis of a crawling cell . Thus , we model a section through the cell , from posterior to anterior end , and approxi - mately through the center of the cell nucleus . In ﬁgure 3 . 1 , this section is indicated by the green bar and bounded by the intersections of the horizontal axis with the cell outline . The ends of the cell are denoted by 46 the spatial coordinates y 1 ( t ) and y 2 ( t ) , whereby it is not speciﬁed a - priori which of these ends will be the anterior or posterior one . Importantly , all velocities in following model equations are measured in the lab frame at rest . 2 . Two molecular states of myosin motors : The ﬁlaments in the cy - toskeleton phase may be connected to various specialized kinds of linker molecules , each of which is responsible for speciﬁc functions . In particu - lar , we are interested in molecules involved in physical mechanisms such as force generation and transduction . As we have seen in paragraphs 1 . 2 . 1 and 1 . 6 . 1 , myosin proteins attach to the actin ﬁlaments of the cytoskele - tal phase and create contractile forces by means of sliding the adjacent ﬁlaments in opposite directions . Here we consider two main states of this process : 1 . bound myosins m b are connected with the ﬁlamentous phase and give rise to contractions therein , 2 . free myosins m f are immersed in the solvent phase and diﬀuse freely . Importantly , m b and m f describe the respective molecular concentrations with a dimension of dimension number / volume . 3 . Scalar reaction , diﬀusion and transport equations : In one spatial dimension we can write all quantities as scalars , including the previously introduced F - actin transport velocity u ≡ u . Denoting the spatial coor - dinate by y ∈ Ω ≡ [ y 1 , y 2 ] , the mass balances for bound and free myosin are ∂ t m b + ∂ y (cid:0) m b u (cid:1) = α m θm f − δ m ( θ ) m b , ( 3 . 2 ) ∂ t m f − ∂ y (cid:0) D m ∂ y m f (cid:1) = − α m θm f + δ m ( θ ) m b . ( 3 . 3 ) The second terms on the left - hand sides represent material transport . Since m b is bound to the F - actin network , it is convected with the cy - toskeleton transport velocity u . In contrast , the free myosins m f merely diﬀuse with constant D m , because there is no speciﬁc anchoring for m f in the cytosol . The kinetic terms with α m , δ m quantify the local turnover in the reversible chemical reaction m f ↔ m b . The association rate α m on the right - hand sides describes the bond formation between free myosins 47 m f and cytoskeletal ﬁlaments . The bond dissociation rate δ m = δ m ( θ ) is exponential in the volume fraction of the cytoskeleton phase θ , δ m ( θ ) = δ m 0 exp (cid:16) θ θ m (cid:17) , ( 3 . 4 ) which resembles steric inhibition or competition for binding sites . 2 The two constants δ m 0 and θ m are model parameters , see appendix table A . 2 . The boundary conditions for the two myosin mass balances will be dis - cussed in section 3 . 4 . From equations ( 3 . 2 , 3 . 3 ) we can obtain the chemical equilibrium con - centration for m b . Setting the left - hand sides to zero , i . e . vanishing trans - port ∂ y . . . and concentration change ∂ t . . . , we solve the remaining ex - pressions for m b = α m θ δ m ( θ ) m f , ( 3 . 5 ) where m f now represents the constant base - level concentration of free myosin . 4 . Myosin and active stresses : When in contact with the cytoskeleton , bound myosin m b gives an active contribution to the model stress S from equation ( 2 . 25 ) . The speciﬁc form of this active stress contribution will be introduced in section 3 . 3 . 3 . 2 . Integrin connects cytoskeleton and substratum 1 . Four integrin binding states : In the introduction , paragraphs 1 . 2 . 1 and 1 . 6 . 3 , we have already seen how integrin aﬀects the cellular migration machinery . Recall that integrin is a trans - membrane receptor , which has binding sites for both intracellular and extracellular ligands . In this way , integrin provides for the links of the cell to the substratum or the extra - cellular matrix fabric . Notably , the fairly complex process of assembling and disassembling so - called focal adhesion sites involves various regula - tion hooks [ 87 ] . Based on the already present ingredients of our model , we here employ a four - state model for the integrin binding kinetics , which was originally proposed by Palacek and coworkers [ 170 ] and subsequently applied in a model of cell fragment motion [ 135 ] . In these four - state 2 In [ 6 , eq . 8 ] , the dissociation rate δ m was ∝ ( 1 + θ 2 / θ 2 m ) . However , the model modiﬁcation ( 3 . 4 ) with exponential was actually used in [ 6 , section 4 . 2 ] . 48 models , one separately takes into account the state of both exterior and interior binding sites : ( i ) free integrins b f diﬀuse in the cell membrane , ( ii ) actin bound integrins b a are connected with the cell’s actin cy - toskeleton on their interior binding site , ( iii ) substratum bound integrins b s are attached to the extracellular ma - trix on their exterior binding site , ( iv ) bound integrins b b maintain connections on both binding sites , pro - viding the link between substratum and cytoskeleton . A cartoon summary of the four binding states is presented in ﬁgure 3 . 2 . 2 . Integrin reaction , diﬀusion and transport equations : According to ﬁgure 3 . 2 , we write four mass balance equations for the respective number of integrins per basal cell area , ∂ t b f − ∂ y (cid:0) D f ∂ y b f (cid:1) = − β fsa b f + δ sf b s , ( 3 . 6 ) ∂ t b a + ∂ y (cid:0) b a u (cid:1) = α fa b f − β fab b a + δ ba b b , ( 3 . 7 ) ∂ t b s = α fs b f − β fsb b s + δ bs b b , ( 3 . 8 ) ∂ t b b = + α sb b s + α ab b a − β sab b b . ( 3 . 9 ) For the sake of better readability , we introduced the combined reaction constants β fsa ≡ α fa + α fs , β fab ≡ δ af + α ab , β fsb ≡ α sb + δ sf , β sab ≡ δ ba + δ bs . ( 3 . 10 ) Several reaction constants depend on the amount of present actin θ and the local force f u , α fa = α 0 fa · θ , α sb = α 0 sb · θ , ( 3 . 11 ) δ ba = δ 0 ba · exp (cid:0) ρ ba | f u | (cid:1) , δ bs = δ 0 bs · exp (cid:0) ρ bs | f u | (cid:1) . ( 3 . 12 ) The ﬁrst two identities mean that integrins are recruited to the cytoskele - ton in an auto - catalyzed manner proportional to the local amount of F - actin . The second two equations resemble the dependence of chemical bond rupture on the applied force f u in focal adhesions b b . For further details on this force - induced rupture mechanism see section 1 . 6 . 6 . All the 49 α fs δ sf b a f α fa δ af s α sb δ bs α ab δ ba Figure 3 . 2 . : The adhesion of cells to the extracellular matrix or substrata is mediated by so - called integrins . This whole class of trans - membrane molecules connects the intracellular cytoskeleton to the extracellular matrix , for example to ﬁbronectin . If we do not consider any further mediator proteins , this leaves four distinct binding states for a single integrin molecule : ( i ) free integrins ( f ) diﬀuse on the cell membrane , ( ii ) actin bound integrins ( a ) are linked with the cytoskeleton within the cell , ( iii ) substratum bound integrins ( s ) are attached to the adhesion sites on the extracellular matrix , and ( iv ) bound integrins ( b ) have connections to both substratum and the cy - toskeleton . In the text , we denote the corresponding integrin concentrations by b f , b a , b s , b b , respectively . The association and dissociation rates α . , δ . characterize the formation and subsequent bond breaking kinetics of the integrins . Initially , such an adhesion model has been proposed in [ 170 ] . The cartoons presented here are courtesy of Esa Kuusela [ 135 ] . 50 remaining coeﬃcients and reaction constants are model parameters , see appendix table A . 2 . Finally , the speciﬁc form of f u will be introduced in equations ( 3 . 14 , 3 . 38 ) . In addition to the chemical kinetics , we consider material transport in equations ( 3 . 6 – 3 . 9 ) . Being immersed in the cell membrane , free integrins diﬀuse with the diﬀusion constant D f , see equation ( 3 . 6 ) . Moreover , actin bound integrins b a are advected with the F - actin cytoskeleton velocity u , cf . equation ( 3 . 7 ) . Finally , due to their rigid connections with the substratum , both substratum and double bound integrins b s , b b are at rest . Therefore , equations ( 3 . 8 , 3 . 9 ) lack a transport term with ∂ y . As for myosin , the boundary conditions will be discussed in section 3 . 4 . 3 . Parameter estimates : Regarding the model parameters presented in this section , only few rather rough estimates can be extracted from experimental data . Integrin transport properties like velocities and dif - fusion constants have been measured in Chinese hamster ovary cells by means of image correlation microscopy [ 230 , table 1 ] . The reported diﬀu - sion constants are approximately 0 . 5 . . . 6 times the value from appendix table A . 2 . For all the chemical parameters α , δ , we refer to the original model [ 170 , table 1 ] and references therein . 3 . 3 . Cytoplasm contractions and adhesion sites join forces in whole - cell migration In this section we combine the equations for reactive interpenetrating ﬂow , myosin reaction / transport and four - state integrin reaction / transport into a coupled system jointly describing cytoplasm and adhesion dynam - ics of a one - dimensional migrating model cell . 1 . Reactive interpenetrating ﬂow : In one spatial dimension , the gen - eral equations ( 2 . 29 , 2 . 31 , 2 . 30 ) for the combined cytoskeleton and cytosol ﬂow read ∂ t θ + ∂ y (cid:0) θu (cid:1) = J , ( 3 . 13 ) − ∂ y (cid:0) η∂ y u (cid:1) − ∂ y (cid:0) S − p (cid:1) = f u , ( 3 . 14 ) ∂ y (cid:16) 1 − θ φ ph θ · ∂ y p (cid:17) = ∂ y u , ( 3 . 15 ) where all quantities have been replaced by their scalar representation , i . e . u ≡ u , f u ≡ f u and ∇∇∇ = (cid:101) ∇∇∇ ≡ ∂ y . As in chapter 2 , θ denotes the 51 F - actin volume fraction , u its transport velocity , and p the hydrostatic pressure . The force f u on the right - hand side of ( 3 . 14 ) will be speciﬁed later in equation ( 3 . 38 ) . 2 . Viscosity and actin polymerization : The viscosity η is assumed to be linear in the F - actin volume fraction , η = η 0 θ , ( 3 . 16 ) because denser ﬁlament networks are more viscous due to increased en - tanglement [ 69 ] . The actin polymerization J is believed to be mostly determined by the amount of available barbed or plus ends θ + in the ﬁlamentous net - work phase [ 179 ] . Following [ 151 ] , we write ∂ t θ + = β n ( θ ) − ωθ + for the corresponding kinetic evolution equation , where β n is denotes the F - actin branching rate and ω the rate of branch number reduction due to capping proteins . Assuming that the preceding chemical reaction quickly reaches its equilibrium , this relation reduces to θ + ( θ ) = β n ( θ ) / ω . ( 3 . 17 ) This equilibrium assumption relies on the idea that the reaction kinetics is fast as compared to the other processes occuring in the cell during migration . The eﬀective F - actin branching rate β n has two contributions , β n = ε + ν θ θ β + θ . ( 3 . 18 ) Here , ε summarizes the spontaneous actin nucleation rate , which is ex - pected to be low , because most actin monomers associate with the poly - merization inhibitor thymosin ( S . A . Koestler , private communication ) . The second term on the right hand side of ( 3 . 18 ) represents stimulated ﬁlament branching of the actin network . Thereby , ν = ν 0 · [ Arp2 / 3 ] is proportional to the concentration of activated Arp2 / 3 complexes induc - ing branches . Also , branching begins to saturate at the characteristic volume fraction θ β . The net F - actin polymerization J includes these in - gredients in a speciﬁc manner , J = (cid:0) α B θ g − δ B (cid:1) θ + ( θ ) − δ a θ + perturbations . ( 3 . 19 ) Again , F - actin polymerization mostly occurs at the barbed ends θ + of the ﬁlaments , which comprises a mechanism of auto catalysis . Thus the 52 polymerization term α B θ g θ + depends linearly on the amount of available barbed ends θ + , but also on the present G - actin monomers θ g . Actin dis - assembly occurs in two distinct ways , namely ( i ) via the depolymerization δ B at plus or barbed ends θ + , and ( ii ) via other mechanisms like ﬁlament severing , pointed - end depolymerization or other degradation , with the lumped rate δ a . Since we do not explicitly resolve the G - actin monomers as a separate phase in the compound ﬂuid , we have to prescribe their volume fraction as constant θ g < 1 − θ as part of the aqueous cytosolic phase . This assumption is not problematic because the F - actin volume fraction θ is expected to not exceed θ ∼ 0 . 1 , even under the rather ex - treme conditions at the leading edge of the cell . The last term in the preceding equation contains contains the small stochastic perturbations that were employed as a robustness check during the simulations . As usual , the constant model parameters η 0 , ω , ε , ν 0 , [ Arp2 / 3 ] , θ β , α B , θ g , δ B and δ a are given in appendix table A . 2 . 3 . Myosin induced contraction and cytoskeleton swelling : The bound myosins m b are attached to the F - actin cytoskeleton θ , and induce a certain contractile stress ψ in the ﬁlament phase . Together with the swelling pressure σ we obtain the eﬀective cytoplasm stress S = ψ − σ = ψ 0 θm b − σ 0 (cid:12)(cid:12) ln ( 1 − θ ) (cid:12)(cid:12) , ( 3 . 20 ) cf . also row 5 in table 2 . 2 As mentioned in paragraph 2 . 3 . 2 , the second term σ on the right hand side arises due to osmotic eﬀects , because regions with high F - actin volume fractions attract solvent cytosol in the same manner as salt attracts water . In order to better understand the ﬁrst term ψ , we insert the equation ( 3 . 5 ) corresponding to the situation when bound myosin m b is in chemical equilibrium with respect to a certain ﬁxed free myosin concentration m f . With the help of this approximation we have myosin equilibrium : ψ ( 3 . 5 ) = ψ 0 α m m f δ m 0 · θ 2 exp ( θ / θ m ) , ( 3 . 21 ) In this way , the active cytoskeleton stress S depends only on the F - actin volume fraction θ , and we can plot the emerging S ( θ ) , see ﬁgure 3 . 3 . However we emphasize that in the actual simulations the more complete model expression from equation ( 3 . 20 ) has been employed , and the con - centrations of both myosin species m b , m f have been retained as free variables . 53 - 4 - 2 0 2 4 6 0 0 . 02 0 . 04 0 . 06 0 . 08 - 4 - 2 0 2 4 6 a c t i v e p r e ss u r e [ k P a ] a c t i n p o l y m e r i z a t i o n [ µ M / M i n ] F - actin volume fraction θ - 4 - 2 0 2 4 6 0 0 . 02 0 . 04 0 . 06 0 . 08 - 4 - 2 0 2 4 6 a c t i v e p r e ss u r e [ k P a ] a c t i n p o l y m e r i z a t i o n [ µ M / M i n ] F - actin volume fraction θ ψ ( θ ) σ ( θ ) S ( θ ) J ( θ ) Figure 3 . 3 . : Stress model functions according to equation ( 3 . 20 ) with the simpliﬁcation ( 3 . 21 ) . Both active contractile stress ψ and osmotic swelling pressure σ depend on the F - actin volume fraction θ , and jointly constitute the active cytoplasm stress S = ψ − σ . This stress should be compared with the F - actin assembly rate J ( θ ) . In the low concentration regime , strong polymerization overcomes the weak expanding pressure from S . In contrast , in the high concentration regime , strong de - polymerization and strong pressure join forces to spread and dissolve all the F - actin . In the intermediate regime , the con - tractile stress causes the ﬁlaments to aggregate . For the plot of ψ , the free myosin concentration was m f = 10 µ M . 54 3 . 4 . Boundary conditions describe phenomena close to the plasma membrane 1 . Lab frame coordinates and velocities : In the cell migration model presented here , all quantities are written in terms of the lab frame at - tached to the resting substrate underneath the cell . As already men - tioned , the moving domain Ω ( t ) is delimited by the set of time - dependent boundary points Γ : = ∂ Ω = { y 1 ( t ) , y 2 ( t ) } , see ﬁgure 3 . 1 . The motion of the free boundary ˙Γ can therefore be conveniently expressed in terms of the boundary point velocities , ˙Γ (cid:12)(cid:12) y 1 = ˙ y 1 · ν Γ (cid:12)(cid:12) y 1 , ˙Γ (cid:12)(cid:12) y 2 = ˙ y 2 · ν Γ (cid:12)(cid:12) y 2 , ( 3 . 22 ) where we again stress that these boundary point velocities ˙ y 1 , ˙ y 2 are mea - sured in the lab frame . As we have seen in paragraph 1 . 5 . 1 , actin polymerization induces a certain boundary stress at the outer edge of crawling cells . This stress will appear in the boundary conditions , which are necessary to close the mathematical RIF description ( 3 . 13 – 3 . 15 ) of the cytoplasm ﬂow . Since these boundary conditions are quite peculiar , we take the remainder of this section to develop them in detail . 2 . The tip expansion velocity V : In general , since the cell membrane is impermeable to actin ﬁlaments , we have to impose a zero eﬄux condition on the F - actin mass balance ( 3 . 13 ) . This means that the F - actin network θ cannot cross the free boundary Γ . However , in principle , the network may as well fall back and leave the membrane by moving towards the cell center . The resulting boundary condition for the F - actin mass balance ( 3 . 13 ) is therefore an inequality , y = y 1 , y 2 : θV · ν Γ ≥ 0 , with V : = ˙ y 1 , 2 − u . ( 3 . 23 ) For convenience , we have condensed the boundary velocities ˙ y 1 / 2 ≡ ˙ y 1 , ˙ y 2 , because the last equation of ( 3 . 23 ) holds for both respective boundary positions y = y 1 , y 2 in the lab frame . The quantity V indicates the amount of membrane advancement as compared to the amount of F - actin network advection u on both ends y = y 1 , y 2 of the cell . It therefore represents the intracellular expansion velocity between membrane an cytoskeleton at the outer tip of the cell , so that we brieﬂy shall refer to V as “tip expansion velocity” . Clearly , the F - actin volume fraction θ ≥ 0 , so that the F - actin boundary ﬂux inequality ( 3 . 23 ) is fulﬁlled in the following scenarios for the tip dynamics : 55 1a . V · ν Γ > 0 , θ | Γ > 0 : F - actin ﬂux away from membrane 1b . V · ν Γ > 0 , θ | Γ = 0 : zero F - actin ﬂux with non - zero tip expansion 2 . V · ν Γ = 0 , 0 ≤ θ | Γ ≤ 1 : zero F - actin ﬂux at the boundary . The generic case is 1a . The non - zero tip expansion V means that the F - actin velocity u tends to remove the network from the tip . Simultaneously , however , the emerging gap towards the membrane is closed by enhanced actin polymerization , so that V can here be interpreted as eﬀective tip polymerization speed . In the special case 1b , the solvent ﬂow enlarges the gap between cell boundary Γ and the F - actin network θ , which can be observed in biological cells during blebbing [ 216 ] . In case 2 , the F - actin network always has contact to the membrane , which happens at regions of active retraction or stalled tip advancement . In any case , both protrusion and retraction naturally emerge from our model system . 3 . Motion of the free boundary ˙ Γ : For the cell to translocate , the tip has to extend and the rear has to retract . This kind of boundary motion is determined from the total volume ﬂux , ˙ y 1 / 2 = θu + ( 1 − θ ) w . ( 3 . 24 ) However , the RIF dynamics from above have been written in terms of θ , u , p exclusively , so that we want to eliminate the cytosol velocity w . To this end , we again employ the original equation ( 2 . 33 ) for the cytosol velocity w and insert it into equation ( 3 . 24 ) , ˙ y 1 / 2 = u − 1 − θ φ ph θ ∂ y p . ( 3 . 25 ) Replacing the left - hand side with ˙ y 1 / 2 from equation ( 3 . 23 ) , we see that tip expansion is related to the pressure gradient at the boundary , y = y 1 , y 2 : V = − 1 − θ φ ph θ ∂ y p . ( 3 . 26 ) 4 . Boundary pressure balances : Since there is a separate force balance in each phase , cf . equations ( 2 . 26 , 2 . 27 ) , there are two distinct boundary pressure balances at y = y 1 , y 2 [ 5 , section 2 . 4 ] , F - actin : − ν Γ · η ( θ ) ∂ y u − ψ ( θ , m b ) + θp = κ Γ θτ + P poly (cid:0) θ , m b , V (cid:1) , ( 3 . 27 ) cytosol : σ ( θ ) + ( 1 − θ ) p = ( 1 − κ Γ θ ) τ − P poly (cid:0) θ , m b , V (cid:1) . ( 3 . 28 ) 56 The F - actin contractile stress ψ ( θ , m b ) and the swelling pressure σ ( θ ) have been introduced in equation ( 3 . 20 ) . Moreover , κ Γ ∈ [ 0 , 1 ] represents the relative inﬂuence of the membrane tension τ on the cytoskeleton phase at the tips y 1 , y 2 . As a side note , τ itself is an independent ﬁeld variable τ = τ ( t , y ) of the dimension of an eﬀective pressure , which describes the tension of those parts of the membrane that are situated below the cell . Other eﬀects which could arise from the membrane dynamics atop – but not below – the cell are neglected . Finally , the lamella tip polymerization pressure P poly has three contributions , P poly (cid:0) θ , m b , V (cid:1) = P clamp ( θ ) + P ratchet ( θ ) − η Γ (cid:0) θ , m b (cid:1) V . ( 3 . 29 ) Here we take into account boundary pressures that arise from the clamp - motor P clamp and Brownian ratchet P ratchet mechanism . They both arise from the localized polymerization of F - actin at the cell boundary Γ , see paragraph 1 . 5 . 1 for details . The resistance against polymerization orig - inates from cross - linked ﬁlaments that are situated slightly behind the membrane edge . This resistance limits the tip expansion velocity V and is assumed to be purely viscous on the considered time - and length - scale , see paragraphs 1 . 6 . 2 and 2 . 2 . 2 . The related eﬀective viscosity η Γ depends on both the present actin θ and the cross - linking motor myosin m b . In order to keep the focus on the boundary conditions , we refer to appendix A . 2 for details on the model functions P clamp , P ratchet , η Γ . 5 . Actin boundary conditions and free boundary motion : With the ingredients from the preceding paragraphs , we can now write the actin boundary conditions . First , we sum the boundary pressure balances ( 3 . 27 , 3 . 28 ) , y = y 1 , y 2 : − ν Γ · η ( θ ) ∂ y u − S ( θ ) + p = τ , ( 3 . 30 ) where S = ψ − σ as before . Next , we eliminate the pressure p with the help of the cytosol boundary balance ( 3 . 28 ) , ν Γ · η ( θ ) ∂ y u + S ( θ ) = 1 1 − θ (cid:104) θ ( 1 − κ Γ ) τ − σ ( θ ) − P poly (cid:0) θ , m b , V (cid:1)(cid:105) , ( 3 . 31 ) which can be employed as a boundary expression for u . 3 Importantly , however , since the tip expansion velocity reads V = u − ˙ y 1 / 2 , equation 3 A slightly simpliﬁed relation follows from writing the swelling σ in the F - actin boundary pressure balance 3 . 27 . Dropping κ Γ and splitting τ according to volume fraction θ , one obtains ν Γ · η ( θ ) ∂ y u + S ( θ ) + P poly (cid:0) θ , m b , V (cid:1) = 0 . 57 ( 3 . 31 ) constitutes a mixed Dirichlet - Neumann expression in u , cf . also the polymerization pressure ( 3 . 29 ) . The actual choice of boundary conditions for the RIF system ( 3 . 13 – 3 . 15 ) depends on the aforementioned scenarios for the tip dynamics : 1a . V · ν Γ > 0 , θ | Γ > 0 : The zero eﬄux condition for the F - actin mass balance is fulﬁlled since V · ν Γ > 0 . Equation ( 3 . 31 ) constitutes a mixed condition for u , while the cytosol boundary pressure balance ( 3 . 28 ) represents a Dirichlet condition for p . The motion of the free boundary ˙ y 1 / 2 is then determined from u and ∂ y p according to ( 3 . 25 ) , which is an implicit relation because the boundary conditions for u and p contain ˙ y 1 / 2 via V in the polymerization pressure term ∝ P poly . Since membrane and F - actin network move in opposite directions , the boundary inﬂux for the F - actin mass transport equation ( 3 . 13 ) has to vanish . 1b . V · ν Γ > 0 , θ | Γ = 0 : Here , the F - actin eﬄux vanishes because θ = 0 . This case can arise at boundary points with vanishing polymerization pressure P poly . There , the volume fraction θ → 0 degenerates , so that all summands of the F - actin boundary pressure balance ( 3 . 27 ) vanish independently . The solvent boundary pressure balance ( 3 . 28 ) breaks down to the Dirichlet condition p = τ for p . Finally , by ( 3 . 25 , 3 . 26 ) we have V = ˙ y 1 / 2 , whereby ˙ y 1 / 2 follows from the L’Hospital limit of the expression ∝ ∂ y p for y → y 1 , y 2 from the interior . 2 . V · ν Γ = 0 , 0 ≤ θ | Γ ≤ 1 : The F - actin eﬄux vanishes again , since V = 0 . The tip expansion relation ( 3 . 26 ) therefore yields a zero - Neumann condition for p . Conversely , ( 3 . 30 ) constitutes a pure Neumann con - dition for u , because it does not contain the polymerization pressure P poly . The quite subtle case 1b is desirable only for speciﬁc biological phenomena like the aforementioned blebbing . The earlier formulation [ 135 ] of the present model has taken into account such a possibility . For the pursued modeling aim of explaining relatively fast cell migration this complication is however not needed . In the remaining part of this chapter , we therefore assume for simplicity ∀ y ∈ Ω : θ > 0 , ( 3 . 32 ) so that the F - actin cytoskeleton always sticks to the membrane . More - over , since the extension of steadily crawling cells like human epidermal 58 keratinocytes along the anterior - posterior axis does not change very much during migration , we also assume y 2 ( t ) − y 1 ( t ) = const . = : λ , ( 3 . 33 ) where the model cell length λ is parameter , see appendix table A . 2 . In this way , the boundary velocities ˙ y 1 = ˙ y 2 ≡ ˙ y 1 / 2 are identical and constitute the migration velocity of the model cell . Under the remaining tip scenarios 1a & 2 and together with the re - spective boundary conditions from above , the hyperbolic - elliptic system ( 3 . 13 – 3 . 15 ) for actin turnover and ﬂow is closed and therefore accessible to its numerical solution . The motion of the time - dependent domain Ω ( t ) follows from equation ( 3 . 25 ) . The only remaining undetermined quantity is the eﬀective membrane surface tension τ . As will turn out , it provides for a Lagrange multiplier needed to implement the cellular force balance constraint as introduced in the following section , cf . 3 . 5 . Before coming to that , however , we also have to close the transport , reaction and diﬀusion systems for myosin and integrin . 6 . Myosin boundary conditions : Since the myosin evolution equations ( 3 . 2 , 3 . 3 ) involve transport terms , they also require the speciﬁcation of suitable boundary conditions describing the mass transport at the domain border Γ . For bound myosin m b , the situation is similar to that of F - actin discussed above . However , since the role of m b does not involve the peculiarities of polymerization at the cell boundary Γ , we can take a simpler approach here and require zero ﬂux without inequality , y = y 1 , y 2 : m b (cid:0) u − ˙ y 1 / 2 (cid:1) · ν Γ = 0 ⇔ (cid:40) m b = 0 for V · ν Γ > 0 , m b free for V · ν Γ = 0 . ( 3 . 34 ) The corresponding zero ﬂux identity D m ∂ y m f = 0 for free myosin gives rise to the Neumann condition , y = y 1 , y 2 : ∂ y m f = 0 . ( 3 . 35 ) 7 . Integrin boundary conditions : The boundary conditions for the two integrin mass balances ( 3 . 6 , 3 . 7 ) are also zero ﬂux . In full analogy to the corresponding myosin relations , we therefore write y = y 1 , y 2 : ∂ y b f = 0 , ( 3 . 36 ) b a (cid:0) u − ˙ y 1 / 2 (cid:1) · ν Γ = 0 ⇔ (cid:40) b a = 0 for V > 0 , b a free for V = 0 . ( 3 . 37 ) 59 Having found suitable boundary conditions for the coupled system for cytoplasm and adhesion dynamics , we come now to the mechanism gen - erating the locomotion forces of the model cell . 3 . 5 . Cell - substratum adhesive slip mediates locomotion forces 1 . Traction arising from frictional slip : As argued in paragraph 1 . 6 . 3 , the forces for cellular locomotion arise at the interface between the cell and the substratum . At this interface , integrins connect the cell - interior F - actin and the cell - exterior substrate or extracellular matrix . Impor - tantly , these connections appear to be non - rigid on the time - scale of cel - lular migration . Bond formation and breakup are in a dynamical chemi - cal equilibrium , where both the forward and the backward reaction occur simultaneously . In this sense and in the time average relevant to cellu - lar migration , the instantaneous assembly of substratum adhesion bonds allows only for transient force transduction . Accordingly , the F - actin ret - rograde ﬂow is only transiently connected to focal adhesion sites , and therefore does not stop by mere integrin binding . This transiency of the cellular adhesion mechanism can be conceptu - alized in terms of a molecular clutch [ 45 ] . Instantaneously , force trans - mission is possible at seemingly ﬁxed or rigid focal adhesions , while on a longer time - scale , the whole focal adhesion complex is well capable of moving relative to the substrate . The same holds also for F - actin moving over the integrin substratum contact . Indeed , this molecular clutch has been shown to be eﬀective in human osteosarcoma cells [ 11 ] . Experimen - tal evidence indicates that α - actinin is involved in increasing the slip at the actin - integrin binding complex [ 38 , table 1 ] . The apparent mutual re - lation of focal adhesions and actin speed [ 3 , 86 ] also seems to be consistent with the general idea of a molecular clutch at focal adhesions . Since the integrin bonds are transient only , the actin retrograde ﬂow generates friction - type forces , which ultimately give rise to forward translo - cation of the cell . Here , we model this cytoskeleton - initiated traction via a slip of F - actin dragging over the integrin - mediated substratum adhe - sions , f u = − φ u b b θu . ( 3 . 38 ) The parameter φ u describes the amount of eﬀective friction due to the interactions of F - actin θ with bound integrins b b . Importantly , the drag 60 force f u appears also as external force on the right - hand side of the Stokes equation ( 3 . 14 ) . 2 . Cell - level force balance : Recall that the domain Ω of the migrating model cell has the ﬁxed length λ . Therefore , the cellular migration veloc - ity v coincides with the velocity ˙ y 1 / 2 driving the free boundary Γ = ∂ Ω . Assuming that the lower plasma membrane moves along with the whole cell , the local friction towards the substratum is f v = − φ v v ≡ − φ v ˙ y 1 / 2 , ( 3 . 39 ) whereby φ v denotes the membrane friction coeﬃcient . The resulting sub - stratum force balance reads (cid:90) y 2 y 1 (cid:0) f u + f v (cid:1) d y = 0 ⇔ λφ v ˙ y 1 / 2 = (cid:90) y 2 y 1 (cid:0) φ u b b θu (cid:1) d y . ( 3 . 40 ) Substituting f u from the Stokes equation ( 3 . 14 ) into the ﬁrst summand of the friction integral ( 3 . 40 ) , one obtains the Stokes boundary terms (cid:90) y 2 y 1 f u d y = (cid:0) − ν Γ · η∂ y u − S + p (cid:1)(cid:12)(cid:12) y 2 y 1 = τ (cid:12)(cid:12) y 2 y 1 , ( 3 . 41 ) where we used the boundary condition ( 3 . 30 ) for the last equality . From the total friction integral we therefore conclude λφ v ˙ y 1 / 2 = τ | y 2 y 1 . ( 3 . 42 ) This reveals that , similar to p , τ acts as a Lagrange multiplier . As mentioned in paragraph 2 . 3 . 3 , p enforces the incompressibility condition ( 2 . 10 ) on the bulk cytoplasm ﬂux velocity θu + ( 1 − θ ) w . In contrast , τ ( t , y ) causes the lower plasma membrane to move with the uniform ve - locity ˙Γ over the substrate for all positions y ∈ [ y 1 , y 2 ] . Alternatively one could also impose the incompressibility of the membrane , see [ 6 , section 3 . 2 . 4 ] for details . Equation ( 3 . 42 ) also shows that the determination of the variable pair u , p in the tip expansion scenarios 1b & 2 is implicit as well . For 1b , the Dirichlet condition ( 3 . 28 ) for the pressure reads p = τ and relates the original identity ( 3 . 25 ) for ˙ y 1 / 2 indirectly with τ . In scenario 2 , the relation ( 3 . 42 ) indirectly aﬀects the employed Neumann condition ( 3 . 30 ) for u via τ , while at the same time ˙ y 1 / 2 = u from equation ( 3 . 25 ) . Thus , 61 in any case u , ˙ y 1 / 2 and τ are given in an implicit way and the equa - tions have to be numerically iterated until the system is self - consistent . Since the τ - equation ( 3 . 42 ) determines only the tension diﬀerence be - tween the two cell ends , we assume a small baseline tension parameter τ 0 = min (cid:2) τ ( y 1 ) , τ ( y 2 ) (cid:3) in the numerical iteration , see table A . 2 . 3 . 6 . Cell polarization is either spontaneous or induced by taxis cues 1 . Symmetric and polarized model cell mode : When seeding human epidermal keratinocytes on ﬁbronectin substrata , these cells exhibit sev - eral dynamical states at suﬃciently low density , compare ﬁgure 1 . 6 . The most common dynamical states of the cells are ( i ) the symmetric state in which the cells are circular and do not move , and ( ii ) the polarized state with prominent leading lamella extending in the direction of the cellular migration . The same two states have also been observed in ﬁsh keratocytes [ 233 ] , and in celloids without nucleus [ 221 ] . Here we want to understand the nature of these two dynamical cell modes and their underlying molecular structure . 2 . Symmetric non - motile cell mode : Starting from evenly distributed actin , myosin and integrin concentrations θ , m f , m b , b f , b a , b s , b b , the model cell quickly settles and exhibits the symmetric state , see ﬁgure 3 . 4 ( a1 ) & ( a2 ) . This sessile cell mode is characterized by the concentrations being distributed in symmetric manner with respect to the center of the cell . Apparently , actin , myosin and bound integrin pile up in the middle of the cell . This can be understood in terms of the F - actin ﬂow velocity u , see the black dotted line in ﬁgure 3 . 4 ( a1 ) . Since this ﬂow is directed towards the cell center , there is a tendency to remove actin associated species from the outer ends and advect them to the central region . Accordingly , since b a integrins are actin - bound , they are transported with the F - actin ﬂow velocity u . Thus , there is a general trend for the majority of the overall integrin pool to accumulate at the cell center . In contrast , free and substrate - bound integrins b f , b s extend towards the outer ends of the cell . Recall that by equations ( 3 . 11 , 3 . 12 ) , both actin θ and force f u = − φ u b b θu ( red dashed line in ﬁgure 3 . 4 ( a1 ) ) aﬀect the integrin association and dissociation rates , respectively . Since α fa , α sb ∝ θ , the relatively low amount of actin at the ends of the cell shifts the chemical integrin equilibrium towards b f , b s . In the intermediate range , 62 Figure 3 . 4 . : Keratinocytes at rest attain a circular , symmetric and unpo - larized state , while migrating ones are of asymmetric shape and the polarized lamella is oriented towards the direction of the motion . Here we consider central sections through the cell , along the posterior - anterior axis . The emerging con - centration proﬁles of the quantities in the simulated , one - dimensional model cell exhibit both of these two , clearly dis - tinct motility states . On the left hand side , the cytoskeletal F - actin θ together with the contractile myosin m b and the bound integrin b b is symmetric with respect to the cell center . Since the cytoskeleton ﬂow u is evenly oriented in centripetal direction towards the cell center , the cell the net locomotive force of the cell vanishes . In contrast , on the right hand side the concentrations θ , m b and b b are asymmetric . The inter - play of the posterior cytoskeletal contraction and the anterior polymerization drive at the lamella tip leads to a prominent asymmetry in the F - actin ﬂow proﬁle u . Due to the enhanced retrograde ﬂow at the cell front , the integrated overall force leads to forward translocation in positive y - direction . 63 where | f u | is rather high , focal adhesions are quickly disrupted yielding increased amounts of b a , b s , even despite of the already high actin level θ . In the center of the cell , the very high amount of actin θ and the relatively low force | f u | favor the double - bound state b b of integrins . The cellular migration force f u from equation ( 3 . 38 ) is determined from the joint action of integrin adhesion sites b b and the centripetal F - actin mass ﬂux θu . As can be observed in ﬁgure 3 . 4 ( a1 ) & ( a2 ) , the proﬁles of both F - actin θ and integrin b b are symmetric about the cell center y ∼ 5 µ m . In contrast , the proﬁle of the F - actin transport velocity u is antisymmetric , so that the resulting proﬁle of the traction force f u is antisymmetric . Thus , the centripetal pulling forces from both cell ends mutually compensate in the cellular traction force integral (cid:82) Ω f u d y from equation ( 3 . 40 ) . In this way , the cell remains stationary and rests at its place , even though the underlying cytoskeleton machinery turns over in a highly dynamic manner . 3 . Polarized and migrating cell mode : Cell polarization arises from contractile or polymerization stimuli as discussed in the following para - graph . Once the full polarity has been established , the model cell migrates and exhibits asymmetric concentration proﬁles , see ﬁgure 3 . 4 ( b1 ) & ( b2 ) . In the plots , we see the resulting protrusion front on the right hand side of the model cell . This lamella - like region is characterized by low levels of bound myosin m b and a prominent retrograde ﬂow velocity u . At the rear end of the cell , the F - actin ﬂow u is almost vanishing , whereas the amount of bound myosin m b is generally high . Note that in the presented plots , u is measured in cell - centric coordinates , so that the F - actin veloc - ity in the lab frame is u lab = u plot + v , whereby v ≈ 0 . 12 µ m / min denotes the migration velocity of the cell . The particular distribution of actin in ﬁgure 3 . 4 ( b1 ) is somewhat at odds with the general behavior as observed in experiments like [ 192 , 221 ] . However , here we do not model the presence of a cell body or nucleus . Its presence would impose a spatial obstacle within the cytoplasmic ﬂow . During migration , this obstacle is situated at the back of the cell , so that the accumulation of actin at the rear end would be hindered . In spite of this model limitation , we emphasize that the obtained distributions of F - actin exhibit the correct proﬁle at the outer ends of the cell , see also the experimental data below . The behavior of the bound myosin mostly arises from its transport properties . Since it is bound to the F - actin cytoskeleton , it moves with the 64 corresponding velocity u , and is thus constantly shuﬄed away from the front towards the rear . Due to the permanent mutual turnover between bound and free myosins , depletion of one leads to the depletion of the other . Therefore , also free myosin m f is low at the front . The converse situation arises at the rear of the cell , where the general trend is similar as for actin . The mechanism underlying the observed integrin distributions is much alike the one in the symmetric cell mode . The now asymmetric ﬂow shuﬄes actin - bound integrins b a to the back . The transition from the bound kinetic state b b to the semi - bound ones b a , b s is mediated by the force - dependent disruption rates δ ba , δ bs . Therefore , integrin recycling occurs predominantly at the cell rear , where the forces f u give rise to strong retraction . The motion of the cell arises from the speciﬁc proﬁle of f u , which – in contrast to the symmetric cell state – does not balance in the cellular traction force integral (cid:82) Ω f u d y from equation ( 3 . 40 ) . Recall that by equation ( 3 . 38 ) we have f u ∝ b b θu . Inspecting ﬁgure 3 . 4 ( b1 ) & ( b2 ) , we ﬁnd that the asymmetry in f u follows almost exclusively from the F - actin transport velocity u . Surprisingly , both F - actin θ and integrin b b proﬁles rather seem to antagonize the forward asymmetry of f u toward the right - hand side of the plots . Nevertheless , since the retrograde ﬂow is prominent enough throughout the tip region y ∼ 7 . . . 11 µ m , and also because there is a small overlap of high θ and b b values with still negative u at y ∼ 6 µ m , the model cell migrates due to aforementioned asymmetry in the force integral . This shows that the consideration of a dynamical F - actin transport velocity u is essential for the model cell’s migration capability . 4 . Transition and robustness of the two cell modes : Here we consider two scenarios for the stimulus that causes the model cell to polarize . As we have seen in section 1 . 5 , the Rho / Rac family of proteins is involved in initiating a F - actin polymerization stimulus [ 168 , 184 ] . In order to mimic the eﬀect of a chemotactic gradient , we permanently increase the F - actin polymerization rate J from equations ( 3 . 13 , 3 . 19 ) at one end of the model cell in its sessile and unpolarized mode . As expected , the cell slowly polarizes and engages in persistent migration , see [ 6 , section 4 . 2 ] for further details . On the other hand , polarization might also arise due an asymmetry in the stress distribution throughout the cell , see again section 1 . 5 . A 65 corresponding stimulus would aﬀect the contractile machinery in the cell , which also has been associated with downstream eﬀectors of Rho [ 168 ] . Here we directly modify the myosin - actin association rate α m , which leads to an increased contractile stress ψ according to equation ( 3 . 21 ) . If we prescribe α m = 20 / min at one end of the unpolarized cell for 0 . 5 min , the cell returns to its initial sessile state after a short period of overshooting migration . However , if we impose a stimulus of α m = 50 / min for the same time , the polarization is persistent and migration prevails , see [ 6 , ﬁgure 8 ] for the emerging cell velocity curves . Importantly , the polarizing stimulus has to exceed a certain threshold so that persistent cell migration may emerge . Finally , we also impose stochastic perturbations on the F - actin poly - merization rate J from equation ( 3 . 19 ) . This particular robustness check demonstrates that both the sessile and the migrating cell mode are able to withstand occurring ﬂuctuations in all force - bearing chemical reaction processes . Together with the in - silico experiments on stimulated cell po - larization mentioned above , we conclude that the fundamental modes of migrating cells in two dimensions are autonomous , self - organizing , and self - stabilizing . Indeed , from a biological perspective , such a robustness is highly desirable , in particular with respect to signal reception and trans - duction . When the dynamical system of the force - generating cellular migration machinery is able to sustain the fundamental morphological modes autonomously , then the associated signalling relay merely needs to control the switch between these modes . Consequently , any logic that just maintains a speciﬁc mode would – in principle – be superﬂuous . Con - versely , such a logic could be neglected until the mechanical cell modes and their upstream signalling switch are understood in a satisfactory manner . 5 . Comparison with experimental data : Here we present relevant con - centration , traction and ﬂow ﬁelds of HEK cells , see ﬁgure 3 . 5 . The data contain the information extracted from several diﬀerent time - lapse movies that have been averaged according to a novel method involving the cir - cular normalization of the cell outline [ 157 ] . Thereby , the cell shape is approximated by a polygon with ∼ 12 nodes , for each frame in the in - volved movies . The cell center is identiﬁed with the center - of - mass of the polygon , and the cell’s velocity is computed from the time derivative of the center position , see A & E in ﬁgure 3 . 5 . Then , the individual frames are rotated , so that the turned cell always migrates towards the top , cf . B 66 Figure 3 . 5 . : Experimental data on human epidermal keratinocytes ( HEK ) compares favorably with the results from the simulation model . Note that these data are averaged , see the text for a brief description of the averaging procedure . The connec - tions between experimental and model quantities are ( i ) vin - culin ≈ bound integrins b b , ( ii ) actin ∼ cytoskeletal F - actin θ , ( iii ) cytoplasm ﬂow ∼ F - actin velocity u , and ( iv ) traction ≈ traction force f u . The nature of these correspondences is further explained in the text . This ﬁgure has been repro - duced from [ 157 , ﬁgure 1 A - H , ﬁgure 3 B & F ] , with kind permission by Christoph M¨ohl . 67 & F . Since the cell center is known , the cell contours can be morphed to a circle of ﬁxed radius , which is again done for each frame . Each of the resulting micrographs of the time - lapse movie frames thus exhibits an almost circular cell and therefore they all can be averaged in a mean - ingful way . Here , we compare these experimental data to the migrating state of our model cell , because the cells in the time - lapse movies were also migrating . Note that the model plots from ﬁgure 3 . 4 feature the anterior - posterior cell axis from left to right , cf . the simulation domain [ y 1 , y 2 ] as drawn in ﬁgure 3 . 1 . In contrast , the anterior - posterior cell axis stretches from bottom to top in the experimentally determined reference pictures from ﬁgure 3 . 5 . Vinculin is known to co - localize with focal adhesions , so that the con - centration proﬁle in ﬁgure 3 . 5 D relates to the proﬁle of bound integrins b b , indicated in blue in ﬁgure 3 . 4 ( b2 ) . The concentration proﬁle in 3 . 5 H shows the distribution of actin , in both monomeric and ﬁlamentous states . Even though we model only F - actin explicitly , we compare H with the model prediction θ , see blue line in ﬁgure 3 . 4 ( b1 ) . Since this ‘correspondence’ is clearly incomplete , any interpretation arising from this particular comparison of experiment and theory should not be over - stretched . Note also that in the averaged experimental proﬁles , the eﬀect of the cell nucleus is clearly visible . Being situated at the cells rear , it decreases both actin and vinculin levels as one can see from the promi - nent blue / green spot within the otherwise mostly red cell circle in ﬁgure 3 . 5 D & H . The cytoplasmic ﬂow ﬁeld in ﬁgure 3 . 5 B’ has been recorded in lab coordinates , so that the highest amount of ﬂow is situated at the cell’s rear . The F - actin ﬂow proﬁle u as indicated by the black dotted line in ﬁgure 3 . 4 ( b1 ) , however , is displayed in cell - centric coordinate . By writing the F - actin velocity in the lab frame , u lab = u plot + v , we see that u lab resembles the experimental situation quite precisely . Finally , the averaged traction forces from 3 . 5 F’ mostly arise in the rear half of the cell . Note that in white regions of F’ there was unfortunately not enough data to faithfully quantify traction . In any case , the traction analogue in the model cell f u appears to match the general behavior , cf . the red line in ﬁgure 3 . 4 ( b1 ) . Finally , we note that there are several other experimental data that exhibit the semi - quantitative features of the simulations presented here , for example ( i ) actin and myosin distribution in celloids , in both resting and migrating states [ 221 , ﬁgure 2ac ] , ( ii ) actin velocity ﬁeld [ 192 , ﬁgure 1G ] , ( iii ) force distribution in Dictyostelium discoideum [ 55 , ﬁgure 1 ( d ) ] , 68 ( iv ) actin velocity ﬁeld , traction forces and substratum interactions [ 78 , ﬁgure 2 ] , and ( v ) actin bundling , actin velocity ﬁeld , myosin distribution [ 229 , ﬁgure 1 ] . We take this as an indication and a - posteriori conﬁrmation that the phenomenological constitutive force and stress laws introduced in sections 2 . 3 , 3 . 3 are useful in compound ﬂuid models and capable of describing whole cell motion . 3 . 7 . The migration velocity of cells is sensitive to substratum adhesion 1 . Modiﬁcation of adhesion and friction model functions : In this section we investigate the inﬂuence of substratum adhesiveness on the distribution of focal adhesion integrins b b and the generation of cellular traction forces . During focal adhesion formation , integrin binding clearly depends on the availability of substratum receptors such as ﬁbronectin . For simplicity , we describe the arising eﬀective substratum adhesiveness by the dimensionless number A dh . Since both traction and friction ulti - mately arise from the substratum adhesiveness , eﬀects on the migration velocity v of the cell are to be expected . Including the eﬀect of sub - stratum receptors leads to a linear dependence of the integrin reaction constants on the adhesiveness , α fs = α s 0 · A dh , α ab = α s 0 · A dh , ( 3 . 43 ) with α s 0 = 5 min − 1 and typically A dh ∼ 3 , see also equations ( 3 . 6 – 3 . 9 ) . At the same time , since the cell membrane friction is inﬂuenced by the molecular bonds towards the substrate , we suppose the proportionality φ v = φ 0 v · A dh , ( 3 . 44 ) for the cellular friction coeﬃcient ( 3 . 39 ) , whereby φ 0 v = 6 Pa · min / µ m 2 . 2 . The cellular adhesiveness - speed relation : In order to explore pos - sible modiﬁcations in the migration machinery of the model cell , we put it on substrata of diﬀerent adhesiveness A dh , and measure the emerging steady - state speed together with the essential concentration and force proﬁles , see ﬁgure 3 . 6 . The top left panel shows the resulting velocity - adhesiveness curve . Depending on substratum adhesiveness A dh , the cell exhibits two distinct migration regimes . In the low adhesiveness regime , A dh = 0 . . . 3 , there is a quick adaption of the migration speed to the 69 Figure 3 . 6 . : The substratum adhesiveness A dh inﬂuences the migration speed v of the model cell , see top left panel . For low substra - tum adhesiveness A dh = 0 . . . 3 , the cell is highly respon - sive to changes in A dh . At higher levels of adhesiveness , there is a broad optimal range for the model cell’s migra - tion speed . Comparing with experiment , see top right panel , the model cell speed seems to capture the general behavior . The lower panels ( a - d ) show integrin and force proﬁles of the model cell at respective A dh - values indicated in the top left panel . The top right plot containing experimental data is reproduced from [ 169 , ﬁgure 1a ] , with kind permission by D . A . Lauﬀenburger . 70 substratum adhesiveness . In contrast , for higher values of A dh , the speed of the model cell does not change much while it is fairly high in gen - eral . This points at the ability of the cell to adapt to various external conditions at seemingly optimal performance . Indeed , this adaption is also reﬂected in the traction force and integrin proﬁles from ﬁgure 3 . 6 ( a – d ) , which characteristically vary according to the adhesiveness A dh of the present substratum : ( a ) A dh ∼ 0 . 01 : almost symmetric b b and f u distribution with ﬂat force plateau at the front ( b ) A dh ∼ 0 . 2 : start of integrin b b accumulation at the rear reducing migration speed ( c ) A dh ∼ 1 . . . 3 : enriched b b carpet at the front and sharp increase of disruptive forces at the rear ( d ) A dh ∼ 20 : b b accumulation at rear reducing migration speed v Therefore , for 1 < A dh < 4 , the cell has a high sensitivity for respond - ing to an increase of adhesiveness , while between 5 < A dh < 12 a broad optimum in saturated migration speed occurs . This explains the polariza - tion and haptotaxis of cells in spatial adhesion gradients , and reproduces adhesion and migration experiments on CHO B2 cells 4 [ 169 , ﬁgure 1a ] . Mechanistic understanding of cellular migration : In the light of the emerging concentration proﬁles in ﬁgures 3 . 4 ( b1 ) & ( b2 ) and 3 . 6 ( a - d ) , a physical explanation for cell migration therefore is not “more adhesion” or “stronger force” at the front compared to the rear . Instead , the asymme - try in the polarized state leads to a wide front region with modest forward traction force , and a short rear region with strong opposing forces favor - ing FA rupture . This is how the self - organizing morphological features of crawling cells regulate the strength of motile force transduction . 4 mutated Chinese hamster ovary cells 71 3 . 8 . The cytoplasm ﬂow model can be applied in a quasi two - dimensional geometry 1 . Peripheral approximation and simulation domain : Here , we pro - pose a modiﬁed version of the single cell motility model described in the preceding sections . Since that model was limited to one dimension , it is desirable to extend the theory so that two - dimensional shape and dy - namics can be accounted for . At the same time , however , the need for additional simpliﬁcations arises . To this end we follow the general ideas laid out in the earlier eﬀorts [ 200 , 201 , 218 ] , while retaining the most es - sential quantities of the one - dimensional model from before . The central idea to arrive at a quasi two - dimensional description is to go over to cell - centric coordinates , whereby the cell body center represents the co - moving origin . In ﬁgure 3 . 7 , the cell body is indicated by the white line R ( ϕ ) . We then parameterize all ﬁeld variables like actin and forces in terms of the polar angle ϕ , which constitutes the only considered spatial coordinate in the cell frame . In this way , the simulation domain is given by the unit circle . In order to quantify the shape of the cell , we introduce the local lamella width L = L ( t , ϕ ) as additional ﬁeld variable . It denotes the distance from the cell body to the exterior tip boundary in direction of ϕ at each time instant t , cf . ﬁgure 3 . 7 . Concentrations like the one of actin a = a ( t , ϕ ) are then assumed to be constant in the inﬁnitesimal lamella segment (cid:8) ( r , φ ) ∈ R 2 : R ( φ ) ≤ r ≤ R ( φ ) + L ( t , φ ) , ϕ − d ϕ ≤ φ ≤ ϕ + d ϕ (cid:9) around ϕ . Alternatively , one could think of the average concentration of actin in that region . Importantly , since we are now employing cell - centric coordinates , we also measure the mass transport velocities relative to the moving cell center . 2 . Peripheral mass balances : In order to set up the mass balance equa - tion for the F - actin density a ( t , ϕ ) , we write the one - dimensional analogue of ( 2 . 1 ) . Identifying ρ f : = a , and introducing the modiﬁcations explained below , we obtain ∂ t a + ∂ s (cid:0) au a − D a ∂ s a (cid:1) = J (cid:48)(cid:48) . ( 3 . 45 ) In the one - dimensional peripheral approximation , we employ the F - actin concentration a = θ / V a , where V a indicates the volume of a single actin monomer . Moreover , we compute the derivatives involved in the trans - port terms on the surface of the cell body , ∂ s : = 1 R · ∂ ϕ , ( 3 . 46 ) 72 Figure 3 . 7 . : Cell centric coordinates underlying the quasi two - dimensional migration model . In order to obtain a simple description , we attach a coordinate system to the center of the migrating cell , see black arrows , and parameterize all model variables over the unit circle as described by the polar angle ϕ . The curve of L ( ϕ ) represents the outline of the cell as it spreads on the substratum , relative to the cell body R ( ϕ ) . The latter can be observed as the fan - like central region with bright white spots and almost no focal adhesions , and is indicated by the white line in the picture . In the micrograph , the focal adhesion sites are highlighted by a green ﬂuorescence dye . The presented microscopic picture of a human epidermal keratinocyte is courtesy of Claudia Sch¨afer , Merkel group , Forschungszentrum J¨ulich [ 189 , movie 05 ] . 73 where we have assumed that the cell body is spherical and has a constant radius R ( ϕ ) = const . = : R . A certain amount of F - actin diﬀusion with constant D a could arise from material transport not fully captured by the F - actin velocity u a , which represents the tangential component of u from equation ( 2 . 1 ) . For a more detailed explanation of the velocity u a see the paragraph 3 . 8 . 4 on transport velocities below . The actin polymerization model function reads J (cid:48)(cid:48) = α L L + α a ba − δ a a + β a ξ t . ( 3 . 47 ) F - actin assembly arises from the local cell extension L in the ﬁrst sum - mand with coeﬃcient α L > 0 . Adhesion - mediating integrins b recruit auto - catalyzing F - actin with the association constant α a in the second summand , see below for details on the integrin concentration b . More - over , ﬁlament disassembly is proportional to the amount of F - actin a , with the dissociation constant δ a . The last term on the right - hand side induces small variations in the F - actin polymerization due to ﬂuctua - tions in the environment , where ξ t is a Gaussian random number with mean zero and variance one , and β a the model parameter for the pertur - bation strength . The actual values of the parameters D a , α L , α a , δ a , β a are all listed in table A . 6 . Previously , we have employed diﬀerent rep - resentations of the polymerization function J (cid:48)(cid:48) , cf . equations ( 2 . 1 , 2 . 29 ) . Though not directly needed in the present model formulation , the rela - tions for conversion would be J (cid:48) = m a J (cid:48)(cid:48) = m a J / V a , where m a is the mass of a single actin monomer , and V a its volume . In this simpliﬁed model , we consider only one kind of integrin molecules involved in cellular adhesion , namely the bound ones b ≡ b b , compare also ﬁgure 3 . 2 . The corresponding mass balance for the concentration of bound integrin receptors b engaged in focal adhesions reads ∂ t b + ∂ s (cid:0) bu b (cid:1) = α b ad − δ b b exp (cid:0) f / f b (cid:1) − δ e b (cid:0) v outtip + v outbody (cid:1) . ( 3 . 48 ) Here , u b denotes the transport velocity , see paragraph 3 . 8 . 4 for details . The ﬁrst term on the right - hand side indicates that F - actin a facilitates the formation of integrin - mediated adhesions b . They assemble at sites where there are suitable substratum ligands d = d ( t , ϕ ) , see below for de - tails . In this way , the reservoir function of the semi - bound integrins from ﬁgure 3 . 2 is included in the eﬀective association rate constant α b . The adhesions b disassemble with the rate δ b , whereby the present tensile load f : = | f ( t , ϕ ) | aﬀects the kinetics in a Bell - type exponential factor [ 21 ] . The load f arises from the traction force of the cell and is deﬁned below 74 in equation ( 3 . 57 ) . The last term on the right - hand side includes passive eﬀects of adhesion sites leaving the cell lamella domain in radial direc - tion , where δ e indicates the inverse characteristic length of eﬀective radial egress . This type of transport occurs both at the lamella tip L ( ϕ ) and at the cell body ( cf . ﬁgure 3 . 7 ) , with the respective velocities v outtip , v outbody , whose deﬁnition is given in the following paragraph 3 . 8 . 3 . The speciﬁc values for the parameters α b , δ b and δ e are listed in table A . 6 . The integrin kinetics above involve the adhesion ligand density d on the substratum , e . g . like ﬁbronectin or collagen . In order to account for their variations , we consider their mass balance in an idealized manner , ∂ t d + ∂ s (cid:0) du d (cid:1) = − α b ad − δ e d (cid:0) v outtip + v outbody (cid:1) + α d v intip ζ t (cid:0) d 0 , σ d (cid:1) , ( 3 . 49 ) where the velocities u d , v intip , v outtip , and v outbody are deﬁned below . The ﬁrst term on the right - hand side indicates that the substratum ligands d be - come occupied by integrin in focal adhesion sites b , see also equation ( 3 . 48 ) . The ligands d can also leave the cell lamella domain in radial direction , which is represented by the second summand on the right hand side of the mass balance ( 3 . 49 ) . The most important kinetic term is the last one . In the employed co - moving cell coordinate frame , new sub - stratum ligands enter the cell lamella domain at the tip R + L ( t , ϕ ) . Thereby , the amount of entering ligands derives from the local lamella area increase , which is proportional to the tip growth velocity v intip . Here we model the ligand density within the gained area by the stochastic variable ζ t (cid:0) d 0 , σ d (cid:1) ≥ 0 , which is assumed to be distributed according to the truncated positive Gaussian distribution with mean d 0 and standard deviation σ d . 5 The coeﬃcient α d represents the eﬀective radial ingress parameter for ligands entering from the lamella tip . Together with the values for α b , δ e , d 0 and σ d , the ingress parameter α d is is given in table A . 6 . An alternative and more complete adhesion model has been studied in [ 132 ] , whereby the model cell crawls on a substrate with a check - board like Poissonian adhesion ligand density . 3 . Passive radial transport velocities : In order to specify the transport velocities in equations ( 3 . 45 , 3 . 48 , 3 . 49 ) , we introduce the radial and tangential unit vectors ˆ e r ( ϕ ) = (cid:18) cos ϕ sin ϕ (cid:19) , ˆ e ϕ ( ϕ ) = (cid:18) − sin ϕ cos ϕ (cid:19) , ( 3 . 50 ) 5 This is implemented by drawing vectors of Gaussian random numbers ζ t ∈ N ( d 0 , σ d ) and replacing negative entries by zero . 75 deﬁned for each angle ϕ in co - moving polar cell coordinates . Furthermore , let v = v ( t ) denote the cellular migration velocity as deﬁned in paragraph 3 . 8 . 5 below . Expressing v in terms of the local polar unit vectors ( 3 . 50 ) we have v r ( t , ϕ ) = v ( t ) · ˆ e r ( ϕ ) , v ϕ ( t , ϕ ) = v ( t ) · ˆ e ϕ ( ϕ ) . ( 3 . 51 ) The relative radial lamella tip growth or local protrusion velocity at a certain position ϕ then reads v tip ( t , ϕ ) = v r ( t , ϕ ) + ∂ t L ( t , ϕ ) . ( 3 . 52 ) For the inward velocity v intip appearing in equation ( 3 . 49 ) , we consider only forward tip growth and not shrinking , v intip = (cid:2) v tip ( t , ϕ ) (cid:3) ≥ 0 . ( 3 . 53 ) This is implemented by returning zero whence the expression in square brackets is negative . As already mentioned , the amount of incoming substratum ligands d is proportional to v intip , because the local area gain at the lamella tip is proportional to the product v intip · d t at each time instant . In a similar way , adhesion sites leave the cell domain at places where the lamella is retracting . The corresponding retraction velocity v outtip is responsible for the loss of adhesion sites close to the tip , − v outtip ( t , ϕ ) = (cid:2) v tip ( t , ϕ ) (cid:3) ≤ 0 . ( 3 . 54 ) where we consider cell shrinking by allowing for non - positive values only . Note that v outtip is non - negative , cf . equations ( 3 . 48 , 3 . 49 ) . When inspecting the micrograph in ﬁgure 3 . 7 , on observes that there are only few green ﬂuorescence spots of adhesion sites below the cell body as outlined by R in white . In order to take this observation into account , we suppose that the adhesions disassemble when they approach the cell body boundary . This could be triggered by specialized chemical agents close to or within the cell body . In human epidermal keratinocytes , tubulin is a possible candidate , because its location matches [ 231 , ﬁgure 3 . 4 ] , cf . also ﬁgure 1 . 6 . Independent of the precise chemistry of their degradation pathway , we here assume that the adhesion sites vanish when they come into contact with the cell body . The relevant radial velocity of the cell body boundary with respect to the adhesion site is given by v outbody ( t , ϕ ) = (cid:2) v r ( t , ϕ ) (cid:3) ≥ 0 , ( 3 . 55 ) 76 where we again pertain only non - negative values . In this way , adhesion sites approaching the cell body from the cell front in the direction of migration are removed from the pool at ϕ , see also equations ( 3 . 48 , 3 . 49 ) and ﬁgure 3 . 7 . 4 . Passive tangential transport velocities : The peripheral mass bal - ances from paragraph 3 . 8 . 2 describe transport and turnover of actin a , in - tegrin receptors b and substratum ligands d . The corresponding transport velocities u a , u b , u d redistribute the three species in ϕ - direction through - out the cell lamella . In order to keep this model as simple as possible , we suppose that the peripheral transport is purely passive and driven by drag eﬀects arising from the cell being pulled over the substratum . Thus , as the cell proceeds , the stationary substratum underneath would be in transient contact with the cellular molecules , which would entail a certain amount of mutual sliding and result in an eﬀective opposing drag . This is the essence of the molecular clutch mechanism described in paragraph 3 . 5 . 1 , see also [ 156 , section 3 . 4 ] for some experimental ﬁgures on the slid - ing of focal adhesion sites . In the basic description we develop here , we however take a short cut and have the velocity of the substratum with respect to the co - moving cell frame drive molecular transport , and not vice - versa . To this end we the assume the linear slip relations u a ( t , ϕ ) = − κ a v ϕ ( t , ϕ ) , u b ( t , ϕ ) = − κ b v ϕ ( t , ϕ ) , u d ( t , ϕ ) = − κ d v ϕ ( t , ϕ ) , ( 3 . 56 ) expressing the molecular transport velocities u a , u b , u d in terms of the local tangential projection of the substratum velocity − v ϕ . The eﬀective slip factors κ a < κ b < κ d ≤ 1 are model parameters , see table A . 6 . Apart from considering ϕ as the only spatial variable , the equations ( 3 . 56 ) constitute the second major assumption in the peripheral approx - imation . Naturally , such a simplistic velocity model cannot fully capture the transport phenomena occurring in the cytoplasm or on the cell mem - brane . This is also the reason for including the diﬀusion term ∝ D a in the F - actin mass balance ( 3 . 45 ) , which provides for a certain smooth - ing property being essential for the model cell’s stability and migration capability . 5 . Cellular migration force : In paragraph 1 . 7 . 1 , we have found that the key molecular players driving cellular locomotion are actin , myosin and integrin . In the one - dimensional migration model , we have seen how actin 77 retrograde ﬂow , myosin induced contraction and integrin adhesion jointly create the cellular locomotion forces , cf . paragraph 3 . 7 . 3 . Similar to the one - dimensional model equation ( 3 . 38 ) , we assume that the locomotion force is proportional to the local integrin receptor density b . As additional modiﬁcation , we account for actin a and the lamella width L in the local force density f , f ( t , ϕ ) = f loc · a ( t , ϕ ) b ( t , ϕ ) L ( t , ϕ ) · ˆ e r ( ϕ ) . ( 3 . 57 ) We interpret the combination of aL as a measure for the contractility of the cell in the speciﬁc direction ˆ e r , which would ultimately arise from the activity of myosin motors not explicitly resolved in the two - dimensional model . In this way , the lamella segment around ϕ imposes a force on the cell body pulling in centripetal direction ˆ e r , where the pulling strength f loc is a model parameter , see table A . 6 . The force integral over the unit circle then determines the total cellular locomotion , F loc = (cid:90) π − π f ( t , ϕ ) d ϕ . ( 3 . 58 ) Essential to the model is that the integrin dissociation term ∝ δ b in equa - tion ( 3 . 48 ) involves the exponential of the local tensile density | f ( t , ϕ ) | deﬁned here , otherwise the model cell seems to be incapable to migrate . In a friction - dominated environment , the traction force F loc determines the velocity v of the cell body from the eﬀective drag γ v of the cell with the substratum , γ v v = F loc . ( 3 . 59 ) For simplicity , we assume that γ v is a constant model parameter , again see table A . 6 . Together with the force integral ( 3 . 58 ) , equation ( 3 . 59 ) constitutes the cell - level force balance , in full analogy to ( 3 . 40 ) from the one - dimensional migration model . 6 . Radial force balance at lamella tip : In order to close the description , we still need an equation for the evolution of the local lamella width L ( t , ϕ ) . To this end , we introduce the eﬀective cellular curvature force (cid:101) τ = (cid:101) τ ( t , ϕ ) , ˜ τ = − τ 0 a 2 R + L + ∂ s (cid:0) τ 0 a 2 ∂ s L (cid:1) + p 0 L . ( 3 . 60 ) The ﬁrst two summands derive from the uncompensated tension of the F - actin network τ 0 a 2 close to the curved cell outline . The ﬁrst term 78 resembles the contribution of a purely circular geometry with radius R + L , and the second term the deviations from that circle . The speciﬁc exponent in the model expression τ 0 a 2 depends on the employed stress model for the actin ﬁlament network , see e . g . [ 69 ] . Other values are possible and typically range from 1 to 2 , of which we choose the upper bound to facilitate shape deformations in our model cell . The overall tension of the actin network behind the lamella tip can be adjusted by prescribing the coeﬃcient τ 0 , see table A . 6 . Moreover , we evaluate the derivatives at the surface of the cell body for simplicity . This avoids further complications , as the derivatives would otherwise involve L . The last summand in equation ( 3 . 60 ) incorporates the pressure - like protrusion force p 0 initiating from the central cell body and propagating towards the cell periphery . Here we model the eﬀective decrease of that force throughout the lamella by including the inverse local lamella width L . As a further simplifying approximation , we assume that p 0 / L (cid:29) τ 0 a 2 / ( R + L ) . The motivation for this approach is , that the actin network at the lamella tip is rather protrusive than tensile , which is consistent with the observation of stress softening in lammellipodia - like , reconstituted actin networks [ 47 ] . Under this approximation , we may write (cid:101) τ ≈ τ = ∂ s (cid:0) τ 0 a 2 ∂ s L (cid:1) + p 0 L . ( 3 . 61 ) Importantly , the choice of the p 0 and τ 0 parameters is consistent with the employed approximation , cf . table A . 6 . Lamella protrusion and retraction derives from a force balance at the tip L ( t , ϕ ) . In the peripheral approximation and the employed co - moving cellular coordinate system , the involved forces are balanced in radial di - rection exclusively . The resulting scalar radial force balance for lamella protrusion and retraction is φ 0 a∂ t L = τ + p b ab − ρ 0 a 2 . ( 3 . 62 ) The left hand side represents the friction force that opposes the lamella deformation occurring with the radial velocity ∂ t L . This friction is as - sumed to be proportional to the local concentration of F - actin , because the viscosity of the cytosol can be neglected , see paragraph 2 . 3 . 2 . The ﬁrst term on the right - hand side is the eﬀective cellular curvature force τ = τ ( t , ϕ ) as described above . The second term on the right - hand side ∝ p b represents enhanced lamella protrusion onto substratum adhesion sites b . Such a protrusion involves F - actin polymerization initiating from 79 the barbed ends of the ﬁlaments , which we here assume to be a linear function in a . Finally , the F - actin network is engaged in retrograde ﬂow towards the cell center . This gives rise to retraction stresses at the lamella tip , which derive from the tension in the ﬁlament network . Consistent with the arguments for deriving τ , we suppose that the stress is propor - tional to the squared concentration of actin a 2 . The model parameters φ 0 , p 0 , p b and ρ 0 are constants and listed in appendix table A . 6 . 3 . 9 . Simulations including the cell lamella exhibit cellular shape and trajectory characteristics 1 . Dimensional considerations : In order to obtain meaningful data from our simulations , we have to clarify the units that are implied by the model equations in the preceding section . In paragraph 1 . 7 , we have identiﬁed µ m and min as the biologically relevant time - and length - scale of cellular migration . Moreover , the total traction force of cells has been estimated to be in the nN region [ 10 , table 2 ] . Thus , the physical scales of the model are set . For chemistry , we ﬁrst observe that a is the volume concentration of actin monomers assembled in ﬁlaments . Here we measure this concen - tration in mM , i . e . milli - moles per liter . In this way , typical values of a in the model are close to the ones observed in the lamellipodia of mouse melanoma cells [ 129 ] , cf . also table A . 5 . On the other hand , the integrin receptors b and substratum ligands d clearly represent area concentrations indicating the number of molecules per surface area . Unfortunately , there seem to be no quantitative experimental data on typical values for b and d . If one estimates the lateral extension of a single integrin to be approx - imately 2 . . . 5 nm , one concludes that there could be 40 . 000 . . . 250 . 000 molecules per µ m 2 in maximal packing on a square lattice . With the values b , d as in table A . 5 , the suitable area concentration measure is approximately 10 6 µ m − 2 . The resulting dimensions of the model variables are listed in table A . 5 , together with typical values obtained from the simulations described be - low . 2 . Simulating the quasi two - dimensional model cell : For the in - silico simulation of migrating cells , we start by initializing the model variables a , b , d , L with constant values along the cell perimeter ϕ ∈ [ − π , π ] . We then solve the evolution equations ( 3 . 45 , 3 . 48 , 3 . 49 , 3 . 62 ) in an explicit 80 Euler - Maruyama scheme [ 127 ] , where we have to take into account the periodic boundary conditions X ( t , − π ) = X ( t , π ) for all variables X = a , b , d , L . The locomotion force follows from ( 3 . 58 ) and the cell velocity v from ( 3 . 59 ) , so that the cell position x is updated according to d x = v d t in each time step . All parameter values involved in this numerical model are listed in table A . 6 . Part of one particular resulting trajectory of the migrating model cell is shown in ﬁgure 3 . 8 , together with the instantaneous cell outline and the concentrations of actin and integrin . 3 . Experimental reference data : For comparison with experiments we include some image analysis data from a migrating human epidermal ker - atinocyte . The phase - contrast micrograph presented in ﬁgure 3 . 8 is part of a movie taken by Christoph M¨ohl at the Institut f¨ur Zellbiologie [ 155 ] . From these raw data the outline of cell edge and body can be extracted by means of semi - automatized image processing tools that have been de - veloped by Wolfgang Alt , Christoph M¨ohl and Carina Wollnik [ 231 ] . The central idea for image processing is same as for the simulation model : the local cell - centric coordinate system is a natural representation for the description of motility phenomena . Here we only brieﬂy summarize the employed algorithm to reconstruct both cell body and tip outline . The center of the migrating cell had already been quantiﬁed in ear - lier eﬀorts . Therefore , the transformation in polar coordinates attached to this very cell center was straight forward . The resulting map of im - age brightness values in polar coordinates then formed the basis for fur - ther processing . The two outlines were then detected with the help of a stochastic chain or active contour algorithm [ 7 , 141 , 231 ] . To this end , a circle of interest was prescribed around the cell center to deﬁne rel - evant region within the micrograph . Next , the radial gradients in the polar brightness map were computed . Subsequently , an imaginary chain was placed on the polar picture , and moved according to “image forces” including chain stiﬀness , centripetal contraction and radial brightness gradients . With suitably chosen parameters , this chain is driven towards the cell ( body ) outline , where additional stochastic perturbations helped to overcome small obstacles due to dirt or other debris . Repeating the procedure , the two outlines were obtained for each frame in the movie . Cell body and edge outline are colored cyan and blue in ﬁgure 3 . 8 , re - spectively , and comprise the data needed for the analysis below . 81 Figure 3 . 8 . : Tracking of cell body and lamella outline of a migrating hu - man epidermal keratinocyte ( left ) and a simulated model cell ( right ) , both with the corresponding cell - center migration trajectory ( green ) . In the simulation model we have assumed that the cell body has constant radius R as indicated by the innermost black circle in the right plot . The local lamella width L is indicated in blue , with the cell body circle as ref - erence . Similarly , the concentration of actin a is drawn in red , with the same reference . Finally , the integrin adhesion sites b are indicated by the line in magenta , with respect to the outer black reference circle . Note that plotting the model cell in this compact ﬁgure involves additional rescaling of the values of a and b . For comparison , we present the analogous in - vitro experiment ( left ) . Here , cell body ( cyan ) and lamella outline ( blue ) have been extracted by means of image anal - ysis . The time - lapse phase - contrast micrographs have been taken by Christoph M¨ohl at the Institut f¨ur Zellbiologie , Uni - versit¨at Bonn . Subsequent image analysis was performed by Wolfgang Alt and Carina Wollnik . 82 4 . Cell shape and trajectory : The full - length movie s2d simulation . avi 6 of the simulated model cell exhibits several interesting quantitative fea - tures . As in ﬁgure 3 . 8 , the lamella width L is represented by a blue line , F - actin a by a red line , adhering integrins b by a magenta line , and the cell center trajectory by a green one . After the initial start with evenly distributed molecular players , the lamella of the cell spreads in a symmet - ric manner for some 10 min . Next , the polar symmetry of the model cell breaks quite quickly due to the stochastic perturbation term in the actin polymerization , cf . equation 3 . 47 . Approximately at t ∼ 14 min , one can already see that the model cell starts to polarize , which coincides with a slow but steady increase in the cellular migration speed . Subsequently , the onsetting forward motion causes new adhesion ligands d to enter the cell domain from the tip , which gives a positive feedback on integrin b and thereby on actin a and lamella width L , as expected from equations ( 3 . 48 , 3 . 45 , 3 . 62 ) . In this way , persistent migration emerges in a robust manner without the need for external guiding cues . In that sense , the essential guiding cue is the forward motion and protrusion of the model cell itself . Noteworthy , the cellular polarization seems to be most clearly visible in the integrin distribution . Once a while , for example at t ∼ 30 min , t = 155 min or t ∼ 200 min , the model cell engages in rather sharp turns , whereby the apparent polarization tends to break down . However , protrusion continues so that the subsequent repolarization does not take very long . This exhibits the interplay between protrusion and persistent locomotion . The assembly of new adhesion sites induces an accelerated local protrusion , which pulls the cell in the corresponding direction . Thus , the shape dynamics of the model cell is decisive for the emerging directionally persistent trajectories . 5 . Quantitative migration observables : In order to get a better un - derstanding of the observed migration behavior of the model cell , we consider several quantities that serve as benchmarks for the ongoing cell motion and deformation . Apart from the cell’s migration speed | v | and its lamella area A Lam ( t ) = 1 2 (cid:90) π − π (cid:2) L 2 ( t , ϕ ) − R 2 ( t , ϕ ) (cid:3) d ϕ , ( 3 . 63 ) we employ so - called directors that represent the instantaneous polariza - tion of a certain cell characteristic like actin distribution . The director 6 See supplementary material or http : / / www . theobio . uni - bonn . de / people / mab / dsup . 83 for a given quantity X ( ϕ ) is given by D X = (cid:82) π − π X ˆ e r d ϕ (cid:82) π − π X d ϕ , ( 3 . 64 ) and thus constitutes the orientation vector of X as averaged over the whole cell periphery . These directors can be deﬁned for all model variables X = a , b , d , L , and have the property of being dimensionless with | D X | ≤ 1 . In ﬁgure 3 . 9 , we see the plots of mean cell speed | v | ( green ) , lamella area A Lam ( blue ) , and the director strengths | D L | , | D a | , | D b | for lamella width ( black ) , actin ( red ) and integrin ( magenta ) , respectively . Upon closer inspection one encounters characteristic time constants in these observables . For example , the integrin director seems to break down ap - proximately every 15 . . . 25 min . Indeed , one can observe a sharp turn in the cell trajectory at t ∼ 200 min , whence the integrin is evenly dis - tributed around the cell . In the plots of ﬁgure 3 . 9 , the lamella director | D L | mostly seems to follow the actin director | D a | , unless there simulta - neously occur rather dramatic evens in the integrin director | D b | . Similar eﬀects are also exhibited by the cell migration speed and the lamella area , which will be discussed below . Before that , however , we point out that the proposed directors and similar quantities are readily accessible to experimental measurements , although some require molecular staining by means of ﬂuorescence . The main advantage of directors is that they provide for a cell - level descrip - tion of subcellular detail . The molecular directors proposed here directly relate to the distribution of mechanically active units throughout the cell . We therefore suggest that such directors could serve as practical criteria to identify new phenotypes or mutants . For example , by looking at cell aspect ratio and actin variation along leading edge , the vast majority of observed keratocyte shapes could be predicted in a quantitative way [ 122 ] . As opposed to the common catalogization of genomics and proteomics , this emphasizes the importance of functional aspects as cornerstone of coherent biological model genesis . 6 . Comparing correlation features in experiment and simulation : Here we take a closer look at the cell migration speed | v | and its possible re - lation with the lamella area A Lam . To this end we consider the autocor - relation function C X ( τ ) = (cid:104) [ X ( t ) − µ X ] · [ X ( t + τ ) − µ X ] (cid:105) t σ 2 X ( 3 . 65 ) 84 0 . 2 0 . 4 0 . 6 0 . 8 1 1 . 2 0 10 20 30 40 50 0 100 200 300 400 500 | v | [ µ m / m i n ] , | D L | [ 1 ] A L a m [ µ m 2 ] experiment time [ min ] | v | | D L | A Lam 0 0 . 2 0 . 4 0 . 6 0 . 8 0 60 120 180 240 10 20 30 40 50 | v | [ µ m / m i n ] , | D X | [ 1 ] A L a m [ µ m 2 ] simulation time [ min ] | v | | D a | | D b | | D L | A Lam Figure 3 . 9 . : Observables in the quasi two - dimensional cell migration ex - periment ( top ) and model ( bottom ) . Here , we plot the time series of the cell speed | v | in green , the lamella director | D L | in black , and the lamella area A Lam in blue . In the simula - tion model , we additionally obtain the molecular directors of actin | D a | ( red ) and integrin adhesions | D b | ( magenta ) . All directors are dimensionless , which is indicated by the symbol [ 1 ] for the respective units . In the model , the most promi - nent behavior is observed in the integrin director modulus | D b | , which is highly dynamic and varies almost over the whole possible range 0 . . . 1 . Note that this director drops sharply before the model cell engages in turning movements , see e . g . at t ∼ 30 , 155 , 200 min . Both model and experimental observables exhibit a seemingly regular quasi - periodic behav - ior . Further details are discussed in the text . 85 of a time - dependent quantity X , where (cid:104)(cid:105) t indicates averaging over the time series , µ X ≡ (cid:104) X ( t ) (cid:105) t the mean and σ 2 X ≡ (cid:104) [ X ( t ) − µ X ] 2 (cid:105) t the squared standard deviation of X . The correlation coeﬃcient C X ( τ ) has the prop - erty of being ∈ [ − 1 , 1 ] . When it is close to + 1 , then – on average – X ( t ) is similar to X ( t + τ ) . Conversely , if C X ( τ ) is around − 1 , X ( t ) would be on average close to − X ( τ ) . Finally , if C X ( τ ) is close to zero , than there is no trend in either of the two aforementioned directions . As can be seen in ﬁgure 3 . 10 , the autocorrelation functions for the cell speed X ( t ) = | v ( t ) | has a pronounced minimum both in experiment and simulation . For the simulated cell , this reﬂects the properties of the green speed curve from ﬁgure 3 . 9 , where the migration velocity increases and decreases in periods of approximately 25 min . Correspondingly , the cor - relation function exhibits a maximum for correlation times τ ∼ 22 . . . 28 min . Consistent with this model prediction , a similar eﬀect can also be observed in the experimental data . It is not surprising that these characteristic speed ﬂuctuations are also reﬂected in the model cell’s tra - jectory , cf . ﬁgure 3 . 8 and the movie . In particular , the black crosses on the green trajectory are evenly spaced in time , so that intermittent phases of decreased cell speed become visible by the proximity of these time checkmarks . Naturally , this eﬀect is most pronounced close to the turning points in the trajectory . Thus , the autocorrelation function of the migration speed reﬂects the cell’s tendency to reorient and additionally exhibits the inherent characteristic reorientation time - scale . The autocorrelation functions ( 3 . 65 ) of the lamella area X ( t ) = A Lam ( t ) exhibit the same general behavior , although the period times appear to be somewhat diﬀerent , see ﬁgure 3 . 10 ( bottom plot ) . In the experimental curve we observe a broad minimum from τ = 8 . . . 13 min , which however does not deviate signiﬁcantly from the zero within the given conﬁdence interval . There is also no clear subsequent maximum due to the limited observation time of the experiment . In contrast , there is a very pro - nounced trend and a very clear periodicity of 18 . . . 19 min for the model cell . Since the simulations can be run as long as desired , the conﬁdence interval is very narrow as well . One might be tempted to extrapolate the period in the experiment to some 20 min , based on the position of the minimum at the red curve in ﬁgure 3 . 10 ( bottom plot ) . However , the experimental data neither support nor contradict any such predictions . Regardless of the precise periodicity , both experiment and model data point to the presence of certain persistence phenomena in migrating cells . Lamella area and cell speed are modulated in the sense that they in - crease and subsequently decrease in a repetitive manner , which hints 86 - 0 . 5 0 0 . 5 1 0 10 20 30 40 50 60 C v ( τ ) autocorrelation function cell speed | v | simulationexperiment - 0 . 5 0 0 . 5 1 0 10 20 30 40 50 60 C A L a m ( τ ) correlation time τ [ min ] autocorrelation function lamella area A Lam simulationexperiment Figure 3 . 10 . : Autocorrelation function of cell speed | v | ( top ) and lamella area ( bottom ) in experiment and model . The qualitative shapes of the experimental and simulation curves seem to coincide . The positions of minima and maxima of both speed autocorrelation functions ( top ) exhibit a certain peri - odicity , roughly 20 min for the experiment , and 27 min for the simulation model . A similar behavior can be observed in the lamella area autocorrelation function ( bottom ) . There , the simulations show a very prominent periodicity of ap - proximately 18 min . Due to the limited observation time , the experimental curve is less indicative . Note that the thin lines surrounding the autocorrelation curves indicate the 95 % conﬁdence interval . 87 towards speciﬁc adaptation properties in the underlying dynamical pro - cesses . Comparison of several cells from experiments shows that their modulation is universal , whereas the respective periodicity is not [ 210 , ﬁg - ure 14 & 15 ] . In the well - controlled simulation model we do not have to expect ubiquitous variations across diﬀerent individual cells , because the exact model behavior is naturally reproducible . It is therefore not sur - prising that both periodicity and modulation are robust for a given set of parameters . The degree of robustness can be tested by adjusting the stochastic perturbation β a for actin , which does only barely aﬀect the observed model dynamics of speed and lamella area , even when increased to quite high values . Reviewing the plots from ﬁgure 3 . 10 , it is remarkable that the area and speed autocorrelation functions look quite similar in a qualitative way . Thus one might suspect a relation or dependency between the two model observables . In order to test this hypothesis , we consider the cross - correlation function C × XY ( τ ) = (cid:104) [ X ( t ) − µ X ] · [ Y ( t + τ ) − µ Y ] (cid:105) t σ X σ Y , ( 3 . 66 ) where again µ X denotes the mean of X over the whole time series and σ X its standard deviation . This function probes the similarity of the two time series X ( t ) and Y ( t + τ ) , where τ represents the relative time lag . The crosscorrelation function of cell speed | v | = : X versus lamella area A Lam = : Y is plotted in ﬁgure 3 . 11 . The data of experiment ( red ) and simulation ( blue ) exhibits a certain maximum close to τ = 0 , which seemingly implies that cell speed and lamella area are correlated , and the relative lag time is given by the position of the respective maxi - mum . Yet the basis for the underlying data consists of only one single cell trajectory in both theory and experiment . Indeed , when comparing the experimental observation with [ 210 , ﬁgure 19 ] , one ﬁnds that other human epidermal keratinocytes behave markedly diﬀerent . This individ - ualism pervades also the simulation model . From the blue simulation curve in ﬁgure 3 . 11 , one might be tempted to infer from the maximum plateau at τ ∼ − 7 min , that the cell speed builds after the lamella area has increased . However , this feature is not robust and highly depends on the speciﬁc simulation , because the stochastic realizations of the two variables a , d diﬀer for every run . Neither does ﬁxing all other parame - ters and decreasing the stochastic perturbation lead to more conclusive results . In yet another cell migration model , there is also no clear trend whether the lamella area follows speed or vice versa [ 193 , ﬁgures 12 & 88 - 0 . 5 0 0 . 5 1 - 60 - 40 - 20 0 20 40 60 C × ( τ ) correlation time τ [ min ] cross correlation A Lam vs . | v | simulationexperiment Figure 3 . 11 . : Crosscorrelation function of speed and lamella area in ex - periment ( red ) and model ( blue ) . The thin lines around the correlation plots represent the 95 % conﬁdence interval . As judged from the ﬁrst maximum of the red experimental curve at τ ∼ 3 min , the lamella area seems to follow the cell speed with a small time lag . However , this phenomenon is not universal in human epidermal keratinocytes . The blue simulation curve also does not exhibit a clear trend . For further explanations see the text . 17 ] . The biological relevance of this question lies in the possibility to explain molecular interactions in a functional manner and particularly in terms of the whole - cell behavior . It is commonly perceived that the protrusion and retraction of the lamella constitutes a kind of cellular sensing , with an implicit assumption that the environment would thus be probed more eﬃciently . Consequently , one is lead to hypothesize that cellular reori - entation would somehow be related with preceding protrusions . Since we could not make deﬁnite statements about this relation , it would be desirable to further reﬁne the methodology of theoretical model and ex - perimental data evaluation . In the worst case we could hope for ﬁnding that protrusion and subsequent migration are not related at all . In the best case we would quantify the precise relation so to make a prediction on the molecular pathways suitable to trigger the cellular reorientation . We emphasize , however , that such predictions are only possible by con - sidering basic quantities such as cell and lamella size , area , orientation and relate them to the molecular distributions on the whole - cell level as summarized e . g . by the directors proposed above . Thus , to arrive at a modern biology of the cell , it is inevitable to consider quantitative spatio - temporal and kinetic features of molecular distributions . 89 4 . Generalized Voronoi tessellations divide space into cellular compartments Summary : In this chapter we propose a new method to construct Voronoi tessellations from generators of elliptic shape . The resulting set of Voronoi cells represents individual biological cells cooperating in small aggregates or proto - tissues . The locus of the contact border between two Voronoi cells is given by an equality of mathematical norms . Each of these norms attributes a certain power to any point in space , and is associated with the genera - tors adjacent to the contact border . Scaling the contact equation with a monotonic function gives an equivalent expression , so that the generators may be written in terms of matrices in homogeneous coordinates . These generator matrices describe ellipses of arbitrary size and orientation in the two - dimensional plane . Finding the shape of the contact border between two elliptic generators amounts to diagonalizing the so - called contact ma - trix . The entries of this matrix are coeﬃcients of a quadratic form for a conic section . Non - degenerate contact matrices describe ellipses or hy - perbolas , while degenerate contact matrices give rise to straight lines or parabolas . All these contact borders can be parameterized in polar co - ordinates . Using the polar ordering property of points on the contact border , we ﬁnd an algorithm that constructs Voronoi tessellations from the elliptic generators . 4 . 1 . Voronoi generators consisting of norm - functions give rise to curved cell - cell contacts The following deﬁnitions involve the d - dimensional real vector space 1 R d , which is a particular example of a normed space . In principle one could give these deﬁnitions in the more general setting of normed spaces . How - ever , this generalization is not useful for describing biological systems in the intended context . Let { i = 1 , . . . N } be a set of indices with N ∈ N members . 1 For an introductory text on vector spaces and linear algebra , see the particularly accessible textbook [ 25 ] . For reference purposes , [ 37 ] is quite versatile . 91 Deﬁnition 4 . 1 . 1 ( Voronoi generator ) : Let (cid:107) . (cid:107) i be a norm on R d , and let the zero element of the normed space (cid:0) R d , (cid:107) . (cid:107) i (cid:1) be denoted by x i . Then the norm (cid:107) . (cid:107) i is called Voronoi generator . Remark : The zero element x i of the norm (cid:107) . (cid:107) i is deﬁned by the expression (cid:107) x i (cid:107) i = 0 . In practice , x i is supposed to coincide with the position of the cell center , for example as given by the center of cell body or nucleus . Example 4 . 1 . 2 : Consider the n - th power norm of the d - dimensional vec - tor x : = ( x 1 , . . . , x k , . . . , x d ) , (cid:107) x (cid:107) ( n ) : = (cid:16) d (cid:88) k = 1 x nk (cid:17) 1 / n . ( 4 . 1 ) The corresponding shifted expressions (cid:107) x (cid:107) i : = (cid:107) x − x i (cid:107) ( n ) ( 4 . 2 ) are also norms , whereby the normed spaces (cid:0) R d , (cid:107) . (cid:107) i (cid:1) have the zero - element x i . Example 4 . 1 . 3 : Let (cid:101) F ∈ R d × d be a d - dimensional , symmetric , positive deﬁnite matrix . With x as in the previous example , the expression (cid:107) x (cid:107) ( (cid:101) F ) = (cid:2) x T · (cid:101) F · x (cid:3) 1 / 2 ( 4 . 3 ) constitutes a norm . Allowing a separate (cid:101) F i for each i , and considering x relative to x i , we obtain the norms (cid:107) x (cid:107) i : = (cid:107) x − x i (cid:107) ( (cid:101) F i ) ≡ (cid:2) ( x − x i ) T · F i · ( x − x i ) (cid:3) 1 / 2 , ( 4 . 4 ) where the corresponding normed space (cid:0) R d , (cid:107) . (cid:107) i (cid:1) again has its zero ele - ment at x i . Deﬁnition 4 . 1 . 4 ( Voronoi cell ) : Let (cid:8) (cid:107) . (cid:107) i : i = 1 , . . . , N (cid:9) be a set of Voronoi generators and 0 < d max ∈ R a real number . Then V i : = (cid:110) x ∈ R d : (cid:107) x (cid:107) i < min (cid:2) (cid:107) x (cid:107) j , d max (cid:3) ∀ j (cid:54) = i (cid:111) ( 4 . 5 ) is the Voronoi cell corresponding to the generator (cid:107) . (cid:107) i . 92 Remark 4 . 1 . 5 : This marks the central property of Voronoi tessellations . The set V i consists of the “spatial” surrounding of x i . All points in V i are – in this general sense – closer to x i than to any other generator x j with i (cid:54) = j . Deﬁnition 4 . 1 . 6 ( Contact border , neighbor pair ) : Let V i be the closure of Voronoi cell i , and let i (cid:54) = j . If the intersection Γ ij : = V i ∩ V j (cid:54) = ∅ , ( 4 . 6 ) is non - empty , then i , j form a neighbor pair and Γ ij is called the contact border . This neighbor relation is denoted by i ∼ j . Remark ( Contact equation ) : From the deﬁnitions 4 . 1 . 4 and 4 . 1 . 6 , we ﬁnd that Γ ij is embedded in a certain point set , Γ ij ⊂ (cid:110) x ∈ R d : (cid:107) x (cid:107) i = (cid:107) x (cid:107) j (cid:111) . ( 4 . 7 ) This set is described by the so - called contact equation , (cid:107) x (cid:107) i = (cid:107) x (cid:107) j , and represents a hyper - surface , which separates the two corresponding Voronoi cells . Corollary 4 . 1 . 7 ( Generalized Voronoi cell ) : Let P : R (cid:51) y (cid:55)→ P ( y ) ∈ R be a scaling function of the form P (cid:0) y (cid:1) = qy ν + P 0 , ( 4 . 8 ) with the real constants q (cid:54) = 0 , ν (cid:54) = 0 , P 0 ∈ R . The following deﬁnitions of a Voronoi cell V i are equivalent : 1 . V i = (cid:26) x ∈ R d : (cid:107) x (cid:107) i < min (cid:104) (cid:107) x (cid:107) j , d max (cid:105) ∀ j (cid:54) = i (cid:27) , ( 4 . 9 ) 2 . sgn q = sgn ν : V i = (cid:26) x ∈ R d : P (cid:0) (cid:107) x (cid:107) i (cid:1) < min (cid:104) P (cid:0) (cid:107) x (cid:107) j (cid:1) , P (cid:0) d max (cid:1)(cid:105) ∀ j (cid:54) = i (cid:27) , ( 4 . 10 ) 3 . sgn q (cid:54) = sgn ν : V i = (cid:26) x ∈ R d : P (cid:0) (cid:107) x (cid:107) i (cid:1) > max (cid:104) P (cid:0) (cid:107) x (cid:107) j (cid:1) , P (cid:0) d max (cid:1)(cid:105) ∀ j (cid:54) = i (cid:27) . ( 4 . 11 ) 93 Proof : The result follows from equivalent reformulations of the inequal - ity in equation ( 4 . 5 ) . First we note that the shape of the contact border Γ ij does not change when transforming both sides of the contact equa - tion with the help of the scaling function P . For the Voronoi cells not to change , however , the inequality in ( 4 . 5 ) has to be transformed si - multaneously . The resulting expressions ( 4 . 9 , 4 . 10 , 4 . 11 ) depend on the monotonicity behavior of P , which is determined by the sign function sgn ( q · ν ) of the involved constants q , ν . Based on the corollary 4 . 1 . 7 , we may extend our notion of Voronoi gen - erators , so that the ﬂexibility of the scaling function P can be exploited in the intended biological application . Deﬁnition 4 . 1 . 8 ( Generalized Voronoi generator ) : Let P ( y ) = qy ν + P 0 be a scaling function with real constants q (cid:54) = 0 , ν (cid:54) = 0 , P 0 ∈ R . Deﬁne the abbreviations P i ( . ) ≡ P (cid:0) (cid:107) . (cid:107) i (cid:1) P ex ≡ P (cid:0) d max (cid:1) . ( 4 . 12 ) Then we call the scaled norm P i ( . ) a generalized Voronoi generator , and P ex the extremal scaled norm . Remark ( Generalized contact equation , point power ) : With the pre - ceding notion of generalized Voronoi generator , the embedding set of a contact border ( 4 . 7 ) is modiﬁed to Γ ij ⊂ (cid:110) x ∈ R d : P i ( x ) = P j ( x ) (cid:111) , ( 4 . 13 ) which now involves the generalized contact equation P i ( x ) = P j ( x ) . In this sense , each generalized Voronoi generator P i assigns to the point x a certain power P i ( x ) . Voronoi cells and contact equation therefore arise from the comparison of the point powers P i ( x ) , P j ( x ) , which also may be interpreted as distance notions , cf . also remark 4 . 1 . 5 . Deﬁnition 4 . 1 . 9 ( Free margin ) : The free margin Γ i 0 of a Voronoi cell V i is the boundary set Γ i 0 : = ∂ V i \ (cid:91) j (cid:54) = i Γ ij . ( 4 . 14 ) Remark : From deﬁnition 4 . 1 . 4 , d max determines the maximal extension of a Voronoi cell in directions where there is no other cell . Correspondingly , 94 the set Γ i 0 is contained in (cid:8) x ∈ R d : (cid:107) x (cid:107) i = d max (cid:9) . By corollary 4 . 1 . 7 , this is equivalent to Γ i 0 ⊂ (cid:8) x ∈ R d : P i ( x ) = P ex (cid:9) , ( 4 . 15 ) meaning that the point power P i ( x ) is constant on the free margin Γ i 0 . In the remaining part of this section , let N ∈ N indicate the number of present Voronoi generators . Deﬁnition 4 . 1 . 10 ( Voronoi tessellation ) : Let (cid:8) P i ( . ) : i = 1 , . . . , N (cid:9) be a speciﬁc set of generalized Voronoi generators . The collection of all Voronoi cells (cid:91) i V i ( 4 . 16 ) is called Voronoi tessellation . Deﬁnition 4 . 1 . 11 ( Voronoi diagram ) : Let (cid:8) P i ( . ) : i = 1 , . . . , N (cid:9) be a speciﬁc set of generalized Voronoi generators . Then the graph of (cid:91) i ∼ j Γ ij ∪ (cid:91) i Γ i 0 ( 4 . 17 ) is called Voronoi diagram . Remark : In two spatial dimensions , the Voronoi tessellation covers space with its plastering mosaic tiles or cells , while the corresponding diagram refers to the emerging edges in between . However , in the rest of this thesis we do not insist on this peculiar distinction and consider Voronoi tessel - lation and Voronoi diagram as synonyms , regardless of the dimension of the underlying space . Deﬁnition 4 . 1 . 12 ( Delaunay triangulation ) : Let (cid:8) P i ( . ) : i = 1 , . . . , N (cid:9) be a speciﬁc set of generators , and let (cid:8) ( i , j ) : i ∼ j (cid:9) be the set of neighbor pairs of the Voronoi tessellation . The graph of straight lines connecting the cell centers of all neighbor pairs ( i , j ) is called Delaunay triangulation . Remark : As a historic note , Voronoi tessellations constructed from the Euclidean norm were described by Voronoi 2 in 1908 [ 223 ] . Delaunay triangulations were proposed by Delaunay 3 in 1934 [ 56 ] . 2 Russian name [ 228 ] : ˆ(cid:229)(cid:238)(cid:240)ªŁØ (cid:212)(cid:229)(cid:238)(cid:228)(cid:238)æ(cid:252)(cid:229)(cid:226)Ł(cid:247) ´(cid:238)(cid:240)(cid:238)(cid:237)(cid:238)Ø 3 Russian name [ 228 ] : ` (cid:238)(cid:240)Łæ ˝ŁŒ(cid:238)º(cid:224)(cid:229)(cid:226)Ł(cid:247) ˜(cid:229)º(cid:238)(cid:237)(cid:229) 95 Example 4 . 1 . 13 : Let the centers x i ∈ R 2 for all i = 1 , . . . , N and the generalized Voronoi generators P i (cid:0) x (cid:1) = (cid:0) x − x i (cid:1) 2 . With q = 1 , ν = 2 , P 0 = 0 in equation ( 4 . 8 ) , we see that the underlying norm (cid:107) . (cid:107) i is the Euclidean one , whereby the zero element is situated at x i , as usual . The generalized contact equation ( 4 . 13 ) reads P i ( x ) = P j ( x ) ⇔ (cid:107) x (cid:107) i = (cid:107) x (cid:107) j ⇔ (cid:107) x − x i (cid:107) = (cid:107) x − x j (cid:107) , ( 4 . 18 ) where the equivalence to the ordinary contact equation 4 . 7 follows from corollary 4 . 1 . 7 . In this two - dimensional setting , the set of all contact borders (cid:8) Γ ij : i ∼ j (cid:9) ( straight lines ) and free margins (cid:8) Γ i 0 : Γ i 0 (cid:54) = ∅ (cid:9) ( circular arcs ) comprises the Voronoi diagram as sketched in ﬁgure 4 . 1 ( left ) . The generator centers x i are indicated by blue stars , which are situated within their surrounding Voronoi cell as delimited by the afore - mentioned Γ ij and Γ i 0 . The resulting Delaunay triangulation connects the centers x i of neighboring cells by cyan lines . As a ﬁrst generalization to these simple Euclidean generators , we have proposed a method to con - struct two - dimensional Voronoi tessellations from P i ( x ) = ( x − x i ) 2 / r 2 i , with r i > 0 a scalar weight representing the size of the cell [ 31 ] . It turned out , that the cell - cell contacts Γ ij in general also comprise circular arcs , in addition to the free margins Γ i 0 , see ﬁgure 4 . 1 ( right ) . In the following section we construct an anisotropic norm allowing for curved cell - cell contacts with varying curvature . 4 . 2 . Homogeneous coordinates facilitate transformation operations on vectors In the preceding section we have set up the formal deﬁnition of Voronoi tessellation in the vector space R d . However , in this section we employ the notion of homogeneous coordinates instead of considering the usual Cartesian vectors with d components . 4 Dating back to M¨obius [ 149 ] , homogeneous coordinates are heavily used in computer graphics , because they simplify and unify many operations on sets of points or vectors , see e . g . [ 102 ] 5 . Most notably , translation and subsequent rotation can be 4 Initially , I encountered the idea of homogeneous coordinates on wikipedia . org [ 228 , fall 2010 ] . Subsequently , I have set up my own notions , which are presented in the rest of this section . 5 Pierluigi Taddei , the author of [ 208 ] , pointed me to the highly relevant article [ 102 ] by Kenneth J . Hill in August 2012 , when the presented theory on elliptic Voronoi diagrams had already been completed . 96 Figure 4 . 1 . : Planar ( left ) and circular ( right ) Voronoi diagram diﬀer in the shapes of their contact borders Γ ij ( red ) . The underlying centers x i ( blue stars ) are the same in both diagrams . The generators in the planar Voronoi diagram consist of the Eu - clidean norm , centered at the center points x i . Weighting the Euclidean norm with diﬀerent weights r i > 0 for each center causes the Voronoi cells to exhibit varying sizes and shapes . In particular , the contacts are straight lines in the planar Voronoi diagram ( left ) , whereas in the circular Voronoi di - agram ( right ) they are spherical arcs . The free margins Γ i 0 ( black ) close the cells towards the surrounding . The light cyan lines connect cell centers obeying the neighbor relation i ∼ j , i . e . when the cells are adjacent to each other and thereby share a common cell boundary Γ ij . In this way , the so - called Delaunay triangulation ( cyan ) is the geometric dual of the Voronoi tessellation ( red ) . 97 represented by a product of two corresponding square matrices . This is also the main advantage of homogeneous coordinates to the modelling of cells in this thesis . For readers interested in a more formal development of homogeneous coordinates , we refer to mathematical texts on projective geometry , for example [ 51 ] . Deﬁnition 4 . 2 . 1 ( Homogeneous coordinates ) : Let x = (cid:0) x 1 , . . . , x d (cid:1) ∈ R d , and let Λ (cid:54) = 0 be a length unit . The vector x hom : = (cid:0) x 1 / Λ , . . . , x d / Λ , 1 (cid:1) ∈ R d + 1 ( 4 . 19 ) is called homogeneous transform of x . Its components x 1 , . . . , x d , 1 are the homogeneous coordinates of x . Remark : In homogeneous coordinates , the position of a point is encoded in the ratios – and not the absolute values – of the vector components . Since we are dealing with cells and cell aggregates of ﬁnite extension , we do not need to take into account points at inﬁnity , where Λ would be zero . Therefore , the transformation x ↔ x hom is bijective , i . e . an isomorphism . For convenience , we set Λ : = 1 . Deﬁnition 4 . 2 . 2 ( Translation matrix ) : Let y = (cid:0) y 1 , . . . , y d (cid:1) ∈ R d . Then T = T (cid:0) y (cid:1) : =   1 0 . . . 0 y 1 0 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 0 . . . . . . . . . 1 y d 0 . . . . . . 0 1   ∈ R ( d + 1 ) × ( d + 1 ) ( 4 . 20 ) is called d - dimensional homogeneous translation matrix . Remark : The d - dimensional homogeneous translation matrix acts on the homogeneous transform x hom of any d - dimensional vectors x . Suppose x = (cid:0) x 1 , . . . , x d (cid:1) , y = (cid:0) y 1 , . . . , y d (cid:1) ∈ R d . The operation (cid:101) x hom : = T (cid:0) y (cid:1) x hom ( 4 . 21 ) displaces x by y . This can be seen by assuming Λ = 1 , inserting x hom and computing the matrix product (cid:101) x h = (cid:0) x 1 + y 1 , . . . , x d + y d , 1 (cid:1) . ( 4 . 22 ) 98 Deﬁnition 4 . 2 . 3 ( Homogeneous rotation matrix ) : Let (cid:101) D = (cid:101) D (cid:0) { ϕ k } (cid:1) be the rotation matrix in d dimensions , with its angle parameters ϕ k ∈ R ∀ k = 1 , . . . , d ( d − 1 ) / 2 . Then D = D (cid:0) { ϕ } (cid:1) : =   . . . . . . 0 (cid:101) D (cid:0) { ϕ k } (cid:1) . . . . . . . . . 0 0 . . . 0 1   ∈ R ( d + 1 ) × ( d + 1 ) ( 4 . 23 ) is called d - dimensional homogeneous rotation matrix . With these notations at hand , we can conveniently deﬁne certain func - tions P i as anisotropic generators of generalized Voronoi diagrams . As indicated before , each of these functions then encodes the approximate shape of a tissue cell in a sense that will become apparent in the following sections . 4 . 3 . Matrices in homogeneous coordinates provide for anisotropic Voronoi generators Deﬁnition 4 . 3 . 1 ( Anisotropic generator matrix ) : Let T i : = T (cid:0) − x i (cid:1) and D i = D (cid:0) { − ϕ ik } (cid:1) be d - dimensional homogeneous translation and ro - tation matrices , respectively . Furthermore , let the homogeneous axis ma - trix F i : = diag (cid:0) w i 1 , . . . , w id , − 1 (cid:1) , be diagonal with w ij > 0 for j = 1 , . . . , d . The anisotropic generator matrix E i is then deﬁned as E i : = T Ti D Ti F i D i T i ∈ R ( d + 1 ) × ( d + 1 ) , ( 4 . 24 ) whereby superscript capital T indicates matrix transposition . The parameters x i describe center position , and (cid:8) w ij (cid:9) the anisotropic axis weights of a speciﬁc Voronoi generator i . Its orientation is determined by the d ( d − 1 ) / 2 angles { ϕ ik } in the homogeneous rotation matrix D i . Again , the center position of a generator is supposed to coincide with the center of a model cell body or nucleus . Deﬁnition 4 . 3 . 2 ( Anisotropic Voronoi generator ) : The quadratic func - tion P i (cid:0) x (cid:1) : = x T hom · E i · x hom . ( 4 . 25 ) is called anisotropic Voronoi generator . 99 Before exploring the formal properties of P i , and , in particular , whether it is of the form as required by deﬁnition 4 . 1 . 1 , we consider a basic ex - ample , which provides also a kind of formal motivation for our approach . Example : In d = 2 there is only the single angle parameter ϕ i 1 ≡ ϕ i in the homogeneous rotation matrix D i . Furthermore we identify w i 1 ≡ 1 / a 2 i , w i 2 ≡ 1 / b 2 i in the homogeneous axis matrix F i , where a i and b i are positive real constants . Expansion of equation ( 4 . 25 ) leads to point powers being a quadratic form in the components x , y of x , P i (cid:0) x (cid:1) = (cid:0) ∆ x cos ϕ i + ∆ y sin ϕ i (cid:1) 2 a 2 i + (cid:0) − ∆ x sin ϕ i + ∆ y cos ϕ i (cid:1) 2 b 2 i − 1 , ( 4 . 26 ) with the abbreviations ∆ x : = x − x i , ∆ y : = y − y i , x i = ( x i , y i ) . Equating the right - hand side with a constant C > − 1 , one obtains the implicit deﬁnition of the graph of an ellipse . In the speciﬁc case of x i = y i = ϕ i = 0 , the point power P i ( x ) simpliﬁes to P i ( x ) = x 2 a 2 i + y 2 b 2 i − 1 . ( 4 . 27 ) If we furthermore set P i ( x ) equal to zero , we obtain an ellipse equation in its fundamental form , whereby the semi - axes a i , b i are aligned with the coordinate axes x , y , P i (cid:0) x (cid:1) = 0 ⇔ x 2 a 2 i + y 2 b 2 i = 1 . ( 4 . 28 ) We interpret the emerging graph as the outline of the cell body , which surrounds the center of each cell , and encloses its nucleus . Proposition 4 . 3 . 3 : The expression x T hom · E i · x hom is a Voronoi generator , i . e . of the form q (cid:107) x (cid:107) ν + P 0 . Proof : Without loss of generality assume E i = F i ( otherwise use T i , D i to transform both E i and x ) . Then we have P i (cid:0) x (cid:1) = x · (cid:101) F i · x − 1 , with (cid:101) F i = diag (cid:0) w ( i ) 1 , . . . , w ( i ) d (cid:1) , ( 4 . 29 ) where x = (cid:0) x 1 , . . . , x d (cid:1) . Note that (cid:101) F i ∈ R d × d is the non - homogeneous axis matrix , without the additional “homogeneous” dimension . For con - venience , we drop the generator index i for the rest of this proof . The 100 ﬁrst summand in the preceding equation can be understood as a scalar product , x · (cid:101) F · y = d (cid:88) k = 1 w k x k y k = : p (cid:0) x , y (cid:1) , ( 4 . 30 ) because it is bilinear , symmetric and positive deﬁnite , since for all k : w k > 0 . Therefore , (cid:112) p ( x , x ) is a norm , and we can identify q = 1 , ν = 2 , P 0 = − 1 . Remark : When employing Voronoi generators of the form ( 4 . 25 ) , one can no longer express all norms that would have been possible according to deﬁnition 4 . 1 . 8 . Instead , the attainable norms inherit the axis matrix (cid:101) F i , which has to be positive deﬁnite for the norm property to hold . The re - sulting norms comprise quadratic forms in the components of the vector x . In that sense , the previously given deﬁnition 4 . 1 . 8 of Voronoi genera - tors is therefore more ﬂexible . However , for the intended modeling aim of expressing the preferred shape function of biological cells as ellipses , the expression from equation ( 4 . 25 ) is suﬃcient . In the following sections , we restrict our analysis to systems of two spatial dimensions . This approach does not only simplify the underly - ing equations , but it is also justiﬁable on biological grounds : all tissues ultimately arise from quasi two - dimensional epithelial structures during embryogenesis [ 77 , 160 ] , which partially carry over to the adult , e . g . in intestine and skin . 4 . 4 . Circular Voronoi diagrams emerge from isotropic axis matrices 1 . Isotropic axis weights : Let (cid:8) P i : i = 1 , . . . , N (cid:9) be a set of N Voronoi generators , so that the resulting point powers (cid:8) P i ( x ) (cid:9) are of the form ( 4 . 25 ) . Furthermore , assume that the underlying axis weights w i 1 , . . . w id in the axis matrices F i from equation ( 4 . 24 ) coincide , w i 1 = . . . = w id ≡ 1 / r 2 i ∀ i = 1 , . . . , N , ( 4 . 31 ) where the r i are positive real numbers . With the help of the additional assumption ( x i + x j ) / 2 = 0 we have previously shown [ 31 ] , that the 101 R ij x j r j x i M ij r i d ij δ j δ i δ ij ˆ d ij S ij Γ ij Figure 4 . 2 . : Circular contact surface Γ ij ( red ) with radius R ij and cen - tered at M ij according to equation ( 4 . 33 ) . Positions x i , x j and weights r i , r j are indicated in green . The rest of the geometric items presented here will be explained in section 5 . 3 . generalized contact equation ( 4 . 13 ) can be rewritten to (cid:0) x − M ij (cid:1) 2 = R 2 ij , with ( 4 . 32 ) M ij = − r 2 i + r 2 j r 2 i − r 2 j · x i − x j 2 , R ij = r i r j | r 2 i − r 2 j | (cid:12)(cid:12) x i − x j (cid:12)(cid:12) . ( 4 . 33 ) for r i (cid:54) = r j . Clearly , the preceding contact equation represents a sphere of radius R ij centered at M ij , see ﬁgure 4 . 2 . Deﬁnition 4 . 4 . 1 ( Circular Voronoi tessellation / diagram ) : A Voronoi tessellation constructed from the scaled norms ( 4 . 25 ) with isotropic weights such that w ik ≡ 1 / r 2 i holds ∀ k = 1 , . . . , d is called circular . Remark : This method of constructing circular Voronoi tessellations in two dimensions is discussed as “quotient method” in [ 31 , section 2 . 2 ] . Figure 4 . 1 displays an example of such a circular Voronoi diagram with 23 cells in the right panel . Under the assumption of isotropic axis weights from equation ( 4 . 31 ) , we can conveniently represent the information contained in a generator P i by the mathematical ball B r i ( x i ) , see the green circles in 4 . 2 . In practice , this ball centered at x i and with radius r i could be ﬁtted to the cell body 102 or nucleus . In terms of the point power P i ( x ) , we thus can express the cell body or nucleus by the set identity , B r i ( x i ) = (cid:8) x ∈ R 2 : P i ( x ) ≤ 0 (cid:9) , ( 4 . 34 ) which provides for a clear - cut relation between formal description and the actual biological system . Importantly , the Voronoi generator balls B r i ( x i ) are readily accessible to experimental determination via image processing , see also section 5 . 2 . 2 . Planar cell - cell contacts : A notable special case in circular Voronoi diagrams is the occurrence of a planar contact boundary . This happens when the isotropic axis weights of two adjacent generators are equal , r i = r j . In this case , the two equations in ( 4 . 33 ) clearly degenerate and become undeﬁned . However , under these circumstances , the contact equation P i ( x ) = P j ( x ) is still deﬁned and yields (cid:16) x − x i + x j 2 (cid:17) · (cid:0) x i − x j (cid:1) = 0 . ( 4 . 35 ) This represents a ( d − 1 ) - dimensional hyper - plane embedded in the d - dimensional space , which forms the perpendicular bisector of the straight line connecting the two centers x i and x j . In this way , conventional Voronoi diagrams [ 105 , 223 ] are contained in the generalized framework presented here . In chapter 5 , we show how to make use of spherical Voronoi tessellations in order to simulate the spatio - temporal dynamics of two - dimensional cell aggregates or proto - tissues . Before coming to numerics , however , we ﬁrst explore how to construct Voronoi diagrams from general anisotropic generators of the form ( 4 . 25 ) . Such diagrams are of novel type and have – to my knowledge – so far not been described elsewhere . There seems to be only one comparable approach [ 72 – 74 ] , which employs another notion of point power , see also paragraph 4 . 9 . 4 for details . 4 . 5 . The contact matrix can be diagonalized Deﬁnition 4 . 5 . 1 ( Contact matrix ) : Let P i ( x ) = x T hom · E i · x hom and P j ( x ) = x T hom · E j · x hom be two anisotropic Voronoi generators according to deﬁnitions 4 . 3 . 1 and 4 . 3 . 2 . The matrix E : = E i − E j ( 4 . 36 ) is called contact matrix of the two generators P i , P j . 103 Proposition 4 . 5 . 2 ( Matrix contact equation ) : The contact equation ( 4 . 7 ) can be represented in matrix form x T hom · E · x hom = 0 , ( 4 . 37 ) with the contact matrix E ≡ E i − E j . Proof : The anisotropic generators P i and P j have the matrix represen - tation ( 4 . 25 ) , which we insert into the contact equation ( 4 . 7 ) , namely P i (cid:0) x (cid:1) = P j (cid:0) x (cid:1) . We obtain the result by subtracting the right - hand side and factoring out x T hom and x hom . Since the shape of the contact between two cells is determined by equa - tion ( 4 . 37 ) , it is worthwhile to study its properties in detail . Corollary 4 . 5 . 3 : The contact matrix E is symmetric . Proof : By deﬁnition 4 . 3 . 1 , E i = T T ( − x i ) D T ( − ϕ i ) F i D ( − ϕ i ) T ( − x i ) . In two dimensions , the translation matrix T ( − x i ) as deﬁned in equation ( 4 . 20 ) contains the explicit vector components ( x i , y i ) = x i of the cell center x i . Moreover , the homogeneous axis and rotation matrices are F i : =   a − 2 i 0 0 0 b − 2 i 0 0 0 − 1   , D (cid:0) ϕ i (cid:1) : =   c i − s i 0 s i c i 0 0 0 1   , ( 4 . 38 ) respectively , with c i : = cos ϕ i and s i : = sin ϕ i . Computing the product of the ﬁve matrices we obtain E i =   α i γ i κ i γ i β i λ i κ i λ i ω i   , with α i : = c 2 i a − 2 i + s 2 i b − 2 i , β i : = s 2 i a − 2 i + c 2 i b − 2 i , γ i : = c i s i (cid:0) a − 2 i − b − 2 i (cid:1) , κ i : = − α i x i − γ i y i , λ i : = − γ i x i − β i y i , ω i : = α i x 2 i + 2 γ i x i y i + β i y 2 i − 1 , ( 4 . 39 ) Since the anisotropic generator matrix E i is symmetric , also the contact matrix E = E i − E j is symmetric . Similar as for E i , we introduce the following short - hand notations for 104 the contact matrix , E = E i − E j : =   α γ κ γ β λ κ λ ω   , with α : = α i − α j , β : = β i − β j , γ : = γ i − γ j , κ : = κ i − κ j , λ : = λ i − λ j , ω : = ω i − ω j . ( 4 . 40 ) Clearly , the expression x hom · E · x hom from the contact equation is a quadratic form in the components x , y of x . In general , such quadratic forms describe a conic section ( or brieﬂy , conic ) . In order to assess whether its graph is an ellipse , hyperbola , or other curve , one needs to ﬁnd the eigenvalues of E . One possibility to ﬁnd them is diagonalizing the contact matrix E . As an additional beneﬁt , we may get some idea as to where the conic is located and how it is oriented in the two - dimensional plane . Here we make an ansatz much alike the construction principle for E i from deﬁnition 4 . 3 . 1 . Consider the transformed contact matrix E (cid:48) = D T (cid:0) φ (cid:1) T T (cid:0) x 0 (cid:1) E T (cid:0) x 0 (cid:1) D (cid:0) φ (cid:1) = :   α (cid:48) γ (cid:48) κ (cid:48) (cid:101) γ (cid:48) β (cid:48) λ (cid:48) (cid:101) κ (cid:48) (cid:101) λ (cid:48) ω (cid:48)   . ( 4 . 41 ) The speciﬁc coordinate system in which E (cid:48) becomes diagonal has the origin at x 0 : = (cid:0) x 0 , y 0 (cid:1) . With the abbreviations c ≡ cos φ , s ≡ sin φ we obtain α (cid:48) = αc 2 + 2 γcs + βs 2 , β (cid:48) = αs 2 − 2 γcs + βc 2 , (cid:101) γ (cid:48) = γ (cid:48) = − (cid:0) α − β (cid:1) cs + γ (cid:0) c 2 − s 2 (cid:1) , (cid:101) κ (cid:48) = κ (cid:48) = c (cid:0) αx 0 + γy 0 + κ (cid:1) + s (cid:0) γx 0 + βy 0 + λ (cid:1) , ( 4 . 42 ) (cid:101) λ (cid:48) = λ (cid:48) = − s (cid:0) αx 0 + γy 0 + κ (cid:1) + c (cid:0) γx 0 + βy 0 + λ (cid:1) , ω (cid:48) = x 0 (cid:0) αx 0 + γy 0 + κ (cid:1) + y 0 (cid:0) γx 0 + βy 0 + λ (cid:1) + κx 0 + λy 0 + ω . This shows that E (cid:48) is indeed symmetric . In order to diagonalize E (cid:48) , we have to ﬁnd φ , x 0 , y 0 such that γ (cid:48) = κ (cid:48) = λ (cid:48) = 0 . Once we know such φ , x 0 , y 0 , we have also found the actual center x 0 and orientation φ of the contact border . 105 For the translation parts of E (cid:48) to vanish , we set κ (cid:48) = 0 λ (cid:48) = 0 (cid:41) ⇔ (cid:40) αx 0 + γy 0 = − κ γx 0 + βy 0 = − λ ( 4 . 43 ) Solvability of this linear system depends on the determinant of the two - dimensional part of the contact matrix , δ : = (cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12) α γ γ β (cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12)(cid:12) = αβ − γ 2 . ( 4 . 44 ) With this short - hand notation , we solve the system ( 4 . 43 ) and thus we have proven the following Proposition 4 . 5 . 4 : The translation parts κ (cid:48) , λ (cid:48) of the transformed con - tact matrix ( 4 . 42 ) vanish , iﬀ 6 δ (cid:54) = 0 ∧ x 0 = 1 δ (cid:18) γλ − βκ γκ − αλ (cid:19) . ( 4 . 45 ) Remark : Using of ( 4 . 43 ) and ( 4 . 45 ) , the last equation in ( 4 . 42 ) can be simpliﬁed to ω (cid:48) = ω + κx 0 + λy 0 = ω − 1 δ (cid:0) αλ 2 − 2 γλκ + βκ 2 (cid:1) iﬀ δ (cid:54) = 0 . ( 4 . 46 ) In order to complete the diagonalization of E (cid:48) , we investigate the im - plications of setting γ (cid:48) = 0 , however this requires several auxiliary con - structs and additional notions . From the trigonometric relations c = (cid:0) e iφ + e − iφ (cid:1) / 2 and s = − i (cid:0) e iφ − e − iφ (cid:1) / 2 follows cs = − i 4 (cid:0) e 2 iφ − e − 2 iφ (cid:1) , c 2 − s 2 = 1 2 (cid:0) e 2 iφ + e − 2 iφ (cid:1) . ( 4 . 47 ) With these two identities we cast the γ (cid:48) - equation from ( 4 . 42 ) into the form 4 γ (cid:48) = e 2 iφ (cid:2) 2 γ + i ( α − β ) (cid:3) + e − 2 iφ (cid:2) 2 γ − i ( α − β ) (cid:3) . ( 4 . 48 ) We observe that in the square brackets there appears the complex number z : = 2 γ + i ( α − β ) and its conjugate z ∗ = 2 γ − i ( α − β ) . Equivalently , one may use the polar representation of z , z = re iψ , z ∗ = re − iψ , with r 2 : = 4 γ 2 + ( α − β ) 2 , sin ψ : = α − β r , cos ψ : = 2 γ r , ( 4 . 49 ) 6 if and only if 106 where we employ the usual convention r ≥ 0 . Thus , for r (cid:54) = 0 the expression 4 γ (cid:48) = 0 reads e 4 iφ + e 2 iψ = 0 . In this way , we ﬁnd with the help of − 1 = e i ( 2 n + 1 ) π , n ∈ Z the orientation φ = ( 2 n + 1 ) π 4 − ψ 2 , ( for r (cid:54) = 0 ) ( 4 . 50 ) of the contact border in the plane . Without loss of generality it is suﬃ - cient to consider n = − 2 , − 1 , 0 , 1 . Moreover , in the equations ( 4 . 42 ) for α (cid:48) , β (cid:48) , γ (cid:48) , there appear only two - factor products of trigonometric functions c = cos φ , s = sin φ , namely c 2 , s 2 , cs . In order to express these products in terms of ( α − β ) , γ , r , we compute c and s from equation ( 4 . 50 ) . They are both of the form c , s = ± √ 2 2 (cid:16) cos ψ 2 ± sin ψ 2 (cid:17) , ( 4 . 51 ) where the actual signs depend on n . In this way , the products c 2 , s 2 , cs do only depend on sin ψ and cos ψ . With the relations ( 4 . 49 ) , we obtain c 2 = 1 2 (cid:16) 1 + [ − 1 ] n α − β r (cid:17) , s 2 = 1 2 (cid:16) 1 − [ − 1 ] n α − β r (cid:17) , cs = 1 2 [ − 1 ] n 2 γ r , ( 4 . 52 ) Inserting these expressions into the ﬁrst three equations of ( 4 . 42 ) yields α (cid:48) = 1 2 (cid:0) α + β + [ − 1 ] n r (cid:1) , β (cid:48) = 1 2 (cid:0) α + β − [ − 1 ] n r (cid:1) , with n = − 2 , − 1 , 0 , 1 , and r (cid:54) = 0 , ( 4 . 53 ) whereby γ (cid:48) vanishes as expected . This completes the proof of : Proposition 4 . 5 . 5 : The two - dimensional rotation part γ (cid:48) of the trans - formed contact matrix ( 4 . 42 ) vanishes , iﬀ r (cid:54) = 0 ∧ φ = ( 2 n + 1 ) π / 4 − ψ / 2 . Altogether , the transformed contact matrix is diagonal , namely E (cid:48) = diag (cid:0) α (cid:48) , β (cid:48) , ω (cid:48) (cid:1) , and all the other entries vanish . Based on this simple representation , we may explore special cases such as δ = 0 or r = 0 . Before that , however , we investigate under which conditions generator and contact matrices can be determined uniquely . 107 4 . 6 . Generator and diagonalized contact matrices are unique In the preceding sections we constructed Voronoi generators P i ( x ) = x T hom · E i · x hom representing scaled norms . The identity P i ( x ) = 0 de - scribes the graph of an ellipse situated in the two - dimensional plane . Our initial premise was to construct Voronoi diagrams from certain properties of biological tissue cells . As a ﬁrst approximation beyond the isotropic sphere , the shape of cell bodies ( containing nucleus , organelles , etc . ) can be represented by ellipses [ 231 ] . Now we ask for the corresponding gen - erator matrix E i , given a cell body of idealized ellipsoid shape . Clearly , the center position of the cell body uniquely determines the position pa - rameter x i of E i . In contrast , there is some redundancy in the choice of the corresponding (cid:8) a i , b i , ϕ i (cid:9) : First , a i could be either major or minor half - axis of the ellipse . Next , for a ﬁxed ratio of major and minor half - axes , four distinct angles ϕ i = ˜ ϕ i + nπ / 2 , n ∈ Z align with the symmetry axes of the ellipse . Speciﬁcally , there are four parameter constellations of winding number zero 7 which all describe the same graph : a i > b i ∧ ϕ i = ± (cid:101) ϕ i and a i < b i ∧ ϕ i = ± (cid:101) ϕ ⊥ i . ( 4 . 54 ) Here , ± (cid:101) ϕ ⊥ i indicate those two directions perpendicular to ± (cid:101) ϕ i ∈ [ − π , π ) , which are also situated in the interval [ − π , π ) . In order to make the choice of (cid:8) a i , b i , ϕ i (cid:9) unique , we align ϕ i with the major axis of the ellipse and impose the following two conditions : a i ≥ b i ∧ ϕ i ∈ (cid:104) − π 2 , π 2 (cid:17) . ( 4 . 55 ) In a similar manner , we can make the parameters (cid:8) α (cid:48) , β (cid:48) , φ (cid:9) of the contact matrix E i unique , if we require α (cid:48) ≤ β (cid:48) ∧ φ ∈ (cid:104) − π 2 , π 2 (cid:17) , ( 4 . 56 ) cf . F i in equation ( 4 . 38 ) and E (cid:48) in equation ( 4 . 59 ) . Speciﬁcally , if r = 0 then we have α (cid:48) = β (cid:48) from equation ( 4 . 49 ) and the graph of x h · E · x h = 0 is circular . In this way , φ does not aﬀect the shape of the contact graph . With the help of the uniqueness criterion ( 4 . 56 ) , we can slightly simplify the expressions ( 4 . 53 ) . Enforcing α (cid:48) ≤ β (cid:48) leads us to n being odd , so that 7 Being of winding number zero means that the angle ϕ i is situated within the interval [ − π , π ) . 108 way we obtain α (cid:48) = 1 2 (cid:16) α + β − r (cid:17) , β (cid:48) = 1 2 (cid:16) α + β + r (cid:17) . ( 4 . 57 ) Requiring the angle φ ∈ (cid:2) − π / 2 , π / 2 (cid:1) and considering only odd n leaves only one consistent choice for the signs of c , s from the identities in ( 4 . 52 ) , c = √ 2 2 (cid:114) 1 − α − β r ,   s = √ 2 2 (cid:114) 1 + α − β r , for γ ≤ 0 , s = − √ 2 2 (cid:114) 1 + α − β r , for γ > 0 , ( 4 . 58 ) where r > 0 has again been employed . We have thus proven the main result : Theorem 4 . 6 . 1 : Let E be a contact matrix of the form ( 4 . 40 ) , with δ = αβ − γ 2 (cid:54) = 0 and r 2 = 4 γ 2 + ( α − β ) 2 > 0 . Then the transformed contact matrix E (cid:48) in equation ( 4 . 41 ) is unique and diagonal , E (cid:48) =   α (cid:48) 0 0 0 β (cid:48) 0 0 0 ω (cid:48)   , with α (cid:48) = 1 2 (cid:0) α + β − r (cid:1) , β (cid:48) = 1 2 (cid:0) α + β + r (cid:1) , ω (cid:48) = ω − αλ 2 − 2 γλκ + βκ 2 δ . ( 4 . 59 ) Now we are in the position to study the properties of contact borders and the precise conditions under which a speciﬁc shape occurs . In the non - degenerate cases we have δ (cid:54) = 0 ∧ r > 0 , so that with sgn α (cid:48) = sgn β (cid:48) = − sgn ω (cid:48) , the contact border is an ellipse 8 , whereas with sgn α (cid:48) (cid:54) = sgn β (cid:48) a hyperbola . Apart from these two simple cases , there are several degenerate contact surfaces which we treat in the following section . 4 . 7 . There are several types of degenerate contact border surfaces In the preceding sections we have found elliptic and hyperbolic contact borders by diagonalizing the contact matrix . There are several cases in which a complete diagonalization of the contact matrix is not possible : 8 It remains elusive whether sgn α (cid:48) = sgn β (cid:48) = sgn ω (cid:48) is actually possible . 109 1 . r 2 = 0 ⇔ α = β ∧ γ = 0 , i . e . ψ and φ undeﬁned , cf . ( 4 . 50 ) 2 . δ = αβ − γ 2 = 0 , i . e . x 0 = (cid:0) x 0 , y 0 (cid:1) undeﬁned , cf . ( 4 . 45 ) a ) α = β = γ = 0 ( implies also case 1 ) , b ) α (cid:54) = 0 ∧ β = γ = 0 , c ) β (cid:54) = 0 ∧ α = γ = 0 , d ) γ (cid:54) = 0 ∧ αβ = γ 2 . Let us investigate what kind of contact border arises in these special cases . 1 . Undeﬁned contact orientation φ , circular contact : We have r = 0 , i . e . α = β ∧ γ = 0 . First , assume α (cid:54) = 0 , so that also β (cid:54) = 0 , otherwise refer to case 2a . Under these assumptions , δ = αβ − γ 2 = α 2 > 0 . Next , we partially transform the contact matrix E according to equation ( 4 . 41 ) , however without including the rotation D . This is equivalent to formally setting φ = 0 , which yields the degenerate transformed contact matrix E (cid:48) = T T (cid:0) x 0 (cid:1) E T (cid:0) x 0 (cid:1) =   α 0 0 0 α 0 0 0 ω (cid:48)   . ( 4 . 60 ) Thereby , E (cid:48) is written in coordinates centered at x 0 . Equations ( 4 . 45 ) and ( 4 . 46 ) remain valid , so that inserting δ = α 2 gives us the identities x 0 = − 1 α (cid:18) κ λ (cid:19) , ω (cid:48) = ω − κ 2 + λ 2 α . ( 4 . 61 ) Then , the quadratic form of the contact border reads (cid:0) x − x 0 (cid:1) 2 = κ 2 + λ 2 α 2 − ω α . ( 4 . 62 ) The preceding equation represents – up to matters of sign on the right hand side – a sphere . Therefore , it remains to be shown that the right - hand side is ≥ 0 . To this end , we investigate the premises α = β ∧ γ = 0 , together with the generator uniqueness criteria a i ≥ b i ≥ 0 and ϕ i / j ∈ (cid:2) − π / 2 ; π / 2 (cid:1) ( cf . section 4 . 6 ) . We observe that there are two sub - cases , 1 . ϕ i = ϕ j (cid:32) a − 2 i − b − 2 i = a − 2 j − b − 2 j , 2 . ϕ i (cid:54) = ϕ j (cid:32) a − 2 i = b − 2 i ∧ a − 2 j = b − 2 j , 110 which also cover the situation with ‘special’ angles ϕ i / j = nπ / 4 , n ∈ Z , whence c 2 i / j = s 2 i / j . In the ﬁrst sub - case ϕ i = ϕ j , a longer but straight - forward calculation yields κ 2 + λ 2 − αω = 1 a 2 i a 2 j (cid:16) c i (cid:0) x i − x j (cid:1) + s i (cid:0) y i − y j (cid:1)(cid:17) 2 + 1 b 2 i b 2 j (cid:16) − s i (cid:0) x i − x j (cid:1) + c i (cid:0) y i − y j (cid:1)(cid:17) 2 ≥ 0 , ( 4 . 63 ) with the abbreviations c i ≡ cos ϕ i , s i ≡ sin ϕ i . In deriving this relation , we can use γ i = γ j to symmetrize the γ - terms by setting γ i = (cid:0) γ i + γ j (cid:1) / 2 , because γ = 0 . Moreover , α 2 > 0 by assumption , so that the right - hand side of equation ( 4 . 62 ) is indeed ≥ 0 . In particular , equality holds iﬀ x i = x j ∧ y i = y j , which we can exclude by requiring the generator centers to be not coinciding . Altogether , equation ( 4 . 62 ) represents a sphere under the premises α = β (cid:54) = 0 ∧ γ = 0 ∧ ϕ i = ϕ j ∧ x i (cid:54) = x j . In the second sub - case ϕ i (cid:54) = ϕ j , both generators represent spheres , a i = b i = : r i , a j = b j = : r j . Then the contact equation ( 4 . 62 ) again takes the form of a sphere , x 0 = r 2 j x i − r 2 i x j r 2 j − r 2 i , κ 2 + λ 2 α 2 − ω α = r 2 i r 2 j ( x i − x j ) 2 ( r 2 i − r 2 j ) 2 . ( 4 . 64 ) The relation to equation ( 4 . 33 ) is as follows : First , we write the contact equation ( 4 . 62 ) in right - handed Cartesian coordinates centered at (cid:0) x i + x j (cid:1) / 2 , with the positive x - axis pointing towards x j . We observe that the form of x 0 does not change under this transformation . Moreover , the y - component of both generator centers vanishes in these coordinates . Clearly , the x - component of both transformed x i , x j are – up to the sign – equal to half the center distance (cid:12)(cid:12) x i − x j (cid:12)(cid:12) / 2 . In this way , centers x i , x j and weights r i , r j can be disentangled and we see that the transformed x 0 is identical to M ij from equation ( 4 . 33 ) . 2 . Undeﬁned contact center x 0 , parabolic or ﬂat contact border : We have δ = αβ − γ 2 = 0 . This happens , when the semi - axes of the two involved generator ellipses a i , b i , a j , b j obey certain ordering inequalities , see appendix A . 3 . 1 . Here we are interested in the speciﬁc form of the emerging contact equation x T hom · E · x hom = 0 , which can be seen most directly when considering the aforementioned sub - cases : 111 2a , α = β = γ = 0 : The six individual identities α = β = γ = 0 can be condensed into three , 1 a 2 i + 1 b 2 i = 1 a 2 j + 1 b 2 j , cos (cid:0) 2 ϕ i (cid:1)(cid:16) 1 a 2 i − 1 b 2 i (cid:17) = cos (cid:0) 2 ϕ j (cid:1)(cid:16) 1 a 2 j − 1 b 2 j (cid:17) , sin (cid:0) 2 ϕ i (cid:1)(cid:16) 1 a 2 i − 1 b 2 i (cid:17) = sin (cid:0) 2 ϕ j (cid:1)(cid:16) 1 a 2 j − 1 b 2 j (cid:17) . ( 4 . 65 ) Squaring the last two equations and adding them yields a − 2 i − b − 2 i = a − 2 j − b − 2 j . Addition and subtraction to / from the ﬁrst equation leads to a i = a j ∧ b i = b j , and we have ellipse - like generators : a i = a j , b i = b j , ϕ i = ϕ j , ( 4 . 66 ) meaning size and orientation of the generators are equal . If the generators are circles , the sin - and cos - equations of ( 4 . 65 ) hold for any ϕ i , ϕ j , because they vanish , circular generators : a i = b i = a j = b j . ( 4 . 67 ) Recall the homogeneous coordinate vectors x hom = ( x , y , 1 ) as in - troduced in deﬁnition 4 . 2 . 1 . The untransformed contact equation ( 4 . 37 ) reads x T hom · E · x hom = x T hom ·   0 0 κ 0 0 λ κ λ ω   · x hom = 2 κx + 2 λy + ω = 0 . ( 4 . 68 ) This clearly represents a straight line . There are two possibilities , λ (cid:54) = 0 : y = − κ λx − ω 2 λ , λ = 0 , κ (cid:54) = 0 : x = − ω 2 κ . ( 4 . 69 ) Both κ and λ cannot vanish at the same time , because this would imply x i = x j , which we again exclude by requiring | x i − x j | > 0 , i . e . the centers of two distinct cells may not coincide . 2b , α (cid:54) = 0 ∧ β = γ = 0 : In contrast to sub - case 2a above , the three identities β = γ = 0 do not lead to expressions of similar simplicity . 112 However , we still can use β i = β j and γ i = γ j , while γ = β gives no new information . The untransformed contact equation ( 4 . 37 ) is x T hom · E · x hom = x T hom ·   α 0 κ 0 0 λ κ λ ω   · x hom = αx 2 + 2 κx + 2 λy + ω = 0 . ( 4 . 70 ) If λ does not vanish , this identity represents a parabola , λ (cid:54) = 0 : y = − α 2 λx (cid:16) x + 2 κ α (cid:17) − ω 2 λ . ( 4 . 71 ) Otherwise , for λ = 0 , we end up with a quadratic equation for x . Solvability in the real numbers R depends on the discriminant κ 2 − ωα , which happens to be one of the two other sub - determinants of the contact matrix E , besides δ . Appendix A . 3 . 2 shows that with β = γ = λ = 0 , the discriminant κ 2 − ωα ≥ 0 , whereby equality arises when y i = y j . In this way we may write λ = 0 : x = − κ α ± 1 α √ κ 2 − ωα , ( 4 . 72 ) representing two straight lines , both parallel to the y - axis . This perhaps puzzling situation can be understood in terms of a degen - erate underlying cone , which has its vertex at inﬁnity . The “cone” thus appears as a cylinder . The “conic section” of two parallel lines from above is then obtained by intersecting the cylinder with a plane parallel to the polar symmetry axis . 2c , β (cid:54) = 0 ∧ α = γ = 0 : This case is conceptually similar to 2b . The untransformed contact equation ( 4 . 37 ) is x T hom · E · x hom = x T hom ·   0 0 κ 0 β λ κ λ ω   · x hom = βy 2 + 2 λy + 2 κx + ω = 0 . ( 4 . 73 ) If κ = 0 , the discriminant λ 2 − ωβ ≥ 0 , see appendix paragraph A . 3 . 2 . Thus , we arrive at κ (cid:54) = 0 : x = − β 2 κy (cid:16) y + 2 λ β (cid:17) − ω 2 κ , ( 4 . 74 ) κ = 0 : y = − λ β ± 1 β (cid:112) λ 2 − ωβ , ( 4 . 75 ) which again represents parabola and straight lines . 113 2d , γ (cid:54) = 0 ∧ αβ = γ 2 : The two - dimensional part of the contact matrix can be rotated by the uniquely determined angle φ from equation ( 4 . 58 ) , which leads to E (cid:48) =   α (cid:48) 0 κ (cid:48) 0 β (cid:48) λ (cid:48) κ (cid:48) λ (cid:48) ω (cid:48)   , with α (cid:48) = (cid:0) α + β − r (cid:1) / 2 , β (cid:48) = (cid:0) α + β + r (cid:1) / 2 , κ (cid:48) = κ cos φ + λ sin φ , λ (cid:48) = − κ sin φ + λ cos φ , ω (cid:48) = ω . ( 4 . 76 ) Here , the matrix entries follow from equations ( 4 . 42 ) , by formally setting x 0 = y 0 = 0 . Alternatively one can construct E (cid:48) without translation , E (cid:48) = D T ( φ ) E D ( φ ) , which leads to the same result . By equation ( 4 . 49 ) , the helper radius is given by r 2 = 4 γ 2 + ( α − β ) 2 . Since we have γ 2 = αβ in this case , we obtain r 2 = (cid:0) α + β (cid:1) 2 , i . e . α (cid:48) = (cid:0) α + β − | α + β | (cid:1) / 2 , β (cid:48) = (cid:0) α + β + | α + β | (cid:1) / 2 . ( 4 . 77 ) Depending on the sign of α + β , either α (cid:48) or β (cid:48) will vanish , while the other will be equal to α + β . Note that due to δ = αβ − γ 2 = 0 , the sign of α and β will coincide . Altogether , for any E with δ = 0 there exists a unique coordinate system tilted by − φ , so that the transformed E (cid:48) attains the representation ( 4 . 76 ) with ( 4 . 77 ) . In these coordinates , the contact equation attains the form of either case 2b or 2c , and these previous results can be readily applied . The shape of the contact border is therefore either a parabola or two parallel straight lines , possibly in superposition . 4 . 8 . How to construct Voronoi diagrams from elliptic generators ? In the previous two sections we have discovered various possible shapes for the contact border between two Voronoi cells . All these shapes may arise from the contact equation ( 4 . 37 ) . As an overviewing summary we recapitulate all diﬀerent types of contact shapes together with precise conditions when they do occur , see table 4 . 1 . A speciﬁc realization of a Voronoi diagram constructed from elliptic generators is presented in ﬁgure 4 . 3 . For the sake of brevity , we shall call such a diagram “elliptic Voronoi 114 Figure 4 . 3 . : Voronoi diagram of four elliptic generators . The centers of the generators are indicated by stars , and their elliptic con - tours arising from P i ( x ) = x hom · E i · x hom = 0 are drawn in blue . The emerging Voronoi diagram consists of cell - pair contact borders Γ ij ( red ) and free margins Γ i 0 ( black ) . The corresponding Delaunay triangulation is indicated in thin cyan lines connecting the generator centers . The two up - permost cells share common size a i = a j ∧ b i = b j and ori - entation ϕ i = ϕ j , so that the contact matrix degenerates , α = β = γ = 0 . Therefore , the corresponding contact border is a straight line . Other common contact shapes are ellipse and hyperbola . Both unlabeled contact borders ( bottom and center red line ) are also hyperbola segments . 115 # δ r 2 α , β , γ section shape 0a − + 4 . 6 hyperbola 0b + + 4 . 6 ellipse 1 + 0 4 . 7 . 1 circle 2a 0 0 α = β = γ = 0 4 . 7 . 2a single straight line 2b 0 + β = γ = 0 4 . 7 . 2b λ (cid:54) = 0 parabola ; λ = 0 two parallel straight lines 2c 0 + α = γ = 0 4 . 7 . 2c κ (cid:54) = 0 parabola ; κ = 0 two parallel straight lines 2d 0 + αβ = γ 2 4 . 7 . 2d cf . 2b or 2c Table 4 . 1 . : Diﬀerent types of emerging contact border shapes under var - ious conditions for the contact determinant δ = αβ − γ 2 , the helper radius r 2 = ( α − β ) 2 + 4 γ 2 , and the coeﬃcients α , β , γ . Note that the non - trivial zero of r 2 in case 1 implies δ > 0 , otherwise see 2a . For 2d it has been shown that it either maps to 2b or 2c . Possible contact shapes then are parabola or a pair of parallel straight lines . diagram” in the rest of this thesis . We now come to the algorithm how to numerically construct such a diagram . After the detailed explanation of each algorithm step 1 – 7 as given below , the involved key variables like indices and arrays are brieﬂy summarized at the end of each paragraph . 9 1 . Ordering property of the contact border : It is clear that both the circular and the elliptic contact border from table 4 . 1 can be conveniently parameterized in polar coordinates . The resulting expression R = R ( θ ) is explicit , in contrast to the implicit contact equation ( 4 . 37 ) . Using the same polar ansatz , also hyperbolas , straight lines and parabolas can be written as R ( θ ) . All these polar expressions are given in appendix A . 5 . With the help of this parameterization one can devise the following ordering property for points x 1 , x 2 ∈ Γ ij : x 1 < x 2 ⇔ θ ( x 1 ) < θ ( x 2 ) for θ ∈ [ − π , π ) . ( 4 . 78 ) 9 The following paragraphs explain the accompanying prototype routine mwvoro . m for circular generators . The presented algorithm however is general in the sense that it is also capable to construct elliptic Voronoi tessellations . See http : / / www . theobio . uni - bonn . de / people / mab / dsup for the supplementary material including mwvoro . m . 116 As discussed below , this ordering property is essential to identify the correct contact borders . 2 . Construction of candidate contact borders : The general equation parameterizing a superset of each contact border Γ ij is given by ( 4 . 37 ) . We compute the involved matrix E = E i − E j for all the generator pairs ( i , j ) with j > i , where i , j ∈ { 1 , . . . , N } are cell indices . The resulting set of matrices is stored in the array EE , which is indexed by the pair index m . 10 Additionally , we set up a mapping array p2c , which contains the paired cell numbers ( i , j ) as indexed by the corresponding pair index m (cid:32) ( i , j ) . Conversely , the cell’s membership in pair m is recorded in the mapping array c2p , indexed by the cell number . In principle , the computational cost of this step is quadratic in the number of generators N , because usually the “exterior” Voronoi cells of a speciﬁc diagram are unbounded . However , in deﬁnition 4 . 1 . 4 we made an additional assump - tion , which could be exploited to consider fewer generator pairs . Clearly , the maximal extension of a Voronoi cell is bounded by extremal scaled norm P ( d max ) ≡ P ex , cf . equations ( 4 . 9 – 4 . 11 ) . For example , the black surrounding lines in ﬁgure 4 . 3 indicate the emerging exterior boundary delimiting the Voronoi cells . Given a set of generalized generators { P i } , one can therefore derive a maximal generator distance , beyond which no contact border is possible . This property can be used to divide the sim - ulation space into boxes , where only generator pairs in the same or in two adjacent boxes need to be considered . This approach is also useful to distribute the computation to multiple processor cores and is sometimes called “linked - cell” algorithm [ 92 , chapter 3 ] . indices : cell numbers i , j , candidate cell pair number m arrays : mapping pair - to - cell p2c and cell - to - pair c2p , contact matrices EE 3 . Construction of candidate vertices : A vertex is the intersection of three contact borders . It arises from a triple consisting of three pairs formed by three generators . In the case when four or more contact bor - ders intersect in one common point , we merely obtain several distinct triples . Contact border intersections between two general conical sec - tions ( ≡ conics ) can be computed according to [ 102 , 208 ] . To ﬁnd vertex 10 The array EE in this description corresponds to the pair - to - sphere array p2s in the accompanying prototype implementation mwvoro . m . 117 candidates , we iterate over cell pairs m and m (cid:48) > m . If these two pairs share a common cell , we have identiﬁed a triple and acquire the third pair index m (cid:48)(cid:48) from the cell - to - pair mapping array c2p . In a subroutine we mutually intersect the three candidate contact borders and keep those in - tersection points that occur three times . A possible safety check for such a potential vertex with position v is whether the norm function [ P i ( v ) ] 1 / 2 values are – up to numerical ﬂuctuations – identical for all three gener - ators i of the triple . Additionally , we impose that P i ( v ) ≤ P ex , because otherwise the vertex will be outside of the Voronoi cell . Having identiﬁed these triple’s vertex candidates , we store their position in the VV array , indexed by their respective vertex candidate number n . 11 Subsequently , we associate contact border and potential vertex by means of the map - ping array p2v , containing all vertex candidate numbers n of the pair as indexed by m . For bookkeeping purposes we also create the pair - to - triple p2t and triple - to - cell t2c mapping arrays . index : vertex candidate number n arrays : mapping pair - to - vertex p2v , pair - to - triple p2t , triple - to - cell t2c , vertex candidate positions VV 4 . Injection of free margin and connection vertices : For each can - didate contact border m , we gather all vertices in the vertex candidate array VCL . 12 For each vertex we record position v ≡ ( v x , v y ) and squared norm P i ( v ) with respect to any / all the surrounding generator centers { x i } . All this information can be obtained from p2v , VV and EE . Such a vertex is said to be “ordinary” and of type 1 , which is also recorded . In addition to these “ordinary” vertices , we have to consider two kinds of special vertices . First , we need to account for the limited size of the Voronoi cells under construction . Therefore we include in VCL so - called “margin” vertices . They arise from the intersection of the free margin supersets , P i ( x ) = P ex = P j ( x ) , cf . deﬁnition 4 . 1 . 9 . 13 Up to four such margin vertices may 11 The array VV in this description corresponds to the vertex - to - vertex array v2v in the accompanying prototype implementation mwvoro . m . 12 The equivalent in the prototype implementation is vcl , which contains slightly more information . This information is not strictly needed to construct the Voronoi tessellation , and therefore was omitted in the present description of the algorithm . 13 These margin vertices are termed “wertex” in the accompanying prototype im - plementation mwvoro . m . 118 arise , which are designated the type 0 . As before , squared norm P ex and vertex position is also stored in VCL . In order to correctly identify the Voronoi contact borders , we still need another type of special vertices called “connection” vertices . 14 Since the angle parameter θ ∈ [ − π , π ) is discontinuous at the cut θ = ± π , we have to work around the resulting continuation problem . By inserting a pair of connection vertices at the θ - discontinuity , the unit circle can be connected , see also step 6 below . These connection vertices are of type 2 , and are also recorded in VCL . array : vertex candidate array VCL 5 . Vertex erosion and sorting : This is the central step in the algo - rithm . Previously , in step 4 , we have constructed the vertex candidate array VCL for each candidate contact boundary m . To decide whether a vertex is part of the contact border , we have to check that its squared norm P i ( v ) = P j ( v ) with respect to the pair generators i , j is less than P k ( v ) for all surrounding generators k . The index set { k } is stored in the common neighbor candidates vector cnbc , which is constructed from p2t and t2c by ﬁnding all generators that participate in a triple with pair m . For each candidate vertex in VCL , we iterate over the generators k in cnbc . If P i ( v ) > P k ( v ) for some vertex candidate , then it is ignored . The remaining vertices are then part of the contact border m , and sub - sequently transfered into the vertex array vl . When adding vertices to vl , we additionally record their orientation θ ( v ) = atan ( v − x 0 ) ( 4 . 79 ) with respect to the contact border center x 0 . Here , atan denotes the arc tangent function with vector argument that uniquely determines θ ∈ [ − π , π ) . In principle , the number of vertices in vl has to be even , because each line segment is delimited precisely by two points . However , when four or more cells share a common vertex , this vertex appears two or more times in vl . Therefore , before sorting , only vertices of unique position are retained in vl , where an exception is made only for the connection vertices . Then we sort vl according to increasing θ ( v ) . The resulting sorted vertex array svl starts with the connection vertex at θ = − π and ends with the connection vertex at θ = π , unless they have been removed during erosion . 14 Connection vertices are termed “uertices” in mwvoro . m . 119 array : sorted vertex array svl 6 . Connecting vertices to full contact borders : Now we can use the essential contact border ordering property introduced in step 1 above . In general , the contact border Γ ij consists of one or more non - touching contact arcs . If the ﬁrst vertex in svl is a connection vertex , it has to be situated on a contact arc , because it was kept during the erosion step . Otherwise , it has been removed so that the ﬁrst non - connection vertex initiates an arc . Thus , in any case the ﬁrst vertex in svl will initiate an arc . Correspondingly , we iterate over pairs of consecutive vertices and connect them by contact arc segments in alternating fashion like a check board . When arriving at the last vertex , we take into account the possibility that the ﬁrst / last vertex in svl may be a connection vertex . In this case , we remove the connection vertices so that the two arcs adjacent to θ = ± π are united . Each of the obtained contact arcs is then stored in the array AA , indexed by the arc number p . 15 Speciﬁcally , we store the index of the corresponding cell contact border matrix in EE , and the θ - parameters for the start and stop vertex . Moreover , we record the involved vertex positions and types . For bookkeeping purposes , we also introduce a cell - to - arc mapping array c2a . The candidate pair m fulﬁlls the neighbor relation i ∼ j if there exists a corresponding contact border arc . This neighbor property is recorded in the neighbor array nd , indexed by cell number i and containing the indices of neighboring cells j . index : arc number p arrays : neighbor arc array AA , cell - to - arc mapping array c2a , neighbor array nd 7 . Closing free margins of Voronoi cells : The idea to close the free margins of the Voronoi cells towards the surrounding is similar as for step 6 . Since each free margin arc is situated on an ellipse given by P i ( x ) = P ex , the ordering property described in step 1 applies here as well . For each cell i we ﬁrst collect all margin vertices from the contact borders involving i , as recorded in c2a and AA . For each of these vertices we then determine the angular orientation ϕ with respect to the cell center 15 The array AA is the analogue of a2a in the prototype implementation mwvoro . m . Minor diﬀerences in the data structure of AA and a2a are owed to the generality of the algorithm described here , which is capable of constructing Voronoi tessellations from elliptical , and not only spherical generators . 120 x i . In order to ensure connectivity at ϕ = ± π , we inject an additional pair of connecting vertices , which we erode over the already deﬁned neighbors j of i , as recorded in nd . After sorting the obtained vertex list according to their angular position ϕ , we can connect consecutive vertices , so that the resulting arcs form a checked pattern . For each of these arcs we gather the generator index i , and the involved ϕ - parameters in the free arc array FF , indexed by arc number q . 16 index : margin arc index q array : margin arc array FF Taking together the steps 1 – 7 we have shown the second result : Theorem 4 . 8 . 1 : The algorithm described above constructs a Voronoi diagram from generalized anisotropic generators . Remark : The Voronoi tessellation has been introduced in deﬁnition 4 . 1 . 10 , and the generalized anisotropic generator in deﬁnition 4 . 3 . 2 . The corre - sponding Delaunay triangulation according to deﬁnition 4 . 1 . 12 follows from the set of constructed Voronoi neighbor relations { i ∼ j } . Remark : The notion of cell is of utmost importance in biology . There - fore it is indispensable for the intended modelling aim to extract explicit cellular entities from the computed Voronoi diagram . This purpose is achieved by the c2a and nd data structures , which enable the modeler to directly address a speciﬁc cell’s boundary and its direct neighbors . 4 . 9 . Comparing generalized Voronoi tessellation methods Before coming to the comparison of several types of Voronoi diagrams , we recapitulate the critical steps in the construction of the formal theory proposed here . In section 4 . 1 we have started from Voronoi generators comprising of norms (cid:107) . (cid:107) i , whereby the zero element of the associated normed ( vector ) space (cid:0) R d , (cid:107) . (cid:107) i (cid:1) represents the center x i of cell body or nucleus . We then constructed equivalent formulations of the Voronoi cell by scaling the norms (cid:107) . (cid:107) i = : y with the scaling function P ( y ) = qy ν + 16 Again , there are slight diﬀerences in the data structure of FF with respect to the analogue f2f in the prototype implementation mworo . m . 121 P 0 , leading to Voronoi generators P i in terms of scaled norms , P i ( x ) ≡ P (cid:0) (cid:107) x (cid:107) i (cid:1) . The scaled norms P i ( x ) represent the power of the point x with respect to the generator P i . Comparing point powers of individual generators leads to the equation contact P i ( x ) = P j ( x ) , which forms the basis of constructing the Voronoi diagram , cf . equation ( 4 . 13 ) . In order to be able to write this contact equation as a simple product of the form x T hom · ( E i − E j ) · x hom = 0 , we then introduced homogeneous coordinates x hom in section 4 . 2 . They allowed to understand both translations and rotations in terms of matrix products . In particular , this formulation involved generator norms (cid:107) . (cid:107) i in terms of the positive deﬁnite axis matrix (cid:101) F i , namely (cid:107) . (cid:107) i = ( x T · (cid:101) F i · x ) 1 / 2 . We additionally assumed that the (cid:101) F i are diagonal , with strictly positive matrix elements called axis weights . This means that all norms involved in the proposed Voronoi tessellation method are elliptic , even though the initial formulation from section 4 . 1 accommodates for arbitrary norms in R d . In any case , we denote by (cid:107) . (cid:107) without superscript the Euclidean norm . Note also that in this section we compare only two - dimensional Voronoi diagrams , even though there are generalizations of some of the presented generator formulas to higher spatial dimensions . 1 . Polar generator symmetry : From the deﬁnition ( 4 . 3 . 2 ) of anisotropic Voronoi generators P i , we can derive an equivalent formulation for the point power P i ( x ) , see appendix section A . 4 . The resulting expression P i ( x ) = (cid:107) x − x i (cid:107) r i ( ϕ i x ) , ( 4 . 80 ) relies on the inherent polar symmetry , where r i ( ϕ i x ) denotes the polar pa - rameterization of an ellipse , cf . equation ( A . 31 ) , possibly with non - zero orientational tilt . Importantly , the angle ϕ i x = atan ( x − x i ) depends on the relative position of the point x with respect to the generator center x i . see ﬁgure 4 . 4 ( blue ) . In particular , the point power ( 4 . 80 ) repre - sents the Euclidean norm of x − x i , divided by the weighting extension r i of the generator ellipse in the direction of x − x i , again see ﬁgure 4 . 4 ( blue ) . Anisotropic Voronoi generators as described in this thesis have the favorable property that their diagram does not change when scaling all P i with a common factor , or – equivalently – adjusting q in the scaling function P from equation ( 4 . 8 ) . We emphasize that the particular rep - resentation ( 4 . 80 ) of the point powers P i ( x ) yields an implicit expression for the contact equation P i ( x ) = P j ( x ) which is not well - suited to further 122 1 . 4 . 5 . x i r ( ϕ i x ) x x i x j r ( ϕ j x ) x j P i ( x ) = (cid:107) x − x i (cid:107) r i ( ϕ i x ) P i ( x ) = (cid:107) x − x i (cid:107) r ( ϕ i x ) r ( ϕ ) : convex shape r i ( ϕ ) : ellipse i P i ( x ) P j ( x ) (cid:107) x − x i (cid:107) x (cid:107) x − x j (cid:107) (cid:107) x − x i (cid:107) r j ( ϕ j x ) (cid:107) x − x j (cid:107) x r i ( ϕ i x ) x i x j Figure 4 . 4 . : Voronoi generators P i attribute to each point x in the plane a certain power P i ( x ) , which is usually some function of the distance of x from the generator . Here , we compare genera - tors which can be described by convex shape functions r i ( ϕ ) in polar coordinates with respect to the generator center x i . In this thesis , we have developed point powers as in 1 ( blue ) , whereby we prescribe ellipses centered at x i and with ra - dius function r i as Voronoi generators . For ﬁnding the power P i ( x ) of the point x , we divide the Euclidean norm (cid:107) x − x i (cid:107) by the local ellipse radius r i ( ϕ i x ) in the relative direction of the point x . This idea is also used in method 5 ( green ) , however the weighting radius r ( ϕ j x ) is the same for all gen - erators , and it may represent a single but arbitrary convex shape [ 143 ] . Although based on ellipses as well , method 4 ( magenta ) developed by Emiris and coworkers [ 73 ] is diﬀer - ent . There , the point power P i ( x ) is the shortest distance to the surface of the ellipse surface of the Voronoi generator . For further explanations of the methods 1 , 4 and 5 , see the respective paragraphs 4 . 9 . 1 , 4 . 9 . 4 and 4 . 9 . 5 in the text . 123 analysis . However , equation ( 4 . 80 ) is still useful to compare the Voronoi tessellation described in this work with other approaches . 2 . Circular Voronoi diagrams : Setting r i = const . in equation ( 4 . 80 ) , we obtain the point power P i ( x ) = (cid:107) x − x i (cid:107) r i . ( 4 . 81 ) as generalized Voronoi generator . Such generators lead to the conven - tional multiplicatively weighted Voronoi diagram by Aurenhammer and Edelsbrunner [ 16 ] , which is discussed as “quotient method” in our work [ 31 ] . The equivalent representation of the generator ( 4 . 81 ) in terms of homogeneous matrices has already been derived in section 4 . 4 . As can be seen from equation ( 4 . 81 ) , such a diagram is based on the Euclidean norm weighted by r i , with the scaling function P coeﬃcients from equa - tion ( 4 . 8 ) being q = 1 , ν = 2 , P 0 = − 1 . In the multiplicatively weighted Voronoi diagram the generators can also be represented as circles of ra - dius r i centered at x i , and the resulting contact borders are either circles or straight lines . We therefore refer to such a diagram as circular . Specif - ically , the circular generators ( 4 . 81 ) are special cases of the elliptic ones from the preceding paragraph , with the simpliﬁcation of r i ( ϕ i x ) = r i being constant and independent of ϕ i x . Aurenhammer and Edelsbrunner have shown that the optimal time to construct a circular Voronoi diagram is O ( N 2 ) , i . e . quadratic in the number of generators N [ 16 ] . To achieve this optimality , the authors map the two - dimensional plane on a two - sphere embedded in three dimensions . This is a way to introduce the projective plane and thereby the homogeneous coordinates used in this thesis . How - ever , whether and in which way the cell complex described in [ 16 ] can be mapped to the concepts described here is less obvious . 3 . Increasing functions of the Euclidean norm : Ash and Bolker have worked on the question whether a given tessellation is Voronoi and , if so , what are the underlying generators [ 14 ] . For the point power P i ( x ) they write the expression P i ( x ) = f (cid:0) (cid:107) x − x i (cid:107) (cid:1) + w i . ( 4 . 82 ) The function f is increasing in the Euclidean norm (cid:107) . (cid:107) , and the additive weights w i may be diﬀerent for each generator . If w i < 0 and f = (cid:107) x − x i (cid:107) , the resulting contact borders are straight lines and the emerging Voronoi 124 diagram is often called “power diagram” . This special case is discussed as “diﬀerence method” in [ 31 ] , where it turned out that the partition of space between two neighboring cell bodies exhibits a biologically undesirable monotonicity behavior in the w i . For w i > 0 and f = (cid:107) x − x i (cid:107) , the contact borders are hyperbolic arcs or straight lines . Another possible choice for f involves the distance constructed from a quadratic form with the help of a two - dimensional matrix (cid:101) F [ 15 , section 3 . 1 . 5 ] , cf . also example 4 . 1 . 3 . For comparison , the anisotropic generator expression ( 4 . 80 ) sets w i : = w ≡ const . in ( 4 . 82 ) , while generalizing the matrix (cid:101) F in f to prescribe (cid:101) F i independently for each generator , see section 4 . 3 . Finally , by taking the logarithm of the circular generator function ( 4 . 81 ) , one ﬁnds that it is also of the form ( 4 . 82 ) . Therefore , the anisotropic generators ( 4 . 80 ) proposed in this thesis generalize the expressions ( 4 . 81 ) and certain versions of ( 4 . 82 ) . In this way , the expression ( 4 . 80 ) establishes a formal connection between Voronoi diagrams with hyperbolic and circular contact borders , and closes the formalism to allow for all kinds of conic section type contact shapes . 4 . Voronoi diagram of ellipses : Another type of Voronoi diagrams has been been developed by Emiris and coworkers [ 72 – 74 ] , and is called a “Voronoi diagram of ellipses” . The employed point power P i ( x ) con - stitutes the Euclidean distance of x from the surface of the ellipse i , see ﬁgure 4 . 4 ( magenta ) . The resulting contact equation P i ( x ) = P j ( x ) is computationally quite demanding , because it involves the solution of degree - 184 polynomial equations [ 74 ] . Remarkably , the Voronoi diagram constructed in such a way changes when scaling the generator ellipses with a common factor . 5 . Polar weighting functions : Klein and Ma have prescribed r ( ϕ i x ) as the same polar weighting function for all generators [ 17 , 143 ] , P i ( x ) = (cid:107) x − x i (cid:107) r ( ϕ i x ) , ( 4 . 83 ) see ﬁgure 4 . 4 ( green ) . This technique shares some similarity with the one proposed in this thesis . The main diﬀerence is that there is only one single global shape template r for all P i . The shape of the resulting Voronoi cells then depends on the particular choice of r . Interestingly , in Voronoi diagrams constructed from ( 4 . 83 ) , the symmetry property x ↔ x i of the anisotropic Voronoi generators ( 4 . 80 ) is not required [ 143 ] . This allows 125 for generator shapes which are not point symmetric with respect to their center . 6 . Abstract Voronoi diagrams : Yet another approach is the framework of “abstract Voronoi diagrams” as proposed by Klein and coworkers [ 125 , 126 ] . For each pair of generators ( i , j ) there is a unique contact border given by an arbitrary curve with a stereographic projection that contains the north pole of the projective sphere . Thus , it is required that the contact borders extend to inﬁnity , and curves such as circles and ellipses are not allowed . Conversely , hyperbolas , straight lines and parabolas can be described by the abstract Voronoi diagram framework . 7 . Partial Delaunay property , clustering and parallel computing : The extension of a Voronoi cell V i from deﬁnition 4 . 1 . 4 is bounded by the maximal generalized distance d max of a point x from the generator center x i . In the deﬁnition 4 . 1 . 7 of a generalized Voronoi cell , the value P ex = P ( d max ) indicates the resulting extremal value attainable by the point power P i ( x ) . This P ex - bound manifests itself in deﬁnition 4 . 1 . 9 , which means that the cells have a so - called free margin arc in directions void of a suﬃciently close neighbor cell . Thus , the tessellation arising from a given set of anisotropic generators does not span the whole plane . Instead , it is conﬁned to a limited region , which surrounds the generator centers { x i } . Therefore , the hull of the emerging Delaunay triangulation is not necessarily convex . In this sense , the Voronoi tessellation put forward here has only a partial Delaunay property . However , completing the Delaunay triangulation for a given ﬁnite Voronoi diagram is straight forward . We merely have to increase the maximal cell extension d max (cid:32) P ex , so that the cells at the margin become aware of one another . In order to construct the corresponding inﬁnite Voronoi tessellation , and thereby the convex Delaunay hull , we have to consider only those generators that previously have been situated at the margin . Indeed , the remaining interior Voronoi cells have already neighbors and extend only up to points with power within the initial P ex bound . The proposed property of ﬁnite Voronoi tessellations could be exploited in several ways . Obviously , for a given P ex , there can be several clusters of cells which are internally connected via neighbor relation chains of the type i ∼ j ∼ . . . ∼ k . The outer limit of such a cluster is naturally given by the free margins . Limiting the maximal P i ( x ) for a point x by P ex thus provides for a facility to detect clusters of Voronoi cells . 126 Similarly , one could start to construct a Voronoi tessellation of many generators by initially choosing d max fairly small . As pointed out earlier , only those generator pairs need to be considered that are suﬃciently close . Assuming the coeﬃcients q = 1 , ν = 1 , P 0 = 0 in the scaling function P from equation ( 4 . 8 ) , the plane can be subdivided into boxes of size P ex · max i a i , where a i denotes the major half - axis of the generator ellipses . Neighbor pairs can only form between generators in adjacent boxes , so that this initial stage of the Voronoi construction can be easily computed in parallel . Then , P ex can be successively increased and new pairs would only arise between some of the formerly marginal cells . Once the minimal stretched minor half - axis P ex · min i b i exceeds max i (cid:54) = j | x i − x j | , all generators become aware of one another . Thus one obtains the “inﬁnite” Delaunay triangulation , i . e . those neighbor relations that would arise from a Voronoi tessellation without any P ex bound . In summary , we have found a mathematical method to divide space into closed , contacting regions . In the following chapter we apply this method to quantitatively describe the motion within biological cell aggregates . 127 5 . Coupling intracellular stress and cell - cell adhesion determines cooperative cell motion in tissue monolayers Summary : In this chapter we combine results from the preceding chap - ters to arrive at a simulation model suited to describe motion in mesenchy - mal cell aggregates or epithelial tissues . First , we survey earlier models of multi - cellular aggregates and outline a selection of their ﬁndings . Next , we analyze in - vitro micrographs in order to investigate whether planar or spherical Voronoi tessellation is the more appropriate cell shape model . Then we construct cellular interaction and locomotion forces based on the cell outline geometry as obtained from the Voronoi tessellation . Here , cadherin and integrin densities are assumed to be constant on the surface of each model cell but diﬀerent across the tissue . An explicit distance dependence of the emerging force density hinders tissue collapse by pro - viding for an idealized contact inhibition mechanism . With the help of simulations of the resulting model tissue we ﬁnd : 1 . For a given set of Voronoi generators , there are several quasi - stable topological arrangements . The multiple inherent relaxation time scales seem to indicate that the model tissue behaves like a struc - tural glass . 2 . Starlike Voronoi cells enhance the cohesion stability of the whole aggregate . The starlikeness property can be enforced a priori by allowing only for moderate variation in the sizes of the model cells . 3 . Since the tissue geometry is reduced to the two - dimensional plane , cell sorting can only be partially recapitulated in our simulations . This limitation can be understood in terms of incompletely perme - ating strands of non - mixing cells . 4 . Convergent tissue extension as occurring during embryo develop - ment is driven by anisotropic cell - cell interactions . Here we impose a small force anisotropy in the interactions of the inner cells for a limited time . Surprisingly , the resulting shape deformation of the whole tissue is large , global and persistent . 129 5 . 1 . There are several types of multi - cell tissue models The fundamental compartment of life is the cell [ 195 ] , which separates the interior metabolism from the exterior environment [ 9 ] . This separation is essential for gene expression and biomolecular reaction , because both pro - cesses require a located and conﬁned vessel providing for a well - controlled micro - environment . In order to describe the large - scale organization of tissue from the underlying cell compartments , we therefore need a math - ematical formalism that is able to partition space into well - deﬁned and distinct regions . If we can uniquely identify the mathematical regions with corresponding biological cells , such a formalism would allow us to obtain a detailed description of the organizational principles of tissue for - mation , which would be directly inferred from individual cell properties . Indeed , there are several frameworks suited to perform such a task , with diﬀerent emphasis , advantages , but also shortcomings . 1 . Vertex dynamics : The ﬁrst important class of collective motility models describes cells as shape - changing polygonal objects given by a set of vertices . In two spatial dimensions a vertex is located at the junction of three ( or more ) cells , and in three dimensions it is located at that of four or more cells . Usually , one prescribes force balances at these node or vertex points , and the motion of the cells is calculated accordingly . • Sulsky and coworkers derive the force balances from a surface energy minimizing variational principle [ 205 ] . • Weliky and Oster consider force balances at polygon nodes by in - corporation of internal pressures and surface tensions [ 226 , 227 ] . • Honda and coworkers take a similar approach by starting from a three - dimensional Voronoi tessellation [ 106 ] . • Brodland and coworkers reproduce the morphogenetic movement of whole embryos by carefully measuring the involved forces in vivo and implementing them in their simulations [ 48 , 49 , 111 ] . In ear - lier work they investigate the inﬂuence of directed mitosis on the emerging cell shapes and the resulting stresses in the tissue [ 36 ] . • J¨ulicher and coworkers describe the dynamics of developing tissues such as the Drosophila wing disk [ 1 ] . They write an essentially elas - tic potential - like work function , which determines the forces onto the vertices at the cellular junctions [ 197 ] . 130 Models using vertex dynamics naturally implement tensile forces on the cell boundaries . Friction automatically dominates the resulting mechan - ical system , because the forces are imposed on massless vertices instead of the center of gravity of the cells [ 106 ] . On the other hand , topological rearrangements lead to the disappearance of vertices , which is usually im - plemented by imposing a lower threshold on the distance of two vertices on a particular edge . Energy changes arising from topological rearrange - ments therefore might not be fully accounted for . 2 . Contact boundary dynamics : The broad class of cellular Potts type models relies on the minimization of surface energy arising from homo - and heterotypic cell - cell adhesion contacts . The involved stochastic Monte - Carlo update procedure locally and gradually shifts the position of cell - cell boundaries . • The Cellular Potts model was pioneered by Glazier and Graner [ 90 ] . Originally it appeared as a multi - spin generalization of the Ising model in statistical physics . The simulation domain is a square or cubic lattice , where each cell occupies several lattice sites , usually approximately 40 . Importantly , the model cells are identiﬁed by the spin number of their underlying lattice sites . They are only connected in a certain dynamical regime of the Monte - Carlo update , where the level of stochastic ﬂuctuations is not too high . Since its initial proposal , the cellular Potts model has been extended [ 167 ] and integrated into a freely available simulation framework [ 114 ] . Therefore it appears to be quite popular [ 120 , 146 , 219 ] . • Czirok and coworkers enhance the cellular Potts model and imple - ment anisotropy in the adhesiveness of the cells . In this way , they successfully reproduce the formation of blood vessels [ 207 ] . As already mentioned , the boundary dynamics method of the Cellular Potts model relies on stochastic Monte - Carlo update rules . While usually each component of the underlying Cellular Potts Hamiltonian function has a straight forward interpretation in terms of biological terms like cell protrusiveness or persistence , the relation of the Monte - Carlo update to measurable physical force balances is less obvious . Despite of this limitation , cellular Potts models perform exceptionally well in cell sorting simulations . 131 3 . Center dynamics : Another popular approach represents cells as in - dividual particles of ﬁnite extension . In contrast to cellular automata on a lattice , these particles may attain arbitrary positions in continuous space . In general , the common feature of this class of models is that the translation dynamics acts on the cell centers exclusively . • Drasdo and coworkers mainly model the growth kinetics of tissue - cell populations [ 71 , 82 ] . In their Monte - Carlo approach , the cell center positions are stochastically updated depending on the change in pair interaction energies . The simulation domain is partitioned into polygonal cells by constructing a Voronoi tessellation . Re - cently , they established a mapping between the cellular expansion kinetics in two and three dimensions [ 181 ] . • Similarly , Schaller and Meyer - Hermann obtain polyhedral cells from a three - dimensional Voronoi diagram [ 191 ] . However , their method accounts for diﬀerent sizes of the elastic cells . In a Langevin ap - proach , the cellular motility is governed by both stochastic pertur - bations and chemical adhesion forces . This leads to the prediction of tissue internalization instability induced by cell transmembrane receptor dynamics [ 26 , 148 ] . Moreover , Beyer and Meyer - Hermann could conceive the formation of the primary lymphoid follicle within their framework of Delaunay object dynamics [ 27 ] . • Palsson and Othmer describe biological cells as deformable ellip - soids with viscoelastic deformation forces . By employing locomo - tion forces due to taxis and cell - cell interaction forces , they obtain results on individual and collective movement of Dictyostelium dis - coideum [ 172 ] and the sorting of its prestalk and prespore cells [ 171 ] . The speciﬁc construction principle for cell - cell contacts fully determines the tissue geometry , which generally forms the basis of the dynamical force balances in center - based tissue models . The latter have , however , diﬃculties in cell sorting , as ﬂuctuations in the cell boundaries are not represented correctly . It is noteworthy that the earliest descriptions of cell aggregates in terms of Voronoi tessellation date back to Honda [ 105 ] . Moreover , the tissue model described in this thesis falls into this category , see also [ 31 ] . 132 5 . 2 . Conﬂuent monolayers and epithelial tissues can be described by circular Voronoi tessellations 1 . Shapes of biological cells in mesenchyma and epithelia : In chapter 4 we developed a method that divides space into compartments resem - bling distinct model cells . While it has been shown that the general method is consistent and does the envisioned job for the model , it is not yet clear whether its application as formal description of two - dimensional biological tissues is appropriate . Two - dimensional cell motility ranges from single cells moving inde - pendently to almost epithelial sheets undergoing collective and directed migration . The intermediate regime is usually referred to as epithelial - mesenchymal transition , see e . g . [ 214 ] . Thereby the cells loosen their contacts to engage in relatively fast migration , for example towards a wound . By the late 1970s , Hisao Honda had already shown that planar Voronoi diagrams ( ﬁgure 4 . 1 left ) generally describe the cell morphology observed highly polarized and densely packed epithelial sheets quite ac - curately [ 105 ] . However , in these diagrams the resulting cell - cell contacts are all represented by straight lines being ﬂat without curvature . Also , there is no explicit provision for cells of diﬀerent sizes . Certainly , however , both cell size and cell - cell contact shape have some inﬂuence on cell functions , such as the formation and stabilization of mutual adhesion , especially in the mesenchymal state between collective epithelial resting and the independent migration of isolated cells . The generalized Voronoi method from chapter 4 is in principle capable to account for curved cell - cell contact shapes . It is therefore worthwhile to check whether certain Voronoi shape models accurately resemble a given conﬂuent monolayer of biological cells close to the epithelial - mesenchymal transition . 2 . Aggregates of Zebraﬁsh ectodermal cells : Both outline and nucleus features of quasi two - dimensional cell aggregates can be extracted in a particularly easy manner , if suitable ﬂuorescence dyes are employed to highlight regions of interest . In [ 145 , ﬁgure 1A ] , Schoetz and coworkers have stained membranes and nuclei of Zebraﬁsh ectoderm cells in blue and green , respectively , see ﬁgure 5 . 1 bottom . For the purpose of computer - assisted image processing , we use the com - mand line tool pdfimages to extract [ 145 , ﬁgure 1 ] from the pdf - ﬁle of the article . Subsequently , we crop the ﬁgure to contain only the panel 133 A , and split the resulting micrograph into red , green and blue channels for further use . In order to segment the cell nuclei , we create a blurred version B b of the original blue channel O b by employing a Gaussian ﬁlter with 50 pixels radius . Next , we subtract the blurred nuclei micrograph from the original one , D b = O b − B b . If the brightness of a pixel in D b exceeds the threshold value of 0 . 23 times the brightness in B b , then we assign the corresponding pixel a value of 1 , and otherwise set it to 0 . The resulting boolean picture Z b = ( D b > 0 . 23 B b ) is then smoothed by ﬁve dilation and ﬁve subsequent erosion steps with a boolean and approxi - mately circular stencil of 5 pixels in diameter . As a result , we obtain several white pixel aggregates with very sharp boundaries , indicated as white rings in ﬁgure 5 . 1 top left . These aggregates are then identiﬁed with the help of a self - written clustering routine of Hoshen - Kopelman type [ 109 ] 1 . It uniquely assigns a number to each of the found pixel clus - ters , and gathers all pixels of a speciﬁc cell’s nucleus so that they can be collectively addressed by their respective nucleus number . Importantly , we ignore clusters consisting of only one single pixel . The cell - cell contacts can be extracted from the green channel of the mi - crograph , in a procedure similar to the one for the nuclei described above . Thereby , the blurred picture B g is created from the original O g by em - ploying a Gaussian ﬁlter of 15 pixels radius . Then , the relative diﬀerence is computed by D g = ( O g − B g ) / B g , renormalized to D (cid:48) g = D g / ( max D g ) and converted to boolean by thresholding , namely Z g = ( D (cid:48) g > 0 . 39 ) for each pixel , see ﬁgure 5 . 1 top right . No further dilation or erosion steps need to be performed , because these boolean membrane images merely serve as a synthetic benchmark for quantifying the accuracy of certain kinds of Voronoi tessellations . To this end , we consider the two speciﬁc types of tessellations from example 4 . 1 . 13 , both based on the Euclidean norm : ( i ) the circular dia - gram with isotropic weighted point powers P i ( x ) = (cid:107) x − x i (cid:107) / r i , and ( ii ) the planar diagram without explicit generator weights , P i ( x ) = (cid:107) x − x i (cid:107) . First , we compute the centers x i of the generators from the center of mass of the cell nuclei , and choose the weights r i such that the total pixel area of the nucleus coincides with the area of a circle with radius r i . In this way , the resulting Voronoi generator balls B r i ( x i ) resemble the size and position of the cell nuclei quite closely . With the help of the routine 1 Alternatively , one can employ the bwlabel ( ) function of GNU Octave http : / / www . octave . org . In computer science , the Hoshen - Kopelman procedure is apparently also known as union ﬁnd , see http : / / www . ocf . berkeley . edu / ~ fricke / projects / hoshenkopelman / hoshenkopelman . html ( accessed September 18 , 2012 ) . 134 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 Figure 5 . 1 . : Comparing monolayer of Zebraﬁsh ectoderm cells with re - lated Voronoi diagram . The top row of panels represents the overlay of extracted cell characteristics and the original inten - sity proﬁles , whereby objects found from image analysis are artiﬁcially highlighted . As described in the text , both cell nuclei ( left ) and membranes ( right ) can be extracted from ﬂuorescence data in the individual channels of the original micrograph [ 145 , ﬁgure 1A ] . The shown Voronoi tessellations then can be constructed from size and position data of the nuclei . In the lower row , panels show the original micrograph in overlay with ( i ) a circular Voronoi diagram ( left ) , and ( ii ) an ordinary Voronoi diagram with planar cell - cell con - tacts ( right ) . The original ﬂuorescence picture is extracted from [ 145 ] , with kind permission by Eva - Maria Sch¨otz . 135 mwvoro . m 2 implementing the algorithm from section 4 . 8 , we construct the Voronoi diagrams ( i ) & ( ii ) , see ﬁgure 5 . 1 . Moreover , we render the resulting cell - cell contact borders into the two boolean images V planar and V circular , respectively . For ( ii ) , an identical radius is assigned to all nucleus balls { B r i ( x i ) } , so that we obtain an ordinary Voronoi diagram from ex - ample 4 . 1 . 13 . In order to quantify how well the tessellations describe the actual tissue , we deﬁne the relative match M as ratio , M : = # matching Voronoi contact border pixels total # membrane pixels , ( 5 . 1 ) which is computed from boolean template Z g and Voronoi images V planar , V circular . All results of the image analysis are summarized in ﬁgure 5 . 1 , together with an overlay of the Voronoi diagrams on top of the original micro - graph . As turns out , the relative match is ( i ) M circular = 4 . 6 % for the circular and ( ii ) M planar = 2 . 9 % for the ordinary planar Voronoi diagram . Moreover , the circles generally seem to resemble the qualitative features of the observed cell outline curves more closely . The relatively low values of M arise from the incomplete segmentation of the cell membranes and from rendering of the Voronoi contact borders as thin lines . The signiﬁcance of M is however not aﬀected since the situation is the same for both types of Voronoi tessellations , and because we are mostly interested in their mutual comparison . Thus , although the quality measure M is simplistic and certainly could be improved , we take its values as an indication that circular Voronoi diagrams are to be preferred when describing quasi two - dimensional cell aggregates . 3 . Quail embryo endocardial cells : In order to further inquiry on the accuracy of the two Voronoi tessellation methods , we apply the image segmentation described above also to micrographs of endocardial cells extracted from a quail embryo , see ﬁgure 5 . 2 . Here , only the nuclei are available in a separate ﬂuorescence channel . However , the phase contrast images taken simultaneously are also suitable for extracting data on the cell - cell contacts . In particular , cells in the bulk seem to be surrounded by a fairly bright halo , which is prominent enough to be taken as indication for the membrane situated between two distinct cells . As before , we identify the nuclei from the ﬂuorescence channel O f . Here , the Gaussian ﬁlter for creating the blurred image B f has a radius 2 See electronic supplementary material , section A . 7 , or http : / / www . theobio . uni - bonn . de / people / mab / dsup . 136 Figure 5 . 2 . : Comparison of circular and planar Voronoi diagram con - structed from the nuclei of quail embryonic endocardial cells in a conﬂuent monolayer . The original micrograph is cour - tesy of Andras Czirok . 137 of 25 pixels , and the diﬀerence picture is D f = O f − B f . Thresholding according to Z f = ( D f > 1 . 8 B f ) creates the Boolean version Z f , and only one single dilation / erosion step is performed with a small cross - like stencil of diameter 3 . In the resulting boolean image Z (cid:48) f , we neglect clusters of less than 12 pixels in size . Segmentation of the cell - cell contacts works as described for the Zebraﬁsh cells above , with Gaussian radius of 5 pixels and the cell - cell contact brightness threshold of 0 . 29 . Figure 5 . 2 shows phase contrast and circular ( top ) versus planar ( bot - tom ) Voronoi diagram in overlay . For cells with smaller nuclei , the diﬀer - ences in Voronoi cell shape are quite pronounced . In the ﬁgure , one can also observe dividing cells near the big cell in the center of the monolayer . Apparently , the ﬂuorescent area associated with the nucleus appears to split into two equal parts . This interesting feature is exhibited only in the ﬁrst image , because only the circular Voronoi diagram takes into ac - count the varying sizes of the cell nuclei . While the relative matches M circular = 13 . 7 % versus M planar = 13 . 3 % give no clear indication , the observed cellular shape variations clearly favor the circular Voronoi tessel - lation over the planar one . In the following sections , we therefore model cell aggregates by circular Voronoi tessellations exclusively . 5 . 3 . Cell pairs interact via cadherin mediated adhesion 3 1 . Geometry of a cell pair and starlikeness : In order to deﬁne mean - ingful pair interaction forces , we ﬁrst explore the geometric properties of a single cell pair comprising the circular Voronoi tessellation from sec - tion 4 . 4 . As before , the cell bodies are represented by mathematical balls B r i ( x i ) , B r j ( x j ) from equation ( 4 . 34 ) and drawn green in ﬁgure 5 . 3 . The maximal possible extension of a Voronoi cell can be represented as ball , B R i 0 ( x i ) = { x ∈ R 2 : P i ( x ) ≤ P ex } ⊃ V i , ( 5 . 2 ) which follows from the deﬁning relation ( 4 . 10 ) of a Voronoi cell V i . Corre - spondingly , a free cell without contact to another would comprise the open version of the the so - called free ball B R i 0 ( x i ) . Setting q = 1 , ν = 2 , P 0 = 0 in the scaling function ( 4 . 8 ) , and thereby dropping the matrix notation 3 Most paragraphs of this section appeared in [ 31 ] , as indicated in separate foot - notes . The article [ 31 ] was jointly written by M . B . , Amit Kumar Tyagi , Jan - Ulrich Kreft and Wolfgang Alt . 138 R T R j R j 0 R i 0 M ij A R ij θ φ j T φ i x j x i A 0 R i A T ˆ d ij Γ ij B R j 0 ( x j ) B R i 0 ( x i ) Figure 5 . 3 . : Contact geometry of a pair of two circular Voronoi cells . The properties of their generators P i , P j are represented by the two cell body balls B r i ( x i ) , B r j ( x j ) ( green circles ) , cf . equa - tion ( 4 . 34 ) . On the other hand , the maximal extension of the corresponding Voronoi cells V i , V i is limited by the ex - tremal scaled norm P ex , see equation ( 5 . 2 ) . It gives rise to the so - called free balls B R i 0 ( x i ) , B R j 0 ( x j ) ( blue outer circles ) , which represent the occupied domains of the Voronoi cells V i , V j in isolation . The latter can only be neighbors i ∼ j if the shaded region B R i 0 ( x i ) ∩ B R j 0 ( x j ) is non - empty . Oth - erwise , there would be no contact border Γ ij ( red ) , because it would be situated in the void between the distant cells . For proposition 5 . 3 . 1 , we additionally need several geometric quantities . The point A ( red dot ) on the contact circle ( red line ) with radius R ij is parameterized by the polar angle θ with respect to the contact center M ij . The corresponding angles as viewed from the cell centers x i , x j are φ i , φ j , and R i , R j are the distances of A from x i , x j . The circle through M ij and x i ( black ) has its center at T ( center black dot ) , and intersects Γ ij ( red ) at the A T ( top black dot ) . The point A 0 ( blue dot ) marks the intersection of the circles associated with the free balls B R i 0 ( x i ) and B R j 0 ( x j ) . Finally , the coordi - nate system has been aligned with the cell center connection x i − x j , which deﬁnes the unit vector ˆ d ij . 139 ( 4 . 25 ) of the generator P i , we have P i ( x ) = (cid:13)(cid:13) x − x i (cid:13)(cid:13) 2 i ≡ ( x − x i ) 2 r 2 i . ( 5 . 3 ) In this way , the relation of free cell radius R i 0 deﬁned by ( 5 . 2 ) and body radius r i is R i 0 = r i · (cid:112) P ex , with P ex > 1 . ( 5 . 4 ) The later inequality condition is a consequence of the model requirement that a Voronoi cell should have at least some space around the central cell body region B r i ( x i ) . According to equation ( 4 . 15 ) we also have Γ i 0 ⊂ (cid:8) x ∈ R 2 : (cid:107) x − x i (cid:107) = R i 0 (cid:9) ( 5 . 5 ) for the free margin Γ i 0 of the Voronoi cell V i . With these notions at hand , we take a closer look at geometrical prop - erties of the contact surface Γ ij between two adjacent cells as in ﬁgure 5 . 3 . From this ﬁgure and the formulae ( 4 . 33 ) deﬁning the circular contact border Γ ij , it becomes apparent that the larger cell may not always be starlike . Recall the deﬁnition of starlikeness with respect to the center x i : ∀ x ∈ V i also the line segment x i x ⊂ V i . Not being starlike is – how - ever – an unusual property of biological cells . While exceptions to this rule naturally do exist , they usually have a rather extreme architecture , like e . g . neurons with multiple dendritic extensions and a long axon . Since non - starlike cells also deviate from earlier tissue models [ 71 , 105 , 191 , 205 ] , we investigate under which circumstances Voronoi cells of circular gener - ators remain starlike . 4 In ﬁgure 5 . 3 , the straight line connecting x i and A T is a tangent to Γ ij . Thus it is clear from the geometry that both V i and V j are star - like domains with respect to x i , x j , if and only if their corresponding free balls B R i 0 ( x i ) , B R j 0 ( x j ) do not extend beyond the point A T . Before we proceed , we introduce the cell size homogeneity quotient Q = min i , j r i + r j | r i − r j | = r max + r min r max − r min , ( 5 . 6 ) where r min = min i r i , r max = max i r i , and the last equality in ( 5 . 6 ) follows from monotonicity arguments . Therefore , Q = Q ( { r i : i = 1 . . . N } ) is a measure of the uniformity of cell sizes within a tissue , with Q → ∞ for almost equal r i and Q ≈ 1 for r max (cid:29) r min . 4 The remainder of this paragraph appeared in slightly modiﬁed form as part of [ 31 , section 2 . 2 ] . M . B . performed the presented research and wrote that part of the paper . 140 Proposition 5 . 3 . 1 ( Starlike cells ) : For a circular Voronoi tessellation , the resulting cells V i are starlike with respect to x i , if the maximal P - distance P ex fulﬁlls the homogeneity constraint 1 < P ex ≤ Q . ( 5 . 7 ) Proof : Consider the ﬁgure 5 . 3 . From fundamental trigonometric rela - tions follows the angle φ Tj : = ∠ ( T , x j , A T ) = π 2 , ( 5 . 8 ) and the geometric similarity of the triangles (cid:52) ( M ij , x i , A T ) , (cid:52) ( x i , A T , x j ) . Let d ij : = (cid:107) x i − x j (cid:107) denote the distance between the two cell centers . With r j < r i , we have for the point A = A T cos θ T = r j r i ( 5 . 9 ) R jT = r j (cid:113) | r 2 i − r 2 j | · d ij , R iT = r i (cid:113) | r 2 i − r 2 j | · d ij , ( 5 . 10 ) where the angle θ T corresponds to the θ - parameterization of A T on Γ ij and the radii R iT , R jT connect A T and x i , x j , respectively . With the equations in ( 5 . 10 ) , the maximal distances of a point A on Γ ij from the two cell centers have been identiﬁed . Starlikeness of V i is equivalent to the condition R 2 i 0 ≤ R 2 iT with R 2 i 0 = P ex r 2 i , thus P ex ≤ ( x i − x j ) 2 / | r 2 i − r 2 j | , which can be fulﬁlled by requiring P ex ≤ Q , since we have ( r i + r j ) 2 ≤ ( x i − x j ) 2 , i . e . non - overlapping generator balls for all i , j . With the inequality condition in ( 5 . 4 ) the assertion follows . In particular , starlikeness prohibits engulfment of one cell by the other , so that B R i 0 ( x i ) may not contain B R j 0 ( x j ) completely for r i > r j . Note that within suﬃciently large tissues , the smallest and biggest cell will usually not be in contact , which relaxes inequality ( 5 . 7 ) into the condition : 1 < P ex ≤ min neighbors i , j r i + r j | r i − r j | = : Q nb , ( 5 . 11 ) where Q nb indicates the cell size homogeneity over all neighbor pairs . 141 cell body cell - cell contact nucleus lamella / cortex Figure 5 . 4 . : Scheme of interacting cell pair with the biologically motivated functional units nucleus ( dark blue ) , cell body ( white ) , and lamella / cortex ( green ) . The interplay of intracellular cyto - plasm dynamics and external substratum adhesion beneath the lamella leads to cellular locomotion . In addition , the mutual transcellular adhesion is mediated by links bridging the cytoskeleton of both cells via dedicated junctions at the cell - cell contact ( red ) , which is inﬂuenced by the underlying density of pairing ﬁlaments ( black ) , see text for details . 2 . Structural components of cell - cell adhesions 5 : The cytoskeleton with its network of ﬁlaments often features bundled structures , which are commonly visible as so - called stress ﬁbers . They emanate from the cell body or nucleus in radial direction and often reach out towards the cell border , cf . the red and green lines in ﬁgure 1 . 4 . According to [ 68 ] , ﬁla - mentous actin at cell cell contacts attaches to transmembrane complexes called adherens junctions . The latter are made from e . g . catenins on the cytosolic side and cadherins at the exterior of the cell , cf . also section 1 . 6 . By connecting neighboring cells , these structures stiﬀen and strengthen the tissue coherence . Inspired by this observation , it is assumed that the interaction force between two cell bodies is transduced by radial ﬁlament structures ex - tending towards the cell boundaries . Thereby , the ﬁlaments of one cell connect to those of the other and form pairs along the contact border Γ ij , see ﬁgure 5 . 4 . However , these cell - cell junctions are not ﬁxed and undergo dissociation , diﬀusion , and renewed association . Motivated by protein ( e . g . cadherin ) diﬀusion properties in membranes [ 85 ] , this pro - 5 A slightly modiﬁed form of this paragraph appeared in [ 31 , section 3 . 1 ] . M . B . per - formed the presented research and wrote that part of the paper . 142 cess is considered to be fast ( seconds ) compared to the slower time scale ( several minutes ) of cell deformation and translocation . In this way , pair formation of cross - attachments between ﬁlament bundles from both cell bodies can be regarded as a pseudo - stationary stochastic process [ 76 ] . In order to compute the interaction force between two cells , one needs a suitable expression for the density of pairing ﬁlaments ρ ( θ ) at the border of the cells i , j . 3 . Filament pair density at cell - cell contacts 6 : Consider the cell pair as illustrated in ﬁgures 5 . 3 and 5 . 4 , with cell body radii r i > r j , and all geometric quantities as before . Starting from the surface of the cell bodies B r i ( x i ) and B r j ( x j ) , ﬁlaments extend in radial direction under angles φ i ( θ ) and φ j ( θ ) , respectively , to eventually meet at A ( θ ) on the contact border Γ ij . The density of the radial ﬁlaments is assumed to be constant on the surface of each cell body , and given by a universal value ˜ ρ > 0 , which represents the active structures of the cytoskeleton and thereby the capability for cellular contraction and spreading forces . In order to construct the pairing density of ﬁlaments ρ ( θ ) , we need to establish a mapping of the single densities ˜ ρ from the cell body surfaces onto the contact border Γ ij . Denoting the mapped densities by ρ i ( θ ) , ρ j ( θ ) we ﬁnd ρ i ( θ ) R ij d θ = ˜ ρr i d φ i , ρ j ( θ ) R ij d θ = ˜ ρr j d φ j . ( 5 . 12 ) by equating corresponding surface elements . For a point A ( θ ) ∈ Γ ij , we have R ij sin θ = R i sin φ i = R j sin φ j , ( 5 . 13 ) R ij cos θ = | x j − M ij | + R j cos φ j . ( 5 . 14 ) With the help of equation ( 5 . 3 ) , the deﬁning condition for the contact border in equation ( 4 . 13 ) can be written as R j = ηR i with η = r j r i < 1 . ( 5 . 15 ) Thus , from equation ( 5 . 13 ) we obtain the relation sin φ i = η · sin φ j ( 5 . 16 ) 6 A longer version of this paragraph appeared in [ 31 , section 3 . 2 ] . M . B . and Amit Kumar Tyagi performed the presented research , and M . B . wrote that part of the paper . 143 between the two angles φ i ( θ ) and φ j ( θ ) . Diﬀerentiation of ( 5 . 16 ) with respect to θ yields the proportionality d φ i d θ = η · cos φ j cos φ i · d φ j d θ = η κ η ( φ j ) · d φ j d θ , ( 5 . 17 ) where κ η ( φ j ) = (cid:112) 1 + ( 1 − η 2 ) · tan 2 φ j . Moreover , by solving equation ( 5 . 13 ) for R j in terms of R ij , inserting it into equation ( 5 . 14 ) , and using the relations ( 4 . 33 ) we get an explicit expression for tan φ j in terms of θ , tan φ j = sin θ cos θ − η . ( 5 . 18 ) This expression holds for all | θ | < θ T or equivalently | φ j | < π / 2 , see equations ( 5 . 8 , 5 . 9 ) . Finally , by diﬀerentiation of equation ( 5 . 18 ) with respect to θ we obtain d φ j d θ = tan φ j 1 + tan 2 φ j · (cid:16) tan φ j + 1 tan θ (cid:17) = 1 − η cos θ 1 − 2 η cos θ + η 2 > 0 . ( 5 . 19 ) Let us now assume that the pairing density function ρ ( θ ) depends on ρ i ( θ ) and ρ j ( θ ) , is even in θ , maximal at θ = 0 , and strictly monotonically decreasing for increasing | θ | . In [ 31 , section 3 . 2 ] , two exemplary models to specify such a density function ρ ( θ ) are discussed . Here , we prefer the so - called mean density pairing involving the geometric mean , ρ ( θ ) = (cid:113) ρ i ( θ ) · ρ j ( θ ) = ˜ ρ · r j R ij · (cid:112) κ η ( φ j ) · d φ j d θ . ( 5 . 20 ) It describes the steady - state of short - term stochastic ﬁlament association provided that each ﬁlament from either of the neighboring cells has some probability to randomly engage in some junction on Γ ij . 4 . Pair interaction force 7 : Consider two adjacent neighbor cells i ∼ j with their cell - cell center distance being d ij = (cid:107) x i − x j (cid:107) . This axis connecting the cell center deﬁnes the horizontal direction of the pair - local coordinate system in ﬁgure 5 . 3 , and is denoted by the unit vector ˆ d ij . The orthogonal direction is given by the vertical unit vector ˆ d ⊥ ij with 7 A slightly modiﬁed version of this paragraph appeared in [ 31 , section 3 . 3 ] . Wolf - gang Alt and M . B . jointly performed the presented research and wrote that part of the paper . 144 the property ˆ d ij · ˆ d ⊥ ij = 0 and facing upwards in ﬁgure 5 . 3 . The cell body distance corresponding to d ij is δ ij : = d ij − r i − r j and relative partition of the space in between is denoted by δ ij = δ i + δ j , cf . ﬁgure 4 . 2 . Let the cells be situated in such a manner that they are barely touching each other , so that any further increase in δ ij would cause them to dissociate . Then , d ij = R i 0 + R j 0 , and by equation ( 5 . 4 ) we have for the limiting rupture distance δ rup ij of the cell bodies δ rup ij = (cid:0)(cid:112) P ex − 1 (cid:1) ( r i + r j ) = : δ i 0 + δ j 0 , ( 5 . 21 ) where δ i 0 : = R i 0 − r i , δ j 0 : = R j 0 − r j quantify the partition of δ ij = δ rup ij at rupture . Then according to the assumptions in the two preceding paragraphs , any paired couple of actin ﬁbers meeting at an adherens junction in the contact boundary Γ ij develops a certain positive stress between the two cell bodies . As in the model function ( 3 . 20 ) for single cell migration , this stress depends on the mean volume fraction q 0 of the contractile cytoskeletal network 8 , which before touching was equal in both contacting lamellae of width δ i 0 , δ j 0 , respectively . If now δ ij further decreases , then both lamellae will be compressed by the equal factor δ i / δ i 0 = δ j / δ j 0 = δ ij / δ rup ij < 1 . as a consequence of the Voronoi partition laws ( 4 . 10 , 4 . 15 ) . Thus , we can make the following two assumptions : ﬁrst , the mean volume fraction in both lamellae increases to the same value q satisfying the inverse relation q q 0 = δ rup ij δ ij . ( 5 . 22 ) Second , any paired actin ﬁbers develop the same stress between their adherens junction and the corresponding cell body , with a strength f that , for simplicity , depends only on the common cytoskeletal volume fraction q , i . e . f = f ( q ) . Yet the cytoskeletal network consists not only of cross - linked actin - myosin ﬁlaments but also of more or less ﬂexible mi - crotubuli and intermediate ﬁlaments [ 128 , 196 , 211 ] . Therefore , the stress function f ( q ) has to decrease to ( large ) negative values for increasing q → q max = 1 , which would also resemble a certain amount of contact inhibition between cells in close contact . Here we chose the simple , ther - modynamically compatible strictly decreasing model function f ( q ) = f int (cid:16) ln ( 1 − q ) − ln q − ln z c (cid:17) , ( 5 . 23 ) 8 In order to avoid notational clashes , the cytoskeletal volume fraction is denoted by the letter q in this multi - cell model and not by θ as in chapter 3 . 145 where the coeﬃcient f int is a model parameter . The corresponding gen - eralized free energy F is convex and satisﬁes F ( 1 − q ) = ( 1 − q ) (cid:0) f ( q ) − f int (cid:1) ( 5 . 24 ) for 0 < q < 1 ( cf . [ 4 ] ) , where the positive constant z c < ( 1 − q 0 ) / q 0 determines the critical volume fraction q c = 1 / ( 1 + z c ) > q 0 such that f ( q c ) = 0 . Applying transformation ( 5 . 22 ) we ﬁnally obtain an actin ﬁber stress function that depends only on the relative cell body distance ∆ ij = δ ij / δ rup ij < 1 , namely f ( ∆ ij ) = f int · ln (cid:16) ∆ ij − ∆ min ∆ crit − ∆ min (cid:17) , ( 5 . 25 ) where 0 < ∆ min = q 0 < q 0 ( 1 + z c ) = ∆ crit < 1 . The derivation of this cellular interaction model relies on several simpli - fying assumptions . First , the stress arises from ﬁlaments emanating from the two cell bodies B r i ( x i ) , B r j ( x j ) , and engaging in an adherens junction at Γ ij . Second , the stress in the ﬁlament pair is completely determined by the coupling of eﬀective adhesion strength f int and the local cytoskele - ton state q . According to equation ( 5 . 22 ) , this state is attained in the lamellae near the horizontal cell - cell connection axis along ˆ d ij , see ﬁgures 5 . 3 and 5 . 4 . Finally , within this pair - coordinate frame , the respective ﬁl - ament orientations are ˆ R i = ( − cos φ i , sin φ i ) and ˆ R j = ( cos φ j , sin φ j ) , so that the corresponding adherens junction at Γ ij experiences two force vectors f i = − f ( ∆ ij ) · ˆ R i and f j = − f ( ∆ ij ) · ˆ R j with opposing horizontal components . However , their resultant vector f i + f j generally does not vanish ( except for φ i = φ j = 0 ) . It has a negative vertical component ( f i + f j ) · ˆ d ⊥ ij = − f ( ∆ ij ) · ( sin φ i + sin φ j ) , which could pull the adherens junction towards the cell - cell connection line along the contact boundary Γ ij . Therefore , some counterforces due to substrate adhesion via e . g . inte - grin [ 79 , 98 ] or frictional drag have to be supposed in order to guarantee the assumed pseudo - stationary equilibrium condition for Γ ij . Using the simplifying decomposition in horizontal and vertical components , we ar - rive at the following model expression for the force f ij applied by a single ﬁlament pair onto the cell body center x j : f ij = 1 2 (cid:16) ( f i − f j ) · ˆ d ij , α ( f i + f j ) · ˆ d ⊥ ij (cid:17) = f ( ∆ ij ) 2 (cid:16) ( cos φ i + cos φ j ) ˆ d ij + α ( sin φ i + sin φ j ) ˆ d ⊥ ij (cid:17) , ( 5 . 26 ) 146 - 2 - 1 0 1 2 4 6 8 10 (cid:12)(cid:12) F int ij (cid:12)(cid:12) [ nN ] ∆ min = 0 . 2 ∆ crit = 0 . 5 r j = 2 . 5 µ m P ex = 9 log (cid:0) r i / r j (cid:1) δ i j [ µ m ] (cid:12)(cid:12) F int ij (cid:12)(cid:12) [ nN ] - 1 . 0 - 0 . 5 0 . 0 0 . 5 1 . 0 Figure 5 . 5 . : Dependence of the in - tissue cellular interaction force | F int ij | on the cell body distance δ ij and the ratio r i / r j of their generator radii . In the empty regions of the plot , F int ij is not deﬁned , because there the two cells are not in contact . where α ≥ 0 is an additional adhesion or friction parameter , representing the cooperative traction activity of the cell pair in the vertical direction . By relying on the pairing ﬁlament density ρ ( θ ) from paragraph 5 . 3 . 3 , we obtain an integral expression for the total pair interaction force applied by cell i onto cell j : F int ij = R ij (cid:90) Γ ij d θ ρ ( θ ) · f ij ( θ ) ( 5 . 27 ) where the trigonometric relations between φ i , φ j and the parameterization angle θ have to be extracted from equations ( 5 . 16 , 5 . 17 ) . The emerging cell pair interaction force F int ij is shown in ﬁgures 5 . 5 and 5 . 6 . A natural and maximal cut - oﬀ distance for the force is given by the ﬁniteness of the Voronoi tessellation , whereby neighboring is only possible for suﬃciently small cell center distances δ ij < δ rup ij + r i + r j , i . e . B R i 0 ( x i ) ∩ B R j 0 ( x j ) (cid:54) = ∅ . Once two previously isolated cells come close enough for contact , there is a strong tendency to attach , which facilitates multicellular tissue formation . As one can see from ﬁgure 5 . 6 ( a ) , the interaction force is attractive until the cell distance δ ij reaches δ crit ij = ∆ crit · δ rup ij , where F int ij vanishes . Finally , if δ ij drops below δ crit ij , F int ij becomes repulsive and therefore hinders tissue collapse at distances approaching δ min ij = ∆ min · δ rup ij , which resembles the contact - mediated inhibition of collectively migrating cells . 147 - 1 . 0 - 0 . 5 0 . 0 0 . 5 1 . 0 0 2 4 6 8 10 (cid:12)(cid:12) F i n t i j (cid:12)(cid:12) [ n N ] δ ij [ µ m ] ∆ min = 0 . 2 ∆ crit = 0 . 5 r j = 2 . 5 µ m P ex = 9 r i = 4 . 0 µ m 2 . 5 µ m 1 . 0 µ m δ ( rup ) ij ( a ) - 1 . 0 - 0 . 5 0 . 0 0 . 5 1 . 0 0 1 2 3 4 5 r i [ µ m ] ∆ min = 0 . 2 ∆ crit = 0 . 5 r j = 2 . 5 µ m P ex = 9 δ ij = 6 µ m 4 µ m 2 µ m ( b ) Figure 5 . 6 . : Dependence of the in - tissue cellular interaction force | F int ij | on ( a ) the cell body distance δ ij and ( b ) the cell body radius r i . In each plot we show three distinct curves corresponding to the indicated parameter values of r i and δ ij , respectively . Note that with the relative cell body distances ∆ ij > ∆ min , the lower bound from inequality ( 5 . 11 ) on the homogeneity of cell radii due to ﬁxed √P ex can be relaxed to 1 < P ex (cid:0) ∆ min ( √P ex − 1 ) + 1 (cid:1) 2 ≤ Q nb . ( 5 . 28 ) Correspondingly , P ex can be increased for given cell size homogeneity Q or neighbor size homogeneity Q nb , cf . equations ( 5 . 6 , 5 . 11 ) . For example , the constraint ( 5 . 28 ) yields Q nb = 6 . 25 for √P ex = 3 , or r min ≥ 0 . 73 · r max for each cell pair . In fact , the actual distances ∆ ij in a tissue will be larger than ∆ min , eﬀectively relaxing ( 5 . 28 ) even further . 5 . Locomotion force at the free boundary 9 : In addition to the dy - namics induced by pair interaction forces , cells at the tissue margin may migrate into open space . The locomotion force causing such a migration is due to lamellipodial protrusion and retraction , which is unhindered only at the free cell boundary Γ i 0 . In a similar manner as before , we assume that this locomotion or free boundary force onto the cell body B r i ( x i ) is determined by connecting radial ﬁlament bundles as indicated 9 A slightly modiﬁed version of this paragraph appeared in [ 31 , section 3 . 4 ] . Wolf - gang Alt and M . B . jointly performed the presented research , and M . B . wrote that part of the paper . 148 - 1 . 0 - 0 . 5 0 . 0 0 . 5 1 . 0 2 4 6 8 100 50 100 150 200 F j [ nN ] ( a ) δ [ µ m ] f l o c [ p N ] F j [ nN ] - 1 . 0 - 0 . 5 0 . 0 0 . 5 1 . 0 2 4 6 8 10 F j [ n N ] δ [ µ m ] f loc [ pN ] = 40 80 105 120 160 ( b ) Figure 5 . 7 . : Force balancing in an isolated cell pair . The deterministic force F j = | F int ij + F loc j | acts on the cell center x j . Parameters are f int = 60 pN , α = 1 , r i = 3 . 0 , r j = 2 . 0 , ˜ ρ = 6 . 6 / µ m , ∆ min = 0 . 2 , ∆ crit = 0 . 5 . in ﬁgure 5 . 4 . The ﬁlament density of cell i along its free boundary Γ i 0 is given by ρ i 0 = ˜ ρr i R i 0 = ˜ ρ √P ex , ( 5 . 29 ) and thus independent of r i . In this way , the locomotion force of a cell i reads as F loc i = f loc (cid:90) Γ i 0 d s i ρ i 0 ˆ R i 0 ( φ i ) , ( 5 . 30 ) with arc length s i = R i 0 φ i , the radial unit vector ˆ R i 0 ( φ i ) = ( cos φ i , sin φ i ) and the locomotion strength parameter f loc , see table 5 . 1 below . We remark that this expression for the locomotion force is in full analogy to equations ( 3 . 57 , 3 . 58 ) from the peripheral cell migration model , except that the free boundary Γ i 0 does not occupy the full cell perimeter . The resultant force F j = | F int ij + F loc j | for a cell j interacting with another cell i in a pair including locomotion is shown in ﬁgure 5 . 7 . Apparently , there is a stable contact equilibrium in F j for lower values of the locomotion strength f loc ≤ 105 pN . In order to heuristically account for ubiquitous perturbations due to lamellipodial ﬂuctuations or possible signals , we additionally implement stochastic force increments at the tissue margin d F st i = b st (cid:90) Γ i 0 d B t , s i . ( 5 . 31 ) Here we assume a uniform and isotropic vector noise B t , s i deﬁning a spatio - temporal Brownian sheet in arc length and time coordinates with 149 independent Gaussian increments satisfying Var (cid:0) d B ts i (cid:1) = d s i · d t . The strength of the stochastic force is determined by the the parameter b st , again see table 5 . 1 below . For each time t , stochastic integration results in a simple weighted Gaussian noise term with random increments d W t d F st i = b st (cid:112) | Γ i 0 | d W t (cid:98) = b st (cid:114) | Γ i 0 | d t 2 ξξξ t , ( 5 . 32 ) where ξξξ t is a vector of Gaussian random numbers , which is chosen inde - pendently for every time step in a corresponding numerical realization of the stochastic process . 6 . Drag forces 10 : Apart from interaction and free boundary forces , the cell is subject to drag forces F drag i slowing down its movement . Such drag forces are generally functions of the cell body velocity ˙ x i = v i . As in paragraph 3 . 8 . 5 , we assume the simplest dependency of a linear force - velocity relation F drag i = − γ i v i , ( 5 . 33 ) with drag coeﬃcient γ i = γ ( r i ) . Arising from friction with the substra - tum , γ i could depend on the area of the cell body , e . g . γ ( r i ) ∝ r 2 i , however , for simplicity , here we take γ i = ˜ γ independent of cell body sizes . 7 . Dynamics of cell movement 11 : The previously described , active and anisotropic forces F int ij , F loc i arise from the actin ﬁlament network and cooperative adhesions , act onto the cell center x i , and thereby cause the cell to translocate . Thereby , the friction from equation ( 5 . 33 ) is considered to be dominating and inertia terms are neglected [ 83 , 106 , 191 ] , so that the emerging deterministic overdamped Newtonian equations of motion read as F i + F drag i = 0 , with F i = F loc i + (cid:88) j neighbor F int ji . ( 5 . 34 ) However , any change of the translocation direction as well as adjustment of speed to the pseudo - steady state as given by the previous equation 10 In slightly modiﬁed from , this paragraph appeared in [ 31 , section 3 . 4 ] . Wolfgang Alt and M . B . jointly performed the presented research , and M . B . wrote that part of the paper . 11 A slightly modiﬁed version of this paragraph appeared in [ 31 , section 3 . 4 ] . Wolf - gang Alt and M . B . jointly performed the presented research , and M . B . wrote that part of the paper . 150 ( 5 . 34 ) requires some ( mean ) time T i for restructuring and reinforcing the anisotropic actin network . The simplest way to model this adjustment process involves a linear stochastic ﬁlter of ﬁrst order for the velocity [ 13 ] . Together with equation ( 5 . 31 ) this results in the stochastic diﬀerential equation ( SDE ) system d v i = 1 T i (cid:18) F i γ i − v i (cid:19) d t + b ( i ) st (cid:112) | Γ i 0 | d W t , d x i = v i d t , ( 5 . 35 ) with b ( i ) st = b st / γ i . Similarly as the friction γ i , also the mean adjustment time T i could be cell dependent , however here we restrict ourselves to the case of cells with a single activity time scale ∀ i : T i = T for all cells . For each time t , the forces ( 5 . 27 , 5 . 30 , 5 . 32 , 5 . 33 ) can be computed ex - plicitly from the Voronoi tessellation of the generating cell bodies { B r i ( x i ) : i = 1 . . . N } using a spatial discretization of { Γ ij } in the parameterizing angle θ . Next , the velocities { v i } and positions { x i } of the cell cen - ters are updated according to both equations ( 5 . 35 ) in an explicit Euler - Maruyama step [ 127 ] . Finally , the Voronoi tessellation is recomputed from the updated cell bodies { B r i ( x i ) } . Higher order stochastic integration schemes were not applied , since such procedures require the distribution of both forces and perturbations onto the powers of a Taylor expansion . In general , the involved derivatives of cell - cell contacts { Γ ij } and cell margins { Γ i 0 } cannot be computed easily a priori . Particularly , the change of a contact Γ ij may depend on the behavior of several distinct nearby cells k (cid:54) = i , j . Altogether , here we use the versatile basic method for integrating the equations of motion , because it is applicable regardless of the structure of the underlying SDE system . 8 . Dimensional considerations 12 : Before coming to simulations of model tissues , we further study the cellular equations of motion ( 5 . 35 ) . Since both time ( seconds ) and length scale ( microns ) of cell motility processes are well known , the only remaining free scaling ﬁgure is the magnitude of cell forces . In accordance to [ 10 ] , we assume that a typical bundle of sev - eral actin ﬁlaments can exert a force of approximately 10 pN . A single cell can , with the overall ﬁlament density parameter ˜ ρ and the force prefactors f loc , f int as in table 5 . 1 , reach an eﬀective traction of O ( 1000 pN ) from a force as given by equation ( 5 . 27 ) . The drag coeﬃcient ˜ γ then naturally 12 A slightly modiﬁed version of this paragraph has been published in [ 31 , section 5 ] . M . B . performed the presented research and wrote that part of the paper . 151 Symbol Meaning Value Units √P ex Relative maximal cell extension 3 dimensionless r i Cell body radii 0 . 9 . . . 2 . 0 µ m T Cytoskeletal reorganization time 120 s ˜ ρ Filament bundle density on cell body 9 . 55 1 / µ m f loc Strength of cellular locomotion force 10 . . . 20 pN f int Strength of cellular interaction force 60 pN α Cooperative vertical traction coeﬃcient 0 . . . 0 . 17 dimensionless ∆ min Relative minimal cell pair distance 0 . 1 dimensionless ∆ crit Relative critical cell pair distance 0 . 2 . . . 0 . 7 dimensionless b st · P − 1 / 4 ex Strength of stochastic migration force 8 . 31 pN / √ µ m · s ˜ γ Cellular friction constant 2 . 5 · 10 4 pN · s / µ m d t Numerical time step 2 s Table 5 . 1 . : Model parameter values as employed in this chapter 5 , unless indicated otherwise . As explained in the text , P ex determines the relative size of the lamella region around the cell body B r i ( x i ) . The scaled interaction distances ∆ min , ∆ crit are de - ﬁned in equation ( 5 . 25 ) and determine the sign and scaling of the cell pair interaction force F int ij . The relative strength of the vertical component of F int ij in equation ( 5 . 26 ) is given by α . Finally , the stochastic perturbation parameter b st in equa - tion ( 5 . 32 ) contains a factor ( P ex ) − 1 / 4 in order to obtain the same amount of perturbation for cells with equal body radii r i . Since we look for robust features in the simulations , b st was chosen fairly high . follows from experimentally observed cell velocities [ 79 , 155 , 234 ] . These and all the other model parameters used in this chapter are summarized in table 5 . 1 , together with a brief description of their meaning . Unless indicated otherwise , we here employ the default parameter set from table 5 . 1 . 152 5 . 4 . Small cell groups exhibit several topological arrangements 13 1 . Emergence of tissue shape and multiple stable states : Consider a simple proto - tissue of seven cells as shown in ﬁgure 5 . 8 ‘start’ . Using the 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 1 23 4 5 6 7 1 23 4 5 6 7 start ( a ) ( b ) ( c ) ( d ) 0 10 20 30 40 50 ( a ) ( b ) ( c ) ( d ) p e r ce n t ag e o f o cc u rr e n ce conformation Figure 5 . 8 . : Diﬀerent tissue conformations ( a – d ) evolving from the con - ﬁguration ‘start’ after a simulation time of 8 h ; here r max = 2 . 0 µ m ( cell 7 ) , r min = 1 . 0 µ m ( cell 2 ) , and parameters f loc = 20 pN , α = 0 , ∆ crit = 0 . 25 . The percentage of occur - rence of a particular conformation then was computed , and the error bars were obtained by a simple bootstrap method . Other features are further explained in the text . parameters f loc = 20 pN , α = 0 , ∆ crit = 0 . 25 , a series of 1000 simulations has been performed . After a simulation time of 8 h , the emerging tissue conformations as distinguished by Delaunay network topology have been recorded . In the course of these 8 h , signiﬁcant changes appear within the 13 A slightly modiﬁed version of this section has been published in [ 31 , section 5 . 1 ] , which was jointly written by M . B . , Amit Kumar Tyagi , Jan - Ulrich Kreft , and Wolfgang Alt . M . B . performed the presented research and wrote that part of the paper . 153 tissue , and apparently several equilibrium conformations emerge . For the four most prevalent cellular arrangements the percentage of occurrence is displayed in ﬁgure 5 . 8 . One observes two rather globular shapes ( a ) , ( d ) , where either the big cell 1 or the two small cells 2 , 3 are engulfed by the others , respectively . Furthermore , there are two quite elongated shapes ( b ) , ( c ) , where only the single small cell 2 is completely surrounded by other cells . Being distinguished by topology , ( b ) and ( c ) are in fact quite close in shape , despite of their rotational variation . 2 . Quantifying tissue shape and its ﬂuctuations : From the high oc - currence of the topological conformations ( a ) , ( b ) one might conclude that these two conformations are the most stable ones . Thus , and to clarify the interrelations between the conformations ( a – d ) , we investigate ( a ) and ( b ) in longer simulations . To this end , by starting from the conﬁg - urations ( a ) and ( b ) ( see ﬁgure 5 . 8 ) , both tissues have been evolved for 40 additional hours of simulation time . In order to characterize the shape of tissue with respect to global and elongated shape , here we observe tissue size , i . e . the maximum diameter , and tissue circularity Ω = 2 √ πA tiss (cid:80) i | Γ i 0 | ≤ 1 , ( 5 . 36 ) where A tiss is the total area of the tissue . Note that in connected tissues Ω = 1 would be attained for a purely circular globe . In ﬁgure 5 . 9 , we plot the full time series of size and circularity for the two tissues from 5 . 8 ( a ) & ( b ) . After approximately 8 h , the time series for ( a (cid:98) = blue ) & ( b (cid:98) = red ) exhibit clearly diﬀerent conformations . While the circularity Ω is only slightly diﬀerent in the two cases , the tissue size is clearly higher for the elongated conformation ( b ) . Apart from stochastic ﬂuctuations and an initial equilibration phase for t < 1 h , both observables attain a constant value for time series ( a ) . In contrast , for time series ( b ) there appear distinct states between t ∼ 2 . 5 h and t ∼ 24 h . Indeed these observations are reﬂected by the actual evolution of the tissue . While the topology of the tissue does not change after t = 2 h for time series ( a ) ( mova . avi 14 ) , tissue ( b ) ( movb . avi ) goes through several diﬀerent conformational states . At t = 13 . 5 h it attains the same topology as conformation ( c ) , identifying ( c ) as a transient state ( movc . avi ) . After - wards , approximately at t ∼ 18 . 5 h , cell 7 establishes contact with cells 14 All electronic supplementary material is available from http : / / www . theobio . uni - bonn . de / people / mab / dsup . 154 0 . 75 0 . 80 0 . 85 0 . 90 0 . 95 0 4 8 12 16 20 24 28 32 36 40 44 4818 20 22 24 26 28 Ω t i ss u e s i ze [ µ m ] t [ h ] Ω tissue size [ µ m ] ( a ) ( b ) Figure 5 . 9 . : Two time series ( blue , red ) for the tissue in ﬁgure 5 . 8 ‘start’ . After 8 h the two distinct topological conformations from ﬁg - ure 5 . 8 ( a ) ( blue ) and 5 . 8 ( b ) ( red ) have emerged . These topo - logical conformations are characterized by distinct tissue size ( right axis ) and circularity Ω ( left axis ) . While ( a ) is appar - ently a stable topological conformation that does not change even for strong stochastic perturbations , ( b ) relaxes into a topological conformation of globular shape via several inter - mediate steps , see supplementary mova . avi & movb . avi . 1 and 3 , so that the tissue shape is similar to ( c ) . Finally , shortly before t = 24 h , the tissue reaches its ﬁnal conformation similar to ( d ) except for the order of the marginal cells . Conformation ( d ) emerges in a sim - ilar manner as ( a ) , however instead of cells 1 , 5 initially cells 3 , 4 form a neighbor pair , quickly leading to the stable ﬁnal arrangement in less than 0 . 5 h ( movd . avi ) . Moreover , the time series of conformation ( b ) in ﬁgure 5 . 9 suggests , that during t = 0 . 5 . . . 3 h the tissue already attains a shape of similar compactness and stability as in ﬁgure 5 . 8 ( a ) . Never - theless , the Delaunay mesh ( green lines ) is not convex there ( movb . avi ) , which explains this surprising instability . 3 . Shape deformation barriers and tissue stability : It appears , that the stability of a tissue is related to its globular shape . This is not a surprise , since the stochastic forces in equation ( 5 . 30 ) are deﬁned only on free cell boundaries Γ i 0 , and therefore act only on marginal cells . Thus , by minimizing the total extension of all Γ i 0 , maximal circularity minimizes stochastic perturbations , which enhances the stability of the tissue . Additionally , for a tissue to change its topology , its cells have to over - 155 come barriers as imposed by the other cells . For example , cell 3 has to displace cell 1 in movb . avi at t ≈ 3 h in order to make contact with 2 . Depending on the particular conﬁguration , the severity of these barri - ers might range from prohibitive to practically non - existent . Inﬂuenced by the strength of the stochastic interactions , these barriers then deter - mine the time scale of further relaxation to equilibrium . In this sense , the notion of equilibrium is directly related to an inherent time scale . According to the previous evolution of the tissue , there may be several stable topological conformations for a given time scale . 5 . 5 . Tissue stability is favored by starlike cell geometries 15 1 . Eﬀects of maximal cell extension and critical distance : In order to explore the ramiﬁcations of piecewise spherical cells within our model framework , we study the inﬂuence of P ex and ∆ crit on tissue formation . To this end , a simulation has been performed starting from an exemplary conﬁguration as in ﬁgure 4 . 1 ( right ) with ∆ crit = 0 . 3 , √P ex = 3 , α = 0 . 17 and f loc = 10 pN . After 8 h , either ∆ crit or √P ex was modiﬁed to a nearby parameter position as indicated in ﬁgure 5 . 10 , and the simulation was continued for another 8 h . This procedure was repeated until the whole panel in 5 . 10 was ﬁlled with the ﬁnal tissue conﬁgurations . For ﬁxed { r i } , √P ex deﬁnes the free cell radius R i 0 in units of r i , and ∆ crit presets the equilibrium cell - cell body distance in units of δ rup ij , see equations ( 5 . 4 , 5 . 25 , 5 . 21 ) . In this way , both parameters jointly determine the emerging tissue size . In ﬁgure 5 . 10 , the corresponding overall tissue extension increases from left to right and from top to bottom . Further - more , for given ∆ crit , tissues with higher √P ex exhibit a rather compact , almost quadratic shape . We speculate that this is due to spontaneous formation of distinct protrusions arising from stochastic perturbations and leading to an increase of locomotion at the corners . In contrast , tis - sues with lower √P ex feature more irregular margins . Similarly , for given √P ex , larger values of ∆ crit yield more irregularity , most pronounced di - rectly before dissociation of the tissue . 15 A slightly modiﬁed version of this section has been published in [ 31 , section 5 . 2 ] , which was jointly written by M . B . , Amit Kumar Tyagi , Jan - Ulrich Kreft , and Wolfgang Alt . M . B . performed the presented research and wrote that part of the paper . 156 (cid:72)(cid:72)(cid:72) ∆ crit √P max 1 . 5 2 . 0 3 . 0 5 . 0 0 . 2 0 . 3 0 . 4 0 . 5 0 . 6 0 . 7 50 µ m Figure 5 . 10 . : Stability of tissue for various values of the parameters √P ex and ∆ crit , where f loc = 10 pN , and α = 0 . 17 . When in - creased , both parameters √P ex , ∆ crit lead to an increased tissue size . For suﬃciently large ∆ crit , the tissue eventually dissociates . The extremal cell body radii are r min = 0 . 9 µ m and r max = 1 . 7 µ m in all simulations presented in this ﬁgure . 157 0 . 3 0 . 4 0 . 5 0 . 6 0 . 7 0 . 8 0 . 3 0 . 4 0 . 5 0 . 6 0 . 7 0 . 8 Z W aggregating dissociating ZW = T 0 Figure 5 . 11 . : Tissue aggregation and dissociation depending on the rel - ative lamella width W and the dimensionless cell overlap Z . The line Z · W = T 0 ≈ 0 . 24 ± 3 % separates associating from dissociating tissues and was determined from a linear regression against Z = T 0 / W . See also the explanations in the text . 2 . Cell overlap and tissue coherence threshold : Apparently , for sus - taining the aggregation of the tissue , the interaction forces are suﬃciently strong only if there is enough space for the adaptation of neighboring cell lamellae . This space serves as a cushion for accommodating near - range repulsion from multiple neighbor cells and at the same time poses a resis - tance to stochastic perturbations by mid - range neighbor cell attraction , cf . also ﬁgure 5 . 7 . Otherwise the tissue dissociates , leading to isolated cells exclusively driven by stochastic perturbations . In order to quantify these ﬁndings , consider the relative lamella width W and the dimension - less cell overlap Z deﬁned by W = √P ex − 1 √P ex < 1 , Z = 1 − ∆ crit < 1 . ( 5 . 37 ) Since W relates only to √P ex and Z only to ∆ crit , we can reconstitute the panel from ﬁgure 5 . 10 in terms of W and ∆ crit . The result is shown in ﬁgure 5 . 11 , where dissociating tissues are indicated by red dots , and aggregating tissues by green ones . Next , we ﬁt the function Z ( W ) = T 0 / W to the lower - most green dots , whereby T 0 is the ﬁtting parameter . On the resulting blue line in ﬁgure 5 . 11 , the product Z · W attains the constant value T 0 ≈ 0 . 24 , and aggregating tissues are located above – but 158 not below – the ﬁtted line . Thus , T 0 can be identiﬁed as a threshold value guaranteeing tissue coherence under the condition Z · W ≥ T 0 . ( 5 . 38 ) The speciﬁc value of T 0 eventually depends on the other dynamical tissue parameters from table 5 . 1 . The presence of the coherence threshold T 0 conﬁrms that for tissue aggregation to occur , there has to be enough space for the formation of cellular lamellae . This means that the relative lamella width W and thereby the maximal cell extension parameter √P ex have to be suﬃciently large . 3 . Starlike cells and coherent tissues : On the other hand , we have es - tablished this result under the tissue homogeneity condition ( 5 . 11 ) , guar - anteeing starlikeness of cells , which can now be rewritten as Z max · W = 1 − 1 Q nb , ( 5 . 39 ) with Z max : = 1 − ∆ min deﬁning the maximal dimensionless overlap . Since W < 1 by construction , inequality ( 5 . 38 ) always holds with ( 5 . 39 ) for very high cell size homogeneities Q nb ≥ 1 / ∆ min . However , for lower Q nb there is an upper bound on W restricting the available lamella space . If , in addition , starlikeness of cells is enforced for all possible neighborhood constellations , then Q nb has to be replaced by Q , see equation ( 5 . 7 ) . In this way the relations ( 5 . 38 ) and ( 5 . 39 ) lead to the suﬃcient condition for tissue coherence T 0 1 − ∆ crit ≤ W = 1 − 1 √P ex ≤ 2 ( 1 − ∆ min ) ( 1 + r max / r min ) . ( 5 . 40 ) From these estimates we conclude that the formation of connected tissue aggregates is guaranteed within a certain ﬁnite range of the free cell size parameter √P ex . The precise range of √P ex depends on the model force parameters ( ∆ min , ∆ crit , f int , α , f loc , b st ) and the extremal cell body radii r min and r max . Within the limits of inequality ( 5 . 40 ) , the lamellae regions are wide enough to perform the necessary deformations by adapting to the surrounding neighbors through shape changes . Thus , nature’s freedom in developing aggregating tissues may be constrained by a tradeoﬀ between the relative size of cells with respect to their bodies ( √P ex ) and the cell size heterogeneity ( 1 / Q ) . 159 Figure 5 . 12 . : Experimental cell sorting assay with Zebraﬁsh cells . The cells are stained by injecting ﬂuorescence molecules in the one - cell stage of the embryo . Subsequently , progenitor cells for a speciﬁc dermal layer of each donor embryo are ex - tracted and subsequently mixed ( a ) . After several hours the cells start to demix ( b – d ) and sort out in prominent do - mains . Depending on the combination of endoderm , meso - derm or ectoderm cells , diﬀerent sorting patterns emerge ( e – g ) . This ﬁgure is reprinted from [ 130 , ﬁgure 3 ] , with kind permission by Carl - Philip Heisenberg . 5 . 6 . Two - dimensional cell sorting cannot be fully reproduced in cell - center based tissue models 1 . Self - sorting of embryonic cells : In the early development of am - phibia , between the so - called gastrula and late neurula stages , the em - bryo is organized in three layers of cells called the endoderm , mesoderm and ectoderm [ 77 , 160 ] . Most parts of the ectoderm will form the exterior skin . The mesoderm will become muscle and connective tissue . The fate of the endoderm is to form the digestive system and possibly other inner organs , see e . g . [ 77 , 160 ] . When embryonic cells from the three dermal layers are extracted and subsequently brought in contact in - vitro , they adhere to one another , even if they come from diﬀerent species [ 217 ] . Moreover , they arrange in a way that recapitulates the order as present in the original embryo , which is usually referred to as cell sorting [ 77 , 91 ] . One example of such a cell sorting assay is shown in ﬁgure 5 . 12 . Early and very extensive studies 160 in the 1950s lead Townes and Holtfreter to suggest an “emergence of a selectivity of cell adhesion” [ 217 , p . 115 ] as an explanation of the observed cellular arrangement patterns . Based on this idea , Steinberg developed his theory of “diﬀerential adhe - sion” in the 1960s [ 198 , 199 ] . Thereby , the demixing of cells is explained from their microscopic molecular adhesion properties , whence the cells would adhere to one another just like molecules in a ﬂuid . Adhesion would occur in a diﬀerential manner according to the mutual binding energies of the involved molecules or cells . For the same molecular reason , one can observe the spontaneous demixing of oil and water in the salad bowl . Despite of the obvious appeal of this simple argument , only few years later it was pointed out that cell sorting might not be fully explained by diﬀerential adhesion [ 96 ] . The main arguments were that cells are active , i . e . thermodynamically open systems and not passive molecules . Also , the cells might engage in non - local interactions extending far beyond the molecular range . Finally , there are highly localized adhesion zones like desmosomes , which would seem to contradict the necessity for maximiz - ing the contact area [ 96 ] . The subsequent fruitful debate on the intricacies of cell sorting lead to the suggestion of various sorting mechanisms and is still in progress . Approaching the problem with modern experimental techniques gave rise to the conclusion that diﬀerential adhesion would not suﬃce to ex - plain cell sorting [ 130 ] . These measurements were performed by means of atomic force microscopy , and involved the selective knock - down of cad - herin and myosin . Apparently , the by now well appreciated cortical ten - sion arising from acto - myosin needs to be accounted for to explain the observed cell sorting behavior [ 130 ] . As usual in science , this study lead to puzzling new questions . In particular , it could not be explained why the ectoderm cells would sort to the interior of aggregates in - vitro [ 91 ] . It is therefore worthwhile to further inquire the problem in fully controlled in - silico environments . 2 . Modiﬁcations of model forces and their interpretation : Within the tissue model presented in this thesis , there are several possible hooks to inﬂuence speciﬁc characteristics of individual cells . Here , we consider three behavior parameters that aﬀect the tissue - scale dynamics by allow - ing for diﬀerential cell properties in the force balances . Based on the classical idea that cell sorting arises from diﬀerential cell - cell adhesion , and according to the arguments from section 1 . 7 , we assign 161 to each model cell i its cadherin expression level c i . This dimensionless number aﬀects the interaction force from equation ( 5 . 27 ) , and represents the amount of expressed cadherin receptors on the cell membrane . Re - call that the cellular interaction force derives from the stress exerted by cytoskeletal ﬁlament bundles meeting on the contact surface Γ ij with the mutual pairing density ρ . Generalizing the purely ﬁlament - driven inter - action , we include also the cadherin expression level , F int ij = R ij (cid:90) Γ ij d θ c ij ρ ( θ ) · f ij ( θ ) ( 5 . 41 ) where the adhesion density c ij = √ c i · c j results from the joint cooper - ation of the cell pair i ∼ j . In this way , the intracellular stresses are coupled to trans - cellular adhesion sites . In order to additionally incorporate diﬀerential adhesion towards the extracellular matrix , we include the cellular integrin expression level b i in the locomotion forces from equation ( 5 . 30 ) , again as dimensionless number . As before , locomotion occurs at the free margin arcs Γ i 0 forming the exterior tissue boundary , F loc i = f loc (cid:90) Γ i 0 d s i b i ρ i 0 ˆ R i 0 ( φ i ) , ( 5 . 42 ) There , the joint action of lamella - like structures and the cell’s capability to engage in integrin adhesions would create a net pulling force directed outwards . Higher values of b i will therefore bias the cellular positioning towards the free margin of the tissue with fewer surrounding neighbors . Another factor that might inﬂuence the cellular sorting behavior is their sensitivity to external cues . In this model , no such cues are considered ex - plicitly . However , stochastic perturbations provide for a related function in that they directly inject ﬂuctuations in the force - generating migration machinery . A possible interpretation for a strong ﬂuctuation is that the cell would receive a dedicated though unspeciﬁed migratory signal . In the stochastic force from equation ( 5 . 31 ) , the ﬂuctuations arise from the free cell boundary Γ i 0 exclusively . As an additional model reﬁnement , we here also include stochastic forces originating from the cell - cell contact borders Γ ij , d F st i = b st q i d W ( i ) t , d W ( i ) t = κ Γ · (cid:90) Γ i 0 d B t , s i + ( 1 − κ Γ ) · (cid:88) j : j ∼ i (cid:90) Γ ij d B t , s ij ( 5 . 43 ) 162 The overall strength of stochastic perturbation is regulated by the b st parameter . Moreover , κ Γ ∈ [ 0 , 1 ] describes the relative importance of perturbation signals from free cell margin Γ i 0 and the pair contacts Γ ij . Finally , the per - cell sensitivity to external ﬂuctuations in the environ - ment is quantiﬁed by the dimensionless number q i , which we shall call protrusiveness . 3 . Sorting in two - dimensional Voronoi models : In the computer sim - ulations presented in this section , the model tissue contains two distinct cell types with diﬀerential properties : ( i ) blue cells strongly adhere to one another , c blue i = 3 . 0 , while exhibiting only weak locomotion at the tissue margin , b blue i = 0 . 2 , ( ii ) green cells have a decreased ability for adhesion , c green j = 1 . 0 , and exert high locomotion forces at their free boundary , b green j = 2 . 0 . Apart from the following non - diﬀerential parameters , there are no further modiﬁcations with respect to the values used in the preceding sections and table 5 . 1 . In this section we employ • ∆ min = 0 . 02 , ∆ crit = 0 . 4 , to achieve a broad repulsive region in the interaction force , • α = 0 . 66 , so that there is a high degree of neighbor cooperativity in the vertical component of the interaction force , • κ Γ = 0 . 45 , q blue i = q green j = 1 . 0 , so that the stochastic perturbations are the same for both cell types . The interaction ranges ∆ min , ∆ crit facilitate the cellular rearrangements within the tissue , because then the slope of the resulting force at the equi - librium point F int ij = 0 becomes fairly ﬂat , cf . ﬁgure 5 . 6 . The locomotion strength was f loc = 10 pN . Moreover , according to the κ Γ parameter , the majority of perturbations arises from the interior cell - cell contact borders . The simple assumption of uniform protrusivity q i is justiﬁed because ear - lier trial simulations have revealed that there is no signiﬁcant inﬂuence on the observed sorting behavior ( data not shown ) . Here we start each simulation with a tissue as depicted in ﬁgure 5 . 13 at t = 0 , whereby the cell radii r i = 1 . 08 . . . 1 . 78 are fairly uniform . Already after two hours we observe that the blue and more adherent cells have gathered in the interior to form a characteristic strand throughout the 163 t = 0 t = 2 h t = 8 h t = 168 h t = 84 h t = 24 h Figure 5 . 13 . : Cell sorting and strand formation in two - dimensional aggre - gates . According to the expression level of cadherin and in - tegrin proteins , the blue cells are strongly adherent , whereas the green cells do only weakly attach to one another . Addi - tionally , the latter are capable of sustaining relatively high traction forces at the tissue margin , in contrast to the blue ones . As can be observed from the second panel t = 2 h , strands of blue cells quickly assemble in the tissue bulk . However , sorting remains incomplete , even after the model tissue has evolved for one week , t = 168 h . Remarkably , the central strand of the blue cells seems to determine the overall tissue shape . 164 tissue . After that , and during the typical time - scale of few days set by in - vitro experiments , no major changes arise . Sometimes , the blue cell strands locally break up , though the general structure is rather persis - tent . Inspecting the accompanying movie mov sort . avi 16 , one observes that the formation of new contacts between blue cells is hindered by intermediate and usually big green cells . Trying various combinations of diﬀerential c i , b i , q i ( data not shown ) and changing the other model parameters within biologically reasonable bounds ( not shown ) did not result in quicker or more complete cell sorting . Diﬀerential protrusive - ness q green i > q blue j enhances the mobility of the green cells , but otherwise does not aﬀect the aforementioned observation . In contrast , diﬀerential integrin expression b green i > b blue j seems to facilitate sorting until strand formation , for given amounts of diﬀerential cadherin expression . A similar phenomenon was already observed in the small aggregates from section 5 . 4 . There , the steric interactions between individual cells have posed eﬀective barriers against otherwise favorable rearrangements . For given amounts of stochastic perturbation , these barriers set a char - acteristic time - scale to the further topological relaxation of the tissue . Indeed , when continuing to evolve a model tissue for a very long simu - lation time of up to half a year , one can observe that the cells do sort out as expected . Thereby , the blue cells form a globular tissue core , and the green cells gather in an exterior ring ( data not shown ) . Apparently , the employed cellular interaction model exhibits intermittent barriers be - tween meta - stable tissue states that are unphysical in the sense that these barriers cannot be overcome in the expected time frame of at most two days . In the spirit of Harris [ 96 ] , we could consider diﬀerential cellular sur - face contraction or cortical tension . Unfortunately , such tensile forces would be situated within the cell - cell contacts of the model . For a valid implementation , we would need to impose the force balances at the ver - tices , and not at the cell centers as required by the Voronoi description . One might also be tempted to blame the discrepancy in sorting time on model parameter uncertainties . Indeed , since their estimation is rather crude and the underlying measured data exhibits quite some variation , we have to expect at least some error accumulation due to the employed parameter values . However , even taking into account these possible er - ror sources , being oﬀ by two orders of magnitude does not appear to be reasonable . 16 See http : / / www . theobio . uni - bonn . de / people / mab / dsup . 165 In the context of pattern formation , the observed strand formation nevertheless constitutes an interesting phenomenon , because the tissue shape appears to follow the central strand . Since the interior cells are highly adhesive , they gather the exterior green ones in their neighbor - hood , without breaking the central strand cohesion . For further details on pattern formation and several related mechanisms , see [ 144 ] . 4 . New theoretical and experimental insights : In vertex - based mod - els , the sorting of cells can surprisingly be recapitulated in three – but not in two – spatial dimensions ( G . Wayne Brodland , private communication ; cf . also [ 111 ] ) . In particular , due to the additional freedom in the third dimension , after strand formation there still is the possibility of forming contacts with nearby cells of the same kind . One can understand this mechanism by thinking of two connected chain links of diﬀerent kinds of cells . In this scenario , even though one cell of the blue kind would be surrounded by green cells from almost all sides , the freedom of the third dimension enables the blue cell to make new contacts with other adja - cent blue ones . In contrast , in two dimensions the strands are quite stable objects , because new contacts to the other side of the strand cannot be made . More formally , the disentangling of the presorted cellular strands occurs through a Plateau - Rayleigh or dripping - faucet instability in three dimensions [ 111 ] . In two dimensions , such a breakup of the presorted chains naturally works against sorting . This provides for a fundamental explanation why cell sorting takes so long when simulated in two dimensions . Moreover , the occurrence of the problem in both Voronoi and vertex tissue models seems to indicate that the speciﬁc nature of the involved forces is not critical . In fact , since center and vertex based geometries are dual to one another , so is the structure of their accessible model forces . This rises the question why cellular Potts type models are able to reproduce sorting even in two dimensions [ 90 ] . The reason lies in their dynamical properties . As in the original proposal by Steinberg [ 198 ] , cellular Potts models are for - mulated in terms of surface energies , which do not directly give rise to force balances . Instead , tissue evolution is driven by the energy - centric and stochastic Monte - Carlo update rule , causing the cells to perpetually deform . The resulting fairly strong ﬂuctuations enable the strands to quickly disentangle so that the additional eﬀect of the Plateau - Rayleigh instability is not needed . In a recent report , Steinberg and coworkers propose a theory that ex - 166 plains the apparent tissue surface tension from underlying cellular prop - erties [ 145 ] . In their theory , they ﬁnd that the ratio of cell - cell adhesion and intracellular cortical tension determines the overall surface tension of a group of speciﬁc tissue cells . Moreover , there occurs an intermediate transitional regime between sorting driven by cortical tension and sorting driven by cell - cell adhesion . Remarkably , several of these theoretical pre - dictions could also be conﬁrmed in accompanying experiments [ 145 ] , and generally agree with aforementioned AFM measurements [ 130 ] . These re - sults suggest a modiﬁed interpretation for “adhesion energy” or “surface contraction” as proposed in the pioneering works [ 96 , 198 ] . Both could be understood in terms of the total group surface tension divided by the number of individual cells . Even though the in - silico studies presented here were not conclusive , we gain several insights from our undertaking . First , modeling eﬀorts of reduced dimensionality entail fundamental inherent limits . However , the full explanation of the slow sorting in two dimensions revealed detailed mechanistic predictions on the condensation kinetics of presorted cellu - lar domains in three dimensions . Second , cell sorting can be inﬂuenced by the cellular adhesion , cortical tension and possibly other diﬀerential properties or combinations thereof . This points at a certain modular - ity and failure tolerance in the mechano - active cellular components or proteomics . 5 . 7 . Convergent tissue extension is driven by anisotropic cell - cell interactions 1 . The early development of Drosophila : The fruit ﬂy Drosophila malanogaster plays a very special role in developmental biology . It was the ﬁrst species at which certain events during morphogenesis could be traced back to the underlying genetic regulation circuitry [ 163 ] , which was awarded the Nobel Price in Physiology or Medicine in 1995 . After the initial fertilization of the egg , the ﬁrst 12 - 13 division rounds occur in a synchronous manner , whereby all nuclei share one common syncytium or cytoplasm , see e . g . [ 121 ] . After the subsequent formation of separat - ing cell membranes , the three dermal layers of endoderm , mesoderm and ectoderm form in so - called invagination processes , cf . [ 77 , 160 ] . When the ecto - and mesoderm have been formed , a particular movement pattern oc - curs at the ectoderm on the surface of the embryo . Thereby , the so - called germband converges in lateral direction , while it simultaneously expands 167 along the anterior - posterior body axis . The common understanding of this behavior relies on the collective action of the involved cells , which are said to intercalate , i . e . squeeze in between one another towards the anterior - posterior axis [ 77 , section “Convergence and extension” ] . The mechanisms that give rise to the observed intercalation , however , remain under debate . For example , laser ablation experiments have revealed a certain anisotropy in the distribution of the cortical actin tension , which is suﬃcient to drive the elongation of the germband [ 183 ] . Estimating the cortical tension from the observed rupture velocities , one is lead to conclude that the bond tensions diﬀer by a factor of approximately 2 [ 183 , ﬁgure 6f’ ] , depend - ing on their direction with respect to the anterior - posterior body axis . On the other hand , precise monitoring of cellular elongation versus in - tercalation and tissue expansion lead to the suggestion that the observed ectodermal cell shape changes would be mostly a passive response to the invagination movement of the underlying mesoderm [ 40 ] . We therefore recapitulate the elongation movement in terms of the proposed Voronoi tissue model and see what we can learn from this paradigmatic biological model system . 2 . Modiﬁcations to the individual cell locomotion forces : Inspired by the correlation features of single cell migration trajectories from section 3 . 9 , we write a new expression as a substitute for the locomotion and stochastic forces from equations ( 5 . 42 ) and ( 5 . 43 ) . In order to devise a suﬃciently versatile structure , we ﬁrst attribute to each cell i a certain polarity vector p i = p i ( t ) . This phenomenological and dimensionless quantity describes the instantaneous and in - plane polarization state of the cellular cytoskeleton , and is computed according to d p i = 1 T pol · (cid:16) v i v pol − p i (cid:17) · d t − δ p (cid:98) p i · d t + α p q i d W ( i ) t . ( 5 . 44 ) The ﬁrst contribution to d p i represents a linear ﬁlter of ﬁrst order , in full analogy to the previous velocity update rule ( 5 . 35 ) . This ﬁlter causes the polarity vector p i to adapt to the normalized cell migration velocity v i / v pol , with an eﬀective time lag of T pol , representing the average cellular reorientation time . From the cell speed autocorrelation plots from ﬁgure 3 . 10 , we would expect the cellular reorientation time to be approximately 20 min . However , we here take the relatively low value T pol ≈ 10 min in order to facilitate the cellular reorientation in highly dynamic embryonic 168 tissues . For a list of the employed model parameters see table A . 9 . The second term on the right - hand side of equation ( 5 . 44 ) implies that the polarity decreases by a constant amount in each time step , however only when p i is still large enough . The parameter δ p indicates the rate of po - larity degradation , and (cid:98) p i the unit vector in direction of p i . Finally , the last summand in ( 5 . 44 ) provides for an autonomous build - up of polarity due to cellular guiding cues , which we however do not consider explicitly in the model . Instead , we write the stochastic terms W ( i ) t from equa - tion ( 5 . 43 ) , with the dimensionless protrusivity number q i . The overall strength of the cellular perturbation is therefore regulated by the rate α 2 p , again see table A . 9 . With the polarity vector p i as deﬁned above , the so - called polarity force F pol i = f pol b i ˜ ρ i r i p i ( 5 . 45 ) comprises a combined stochastic and locomotion force for each cell . Here , the force - generating polar ﬁlament density ˜ ρ i is a speciﬁc cell property , with the total number of ﬁlaments in a cell being ˜ ρ i · r i . Finally , the dimensionless number b i indicates the eﬀective integrin expression level , and f pol the strength of the polarity force . If a single model cell is subjected to the polarity force ( 5 . 45 ) and the drag force ( 5 . 33 ) with a cellular friction coeﬃcient γ i = γ drag b i P ex r 2 i π , ( 5 . 46 ) one obtains the persistent migration trajectories as discussed earlier in section 3 . 9 . Here , γ drag is the characteristic friction force per cell area . In ﬁgure 5 . 14 , we plot the resulting autocorrelation function of the migration speed of the model cell with polarity force . The overall features of the corresponding experimental red curve in ﬁgure 3 . 10 are quite similar . We therefore conclude that the polarity force F pol i is capable of reproducing the most essential properties of isolated cellular migration trajectories . For the collective motion in tissues , we postulate that the cell’s in - plane polarity p i essentially carries over , albeit in a less insisting manner . In particular , the less prominent individualism eﬀectively would result in decreased perturbation and force parameters α p , f pol . For the speciﬁc values employed in both ﬁgure 5 . 14 and the simulations described below , see table A . 9 . 3 . Anisotropic interaction force : It has been shown in experiments that during the elongation of the germband of Drosophila , the involved 169 - 0 . 5 0 0 . 5 1 0 10 20 30 40 50 60 C v i ( τ ) autocorrelation function cell speed | v i | simulation Figure 5 . 14 . : Autocorrelation function of cell migration speed arising from the polarity force from equation ( 5 . 45 ) . The under - lying single - cell trajectories exhibit the piecewise persistent structure found in in section 3 . 9 . Note that the 95 % con - ﬁdence interval around the autocorrelation curve is only barely visible because of its relative smallness . cells intercalate by exerting anisotropic tension throughout their actin cortex underneath the adhesion belt [ 183 ] . In a quantitative tissue model it would therefore be natural to assume that the tension within the cell - cell contact depends on its orientation . However , in contrast to vertex - based models , this cannot be directly implemented in center - based Voronoi models . Instead , we have to devise an interaction force that would encompass the in - tissue eﬀect of anisotropic cellular cortex con - tractions . To this end we think of an idealized model cell being of rectan - gular box - like shape and ﬁlled with ﬂuid . If we were to squeeze the cell box at its two opposite shorter faces , incompressibility of the interior ﬂuid would cause the box to elongate in lateral direction perpendicular to the squeezing . Correspondingly , enhanced contractions at opposite cell - cell contacts would drive the directed elongation of a single cell in the tissue . Thus we can model the anisotropic cortical tension by designating a spe - ciﬁc direction in which the cells prefer to arrange with enhanced mutual spacing . Accordingly , the interaction force ( 5 . 27 ) , and in particular its distance - dependent contribution ( 5 . 25 ) , namely f ( ∆ ij ) = f int · ln (cid:16) ∆ ij − ∆ min ∆ crit − ∆ min (cid:17) ( 5 . 47 ) has to be modiﬁed in a cell - dependent fashion . The equilibrium distance of two adjacent cells i ∼ j is given by the parameter ∆ crit . Here we consider two distinct types of model cells : ( i ) the blue ( and also the black ) cells are under anisotropic cortical tension , and ( ii ) the green cells are 170 0 . 15 0 . 3 0 . 45 - 3 - 2 - 1 0 1 2 3 φ ij ∆ ( 0 ) cr = 0 . 3 α ani = 1 . 4 ∆ bbcr ( φ ij ) Figure 5 . 15 . : The anisotropic cortical tension present in Drosophila cells during germband elongation cannot be directly imple - mented in center - based Voronoi tissue models . However , as a phenomenological substitute one can prescribe anisotropic equilibrium distances between neighbor cells . Here we plot this equilibrium distance ∆ bbcrit between two such cells . If the cell - center connection vector x i − x j is parallel to the x - axis , then the neighbor bond angle φ ij = atan ( x i − x j ) = − π , 0 , π , where ∆ bbcrit attains its maxima . Conversely , its minima are located at φ ij = − π / 2 , π / 2 , where x i − x j is parallel to the y - axis . under isotropic cortical tension . For the anisotropic ones , ∆ crit should be higher in x - direction than in y - direction . To account for the directionality , we introduce the angle φ ij ≡ atan ( x i − x j ) indicating the direction of the connecting line between the cell centers x i − x j . We thus end up with three diﬀerent constellations for the preferred cell - cell equilibrium distance , green – green : ∆ ggcrit = ∆ ( 0 ) crit ≡ 0 . 3 , ( 5 . 48 ) blue – blue : ∆ bbcrit = ∆ ( 0 ) crit (cid:112) α 2ani ( cos φ ij ) 2 + ( sin φ ij ) 2 / α 2ani , ( 5 . 49 ) blue – green : ∆ bgcrit = 1 2 (cid:0) ∆ bbcrit + ∆ ggcrit (cid:1) . ( 5 . 50 ) The expression for ∆ bbcrit involves the anisotropy parameter α ani . Its eﬀect is shown in ﬁgure 5 . 15 , where we have chosen α ani = 1 . 4 in such a way that the maximum of ∆ bbcrit is approximately two times its minimum . 4 . Additional cell - cell friction forces : When adjacent cells within an aggregate move with respect to one another , we certainly have to expect a certain response to the perceived mutual sliding . In principle , such a 171 response could arise from various underlying molecular interaction sig - nals . Within the present model there are , however , only two relevant players , namely the cadherin cell - cell adhesion molecules and the F - actin cytoskeleton providing for intracellular adhesion anchoring . The most ba - sic modeling expression involving the mutual cell sliding is proportional to the diﬀerence of cell velocities v i − v j , F vis ij = γ vis ij ( v j − v i ) , ( 5 . 51 ) with respect to each of the topological neighbors j ∼ i from the Voronoi tessellation . The sign of the velocity diﬀerence v j − v i is such that the velocity v i of cell i tends to adjust to its surrounding spatial neighbor cells . Thus , if the cell i were passive in all other regards , due to F vis ij it would still be partially dragged along by its neighbors . Here we assume that this velocity adaptation is driven by a force - induced cross - talk between the adjacent cells . Therefore , the eﬀective pair - drag γ vis ij derives from the ﬁlament and adhesion densities along the contact border Γ ij , γ vis ij = γ vis0 · R ij (cid:90) Γ ij d θ ρ ( θ ) c ij , ( 5 . 52 ) see ﬁgure 4 . 2 for the contact radius R ij . The model parameter γ vis0 reg - ulates the overall strength of the viscous cell - cell friction , see table A . 9 . The integral on the right - hand side of equation ( 5 . 52 ) corresponds to the one from the cellular interaction force ( 5 . 41 ) . Speciﬁcally , we again inte - grate the product ﬁlament pairing density ρ ( θ ) and the cadherin adhesion density c ij = √ c i · c j , cf . equations ( 5 . 20 ) and ( 5 . 41 ) , respectively . At this stage one could raise the question how cell - cell adhesions might be robust while there is apparently a non - zero strain rate v i − v j perpetually tear - ing on the underlying chemical bonds . However , if the formation and dissociation of these bonds were fast as compared to the related cellular migration processes , then the transient amount of adhesions would enter the cell - cell friction in a temporally averaged manner , which is fully com - patible with the expression in ( 5 . 52 ) . Indeed , this line of arguments is based on the very idea behind the whole - cell traction clutch from para - graph 3 . 5 . 1 , or behind the ﬂuidity of the cytoskeleton , cf . paragraph 1 . 7 . 2 . Thus , the proposed pair - drag model is the minimal consistent extension of the assumptions made in the preceding cellular migration models . 5 . Equations of motion and their numerical integration : First we deﬁne the active forces F i acting on each cell i as the sum of polarity and 172 interaction forces , F i = F pol i + (cid:88) j : j ∼ i F int ji . ( 5 . 53 ) In principle , all these active forces should be balanced by the the friction forces in a whole - cell force equilibrium , F i + F drag i + (cid:88) j : j ∼ i F vis ij = 0 . ( 5 . 54 ) This equation has to be solved for the cell velocity v i ≡ ( v xi , v yi ) . How - ever , the sum in the last term involves also several of the neighbor ve - locities v j , which have to be computed simultaneously . Therefore , we gather all velocity components in one single combined vector V tiss = ( . . . , v xi , v yi , . . . , v xj , v yj , . . . ) and write the drag F drag i and friction forces F vis ij with the help of the large matrix G tiss = ( g ij ) with   g ij = γ i for i = j , g ij = γ vis ij for i ∼ j , g ij = 0 otherwise , ( 5 . 55 ) where γ i and γ vis ij have been deﬁned in equations ( 5 . 46 ) and ( 5 . 52 ) , respec - tively . With the help of the force vector F tiss = ( . . . , F xi , F yi , . . . F xj , F yj , . . . ) built from the components F i ≡ ( F xi , F yi ) , we can embed the force equi - librium ( 5 . 54 ) in the linear system of equations G tiss · V tiss = F tiss . ( 5 . 56 ) This system of equations describes the force equilibria ( 5 . 54 ) of all tissue cells simultaneously . In each time - step we therefore invert 17 the global drag matrix G tiss and apply its inverse to F tiss , which then yields the desired velocities . 6 . Cellular anisotropy drives topological cell rearrangements : We start the tissue simulation from a cellular arrangement close to the ﬁrst panel in ﬁgure 5 . 16 , see supplementary material 18 for the precise con - stellation at t = 0 . Subsequently , the model cells move according to 17 Such a kind of matrix inversion can be conveniently implemented by the left - division operator of the open - source simulation software GNU octave , http : / / www . octave . org . 18 The electronic supplementary material is available from http : / / www . theobio . uni - bonn . de / people / mab / dsup . 173 the equations ( 5 . 56 ) without anisotropy α ani = 1 . 0 . The other param - eters are given in table A . 9 . After the tissue has settled , we activate the anisotropy at the simulation time of t = 8 h . To this end we set α ani = 1 . 4 , which models the cells’ anisotropic cortical tension and pre - scribes direction - dependent equilibrium distances ∆ crit for the pair inter - action force . Speciﬁcally , we have ∆ bbcrit | horizontal ≈ 2∆ bbcrit | vertical for the interior blue and black cells , see ﬁgure 5 . 15 . At t = 24 h , we then reset α ani = 1 . 0 and continue the simulation for another 24 h , especially to see whether the apparent tissue deformation is permanent . In the accompanying movie mov elo . avi we observe that the polarity force causes small but persistent motions throughout the model tissue . This inherent mobility of the cells facilitates the possibility for topological neighbor changes , even though the tissue as a whole is robust and remains connected . Indeed , already at t = 1 h the small cell 39 on the right margin of the tissue connects with cell 8 . Moreover , the cell - cell friction force ( 5 . 52 ) also plays an important role in the overall tissue motion . If one reduces the cell - cell friction coeﬃcient γ vis0 , there seem to occur even less topological neighbor changes ( data not shown ) . This can be conceptualized if one presumes that the rearrangements require the joint persistent motion of several adjacent cells . In ﬁgure 5 . 16 , we observe the development of the elongated tissue from its initially rather round appearance . In the panels at t = 10 h , t = 15 h and t = 20 h , whence the blue and black cells interact in the same anisotropic manner , we observe several cells of partially quadratic shape at the core of the tissue . This is a prominent signature for a topological neighbor change being in progress . For example , at t = 10 h , the big blue cells 6 & 37 are about to form a neighbor connection , cf . also the panel at t = 15 h . In order to form this speciﬁc connection , the two cells 6 & 37 have to squeeze the intermediate black cells 22 & 23 19 apart . The whole process of squeezing and reconnecting is one example of cell intercalation . The eﬀect of repeated intercalations on the whole tissue is quite dra - matic . In the ﬁrst panel of ﬁgure 5 . 16 at t = 5 h , the blue and black cells are ordered in clear horizontal stripes . At the late stages of the sim - ulation , e . g . at t = 30h , the blue cells have intercalated the black ones and the interior tissue core has clearly extended in horizontal direction . Now the skeptic might point to the interaction anisotropy from equation ( 5 . 49 ) , which states that the interior cells prefer to elongate . To clarify 19 The black cell 28 is situated close to the green cells in the north - west corner of the central group of blue / black cells . 174 30 25 20 15 10 5 0 - 5 - 10 - 15 - 20 - 25 - 30 25 20 15 10 5 0 - 5 - 10 - 15 - 20 - 25 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 25 26 27 28 29 30 31 32 33 34 35 36 37 38 39 40 41 42 43 44 45 46 47 48 49 50 51 52 53 54 55 56 57 58 59 60 61 t = 5 . 0 h 30 25 20 15 10 5 0 - 5 - 10 - 15 - 20 - 25 - 30 20 15 10 5 0 - 5 - 10 - 15 - 20 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 25 26 27 28 29 30 31 32 33 34 35 36 37 38 39 40 41 42 43 44 45 46 47 48 49 50 51 52 53 54 55 56 57 58 59 60 61 t = 10 . 0 h 30 25 20 15 10 5 0 - 5 - 10 - 15 - 20 - 25 20 15 10 5 0 - 5 - 10 - 15 - 20 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 25 26 27 28 29 30 31 32 33 34 35 36 37 38 39 40 41 42 43 44 45 46 47 48 49 50 51 52 53 54 55 56 57 58 59 60 61 t = 15 . 0 h 35 30 25 20 15 10 5 0 - 5 - 10 - 15 - 20 - 25 - 30 25 20 15 10 5 0 - 5 - 10 - 15 - 20 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 25 26 27 28 29 30 31 32 33 34 35 36 37 38 39 40 41 42 43 44 45 46 47 48 49 50 51 52 53 54 55 56 57 58 59 60 61 t = 20 . 0 h 35 30 25 20 15 10 5 0 - 5 - 10 - 15 - 20 - 25 25 20 15 10 5 0 - 5 - 10 - 15 - 20 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 25 26 27 28 29 30 31 32 33 34 35 36 37 38 39 40 41 42 43 44 45 46 47 48 49 50 51 52 53 54 55 56 57 58 59 60 61 t = 25 . 0 h 35 30 25 20 15 10 5 0 - 5 - 10 - 15 - 20 - 25 20 15 10 5 0 - 5 - 10 - 15 - 20 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 25 26 27 28 29 30 31 32 33 34 35 36 37 38 39 40 41 42 43 44 45 46 47 48 49 50 51 52 53 54 55 56 57 58 59 60 61 t = 30 . 0 h Figure 5 . 16 . : Evolution of intercalating tissue cells driven by anisotropic cell - cell interaction forces . While the inner cells ( blue , black ) do not seem to elongate , the tissue as a whole per - forms a prominent stretch in horizontal direction . This is due to the topological rearrangement of the inner cells , which is driven by vertical pairs of cells squeezing in be - tween two horizontal ones . This phenomenon is generally known as cell intercalation . The inner cells ( blue , black ) have anisotropic interaction forces to their neighbors for times t = 8 h . . . 20 h , whereas the outer cells ( green ) have isotropic interaction forces for all times . Note that the unit length in the plots slightly varies in time . 175 1 . 05 1 . 10 1 . 15 1 . 20 0 8 16 24 32 40 48 d e v i a t i o n o f c i r c l e s h a p e time t [ h ] anisotropic cortical tension of inner cells whole tissue inner cells Figure 5 . 17 . : Shape factor quantifying deviation of circularity for in - ner cells ( blue line ) and whole tissue ( green line ) . The anisotropic equilibrium distance for the cell - cell interaction force was activated for times t = 8 h . . . 20 h ( red arrow ) , and aﬀected only the inner blue and black cells . this question , we introduce the normalized perimeter - area ratio P A = perimeter 2 √ area · π ≥ 1 , ( 5 . 57 ) as a measure to quantify shapes and in particular “elongatedness” . Since the shape factor P A is a purely geometric quantity , it is equally valid for the whole tissue or individual cells . It has the speciﬁc property of P A = 1 for exactly circular shapes . Any deviation such as an elongation in a particular direction leads to increased P A - values . 20 Having established the shape measure P A , we are able to decide whether the tissue elongation can be attributed to the anisotropic interactions of the inner blue and black cells . Plotting the time - course of their average P A - value – see ﬁgure 5 . 17 – we ﬁnd that they in fact remain quite spher - ical , even during the phase of anisotropic interaction forces . In contrast , the P A - value of the whole tissue – including green , blue and black cells – increases much further , even in a relative sense . Indeed , in ﬁgure 5 . 16 we see that the tissue bulk elongates by almost 30 % during the anisotropic interaction phase . Thus we conclude that the tissue elongation is mostly driven by the directed intercalation of the inner cells . 20 P A is also the reciprocal value of the “circularity” Ω deﬁned in equation ( 5 . 36 ) . 176 Within the Voronoi tissue simulations , the eﬀect of elongation driven by intercalation is of remarkable robustness . In the examplary simulation from ﬁgure 5 . 16 , only the inner cells could contribute to the directed intercalation . If one extends the anisotropic interaction to all cells in the tissue , it elongates even faster and further ( data not shown ) . However , even few anisotropic cells at the core of the tissue seem suﬃce for a net elongation of the tissue . Moreover , after the anisotropy has ceased , the tissue remains in its elongated state , at least for another 24 h . The newly found topological cell arrangement apparently is favorable enough so to persist and withstand the ordinary in - tissue ﬂuctuations . Clearly , such a robustness is helpful for ensuring the correct succession of embryogenetic events . 7 . Cause , eﬀect and biological redundancy : In this section , we have built our model on the assumption of an anisotropic cortical tension that would drive the cell intercalation and subsequent germband elongation in Drosophila . From the simulations we arrive at the conclusion , that a certain interaction anisotropy is suﬃcient to drive elongation , which matches the ﬁndings in [ 183 ] . Moreover , since the cortical tensions in the ectoderm apparently are anisotropic [ 183 ] , it is natural – though not compellable – to assume that it is their purpose to drive the cell intercalation . However , there might also be other mechanisms that contribute to the observed intercalation and / or elongation eﬀect . With the help of the clas - sical notion of strain 21 [ 29 ] , the relative contributions of cell intercalation and deformation to elongation could be quantiﬁed [ 40 ] . In intercalation - defective mutants ( so - called Kr¨uppel ) , the cells initially compensate by means of enhanced cellular deformation , whereas in mutants without mesoderm ( twist ) , the ectodermal germband elongation is reduced [ 40 ] . Based on these fascinating observations , the authors of [ 40 ] therefore sug - gest that the ectodermal shape changes would comprise a passive reponse to the mesoderm invagination . If this is indeed the case , then the causation chain would point in the opposite direction . The invagination of the mesoderm constitutes a co - ordinated motion towards the anterior - posterior body axis . Since the ectoderm is situated on top of the mesoderm , the movement of the latter would deform the cells of the former , leading to intercalation and therefore elongation . What , then , causes the cortical tension in the ectoderm cells 21 Another possible name would be deformation . 177 to be anisotropic ? From the present data we cannot make any deﬁnite decision . Indeed , the ectoderm intercalation could be ( partly ) responsible for the mesoderm invagination as well . Without further measurements , one could speculate that for the sake of developmental robustness , both mesoderm and ectoderm would cooperate in mutually ensuring the pro - cesses of invagination and intercalation . In any case , this calls for a a better understanding of the interactions between mesoderm and ecto - derm . 178 6 . Mechanical and functional principles of cellular motion 1 . Persistence and polarization : One important aspect of two - dimen - sional cellular migration trajectories is their persistence , as e . g . quantiﬁed in the experiments described in section 3 . 9 . The key feature is that a mi - grating cell undergoes successive phases of polarization and depolariza - tion , with relatively fast but also intermittently stalling locomotion . Such a persistence is advantageous because it comprises an optimized search strategy when signals are lacking or weak , see e . g . [ 67 ] . Apart from the migration speed , there are also morphological and molecular polarization markers , in particular the lamella outline shape or the localization of the actin polymerization front . In principle , how - ever , there could be an asymmetry in the distribution of any molecule that is somehow involved in the migration machinery , including integrin and myosin . The directors introduced in section 3 . 9 provide for a quanti - tative description of these asymmetries , both for molecular distributions and cell shape characteristics . If one considers the cell to be a dynamical system involving chemical re - actions , force generating processes and mutual feedback , then one has to expect that persistence arises from the system’s inherent time constants . By extracting persistence times from aforementioned directors , one ob - tains quantitative ﬁgures that directly describe the kinetics and transport dynamics of the underlying molecular pathways on the whole - cell level . Thus , directors provide for a prominent landmark to validate or falsify quantitative models of biological cells . Accordingly , the parameter space of the two - dimensional migration model could be restrained by reproduc - ing several persistence features determined from experiments , cf . section 3 . 9 . Similarly , one could employ the directors for quantifying genotypic or phenotypic characteristics . 2 . Modularity and robustness : It has been argued in chapter 1 , that the modular combination of relatively few mechanisms would cause di - versity in cellular migration behavior . Such a modularity arises natu - rally when multi - functional units like biomolecules are integrated in a 179 compound system . In the context of cell migration , both extracellular integrin adhesions and intracellular F - actin network jointly cooperate to generate locomotion forces . Thereby , actin plays two apparently antago - nistic roles , as it may enhance both assembly and disassembly of integrin adhesions by imposing a suitable tensile load , see paragraph 1 . 6 . 6 . This Janus - faced behavior of actin is also implemented in the two single - cell migration models from chapter 3 . Functionally , this a mechanism is a very elegant solution for the cyto - plasm to inhere its two fundamental dynamical modes , cf . ﬁgure 1 . 6 A & B . In the symmetric mode the forces balance around the cell periphery , whereby adhesion assembly and disassembly occur simultaneously in all directions . In contrast , in the asymmetric and migrating mode , adhesion assembly occurs mostly at the lamella front , whereas disassembly domi - nates at the cell rear , due to localized actin contractions inducing rupture . In both modes , however , the feedback of actin on integrin adhesions has the tendency to maintain the respective morphological organization . Other modular cell properties are exhibited in sorting assays as dis - cussed in section 5 . 6 . Cellular sorting may be driven by diﬀerential cell - cell adhesion , surface contraction , or a combination thereof . Thus , var - ious sorting patterns can be achieved by merely adjusting the cellular level of contraction and adhesion . At the same time , such a modularity gives rise to graceful failure recovery and robustness , which is particularly important during the early development of the embryo . These two examples emphasize how functional diversity arises from few underlying modular constituents . This is one motivation for constructing synthetic models of biological systems , because the quantiﬁcation of func - tional principles helps to identify common patterns and modular building blocks . 3 . Scales and separation : At several instances in this work , the ar - gument of scale - separation was invoked to neglect one particular model contribution over another . This principle is ubiquitous in physics , as it helps to design well - controllable assays or to simplify mathematical in - tricacies of a theory . For the proposed cell models , the basic argument was that the chemical reaction time - scale is much faster than the cellular migration time - scale , see e . g . paragraphs 1 . 6 . 2 & 3 . 5 . 1 , and sections 2 . 2 & 2 . 5 . Correspondingly , the cytoplasm was treated as a two - component , incompressible ﬂuid mixture of ﬁlamentous F - actin and aqueous solvent , much like a dynamic , internally condensing sponge . 180 With the help of the same argument , the adhesions of a cell were con - sidered to exhibit a certain slip , meaning that their bonds connect only transiently to the cytoskeleton and / or the substrate . It is important not to picture biological bonds as overly rigid entities . Indeed , the bond en - ergy is typically only slightly above the thermal ﬂuctuation energy , see e . g . [ 177 ] . Finally , in expressing the single cell migration models with the help of continuum equations , also a spatial scale separation argument has been invoked , see paragraph 2 . 5 . 2 . Clearly , one cannot describe all the molecules comprising a cell in full detail . Instead , one averages over tiny boxes containing thousands of molecules , and subsequently deals with the emerging averaged densities . 4 . Geometry and shape : There are two classics on the quantiﬁcation and conceptualization of biological shape , written by D’Arcy Thompson [ 215 ] and Harry Blum [ 30 ] . Since large parts of this thesis deal with the geometric properties of cell aggregates , it is worthwhile to draw a connection from those seminal works to the proposed Voronoi tessellation . The contact border between two adjacent model cells can be con - structed in various ways , though it is desirable to employ a simple rule that would conform to the biological requirements . To this end , D’Arcy Thompson develops the soap - bubble principle , see ﬁgure 6 . 1 top panel . Adjacent soap bubbles have the property that any three contour lines meet at angles of 120 degrees . Each of the bubbles inherits a certain pressure , and the contour radii of curvature adapt accordingly . Compar - ing with circular Voronoi cells from section 4 . 4 , it appears that the soap bubble centers are fairly close . Indeed , the distance between the Voronoi cell centers can be arbitrary , without being inﬂuenced by the body radii ( fat lines in bottom right panel of ﬁgure 6 . 1 ) . This additional freedom in the Voronoi pair is also the reason why its outer cell boundaries do not exhibit the 120 degree rule . Harry Blum developed a whole geometry based on the primitives of point and growth . When a point grows for some time , it becomes a disc . Forming so - called ligatures from two discs , one obtains a pattern that is remarkably close to a pair of circular Voronoi cells , see ﬁgure 6 . 1 central panel , and compare e . g . ﬁgure 5 . 4 or the outer lines of the bottom right panel in 6 . 1 . However , the drawback of the ligature principle is that the cell - cell contact is comprised of two straight line segments . Surprisingly , the concept of growth is also useful for constructing a 181 Figure 6 . 1 . : Shape geometry concepts for a cell pair . In the top panel , there are three soap bubble “cell” pairs , whereby the centers are rather close and the angles at the marginal triple junc - tion are 120 degrees each ( reprinted from D’Arcy Thompson’s book [ 215 , ﬁgure 157 ] ) . In the central panel , the so - called ligature is built from two overlapping discs , where the inte - rior triangles follow from so - called sym - axes ( reprinted from Harry Blum’s article [ 30 , ﬁgure 32 ] ) . The two bottom pan - els show how the contact border between ( red ) two Voronoi cells emerges from the growth of the two adjacent generators ( blue , green ) . Diﬀerent rules for the speed of growth give rise to diﬀerent contact borders . In the left bottom panel there appears a straight line contact , whereas in the right bottom panel a circular contact , cf . also ﬁgure 4 . 1 . 182 Voronoi tessellation . Depending on the growth process of the two ad - jacent cells , several diﬀerent contact shapes may arise . In the elliptical Voronoi tessellation developed in chapter 4 , there appear ellipses , cir - cles , hyperbolas , parabolas , and straight lines as possible contact shapes . Thus , most of the basic geometric items suggested in [ 30 , page 279 ] can be naturally obtained from the proposed Voronoi tessellation . 5 . Problems and ideas : Based on the results of this work , there several starting points for furthergoing research . The regulation pathways aﬀecting force - bearing players in various kinds of cells seem to share some similarities , possibly because important pro - tein structure motifs being evolutionary conserved [ 168 ] . In any case , by quantitatively studying the functional aspect of force generation and transduction , regulative similarities could be exhibited in order to pin - point modular pathway components . Molecular directors according to paragraph 3 . 9 . 5 provide for suitable whole - cell measures , which however require targeted ﬂuorescence staining . One speciﬁc pathway centers around the epidermal growth factor , which triggers the epithelial - mesenchymal transition ( EMT ) [ 214 ] . During EMT , cells leave the tissue bulk and subsequently migrate autonomously . From the modeler’s view one expects a full continuum of cell states ranging from embedded epithelial to isolated and autonomous . Importantly , the EMT has been implicated in wound healing and cancer . Therefore , the force machinery of cells undergoing EMT should be studied , in particular with respect to cooperative motion patterns , see e . g . ﬁgure 1 . 5 . A neces - sary ingredient to faithfully model EMT are polarized cells of anisotropic shape according to chapter 4 . During wound healing , embryo development and tumor expansion , cells divide while remaining in more or less dense contact . At some point , how - ever , growth usually stops and the tissue enters the homeostatic state , whereby cell division is balanced by apoptosis [ 182 ] . This raises two ques - tions . First , how is the transition to the homeostatic state initiated , and second , how does the transformation to a functional but otherwise pas - sive homeostatic tissue take place . To represent the cellular deformations during cell cycle and mitosis , one again needs anisotropic model cells , see chapter 4 . The force generation mechanism of a single crawling cell has been in - vestigated in section 3 . 7 . The next step towards understanding tissue forces would therefore be to extend the single - cell system and include a 183 single neighbor cell . The full problem involves the cytoplasm dynamics of both adjacent cells , which can be written in terms of a dissipation func - tional J [ u , ∂u , p ] of the F - actin velocity u and the pressure p , see chapter 2 and [ 5 ] . As an additional complication one has to consider the motion of the free boundary between the cells . This involves cell - cell adhesion , cortex tension and curvature , all of which has to be incorporated in a joint variational principle with the cytoplasm functional . The boundary conditions from section 3 . 4 would serve as guideline for the envisioned free boundary evolution . 184 A . Appendix A . 1 . Estimating the characteristic dimensions of cytoplasm ﬂow At room temperature , the viscosity of the aqueous solvent phase is ap - proximately that of water η w ≈ 10 − 3 Pa · s = 10 − 3 pN · s / µ m 2 . Typ - ical physiological concentrations of dissolved proteins are expected to increase this value by a factor of approximately 1 . 5 [ 202 , table I ] . In contrast , the overall cell viscosity of neutrophils has been measured to be η cell ∼ 100 Pa · s in micropipette aspiration experiments [ 104 ] . Therefore we suspect the cytoskeleton to be mostly responsible for the observed whole - cell viscosity . Indeed , by comparing experiments on the ingres - sion of neutrophils into micropipettes with corresponding simulation data , possible values of the actin network viscosity have been narrowed down to η f ≈ 300 . . . 600 Pa · s [ 101 ] . In fact , these numbers are the extremal values with which qualitative and semi - quantitative features of the time - velocity ingression curve could be recovered . Altogether , we conclude that the viscosity in the aqueous solvent phase θ w can be neglected over the viscosity in the actin network θ g . In the light of η f / η w (cid:38) 10 5 , this is a conservative assumption to make , because it still would hold if either of our estimated viscosities were oﬀ by two orders of magnitude . In ﬁsh keratocytes , which are known to crawl very fast , the upper limit of the F - actin retrograde ﬂow velocity is approximately 0 . 25 µ m / s [ 78 , 192 , 229 , 233 ] . In the same cell type , the transport velocity of G - actin embedded in the solvent has been determined indirectly , being up to 0 . 7 µ m / s [ 123 , page 1221 and ﬁgure 3e ] . Unfortunately , experimental data on other cell types are not as widely available . However , these numbers still provide a reasonable estimate , because it is expected that the ﬂow velocity in fast cells is fast as compared to cells crawling more slowly . Moreover , an upper bound to ﬂow velocity will give us an upper - bound estimate for the Reynolds number , which we aim to put forward here . Typical diameters of cells range from few to several tens of µ m [ 2 , chap - ter 22 ] , whereby possible exceptions like neurons have a rather extreme architecture . Therefore , the characteristic length - scale is 1 µ m , because 185 streaming varies in the cells’ interior . Finally , the overall mass density of single cells is fairly close to 1 . 1 mg / µ l = 1 . 1 pg / µ m 3 [ 39 , 93 ] . Taking all these numbers together , we obtain the Reynolds numbers F - actin network phase : Re g ∼ 10 − 12 , ( A . 1 ) aqueous solvent phase : Re w ∼ 10 − 6 . ( A . 2 ) A . 2 . Polymerization pressure and viscosity for the one - dimensional model cell The relations described in this appendix are all deﬁned only on the bound - ary Γ of the model cell , i . e . y = y 1 , y 2 . In the boundary pressure balances ( 3 . 27 , 3 . 28 ) there appears the polymerization pressure , P poly (cid:0) θ , m b , V (cid:1) = P clamp ( θ ) + P ratchet ( θ ) − η Γ (cid:0) θ , m b (cid:1) V . ( A . 3 ) 1 . Intermediate actin volume fractions : The dependence on θ involves several intermediate players . Let θ B denote the fraction of membrane - bound ﬁlaments , with 2 θ B ( θ ) = θ A + θ + K 2 θ − (cid:114)(cid:0) θ A − θ (cid:1) 2 + 2 ( θ A + θ ) K 2 θ + K 4 θ 2 , ( A . 4 ) see [ 6 , section 4 . 2 . 2 ] . Here , the model parameter θ A = 0 . 0625 denotes the eﬀective volume fraction of available membrane proteins for actin binding . Their binding process is self - enhanced , e . g . due to clustering or cooperativity , whereby the eﬀective dissociation constant K = 0 . 198 is also a model parameter . With θ B from equation ( A . 4 ) , the volume fraction of the remaining free ﬁlaments not bound to the membrane is therefore free ﬁlaments : θ F ( θ ) = θ − θ B ( θ ) . ( A . 5 ) Filament branching involves only barbed or plus ends of the ﬁlaments , which are oriented roughly in direction of the cell membrane . Their volume fraction is modeled by the so - called Monod kinetics [ 20 , section 4 . 3 ] in the free ﬁlaments θ F , barbed ≡ ’ + ’ ﬁlament ends : θ + ( θ ) = α Arp · θ F ( θ ) θ β + θ F ( θ ) . ( A . 6 ) Here , the prefactor α Arp = α 0Arp · [ Arp2 / 3 ] is proportional to the con - centration of the Arp2 / 3 branching agent , and θ β is the half saturation volume fraction as introduced in ( 3 . 18 ) . 186 2 . Clamp - motor and Brownian ratchet pressure : The polymerization pressure arising from the Brownian ratchet mechanism is assumed to be proportional to the volume fraction of the barbed ends , P ratchet ( θ ) = π ratchet · θ + ( θ ) . ( A . 7 ) Moreover , the clamp - motor polymerization pressure is a linear function of the clamped actin ﬁlaments θ c at the tip , P clamp = π clamp · θ c ( θ ) ≡ π clamp · θ B ( θ ) 10 , ( A . 8 ) where it was assumed that one tenth of the bound ﬁlaments at the mem - brane are actually clamped within motors . 3 . Viscous polymerization resistance : The viscosity resisting F - actin polymerization at the tip is a linear function in the bound myosin motors m b and the fraction of membrane - bound ﬁlaments θ B , η Γ = (cid:0) η Γ0 + η Γ m m b (cid:1) θ B ( θ ) , ( A . 9 ) where η Γ0 = 0 . 09 Pa · min / µ m , and η Γ m = 4 . 05 Pa · min / ( µ m · µ M ) . A . 3 . Some formulae regarding the transformed contact matrix 1 . The two - dimensional contact matrix determinant δ = αβ − γ 2 : In equation 4 . 44 , the two - dimensional contact matrix determinant was deﬁned as δ = αβ − γ 2 . Moreover , according to equations ( 4 . 39 ) and ( 4 . 40 ) , we have α = α i − α j = c 2 i a 2 i + s 2 i b 2 i − c 2 j a 2 j − s 2 j b 2 j , β = β i − β j = s 2 i a 2 i + c 2 i b 2 i − s 2 j a 2 j − c 2 j b 2 j , γ = γ i − γ j = c i s i (cid:16) 1 a 2 i − 1 b 2 i (cid:17) − c j s j (cid:16) 1 a 2 j − 1 b 2 j (cid:17) , ( A . 10 ) 187 with the usual abbreviations c i ≡ cos ϕ i and s i ≡ sin ϕ i for all i . Inserting into δ , and factoring out products in a , b , one obtains δ = 1 a 2 i b 2 i + 1 a 2 j b 2 j − (cid:16) c i c j + s i s j (cid:17) 2 (cid:16) 1 a 2 i b 2 j + 1 a 2 j b 2 i (cid:17) − (cid:16) c i s j − c j s i (cid:17) 2 (cid:16) 1 a 2 i a 2 j + 1 b 2 i b 2 j (cid:17) , ( A . 11 ) whereby the pure fourth - order terms drop out . For convenience , we may bring the factors a , b to the left - hand side . Finally , the trigonometric functions can be further simpliﬁed , and we end up with a 2 i b 2 i a 2 j b 2 j δ = cos 2 (cid:0) ϕ i − ϕ j (cid:1)(cid:0) a 2 i − a 2 j (cid:1)(cid:0) b 2 i − b 2 j (cid:1) + sin 2 (cid:0) ϕ i − ϕ j (cid:1)(cid:0) a 2 i − b 2 j (cid:1)(cid:0) b 2 i − a 2 j (cid:1) . ( A . 12 ) Inspecting the right - hand side , one can enumerate the cases when δ = 0 , since by assumption the generator ellipse semi - axes are positive , a i > 0 ∧ b i > 0 ∀ i . All these possibilities for δ = 0 are summarized in table A . 1 . The most prominent case of δ = 0 is , when any three of the involved generator axes a i , b i , a j , b j are equal . Then , both summands in equation ( A . 12 ) vanish separately , independent of the angle diﬀerence ∆ ϕ ≡ ϕ i − ϕ j , cf . cases 11 . , 13 . , and 15 . in the table . The other cases δ = 0 , namely 5 . , 7 . , 8 . , 10 . , and 14 . , involve a speciﬁc relation between the orientation of the two generators ϕ i and ϕ j . This also happens in case 2 . , δ (cid:82) 0 , where we expect a transition from elliptic ( δ > 0 ) to hyperbolic ( δ < 0 ) contact surfaces . Indeed , setting δ = 0 in equation ( A . 11 ) , and employing c i c j + s i s j = cos (cid:0) ϕ i − ϕ j (cid:1) , c i s j − s i c j = sin (cid:0) ϕ i − ϕ j (cid:1) , we ﬁnd cos 2 (cid:0) ϕ i − ϕ j (cid:1) = (cid:0) a 2 i − b 2 j (cid:1)(cid:0) a 2 j − b 2 i (cid:1) (cid:0) a 2 i − b 2 i (cid:1)(cid:0) a 2 j − b 2 j (cid:1) . ( A . 13 ) For this equation to have a valid solution ∆ ϕ : = ϕ i − ϕ j , the right - hand side has to be ∈ [ 0 , 1 ] . Suppose now a i > a j > b i > b j as in case 2 . of table A . 1 . Splitting the expressions (cid:0) a 2 i − b 2 j (cid:1) and (cid:0) a 2 j − b 2 j (cid:1) at b 2 i ∈ (cid:0) b 2 j , a 2 j (cid:1) , one ﬁnds for the right - hand side in equation ( A . 13 ) numerator = (cid:0) a 2 i − b 2 i (cid:1)(cid:0) a 2 j − b 2 i (cid:1) + (cid:0) b 2 i − b 2 j (cid:1)(cid:0) a 2 j − b 2 j (cid:1) , denominator = (cid:0) a 2 i − b 2 i (cid:1)(cid:0) a 2 j − b 2 i (cid:1) + (cid:0) b 2 i − b 2 j (cid:1)(cid:0) a 2 i − b 2 j (cid:1) . ( A . 14 ) Clearly , the ratio is < 1 , since a i > a j . Moreover , we see from equation ( A . 13 ) that this ratio is > 0 , since by assumption all brakets are positive . 188 # Ellipse axis order C , S δ Comment 1 . a i > b i > a j > b j + , + > 0 2 . a i > a j > b i > b j + , − (cid:82) 0 for speciﬁcs on δ = 0 see text 3 . a i > a j > b j > b i − , − < 0 4 . a i > b i > a j = b j + , + > 0 5 . a i > b i = a j > b j + , 0 ≥ 0 δ = 0 iﬀ ϕ i − ϕ j = ( 2 n + 1 ) π / 2 6 . a i = b i > a j > b j + , + > 0 7 . a i > a j > b i = b j 0 , − ≤ 0 δ = 0 iﬀ ϕ i − ϕ j = nπ 8 . a i = a j > b i > b j 0 , − ≤ 0 δ = 0 iﬀ ϕ i − ϕ j = nπ 9 . a i > a j = b j > b i − , − < 0 10 . a i = a j > b j > b i + , + > 0 δ = 0 iﬀ ϕ i − ϕ j = nπ 11 . a i > b i = a j = b j 0 , 0 = 0 12 . a i = b i > a j = b j + , + > 0 13 . a i = b i = a j > b j 0 , 0 = 0 14 . a i = a j > b i = b j 0 , − ≤ 0 δ = 0 iﬀ ϕ i − ϕ j = nπ 15 . a i = a j = b j > b i 0 , 0 = 0 16 . a i = b i = a j = b j 0 , 0 = 0 Table A . 1 . : Possible constellations of generator ellipses and corresponding sign of the determinant δ = αβ − γ 2 . Here , C : = sgn (cid:0) a 2 i − a 2 j (cid:1) · sgn (cid:0) b 2 i − b 2 j (cid:1) , S : = sgn (cid:0) a 2 i − b 2 j (cid:1) · sgn (cid:0) b 2 i − a 2 j (cid:1) , i . e . C indicates the sign of the coeﬃcient at cos 2 (cid:0) ϕ i − ϕ j (cid:1) , whereas S the one at sin 2 (cid:0) ϕ i − ϕ j (cid:1) . Upon interchanging i , j in the “axis order” column , the behavior in the other columns remains valid . In principle , δ > 0 will lead to elliptic contact surfaces , whereas δ < 0 gives rise to hyperbolic ones . In the degenerate cases δ = 0 , several types of contact surfaces may occur , which are all discussed in section 4 . 8 . 189 Therefore , ∀ a i > a j > b i > b j ∃ ∆ ϕ : δ = 0 . For the identity ( A . 13 ) to hold , there are four distinct ∆ ϕ ∈ (cid:2) − π , π (cid:1) . These four angle diﬀerences divide the unit circle into four regions , where the contact surface alter - nates from elliptic to hyperbolic in a checked pattern . Speciﬁcally , we have cos 2 (cid:0) ϕ i − ϕ j (cid:1) (cid:82) (cid:0) a 2 i − b 2 j (cid:1)(cid:0) a 2 j − b 2 i (cid:1) (cid:0) a 2 i − b 2 i (cid:1)(cid:0) a 2 j − b 2 j (cid:1) (cid:33)   ellipse , degenerate , hyperbola , ( A . 15 ) for a i > a j > b i > b j and a j > a i > b j > b i . Notably , this relation holds also for the second case , i . e . when a j > a i . The only diﬀerence in the derivation of the result is , that the aforementioned interval splitting has to be performed at b j . 2 . Other sub - determinants of the contact matrix : Apart from δ dis - cussed in the previous section , the contact matrix E has two other sub - determinants , δ ( κ ) : = αω − κ 2 , δ ( λ ) : = βω − λ 2 , ( A . 16 ) where α , β are deﬁned as in the equations A . 10 . Moreover , by equations ( 4 . 39 ) and ( 4 . 40 ) , the translation coeﬃcients κ , λ and the scaling factor ω depend on the positions (cid:0) x i , y i (cid:1) , (cid:0) x j , y j (cid:1) of the generators , κ = − α i x i − γ i y i + α j x j + γ j y j , λ = − γ i x i − β i y i + γ j x j + β j y j , ω = α i x 2 i + 2 γ i x i y i + β i y 2 i − α j x 2 j − 2 γ j x j y j − β j y 2 j , ( A . 17 ) with γ deﬁned in A . 10 . Inserting these relations into ( A . 16 ) and factoring out x i − x j , y i − y j , one ﬁnds the two identities − δ ( κ ) = α i α j (cid:0) x i − x j (cid:1) 2 + 2 (cid:0) α j γ i y i − α i γ j y j (cid:1)(cid:0) x i − x j (cid:1) + (cid:0) γ i y i − γ j y j (cid:1) 2 − (cid:2) α i − α j (cid:3)(cid:0) β i y 2 i − β j y 2 j (cid:1) − δ ( λ ) = β i β j (cid:0) y i − y j (cid:1) 2 + 2 (cid:0) β j γ i x i − β i γ j x j (cid:1)(cid:0) y i − y j (cid:1) + (cid:0) γ i x i − γ j x j (cid:1) 2 − (cid:2) β i − β j (cid:3)(cid:0) α i x 2 i − α j x 2 j (cid:1) . ( A . 18 ) Under the premises of the special cases 2b and 2c from section 4 . 7 , the two rightmost terms in both preceding equations ( A . 18 ) can be treated 190 jointly , 2b , β = γ = λ = 0 : 2 ( ) ( ) − [ ] ( ) = γ i (cid:0) α i + α j (cid:1)(cid:0) x i − x j (cid:1)(cid:0) y i − y j (cid:1) , 2c , α = γ = κ = 0 : 2 ( ) ( ) − [ ] ( ) = γ i (cid:0) β i + β j (cid:1)(cid:0) x i − x j (cid:1)(cid:0) y i − y j (cid:1) . ( A . 19 ) In this way , both − δ ( κ ) and − δ ( λ ) are ≥ 0 when γ i = γ j = 0 , since ∀ i : α i , β i > 0 by construction , see equation ( 4 . 39 ) . Let us now turn to the more general case γ i = γ j (cid:54) = 0 . To this end , we ﬁrst compute the two - dimensional determinant of the generator matrix E i from equation ( 4 . 39 ) , δ i : = α i β i − γ 2 i = 1 a 2 i b 2 i > 0 . ( A . 20 ) With the help of these short - hand notations , ( A . 19 ) can be rewritten to 2b , β = γ = λ = 0 : − δ ( κ ) = 2 δ i δ j γ 2 i + γ 2 j (cid:0) y i − y j (cid:1) 2 ≥ 0 , 2c , α = γ = κ = 0 : − δ ( λ ) = 2 δ i δ j γ 2 i + γ 2 j (cid:0) x i − x j (cid:1) 2 ≥ 0 , ( A . 21 ) which holds for γ i = γ j (cid:54) = 0 ( otherwise see above ) . 3 . The third Eigenvalue ω (cid:48) of the transformed contact matrix : Ac - cording to equation ( 4 . 59 ) , we have δω (cid:48) = δω − αλ 2 + 2 γκλ − βκ 2 . ( A . 22 ) Again , α , β , γ are δ are as in equations A . 10 . Now we separately compute the four summands of δω (cid:48) on the right - hand side of equation ( A . 22 ) , and factor out powers and products of x , y . Once we have all these terms , we gather them in ten groups , namely the pure ones x 2 i , x 2 j , x i x j ; y 2 i , y 2 j , y i y j and the mixed ones x i y i , x j y j , x i y j , x j y i . As turns out , the latter have one single prefactor in common . Similarly , the former split into two subgroups x and y . In this way , diﬀerences in x , y separate and we obtain δω (cid:48) = (cid:0) α i δ j − α j δ i (cid:1)(cid:0) x i − x j (cid:1) 2 + (cid:0) β i δ j − β j δ i (cid:1)(cid:0) y i − y j (cid:1) 2 + 2 (cid:0) γ i δ j − γ j δ i (cid:1)(cid:0) x i − x j (cid:1)(cid:0) y i − y j (cid:1) ( A . 23 ) 191 Even though of similar form , the coeﬃcients cannot be molded together , α i δ j − α j δ i = b 2 i c 2 i + a 2 i s 2 i − b 2 j c 2 j − a 2 j s 2 j a 2 i b 2 i a 2 j b 2 j , β i δ j − β j δ i = b 2 i s 2 i + a 2 i c 2 i − b 2 j s 2 j − a 2 j c 2 j a 2 i b 2 i a 2 j b 2 j , γ i δ j − γ j δ i = c i s i ( b 2 i − a 2 i ) − c j s j ( b 2 j − a 2 j ) a 2 i b 2 i a 2 j b 2 j , ( A . 24 ) because this would break the diﬀerence structure of the x , y factors . How - ever , with the help of equations ( A . 24 ) we can construct an alternate representation , a 2 i a 2 j b 2 i b 2 j δω (cid:48) = a 2 i (cid:16) − s i (cid:2) x i − x j (cid:3) + c i (cid:2) y i − y j (cid:3)(cid:17) 2 − a 2 j (cid:16) − s j (cid:2) x i − x j (cid:3) + c j (cid:2) y i − y j (cid:3)(cid:17) 2 + b 2 i (cid:16) c i (cid:2) x i − x j (cid:3) + s i (cid:2) y i − y j (cid:3)(cid:17) 2 − b 2 j (cid:16) c j (cid:2) x i − x j (cid:3) + s j (cid:2) y i − y j (cid:3)(cid:17) 2 , ( A . 25 ) again separating the i and j terms . A . 4 . Polar representation of anisotropic Voronoi generators Consider a two - dimensional Voronoi generator according to deﬁnition 4 . 1 . 1 with the elliptic norm (cid:107) x (cid:107) i = (cid:115) x 2 a 2 i + y 2 b 2 i , ( A . 26 ) where x ≡ ( x , y ) . For convenience , we have written (cid:107) x (cid:107) i in its diagonal coordinate system , in which the generator center x i coincides with the origin , and the longer semi - axis a i of the generator ellipse aligns with the positive x - axis . As we have shown in corollary 4 . 1 . 7 and proposition 4 . 3 . 3 , the elliptic norm generator from equation ( A . 26 ) has an equivalent representation in terms of homogeneous matrices as in deﬁnition 4 . 3 . 2 . The ellipse graph of the norm generator ( A . 26 ) is given by the identity (cid:107) x (cid:107) i = 1 . ( A . 27 ) 192 Next , we scale the norm (cid:107) x (cid:107) i = : z with the function P ( z ) = qz ν + P 0 from equation ( 4 . 8 ) , whereby we employ the simplest possible coeﬃcients q = 1 , ν = 1 , P 0 = 0 . In this way we obtain a generalized Voronoi generator according to deﬁnition 4 . 1 . 8 , P i ( x ) = (cid:115) x 2 a 2 i + y 2 b 2 i , ( A . 28 ) where we have employed the abbreviation ( 4 . 12 ) , namely P i ( x ) ≡ P (cid:0) (cid:107) x (cid:107) i (cid:1) . Next , we express x in polar coordinates , x : = R x cos ϕ i x , y : = R x sin ϕ i x , ( A . 29 ) where the superscript i indicates that the polar angle ϕ i x for the point x has its apex at the generator center x i . Inserting the polar form of x into equation ( A . 28 ) , we ﬁnd that the scaled norm P i is a product of two factors , P i (cid:0) R x , ϕ i x (cid:1) = R (cid:20) cos 2 ( ϕ i x ) a 2 i + sin 2 ( ϕ i x ) b 2 i (cid:21) 1 / 2 ( A . 30 ) whereby the ﬁrst factor involves only the R x - and the second only the ϕ i x - coordinate of x . The latter factor in square brackets constitutes the polar representation of equation ( A . 27 ) for the ellipse graph underlying the present generator . Indeed , by transforming the ( A . 27 ) with the scaling function P , and making the polar ansatz x = r i cos ϕ i , y = r i sin ϕ i , we arrive at 1 r i ( ϕ i ) = (cid:20) cos 2 ( ϕ i ) a 2 i + sin 2 ( ϕ i ) b 2 i (cid:21) 1 / 2 . ( A . 31 ) Identifying ϕ i ≡ ϕ i x , the polar generalized Voronoi generator from equa - tion ( A . 30 ) becomes a ratio of radii . Moreover , the radius R x of the point x can be written as Euclidean norm (cid:107) x (cid:107) , which follows from the polar ansatz in equation ( A . 29 ) . In more general coordinates , where x i (cid:54) = 0 , this norm becomes (cid:107) x − x i (cid:107) . Altogether we have found P i ( x ) = (cid:107) x − x i (cid:107) r i ( ϕ i x ) , ( A . 32 ) where the x dependence in the radius r i is implicitly encoded in the polar angle ϕ i x of the point x with respect to the generator center x i . Thus , the point power P i ( x ) of the elliptic Voronoi generator P i represents the Euclidean distance (cid:107) x − x i (cid:107) being directionally weighted by the angle - dependent ellipse radius r i ( ϕ i x ) . 193 A . 5 . Contact surface parameterizations in polar coordinates This appendix builds on the results in sections 4 . 6 and 4 . 7 , where the shape of the contact border is investigated for several distinct cases , namely 0ab ( ellipse , hyperbola ) , 1 ( circle ) , 2a ( single straight line ) and 2b – d ( parabola or two parallel straight lines ) . Ellipse , hyperbola , circle , cases 0ab & 1 : The graph of an ellipse centered at the coordinate origin and with semi - axes a ≥ b aligned on the x – and y – axis , respectively , is described by the quadratic form x 2 a 2 + y 2 b 2 = 1 . ( A . 33 ) Inserting x : = R ( θ ) cos θ , y : = R ( θ ) sin θ and eliminating the sin - function yields R 2 ( θ ) = b 2 1 − ε 2 cos 2 θ , ( A . 34 ) where ε 2 : = 1 − b 2 / a 2 < 1 denotes the excentricity . 1 On the other hand , the contact equation ( 4 . 37 ) in its diagonal form ( 4 . 59 ) reads α (cid:48) x 2 + β (cid:48) y 2 + ω (cid:48) = 0 ( A . 35 ) Comparing the identity ( A . 34 ) with the corresponding expression derived from ( A . 35 ) , we ﬁnd a 2 = − ω (cid:48) α (cid:48) , b 2 = − ω (cid:48) β (cid:48) , ε 2 = 1 − α (cid:48) β (cid:48) . ( A . 36 ) Center x 0 = ( x 0 , y 0 ) and orientation φ of this contact ellipse were already determined during contact matrix diagonalization , cf . equations ( 4 . 45 , 4 . 58 ) , where φ is unique since both cos φ and sin φ are known . Altogether , we obtain an explicit parameterization of the contact border , x = x 0 + R ( θ ) cos θ , y = y 0 + R ( θ ) sin θ , R 2 ( θ ) = − ω (cid:48) β (cid:48) − ( β (cid:48) − α (cid:48) ) cos 2 ( θ − φ ) . ( A . 37 ) 1 Note that the coordinate origin coincides with the center of the ellipse . This representation is diﬀerent from the commonly used description centered at one focus of the ellipse , where we have R = a ( 1 − ε 2 ) / ( 1 + ε cos ˜ θ ) . 194 with θ ∈ [ − π , π ) . Below we argue that this parameterization is general and holds for elliptic , circular and hyperbolic contact shapes . If the right - hand side of the R - equation were positive for all θ , then the graph (cid:8) x ( θ ) , y ( θ ) (cid:9) would describe an ellipse . Recall the uniqueness conditions ( 4 . 56 ) , namely α (cid:48) ≤ β (cid:48) ∧ φ ∈ [ − π / 2 , π / 2 ) . Thus , the following three coeﬃcient constellations may arise : ( i ) α (cid:48) < β (cid:48) < 0 , ( ii ) α (cid:48) < 0 < β (cid:48) , ( iii ) 0 < α (cid:48) < β (cid:48) . Inspecting the diagonal contact equation ( A . 35 ) , it becomes apparent that only ( i ) and ( iii ) are suitable for the contact surface to be elliptic . The sign of the homogeneous scaling coeﬃcient ω (cid:48) then has to behave accordingly 2 , i . e . ω (cid:48) > 0 for ( i ) and ω (cid:48) < 0 for ( iii ) . If ω (cid:48) = 0 , then the determinant δ = 0 , and the contact is a degenerate one ( see below ) . In case of ( ii ) , the graph { x , y } arising from the implicit equation A . 35 will be a hyperbola regardless of the sign of ω (cid:48) , because then sgn α (cid:48) (cid:54) = sgn β (cid:48) . Since we did not use any speciﬁc properties of the coeﬃcients α (cid:48) , β (cid:48) , ω (cid:48) in deriving the parameterization ( A . 37 ) , it can also be employed to explicitly describe the graph of a hyperbola . Importantly , only those θ need to be considered where the imaginary part of R ( θ ) vanishes . There are four angles θ where R becomes inﬁnite , which coincide with the two asymptotes of the hyperbola . In summary , all non - degenerate contact borders are covered by aforementioned parameterization . Parabola , cases 2b – d : For degenerate contact borders of parabola shape , the contact equation ( 4 . 37 ) has the from 2bd , λ (cid:48) (cid:54) = 0 : y (cid:48) = − α (cid:48) 2 λ (cid:48) x (cid:48) (cid:16) x (cid:48) + 2 κ (cid:48) α (cid:48) (cid:17) − ω (cid:48) 2 λ (cid:48) , ( A . 38 ) 2cd , κ (cid:48) (cid:54) = 0 : x (cid:48) = − β (cid:48) 2 κ (cid:48) y (cid:48) (cid:16) y (cid:48) + 2 λ (cid:48) β (cid:48) (cid:17) − ω (cid:48) 2 κ (cid:48) , ( A . 39 ) cf . equations ( 4 . 71 , 4 . 74 ) . In the pure cases 2b & 2c , the variables do not involve any transformation , x ≡ x (cid:48) , y ≡ y (cid:48) , α (cid:48) ≡ α , β (cid:48) ≡ β , . . . . In 2 Currently , it is not clear whether this follows from the assumed premises δ > 0 ∧ r 2 > 0 ∧ sgn α (cid:48) = sgn β (cid:48) . Therefore this should be explicitely checked in a numerical implementation . 195 contrast , in the case 2d , the contact matrix has been rotated , see relations ( 4 . 76 ) , which is indicated by the primes . In order to arrive at the simplest representation for R ( θ ) , we ﬁrst choose the coordinate center , 2bd , λ (cid:48) (cid:54) = 0 : x 0 = (cid:16) − κ (cid:48) α (cid:48) , κ (cid:48) 2 − α (cid:48) ω (cid:48) 2 α (cid:48) λ (cid:48) − λ (cid:48) 2 α (cid:48) (cid:17) , ( A . 40 ) 2cd , κ (cid:48) (cid:54) = 0 : x 0 = (cid:16) λ (cid:48) 2 − β (cid:48) ω (cid:48) 2 β (cid:48) κ (cid:48) − κ (cid:48) 2 β (cid:48) , − λ (cid:48) β (cid:48) (cid:17) . ( A . 41 ) Rewriting equations ( A . 38 , A . 39 ) in the coordinates ( x (cid:48)(cid:48) , y (cid:48)(cid:48) ) ≡ x (cid:48)(cid:48) : = x (cid:48) − x 0 , and inserting x (cid:48)(cid:48) : = R ( θ ) cos θ , y (cid:48)(cid:48) : = R ( θ ) sin ( θ ) , one ﬁnds that the discriminant of the quadratic equation in R vanishes . Note that here the contact matrix coeﬃcients α (cid:48) , β (cid:48) , . . . are not changed by this translation . Thus we obtain the following expressions for the polar radius 2bd , λ (cid:48) (cid:54) = 0 : R ( θ ) = λ (cid:48) α (cid:48) · − sin θ ± 1 cos 2 θ , ( A . 42 ) 2cd , κ (cid:48) (cid:54) = 0 : R ( θ ) = κ (cid:48) β (cid:48) · − cos θ ± 1 sin 2 θ . ( A . 43 ) In particular , θ ∈ [ − π , π ) , and both signs describe the same graph . Con - ventionally , however , one requires R > 0 which rules out one of the signs in the numerator , depending on the sign of the respective prefactor λ (cid:48) / α (cid:48) or κ (cid:48) / β (cid:48) . The polar contact border parameterization therefore is x (cid:48) = x 0 + R ( θ ) cos θ , y (cid:48) = y 0 + R ( θ ) sin θ , ( A . 44 ) for the cases 2bc . In the case 2d , the described set of points has to be rotated by the angle − φ as indicated in ( 4 . 58 ) . Finally , there is one angle θ 0 where R becomes inﬁnite . This angle indicates the direction of the opening of the parabola . Straight lines , cases 2a – d : In case of 2a we have α = β = γ = 0 , and the contact border is given by the linear relation 2a , λ (cid:54) = 0 : y = − κ λx − ω 2 λ , ( A . 45 ) cf . ( 4 . 69 ) . Inserting x : = R ( θ ) cos θ , y : = R ( θ ) sin θ , we obtain 2a , ∀ λ : R ( θ ) = − ω 2 λ sin θ + 2 κ cos θ . ( A . 46 ) 196 This expression also holds for λ = 0 , because then we have x = − ω / 2 / κ , whence the λ – term in the denominator drops out . In this case , only those θ need to be considered where R ( θ ) > 0 , because the other , unconven - tional scenario R ( θ ) < 0 describes the same straight line . For 2b – d , we again employ primed quantities to indicate the rotation involved in 2d , whereas for 2bc primed and unprimed quantities coincide . The corresponding contact equations describe a parallel pair of straight lines , 2bd , λ (cid:48) = 0 : x (cid:48) = − κ (cid:48) α (cid:48) ± 1 α (cid:48) √ κ (cid:48) 2 − ω (cid:48) α (cid:48) , ( A . 47 ) 2cd , κ (cid:48) = 0 : y (cid:48) = − λ (cid:48) β (cid:48) ± 1 β (cid:48) (cid:112) λ (cid:48) 2 − ω (cid:48) β (cid:48) . ( A . 48 ) Fixing the center of the coordinate system to x 0 = ( − κ (cid:48) / α (cid:48) , 0 ) ( 2bd ) or x 0 = ( 0 , − λ (cid:48) / β (cid:48) ) ( 2cd ) yields for the polar radii 2bd , λ (cid:48) = 0 : R ( θ ) = ± 1 α (cid:48) cos θ √ κ (cid:48) 2 − ω (cid:48) α (cid:48) , ( A . 49 ) 2cd , κ (cid:48) = 0 : R ( θ ) = ± 1 β (cid:48) sin θ (cid:112) λ (cid:48) 2 − ω (cid:48) β (cid:48) . ( A . 50 ) Each of these expressions describes both parallel lines simultaneously , where the correct sign has to be chosen in a θ - dependent manner from R > 0 . Again , the resulting polar parameterizations of the contact border are x (cid:48) = x 0 + R ( θ ) cos θ , y (cid:48) = y 0 + R ( θ ) sin θ , ( A . 51 ) where an additional rotation by − φ has to be performed for 2d , according to the relations ( 4 . 58 , 4 . 76 ) . There are two angles θ 0 , θ 0 + π where R ( θ ) becomes inﬁnite . These angles indicate the direction of the described pair of straight lines . 197 A . 6 . Model parameters and selected mathematical symbols One - dimensional cell migration model , sections 3 . 1 – 3 . 7 : Symbol Meaning Value Units λ Length of model cell ( fragment ) 10 µ m θ g Volume fraction of G - actin 0 . 0375 dimensionless α B Amount of F - actin polymerization at plus ends 5 . 57 · 10 5 dimensionless δ B Amount of F - actin depolymerization at plus ends 258 dimensionless ω F - actin capping rate 1250 1 / min δ a F - actin disassembly rate 0 . 2 1 / min ε Amount of F - actin nucleation 0 . 75 dimensionless [ Arp2 / 3 ] Concentration of activated Arp2 / 3 complexes 10 µ M ν 0 Amount induced nucleation by Arp2 / 3 60 1 / µ M θ β Half - saturation concentration for nucleation 0 . 00375 dimensionless η 0 Viscosity coeﬃcient of the F - actin network phase 0 . 625 Pa · min ψ 0 Contractile stress per bound myosin - II 1 . 04 · 10 4 Pa · / µ M σ 0 Strength of the swelling pressure 8 · 10 5 Pa φ ph Drag coeﬃcient between network and solvent 2 Pa · min / µ m 2 κ Γ Tip curvature weight factor for membrane tension 0 . 5 dimensionless τ 0 Minimal cellular membrane tension 25 Pa φ u Friction per actin - substrate bound integrin 0 . 02 Pa · min φ v Additional friction associated to the cell body 18 Pa · min / µ m 2 D m Diﬀusion coeﬃcient for free myosin - II 0 . 5 µ m 2 / min α m F - actin binding rate of myosin - II 400 1 / min δ m 0 Dissociation rate of bound myosin - II 3 1 / min θ m Optimal F - actin for myosin - II binding 0 . 025 dimensionless D f Diﬀusion coeﬃcient for free integrin 0 . 5 µ m 2 / min α 0 fa Free integrin binding rate to F - actin 1 . 2 · 10 4 1 / min δ af Dissociation rate for F - actin bound integrin 5 1 / min α fs Free integrin binding rate to substrate 15 1 / min δ sf Dissociation rate for substrate bound integrin 5 1 / min α 0 sb F - actin binding rate for substrate bound integrin 1 . 2 · 10 4 1 / min δ 0 bs FA dissociation of the F - actin link 0 . 1 1 / min ρ bs Exponential FA - rupture coeﬃcient substrate link 11 . 7 µ m / Pa α ab Substrate binding rate for F - actin bound integrin 15 1 / min δ 0 ba FA dissociation rate of the substrate link 0 . 1 1 / min ρ ba Exponential FA - rupture coeﬃcient F - actin link 11 . 7 µ m / Pa A dh Eﬀective substratum adhesiveness coeﬃcient 3 dimensionless Table A . 2 . : Parameter values in the one - dimensional cell migration model from sections 3 . 1 – 3 . 7 , unless indicated otherwise . 198 Symbol Meaning Units θ ( t , y ) Volume fraction of F - actin dimensionless u ( t , y ) F - actin velocity µ m / min p ( t , y ) Eﬀective two - phase ﬂow pressure Pa τ ( t , y ) Dorsal membrane tension induced eﬀective pressure Pa ˙ y 1 ≡ ˙ y 2 ≡ Protrusion / retraction speed at cell ends µ m / min v ( t ) Migration velocity of model cell µ m / min V Relative inward F - actin velocity at boundary µ m / min ν Γ Outer normal of the free boundary Γ ( t ) dimensionless m f ( t , y ) Concentration of free myosin - II µ M m b ( t , y ) Concentration of F - actin bound myosin - II µ M b f ( t , y ) Concentration of free integrin 1 / µ m 2 b a ( t , y ) Concentration of actin bound integrin 1 / µ m 2 b s ( t , y ) Concentration of substrate bound integrin 1 / µ m 2 b b ( t , y ) Concentration of substrate and actin bound integrin 1 / µ m 2 Table A . 3 . : Variables in the one - dimensional cell migration model from sections 3 . 1 – 3 . 7 . Symbol Meaning Units J ( θ ) F - actin net polymerization rate 1 / min ψ ( θ , m b ) Contractile stress Pa σ ( θ ) Swelling pressure Pa S ( θ , m b ) Eﬀective cytoplasmic stress Pa η ( θ ) Viscosity of F - actin phase Pa · min β n ( θ ) F - actin branching rate at tip dimensionless ν ( [ Arp2 / 3 ] ) Stimulated F - actin branching coeﬃcient at tip dimensionless f u Active frictional clutch force at focal adhesions Pa / µ m f v Passive frictional force at dorsal membrane Pa / µ m P poly Total polymerization pressure Pa P clamp Clamp - motor polymerization pressure Pa P ratchet Brownian ratchet polymerization pressure Pa η Γ ( m b ) Eﬀective F - actin shear viscosity at tip Pa · min / µ m θ + ( θ ) F - actin barbed / plus end volume fraction at tip dimensionless Table A . 4 . : Model functions for one - dimensional cell migration as em - ployed in sections 3 . 1 – 3 . 7 . 199 Two - dimensional cell migration model , sections 3 . 8 – 3 . 9 : Symbol Meaning Values Units a ( t , ϕ ) Concentration of F - actin 0 . 3 . . . 0 . 8 mM b ( t , ϕ ) Area concentration of adhering integrin 0 . . . 0 . 03 10 6 / µ m 2 d ( t , ϕ ) Area concentration of substratum ligands 0 . . . 0 . 2 10 6 / µ m 3 L ( t , ϕ ) Local lamella width 2 . . . 5 µ m v ( t ) Migration velocity of model cell 0 . . . 0 . 3 µ m / min Table A . 5 . : Variables in the two - dimensional cell migration model from sections 3 . 8 – 3 . 9 . Symbol Meaning Value Units C A Area concentration 10 6 / µ m 2 d t Numerical time step increment 0 . 01 min R Cell body radius 2 µ m γ v Eﬀective cellular friction coeﬃcient 25 nN · min / µ m f loc Strength of locomotion force 17 nN / µ m / mM / C A κ a Slip factor for actin transport velocity 0 . 3 dimensionless α L Actin assembly rate per lamella extension 0 . 04 mM / min / µ m α a Integrin stimulated F - actin autocatalysis 0 . 016 1 / min / C A δ a F - actin depolymerization rate 0 . 30 1 / min β a F - actin polymerization perturbation strength 0 . 14 mM / min 1 / 2 D a Diﬀusion coeﬃcient for F - actin 0 . 04 µ m 2 / min α b Adhesion assembly stimulated by F - actin 1 . 8 1 / min / mM δ e Adhesion loss due to radial transport 1 1 / µ m δ b Adhesion disassembly rate 0 . 2 1 / min f b Characteristic adhesion rupture force 0 . 2 nN κ b Slip factor for integrin transport velocity 0 . 7 dimensionless d 0 Eﬀective amount of substratum receptors 0 . 1 dimensionless σ d Substratum receptor variation 0 . 05 dimensionless α d Substratum receptor gain factor 0 . 03 C A / µ m κ d Slip factor for substratum velocity 1 . 0 dimensionless φ 0 Amount of tip protrusion friction 1 . 5 nN · min / mM / µ m τ 0 Eﬀective cellular surface tension 0 . 04 nN · µ m / mM 2 p 0 Protrusion pressure from cell body 1 . 2 nN · µ m p b Protrusion induced by adhesions 0 . 3 nN / mM / C A ρ 0 Retrograde F - actin ﬂow contraction 1 . 2 nN / mM 2 Table A . 6 . : Values of model parameters from sections 3 . 8 – 3 . 9 , unless in - dicated otherwise . 200 Symbol Meaning Units J (cid:48)(cid:48) ( a , b , L ) F - actin net polymerization rate mM / min u a ( v ) F - actin transport velocity µ m / min u b ( v ) Integrin transport velocity µ m / min u d ( v ) Eﬀective substratum receptor transport velocity µ m / min v intip ( v ) Velocity of incoming receptors at cell tip µ m / min v outtip ( v ) Velocity of leaving receptors at cell tip µ m / min v outbody ( v ) Velocity of leaving receptors at cell body µ m / min τ ( a , L ) Eﬀective curvature force at the cell outline mN / µ m f ( a , b , L ) Local cellular locomotion force mN / µ m F loc ( f ) Total cellular locomotion force mN Table A . 7 . : Model functions for two - dimensional cell migration as em - ployed in sections 3 . 8 – 3 . 9 . Cell tissue model , chapter 5 : Symbol Meaning Value Units √P ex Relative maximal cell extension 3 dimensionless r i Cell body radii 0 . 9 . . . 2 . 0 µ m T Cytoskeletal reorganization time 120 s ˜ ρ Filament bundle density on cell body 9 . 55 1 / µ m f loc Strength of cellular locomotion force 10 . . . 20 pN f int Strength of cellular interaction force 60 pN α Cooperative vertical traction coeﬃcient 0 . . . 0 . 17 dimensionless ∆ min Relative minimal cell pair distance 0 . 1 dimensionless ∆ crit Relative critical cell pair distance 0 . 2 . . . 0 . 7 dimensionless b st · P − 1 / 4 ex Strength of stochastic migration force 8 . 31 pN / √ µ m · s ˜ γ Cellular friction constant 2 . 5 · 10 4 pN · s / µ m d t Numerical time step 2 s Table A . 8 . : Values of model parameters from chapter 5 , unless indicated otherwise . These values have been derived from the dimen - sional estimates in paragraph 5 . 3 . 8 . This table is a duplicate of 5 . 1 , and repeated here for reference . 201 Symbol Meaning Value Units r i Cell body radii 1 . 08 . . . 1 . 93 µ m ˜ ρ i Force generating ﬁlament density 7 . 02 . . . 9 . 13 1 / µ m b i Eﬀective integrin expression level 1 . 0 dimensionless c i Eﬀective cadherin expression level 1 . 0 dimensionless q i Perturbation response , protrusivity 1 . 0 dimensionless f int Strength of interaction force 60 pN α Cooperative vertical traction coeﬃcient 0 . 0 dimensionless ∆ min Minimal normalized cell - cell distance 0 . 1 dimensionless ∆ ( 0 ) crit Critical normalized cell - cell distance 0 . 3 dimensionless α ani Anisotropy parameter for ∆ bbcrit 1 . 0 & 1 . 4 dimensionless f pol Strength of polarity force 2 . 5 pN T pol Polarity reorientation time 600 s v pol Characteristic polarity adaptation velocity 1 . 0 µ m / s δ p Polarity decrease rate 8 . 3 · 10 − 4 1 / s α p Stochastic polarity increase 0 . 03 1 / √ s γ drag Friction coeﬃcient per free cell area 1326 . 3 pN · s / µ m 3 γ vis0 Viscous cell - cell friction coeﬃcient 200 pN · s / µ m d t Numerical time step 2 s Table A . 9 . : Parameter values introduced in section 5 . 7 in addition to the ones from table A . 8 . The values presented here are defaults and employed only unless indicated otherwise in the respec - tive sections . 202 A . 7 . Accompanying electronic supplementary material This thesis is accompanied by several ﬁles of electronic supplementary material . This material can also be obtained from http : / / www . theobio . uni - bonn . de / people / mab / dsup . Single cell migration – section 3 . 9 : s2d experiment . avi s2d simulation . avi Voronoi algorithm – section 4 . 8 : The zip - ﬁle mwvoro . zip contains the Octave code ( Matlab - compatible ) to construct circular Voronoi diagrams , licensed under the two - clause BSD open - source license . The program ﬁles are extensively commented . Voronoi tissue topology – section 5 . 4 mova . avi movb . avi movc . avi movd . avi 203 Cell sorting model – section 5 . 6 mov sort . avi Germband elongation model – section 5 . 7 35 30 25 20 15 10 5 0 - 5 - 10 - 15 - 20 - 25 20 15 10 5 0 - 5 - 10 - 15 - 20 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 25 26 27 28 29 30 31 32 33 34 35 36 37 38 39 40 41 42 43 44 45 46 47 48 49 50 51 52 53 54 55 56 57 58 59 60 61 t = 30 . 0 h mov elo . avi 204 List of Figures 1 . 1 . Cells as sketched by Theodor Schwann in [ 195 ] . . . . . . . 3 1 . 2 . Migrating human epidermal keratinocyte cell with stained focal adhesion sites . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 9 1 . 3 . Cartoon model of dendridic nucleation and actin ﬁlament turnover at the tip of migrating cells ; from [ 179 ] . . . . . . 11 1 . 4 . Diﬀerent kinds of intracellular stress ﬁbers ; from [ 110 ] . . . 17 1 . 5 . Pair of human epidermal keratinocytes engaged in mutual contact with stained adhesion sites . . . . . . . . . . . . . 20 1 . 6 . Three basic morphodynamical states of human epidermal keratinocytes on substrata . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 27 3 . 1 . Simulation domain of one - dimensional cell migration model 46 3 . 2 . Integrin adhesion model with four kinetic states . . . . . . 50 3 . 3 . Stress model function for active and passive contractions in the cytoplasm . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 54 3 . 4 . Concentrations and forces within the one - dimensional mi - gration model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 63 3 . 5 . Experimental distributions of concentrations and forces in migrating human epidermal keratinocytes ; from [ 157 ] . . . 67 3 . 6 . Experimental data and model prediction for the cellular velocity - adhesiveness relation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 70 3 . 7 . Cell - centric coordinates for the two - dimensional cell mi - gration model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 73 3 . 8 . Tracking of experimental cell trajectory and corresponding simulation data . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 82 3 . 9 . Cell - level observables during migration on two - dimensional substrata . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 85 3 . 10 . Autocorrelation of migrating cell speed and lamella area . 87 3 . 11 . Crosscorrelation of migrating cell speed and lamella area . 89 4 . 1 . Comparison of planar and circular Voronoi diagrams . . . 97 4 . 2 . Circular contact surface between two Voronoi cells . . . . . 102 4 . 3 . Voronoi diagram of elliptic generators . . . . . . . . . . . . 115 4 . 4 . Point powers of several Voronoi generator types . . . . . . 123 205 5 . 1 . Comparing planar and circular Voronoi diagram with mono - layer of Zebraﬁsh cells . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 135 5 . 2 . Comparing planar and circular Voronoi diagram with mono - layer of quail cells . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 137 5 . 3 . Finite size of Voronoi cells and their starlikeness . . . . . . 139 5 . 4 . Functional units participating in the Voronoi cell interac - tion model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 142 5 . 5 . Cellular interaction force in the Voronoi model I . . . . . . 147 5 . 6 . Cellular interaction force in the Voronoi model II . . . . . 148 5 . 7 . Force balancing in an isolated Voronoi cell pair . . . . . . . 149 5 . 8 . Several quasi - stable cellular arrangements of small Voronoi tissues . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 153 5 . 9 . Circularity and overall size as tissue - level model observables155 5 . 10 . Limited parameter constellations for stable and coherent model tissues . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 157 5 . 11 . Model tissue cohesion depends on lamella width and cell overlap . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 158 5 . 12 . Experimental cell sorting assay . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 160 5 . 13 . Cell sorting and strand formation in two - dimensional Voronoi cell aggregates . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 164 5 . 14 . Speed autocorrelation function arising from polarity force . 170 5 . 15 . Anisotropy in the equilibrium cell - cell distance of the Drosophila germband elongation model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 171 5 . 16 . Voronoi model of cell intercalation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 175 5 . 17 . Time series of concomitant cell and tissue shape . . . . . . 176 6 . 1 . Shape geometry concepts for a cell pair . . . . . . . . . . . 182 206 List of Tables 1 . 1 . Taxonomy of force - involving phenomena in cellular migration 25 2 . 1 . Characteristic dimensions of the cytoplasm ﬂow . . . . . . 33 2 . 2 . Constitutive stress functions in Reactive Interpenetrating Flow models . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 37 4 . 1 . Possible cell - cell contact shapes in the Voronoi tissue model 116 5 . 1 . Parameter values for the two - dimensional Voronoi tissue model . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 152 A . 1 . Generator ellipse radii and sign of the corresponding con - tact matrix determinant . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 189 A . 2 . Default values of model parameters from sections 3 . 1 – 3 . 7 . 198 A . 3 . Variables in the one - dimensional cell migration model from sections 3 . 1 – 3 . 7 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 199 A . 4 . Model functions for one - dimensional cell migration as em - ployed in sections 3 . 1 – 3 . 7 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 199 A . 5 . Variables in the two - dimensional cell migration model from sections 3 . 8 – 3 . 9 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 200 A . 6 . Default values of model parameters from sections 3 . 8 – 3 . 9 . 200 A . 7 . Model functions for two - dimensional cell migration as em - ployed in sections 3 . 8 – 3 . 9 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 201 A . 8 . Default values of model parameters from chapter 5 . . . . 201 A . 9 . Additional parameter values from section 5 . 7 . . . . . . . . 202 207 Bibliography [ 1 ] B . Aigouy , R . Farhadifar , D . B . Staple , A . Sagner , J . - C . R¨oper , F . J¨ulicher , and S . Eaton . Cell ﬂow reorients the axis of planar polarity in the wing epithelium of Drosophila . Cell , 142 : 773 , 2010 . [ 2 ] B . Alberts , A . Johnson , J . Lewis , M . Raﬀ , K . Roberts , and P . Wal - ter . Molecular Biology of the Cell . Garland Science , 4th edition , 2002 . [ 3 ] A . Y . Alexandrova , K . Arnold , S . Schaub , J . M . Vasiliev , J . - J . Meister , A . D . Bershadsky , and A . B . Verkhovsky . Comparative dynamics of retrograde actin ﬂow and focal adhesions . PLoS ONE , 3 : e3234 , 2008 . [ 4 ] H . W . Alt and W . Alt . Phase boundary dynamics : transition be - tween ordered and disordered lipid monola ` uers . Interfaces and Free Boundaries , 11 : 1 , 2009 . [ 5 ] W . Alt . Nonlinear hyperbolic systems of generalized Navier - Stokes type for interactive motion in biology . In S . Hildebrandt and H . Karcher , editors , Geometric Analysis and Nonlinear Partial Dif - ferential Equations , pages 431 – 461 . Springer , 2003 . [ 6 ] W . Alt , M . Bock , and C . M¨ohl . Coupling of cytoplasm and adhesion dynamics determines cell polarization and locomotion . In A . Chauvi ` ere , L . Preziosi , and C . Verdier , editors , Cell Me - chanics : From Single Scale - Based Models to Multiscale Modeling , pages 86 – 125 . Chapman & Hall / CRC , 2010 . Preprint http : / / arxiv . org / abs / 0907 . 5078 . [ 7 ] W . Alt , O . Brosteanu , B . Hinz , and H . - W . Kaiser . Patterns of spontaneous motility in videomicrographs of human epidermal ker - atinocytes ( HEK ) . Biochemistry and Cell Biology , 73 : 441 , 1995 . [ 8 ] W . Alt and M . Dembo . Cytoplasm dynamics and cell motion : two - phase ﬂow models . Mathematical Biosciences , 156 : 207 , 1999 . 209 [ 9 ] W . Alt , U . Eibach , V . Herzog , S . Schleim , and G . Sch¨utz . Lebensentstehung und k¨unstliches Leben . Die Graue Edition , 2010 . [ 10 ] R . Ananthakrishnan and A . Ehrlicher . The forces behind cell move - ment . International Journal of Biological Sciences , 3 : 303 , 2007 . [ 11 ] Y . Aratyn - Schaus and M . L . Gardel . Transient frictional slip be - tween integrin and the ECM in focal adhesions under myosin II tension . Current Biology , 20 : 1145 , 2010 . [ 12 ] S . Archer , D . W . Wylie , L . S . Harris , J . W . Schulenberg , T . R . Lewis , M . R . Bell , R . K . Kullnig , and A . Arnold . l - ( indolylalkyl ) - 4 - arryr - piperazmes : a new class of tranquillizers . Journal of the American Chemical Society , 84 : 1306 , 1962 . [ 13 ] L . Arnold . Stochastische Diﬀerentialgleichungen : Theorie und An - wendung . R . Oldenbourg Verlag , 1973 . [ 14 ] P . F . Ash and E . D . Bolker . Generalized Dirichlet tessellations . Geometrica Dedicata , 20 : 209 , 1986 . [ 15 ] F . Aurenhammer . Voronoi diagrams – a survey of a fundamental geometric data structure . ACM Computing Surveys , 23 : 345 , 1991 . [ 16 ] F . Aurenhammer and H . Edelsbrunner . An optimal algorithm for constructing the weighted Voronoi diagram in the plane . Pattern Recognition , 17 : 251 , 1984 . [ 17 ] F . Aurenhammer and R . Klein . Voronoi diagrams . In J . - R . Sack and J . Urrutia , editors , Handbook of Computational Geometry , pages 201 – 290 . North Holland , 1999 . [ 18 ] N . Q . Balaban , U . S . Schwarz , D . Riveline , P . Goichberg , G . Tzur , I . Sabanay , D . Mahalu , S . Safran , A . Bershadsky , L . Addadi , and B . Geiger . Force and focal adhesion assembly : a close relation - ship studied using elastic micropatterned substrates . Nature , 3 : 466 , 2001 . [ 19 ] I . Banga and A . Szent - Gy¨orgyi . Preparation and properties of myosin A and B . Studies from the Institute of Medical Chemistry , University Szeged , 1 : 5 , 1942 . [ 20 ] D . A . Beard and H . Qian . Chemical Biophysics – Quantitative Analysis of Cellular Systems . Cambridge University Press , 2008 . 210 [ 21 ] G . I . Bell . Models for the speciﬁc adhesion of cells to cells . Science , 200 : 618 , 1978 . [ 22 ] M . Ben Amar , C . Chatelain , and P . Ciarletta . Contour instabilities in early tumor growth models . Physical Review Letters , 106 : 148101 , 2011 . [ 23 ] T . Betz , D . Koch , D . Lim , and J . A . K¨as . Stochastic actin poly - merization and steady retrograde ﬂow determine growth cone ad - vancement . Biophysical Journal , 96 : 5130 , 2009 . [ 24 ] T . Betz , D . Koch , Y . - B . Lu , K . Franze , and J . A . K¨as . Growth cones as soft and weak force generators . Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America , 108 : 13420 , 2011 . [ 25 ] A . Beutelspacher . Lineare Algebra – Eine Einf¨uhrung in die Wis - senschaft der Vektoren , Abbildungen und Matrizen . Vieweg , 2001 . [ 26 ] T . Beyer and M . Meyer - Hermann . Cell transmembrane recep - tors determine tissue pattern stability . Physical Review Letters , 101 : 148102 , 2008 . [ 27 ] T . Beyer and M . Meyer - Hermann . Multiscale modeling of cell me - chanics and tissue organization . IEEE Engineering in Medicine and Biology , 28 : 38 , 2009 . [ 28 ] I . B . Bischofs , S . S . Schmidt , and U . S . Schwarz . Eﬀect of adhe - sion geometry and rigidity on cellular force distributions . Physical Review Letters , 103 : 048101 , 2009 . [ 29 ] G . B . Blanchard , A . J . Kabla , N . L . Schultz , L . C . Butler , B . San - son , N . Gorﬁnkiel , L . Mahadevan , and R . J . Adams . Tissue tecton - ics : morphogenetic strain rates , cell shape and intercalation . Nature Methods , 6 : 1327 , 2009 . [ 30 ] H . Blum . Biological shape and visual science ( part 1 ) . Journal of Theoretical Biology , 38 : 205 , 1973 . [ 31 ] M . Bock , A . K . Tyagi , J . - U . Kreft , and W . Alt . Generalized Voronoi tessellation as a model of two - dimensional cell tissue dy - namics . Bulletin of Mathematical Biology , 72 : 1696 , 2010 . Preprint http : / / arxiv . org / abs / 0901 . 4469 . 211 [ 32 ] M . Bock and C . Wollnik . How do biological cells move ? European Communications in Mathematical and Theoretical Biology , 14 : 54 – 69 , Oct . 2011 . Special issue on occasion of the 25th anniversary of Wolfgang Alt’s Theoretical Biology group at the University of Bonn , edited by Martin Bock and Markus P . Knappitsch . [ 33 ] N . Borghi , M . Lowndes , V . Maruthamuthu , M . L . Gardel , and W . J . Nelson . Regulation of cell motile behavior by crosstalk be - tween cadherin - and integrin - mediated adhesions . Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America , 107 : 13324 , 2010 . [ 34 ] S . L . Brenner and E . D . Korn . Substoichiometric concentrations of cytochalasin D inhibit actin polymerization . Journal of Biological Chemistry , 254 : 9982 , 1979 . [ 35 ] J . Brevier , D . Montero , T . Svitkina , and D . Riveline . The asym - metric self - assembly mechanism of adherens junctions : a cellular push - pull unit . Physical Biology , 5 : 016005 , 2008 . [ 36 ] G . W . Brodland and J . H . Veldhuis . Computer simulations of mi - tosis and interdependencies between mitosis orientation , cell shape and epithelia reshaping . Journal of Biomechanics , 35 : 673 , 2002 . [ 37 ] I . N . Bronstein , K . A . Semendjajew , G . Musiol , and H . M¨uhlig . Taschenbuch der Mathematik . Harri Deutsch , 4 . Auﬂage , 1999 . [ 38 ] C . M . Brown , B . Hebert , D . L . Kolin , J . Zareno , L . Whitmore , A . R . Horwitz , and P . W . Wiseman . Probing the integrin - actin linkage using high - resolution protein velocity mapping . Journal of Cell Science , 119 : 5204 , 2006 . [ 39 ] A . K . Bryan , A . Goranov , A . Amon , and S . R . Manalis . Mea - surement of mass , density , and volume during the cell cycle of yeast . Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America , 107 : 999 , 2010 . [ 40 ] L . C . Butler , G . B . Blanchard , A . J . Kabla , N . J . Lawrence , D . P . Welchman , L . Mahadevan , R . J . Adams , and B . Sanson . Cell shape changes indicate a role for extrinsic tensile forces in Drosophila germ - band extension . Nature Cell Biology , 11 : 859 , 2009 . 212 [ 41 ] Y . Cai , O . Rossier , N . C . Gauthier , N . Biais , M . - A . Fardin , X . Zhang , L . W . Miller , B . Ladoux , V . W . Cornish , and M . P . Sheetz . Cytoskeletal coherence requires myosin - IIA contractility . Journal of Cell Science , 123 : 413 , 2010 . [ 42 ] A . C . Callan - Jones and F . J¨ulicher . Hydrodynamics of active per - meating gels . New Journal of Physics , 13 : 093027 , 2011 . [ 43 ] H . B . Callen . Thermodynamics and Introduction to Thermostatis - tics . Wiley , 2nd edition , 1985 . [ 44 ] M . Chalﬁe , Y . Tu , G . Euskirchen , W . W . Ward , and D . C . Prasher . Green ﬂuorescent protein as a marker for gene expression . Science , 263 : 802 , 1994 . [ 45 ] C . E . Chan and D . J . Odde . Traction dynamics of ﬁlopodia on compliant substrates . Science , 322 : 1687 , 2008 . [ 46 ] C . Chatelain , T . Balois , P . Ciarletta , and M . Ben Amar . Emergence of microstructural patterns in skin cancer : a phase separation anal - ysis in a binary mixture . New Journal of Physics , 13 : 115013 , 2011 . [ 47 ] O . Chaudhuri , S . H . Parekh , and D . A . Fletcher . Reversible stress softening of actin networks . Nature , 445 : 295 , 2007 . [ 48 ] H . H . Chen and G . W . Brodland . Cell - level ﬁnite element studies of viscous cells in planar aggregates . Journal of Biomedical Engi - neering , 122 : 394 , 2000 . [ 49 ] X . Chen and G . W . Brodland . Multi - scale ﬁnite element modeling allows the mechanics of amphibian neurulation to be elucidated . Physical Biology , 5 : 015003 , 2008 . [ 50 ] N . G . Cogan and R . D . Guy . Multiphase ﬂow models of biogels from crawling cells to bacterial bioﬁlms . HFSP Journal , 4 : 11 , 2010 . [ 51 ] H . S . M . Coxeter . Projective Geometry . Springer , 2003 . Reprint of the 2nd edition from 1973 . [ 52 ] L . P . Cramer . Forming the cell rear ﬁrst : breaking cell symmetry to trigger directed cell migration . Nature Cell Biology , 12 : 628 , 2010 . 213 [ 53 ] H . Darcy . Les fontaines publiques de la ville de Dijon . Paris , 1856 . Available online from the Bibliot´eque nationale de France , http : / / gallica . bnf . fr / ark : / 12148 / bpt6k624312 . [ 54 ] S . R . DeGroot and P . Mazur . Non - Equilibrium Thermodynamics . Dover , 1984 . [ 55 ] H . Delano¨e - Ayari , S . Iwaya , Y . T . Maeda , J . Inose , C . Rivi ` ere , M . Sano , and J . - P . Rieu . Changes in the magnitude and distribu - tion of forces at diﬀerent Dictyostelium developmental stages . Cell Motility and the Cytoskeleton , 65 : 314 , 2008 . [ 56 ] B . Delaunay . Sur la sph ` ere vide . A la m´emoire de Georges Vorono¨ı . Bulletin de l’Academie des Sciences de l’URSS , 1934 ( 6 ) : 793 – 800 , 1934 . Russian journal name : ¨(cid:231)(cid:226)(cid:229)æ(cid:242)Ł(cid:255) (cid:192)Œ(cid:224)(cid:228)(cid:229)(cid:236)ŁŁ (cid:237)(cid:224)(cid:243)Œ (cid:209)(cid:209)(cid:209)— . VII æ(cid:229)(cid:240)Ł(cid:255) . ˛(cid:242)(cid:228)(cid:229)º(cid:229)(cid:237)Ł(cid:229) (cid:236)(cid:224)(cid:242)(cid:229)(cid:236)(cid:224)(cid:242)Ł(cid:247)(cid:229)æŒŁı Ł (cid:229)æ(cid:242)(cid:229)æ(cid:242)(cid:226)(cid:229)(cid:237)(cid:237)ßı (cid:237)(cid:224)(cid:243)Œ , available online from http : / / www . mathnet . ru / php / archive . phtml ? wshow = paper & jrnid = im & paperid = 4937 & option _ lang = rus ( accessed October 22 , 2012 ) . [ 57 ] M . Dembo . The mechanics of motility in dissociated cytoplasm . Biophysical Journal , 50 : 1165 , 1986 . [ 58 ] M . Dembo . Field theories of the cytoplasm . Comments Theoretical Biology , 1 : 159 , 1989 . [ 59 ] M . Dembo . Mechanics and control of the cytoskeleton in amoeba proteus . Biophysical Journal , 55 : 1053 , 1989 . [ 60 ] M . Dembo . On free boundary proplems and amoeboid motion . In N . Akkas , editor , Biomechanics of Active Movement and Division of Cells , volume 84 of NATO ASI Series H , pages 231 – 283 . Springer , 1994 . [ 61 ] M . Dembo and F . Harlow . Cell motion , contractile networks and the physics of interpenetrating reactive ﬂow . Biophysical Journal , 50 : 109 , 1986 . [ 62 ] M . Dembo , F . H . Harlow , and W . Alt . The biophysics of cell surface motility . In C . DeLisi , F . W . Wiegel , and A . S . Perelson , editors , Cell Surface Dynamics : Concepts and Models , pages 495 – 542 . Mar - cel Dekker , New York , 1982 . 214 [ 63 ] M . Dembo and Y . - L . Wang . Stresses at the cell - to - substrate inter - face during locomotion of ﬁbroblasts . Biophysical Journal , 76 : 2307 , 1999 . [ 64 ] http : / / dict . leo . org . Web dictionary English ↔ German , ac - cessed 2007 – 2012 . Used as language reference and for translation purposes . Any speciﬁc technical terms have been veryﬁed from in - dependent resources such as textbooks or journal articles , each of which are separately listed in the present bibliography . [ 65 ] R . B . Dickinson . Models for actin polymerization motors . Journal of Mathematical Biology , 58 : 81 , 2009 . [ 66 ] R . B . Dickinson , L . Caro , and D . L . Purich . Force generation by cytoskeletal ﬁlament end - tracking proteins . Biophysical Journal , 87 : 2838 , 2004 . [ 67 ] P . Dieterich , R . Klages , R . Preuss , and A . Schwab . Anomalous dynamics of cell migration . Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America , 105 : 459 , 2008 . [ 68 ] G . J . Doherty and H . T . McMahon . Mediation , modulation , and consequences of membrane - cytoskeleton interactions . Annual Re - views of Biophysics , 37 : 65 , 2008 . [ 69 ] M . Doi and S . F . Edwards . The Theory of Polymer Dynamics . Oxford University Press , 1986 . [ 70 ] M . Doi and A . Onuki . Dynamic coupling between stress and com - position in polymer solutions and blends . Journal de Physique II , 2 : 1631 , 1992 . [ 71 ] D . Drasdo , R . Kree , and J . S . McCaskill . Monte Carlo approach to tissue - cell populations . Physical Review E , 52 : 6635 , 1995 . [ 72 ] I . Z . Emiris , E . P . Tsigaridas , and G . M . Tzoumas . The predicates for the Voronoi diagram of ellipses . In Proceedings of the twenty - second annual symposium on Computational Geometry , SCG ’06 , pages 227 – 236 . ACM , 2006 . [ 73 ] I . Z . Emiris , E . P . Tsigaridas , and G . M . Tzoumas . Exact Delaunay graph of smooth convex pseudo - circles : general predicates , and im - plementation for ellipses . In 2009 SIAM / ACM Joint Conference on 215 Geometric and Physical Modeling , SPM ’09 , pages 211 – 222 . ACM , 2009 . [ 74 ] I . Z . Emiris , E . P . Tsigaridas , and G . M . Tzoumas . Voronoi dia - gram of ellipses in CGAL . http : / / cgi . di . uoa . gr / ~ geotz / bib / papers / EmTsTz - EWCG08 - VorEll . pdf ( 2008 ) , accessed September 10 , 2012 . [ 75 ] M . Enculescu , M . Sabouri - Ghomi , G . Danuser , and M . Falcke . Modeling of protrusion phenotypes driven by the actin - membrane interaction . Biophysical Journal , 98 : 1571 , 2010 . [ 76 ] E . Evans and K . Ritchie . Dynamic strength of molecular adhesion bonds . Biophysical Journal , 72 : 1541 , 1997 . [ 77 ] G . Forgacs and S . A . Newman . Biological Phyics of the Developing Embryo . Cambridge University Press , 2005 . [ 78 ] M . F . Fournier , R . Sauser , D . Ambrosi , J . - J . Meister , and A . B . Verkhovsky . Force transmission in migrating cells . Journal of Cell Biology , 188 : 287 , 2010 . [ 79 ] P . Friedl , K . S . Z¨anker , and E . - B . Br¨ocker . Cell migration strategies in 3 - D extracellular matrix : Diﬀerences in morphology , cell matrix interactions , and integrin function . Microscopy Research and Tech - nique , 43 : 369 , 1998 . [ 80 ] C . G . Galbraith and M . P . Sheetz . A micromachined device provides a new bend on ﬁbroblast traction forces . Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America , 94 : 9114 , 1997 . [ 81 ] C . G . Galbraith , K . M . Yamada , and M . P . Sheetz . The relation - ship between force and focal complex development . Journal of Cell Biology , 159 : 695 , 2002 . [ 82 ] J . Galle , G . Aust , G . Schaller , T . Beyer , and D . Drasdo . Individual cell - based models of the spatial - temporal organization of multicel - lular systems – achievements and limitations . Cytometry Part A , 69 : 704 , 2006 . [ 83 ] J . Galle , M . Loeﬄer , and D . Drasdo . Modeling the eﬀect of dereg - ulated proliferation and apoptosis on the growth dynamics of ep - ithelial cell populations in vitro . Biophysical Journal , 88 : 62 , 2005 . 216 [ 84 ] W . J . Gallin , G . M . Edelman , and B . A . Cunningham . Character - ization of L - CAM , a major cell adhesion molecule from embryonic liver cells . Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America , 80 : 1038 , 1983 . [ 85 ] Y . Gambin , R . Lopez - Esparza , E . Sierecki , N . S . Gov , M . Genest , R . S . Hodges , and W . Urbach . Lateral mobility of proteins in liq - uid membranes revisited . Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America , 102 : 2098 , 2006 . [ 86 ] M . L . Gardel , B . Sabass , L . Ji , G . Danuser , U . S . Schwarz , and C . M . Waterman . Traction stress in focal adhesions correlates biphasically with actin retrograde ﬂow speed . Journal of Cell Biology , 183 : 999 , 2008 . [ 87 ] M . L . Gardel , I . C . Schneider , Y . Aratyn - Schaus , and C . M . Wa - terman . Mechanical integration of actin and adhesion dynamics in cell migration . Annual Review of Cell and Developmental Biology , 26 : 315 , 2010 . [ 88 ] http : / / www . gnuplot . info . Plotting tools , versions 4 . 0 , 4 . 2 , and 4 . 4 , 2007 – 2012 . Most of the presented plots have been created with Gnuplot . [ 89 ] G . Giannone , B . J . Dubin - Thaler , O . Rossier , Y . Cai , O . Chaga , G . Jiang , W . Beaver , H . - G . D¨obereiner , Y . Freund , G . Borisy , and M . P . Sheetz . Lamellipodial actin mechanically links myosin activ - ity with adhesion - site formation . Cell , 128 : 561 , 2007 . [ 90 ] J . A . Glazier and F . Graner . Simulation of the diﬀerential adhesion driven rearrangement of biological cells . Physical Review E , 47 : 2128 , 1992 . [ 91 ] J . B . A . Green . Sophistications of cell sorting . Nature Cell Biology , 10 : 375 , 2008 . [ 92 ] M . Griebel , S . Knapek , G . Zumbusch , and A . Caglar . Numerische Simulation in der Molek¨uldynamik . Springer , 2004 . [ 93 ] W . H . Grover , A . K . Bryan , M . Diez - Silva , S . Suresh , J . M . Higgins , and S . R . Manalis . Measuring single - cell density . Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America , 108 : 10992 , 2011 . 217 [ 94 ] J . M . Halbleib and W . J . Nelson . Cadherins in development : cell adhesion , sorting , and tissue morphogenesis . Genes & Development , 20 : 3199 , 2006 . [ 95 ] W . D . Halliburton . On muscle plasma . Journal of Physiology , 8 : 133 , 1887 . [ 96 ] A . K . Harris . Is cell sorting caused by diﬀerences in the work of intercellular adhesion ? A critique of the Steinberg hypothesis . Jour - nal of Theoretical Biology , 061 : 267 , 1976 . [ 97 ] A . K . Harris , P . Wild , and D . Stopak . Silicone rubber substrata : a new wrinkle in the study of cell locomotion . Science , 208 : 177 , 1980 . [ 98 ] Y . Hegerfeldt , M . Tusch , E . - B . Br¨ocker , and P . Friedl . Collective cell movement in primary melanoma explants : Plasticity of cell - cell interaction , β - integrin function , and migration strategies . Cancer Research , 62 : 2125 , 2002 . [ 99 ] M . Herant and M . Dembo . Form and function in cell motility : From ﬁbroblasts to keratocytes . Biophysical Journal , 98 : 1408 , 2010 . [ 100 ] M . Herant , V . Heinrich , and M . Dembo . Mechanics of neutrophil phagocytosis : experiments and quantitative models . Journal of Cell Science , 119 : 1903 , 2006 . [ 101 ] M . Herant , W . A . Marganski , and M . Dembo . The mechanics of neutrophils : Synthetic modeling of three experiments . Biophysical Journal , 84 : 3389 , 2003 . [ 102 ] K . J . Hill . Matrix - based ellipse geometry . In A . W . Paeth , editor , Graphics Gems V , pages 72 – 77 . Academic Press , 1995 . [ 103 ] B . Hinz , W . Alt , C . Johnen , V . Herzog , and H . - W . Kaiser . Quantifying lamella dynamics of cultured cells by SACED , a new computer - assistet motion analysis . Experimental Cell Research , 251 : 234 , 1999 . [ 104 ] R . M . Hochmuth . Micropipette aspiration of living cells . Journal of Biomechanics , 33 : 15 , 2000 . [ 105 ] H . Honda . Description of cellular patterns by dirichlet domains : The two - dimensional case . Journal of Theoretical Biology , 072 : 523 , 1978 . 218 [ 106 ] H . Honda , M . Tanemura , and T . Nagai . A three - dimensional vertex dynamics cell model of space ﬁlling polyhedra simulating cell be - havior in a cell aggregate . Journal of Theoretical Biology , 226 : 439 , 2004 . [ 107 ] S . Hong , R . B . Troyanovsky , and S . M . Troyanovsky . Spontaneous assembly and active disassembly balance adherens junction home - ostasis . Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America , 107 : 3528 , 2010 . [ 108 ] R . Hooke . Micrographia – Some Physiological Descriptions of Minute Bodies Made by Magnifying Glasses with Observations and Inquiries Thereupon . Royal Society of London , 1665 . Available online from http : / / www . gutenberg . org / files / 15491 / 15491 - h / 15491 - h . htm . [ 109 ] J . Hoshen and R . Kopelman . Percolation and cluster distribution . I . cluster multiple labeling technique and critical concentration al - gorithm . Physical Review B , 14 : 3438 , 1976 . [ 110 ] P . Hotulainen and P . Lappalainen . Stress ﬁbers are generated by two distinct actin assembly mechanisms in motile cells . Journal of Cell Biology , 173 : 383 , 2006 . [ 111 ] M . S . Hutson , G . W . Brodland , J . Yang , and D . Viens . Cell sorting in three dimensions : Topology , ﬂuctuations , and ﬂuidlike instabili - ties . Physical Review Letters , 101 : 148105 , 2008 . [ 112 ] R . O . Hynes . Integrins : a family of cell surface receptors . Cell , 48 : 549 , 1987 . [ 113 ] R . O . Hynes . Integrins : Bidirectional , allosteric signaling machines . Cell , 110 : 673 , 2002 . [ 114 ] J . A . Izaguirre , R . Chaturvedi , C . Huang , T . Cickovski , J . Coﬄand , G . Thomas , G . Forgacs , M . Alber , G . Hentschel , S . A . Newman , and J . A . Glazier . Compucell , a multi - model framework for simulation of morphogenesis . Bioinformatics , 20 : 1129 , 2004 . [ 115 ] I . Jahn , editor . Geschichte der Biologie . Nikol Verlag , 3rd edition , 2004 . 219 [ 116 ] A . Jilkine and L . Edelstein - Keshet . A comparison of mathemati - cal models for polarization of single eukaryotic cells in response to guided cues . PLoS Computational Biology , 7 : e1001121 , 2011 . [ 117 ] J . F . Joanny , F . J¨ulicher , K . Kruse , and J . Prost . Hydrodynamic theory for multi - component active polar gels . New Journal of Physics , 9 : 422 , 2007 . [ 118 ] J . - F . Joanny and J . Prost . Active gels as a description of the actin - myosin cytoskeleton . HFSP Journal , 3 : 94 , 2009 . [ 119 ] F . H . Johnson , O . Shimomura , Y . Saiga , L . C . Gershman , G . T . Reynolds , and J . R . Waters . Quantum eﬃciency of cypridina lumi - nescence , with a note on that of aequorea . Journal of Cellular and Comparative Physiology , 60 : 85 , 1962 . [ 120 ] J . K¨afer , T . Hayashi , A . F . M . Mar´ee , R . W . Carthew , and F . Graner . Cell adhesion and cortex contractility determine cell patterning in the Drosophila retina . Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America , 104 : 18549 , 2007 . [ 121 ] T . Kanesaki , C . M . Edwards , U . S . Schwarz , and J . Grosshans . Dynamic ordering of nuclei in syncytial embryos : a quantitative analysis of the role of cytoskeletal networks . Integrative Biology , 3 : 1112 , 2011 . [ 122 ] K . Keren , Z . Pincus , G . M . Allen , E . L . Barnhart , G . Marriott , A . Mogilner , and J . A . Theriot . Mechanism of shape determination in motile cells . Nature , 453 : 475 , 2008 . [ 123 ] K . Keren , P . T . Yam , A . Kinkhabwala , A . Mogilner , and J . A . Theriot . Intracellular ﬂuid ﬂow in rapidly moving cells . Nature Cell Biology , 11 : 1219 , 2009 . [ 124 ] G . Kirfel , A . Rigort , B . Borm , C . Schulte , and V . Herzog . Structural and compositional analysis of the keratinocyte migration track . Cell Motility and the Cytoskeleton , 55 : 1 , 2003 . [ 125 ] R . Klein . Abstract Voronoi diagrams and their applications . In H . Noltemeier , editor , Proceedings Workshop on Computational Ge - ometry and its Applications , volume 333 of Lecture Notes in Com - puter Science , page 148 . Springer , 1988 . 220 [ 126 ] R . Klein , E . Langetepe , and Z . Nilforoushan . Abstract Voronoi diagrams revisited . Computational Geometry , 42 : 885 , 2009 . [ 127 ] P . E . Kloeden and E . Platen . Numerical Solution of Stochastic Diﬀerential Equations . Springer , 1999 . [ 128 ] S . A . Koestler , S . Auinger , M . Vinzenz , K . Rottner , and J . V . Small . Diﬀerentially oriented populations of actin ﬁlaments generated in lamellipodia collaborate in pushing and pausing at the cell front . Nature Cell Biology , 10 : 306 , 2008 . [ 129 ] S . A . Koestler , K . Rottner , F . Lai , J . Block , M . Vinzenz , and J . V . Small . F - and G - actin concentrations in lamellipodia of moving cells . PLoS ONE , 4 : e4810 , 2009 . [ 130 ] M . Krieg , Y . Arboleda - Estudillo , P . - H . Puech , J . K¨afer , F . Graner , D . J . M¨uller , and C . - P . Heisenberg . Tensile forces govern germ - layer organization in zebraﬁsh . Nature Cell Biology , 10 : 429 , 2008 . [ 131 ] H . Krobath , B . Rozycki , R . Lipowsky , and T . R . Weikl . Binding cooperativity of membrane adhesion receptors . Soft Matter , 5 : 3354 , 2009 . [ 132 ] S . Krokowski . Simulation der Migration von Keratinozyten mit Fokus auf die Adh¨asionskinetik . Bachelor thesis , Universit¨at Bonn , 2011 . [ 133 ] K . Kruse , J . F . Joanny , F . J¨ulicher , J . Prost , and K . Sekimoto . Generic theory of active polar gels : a paradigm for cytoskeletal dynamics . European Physical Journal E , 16 : 5 , 2005 . [ 134 ] W . K¨uhne . Myosin , seine Darstellung , Eigenschaften , Umwandlung in Syntonin und R¨uckbildung aus demselben . Journal of Physiology , 8 : 133 , 1864 . [ 135 ] E . Kuusela and W . Alt . Continuum model of cell adhesion and migration . Journal of Mathematical Biology , 58 : 135 , 2009 . [ 136 ] I . R . Kuznetsov , M . Herant , and M . Dembo . Analysis of actin FLAP dynamics in the leading lamella . PLoS ONE , 5 : e10082 , 2010 . [ 137 ] L . D . Landau and E . M . Lifshitz . Fluid Dynamics , volume 6 of Course of Theoretical Physics . Butterworth Heinemann , 2nd edi - tion , 1987 . 221 [ 138 ] D . A . Lauﬀenburger and A . F . Horwitz . Cell migration : A physi - cally integrated molecular process . Cell , 84 : 359 , 1996 . [ 139 ] D . Leckband . Beyond structure : mechanism and dynamics of inter - cellular adhesion . Biochemical Society Transactions , 36 : 213 , 2008 . [ 140 ] J . Lee , M . Lenord , T . N . Oliver , A . Ishihara , and K . Jacobson . Traction forces generated by locomoting keratinocytes . Journal of Cell Biology , 127 : 1957 , 1994 . [ 141 ] F . Leymarie and M . D . Levine . Tracking deformable objects in the plane using an active contour model . IEEE Transactions on Pattern Analysis and Machine Intelligence , 15 : 617 , 1993 . [ 142 ] T . Libotte , H . - W . Kaiser , W . Alt , and T . Bretschneider . Polar - ity , protrusion - retraction dynamics and their interplay during ker - atinocyte cell migration . Experimental Cell Research , 270 : 129 , 2001 . [ 143 ] L . Ma . Bisectors and Voronoi Diagrams for Convex Distance Func - tions . PhD thesis , FernUniversit¨at Hagen , 2000 . [ 144 ] P . K . Maini and H . G . Othmer , editors . Mathematical Models for Biological Pattern Formation . Springer , 2001 . [ 145 ] M . L . Manning , R . A . Foty , M . S . Steinberg , and E . - M . Schoetz . Coaction of intercellular adhesion and cortical tension speciﬁes tis - sue surface tension . Proceedings of the National Academy of Sci - ences of the United States of America , 107 : 12517 , 2010 . [ 146 ] P . Marmottant , A . Mgharbel , J . K¨afer , B . Audren , J . - P . Rieu , J . - C . Vial , B . van der Sanden , A . F . M . Mar´ee , F . Graner , and H . De - lano¨e - Ayari . The role of ﬂuctuations and stress on the eﬀective viscosity of cell aggregates . Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America , 106 : 17271 , 2009 . [ 147 ] R . Merkel . Force spectroscopy on single passive biomolecules and single biomolecular bonds . Physics Reports , 346 : 343 , 2001 . [ 148 ] M . Meyer - Hermann . Delaunay - object dynamics : Cell mechanics with a 3D kinetic and dynamic weighted Delaunay - triangulation . In S . Schnell , P . K . Maini , S . A . Newman , and T . J . Newman , editors , Multiscale Modeling of Developmental Systems , pages 373 – 399 . Elsevier , 2008 . 222 [ 149 ] A . F . M¨obius . Der barycentrische Calcul . Verlag von Jo - hann Ambrosius Bart . , Leipzig , 1827 . Available online from the Bayerische Staatsbibliothek , http : / / opacplus . bsb - muenchen . de / search ? oclcno = 166123133 . [ 150 ] A . Mogilner . Mathematics of cell motility : have we got its number ? Journal of Mathematical Biology , 58 : 105 , 2009 . [ 151 ] A . Mogilner and L . Edelstein - Keshet . Regulation of actin dynam - ics in rapidly moving cells : A quantitative analysis . Biophysical Journal , 83 : 1237 , 2002 . [ 152 ] A . Mogilner and G . Oster . Cell motility driven by actin polymer - ization . Biophysical Journal , 71 : 3030 , 1996 . [ 153 ] A . Mogilner and G . Oster . The physics of lamellipodial protrusion . European Biophysics Journal , 25 : 47 , 1996 . [ 154 ] A . Mogilner and G . Oster . Force generation by actin polymerization II : The elastic ratchet and tethered ﬁlaments . Biophysical Journal , 84 : 1591 , 2003 . [ 155 ] C . M¨ohl . Modellierung von Adh¨asions - und Cytoskelett - Dynamik in Lamellipodien migratorischer Zellen . Diploma thesis , Universit¨at Bonn , 2005 . [ 156 ] C . M¨ohl . Untersuchungen zur Adh¨asionsdynamik migrierender Ker - atinozyten . Doctoral thesis , Universit¨at Bonn and Forschungszen - trum J¨ulich , 2009 . Available online from http : / / nbn - resolving . de / urn : nbn : de : hbz : 5N - 18944 . [ 157 ] C . M¨ohl , N . Kirchgeßner , C . Sch¨afer , B . Hoﬀmann , and R . Merkel . Quantitative mapping of averaged focal adhesion dynamics in mi - grating cells by shape normalization . Journal of Cell Science , 125 : 155 , 2011 . [ 158 ] C . M¨ohl , N . Kirchgeßner , C . Sch¨afer , K . K¨upper , S . Born , G . Diez , W . H . Goldmann , R . Merkel , and B . Hoﬀmann . Becoming stable and strong : The interplay between vinculin exchange dynamics and adhesion strength during adhesion site maturation . Cell Motility and the Cytoskeleton , 66 : 350 , 2009 . 223 [ 159 ] D . J . Montell . Morphogenetic cell movements : Diversity from mod - ular mechanical properties . Science , 322 : 1502 , 2008 . [ 160 ] W . A . M¨uller and M . Hassel . Entwicklungsbiologie und Reproduk - tionsbiologie . Springer , 2012 . [ 161 ] M . Muskat . The ﬂow of ﬂuids through porous media . Journal of Applied Physics , 8 : 274 , 1937 . [ 162 ] W . Norris and P . G . M . Wallace . Oxypertine ( Integrin ) : a study of its use in premedication . British Journal of Anaesthesia , 45 : 1222 , 1973 . [ 163 ] C . N¨usslein - Volhard and E . Wieschaus . Mutations aﬀecting seg - ment number and polarity in Drosophila . Nature , 287 : 795 , 1980 . [ 164 ] http : / / www . octave . org . Simulation language , versions 2 . 9 , 3 . 0 , and 3 . 2 , 2007 – 2012 . Most of the presented simulations have been implemented in Octave . [ 165 ] L . Onsager . Reciprocal relations in irreversible processes I . Physical Review , 37 : 405 , 1931 . [ 166 ] L . Onsager . Reciprocal relations in irreversible processes II . Phys - ical Review , 38 : 2265 , 1931 . [ 167 ] N . B . Ouchi , J . A . Glazier , J . - P . Rieu , A . Upadhyaya , and Y . Sawada . Improving the realism of the cellular Potts model in simulations of biological cells . Physica A , 329 : 451 , 2003 . [ 168 ] S . B . Padrick and M . K . Rosen . Physical mechanisms of signal inte - gration by WASP family proteins . Annual Reviews of Biochemistry , 79 : 707 , 2010 . [ 169 ] S . P . Palacek , J . C . Loftus , M . H . Ginsberg , D . A . Lauﬀenburger , and A . F . Horwitz . Integrin - ligand binding properties govern cell migration speed through cell - substratum adhesiveness . Nature , 385 : 537 , 1997 . [ 170 ] S . P . Palecek , A . F . Horwitz , and D . A . Lauﬀenburger . Kinetic model for integrin - mediated adhesion release during cell migration . Annals of Biomedical Engineering , 27 : 219 , 1999 . 224 [ 171 ] E . Palsson . A 3 - D model used to explore how cell adhesion and stiﬀness aﬀect cell sorting and movement in multicellular systems . Journal of Theoretical Biology , 254 : 1 , 2008 . [ 172 ] E . Palsson and H . G . Othmer . A model for individual and col - lective cell movement in dictyostelium discoideum . Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America , 97 : 10448 , 2000 . [ 173 ] R . Pankov , Y . Endo , S . Even - Ram , M . Araki , K . Clark , E . Cukier - man , K . Matsumoto , and K . M . Yamada . A Rac switch regulates random versus directional persistent cell migration . Journal of Cell Biology , 170 : 793 , 2005 . [ 174 ] R . J . Pelham and Y . - L . Wang . Cell locomotion and focal adhesions are regulated by substrate ﬂexibility . Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America , 94 : 13661 , 1997 . [ 175 ] A . E . Pelling and M . A . Horton . An historical perspective on cell mechanics . Pﬂ¨ugers Archiv – European Journal of Physiologoy , 456 : 3 , 2008 . [ 176 ] S . V . Perry . When was actin ﬁrst extracted from muscle ? Journal of Muscle Research and Cell Motility , 24 : 597 , 2003 . [ 177 ] R . Philips , J . Kondev , J . Theriot , and N . Orme . Physical biology of the cell . Garland Science , 2008 . [ 178 ] E . Pokorn´a , P . W . Jordan , C . H . O’Neill , D . Zicha , C . S . Gilbert , and P . Vesel´y . Actin cytoskeleton and motility in rat sarcoma cell populations with diﬀerent metastatic potential . Cell Motility and the Cytoskeleton , 28 : 25 , 1994 . [ 179 ] T . D . Pollard and G . G . Borisy . Cellular motility driven by assembly and disassembly of actin ﬁlaments . Cell , 112 : 453 , 2003 . [ 180 ] E . Puklin - Faucher and M . P . Sheetz . The mechanical integrin cycle . Journal of Cell Science , 122 : 179 , 2009 . [ 181 ] M . Radszuweit , M . Block , J . G . Hengstler , E . Sch¨oll , and D . Drasdo . Comparing the growth kinetics of cell populations in two and three dimensions . Physical Review E , 79 : 051907 , 2009 . 225 [ 182 ] J . Ranft , M . Basan , J . Elgeti , J . - F . Joanny , J . Prost , and F . J¨ulicher . Fluidization of tissues by cell division and apopto - sis . Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America , 107 : 20863 , 2010 . [ 183 ] M . Rauzi , P . Verant , T . Lecuit , and P . - F . Lenne . Nature and anisotropy of cortical forces orienting Drosophila tissue morpho - genesis . Nature Cell Biology , 10 : 1401 , 2008 . [ 184 ] A . J . Ridley . Rho GTPases and cell migration . Journal of Cell Science , 114 : 2713 , 2001 . [ 185 ] M . Rocco , C . Rosano , J . W . Weisel , D . A . Horita , and R . R . Hant - gan . Integrin conformational regulation : Uncoupling extension / tai separation from changes in the head region by a multiresolution approach . Structure , 16 : 954 , 2008 . [ 186 ] B . Rubinstein , M . F . Fournier , K . Jacobson , A . B . Verkhovsky , and A . Mogilner . Actin - myosin viscoelastic ﬂow in the keratocyte lamellipod . Biophysical Journal , 97 : 1853 , 2009 . [ 187 ] B . Sabass , M . L . Gardel , C . M . Waterman , and U . S . Schwarz . High resolution traction force microscopy based on experimental and computational advances . Biophysical Journal , 94 : 207 , 2008 . [ 188 ] A . Saez , A . Buguin , P . Silberzan , and B . Ladoux . Is the mechani - cal activity of epithelial cells controlled by deformations or forces ? Biophysical Journal , 89 : L52 , 2005 . [ 189 ] C . Sch¨afer . Analyse der Zellwanderung am Beispiel von Keratinozyten : Zusammenspiel von Filopodien , Krafterzeugung und Matrix - Sekretion . Doctoral thesis , Universit¨at Bonn and Forschungszentrum J¨ulich , 2010 . Available online from http : / / nbn - resolving . de / urn : nbn : de : hbz : 5N - 22233 . [ 190 ] C . Sch¨afer , B . Borm , S . Born , C . M¨ohl , E . - M . Eibl , and B . Hoﬀ - mann . One step ahead : Role of ﬁlopdia in adhesion formation during cell migration of keratinocytes . Experimental Cell Research , 315 : 1212 , 2009 . [ 191 ] G . Schaller and M . Meyer - Hermann . Multicellular tumor spheroid in an oﬀ - lattice Voronoi - Delaunay cell model . Physical Review E , 71 : 051910 , 2005 . 226 [ 192 ] S . Schaub , S . Bohnet , V . M . Laurent , J . - J . Meister , and A . B . Verkhovsky . Comparative maps of motion and assembly of ﬁla - mentous actin and myosin II in migrating cells . Molecular Biology of the Cell , 18 : 3723 , 2007 . [ 193 ] B . Schneid . Simulation der Migration von Keratinozyten : mit Fokus auf zellinterne Aktin - und Myosin - Dynamik . Bachelor thesis , Uni - versit¨at Bonn , 2012 . [ 194 ] R . Schuh , D . Vestweber , I . Riede , M . Ringwald , U . B . Rosenberg , H . Jackle , and R . Kemler . Molecular cloning of the mouse cell adhesion molecule uvomorulin : cDNA contains a B1 - related se - quence . Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America , 83 : 1364 , 1986 . [ 195 ] T . Schwann . Microscopical researches into the accordance in the structure and growth of animals and plants . Sydenham Soci - ety London , 1845 . With appendix “Contributions to phytogen - esis” by M . J . Schleiden , all available online from http : / / vlp . mpiwg - berlin . mpg . de / library / data / lit28715 / index _ html . [ 196 ] S . Sivaramakrishnan , J . V . DeGiulio , L . Lorand , R . D . Goldman , and K . M . Ridge . Micromechanical properties of keratin interme - diate ﬁlament networks . Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America , 105 : 889 , 2008 . [ 197 ] D . B . Staple , R . Farhadifar , J . - C . R¨oper , B . Aigouy , S . Eaton , and F . J¨ulicher . Mechanics and remodelling of cell packings in epithelia . European Physical Journal E , 33 : 117 , 2010 . [ 198 ] M . S . Steinberg . Reconstruction of tissues by dissociated cells . Sci - ence , 141 : 401 , 1963 . [ 199 ] M . S . Steinberg . Does diﬀerential adhesion govern self - assembly processes in histogenesis ? Equilibrium conﬁcurations and the emer - gence of a hierarchy among popoulations of embryonic cells . Journal of Experimental Zoology , 173 : 395 , 1970 . [ 200 ] A . St´ephanou , M . Chaplain , and P . Tracqui . A mathematical model for the dynamics of large membrane deformations of isolated ﬁbrob - lasts . Bulletin of Mathematical Biology , 66 : 1119 , 2004 . 227 [ 201 ] A . St´ephanou , E . Mylona , M . Chaplain , and P . Tracqui . A compu - tational model of cell migration coupling the growth of focal adhe - sions with oscillatory cell protrusions . Journal of Theoretical Biol - ogy , 253 : 701 , 2008 . [ 202 ] J . M . Stewart , W . R . Driedzic , and J . A . M . Berkelaar . Fatty - acit - binding protein facilitates the diﬀusion of oleate in a model cytosol system . Biochemical Journal , 275 : 569 , 1991 . [ 203 ] F . B . Straub . Actin . Studies from the Institute of Medical Chemistry University Szeged , 2 : 3 , 1942 . [ 204 ] R . Strohmeier and J . Bereiter - Hahn . Control of cell shape and loco - motion by external calcium . Experimental Cell Research , 154 : 412 , 1984 . [ 205 ] D . Sulsky , S . Childress , and J . K . Percus . A model of cell sorting . Journal of Theoretical Biology , 106 : 275 , 1984 . [ 206 ] P . Suraneni , B . Rubinstein , J . R . Unruh , M . Durnin , D . Hanein , and R . Li . The Arp2 / 3 complex is required for lamellipodia extension and directional ﬁbroblast cell migration . Journal of Cell Biology , 197 : 239 , 2012 . [ 207 ] A . Szabo , E . Mehes , E . Kosa , and A . Czirok . Multicellular sprout - ing in vitro . Biophysical Journal , 95 : 2702 , 2008 . [ 208 ] P . Taddei . Conics intersection . http : / / www . mathworks . com / matlabcentral / fileexchange / 28318 - conics - intersection , ( November 3 , 2010 ) presenting BSD - licensed Octave / Matlab code for intersecting two conics , accessed September 1 , 2012 . [ 209 ] J . L . Tan , J . Tien , D . M . Pirone , D . S . Gray , K . Bhadriraju , and C . S . Chen . Cells lying on a bed of microneedles : An approach to isolate mechanical force . Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America , 100 : 1484 , 2003 . [ 210 ] T . Tauscher . Zellk¨orper - und Zellranderkennung von migrierenden Keratinozyten durch iterative N¨aherungsverfahren . Bachelor thesis , Universit¨at Bonn , 2011 . [ 211 ] K . M . Taute , F . Pampaloni , E . Frey , and E . - L . Florin . Microtubule dynamics depart from the wormlike chain model . Physical Review Letters , 100 : 028102 , 2008 . 228 [ 212 ] D . L . Taylor , J . S . Condeelis , P . L . Moore , and R . D . Allen . The contractile basis of amoeboid movement i . the chemical control of motility in isolated cytoplasm . Journal of Cell Biology , 59 : 378 , 1973 . [ 213 ] D . L . Taylor , Y . - L . Wang , and J . M . Heiple . Contractile basis of amoeboid movement vii . the distribution of ﬂuorescently labeled actin in living amebas . Journal of Cell Biology , 86 : 590 , 1980 . [ 214 ] J . P . Thiery , H . Acoloque , R . Y . J . Huang , and M . A . Nieto . Epithelial - mesenchymal transitions in development and disease . Cell , 139 : 871 , 2009 . [ 215 ] D . W . Thompson . Growth and form . Cambridge University Press , 2nd edition , 1946 . [ 216 ] J . - Y . Tinevez , U . Schulze , G . Salbreux , J . Roensch , J . - F . Joanny , and E . Paluch . Role of cortical tension in bleb growth . Proceed - ings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America , 106 : 18581 , 2009 . [ 217 ] P . L . Townes and J . Holtfreter . Directed movements and selective adhesion of embryonic amphibian cells . Journal of Experimental Zoology , 128 : 53 , 1955 . [ 218 ] R . T . Tranquillo and W . Alt . Stochastic model of receptor - mediated cytomechanics and dynamic morphology of leukocytes . Journal of Mathematical Biology , 34 : 361 , 1996 . [ 219 ] S . Turner and J . A . Sherratt . Intercellular adhesion and cancer invasion : A discrete simulation using the extended Potts model . Journal of Theoretical Biology , 216 : 85 , 2002 . [ 220 ] A . van Leeuwenhoek . Observations , Communicated to the Pub - lisher by Mr . Antony van Leewenhoeck , in a Dutch Letter of the 9th of Octob . 1676 . Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society , 12 : 821 , 1677 . [ 221 ] A . B . Verkhovsky , T . M . Svitkina , and G . G . Borisy . Self - polarization and directional motility of cytoplasm . Current Biology , 9 : 11 , 1999 . 229 [ 222 ] M . Vicente - Manzanares , X . Ma , R . S . Adelstein , and A . R . Hor - witz . Non - muscle myosin II takes centre stage in cell adhesion and migration . Nature Reviews Molecular Cell Biology , 10 : 779 , 2009 . [ 223 ] G . Voronoi . Recherches sur les parall´ello ` edres primitifs . Journal f¨ur die reine und angwandte Mathematik , 134 : 198 , 1908 . [ 224 ] J . H . - C . Wang and J . - S . Lin . Cell traction force and measurement methods . Biomechanics and Modeling in Mechanobiology , 6 : 361 , 2007 . [ 225 ] T . R . Weikl , M . Asfaw , H . Krobath , B . Rozycki , and R . Lipowsky . Adhesion of membranes via receptor - ligand complexes : Domain for - mation , binding cooperativity , and active processes . Soft Matter , 5 : 3213 , 2009 . [ 226 ] M . Weliky , S . Minsuk , R . Keller , and G . Oster . Notochord mor - phogenesis in Xenopus laevis : simulation of cell behavior underlying tissue convergence and extension . Development , 113 : 1231 , 1991 . [ 227 ] M . Weliky and G . Oster . The mechanical basis of cell rearrange - ment . Development , 109 : 373 , 1990 . [ 228 ] http : / / wikipedia . org . Various articles , in various languages , ac - cessed 2007 – 2012 . This web - based encyclopedia was used for refer - ence purposes , as universal and easy - to - access collection of formu - las , and for exploring basic concepts that are otherwise practically impossible to discover . Any information from http : / / wikipedia . org that was used in this thesis has been veryﬁed from conventional scientiﬁc publications like books and journal articles , each of which are separately listed in the present bibliography . [ 229 ] C . A . Wilson , M . A . Tsuchida , G . M . Allen , E . L . Barnhart , K . T . Applegate , P . T . Yam , L . Ji , K . Keren , G . Danuser , and J . A . The - riot . Myosin II contributes to cell - scale actin network treadmilling through network disassembly . Nature , 465 : 373 , 2010 . [ 230 ] P . W . Wiseman , C . M . Brown , D . J . Webb , B . Hebert , N . L . John - son , J . A . Squier , M . H . Ellisman , and A . F . Horwitz . Spatial map - ping of integrin interactions and dynamics during cell migration by image correlation microscopy . Journal of Cell Science , 117 : 5521 , 2004 . 230 [ 231 ] C . Wollnik . Quantifying lamella and body dynamics in two - dimensional cell motility . Diploma thesis , Universit¨at Bonn , 2011 . [ 232 ] Y . Xiong , C . - H . Huang , P . A . Iglesias , and P . N . Devreotes . Cells navigate with a local - excitation , global inhibition - biased excitable network . Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America , 107 : 17079 , 2010 . [ 233 ] P . T . Yam , C . A . Wilson , L . Ji , B . Hebert , E . L . Barnhart , N . A . Dye , P . W . Wiseman , G . Danuser , and J . A . Theriot . Actin - myosin network reorganization breaks symmetry at the cell rear to spon - taneously initiate polarized cell motility . Journal of Cell Biology , 178 : 1207 , 2007 . [ 234 ] J . - M . Zahm , H . Kaplan , A . - L . H´erard , F . Doriot , D . Pierrot , P . Somelette , and E . Puchelle . Cell migration and proliferation during the in vitro wound repair of the respiratory epithelium . Cell Motility and the Cytoskeleton , 37 : 33 , 1997 . [ 235 ] Y . Zhang , S . Sivasankar , W . J . Nelson , and S . Chu . Resolving cad - herin interactions and binding cooperativity at the single - molecule level . Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America , 106 : 109 , 2009 . [ 236 ] J . Zimmermann , M . Enculescu , and M . Falcke . Leading - edge - gel coupling in lamellipodium motion . Physical Review E , 82 : 051925 , 2010 . 231 Thanks to . . . the Theoretical Biology group in Bonn for the stimulating working en - vironment , Wolfgang Alt for overwhelming thrust , challenging problems and the calmness of the elder in face of the ardent demands of the younger , Rolf Klein for supervision and expertise on Voronoi diagrams , Klemens Rottner and Juan J . Velazquez for joining the interdisciplinary comittee evaluating this thesis , . . . my wife Annelene Wittenfeld , for proofreading this manuscript , check - ing the calculations and especially the continuous support , in particular during outbursts of productivity , my family in Beilngries , for sustaining me during signiﬁcant parts of the writeup of this thesis , . . . Dagmar B¨ar , for teaching me the necessity and beauty of biological complexity , Eva Deinum , for walking ﬂying discussions about life , the universe and everything , Adrian Klein , for showing me how science can be play , Markus Knappitsch , for casually bringing along the right books at the right time , and professional editing of the ECMTB issue , Esa Kuusela , for solid work to build upon , and the fabulous sofa , Christoph M¨ohl for the best keratinocyte movies , and stimulating discussions on various occasions , Christina Surulescu for the invitation to Stuttgart , Carina Wollnik for the best keratinocyte pictures ever , professional co - authoring of the ECMTB article , and the unstoppable smile , . . . G . Wayne Brodland for the insights of the engineer and open and en - lighting discussions on the cell sorting problem , Andr´as Czir´ok for the quail cell micrograph , and insightful discussions on various occasions , Stephan Grill and Frank J¨ulicher for the invitation to Dresden , Carl - Philip Heisenberg for permission to reprint the sorting assay picture , Pirta Hotulainen for permission to reprint the stress ﬁber picture , Josef K¨as for pointing me to the position in Bonn , the K¨as - lab people for discussions on various occasions , Norbert Kirchgeßner for the invitation to J¨ulich , Stefan Koestler for stimulating discussions on actin polymerization , the group of Rudolf Merkel at J¨ulich , in particular David Kirchb¨uchler and Inka Lauter , Dietmar ¨Olz for the invitation to Knoxville , Thomas D . Pollard for his motivating yet humbling talk in Regensburg , and the permission to reprint the famous polymerization cartoon , Claudia Schaefer for the best keratinocyte movie ever , Eva - Maria Sch¨otz for permission to extract data from the Zebraﬁsh migrographs , Pierluigi Taddei , for sharing his conic intersection code , and pointing me to the Graphics Gems V book , Juliane Zimmermann and Anders Carlsson for discussions on the physics of actin polymerization , . . . 232 the crowd at “BioMedMath 2008” in Middlefart , Denmark , the crowd at “MECO34 2009” in Leipzig , Germany , the crowd at “SoftFlow 2009” in Carg´ese , Corsica , France , the crowd at “VW 2009” in Mainz , Ger - many , the crowd at “Morphogenesis and Dynamics of Multicellular Sys - tems 2009” in Heidelberg , the crowd at “The Physics of Cell Functionality 2010” in Beijing , China , the crowd at “Mechanics of Cell Motion 2010” in Oberwolfach , Germany , the crowd at “ColMot 2010” in Dresden , the crowd at “ECMTB 2011” in Krakau , Poland , the crowd at “VW 2012” in Potsdam , Germany , the crowd at “From Nonlinear Physics to Biol - ogy and Medicine 2012” in Carg´ese , Corsica , France , the crowd at “SMB 2012” in Knoxville ( TN ) , USA the crowd at “Morphogenesis and Dynam - ics of Multicellular Systems 2012” in Heidelberg , Germany , the crowd at “Actin Dynamics 2012” in Regensburg , Germany , . . . the IZMB , in particular Frau Hertweck , Frau Marikar and the E - Labor , for mostly not noticing their highly appreciated hidden work , all other people that should be mentioned here but are not due to the insuﬃcient capacity of my memory . . . the ECMTB and the BIGS for travel support , . . . the DFG for funding within the SFB 611 “Singular Phenomena and Scaling in Mathematical Models” , and ﬁnally the VolkswagenStiftung funding the two projects “Simulation models for cell motility” and “Sim - ulation models for interactive cell motility” , both within the initiative “New conceptual approaches to modeling and simulation of complex sys - tems” . 233