BMB reports 795 http : / / bmbreports . org BMB reports * Corresponding author . Tel : 82 - 51 - 629 - 5598 ; Fax : 82 - 51 - 629 - 5583 ; E - mail : parksj @ pknu . ac . kr DOI 10 . 5483 / BMBRep . 2010 . 43 . 12 . 795 Received 5 October 2010 , Accepted 30 October 2010 Keywords : Chromosome , Congression , Huntingtin - interacting pro - tein 1 - related , Mitotic spindle , Segregation Huntingtin - interacting protein 1 - related is required for accurate congression and segregation of chromosomes Sun Joo Park * Department of Chemistry , Pukyong National University , Busan 608 - 737 , Korea Huntingtin - interacting protein 1 - related ( HIP1r ) is known to function in clathrin - mediated endocytosis and regulation of the actin cytoskeleton , which occurs continuously in non - dividing cells . This study reports a new function for HIP1r in mitosis . Green fluorescent protein - fused HIP1r localizes to the mitotic spindles . Depletion of HIP1r by RNA interference induces mis - alignment of chromosomes and prolonged mitosis , which is associated with decreased proliferation of HIP1r - deficeint cells . Chromosome misalignment leads to missegregation and ulti - mately production of multinucleated cells . Depletion of HIP1r causes persistent activation of the spindle checkpoint in mis - aligned chromosomes . These findings suggest that HIP1r plays an important role in regulating the attachment of spindle mi - crotubules to chromosomes during mitosis , an event that is re - quired for accurate congression and segregation of chromosomes . This finding may provide new insights that improve the under - standing of various human diseases involving HIP1r as well as its fusion genes . [ BMB reports 2010 ; 43 ( 12 ) : 795 - 800 ] INTRODUCTION Mitosis is the process by which replicated chromosomes in a parent cell are separated into two identical sets . Accurate dis - tribution of replicated chromosomes through mitosis is crucial for cellular viability , normal development of organisms , and genetic inheritance over generations . In addition , chromosome instability caused by dysfunctions in mitosis is associated with various genetic human diseases . Microtubules ( MTs ) are responsible for ensuring efficient and accurate distribution of chromosomes throughout mitosis . As the nuclear envelope is disassembled , MT spindles emanat - ing from centrosomes bind to the kinetochores of each sister chromatid . This bipolar attachment of MTs to chromosomes ensures that chromosomes congress correctly at the metaphase plate . Sister chromatids are then segregated to each pole in anaphase and telophase by the combined actions of MT shrinkage and MT - associated proteins ( 1 ) . Therefore , fast and accurate attachment of the MT spindle to the paired sister chromatids is essential for proper distribution of chromosomes to the two daughter cells . Although regulation of the overall progression of mitosis has been studied , much remains to be learned about the molecules responsible for correct chromo - some congression and segregation . Recent reports indicate that endocytic proteins are involved in mitotic events . Endocytosis is the process by which cells in - ternalize molecules from the exterior by membrane trafficking . Endocytosis is critically important for nutrient uptake , signal processing , and maintenance of the surface area of the plasma membrane ( 2 , 3 ) . However , the biological contribution of en - docytosis is likely defined in interphase cells . For example , with respect to receptor - mediated endocytosis , as the cell en - ters mitosis , clathrin - mediated traffic is rapidly shutdown and resumes only in late telophase ( 4 - 6 ) . During mitosis , clathrin is localized on the mitotic spindle ( 5 , 7 ) . Royle et al . showed that clathrin is directly bound to the spindle and stabilizes ki - netochore fibers ( 8 ) . Interestingly , clathrin is not associated with the membrane during mitosis . This suggests that the func - tion of clathrin in mitosis is not dependent on endocytosis . Dynamin 2 , a GTPase involved in vesicle formation , is also in - volved in centrosome separation and cytokinesis ( 9 ) . These ob - servations suggest that endocytic machines may be function - ally relevant to cell division . The proteins of the Huntingtin - interacting protein 1 ( HIP1 ) family , including HIP1 and HIP1 - related ( HIP1r ) , bind to cla - thrin and possess domains for binding to phosphoinositides and actin ( 10 , 11 ) . Several previous reports have shown that these proteins primarily regulate the formation of clathrin - coated vesicles and trafficking by associating with actin at the plasma membrane ( 12 , 13 ) . However , it was unexpectedly found that embryonic fibroblasts derived from either HIP1 or HIP1r single knockout mice do not have any endocytic defects ( 3 , 14 , 15 ) . Additionally , double HIP1 / HIP1r knockout ( DKO ) mouse embryonic fibroblasts have no clearly observable de - fects in clathrin trafficking , growth factor signaling , or the actin pathway ( 15 , 16 ) . All observed data using knockout mice sug - gest that HIP1 family proteins play roles in the regulation of Role of HIP1r in mitosis Sun Joo Park 796 BMB reports http : / / bmbreports . org Fig . 1 . GFP - HIP1r localizes to mitotic spindles in HeLa cells . ( A ) HeLa cells were transfected with GFP or GFP - HIP1r and fixed in − 20 o C methanol after nocodazole removal . GFP - HIP1r , green ; DNA , TOPRO3 , blue ; phalloidin , red . ( B ) GFP - HIP1r associates with mitotic spindles . HeLa cells expressing GFP - or GFP - HIP1r were synchronized by sequential combination of 10 mM thymi - dine and 1 μ M nocodazole . Mitotic spindles were purified , and the presence of HIP1r in mitotic spindles was determined by Western blot using antibodies specific to α - tubulin and GFP . cell proliferation and survival , although there are no clear data supporting this hypothesis . Therefore , the true function of HIP1 / HIP1r remains unknown . HIP1 was originally identified as a protein that binds to Huntingtin , a gene that is mutated in patients with Hunting - ton’s disease , which is an inherited and autosomal dominant neurodegenerative disease ( 17 , 18 ) . HIP1 was also found to be part of a chromosomal translocation with PDGFbR in myelomo - nocytic leukemia with t ( 5 ; 7 ) ( q33 ; q11 . 2 ) ( 19 ) . The chromoso - mal locus of 7q11 for HIP1 ( 12q for HIP1r ) was deleted and mutated in human patients with various genetic syndromes ( 20 , 21 ) . Chromosomal alterations such as mutations and dele - tions usually occur when there is an error in cell division fol - lowing meiosis or mitosis . Therefore , it may be possible that dysregulated HIP1 family proteins are involved in chromoso - mal instability related to various human diseases . The involve - ment of HIP1 and HIP1r in mitosis was investigated in this study . It was found that green fluorescent protein - fused HIP1r ( GFP - HIP1r ) was localized to MT spindles of mitotic HeLa cells . HIP1r was important for accurate congression and segre - gation of chromosomes . RESULTS To investigate the functions of HIP1 family proteins during cell division , localization of HIP1 and HIP1r in mitosis was first examined . HeLa cells were transfected with GFP - fused HIP1 or HIP1r . GFP - HIP1 signals were seen as small puncta represent - ing clathrin - coated vesicles throughout the cell cycle ( 11 ) . These signals became diffusely distributed and blurred during mitosis . On the other hand , the subcellular distribution of GFP - HIP1r was found to be unique during specific phases of the cell cycle . During interphase , GFP - HIP1r in HeLa cells was found to be associated with clathrin - coated vesicles as pre - viously described ( 12 , 13 ) . In metaphase , the fluorescence sig - nal was found to be concentrated to mitotic spindle fibers , as judged by immunostaining of α - tubulin ( Fig . 1A ) . To assess whether HIP1r associates with spindles , mitotic spindles were purified ( 13 ) . HIP1r was identified in the purified mitotic spin - dles ( Fig . 1B ) . These findings suggest that HIP1r may have played a role in mitotic progression . Therefore , this study fo - cused on investigating the function of HIP1r during mitosis . HeLa cells were transfected with a small interfering RNA ( siRNA ) against HIP1r and then cultured for 72 h . During this time , the cells were subjected to double thymidine block and nocodazole block in order to synchronize progression of the cell cycle . Treatment with siRNA produced a marked decrease in the protein level of HIP1r , whereas expression of HIP1 was not affected ( Fig . 2A ) . Cells were collected at different time points after release from nocodazole block . The population of cells in each stage was measured by staining for chromosomes and MTs . A large percentage of the cells treated with siRNA against HIP1r was delayed from exiting mitosis . More than 55 % of cells were in prometaphase for over 4 h following no - codazole release , whereas most of the control cells ( ＞ 90 % ) had progressed through mitosis into interphase ( Fig . 2B ) . Immunofluorescence analysis of mitotic cells in these pop - ulations revealed that although the majority of cells had formed a bipolar spindle , the chromosomes were widely scat - tered ( Fig . 2C ) . In some cells , chromosomes remained at the poles or had orientated with an apparent lack of MT attach - ment ( arrows and insets ) . Regarding control cells , only 4 % contained misaligned chromosomes . In contrast , more than 51 % of HIP1r - depleted cells were found to have misaligned chromosomes . Misaligned chromosomes were observed even up to 7 h after mitotic entry . Furthermore , some of the HIP1r -