ACTIN IN ERYTHROCYTE GHOSTS AND ITS ASSOCIATION WITH SPECTRIN Evidence for a Nonfilamentous Form of These Two Molecules In Situ LEWIS G . TILNEY and PATRICIA DETMERS From the Department of Biology , University of Pennsylvania , Philadelphia , Pennsylvania 19174 , and the Marine Biological Laboratory , Woods Hole , Massachusetts 02543 ABSTRACT Actin was isolated from erythrocyte ghosts . It is identical to muscle actin in its molecular weight , net charge , ability to polymerize into filaments with the double helical morphology , and its decoration with heavy meromyosin ( HMM ) . When erythrocyte ghosts are incubated in 0 . 1 mM EDTA , actin and spectrin are solu - bilized . Spectrin has a larger molecular weight than muscle myosin . When salt is added to the EDTA extract , a branching filamentous polymer is formed . However , when muscle actin and the EDTA extract are mixed together in the presence of salt , the viscosity achieved is less than the viscosity of the solution if spectrin is omitted . Thus , spectrin seems to inhibit the polymerization of actin . If the actin is already polymerized , the addition of spectrin increases the viscosity of the solution , pre - sumably by cross - linking the actin filaments . The addition of HMM or trypsin to erythrocyte ghosts results in filament formation in situ . These agents apparently act by detaching erythrocyte actin from spectrin , thereby allowing the polymeri - zation of one or both proteins to occur . Since filaments are not present in untreated erythrocyte ghosts , we conclude that erythrocyte actin and spectrin associate to form an anastomosing network beneath the erythrocyte membrane . This network presumably functions in restricting the lateral movement of membrane - penetrating particles . The molecular biology of membranes is an area of extremely active research at the present time , as can be attested to by the large number of reviews and books published on this subject over the past few years ( see Singer , 1974 , for references ) . The erythrocyte membrane has been a favorite source of experimental material because ( a ) it is readily available , ( b ) it is relatively homogeneous ; and ( c ) it can be prepared without contamination of other membrane fragments or cytoplasm . The literature concerning the proteins in this membrane has been extensively reviewed ; no less than 10 reviews have appeared in the last two years ( see Steck , 1974 ) . About 20 - 25 % of the total protein in erythrocyte membranes is made up of a pair of proteins called spectrin ( bands 1 and 2 on SDS polyacrylamide gels ) by Marchesi and Steers ( 1968 ) . These pro - teins have molecular weights of 250 , 000 and 220 , 000 ( Fairbanks et al . , 1971 ) and appear to function , at least in part , in constraining the lateral ~ 0 ~ THE JOURNAL OF CELL BIOLOGY (cid:12)9 VOLUME 66 , 1975 (cid:12)9 pages 508 - 520 motion of membrane - penetrating particles ( Elg - saeter and Branton , 1974 ) . When spectrin is iso - lated from ghosts by incubating the ghosts with EDTA ( Fairbanks et al . , 1971 ) or low salt ( Mar - chesi and Steers , 1968 ; Elgsaeter and Branton , 1974 ) , a second protein component is invariably isolated with it , so - called band 5 . This protein has a molecular weight of 43 , 000 and comprises about 4 % of the total membrane protein . Over the years there has been considerable speculation on the possibility that an actomyosin system exists in the erythrocyte ghost ( Guidotti , 1972 ) . This speculation was initiated by Ohnishi ( 1962 ) , who added muscle myosin to a water extract of an acetone powder of erythrocyte ghosts and demonstrated by viscometry that the myosin interacted with a protein in the extract . This interaction could be inhibited with ATP ; in the parlance of muscle biochemists , it showed ATP sensitivity . More recently , Marchesi and Palade ( 1967 a ) demonstrated that when ghosts were trypsinized in the presence of ATP and Mg ~ + , filaments appeared which had the double helical morphology of F - actin . Unfortunately , the inter - pretation of these discoveries was confused by a subsequent report ( Marchesi and Steers , 1968 ) which showed that , although similar filaments could be polymerized by the addition of Mg + ~ to the proteins obtained by dialysing ghosts for 24 h against distilled water to which mercaptoethanol was added , antibodies to this solution would not react with muscle actin . Instead , the antibodies cross - reacted only with ghost membranes . Thus , Marchesi and Steers ( 1968 ) concluded that spec - trin was not actin . On polyacrylamide gels of the extract , they found only one major band which they called spectrin . ( Actually , there is a minor component on their gels as well which will be shown to be actin in this report . ) The idea that actomyosin was associated with erythrocyte membranes persisted , however , based on the relative molecular weights of bands 1 , 2 ( in the range of myosin ) and 5 ( similar to muscle actin ) and on the fact that band 2 seems to be a weak Ca ~ - dependent ATPase ( Marchesi et al . , 1970 ; Rosenthal et al . , 1970 ) . The other evidence in support of this idea is either too weak to consider seriously or is published only as a " personal communication " ( see Steck , 1974 ) and therefore is impossible to evaluate . Considering the volume of literature on erythro - cyte membranes , it is surprising , and in fact disturbing , that no one has looked rigorously into the question concerning the actual existence of actin and myosin in erythrocyte membranes . Per - haps data are lacking in this area because , under the usual conditions of fixation , filaments are not attached to the inner surface of the erythrocyte membrane . Instead of filaments there appears to be an amorphous material which may in fact be composed of fine , short elements about 200 A in length ( Zelander and Ericsson , 1965 ; Rosenthal et al . , 1970 ) . As will be demonstrated shortly , these are probably spectrin monomers or dimers . Only under conditions such as trypsinization ( Marchesi and Palade , 1967 a ) , long - term dialysis ( Marchesi and Steers , 1968 ) or extraction of ghosts with EDTA ( Marchesi and Palade , 1967 b ) followed by the addition of salt , can one demonstrate the presence of filaments of any appreciable length . This is true irregardless of the technique used to examine erythrocyte ghosts : thin sectioning , nega - tive staining ( Yu et al . , 1973 ) , or freeze - fracturing ( Tillack and Marchesi , 1970 ) . The report of Til - lack and Marchesi ( 1970 ) using freeze - fracturing is most revealing in this regard . These investigators fixed ghosts in the presence of F - actin from skeletal muscle in order to be able to identify the outer surface of the membrane . In an etched preparation the muscle actin filaments can readily be identified by the characteristic double helical substructure . Since muscle actin filaments can easily be identified attached to the outer surface of the ghost membrane by this technique , there is no reason why actin filaments , or , for that matter , filaments of any kind , would not also be resolved on the inner surface of the ghost membrane if they existed . Since these investigators did not see filaments within the ghost or attached to the inner surface of the erythrocyte membrane , their evi - dence demonstrates that filaments do not exist there in situ . Despite this evidence there has been a fantastic amount written about fibrous or filamen - tous material attached to the inner surface of erythrocyte ghosts ( see Elgsaeter and Branton , 1974 ; Steck , 1974 ; Rosenthal et al . , 1970 ; Mar - chesi , 1974 ; Singer , 1974 ) . These reports , which conflict with available evidence , apparently result from the fact that filaments can be induced to form if ghosts are mistreated in certain ways , i . e . , trypsinization , extraction with EDTA , or dialysis against water for several days followed by the addition of salt . Likewise , filaments will form in vitro if salt is added to a solution of spectrin ( Clarke , 1971 ; Rosenthal et al . , 1970 ) . The purpose of this paper is to first demonstrate TILNEY AND DETMERS Actin and Spectrin in Erythrocyte Ghosts 509 that actin is indeed present in erythrocyte ghosts . We wilt then present evidence that wilt lead us to a new interpretation of the state of actin and spectrin in the erythrocyte membrane . We will suggest that spectrin is not in the form of filaments in situ as has been concluded by many investigators ( see Elgsaeter and Branton , 1974 ; Steck , 1974 ; Rosen - thai et al . , 1970 ; Marchesi , 1974 ; Singer , 1974 ) , but instead forms an anastomosing network be - neath the erythrocyte membrane in combination with monomeric actin . MATERIALS AND METHODS Preparation of Ghosts Recently outdated human whole blood ( the blood was used within the same week that it was outdated ) or whole blood that was newly collected was obtained from local hospitals . To prepare ghosts we followed the procedure of Fairbanks et al . ( 1971 ) . The blood was washed four times in large volumes of 0 . 15 M NaCl and 5 mM phosphate buffer at pH 8 . 0 to remove platelets , serum , and leukocytes . Examination of the washed blood with the light microscope revealed no contaminating platelets . Ghosts were prepared by lysing the cells with 5 mM phosphate buffer and then washing them repeatedly to remove all traces of hemoglobin . Preparation of an Acetone Powder of Ghosts Purified ghosts were extracted with at least 10 vol of acetone at 4 ~ They were washed three times with fresh acetone . The powder was air dried overnight and stored in a dessicator at 0 ~ Preparation of Muscle Protein Muscle actin was prepared from an acetone powder of rabbit skeletal muscle by extracting 1 g of powder with 25 ml of water for 30 min at 0 ~ The residuum was removed by centrifugation ( 10 , 000 (cid:141) g for 10 rain ) ; the supernate was filtered . Myosin and heavy meromyosin ( HMM ) were pre - pared by standard procedures ( see Tilney et al . , 1973 ) . Subfragment t ( SO was prepared in two ways . The first method followed the procedure of Lowey et al . ( 1969 ) in which insoluble papain was employed . Digestion was stopped with iodoacetic acid which , as stated by Smith and Kimmel ( 1960 ) , alkylates the sulfhydryl groups of the enzyme and completely destroys its activity . The inactivated papain was removed by centrifugation . More recently , we have used soluble papain instead . As before , digestion was stopped by iodoacetic acid . The $ 1 was then isolated from light meromyosin ( LMM ) by low salt precipitation of the LMM . The St was 3urified by fractionation with ammonium sulfate ( 55 % ) . Both the $ 1 and HMM were stored at - 20 ~ in 50 % glycerol . Viscosity Viscosity determinations were made with an Ostwald - type capillary viscometer at 22 + 0 . 1 ~ The flow time for water was 26 s . Gel Electrophoresis 5 % polyacrylamide gels containing 0 . 1 % sodium do - decyl sulfate ( SDS ) were run using 25 mM Tris glycine at pH 8 . 3 or the phosphate buffer system of Weber and Osborn ( 1969 ) as lhe running buffer . Skeletal muscle actin and myosin served as protein standards . Brom - phenol blue was used as the tracking dye , and the gels were stained with Coomassie brilliant blue . Protein standards , whole ghosts and the EDTA extract of ghosts ( see Fairbanks et al . , 1971 ) were dissolved in I % SDS in 2 . 5 mM Tris glycine at pH 8 . 3 or 10 mM phosphate buffer at pH 6 . 8 . Samples were reduced in 1 % mercapto - ethanol and boiled for 2 rain . 5 % polyacrylamide gels in 8 M urea were also run . The samples , which included muscle actin and the EDTA extract of ghosts , were reduced and acetylated before the runs . The running buffer was 25 mM Tris glycine at pH 8 . 3 . Electron Microscopy NEGATIVE STAINING : A drop of solution to be examined by negative staining was added to either a lightly carbonized collodion - coated grid or to a " holey ' " grid ( Huxley and Zubay , 1960 ) . The solution remained on the grid for periods of time ranging from 5 s to 2 min and then 0 . 5 % unbuffered uranyl acetate was added as the negative stain . The excess stain was removed with filter paper . For $ 1 or HMM binding , the solution con - taining the proteins to be tested was added to an equal volume of St or HMM ( 0 . 5 - 2 mg / ml ) . The solution was allowed to stand at room temperature for a few minutes and then a drop was added to a grid and negatively stained . FIXATION , EMBEDDING , AND THIN SEC - TIONING : Erythrocyte ghosts that had been treated with trypsin , $ 1 , HMM , or both $ 1 and trypsin , were fixed in 2 % glutaraldehyde from a 50 % stock , ( Fisher Scientific Co . , Fair Lawn , N . J . : in another group of experiments , from an 8 % stock , Electron Microscopy Sciences , Fort Washington , Pa . ) in a 0 . 05 M phosphate buffer at pH 7 . 5 for 1 2 h , washed in buffer , and postfixed in 1 % OsO4 in 0 . 1 M phosphate buffer for 1 h at 4 ~ They were rinsed in distilled water twice and , before dehydration , were stained with 0 . 5 % uranyl acetate for 2 h at 0 ~ They were then dehydrated and embedded in araldite . Thin sections were cut with a diamond knife on a Sorvall Porter - Blum II ultramicrotome and stained with uranyl acetate and lead citrate . They were viewed with a Philips 200 electron microscope . 510 THE . JOURNAL OF CELL BIOLOGY VOLUME 66 , 1975 HMM or $ 1 Binding In Situ Purified ghosts were incubated in St or HMM . The final concentration of St or HMM was about 2 mg / ml . In one group of experiments ghosts were glycerinated in 50 % glycerol in the presence of HMM and 10 mM phosphate buffer at pH 7 . 5 for 30 min at 37 ~ In two other groups of experiments ghosts were incubated in St at 4 ~ for 12 h with or without glycerol . There was no difference in the results , regardless of what temperature incubation was carried out at or whether or not glycerol was added . In a final group of experiments , we added trypsin ( 10 gg / ml ) to purified ghosts for 15 min at 37 ~ The trypsin was then inactivated with an excess of soybean trypsin inhibitor ( Sigma Chemical Co . , St . Louis , Mo . ) . RESULTS Actin in Erythrocyte Ghosts As described by Fairbanks et al . ( 1971 ) , when erythrocyte ghosts are run by SDS gel electropho - resis , about nine major bands are present . These bands have been numbered according to their electrophoretic mobilities . Of particular interest to this report are bands I and 2 ( spectrin ) and band 5 . FIGURE I SDS gel electrophoresis . Purified erythrocyte ghosts were extracted with 0 . 1 mM EDTA and the supernate was run ( left gel ) ; three bands appear , bands 1 and 2 ( spectrin ) and band 5 . The center gel illustrates the proteins of erythrocyte ghosts . The right gel represents purified skeletal muscle actin . Note that band 5 has the same molecular weight as muscle actin . FIGURE 2 Polyacrylamide gels containing 8 M urea . Left gel , EDTA extract . Bands I and 2 ( spectrin ) and band 5 are indicated . Right gel , skeletal muscle actin . Note that a band from the EDTA extract has the same net charge as actin on these urea gels , Band 5 has a molecular weight indistinguishable from that of muscle actin ( Fig . 1 ) . When ghosts are extracted with 0 . 1 mM EDTA ( Fairbanks et al . , 1971 ) and the residual membranes removed by centrifugation , the supernate contains bands 1 , 2 and 5 plus some minor contamination from the other components ( Fig . 1 ) . If this EDTA extract is reduced , acetylated and run on polyacrylamide gels containing 8 M urea , two major bands appear . One of these is spectrin ( bands 1 and 2 ) , and the other is band 5 ( Fig . 2 ) , Band 5 has the same mobility as muscle actin , indicating that band 5 and actin have an identical net charge and molecu - lar weight . When an acetone powder of erythrocyte ghosts is extracted with water and 0 . 1 M KCI is added , filaments , each about 50 A in diameter , can be seen in negatively stained preparations . These filaments resemble actin morphologically ; they show the typical double helical structure . If $ 1 is added to this extract and the solution negatively stained , the filaments show the characteristic ar - rowhead pattern of decorated actin filaments ( Fig . 3 ) . The periodicity of the arrowheads is about 375 A . The yield of actin from the ghosts is difficult to estimate because of the small amount of acetone powder obtainable from ghosts , beginning with T1LNEY AND DETMERS Actin and Spectrin in Erythrocyte Ghosts 511 100 ml of blood . In addition , if $ 1 and salt are added to the EDTA extract , decorated filaments can be demonstrated by negative staining ( Fig . 4 ) , although the clarity of the decorations is not so FIGURE 3 An acetone powder of purified erythrocyte ghosts was extracted with water . KCI was added to the extract to 0 . I M , then $ 1 was added . The filaments illus - trated show the characteristic " arrowhead pattern " of decorated actin filaments . The arrow indicates the polar - ity of the filaments in this negatively stained prepara - tion . (cid:141) 115 , 000 , obvious as that seen when actin is extracted from the acetone powder . This is due to the tremendous amount of unpolymerized spectrin which forms the background and tends to adhere to some of the filaments . When we added $ 1 to the spectrin polymer , the polymer did not decorate . More will said about this polymer later . Thus , actin appears to be present in erythro - cytes on the basis of its characteristic molecular weight , net charge , ability to form filaments with a double helical morphology , and , most importantly , the ability to be decorated with S ~ or HMM . Since there have been reports that myosin may be similar to spectrin ( Guidotti , 1972 ) , we coelec - trophoresed the EDTA extract which contained the spectrin and erythrocyte actin with skeletal muscle actomyosin ( Fig . 5 ) . Whereas muscle actin and erythrocyte actin comigrate , myosin does not comigrate with either band 1 or band 2 of spectrin . In fact , myosin has a lower molecular weight than either band 1 or 2 . This indicates not only that spectrin does not have a molecular weight identical to that of myosin , but also that neither spectrin band can be a proteolytic fragment of myosin . Spectrin : Its Monomeric and Polymeric Forms When the EDTA extract ( about 0 . 09 mg / ml ) is examined by negative staining in the absence of salt , the grid is covered by small , curved elements that generally take the form of a " C " ( Fig . 6 ) . Each C is approximately 250 ~ in length . Since the bulk of this extract contains bands ! and 2 ( spectrin ) , band 5 contributing about one - sixth to FIGUaE 4 S ~ was added to the EDTA extract which was then negatively stained . The arrows indicate the polarity of a decorated filament . In the background is a large amount of unpolymerized spectrin . (cid:141) 65 , 000 . 512 THE JOURNAL OF CELL BIOLOGY (cid:12)9 VOLUME 66 , 1975 one - fifth of the staining on an SDS or urea gel , the Cs must be unpolymerized spectrin . If salt is added to the extract and the solution negatively stained 10 - 15 min later , the grids are covered by a filamentous polymer ( Fig . 7 ) . The diameters of the filaments vary from about 40 to 120 / ~ and the filaments , unlike F - actin , are not double helical . Generally , the filaments tend to align themselves parallel to each other and thus form large bundles . Under these conditions adjacent filaments seem to be connected by strands of similar material or to be branched . A similar polymer has been described by Rosenthal et al . ( 1970 ) , when 2 mM CaCI ~ is added to the EDTA extract of ghosts . Thin Sections of Erythrocyte Ghosts As has been demonstrated by many investiga - tors the erythrocyte ghost membrane in transverse section ( Fig . 8 ) consists of two dense lines sepa - rated by an intervening less dense space . On the cytoplasmic surface is an amorphous , almost cot - ton - like material . In certain places this fuzz ap - pears as short , thin elements . The diameters of these structures are about 30 / ~ and their lengths seldom exceed 200 A . These filaments can best be seen in grazing sections . The bulk of the material , however , appears amorphous . The interior of the ghosts is empty . Effect of St or HMM on Erythrocyte Ghosts The interior of ghosts which have been incu - bated with $ 1 or HMM with or without glycerina - tion is filled with a filamentous material ( Fig . 9 ) . Most of the filaments appear to have material attached to their surfaces . It is very difficult to identify good examples of " decorated " filaments formed by an interaction between an actin filament and $ 1 . There are regions on some of the filaments that have periodic projections on them , as if they might have been decorated . Some of the filaments seem to attach to the plasma membrane . The FIGURE 5 SDS gel electrophoresis of muscle actomy - osin ( left gel ) , and the EDTA extract of erythrocyte ghosts ( center gel ) . When the EDTA extract and acto - myosin are run in the same gel ( right gel ) , it is clear that the actin ( a ) in the two gels comigrates but that myosin ( m ) migrates at a faster mobility than spectrin ( bands 1 and 2 ) . FIGURE 6 Negatively stained preparation of the EDTA extract containing unpolymerized spectrin . The extract consists of elements which resemble Cs . Some of these are indicated by the arrows . (cid:141) 105 , 000 . TILNEY AND DETMERS Actin and Spectrin in Erythrocyte Ghosts 513 FIGURE 7 When salt ( 50 mM KCI and I mM MgClz ) is added to the EDTA extract , the spectrin will polymerize . The polymer is illustrated in this negatively stained preparation . (cid:141) 75 , 000 . FIGURE 8 Thin section through a portion of an erythrocyte ghost . On the cytoplasmic surface of the plasma membrane of the ghosts is an amorphous material . Short filaments about 200 ~ . in length are indicated by the arrows , No material is present within the lumen . (cid:141) 100 , 000 . amorphous fuzz that was attached to the inner surface of the untreated erythrocyte membrane has largely disappeared from the treated ghosts . Pre - sumably , it is now located within the ghost proper . Considering the amount of actin present in SDS gels of erythrocyte ghosts ( about 4 % of the total protein ) , there are too many filaments present in the interior of the ghost to be accounted for by band 5 alone . Since the fuzz has disappeared from the cytoplasmic surface of the membrane , much of the filamentous material within the ghost can he attributed to bands 1 and 2 as well as to band 5 . 514 THE JOURNAl - OF CELL BIOLOGY . VOLUME 66 , 1975 Perhaps some of these filaments are the branching spectrin polymers seen in the negatively stained image . Effect of Trypsin on Erythrocyte Ghosts As was originally demonstrated by Marchesi and Palade ( 1967 a ) , if ghosts are treated with trypsin in the presence of ATP and salt , filaments which resemble F - actin in morphology appear in negatively stained preparations . When we re - preated this experiment and examined the ghosts in thin sections , within the interior we found large numbers of filaments ( Fig . 10 ) . The morphology of these filaments resembles that of the actin fila - ments that are found attached to isolated amoeba membranes ( Pollard and Korn , 1973 ) . As in the case where ghosts were incubated in the presence of St , the amorphous fuzz formerly on the cyto - plasmic surface of the plasma membrane has disappeared . Some of this material appears as filaments within the interior of the ghost , the rest must have been digested . When ghosts are first digested with trypsin and then treated with S ~ , very few filaments are present . Those filaments that are present have material associated with them which gives the impression that they are decorated . Why there is such a large reduction in the number of filaments in this experiment compared with the experiment FIGURE 9 Thin section through a portion of an erythrocyte ghost that has been incubated in the presence of $ 1 . Within the lumen are large numbers of filaments . Some of these filaments appear to have material attached to them as if decorated . Others appear to be attached to the plasma membrane ( see arrows ) . Note that the cytoplasmic surface oftbe plasma membrane has no amorphous material attached to it . (cid:141) 70 , 000 . TILNEY AND DETMERS Actin and Spectrin in Erythrocyte Ghosts 515 FIGURE 10 Thin section through a portion of an erythrocyte ghost which has been incubated in the presence of trypsin . Filaments are now present within the ghost . Note that the cytoplasmic surface of the plasma membrane is bare ; the amorphous material has disappeared . (cid:141) 75 , 000 . with trypsin alone may be explained by the diffu - sion of material from inside the ghosts . Trypsin may make holes in the ghosts so that when ghosts are incubated with $ 1 for either 30 min at 37 ~ or overnight at 4 ~ much of the material which once was attached to the cytoplasmic surface of the membrane is able to diffuse away . Polymerization of Spectrin and Actin In Vitro If the EDTA extract ( about 0 . 09 mg / ml ) is treated with salt ( 1 mM MgCI2 , 40 mM KCI ) , there is essentially no increase in the viscosity of the solution , due to the low concentration of actin and spectrin in this solution ( Fig . il , curve a ) . When salt ( 1 mM MgCI ~ , 40 mM KCI ) is added to monomeric muscle actin ( G - actin ) ( about 0 . 3 mg / ml ) , there is a rapid increase in the viscosity of the solution ( Fig . 11 , curve c ) , related , of course , to the polymerization of G - actin into F - actin . ( If 0 . 1 mM EDTA is added to the solution of muscle G - actin , the polymerization is unaffected . ) However , if we add the EDTA extract which contains spectrin to monomeric muscle actin and then add salt , the resultant mixture does not achieve as high a viscosity as the muscle actin alone ( Fig . 11 , curve b ) . ( For this experiment we kept the concentrations of actin and the EDTA extract the same as they were for curves a and c . ) Alternatively , if we take the same amount of muscle actin used in the previous two experiments ( curves b and c of Fig . i 1 ) , polymerize it and then add the EDTA extract , a higher viscosity is achieved ( Fig . 11 , curve d ) than when the muscle actin alone is measured . The most obvious interpretation of these results is that the spectrin , which is the main component of the EDTA extract , inhibits the polymerization of muscle G - actin , possibly by capping polymerizing filaments . If the actin is already in the F state , however , the spectrin acts to link the actin fila - ments together . The negatively stained image of these solutions is consistent with this interpreta - tion . When the solution represented by curve b was negatively stained , we could see a lot of disor - ganized material ( Fig . 12 a ) . On the other hand , when the solution from curve d was examined ( Fig . 12 b ) , filaments were observed as well as some disorganized material . The disorganized material frequently appeared to be plastered over the 516 THE JOURNAL OF CELL BIOLOGY (cid:12)9 VOLUME 66 , 1975 length of the filament . No disorganized material was present in the solution of actin by itself ( curve c ) . Similar curves were obtained using light scat - tering at 90 ~ . DISCUSSION In this report we have demonstrated that actin is present in erythrocyte ghosts . This assertion is based upon actin ' s molecular weight , its net charge , its ability to polymerize into filaments with the typical double helical structure of actin , and most important , its ability to form the characteris - tic arrowhead complexes seen when actin is com - bined with HMM or $ 1 . Secondly , we have shown that both erythrocyte actin and spectrin can po - lymerize in vitro to form filamentous polymers when salt is added to the monomeric material . Yet in thin sections through erythrocyte ghosts , fila - ments cannot be demonstrated ; one does see , however , fine linear elements about 200 A in length , the approximate length of our unpolymer - ized spectrin . And , finally , we have demonstrated that when salt is added to a solution containing muscle G - actin and spectrin , the viscosity of this solution is much less than one would expect in the absence of spectrin . Similar results were obtained from the light scattering observations . The most reasonable explanation for this result is that the spectrin is reducing the polymerization of the actin by inhibiting the elongation of the filaments . Consistent with such an interpretation is the negatively stained image . We recognize , of course , that the results ob - tained by viscometry are open to several interpre - tations . We have , therefore , repeated these obser - vations using light scattering and have obtained very similar results . Criticism can be directed against this technique as well , but since both give similar curves , we feel somewhat reassured . Clearly , many more experiments must be carried out to show that actin and spectrin bind in vitro . These experiments are in progress . We have de - scribed our experiments , although preliminary at this time , because the implications of an associa - tion between actin and spectrin have tremendous significance in the maintenance of not only the erythrocyte membrane but other membranes as well . These observations and several more which we will discuss below lead us to a new interpretation of how actin and spectrin exist in situ . Since spectrin appears to inhibit the polymerization of actin in vitro and since no filaments appear to be present in vivo unless the cells are subjected to nonphysiolog - ical conditions , we suspected not only that spectrin might inhibit the polymerization of actin , but also that actin might inhibit the polymerization of spectrin . Thus , actin and spectrin together may form a mesh of unpolymerized material on the cytoplasmic surface of the lipid bilayer . Instead of these materials existing as a filamentous layer beneath the erythrocyte membrane as has been suggested repeatedly in the literature ( Guidotti , 1972 ; Fig . 12 of Elgsaeter and Branton , 1974 ; Steck , 1974 ) , we believe that the actin and spectrin form an anastomosing framework like a net woven 171 d f - A ~ tin + I . : I : S ~ trin 1 , 6 1 . 5 I C 1 . 1 - l OOi " : ' - 5 ' ' ' ' 10 ' ( - ' Jr e Sp . . . . in Time Mi ' n ) ' 15 1 ' , 20 1 mM MgCI 2 50rnM KCL FIGURE I I Viscometry of spectrin ( the EDTA extract ) and muscle actin at intervals after the addition of salt . The concentration of the spectrin is approximately 0 . 09 mg / ml , that of the muscle actin 0 . 3 mg / ml . TILNEY AND DETMERS Actin and Spectrin in Erythrocyte Ghosts 517 FIGURE 12 a Negatively stained image of the solution illustrated in curve b of Fig . I l , 6 min after the addi - tion of salt . (cid:141) 60 , 000 . FIGURE 12 b Negatively stained image of the solution illustrated in curve d of Fig . 11 , 60 min after the addition of salt . (cid:141) 60 , 000 . by a myopic fisherman ( not too well ordered ) where the spectrin subunits ( a combination of bands I and 2 , see Clarke , 1971 ) and actin subunits make up individual lines of the net . Consistent with this idea are , of course , our experiments in which ghosts are incubated in the presence of HMM or trypsin . Under both conditions filaments appear in the interior of the ghost at the expense of the fuzz which was formerly attached to the cytoplasmic surface of the membrane . Our interpretation of these experiments is as follows . If either actin or spectrin is partially or totally removed from the membrane by these agents ( the spectrin by diges - tion , the actin by its polymerization when HMM is added ) , the remaining material is free to polymer - ize . ( We should mention that actin is notoriously trypsin - insensitive , while spectrin is rather sensi - tive to trypsin [ Steck et al . , 1971 ] . ) Furthermore , from these results , the viscometric data , and from the fact that , if one extracts spectrin , band 5 ( actin ) invariably is present in the solution as well ( see Fairbanks et al . , 1971 ; Steck and Yu , 1973 ; Yu et al . , 1973 ) , it seems reasonable that spectrin and actin may bind to each other in vivo . Moreover , one would predict the molar ratio between actin and spectrin to be 1 : 1 . Spectrin has a molecular weight of 470 , 000 , yet is made up of two compo - nents , 250 , 000 and 220 , 000 mol wt , respectively . Since each component of spectrin has a molecular weight about five times that of band 5 ( actin ) and comprises about 20 25 % of the total erythrocyte protein , whereas band 5 is only about 4 % ( see 518 THE JOURNAL OF CELL BIOLOGY (cid:12)9 VOLUME 66 , 1975 Elgsaeter and Branton , 1974 ; Steck , 1974 ) , the molar ratio of band 5 to the combination of bands I and 2 is about 1 : 1 as predicted . In our negatively stained preparations of un - polymerized spectrin we find a large population of small curled elements , each of which measures about 250 ~ , in length . These elements are presum - ably " monomeric " spectrin . Similar short fila - ments are seen attached to the ghost membrane in situ ( Rosenthal et al . , 1970 ; Zelander and Eric - sson , 1965 ; and this report ) . The size of this unit is at variance with the size of spectrin reported by Clarke and Griffith ( 1972 ) . These investigators report that the basic unit of spectrin is 2 , 100 , ~ in length . We presume that this unit must be an oligomer of the small elements discribed in this report . When the solution containing spectrin and actin ( the EDTA extract ) is treated with salt ( Mg ยง 247 and K ยง it polymerized to form a branch - ing filamentous polymer . The diameter of these filaments ( Fig . 7 ) is extremely variable and the polymer appears to branch . Thus , spectrin appears to be capable of associating either end to end or side to side , or both , in the presence of salt to form an anastomosing network beneath the erythrocyte membrane . Additional information is available which is consistent with this arrangement of spectrin and actin in ghost membranes . It further demonstrates that a spectrin - like molecule and actin may be present in many cell types . For example , we ( Tilney , 1974 ; Tilney , 1975 ) demonstrated recently that a large amount of unpolymerized actin is present in echinoderm sperm before the acrosomal reaction . During the formation of the acrosomal process this actin polymerizes explosively . Of particular interest to this report is that the actin in the untreated sperm is associated with a pair of proteins whose molecular weights are similar to those of bands 1 and 2 ( spectrin ) . Furthermore , if either HMM , $ 1 , or trypsin is added to demem - branated sperm , the actin will polymerize to form filaments . We were able to show that brief trypsin - ization did not affect the molecular weight of actin , while the spectrin - like proteins were rapidly di - gested . In the sperm , then , we appear to have a situation homologous to that of actin and spectrin in the erythrocyte ghosts , that is , the actin is kept from polymerizing by spectrin - like proteins . If these proteins are removed by digestion or dis - placed from their binding to sperm actin by HMM , then the actin is competent to polymerize as is the case in the erythrocyte . There is one distinction , however ; the concentration of actin relative to that of spectrin is strikingly different in each of these two systems . This seems to be re - lated to the presumed function of the spectrin - like molecules in each system . In the sperm the spec - trin - like protein apparently functions to sequester the actin in a localized region of the cell in a non - filamentous state , whereas in the ghosts , because of the great excess of spectrin relative to the amount of actin ( on a weight basis ) , the actin might function in keeping the spectrin unpolymerized , thus preventing the lateral translation of mem - brane - penetrating molecules . Although we have looked for spectrin - like pro - teins only in echinoderm sperm and erythrocytes , when we were examining two other systems ( devel - oping myoblasts and chondroblasts ) for another purpose we found a pair of bands whose electro - phoretic mobility was similar to that of the bands in the erythrocyte ghosts and in sperm . More recently , Hartwig and Stossel ( 1975 ) examined macrophages and found a spectrin - like protein that binds to actin . This protein has a molecular weight similar to that of band 2 of erythrocyte spectrin . Furthermore , actin has been shown to be associated with the plasma membrane fraction of 3T3 and HcLa cells ( Gruenstein et al . , 1975 ) . In HeLa cell membranes there is a pair of bands with the approximate electrophoretic mobility of spec - trin . All of these reports lead us to speculate that spectrin and actin might be common to many cell membranes . The fact that actin is associated with the membranes is particularly intriguing when one considers that most " motile " processes in cells , such as cytokinesis , microspike formation , the acrosomal reaction , etc . , take place in conjunction with membranes . We are particularly grateful to Dr . Ray Stephens who not only allowed us to use his equipment , but also helped us with our first spectrin isolations . His extensive knowl - edge of the literature and his enthusiastic discussions really made this project enjoyable . We would also like to thank Mark Mooseker , Robert Kyrka and David Begg for discussions . It is also a great pleasure to thank Mrs . Doris Bush for laer fantastic technical assistance and Dr . David Goddard who helped us in the final stages of preparation of the manuscript . This work was supported by a grant from the National Science Foundation , GB 22863 , and a grant from the National Institutes of Health , GM 18 - 100 . Received for publication 29 April 1975 . TILNEY AND DETMERS Actin and Spectrin in Erythrocyte Ghosts 519 BIBLIOGRAPHY CLARKE , M . 1971 . Isolation and characterization of a water - soluble protein from bovine erythrocyte mem - branes . Biochem . Biophys . Res . Commun . 45 : 1063 - 1070 . CLARKE , M . , and J . GRIFFITH . 1972 . Isolation and properties of a protein from human erythrocyte mem - branes . Fed . Prod . 31 : 412 a ( Abstr . ) . ELGSAETER , A . , and D . BRANTON . 1974 . lntramembrane particle aggregation in erythrocyte ghosts . ! . The effects of protein removal . J . Cell Biol . 63 : 1018 - 1036 . FAIRBANKS , G . , T . L . STECK , and D . F . H . WALLACH . 1971 . Electrophoretic analysis of the major polypep - tides of the human erythrocyte membrane . Biochemistry . 10 : 2606 - 2617 . GRUENSTEIN , E . , A . RICH , AND R . R . WEIHING . 1975 . Actin associated with membranes from 3T3 mouse fibroblasts and HeLa cells . J . Cell Biol . 64 : 223 - 234 . GUIDOTTI , G . 1972 . Membrane proteins . Annu . Rev . Biochem . 41 : 731 - 752 . HARTWIG , J . H . , and T . P . STOSSEL . 1975 . Actin , myosin and a spectrin - like protein in rabbit alveolar macro - phages . J . Biol . Chem . In press . HUXLEY , H . , and G . ZURAY . 1960 . Electron microscope observations in the structure of microsomal particles from Escherichia coll . J . Mol . Bhgl . 2 : 10 - 18 . LOWEY , S . , H . S . SLAYTER , A . G . WEEDS , and H . BAKER . 1969 . Substructure of the myosin molecule . 1 . Subfragments of myosin by enzymatic degradation . J . Mol . Biol . 42 : 1 - 29 . MARCHESI , S . L . , E . STEERS , V . T . MARCHESI , and T . W . TILLACK . 1970 . Physical and chemical properties of a protein isolated from red cell membranes . Biochem - ivtry . 9 : 50 - 57 . MARCHESI , V . T . 1974 . Isolation of spectrin from erythrocyte membranes . Methods Enzymol . 32B : 275 277 . MARCHESt , V . T . , and G . E . PALADE . 1967 a . Inactiva - tion of adenosine triphosphatase and disruption of red cell membranes by trypsin : protective effect of adeno - sine triphosphate . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . U . S . A . 58 : 991 - 995 . MARCHESt , V . T . , and G . E . PALADE . 1967 b . The localization of Mg - Na - K - activated adenosine tri - phosphate on red cell ghost membranes . J . Cell Biol . 35 : 384 - 404 . MARCrtESl , V . T . , and E . STEERS . 1968 . Selective solubi - lization of a protein component of the red cell membrane . Science ( Wash . D . C . ) . 159 : 203 - 204 . OHNISm , T . 1962 . Extraction of actin and myosin - like proteins from erythrocyte membrane . J . Biochem . ( Tokyo ) . 52 : 307 - 308 . POLLARD , T . D . , and E . D . KORN . 1973 . Electron microscope identification of actin associated with isolated amoeba plasma membranes . J . Biol . Chem . 248 : 448 - 450 . ROSENTHAL , A . S . , F . M . KREGENOW , and H . L . MOSES . 1970 . Some characteristics of a Ca 2 + dependent ATP - ase activity associated with a group of erythrocyte membrane proteins which form fibrils . Biochim . BiD - phys . Acta . 196 : 254 - 262 . SINGER , S . J . 1974 . The molecular organization of membranes . Annu . Rev . Biochem . 43 : 805 - 833 . SMITB , E . L . , and J . R . KIMMEL . 1960 . Papain . In The Enzymes . P . D . Boyer , H . Lardy , and K . Myrback , editors . Academic Press , Inc . , New York . 4 : 133 . STECK , T . L . 1974 . The organization of proteins in the human red blood cell membrane . A review . J . Cell Biol . 62 : 1 - 19 . STECK , T . L . , G . FAIRBANKS , and D . F . H . WALLACH . 1971 . Disposition of the major proteins in the isolated erythrocyte membranes . Proteolytic dissection . Biochemistry . 10 : 2617 - 2624 . STECK , T . L . , and J . Yu . 1973 . Selective solubilization of proteins from red blood cell membranes by protein perturbants . J . Supramol . Struct . 1 : 220 - 232 . TILLACK , T . W . , and V . T . MARCHESI . 1970 . Demonstra - tion of the outer surface of freeze - etched red blood cell membranes . J . Cell Biol . 45 : 649 - 653 . TILNEY , L . G . 1974 . Non - filamentous aggregates of actin in sperm : a new state of actin . J . Cell Biol . 63 ( 2 , Pt . 2 ) : 349 a ( Abstr . ) . TILNEY , L . G . 1975 . The role of actin in non - muscle cells . In Molecules and Cell Movement . S . Inou6 and R . E . Stephens , editors . Raven Press , New York . TILNEY , L . G . , S . HATANO , H . ISHIKAWA , and M . S . MOOSEKER . 1973 . The polymerization of actin : its rote in the generation of the acrosomal process of certain echinoderm sperm . J . Cell Biol . 59 : 109 - 126 . WEBER , K . , and M . OSRORN . 1969 . The reliability of molecular weight determination by dodecyl sulfate polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis . J . Biol . Chem . 244 : 4406 - 44 12 . Yu , J . , D . A . FISHMAN , and T . L . STECK . 1973 . Selective solubilization of proteins and phospholipids from red blood cell membranes by non - ionic detergents . J . Supramol . Struct . 1 : 233 - 247 . ZELANOER , T . , and L . ERICSSON . 1965 . The plasma membrane of the red blood cell . J . Ultrastruct . Res . 12 : 240 . 520 THE JOURNAL OF CELL BIOLOGY (cid:12)9 VOLUME 66 , 1975