Toward A Taxonomy of Copresence Shanyang Zhao Department of Sociology , Temple University , Philadelphia , PA 19122 1 . Introduction The term " copresence " has recently been appearing in the presence literature with increasing frequency , but , like the concept of presence at its nascent stage , the meaning of this term is yet to be fully explicated . As it currently stands , " copresence " refers to ( 1 ) the sense of being together with other people in a remote environment ( Muhlbach et al 1995 ; Lombard and Ditton 1997 ) ; and ( 2 ) the sense of being together with other people in a shared virtual environment ( Slater , et al . 2000 ; Durlach and Slater 2000 ) . This use of " copresence " is therefore parallel to the established usage of " presence " that entails ( 1 ) telepresence - - the sense of being present in a remote environment , and ( 2 ) virtual presence - - the sense of being present in a simulated virtual environment ( Steuer 1992 : Sheridan 1992 ) . The difference between the two , however , lies in the emphasis of copresence on people and human relations . Separating people from things and treating them as a distinctive category for presence research is the main contribution of the conception of copresence . The purpose of this paper is to further develop the concept of copresence by suggesting a taxonomy that describes the major forms of human togetherness in contemporary society . Not every type of human gathering is a form of human copresence , and there can be human copresence without the gathering of real people . It is therefore important to clearly explicate the conception of copresence . I will start by specifying the criteria I will use to classify copresence ; I will then apply these criteria to the construction of a taxonomy that delineates four conditions of human co - location ; after that I will examine the interface parameters that define the ways in which individuals communicate with one another in a given condition of co - location ; finally I will discuss the implications of the taxonomy for copresence research and design . 2 . Classification Criteria Copresence is defined here as a form of human co - location in which individuals become " accessible , available , and subject to one another " ( Goffman 1963 : 22 ) . In other words , it is a condition in which instant two - way human interactions can take place . " Instant " human interaction refers to real - time or near real - time human communication , which does not include diachronic exchanges like postal correspondence ; and " two - way " human interaction refers to reciprocal or feedback - based human communication , which excludes unidirectional " para - social " behaviors like watching TV or listening to radio ( Horton and Wohl 1979 ) . For ease of exposition , I will focus on a dyadic situation involving two hypothetical individuals labeled as Person X and Person Y . I will define the situation of copresence from the standpoint of Person X , thereby referring to Person Y as the other person . Providing that Person X is a real human individual corporeally present in a physical locale , different forms of copresence of Person X with Person Y can be delineated depending on ( 1 ) How is the other person present at the scene ? And ( 2 ) Where is the other person present ? 2 . 1 . How Is the Other Person Present ? The other person can be present at the scene either in person or through simulation . A simulated presence is a virtual presence , in the sense that the real person the simulation represents is physically absent from the scene . The presence of a person can be simulated in two different ways : ( 1 ) physical simulation that produces a physical entity occurring in a physical locale , and ( 2 ) digital simulation that produces a digital entity occurring in an electronic sphere . Physically simulated entities capable of interacting with real people are called robotic machines , and digitally simulated interactive entities are called computer agents . 2 . 2 . Where Is the Other Person Present ? For an instant two - way interaction to take place , the other person must be positioned in proximity to Person X . There are two types of proximity : physical and electronic . Physical proximity is an area within which naked human senses can reach , and electronic proximity is an area within which electronically extended human senses can reach . Through the mediation of a telephone or a Personal Digital Assistant ( PDA ) , for example , individuals not mutually present in the same physical locale can reach each other at a distance in real time . A cross - classification of the above two criteria generates a two - by - two taxonomy that consists of four basic types of human copresence , which are displayed in Table 1 . Table 1 . A Taxonomy of Human Copresence in A Dyadic Situation Where Is the Other Located ? How Is the Other Present ? The Other Is Located In Physical Proximity The Other Is Located In Electronic Proximity The Other Is Present In Person Corporeal Copresence ( face - to - face ) Corporeal Telecopresence ( face - to - device ) - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - The Other Is Present Via Simulation Virtual Copresence ( physical simulation : instrumental robots Virtual Telecopresence ( digital simulation : instrumental agents communicative robots ) communicative agents ) 3 . Forms of Copresence 3 . 1 . Corporeal Copresence Corporeal copresence is a form of human co - location in which the other person is corporeally present at the scene in physical proximity to Person X . The co - location is such that Person X and Person Y are within range of each other ' s naked sense perceptions , and able to reach each other simultaneously through unmediated sensory channels . Under the " full conditions of copresence , " according to Goffman ( 1963 : 17 ) , " persons must sense that they are close enough to be perceived in whatever they are doing , including their experiencing of others , and close enough to be perceived in this sensing of being perceived . " Corporeal copresence is the oldest form of human copresence . To interact with a person in corporeal copresence is to interact with that person face - to - face from body to body . Examples : Dining with someone at a restaurant ; playing volleyball with friends on the beach ; dancing with a partner at a party 3 . 2 . Corporeal Telecopresence Corporeal telecopresence is a form of human co - location in which the other person is corporeally present at the scene in electronic proximity to Person X . The two individuals are positioned outside the range of each other ' s naked sense perceptions , but within reach of an electronic communications network that both are logged on . By extending their sensory channels through the Internet , Person X and Person Y are in immediate contact with each other , even though physically they could be half a world apart . Telecopresence , which allows for instant two - way communications between distant individuals , needs to be distinguished from telepresence ( Minsky 1980 ) , which does not support reciprocal human interactions . Telepresence enables a person to receive live sensory inputs from a distant environment and , under certain conditions , to telemanipulate the objects there , but this capacity of distant presence is not available to the people at the remote location . In watching a live coverage of a football game on television , for example , TV viewers are telepresent at the football stadium , but people at the football stadium are not telepresent in the place of the TV viewers . As a result , only the TV viewers can see the stadium people but the stadium people cannot see the TV viewers . By the same token , listening to radio is also a form of telepresence . However , when individuals in separate locations have the capacity to be simultaneously telepresent at each other ' s site , telepresence is turned into telecopresence ( Zhao 2001 ) . To interact with someone in corporeal telecopresence is to interact with a person " face - to - device , " i . e . , person - to - person via a communications network plus an interface device . The person on one end of the communication line uses an electronic device , such as a networked computer , to get in touch with the person on the other end of the line , who is also equipped with a network device , such as a wireless handheld . Through such electronic mediations , remote people are able to extend their instant contact over a great distance . Examples : Talking to a friend over the phone ; chatting with someone through instant messaging ; holding a business conference via satellite . 3 . 3 . Virtual Copresence Virtual copresence is a form of co - location in which the other " person " is present at the scene in physical proximity to Person X through physical simulation ( including any necessary electronic component ) . Located within the range of the naked sense perceptions of Person X , the robotic machine ( which may or may not be networked ) enables Person X to interact with it " face - to - face . " There are two types of robotic machines used to substitute for real people in virtual copresence . Instrumental robots simulate the causative aspect of human copresence , and are used to replace real people in their repetitive dealings with other human individuals . ATM machines , for example , conduct routine business transactions with human customers in place of bank tellers , cashiers , and other human assistants . Communicative robots , on the other hand , simulate the emotive aspect of human copresence , and are used to replace real people in their intimate contacts with other human individuals . Humanoid robots like Kismet ( Thomson 2001 ) , for example , may one day take the place of a friend or a social worker in providing entertainment and companionship to socially isolated individuals . Both instrumental and communicative robots can be called social robots . While non - social robots are designed to replace humans who interact with non - humans ( e . g . , in place of a human worker , a robotic arm operates inside a nuclear reactor ) , social robots are designed to replace humans who interact with other humans ( e . g . , in place of a bank teller , an ATM machine interacts with human customers ) . In general , instrumental robots are automated machines that perform duties according to preprogrammed instructions , and communicative robots , on the other hand , are trainable machines with a learning capacity ( Alpert 2001 ) . Although both can be used to operate remotely via a communications network , social robots are most effective when used in a copresence setting . 3 . 4 . Virtual Telecopresence Virtual telecopresence is a form of co - location in which the other " person " is present at the scene in electronic proximity to Person X through digital simulation ( including any necessary physical component ) . The digital agent is an interactive computer program , and Person X interacts with it through an electronic medium : a local computer if the program directly runs on it ; or a networked computer if the program is located somewhere else and needs be accessed remotely . Like robotic machines , computer agents are divided into two categories : instrumental and communicative . Instrumental agents , often used for automated response services , handle routine human inquires on behalf of human operators . Examples : MapQuest on the World Wide Web that gives driving instructions upon request ; and Googly , an online automated buddy , that answers human queries in natural human language ( Liebeskind 2001 ) . Communicative agents , typically used by individuals for personal recreation , interact with real people on an emotional level . Examples : interactive computer programs like ELIZA with which people converses for fun ( Weizenbaum 1966 ) ; and digital characters like the one simulated by Princess Maker that people can adopt ( Coleman 1996 ) . Interactive computer agents differ from other types of computer programs in that they are specifically designed to communicate with humans in place of humans . In the case of an instrumental agent , a computer program replaces human assistance with an automated response system that makes information sharing more efficient . And in the case of a communicative agent , a computer program mimics human interaction in providing people with entertainment , interpersonal training , and psychological comfort . To interact with someone in virtual telecopresence is therefore to interact with a computer program that simulates human responses . If such a program runs on a local computer that is not networked , then " telecopresence " becomes an analogy rather than an accurate description , for the user can interact with the program without the mediation of a communications network . In the foreseeable future , however , remote computing will become the norm , as most programs will be installed on centralized servers to be accessed by different users over the Internet . 3 . 5 . Other Forms of Copresence Corporeal copresence , corporeal telecopresence , virtual copresence , and virtual telecopresence are four basic forms of human copresence in contemporary society . However , there are other forms of human copresence that have been omitted from the taxonomy . For example , when both Person X and Person Y are present through physical simulation in each other ' s physical proximity , we have a situation of hypervirtual copresence ; and when both Person X and Person Y are present through digital simulation in each other ' s electronic proximity , we have a situation of hypervirtual telecopresence . In the first instance , human interaction is replaced by complete physical automation ; and in the second instance , human interaction is replaced by complete digital automation . Finally , there are hybrid or mixed types of human copresence , which combine two or more basic forms of copresence . 3 . 6 . Multiple Meanings of Virtuality It is important here to clarify the multiple meanings of virtuality that have been used in the presence literature . The first meaning is the substitution of a person ' s corporeal presence by physical or electronic simulation . The second meaning is a person ' s mediated presence in a distant environment . The third meaning refers to the interaction between simulated human characters played by real people . In the first two cases , the presence is virtual ( one party is not corporeally present ) but the interaction is real ( it is a real life event occurring to the person who is corporeally present ) ; in the third case , however , the presence is real ( the players are physically present ) but the interaction is virtual ( it takes place between simulated human characters ) . A more generic concept of virtuality is " virtual reality , " which refers to the totality of computer - simulated objects , including settings , events , humans , and human activities . These conceptual differences are subtle , but by no means trivial , for they have important social and ethical implications , which I will touch upon in conclusion . 4 . Interface Parameters Forms of copresence are types of human co - location in which human interactions take place . Within each type of co - location , however , there can be different interface arrangements that allow copresent individuals to interact with each other in different ways . The combination of a given form of co - location and a given interface arrangement constitutes a given modality of human copresence . Interface parameter structures the ways in which co - located individuals come into contact with each other . In this section of the paper , I will discuss four interface parameters of human copresence : ( 1 ) embodiment , ( 2 ) immediacy , ( 3 ) scale , and ( 4 ) mobility . 4 . 1 . Embodiment Embodiment refers to the involvement of human bodies in the process of communication . A continuum can be constructed ranging from total body to fully disembodied communications . " Total body communication " ( Poyatos 1975 ) involves both verbal and nonverbal human behaviors , with the latter including a rich array of " body idioms ( Goffman 1963 ) like facial expressions , gestures , and postures . This type of fully embodied communication requires a " face - to - face " interface that engages all human sensory channels . Only corporeal copresence supports this interface . As the physical distance between communicating individuals increases , the involvement of unmediated sensory channels decreases , starting with the loss of taste , smell , and touch , and then hearing and vision . Such perceptual losses , however , can be partially restored through sensory extension via electronic mediation . A multimedia interface in telecopresence ( e . g . , a videophone ) , for example , allows distant individuals to see and hear each other as if they were corporeally copresent . Efforts are now being made to restore haptic and other perceptual channels in remote communications . The least embodied interface is plain text messaging , which reveals nothing about the corporeal characteristics of copresent individuals . Perceptual losses due to distance can also be remedied through computer simulation ( e . g . , avatars ) that generates artificial corporeal characteristics . These simulated characteristics may or may not resemble the true characteristics of the telecopresent individuals , but they add sensory cues to an otherwise disembodied process . Graphical images , synthetic sounds , electrocutaneous displays , and other tele - immersive techniques can be used to create a virtual environment that mimics a real physical setting for telecopresent interaction ( Lanier 2001 ) . 4 . 2 . Immediacy Immediacy refers to the speed at which messages travel back and forth between copresent individuals . An interface for synchronous communication , such as the face - to - face condition , enables copresent individuals to reach each other instantaneously . Depending on the bandwidth of a given transmission medium , there are varying time lags in telecopresent data transmission . The immediacy of communication also can be deliberately regulated through an interface design , which permits real - time or near real - time interaction in the case of instant messaging and conference calls , but imposes an asynchronous structure in the case of email , listsevs , and bulletin boards . 4 . 3 . Scale Scale refers to the number of people enabled by a given interface to interact with one another . The face - to - face interface in corporeal copresence allows only a small number of people to communicate with one another . In telecopresence , the " scale of community " varies tremendously depending on the types of interface used in the communication : telephones are typically used for two - person conversations ; email supports one - to - one dialogues as well as one - to - many broadcasting ; and electronic bulletin boards open the floor to virtually any number of people who want to participate in the discussion ( Feder 2001 ) . 4 . 4 . Mobility Mobility refers to the capacity of copresent individuals to carry the interactions around . The face - to - face interface in corporeal copresence supports a limited amount of mobility , provided that all the participants move along with one another . In telecopresence , there are three basic types of mobility conditions : stationary , portable , and wearable . The stationary condition , such as communicating through desktop computers in fixed locations , essentially permits no mobility . The portable condition , such as communicating through laptop computers , allows individuals to temporarily suspend their communication while on the move , and to resume it when they are stationary . The wearable condition , such as communicating through mobile phones , monocular head - mounted displays , and other body - worn networked devices , enables distant individuals to continue interacting with one another while some , or even all , of them are simultaneously moving around . The widened use of wearable communication devices in the general population will eventually make telecopresence a ubiquitous phenomenon . Different combinations of interface parameters within different forms of co - location give rise to different modalities of copresence for human interaction . The increasing diversification of the modalities of copresence in contemporary society has important implications for copresence research and design . 5 . Implications for Research and Design 5 . 1 . Sense of Copresence The sense of copresence is an individual ' s subjective experience of being together with other people . Such experiences are directly influenced by the interface characteristics . The face - to - face situation undoubtedly generates the most vivid sense of copresence . In situations other than corporeal copresence , high levels of embodiment or " media richness " ( Daft and Lengel 1984 ) tend to enhance the feeling of " social presence " ( Short et al 1976 ; Rice 1992 ) , which culminates in a fully immersive environment . The strongest mediated sense of copresence is sometimes defined as the " perceptual illusion of nonmediation ' ( Lombard and Ditton 1997 ) . However , creating a strong sense of copresence is not always the main objective of the copresence design . One of the advantages of a telecopresent condition is that it is possible for people to remain anonymous while communicating with one another . The text - based online chat program , for example , is least embodied , yet it is tremendously popular among users of all ages because the disembodiment of the program enables the users to be " simultaneously linked to and buffered from one another " ( Sproull and Kiesler 1991 : 30 ) . Low level of media richness , in this case , becomes a desirable feature . In other instances , however , high levels of embodiment are preferred . When interacting with simulated " persons " on an emotional level in either virtual copresence or virtual telecopresence , individuals expect the robotic machines or computer agents to look and act like humans . Humanoid robots and lifelike avatars are therefore employed to evoke a rich sense of copresence that resembles those obtained in corporeal copresence . This has not been always the case , however , with instrumental robots and agents , for the purpose of these simulations is to maximize efficiency rather than intimacy . But efforts are now being made to enable robots like ATM machines to communicate with humans in natural human language ( Kurzweil 2001 ) . In so doing , a stronger sense of copresence will be generated even when interacting with instrumentally simulated beings . 5 . 2 . Copresence Design The purpose of the copresence design is to provide a variety of interface devices that meet different human copresence needs . Besides technological knowledge and skills , it is crucial for the designers to acquire a good understanding of various copresence situations and the needs of those who find themselves in these situations . By designing a new interface device , the designers are in fact suggesting a new mode of human copresence , hence a new way of interacting with other people . Copresence designs have recently begun to depart from the traditional telepresence paradigm by adopting a " people as content " approach ( Walker et al . 2000 ) . Attentions are now being paid to the unique needs people have in different situations of copresence . Examples of such efforts include the designs of ( 1 ) " symbolic acting , " which uses an online avatar to act out the symbolic meaning of a person ' s activity on a desktop machine ; ( 2 ) " contact space , " where acting avatars indicate the availability status of an individual so that others can initiate a chance meeting if they want to ; and ( 3 ) " online public gathering , " which allows online viewers to see their fellow audience in the same way as they watch a TV show together with other people in the same room ( Davies and Revett 1997 ; Walker et al . 2000 ) . Efforts have also been made to improve existing conference call interfaces by adding functions for visual representation , turn - taking , chairman control , and private chat . 6 . Conclusion I would like to end this paper by briefly discussing the ethical implications of the above conception of copresence . Expanding human copresence into the realms of automation , simulation , and virtual reality introduces a host of ethical and legal issues that we will have to confront . As Biocca ( 1992 : 13 ) points out , all computer - based interactivity is inherently social , even when no real people are present , for the human essence of the designers remain resident in the logic of the interactive programs . For the same reason , the behavior of a robotic machine or a computer agent may have to be subject to the same norms and laws that regulate the behaviors of real people . The owner of a shop , for example , will probably be held legally responsible if his or her ATM machine is found selling controlled substances . But what about someone ' s computer agents stealing someone else ' s personal documents ? Or someone ' s avatar sexually abusing - - in the public domain - - the avatar that represents someone else ? Or a communicative robot spewing vicious insults at a feeble elderly ? Or an interactive video game suggesting mass murder to the young players ? Answers to these questions lie in our definition of human beings and being humans , and our understanding of the growing virtualization of human interaction . By making machines more human - like , humans are becoming more machine - like . And as computer technologies are more and more integrated into the fabric of social life , social reality becomes increasingly virtual , and virtual reality increasingly social . The taxonomy I proposed here has been an attempt to map out and make sense of the changing contour of human copresence in the Internet era . References Alpert , M . ( 2001 ) . Kibbles and bytes : How much is that robotic doggy in the window ? Scientific American , 284 ( 6 ) , 102 - 4 . Biocca , F . ( 1992 ) . Communication within virtual reality : Creating a space for research . Journal of Communicaiton , 42 ( 4 ) , 5 - 22 . Coleman , J . ( 1996 , April 21 ) . An escape for virtual " fathers " : Through the magic of software , you can have a little daughter . Philadelphia Inquirer , p . D3 . Davies , J . , and Revett , M . ( 1997 ) . Networked information management . BT Technology Journal , 15 ( 2 ) , 194 - 208 . Durlach , N . and Slater , M . ( 2000 ) . Presence in shared virtual environments and virtual togetherness . Presence : Teleoperators and Virtual Environments , 9 ( 2 ) , 214 - 217 . Feder , B . ( 2001 , May 28 ) . I . B . M . meets with 52 , 600 , virtually . The New York Times , p . Technology . Available : http : / / www . nytimes . com / 2001 / 05 / 28 / technology / 28BLUE . html Liebeskind , K . ( 2001 , June 25 ) . Activebuddy transforms instant messaging into a market tool . Media Daily News . Available : http : / / www . activebuddy . com Goffman , E . ( 1963 ) . Behavior in public places . New York : The Free Press . Horton , D . and Wohl , R . R . ( 1979 ) . Mass communication and para - social interaction : Observation on intimacy at a distance . In G . Gumpert and R . Cathcart ( Eds . ) , Inter / Media : Interpersonal Communication in a Media World ( pp . 32 - 55 ) . New York : Oxford University Press . Kurzweil , R . ( 2001 ) The Muse : Ray Kurzweil on sounds of the future . Available : http : / / cma . zdnet . com / texis / techinfobase / techinfobase / pdisplay . html Lanier , J . ( 2001 ) . Tele - immersion : Like being there . Scientific American , 284 ( 4 ) , 68 - 75 . Lombard , M . ( 1997 ) . At the heart of it all : The concept of presence . Journal of Computer - Mediated Communication , 3 ( 2 ) . Available : http : / / www . ascusc . org / jcmc / vol3 / issue2 / lombard . html Minsky , M . ( 1980 , June ) . Telepresence . Omni , pp . 45 - 51 . Muhlbach , L . , Bocker , M . , and Prussog , A . ( 1995 ) . Telepresence in videocommunications : A study on stereoscopy and individual eye contact . Human Factors , 37 ( 2 ) , 290 - 305 . Poyatos , F . ( 1975 ) . Cross - culture study of paralinguistic " alternants " in face - to - face interaction . In A . Kendon , R . Harris , and M . R . Key ( Eds . ) , Organization of behavior in face - to - face interaction ( pp . 285 - 314 ) . Chicago , ILL : Aldine . Rice , R . E . ( 1992 ) . Task analyzability , use of new medium and effectiveness : A multi - site exploration of media richness . Organization Science , 3 ( 4 ) , 475 - 500 . Sheridan , T . B . ( 1992 ) . Musings on telepresence and virtual presence . Presence : Teleoperators and Virtual Environments , 1 ( 1 ) , 120 - 126 . Short , J . , Williams , E . , and Christie , B . ( 1976 ) . The social psychology of telecommunications . London : Wiley . Sproull , L . , and Kiesler , S . 1991 . Connections : New ways of working in the networked organization . Cambridge , MA : The MIT Press . Slater , M . , Sadagic , A . , and Schroeder , R . ( 2000 ) . Small - group behavior in a virtual and real environment : A comparative study . Presence : Teleoperators and Virtual Environments , 9 ( 1 ) , 37 - 51 . Steuer , J . ( 1992 ) . Defining virtual reality : Dimensions determining telepresence . Journal of Communication , 42 ( 4 ) , 73 - 93 . Thomson , E . ( 2001 ) . MIT team building social robot . Available : http : / / web . mit . edu / newsoffice / nr / 2001 / kismet . html Walker , G . , Bowskill , J . , Hollier , M . , and McGrath , A . ( 2000 ) . Telepresence : Understanding people as content . Presence : Teleoperators and Virtual Environments , 9 ( 2 ) , 119 - 136 . Weizenbaum , J . ( 1966 ) . ELIZA : A computer program for the study of natural language communication between man and machine . Communications of the ACM , 9 ( 1 ) , 26 - 35 . Zhao , S . ( 2001 ) . The increasing presence of telecopresence in the Internet era . Paper to be presented at the annual conference of the American Sociological Association , Anaheim , CA .