394 NATURE MATERIALS | VOL 16 | APRIL 2017 | www . nature . com / naturematerials news & views BIOMEDICAL ENGINEERING In vitro amniogenesis Using a biomimetic culture platform to replicate the early biophysical environment of a developing embryo , human pluripotent stem cells can be directed towards amnion formation in vitro . Martin Pera T he amniotes are a vertebrate clade including reptiles , birds and mammals , whose embryos develop from eggs that are either laid on land or nurtured within the maternal environment . The production of large eggs with stores of fluid and nutrients and , later , placentation were evolutionary breakthroughs that allowed for more extended and complex embryonic development in the terrestrial environment . These innovations were enabled by the emergence and specialization of the extra - embryonic membranes — tissues derived from the zygote that support the embryo , allowing respiration , the uptake and processing of nutrients and fluids , and the elimination of waste . The amnion ( the origin of the term amniote ) is one of the extra - embryonic membranes , consisting of an epithelium and an outer mesodermal layer , which encapsulates a fluid - filled cavity surrounding the embryo and fetus ( Fig . 1 ) . The amnion allows fluid exchange , and the sac it forms facilitates movement of the developing fetus within a protective cushion . In humans , the amniotic epithelium appears early during the second week of development , deriving directly from the pluripotent cells of the epiblast . Owing to the inaccessibility of this stage of the human lifecycle to experimentation , the functions of the amnion early in development and the mechanism whereby it differentiates from the epiblast are unknown . A recent study presented compelling evidence showing that primordial germ cells ( the precursors of eggs and sperm ) arise from the amnion in monkeys 1 , an unanticipated finding that is indicative of the gaps in our understanding of primate embryology . Recent advances in three - dimensional organoid culture systems have enabled researchers to produce remarkable replicas of brain , gut , kidney and other tissues in the laboratory 2 . Through engineering of the microenvironment in vitro , several groups have even been able to mimic some early stages of post - implantation development of the human embryo 3 – 5 . Deborah Gumucio , Jianping Fu and colleagues now report in Nature Materials 6 the use of a bilayered extracellular matrix culture system to allow in vitro formation of the amnion from human pluripotent stem cells , thus modelling a key event in early embryogenesis . They grew human pluripotent stem cells in a sandwich of extracellular matrices designed to mimic the physical environment of the implanting blastocyst . Cells grown between two thick layers of a matrix made up of basement membrane extract lost pluripotency markers and formed cysts composed of cells with morphology resembling the amniotic epithelium ( Fig . 2 ) . Control cultures grown on a bed of basement membrane extract alone , or between a bed of extract and a rigid glass surface coated with extract , formed structures with a lumen . They did not differentiate , however , suggesting that the elastic modulus of the surrounding basement membrane extract was critical for differentiation . Further proof of the importance of matrix rigidity is shown in experiments using an elastomer fabricated into an artificial matrix array of microposts , which allowed for precise control of the elastic modulus of the surface . Only those arrays that mimicked the ‘soft’ environment of the extracellular matrix gel supported differentiation . To identify the nature of the differentiated squamous epithelial cells , Amnion Amnion Embryo Allantois Epiblast Extra - embryonic mesoderm Extra - embryonic mesoderm Cytotrophoblast Syncytiotrophoblast Chorion Hypoblast , yolk sac Yolk sac Fetal placenta Maternal placenta a b c Figure 1 | Development of the amnion . a , By ten days , the amnion lines the amniotic cavity , with cytotrophoblast ( destined to form the placenta ) above and epiblast ( pluripotent cells that will form all the tissues of the body ) below . b , Several days later , a layer of extra - embryonic mesoderm becomes imposed between the trophoblast and the amnion . c , By four weeks , the amnion encloses the entire embryo in the amniotic sac ; it also surrounds the umbilical cord , which connects the embryo to the placenta . © 2017 Macmillan Publishers Limited , part of Springer Nature . All rights reserved . © 2017 Macmillan Publishers Limited , part of Springer Nature . All rights reserved . NATURE MATERIALS | VOL 16 | APRIL 2017 | www . nature . com / naturematerials 395 news & views the authors undertook gene expression analysis . Definitive identification of the squamous epithelial cells as amnion presented a challenge , since little is known of gene expression in early human amnion , and current animal models do not accurately reflect the mechanism of human amnion development . By a process of elimination , the authors showed that their cells were distinct to other early embryonic or extra - embryonic lineages found in differentiating cultures of pluripotent stem cells , and they were able to demonstrate that the epithelial cells expressed a handful of marker genes that are combinatorially characteristic of later ( first trimester ) human amnion . The authors also provided evidence that the epithelial differentiation was dependent upon bone morphogenetic protein signalling . It is known that human pluripotent stem cells can form lumen - like structures in vitro 7 — an important step in amniotic cavity formation — and the development of a structure consistent with the amniotic cavity from human embryos has also been reported in vitro 3 , 5 . However , this new study is the first to demonstrate directed differentiation of pluripotent stem cells into amnion - like organoids . The authors’ findings highlight the importance of the physical microenvironment in three - dimensional organoid culture . Further single - cell transcriptome studies of the primate post - implantation embryo , as reported recently 8 , will provide additional validation of the identification of the cells described . Pending this kind of characterization of the amniotic cells , their system will certainly enable more detailed analysis of the development and function of this tissue in the early post - implantation period . The study of amnion in vitro may yield an insight into the origin of the germ line in primates . Another important question is whether the early amnion and its eponymous cavity , which form relatively early in human development and are intimately associated with the epiblast , play an important role in directing the growth and differentiation of the pluripotent cells in the embryo , possibly through nutrient transfer or secretion of polypeptide factors . Finally , the amnion represents one of the prominent anatomical components of the post - implantation conceptus . If amnion organoids can be combined in vitro with other elements , such as trophectoderm and extra - embryonic endoderm , it is possible that extensive histotypic growth and differentiation of the post - implantation human embryo might be achieved in culture . Such an advance would open up new horizons for the study of human development , and would also raise significant ethical questions regarding the growth of human embryos made from stem cells in a dish . ❐ Martin Pera is at the School of Biomedical Sciences , University of Melbourne , Parkville , Victoria 3010 , Australia . e - mail : martin . pera @ unimelb . edu . au References 1 . Sasaki , K . et al . Dev . Cell 39 , 169 – 185 ( 2016 ) . 2 . Clevers , H . Cell 165 , 1586 – 1597 ( 2016 ) . 3 . Deglincerti , A . et al . Nature 533 , 251 – 254 ( 2016 ) . 4 . Etoc , F . et al . Dev . Cell 39 , 302 – 315 ( 2016 ) . 5 . Shahbazi , M . N . et al . Nat . Cell Biol . 18 , 700 – 708 ( 2016 ) . 6 . Shao , Y . et al . Nat . Mater . 16 , 419 – 425 ( 2017 ) . 7 . Taniguchi , K . et al . Stem Cell Reports 5 , 954 – 962 ( 2015 ) . 8 . Nakamura , T . et al . Nature 537 , 57 – 62 ( 2016 ) . Figure 2 | Development of squamous cysts from human pluripotent stem cells on a synthetic , soft artificial matrix . a , Specifics and schematic diagrams of culture conditions using artificial matrices made of polydimethylsiloxane ( PDMS ) microposts of different height . b , Confocal micrographs showing staining of pluripotency markers NANOG , OCT4 , WGA , ECAD and SOX2 , and Hoechts counterstain nuclei for human pluripotent stem cells cultured in the indicated conditions . For the squamous cyst formed in three dimensions on 8 . 4 - μ m - tall microposts , confocal micrographs taken at two planes passing the middle ( P1 ) and bottom ( P2 ) of the cyst ( white dashed lines in a ) are shown . The yellow square highlights E - cadherin ( ECAD ) protrusions ( white arrowheads ) at the interface between the cyst and microposts . Scale bar , 50 μ m . Reproduced from ref . 6 , Macmillan Publishers Ltd . P1 P2 W G A N A N O G W G A O C T 4 H o e c h s t D3 D2 Micropost height 0 μ 4 . 8 m µ m 0 . 7 µ 0 m µ 4 . 8 m µ m 0 . 7 µ m 5 kPa aPk 005 , 2 aPk 000 , 2 5 kPa 2 , 000 kPa Normalized surface area 1 4 . 8 1 23 . 1 4 . 8 1 . 32 Flat PDMS E C A D S O X 2 P1 P2 b a Effective in - plane rigidity 2 , 500 kPa © 2017 Macmillan Publishers Limited , part of Springer N ature . All rights reserved . © 2017 Macmillan Publis h ers Limited , part of Springer Nature . All rights reserved .