brief communications nature methods | VOL . 13 NO . 6 | JUNE 2016 | 485 as conventional immunostaining . We also extended our approach to allow the direct imaging of intrinsic fluorescent protein signal in ExM . We initially reasoned that conventional fluorescently labeled antibodies could potentially be used in ExM if a sufficient number of linkages could be formed between the antibodies and hydro - gel so that protease - digested antibody fragments would remain linked to the hydrogel ( Fig . 1 ) . Indeed , we found that a 60 - min treatment of fixed and conventionally immunostained cultured cells with a 25 mM solution of the amine - reactive small mol - ecule MA - NHS ( methacrylic acid N - hydroxysuccinimidyl ester ) conferred excellent retention of fluorescent signal after digestion and expansion ( Fig . 2a – d ) . Omission of the MA - NHS treatment resulted in distorted images with poor retention of fluorescence ( Supplementary Fig . 1 ) . MA - NHS was chosen here because of its resemblance to the methacryloyl group originally used in the DNA - labeled antibody probes ; similar reactive groups are also used for the linking of peptides or proteins to hydrogels 4 . As with the original ExM report , we observed fine details in the images of expanded specimens that were hidden in images of the unexpanded specimens ( Fig . 2a – d ) . The cross - sectional pro - file of expanded microtubules yielded an average Gaussian - fitted full width at half maximum ( FWHM ) of 79 ± 9 nm ( mean ± s . d . , Supplementary Fig . 2 ) . This 79 - nm width was consistent with a convolution of the double - peaked cross - sectional profile of indi - rectly immunolabeled microtubules 5 , 6 measured by localization microscopy ( i . e . , STORM , PALM , etc . ) 2 , 3 and an estimated ~ 65 - nm expansion - corrected lateral spatial resolution . The uniformity of expansion was remarkably good across the sample , and an analy - sis of distortions between corresponding pre - expansion and post - expansion images recorded by confocal microscopy showed that distortions were generally below 100 nm ( root mean square dis - tance ) over length scales of up to 30 µ m ( Supplementary Fig . 3 ) . A comparison of expansion fidelity using DNA - labeled secondary antibodies also yielded similar results ( Supplementary Fig . 4 ) . Note that all distances and scale bars for expanded specimens in this report have been divided by their respective measured expan - sion factors of 4 – 4 . 2 and that all distances and scale bars therefore refer to pre - expansion dimensions . In a second approach , we found that treatment of convention - ally immunostained cultured cells with glutaraldehyde ( GA ) also yielded excellent fluorescence retention after digestion ( Supplementary Fig . 1 ) . Although GA postfixation is a commonly used procedure in immunofluorescence assays , GA crosslinking is also well known for use in linking proteins or enzymes to polyac - rylamide gels 7 . Correlated pre - expansion localization microscopy and postexpansion confocal microscopy measurements using GA expansion microscopy with conventional antibodies and fluorescent proteins Tyler J Chozinski 1 , 4 , Aaron R Halpern 1 , 4 , Haruhisa Okawa 2 , Hyeon - Jin Kim 1 , Grant J Tremel 1 , Rachel O L Wong 2 & Joshua C Vaughan 1 , 3 expansion microscopy is a technique in which fluorophores on fixed specimens are linked to a swellable polymer that is physically expanded to enable super - resolution microscopy with ordinary microscopes . We have developed and characterized new methods for linking fluorophores to the polymer that now enable expansion microscopy with conventional fluorescently labeled antibodies and fluorescent proteins . our methods simplify the procedure and expand the palette of compatible labels , allowing rapid dissemination of the technique . Boyden and coworkers recently introduced expansion microscopy ( ExM ) as a super - resolution microscopy technique that uses phys - ical expansion of fixed specimens to allow features closer than the diffraction limit of light ( ~ 250 nm ) to become resolvable in the expanded specimen 1 . Unlike other super - resolution techniques that rely on specialized instruments 2 , 3 , ExM is compatible with standard microscopes ( for example , widefield , confocal , etc . ) and is poised to make a significant impact based on its accessibility and its strong performance in thick specimens . In the initial report on ExM , imaging with ~ 65 - nm resolution was demonstrated in cultured cells and in brain tissue using a procedure entailing the staining of a specimen with polymer - linkable probes , growth of a swellable polymer within the speci - men that links to the probes , protease digestion of the specimen , and expansion of the polymer through dialysis 1 . The polymer - linkable probes consisted of antibodies labeled with doubly modi - fied DNA oligonucleotides that contained a fluorophore and a methacryloyl group and were designed to become covalently incorporated into the polymer . As these DNA - labeled antibodies are custom - made and require a 1 - to 2 - day multi - step protocol to prepare with expensive reagents , we sought to develop meth - ods that would allow ExM to use standard fluorophore - labeled secondary antibodies lacking DNA . We refer to these standard antibodies as conventional secondary antibodies , and to their use 1 Department of Chemistry , University of Washington , Seattle , Washington , USA . 2 Department of Biological Structure , University of Washington , Seattle , Washington , USA . 3 Department of Physiology and Biophysics , University of Washington , Seattle , Washington , USA . 4 These authors contributed equally to this work . Correspondence should be addressed to J . C . V . ( jcv2 @ uw . edu ) . Received 21 JanuaRy ; accepted 18 MaRch ; published online 11 apRil 2016 ; doi : 10 . 1038 / nMeth . 3833 n p g © 201 6 N a t u r e A m e r i ca , I n c . A ll r i gh t s r ese r ve d . n p g © 201 6 N a t u r e A m e r i ca , I n c . A ll r i gh t s r ese r ve d . 486 | VOL . 13 NO . 6 | JUNE 2016 | nature methods brief communications treatment of immunostained cells revealed that distortions were generally below 25 nm ( root mean square distance ) over length scales of up to 20 µ m ( Supplementary Fig . 5 ) . Microtubule cross - sectional profiles had an average Gaussian - fitted FWHM of 80 ± 7 nm ( mean ± s . d . , Supplementary Fig . 2 ) , indicating a spatial resolution of ~ 65 nm as before . A three - color stain of an early ana - phase PtK1 cell produced clear images of the mitotic spindle and distinctly resolved attachments between kinetochore fiber micro - tubule bundles and chromosomes with good expansion fidelity ( Fig . 2e – j and Supplementary Figs . 6 – 8 ) . Although the DNA stain TO - PRO - 3 was quenched by the polymerization reaction , we were able to stain DNA after expansion through a brief incubation step with the dye ( Online Methods ) . A gallery of GA - treated immunostained cells for a variety of cytoskeletal structures and subcellular organelles is shown in Supplementary Figure 9 . Cells that were conventionally immunostained and treated with either MA - NHS or GA showed 3 – 4× brighter signal after expansion compared with untreated cells immunostained using DNA - labeled antibodies ( Supplementary Fig . 10 ) . Although fluorescence retention postexpansion was somewhat better when DNA - labeled antibodies were used than it was with MA - NHS or GA treatment of conventional antibodies ( ~ 90 % compared to ~ 70 % , Supplementary Fig . 11 ) , we found that pre - expansion specimens were ~ 4× brighter with conventional antibodies than with DNA antibodies ( data not shown ) . This increased brightness likely resulted from specimens’ ability to conjugate more of the small fluorophore molecules ( ~ 600 g mol −1 ) to an O NH P OH O O Acrydite NH O Methacrylic acid ( MA ) ( amide linked ) O O n N N Glutaraldehyde ( GA ) polymer ( imine linked ) DNA method MA - NHS / GA methods L L L L A A Digest Link to gel matrix Conjugatewith linkinggroup Digest Link to gel matrix Stain Digest Expand 4 × Link to gel matrix Fluorophore MA or GA linking group L Intact protein DNA Link to gel Digested protein Acrydite A Gel matrix figure 1 | Schematic illustration of expansion microscopy and label retention strategies . The boxed region highlights the difference between the original DNA method 1 and the poststain linker - group functionalization methods ( ‘MA - NHS / GA methods’ ) presented in this work . In the DNA method , the specimen is immunostained with a custom - prepared antibody bearing doubly modified DNA linked to a fluorophore and an acrydite moiety ( A ) . In contrast , with the MA - NHS / GA methods , methacrylic acid N - hydroxy succinimidyl ester ( MA - NHS ) or glutaraldehyde ( GA ) are used to label the entire sample with polymer - linking groups after conventional immunostaining with fluorophore - labeled antibodies ( only secondary antibodies are shown ) . Fluorescent proteins are also retained using the MA - NHS / GA methods through similar mechanisms but are not shown here for the sake of clarity . d – 0 . 5 0 0 1 Position ( µ m ) I n t en s i t y ( a r b . ) 0 . 5 ( c ) a ( d ) bb ( d ) c m I n t en s i t y ( a r b . ) Position ( µ m ) 0 1 – 0 . 5 0 0 . 5 ( m ) ( l ) k l e ( h ) ( j ) ( i ) ( g ) f x z xz g i j h x y figure 2 | Confocal fluorescence images of expanded cultured cells . ( a ) BS - C - 1 cell immunostained for tyrosinated tubulin ( green ) and detyrosinated tubulin ( magenta ) using conventional secondary antibodies and partially overlaid with corresponding pre - expansion image ( top ) . Specimen was treated with MA - NHS after immunostain . ( b – d ) Zoomed - in view of boxed region in a showing corresponding pre - expansion ( b ) and postexpansion ( c ) images of tyrosinated tubulin signal along with corresponding ( d ) line profiles arb . , ( arbitrary units ) . ( e , f ) Pre - expansion ( e ) and postexpansion ( f ) images of a dividing PtK1 cell immunostained for tubulin ( green ) and the kinetochore protein HEC1 ( red ) using conventional secondary antibodies and also stained for DNA ( blue ) using TO - PRO - 3 . Specimen was treated with GA after immunostain . ( g , h ) Zoomed - in view of microtubule - kinetochore attachments from boxed regions in e and f . ( i , j ) End - on views of boxed regions in e , f before ( i ) and after ( j ) expansion ( DNA channel omitted for clarity ) . ( k ) Maximum intensity projection of a fixed BS - C - 1 cell expressing the endoplasmic reticulum ( ER ) tag Sec61 b - GFP ( green ) and the inner mitochondrial membrane tag mito - DsRed ( blue ) and immunostained against the outer mitochondrial membrane protein TOM20 using a conventional secondary antibody ( red ) . Specimen was treated with GA after immunostain . ( l ) Zoomed - in view of boxed region in k showing close apposition of an ER tubule with two mitochondria . ( m ) Cross - sectional profile of boxed region in l arb . , ( arbitrary units ) . All distances and scale bars are in pre - expansion units . Scale bars , 2 µ m ( a , i – k ) , 500 nm ( b , c , g , h , l ) , 5 µ m ( e , f ) . n p g © 201 6 N a t u r e A m e r i ca , I n c . A ll r i gh t s r ese r ve d . n p g © 201 6 N a t u r e A m e r i ca , I n c . A ll r i gh t s r ese r ve d . nature methods | VOL . 13 NO . 6 | JUNE 2016 | 487 brief communications antibody than the comparably large ( ~ 6 , 000 g mol −1 ) and highly charged single - stranded oligonucleotides before compromising the antibody’s binding ability . Although we used conventional secondary anitbodies prepared in - house , we found that com - mercially obtained secondary antibodies gave comparable results ( Supplementary Fig . 12 ) . In cultured cells , we observed that that GA - treated specimens tolerated short digestion times ( ~ 30 min ) with low distortion , while MA - treated specimens required longer digestion times to avoid distortion ( ~ 12 – 18 h , Supplementary Figs . 13 and 14 ) . This observation led us to ask whether fluorescent protein signals could be retained for imaging after digestion and expansion . We found that cells treated with GA retained intrinsic fluorescence signal from fluorescent proteins ( GFP , DsRed ) targeted to various structures when using a ~ 30 min digestion time ( Fig . 2k – m and Supplementary Fig . 11 ) . The use of long digestion times ( > 12 h ) or the omission of GA treatment resulted in little retained fluo - rescent protein ( FP ) signal ( Supplementary Figs . 15 and 16 ) . Hybrid experiments using a mixture of FP and antibody stains are straightforward ( Fig . 2k – m ) . The above methods extended well to brain tissue . The treatment of conventionally immunostained 100 - µ m - thick THY1 - YFP - H mouse brain slices with MA - NHS ( Fig . 3 ) or GA retained anti - body fluorescence , although we prefer the MA - NHS treatment because treatment with GA leads to high levels of background fluorescence ( Supplementary Fig . 17 ) 8 . Complete , high - fidelity expansion in tissue required a lower MA - NHS concentration than in cultured cells ( 1 mM for 60 min ) , presumably due to physical differences between the specimens . We therefore advise valida - tion ( through correlative imaging before and after expansion ) and possible optimization of these procedures or their variations before applying them to uncharacterized specimens that may have different properties . We immunostained THY1 - YFP - H brain slices for YFP - express - ing neurons and the presynaptic and postsynaptic markers Bassoon and Homer using conventional secondary antibodies ( Fig . 3a – f ) and then treated these slices with MA - NHS before gelation , digestion , and expansion . Presynaptic and postsyn - aptic densities were well resolved and junctions between syn - apses and dendritic spines were clearly observable ( Fig . 3a – f , Supplementary Fig . 18 , and Supplementary Video 1 ) . Over length scales of up to 30 µ m , we observed distortions generally below 0 . 2 µ m ( Supplementary Fig . 19 ) . By decreasing the diges - tion time for MA - treated mouse brain tissue to 1 h ( rather than 12 – 18 h ) , we were able to preserve intrinsic YFP fluorescence in expanded brain tissue and we were easily able to observe dendritic spines on a neurite even using a rudimentary epifluorescence microscope equipped with a 20 × 0 . 45 numeric aperture ( NA ) air - objective lens ( Fig . 3i , j ) . Omission of MA - NHS treatment results in very weak intrinsic YFP fluorescence levels ( Supplementary Fig . 20 ) , as pointed out by Boyden and coworkers 1 . The MA - NHS and GA - polymer - linking steps resemble the formaldehyde – acrylamide linking strategy used in the CLARITY tissue clearing procedure to link protein amines to a polyacry - lamide gel , although labeling of amines on the specimen with MA - NHS and GA is over an order of magnitude faster , requir - ing an incubation of 60 min ( or less ) as opposed to one or more days in CLARITY 9 , 10 . While MA is almost certainly being incor - porated covalently into the polymer , the linking mechanism of GA - treated specimens is less obvious . GA exists in aqueous solu - tion as a complex equilibrium distribution of monomeric and polymeric forms that contain aldehyde and alkene groups 11 . In principle , both aldehydes and alkene groups on GA could become covalently linked to the acrylamide polymer . Additionally , the GA polymer could become linked to the gel by entanglement with the acrylamide polymer 12 or through a combination of cova - lent and entanglement mechanisms . Overall , we favor MA - NHS treatment for brain tissue because of its lower background sig - nal and GA treatment for cultured cells because of its generality with both immunolabeled specimens and fluorescent proteins . Supplementary Table 1 summarizes all stain procedures and imaging conditions used in this report . Boyden and coworkers pointed out that not all organic fluor - ophores survive the polymerization step ( for example , several cyanine fluorophores do not survive ) and they recommended use of Alexa Fluor 488 , TAMRA or Atto 565 , and Atto 647N 1 . To this we add that Alexa Fluor 405 , Atto 488 , Alexa Fluor 532 , Alexa Fluor 546 , Alexa Fluor 568 , GFP , YFP , DsRed , Hoechst 33342 , and SYBR Gold also survive polymerization ( Fig . 2 and Supplementary Fig . 21 ) . Additionally , in order to avoid quenching c e ( h ) f ( c , e ) ( d , f ) a b d Position ( µ m ) I n t en s i t y ( a r b . ) 0 – 0 . 3 0 . 3 1 g 0 I n t en s i t y ( a r b . ) h Position ( µ m ) 0 – 0 . 3 0 . 3 1 0 j i ( g ) ( j ) figure 3 | Images of expanded mouse brain tissue prepared using the MA - NHS treatment method . a – f show confocal images and i , j show epifluorescence images . ( a ) Single pre - expansion focal plane of a THY1 - YFP - H mouse brain slice indirectly immunostained for YFP ( blue ) , the presynaptic marker Bassoon ( green ) , and the postsynaptic marker Homer ( red ) using conventional secondary antibodies . ( b ) The same area as in a after expansion , displayed with the relative size compared with a in order to show the relative amount of physical expansion . ( c – f ) Zoomed - in view of the boxed regions in b before expansion ( c , d ) and after expansion ( e , f ) , revealing that the presynaptic and postsynaptic markers are well resolved and aligned with dendritic spines . ( g , h ) Cross - sectional profiles of the boxed regions in e , f ( arb . , arbitrary units ) . ( i ) Epifluorescence image of a neuron in an expanded THY1 - YFP - H mouse brain slice using YFP itself as the fluorescence reporter . The specimen was treated with MA - NHS and digested only briefly ( 1 h ) in order to retain FP fluorescence . ( j ) Zoomed - in view of the boxed region in i showing clearly resolved dendritic spines . All distances and scale bars correspond to pre - expansion dimensions . Scale bars , 5 µ m ( a , b ) , 500 nm ( c – f ) , 4 µ m ( i ) , 1 µ m ( f ) . n p g © 201 6 N a t u r e A m e r i ca , I n c . A ll r i gh t s r ese r ve d . n p g © 201 6 N a t u r e A m e r i ca , I n c . A ll r i gh t s r ese r ve d . 488 | VOL . 13 NO . 6 | JUNE 2016 | nature methods brief communications or bleaching by the polymerization reaction , fluorophores may be introduced postdigestion by incubating the gel with labeled streptavidin for a specimen that has been labeled with a biotin - labeled secondary antibody , or through incubation with DNA - binding fluorophores such as TO - PRO - 3 , etc . ( Fig . 2e – j and Supplementary Fig . 21 ) . We have introduced and characterized new polymer - linking methods for expansion microscopy which now enable the use of conventional fluorophore - labeled antibodies and FPs . These methods should make ExM more accessible to a large and growing community of researchers applying super - resolu - tion techniques to a wide range of biological questions . These methods improve the brightness of immunostained specimens compared with that of DNA - conjugated antibodies while mak - ing use of conventional secondary antibodies that are in many cases already available in research laboratories . Given the choice , we generally prefer the immunostaining of FPs due to its enhancement of signal brightness . However , the use of intrinsic FP signals with ExM creates flexibility in multichan - nel situations when compatible antibody species may not be available or when FPs are separable spectrally but not anti - genically ( as with CFP and YFP ) . The use of intrinsic FP sig - nals may also provide advantages when antibody penetration into thick samples is limited . Expansion microscopy is a highly attractive imaging modal - ity owing to its compatibility with conventional microscopes and conventional probes , its robust multicolor and 3D capabilities , and its optical clearing properties for thick tissues 1 . While the method is limited to fixed specimens whose mechanical properties do not prevent expansion , the currently achieved ~ 65 - nm resolution is sufficient to answer a wide range of biological questions and is likely to improve with further development . methods Methods and any associated references are available in the online version of the paper . Note : Any Supplementary Information and Source Data files are available in the online version of the paper . acknoWledgments This work is supported by the University of Washington ( J . C . V . ) , a Burroughs - Wellcome Career Award at the Scientific Interface ( J . C . V . ) , an NSF Graduate Research Fellowship DGE - 1256082 ( T . J . C . ) , and by NIH grants EY10699 and EY17101 ( R . O . L . W . ) . The authors would like to thank L . Wordeman ( University of Washington , Seattle , WA ) for providing the PtK1 cell line and anti - HEC1 antibody , for access to an electroporator , and for helpful discussions ; K . Oda ( University of Washington , Seattle , WA ) for performing the cardiac perfusion of mice ; T . Rapoport ( Harvard Medical School , Boston , MA ) for the Sec61 β - GFP plasmid ; E . Boyden , F . Chen , and P . Tillberg ( MIT , Boston , MA ) for conducting an ExM workshop ; and the Biology Imaging Facility at the University of Washington for imaging assistance . author contributions T . J . C . , A . R . H . , H . O . , R . O . L . W . , and J . C . V . designed the experiments . T . J . C . , A . R . H . , H . O . , H . - J . K . , and G . J . T . performed the experiments and analysis . T . J . C . , A . R . H . , and J . C . V . wrote the paper and all authors commented on the manuscript . J . C . V . supervised the project . comPeting financial interests The authors declare competing financial interests : details are available in the online version of the paper . reprints and permissions information is available online at http : / / www . nature . com / reprints / index . html . 1 . Chen , F . , Tillberg , P . W . & Boyden , E . S . Science 347 , 543 – 548 ( 2015 ) . 2 . Huang , B . , Babcock , H . & Zhuang , X . Cell 143 , 1047 – 1058 ( 2010 ) . 3 . Hell , S . W . Science 316 , 1153 – 1158 ( 2007 ) . 4 . Hern , D . L . & Hubbell , J . A . J . Biomed . Mater . Res . 39 , 266 – 276 ( 1998 ) . 5 . Dempsey , G . T . , Vaughan , J . C . , Chen , K . H . , Bates , M . & Zhuang , X . Nat . Methods 8 , 1027 – 1036 ( 2011 ) . 6 . Olivier , N . , Keller , D . , Gönczy , P . & Manley , S . PLoS ONE 8 , e69004 ( 2013 ) . 7 . Weston , P . D . & Avrameas , S . Biochem . Biophys . Res . Commun . 45 , 1574 – 1580 ( 1971 ) . 8 . Lee , K . , Choi , S . , Yang , C . , Wu , H . - C . & Yu , J . Chem . Commun . ( Camb . ) 49 , 3028 – 3030 ( 2013 ) . 9 . Chung , K . et al . Nature 497 , 332 – 337 ( 2013 ) . 10 . Yang , B . et al . Cell 158 , 945 – 958 ( 2014 ) . 11 . Migneault , I . , Dartiguenave , C . , Bertrand , M . J . & Waldron , K . C . BioTechniques 37 , 790 – 802 ( 2004 ) . 12 . Kim , D . & Park , K . Polymer 45 , 189 – 196 ( 2004 ) . n p g © 201 6 N a t u r e A m e r i ca , I n c . A ll r i gh t s r ese r ve d . n p g © 201 6 N a t u r e A m e r i ca , I n c . A ll r i gh t s r ese r ve d . doi : 10 . 1038 / nmeth . 3833 nature methods online methods Reagents and reagent preparation . Unconjugated secondary antibodies were purchased from Jackson Immunoresearch ( West Grove , PA , USA ) including donkey anti - rat ( 712 - 005 - 151 ) , don - key anti - rabbit ( 711 - 005 - 152 ) , donkey anti - mouse ( 715 - 005 - 151 ) , and donkey anti - chicken ( 703 - 005 - 155 ) . An Alexa Fluor 488 conjugated donkey anti - rat antibody ( 712 - 545 - 150 ) was pur - chased from Jackson Immunoresearch . Primary antibodies are listed as follows : rat anti - alpha tubulin ( MA1 - 80017 , Thermo Fisher Scientific , Waltham , MA , USA ) , rabbit anti - detyrosinated tubulin ( ab48389 , Abcam , Cambridge , MA , USA ) , mouse anti - HEC1 ( ab3613 , Abcam ) , rabbit anti - TOM20 ( sc - 11415 , Santa Cruz Biotechnology , Santa Cruz , CA , USA ) , rabbit anti - GFP ( A31857 , Life Technologies , Carlsbad , CA , USA ) , chicken anti - GFP ( A10262 , Thermo Fisher Scientific ) , rabbit anti - Homer1 ( 160003 , Synaptic Systems , Goettingen , Germany ) , mouse anti - Bassoon ( ab82958 , Abcam ; see Supplementary Table 1 for antibody concentrations ) . Bovine serum albumin ( BSA ) was purchased from Santa Cruz Biotechnology . NHS - functionalized ( amine - reactive ) dyes and biotin were obtained from Sigma - Aldrich , ( Atto 488 , Atto 565 , Atto 647N , St . Louis , MO , USA ) or Thermo Fisher Scientific ( Alexa Fluor 405 , Alexa Fluor 488 , Alexa Fluor 532 , Alexa Fluor 546 , Alexa Fluor 647 , EZ - link NHS - PEG - 4 - Biotin ) . Dyes were obtained in 1 mg aliquots from the suppliers , dissolved at a concentration of ~ 100 mg mL −1 in anhydrous DMSO , subaliquoted into anhydrous DMSO at 1 and 10 mg mL −1 , and stored at −20 °C . NAP - 5 size - exclusion chromatography columns were obtained from GE Healthcare ( Little Chalfont , Buckinghamshire , United Kingdom ) and were reused ten or more times by washing with 5 mL aqueous 1 M sodium hydroxide between uses and stored at 4 °C in phosphate - buffered saline ( PBS ) containing 2 mM sodium azide for up to several months . Methacrylic acid N - hydroxy succinimidyl ester ( MA - NHS ) , anhydrous dimethyl sulfoxide ( DMSO ) , sodium bicarbonate , PIPES salt ( for buffer ) , ethylene diamine tetraacetic acid ( EDTA ) , magnesium chloride , Triton X - 100 , and sodium borohydride were obtained from Sigma - Aldrich . MA - NHS was dissolved in anhydrous DMSO at a concentration of 1 M and stored at −20 °C until used . Paraformaldehyde ( 32 % ) and glutar - aldehyde ( 50 % ) were obtained from Electron Microscopy Sciences ( Hatfield , PA , USA ) . All DNA was purchased from Integrated DNA Technologies ( Coralville , IA , USA ) . DNA stains , including Hoescht 33342 ( NucBlue Live ) , SYBR Gold , and TO - PRO - 3 , were purchased from Life Technologies . Tetramethylethylenediamine ( TEMED , 17919 ) and ammonium persulfate ( APS , 17874 ) were purchased from Thermo Fisher Scientific . 4 - hydroxy - TEMPO ( 97 % , 176141 ) , and sodium acrylate ( 97 % , 408220 ) were pur - chased from Sigma - Aldrich . 40 % acrylamide ( 1610140 ) and 2 % bis - acrylamide ( 1410142 ) solutions were purchased from Bio - Rad Laboratories ( Hercules , CA , USA ) . Proteinase K was purchased from Thermo ( EO0491 ) and New England BioLabs ( P8107S , Ipswich , MA , USA ) . Preparation of fluorophore - labeled antibodies and strepta - vidin . Fluorophore - conjugated antibodies or streptavidin were prepared as follows . To 40 µ L of unconjugated protein ( ~ 1 . 3 mg mL −1 IgG , or 1 mg mL −1 streptavidin ) was added 5 µ L of aque - ous 1 M sodium bicarbonate ( pH ~ 8 . 3 ) and 1 µ L of NHS - dye stock in DMSO . These reagents were allowed to react at room temperature ( 22 °C ) for ~ 30 min . During the reaction , a NAP - 5 size - exclusion chromatography column , for purification of labeled antibody from free dye , was equilibrated by flowing ~ 10 mL of PBS through each column . The ~ 50 µ L reaction was loaded onto the column followed by flowing through and discarding 650 µ L of PBS and flowing through and keeping 300 µ L eluate . The eluate was characterized by absorption spectroscopy by measur - ing the average concentration of dye and average concentration of antibody according to the instructions provided by the dye manufacturers . Care was taken to avoid adding more than ~ 5 % DMSO to the antibody solution to avoid disturbing the antibody in all antibody - labeling reactions . The obtained dye - to - protein ratios are listed in Supplementary Table 1 . The DNA - antibody conjugate was prepared using 5 ′ amine modified DNA ( TAC GCC CTA AGA ATC CGA ACT TTA CGC CCT AAG AAT CCG AAC ) according to the protocol described previously 1 ( updated pro - tocols available at http : / / www . expansionmicroscopy . org ) . The trifunctional linker was prepared from 5 ′ acrydite and 3 ′ amine modified DNA ( GTT CGG ATT CTT AGG GCG TA ) , reacted with a ten - fold molar excess of Atto 488 NHS for 1 h at pH 8 . 3 , and purified by cold ethanol precipitation . Fluorescence microscopes . Confocal microscopy was per - formed on a Leica SP5 inverted confocal scanning microscope at the UW Biology Imaging Core ( Fig . 2 and Supplementary Figs . 2 – 8 and 21 ) using a 63 × 1 . 2 NA water lens ( Leica , Nussloch , Germany ) , or an Olympus upright FV1000 ( Fig . 3 and Supplementary Figs . 18 and 19 ) with a 25 × 1 . 0 NA SCALE objective . Conventional widefield epifluorescence imaging was performed on an inverted Nikon Ti - S microscope configured with a 10 × 0 . 25 NA air objective lens ( Nikon , Melville , NY , USA ) , 20 × 0 . 45 NA air objective lens ( Nikon ) , or a 60 × 1 . 2 NA water - immersion objective lens ( Nikon ) . The widefield microscope was illuminated using a four - channel light emitting diode source ( LED4D120 , Thorlabs , Newton , NJ , USA ) using a multiband filter set ( LF405 / 488 / 532 / 635 - A - 000 , Semrock , Rochester , NY , USA ) and images were captured with a Zyla 5 . 5 sCMOS camera ( Andor , Windsor , CT , USA ) ( Supplementary Figs . 1 , 9 – 17 , 20 ) . Localization microscopy ( Supplementary Fig . 5 ) was performed on a homebuilt Nikon Ti - U system configured for total inter - nal reflection fluorescence using a Nikon CFI Plan Apo Lambda 100 × 1 . 45 NA objective and a 647 - nm diode - pumped solid - state laser source ( MPB Communications , Pointe - Claire , QC , Canada ) . A 405 - nm solid state laser ( Obis , Coherent ) was used for activa - tion to increase the rate of fluorophore blinking . Localization images were acquired on an EMCCD ( iXon Ultra 897 , Andor ) operating at 200 frames per second . A custom - built focus lock using an objective nanopositioner ( Nano F - 100S , Mad City Labs , Madison , WI , USA ) and a 940 - nm diode laser ( LP - 940 , Thorlabs ) was used to control axial drift . Cell culture . BS - C - 1 and Ptk1 cells were obtained from ATCC and both tested negative for mycoplasma using 4 ′ , 6 - diamidino - 2 - phenylindole dihydrochloride . Cell lines obtained from ATCC were used without additional authentication . BS - C - 1 cells were cultured in EMEM ( ATCC , 30 - 2003 , Manassas , VA , USA ) con - taining penicillin and streptomycin ( PS , 15140 - 122 , Life Tech . ) , 10 % FBS ( FB22 - 500 , Serum Source International , Charlotte , NC , USA ) , and nonessential amino acids ( NEAA , 11140 - 050 , Life n p g © 201 6 N a t u r e A m e r i ca , I n c . A ll r i gh t s r ese r ve d . n p g © 201 6 N a t u r e A m e r i ca , I n c . A ll r i gh t s r ese r ve d . doi : 10 . 1038 / nmeth . 3833 nature methods Tech . ) . PtK1 cells were cultured in RPMI ( 11875 - 093 , Life Tech . ) containing PS , 10 % FBS and NEAA . Cells were maintained at 37 °C environment with 5 % CO 2 . Immunostaining of cultured cells . See Supplementary Table 1 for a summary and detailed list of concentrations and reagents for the preparation of all imaged specimens . Immunostaining of BS - C - 1 cells was conducted as follows . Cells were seeded at a density of ~ 50 , 000 cells per well of a 24 - well plate containing a 12 mm # 1 . 5 coverglass and incubated overnight . Cells were optionally extracted for 30s with PEM ( 0 . 1 M PIPES pH 7 , 1 mM EDTA , 1 mM MgCl 2 ) containing 0 . 5 % Triton - X - 100 immediately before fixation . The extraction step is important for high - quality stains of cytoskeletal structures , but was not used on stains of organelle structures where treatment with detergent would likely destroy the structure ( see Supplementary Table 1 ) . Specimens were fixed for 10 min in a solution containing 3 . 2 % paraformaldehyde and 0 . 1 % glutaraldehyde in PEM ( for micro - tubules ) or PBS ( for organelles ) , followed by brief washing in PBS and reduction in an aqueous solution of 10 mM sodium borohy - dride for 5 min . After reduction , samples were washed three times with PBS and then incubated with blocking / permeabilization buffer ( PBS with 3 % BSA and 0 . 5 % Triton X - 100 ) for 30 min . Specimens were then incubated with primary antibodies in blocking / permeabilization buffer for 45 min , washed three times with PBS , and incubated for 45 min with secondary antibodies in blocking / permeabilization buffer . After three more washes with PBS , cells were treated with either GA or MA - NHS . GA treatment consisted of a 10 min , room - temperature incubation with 0 . 25 % GA in PBS followed by washing three times with PBS . MA - NHS - treatment consisted of a 60 min , room - temperature incubation with 25 mM MA - NHS in PBS followed by washing three times with PBS . For correlative pre - expansion localization microscopy and postexpansion widefield imaging of fixed BS - C - 1 cells in Supplementary Figure 5 , a tertiary antibody immunostain was performed including steps for : primary rat anti - tubulin , second - ary Alexa Fluor 647 mouse anti - rat , tertiary Atto 488 donkey anti - mouse antibody and finally GA treatment . Immunostaining of PtK1 cells was conducted using a variation of the above protocol for BS - C - 1 cells , but with the following dif - ferences . Cells were incubated with rat anti - tubulin and mouse anti - HEC1 primary antibodies overnight at 4 °C . After washing , cells were incubated at room temperature for 45 min with second - ary antibodies consisting of donkey anti - rat secondary antibody labeled with Atto 488 and a donkey anti - mouse secondary anti - body that was dually labeled Alexa Fluor 546 and biotin . After sec - ondary labeling , samples were treated with GA as described above for BS - C - 1 cells . Prior to postexpansion imaging , the expanded samples were incubated with 2 µ g mL −1 Alexa Fluor 546 labeled streptavidin in PBS containing 3 % BSA for one hour . After con - tracting during this incubation , the gel was allowed to re - expand to full size in DI ( deionized ) water . Additionally , immediately before pre - and postexpansion imaging , cells were incubated with 1 µ M TO - PRO - 3 in water for 15 min . Transfection of cultured cells . BS - C - 1 cells were dissociated and concentrated to ~ 10 6 cells mL −1 by centrifugation at 90 g for 10 min and resuspended in Solution SF ( Lonza , Basel , Switzerland ) . A 100 µ L volume of cells was mixed with 5 µ g of plasmid : pAcGFP1 - Mito ( Clontech , Mountain View , CA , USA ) in Supplementary Figures 9e and 16 , or pAc - GFPC1 - Sec61 β 13 ( a gift from Tom Rapoport ( Harvard Medical School ) , Addgene plasmid # 15108 ) in Supplementary Figures 9f and 15 , or Sec61 β and pDsRed2 - Mito ( BD Biosciences , Franklin Lakes , NJ , USA ) in Figure 2k , i . The cells were then electroporated in an electrode cuvette with pulse code X - 001 in a Lonza Amaxa nucleofector , immediately resuspended in warm media , and plated in a 24 - well plate as described above . After 24 – 48 h , the cells were fixed with paraformaldehyde and glutaraldehyde ( Supplementary Figs . 15 and 16a , or paraformaldehyde only in 16b , c ) , or fixed and immunostained for outer mitochondrial membrane ( Fig . 2k , l ) or with anti - GFP ( Supplementary Fig . 9e , f ) as described above . Mouse brain tissue dissection and preparation . All animal experiments were carried out in accordance with the Institutional Animal Care and Use Committee at the University of Washington . Mice ( strain C57BL / 6 ) were anesthetized with isoflurane and perfused transcardially with PBS , followed by paraformaldehyde ( PFA , 4 % wt / vol in PBS ) . Brains were dissected out , postfixed in 4 % PFA in PBS at 4 °C for one hour and washed in PBS . Then , the brains were sliced to 100 µ m thickness using a vibratome . All mice used in this work were between the ages of 1 and 4 months at the time of dissection . Both male and female mice were used . Immunostaining of tissue slices . 100 - µ m - thick mouse brain slices were first incubated in blocking / permeabilization buffer ( 3 % BSA and 0 . 1 % Triton X - 100 in PBS ) for 6 – 12 h at 4 °C . The tissue was then incubated in primary antibody diluted into blocking / permeabilization buffer for at least 24 h at 4 °C and was then washed three times in blocking / permeabilization buffer ( 20 min each ) . Tissues were then incubated with secondary anti - body diluted into blocking / permeabilization buffer for 24 h at 4 °C and afterwards were washed three times with PBS ( 20 min each ) . The brain slices were then either treated with 0 . 1 % GA in PBS or 1 mM MA - NHS in PBS for 1 h at room temperature followed by three washes with PBS . Tissue slices that were not immunostained ( samples with fluorescent protein signal preserved ) were simply treated with GA or MA - NHS . See also Supplementary Table 1 for a summary and detailed list of concentrations and reagents for the preparation of all imaged specimens . Gelation , digestion , and expansion of cultured cell specimens . Fixed cell samples on 12 mm round coverglass were incubated in monomer solution ( 1 × PBS , 2 M NaCl , 2 . 5 % ( wt / wt ) acrylamide , 0 . 15 % ( wt / wt ) N , N ′ - methylenebisacrylamide , 8 . 625 % ( wt / wt ) sodium acrylate ) for ~ 1 min at room temperature before gelation . Concentrated stocks of ammonium persulfate ( APS ) and tetram - ethylethylenediamine ( TEMED ) at 10 % ( wt / wt ) in water were diluted in monomer solution to concentrations of 0 . 2 % ( wt / wt ) for gelation , with the initiator ( APS ) added last . The gelation solution ( ~ 70 µ l ) was placed in a 1 mm deep , 1 cm diameter Teflon well and the coverglass was placed on top of the solution with cells face down . Gelation was allowed to proceed at room temperature for 30 min . The coverglass and gel were removed with tweezers and placed in digestion buffer ( 1 × TAE buffer , 0 . 5 % Triton X - 100 , 0 . 8 M guanidine HCl ) containing 8 units mL −1 Proteinase K added n p g © 201 6 N a t u r e A m e r i ca , I n c . A ll r i gh t s r ese r ve d . n p g © 201 6 N a t u r e A m e r i ca , I n c . A ll r i gh t s r ese r ve d . doi : 10 . 1038 / nmeth . 3833 nature methods freshly . Unless otherwise indicated , gels were digested at 37 °C for various amounts of time as follows : MA - treated cells were digested overnight , GA - treated cells were digested for 30 min to 1 h , and fluorescent protein samples were digested for 30 min maximum . The gels ( sometimes still attached to the coverglass ) were removed from digestion buffer and placed in ~ 50 mL DI water to expand . Water was exchanged every 30 min until expan - sion was complete ( typically 3 – 4 exchanges ) . Postexpansion labeling of expanded cultured cell specimens with streptavidin . Expanded cultured cell specimens initially immunostained with biotin - modified antibodies were sub - merged in a streptavidin solution ( 2 µ g mL −1 ) in PBS containing 3 % BSA for 45 min . The contracted gels were then washed and re - expanded in DI water . Gelation , digestion , and expansion of mouse tissue specimens . Tissue samples were incubated in monomer solution at 4 °C for 45 min before gelation . Tissue was gelled with the same solution as cells but with the addition of 4 - hydroxy - 2 , 2 , 6 , 6 - tetramethylpiperidin - 1 - oxyl ( 4 - hydroxy - TEMPO ) at a concentration of 0 . 01 % ( wt / wt ) from a 1 % ( wt / wt ) stock as an inhibitor to allow complete diffu - sion of the monomers throughout the tissue . The glass slide with the sample and a # 1 . 5 coverglass on top separated by spacers ( one # 1 coverglass ) on either side of the tissue was used as a gelation chamber . The samples were allowed to gel for 2 – 2 . 5 h at 37 °C . Excess gel around the samples was removed , the glass around the samples was cut to leave the tissue on a small glass square , and the samples were placed in digestion buffer with 8 units mL −1 and were allowed to digest at 37 °C for various amounts of time : stained samples were digested overnight and fluorescent protein samples were digested for 1 h . The gels were removed from the digestion solution ( using the glass square to support the gel ) and placed in DI water to expand . Gradually increasing the amount of water helped prevent the gels from folding . Expanded specimen handling . Expanded gels were cut to fit on coverglass ( 2 – 4 cm edge – length rectangles ) and excess water was removed and then gently placed on coverglass substrates for imaging . When possible , gels were immobilized using a small amount of cyanoacrylate glue on the periphery after wicking away excess water from the edges . Correlative localization microscopy and ExM . Pre - expansion localization microscopy images of Alexa Fluor 647 labeled micro - tubules were acquired at 200 Hz for ~ 80 , 000 frames at ~ 2 kW cm −2 in an oxygen - scavenging switching buffer ( 100 mM Tris pH 8 , 10 % glucose ( wt / wt ) , 0 . 5 mg mL −1 glucose oxidase , 40 µ g mL −1 catalase , and 143 mM 2 - mercaptoethanol ) . After localiza - tion microscopy , samples were washed to remove the switching buffer , gelled , digested , and expanded as described above . During gelation , the Alexa Fluor 647 signal was destroyed ; however , the Atto 488 from the tertiary antibody remained fluorescent for widefield epifluorescence imaging . Image processing . Expanded cell culture confocal z - stacks were aligned frame by frame using an automated rigid registration routine in Mathematica in order to correct for minor lateral drift during acquisition . Mitotic spindle confocal z - stacks of PtK1 cells were processed to remove peripheral nonspecific adsorption of the HEC1 antibody as follows : A binary 3D mask of the kineto - chore attachments was generated by binarizing the kinetochore channel and retaining connected - component features larger than 100 voxels and within 1 µ m of the outer surface of the chromo - somes . The kinetochore binary mask was then dilated by three pixels and multiplied by the original channel data . The process - ing was performed to clarify the maximum intensity projections in Fig . 2f , i , j , but had little effect on the individual z - sections as shown in detail in Supplementary Figure 7 . Localization micros - copy images were analyzed as described previously 5 . Registration of pre - expansion and postexpansion correlative images was car - ried out in the open - source software Elastix , using rigid ( similar - ity ) and nonrigid ( B - spline ) transformations to determine the expansion factor and quantify distortions . Details , including example data and processing scripts ( Supplementary Analysis ) , are included in the Supplementary Protocol . Reproducibility . All experiments were carried out ≥ 3 times including all sample preparation and analysis , except as noted below . Representative data for each experiment are shown . Experiments for Supplementary Figures 5 , 10c , 11 , 12 , and 16b were performed only once . 13 . Voeltz , G . K . , Prinz , W . A . , Shibata , Y . , Rist , J . M . & Rapoport , T . A . Cell 124 , 573 – 586 ( 2006 ) . n p g © 201 6 N a t u r e A m e r i ca , I n c . A ll r i gh t s r ese r ve d . n p g © 201 6 N a t u r e A m e r i ca , I n c . A ll r i gh t s r ese r ve d .