Modalities of Participation : Designing Beyond the Verbal Cara Wilson Institute for Design Informatics , Advanced Care Research Centre , University of Edinburgh , Edinburgh , Scotland cara . wilson @ ed . ac . uk Kellie Morrissey School of Design , University of Limerick , Limerick , Ireland kellie . morrissey @ ul . ie ABSTRACT Participatory design ( PD ) approaches strive for inclusion and em - powerment in the process of design , no matter the experience or abilities of participants . In practice , however , conventional PD meth - ods can be inappropriate for those who communicate in non - verbal ways , which leads to exclusion . This paper asks what participation looks like when we place value on modalities of expression that are beyond the verbal . Responding to PDC 2022’s ‘Senti - Pensar’ theme , we ask ; How can we better attune to different forms of expression in a socially just way ? What are ‘other’ dimensions to participation ? How do we value these , even if they are difficult to describe but somehow felt ? Retroanalysing the second author’s work in the context of dementia care and design through the first author’s framework for non - verbal participatory design , we reflect on how we can recognise and support participation other . CCS CONCEPTS • Human - centered computing → Interaction design ; Interaction design process and methods ; Participatory design . KEYWORDS Expression , Participation , Non - verbal , Dementia , Autism , Partici - patory Design ACM Reference Format : Cara Wilson and Kellie Morrissey . 2022 . Modalities of Participation : : De - signing Beyond the Verbal . In Participatory Design Conference 2022 : Volume 2 ( PDC 2022 Vol . 2 ) , August 19 – September 01 , 2022 , Newcastle upon Tyne , United Kingdom . ACM , New York , NY , USA , 7 pages . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3537797 . 3537812 1 INTRODUCTION A central concern of Participatory Design is ensuring that those with lived experience of a context have the space and power to contribute meaningfully to design which impacts them [ 23 ] . What is less - discussed is how we know that participation is happening . Commonly , participants can verbally contribute , brainstorm , debate and be questioned on their feelings regarding their participation . Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation on the first page . Copyrights for components of this work owned by others than the author ( s ) must be honored . Abstracting with credit is permitted . To copy otherwise , or republish , topostonserversortoredistributetolists , requirespriorspecificpermission and / or a fee . Request permissions from permissions @ acm . org . PDC 2022 Vol . 2 , August 19 – September 01 , 2022 , Newcastle upon Tyne , United Kingdom © 2022 Copyright held by the owner / author ( s ) . Publication rights licensed to ACM . ACM ISBN 978 - 1 - 4503 - 9681 - 3 / 22 / 08 . . . $ 15 . 00 https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3537797 . 3537812 Such participation is demonstrable , it is easily documented in writ - ten accounts and researchers can infer a certain degree of partic - ipation is occurring . However , what happens in contexts where participants communicate in non - traditional ways - where verbal communication is not the primary mode of expression ? In such contexts , participation is very often “felt” or shown through easy - to - miss micro - instances of interaction and expression [ 35 ] . As Light [ 23 , p . 2 ] highlights , an enduring issue in PD is “its tendency to speak for rather than with” despite the fact that post - colonial theory has “already debunked the idea that one can speak for others” . This is never more apparent than in PD with non - verbal participants . Traditionally , PD methods rely on verbal interaction , brainstorming , group discussions , and verbal feedback as preferred methods of engagement ( as described in [ 35 ] ) . These methods , how - ever , can be misaligned with the abilities of , for example , minimally - verbal children , older adults with dementia , and many other groups . In effect , employing only these methods serves to exclude such groups from PD participation , perpetuating a view that it is not possible to design with those who communicate other . There is a small but growing body of work concerned with understanding participation beyond the verbal ( e . g . [ 4 , 9 , 15 , 17 – 21 , 23 – 25 , 27 , 30 – 35 ] ) . For example , Höök [ 17 , p . 1 ] proposes soma design , an approach that prioritises an experiential , felt process which “reincorporates body and movement into a design regime that has long privileged language and logic . ” In reference to soma design , Stahl et al . [ 30 , p . 3 ] argue that “the tides of what constitutes knowledge in our field are changing” . The concept of senti - pensar ( feeling - thinking ) - or of being a sentipensante ( feeler - thinker ) - has been gaining traction in Participatory Design research [ 18 , 30 ] . Sentipensantes are concerned with the collective construction of knowledge , with the transformation of society , with the recovery of invisible voices , and with the intersection between academia and the non - academic [ 18 , p . 94 ] . This speaks to Fals Borda’s [ 6 ] participa - tory action research in the Global South and Escobar’s [ 14 ] designs for the pluriverse . Presenting proposals of knowledge otherwise and the plurality of human and more - than - human experiences , Escobar [ 14 ] prioritises attending to environment , experience , politics and the ‘radical interdependence of all beings’ . These works critique traditional forms of empirical truth and acceptable expression in design and , per [ 30 ] , can support thinking on PD otherwise , where plurality , autonomy and interdependence are employed to radically transform our design practice and knowledge construction . Currently , however , verbalised forms of PD still dominate . One framework which attempts to support non - verbal contributions to PD is Wilson et al . ’s Modalities of Self - Expression [ 34 ] . Here , the first author and colleagues advocate for learning to identify and 63 PDC 2022 Vol . 2 , August 19 – September 01 , 2022 , Newcastle upon Tyne , United Kingdom Cara Wilson and Kellie Morrissey Table 1 : Wilson et al . ’s ( 2020 ) Modalities of Self - Expression Framework Modality Auto - Expressive Example Socio - Expressive Example Dimension Words Conveying Interests ( “gloves” ) Describing actions ( “bounce” ) Fundamental Sounds Self - Soothing ( low humming ) Attention - seeking ( “uh uh ! ” ) Bodily Movement Dancing with the ball Throwing the ball to a peer Touch / Gesture Stroking the ball Pointing to the ball Play Throwing the ball up for peripheral stimulation Independently initiated turn - taking games Integrative Creativity Making up a song in the ball Collaborative drawing on the ball support different modalities of self - expression inherent to partic - ipants ( who , in this case , were minimally - verbal children on the autism spectrum ) . We proposed six Modalities of Self - Expression ( Table 1 ) which researchers can attune themselves to in order to recognise instances of expression and participation beyond the verbal . These dimen - sions include ; bodily movement , sounds , words , touch / gesture , play and creativity . We included ‘words’ as a modality here because some of their participants used limited words , phrases or utterances to communicate in design sessions , although these were usually not generative but repetitions or scripts . Each modality can be of a fundamental or an integrative nature . Integrative modalities ( Cre - ativity , Play ) employ combinations of the fundamental modalities ( Words , Sounds , Bodily Movement , Touch and Gesture ) . Someone may self - express through play , an integrative modality , involving the fundamental modalities of Bodily Movement ( throwing the ball to a friend ) and Sounds ( excited noises ) . While these modalities of self - expression were developed in the context of minimally - verbal children on the autism spectrum , we advocate for attuning attention to discover diverse modes of self - expression for any participant or group of participants , for example , complementing existing work on PD and dementia [ 7 , 16 ] . Our focus on embodied expression in autism has been mirrored by critical gerontology work in dementia [ 20 ] , though its potential for design for this population remains underexplored . It is clear that , in work in autism , dementia , and embodiment in design , researchers are recognising that much par - ticipation is embodied , evolving , oscillating , ‘other’ . In this paper , we therefore look to apply the Modalities of Self - Expression frame - work to the analysis of self - expression of people with dementia , in order to better understand other dimensions to participation which are at play in PD , beyond the verbal . 2 METHOD , CONTEXT AND DESIGN PROTOTYPE In this paper , a dementia care design ethnography was retro - analysed using the lens of Wilson et al . ’s [ 34 ] Modalities of Self - Expression . In the context of dementia , we endeavour to understand whether modalities translate to other beyond verbal contexts and what this may reveal about the Senti - Pensar theme’s provocation - how can we better attune to different forms of expression in a socially just way ? Overall , we aim to highlight the value of frame - works such as these in PD in supporting critically attuning to other forms of expression and participation . The ethnography from which this data is drawn was carried out in three Irish long - stay and day - care homes for people with dementia , with which the second author was engaged over a period of 3 years . These ethnographic engagements led to the development of a prototype technology , Swaytheband [ 28 ] ( Figure 1 , Figure 2 ) . The prototype consists of a series of batons pre - programmed to light up and switch colour to the beat of music playing in the background . The prototypes were adopted into a series of music sessions at care centres ( Figure 3 ) , where their use by people with dementia quickly transgressed initial expectations . This paper does not seek to revisit this technology in depth ; however , several of the vignettes visited below necessitate a basic understanding of the prototype concept . 3 FINDINGS Here , we reconsidered data through the lens of the modalities iden - tified in [ 34 ] . Where below we refer to ‘I’ , we are referring to the second author’s reflections . We provide an overview of findings in Table 2 . 3 . 1 Touch Veronica was a day resident who had progressed dementia and verbally , only used basic phrases . She was introspective and was not likely to engage in dance the way that some others were . Veron - ica was religious - she carried keepsakes on her person : a carved and oiled set of rosary beads coiled in her pocket ; a small book of religious poetry with a leather cover which she had purchased on a trip to Lourdes with her family several years earlier . She would often take out these items and run her fingers through the pages or through the beads . This meditative touch was something she employed during stressful situations – when the group was play - ing a game she couldn’t quite grasp or when she was seated near unfamiliar people . Early on in getting to know her , we were sitting together in the parlour of the day centre , listening to music . On the TV was an instrumental version of an Irish ballad , very slow and sweet . Suddenly , Veronica reached her hand out to take mine and guided my hand in an elaborate dance to the music for a minute , 64 Modalities of Participation : PDC 2022 Vol . 2 , August 19 – September 01 , 2022 , Newcastle upon Tyne , United Kingdom Table 2 : Retroanalysing Dementia Data through Modalities of Self - Expression Framework Modality Example PD Insights Touch Veronica’s meditative touch of special items – rubbing rosary beads . Hand touching . As long as it is appropriate , embrace simple human gestures like hand - holding in developing relationships Bodily Movement Una’s wandering Develop opportunities for everyday togetherness Words Fionnula’s confabulating Create space for improvisation and flexibility Play Neasa’s tug - of - war Support unexpected or provocative interactions Creativity Marie’s card - making Integrate interests - workshops ‘set to song’ Sounds Claire’s ‘yoo - hoos’ Spend time with participants to understand how their non - normative sound - making is expression Figure 1 : The Swaytheband prototypes and some of the props used in music sessions before bringing it to her face and kissing it softly . She laid my hand down and we resumed listening to music together . Design insights : This early interaction with Veronica indicated to me that any resulting design implemented should make use of touch and tactility . It made me think about how important religion was for my participants , as were small , meaningful objects , which could be touched and rubbed to self - soothe . Most of all , it highlighted to me the expressive possibilities of hand - holding and dance , even if that dance was limited to staying in seats . 3 . 2 Bodily Movement Some residents traced out the anxiety of being in the care home in bodily ways – one resident , Una , walked the halls ceaselessly , her brow furrowed , hands clasped loosely behind her back , eyes down - cast . Residents grew irritated as she weaved between their chairs to try the handles of windows behind them . ‘Strange’ behaviour was seen as disruptive by most residents , and though Una’s anxiety manifested itself in these quiet ways , the ways she interacted with her environment disrupted the ‘quiet and polite’ status quo . Wan - dering is a common symptom of dementia : people with dementia who wander may do so either aimlessly , or with a purpose in mind that is eventually forgotten . However , in recent years wandering has been re - conceptualised by some as a sort of sense - making [ 29 ] . Una’s wandering was in part motivated by a sense of dislocation she felt in the care centre - in opening the windows , she told us she was trying to see if her family cat needed to be let in . At the same time , she knew she was not at home anymore , that the cat was not there , and she was surrounded by unfamiliar people . Design insights : Una’s wandering highlighted that many resi - dents in care are living in ‘separate’ realities as their condition progresses or as they get used to life in the unit . It also indicated that these ‘realities’ could intersect and clash . As a result , I oriented to design within contexts that promoted ‘togetherness’ or shared experiences . I also knew I wanted to create something that ‘flat - tened’ the hierarchy of differences that residents were experiencing in living ( often involuntarily ) together near the end of their lives . It could be that hosting PD workshops or interventions within con - texts of everyday ‘togetherness’ ( e . g . , coffee mornings ) might be generative in future research . 3 . 3 Words Other participants’ waning cognitive abilities meant that they were often confused . One resident , Fionnuala , had Korsakoff - type de - mentia , which is marked by the tendency to confabulate - to ‘lie’ to cover up gaps in knowledge or make sense of unfamiliar or confus - ing situations . One day , sitting together in the parlour , she turned to me . ‘I told the doctor about your problem , ’ she said to me , her eyes flicking to my face . ‘You did ? ’ I asked . I did not know what she was talking about . ‘Yes . Did he not give you a call ? ’ Fionnuala already had an idea of our relationship in our head – one that I was not privy to . She believed she had told the doctor about my problem . If I answered ‘incorrectly’ here , it might throw our whole conversation off - kilter . 65 PDC 2022 Vol . 2 , August 19 – September 01 , 2022 , Newcastle upon Tyne , United Kingdom Cara Wilson and Kellie Morrissey Figure 2 : An early Swaytheband prototype wrapped in sparkling fabric ‘No , ’ I said . ‘He didn’t call me yet . Soon though , I hope . ’ She looked at me a little oddly but then her gaze shifted away . Our relationship , or at least the script of it that she kept running in her mind , was safe for now . Design insights : Interacting with Fionnuala made it even clearer to me that , even if participants did not give direct , verbal responses to me about prototypes , that I was able to make sense of their words through careful attention . It made me think about ways in which my responses helped her to preserve a continuous sense of herself . In turn , it introduced to me the concept of ‘improvisation’ , as practiced in music and in theatre , which later mapped to functions allowable by my prototype system . Many PD sessions are structured around agendas or sets of activities such as future workshops , mock - up techniques and cooperative prototyping [ 8 ] ; working with people with dementia may require that these agendas are fluid and make room for improvisational activities rather than fitting to tight , pre - planned tasks . 3 . 4 Play Props were often used to encourage participants to interact with one another – for instance , ribbons and ‘ropes’ of cloth were stretched across the 4 – 5 - metre diameter of the seated circle , supporting par - ticipants to connect with one another and dance without leaving their seats . During one session , participant Neasa deviated from swaying gently with the rope in time to ‘That’s Amore’ , instead flicking it at her partner like a whip and laughing hard . She then moved her grip along the length of the rope , a look of intense but playful concentration on her face , miming a struggle of ‘tug of war’ with her partner . Design insights : Events like these made clear the value of props in dementia care to allow fun and , once more , improvisation . Careful observations of Neasa , made before the rollout of the Swaythe - band prototype , indicated to me the range of possibilities that a design might allow in design for musical expression in dementia care – from soothing , gentle swaying to playful provocation of a partner , along to a sense of ‘competition’ via a tug of war . This made me think that such a design here might serve more than one purpose – not just to ‘unite’ a group to sway peacefully together , but to interact in unexpected ways with one another without using words . Building on my earlier observations concerning contexts of togetherness and moving away from structured activities towards improvisation , I began to wonder if careful documentation of free - flowing , improvisational but intentional movement could ‘count’ towards participation in design processes . 3 . 5 Creativity One day in the care unit , an art session which was initially stilted and uncomfortable began to ‘flow’ better once the art therapist , Rosie , suggested a sing - along . Residents engaged much more with singing than they did with the bright array of art materials in front of them . Marie sang along , and so did Ben , their voices high and clear ; next to me , Veronica hummed along , looking into the faces of those around her , and grasped my hand tight . As the singing continued , with Rosie urging one resident , then another , to lead , the work surrounding the art begins to ‘loosen’ up – Micheál coloured a page , engrossed in listening to the music ; Marie turned to me to show her card . It was lovely , a pink card with purple flowers , green shading and her name written inside in her own shaky hand . She pointed to a flower we drew on the back . ‘I want to do something with this , ’ she said . I looked toward a bag of sparkly stickers , and took out two joke ‘googly’ eyes , placing them on the flower to create a silly face . Marie dissolved into laughter , holding up the card first to me and then to her neighbours . Design insights : The initially stilted art session was ‘eased along’ by singing a familiar song . This seemed to help participants feel comfortable enough to engage in the art session . It indicated to me that familiar music may act as a backdrop to ease other forms of participation along and I began to wonder what PD workshops would look like if they were ‘set’ to music for the benefit of some participants . This was one of the first instances that led me to focus on music in dementia care as a focal theme for the ethnographic work . A central point in the modalities framework is the focus on creativity , which is key to the design process . It is not only about participation for participation’s sake , but to create something new . Moreover , the framework allows for blurring between categories ; this instance of creativity ‘set to song’ could also be considered under the following modality of sound . 3 . 6 Sounds Participants who did not engage verbally still made use of sounds . One morning , resident Ben sat quietly , watching the mass that was on television – when the responsorial psalm was sung , he sang along . Suddenly , there was a commotion . Another day - resident , Claire , had arrived into the unit , and was shrugging off the arm of her son - in - law . ‘No , ’ she shouted . ‘I’m not staying here ! ’ Nurse Billie approached her , and tried to soothe her . Eventually , she persuaded her to take off her coat , and Claire stalked into the parlour , where she sat down next to me and folded herself up , clearly unhappy . We said hello and she retreated back into herself . I passed some remarks for the duration of the mass , but she clearly didn’t want to engage in conversation , so I stopped . Once or twice , she hummed along with Ben who still sang some of the hymns under his breath . This humming and subtle participation in the mass’ activities seemed to soothe her - later on in the day , after tea and cake and some hours to acclimatise , Claire thoroughly enjoyed a music session in the unit . A country music DVD played on the TV . Claire would 66 Modalities of Participation : PDC 2022 Vol . 2 , August 19 – September 01 , 2022 , Newcastle upon Tyne , United Kingdom Figure 3 : Two residents in the care home prepare for a music session with tambourines frequently cackle , slide over in her seat towards me and grab my arm , shake it and smile . Her song was punctuated by ‘woohoos’ and ‘yoohoos’ which garnered curious looks from other residents . She would look to others as she shouted , ‘Come on ! ’ and gestured to them to begin cheering as well . She was met with bemusement , but residents would begin singing once they’d finished laughing . Design insights : Once more these interactions with Ben and Claire indicated to me the soothing power of familiar music ( as well as the importance of religion for residents ) . However , interacting with Claire went beyond this to indicate to me that , although not directly verbal , her ‘yoohoos’ were designed to reach others ; designed to spur others on to participation , to make light of the singing and the situation she found herself in and designed to respond not only to the music , but to those around her . It helped me , as a design researcher , to look beyond direct verbalisations of participation to seek out instances where residents not only participated them - selves , but indicated to others that they’d like them to join in – that there was something going on , and they should get in on it too . I began to put together , in my mind , an informal taxonomy of what such verbalisations might mean for each resident in the setting , and wondered how such an understanding might be reached in more conventional PD settings . It could be that early ethnographic field - work is necessary to reach this understanding before proceeding with design activities ; or else we might reimagine design activities instead as taking place within dialogical moments of understanding between self and other [ 27 ] 4 DISCUSSION The following subsections unpack some of the tensions and oppor - tunities that follow from applying the modalities of participation approach to this , and other , settings . Overall , it seems that PD ben - efits if participants have a key activity that is integrative , like play or dance or another interest / hobby , which can be harnessed for participation and design . Participation in PD is ‘felt’ if the fun - damental modalities are engaged in ways that lead to integrative activities like play and creativity , which are engaging and lead to new outcomes . It is possible that PD sessions organised around these fundamental modalities , bringing them together in integrative activities , may lead to more participative outcomes . The integrative modalities reflect how the foundational modalities come together toward a larger purpose . For instance , for children this seemed to be about play and creativity . For people with dementia , it might be about keeping a continuous sense of self , supporting interaction , in addition to fun and creativity . 4 . 1 Taxonomising expression and participation As Wilson et al . [ 34 ] highlight , the act of attempting to taxonomise the vast human spectrum of expression to several simple modalities is inherently reductive . As argued by Light [ 23 ] and many post - colonial researchers , we cannot presume to adequately interpret the experience of others . However , here we feel it is valuable as a first step towards attuning the participatory researcher’s atten - tion beyond the verbal . Moreover , we do not intend to conflate ‘expression’ and ‘participation’ but recognise that there are extant critical design theories which suggest that they are at least linked , or that expression by participants is constitutive of participation in many design projects [ 26 ] . By continuing this conversation , by repeating these messages , by describing other modalities to search for , recognise , celebrate and support , we hope to make these visible to the participatory design community . 4 . 2 Alignment of Contexts In this paper , we have connected autism and dementia , however , we do not equate the two . Their bio - psychological origins are dif - ferent and not very well understood [ 3 , 11 ] . They are not only two different conditions , but each is a spectrum on its own – dementia is simply an umbrella term for a variety of symptoms ; autism , in its most current conceptualisation , exists across a broad spectrum of neurodiversity [ 3 , 11 ] . However , upon bringing these two contexts together , we saw something similar : a condition wherein people are often best understood 1 ) over time and 2 ) through not just what they say , but how they position themselves in , and interact with , the world . In this way , we do not see the Modalities of Self - Expression framework as a substitute for an initial ethnography ; instead , it offers the modalities as sensitising concepts – points of departure from which to study data and experience [ 5 ] . In this case the frame - work can be seen as helpful for reinterpreting a body of work from the perspective of understanding and supporting participants’ self - expression . It could also be used as a set of sensitizing concepts to guide iteration and reflection on emerging ( new ) data and experi - ence , but in this case , it was used to reconsider an existing body of work . As intimated in section 3 . 6 , it could be that – in some cases - initial design ethnographies [ 13 ] are necessary to build a working 67 PDC 2022 Vol . 2 , August 19 – September 01 , 2022 , Newcastle upon Tyne , United Kingdom Cara Wilson and Kellie Morrissey understanding of a context and its people . Above , the second author wrote about how , over time , she learned to interpret particular resi - dents’ non - verbal sounds as indicating meaning ; in Wilson et al’s 2019 paper [ 36 ] , the first author writes that ‘knowledge of the child can shape understanding in the moment as we observe and interact with the child in their typical context . . . this level of detail [ . . . ] is difficult to convey through case notes or reports , as they may have many contextually specific sensory preferences , which are best observed and understood 1 ) over time and 2 ) in person’ , as above . If we are to consider PD as an emancipatory force [ 2 ] in engaging marginalised participants [ 31 ] , issues of context , temporality , and ‘getting to know you’ must be reckoned with . 4 . 3 Valuing the ‘Feltness’ of Participation Linking with concepts of tacit knowledge [ 10 ] , soma design [ 17 , 32 ] and embodied interaction [ 12 , 25 ] , we highlight that participation can and does occur beyond the verbal . It occurs across many dimen - sions which current PD practices do not typically recognise , and can be appreciated when researchers begin to look for indications of participation using their other senses and feelings such as vision , touch etc . Importantly , where participation is not necessarily visible or demonstrable , we argue that a ‘feltness’ of participation is a just and worthy dimension of participation . A participant’s own modal - ity of participation may not fit neatly into any one or a combination of those described above , but the participant , the researcher and / or the people who know the participant best may feel that they have participated , in their own specific , heterogenous way . Often , we not only see something ( e . g . , a change in body posture ) but we feel something ( e . g . , a change in engagement or attention ) . To be able to ‘feel’ participation , we need to take the time to build relationships with PD collaborators who communicate differently , enabling us to note small changes in interactions which indicate expression or participation ( described as ‘micro - interactions’ [ 36 ] ) . Design con - clusions drawn from such feelings can never be absolute - they are dripping with subjectivity . However , from a PD perspective , what matters is that we recognise this ‘feltness’ of participation as equally important as a verbal contribution in design . The idea that people have only participated if they have done so in ways which we , the researchers , can recognise , describe , analyse , quantify and report is reductionist at best and harmful at worst . We suggest a readjusting of what we value in PD as ‘demonstrated’ participation and its associated reportings , in line with Ann Light’s [ 23 ] discussions on the writing of PD . This is a sticking point when working with participants who don’t communicate verbally - if we don’t have ‘valid data’ ( i . e . , quotable text ) , our papers can be rejected . Therefore , in PD we have a tendency to choose people who are verbal and can provide us with that data , feeding into the idea that those who are not verbal are ‘too hard to work with’ ( i . e . , not quotable ) . If we value PDC’s ‘Senti - Pensar’ mentality , then we value otherness in ways of knowing . The ‘feltness’ of participation should be valued , even if it poses issue for the scientific method and current conceptualisations of empirical evidence - these should be boldly nudged and questioned in the name of progressing design research . 4 . 4 Participating Emotively and Caring for Oneself In order to understand a person’s modalities of participation , the researcher , often , must make themselves malleable , flexible and mouldable to the participant - led process . In order to ‘feel’ partic - ipation of others , we first need to feel out our own participation . As we saw in the earlier vignettes , the second author had to be flexible with her identity and her own understanding of her exist - ing relationship with Fionnuala , in order to support Fionnuala’s comfort and her continued participation . This can be true across all of the modalities described , where researcher identity needs to be completely mutable - an empty vessel , a blank canvas , but one which also provides an unwavering sense of safety and security to participants . This balance can be hard to strike , and requires energy , time , and conviction . Spiel et al . [ 31 ] implore us to explore these as instances of ‘micro - ethics’ , where the researcher must re - fer to “multiple moral frames of reference” in order to interact in ethically - sound ways with their participants . We connect with Balaam et al . ’s work , who shine a light on the emotion work we often do as researchers of ‘sensitive’ set - tings [ 1 ] . Their work calls for frank discussions on the ways in which researchers employ their emotions as tools in the design process , particularly in highly emotive contexts . Certainly , these ideas strongly align with PD ideals - devolving power to the partic - ipant and the researcher opening up to be taught and led . We may not always understand what we are being led to , but we stress the importance of exploring in this way to reach participatory spaces . 5 CONCLUSION By applying the Modalities of Self - Expression framework to a new context , we can see that such modalities apply beyond autism and childhood . This serves to highlight the potential for frameworks such as these to support PD work which aims to extend participation beyond the verbal . Responding to our opening question on what par - ticipation might look like beyond the verbal , our re - reading of our ethnography suggests that it might look like touch ( hand - holding ) ; bodily movement ( wandering , positioning the body ) ; words ( even if infrequent or pertaining to a ‘false’ reality ) ; play ( chaining actions together with a partner ) ; creativity in - situ ( singing , painting , im - provising ; sounds ( meant to spur others or invite participation ) . We suggest that this framework is transferable and can help understand insights gathered from other projects and contexts . Responding to PDC 2022’s Senti - Pensar theme , we argue that a concerted focus on non - verbal participation may be a way to progress toward more socially just forms of PD . ACKNOWLEDGMENTS We would like to thank our participants , as well as colleagues Margot Brereton , Laurianne Sitbon , Bernd Ploderer and John Vines for their feedback on this paper . REFERENCES [ 1 ] Madeline Balaam , Rob Comber , Rachel E . Clarke , Charles Windlin , Anna Ståhl , Kristina Höök , and Geraldine Fitzpatrick . 2019 . Emotion Work in Experience - Centered Design . In Proceedings of the 2019 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems ( CHI ’19 ) . Association for Computing Machinery , New York , NY , USA , Paper 602 , 1 – 12 . DOI : https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3290605 . 3300832 68 Modalities of Participation : PDC 2022 Vol . 2 , August 19 – September 01 , 2022 , Newcastle upon Tyne , United Kingdom [ 2 ] ShaowenBardzell . " Utopiasofparticipation : design , criticality , andemancipation . " In Proceedings of the 13th Participatory Design Conference : Short Papers , Indus - try Cases , Workshop Descriptions , Doctoral Consortium papers , and Keynote abstracts - Volume 2 , pp . 189 - 190 . 2014 . [ 3 ] Vivian L . Begali " Neuropsychology and the dementia spectrum : Differential diagnosis , clinical management , and forensic utility . " NeuroRehabilitation 46 , no . 2 ( 2020 ) : 181 - 194 . [ 4 ] Filip Bircanin , Margot Brereton , Laurianne Sitbon , Bernd Ploderer , Andrew Aza - abanye Bayor , and Stewart Koplick . 2021 . Including Adults with Severe Intel - lectual Disabilities in Co - Design through Active Support . In Proceedings of the 2021 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems ( CHI ’21 ) . Asso - ciation for Computing Machinery , New York , NY , USA , Article 486 , 1 – 12 . DOI : https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3411764 . 3445057 [ 5 ] Glenn Bowen . 2006 . Grounded theory and sensitizing concepts . International journal of qualitative methods 5 , no . 3 , 12 - 23 [ 6 ] Orlando Fals Borda . 2003 . Ante la crisis del país : Ideas acción para el cambio ( 1st . Ed . ) . Panamericana , Bogotá , Colombia . [ 7 ] Rita Maldonado Branco , Joana Quental , and Óscar Ribeiro . " Playing with person - alisation and openness in a codesign project involving people with dementia . " Proceedings of the 14th Participatory Design Conference : Full papers - Volume 1 . 2016 . [ 8 ] Tone Bratteteig , Keld Bødker , Yvonne Dittrich , Preben Holst Mogensen , and Jesper Simonsen . " Methods : Organising principles and general guidelines for participatorydesignprojects . " In Routledgeinternationalhandbookofparticipatory design , pp . 137 - 164 . Routledge , 2012 . [ 9 ] Claire Craig and John Killick . Creativity and communication in persons with dementia : A practical guide . Jessica Kingsley Publishers , 2011 . [ 10 ] Christopher Crouch and Lane Pearce 2012 . Doing research in design . English . , London : Berg p . 37 / 38 [ 11 ] Jac den Houting . 2019 . Why Everything You Know About Autism is Wrong . TED : Ideas Worth Sharing , 1 . [ 12 ] Paul Dourish . 2004 . Where the action is : the foundations of embodied interaction . MIT press . [ 13 ] Paul Dourish . " Reading and interpreting ethnography . " In Ways of Knowing in HCI , pp . 1 - 23 . Springer , New York , NY , 2014 . [ 14 ] Arturo Escobar . 2018 . Sentipensar con la tierra : Nuevas lecturas sobre desarrollo , territorio y diferencia . Ediciones UNAULA , Medellín , Colombia [ 15 ] Elisa Giaccardi and Elvin Karana . 2015 . Foundations of Materials Experience : An Approach for HCI . In Proceedings of the 33rd Annual ACM Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems ( CHI ’15 ) , 2447—2456 [ 16 ] Niels Hendriks et al . 2014 . " Challenges in doing participatory design with people with dementia . " Proceedings of the 13th Participatory Design Conference : Short Papers , Industry Cases , Workshop Descriptions , Doctoral Consortium papers , and Keynote abstracts - Volume 2 . [ 17 ] Kristina Hook . 2018 . Designing with the body : Somaesthetic interaction design . MIT Press [ 18 ] Maria Cristina Ibarra . 2020 . " Aproximaciones a un diseño participativo sentipen - sante : correspondencias con un colectivo de residentes en rio de janeiro . " In Proceedings of the 16th Biennial Participatory Design Conference , vol . 3 . 2020 . [ 19 ] Seray Ibrahim and Asimina Vasalou . 2021 . Voice and representation : engaging with the voices of children who have disabilities . interactions 28 , 3 ( May - June 2021 ) , 38 – 41 . DOI : https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3457881 . [ 20 ] Pia Kontos and Gary Naglie . 2007 . Bridging theory and practice : Imagination , the body , and person - centred dementia care . Dementia 6 , no . 4 : 549 - 569 . [ 21 ] Amanda Lazar , Raymundo Cornejo , Caroline Edasis , and Anne Marie Piper . 2016 . Designing for the Third Hand : Empowering Older Adults with Cognitive Impair - ment through Creating and Sharing . In Proceedings of the 2016 ACM Conference on Designing Interactive Systems ( DIS ’16 ) . Association for Computing Machin - ery , NewYork , NY , USA , 1047 – 1058 . DOI : https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2901790 . 2901854 [ 22 ] Amanda Lazar , Jessica L . Feuston , Caroline Edasis , and Anne Marie Piper . 2018 . Making As Expression : Informing Design with People with Complex Communi - cation Needs Through Art Therapy . In Proceedings of the 2018 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems ( CHI ’18 ) . Artcile 351 , 16 pages [ 23 ] Ann Light . 2018 . Writing PD : accounting for socially - engaged research . In Pro - ceedings of the 15th Participatory Design Conference : Short Papers , Situated Actions , Workshops and Tutorial - Volume 2 ( PDC ’18 ) Association for Comput - ing Machinery , New York , NY , USA , Article 1 , 1 – 5 . DOI : https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3210604 . 3210615 [ 24 ] Julia Makhaeva , Christopher Frauenberger , and Katharina Spiel . 2016 . Creating Creative Spaces for Co - [ 49 ] designing with Autistic Children : The Concept of a “Handlungsspielraum” . In Proceedings of the 14 th Participatory Design Conference : Full Papers – Volume 1 ( PDC ‘16 ) , 51 – 60 . [ 25 ] Laura Malinverni , Edith Ackermann , and Narcis Pares . 2016 . Experience as an Object to Think with : from Sensing - in - action to Making - Sense of action in Full - Body Interaction Learning Environments . In Proceedings of the TEI ’16 : Tenth International Conference on Tangible , Embedded , and Embodied Interaction ( TEI ’16 ) , 332 – 339 . [ 26 ] John McCarthy and Peter Wright . 2015 . Taking [ A ] part . The Politics and Aes - thetics of Participation in Experience - Centered Design . MIT Press . [ 27 ] Kellie Morrissey , John McCarthy , and Nadia Pantidi . " The value of experience - centred design approaches in dementia research contexts . " In Proceedings of the 2017CHIConferenceonHumanFactorsinComputingSystems , pp . 1326 - 1338 . 2017 . [ 28 ] Kellie Morrissey , Gavin Wood , David Green , Nadia Pantidi , and John McCarthy . 2016 . ’I’marambler , I’magambler , I’malongwayfromhome’ : ThePlaceofProps , Music , and Design in Dementia Care . In Proceedings of the 2016 ACM Conference on Designing Interactive Systems ( DIS ’16 ) . Association for Computing Machinery , New York , NY , USA , 1008 – 1020 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2901790 . 2901798 [ 29 ] Linda Örulv and Lars - Christer Hydén . " Confabulation : Sense - making , self - making and world - making in dementia . " Discourse Studies 8 , no . 5 ( 2006 ) : 647 - 673 . [ 30 ] Pablo Calderon Salazar and Liesbeth Huybrechts . 2020 . PD otherwise will be pluriversal ( or it won’t be ) . In Proceedings of the 16th Participatory Design Con - ference 2020 - Participation ( s ) Otherwise - Volume 1 ( PDC ’20 ) . Association for Computing Machinery , New York , NY , USA , 107 – 115 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3385010 . 3385027 [ 31 ] Katta Spiel , Emeline Brulé , Christopher Frauenberger , Gilles Bailly , and Geral - dine Fitzpatrick . 2018 . Micro - ethics for participatory design with marginalised children . In Proceedings of the 15th Participatory Design Conference : Short Pa - pers , Situated Actions , Workshops and Tutorial - Volume 2 ( PDC ’18 ) Association for Computing Machinery , New York , NY , USA , Article 17 , 1 – 12 . DOI : https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3210586 . 3210603 . [ 32 ] Anna Ståhl , Vasiliki Tsaknaki , and Madeline Balaam . 2021 . Validity and Rigour in Soma Design - Sketching with the Soma . ACM Trans . Comput . - Hum . Interact . 28 , 6 , Article 38 ( December 2021 ) , 36 pages . DOI : https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3470132 . [ 33 ] Julia Twigg . 2006 . The body in health and social care . Macmillan International Higher Education . [ 34 ] Cara Wilson , Laurianne Sitbon , Bernd Ploderer , Jeremy Opie , and Margot Br - ereton . 2020 . Self - Expression by Design : Co - Designing the ExpressiBall with Minimally - Verbal Children on the Autism Spectrum . Proceedings of the 2020 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems Association for Comput - ing Machinery , New York , NY , USA , 1 – 13 . DOI : https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3313831 . 3376171 [ 35 ] Cara Wilson , Roisin McNaney , Abi Roper , Tara Capel , Laura Scheepmaker , Margot Brereton , Stephanie Wilson , David Philip Green , and Jayne Wallace . 2020 . Rethinking Notions of ’Giving Voice’ in Design . In Extended Abstracts of the 2020 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems ( CHI EA ’20 ) . Association for Computing Machinery , New York , NY , USA , 1 – 8 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3334480 . 3375171 [ 36 ] Cara Wilson , Margot Brereton , Bernd Ploderer , and Laurianne Sitbon . 2019 . Co - Design Beyond Words : ’Moments of Interaction’ with Minimally - Verbal Children on the Autism Spectrum . In Proceedings of the 2019 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems ( CHI ’19 ) . Association for Computing Machinery , New York , NY , USA , Paper 21 , 1 – 15 . DOI : https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3290605 . 3300251 69