LETTERS TO THE EDITOR 106 Harvard Business Review | February 2009 | hbr . org connect with an audience , and thinking of a presentation as a conversation can also help . But there are diff erent kinds of speeches and diff erent levels of for - mality . If a newly elected president be - gan his inaugural address with “Good morning , in our meeting today , we’ll be covering…” he or she would raise a lot of eyebrows , and not in a good way . In the end , I ﬁ nd that it takes more than merely changing the opening or the pronouns in a speech to truly con - nect with an audience . It takes deep thought about how to keep the content relevant for the audience throughout and a conscious attempt to bridge the gap emotionally between audience and speaker . The best way to accomplish that is by being open , connected , and pas - sionate – and by listening profoundly . Should You Invest in the Long Tail ? In her article “Should You Invest in the Long Tail ? ” ( July – August 2008 ) , Anita Elberse challenges Chris Anderson’s the - sis that the emergence of digital distribu - tion systems for cultural goods has ren - dered the blockbuster strategy obsolete . To accurately assess the validity of their positions , however , one must under - stand the way that culture - consuming audiences are segmented . Anderson seems to imply that mem - bers of most culture - consuming audi - ences hold very delimited and select tastes , and therefore producers should reconsider their commitment to the blockbuster strategy and begin devel - oping cultural goods with niche appeal . Elberse , drawing on William McPhee’s work , maintains that culture - consuming audiences include heavy consumers , with an appetite for all kinds of cultural goods ( including niche products ) , and light consumers , who depend more on social cues for their cultural choices and are thus disproportionately attracted to popular products – such as blockbust - ers . In fact , however , Richard Peterson’s model may best approximate the way that culture - consuming audiences are segmented : into either omnivores , who consume a wide variety of cultural off er - ings ( from both popular and niche cul - tures ) , or univores , who consume a less diverse array of cultural goods ( usually only popular ) . Using Peterson’s terminology , there - fore , the long - tail model characterizes the culture - consuming audience as a mosaic of niche - culture univores , who would prefer niche culture to popu - lar culture if they had the choice . This , however , does not accord with what we know . The most discerning and most avid culture - consuming audiences ( usu - ally younger and more educated ) are not niche snobs but are , instead , omnivores . They may have strong , expert tastes for niche cultures , but that does not mean they disdain mass - appeal cultural goods . Less educated ( and older ) audiences tend to be popular - culture univores , who will not usually venture into intim - idating niche - culture territory ( mostly because niche cultures presuppose a certain level of cultural competence in order to be understood and enjoyed ) . In a world where the most active , elite portion of the audience does not shun popular products , and the bulk of the public conﬁ nes itself to easy - to - decode mass culture , the blockbuster strategy will continue to be dominant . Omar Lizardo Assistant Professor Department of Sociology University of Notre Dame Notre Dame , Indiana Where Oil - Rich Nations Are Placing Their Bets In their article “Where Oil - Rich Nations Are Placing Their Bets” ( September 2008 ) , Rawi Abdelal , Ayesha Khan , and Tarun Khanna outline the Gulf region’s changing economic landscape and its impact on world economics as a whole . One important point deserves attention : how businesses in Gulf Cooperation Council ( GCC ) countries can use geo - graphic inﬂ uence over their raw mate - rial – oil – to strategic advantage . For example , GE Plastics apparently faced margin pressures because of in - creasingly volatile oil - price ﬂ uctuations . Saudi Basic Industries Corporation ( SABIC ) , however , probably had greater insight into those ﬂ uctuations because the Saudi Arabian government holds 70 % of SABIC shares and private investors in Saudi Arabia and other GCC countries hold the remaining 30 % . SABIC seems to have used that advantage to control costs more effi ciently , thus enabling im - proved production planning and better pricing of the company’s downstream petrochemical products . What’s more , when SABIC acquired GE Plastics , it inherited that company’s global manu - facturing infrastructure , distribution network , established customer base , and human capital . By leveraging its geographic inﬂ uence , therefore , SABIC appears to have ensured strategic cost control while simultaneously gaining an instant global footprint – something that would have taken years for the com - pany to build organically . Lokin Chemburkar Solutions Architect Patni Life Sciences Patni Computer Systems Mumbai Abdelal , Khan , and Khanna respond : Lokin Chemburkar’s observation regard - ing the SABIC - GE Plastics deal is in line with developments occurring through - out emerging markets . That is , compa - nies are trying to capitalize on some homegrown advantage particular to their country of origin – in this case the informational upper hand that SABIC gained through Saudi Arabia’s position in the world oil markets – to build more extensive global footprints . The form of advantage varies across locations , only sometimes originating from state in - volvement and support . It behooves en - trepreneurs and ﬁ nanciers everywhere to pay attention to such newer entrants on the world stage , as both competitors and collaborators . 1827 Feb09 Letters Layout . indd 106 1827 Feb09 Letters Layout . indd 106 1 / 5 / 09 4 : 26 : 35 PM 1 / 5 / 09 4 : 26 : 35 PM