ª The Rockefeller University Press , 0021 - 9525 / 2000 / 02 / 519 / 12 $ 5 . 00 The Journal of Cell Biology , Volume 148 , Number 3 , February 7 , 2000 519 – 530 http : / / www . jcb . org 519 Actin - dependent Propulsion of Endosomes and Lysosomes by Recruitment of N - WASP J Jack Taunton , * Brian A . Rowning , ‡ Margaret L . Coughlin , * Michael Wu , § Randall T . Moon , i Timothy J . Mitchison , * and Carolyn A . Larabell ‡ * Department of Cell Biology , Harvard Medical School , Boston , Massachusetts 02115 ; ‡ Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory , Berkeley , California 94720 ; § Department of Molecular and Cell Biology , University of California Berkeley , Berkeley , California 94720 ; and i Howard Hughes Medical Institute , Department of Pharmacology , University of Washington School of Medicine , Seattle , Washington 98195 Abstract . We examined the spatial and temporal con - trol of actin assembly in living Xenopus eggs . Within minutes of egg activation , dynamic actin - rich comet tails appeared on a subset of cytoplasmic vesicles that were enriched in protein kinase C ( PKC ) , causing the vesicles to move through the cytoplasm . Actin comet tail formation in vivo was stimulated by the PKC acti - vator phorbol myristate acetate ( PMA ) , and this pro - cess could be reconstituted in a cell - free system . We used this system to deﬁne the characteristics that distin - guish vesicles associated with actin comet tails from other vesicles in the extract . We found that the protein , N - WASP , was recruited to the surface of every vesicle associated with an actin comet tail , suggesting that vesi - cle movement results from actin assembly nucleated by the Arp2 / 3 complex , the immediate downstream target of N - WASP . The motile vesicles accumulated the dye acridine orange , a marker for endosomes and lyso - somes . Furthermore , vesicles associated with actin comet tails had the morphological features of multive - sicular endosomes as revealed by electron microscopy . Endosomes and lysosomes from mammalian cells pref - erentially nucleated actin assembly and moved in the Xenopus egg extract system . These results deﬁne endo - somes and lysosomes as recruitment sites for the actin nucleation machinery and demonstrate that actin as - sembly contributes to organelle movement . Conversely , by nucleating actin assembly , intracellular membranes may contribute to the dynamic organization of the actin cytoskeleton . Key words : actin assembly • fertilization • Wiskott - Aldrich • phorbol ester • Rho - GDI Introduction The spatial arrangement of cytoplasmic organelles is coor - dinated by dynamic interactions with microtubules and ac - tin filaments . There is substantial biochemical , cytological , and genetic evidence to support a mechanism in which molecular motors couple the energy of ATP hydrolysis to the directed transport of membrane vesicles along tracks formed by cytoskeletal polymers ( Goodson et al . , 1997 ) . However , for most membrane compartments , the precise mechanisms specifying their positions within the cell and their interactions with microtubules and actin have not been delineated . In many regions of the cytoplasm , micro - tubules and actin filaments are not stable tracks but are in - stead dynamic polymers undergoing continual assembly and disassembly . The implications of cytoskeletal polymer dynamics for organelle movement have been little empha - sized . The pathogenic bacterium , Listeria monocytogenes , uses a distinct mechanism to generate the force required for movement that apparently does not involve molecular mo - tors ( Loisel et al . , 1999 ) . Listeria propels itself through the cytoplasm of a mammalian host cell by nucleating actin fil - ament assembly on the surface of its outer membrane . Newly assembled actin filaments are cross - linked to form a dense comet tail structure that undergoes rapid disas - sembly by cytoplasmic actin depolymerizing factors . Shi - gella , Rickettsia , and vaccinia virus have been shown to ex - ploit similar motility mechanisms ( Higley and Way , 1997 ) . Have these unrelated pathogens evolved a unique mecha - nism for intracellular movement , or have they appropri - J The online version of this article contains supplemental material . Address correspondence to Jack Taunton , Harvard Medical School , Department of Cell Biology , 240 Longwood Ave . , Boston , MA 02115 . Tel . : ( 617 ) 432 - 3804 . Fax : ( 617 ) 432 - 3702 . E - mail : jack _ taunton @ hms . harvard . edu The Journal of Cell Biology , Volume 148 , 2000 520 ated a mechanism normally employed by their host for the movement of its organelles ? Although described as a model system for actin dynam - ics at the plasma membrane of a migrating cell , Listeria more closely resembles a cellular organelle in terms of its size and shape . During the course of studies on Listeria movement in crude Xenopus egg extracts , we and others occasionally observed actin - rich comet tails in the absence of added Listeria ( T . J . Mitchison , unpublished observa - tions ; Marchand et al . , 1995 ) . Two recent studies found that this phenomenon could be potentiated by GTP g S and orthovanadate , and through the use of dominant mutant constructs , demonstrated a requirement for the Rho fam - ily GTPase Cdc42 ( Ma et al . , 1998 ; Moreau and Way , 1998 ) . These studies did not address whether actin - depen - dent vesicle movement occurs in vivo , nor did they charac - terize the motile vesicles . We were thus inspired to address three questions . First , do vesicles move by a Listeria - like mechanism in living Xenopus eggs ? Second , how do vesi - cles signal the recruitment and activation of the cytosolic actin nucleation machinery ? Third , what features distin - guish the vesicles that nucleate actin assembly from those that do not ? We chose to examine Xenopus eggs immediately after fertilization because we suspected that second messengers produced at fertilization might be responsible for signaling to cytosolic actin nucleation factors . Sperm entry causes rapid elevation of intracellular calcium and diacylglycerol , the endogenous activators of conventional protein kinase C ( PKC ) 1 isoforms , and these changes temporally coincide with the association of PKC with the membrane fraction ( Stith et al . , 1997 ) . Moreover , the potent diacylglycerol mimetic , PMA , recapitulates the major cortical events of fertilization , including granule exocytosis , resumption of membrane trafficking , contraction of the cortex , and cleavage furrow formation ( Bement and Capco , 1989 , 1991 ) . We therefore investigated the dynamic behavior of Xenopus PKC a ( a conventional PKC isoform ) fused to green fluorescent protein ( XPKC a - GFP ) along with rhodamine - labeled actin during egg activation . We discov - ered that XPKC a - GFP localized to cytoplasmic vesicles . A subset of these vesicles nucleated actin assembly and moved in a manner reminiscent of Listeria . PMA power - fully stimulated actin assembly - dependent vesicle move - ment in vivo and in a cell - free system , and we have used this system to further characterize the motile vesicles . Materials and Methods Live Cell Imaging Xenopus PKC a ( Chen et al . , 1988 ) , was cloned upstream of enhanced GFP ( Heim et al . , 1995 ) , in the Xenopus expression vector CS2 1 . The resulting fusion protein , XPKC a - GFP , is enzymatically active in vitro and in cul - tured cells is recruited to the plasma membrane in response to PMA ( Sheldahl et al . , 1999 ) . Approximately 5 nl of XPKC a - GFP RNA and 20 nl of a stock solution of rhodamine - labeled non - muscle actin ( 10 mg / ml in 2 mM Tris - HCl [ pH 8 . 0 ] , 0 . 2 mM CaCl 2 , 0 . 2 mM ATP , and 0 . 5 mM DTT ; Cytoskeleton ) were injected into manually defolliculated stage VI oo - cytes . After 8 – 10 h , meiotic maturation was triggered by the addition of 1 m g / ml progesterone , and oocytes were incubated overnight in Barth’s me - dium at 16 – 17 8 C . Several hours after germinal vesicle breakdown , oocytes were activated by pricking with a glass micropipet . Oocytes were mounted in viewing dishes for live cell analyses as described previously ( Rowning et al . , 1997 ; Larabell , 1998 ) , using a BioRad MRC 1024 confocal laser scan - ning microscope equipped with a Nikon Diaphot 200 microscope and a Nikon 60 3 PlanApo 1 . 4 NA oil immersion lens . XPKC a - GFP constructs and rhodamine - actin were visualized using fluorescein and rhodamine fil - ters , respectively . Optical sections from the outer 20 m m were collected . For a given time - lapse sequence , multiple images of a single optical sec - tion were collected as rapidly as possible . Images were collected using a 512 3 512 - pixel format at 1 frame per 3 . 5 s for up to 1 h . Data were ana - lyzed using ImageSpace software ( Molecular Dynamics ) on a Silicon Graphics computer . Whole Mount Immunocytochemistry Eggs were collected from adult frogs and fertilized as described previously ( Rowning et al . , 1997 ) . They were fixed overnight in 4 % paraformalde - hyde , 0 . 1 % glutaraldehyde , 100 mM KCl , 3 mM MgCl 2 , 10 mM Hepes , 150 mM sucrose , and 0 . 1 % Triton X - 100 ( pH 7 . 6 ) . Nonspecific binding was blocked by incubation ( 1 – 2 h , with rotation ) in 0 . 1 % Triton X - 100 in Super Block ( Pierce ) . Specimens were then incubated for 1 h with 0 . 16 m M fluorescein - phalloidin in Super Block . Eggs were viewed with a BioRad 1024 confocal laser scanning microscope using a fluorescein filter . Cell - free Reconstitution of Vesicle Movement Crude Xenopus egg extract was prepared as described except that cytocha - lasin D was omitted ( Murray and Kirschner , 1989 ) . Cytosol and a heavy membrane fraction were prepared by centrifugation of the crude extract ( 2 h , 300 , 000 g max ; Beckman SW - 50 rotor ) . The viscous glycogen pellet beneath the membrane layer was discarded . Cytosol was further clarified by spinning for 15 min at 541 , 000 g max ( Beckamn TLA 100 . 3 rotor ) . Crude membranes ( diluted with one volume of 2 M sucrose ) and cytosol were snap frozen in separate aliquots for storage at – 80 8 C unless other - wise indicated . Clarified cytosol contained a small population of vesicles , but motility assays were far more robust ( more comet tails over a longer time period ) when cytosol was supplemented with the heavy membrane fraction . For the standard assay , crude membranes in 1 M sucrose ( 20 - m l aliquot , derived from z 80 m l crude extract ) were washed and resuspended in 14 m l buffer A ( 50 mM NaCl , 5 mM MgCl 2 , and 50 mM tris [ pH 7 . 5 ] ) . To the membrane suspension were added 35 m l cytosol ( derived from z 80 m l crude extract ) , 0 . 3 m l rhodamine - labeled actin ( Kellogg et al . , 1988 ) , 3 m l PMA ( 20 m M stock in 10 % DMSO ) , and 20 m l buffer A at 4 8 C . 20 - m l sam - ples were then warmed to room temperature . After 30 – 40 min , 2 - m l ali - quots were viewed with a Nikon E800 microscope . Images were acquired with a Princeton Instruments cooled CCD camera ( standard rhodamine filter set ) and analyzed with Winview or Metamorph software . Pixels hav - ing an intensity over a threshold value ( set to a value greater than the background fluorescence in regions devoid of comet tails ) were summed over 10 random fields to quantitate relative actin assembly . In the experiment presented in Fig . 5 , rhodamine - actin was replaced by acridine orange ( 20 m g / ml ) and freshly prepared extracts were used . Im - ages were acquired using phase contrast optics and a Texas red filter set , and comet tails were scored for colocalization of red fluorescence ( three experiments , n 5 417 comet tails ) . Immunofluorescence Microscopy Vesicle motility reactions were perfused into 10 - m l chambers composed of a glass microscope slide , double - sided tape , and a poly - lysine coated Aclar coverslip ( Ted Pella , Inc . ) . Some reactions contained 1 m g / ml Clostridium difficile ToxB ( prepared as a GST fusion protein as described ; Hofmann et al . , 1997 ) . After 30 min , reactions were fixed by gently perfusing with 4 % paraformaldehyde in cytoskeleton buffer ( 10 mM MES , pH 6 . 1 , 138 mM KCl , 3 mM MgCl 2 , 2 mM EGTA , and 0 . 32 M sucrose ) for 20 min . Reac - tions containing Texas red transferrin – labeled membranes were fixed with 4 % paraformaldehyde / 0 . 1 % glutaraldehyde . The perfusion chambers were washed with TBS and blocked with 2 % BSA / TBS ( for Sec61 b and Lamp - 1 immunolabeling , all solutions after the fixation step contained 0 . 2 mg / ml saponin ) . Primary antibodies ( 1 - h incubation ) were diluted into 2 % BSA / TBS as follows : affinity - purified rabbit anti – N - WASP , 1 : 1000 ( Ro - 1 Abbreviations used in this paper : BIM - I , bisindolylmaleimide I ; GDI , guanine - nucleotide dissociation inhibitor ; GFP , green fluorescent protein ; PKC , protein kinase C ; PNS , postnuclear supernatant . Taunton et al . Organelle Motility by Actin Assembly 521 hatgi et al . , 1999 ) ; affinity - purified rabbit anti - Sec61 b , 1 : 100 ( Gorlich et al . , 1992 ) ; H4A3 mouse anti – Lamp - 1 hybridoma supernatant , 1 : 5 ( Develop - mental Studies Hybridoma Bank ) . Texas red – labeled secondary antibod - ies ( Jackson Laboratories ) were diluted 1 : 100 ( 1 - h incubation ) , and FITC - phalloidin ( 20 min incubation ; Sigma ) was diluted to 1 m g / ml . Chambers were perfused with mounting media ( 60 % glycerol / TBS / 0 . 5 % p - phe - nylenediamine ) , sealed with VALAP , and viewed with a 60 3 objective on a Nikon E600 epifluorescence microscope mounted with a Princeton In - struments cooled CCD camera . Electron Microscopy Vesicle motility reactions with freshly prepared Xenopus cytosol and membranes ( described above ) were perfused into 10 - m l chambers com - posed of a glass microscope slide , double - sided tape , and a poly - lysine – coated Aclar coverslip ( Ted Pella , Inc . ) . Samples were fixed by perfusing with 50 mM lysine / 3 % glutaraldehyde in 0 . 1 M cacodylate buffer ( pH 7 . 0 ) for 10 min , followed by 3 % glutaraldehyde in cacodylate buffer for 20 min ( Boyles et al . , 1985 ) . Samples were post - fixed with osmium , stained with 2 % uranyl acetate , dehydrated , and embedded with Epon aryldite . Small pieces of embedded sample were excised , mounted , and sectioned ( 55 - nm sections ) . Sections were stained with 2 % uranyl acetate in 50 % methanol , then 0 . 4 % lead citrate , and viewed on a JEOL 1200 EX microscope . For immunogold labeling , perfusion chamber reactions containing membrane - free Xenopus cytosol and HeLa membranes were fixed with 4 % paraformaldehyde for 20 min and immunolabeled exactly as described above for immunofluorescence except that 15 - nm protein A – gold ( J . W . Slot ) was used instead of the secondary antibody ( 1 : 50 dilution ) . After im - munolabeling , the samples were fixed with lysine / glutaraldehyde and pro - cessed for electron microscopy exactly as described above . Preparation and Motility Assay of Mammalian Cell Endosomes HeLa cells were cultured in DME with 10 % fetal calf serum . Cells ( 2 3 15 - cm dishes , z 90 % confluent ) were cultured for 30 min in serum - free media containing 2 mg / ml BSA . Cells were then labeled for 20 min at 4 8 C or 37 8 C with 40 m g / ml Texas red transferrin ( Molecular Probes ) , washed three times with cold PBS , and scraped into PBS . Cells were washed once with lysis buffer ( 0 . 25 M sucrose , 20 mM Hepes , pH 7 . 7 ) and then resus - pended in 2 vol of lysis buffer with protease inhibitors ( 10 m g / ml leupep - tin , pepstatin , and chymostatin and 0 . 2 mM phenylmethanesulfonyl fluo - ride ) . They were lysed by passage through a 27 - gauge needle ( 5 – 7 times ; cell breakage was monitored by phase contrast microscopy ) . Centrifuga - tion for 10 min at 5 , 000 g max provided the postnuclear supernatant ( PNS ) . For immunofluorescence experiments in perfusion chambers , the PNS from an equal number of unlabeled cells was prepared in parallel . For all motility assays with HeLa membranes , the PNS was diluted 60 - fold into membrane - free Xenopus cytosol ( see below ) containing 1 m M PMA . For the time - lapse experiments , 0 . 5 m M Alexa ( 488 ) – labeled actin ( Mo - lecular Probes ) was included . A 2 . 5 - m l aliquot of the cell - free motility re - action was placed on a glass slide under a coverslip and sealed with VALAP . Texas red and fluorescein images were acquired every 10 s using Metamorph software to drive a filter wheel and an automatic shutter mounted on a Nikon E600 upright microscope . Membrane - free Xenopus cytosol was prepared as follows : freshly pre - pared cytosol ( 2 ml ) was diluted with 12 . 5 ml buffer A and 0 . 68 ml ATP - regenerating mix ( 20 mM ATP , 20 mM MgCl 2 , and 150 mM creatine phos - phate ) and centrifuged for 1 h at 450 , 000 g max . The supernatant ( 12 ml ) was concentrated with a Centriprep 10 concentrator ( Millipore ) to a final volume of 2 ml . Online Supplemental Material Video 1 . Actin comet tail formation in an activated Xenopus egg as de - picted in Fig . 1 D . Rhodamine - actin comet tails form at PKC - GFP encir - cled vesicles in the egg periphery during the first 15 – 20 min after activa - tion . The actin comet tails effect vesicle displacement at z 10 m m / min . In vivo time - lapse sequence collected with a confocal microscope at 3 . 5 - s in - tervals . Video 2 . Actin comet tail formation in an egg activated with PMA as depicted in Fig . 2 B . Actin comet tails are more abundant and persist for longer times ( 1 h ) in response to PMA activation ( compare with egg in Video 1 ) . In vivo time - lapse sequence collected with a confocal micro - scope at 3 . 5 - s intervals . Videos available at http : / / www . jcb . org / cgi / content / full / 148 / 3 / 519 / DC1 . Results Protein Kinase C and Actin Dynamics during Xenopus Egg Activation We considered that simultaneous observation of PKC and actin dynamics during Xenopus egg activation might re - veal specialized domains of regulated actin assembly . To this end , we injected Xenopus oocytes with rhodamine - ac - tin and RNA encoding XPKC a - GFP and treated them with progesterone to induce maturation . Examination of the cortical cytoplasm of mature eggs by confocal micros - copy revealed diffuse fluorescence of both actin and XP - KC a - GFP ( Fig . 1 A ) . We activated the eggs by pricking them with a glass micropipet in a calcium - containing buffer , an established model for fertilization . Within 4 min of activation , we observed a dramatic accumulation of XP - KC a - GFP on the surface of previously undetectable vesi - cles ; a subset of these vesicles colocalized with bright puncta of rhodamine actin ( Fig . 1 B ) . Diacylglycerol pro - duction and PKC activation are well - characterized re - sponses to Xenopus egg activation ( Stith et al . , 1997 ) , but localization of PKC to cytoplasmic vesicles has not been observed previously in Xenopus eggs . At 3 – 5 min after activation , the cortex began to con - tract . After the peak of cortical contraction , a subpopula - tion of the XPKC a - GFP labeled vesicles developed dy - namic actin - rich comet tails and were propelled through the cytoplasm ( Figs . 1 , C and D ) . We observed actin comet tails behind moving vesicles in 18 out of 18 time - lapse ex - periments . Moving vesicles persisted within a single focal plane for 5 – 10 min , with some comet tails visible for up to 20 min . Tracking individual comet tails that remained in a single focal plane revealed a mean velocity of 10 . 4 6 1 . 1 m m / min ( n 5 9 ) . We next asked whether actin comet tails form in fertil - ized eggs . Eggs were fixed as soon as possible after fertili - zation ( z 8 min were required to remove the jelly coats ) and at various time points thereafter , then prepared for observation by whole mount immunocytochemistry . Those eggs fixed 8 – 15 min after fertilization displayed ac - tin - rich comet tails throughout the periphery as seen by fluorescein - phalloidin staining ( Fig . 2 A , n 5 37 ) . Unfertil - ized eggs ( n 5 35 ) and eggs fixed between 18 and 40 min after fertilization ( n 5 35 ) were devoid of comet tails ( data not shown ) . Therefore , the appearance of comet tails oc - curs with a similar time course in fertilized and pricked eggs . To test whether diacylglycerol plays a causal role in this process , we treated progesterone - matured eggs with PMA and monitored rhodamine - actin dynamics . PMA induced greater numbers of comet tails relative to fertilized or prick - activated eggs ( Fig . 2 B ) , and they were observed over a much longer time period ( at least 1 h ) , consistent with the greater metabolic stability of PMA relative to di - acylglycerol . PMA thus provided a means of inducing actin comet tails without having to prick or fertilize the eggs . Given the rapid contraction of the cortex that occurs dur - ing fertilization and the likely involvement of actin in many aspects of this transformation , we felt that a cell - free The Journal of Cell Biology , Volume 148 , 2000 522 system based on PMA stimulation would provide a more tractable starting point for mechanistic studies that fo - cused specifically on actin - dependent vesicle propulsion . Cell - free Reconstitution of PMA - Stimulated Actin Assembly and Vesicle Movement We developed a cell - free system in Xenopus egg extracts that reconstitutes PMA - stimulated actin assembly on the surface of endogenous vesicles . Our system is similar to those used in previous studies ( Ma et al . , 1998 ; Moreau and Way , 1998 ) , except that cytosol and a crude mem - brane fraction were separated so that they could be ma - nipulated independently . Membranes were used in the following experiments at their approximate physiological concentrations . Treatment of a mixture of cytosol ( containing 0 . 5 m M rhodamine - actin ) and the crude membrane fraction with 1 m M PMA resulted within 10 min in the assembly of dy - namic actin - rich comet tails on a subset of the vesicles ( Fig . 3 A ) . The 4 a - stereoisomer of PMA , which fails to ac - tivate PKC , had no effect ( data not shown ) . Actin assem - Figure 1 . Actin comet tail formation in an activated Xe - nopus egg . ( A ) Vegetal pole of an egg , 2 min after activat - ing the animal hemisphere by pricking with a glass micropi - pet . This region of the egg , viewed with a scanning laser confocal microscope , has not yet undergone activation - induced modifications . A diffuse distribution of rho - damine - actin and XPKC a - GFP is seen amidst the sec - retory cortical granules ( 1 – 3 - m m - diam circular shad - ows ) just beneath the plasma membrane . ( B ) Same region of the egg , 4 min after activa - tion . The cortical secretory granules have undergone exocytosis and larger vesi - cles enriched in XPKC a - GFP ( 3 – 5 - m m - diam ) are now visible . As the egg reaches maximal contraction , large spherical accumulations of rhodamine - actin form amidst the field of vesicles . ( C ) A similar region of the egg after contraction ( 8 min after acti - vation ) showing numerous rhodamine - actin comet tails in a field of XPKC a - GFP vesicles of varying sizes . This is a tangential optical section , with the far right edge of the image showing microvillar tips on the egg surface and deeper regions of the egg cor - tex revealed on the left . ( D ) Time - lapse sequence ( 3 . 5 - s intervals ) showing the birth of rhodamine - actin comet tails . Actin assembly appears to be initiated by a PKC - enriched vesicle and ulti - mately effects a 10 - m m dis - placement of that vesicle . See Online Supplemental Mate - rial , Video 1 ( http : / / www . jcb . org / cgi / content / full / 148 / 3 / 519 / DC1 ) . Bars : ( A – C ) 10 m m ; ( D ) 5 m m . Taunton et al . Organelle Motility by Actin Assembly 523 bly occurred specifically on the surface of vesicles as ob - served by epifluorescence and phase contrast microscopy ( Fig . 3 A ) , resulting in movement at a rate of 8 . 2 6 2 . 7 m m / min ( n 5 11 ) , similar to the rate observed in vivo . Fig . 3 B shows representative low magnification images from an experiment similar to that shown in Fig . 3 A . Cy - tosol , membranes , and rhodamine - actin were treated with 0 . 5 % DMSO ( control ) or PMA , both alone and in the presence of the PKC active site inhibitor bisindolyl male - imide - I ( BIM - I ; Toullec et al . , 1991 ) . We quantitated the relative actin assembly activity by acquiring digital fluores - cence images of 10 random fields and summing the total number of fluorescent pixels that were brighter than the background ( Fig . 3 C ) . In the absence of PMA , actin comet tails were rarely detected ( z 1 comet tail per 10 fields ) , whereas PMA induced hundreds of comet tails per field ( Fig . 3 B ) . PMA - stimulated comet tail formation was largely suppressed by BIM - I ( Figs . 3 , B and C ) , suggesting further that PKC regulates comet tail formation . The re - semblance to moving Listeria and response to PMA sug - gest that the cell - free system recapitulates the vesicle movement phenomenon observed in vivo . Recruitment of N - WASP to the Surface of Motile Vesicles We suspected that a Rho family GTPase was required to recruit and / or activate a soluble actin nucleator on the sur - face of vesicles . Two well - characterized Rho GTPase in - hibitors , RhoGDI and ToxB , abolished PMA - stimulated actin comet tail formation ( data not shown ) , consistent with previous studies which used GTP g S and orthovana - date to induce actin comets in Xenopus egg extracts ( Ma et al . , 1998 ; Moreau and Way , 1998 ) . We took advantage of the irreversible inhibitory properties of ToxB to iden - tify the relevant Rho GTPase in our system . In work to be published elsewhere , we purified a soluble factor capable of rescuing ToxB - inactivated cytosol . The factor consisted of two polypeptides that were identified as the Rho GTP - ase Cdc42 and its regulatory subunit , RhoGDI . This find - ing confirms and extends previous work in which domi - nant mutant versions of Cdc42 were used to inhibit or stimulate actin assembly in Xenopus egg extracts ( Ma et al . , 1998 ; Moreau and Way , 1998 ) . The mechanism by which Cdc42 stimulates actin assembly has recently been shown to involve a minimum of two additional components : N - WASP , a multidomain protein with which GTP - bound Cdc42 directly interacts , and the Arp2 / 3 complex , whose actin nucleation activity is stimulated by the COOH - termi - nal domain of N - WASP ( Egile et al . , 1999 ; Rohatgi et al . , 1999 ) . To test whether N - WASP is recruited specifically to mo - tile vesicles , we developed a perfusion chamber assay in which the membranes were fixed to the surface of a cover - slip and analyzed by indirect immunofluorescence ( Fig . 4 ; see Fig . 6 for characterization of the membranes by elec - tron microscopy ) . Chambers containing a mixture of cyto - sol , crude membranes , and 1 m M PMA were gently per - fused with 4 % paraformaldehyde and fixed for 20 min . F - actin structures were visualized with FITC - phalloidin . Indirect immunofluorescence with an affinity - purified an - tibody against N - WASP ( Rohatgi et al . , 1999 ) revealed in - tense staining at the membrane - proximal ends of actin comet tails ( 100 % colocalization , n 5 524 ; Fig . 4 ) . As ex - pected from previous studies with Listeria and Shigella , components of the Arp2 / 3 complex localized throughout the actin comet tails ( data not shown ) . We performed two additional experiments to determine the extent to which N - WASP recruitment correlated with actin comet formation . When PMA was added in the pres - Figure 2 . Comet tail forma - tion in vivo induced by fertil - ization and PMA treatment . ( A ) Gallery of confocal im - ages showing actin comet tails in eggs fixed 8 min after fertilization . F - actin was vi - sualized by fluorescein - phal - loidin staining . ( B ) In vivo time - lapse sequence ( 16 - s in - tervals ) showing rhodamine - actin comet tails ( indicated by arrowheads ) 20 min af - ter treatment with 2 m M PMA . See Online Supplemen - tal Material , Video 2 ( http : / / www . jcb . org / cgi / content / full / 148 / 3 / 519 / DC1 ) . Bars , 10 m m . The Journal of Cell Biology , Volume 148 , 2000 524 ence of 75 m M latrunculin A , an actin monomer sequester - ing compound , actin comet tails were not observed . How - ever , intense N - WASP staining of a subset of the vesicles persisted under these conditions ( Fig . 4 ) . Thus , N - WASP recruitment can be experimentally uncoupled from vesicle propulsion . Remarkably , a faint ring of F - actin colocalized with N - WASP under these conditions , suggesting that when N - WASP is recruited to the membrane surface , it effectively competes with latrunculin to stabilize F - actin . N - WASP has been shown to bind to F - actin in solution , particularly in the presence of allosteric activators ( Egile et al . , 1999 ) . Neither N - WASP nor actin was recruited to the membranes in the presence of ToxB ( Fig . 4 ) , consistent with the idea that recruitment and activation of N - WASP is mediated by Cdc42 . Finally , N - WASP recruitment was rarely observed in the absence of PMA stimulation ( 1 – 5 puncta per coverslip ; data not shown ) , and in every case N - WASP staining colocalized with an actin comet tail . Motile Vesicles Have the Characteristics of Endosomes We wished to determine whether the motile vesicles , which appeared to be a small subset of the organelles visi - ble by phase contrast microscopy , could be classified ac - cording to functional and morphological criteria . First , we incubated vesicle motility reactions with acridine orange , a marker for endosomes and lysosomes ( Matteoni and Kreis , 1987 ) , and acquired fluorescence and phase contrast images of the live ( unfixed ) reactions . Of the vesicles asso - ciated with phase dense tails , 80 % exhibited bright red flu - orescence when viewed with a Texas red filter set ( n 5 417 actin comet tails , Fig . 5 ) . Acridine orange labeling was abolished by the vacuolar proton pump inhibitors bafilo - mycin A and concanamycin A ( data not shown ) , suggest - ing that the majority of the motile vesicles are endosomes and / or lysosomes . Using the flow chambers described in Fig . 4 , we devel - oped a method for examining the ultrastructure of motile vesicles by thin - section electron microscopy . Dense comet tail structures were observed , and each was attached to a single , well - defined vesicle ( Fig . 6 ) . Unexpectedly , the majority of the vesicle profiles associated with comet tails ( 76 % , n 5 115 comet tails ) contained smaller vesicles , Figure 3 . Reconstitution of PMA - stimulated actin assembly in vitro . ( A ) Time - lapse sequences showing actin comet tails in Xe - nopus egg extracts . Cytosol was supplemented with a crude mem - brane fraction , rhodamine - actin , and 1 m M PMA . After incubat - ing at room temperature for 20 min , samples were viewed by fluorescence ( left ) or phase contrast ( right ; note higher magnifi - cation ) microscopy . Arrowheads ( left ) indicate a moving comet tail . Arrow ( bottom right ) indicates a phase dense particle at the tip of the comet tail . ( B ) In vitro actin assembly reactions as in ( A ) performed in the presence or absence of the PKC inhibitor , BIM - I ( 40 m M ) . Fluorescence images from a control reaction without PMA are also presented . Low magnification ( 20 3 objec - tive ) images were acquired from ten random fields , two of which are depicted for each condition . ( C ) Quantitation of data pre - sented in B . The total number of pixels with fluorescence intensi - ties above the background were summed over 10 random fields . Data ( mean 6 SD ) from three experiments are presented . Bars : ( A ) 10 m m ; ( B ) 20 m m . Taunton et al . Organelle Motility by Actin Assembly 525 20 – 100 nm in diameter , within their limiting membranes ( Fig . 6 ) . This percentage is likely an underestimate be - cause apparently empty vesicles may have contained in - ternal vesicles in an adjacent section plane . Similar multi - vesicular bodies were identified previously in Xenopus oocytes and were shown to be specialized endosomes in - volved in vitellogenin processing ( Wall and Patel , 1987 ) . Most of the vesicles associated with actin tails had highly irregular , nonspherical shapes , often with protrusions or invaginations ( 69 % , n 5 115 ) . Circular profiles lacking in - ternal vesicles were abundant in the extract but were never observed in association with comet tails . Finally , none of the 329 mitochondria identified had comet tails . These data suggest that , at least in the Xenopus extract system , vesicles having the stereotyped morphology of multivesicular endosomes are the preferential mediators of actin assembly . Endosomes and Lysosomes from Mammalian Cells Preferentially Nucleate Actin Assembly In Vitro The endocytic compartments of Xenopus eggs have not been well characterized . To test whether bona fide endo - somes from other cell types promote actin assembly in our cell - free system , HeLa cells were allowed to internalize Texas red transferrin and a postnuclear supernatant ( PNS ) was prepared . The PNS was diluted 60 - fold into mem - brane - free Xenopus cytosol containing 1 m M PMA and Alexa ( 488 ) - labeled actin . The time - lapse series depicted in Fig . 7 demonstrates that exogenous transferrin - positive endosomes formed actin comet tails and moved in a man - ner indistinguishable from the Xenopus egg vesicles . Thus , endosomes from cultured human cells are competent to undergo actin - dependent propulsion . We noted that approximately half of the actin comet tails observed in the preceding experiment were not asso - ciated with labeled endosomes . We therefore wished to define further the nature of the vesicles that nucleate actin assembly and if possible , those that do not . Because there are few well - characterized molecular markers for Xenopus organelles , we focused on the HeLa membranes . Crude membranes were added to Xenopus cytosol to allow the different vesicle subpopulations to compete for essential signaling and actin nucleation components . Fig . 8 A shows Figure 4 . PMA stimulates the recruitment of N - WASP to vesicles associated with actin comet tails . Cell - free vesicle motility assays con - taining Xenopus cytosol , membranes , and 1 m M PMA were fixed in perfusion chambers and immunola - beled with affinity - purified anti – N - WASP antibodies followed by Texas red sec - ondary antibodies and FITC - phalloidin . N - WASP and F - actin recruitment oc - curred in the presence of 75 m M latrunculin A , but comet tails were not observed . ToxB treatment prevented both N - WASP and F - actin recruitment , although non - specific labeling of fixed membranes could be ob - served with long exposure times . Bar , 5 m m . Figure 5 . Accumulation of acridine orange , a marker for endo - somes and lysosomes , in motile vesicles . Cell - free reactions ( without rhodamine - actin ) were monitored by phase contrast and fluorescence microscopy in the presence of 20 m g / ml acridine orange . A gallery of merged images ( phase contrast and Texas red filter set ) from three experiments is presented . 80 % of the vesicles associated with comet tails strongly accumulated acridine orange ( n 5 417 comet tails ) . Bar , 10 m m . The Journal of Cell Biology , Volume 148 , 2000 526 a vesicle motility reaction that was fixed in a flow chamber and visualized by immunolabeling with antibodies against Sec61 b , an endoplasmic reticulum marker ( Gorlich et al . , 1992 ) , along with FITC - phalloidin . Despite their abun - dance , Sec61 b - positive membranes were never observed in association with actin comet tails ( Fig . 8 , A and E ) . Con - sistent with this observation , ER microsomes purified from canine pancreas failed to form actin comets ( data not shown ) . In a parallel experiment , early and recycling endosomes were labeled by allowing HeLa cells to internalize Texas red transferrin for 20 min . Quantitation of vesicle motility reactions indicated that 42 % of the comet tails ( n 5 456 ) were associated with transferrin - positive vesicles ( Fig . 8 , B and E ) . To address the possibility that plasma membranes are partly responsible for the actin comet tails , cells were labeled at 4 8 C , a temperature at which endocytosis is blocked . Transferrin positive plasma membranes were an abundant constituent of the crude membranes in accord with previous observations ( Sheff et al . , 1999 ) , yet they colocalized with only 1 . 4 % of the comet tails ( n 5 433 , Fig . 8 , C and E ) . Finally , we found that nearly half of the actin comet tails ( 48 % , n 5 678 ) were associated with vesicles that stained intensely with a monoclonal antibody against human Lamp - 1 , a marker for late endosomes and lyso - somes ( Fig . 8 , D and E ) . Internalized transferrin and Lamp - 1 are thought to be largely nonoverlapping markers for the early / recycling and late endocytic pathways , respectively ( Futter et al . , 1996 ) . We conclude that PMA - stimulated actin assembly occurs preferentially on the surface of en - dosomes and lysosomes . We note that in the absence of PMA , low levels of actin comet tails are generated consti - tutively by an as yet unidentified subpopulation of HeLa membranes . Figure 6 . Thin - section electron microscopy analysis of vesicles associated with comet tails . Cell - free reactions were fixed in per - fusion chambers and processed for electron microscopy ( see Ma - terials and Methods ) . A gallery of representative images was as - sembled to highlight the odd shapes , tubular processes , and multivesicular lumens of vesicles associated with tails . Note the clear circular profiles and mitochondria , none of which are asso - ciated with comet tails . Bars , 500 nm . Figure 7 . Actin - dependent pro - pulsion of exogenous endo - somes in Xenopus egg cytosol . HeLa cells were treated with Texas red transferrin ( 40 m g / ml ) for 20 min at 37 8 C , and a postnu - clear supernatant ( PNS ) was prepared . The PNS was diluted 60 - fold with Xenopus egg cytosol containing 0 . 5 m M Alexa ( 488 ) - actin and 1 m M PMA . Alexa ( 488 ) and Texas red epifluorescence images were ac - quired every 10 s . Approxi - mately half of the vesicles associated with actin comet tails contained internalized Texas red transferrin . Bar , 5 m m . Taunton et al . Organelle Motility by Actin Assembly 527 Actin nucleation by HeLa membranes in Xenopus cyto - sol was abolished by ToxB , and we confirmed by immuno - fluorescence analysis that N - WASP was recruited specifi - cally to vesicles associated with actin comet tails ( data not shown ) . Using the crude HeLa membranes as in Fig . 8 , we examined the localization of N - WASP by immunoelectron microscopy ( Fig . 9 ) . Consistent with the results presented in Fig . 4 , we observed N - WASP localization to the surface of every vesicle that was associated with an actin comet tail . Three additional features were revealed by this exper - iment . First , almost every gold particle was intimately as - sociated with the vesicle membrane . Second , in most cases , the gold particles appeared to be distributed asymmetri - cally and were localized to the region of the vesicle con - tacting the actin comet tail . Third , the morphologies of the HeLa vesicles associated with actin comet tails , including crescent shapes and multivesicular lumens , were strikingly reminiscent of the Xenopus vesicles ( Fig . 6 ) . Discussion This work describes a relatively unexplored mode of in - tracellular vesicle movement . Propulsive movement is driven by actin assembly that is spatially restricted to the membrane - cytosol interface . Intracellular vesicles thus ex - ploit a mechanism for movement that until recently was thought to be the exclusive purview of pathogenic micro - Figure 8 . Endosomes and lysosomes preferentially nucleate actin assembly and move in vitro . HeLa postnuclear supernatants were prepared identically from unlabeled cells ( A and D ) and cells that had been treated with Texas red transferrin at 37 8 C ( B ) or 4 8 C ( C ) . Cell - free motility reactions were fixed and processed for epifluorescence detection of organelle markers ( red ) . F - actin ( green , A – D ) was detected with FITC - phalloidin . ( A ) ER mem - branes were immunodetected with affinity - purified anti - Sec61 b antibodies followed by Texas red secondary antibodies . ( B ) Early and recycling endosomes were detected by labeling cells with Texas red transferrin for 20 min at 37 8 C . ( C ) Plasma membranes were detected by labeling cells with Texas red transferrin for 20 min at 4 8 C . ( D ) Lysosomes were immunodetected with anti – Lamp - 1 H4A3 mAb followed by Texas red secondary antibodies . Bar , 5 m m . ( E ) Quantitation of comet tails associated with a la - beled vesicle in the experiments described in A – D . The n value refers to the total number of actin comet tails counted under each condition from 8 – 10 random fields . Figure 9 . Gallery of electron micrographs depicting N - WASP immunogold - labeled HeLa vesicles associated with actin comet tails . Cell - free motility reactions containing unlabeled HeLa membranes were fixed in perfusion chambers , immunolabeled with affinity - purified N - WASP antibodies followed by 15 nm protein A – gold , and processed for electron microscopy . Gold particles are occasionally visible in the comet tails , but the vast majority are associated with the membrane . Note the similarity in vesicle morphology to the Xenopus egg vesicles shown in Fig . 6 . Bar , 200 nm . The Journal of Cell Biology , Volume 148 , 2000 528 organisms . In contrast to the rocketing movement of Liste - ria and Shigella , which is thought to be essential for cell to cell spreading , the reasons behind the sudden appearance of rocketing vesicles after Xenopus egg fertilization are unclear . The phenomenon temporally coincides with a massive increase in membrane flux induced by fertiliza - tion , but whether rocketing behavior plays a role in mem - brane trafficking is not yet known . Calcium - dependent cortical granule exocytosis , which is triggered by fertiliza - tion , is thought to be followed by a wave of membrane re - trieval , and studies in sea urchin eggs have demonstrated that the exocytosis / endocytosis cycle induced by fertiliza - tion is mechanistically related to membrane recycling events in neuroendocrine cells and synaptic junctions ( Conner and Wessel , 1998 ; Whalley et al . , 1995 ) . However , it is unlikely that all of the motile vesicles we observe corre - spond to newly recycled exocytic membranes as the actin comet tails did not colocalize with a fluid phase endocytic tracer introduced just before fertilization ( our unpublished results ) . The motile vesicles may comprise a preexisting endosomal compartment that excludes endocytic vesicles formed as a result of cortical granule exocytosis . The conditions under which rocketing vesicles were ob - served in Xenopus eggs are known to induce diacylglyc - erol synthesis and PKC activation ( Stith et al . , 1997 ) . Al - though we lack definitive proof , several pieces of evidence suggest that PKC , or at least a protein that is similarly acti - vated by diacylglycerol , plays a role in vesicle rocketing . First , in activated eggs actin comet tails were associated with vesicles that were enriched in GFP - XPKC a . Impor - tantly , actin comets were also observed in naturally fertil - ized eggs , indicating that they are not an artifact of prick activation , GFP - XPKC a expression , or rhodamine - actin microinjection . Second , actin comet tails appeared during a time window that correlates with increased diacylglyc - erol production ( Stith et al . , 1997 ) . Third , PMA , a high af - finity ligand for the diacylglycerol activation domain of PKC , stimulated actin assembly - dependent vesicle move - ment in vivo and in vitro . Fourth , the PKC inhibitor BIM - I inhibited vesicle movement in vitro . What are the downstream effects of PMA stimulation that ultimately lead to vesicle propulsion ? We demon - strated that PMA stimulates the recruitment of N - WASP specifically to the surface of motile vesicles , as shown by immunofluorescence and immunogold labeling of cell - free motility reactions . The immunogold experiment reveals an intimate association between N - WASP and the mem - brane . Actin filaments in the comet tail are also associated with the membrane . In agreement with the mechanistic studies of Shigella movement by Egile et al . ( 1999 ) , we hy - pothesize that associations between the actin comet tail and the vesicle membrane are mediated by the NH 2 - termi - nal F - actin binding domain of N - WASP . The fact that latrunculin A inhibited comet tail formation without affecting N - WASP recruitment shows that these two sub - processes can be uncoupled from one another . This mech - anistic feature is reminiscent of Shigella - mediated actin as - sembly wherein the Shigella outer membrane protein , IcsA , forms a high affinity complex with cytosolic N - WASP ( Egile et al . , 1999 ; Suzuki et al . , 1998 ) . Whereas Shigella movement does not require Rho GTPases ( Mounier et al . , 1999 ) , N - WASP recruitment to vesicles was abolished by the Clostridium difficile toxin ToxB , an irreversible in - hibitor of Rho family GTPases . This result provides cir - cumstantial evidence for the involvement of Cdc42 , since it is the only Rho family member that has been shown con - clusively to activate N - WASP ( Miki et al . , 1998 ; Symons et al . , 1996 ) . An essential role for Cdc42 is also indicated by our unpublished result that pure , recombinant Cdc42 / Rho - GDI complex rescues ToxB - mediated inhibition ( manu - script in preparation ) . N - WASP interacts with Cdc42 only when it is bound to GTP ( Miki et al . , 1998 ) . Thus , our data are consistent with a primary role for PMA in promoting the membrane recruitment of GTP - bound Cdc42 , possibly via PKC - mediated phosphorylation of a membrane - asso - ciated nucleotide exchange factor . GTP - bound Cdc42 is then able to recruit and activate N - WASP . In solution , N - WASP is thought to exist in an autoinhibited conforma - tion involving an intramolecular interaction between its Cdc42 interaction domain , and its COOH - terminal do - main ( Miki et al . , 1998 ) . Based on pyrene actin assembly assays with synthetic liposomes , it has been proposed that interactions between membrane phosphoinositides and the N - WASP PH domain , in concert with GTP - bound Cdc42 , mediate allosteric activation of N - WASP ( Rohatgi et al . , 1999 ) . It will be interesting to test this hypothesis with biological membranes and recombinant N - WASP constructs using the functional and morphological assays described in this paper . What is the identity of the moving vesicles ? Our data suggest that the majority of actin comet tails are associated with endosomes and lysosomes . First , motile vesicles from Xenopus eggs accumulate the weakly basic dye acridine orange in a bafilomycin - sensitive manner , indicating that they belong to an acidic subcellular compartment . Second , ultrastructural examination of the motile vesicles revealed highly irregular , multivesicular profiles consistent with an endosomal morphology ( Wall and Patel , 1987 ) . Third , HeLa cell endosomes containing internalized transferrin nucleated actin assembly and moved as efficiently as the Xenopus egg vesicles when added to Xenopus cytosol . Fourth , using crude HeLa cell membranes , we determined that the majority of the actin comet tails were associated with early / recycling endosomes ( transferrin positive ) and late endosomes / lysosomes ( Lamp - 1 positive ) . Finally , mem - brane specificity is evident from our observation that nei - ther mitochondria nor Sec61 positive ER membranes ever assembled actin comet tails . Although endosomes and ly - sosomes accounted for the vast majority of the vesicles as - sociated with actin comet tails in our system , other or - ganelles might be able to nucleate actin assembly . It is possible that the potent activating effects of PMA bias the recruitment of limiting components of the signaling ( e . g . , Cdc42 ) and actin nucleation machinery ( e . g . , N - WASP ) to membranes enriched in PKC - dependent signaling compo - nents , for example . We have not ruled out the possibility that membranes derived from the secretory pathway also nucleate actin assembly . The demonstration that overex - pressed dominant alleles of Cdc42 interfere with aspects of Golgi trafficking in polarized epithelial cells is consistent with this possibility ( Kroschewski et al . , 1999 ) . What function does actin - based vesicle propulsion serve , especially given its apparently random direction ? Pino - somes , which are functionally distinct from endosomes Taunton et al . Organelle Motility by Actin Assembly 529 and lysosomes , have been observed at the tips of dynamic actin comet tails in mast cells and macrophages cultured in hyperosmolar media or after treatment with Ni 2 1 or La 3 1 , respectively ( Heuser and Morisaki , 1992 ; Merrifield et al . , 1999 ) . In a recent report , Merrifield et al . ( 1999 ) pro - posed a model wherein actin assembly on the surface of a nascent pinosome is intimately tied to the pinocytic event which is initiated by a burst of actin assembly at the plasma membrane . As the newly formed endosome pinches off , it is propelled away from the plasma mem - brane by sustained actin assembly on its surface . We pro - pose to extend this model to incorporate extant endo - somes , lysosomes , and possibly other organelles . In this model , the transient accumulation of signaling lipids ( e . g . , diacylglycerol ) on the membrane recruits cytosolic actin nucleation factors as a means of pushing the endosome through the cytoplasm . Actin - based propulsion of endo - somes and lysosomes may be a rare and transient event in most cell types , especially in the more two - dimensional cells whose cytoskeletons are easiest to visualize . The force provided by actin assembly may enhance the effi - ciency of organelle movement , especially in a large three - dimensional cell such as the Xenopus egg . Microtubule tracks , which provide directed transport of endosomes and lysosomes over long distances , may not adequately cover three - dimensional space , despite their dynamicity . Nondi - rected vesicle propulsion , which may be seen as a form of ATP - dependent diffusion , may work in concert with mi - crotubule capture to move large particles through the crowded and bustling cytoplasmic milieu . A role for actin filaments in maintaining the steady - state distribution of endosomes and lysosomes as well as coordi - nating membrane traffic between these compartments has been implicated in several experimental systems . Cytocha - lasin D , which inhibits actin filament assembly , has been found to impair the delivery of cargo from late endosomes to lysosomes and to disrupt the organization of endosomes in certain cell lines ( van Deurs et al . , 1995 ; Barois et al . , 1998 ) . In addition , jasplakinolide , a toxin that stabilizes ac - tin filaments and inhibits filament disassembly , causes the accumulation of internalized fluid phase markers in a late endosomal compartment of polarized epithelial cells ( Shurety et al . , 1998 ) . Involvement of actin dynamics in the steady - state positioning of late endosomes and lyso - somes is also suggested by phenotypic analysis of cells de - ficient in the actin cross - linking protein , filamin ( Liu et al . , 1997 ) . In the mutant cells , late endosomes are dispersed throughout the cytoplasm , whereas in a matched cell line expressing filamin they are clustered around the nucleus . The mechanisms underlying these observations have not been elucidated , but may relate to the ability of intracellu - lar membranes to nucleate actin assembly , as described in this paper . The most obvious function for actin nucleation by endo - somes and lysosomes is in their physical movement , but there may also be functional implications for the actin cy - toskeleton . We do not know how the majority of actin fila - ments in the cell are generated or positioned . The leading edge of a motile cell is a major nucleation site , but proba - bly cannot account for all the filaments in a large cell . We speculate that intracellular membranes , via N - WASP and the Arp2 / 3 complex , may nucleate the assembly of actin filaments which are then organized into networks by myo - sins , bundlers , and cross - linkers . We are especially grateful to Marc Kirschner for providing antibodies against N - WASP . We also thank Tom Rapoport for anti - Sec61 b antibod - ies , Fred Hofmann and Klaus Aktories for the GST - ToxB expression plasmid , Bill Brieher for Alexa ( 488 ) - labeled actin , Zach Perlman for help with data analysis , and Bill Brieher , Mimi Shirasu , Jennifer Tirnauer , and Rebecca Ward for critiquing the manuscript . This work was supported by a Life Sciences Research Foundation fel - lowship to J . T . ( Amgen fellow ) , a National Institutes of Health grant ( GM35126 ) to T . J . Mitchison and a US Department of Defense / Breast Cancer Research Program grant ( no . B696 - 337 ) to C . A . Larabell . Support was also provided by the Office of Health and Environmental Research of the US Department of Energy ( contract no . DE - AC03 - SF00098 ) . R . T . Moon acknowledges support as an Investigator of the Howard Hughes Medical Institute . Submitted : 13 August 1999 Revised : 7 December 1999 Accepted : 20 December 1999 References Barois , N . , F . Forquet , and J . Davoust . 1998 . Actin microfilaments control the MHC class II antigen presentation pathway in B cells . J . Cell Sci . 111 : 1791 – 1800 . Bement , W . M . , and D . G . Capco . 1989 . Activators of protein kinase C trigger cortical granule exocytosis , cortical contraction , and cleavage furrow forma - tion in Xenopus laevis oocytes and eggs . J . Cell Biol . 108 : 885 – 892 . Bement , W . M . , and D . G . Capco . 1991 . Parallel pathways of cell cycle control during Xenopus egg activation . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA . 88 : 5172 – 5176 . Boyles , J . , L . Anderson , and P . Hutcherson . 1985 . A new fixative for the preser - vation of actin filaments : fixation of pure actin filament pellets . J . His - tochem . Cytochem . 33 : 1116 – 1128 . Chen , K . H . , Z . G . Peng , S . Lavu , and H . F . Kung . 1988 . Molecular cloning and sequence analysis of two distinct types of Xenopus laevis protein kinase C . Second Messengers Phosphoproteins . 12 : 251 – 260 . Conner , S . , and G . M . Wessel . 1998 . Rab3 mediates cortical granule exocytosis in the sea urchin egg . Dev . Biol . 203 : 334 – 344 . Egile , C . , T . P . Loisel , V . Laurent , R . Li , D . Pantaloni , P . J . Sansonetti , and M . F . Carlier . 1999 . Activation of the CDC42 effector N - WASP by the Shigella flexneri IcsA protein promotes actin nucleation by Arp2 / 3 complex and bac - terial actin - based motility . J . Cell Biol . 146 : 1319 – 1332 . Futter , C . E . , A . Pearse , L . J . Hewlett , and C . R . Hopkins . 1996 . Multivesicular endosomes containing internalized EGF - EGF receptor complexes mature and then fuse directly with lysosomes . J . Cell Biol . 132 : 1011 – 1023 . Goodson , H . V . , C . Valetti , and T . E . Kreis . 1997 . Motors and membrane traffic . Curr . Opin . Cell Biol . 9 : 18 – 28 . Gorlich , D . , S . Prehn , E . Hartmann , K . U . Kalies , and T . A . Rapoport . 1992 . A mammalian homolog of SEC61p and SECYp is associated with ribosomes and nascent polypeptides during translocation . Cell . 71 : 489 – 503 . Heim , R . , A . B . Cubitt , and R . Y . Tsien . 1995 . Improved green fluorescence . Na - ture . 373 : 663 – 664 . Heuser , J . E . , and J . H . Morisaki . 1992 . Time - lapse video microscopy of endoso - mal “rocketing” in La / Zn treated cells . Mol Biol . Cell Abstr . 3 : 172 . Higley , S . , and M . Way . 1997 . Actin and cell pathogenesis . Curr . Opin . Cell Biol . 9 : 62 – 69 . Hofmann , F . , C . Busch , U . Prepens , I . Just , and K . Aktories . 1997 . Localization of the glucosyltransferase activity of Clostridium difficile toxin B to the N - terminal part of the holotoxin . J . Biol . Chem . 272 : 11074 – 11078 . Kellogg , D . R . , T . J . Mitchison , and B . M . Alberts . 1988 . Behaviour of microtu - bules and actin filaments in living Drosophila embryos . Development . 103 : 675 – 686 . Kroschewski , R . , A . Hall , and I . Mellman . 1999 . Cdc42 controls secretory and endocytic transport to the basolateral plasma membrane of MDCK cells . Nat . Cell Biol . 1 : 8 – 13 . Larabell , C . 1999 . Confocal microscopy of live Xenopus eggs , oocytes , and em - bryos . Methods Mol . Biol . In press . Liu , G . , L . Thomas , R . A . Warren , C . A . Enns , C . C . Cunningham , J . H . Hartwig , and G . Thomas . 1997 . Cytoskeletal protein ABP - 280 directs the intracellular trafficking of furin and modulates proprotein processing in the endocytic pathway . J . Cell Biol . 139 : 1719 – 1733 . Loisel , T . P . , R . Boujemaa , D . Pantaloni , and M . F . Carlier . 1999 . Reconstitution of actin - based motility of Listeria and Shigella using pure proteins . Nature . 401 : 613 – 616 . Ma , L . , L . C . Cantley , P . A . Janmey , and M . W . Kirschner . 1998 . Corequirement of specific phosphoinositides and small GTP - binding protein Cdc42 in in - ducing actin assembly in Xenopus egg extracts . J . Cell Biol . 140 : 1125 – 1136 . Marchand , J . B . , P . Moreau , A . Paoletti , P . Cossart , M . F . Carlier , and D . Panta - The Journal of Cell Biology , Volume 148 , 2000 530 loni . 1995 . Actin - based movement of Listeria monocytogenes : actin assembly results from the local maintenance of uncapped filament barbed ends at the bacterium surface . J . Cell Biol . 130 : 331 – 343 . Matteoni , R . , and T . E . Kreis . 1987 . Translocation and clustering of endosomes and lysosomes depends on microtubules . J . Cell Biol . 105 : 1253 – 1265 . Merrifield , C . J . , S . E . Moss , C . Ballestrem , B . A . Imhof , G . Giesc , I . Wunderlich , and W . Almers . 1999 . Endocytic vesicles move at the tips of actin tails in cul - tured mast cells . Nature Cell Biol . 1 : 72 – 74 . Miki , H . , T . Sasaki , Y . Takai , and T . Takenawa . 1998 . Induction of filopodium formation by a WASP - related actin - depolymerizing protein N - WASP . Na - ture . 391 : 93 – 96 . Moreau , V . , and M . Way . 1998 . Cdc42 is required for membrane dependent ac - tin polymerization in vitro . FEBS Lett . 427 : 353 – 356 . Mounier , J . , V . Laurent , A . Hall , P . Fort , M . F . Carlier , P . J . Sansonetti , and C . Egile . 1999 . Rho family GTPases control entry of Shigella flexneri into epi - thelial cells but not intracellular motility . J . Cell Sci . 112 : 2069 – 2080 . Murray , A . W . , and M . W . Kirschner . 1989 . Cyclin synthesis drives the early em - bryonic cell cycle . Nature . 339 : 275 – 280 . Rohatgi , R . , L . Ma , H . Miki , M . Lopez , T . Kirchhausen , T . Takenawa , and M . W . Kirschner . 1999 . The interaction between N - WASP and the Arp2 / 3 complex links Cdc42 - dependent signals to actin assembly . Cell . 97 : 221 – 231 . Rowning , B . A . , J . Wells , M . Wu , J . C . Gerhart , R . T . Moon , and C . A . Larabell . 1997 . Microtubule - mediated transport of organelles and localization beta - catenin to the future dorsal side of Xenopus eggs . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA . 94 : 1224 – 1229 . Sheff , D . R . , E . A . Daro , M . Hull , and I . Mellman . 1999 . The recycling pathway contains two distinct populations of early endosomes with different sorting functions . J . Cell Biol . 145 : 123 – 139 . Sheldahl , L . C . , M . Park , C . C . Malbon , and R . T . Moon . 1999 . Protein kinase C is differently stimulated by Wnt and Frizzled homologs in a G - protein - depen - dent manner . Curr . Biol . 9 : 695 – 698 . Shurety , W . , N . L . Stewart , and J . L . Stow . 1998 . Fluid - phase markers in the ba - solateral endocytic pathway accumulate in response to the actin assembly - promoting drug jasplakinolide . Mol . Biol . Cell . 9 : 957 – 975 . Stith , B . J . , K . Woronoff , R . Espinoza , and T . Smart . 1997 . sn - 1 , 2 - diacylglycerol and choline increase after fertilization in Xenopus laevis . Mol . Biol . Cell . 8 : 755 – 765 . Suzuki , T . , H . Miki , T . Takenawa , and C . Sasakawa . 1998 . Neural Wiskott - Aldrich syndrome protein is implicated in the actin - based motility of Shi - gella flexneri . EMBO ( Eur . Mol . Biol . Organ . ) J . 17 : 2767 – 2776 . Symons , M . , J . M . Derry , B . Karlak , S . Jiang , V . Lemahieu , F . McCormick , U . Francke , and A . Abo . 1996 . Wiskott - Aldrich syndrome protein , a novel ef - fector for the GTPase CDC42Hs , is implicated in actin polymerization . Cell . 84 : 723 – 734 . Toullec , D . , P . Pianetti , H . Coste , P . Bellevergue , T . Grand - Perret , M . Ajakane , V . Baudet , P . Boissin , E . Boursier , F . Loriolle , et al . 1991 . The bisindolylma - leimide GF 109203X is a potent and selective inhibitor of protein kinase C . J . Biol . Chem . 266 : 15771 – 15781 . van Deurs , B . , P . K . Holm , L . Kayser , and K . Sandvig . 1995 . Delivery to lyso - somes in the human carcinoma cell line HEp - 2 involves an actin filament - facilitated fusion between mature endosomes and preexisting lysosomes . Eur . J . Cell Biol . 66 : 309 – 323 . Wall , D . A . , and S . Patel . 1987 . Multivesicular bodies play a key role in vitello - genin endocytosis by Xenopus oocytes . Dev . Biol . 119 : 275 – 289 . Whalley , T . , M . Terasaki , M . S . Cho , and S . S . Vogel . 1995 . Direct membrane re - trieval into large vesicles after exocytosis in sea urchin eggs . J . Cell Biol . 131 : 1183 – 1192 .