© 2018 . Published by The Company of Biologists Ltd . The LTB 4 - BLT1 axis regulates the polarized trafficking of chemoattractant GPCRs during neutrophil chemotaxis Bhagawat C . Subramanian 1 , Konstadinos Moissoglu 1 and Carole A . Parent 1 , 2 * 1 Laboratory of Cellular and Molecular Biology , Center for Cancer Research , National Cancer Institute , NIH , Bethesda , MD 20892 2 Department of Pharmacology , University of Michigan , Ann Arbor , MI 48109 , USA * Corresponding author : Carole A . Parent , PhD Department of Pharmacology Life Sciences Institute University of Michigan 210 Washtenaw Avenue , Office 4437 Ann Arbor , MI 48109 - 2216 Tel : 734 - 647 - 2209 Email : parentc @ umich . edu Key words : GPCRs , endocytosis , neutrophils , leukotriene B 4 , Myosin and chemotaxis J o u r n a l o f C e ll S c i e n c e • A cc e p t e d m a n u s c r i p t JCS Advance Online Article . Posted on 29 August 2018 SUMMARY STATEMENT We uncover a role for the leukotriene B 4 - BLT1 axis in the regulation of polarized trafficking of the chemoattractant receptors , FPR1 and C5aR , from the trailing edge of polarized neutrophils to drive persistent chemotaxis . J o u r n a l o f C e ll S c i e n c e • A cc e p t e d m a n u s c r i p t ABSTRACT Neutrophils sense and respond to diverse chemotactic cues using G - protein coupled receptors ( GPCRs ) . However , the precise trafficking dynamics of chemoattractant GPCRs during neutrophil activation and chemotaxis remain unclear . Here , using small molecule inhibitors and CRISPR - based knockouts , we establish that two primary chemoattractant GPCRs - formyl peptide receptor 1 ( FPR1 ) and C5a receptor 1 ( C5aR ) - internalize in a CDC42 - Actin - dependent manner . Using live - cell imaging , we demonstrate that upon stimulation FPR1 rapidly clusters , re - distributes along the plasma membrane to the trailing edge , where it internalizes and is directionally trafficked towards the front of migrating primary human neutrophils . In contrast to FPR1 and C5aR , the leukotriene B 4 ( LTB 4 ) receptor ( BLT1 ) , which relays LTB 4 signals in response to primary chemoattractants during neutrophil chemotaxis , fails to internalize upon physiological stimulation with LTB 4 , fMLF or C5a . Importantly , we report that blocking the LTB 4 - BLT1 axis or downstream Myosin activation enhances the internalization of FPR1 and C5aR , thus reducing downstream signaling and impairing chemotaxis to primary chemoattractants . The polarized trafficking of chemoattractant GPCRs and its regulation by the BLT1 - mediated Myosin activation therefore drives persistent chemotactic signaling in neutrophils . J o u r n a l o f C e ll S c i e n c e • A cc e p t e d m a n u s c r i p t INTRODUCTION Neutrophils are part of the first line of defense during inflammation . They sense and rapidly respond to diverse inflammatory cues by acquiring polarity and migrating directionally to inflammation sites ( Vargas et al . , 2017 ) ( Hind et al . , 2016 ) . In response to activation by inflammatory cues , neutrophils secrete a variety of proteases , produce reactive radical species , phagocytose particles and form extra - cellular traps ( NETs ) ( Thieblemont et al . , 2016 ) . Most of these functional responses are the consequence of signaling cascades activated in response to inflammatory cues or chemoattractants , which act largely through receptors belonging to the G - protein coupled receptors ( GPCRs ) superfamily ( Artemenko et al . , 2014 ) . Chemoattractant GPCRs regulate the functions of multiple leukocyte subtypes including neutrophils . The formyl - peptide receptor 1 ( FPR1 ) , for example , is expressed by most innate leukocyte subtypes and is activated upon binding of formylated peptides derived from bacteria during infections or from mitochondria upon necrosis resulting from cellular injury ( Chen et al . , 2017 ) . FPR1 is amongst the most widely studied chemoattractant GPCRs in the context of neutrophil activation and functional responses ( He and Ye , 2017 ) . Like other GPCRs , once activated , FPR1 is endocytosed and desensitized - a response characterized by the phosphorylation of its intracellular tail by a GPCR kinase ( GRK ) ( Cotton and Claing , 2009 ) . However , most studies pertaining to internalization and trafficking of chemoattractant receptors such as FPR1 and Complement 5a receptor ( C5aR ) have been limited to their expression and characterization in heterologous cell culture systems such as fibroblasts ( Vines et al . , 2003 ) , HEK 293 cells ( Gilbert et al . , 2001 ) or CHO cells ( Suvorova et al . , 2005 ) . Although  - Arrestin and GRK2 , which are associated with the Clathrin - mediated endocytic pathway , have been shown to mediate internalization of C5aR and FPR1 in RINm5F cells and neutrophil - like PLB - 985 cells respectively ( Braun et al . , 2003 , Liu et al . , 2012 ) , evidence supporting Clathrin - independent endocytosis of C5aR and FPR1 have also been established ( Gilbert et al . , 2001 , Suvorova et al . , 2005 ) . Furthermore , little is known about the spatio - temporal dynamics of chemoattractant GPCRs in fast migrating amoeboid - like cells such as neutrophils . Among chemoattractants , the formylated peptide fMLF and complement product C5a are known ‘end - target’ chemoattractants that are stronger and can over - ride chemotactic cues from ‘intermediate’ chemoattractants such as Leukotriene B 4 ( LTB 4 ) or CXCL8 ( Foxman et al . , 1997 , Heit et al . , 2002 ) . Upon the addition of ‘end - target’ or primary chemoattractants such as fMLF , J o u r n a l o f C e ll S c i e n c e • A cc e p t e d m a n u s c r i p t neutrophils produce and secrete the “intermediate” or secondary chemoattractant LTB 4 , which then acts on its cognate GPCR BLT1 to activate downstream signals ( Subramanian et al . , 2017 ) . In fact , the LTB 4 - BLT1 axis acts as a signal - relay mechanism to amplify chemotactic responses to primary chemoattractants in neutrophils ( Afonso et al . , 2012 , Pazos et al . , 2015 ) . Also , upon fMLF stimulation neutrophils actively package LTB 4 as well as the machinery required for LTB 4 synthesis into multi - vesicular bodies that are secreted as exosomes to facilitate the formation of a secondary chemoattractant gradient ( Majumdar et al . , 2016 ) . The released LTB 4 acts in an autocrine and paracrine manner to enforce cell polarization and elicit a secondary gradient that extends the recruitment range of neutrophils to primary chemoattractants . Although LTB 4 has been shown to mediate F - Actin stability and Myosin activation ( Afonso et al . , 2012 ) , the precise contribution of BLT1 signaling to bolster directional migration in response to primary chemoattractants remains unclear . In this study , using specific small molecule inhibitors , established endocytic markers and CRISPR - based knockouts , we identify the mode of internalization and the trafficking fate of the primary chemoattractant GPCRs – FPR1 and C5aR - as well as the relay receptor , BLT1 , in neutrophils . Further , using live - cell imaging we establish the spatio - temporal dynamics of GPCR endocytosis and trafficking . Finally , we identify the specific contribution of BLT1 signaling in the regulation of internalization of primary chemoattractant GPCRs and its impact on downstream signaling and neutrophil chemotaxis . J o u r n a l o f C e ll S c i e n c e • A cc e p t e d m a n u s c r i p t RESULTS FPR1 internalization is independent of GRK2 and Clathrin To investigate the mechanisms underlying FPR1 internalization , we used the FPR1 ligands fMLF conjugated with Alexa Fluor 488 ( fMLF - Alexa Fluor 488 ) and fNLFNYK - FITC to directly follow ligand - bound receptors in primary human neutrophils ( polymorphonucleated neutrophils or PMNs ) and used the spot - detection method to quantify the extent of internalization ( see Materials and Methods for details ) . Using a 10 - fold difference in the dose range of fMLF - Alexa Fluor 488 , we observed that maximum internalization occurred when fMLF - Alexa Fluor 488 was added at 100 nM ( Fig . 1A ) . When added at a physiological concentration ( 2 nM fNLFNYK - FITC ; Kd for FPR1 is ~ 3 nM ( Gilbert et al . , 2001 ) ) , we detected a time - dependent internalization ( Fig . 1B ) , with strong membrane - bound ligand clusters appearing as early as 5 min post - addition , when the cells were well polarized , and a robust internalized FITC signal was detected from 10 min onwards ( Fig . 1C ; white arrow heads ) . To verify the specificity of internalization of FPR1 ligands and the efficiency of the spot - detection assay , we took the following approaches . First , we imaged the potential internalization of the non - chemotactic ligand  3 integrin antibody conjugated to Alexa Fluor 488 (  3 integrin antibody - Alexa Fluor 488 ) . As PMNs do not express  3 integrin receptors on their surface ( Rieu et al . , 1993 ) , this antibody represents a good way to control potential non - specific fluid phase uptake / micropinocytosis of particles from the surrounding medium by polarized PMNs . To assess the internalization of the  3 integrin antibody , cells were co - stained with CellTracker and CellMask , which label the cytoplasm and the plasma membrane respectively , before stimulation with fMLF . We found that upon stimulation of PMNs with fMLF , the  3 integrin antibody failed to internalize into the cytoplasm of PMNs ( Fig . S1A ) . However , under similar conditions , fMLF - Alexa Fluor 488 readily internalized into cytoplasmic vesicles ( Fig . S1A ; blue arrowheads ) . Second , we compared the extent of internalization of  3 integrin antibody - Alexa Fluor 488 with fMLF - Alexa Fluor 488 using two different methods : ( 1 ) total fluorescence intensity and ( 2 ) spot - detection method . We found that irrespective of the method used , conjugated fMLF was internalized strongly ( > 30 times ) compared to  3 integrin antibody - Alexa Fluor 488 ( Fig . S1B ) , in spite of using excess  3 integrin antibody - Alexa Fluor 488 ( 1  g ) compared to fMLF - Alexa Fluor 488 ( pg / ml ) . J o u r n a l o f C e ll S c i e n c e • A cc e p t e d m a n u s c r i p t Next , we tested if the signals detected by the spot - detection method we employed were indeed intracellular . Towards this , we performed experiments with fMLF - Alexa Fluor 488 and used an anti - Alexa Fluor 488 antibody to quench membrane signals . To test if the anti - Alexa Fluor 488 antibody was membrane impermeable and quenched membrane - bound Alexa Fluor 488 signals , we first added  2 integrin antibody - Alexa Fluor 488 to PMNs and treated them with fMLF ( 10 nM ) for 10 mins , followed by fixation and treatment with or without the anti - Alexa Fluor 488 antibody . We observed a dense membrane staining in the back of polarized PMNs as well as a pool of internalized  2 integrin signals ( Fig . S1C ; orange arrowheads indicate staining at the membrane ) . Importantly , treatment with the anti - Alexa Fluor 488 antibody completely abolished the membrane - bound signals of the  2 integrin antibody - Alexa Fluor 488 , but the cells retained internalized  2 integrin signals ( Fig . S1C ) . These findings establish that anti - Alexa Fluor 488 antibody quenched membrane - bound Alexa Fluor 488 signals . Next , we treated PMNs with 10 nM fMLF - Alexa Fluor 488 for 10 mins , fixed and treated with or without the anti - Alexa Fluor 488 antibody . Unlike the results with  2 integrin antibody - Alexa Fluor 488 antibody , we failed to observe any membrane bound fMLF - Alexa Fluor 488 signals and no difference was observed in the extent of detection of the internalized pool of fMLF - Alexa Fluor 488 signals upon treatment with or without the anti - Alexa Fluor 488 antibody ( Fig . S1C - D ) . Therefore , our assay specifically detected internalized ligands and not plasma membrane bound ligands . Furthermore , we analyzed the extent of internalization of fMLF - Alexa Fluor 488 in the absence or presence the membrane impermeable anti - Alexa Fluor 488 antibody and compared the results using the total fluorescence intensity and spot - detection assays respectively . Again , irrespective of the analysis method used , we failed to detect any difference in the extent of fMLF - Alexa Fluor 488 internalization between the anti - Alexa Fluor 488 antibody treated and untreated samples ( Fig . S1D ) . Taken together , these findings establish that the spot detection method is as sensitive as the total fluorescence intensity measurements in identifying internalized FPR1 ligands . To establish that FPR1 specifically binds and uptakes the conjugated ligand , we used the pluripotent hematopoietic cell line PLB - 985 ( PLB ) , which is amenable to genetic manipulation and readily differentiated into neutrophil - like cells ( Tucker et al . , 1987 ) and generated FPR1 - / - PLBs using the CRISPR technology . FPR1 - / - PLBs were characterized by the presence of a frame shift deletion next to the PAM site in the first 250 bps of the FPR1 coding region and not in the predicted off - target locus ANKK1 ( TableS1 & Fig . S1E ; compare scramble ( Scr ) with FPR1 sg J o u r n a l o f C e ll S c i e n c e • A cc e p t e d m a n u s c r i p t RNA ) . Functionally , FPR1 - / - dPLBs were specifically insensitive to fMLF stimulation , but not to LTB 4 or C5a , as assessed by the activation of AKT ( pAKT ) and Myosin Light Chain ( pMLC ) ( Fig . S1F ) and by measuring chemotaxis towards fNLFNYK ( Fig . S1G ) . Importantly , we found that fNLFNYK - FITC was readily internalized in Scr dPLBs ( Fig . S1H ; white arrowheads ) , but not in FPR1 - / - dPLBs , establishing that internalization of the ligand is FPR1 - dependent . Further , we found that CRISPR - resistant FPR1 - mCherry when expressed in FPR1 - / - PLBs strongly co - localized with the internalized fNLFNYK - FITC ( Fig . S1I ; Pearson’s correlation coefficient ( PCC ) of 0 . 78 ; white arrow heads ) , showing that the ligand internalizes with the receptor and that it can be used as a proxy to monitor FPR1 dynamics in neutrophils . Finally , we confirmed that fMLF treatment , but not C5a , induced robust internalization of FPR1 - EGFP in FPR1 - / - PLBs ( Fig . S2A ) , establishing ligand specificity driving FPR1 internalization . C - terminal Ser / Thr phosphorylation is presumed to drive FPR1 internalization in a GRK2 - dependent manner in neutrophils ( Liu et al . , 2012 ) . We therefore addressed the direct contribution of the Clathrin - Dynamin - GRK2 pathway to FPR1 endocytosis in neutrophils . Towards this , we first tested the impact of known Clathrin - mediated endocytosis inhibitors such as Monodansyl Cadaverine ( MDC ) , Phenyl Arsine Oxide ( PAO ) and PitStop2 on the internalization of Transferrin in PMNs . Indeed , the use of inhibitors to study endocytic modes needs careful consideration as Clathrin inhibitors often block Actin polymerization when used at inappropriate concentrations ( Dutta and Donaldson , 2012 ) . To select for the right dose of endocytic inhibitors in our studies , we therefore monitored their impact on chemoattractant - induced F - Actin polarity and also used a CRISPR - based approach to validate our findings with the inhibitors . As expected , in response to fNLFNYK stimulation , MDC , PAO and PitStop2 largely inhibited internalization of conjugated Transferrin , without impacting F - Actin distribution ( Fig . S2B and C ) . Importantly , pre - treatment of PMNs with known inhibitors to Clathrin ( MDC and PAO ) and Dynamin ( OctMAB , MitMAB and Dynasore ) did not impact the extent of FPR1 internalization , when the inhibitors were used at a concentration where F - Actin distribution was not grossly perturbed upon fNLFNYK - FITC stimulation ( Fig . 1D and E ) . Similarly , cells lacking Clathrin Heavy Chain ( CHC ) did not exhibit FPR1 internalization defects ( see below , Fig . 2 C and D ) . Next , we generated GRK2 - / - dPLBs ( TableS1 and Fig . S3A ) and upon treatment with fNLFNYK - FITC , we did not observe any significant difference in the internalization of FPR1 between Scr and GRK2 - / - dPLBs ( Fig . 1 F and G ) . Further , we assessed the extent of internalization of the FPR1 -  ST mutant , where all Ser and J o u r n a l o f C e ll S c i e n c e • A cc e p t e d m a n u s c r i p t Thr residues in the C - terminal tail are converted to Ala ( Hsu et al . , 1999 ) . We expressed either WT FPR1 - mCherry or FPR1 -  ST - mCherry in FPR1 - / - dPLBs and observed that both the WT and  ST mutant internalized fNLFNYK - FITC ( Fig . S2D and E ; blue arrow heads ) , consistent with our observations in GRK2 - / - dPLBs ( Fig . 1G ) . However , the extent of the internalized fNLFNYK - FITC in the FPR1 -  ST expressing dPLBs was significantly lesser than that of WT FPR1 ( Fig . S2E ) , which correlated with the increased ability of the mutant to chemotax toward fNLFNYK ( Fig . S2F ) . Interestingly , Lui and colleagues reported that overexpressing the FPR1 -  ST mutant lead to enhanced FPR1 -  ST membrane retention and chemotaxis towards fMLF compared to WT FPR1 overexpression ( Liu et al . , 2012 ) . We reason that the discrepancy arises from the overexpression of the mutant over and above endogenous FPR1 levels , which leads to potentially skewed signaling , and to the use of saturating or higher amounts of ligand . Overall , our findings establish that the Clathrin - mediated pathway and C - terminal tail phosphorylation do not contribute to FPR1 endocytosis in neutrophils . FPR1 and C5aR internalize via the CDC42 - Actin axis , but have distinct endocytic fates We next set out to identify the Clathrin and dynamin - independent mode of FPR1 endocytosis in neutrophils ( Mayor et al . , 2014 ) . We found that the internalized fNLFNYK - FITC endosomes often were enriched with F - Actin ( Fig . 2A ; cyan arrow heads ) and treatment with F - Actin inhibitor ( LatA ) , Arp2 / 3 inhibitor ( CK666 ; CK689 as inactive control ) , RAC inhibitor ( EHT1864 ) , CDC42 inhibitors ( ML141 and ZCL278 ) and PAK1 inhibitor ( IPA3 ) profoundly impacted F - Actin assembly and prevented FPR1 internalization in PMNs ( Figs . S3B and 2B ) . However , inhibitors to macropinocytosis ( EIPA ) , Tubulin polymerization ( Nocadazole ) and Golgi organization ( Brefeldin A ) hard ly influenced FPR1 internalization in PMNs ( Figs . S3B and 2B ) . We next generated dPLBs lacking endocytic regulators such as CHC , Caveolin 1 ( Cav1 ) , Flotillin 2 ( FLT2 ) , PAK1 or CDC42 ( TableS1 and Fig . S3A ) . Consistent with our results with the inhibitors on PMNs , we observed that only cells lacking PAK1 or CDC42 impacted F - Actin assembly and profoundly inhibited FPR1 internalization in dPLBs ( Fig . 2C and D ) . We conclude that FPR1 is internalized in a CDC42 / PAK1 - Actin - dependent manner upon ligand addition . We next studied the internalization mode of another primary chemoattractant GPCR , the C5aR . We expressed C5aR - EGFP in PLBs and found that 100 ng / ml of C5a is required to induce robust endocytosis ( Fig . 3A ) - a concentration ~ 4 times that of the reported Kd for C5aR ( ~ 25 J o u r n a l o f C e ll S c i e n c e • A cc e p t e d m a n u s c r i p t ng / ml ) ( Chenoweth et al . , 1982 ) . Not surprisingly , endocytosis of C5aR was specific to C5a , as fMLF treatment did not cause C5aR internalization ( Fig . 3A ) . Similarly to FPR1 , endocytosis of C5aR - EGFP induced by C5a was significantly blocked by inhibitors to Actin ( LatA ) and CDC42 ( ZCL278 ) , but not to Dynamin ( MitMAB ) and Clathrin ( PitStop2 ) ( Fig . 3B and C ) . Additionally , C5aR - EGFP co - localized on the plasma membrane with the Clathrin - independent cargo CTxB ( Fig . 3D ; PCC of 0 . 7 ; magenta arrow heads ) , which is also used as a lipid - microdomain marker ( Mayor et al . , 2014 ) , but not with the Clathrin - dependent cargo Transferrin ( Fig . 3E ; PCC of 0 . 46 ) . Thus , the primary chemoattractant GPCRs , FPR1 and C5aR , internalize as Clathrin - independent cargos using the CDC42 - Actin pathway in neutrophils . We next addressed the endocytic fates of internalized FPR1 and C5aR . At 5 min post - treatment with their respective ligands , we found that both FPR1 and C5aR trafficked to early endosomal compartments marked by EEA1 ( Maldonado - Baez et al . , 2013 ) ( Fig . 3F ; PCC of 0 . 55 & 0 . 79 , respectively ; magenta arrow heads ) . By 15 min , internalized FPR1 strongly co - localized with recycling endosomes marked by Rab11 ( Maldonado - Baez et al . , 2013 ) ( Fig . 3F ; PCC of 0 . 73 ; magenta arrow heads ) and failed to localize to lysosomes ( Fig . 3F ; PCC of 0 . 14 ) . In contrast , internalized C5aR did not localize to Rab11 compartments ( Fig . 3F ; PCC of 0 . 3 ) , but instead strongly localized to lysosomes after 30 mins of C5a stimulation ( Fig . 3F ; PCC of 0 . 76 ; magenta arrow heads ) . The diverging trafficking fates of FPR1 and C5a is consistent with previously reported fractionation - based experiments ( Suvorova et al . , 2005 ) . Migrating neutrophils internalize GPCRs from their trailing edge We next investigated the dynamics of FPR1 and C5aR in fast - migrating neutrophils using time - lapse imaging of chemotaxing dPLBs expressing FPR1 - EGFP or C5aR - EGFP , towards a gradient of fNLFNYK or C5a . Strikingly , we found that FPR1 - EGFP internalized as clusters from the back of chemotaxing dPLBs ( Movie S1 ) . Upon tracking individual vesicles , we observed that the internalized FPR1 - EGFP vesicles trafficked directionally up the length of the cell towards the protrusive front ( Fig . S4A ; track straightness of 0 . 62 ) . Additionally , similar to FPR1 - EGFP we observed clustering and directed trafficking of internalizing C5aR - EGFP containing vesicles from the trailing edge of chemotaxing cells ( Movie S2 and Fig . S4B ; track straightness of 0 . 66 ) . Together , these studies establish that primary chemoattractant GPCRs internalize predominantly J o u r n a l o f C e ll S c i e n c e • A cc e p t e d m a n u s c r i p t as clusters from the trailing edge that are trafficked directionally towards the protrusive front in chemotaxing neutrophils ( Fig . S4D ) . fMLF bound FPR1 cluster , migrate and internalize from lipid - microdomains on the plasma membrane at the trailing edge of PMNs We next studied the spatio - temporal dynamics of FPR1 internalization in PMNs by following the distribution of fMLF - Alexa Fluor 488 ( 50  M ) from the time of stimulation . Upon the addition of the ligand , we readily observed uniform ligand binding along the membrane of PMNs ( Movie S3 and Fig . 4A ; T = 0 s in vehicle early phase ) . As time progressed , we observed FPR1 clusters to form and re - distribute ( track straightness of 0 . 548 ) to the trailing edge of polarizing cells at the early phase ( 0 - 5 mins ) of stimulation ( Fig . 4A ; T = 62 . 3 s in vehicle early phase ; white arrow heads ) . Importantly , the ability of PMNs to form and re - distribute FPR1 clusters was CDC42 - dependent as we observed much less clusters ( 29 in vehicle vs 5 in ZCL278 treated cells ) that re - distributed to the trailing edge of stimulated ZCL278 - treated PMNs ( Fig . 4A ; Vehicle and ZCL278 treatments at early phase ; Movies S3 and S4 ) . At later time points ( 5 - 10 mins post - stimulation ) the directed trafficking of internalized or internalizing FPR1 clusters from the trailing edge to the front of PMNs was readily observed ( track straightness of 0 . 6 ; Fig . 4A ; vehicle late phase ; white arrow heads ; Movie S3 ) and again inhibited in ZCL278 - treated cells ( Fig . 4A ; ZCL278 late phase ; Movie S4 ) . The response of PMNs to conjugated fMLF was specific as the ( i ) plasma membrane binding ( labeled with CellMask ) , ( ii ) clustering response , ( iii ) re - distribution to the trailing edge and ( iv ) internalization from the back to the front of PMNs was absent when  integrin antibody - Alexa Fluor 488 was added along with stimulation with fNLFNYK ( Fig . S4C ) . Together , these findings show that CDC42 is required for FPR1 clustering , re - orientation and directional trafficking of FPR1 in stimulated PMNs . We next asked if the FPR1 clusters that re - distribute along the trailing edge of PMNs are membrane - bound or trafficked as internalized vesicles in the cytoplasm . To do so , PMNs were co - stained with CellTracker ( cytoplasm ) or CellMask ( plasma membrane ) before stimulation with labeled fMLF . Live - imaging of the bottom 5 - 6  m of PMNs revealed that the fMLF bound FPR1 clusters are primarily associated with the plasma membrane and predominantly at the trailing edge of PMNs ( Movie S5 and Fig . 4B , orange arrows ) . Internalized FPR1 close to the protruding front were also observed , most - likely reflecting the trafficked FPR1 endosomes in PMNs ( Movie S5 J o u r n a l o f C e ll S c i e n c e • A cc e p t e d m a n u s c r i p t and Fig . 4B ) . Moreover , internalizing FPR1 clusters at an early time point ( ~ 5 mins post - stimulation ) were associated with F - Actin - rich regions at the trailing edge of PMNs ( Fig . 1C ) and co - localized on the plasma membrane with the internalizing lipid - microdomain - dependent and Clathrin - independent cargo CTxB ( Fig . 4C ; PCC of 0 . 54 ; blue arrows ) on the plasma membrane , but not with the Clathrin - dependent cargo Transferrin ( Fig . 4D , PCC of 0 . 3 ) . Together these findings established that FPR1 cluster and re - distribute to lipid - microdomain - rich regions at the back of polarized neutrophils to internalize as a CDC42 - dependent cargo in a directed manner towards the cell front ( Fig . S4D ) . BLT1 is resistant to internalization in response to physiological stimulation We next studied the internalization and dynamics of BLT1 in neutrophils as studies in heterologous cell - types point to a Clathrin - dependent internalization of BLT1 ( Chen et al . , 2004 , Jala et al . , 2005 , Subramanian et al . , 2017 ) . We first generated BLT1 - / - PLBs by expressing sgRNAs that targeted a specific region in the first 250 bps of the coding region of the endogenous BLT1 ( Table S1 ) , which resulted in a specific frame shift mutation in the targeted loci in BLT1 ( Fig . S5A ) . We also generated another PLB line with sgRNA ( # 2 ) targeting a different portion in the first 250 bps of BLT1 and obtained a frameshift insertion in BLT1 ( Table S1 and Fig . S5B ) . Due to the lack of availability of reliable and specific antibodies to detect endogenous BLT1 from cell lysates , we resorted to functional validation of the BLT1 frameshift mutants ( BLT1 - / - PLBs ) . BLT1 - / - dPLBs ( both sgRNAs ) failed to chemotax in response to a LTB 4 gradient ( Fig . S5C ) and displayed impaired pMLC in response to primary chemoattractants such as fMLF and C5a ( Fig . S5D ) – findings that are consistent with the role of BLT1 in mediating signal relay during neutrophil chemotaxis ( Afonso et al . , 2012 ) . Furthermore , expression of a CRISPR resistant BLT1 - EGFP in BLT1 - / - PLB cells ( sgRNA1 clone ) restored the chemotaxis defect to LTB 4 gradient ( Fig . S5C ) . Using the CRISPR resistant BLT1 - EGFP expressing BLT1 - / - PLB cells , we next performed internalization assays . We found a dose - and time - dependent increase in the internalization of BLT1 - EGFP in response to LTB 4 , with 100 nM LTB 4 required to induce robust internalization by 10 mins of stimulation ( Figs . 5A and S6A ) . The reported K d of BLT1 for LTB 4 is ~ 1nM ( Gaudreau et al . , 2004 ) , suggesting that BLT1 is largely resistant to endocytosis under physiological conditions . Consistent with this , stimulation with primary chemoattractants fNLFNYK or C5a , which induce LTB 4 production ( Afonso et al . , 2012 , Pazos et al . , 2015 ) , also failed to induce J o u r n a l o f C e ll S c i e n c e • A cc e p t e d m a n u s c r i p t BLT1 - EGFP endocytosis ( Figs . 5A and S6B ) . However , unlike FPR1 and C5aR , we found that BLT1 internalization was blocked in the presence of Clathrin ( MDC , PAO , PitStop2 , OctMAB and MitMAB ) and microtubules ( Nocodazole ) inhibitors , but not to Actin ( LatA ) , in response to non - physiological concentration of LTB 4 ( Fig . S6C and D ) . The role of di - leucines in the C - terminal tail of BLT1 in its internalization has been controversial , as expression of a BLT1 mutant with Leu304 and Leu305 mutated to Ala ( LL304 - 5AA or LL / AA mutant ) gave rise to higher internalization in CHO cells ( Aratake et al . , 2012 ) , while the expression of the same mutant in HEK293 cells resisted internalization in response to LTB 4 treatment ( Gaudreau et al . , 2004 ) . To test the role of the di - leucine in regulating BLT1 internalization in neutrophils , we next expressed the LL / AA mutant of BLT1 in BLT1 - / - dPLBs . Consistent with the observations in CHO cells , we found that the mutant internalized five times greater in response to LTB 4 stimulation ( Fig . S6E and F ) . Importantly , the greater internalization observed in cells expressing BLT1 LL / AA - EGFP gave rise to lowered signaling and chemotactic response to LTB 4 when compared to cells expressing WT BLT1 - EGFP ( Figs . S6G and S5C ) . Therefore , greater receptor retention on the plasma membrane drives persistent signaling and chemotactic signaling in response to LTB 4 . Signal - relay and back retraction restrict primary chemoattractant GPCR internalization and promote chemotactic signaling Next , we studied the role of the RHO - ROCK pathway and back - retraction in regulating chemoattractant GPCR internalization . Treatment with the ROCK inhibitor Y27632 did not impact initial FPR1 clustering , although it did impair back retraction ( Movie S6 ) . Upon tracking internalizing vesicles over time , we observed that Y27632 treatment promotes the early internalization of FPR1 ( by 5 mins of stimulation ) when compared to vehicle control ( Fig . 5B ; white arrowheads ) . Furthermore , inhibition of RHO or ROCK with Rhosin or Y27632 , respectively , resulted in a similar enhanced FPR1 internalization 10 mins post - stimulation ( Fig . 5C ) . Similar findings were obtained using dPLB cells lacking Myosin Light Chain Kinase ( MLCK ) ( TableS1 , Figs . S3A and 5D ) . Consistent with the results with FPR1 , we observed enhanced internalization of C5aR - EGFP upon Y27632 treatment in dPLBs ( Fig . 5E ) , suggesting that the back retraction pathway in general promotes membrane retention of primary chemoattractant GPCRs . In neutrophils , the LTB 4 - BLT1 axis potentiates fMLF - mediated Myosin activation ( Afonso et al . , 2012 ) . Indeed , as we previously found ( Afonso et al . , 2012 ) , blocking J o u r n a l o f C e ll S c i e n c e • A cc e p t e d m a n u s c r i p t LTB 4 synthesis ( using MK886 ) leads to a strong inhibition of Myosin activation upon fMLF stimulation ( Fig . 5F ; red dashed box ) . Importantly , we now find that blocking LTB 4 synthesis ( MK886 ) or LTB 4 binding to BLT1 ( LY223982 or BLT1 - / - dPLBs ) results in greater internalization of both FPR1 ( Fig . 5 C and D ) and C5aR ( Fig . 5E ) , most - likely by regulating Myosin activation . We next investigated how altering the extent of internalization of a primary chemoattractant GPCR impacts downstream signaling . Towards this , we first assessed the impact of different inhibitors that regulate FPR1 internalization on downstream kinase activation . Treatment of PMNs with LatA , which blocks FPR1 internalization ( Fig . 2B ) , led to a profound increase and sustained kinase activation upon fMLF stimulation ( Figs . S7A and 6A - C ) . On the other hand , inhibition of BLT1 ( LY223982 ) , which enhances FPR1 internalization , resulted in a lower and less sustained activation of kinases in response to fMLF stimulation ( Figs . S7A and 6A - C ) . Consistent with these negative effects on internalization and signaling , dPLBs lacking BLT1 or MLCK exhibited impaired chemotaxis towards fNLFNYK ( Fig . 6D - H ) and C5a ( Fig . S7B - F ) . Importantly , the lack of BLT1 or MLCK had a most significant impact on the directionality of chemotaxing cells towards fNLFNYK ( Fig . 6I ) and C5a ( Fig . S7G ) . Together , these findings suggest that signal relay and back retraction contribute to maintaining primary chemoattractant GPCRs on the cell surface for sustained chemotaxis ( Fig . 7 ) . J o u r n a l o f C e ll S c i e n c e • A cc e p t e d m a n u s c r i p t DISCUSSION We set out to identify the mechanisms underlying the internalization and recycling of chemotactic GPCRs in neutrophils . Although internalization of FPR1 and C5aR has been explored in heterologous cell culture models ( Xue et al . , 2004 , Vines et al . , 2003 , Suvorova et al . , 2005 , Hsu et al . , 1999 ) , our study is the most direct and extensive to establish the Clathrin - independent and polarized internalization of FPR1 and C5aR in neutrophils . Indeed , while the spatial regulation of endocytosis involving Clathrin - dependent and - independent pathways has been characterized in specialized and polarized cells such as epithelial cells ( Sandvig et al . , 2008 , Wirtz - Peitz and Zallen , 2009 ) , hepatic cells ( Tuma et al . , 2001 ) , and neurons ( Itofusa and Kamiguchi , 2011 ) , it had not been reported in fast - migrating neutrophils . In addition , Clathrin - independent cargos have been shown to internalize from the leading edge of migrating fibroblasts ( Howes et al . , 2010 ) . However , unbranched F - Actin and lipid - microdomain regions are best observed along the trailing edge of a polarized neutrophil ( Hind et al . , 2016 ) and blocking neutrophil polarity using inhibitors to Actin or its regulators dramatically inhibited the internalization of the Clathrin - independent cargos , FPR1 and C5aR . Furthermore , we established that internalized FPR1 vesicles are trafficked from the back to the front of chemotaxing cells . Lipid - anchored membrane proteins are known to be internalized in a CDC42 - dependent manner ( Mayor et al . , 2014 ) . CDC42 is also known to promote trailing edge stability in neutrophils apart from its proposed role as a compass in steering neutrophil migration ( Yang , 2016 , Hind et al . , 2016 ) . Moreover , FPR1 clusters have been shown to localize to Ganglioside monoside 1 - enriched lipid - microdomains in U937 cells ( Xue et al . , 2004 , Mayor et al . , 2014 ) . Therefore , blocking CDC42 or F - Actin not only prevents neutrophils to polarize , but most - likely blocks lipid - microdomains formation , which are essential for Clathrin - independent endocytosis to occur from the trailing edge in neutrophils . Interestingly , unlike Clathrin - independent cargos , we found that BLT1 internalization via Clathrin is not cell - polarity dependent . The spatio - temporal dynamics of chemoattractant GPCRs on the plasma membrane of neutrophils has largely remained unexplored . Using live imaging of fluorescent labeled ligands , we observed two phases of FPR1 dynamics on neutrophils . In the early stages ( 0 - 5 mins ) , FPR1 clusters on the plasma membrane and re - distributes as clusters along the plasma membrane towards the trailing edge of polarizing cells - events that happen in relatively stationary cells . At later time ( 5 - 10 mins ) , neutrophils are completely polarized and FPR1 clusters internalizing from the back of cells are trafficked towards the protruding front - events that occur when stimulated J o u r n a l o f C e ll S c i e n c e • A cc e p t e d m a n u s c r i p t neutrophils begin to migrate . Under these conditions , we did observe that the fluorescence labeling on the plasma membrane remains low and constant thoughout the acquisition time and that receptor clusters on the plasma membrane , and subsequently in the internalized vesicles , have higher fluorescence intensity than the rest of the plasma membrane . Live imaging was carried out in the presence of fluorescent fMLF throughout the acquisition period and therefore conjugated ligand was always accessible to unoccupied FPR1 , which may contribute to the uniform membrane labeling seen throughout the movie . The dynamic change in PMN morphology is associated with dynamic changes to the plasma membrane . Given that we could image only 2 - 3 µm from the bottom , we were unable to directly visualize the movement of fMLF bound - FPR1 in and out of the imaging area . We also failed to observe a strong uniform membrane bound fMLF signal on the plasma membrane of fixed cells . However , receptor clusters or internalized FPR1 - containing vesicles were strongly detected in both live and fixed cells . These findings suggest that the low , uniform conjugated fMLF labeling on the plasma membrane represents dynamic fMLF - FPR1 interactions and that receptor clusters represent stronger fMLF - FPR1 interactions that eventually get internalized from the trailing edge of polarized PMNs . We envisage a similar response by the other Clathrin - independent CDC42 - dependent cargo , C5aR , in neutrophils . The chemotactic responses of the mutants of FPR1 and BLT1 , that impact GPCR internalization in opposite ways , revealed a key role for the endocytosis of chemoattractant GPCRs in chemotactic response of neutrophils . Cells expressing the FPR1 - ΔST mutant showed a significantly reduced internalized FPR1 pool and a greater chemotactic response compared to cells expressing WT FPR1 . Conversely , expression of the BLT1 mutant ( LL / AA ) , which internalized significantly more than WT BLT1 , gave rise to reduced signaling and chemotactic responses to LTB 4 . Therefore , membrane retention of GPCRs supports robust chemotactic response . Interestingly , we also found that the fate of trafficked GPCRs regulates chemotactic responses . Heit and colleagues reported that while the primary chemoattractants fMLF and C5a induce equivalent chemotactic responses , the amount of fMLF required to do so is much less compared to C5a ( Heit et al . , 2002 ) . Moreover , at equivalent concentrations , fMLF promoted neutrophils to migrate longer distance compared to C5a ( Foxman et al . , 1997 ) . We now find that while FPR1 is trafficked to recycling endosomes , C5aR is trafficked for degradation to lysosomes . It therefore appears that endosomal recycling of FPR1 and lysosomal trafficking of C5aR correlate with the extent by which neutrophils chemotax to fMLF and C5a . J o u r n a l o f C e ll S c i e n c e • A cc e p t e d m a n u s c r i p t The relationship between the spatial distribution of chemoattractant GPCRs on the plasma membrane and the receptor activity driving persistent neutrophil chemotaxis is not well characterized . Increased membrane folds at the protruding front is thought to provide access to a greater number of GPCRs to the available chemoattractant ( Servant et al . , 1999 ) . However , such a concept does not account for GPCR desensitization via internalization and fails to justify steep signaling gradients established across the length of a chemotaxing neutrophil ( Cai and Devreotes , 2011 , Janetopoulos and Firtel , 2008 ) . While our findings have not directly addressed chemoattractant GPCR desensitization involving modifications by GRKs or other kinases to mediate stop signals , our study does provide novel insight into the dynamic clustering and the spatial re - distribution of ligand - bound GPCRs along the membrane of the trailing edge of stimulated neutrophils . While the continuous ligand - bound GPCRs at the protruding front most - likely promote sustained receptor signaling ( Cai and Devreotes , 2011 , Janetopoulos and Firtel , 2008 ) , clustered GPCRs internalizing from the trailing edge may eventually desensitize and thereby help generate a steep signaling gradient across the length of a migrating neutrophil . Such a concept could support the idea of an indirect amplification of local excitation signals at the protruding front with chemoattractant accessible GPCRs - ideas that resonate with the proposed Local Excitation Global Inhibition ( LEGI ) model ( Cai and Devreotes , 2011 , Janetopoulos and Firtel , 2008 ) . The concept of polarized internalization and orientated trafficking of cargos within neutrophils has been proposed for recycling integrins ( Pierini et al . , 2000 , Lawson and Maxfield , 1995 ) . However , we provide the first direct visual evidence of such trafficking for chemoattractant GPCRs in neutrophils . The dynamic actin polymerization at the front provides the necessary physical force for cells to push forward up a gradient ( Stephens et al . , 2008 , Leithner et al . , 2016 ) that causes F - Actin to eventually flow rearward , sweeping membrane - bound particles to the trailing edge , where contractile forces are thought to drive endocytosis ( Mellman , 2000 , Stephens et al . , 2008 ) . Once internalized , endocytic vesicles undergo oriented recycling to the plasma membrane to supplement the membrane requirement at the protruding cell front ( Stephens et al . , 2008 ) . Clearly , endocytosis at the protrusive front is physically unfavorable ( Diz - Munoz et al . , 2013 , Dai and Sheetz , 1995 ) and likely biologically counterproductive in neutrophils . Primary chemoattractants such as fMLF and C5a give rise to low , yet sufficient amounts of LTB 4 , which then acts as a signal relay molecule during neutrophil chemotaxis . Our study has therefore focused on the dynamics and cross - talk between primary chemoattractant GPCRs , FPR1 J o u r n a l o f C e ll S c i e n c e • A cc e p t e d m a n u s c r i p t and C5aR , that rely on the secondary chemoattractant GPCR , BLT1 , to relay chemotactic signaling and not other GPCRs such as the CXCL8 receptors , which do not relay chemotactic signals ( Afonso et al . , 2012 ) . We show that BLT1 helps sustain signaling responses to primary chemoattractants , largely due to its ability to restrict the internalization of primary chemoattractant GPCRs , as well as its own internalization . By doing so , BLT1 potentially contributes to better detection and response to small bursts of LTB 4 , as is predicted with the exosomal packaging and secretion of LTB 4 by migrating leader cells ( Majumdar et al . , 2016 ) . Although F - Actin is required for the internalization of Clathrin - independent cargos , the precise contribution of Myosin II activity to cargo uptake remains unclear ( Mayor et al . , 2014 ) . In neutrophils , BLT1 - mediated Myosin II activation appears to prevent GPCR internalization most - likely by promoting back retraction to primary chemoattractants . We envision that by indirectly preventing primary GPCR internalization , BLT1 promotes downstream signaling to sustain neutrophil chemotaxis . Together , our findings establish the polarized dynamics of primary chemoattractant GPCRs and their cross - talk with the LTB 4 - BLT1 axis in promoting chemotactic sensing , which underlies neutrophil and other such innate - immune cellular responses to chemotactic agents . J o u r n a l o f C e ll S c i e n c e • A cc e p t e d m a n u s c r i p t MATERIALS AND METHODS Reagents Dimethyl sulfoxide ( D2650 ) , Histopaque 1077 , saponin , BSA ( A9576 ) , PitStop 2 , Phenylarsine oxide ( PAO ; P3075 ) , Monodansyl cadaverine ( MDC ; 30432 ) , Methyl -  - cyclodextrin ( C4555 ) , Filipin ( F4767 ) , CK666 , CK689 , 5 - ( N - Ethyl - N - isopropyl ) amiloride ( EIPA ) , 4’ , 6 - Diamidino - 2 - phenylindole dihydrochloride ( DAPI ; D8417 ) and Brefeldin A ( B5936 ) were purchased from Sigma Aldrich ( St . Louis ) . Formyl - Nle - Leu - Phe - Nle - Tyr - Lys fluorescein derivative ( fNLFNYK - FITC ) , Rhodamine phalloidin , Alexa Fluor 647 - conjugated phalloidin , Alexa Fluor 568 conjugated Transferrin from Human serum , Alexa Fluor 555 - conjugated Cholera Toxin B subunit ( CTxB ) , CellTracker Red CMPTX dye , CellMask Deep Red Plasma membrane stain and LysoTracker Red DND - 99 , Alexa Fluor 568 - conjugated Donkey antibodies to IgG ( mouse , rabbit and goat ) and Latrunculin A were obtained from Molecular Probes . OctMAB , MitMAB , Dynasore , IPA3 , EHT1864 , ML141 , ZCL278 , Rhosin and MK886 were obtained from Tocris Bioscience . LTB 4 , LY223982 and Y27632 were from Cayman chemical . fMLF - Alexa Fluor 488 was synthesized by Discovery peptides , Cambridge Research Biochemicals . C5a was obtained from R & D Biosystems . Nocadazole was purchased from Calbiochem . Primary neutrophils Isolation Heparinized whole blood from anonymous healthy human donors was obtained by venipuncture from the NIH Blood Bank research program . Neutrophils were isolated by dextran sedimentation ( 3 % dextran in 0 . 9 % NaCl solution ) followed by overlaying onto Histopaque 1077 and differential centrifugation as reported before ( Afonso et al . , 2012 ) . Neutrophils were cleared off erythrocytes by multiple rounds of hypotonic lysis with 0 . 2 % NaCl solution followed by neutralization with 1 . 6 % NaCl solution . Cell lines and constructs Human leukemic cell line PLB - 985 cells were cultured in RPMI medium 1640 – GlutaMAX ( Gibco ) supplemented with 10  M HEPES ( Gibco ) , 100 U / ml of Pencillin - Streptomycin mixture ( Gibco ) and 10 % heat - inactivated FBS ( Gemini Bio Products ) . All the cell lines used and generated from PLB - 985 cells were periodically tested for mycoplasma contamination , which was confirmed to be negative in this study . PLBs were differentiated as described previously J o u r n a l o f C e ll S c i e n c e • A cc e p t e d m a n u s c r i p t ( Majumdar et al . , 2016 ) using 1 . 3 % DMSO every 48 h for a period of 6 days . FPR1 and FPR1 -  ST mutant were a kind gift from Dr . Richard Ye . BLT1 template was from Origene . FPR1 and BLT1 were tagged with EGFP or mCherry expressing sequence at the C - terminus and cloned into pMSCVneo vector ( Clontech Laboratories ) . C5aR - EFGP was amplified from Addgene plasmid # 62612 . pMSCV - based constructs were transfected using Lipofectamine 2000 ( Invitrogen ) into Phoenix 293T packaging cells to produce retroviruses , which were then used to infect and select PLB cells . All the experiments in this study were performed in RPMI without phenol red and at 37 0 C and 5 % CO 2 . CRISPR - based knockouts and expression of CRISPR - resistant GPCRs The nucleotide sequence in the human genomic DNA ( gDNA ) that transcribes the first 250 bps of the first exon of the target protein was used to obtain potential sgRNAs from the CRISPR Design tool developed by Dr . Feng Zhang’s group at MIT , Boston . The sgRNAs with the highest scores from the CRISPR Design tool were used in this study . A scrambled ( Scr ) sgRNA was also designed using the siRNA Wizard 3 . 1 tool ( InvivoGen ) that does not target any exon in the human gDNA using sgRNA with the highest score that targets the FPR1 locus as a template . A list of sgRNA sequences targeting specific proteins is listed in Table S1 . sgRNAs encoding sequences were cloned into plentiCRISPRv2 as described by Dr . Feng Zhang’s group ( Addgene plasmid # 52961 ) . pLentiCRISPRv2 constructs were transfected using Trans - Lentiviral shRNA packaging kit ( Thermo Scientific ; # TLP5913 ) into 293 T cells to produce lentiviruses that were then used to infect PLB cells . Transfected PLB cells were selected with puromycin ( 2 . 5  g / ml ) , propagated and sub - cloned ~ 2 - 3 cells / well . Cells from each well were considered as single clone in this study and wherever possible each clone was subjected to western analysis to detect loss of target protein expression and / or subjected to functional assays to shortlist potential knockout clones . In case of PLB clones targeting the FPR1 and BLT1 loci , due to lack of specific antibodies , functional responses such as activation of AKT or ERK and MLC were used to shortlist potential knockout clones . The genomic DNA from shortlisted clones was extracted , the target loci and the top two potential exonic off - target loci were PCR amplified and sequenced for indels . Successful clones were found to have a frameshift mutation ( deletion or insertion ) at the target site but not at potential off - targets . FPR1 - EGFP , FPR1  ST - EGFP , BLT1 - EGFP and BLT1LL / AA - EGFP resistant to J o u r n a l o f C e ll S c i e n c e • A cc e p t e d m a n u s c r i p t CRISPR activity were generated by introducing in - frame silent mutations to PAM site ( NGG ) using site - directed mutagenesis and were transfected into FPR1 - / - and BLT1 - / - PLBs respectively . Uniform stimulation internalization assay and vesicle tracking For the analysis of internalization , polymorphonuclear neutrophils ( PMNs ) or dPLBs were seeded at 0 . 1 - 2 million cells in each well of an 8 well chambered slide ( Lab - TekII ; Thermo Fisher Scientific ) coated with 1 % BSA in DPBS ( Gibco ) overnight . Wherever necessary , PMNs were pre - treated with specific inhibitors for at least 30 mins before stimulation . For internalization of GPCRs fNLFNYK - FITC or fMLF - Alexa Fluor 488 was used to track FPR1 . dPLBs expressing BLT1 - EGFP or C5aR - EGFP were used to analyze internalization of BLT1 with LTB 4 or C5aR with C5a respectively . At a given time point , cells were washed and adherent cells were fixed with 4 % Paraformaldehyde solution ( Electron Microscopy Sciences ) for ~ 4 - 5 mins at 37 0 C . Once fixed , cells were permeabilized with 0 . 05 % saponin in 3 % BSA containing DPBS and stained with rhodamine phalloidin ( 0 . 2 Units ) and DAPI ( 10 ng / ml ) . Cells were imaged using 40x objective lens on a Zeiss observer microscope ( Zeiss Axiovert S100 microscope ) or Revolve FL ( FJSD1000 ) microscope from ECHO Laboratories . Cells in four to six fields across the width of a well were captured randomly for each condition in an experiment . For the total fluorescence intensity measurements , individual cells were identified and measured using Fiji ROI manager . The background was subtracted using unstained cells as control and the measurements were represented as fold change with respect to the control condition in the experiment . For the spot - detection analysis of internalization , we have used a two step criteria – size ( 0 . 5 µm ) and intensity - of spots as detected by the Imaris spot detection method to quantify the extent of internalization . The threshold for the intensity of spots was set manually based on the spots observed in the control condition in each experiment as the exposure settings were identical between conditions in each experiment . FITC or EFGP spots of 500 nm were identified over and above a threshold fluorescence intensity set for the control ( vehicle or Scr ) sample in each experiment . Spots detected along the plasma membrane ( detected using phalloidin staining and membrane EGFP signals ) were manually excluded and spots observed within the cytoplasm were only considered for the analysis of internalization . A hundred or more cells per condition per experiment , with DAPI staining used to identify the number of cells in each field . The number of spots per cell were averaged for each treatment and is represented as percentage or as fold change in comparison to an appropriate J o u r n a l o f C e ll S c i e n c e • A cc e p t e d m a n u s c r i p t control . Vesicles ( 0 . 5 µm ) were tracked using Imaris spot detection over time and represented in figures as cylindrical tracks ( > 3 µm in length in the time interval analyzed ) with color code matching time scale . Statistics on the number of tracks and track straightness were also obtained . Live - cell confocal imaging For certain experiments , dPLB expressing EGFP - tagged GPCRs were imaged live using 60x objective lens on the Carl Zeiss LSM 880 microscope as cells migrated underagarose up a chemoattractant gradient ( refer supplementary methods for underagarose assay ) . Based on the speed of cell movement ( 10 - 15  m / min ) and the rate of acquisition , only the bottom 2 - 3  m , where most endocytic events could be observed , was reliably and continuously acquired . For certain experiments , PMNs were pre - treated with DMSO or specific inhibitors for 15 - 20 mins before simultaneous stimulation with fMLF - Alexa Fluor 488 and the bottom 2 - 3  m was continuously acquired . For specific experiment , PMNs were pre - stained with CellMask and CellTracker Red for 20 mins , before washing and stimulation with fMLF - Alexa Fluor 488 ( 10 nM or 25 nM ) or  3 integrin antibody - Alexa Fluor 488 ( Santa Cruz Biotechnology ; clone A - 3 ; 1 µg / ml ) for indicated time points . The bottom 5 - 6  m of cells was acquired live and wherever necessary the surfaces were rendered using Imaris . Underagarose assay and chemotaxis analysis Briefly , 0 . 5 % SeaKem ME agarose ( Lonza ) in 50 % each of PBS and RPMI without phenol red was allowed to solidify in 1 % BSA coated 6 well plates ( In Vitro Scientific , California ) . Three 2 mm diameter wells were carved out at 2 mm distance from each other . dPLBs were stained with CellTracker Red CMPTX dye according to the manufacturer’s protocol ( Life Technologies ) and re - suspended in RPMI without phenol red . 10 µl ( 5 x 10 4 cells ) of stained Scr or BLT1 - / - or MLCK - / - cells were added to the extreme wells and were allowed to migrate towards the center well containing 10 µl of either fNLFNYK ( 100 nM ) or 2 . 5  g / ml of C5a . Time - lapse imaging was performed using a 10x objective lens ( Zeiss Axiovert S100 microscope ) at an interval of 45 secs between frames for a total period of 60 mins in an enclosure set to 37 0 C and supplied with 5 % CO 2 . Image sequences from underagarose assays were used to manually track 20 or more cells per condition in each experiment using the Manual Tracking plugin for Image J . The output files containing the x and y coordinates were then used to obtain the accumulated distance , velocity and J o u r n a l o f C e ll S c i e n c e • A cc e p t e d m a n u s c r i p t directionality of cells using the Chemotaxis plugin ( ibidi ) available for Image J . To identify the number of migrated cells , Imaris spot detection tool was used at the end of 30 mins of imaging for different conditions . Immunofluorescence and confocal imaging dPLBs expressing EGFP - tagged GPCR were stimulated and fixed at desired time points with 4 % PFA for 5 mins at 37 0 C . After washing , cells were permeabilized using 0 . 05 % saponin in 3 % BSA containing DPBS for 20 mins at 37 0 C before addition of primary antibody ( 1 : 100 ) and incubated at 4 0 C overnight . Cells were washed and stained with secondary antibody conjugated with Alexa Fluor 568 ( 1 : 500 ) and DAPI ( 10 ng / ml ) . For experiments involving LysoTracker ( 100 nM ) or Transferrin Alexa Fluor 568 ( 5  g / ml ) or CTxB Alexa Fluor 555 ( 1  g / ml ) dPLBs expressing EGFP - tagged GPCRs were pre - treated with one of the conjugated molecules for 5 mins before stimulation with a chemoattractant for a specific time period followed by fixation and co - staining with DAPI . For certain experiments , PMNs were pre - treated with Transferrin Alexa Fluor 568 ( 5  g / ml ) or CTxB Alexa Fluor 555 ( 1  g / ml ) for 5 mins before stimulation with fNLFNYK - FITC or fMLF - Alexa Fluor 488 for specific time periods followed by fixation and co - staining with phalloidin and DAPI . For certain experiments , PMNs were pre - treated with CellTracker Red and CellMask Deep Red for 15 mins before adding  3 integrin antibody - Alexa Fluor 488 and stimulating with fNLFNYK ( 25 nM ) . In specific experiments , PMNs were treated with  2 - integrin antibody - Alexa Fluor 488 ( Santa Cruz Biotechnology ; clone CTB104 ) and CellMask Deep Red for 5 mins before stimulating with fMLF and fixed after 10 mins of stimulation . To quench membrane - bound Alexa Fluor 488 signals , anti - Alexa Fluor 488 functional antibody ( Invitrogen ; rabbit oligoclonal ; 710369 ; 1  g / ml ) was added after cell fixation and incubated for at least 30 mins in room temperature before further processing . Post - processing , cells were imaged at 60x objective using either a Leica TCS SP8 confocal microscope or a Carl Zeiss LSM 880 with Airyscan microscope . Images were further processed using LAS X software or Imaris to be presented in figures . J o u r n a l o f C e ll S c i e n c e • A cc e p t e d m a n u s c r i p t Western analysis and quantification PMNs were pretreated with inhibitors for 30 mins and at specific time intervals , cells were lysed by the addition of Laemmli buffer ( Bio - Rad Laboratories ) containing complete EDTA - free protease inhibitor cocktail ( Roche ) and PhosSTOP phosphatase inhibitor cocktail ( Roche ) as suggested by the manufacturer . Lysates were analyzed on 4 - 12 % gradient pre - cast polyacrylamide gel ( Bio - Rad Laboratories ) , transferred to PVDF membranes ( Millipore ) and blocked with 3 % BSA ( Fraction V ; MP Biomedicals ) in Tris - buffered saline solution ( Corning ) containing 0 . 05 % Tween - 20 ( Sigma ) or TBST . fNLFNYK and antibodies to Endophilin A2 ( EndoA2 ; sc - 365704 ) , Flotillin 1 ( FLT1 ; sc - 25506 ) , Caveolin1 ( Cav1 ; sc - 53564 ) , GRK2 ( sc - 562 ) and GAPDH ( sc - 47724 ) were from Santa Cruz Biotechnology . Antibodies to p - AKT ( Ser473 ; # 4060 ) , p - ERK ( Thr202 / Tyr204 ; # 4370 ) , p - p38MAPK ( Thr180 / Tyr182 ; # 4511 ) , p - MLC 2 ( Ser19 ; # 3675 ) , AKT ( # 9272 ) , Caveolin 1 ( # 3267 ) , Clathrin heavy chain ( # 4796 ) , EEA1 ( # 3288 ) and Rab11 ( # 5589 ) were from Cell Signaling Technology . Primary antibodies were diluted according to manufacturer’s recommendations ( typically 1 : 1000 ) in TBST with 1 % BSA and incubated with the membrane on a rocking platform overnight . After three successive washes , secondary antibodies conjugated to peroxidase ( Jackson Laboratories ) were added at 1 : 5000 dilution for an hour at room temperature . Blots were developed using a chemiluminescence reagent ( GE Healthcare ) . Band intensity were quantified using the Gel Analyzer tool in Image J ( NIH ) and represented as fold change with respect to the unstimulated control in each experiment . Statistical analysis Data generated using Microsoft Excel were plotted using Prism 7 tool . For analysis of significance , one - way analysis of variance ( ANOVA ) involving Dunnette’s multiple comparisons test was carried out for most experiments using Prism 7 . For experiments with two conditions , non - parametric paired Welch’s two - tailed t - test was performed . For western analysis experiments , significance was analyzed using two - way ANOVA with Dunnette’s multiple comparisons test using Prism 7 . For analyzing co - localization , Imaris was used to measure Pearson’s correlation coefficient ( PCC ) on confocal images of cells involving multiple Z - stacks . Importantly , as suggested previously PCC values were compared between appropriate markers ( Dunn et al . , 2011 ) and a PCC of 0 . 5 or higher was considered substantially co - localized . J o u r n a l o f C e ll S c i e n c e • A cc e p t e d m a n u s c r i p t ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS We wish to thank Dr . Richard Ye for providing the FPR1 and FPR1 -  ST mutant and all the members of Parent laboratory for thoughtful and supportive discussions . Drs . Roberto Weigert , Paul Randazzo , Julie Donaldson and Philip Murphy are thanked for their critical and constructive comments as well as for sharing reagents to complete this work . Daniel Letwin and Laquaundra Hampton are acknowledged for their technical assistance . Langston Lim at the CCR Microscopy core is acknowledged for his technical assistance in image acquisition and analysis . Microscopy Core of LCMB as well as the CCR DNA sequencing and the FACS cores are thanked for all their help in this work . This work was supported by the Intramural Research Program of the Center for Cancer Research , NCI , National Institutes of Health . AUTHORSHIP CONTRIBUTIONS BCS , KM and CAP designed the experiments . BCS and KM performed the experiments . BCS analyzed the results . BCS , KM and CAP wrote and edited the manuscript . CONFLICT OF INTEREST DISCLOSURE Authors declare no conflicts of interest . J o u r n a l o f C e ll S c i e n c e • A cc e p t e d m a n u s c r i p t REFERENCES AFONSO , P . V . , JANKA - JUNTTILA , M . , LEE , Y . J . , MCCANN , C . P . , OLIVER , C . M . , AAMER , K . A . , LOSERT , W . , CICERONE , M . T . & PARENT , C . A . 2012 . LTB4 is a signal - relay molecule during neutrophil chemotaxis . Dev Cell , 22 , 1079 - 91 . ARATAKE , Y . , OKUNO , T . , MATSUNOBU , T . , SAEKI , K . , TAKAYANAGI , R . , FURUYA , S . & & YOKOMIZO , T . 2012 . Helix 8 of leukotriene B4 receptor 1 inhibits ligand - induced internalization . FASEB J , 26 , 4068 - 78 . ARTEMENKO , Y . , LAMPERT , T . J . & DEVREOTES , P . N . 2014 . Moving towards a paradigm : common mechanisms of chemotactic signaling in Dictyostelium and mammalian leukocytes . Cell Mol Life Sci , 71 , 3711 - 47 . BRAUN , L . , CHRISTOPHE , T . & BOULAY , F . 2003 . Phosphorylation of key serine residues is required for internalization of the complement 5a ( C5a ) anaphylatoxin receptor via a beta - arrestin , dynamin , and clathrin - dependent pathway . J Biol Chem , 278 , 4277 - 85 . CAI , H . & DEVREOTES , P . N . 2011 . Moving in the right direction : how eukaryotic cells migrate along chemical gradients . Semin Cell Dev Biol , 22 , 834 - 41 . CHEN , K . , BAO , Z . , GONG , W . , TANG , P . , YOSHIMURA , T . & WANG , J . M . 2017 . Regulation of inflammation by members of the formyl - peptide receptor family . J Autoimmun . CHEN , Z . , GAUDREAU , R . , LE GOUILL , C . , ROLA - PLESZCZYNSKI , M . & STANKOVÁ , J . 2004 . Agonist - induced internalization of leukotriene B ( 4 ) receptor 1 requires G - protein - coupled receptor kinase 2 but not arrestins . Mol Pharmacol , 66 , 377 - 86 . CHENOWETH , D . E . , GOODMAN , M . G . & O . , W . W . 1982 . Demonstration of a specific receptor for human C5a anaphylatoxin on murine macrophages . J Exp Med , 156 , 68 - 78 . COTTON , M . & CLAING , A . 2009 . G protein - coupled receptors stimulation and the control of cell migration . Cell Signal , 21 , 1045 - 53 . DAI , J . & SHEETZ , M . P . 1995 . Regulation of endocytosis , exocytosis , and shape by membrane tension . Cold Spring Harb Symp Quant Biol . , 60 , 567 - 71 . DIZ - MUNOZ , A . , FLETCHER , D . A . & WEINER , O . D . 2013 . Use the force : membrane tension as an organizer of cell shape and motility . Trends Cell Biol , 23 , 47 - 53 . DUNN , K . W . , KAMOCKA , M . M . & MCDONALD , J . H . 2011 . A practical guide to evaluating colocalization in biological microscopy . Am J Physiol Cell Physiol , 300 , C723 - 42 . DUTTA , D . & DONALDSON , J . G . 2012 . Search for inhibitors of endocytosis : Intended specificity and unintended consequences . Cell Logist , 2 , 203 - 208 . FOXMAN , E . F . , CAMPBELL , J . J . & BUTCHER , E . C . 1997 . Multistep Navigation and the Combinatorial Control of Leukocyte Chemotaxis . The Journal of Cell Biology , 139 , 1349 - 1360 . GAUDREAU , R . , BEAULIEU , M . E . , CHEN , Z . , LE GOUILL , C . , LAVIGNE , P . , STANKOVA , J . & ROLA - PLESZCZYNSKI , M . 2004 . Structural determinants regulating expression of the high affinity leukotriene B4 receptor : involvement of dileucine motifs and alpha - helix VIII . J Biol Chem , 279 , 10338 - 45 . GILBERT , T . L . , BENNETT , T . A . , MAESTAS , D . C . , CIMINO , D . F . & PROSSNITZ , E . R . 2001 . Internalization of the Human N - Formyl Peptide and C5a Chemoattractant Receptors Occurs via Clathrin - Independent Mechanisms . Biochemistry , 40 , 3467 - 3475 . HE , H . Q . & YE , R . D . 2017 . The Formyl Peptide Receptors : Diversity of Ligands and Mechanism for Recognition . Molecules , 22 . J o u r n a l o f C e ll S c i e n c e • A cc e p t e d m a n u s c r i p t HEIT , B . , TAVENER , S . , RAHARJO , E . & KUBES , P . 2002 . An intracellular signaling hierarchy determines direction of migration in opposing chemotactic gradients . J Cell Biol , 159 , 91 - 102 . HIND , L . E . , VINCENT , W . J . & HUTTENLOCHER , A . 2016 . Leading from the Back : The Role of the Uropod in Neutrophil Polarization and Migration . Dev Cell , 38 , 161 - 9 . HOWES , M . T . , KIRKHAM , M . , RICHES , J . , CORTESE , K . , WALSER , P . J . , SIMPSON , F . , HILL , M . M . , JONES , A . , LUNDMARK , R . , LINDSAY , M . R . , HERNANDEZ - DEVIEZ , D . J . , HADZIC , G . , MCCLUSKEY , A . , BASHIR , R . , LIU , L . , PILCH , P . , MCMAHON , H . , ROBINSON , P . J . , HANCOCK , J . F . , MAYOR , S . & PARTON , R . G . 2010 . Clathrin - independent carriers form a high capacity endocytic sorting system at the leading edge of migrating cells . J Cell Biol , 190 , 675 - 91 . HSU , M . H . , CHIANG , S . C . , YE , R . D . & PROSSNITZ , E . R . 1999 . Phosphorylation of the N - formyl peptide receptor is required for receptor internalization but not chemotaxis . J Biol Chem , 272 , 29426 - 9 . ITOFUSA , R . & KAMIGUCHI , H . 2011 . Polarizing membrane dynamics and adhesion for growth cone navigation . Mol Cell Neurosci , 48 , 332 - 8 . JALA , V . R . , SHAO , W . H . & HARIBABU , B . 2005 . Phosphorylation - independent beta - arrestin translocation and internalization of leukotriene B4 receptors . J Biol Chem , 280 , 4880 - 7 . JANETOPOULOS , C . & FIRTEL , R . A . 2008 . Directional sensing during chemotaxis . FEBS Lett , 582 , 2075 - 85 . LAWSON , M . A . & MAXFIELD , F . R . 1995 . Ca ( 2 + ) - and calcineurin - dependent recycling of an integrin to the front of migrating neutrophils . Nature , 377 , 75 - 9 . LEITHNER , A . , EICHNER , A . , MULLER , J . , REVERSAT , A . , BROWN , M . , SCHWARZ , J . , MERRIN , J . , DE GORTER , D . J . , SCHUR , F . , BAYERL , J . , DE VRIES , I . , WIESER , S . , HAUSCHILD , R . , LAI , F . P . , MOSER , M . , KERJASCHKI , D . , ROTTNER , K . , SMALL , J . V . , STRADAL , T . E . & SIXT , M . 2016 . Diversified actin protrusions promote environmental exploration but are dispensable for locomotion of leukocytes . Nat Cell Biol , 18 , 1253 - 1259 . LIU , X . , MA , B . , MALIK , A . B . , TANG , H . , YANG , T . , SUN , B . , WANG , G . , MINSHALL , R . D . , LI , Y . , ZHAO , Y . , YE , R . D . & XU , J . 2012 . Bidirectional regulation of neutrophil migration by mitogen - activated protein kinases . Nat Immunol , 13 , 457 - 64 . MAJUMDAR , R . , TAVAKOLI TAMEH , A . & PARENT , C . A . 2016 . Exosomes Mediate LTB4 Release during Neutrophil Chemotaxis . PLoS Biol , 14 , e1002336 . MALDONADO - BAEZ , L . , WILLIAMSON , C . & DONALDSON , J . G . 2013 . Clathrin - independent endocytosis : a cargo - centric view . Exp Cell Res , 319 , 2759 - 69 . MAYOR , S . , PARTON , R . G . & DONALDSON , J . G . 2014 . Clathrin - independent pathways of endocytosis . Cold Spring Harb Perspect Biol , 6 . MELLMAN , I . 2000 . Quo Vadis : Polarized Membrane Recycling in Motility and Phagocytosis . J Cell Biol . , 149 , 529 - 530 . PAZOS , M . A . , PIRZAI , W . , YONKER , L . M . , MORISSEAU , C . , GRONERT , K . & HURLEY , B . P . 2015 . Distinct cellular sources of hepoxilin A3 and leukotriene B4 are used to coordinate bacterial - induced neutrophil transepithelial migration . J Immunol , 194 , 1304 - 15 . PIERINI , L . M . , LAWSON , M . A . , EDDY , R . J . , HENDEY , B . & MAXFIELD , F . R . 2000 . Oriented endocytic recycling of alpha5beta1 in motile neutrophils . Blood , 95 , 2471 - 80 . J o u r n a l o f C e ll S c i e n c e • A cc e p t e d m a n u s c r i p t RIEU , P . , LESAVRE , P . & HALBWACHS - MECARELLI , L . 1993 . Evidence for integrins other than beta 2 on polymorphonuclear neutrophils : expression of alpha 6 beta 1 heterodimer . J Leukoc Biol , 53 , 576 - 82 . SANDVIG , K . , TORGERSEN , M . L . , RAA , H . A . & VAN DEURS , B . 2008 . Clathrin - independent endocytosis : from nonexisting to an extreme degree of complexity . Histochem Cell Biol , 129 , 267 - 76 . SERVANT , G . , WEINER , O . D . , NEPTUNE , E . R . , SEDAT , J . W . & BOURNE , H . R . 1999 . Dynamics of a Chemoattractant Receptor in Living Neutrophils during Chemotaxis . Mol Biol Cell , 10 , 1163 – 1178 . STEPHENS , L . , MILNE , L . & HAWKINS , P . 2008 . Moving towards a better understanding of chemotaxis . Curr Biol , 18 , R485 - 94 . SUBRAMANIAN , B . C . , MAJUMDAR , R . & PARENT , C . A . 2017 . The role of the LTB4 - BLT1 axis in chemotactic gradient sensing and directed leukocyte migration . Semin Immunol , 33 , 16 - 29 . SUVOROVA , E . S . , GRIPENTROG , J . M . & MIETTINEN , H . M . 2005 . Different endocytosis pathways of the C5a receptor and the N - formyl peptide receptor . Traffic , 6 , 100 - 15 . THIEBLEMONT , N . , WRIGHT , H . L . , EDWARDS , S . W . & WITKO - SARSAT , V . 2016 . Human neutrophils in auto - immunity . Semin Immunol , 28 , 159 - 73 . TUCKER , K . A . , LILLY , M . B . , HECK , L . J . & RADO , T . A . 1987 . Characterization of a new human diploid myeloid leukemia cell line ( PLB - 985 ) with granulocytic and monocytic differentiating capacity . Blood , 70 , 372 - 8 . TUMA , P . L . , NYASAE , L . K . , BACKER , J . M . & HUBBARD , A . L . 2001 . Vps34p differentially regulates endocytosis from the apical and basolateral domains in polarized hepatic cells . J Cell Biol , 154 , 1197 - 208 . VARGAS , P . , BARBIER , L . , SAEZ , P . J . & PIEL , M . 2017 . Mechanisms for fast cell migration in complex environments . Curr Opin Cell Biol , 48 , 72 - 78 . VINES , C . M . , REVANKAR , C . M . , MAESTAS , D . C . , LARUSCH , L . L . , CIMINO , D . F . , KOHOUT , T . A . , LEFKOWITZ , R . J . & PROSSNITZ , E . R . 2003 . N - formyl peptide receptors internalize but do not recycle in the absence of arrestins . J Biol Chem , 278 , 41581 - 4 . WIRTZ - PEITZ , F . & ZALLEN , J . A . 2009 . Junctional trafficking and epithelial morphogenesis . Curr Opin Genet Dev , 19 , 350 - 6 . XUE , M . , VINES , C . M . , BURANDA , T . , CIMINO , D . F . , BENNETT , T . A . & PROSSNITZ , E . R . 2004 . N - formyl peptide receptors cluster in an active raft - associated state prior to phosphorylation . J Biol Chem , 279 , 45175 - 84 . YANG , H . W . , COLLINS , S . R . & MEYER , T . 2016 . Locally excitable Cdc42 signals steer cells during chemotaxis . Nat Cell Biol , 18 , 191 - 201 . J o u r n a l o f C e ll S c i e n c e • A cc e p t e d m a n u s c r i p t Figures J o u r n a l o f C e ll S c i e n c e • A cc e p t e d m a n u s c r i p t Figure 1 . FPR1 endocytosis is independent of Dynamin and GRK2 ( A ) Graph depicting the extent of internalization of fMLF - Alexa Fluor 488 in PMNs treated with different doses ( nM ) for 10 mins before fixation and staining for F - Actin and nuclei . The extent of internalization is compared to 1 nM stimulation from n = 3 independent experiments and represented as mean ± SEM with * * * * standing for a p - value of ≤0 . 0001 as determined by one - way analysis of variance ( ANOVA ) involving Dunnette’s multiple comparisons test . ( B ) Graph depicting the extent of internalization of fNLFNYK - FITC in PMNs treated with fNLFNYK - FITC ( 2 nM ) for the indicated time points before fixation and staining for F - Actin and nuclei . The extent of internalization is compared to 2 min stimulation from n = 3 independent experiments and represented as mean ± SEM with * * * * standing for a p - value of ≤0 . 0001 as as determined by one - way analysis of variance ( ANOVA ) involving Dunnette’s multiple comparisons test . ( C ) Representative confocal images of PMNs treated with fNLFNYK - FITC ( green ; 2 nM ) for the indicated time points , washed , fixed and co - stained with phalloidin ( red ) . White arrow heads indicate internalizing or internalized fNLFNYK and the presence of F - Actin around the fNLFNYK signals . Scale bar = 10  m . Images are representative of three independent experiments . ( D ) Representative confocal images of PMNs pre - treated with vehicle ( DMSO – 0 . 2 % v / v ) or endocytosis mode inhibitors ( MDC – 100  M and PAO – 500 nM ) for 30 mins and treated with fNLFNYK - FITC ( 2 nM ) for 10 mins , fixed and co - stained with phalloidin ( red ) . Scale bar = 10  m . Images are representative of three independent experiments . ( E ) Graph depicting the extent of internalization of fNLFNYK - FITC in PMNs pre - treated with vehicle ( DMSO – 0 . 2 % v / v ) or endocytosis mode inhibitors listed in panel C and others ( OctMAB – 500 nM , MitMAB – 2 . 5  M , Dynasore – 25  M & M  CD – 50  M ) for 30 mins and treated with fNLFNYK - FITC ( 2 nM ) for 10 mins . The extent of internalization is compared to vehicle control with n = 3 independent experiments and represented as mean ± SEM and the significance was tested by one - way analysis of variance ( ANOVA ) involving Dunnette’s multiple comparisons test . J o u r n a l o f C e ll S c i e n c e • A cc e p t e d m a n u s c r i p t ( F - G ) Representative confocal sections of dPLBs targeted with Scr or GRK2 sgRNAs treated with fNLFNYK - FITC ( 10 nM ; green ) for 15 mins , fixed and co - stained with phalloidin ( red ) . Scale bars = 10  m . Images are representative of two independent experiments ( F ) . The extent of fNLFNYK internalization is compared to Scr controls with n = 4 independent experiments and represented as mean ± SEM . The significance was tested by non - parametric paired Welch’s two - tailed t - test ( G ) . J o u r n a l o f C e ll S c i e n c e • A cc e p t e d m a n u s c r i p t J o u r n a l o f C e ll S c i e n c e • A cc e p t e d m a n u s c r i p t Figure 2 . FPR1 undergoes CDC42 - PAK1 - Actin - dependent endocytosis ( A ) A representative confocal image of PMNs treated with fNLFNYK - FITC ( 2 nM ; green ) for 10 mins , fixed and stained with phalloidin ( red ) . Turquoise arrow heads highlight the fNLFNYK vesicles enriched with F - Actin . Scale bar = 5  m . Images are representative of at least three independent experiments . ( B ) Graph depicting the extent of internalization of fNLFNYK - FITC in PMNs pretreated with vehicle ( DMSO - 0 . 2 % v / v ) or inhibitors ( Nocadazole – 25  M ; Lat A – 100 nM ; CK666 – 100  M ; CK689 – 100  M ; IPA3 – 5  M ; EHT1864 – 25  M ; ML141 – 100  M ; ZCL278 – 100  M ; EIPA – 50  M ; Brefeldin A – 20  M ) , stimulated with fNLFNYK - FITC ( 2 nM ) for 10 mins and fixed . The extent of internalization of fNLFNYK was quantified and represented as percentage of vehicle control from n = 4 independent experiments . Findings are represented as mean ± SEM with * * * * standing for a p - value of ≤0 . 0001 as determined by one - way analysis of variance ( ANOVA ) involving Dunnette’s multiple comparisons test . ( C ) Representative confocal images of Scr , CHC - / - , Cav1 - / - , FLT2 - / - , PAK1 - / - and CDC42 - / - dPLBs treated with fNLFNYK - FITC ( 10 nM ; green ) for 15 mins , fixed and stained with phalloidin ( red ) and DAPI ( blue ) . Scale bar = 10  m . Images are representative of three independent experiments . ( D ) Graph depicting the extent of internalization of fNLFNYK - FITC in Scr , CHC - / - , Cav1 - / - , FLT2 - / - , PAK1 - / - and CDC42 - / - dPLBs treated with fNLFNYK - FITC ( 10 nM ) for 15 mins and fixed . The extent of internalization of fNLFNYK was quantified and represented as percentage of Scr control from n = 4 independent experiments . Findings are represented as mean ± SEM with * * * standing for a p - value of ≤0 . 001 as determined by one - way analysis of variance ( ANOVA ) involving Dunnette’s multiple comparisons test . J o u r n a l o f C e ll S c i e n c e • A cc e p t e d m a n u s c r i p t J o u r n a l o f C e ll S c i e n c e • A cc e p t e d m a n u s c r i p t Figure 3 . C5aR internalizes in a Clathrin - independent manner and is trafficked to lysosomes ( A ) Graph depicting the extent of internalization of C5aR - EGFP in dPLBs expressing C5aR - EGFP treated with indicated doses of C5a or fMLF ( 10 nM ) for 10 mins and fixed . Quantification of the extent of C5aR internalization is shown relative to untreated control ( UT ) with n = 2 independent experiments and represented as mean ± SEM . ( B ) Representative confocal images of vehicle ( DMSO – 0 . 2 % v / v ) or inhibitor ( PitStop2 – 5  M ; Lat A – 100 nM ; ZCL278 – 100  M ) treated C5aR - EGFP dPLBs ( 30 mins ) stimulated with C5a ( 100 ng / ml ) for 15 mins , fixed and co - stained with phalloidin ( red ) and DAPI ( blue ) . Scale bar = 4  m . Images are representative of three independent experiments . ( C ) Graph depicting the extent of internalization of C5aR in vehicle or inhibitor - treated C5aR - EGFP dPLBs ( as in panel B and MitMAB – 5  M ) , represented as percentage with respect to vehicle control with n = 3 independent experiments . Findings are represented as mean ± SEM with * * * * standing for a p - value of ≤0 . 0001 as determined by one - way analysis of variance ( ANOVA ) involving Dunnette’s multiple comparisons test . ( D & E ) Representative multiple intensity projections of Z - Stacks for C5aR - EGFP ( green ) dPLBs pre - treated with Alexa Fluor 555 conjugated CTxB ( 1  g / ml ; red ; D ) or Alexa Fluor 568 conjugated Transferrin ( 5  g / ml ; red ; E ) for 5 mins , stimulated with C5a ( 100 ng / ml ) for 5 mins , fixed and stained with DAPI ( blue ) . Magenta arrow heads represent co - localization on the plasma membrane . Scale bar = 2  m . Images are representative of two independent experiments . ( F ) Representative multiple intensity projections of Z - stacks of dPLBs expressing FPR1 - EGFP and C5aR - EGFP treated with fNLFNYK ( 10 nM ) or C5a ( 100 ng / ml ) for the indicated time points , fixed and co - stained for EEA1 ( red ; 5 mins post - stimulation ) , Rab11 ( red ; 15 mins post - stimulation ) and LysoTracker ( red ; 30 mins post - stimulation ) . Magenta arrow heads represents co - localization . Scale bar = 10  m . Images are representative of two independent experiments . J o u r n a l o f C e ll S c i e n c e • A cc e p t e d m a n u s c r i p t J o u r n a l o f C e ll S c i e n c e • A cc e p t e d m a n u s c r i p t Figure 4 . Dynamic clustering , mobilization and endocytosis of ligand - bound FPR1 from lipid - microdomains in PMNs ( A ) Representative multiple intensity projections of the bottom 2  m of PMNs pre - treated for 20 mins with DMSO ( 0 . 2 % v / v ) or ZCL278 ( 50  M ) followed by fMLF - Alexa Fluor 488 ( 50 nM ) stimulation . Images are presented from Movie S3 & S4 . T = 0 represents the initial time point when vesicles began to be tracked . White arrow heads in the vehicle early phase represent the tracks of vesicles that are re - distributed to the back of polarizing cell . White arrow heads in the vehicle late phase represent the tracks of vesicles that trafficked directionally from the back of polarized cell . Scale bars = 3  m except for the vehicle early phase images where the bar = 2  m . ( B ) Representative surface rendering of PMNs pre - stained with CellMask Deep Red ( purple ) to label the plasma membrane and CellTracker CMPTX Red ( red ) to label the cytoplasm for 15 - 20 mins before stimulating with fMLF - Alexa Fluor 488 ( green ; 50 nM ) . A Z - stack ( ~ 6  m from the bottom ) was obtained after 5 mins and the surface rendered using Imaris . Chrome yellow arrows point to clustered FPR1 embedded in the plasma membrane across the length of polarized PMNs . Images are representative of two independent experiments . ( C & D ) Representative multiple intensity projections of PMNs pre - treated for 5 mins with Alexa Fluor 555 conjugated CTxB ( 1  g / ml ; red in panel E ) or Alexa Fluor 568 conjugated Transferrin ( 5  g / ml ; red in panel F ) followed by stimulation with fMLF - Alexa Fluor 488 ( 5 nM ; green ) for 5 mins , fixed and co - stained with phalloidin ( purple ) and DAPI ( blue ) . Blue arrows in panel ( C ) represent regions of co - localization of FPR1 and CTxB . Scale bar = 10  m . Images are representative of three independent experiments . J o u r n a l o f C e ll S c i e n c e • A cc e p t e d m a n u s c r i p t J o u r n a l o f C e ll S c i e n c e • A cc e p t e d m a n u s c r i p t Figure 5 . BLT1 signaling and Myosin activation restrict primary GPCR internalization ( A ) Graph depicting the extent of internalization of BLT1 - EGFP in BLT1 - / - dPLBs expressing BLT1 - EGFP untreated ( UT ) or treated with the indicated concentration of LTB 4 , fMLF ( 10 nM ) or C5a ( 250 ng / ml ) for 10 mins . The extent of internalization was analyzed as discussed in the Methods section . Results are presented as fold change over UT control from n = 3 independent experiments and represented as mean ± SEM with * * * * standing for a p - value of ≤0 . 0001 as determined by one - way analysis of variance ( ANOVA ) involving Dunnette’s multiple comparisons test . ( B ) Represnetative multiple intensity projections from live - cell imaging of the bottom 2  m of PMNs pre - treated for 20 mins with either DMSO ( 0 . 2 % v / v ) or Y27632 ( 25  M ) followed by fMLF - Alexa Fluor 488 ( 50 nM ) stimulation . White arrow heads represent the tracks of vesicles that trafficked directionally to the center of the cell in the first 5 mins of Y27632 treatment . Scale bars = 3  m . ( C ) Graph depicting the extent of internalization of fNLFNYK - FITC in PMNs pre - treated with vehicle ( DMSO – 0 . 2 % v / v ) or inhibitors ( MK886 – 1  M ; LY223982 – 10  M ; Y27632 – 25  M ; Rhosin – 50  M ) for 30 mins before stimulation with fNLFNYK - FITC ( 2 nM ) for 10 mins , fixed and co - stained with phalloidin and DAPI . The extent of internalization is compared to vehicle control with n = 3 independent experiments and represented as mean ± SEM with * * * * and * * * standing for p - values of ≤0 . 0001 and ≤0 . 001 , respectively as determined by one - way analysis of variance ( ANOVA ) involving Dunnette’s multiple comparisons test . ( D ) Graph depicting the extent of internalization of fNLFNYK - FITC in Scr , BLT1 - / - , p38MAPK - / - or MLCK - / - dPLBs stimulated with fNLFNYK - FITC ( 10 nM ) for 15 mins , fixed and co - stained with phalloidin and DAPI . The extent of internalization is compared to Scr control with n = 4 independent experiments and represented as mean ± SEM with * * * * and * * standing for p - values of ≤0 . 0001 and ≤0 . 01 respectively as determined by one - way analysis of variance ( ANOVA ) involving Dunnette’s multiple comparisons test . ( E ) Graph depicting the extent of internalization of C5a - EGFP in dPLBs expressing C5aR - EGFP pre - treated with vehicle ( DMSO – 0 . 2 % v / v ) or inhibitors ( Y27632 – 25  M & LY223982 - 10  M ) for 30 mins before stimulation with C5a ( 100 ng / ml ) , fixed and co - stained with phalloidin and DAPI . The extent of internalization is compared with vehicle control with n = 3 independent J o u r n a l o f C e ll S c i e n c e • A cc e p t e d m a n u s c r i p t experiments and represented as mean ± SEM with * * standing for a p - value of ≤0 . 01 as determined by one - way analysis of variance ( ANOVA ) involving Dunnette’s multiple comparisons test . ( F ) A representative Western analysis of protein lysates from PMNs that were pre - treated with vehicle ( DMSO – 0 . 2 % v / v ) or MK886 ( 1  M ) for 30 mins before stimulation with fNLFNYK ( 1 nM ) for indicated time points . Red box highlights the effect of inhibitor treatment on pMLCII . Images represent results from one of two independent experiments . J o u r n a l o f C e ll S c i e n c e • A cc e p t e d m a n u s c r i p t Figure 6 . The extent of FPR1 internalization impacts downstream signaling and chemotaxis behavior ( A - C ) Graph depicting the quantification of pERK ( A ) , pAKT ( B ) and p - p38MAPK ( C ) from Western analyses of the indicated samples ( see Fig . S7A ) from n = 4 independent experiments and represented as mean ± SEM with * * * * , * * * , * * and * standing for p - values of ≤0 . 0001 , ≤0 . 001 , J o u r n a l o f C e ll S c i e n c e • A cc e p t e d m a n u s c r i p t ≤0 . 01 and ≤0 . 05 , respectively as determined by two - way ANOVA with Dunnette’s multiple comparisons test . ( D - F ) Cell tracks from a single experiment where Scr ( D ) , BLT1 - / - ( E ) or MLCK - / - ( F ) dPLBs were allowed to migrate in a gradient established from 100 nM of fNLFNYK in an underagarose assay . ( G - I ) The distance ( G ) , velocity ( H ) and directionality ( I ) of Scr , BLT1 - / - or MLCK - / - cells migrating in a gradient of fNLFNYK ( see D - E ) . A minimum of 20 cells were manually tracked for each cell line in a single experiment with n = 3 independent experiments and represented as mean ± SEM with * * * * standing for a p - value of ≤0 . 0001 as determined by one - way analysis of variance ( ANOVA ) involving Dunnette’s multiple comparisons test . J o u r n a l o f C e ll S c i e n c e • A cc e p t e d m a n u s c r i p t Figure 7 . Schematic representation of PMNs internalizing FPR1 from the trailing edge of a neutrophil and the contribution of the BLT1 - Myosin axis in restricting the extent of FPR1 internalization to promote the directional migration toward fMLF . J o u r n a l o f C e ll S c i e n c e • A cc e p t e d m a n u s c r i p t The LTB 4 - BLT1 axis regulates the polarized trafficking of chemoattractant GPCRs during neutrophil chemotaxis Bhagawat C . Subramanian , Konstadinos Moissoglu and Carole A . Parent Table S1 . List of genes targeted by CRISPR along with the sequence used to target with sgRNAs . BLT1 sgRNA # 1 was more specific and had fewer predicted off - targets than sgRNA # 2 . For the other genes , sgRNAs with the least predicted off - targets were chosen . Gene Targeted sgRNA Sequence ' with ' PAM 1 FPR1 GTCCCTCCAGAGATGTTCGTGGG % 2 BLT1 % # % 1 CAATACGGCCAGGTCGGCCAGGG % 3 BLT1 % # % 2 GATGAACTCTACACCTAGTGAGG % 4 GRK2 GATCTTCTTGCTGGCGCGCGCGG % 5 CHC CCAATTCGAAGACCAATTTCAGC 6 Cav1 AGTGTACGACGCGCACACCAAGG % 7 FLOT2 CCCCGCTGCGAGGACGTAGAGAC % 8 PAK1 CCAGCACTATGATTGGAGCCGGC % 9 MLCK CCAAAGAAAGCTCCGGATCCACC % 10 CDC42 CCATCGGAATATGTACCGACTGT % 11 p38MAPK AGCTCCTGCCGGTAGAACGTGGG % 12 Scrambled CACCGCCTAAGGTTGGGTCGCCCTC % J . Cell Sci . : doi : 10 . 1242 / jcs . 217422 : Supplementary information J o u r n a l o f C e ll S c i e n c e • S u pp l e m e n t a r y i n f o r m a t i o n α3 Integrin - AF488 Ab + fNLFNYK CellTracker CellTracker + CellMask α3 Integrin - AF488 Ab + fNLFNYK fMLF - AF488 CellTracker CellTracker + CellMask fMLF - AF488 F l uo r esce n ce i n t e n s i t y S po t d e t ec t i on assay 0 10 20 30 40 50 I n t e r n a li z a t i on ( Fo l d c h a ng e ) α 3 Integrin fMLF * * * * * * * * A B b 2 Integrin - AF488 Ab b 2 Integrin - AF488 Ab Control Anti - Alexa Fluor 488 CellMask CellMask fMLF fMLF CellMask CellMask Control Anti - Alexa Fluor 488 F l uo r esce n ce i n t e n s i t y S po t d e t ec t i on assay 0 . 0 0 . 5 1 . 0 1 . 5 I n t e r n a li z a t i on ( Fo l d c h a ng e ) Control Anti - Alexa488 Ab C D Scr _ sgRNA _ FPR1 1 ATGGAGACAAATTCCTCTCTCCCCACGAACATCTCTGGAGGGACACCTGC 50 | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | FPR1 _ sgRNA _ FPR1 ATGGAGACAAATTCCTCTCTCCCCAC - - - - ATCTCTGGAGGGACACCTGC ! ! Scr _ sgRNA _ ANKK1 7202 TCGGCTCTGCGGGGCATGCTCAGCTACATCCCCCCTGAGATGTTCCTGGA 7251 | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | FPR1 _ sgRNA _ ANKK1 TCGGCTCTGCGGGGCATGCTCAGCTACATCCCCCCTGAGATGTTCCTGGA ! ! fNLFNYK F ! Actin Merge Scr FPR1 ! / ! FPR1 ! / ! fNLFNYK FPR1 ! mCherry Merge fNLFNYK F ! Actin Merge Scr FPR1 ! / ! FPR1 ! / ! fNLFNYK FPR1 ! mCherry Merge E F G H I J . Cell Sci . : doi : 10 . 1242 / jcs . 217422 : Supplementary information J o u r n a l o f C e ll S c i e n c e • S u pp l e m e n t a r y i n f o r m a t i o n Fig . S1 . The specificity of FPR1 internalization and analysis using spot - detection assay ( A ) Representative confocal sections of PMNs pre - stained with CellMask Deep Red ( cyan ) to label the plasma membrane and CellTracker CMPTX Red ( red ) to label the cytoplasm for 15 - 20 mins before stimulating with a 3 integrin antibody - Alexa Fluor 488 ( green ; 5 µ g / ml ) or fMLF - Alexa Fluor 488 ( green ; 25 nM ) for 10 mins and fixed for confocal imaging . Blue arrow heads represent internalized fMLF in the cytoplasm . Scale bar = 3 µ m for a 3 integrin antibody - Alexa Fluor 488 containing images and 5 µ m for fMLF - Alexa Fluor 488 . Images represent results from one of two independent experiments . ( B ) The quantification of the extent of internalization of fMLF - Alexa Fluor 488 ( 100 nM ) in PMNs when compared to internalization of a 3 integrin antibody - Alexa Fluor 488 ( green ; 1 µ g / ml ) and treated with fMLF 100 nM for 10 mins . The cells were co - stained with CellMask deep red and DAPI to identify cells . The images were obtained using epi - fluorescence microscope and analyzed using two different methods – the total fluorescence intensity and the spot - detection method . The results are represented fold change with respect to a 3 integrin antibody staining from n = 3 independent experiments and represented as mean ± SEM with * * * * standing for a p - value of ≤ 0 . 0001 as determined by two - way ANOVA analysis involving Bonferroni’s multiple comparisons test . ( C ) Representative confocal sections of PMNs pre - stained with CellMask Deep Red ( magenta ) to label the plasma membrane for 10 mins before addition of b 2 - integrin antibody - Alexa Fluor 488 ( green ; 1 µ g / ml ) , stimulated with fMLF ( 100 nM ) for 10 mins and fixed . Also , PMNs were stimulated with 100 nM fMLF - Alexa Fluor 488 ( green ) for 10 mins and fixed . The samples were then left untreated or treated with anti - Alexa Fluor 488 antibody ( 1 µ g / ml ) , before co - staining the samples with DAPI . The samples were imaged with 60x objective using a confocal microscope . The orange arrowheads represent membrane staining by b 2 - integrin antibody - Alexa Fluor 488 . Scale bar = 5 µ m . Images represent results from two independent experiments . ( D ) The PMNs stimulated with 100 nM fMLF - Alexa Fluor 488 for 10 mins and fixed . The samples were then left untreated or treated with anti - Alexa Fluor 488 antibody ( 1 µ g / ml ) , before co - staining the samples with DAPI . The samples were imaged with 40x objective using an epi - fluorescence microscope . The images from two independent experiments were analyzed using two J . Cell Sci . : doi : 10 . 1242 / jcs . 217422 : Supplementary information J o u r n a l o f C e ll S c i e n c e • S u pp l e m e n t a r y i n f o r m a t i o n different methods – the total fluorescence intensity and the spot - detection method . The results are represented fold change with respect to control staining and represented as mean ± SEM . ( E ) The FPR1 locus or the predicted off - target locus ( ANKK1 ) in the sequenced gDNA from Scr sgRNA expressing PLBs or FPR1 sgRNA expressing PLBs . Green highlight represents the PAM site , red highlight indicates the indel site and yellow highlight represents the predicted off - target site . ( F ) A representative Western analysis of Scr or FPR1 sgRNA expressing dPLBs treated with fMLF ( 10 nM ) , LTB 4 ( 100 nM ) or C5a ( 100 ng / ml ) for 5 mins . Protein lysates were analyzed for the pAKT and pMLC using CAS9 - FLAG as a loading control . ( G ) A Graph depicting the number of Scr or FPR1 sgRNA expressing dPLBs that migrated toward fNLFNYK in an underagarose assay after stimulation for 30 mins with 200 nM fNLFNYK in the chemoattractant well . n = 2 independent experiments and represented as mean ± SEM . ( H ) Representative confocal sections of Scr or FPR1 - / - dPLBs treated with FNLFNYK - FITC ( 10 nM ) for 15 mins , fixed and co - staind with phalloidin . Scale bar = 10 µ m . Images are representative of three independent experiments . White arrow heads represent internalized ligand . ( I ) A representative confocal section of FPR1 - / - dPLB expressing FPR1 - mCherry treated with FNLFNYK - FITC ( 10 nM ) for 15 mins . Scale bar = 10 µ m . Images are representative of three independent experiments . White arrow heads represent internalized ligand co - localizing with FPR1 mCherry in FPR1 - / - dPLBs . J . Cell Sci . : doi : 10 . 1242 / jcs . 217422 : Supplementary information J o u r n a l o f C e ll S c i e n c e • S u pp l e m e n t a r y i n f o r m a t i o n A Vehicle MDC PAO PitStop2 F - Actin Transferrin B Vehicle MDC PAO PitStop2 0 50 100 150 T f n i n t e r n a li z a t i o n ( % V e h i c l e ) Clathrin i C fMLF C5a D FPR1 - ΔST f M LF F P R 1 W T E F P R 1 - m C h e rr y F P R 1 - Δ S T - m C h e rr y 0 50 100 150 # o f ce ll s m i g r a t e d F F P R 1 - m C h e rr y F P R 1 - Δ S T - m C h e rr y 0 50 100 150 I n t e r n a li z a t i on ( % W T c on t r o l ) * * fMLF J . Cell Sci . : doi : 10 . 1242 / jcs . 217422 : Supplementary information J o u r n a l o f C e ll S c i e n c e • S u pp l e m e n t a r y i n f o r m a t i o n Fig . S2 . FPR1 internalization does not depend on C - terminal tail phosphorylation ( A ) A representative multiple intensity projection of confocal Z - stacks of FPR1 - / - dPLBs expressing FPR1 - EGFP ( green ) treated with fMLF ( 10 nM ) and C5a ( 250 nM ) , fixed and co - stained with phalloidin ( red ) and DAPI ( blue ) for 20 mins . Scale bar = 2 µ m . Images are representative of two independent experiments . ( B - C ) Representative confocal images of PMNs pre - treated with vehicle ( DMSO – 0 . 2 % v / v ) or endocytosis inhibitors ( MDC – 50 µ M , PAO – 500 nM & PitStop2 – 2 µ M ) for 30 mins , treated with Transferrin - Alexa Fluor 568 ( 2 µ g / ml ; red ) and fNLFNYK ( 10 nM ) for 10 mins , fixed and co - stained with phalloidin ( green ) and DAPI ( blue ) ( B ) . Scale bar = 5 µ m . The extent of internalization of Transferrin - Alexa Fluor 568 in PMNs is represented as % in comparison to vehicle control from n = 2 independent experiments . ( D - F ) Representative multiple intensity projection of confocal Z - stacks of FPR1 - / - dPLBs expressing FPR1 - mCherry ( red ) or FPR1 D ST - mCherry treated with fMLF - Alexa Fluor 488 ( 10 nM ; green ) for 15 mins , fixed and co - stained with DAPI ( blue ) ( D ) . Scale bar = 2 µ m ( WT ) and 5 µ m ( D ST ) . Blue arrow heads indicate internalized conjugated fMLF in cells . The extent of fMLF - Alexa Fluor 488 internalization is compared to FPR1 - mCherry controls ( E ) with n = 3 independent experiments and represented as mean ± SEM with * * standing for a p - value of ≤ 0 . 01 as determined by non - parametric paired Welch’s two - tailed t - test . The number of cells that migrated out of a well in the underagarose assay , 30 mins after addition of 100 nM of fNLFNYK , is presented ( F ) . The data are representative of two independent experiments . J . Cell Sci . : doi : 10 . 1242 / jcs . 217422 : Supplementary information J o u r n a l o f C e ll S c i e n c e • S u pp l e m e n t a r y i n f o r m a t i o n A Scr C1 C2 C3 C4 GRK2 - / - clones GRK2 GAPDH Scr C1 C2 C3 C5 Cav1 - / - clones FLT1 Cav1 ~ 20 KDa Scr C1 C2 C3 C5 CHC - / - clones CHC GAPDH Scr CDC42 - / - CDC42 GAPDH Scr C1 C2 C3 C4 C5 FLT2 - / - clones FLT2 GAPDH Scr C1 C2 C3 C4 C5 C6 PAK1 - / - clones PAK1 GAPDH Scr C1 C2 C3 C4 p38MAPK - / - clones p38MAPK JNK - + pMLCII GAPDH - + fNLFNYK ( 2 nM ) Scr MLCK - / - Vehicle Lat A " ( Actin " i ) CK666 $ ( Arp2 / 3 $ i ) IPA3 % ( PAK1 & i ) CK689 & ( CK666 & a ) ML141 % ( CDC42 % i ) Nocadazole ( Tubulin ( i ) ZCL278 ' ( CDC42 ' i ) EHT1864 ( ( RAC ( i ) F - Actin fNLFNYK B J . Cell Sci . : doi : 10 . 1242 / jcs . 217422 : Supplementary information J o u r n a l o f C e ll S c i e n c e • S u pp l e m e n t a r y i n f o r m a t i o n Fig . S3 . FPR1 internalization is blocked by Actin inhibitors ( A ) Representative Western analyses for the identification of knockout clones for GRK2 , CHC , Cav1 , FLT2 , PAK1 and p38 MAPK . CDC42 could not be sub - cloned due to cell death at low densities . The non - clonal population was utilized for this cell line . Also , clones C4 , C2 , C1 , C2 , C2 and C3 from sgRNAs to GRK2 , CHC , Cav1 , FLT2 , PAK1 and p38 MAPK were further validated by gDNA sequencing and shown to have specific deletions at the intended locus , but not in the predicted off - target locus . For MLCK , clone C5 was functionally tested by stimulating dPLBs from Scr and MLCK - / - clone for the activation of MLCII in response to 2 nM of fNLFNYK for 5 mins by western analysis . ( B ) Representative confocal images for vehicle and inhibitor treated PMNs quantified in Fig . 3B . Internalized fNLFNYK is depicted in green and phalloidin in red . Scale bar = 10 µ m . Images are representative of at least three independent experiments . J . Cell Sci . : doi : 10 . 1242 / jcs . 217422 : Supplementary information J o u r n a l o f C e ll S c i e n c e • S u pp l e m e n t a r y i n f o r m a t i o n A B FPR1 - EGFP C5aR - EGFP D T = 0 T = 31 . 5 s T = 0 T = 34 . 7 s C 5 mins 10 mins α3 Integrin - AF488 + fNLFNYK fMLF - AF488 α3 Integrin - AF488 + fNLFNYK fMLF - AF488 J . Cell Sci . : doi : 10 . 1242 / jcs . 217422 : Supplementary information J o u r n a l o f C e ll S c i e n c e • S u pp l e m e n t a r y i n f o r m a t i o n Fig . S4 . Chemoattractant GPCRs internalize from the back of chemotaxing dPLBs ( A - B ) Multiple intensity projections of the bottom 1 - 2 µ m of dPLBs expressing FPR1 - EGFP ( A ) and C5aR - EGFP ( B ) migrating to a gradient of fNLFNYK ( A ; 100 nM ) or C5a ( B ; 2 µ g / ml ) in an underagarose assay . Images are selected from Movies S1 and S2 . The star ( cyan ) represents the position of the chemoattractant source . The vesicles tracks are represented with a color code for time interval of tracking ( ascending from blue to red ) . Scale bar = 3 µ m for ( A ) and 2 µ m for ( B ) . ( C ) Representative confocal sections of PMNs were treated with CellMask Deep Red ( cyan ) to label the plasma membrane and a 3 integrin antibody - Alexa Fluor 488 ( green ; 5 µ g / ml ) with fNLFNYK ( 25 nM ) or fMLF - Alexa Fluor 488 ( green ; 25 nM ) alone and imaged at 5 or 10 mins post - stimulation . Scale bar = 5 µ m . Images are representative of two independent experiments . ( D ) Schematic depiction of the endocytic fate of chemoattractant GPCRs from the trailing edge of migrating neutrophils . J . Cell Sci . : doi : 10 . 1242 / jcs . 217422 : Supplementary information J o u r n a l o f C e ll S c i e n c e • S u pp l e m e n t a r y i n f o r m a t i o n Human _ BLT1 151 TCTGTCACTGCCCTGATGGTGCTGAACCTGGCCCTGGCCGACCTGGCCGT 200 | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | sgRNA _ Scr TCTGTCACTGCCCTGATGGTGCTGAACCTGGCCCTGGCCGACCTGGCCGT ! Human _ BLT1 151 TCTGTCACTGCCCTGATGGTGCTGAACCTGGCCCTGGCCGACCTGGCCGT 200 | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | sgRNA1 _ BLT1 TCTGTCACTGCCCTGATGGTGCTGAACCTGGCCCTG - - - - ACCTGGCCGT ! sgRNA _ Scr _ BLT1 1 ATGAACACTACATCTTCTGCAGCACCCCCCTCACT - AGGTGTAGAGTTCA 49 | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | | sgRNA2 _ BLT1 ATGAACACTACATCTTCTGCAGCACCCCCCTCACTTAGGTGTAGAGTTCA ! A B C D J . Cell Sci . : doi : 10 . 1242 / jcs . 217422 : Supplementary information J o u r n a l o f C e ll S c i e n c e • S u pp l e m e n t a r y i n f o r m a t i o n Fig . S5 . CRISPR - based generation of BLT1 - / - PLBs and expression of CRISPR - resistant WT BLT1 and LL / AA mutant BLT1 ( A ) The BLT1 locus from the human database compared with sequenced gDNA from Scr sgRNA expressing PLBs or BLT1 sgRNA # 1 expressing PLBs . Green highlight represents the PAM site and red highlight indicates the indel site . ( B ) The BLT1 locus from the human database compared with sequenced gDNA from Scr sgRNA expressing PLBs or BLT1 sgRNA # 2 expressing PLBs . Green highlight represents the PAM site and red highlight indicates the indel site . ( C ) Graph depicting the number of cells migrating from the well containing Scr , BLT1 sgRNA1 , BLT1 sgRNA2 , BLT1 - EGFP expressing BLT1 sgRNA1 or BLT1 LL304 - 5AA - EGFP expressing BLT1 sgRNA1 in response to 1 µ M LTB 4 in an underagarose assay from n = 2 independent experiments and represented as mean ± SEM . ( D ) A representative Western analysis of Scr or BLT1 sgRNAs expressing dPLBs treated with fMLF ( 10 nM ) , LTB 4 ( 100 nM ) or C5a ( 100 ng / ml ) for 5 mins . Protein lysates were analyzed for pAKT and pMLC using CAS9 - FLAG as loading control . The Western analysis represents results from one of two independent experiments . J . Cell Sci . : doi : 10 . 1242 / jcs . 217422 : Supplementary information J o u r n a l o f C e ll S c i e n c e • S u pp l e m e n t a r y i n f o r m a t i o n Vehicle BLT1 % WT F ! Actin Lat A Nocodazole PitStop2 ( C5a LTB 4 fNLFNYK BLT1WT - EGFP BLT1LL304 - 5AA - EGFP A B C D E F G U T 2 5 10 20 0 2 4 6 I n t e r n a li z a t i on ( Fo l d c h a ng e ) Time ( min ) * * * * * * * * V e h i c l e O c t M AB ( D y n a m i n i ) M i t M AB ( D y n a m i n i ) M DC ( C l a t h r i n i ) P A O ( C l a t h r i n i ) P i t S t op 2 ( C l a t h r i n i ) F ili p i n ( C ho l es t e r o l i ) L a t A ( A c t i n i ) N o ca d a z o l e ( Tubu li n i ) 0 50 100 150 I n t e r n a li z a t i on ( % V e h i c l e c on t r o l ) * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * WT LL304 - 5AA 0 2 4 6 I n t e r n a li z a t i on ( Fo l d c h a ng e ) J . Cell Sci . : doi : 10 . 1242 / jcs . 217422 : Supplementary information J o u r n a l o f C e ll S c i e n c e • S u pp l e m e n t a r y i n f o r m a t i o n Fig . S6 . Saturating LTB 4 concentrations induce the Clathrin - dependent endocytosis of BLT1 ( A ) Graph depicting the extent of internalization of BLT1 - EGFP in BLT1 - / - dPLBs expressing BLT1 - EGFP untreated ( UT ) or treated with LTB 4 ( 100 nM ) for the indicated times . Results are presented as fold change over UT control from n = 3 independent experiments . The findings are shown as mean ± SEM with * * * * standing for a p - value of ≤ 0 . 0001 as determined by one - way analysis of variance ( ANOVA ) involving Dunnette’s multiple comparisons test . ( B ) Representative confocal images of BLT1 - / - dPLBs expressing BLT1 - EGFP ( green ) treated with LTB 4 ( 50 nM ) , fNLFNYK ( 10 nM ) or C5a ( 250 ng / ml ) for 15 mins . Scale bar = 10 µ m . Images are representative of two independent experiments . ( C ) Representative confocal images of BLT1 - / - dPLBs expressing BLT1 - EGFP ( green ) pre - treated with vehicle ( DMSO – 0 . 2 % v / v ) or endocytosis mode inhibitors ( PitStop2 – 5 µ M , Lat A – 200 nM & Nocodazole – 25 µ M ) for 30 mins , treated with LTB 4 ( 100 nM ) for 10 mins , fixed and co - stained with phalloidin ( red ) and DAPI ( blue ) . Scale bar = 10 µ m . Inbox in Nocodazole condition represents GFP and DAPI signals alone . Images are representative of at least three independent experiments . ( D ) Graph depicting extent of internalization of BLT1 - EGFP in BLT1 - / - dPLBs expressing BLT1 - EGFP pre - treated with vehicle ( DMSO – 1 % v / v ) or endocytosis mode inhibitors listed in panel C as well as other inhibitors ( MDC – 100 µ M , OctMAB – 1 µ M & MitMAB – 5 µ M ) for 30 mins and treated with LTB 4 ( 100 nM ) for 10 mins . Results are represented as fold change over vehicle control from n = 3 independent experiments and shown as mean ± SEM with * and * * * * standing for a p - value of ≤ 0 . 05 and ≤ 0 . 0001 , respectively as determined by one - way analysis of variance ( ANOVA ) involving Dunnette’s multiple comparisons test . ( E ) A representative multiple intensity projection of confocal Z - stacks acquired from live and migrating BLT1 - / - dPLBs expressing BLT1 WT - EGFP or BLT1 LL304 - 5AA - EGFP ( green ) to 1 µ M LTB 4 in an underagarose assay . Red star represents the position of the chemoattractant source and scale bar = 10 µ m . Images are representative of two independent experiments . ( F ) Graph depicting the extent of internalization of BLT1 WT - EGFP or BLT1 LL304 - 5AA - EGFP expressed in BLT1 - / - dPLBs treated with 25 nM of LTB 4 for 10 mins , fixed and stained with DAPI . The results are represented at fold change in comparison to WT from n = 2 independent experiments . J . Cell Sci . : doi : 10 . 1242 / jcs . 217422 : Supplementary information J o u r n a l o f C e ll S c i e n c e • S u pp l e m e n t a r y i n f o r m a t i o n ( G ) Representative Western analysis of BLT1 - EGFP or BLT1LL / AA - EGFP expressed in BLT1 - / - dPLBs treated with 25 nM of LTB 4 for the indicated time points . Protein lysates were analyzed for pAKT and pERK using PKC e as a loading control . J . Cell Sci . : doi : 10 . 1242 / jcs . 217422 : Supplementary information J o u r n a l o f C e ll S c i e n c e • S u pp l e m e n t a r y i n f o r m a t i o n A B C D E F G J . Cell Sci . : doi : 10 . 1242 / jcs . 217422 : Supplementary information J o u r n a l o f C e ll S c i e n c e • S u pp l e m e n t a r y i n f o r m a t i o n Fig . S7 . BLT1 and MLCK promote chemotaxis to C5a ( A ) Representative Western analysis of the indicated proteins from lysates of PMNs pre - treated with vehicle ( DMSO – 0 . 2 % v / v ) , LY223982 ( 10 µ M ) or Lat A ( 100 nM ) followed by fNLFNYK ( 2 nM ) treatment for the indicated time points . ( B - D ) Representation of cell tracks from a single experiment where Scr ( B ) , BLT1 - / - ( C ) or MLCK - / - ( D ) dPLBs were allowed to migrate up a gradient established from 2 µ g / ml of C5a in an underagarose assay . ( E - G ) Graphs depicting the distance ( E ) , velocity ( F ) and directionality ( G ) of Scr , BLT1 - / - or MLCK - / - cells migrating in a gradient of C5a ( see B - D ) . A minimum of 20 cells were manually tracked for each cell line in a single experiment with n = 3 independent experiments and represented as mean ± SEM with * and * * * * standing for a p - value of ≤ 0 . 05 and ≤ 0 . 0001 , respectively as determined by one - way analysis of variance ( ANOVA ) involving Dunnette’s multiple comparisons test . J . Cell Sci . : doi : 10 . 1242 / jcs . 217422 : Supplementary information J o u r n a l o f C e ll S c i e n c e • S u pp l e m e n t a r y i n f o r m a t i o n Movie S1 . Time - lapse imaging of FPR1 - EGFP expressing dPLB cell migrating up a fNLFNYK gradient ( 100 nM ) in an underagarose assay . Multiple intensity projection ~ 1 . 5 µ m from the cell’s bottom is presented at the rate of 5 frames / sec . Target symbol represents the direction of increase in fNLFNYK concentration . J . Cell Sci . : doi : 10 . 1242 / jcs . 217422 : Supplementary information J o u r n a l o f C e ll S c i e n c e • S u pp l e m e n t a r y i n f o r m a t i o n Movie S2 . Time - lapse imaging of C5aR - EGFP expressing dPLB cell migrating up a C5a gradient ( 2 µ g / ml ) in an underagarose assay . Multiple intensity projection ~ 1 . 5 µ m from the cell’s bottom is presented at the rate of 5 frames / sec . Target symbol represents the direction of increase in C5a concentration . J . Cell Sci . : doi : 10 . 1242 / jcs . 217422 : Supplementary information J o u r n a l o f C e ll S c i e n c e • S u pp l e m e n t a r y i n f o r m a t i o n Movie S3 . Time - lapse imaging of PMN pre - treated with DMSO ( 0 . 2 % v / v ) for 20 mins and uniformly stimulated with fMLF - Alexa Fluor 488 ( 50 nM ) . Multiple intensity projection ~ 2 µ m from the cell’s bottom is presented at the rate of 5 frames / sec . J . Cell Sci . : doi : 10 . 1242 / jcs . 217422 : Supplementary information J o u r n a l o f C e ll S c i e n c e • S u pp l e m e n t a r y i n f o r m a t i o n Movie S4 . Time - lapse imaging of PMN pre - treated with ZCL278 ( 100 µ M ) for 15 mins and uniformly stimulated with fMLF - Alexa Fluor 488 ( 50 nM ) . Multiple intensity projection ~ 2 µ m from the cell’s bottom is presented at the rate of 5 frames / sec . J . Cell Sci . : doi : 10 . 1242 / jcs . 217422 : Supplementary information J o u r n a l o f C e ll S c i e n c e • S u pp l e m e n t a r y i n f o r m a t i o n Movie S5 . Image sequence depicts PMNs pre - stained with CellMask Deep Red ( purple ) to label Plasma membrane and CellTracker CMPTX Red ( red ) to label cytoplasm for 15 mins before stimulating with fMLF - Alexa Fluor 488 ( green ; 50 nM ) . A z - stack ( ~ 6 µ m from the bottom ) was obtained after 5 mins of stimulation from live cells , surface rendered and different channels were sequentially added or removed using animation tool in Imaris . J . Cell Sci . : doi : 10 . 1242 / jcs . 217422 : Supplementary information J o u r n a l o f C e ll S c i e n c e • S u pp l e m e n t a r y i n f o r m a t i o n Movie S6 . Time - lapse imaging of PMN pre - treated with Y27632 ( 25 µ M ) for 15 mins and uniformly stimulated with fMLF - Alexa Fluor 488 ( 50 nM ) . Multpile intensity projection ~ 2 µ m from the cell’s bottom is presented at the rate of 5 frames / sec . Image acquisition began 30 secs after the addition of conjugated fMLF . J . Cell Sci . : doi : 10 . 1242 / jcs . 217422 : Supplementary information J o u r n a l o f C e ll S c i e n c e • S u pp l e m e n t a r y i n f o r m a t i o n