Which skills ? A critical perspective on the skills facilitating the transfer of third - cycle students to knowledge - intensive SMEs Fredrik Asplund , Mats Magnusson , Martin T¨orngren and Tobias Vahlne Department of Machine Design KTH Royal Institute of Technology Stockholm , Sweden Email : { fasplund , matsmag , martint , vahlne } @ kth . se Martin Karlsson Northvolt AB Alstr¨omergatan 20 Stockholm , Sweden Email : mk @ martinkarlsson . se Abstract —This Research Full Paper relates to public - private innovation ecosystems . This loosely knit form of cooperation allows for beneﬁcial activities such as knowledge transfer , dissem - ination of novel technology , and recruitment . In these contexts students graduating from third - cycle education should be able to ﬁnd opportunities for transferring to knowledge - intensive positions in small and medium - sized enterprises ( SMEs ) . However , a 3 - year study of the reasons why ﬁrms approach public organisations within a Europe - wide , public - private inno - vation ecosystem suggests that students might struggle to ﬁnd such opportunities . Through a questionnaire provided to all ﬁrms approaching the ecosystem we identify recruitment as one of their lowest ranked interests . By interviewing members of the public organisations found in the ecosystem we identify how cooperation is initiated and maintained , and how this inﬂuences the opportunities for students to transfer into industry . The results provide nuance to the current emphasis in skill development within third - cycle ( engineering ) education . It is rarely recognized that fostering technical skill and academic entrepreneurship might not be enough to allow all types and sizes of ﬁrms to receive engineering students . Particularly , this study identiﬁes the academic and industrial boundary spanning roles at knowledge - intensive SMEs as im - portant . These roles require a third - cycle education that early on hones skills that typically do not become critical until much later for students that pursue an academic path – e . g . , the inter - organisational project management skills necessary to effectively seek research funding or to negotiate goal alignment between organisations . We argue that to allow third - cycle students to practice the ﬁner points of such skills , universities need to evolve more distributed support structures for innovation that integrate in - depth engineering knowledge with innovation skills and have an increased focus on human and social capital . I . I NTRODUCTION The last few decades have seen a change to the rela - tionship between academia and industry , which is affecting the activities of both academic researchers and organisations [ 1 ] . A substantial number of academic researchers are now involved in the ”third mission” [ 2 ] , i . e . , a part of their scholarly activities involve providing ”services” to both academia and the wider society . As part of these services , such as technology transfer , academic organisations are becoming involved in public - private innovation ecosystems [ 3 ] , [ 4 ] , [ 5 ] . These are sets of public and private organizations that incorporate both production and use side participants , and which interconnect , often around a focal ﬁrm or a platform , to focus on the devel - opment of new value through innovation [ 6 ] . In other words , academia’s exposure to industry is growing , and especially so the exposure of the applied sciences to smaller enterprises as public policy attempts to support job growth in this segment [ 7 ] . Arguably , this should increase the opportunities for en - gineering students in third - cycle education to transfer to knowledge - intensive positions in industry . However , this con - text is substantially different from that experienced by the PhD who transfers to a large research - focused company , initiates a university spin - off , or sets up a start - up . Unfortunately , as the higher levels of education are understudied [ 8 ] , the skills required for successfully managing an early career at the border of a loosely knit academia and industry are not well known . Therefore , this paper presents a study of small and medium - sized enterprises ( SMEs ) involving themselves in a public - private innovation ecosystem . The aim is to elicit their moti - vation and the conditions for this involvement . The purpose of the study to thus clarify what skills could help an early - career PhD seeking to transfer to SMEs in this context . II . T HEORETICAL B ACKGROUND The concept of innovation ecosystems that aim for value cre - ation is rather new [ 1 ] , and overlaps with other types of loosely coupled sets of public and private organisations . Academic organisations are typically more prominent in knowledge ecosystems centred on knowledge generation , while industry is dominant in business ecosystems that mainly work towards value capture [ 9 ] , [ 10 ] . Academic organisations can become leaders in innovation ecosystems in case industry is reluctant to take on this role , but usually rather act as advisers [ 3 ] , [ 4 ] . On the one hand , cooperation between public and private organisations can often experience difﬁculties due to cultural differences . These difﬁculties might not be possible to over - come until substantial trust has been created [ 11 ] , [ 12 ] , which 2022 I EEE F r on ti e r s i n E du ca ti on C on f e r e n ce ( F I E ) | 978 - 1 - 6654 - 6244 - 0 / 22 / $ 31 . 00 © 2022 I EEE | DO I : 10 . 1109 / F I E 56618 . 2022 . 9962435 might take more time in loosely coupled cooperation . On the other hand , ﬁrms might be vary of investing too heavily in collaboration with academia , as this might decrease the value of simultaneous , heavy investments in internal scientiﬁc research [ 13 ] . Loosely coupled cooperation might then be appreciated as it allows partners to take stock of each other before committing fully . Innovation ecosystems are thus likely conducive to collaboration models in which ﬁrms e . g . , wait with engaging in research and rather set up collaboration suitable for second - cycle capstone or thesis courses [ 12 ] , [ 14 ] . In this way ﬁrms combine the best of two worlds as they get tailor - made advice on how to use cutting - edge technology [ 15 ] , [ 16 ] without spending a large effort themselves [ 17 ] . While academia ideally wants to engage on research , this way of also enabling second - cycle students to learn from best practice in an industrial context is increasingly appreciated in education [ 18 ] , [ 19 ] . A primary reason is that it offers engi - neering students an opportunity to learn informal engineering skills . Although these skills are otherwise difﬁcult to teach in higher education , the engineering discipline of a ( second - cycle ) engineering student can come with the expectation to quickly master such skills [ 20 ] . This cooperation also aligns well with strong contemporary initiatives such as CDIO [ 21 ] , which seek to deﬁne best practice in the context of engineering education . This includes emphasising professional skills taught in close cooperation with industry . However , not all second - cycle students will have the nec - essary skills to seamlessly fulﬁll requirements from both academia and industry . Particularly , when a ﬁrm wants to make use of student placements to explore what is , to them , unknown technology , it might require students who are accomplished boundary spanners [ 17 ] . In other words , students who are able to bridge boundaries , in this case organisational boundaries between academia and industry , to bring together distinct networks and expectations [ 22 ] . This is to be expected as this technological brokering , also when occurring in industry , typically requires much resources [ 23 ] , individuals with both deep technical know - how and extensive communication skills [ 24 ] , and even employees who occupy special places in the organisational networks [ 25 ] . As third - cycle students also have academic requirements to fulﬁll , they will face similar challenges when addressing industrial requirements - especially if these are formed in the context of value creation and technology brokering . Arguably , if third - cycle students then transfer into early industrial careers in a public - private innovation ecosystem , such requirements can easily accompany their new roles . Maintaining a collaboration with former colleagues can be a necessity to access , enable cost - savings related to or even push research in a direction required for future growth [ 16 ] . Still , studies on third - cycle engineering students and the transfer to small knowledge - intensive , engineering ﬁrms have rather focused on the establishment of spin - offs by academic researchers . The primary choices and activities to enable this academic entrepreneurship can be driven by the third - cycle students themselves [ 26 ] . That the academic context is not conducive to commercialization can then lead to many chal - lenges , including conﬂict with advisors based on differences in expectations and the need to overcome a lack of business and management skills [ 26 ] , [ 27 ] . Successfully overcoming these challenges are often tied to personal motivation and interests . Therefore , while universities can do more to support the skill development of third - cycle students interested in academic entrepreneurship , it will still not be for everyone . This suggests that other paths to transfer into an early career at knowledge - intensive SMEs should also be investigated . III . M ETHODOLOGY This study was conducted through a questionnaire and interviews . The associated steps involving data collection and analysis are described separately in this section . A . The Questionnaire The questionnaire was administered to SMEs that ap - proached the Digital Innovation Hubs and Collaborative Plat - form for Cyber - Physical Systems ( HUBCAP ) project [ 28 ] during its open calls for collaboration between 2020 and 2022 . This was a substantial amount of SMEs from across Europe , as HUBCAP aims at building a pan - European innovation ecosystem by connecting hubs for SME support in the cyber - physical systems ( CPS ) domains . 1 ) Data Collection : The study started by clarifying the purpose of the questionnaire and interviews [ 29 ] . This purpose was then operationalised into features that could be measured , resulting in a semi - structured questionnaire with questions related to this study . To check the clarity of the questionnaire and elicit associated feedback [ 30 ] it was piloted with 2 project partners before being deployed . All project partners were then invited to identify and comment on any remaining issues . The ﬁnal set of questions included a few open - ended questions for the sake of validity , but centred on four sets of multiple questions to be graded on a 7 point Likert scale from ”No Interest” to ”High Interest” . Each set asked for the SMEs’ interest in HUBCAP regarding different aspects of scholarly service . First from the perspective of relevant application domains , and then in regard to relevant scientiﬁc disciplines , that the SMEs were either strong or weak in . The questionnaire was clearly indicated as voluntary , both through a written statement and by its isolation into a visually distinct and separate addition to the registration process when approaching HUBCAP . The respondents could withdraw at any part of the questionnaire and leave parts of it unanswered . Still , after all open calls had closed the questionnaire had been opened by representatives from 170 SMEs out of the 234 who registered . Most of these representatives opted to answer all questions . This meant that the response rate was overall 73 % . The response rate for each question is reported in the results . 2 ) Data Analysis : The questionnaire asked the SMEs to name relevant application domains and scientiﬁc disciplines . This was used to validate that all SMEs were active in CPS domains . Naturally , not all SMEs were comfortable with naming relevant application domains and scientiﬁc disciplines , as it could hint at their future market strategy . However , those who did not name domains or disciplines were very few . Furthermore , we could compare answers to each open - ended question with those to each set of Likert scale questions to ensure that companies were not simply clicking their way through the questionnaire without much thought . The summary of the responses to the 7 point Likert scale questions are provided in Section IV . B . The Interviews The interviews targeted the project partners of the HUBCAP project which were setting up digital innovation hubs ( DIHs ) to act as one - stop - shops for supporting SMEs . These were ﬁve universities and three research institutes . Senior people covering one or several of three activities were sought : man - agement of innovation or research projects ; research studies ; and provision of innovation support . 1 ) Data Collection : Based on the purpose of the study , the interviews were thematised and interview questions deﬁned according to the process by Brinkmann and Kvale [ 31 ] . As the project partners belong to organisations of different character and background , the interview script was intentionally broad . This to allow the interviewees to freely decide which aspects of the organisation they reside in were the most important . One of the HUBCAP research institutes did not participate . Fifteen employees from the other project partners , covering one or several of the activities sought , were interviewed in - dividually across two months . Informed consent was ensured , and permission to record the interviews acquired . During the initial interviews the two interviewers both participated to ensure a common understanding of the interview script . Later , in the interest of time , each interviewer conducted interviews separately . 2 ) Data Analysis : The interviews were transcribed and coded separately by the two interviewers . These aimed to acquire a common understanding of the interviews by dis - cussing them in monthly meetings across ﬁve months . One of the interviewers then chose the examples that are presented in Section IV . These examples were discussed among the authors to ensure a common and valid interpretation of the ﬁndings . IV . R ESULTS AND A NALYSIS This section presents the relevant ﬁndings from the ques - tionnaire and interviews . The former is presented as sum - maries , which will be discussed in the synthesis . The latter is presented as representative quotes interspersed with the authors’ analysis of the interviewees’ responses . Clariﬁcations by the authors are provided within square brackets . A . Questionnaire The results from the questionnaire are presented in four tables . Table I presents the support interest of the SMEs in regard to application domains they already do business in . Table II refers to application domains the SMEs do not , but want to , do business in . Table III presents the support interests of the SMEs in regard to scientiﬁc disciplines their engineers are experts in . Table IV refers to scientiﬁc disciplines that are of interest but in which the SMEs lack experts . To support the readers’ understanding of the analysis these results are also visualized in Figure 1 through Figure 6 . Each ﬁgure visualizes the average percentages from combining the tables referring to application domains ( Table I and Table II ) or the tables referring to scientiﬁc disciplines ( Table III and Table IV ) , with one of the associated categories highlighted in white . B . Interviews Naturally , organisations in academia will want their second - and third - cycle students to be possible to employ ( also ) externally . Interactions with industry to facility this transfer for second - cycle students are increasingly important . This involves an increase in industrial placements [ 19 ] , but also a virtuous cycle of academia and industry interactions for the beneﬁt of second - cycle students . Example 1 : When its possible , we can send a [ second - cycle ] student . . . that start collaborating with the company . Sometimes involved in a research project as a student and then graduate with a thesis on the topic which we are investigating with the company , and then the students remain there . So it’s not just technology transfer through the fact that we explain something , but it’s because we share the people . Example 2 : You have to ensure that those people are inﬂuencing the training that you offer . So they have to be engaged in teaching . And that means they have to be inﬂuencing the content of the curriculum . And then in terms of business interaction , we put in place a lot of mechanisms for businesses to access our students . . . ideally , we want about a third of our students to be out , taking an industry placement as part of their degree . . . But in order for that to happen , we have to provide opportunities for businesses to come and meet our students . So businesses will set the challenge problems that students work on as part of their degree program . . . They’ll come in and help our students to develop skills like how to perform in a job interview . . . We , you know , put our students doing mock interviews . . . And , of course , those businesses are talent spotting . . . . They come in and talk about what it’s like to work in their profession and so forth . . . That means they take our graduates and that is what completes the cycle . Even ﬁrms that have little knowledge in regard to research focus their interactions with research roles on research activi - ties . This makes the interactions regarding and involving third - cycle students different . Most importantly , ﬁrms might then not take on the role of ( best practice ) expert , but rather seek ( state - of - the - art ) knowledge that the students have elicited as researchers . Third - cycle students can thus end up interacting more with management roles in industry . TABLE I I NTEREST IN S UPPORT FROM HUBCAP IN S TRONG A PPLICATION D OMAINS ( P ERCENTAGES ) 1 ( No interest ) 2 3 4 5 6 7 ( High interest ) Response Rate Identifying and approaching other funding sources 0 1 , 18 1 , 18 4 , 12 11 , 76 11 , 76 70 73 Accessing specialist , technical consultancy 4 , 71 5 , 88 9 , 41 10 , 59 17 , 06 18 , 82 33 , 53 73 Business development 0 0 , 59 3 , 55 6 , 51 13 , 61 20 , 12 55 , 62 72 Learning opportunities ( courses , workshops , etc . ) 2 , 96 5 , 92 10 , 65 11 , 83 26 , 04 18 , 34 24 , 26 72 Networking with other companies 0 1 , 18 4 , 73 7 , 1 13 , 02 24 , 26 49 , 7 72 TABLE II I NTEREST IN S UPPORT FROM HUBCAP IN W EAK A PPLICATION D OMAINS ( P ERCENTAGES ) 1 ( No interest ) 2 3 4 5 6 7 ( High interest ) Response Rate Identifying and approaching other funding sources 1 , 26 1 , 26 2 , 52 6 , 92 8 , 81 15 , 72 63 , 52 68 Accessing specialist , technical consultancy 4 , 4 3 , 14 8 , 18 11 , 95 18 , 87 19 , 5 33 , 96 68 Business development 1 , 88 1 , 26 1 , 26 7 , 55 11 , 32 21 , 38 55 , 35 68 Learning opportunities ( courses , workshops , etc . ) 3 , 75 5 , 63 11 , 25 13 , 13 20 , 61 18 , 75 26 , 86 68 Networking with other companies 0 0 , 63 3 , 77 8 , 18 12 , 59 25 , 16 49 , 69 68 TABLE III I NTEREST IN S UPPORT FROM HUBCAP IN S TRONG S CIENTIFIC S KILLS ( P ERCENTAGES ) 1 ( No interest ) 2 3 4 5 6 7 ( High interest ) Response Rate Recruitment of faculty or students 8 , 43 7 , 23 9 , 04 10 , 24 16 , 27 18 , 67 30 , 12 71 Accessing knowledge to solve problems you currently face 3 , 57 5 , 36 8 , 93 11 , 9 12 , 5 26 , 79 30 , 95 72 Access to knowledge on new , novel technology 0 , 6 2 , 99 2 , 99 8 , 38 11 , 98 23 , 95 49 , 1 71 Identifying and joining research projects 0 , 6 1 , 79 2 , 98 7 , 74 8 , 93 17 , 26 60 , 71 72 TABLE IV I NTEREST IN S UPPORT FROM HUBCAP IN W EAK S CIENTIFIC S KILLS ( P ERCENTAGES ) 1 ( No interest ) 2 3 4 5 6 7 ( High interest ) Response Rate Recruitment of faculty or students 17 , 76 6 , 54 4 , 67 9 , 35 17 , 76 14 , 95 28 , 97 46 Accessing knowledge to solve problems you currently face 10 , 28 2 , 8 5 , 61 12 , 15 9 , 35 19 , 63 40 , 19 46 Access to knowledge on new , novel technology 10 , 28 0 , 93 3 , 75 9 , 35 14 , 02 14 , 02 47 , 66 46 Identifying and joining research projects 9 , 35 0 , 93 4 , 67 8 , 41 11 , 21 16 , 83 48 , 6 46 Example 3 : Its based on the the expertise of the com - pany in research projects . . . it happens sometimes that we are approached from an industrial company , even big companies , and since they have never worked in this type of , of research activities , they think that we are somehow some kind of wizard or magicians , which can do everything for them . This is a very big issue . In my opinion , at least , because in particular , in the ﬁrst month of cooperation of a business relation , they do not know what they want . . . or they want something which they don’t need . Example 4 : When they are industrial partners , we [ as researchers ] usually . . . [ interact ] with the CEO or with the digital manager . . . and with them de - pending on the project , the production manager or the maintenance manager . Furthermore , the need to align the interests of academia and industry becomes more acute in these interactions . Especially as the cost beneﬁts might be much less than when utilizing second - cycle students . Example 5 : My primary aim is to ﬁnd opportunities to develop applications for collaborative research . So that would be either funded directly by the company . So the company pays university to engage on on a piece of work , or where we would apply jointly to government sources . Or thirdly , where we would , as an academic body , apply to funding councils and bring companies as company collaborators . . . So consultancy as a service to the company in return for payment , we’re less inclined to want to work in that way . And as most universities are concerned about advancing knowledge and developing new knowledge , we’re much more likely to engage with them if that is going to be the case . . . [ it is ] kind of two sides to a project coming together . . . One is the company with something they want to do . And the second side is an academic who is interested in what that company is looking to do because it advances their knowledge , gives them an opportunity to learn something new . . . [ Consultancy ] is less likely to get the interest , the real interest of the academics . Because in general , they’re not short of funds , what they are short of [ are ] new research angles . Example 6 : So our starting point has to be [ high cost ] Euros , and then we allowed in a small margin , maybe 20 % . So we might be starting off on [ high cost ] Euros a day for a relatively junior member of staff . However , when these interactions do lead to collaboration , they are often started by previous students coming back to get support with solving problems that are beyond best practice . For third - cycle students this can also be seen as a virtuous cycle , but in which industrial challenges drive the research agenda of academia . Example 7 : So , the [ second - cycle ] student complete his thesis and then go working for a company , which could be small and could not have the skill in a particular technology or a particular methodology . . . he is younger there , he is proactive and he sees a problem which maybe was unseen to the management . But , since he is a junior ﬁgure , he has not the competency to ﬁnd a solution . . . and so the ﬁrst thing he does is to take his phone and call for [ the ] professor [ supervising his thesis ] . Example 8 : This virtuous cycle is part of that . . . we see the training of PhDs , as being for industry every bit as much as academia . The vast majority of our PhDs will not be academics . I mean , in the [ Country ] . . . maybe 5 % of PhDs go on to become academics . The vast majority will go into industry . Those folks go into businesses tackling some of the most demanding , challenging , technical problems that those businesses are dealing with . They will also identify the problems that cannot be solved now , and those become for us research challenges . . . And that drives our research agenda . And those researchers who work on that research agenda . . . they develop and deliver the training to the next generation of PhDs , and that completes the cycle . Still , these interactions are often more difﬁcult for SMEs than for other ﬁrms . SMEs often lack resources and have a hard time understanding the interests and limitations of academia . However , an exception in regard to the latter is SMEs started by former faculty or third - cycle students . These often understand both academia in general , and the interests of their old colleagues in particular . Example 9 : We have this situation in which SMEs sometimes tend to see universities [ as ] far from their business . Example 10 : Many of those who approach us . . . are not companies who have engaged with , or worked through , a university environment before , so their expectations need to be managed . So often they think it’s going to be very cheap to work with the university because they’ve already paid their taxes . So why would the university want to charge again ? They will often think that staff are sitting waiting for the call , they have not really got very much on . . . because they maybe associate university staff with for example secondary school teachers or something of that kind . Example 11 : When you know someone from a company they tell you from the beginning ”Ok , this is not a project which we are interested in” . . . you gain a lot of time . Because , otherwise , you have to go through a long procedure . . . to be approved by different levels . . . at least in big companies . For SMEs , it is easiest because [ I and ] my former colleagues or my former students . . . in ﬁve minutes , we go together or not . But , unfortunately , SMEs do not have enough resources . V . D ISCUSSION Established , knowledge - intensive SMEs require recruits with an understanding of the state - of - the - art , but with an additional focus on products and customers [ 26 ] . This might explain the relatively low interest in technical consultancy and recruitment of academics reﬂected in Table I through Table IV ( see Figure 1 and Figure 2 ) . This implies that supporting the important job growth in SMEs [ 7 ] requires new foci for the skill development of third - cycle students . Unfortunately , teaching third - cycle students the informal skills required to work closer to products and customers will encounter similar challenges as for second - cycle students : the academic context might be suited for teaching formal professional skills , but informal skills rather require informal interactions with peers [ 32 ] . Enabling such interactions is typically difﬁcult without learning environments with more socio - technical complexity and less emphasis on academic practice than higher education institutions can provide [ 33 ] , [ 34 ] . Be that as it may , our study suggests that there are at least two important roles at knowledge - intensive SMEs for which academia could enhance skill development . Further - more , public - private innovation ecosystems could provide suit - able learning environments for this skill development regard - ing third - cycle students . In this section we discuss these two roles , and the related implications for academia as public - private innovation ecosystems increase in importance . A . The Academic Boundary Spanner One important role that can be ﬁlled by PhDs in SMEs is that of a boundary spanner to academia . As indicated in Section IV , personal connections to research groups and an understanding of academia can be used to enable collaboration with a minimum of conﬂicts . In fact , this is used by certain SMEs to get access to informal training on the latest research ﬁndings [ 35 ] , thereby avoiding the high costs associated with formal training . This might explain the relatively low interest in formal access to learning opportunities reﬂected in Table I and Table II ( see Figure 3 ) . A PhD’s ability to enable the virtuous cycles mentioned in Section IV can also be impor - tant . Engaging with the virtuous cycle regarding second - cycle students can both be appreciated by old colleagues and enable SMEs to hunt for talents aligned with growth needs . In fact , if this is based on a strong mutual trust it might enable second - cycle students to learn informal skills [ 17 ] and transition more easily to industry [ 20 ] . However , given the strong emphasis Fig . 1 . Average percentages from the combination of Table I and Table II , with technical consultancy highlighted in white . Fig . 2 . Average percentages from the combination of Table III and Table IV , with recruitment of faculty or students highlighted in white . on knowledge generation by academia , it is more difﬁcult to grow these ( strong ) relationships without also engaging in research - related activities . Indeed , as indicated by Section IV , academia typically requires a stronger alignment than technical consultancy to maintain a relationship . To the beneﬁts of industry in regard to accessing and directing research already mentioned [ 16 ] , one can thus also add the social capital gained by engaging with the virtuous cycle involving third - cycle students . The strong emphasis on support in identifying and engaging with funding sources and research project reﬂected in the interviews , and Table I through Table IV ( see Figure 4 and Fig - ure 5 ) , then represents an opportunity . Engaging with academia in setting up joint research can be more than only a way of accessing funds , but also secure employees and knowledge for future growth . However , a transfer to industry based on this opportunity will require skills in securing funding and initiating research studies , which are skills typically not learnt until later in an academic career . In - depth knowledge in particular research areas is then only a prerequisite . Project management skills are also required , especially as related to international and inter - organisational collaboration . Firstly , because this role will depend on the ability to appropriately frame the utility of research . Different funding bodies have their own aims and purposes , which must be related to a research proposal for it to be funded . Furthermore , the possibility to achieve a high impact for all relevant stakeholders must be conveyed appropriately . Sec - ondly , because project management skills confers the ability to identify a balance between having feasible and ambitious research aims . In other words , the ability to see the effort , risk and resources involved in pursuing speciﬁc outcomes , and weigh this against the gain this would represent for both industry and academia . B . The Industrial Boundary Spanner Another important role that this study suggests that PhDs in SMEs can ﬁll is that of the boundary spanner to other ﬁrms . Both Table I and Table II ( see Figure 6 ) show a strong interest by the SMEs to network with other ﬁrms . Indeed , network - ing in loosely coupled networks with dominant nodes that favour open knowledge sharing will often result in knowledge spillover [ 36 ] . In fact , this can be an explicit goal of knowledge and innovation networks led by academia [ 37 ] . The result is often new products born from the recombination of technolo - gies from different contexts . However , actually enabling ﬁrms to systematically beneﬁt from networking is challenging as employees from different ﬁrms often have different expertise and backgrounds . A basic task for a boundary spanner is then to enable cooperation by repackaging external knowledge to make it understandable inside a ﬁrm [ 38 ] . This requires an expert with both a breadth and depth to his intellectual capital [ 25 ] , [ 22 ] . A PhD might thus be a prerequisite to enable a fruitful sharing of the type of advanced knowledge found in public - private innovation ecosystems and knowledge - intensive SMEs . Furthermore , to establish networks and get access to relevant knowledge , a boundary spanner in a public - private context might also require time , empowerment , a certain type of personality , and a certain skill set [ 39 ] . As for the academic boundary spanner role , project management skills as related to inter - organisational collaboration are thus also required for this role . However , rather than skills related to planning , this Fig . 3 . Average percentages from the combination of Table I and Table II , with learning opportunities highlighted in white . Fig . 4 . Average percentages from the combination of Table I and Table II , with engaging with funding sources highlighted in white . Fig . 5 . Average percentages from the combination of Table III and Table IV , with engaging in research projects highlighted in white . Fig . 6 . Average percentages from the combination of Table I and Table II , with networking with other ﬁrms highlighted in white . type of industrial boundary spanner needs project management skills related to e . g . , bargaining and negotiation . In other words , rather than skill in explaining goals to , and matching goals to those of , a funding organisation , this role requires people with the ability to actively inﬂuence others to align with the goals of their SMEs . C . Implications for Academia In addition to the identiﬁed need for additional skill and knowledge development in third - cycle education , this study brings about implications for the design and use of university support structures . Many universities , and in particular those with a strong focus on the applied sciences , have in the last decades focused increasingly on developing support structures for third - mission activities . This includes e . g . , innovation incu - bators , technology transfer ofﬁces , and entrepreneurial training of both students and faculty . Earlier studies have revealed that these structures are useful for the commercialization of engineering - focused research , but typically have a narrow focus on patents and generation of start - up companies [ 40 ] . Arguably , this narrow focus , which tends to be predomi - nant in both research on academic commercialization and within university management , needs to be extended to a more comprehensive view on value creation from academic research . The results from this study thus highlights two associated aspects of university support structures that need further attention . Arguably , these can be directly linked to public - private innovation ecosystems as learning environments for third - cycle students seeking to transfer to early careers in knowledge - intensive SMEs . Firstly , the overly narrow view on value creation in terms of intellectual capital should be complemented with a more explicit focus on human and social capital . Innovation does not only require technical resources to be realized , but also the right circumstances . Successful innovation thus often re - lies on networks of people that interchange knowledge and , often more crucially , ensure organisational learning . Arguably , university support structures need to reach out beyond their own , immediate concerns and engage with such networks . Of particular interest is then the non - transient character of inter - organisational projects involving SMEs [ 41 ] . A third - cycle student who has the opportunity to engage with inter - organisational , industrial projects through the management connections indicated by Section IV should also have oppor - tunities to engage with long - term networks working on pre - dominantly routine tasks using traditional project management tools . Informal interactions with these professionals will pro - vide skill training on inter - organisational project management that is otherwise difﬁcult to access . Secondly , this narrow focus on commercialization is also nested in an overly linear view , in which innovations almost by necessity develop from academic research . The implicit focus thus becomes innovations that can easily be packaged as either explicit or tradeable knowledge . With such a focus there is a clear risk that innovation activities focusing on more complex systems innovation , in which multiple stakeholders jointly and interactively contribute to the same overall innovation goal , are overlooked . Given the overall development towards more complex , multi - technological ﬁrms and ﬁrm collaborations , this type of innovation will become increasingly important . Forward - looking universities will thus need to develop an associated , new set of support structures and activities . These support structures could most likely not remain as generic as incubators and technology transfer ofﬁces due to the techno - logical and relational complexity characterizing e . g . , public - private innovation ecosystems . Consequently , the support re - sources will have to be more distributed and require integration roles populated by individuals or teams with a combination of both in - depth engineering knowledge and innovation skills . In other words , support resources capable of matching the bound - ary spanning roles that third - cycle students could transition to given the right support for skill development . Arguably , such roles will be well placed to introduce third - cycle students to the networks discussed in the previous paragraph . VI . C ONCLUSION Third - cycle engineering students that pursue an early career in SMEs that take part in public - private innovation ecosystems will require a different skill set than required by those that turn to academia , large ﬁrms or even entrepreneurship . This study identiﬁed two roles that would match both the interests of SMEs in this context and the in - depth knowledge of the state - of - the - art possessed by an early career PhD . The ﬁrst is the role of the academic boundary spanner , who works in close collaboration with academia to secure additional fund - ing , personnel and knowledge for future growth . This role will require a PhD who has also learnt project management skills related to the planning of complex collaboration . The second is the role of the industrial boundary spanner , who works with other SMEs to broker knowledge for value creation . This role will require a PhD who has also learnt project management skills related to complex collaboration , but in regard to bargaining and negotiation . These skills are typically important to a PhD that pursues an academic career , but not until later in that career . There - fore , third - cycle education typically does not emphasise these two skill sets . To support the third mission also in regard to knowledge - intensive SMEs this should be reconsidered . Simultaneously , this implies the need to evolve university sup - port structures for innovation . On the one hand , by increasing their focus on human and social capital ; on the other hand , by creating more distributed innovation roles that combine both in - depth engineering knowledge and innovation skills . The former should create innovation roles in universities that reach out further into the industrial networks that bring about innovation . The latter should provide an established way of introducing third - cycle students to these industrial networks . Together , these changes should give third - cycle students op - portunities to access informal training necessary for the two identiﬁed boundary spanning roles . A CKNOWLEDGMENT This work was carried out while Martin Karlsson was employed by Atlas Copco Industrial Technique AB . The work is supported by the Horizon 2020 Programme under GA ID 872698 . R EFERENCES [ 1 ] H . Etzkowitz , “Innovation in innovation : The triple helix of university - industry - government relations , ” Social science information , vol . 42 , no . 3 , pp . 293 – 337 , 2003 . [ 2 ] B . ´Culum , N . Ronˇcevi´c , and J . Ledi´c , The academic profession and the role of the service function . Springer , 2013 , pp . 137 – 158 . [ 3 ] O . Dedehayir , S . J . M¨akinen , and J . R . Ortt , “Roles during innovation ecosystem genesis : a literature review , ” Technological Forecasting and Social Change , 2018 . [ 4 ] O . Dedehayir and M . Sepp¨anen , “Birth and expansion of innovation ecosystems : A case study of copper production , ” Journal of technology management & innovation , vol . 10 , no . 2 , pp . 145 – 154 , 2015 . [ 5 ] F . Asplund , J . Bj¨ork , M . Magnusson , and A . J . Patrick , “The genesis of public - private innovation ecosystems : Bias and challenges , ” Technolog - ical Forecasting and Social Change , vol . 162 , 2021 . [ 6 ] E . Autio and L . D . W . Thomas , Innovation Ecosystems : Implications for Innovation Management . Oxford : Oxford University Press , 2014 , pp . 204 – 288 . [ 7 ] A . Kalpaka , J . S¨orvik , A . Tasigiorgou , and G . Rissola , “Digital in - novation hubs as policy instruments to boost digitalisation of smes , ” Publications Ofﬁce of the European Union , Report , 2020 . [ 8 ] F . Asplund and M . Grimheden , “Reinforcing learning in an engineering master’s degree program : The relevance of research training , ” Interna - tional journal of engineering education , vol . 35 , no . 2 , pp . 598 – 616 , 2019 . [ 9 ] L . A . d . V . Gomes , A . L . F . Facin , M . S . Salerno , and R . K . Ikenami , “Unpacking the innovation ecosystem construct : Evolution , gaps and trends , ” Technological Forecasting and Social Change , 2016 . [ 10 ] K . Valkokari , “Business , innovation , and knowledge ecosystems : How they differ and how to survive and thrive within them , ” Technology Innovation Management Review , vol . 5 , no . 8 , 2015 . [ 11 ] R . M . Cyert and P . S . Goodman , “Creating effective university - industry alliances : An organizational learning perspective , ” Organizational dy - namics , vol . 25 , no . 4 , pp . 45 – 58 , 1997 . [ 12 ] E . de Wit - de Vries , W . A . Dolfsma , H . J . van der Windt , and M . P . Gerkema , “Knowledge transfer in university – industry research partner - ships : a review , ” The Journal of Technology Transfer , vol . 44 , no . 4 , pp . 1236 – 1255 , 2019 . [ 13 ] P . - H . Soh and A . M . Subramanian , “When do ﬁrms beneﬁt from university – industry r & d collaborations ? the implications of ﬁrm r & d focus on scientiﬁc research and technological recombination , ” Journal of Business Venturing , vol . 29 , no . 6 , pp . 807 – 821 , 2014 . [ 14 ] T . Buganza , G . Colombo , and P . Landoni , “Small and medium enter - prises’ collaborations with universities for new product development , ” Journal of Small Business Enterprise Development , vol . 21 , no . 1 , pp . 69 – 86 , 2014 . [ 15 ] M . Ozman , “Inter - ﬁrm networks and innovation : a survey of literature , ” Economic of Innovation and New Technology , vol . 18 , no . 1 , pp . 39 – 67 , 2009 . [ 16 ] S . Ankrah and A . - T . Omar , “Universities – industry collaboration : A systematic review , ” Scandinavian Journal of Management , vol . 31 , no . 3 , pp . 387 – 408 , 2015 . [ 17 ] F . Asplund and E . Flening , “Boundary spanning at work placements : challenges to overcome , and ways to learn in preparation for early career engineering , ” European Journal of Engineering Education , pp . 1 – 20 , 2021 . [ 18 ] L . H . Jamieson and J . R . Lohmann , Innovation with impact : Creating a culture for scholarly and systematic innovation in engineering education . Washington , DC : American Society for Engineering Education , 2012 . [ 19 ] R . G . Hadgraft and A . Kolmos , “Emerging learning environments in engineering education , ” Australasian Journal of Engineering Education , vol . 25 , no . 1 , pp . 1 – 14 , 2020 . [ 20 ] E . Flening , F . Asplund , and M . Edin Grimheden , “Measuring professional skills misalignment based on early - career engineers’ perceptions of engineering expertise , ” European Journal of Engineering Education , pp . 1 – 27 , 2021 . [ Online ] . Available : https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1080 / 03043797 . 2021 . 1967883 [ 21 ] CDIO Ofﬁce , Chalmers University of Technology . ( 2022 ) Conceive , design , implement , operate . [ Online ] . Available : http : / / www . cdio . org / [ 22 ] A . Haas , “Crowding at the frontier : boundary spanners , gatekeepers and knowledge brokers , ” Journal of Knowledge Management , vol . 19 , no . 5 , pp . 1029 – 1047 , 2015 . [ 23 ] A . Hargadon and R . I . Sutton , “Technology brokering and innovation in a product development ﬁrm , ” Administrative science quarterly , vol . 42 , no . 4 , pp . 716 – 749 , 1997 . [ 24 ] P . Cillo , “Fostering market knowledge use in innovation : : The role of internal brokers , ” European Management Journal , vol . 23 , no . 4 , pp . 404 – 412 , 2005 . [ 25 ] K . S . Nochur and T . J . Allen , “Do nominated boundary spanners become effective technological gatekeepers ? ” IEEE Transactions on Engineering Management , vol . 39 , no . 3 , pp . 265 – 269 , 1992 . [ 26 ] C . S . Hayter , R . Lubynsky , and S . Maroulis , “Who is the academic entrepreneur ? the role of graduate students in the development of university spinoffs , ” The Journal of Technology Transfer , vol . 42 , no . 6 , pp . 1237 – 1254 , 2017 . [ 27 ] C . S . Hayter , A . J . Nelson , S . Zayed , and A . C . O’Connor , “Concep - tualizing academic entrepreneurship ecosystems : A review , analysis and extension of the literature , ” The Journal of Technology Transfer , vol . 43 , no . 4 , pp . 1039 – 1082 , 2018 . [ 28 ] European Commission . ( 2022 ) Digital innovation hubs and collaborative platform for cyber - physical systems . [ Online ] . Available : https : / / cordis . europa . eu / project / id / 872698 [ 29 ] S . Brinkmann and S . Kvale , Thematizing and Designing an Interview Study , 3rd ed . SAGE Publications , Inc , 2015 , book section 6 , pp . 125 – 147 . [ 30 ] L . Cohen , L . Manion , and K . Morrison , Questionnaires . Abingdon : Routledge , 2007 , book section 14 , pp . 245 – 266 . [ 31 ] S . Brinkmann and S . Kvale , InterViews , Learning the Craft of Qualita - tive Research Interviewing , 3rd ed . SAGE Publications , Inc , 2015 . [ 32 ] B . Johnson and R . Ulseth , “Development of professional competency through professional identity formation in a pbl curriculum , ” in 2016 IEEE Frontiers in Education Conference ( FIE ) . IEEE , 2016 , Confer - ence Proceedings , pp . 1 – 9 . [ 33 ] D . P . Dannels , “Learning to be professional : Technical classroom discourse , practice , and professional identity construction , ” Journal of Business Technical Communication , vol . 14 , no . 1 , pp . 5 – 37 , 2000 . [ 34 ] J . Trevelyan , “Transitioning to engineering practice , ” European Journal of Engineering Education , vol . 44 , no . 6 , pp . 821 – 837 , 2019 . [ 35 ] F . Asplund , H . D . Macedo , and C . Sassanelli , “Problematizing the service portfolio of digital innovation hubs , ” in Working Conference on Virtual Enterprises . Springer , 2021 , pp . 433 – 440 . [ 36 ] J . Owen - Smith and W . W . Powell , “Knowledge networks as channels and conduits : The effects of spillovers in the boston biotechnology community , ” Organization science , vol . 15 , no . 1 , pp . 5 – 21 , 2004 . [ 37 ] M . T¨orngren , F . Asplund , and M . Magnusson , “The role of competence networks in the era of cyber - physical systems — promoting knowledge sharing and knowledge exchange , ” IEEE Design & Test , vol . 37 , no . 6 , pp . 8 – 15 , 2020 . [ 38 ] W . M . Cohen and D . A . Levinthal , “Absorptive capacity : A new per - spective on learning and innovation , ” Administrative Science Quarterly , vol . 35 , no . 1 , pp . 128 – 152 , 1990 . [ 39 ] P . Williams , “The competent boundary spanner , ” Public administration , vol . 80 , no . 1 , pp . 103 – 124 , 2002 . [ 40 ] E . Bourelos , M . Magnusson , and M . McKelvey , “Investigating the complexity facing academic entrepreneurs in science and engineering : the complementarities of research performance , networks and support structures in commercialisation , ” Cambridge Journal of Economics , vol . 36 , no . 3 , pp . 751 – 780 , 2012 . [ 41 ] R . M . Bakker , J . Knoben , N . De Vries , and L . A . Oerlemans , “The nature and prevalence of inter - organizational project ventures : Evidence from a large scale ﬁeld study in the netherlands 2006 – 2009 , ” International Journal of Project Management , vol . 29 , no . 6 , pp . 781 – 794 , 2011 .