Development / Plasticity / Repair SDF1 Regulates Leading Process Branching and Speed of Migrating Interneurons Daniel E . Lysko , 1 Mary Putt , 2 and Jeffrey A . Golden 1 , 3 Departments of 1 Pathology and Laboratory Medicine and 2 Biostatistics and Epidemiology , University of Pennsylvania School of Medicine , Philadelphia , Pennsylvania 19104 , and 3 Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine , Children’s Hospital of Philadelphia , Philadelphia , Pennsylvania 19104 Cell migration is required for normal embryonic development , yet how cells navigate complex paths while integrating multiple guidance cues remains poorly understood . During brain development , interneurons migrate from the ventral ganglionic eminence to the cerebral cortex within several migratory streams . They must exit these streams to invade the cortical plate . While SDF1 ( stromal cell - derived factor - 1 ) signalingisnecessaryfornormalinterneuronstreammigration , howtheyswitchfromtangentialstreammigrationtoinvadethe cortical plate is unknown . Here , we demonstrate that SDF1 signaling reduces interneuron branching frequency by reducing cAMP levels via a G i signaling pathway using an in vitro mouse explant system , resulting in the maintenance of stream migration . Blocking SDF1 signaling or increasing branching frequency results in stream exit and cortical plate invasion in mouse brain slices . These data support a novel model to understand how migrating interneurons switch from tangential migration to invade the cortical plate in which reducing SDF signaling increases leading process branching and slows the migration rate , permitting migrating interneurons to sense cortically directed guidance cues . Introduction Two primary pathways of migration exist for neurons destined for the cerebral cortex . Excitatory projection neurons migrate radially from the pallial ventricular zone ( VZ ) ( Hatten , 2002 ; Kriegstein and Noctor , 2004 ) . In contrast , interneurons ( inhibi - tory neurons ) have a much longer and more circuitous migration path , originating in the subpallial ganglionic eminence and mi - grating tangentially through the pallium , eventually turning to enter the cortical plate ( Marín and Rubenstein , 2003 ) . Interneu - rons predominately migrate within two defined streams : one in the marginal zone ( MZ ) and the second a broader stream in the subventricular ( SVZ ) and intermediate ( IZ ) zones ( McManus et al . , 2004 ; Me´tin et al . , 2006 ) . Interneurons eventually turn out of these streams to enter the developing cortical plate , suggesting the presence of neocortical guidance factors that direct interneu - rons to their final position ( supplemental Fig . S1 , available at www . jneurosci . org as supplemental material ) ( Lo´pez - Bendito et al . , 2008 ) . Several secreted guidance factors have been identified for their roles in directing interneurons along their migratory path . For example , Sema3a repels migrating interneurons from the stria - tum ( Tamamaki et al . , 2003 ) , while Nrg1 - Ig attracts interneurons to migrate dorsally from the subpallium into the pallium ( Flames et al . , 2004 ) . SDF1 ( stromal cell - derived factor - 1 ; also called CXCL12 ) was recently identified as a molecule necessary for nor - mal stream migration ( Stumm et al . , 2003 ) . SDF1 is a chemokine that induces chemotaxis in lymphocytes and is expressed in the cerebral cortex along the migration stream of interneurons , whereas the SDF1 receptor CXCR4 is expressed on migrating interneurons ( Stumm and Hollt , 2007 ; Stumm et al . , 2007 ; Lo´pez - Bendito et al . , 2008 ) . In CXCR4 - null mice stream migra - tion is disrupted , causing interneurons to prematurely exit the migratory streams and invade the cortical plate , resulting in ab - normal interneuron distribution ( Li et al . , 2008 ; Lo´pez - Bendito et al . , 2008 ) . While these studies indicate that SDF1 signaling is necessary for normal interneuron distribution in the brain , it remains unknown how the loss of SDF1 signaling results in inter - neurons leaving their tangential trajectory and prematurely in - vading the cortical plate . We and others have hypothesized that the leading process of migrating interneurons functions like an axon’s growth cone to provide guidance during cell migration ( Tessier - Lavigne and Goodman , 1996 ; Nasrallah et al . , 2006 ; Martini et al . , 2009 ; Gopal et al . , 2010 ) . Interneurons have a unique migratory behavior in which the nucleus moves in a saltatory manner behind a long single or branched projection : the leading process ( Me´tin et al . , 2006 ; Nasrallah et al . , 2006 ) . The leading process branches re - peatedly during migration , possibly to sample the surrounding environment for guidance factors ( supplemental Fig . S1 D ) . Re - cent data demonstrating that interneurons preferentially branch toward attractants such as Nrg1 support this hypothesis ( Martini et al . , 2009 ) . In this study , we test the hypothesis that SDF1 sig - naling influences interneuron branching to control interneuron stream migration and stream exit . We find that SDF1 suppresses branching , thus keeping migrating interneurons within their mi - ReceivedJune17 , 2010 ; revisedOct . 22 , 2010 ; acceptedNov . 24 , 2010 . ThisworkwassupportedbyNationalInstitutesofHealthGrantsNS45034andHD26979 . Wethankthemembers oftheGoldenlaboratoryfortheirhelpfulcommentsandsupport . WethankDr . JonathenRaperforthekindgiftsof SDF1aandG i inhibitoryexpressionvectors . WethankGaiaColasanteandDr . VaniaBroccoliforthekindgiftofan SDF1avector . WethankDr . RamonPla , JuanAntonioSanchez , andDr . OscarMarinforassistancewithstatistical analysis . WethankDrs . JonathanRaperandGregBashawforcriticallyreviewingthismanuscript . CorrespondenceshouldbeaddressedtoJeffreyA . Golden , Children’sHospitalofPhiladelphia , 3615CivicCenterBoule - vard . , AbramsonResearchCenter , Room516G , Philadelphia , PA19104 . E - mail : goldenj @ mail . med . upenn . edu . DOI : 10 . 1523 / JNEUROSCI . 3118 - 10 . 2011 Copyright©2011theauthors 0270 - 6474 / 11 / 311739 - 07 $ 15 . 00 / 0 TheJournalofNeuroscience , February2 , 2011 • 31 ( 5 ) : 1739 – 1745 • 1739 gratory stream and moving rapidly . When SDF1 signaling is reduced , interneuron branchingisstimulated , therateofmigra - tion is slowed , and interneurons more frequently turn and exit their migratory streams . Materials and Methods Mouse strains . CD1 mice or CD1 mice crossed to Dlx5 / 6 - Cre - IRES - eGFP mice ( Stenman et al . , 2003 ) to genetically label interneurons de - rived from the medial ganglionic eminence ( MGE ) with green fluorescent protein ( GFP ) were used for all experiments . All studies were approved by the Institutional Animal Care and Use Committee of the Children’s Hospital of Philadelphia , Philadelphia , PA . Sliceandexplantculture . Brainsfromembry - onicday14 . 5 ( E14 . 5 ) mouseembryosweredis - sected in ice - cold HBSS ( Sigma ) , embedded in 4 % lowmeltingpointagarose ( Lonza ) inHBSS and sectioned coronally at 250 (cid:1) m . Slices were placed on Millicell - CM culture inserts ( Milli - pore ) , while 100 (cid:1) m square explants were cut out of the MGE of the slice and placed on plas - tic dishes or glass coverslips . The explants were covered with 50 % Matrigel and 50 % collagen ( 2 mg / ml ; BD Biosciences ) and placed at 37°C with 5 % CO 2 for 20 min to gel . Tissue was incubated in DFS medium ( F12 : DMEM with 10 % FBS , 40 (cid:1) M L - glutamine , 47 m M glucose , and penicillin / streptomycin ) for 1 h , then switched to DM medium ( DMEM with N2 , 36 m M glucose , and penicillin / streptomycin ) . Slices were imaged after 1 h in DM medium , while explants were imaged after one day . Microscopy . Speed and branching analyses wereperformedontime - lapseimagesacquired at 10 (cid:1) magnification and at 10 min intervals for 8 – 12 h on a Nikon TE300 microscope equipped with an Okolab environmental chamberat37°Cwith5 % CO 2 . Time - lapseim - aging of GFP - labeled interneurons migrating in brain slices was acquired with 5 (cid:1) m Z - stacks at 20 (cid:1) at 10 min intervals for 3 . 5 h on a Leica SP2 or Olympus FV10i confocal microscope . SDF1 bead - implanted slices were imaged on a Leica MZ16FA stereomicroscope . Treatment protocols . Interneurons were ex - posed to SDF1a by coculturing COS7 cell clumps coexpressing SDF1a and DsRed 300 (cid:1) m from MGE explants within Matrigel : colla - gen ( BD Biosciences ) . COS7 cells were tran - siently transfected with FuGENE 6 ( Roche ) 2 d before pelleting and resuspension in an equal volume of Matrigel : collagen to form clumps . To inhibit G i signaling , slices were electropo - rated with a construct expressing interfering peptide IKNNLKDCGLF ( cue BIOtech ) , fol - lowed by setting up explants as described above . Modulation of cAMP was achieved by treating tissue with 125 (cid:1) M forskolin ( Sigma ) or 790 (cid:1) M dibromo ( db ) - cAMP ( Sigma ) and imaged immediately . To block SDF1 signaling , slices were treated with the CXCR4 inhibitor AMD3100 ( Sigma ; 189 . 6 (cid:1) M ) . To treat slices with BSA or recombinant SDF1 ( PeproTech ) , agarose beads ( Affi - Gel , Bio - Rad ) were soaked Figure 1 . SDF1 reduces branching frequency . A , Phase microscopy of migrating interneurons exhibiting leading process branching ( * ) , interstitial branching ( * * ) , and somal translocation ( arrowheads ) in control neurons . B ( and supplemental Fig . 1 , video1 ) , SDF1 - treatedinterneuronsshowdecreasedbranchingfrequencyandfastersomaltranslocation . C , D , Quantificationof speed and branching of individual interneurons treated with SDF1 shows an increase in speed and a decrease in both leading process splitting and interstitial branching . Error bars are (cid:2) SEM ( * * * p (cid:3) 0 . 001 , t test ) ; 45 cells for each condition ; three independentexperiments . Scalebar , 50 (cid:1) m . Figure2 . InterneuronsintheSVZ / IZmigrationstreamdecreasespeedandincreasebranchingastheymigratedowntheSDF1 expressiongradient . A , SDF1isexpressedintwoareasinthedevelopingmousebrain : anarrowbandnearthesurfaceofthebrain and in a gradient within the cortex . These two areas are also the sites of interneuron stream migration seen in B . LGE , Lateral ganglionic eminence ; V , lateral ventricle . B , Phase / confocal microscopy of GFP (cid:4) interneurons migrating in a mouse brain slice , showingareasdefinedforanalysis . C , D , Nearthecorticalnotch , anareaofhighendogenousSDF1 , interneuronsmigrateat53 (cid:2) 2 (cid:1) m / handbranchinfrequently ( 0 . 26 (cid:2) 0 . 02branches / h ) . Onceinthearcharea , anareaoflowerSDF1expression , interneurons slowdown ( 47 (cid:2) 2 (cid:1) m / h ) andbranchmorefrequently ( 0 . 6 (cid:2) 0 . 03branches / h ) . E , F , Histogramsofbranchanglefrequencyshow modestbranchanglesnearthenotcharea , whileinthearcharealargerbranchanglesoccur . Meanangles : 50 (cid:2) 2 . 2 ( notch ) , 56 (cid:2) 2 . 2 ( arch ) . Errorbarsare (cid:2) SEM ( * * * p (cid:3) 0 . 001 , * * p (cid:3) 0 . 01 , * p (cid:3) 0 . 05 , t testor (cid:2) 2 testin F ) ; 90cellsforeachcondition ; three independentexperiments . Scalebar , 300 (cid:1) m . 1740 • J . Neurosci . , February2 , 2011 • 31 ( 5 ) : 1739 – 1745 Lyskoetal . • SDF1ControlsMigratingInterneuronBranching in20 (cid:1) g / mlproteinsolution1 – 24hat4°Candimbeddedintothesliceat defined positions . Quantification . Interneuron average speed was measured by recording cell soma position in each frame using the Manual Tracking plugin in ImageJ ( NationalInstitutesofHealth ; http : / / rsb . info . nih . gov / ij / ) andav - eragingthespeedfromeachframeintheintervalofanalysis . Interneuron branching was recorded manually . Interneurons with blocked G i signal - ing were identified by the fluorescence of cotransfected DsRed . Unfor - tunately , the fluorescence was not bright enough to allow reliable quantification of branching ; speed was analyzed instead . Interneuron distribution across the neocortex was determined by manual counting using the Cell Counter plugin in ImageJ . Cells were counted in a defined 400 pixel - wide ( 293 (cid:1) m ) area of analysis divided into 10 equal bins placed 300 (cid:1) m dorsal to the pallial / subpallial boundary . Statistical analysis . Statistical analysis was performed using Microsoft Excel or R ( www . r - project . org ) with plugin R commander . If data ap - peared normally distributed , we asked whether there were differences between groups using multiway ANOVA and post hoc tests adjusted for multiple comparisons using a Bonferroni correction . For forskolin and db - cAMP treatment in vitro the branching data appeared non - normally distributed so a similar approach was used , but in this case a generalized linear model with a Poisson distribution and a term to correct for overd - ispersion was used to fit the data , yielding an overall test of significance based on analysis of deviance . Interneuron distribution in AMD3100 - treated and forskolin - treated slices and branch angle distributions were analyzed using a (cid:2) 2 test . If a difference was found between the popula - tions , control and treated values for each bin were independently ana - lyzed using 2 (cid:1) 2 contingency tables . Results SDF1 reduces branching frequency in migrating interneurons SDF1 signaling is necessary for normal in - terneuron stream migration , although the effect of SDF1 on interneuron migratory behavior is incompletely understood . In contrast , Nrg1 is known to alter interneu - ron branching to attract interneurons to - ward the pallium . We have hypothesized that SDF1 also influences branching be - havior to facilitate interneuron migration within streams . We examined the branching behavior of control - treated and SDF1 - treated in - terneurons in vitro by time - lapse micros - copy ( explant culture ) . Interneurons treated with SDF1 migrate faster than controls , as reported previously ( Lo´pez - Bendito et al . , 2008 ) , but were also found to branch less frequently ( Fig . 1 ) . The SDF1 - induced branching phenotype was found for both leading process splitting as well as interstitial branching ( Fig . 1 D ) . These data demonstrate that SDF1 signal - ing enhances the rate of migration while simultaneously affecting specific branch - ing behavior : a reduction in branching frequency . In vivo , stream migration occurs in ar - eas of SDF1 expression ( Stumm et al . , 2007 ; Lo´pez - Benditoetal . , 2008 ) ; thus , we hypothesized that interneurons migrating within SDF1 - rich streams into the pal - lium would exhibit reduced branching and fast migratory rates . As these neurons move from ventral to dorsal in the SVZ / IZ stream , they are exposed to progressively lower SDF1 levels ( Fig . 2 A ) ; thus , we predicted they would exhibit increased branching and slower migration . This would lead to increased exploration of their environment , increased directional changes , and ulti - mately accelerated cortical plate invasion . To test this model in brain slices , we measured interneuron speed and branching frequency within the SVZ / IZ stream in two positions of differing SDF1 expression by time - lapse microscopy ( Fig . 2 B ) . The first position was just above the cortical notch where SDF1 is highly expressed ( ventrolateral neocortex ) . Inter - neurons were found to branch at a modest rate ( 0 . 24 branches / h ) and migrate quickly ( 53 (cid:1) m / h ) ( Fig . 2 C , D ) . In contrast , farther up the cortical arch where SDF1 expression is lower and narrower ( dorsomedial neocortex ) , interneurons branch (cid:5) 2 . 5 times more frequently ( 0 . 6 branches / h ) and slow down ( 47 (cid:1) m / h ) . We also measured the angle between leading process branches , as differ - ences in branch angle have been observed previously at different areas along the interneuron migration path ( Martini et al . , 2009 ) . Interneurons migrating in the SVZ / IZ stream near the notch had an average branch angle of 50 (cid:2) 2 . 2° , while interneurons migrat - ing farther along in the arch had a slightly higher average branch angle of 56 (cid:2) 2 . 2° . The distribution of branch angles in both areas appeared log normal , but only in the arch area did branch angles larger than 105° occur , with significantly wider angles occurring throughout the distribution ( Fig . 2 E , F ) . Figure 3 . Blocking SDF1 signaling in brain slices increases branching and shifts interneuron distribution toward the cortical plate ( CP ) . A , Control - treatedDlx5 / 6 - Cre - IRES - GFPanimalsexpressGFPininterneuronsborninthemedialandlateralganglionic eminences . Thebrainslicein A showstypicalstreammigrationinthemarginalzone , MZ , andsubventricularzone / intermediate zone , SVZ / IZ . B ( andsupplementalFigs . 3 , 5 , video1 ) , BlockingSDFsignalingwithAMD3100resultsinalossofdistinctinterneuron streammigrationandanincreaseininterneuronsinthecorticalplate . C , Quantificationofinterneuronbranchingfrequencyshows asignificantincreaseinbranchinginsliceswhenSDF1signalingisblocked . Errorbarsare (cid:2) SEM ( * * * p (cid:3) 0 . 001 , t test ) ; 18cellsfor eachcondition ; sixindependentexperiments . D , InterneuronsnormallycontainedintheSVZ / IZmigrationstream ( bins5and6 ) are shiftedoutwardstowardthecorticalplate ( bins7and8 ) insliceswithblockedSDF1signaling . Severalinterneuronsalsomigrated towardtheVZ ( bin1 ) inAMD3100 - treatedslices . Errorbarsare (cid:2) SEM ( * p (cid:3) 0 . 05 , * * p (cid:3) 0 . 01 , * * * p (cid:3) 0 . 001 , (cid:2) 2 test ) ; 10slices foreachcondition ; threeindependentexperiments ; cntl , Control . Scalebar , 100 (cid:1) m . Lyskoetal . • SDF1ControlsMigratingInterneuronBranching J . Neurosci . , February2 , 2011 • 31 ( 5 ) : 1739 – 1745 • 1741 Blocking SDF1 signaling increases interneuron branching in brain slices , driving interneurons from the SVZ / IZ migration stream to the cortical plate To test the pathfinding aspect of our model , we acutely inhibited interneuron SDF1 signaling in brain slices . As expected and seen previously , inhibition of SDF1 signaling with the CXCR4 inhib - itor AMD3100 disrupted migration stream organization similar to the phenotype of the CXCR4 - null mouse ( Fig . 3 A , B ) ( Lo´pez - Bendito et al . , 2008 ) . Importantly , inhibiting SDF1 signaling in - creased the branching frequency of interneuron leading processes in the SVZ / IZ migration stream ( Fig . 3 C ) and resulted in a shift in interneuron distribution . Interneurons in control slices were most frequently present in two main migration streams ( SVZ / IZ and MZ ) , whereas interneurons in AMD3100 - treated slices exited out of the SVZ / IZ migratory stream to find positions in the cortical plate and VZ ( Fig . 3 D ) . Thus , we find SDF1 signaling reduces branching frequency of migrating inter - neurons both in explant cultures and in brain slices . These data suggest that SDF1 induces a specific branching behavior in inter - neurons that is necessary for normal stream migration and inter - neuron position within the developing cortex . SDF1 uses a G i - coupled signal transduction pathway to decrease interneuron branching The SDF1 signaling pathway governing this branching behavior has yet to be investigated in migrating interneurons , but SDF1 signaling is known to positively modulate leukocyte chemotaxis and primordial germ cell migration in zebrafish ( Phillips and Ager , 2002 ; Knaut et al . , 2003 ) . The SDF1 receptor CXCR4 func - tions as a G - coupled protein receptor that can act through G i to inhibit adenylyl cyclase ( AC ) , lowering cAMP levels and protein kinase A ( PKA ) activity . Given that other migrating cell types employ similar signaling mechanisms during migration , we pre - dicted that the increased speed of migration and reduction in branching frequency seen in SDF1 - treated interneurons in vitro would be the result of a similar signaling pathway . Totestthisprediction , weelectroporatedinterneurons invitro with a cue BIOtech G i minigene vector expressing an interfering peptide known to specifically block G i signaling ( explant cul - ture ) . The G i minigene had little effect on migration in the ab - sence of SDF1 , but in the presence of SDF1 blocking G i signaling blocked the expected increase in migration rate ( Fig . 4 A ) . Given that SDF1 signaling normally inhibits AC through G i , we expected stimulation of AC to block the reduction in branch - ing frequency seen in SDF1 - treated interneurons . Stimulation of AC with forskolin increased branching frequency in control - treated neurons and blocked reduction of branching in SDF1 - treated interneurons ( Fig . 4 B ) . Similarly , stimulating protein kinase A with dibromo - cAMP also resulted in an increased branching frequency , but in the presence of SDF1 dibromo - cAMP blocks the expected reduction in branching ( Fig . 4 C ) . These data indicate that SDF1 inhibits branching of interneurons through this G i - coupled receptor signal transduction pathway . Forskolin increases interneuron branching in brain slices , driving interneurons from the SVZ / IZ migration stream to the cortical plate To further test the sufficiency of increased branching to induce the same shift in interneuron distribution seen when inhibiting SDF1 signaling , we again used our slice culture system . We acutely increased the frequency of interneuron branching in brain slices by adding forskolin , as was done in explant culture . This resulted in a similar disruption of the migration streams as seen in brain slices with inhibited SDF1 signaling ( compare Figs . 5 A , B , 3 A , B ) . As expected , this treatment increased the branch - ing frequency of interneurons and resulted in a shift in interneu - ron distribution ( Fig . 5 C , D ) . Interneurons exited from the SVZ / IZ migration stream to positions in the cortical plate . Im - portantly , treatment with forskolin did not effect interneurons’ capacity to respond to SDF1 in brain slices in a bead attraction assay ( supplemental Fig S2 , available at www . jneurosci . org as supplemental material ) , supporting our model that either inhib - iting SDF1 signaling or increasing branching frequency is suffi - cient to allow interneurons to exit at least one of their migration streams and invade the cortical plate . Figure4 . SDF1affectsbranchingfrequencythroughaG i - mediatedmechanism . A ( andsup - plemental Fig . 4 , video 1 ) , Interneurons transfected with a G i - specific interfering peptide mi - gratewithsimilarspeedasthatofmock - treatedcellsintheabsenceofSDF1 ( whitebars , invitro explant culture ) . SDF1 induces a faster migration speed in mock - treated cells , but this speed increaseisblockedincellswithinhibitedG i signaling ( graybars ) . Errorbarsare (cid:2) SEM ( p (cid:3) 0 . 001 , multiwayANOVA , notsignificant ( ns ) , p (cid:6) 0 . 05 , * p (cid:3) 0 . 05 , * * * p (cid:3) 0 . 001 , t testswith Bonferroni correction ) ; (cid:6) 32 cells for each condition ; three independent experiments . B ( and supplementalFig . 4 , video2 ) , Stimulationofadenylylcyclasewithforskolininducesinterneu - ronbranching . SDF1alonereducesbranching , butthisbranchingdecreaseisblockedwhencells arealsostimulatedwithforskolin . Errorbarsare (cid:2) SEM ( p (cid:3) 0 . 001 , analysisofdeviance , ns , p (cid:6) 0 . 05 , * * * p (cid:3) 0 . 001 , posthoc testswithBonferronicorrection ) ; (cid:6) 70cellsforeachcondi - tion ; three independent experiments . C ( and supplemental Fig . 4 , video 2 ) , Stimulation of proteinkinaseAwithdb - cAMPinducesinterneuronbranching . SDF1alonereducesbranching , butthisbranchingdecreaseisblockedwhencellsarealsostimulatedwithdb - cAMP . Errorbars are (cid:2) SEM ( p (cid:3) 0 . 001 , analysis of deviance , * p (cid:3) 0 . 05 , * * * p (cid:3) 0 . 001 , post hoc tests with Bonferronicorrection ) ; (cid:6) 58cellsforeachcondition ; threeindependentexperiments . 1742 • J . Neurosci . , February2 , 2011 • 31 ( 5 ) : 1739 – 1745 Lyskoetal . • SDF1ControlsMigratingInterneuronBranching Interneuron leading process branching and migration rates are inversely regulated by SDF1 signaling Interneurons in CXCR4 - null mice prematurely exit their migra - tion streams and migrate to the cortical plate , eventually exhibit - ing an abnormal distribution ( Li et al . , 2008 ; Lo´pez - Bendito et al . , 2008 ) . Our data indicate that SDF1 increases the speed of migra - tion while decreasing the frequency of branching . Based on these findings , we predicted that branching and speed would be co - regulated by cAMP . To test this hypothesis , we treated interneu - rons with different concentrations of forskolin to induce branching and measured interneuron migration speed . We found that as branching frequency increases , migration speed decreases ( Fig . 6 ) . At the highest concentrations of forskolin we observed cells branch - ing most frequently , while some cells also frequently change the po - larity of their leading process and migrate quickly back and forth , resulting in a higher average speed . Cells treated with lower doses of forskolin branch more frequently than control cells while maintain - ing the polarity of their leading process , resulting in the lowest mi - gration speed . These data support our model that intracellular signaling pathways that affect branching frequency through cAMP levels or PKA activity inversely affect speed . Discussion Understanding how migrating neurons navigate the complex en - vironment of the embryonic brain is a fundamental question in CNS development . Although progress has been made in under - standing how migrating cells move and change their direction in vitro , the mechanisms migrating cells use as they are directed through tissue by multiple guidance factors are largely unknown . We have examined interneuron stream migration in the cor - tex and tested the role of SDF1 in stream maintenance and inter - neuron stream exit . Although SDF1 had previously been identified as a modulator of migration rate in vitro , data we were able to confirm , we also determined that SDF1 signaling reduces interneuron branching frequency both in vitro and in brain slices . In this context , inhibiting SDF1 signaling results in interneurons prematurely exiting from migratory streams and shifting the interneuron dis - tribution from the SVZ / IZ to the cortical plate . We found that inducing branching in migrating interneurons is sufficient to cause cells to exit their migration stream and invade the cortical plate in brain slices . While treatment with AMD3100 will act autonomously on interneurons , we have not yet excluded the possibility that treatment with forskolin could act nonautonomously to cause cortical plate invasion . Together , our data suggest that SDF1 signaling suppresses branching fre - quencytoallowcellstomaintainasimplermorphologybettersuitedtorapidmigra - tion within a defined stream . Interest - ingly , these treatments did not cause a measurable amount of interneurons to exit the MZ stream , where SDF1 is also highly but more uniformly expressed ( Figs . 3 , 5 , bin 10 ) . This could suggest in - trinsic differences between the SDF1 re - sponse of interneurons occupying the two different migration streams , external sub - strate differences , or a more complex guidance switch with addi - tional signaling factors to induce interneurons to exit the MZ to invade the cortical plate . To characterize the intracellular signaling pathway used by SDF1 in interneurons , we interrogated known components of the pathway . We expected CXCR4 signaling to occur through G i as in other cell types . We found that G i regulation of cAMP concen - tration is important in defining interneuron speed and branching frequency . We also found that protein kinase A may transduce this second messenger signal to further signaling pathways to create the complex migration behavior of interneurons . Our data imply an inverse relationship between branching and the rate of migration . Treating interneurons with SDF1 re - sulted in both an increase in speed and a decrease in leading process branching . We next asked whether regulation of these two aspects of cell behavior diverge farther down the SDF1 sig - naling pathway . Treatment over a range of forskolin concen - trations , which increases cAMP through adenylyl cyclase sensitization , determined that increasing cAMP concentration increases branching while reducing speed . Together with our SDF1 treatment results , cAMP concentration is a central media - tor of both speed and branching frequency . Whether cAMP affects speed and branching through separate downstream sig - naling pathways or through shared cytoskeletal regulation re - mains to be determined . The inverse relationship between branching and speed has led us to propose a new model to describe interneuron stream mi - gration ( Fig . 6 B ) . In this model , interneurons migrating in streams under the influence of SDF1 migrate faster as a result of a reduced branching frequency . This allows interneurons to spread Figure5 . Increasingbranchingfrequencyinbrainslicesshiftsinterneurondistributiontowardthecorticalplate ( CP ) . A , B ( and supplementalFigs . 3 , 5 , video1 ) , Normalstreammigrationisdisruptedbyincreasingbranchingfrequencywithforskolintreatment similartoblockingSDF1signaling ( comparewithFig . 3 ) . C , Quantificationofbranchingfrequencyofinterneuronsinslicestreated withforskolinshowsasignificantincreaseinbranchingfrequency . Errorbarsare (cid:2) SEM ( * * * p (cid:3) 0 . 001 , t test ) ; 18cellsforeach condition ; six independent experiments . D , Interneurons normally contained in migration streams in bins 5 and 6 are shifted outwardstowardthecorticalplate ( bins7and8 ) inslicestreatedwithforskolin . Errorbarsare (cid:2) SEM ( * p (cid:3) 0 . 05 , * * p (cid:3) 0 . 01 , * * * p (cid:3) 0 . 001 , (cid:2) 2 test ) ; (cid:6) 9slicesforeachcondition ; sevenindependentexperiments . InterneuronmigrationtowardtheVZ ( bin 1 ) wasnotseeninforskolin - treatedslices ; someneuronsmaymigrateawayfromtheVZintreatedslices . Scalebar , 100 (cid:1) m . Lyskoetal . • SDF1ControlsMigratingInterneuronBranching J . Neurosci . , February2 , 2011 • 31 ( 5 ) : 1739 – 1745 • 1743 from their ganglionic eminence origins through the cortex and achieve a proper interneuron distribution . As individual interneurons encounter lower SDF1 levels and consequently reduce SDF1 signaling , they increase their branching and reduce their speed . This permits them to sample as yet unknown cues , change direction , and migrate into the cortical plate to achieve their final position . One possible cortical plate invasion cue could be a time - dependent reduction in SDF1 signaling levels . It is likely that SDF1 signaling within individual inter - neurons is reduced as they exit migration streams ( Liapi et al . , 2008 ; Lo´pez - Bendito et al . , 2008 ) . Consistent with our observa - tion of increased branching and stream exit when treating brain slices with SDF1 signaling inhibitor , migratory interneu - rons in the CXCR4 knock - out mouse exit their migration streams prematurely , demonstrating that a reduction in SDF1 signaling allows cells to exit migration streams , but also that SDF1 alone cannot define and maintain stream migration ( Li et al . , 2008 ) . Whether this reduced SDF1 signaling is the result of downregulation of CXCR4 or internally initiated interfer - ence with the SDF1 signaling pathway , perhaps at the cAMP level , remains to be elucidated . One external cue for interneu - ron stream exit is likely decreasing SDF1 concentration as interneurons migrate down the gradient of SDF1 expression ( Stumm et al . , 2007 ) . Consistent with this hypothesis , our measurement of inter - neuron branching in brain slices shows that interneuron branching is lower near the cortical notch , an area of high SDF expression ; but farther up the cortical arch where SDF expression is reduced , interneuron branching in - creases ( Fig . 2 ) . According to our data and model , as SDF1 signaling is re - duced , the branching frequency of interneurons increases ( Fig . 6 B ) . We speculate that this increase in branching allows inter - neurons to probe greater space and come into contact with addi - tional guidance factors . A cortical plate attractant has been biologically demonstrated , but is yet to be identified ( Lo´pez - Bendito et al . , 2008 ) . In addition to the cortical plate attractant , it is possible that repellents could direct interneuron migration in the cortex . There is some evidence that semaphorins may be ex - pressed in the dorsal VZ / SVZ ( Tamamaki et al . , 2003 ) , and SDF1 has been shown to reduce the response of pathfinding axons to repellents in the Slit and Semaphorin families ( Chalasani et al . , 2003 ) . In the cortex , interneurons migrating in SDF1 - rich streams would be insensitive to any repellents . Upon reduction in SDF1 signaling , interneurons could then respond to the repel - lents and exit migration streams toward the cortical plate . Inter - estingly , we provide some evidence that reduction of SDF1 signaling with AMD3100 can slightly increase interneuron local - ization in the VZ ( Fig . 3 , bin 1 ) , suggesting that blocking SDF1 signaling may leave interneurons free to explore the VZ . In con - trast , if SDF1 signaling is intact but interneuron branching is increased by forskolin treatment , fewer cells localize to the VZ even though cells exit the SVZ / IZ stream on both sides , possibly displaying a balance between SDF1’s attractive ability and inter - neuron branching causing more exploratory migration ( Fig . 5 , bins1and4 – 6 ) . Finally , inourmodelincreasedbranchingwould shift the balance of stimulation from SDF1 to the cortical plate attractant or a VZ - localized repellent , resulting in slower migra - tion and stream exit . The role of SDF1 in this model is to affect pathfinding by modulating cell morphology , not necessarily for SDF1 to function as an attractant or a motogen , both additional possible functions ( Li et al . , 2008 ; Lo´pez - Bendito et al . , 2008 ) . Our data provide a new model as to how SDF1 controls inter - neuron stream migration through signal transduction and mod - ification of cell migratory morphology and behavior . Because we have shown that changes in branching frequency are relevant in a tissue context , we expect future studies to further define the role of migrating interneuron branching in brain development . References Chalasani SH , Sabelko KA , Sunshine MJ , Littman DR , Raper JA ( 2003 ) A chemokine , SDF - 1 , reducestheeffectivenessofmultipleaxonalrepellents and is required for normal axon pathfinding . J Neurosci 23 : 1360 – 1371 . Flames N , Long JE , Garratt AN , Fischer TM , Gassmann M , Birchmeier C , Lai C , Rubenstein JL , Marín O ( 2004 ) Short - and long - range attraction of cortical GABAergic interneurons by neuregulin - 1 . Neuron 44 : 251 – 261 . Gopal PP , Simonet JC , Shapiro W , Golden JA ( 2010 ) Leading process Figure6 . Speedandbranchingfrequencyareinverselyrelated . A , Interneuronsshowadose - dependentincreaseinbranching frequencywhentreatedwithforskolin . Asthebranchingfrequencyincreases , theaveragespeedofmigrationdecreases . Dosesin (cid:1) M : 0 , 1 . 25 , 6 . 25 , 12 . 5 , 125 . Errorbarsare (cid:2) SEM ; 75cellsforeachdose ; threeindependentexperiments . B , Proposedmodelfor leadingprocessbranchinginitiationofinterneuronexitfrommigrationstreams . E14 . 5 , AninterneuronmigratingintheSDF1 - rich SVZ / IZstreambranchesinfrequentlyandmigratesfast . E15 . 5 , Asdevelopmentaltimegoeson , SDF1signalingdecreases , increas - ingbranchingfrequencyandslowingtheinterneuron . E16 . 5 , Increasedbranchingexposestheinterneurontoadditionalguidance factors , inducingachangeinmigrationbehaviorandstreamexit . E17 . 5 , Theinterneuronisfullyundercorticalplate ( CP ) attractant controlandreachesitsdestinationinthecorticalplate . 1744 • J . Neurosci . , February2 , 2011 • 31 ( 5 ) : 1739 – 1745 Lyskoetal . • SDF1ControlsMigratingInterneuronBranching branch instability in Lis1 (cid:4) / (cid:7) nonradially migrating interneurons . Cereb Cortex 20 : 1497 – 1505 . Hatten ME ( 2002 ) New directions in neuronal migration . Science 297 : 1660 – 1663 . Knaut H , Werz C , Geisler R , Nu¨sslein - Volhard C , Tu¨bingen 2000 Screen Consortium ( 2003 ) A zebrafish homologue of the chemokine receptor Cxcr4 is a germ - cell guidance receptor . Nature 421 : 279 – 282 . Kriegstein AR , Noctor SC ( 2004 ) Patterns of neuronal migration in the em - bryonic cortex . Trends Neurosci 27 : 392 – 399 . Li G , Adesnik H , Li J , Long J , Nicoll RA , Rubenstein JL , Pleasure SJ ( 2008 ) RegionaldistributionofcorticalinterneuronsanddevelopmentofinhibitorytoneareregulatedbyCxcl12 / Cxcr4 signaling . J Neurosci 28 : 1085 – 1098 . Liapi A , Pritchett J , Jones O , Fujii N , Parnavelas JG , Nadarajah B ( 2008 ) Stromal - derived factor 1 signalling regulates radial and tangential migra - tion in the developing cerebral cortex . Dev Neurosci 30 : 117 – 131 . Lo´pez - BenditoG , Sa´nchez - Alcan˜izJA , PlaR , BorrellV , Pico´E , Valdeolmillos M , Marín O ( 2008 ) Chemokine signaling controls intracortical migra - tion and final distribution of GABAergic interneurons . J Neurosci 28 : 1613 – 1624 . Marín O , Rubenstein JL ( 2003 ) Cell migration in the forebrain . Annu Rev Neurosci 26 : 441 – 483 . Martini FJ , Valiente M , Lo´pez Bendito G , Szabo´ G , Moya F , Valdeolmillos M , MarínO ( 2009 ) Biasedselectionofleadingprocessbranchesmediatesche - motaxis during tangential neuronal migration . Development 136 : 41 – 50 . McManus MF , Nasrallah IM , Gopal PP , Baek WS , Golden JA ( 2004 ) Axon mediated interneuron migration . J Neuropathol Exp Neurol 63 : 932 – 941 . Me´tin C , Baudoin JP , Rakic´ S , Parnavelas JG ( 2006 ) Cell and molecular mechanisms involved in the migration of cortical interneurons . Eur J Neurosci 23 : 894 – 900 . Nasrallah IM , McManus MF , Pancoast MM , Wynshaw - Boris A , Golden JA ( 2006 ) Analysis of non - radial interneuron migration dynamics and its disruption in Lis1 (cid:4) / (cid:7) mice . J Comp Neurol 496 : 847 – 858 . Phillips R , Ager A ( 2002 ) Activation of pertussis toxin - sensitive CXCL12 ( SDF - 1 ) receptors mediates transendothelial migration of T lymphocytes across lymph node high endothelial cells . Eur J Immunol 32 : 837 – 847 . Stenman J , Toresson H , Campbell K ( 2003 ) Identification of two distinct progenitor populations in the lateral ganglionic eminence : implications for striatal and olfactory bulb neurogenesis . J Neurosci 23 : 167 – 174 . Stumm R , Ho¨llt V ( 2007 ) CXC chemokine receptor 4 regulates neuronal migration and axonal pathfinding in the developing nervous system : im - plications for neuronal regeneration in the adult brain . J Mol Endocrinol 38 : 377 – 382 . Stumm RK , Zhou C , Ara T , Lazarini F , Dubois - Dalcq M , Nagasawa T , Ho¨llt V , Schulz S ( 2003 ) CXCR4 regulates interneuron migration in the de - veloping neocortex . J Neurosci 23 : 5123 – 5130 . Stumm R , Kolodziej A , Schulz S , Kohtz JD , Ho¨llt V ( 2007 ) Patterns of SDF - 1alpha and SDF - 1gamma mRNAs , migration pathways , and phenotypes of CXCR4 - expressing neurons in the developing rat telencephalon . J Comp Neurol 502 : 382 – 399 . Tamamaki N , Fujimori K , Nojyo Y , Kaneko T , Takauji R ( 2003 ) Evidence that Sema3A and Sema3F regulate the migration of GABAergic neurons in the developing neocortex . J Comp Neurol 455 : 238 – 248 . Tessier - Lavigne M , Goodman CS ( 1996 ) The molecular biology of axon guidance . Science 274 : 1123 – 1133 . Lyskoetal . • SDF1ControlsMigratingInterneuronBranching J . Neurosci . , February2 , 2011 • 31 ( 5 ) : 1739 – 1745 • 1745