CONCEPTUALIZING NETWORKED KNOWLEDGE ACTIVITIES : RELATED AND CO - OCCURRING ACTIVITIES IN ONLINE SPACES Vanessa P . Dennen , Dan He , Hui Shi and Dawn Adolfson Florida State University , Tallahassee , FL , USA ABSTRACT This study examines how college students conceptualize the relationship between different types of networked knowledge activities . The purpose was to determine where there is greater or lessons conceptual consensus among students , which can serve as an indicator of areas where networked knowledge skills may be weak or underused . Using an interview with an embedded card sort activity , 63 college students shared how they would organize different social media actions given larger activity categories ( network , collect , curate , share , broker , negotiate , and create ) . Findings showed greatest consensus under the network and collect categories , especially when familiar actions were represented . Less familiar actions , like different ways of tagging resources and sharing tags , were not highly associated with any particular networked knowledge activity . These findings have implications for teaching digital literacy skills at the college level . KEYWORDS College Students , Information Seeking , Knowledge Networks , Networking , Sharing , Social Networking , Social Media 1 . INTRODUCTION In a typical day , most people find themselves in need of information and human interaction . They also might have information of use to others or be able to meet the interaction needs of others . These needs are the driving forces behind networked knowledge activities , and the building blocks of online social networks . Most daily activities , including those supporting work , school , home , and relationships , may be enhanced or enabled by information seeing and interaction in online networks ( Rainie & Wellman , 2012 ) . These networks tend to incorporate social media platforms , which offer tools for sharing , searching , and otherwise engaging with both people and information . In a professional context , online networks offer work - related sharing and mentoring opportunities that support informal learning and professional development ( Dennen & Wang , 2002 ) . Although the motivation may be different from work contexts , the two dimensions of everyday life information seeking per Savolainen ( 1995 ) are orienting information ( information about the world and world events ) and practical information ( information for problem solving ) , both of which are supported by online networks . Finally , people use social media to maintain personal relationship , including while at work . This latter option offers the ability to connect to their non - work lives in ways that are beneficial to both contexts ( Kühnel et al . , 2020 ) . In short , online spaces support knowledge networking in its broadest sense for those people who know how and chose to engage in it . Young adults , a group that includes most traditional - aged college students , occupy an interesting position in the online sphere . They are labeled digital natives because they were born at a time when technology was all around them , although the omnipresence of technology in their lives has not innately made them better than prior generations at online knowledge seeking and network building ( Kirschner & De Bruyckere , 2017 ) . They been hailed as active participants in participatory culture ( Jenkins et al . , 2009 ) and in transmedia activities ( Scolari , 2018 ; Scolari et al . , 2018 ) , although for many their actual online activities may be far more mundane . Still , their regular use of social media is well documented from their teenage years ( Anderson & Jiang , 2018 ; Anderson et al . , 2022 ) and onward into their early adult years ( Perrin & Anderson , 2019 ) . Prior research on this population has found that heavy users and non - users experience the greatest satisfaction from their online information - seeking activities ( Kim et al . , 2014 ) , and that psychological and sociocultural factors may affect information behaviors as well ( Kim & Sin , 2015 ) . This study investigates how college students conceptualize and organize different online and social media activities using the Networked Knowledge Activities ( NKA ) framework ( Dennen , 2019 ) . This framework was original developed to help educators break down online activities into meaningful , related actions when designing lessons , but has also been used to analyze social network activities in naturalistic online settings ( Dennen et al . , 2020 ) . While the framework provides clarity about activity intent and outcomes and helps structure content analysis for researchers interested in functional activities in online environments , less is known about how individuals conceptualize their online activities and whether they see the relationship between those activities . 2 . PURPOSE AND RESEARCH QUESTIONS This purpose of this exploratory study was to determine how college undergraduates perceive a variety of online activities , and in particular the relationship between different activities . In other words , it explores which activities participants view as being highly related , using the NKA framework as an organizational device . 1 . To what extent do college students agree on the social media actions related to each networked knowledge activity category ? 2 . What social media actions are most associated with each networked knowledge activity ? 3 . Which social media actions were not closely associated with a specific networked knowledge activity ? 4 . Which category of social media actions are most and least familiar to college students ? These research questions put an emphasis on practices rather than tools , as recommended by Greenhow et al . ( 2019 ) . Certain tools may enable specific practices , practices tend to transcend specific tools . 3 . METHOD 3 . 1 Participants The participants in this study were 63 undergraduate college students at a large research university . Participants were recruited from a research participation pool . All participation was voluntary , and students in the research participation pool could opt to complete an alternate assignment for their classes if they were not comfortable or interested in participating in research . Participants opted into each study they completed , including this one . The study was approved by the researchers’ Institutional Review Board and all participants provided consent to participate and to be recorded . 3 . 2 Data Collection and Analysis Data collection occurred via one - hour interviews on zoom . During these interviews , participants first completed a brief demographic survey . Then they were asked some general questions about their social media use . Next , they engaged in three rounds of a card sort activity hosted on the ProvenbyUsers platform . Finally , they debriefed the card sort activity with the researcher . To complete the card sorts , participants followed a URL supplied by the researcher and shared their screen . During the card sort activities , they were asked to use a think - aloud process while sorting cards . All three card sorts used the same 41 cards , but each sort provided participants with different sorting categories . The 41 cards represented different types of social media actions ( e . g . , use social media to find resources ; tag another person to call attention to a resource ) , The card list was initially developed by the researchers , and then refined with the assistance of a focus group of undergraduate students . The intent was to develop a comprehensive list of activities that might be supported on different online platforms . To maintain cross - platform applicability , general terms like connect , bookmark , and tag were used rather than platform - specific ones like friend , hashtag , and favorite . The third card sort activity is the focus of this paper . During this card sort , participants were asked to sort their cards into six piles representing the main components of the NKA framework : share , collect , curate , broker , create , and negotiate . Each NKA category was defined for the participants at the start of the card sort and definitions appeared on screen . During the card sort , which typically took 15 minutes or less , participants had to place each card onto a pile . No card could be left out at the end , and cards could only appear in one pile . However , once placed on a pile , cards could later be moved around . At the Data analysis focused on the calculating overall consensus levels across participants for each NKA category ( research question 1 ) and using frequency counts to determine which actions were most commonly associated with each category ( research question 2 ) or not distinctly associated with any category ( research question 3 ) . Qualitative data from the think - aloud portion of the study and the card sort debrief was used to address the fourth research question . 4 . FINDINGS 4 . 1 Overview of Participants Of the 63 college students who participated in this study , most were under the age of 25 ( 59 ; 93 . 7 % ) . Of the remaining four participants , two were between 25 - 34 , one was 45 - 54 , and one declined to answer . Only 7 ( 11 . 1 % ) considered themselves very savvy social media users , whereas 3 ( 4 . 8 % ) reported being not very savvy . The majority of participants self - reported that they were savvy ( 31 ; 49 . 2 % ) or somewhat savvy ( 22 ; 34 . 9 % ) . For these participants , the primary purpose for using social media was connecting with close ties ( i . e . , family and friends ) and entertainment , which each were selected by 60 ( 95 . 2 % ) participants . Following this , 42 ( 66 . 7 % ) use it for school / schoolwork , 40 ( 63 . 5 % ) for news consumption , 39 ( 61 . 9 % ) for learning about hobbies , 28 ( 44 . 4 % ) for meeting new people , and 20 ( 31 . 7 % ) for work or seeking employment information . In addition , participants were asked about what social media platforms they often use for personal and educational purposes . Most mentioned platforms include Instagram , Snapchat , TikTok , Facebook , YouTube , Pinterest , LinkedIn , Twitter , and blogs . 4 . 2 Overall NKA Category Sort Consensus To answer the first research question , participant agreement was calculated at the category level . With a maximum possible value of 1 . 00 , it was unsurprising to see that agreement levels overall were low ( see Table 1 ) . The highest agreement was within the network category . All 63 participants sorted cards into this category , and while the participants in aggregate placed greatest number of cards in this category , the number of unique cards in this category was similar to the number of unique cards placed in other categories . The lowest agreement is in the broker category , which received the lowest aggregate number of cards , but the same number of unique cards as the network category . Additionally , 3 participants did not sort any cards into the broker category , making it the only category in the framework not used by all participants during the card sort activity . Table 1 . Students’ consensus on the categorical functions of social media actions NKA # Participants Used # Cards 1 # Unique Cards 2 Agreement 3 Network 63 617 27 0 . 36 Collect 63 358 20 0 . 28 Curate 63 389 23 0 . 27 Negotiate 63 350 26 0 . 21 Create 63 294 26 0 . 18 Share 63 374 33 0 . 18 Broker 60 201 27 0 . 12 Notes : 1 . Total number of cards placed into the group across all participants . 2 . Number of unique cards placed into the group across all participants . 3 . Level of participant consensus about which cards belong in a group . The maximum value of 1 . 00 would mean that all participants sorted cards into the category identically . 4 . 3 Within Category Consensus To identify similarities in thinking about different social media actions , the most commonly sorted cards were noted for each of the NKA categories . The network category is the overarching category of the NKA framework , and it involves actions that help people build and maintain their connections with others . The social media actions sorted into this category by the greatest number of participants are : • Send connection requests to people ( 60 ; 95 . 2 % ) • Follow people who I know ( 60 ; 95 . 2 % ) • Follow people with whom I do not yet have established relationships ( 60 ; 95 . 2 % ) • Send a private message to someone with whom I do not have an existing relationship ( 58 ; 92 . 1 % ) • Send a private message to someone with whom I have an existing relationship ( 54 ; 85 . 7 % ) The 6 . 4 % discrepancy between these last two items is interesting , with four participants differentiating the function of private messages depending on type of relationship . The collect category had the second highest agreement score . This category was defined as finding and saving an online item . The actions most frequently sorted into this category are : • Download interesting resources to my computer ( 55 ; 87 . 3 % ) • Email things I find online to myself ( 55 ; 87 . 3 % ) • Use search engines to find resources ( 47 ; 74 . 6 % ) • Use social media to find resources ( 45 ; 71 . 4 % ) • Bookmark resources ( 42 ; 66 . 7 % ) In the collect category it is evident that participants most readily identified with downloading and emailing items to store them locally or in personal accounts . However bookmarking , while still firmly in this category , does not reach such high recognition as a collection strategy . To curate is to select and organize a group of items , and curation is highly related to collecting . The top cards appearing in this category are : • Organize online resources by topic ( 58 ; 92 . 1 % ) • Apply tags to resources for organizational purposes ( 51 ; 81 . 0 % ) • Apply tags to resources to help describe them for myself ( 44 ; 69 . 8 % ) Organization as a component of curation clearly resonated with the participants , although some were unable to see that applying tags to organize items is essentially the same as applying tags to describe those items . The negotiate category was defined for participants as discussing knowledge with other people . The four cards most sorted into this category are : • Offer my opinion in response to someone else’s post ( 57 ; 90 . 5 % ) • Offer my expertise in response to someone else’s post ( 57 ; 90 . 5 % ) • Correct misconceptions or misinformation that others have posted online ( 53 ; 84 . 1 % ) • Ask for advice online ( 43 ; 68 . 3 % ) Interestingly , the three of these four items with the highest agreement all focus on giving information to others . The item that involves asking others for assistance had a lower frequency of being sorted into this category , suggesting that participants The create category focuses on generating knew knowledge objects or resources . The three most frequently appearing cards are : • Develop media to share expertise online ( 55 ; 87 . 3 % ) • Develop media to share opinions online ( 48 ; 76 . 2 % ) • Make a remix or mashup of existing online items ( 47 ; 74 . 6 % ) Based on the cards sorted into this category , participants appear to associate creation with expertise more frequently than with opinions , and with unique productions rather than derivative ones . Share is a simple concept given the prevalence of “share” buttons in most social media tools , although it was one of the categories with lowest consensus . Sharing occurs when one person makes items available to others , The items with greatest agreement were : • Email things I find online to other people ( 45 ; 71 . 4 % ) • Post resources that I have created to an online group or community ( 35 ; 55 . 6 % ) • Tag another person to call their attention to a resource ( 33 ; 52 . 4 % ) These agreement levels are notably lower than agreement levels in other categories . Broker was defined for participants as an intermediary behavior , where an individual draws upon knowledge or objects originating with one party or location and purposefully makes it available to another party . With the lowest overall category consensus , the three most frequently appearing cards in this category did not reach sorting frequencies comparable to those of other categories : • Share or post resources from one social media platform to another ( 36 ; 57 . 1 % ) • Share resources from my face - to - face network with my online network ( 33 ; 52 . 4 % ) During the think - aloud and debrief , participants expressed that this was a largely unfamiliar concept . Still , a little more than half of the participants recognized brokering as a highly specific form of sharing . 4 . 4 Actions Lacking a Clear Category Whereas many cards were sorted into a primary category , as noted above , others were sorted into multiple categories , with less than 50 % categorical consensus . Table 2 presents a sample of these items along with the two highest sorting categories . All of these low sorting consensus items were sorted into at least four unique categories and , in most instances , six or seven . The varied sorting patterns indicate the breadth of ways that participants thought about the different activities , and in many cases have a logical connection . For example , Writing a description of an item before saving or sharing is an act of annotation that is associated with curation , but 14 participants felt this was an act of creation , albeit a small act . When following an account that shares interesting things a person is building their network , but the underlying intent may be to collect knowledge objects . The act of evaluating an item before sharing it online resonates with the intentionality behind curation , but 12 participants sorted it into the category related to the next action in the sequence . Finally , applying tags to resources to describe them for others made some participants consider tags as a means of curation , whereas other participants focused on the idea of an audience for those items and sorted the action under share or broker . Table 2 . Sample items with less than 50 % category consensus Action Highest NKA Second Highest NKA Write a description of an item before saving or sharing it Curate ( 44 % ) Create ( 22 % ) Follow an account that shares interesting things Collect ( 41 % ) Network ( 37 % ) Evaluate an item before sharing it online Curate ( 37 % ) Share ( 19 % ) Apply tags to resources to help describe them for other people Curate ( 35 % ) and Share ( 35 % ) Broker ( 14 % ) In other instances , actions co - occurred in the same categories with greater frequency than they appeared in any single category . For example , 57 ( 90 . 5 % ) participants placed the cards for unfriending or unfollowing a person and leaving an online group in the same category , although these cards appeared in the networking category with respective frequencies of 79 . 4 % ( 50 participants ) and 76 . 2 % ( 48 participants ) . 4 . 5 Most and Least Familiar Categories and Actions During the card sort process , participants were free to ask researchers questions about the actions on each card and researchers could provide clarification or examples so long as they did not suggest a specific sorting category . Participants were also asked to use a think - aloud process to indicate their rationale as they sorted cards . Prior to the NKA card sort , the NKA framework was reviewed with each participant . At that time , all participants had already sorted all the cards twice using different frameworks . Based on participant comments during this overall process , brokering was the least familiar category to participants . Curation , while a familiar term , yielded a wide range of participant familiarity ; some participants indicated that they regularly curate online resources and talked about making selection and organizational decisions as well as describing or annotating their curated resources . Others appeared to understand the general concept , but struggled to fully differentiate curation from collecting . When discussing the negotiate and create categories , participants commented about their own participation in these activities , generally falling into two user types . The majority indicated discomfort with these activities , wanting to avoid both perceived conflict that might occur through negotiation and vulnerability associated with creation . Participants who engaged in these activities , however , appeared to either hold more nuanced views of the categories ( e . g . , negotiation as a means of navigating conversation and creation as any act that produces something new , regardless of scope or size ) or to be comfortable with public interactions . In terms of specific actions , tagging was the most confusing to participants . Tagging actions of various types appeared on eight cards , six of which achieved less than 50 % frequency in any one category . Comments during the think - aloud confirmed participants’ uncertainty about tag use in various contexts . Similar questions arose when piloting the cards . During the first card sort , which focused on frequency of activity , there were four cards focused on resource tagging . For each of these four resource tagging activities , 28 - 41 of participants indicted it was a practice in which they never or rarely engage . 5 . DISCUSSION Overall , the findings suggest that the were best able to see the functional relationships among familiar networking , negotiation and collection activities that are part of typical information - seeking practices . However , there are many less familiar and practiced networked knowledge activities among this population . Specifically , the findings showed that tagging actions were poorly understood , as were annotation and resource evaluation activities , echoing earlier studies ( Cates et al . , 2019 ; Dennen et al . , 2018 ) . Although tags can be used in varied ways across social media contexts ( La Rocca & Boccia Artieri , 2022 ) , play a critical role in information aggregation , which means that skills related to selecting and applying meaningful tags are important . Tags enable effective information seeking behaviors ( Jiang , 2013 ) , and increased tagging literacy can help improve information storage and retrieval activities across various online social platforms and contexts ( Keck & Heck , 2019 ; Shi et al . , 2023 ) . For individuals who know tagging primarily as a performative activity , this use of tags may challenge their knowledge and skills , and creates tensions in how people understand tag purpose and use in the broader social media landscape ( McCosker , 2017 ) . Classifying one’s everyday online activities using a framework may seem like a largely academic exercise , but it offers participants the opportunity to reflect on their practices . By discussing online practices in terms of isolated actions , it also highlights practices that may be less often invoked or less well understood . It may not be important for individuals to label their networked knowledge activities in order to perform them , but it is nonetheless important for them to understand the range of activities that might be used to support networked knowledge tasks . For example , if individuals are not taught to effectively tag and annotate online resources , or that tags and annotations may be available to help them locate resources , their networked knowledge interactions may be unsatisfactory or at the surface level . Individuals who do not understand curation and its underlying activities , for example , are unlikely to be effective online curators . Although tagging has been highlighted in this discussion , it is not the only skill area of concern . Curation is an important skill for navigating online information across different life contexts . For example , individuals’ curation activities related to online news consumption affect not only the quantity but also the veracity and perspective of the news to which they are exposed ( Merten , 2020 ) . Alternately , individuals who cannot differentiate general sharing from targeted brokering may not fully understand the purpose of either . People who engage in knowledge brokering typically exhibit greater depth of knowledge and also are successful at developing and promoting novel ideas ( Resch & Kock , 2021 ) . Their knowledge and skills are highly valued in communal knowledge settings . Essentially , all of the skills falling under the umbrella of networked knowledge activities play an important role in being an effective information user . The findings generated by this study show variability in how people understand networked knowledge activities . Among traditional college - aged people , such as the students in this study , formal education on networked knowledge activities may be lacking . Although demonstrated time and again that the digital natives moniker has little bearing on actual digital skills ( Kirschner & De Bruyckere , 2017 ) , this erroneous belief persists . Digital skills vary widely among youth , although they generally increase as education levels increase ( Correa , 2016 ) , and meaningful generational differences about social media use may be more about cultural elements than about skill sets ( Evans & Robertson , 2020 ) . What his means for educators is that there are latent opportunities for developing these skill sets among their students and smoothing the transition from school settings . Whereas the focus of digital and related information skill development in schools may be limited to certain academic - specific activities ( e . g . , locating and assessing the quality of scholarly articles ) , perhaps it should extend to helping students develop broader abilities to navigate the information and sharing landscapes of the Internet in general and social media more specifically . To address this call , educators may need to improve their own skills as well . Regardless , opportunities are plentiful across the academic disciplines to teach students how to effectively engage in activities like information curation and brokering , and these skill sets will serve students well as they enter the workforce . 6 . CONCLUSION The connections made by these participants , individually and in aggregate , demonstrate how they think about their online and social media actions . These findings suggest areas where transfer of skill or knowledge may be weak , specifically in the places where participants did not commonly or consistently see connections between different activities and overall activity categories . In this sense , the study has implications for how social media networking skills and related digital literacy and communication skills are taught to teenagers and young adults . Rather than just assuming frequent use of and familiarity with activities due to time spent on social media platforms , educators might identify and focus on knowledge networking skills that enhance both professional development and everyday life information seeking in their disciplines . Then they can assess the degree to which college students are able to apply skills in these contexts , noting that skill application is not just mechanical ( e . g . , type a tag ) , but also conceptual ( e . g . , identify meaningful tags ) . They can also use frameworks like NKA to help identify areas where college students may lack confidence in online environments , such as network development , and use their classes to foster skill development . This study has several limitations as well as implications for future research . Although interviewing 63 participants is a labor - intensive process , it does not yield sufficient insights to support broad generalizability . Data collection relied on self - report and did not extend into measurements of how effectively participants can engage in the different activities . This study represents analysis of a partial dataset . Analysis of the full dataset is ongoing and will include comparison of self - reported activity frequency to effectiveness of activity classification . Additionally , future research could focus on better understanding different naturalistic approaches to engagement in networked knowledge activities as well as the formative experiences that help develop awareness , skills , and use of these activities . ACKNOWLEDGEMENT The software used in this research was funded by an Undergraduate Research Opportunity Program Materials grant at Florida State University . We thank the UROP students who assisted with data collection . REFERENCES Anderson , M . , & Jiang , J . ( 2018 ) . Teens , social media & technology 2018 . Pew Research Center . Anderson , M . , Vogels , E . A . , Perrin , A . , & Rainie , L . ( 2022 ) . Connection , creativity and drama : Teen life on social media in 2022 . Pew Research Center . Cates , M . L . , Dennen , V . P . , & Bagdy , L . M . ( 2019 ) . Building pre - service teacher knowledge communities through social bookmarking : A design case . Technology , Instruction , Cognition & Learning , 11 ( 2 / 3 ) , 193 - 217 . Correa , T . ( 2016 ) . Digital skills and social media use : How Internet skills are related to different types of Facebook use among ‘digital natives’ . Information , Communication & Society , 19 ( 8 ) , 1095 - 1107 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1080 / 1369118X . 2015 . 1084023 Dennen , V . P . ( 2019 ) . Frameworks for designing and analyzing learning : Activity interactions in online courses . In M . G . Moore & W . Diehl ( Eds . ) , Handbook of Distance Education ( pp . 244 - 259 ) . Routledge . Dennen , V . P . , Bagdy , L . M . , & Cates , M . L . ( 2018 ) . Effective tagging practices for online learning environments : An exploratory study of approach and accuracy . Online Learning , 22 ( 3 ) , 103 - 120 . Dennen , V . P . , & Wang , M . ( 2002 ) . The keyboard - based job coach : Informal learning via the Internet . Advances in Developing Human Resources , 4 ( 4 ) , 440 - 450 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1177 / 152342202237521 Dennen , V . P . , Word , K . , Adolfson , D . , Arechavaleta , V . , He , D . , Hsu , C . - W . , Hur , J . , Jung , D . , Kent , H . , Russell , A . , & Toth , K . ( 2020 ) . Using the networked knowledge activities framework to examine learning on social networking sites . In P . Kommers & G . C . Peng ( Eds . ) , Proceedings of the international conference on Web - based Communities and Social Media 2020 ( pp . 165 - 172 ) . IADIS Press . Evans , C . , & Robertson , W . ( 2020 ) . The four phases of the digital natives debate . Human Behavior and Emerging Technologies , 2 ( 3 ) , 269 - 277 . https : / / doi . org / https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1002 / hbe2 . 196 Greenhow , C . , Cho , V . , Dennen , V . P . , & Fishman , B . J . ( 2019 ) . Education and social media : Research directions to guide a growing field . Teachers College Record , 121 , 14 . Jenkins , H . , Purushotma , R . , Weigel , M . , Clinton , K . , & Robison , A . J . ( 2009 ) . Confronting the challenges of participatory culture : Media education for the 21st century . Macarthur Foundation . Jiang , T . ( 2013 ) . An exploratory study on social library system users ' information seeking modes . Journal of Documentation , 69 ( 1 ) , 6 - 25 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1108 / 00220411311295306 Keck , H . , & Heck , T . ( 2019 ) . Improving tagging literacy to enhance metadata and retrieval for open educational resources . DIPF | Leibniz - Institut für Bildungsforschung und Bildungsinformation . Kim , K . - S . , & Sin , S . - C . J . ( 2015 ) . Use of social media in different contexts of information seeking : Effects of sex and problemsolving style . Information Research : An International Electronic Journal , 20 ( 1 ) , n1 . Kim , K . - S . , Sin , S . - C . J . , & Yoo - Lee , E . Y . ( 2014 ) . Undergraduates’ use of social media as information sources . College & Research Libraries , 75 ( 4 ) , 442 - 457 . Kirschner , P . A . , & De Bruyckere , P . ( 2017 ) . The myths of the digital native and the multitasker . Teaching and Teacher Education , 67 , 135 - 142 . https : / / doi . org / https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . tate . 2017 . 06 . 001 Kühnel , J . , Vahle - Hinz , T . , de Bloom , J . , & Syrek , C . J . ( 2020 ) . Staying in touch while at work : Relationships between personal social media use at work and work - nonwork balance and creativity . The International Journal of Human Resource Management , 31 ( 10 ) , 1235 - 1261 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1080 / 09585192 . 2017 . 1396551 La Rocca , G . , & Boccia Artieri , G . ( 2022 ) . Interpreting the changeable meaning of hashtags : Toward the theorization of a model . Frontiers in Sociology , 7 , 1104686 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 3389 / fsoc . 2022 . 1104686 McCosker , A . ( 2017 ) . Data literacies for the postdemographic social media self . First Monday , 22 ( 10 ) . Merten , L . ( 2020 ) . Block , hide or follow—Personal news curation practices on social media . Digital Journalism , 9 ( 8 ) , 1018 - 1039 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1080 / 21670811 . 2020 . 1829978 Perrin , A . , & Anderson , M . ( 2019 ) . Share of U . S . adults using social media , including Facebook , is mostly unchanged since 2018 . In . Pew Research Center . https : / / www . pewresearch . org / fact - tank / 2019 / 04 / 10 / share - of - u - s - adults - using - social - media - including - facebook - is - mostly - unchanged - since - 2018 / Rainie , L . , & Wellman , B . ( 2012 ) . Networked : The new social operating system . The MIT Press . Resch , C . , & Kock , A . ( 2021 ) . The influence of information depth and information breadth on brokers’ idea newness in online maker communities . Research Policy , 50 ( 8 ) , 104142 . https : / / doi . org / https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . respol . 2020 . 104142 Savolainen , R . ( 1995 ) . Everyday life information seeking : Approaching information seeking in the context of “way of life” . Library & Information Science Research , 17 ( 3 ) , 259 - 294 . https : / / doi . org / https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / 0740 - 8188 ( 95 ) 90048 - 9 Scolari , C . A . ( Ed . ) . ( 2018 ) . Teens , media and collaborative cultures : Exploiting teens ' transmedia skills in the classroom . Transmedia Literacy H2020 Research and Innovation Action / Universitat Pompeu Fabra . Scolari , C . A . , Masanet , M . - J . , Guerrero - Pico , M . , & Establés , M . - J . ( 2018 ) . Transmedia literacy in the new media ecology : Teens’ transmedia skills and informal learning strategies . El profesional de la información ( EPI ) , 27 ( 4 ) , 801 - 812 . Shi , Y . , Cao , H . , & Chen , S . ( 2023 ) . Order and disorder in the evolution of online knowledge community : an investigation of the chaotic behavior in social tagging systems with evidence of stack overflow . Aslib Journal of Information Management . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1108 / ajim - 08 - 2022 - 0353