EGF - Induced Activation of the EGF Receptor Does Not Trigger Mobilization of Caveolae Kirstine Roepstorff 1 , Maja Kazazic 2 , Lene E . Johannessen 2 , Nina M . Pedersen 2 , Bo van Deurs 1 , Espen Stang 2 , Inger H . Madshus 2 1 Department of Cellular and Molecular Medicine , University of Copenhagen , Denmark 2 Institute of Pathology , Faculty of Medicine , University of Oslo , Norway E - mail : k . roepstorff @ mai . ku . dk Key words : Fluorescence Recovery after Photobleaching , Caveolae , Epidermal Growth Factor Receptor , Endocytosis . Caveolae - dependent endocytosis has been proposed in the uptake of Epidermal Growth Factor Receptor ( EGFR ) at high concentrations of ligand . However , we have previously shown that plasma membrane caveolae are stable membrane domains not involved in constitutive endocy - tosis [ 1 ] . We therefore investigated whether stimulation with high concentrations ( 100 ng / ml ) of Epidermal Growth Factor ( EGF ) induced mobilization of plasma membrane caveolae , either as a bulk movement of cell surface caveolae towards the interior of the cell , or as an increased turnover of caveolae at the plasma membrane . Live - cell microscopy of cells expressing GFP - Caveolin - 1 as a marker for caveolae revealed that no net movement of caveolae takes place in cells stimulated with high concentra - tions of EGF . In addition , Fluores - cence Recovery after Photobleaching analysis of GFP - labeled plasma mem - brane caveolae showed that EGF stimulation does not increase the turn - over of caveolae at the plasma mem - brane . Both in control cells and in E stimulated cells , the mobile fraction of caveolae was as low as 20 - 30 % . In contrast , we found that endocytosis of EGFR was efficiently inhibited by knockdown of clathrin heavy chain , both at high and low concentrations of EGF . Our results show that caveolae are not involved in endocytosis of EGF - bound EGFR to any significant degree , and high concentrations of EGF do not mobilize caveolae . We further show that clathrin - mediated endocytosis is the major EGFR inte nalization mechanism irrespectively of EGF concentration [ 2 ] . Figure 1 Peripheral caveolar regions of a live cell ex - pressing GFP - caveolin - 1 were bleached and the cell was followed by microscopy for 6 min . The same cell was subsequently stimulated with EGF , and after 1 - 2 min a similar bleaching experiment was performed . The upper panel shows the control experiment , and the lower panel shows the same cell after stimulation with EGF . Note the very limited fluorescence recovery in the bleached region . Figure modified from ref . [ 2 ] . GF r - [ 1 ] Thomsen , P . , K . Roepstorff , M . Stahlhut , and B . van Deurs . Caveolae are highly immobile plasma membrane microdomains , which are not involved in constitutive endocytic trafficking . Mol . Biol . Cell 13 , 238 - 250 ( 2002 ) . [ 2 ] Kazazic , M . , K . Roepstorff , L . E . Johannessen , N . M . Pedersen , B . van Deurs , E . Stang , and I . H . Madshus . EGF - induced activation of the EGF receptor does not trigger mobilization of caveolae . Traffic . 7 , 1518 - 1527 ( 2006 ) .