Interactions with Actin Monomers , Actin Filaments , and Arp2 / 3 Complex Define the Roles of WASP Family Proteins and Cortactin in Coordinately Regulating Branched Actin Networks * □ S Receivedforpublication , June11 , 2014 , andinrevisedform , August13 , 2014 Published , JBCPapersinPress , August26 , 2014 , DOI10 . 1074 / jbc . M114 . 587527 Luke A . Helgeson , Julianna G . Prendergast , Andrew R . Wagner , Max Rodnick - Smith , and Brad J . Nolen 1 From the Institute of Molecular Biology and Department of Chemistry and Biochemistry , University of Oregon , Eugene , Oregon 97403 - 1229 Background : How cortactin and WASP proteins coordinately regulate branched actin assembly is poorly understood . Results : The Arp2 / 3 complex - and actin - interacting regions of cortactin and WASP proteins are functionally distinct and tailored to their regulatory roles . Conclusion : Mechanistic distinctions between activators are important in allowing coordinate regulation of branched actin networks . Significance : Understanding mechanistic distinctions between activators is required to understand cellular structures like lamellipodia . Arp2 / 3 complex is an important actin filament nucleator that creates branched actin filament networks required for forma - tion of lamellipodia and endocytic actin structures . Cellular assembly of branched actin networks frequently requires multi - ple Arp2 / 3 complex activators , called nucleation promoting fac - tors ( NPFs ) . We recently presented a mechanism by which cor - tactin , a weak NPF , can displace a more potent NPF , N - WASP , from nascent branch junctions to synergistically accelerate nucleation . The distinct roles of these NPFs in branching nucle - ation are surprising given their similarities . We biochemically dissected these two classes of NPFs to determine how their Arp2 / 3 complex and actin interacting segments modulate their influences on branched actin networks . We find that the Arp2 / 3 complex - interacting N - terminal acidic sequence ( NtA ) of cor - tactin has structural features distinct from WASP acidic regions ( A ) that are required for synergy between the two NPFs . Our mutational analysis shows that differences between NtA and A do not explain the weak intrinsic NPF activity of cortactin , but instead that cortactin is a weak NPF because it cannot recruit actin monomers to Arp2 / 3 complex . We use TIRF microscopy to show that cortactin bundles branched actin filaments using actin filament binding repeats within a single cortactin mole - cule , but that N - WASP antagonizes cortactin - mediated bun - dling . Finally , we demonstrate that multiple WASP family pro - teins synergistically activate Arp2 / 3 complex and determine the biochemical requirements in WASP proteins for synergy . Our data indicate that synergy between WASP proteins and cortac - tin may play a general role in assembling diverse actin - based structures , including lamellipodia , podosomes , and endocytic actin networks . Control of actin filament network assembly is required for eukaryotic cells to move , divide , and differentiate ( 1 ) . Arp2 / 3 ( actin - related protein 2 / 3 ) complex is one of three major classes of actin regulators capable of de novo initiation of actin fila - ments and is unique among actin nucleators in that under most circumstances it creates only branched filaments ( 2 , 3 ) . The activity of Arp2 / 3 complex is tightly controlled in vivo , and there are now approximately a dozen known NPF 2 proteins that bind to the complex and switch on its nucleation activity ( 4 , 5 ) . NPFs are responsible for regulating assembly of branched actin networks that power a broad range of cellular processes , includ - ing endocytosis ( 6 ) and protrusion of lamellipodia ( 7 ) and inva - dopodia ; the latter of which are actin - based protrusions that allow transformed cells to degrade extracellular matrix during metastasis ( 8 ) . Proper assembly of branched actin networks in these cellular structures frequently requires the coordinated action of multiple NPFs . For example , formation of invadopo - dia requires the activity of two distinct NPFs : cortactin and N - WASP ( 9 – 11 ) . Similarly , multiple NPFs , including the WASP ( Wiskott - Aldrich syndrome protein ) family protein Wsp1 , type I myosins , Pan1 , Crn1 , Abp1 , and Dip1 contribute to Arp2 / 3 complex activation during endocytosis in yeast ( 12 – 15 ) . Understanding how these distinct NPFs collectively control branched actin assembly is critical to understanding how the actin cytoskeleton mediates complex cellular processes . Recent evidence suggests that the biochemical mechanisms by which different NPFs turn on Arp2 / 3 complex influence * This work was supported , in whole or in part , by National Institutes of Health Grant R01 - GM092917 ( to B . J . N . ) and Predoctoral Training Grant GM007759 ( toL . A . H . ) . ThisworkwasalsosupportedbyAmericanHeartAssociationGrant 10SDG2610189 ( to B . J . N . ) and the NICHD Summer Research Program at the University of Oregon through National Institutes of Health Grant R25HD070817 ( toJ . G . P . ) . □ S This article contains supplemental Movies S1 – S7 . 1 To whom correspondence should be addressed : Dept . of Chemistry and BiochemistryandtheInst . ofMolecularBiology , 1229UniversityofOregon , Eugene , OR97403 - 1229 . Tel . : 541 - 346 - 7412 ; E - mail : bnolen @ uoregon . edu . 2 The abbreviations used are : NPF , nucleation promoting factor ; N - WASP , neural WASP ; TIRF , total internal reflection fluorescence . THEJOURNALOFBIOLOGICALCHEMISTRY VOL . 289 , NO . 42 , pp . 28856 – 28869 , October17 , 2014 ©2014byTheAmericanSocietyforBiochemistryandMolecularBiology , Inc . PublishedintheU . S . A . 28856 JOURNAL OF BIOLOGICAL CHEMISTRY VOLUME 289•NUMBER 42• OCTOBER 17 , 2014 by gu e s t on F e b r u a r y 4 , 2015 h tt p : / / www . j b c . o r g / D o w n l o a d e d fr o m their ability to coordinately regulate the dynamics of branched actin assembly . N - WASP and other WASP family proteins con - tain an acidic “A” and central “C” region that bind Arp2 / 3 com - plex , and a V ( verprolin homology , also called WASP homology 2 ( WH2 ) ) region that binds monomers ( 16 ) ( Fig . 1 , A and B ) . Engineered cross - linking experiments show that actin mono - mer recruitment by N - WASP stimulates a conformational change in Arp2 / 3 complex that may be important for nucle - ation ( 17 ) . Like WASP family proteins , cortactin contains an acidic region that interacts with Arp2 / 3 complex , but unlike WASP proteins , it contains an actin filament binding domain instead of a V region ( 18 , 19 ) ( Fig . 1 , A and B ) . The intrinsic NPF activity of cortactin is weak compared with N - WASP , but importantly , in the presence of N - WASP , it dramatically stim - ulates branching nucleation ( 20 – 23 ) ( Fig . 1 , B and C ) . The actin filament binding repeats of cortactin potently increase synergy between these two NPFs , and single molecule TIRF microscopy experiments indicate that the repeats allow cortactin to target nascent branch junctions to displace N - WASP and stimulate nucleation ( 23 ) ( Fig . 1 C ) . These observations demonstrate that cortactin and N - WASP have distinct modes of activation of the complex that are controlled by the precise structural mecha - nism by which each NPF interacts with Arp2 / 3 complex and actin . Determining how the differences in these interactions tune regulation of the complex by NPFs , alone or in concert , is critical to understanding how branched actin networks are assembled in vivo . The cortactin acidic region ( NtA ) has generally been posited to be functionally similar to the A region in WASP family pro - teins . Both A and NtA sequences are characterized by a stretch of multiple acidic residues surrounding a conserved trypto - phan , which is required for the interaction with Arp2 / 3 com - plex ( 16 , 19 ) . However , the acidic regions of cortactin and WASP proteins also show several sequence differences , and evidence points to functional implications for these differences . Cross - linking assays showed that the NtA of cortactin com - petes with N - WASP for binding to Arp3 , but unlike N - WASP , it does not bind to the Arp2 subunit ( 24 ) . It is not known whether these differences tailor each NPF for its specific func - tion in activating the complex . For instance , it is not clear whether specific structural properties of NtA are required for cortactin to synergize with N - WASP , nor whether sequence differences in NtA versus A prevent cortactin ( on its own ) from activating Arp2 / 3 complex as potently as N - WASP . Further - more , although it is known that N - WASP can synergize with cortactin in activating Arp2 / 3 complex , the precise biochemical properties of N - WASP , including its oligomerization state and affinity for actin monomers , were shown to play critical roles in FIGURE1 . OverviewofactivationofArp2 / 3complexbycortactinandN - WASP . A , domainorganizationofWASPfamilyproteinsandcortactin . WH1 , WASP homology 1 ; B , basic region ; GBD , GTPase binding domain ; V , verpolin homology ( also known as WH2 , WASP homology 2 ) domain ; C , central region ; A , acidic region ; SHD , SCARhomologydomain ; NtA , N - terminalacidicregion ; SH3 , Srchomology3 . B , schematicsofintrinsicNPFactivitiesofN - WASP - VCAandcortactin . Light blue - shaded regions on Arp2 / 3 complex indicate NPF binding sites . C , schematic of the displacement mechanism of synergistic activation of Arp2 / 3 complexbycortactinanddimericN - WASP - VCA ( GST - VCA ) . GST - VCAmustbereleasedfromthenascentbranchfornucleation / elongationtoproceed . Cortactin bindstothenascentbranchcomplexatoneofthetwoNPFsitesanddisplacesoneCAoftheGST - VCAdimerfromtheArp2 / 3complex ( reaction1 ) , accelerating complete release of GST - VCA ( reaction 2 ) and allowing elongation of the newly nucleated branch filament . Regulation of Actin Networks by Cortactin and WASP Proteins OCTOBER 17 , 2014• VOLUME 289•NUMBER 42 JOURNAL OF BIOLOGICAL CHEMISTRY 28857 by gu e s t on F e b r u a r y 4 , 2015 h tt p : / / www . j b c . o r g / D o w n l o a d e d fr o m determining the potency of synergy ( 23 ) . Therefore , it is unclear whether potent synergy with cortactin is a general feature of WASP family proteins and if so , whether the mechanism is conserved . Cortactin colocalizes with WASP family proteins such as N - WASP , WASP , and WAVE ( Wiskott - Aldrich syn - drome protein family verproline - homologous protein ) in mul - tiple branched actin networks , including in podosomes ( 25 ) , at the leading edge of lamellipodia ( 26 ) , and at sites of endocytosis ( 27 ) . Determining how branched actin is assembled in each of these structures will require an understanding of how each WASP family protein coordinately regulates Arp2 / 3 complex with cortactin . A key biochemical difference between cortactin and WASP family proteins is that cortactin binds filamentous actin and WASP proteins bind monomeric actin ( 28 , 29 ) . Because the actin monomer - binding region of WASP family proteins is required for potent Arp2 / 3 complex activation ( 16 ) , its replace - ment in cortactin with a filament binding domain could explain why cortactin on its own is a weak NPF , but this has not been tested . In fact , the precise role of the actin filament binding region , which consists of 6 . 5 repeats of a 37 - amino acid repeat sequence , is not completely understood , partially because of its multiple biochemical functions . For instance , it increases the potency of cortactin in synergizing with N - WASP and is required for the intrinsic NPF activity of cortactin ( 19 , 23 ) . In some studies , the actin filament binding repeats of cortactin have also been also reported to bundle actin filaments ( 30 – 32 ) . However , bundling has not been studied in the presence of branching , despite the observation that in vivo , cortactin colocalizes with Arp2 / 3 complex within branched actin networks ( 18 , 33 ) . Therefore , the influence of the actin filament binding repeats of cortactin on the architecture of Arp2 / 3 complex - nucleated filament networks is not known . Here we use a combination of biochemical studies and TIRF microscopy to dissect how the Arp2 / 3 complex - and actin - in - teracting segments of WASP proteins and cortactin influence their roles in regulating branched actin networks . Our results show that the NtA of cortactin is tailored to synergistically acti - vate the complex with WASP family VCAs and is biochemically and functionally distinct from the A region of WASP family proteins . The actin filament binding repeats of cortactin allow it to bundle the branched actin filaments it initiates , but bun - dling is antagonized by N - WASP . In addition , our data show that the intrinsic NPF activity of cortactin is weak because it lacks an actin monomer binding region . Finally , we show that synergy with cortactin is not unique to N - WASP and that other WASP family proteins , including WASP and WAVE , can coop - erate with cortactin to potently activate Arp2 / 3 complex . Potent synergy requires dimerization of the WASP protein in all cases , suggesting that cortactin displaces each of these WASP proteins from nascent branch junctions to accelerate branching nucleation . These observations have important implications for understanding how cortactin and WASP family proteins inde - pendently and coordinately regulate the dynamics of branched actin networks . EXPERIMENTAL PROCEDURES Protein Purification— Rabbit skeletal muscle actin was puri - fied and labeled with either Oregon - Green 488 or N - ( 1 - pyr - ene ) iodoacetamide ( Molecular Probes , Eugene , OR ) as previ - ously described ( 17 ) . Bovine Arp2 / 3 complex was purified as previously described ( 17 ) . A - cortactin was generated by fusing residues 486 – 505 of bovine N - WASP to the N terminus of residues 46 – 546 of cortactin . V - and VV - cortactin constructs were constructed by adding bovine N - WASP residues 428 – 457 and 399 – 457 ( V and VV , respectively ) to the N terminus of a 16 - residue Gly - Ser linker attached to the N terminus of full - length cortactin . The Gly - Ser linker ensures that the number of residues separating the Arp2 / 3 complex binding tryptophan ( DDWE motif ) and the C - terminal V region residues corre - sponds to the shortest V to A distance of any WASP sequence . Alexa 568 - cortactin ( residues 1 – 336 ) and Alexa 546 - NtA ( res - idues 1 – 48 ) , both with a C - terminal KCK ( Lys - Cys - Lys ) sequence , were labeled with maleimide reactive Alexa fluoro - phore dyes ( Molecular Probes ) as previously described ( 23 ) . All cortactin constructs are murine and were overexpressed and purified from Escherichia coli as previously described ( 23 ) . Human WAVE1 VCA ( residues 485 – 559 ) , human WASP VCA ( residues 429 – 502 ) , human WASP CA ( residues 460 – 502 ) , bovine N - WASP VCA ( residues 428 – 505 ) , bovine N - WASP VVCA ( residues 392 – 505 ) , and bovine N - WASP CA ( residues 461 – 505 ) were purified as dimeric ( GST - tagged ) or monomeric proteins as previously described ( 17 ) . Synthetic peptides of human WASP C ( residues 464 – 484 ) and A ( residues 497 – 502 ) are as previously described ( 16 ) . Pyrene - Actin Polymerization Assays— Pyrene - actin polymer - ization assays were performed as previously described ( 15 ) . The influence of cortactin on polymerization rates of reactions con - taining Arp2 / 3 complex and a WASP family protein was quan - tified by dividing the maximum polymerization rate at each cortactin concentration by the maximum polymerization rate of an identical reaction without cortactin ( 23 ) . These values were reported as fold activation and plotted versus cortactin concentration . Fold activation data were fit to the following equation , fold act . (cid:2) max . fold act . * X K syn (cid:3) X (cid:3) 1 ( Eq . 1 ) where X is the concentration of cortactin , and K syn is the con - centration of cortactin at half - maximal activity . The reaction lag phase lifetime was defined as the start of the reaction to the time at which the acceleration of the reaction was the greatest . This time point was found by taking the second derivative of the raw fluorescence data that had been filtered with a five - point moving average . Competition Binding Assays— The fluorescence anisotropy of 100 n M Alexa 546 - NtA ( 1 – 48 ) was measured in the presence of 750 n M Arp2 / 3 complex and 0 . 2 – 20 (cid:4) M of cortactin NtA or cortactin NtA mutants . Fluorescence anisotropy was moni - tored through excitation at 530 nm and emission at 570 nm in a buffered solution of 10 m M Hepes , pH 7 . 0 , 50 m M KCl , 1 m M EGTA , 1 m M MgCl 2 , 1 m M DTT , and 0 . 2 m M ATP . Binding experiments were performed at least three times , and the data Regulation of Actin Networks by Cortactin and WASP Proteins 28858 JOURNAL OF BIOLOGICAL CHEMISTRY VOLUME 289•NUMBER 42• OCTOBER 17 , 2014 by gu e s t on F e b r u a r y 4 , 2015 h tt p : / / www . j b c . o r g / D o w n l o a d e d fr o m from each experiment were fit individually as previously described ( 34 ) with the probe affinity and receptor concentra - tion held constant . The probe , Alexa 546 - NtA ( 1 – 48 ) , affinity for the Arp2 / 3 complex was determined by measuring the fluorescence anisotropy under conditions described above and fitting the results with a previously described equation ( 35 ) . The probe affinity was found to be 0 . 66 (cid:2) 0 . 13 (cid:4) M , error is 95 % confidence interval . The reported affinities are the means of all individual fits . TIRF Microscopy— Objective - based TIRF microscopy was performed on a Nikon TE2000 - U microscopy body with a Nikon 100 (cid:3) 1 . 49 NA TIRF objective and a 1 . 5 (cid:3) auxiliary lens , as described previously ( 23 ) . Laser light from an argon 488 - nm ( Dynamic Laser , Salt Lake City , UT ) or solid state 561 - nm ( Coherent , Santa Clara , CA ) laser were filtered through dual - band excitation and dichroic filters ( Chroma , Bellows Falls , VT ) prior to striking the sample from which the resulting fluores - cent emission was filtered through dual - band dichroic and emission filters before collection on an EM - CCD camera ( iXon3 , Andor , or Image - EM ; Hamamatsu ) . Actin polymeriza - tion was initiated by adding protein components to an oxygen - scavenging polymerization buffer composed of glucose - oxi - dase , catalase , and Trolox . The polymerization reaction was imaged after wicking the reaction into a cleaned flow chamber where the coverslip surface was passivated with polyethylene glycol . Polymerizing actin filaments were tethered to the cov - erslip by N - ethyl - or biotin maleimide - inactivated myosin , which was adhered to the coverslip through biotin - streptavidin interactions . The open source microscopy software Micro - Manager ( 36 ) was used to acquire 488 - channel images at rates of 0 . 2 – 1 s (cid:4) 1 and 561 - channel images at 3 . 6 s (cid:4) 1 with exposure times of 25 – 100 ms . Individual reaction parameters are detailed in the supplemental Movie S1 legends . Images were processed in ImageJ by background subtraction with a rolling ball radius of 10 pixels and then slightly blurred with a Gaussian filter of radius 0 . 6 pixels . Image Analysis— Lifetime analysis of cortactin molecules was performed as previously described ( 23 ) . Briefly , puncta in 561 - channel images were automatically tracked using a nearest neighbor algorithm to determine their lifetime . Tracks were rejected if : 1 ) they appeared in the first or last image of the acquisition , 2 ) their intensity did not correspond to single mol - ecules , or 3 ) their position did not correlate with actin fila - ments . Molecules from the tracks were manually viewed to classify them as binding to either single or bundled filaments . Molecule lifetimes were binned by 5 s , and the cumulative frequency for all molecules was determined . 1 minus cumula - tive frequency as a function of binned lifetimes was fit to a single exponential decay equation to yield an off rate constant and accompanying standard error . The number of cortactin molecules per micrometer of fila - ment was determined by manually counting cortactin mole - cules along a filament and measuring the length of filaments using a previously published ImageJ plugin ( 37 ) . The number of filaments in the bundles were manually determined and incor - porated into the filament length measurements . Binding densi - ties were analyzed at three separate time points ( 105 , 140 , and 174 s from the start of imaging ) . No time - dependent difference was observed , so the average binding density reported contains measurements from all three time points . The fraction of total filament bundled was calculated in Mat - lab ( Mathworks Inc . , Natick , MA ) similar to a previously described procedure ( 23 ) . Regions of interest were manually segmented to separate actin filaments from the background . Then extraneous pixels were removed using morphological opening to produce a binary image with filaments represented by positive pixels . The total length of all filaments was calcu - lated by dividing the number of positive pixels by three ( the average filament width because of the point spread function ) and then the summed pixel value was converted to microme - ters using 1 pixel (cid:5) 0 . 16 or 0 . 017 (cid:4) m ( depending upon magni - fication used ) . Pixels corresponding to bundled filaments were manually marked and analyzed with the assumption that bun - dles contain only two filaments . Manual tracking of bundles showed that a vast majority contained only two filaments at the time points measured . Multiple nonoverlapping regions of interest were analyzed to calculate the reported fraction of total filament bundled . Photobleaching data were collected by adhering 1 n M of NHS - biotin ( Thermo - Pierce , Rockford , IL ) conjugated Alexa 568 - cortactin ( residues 1 – 336 ) to the surface of PEGylated cover slips and acquiring 100 - ms exposures continuously for 3 min . Fluorescent puncta were identified in the first image frame , and their positions were integrated across all images to produce an intensity time series for each puncta . The number of photobleaching steps was identified using a one - dimensional edge detection algorithm written in - house and implemented in Matlab . Kinetic Modeling— Simulations were performed using previ - ously described kinetic models ( 23 ) . Briefly , time courses of actin polymerization for reactions containing GST - N - WASP - VCA , cortactin , and Arp2 / 3 complex were fit to a model in which cortactin can bind nascent branches and displace GST - N - WASP - VCA through an irreversible activation step ( k dis ) , allowing a new branched filament end to form . k dis was the only parameter optimized during these fitting routines . Simulations of actin polymerization at increasing cortactin concentrations were performed using this optimized model , and the corre - sponding lag phase lifetimes were calculated as described above . RESULTS Cortactin Is a Weak NPF Because It Cannot Recruit Actin Monomers to Arp2 / 3 Complex— A critical difference between WASP family proteins and cortactin is that WASP proteins recruit actin monomers to Arp2 / 3 complex through their V regions , whereas cortactin lacks a V region and does not bind actin monomers ( 19 ) . Actin monomer recruitment by WASP is required for NPF activity and has been shown to stimulate movement of Arp2 and Arp3 into a filament - like ( short pitch ) conformation that may template nucleation ( 16 , 17 , 38 ) . There - fore , we hypothesized that the weak NPF activity of cortactin is due to its inability to recruit actin monomers to Arp2 / 3 com - plex . We tested this hypothesis by creating a chimeric cortactin construct in which the second V region of N - WASP was fused to the N terminus of cortactin with a 16 - amino acid linker Regulation of Actin Networks by Cortactin and WASP Proteins OCTOBER 17 , 2014• VOLUME 289•NUMBER 42 JOURNAL OF BIOLOGICAL CHEMISTRY 28859 by gu e s t on F e b r u a r y 4 , 2015 h tt p : / / www . j b c . o r g / D o w n l o a d e d fr o m ( V - cortactin ; Fig . 2 A ) . Fusion of the V region dramatically increased the activity of cortactin , increasing the maximum polymerization rate 3 . 1 - fold compared to wild type cortactin , demonstrating that cortactin is a weak NPF because it is unable to recruit actin monomers to the Arp2 / 3 complex ( Fig . 2 , B and C ) . Despite its increased intrinsic NPF activity , the V - cortactin chimera had a 1 . 4 - fold reduced maximum polymerization rate compared with N - WASP - VCA . Recent experiments show that VCA binds to two NPF binding sites on Arp2 / 3 complex to recruit two actin monomers and maximally stimulate nucle - ation ( 39 – 41 ) . Cortactin NtA binds to only one of these two sites , so we hypothesized that V - cortactin may be less active than N - WASP because it cannot simultaneously recruit two monomers to the complex ( 24 ) . To test this hypothesis , we pre - pared a VV - cortactin fusion , in which the tandem V region of N - WASP was appended to the N terminus of cortactin ( Fig . 2 A ) . VV - cortactin activated the Arp2 / 3 complex 1 . 6 - fold more potently than V - cortactin , and to a similar extent as N - WASP - VCA , with a maximum polymerization rate at saturation of 19 n M / s ( Fig . 2 C ) . Together , these data demonstrate that differ - ences in the actin binding properties and not the Arp2 / 3 com - plex interacting regions of cortactin and N - WASP explain their intrinsic potency as NPFs . An important question will be to determine how , in both NPFs , increasing the number of mon - omer binding regions from one to two increases potency , a property previously reported for N - WASP ( 42 ) . Cortactin Bundles Branched Actin Filaments to Create Actin Networks Distinct from N - WASP - activated Arp2 / 3 Complex— Low speed copelleting assays , negative staining electron microscopy , and small angle x - ray scattering showed that cor - tactin bundles spontaneously nucleated ( unbranched ) actin fil - aments ( 30 – 32 ) . Cortactin localizes with Arp2 / 3 complex in branched actin networks in vivo ( 33 ) and specifically targets branch junctions in vitro ( 23 ) , but it is uncertain whether cor - tactin can bundle branched actin filaments or how its nucle - ation - promoting and bundling activities might together influ - ence branched actin filament architectures . Therefore , we used TIRF microscopy to directly visualize GST - N - WASP - VCA - or cortactin - mediated branching nucleation . GST - N - WASP - VCA - activated Arp2 / 3 complex created both primary branches that grew from spontaneously nucleated filaments and second - ary or higher order branches from Arp2 / 3 - nucleated filaments , creating dense dendritic networks ( Fig . 3 A , top panel , and sup - plemental Movie S1 ) . In contrast , cortactin - mediated branch - ing formed dramatically different networks , in which branching was less dendritic , and instead consisted of a few daughter fila - ments elongating from mother filaments that were frequently bundled . In many instances , daughter filaments growing away from the mother filament ( or mother filament bundle ) collided with a nearby “sister filament” to form daughter filament bun - dles ( Fig . 3 A , bottom panel , and supplemental Movie S2 ) . These data show that the bundling and branching activation activities of cortactin together create a network of interconnected bun - dles distinct from N - WASP - mediated branching . Electron micrographs show actin filaments in lamellipodia and at sites of endocytosis are dendritic and more similar to the N - WASP - initiated networks we observed in our TIRF images than the bundled cortactin - mediated networks ( 43 , 44 ) . This presents an apparent discrepancy , because cortactin localizes to both of these actin - based structures ( 28 , 45 ) . To resolve this apparent discrepancy , we examined the architecture of branched networks created in the presence of both N - WASP ( GST - N - WASP - VCA ) and cortactin . Reactions containing both NPFs showed highly dendritic networks , similar to those created with N - WASP - VCA alone ( Fig . 3 B ) . Even at high con - centrations of cortactin , which normally cause dramatic bun - dling ( supplemental Movie S3 ) , very little bundling was observed when GST - N - WASP - VCA was present ( Fig . 3 , B and C , and supplemental Movie S4 ) . These data suggest that high rates of branching nucleation antagonize bundling and that the architectures of cortactin - containing actin networks in vivo will be modulated by the activities of the other NPFs present . Cortactin Monomers Bundle Parallel and Antiparallel Actin Filaments— To better understand the bundling mechanism , we directly observed bundling of unbranched elongating filaments by cortactin using two - color TIRF microscopy . For these FIGURE 2 . Cortactin is a weak NPF because it cannot recruit actin monomers to the Arp2 / 3 complex . A , domain organization of wild type cortactin and N - terminal V region fusions . B , pyrene - actin polymerization time courses showing Arp2 / 3 complex activation by cortactin , V - cortactin , or VV - cortactin . Reac - tionscontain3 (cid:4) M 15 % pyrene - actin , 40n M Arp2 / 3complex , andtheindicatedconcentrationsofcortactinconstructs . C , maximumpolymerizationrate versus NPF concentration for N - WASP VVCA , N - WASP VCA , cortactin , V - cortactin , and VV - cortactin . Reactions conditions were as described in B . Maximum polymer - ization rates were calculated as previously described ( 15 ) . Regulation of Actin Networks by Cortactin and WASP Proteins 28860 JOURNAL OF BIOLOGICAL CHEMISTRY VOLUME 289•NUMBER 42• OCTOBER 17 , 2014 by gu e s t on F e b r u a r y 4 , 2015 h tt p : / / www . j b c . o r g / D o w n l o a d e d fr o m assays , we used an Alexa 568 - labeled C - terminally truncated construct of cortactin that lacks the proline - rich region and the Src homology 3 domain . This construct has the same NPF activity as full - length cortactin ( 23 ) . Multiple pathways to bun - dling were observed . In some events , actin filaments with bound fluorescent cortactin puncta collided at an acute angle with a second filament ( Fig . 4 A and supplemental Movie S5 ) . Either the two filaments then zippered together , or the shorter end of the Y - shaped structure bound to the side of the longer filament , creating a gap that closed from each side . In other cases , filaments aligned along their lengths collided and imme - diately snapped together , and in others , two filaments attached to the surface elongated into each other ( Fig . 4 A and supple - mental Movies S6 and S7 ) . Using fiduciary marks to identify barbed ends , we observed both parallel and anti - parallel bun - dling events ( Fig . 4 A ) . We hypothesized that bundling could occur by cortactin oligomerization , which would allow the actin filament binding region from each cortactin molecule to contact a separate filament . Alternatively , a cortactin monomer could utilize a single set of filament binding repeats to bridge two actin filaments ( Fig . 4 B ) . To distinguish between these pos - sibilities , we measured the oligomerization state of cortactin by FIGURE 3 . Cortactin bundles branched actin filaments to form actin net - works distinct from N - WASP . A , time lapse TIRF microscopy images of branched networks nucleated by Arp2 / 3 complex activated by either GST - N - WASP - VCA ( top panels ) or cortactin ( residues 1 – 336 ) ( bottom panel ) at the indicated concentrations . Arrowheads indicate an example of daughter fila - ment bundling . B , time lapse TIRF microscopy images of branched networks nucleated by Arp2 / 3 complex activated by cortactin alone ( residues 1 – 336 ) ( top panel ) or cortactin and GST - N - WASP - VCA ( bottom panel ) . C , quantifica - tion of the fraction of actin filaments in bundles from reactions in B as a function of time . All TIRF reactions contain 1 . 5 (cid:4) M 33 % Oregon - Green actin . Scale bars are 2 (cid:4) m . FIGURE 4 . Cortactin monomers bundle parallel and antiparallel actin fil - aments . A , two - color time lapse TIRF microscopy images of cortactin mole - cules ( magenta ) bundlingactinfilaments ( green ) ineitherparallel ( toppanels ) or antiparallel ( bottom panels ) orientations with respect to their barbed ends ( arrowheads ) . Colocalized signals are white . Reaction contains 1 . 5 (cid:4) M 33 % Oregon - Green actin and 10 n M Alexa 568 - cortactin ( 1 – 336 ) . B , graphic repre - sentationofproposedcortactinbundlingmechanism . C , countoffluorescent puncta corresponding to the indicated number of observed photobleaching steps from a reaction of 1 n M biotinylated Alexa 568 - cortactin attached to a streptavidin - coatedcoverslip . Inset , plotoffluorescenceintensity versus time for three different monomeric Alexa 568 - cortactin molecules during photo - bleaching experiment . D , frequency plot of tracked cortactin lifetimes for moleculesboundtosingle ( graycircles , n (cid:5) 99 ) orbundled ( blackcrosses , n (cid:5) 49 ) filaments from the reaction in A . The data were fit with a single exponen - tial decay function to yield off rates of 0 . 09 (cid:2) 0 . 01 and 0 . 07 (cid:2) 0 . 01 s (cid:4) 1 for singleandbundledfilaments , respectively . Errorsare95 % confidenceinterval from fit . E , number of cortactin molecules bound per micrometer of actin filament for molecules bound to either single ( circles , n (cid:5) 99 ) or bundled ( crosses , n (cid:5) 48 ) filaments from reaction in A . Black bars represent means ; single (cid:5) 0 . 85 (cid:2) 0 . 28 and bundled (cid:5) 0 . 62 (cid:2) 0 . 17 cortactin molecules per micrometer of actin filament . Errors are S . D . Regulation of Actin Networks by Cortactin and WASP Proteins OCTOBER 17 , 2014• VOLUME 289•NUMBER 42 JOURNAL OF BIOLOGICAL CHEMISTRY 28861 by gu e s t on F e b r u a r y 4 , 2015 h tt p : / / www . j b c . o r g / D o w n l o a d e d fr o m attaching it to the imaging surface through biotinylation and observing its photobleaching behavior . The vast majority of fluorescent puncta bleached in a single step , demonstrating that cortactin is a monomer and supporting a model in which monomers of cortactin mediate bundling using a single set of repeats to bridge two filaments ( Fig . 4 C ) . To determine how bundling influences the interactions of cortactin with actin , we measured the lifetimes of cortactin bound to single filaments versus bundles . The off rate of cortactin for filaments was nearly identical in each scenario ( Fig . 4 D ) . In addition , the number of cortactin molecules bound per filament length was nearly iden - tical for cortactin bound to single versus bundled filaments ( Fig . 4 E ) . These observations indicate that bundling does not dra - matically alter the interactions between cortactin and actin filaments . The Arp2 / 3 Complex Binding Region of Cortactin Has Unique Biochemical Properties Required for Synergistic Activation— To better understand how functional segments of Arp2 / 3 complex activators influence branching nucleation , we next focused on the Arp2 / 3 complex interacting regions of N - WASP and cor - tactin . Specifically , we asked if features of Arp2 / 3 complex binding regions in these NPFs influenced their ability to coor - dinately regulate the complex . Cortactin and N - WASP have been shown to synergistically activate the complex using a dis - placement mechanism , in which cortactin increases the nucle - ation rate by binding to the complex at nascent branch junc - tions and displacing N - WASP - VCA ( 23 ) ( Fig . 1 C ) . This model is consistent with the observation that the NtA region of cor - tactin is sufficient for synergy with N - WASP and competes with N - WASP - CA for binding to the Arp3 subunit ( 23 , 24 ) . It is also consistent with the observation that N - WASP must be released from the complex at nascent branch junctions before nucleation , whereas cortactin can remain bound throughout nucleation and elongation ( 23 , 46 ) . Structural modeling sug - gests the V region in WASP - VCA blocks the barbed ends of recruited actin monomers from interacting with actin mono - mers , explaining why VCA must be released ( 47 ) . These results suggest that any interaction that can promote displacement of VCA from the nascent branch junction without blocking incoming actin monomers might synergistically activate the Arp2 / 3 complex . Therefore , we asked whether the A region of WASP , which can compete with VCA for binding to Arp2 / 3 complex ( 16 ) , can synergistically activate the complex with GST - N - WASP - VCA . Unexpectedly , the A region of WASP was not synergistic with GST - N - WASP - VCA , even at concen - trations where NtA - mediated synergy was saturated ( Fig . 5 A ) . These data demonstrate that NtA is functionally distinct from A and harbors unique structural features required for synergy . The failure of A to synergize with GST - N - WASP - VCA cannot be explained by its relatively low affinity ( K D (cid:5) (cid:6) 9 (cid:4) M ) com - pared with NtA ( K D (cid:5) 1 . 6 (cid:4) M ) , because neither WASP - CA nor N - WASP - CA ( K D (cid:5) (cid:6) 1 (cid:4) M ) synergistically activated the com - plex with GST - N - WASP - VCA ( 16 , 48 ) ( Fig . 5 A ) . Consistent with this observation , the WASP C region also failed to syner - gize with GST - N - WASP - VCA ( Fig . 5 A ) . In some contexts CA inhibits WASP - mediated activation of the complex ( 49 , 50 ) . Our data here show that monomeric CA constructs are not effective inhibitors of GST - N - WASP - VCA . Although we cannot eliminate the possibility that CA - mediated inhibition is masked by weak synergy between CA and GST - N - WASP - VCA , the observation that WASP proteins do not bind to branch junctions indicates that CA lacks a key biochemical property for displacement - mediated synergy ( 23 , 46 ) . There - fore , we speculate the weak inhibitory potency of CA we mea - sured is due to its weak binding to isolated Arp2 / 3 complex compared with dimeric N - WASP constructs ( 16 , 48 ) . Because the actin filament binding domain of cortactin increases its potency in synergizing with N - WASP ( Fig . 5 A ) , we next replaced the NtA region of cortactin with the acidic ( A ) region of N - WASP and asked whether this chimeric construct ( A - cortactin ) could synergize with GST - N - WASP - VCA . A - cortactin showed dramatically reduced synergy with GST - N - WASP - VCA compared with wild type cortactin ( Fig . 5 , B and C ) . The chimeric construct increased the maximum polymerization rate 1 . 4 - fold over the rate with GST - N - WASP - VCA alone , compared with the 3 . 5 - fold increase of wild type cortactin . These data show that even in the context of the actin filament binding repeats , NtA is functionally distinct from WASP family A regions . FIGURE 5 . Cortactin NtA has unique biochemical properties compared with the CA region of WASP . A , fold Arp2 / 3 complex activation versus NPF concentration for pyrene - actin polymerization reactions containing either cortactin , NtA , WASP CA , WASP A , WASP C , or N - WASP CA . All reactions contained 2 (cid:4) M 15 % pyrene - actin , 20n M Arp2 / 3complex , 250n M GST - N - WASP - VCA , andtheindicatedNPF . Foldactivationisdefinedasthemaximumpolymerizationrate from a reaction with both GST - N - WASP - VCA and either cortactin or WASP proteins divided by the maximum polymerization rate of the reaction with just GST - N - WASP - VCA . B , pyrene - actin polymerization time courses showing intrinsic NPF activity and synergy with 150 n M GST - N - WASP - VCA ( GST - VCA ) by cortactin and N - WASP acidic cortactin ( A - cortactin ) for reactions containing 3 (cid:4) M 15 % pyrene - actin and the indicated protein concentrations . C , plot of fold activation versus cortactin concentration for cortactin and A - cortactin . Reactions include 2 (cid:4) M 15 % pyrene - actin , 20 n M Arp2 / 3 complex , and 150 n M GST - N - WASP - VCA . Regulation of Actin Networks by Cortactin and WASP Proteins 28862 JOURNAL OF BIOLOGICAL CHEMISTRY VOLUME 289•NUMBER 42• OCTOBER 17 , 2014 by gu e s t on F e b r u a r y 4 , 2015 h tt p : / / www . j b c . o r g / D o w n l o a d e d fr o m NtA Harbors Non - WASP - like Sequences That Contribute to Synergy— To determine the basis of functional differences between cortactin NtA and N - WASP A , we aligned cortactin sequences from multiple species to the A region of WASP fam - ily proteins . This analysis revealed that the acidic motif of cor - tactin ( the DDWE motif ) is embedded within a (cid:6) 60 - amino acid stretch of residues highly conserved among cortactin sequences but not present in WASP family proteins ( Fig . 6 A ) . To deter - mine the importance of each of these conserved NtA segments , we tested the influence of truncations of NtA on its ability to synergistically activate the complex . We first asked whether the conserved region C - terminal to the DDWE motif is required for synergy . We made a construct ( NtA ( 1 – 27 ) ) that contains the short conserved stretch N - terminal to the DDWE motif plus the DDWE motif but lacks the C - terminal region of NtA . NtA ( 1 – 27 ) showed a dramatic reduction in synergy with GST - N - WASP - VCA . The maximum polymerization rate at 50 (cid:4) M NtA ( 1 – 27 ) was 2 . 2 - fold less than the full - length NtA construct ( NtA ( 1 – 84 ) ) . A construct lacking only the C - terminal 36 amino acids of the NtA ( NtA ( 1 – 48 ) ) was 1 . 6 - fold defective compared with NtA ( 1 – 84 ) , whereas a construct lacking 14 residues at the N terminus ( NtA ( 15 – 79 ) ) showed a 1 . 3 - fold decrease in syn - ergy ( Fig . 6 B ) . These data indicate that the conserved non - WASP - like sequences in NtA region contribute to the ability of cortactin to synergistically activate Arp2 / 3 complex with N - WASP . To determine how regions outside the DDWE motif contrib - ute to synergy , we asked whether the NtA truncations influ - enced interactions with Arp2 / 3 complex . We measured the affinity of the NtA constructs for free Arp2 / 3 complex using a fluorescence anisotropy competition binding assay ( Fig . 6 C ) . Unexpectedly , all NtA constructs bound Arp2 / 3 complex with a similar affinity to the full - length NtA . The displacement model of synergistic activation predicts that cortactin binds FIGURE 6 . All regions of the cortactin NtA contribute to synergy . A , sequence alignment of cortactin NtA and WASP family acidic regions . WASP family proteins are human ( Hs ) N - WASP ( residues 482 – 505 ) , WASP ( residues 481 – 502 ) , and WAVE1 ( residues 540 – 559 ) . Gray - and green - shaded NtA residues are 100 and 80 % conserved , respectively . Red - shaded residues represent the WASP - like DDWE motif . Residue numbering is based on Mus musculus cortactin . Vertical blacklines indicatetruncationsoftheNtA . B , plotoffoldactivation versus concentrationsofcortactin ( blackdashedline ) , NtA ( 1 – 84 ) ( reddashedline ) , NtA ( 15 – 79 ) , NtA ( 1 – 48 ) , and NtA ( 1 – 27 ) . Dashed lines indicate previously published data ( 23 ) . C , fluorescence anisotropy binding assay showing competition between 100 n M Alexa 546 - labeled NtA ( 1 – 48 ) and unlabeled NtA constructs for 750 n M Arp2 / 3 complex . Plot shows representative competition binding titration data for each construct with accompanying fit . Reported affinities ( inset ) are averages of three separate titrations . Errors are S . D . D , plot of fold Arp2 / 3 complex activation for a range of concentrations of cortactin in pyrene - actin polymerization reactions containing the indicated cortactin construct and 250 n M GST - N - WASP - VCA , 2 (cid:4) M 15 % pyrene - actin , and 20 n M Arp2 / 3 complex . The right panel contains best fit values with 95 % confidence intervals of concentration to half - maximum saturation of synergistic activation . Fits were performed as described under “Experimental Procedures . ” E , plot of maximum polymerization rate versus cortactinconcentrationforactinpolymerizationreactionscontaining3 (cid:4) M 15 % pyrene - actinand0 . 5 (cid:4) M Arp2 / 3complex , butnoGST - N - WASP - VCA . F , plot of maximum polymerization rate versus cortactin concentration for actin polymerization reactions containing 3 (cid:4) M 15 % pyrene - actin , 40 n M Arp2 / 3 complex , and the indicated cortactin construct . Regulation of Actin Networks by Cortactin and WASP Proteins OCTOBER 17 , 2014• VOLUME 289•NUMBER 42 JOURNAL OF BIOLOGICAL CHEMISTRY 28863 by gu e s t on F e b r u a r y 4 , 2015 h tt p : / / www . j b c . o r g / D o w n l o a d e d fr o m Arp2 / 3 complex at nascent branch junctions , where interac - tions of the complex with N - WASP , actin monomers , and actin filaments could influence the NtA binding surface ( Fig . 1 C ) . Therefore , the mutations in NtA might decrease interactions with Arp2 / 3 complex specifically at nascent branch junctions . To test this , we measured the concentrations of mutant NtA constructs required to saturate synergy with GST - N - WASP - VCA . For these assays , we introduced the NtA mutations in the context of full - length cortactin to enable us to saturate the reac - tions . The concentrations required for half - maximal synergy for the full - length NtA mutants were 4 – 8 - fold greater than wild type cortactin , whereas the potency of each mutant at sat - uration was identical to wild type cortactin ( Fig . 6 D ) . These results are consistent with a model in which mutations in the NtA decrease the affinity of cortactin for the nascent branch junctions rather than slowing a post - binding first order reac - tion rate . The Distinct Modes of Activation of Arp2 / 3 Complex by Cor - tactin Are Partially Separable and Encoded within the NtA— The intrinsic NPF activity of cortactin requires both the DDWE motif of the NtA and the actin filament binding repeats , leading to the hypothesis that cortactin recruits free Arp2 / 3 complex to a pre - existing filament to activate nucleation ( 24 ) ( Fig . 1 B ) . In the recruitment pathway to activation , the interactions of NtA with the free Arp2 / 3 complex could influence rates of activa - tion . This is in contrast to the displacement mechanism of syn - ergistic activation , in which interaction of NtA with nascent branch junctions ( and not the isolated Arp2 / 3 complex ) define activation rates . Therefore , we hypothesized that NtA residues outside of the DDWE motif , which are important for synergistic activation but not for binding to the isolated complex , might be dispensable for the intrinsic NPF activity of cortactin . Consis - tent with this hypothesis , we found that deleting the C - terminal portion of NtA had no effect on the intrinsic NPF activity of cortactin ( Fig . 6 E ) . Similarly , truncating the N terminus of NtA also failed to reduce cortactin’s intrinsic NPF activity . Instead , this mutant showed increased activity compared with wild type cortactin , indicating that the N terminus of NtA antagonizes the intrinsic NPF activity of cortactin ( Fig . 6 E ) . The stimulatory effect of the N - terminal truncation was insignificant when directly compared with potent stimulation caused by the N - ter - minal V - cortactin fusions ( Fig . 6 F ) . Together , these observa - tions indicate that the intrinsic versus synergistic activation activities of cortactin are mechanistically distinct and that mutations in the NtA allow functional separation of these activities . Cortactin Synergistically Activates Arp2 / 3 Complex to Differ - ent Extents with WAVE , WASP , and N - WASP— Cortactin reg - ulates branched actin assembly in multiple cellular structures , including podosomes ( 51 ) , invadopodia ( 52 ) , sites of endocyto - sis ( 45 ) , and at the leading edge of the cell ( 33 ) . Each of these structures contains both cortactin and a WASP family protein , suggesting these two NPFs might synergize to assemble the branched actin filaments in each of these structures . However , N - WASP is the only WASP family protein demonstrated to potently synergize with cortactin , and few experiments have explored synergy with other WASP family proteins ( 20 – 23 ) . Dissection of the mechanism revealed strict biochemical requirements for N - WASP , making it uncertain whether potent synergy with cortactin is a general feature of WASP fam - ily proteins . To answer this question , we tested combinations of cortactin and different WASP family proteins for their ability to synergistically activate Arp2 / 3 complex . Cortactin and N - WASP colocalize in ventral actin - based protrusions in transformed cells called invadopodia ( 53 ) . We previously showed that GST - N - WASP - VCA and cortactin synergistically activate Arp2 / 3 complex in vitro ( 23 ) , poten - tially explaining why both NPFs are required for assembly of actin filaments in invadopodia ( 10 ) . Potent synergy required dimerization of N - WASP - VCA ; monomeric N - WASP - VCA containing either one or both of the two native V regions ( N - WASP - VCA or N - WASP - VVCA ) showed little or no syn - ergy , respectively ( 23 ) . This does not rule out the possibility that N - WASP synergizes with cortactin in invadopodia , because there is building evidence that WASP family proteins act as oligomers in vivo ( 48 , 54 – 56 ) . However , experiments to mea - sure the synergy of dimerized N - WASP have all used a con - struct of N - WASP that includes only one of its two native V regions ( 20 , 21 ) . Because the additional V region increases the intrinsic NPF activity of N - WASP ( Fig . 7 H ) , and we observed that intrinsic and synergistic activity are inversely correlated ( 23 , 42 ) ( see “Discussion” ) , we reasoned that the additional V region may influence synergy with cortactin . Therefore , we tested the ability of GST - N - WASP - VVCA to synergize with cortactin . The addition of cortactin to GST - N - WASP - VVCA increased the maximum polymerization only 1 . 3 - fold over GST - N - WASP - VVCA alone , whereas its addition to GST - N - WASP - VCA increased the polymerization rate 3 . 8 - fold ( Fig . 7 , A , B , and G ) . These data demonstrate that the presence of an additional V region in N - WASP significantly decreases synergy with cortactin . Therefore , synergy between these two NPFs may not contribute significantly to nucleation of branched fil - aments in invadopodia . WASP is a hematopoietic cell - specific WASP family protein required for the assembly of actin filaments in podosomes , pro - trusive structures similar to invadopodia that occur in non - transformed cells ( 57 ) . WASP has a single V region and has increased intrinsic dimeric NPF activity compared with GST - N - WASP - VCA ( Fig . 7 H ) . Dimeric WASP - VCA was recently shown by TIRF microscopy to increase Arp2 / 3 complex - medi - ated branching in the presence of cortactin ( 22 ) . However , it is unknown whether the biochemical differences between WASP and N - WASP influence the potency or mechanism of synergy . To test this , we added cortactin to reactions containing Arp2 / 3 complex and dimeric or monomeric WASP - VCA . We found that dimeric WASP ( GST - WASP - VCA ) , but not monomeric WASP ( WASP - VCA ) , synergistically activated Arp2 / 3 com - plex with cortactin ( Fig . 7 , C , D , and G ) . Therefore , like N - WASP , the oligomerization state of WASP - VCA is a critical determinant of synergy , suggesting N - WASP and WASP use a similar mechanism to synergize with cortactin . The addition of cortactin to GST - WASP - VCA increased the maximum poly - merization rate 2 . 6 - fold over GST - WASP - VCA alone . This value was significantly less than dimeric N - WASP - VCA , indicating that sequence differences in the VCA of distinct WASP proteins tune the potency of their synergy with cortactin ( Fig . 7 G ) . Regulation of Actin Networks by Cortactin and WASP Proteins 28864 JOURNAL OF BIOLOGICAL CHEMISTRY VOLUME 289•NUMBER 42• OCTOBER 17 , 2014 by gu e s t on F e b r u a r y 4 , 2015 h tt p : / / www . j b c . o r g / D o w n l o a d e d fr o m WAVE and cortactin colocalize with Arp2 / 3 complex in lamellipodia , and RNAi knockdown experiments indicate that both NPFs contribute to nucleation of actin filaments in these structures ( 26 , 58 , 59 ) . WAVE contains one V region and as a dimer was found to have slightly higher activity than dimeric N - WASP - VCA but less activity than dimeric WASP VCA ( Fig . 7 H ) . Dimeric WAVE - VCA ( GST - WAVE - VCA ) showed a sim - ilar potency as dimeric WASP - VCA in cortactin - mediated syn - ergistic activation of Arp2 / 3 complex ( Fig . 7 , E – G ) . In addition to increasing the polymerization rate , synergistic activation of Arp2 / 3 complex by WASP family VCAs and cor - tactin significantly decreased the lag phase of the polymeriza - tion time courses ( Fig . 7 I ) . To determine whether the displace - ment mechanism can account for the decreased lag phase , we simulated time courses of reactions of cortactin , GST - N - WASP - VCA , and Arp2 / 3 complex using a previously optimized kinetic model of cortactin - mediated displacement ( 23 ) . In our simulations , increasing cortactin concentrations decreased the length of the lag phase almost 3 - fold , similar to the decreases measured in the reactions ( Fig . 7 K ) . Although the duration of the lag phase simulated at saturating cortactin was greater than the observed value , it was also overestimated at 0 (cid:4) M cortactin . This indicates that that the reactions describing spontaneous and / or GST - N - WASP - VCA - activated nucleation may be oversimplified , creating the observed differences between predicted and mea - sured lag phase in reactions containing cortactin . FIGURE 7 . Cortactin synergistically activates Arp2 / 3 complex to different extents with WAVE , WASP , and N - WASP . A , C , and E , time courses of pyrene - actin polymerization for reactions containing indicated WASP family proteins with or without 1 (cid:4) M cortactin , plus 20 n M Arp2 / 3 complex , 2 (cid:4) M 15 % pyrene - actin , andeither750n M N - WASP - VVCA , 100n M GST - N - WASP - VVCA , 750n M WASP - VCA , 250n M GST - WASP - VCA , 750n M WAVE - VCA , or250n M GST - WAVE - VCA . B , D , and F , fold activation for cortactin - mediated synergistic activation of Arp2 / 3 complex with either monomeric or dimeric WASP family proteins . Reactions conditions are the same as above but with varying concentrations of cortactin . The data were fit as described under “Experimental Procedures . ” Dashed lines indicate previously published data ( 23 ) . G , average fold activation of Arp2 / 3 complex by cortactin for reactions containing 1 (cid:4) M cortactin , 20 n M Arp2 / 3 complex , 2 (cid:4) M 15 % pyrene - actin , and a WASP family protein at concentrations listed above . Dimeric N - WASP VCA , monomeric N - WASP VCA , and monomeric N - WASP VVCA were previously published ( 23 ) . The dashed gray line indicates no synergy . p values were calculated by two - tailed Student’s t test . Error bars indicate S . E . n . s . , not significant . H , plot of maximum polymerization rate versus dimeric NPF concentration for actin polymerization reactions performed with 3 (cid:4) M 15 % pyrene - actin , 20 n M Arp2 / 3 complex , and the indicated concentrations of either GST - N - WASP - VCA ( black dashed line ; previously published ( 23 ) ) , GST - N - WASP - VVCA , GST - WAVE - VCA , or GST - WASP - VCA . I , plot of lag phase lifetime versus cortactin concentration for actin polymerization reactions contain - ing2 (cid:4) M 15 % pyrene - actin , 20n M Arp2 / 3complex , indicatedconcentrationsofcortactinandeither250n M GST - N - WASP - VCA , 100n M GST - N - WASP - VVCA , 250 n M GST - WAVE - VCA , or 250 n M GST - WASP - VCA . K , plot of lag phase lifetime versus cortactin concentration for either actin polymerization reactions performed with3 (cid:4) M 15 % pyrene - actin , 50n M Arp2 / 3complex , 100n M GST - N - WASP - VCA , andtheindicatedconcentrationsofcortactin ( blackclosedcircles ) orsimulations of actin polymerization reactions ( black line ) from a kinetic model of cortactin mediated synergistic displacement . Kinetic model fits and parameter optimiza - tion were published previously ( 23 ) . L , schematic indicating the actin based cellular structures were cortactin and a corresponding WASP family protein have been observed to colocalize . Regulation of Actin Networks by Cortactin and WASP Proteins OCTOBER 17 , 2014• VOLUME 289•NUMBER 42 JOURNAL OF BIOLOGICAL CHEMISTRY 28865 by gu e s t on F e b r u a r y 4 , 2015 h tt p : / / www . j b c . o r g / D o w n l o a d e d fr o m Together , these results show that the ability to synergize with cortactin is a general feature of WASP family proteins . Therefore , synergisticactivationofArp2 / 3complexbycortactinandaWASP family protein may be important for assembly of branched actin filaments in diverse actin - based structures , including podosomes , endocytic sites , and lamellipodia ( Fig . 7 L ) . DISCUSSION Cortactin Is a Weak NPF Because It Cannot Recruit Actin Monomers to the Arp2 / 3 Complex— Here we showed that dif - ferences between the cortactin NtA and the WASP A region cannot explain the weak intrinsic NPF activity of cortactin . Instead , we showed that cortactin is a weak NPF because it cannot recruit actin monomers to Arp2 / 3 complex . The absence of an actin monomer binding domain may ensure the NPF activity of cortactin is suppressed until a WASP family protein is activated , and branched networks can be assembled by the two NPFs synergistically . Alternatively , the NPF activity of cortactin may be stimulated when it binds proteins that allow it to indirectly tether monomers to Arp2 / 3 complex . For instance , WIP ( WASP interacting protein ) contains both a pro - line - rich region that binds to the Src homology 3 domain of cortactin and two V regions that bind actin monomers . In vitro , WIP increases cortactin - mediated activation of Arp2 / 3 com - plex , and coexpression of WIP and cortactin stimulates mem - brane protrusion ( 60 ) . Several other NPFs , including type I myosins and Abp1 ( actin binding protein 1 ) ( 5 ) , share the sequence characteristics of cortactin , in that they contain Arp2 / 3 complex interacting and actin filament binding regions , but no actin monomer binding segments . Indirect recruitment of actin monomers by these NPFs may be a general mechanism to control their activity . Indeed , myosin 1 , like cortactin , shows weak intrinsic Arp2 / 3 activation , but its NPF activity is potently stimulated by a direct interaction with WIP ( 61 ) . The observation that fusing a V region onto the N terminus of cortactin potently activated its NPF activity was unexpected given that cortactin lacks a canonical C region ( Fig . 6 A ) . The C region of WASP VCA is thought to be critical for stimulating an activating conformational change in Arp2 / 3 complex ( 62 ) . Why the C region is required for activation in the context of VCA but not in V - cortactin is unclear . One possibility is that the cortac - tin NtA harbors sequences unique from the WASP C region that stimulate conformational changes in the complex . In sup - port of this , single particle reconstructions of electron micros - copy images of cortactin - bound Arp2 / 3 complex show Arp2 and Arp3 in a filament - like conformation distinct from the splayed conformation observed in crystal structures of inactive Arp2 / 3 complex ( 63 ) . FRET experiments by Goley et al . ( 64 ) showed that unlike CA , an NtA construct containing residues 1 – 39 does not stimulate conformation changes in the complex , indicating that NtA residues important for these changes may be C - terminal to residue 39 . Determining precisely how V - cor - tactin and WIP - bound cortactin activate Arp2 / 3 complex with - out a C region will be critical for understanding the structural mechanisms by which NPFs activate the complex . The activity of V - cortactin was also unexpected because NtA binds to a single NPF site on the complex ( 24 ) . In contrast , multiple lines of evidence , including analytical ultracentrifuga - tion , isothermal titration calorimetry , and chemical cross - link - ing , indicate that WASP CA binds two sites on the complex , one on Arp3 and the other on ARPC1 and Arp2 ( 15 , 39 – 41 ) . Furthermore , mutational studies showed that recruitment of two actin monomers through engagement of VCA to both NPF sites is required for maximal activation ( 39 ) . Assuming that the conserved tryptophan in NtA binds to the same surface on Arp3 as WASP ( 24 ) , our structural modeling suggests the V - cortactin construct can deliver an actin monomer to the barbed end of Arp3 . V - cortactin could potentially also deliver an actin monomer to the barbed end of Arp2 , but the linear distance is much greater ( 107 versus 50 angstroms ) and is unlikely to be spanned by the 43 amino acids between the end of the V to the tryptophan , especially considering that a fully extended conformation of this region would occupy excluded volume in the model . Therefore , these data indicate that V - cor - tactin activates the complex by recruiting a single actin mono - mer to Arp3 . This is consistent with the results of Padrick et al . ( 39 ) , who showed that recruitment of actin monomers to Arp3 is more important for activation than monomer recruitment to Arp2 . However , as with WASP - VCA , recruitment of actin monomers to both sites may contribute to activation , because we found that fusion of the tandem V of N - WASP to the N terminus of cortactin ( VV - cortactin ) further stimulated NPF activity . Cortactin Bundles Branched Actin Filaments to Create Actin Networks Distinct from N - WASP— Recent observations indi - cate that filament bundling by fimbrin plays a role in modulat - ing the function of Arp2 / 3 - nucleated branched networks in vivo ( 65 ) . These observations suggest that other bundlers , including cortactin , may also influence branched filament net - works in vivo . However , we showed that the bundling potency of cortactin is reduced in the presence of N - WASP , presumably because increased nucleation rates create shorter branches that cannot bundle . Therefore , if cortactin - mediated bundling is important in vivo , its bundling activity is likely tuned by the presence of other actin regulators that influence branch density and filament lengths , including capping protein ( 66 ) . During endocytosis , bundling may also be influenced by dynamin , which is thought to oligomerize cortactin , thereby directly reg - ulating its bundling activity ( 32 , 67 ) . Dynamic Multivalent Contacts with Actin Filaments Can Explain Bundling by Cortactin— Our data demonstrate that multiple actin binding regions are harbored within the 6 . 5 repeats of cortactin . We propose a model in which a cortactin molecule binds to the side of a filament , with individual repeats dynamically binding and releasing the filament . When an adja - cent filament collides with the bound cortactin , one or more of the filament binding repeats release from the parent filament and interact with the bundling partner to bridge the filaments , leaving at least one repeat bound to the parent filament ( Fig . 4 B ) . Several lines of evidence support this model . First , chemi - cal cross - linking and circular dichroism experiments demon - strate that the repeats are dynamic and unstructured in the absence of actin ( 68 ) . Flexibility within the repeat region would allow it to dynamically switch between single and multiple fil - ament binding configurations . Second , the binding stoichiom - etry of cortactin to actin filaments is approximately five actin Regulation of Actin Networks by Cortactin and WASP Proteins 28866 JOURNAL OF BIOLOGICAL CHEMISTRY VOLUME 289•NUMBER 42• OCTOBER 17 , 2014 by gu e s t on F e b r u a r y 4 , 2015 h tt p : / / www . j b c . o r g / D o w n l o a d e d fr o m subunits to one cortactin , consistent with the idea that multiple actin subunits are contacted by a single filament binding repeat region and that each repeat contacts approximately one subunit ( 69 ) . Third , we showed that the off rate of cortactin for single filaments is identical to its off rate for bundles , and that the apparent affinity of cortactin for single filaments is similar to its apparent affinity for bundles . This suggests that the strength of contacts made by the repeat region is similar whether cortactin is bound to a single or bundled filament . This could occur if repeats act as flexibly connected binding modules , and the total strength of the interaction is additive and tuned by the total number of repeats attached , whether to a single or bundled filaments . This mode of interaction may allow both the actin filament binding and bundling activities of cortactin to be reg - ulated by alternative splicing , which generates isoforms of cor - tactin that have between 2 . 5 and 6 . 5 repeats ( 70 ) . We note that our data are inconsistent with experiments suggesting that the fourth repeat is entirely responsible for the actin binding affin - ity of cortactin ( 18 ) and with small angle x - ray scattering studies and modeling exercises that led to the hypothesis that the repeats fold into a stable globular domain ( 31 ) . The Arp2 / 3 Complex Binding Regions of Cortactin and WASP Are Functionally Distinct— NtA versus A sequence differences likely contribute to the distinct binding site specificities of NtA versus WASP for the complex , providing one explanation for the functional differences we observed here . Biochemical data suggest that WASP binds more tightly to the NPF site that spans Arp2 and ARPC1 , with an (cid:6) 100 - fold weaker affinity for the Arp3 NPF site , which is the only site bound by the cortactin NtA ( 24 , 40 , 41 ) . However , simple competition with dimeric WASP for binding to the Arp3 site cannot explain synergy , because at high concentrations CA and A can bind to both sites , yet we did not observe synergistic activation of the Arp2 / 3 com - plex even at very high concentrations of CA or A . Understanding the molecular bases for the functional differences between NtA and A will likely require high resolution structural information showing how both WASP - A and NtA bind to the complex . Our comparisons of WASP A versus NtA segments have implications for understanding diverse regulators of Arp2 / 3 complex . In addition to NPFs like WASP and cortactin , the A region is found in several inhibitors of Arp2 / 3 complex , includ - ing PICK1 ( 71 ) , Gadkin ( 72 ) , and Arpin ( 73 ) . These proteins block branching nucleation by competing with WASP family proteins for binding to the complex . However , unlike cortactin , none of these proteins have been observed to synergize with WASP family proteins in activation of Arp2 / 3 complex . Our data suggest that the A regions of these proteins may lack specific fea - tures present in cortactin NtA required for potent synergy . The Presence of Tandem V Regions in N - WASP Hinders Its Synergy with Cortactin— We showed that the ability to syner - gistically activate Arp2 / 3 complex with cortactin is a general feature of WASP family proteins , but that the potency of differ - ent WASP family proteins varies widely . Native N - WASP had the weakest synergistic activity , whether monomeric or dimerized . The weak synergy of native N - WASP is due to the presence of two V regions , because deletion of one V dramati - cally increased the potency of dimeric N - WASP in synergistic activation of Arp2 / 3 complex ( 23 ) ( Fig . 7 , A , B , and G ) . How tandem actin monomer recruitment regions could influence synergy with cortactin can be understood in the context of the displacement mechanism . In this mechanism , the rate of WASP release from the nascent branch junction limits or par - tially limits the rate of branching nucleation ( 23 , 46 ) . By displac - ing WASP from the nascent branch junction , cortactin increases branching rates . Therefore , the displacement mech - anism predicts an inverse correlation between the intrinsic activity of WASP family proteins at saturation ( which likely reflects the limiting release rate ) and the fold increase in poly - merization rate because of addition of cortactin . We previously observed this correlation for point mutations within the V region of GST - N - WASP - VCA ( 23 ) . Here we observe this cor - relation when comparing diverse WASP family proteins . For instance , GST - N - WASP - VVCA shows a much higher intrinsic NPF activity and a much lower synergy with cortactin compared with GST - N - WASP - VCA ( 23 ) ( Fig . 7 , A , B , and G ) . These obser - vationssuggestthatGST - N - WASP - VVCAshows decreased syn - ergistic activation because it is released more rapidly from the nascent branch than GST - N - WASP - VCA . Although we do not know how the number of V regions could influence the WASP release rate from nascent branches , one possibility is that recruitment of additional actin monomers helps stimulate a conformational change that accelerates WASP release and nucleation . Finally , we note that although we observed an inverse correlation between intrinsic NPF activity of WASP proteins to their synergy with cortactin , it was unexpected that the synergy of cortactin with GST - WAVE - VCA was not signif - icantly greater than with GST - WASP - VCA . This observation may indicate that the intrinsic NPF activity at saturation is a relatively crude indicator of potential synergy with cortactin for reasons that we do not currently understand . All WASP Family Proteins May Use a Similar Mechanism to Synergistically Activate Arp2 / 3 Complex with Cortactin— Our previous data indicate that release of dimeric but not mono - meric N - WASP from the nascent branch junction is rate - lim - iting , explaining why dimerization of WASP proteins is required for synergy with cortactin . Here we showed that mul - tiple WASP family proteins synergize with cortactin to activate Arp2 / 3 complex , but that in each case potent synergy required dimerization of the WASP protein . These data suggest that all WASP family proteins use the displacement mechanism to syn - ergize with cortactin . This finding has important implications for understanding the role of cortactin in assembling branched actin networks in diverse cellular structures . WASP , N - WASP , and WAVE are frequently attached to cellular membranes , allowing them to initiate branched actin networks that provide pushing forces to move or remodel cellular membranes ( 74 ) . WASP proteins are thought to provide a transient connection between membranes and the polymerizing actin networks by binding the barbed ends of polymerizing filaments , nascent branch junctions , or both ( 75 , 76 ) . Using the displacement mechanism to synergistically activate Arp2 / 3 complex with WASP family proteins , cortactin can not only increase rates of branching nucleation but may also decrease the lifetime of WASP - mediated connections between the polymerizing net - work and the membrane ( 22 ) . The importance of WASP - medi - ated connections to polymerizing actin networks has been Regulation of Actin Networks by Cortactin and WASP Proteins OCTOBER 17 , 2014• VOLUME 289•NUMBER 42 JOURNAL OF BIOLOGICAL CHEMISTRY 28867 by gu e s t on F e b r u a r y 4 , 2015 h tt p : / / www . j b c . o r g / D o w n l o a d e d fr o m demonstrated using in vitro bead motility assays ( 75 ) , and an important question to resolve will be the role of these connec - tions in modulating actin network - membrane interactions in vivo . Acknowledgments—WethankByronHetrickandSuLing - Liuforhelp with N - WASP and Arp2 / 3 complex purifications , as well as Bruce Bowerman and Chris Doe for use of their microscope and Raghuveer Parthasarathy for the particle tracking script . REFERENCES 1 . Pollard , T . D . , and Cooper , J . A . ( 2009 ) Actin , a central player in cell shape and movement . Science 326 , 1208 – 1212 2 . Blanchoin , L . , Pollard , T . D . , and Mullins , R . D . ( 2000 ) Interactions of ADF / cofilin , Arp2 / 3 complex , capping protein and profilin in remodeling of branched actin filament networks . Curr . Biol . 10 , 1273 – 1282 3 . Wagner , A . R . , Luan , Q . , Liu , S . - L . , and Nolen , B . J . ( 2013 ) Dip1 defines a class of Arp2 / 3 complex activators that function without preformed actin filaments . Curr . Biol . 23 , 1990 – 1998 4 . Higgs , H . N . , and Pollard , T . D . ( 2001 ) Regulation of actin filament net - work formation through ARP2 / 3 complex : activation by a diverse array of proteins . Annu . Rev . Biochem . 70 , 649 – 676 5 . Goley , E . D . , and Welch , M . D . ( 2006 ) The ARP2 / 3 complex : an actin nucleator comes of age . Nat . Rev . Mol . Cell Biol . 7 , 713 – 726 6 . Kaksonen , M . , Toret , C . P . , and Drubin , D . G . ( 2006 ) Harnessing actin dynamics for clathrin - mediated endocytosis . Nat . Rev . Mol . Cell Biol . 7 , 404 – 414 7 . Stradal , T . E . , Rottner , K . , Disanza , A . , Confalonieri , S . , Innocenti , M . , and Scita , G . ( 2004 ) RegulationofactindynamicsbyWASPandWAVEfamily proteins . Trends Cell Biol . 14 , 303 – 311 8 . Nu¨rnberg , A . , Kitzing , T . , and Grosse , R . ( 2011 ) Nucleating actin for inva - sion . Nat . Rev . Cancer 11 , 177 – 187 9 . Mizutani , K . , Miki , H . , He , H . , Maruta , H . , and Takenawa , T . ( 2002 ) Es - sential role of neural Wiskott - Aldrich syndrome protein in podosome formation and degradation of extracellular matrix in src - transformed fi - broblasts . Cancer Res . 62 , 669 – 674 10 . Ayala , I . , Baldassarre , M . , Giacchetti , G . , Caldieri , G . , Tete ` , S . , Luini , A . , and Buccione , R . ( 2008 ) Multiple regulatory inputs converge on cortactin to control invadopodia biogenesis and extracellular matrix degradation . J . Cell Sci . 121 , 369 – 378 11 . Oser , M . , Yamaguchi , H . , Mader , C . C . , Bravo - Cordero , J . J . , Arias , M . , Chen , X . , Desmarais , V . , van Rheenen , J . , Koleske , A . J . , and Condeelis , J . ( 2009 ) Cortactin regulates cofilin and N - WASp activities to control the stages of invadopodium assembly and maturation . J . Cell Biol . 186 , 571 – 587 12 . Sirotkin , V . , Berro , J . , Macmillan , K . , Zhao , L . , and Pollard , T . D . ( 2010 ) Quantitative analysis of the mechanism of endocytic actin patch assembly and disassembly in fission yeast . Mol . Biol . Cell 21 , 2894 – 2904 13 . Galletta , B . J . , Chuang , D . Y . , and Cooper , J . A ( 2008 ) Distinct roles for Arp2 / 3 regulators in actin assembly and endocytosis . PLoS Biol . 6 , e1 14 . Basu , R . , andChang , F . ( 2011 ) Characterizationofdip1prevealsaswitchin Arp2 / 3 - dependentactinassemblyforfissionyeastendocytosis . Curr . Biol . 21 , 905 – 916 15 . Liu , S . - L . , Needham , K . M . , May , J . R . , and Nolen , B . J . ( 2011 ) Mechanism ofaconcentration - dependentswitchbetweenactivationandinhibitionof Arp2 / 3 complex by coronin . J . Biol . Chem . 286 , 17039 – 17046 16 . Marchand , J . - B . , Kaiser , D . A . , Pollard , T . D . , and Higgs , H . N . ( 2001 ) Interaction of WASP / Scar proteins with actin and vertebrate Arp2 / 3 complex . Nat . Cell Biol . 3 , 76 – 82 17 . Hetrick , B . , Han , M . S . , Helgeson , L . A . , and Nolen , B . J . ( 2013 ) Small molecules CK - 666 and CK - 869 inhibit actin - related protein 2 / 3 complex byblockinganactivatingconformationalchange . Chem . Biol . 20 , 701 – 712 18 . Weed , S . A . , Karginov , A . V . , Schafer , D . A . , Weaver , A . M . , Kinley , A . W . , Cooper , J . A . , and Parsons , J . T . ( 2000 ) Cortactin localization to sites of actin assembly in lamellipodia requires interactions with F - actin and the Arp2 / 3 complex . J . Cell Biol . 151 , 29 – 40 19 . Uruno , T . , Liu , J . , Zhang , P . , Fan , Y . , Egile , C . , Li , R . , Mueller , S . C . , and Zhan , X . ( 2001 ) Activation of Arp2 / 3 complex - mediated actin polymeri - zation by cortactin . Nat . Cell Biol . 3 , 259 – 266 20 . Weaver , A . M . , Karginov , A . V . , Kinley , A . W . , Weed , S . A . , Li , Y . , Parsons , J . T . , and Cooper , J . A . ( 2001 ) Cortactin promotes and stabilizes Arp2 / 3 - induced actin filament network formation . Curr . Biol . 11 , 370 – 374 21 . Uruno , T . , Liu , J . , Li , Y . , Smith , N . , and Zhan , X . ( 2003 ) Sequential interaction of Actin - related proteins 2 and 3 ( Arp2 / 3 ) complex with neural Wiscott - Aldrich syndrome protein ( N - WASP ) and cortactin during branched actin filament network formation . J . Biol . Chem . 278 , 26086 – 26093 22 . Siton , O . , Ideses , Y . , Albeck , S . , Unger , T . , Bershadsky , A . D . , Gov , N . S . , and Bernheim - Groswasser , A . ( 2011 ) Cortactin releases the brakes in ac - tin - based motility by enhancing WASP - VCA detachment from Arp2 / 3 branches . Curr . Biol . 21 , 2092 – 2097 23 . Helgeson , L . A . , and Nolen , B . J . ( 2013 ) Mechanism of synergistic activa - tion of Arp2 / 3 complex by cortactin and N - WASP . Elife 2 , e00884 24 . Weaver , A . M . , Heuser , J . E . , Karginov , A . V . , Lee , W . L . , Parsons , J . T . , and Cooper , J . ( 2002 ) InteractionofcortactinandN - WASpwithArp2 / 3com - plex . Curr . Biol . 12 , 1270 – 1278 25 . Tehrani , S . , Faccio , R . , Chandrasekar , I . , Ross , F . P . , and Cooper , J . A . ( 2006 ) Cortactin has an essential and specific role in osteoclast actin as - sembly . Mol . Biol . Cell 17 , 2882 – 2895 26 . Martinez - Quiles , N . , Ho , H . - Y . , Kirschner , M . W . , Ramesh , N . , and Geha , R . S . ( 2004 ) Erk / Src phosphorylation of cortactin acts as a switch on - switch off mechanism that controls its ability to activate N - WASP . Mol . Cell Biol . 24 , 5269 – 5280 27 . Taylor , M . J . , Perrais , D . , and Merrifield , C . J . ( 2011 ) A high precision surveyofthemoleculardynamicsofmammalianclathrin - mediatedendo - cytosis . PLoS Biol . 9 , e1000604 28 . Wu , H . , and Parsons , J . T . ( 1993 ) Cortactin , an 80 / 85 - kilodalton pp60src substrate , is a filamentous actin - binding protein enriched in the cell cor - tex . J . Cell Biol . 120 , 1417 – 1426 29 . Machesky , L . M . , and Insall , R . H . ( 1998 ) Scar1 and the related Wiskott - Aldrich syndrome protein , WASP , regulate the actin cytoskeleton through the Arp2 / 3 complex . Curr . Biol . 8 , 1347 – 1356 30 . Huang , C . , Ni , Y . , Wang , T . , Gao , Y . , Haudenschild , C . C . , and Zhan , X . ( 1997 ) Down - regulation of the filamentous actin cross - linking activity of cortactin by Src - mediated tyrosine phosphorylation . J . Biol . Chem . 272 , 13911 – 13915 31 . Cowieson , N . P . , King , G . , Cookson , D . , Ross , I . , Huber , T . , Hume , D . A . , Kobe , B . , and Martin , J . L . ( 2008 ) Cortactin adopts a globular conforma - tion and bundles actin into sheets . J . Biol . Chem . 283 , 16187 – 16193 32 . Yamada , H . , Abe , T . , Satoh , A . , Okazaki , N . , Tago , S . , Kobayashi , K . , Yo - shida , Y . , Oda , Y . , Watanabe , M . , Tomizawa , K . , Matsui , H . , and Takei , K . ( 2013 ) Stabilization of actin bundles by a dynamin 1 / cortactin ring com - plex is necessary for growth cone filopodia . J . Neurosci . 33 , 4514 – 4526 33 . Kaksonen , M . , Peng , H . B . , andRauvala , H . ( 2000 ) Associationofcortactin with dynamic actin in lamellipodia and on endosomal vesicles . J . Cell Sci . 113 , 4421 – 4426 34 . Wang , Z . ( 1995 ) An exact mathematical expression for describing com - petitive binding of two different ligands to a protein molecule . FEBS Lett . 360 , 111 – 114 35 . Liu , S . - L . , May , J . R . , Helgeson , L . A . , and Nolen , B . J . ( 2013 ) Insertions withintheactincoreofactin - relatedprotein3 ( Arp3 ) modulatebranching nucleation by Arp2 / 3 complex . J . Biol . Chem . 288 , 487 – 497 36 . Edelstein , A . , Amodaj , N . , Hoover , K . , Vale , R . , and Stuurman , N . ( 2010 ) Computer control of microscopes using (cid:4) Manager . Curr . Protoc . Mol . Biol . Unit 14 . 20 . 1 – 14 . 20 . 17 37 . Kuhn , J . R . , and Pollard , T . D . ( 2005 ) Real - time measurements of actin filament polymerization by total internal reflection fluorescence micros - copy . Biophys . J . 88 , 1387 – 1402 38 . Boczkowska , M . , Rebowski , G . , Petoukhov , M . V . , Hayes , D . B . , Svergun , D . I . , andDominguez , R . ( 2008 ) X - rayscatteringstudyofactivatedArp2 / 3 complex with bound actin - WCA . Structure 16 , 695 – 704 39 . Padrick , S . B . , Doolittle , L . K . , Brautigam , C . A . , King , D . S . , and Rosen , M . K . ( 2011 ) Arp2 / 3 complex is bound and activated by two WASP pro - Regulation of Actin Networks by Cortactin and WASP Proteins 28868 JOURNAL OF BIOLOGICAL CHEMISTRY VOLUME 289•NUMBER 42• OCTOBER 17 , 2014 by gu e s t on F e b r u a r y 4 , 2015 h tt p : / / www . j b c . o r g / D o w n l o a d e d fr o m teins . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . U . S . A . 108 , E472 – E479 40 . Ti , S . - C . , Jurgenson , C . T . , Nolen , B . J . , and Pollard , T . D . ( 2011 ) Structural and biochemical characterization of two binding sites for nucleation - pro - moting factor WASp - VCA on Arp2 / 3 complex . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . U . S . A . 108 , E463 – E471 41 . Boczkowska , M . , Rebowski , G . , Kast , D . J . , and Dominguez , R . ( 2014 ) Structural analysis of the transitional state of Arp2 / 3 complex activation by two actin - bound WCAs . Nat . Commun . 5 , 3308 42 . Yamaguchi , H . , Miki , H . , Suetsugu , S . , Ma , L . , Kirschner , M . W . , and Tak - enawa , T . ( 2000 ) Two tandem verprolin homology domains are necessary for a strong activation of Arp2 / 3 complex - induced actin polymerization andinductionofmicrospikeformationbyN - WASP . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . U . S . A . 97 , 12631 – 12636 43 . Svitkina , T . M . , and Borisy , G . G . ( 1999 ) Organization and treadmilling of actin filament array in lamellipodia . J . Cell Biol . 145 , 1009 – 1026 44 . Collins , A . , Warrington , A . , Taylor , K . A . , and Svitkina , T . ( 2011 ) Struc - tural organization of the actin cytoskeleton at sites of clathrin - mediated endocytosis . Curr . Biol . 21 , 1167 – 1175 45 . Cao , H . , Orth , J . D . , Chen , J . , Weller , S . G . , Heuser , J . E . , and McNiven , M . A . ( 2003 ) Cortactin is a component of clathrin - coated pits and partic - ipates in receptor - mediated endocytosis . Mol . Cell Biol . 23 , 2162 – 2170 46 . Smith , B . A . , Padrick , S . B . , Doolittle , L . K . , Daugherty - Clarke , K . , Correˆa , I . R . , Jr . , Xu , M . - Q . , Goode , B . L . , Rosen , M . K . , andGelles , J . ( 2013 ) Three - color single molecule imaging shows WASP detachment from Arp2 / 3 complex triggers actin filament branch formation . Elife 2 , e01008 47 . Chereau , D . , Kerff , F . , Graceffa , P . , Grabarek , Z . , Langsetmo , K . , and Dominguez , R . ( 2005 ) Actin - bound structures of Wiskott - Aldrich syn - drome protein ( WASP ) - homology domain 2 and the implications for fil - ament assembly . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . U . S . A . 102 , 16644 – 16649 48 . Padrick , S . B . , Cheng , H . - C . , Ismail , A . M . , Panchal , S . C . , Doolittle , L . K . , Kim , S . , Skehan , B . M . , Umetani , J . , Brautigam , C . A . , Leong , J . M . , and Rosen , M . K . ( 2008 ) Hierarchical regulation of WASP / WAVE proteins . Mol . Cell 32 , 426 – 438 49 . Rohatgi , R . , Ma , L . , Miki , H . , Lopez , M . , Kirchhausen , T . , Takenawa , T . , and Kirschner , M . W . ( 1999 ) The interaction between N - WASP and the Arp2 / 3complexlinksCdc42 - dependentsignalstoactinassembly . Cell 97 , 221 – 231 50 . Hu¨fner , K . , Higgs , H . N . , Pollard , T . D . , Jacobi , C . , Aepfelbacher , M . , and Linder , S . ( 2001 ) Theverprolin - likecentral ( vc ) regionofWiskott - Aldrich syndrome protein induces Arp2 / 3 complex - dependent actin nucleation . J . Biol . Chem . 276 , 35761 – 35767 51 . Destaing , O . , Saltel , F . , Geminard , J . C . , Jurdic , P . , and Bard , F . ( 2003 ) Po - dosomes display actin turnover and dynamic self - organization in oste - oclasts expressing actin - green fluorescent protein . Mol . Biol . Cell 14 , 407 – 416 52 . Bowden , E . T . , Barth , M . , Thomas , D . , Glazer , R . I . , and Mueller , S . C . ( 1999 ) An invasion - related complex of cortactin , paxillin and PKCmu associates with invadopodia at sites of extracellular matrix degradation . Oncogene 18 , 4440 – 4449 53 . Desmarais , V . , Yamaguchi , H . , Oser , M . , Soon , L . , Mouneimne , G . , Sar - miento , C . , Eddy , R . , and Condeelis , J . ( 2009 ) N - WASP and cortactin are involved in invadopodium - dependent chemotaxis to EGF in breast tumor cells . Cell Motil . Cytoskeleton 66 , 303 – 316 54 . Li , P . , Banjade , S . , Cheng , H . - C . , Kim , S . , Chen , B . , Guo , L . , Llaguno , M . , Hollingsworth , J . V . , King , D . S . , Banani , S . F . , Russo , P . S . , Jiang , Q . - X . , Nixon , B . T . , and Rosen , M . K . ( 2012 ) Phase transitions in the assembly of multivalent signalling proteins . Nature 483 , 336 – 340 55 . Suetsugu , S . ( 2013 ) Activation of nucleation promoting factors for direc - tionalactinfilamentelongation : allostericregulationandmultimerization on the membrane . Semin . Cell Dev . Biol . 24 , 267 – 271 56 . Gohl , C . , Banovic , D . , Grevelho¨rster , A . , and Bogdan , S . ( 2010 ) WAVE forms hetero - and homo - oligomeric complexes at integrin junctions in Drosophila visualized by bimolecular fluorescence complementation . J . Biol . Chem . 285 , 40171 – 40179 57 . Murphy , D . A . , and Courtneidge , S . A . ( 2011 ) The “ins” and “outs” of podosomes and invadopodia : characteristics , formation and function . Nat . Rev . Mol . Cell Biol . 12 , 413 – 426 58 . Bryce , N . S . , Clark , E . S . , Leysath , J . L . , Currie , J . D . , Webb , D . J . , and Weaver , A . M . ( 2005 ) Cortactin promotes cell motility by enhancing la - mellipodial persistence . Curr . Biol . 15 , 1276 – 1285 59 . Rogers , S . L . , Wiedemann , U . , Stuurman , N . , and Vale , R . D . ( 2003 ) Mo - lecular requirements for actin - based lamella formation in Drosophila S2 cells . J . Cell Biol . 162 , 1079 – 1088 60 . Kinley , A . W . , Weed , S . A . , Weaver , A . M . , Karginov , A . V . , Bissonette , E . , Cooper , J . A . , and Parsons , J . T . ( 2003 ) Cortactin interacts with WIP in regulating Arp2 / 3 activation and membrane protrusion . Curr . Biol . 13 , 384 – 393 61 . Sirotkin , V . , Beltzner , C . C . , Marchand , J . - B . , and Pollard , T . D . ( 2005 ) InteractionsofWASp , myosin - I , andverprolinwithArp2 / 3complexdur - ing actin patch assembly in fission yeast . J . Cell Biol . 170 , 637 – 648 62 . Panchal , S . C . , Kaiser , D . A . , Torres , E . , Pollard , T . D . , and Rosen , M . K . ( 2003 ) A conserved amphipathic helix in WASP / Scar proteins is essential for activation of Arp2 / 3 complex . Nat . Struct . Biol . 10 , 591 – 598 63 . Xu , X . - P . , Rouiller , I . , Slaughter , B . D . , Egile , C . , Kim , E . , Unruh , J . R . , Fan , X . , Pollard , T . D . , Li , R . , Hanein , D . , and Volkmann , N . ( 2012 ) Three - dimensional reconstructions of Arp2 / 3 complex with bound nucleation promoting factors . EMBO J . 31 , 236 – 247 64 . Goley , E . D . , Rodenbusch , S . E . , Martin , A . C . , and Welch , M . D . ( 2004 ) Critical conformational changes in the Arp2 / 3 complex are induced by nucleotide and nucleation promoting factor . Mol . Cell 16 , 269 – 279 65 . Skau , C . T . , Courson , D . S . , Bestul , A . J . , Winkelman , J . D . , Rock , R . S . , Sirotkin , V . , and Kovar , D . R . ( 2011 ) Actin filament bundling by fimbrin is important for endocytosis , cytokinesis , and polarization in fission yeast . J . Biol . Chem . 286 , 26964 – 26977 66 . Xu , J . , Casella , J . F . , and Pollard , T . D . ( 1999 ) Effect of capping protein , CapZ , on the length of actin filaments and mechanical properties of actin filament networks . Cell Motil . Cytoskeleton 42 , 73 – 81 67 . Mooren , O . L . , Kotova , T . I . , Moore , A . J . , and Schafer , D . A ( 2009 ) Dy - namin2 GTPase and cortactin remodel actin filaments . J . Biol . Chem . 284 , 23995 – 24005 68 . Shvetsov , A . , Berkane , E . , Chereau , D . , Dominguez , R . , and Reisler , E . ( 2009 ) The actin - binding domain of cortactin is dynamic and unstruc - tured and affects lateral and longitudinal contacts in F - actin . Cell Motil . Cytoskeleton 66 , 90 – 98 69 . MacGrath , S . M . , andKoleske , A . J . ( 2012 ) Arg / Abl2modulatestheaffinity and stoichiometry of binding of cortactin to F - actin . Biochemistry 51 , 6644 – 6653 70 . Katsube , T . , Togashi , S . , Hashimoto , N . , Ogiu , T . , and Tsuji , H . ( 2004 ) Filamentous actin binding ability of cortactin isoforms is responsible for theircell - celljunctionallocalizationinepithelialcells . Arch . Biochem . Bio - phys . 427 , 79 – 90 71 . Rocca , D . L . , Martin , S . , Jenkins , E . L . , andHanley , J . G . ( 2008 ) Inhibitionof Arp2 / 3 - mediatedactinpolymerizationbyPICK1regulatesneuronalmor - phology and AMPA receptor endocytosis . Nat . Cell Biol . 10 , 259 – 271 72 . Maritzen , T . , Zech , T . , Schmidt , M . R . , Krause , E . , Machesky , L . M . , and Haucke , V . ( 2012 ) Gadkin negatively regulates cell spreading and motility via sequestration of the actin - nucleating ARP2 / 3 complex . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . U . S . A . 109 , 10382 – 10387 73 . Dang , I . , Gorelik , R . , Sousa - Blin , C . , Derivery , E . , Gue´rin , C . , Linkner , J . , Nemethova , M . , Dumortier , J . G . , Giger , F . A . , Chipysheva , T . A . , Ermi - lova , V . D . , Vacher , S . , Campanacci , V . , Herrada , I . , Planson , A . - G . , Fetics , S . , Henriot , V . , David , V . , Oguievetskaia , K . , Lakisic , G . , Pierre , F . , Steffen , A . , Boyreau , A . , Peyrie´ras , N . , Rottner , K . , Zinn - Justin , S . , Cherfils , J . , Bie ` che , I . , Alexandrova , A . Y . , David , N . B . , Small , J . V . , Faix , J . , Blanchoin , L . , and Gautreau , A . ( 2013 ) Inhibitory signalling to the Arp2 / 3 complex steers cell migration . Nature 503 , 281 – 284 74 . Takenawa , T . , and Suetsugu , S . ( 2007 ) The WASP - WAVE protein net - work : connecting the membrane to the cytoskeleton . Nat . Rev . Mol . Cell Biol . 8 , 37 – 48 75 . Co , C . , Wong , D . T . , Gierke , S . , Chang , V . , and Taunton , J . ( 2007 ) Mech - anism of actin network attachment to moving membranes : barbed end capture by N - WASP WH2 domains . Cell 128 , 901 – 913 76 . Akin , O . , and Mullins , R . D . ( 2008 ) Capping protein increases the rate of actin - based motility by promoting filament nucleation by the Arp2 / 3 complex . Cell 133 , 841 – 851 Regulation of Actin Networks by Cortactin and WASP Proteins OCTOBER 17 , 2014• VOLUME 289•NUMBER 42 JOURNAL OF BIOLOGICAL CHEMISTRY 28869 by gu e s t on F e b r u a r y 4 , 2015 h tt p : / / www . j b c . o r g / D o w n l o a d e d fr o m Brad J . Nolen Andrew R . Wagner , Max Rodnick - Smith and Luke A . Helgeson , Julianna G . Prendergast , Branched Actin Networks Cortactin in Coordinately Regulating Roles of WASP Family Proteins and Filaments , and Arp2 / 3 Complex Define the Interactions with Actin Monomers , Actin Molecular Biophysics : doi : 10 . 1074 / jbc . M114 . 587527 originally published online August 26 , 2014 2014 , 289 : 28856 - 28869 . J . Biol . Chem . 10 . 1074 / jbc . M114 . 587527 Access the most updated version of this article at doi : . JBC Affinity Sites Find articles , minireviews , Reflections and Classics on similar topics on the Alerts : When a correction for this article is posted • When this article is cited • to choose from all of JBC ' s e - mail alerts Click here Supplemental material : http : / / www . jbc . org / content / suppl / 2014 / 08 / 26 / M114 . 587527 . DC1 . html http : / / www . jbc . org / content / 289 / 42 / 28856 . full . html # ref - list - 1 This article cites 75 references , 33 of which can be accessed free at by gu e s t on F e b r u a r y 4 , 2015 h tt p : / / www . j b c . o r g / D o w n l o a d e d fr o m