A Case Study of Remote Interdisciplinary Designing through Video Prototypes Cristian Bogdan (cid:2) , Dominik Ertl † , J¨urgen Falb † , Anders Green (cid:2) and Hermann Kaindl † (cid:2) Royal Institute of Technology , School of Computer Science and Communication S - 100 44 Stockholm , Sweden { cristi , green } @ csc . kth . se † Vienna University of Technology , Institute of Computer Technology A – 1040 Vienna , Austria { ertl , falb , kaindl } @ ict . tuwien . ac . at Abstract Designing in an interdisciplinary context is challenging , and it is even more so when it has to be done remotely . For such remote interdisciplinary designing , we propose video prototypes as artifacts for supporting the interaction design process . In this paper , we present a case study where we have successfully used video prototypes for collaboratively designing a modeling tool . This tool is supposed to provide Dialogue Design Support for creating multimodal user in - terfaces . The new and important aspect of this case study was using video prototypes for joint interactive designing done remotely , and also between disciplines . 1 Introduction Collaborative interaction design involves interdisci - plinary teams and should be supported by appropriate ar - tifacts . Video prototypes are one type of such artifacts and facilitate communication through videotaped sketches for demonstrating interaction . The main rationale for the use of any video prototype in collaborative design is that using reg - ular prototyping methods , such as wire - frames , visual tools for GUI development , etc , often fail to capture the overall user experience because they focus on the user interface as an artifact [ 13 , 15 ] . The new question was whether such video prototypes can still be useful when the teams involved work remotely and even in different countries , so that they become the key artifact for communication . In addition , it was interesting to see , whether and how this approach could support collabo - rative designing between interaction designers and software developers . We investigated this question through a case study of de - signing a complex modeling tool in the context of an EU - funded research project . This design process has been en - acted between the partner responsible for interaction design and the partner responsible for tool development , where these partners worked in different European countries . It involved interdisciplinary negotiation in the course of inter - action design , with the goal of achieving an innovative de - sign that was still implementable in the given context . Video prototypes were used as the key artifacts supporting remote collaboration and interdisciplinary designing . The remainder of this paper is organized in the following manner . First , we provide some background on video proto - types . Then we describe the context of our case study . After that , we elaborate on several iterations of remote design col - laboration making use of video prototypes , as it happened in this case study . Next , we generalize from the concrete case at hand and provide lessons learned . Finally , we dis - cuss related work on cooperative design . 2 Background Video prototyping [ 10 ] has been introduced as a method to make concrete representations of interaction design in the form of videotaped sketches on which interaction is demon - strated and explained by the narrator . Compared with or - dinary sketches , video prototypes have the advantage that they can capture the temporal dimension of the interaction . In the following we describe what a video prototypes is and where video prototyping is needed . 2 . 1 What a Video Prototype is Video prototypes are representations of interaction de - sign that use the video medium to record and convey design 2012 45th Hawaii International Conference on System Sciences 978 - 0 - 7695 - 4525 - 7 / 12 $ 26 . 00 © 2012 IEEE DOI 10 . 1109 / HICSS . 2012 . 46 504 ideas . In being prototypes , they focus on the design state - ment rather than on the quality of the video , which makes them unusual video productions . Video prototypes are of - ten a series of sketches drawn by hand and ﬁlmed in one go , with no double takes and no cutting , with the audio track being used for explaining and commenting on the interac - tion envisaged . After a bit of training , rapid production of video prototypes allows the designer to explore the design space rapidly , without having to think of the video tech - nique . The ease of importing video into the digital form in recent years has made video prototyping even more at - tractive for expressing and documenting interaction design ideas . Mackay [ 9 , 10 , 3 ] has emphasized the role of video in design exploration , and idea generation ( video brainstorm - ing ) already in the late 1980s . Mackay introduced video prototypes in the wider context of participatory design [ 7 ] , where users and developers are co - present with designers at the video prototyping sessions . As in most participatory design contexts , the participants learn the design techniques like video prototyping and are able to express their ideas us - ing the method learned . The prototypes are kept on record for future reference during the design process , and it is typ - ically the designers who keep them and consult them often . Westerlund [ 16 ] has also worked with video prototypes in the participatory tradition and has elaborated on the leading role of the designer in such contexts . In principle , video prototypes can be helpful artifacts to study all technical activities where humans are involved . However , in our case study we used video prototypes to document interaction design where different stakeholders are involved . So , the content of such a video prototype is interaction design from a stakeholder’s point of view . This stakeholder ( one person or a group of people ) documents with spoken text how she deﬁnes and understands the ac - cording interaction with a tool . The designed interaction is informal and allows any techniques or wording that helps to better understand the interaction and to achieve a middle ground between the collaborating partners . The output artifact in the collaboration process is a ﬁnal video that prototypes the interaction design for a given ap - plication with additional background documentation of the domain and the iterative prototyping process . This video is the middle ground of the stakeholders and shall be used as a basis for the design and implementation of the tool . So , the video has to clearly show how a human and a machine are interacting with each other , which actions are performed and what content they are communicating about . Documenting the ( paper ) sketches via speech - supported video improves the quality of the interaction design . For the editing itself , the stakeholders can use any open source or freely available video editing software . 1 1 e . g . , the Windows Movie Maker http : / / en . wikipedia . org / So , video prototyping comes in different variants , one type is showing the “grand vision” of some kind of novel user interface . The “Starﬁre” video prototype is an early example of such use of video prototyping [ 13 ] . This type of video prototypes show a certain type of “future use” , a smooth and ﬂawless vision of how an interface or interac - tion situation would unfold . Nevertheless , for using sketches at the different stages of the prototype creation , some techniques were proposed in [ 15 ] that should be considered : use story boarding to create a narrative structure for the video prototype ; cut out anima - tion , where objects are moved in real time in the view of the camera or other simple animation techniques for real - time animation can be used ( i . e . , using hidden magnets to move objects on a screen ) ; cell animation , which is commonly used in making animated movies , is a somewhat more time - consuming technique , but can be useful to illustrate key el - ements of the prototype . Cell animation can be done us - ing hand - made sketching , physical models or other imaging tools such as presentation - drawing software or 3D software . There are risks , however , such as the issues involved in portraying characteristics of a speciﬁc software prod - uct ( e . g . , look - and - feel of an operating system ) [ 15 ] . An - other possible problem as noted in [ 13 ] is that the whole project portrays a kind of fantasy that cannot be imple - mented . When it comes to how the users perceive the pro - totype shown in the video , people might think the system shown is the real system . Several authors have noted that the video creation pro - cess can be time and resource consuming to the expense of the overall project [ 8 , 13 , 15 ] . Thus , there is a need to ﬁnd a compromise between the power capacity of showing a vi - sion for the future and actually being able to create a video prototype before that future arrives . This leads to another approach for video prototyping that involves using video as a means of representing a usage scenario [ 8 , 10 ] . This variant of video prototyping has the goal to make concrete representations of interaction design in the form of video - taped sketches on which interaction is demonstrated and ex - plained by the narrator . 2 . 2 Where Video Prototyping is Needed Video prototypes relate well to the scenarios that may be used in design , as several prototypes can be made for a cer - tain scenario . It is one of several approaches to support the creation of scenarios . Scenarios allow designers and users to form visions of a possible future product . Bannon [ 1 ] phrased this as “users need to have the experience of being in the future use situation , or at least an approximation for it , in order to be able to give comments of the advantage wiki / Windows _ Live _ Movie _ Maker 505 or disadvantages of the proposed system” . Using scenar - ios that involve design of “future use” also implies that the design process starts from the praxis of future users . Such praxis arises from what can be characterized as a “conﬂict between current use and demands from external forces” [ 2 ] . Video prototyping generally assumes a co - located group of designers , users and developers producing a number of prototypes together as a form of documenting the interac - tion design . Like for any form of prototyping , it is important that the participants focus on the interaction design ideas prototyped , not on the prototyping technique [ 3 ] . In the case of designing a tool , an expert on human - computer interaction might study how people work with comparable tools and what their interaction preferences are . In contrast , a software developer is mainly focused on the technical aspects . The UI designer might be interested in the concrete implementation of the GUI , where to place the buttons and text ﬁelds and how to achieve network commu - nication . Here , video prototypes are very helpful to better understand each other’s position — especially when stake - holders are working remotely , a quite typical situation in today’s research and development projects . The video - based approach relies on sketching and works as a means to reason about , communicate , and persuade oth - ers [ 8 ] of the ideas expressed and manifested in the video . As being a type of asynchronous design method [ 14 ] , video - based prototyping allows designers and developers to form heterogeneous teams to develop ideas across organizational , temporal and social boundaries . The concrete video artifacts can also be used as mile - stones to step back to prior revisions if the prototyping leads in an undesired direction . Moreover , the artifacts can be used as project results even at an early phase of a project . This is helpful when the project plan includes ( formal ) re - quirements or milestones for such results . 3 Context of the Case Study Our case study has been performed in the context of a research project involving partners from several European countries . Part of our work was designing and implement - ing a multimodal UI of a semi - autonomous mobile service robot . Here we used a novel approach with Dialogue De - sign Support to semi - automatically generate the user inter - face out of a high - level interaction model . A success criterion for the design support features was deﬁned as to what extent they allow modeling human - robot interfaces . We set out to design a tool that would help a modeler to design multimodal dialogues . This interaction design work started with a number of premises : • Generic requirements are weak in expressing interac - tion design . A technique that would work with con - crete representations of interaction was necessary to achieve common ground within the interdisciplinary consortium , especially between partners specialized in interaction design and partners specialized in software engineering . Therefore , we chose video prototyping [ 9 , 10 ] , a technique that our designers were experi - enced with to design anything from graphical user in - terfaces to multimodal robot interfaces . • Another speciﬁcity of the design situation was that a modeling tool existed already as shown in Figure 1 , yet it was not targeted at a modeler audience , in that it required a combination of interactive tools with au - thoring XML - based scripts . Furthermore , the tool was lacking interactive modeling facilities . The pre - existing tool in Figure 1 supports a modeler to cre - ate dialogue models in a graphical manner that capture the interaction between two parties ( usually between a user and a machine ) , but the tool lacks design sup - port for modeling interaction through speciﬁc modali - ties humans use for interacting with a robot , e . g . GUI , speech , and gestures . • We had to carry out the interaction design work in a distributed design work situation , spread among two locations ( Sweden and Austria ) . Therefore , it was im - portant to work on achieving common ground , and to use concrete artifacts during design , hence the choice of video prototyping . • We also were in a multi - disciplinary work situation , in that one location was focused on users and interaction and the other location was focused on modeling lan - guage and tool development . We were aware that a ‘gradient of resistance’ [ 4 ] exists from the developers in such situations . This made the grounding of the de - sign ideas over the whole distributed team even more important . 4 Remote Collaboration in Design via Video Prototypes In this given context , we had to collaborate remotely in the course of interaction design . Our case study focused on the use of video prototypes facilitating this process . More precisely , our work employed video prototyping in a distributed setting , where project partners from var - ious disciplines worked at different locations and did not meet physically for long periods . Along with documenting the interaction design , the prototypes also had a role in the dialogue between disciplines in that each video prototype sent to the other partner was not only a documentation of progress but also a statement made in a negotiation process . 506 Figure 1 . Preexisting tool served as the basis for video prototyping . For example , a prototype sent by designers can commu - nicate “we would like this feature” while a prototype sent back by developers makes a statement that “this is what is feasible to implement” . Throughout , the two sides learned from each other : developers learned and applied ( with vari - ous adaptations ) the video prototyping technique , while de - signers learned the technology constraints . Both sides de - veloped together knowledge about the features that should be offered to the dialogue modeler using the resulting tool . We can thus view our approach as a negotiation via video prototypes . The interaction design partner created some provocative video prototypes , and shared them via the In - ternet . The prototypes constituted a basis for computer - mediated discussion , and it was easy to refer to certain de - tails in the prototypes by referring to the video - clip time . Based on these discussions , the tool - development partner was asked to respond with prototypes that express what can be implemented within a reasonable timeframe . The dia - logue achieved a form of grounding between the partners , and based on that common ground we were able to select the interaction design ideas for a Dialogue Design Support tool which are of highest value to the project . 4 . 1 First Design Iteration The ﬁrst iteration in our process was a video prototype sent by the interaction designers , which started from the ini - tial dialogue modeling tool in Figure 1 and proposed im - provements to it . The existing tool was ﬁrst shown as a screenshot , to ground the current situation , then the proto - type switches to a sketchy representation of the same tool ( Figure 2 , left ) , in order to disconnect from the presently implemented tool and encourage occurrence of and trying out new design ideas . The video prototype introduced the idea of creating a navigation map out of the dialogue model , and to illustrate the navigation map along with the dia - logue model ( see the leftmost part of the left sub - ﬁgure in Figure 2 ) . The navigation map had been discussed by the two collaborating parties previously and it was regarded by the interaction designers as crucial for the users to get an overview of the interaction , as a complement to the overview provided by the dialogue model . The prototype also suggests showing a corresponding graphical user interface ( GUI ) at the same time as the di - alogue model , and illustrates the correspondence between various panels in the GUI with various sub - trees in the di - alogue model . This is termed as “model correspondence” and is reinforced with a text bullet in the video prototype . Such correspondence is important in the area of modeling tools because the abstract models will often be far from a “what you see is what you get” situation , therefore the cor - relation is needed to help the modeler learn about the inter - face rendering process . While the new concepts introduced by this prototype 507 Figure 2 . Snapshots of video prototypes of ﬁrst and second iteration . would allow the modeler to understand and control better the process of generating and adjusting a user interface , it still did not cover well other modalities than GUI . The video prototype then goes on to illustrate another interac - tion approach which was based on the navigation map . Each state in the map was presented with its communicative acts ( model sub - tree ) , and transitions between states were au - tomatically associated with each communicative act . The concept of communicative acts is derived from speech act theory [ 12 ] . Each state was shown with its corresponding GUI dialogue but also with the modalities in which all com - municative acts could be uttered . This prototyped variation of the interaction was thus focused on the navigation map , and attempted to explore the interaction possibilities that appear once the navigation map takes such a central role in the interaction . Most prototypes make a statement , and in this sense the ﬁrst iteration prototype stated that modeling tools need to be enhanced to provide overview , especially in regard to nav - igation . Like it often happens in design , alternatives were presented : two ways of presenting the navigation map were shown , of which only the second covers the multimodal in - teraction case . 4 . 2 Second Design Iteration Together with the ﬁrst video , another message was con - veyed to the developers as to how facile it is to make a video prototype . The practice associated generally with video is that of careful planning , scripting , taking multiple shots of the same scene , cutting , adding soundtracks , etc . The state - ment made by interaction designers at this point was that one has to renounce on the “quality video” approach and regard the video as a sketching tool , and that it would al - low playing around with interaction design ideas rather than focusing on producing a video in the professional sense . Some speciﬁc techniques of using paper , post - its , trans - parencies , trying to ﬁlm a scene just once , etc . , were also conveyed in the same spirit of illustrating easiness of video prototyping and of encouraging the developers to take up the technique . The developers were receptive to this and , as they did not agree on how multimodality was supported in the ﬁrst video , one developer made a prototype where he expressed his interaction design ideas ( Figure 2 , right ) . As he was re - sponsible for the multimodality part of the Dialogue Design Support , the developer aimed to present an approach that would be reasonable to implement within a given timeframe in the project . The prototype introduced the idea of anno - tating communicative acts with the modalities in which they can be uttered . The video was strongly grounded in the ex - isting modeling tool , so it was presenting sketches that were placed on various parts of the tool , thereby being careful not to depart too much from the existing implementation . The prototype was , on occasion , confronting the modeler with XML ﬁles that had to be written within the tool for the 508 Figure 3 . Modeling tool interaction sketch centered on the UI navigation map and multimodality at communicative act level . multimodality modeling . Also state machines expressed in UML format were to be exposed to the user of the modeling tool . While the prototype of the second iteration was received by the interaction designers as a positive development , it was clear ( and not unexpected for a ﬁrst video prototype made by the developers ) that the prototyping technique was too much in focus and that the reluctance to depart too much from the existing implementation was hampering the intro - duction of radically new ideas . The XML authoring or state machine modeling , while easy to implement , were hard to accept considering a non - programmer modeler who would use the tool , but the rationale for proposing it was under - stood by the interaction designers . 4 . 3 Third Design Iteration The third iteration consisted of remote discussions be - tween the two sides , trying to achieve a middle ground be - tween the designer prototype and the developer prototype . The navigation - centered interaction paradigm as proposed by the interaction designers was considered an interesting new approach but hard to implement given the technical in - frastructure available , and alternatives were preferred . Al - ternatives were sought for the XML editing proposed by the developer . It was also recognized that the developer proto - type was too much grounded on current realities , but it was also agreed that the implementation at the time could not be changed radically due to project constraints . The video prototype proposed the following resulting de - sign elements : • An interaction design centered on the navigation map : instead of the map being shown on the side as in Figure 2 ( leftmost part of the left sub - ﬁgure ) , the in - teraction designers played with the idea of having large navigation map states , inside which renderings of the GUI can be shown ( Figure 3 ) . Each rendered widget is associated with the corresponding dialogue model’s communicative acts shown at the bottom of the state , with the model correspondence design principle in mind ( correspondence between a widget and its com - municative act ) . • The modalities for each communicative act that can be uttered in the respective state are also modeled as an - notations to the communicative acts . • Fusion between modalities can be modeled by using modality combinations like speech + GUI to express , e . g . , “Go” in speech and indicate the location ( of a product in the context of a supermarket ) on a touch - screen . • Links between navigational map states are emphasized by arrows starting on the communicative acts that lead 509 Figure 4 . A transition in the UI navigation map . to the state transition . • As the states that show rendering inside it are large , the interface needs to scroll when a state transition is triggered , as shown in Figure 4 . • This prototype also introduces the idea of recording corpora while the user interface generated with the tool under design is running . During prototyping , we learned that in the GUI modality some of the communicative acts are already uttered by the time the GUI dialog is shown ( displaying a widget corre - sponding to an Offer effectively means that the Offer was uttered ) . These already - uttered communicative acts should be shown in a different color in the Dialog Design Support tools . 4 . 4 Fourth Design Iteration As a result of the remote negotiation in the third iteration , the developers proposed the fourth and ﬁnal prototype of this case study . The prototype was made by the chief devel - oper , who had an overview of all implementation aspects . While the aim was to produce a video , the medium chosen was not paper but a slideshow in a presentation tool . As he was ﬂuent in using this tool , the prototype author could focus on the prototyped ideas rather than needing to focus on the prototyping technique . The prototype is illustrated in Figure 5 through a GUI mockup based on the initial tool screenshot and extended in a graphics tool . From the ﬁrst prototype it adopts the idea of showing a navigation map , yet it does not adopt the interaction paradigm centered on the navigation map . A rendering to GUI is also shown at the bottom of the ﬁgure , and the correspondence between the model elements and the GUI widgets is shown as suggested by the ﬁrst prototype . For example , in Figure 5 the cor - responding elements communicative acts , generated GUI , and the state in the navigation map circled in red are illus - trated . In contrast to the third prototype , the rendered GUI is not presented within a state of the navigation map by the developer due to expected implementation difﬁculties . This correspondence between user interface , modeling , and nav - igation map elements has been animated in the slideshow to get a glimpse of the intended behavior and interactions . Annotating communicative acts to support multimodal - ity is adopted from the second prototype and represented by checkboxes to select the supported modalities ( see Fig - ure 5 , bottom center ) . The video prototype also showed in further slides possible representations of communicative acts for other modalities like speech . The recording of dialogues to form a corpus was adopted from the third prototype . A tool for generating a large num - ber of possible dialogues was also added based on discus - sions in the third iteration . Figure 6 shows a small excerpt of a list representing sequences of possible dialogues that re - sult from a designed dialogue model . This video prototype 510 Figure 5 . Screenshot of fourth prototype . thus served well to achieve a middle ground between the two collaborating partners and was accepted by both part - ners as a good result for this design process . Both partners agreed that the most important features for supporting dia - logue design have been included in the ﬁnal prototype . The partners negotiated a comprise for representing these fea - tures within these four video prototyping iterations . 5 Lessons Learned Let us generalize from this case at hand and state a few lessons learned . First , it was easy to create video prototypes even for those not experienced . This makes video prototyp - ing suitable for such interdisciplinary processes . For exam - ple , the video prototype of our second iteration was the ﬁrst one produced by the developer in charge of multimodality , and he invested only little time following basic tips from the designers plus the example prototype from the ﬁrst it - eration . Of course , designers have to encourage developers to engage with one of their techniques in the course of the design processes . Our second lesson learned is the following . As long as all the participants involved can both understand and cre - ate such video prototypes , this can help to bridge different disciplines . Finding a common communication language is crucial for the discussions and negotiations between disci - plines . The experience gained in this case study suggests that video prototypes can indeed serve this purpose . How - ever , even though the interaction designers and the software developers in this project came from different “cultures” , both in terms of disciplines and countries involved , all of them have in common that they are researchers . This may have facilitated their understanding and their ability to cre - ate such video prototypes . Third , video prototypes are useful artifacts for remote de - sign negotiation , based on the experience gained in this case study . The compactness of these video design statements is suitable for a remote design setting . A video of 5 - 10 min - utes can package a lot of interaction design material to be discussed online . Working with videos remotely is also fa - cilitated by the ability to refer to different time slots in the video and rapidly ﬂipping through it . Fourth , this case study also showed that video prototyp - ing can be an efﬁcient starting point for creating interaction models , since its main purpose is to convey the intended in - teractions a user executes with a machine . Thus , as a side effect , we have seen that these video prototypes are also a very helpful starting point to derive initial dialogue models from them . Fifth , like any kind of prototyping , video prototypes help stakeholders to achieve a common understanding of a de - sign . While this is true for our prototyping process , the 511 Figure 6 . Sequences of example dialogues shown in the fourth prototype . video prototypes presented here have several speciﬁcs that are not commonly associated with such prototypes . Each of our prototypes was made by people from one single dis - cipline ( designer , developer ) . In addition , the participants were not co - located . Finally , the participants had a dia - logue through sending out the prototypes ( and not a di - alogue while making the prototype as it is generally as - sumed ) . We therefore wish to emphasize the asynchronous pro - totyping [ 14 ] values of the video prototypes , as well as their value in getting designers and developers who can - not meet for objective reasons to still collaborate closely around interaction design ideas . As our case study shows , such collaboration can include negotiation and other sen - sitive aspects that are usually associated with the need for co - location . Lack of co - location between disciplines has of - ten led to developers retreating in an “ivory tower” and pro - ducing software without knowledge on how it is going to be used . Our experience shows that video prototypes may provide an easy way to break such a negative pattern . It is important that people from different traditions and disciplines are able to adapt the language to their own ex - isting skills , like the developer who went from a video pro - totype on paper to a video made out of slides in a presenta - tion tool . The quality in regard to technique or design ideas for participants who are not used to video prototypes is not so important in the beginning , yet their engagement in the interaction design process is crucial for a productive inter - disciplinary process . Due to its low - level prerequisites and ease of assembling a provocative prototype , we believe that video prototyping is suitable for attracting such developer engagement into the design process . 6 Related Work Interdisciplinary work and the tensions between various disciplines in interaction design have been enduring themes in human - computer interaction . In requirements engineer - ing , primarily textual speciﬁcation is the traditional way of communicating between different stakeholders in a project . However , this traditional approach has shortcomings in re - gard to interaction design , as it is difﬁcult to describe inter - action details in textual statements . Cooperative design [ 7 ] has been an early structured attempt to involve designers and developers ( along with users ) and let them participate from the early stages of the design process . Cooperative design combines stakehold - ers with different competencies and they get to learn each other’s concerns . They also learn about and engage with each other’s methods . Cooperative design thus creates a context where participants are viewed as partners who learn from each other . This is close to the approach we have taken here . Although users of the designed tool ( potential dia - logue modelers ) were not involved directly in the process , we still regard it as a cooperative design activity between designers and developers . In the context of the video prototyping for creating a vi - sion of a future use scenario , Hi - Fi simulation techniques should be mentioned . Such methods for creating a vision of an interface involve the portrayal of an interface that can be experienced directly by the users . The most prominent tech - nique for doing this is the Wizard - of - Oz method , that uses a simulation software to make users believe that they are in - teracting with a real implemented interface where , in fact , the mechanism and program logic behind the interface and the actions are controlled by a hidden operator [ 11 ] . In in - teraction design for human - robot interaction , this has been employed in [ 6 ] . Using a slightly modiﬁed variant of the Wizard - of - Oz technique that focuses on the overall experi - ence of the scenario , a theatre - based human - robot interac - tion has been developed [ 5 ] . Instead of portraying an inter - face that can be directly interacted with , the whole scenario is shown using actors who play the part of the user interact - ing with a machine ( e . g . , a robot ) that plays the other part . 512 The overall scenario is then watched by an audience that can express opinion and attitudes towards the scenario being staged , e . g . , using standard usability assessment methods . 7 Conclusion While interaction design is often a co - located activity , we show a case of designing remotely . The results from this case study indicate that video prototyping can be used suc - cessfully for collaborate design involving remote partners and between disciplines . To our best knowledge , such a use of video prototyping has not been reported in the literature before . While stakeholders have been co - present and work - ing on the same video prototype in previous studies , we had the stakeholders distributed and doing one prototype each in successive iterations . In particular , this work also shows how project partners concerned with software development can participate in the prototyping activities during interaction design . Several versions of video prototypes can facilitate the design nego - tiations with project partners concerned with the interaction design . The ﬁnally agreed interaction design of Dialogue Design Support for modeling multimodal user interfaces — again represented as a video prototype — comprised fea - tures that , thanks to the negotiation process , were both in - novative and feasible to implement technically . Acknowledgment Part of this research has been carried out in the Comm - Rob project , partially funded by the EU ( contract num - ber IST - 045441 under the 6th framework programme ) , see http : / / www . commrob . eu . References [ 1 ] L . J . Bannon . From human factors to human actors : The role of psychology and human - computer interaction stud - ies in systems design . In M . Greenbaum , J . and Kyng , edi - tor , Design at Work : Cooperative Design of Computer Sys - tems , pages 25 – 44 . Lawrence Erlbaum Associates , Hills - dale , 1991 . [ 2 ] L . J . Bannon and S . Bødker . Beyond the interface : encoun - tering artifacts in use , pages 227 – 253 . Cambridge Univer - sity Press , New York , NY , USA , 1991 . [ 3 ] M . Beaudouin - Lafon and W . Mackay . Prototyping tools and techniques . In J . A . Jacko and A . Sears , editors , The Human - Computer Interaction Handbook , pages 1006 – 1031 . L . Erl - baum Associates Inc . , Hillsdale , NJ , USA , 2003 . [ 4 ] J . Bowers and J . Pycock . Talking through design : Require - ments and resistance in cooperative protoyping . In Proceed - ings of Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems ( CHI ’94 ) , pages 299 – 305 , Boston , Massachusetts , 1994 . ACM . [ 5 ] A . R . Chatley , K . Dautenhahn , M . L . Walters , D . S . Syrdal , and B . Christianson . Theatre as a discussion tool in human - robot interaction experiments - a pilot study . In Proceedings of the 2010 Third International Conference on Advances in Computer - Human Interactions , ACHI ’10 , pages 73 – 78 , Washington , DC , USA , 2010 . IEEE Computer Society . [ 6 ] A . Green , H . H¨uttenrauch , and K . Severinson Eklundh . Ap - plying the Wizard - of - Oz framework to Cooperative Service Discovery and Conﬁguration . In 13th IEEE International Workshop on Robot and Human Interactive Communication RO - MAN 2004 , pages 575 – 580 , 20 - 22 Sept 2004 . [ 7 ] J . Greenbaum and M . Kyng , editors . Design at Work . Lau - rence Erlbaum Associates , 1991 . [ 8 ] J . L¨owgren . Animated use sketches as design representa - tions . interactions , 11 : 22 – 27 , November 2004 . [ 9 ] W . E . Mackay . Using video to support interaction design . http : / / stream . cc . gt . atl . ga . us / hccvideos / viddesign . php , 2002 . [ 10 ] W . E . Mackay , A . Ratzer , and P . Janecek . Video artifacts for design : Bridging the gap between abstraction and detail . In Proceedings of ACM Conference of Designing Interac - tive Systems ( DIS 2000 ) , pages 72 – 82 , Brooklyn , New York , 2000 . ACM . [ 11 ] D . Maulsby , S . Greenberg , and R . Mander . Prototyping an Intelligent Agent through Wizard of Oz . In INTERCHI’93 , pages 277 – 282 . ACM , April 1993 . [ 12 ] J . R . Searle . Speech Acts : An Essay in the Philosophy of Language . Cambridge University Press , Cambridge , Eng - land , 1969 . [ 13 ] B . Tognazzini . The “starﬁre” video prototype project : a case history . In Proceedings of the SIGCHI conference on Human factors in computing systems : celebrating interdependence , CHI ’94 , pages 99 – 105 , New York , NY , USA , 1994 . ACM . [ 14 ] L . Tudor and J . Radford - Davenport . Asynchronous collabo - rative design . In extended abstracts on Human factors in computing systems ( CHI ’05 ) , CHI EA ’05 , pages 1837 – 1840 , New York , NY , USA , 2005 . ACM . [ 15 ] L . Vertelney . Using video to prototype user interfaces . SIGCHI Bull . , 21 : 57 – 61 , October 1989 . [ 16 ] B . Westerlund . Design Space Exploration : co - operative creation of proposals for desired interactions with future artefacts . PhD thesis , KTH , Human - Computer Interaction , MDI , 2009 . 513