Neuron , Vol . 41 , 521 – 534 , February 19 , 2004 , Copyright  2004 by Cell Press Nervous Wreck , an SH3 Adaptor Protein that Interacts with Wsp , Regulates Synaptic Growth in Drosophila etal growth is controlled by the Rho GTPases , including RhoA , Rac , and Cdc42 ( Hall , 1998 ) . They act as binary switches that are active in the GTP bound form and inactive in the GDP bound form . Rho signaling is modu - lated by GTPase activating proteins ( GAPs ) that acceler - Ian P . Coyle , 1 Young - Ho Koh , 1 Wyan - Ching Mimi Lee , 2 Jessica Slind , 2 Tim Fergestad , 1 J . Troy Littleton , 2 and Barry Ganetzky 1 , * 1 Laboratory of Genetics ate hydrolysis of GTP and guanine nucleotide exchange University of Wisconsin factors ( GEFs ) that promote GTP for GDP exchange Madison , Wisconsin 53706 ( Peck et al . , 2002 ; Schmidt and Hall , 2002 ) . Rho proteins 2 Picower Center for Learning and Memory and their effectors are highly expressed in nerve termi - Department of Biology and Brain and Cognitive nals and are known to regulate neurite extension , guid - Sciences ance , branching , and stability ( Negishi and Katoh , 2002 ) . Massachusetts Institute of Technology Genetic analysis in Drosophila has demonstrated roles Cambridge , Massachusetts 02139 for Rho effectors in synapse formation . For example , loss - of - function mutations in p190RhoGAP and the RhoGEF , stilllife ( sif ) , affectaxongrowthinmushroombodyneurons Summary and motorneurons , respectively ( Billuart et al . , 2001 ; Sone et al . , 1997 ) . Also , the RhoGEF Trio combines with Dock We describe the isolation and characterization of nwk and Pak to activate Rac during photoreceptor axon ( nervous wreck ) , a temperature - sensitive paralytic mu - guidance ( Newsome et al . , 2000 ) . tant that causes excessive growth of larval neuromus - Activated Rho proteins can activate members of the cular junctions ( NMJs ) , resulting in increased synaptic Wiscott - Aldrich Syndrome Protein ( Wasp ) family ( Mul - bouton number and branch formation . Ultrastructur - lins , 2000 ; Takenawa and Miki , 2001 ) . Wasp and its ho - ally , mutant boutons have reduced size and fewer mologs , N - Wasp and the Wave / Scar proteins , promote active zones , associated with a reduction in synaptic F - actin assembly at the leading edge of motile cells by transmission . nwk encodes an FCH and SH3 domain - activating the ARP2 / 3 ( actin - related protein ) complex containing adaptor protein that localizes to the peri - ( Rohatgi et al . , 1999 ) . This regulation is essential for the active zone of presynaptic terminals and binds to the formation of lamellipodia and filopodia during axonal Drosophila ortholog of Wasp ( Wsp ) , a key regulator of and dendritic growth in mammalian neurons ( Banzai et actin polymerization . wsp null mutants display synap - al . , 2000 ; Irie and Yamaguchi , 2002 ) . Wasp and N - Wasp tic overgrowth similar to nwk and enhance the nwk containaCRIB / PBDdomain thatbindsactivatedCdc42 , morphological phenotype in a dose - dependent man - an interaction that is required for efficient stimulation ner . Evolutionarily , Nwk belongs to a previously unde - of ARP2 / 3 . The Wave / Scars do not directly bind Rho scribed family of adaptor proteins that includes the hu - GTPases , but can be activated through binding to Rac - man srGAPs , which regulate Rho activity downstream associated intermediaries like IRSp53 ( Miki et al . , 2000 ) . of Robo receptors . We propose that Nwk controls syn - All Wasp / N - Wasp and Wave / Scar relatives contain a apse morphology by regulating actin dynamics down - central proline - rich domain that is recognized by SH3 stream of growth signals in presynaptic terminals . adaptor proteins in numerous signal transduction path - ways . Including Dock and its mammalian homolog , Nck Introduction ( Rivero - Lezcano et al . , 1995 ) , these SH3 adaptors con - trol the spatial and temporal activation of the Wasps . SH3 adaptor proteins , characterized by the presence of In addition to growth cone motility , Wasp - dependent SRC homology 3 ( SH3 ) domains , commonly link trans - F - actin polymerization also plays a role in some types membrane signaling molecules with cytoskeleton - asso - of vesicle transport and endocytosis ( Merrifield et al . , ciated effectors in the cytoplasm ( Schlessinger , 1994 ; 2002 ; Qualmann and Kessels , 2002 ; Schafer , 2002 ) . Al - Li et al . , 2001 ; Mayer , 2001 ) . They play a major role in though Wasp and its homologs are not yet implicated axon pathfinding by recruiting proteins that affect actin in synaptic transmission , functional analysis has re - polymerization downstream of guidance cue receptors vealed arequirement forF - actin in synapticvesicle recy - to generate acute changes in growth cone movement . cling ( Kuromi and Kidokoro , 1998 ) and for the induction For example , Dreadlocks ( Dock ) , which contains three of long - term potentiation , during which rapid formation SH3 domains , facilitates Slit - Robo repulsion in commis - and retraction of actin - rich filopodia and dendritic spines sural axons of the Drosophila CNS and also mediates are observed both pre - and postsynaptically ( Fischer et projection of retinal axons into optic lobes ( Fan et al . , al . , 1998 ; Lendvai et al . , 2000 ) . Despite the pervasive role 2003 ; Garrity et al . , 1996 ) . Dock recruits proteins that of actin in neuronal growth and function , the molecular affect Rho GTPase activation , aswell as the Rho - depen - pathways involving Rho and Wasp at synapses are not dentkinase , Pak ( Hingetal . , 1999 ) , downstreamoftrans - well understood . membrane receptors such as Robo and Dscam ( Worby Here we describe the cloning and characterization of et al . , 2001 ; Ang et al . , 2003 ) . nwk , a gene encoding a novel synaptic adaptor protein In organisms ranging from yeast to humans , cytoskel - that binds the Drosophila ortholog of Wasp ( Wsp ) and regulates both NMJ growth and activity . Nwk has a dis - tinct domain organization , including an N - terminal FCH * Correspondence : ganetzky @ wisc . edu Neuron522 and two SH3 domains , that is conserved throughout 0 . 02 (cid:1) 10 (cid:2) 3 boutons / (cid:3) m 2 ; p (cid:4) 0 . 05 ) . The increase in bouton number was accompanied by an expansion in evolution . Mutation of a human Nwk homolog , srGAP3 ( Slit - Robo GTPase Activating Protein ) , is associated NMJ length as measured by summing the lengths of all axon branches within NMJ 6 / 7 . After normalization to with severe mental retardation ( Endris et al . , 2002 ) , sug - gesting that Nwk proteins regulate the development of muscle area , NMJ length was increased by (cid:1) 30 % ( 10 . 1 (cid:5) 0 . 3 versus 7 . 8 (cid:5) 0 . 2 (cid:1) 10 (cid:2) 3 (cid:3) m ; p (cid:4) 0 . 05 ) . both vertebrate and invertebrate nervous systems . We propose that Nwk affects synaptic growth and activity nwk mutants also display increased frequency and complexity of branch formation . Branches form from by regulating cytoskeletal dynamics downstream of transmembrane receptors in presynaptic terminals . pre - existing boutons in a process that superficially re - sembles budding or asymmetric division in yeast cells ( Zito et al . , 1999 ) . Typically , a branching bouton bifur - Results cates to yield just two new branches . In agreement with previous studies , we found that only a small percentage To identify mutations that perturb function and develop - of boutons in wild - type larvae contained branch points ment of the nervous system in Drosophila , we previously at NMJ 6 / 7 ( 5 . 9 % (cid:5) 0 . 4 % ) and NMJ 4 ( 6 . 5 % (cid:5) 0 . 9 % ) isolated a large collection of temperature - sensitive ( ts ) and virtually all of these branches were bifurcations . paralytic mutants following mutagenesis by ethylmeth - Among all 36 wild - type NMJs examined , only a single ane sulfonate ( EMS ) ( Wu et al . , 1978 ; R . Kreber and B . G . , instance was found of a bouton extending more than unpublished ) . Previous studies have shown that the ts two new branches . In nwk 1 , the proportion of branching paralytic phenotype often results from the absence of boutons was increased by 50 % at NMJ 6 / 7 ( 8 . 6 % (cid:5) an affected protein and not from a thermolabile variant 0 . 7 % ) and by 125 % at NMJ 4 ( 14 % (cid:5) 2 % ) . Moreover , ( Atkinson et al . , 1991 ; Titus et al . , 1997 ; Yuan and Ga - there was a striking increase in the incidence of hyper - netzky , 1999 ) . Suchmutantscanhavedefectivesynaptic branched boutons , those extending three or more new morphology or function even at nominally permissive branches . At least one such hyperbranched bouton was temperatures . Therefore , we screened our ts mutants observed at all NMJs 6 / 7 ( 1 . 4 (cid:5) 0 . 43 / NMJ ) and among to identify those with abnormal morphology at the larval about half of all NMJs 4 ( 0 . 41 (cid:5) 0 . 15 / NMJ ) examined NMJ . Here we report the analysis of nwk , the first of in nwk 1 larvae . Most of these hyperbranched boutons these lines to be so characterized . extended three new branches but (cid:1) 10 % extended even nwk adults behave normally at room temperature , but four , suggesting that the underlying mechanism of bou - rapidly ( 10 – 40 s ) lose coordination at 38 (cid:6) C and undergo ton division is misregulated in nwk mutants . seizure - like spasms that gradually diminish until the flies We obtainedfour additional nwk alleles ( nwk 2 - 5 ) follow - become paralyzed within 3 min . When returned to room ing EMS and (cid:7) ray mutagenesis in screens for failure to temperatureaftera5minexposureto38 (cid:6) C , nwk mutants complement the ts paralytic phenotype of nwk . All of gradually recover , and normal behavior is fully restored these mutants are thought to be functional nulls ( see after 5 to 10 min . Wild - type flies exhibit no locomotor below ) , and all display similar NMJ overgrowth pheno - defects at 38 (cid:6) C for at least 20 min . types , confirming that nwk is responsible for both mor - phological defects in larvae and ts paralysis in adults . nwk Mutants Display Excessive NMJ Growth Data are presented for nwk 2 in Figure 1 and Supplemen - The glutamatergic synapses of the Drosophila larval tal Table S1 at http : / / www . neuron . org / cgi / content / full / NMJ have become a favored genetic model for studies 41 / 4 / 521 / DC1 . To further verify that loss of Nwk is re - of synaptic development and plasticity ( Chiba , 1999 ; sponsible for the observed phenotypes , we evaluated Koh et al . , 2000 ) . Each motorneuron forms distinctive the phenotypeof nwk 2 heterozygous withthe deficiency , synapticjunctionsonitstargetmuscle ( s ) , containingstereo - Df ( 3L ) Rdl2 , which uncovers nwk . These nwk 2 hemi - typic numbers of branches and boutons ( Johansen et al . , zygotes had synaptic defects that were nearly identical 1989a , 1989b ; Keshishian et al . , 1996 ; Schuster et al . , with those observed in nwk 2 homozygotes ( Figure 1 and 1996a ) . Initial observations revealed that NMJs in nwk Supplemental Table S1 ) . larvae were more extensive than in wild - type ( Figure 1 ) and that this phenotype was 100 % penetrant . No de - fects in axon pathfinding were observed . nwk Affects Synaptic Bouton Morphology To investigate the effects of nwk on synaptic growth at To quantify the nwk phenotype , we measured bouton number , NMJ length , branch number , and branch com - the ultrastructural level , we performed electron micro - scopic analysis of serially sectioned type Ib boutons plexity at NMJ 6 / 7 and NMJ 4 ( Figure 1 and Supplemen - tal Table S1 at http : / / www . neuron . org / cgi / content / full / from NMJ 6 / 7 in nwk 2 and wild - type larvae . General bouton anatomy in nwk 2 appeared normal ( Figure 2 ) . 41 / 4 / 521 / DC1 ) . Compared with controls , the number of boutons at NMJ 6 / 7 in nwk 1 larvae is increased by (cid:1) 50 % Postsynaptically , boutonsweresurroundedbyanexten - sive subsynaptic reticulum ( ssr ) that resembled wild - ( 168 (cid:5) 6 versus 115 (cid:5) 3 ; mean (cid:5) SEM ; p (cid:4) 0 . 05 ) . A similar result was also observed at NMJ 4 ( 39 (cid:5) 1 versus type with respect to thickness and complexity . Individ - ual synaptic contacts ( synaptic densities ) , which are 26 (cid:5) 1 ; p (cid:4) 0 . 05 ) . Because NMJ growth varies in propor - tion to muscle size ( Schuster et al . , 1996b ) , we normal - identified by dark electron - dense areas in the cell mem - brane , were present in mutant boutons and contained ized measurements to muscle surface area . At NMJ 6 / 7 , normalizedboutonnumberremains (cid:1) 50 % largerin nwk 1 active zones , marked by the presence of T bars sur - rounded by clouds of synaptic vesicles . The size and compared with control larvae ( 1 . 9 (cid:5) 0 . 05 versus 1 . 3 (cid:5) 0 . 04 (cid:1) 10 (cid:2) 3 boutons / (cid:3) m 2 ; p (cid:4) 0 . 05 ) , whereas at NMJ abundance of these vesicles appeared normal . In addi - tion , the distribution of T bars ( ranging from 0 to 3 ) per 4 , it becomes 22 % larger ( 0 . 607 (cid:5) 0 . 02 versus 0 . 497 (cid:5) Nwk and Wasp Regulate Synaptic Growth 523 Figure 1 . nwk Affects Morphology of Larval NMJs ( A – H ) Confocal images of NMJ 6 / 7 ( A – D ) and NMJ 4 ( E – H ) double - labeled with anti - HRP ( green ) and anti - Syt ( red ) . Syt expression is high in synaptic boutons , which appear yel - low / orange due to signal overlap . ( A and E ) The top panels show typical wild - type ( wt ) NMJs . ( B and F ) In nwk 1 , the NMJ has more boutons , more branches , and increased total length . In ( B ) , the branches of NMJ 6 / 7 in nwk extend to the extremeedges of the view , while the wild - type NMJ 6 / 7 in ( A ) is clearly shorter . In ( F ) , increased branch formation is readily apparent . A second allele , nwk 2 , shows similar changes in homozygotes ( C and G ) and hemizygotes ( D and H ) . Note the incidence of hyperbranching boutons ( which divide into more than two new branches ) in the mutants , particularly in ( H ) . Scale bars equal 20 (cid:3) m . ( I – K ) Quantification of nerve terminal growth at NMJ 6 / 7 in wild - type ( left columns ) , homo - zygous nwk 1 and nwk 2 ( middle columns ) , and a rescue line with panneural expression of a UAS - nwk (cid:8) cDNA in a nwk 2 background ( right columns ) . Bouton number ( I ) , NMJ length ( J ) , and branch number ( K ) are elevated in mutants . An asterisk indicates significant difference from both nwk 1 and nwk 2 ( Student’s t test , p (cid:4) 0 . 05 ) . Transgenic rescue restores bouton and branch number to wild - type values , while NMJ length is partially rescued . synaptic contact was similar in mutant and wild - type nals in nwk NMJs contain less total surface area of synaptic contact with the postsynaptic muscle . boutons . In wild - type , 25 % of synaptic contacts had 0 T bars , 63 % had 1 T bar , 10 % had 2 T bars , and 2 % had 3 T bars . In nwk 2 , 20 . 6 % had 0 T bars , 63 . 7 % had nwk Mutations Disrupt Synaptic Transmission at the Larval NMJ 1 T bar , 13 . 7 % had 2 T bars , and 2 % had 3 T bars . We obtained comparable results for nwk 2 / Df ( Figure 2 ) . We recorded nerve - evoked excitatory junctional cur - rents ( EJCs ) from NMJ 6 / 7 to determine if nwk caused Nonetheless , the general shape of nwk boutons was abnormal . Midline cross - sections of wild - type boutons defects in synaptic function that paralleled the morpho - logical defects described above ( Figure 3 ) . Both nwk 1 were circular in outline , but those of nwk 2 were consis - tently elliptical . Morphometric analysis indicated that ( 18 . 5 (cid:5) 2 . 4 nA ) and nwk 2 ( 23 . 3 (cid:5) 2 . 2 nA ) reduced mean EJC amplitude by (cid:9) 50 % compared with wild - type ( 51 . 6 (cid:5) the surface area and volume of nwk 2 boutons were re - duced by 42 % ( from 32 . 50 (cid:5) 4 . 7 to 18 . 78 (cid:5) 2 . 4 (cid:3) m 2 ; 3 . 19 nA ; p (cid:4) 0 . 0001 ) . Although EJC amplitudes were reduced , the amplitude of miniature EJCs ( mEJCs ) , or p (cid:4) 0 . 05 ) and 60 % ( from 19 . 60 (cid:5) 4 . 2 to 7 . 78 (cid:5) 1 . 7 (cid:3) m 3 ; p (cid:4) 0 . 05 ) , respectively . These changes were accompa - quantal size , was slightly increased in nwk 1 ( 0 . 62 (cid:5) 0 . 02 nA ) and nwk 2 ( 0 . 63 (cid:5) 0 . 02 ) compared with wild - type nied by a reduction in the size and number of individual synaptic contacts . Each wild - type bouton contained an ( 0 . 47 (cid:5) 0 . 02 nA ; p (cid:4) 0 . 002 ) . mEJC frequency was not significantly different in nwk 2 , although it was slightly averageof20synapticcontacts , withanaveragesurface area of 0 . 3673 (cid:5) 0 . 0202 (cid:3) m 2 each . In contrast , nwk 2 elevated in nwk 1 ( 4 . 47 (cid:5) 0 . 57 Hz ) compared with wild - type ( 2 . 94 (cid:5) 0 . 40 Hz ; p (cid:10) 0 . 036 ) . Taken together , these boutons contained an average of only 10 synaptic con - tacts , 50 % percent fewer , with an average surface area results demonstrate that synaptic transmission is im - paired in nwk mutants . The large reduction in quantal of 0 . 2817 (cid:5) 0 . 0181 (cid:3) m 2 ( p (cid:4) 0 . 005 ) , 23 % smaller . We conclude that the total area of synaptic contact content , despite a small increase in quantal size , sug - gests that presynaptic vesicle release is reduced . is reduced in each nwk NMJ . Because type Ib boutons contain the majority of the synaptic contacts within a To determine if the synaptic transmission defect in nwk involves any disruption in synaptic vesicle ( sv ) en - given NMJ 6 / 7 , having almost 3 times more than type Is per (cid:3) mlength ( Atwood et al . , 1993 ) , the 50 % reduction docytosis , we analyzed sv recycling using the lipophilic dye , FM1 - 43 ( Kuromi and Kidokoro , 1998 ) . We found in synaptic contact number observed in nwk 2 indicates a large reduction in the total synaptic complement . This no qualitative differences between nwk and wild - type ( Figure 3E ) . Consistent with these results , 10 Hz high - reduction would not be rectified by the increased synap - tic bouton number in nwk mutants . Although there are frequency stimulation at 22 (cid:6) C or 38 (cid:6) C did not result in an activity - dependent loss of synaptic transmission ( not (cid:1) 50 % more boutons at NMJ 6 / 7 in nwk larvae , at least a 100 % increase would be required to compensate for shown ) as is observed in other mutants with impaired endocytosis , such as shi ts1 ( Li and Schwarz , 1999 ) the 50 % reduction in synaptic contacts per bouton . Since T bars ( active zones ) were distributed normally among nwk synapses , nwk NMJs contain fewer total The nwk Locus Corresponds to CG4684 We identified nwk by positional cloning . Recombination active zones . Furthermore , the average surface area of each synaptic contact is reduced in nwk . Taken to - mapping placed nwk (cid:1) 1 map unit to the right of hairy ( 3 – 26 . 5 ) , which corresponds approximately to cytologi - gether , these data demonstrate that motorneuron termi - Neuron524 cDNAs that linked CG4684 and SD04555 into a single full - length ORF encoding a 1001 amino acid protein . All five nwk alleles contained unique molecular lesions within this ORF ( Figure 4 ) . Nwk Defines an Evolutionarily Conserved Family of Adaptor Proteins nwk encodes a predicted (cid:1) 110 kDa protein with several recognizable functional domains ( Figure 4C ) . An Fes / CIP4 Homology ( FCH ) domain is present at the N termi - nus . The function of this domain is unknown , but it has beenimplicatedinactinbinding ( Fankhauseretal . , 1995 ; Aspenstrom , 1997 ) . Following the FCH domain are two canonical SH3 domains , modular protein binding domains that recognize proline - rich consensus sequences , often found in signal transduction pathways linking the mem - brane and cytoskeleton . In addition , the C terminus of Nwk contains a proline - rich segment with at least five potential SH3 binding sites . Database searches identified 11 related proteins in yeast , worms , and mammals , including the three human srGAPs ( Figure 4C ) . Nwk and these 11 homologs share a highly conserved (cid:1) 60 amino acid sequence adjacent to the FCH domain that is not present in any other pro - teins . We refer to this as the ARNEY domain based on its central consensus sequence ARNEYLL ( Figure 4D ) . There are six Nwk relatives in humans and three in mice . Drosophila , C . elegans , and S . cerevisiae each contain a single Nwk protein . Seven of the twelve Nwk family members differ in that the first SH3 domain ( SH3a ) is replaced by a RhoGAP domain . The presence of FCH , Figure 2 . Bouton Morphology Is Abnormal in nwk Mutants ARNEY , RhoGAP , and SH3 domains suggests that Nwk Electron micrographs showing midline cross - sections of type Ib and its homologs compose a distinct family of adaptor synaptic boutons in wild - type ( A ) , homozygous nwk 2 ( B ) , or nwk 2 / Df ( C ) . Both wild - type and mutant boutons are surrounded by an proteins that interact with cytoskeletal regulators . extensive subsynaptic reticulum ( ssr ) and contain mitochondria ( as - terisks ) and synaptic densities ( arrows ) . T bars ( arrowheads ) are Nwk Is Expressed in Neurons and Localizes distributed in synaptic densities , and clouds of synaptic vesicles to the Periactive Zone of Synaptic Boutons are clustered in the vicinity . Normal boutons are spherical , while In situ hybridization of embryos showed that nwk is nwk boutons are markedly elliptical with reduced surface area and abundantly transcribed throughout the CNS and PNS , volume and with fewer synaptic densities and T bars . Scale bar equals 500 nm . whereas its expression was not detected in other tis - sues , including muscles ( Figures 5A – 5C ) . A polyclonal anti - Nwk antiserum stained motorneuron axons and ter - minals , but not muscles ( Figures 5D – 5G ) . Confocal mi - cal interval 66E - 67A . Therefore , we tested Df ( 3L ) 29A6 , croscopy revealed a distinctive distribution of Nwk which is deleted for 66F5 - 67B1 , and found that it failed within synaptic boutons ( Figures 5D – 5G ) . Nwk is distrib - tocomplementthetsparalysisof nwk . Df ( 3L ) Rdl2 , which uted in a patchwork of rings in the plane of the bouton contains a small deletion within 66F5 that includes the membrane . Pak , a marker of synaptic densities , has a GABA - A receptor gene Rdl , also uncovered nwk . Com - complementary punctate distribution , such that each plementation tests indicated that nwk and Rdl null mu - Nwk ring surrounds one Pak punctum . This distribution tants are not allelic . of Nwk corresponds to the periactive zone , described We mapped the breakpoints of Df ( 3L ) Rdl2 by Southern by Sone et al . ( 2000 ) for Sif and FasII and by Wan et blot analysis using overlapping cosmids that spanned al . ( 2000 ) for Hiw . These proteins also regulate NMJ 66F . The Drosophila genome database lists 20 ORFs morphology , which led to the proposal that the peri - within this interval , representing candidates for the nwk activezoneisspecializedforsynapticgrowthregulation . locus . Sequence analysis revealed that one of these Thus , the localization of Nwk to this region is consistent candidates , CG4684 , a predicted ORF with homology with the morphological defects in nwk mutants . to Dock ( Garrity et al . , 1996 ) , contained a unique poly - morphismineachofthreealleles ( nwk 2 , 4 , 5 ) . Theremaining alleles , nwk 1 and nwk 3 , had molecular lesions down - Presynaptic Expression of a nwk (cid:1) Transgene Rescues Mutant Phenotypes stream of CG4684 but within an overlapping EST ( SD0455 ) , suggesting thatthepredictedORF inthedata - We generated transgenic flies expressing a cDNA that encodes a complete nwk ORF plus 5 (cid:11) and 3 (cid:11) untrans - base was incomplete . Therefore , we isolated the 5 (cid:11) end of CG4684 via RACE and used this sequence to probe lated sequences ( UTRs ) linked to a yeast UAS promoter ( UAS - nwk (cid:8) ) ( Figure 4B ) . Neural - specific expression of an adult Drosophila cDNA library . We recovered several Nwk and Wasp Regulate Synaptic Growth 525 Figure 3 . nwk MutantsExhibitaReductionin Evoked Neurotransmission ( A ) Representative EJC traces of wild - type ( wt ) and nwk 2 animals . Arrowsindicatestimu - lus artifact . ( B ) Mean EJC amplitudes for wild - type ( n (cid:10) 15 ) , nwk 1 ( n (cid:10) 11 ) , nwk 2 ( n (cid:10) 6 ) , a control line : elaV - Gal4 nwk 2 / nwk 2 ( n (cid:10) 7 ) , andthe panneu - ronal rescue line : elav - Gal4 nwk 2 / UAS - nwk (cid:8) nwk 2 ( n (cid:10) 6 ) . Mutants have severely reduced mean EJC amplitude , while the rescue line resembles wild - type . An asterisk indicates significant difference from wild - type ( p (cid:4) 0 . 01 ) . Error bars signify SEM . ( C ) Representative traces of spontaneous neurotransmitter release . mEJC amplitude , representing quantal size , is increased in nwk 2 compared to wild - type . ( D ) Mean mEJC amplitudes . The increased quantal size in nwk mutants is partially res - cued by panneural expression of UAS - nwk (cid:8) ( p (cid:4) 0 . 01 ) . ( E ) DistributionofFM1 - 43fluorescencewithin synaptic boutons stained by activity - depen - dentloadinginhighK (cid:8) salinefor2min . Wild - typeboutons ( 1and2 ) containnewlyrecycled synaptic vesicles labeled with FM1 - 43 at both room temperature ( 22 (cid:6) C ) and elevated temperature ( 38 (cid:6) C ) . nwk boutons ( 3 and 4 ) contain a similar amount of fluorescence at both temperatures , indicating that synaptic vesicle endocytosis occurs normally . Scale bar equals 5 (cid:3) m . UAS - nwk (cid:8) using an elaV - Gal4 driver in a homozygous aptic expression of UAS - nwk (cid:8) using a muscle driver did not rescue the ts or morphological phenotypes ( not nwk 2 background restored the presenceof Nwk at motor terminals with normal periactive zone localization ( not shown ) . In summary , these results demonstrate that the behavioral , developmental , and electrophysiological shown ) . The ts paralytic phenotype of nwk 2 adults was also rescued : after 15 min at 38 (cid:6) C , more than 90 % of the phenotypes associated with nwk all result from mutation of a single gene that acts presynaptically . transgenic flies continued to walk and climb normally . NMJ overgrowth phenotypes were fully or partially rescued by neural - specific expression of UAS - nwk (cid:8) Nwk Binds to Wsp In Vitro Several lines of evidence suggested that Nwk might ( Figure 1 and Supplemental Table S1 at http : / / www . neuron . org / cgi / content / full / 41 / 4 / 521 / DC1 ) . The normal - interact with Wsp . First , the SH3a domain of Nwk is between 35 % and 45 % identical to the three SH3 do - ized numbers of boutons and branches were fully rescued at NMJ 6 / 7 and NMJ 4 . The incidence of hyper - mains of Dock . Nck , a mammalian homolog of Dock , binds to Wasp via its SH3 domains ( Rivero - Lezcano et branching boutons per NMJ was not significantly differ - ent between the rescue and control lines . Total synapse al . , 1995 ) . Second , Bzz1p , the yeast ortholog of Nwk , binds to Las17p , the yeast ortholog of Wasp ( Soulard length of NMJ 6 / 7 was substantially reduced compared with nwk 2 . At the electrophysiological level , EJC ampli - et al . , 2002 ) , via its SH3 domains . Third , we discovered that wsp mutants had a morphological phenotype simi - tude was fully rescued by neural - specific expression of the UAS - nwk (cid:8) transgene , and mEJC amplitude was lar to nwk at larval NMJs ( see below ) . To evaluate whether Nwk and Wsp interact biochemi - partially rescued ( Figure 3 ) . The inability to achieve perfect rescue could result cally , we performed affinity chromatography using GST - fusion proteins containing each of the two Nwk SH3 from failure of the transgene to exactly recapitulate the timing and amplitude of nwk expression , or from the domains . The construct containing the SH3a domain , but not the one containing the SH3b domain , precipi - lack of particular splice variants . Nonetheless , all nwk phenotypes were at least partially rescued by neural - tated Wsp immunoreactivity from Drosophila head ho - mogenates with high affinity ( Figure 6L ) . specific expression of UAS - nwk (cid:8) . In contrast , postsyn - Neuron526 Figure 4 . nwk Encodes an FCH and SH3 Do - main - Containing Adaptor Protein with a Dis - tinctive Evolutionarily Conserved Structure ( A ) Genomic organization of the nwk locus . At least 12 alternative splice forms were de - tected . Retained introns are cross hatched , UTRs are shaded , and the lesions in each nwk allele are marked by arrows plus a red barforout - of - framedeletionsorjustanarrow for point mutants . ( B ) Structure of the nwk (cid:8) cDNA used for transformation rescue . Note that the second of three possible stop codons is used . ( C ) Comparison of Nwk to all other proteins currently in the database that contain the novel ARNEY domain . In seven of these ho - mologs , a RhoGAP domain has replaced the SH3a domain . At their C termini , most Nwk homologs contain several PXXP motifs , which is the consensus recognized by SH3 do - mains . Percentagesindicatetheidentityeach domain shares with its counterpart in Dro - sophila Nwk ; for example , SH3a in H . sapiens Nwk is 55 % identical to SH3a in Nwk . A dash indicatesinsufficientsimilarityforBLASTalign - ment . H . sapiens Nwk is represented in the database by an incomplete cDNA ( KIAA0769 ) , lackinganinitiationmethionine , isolatedfrom brain ( Nagaseetal . , 1998 ) . Nwk2isFLJ00007 . ( D ) Alignment of the central 40 amino acids intheARNEYdomainsofeachNwkhomolog . This novel conserved domain of unknown function exists at the same relative position within all Nwk homologs and is not found in any other proteins currently in the database . A yeast two - hybrid protein binding assay further indi - cally , Wsp is associated with the subsynaptic reticulum ( ssr ) , which was revealed by colocalization with the ssr cated that Nwk and Wsp can interact directly . Two - bait constructs expressing either full - length Nwk or a marker , Dlg , and by reduction of immunoreactivity in pak mutants that reduce the ssr ( not shown ) . There is subfragmentconsisting ofthetwo SH3domains plusthe C terminus stimulated transcription of reporter genes in also a significant presynaptic component of Wsp immu - noreactivity , which is most evident in thin ( 0 . 25 (cid:3) m ) yeast cells cotransformed with a full - length Wsp prey . Colonies grew rapidly on selectable media and ex - optical sections through the center of boutons . An ex - ample is shown in Figure 6H where the presynaptic pressed (cid:12) - gal . In contrast , bait constructs containing the FCH and ARNEY domains of Nwk but lacking the membrane is labeled with anti - HRP . Wsp is clearly pres - ent both inside the bouton as well as in association with SH3 domains did not activate reporter genes when co - transformed with Wsp prey , indicating that the SH3 do - the surrounding ssr . Although the presynaptic distribu - tion of Wsp is not continuous throughout the periactive mains are required for binding with Wsp . Single transfor - mation of any Nwk bait or Wsp prey alone did not zone , regions of overlap with Nwk can be observed in thin optical confocal sections through double - labeled stimulate transcription of reporter genes at substantial levels . boutons ( Figure 6F ) . Thus , Nwk and Wsp colocalize in spatially restricted regions of the periactive zone . Nwk is not required for Wsp localization since Wsp immuno - Wsp Is Expressed in the NMJ reactivity was not obviously disrupted in nwk mutants A previous study of Drosophila wsp mutants revealed ( not shown ) . defects in sensory cell proliferation during PNS develop - Wasp promotes the nucleation and branching of ment , butaroleatNMJshadnotbeeninvestigated ( Ben - F - actin ( Mullins , 2000 ) . Phalloidin staining revealed that Yaacov et al . , 2001 ) . Therefore , to determine whether F - actin is enriched around synaptic boutons and gener - endogenous Nwk and Wsp were capable , in principle , ally colocalizes with Wsp ( Figures 6I and 6J ) . The overall of interacting in vivo , we examined the distribution of abundance and distribution of F - actin appeared normal Wsp at the NMJ by immunocytochemistry ( Figure 6 ) . in wsp mutants ( Figure 6K ) , indicating that Wsp is not We found that Wsp is localized diffusely at synaptic boutons in irregular patches ( Figure 6B ) . Postsynapti - the only factor promoting actin polymerization at the Nwk and Wasp Regulate Synaptic Growth 527 Figure 5 . Nwk Is Expressed in Neurons and Localizes to the Periactive Zone of Synap - tic Boutons ( A – C ) In situ hybridization using nwk anti - sense probes ; stage 16 wild - type embryos . ( A ) Ventral view . nwk mRNAis detectedin the brain and ventral nerve cord . ( B ) Lateral view . nwk expression is also de - tected in sensory neurons ( filled arrow ) . ( C ) Higher magnification . nwk is not detected in postsynaptic muscle cells ( open arrow and numbers ) . ( D – G ) Confocal images of synaptic boutons in wild - type ( wt ) ( D – F ) or nwk 2 ( G ) NMJ 6 / 7 , double - labeled with anti - Nwk ( magenta ) and anti - Pak ( green ) . Green spots mark the local - ization of Pak , which is located at the post - synaptic membrane of synaptic densities ( Sone et al . , 2000 ) . ( D ) The distribution of Nwk is complementary to that of Pak . Arrows point to examples where this relationship is particularly clear . ( E ) Nwk immunoreactivity is confined to re - gions surrounding active zones , producing a honeycomb - like appearance . ( F ) Pak immunoreactivity is present in noncontiguous puncta . ( G ) Double - labeled nwk 2 boutons . Anti - Nwk immunoreactivity is completely absent . Only Pak is detected , and it continues to exist in discrete puncta . Scale bar equals 2 (cid:3) m . synapse . The Drosophila genome contains one other 0 . 56 (cid:5) 0 . 16 hyperbranches per NMJ in nwk 2 or 0 . 86 (cid:5) 0 . 35 in wsp 1 / Df ( p (cid:4) 0 . 05 ) . On average , each double wsp family member , scar , whose function may overlap with wsp , although its role at synapses has not been mutant NMJ contained one bouton that emitted four new branches , while this type of hyperbranch was only investigated ( Zallen et al . , 2002 ) . Thus , loss of Wsp may have only a limited , localized effect on actin dynamics observed in (cid:1) 10 % of NMJs in single mutants . Boutons extending 5 or 6 new branches are found in more than andarchitecturewithoutcompletelyabolishingthecorti - cal cytoskeleton . 10 % of the double mutant larvae . These results suggest that Nwk and Wsp interact pre - synaptically to regulate NMJ growth . Consistent with wsp Mutations Cause NMJ Overgrowth and Enhance nwk this interpretation , we partially rescued the morphologi - cal phenotype of wsp mutants by driving expression of Theabove datasuggestthat NwkandWsp couldpartici - pate in a common regulatory pathway affecting F - actin a UAS - wsp (cid:8) transgene using a panneuronal Gal4 driver . Normalized bouton number , NMJ length , and branch dynamics in synapses . If so , then wsp loss - of - function mutations should cause increased NMJ growth and number were significantly reduced toward wild - type val - ues ( Supplemental Table S2 at http : / / www . neuron . org / branching similar to nwk . Indeed , we found that bouton number , branch number , total NMJ length , and hyper - cgi / content / full / 41 / 4 / 521 / DC1 ) . Thus , presynaptic ex - pression of Wsp , like Nwk , normally suppresses NMJ branching wereall increasedin wsp 1 / Df and wsp 1 ( Figure 7 and Supplemental Table S2 at http : / / www . neuron . org / growth and bouton branching . In summary , the striking similarity in NMJ phenotypes cgi / content / full / 41 / 4 / 521 / DC1 ) . wsp 1 is a putative null allele , with occasional escapers surviving to the pharate exhibited by nwk and wsp mutants and the enhanced phenotypes observed in double mutants strongly sup - adult stage . Although there is maternal contribution of Wsp in embryos , we detected no Wsp immunoreactivity port the idea that Nwk and Wsp act in a common regula - tory pathway . The more extreme phenotype observed at wsp NMJs ( not shown ) . Thus , Wsp and Nwk have a similar function in the regulation of synaptic growth and in double mutants compared with either single mutant most likely indicates that either mutation alone does not bouton branching . To further investigate the functional relationship be - completely abolish the pathway as would be expected if there is some functional redundancy . For example , tween Nwk and Wsp in vivo , we examined double mu - tants ( Figure 7 and Supplemental Table S2 at http : / / Wsp is known to be activated by many different binding partners and Nwk may act in part via other effectors www . neuron . org / cgi / content / full / 41 / 4 / 521 / DC1 ) . The phenotype of homozygous nwk wsp double mutants besides Wsp . was more severe than that of either single mutant with respect to bouton number , branch formation , and NMJ nwk and wsp Mutations Display Dosage - Sensitive Interactions length ( Figure 7 and Supplemental Table S2 ) . Also , hy - perbranch complexity was dramatically increased , pro - The data above suggest that nwk and wsp contribute to a common regulatory mechanism in a gene dosage - ducingdistinctsynapticmorphologies ( Figure7G , inset ) . At NMJ 6 / 7 in double mutants , we observed 3 . 2 (cid:5) 0 . 5 dependent manner , as do several other cytoskeletal ef - fectors required for axon growth ( Gertler et al . , 1989 ; hyperbranched boutons per NMJ , compared with only Neuron528 Figure 6 . Wsp Is Expressed in the Larval NMJ and Binds to Nwk ( A – C ) Confocal images of an axon terminal from wild - type NMJ 6 / 7 , double - labeled with anti - Nwk ( magenta ) and anti - Wsp ( green ) . ( A ) Nwk immunoreactivity is localized to the periactive zone . ( B ) Wspimmunoreactivityispresentinirregu - lar patches throughout the synapse , espe - cially in the postsynaptic ssr . ( C ) The merged image shows that the Wsp - enriched ssr envelops the presynaptic ter - minal . ( D – F ) Thin ( 0 . 25 (cid:3) m ) optical cross - sections through the center of boutons . In ( D ) , Nwk immunoreactivity rings the inner periphery of the bouton . In ( E ) , Wsp is prominent in the postsynapticssr , whilearrowheadsmarkpre - synaptic Wsp patches . In the merged image ( F ) , patches of Wsp colocalize with Nwk ( ar - rowheads ) in localized regions of the peri - active zone . The gain is kept relatively low on both channels to prevent fluorescence out - side thefocal plane from appearingas a false signal . TheWsppatchesneararrowheadsare bright , close to the maximum intensity on the green channel , emphasizing the precise lo - calization of these patches within the speci - fied optical section . ( G – J ) Another 0 . 25 (cid:3) m optical cross - section through a wild - type terminal bouton labeled with anti - HRP ( blue ) , anti - Wsp ( green ) , and Phalloidin ( red ) . Anti - HRP ( G ) labels the presynaptic membrane , providing a thin profile to identify bouton boundaries . Wsp ( H ) is concentrated near the membrane , in a characteristic patchy distribution both inside the bouton and in the ssr . The gain is slightly elevated compared to ( E ) to emphasize the presence of Wsp throughout the bouton interior . Phalloidin ( I ) selectively stains filamentous actin ( F - actin ) , whose distribution is more uniform than that of Wsp but largely overlaps with Wsp at or near pre - and postsynaptic membranes ( J ) . ( K ) The amount and distribution of F - actin appears grossly normal in nwk and wsp mutants . Scale bars equal 2 (cid:3) m . ( L ) The SH3a but not SH3b domain of Nwk precipitates Wsp immunoreactivity from Drosophila head homogenates with high affinity , implying a direct interaction . GST fusion proteins were immobilized on beads in 2 mM EGTA ( E ) , 1 mM calcium ( Ca 2 (cid:8) ) , or without addition of head homogenates ( N ) , and bound proteins were analyzed by Western blot using anti - Wsp antiserum . This interaction was not calcium dependent . GST alone did not bind Wsp . Equal amounts of protein were loaded in each lane . Wills et al . , 1999b ; Liebl et al . , 2000 ) . To verify this , we tubule loops within a subset of terminal boutons ( not shown ) . In wild - type larvae , these loops are associated focused on the incidence of hyperbranching , which is the most distinctive trait observed in these mutants . We with stable boutons and disintegrate during branch for - mation ( Roos et al . , 2000 ) . In addition , the patterns of observed an increase in the frequency and complexity of these structures as the number of wild - type nwk and MTs within branching boutons in wild - type and double mutants were indistinguishable ( Figures 8B and 8C ) . wsp alleles decreased ( Figure 8A ) . Wild - type larvae ex - hibited no hyperbranches . Heterozygotes for either nwk Thus , there is no major disorganization of MT structure in nwk and wsp mutants . Rather , abnormal proliferation or wsp alone displayed a low incidence of hyperbranch - ing , but boutons with four or more new branches were and branching of boutons in these mutants is likely caused by the disruption of some other pathway . never observed . In contrast , double heterozygotes ( i . e . , nwk 2 wsp 1 / (cid:8) (cid:8) ) were intermediate between wild - type and the respective homozygotes , including the appear - ance of boutons that gave rise to four new branches . Discussion In hemizygotes for nwk or wsp , loss of one wild - type allele of the other gene caused a further enhancement We describe the isolation and characterization of nwk , a new mutation affecting synaptic growth and function . of the mutant phenotype . Double homozygotes dis - played the highest incidence of hyperbranch formation On the basis of genetic , physiological , anatomical , and biochemical analyses , we conclude that nwk encodes with boutons emitting up to six new branches . We ob - served similar trends for boutonnumber and NMJ length an SH3 adaptor protein that interacts with Wsp , a princi - pal regulator of ARP2 / 3 - dependent actin polymeriza - ( not shown ) . These data provide additional evidence that Nwk and Wsp interact within a common regulatory tion . Regulated actin polymerization via WASP and its homologs is thought to underlie neurite extension , cell complex to regulate bouton proliferation and branching . The mechanism of bouton branching is unresolved at junction formation , receptor - mediated endocytosis , and other processes relevant to synaptic growth and func - present , butitinvolves thereorganizationofcytoskeletal components including microtubules ( MTs ) ( Pennetta et tion ( Mullins , 2000 ; Luo , 2002 ; Qualmann and Kessels , 2002 ; Schafer , 2002 ) . Our results reveal a novel molecu - al . , 2002 ; Roos et al . , 2000 ; Dent and Kalil , 2001 ) . We found that overall MT organization appeared normal in lar pathway that potentially links signal transduction and actin dynamics in synapses . nwk and wsp mutants , including the presence of micro - Nwk and Wasp Regulate Synaptic Growth 529 Figure 7 . wsp RegulatesNMJGrowthandIn - teracts Genetically with nwk ( A – H ) Confocal images of NMJ 6 / 7 ( A – D ) and NMJ 4 ( E – H ) double - labeled with anti - HRP ( green ) and anti - Syt ( red ) . Hemizygous wsp 1 mutants ( B and F ) exhibit an NMJ overgrowth phenotype that is very similar to nwk ( C and G ) . Doublemutants ( DandH ) displayafurther increase in bouton and branch number be - yond that observed in either single mutant . Hyperbranching boutons that divide exces - sively , producingmorethantwonewbranches , aremorefrequentandextensiveinthedoublemutants . The inset in ( D ) is a magnified view of a hyperbranching bouton , sprouting five new branches . Each of these neurites is a branch with only one small bouton , and the bottom - most bouton immediately branches again . Scale bars equal 20 (cid:3) m . ( I – K ) Quantification of nerve terminal growth at NMJ 6 / 7 in wt ( left columns ) , wsp 1 / Df ( mid - dleleftcolumns ) , nwk 2 ( middlerightcolumns ) , and wsp 1 nwk 2 double mutants ( right col - umns ) . In wsp mutants , bouton number ( I ) , NMJ length ( J ) , and branch number ( K ) are significantly greater than wild - type and similar to nwk mutants ( p (cid:4) 0 . 05 ) . In all graphs , the double mutant phenotypes are significantly more severe than those of either single mutant . Nwk Regulates Synaptic Growth Nwk contains an N - terminal FCH domain , a novel ARNEY domain , two SH3 domains , and many polypro - Nwk negatively regulates larval NMJ growth , since null mutants exhibit increased bouton number , branch for - line sequences . This particular domain arrangement is distinct , found only in Nwk and 11 other homologs in mation , and total length . In addition , nwk adults undergo rapid temperature - sensitive ( ts ) paralysis at 38 (cid:6) C , sug - organisms ranging from yeast to humans . Therefore , Nwk is a member of a small subfamily of evolutionarily gesting that Nwk continues to have an important func - tion ( s ) in the adult nervous system that may include a conserved SH3 adaptor proteins that includes other po - tential regulators of synaptic development and function . direct role in neurotransmission . The molecular mecha - nism of ts paralysis is not understood at present , and The only substantial difference in domain structure among these 12 proteins is that 7 of them have a Rho - further studies are underway to determine how this be - havioral defect is related to the morphological changes GAP domain in place of the SH3a domain . Among the six human or three mouse Nwk homologs , there are in nwk synapses . Nevertheless , we have verified by sev - eral means that all of these phenotypes arise from muta - proteins of both structural types . In contrast , the D . melanogaster and S . cerevisiae genomes each contain tions of the same gene . First , we observed the same abnormalities when nwk is homozygous as when it is a single Nwk ortholog lacking the RhoGAP domain but containingasecondSH3domain . Nevertheless , theNwk hemizygous over Df ( 3L ) Rdl2 . Second , multiple indepen - dent alleles of nwk isolated by failure to complement to Rho signaling pathway may be conserved in these organisms because the S . cerevisiae ortholog of Nwk , the adult ts paralytic phenotype all displayed identical changesinlarvalNMJdevelopment . Third , eachofthese Bzz1p , was found to coprecipitate with the RhoGAP protein , ECM25 ( Gavin et al . , 2002 ) . Similar to Dock , Nwk phenotypes was partially or completely rescued by panneural expression of a transgene that contains a is likely to interact with multiple targets in a variety of cellular contexts by virtue of its modular protein bind - complete nwk ORF . While panneural expression of Nwk rescued both lar - ing domains . val and adult phenotypes , expression in muscle did not rescue either , indicating that Nwk does not function A Synaptic Growth Control Pathway Involving Nwk and Wsp postsynaptically . In agreement with these observations , we found that Nwk expression in wild - type larvae is We propose that Nwk and Wsp interact directly as com - ponents of a signal transduction pathway in neurons restricted to neurons and is localized to a distinct pre - synaptic , subcellular region of synaptic boutons termed controlling NMJ growth and bouton branching on the basisofseverallinesofevidence . First , theSH3adomain the periactive zone . Sone at al . ( 2000 ) originally named the periactive zone and proposed that it is specialized of Nwk binds Wsp in vitro , and Wsp interacts directly with the SH3 domains of Nwk in the yeast two - hybrid for regulating synaptic development . It encompasses theareaimmediatelysurroundingsynapticdensitiesand system . Second , Nwk and Wsp immunoreactivity over - lap in discrete regions of periactive zones . Third , nwk contains several known regulators of synaptic growth and plasticity , including the cell adhesion molecule , FasII , the and wsp null mutations increase synaptic growth and bouton branching in identical fashion . Fourth , each mu - RhoGEF , Sif , and the microtubule - associated protein , DVap - 33A ( Soneet al . , 2000 ; Pennettaet al . , 2002 ) . Thus , tant can be rescued by presynaptic expression of the respective wild - type gene . Fifth , the severity of the nwk Nwk is positioned at a critical juncture between trans - membrane receptors , cytoskeletal proteins , and active and wsp mutant phenotypes are enhanced by removal of the other gene in a dose - dependent manner . Finally , zones . Neuron530 Figure 8 . Gene Dosage Effects on Hyper - branching between nwk and wsp ( A ) Histogram representing the average num - ber of hyperbranches in larvae of different genotypes . Loss of additional wild - type al - leles of either nwk or wsp exacerbates the incidenceandcomplexityofhyperbranchfor - mation . ( B ) Microtubule ( MT ) organization within ter - minal branchingboutons , stainedwith 22C10 ( red ) , which recognizes the MT binding pro - tein , Futsch . Futsch signal is faint in terminal boutonsandrevealspunctateclustersofMTsdistributedinsidethebranchingboutonthatbegintocoalesceasthemainMTshaftex - tends into the center . ( C ) In nwk 2 wsp 1 double mutants , more termi - nal boutons ( 5 in this case ) emerge from the branchingboutonbutthegeneralMTorganiza - tion appears normal . Scale bars equal 2 (cid:3) m . the proposed interaction between Nwk and Wsp is sup - double mutants result from altered activity in a Nwk / Wsp / ARP2 / 3 - dependent pathway that regulates one or ported by studies in yeast demonstrating that the or - tholog of Nwk , Bzz1p , binds to the ortholog of Wasp , more of these mechanisms within periactive zones . We infer the involvement of ARP2 / 3 from the exten - Las17p , promoting actin polymerization and regulating yeast cell growth ( Soulard et al . , 2002 ) . sively documented role of Wsp in various cell types including neurons . However , we cannot yet exclude the Wasp and its relatives such as Wave / Scar stimulate the ARP2 / 3 complex , which nucleates and crosslinks possibility that the Nwk / Wasp interaction in boutons may involve other , novel functions . F - actin ( Higgs and Pollard , 2001 ) . Other neuronally ex - pressed proteins have distinct effects on the actin cy - Recent analysis of three human Nwk homologs , the Slit - Robo GAPs ( srGAPs 1 – 3 ) , supports the proposal toskeleton . For example , Cortactin stablizes F - actin branches and promotes ARP2 / 3 activity independently that Nwk family members link transmembrane signals with cytoskeletal effectors . Robo receptors bind se - of Wasp ( Weed and Parsons , 2001 ; Weaver et al . , 2003 ) ; Ena / Vasp increases the rate of actin filament extension creted ligands , Slits , to control neuronal migration and axon guidance in mammals and insects ( Brose et al . , ( Kwiatkowski et al . , 2003 ; Wills et al . , 1999a ) ; and Cofilin severs existing filaments to accelerate F - actin turnover 1999 ; Kidd et al . , 1999 ; Li et al . , 1999 ) . The srGAPs share the same domain organization with Nwk , except they ( Gungabissoon and Bamburg , 2003 ) . The Drosophila ge - nome contains homologs of scar , cortactin , ena , cofilin , contain one SH3 domain and a RhoGAP domain instead of two SH3 domains . The SH3 domain of the srGAPs and others that may function either in parallel or antago - nistically to wsp . Consequently , loss of Wsp may only binds to the cytoplasmic CC3 domain of activated Robo1 , and the neighboring RhoGAP domain locally partially or selectively disrupt F - actin polymerization at the synapse . In support of this possibility , phalloidin inactivates Cdc42 ( Wong et al . , 2001 ) . As a result , ARP2 / 3 - dependent F - actin assembly is decreased down - staining was not abolished in wsp mutant NMJs , al - though the precise arrangement of individual actin fila - stream of activated Robo and migrating neurons are repulsed from Slit . This activity is important for CNS ments cannot be resolved . Adaptor proteins such as Nwk may specify which development , since mutations of srGAP3 are associated with severemental retardation ( Endris et al . , 2002 ) . Thus , combinations of actin regulators are recruited in re - sponse to specific cues ( Caron , 2002 ; Bogdan and Nwk and its relatives potentially regulate F - actin poly - merization and synaptic growth in both vertebrates Klambt , 2003 ) . Differentcombinationsofactinregulators may contribute to distinct cellular mechanisms such as and invertebrates . adhesion , axon extension , endocytosis , and vesicle transport ( Meyer and Feldman , 2002 ; Skoble et al . , 2001 ; Nwk Affects Synaptic Transmission In Drosophila , mutations in nwk lead not only to in - Zalevsky et al . , 2001 ) . We propose that the morphologi - cal abnormalities observed in nwk and wsp single and creased NMJ growth , but also to decreased synaptic Nwk and Wasp Regulate Synaptic Growth 531 Nwk amino acids 739 – 866 was cloned in pQE30 ( Qiagen ) . The (cid:1) 14 transmission . At nwk NMJs , quantal content is reduced kDa 6 - His - tagged fusion protein was expressed in E . coli M15 cells by more than half , indicating that presynaptic vesicle and purified via Ni - NTA agarose affinity matrix ( Qiagen ) . Antisera release is curtailed . However , we do not believe that were hybridized to formaldehyde - fixed third instar CS or nwk larval the overgrowth observed in nwk NMJs is a secondary , preparations to assess specificity . compensatory effect of reduced synaptic transmission for several reasons . First , mutations that directly de - Immunohistochemistry , Confocal Microscopy , crease quantal content at larval NMJs , such as in synap - and NMJ Measurement Lines were maintained at 25 (cid:6) C . Wandering third instar larvae were totagmin and methuselah , do not cause compensatory dissected in Ca 2 (cid:8) free saline and fixed in 4 % paraformaldehyde , 0 . 5 overgrowth in presynaptic terminals ( DiAntonio and mM EGTA in PBS for 30 min . Fixed larvae were washed in PBT and Schwarz , 1994 ; Songetal . , 2002 ) . Second , Nwklocalizes blocked 20 min with 5 % BSA / PBT . Anti - Syt ( Littleton et al . , 1993 ) to the periactive zone and is therefore unlikely to have was used at 1 : 3000 ; anti - PAK ( Harden , et al . , 1996 ) , anti - Wsp ( Ben - a primary effect on synaptic vesicle exocytosis in active Yaacov et al . , 2001 ) , and rat anti - Nwk at 1 : 2000 ; and FITC - conju - zones . Third , wedidnotdetectdecreasesinthedistribu - gated anti - HRP at 1 : 200 ( Molecular Probes ) . Secondary antibodies conjugated to Alexa 488 or Alexa 568 ( Molecular Probes ) were ap - tion or size of synaptic vesicles in the ultrastructural plied at 1 : 200 dilution . Phalloidin - conjugated Alexa 488 ( Molecular analysis of synaptic boutons or in functional assays of Probes ) was used at 1 : 6 . Stained preparations were mounted in quantal size . Fourth , we observed normal endocytosis Vectashield ( Vector Laboratories ) and visualized with a BIO - RAD of synaptic vesicles in nwk . These results indicate that MRC 1024 laser scanning confocal apparatus mounted on a Ni - Nwk is not directly involved with synaptic vesicle dy - kon microscope . namics . Instead , ourultrastructuralanalysisshowedthat WequantifiedlarvalNMJsinsegment A2 . AtNMJ4 , wequantified MN4 ( Ib ) only . At NMJ 6 / 7 , RP3 and MN6 / 7b were jointly quantified . synaptic contacts were fewer and smaller in nwk bou - Boutons were scored by counting each distinct spherical anti - SYT - tons , which may account for the reduced synaptic cur - stained varicosity along motor terminals . HRP - stained NMJs were rents . Future experiments will address whether this phe - photographed at 20 (cid:1) magnification and traced in Adobe Pho - notype is also mediated via Wsp or through other toshop . Total pixels were counted in NIH Image and converted to effectors . (cid:3) m to yield values for synapse length . Muscles were photographed In summary , the discovery and characterization of at 10 (cid:1) and traced , and area ( in (cid:3) m 2 ) was computed in NIH image . Branch number was counted as the total number of boutons with nwk identifies a novel gene affecting synaptic growth three or more HRP staining axonal branches / protrusions . Nerve and activity . The physical and functional interactions terminal branch points always initiate within boutons , except up - between Nwk and Wsp lead us to suggest the existence stream of bouton formation near the nerve entry to the muscle . of a signal transduction pathway controlling synaptic Thesebranchpointswerenotscored . Hyperbranchedboutonscon - growth and bouton branching by regulating actin dy - taining 3 , 4 , or 5 new branches were quantified in NMJ 6 / 7 . To namics in localized regions of the periactive zone . Fur - compare the incidence of hyperbranches / NMJ in different geno - types ( Figure 8 ) , the average frequency / NMJ of each type of hyper - ther studies of Nwk should reveal how this new synaptic branched bouton was multiplied by the corresponding number ( 3 , component is integrated with others that regulate syn - 4 , 5 ) of branches . aptic growth and plasticity . Electron Microscopy Experimental Procedures Electron microscopy was performed as described in Koh et al . ( 2000 ) . Axon terminals from NMJ 6 / 7 ( segment A2 ) were serially Genetic Stocks sectioned ( 100 nm ) , then imaged at 15 , 000 (cid:1) on a Philips CM120 nwk was generated via EMS mutagenesis and identified in a screen STEM ( Scanning Transmission Electron Microscope ) equipped with for ts paralysis ( 38 (cid:6) C ) . Four additional alleles , nwk 2 - 5 , were isolated a MegaPixel digital camera ( Kodak , USA ) . Serial sections were digi - following (cid:7) irradiation in a jv Hn h background by failure to comple - tized and aligned in Adobe Photoshop . Two different samples of ment nwk tsparalysis . Thesmallestdeficiencythatfailedtocomple - each genotype were used , and a total of 8 wild - type , 10 nwk 2 , and ment nwk is Df ( 3L ) Rdl2 . All five nwk alleles are likely nulls . 9 nwk 2 / Df type Ib boutons were measured . Two - sample T test was UAS - nwk (cid:8) comprises a full - length nwk cDNA cloned into pUAST . performed by Minitab software . Type Ib boutons were clearly distin - Followinggermlinetransformation , UAS - nwk (cid:8) wasinsertedonchro - guished from type Is by following strings of boutons within distinct mosome 3 in a w i1118 background , then recombined into the nwk 2 axon terminals and by comparing traits such as bouton diameter background . Theneural - specific elaV ( 3 ) a - Gal4 wasrecombinedinto and SSR thickness , as described in Atwood et al . ( 1993 ) and Jia et nwk 2 . Canton - S ( CS ) iswild - type , while jvHnh isanadditionalcontrol al . ( 1993 ) . Boutons near the distal ends of axonal branches were for the nwk 2 background . The adult tsphenotype wasrescued using chosen . We define actives zone as a T bars . the neuron - specific elaV C155 - Gal4 driver . Transgenic nwk expression in muscles was driven with BG57 - GAL4 nwk 2 . The wsp allele is a functional null uncovered by Df ( 3R ) 3450 ( Ben - Electrophysiology Electrophysiology was performed at 19 (cid:6) C on muscle 6 ( segments Yaacov et al . , 2001 ) . A recombinant wsp elaV ( 3 ) a - Gal4 line served as both a wsp homozygous strain and as a negative control for A2orA3 ) ofwanderingthirdinstars , usingstandardTEVCtechniques ( Zhong and Wu , 1991 ) , dissections as previously described ( Rohr - neural - specific UAS - wsp (cid:8) rescue . bough et al . , 1999 ) . All experiments used a modified standard saline ( in mM : NaCl , 128 ; KCl , 2 ; MgCl 2 , 4 ; CaCl 2 , 0 . 5 ; sucrose , 70 ; HEPES , Cloning and Molecular Analysis Predicted ORFs within Df ( 3L ) Rdl2 were sequenced in nwk 2 - 5 using 5 [ pH 7 . 2 ] ) . Preparations were visualized on an inverted Nikon DIAPHOT200 using a 20 (cid:1) objective and Nomarski optics . primersdesignedfromtheBDGP . The5 (cid:11) endofCG4684wasisolated viaRACEPCRfromamarathoncDNAlibrary ( Clontech ) . A Drosoph - Microelectrodes , with R of (cid:1) 15 M (cid:13) , were filled with 3 M KCl and nerve stimulation electrodes with filled with bath saline . Evoked ila adult CS cDNAlibrarywas screenedusingthe5 (cid:11) 1 . 6kbsequence of the CG4684 ORF . Seven full - length ( longest (cid:10) 3 . 722 kb encoding EJCs were recorded in TEVC voltage - clamp mode ( (cid:2) 60 mV ) using theAxoclamp2Bamplifier ( AxonInstruments , UnionCity , CA ) . Mean 1001 amino acids ) clones were recovered that joined the predicted CG4684ORFwiththeEST , SD04555 . Additionalsplicevariantswere EJCamplitudesweredeterminedfrom20consecutiveevokedEJCs . Currents were filtered at 1 kHz and acquired and analyzed with observed in partial cDNAs and RT - PCR products . Embyronicwhole - mountinsituhybridizationwasperformedusing pClamp6 software . mEJC amplitude and frequency were analyzed using Mini Analysis software 5 . 6 . 4 ( Synaptosoft , Deactur , GA ) . P antisense nwk probes as described ( Tautz and Pfeifle , 1989 ) . To produce polyclonal anti - Nwk antisera , a 384 bp fragment encoding values were calculated via Mann - Whitney U tests . Neuron532 Qualitative FM1 - 43 dye analysis of synaptic vesicle endocytosis sion in PC12 cells and rat hippocampal primary culture cells . J . Biol . Chem . 275 , 11987 – 11992 . was performed as described ( Kuromi and Kidokoro , 1998 ) . Ben - Yaacov , S . , Le Borgne , R . , Abramson , I . , Schweisguth , F . , and Schejter , E . D . ( 2001 ) . Wasp , the Drosophila Wiskott - Aldrich syn - Biochemical Assays drome gene homolog , is required for cell fate decisions mediated For GST pull - downs , the SH3a and SH3b domains of Nwk were by Notch signaling . J . Cell Biol . 152 , 1 – 13 . generated by PCR and subcloned into the pGEX - 2T expression vector . JM109 cells expressing GST , SH3a - GST , or SH3b - GST were Billuart , P . , Winter , C . G . , Maresh , A . , Zhao , X . , and Luo , L . ( 2001 ) . grown to an A600 of 0 . 4 , induced by the addition of 0 . 4 mM IPTG , Regulating axon branch stability : the role of P190 RhoGAP in re - and harvested as previously described ( Littleton et al . , 1998 ) . GST , pressing a retraction signaling pathway . Cell 107 , 195 – 207 . SH3a - GST , and SH3b - GST immobilized on glutathione - Sepharose Bogdan , S . , and Klambt , C . ( 2003 ) . Kette regulates actin dynamics beads were incubated with Drosophila head homogenate at 4 (cid:6) C for and genetically interacts with Wave and Wasp . Development 130 , 3 hr in Tris - saline buffer containing either 2 mM EGTA or 1 mM 4427 – 4437 . calcium . The beads were pelleted by centrifugation and washed Brose , K . , Bland , K . S . , Wang , K . H . , Arnott , D . , Henzel , W . , Goodman , three times with Tris Saline buffer containing EGTA or calcium . C . S . , Tessier - Lavigne , M . , and Kidd , T . ( 1999 ) . Slit proteins bind Proteinsweresolubilized byboilinginSDSsample buffer , andequal Robo receptors and have an evolutionarily conserved role in repul - fractions were subjected to SDS - PAGE , immunoblotting , and ECL . sive axon guidance . Cell 96 , 795 – 806 . Anti - Wsp antiserum was used at 1 : 1000 dilution . Caron , E . ( 2002 ) . Regulation of Wiskott - Aldrich syndrome protein and related molecules . Curr . Opin . Cell Biol . 14 , 82 – 87 . Yeast Two - Hybrid Assay Chiba , A . ( 1999 ) . Early development of the Drosophila neuromuscu - S . cerevisiae strain AH109 was cotransformed with Nwk baits in - larjunction : amodelforstudyingneuronalnetworksindevelopment . serted in - frame into the pAS2 - 1 vector ( Clontech ) and prey con - Int . Rev . Neurobiol . 43 , 1 – 24 . structs in the pACT2 vector . Four bait constructs were : full - length Dent , E . W . , andKalil , K . ( 2001 ) . Axonbranchingrequiresinteractions Nwk , an 598 bp SmaI restriction fragment that includes only the 5 (cid:11) between dynamic microtubules and actin filaments . J . Neurosci . FCH domain , an 1107 bp BamHI fragment that includes the FCH 21 , 9757 – 9769 . and ARNEY domains , or a 1 . 5 kb construct that includes both SH3 domains and the remaining 3 (cid:11) ORF . We tested two full - length Wsp DiAntonio , A . , andSchwarz , T . L . ( 1994 ) . Theeffectonsynapticphysiol - preys ; they were alternate splice forms that differed only the initial ogy of synaptotagmin mutations in Drosophila . Neuron 12 , 909 – 920 . 40 amino acids : either MRRKLKTLN or MSSGMRSQDGPRAKV Endris , V . , Wogatzky , B . , Leimer , U . , Bartsch , D . , Zatyka , M . , Latif , NAASTLLTQEENEAVFKLLGKKCQTLN . Allpossiblecombinationsof F . , Maher , E . R . , Tariverdian , G . , Kirsch , S . , Karch , D . , and Rappold , bait and prey were tested . Only colonies cotransformed with Nwk G . A . ( 2002 ) . ThenovelRho - GTPaseactivatinggeneMEGAP / srGAP3 SH3 domains and either Wsp construct yielded strong growth on has a putative role in severe mental retardation . Proc . Natl . Acad . ALT (cid:2) and HLT (cid:2) plates and activated transcription of the (cid:12) - gal re - Sci . USA 99 , 11754 – 11759 . porter gene . Transformation and growth was performed according Fan , X . , Labrador , J . P . , Hing , H . , andBashaw , G . J . ( 2003 ) . Slit stimu - to Clontech Matchmaker manual . lation recruits Dock and Pak to the roundabout receptor and in - creases Rac activity to regulate axon repulsion at the CNS midline . Acknowledgments Neuron 40 , 113 – 127 . Fankhauser , C . , Reymond , A . , Cerutti , L . , Utzig , S . , Hofmann , K . , We thank Robert Kreber for help with genetic analysis , Richard and Simanis , V . ( 1995 ) . The S . pombe cdc15 gene is a key element Ffrench - Constant for providing cosmids , Eyal Schejter for providing in the reorganization of F - actin at mitosis . Cell 82 , 435 – 444 . wsp mutants and antibodies , Sean Carroll and Steve Paddock for Fischer , M . , Kaech , S . , Knutti , D . , and Matus , A . ( 1998 ) . Rapid actin - use of and assistance with confocal microsopy , Ling Ling Ho for based plasticity in dendritic spines . Neuron 20 , 847 – 854 . help with yeast assays , and Katherine Kalil and Julie Simpson for helpful discussions . This work was supported by NIH grants Garrity , P . A . , Rao , Y . , Salecker , I . , McGlade , J . , Pawson , T . , and NS15390 to B . G . , NS43244 to J . T . L , GMS 5 T32GM08349 to I . P . C . Zipursky , L . S . ( 1996 ) . Drosophila photoreceptor axon guidance and through the UW - Madison Biotechnology Training Program , and F32 targeting requires the dreadlocks SH2 / SH3 adapter protein . Cell NS44722 - 01 to T . F . , and by the Human Frontiers Science Program 85 , 639 – 650 . Organization , the David and Lucille Packard Foundation , and the Gavin , A . C . , Bosche , M . , Krause , R . , Grandi , P . , Marzioch , M . , Bauer , Searle Scholars Program . J . T . L . is an Alfred P . Sloan Research Fel - A . , Schultz , J . , Rick , J . M . , Michon , A . M . , Cruciat , C . M . , et al . ( 2002 ) . low . This is paper number 3612 from the Laboratory of Genetics . Functional organization of the yeast proteome by systematic analy - sis of protein complexes . Nature 415 , 141 – 147 . Received : July 8 , 2003 Gertler , F . B . , Bennett , R . L . , Clark , M . J . , and Hoffmann , F . M . ( 1989 ) . Revised : November 13 , 2003 Drosophila abl tyrosine kinase in embryonic CNS axons : a role in Accepted : January 7 , 2004 axonogenesis is revealed through dosage - sensitive interactions Published : February 18 , 2004 with disabled . Cell 58 , 103 – 113 . Gungabissoon , R . A . , andBamburg , J . R . ( 2003 ) . Regulationofgrowth References cone actin dynamics by ADF / cofilin . J . Histochem . Cytochem . 51 , 411 – 420 . Ang , L . H . , Kim , J . , Stepensky , V . , and Hing , H . ( 2003 ) . Dock and Hall , A . ( 1998 ) . Rho GTPases and the actin cytoskeleton . Science Pak regulateolfactory axon pathfinding in Drosophila . Development 279 , 509 – 514 . 130 , 1307 – 1316 . Harden , N . , Lee , J . , Loh , H . Y . , Ong , Y . M . , Tan , I . , Leung , T . , Manser , Aspenstrom , P . ( 1997 ) . A Cdc42 target protein with homology to the E . , and Lim , L . ( 1996 ) . A Drosophila homolog oftheRac - andCdc42 - non - kinasedomainofFERhasapotentialroleinregulatingtheactin activated serine / threonine kinase Pak is a potential focal adhesion cytoskeleton . Curr . Biol . 7 , 479 – 487 . andfocalcomplexproteinthatcolocalizeswithdynamicactinstruc - tures . Mol . Cell . Biol . 16 , 1896 – 1908 . Atkinson , N . S . , Robertson , G . A . , and Ganetzky , B . ( 1991 ) . A compo - nent of calcium - activated potassium channels encoded by the Dro - Higgs , H . N . , and Pollard , T . D . ( 2001 ) . Regulation of actin filament sophila slo locus . Science 253 , 551 – 555 . network formation through ARP2 / 3 complex : activation by a diverse array of proteins . Annu . Rev . Biochem . 70 , 649 – 676 . Atwood , H . L . , Govind , C . K . , and Wu , C . F . ( 1993 ) . Differential ultra - structure of synaptic terminals on ventral longitudinal abdominal Hing , H . , Xiao , J . , Harden , N . , Lim , L . , and Zipursky , S . L . ( 1999 ) . muscles in Drosophila larvae . J . Neurobiol . 24 , 1008 – 1024 . Pak functions downstream of Dock to regulate photoreceptor axon guidance in Drosophila . Cell 97 , 853 – 863 . Banzai , Y . , Miki , H . , Yamaguchi , H . , andTakenawa , T . ( 2000 ) . Essen - tialroleofNeuralWiscottAldrich Syndromeproteininneuriteexten - Irie , F . , andYamaguchi , Y . ( 2002 ) . EphBreceptors regulate dendritic Nwk and Wasp Regulate Synaptic Growth 533 spine development via intersectin , Cdc42 and N - Wasp . Nat . Neu - of the coding sequences of unidentified human genes . XI . The com - plete sequences of 100 new cDNA clones from brain which code rosci . 5 , 1117 – 1118 . for large proteins in vitro . DNA Res . 5 , 277 – 286 . Jia , X . X . , Gorczyca , M . , and Budnik , V . ( 1993 ) . Ultrastructure of neu - romuscular junctions in Drosophila : comparison of wild type and Negishi , M . , andKatoh , H . ( 2002 ) . RhofamilyGTPasesaskeyregula - mutants with increased excitability . J . Neurobiol . 24 , 1025 – 1044 . tors for neuronal network formation . J . Biochem . ( Tokyo ) 132 , 157 – 166 . Johansen , J . , Halpern , M . E . , Johansen , K . M . , and Keshishian , H . ( 1989a ) . Stereotypicmorphologyofglutamatergicsynapsesoniden - Newsome , T . P . , Schmidt , S . , Dietzl , G . , Keleman , K . , Asling , B . , tified muscle cells of Drosophila larvae . J . Neurosci . 9 , 710 – 725 . Debant , A . , and Dickson , B . J . ( 2000 ) . Trio combines with dock to regulate Pak activity during photoreceptor axon pathfinding in Dro - Johansen , J . , Halpern , M . E . , and Keshishian , H . ( 1989b ) . Axonal sophila . Cell 101 , 283 – 294 . guidance and the development of muscle fiber - specific innervation in Drosophila embryos . J . Neurosci . 9 , 4318 – 4332 . Peck , J . , Douglas , G . , 4th , Wu , C . H . , andBurbelo , P . D . ( 2002 ) . Human RhoGAP domain - containing proteins : structure , function and evolu - Keshishian , H . , Broadie , K . , Chiba , A . , and Bate , M . ( 1996 ) . The tionary relationships . FEBS Lett . 528 , 27 – 34 . Drosophila neuromuscular junction : a model system for studying synaptic development and function . Annu . Rev . Neurosci . 19 , Pennetta , G . , Hiesinger , P . , Fabian - Fine , R . , Meinertzhagen , I . , and 545 – 575 . Bellen , H . ( 2002 ) . Drosophila VAP - 33A directs bouton formation at neuromuscular junctions in a dosage - dependent manner . Neuron Kidd , T . , Bland , K . S . , and Goodman , C . S . ( 1999 ) . Slit is the midline 35 , 291 – 306 . repellent for the robo receptor in Drosophila . Cell 96 , 785 – 794 . Qualmann , B . , and Kessels , M . M . ( 2002 ) . Endocytosis and the cy - Koh , Y . H . , Gramates , L . S . , and Budnik , V . ( 2000 ) . Drosophila larval toskeleton . Int . Rev . Cytol . 220 , 93 – 144 . neuromuscular junction : molecular components and mechanisms underlying synaptic plasticity . Microsc . Res . Tech . 49 , 14 – 25 . Rivero - Lezcano , O . M . , Marcilla , A . , Sameshima , J . H . , and Robbins , K . C . ( 1995 ) . Wiskott - Aldrichsyndrome proteinphysically associates Kuromi , H . , and Kidokoro , Y . ( 1998 ) . Two distinct pools of synaptic withNckthrough Srchomology3domains . Mol . Cell . Biol . 15 , 5725 – vesicles in single presynaptic boutons in a temperature - sensitive 5731 . Drosophila mutant , shibire . Neuron 20 , 917 – 925 . Kwiatkowski , A . V . , Gertler , F . B . , and Loureiro , J . J . ( 2003 ) . Function Rohatgi , R . , Ma , L . , Miki , H . , Lopez , M . , Kirchhausen , T . , Takenawa , and regulation of Ena / VASP proteins . Trends Cell Biol . 13 , 386 – 392 . T . , and Kirschner , M . W . ( 1999 ) . The interaction between N - Wasp and the Arp2 / 3 complex links Cdc42 - dependent signals to actin Lendvai , B . , Stern , E . A . , Chen , B . , and Svoboda , K . ( 2000 ) . Experi - assembly . Cell 97 , 221 – 231 . ence - dependent plasticity of dendritic spines in the developing rat barrel cortex in vivo . Nature 404 , 876 – 881 . Rohrbough , J . , Pinto , S . , Mihalek , R . M . , Tully , T . , and Broadie , K . ( 1999 ) . Latheo , a Drosophila gene involved in learning , regulates Li , J . , and Schwarz , T . L . ( 1999 ) . Genetic evidence for an equilibrium functional synaptic plasticity . Neuron 23 , 55 – 70 . between docked and undocked vesicles . Philos . Trans . R . Soc . Lond . B Biol . Sci . 354 , 299 – 306 . Roos , J . , Hummel , T . , Ng , N . , Klambt , C . , and Davis , G . W . ( 2000 ) . Drosophila Futsch regulates synaptic tubule organization and is Li , H . S . , Chen , J . H . , Wu , W . , Fagaly , T . , Zhou , L . , Yuan , W . , Dupuis , necessary for synaptic growth . Neuron 26 , 371 – 382 . S . , Jiang , Z . H . , Nash , W . , Gick , C . , et al . ( 1999 ) . Vertebrate slit , a secreted ligand for the transmembrane protein roundabout , is a Schafer , D . A . ( 2002 ) . Coupling actin dynamics and membrane dy - repellent for olfactory bulb axons . Cell 96 , 807 – 818 . namics during endocytosis . Curr . Opin . Cell Biol . 14 , 76 – 81 . Li , W . , Fan , J . , and Woodley , D . T . ( 2001 ) . Nck / Dock : an adapter Schlessinger , J . ( 1994 ) . SH2 / SH3 signaling proteins . Curr . Opin . between cell surface receptors and the actin cytoskeleton . Onco - Genet . Dev . 4 , 25 – 30 . gene 20 , 6403 – 6417 . Schmidt , A . , and Hall , A . ( 2002 ) . Guanine nucleotide exchange fac - Liebl , E . C . , Forsthoefel , D . J . , Franco , L . S . , Sample , S . H . , Hess , J . E . , tors for Rho GTPases : turning on the switch . Genes Dev . 16 , 1587 – Cowger , J . A . , Chandler , M . P . , Shupert , A . M . , and Seeger , M . A . 1609 . ( 2000 ) . Dosage - sensitive , reciprocal genetic interactions between Schuster , C . M . , Davis , G . W . , Fetter , R . D . , and Goodman , C . S . the Abl tyrosine kinase and the putative GEF trio reveal trio’s role ( 1996a ) . Geneticdissection ofstructural andfunctional components in axon pathfinding . Neuron 26 , 107 – 118 . of synaptic plasticity I . Fasciclin II controls synaptic stabilization Littleton , J . T . , Bellen , H . J . , and Perin , M . S . ( 1993 ) . Expression of and growth . Neuron 17 , 641 – 654 . synaptotagmin in Drosophila reveals transport and localization of Schuster , C . M . , Davis , G . W . , Fetter , R . D . , and Goodman , C . S . synaptic vesicles to the synapse . Development 118 , 1077 – 1088 . ( 1996b ) . Geneticdissectionofstructuralandfunctionalcomponents Littleton , J . T . , Chapman , E . R . , Kreber , R . , Garment , M . B . , Carlson , of synaptic plasticity . II . Fasciclin II controls presynaptic structural S . D . , andGanetzky , B . ( 1998 ) . Temperature - sensitiveparalyticmuta - plasticity . Neuron 17 , 655 – 667 . tions demonstrate that synaptic exocytosis requires SNARE com - Skoble , J . , Auerbuch , V . , Goley , E . D . , Welch , M . D . , and Portnoy , plex assembly and disassembly . Neuron 21 , 401 – 413 . D . A . ( 2001 ) . Pivotal role of VASP in Arp2 / 3 complex - mediated actin Luo , L . ( 2002 ) . Actincytoskeletonregulationinneuronalmorphogen - nucleation , actin branch - formation , and Listeria monocytogenes esis and structural plasticity . Annu . Rev . Cell Dev . Biol . 18 , 601 – 635 . motility . J . Cell Biol . 155 , 89 – 100 . Mayer , B . J . ( 2001 ) . SH3 domains : complexity in moderation . J . Cell Sone , M . , Hoshino , M . , Suzuki , E . , Kuroda , S . , Kaibuchi , K . , Naka - Sci . 114 , 1253 – 1263 . goshi , H . , Saigo , K . , Nabeshima , Y . , and Hama , C . ( 1997 ) . Still life , Merrifield , C . J . , Feldman , M . E . , Wan , L . , and Almers , W . ( 2002 ) . Im - a protein in synaptic terminals of Drosophila homologous to GDP - aging actin and dynamin recruitment during invagination of single GTP exchangers . Science 275 , 543 – 547 . clathrin - coated pits . Nat . Cell Biol . 4 , 691 – 698 . Sone , M . , Suzuki , E . , Hoshino , M . , Hou , D . , Kuromi , H . , Fukata , Meyer , G . , and Feldman , E . L . ( 2002 ) . Signaling mechanisms that M . , Kuroda , S . , Kaibuchi , K . , Nabeshima , Y . , and Hama , C . ( 2000 ) . regulate actin - based motility processes in the nervous system . J . Synaptic development is controlled in the periactive zones of Dro - Neurochem . 83 , 490 – 503 . sophila synapses . Development 127 , 4157 – 4168 . Miki , H . , Yamaguchi , H . , Suetsugu , S . , and Takenawa , T . ( 2000 ) . Song , W . , Ranjan , R . , Dawson - Scully , K . , Bronk , P . , Marin , L . , Ser - IRSp53 is an essential intermediate between Rac and WAVE in the oude , L . , Lin , Y . J . , Nie , Z . , Atwood , H . L . , Benzer , S . , and Zinsmaier , regulation of membrane ruffling . Nature 408 , 732 – 735 . K . E . ( 2002 ) . Presynapticregulationofneurotransmissionin Drosoph - ila by the g protein - coupled receptor methuselah . Neuron 36 , Mullins , R . D . ( 2000 ) . HowWasp - familyproteinsandtheArp2 / 3com - 105 – 119 . plex convert intracellular signals into cytoskeletal structures . Curr . Opin . Cell Biol . 12 , 91 – 96 . Soulard , A . , Lechler , T . , Spiridonov , V . , Shevchenko , A . , Shevchenko , A . , Li , R . , and Winsor , B . ( 2002 ) . Saccharomyces cerevisiae Bzz1p Nagase , T . , Ishikawa , K . , Suyama , M . , Kikuno , R . , Miyajima , N . , Ta - naka , A . , Kotani , H . , Nomura , N . , and Ohara , O . ( 1998 ) . Prediction is implicated with type I myosins in actin patch polarization and is Neuron534 able to recruit actin - polymerizing machinery in vitro . Mol . Cell . Biol . 22 , 7889 – 7906 . Takenawa , T . , and Miki , H . ( 2001 ) . Wasp and WAVE family proteins : key molecules for rapid rearrangement of cortical actin filaments and cell movement . J . Cell Sci . 114 , 1801 – 1809 . Tautz , D . , and Pfeifle , C . ( 1989 ) . A non - radioactive in situ hybridiza - tion method for the localization of specific RNAs in Drosophila em - bryos reveals translational control of the segmentation gene hunch - back . Chromosoma 98 , 81 – 85 . Titus , S . A . , Warmke , J . W . , and Ganetzky , B . ( 1997 ) . The Drosophila erg K (cid:8) channel polypeptide is encoded by the seizure locus . J . Neurosci . 17 , 875 – 881 . Wan , H . I . , DiAntonio , A . , Fetter , R . D . , Bergstrom , K . , Strauss , R . , and Goodman , C . S . ( 2000 ) . Highwire regulates synaptic growth in Drosophila . Neuron 26 , 313 – 329 . Weaver , A . M . , Young , M . E . , Lee , W . L . , and Cooper , J . A . ( 2003 ) . Inte - gration of signals to the Arp2 / 3 complex . Curr . Opin . Cell Biol . 15 , 23 – 30 . Weed , S . A . , andParsons , J . T . ( 2001 ) . Cortactin : couplingmembrane dynamics to cortical actin assembly . Oncogene 20 , 6418 – 6434 . Wills , Z . , Bateman , J . , Korey , C . A . , Comer , A . , and Van Vactor , D . ( 1999a ) . The tyrosine kinase Abl and its substrate enabled collabo - rate with the receptor phosphatase Dlar to control motor axon guid - ance . Neuron 22 , 301 – 312 . Wills , Z . , Marr , L . , Zinn , K . , Goodman , C . S . , and Van Vactor , D . ( 1999b ) . Profilin and the Abl tyrosine kinase are required for motor axon outgrowth in the Drosophila embryo . Neuron 22 , 291 – 299 . Wong , K . , Ren , X . R . , Huang , Y . Z . , Xie , Y . , Liu , G . , Saito , H . , Tang , H . , Wen , L . , Brady - Kalnay , S . M . , Mei , L . , et al . ( 2001 ) . Signal trans - duction in neuronal migration : roles of GTPase activating proteins and the small GTPase Cdc42 in the Slit - Robo pathway . Cell 107 , 209 – 221 . Worby , C . A . , Simonson - Leff , N . , Clemens , J . C . , Kruger , R . P . , Muda , M . , and Dixon , J . E . ( 2001 ) . The sorting nexin , DSH3PX1 , connects the axonal guidance receptor , Dscam , to the actin cytoskeleton . J . Biol . Chem . 276 , 41782 – 41789 . Wu , C . F . , Ganetzky , B . , Jan , L . Y . , and Jan , Y . N . ( 1978 ) . A Drosophila mutant with a temperature - sensitive block in nerve conduction . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA 75 , 4047 – 4051 . Yuan , L . L . , and Ganetzky , B . ( 1999 ) . A glial - neuronal signaling path - way revealed by mutations in a neurexin - related protein . Science 283 , 1343 – 1345 . Zalevsky , J . , Lempert , L . , Kranitz , H . , andMullins , R . D . ( 2001 ) . Differ - ent WASP family proteins stimulate different Arp2 / 3 complex - dependent actin - nucleating activities . Curr . Biol . 11 , 1903 – 1913 . Zallen , J . A . , Cohen , Y . , Hudson , A . M . , Cooley , L . , Wieschaus , E . , and Schejter , E . D . ( 2002 ) . SCAR is a primary regulator of Arp2 / 3 - dependent morphological events in Drosophila . J . Cell Biol . 156 , 689 – 701 . Zhong , Y . , and Wu , C . F . ( 1991 ) . Altered synaptic plasticity in Dro - sophila memory mutants with a defective cyclic AMP cascade . Sci - ence 251 , 198 – 201 . Zito , K . , Parnas , D . , Fetter , R . D . , Isacoff , E . Y . , and Goodman , C . S . ( 1999 ) . Watching a synapse grow : noninvasive confocal imaging of synaptic growth in Drosophila . Neuron 22 , 719 – 729 .