Specialists and Generalists : Equilibrium Skill Acquisition Decisions in Problem - solving Populations Katharine A . Anderson b , ∗ a Tepper School of Business , Carnegie Mellon University , Pittsburgh , PA 15213 , USA Abstract Many organizations rely on the skills of innovative individuals to create value , including academic and government institutions , think tanks , and knowledge - based ﬁrms . Roughly speaking , workers in these ﬁelds can be divided into two categories : specialists , who have a deep knowledge of a single area , and gener - alists , who have knowledge in a wide variety of areas . In this paper , I examine an individual’s choice to be a specialist or generalist . My model addresses two questions : ﬁrst , under what conditions does it make sense for an individual to acquire skills in multiple areas , and second , are the decisions made by individu - als optimal from an organizational perspective ? I ﬁnd that when problems are single - dimensional , and disciplinary boundaries are open , all workers will spe - cialize . However , when there are barriers to working on problems in other ﬁelds , then there is a tradeoﬀ between the depth of the specialist and the wider scope of problems the generalist has available . When problems are simple , having a wide variety of problems makes it is rational to be a generalist . As these problems become more diﬃcult , though , depth wins out over scope , and workers again tend to specialize . However , that decision is not necessarily socially optimal – on a societal level , we would prefer that some workers remain generalists . Keywords : Skill acquisition , specialization , jack - of - all - trades , problem solving , knowledge based production , human capital JEL Codes : J24 , O31 , D00 , M53 , I23 ∗ Corresponding author : + 1 - ( 412 ) 427 - 1904 Email address : andersok @ andrew . cmu . edu ( Katharine A . Anderson ) Preprint submitted to Journal of Economic Behavior and Organization April 28 , 2013 a r X i v : 1 1 08 . 4429v1 [ phy s i c s . s o c - ph ] 2 2 A ug 2011 Thanks to Scott Page and Ross O’Connell . This work was supported by the NSF and the Rackham Graduate School , University of Michigan . Computing resources supplied by the Center for the Study of Complex Systems , University of Michigan . 2 Specialists and Generalists : Equilibrium Skill Acquisition Decisions in Problem - solving Populations Katharine A . Anderson b , ∗ b Tepper School of Business , Carnegie Mellon University , Pittsburgh , PA 15213 , USA 1 . Introduction Many organizations rely on the skills of innovative individuals to create value . Examples include academic institutions , government organizations , think tanks , and knowledge - based ﬁrms . Workers in these organizations apply a variety of skills to in order to solve diﬃcult problems : architects design buildings , bio - chemists develop new drugs , aeronautical engineers create bigger and better rockets , software developers create new applications , and industrial designers create better packaging materials . Their success – and thus the success of the or - ganizations they work for – is dependent on the particular set of skills that they have at their disposal , but in most cases , the decision of which skills to acquire is made by individuals , rather than organizations . The perception is that these workers choose to become more specialized as the problems they face become more complex ( Strober ( 2006 ) ) . This perception has generated a countervailing tide of money and institutional attention focused on promoting interdisciplinary eﬀorts . However , we have very little real understanding of what drives an indi - vidual’s decision to specialize . Roughly speaking , workers in knowledge - based ﬁelds can be divided into two categories : specialists , who have a deep knowledge of a single area , and general - ists , who have knowledge in a wide variety of areas . 1 In this paper , I consider an ∗ Corresponding author : + 1 - ( 412 ) 427 - 1904 Email address : andersok @ andrew . cmu . edu ( Katharine A . Anderson ) 1 This dichotomy is often summed up in the literature via a metaphor used by Isaiah Berlin Preprint submitted to Journal of Economic Behavior and Organization April 28 , 2013 individual’s decision to be a specialist or a generalist , looking speciﬁcally at two previously unaddressed questions . First , under what conditions does it make sense for an individual to acquire skills in multiple areas ? And second , are the decisions made by individuals optimal from an organizational perspective ? Most of the work done on specialists and generalists is focused on the roles the two play in the economy . Collins ( 2001 ) suggests that specialists are more likely to found successful companies . Lazear ( 2004 and 2005 ) , on the other hand , suggests that the successful entrepreneurs should be generalists – a theory supported by Astebro and Thompson ( 2011 ) , who show that entrepreneurs tend to have a wider range of experiences than wage workers . Tetlock ( 1998 ) ﬁnds that generalists tend to be better forecasters than specialists . In contrast , a wide variety of medical studies ( see , for example , Hillner et al ( 2000 ) and Nallamothu et al ( 2006 ) ) , show that outcomes tend to be better when patients are seen by specialists , rather than general practitioners . However , none of this work considers the decision that individuals make with respect to being a specialist or generalist . While some people will always become generalists due to personal taste , the question remains : is it ever rational to do so in the absence of a preference for interdisciplinarity ? And is the decision that the individual makes optimal from a societal perspective ? There is evidence that being a generalist is costly . Adamic et al ( 2010 ) show that in a wide variety of contexts , including academic research , patents , and contributions to wikipedia , the contributions of individuals with greater focus tend to have greater impact , indicating that there is a tradeoﬀ between the number of ﬁelds an individual can master , and her depth of knowledge in each . This should not be surprising . Each of us has a limited capacity for learning new things – by focusing on a narrow ﬁeld of study , specialists are able to concentrate in an essay on Leo Tolstoy : “The fox knows many things , but the hedgehog knows one big thing” ( Berlin ( 1953 ) ) In other words , foxes are generalists with a wide variety of tools to apply to problems ( albeit sometimes inexpertly ) and hedgehogs are specialists who have a single tool that they can apply very well . 4 their eﬀorts and maximize the use of that limited capacity , while generalists are forced to spread themselves more thinly in the pursuit of a wider range of knowledge . In the language of economics , generalists pay a ﬁxed cost for each new ﬁeld of study they pursue , in the form of eﬀort expended learning new jargon , establishing new social contacts in a ﬁeld , and becoming familiar with new literatures . Given that it is costly to diversify ones skills , the decision to become a generalist can be diﬃcult to rationalize . In this paper , I examine model in which workers decide whether to be specialists or generalists to explore conditions under which it is rational for an individual to choose to be a generalist . I show that when problems are single - dimensional and there are no barriers to working on problems in other disciplines , the equilibrium population contains only specialists . However , when there are barriers to working on problems in other ﬁelds ( eg : communication barriers or institutional barriers ) then there is a tradeoﬀ between the depth of study of the specialist and the wide scope of problems that the generalist can work on . When problems are relatively simple , generalists dominate because their breadth of experience gives them a wider variety of problems to work on . But as problems become more diﬃcult , depth wins out over scope , and workers tend to specialize . I then show that the equilibrium decisions reached by individuals are not necessarily socially optimal . As problems become harder , individual workers are more likely to specialize , but as a society , we would prefer that some indi - viduals remain generalists . This disconnect reﬂects the fact that from a social perspective , we would prefer to have researchers apply the widest possible va - riety of skills to the problems we face , but individuals internalize the cost of obtaining those skills . Thus , the model predicts that some populations will suf - fer from an undersupply of generalists . In such populations , it would be socially beneﬁcial to subsidize the acquisition of skills in broad subject areas . Finally , I consider an extension of the model in which problems have multiple parts . This allows me to consider problems that are explicitly multidisciplinary – that is , when diﬀerent parts of a problem are best addressed using skills from 5 diﬀerent disciplines . I show when problems are multidisciplinary , it is possible to rationalize being a generalist , even when there are no disciplinary boundaries . In particular , when there is a large advantage to applying the best tool for the job , being a generalist is optimal . 2 . Model I construct a two period model . In period 1 , the workers face a distribution of problems and each worker chooses a set of skills . In period 2 , a problem is drawn from the distribution , and the workers attempt to solve it using the skills they acquired in period 1 . I will solve for the equilibrium choice of skills in period 1 . Let S be the set of all possible skills . 2 The skills are arranged into 2 dis - ciplines , d 1 and d 2 , each with K skills , s 1 d . . . s Kd . An example with six skills arranged into two disciplines is shown in Figure 2 . 1 . A specialist is a person who chooses skills within a single discipline . A generalist is a person who chooses some skills from both disciplines . A problem , y , is a task faced by the workers in the model . A skill is a piece of knowledge that can be applied to the problem in an attempt to solve it . Each skill s kd ∈ S has either a high probability ( H ) or a low probability ( L ) of solving the problem . I will deﬁne a problem by the matrix of probabilities that each skill will solve the problem . That is , y =   y 11 y 12 . . . . . . y K 1 y K 2   where y kd = H if skill k in discipline d has a high probability of solving the problem and L if it has a low probability of solving the problem . So , for example , if there are two 2 Skills are deﬁned as bits of knowledge , tools , and techniques useful for solving problems and not easily acquired in the short run . See Anderson ( 2010 ) for a model with a similar treatment of skills . 6 Discipline 1 ( d 1 ) s 11 s 31 s 21 Discipline 2 ( d 2 ) s 12 s 32 s 22 Figure 2 . 1 : Two disciplines , each with three skills . disciplines , each with three skills , a problem might be y =   L H H H H L   meaning that two of the skills in each discipline have a high probability of solving the problem , and one skill in each discipline has a low probability of solving the problem . Deﬁne h ≡ 1 − H and l ≡ 1 − L . The mechanics of the model are as follows . In period 1 , the workers , i 1 . . . i N , each choose a set of skills A i ⊂ S . In period 2 , the workers attempt to solve a problem using those skills . I will assume that workers have a capacity for learning skills , which limits the number of skills they can obtain . In the current context , I will assume that all workers all have the same capacity for learning new skills , and that all skills are equally costly to obtain . 3 Let M ∈ Z + represent an individual’s capacity for new skills and let q = 1 be the cost of acquiring a 3 The case where workers have diﬀerent capacities would obviously be an interesting exten - sion , as would the case where diﬀerent skills had diﬀerent costs . 7 new skill . I assume that workers pay a ﬁxed cost , c , for learning skills in a new discipline . That is , a worker pays 1 + c to obtain the ﬁrst skill in a discipline , and q = 1 for every additional skill in that discipline . For simplicity , I will assume that M = K + c . This assumption means that a specialist can obtain all K skills in one discipline , and a generalist can obtain a total of K − c skills spread over the two disciplines . Although workers in period 1 do not know the particular problem they will face in period 2 , they do know the distribution , ∆ , from which those problems will be drawn . In particular , they know the probability that each skill will be an H skill or an L skill . For simplicity , I will make two assumptions about the distribution of problems : 1 ) skills are independent , meaning that the probability that skill s kd is an H skill is independent of the probability that skill s k (cid:48) d (cid:48) is an H skill 4 and 2 ) skills are symmetric within disciplines , meaning that every skill in a discipline has an equal probability of being an H skill . 5 This knowledge of the distribution of problems can be translated into knowl - edge about individual skills . Let δ d be the probability that a skill in discipline d is an H skill – that is , δ d = E [ Prob ( y kd = H ) ] where the expectation is taken over the distribution of problems , ∆ . The vector of probabilities in the two disciplines , δ = [ δ 1 , δ 2 ] , is known ex ante . Workers choose their skills in period 1 to maximize their expected probability of solving the problem in period 2 . A Nash equilibrium of this game is a choice of skill set for each worker in the population , A = { A 1 . . . A N } , such that no worker has an incentive to unilaterally change her skill set , given the distribution of problems . 4 This assumption means that skills must be applied more or less independently . That is , it cannot be the case that skills are used in combination to solve problems , or that skills build on one another . 5 This assumption simpliﬁes the decision making process for generalists . When skills are symmetric within a discipline , a generalist’s skill acquisition decision is simply a division of her skills across the two disciplines – within a discipline , she can choose her skills at random . 8 3 . Results : Specialization and Barriers Between Disciplines In this section , I consider two questions . The ﬁrst question concerns indi - vidual decision - making – what is the equilibrium skill acquisition decision of the workers ? Under what conditions do individuals decide to generalize ? The sec - ond question concerns the optimality of that population from an organizational perspective . Is the equilibrium population optimal ? Note that in order to simplify the exposition , I will consider a special case where all disciplines are equally useful in expectation – that is , where δ 1 = δ 2 = δ . It is straightforward to generalize the results to a case where δ 1 (cid:54) = δ 2 ( see Appendix for the details ) . 3 . 1 . Equilibrium Skill Populations with No Barriers between Disciplines Given that generalists pay a signiﬁcant penalty for diversifying their skills , it is diﬃcult to explain the existence of generalists in the population . Theorem 1 states that if workers can work on any available problem , then there will be no generalists in equilibrium . Theorem 1 . If skills are independent and symmetric within discipline , and workers can work on any available problem , then no worker will ever want to be a generalist and the equilibrium population will contain only specialists . Proof . The ex ante probability that a specialist in discipline i will be able to solve a problem from a given distribution , ∆ , is E [ P ( S i ) ] = (cid:88) y Prob ( one of skills solves y ) ∗ ∆ ( y ) = (cid:88) y ( 1 − Prob ( none do ) ) ∗ ∆ ( y ) = 1 − K (cid:88) n i = 0 h n i l K − n i (cid:18) K n i (cid:19) δ n i ( 1 − δ ) K − n i = 1 − ( δh + ( 1 − δ ) l ) K where n i is the number of H skills in discipline i in a particular problem , y . 9 Now , consider a generalist who is spreading his skills across both disciplines . The ex ante probability that a generalist with x skills in discipline 1 and K − c − x skills in discipline 2 will solve a problem from a given distribution , ∆ , is E [ P ( G ) ] = 1 − (cid:88) y Prob ( none of skills solve y ) ∗ ∆ ( y ) = 1 − ( δh + ( 1 − δ ) l ) K − c 1 − ( δh + ( 1 − δ ) l ) K > 1 − ( δh + ( 1 − δ ) l ) K − c , and thus no individual will ever be a generalist in two disciplines . ( See Appendix for the same result with δ 1 (cid:54) = δ 2 ) Note that this result generalizes to a case with more than two disciplines . Generalists do worse as they add skills in additional disciplines , so this result holds regardless of the number of disciplines a generalist spreads himself across . 3 . 2 . Equilibrium Skill Populations with Barriers between Disciplines Theorem 1 clearly indicates that when workers can solve problems in other ﬁelds , there is no advantage to being a generalist . However , in practice , there may be many barriers between disciplines that prevent a worker in one disci - pline from solving problems in another . Cultural or institutional barriers may prevent her from working on questions in other disciplines , either because re - sources are not forthcoming or because it is diﬃcult to get compensated for work in other areas . Communication barriers are also a signiﬁcant impediment to interdisciplinary work – although a software engineers may have skills useful in solving user interface problems , ﬁeld - speciﬁc jargon may make it diﬃcult for her to communicate her insights . If communication barriers are severe enough , she may even have diﬃculty understanding what open questions exist . Finally , a person in one ﬁeld may simply be unaware of problems that exist in other ﬁelds , even if her skills would be useful in solving them . Barriers to working on problems outside ones discipline give us the ability to talk about the “scope” of a worker’s inquiry . Generalists are able to work on a broader set of problems , and thus their scope is larger than that of specialists . 10 There is therefore a tradeoﬀ between the depth of skill gained through special - ization and the scope gained through generalization . A specialist has a depth of skill that gives her a good chance of solving the limited set of problems in the area she specializes in . Generalists have a limited number of skills , but are able to apply those skills to a much broader set of problems . Thus , the choice between being a specialist and a generalist can be framed in terms of a tradeoﬀ between the depth of one’s skill set and scope of one’s problem set . More formally , choice of whether to specialize will depend on two parameters . First , let π ( δ , h , l ) ≡ ( δh + ( 1 − δ ) l ) be the expected probability that a skill won’t be able to solve a problem drawn from ∆ . When π is large , the probability that any one skill will solve the problem is very low . Thus , we can think of problems becoming more diﬃcult as π increases . Second , let φ be the fraction of all problems that occur in discipline 1 . When φ is very large or very small , most of the problems fall in one ﬁeld or another , limiting the value of increasing the scope of the problem set . These two parameters – φ and π – deﬁne a range in which workers will choose to generalize in equilibrium . This range is illustrated in Figure 3 . 1 . This di - agram illustrates the tradeoﬀ between depth and scope . When problems are easy to solve , scope is more valuable than depth . However , as π increases and problems become more diﬃcult , depth wins out over scope , and the range in which individuals choose to generalize shrinks . Theorem 2 summarizes these results . Theorem 2 . If skills are independent and symmetric within discipline , and there are barriers to working on problems in other disciplines , then workers will generalize if 1 − (cid:16) 1 − π K − c 1 − π K (cid:17) ≤ φ ≤ 1 − π K − c 1 − π K where φ is the fraction of problems assigned to discipline 1 . If φ > 1 − π K − c 1 − π K , then workers will all specialize in discipline 1 and if φ < 1 − (cid:16) 1 − π K − c 1 − π K (cid:17) then workers will all specialize in discipline 2 . Proof . In this case , the ex ante probability that a problem is solved by a special - ist is φ (cid:16) 1 − ( δh + ( 1 − δ ) l ) K (cid:17) for a specialist in discipline 1 and ( 1 − φ ) (cid:16) 1 − ( δh + ( 1 − δ ) l ) K (cid:17) 11 0 . 2 0 . 4 0 . 6 0 . 8 1 . 0 0 . 2 0 . 4 0 . 6 0 . 8 1 . 0 ! problems are harder problems are easier ϕ Generalists Specialists Specialists Figure 3 . 1 : Equilibrium skill acquisition decisions when k = 3 and c = 1 . for a specialist in discipline 2 . Since generalists can work on problems in both disciplines , their expected probability of solving the problem is 1 − ( δh + ( 1 − δ ) l ) K − c . A worker will generalize if E [ P ( S 1 ) ] < E [ P ( G ) ] and E [ P ( S 2 ) ] < E [ P ( G ) ] . The result follows immediately . ( See Appendix for the same result with δ 1 (cid:54) = δ 2 ) Note that the size of the regions in which workers specialize depends on how costly it is to diversify ones skills . As the ﬁxed cost of learning something in a new discipline increases ( c ↑ ) , the regions in which people specialize grow . 3 . 3 . Optimality of the Equilibrium In this section , I consider whether this distribution of specialists and gener - alists in the population is optimal , from a societal perspective . There is reason to believe that it would not be . From a societal standpoint , we would like to maximize the probability that someone manages to solve the problem . This means that as a society , we would prefer to have problem solvers apply as wide a range of skills as possible . But workers who diversify their skills obtain fewer 12 Generalists ! 0 1 Specialists ( d 2 ) Specialists ( d 1 ) Society Prefers Specialists ( d 1 ) Society Prefers Specialists ( d 2 ) Society Prefers Generalists Ranges in which generalists are under - provided Figure 3 . 2 : skills overall , which tends to make the individual want to specialize . The result of this disconnect between individual and social welfare is a range in which gen - eralists are under provided ( see Figure 3 . 2 ) . As problems become more diﬃcult , this region of suboptimality grows , as is illustrated in Figure 3 . 3 . Theorem 3 summarizes these results . Theorem 3 . If skills are independent and symmetric within discipline , and there are barriers to working on problems in other disciplines , then there is a range of values for φ ( the fraction of problems assigned to discipline 1 ) such that generalists are underprovided in the equilibrium population of problem solvers . In particular , generalists are underprovided when 1 − π K − c 1 − π K < φ < 1 − π N ( K − c ) 1 − π NK or 1 − 1 − π N ( K − c ) 1 − π NK < φ < 1 − 1 − π K − c 1 − π K . Proof . The probability that at least one of the N problem - solvers in the popu - lation solves the problem is 1 − Prob ( none of them do ) . If all of the individuals in the population are specialists in discipline 1 , then with probability φ , each specialist has a probability 1 − π K of solving the problem and π K of not solv - ing it . With probability 1 − φ , the problem is assigned to the other discipline , and no specialist solves it . Thus , the probability of someone in a population of 13 0 . 2 0 . 4 0 . 6 0 . 8 1 . 0 0 . 2 0 . 4 0 . 6 0 . 8 1 . 0 ! problems are harder problems are easier ϕ Workers generalize and it is optimal Workers specialize but generalists are socially optimal Workers specialize and it is optimal Figure 3 . 3 : Regions of social suboptimality for k = 3 , c = 1 , N = 10 discipline 1 specialists solving the problem is Prob ( one of N solve it ) = 1 − Prob ( none of N solve it ) = 1 − [ φProb ( none solve problem in d 1 ) + ( 1 − φ ) Prob ( none solve problem in d 2 ) ] = 1 − (cid:104) φProb ( one fails ) N + ( 1 − φ ) ∗ 1 (cid:105) = 1 − (cid:104) φ (cid:0) π K (cid:1) N + ( 1 − φ ) ∗ 1 (cid:105) = φ (cid:0) 1 − π KN (cid:1) On the other hand , if they are all generalists , then the probability of at least one solving the problem is Prob ( one of N solve it ) = 1 − Prob ( none of N solve it ) = 1 − (cid:0) π K − c (cid:1) N = 1 − π N ( K − c ) Society is better oﬀ with a population of generalists when 1 − π N ( K − c ) > φ (cid:0) 1 − π KN (cid:1) , which is true when φ < 1 − π N ( K − c ) 1 − π NK . However , there is a population of generalists when φ ≤ 1 − π K − c 1 − π K . It is always the case that 1 − π K − c 1 − π K ≤ 1 − π N ( K − c ) 1 − π NK . 14 So if 1 − π K − c 1 − π K < φ < 1 − π N ( K − c ) 1 − π NK , then society is better oﬀ with a population of generalists , but has a population of specialists . We can make a similar argument for specialists in discipline 2 . Society is bet - ter oﬀ with a population of generalists when 1 − π N ( K − c ) > ( 1 − φ ) (cid:0) 1 − π KN (cid:1) , which is true when φ > 1 − 1 − π N ( K − c ) 1 − π NK . However , there is a population of general - ists when φ > 1 − 1 − π K − c 1 − π K . It is always the case that 1 − 1 − π N ( K − c ) 1 − π NK ≤ 1 − 1 − π K − c 1 − π K . So if 1 − 1 − π N ( K − c ) 1 − π NK < φ < 1 − 1 − π K − c 1 − π K , then society is better oﬀ with a popu - lation of generalists , but has a population of specialists . ( See Appendix for the same result with δ 1 (cid:54) = δ 2 ) Note that the size of the regions of suboptimality will depend on the number of individuals in the population . As N increases , the suboptimal regions become larger . 4 . An Extension : Problems with Multiple Parts In the previous section , I showed that barriers to addressing problems in other disciplines can induce problem solvers to diversify their skills . In this sec - tion , I consider an extension of the previous model , which highlights a second scenario in which individuals can be incentivized to acquire skills in multiple disciplines : problems with multiple parts . As problems become increasingly complicated , they may be broken down into many diﬀerent sub - problems . Al - though in some cases , these subproblems may all be best addressed within a single discipline , in others , diﬀerent subproblems will be best addressed using diﬀerent skills . In this section , I show that when problems are multidisciplinary – that is , when diﬀerent parts of a problem are best addressed using diﬀerent disciplines – then a population of generalists can be sustained . 4 . 1 . Problems With Multiple Parts As in the previous model , skills in the set S are divided into two disciplines , d 1 and d 2 . Workers use their skills to address a problem , the nature of which is not known ex ante . They will choose to be a specialist or generalist in period 1 15 to maximize their chances of solving the problem in period 2 . But now , suppose each problem consists of two parts , y 1 and y 2 . In order to solve the problem , an individual must solve all parts of the problem . 6 Each part of the problem is addressed independently by the skills in each of the disciplines . Thus , much as before , we can deﬁne the parts of the problem by a matrix of probabilities that each skill will solve the problem . That is , y i =   y i 11 y i 12 . . . . . . y iK 1 y iK 2   where y ikd = H if skill k in discipline d has a high probability of solving part i and L if it has a low probability of solving part i . As in the previous section , I will assume that for each part of the problem , skills are independent ( Prob ( y ikd = H ) uncorrelated with Prob ( y ik (cid:48) d (cid:48) = H ) ) and skills are symmetric within disciplines ( Prob ( y ikd = H ) = Prob ( y ijd = H ) ) . As before , the probability that a given skill is an H skill is not known ex ante . However , the workers know the expected probability that a skill is an H skill . I will allow the expected probabilities to vary across parts of the problem – in other words , it is possible that a discipline will be more useful in solving one of the parts of the problem than in solving the other part of the problem . Let δ id be the probability that a skill from discipline d is an H skill for part i of the problem . That is , δ id = E (cid:2) Prob (cid:0) y ikd = H (cid:1)(cid:3) . The matrix δ =   δ 11 δ 21 δ 12 δ 22   describes a distribution of problems , ∆ , and is known ex ante . An entry in the i th column of that matrix is the vector of probabilities that a skill in each of the disciplines will be useful for solving part i of the problem . We can categorize the problems according to the relative usefulness of the two disciplines in the two parts of the problem . There are two categories for the problems : 1 . One discipline is as or more useful for both parts of the problem : δ i 1 ≥ δ i 2 ∀ i 2 . One discipline is more useful for part 1 and the other discipline is more 6 This is essentially an adaptation of Kremer’s O - ring Theory ( Kremer ( 1993 ) ) . 16 Category 2 : Each discipline useful for a different part Category 1 : One discipline is always as or more useful on all parts X X X X X X O O X X O O X X X O Part 1 Part 2 Discipline 1 Discipline 2 X X X X X O O X O X X O O X O X O O O O X O O O etc . . . Figure 4 . 1 : useful for part 2 : δ i 1 > δ i 2 and δ j 1 < δ j 2 These categories are illustrated in Figure 4 . 1 . If a problem falls into the ﬁrst category , then the results are similar to those obtained in Section 3 . In particular , if there are no barriers to working on problems in other disciplines , then all workers will specialize . If a problem falls into the second category , then the results do not resemble any of those already explored . Problems with multiple parts , each of which is best addressed within the context of a diﬀerent discipline , are often referred to as multidisciplinary . Generalists have an advantage in multidisciplinary problems , because they can apply diﬀerent types of skills to diﬀerent parts of a problem . For example , sup - pose a scientist is look at nerve conduction in an organism . That problem may have elements are are best addressed using biological tools , and other elements that are best addressed using physics tools . An individual with both biology and physics skills will have an advantage over someone who is forced to use ( for example ) physics skills to solve both parts of the problem . The below states that when problems are multidisciplinary , it can be rational to be a generalist , even in the absence of barriers to working in other ﬁelds . More formally , suppose that if a worker uses the “right” discipline for a part of a problem , then there is a probability δ 1 that a skill in that discipline is 17 useful ( δ 1 = Prob (cid:0) y ikd = H (cid:1) when d is the right discipline to use for part i of the problem ) . If she uses the “wrong” discipline , then there is a probability δ 0 that a skill in that discipline is useful ( δ 1 = Prob (cid:0) y ikd = H (cid:1) when d is the wrong discipline to use for part i of the problem ) . This is without loss of generality , because the only thing that makes a problem multidisciplinary is the ordering of the usefulness of the disciplines . Further , let π 1 = δ 1 h + ( 1 − δ 1 ) l and π 0 = δ 0 h + ( 1 − δ 0 ) l . These represent the probability that a skill in the right discipline will not solve a part of a problem and the probability that a skill in the wrong discipline will not solve part of the problem . Note that π 1 < π 0 . When the eﬃcacy of the two disciplines is very diﬀerent ( π 1 (cid:28) π 0 ) , then using the right skill for the job has a large eﬀect on the probability of solving the problem as a whole , and it will be rational to obtain skills in multiple disciplines . Figure 4 . 2 illustrates the region in which individuals choose to be generalists and specialists , and Theorem 4 summarizes the result . Theorem 4 . If skills are independent and symmetric within discipline , and problems multidisciplinary ( eg : δ =   δ 1 δ 0 δ 0 δ 1   with δ 1 > δ 0 ) then there is a set of values of π 1 = δ 1 h + ( 1 − δ 1 ) l and π 0 = δ 0 h + ( 1 − δ 0 ) l such that it is individually optimal for workers to be generalists , even when there are no barriers to solving problems in other ﬁelds . In particular , workers will become generalists when (cid:16) 1 − π K − c 2 1 π K − c 2 0 (cid:17) 2 > (cid:0) 1 − π K 1 (cid:1) (cid:0) 1 − π K 0 (cid:1) Proof . WLOG , consider the case where δ =   δ 1 δ 0 δ 0 δ 1   with δ 1 > δ 0 . A spe - cialist in discipline i will have K skills in discipline i . The expected probability that her skills will solve both parts of the problem is E [ P ( success on part 1 ) ] ∗ E [ P ( success on part 2 ) ] , which is (cid:0) 1 − π K 1 (cid:1) (cid:0) 1 − π K 0 (cid:1) where π 1 = δ 1 h + ( 1 − δ 1 ) l and π 0 = δ 0 h + ( 1 − δ 0 ) l . A generalist will have skills in both disciplines . In this case , it will be optimal for a generalist to split her skills evenly between the two disciplines , and she will obtain K − c 2 skills in each . The expected probability that she will solve both 18 0 . 0 0 . 2 0 . 4 0 . 6 0 . 8 1 . 0 0 . 0 0 . 2 0 . 4 0 . 6 0 . 8 1 . 0 π 1 π 0 S pe c i a li s t s Generalists π 1 = π 0 Equilibrium Skill Acquisition as a Function of π 1 and π 0 ( Two Part Problem with K = 3 , c = 1 ) Figure 4 . 2 : Equilibrium skill acquisition decisions when problems are multidisciplinary , and k = 3 and c = 1 . parts of the problem is (cid:16) 1 − π K − c 2 1 π K − c 2 0 (cid:17) 2 . Thus , individuals choose to generalize , when (cid:16) 1 − π K − c 2 1 π K − c 2 0 (cid:17) 2 > (cid:0) 1 − π K 1 (cid:1) (cid:0) 1 − π K 0 (cid:1) . 7 This region , as a function of π 1 and π 0 , is illustrated in Figure 4 . 2 for K = 3 and c = 1 . The boundary of this region is deﬁned by the equation π K 1 + π K 0 = ( π 1 π 0 ) K − c 2 − 2 ( π 1 π 0 ) K − c + ( π 1 π 0 ) K . As would be expected , the region where individuals specialize shrinks as the costs to generalizing ( c ) become smaller , relative to the individual’s total 7 Note that when δ 1 = δ 0 , we have a case that ﬁts into the ﬁrst category in the taxonomy of problem distributions in Figure 4 . 1 . Since δ 1 = δ 0 = ⇒ π 1 = π 0 , we can use this calculation to verify the claim made above that in the case where skills are symmetric , the results are the same as in Section 3 . 19 capacity for learning new skills ( M = K + c ) . 5 . Conclusion Being a generalist is costly . Every new area of expertise comes at consid - erable ﬁxed cost , in the form of a new literature , new jargon , and new basic ideas . However , there are clearly a large ( and growing ) number of individuals in research communities who choose to do so . This raises the question of whether that decision is ever individually rational ? And is there a reason to believe that fewer people choose to be generalists than is socially optimal ? This paper suggests that being a generalist can be a rational decision under particular conditions . In particular , obtaining a broad range of skills is rational if there are signiﬁcant barriers to working on questions in ﬁelds with which one is unfamiliar . Those who pay the initial price of learning the jargon and literature of a new ﬁeld reap the beneﬁts in the form of a larger pool of problems to solve . It can also be rational to be a generalist if problems are multidisciplinary – that is , if diﬀerent parts of a problem are best addressed using skills in diﬀerent disciplines . Moreover , because individuals bear the costs of becoming generalists , we will tend to have fewer of them than is optimal from a societal standpoint . This potential market failure means that in some cases , it is optimal for funding agencies and private organizations to subsidize individuals in their eﬀorts to diversify their skills and promote interdisciplinary researchers . However , it is unclear whether our current situation is one in which such funding is required . More careful consideration of this question is a good candidate for further work . There are several elements of this model that suggest directions for future research . It would be interesting to consider a case where individuals diﬀer in their innate capacity for learning skills . This might provide some insight into what types of individuals choose to become generalists . Incorporating collab - oration would be another particularly interesting extension . Collaboration has always been an important part of problem solving and innovation , and it has only become more important over time ( see , among others , Laband and Tollison 20 ( 2000 ) , Acedo et al ( 2006 ) , and Goyal et al ( 2006 ) ) . There is reason to believe that in a collaborative context , the advantage to generalists would be enhanced , because generalists could connect specialists in diﬀerent ﬁelds . On a more general level , there is much to be gained from a better understand - ing of specialization decisions . Research universities , government organizations such as NASA , and private enterprises ranging from Genentec to Google are reliant on the skills of individual problem solvers . The decisions these individ - uals make about the breadth skills they obtain have an undeniable eﬀect on the rate of innovation . However , we still have only a limited understanding of the what drives those skill acquisition decisions , and what distinguishes the role of specialists and generalists in problem solving . Better theoretical models of these decisions have the potential to greatly enhance our understanding of this important aspect of such organizations . References [ 1 ] Acedo , F . . J . , Barroso , C . , Casanueva , C . , and Galan , J . L . , 2006 . Co - authorship in Management and Organizational Studies : An Empirical and Network Analysis . Journal of Management Studies 43 ( 5 ) , 957 - 983 [ 2 ] Adamic , L . A . , Wei , X . , Yang , J . , Gerrish , S . , Nam , K . K . , and Clarkson , G . S . , 2010 . Individual focus and knowledge contribution . Preprint . arXiv : 1002 . 0561v1 [ 3 ] Astebro , T . , and Thompson , P . , 2011 . Entrepreneurs , Jacks of all trades or Hobos ? Research Policy 40 ( 5 ) , 637 - 649 [ 4 ] Berlin , I . , 1953 . The Hedgehog and the Fox . Simon and Schuster , New York . [ 5 ] Collins , J . , 2001 . Good to Great . HarperCollins , New York . 21 [ 6 ] Goyal , S . , van der Leij , M . J . , and Moraga - Gonzalez , J . L . , 2006 . Economics : An Emerging Small World . Journal of Political Econ - omy 144 ( 2 ) , 403 - 412 [ 7 ] Hillner , B . E . , Smith , T . J . , and Desch , C . E . , 2000 . Hospital and Physician Volume or Specialization and Outcomes in Cancer Treat - ment : Importance in Quality of Cancer Care . Journal of Clinical Oncology 18 ( 11 ) , 2327 - 2340 [ 8 ] Kremer , M . , 1993 . The O - ring theory of economic development . Quarterly Journal of Economics 108 ( 3 ) , 551 - 575 [ 9 ] Laband , D . N . , and Tollison , R . D . , 2000 . Intellectual Collaboration . Journal of Political Economy 108 ( 3 ) , 632 - 662 [ 10 ] Lazear , E . , 2004 . Balanced skills and entrepreneurship . American Economic Review 94 ( 2 ) , 208 – 211 . [ 11 ] Lazear , E . , 2005 . Entrepreneurship . Journal of Labor Economics 23 ( 4 ) , 649 – 680 . [ 12 ] Nallamothu , B . K , Wang , Y . , Magid , D . J . , McNamara , R . L . , Her - rin , J . , Bradley , E . H . , Bates , E . R . , Pollack , C . V . , and Krumholz , H . M . , 2006 . Relation Between Hospital Specialization With Pri - mary Percutaneous Coronary Intervention and Clinical Outcomes in ST - Segment Elevation Myocardial Infarction : National Registry of Myocardial Infarction - 4 Analysis . Circulation 113 , 222 - 229 [ 13 ] Strober , M . H . 2006 . Habits of the Mind : Challenges for Multidis - ciplinary Engagement . Social Epistemology 20 ( 3 ) , 315 - 331 [ 14 ] Tetlock , P . E . , 1998 . Close - Call Counterfactuals and Belief - System Defenses : I Was Not Almost Wrong But I Was Almost Right . Journal of Personality and Social Psychology 75 ( 3 ) , 639 - 652 22 Appendix Theorem 5 is the equivalent of Theorem 1 , and states that if individuals can work on any available problem , then there is no advantage to being a generalist . Theorem 5 . If skills are independent and symmetric within discipline , and workers can work on any available problem , then no worker will ever want to be a generalist and the equilibrium population will contain only specialists . Proof . As above , the ex ante probability that a specialist in discipline i will be able to solve a problem from a given distribution , ∆ , is E [ P ( S i ) ] = 1 − ( δ i h + ( 1 − δ i ) l ) K = 1 − π Ki where π i = ( δ i h + ( 1 − δ i ) l ) . WLOG , suppose δ 1 > δ 2 . Since h < l , this means that π 1 < π 2 and E [ P ( S 1 ) ] > E [ P ( S 2 ) ] . Thus , to determine whether any individual will gener - alize , I need to compare E [ P ( S 1 ) ] to E [ P ( G ) ] . The ex ante probability that a generalist with x skills in discipline 1 , and K − c − x skills in discipline 2 solves a problem from a given distribution , ∆ , is E [ P ( G ) ] = 1 − ( δ 1 h + ( 1 − δ 1 ) l ) x ( δ 2 h + ( 1 − δ 2 ) l ) K − c − x = 1 − π x 1 π K − c − x 2 Since π 1 < π 2 , E [ P ( G ) ] is strictly increasing in x . This means that a generalist will set x = K − c − 1 and E [ P ( G ) ] = 1 − π K − c − 1 1 π 2 , which is clearly less than E [ P ( S 1 ) ] = 1 − π K 1 . Theorem 6 is a generalized version of Theorem 2 , and states the parameter range in which individuals will choose to diversify their skills when there are barriers to working interdisciplinarily . Theorem 6 . If skills are independent and symmetric within discipline , and there are barriers to working on problems in other disciplines , then there is a 23 range of values for φ ( the fraction of problems assigned to discipline 1 ) for which individuals will generalize . In particular , the ranges are as follows : If δ 1 = δ 2 = δ , workers will obtain K − c skills spread across the two disciplines when 1 − 1 − π K − c 1 − π K ≤ φ ≤ 1 − π K − c 1 − π K , K skills in discipline 1 when φ > 1 − π K − c 1 − π K , and K skills in discipline 2 when φ < 1 − 1 − π K − c 1 − π K . If δ 1 > δ 2 , then workers will obtain K − c − 1 skills in discipline 1 and one skill in discipline 2 when 1 − (cid:16) 1 − π K − c − 1 1 π 2 1 − π K 2 (cid:17) ≤ φ ≤ 1 − π K − c − 1 1 π 2 1 − π K 1 , K skills in discipline 1 when φ > 1 − π K − c − 1 1 π 2 1 − π K 1 , and K skills in discipline 2 when φ < 1 − (cid:16) 1 − π K − c − 1 1 π 2 1 − π K 2 (cid:17) . If δ 2 > δ 1 , then workers will obtain K − c − 1 skills in discipline 2 and one skill in discipline 1 when 1 − (cid:16) 1 − π K − c − 1 2 π 1 1 − π K 1 (cid:17) ≤ φ ≤ 1 − π K − c − 1 2 π 1 1 − π K 1 , K skills in discipline 1 when φ > 1 − π K − c − 1 2 π 1 1 − π K 1 , and K skills in discipline 2 when φ < 1 − (cid:16) 1 − π K − c − 1 2 π 1 1 − π K 2 (cid:17) . Proof . In this case , the ex ante probability that a problem is solved by a spe - cialist is φ (cid:0) 1 − π K 1 (cid:1) for a specialist in discipline 1 and ( 1 − φ ) (cid:0) 1 − π K 2 (cid:1) for a specialist in discipline 2 . Since generalists can work on problems in both disci - plines , their expected probability of solving the problem is 1 − π x 1 π K − c − x 2 where x is the number of skills the generalist chooses to acquire in discipline 1 . First , suppose δ 1 > δ 2 . Since h < l , this means that π 1 < π 2 and E [ P ( G ) ] is strictly increasing in x . Thus , a generalist will choose a minimal number of skills in the less useful discipline , and E [ P ( G ) ] = 1 − π K − c − 1 1 π 2 . An individual will generalize if E [ P ( S 1 ) ] < E [ P ( G ) ] and E [ P ( S 2 ) ] < E [ P ( G ) ] . Setting φ (cid:0) 1 − π K 1 (cid:1) < 1 − π K − c − 1 1 π 2 implies that φ ≤ 1 − π K − c − 1 1 π 2 1 − π K 1 . Setting ( 1 − φ ) (cid:0) 1 − π K 2 (cid:1) < 1 − π K − c − 1 1 π 2 implies that 1 − 1 − π K − c 1 − π K ≤ φ . We can verify that in the appropriate ranges , individuals choose to specialize . The result follows immediately . The proof for δ 2 > δ 1 is similar . For the proof when δ 1 = δ 2 , see Theorem 2 . Finally , Theorem 7 is the generalization of Theorem 3 . It states that there is a parameter region in which individuals choose to specialize , but society would 24 prefer to have at least a few generalists . Theorem 7 . If skills are independent and symmetric within discipline , and there are barriers to working on problems in other disciplines , then there is a range of values for φ ( the fraction of problems assigned to discipline 1 ) such that generalists are underprovided in the equilibrium population of problem solvers . In particular , generalists are underprovided in the following ranges : If δ 1 = δ 2 , then generalists are underprovided when 1 − π K − c 1 − π K < φ < 1 − π N ( K − c ) 1 − π NK or 1 − 1 − π N ( K − c ) 1 − π NK < φ < 1 − 1 − π K − c 1 − π K If δ 1 > δ 2 , then generalists are underprovided when 1 − π K − c − 1 1 π 2 1 − π K 1 < φ < 1 − π N ( K − c − 1 ) 1 π 2 1 − π NK 1 or 1 − 1 − π N ( K − c − 1 ) 1 π 2 1 − π NK 2 < φ < 1 − 1 − π K − c − 1 1 π 2 1 − π K 2 If δ 2 > δ 1 , then generalists are underprovided when 1 − π 1 π K − c − 1 2 1 − π K 1 < φ < 1 − π 1 π N ( K − c − 1 ) 2 1 − π NK 1 or 1 − 1 − π 1 π N ( K − c − 1 ) 2 1 − π NK 2 < φ < 1 − 1 − π 1 π K − c − 1 2 1 − π K 2 Proof . First , suppose that δ 1 > δ 2 . The probability that at least one of the N problem - solvers in the population solves the problem is 1 − Prob ( none of them do ) . If all of the individuals in the population are specialists in discipline 1 , then ev - ery individual has probability φ of a problem occurring in her discipline . In that case , each specialist in discipline has a probability 1 − π K 1 of solving the problem and π K 1 of not solving it . With probability 1 − φ , the problem is assigned to the other discipline , and no specialist solves it . Thus , the probability of someone in a population of specialists solving the problem is Prob ( one of N solve it ) = 1 − Prob ( none of N solve it ) = 1 − [ φProb ( none solve problem in d 1 ) + ( 1 − φ ) Prob ( none solve problem in d 2 ) ] = 1 − (cid:104) φProb ( one fails ) N + ( 1 − φ ) ∗ 1 (cid:105) = 1 − (cid:104) φ (cid:0) π K 1 (cid:1) N + ( 1 − φ ) ∗ 1 (cid:105) = φ (cid:0) 1 − π KN 1 (cid:1) Through a similar argument , if everyone in the population is a specialist in discipline 2 , then the probability that someone in the population solves the problem is ( 1 − φ ) (cid:0) 1 − π KN 2 (cid:1) . 25 If everyone in the population is a generalists , then the probability of at least one person in solving the problem is Prob ( one of N solve it ) = 1 − Prob ( none of N solve it ) = 1 − (cid:0) π K − c − 1 1 π 2 (cid:1) N = 1 − π N ( K − c − 1 ) 1 π N 2 Society is better oﬀ with a population of generalists than a population of discipline 1 specialists when 1 − π N ( K − c − 1 ) 1 π N 2 > φ (cid:0) 1 − π KN 1 (cid:1) , which is true when φ < 1 − π N ( K − c − 1 ) 1 π N 2 1 − π NK 1 . However , there is a population of generalists when φ ≤ 1 − π K − c − 1 1 π 2 1 − π K 1 . It is always the case that 1 − π K − c − 1 1 π 2 1 − π K 1 ≤ 1 − π N ( K − c − 1 ) 1 π 2 1 − π NK 1 . Thus , if 1 − π K − c − 1 1 π 2 1 − π K 1 < φ < 1 − π N ( K − c − 1 ) 1 π 2 1 − π NK 1 , then society is better oﬀ with a population of generalists , but has a population of specialists . Through a similar argument , society is better oﬀ with a population of gen - eralists than a population of discipline 2 specialists when 1 − π N ( K − c − 1 ) 1 π N 2 > ( 1 − φ ) (cid:0) 1 − π KN 2 (cid:1) , which is true when φ > 1 − 1 − π N ( K − c − 1 ) 1 π N 2 1 − π NK 2 . However , there is a population of generalists when φ ≤ 1 − 1 − π K − c − 1 1 π 2 1 − π K 2 . It is always the case that 1 − 1 − π N ( K − c − 1 ) 1 π 2 1 − π NK 2 ≤ 1 − 1 − π K − c − 1 1 π 2 1 − π K 2 . Thus , if 1 − 1 − π N ( K − c − 1 ) 1 π 2 1 − π NK 2 < φ < 1 − 1 − π K − c − 1 1 π 2 1 − π K 2 , then society is better oﬀ with a population of generalists , but has a population of specialists . The proof for δ 2 > δ 2 is similar . See the proof of Theorem 3 for the case where δ 1 = δ 2 . 26