Influencing Factors in Atomic Force Microscopy Based Mechanical Characterization of Biological Cells V . Managuli 1 & S . Roy 1 Received : 4 March 2017 / Accepted : 24 July 2017 / Published online : 11 August 2017 # The Society for Experimental Mechanics , Inc 2017 Abstract AFM - based single cell force spectroscopy is in - creasingly being used to understand many biological health problems like malaria , cancer etc . A reliable diagnostics needs , accurate measurement and a clear understanding of the influencing factors , which may otherwise sour the mea - sured biomechanics . Results from any successful experimen - tation should be repeatable and error free . For this , a deeper understanding of the sources of uncertainties , which may af - fect the results is necessary . In order to assure the accuracy of evaluated properties and to avoid misinterpretation of the ex - perimental data , we have categorized the common causes of uncertainties in an AFM force spectroscopy , based on their sources of origin and discussed possible remedies to them . The present work discusses the assumptions involved in AFM - based biomechanical studies ( assumptions in contact model , data analysis , instrument calibration etc . ) and their implications in overall estimations of mechanical biomarkers like stiffness , and adhesive strength . Advantages and disad - vantages of simultaneous measurement of stiffness and adhe - siveness from single force - indentation data have also been discussed . Keywords Elasticity . Non - specific cell adhesion . Nano - indentation . Cell mechanics Introduction AFM was originally invented for extracting topographical in - formation at atomic scale . Over the years , development of new AFM modes and its hybridization with other techniques have broadened its applications [ 1 , 2 ] . One of the important appli - cation is mechanical or force spectroscopy study of live cells in their physiological environment . Here a cell ’ s response to applied static and dynamic indentation force are analyzed and expressed in terms of elastic [ 3 ] and viscoelastic properties [ 4 ] . Changes in these properties indicate the structural modi - fications occurred in cellular cytoskeleton during disease pro - gression [ 5 ] and help s in interpreting drug effects [ 6 ] . AFM force spectroscopy method is also applied in measuring spe - cific and non - specific adhesion properties of the cells through probe - cell and cell - cell interaction tests [ 7 – 9 ] . These adhesion tests are conducted to identify expression of cell surface re - ceptors [ 10 , 11 ] , to understand the role of adhesion in tissue formation [ 9 ] and in cell migration during disease progression [ 7 , 8 , 12 ] . Combined approach of AFM force spectroscopy and molecular biological techniques help in identifying the mechano - chemical signaling pathways [ 5 , 13 ] . AFM experimental data and it ’ s outcomes can easily get influenced by many factors . Therefore locating the sources of uncertainties or errors and their effect on evaluated properties is of paramount importance . Previous efforts in discussing AFM measurement uncertainties addressed some one - off is - sues . Such as , research work of Wagner R . et al . ( 2011 ) [ 14 ] is focused on instrument calibration and standard uncertainty associated with the basic input parameters . Lin D . C . et al . ( 2007 , 2007 ) [ 15 , 16 ] discussed methods of adhesion free and adhesion affected AFM data analysis techniques . Chen J . ( 2014 ) [ 17 ] and Lin D . C . et al . ( 2008 ) [ 18 ] discussed the AFM mathematical contact models and their scope of appli - cations . None of the above references have discussed major * S . Roy sroy @ am . iitd . ac . in 1 Applied Mechanics Department , Indian Institute of Technology Delhi , New Delhi , India Exp Tech ( 2017 ) 41 : 673 – 687 DOI 10 . 1007 / s40799 - 017 - 0199 - 9 sources of variability in one single place . Also , there is a need of periodic updates on progressive developments and refine - ments made in mathematical contact models and methodolo - gies . In this regard , we have documented most of the influenc - ing factors in mechanical characterization of cells in one place . It discusses the uncertainties coming from sample preparation , effects and limitations of experimental parameters , chronolog - ical improvements of contact models and some common er - rors associated with data processing . The experimental data obtained from cells and similar stiffness polyacrylamide gels were used as examples . This study will help the experimen - talists of interdisciplinary cell - mechanics research with the basic information required for mechanical characterization of cell material . Classification of Influencing Parameters Measured properties of the same cell line can vary due to many reasons . We have broadly classified these influencing factors into three categories based on their sources of origin , as shown in Fig . 1 . Cell Culture and Sample Preparation Effect of cell fixing , surface coating , and surface stiffness Cells are living materials and their internal cytoskeleton is highly dynamic in nature . They constantly interact with the surrounding chemical and physical cues in the environment . Generalizing cell material properties in a similar way as it is done for passive engineering material may not be right . A common method used in cellular imaging is B chemical fixation ^ process to visualize the inner organelles for analysis . Similar attempts have been made to extract cellular material information by paraformaldehyde fixation process , which lead to large difference in measured properties of live and fixed cells [ 19 , 20 ] . This method fails to capture the real material characteristic of cells because fixing procedure hardens the cell material . Similarly , ECM proteins [ 19 , 21 , 22 ] and adhesion enhanc - ing molecules [ 23 , 24 ] are commonly used to promote a cell ’ s attachment to a substrate or to increase proliferation in - vitro studies . This enhances the biocompatibility of culture surface and stimulates the focal adhesion formation , actin content , and its organization which in turn leads to variations in morpho - logical features and mechanical properties [ 22 , 25 ] . The amount of influence and duration of its effect depends on the cell ’ s affinity towards that particular protein , coating density and culture time [ 22 , 24 ] . The stiffness of substrate also acts as mechanical stimuli and influences the cell ’ s biomechanical properties . It is found that a cell ’ s stiffness increases with increase in culture surface stiffness [ 26 ] . Expecting similar experimental outcomes is not possible unless all these param - eters are taken into consideration . Effect of media composition , source , cultivation period and confluence There can be considerable variation in extracted properties depending on the sensitivity of cell line to composition of media . For example , it has been reported that non - malignant cells are more responsive to changes in media composition than the malignant cells [ 27 ] . In the case of primary cells , the age of source is also an important factor . Studies conduct - ed on cardiac myocytes extracted from young ( 4 month ) and aged mice ( 30 month ) showed significant differences in their stiffness [ 28 ] . In most of the cases , preliminary studies are conducted on cell lines due to difficulty in primary cells ’ ex - traction and uncertainty in their growth . In comparison to primary cells , the immortalized cell lines can retain their phys - ical and biochemical characteristics for a large number of pas - sages but it is necessary to confirm their originality periodi - cally to avoid erroneous studies . A study conducted on prima - ry thyroid cell line by Prabhune et al . ( 2012 ) [ 29 ] showed that cell stiffness is also a function of cultivation period . A three to five fold difference in stiffness property was observed be - tween second and third - day cultured cells . Similarly , a study was also conducted to understand the effect of confluence . Efremov et al . ( 2013 ) [ 30 ] observed 1 . 4 – 1 . 7 time ’ s lower elas - tic modulus and lower amount of cortical actin in cells within Effect of cell fixing Culture surface coating Culture surface stiffness Source of sample Media composition Cell aging Confluence Cultivation period Photo - Diode sensitivity Virtual deflection Optical lever sensitivity Cantilever stiffness Probe selection Indentation force Indentation velocity Viscous effect Choice of contact model and associated assumptions Finite thickness of cell sample Adhesive nature of cell sample Contact and detachment point Cell height , Poisson ' s ratio Tip curvature effect Cell Culture and Sample Preparation Instrument and Experimental parameter Contact Models and Data Analysis AFM Force Spectroscopy Study of Cell Fig . 1 Classification of sources of uncertainties and errors based on their origin 674 Exp Tech ( 2017 ) 41 : 673 – 687 monolayer compared to a single cell or cells migrating in scratch wound experiment . This indicates that mechanical properties of cells get modulated depending upon intercellular connectivity and mobility . The above discussion indicates that for accurate results and meaningful comparison , a clear understanding of cells ’ re - sponse to associated culture environment must be known . The experiments needed to be conducted in similar conditions for accurate quantitative evaluation of overall sample response . Instrument and Experimental Parameters Instrument related uncertainties AFM is an engineering marvel , yet a complex instrument . The lack of adequate understanding of fundamental principles on which AFM is built can easily add up errors to indentation data and subsequently in measured properties . Figure 2 shows the schematic diagram of an MFP - 3D Bio - AFM assembly . It has separate decoupled x - y and z - piezo motions . X - Ypiezo in sample scanner moves the sample , while z - piezo controls the cantilever motion and indents on pre - decided location . Photodiode sensitivity and virtual deflection problem Photodiode plays a significant role in the accurate measure - ment of cantilever deflection data . According to Wagner et al . ( 2011 ) [ 14 ] , erroneous photodiode sensitivity calibration can lead to significant measurement uncertainty . Any uncertainty in its calibration will subsequently propagate errors into mea - sured cantilever stiffness . The transverse motion of the laser spot on photodiode should happen only when AFM cantilever tip deflects due to tip - sample interaction , as shown in Fig . 2 . Sometimes , this can also happen even in the absence of tip - sample interaction due to virtual deflection , which arises mainly due to the coupling of the piezoelectric transducer and mechanical instrumentation . Because of this , changes in deflection values can be seen even before the real contact occurs . For accurate analysis of cell response , it is very im - portant to nullify this effect . This can be measured by record - ing changes in deflection values on photodiode while extend - ing the Z - piezo to its maximum range . Correction of virtual deflection helps in defining proper reference base in obtained data . Also , it makes sure that obtained force and indentation values resulting from tip - sample interaction only . InvOLS and cantilever stiffness measurement The conversion of deflection from ‘ voltage ’ to ‘ nm ’ needs a calibrating factor known as inverted optical lever sensitivity ( InvOLS ) and has SI unit of ‘ nm / mV ’ . It is in standard oper - ating procedure to measure InvOLS before conducting any experiment by indenting on a hard surface , but one has to be aware that InvOLS is environment sensitive . As most of the cellular studies are conducted in a liquid media , it should be re - calculated within the liquid environment at the beginning of experiment . Accurate evaluation of cantilever stiffness is ( A + B ) - ( C + D ) = ver(cid:2)cal deﬂec(cid:2)on X - Y - mo(cid:2)on A B C D Mirror 4 quadrant photo diode Laser source Probe Substrate Z Feedback circuit set voltage Photo diode Voltage Z - sensor mo(cid:2)on Δd Δδ z 0 z Fig . 2 Schematic representation of AFM force feedback system . It shows the assembly of the laser source , four segmented photodiodes , cantilever probe and feedback control Exp Tech ( 2017 ) 41 : 673 – 687 675 another necessity and important parameter required for con - version of deflection ( nm ) into force ( nN ) . Stiffness being a structural property of the AFM cantilever remains indepen - dent of environmental effect . Cantilever stiffness is measured in air using thermal spectrum approach [ 31 ] . As probes are often calibrated using functionality built in the individual in - strument software and may vary because they are built by different manufacturers . To avoid any kind of uncertainty aris - ing in the evaluated cantilever stiffness and to bring univer - sality , recently Sader et al . ( 2016 ) [ 32 ] developed a new the - oretical framework based on combined thermal method [ 31 ] and Sader method [ 33 ] . This global calibration initiative [ URL for GCI : https : / / sadermethod . org ] may help to standardize AFM force measurements and in robust comparison of obtained results . Experimental Parameters Cells are heterogeneous , viscoelastic material . The mea - sured heterogeneity can vary with indentation depth , the location of indentation and probe shape . Also , a viscous component of cell material affects the static indentation analysis . The choice of a right set of protocols and ex - perimental parameters depend on the B information ^ that needed to be extracted from a sample in a particular experiment . Here we have discussed some major factors such as selection of probe stiffness ( k ) and tip geometry , indentation force ( F ) , velocity ( v ) , and sample thickness ( h ) etc . In most cases , the effects of these factors are expressed in terms of the difference in measured proper - ties and significance of their effect is evaluated from statistical studies . One can identify the influences of many of these parameters and sample material character - istic from nature of force - indentation ( F - δ ) curve . This identification will help in choosing relevant contact mod - el and adopting data analysis procedure for any unknown sample . Fundamental understanding of F - δ curve is es - sential in this regard . Force indentation ( F - δ ) curve The F - δ curve is the response of the sample to an applied external load . The typical F - δ curve obtained from cell mate - rial is shown in Fig . 3 . During the indentation process , the voltage supplied to Z - piezo triggers transverse motion of can - tilever . Cantilever moves uninterrupted up to point ‘ A ’ where first tip - sample contact occurs on the cell membrane and is known as a contact point ( δ 0 , F 0 ) . Further , extension of Z - piezo results in the indentation on sample and it is continued till force value reaches to pre - decided trigger value F = F max . The cellular response is stored as approach or loading curve ( A - B ) and thereafter Z - piezo starts retracting back from max - imum force value ( point B ) . This initiates the tip - sample detachment process and the cell ’ s elastic recovery . During this process , tip - sample contact area decreases continuously and the presence of cell ’ s membrane adhesive forces can be clearly seen in obtained data as negative or attractive force values . At a certain point during withdrawal , these adhesive forces reach to a peak value ( point C ) and interaction ends at a point ‘ D ’ . The point , ‘ D ’ is known as detachment point . This F - δ data is stored as unloading curve ( B - D ) . Location of this detachment point is very uncertain and cannot be ascertained easily . It is a function of adhesive nature of the material . The distance be - tween points ‘ A ’ and ‘ D ’ is the length of neck formed between AFM tip and sample . In the case of cells or similar soft matters permanent deformation never occurs . The combined effect of material elastic response and its adhesive nature during unloading process helps in complete recovery . Also , one can easily identify the viscous nature of sample through hysteresis or energy losses between loading and unloading part of the F - δ curve . Figure 4 shows the common F - δ curves obtained in an AFM based indentation test . These are obtained by in - denting soft polyacrylamide gel ( A & B ) [ 34 ] and cells ( C to F ) respectively . The shape of the curves indicates different material nature , ( A ) and ( B ) shows elastic na - ture while ( C ) and ( D ) shows the presence of viscous nature . The curve ( B ) and ( D ) shows the presence of adhesive nature in material , where ‘ l ’ is the length of neck formed between cantilever tip and sample . Curves ‘ E ’ and ‘ F ’ show the presence of hydrodynamic drag and - 2 - 1 . 5 - 1 - 0 . 5 0 0 . 5 1 x 10 - 6 0 1 2 3 4 5 x 10 - 10 Indentation ( m ) ) N ( ec r oF C D A B Pre contact data Post DD Fig . 3 An experimental F - δ curve taken on the cell surface . Plots show A - contact point , B - trigger force value , C - peak negative force , D - detachment point . Here ‘ A - B ’ is loading curve and ‘ B - D ’ is unloading curve . Obtained data before point ‘ A ’ and after point ‘ D ’ are known as pre - contact and post - detachment data 676 Exp Tech ( 2017 ) 41 : 673 – 687 bottom substrate effect due to high velocity and large transverse strain ( δ / h ) at the indentation location . Probe selection The selection of right cantilever probe is of great importance in any AFM experiment . The cantilever stiffness and probe geometry are the two decisive factors . The selection of canti - lever stiffness depends on the relative stiffness of a sample . Cantilever must be stiffer than the sample to carry out effective indentation . But , it should not be too stiff either , as cantilever may never deflect upon indentation and may end up damaging the sample . The nominal spring constant of cantilevers typically used in cell mechanics studies is in the range of 0 . 01 to 0 . 08 N / m . The most common tip geometries used in cell material charac - terization are spherical , conical or pyramidal in shape . Every tip - geometry has certain advantages and application . Selection of probe depends on whether an average property or a single value of modulus , property map or distribution is sought . For example , a colloidal probe indents over a large surface area and hence captures the average response of the cell . These probes are most widely used to extract average elastic properties from nucleus region of the cell [ 3 , 30 , 35 ] . Figure 5 ( a ) shows AFM cantilever with a spherical bead ( Dia . = 4 . 5 μ m ) attached at the tip ( k = 0 . 03 N / m ) . For this kind of tip shape , information of cellular features smaller than the contact area will be lost or averaged out . The conical or pyramidal tips are preferred for imaging morphology and analyzing surface features through force - map studies . In these studies , it is necessary to use probes having 20 – 60 nm tip apex diameter to avoid damage to the cell sample . These tips deform soft samples beyond their linear strain regime , so invalidating the Hertzian assumption . In this case using lower indentation force can help in reducing its effect . If used for the averaging elastic property of the cell , both spherical and tapered tip geometries provide different mean values , as shown in Fig . 5 ( b ) . Also , the standard deviation will be larger in tapered tips . This is because these tips indent deeper depths and captures different local heterogeneity for the same value of force . Apart from this , the bottom substrate effect is another source of error in elastic and adhesion maps generated from force map studies [ 36 – 38 ] . It comes due to finite thickness of sample , so invalidating infinite thickness assumption of classical contact models . Effect of magnitude of indentation force Cells show transverse anisotropy . Adherent cells show the clear polarity of head and base with distinct layers of materials of varying mechanical properties . Such as the external plasma membrane , internal cytoskeleton , cytoplasm , nucleus and other organelles situated at the bottom . Due to this heterogeneity , the mechanical properties vary in a transverse direction with - 1 . 5 - 1 - 0 . 5 0 0 . 5 1 1 . 5 2 x 10 - 6 - 1 0 1 2 3 4 5x 10 - 10 Indentation ( m ) ) N ( ec r oF - 1 - 0 . 5 0 0 . 5 1 1 . 5 x 10 - 6 - 1 0 1 2 3 4 x 10 - 10 - 3 - 2 - 1 0 1 x 10 - 6 - 2 0 2 4 6 8 10 x 10 - 10 ) N ( ec r o F - 4 - 3 - 2 - 1 0 1 2 3 x 10 - 6 - 1 - 0 . 5 0 0 . 5 1 1 . 5 2 x 10 - 9 ) N ( ec r o F - 1 - 0 . 5 0 0 . 5 1 x 10 - 6 0 1 2 3 4 5 x 10 - 10 - 1 - 0 . 5 0 0 . 5 1 x 10 - 6 - 1 0 1 2 3 4 5 x 10 - 10 ) N ( ec r oF F o r c e ( N ) F o r c e ( N ) Indenta(cid:2)on ( m ) Indenta(cid:2)on ( m ) Indenta(cid:2)on ( m ) A B C D E F Elas(cid:2)c Behavior Elas(cid:2)c – Adhesive Behavior Viscoelas(cid:2)c Behavior Hydrodynamic Eﬀect Substrate Eﬀect Viscoelas(cid:2)c Adhesive Behavior Drag Fig . 4 Force - indentation ( F - δ ) curves collected from different soft samples and their material nature Exp Tech ( 2017 ) 41 : 673 – 687 677 respect to indentation depth , as shown in Fig . 6 ( a ) . The inden - tation curves extracted by indenting different depths using 0 . 5 , 1 , 2nN indentation force on cell and polyacrylamide gel ( ≈ 3 kPa ) , shown in Fig . 6 ( b ) & ( c ) . Both the soft samples exhibit a non - linear response to applied force , but cell sample shows higher energy loss ( hysteresis ) due to high viscous con - tent . While extracting average cellular properties using spheri - cal tips , it has been found that studies conducted at shallow indentation ( 50 nm – 200 nm ) are not reliable due to large deviation in measured properties [ 24 , 30 , 39 ] . Electronic noise causes the difficulty in locating the contact point and missing its location by even few ‘ nm ’ has further implications on evaluated properties . For characterizing me - chanical properties of cells , a minimal indentation depth of 400 - 600 nm is necessary ( depending on tip geometry ) to extract reliable information about cell material and its health state [ 24 , 30 , 40 , 41 ] , otherwise lack of firm contact , noisy data will influence the analysis . - 2 - 1 0 1 2 3 4 x 10 - 6 - 0 . 5 0 0 . 5 1 1 . 5 2 x 10 - 9 Indentation ( m ) ) N ( ec r oF - 1 - 0 . 5 0 0 . 5 1 x 10 - 6 0 5 10 15 20 x 10 - 10 Indentation ( m ) ) N ( ec r oF 0 100 200 300 400 500 600 700 0 . 5nN 1nN 2nN E ( N / m 2 ) Indenta(cid:2)on Force a b c 0 . 5nN 1nN 2nN Fig . 6 ( a ) Effect of increasing indentation force on HCT - 116 cells . ( b ) and ( c ) Comparision of F - δ curves taken on single HCT - 116 cell nucleus region and polyacrylamide gel ( ≈ 3 kPa ) . The energy loss between loading and unloading curve is more in the cells compared to gel 4 . 5μm dia . Spherical bead at tip a b 0 100 200 300 400 500 600 Spherical Tip Sharp Tip E ( N / m 2 ) Force = 1nN Fig . 5 ( a ) Optical image of AFM cantilever with a 4 . 5 μ m diameter spherical bead at the tip ( Novascan ) and ( b ) Shows variation observed in the mean value of elastic modulus for MCF - 7 measured from spherical ( Dia . = 4 . 5 μ m ) and pyramidal sharp tip ( TR400PB ) 678 Exp Tech ( 2017 ) 41 : 673 – 687 Indentation velocity and sample viscous effect Cellular materials are inherently viscous in nature . In a static indentation , the influence of viscous nature of the material on elastic property should be minimum . It is achieved by choos - ing appropriate indentation velocity . The effect of velocity on obtained indentation curves is shown in Fig . 7 ( a ) . The slope of curves increases with increasing velocity , which directly in - fluences the estimated elastic property of the cell . The effect of velocity on the measured stiffness of cell can be seen in Fig . 7 ( b ) . Velocity also alters the non - specific adhesion behavior captured in the unloading process , as shown in Fig . 7 ( a ) . It is necessary to find the optimum velocity ( specific to sample ) to capture the true elastic response of the sample . This can be decided by probing viscous relaxation time of the sample [ 42 , 43 ] . The value of indentation time period for chosen velocity should be greater than the viscous relaxation time of the cell , otherwise , viscoelastic cell samples appear stiffer than natural . In our observation 0 . 5 μ m / s is the optimum velocity and fur - ther reducing velocity may not have a significant effect on measured properties . In the case of AFM indentation studies , the indentation velocity refers to the velocity of AFM probe base ( i . e . z - piezo motion ) , as shown in Fig . 2 . In literature , it is seen that experiments are conducted with constant indentation rate ( Hz ) [ 3 , 30 ] . The indentation rate or constant rate does not mean ‘ constant velocity ’ . During the experiment , tip - sample gap changes from cell to cell or even over a single cell surface during a force map study , in such case constant rate leads to variation in velocity . Hence to minimize er - rors , the experiment must be conducted in constant veloc - ity mode . It is seen in the literature that indentation force of the order of 10nN [ 19 ] and velocity of ≈ 16 μ m / s [ 24 ] are used in static indentation studies . The optimum values of these might change from sample to sample . As a guideline , the choice of the magnitude of experimental parameters must be such that they should not cause high non - linear strains , invite less viscous influence , less hydrodynamic effect , should avoid bottom substrate effect and should not damage the cell under testing . Mathematical Contact Models and Data Analysis Choice of contact model and associated assumptions AFM - based nanoindentation technique provides a unique platform to study the cells in - vitro physiological environ - ment with selected tip geometry . However , interpretation of indentation data is a critical task . It needs skills of data handling and in - depth knowledge about the limita - tions of the contact models used . For a specific study , the choice of contact model largely depends upon the tip geometry and material nature observed in the F - δ curve . Here we have discussed some of the popular contact models and their suitability , limitations in AFM - based force spectroscopy studies . Table 1 lists some of the chronological developments occurred in analytical con - tact models . In many of these models , cell material is modeled as infinitely thick , linear elastic continuum . The viscosity , adhesion , finite thickness and heterogene - ity observed in cell sample are neglected or assumed to be not so significant . The mathematical representation of a sample as per classical Hertzian contact models [ 44 , 45 ] are shown in Fig . 8 . A contact model is applicable and it will yield right information , only if assumptions made about the sample nature are right , and the experi - mental parameters are selected in such a manner so that the neglected material behavior do not significantly af - fect the collected data . Common properties extracted from the cellular material are elastic modulus and adhe - sion ; the first one represents cell stiffness or elastic re - sponse and second represents the membrane adhesive 0 100 200 300 400 500 600 700 800 900 3μm / s 0 . 5μm / s E ( N / m 2 ) F = 1nN - 1 0 1 2 3 x 10 - 6 - 4 - 2 0 2 4 6 8 10 12 x 10 - 10 Ind Depth ( m ) ) N ( ec r oF 0 . 5μm / s 5 μm / s 10μm / s a b Fig . 7 ( a ) The effect of increasing indentation velocity ( 10 , 5 and 0 . 5 μ m / s ) on an F - δ curve . ( b ) Shows the effect of velocity on mean values of elastic properties measured from nucleus region of MCF - 7 cells Exp Tech ( 2017 ) 41 : 673 – 687 679 behavior . The effects of finite thickness , adhesion and viscous nature of the sample on their measurement are discussed below . Where , E = Young ’ s modulus , E * ¼ 1 − ν 2 E cell , R = Radius of sphere , δ = Indentation depth , ν = Poisson ’ s ratio , h = Cell height at indentation location , θ = Half cone angle , γ = surface energy per unit area ( J / m 2 ) . Finite thickness of cell sample Assuming cell as an infinitely thick sample can invite consid - erable errors in measured stiffness property . This error arises because of the presence of hard bottom substrate below the sample , it is commonly termed as bottom substrate effect ( BSE ) . In its presence , sample appears stiffer than natural . To avoid its influence , studies are restricted to nucleus region of cells but in force map studies , it is unavoidable source of error . In force map studies , transverse strain ( δ / h ) can become signif - icant ( ≥ 80 % ) depending on local height of the sample . In this case , indentation data gets influenced by the bottom hard sub - strate on which sample is resting . Very few analytical solutions exist to correct this effect in static indentation tests . Dimitriadis et al . ( 2002 ) [ 48 ] and Vishwanath et al . ( 2017 ) [ 50 ] provided analytical closed form corrections to Hertz and Sneddon contact models for spherical and conical tip geometry , as shown in Table 1 . The BSE effects are more prominent in thin sample studies using conical or sharp tip . To identify the presence of this , a high strain ( δ / h = 65 . 14 % ) indentation test is conducted on transverse isotropic thin polyacrylamide gel ( h = 2 . 353 μ m ) . In a trans - versely isotropic elastic material , it is expected that the material will show a constant , single value of elastic property along the transverse direction at every point of indentation data . Any changes in evaluated elastic property along this direction can be directly attributed to substrate influence . We have compared properties extracted from two models , shown in Fig . 9 . One assumes the sample as infinite thick [ 45 ] and other takes finite thickness of sample into account [ 50 ] . The E δ value shown in the plot is obtained by analyzing each data point of F - δ curve a Hertz ( 1882 ) a F Sneddon ( 1965 ) Fig . 8 Schematic representation of AFM cantilever tip and cell sample interaction in Hertz and Sneddon ’ s contact Model T a b l e 1 F o r ce - i nd e n t a ti on r e l a ti on i n d i ff e r e n t c on t ac t m od e l s a nd t h e i r a pp li ca ti on s N o . A u t ho r C on t ac t M od e l E qu a ti on A pp li ca ti on 1 H e r t z [ 44 ] F ¼ 43 E ﬃﬃﬃ R p 1 − ν 2 ð Þ δ 32 F o r a n a l y z i ng s ph e r i ca l p r ob e d a t a ob t a i n e d fr o m i n f i n it e l y t h i c k e l a s ti c s a m p l e 2 S n e ddon [ 45 ] F ¼ 2 π E t an θ ð Þ 1 − ν 2 ð Þ δ 2 F o r a n a l y z i ng c on i ca l p r ob e d a t a ob t a i n e d fr o m i n f i n it e l y t h i c k e l a s ti c s a m p l e . 3 J ohn s on [ 4 6 ] δ ¼ a 2 R − ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ 2 π a △ γ E * q , a 3 ¼ 3 FR 4 E * (cid:2) 1 þ 3 π △ γ R F þ ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ 6 π △ γ R F þ 3 π △ γ R F (cid:3) (cid:4) 2 q (cid:5) (cid:6) (cid:7) (cid:8) F o r a n a l y z i ng s ph e r i ca l i nd e n t e r d a t a o f t h i c k c o m p li a n t m a t e r i a l s ho w i ng a dh e s i v e b e h a v i o r . 4 B il od ea u [ 47 ] F ¼ 1 : 49062 E t a n θ 1 − ν 2 ð Þ δ 2 F o r a n a l y z i ng f ou r - s i d e d s h a r p py r a m i d a l ti p i nd e n t e r d a t a ob t a i n e d fr o m i n f i n it e l y t h i c k e l a s ti c s a m p l e . 5 D i m it r i d i s e t a l . [ 48 ] F ¼ 16 E 9 ﬃﬃﬃ R p δ 32 1 þ 1 : 133 χ þ 1 : 283 χ 2 þ 0 : 386 χ 3 þ 0 : 0048 χ 4 ½ (cid:3) ; χ ¼ ﬃﬃﬃﬃ R δ p h ; ν ¼ 0 : 5 A n a l y z i ng t h e s ph e r i ca l i nd e n t e r d a t a t a k e n fr o m f i n it e t h i c kn e ss s a m p l e bond e d t o bo tt o m s ub s t r a t e . 6 S i r gh i e t a l . [ 43 , 49 ] F ¼ 83 E π t a n θ ð Þ δ 2 − 8 γ t a n θ ð Þ π c o s θ ð Þ δ ; F ¼ 163 E π ﬃﬃ π p t a n θ ð Þ δ 2 − 32 γ t a n θ ð Þ π 2 c o s θ ð Þ δ F o r a n a l y z i ng c on i ca l a nd py r a m i d a l ti p d a t a ob t a i n e d fr o m t h e i n f i n it e l y t h i c k e l a s ti c – a dh e s i v e s a m p l e . 7 V i s h w a n a t h e t a l . [ 50 ] F ¼ 83 E π t a n θ ð Þ δ 2 1 þ 4 C δ h þ 20 C 2 δ 2 h 2 n o − 8 γ t a n θ ð Þ π c o s θ ð Þ δ 1 þ 3 C δ h þ 16 C 2 δ 2 h 2 n o ; w h e r e ; C ¼ 1 : 7795 t a n θ ð Þ π 2 ; ν ¼ 0 : 5 F o r a n a l y z i ng c on i ca l ti p d a t a o f t h e f i n it e l y t h i c k e l a s ti c - a dh e s i v e s a m p l e bond e d t o t h e bo tt o m s ub s t r a t e . 680 Exp Tech ( 2017 ) 41 : 673 – 687 independently and it is normalized by elastic modulus obtained from fitting the whole curve ( E w ) . The observed initial fluctua - tion in the property was because of premature contact . It is found that it is necessary to indent at least to an absolute depth of 400 nm to establish firm contact between AFM cantilever tip and sample . Furthermore , properties extracted from both models showed good agreement at lower strains but at higher strains Sneddon ’ s model diverges from the straight line path , clearly visible in Fig . 9 . This is a clear indication of presence of sub - strate effect . It leads to overestimation of sample properties . In this test , an 18 % variation in E values is observed at the peak value of indentation depth . This observed variation in elastic property will further increase at higher δ / h values . On the con - trary , properties evaluated from substrate effect corrected model [ 50 ] fairly falls along a straight line ( i . e . constant value ) and shows negligible influence of substrate effect . A similar study was conducted on the cell surface to under - stand the impact of infinite thickness assumption in cell sample studies . The indentation data was obtained from peripheral and nucleus region of an MCF - 7 cell , as shown in Fig . 10 . Here sample has a different local height in both the locations . The loading curve data is analyzed using contact model equation ( 2 ) and ( 7 ) ( γ = 0 ) , as cited in Table 1 . The results in Table 2 reveal the presence of significant influence of BSE in evaluated prop - erty at peripheral region . Correction of BSE will provide quan - titatively more accurate local properties and will help in gener - ating more realistic spatial heterogeneity map of the cell sur - face . This might be the main reason for large stiffness variation seen in many of the force maps studies [ 36 – 38 ] . Even though substrate influence is negligible at nucleus region , there is con - siderable variation ( ≈ 8 – 10 % ) in the evaluated properties from both models . This difference is arising because by nature Sneddon ’ s model overestimates the properties of finite thick - ness samples by assuming them as infinitely thick . Here we can say that infinite thickness assumption based contact models are not suitable for analysis of large strain indentation data or for the characterization of thin samples . The contact model [ 50 ] in Table 1 , can be referred as B Sneddon ’ s extended model ^ . It is asymptotically correct up to the second order of δ / h term and provides an accurate correction to substrate effect . This model can extract both elastic and adhesion property of sample simul - taneously depending upon its application to loading or unloading curve . Accounting adhesive nature of cell sample Another major assumption in Hertzian contact models is that of the sample being assumed as non - adhesive . In reality , cell samples show adhesive nature and this property has great significance in understanding health state of the cell . The ad - hesion has a role in cell communication , development of tis - sues and migration of cell . It has been found that changes in this property have many consequences during diseases pro - gression [ 7 , 12 , 13 ] . None - the - less , both elastic and adhesion properties of cell play a pivotal role and these properties are complimentary to each other . So simultaneous evaluation of both properties is necessary . The cell material possesses spe - cific and non - specific adhesion [ 7 ] to gain mechanical support through contact between intracellular actin cytoskeleton and extracellular matrix . In an indentation test , data carries information of both stiff - nesses as well as the non - specific adhesive behavior of the cell . Several contact models were developed to analyze this adhesion seen in the indentation curve [ 43 , 46 , 50 ] . The ob - jective of these models was to provide a hypothesis for the observed adhesion forces in the data . Following assumptions are made in most cases to reduce the complexity of the prob - lem . Such as , it is assumed that the electrostatic interaction , steric repulsion between cell and tip are absent [ 51 ] . The ad - hesion influence seen in the F - δ curve results entirely because of tip and cell membrane interaction . These assumptions are also valid in AFM - based cell indentation studies conducted in a liquid environment . Adopting the Hertzian contact models by neglecting the adhesion influence can lead to misinterpretation of mechanical properties . Johnson et al . ( 1971 ) [ 46 ] was first to account for the effect of interactive surface forces into contact mechanics and gave famous JKR theory . This model defines contact be - tween the rigid spherical probe and compliant material , where adhesion of sample is expressed in terms of surface energy per unit area ( γ ) and it is evaluated using peak value of adhesion force . Further , some quantitative methods have been devel - oped for the evaluation of elastic property considering the adhesion effect into contact model [ 52 – 54 ] . It is Sirghi et al . [ 43 , 49 ] , who extended the Sneddon ’ s solution [ 45 ] and en - abled simultaneous evaluation of both elastic and adhesion properties for sharp tip geometries . In these models , adhesion is evaluated by analyzing complete tip - sample detachment process captured in unloading part of indentation curve . The major limitation of these models is assumption of infinite thickness . Recently , in the works of Vishwanath et al . ( 2017 ) 0 0 . 5 1 1 . 5 2 2 . 5 0 0 . 1 0 . 2 0 . 3 0 . 4 0 . 5 0 . 6 0 . 7 E δ / E w δ / h Vishwanath [ 50 ] Sneddon [ 45 ] WithoutCorrec(cid:2)on With Correc(cid:2)on Fig . 9 Comparison of elastic properties of isotropic gel obtained from with and without BSE correction Exp Tech ( 2017 ) 41 : 673 – 687 681 [ 50 ] this limitation is also overcome and evaluated elastic and adhesion properties are made free of substrate effects . Adhesion property measurement and experimental parameter influence There are two common ways of expressing the adhesion prop - erty . In most studies , it is represented by peak detachment force ( PAF ) value seen in an F - δ curve [ 7 , 9 – 12 , 40 ] . This method of representation assumes adhesion effect as a single detachment event and observed force is largely influenced by tip geometry i . e . contact area . Another way of expressing this property is using specific energy per unit area ‘ γ ’ ( J / m 2 ) . It is based on work of adhesion concept [ 55 ] , evaluated by analyz - ing the complete retraction data and it is more material specific than PAF . From thermodynamic approach [ 56 ] , an approxi - mate number of non - specific bonds formed per unit contact area can be estimated using equation γ = ( n / A c ) k B T . Here ‘ n / A c ’ indicates number of bonds formed per unit contact area , ‘ k B ’ is Boltzmann constant and ‘ T ’ is the absolute tempera - ture . Results of indentation tests conducted on nucleus region of MCF - 7 and soft polyacrylamide gels with 1nN force and at 0 . 5 μ m / s velocity are shown in Table 3 . According to above equation , MCF - 7 cell and polyacrylamide gels ( PAM - A , PAM - B ) generates an average ≈ 20 , 315 , 48 , 318 and 59 , 259 bonds / μ m 2 with cantilever tip surface . It is also becomes ev - ident from Table 3 that assumption of infinite thickness leads to overestimation of adhesion property ( γ ) finite thickness cell samples . The thick soft gel showed higher value of PAF and comparatively stiff gel showed a higher number of bonds for - mation . As there is not much literature available on adhesion characterization using work of adhesion ( γ ) concept , further verification is needed for generalizing the relation between γ and PAF . One has to be aware that indentation on cells is a short duration study ( ≈ 3 - 6 s ) and duration of contact has an Table 2 The comparison of measured properties at ( A ) peripheral and ( B ) nucleus region of cell S / No . Force h ( μ m ) δ ( μ m ) E ( Pa ) [ 45 ] E ( Pa ) [ 50 ] % Δ E A 1nN 1 . 02 0 . 982 953 . 77 556 . 97 71 . 24 % B 11 . 898 2 . 1751 335 . 15 308 . 84 8 . 53 % Table 3 Non - specific adhesion of different samples in terms of surface energy per unit area ( γ ) and peak adhesion force ( PAF ) Sample h ( μ m ) γ ( J / m 2 ) [ 49 ] γ ( J / m 2 ) [ 50 ] PAF ( pN ) MCF - 7 11 . 4 ± 1 . 8 1 . 0217 × 10 − 4 0 . 86992 × 10 − 4 72 . 94 ± 24 . 14 PAM - A 1 ≈ 200 2 . 094 × 10 − 4 2 . 06909 × 10 − 4 192 . 21 ± 53 . 02 PAM - B 2 ≈ 200 2 . 5888 × 10 − 4 2 . 53763 × 10 − 4 128 . 36 ± 55 . 27 1 PAM - A = 4 % acrylamide and 0 . 1 % bis - acrylamide 2 PAM - B = 5 % acrylamide and 0 . 225 % bis - acrylamide - 3 - 2 - 1 0 1 2 x 10 - 6 - 2 0 2 4 6 8 10 x 10 - 10 Indentation ( m ) ) N ( ec r oF - 4 - 2 0 2 x 10 - 6 - 2 0 2 4 6 8 x 10 - 10 ) N ( ec r oF Indentation ( m ) 40μm a b F = 1nN v = 0 . 5 μ m / s Fig . 10 The inverted microscopic image of a cell showing the location of indentation and corresponding indentation data obtained from that location 682 Exp Tech ( 2017 ) 41 : 673 – 687 effect on the magnitude of adhesion [ 12 ] . Also experimental parameters like velocity , indenter size and force have an effect on measured adhesion property . The detailed discussion re - garding influence of these factors are provided in works of Zhang C Y et al . ( 2008 ) [ 51 ] . Effect of adhesive and viscous nature on elastic property In general a cell is a viscoelastic material that shows adhesive nature . In this material , the observed non - specific adhesive behavior appears only during tip withdrawal or unloading , where contact bonds between tip and sample are in tension . In contrast to adhesive nature , the viscous nature affects both loading and unloading curves . With the extended Sneddon contact model [ 49 , 50 ] , one can simultaneously evaluate both the elastic and adhesive properties from unloading curves . But does cell ’ s elastic response remains same in loading and unloading . To understand influence of these two factors on evaluated elastic property , indentation tests were carried out on two different stiffness polyacrylamide gel and MCF - 7 cells . In these tests , the unloading curves of gel material showed the presence of adhesive nature with no viscous influence , as shown in Fig . 6 ( c ) . The analysis of adhesion influenced unloading curve resulted in lower value of elastic property compared to the property extracted from loading curve . The properties extracted from different samples are presented in Table 4 . In our studies on stiff ( PAM - B ) and soft gel ( PAM - A ) , we have observed that this difference increases significantly from 1 . 2 % to 13 . 1 % . This quantitative difference in mean property shows the amount of adhesion role in indentation recovery . Unlike homogeneous gels , cell material ( MCF - 7 cells ) showed the presence of both viscous and adhesive na - ture in unloading curve . This leads to hysteresis loss between loading and unloading curve , which is an expected conse - quence . In this situation , unloading curves resulted in higher value of elastic property compared to loading curve . The tests carried out on MCF - 7 cells with 1nN indentation force at 0 . 5 μ m / s velocity showed 10 % difference in mean properties . Overall , the simultaneous analysis of both loading and unloading curves provides complete information of cell mate - rial i . e . stiffness , viscous nature , and adhesion . In preliminary studies , if it is seen hysteresis losses are high then it is better to conduct dynamic indentation studies instead of static indenta - tion , where viscous nature can be quantified as loss modulus [ 4 ] . In all the above comparative studies MCF - 7 cells and polyacrylamide ( PAM ) gel samples are used . The MCF - 7 cells are procured from NCCS Pune and cultured as per standard procedures in complete media made of DMEM , 10 % FBS along with the antibiotic and antimycotic solution . Different stiffness polyacrylamide ( PAM ) gels are prepared by follow - ing the procedures provided in [ 34 , 58 ] . Data Analysis In a static indentation test , mechanical properties of cell ma - terial are extracted by analyzing complete indentation data . The choice of a model is largely governed by material behav - ior i . e . whether it is expressing Hertzian and non - Hertzian behavior [ 18 ] and common strategies followed to handle AFM data are provided in the literature [ 15 , 16 ] . Based on contact model , the analysis procedure needs the location of the contact point ( CP ) , detachment point ( DP ) within F - δ curve and height of sample ( h ) at the point of indentation . These three parameters play a significant role in the accurate evaluation of mechanical properties . Effect of contact point and detachment of point location The contact point ( CP ) is the location of first point of contact between tip and sample . The indentation depth is measured from this point , hence estimated property is dependent on the location of CP . In soft material tests , CP cannot be identified with certainty because of lack of firm contact due to non - flat tip edge , thermal fluctuations of the plasma membrane and due to poor signal to noise ratio at the initial stages of inden - tation [ 57 , 59 ] . In the literature , a detailed discussion is pro - vided for optimal detection of CP location [ 15 , 59 ] . In an indentation curve , the significance of CP location is a function Table 4 The comparison of mean values of elastic properties from different models on three different samples by applying 1nN indentation force Sample h ( μ m ) E ( Pa ) [ 50 ] Loading Curve Unloading Curve MCF - 7 Cells 11 . 4 ± 1 . 8 395 . 21 ± 103 . 5 434 . 84 ± 82 . 9 PAM - A ≈ 200 946 . 41 ± 96 . 44 837 . 1 ± 184 . 11 PAM - B ≈ 200 2613 . 24 ± 193 2582 . 81 ± 172 . 1 - 60 - 40 - 20 0 20 40 60 - 200 - 150 - 100 - 50 0 50 100 150 200 % E V a r i a (cid:2) o n CP Loca(cid:2)on ( nm ) F = 2000pN 250pN R 2 max Post - Contact Pre - Contact Fig . 11 The effect of the contact point ( CP ) location on evaluated elastic property . Force - indentation curves with applying trigger force value of 0 . 25nN and 2nN are taken from nucleus region of the cell Exp Tech ( 2017 ) 41 : 673 – 687 683 of indentation depth . Its effect is shown in Fig . 11 as % vari - ation in evaluated elastic ( E ) property with respect the CP location . Two F - δ curves retrieved by applying 250pN and 2000pN force are analyzed using contact model equation ( 7 ) of Table 1 . The CP location is identified by following the procedure mentioned in reference [ 50 ] . It is clearly evident in the Fig . 11 that CP location is a major source of uncertainty in low indentation depth studies and missing CP location by 50 nm results in an erroneous conclusion . In the case of 2nN indentation test ( i . e . higher indentation depth study ) , its influ - ence decreases drastically and moving CP by 100 nm has less than ≈ 8 % influence on evaluated properties i . e . importance CP location decreases asymptotically at higher indentation depth studies . This is one of the reason why it is recommended in cell mechanics studies to indent ≈ 400 - 600nm to extract reliable information about the cell material . Similar to the contact point , the location of detachment point ( DP ) is necessary to separate the tip - sample interaction data from post - detachment data . In most cases , DP location is clearly visible but its exact location depends upon non - specific adhesive nature of the sample , as shown in Fig . 4 . In the absence of adhesion influence and clear detachment of tip and sample , location of DP can be detected following the similar approach as adopted for the detection of contact point . Figure 12 shows the curve fitting analysis of loading , unloading curves with residuals plotted along indentation axis using equation ( 7 ) of Table 1 . The magnitude of residuals are well within the 10 % of indentation force value , except at the beginning of the unloading due to creep at tip - sample contact . This is a common source of high residuals in unloading curve analysis and a similar observation is made by Zhu et al . ( 2016 ) [ 42 ] . It is evident from the literature that coefficient of deter - mination ( R 2 ) is vastly used to determine the goodness of fit of a model to experimental data but highest R 2 value does not assure minimum residuals all the time . It is necessary to mon - itor the magnitude and pattern of residual distribution . All the continuum model assume there will be smooth variation in the contact area and surface energy during loading as well as unloading . It is not possible to analyze the data showing inter - mediate break or steep detachments using these models . If unloading curves shows the zig - zag or non - smooth detachment , properties evaluated from regression analysis will not follow the exact detachment process and lead to high residuals . Other influencing parameters and experimental uncertainties The Local Thickness of the Cell It is one of the necessary information for analyzing finite thickness sample data . Usually , sample height is measured from force maps or AFM images . This results in underestimation of cell thickness because force maps / AFM images are created from constant force method , where a pre - fixed indentation / set point force is applied on a selected region of a sample . Soft matters like live cell material undergo deformation and morphological changes due to prolonged physical touch . The better approach for mea - suring sample thickness at the point of indentation is by fol - lowing the indentation technique . In this method , two subse - quent F - z curves are taken on the cell and on the hard Loading Curve Unloading Curve 0 1 2 3 4 5 x 10 - 7 - 1 0 1 2 3 4 5x 10 - 10 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 x 10 - 7 - 4 - 2 0 2 4 6x 10 - 11 Ind . Depth ( m ) ) N ( l a ud i se R 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 x 10 - 7 - 1 0 1 2 3 4 5x 10 - 10 ) N ( ec r oF - 1 - 0 . 5 0 0 . 5 1 x 10 - 6 - 1 0 1 2 3 4 5x 10 - 10 Indentation ( m ) ) N ( ec r oF CP DP 0 1 2 3 4 5 x 10 - 7 - 0 . 5 0 0 . 5 x 10 - 10 Ind . Depth ( m ) DP R 2 = 0 . 9903 a b CP R 2 = 0 . 9893 Fig . 12 ( a ) Experimental indentation curve showing the location of the contact point ( CP ) and detachment point ( DP ) . ( b ) First and second columns show the plots of loading and unloading data fitted with extended contact model for conical tip indentation and their residuals [ 50 ] 684 Exp Tech ( 2017 ) 41 : 673 – 687 substrate . The distance between contact points of these two F - z curves provides the local thickness of sample . This measure - ment technique has a limitation , it cannot be applied to cell monolayer and thin films where the substrate is not accessible and also measurements may get influenced from the surface tilts . In thick samples where AFM cannot be operated , the inverted microscopy can be used to evaluate the thickness by focusing on the substrate and sample upper surface sequentially . Sample Stiffening at High Strains In case force map studies on the cell surface , the use of tapered tips ( carries a tip radius of 20 - 60 nm to avoid damage to sample ) can cause high strains ( δ / h > 80 % ) in the peripheral region of the cell surface . A steep increase in force values with negligible change in indentation depth can be seen in obtained F - δ curves due to BSE influence , as shown in Fig . 10 ( a ) . In such case , data needs to be filtered and affected portion must be truncated during the analysis by monitoring the relative changes in in - dentation depth values with respect to force . The part of the F - δ curve that fits well to the contact model should be used for the analysis [ 43 ] . Poisson ’ s Ratio In most of the studies , Poisson ’ s ratio of 0 . 5 is used in the analysis because of high liquid content in cell material . The parametric studies show that varying it from 0 . 3 to 0 . 5 will result in 10 – 20 % fluctuation in evaluated prop - erties [ 18 , 60 ] . To avoid this uncertainty , the unknown Poisson ’ s ratio can be combined with elastic modulus to form an effective material constant but these results will be useful for comparing only with materials of similar compressibility . As it is an unknown quantity , the extracted mechanical prop - erties from the biological soft matters are always going to be effective material constants and these are not exact elastic modulus or Young ’ s modulus as per definition . Probe Cleanliness For a successful AFM indentation exper - iment , assuring probe cleanliness is pre - requisite for error - free data collection . Prior to experiment , coverslips on which cells are seeded must be washed with 1XPBS to remove loosely connected cells and debris . Conducting experiment within 30 h after seeding the cells is necessary to avoid the excess generation of ECM around and on the cell surface which hin - ders the experiment . The reliability of experimental data de - pends upon the surface cleanliness of probe , proper cleaning procedure must be followed after the experiments [ 61 , 62 ] . In the case of colloidal probes , acetone use must be limited be - cause it may dissolve the adhesive between the cantilever and spherical bead . In case of re - using probes , apart from visual inspection of tip surface through microscope , it is necessary to compare stiffness and resonance properties of the used one with the fresh cantilever . Refinements in contact models and their applications A growing demand for more accurate material characteriza - tion has inspired researchers to develop refined contact models . In order to reduce the uncertainty or error in measured properties , it becomes necessary to know the scope of appli - cation of these contact models . Such as , 1 ) refinements in tapered tip based contact models were made to accommodate the bluntness of tip i . e . tip apex curvature [ 63 , 64 ] . It has been found that significance of these improvements are limited to lower indentation depth studies ( < 100 nm ) [ 65 ] and error as - sociated with tip radius decreases drastically with increase in indentation depth [ 66 ] . 2 ) The eukaryotic cells have inelastic brush over their surface , it is the first interacting cell material with AFM tip . During indentation , probe squeezes upper brush and then cell body . In linear strain regime , cells cannot be treated as elastic without filtering this inelastic brush effect . The improvements in contact model and methods to process the data were proposed in the reference [ 67 ] . The inclusion of brush model in the analysis of indentation data collected from the spherical tips provides justification to the elastic medium assumption [ 68 ] . Further experimental validation is necessary to prove its usefulness . 3 ) Most of the contact models assume that sample is in firm contact with the substrate . In the case of loose or not - bonded sample studies , corrections are necessary to reduce the errors in the evaluated properties . The correc - tions are available in the literature for static and dynamic in - dentation with spherical probe [ 48 , 69 ] . For conical tip studies , substrate effect corrected model [ 50 ] can be used by changing the numerical factor 1 . 7795 to 1 . 388 throughout in equation ( 7 ) of Table 1 . Further improvements in contact models are necessary to take fullest advantage of AFM nano - indentation technique . Specifically , modelling nonlinear elastic indenta - tion to accommodate large strain behavior of biomaterials . Conclusions The present work summarizes most of the important parameters which should be properly chosen for successful conduct , with a greater probability of repeatability and reproducibility of AFM - based force spectroscopy studies . The sources of uncertainties are grouped into three broader categories based on their origin and discussed the possible solutions to them . Such as sample and culture based uncertainties can be minimized , if cell ’ s re - sponse to associated culture environment is pre - identified and experiments are conducted in similar environmental conditions for accurate interpretation of cellular responses and comparison of mechanical properties . An adequate understanding of funda - mental principles on which AFM is built and the right choice of experimental parameters is necessary to avoid capturing erro - neous indentation data and subsequently its effect in measured properties . Such as , photodiode calibration , virtual deflection Exp Tech ( 2017 ) 41 : 673 – 687 685 problem , optical lever sensitivity , choice of cantilever stiffness , tip geometry , indentation force , and velocity are some of the important decisive factors in the characterization of cell material . Here we have provided a set of force - indentation curves , which can be a mechanical response of any unknown cell . Referring to this , one can identify the mechanical nature of cell material . The popular mathematical contact models , their associated assumptions , recent developments in models are discussed with the support of experimental data . The impact of infinite thickness assumption , adhesion and viscous nature on evaluated mechanical properties are explained . This infor - mation eventually guides one to select an appropriate mathe - matical model for the analysis of any cell sample data . As stiffness and adhesion properties play a significant role in cell migration . A possible scope of simultaneous extraction of both elastic and non - specific adhesion of cell material ac - counting the finite thickness of the sample are provided . BSE , Bottom substrate effect ; CP , Contact point ; DP , Detachment point ; E , Elasticity , Pa ; F , Indentation force , nN ; k , Stiffness , N / m ; nNv , Velocity , μ m / s ; PAF , Peak value of adhesion force , v , Poisson ’ s ratio ; z , Z - piezo motion in trans - verse direction , μ m ; γ , Adhesion parameter , surface energy per unit area , J / m 2 ; δ , Indentation depth , μ m ; Δ , Represents difference ; , Half cone angle . References 1 . Müller DJ , Dufrêne YF ( 2008 ) Atomic force microscopy as a mul - tifunctional molecular toolbox in nanobiotechnology . Nat Nanotechnol 3 ( 5 ) : 261 – 269 2 . Pillet F , Chopin L , Formosa C , Dague É ( 2014 ) Atomic force mi - croscopy and pharmacology : from microbiology to cancerology . Biochim Biophys Acta 1840 ( 3 ) : 1028 – 1050 3 . LiQS , LeeGYH , OngCN , LimCT ( 2008 ) AFMindentationstudyof breast cancercells . BiochemBiophys Res Commun374 ( 4 ) : 609 – 613 4 . Rother J , Nöding H , Mey I , Janshoff A ( 2014 ) Atomic force microscopy - based microrheology reveals significant differences in the viscoelastic response between malign and benign cell lines . Open Biol 4 ( 5 ) : 140046 5 . Suresh S ( 2007 ) Biomechanics and biophysics of cancer cells . Acta Mater 55 ( 12 ) : 3989 – 4014 6 . Rotsch C , Radmacher M ( 2000 ) Drug - induced changesofcytoskel - etal structure and mechanics in fibroblasts : an atomic force micros - copy study . Biophys J 78 ( 1 ) : 520 – 535 7 . Palmieri D , Lucchetti D , Majorana A , Papi M , Maulucci G , Calapa F , Ciasca G , Giodno R , Sagambato A , Sprito MD ( 2015 ) Mechanical and structural comparison between primary tumor and lymph node metastasis cells in colorectal cancer . Soft Matter 11 ( 28 ) : 5719 – 5726 8 . Cross SE , Yu - Sheng J , Jianyu R , Gimzewski JK ( 2007 ) Nanomechanical analysis of cells from cancer patients . Nat . Nanotechnol 2 ( 12 ) : 780 – 783 9 . Puech P , Poole K , Knebel D , Muller DJ ( 2006 ) A new technical approach to quantify cell – cell adhesion forces by AFM . Ultramicroscopy 106 : 637 – 644 10 . Shinto H , Aso Y , Fukasawa T , Higashitani K ( 2012 ) Biointerfaces adhesion of melanoma cells to the surfaces of microspheres studied by atomic force microscopy . Colloids Surf . B : Biointerfaces 91 : 114 – 121 11 . Wang B , Guo P , Auguste DT ( 2015 ) Mapping the CXCR4 receptor on breast cancer cells . Biomaterials 57 : 161 – 168 12 . Omidvar R , Tafazzoli - shadpour M , Shokrgozar MA , Rostami M ( 2014 ) Atomic force microscope - based single cell force spectros - copy of breast cancer cell lines : an approach for evaluating cellular invasion . J Biomech 47 ( 13 ) : 3373 – 3379 13 . Mierke CT ( 2014 ) The fundamental role of mechanical properties in the progression of cancer disease and inflammation . Reports Prog . Phys 77 ( 7 ) : 76602 14 . Wagner R , Shaw G , Pratt J , Raman A , Moon R ( 2011 ) Uncertainty quantification in nanomechanical measurements using the atomic force microscope : supplemental material . Nanotechnology 22 ( 45 ) : 455703 15 . Lin DC , Dimitriadis EK , Horkay F ( 2007 ) Robust strategies for automated AFM force curve analysis — I . Non - adhesive indenta - tion of soft , inhomogeneous materials . J . Biomech . Eng 129 : 430 – 440 16 . Lin DC , Dimitriadis EK , Horkay F ( 2007 ) Robust strategies for automated AFM force curve analysis - II : adhesion - influenced in - dentation of soft , elastic materials . J . Biomech . Eng 129 ( 6 ) : 904 – 912 17 . ChenJ ( 2014 ) Nanobiomechanicsofliving cells : a review . Interface Focus 4 18 . Lin DC , Horkay F ( 2008 ) Nanomechanics of polymer gels and biological tissues : a critical review of analytical approaches in the Hertzian regime and beyond . Soft Matter 4 : 669 – 682 19 . Leporatti S , Vergara D , Zacheo A , Vergaro V , Maruccio G , Cingolani R , Rinaldi R ( 2009 ) Cytomechanical and topological investigation of MCF - 7 cells by scanning force microscopy . Nanotechnology 20 ( 5 ) : 55103 20 . Codan B , Martinelli V , Mestroni L , SbaizeroO ( 2013 ) Atomic force microscopy of 3T3 and SW - 13 cell lines : an investigation of cell elasticity changes due to fixation . Mater Sci Eng C 33 ( 6 ) : 3303 – 3308 21 . Takai E , Costa KD , Shaheen A , Hung CT , Guo XE ( 2005 ) Osteoblast elastic modulus measured by atomic force microscopy is substrate dependent . Ann Biomed Eng 33 ( 7 ) : 963 – 971 22 . Docheva D , Padula D , Schieker M , Clausen - Schaumann H ( 2010 ) Effect of collagen I and fibronectin on the adhesion , elasticity and cytoskeletal organization of prostate cancer cells . Biochem Biophys Res Commun 402 ( 2 ) : 361 – 366 23 . Kuznetsova TG , Starodubtseva MN , Yegorenkov NI , Chizhik SA , Zhdanov RI ( 2007 ) Atomic force microscopy probing of cell elas - ticity . Micron 38 ( 8 ) : 824 – 833 24 . McPhee G , Dalby MJ , Riehle M , Yin H ( 2010 ) Can common ad - hesion molecules and microtopography affect cellular elasticity ? A combined atomic force microscopy and optical study . Med Biol Eng Comput 48 ( 10 ) : 1043 – 1053 25 . Zhou Z , Zheng C , Li S , Zhou X , Liu Z , He Q , Zhang N , Ngan A ( 2013 ) AFM nanoindentation detection of the elastic modulus of tongue squamous carcinoma cells with different metastatic poten - tials . Nanomedicine Nanotechnology Biol . Med 9 ( 7 ) : 864 – 874 26 . Liu H , Sun Y , Simmons CA ( 2013 ) Determination of local and global elastic moduli of valve interstitial cells cultured on soft sub - strates . J Biomech 46 ( 11 ) : 1967 – 1971 27 . Nikkhah M , Strobl JS , Schmelz EM , Agah M ( 2011 ) Evaluation of the influence of growth medium composition on cell elasticity . J Biomech 44 ( 4 ) : 762 – 766 28 . Lieber SC , Aubry N , Pain J , Diaz G , Kim S - J , Vatner SF ( 2004 ) Aging increases stiffness of cardiac myocytes measured by atomic force microscopy nanoindentation . Am J Physiol Heart Circ Physiol 287 : H645 – H651 686 Exp Tech ( 2017 ) 41 : 673 – 687 29 . Prabhune M , Belge G , Dotzauer A , Bullerdiek J , Radmacher M ( 2012 ) Comparison of mechanical properties of normal and malig - nant thyroid cells . Micron 43 ( 12 ) : 1267 – 1272 30 . Efremov YM , Dokrunova AA , Bagrov DV , Kudryashova KS , Sokolova OS , Shaitan KV ( 2013 ) The effects of confluency on cell mechanical properties . J Biomech 46 ( 6 ) : 1081 – 1087 31 . Hutter JL , Bechhoefer J ( 1993 ) Calibration of atomic - force micro - scope tips . Rev . Sci . Instrum 64 ( 7 ) : 1868 32 . Sader JE , Borgani R , Gibson CT , Haviland DB et al ( 2016 ) A virtual intrument to standardise the caliberation of atomic force microscope cantilevers . Rev Sci Instrum 87 : 093711 33 . Sader JE , Larson I , Mulvaney P , White LR ( 1995 ) Method for the calibration of atomic force microscope cantilevers . Rev . Sci . Instrum . 66 ( 7 ) : 3789 – 3798 34 . Tse JR , Engler AJ ( 2010 ) Preparation of hydrogel substrates with tunable mechanical properties . Curr . Protoc . Cell Biol 47 : 1 – 16 35 . Mathieu PS , Loboa EG ( 2012 ) Cytoskeletal and focal adhesion influences on mesenchymal stem cell shape , mechanical properties , and differentiation down osteogenic , adipogenic , and chondrogenic pathways . Tissue Eng B Rev 18 ( 6 ) : 436 – 444 36 . Haga H , Sasaki S , Kawabata K , Ito E , Ushiki T , Sambongi T ( 2000 ) Elasticity mapping of living fibroblasts by AFM and immunofuorescence observation of the cytoskeleton . Ultramicroscopy 82 : 253 – 258 37 . Almqvist N , Bhatia R , Primbs G , Desai N , BanerjeeS , Lal R ( 2004 ) Elasticity and adhesionforcemapping revealsreal - tme clustering of growth factor receptors and associated changes in local cellular rheological properties . Biophys J 86 : 1753 – 1762 38 . Wagh AA , Roan E , Chapman KE , Desai LP , Rendon DA , Eckstein EC , Waters CM ( 2008 ) Localized elasticity measured in epithelial cells migrating ata wound edge usingatomicforcemicroscopy . Am J Physiol Lung Cell Mol Physiol 295 : L54 – L60 39 . Demichelis A , Divieto C , Mortati L , Pavarelli S , Sassi G , Sassi MP ( 2015 ) Toward the realization of reproducible atomic force micros - copy measurements of elastic modulus in biological samples . J . Biomech 48 ( 6 ) : 1099 – 1104 40 . Cross SE , Jin Y - S , Tondre J , Wong R , Rao J , Gimzewski JK ( 2008 ) AFM - based analysis of human metastatic cancer cells . Nanotechnology 19 ( 38 ) : 384003 41 . Lekka M , Gil D , Pogoda K , Duli ń ska - Litewka J , Jach R , Gostek J , Klymenko O , Prauzner - Bechcicki S , Stachura Z , Wiltowska - Zuber J , Oko ń K , Laidler P ( 2012 ) Cancer cell detection in tissue sections using AFM . Arch Biochem Biophys 518 ( 2 ) : 151 – 156 42 . Zhu X , Siamantouras E , Liu KK , Liu X ( 2016 ) Determination of work of adhesion of biological cell under AFM bead indentation . J Mech Behav Biomed Mater 56 : 77 – 86 43 . Sirghi L , Ponti J , Broggi F , Rossi F ( 2008 ) Probing elasticity and adhesion of live cells by atomic force microscopy indentation . Eur Biophys J 37 ( 6 ) : 935 – 945 44 . Johnson KL ( 1985 ) Contact mechanics . Cambridge University press , Cambridge 45 . SneddonIN ( 1965 ) The relationbetween loadandpenetration inthe axisymmetric boussinesq problem for a punch of arbitrary profile . Int J Eng Sci 3 ( 1 ) : 47 – 57 46 . Johnson KL , Kendall KK , Roberts D ( 1971 ) Surface energy and the contact of elastic solids . Proc R Soc A Math Phys Eng Sci 324 ( 1558 ) : 301 – 313 47 . Bilodeau GG ( 1992 ) Regular pyramidpunch problem . J Appl Mech 59 : 519 – 523 48 . Dimitriadis EK , Horkay F , Maresca J , Kachar B , Chadwick RS ( 2002 ) Determination of elastic moduli of thin layers of soft mate - rial using the atomic force microscope . Biophys J 82 : 2798 – 2810 49 . Sirghi L ( 2010 ) Atomic force microscopy indentation of living cells . Microscopy : science , technology . Applications and Education , Formatex , Badajoz , pp 433 – 440 50 . Managuli V , Roy S ( 2017 ) Simultaneous analysis of elastic and non - specific adhesive properties of thin sample and biological cell considering bottom substrate Effect . J Biomech Eng 139 ( 9 ) . doi : 10 . 1115 / 1 . 4037289 51 . Zhang CY , Zhang YW ( 2008 ) Computational analysis of adhesion force in the indentation of cells using atomic force microscopy . Phys . Rev . E - Stat . Nonlinear , Soft Matter Phys 77 ( 2 ) : 1 – 8 52 . Scheffer L , Bitler A , Ben - Jacob E , Korenstein R ( 2001 ) Atomic force pulling : probing the local elasticity of the cell membrane . Eur Biophys J 30 ( 2 ) : 83 – 90 53 . Sun Y , Akhremitchev B , Walker GC ( 2004 ) Using the adhesive interaction between atomic force microscopy tips and polymer sur - faces to measure the elastic modulus of compliant sample . Langmuir 20 ( 14 ) : 5837 – 5845 54 . Sen S , SubramanianS , Discher DE ( 2005 ) Indentationandadhesive probing of a cell membrane with AFM : theoretical model and ex - periments . Biophys J 89 ( 5 ) : 3203 – 3213 55 . Israelachvili JN ( 1992 ) Intermolecular and surface forces . Academic Press , Elsevier 56 . Zhu C ( 2000 ) Kinetics and mechanics of cell adhesion . J Biomech 33 ( 1 ) : 23 – 33 57 . Crick SL , Yin FC ( 2007 ) Assessing micromechanical properties of cells with atomicforce microscopy : importanceofthe contact point . Biomech . Model . Mechanobiol 6 ( 3 ) : 199 – 210 58 . Pelham RJ , Wang Y ( 1997 ) Cell locomotion and focal adhesions are regulated by substrate flexibility . National Academy of Sciences 94 ( 25 ) : 13661 – 13665 59 . Gavara N ( 2016 ) Combined strategies for optimal detection of the contact point in AFM force - indentation curves obtained on thin samples and adherent cells . Nat . Publ 6 : 21267 60 . Darling EM , Topel M , Zauscher S , Vail T ( 2008 ) Viscoelastic prop - erties of human mesenchymally - derived stem cells and primary osteoblasts , chondrocytes , and adipocytes . J . Biomech 41 ( 2 ) : 454 – 464 61 . Sirghi L ( 2011 ) Plasma cleaning of silicon surface of atomic force microscopy Probes . Rom . Reports Phys 56 : 144 – 148 62 . Sirghi L , Kylin O , Gilliland D , Ceccone G , Rossi F , Kylia O ( 2006 ) Cleaning and hydrophilization of atomic force microscopy silicon probes . J Phys Chem B 110 ( 51 ) : 25975 – 25981 63 . Briscoe BJ , Sebastian KS , Adams MJ ( 1999 ) The effect of indenter geometry on the elastic response to indentation . J . Phys . D . Appl . Phys 27 ( 6 ) : 1156 – 1162 64 . Rico F , Roca - Cusachs P , Gavara N , Farré R , Rotger M , Navajas D ( 2005 ) Probing mechanical properties of living cells by atomic force microscopy with blunted pyramidal cantilever tips . Phys Rev E 72 ( 2 ) : e21914 65 . Mathur AB , Collinsworth AM , Reichert WM , Kraus WE , Truskey G ( 2001 ) A : endothelial , cardiac muscle and skeletal muscle exhibit different viscous and elastic properties as determined by atomic force microscopy . J Biomech 34 : 1545 – 1553 66 . Costa KD , Yin FC ( 1999 ) Analysis of indentation : implications for measuring mechanical properties with atomic force microscopy . J . Biomech . Eng 121 ( 5 ) : 462 – 471 67 . Sokolov I , Dokukin ME , Guz NV ( 2013 ) Method for quantitative measurements of the elastic modulus of biological cells in AFM indentation experiments . Methods 60 ( 2 ) : 202 – 213 68 . Guz N , Dokukin M , Kalaparthi V , Sokolov I ( 2014 ) Article if cell mechanics can be described by elastic modulus : study of different models and probes used in indentation experiments . Biophys J 107 ( 3 ) : 564 – 575 69 . Mahaffy RE , Park S , Gerde E , Kas J , Shih CK ( 2004 ) Quantitative analysis of the viscoelastic properties of thin regions of fibroblasts using atomic force microscopy . Biophys . J 86 : 1777 – 1793 Exp Tech ( 2017 ) 41 : 673 – 687 687