UC Merced Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society Title Early and Repeated Exposure to Examples Improves Creative Work Permalink https : / / escholarship . org / uc / item / 2tv82969 Journal Proceedings of the Annual Meeting of the Cognitive Science Society , 34 ( 34 ) ISSN 1069 - 7977 Authors Kulkarni , Chinmay Dow , Steven Klemmer , Scott Publication Date 2012 Peer reviewed eScholarship . org Powered by the California Digital Library University of California Early and Repeated Exposure to Examples Improves Creative Work Chinmay Kulkarni Stanford University HCI Group Stanford , CA 94305 - 9035 USA chinmay @ cs . stanford . edu Steven P . Dow Carnegie Mellon , HCI Institute Pittsburgh , PA 15213 spdow @ cs . cmu . edu Scott R Klemmer Stanford University HCI Group Stanford , CA 94305 - 9035 USA srk @ cs . stanford . edu Abstract This article presents the results of an online creativity experi - ment ( N = 81 ) that examines the effect of example timing on creative output . In the between - subjects experiment , partici - pants drew animals to inhabit an alien Earth - like planet while being exposed to examples early , late , or repeatedly during the experiment . We ﬁnd that exposure to examples increases con - formity . Early exposure to examples improves creativity ( mea - sured by the number of common and novel features in draw - ings , and subjective ratings by independent raters ) . Repeated exposure to examples interspersed with prototyping leads to even better results . However , late exposure to examples in - creases conformity , but does not improve creativity . Introduction Examples are considered “a cornerstone of creative practice” ( Herring et al . , 2009 ) . Leveraging examples of prior work is an established technique in design ( Buxton & Buxton , 2007 ) , and many design programs encourage students to use examples of existing designs ( Sch ¨ on , 1985 ) . However , the strategies employed by designers to seek and use examples is largely ad - hoc ( Newman & Landay , 2000 ) . Frequently , these strategies differ in timing—in an infor - mal survey we conducted among designers around Stanford University , one respondent described inspirational examples as “huge parts of my initial steps . I need to know as much as I can about the topic before I feel comfortable moving for - ward . ” In contrast , another said that “I don’t do this [ look at examples ] at the very beginning because it gets your mind stuck in one way of thinking . ” This fear of conformity was echoed by other participants , and one went on to say that he looked for inspiration only when “facing a creative block . ” These different strategies suggest that examples may mod - ify the creative process differently depending on the point in the design process at which they are presented . This leads to the practical question : what are the tradeoffs of looking at examples earlier or later in the design process ? Further - more , even if there is an “ideal” time to view examples , some designers feel ubiquitous information access and their own “thirst for knowledge” bombards them constantly with exam - ples ( Herring et al . , 2009 ) . How does this repeated exposure to examples affect the creative process ? This article presents the results of an online creativity ex - periment we conducted on Amazon Mechanical Turk . Par - ticipants in the experiment generated drawings of alien crea - tures as a creative task . The pervasive use of sketches to develop and communicate conceptual designs in the creative ﬁelds ( Suwa & Tversky , 1997 ) , and the use of similar tasks in prior work Ward ( 1994 ) inspired the choice of the drawing task . Focusing on drawings of alien ﬁgures makes this task ( a ) “alien drone . . . ” ( b ) “balances on its circular appendages . . . ” ( c ) “buglike alien . . . ” ( d ) : “This round furry crea - ture gets around either by walking on his retractable legs or rolling across sur - faces . . . ” Figure 1 : Sampling of drawings created in our experiment , with excerpts of participant - provided descriptions readily accessible to non - designers ( see Figure 1 for a sam - pling of drawings created by participants ) . Participants were randomly assigned to one of four conditions : examples early , examples late , examples early and late , or a control condi - tion without examples . This study’s creativity measures were the number of uncommon and novel features in the drawings and Likert - scale ratings by condition - blind raters . Confor - mity was measured by the number of critical features ( fea - tures that were directly copied from examples ) . This paper’s experimental results suggest that while expo - sure to examples increases conformity , such exposure early in the creative process improves the creativity in the output , while later exposure provides no such beneﬁt . Furthermore , exposure to examples followed by prototyping and subse - quent re - exposure to the same examples improved creative output even more . This ﬁnding may allay some fears of ex - ample bombardment . Lastly , in our experiment , participants exposed to examples created fewer drawings , so these exam - ple driven quality improvements may come at the cost of a lower quantity of creative work . Related work Examples : Bringing existing solutions to mind is crucial for creative generation ( Smith et al . , 1993 ) . The Structured Imag - 635 ination theory by Ward ( 1994 ) describes creativity as a multi - step process : in the recall step , people bring to mind existing solutions and constructs . Then , in the modiﬁcation step , these constructs are altered in novel ways . Similar analogical pro - cesses are found in other areas of cognition such as analysis and learning ( Gentner & Colhoun , 2010 ) . Designers often incorporate features from examples di - rectly into their work ( Marsh & Bower , 1993 , “inadvertent plagiarism” ) ; but examples also “ultimately alter the nature of the creative product” in more subtle ways ( Marsh et al . , 1996 ) . Lee et al . ( 2010 ) found that designing with examples generally improves the quality of creative work . These ﬁnd - ings have also led to tools for discovering , storing and retriev - ing examples ( Kerne et al . , 2008 ; Ritchie et al . , 2011 ) . The current work is an extension of Marsh et al . ( 1996 ) ( it - self an extension of Smith et al . , 1993 ) , so we describe Marsh et al . ’s experiment in more detail . In their experiment , partic - ipants generated drawings of non - Earth - like creatures to in - habit an alien planet similar to Earth . In the example condi - tions , experimenters provided participants example drawings of aliens at the start of the experiment . Example drawings all had certain attributes , or critical features , in common—four legs , antennae and a tail . The proportion of these critical fea - tures incorporated into participants’ own drawings was used as a measure of conformity . The proportion of other , non - critical , features was used as a measure of creativity . These non - critical features were classiﬁed as either novel ( not com - monly found on animals , such as speakers or propellors ) , un - common ( such as a pouch or tentacles ) , or common ( such as a nose , mouth or two legs ) . Participants exposed to examples incorporated more criti - cal features in their drawings , but not at the expense of novel and uncommon features . Instead , their drawings contained fewer common features . This suggests that while examples increase conformity by increasing activation of critical fea - tures , they do not block retrieval of original ideas ( such as novel and uncommon features ) . We use Marsh et al . ’s feature - based evaluation metric , and extend their work by examining how the example timing af - fects creative output . In addition , we study the effects of re - peated exposure to examples in the creative process . Research methods Our experiment uses a task ( drawing sketches of alien ﬁgures ) that has previously been employed to study creativity in a context of no prior training ( Marsh & Bower , 1993 ; Ward , 1994 ) . Drawing tasks have also been demonstrated to be appropriate for online experiments ( Yu & Nickerson , 2011 ) . This experiment was run on Amazon Mechanical Turk ( www . mturk . com ) , a web - based crowdsourcing plaform . This platform has been used for experiments on affect and creativity ( Lewis et al . , 2011 ) . Mechanical Turk workers have also been employed to provide perception responses ( Heer & Bostock , 2010 ) , objective labels ( Deng et al . , 2009 ; Snow et al . , 2008 ) , and subjective ratings ( Dow et al . , 2011 ) . Condition Task before ﬁrst session Task before second session Control Think Think Early Examples Think Late Think Examples Repeated Examples Examples Table 1 : Experimental conditions Experiment Our experiment had two goals . First , we wanted to see if exposure to examples at the start of a creative process leads to a different quality of creative output in contrast to exposure when the creative process is underway . Second , we wanted to to investigate the role of repeated exposure to examples . Our initial hypothesis was that exposure to examples later in the creative process would have the same creative beneﬁts but lower conformity than exposure at the start . This hypoth - esis was motivated by Weisberg ( 1999 ) , who observed that creative failures are more often explained by the absence of relevant information than the presence of irrelevant informa - tion . Furthermore , the presence of one’s own ideas would inhibit the adoption of sub - optimal ideas from late exposure to examples ( mirroring the intuitions of some designers ) . In the case of repeated exposure , the activation account would predict that , similar to showing more examples at once , this would result in greater degree of conformity due to higher activation of features present in examples . Participants We solicited US - resident participants on Mechanical Turk with a compensation of US $ 1 . 00 . 81 participants responded ( 27 male , 54 female ; median age 34 ) . All participants reported a high - school diploma or a higher degree . This between - subjects experiment randomly assigned participants to one of four conditions . Procedure The experiment comprised two drawing sessions , each lasting 7 minutes . Participants were asked to create as many draw - ings as they could during the drawing session . To encourage this ( and discourage participants from spending time perfect - ing only a few drawings ) , the experimental platform included a clear - canvas tool but no line - eraser tool ( Figure 2 ) . Each session was preceded by a condition - speciﬁc task in which participants were either exposed to examples , or asked to think about the aliens they planned to draw in the next ses - sion ( Table 1 ) . At the start of the experiment , all participants saw a Web page with instructions adapted from Marsh et al . ( 1996 ) to account for two drawing sessions and a break ( see hci . stanford . edu / example / aliens for actual prompts used ) . For the Example task , participants were shown three ex - ample alien drawings for 90 seconds ( see Figure 4 ) . We used drawings from ( Marsh et al . , 1996 ) , p . 672 . Using the prompt 636 Figure 2 : Drawing canvas with time remaining ( top right ) , and an option to clear the canvas ( bottom left , red ) of Marsh et al . ( 1996 ) ( and Smith et al . , 1993 ) , participants were instructed that examples were only shown to help them create their original creations , and that we did not want them to copy the examples in any aspect . For the Think task , par - ticipants were asked to “think about aliens” they planned to draw in the next session for 90 seconds . In the Repeated Ex - amples condition , participants saw the same three examples before both drawing sessions . After the second drawing session , participants ﬁlled out a survey that covered demographics , artistic interest and ability and the thought - process they followed while drawing . Labeling features in drawings Participants generated a total of 543 drawings . Each drawing was labelled with the features it incorporated from the fea - ture set of Marsh et al . ( 1996 ) ( Appendix ) . Drawings were annotated on Mechanical Turk , since the features were well - deﬁned . All workers were US resident and at least 18 years of age , and were compensated US $ 0 . 50 for the task . Workers who participated in the experiment were disallowed from the annotation task ( and vice - versa ) . All annotators were blind to experimental condition . Workers were trained using a drawing from a pilot partic - ipant ( Figure 3 ) . Then , each worker annotated a set of seven randomly assigned drawings . Workers also rated how cre - ative they found the drawing on a 7 - point Likert scale ( each annotator saw at least one drawing from each condition ) . Lastly , annotators could ﬂag offensive ( or non - alien ) draw - ings . Upon review , 34 ﬂagged drawings were discarded by the authors . Each drawing was annotated by two workers . Disputes in annotation were resolved by the authors . Figure 3 : Training interface for annotators . The training in - terface shows what features to label ( “click antennae” ) . The actual annotation is performed on an identical list of features . Figure 4 : Example drawings provided to participants . All examples contain critical features—four legs , antennae , and a tail . 637 Condition Critical Common Uncommon Novel Total Drawings per session Likert Rating Control 0 . 39 4 . 21 0 . 95 0 . 47 6 . 03 4 . 00 3 . 71 Early 0 . 57 3 . 91 1 . 15 0 . 40 6 . 04 3 . 00 4 . 10 Late 0 . 52 3 . 82 0 . 78 0 . 45 5 . 57 3 . 68 3 . 43 Repeated 0 . 64 4 . 20 1 . 21 0 . 54 6 . 60 3 . 00 4 . 22 Table 2 : Table of means . Means that differed from control at p < 0 . 05 are bold , those marginally signiﬁcant ( p < 0 . 1 ) are in italics ( p - values from the post - hoc analysis using mixed models , see section Results ) . Results We analyze data using a mixed - effects linear model . Since participants drew multiple drawings per drawing session , un - less noted , we consider the participant as a random effect with a ﬁxed intercept ; and experimental condition , drawing session ( ﬁrst or second ) , and an interaction term as ﬁxed - effects in all our analysis below . Reported p - values are from a Monte - Carlo ( MCMC ) simulation ( Baayen et al . , 2008 ) . Examples increase conformity Following Smith et al . ( 1993 ) , conformity was measured as the number of critical features incorporated per drawing . Without controlling for the drawing session , examples shown at the start of the experiment increased the number of critical features that were incorporated into drawings ( t ( 507 ) = 2 . 06 , p < 0 . 05 ) , consistent with results from ( Smith et al . , 1993 ; Marsh et al . , 1996 ) . Participants in the Late Examples con - dition show higher conformity in the second drawing session ( i . e . post - exposure ) [ t ( 419 ) = 1 . 83 , p = 0 . 07 ] . Early exposure increases uncommon features The number of uncommon features per drawing increased in the Early Examples condition ( t ( 419 ) = 1 . 61 , p = 0 . 06 ) , and in the Repeated Examples condition ( t ( 419 ) = 1 . 72 , p < 0 . 05 ) , but not in the Late Examples condition ( t ( 419 ) = − 0 . 45 , p = 0 . 649 ) ( Figure 5 ) . The number of novel features did not vary signiﬁcantly across condition . Participants in the Late exposure condition created drawings with marginally fewer common features ( t ( 419 ) = − 1 . 33 , p = 0 . 09 ) and fewer total number of features ( t ( 419 ) = − 1 . 30 , p = 0 . 09 ) . Early and Repeated exposure leads to higher subjective ratings Annotators rated drawings in the Early Examples and the Repeated Examples conditions higher ( t = 2 . 24 , p < 0 . 05 and t = 2 . 65 , p < 0 . 01 , respectively ) . Intra - class corre - lation amongst raters ( average , random raters ) was 0 . 54 ( F ( 508 , 508 ) = 2 . 2 , p < 0 . 001 ) . Examples reduce number of drawings Unlike Marsh et al . ( 1996 ) , participants created fewer draw - ings per session in all example conditions 1 [ Early : t ( 149 ) = − 2 . 50 , p < 0 . 05 ; Late : t ( 149 ) = − 2 . 14 , p < 0 . 05 , Repeated : 1 Since the number of drawings is not a repeated measure , anal - ysis uses a ﬁxed - effects model with interaction , the experimental condition and the type of session being independent variables . Figure 5 : Participants in early and repeated exposure con - ditions included more uncommon features compared to Late exposure / control conditions . t ( 149 ) = − 2 . 63 , p < 0 . 05 ] ( Figure 6 ) . Participants in the Late Examples condition created fewer drawings after expo - sure to examples ( µ before = 4 . 10 , µ after = 3 . 13 , t ( 149 ) = 1 . 91 , p interaction < 0 . 05 ) . Discussion Example timing affects creative output These results suggest that exposure to examples at any time increases conformity . However , early exposure increases the number of uncommon features and subjective ratings of cre - ativity , while late exposure provides no such beneﬁts . This runs counter to both our initial hypothesis and the intuitions of many designers who delay looking at examples in an ef - fort to reduce ﬁxation and think “out of the box” ( Jansson & Smith , 1991 ) . One possible explanation for these effects is that early ex - posure to examples aids the designer in understanding the scope of acceptable solutions to a problem , and helps form an initial representation of the creative concept ( Heit , 1992 ) . Prototyping results in subsequent abstraction and reﬁnement of the initial representation ( Lim et al . , 2008 ) . Without ini - tial exposure to examples , the reﬁned representation may dif - 638 Figure 6 : Participants drew fewer drawings when examples were shown ( in the Late examples condition , participants drew fewer drawings in the second session ) . fer widely from the one embodied in examples , which would make it harder to map concepts from the example to one’s own representation . When exposure is only for a short dura - tion ( 90s in our experiment ) , it is possible that only concepts with high enough activation , such as critical features in our experiment , are transferred ( motivated by Boroditsky , 2007 ) . Another counter - intuitive experimental result is that re - peated exposure to the same examples led to higher creative quality . This may also be explained by a seeding - and - transfer account . Initial exposure to examples prevents the reﬁned representation formed by prototyping from diverging greatly from the one embodied in the examples . This reﬁned yet sim - ilar representation would then allow the designer to learn dif - ferent concepts on re - exposure to the same example . In essence , the crucial ingredient that allows repeated ex - posure to improve creativity might be the prototyping that oc - curs between exposures . Why did examples yield fewer drawings ? Examples play a dual role in design – ﬁrst , they inspire differ - ent solutions and ways of thinking . Second , they help form expectations about what characteristics a solution needs to have ( Herring et al . , 2009 ) . The decrease in in the number of drawings created may be due to this second role . Seeing examples may have signaled a higher threshold for “accept - able” drawings , resulting in participants spending more time on each drawing , and creating fewer drawings overall . Our data suggest that this expectation - setting role has a dif - ferent behavior than the inspirational role . While the num - ber of drawings created decreased nearly uniformly post - exposure , changes in creativity measures ( uncommon fea - tures and subjective ratings ) were non - uniform . Therefore , while examples may set expectations any time they are pre - Figure 7 : Participant - provided description : “An ambush predator that does move very much , but lures prey into its mouth using scent to make them think there is food there . It only occasionally shifts using the pads on its bottom , which can also suck up nutrients from the ground or water for emer - gencies . ” Rated highly creative by our raters , this drawing has no novel or uncommon visual features , and uses a non - visual feature ( scent ) . sented ( including late in the design process ) , their inspira - tional value may be time - dependent . Multiple Measures of Creativity Results from both the feature - counting measure of creativity from prior work and the Likert - scale ratings provided by an - notators are largely consistent . While the Likert ratings are subjective , they better capture the creativity in some draw - ings that combine common or critical features in a novel way , or use a non - visual feature ( for e . g . see Figure 7 ) . Using both together provides a better characterization of creativity . Conclusions and future work This work demonstrates the beneﬁts of early and repeated ex - posure to examples on creative work . In addition , it suggests that conformity may be the price one pays for these gains , re - gardless of when examples are seen . Hopefully , these results will encourage designers to seek examples early and often in the design process , when they are most useful . This experiment also demonstrates a replication ( and ex - tension ) of creativity studies in an online crowdsourced en - vironment . Crowdsourced experiments often offer a lower cost , have a faster time to completion , and provide access to wider populations ( Heer & Bostock , 2010 ) . This paper’s experiment and the labeling tasks took one week on Ama - zon Mechanical Turk . This was possible because the labeling scheme from Marsh et al . ( 1996 ) provided this study with a clear taxonomy of features that could be easily labeled by non - experts . We suggest crowdsourcing as a viable platform both for experiments that do not need participants with spe - cialized skills or background ( or modiﬁcation per participant ) and for analysis / labeling tasks that easily veriﬁable . This work also raises a number of questions . First , the re - sults of the repeated - exposure experimental condition indi - cate that the processes of prototyping and learning from ex - amples may be intertwined in a creative task . Further empir - 639 ical studies could characterize the precise nature of this in - teraction . Second , this work shows that repeated exposure to examples is beneﬁcial . How does the frequency of ( or interval between ) such exposures affect this result ? Third , designers often spend years acquiring skills and speciﬁc domain knowl - edge . How do such skills and knowledge affect their interac - tion with examples ? Furthermore , similar to cross - cultural effects of prototyping ( Kim & Hinds , 2012 ) , are effects of examples different in different cultures ? Finally , how can the results of this work inform the design of tools that support creative work ? Acknowledgements We thank the Hasso Plattner Design Thinking Research Pro - gram for supporting this work . References Baayen , R . , Davidson , D . , & Bates , D . ( 2008 ) . Mixed - effects modeling with crossed random effects for subjects and items . Journal of memory and language , 59 ( 4 ) , 390 – 412 . Boroditsky , L . ( 2007 ) . Comparison and the development of knowledge . Cognition , 102 ( 1 ) , 118 – 128 . Buxton , B . , & Buxton , W . ( 2007 ) . Sketching user experi - ences : getting the design right and the right design . Mor - gan Kaufmann . Deng , J . , Dong , W . , Socher , R . , Li , L . , Li , K . , & Fei - Fei , L . ( 2009 ) . Imagenet : A large - scale hierarchical image database . In Computer vision and pattern recognition , 2009 . cvpr 2009 . ieee conf on ( pp . 248 – 255 ) . Dow , S . , Fortuna , J . , Schwartz , D . , Altringer , B . , Schwartz , D . , & Klemmer , S . ( 2011 ) . Prototyping dynamics : sharing multiple designs improves exploration , group rapport , and results . In Proc of CHI : ACM conf . on human factors in computing systems ( pp . 2807 – 2816 ) . Gentner , D . , & Colhoun , J . ( 2010 ) . Analogical processes in human thinking and learning . Towards a Theory of Think - ing , 35 – 48 . Heer , J . , & Bostock , M . ( 2010 ) . Crowdsourcing graphical perception : Using mechanical turk to assess visualization design . In Proc of CHI : ACM conf . on human factors in computing systems ( pp . 203 – 212 ) . Heit , E . ( 1992 ) . Categorization using chains of examples . Cognitive Psychology , 24 ( 3 ) , 341 – 380 . Herring , S . , Chang , C . , Krantzler , J . , & Bailey , B . ( 2009 ) . Getting inspired ! : understanding how and why examples are used in creative design practice . In Proc of CHI : ACM conf . on human factors in computing systems ( pp . 87 – 96 ) . Jansson , D . , & Smith , S . ( 1991 ) . Design ﬁxation . Design Studies , 12 ( 1 ) , 3 – 11 . Kerne , A . , Koh , E . , Smith , S . , Webb , A . , & Dworaczyk , B . ( 2008 ) . combinformation : Mixed - initiative composition of image and text surrogates promotes information discovery . ACM Trans on Information Systems ( TOIS ) , 27 ( 1 ) , 5 . Kim , H . , & Hinds , P . ( 2012 ) . Harmony vs . disruption : The effect of iterative prototyping on teams creative processes and outcomes in the west and the east . In Proc . icic : Inter - national conf . on intercultural collaboration . ACM . Lee , B . , Srivastava , S . , Kumar , R . , Brafman , R . , & Klemmer , S . ( 2010 ) . Designing with interactive example galleries . In Proc of CHI : ACM conf . on human factors in computing systems ( pp . 2257 – 2266 ) . Lewis , S . , Dontcheva , M . , & Gerber , E . ( 2011 ) . Affective computational priming and creativity . In Proc of CHI : ACM conf . on human factors in computing systems ( pp . 735 – 744 ) . Lim , Y . , Stolterman , E . , & Tenenberg , J . ( 2008 ) . The anatomy of prototypes : Prototypes as ﬁlters , prototypes as manifes - tations of design ideas . ACM Transactions on Computer - Human Interaction ( TOCHI ) , 15 ( 2 ) , 7 . Marsh , R . , & Bower , G . ( 1993 ) . Eliciting cryptomnesia : Un - conscious plagiarism in a puzzle task . Journal of Exper - imental Psychology : Learning , Memory , and Cognition , 19 ( 3 ) , 673 . Marsh , R . , Landau , J . , & Hicks , J . ( 1996 ) . How examples may ( and may not ) constrain creativity . Memory & Cogni - tion . Newman , M . , & Landay , J . ( 2000 ) . Sitemaps , storyboards , and speciﬁcations : a sketch of web site design practice . In Proc of DIS : ACM conf . on designing interactive systems ( pp . 263 – 274 ) . Ritchie , D . , Kejriwal , A . , & Klemmer , S . ( 2011 ) . d . tour : style - based exploration of design example galleries . In Proc . of UIST : ACM symposium on user interface software and technology ( pp . 165 – 174 ) . Sch¨on , D . ( 1985 ) . The design studio : An exploration of its traditions and potentials . RIBA Publications for RIBA Building Industry Trust London . Smith , S . , Ward , T . , & Schumacher , J . ( 1993 ) . Constraining effects of examples in a creative generation task . Memory & Cognition , 21 ( 6 ) , 837 – 845 . Snow , R . , O’Connor , B . , Jurafsky , D . , & Ng , A . ( 2008 ) . Cheap and fast—but is it good ? : evaluating non - expert an - notations for natural language tasks . In Proc of the conf . on empirical methods in natural language processing ( pp . 254 – 263 ) . Suwa , M . , & Tversky , B . ( 1997 ) . What do architects and students perceive in their design sketches ? a protocol anal - ysis . Design studies , 18 ( 4 ) , 385 – 403 . Ward , T . ( 1994 ) . Structured imagination : The role of category structure in exemplar generation . Cognitive Psychology , 27 ( 1 ) , 1 – 40 . Weisberg , R . ( 1999 ) . Creativity and knowledge : A challenge to theories . Handbook of creativity , 226 . Yu , L . , & Nickerson , J . ( 2011 ) . Cooks or cobblers ? : crowd creativity through combination . In Proc of CHI : ACM conf . on human factors in computing systems ( pp . 1393 – 1402 ) . 640