Contents lists available at ScienceDirect Neuropsychologia journal homepage : www . elsevier . com / locate / neuropsychologia Driving the brain towards creativity and intelligence : A network control theory analysis Yoed N . Kenett a , ⁎ , 1 , John D . Medaglia b , c , 1 , Roger E . Beaty d , Qunlin Chen e , Richard F . Betzel f , Sharon L . Thompson - Schill a , Jiang Qiu e a Department of Psychology , University of Pennsylvania , Philadelphia , PA 19104 , USA b Department of Psychology , Drexel University , Philadelphia , PA 19104 , USA c Department of Neurology , Perelman School of Medicine , University of Pennsylvania , Philadelphia , PA 19104 , USA d Department of Psychology and Center for Brain Science , Harvard University , Cambridge , MA , USA e School of Psychology , Southwest University , Chongqing 400715 , China f Department of Bioengineering , University of Pennsylvania , Philadelphia , PA 19104 , USA A R T I C L E I N F O Keywords : Creativity Intelligence Network control theory Cognitive control A B S T R A C T High - level cognitive constructs , such as creativity and intelligence , entail complex and multiple processes , in - cluding cognitive control processes . Recent neurocognitive research on these constructs highlight the importance of dynamic interaction across neural network systems and the role of cognitive control processes in guiding such a dynamic interaction . How can we quantitatively examine the extent and ways in which cognitive control contributes to creativity and intelligence ? To address this question , we apply a computational network control theory ( NCT ) approach to structural brain imaging data acquired via di ﬀ usion tensor imaging in a large sample of participants , to examine how NCT relates to individual di ﬀ erences in distinct measures of creative ability and intelligence . Recent application of this theory at the neural level is built on a model of brain dynamics , which mathematically models patterns of inter - region activity propagated along the structure of an underlying net - work . The strength of this approach is its ability to characterize the potential role of each brain region in regulating whole - brain network function based on its anatomical ﬁ ngerprint and a simpli ﬁ ed model of node dynamics . We ﬁ nd that intelligence is related to the ability to “ drive ” the brain system into easy to reach neural states by the right inferior parietal lobe and lower integration abilities in the left retrosplenial cortex . We also ﬁ nd that creativity is related to the ability to “ drive ” the brain system into di ﬃ cult to reach states by the right dorsolateral prefrontal cortex ( inferior frontal junction ) and higher integration abilities in sensorimotor areas . Furthermore , we found that di ﬀ erent facets of creativity — ﬂ uency , ﬂ exibility , and originality — relate to gen - erally similar but not identical network controllability processes . We relate our ﬁ ndings to general theories on intelligence and creativity . 1 . Introduction High - level cognition entails complex and multiple processes , in - cluding cognitive control processes . For example , current theories on the creative process view it as a multistage process , involving dynamic interactions between bottom - up , automatic processes involved during idea generation ; and top - down , executive control processes mainly in - volved during idea evaluation ( Barr et al . , 2014 ; Beaty et al . , 2016 ; Chrysikou , 2018 ; Sowden et al . , 2014 ) . These theories attribute a key role to cognitive control processes in guiding creative novelty seeking and response retrieval , selection , and evaluation ( Chrysikou , 2018 ) . Similarly , the neural processes related to reasoning and intelligence demand cognitive control processes , required for ﬂ uent manipulation of complex information ( Hearne et al . , 2015 , 2016 ; Jung and Haier , 2007 ) . However , the exact nature of the cognitive control required in such high - level cognitive processes are still mostly unknown and de - bated . Here , we apply a state - of - the - art computational approach — net - work control theory — to quantitatively examine how di ﬀ erent control strategies in speci ﬁ c brain regions relate to creativity and intelligence . Such a comparison can further elucidate the di ﬀ erences between these two high - level , cognitive constructs . In the past decade , there has been a large increase in neurocognitive https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . neuropsychologia . 2018 . 01 . 001 Received 29 July 2017 ; Received in revised form 20 November 2017 ; Accepted 2 January 2018 ⁎ Corresponding author . 1 Equally contributed to the manuscript E - mail address : yoedk @ sas . upenn . edu ( Y . N . Kenett ) . Neuropsychologia 118 ( 2018 ) 79 – 90 Available online 04 January 2018 0028 - 3932 / © 2018 Elsevier Ltd . All rights reserved . T research on creativity , attempting to identify the main brain regions that contribute to creativity ( Dietrich and Kanso , 2010 ; Gonen - Yaacovi et al . , 2013 ; Jung et al . , 2013 ; Shen et al . , 2017 ; Wu et al . , 2015 ; Yoruk and Runco , 2014 ) . These e ﬀ orts have related the generation process in creativity to the Default Mode Network ( DMN ) and the evaluation process in creativity to the Executive Control Network ( ECN ; Beaty et al . , 2016 ) . The DMN is a set of midline and inferior parietal regions that activate in the absence of most external task demands ( Andrews - Hanna et al . , 2014 ) . The DMN is associated with cognitive processes that require internally - directed or self - generated thought , including mind - wandering , future thinking , semantic memory , and mental si - mulation ( Andrews - Hanna et al . , 2014 ; Zabelina and Andrews - Hanna , 2016 ) . The ECN is a set of prefrontal and posterior parietal regions that are engaged during cognitive tasks that require externally - directed at - tention , such as working memory , relational integration , response in - hibition , and task - set switching ( Zabelina and Andrews - Hanna , 2016 ) . Recent studies have found that ECN and DMN networks cooperate in tasks that require evaluation of internal information , such as auto - biographical future memory planning , emotion regulation , and mind wandering ( Christo ﬀ et al . , 2009 ; Gerlach et al . , 2014 ; Ochsner et al . , 2012 ; Spreng et al . , 2014 ) . A growing number of studies relate the creative process to dynamic interactions between these two systems ( Beaty et al . , 2015 , 2016 ; Liu et al . , 2015 ; Pinho et al . , 2014 ) . For example , Beaty et al . ( 2015 ) con - ducted a temporal functional connectivity analysis when participants either generated alternative uses or simple characteristics for common objects . The authors show DMN and ECN cooperation at later stages of the creative task , which they interpret as the ECN executing evaluation processes on ideas generated by the DMN during earlier stages of the task ( Beaty et al . , 2015 ) . Such a dynamic role for the ECN is consistent with a theory on the role of the prefrontal cortex as a ﬁ ltering me - chanism , contingent on task demands and context ( Chrysikou et al . , 2014 ) . According to this theory , cognitive control , as mediated by the prefrontal cortex , is critical to performance on tasks that rely on top - down , rule - based processes ( such as idea evaluation ) , and can constrain performance in tasks that rely on bottom - up , spontaneous processes ( such as idea generation ; Chrysikou et al . , 2014 ) . Recent neurocognitive theories also relate intelligence to similar brain networks and dynamics observed in creativity research ( Hearne et al . , 2016 ; Jung and Haier , 2007 ; Pineda - Pardo et al . , 2016 ) . The dominant theory on the neural processes involved in intelligence has implicated frontal and parietal activation in relation to individual dif - ferences in intelligence , theory known as the Parieto - Frontal Integra - tion Theory of intelligence ( P - FIT ; Jung and Haier , 2007 ) . Hearne et al . ( 2016 ) conducted a resting state functional connectivity analysis to examine the P - FIT theory and how it relates to interactions between di ﬀ erent neural system networks . Surprisingly , the authors found that greater connectivity between ECN ( overlapping with the P - FIT theory ) and DMN was associated with higher intelligence scores . Such an in - tegration was also shown in a task related functional imaging study , which demonstrated how task complexity in the Wason sorting task led to higher connectivity between ECN and DMN regions ( Hearne et al . , 2015 ) . Recently , Santarnecchi et al . ( 2017 ) conducted a meta - analysis to examine the brain regions and networks related to ﬂ uid intelligence ( Gf ) , the ability to apply a variety of mental operations to solve novel problems ( McGrew , 2005 ) . This analysis highlighted the interaction of attention , salience , and cognitive control networks in Gf ( Santarnecchi et al . , 2017 ) . Speci ﬁ cally , the authors argue that individual di ﬀ erences in Gf are attributed to the interactions between the ventral ( stimulus driven ) attention network and the dorsal ( goal driven ) attention net - work ( Corbetta et al . , 2008 ) . Finally , the authors found that increasing task di ﬃ culty recruited left prefrontal cortex areas ( Santarnecchi et al . , 2017 ) . The apparent parallels in the neurocognitive mechanisms sup - porting intelligence and creativity , along with several recent studies linking these constructs at the behavioral level ( Beaty et al . , 2014 ; Benedek et al . , 2014a , 2014b , 2017 ; Kenett et al . , 2016 ; Silvia , 2015 ) , raises interesting questions about how intelligence and creativity en - gage cognitive control processes in the brain . Importantly , these studies argue for an interaction between the ECN and DMN , and that the ECN exerts cognitive control mechanisms that are crucial for reasoning and creativity . However , these studies do not account for the speci ﬁ c net - work control mechanisms exerted in these processes . Furthermore , they do not examine the di ﬀ erences in the dynamics engaged by such control processes related to creativity or intelligence . Here we present an ap - plication of a computational network neuroscience method that is based on white - matter connectivity networks that may be applied to examine theoretical control processes related to di ﬀ erent high - level cognitive processes . Currently , the majority of the research on the neurocognitive pro - cesses of high - level cognition , such as creativity and intelligence , is conducted via functional MRI ( both rest and task related ; Basten et al . , 2015 ; Beaty et al . , 2016 ; Deary et al . , 2010 ) , which has well - known limitations in its range of sensitivity and speci ﬁ city in measuring neural activity . Functional MRI is well suited in examine state - level variability across participants , given that rest and task functional activity related patterns ﬂ uctuate in ways that predict similarly ﬂ uctuating cognitive measures . However , anatomically - based brain network analysis — ana - lysis incorporating models that support inferences about dyna - mics — might be better suited for looking at trait level variability across participants , by measuring stable individual di ﬀ erences in their neu - roanatomy that might constrain neural and psychological states . Recent computational studies have begun to demonstrate how functional brain signals are constrained by anatomical brain connectivity ( Goñi et al . , 2014 ; Gu et al . , 2015 ; Hermundstad et al . , 2013 ; Honey et al . , 2009 ) . Thus , anatomical brain connectivity can contribute to investigating state - level cognition , and to better understanding functional neural signals . This is due to the unique information embedded in the anato - mical network organization that has been demonstrated to organize much of observable functional activity such as that observed in fMRI ( Hermundstad et al . , 2013 , 2014 ; Medaglia et al . , 2017 ( Nature Human Behavior paper ) ) . Thus , anatomical connectivity analysis contributes to neurocognitive research on cognitive phenomena ( Sotiropoulos and Zalesky , 2017 ) . Only a few studies have examined how white matter structural connectivity relates to creative ability ( Jung et al . , 2010 , 2013 ; Ryman et al . , 2014 ; Takeuchi et al . , 2017 , 2010 , 2011 ; Wu et al . , 2016 ) . Takeuchi et al . ( 2010 ) conducted a di ﬀ usion tensor imaging study to examine the relation between white matter integrity ( measured with fractional anisotropy ) and creative ability . The authors show how in - creased integrity in white - matter anatomical connectivity in several brain areas , including the bilateral prefrontal cortex and the corpus callosum , were signi ﬁ cantly correlated with creativity . The authors interpret the signi ﬁ cant relation between creativity and white matter integrity in the frontal lobes via enhanced cognitive control processes , and the relation with the corpus callosum via more e ﬃ cient informa - tion integration across the two hemispheres . A few studies have also examined how white matter structural connectivity relates to in - telligence ( Bettcher et al . , 2016 ; Haász et al . , 2013 ; Ohtani et al . , 2017 , 2015 ; Penke et al . , 2012 ) . These studies , while mostly supporting the P - FIT theory of intelligence , have also found a relation between white matter integrity in the corpus callosum and intelligence ( Bettcher et al . , 2016 ) or distributed white matter tracts across the brain ( Haász et al . , 2013 ) . For example , Haász et al . ( 2013 ) examined the relation of white matter integrity to di ﬀ erent components of ﬂ uid intelligence . The au - thors show how higher Gf was related to general higher white matter integrity across the brain . Thus , individual di ﬀ erences in such high - level cognitive constructs may be related to variance in whole brain white matter connectivity , which may facilitate e ﬃ cient cognitive control processes . In the current study , we apply computational net - work control theory ( NCT ) in relation to individual di ﬀ erences in creativity and intelligence . This allows us to examine how whole brain Y . N . Kenett et al . Neuropsychologia 118 ( 2018 ) 79 – 90 80 structural connectivity theoretically “ controls ” dynamic brain processes in relation to individual di ﬀ erences in creativity and intelligence and whether they engage similar control processes . From an engineering perspective , network control is a process in which a system is deliberately shifted or guided along a particular trajectory to support speci ﬁ c goals ( Tang and Bassett , 2017 ) . This guidance is usually theoretically examined by simulating injection of signals into the system via deliberate perturbations . Recently , network control theory has been applied to study the dynamics of large - scale neural systems ( Gu et al . , 2015 ; Yan et al . , 2017 ) . For example , Yan et al . ( 2017 ) applied NCT to investigate the signi ﬁ cance of controll - ability of speci ﬁ c neurons in C . Elegans on its locomotion behavior . Importantly , these predictions were empirically examined and veri ﬁ ed by ablating speci ﬁ c neurons identi ﬁ ed as signi ﬁ cant controllers ( Yan et al . , 2017 ) . Thus , this study demonstrates the feasibility of this computational theoretical approach in examining control strategies and dynamics in neural systems . Application of this theory at the human neural level is built on a mathematical model of brain dynamics in which patterns of inter - re - gion activity are propagated along the white matter structure of an underlying network . The strength of this approach is its ability to better understand the role of each brain region in regulating whole - brain network function based explicitly on its anatomical ﬁ ngerprint ( Gu et al . , 2015 ; Tang and Bassett , 2017 ) . Investigating the controllability of neural dynamics is computationally challenging , as it requires model - ling non - linear neural dynamics and the neural structural connectivity that gives rise to such dynamics ( Gu et al . , 2015 ) . Thus , a common practice in the application of network control theory is to locally line - arize models of dynamic processes ( Liu et al . , 2011 ) . Accordingly , the application of control theory in neuroscience is built upon anatomical connectivity networks combined with a simpli ﬁ ed , linear model of such neural dynamics ( Gu et al . , 2015 ) . This assumption of linear dynamics is commonly accepted , and is based upon prior models linking anato - mical brain networks to resting state functional dynamics ( Abdelnour et al . , 2014 ; Bettinardi et al . , 2017 ; Honey et al . , 2009 , 2010 ; Muldoon et al . , 2016 ) . These prior studies have demonstrated that a moderate amount of variance in neural dynamics as measured by fMRI can be predicted from simpli ﬁ ed linear models ( Cole et al . , 2016 ; Galán , 2008 ; Honey et al . , 2009 ) . Recently , Muldoon et al . ( 2016 ) examined the ef - fects of regional brain stimulation on controllability of brain states using a non - linear computational model . The authors demonstrate that while the dynamics of their computational model is highly variable across participants , it is highly reproducible across multiple imaging scans . Furthermore , the authors applied their non - linear model to va - lidate controllability measures computed based on the simpli ﬁ ed linear model . Thus , while the forefront of computational neuroscience aims to develop methods to map the relation between structural and functional signals ( Medaglia et al . , 2017 ( Nature Human Behavior paper ) ) , con - trollability measures built on a simpli ﬁ ed linear model have proven their fruitfulness . Recent applications of NCT to neural systems have mathematically formulated a set of three controllability metrics that quantify the con - tributions made by individual brain regions in “ driving ” the entire brain network from one state ( the magnitude of neurophysiological activity across brain regions at a single time point ) into another : Average , Modal , and Boundary controllability ( Gu et al . , 2015 ; Pasqualetti et al . , 2014 ) . Average controllability quanti ﬁ es the theoretical extent to which a speci ﬁ c brain region can easily “ drive ” the brain into easy to reach states with little energy . Thus , brain regions with high average con - trollability can drive the brain into many “ easy to reach ” states , and have been observed in DMN regions ( Gu et al . , 2015 ; Pasqualetti et al . , 2014 ) . Gu et al . ( 2015 ) have argued that if control energy relates to cognitive e ﬀ ort , and if brain regions relate to cognitive function , than brain regions with high average controllability are important in al - lowing the brain to move smoothly between such functions that require little e ﬀ ort . Modal controllability quanti ﬁ es the theoretical extent to which a speci ﬁ c brain region can easily “ drive ” the brain into states that require substantial input energy to reach , i . e . those considered to be “ di ﬃ cult - to - reach ” states . Brain region with high modal controllability have been observed in fronto - parietal regions ( Gu et al . , 2015 ) . Boundary controllability quanti ﬁ es the theoretical extent to which a speci ﬁ c brain region lies at the “ boundary ” between network sub - communities , contributing to the integration or segregation between them . Brain regions with high boundary controllability have been ob - served in attention systems ( Gu et al . , 2015 ) . Collectively , these three theoretical control roles de ﬁ ne di ﬀ erent continua in brain networks : brain regions may vary in their tendency to drive the brain to or away from speci ﬁ c types of states or into integrated states , and are termed according to their ability to globally control the entire brain system . Without the context of behavior and the brain , these are mathematical abstractions that may hold no behavioral relevance . The extent to which these controllability roles vary across individuals may be related to behavioral and cognitive variability , which would establish a link between network control theoretic analysis and cognition ( Medaglia et al . , 2016 , 2017 ; Tang et al . , 2017 ) . A few recent studies have demonstrated the feasibility of applying network control theory to study cognition . Tang et al . ( 2017 ) in - vestigated whole brain network controllability measures related to ty - pical neurocognitive development . The authors found that the relative strength of average controllability of subcortical brain regions pre - dicted improved cognitive performance as related to development . Medaglia et al . ( 2016 ) demonstrated how modal and boundary con - trollability related to individual di ﬀ erences in cognitive control . The authors computed whole - brain modal and boundary controllability , and related these measures to performance on a variety of tasks that demand executive control ( such as the Stroop task ) . This study de - monstrates how these controllability measures for speci ﬁ c brain areas ( such as in frontal control areas ) correlate with performance on the di ﬀ erent tasks , and it is the ﬁ rst to ground cognitive control in network controllability measures . Finally , Medaglia et al . ( 2017 ) show how modal controllability of the left inferior frontal gyrus predicts vulner - ability to transcranial magnetic brain stimulation on linguistic tasks . Furthermore , the authors show how such brain stimulation a ﬀ ects the boundary controllability of the left inferior frontal gyrus . Thus , the application of NCT in neurocognitive research advances our under - standing of regions ’ theoretical roles in driving activity across the brain as related to cognitive processes . In the current study , we apply NCT on white - matter anatomical connectivity networks in a large sample of participants ( N = 416 ) who completed a battery of creativity and intelligence tasks . Creativity was assessed via a battery of divergent thinking tasks ( DT ) , the hallmark predictor of creative ability characteristics , frequently applied in crea - tivity research ( Baird et al . , 2012 ; Runco and Acar , 2012 ) , and predicts real - life creative ability ( Plucker , 1999 ) . Intelligence was measured by a battery of Raven ' s matrices tasks , widely applied in intelligence re - search ( Carpenter et al . , 1990 ) . For each participant , we extracted anatomical connectivity matrices based on di ﬀ usion tractography and compute average , modal , and boundary controllability for brain regions across the whole brain . We then examined and compared the relation of each of the controllability measures to creativity and intelligence . Next , we conducted a similar analysis to di ﬀ erent facets of creativity based on standard measures of DT computed from participants ’ performance – ﬂ uency , ﬂ exibility , and originality . This analysis allows us to quantify and compare how speci ﬁ c control strategies in di ﬀ erent brain regions di ﬀ erentiate between intelligence and creativity in general , and be - tween speci ﬁ c measures of creative ability . More generally , our study allows us to quantitatively examine theories on the roles of the ECN and DMN regions in driving brain network dynamics as related to individual di ﬀ erences in creativity and intelligence . While we are theoretically motivated to focus on the ECN and DMN , we conduct a whole - brain analysis to examine di ﬀ erences in controllability across all possible brain regions . This is motivated by the possibility that di ﬀ erent brain Y . N . Kenett et al . Neuropsychologia 118 ( 2018 ) 79 – 90 81 regions actually regulate such dynamics whereas functional imaging studies are the consequences of underlying dynamic - driving roles across the brain . In line with recent research on the neurocognitive processes related to intelligence and creativity ( Chrysikou , 2018 ; Santarnecchi et al . , 2017 ) , we predict a signi ﬁ cant positive relation between modal con - trollability , intelligence , and creativity in prefrontal cortex . Intuitively , individuals that have a prefrontal cortex that is highly specialized to drive the brain into di ﬃ cult to reach brain states may have superior performance on tasks demanding higher cognitive control such as in - telligence or creativity . Furthermore , consistent with theories on the signi ﬁ cance of ECN and DMN interaction related to both creativity and intelligence ( Beaty et al . , 2016 ; Hearne et al . , 2016 ) , we predict a sig - ni ﬁ cant relation between boundary controllability , creativity , and in - telligence in brain regions that have been implicated in coupling be - tween ECN and DMN systems , such as the inferior frontal gyrus ( Sebastian et al . , 2016 ) or the insula ( Menon , 2011 ) . We expect that such a relation will highlight the coupling relation previously found in DMN and ECN networks in the creative process ( Beaty et al . , 2015 ) and in reasoning ( Hearne et al . , 2015 ) . 2 . Methods 2 . 1 . Participants The sample was collected as part of a large research project ex - ploring the associations among individual di ﬀ erences in brain structure and function , creativity , and mental health ( Chen et al . , 2016 , 2015 ; W . Liu et al . , 2017 ) . Participants were recruited from Southwest University by means of the campus network , advertisements on bulletin boards and lea ﬂ ets , or through face - to - face communications on campus . Before enrolling in the study , each participant was screened with a set of ex - clusion procedures involving self - reported questionnaires as well as structured and semi - structured interviews . The original sample included 443 participants . Seventeen partici - pants were excluded from the ﬁ nal analysis due to a creativity score two standard deviations lower or higher than the average score . The re - maining sample of 416 participants included 225 females ( 54 % ) with an average age of 20 years ( SD = 1 . 26 years ) . All participants were required to be right - handed , and none had a history of psychiatric disorder , cognitive disability , substance abuse , or MRI contra - indications . This research project was approved by the Southwest University Brain Imaging Center Institutional Review Board , and written informed consent was obtained from each participant . Participants received payment depending on time and tasks completed . 2 . 2 . Materials 2 . 2 . 1 . Behavioral measures 2 . 2 . 1 . 1 . Creativity assessment . The verbal form of the Torrance Tests of Creative Thinking ( TTCT ; Torrance , 1966 ) was used to assess creativity ( i . e . , divergent thinking ability ) . The TTCT was revised in Chinese by the Shanghai Normal University ( Ye et al . , 1988 ) , and the scoring guide was slightly adjusted in recent studies because some responses were produced in contemporary times that were non - existent in the original guidelines ( Chen et al . , 2015 ; Wei et al . , 2014 ) . We administered the following ﬁ ve tasks out of the Chinese version of the TTCT : generating questions ; causes and consequences ; improving products ; alternate uses ; and manipulating objects . The TTCT provides a total creativity score as well as indices and scores for evaluating di ﬀ erent measures of creativity , assessed by divergent thinking abilities , which includes ( a ) ﬂ uency ( the number of meaningful and relevant responses , which is associated with the ability to generate and consider several di ﬀ erent possibilities ) , ( b ) ﬂ exibility ( the number of di ﬀ erent categories of responses , which re ﬂ ects the ability to shift between conceptual ﬁ elds ) , and ( c ) originality ( the degree of originality of the responses , which is associated with thinking “ outside of the box ” ) . Three trained raters scored the creative quality of all responses . The three raters majored in psychology and were blind to the goal of this research . First , they were trained to master the method of manual scoring of the responses . Then , they independently assessed all re - sponses of 30 participants and yielded relatively uniform scoring cri - terion through structured discussions . This step was used to adjust the scoring guide for ﬂ exibility in the present sample , such as to how to evaluate a response that was nonexistent in the original guidelines . Finally , raters were asked to assess the responses of all participants based on these guidelines , and their inter - rater correlation coe ﬃ cient was signi ﬁ cant ( ICC > . 90 ) . Latent variable analysis was applied to extract factor scores for each participant on the three DT measures ( ﬂ uency , ﬂ exibility , and origin - ality ) using Mplus 7 . 4 . A strength of this approach , compared to com - puting averages , is that it models error variance separately from true measurement variance , leading to a more robust and reliable assess - ment of e ﬀ ect size ( Klein , 2011 ) . In addition to modelling the three DT measures separately , we also speci ﬁ ed a higher - order latent model that included these three measures as lower - order indicators . We thus ex - amined unique relationships between the three DT measures ( ﬂ uency , ﬂ exibility , and originality ) , as well as their combined contribution , and network controllability measures . 2 . 2 . 1 . 2 . Intelligence assessment . To adjust for the e ﬀ ect of general intelligence on creativity , we assessed intelligence with the Combined Raven ' s Test ( CRT ) , a widely adopted measure administered to Chinese individuals between the ages of 5 and 75 ( Li et al . , 1989 ; Qian et al . , 1997 ; Wang et al . , 2007 ) . The CRT is based on Raven ' s Color Progressive Matrices ( Raven , 1958 ) and Raven ' s Standard Progressive Matrices ( Raven , 1960 ) . It contains 72 items in 6 segments , corresponding to the Color Progressive Matrices lists A , AB , and B , and the Standard Progressive Matrices lists C , D , and E in the original Raven matrices . The CRT for Adults in China ( CRT - AC2 ) has shown good reliability and validity , and the Chinese norms for CRT - AC2 was established from a sample of 2526 people ( aged 17 – 64 years ) from 20 provinces in China ( Qian et al . , 1997 ) . The raw scores of the CRT are computed by summing the number of correct responses , and the distribution of participants is calculated with percentiles that vary from 0 to 100 in the di ﬀ erent age groups . The percentiles were converted to z - scores using a z - table and the standard CRT scores ( mean = 100 and SD = 15 ) were calculated according to the Norm for Chinese Adult by Tianjin Medical University ( Qian et al . , 1997 ; Wang et al . , 2007 ) . 2 . 2 . 2 . MRI data acquisition Imaging data were collected using a 12 - channel head coil on a Siemens 3 T Trio scanner ( Siemens Medical Systems , Erlangen , Germany ) at the Brain Imaging Center , Southwest University . High - resolution , three - dimensional T1 - weighted structural images were ob - tained using a Magnetization Prepared Rapid Acquisition Gradient - echo ( MPRAGE ) sequence ( TR / TE = 1900 ms / 2 . 52 ms , FA = 9° , resolution matrix = 256 × 256 ; slices = 176 ; thickness = 1 . 0 mm ; voxel size = 1 × 1 × 1 mm 3 ) . Di ﬀ usion tensor images were obtained using a di ﬀ u - sion - weighted , single shot , spin echo , EPI sequence ( TR / TE = 11 , 000 / 98 ms , matrix = 128 × 128 , ﬁ eld of view = 256 × 256 mm , voxel size = 2 × 2 × 2 mm 3 , 60 axial slices , 2 mm slice thickness , b value 1 = 0 s / mm 2 , b value 2 = 1000 s / mm 2 ) in 30 directions and repeated ac - quisition of di ﬀ usion - weighted imaging data three times to increase the signal - to - noise ratio . DTI data were reconstructed in DSI Studio ( www . dsi - studio . labsolver . org ) using q - space di ﬀ eomorphic reconstruction ( QSDR ; Yeh et al . , 2011 ) . QSDR ﬁ rst reconstructs di ﬀ usion - weighted images in na - tive space and computes the quantitative anisotropy ( QA ) in each voxel . These QA values are used to warp the brain to a template QA volume in Montreal Neurological Institute ( MNI ) space using the statistical Y . N . Kenett et al . Neuropsychologia 118 ( 2018 ) 79 – 90 82 parametric mapping nonlinear registration algorithm . Once in MNI space , spin density functions were again reconstructed with a mean di ﬀ usion distance of 1 . 25 mm using three ﬁ ber orientations per voxel . Fiber tracking was performed in DSI Studio with an angular cuto ﬀ of 35 , step size of 1 . 0 mm , minimum length of 10 mm , spin density function smoothing of 0 , maximum length of 400 mm and a QA threshold determined by DWI signal in the colony - stimulating factor . Deterministic ﬁ ber tracking using a modi ﬁ ed FACT algorithm was performed until 1 , 000 , 000 streamlines were reconstructed for each individual . Anatomical scans were segmented using FreeSurfer ( Fischl , 2012 ) and parcellated using the connectome mapping toolkit ( Cammoun et al . , 2012 ) . Based on previous research ( Gu et al . , 2015 ; Hermundstad et al . , 2013 ; Medaglia et al . , 2016 ) , a parcellation scheme including 234 brain regions ( Cammoun et al . , 2012 ) was registered to the B0 volume from each participant ' s DTI data . The B0 to MNI voxel mapping produced via QSDR was used to map region labels from native space to MNI coordinates . To extend region labels through the grey - white matter interface , the atlas was dilated by 4 mm ( Cieslak and Grafton , 2014 ) . Dilation was accomplished by ﬁ lling non - labelled voxels with the statistical mode of their neighbors ’ labels . In the event of a tie , one of the modes was arbitrarily selected . Each streamline was labelled according to its terminal region pair . From these data , we constructed structural connectivity networks that map streamline con - nections between 234 cortical and sub - cortical regions . In these ana - tomical connectivity matrices brain regions are de ﬁ ned as nodes , and a link between two nodes represents the number of streamlines con - necting them , normalized for their density ( Sotiropoulos and Zalesky , 2017 ) . 2 . 2 . 3 . Network controllability analysis To study the ability of a certain brain region to in ﬂ uence other re - gions in di ﬀ erent ways , we adopt the control theoretic notion of con - trollability . Controllability of a dynamical system refers to the possi - bility of driving the state of a dynamical system to a speci ﬁ c target state by means of an external control input ( Tang and Bassett , 2017 ) . Classic results in control theory ensure that controllability of the network is equivalent to the controllability Gramian matrix , which determines whether a linear system is controllable ( Summers et al . , 2016 ) . Besides ensuring controllability , the eigenvalues of the controll - ability Gramian are a quantitative measure of the magnitude of the control input that drives a network to a desired target state , and the structure of the Gramian itself provides systematic guidelines for the selection of control regions that can theoretically optimize cognitive functions . While the magnitude of the control input may not be the unique feature to take into account when controlling brain dynamics ( Kumar et al . , 2014 ) , it allows us to better understand the relationship between the anatomical organization of the brain and its dynamics . Here , this allows us to isolate the control role of each region separately for each participant and relate it with our behavioral measures . A rig - orous mathematical formulation of network controllability in brain networks can be found in Gu et al . ( 2015 ) . From the Gramian matrix , di ﬀ erent controllability measures can be computed for each node ( brain region ) in the network . Here , based on previous research of network controllability in brain networks , we compute for each participant and each brain region their average controllability , modal controllability , and boundary controllability ( Gu et al . , 2015 ; Medaglia et al . , 2016 ; Pasqualetti et al . , 2014 ) . Average controllability identi ﬁ es brain regions that , on average , can drive the system into di ﬀ erent states with little e ﬀ ort ( input energy ) . A state can be de ﬁ ned as the vector of neurophysiological activity mag - nitudes across brain regions at a single time point . Thus , regions with high average controllability can move the brain to many easily reach - able states ( Fig . 1D ) . Thus , these regions may be important in allowing the brain to move smoothly between many cognitive functions that require little cognitive e ﬀ ort . Previous work has identi ﬁ ed brain regions that demonstrate high average controllability , such as the precuneus , posterior cingulate , superior frontal , paracentral , precentral and sub - cortical structures ( Gu et al . , 2015 ) . Modal controllability identi ﬁ es brain regions that can drive the brain into di ﬀ erent states that require high e ﬀ ort to achieve ( those which require substantial input energy ) . Thus , regions with high modal con - trollability can move the brain to many di ﬃ cult to reach states ( Fig . 1E ) . From a cognitive perspective , these regions may be important in switching the brain between functions that require signi ﬁ cant cog - nitive e ﬀ ort . Previous work has identi ﬁ ed brain regions that demon - strate high modal controllability , such as the postcentral , supramar - ginal , inferior parietal , pars orbitalis , medial orbitofrontal and rostral middle frontal cortices ( Gu et al . , 2015 ) . Boundary controllability identi ﬁ es brain regions that can drive the system into states where di ﬀ erent cognitive systems are either coupled or decoupled ( Fig . 1F ) . From a cognitive perspective , these regions could be important in gating , synchronizing or otherwise manipulating information across di ﬀ erent cognitive processes . Previous work has identi ﬁ ed brain regions that demonstrate high boundary controllability , such as the rostral middle frontal , lateral orbitofrontal , frontal pole , medial orbitofrontal , superior frontal and anterior cingulate cortices ( Gu et al . , 2015 ) . Boundary controllability identi ﬁ es network nodes that lie at the boundaries between network communities , as de ﬁ ned across all pos - sible levels of hierarchical modularity in a network ( Tang and Bassett , 2017 ) . As such , an initial identi ﬁ cation of brain modules ( or commu - nities ) is required . While data - driven approaches have been developed to achieve such an identi ﬁ cation , identifying brain modular organiza - tion remains an open challenge ( see Medaglia et al . , 2016 ) . Here we chose to side step this issue and use a modular assignment that was computed via a data - driven approach that analyzed a large independent sample of resting state functional data using the same parcellation atlas . This approach , based on the method developed by Mi š i ć et al . ( 2015 ) , uses a consensus analysis to identify a partition that maximizes the modular partition of a large sample of independent datasets ( Mi š i ć et al . , 2015 ) . This partition identi ﬁ ed 12 systems which are in line with neural systems identi ﬁ ed in previous research ( Dosenbach et al . , 2010 ) . Using this a priori independent modularity partition controls for the stochastic nature of the boundary controllability method and is justi ﬁ ed by the identi ﬁ ed relation between anatomical connectivity and resting state functional data ( Honey et al . , 2009 ) . 2 . 2 . 4 . Analysis overview Our analysis process is as follows ( Fig . 1 ) : We de ﬁ ned anatomical brain networks by subdividing the entire brain into 234 anatomically distinct brain regions ( network nodes ) in a commonly used anatomical atlas ( Cammoun et al . , 2012 ; Daducci et al . , 2012 ; Hagmann et al . , 2008 ) . Following prior work ( Bassett et al . , 2011 ; Gu et al . , 2015 ; Hermundstad et al . , 2013 , 2014 ) , we connected nodes ( brain regions ) by the number of white matter streamlines identi ﬁ ed by a commonly used deterministic tractography algorithm ( Cieslak and Grafton , 2014 ) . This procedure results in sparse , weighted , undirected structural brain networks for each participant . To control for volume confounds be - tween pairs of brain regions i and j , streamline counts were normalized by dividing by the sum of streamlines brain region i has , which resulted in a measure of streamline density ( Medaglia et al . , 2016 ) . Next , a simpli ﬁ ed model of brain dynamics was applied to simulate network control and quantify average , modal , and boundary controllability for each brain region for each participant , as described above ( Gu et al . , 2015 ; Tang and Bassett , 2017 ) . Intuitively , a node ' s average and modal controllability values are negatively related ( Gu et al . , 2015 ; Wu - Yan et al . , 2017 ) . To verify this , we computed the correlations between average and modal controllability across all participants . This revealed a nearly perfect negative correlation between raw average and modal controllability scores in our dataset ( average correlation = − . 9992 , range of correlations = − . 9992 - − . 9402 , all p ' s < . 001 ) . We then conducted a whole - brain correlation analysis between the Y . N . Kenett et al . Neuropsychologia 118 ( 2018 ) 79 – 90 83 behavioral measures and each of the network controllability measures for all brain regions . Previous studies have shown that raw boundary scores are di ﬃ cult to compare across participants . This is resolved by assigning a rank boundary value for each of the nodes . Therefore , we conducted a Spearman correlation analysis for boundary controllability and a Pearson ' s correlation analysis for average and modal controll - ability , controlling for multiple comparisons by calculating the False Discovery Rate ( FDR ; Benjamini and Hochberg , 1995 ; Benjamini and Yekutieli , 2001 ) with a false positive rate of 0 . 05 . The brain networks were then visualized via the BrainNet Viewer ( http : / / www . nitrc . org / projects / bnv / ; Xia et al . , 2013 ) . Anatomical labels were determined using the Brainnetome Atlas ( http : / / atlas . brainnetome . org ) , which uses state - of - the - art multimodal neuroimaging techniques to provide a cur - rent ﬁ ne - grained , cross - validated atlas and contains information on both anatomical and functional connections ( Fan et al . , 2016 ) . 3 . Results We ﬁ rst computed the correlations between all behavioral measures analyzed ( Table 1 ) . As expected , all three divergent thinking measures were highly correlated with each other ( Table 1 ) . Furthermore , a sig - ni ﬁ cant negative correlation was found between the CRT and the latent measure of ﬂ uency . Contrary to previous studies ( Jauk et al . , 2013 ) , no signi ﬁ cant correlation was found between the intelligence measure , as measured with the CRT , and the compiled latent creativity , as measured with DT , measures . We then applied the network controllability analysis by contrasting the di ﬀ erent measures of network controllability and brain regions in the latent CRT and DT measures . Next , we conducted the same analysis for the di ﬀ erent DT measures – ﬂ uency , ﬂ exibility , and originality . Despite the DT measures being highly correlated , this analysis allowed us to examine any possible di ﬀ erences between them in relation to network controllability and creativity . Such an approach allowed us to ﬁ rst contrast network controllability in intelligence and creativity and then to more sensitively examine network controllability in the dif - ferent dimensions of creativity that were measured . 3 . 1 . Network controllability related to intelligence and creativity 3 . 1 . 1 . Intelligence The correlation analysis between the CRT measure and the network controllability measures identi ﬁ ed only two brain regions that survived FDR correction ( Table 2 and Fig . 2 ) . A brain region within the right Inferior Parietal Lobe ( IPL ) exhibited a signi ﬁ cant positive correlation with average controllability ( adjusted p < . 02 ) and a signi ﬁ cant nega - tive correlation with modal controllability ( adjusted p < . 02 ) . Fur - thermore , the left Retrosplenial Cortex ( RSC ) exhibited a signi ﬁ cant negative correlation with boundary controllability ( adjusted p < . 03 ) . 3 . 1 . 2 . Creativity The correlation analysis between the latent DT measure and the network controllability measures revealed several brain regions that survived the FDR correction ( Table 2 and Fig . 2 ) . This analysis revealed three brain regions that exhibited a signi ﬁ cant negative correlation with average controllability and a signi ﬁ cant positive correlation with modal controllability : An area in the right dorsolateral Pre - Frontal Cortex , the right Inferior Frontal Junction ( IFJ ; average : adjusted p < . 001 ; modal : adjusted p < . 001 ) , the right posterior Medial Frontal Gyrus ( pMFG ; average : adjusted p < . 04 ; modal : adjusted p < . 04 ) ; and the left Fusiform area ( average : adjusted p < . 04 ; modal : adjusted p < . 04 ) . Furthermore , this analysis revealed a signi ﬁ cant positive correlation with several post - central brain regions and boundary con - trollability ( all adjusted p ' s < . 04 ) and a brain region in the left Su - perior Temporal Gyrus ( STG ; adjusted p < . 03 ) . 3 . 2 . Network controllability related to ﬂ uency , ﬂ exibility , and originality Next , we conducted a similar analysis on the three di ﬀ erent DT measures : ﬂ uency , ﬂ exibility , and originality . The aim of this analysis was to examine any di ﬀ erences in the relation between them and net - work controllability measures . 3 . 2 . 1 . Fluency The correlation analysis between the ﬂ uency measure and the net - work controllability measures found two brain regions that survived Fig . 1 . Overview of methods : ( A ) We performed di ﬀ usion tractography for each participant , and ( B ) applied a whole - brain parcellation to identify anatomical divisions . ( C ) We constructed an anatomical connectivity matrix that represents the number of streamlines between pairs of regions , normalized by density . We de ﬁ ned a simpli ﬁ ed model of brain dynamics and simulated network control to quantify ( D ) average , ( E ) modal and ( F ) boundary controllability for each node ( brain region ) in the network for each participant . Table 1 Correlation analysis between all behavioral measures . CRT DT Fluency Flexibility Originality CRT – − . 04 − . 19 * * * . 09 . 07 DT – . 95 * * * . 88 * * * . 90 * * * Fluency – . 77 * * * . 80 * * * Flexibility – . 76 * * * Originality – * * * p < . 001 . Y . N . Kenett et al . Neuropsychologia 118 ( 2018 ) 79 – 90 84 FDR correction ( Table 3 and Fig . 3 ) . The right IFJ exhibited a signi ﬁ cant negative correlation with average controllability ( adjusted p < . 01 ) and a signi ﬁ cant positive correlation with modal controllability ( adjusted p < . 01 ) . Furthermore , the right Medial Temporal Gyrus ( MTG ) ex - hibited a signi ﬁ cant positive correlation with boundary controllability ( adjusted p < . 02 ) . 3 . 2 . 2 . Flexibility The correlation analysis between the ﬂ exibility measure and the network controllability measures found several brain regions that sur - vived FDR correction ( Table 3 and Fig . 3 ) . This analysis revealed sev - eral brain regions that exhibited a signi ﬁ cant negative correlation with average controllability and a signi ﬁ cant positive correlation with modal controllability : The right IFJ ( average : adjusted p < . 001 ; modal : ad - justed p < . 001 ) , three brain regions ( one anterior , two posterior ) in the right MFG ( average : all adjusted p ' s < . 03 ; modal : all adjusted p ' s < . 03 ) , the left Fusiform ( average : adjusted p < . 02 ; modal : adjusted p < . 02 ) , and the left posterior MTG ( average : adjusted p < . 02 ; modal : adjusted p < . 02 ) . Furthermore , several brain regions exhibited a sig - ni ﬁ cant positive correlation with boundary controllability : The right MTG ( adjusted p < . 049 ) , three brain regions in the post - central gyrus ( all adjusted p ' s < . 04 ) , and the left STG ( adjusted p < . 049 ) . 3 . 2 . 3 . Originality The correlation analysis between the originality measure and the network controllability measures found several brain regions that survived FDR correction ( Table 3 and Fig . 3 ) . This analysis revealed two brain re - gions that exhibited a signi ﬁ cant negative correlation with average con - trollability and a signi ﬁ cant positive correlation with modal controll - ability : The right IFJ ( average : adjusted p < . 001 ; modal : adjusted p < . 001 ) , and two brain regions in the posterior Inferior Temporal Gyrus ( ITG ; average : all adjusted p ' s < . 04 ; modal : all adjusted p ' s < . 04 ) . Fur - thermore , two brain regions exhibited a signi ﬁ cant positive correlation with boundary controllability : Two brain regions in the post - central gyrus ( all adjusted p ' s < . 047 ) , and the left STG ( adjusted p < . 045 ) . 4 . Discussion In the current study , we applied a novel computational ap - proach — network control theory — to quantify the relation between the role of di ﬀ erent brain regions in theoretically “ driving ” whole brain neural dynamics related to creativity and intelligence . Current research has implicated cognitive control processes in the ECN in both in - telligence ( Hearne et al . , 2016 ; Jung and Haier , 2007 ) and creativity ( Beaty et al . , 2016 ; Chrysikou , 2018 ; Chrysikou et al . , 2014 ) . However , which speci ﬁ c control processes distinguish these cognitive abilities ? Table 2 Whole - brain correlation analysis between the two behavioral measures ( CRT and DT ) and network controllability measures ( average , modal , and boundary ) . Area Hemisphere BA x y Z Average Boundary Modal CRT IPL Right 40 43 − 51 46 . 11 * − . 11 * RSC Left 29 − 7 − 44 18 − . 15 * DT IFJ Right 9 44 13 40 − . 16 * * * . 16 * * * pMFG Right 8 35 17 53 − . 10 * . 10 * Fusiform Left 37 − 40 − 54 − 17 − . 10 * . 10 * post - central gyrus Left 3 − 46 − 11 35 . 14 * post - central gyrus Left 3 − 45 − 21 52 . 14 * post - central gyrus Left 4 − 57 − 16 44 . 14 * pSTG Left 22 − 53 − 44 10 . 14 * Note – All correlation values reported survived FDR correction ; x , y , z coordinates represent the peak maximal voxel in MNI space . Anatomical labels were determined using the Brainnetome Atlas ( http : / / atlas . brainnetome . org ) . * p < . 05 . * * * p < . 001 . Fig . 2 . Relation between individual di ﬀ erences in average , modal , and boundary controllability anatomical brain networks to CRT and DT . Maps highlight brain regions with signi ﬁ cant correlation values that survived FDR correction . Warmer / colder colors indicate a positive / negative correlation between controll - ability and behavior . Y . N . Kenett et al . Neuropsychologia 118 ( 2018 ) 79 – 90 85 We argue that network control theory can advance our understanding of the control processes evoked during ﬂ uid intelligence , as measured with the CRT , and creativity , as measured with a battery of divergent thinking tasks . Our approach is motivated by previous initial work that has implicated the importance of average controllability in typical de - velopment ( Tang et al . , 2017 ) and modal and boundary controllability in cognitive control tasks ( Medaglia et al . , 2016 , 2017 ) . The current study extends recent applications of control theory to cognitive neu - roscience by revealing di ﬀ erential control e ﬀ ects of intelligence and creativity — two high - level cognitive abilities that tap common and distinct aspects of cognitive control ( Benedek et al . , 2014a , 2014b ) . While these abilities involve complex non - linear neural dynamics , previous studies demonstrated how a simpli ﬁ ed linear model applied in network control theory can be applied to study neural dynamics ( Muldoon et al . , 2016 ; Tang and Bassett , 2017 ) . In fact , a common practice in the general application of control theory is to locally line - arize models of dynamic processes ( Liu et al . , 2011 ) . Finally , while our work is theoretically focused on the ECN and DMN , we apply here a whole brain analysis . Such an analysis is consistent with previous si - milar studies , and is also aimed to identify di ﬀ erent brain regions that contribute to the neural dynamics , but are somehow obscured in functional imaging studies . Table 3 Whole - brain correlation analysis between the di ﬀ erent DT measures ( ﬂ uency , ﬂ exibility , and originality ) and network controllability measures ( average , modal , and boundary ) . Area Hemisphere BA x y z Average Boundary Modal Fluency IFJ Right 9 44 13 40 − . 15 * * * . 15 * * * MTG Right 21 60 − 27 − 7 . 15 * Flexibility IFJ Right 9 44 13 40 − . 14 * * * . 14 * * * aMFG Right 10 34 53 7 − . 11 * . 11 * pMFG Right 6 37 3 46 − . 11 * . 11 * pMFG Right 8 35 17 53 − . 11 * . 11 * Fusiform Left 37 − 40 − 54 − 17 − . 12 * . 12 * pMTG Left 21 − 62 − 36 − 7 − . 11 * . 11 * MTG Right 21 60 − 27 − 7 . 13 * post - central gyrus Left 3 − 46 − 11 35 . 14 * post - central gyrus Left 3 − 45 − 21 52 . 14 * post - central gyrus Left 4 − 57 − 16 44 . 14 * pSTG Left 22 − 53 − 44 10 . 13 * Originality IFJ Right 9 44 13 40 − . 14 * * * . 14 * * * pITG Left 20 − 54 − 21 − 29 − . 10 * . 10 * pITG Left 20 − 54 − 40 − 21 − . 10 * . 10 * post - central gyrus Left 3 − 46 − 11 35 . 14 * post - central gyrus Left 3 − 45 − 21 52 . 14 * pSTG Left 22 − 53 − 44 10 . 13 * Note – All correlation values reported survived FDR correction ; x , y , z coordinates represent the peak maximal voxel in MNI space . Anatomical labels were determined using the Brainnetome Atlas ( http : / / atlas . brainnetome . org ) . * p < . 05 . * * * p < . 001 . Fig . 3 . Relation between individual di ﬀ erences in average , modal , and boundary controllability of anatomical brain networks to ﬂ uency , ﬂ exibility , and originality DT measures . Maps highlight brain regions with signi ﬁ cant correlation values that survived FDR correction . Warmer / colder colors indicate a positive / negative correlation between controllability and behavior . Y . N . Kenett et al . Neuropsychologia 118 ( 2018 ) 79 – 90 86 4 . 1 . Controllability , intelligence , and creativity Regarding intelligence , we found that the right IPL exhibited a po - sitive correlation with average controllability and a negative correla - tion with modal controllability . Previous studies have found activation in right IPL related to mental manipulation of information and working memory tasks ( Chochon et al . , 1999 ; Klepousniotou et al . , 2014 ; H . Liu et al . , 2017 ) . In accordance with the parietal - frontal theory of in - telligence ( Jung and Haier , 2007 ) , the higher average controllability in the right IPL may facilitate processing of the multiple interpretations of speci ﬁ c CRT stimuli . In this sense , the more the IPL can drive the brain network into easy to reach states , the easier it may be to process de - manding CRT stimuli . We also found a negative correlation between intelligence and boundary controllability within the retrosplenial cortex ( RSC ) . The RSC has been implicated in episodic memory , future simulation , spatial cognition , and context processing , and it exhibits direct connections with hippocampal , parahippocampal , and thalamic regions ( Miller et al . , 2014 ; Spreng et al . , 2009 ; Vann et al . , 2009 ) . According to Miller et al . ( 2014 ) , the RSC plays a role in processing complex cue associa - tions ( Miller et al . , 2014 ) , a function that appears crucial to perfor - mance on the CRT task , which requires processing complex associations between cues , and identifying a solution that adheres to such a complex relation . The negative relation between intelligence and RSC boundary controllability might re ﬂ ect lower integration - segregation abilities in this area for heightened performance in the CRT , possibly due to a higher demand of more ﬂ uid spread of information across the dorsal - RSC - hippocampus stream . Regarding creativity , we found a consistent pattern of relations between network controllability measures in speci ﬁ c brain regions as - sociated with cognitive control , including a positive correlation with modal controllability and a negative correlation with average con - trollability . The brain region that showed the strongest correlations between modal controllability and creativity measures was a region in the right dorsolateral prefrontal cortex — the right Inferior Frontal Junction ( IFJ ) . Located at the junction of the inferior frontal sulcus and the precentral sulcus ( Muhle - Karbe et al . , 2016 ) , the left IFJ has been shown to play a general role in creative tasks ( Gonen - Yaacovi et al . , 2013 ) and has been speci ﬁ cally attributed to cognitive ﬂ exibility and task switching ( Harding et al . , 2015 ; Yin et al . , 2016 ) . Recently , Sebastian et al . ( 2016 ) showed that the right IFJ was associated with the detection of salient stimuli and co - activated with both the ventral and dorsal attention networks ( Corbetta et al . , 2008 ) . This co - activation pattern points to its potential role as a mediator between the stimulus - driven ventral attention network and the goal - directed dorsal attention network ( Corbetta et al . , 2008 ; Levy and Wagner , 2011 ) . Furthermore , in light of its role in switching between the ventral ( stimulus based ) and dorsal ( goal directed ) attention systems , the IFJ may serve as a link between DMN and ECN interactions , which have commonly been re - ported in fMRI studies ( Beaty et al . , 2015 , 2016 ) . We also found a si - milar pattern of relations within anterior posterior regions of the right MFG , consistent with past work implicating this region in suppressing inappropriate responses ( Volle et al . , 2012 ) , shifting between response alternatives ( Chen et al . , 2016 ; Gonen - Yaacovi et al . , 2013 ) , and facil - itating dynamic coupling between ECN and DMN during divergent thinking ( Beaty et al . , 2015 , 2016 ; Zhu et al . , 2017 ) . Our analysis further revealed a similar pattern of relations in the left fusiform area . Research has shown that compared with baseline , ori - ginal idea generation exhibits robust activation of the fusiform gyrus , indicating its involvement in the formation of new associations ( Bechtereva et al . , 2004 ; Chrysikou and Thompson - Schill , 2011 ; Ellamil et al . , 2012 ) . For example , Chrysikou and Thompson - Schill ( 2011 ) ex - amined neural activity during generating common versus uncommon uses for objects . The authors found higher left fusiform activation when participants were required to generate uncommon responses , possibly re ﬂ ecting a deeper retrieval process over visual features of objects . Our ﬁ ndings support the ﬁ ndings of Chrysikou and Thompson - Schill ( 2011 ) by ﬁ nding a positive correlation between modal controllability and ﬂ exibility in the left fusiform area . Finally , we found a similar pattern of network controllability e ﬀ ects within the left posterior MTG and ITG . The posterior MTG plays a key role semantic control processes ( Binder and Desai , 2011 ; Davey et al . , 2015 , 2016 ; Noonan et al . , 2013 ; Price , 2010 ) and is commonly im - plicated in studies of creativity ( Gonen - Yaacovi et al . , 2013 ; Shen et al . , 2017 ) . Recently , Davey et al . ( 2016 ) investigated the functional role of the left posterior MTG in semantic control , and showed that the left posterior MTG integrates information from the DMN and ECN . In this context , higher modal controllability in the left posterior MTG may facilitate inhibition of salient responses during verbal creativity tasks , consistent with behavioral work linking inhibitory control and di - vergent thinking abilities ( Benedek et al . , 2014a , 2014b ) . The role of the posterior ITG ( BA 20 ) in creativity is currently unclear ( Benedek et al . , 2014a , 2014b ; Zhu et al . , 2017 ) . A recent meta - analysis has shown how this region plays a secondary role in language processing , as a kind of marginal language processing region ( Ardila et al . , 2016 ) . In a recent large - scale patient study , Herbet et al . ( 2016 ) investigate the anatomical factors that prevent full recovery of lexical retrieval in pa - tients . The authors identify the importance of BA 20 and its underlying white matter tracts to lexical retrieval de ﬁ cits ( Herbet et al . , 2016 ) . Thus , higher modal controllability in the posterior ITG may facilitate more lexical retrieval processes that increase originality . 4 . 2 . Boundary controllability and creativity We found a consistent correlation between boundary controllability within sensorimotor areas and divergent thinking performance . Although this ﬁ nding was unexpected , it is consistent with a cognitive embodiment perspective , which argues for the importance of sensor - imotor simulations ( Barsalou , 2008 ) in divergent thinking tasks . Sen - sorimotor simulations refer to “ the reenactment of perceptual , motor , and introspective states acquired during experience with the world , body , and mind ” ( Barsalou , 2008 ) . Such simulation mechanisms have been argued to act as a core computational factor in the brain ( Binder , 2016 ) . One such example is mental imagery , which involves the con - struction of conscious representations in working memory ( Pearson et al . , 2015 ) . Finally , a recent study demonstrated how semantic re - presentations of concepts bidirectionally converges with the sensor - imotor system ( Ekstrand et al . , 2017 ) . Thus , mental conceptual ma - nipulations required in divergent thinking may involve the recruitment of sensorimotor brain regions . Neuroimaging studies have demonstrated how simulation plays a central role in conceptual representations ( Binder , 2016 ; Binder and Desai , 2011 ; Binder et al . , 2009 ) . Surprisingly , however , no research has directly examined the relation of sensorimotor simulations and creativity ( but see Cousijn et al . , 2014a , 2014b , p . 10 ) , despite the ﬂ exible processes utilized in creativity on sensorimotor features of concepts ( Barsalou , 2008 ; Binder , 2016 ) . In divergent thinking tasks , the canonical measure of creative ability , participants are required to simulate and manipulate concepts in order to generate novel , alter - native , or uncommon uses to them ( Runco and Acar , 2012 ) . In a recent study , Matheson et al . ( 2017 ) examine multivariate voxel pattern ac - tivation when participants generate common and uncommon tool uses to concrete tools . The authors found that common tool use is related to categorical information in ventral stream areas while uncommon tools use is related to action and visual information in dorsal stream areas , thus demonstrating ﬂ exible activation within the “ tool network ” ( Matheson et al . , 2017 ) . The authors interpret this ﬂ exibility as con - tributing to the generation of creative responses . In the context of Matheson and colleagues , we argue that the positive correlations be - tween boundary controllability in sensorimotor brain regions related to individual di ﬀ erences in divergent thinking measures of ﬂ exibility and originality , highlight the importance of integration of sensory and Y . N . Kenett et al . Neuropsychologia 118 ( 2018 ) 79 – 90 87 motor information in relation to creativity . Further research is required to explore the role of sensorimotor simulation in divergent thinking . We also found positive correlations between divergent thinking measures and boundary controllability within temporal regions , in - cluding the left posterior STG and right MTG . Activation in the left posterior STG has been consistently found in creativity research ( Gonen - Yaacovi et al . , 2013 ; Jung - Beeman , 2005 ; Mirous and Beeman , 2012 ; Shen et al . , 2017 ) . The left STG is considered to play a key role in integrative processing via selective access to distributed cross - modal representations , which is important in forming novel associations that are required in semantic creativity tasks ( Shen et al . , 2017 ) . The right MTG has also been implicated in several creativity studies ( Bashwiner et al . , 2016 ; Chen et al . , 2016 ; Cousijn et al . , 2014a , 2014b ) . For ex - ample , a recent resting - state study found that divergent thinking ability was related to increased functional connectivity between the right MTG and post - central gyrus ( Cousijn et al . , 2014a , 2014b ) . Thus , higher boundary controllability of this region could facilitate integration with sensorimotor areas , which could in turn increase ﬂ uency and ﬂ exibility of ideas that originate from sensorimotor simulations . Taken together , our results highlight the di ﬀ erent control processes involved in intelligence and creativity . We found that intelligence was related to a heightened ability to drive the brain into easy - to - reach states and ﬂ uid spread of information within contextual association regions ( e . g . , IPL and RSC ) . On the other hand , creativity was related to a heightened ability to drive the brain into di ﬃ cult to reach states , with e ﬀ ects largely localized within regions that connect between bottom - up and top - down processes ( e . g . , IFJ ) and to integration / segregation pro - cesses in sensorimotor areas . 4 . 3 . Limitations and future directions A few limitations of the current study are worth noting . First , de - spite an established relation between intelligence and creativity ( Jauk et al . , 2013 ) , we only found a correlation between our measure of in - telligence ( CRT ) and divergent thinking ﬂ uency ( Table 1 ) . In a previous report of these behavioral data ( from the same sample ; Chen et al . , 2015 ) , the authors suggested that this relation might be due to the focus of the CRT on reasoning skills , which might be more similar in our sample of college students . Importantly , studies that have found a correlation between intelligence and creativity have done so only at a latent level , based on several measures of intelligence ( Beaty et al . , 2014 ; Benedek et al . , 2014a , 2014b ; Nusbaum and Silvia , 2011 ) , and not a single measure , as in the current study . Furthermore , previous studies have also found a negative correlation between ﬂ uency and intelligence ( e . g . , Beaty et al . , 2014 ) . Thus , future research is needed to replicate our ﬁ ndings with other measures of creativity and in - telligence . Finally , previous research has indicated di ﬀ erences in the notion of creativity between Western and Eastern cultures ( Niu and Sternberg , 2002 ) . Such di ﬀ erences may account for the pattern of the behavioral results . Thus , our study requires future replication in a Western society . Another limitation concerns the method we used to measure structural connectivity , which was based on DTI data . Past research suggests that DTI may under - sample some white matter ﬁ bers , parti - cularly those linking hemispheres or those that cross paths with other ﬁ bers ( Wedeen et al . , 2008 ) . This may also partially account for rela - tively small correlations found in our data . Future e ﬀ orts should apply di ﬀ usion spectrum imaging to improve estimates of structural network architecture . Third , our boundary controllability analysis was based on an in - dependent , a - priori brain modularity partition , which was based on a modularity analysis of resting - state fMRI data ( Mi š i ć et al . , 2015 ) . Fu - ture research is needed to establish a - priori partitions based on struc - tural connectivity networks , which will increase the reliability and validity of the boundary controllability analysis . Finally , the ability of speci ﬁ c nodes in a network ( such as anatomical brain networks ) to drive the system into a speci ﬁ c state has been recently questioned ( Menara et al . , 2017 ; Tu et al . , 2017 ) . In the current study , we were interested in investigating the theoretical notion of network control theory and individual di ﬀ erences in creativity , without committing to linking between cognitive control processes and network controllability . In conclusion , we applied a network control theory approach to identify speci ﬁ c control strategies in speci ﬁ c brain regions as related to intelligence and creativity . We found that intelligence is related to driving the brain into easy to reach states within association cortices , whereas creativity is related to driving the brain into di ﬃ cult to reach states within regions involved in DMN - ECN switching and sensorimotor processing . Our work demonstrates the strength of this computational approach and how it can shed unique light on cognitive control pro - cesses involved in cognition , and highlights the role of white matter anatomical connectivity on large scale functional dynamics in high - level cognition . Acknowledgements JDM acknowledges support from the O ﬃ ce of the Director at the National Institutes of Health ( 1 - DP5 - OD - 021352 - 01 ) . REB acknowl - edges support from the Imagination Institute , funded by the John Templeton Foundation ( RFP - 15 - 12 ) . QC and JQ acknowledge support from the National Natural Science Foundation of China ( 31571137 ; 3177231 ) . STS acknowledges support from the National Institute of Health ( R01 DC009209 and R01 DC015359 ) . References Abdelnour , F . , Voss , H . U . , Raj , A . , 2014 . Network di ﬀ usion accurately models the re - lationship between structural and functional brain connectivity networks . Neuroimage 90 , 335 – 347 . Andrews - Hanna , J . R . , Smallwood , J . , Spreng , R . N . , 2014 . The default network and self - generated thought : component processes , dynamic control , and clinical relevance . Ann . N . Y . Acad . Sci . 1316 ( 1 ) , 29 – 52 . Ardila , A . , Bernal , B . , Rosselli , M . , 2016 . How extended is Wernicke ' s area ? Meta - analytic connectivity study of BA20 and integrative proposal . Neurosci . J . 2016 , 4962562 . Baird , B . , Smallwood , J . , Mrazek , M . D . , Kam , J . W . Y . , Franklin , M . S . , Schooler , J . W . , 2012 . Inspired by distraction : mind wandering facilitates creative incubation . Psychol . Sci . 23 ( 10 ) , 1117 – 1122 . Barr , N . , Pennycook , G . , Stolz , J . A . , Fugelsang , J . A . , 2014 . Reasoned connections : a dual - process perspective on creative thought . Think . Reason . 21 ( 1 ) , 61 – 75 . Barsalou , L . W . , 2008 . Grounded cognition . Annu . Rev . Psychol . 59 , 617 – 645 . Bashwiner , D . M . , Wertz , C . J . , Flores , R . A . , Jung , R . E . , 2016 . Musical creativity “ revealed ” in brain structure : interplay between motor , default mode , and limbic networks . Sci . Rep . 6 , 20482 . Bassett , D . S . , Brown , J . A . , Deshpande , V . , Carlson , J . M . , Grafton , S . T . , 2011 . Conserved and variable architecture of human white matter connectivity . Neuroimage 54 ( 2 ) , 1262 – 1279 . Basten , U . , Hilger , K . , Fiebach , C . J . , 2015 . Where smart brains are di ﬀ erent : a quantitative meta - analysis of functional and structural brain imaging studies on intelligence . Intelligence 51 , 10 – 27 . Beaty , R . E . , Benedek , M . , Kaufman , S . B . , Silvia , P . J . , 2015 . Default and executive network coupling supports creative idea production . Sci . Rep . 5 , 10964 . Beaty , R . E . , Benedek , M . , Silvia , P . J . , Schacter , D . L . , 2016 . Creative cognition and brain network dynamics . Trends Cogn . Sci . 20 ( 2 ) , 87 – 95 . Beaty , R . E . , Silvia , P . J . , Nusbaum , E . C . , Jauk , E . , Benedek , M . , 2014 . The roles of asso - ciative and executive processes in creative cognition . Mem . Cogn . 42 ( 7 ) , 1 – 12 . Bechtereva , N . P . , Korotkov , A . D . , Pakhomov , S . V . k . , Roudas , M . S . , Starchenko , M . G . , Medvedev , S . V . , 2004 . PETstudy ofbrain maintenance of verbal creative activity . Int . J . Psychophysiol . 53 ( 1 ) , 11 – 20 . Benedek , M . , Jauk , E . , Fink , A . , Koschutnig , K . , Reishofer , G . , Ebner , F . , Neubauer , A . C . , 2014a . To create or to recall ? Neural mechanisms underlying the generation of creative new ideas . NeuroImage 88 , 125 – 133 . Benedek , M . , Jauk , E . , Sommer , M . , Arendasy , M . , Neubauer , A . C . , 2014b . Intelligence , creativity , and cognitive control : the common and di ﬀ erential involvement of ex - ecutive functions in intelligence and creativity . Intelligence 46 , 73 – 83 . Benedek , M . , Kenett , Y . N . , Umdasch , K . , Anaki , D . , Faust , M . , Neubauer , A . C . , 2017 . How semantic memory structure and intelligence contribute to creative thought : a net - work science approach . Think . Reason . 23 ( 2 ) , 158 – 183 . Benjamini , Y . , Hochberg , Y . , 1995 . Controlling the false discovery rate : a practical and powerful approach to multiple testing . J . R . Stat . Soc . Ser . B ( Methodol . ) 57 ( 1 ) , 289 – 300 . Benjamini , Y . , Yekutieli , D . , 2001 . The control of the false discovery rate in multiple testing under dependency . Ann . Stat . 29 ( 4 ) , 1165 – 1188 . Y . N . Kenett et al . Neuropsychologia 118 ( 2018 ) 79 – 90 88 Bettcher , B . M . , Mungas , D . , Patel , N . , Elofson , J . , Dutt , S . , Wynn , M . , Watson , C . L . , Stephens , M . , Walsh , C . M . , Kramer , J . H . , 2016 . Neuroanatomical substrates of ex - ecutive functions : beyond prefrontal structures . Neuropsychologia 85 , 100 – 109 . Bettinardi , R . G . , Deco , G . , Karlaftis , V . M . , Van Hartevelt , T . J . , Fernandes , H . M . , Kourtzi , Z . , Kringelbach , M . L . , Zamora - López , G . , 2017 . How structure sculpts function : un - veiling the contribution of anatomical connectivity to the brain ' s spontaneous cor - relation structure . Chaos : Interdiscip . J . Nonlinear Sci . 27 ( 4 ) , 047409 . Binder , J . R . , 2016 . In defense of abstract conceptual representations . Psychon . Bull . Rev . 23 ( 4 ) , 1096 – 1108 . Binder , J . R . , Desai , R . H . , 2011 . The neurobiology of semantic memory . Trends Cogn . Sci . 15 ( 11 ) , 527 – 536 . Binder , J . R . , Desai , R . H . , Graves , W . W . , Conant , L . L . , 2009 . Where Is the semantic system ? A critical review and meta - analysis of 120 functional neuroimaging studies . Cereb . Cortex 19 ( 12 ) , 2767 – 2796 . Cammoun , L . , Gigandet , X . , Meskaldji , D . , Thiran , J . P . , Sporns , O . , Do , K . Q . , Maeder , P . , Meuli , R . , Hagmann , P . , 2012 . Mapping the human connectome at multiple scales with di ﬀ usion spectrum MRI . J . Neurosci . Methods 203 ( 2 ) , 386 – 397 . Carpenter , P . A . , Just , M . A . , Shell , P . , 1990 . What one intelligence test measures : a the - oretical account of the processing in the Raven progressive matrices test . Psychol . Rev . 97 ( 3 ) , 404 . Chen , Q . , Beaty , R . E . , Wei , D . , Yang , J . , Sun , J . , Liu , W . , Yang , W . , Zhang , Q . , Qiu , J . , 2016 . Longitudinal alterations of frontoparietal and frontotemporal networks predict future creative cognitive ability . Cereb . Cortex 28 ( 1 ) , 103 – 115 . Chen , Q . - L . , Xu , T . , Yang , W . - J . , Li , Y . - D . , Sun , J . - Z . , Wang , K . - C . , Beaty , R . E . , Zhang , Q . - L . , Zuo , X . - N . , Qiu , J . , 2015 . Individual di ﬀ erences in verbal creative thinking are re ﬂ ected in the precuneus . Neuropsychologia 75 , 441 – 449 . Chochon , F . , Cohen , L . , Van De Moortele , P . F . , Dehaene , S . , 1999 . Di ﬀ erential con - tributions of the left and right inferior parietal lobules to number processing . J . Cogn . Neurosci . 11 ( 6 ) , 617 – 630 . Christo ﬀ , K . , Gordon , A . M . , Smallwood , J . , Smith , R . , Schooler , J . W . , 2009 . Experience sampling during fMRI reveals default network and executive system contributions to mind wandering . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA 106 ( 21 ) , 8719 – 8724 . Chrysikou , E . G . , 2018 . The costs and bene ﬁ ts of cognitive control for creativity . In : Jung , R . E . , Vartanian Vartanian , O . ( Eds . ) , The Cambridge Handbook of the Neuroscience of Creativity . Cambridge University Press , New York , NY , pp . 299 – 317 . Chrysikou , E . G . , Thompson - Schill , S . L . , 2011 . Dissociable brain states linked to common and creative object use . Hum . Brain Mapp . 32 ( 4 ) , 665 – 675 . Chrysikou , E . G . , Weber , M . J . , Thompson - Schill , S . L . , 2014 . A matched ﬁ lter hypothesis for cognitive control . Neuropsychologia 62 , 341 – 355 . Cieslak , M . , Grafton , S . T . , 2014 . Local termination pattern analysis : a tool for comparing white matter morphology . Brain Imaging Behav . 8 ( 2 ) , 292 – 299 . Cole , M . W . , Ito , T . , Bassett , D . S . , Schultz , D . H . , 2016 . Activity ﬂ ow over resting - state networks shapes cognitive task activations . Nat . Neurosci . 19 , 1718 . Corbetta , M . , Patel , G . , Shulman , G . L . , 2008 . The reorienting system of the human brain : from environment to theory of mind . Neuron 58 ( 3 ) , 306 – 324 . Cousijn , J . , Koolschijn , P . C . M . P . , Zanolie , K . , Kleibeuker , S . W . , Crone , E . A . , 2014a . The relation between gray matter morphology and divergent thinking in adolescents and young adults . PLoS One 9 ( 12 ) , e114619 . Cousijn , J . , Zanolie , K . , Munsters , R . J . M . , Kleibeuker , S . W . , Crone , E . A . , 2014b . The re - lation between resting state connectivity and creativity in adolescents before and after training . PLoS One 9 ( 9 ) , e105780 . Daducci , A . , Gerhard , S . , Gri ﬀ a , A . , Lemkaddem , A . , Cammoun , L . , Gigandet , X . , Meuli , R . , Hagmann , P . , Thiran , J . - P . , 2012 . The connectome mapper : an open - source pro - cessing pipeline to map connectomes with MRI . PLoS One 7 ( 12 ) , e48121 . Davey , J . , Cornelissen , P . L . , Thompson , H . E . , Sonkusare , S . , Hallam , G . , Smallwood , J . , Je ﬀ eries , E . , 2015 . Automatic and controlled semantic retrieval : TMS reveals distinct contributions of posterior middle temporal gyrus and angular gyrus . J . Neurosci . 35 ( 46 ) , 15230 – 15239 . Davey , J . , Thompson , H . E . , Hallam , G . , Karapanagiotidis , T . , Murphy , C . , De Caso , I . , Krieger - Redwood , K . , Bernhardt , B . C . , Smallwood , J . , Je ﬀ eries , E . , 2016 . Exploring the role of the posterior middle temporal gyrus in semantic cognition : integration of anterior temporal lobe with executive processes . NeuroImage 137 , 165 – 177 . Deary , I . J . , Penke , L . , Johnson , W . , 2010 . The neuroscience of human intelligence dif - ferences . Nat . Rev . Neurosci . 11 ( 3 ) , 201 – 211 . Dietrich , A . , Kanso , R . , 2010 . A review of EEG , ERP , and neuroimaging studies of crea - tivity and insight . Psychol . Bull . 136 ( 5 ) , 822 – 848 . Dosenbach , N . U . F . , Nardos , B . , Cohen , A . L . , Fair , D . A . , Power , J . D . , Church , J . A . , Nelson , S . M . , Wig , G . S . , Vogel , A . C . , Lessov - Schlaggar , C . N . , 2010 . Prediction of individual brain maturity using fMRI . Science 329 ( 5997 ) , 1358 – 1361 . Ekstrand , C . , Neudorf , J . , Lorentz , E . , Gould , L . , Mickleborough , M . , Borowsky , R . , 2017 . More than a feeling : the bidirectional convergence of semantic visual object and somatosensory processing . Acta Psychol . 181 ( Supplement C ) , 1 – 9 . Ellamil , M . , Dobson , C . , Beeman , M . , Christo ﬀ , K . , 2012 . Evaluative and generative modes of thought during the creative process . NeuroImage 59 ( 2 ) , 1783 – 1794 . Fan , L . , Li , H . , Zhuo , J . , Zhang , Y . , Wang , J . , Chen , L . , Yang , Z . , Chu , C . , Xie , S . , Laird , A . R . , Fox , P . T . , Eickho ﬀ , S . B . , Yu , C . , Jiang , T . , 2016 . The human brainnetome atlas : a new brain atlas based on connectional architecture . Cereb . Cortex 26 ( 8 ) , 3508 – 3526 . Fischl , B . , 2012 . FreeSurfer . Neuroimage 62 ( 2 ) , 774 – 781 . Galán , R . F . , 2008 . On how network architecture determines the dominant patterns of spontaneous neural activity . PLoS One 3 ( 5 ) , e2148 . Gerlach , K . D . , Spreng , R . N . , Madore , K . P . , Schacter , D . L . , 2014 . Future planning : default network activity couples with frontoparietal control network and reward - processing regions during process and outcome simulations . Soc . Cogn . A ﬀ ect . Neurosci . 9 ( 12 ) , 1942 – 1951 . Gonen - Yaacovi , G . , de Souza , L . C . , Levy , R . , Urbanski , M . , Josse , G . , Volle , E . , 2013 . Rostral and caudal prefrontal contribution to creativity : a meta - analysis of functional imaging data . Front . Hum . Neurosci . 7 , 465 . Goñi , J . , van den Heuvel , M . P . , Avena - Koenigsberger , A . , de Mendizabal , N . V . , Betzel , R . F . , Gri ﬀ a , A . , Hagmann , P . , Corominas - Murtra , B . , Thiran , J . - P . , Sporns , O . , 2014 . Resting - brain functional connectivity predicted by analytic measures of network communication . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA 111 ( 2 ) , 833 – 838 . Gu , S . , Pasqualetti , F . , Cieslak , M . , Telesford , Q . K . , Yu , A . B . , Kahn , A . E . , Medaglia , J . D . , Vettel , J . M . , Miller , M . B . , Grafton , S . T . , Bassett , D . S . , 2015 . Controllability of struc - tural brain networks . Nat . Commun . 6 . Haász , J . , Westlye , E . T . , Fjær , S . , Espeseth , T . , Lundervold , A . , Lundervold , A . J . , 2013 . General ﬂ uid - type intelligence is related to indices of white matter structure in middle - aged and old adults . Neuroimage 83 , 372 – 383 . Hagmann , P . , Cammoun , L . , Gigandet , X . , Meuli , R . , Honey , C . J . , Wedeen , V . J . , Sporns , O . , 2008 . Mapping the structural core of human cerebral cortex . PLoS Biol . 6 ( 7 ) , e159 . Harding , I . H . , Yücel , M . , Harrison , B . J . , Pantelis , C . , Breakspear , M . , 2015 . E ﬀ ective connectivity within the frontoparietal control network di ﬀ erentiates cognitive con - trol and working memory . NeuroImage 106 , 144 – 153 . Hearne , L . , Cocchi , L . , Zalesky , A . , Mattingley , J . B . , 2015 . Interactions between default mode and control networks as a function of increasing cognitive reasoning com - plexity . Hum . Brain Mapp . 36 ( 7 ) , 2719 – 2731 . Hearne , L . J . , Mattingley , J . B . , Cocchi , L . , 2016 . Functional brain networks related to individual di ﬀ erences in human intelligence at rest . Sci . Rep . 6 , 32328 . Herbet , G . , Moritz - Gasser , S . , Boiseau , M . , Duvaux , S . , Cochereau , J . , Du ﬀ au , H . , 2016 . Converging evidence for a cortico - subcortical network mediating lexical retrieval . Brain 139 ( 11 ) , 3007 – 3021 . Hermundstad , A . M . , Bassett , D . S . , Brown , K . S . , Amino ﬀ , E . M . , Clewett , D . , Freeman , S . , Frithsen , A . , Johnson , A . , Tipper , C . M . , Miller , M . B . , 2013 . Structural foundations of resting - state and task - based functional connectivity in the human brain . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA 110 ( 15 ) , 6169 – 6174 . Hermundstad , A . M . , Brown , K . S . , Bassett , D . S . , Amino ﬀ , E . M . , Frithsen , A . , Johnson , A . , Tipper , C . M . , Miller , M . B . , Grafton , S . T . , Carlson , J . M . , 2014 . Structurally - con - strained relationships between cognitive states in the human brain . PLoS Comput . Biol . 10 ( 5 ) , e1003591 . Honey , C . J . , Sporns , O . , Cammoun , L . , Gigandet , X . , Thiran , J . - P . , Meuli , R . , Hagmann , P . , 2009 . Predicting human resting - state functional connectivity from structural con - nectivity . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA 106 ( 6 ) , 2035 – 2040 . Honey , C . J . , Thivierge , J . - P . , Sporns , O . , 2010 . Can structure predict function in the human brain ? Neuroimage 52 ( 3 ) , 766 – 776 . Jauk , E . , Benedek , M . , Dunst , B . , Neubauer , A . C . , 2013 . The relationship between in - telligence and creativity : new support for the threshold hypothesis by means of empirical breakpoint detection . Intelligence 41 ( 4 ) , 212 – 221 . Jung , R . E . , Grazioplene , R . , Caprihan , A . , Chavez , R . S . , Haier , R . J . , 2010 . White matter integrity , creativity , and psychopathology : disentangling constructs with di ﬀ usion tensor imaging . PLoS One 5 ( 3 ) , e9818 . Jung , R . E . , Haier , R . J . , 2007 . The parieto - frontal integration theory ( P - FIT ) of in - telligence : converging neuroimaging evidence . Behav . Brain Sci . 30 ( 02 ) , 135 – 154 . Jung , R . E . , Mead , B . S . , Carrasco , J . , Flores , R . A . , 2013 . The structure of creative cognition in the human brain . Front . Hum . Neurosci . 7 , 330 . Jung - Beeman , M . , 2005 . Bilateral brain processes for comprehending natural language . Trends Cogn . Sci . 9 ( 11 ) , 512 – 518 . Kenett , Y . N . , Beaty , R . E . , Silvia , P . J . , Anaki , D . , Faust , M . , 2016 . Structure and ﬂ exibility : investigating the relation between the structure of the mental lexicon , ﬂ uid in - telligence , and creative achievement . Psychol . Aesthet . Creat . Arts 10 ( 4 ) , 377 – 388 . Klein , R . B . , 2011 . convergence of structural equation modeling and multilevel modeling . In : Williams , M . , Vogt , W . P . ( Eds . ) , The SAGE Handbook of Innovation in Social Research Methods . SAGE Publishig , Thousand Oaks , CA , pp . 562 – 589 . Klepousniotou , E . , Gracco , V . L . , Pike , G . B . , 2014 . Pathways to lexical ambiguity : fMRI evidence for bilateral fronto - parietal involvement in language processing . Brain Lang . 131 , 56 – 64 . Kumar , G . , Menolascino , D . , Ching , S . , 2014 . Input novelty as a control metric for time varying linear systems . arXiv preprint . Levy , B . J . , Wagner , A . D . , 2011 . Cognitive control and right ventrolateral prefrontal cortex : re ﬂ exive reorienting , motor inhibition , and action updating . Ann . N . Y . Acad . Sci . 1224 ( 1 ) , 40 – 62 . Li , D . , Hu , K . , Chen , G . , Jin , Y . , 1989 . The Handbook of Combined Raven ' s Test in Chinese Version . East China Normal University , Shanghai . Liu , H . , Yu , H . , Li , Y . , Qin , W . , Xu , L . , Yu , C . , Liang , M . , 2017 . An energy - e ﬃ cient intrinsic functional organization of human working memory : a resting - state functional con - nectivity study . Behav . Brain Res . 316 , 66 – 73 . Liu , S . , Erkkinen , M . G . , Healey , M . L . , Xu , Y . , Swett , K . E . , Chow , H . M . , Braun , A . R . , 2015 . Brain activity and connectivity during poetry composition : toward a multi - dimensional model of the creative process . Hum . Brain Mapp . 36 ( 9 ) , 3351 – 3372 . Liu , W . , Wei , D . , Chen , Q . , Yang , W . , Meng , J . , Wu , G . , Bi , T . , Zhang , Q . , Zuo , X . - N . , Qiu , J . , 2017 . Longitudinal test - retest neuroimaging data from healthy young adults in southwest China . Sci . Data 4 , 170017 . Liu , Y . - Y . , Slotine , J . - J . , Barabási , A . - L . , 2011 . Controllability of complex networks . Nature 473 ( 7346 ) , 167 – 173 . Matheson , H . E . , Buxbaum , L . J . , Thompson - Schill , S . L . , 2017 . Di ﬀ erential tuning of ven - tral and dorsal streams during the generation of common and . J . Cogn . Neurosci . 29 ( 11 ) , 1791 – 1802 . McGrew , K . S . , 2005 . The Cattell - Horn - Carroll theory of cognitive abilities : past , present , and future . In : Flanagan , D . P . , Harrison , P . L . ( Eds . ) , Contemporary Intellectual Assessment : Theories , Tests , and Issues . Guilford Press , New York , NY , US , pp . 136 – 181 . Medaglia , J . D . , Gu , S . , Pasqualetti , F . , Ashare , R . L . , Lerman , C . , Kable , J . , Bassett , D . S . , 2016 . Cognitive control in the controllable connectome . arXiv preprint . Y . N . Kenett et al . Neuropsychologia 118 ( 2018 ) 79 – 90 89 Medaglia , J . D . , Harvey , D . Y . , White , N . , Bassett , D . S . , Hamilton , R . H . , 2017 . Network controllability in the IFG relates to controlled language variability and susceptibility to ArXiv Preprint . Medaglia , J . D . , Huang , W . , Karuza , E . A . , Kelkar , A . , Thompson - Schill , S . L . , Ribeiro , A . , Bassett , D . S . , 2017 . Functional alignment with anatomical networks is associated with cognitive ﬂ exibility . Nat . Hum . Behav . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1038 / s41562 - 017 - 0260 - 9 . Menara , T . , Gu , S . , Bassett , D . S . , Pasqualetti , F . , 2017 . On structural controllability of symmetric ( brain ) networks . arXiv preprint . Menon , V . , 2011 . Large - scale brain networks and psychopathology : a unifying triple network model . Trends Cogn . Sci . 15 ( 10 ) , 483 – 506 . Miller , A . M . P . , Vedder , L . C . , Law , L . M . , Smith , D . M . , 2014 . Cues , context , and long - term memory : the role of the retrosplenial cortex in spatial cognition . Front . Hum . Neurosci . 8 ( 586 ) , 586 . Mirous , H . J . , Beeman , M . , 2012 . Bilateral processing and a ﬀ ect in creative language comprehension . In : Faust , M . ( Ed . ) , The Handbook of the Neuropsychology of Language . Blackwell Publishing , Oxford , UK , pp . 319 – 341 . Mi š i ć , B . , Betzel , Richard F . , Nematzadeh , A . , Goñi , J . , Gri ﬀ a , A . , Hagmann , P . , Flammini , A . , Ahn , Y . - Y . , Sporns , O . , 2015 . Cooperative and competitive spreading dynamics on the human connectome . Neuron 86 ( 6 ) , 1518 – 1529 . Muhle - Karbe , P . S . , Derrfuss , J . , Lynn , M . T . , Neubert , F . X . , Fox , P . T . , Brass , M . , Eickho ﬀ , S . B . , 2016 . Co - activation - based parcellation of the lateral prefrontal cortex delineates the inferior frontal Junction area . Cereb . Cortex 26 ( 5 ) , 2225 – 2241 . Muldoon , S . F . , Pasqualetti , F . , Gu , S . , Cieslak , M . , Grafton , S . T . , Vettel , J . M . , Bassett , D . S . , 2016 . Stimulation - based control of dynamic brain networks . PLoS Comput . Biol . 12 ( 9 ) , e1005076 . Niu , W . , Sternberg , R . , 2002 . Contemporary studies on the concept of creativity : the East and the West . J . Creat . Behav . 36 ( 4 ) , 269 – 288 . Noonan , K . A . , Je ﬀ eries , E . , Visser , M . , Lambon Ralph , M . A . , 2013 . Going beyond inferior prefrontal involvement in semantic control : evidence for the additional contribution of dorsal angular gyrus and posterior middle temporal cortex . J . Cogn . Neurosci . 25 ( 11 ) , 1824 – 1850 . Nusbaum , E . C . , Silvia , P . J . , 2011 . Are intelligence and creativity really so di ﬀ erent ? : ﬂ uid intelligence , executive processes , and strategy use in divergent thinking . Intelligence 39 ( 1 ) , 36 – 45 . Ochsner , K . N . , Silvers , J . A . , Buhle , J . T . , 2012 . Functional imaging studies of emotion regulation : a synthetic review and evolving model of the cognitive control of emo - tion . Ann . N . Y . Acad . Sci . 1251 ( 1 ) , E1 – E24 . Ohtani , T . , Nestor , P . G . , Bouix , S . , Newell , D . , Melonakos , E . D . , McCarley , R . W . , Shenton , M . E . , Kubicki , M . , 2017 . Exploring the neural substrates of attentional control and human intelligence : di ﬀ usion tensor imaging of prefrontal white matter tractography in healthy cognition . Neuroscience 341 , 52 – 60 . Ohtani , T . , Nestor , P . G . , Bouix , S . , Saito , Y . , Hosokawa , T . , Kubicki , M . , 2015 . Medial frontal white and gray matter contributions to general intelligence . PLoS One 9 ( 12 ) , e112691 . Pasqualetti , F . , Zampieri , S . , Bullo , F . , 2014 . Controllability metrics , limitations and al - gorithms for complex networks . IEEE Trans . Control Netw . Syst . 1 ( 1 ) , 40 – 52 . Pearson , J . , Naselaris , T . , Holmes , E . A . , Kosslyn , S . M . , 2015 . Mental imagery : functional mechanisms and clinical applications . Trends Cogn . Sci . 19 ( 10 ) , 590 – 602 . Penke , L . , Maniega , S . M . , Bastin , M . E . , Valdes Hernandez , M . C . , Murray , C . , Royle , N . A . , Starr , J . M . , Wardlaw , J . M . , Deary , I . J . , 2012 . Brain white matter tract integrity as a neural foundation for general intelligence . Mol . Psychiatry 17 ( 10 ) , 1026 – 1030 . Pineda - Pardo , J . A . , Martínez , K . , Román , F . J . , Colom , R . , 2016 . Structural e ﬃ ciency within a parieto - frontal network and cognitive di ﬀ erences . Intelligence 54 , 105 – 116 . Pinho , A . L . , de Manzano , Ö . , Fransson , P . , Eriksson , H . , Ullén , F . , 2014 . Connecting to create : expertise in musical improvisation Is associated with increased functional connectivity between premotor and prefrontal areas . J . Neurosci . 34 ( 18 ) , 6156 – 6163 . Plucker , J . A . , 1999 . Is the proof in the pudding ? Reanalyses of Torrance ' s ( 1958 to pre - sent ) longitudinal data . Creat . Res . J . 12 ( 2 ) , 103 – 114 . Price , C . J . , 2010 . The anatomy of language : a review of 100 fMRI studies published in 2009 . Ann . N . Y . Acad . Sci . 1191 ( 1 ) , 62 – 88 . Qian , M . , Wang , D . , Chen , Z . , 1997 . The development of norm of the combined Raven ' s test ( CRT - AC2 ) for Chinese adult . Chin . J . Control . Endem . Dis . 12 , 215 – 217 . Raven , J . C . , 1958 . Guide to Using the Coloured Progressive Matrices . HK Lewis , London , UK . Raven , J . C . , 1960 . Guide to the Standard Progressive Matrices : Sets A , B , C , D and E . HK Lewis , London , UK . Runco , M . A . , Acar , S . , 2012 . Divergent thinking as an indicator of creative potential . Creat . Res . J . 24 ( 1 ) , 66 – 75 . Ryman , S . G . , van den Heuvel , M . P . , Yeo , R . A . , Caprihan , A . , Carrasco , J . , Vakhtin , A . A . , Flores , R . A . , Wertz , C . , Jung , R . E . , 2014 . Sex di ﬀ erences in the relationship between white matter connectivity and creativity . NeuroImage 101 , 380 – 389 . Santarnecchi , E . , Emmendorfer , A . , Pascual - Leone , A . , 2017 . Dissecting the parieto - frontal correlates of ﬂ uid intelligence : a comprehensive ALE meta - analysis study . Intelligence 63 , 9 – 28 . Sebastian , A . , Jung , P . , Neuho ﬀ , J . , Wibral , M . , Fox , P . T . , Lieb , K . , Fries , P . , Eickho ﬀ , S . B . , Tüscher , O . , Mobascher , A . , 2016 . Dissociable attentional and inhibitory networks of dorsal and ventral areas of the right inferior frontal cortex : a combined task - speci ﬁ c and coordinate - based meta - analytic fMRI study . Brain Struct . Funct . 221 ( 3 ) , 1635 – 1651 . Shen , W . , Yuan , Y . , Liu , C . , Luo , J . , 2017 . The roles of the temporal lobe in creative insight : an integrated review . Think . Reason . 23 ( 4 ) , 321 – 375 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1080 / 13546783 . 2017 . 1308885 . Silvia , P . J . , 2015 . Intelligence and creativity are pretty similar after all . Educ . Psychol . Rev . 27 ( 4 ) , 1 – 8 . Sotiropoulos , S . N . , Zalesky , A . , 2017 . Building connectomes using di ﬀ usion MRI : why , how and but . NMR Biomed . Sowden , P . T . , Pringle , A . , Gabora , L . , 2014 . The shifting sands of creative thinking : connections to dual - process theory . Think . Reason . 21 ( 1 ) , 40 – 60 . Spreng , R . N . , DuPre , E . , Selarka , D . , Garcia , J . , Gojkovic , S . , Mildner , J . , Luh , W . - M . , Turner , G . R . , 2014 . Goal - congruent default network activity facilitates cognitive control . J . Neurosci . 34 ( 42 ) , 14108 – 14114 . Spreng , R . N . , Mar , R . A . , Kim , A . S . , 2009 . The common neural basis of autobiographical memory , prospection , navigation , theory of mind , and the default mode : a quanti - tative meta - analysis . J . Cogn . Neurosci . 21 ( 3 ) , 489 – 510 . Summers , T . H . , Cortesi , F . L . , Lygeros , J . , 2016 . On submodularity and controllability in complex dynamical networks . IEEE Trans . Control Netw . Syst . 3 ( 1 ) , 91 – 101 . Takeuchi , H . , Taki , Y . , Nouchi , R . , Yokoyama , R . , Kotozaki , Y . , Nakagawa , S . , Sekiguchi , A . , Iizuka , K . , Yamamoto , Y . , Hanawa , S . , Araki , T . , Makoto Miyauchi , C . , Shinada , T . , Sakaki , K . , Sassa , Y . , Nozawa , T . , Ikeda , S . , Yokota , S . , Daniele , M . , Kawashima , R . , 2017 . Creative females have larger white matter structures : evidence from a large sample study . Hum . Brain Mapp . 38 ( 1 ) , 414 – 430 . Takeuchi , H . , Taki , Y . , Sassa , Y . , Hashizume , H . , Sekiguchi , A . , Fukushima , A . , Kawashima , R . , 2010 . White matter structures associated with creativity : evidence from di ﬀ usion tensor imaging . Neuroimage 51 ( 1 ) , 11 – 18 . Takeuchi , H . , Taki , Y . , Sassa , Y . , Hashizume , H . , Sekiguchi , A . , Fukushima , A . , Kawashima , R . , 2011 . Verbal working memory performance correlates with regional white matter structures in the frontoparietal regions . Neuropsychologia 49 ( 12 ) , 3466 – 3473 . Tang , E . , Bassett , D . S . , 2017 . Control of Dynamics in Brain Networks . arXiv preprint . Tang , E . , Giusti , C . , Baum , G . L . , Gu , S . , Pollock , E . , Kahn , A . E . , Roalf , D . R . , Moore , T . M . , Ruparel , K . , Gur , R . C . , Gur , R . E . , Satterthwaite , T . D . , Bassett , D . S . , 2017 . Developmental increases in white matter network controllability support a growing diversity of brain dynamics . Nat . Commun . 8 ( 1 ) , 1252 . Torrance , E . P . , 1966 . Torrance Test of Creative Thinking . Scholastic Testing Service , Inc . , Bensenville , IL . Tu , C . , Rocha , R . P . , Corbetta , M . , Zampieri , S . , Zoezi , M . , Suweis , S . , 2017 . Warnings and caveats in brain controllability . arXiv preprint . Vann , S . D . , Aggleton , J . P . , Maguire , E . A . , 2009 . What does the retrosplenial cortex do ? Nat . Rev . Neurosci . 10 ( 11 ) , 792 – 802 . Volle , E . , de Lacy Costello , A . , Coates , L . M . , McGuire , C . , Towgood , K . , Gilbert , S . , Kinkingnehun , S . , McNeil , J . E . , Greenwood , R . , Papps , B . , van den Broeck , M . , Burgess , P . W . , 2012 . Dissociation between verbal response initiation and suppression after prefrontal lesions . Cereb . Cortex 22 ( 10 ) , 2428 – 2440 . Wang , D . , Di , M . , Qian , M . , 2007 . A report on the third revision of combined raven ' s test ( CRT - C3 ) for children in China . Chin . J . Clin . Psychol . 15 ( 6 ) , 559 – 568 . Wedeen , V . J . , Wang , R . P . , Schmahmann , J . D . , Benner , T . , Tseng , W . Y . I . , Dai , G . , Pandya , D . N . , Hagmann , P . , D ' Arceuil , H . , de Crespigny , A . J . , 2008 . Di ﬀ usion spectrum magnetic resonance imaging ( DSI ) tractography of crossing ﬁ bers . Neuroimage 41 ( 4 ) , 1267 – 1277 . Wei , D . , Yang , J . , Li , W . , Wang , K . , Zhang , Q . , Qiu , J . , 2014 . Increased resting functional connectivity of the medial prefrontal cortex in creativity by means of cognitive sti - mulation . Cortex 51 , 92 – 102 . Wu , C . , Zhong , S . , Chen , H . , 2016 . Discriminating the di ﬀ erence between remote and close association with relation to hite - matter structural connectivity . PLoS One 11 ( 10 ) , e0165053 . Wu , X . , Yang , W . , Tong , D . , Sun , J . , Chen , Q . , Wei , D . , Zhang , Q . , Zhang , M . , Qiu , J . , 2015 . A meta - analysis of neuroimaging studies on divergent thinking using activation likelihood estimation . Hum . Brain Mapp . 36 ( 7 ) , 2703 – 2718 . Wu - Yan , E . , Betzel , R . F . , Tang , E . , Gu , S . , Pasqualetti , F . , Bassett , D . S . , 2017 . Benchmarking measures of network controllability on canonical graph models . arXiv preprint . Xia , M . , Wang , J . , He , Y . , 2013 . BrainNet viewer : a network visualization tool for human brain connectomics . PLoS One 8 ( 7 ) , e68910 . Yan , G . , Vértes , P . E . , Towlson , E . K . , Chew , Y . L . , Walker , D . S . , Schafer , W . R . , Barabási , A . - L . , 2017 . Network control principles predict neuron function in the Caenorhabditis elegans connectome . Nature 550 ( 7677 ) , 519 – 523 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1038 / nature24056 . ( advance online publication ) . Ye , R . , Hong , D . , Torrance , E . P . , 1988 . Cross cultural comparison of creative thinking between Chinese and American students using Torrance test . Chin . J . Appl . Psychol . 3 ( 22 – 29 ) . Yeh , F . - C . , Wedeen , V . J . , Tseng , W . - Y . I . , 2011 . Estimation of ﬁ ber orientation and spin density distribution by di ﬀ usion deconvolution . Neuroimage 55 ( 3 ) , 1054 – 1062 . Yin , S . , Wang , T . , Pan , W . , Liu , Y . , Chen , A . , 2016 . Task - switching cost and intrinsic functional connectivity in the human brain : toward understanding individual dif - ferences in cognitive ﬂ exibility . PLoS One 10 ( 12 ) , e0145826 . Yoruk , S . , Runco , M . A . , 2014 . Theneuroscience of divergent thinking . ANS : J . Neurocogn . Res . 56 ( 1 – 2 ) , 1 – 16 . Zabelina , D . L . , Andrews - Hanna , J . R . , 2016 . Dynamic network interactions supporting internally - oriented cognition . Curr . Opin . Neurobiol . 40 , 86 – 93 . Zhu , W . , Chen , Q . , Xia , L . , Beaty , R . E . , Yang , W . , Tian , F . , Sun , J . , Cao , G . , Zhang , Q . , Chen , X . , Qiu , J . , 2017 . Common and distinct brain networks underlying verbal and visual creativity . Hum . Brain Mapp . 38 ( 4 ) , 2094 – 2111 . Y . N . Kenett et al . Neuropsychologia 118 ( 2018 ) 79 – 90 90