Content in Open Production Communities : Taxonomy and Design Construct Providing a Taxonomy and Conceptualizing a Construct to Address Content and Content - related Activites Pujan Ziaie Department of Computer Science Technical University of Munich ( TUM ) Munich , Germany ziaie @ cs . tum . edu Helmut Krcmar Department of Computer Science Technical University of Munich ( TUM ) Munich , Germany krcmar @ in . tum . de Abstract : Open production communities ( OPCs ) are online communities in which content is solely generated by users and is publicly available for everyone . By leveraging the manpower and collective intelligence of a vast crowd , these communities facili - tate gleaning , structuring , evaluating and sharing information from different perspectives and in different areas of interest . Content , as “the king” in OPCs , has been loosely modeled and defined in the literature . Observing the lack of a standard and generalized terminology in the field of production communities in general and in content - related activities in particular , this paper introduces a fine - grained taxonomy for OPCs and a novel repre - sentational construct to resolve inconsistencies based on the exist - ing theories and approaches . The results will establish a standard vocabulary and a unified construct for content to be used by researchers and community designers in this growing field of study . Keywords : online communities , user - generated content ( UGC ) , open production communities ( OPC ) , content quality , collaboration I . I NTRODUCTION ( H EADING 1 ) The increasing number of internet users and the interactive features of Web2 . 0 have significantly facilitated content gener - ation and sharing in the last decade . As a result , an enormous amount of content is being produced every second of every day in the Internet , a virtual network that lacks distinguishable voices of authority [ 1 ] . Many websites try to accumulate and structure user - generated content in a systematic way to turn the potential creativity , manpower , and knowledge of a vast crowd into reusable knowledge . This potential of a large number of people has been used in many areas such as in providing news ( citizen journalism ) , idea generation ( e . g . open innovation communities [ 2 ] ) , software development , or knowledge shar - ing . Open production communities are public communities with two or more layers ( tiers ) of users , in which the generation of content is performed by users and this user - generated content ( UGC ) is considered as a public good . These online communi - ties have been built around the idea of providing an environ - ment for users to generate , update , evaluate , and share content . They are characterized as gift economies where members are non - competing , have a common objective , and the resources ( content ) are not scarce , but abundant [ 3 ] . In many such com - munities , in addition to content generation , the information qualification process has also been transferred from experts to the information - seeking and information - generating public [ 4 ] . Wikipedia , Slashdot , Flickr or Yahoo Answers are some promi - nent examples of OPCs , each focusing on a different domain or form of knowledge . Production communities , in general , differ from service - based communities ( e . g . for gaming ) , social net - works , and common - bond communities [ 5 ] in which the main objective is not necessarily to accumulate high - quality public user - generated content . This “new world” of user - driven pro - duction communities have inevitably created a new under - standing of many aspects such as collaboration , motivation , ownership , and quality [ 6 ] . What all these communities have in common is the salient role of content and users as the sole ge - nerator ( and sometime evaluator ) of content . In other words , content is “the king” in open production communities 1 . Despite the prominent role of content , its variety , and the paramount importance of quality assurance processes , no ge - neric model has been conceptualized to address the major ele - ments of content and no terminology standards have yet been suggested or established to facilitate the communication and accumulation of knowledge in this field . In this paper , we focus on the following research questions : RQ1 : How can the content , as a construct , be represented in the context of open production communities ? RQ2 : What types of OPCs can be distinguished based on the approaches to generate and publish content ? RQ3 : What taxonomy can address and standardize content - related entities and activities ? To answer these questions , we address the relevant practic - es and frequently used terminologies in the context of OPCs based on a critical literature review . Here , the focus is on the content in the information layer rather than in the data layer . In 1 “content in virtual communities is the king” is a quote by Jay Ma - rathe , the head of consulting at Durlacher Research Ltd . 978 - 1 - 4673 - 5285 - 7 / 13 / $ 31 . 00 ©2013 IEEE order to conceptualize a generic construct for content , a con - structive grounded theory approach [ 7 ] was used to glean all relevant elements of content in different types of OPCs and sort them into a number of categories according to their characteris - tic similarities . This paper is structured as follows : First , the accumulated knowledge is provided in a structured form in two major do - mains : content as an entity and content generation as a process . In the first domain , content as an entity is studied and a new construct for content is introduced . In the second part , open production communities are classified into four different do - mains based on two dimensions : how the content is developed ( collaborative vs . creative ) and how the content is published ( open - gate vs . closed - gate ) . Then , taxonomy to consolidate and standardize the frequently used terms pertaining to content and content generation is suggested . Finally , the conclusion includ - ing a summary of the discussions , important issues and future works will be provided . II . U SER - G ENERATED C ONTENT : C ONCEPTUALIZATION To conceptualize different aspects and elements of user - generated content , the literature and best practices were re - viewed and studied from an engineering perspective with a focus on two main domains : content as an abstract entity and content qualification processes . This section entails content characteristics in production communities and the relevant features of content that may be leveraged to enhance content quality . Based on the gleaned information , a new construct ( model ) is introduced to represent content in open production communities . The proposed model can explain different beha - viors and approaches in various content production contexts . The term “content” has been used in the literature with dif - ferent connotations depending on the context and application . Generally , content refers to a piece of information that can be accessed on demand or is available at certain times within the system ( in this case , within an online community ) . Content can be altered , transmitted , viewed , and traded in parts or as a whole [ 8 ] . In the context of production communities , however , a common terminology is missing and more sophisticated and refined definitions are needed to address content and its inex - tricable elements . In many production communities , content is generated by one user , and then extended ( by means of com - ments , tags , ratings , etc . ) or edited ( in case of collaborative content generation ) by others . Regarding the construct of con - tent , four elements can be distinguished for each content : The main body of content ( main content ) , separate contents that are categorized under or are related to the main content ( subcon - tent ) , the additional information that is added by users to enrich the main content ( metacontent ) , and the additional information that is added by the system 2 to enrich both the main content and its pertinent subcontents ( metainformation ) ( see Fig . 1 ) . 1 ) Main content 2 This additional information can be added periodically , event - based , or at the time of generation Each generated content has a main part , which has sometimes been referred to as the essence of content [ 9 ] . For example , the main body of articles in an encyclopedia , the text , picture , or video that represents an article or some news in a media web - site , content of the files in file sharing sites , or blog posts in weblogs can all be considered as “main content” . In open col - laboration communities [ 10 ] , where the main content is being generated collaboratively , this main content can be edited by other users as well ( e . g . in Wikipedia or open source projects ) . In creative production communities , on the other hand , only the user that has generated or publicized 3 [ 11 ] the content in the first place is able to update it if necessary [ 12 ] . 2 ) Subcontent Allowing Discussions and reviews over generated content , whether news , an article , a blog post , or an uploaded video or picture allows other members to supplement them with new information from different angles [ 13 ] . Nowadays , the discus - sion ( commenting ) feature is available in almost every produc - tion community for any generated or publicized piece of con - tent . Particularly in the context of open media , it is believed that any news report is per se “ unfinished ” [ 14 ] and needs to be extended and enriched from other angels and views . Additional files that are attached to provide additional information can also be considered as subcontent . These subcontents have , in fact , all the features of the main content , with the exception that they are categorized or located as a subsection of a main con - tent . In other words , their existence is based or dependent on another piece of content . 3 ) Metacontent Metacontent refers to the user - generated supplementary in - formation that can be added to a piece of content ( main content as well as subcontent ) in order to subjectively specify its value ( evaluative ) or to enrich its characteristics and scope ( descrip - tive ) . In the literature , human - generated metadata [ 15 ] , social - ly - generated metadata 4 [ 16 ] , metadata [ 17 ] or metainformation [ 18 ] are commonly used terms to address this socially - 3 Publicizing is defined as creating pointers to reports or news that have been generated elsewhere . Publicizing is a common action in social bookmarking websites . 4 Socially - generated metadata has been used to address both meta - content and subcontent Figure 1 . Relationship diagrams of content elements generated constituents of content . Metacontent is with no doubt one of the key features driving the growth and success of So - cial Web [ 19 ] . The quality of metacontent ( especially its accu - racy and consistency ) is of great importance , since it is fre - quently used to assess the quality of content [ 17 ] . Contributing metacontent is in part a personal act ( for orga - nizing content for own use ) and in part a social activity to help others ( and also the system ) with finding , interpreting , evaluat - ing , and understanding the essential message of a piece of con - tent [ 20 ] . The most known types of metacontent are tags ( la - bels ) , categories , and ratings ; nevertheless , any other socially - generated information such as votes , flags , favorites , notes ( when editing or updating the main content for example ) , or other user - generated supplementary information can also be considered as metacontent . 4 ) Metainformation The term metainformation is chosen to address any type of supplementary information that is extracted , detected , or de - rived from the context , the content , and the transacting users by the system . Davis et al . [ 21 ] refer to this process as the “ con - text - to - content ” paradigm . Although “ metadata ” has also been used in the literature to address additional information for con - tent ( e . g . in [ 22 ] ) , we deliberately refrained from using “data” and “metadata” in this particular context , so that we can draw a distinct line between the data layer ( relating to database and data storages ) and the information layer ( any piece of informa - tion that can be processed by human - beings ) . Metainformation is , therefore , useful pieces of information that can be gathered or calculated by the system from the context ( e . g . the origin of content , the location or IP address of the contributing user or viewing users ) , the content ( e . g . currency of content , its size and richness , or the number of edits ) [ 23 ] , and the user ( e . g . his or her reputation within the community , age , origin , back - ground , etc . ) . When designing a community , depending on the context , possible ( inter ) actions and the corresponding implications should be identified in advance as relevant metainformation . Metainformation can encompass relevant information about all user - generated elements of content , including the main content , its subcontents and metacontents . It should also contain perti - nent information on different combinations of or interrelations between these elements ( see Fig . 2 ) . The information that per - tains to these interactions should then be gathered either at the point of generation , or at the time of occurrence of relevant transactions , or periodically ( via batch - processing for exam - ple ) . Similar to metacontent , metainformation is of great value to the system to assess or predict content quality [ 24 ] . It also provides valuable data for clustering algorithms ( e . g . to identi - fy similar segments of content or groups of users ) , search en - gines ( to index and filter information and optimize their results ) [ 25 ] , and recommendation systems ( e . g . to suggest relevant content to be viewed or updated ) [ 26 ] . Moreover , it has been suggested that the values of metainformation be normalized by the category of content so that the possible future evaluations would be more accurate [ 27 ] . Fig . 2 demonstrates the construct of content as a whole and its constituents as well as the contributing actors . As depicted in this figure , users can create , update and edit the main con - tent , subcontents , and their corresponding metacontents . The system , then , provides metainformation on all these three ele - ments and the relevant combinations of them ( e . g . the versatili - ty of editors or the number of clicks on the links in the main content ) . In the next section , different approach towards con - tent generation will be discussed . III . C ONTENT G ENERATION AND A PPROVAL A PPROACHES The second domain of our study emphasizes content quali - fication and publication processes and suggests a categorization of OPCs based on two dimensions : the approach to generate and update content ( collaborative vs . creative ) and the publica - Figure 2 . Content construct and the relating actors in open production communities tion process of the content ( open - gate vs . closed - gate ) . Based on the culled knowledge from these two domains , at the end of this section , we ultimately suggest a standard and consistent taxonomy that can be used by the scientific community to ad - dress features and mechanisms related to content and content generation processes and activities . In open production communities , two main approaches to - wards content generation and improvement can be distin - guished : collaborative and creative . The major difference be - tween these two approaches is how they deal with content modifications . What is , however , similar in both approaches , is accepting the fact that content is “ unfinished ” [ 14 ] . In the first approach users collaborate mainly in improving the main con - tent , while in the second approach they collaborate in extend - ing the content by adding descriptive and evaluative metacon - tent . A . Collaborative content generation In the context of knowledge development , collaborative content generation not only helps to keep the knowledge pool up - to - date , but also provides an opportunity to add multipers - pectivality to matters where no objective quality standards can be achieved . In other contexts such as collaborative architec - tural sketching , video editing , or geographical maps [ 10 ] , pro - viding editing features helps improving the content based on a set of agreed objective criteria . Despite all these advantages , however , it should be noted that editing features also open up the door to vandalism [ 28 ] . This concern has led to some skep - ticism over the credibility and quality of the generated content [ 29 ] , which in return magnifies the need for apt mechanisms to assure content quality in such communities . The contribution patter in collaborative OPCs differs even in active members . Some members are considered main con - tent contributors ( who generate main content and instantiate the edition / revision process ) , while others are either metacontent contributors or merely main content editors 5 [ 30 , 31 ] . The most salient issues and challenges in designing and go - verning a platform for collaborative content generation are generally lack of contribution , duplicity or redundancy of data , conflict management between users with differing ideologies or perspectives [ 32 ] , dealing with vandals [ 29 ] such as trolls [ 33 ] or spammers [ 34 ] , and the development of a common ground by training users and familiarizing them with the norms , philosophy and objective of the community [ 35 ] . Next , we review the characteristics of creative communities . B . Creative content generation In creative open production communities , the main content is either not easily updatable ( e . g . videos and photos ) or can be modified merely by the creator of the content and not by other ordinary users [ 12 ] . The collaborations and interactions , there - fore , take place mainly in the subcontent and metacontent lay - ers . Weblogs , review portals , open file sharing platforms , questions and answers portals , public discussion forums and open media sites are prominent examples of creative content 5 Content editors wait for others to generate content and then extend or revise it . generation [ 36 ] . Subcontent is usually in the form of com - ments / discussions , reviews , answers , or file attachments . Meta - content mainly consists of tags , categories , and any possible means of evaluation ( ratings , votes , bookmarks , etc . ) . Since filtering and sorting content is largely based on user evaluation , finding apt evaluation criteria and quantitative measures for quality is of great importance in creative communities . Similar to collaborative communities , the contribution be - havior in communities with semicollaborative content is also different . Some users tend to contribute main content , some merely generate subcontent or metacontent [ 30 ] . This behavior might change with regard to the member lifespan [ 37 ] . Moreo - ver , because of the significance of users’ evaluation , encourag - ing metacontent contribution is sometimes more important than encouraging main content contribution , especially after a community has reached its critical mass of active users or con - tent [ 38 ] . Issues and challenges in creative communities are slightly different from those of collaborative ones . While in collabora - tive communities the focus is on constructive coordination and quick reversion of vandalism , achieving a practical and effec - tive way of evaluating the quality of content is of great impor - tance in creative communities . Ill - intended or dishonest users who try to game the system or build up gangs to pimp content to the top ( or the first page in open media sites for example ) are common issues to deal with . This is due to the fact that here , unlike collaborative communities , user evaluation plays a vital role in assessing the value of content and filtering / sorting it . Designing proper criteria for content evaluation to combine the subjective judgment of users with respect to objective criteria is another challenging task that requires delicate attention . More - over , the criteria should be comprehensive enough to adequate - ly address quality measures of content , yet these criteria shall not be too complicated , lest they impose high cognitive burden on users [ 39 ] . Finally , it should be noted that user interaction still exists in creative communities ; however , it is merely taking place on the metacontent and subcontent elements . C . Content Approval / Publication Approaches : Open - gate vs . Closed - gate Some researchers have divided production communities in - to two general categories [ 11 , 40 ] : open - gate ( or open ) and closed - gate ( or gated ) . This categorization is with regard to quality approval process and lies on the basic principles of production . In manufacturing , quality can be assured or im - proved by either introducing quality enhancement processes ( as in open - gate communities ) or by applying stricter quality ap - proval procedures for the ready products ( as in closed - gate communities ) [ 41 ] . In open - gate communities , content will be published ( meaning made available to the public ) at the same instant it is produced or delivered . The evaluation and quality enhancement procedures follow the publication . In ( open - gate ) collaborative communities , this quality enhancement is performed by other users in forms of discussions and editions . In ( open - gate ) crea - tive communities , the content is enriched by other users through their metacontent and subcontent contributions ( dis - cussion for example ) . The creator of the content can also up - date the content based on contextual changes or others’ sugges - tions ( through discussions and other possible feedback me - chanisms ) . This way , in many cases , there is no “final” or “per - fect” version of content , but content is being improved in a continuous process . One disadvantage of open - gate communi - ties is the possibility of them getting filled out with garbage . Therefore , apt mechanisms to filter and sort content should be practiced in addition to quality enhancement methods in order to encourage high quality of content and exclude content with low quality . In closed - gate communities , content should go through an approval process before being published and made visible to the public . Closed - gate approach is often practiced in commun - ities with sensible or critical content . Open source communities and critical knowledge platforms ( scientific forums reference repositories ) are two well - known communities that have a closed - gate system of content publication . The Gene Ontology is a popular example of this approach . The aim of this platform is to use crowdsourcing to standardize the representation of gene and gene product attributes across species and databases . To secure a certain level of credibility , however , contributions ( provided vocabularies ) go through a control process . The out - put of open source communities should be controlled and ap - proved as well , since too many faults in the published product ( software ) can oppose serious threat to the credibility of the product and the community . IV . C OMMUNITY C ATEGORIZATION AND A STANDARD TAXONOMY We propose a framework to categorize current open pro - duction communities based on two dimensions : The collabora - tiveness of content generation ( whether the content is generated collaboratively or creatively ) , and the openness of content pub - lication processes ( whether it is closed - gate or open - gate ) . As a result , four categories of OPCs can be distinguished : creative open - gate communities , creative closed - gate communities , collaborative open - gate communities and collaborative closed - gate communities . The corresponding matrix including some examples for each category is depicted in Fig . 3 . This categorization provides a framework and narrows the focus for studies on pertinent design concepts and operational mechanisms such as incentive systems , recommendation sys - tems , quality assurance mechanisms , and community gover - nance . Because of similar approaches towards content genera - tion and quality assurance , one can hypothesize that the proce - dures , guidelines , and practices of each of these concepts show some level of similarity for each of these categories . Moreover , this categorization establishes a common ground to study the impact of the type of content ( text , image , software code , vid - eos , etc . ) for specific concepts and systems ( e . g . recommenda - tion systems ) . Finally , based on the conceptualized construct for content and the existing approaches for content generation and publica - tion , a list of common terms is provided . Table I . summarizes this standard terminology ( taxonomy ) for the context of open content production communities . Figure 3 . Communities and user - generated content : Collaboration level and publication policy V . C ONCLUSION Open production communities ( OPCs ) and user - generated content ( UGC ) are rather new phenomena that were initiated by the popularity of open source communities . The concept of crowdsourcing a wide range of activities from content genera - tion to content evaluation and approval , quality enhancement and community governance has been rapidly growing and been applied in other contexts since the introduction of Web2 . 0 . Although there is a large body of literature in this research area , standards and common models and frameworks are not yet widely established . In this paper , we conceptualized a new construct for content to be used in the context of OPCs . The proposed construct consists of four elements : main content , subcontent , metacontent , and metainformation . The first three elements are often contributed by users ( with an exception of bots or some techniques to import information from other repo - sitories ) and the last one automatically by the system . This construct helps scholars to have a common model to use and address when conducting research in content - related areas of study . Furthermore , two approaches where distinguished in the process of content generation and publication . Content genera - tion can be performed either collaboratively or creatively . In collaborative content generation every user has the right to edit and improve the main content , whereas in creative content generation only the creator of content may alter the main con - tent and the other users may only contribute metacontent and subcontent . Regarding content publication , two major ap - proaches were identified : closed - gate and open - gate . In closed - gate approach , content should be approved by privileged users based on specific quality criteria before being published . In open - gate approach , content is published right after being gen - erated and the quality enhancement follows the publication by all users , whether collaboratively , or by suggesting amend - ments or enriching the content by contributing subcontent and metacontent . TABLE I . A TAXONOMY OF CONTENT - RELATED ACTIONS AND ENTITIES IN OPEN PRODUCTION COMMUNITIES Term Definition Example ( s ) Main Content Main body ( the essence ) of content that has been generated ( or initiated ) by one user . Articles of an encyclopedia , News or articles of open news websites , videos and music files in file sharing websites , etc . Metacontent The additional piece of information that is attached to a piece of content mainly by users in order to enrich its essence . tags , categories , edition note , votes , ratings , flags , recommendations , etc . Subcontent The additional stand - alone content which has interdependencies with the main content , however , it can yet be considered as a separate piece of content with its own set of meta - contents . Comments and discussions , answers to questions ( in Q & A or discussion - based websites ) , reviews of an item , etc . Metainforma - tion Any information pertaining to the main content , subcontent , or both that is extracted or captured by the system . Metainformation mostly relates to contributors ( main , sub , or meta ) and their transactions , and also statistics regarding the usage of content and its elements . Date of creation , number of views , format , number of edits , time of evaluation , duration of views , location , number and diversity of subcontent or metacontent contributors ( e . g . commenters ) , etc . Content generation The act of generating main content and if necessary the additional elements of content ( e . g . metacontent ) . In collaborative communities , generating content is equal to initiating it , for every other user may update ( edit or extend ) the generated content ( see the descriptions below ) . Adding a new article to Wikipedia , adding a piece of news on open media website ( e . g . Slashdot ) , adding source code in Open source software ( OSS ) communities , uploading a video on file sharing websites ( e . g . YouTube ) , etc . Metacontribu - tion and metacontribu - tors Metacontribution is the act of contributing metacontent instead of generating a whole piece of content ( content generation ) . Metacontribution can be descriptive ( e . g . tagging an item ) or evaluative ( e . g . rating an item ) . Tagging content ( items ) in open file sharing websites ( e . g . Flickr ) , evaluating content ( e . g . like / dislike or Likert - scale evaluations ) , bookmarking an item , etc . Collaborative ( community or content genera - tion ) Collaborative content generation is a system in which all users who have the right to generate content , may edit and extend the content that has been generated ( initiated ) by others Wikipedia and OSS communities are prominent examples of collaborative content generation . Open sketching and open map development websites are other important applications of this type . Creative ( community or content genera - tion ) Creative content generation is when only users who generate a specific piece of content ( an item ) may update the main content ( with an exception of administrators or other privileged users ) . In these communities , feedback mechanisms such as discussion ( comments ) or directly contacting the creator are essential means to improve the quality of content by adding new perspectives and suggesting improvements . Open file sharing websites ( e . g . YouTube or Flickr ) , open ( creative ) knowledge sharing communities ( e . g . urbandictionary . com ) , discussion - based or Q & A communities ( e . g . Yahoo Answers or online discussion forums ) and open media ( e . g . Slashdot or Digg ) websites are the four prominent types of creative communities . Content publica - tion Publishing content is the act of making it available to other users or the public . Confirming the submitted source code in OSS communities or accepting a new entry in closed knowledge sharing websites ( e . g . geneontology . org ) Closed - gate communities Communities , in which the content should first be confirmed or admitted by privileged users ( experts or admins ) to be publicly available to others . In open source communities , usually the owner ( s ) keep the right of “gatewatching” the public edition / revision of the software to assure an acceptable quality of source code . Open - gate communities In open - gate communities , the generated content is published ( made available to other users or everyone ) at the time of generation , without any other further steps to confirm the content . Inappropriate or harmful content can later be removed automatically by the system ( e . g . upon receiving too many negative ratings ) or manually by privileged users . Many open file sharing websites ( e . g . YouTube or Flickr ) or open media ( e . g . Digg . com ) have an open - gate system . In such systems , fitting algorithms is applied at the point of content generation to prevent users from generating redundant or inappropriate content ( e . g . publishing copyright - protected content ) Editing vs . updating To draw a fine line between editing content in collaborative communities and updating ( own ) content in creative ones , editing is used to any form of changing or extending content in collaborative communities . Updating content is performed solely by the content owner in creative communities . Changing or extending the text of an article in Wikipedia or modifying the source code in OSS communities are examples of “editing” . Updating is either changing the whole main content ( changing an image or video in open file sharing websites ) or updating the main content in creative communities . There are several issues that should be dealt with attention in the context of OPCs . For example , user - generated content forces some redefinitions and rethinking of what content is , who owns it [ 42 ] , or who has responsibility for it [ 43 ] . Espe - cially in collaborative communities , new notions of authorship should be pondered and defined [ 44 ] . Moreover , a practical implication is what kinds of metainformation to define for content . When designing a community , depending on the con - text , helpful information based on possible interactions should be identified as relevant metainformation and be col - lected / calculated and added to the content ( for example the versatility of evaluators can be calculated and considered as a quality factor ) . As for future work , distinct characteristics of the four gen - eral types of OPCs will be studies for different design features such as incentive systems , quality assurance processes , rec - ommendation systems or governance mechanisms . For exam - ple , it is not yet clear whether the design or implications of content qualification measures or incentive practices are signif - icantly different in the four distinguished types of communities . The impact of the type of content ( text , source code , image , etc . ) should also be studied to deepen our understandings to - wards open production communities and their characteristics . R EFERENCES [ 1 ] R . D . Lankes , " Trusting the Internet : New Approaches to Credibility Tools , " The John D . and Catherine T . MacArthur Foundation Series on Digital Media and Learning , pp . 101 - 121 , 2007 . [ 2 ] I . Blohm , O . Köroglu , J . M . Leimeister , and H . Krcmar , " Absorptive capacity for open innovation communities - learnings from theory and practice , " in Academy of Management Annual Meeting , 2011 . [ 3 ] T . Herath and G . L . Sanders , " Sharing of Knowledge in Public Knowledge Spaces : Influencing Factors , " in Americas Conference on Information Systems ( AMCIS ) , 2007 . [ 4 ] M . J . Metzger , " Making sense of credibility on the Web : Models for evaluating online information and recommendations for future research , " Journal of the American Society for Information Science and Technology , vol . 58 , pp . 2078 - 2091 , 2007 . [ 5 ] S . Utz and K . Sassenberg , " Distributive justice in common - bond and common - identity groups , " Group Processes & Intergroup Relations , vol . 5 , p . 151 , 2002 . [ 6 ] G . Fischer , " End - User Development and Meta - Design : Foundations for Cultures of Participation , " End - User Development , pp . 3 - 14 , 2009 . [ 7 ] K . Charmaz , " Grounded theory : Objectivist and constructivist methods , " in Strategies of qualitative inquiry . vol . 2 , N . K . Denzin and Y . S . Lincoln , Eds . , ed , 2003 , p . 249 . [ 8 ] A . Mauthe and P . Thomas , Professional content management systems : Wiley Online Library , 2004 . [ 9 ] H . Schachlbauer and S . Weiss , " EBU / SMPTE Task Force for harmonized standards for the exchange of program material as bit streams - Final report : Analysis and results , " Smpte Journal , vol . 107 , pp . 605 - 815 , 1998 . [ 10 ] L . De Alfaro , A . Kulshreshtha , I . Pye , and B . T . Adler , " Reputation Systems for Open Collaboration , " Communications of the ACM , vol . 54 , pp . 81 - 87 , 2011 . [ 11 ] A . Bruns , Gatewatching : Collaborative Online News Production vol . 26 : Peter Lang Pub Inc , 2005 . [ 12 ] P . J . McKenzie , J . Burkell , L . Wong , C . Whippey , S . E . Trosow , and M . B . McNally , " User - Generated Online Content 1 : Overview , Current State and Context , " First Monday , vol . 17 , 4 June 2012 2012 . [ 13 ] S . Bowman and C . Willis . ( 2003 ) . We media : How audiences are shaping the future of news and information . [ 14 ] G . Meikle , Future Active : Media Activism and the Internet : Routledge , 2002 . [ 15 ] J . Greenberg and W . D . Robertson , " Semantic Web Construction : An Inquiry of Authors ' Views on Collaborative Metadata Generation , " in International Conference on Dublin Core and Metadata for e - Communities , Florence , Italy , 2002 , pp . 45 - 52 . [ 16 ] M . Chen , X . Liu , and J . Qin , " Semantic Relation Extraction from Socially - Generated Tags : A Methodology for Metadata Generation , " in International Conference on Dublin Core and Metadata Applications , 2008 , pp . 117 - 127 . [ 17 ] J . R . Park and Y . Tosaka , " Metadata Quality Control in Digital Repositories and Collections : Criteria , Semantics , and Mechanisms , " Cataloging & Classification Quarterly , vol . 48 , pp . 696 - 715 , 2010 . [ 18 ] M . Ames and M . Naaman , " Why We Tag : Motivations for Annotation in Mobile and Online Media , " in the SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems , San Jose , California , USA , 2007 , pp . 971 - 980 . [ 19 ] E . Khabiri , C . F . Hsu , and J . Caverlee , " Analyzing and Predicting Community Preference of Socially Generated Metadata : A Case Study on Comments in the Digg Community , " in the Third International ICWSM Conference , San Jose , California , USA , 2009 . [ 20 ] L . Van Velsen and M . Melenhorst , " Incorporating User Motivations to Design for Video Tagging , " Interacting with Computers , vol . 21 , pp . 221 - 232 , 2009 . [ 21 ] M . Davis , S . King , N . Good , and R . Sarvas , " From Context to Content : Leveraging Context to Infer Media Metadata , " in Multimedia 2004 ( MM ' 04 ) , New York , USA , 2004 , pp . 188 - 195 . [ 22 ] I . M . Bilasco , S . Amir , P . Blandin , C . Djeraba , J . Laitakari , J . Martinet , E . M . Gracia , D . Pakkala , M . Rautiainen , and M . Ylianttila , " Semantics for Intelligent Delivery of Multimedia Content , " 2010 , pp . 1366 - 1372 . [ 23 ] B . Stvilia , M . B . Twidale , L . C . Smith , and L . Gasser , " Assessing Information Quality Of A Community - Based Encyclopedia , " in the 2005 International Conference on Information Quality , Cambridge , MA , USA , 2005 . [ 24 ] B . Stvilia , L . Gasser , M . B . Twidale , and L . C . Smith , " A Framework for Information Quality Assessment , " Journal of the American Society for Information Science and Technology , vol . 58 , pp . 1720 - 1733 , 2007 . [ 25 ] B . Stvilia , C . Jörgensen , and S . Wu , " Establishing the Value of Socially Created Metadata to Image Indexing , " Library & Information Science Research , 2011 . [ 26 ] M . Ş ah and V . Wade , " Automatic Metadata Extraction from Multilingual Enterprise Content , " presented at the the 19th ACM International Conference on Information and Knowledge Management , Toronto , ON , Canada , 2010 . [ 27 ] E . Agichtein , C . Castillo , D . Donato , A . Gionis , and G . Mishne , " Finding High - Quality Content in Social Media , " in The international Conference on Web Search and Web Data Mining , New York , NY , USA , 2008 , pp . 183 - 194 . [ 28 ] H . Nofrina , V . Viswanathan , T . Poorisat , B . H . Detenber , and P . Chen , " Why Some Wikis are More Credible than Others : Structural Attributes of Collaborative Websites as Credibility Cues , " Observatorio ( OBS * ) , vol . 3 , 2009 . [ 29 ] G . Gorman , " A Tale of Information Ethics and Encyclopedias ; or , Is It Wikipedia / It Just another Internet Scam ? , " Online Information Review , vol . 31 , pp . 273 - 276 , 2007 . [ 30 ] S . Oreg and O . Nov , " Exploring Motivations for Contributing to Open Source Initiatives : The Roles of Contribution Context and Personal Values , " Computers in Human Behavior , vol . 24 , pp . 2055 - 2073 , 2008 . [ 31 ] S . Sen , S . K . Lam , A . M . Rashid , D . Cosley , D . Frankowski , J . Osterhouse , F . M . Harper , and J . Riedl , " Tagging , Communities , Vocabulary , Evolution , " 2006 , pp . 181 - 190 . [ 32 ] A . Forte and A . Bruckman , " Scaling Consensus : Increasing Decentralization in Wikipedia Governance , " in the 41st Annual Hawaii International Conference on System Sciences , Hawaii , 2008 , p . 157 . [ 33 ] P . Shachaf and N . Hara , " Beyond Vandalism : Wikipedia Trolls , " Journal of Information Science , vol . 36 , pp . 357 - 370 , 2010 . [ 34 ] A . G . West , J . Chang , K . Venkatasubramanian , O . Sokolsky , and I . Lee , " Link Spamming Wikipedia for Profit , " 2011 , pp . 152 - 161 . [ 35 ] G . Convertino , H . M . Mentis , M . B . Rosson , J . M . Carroll , A . Slavkovic , and C . H . Ganoe , " Articulating Common Ground in Cooperative Work : Content and Process , " 2008 , pp . 1637 - 1646 . [ 36 ] K . Chai , V . Potdar , and T . Dillon , " Content Quality Assessment Related Frameworks for Social Media , " Computational Science and Its Applications – ICCSA 2009 , pp . 791 - 805 , 2009 . [ 37 ] O . Nov , M . Naaman , and C . Ye , " Analysis Of Participation In An Online Photo ‐ Sharing Community : A Multidimensional Perspective , " Journal of the American Society for Information Science and Technology , vol . 61 , pp . 555 - 566 , 2010 . [ 38 ] S . R . Hiltz and M . Turoff , The network nation : Human communication via computer : The MIT Press , 1993 . [ 39 ] H . Masum , C . Newmark , and M . Tovey , The Reputation Society : How Online Opinions Are Reshaping the Offline World : Mit Pr , 2012 . [ 40 ] S . K . Shah , " Motivation , Governance & the Viability of Hybrid Forms in Open Source Software Development , " Management Science , vol . 52 , pp . 1000 – 1014 , 2006 . [ 41 ] H . E . Cook and H . E . Cook , Product Management : Value , Quality , Cost , Price , Profits , and Organization : Chapman & Hall London , 1997 . [ 42 ] S . Humphreys , " Norrath : New Forms , Old Institutions , " The International Journal of Computer Game Research , vol . 9 , 2009 . [ 43 ] C . George and J . Scerri , " Web 2 . 0 and User - Generated Content : legal Challenges in the New Frontier , " Journal of Information , Law and Technology , vol . 2 , 2007 . [ 44 ] R . Hunter , " Erasing “Property Lines” : A Collaborative Notion of Authorship and Textual Ownership on a Fan Wiki , " Computers and Composition , vol . 28 , pp . 40 - 56 , 2011 .