0123456789 ( ) ; : Human respiratory viruses include a broad range of viruses that infect cells of the respiratory tract , elicit respiratory and other symptoms , and are transmitted mainly by respiratory secretions of infected persons . Respiratory virus infections often cannot be differen - tiated clinically . Respiratory viruses belong to diverse virus families that differ in viral and genomic structures , populations susceptible to infection , disease severity , seasonality of circulation , transmissibility and modes of transmission . Together , they contribute to substantial morbidity 1 , mortality 2 and concomitant economic losses 3 annually worldwide . In addition , occasional pandemics cause extreme disruption to societies and economies as exemplified by the current COVID - 19 pandemic . Until effective treatments or vaccines for COVID - 19 are available , we have to rely heavily on population - based and individual - based public health measures to miti - gate transmission . The effectiveness and the suitability of a non - pharmaceutical intervention ( NPI ) to mit - igate transmission depends substantially on the ease of trans mission ( transmissibility ) and the mechanism of transmission ( modes of transmission ) specific to that virus , as these interventions can target some but not all potential modes of transmission . Therefore , understand - ing how to evaluate the transmissibility and evidence supporting different modes of transmission will aid in the control of respiratory virus transmission . Previous reviews and commentaries discussed the transmissibility of influenza virus 4 , 5 ; methods for stud - ying transmission , including animal models 4 – 7 , human models 6 , 8 and epidemiological studies 9 ; the mechanism and evidence for different modes of transmission 4 , 6 , 7 , 9 – 12 ; factors affecting transmission 4 , 5 , 11 , 13 ; controversies regarding the relative importance of different modes of transmission 14 , 15 ; pharmaceutical interventions 4 and NPIs 11 , 16 – 18 for mitigating transmission 16 – 19 ; and guide - lines from public health agencies on infection pre - vention and control recommendations for respiratory viruses 9 , 15 . These various aspects of transmissibility and transmission have been more comprehensively studied for influenza virus 4 – 7 , 10 , 14 , 17 , 19 than for other respiratory viruses 9 , 11 , 12 , 15 , 16 , 18 . In this Review , I will bring these dis - cussions together to provide a broad overview of the transmissibility and modes of transmission of respira - tory viruses , the approaches used to make these assess - ments , the viral , host and environmental determinants of transmission , and common NPIs for mitigating respiratory virus transmission , in the hope of illustrat - ing the common approaches for studying respiratory virus transmission as well as the interconnection and Transmissibility and transmission of respiratory viruses Nancy H . L . Leung Abstract | Human respiratory virus infections lead to a spectrum of respiratory symptoms and disease severity , contributing to substantial morbidity , mortality and economic losses worldwide , as seen in the COVID - 19 pandemic . Belonging to diverse families , respiratory viruses differ in how easy they spread ( transmissibility ) and the mechanism ( modes ) of transmission . Transmissibility as estimated by the basic reproduction number ( R 0 ) or secondary attack rate is heterogeneous for the same virus . Respiratory viruses can be transmitted via four major modes of transmission : direct ( physical ) contact , indirect contact ( fomite ) , ( large ) droplets and ( fine ) aerosols . We know little about the relative contribution of each mode to the transmission of a particular virus in different settings , and how its variation affects transmissibility and transmission dynamics . Discussion on the particle size threshold between droplets and aerosols and the importance of aerosol transmission for severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 ( SARS - CoV - 2 ) and influenza virus is ongoing . Mechanistic evidence supports the efficacies of non - pharmaceutical interventions with regard to virus reduction ; however , more data are needed on their effectiveness in reducing transmission . Understanding the relative contribution of different modes to transmission is crucial to inform the effectiveness of non - pharmaceutical interventions in the population . Intervening against multiple modes of transmission should be more effective than acting on a single mode . WHO Collaborating Centre for Infectious Disease Epidemiology and Control , School of Public Health , Li Ka Shing Faculty of Medicine , The University of Hong Kong , Hong Kong Special Administrative Region , China . e - mail : leungnan @ hku . hk https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1038 / s41579 - 021 - 00535 - 6 www . nature . com / nrmicro R e v i e w s 528 | August 2021 | volume 19 0123456789 ( ) ; : differences between these discussions . I also discuss recent controversies regarding the role of aerosols in transmission of severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 ( SARS - CoV - 2 ) , and the difficulties in evaluating the relative contribution of each mode to the transmission of respiratory viruses . Transmissibility In the control of a novel pandemic , one of the most important early questions is how easily the disease will spread from an infected person to a susceptible person ; that is , how transmissible the disease is . Transmissibility is determined by the infectivity of the pathogen , the con - tagiousness of the infected individual , the susceptibility of the exposed individual , the contact patterns between the infected individual and the exposed individual , and the environmental stress exerted on the pathogen during transmission . These will determine the scale and intensity of control measures needed to suppress transmission . In animal models , volunteer transmis - sion studies , modelling studies and observational as well as interventional epidemiological studies , although the number of successful transmission events ( that is , infection in the exposed individual ) is often used as an outcome measure , these study designs answer different research questions when evaluating the transmissibility of a respiratory virus . Evaluating transmissibility in animals and volunteers Animal models are often used to compare the transmis - sibility of respiratory viruses with different naturally occurring or engineered genomic constructs to identify viral molecular determinants of increased transmissibil - ity , or to compare the transmissibility between different modes of transmission ( Box 1 ) . For example , for influ - enza virus , animal transmission studies have been used to evaluate the molecular determinants of transmissi - bility 20 , the airborne transmission potential of emerg - ing viruses 21 or drug - resistant viruses 22 , the relative importance of droplets and aerosols to transmission 23 and the anatomical site that drives the different routes of transmission 24 . Alternatively , volunteer transmission studies , where transmission is observed in susceptible volunteers who are exposed to other volunteers who are either experimentally or naturally infected 8 , may be used to provide important information on the effectiveness of interventions and the importance of presymptomatic or asymptomatic transmission in a controlled setting 25 . However , these studies can be challenging and expensive to conduct , and may be criticized as too artificial 8 . Evaluating transmissibility in the population Mathematical or statistical models are often used to esti - mate transmissibility of a respiratory virus in the popula - tion , especially during pandemics to assess the extent of transmission . With use of data from surveillance , obser - vational and interventional epidemiological studies , or simulation from modelling studies , transmissibility is usually assessed by the estimation of the basic reproduc - tion number ( R 0 ) or secondary attack rate ( SAR ) ( Box 2 ) . In addition , by comparing the two simultaneously , one can assess the role of specific populations ( for example , households or schools ) 26 or superspreading events 27 in driving community transmission . Modes of transmission Respiratory viruses are transmitted between individuals when the virus is released from the respiratory tract of an infected person and is transferred through the envi - ronment , leading to infection of the respiratory tract of an exposed and susceptible person . There are a number of different routes ( or modes ) through which transmis - sion could occur , the chance of which is modified by viral , host and environmental factors . Although there is evidence in support of individual modes of transmission , the relative contribution of different modes to a success - ful transmission event , and the relative effect of each factor on each mode or multiple modes simultaneously , is often unknown . Direct contact , indirect contact , droplet and aerosol Respiratory viruses can be transmitted via respiratory secretions over multiple routes independently and simultaneously . Traditionally , it is believed that respira - tory viruses are transmitted directly via physical contact between an infected individual ( infector ) and a suscep - tible individual ( infectee ) , indirectly via contact with contaminated surfaces or objects ( fomites ) or directly through the air from one respiratory tract to another via large respiratory droplets or via fine respiratory aerosols 6 , 7 ( Fig . 1 ) . These four major modes of transmis - sion ( direct contact , indirect contact / fomite , droplet and aerosol ) are often the foci of transmission control ; for example , infection prevention and control measures in health - care settings are designed specifically for each mode 28 . Some respiratory viruses , including influenza viruses , coronaviruses and rhinoviruses , can be recov - ered from faeces 29 , 30 or infect cells in the gastrointestinal Box 1 | Evaluating transmissibility in animal transmission studies In the simplest form of animal transmission studies , naive ( ‘infector’ or ‘donor’ ) animals are first inoculated with a candidate virus , with infection confirmed by the recovery of virus in respiratory specimens ; other naive ( ‘infectee’ or ‘contact’ ) animals are then co - housed with the infected animals for some period to observe whether the contact animal subsequently acquires infection . the number of donor and contact animals used may vary , or multiple donor – contact pairs of animals are used , and transmissibility is assessed by counting the proportion of contact animals infected 204 . this basic design can be adjusted to study transmissibility for different modes of transmission : direct contact transmission studies are done by co - housing donor and contact animals in the same cage to allow all major modes of transmission to occur ; airborne transmission studies are done by physically separating the donor and contact animals usually by an air - permeable barrier , with some distance between the cages or no distance , so only aerosol route , with or without the droplet route , of transmission can occur 205 ; and fomite transmission studies are done by putting contact animals in the cage that was previously used to house the donor animals 108 . Depending on the specific respiratory virus studied , costs , availability of reagents and desired pathogenesis , different animal models are available for transmission studies 204 , 206 , 207 , including mice , guinea pigs , ferrets , syrian hamsters and non - human primates . transgenic or transduced mouse models may also be used to better mimic human pathogenesis when access to non - human primates is limited ; for example , transgenic mice expressing the human ACe2 receptor as a model for coronavirus infection 208 . In animal transmission studies , it has been suggested that a minimum of four pairs of donor – contact animals per group is required for sufficient power to detect differences in transmissibility between experimental groups 209 , and this is usually considered as an accepted number to report in studies of influenza virus 210 . NAtuRe RevIeWs | MICRoBIology R e v i e w s volume 19 | August 2021 | 529 0123456789 ( ) ; : tract 29 , suggesting infection may spread via faeces ; for example , via aerosolization during toilet flushing 31 . Studies have shown SARS - CoV - 2 in ocular secretions 32 and influenza virus infection by ocular exposure 33 , sug - gesting respiratory viruses might also be transmitted via exposure to the eyes . Terminology and defining features of each mode of transmission . The lack of standardization of terminol - ogy and the defining features of each major mode of res - piratory virus transmission , in particular the difficulty to differentiate between ‘droplets’ and ‘aerosols’ , has caused much confusion 34 . Although the direct contact route traditionally refers to transmission via direct physical contact between infectors and infectees 6 , 7 , 9 , some consider exposure to infectious ( large ) droplets as an additional form of contact transmission 28 , 35 , 36 , sometimes using the term ‘droplet contact’ to describe transmission via droplets 37 and ‘direct contact’ 35 or ‘close contact’ 36 to describe transmission via both physical con - tact and exposure to droplets . The WHO uses ‘direct , indirect , or close contact’ to describe ‘contact and droplet Box 2 | Basic reproduction number and secondary attack rate Basic reproduction number the reproduction number ( denoted as R ) is defined as the average number of successful transmissions per infectious individual in a population and can be estimated from mathematical models that describe the natural history of disease . the effective reproduction number ( R t ) represents R at any time ( t ) during an epidemic . the basic reproduction number ( R 0 ) is R at the start of an epidemic and represents the average number of secondary infections caused by a primary infection after its introduction to a completely susceptible population 211 . therefore , R 0 is an important quantity that reflects the capacity of a virus to be transmitted ( that is , transmissibility ) and will inform the potential ease or difficulty in controlling transmission of the disease . Reported estimates of R 0 were heterogenous between viruses and even for the same virus : R 0 for rhinovirus 212 , 213 , parainfluenza virus 212 and adenovirus 212 , 214 was usually slightly above 1 to 5 , R 0 for coronaviruses 213 , 215 could be up to 8 ( also based on a recent preprint 213 ) , whereas R 0 for respiratory syncytial virus 212 , 213 , influenza viruses 216 , varicella zoster virus 217 and measles virus 218 may be as low as around 1 but could go up to above 5 or even above 10 ( TaBle 1 ) . Advanced model structures ( for example , ‘susceptible – exposed – infectious – recovered’ ) or further compartmentation ( for example , age , contact patterns or vaccination status ) allow a more complex description of disease or transmission dynamics ( for example , presymptomatic transmission 95 , asymptomatic infection , waning immunity 219 or seasonality or contact patterns 220 ) , the prediction of impacts of interventions , or identifying the key factors required for such predictions 221 . Incorporation of phylogenetic data into epidemiological models has identified important factors that drive influenza virus transmission at the population level 222 , 223 and evaluated the transmissibility of emerging severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 ( sARs - Cov - 2 ) variants 224 . Furthermore , the effect of superspreading events on transmission may be described by a dispersion parameter ( k ) , where for a disease with low dispersion most secondary infections are from only a small number of the most infectious individuals 225 , 226 , and estimating ‘individual - based’ R instead of ‘population - based ( mean ) ’ R could account for individual variations in contagiousness 225 . therefore , R 0 takes on different values for different populations and scenarios 216 – 218 and whether superspreading events are considered 227 , and comparing transmissibility between respiratory viruses directly on the basis of R 0 estimated from different studies will be challenging . An important application of R 0 is determining the herd immunity threshold needed for an epidemic to end 228 . During an epidemic when R t < 1 , which occurs when the proportion of immune individuals in the population reaches the herd immunity threshold , transmission decreases over time and the epidemic eventually ends . the modes of transmission and their virus , host and environmental determinants 211 influence transmissibility by modulating how effective the contact allows transmission , once contact between susceptible and infectious individuals is established . Secondary attack rate the secondary attack rate ( sAR ) is defined as the proportion infected among those susceptible in contact with the primary case 229 . some suggested calling it ‘secondary infection risk’ , as the quantity refers to a proportion and not a rate 230 , because infection may not necessarily lead to symptomatic illness , and ‘symptomatic secondary infection risk’ could be used instead when one is referring to the risk of symptomatic infection 231 . sAR is most frequently used to estimate the transmission risk in households 232 , 233 , and sometimes in outbreaks if the index ( primary ) cases introducing the infection are known and supplemented with contact tracing 27 , 234 ; that is , case - ascertained studies where exposed individuals are followed up to observe them for infection once a primary case is ascertained 235 , either by identifying symptomatic illness or by systematic collection of a respiratory or serum specimen regardless of symptoms for laboratory - confirmed infection . the proportion of exposed household contacts with infection ( that is , the household sAR ) is then used to describe the transmission risk from the index member to household members . similarly to R 0 , reported estimates of household sAR were heterogenous , ranging between 1 % and 38 % for influenza virus 230 , and estimates were lower if infections were ascertained only in contacts with symptomatic illness excluding asymptomatic infections 231 , 236 , 237 , or if only laboratory - confirmed illnesses were included 238 . For other respiratory viruses , household sARs for respiratory syncytial virus 237 , 239 and coronaviruses 240 generally fall in a similar range as for influenza virus , and are higher for rhinovirus 238 , parainfluenza virus 237 , 241 , varicella zoster virus 232 , 242 and measles virus 232 , 243 ( TaBle 1 ) , but direct comparison between viruses is again challenging . Case - ascertained studies can be used to evaluate factors affecting transmission — for example , virus type / subtype , age , types of contact 244 , asymptomatic or presymptomatic transmission 244 , 245 and pre - infection immunity 237 , 238 , 242 , 245 — or the effectiveness of interventions , such as the postexposure prophylaxis use of antivirals 246 and non - pharmaceutical interventions 125 , and vaccine efficacy 247 . Individual - based hazard models and Bayesian markov chain monte Carlo techniques can account for multiple index cases , unobserved transmission or multiple covariates , for example , incorporating symptom onset data to estimate transmission risk within households versus outside households 248 , or viral shedding data to estimate the effectiveness of face masks and hand hygiene in reducing transmission 249 . www . nature . com / nrmicro R e v i e w s 530 | August 2021 | volume 19 0123456789 ( ) ; : transmission’ , although it is unclear whether ‘close con - tact’ refers to transmission via droplets alone , direct ( physical ) contact alone or both 38 , 39 . Some attempted to define ‘close contact transmission’ by proposing three subroutes as ‘short - range airborne’ , ‘large drop - lets’ and ‘immediate body - surface contact’ to describe transmission in close proximity , where the last refers to an infectee in contact with the infector’s immediate contaminated bodily surfaces ( for example , skin and clothes ) , and is to be distinguished from the ( distant ) fomite route , which involves delayed and less frequent touching from a greater distance 40 . Some use ‘airborne’ to describe transmission via droplets and aerosols as both can travel through the air 9 , whereas others use it to describe transmission via aerosols only 6 , 12 , 28 , 39 , 41 . In the 1930s , William F . Wells , who studied air bac - teriology and the transmission of respiratory tuberculo - sis , proposed that the particle size of exhaled respiratory droplets influences how they are transported in the air , and could be classified as ‘aerosols’ or ‘droplets’ , with different implications to disease transmission 42 ( Box 3 ) . Subsequently , animal studies , experimental volunteer studies and observational epidemiological studies were conducted to study the transmission of respiratory syn - cytial virus ( RSV ) , rhinovirus and influenza virus in homes and health - care settings 43 , 44 . In recent years , on the basis of different aspects of particle behaviours 45 , various particle size cut - offs , often in the range between 5 and 20 µ m , have been used to differentiate particles as ‘aerosols’ or ‘droplets’ . For example , the cut - off at 5 µm used by many regulatory bodies 35 , 38 is based on early studies of pulmonary tuberculosis that believed parti - cles smaller than 5 µ m would deposit in the pulmonary / alveolar region of the lung by settlement and initiate infection , whereas particles larger than 5 µ m deposit in the nasal cavity by centrifugal force 28 , 46 , 47 . Other studies put similar emphasis on the region of particle deposi - tion in the human respiratory tract , and suggested that particles smaller than 10 µ m reach and deposit in the pulmonary region 12 , 45 , 48 , 49 , and particles of size between Direct contact Fomite Aerosol Aerosol Droplet Aerosol < 1 µm > 100 µmDroplet • Droplet • Aerosol • Direct ( physical ) contact • Indirect contact ( fomite ) • Aerosol • Indirect contact ( fomite ) Short - range transmission Long - range transmission Fomite Fig . 1 | Major modes of transmission of respiratory viruses during short - range and long - range transmission . During an acute respiratory virus infection , an infected individual ( infector ; red ) may shed virus in exhaled breath droplets and aerosols , and may also contaminate their immediate bodily surfaces ( for example , skin and clothes ) or surrounding objects and surfaces ( for example , tables ) with their respiratory secretions . In general , if a susceptible individual ( infectee ; grey ) is close to the infector , short - range transmission may occur when the infectee breathes in the virus - laden droplets or aerosols released by the infector , during direct ( physical ) contact with the infector or during physical contact with objects or surfaces contaminated ( fomite ) by the infector . If the infectee is at a distance from the infector , long - range transmission may occur when the infectee breathes in the virus - laden aerosols released by the infector or during physical contact with a fomite . However , the terminology and the defining features of each mode of respiratory virus transmission , especially regarding redefining the particle size threshold between droplets and aerosols , is under active discussion ( see the section Terminology and defining features of modes of transmission ) . NAtuRe RevIeWs | MICRoBIology R e v i e w s volume 19 | August 2021 | 531 0123456789 ( ) ; : 10 and 100 µ m are inspired but deposit in the head air - ways or tracheobronchial regions 49 , 50 . Some consider particles smaller than 20 µ m important for aerosol transmission as particles of 20 µ m were estimated to take 4 minutes to settle on the ground from a height of 3 m , whereas particles smaller than 3 µ m practically do not settle due to regular resuspension by air currents 51 . A recent workshop on the airborne transmission of SARS - CoV - 2 suggested referring to ‘aerosols’ as a sta - ble suspension of solid and / or liquid particles in air , with a particle size cut - off set to an order of magnitude larger than previously thought ( that is , ~ 30 – 100 µ m ) , and ‘droplets’ as liquid particles that are larger than aerosols 52 . Some argued such dichotomization based on particle size alone has not accounted for the influence of expiratory activities on particle behaviour and proposed a turbulent gas cloud model to describe exhaled particle behaviour 53 . The model describes exhaled air as primar - ily a multiphase turbulent gas cloud ( ‘puff’ ) that consists of clusters of exhaled particles mixed with ambient air , where the particles have sizes on a continuous scale and are carried forwards by the momentum of expiratory activities 53 . The behaviour of exhaled particles is then influenced by conditions of both the ambient and the exhaled air , such as composition , temperature , humidity and airflow , highlighting the chance of larger droplets to be propelled further away than would be expected on the basis of particle size alone 53 , 54 . Increased concern for aerosol transmission . To many , bioaerosols ( Box 3 ) pose particular concerns in trans - mission control . As bioaerosols can remain airborne for a prolonged period and travel through the air over long distances 55 – 60 , this potentiates disease transmission over long distances and therefore requires additional measures ( for example , larger spatial separation between hospital beds 28 ) . Individuals with higher bioaerosol pro - duction might contribute to superspreading events 61 , 62 . Some hypothesize that the propensity of aerosol deposi - tion in the lower respiratory tract 45 might require a lower infectious dose and lead to severer disease . Volunteer challenge studies showed that influenza virus and ade - novirus infection initiated by the inhalation of infec - tious bioaerosols required a lower infectious dose 51 , 63 , 64 , whereas rhinovirus might require a similar or a higher infectious dose 51 . Infection initiated by inhaling infec - tious influenza virus bioaerosols led to higher risk of fever compared with intranasal inoculation 65 , although some studies alternatively suggested that infection initi - ated by droplets leads to severer disease due to a higher infectious dose 66 . Alternatively , a narrower bottleneck of the minimum infectious virions required for transmis - sion via aerosols may reduce virus diversity in the popu - lation and therefore the chance of a pandemic strain emerging 67 , whereas a wider bottleneck via the contact route may allow the propagation of minor variants , such as drug - resistant viruses 68 . Determinants of transmission Virus , host and environmental factors influence whether a successful transmission occurs by governing the infec - tivity of the respiratory virus , the contagiousness of the infector , the susceptibility of the exposed individual and the environmental stress on the virus ( Fig . 2 ) . These determinants may have different relative effects on each mode of transmission 69 . Viral determinants . The propensity for respiratory viruses to be transmitted is affected by virus stability under environmental stress 70 , 71 , which in turn is influ - enced by the composition and structure of the virus envelope 72 , 73 , capsid 74 , internal proteins and genomes 75 as well as the formation of viral aggregates 76 . For instance , DNA viruses such as herpesviruses ( for example , var - icella zoster virus ( VZV ) ) with a more densely pack - aged genome have a stronger capsid structure that may prevent premature release of the viral genome before infection 77 . RNA virus genomes such as those of influ - enza virus have higher mutation rates , giving rise to diverse viral genomic variants ( quasispecies ) in infected individuals 78 , which may allow faster host adaptation of a virus strain that is efficiently transmitted via respira - tory droplets 79 . In addition to virus stability , other viral factors , such as viral protein expression and modifica - tion , also influence transmission . Viral surface and inter - nal proteins can affect transmissibility by determining the site of infection and interacting with specific host receptors with differing binding specificity and affinity . In studies of the pandemic potential of avian influenza viruses , human adapted haemagglutinin ( HA ) and polymerase subunit PB2 , which exhibit a preferential binding to ɑ 2 , 6 - linked sialic acids and support viral genome replication in the lower - temperature environ - ment of the mammalian airway , respectively , conferred efficient transmission over the respiratory droplet route in ferrets 80 . Similarly , an optimal ratio of HA to neurami - nidase ( NA ) was essential for efficient transmission over Box 3 | Initial recognition of the importance of aerosols in disease transmission engineers coined the term ‘aerosol’ in the 1920s and defined it as a two - phase system consisting of a collection of solid or liquid particles and the gas in which they are suspended , exemplified by a wide range of products from combustion processes or meteorological phenomena such as dust , fume , mist and clouds , with particle size ranges from about 0 . 002 µ m to more than 100 µ m ( in aerodynamic diameter ) 48 . A related term , ‘bioaerosol’ , describes aerosols of biological origin such as viruses , bacteria , fungi , fungal spores and pollen 48 . the term ‘aerosol’ is commonly used when ‘bioaerosol’ is actually meant ; for example , the transmission of virus - laden aerosol particles is referred to as ‘aerosol transmission’ . In the 1930s William F . Wells , who studied air bacteriology and the transmission of respiratory tuberculosis , proposed the differences between droplets and aerosols and their implications for transmission 42 . Wells suggested respiratory droplets expelled from the nose or mouth undergo evaporation , with smaller droplets evaporating almost immediately , while larger droplets ( which may also be referred to as ‘drops’ 34 ) settle to the ground rapidly without much evaporation 42 . He therefore hypothesized that “transmission of infection through the air may therefore take one of two forms , depending on the size of the infected droplet . the more obvious form , recognized by Flügge , is droplet infection proper . It applies to droplets larger than 0 . 1 mm in diameter , which are rapidly removed from the air by gravity before they can dry and within a short distance from the source . the second form may be called air - borne infection and deals with the dried residues of infected droplets , or droplet nuclei , derived directly from droplets less than 0 . 1 mm in diameter , depending primarily on air for the buoyancy that keeps them suspended for longer times and carries them longer distances” 250 . In the 1940s he subsequently demonstrated the use of ultraviolet germicidal irradiation to prevent airborne transmission of measles in schools 196 , and in the 1950s together with Richard l . Riley demonstrated the airborne transmission of tuberculosis 168 . www . nature . com / nrmicro R e v i e w s 532 | August 2021 | volume 19 0123456789 ( ) ; : the respiratory droplet route 20 , which is hypothesized to be associated with the release of single viral particles instead of aggregates with increased NA activity 81 . The loss of glycosylation sites at specific HA amino acid posi - tions also conferred transmissibility to an avian influ - enza virus in a mammalian model 82 , thereby increasing its pandemic potential . Environmental determinants . Environmental determi - nants could , on one hand , affect transmissibility by influ - encing the survival and persistence of respiratory viruses in respiratory droplets or fomites after their release to the environment , or on the other hand , modulate trans - mission by modulating host factors such as viral shed - ding and human behaviour . These effects could differ across different transmission modes and settings , and may favour one mode over another . As demonstrated mostly for influenza virus , environmental factors that may affect virus survival include temperature , humid - ity , salinity , pH , the medium or materials of the con - taminated objects or surfaces , ventilation , airflow and ultraviolet radiation 83 , 84 . Their effects on survival may differ between viruses 85 , and their effects on transmis - sion may be assessed in animal , epidemiological or modelling studies 86 . Interestingly , although a higher temperature is usually associated with lower influenza virus survival , different studies have suggested that the association between influenza virus survival and relative humidity may follow a monotonic inverse or a U - shaped relationship 13 . For transmission , transmission risk assessment suggested non - fabric surface materials , compared with fabric surfaces , favour fomite trans - mission for RSV and rhinovirus but not for influenza virus in hospital rooms and aircraft cabins 87 . In guinea pig models , a cold and dry environment was shown to favour influenza virus transmission , with the contact route dominating at higher temperatures 88 . Alternatively , to explain the difference in seasonality of influenza virus circulation across regions with temperate , subtropical and tropical climates , ecological studies suggested that influenza virus transmission was favoured in a cold - and - dry climate if a lower threshold of humidity and temper - ature was reached ; otherwise transmission was favoured in a humid - and - rainy climate when precipitation was greatest 89 . However , it was unclear how much was due to changes in virus survival , host susceptibility , indoor crowding or the dominant route of transmission 89 , 90 . Host determinants . Host determinants in both infectors and infectees could affect the propensity of transmission or the preferential routes of transmission . For infectors , tissue and cellular tropism for productive virus replica - tion in the respiratory tract determines the site of release of virus progeny . Compared with SARS - CoV , which rep - licates mainly in alveolar epithelium , SARS - CoV - 2 repli - cates extensively in both bronchial and alveolar epithelia , which , together with other factors , might explain its more efficient transmission 91 . Host viral shedding could determine the contagiousness of the infector . However , nasal or throat viral shedding alone was inadequate to explain influenza A virus transmission in households 92 , Viral determinants of virus survival and transmission Environmental determinants of virus survival and transmission Viral envelope ( if present ) and capsid • Surface protein expression and modiﬁcation → site of infection → host receptor binding speciﬁcity and aﬃnity → f ormation of viral aggregates • Capsid structure → virus stability Internal proteins and viral genomes • Densely packaged → virus stability • Polymerase → host - adapted virus replication Viral genomes • Mutations → host adaptation Humidity Ultraviolet radiation pH Salinity Surface materials Ventilation and airﬂow Temperature The following environmental factors could inﬂuence virus survival , host susceptibility and human behaviour : Host determinants of contagiousness , susceptibility and transmission Factors aﬀecting host contagiousness at the individual level • Tissue and cellular tropism → viral shedding at diﬀerent sites of the respiratory tract ( for example , nose , throat and lung ) • Symptom presentation → presymptomatic , asymptomatic or symptomatic transmission • Lung function → exhaled particle number and size distribution • Pre - existing immunity from prior infection or vaccination → heterogeneity in viral shedding ( for example , supershedder ) Factors aﬀecting host susceptibility to infection at the individual level • Tissue - speciﬁc receptor expression , glycosylation and glycan expression → site of infection → risk of infection • Pre - existing immunity from prior infection or vaccination → risk of infection • Lung anatomy → site of virus - laden particle deposition Factors aﬀecting transmission at the population level • Social contact patterns → mode of transmission • Age - related mixing patterns → age - speciﬁc risk of transmission Fig . 2 | Viral , environmental and host determinants of respiratory virus transmission . Virus , environmental and host factors influence whether a successful transmission occurs by governing the infectivity of the respiratory virus , the contagiousness of the infected person , the environmental stress on the virus , which affects its persistence and survival during transmission , and the susceptibility of the exposed person . NAtuRe RevIeWs | MICRoBIology R e v i e w s volume 19 | August 2021 | 533 0123456789 ( ) ; : suggesting the importance of other host factors ( for example , variability in symptom presentation 93 or lung function 94 ) that may lead to heterogeneity in contagious - ness and partially explain the presence of superspread - ers and superspreading events . For SARS - CoV - 2 , some studies showed presymptomatic viral shedding and transmission 95 , and similar levels of viral shedding 96 in asymptomatic and symptomatic infected individuals , demonstrating substantial ‘silent’ presymptomatic trans - mission or transmission from a substantial fraction of infected individuals who are asymptomatic 97 is possible . Pre - existing immunity 98 and vaccination history 93 , 99 may also modulate virus shedding in infectors . For infectees , tissue - specific expression of viral receptors 100 or glycosyl - ation and glycan expression 101 along the respiratory tract determines the site of infection and may affect the pre - ferential route of infection . Interestingly , despite the aero dynamic tendency of aerosols to deposit in the lower respiratory tract 102 , a preferential expression of ACE2 and the observation that virus - laden aerosols deposited mostly in the nose may indicate that virus - laden aerosols may initiate SARS - CoV - 2 infection in the nasal cavity 100 . Although host genetics is suggested to modulate infec - tion severity upon virus exposure , less evidence is avail - able for its role in the transmissibility and modes of transmission of respiratory viruses 103 . At the popu lation level , heterogeneous social contacts and age - related mix - ing patterns between infected and susceptible individ - uals drives transmission in specific groups or favours a particular route of transmission in different settings 104 . Evidence and relative importance of modes of transmission Various approaches , including environmental sampling , experimental animal and volunteer transmission stud - ies , and epidemiological observations ( mostly from outbreak investigations ) , have been used to provide evidence in support of each individual mode of trans - mission for different respiratory viruses , although for each , some may criticize their relevance 6 , 7 . Furthermore , although attempts have been made to classify each mode as ‘obligate’ , ‘preferential’ or ‘opportunistic’ 15 , 50 , limited research was done to quantify the relative importance of each mode to transmission 9 . Evidence supporting individual modes of transmission . There are different types of evidence in support of indi - vidual modes of transmission of common respiratory viruses in humans ( TaBle 1 ) . For the direct ( physical ) contact and the fomite routes , experimental studies demonstrated the survival of respiratory viruses on sur - faces , although higher viral doses than would usually be identified in natural settings are usually used 105 , 106 . Virus genetic material , and much less often infectious viruses , were recovered from patients’ hands or nat - urally contaminated objects in homes , workplaces , day - care centres , nursing homes and hospitals 105 – 107 . Experimental animal studies 68 , 108 and limited experimen - tal human 109 – 111 or epidemiological 112 studies were able to demonstrate disease transmission via fomites in the absence of direct contact , droplets and aerosols . For the droplet and aerosol routes , collection of exhaled breath from healthy individuals suggested human expiratory activities release respiratory droplet particles in a continuum of particle size , covering droplets or aer - osols , via the mouth and nose . The particle sizes and their respective concentrations depend on the expira - tory activities involved and the original sites of particle generation in the respiratory tract 113 . Although many recognize the generation of respiratory droplets and aerosols via talking , coughing and sneezing , addition - ally studies have demonstrated the exhalation of aero - sols during normal breathing ; such generation varies considerably between individuals 94 , 113 , 114 . Furthermore , studies showed that exhaled particles could contain res - piratory viruses 115 . Viral RNA ( for example , influenza virus , rhinovirus and coronavirus RNA ) was recov - ered from both exhaled breath droplets and aerosols of symptomatic infected individuals 93 , 99 , 115 , but infectious virus has so far been only found in aerosols and not in droplets for influenza virus 93 , 99 , 116 . Experimental animal studies of influenza virus 108 , experimental human studies of rhinovirus 117 and epidemiological studies of SARS - CoV 118 have demonstrated transmission via respiratory droplets ( including both droplets and aerosols ) ; how - ever , experimental animal studies of influenza virus 23 , 119 and SARS - CoV - 2 ( reF . 120 ) , experimental human studies of Coxsackie virus 63 ( which belongs to the same fam - ily as rhinovirus ) and epidemiological studies of influ - enza virus 121 and rhinovirus 122 have demonstrated that transmission likely occurs via aerosols . Epidemiological studies observed reduced SARS - CoV transmission associated with the use of masks and respirators in health - care settings 123 and reduced influenza virus transmission after disinfection of room air by ultraviolet light 124 , suggestive of the role of aerosols and / or droplets in the transmission . Notably , few studies have demon - strated transmission via droplets only in the absence of aerosols , direct physical contact and fomites 7 , 62 . Relative importance of modes of transmission . Very few experimental human transmission or epidemiological studies have evaluated the relative importance of differ - ent modes of transmission in the same study 25 , 117 , 125 . In a human challenge transmission study of rhinovirus , the authors observed that droplet and aerosol routes alone were sufficient to allow rhinovirus transmission to occur , whereas transmission via fomites was not observed ( in the article ‘aerosols’ probably refers to both droplets and aerosols ) 117 . In a recent similar study of influenza virus 25 , by attributing its failure to achieve the targeted SAR to a higher ventilation rate when compared with an earlier proof - of - concept study 126 , the authors suggested aerosol transmission was more important than transmission via the large droplet and contact routes . Alternatively , the relative importance of different modes of transmission in different circumstances may be evaluated using mathematical mechanistic mod - els , simulations and risk analyses ; for example , out - breaks in aircraft 36 , on cruise ships 127 and in health - care settings 61 or during patient care 128 ( for example , in households 49 , 129 ) . By describing the efficiency of virus transfer at each step of a transmission route and cou - pled with a dose – response model with reference to www . nature . com / nrmicro R e v i e w s 534 | August 2021 | volume 19 0123456789 ( ) ; : Table 1 | Transmissibility of , modes of transmission of and transmission - based precautions for common respiratory viruses in humans Transmissibility and transmission HCoV IV MeV PIV RSV HMPV VZV RhV HAdV a Transmissibility b Basic reproduction number ( R 0 ) 0 . 5 – 8 . 0 1 . 0 – 21 . 0 1 . 4 – 770 2 . 3 – 2 . 7 0 . 9 – 21 . 9 – 1 . 2 – 16 . 9 1 . 2 – 2 . 7 2 . 3 – 5 . 1 Household SAR ( % ) 0 – 38 . 2 1 . 4 – 38 . 0 52 . 0 – 84 . 6 36 . 0 – 67 . 0 11 . 6 – 39 . 3 – 61 . 0 – 78 . 1 28 . 0 – 58 . 0 – Evidence for direct contact transmission c Infectious virus survival on experimentally contaminated hands d ✓ ✓ – ✓ ✓ – ✓ ✓ – Virus genetic material recovered on naturally contaminated hands – – – – – – ✓ ✓ – Infectious virus recovered on naturally contaminated hands – – – – – – – ✓ – Transfer of virus genetic material between hands experimentally – ✓ – – – – – – – Transfer of infectious virus between hands experimentally – – – – ✓ – – ✓ – Infection initiated via exposure to infectious virus on hands demonstrated in volunteer studies – – – – – – – ✓ – Transmission of laboratory - confirmed infection via hands demonstrated in observational studies ✓ ✓ ✓ – ✓ – – – ✓ Transmission of laboratory - confirmed infection via hands demonstrated in volunteer studies – ✓ – – – – – ✓ – Evidence for indirect contact ( fomite ) transmission c Infectious virus survival on experimentally contaminated surfaces d ✓ ✓ – ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ Virus genetic material recovered on naturally contaminated surfaces ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ – – ✓ ✓ ✓ Infectious virus recovered on naturally contaminated surfaces ✓ ✓ – – – – – ✓ ✓ Transfer of virus genetic material between hands and surfaces experimentally – ✓ – – – – – ✓ – Transfer of infectious virus between hands and surfaces experimentally – ✓ – ✓ ✓ – – ✓ ✓ Infection initiated via exposure to infectious virus on surfaces demonstrated in volunteer studies – – – – – – – – – Transmission of laboratory - confirmed infection via surfaces demonstrated in observational studies ✓ – – – – – ✓ – – Transmission of laboratory - confirmed infection via surfaces demonstrated in volunteer studies – – – – ✓ – – ✓ – Evidence for droplet transmission c , e Infectious virus survival in experimentally generated droplets – ✓ – ( ✓ ) – – – – – Virus genetic material recovered in droplets in human exhaled breath f ( ✓ ) ( ✓ ) – ( ✓ ) ( ✓ ) ( ✓ ) – ( ✓ ) – Infectious virus recovered in droplets in human exhaled breath – ( ✓ ) – – – – – – – Virus genetic material recovered in droplets in the air ( ✓ ) ( ✓ ) ( ✓ ) – ( ✓ ) – – ( ✓ ) ( ✓ ) Infectious virus recovered in droplets in the air – – – – ( ✓ ) – – – – Infection initiated via exposure to infectious virus in droplets demonstrated in volunteer studies ✓ ✓ – – ✓ ✓ – ✓ ( ✓ ) Transmission of laboratory - confirmed infection via droplets demonstrated in observational studies – – – – – – – – – Transmission of laboratory - confirmed infection via droplets demonstrated in volunteer studies – – – – – – – – – NAtuRe RevIeWs | MICRoBIology R e v i e w s volume 19 | August 2021 | 535 0123456789 ( ) ; : the minimal infectious virus dose needed to initiate infection , one may estimate the relative infection risk between routes , thereby identifying the major transmis - sion route in a particular circumstance . Furthermore , these approaches can also inform the likely values of the impact of individual determinants 130 on each route , and the potential effectiveness of route - specific interventions such as face coverings 128 , and allow comparison of the major transmission modes between viruses 36 . However , a particular challenge for this approach is to identify the minimal infectious dose required for the virus to establish infection via a specific transmission mode . Aerosol transmission of SARS - CoV - 2 and influenza virus Historically , national and international agencies com - monly consider respiratory viruses to be transmitted over the contact and / or droplet route , and exercise caution when one is considering the possibility of aero - sol transmission 28 , 131 . However in recent years , more researchers have advocated the recognition of the impor - tance of aerosol transmission 12 , 132 . The recent contro - versy regarding aerosol transmission of SARS - CoV - 2 reflects the perspectives and long - standing challenges in evaluating the relative importance of each mode of transmission for respiratory viruses . The report by the WHO – China Joint Mission on Coronavirus Disease 2019 ( reF . 133 ) published on 28 February 2020 stated that “airborne spread has not been reported for COVID - 19 and it is not believed to be a major driver of transmission based on available evidence ; however , it can be envisaged if certain aerosol - generating procedures are conducted in health - care facilities” . The initial perception was that droplets and fomites were the major routes of transmission for SARS - CoV - 2 . How - ever , as more data on SARS - CoV - 2 transmission became available , on 27 March , the WHO published another sci - entific brief specifically on the modes of SARS - CoV - 2 transmission 38 . It described droplet transmission as transmission that occurs through infective respiratory droplets of diameter larger than 5 µ m to 10 µ m or fomites in the immediate environment around the infected per - son , and airborne transmission through infective droplet nuclei smaller than 5 µ m ( reF . 38 ) . Addressing the findings of SARS - CoV - 2 remaining infectious in artificially gen - erated aerosols for 3 hours or more 134 and the absence of Transmissibility and transmission HCoV IV MeV PIV RSV HMPV VZV RhV HAdV a Evidence for aerosol transmission c , e Infectious virus survival in experimentally generated aerosols ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ – – – ✓ Virus genetic material recovered in aerosols in human exhaled breath f ✓ ✓ – ✓ ✓ ✓ – ✓ – Infectious virus recovered in aerosols in human exhaled breath – ✓ – – – – – – – Virus genetic material recovered in aerosols in the air ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ – ✓ ✓ ✓ Infectious virus recovered in aerosols in the air ✓ ✓ – – ✓ – – – – Infection initiated via exposure to infectious virus in aerosols demonstrated in volunteer studies – ✓ – – – – – ✓ ✓ Transmission of laboratory - confirmed infection via aerosols demonstrated in observational studies ✓ ✓ ✓ – – – ✓ – – Transmission of laboratory - confirmed infection via aerosols demonstrated in volunteer studies – – ✓ – – – ✓ ✓ – Transmission - based precautions in health - care settings g Contact precautions h Y Y N Y Y Y N Y Y Droplet precautions Y Y N Y Y Y N Y Y Airborne precautions N N Y N N N Y N N See Supplementary Table 1 for supporting references as well as evidence stratified by coronavirus types or influenza virus ( IV ) types / subtypes . Human bocavirus is not shown due to a lack of evidence regarding all modes of transmission . HAdV , human adenovirus ; HCoV , human coronavirus ; HMPV , human metapneumovirus ; MeV , measles virus ; N , not recommended ; PIV , parainfluenza virus ; RhV , rhinovirus ; RSV , respiratory syncytial virus ; SAR , secondary attack rate ; VZV , varicella zoster virus ; Y , recommended ; ✓ , evidence identified ; ( ✓ ) , evidence identified only in particles with aerodynamic diameter between 5 and 100 µ m ( applicable to droplet transmission only ) ; – , evidence not found . a HAdV types that are considered mainly respiratory ( but not enteric ) are included . b The range of reported estimates of the mean or median is provided . Estimates of household SAR in the absence of interventions were extracted where possible . c Observational studies include epidemiological or outbreak investigations , whereas volunteer studies include challenge studies or randomized ( controlled ) trials . d Data include contamination by direct virus inoculation or contamination by volunteers who were experimentally infected . e Particles with aerodynamic diameter larger than 5 µ m are traditionally defined as droplets , whereas those with a smaller aerodynamic diameter are defined as aerosols . However , there is ongoing discussion on redefining the particle size threshold between droplets and aerosols ( see the section Terminology and defining features of modes of transmission ) . Therefore , for evidence on droplet transmission , evidence is provided in parentheses if evidence of virus recovery is identified only in particles with aerodynamic diameter between 5 and 100 µ m . Air samples collected without size fractionation but that were collected more than 2 m from a known source ( for example , an infected individual ) are considered as evidence suggestive of aerosols . f Evidence for virus genetic material recovered in droplets or aerosols in human exhaled breath for PIV , RSV and HMPV is based on the author’s own additional data of the published study 93 . g Each precaution represents a set of infection prevention and control practices and personal protective equipment recommended by the WHO for health - care workers during routine patient care ( excluding aerosol - generating procedures ) within health - care facilities , with consideration of the current understanding on the modes of transmission of the respective pathogen . h For IV , contact precautions are recommended for zoonotic IV only but not for endemic or pandemic IV . Table 1 ( cont . ) | Transmissibility of , modes of transmission of and transmission - based precautions for common respiratory viruses in humans www . nature . com / nrmicro R e v i e w s 536 | August 2021 | volume 19 0123456789 ( ) ; : SARS - CoV - 2 in a small number of air samples collected near symptomatic individuals with COVID - 19 ( reFs 135 , 136 ) , the WHO continued to recommend droplet and con - tact precautions in the absence of aerosol - generating procedures ( that is , airborne transmission was not considered to be a major route ) . On 6 July 2020 , a group of 239 multidisciplinary sci - entists published an open letter advocating the recogni - tion of potential airborne transmission of SARS - CoV - 2 ( reF . 132 ) , citing the latest studies of SARS - CoV - 2 as well as previous studies of influenza virus , corona - viruses and other respiratory viruses . These studies included mechanistic evidence showing generation of ( non - virus - containing ) aerosols from human expira - tory activities 113 , 137 , infectious influenza virus in cough aerosols 99 , 138 , that exhaled droplets of 60 – 100 µ m can be carried less than 1 m away by breathing and more than 2 m by coughing 139 , and survival of SARS - CoV - 2 in arti - ficially generated aerosols ( the same study referenced by the WHO ) 134 . Furthermore , these studies provided evi - dence of SARS - CoV - 2 viral RNA 140 , or infectious RSV 141 , Middle East respiratory syndrome - related coronavirus 142 and SARS - CoV - 2 ( reF . 143 ) in aerosols from the air near infected individuals . They also cited epidemiologi - cal observations of outbreaks or infection clusters of SARS and COVID - 19 , sometimes supported by addi - tional modelling studies , which suggested transmission occurs mainly via aerosols . These studies included the large community outbreak of SARS in Amoy Gardens in Hong Kong 59 ; clusters of SARS - CoV - 2 infections in a restaurant in Guangzhou 54 , 144 and a shopping mall in Wenzhou 145 , China , and a choir in Skagit County , Washington , United States 144 , 146 , 147 ; and a modelling study with tracer gas measurement to simulate the spread of exhaled respiratory droplets from the suspected index patient for the SARS - CoV - 2 restaurant outbreak in Guangzhou 148 . Some argued 149 , 150 that the current epide - miological data and clinical observations for COVID - 19 do not support the letter’s claim of the importance of aerosols in SARS - CoV - 2 transmission ; for example , the lack of observed long - range transmission or observed increased risk of infection among health - care work - ers in the absence of airborne precautions 150 , which the authors of the open letter responded to 151 . On 9 July , the WHO issued a updated scientific brief 39 , cit - ing some of the evidence described in the open letter 132 and extensive subsequent evidence on SARS - CoV - 2 transmission . Addressing studies that identified low quantities of SARS - CoV - 2 RNA in the exhaled breath of infected individuals 152 or in air samples collected from health - care facilities in the absence of aerosol - generating procedures 140 , 153 – 156 , the WHO commented these do not necessarily indicate a sufficient dose of infectious virus for transmission to occur 157 . Addressing outbreak reports 54 , 147 , 158 , 159 , the WHO acknowledged possible SARS - CoV - 2 transmission through aerosols in indoor crowded spaces in the absence of aerosol - generating procedures , although transmission through droplets or fomites cannot be ruled out . Therefore , the WHO concluded that SARS - CoV - 2 is transmitted primarily through direct , indirect or close contact with infected persons or their respiratory droplets that are expelled during coughing , sneezing , talking or singing , that trans - mission via fomites is likely and that transmission via aerosols is possible in indoor crowded spaces 39 . This is not the first time that the same evidence base has led different scientists or regulatory bodies to differ - ent conclusions on the importance of the aerosol route of transmission , with a similar discussion for influenza virus 6 , 10 , 14 , 160 , where there is evidence both for and against the importance of aerosol transmission . In support , infectious influenza virus was detected in aerosols in exhaled breath and coughs 93 , 99 and in the air 161 , infec - tious aerosols could initiate infection in volunteers 51 , 64 , long - range transmission followed airflow 162 and epi - demiological studies showed increased transmission with less ventilation 121 or decreased transmission with upper air disinfection by ultraviolet light 124 . Additional evidence includes influenza virus survival in artificially generated aerosols 163 , suggestive of infectiousness in aerosols in nature ; however , this work has been criti - cized as being too artificial 6 , and influenza virus RNA recovery in the air in both community settings 164 and health - care settings 55 , 56 , 165 ( even beyond 1 . 5 m from the source 55 , 56 ) has been criticized because infectious virus was not identified . Some argued that there is insufficient evidence of influenza virus aerosol transmission 6 , such as evidence for infectious virus recovery far from the source , infection initiated by inhaling air from patient rooms , transmission over long distances , association between airflow and disease spread after removal of the source patient , and effectiveness of ultraviolet irradiation in reducing transmission ; moreover , aerosol transmis - sion is argued against as outbreaks in aircraft still occur despite their being well ventilated . Some researchers have explicitly considered that transmission via the aer - osol route is essentially a long - range transmission 6 and have argued that influenza virus transmission is mostly observed at close range and particularly with prolonged close contact . Importantly , some researchers have argued that since the goal of recognizing the importance of aer - osol transmission is to minimize the risk of transmission in health - care settings by airborne precautions 15 , such recognition may be counterproductive due to resource limitations , logistics challenges and low compliance 6 . In summary , some researchers argued that the ability to be transmitted over long distances is a prerequisite for aerosol transmission 6 , as was shown for measles virus 57 , 58 , VZV 166 , 167 and Mycobacterium tuberculosis 168 , the three respiratory pathogens that are widely accepted to be transmitted mainly via aerosols 12 . They also require evidence of transmission via aerosols in the absence of all other routes 6 . The latest WHO scientific brief on modes of transmission of SARS - CoV - 2 also reflects the emphasis of identifying infectious virus , and not viral RNA alone , in air samples 39 . However , although trans - mission over longer distances through the air is possible for some respiratory viruses 57 , 166 , this would require large numbers of viruses to be produced at the source and could be prevented by air dilution via ventilation or virus inactivation by environmental determinants . A failure to observe long - range transmission is therefore not evi - dence against aerosol transmission 7 , as it could also be explained by low rates of virus emission at the source NAtuRe RevIeWs | MICRoBIology R e v i e w s volume 19 | August 2021 | 537 0123456789 ( ) ; : or by effective dilution or inactivation . The observation that influenza virus viral load in aerosols decreased sub - stantially with increasing distance from the source , pos - sibly because of dilution of virus concentration further from the source 56 , 169 , suggests that if aerosol transmission does occur , it will occur mostly at close range and rarely at long range 170 . Furthermore , transmission via the drop - let route in the absence of all other routes has yet to be observed ( TaBle 1 ) , raising the concern of the available evidence that supports placing relatively more emphasis on droplets over aerosols . Non - pharmaceutical interventions At the early stage of pandemics , virus - specific pharma - ceutical interventions such as vaccines and therapeutics are not available , and in resource - limited settings , such interventions are rarely readily available . Furthermore , owing to constant viral evolution , new viral strains emerge or resistance is gained such that pharmaceutical interventions can soon become outdated . Therefore , at the early stages of a pandemic , NPIs become the most important public health measures that individuals or communities can adopt to reduce respiratory virus transmission . Common NPIs include the use of per - sonal protective equipment ( PPE ) or hygiene practices at the individual level , environmental disinfection or dilution at a systemic level , and social distancing meas - ures at the community level , which reduce transmission by interfering with a single mode or multiple modes of transmission . In particular , in health - care settings , dif - ferent NPIs constitute part of standard precautions or transmission - based precautions ( that is , contact , droplet or airborne precautions ) ( TaBle 1 ) , which represent dif - ferent sets of practices and PPE that health - care work - ers adopt to lower the risk of nosocomial transmission . Although many NPIs have demonstrated mechanisti - cally the ability to inactivate or reduce the amount of respiratory viruses in experimental or natural settings , the effectiveness of these NPIs in preventing infection at the individual level or mitigating transmission at the population level depends on a number of factors : the overall risk of transmission in a specific setting ( for example , dining in restaurants versus playing sports outdoor ) or population group ( for example , health - care workers versus institutionalized individuals ) ; the risk of transmission through the specific modes which the NPIs act on , and whether the virus could be transmitted via alternative modes after intervention ; and individual adherence or population - wide adoption of the NPIs ( TaBle 2 ) . PPE and personal hygiene practices Hand hygiene : soaps and alcohol - based hand sanitizers . Since Semmelweis first demonstrated in the 1840s that health - care workers , by adopting hand hygiene practices , reduced mortality in parturient women , hand hygiene has probably been the most widely adopted NPI for mitigating disease transmission ( targeting the physical contact route ) and is recommended as part of standard precautions for all patient care in health - care facilities 171 . Common hand hygiene practices used in health - care and community settings include handwashing with plain ( non - antimicrobial ) soaps or hand rub using alcohol - based hand sanitizers 172 ( TaBle 2 ) . Alcohol - based hand sanitizers are useful in situations where sinks are not readily available , but are not recommended when hands are visibly dirty 171 . There is mechanistic evidence demonstrating bacterium or virus inactivation by hand hygiene 173 , and a number of systematic reviews of obser - vational studies or randomized trials together suggest that hand hygiene alone is significantly associated with reducing respiratory illnesses ; however , it is unclear whether hand hygiene is effective against laboratory - confirmed influenza virus infections 17 – 19 , possibly due to insufficiently large study sample size or weak adherence to the intervention 125 , 174 . Face coverings : cloth masks , surgical masks , respirators , face shields and eye protection . Surgical face masks , face shields and eye protection are commonly used by health - care workers during routine patient care or when they are performing high - risk procedures as protection against splashes of bodily fluids or respiratory secretions , and respirators are commonly used as protection against aerosols 15 , 131 , 175 . In the community , the COVID - 19 pan - demic has not only led to community - wide adoption of surgical face masks ; the extremely high demand has also resulted in ( reusable ) cloth masks being advocated as an alternative to surgical masks 176 . Apart from mitigating droplet and aerosol transmission , these face coverings might also reduce contact transmission by reducing the frequency of hands touching respiratory mucosa 177 . Mechanistically , face coverings can act either as protec - tion against infection by reducing exposure to a virus when worn by a healthy individual or as source control by filtration 93 and deflection when worn by an infected person 178 , 179 ( TaBle 2 ) . On the basis of systematic reviews of observational studies 123 , 180 and randomized trials 16 , 18 , 123 , many believe there is sufficient evidence supporting the effectiveness of the use of face coverings alone , or in combination with other NPIs , in reducing the risk of respiratory illness or virus transmission in health - care settings 123 , 180 and high - risk community settings 16 , whereas some do not 18 . Mechanistic data from one study preliminarily suggest the effectiveness of surgical face masks may differ between viruses 93 . The relatively lower infection risk in the community compared with health - care settings , the requirement for fit testing and lower adherence argue against the use of respirators in the community 181 . Although surgical face masks as source control are likely applicable to most settings , as protection against infection they may have more util - ity in close encounters 178 and crowded indoor settings ; however , more research is needed . More research on the use of reusable masks , including cloth masks , in com - munity settings either as source control or as protection is also urgently needed , including key parameters for assessment and standardization to address the diversity of materials available . Environmental disinfection and dilution Surface cleaning . Surface cleaning by disinfectants used in health - care settings 182 or household cleaning agents 183 ( TaBle 2 ) mitigates transmission via the fomite route and www . nature . com / nrmicro R e v i e w s 538 | August 2021 | volume 19 0123456789 ( ) ; : Table 2 | Mechanistic evidence and effectiveness of common non - pharmaceutical i n t e r v e n t i o ns Non - pharmaceutical intervention Targeted mode of transmission a Mechanism of action Mechanistic evidence b Effectiveness c PPE and hygiene practice Hand hygiene Contact Soaps remove organic substances by detergent properties Alcohol denatures proteins in the presence of water Alcohol had higher viricidal activity on enveloped viruses than on non - enveloped viruses Alcohol - based hand sanitizers are more efficacious than soaps with regard to pathogen inactivation in vivo Multiple systematic reviews suggested hand hygiene alone is significantly associated with reduced respiratory illness but not influenza virus infection in community settings Studies on the effectiveness of hand hygiene in reducing respiratory virus transmission in health - care settings were not identified Insufficient studies to compare the efficacies of soaps versus alcohol - based hand sanitizers against respiratory infections Face coverings Droplet and aerosol ( contact ) As source control : when worn by an infected individual , reduce virus release to the environment by filtration and immediate virus exposure of nearby healthy individuals by deflection As protection : when worn by a healthy individual , reduce exposure to virus - laden droplets and aerosols in the air Might also reduce contact transmission by reducing the frequency of hands touching respiratory mucosa As source control : surgical masks efficaciously reduced influenza virus and coronavirus release from infected individuals by filtration ( efficacies on exhaled droplets and aerosols may differ between viruses ) Studies using mannequins suggested deflection is also important in reducing virus release As protection against close - range transmission : cloth masks , surgical masks and respirators were efficacious against artificial bacteriophage or influenza virus aerosol challenge by filtration As protection against long - range transmission : in the absence of environmental airflow only 1 % of radiolabeled saline aerosols generated from the source mannequin reached the exposed mannequin 3 feet apart , where only fitted respirators but not surgical masks reduced exposure to aerosols Multiple systematic reviews of observational studies or randomized trials mostly suggested the use of face coverings alone , or in combination with other non - pharmaceutical interventions , is effective in reducing the risk of respiratory illness or respiratory virus transmission in health - care and high - risk community settings Low adherence to use of a face shield during high - risk procedures associated with higher risk of respiratory illnesses in health - care workers Preliminary evidence suggested face mask use by household members before the person with the primary case developed symptoms is significantly associated with reduced SARS - CoV - 2 household transmission Environmental disinfection and dilution Surface cleaning Contact ( droplet and aerosol ) Common disinfectants in health - care settings : 0 . 1 M sodium hydroxide , 70 % ethanol , 70 % 1 - propanol , ethylene oxide and sodium hypochlorite Common household cleaning agents : liquid soap , 1 % bleach and antimicrobial or antiviral wipes Both disinfect contaminated surfaces by virus inactivation Might also reduce droplet or aerosol transmission by reducing fomites available for resuspension Common disinfectants in health - care settings effectively inactivated influenza virus and coronaviruses on surfaces in experimental settings Common household cleaning agents effectively inactivated ( enveloped ) influenza virus , but were less effective for ( non - enveloped ) adenovirus in experimental settings Biweekly disinfection of toys significantly reduced the presence of virus genetic material in the environment for adenovirus , rhinovirus and RSV , but not coronaviruses , parainfluenza virus and bocavirus , in nurseries in a randomized trial A systematic review found limited epidemiological studies on the effectiveness of surface and object cleaning in reducing community respiratory virus transmission during pandemics Biweekly disinfection of toys did not reduce respiratory illness in nurseries in a randomized trial The combined use of an alcohol - based hand sanitizer and chloride wipes , compared with hand washing , did not reduce respiratory illness in elementary school students in a randomized trial . Daily household cleaning was significantly associated with reduced household transmission of SARS - CoV - 2 NAtuRe RevIeWs | MICRoBIology R e v i e w s volume 19 | August 2021 | 539 0123456789 ( ) ; : might also block the droplet or aerosol route by reducing fomites available for resuspension due to various activi - ties ( for example , walking or door opening ) 184 . Although supported by mechanistic evidence on virus inactivation , limited epidemiological studies have evaluated its effec - tiveness in reducing respiratory virus transmission 17 . One randomized trial in day - care nurseries suggested biweekly disinfection of toys significantly reduced the detection of adenovirus , rhinovirus and RSV , but not common cold coronaviruses , parainfluenza virus and bocavirus , in the environment ; however , surface clean - ing did not reduce the incidence of respiratory illness 185 , suggesting transmission may have occurred via routes other than the fomite route . Air dilution by ventilation and directional airflow . Ventilation and directional airflow , although usually used to provide thermal comfort and clean air , could also help in mitigating droplet and aerosol transmission by dilution , especially indoors . Ventilation is an intentional mechanical or natural introduction of outdoor air into a building ( TaBle 2 ) . Natural ventilation , if properly designed , is valuable especially in resource - limited set - tings , but can be used only in locations where climatic conditions are favourable 186 . The ventilation rate is usually described as either per building or per room as the num - ber of air changes per hour , or per occupant in the space as outdoor air rate per person . The minimal ventila - tion required differs depending on the level of infection risk expected or protection needed ; for example , six air changes per hour in patient rooms and 12 air changes per hour in airborne - infection isolation rooms 187 . Separately , directional airflow provides clean air from the cleanest patient care areas to less clean patient care areas . Although limited data demonstrate reduced virus recovery in the air with increased ventilation or the pres - ence of directional airflow 122 , it has been suggested there is ‘strong and sufficient’ evidence supporting the associ - ation between ventilation and airflow patterns in build - ings and transmission of respiratory viruses , including Non - pharmaceutical intervention Targeted mode of transmission a Mechanism of action Mechanistic evidence b Effectiveness c Environmental disinfection and dilution ( cont . ) Air dilution by ventilation and directional airflow Droplet and aerosol Ventilation is the intentional introduction of outdoor air into a building by mechanical ventilation ( for example , fans , ductwork or air conditioning ) or natural ventilation ( for example , windows ) Directional airflow provides clean air from the cleanest area to less clean areas Lower ventilation associated with rhinovirus RNA detection in the air in an office environment in an observational study Multiple systematic reviews suggested strong and sufficient evidence supporting the association between indoor ventilation and airflow patterns with transmission of SARS - CoV , influenza virus , measles virus and varicella zoster virus Directional airflow may reduce the risk of airborne infection in vulnerable individuals or transmission in health - care and community settings Air and surface disinfection by UVGI Aerosol and contact Use of UV light in the germicidal range ( 200 – 320 nm ) , especially UV - C ( 200 – 280 nm ) , to crosslink nucleic acids Air disinfection : in upper - room UVGI , irradiation is confined to the area above the occupants’ heads to minimize direct exposure , but requires good vertical air movement in the room ; in in - duct UVGI , air passes through ventilation systems and is irradiated inside before recirculation or exhaustion Surface disinfection : UVGI is used on internal surfaces of ventilation systems , or surfaces and equipment UV - C efficiently inactivated experimentally generated aerosols containing influenza virus or coronaviruses , but was less effective for adenovirus At higher relative humidity , increased susceptibility to UV - C was observed for experimentally generated aerosols containing adenovirus , but decreased susceptibility to UV - C was observed for influenza virus and vaccinia virus UV - C efficiently inactivated experimentally generated MERS - CoV on glass slides Upper - room UVGI efficiently reduced infectious vaccina virus aerosols in a simulated hospital room UVGI significantly inactivated experimentally inoculated influenza virus on respirators Upper - room UVGI was shown to prevent airborne transmission of measles virus in schools Upper - room UVGI was associated with reduced influenza virus infections among individuals with tuberculosis Randomized trials evaluating the effectiveness of UVGI for air or surface disinfection in reducing respiratory virus transmission were not identified . See Supplementary Table 2 for supporting references . MERS - CoV , Middle East respiratory syndrome - related coronavirus ; PPE , personal protective equipment ; RSV , respiratory syntactical virus ; SARS - CoV - 2 , severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 ; UV , ultraviolet ; UVGI , ultraviolet germicidal irradiation . a The mode or modes of transmission listed in parentheses indicate possible but presumably less important transmission via that mode . b Mechanistic evidence with regard to virus reduction or inactivation . c Effectiveness with regard to prevention of respiratory illness or respiratory virus transmission . Table 2 ( cont . ) | Mechanistic evidence and effectiveness of common non - pharmaceutical i n t e r v e n t i o ns www . nature . com / nrmicro R e v i e w s 540 | August 2021 | volume 19 0123456789 ( ) ; : SARS - CoV , influenza virus , measles virus and VZV 41 , 188 , although this may require further validation by interven - tion studies or randomized trials 86 . Furthermore , direc - tional airflow may reduce the risk of airborne infection in vulnerable individuals or nosocomial transmission in health - care settings 187 , 189 , and also in community set - tings ( for example , aircraft cabins 190 ) . Some suggested that for high levels of virus exposure in crowded indoor areas , increasing indoor mechanical ventilation may be less effective or less cost - effective to achieve sufficient risk reduction 191 , and that it might increase aerosol dis - persion and infection risk for individuals further away from the source 190 ; an uninterrupted air stream from the source to the exhaust may then have a more important role in reducing transmission 192 . Air and surface disinfection by ultraviolet germicidal irradiation . Concern over aerosol and fomite trans - mission of SARS - CoV - 2 has renewed interest in the use of ultraviolet germicidal irradiation ( UVGI ) 193 — that is , the use of ultraviolet light in the germicidal range of wavelengths ( 200 – 320 nm ) — for the disinfection of air and surfaces 194 . For air disinfection , upper - room UVGI and in - duct UVGI are usually used 195 ( TaBle 2 ) . The use of UVGI to prevent airborne transmission was pioneered by Wells for the control of tuberculosis ; Wells also demonstrated its use to prevent measles virus trans - mission in schools 196 . Upper - room UVGI was associated with reduced influenza virus infections among individu - als with tuberculosis 124 . Surface disinfection with UVGI was initially used for bacterial decontamination 197 . Studies evaluating the inactivation of respiratory viruses on surfaces using UVGI in experimental settings 198 are scarce and would be strengthened by studies using infectious virus recovery from naturally contaminated surfaces as the outcome measure . Randomized trials evaluating the effectiveness of UVGI for air or surface disinfection in reducing respiratory virus transmission are also lacking . Some proposed disinfecting surgical masks and respirators 199 with UVGI to allow their reuse in resource - limited settings 200 . Although UVGI is not considered carcinogenic , its domestic use ( for example , consumer products advertised for control of COVID - 19 ) is cautioned against as it requires expert knowledge of the dosage required , and the efficacies of these consumer products are in doubt 201 . Conclusions The complexity of the control of respiratory virus trans - mission is reflected by the cross - disciplinary efforts to estimate the transmissibility of a respiratory virus , to evaluate the relative importance of modes of transmis - sion and factors affecting transmission , to evaluate the efficacy and effectiveness of NPIs in different settings , and in turn how these translate to reduced transmissi - bility in the general and specific populations . Although population - based estimates of transmissibility ( R 0 ) could inform the combined effectiveness of multiple interven - tions in reducing transmission , the household - based estimates ( SAR ) in randomized trials could inform the effectiveness of individual interventions . As shown , rel - ative transmissibility between respiratory viruses may be different depending on whether R 0 or SAR is used to describe transmissibility , amid heterogeneities in esti - mates of the same virus ( TaBle 1 ) . Studies comparing the transmissibility of different respiratory viruses in parallel in the same study , perhaps in case - ascertained house - hold studies , where study settings are more controlled , would be useful to identify which respiratory viruses are more transmissible than others . The controversies regarding the role of aerosols in the transmission of SARS - CoV - 2 and influenza virus highlight our very limited understanding on the relative importance of different modes of transmission . This includes the lack of consensus on the defining features of each mode of transmission , especially the difficulty in differentiating between droplets and aerosols ; the different levels of scrutiny when evidence supporting each mode is being evaluated ; the technical challenges in recovering infectious virus from the environment ; the challenges in identifying the minimal infectious dose required to establish infection in susceptible or immunized individuals ; and the lack of quantitative risk assessment for different modes of transmission . Given the different types of qualitative evidence available in support of individual modes of transmission ( TaBle 1 ) , discussion may be warranted in assigning priority or strength of evidence to these different types of evi - dence in support of each mode ; for example , whether the demonstration of transmission via aerosols alone in the absence of other routes is essential to support the importance of the aerosol route , as suggested for measles virus 57 and VZV 166 , but which was not done in support of the importance of the droplet route for RSV . These study designs may be possible for aerosols and fomites , but it will be more challenging to demonstrate trans - mission via direct contact and droplets in the absence of ( close - range ) aerosols . For rhinovirus , airborne pre - cautions are not required despite the evidence of aero - sol transmission in the absence of other routes 63 , 117 ; in addition , as rhinovirus transmission has been demon - strated independently via direct contact 202 , fomite 109 and aerosols 63 , 117 , efforts should be made to quantitatively evaluate the relative contribution of each mode to trans - mission and their determinants in different settings 130 . However , the relative contribution of different modes at the population level likely varies between different set - tings , populations and interventions in place , and at the individual level varies between individuals due to hetero - geneity in contagiousness and susceptibility , which also changes over time . There is also minimal research on the modes of transmission of bocavirus and metapneumo - virus ( Supplementary Table 1 ) . In general , there is a lack of studies demonstrating droplet transmission alone in the absence of other routes for all respiratory viruses ( TaBle 1 ) , and such studies are urgently needed to support the importance of droplets over aerosols and will have important implications for the choice of NPIs for miti - gating transmission . Alternatively , aerosol transmission does not necessarily indicate a higher intrinsic transmis - sibility of the virus ( TaBle 1 ) nor long - range trans - mission , as transmissibility depends on multiple factors , including the degree of presymptomatic transmission , the contagiousness of the infector , the susceptibility NAtuRe RevIeWs | MICRoBIology R e v i e w s volume 19 | August 2021 | 541 0123456789 ( ) ; : of the infectee , the contact patterns between them and the environmental determinants of transmission in the shared space ; and long - range transmission depends on rates of virus emission at the source or effective dilution or inactivation by environmental determinants . Moving beyond deciding on the adoption of an NPI mostly on the basis of the perceived importance of a particular mode of transmission would provide an incentive for public health practitioners to recognize the importance of aerosol transmission . For common NPIs , although we have mechanistic evidence supporting their efficacy with regard to virus reduction or inactivation , we have limited knowledge of their effectiveness in reducing transmission in the pop - ulation both in health - care settings and in community settings . This may be because we do not yet know the relative contribution of different modes of transmission in a particular setting and whether the different modes can partially compensate for each other if a mode is absent 174 . If the latter is true , studies evaluating the effec - tiveness of one intervention alone , which targets a spe - cific mode , may underestimate its potential effectiveness because a reduction in transmission via a specific mode by the NPI might be compensated by transmission via another mode 174 . Given effectiveness is demonstrated , the eventual adoption of NPIs would also depend on the perceived severity of the disease 15 , the infection risk in a particular setting 175 , 180 , the accessibility of the resources , the purpose of interventions 6 and the economic or societal costs of implementing the intervention . In particular , the choice of which transmission - based pre - cautions to adopt for a particular respiratory virus in health - care settings depends on the perceived major modes of transmission for the pathogen 15 , the level of caution and the resources likely available if the recom - mendation is made 15 , and therefore could differ between countries . Intervening against multiple modes of trans - mission would be more effective than acting against a single mode . For example , although effectiveness of the use of face masks or hand hygiene alone in mitigating community transmission of laboratory - confirmed res - piratory virus infection was not demonstrated , possibly due to various experimental challenges , their combined use has been shown to be effective in reducing influenza virus transmission and should be considered 203 . A clear public health message accounting for these uncertainties will help to gain public confidence and support public health efforts . Published online 22 March 2021 1 . James , S . L . et al . Global , regional , and national incidence , prevalence , and years lived with disability for 354 diseases and injuries for 195 countries and territories , 1990 – 2017 : a systematic analysis for the Global Burden of Disease Study 2017 . Lancet 392 , 1789 – 1858 ( 2018 ) . 2 . Roth , G . A . et al . Global , regional , and national age - sex - specific mortality for 282 causes of death in 195 countries and territories , 1980 – 2017 : a systematic analysis for the Global Burden of Disease Study 2017 . Lancet 392 , 1736 – 1788 ( 2018 ) . 3 . Fendrick , A . M . , Monto , A . S . , Nightengale , B . & Sarnes , M . The economic burden of non - influenza - related viral respiratory tract infection in the United States . Arch . Intern . Med . 163 , 487 – 494 ( 2003 ) . 4 . Belser , J . A . , Maines , T . R . , Tumpey , T . M . & Katz , J . M . Influenza A virus transmission : contributing factors and clinical implications . Expert Rev . Mol . Med . 12 , e39 ( 2010 ) . 5 . Richard , M . & Fouchier , R . A . Influenza A virus transmission via respiratory aerosols or droplets as it relates to pandemic potential . FEMS Microbiol . Rev . 40 , 68 – 85 ( 2015 ) . 6 . Brankston , G . , Gitterman , L . , Hirji , Z . , Lemieux , C . & Gardam , M . Transmission of influenza A in human beings . Lancet Infect . Dis . 7 , 257 – 265 ( 2007 ) . 7 . Killingley , B . & Nguyen - Van - Tam , J . Routes of influenza transmission . Influenza Other Respir . Viruses 7 ( Suppl . 2 ) , 42 – 51 ( 2013 ) . 8 . Killingley , B . et al . Potential role of human challenge studies for investigation of influenza transmission . Lancet Infect . Dis . 11 , 879 – 886 ( 2011 ) . 9 . Kutter , J . S . , Spronken , M . I . , Fraaij , P . L . , Fouchier , R . A . M . & Herfst , S . Transmission routes of respiratory viruses among humans . Curr . Opin . Virol . 28 , 142 – 151 ( 2018 ) . 10 . Tellier , R . Aerosol transmission of influenza A virus : a review of new studies . J . R . Soc . Interface 6 ( Suppl . 6 ) , S783 – S790 ( 2009 ) . 11 . Tang , J . W . , Li , Y . , Eames , I . , Chan , P . K . & Ridgway , G . L . Factors involved in the aerosol transmission of infection and control of ventilation in healthcare premises . J . Hosp . Infect . 64 , 100 – 114 ( 2006 ) . 12 . Tellier , R . , Li , Y . , Cowling , B . J . & Tang , J . W . Recognition of aerosol transmission of infectious agents : a commentary . BMC Infect . Dis . 19 , 101 ( 2019 ) . 13 . Marr , L . C . , Tang , J . W . , Van Mullekom , J . & Lakdawala , S . S . Mechanistic insights into the effect of humidity on airborne influenza virus survival , transmission and incidence . J . R . Soc . Interface 16 , 20180298 ( 2019 ) . 14 . Lemieux , C . , Brankston , G . , Gitterman , L . , Hirji , Z . & Gardam , M . Questioning aerosol transmission of influenza . Emerg . Infect . Dis . 13 , 173 – 174 ; author reply 174 - 5 ( 2007 ) . 15 . Shiu , E . Y . C . , Leung , N . H . L . & Cowling , B . J . Controversy around airborne versus droplet transmission of respiratory viruses : implication for infection prevention . Curr . Opin . Infect . Dis . 32 , 372 – 379 ( 2019 ) . 16 . MacIntyre , C . R . & Chughtai , A . A . Facemasks for the prevention of infection in healthcare and community settings . BMJ 350 , h694 ( 2015 ) . 17 . Xiao , J . et al . Nonpharmaceutical measures for pandemic influenza in nonhealthcare settings - personal protective and environmental measures . Emerg . Infect . Dis . 26 , 967 – 975 ( 2020 ) . 18 . Jefferson , T . et al . Physical interventions to interrupt or reduce the spread of respiratory viruses . Cochrane Database Syst . Rev . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1002 / 14651858 . CD006207 . pub5 ( 2020 ) . 19 . Saunders - Hastings , P . , Crispo , J . A . G . , Sikora , L . & Krewski , D . Effectiveness of personal protective measures in reducing pandemic influenza transmission : A systematic review and meta - analysis . Epidemics 20 , 1 – 20 ( 2017 ) . 20 . Yen , H . L . et al . Hemagglutinin - neuraminidase balance confers respiratory - droplet transmissibility of the pandemic H1N1 influenza virus in ferrets . Proc . Natl Acad . Sci . USA 108 , 14264 – 14269 ( 2011 ) . 21 . Herfst , S . et al . Airborne transmission of influenza A / H5N1 virus between ferrets . Science 336 , 1534 – 1541 ( 2012 ) . 22 . Bouvier , N . M . , Lowen , A . C . & Palese , P . Oseltamivir - resistant influenza A viruses are transmitted efficiently among guinea pigs by direct contact but not by aerosol . J . Virol . 82 , 10052 – 10058 ( 2008 ) . 23 . Zhou , J . et al . Defining the sizes of airborne particles that mediate influenza transmission in ferrets . Proc . Natl Acad . Sci . USA 115 , E2386 – E2392 ( 2018 ) . 24 . Richard , M . et al . Influenza A viruses are transmitted via the air from the nasal respiratory epithelium of ferrets . Nat . Commun . 11 , 766 ( 2020 ) . 25 . Nguyen - Van - Tam , J . S . et al . Minimal transmission in an influenza A ( H3N2 ) human challenge - transmission model within a controlled exposure environment . PLoS Pathog . 16 , e1008704 ( 2020 ) . 26 . Yang , Y . et al . The transmissibility and control of pandemic influenza A ( H1N1 ) virus . Science 326 , 729 – 733 ( 2009 ) . 27 . Liu , Y . , Eggo , R . M . & Kucharski , A . J . Secondary attack rate and superspreading events for SARS - CoV - 2 . Lancet 395 , e47 ( 2020 ) . 28 . Siegel , J . D . , Rhinehart , E . , Jackson , M . & Chiarello , L . 2007 guideline for isolation precautions : preventing transmission of infectious agents in health care settings . Am . J . Infect . Control . 35 , S65 – S164 ( 2007 ) . 29 . Xiao , F . et al . Evidence for gastrointestinal infection of SARS - CoV - 2 . Gastroenterology 158 , 1831 – 1833 e3 ( 2020 ) . 30 . Minodier , L . et al . Clinical and virological factors associated with gastrointestinal symptoms in patients with acute respiratory infection : a two - year prospective study in general practice medicine . BMC Infect . Dis . 17 , 729 ( 2017 ) . 31 . Johnson , D . , Lynch , R . , Marshall , C . , Mead , K . & Hirst , D . Aerosol generation by modern flush toilets . Aerosol Sci . Technol . 47 , 1047 – 1057 ( 2013 ) . 32 . Colavita , F . et al . SARS - CoV - 2 isolation from ocular secretions of a patient with COVID - 19 in Italy with prolonged viral RNA detection . Ann . Intern . Med . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 7326 / M20 - 1176 ( 2020 ) . 33 . Bischoff , W . E . , Reid , T . , Russell , G . B . & Peters , T . R . Transocular entry of seasonal influenza - attenuated virus aerosols and the efficacy of N95 respirators , surgical masks , and eye protection in humans . J . Infect . Dis . 204 , 193 – 199 ( 2011 ) . 34 . Milton , D . K . A rosetta stone for understanding infectious drops and aerosols . J . Pediatric Infect . Dis . Soc . 9 , 413 – 415 ( 2020 ) . 35 . U . S . Department of Health and Human Services , Centers for Disease Control and Prevention . Guidelines for environmental infection control in health - care facilities . Recommendations of CDC and the Healthcare Infection Control Practices Advisory Committee ( HICPAC ) . https : / / www . cdc . gov / infectioncontrol / guidelines / environmental / index . html ( 2003 ) . 36 . Lei , H . et al . Routes of transmission of influenza A H1N1 , SARS CoV , and norovirus in air cabin : comparative analyses . Indoor Air 28 , 394 – 403 ( 2018 ) . 37 . British Columbia Centre for Disease Control . About COVID - 19 : How it Spreads . http : / / www . bccdc . ca / health - info / diseases - conditions / covid - 19 / about - covid - 19 / how - it - spreads ( 2020 ) . 38 . World Health Organization . Modes of transmission of virus causing COVID - 19 : implications for IPC precaution recommendations : scientific brief , 27 March 2020 . https : / / apps . who . int / iris / handle / 10665 / 331616 ( 2020 ) . 39 . World Health Organization . Transmission of SARS - CoV - 2 : implications for infection prevention precautions : scientific brief , 9 July 2020 . https : / / apps . who . int / iris / handle / 10665 / 333114 ( 2020 ) . www . nature . com / nrmicro R e v i e w s 542 | August 2021 | volume 19 0123456789 ( ) ; : 40 . Zhang , N . et al . Close contact behavior in indoor environment and transmission of respiratory infection . Indoor Air 30 , 645 – 661 ( 2020 ) . 41 . Li , Y . et al . Role of ventilation in airborne transmission of infectious agents in the built environment - a multidisciplinary systematic review . Indoor Air 17 , 2 – 18 ( 2007 ) . 42 . Wells , W . F . On air - borne infection : study II . Droplets and droplet nuclei . Am . J . Hyg . 20 , 611 – 618 ( 1934 ) . 43 . Goldmann , D . A . Epidemiology and prevention of pediatric viral respiratory infections in health - care institutions . Emerg . Infect . Dis . 7 , 249 – 253 ( 2001 ) . 44 . Goldmann , D . A . Transmission of viral respiratory infections in the home . Pediatr . Infect . Dis . J . 19 , S97 – S102 ( 2000 ) . 45 . Gralton , J . , Tovey , E . , McLaws , M . L . & Rawlinson , W . D . The role of particle size in aerosolised pathogen transmission : a review . J . Infect . 62 , 1 – 13 ( 2011 ) . 46 . Duguid , J . P . The size and the duration of air - carriage of respiratory droplets and droplet - nuclei . J . Hyg . 44 , 471 – 479 ( 1946 ) . 47 . Hatch , T . F . Behavior of microscopic particles in the air and in the respiratory system in Aerobiology ( ed . Forest R . Moulton ) 102 – 105 ( American Association for the Advancement of Science , 1942 ) . 48 . Hinds , W . C . Aerosol Technology : Properties , Behavior , and Measurement of Airborne Particles ( John Wiley & Sons , 2012 ) . 49 . Nicas , M . & Jones , R . M . Relative contributions of four exposure pathways to influenza infection risk . Risk Anal . 29 , 1292 – 1303 ( 2009 ) . 50 . Roy , C . J . & Milton , D . K . Airborne transmission of communicable infection - The elusive pathway . N . Engl . J . Med . 350 , 1710 – 1712 ( 2004 ) . 51 . Knight , V . Viruses as agents of airborne contagion . Ann . N . Y . Acad . Sci . 353 , 147 – 156 ( 1980 ) . 52 . National Academies of Sciences , Engineering , Medicine . Airborne Transmission of SARS - CoV - 2 : Proceedings of a Workshop — in Brief ( eds Shelton - Davenport , M . , Pavlin , J . , Saunders , J . & Staudt , A . ) ( The National Academies Press , 2020 ) . 53 . Bourouiba , L . Turbulent gas clouds and respiratory pathogen emissions : potential implications for reducing transmission of COVID - 19 . JAMA 323 , 1838 – 1838 ( 2020 ) . 54 . Lu , J . et al . COVID - 19 outbreak associated with air conditioning in restaurant , Guangzhou , China , 2020 . Emerg . Infect . Dis . 26 , 1628 – 1631 ( 2020 ) . 55 . Leung , N . H . et al . Quantification of influenza virus RNA in aerosols in patient rooms . PLoS ONE 11 , e0148669 ( 2016 ) . 56 . Bischoff , W . E . , Swett , K . , Leng , I . & Peters , T . R . Exposure to influenza virus aerosols during routine patient care . J . Infect . Dis . 207 , 1037 – 1046 ( 2013 ) . 57 . Bloch , A . B . et al . Measles outbreak in a pediatric practice : airborne transmission in an office setting . Pediatrics 75 , 676 – 683 ( 1985 ) . 58 . Remington , P . L . , Hall , W . N . , Davis , I . H . , Herald , A . & Gunn , R . A . Airborne transmission of measles in a physician’s office . JAMA 253 , 1574 – 1577 ( 1985 ) . 59 . Yu , I . T . et al . Evidence of airborne transmission of the severe acute respiratory syndrome virus . N . Engl . J . Med . 350 , 1731 – 1739 ( 2004 ) . 60 . Sawyer , M . H . , Chamberlin , C . J . , Wu , Y . N . , Aintablian , N . & Wallace , M . R . Detection of varicella - zoster virus DNA in air samples from hospital rooms . J . Infect . Dis . 169 , 91 – 94 ( 1994 ) . 61 . Xiao , S . , Li , Y . , Sung , M . , Wei , J . & Yang , Z . A study of the probable transmission routes of MERS - CoV during the first hospital outbreak in the Republic of Korea . Indoor Air 28 , 51 – 63 ( 2018 ) . 62 . Fennelly , K . P . Particle sizes of infectious aerosols : implications for infection control . Lancet Respir . Med . 8 , P914 – 924 ( 2020 ) . 63 . Couch , R . B . , Cate , T . R . , Douglas , R . G . , Gerone , P . J . & Knight , V . Effect of route of inoculation on experimental respiratory viral disease in volunteers and evidence for airborne transmission . Bacteriol . Rev . 30 , 517 – 529 ( 1966 ) . 64 . Alford , R . H . , Kasel , J . A . , Gerone , P . J . & Knight , V . Human influenza resulting from aerosol inhalation . Proc . Soc . Exp . Biol . Med . 122 , 800 – 804 ( 1966 ) . 65 . Henle , W . , Henle , G . , Stokes , J . Jr . & Maris , E . P . Experimental exposure of human subjects to viruses of influenza . J . Immunol . 52 , 145 – 165 ( 1946 ) . 66 . Teunis , P . F . , Brienen , N . & Kretzschmar , M . E . High infectivity and pathogenicity of influenza A virus via aerosol and droplet transmission . Epidemics 2 , 215 – 222 ( 2010 ) . 67 . Varble , A . et al . Influenza A virus transmission bottlenecks are defined by infection route and recipient host . Cell Host Microbe 16 , 691 – 700 ( 2014 ) . 68 . Frise , R . et al . Contact transmission of influenza virus between ferrets imposes a looser bottleneck than respiratory droplet transmission allowing propagation of antiviral resistance . Sci . Rep . 6 , 29796 ( 2016 ) . 69 . Spicknall , I . H . et al . Informing optimal environmental influenza interventions : how the host , agent , and environment alter dominant routes of transmission . PLoS Comput . Biol . 6 , e1000969 ( 2010 ) . 70 . Minhaz Ud - Dean , S . M . Structural explanation for the effect of humidity on persistence of airborne virus : seasonality of influenza . J . Theor . Biol . 264 , 822 – 829 ( 2010 ) . 71 . Ausar , S . F . et al . Analysis of the thermal and pH stability of human respiratory syncytial virus . Mol . Pharm . 2 , 491 – 499 ( 2005 ) . 72 . Ijaz , M . K . , Brunner , A . H . , Sattar , S . A . , Nair , R . C . & Johnson - Lussenburg , C . M . Survival characteristics of airborne human coronavirus 229E . J . Gen . Virol . 66 , 2743 – 2748 ( 1985 ) . 73 . Bajimaya , S . , Frankl , T . , Hayashi , T . & Takimoto , T . Cholesterol is required for stability and infectivity of influenza A and respiratory syncytial viruses . Virology 510 , 234 – 241 ( 2017 ) . 74 . Mateu , M . G . Assembly , stability and dynamics of virus capsids . Arch . Biochem . Biophys . 531 , 65 – 79 ( 2013 ) . 75 . Saha , B . , Wong , C . M . & Parks , R . J . The adenovirus genome contributes to the structural stability of the virion . Viruses 6 , 3563 – 3583 ( 2014 ) . 76 . Gerba , C . P . & Betancourt , W . Q . Viral aggregation : impact on virus behavior in the environment . Environ . Sci . Technol . 51 , 7318 – 7325 ( 2017 ) . 77 . Bauer , D . W . et al . Exploring the balance between DNA pressure and capsid stability in herpesviruses and phages . J . Virol . 89 , 9288 – 9298 ( 2015 ) . 78 . Poon , L . L . et al . Quantifying influenza virus diversity and transmission in humans . Nat . Genet . 48 , 195 – 200 ( 2016 ) . 79 . Russell , C . A . et al . The potential for respiratory droplet - transmissible A / H5N1 influenza virus to evolve in a mammalian host . Science 336 , 1541 – 1547 ( 2012 ) . 80 . Van Hoeven , N . et al . Human HA and polymerase subunit PB2 proteins confer transmission of an avian influenza virus through the air . Proc . Natl Acad . Sci . USA 106 , 3366 – 3371 ( 2009 ) . 81 . Schrauwen , E . J . & Fouchier , R . A . Host adaptation and transmission of influenza A viruses in mammals . Emerg . Microbes Infect . 3 , e9 ( 2014 ) . 82 . Gao , Y . et al . Identification of amino acids in HA and PB2 critical for the transmission of H5N1 avian influenza viruses in a mammalian host . PLoS Pathog . 5 , e1000709 ( 2009 ) . 83 . Pica , N . & Bouvier , N . M . Environmental factors affecting the transmission of respiratory viruses . Curr . Opin . Virol . 2 , 90 – 95 ( 2012 ) . 84 . Weber , T . P . & Stilianakis , N . I . Inactivation of influenza A viruses in the environment and modes of transmission : a critical review . J . Infect . 57 , 361 – 373 ( 2008 ) . 85 . Sattar , S . A . et al . Activity of an alcohol - based hand gel against human adeno - , rhino - , and rotaviruses using the fingerpad method . Infect . Control . Hosp . Epidemiol . 21 , 516 – 519 ( 2000 ) . 86 . Luongo , J . C . et al . Role of mechanical ventilation in the airborne transmission of infectious agents in buildings . Indoor Air 26 , 666 – 678 ( 2016 ) . 87 . Sze - To , G . N . , Yang , Y . , Kwan , J . K . , Yu , S . C . & Chao , C . Y . Effects of surface material , ventilation , and human behavior on indirect contact transmission risk of respiratory infection . Risk Anal . 34 , 818 – 830 ( 2014 ) . 88 . Lowen , A . C . , Steel , J . , Mubareka , S . & Palese , P . High temperature ( 30 degrees C ) blocks aerosol but not contact transmission of influenza virus . J . Virol . 82 , 5650 – 5652 ( 2008 ) . 89 . Tamerius , J . D . et al . Environmental predictors of seasonal influenza epidemics across temperate and tropical climates . PLoS Pathog . 9 , e1003194 ( 2013 ) . 90 . Moriyama , M . , Hugentobler , W . J . & Iwasaki , A . Seasonality of respiratory viral infections . Annu . Rev . Virol . 7 , 83 – 101 ( 2020 ) . 91 . Hui , K . P . Y . et al . Tropism , replication competence , and innate immune responses of the coronavirus SARS - CoV - 2 in human respiratory tract and conjunctiva : an analysis in ex - vivo and in - vitro cultures . Lancet Respir . Med . 8 , 687 – 695 ( 2020 ) . 92 . Tsang , T . K . et al . Influenza a virus shedding and infectivity in households . J . Infect . Dis . 212 , 1420 – 1428 ( 2015 ) . 93 . Leung , N . H . L . et al . Respiratory virus shedding in exhaled breath and efficacy of face masks . Nat . Med . 26 , 676 – 680 ( 2020 ) . 94 . Schwarz , K . , Biller , H . , Windt , H . , Koch , W . & Hohlfeld , J . M . Characterization of exhaled particles from the healthy human lung – a systematic analysis in relation to pulmonary function variables . J . Aerosol Med . Pulm . Drug Deliv . 23 , 371 – 379 ( 2010 ) . 95 . He , X . et al . Temporal dynamics in viral shedding and transmissibility of COVID - 19 . Nat . Med . 26 , 672 – 675 ( 2020 ) . 96 . Cevik , M . et al . SARS - CoV - 2 , SARS - CoV , and MERS - CoV viral load dynamics , duration of viral shedding , and infectiousness : a systematic review and meta - analysis . Lancet Microbe 2 , E12 – E22 ( 2020 ) . 97 . Byambasuren , O . et al . Estimating the extent of asymptomatic COVID - 19 and its potential for community transmission : systematic review and meta - analysis . J . Assoc . Med . Microbiol . Infect . Dis . Can . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1101 / 2020 . 05 . 10 . 20097543 ( 2020 ) . 98 . Maier , H . E . et al . Pre - existing anti - neuraminidase antibodies are associated with shortened duration of influenza A ( H1N1 ) pdm virus shedding and illness in naturally infected adults . Clin . Infect . Dis . 70 , 2290 – 2297 ( 2019 ) . 99 . Yan , J . et al . Infectious virus in exhaled breath of symptomatic seasonal influenza cases from a college community . Proc . Natl Acad . Sci . USA 115 , 1081 – 1086 ( 2018 ) . 100 . Hou , Y . J . et al . SARS - CoV - 2 reverse genetics reveals a variable infection gradient in the respiratory tract . Cell 182 , 429 – 446 . e14 ( 2020 ) . 101 . Long , J . S . , Mistry , B . , Haslam , S . M . & Barclay , W . S . Host and viral determinants of influenza A virus species specificity . Nat . Rev . Microbiol . 17 , 67 – 81 ( 2018 ) . 102 . Smith , H . Human Respiratory Tract Model for Radiological Protection . Report No . 66 , ( The International Commission on Radiological Protection , 1994 ) . 103 . Horby , P . , Nguyen , N . Y . , Dunstan , S . J . & Baillie , J . K . An updated systematic review of the role of host genetics in susceptibility to influenza . Influenza Other Respir . Viruses 7 ( Suppl . 2 ) , 37 – 41 ( 2013 ) . 104 . Mossong , J . et al . Social contacts and mixing patterns relevant to the spread of infectious diseases . PLoS Med . 5 , e74 ( 2008 ) . 105 . Boone , S . A . & Gerba , C . P . Significance of fomites in the spread of respiratory and enteric viral disease . Appl . Environ . Microbiol . 73 , 1687 – 1696 ( 2007 ) . 106 . Otter , J . A . et al . Transmission of SARS and MERS coronaviruses and influenza virus in healthcare settings : the possible role of dry surface contamination . J . Hosp . Infect . 92 , 235 – 250 ( 2016 ) . 107 . Ikonen , N . et al . Deposition of respiratory virus pathogens on frequently touched surfaces at airports . BMC Infect . Dis . 18 , 437 ( 2018 ) . 108 . Mubareka , S . et al . Transmission of influenza virus via aerosols and fomites in the guinea pig model . J . Infect . Dis . 199 , 858 – 865 ( 2009 ) . 109 . Gwaltney , J . M . & Hendley , J . O . Transmission of experimental rhinovirus infection by contaminated surfaces . Am . J . Epidemiol . 116 , 828 – 833 ( 1982 ) . 110 . Barker , J . , Stevens , D . & Bloomfield , S . F . Spread and prevention of some common viral infections in community facilities and domestic homes . J . Appl . Microbiol . 91 , 7 – 21 ( 2001 ) . 111 . Hall , C . B . Respiratory syncytial virus : its transmission in the hospital environment . Yale J . Biol . Med . 55 , 219 – 223 ( 1982 ) . 112 . Heung , L . C . , Li , T . , Mak , S . K . & Chan , W . M . Prevalence of subclinical infection and transmission of severe acute respiratory syndrome ( SARS ) in a residential care home for the elderly . Hong . Kong Med . J . 12 , 201 – 207 ( 2006 ) . 113 . Morawska , L . et al . Size distribution and sites of origin of droplets expelled from the human respiratory tract during expiratory activities . J . Aerosol Sci . 40 , 256 – 269 ( 2009 ) . 114 . Fabian , P . , Brain , J . , Houseman , E . A . , Gern , J . & Milton , D . K . Origin of exhaled breath particles from healthy and human rhinovirus - infected subjects . J . Aerosol Med . Pulm . Drug Deliv . 24 , 137 – 147 ( 2011 ) . 115 . Gralton , J . , Tovey , E . R . , McLaws , M . L . & Rawlinson , W . D . Respiratory virus RNA is detectable in airborne and droplet particles . J . Med . Virol . 85 , 2151 – 2159 ( 2013 ) . 116 . Milton , D . K . , Fabian , M . P . , Cowling , B . J . , Grantham , M . L . & McDevitt , J . J . Influenza virus aerosols in human exhaled breath : particle size , culturability , and effect of surgical masks . PLoS Pathog . 9 , e1003205 ( 2013 ) . 117 . Dick , E . C . , Jennings , L . C . , Mink , K . A . , Wartgow , C . D . & Inhorn , S . L . Aerosol transmission of rhinovirus colds . J . Infect . Dis . 156 , 442 – 448 ( 1987 ) . NAtuRe RevIeWs | MICRoBIology R e v i e w s volume 19 | August 2021 | 543 0123456789 ( ) ; : 118 . Olsen , S . J . et al . Transmission of the severe acute respiratory syndrome on aircraft . N . Engl . J . Med . 349 , 2416 – 2422 ( 2003 ) . 119 . Andrewes , C . & Glover , R . Spread of infection from the respiratory tract of the ferret . I . Transmission of influenza A virus . Br . J . Exp . Pathol . 22 , 91 ( 1941 ) . 120 . Sia , S . F . et al . Pathogenesis and transmission of SARS - CoV - 2 in golden hamsters . Nature 583 , 834 – 838 ( 2020 ) . 121 . Moser , M . R . et al . An outbreak of influenza aboard a commercial airliner . Am . J . Epidemiol . 110 , 1 – 6 ( 1979 ) . 122 . Myatt , T . A . et al . Detection of airborne rhinovirus and its relation to outdoor air supply in office environments . Am . J . Respir . Crit . Care Med . 169 , 1187 – 1190 ( 2004 ) . 123 . Offeddu , V . , Yung , C . F . , Low , M . S . F . & Tam , C . C . Effectiveness of masks and respirators against respiratory infections in healthcare workers : a systematic review and meta - analysis . Clin . Infect . Dis . 65 , 1934 – 1942 ( 2017 ) . 124 . Jordan , W . S . Jr . The mechanism of spread of Asian influenza . Am . Rev . Respir . Dis . 83 , 29 – 40 ( 1961 ) . 125 . Cowling , B . J . et al . Facemasks and hand hygiene to prevent influenza transmission in households : a cluster randomized trial . Ann . Intern . Med . 151 , 437 – 446 ( 2009 ) . 126 . Killingley , B . et al . Use of a human influenza challenge model to assess person - to - person transmission : proof - of - concept study . J . Infect . Dis . 205 , 35 – 43 ( 2012 ) . 127 . Azimi , P . , Keshavarz , Z . , Cedeno Laurent , J . G . , Stephens , B . & Allen , J . G . Mechanistic transmission modeling of COVID - 19 on the Diamond Princess cruise ship demonstrates the importance of aerosol transmission . Proc . Natl Acad . Sci . USA 118 , e2015482118 ( 2021 ) . 128 . Jones , R . M . Relative contributions of transmission routes for COVID - 19 among healthcare personnel providing patient care . J . Occup . Environ . Hyg . 17 , 408 – 415 ( 2020 ) . 129 . Atkinson , M . P . & Wein , L . M . Quantifying the routes of transmission for pandemic influenza . Bull . Math . Biol . 70 , 820 – 867 ( 2008 ) . 130 . Jones , R . M . & Adida , E . Influenza infection risk and predominate exposure route : uncertainty analysis . Risk Anal . 31 , 1622 – 1631 ( 2011 ) . 131 . World Health Organization . Infection prevention and control of epidemic - and pandemic prone acute respiratory infections in health care - WHO guidelines . http : / / www . who . int / csr / bioriskreduction / infection _ control / publication / en / ( 2014 ) . 132 . Morawska , L . & Milton , D . K . It is time to address airborne transmission of COVID - 19 . Clin . Infect . Dis . 71 , 2311 – 2312 ( 2020 ) . 133 . World Health Organization . Report of the WHO - China Joint Mission on Coronavirus Disease 2019 ( COVID - 19 ) . https : / / www . who . int / publications - detail / report - of - the - who - china - joint - mission - on - coronavirus - disease - 2019 - ( covid - 19 ) ( 2020 ) . 134 . van Doremalen , N . et al . Aerosol and surface stability of SARS - CoV - 2 as compared with SARS - CoV - 1 . N . Engl . J . Med . 382 , 1564 – 1567 ( 2020 ) . 135 . Cheng , V . C . C . et al . Escalating infection control response to the rapidly evolving epidemiology of the coronavirus disease 2019 ( COVID - 19 ) due to SARS - CoV - 2 in Hong Kong . Infect . Control . Hosp . Epidemiol . 41 , 493 – 498 ( 2020 ) . 136 . Ong , S . W . X . et al . Air , surface environmental , and personal protective equipment contamination by severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 ( SARS - CoV - 2 ) from a symptomatic patient . JAMA 323 , 1610 – 1612 ( 2020 ) . 137 . Somsen , G . A . , van Rijn , C . , Kooij , S . , Bem , R . A . & Bonn , D . Small droplet aerosols in poorly ventilated spaces and SARS - CoV - 2 transmission . Lancet Respir . Med . 8 , 658 – 659 ( 2020 ) . 138 . Lindsley , W . G . et al . Viable influenza a virus in airborne particles from human coughs . J . Occup . Environ . Hyg . 12 , 107 – 113 ( 2015 ) . 139 . Xie , X . , Li , Y . , Chwang , A . T . , Ho , P . L . & Seto , W . H . How far droplets can move in indoor environments – revisiting the Wells evaporation - falling curve . Indoor Air 17 , 211 – 225 ( 2007 ) . 140 . Liu , Y . et al . Aerodynamic analysis of SARS - CoV - 2 in two Wuhan hospitals . Nature 582 , 557 – 560 ( 2020 ) . 141 . Kulkarni , H . et al . Evidence of respiratory syncytial virus spread by aerosol . time to revisit infection control strategies ? Am . J . Respir . Crit . Care Med . 194 , 308 – 316 ( 2016 ) . 142 . Kim , S . H . et al . Extensive viable Middle East respiratory syndrome ( MERS ) coronavirus contamination in air and surrounding environment in MERS isolation wards . Clin . Infect . Dis . 63 , 363 – 369 ( 2016 ) . 143 . Lednicky , J . A . et al . Viable SARS - CoV - 2 in the air of a hospital room with COVID - 19 patients . Int . J . Infect . Dis . 100 , 476 – 482 ( 2020 ) . 144 . Buonanno , G . , Morawska , L . & Stabile , L . Quantitative assessment of the risk of airborne transmission of SARS - CoV - 2 infection : Prospective and retrospective applications . Environ . Int . 145 , 106112 ( 2020 ) . 145 . Cai , J . et al . Indirect virus transmission in cluster of COVID - 19 cases , Wenzhou , China , 2020 . Emerg . Infect . Dis . 26 , 1343 – 1345 ( 2020 ) . 146 . Miller , S . L . et al . Transmission of SARS - CoV - 2 by inhalation of respiratory aerosol in the Skagit Valley Chorale superspreading event . Indoor Air https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1111 / ina . 12751 ( 2020 ) . 147 . Hamner , L . et al . High SARS - CoV - 2 attack rate following exposure at a choir practice - Skagit County , Washington , March 2020 . MMWR 69 , 606 – 610 ( 2020 ) . 148 . Li , Y . et al . Evidence for probable aerosol transmission of SARS - CoV - 2 in a poorly ventilated restaurant . Build . Environ . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . buildenv . 2021 . 107788 ( 2021 ) . 149 . Thomas , B . R . Does expert opinion trump evidence ? Clin . Infect . Dis . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1093 / cid / ciaa1115 ( 2020 ) . 150 . Chagla , Z . , Hota , S . , Khan , S . & Mertz , D . Re : it is time to address airborne transmission of COVID - 19 . Clin . Infect . Dis . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1093 / cid / ciaa1118 ( 2020 ) . 151 . Morawska , L . & Milton , D . K . Reply to Chagla et al . , and Thomas . Clin . Infect . Dis . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1093 / cid / ciaa1121 ( 2020 ) . 152 . Ma , J . et al . Coronavirus disease 2019 patients in earlier stages exhaled millions of severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 Per Hour . Clin . Infect . Dis . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1093 / cid / ciaa1283 ( 2020 ) . 153 . Chia , P . Y . et al . Detection of air and surface contamination by SARS - CoV - 2 in hospital rooms of infected patients . Nat . Commun . 11 , 2800 ( 2020 ) . 154 . Guo , Z . D . et al . Aerosol and surface distribution of severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 in hospital wards , Wuhan , China , 2020 . Emerg . Infect . Dis . 26 , 1583 – 1591 ( 2020 ) . 155 . Barclay , W . S . et al . Investigating SARS - CoV - 2 surface and air contamination in an acute healthcare setting during the peak of the COVID - 19 pandemic in London . Clin . Infect . Dis . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1093 / cid / ciaa905 ( 2020 ) . 156 . Santarpia , J . L . et al . Aerosol and surface contamination of SARS - CoV - 2 observed in quarantine and isolation care . Sci . Rep . 10 , 12732 ( 2020 ) . 157 . Bullard , J . et al . Predicting infectious SARS - CoV - 2 from diagnostic samples . Clin . Infect . Dis . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1093 / cid / ciaa638 ( 2020 ) . 158 . Jang , S . , Han , S . H . & Rhee , J . Y . Cluster of coronavirus disease associated with fitness dance classes , South Korea . Emerg . Infect . Dis . 26 , 1917 – 1920 ( 2020 ) . 159 . Leclerc , Q . et al . What settings have been linked to SARS - CoV - 2 transmission clusters ? [ version 1 ; peer review : 1 approved with reservations ] . Wellcome Open Res . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 12688 / wellcomeopenres . 15889 . 2 ( 2020 ) . 160 . Tellier , R . Review of aerosol transmission of influenza A virus . Emerg . Infect . Dis . 12 , 1657 – 1662 ( 2006 ) . 161 . Xie , C . et al . Detection of influenza and other respiratory viruses in air sampled from a university campus : a longitudinal study . Clin . Infect . Dis . 70 , 580 – 858 ( 2019 ) . 162 . Wong , B . C . et al . Possible role of aerosol transmission in a hospital outbreak of influenza . Clin . Infect . Dis . 51 , 1176 – 1183 ( 2010 ) . 163 . Wells , W . F . & Brown , H . W . Recovery of influenza virus suspended in air . Science 84 , 68 – 69 ( 1936 ) . 164 . Coleman , K . K . et al . Bioaerosol sampling for respiratory viruses in Singapore’s mass rapid transit network . Sci . Rep . 8 , 17476 ( 2018 ) . 165 . Lindsley , W . G . et al . Distribution of airborne influenza virus and respiratory syncytial virus in an urgent care medical clinic . Clin . Infect . Dis . 50 , 693 – 698 ( 2010 ) . 166 . Leclair , J . M . , Zaia , J . A . , Levin , M . J . , Congdon , R . G . & Goldmann , D . A . Airborne transmission of chickenpox in a hospital . N . Engl . J . Med . 302 , 450 – 453 ( 1980 ) . 167 . Thomson , F . The aerial conveyance of infection . Lancet 183 , 1669 – 1673 ( 1914 ) . 168 . Riley , R . L . et al . Aerial dissemination of pulmonary tuberculosis . A two - year study of contagion in a tuberculosis ward . Am . J . Hyg . 70 , 185 – 196 ( 1959 ) . 169 . Wong , T . W . et al . Cluster of SARS among medical students exposed to single patient , Hong Kong . Emerg . Infect . Dis . 10 , 269 – 276 ( 2004 ) . 170 . Liu , L . , Li , Y . , Nielsen , P . V . , Wei , J . & Jensen , R . L . Short - range airborne transmission of expiratory droplets between two people . Indoor Air 27 , 452 – 462 ( 2017 ) . 171 . World Health Organization . Epidemic - prone and pandemic - prone acute respiratory diseases . Summary guidance : Infection prevention & control in health - care facilities . https : / / www . who . int / csr / resources / publications / aidememoireepidemicpandemid / en / ( 2007 ) . 172 . World Health Organization . WHO Guidelines on Hand Hygiene in Health Care ( World Health Organization , 2009 ) . 173 . Suchomel , M . , Steinmann , J . & Kampf , G . Efficacies of the original and modified WHO - recommended hand rub formulations . J . Hosp . Infect . 106 , 264 – 270 ( 2020 ) . 174 . Cowling , B . J . et al . Aerosol transmission is an important mode of influenza A virus spread . Nat . Commun . 4 , 1935 ( 2013 ) . 175 . World Health Organization . Infection prevention and control during health care when novel coronavirus ( nCoV ) infection is suspected : interim guidance ( March 2020 ) . https : / / www . who . int / publications / i / item / 10665 - 331495 ( 2020 ) . 176 . World Health Organization . Advice on the use of masks in the context of COVID - 19 : Interim guidance ( 5 June 2020 ) . Report no . WHO / 2019 - nCov / IPC _ Masks / 2020 . 4 ( World Health Organization , 2020 ) . 177 . Kwok , Y . L . A . , Gralton , J . & McLaws , M . - L . Face touching : a frequent habit that has implications for hand hygiene . Am . J . Infect . Control . 43 , 112 – 114 ( 2015 ) . 178 . Diaz , K . T . & Smaldone , G . C . Quantifying exposure risk : surgical masks and respirators . Am . J . Infect . Control . 38 , 501 – 508 ( 2010 ) . 179 . Ueki , H . et al . Effectiveness of face masks in preventing airborne transmission of SARS - CoV - 2 . mSphere https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1128 / mSphere . 00637 - 20 ( 2020 ) . 180 . Chu , D . K . et al . Physical distancing , face masks , and eye protection to prevent person - to - person transmission of SARS - CoV - 2 and COVID - 19 : a systematic review and meta - analysis . Lancet 395 , 1973 – 1987 ( 2020 ) . 181 . Bakhit , M . et al . Downsides of face masks and possible mitigation strategies : a systematic review and meta - analysis . BMJ Open https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1101 / 2020 . 06 . 16 . 20133207 ( 2021 ) . 182 . Kampf , G . , Todt , D . , Pfaender , S . & Steinmann , E . Persistence of coronaviruses on inanimate surfaces and their inactivation with biocidal agents . J . Hosp . Infect . 104 , 246 – 251 ( 2020 ) . 183 . Greatorex , J . S . et al . Effectiveness of common household cleaning agents in reducing the viability of human influenza A / H1N1 . PLoS ONE 5 , e8987 ( 2010 ) . 184 . Wei , J . & Li , Y . Airborne spread of infectious agents in the indoor environment . Am . J . Infect . Control . 44 , S102 – S108 ( 2016 ) . 185 . Ibfelt , T . , Engelund , E . H . , Schultz , A . C . & Andersen , L . P . Effect of cleaning and disinfection of toys on infectious diseases and micro - organisms in daycare nurseries . J . Hosp . Infect . 89 , 109 – 115 ( 2015 ) . 186 . Atkinson , J . et al . Natural ventilation for infection control in health - care settings : WHO guidelines 2009 . https : / / www . who . int / water _ sanitation _ health / publications / natural _ ventilation / en / ( 2009 ) . 187 . Sehulster , L . M . et al . Guidelines for Environmental Infection Control in Health - Care Facilities . Recommendations of CDC and the Healthcare Infection Control Practices Advisory Committee ( HICPAC ) . https : / / www . cdc . gov / infectioncontrol / pdf / guidelines / environmental - guidelines - P . pdf ( 2004 ) . 188 . Sundell , J . et al . Ventilation rates and health : multidisciplinary review of the scientific literature . Indoor Air 21 , 191 – 204 ( 2011 ) . 189 . Chen , C . , Zhao , B . , Yang , X . & Li , Y . Role of two - way airflow owing to temperature difference in severe acute respiratory syndrome transmission : revisiting the largest nosocomial severe acute respiratory syndrome outbreak in Hong Kong . J . R . Soc . Interface 8 , 699 – 710 ( 2011 ) . 190 . Sze To , G . N . , Wan , M . P . , Chao , C . Y . H . , Fang , L . & Melikov , A . Experimental study of dispersion and deposition of expiratory aerosols in aircraft cabins and impact on infectious disease transmission . Aerosol Sci . Technol . 43 , 466 – 485 ( 2009 ) . www . nature . com / nrmicro R e v i e w s 544 | August 2021 | volume 19 0123456789 ( ) ; : 191 . Nardell , E . A . , Keegan , J . , Cheney , S . A . & Etkind , S . C . Airborne infection . Theoretical limits of protection achievable by building ventilation . Am . Rev . Respir . Dis . 144 , 302 – 306 ( 1991 ) . 192 . Memarzadeh , F . & Xu , W . Role of air changes per hour ( ACH ) in possible transmission of airborne infections . Build . Simul . 5 , 15 – 28 ( 2012 ) . 193 . Nardell , E . A . & Nathavitharana , R . R . Airborne spread of SARS - CoV - 2 and a potential role for air disinfection . JAMA 324 , 141 – 142 ( 2020 ) . 194 . Centers for Disease Control and Prevention . Environmental Control for Tuberculosis : Basic Upper - Room Ultraviolet Germicidal Irradiation Guidelines for Healthcare Settings . https : / / www . cdc . gov / niosh / docs / 2009 - 105 / default . html ( 2009 ) . 195 . Reed , N . G . The History of ultraviolet germicidal irradiation for air disinfection . Public . Health Rep . 125 , 15 – 27 ( 2010 ) . 196 . Wells , W . F . , Wells , M . W . & Wilder , T . S . The environmental control of epidemic contagion : I . An epidemiologic study of radiant disinfection of air in day schools . Am . J . Epidemiol . 35 , 97 – 121 ( 1942 ) . 197 . Dancer , S . J . Controlling hospital - acquired infection : focus on the role of the environment and new technologies for decontamination . Clin . Microbiol . Rev . 27 , 665 – 690 ( 2014 ) . 198 . Bedell , K . , Buchaklian , A . H . & Perlman , S . Efficacy of an automated multiple emitter whole - room ultraviolet - C disinfection system against coronaviruses MHV and MERS - CoV . Infect . Control . Hosp . Epidemiol . 37 , 598 – 599 ( 2016 ) . 199 . Mills , D . , Harnish , D . A . , Lawrence , C . , Sandoval - Powers , M . & Heimbuch , B . K . Ultraviolet germicidal irradiation of influenza - contaminated N95 filtering facepiece respirators . Am . J . Infect . Control . 46 , e49 – e55 ( 2018 ) . 200 . Seresirikachorn , K . et al . Decontamination and reuse of surgical masks and N95 filtering facepiece respirators during the COVID - 19 pandemic : a systematic review . Infect . Control . Hosp . Epidemiol . 42 , 25 – 30 ( 2020 ) . 201 . International Commission on Illumination . CIE position statement on ultraviolet ( UV ) radiation to manage the risk of COVID - 19 transmission . http : / / cie . co . at / publications / cie - position - statement - use - ultraviolet - uv - radiation - manage - risk - covid - 19 - transmission ( 2020 ) . 202 . Gwaltney , J . M . , Jr . Moskalski , P . B . & Hendley , J . O . Interruption of experimental rhinovirus transmission . J . Infect . Dis . 142 , 811 – 815 ( 1980 ) . 203 . Wong , V . W . , Cowling , B . J . & Aiello , A . E . Hand hygiene and risk of influenza virus infections in the community : a systematic review and meta - analysis . Epidemiol . Infect . 142 , 922 – 932 ( 2014 ) . 204 . Thangavel , R . R . & Bouvier , N . M . Animal models for influenza virus pathogenesis , transmission , and immunology . J . Immunol . Methods 410 , 60 – 79 ( 2014 ) . 205 . Lowen , A . C . , Mubareka , S . , Tumpey , T . M . , Garcia - Sastre , A . & Palese , P . The guinea pig as a transmission model for human influenza viruses . Proc . Natl Acad . Sci . USA 103 , 9988 – 9992 ( 2006 ) . 206 . Sutton , T . C . & Subbarao , K . Development of animal models against emerging coronaviruses : from SARS to MERS coronavirus . Virology 479 - 480 , 247 – 258 ( 2015 ) . 207 . Lakdawala , S . S . & Menachery , V . D . The search for a COVID - 19 animal model . Science 368 , 942 – 943 ( 2020 ) . 208 . McCray , P . B . Jr . et al . Lethal infection of K18 - hACE2 mice infected with severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus . J . Virol . 81 , 813 – 821 ( 2007 ) . 209 . Nishiura , H . , Yen , H . L . & Cowling , B . J . Sample size considerations for one - to - one animal transmission studies of the influenza A viruses . PLoS ONE 8 , e55358 ( 2013 ) . 210 . Belser , J . A . , Maines , T . R . , Katz , J . M . & Tumpey , T . M . Considerations regarding appropriate sample size for conducting ferret transmission experiments . Future Microbiol . 8 , 961 – 965 ( 2013 ) . 211 . Delamater , P . L . , Street , E . J . , Leslie , T . F . , Yang , Y . T . & Jacobsen , K . H . Complexity of the basic reproduction number ( R0 ) . Emerg . Infect . Dis . 25 , 1 – 4 ( 2019 ) . 212 . Reis , J . & Shaman , J . Simulation of four respiratory viruses and inference of epidemiological parameters . Infect . Dis . Model . 3 , 23 – 34 ( 2018 ) . 213 . Spencer , J . et al . Epidemiological parameter review and comparative dynamics of influenza , respiratory syncytial virus , rhinovirus , human coronavirus , and adenovirus . Preprint at https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1101 / 2020 . 02 . 04 . 20020404v1 ( 2020 ) . 214 . Guo , Z . et al . Epidemiological analysis of an outbreak of an adenovirus type 7 infection in a boot camp in China . PLoS ONE 15 , e0232948 ( 2020 ) . 215 . Park , M . , Cook , A . R . , Lim , J . T . , Sun , Y . & Dickens , B . L . A systematic review of COVID - 19 epidemiology based on current evidence . J . Clin . Med . 9 , 967 ( 2020 ) . 216 . Biggerstaff , M . , Cauchemez , S . , Reed , C . , Gambhir , M . & Finelli , L . Estimates of the reproduction number for seasonal , pandemic , and zoonotic influenza : a systematic review of the literature . BMC Infect . Dis . 14 , 480 ( 2014 ) . 217 . Nardone , A . et al . The comparative sero - epidemiology of varicella zoster virus in 11 countries in the European region . Vaccine 25 , 7866 – 7872 ( 2007 ) . 218 . Guerra , F . M . et al . The basic reproduction number ( R0 ) of measles : a systematic review . Lancet Infect . Dis . 17 , e420 – e428 ( 2017 ) . 219 . Goeyvaerts , N . et al . Estimating dynamic transmission model parameters for seasonal influenza by fitting to age and season - specific influenza - like illness incidence . Epidemics 13 , 1 – 9 ( 2015 ) . 220 . Zhang , J . et al . Changes in contact patterns shape the dynamics of the COVID - 19 outbreak in China . Science 368 , 1481 – 1486 ( 2020 ) . 221 . Kissler , S . M . , Tedijanto , C . , Goldstein , E . , Grad , Y . H . & Lipsitch , M . Projecting the transmission dynamics of SARS - CoV - 2 through the postpandemic period . Science 368 , 860 – 868 ( 2020 ) . 222 . Muller , N . F . et al . Characterising the epidemic spread of influenza A / H3N2 within a city through phylogenetics . PLoS Pathog . 16 , e1008984 ( 2020 ) . 223 . Lemey , P . et al . Unifying viral genetics and human transportation data to predict the global transmission dynamics of human influenza H3N2 . PLoS Pathog . 10 , e1003932 ( 2014 ) . 224 . van Dorp , L . et al . No evidence for increased transmissibility from recurrent mutations in SARS - CoV - 2 . Nat . Commun . 11 , 5986 ( 2020 ) . 225 . Lloyd - Smith , J . O . , Schreiber , S . J . , Kopp , P . E . & Getz , W . M . Superspreading and the effect of individual variation on disease emergence . Nature 438 , 355 – 359 ( 2005 ) . 226 . Adam , D . C . et al . Clustering and superspreading potential of SARS - CoV - 2 infections in Hong Kong . Nat . Med . 26 , 1714 – 1719 ( 2020 ) . 227 . Riley , S . et al . Transmission dynamics of the etiological agent of SARS in Hong Kong : Impact of public health interventions . Science 300 , 1961 – 1966 ( 2003 ) . 228 . Randolph , H . E . & Barreiro , L . B . Herd immunity : understanding COVID - 19 . Immunity 52 , 737 – 741 ( 2020 ) . 229 . Halloran , M . E . Secondary attack rate . In Encyclopedia of Biostatistics ( eds Armitage , P . & Colton , T . ) ( Wiley , 2005 ) . 230 . Tsang , T . K . , Lau , L . L . , Cauchemez , S . & Cowling , B . J . Household transmission of influenza virus . Trends Microbiol . 24 , 123 – 133 ( 2016 ) . 231 . Lau , L . L . et al . Household transmission of 2009 pandemic influenza A ( H1N1 ) : a systematic review and meta - analysis . Epidemiology 23 , 531 – 542 ( 2012 ) . 232 . Simpson , R . E . Infectiousness of communicable diseases in the household ( measles , chickenpox , and mumps ) . Lancet 2 , 549 – 554 ( 1952 ) . 233 . Cowling , B . J . et al . Comparative epidemiology of pandemic and seasonal influenza A in households . N . Engl . J . Med . 362 , 2175 – 2184 ( 2010 ) . 234 . Leitmeyer , K . & Adlhoch , C . Review article : influenza transmission on aircraft : a systematic literature review . Epidemiology 27 , 743 – 751 ( 2016 ) . 235 . Klick , B . , Leung , G . M . & Cowling , B . J . Optimal design of studies of influenza transmission in households . I : case - ascertained studies . Epidemiol . Infect . 140 , 106 – 114 ( 2012 ) . 236 . Leung , N . H . , Xu , C . , Ip , D . K . & Cowling , B . J . Review article : the fraction of influenza virus infections that are asymptomatic : a systematic review and meta - analysis . Epidemiology 26 , 862 – 872 ( 2015 ) . 237 . Cooney , M . K . , Fox , J . P . & Hall , C . E . The Seattle Virus Watch . VI . Observations of infections with and illness due to parainfluenza , mumps and respiratory syncytial viruses and Mycoplasma pneumoniae . Am . J . Epidemiol . 101 , 532 – 551 ( 1975 ) . 238 . Fox , J . P . , Cooney , M . K . & Hall , C . E . The Seattle Virus Watch . V . Epidemiologic observations of rhinovirus infections , 1965 – 1969 , in families with young children . Am . J . Epidemiol . 101 , 122 – 143 ( 1975 ) . 239 . Hall , C . B . et al . Respiratory syncytial virus infections within families . N . Engl . J . Med . 294 , 414 – 419 ( 1976 ) . 240 . Madewell , Z . J . , Yang , Y . , Longini , I . M . , Jr . Halloran , M . E . & Dean , N . E . Household transmission of SARS - CoV - 2 : a systematic review and meta - analysis . JAMA Netw . Open 3 , e2031756 ( 2020 ) . 241 . Banatvala , J . E . , Anderson , T . B . & Reiss , B . B . Parainfluenza infections in the community . BMJ 1 , 537 – 540 ( 1964 ) . 242 . Seward , J . F . , Zhang , J . X . , Maupin , T . J . , Mascola , L . & Jumaan , A . O . Contagiousness of varicella in vaccinated cases : a household contact study . JAMA 292 , 704 – 708 ( 2004 ) . 243 . Top , F . H . Measles in Detroit , 1935 — I , factors influencing the secondary attack rate among susceptibles at risk . Am . J . Public Health Nations Health 28 , 935 – 943 ( 1938 ) . 244 . Zhang , W . et al . Secondary transmission of coronavirus disease from presymptomatic persons , China . Emerg . Infect . Dis . 26 , 1924 – 1926 ( 2020 ) . 245 . Cauchemez , S . et al . Determinants of influenza transmission in South East Asia : insights from a household cohort study in Vietnam . PLoS Pathog . 10 , e1004310 ( 2014 ) . 246 . Welliver , R . et al . Effectiveness of oseltamivir in preventing influenza in household contacts : a randomized controlled trial . JAMA 285 , 748 – 754 ( 2001 ) . 247 . McCormick , J . B . , Halsey , N . & Rosenberg , R . Measles vaccine efficacy determined from secondary attack rates during a severe epidemic . J . Pediatr . 90 , 13 – 16 ( 1977 ) . 248 . Cauchemez , S . et al . Household transmission of 2009 pandemic influenza A ( H1N1 ) virus in the United States . N . Engl . J . Med . 361 , 2619 – 2627 ( 2009 ) . 249 . Lau , M . S . , Cowling , B . J . , Cook , A . R . & Riley , S . Inferring influenza dynamics and control in households . Proc . Natl Acad . Sci . USA . 112 , 9094 – 9099 ( 2015 ) . 250 . Wells , W . & Wells , M . Air - borne infection . J . Am . Med . Assoc . 107 , 1698 – 1703 ( 1936 ) . Acknowledgements This work was supported by the Theme - based Research Scheme ( project no . T11 - 712 / 19 - N ) from the Research Grants Council and the Collaborative Research Fund ( project no . C7025 - 16G ) from the University Grants Committee of Hong Kong . The author acknowledges B . Cowling for helpful discussions . Competing interests The author declares no competing interests . Peer review information Nature Reviews Microbiology thanks J . Tang , T . Tumpey and the other , anonymous , reviewer ( s ) for their contribution to the peer review of this work . Publisher’s note Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in published maps and institutional affiliations . Supplementary information The online version contains supplementary material available at https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1038 / s41579 - 021 - 00535 - 6 . © Springer Nature Limited 2021 NAtuRe RevIeWs | MICRoBIology R e v i e w s volume 19 | August 2021 | 545