JCB JCB : Review 445 The Rockefeller University Press $ 30 . 00 J . Cell Biol . Vol . 215 No . 4 445 – 456 https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1083 / jcb . 201609037 Introduction Multicellularity in the metazoan evolved by developing and di - versifying genes involved in cell differentiation , cell – cell com - munication , and cell adhesion ( Rokas , 2008 ) . Cell adhesion to the ECM and to neighboring cells allows cells of different lin - eages to interact at the organ level by facilitating the exchange of biochemical and biophysical information . The ECM of the metazoan is mainly composed of fibrous proteins ( e . g . , colla - gens and elastin ) that confer the ECM with tensile strength and elasticity , proteoglycans ( e . g . , perlecan and hyaluronan ) that allow interfibrillar slippage under tensile loads and thus confer the ECM with viscosity , and multiadhesive glycoproteins ( e . g . , fibronectin and laminins ) that bind proteoglycans and collagen fibers ( Mouw et al . , 2014 ) . ECM proteins are recognized by spe - cific cell surface receptors such as integrins , syndecans , CD44 , and dystroglycan . ECM receptors induce signaling pathways and facilitate the assembly of different ECM components into sheet - like fibrous structures ( basement membranes ) or seem - ingly chaotic meshworks of fibrils and fibers ( connective tissue ) whose biochemical composition , compliance , and geometric and topographic features in nanometer to micrometer scale vary and correlate with tissue - specific physiological functions ( Gasi - orowski et al . , 2013 ) . The complex biochemical and biophysical characteristics of the ECM contain a wealth of biological infor - mation that , in concert with soluble growth factors that are often immobilized within the ECM , exerts a profound impact on many cellular behaviors , including migration , proliferation , and differentiation . To detect and interpret the biological informa - tion in the ECM , cells adhere and transduce myosin - generated traction forces to the ECM via integrin - based adhesions and elicit a series of dynamic signaling events that are jointly termed mechanotransduction ( Hoffman et al . , 2011 ) . Integrin - medi - ated mechanotransduction commences with force transmission between cells and the ECM ( termed mechanotransmission ) , a process that occurs across the mechanosensitive , integrin - based adhesions . The mechanical load on the adhesion sites leads to force - induced functionalities , such as changes in protein con - formation or enzymatic reactions ( e . g . , kinase activities ) that in turn induce biochemical signals ( termed mechanosignaling ) . Finally , the mechanically induced biochemical signals generate appropriate cellular responses that adapt to physiological pro - cesses ( e . g . , polarity , migration , differentiation , and survival ) accordingly . In this review , we introduce the main concepts of integrin - mediated mechanotransduction , summarize recent progress on the underlying biophysical principles and the in vivo functional significance , and discuss how the viscoelasticity of the ECM influences integrin - mediated mechanotransduction and how its dysregulation impacts on cancer progression . Structure of integrin - based adhesions Integrins , which connect the ECM with intracellular actin cy - toskeleton and thereby mechanically integrate the extracellular and intracellular compartments , are heterodimeric transmem - brane receptors composed of α and β subunits . There are 24 different integrin receptors in mammals , each recognizing a specific set of ECM ligands ( Hynes , 2002 ) . Integrin - mediated adhesion starts with conformational changes in the integrin ectodomain ( integrin activation ) that shift integrins from a low - to high - affinity state for ligand binding ( Luo et al . , 2007 ; Su et al . , 2016 ) . Kindlin and talin bind integrin cytoplasmic tails ( with the exception of β 4 integrin tails ; de Pereda et al . , 2009 ) and promote integrin activation ( Calderwood et al . , Cells can detect and react to the biophysical proper - ties of the extracellular environment through integ - rin - based adhesion sites and adapt to the extracellular milieu in a process called mechanotransduction . At these adhesion sites , integrins connect the extracellu - lar matrix ( ECM ) with the F - actin cytoskeleton and transduce mechanical forces generated by the actin retrograde flow and myosin II to the ECM through mechanosensitive focal adhesion proteins that are col - lectively termed the “molecular clutch . ” The transmis - sion of forces across integrin - based adhesions establishes a mechanical reciprocity between the vis - coelasticity of the ECM and the cellular tension . During mechanotransduction , force allosterically alters the functions of mechanosensitive proteins within adhe - sions to elicit biochemical signals that regulate both rapid responses in cellular mechanics and long - term changes in gene expression . Integrin - mediated mechanotransduction plays important roles in devel - opment and tissue homeostasis , and its dysregulation is often associated with diseases . Integrin - mediated mechanotransduction Zhiqi Sun , Shengzhen S . Guo , and Reinhard Fässler Max Planck Institute of Biochemistry , 82152 Martinsried , Germany © 2016 Sun et al . This article is distributed under the terms of an Attribution – Noncommercial – Share Alike – No Mirror Sites license for the first six months after the publication date ( see http : / / www . rupress . org / terms ) . After six months it is available under a Creative Commons License ( Attribution – Noncommercial – Share Alike 3 . 0 Unported license , as described at http : / / creativecommons . org / licenses / by - nc - sa / 3 . 0 / ) . Correspondence to Zhiqi Sun : zsun @ biochem . mpg . de Abbreviations used : ABS , actin - binding site ; CAF , cancer - associated fibroblast ; FA , focal adhesion ; FB , fibrillar adhesion ; FN , fibronectin ; FRET , Förster reso - nance energy transfer ; hMSC , human mesenchymal stem cell ; MRTF , myocar - din - related transcription factor ; MTS , molecular tension sensor ; NA , nascent adhesion ; ROCK , Rho - associated coiled - coil containing protein kinase ; SRF , serum response factor ; THD , talin head domain ; VBS , vinculin - binding site . T H E J O U R N A L O F C E L L B I O L O G Y JCB • Volume 215 • NumBer 4 • 2016 446 2013 ) . Upon ligand binding , integrins recruit numerous pro - teins to their short cytoplasmic tails , resulting in the assembly of various adhesion structures that differ in their morphology and subcellular localization as well as in their protein compo - sition and mechanical properties ( Schiller and Fässler , 2013 ) . The first adhesion structure assembles at the leading edge of cell protrusions by nucleating three to six integrins interspaced by less than 70 nm into short - lived nascent adhesions ( NAs ; Fig . 1 ; Cavalcanti - Adam et al . , 2007 ; Hu et al . , 2007 ; Bachir et al . , 2014 ) . The mechanism by which integrins first assemble is unclear . Apart from their signaling function , NAs are able to transmit the retrograde pushing forces from the polymer - izing branched actin network in membrane protrusions to the ECM via mechanosensitive proteins such as talin and vinculin . The assembly of NAs between lamellipodium and lamellum correlates with the switch from a fast to a slow actin retro - grade flow rate caused by the transient coupling of integrins to F - actin ( Hu et al . , 2007 ) . This coupling is required for the assembly and turnover of NAs ( Alexandrova et al . , 2008 ; Thievessen et al . , 2013 ; Swaminathan et al . , 2016 ) . In turn , focal adhesion kinase ( FAK ) in NAs promotes actin dynamics by recruiting Arp2 / 3 , the major actin nucleator in the lamelli - podium ( Serrels et al . , 2007 ; Swaminathan et al . , 2016 ) . β - PIX and the kindlin – paxillin complex in NAs further promote Arp2 / 3 activity through activating the Rac1 GTPase ( Kuo et al . , 2011 ; Theodosiou et al . , 2016 ) . Most NAs are disassembled quickly , whereas a few of them grow in size along templates of actomyosin bundles into bigger focal adhesions ( FAs ) in the lamellum ( Fig . 1 ) . FA maturation is a coordinated process requiring further integrin clustering , F - actin bundling , and the reinforcement of the linkages between integrin and actomyosin ( Straight et al . , 2003 ; Choi et al . , 2008 ; Iskratsch et al . , 2013 ) . Behind the lamellum , the mechanical linkage between FAs and the contractile actomyosin bundles is relaxed and / or released , consequently leading to clathrin - dependent FA disassembly ( Ezratty et al . , 2009 ; Yu et al . , 2015 ) or the translocation of β 1 integrin – containing adhesions into central , fibrillar adhesions ( FBs ; Fig . 1 ; Zamir et al . , 2000 ; Sun et al . , 2016 ) . Although the lengths of integrin - based adhesions ranges from below 1 µm in NAs up to 8 µm in the elongated FAs and FBs , the breadth of integrin - based adhesions is usually below 1 µm , corresponding to the scale of the diameter of a single ECM fiber ( Gasiorowski et al . , 2013 ; Kim and Wirtz , 2013 ) . Therefore , individual adhe - sion structures can detect local ECM properties with subcellular precision in a biophysically inhomogeneous 3D environment ( Doyle et al . , 2015 ) . It is also important to note that there is no simple correlation between the adhesion size and the magnitude of the transmitted force ( Oakes et al . , 2012 ; Schiller et al . , 2013 ) , Figure 1 . Model of a migrating cell containing diverse integrin - based adhesion structures that transmit different levels of traction forces . Nascent ad - hesions ( NAs ) emerge at the leading edge of cell protrusions by nucleating multiple ligand - bond integrins that have been activated by talin and kindlin . Adhesome proteins such as vinculin are subsequently recruited to adhesion sites via talin in a tension - dependent manner or via paxillin in a tension - independent manner . NAs are dynamically coupled to the polymerizing branched actin network through proteins of the molecular clutch such as talin and vinculin , which convert the retrograde movement of polymerizing branched actin network into a protrusive force at the leading edge membrane and rearward traction force on the ECM . A small number of NAs matures into large focal adhesions ( FAs ) along actomyosin bundles in the lamella . Within mature FAs , the molecular clutch becomes strongly engaged by F - actin binding to the talin ABS2 and ABS3 sites and vinculin binding to VBS where high traction forces are transmitted across integrins , leading to catch bond formation between integrin and ligand . Behind the lamella , Kank2 is recruited to the FA belt , where it maintains talin in its active integrin - bond state and at the same time diminishes F - actin binding to talin ABS2 . Consequently , Kank2 decreases force transmission leading to the slip bond formation between integrin and its ligand and the translocation of FA belt - localized β 1 integrins into fibrillar ( or central ) adhesions . At the rear end of migrating cells , trailing edge FAs may apply such high traction forces that detach the cell rear , probably together with integrin - bound ECM fragments . Integrin - mediated mechanotransduction • Sun et al . 447 as small NAs may also transmit forces that are high enough to drive cell migration ( Beningo et al . , 2001 ) . Talin - based molecular clutch mediates mechanotransmission Activated integrins are dynamically coupled to the actomyosin system through integrin - and / or F - actin – binding proteins , such as talin and vinculin . These molecules belong to the molecu - lar clutch ( see text box ) that harnesses the power of the retro - grade actin flow generated by the actin polymerization against the leading - edge cell membrane and the contractile actomyosin movements generated by nonmuscle myosin II to pull on FAs to propel the cell body forward ( Mitchison and Kirschner , 1988 ; Chan and Odde , 2008 ; Giannone et al . , 2009 ; Swaminathan and Waterman , 2016 ) . The spatiotemporal regulation of the clutch engagement determines directional cell migration , for instance , in response to an ECM stiffness gradient in a process called durotaxis ( Lo et al . , 2000 ) . Talin plays a central role among the proteins that con - stitute the molecular clutch ( Fig . 2 A ) . Mammals have two talin paralogue genes , Talin - 1 and Talin - 2 , which share > 80 % homology and show different expression patterns . Although Talin - 1 is ubiquitously expressed , Talin - 2 is mainly expressed in muscle and neuronal cells . Talin consists of an N - terminal FERM ( four - point - one , ezrin , radixin , moesin ) domain , also called talin head domain ( THD ) , and a long C - terminal rod domain composed of 13 helical bundles ( R1 – R13 ) followed by a dimerization motif . The THD directly interacts with the membrane - proximal NPxY motif of β integrin tails , negatively charged lipids in the inner leaflet of the plasma membrane and the cortical F - actin network ( actin - binding site 1 [ ABS1 ] ) . The talin rod domain contains two additional F - actin – binding sites ( ABS2 and ABS3 ) , 11 vinculin - binding sites ( VBSs ) , and binding sites for regulatory proteins , including RIAM ( Rap1 – GTP - interacting adapter molecule ) , Kank ( KN motif and ankyrin repeat domains ) family proteins ( whose func - tions are discussed in the following paragraphs ) , and the Rho GTPase activating protein DLC1 ( deleted in liver cancer 1 ; Calderwood et al . , 2013 ; Sun et al . , 2016 ) . Talin adopts an autoinhibited conformation in the cytosol through an intramo - lecular interaction between the THD and the R9 domain that masks the integrin - binding site of the THD . Kank2 and RIAM interact with the talin rod and release Talin from autoinhibition ( Chang et al . , 2014 ; Sun et al . , 2016 ) . Negatively charged lip - ids such as PtdIns ( 4 , 5 ) P2 , synthesized by a FA - localized splice variant of phosphatidylinositol - 4 - phosphate 5 - kinase type I γ ( PIP KI γ 90 ) or the actin retrograde flow , may also facilitate talin activation at the plasma membrane ( Goksoy et al . , 2008 ; Zhu et al . , 2008a ; Legate et al . , 2011 ; Comrie et al . , 2015 ) . The engagement between talin and F - actin is likely initi - ated at the C - terminal ABS3 site . Although the talin ABS3 is not required for cell adhesion , ∼ 45 % of cells fail to assemble FAs when the function of ABS3 is impaired , suggesting an import - ant role of the ABS3 site in initiating force transmission , which may , at least partially , be compensated by unknown mech - anisms ( Atherton et al . , 2015 ) . Subsequent to ABS3 engage - ment , the R3 domain serves as the first mechanosensor because of its lowest mechanical stability among all domains in the talin rod ( Yao et al . , 2016 ) . Forces in the piconewton range lead to the stretching of the talin rod and the exposure ( and activation ) of the cryptic VBS in the R2R3 domain ( del Rio et al . , 2009 ; Yao et al . , 2014 ) . The subsequent vinculin binding to R2R3 triggers the engagement of talin ABS2 ( R4 – R8 ) with F - actin to further increase the force transmission across the talin – integrin complex . The increased force unfolds other helical bundles within the talin rod and exposes more cryptic VBSs . Eventu - ally , vinculin strengthens the talin – F - actin linkages by further recruiting F - actin ( Fig . 2 B ) . Interestingly , the R1 – R3 domains in talin - 1 and talin - 2 exhibit distinct mechanosensitivities that have consequences for the isoform - specific functions of talins . Unlike the cryptic VBS in the talin - 1 R1 – R3 domains , the VBS in the equivalent region of talin - 2 recruits vinculin in an ABS2 - and ABS3 - independent manner ( Austen et al . , 2015 ) . Furthermore , ABS2 and ABS3 in talin play distinct roles in mechanotransmission . Whereas ABS3 is required for high force transmission at the cell periph - ery , ABS2 plays important roles in sensing differences in ECM stiffness ( Atherton et al . , 2015 ; Austen et al . , 2015 ; Kumar et al . , 2016 ) . In mouse embryonic fibroblasts , talin seems to be less important for force transmission on soft substrates that have a Young’s elastic modulus below 10 kPa in comparison with stiffer substrates ( Elosegui - Artola et al . , 2016 ) , suggesting that other integrin - and F - actin - binding proteins such as kindlin ( Bledzka et al . , 2016 ) , α - actinin ( Roca - Cusachs et al . , 2013 ) , or the ILK ( integrin linked kinase ) – PIN CH – parvin complex ( Wickström et al . , 2010 ) may link integrin to F - actin and con - tribute to the molecular clutch under different rigidity regimes . The molecular clutch This concept was originally proposed in 1988 by Tim Mitchison and Marc Kirschner to explain how the actin retrograde flow exerts tension on the substrate ( Mitchison and Kirschner , 1988 ) . The molecular clutch generally refers to the mechanical linkage formed by dynamic asso - ciations between the ECM - bound integrins and the force - generating actomyosin cytoskeleton . Because integrin cytoplasmic domains do not contain an ABS , the clutch between integrins and actomyosin is mediated by integrin - and / or F - actin - binding proteins such as talin and vinculin . Talin directly interacts with the cytoplasmic domain of activated integrins and F - actin . The connection between integrins and F - actin can be further strengthened by vinculin that binds to talin and F - actin . Other proteins such as kindlin and α - actinin may also contribute to the molecular clutch . In situations where integrin - based adhesions are not connected to acto - myosin , the clutch is not engaged , the retrograde actin flow at the cell leading edge is fast , and traction forces are low or not even generated . The engagement of the clutch has two consequences : the kinetic power of the actin retrograde flow and actomyosin contractility are converted into a traction force that pulls on the ECM , and the polymerizing F - actin pushes the resistant plasma membrane at the cell leading edge forward . The molecular clutch is a highly tunable system that sensitive - ly responds to a wide range of ECM rigidities . On stiff substrates , fast mechanical loading rates on talin induce partial protein unfolding and expose cryptic VBS . Vinculin binding to talin reinforces the clutch by fur - ther elevating force transmission . On soft ECM substrates that are easily deformed , the slow mechanical loading rates on talin are not sufficient to induce vinculin - dependent clutch reinforcement , which keeps the trans - mitted force at a low level . The molecular clutch is a highly dynamic system . Clutch molecules exhibit fast exchange rates ( minute scale ) between FAs and their cytoso - lic pools , indicating that the mechanical linkages within the molecular clutch cannot be static . Furthermore , early study by Odde and colleagues predicted a “frictional slippage” model on stiff substrates caused by con - stant rupture of the molecular clutch under high mechanical loading rates ( Chan and Odde , 2008 ) . Although the probability of clutch rupture is reduced by the vinculin - dependent clutch reinforcement ( Elosegui - Artola et al . , 2016 ) , multiple slippage interfaces are still observed between different clutch molecules on stiff substrates , indicating that the force is transduced across the molecular clutch via transient linkages between different frictional interfaces in a “slip - stick” – like manner rather than via static connections ( Hu et al . , 2007 ) . JCB • Volume 215 • NumBer 4 • 2016 448 The activation of talin and the engagement of F - actin on talin are tightly coupled . RIAM activates talin and provides an immediate connection between activated talin and F - actin po - lymerization by recruiting the F - actin stabilizer and elongator VASP ( vasodilator - stimulated phosphoprotein ; Lafuente et al . , 2004 ; Worth et al . , 2010 ) . Such a rapid coupling may be es - sential for leukocyte β 2 integrins to mediate robust cell adhe - sion and spreading in the presence of shear stress exerted by the blood flow ( Klapproth et al . , 2015 ; Su et al . , 2015 ) . In con - trast to RIAM , Kank family proteins represent a novel type of talin activator that negatively regulates the connections between talin and F - actin . Kank family proteins consist of four members ( Kank1 – 4 ) in mammals and are evolutionarily conserved in metazoans . They are characterized by a short KN motif at the N terminus followed by several coiled - coil domains in the central part of the protein and five ankyrin repeats at the C - terminal end ( Zhu et al . , 2008b ) . Mutations in Kank family genes have been associated with nephrotic syndrome , which can also be caused by compromised integrin - mediated adhesion of podocytes to the glomerular basement membrane or by elevated RhoA sig - naling ( Gee et al . , 2015 ) . Kank proteins interact with liprin - β 1 through a unique coiled - coil domain and are recruited to a large protein complex containing liprin - β 1 , liprin - α 1 , ELKS , and LL5 β ( Lansbergen et al . , 2006 ; van der Vaart et al . , 2013 ) . In - terestingly , this multiprotein complex clusters in the proximity of mature FAs , where the complex on the one hand captures the microtubule plus ends by recruiting CLA SP proteins and mediates the local exocytosis of metalloprotease MMT - MP1 to promote FA disassembly , and on the other hand recruits KIF21a ( kinesin family member 21A ) through C - terminal ankyrin re - peats of Kank to restrict microtubule outgrowth at the cell pe - riphery ( van der Vaart et al . , 2013 ; Stehbens et al . , 2014 ) . Recent studies revealed that Kank proteins directly bind to the talin R7 domain through the KN motif and activate Talin at the periph - eral rim of FAs termed the FA belt ( Bouchet et al . , 2016 ; Sun et al . , 2016 ) . The binding of Kank family proteins to the talin R7 occurs in close proximity to the talin ABS2 and interferes with F - actin recruitment to ABS2 , resulting in reduced force transmission across talin and ECM - bound integrins , adhesion sliding , β 1 integrin translocation into fibrillar adhesion , and a reduction in migration speed ( Fig . 2 B ; Sun et al . , 2016 ) . The talin - based molecular clutch plays important roles in the 3D organization of FAs . Hundreds of different proteins are recruited to FAs and form a dynamic interaction network , collectively termed the “integrin adhesome” ( Winograd - Katz et al . , 2014 ) . Despite the molecular complexity , FAs exhibit a 3D , modular , nanometer - scale organization . Different func - tional modules in FAs are vertically laminated and mechani - cally linked in agreement with the molecular clutch model . The integrin layer spans ∼ 20 nm across the plasma membrane , which is followed by the integrin signaling module containing THD , FAK , and paxillin within 20 nm of the plasma mem - brane , and then a force transduction module containing the talin rod domain , vinculin , and the VASP – zyxin complex that are connected to F - actin ( Hu et al . , 2007 ; Kanchanawong et al . , 2010 ) . The vertical positioning of vinculin is controlled by its Figure 2 . Talin - based molecular clutch mediates mechanotransmission . ( A ) Domain organization of talin . The N - terminal talin head domain ( THD ) is an atypical FERM domain composed of F0 , F1 , F2 , and F3 subdomains containing an integrin tail – binding site ( IBS1 ) . THD is linked to the talin rod domain via a flex - ible linker of ∼ 80 amino acids . The talin rod domain contains 13 helix bundles ( R1 – R13 ) and a dimeriza - tion domain ( DD ) and a second , underinvestigated integrin tail - binding site ( IBS2 ) . The IBS1 , IBS2 , three actin - binding sites ( ABS1 – 3 ) , two critical vinculin - binding sites ( VBSs ) in the R3 and R8 domains , and binding sites for RIAM , Kank2 , and DLC1 are shown . The remaining VBSs are not depicted . ( B ) Model de - picting the mechanical response of the molecular clutch and integrin – ligand bonds on the soft or rigid ECM in the presence or absence of Kank2 . On soft substrates , the slow loading rates fail to induce talin unfolding and vinculin recruitment before the slip bond between integrin and the ligand ruptures under low force . In contrast , on rigid substrate , high loading rates induce vinculin - dependent clutch reinforcement , catch bond formation , and high force transmission . Kank2 inter - feres with F - actin binding to the talin ABS2 , leading to reduced force transmission across talin as well as a diminished activation of VBSs . Consequently , Kank2 abrogates the clutch reinforcement and induces fre - quent ruptures of the slip bond between integrin and ligand even on rigid substrates . Integrin - mediated mechanotransduction • Sun et al . 449 interaction with talin and paxillin during the dynamic trans - mission and sensing of forces ( Plotnikov et al . , 2012 ; Case et al . , 2015 ) . In addition to the vertical layering of molecules in FAs , mature FAs assembled on fibronectin ( FN ) also display a horizontal layering with β 3 integrins in FA cores and talin - bound Kank and β 1 integrins at the FA belt ( Sun et al . , 2016 ; Fig . 1 ) . The lateral segregation of different integrin subtypes may be determined by their differential integrin – ligand bond stabilities under different force regimes . For instance , β 1 inte - grins can assemble adhesion complex without myosin - driven contractility and exhibit fast translocation in FAs , whereas β 3 integrins are stationary in FAs and quickly internalized when force is released ( Rossier et al . , 2012 ; Schiller et al . , 2013 ; Yu et al . , 2015 ) . Consistently , although the β 3 - enriched FA core is highly engaged with F - actin to transmit high forces , the en - richment of Kank in the FA belt diminishes the engagement of the talin ABS2 with F - actin and hence reduces the force trans - mission pointing to a force - dependent self - organization of FA structures and a compartmentalized force transmission within FAs ( Sun et al . , 2016 ) . ECM viscoelasticity regulates mechanotransmission Mechanotransmission through the molecular clutch estab - lishes a mechanical equilibrium between the extracellular me - chanical resistance and the intracellular contractility and thus is essential for detecting the viscoelasticity of the ECM . Both relaxation and rupture of the force - transducing linkages can terminate mechanotransmission ( Schoen et al . , 2013 ; Chen et al . , 2015 ) . While relaxation can be caused by the displacement of the ECM ligands when tensile loads induce the deformation or viscous sliding of ECM materials , rupture may stochasti - cally but preferentially occur at the weakest protein – protein interface where the bond lifetime may be regulated by mechan - ical loads . Whereas most protein – protein interactions exhibit a slip bond behavior in which bond lifetimes are shortened when forces are applied to the bond , some protein – protein interactions are allosterically activated under force , resulting in a prolonged bond lifetime ( Thomas , 2008 ) . Such a force - stabilized bond is called a “catch bond . ” The α 5 β 1 integrins in their relaxed state bind to the tripeptide RGD ( Arg - Gly - Asp ) motif in the 10th type III module of fibronectin ( FNI II10 ; Tak - agi et al . , 2003 ) , whereas they additionally engage the synergy site in FNI II9 under tensile load to form a catch bond ( Fried - land et al . , 2009 ; Kong et al . , 2009 ) . Importantly , repeated stretching of the bond between α 5 β 1 integrin and FN , even with a low force amplitude of ∼ 10 pN , significantly prolongs the bond lifetime in a process called “cyclic mechanical rein - forcement” ( Kong et al . , 2013 ) . Catch bond behaviors have also been documented within the actomyosin system , such as the associations between F - actin / G - actin and between F - actin and myosin II ( Guo and Guilford , 2006 ; Lee et al . , 2013 ) . On soft substrates , the slow loading rates on the molecular clutch fail to induce talin unfolding and vinculin recruitment before the slip bond between integrin and the ligand ruptures , whereas on a rigid substrate , high loading rates induce vincu - lin - dependent clutch reinforcement and catch bond formation ( Fig . 2 B ) . Consequently , both catch bond – dependent adhesion strengthening and vinculin - dependent clutch reinforcement are essential to trigger downstream signaling such as acti - vation of FAK and nuclear translocation of the transcription factor YAP ( Friedland et al . , 2009 ; Elosegui - Artola et al . , 2016 ) . Parallel clustering of force - transducing linkages enhances the robustness of mechanotransmission . A theoretical analy - sis suggests that lateral cross - linking of adjacent force - trans - ducing linkages by adaptor proteins allows the redistribution of the tensile load between parallel bonds within the integrin cluster , increases integrin – ligand rebinding rates , and extends the duration of mechanotransmission ( Schoen et al . , 2013 ) . The functional significance of integrin clustering has been tested in tumor models , where enhanced β 1 integrin clustering induced by the V737N point mutation in the β 1 integrin transmembrane domain , but not constitutive β 1 integrin activation induced by G429N point mutation in the β 1 integrin ectodomain , can by - pass the requirement of ECM stiffness for inducing FAK ac - tivation and malignant phenotypes in cancer cells cultured on soft substrates ( Paszek et al . , 2005 ; Levental et al . , 2009 ) . The viscoelasticity of ECM materials also influences mechanotrans - duction by regulating integrin clustering . In a pure elastic en - vironment , soft ECM negatively modulates integrin rebinding rates and clustering ( Qian and Gao , 2010 ) . However , in a vis - coelastic environment , where elastic energy can be dissipated through material deformations and translocation , cells counter - act the softness by actively remodeling the ECM and increasing local ligand density , which in turn facilitates integrin clustering . Indeed , the spreading and osteoblast differentiation of human mesenchymal stem cells ( hMSCs ) are inhibited on soft poly - acrylamide hydrogel , but not on soft polydimethylsiloxane , a highly viscous material ( Trappmann et al . , 2012 ) . Furthermore , cell spreading , proliferation , and osteogenic differentiation of hMSCs are increased by stress relaxation on viscoelastic ma - terial ( Chaudhuri et al . , 2015 , 2016 ) . Similarly , when hMSCs are cultured on soft networks formed by RGD - functionalized dextran methacrylate fibers , cells recruit nearby fibers by con - tractile force , thereby increasing local ligand density and con - sequently promoting cell spreading , FA assembly , and FAK activation ( Baker et al . , 2015 ) . Integrin clustering can also be regulated by the mechani - cal resistance of the glycocalyx on the cell surface independent of ECM viscoelasticity ( Paszek et al . , 2009 ) . The glycocalyx is a layer of glycoprotein – polysaccharide complex on the cell surface . Although integrins extend ∼ 11 nm from the cell surface in their inactive conformations and up to ∼ 20 nm when they adopt active conformations ( Ye et al . , 2010 ; Su et al . , 2016 ) , the glycocalyx can extend > 100 nm from the cell surface ( Hat - trup and Gendler , 2008 ) . Although the glycocalyx imposes electrosteric and osmotic repulsion between integrins and the ECM ligands ( Bell et al . , 1984 ; Hammer and Tirrell , 1996 ) , local compression of the glycocalyx around integrin – ligand complexes reciprocally imposes a pulling force on integrins to promote integrin extension , clustering , and FA maturation in a kinetic trap - like manner ( Fig . 3 ; Paszek et al . , 2009 ) . Impor - tantly , cancer cells and various normal cells such as chondro - cytes are armed with a bulky mucin - enriched glycocalyx , which induces a cellular perception of high ECM stiffness even on soft substrate and facilitates cancer cell survival and proliferation in a FAK - and phosphoinositide 3 - kinase – dependent manner ( Paszek et al . , 2014 ) . Detection of piconewton force with molecular tension sensors Measuring the exact magnitude of force sensed by each mech - anosensitive unit is not a trivial issue ( Polacheck and Chen , 2016 ) . Atomic force microscopy and optical / magnetic tweezers JCB • Volume 215 • NumBer 4 • 2016 450 can measure mechanical properties with subcellular resolution and in single proteins , but usually outside the physiological con - text . The development of molecular tension sensors ( MTSs ) al - lows measuring the forces sensed by mechanosensitive proteins in living cells with piconewton accuracy . A typical MTS con - tains a Förster resonance energy transfer ( FRET ) pair ( or fluo - rophore - quencher pair ) connected with a spring - like molecule . Tensile loads from both sides of the MTS increase the distance between the fluorophore pair , leading to either a gradual fluores - cence change within a defined force range or a digital fluores - cence change at a defined force threshold ( Fig . 4 A ; Freikamp et al . , 2016 ) . Although MTSs provided molecular insights on force transmission , there are considerable controversies between results from different MTS measurements . Using genetically encoded intracellular MTSs with different dynamic ranges , the mean forces sensed by vinculin and talin within mature FAs were shown to be ∼ 2 . 5 pN and between 7 and 10 pN , respectively ( Grashoff et al . , 2010 ; Austen et al . , 2015 ) . Single - molecule ten - sion measurements using an extracellular MTS sensitive to forces below 6 pN revealed that the majority of integrins apply forces between 1 and 5 pN ( Morimatsu et al . , 2013 , 2015 ) . In contrast , DNA - based digital MTSs demonstrated that integrins can apply wider range of forces up to ∼ 15 pN ( Blakely et al . , 2014 ; Zhang et al . , 2014 ) . DNA - based tension probes that are irreversibly rup - tured by forces above defined thresholds revealed that single in - tegrins transmit forces of up to 40 pN during cell adhesion and even higher forces during FA maturation ( Wang and Ha , 2013 ) . These discrepancies may originate from intrinsic technical lim - itations of the current MTS technology . The bulk measurements of mean forces using FRET - or dequenching - based MTSs lack single - molecule information because of large background signals of tension sensors that are not mechanically engaged ( Fig . 4 B ) . The disadvantage of digital MTSs is their inability to measure forces in a wider dynamic range . Rupturable MTSs on the other hand cannot monitor dynamic changes such as cyclic mechani - cal reinforcement . Another important issue is to determine me - chanical forces in 3D and hence closer to a physiological context . This will probably be resolved in the near future with the help of high - resolution 3D traction force microscopy of cultured cells ( Steinwachs et al . , 2016 ) and oil microdroplet force sensors in intact tissue ( Campàs et al . , 2014 ) . Functional effects of forces on mechanosensitive structures During mechanotransmission , intra - and extracellular force - bearing mechanosensitive molecules and structures can be stretched into different functional states . These force - induced functional states or functionalities trigger biochemical signals whose quality and quantity are determined by the duration , frequency , and history of each mechanotransmission event . On the level of single proteins , forces induce conformational changes that regulate protein – protein interactions , as shown for FN ( Leiss et al . , 2008 ) , talin ( del Rio et al . , 2009 ) , and filamin ( Ehrlicher et al . , 2011 ; Rognoni et al . , 2012 ) , or alter enzymatic reactions on key signaling molecules . Mechanical stretching allows Src family kinases to phosphorylate p130Cas on mul - tiple tyrosine residues , which subsequently serve as a docking hub for downstream signaling molecules ( Tamada et al . , 2004 ; Sawada et al . , 2006 ) . Despite the lack of direct experimental proof , molecular simulations suggest that mechanical force may facilitate FAK activation , although the predicted force require - ment of > 100 pN is terribly high ( Zhou et al . , 2015 ) . Within the integrin adhesome , the protein interaction network is remodeled in response to mechanical forces ( Schiller and Fässler , 2013 ) . A large group of proteins , particularly LIM domain – contain - ing proteins , are recruited to FAs in a force - dependent man - ner through mechanisms that are still unknown ( Schiller et al . , 2011 ) . Other system - level changes in the integrin adhesome have been observed during tension release and adhesion turn - over , suggesting high plasticity and mechanosensitivity of the adhesome network ( Kuo et al . , 2011 ; Horton et al . , 2015 ) . On a larger scale , rapid propagation of mechanical stress from integ - rin adhesion sites along the prestressed cytoskeleton induces the kinase activity of Src at a distance of up to 60 µm away from the site of mechanical stress application and at a speed much higher than achieved by the diffusion or a motor protein - mediated transport of signaling molecules ( Na et al . , 2008 ; Wang et al . , 2009 ) . Integrins can also mechanically activate growth factor Figure 3 . Glycocalyx around integrin – ligand complexes promotes integrin – ligand binding and clustering . The glycocalyx is a layer of glycoprotein – polysaccharide complexes on the cell surface that ex - erts electrosteric and osmotic repulsion to the ECM . Because the height of the glycocalyx exceeds that of the active integrins , the glycocalyx must be mechani - cally compressed around integrin – ligand complexes ( indicated as blue arrows ) . Ligand - bound integrins within the compressed glycocalyx reciprocally sense the pulling force that promotes catch - bond formation and mechanotransduction . Glycocalyx - embedded in - tegrin – ligand complexes shorten the distance between the plasma membrane and the ECM , which increases the probability of integrin activation and clustering around existing integrin - based adhesion sites in a kinetic trap - like manner . Talin is immobilized by ac - tomyosin bundles within FAs , where it captures and activates integrins that enter the kinetic trap . Integrin - mediated mechanotransduction • Sun et al . 451 signaling . TGF - β s are growth factors involved in tissue ho - meostasis , tumor malignancy , and fibrosis ( Wells and Discher , 2008 ) . Secreted TGF - β is immobilized on ECM proteins such as fibrillin , proteoglycans , and FN by LAP ( latency - associated protein ) . The integrins α V β 5 , α V β 6 , and α V β 8 directly bind and pull on LAP , leading to the release of TGF - β , which then acti - vates the heterotetrameric transmembrane TGF - β receptor ki - nases formed by type II receptors and type I receptors ( Buscemi et al . , 2011 ) . Intriguingly , type I and II receptors are spatially segregated within FAs and only converge on the less tensed FA belt structure , suggesting an intricate mechanical requirement for optimal TGF - β signaling ( Rys et al . , 2015 ) . Cellular responses in mechanotransduction Mechanotransduction results in rapid changes of the cellular mechanics as well as long - term responses by affecting gene expression , both of which require integrin - dependent RhoA signaling and downstream actin dynamics . Mechanical stretch on integrins activates FAK and Src family kinases and induces immediate cell stiffening through the Rho - GEFs LARG and GEF - H1 ( Guilluy et al . , 2011 ) . RhoA promotes stress fiber formation through the activation of formins ; RhoA also pro - motes nonmuscle myosin II activity through the activation of Rho - associated coiled - coil containing protein kinase ( ROCK ) . Both RhoA downstream pathways are required for optimal cellular tension and rigidity sensing ( Schiller et al . , 2013 ) . Re - markably , cells adapt their RhoA signaling in response to ECM rigidity , cell geometry , and cell density to control cell prolif - eration and differentiation . For examples , high ECM stiffness enhances cell proliferation and induces an invasive phenotype even in nontransformed mammary epithelial cells ( Paszek et al . , 2005 ; Aragona et al . , 2013 ) . Furthermore , substrate elasticity corresponding to a specific in vivo tissue stiffness predisposes hMSCs to pursue specific cell fates ( Engler et al . , 2006 ) . hMSCs can be differentiated into multiple mesenchymal lineages in vitro , including adipocytes and osteoblasts that reside in soft and rigid tissue environments , respectively . Inhibition of cellu - lar tension with cytochalasin D or the ROCK inhibitor Y - 27632 or by expression of a dominant - negative RhoA promotes adi - pogenesis on rigid , osteogenic conditions , whereas overexpres - sion of constitutively active ROCK restores osteogenic fate on soft , adipogenic conditions ( McBeath et al . , 2004 ; Engler et al . , 2006 ) . Most of the effects of ECM stiffness on cell prolifera - tion and differentiation can be attributed to YAP and TAZ ( YAP / TAZ ) , two transcriptional activators that operate in the Hippo pathway to induce the expression of prosurvival genes ( Dupont et al . , 2011 ; Aragona et al . , 2013 ; Zanconato et al . , 2015 ) . Al - though incompletely understood , integrin signaling and cellular tension activate YAP / TAZ through a signaling cascade involv - ing FAK , Src , phosphoinositide 3 - kinase , and JNK pathways ( Codelia et al . , 2014 ; Mohseni et al . , 2014 ; Kim and Gumbiner , 2015 ; Elbediwy et al . , 2016 ) . Besides regulating YAP / TAZ , F - actin polymerization reduces G - actin concentration and re - leases myocardin - related transcription factors ( MRTFs ) into the nucleus to activate serum response factor ( SRF ) – mediated transcription ( Olson and Nordheim , 2010 ) . Transcriptional tar - gets of MRTF – SRF significantly overlap with gene signatures related to cancer metastasis , mechanotransduction and YAP / TAZ activation ( Esnault et al . , 2014 ) . Interestingly , under cyclic stretch , MRTF – SRF activation precedes and facilitates YAP / Figure 4 . Molecular tension sensors are used to measure the forces sensed by mechanosensitive proteins . ( A ) Models of the different types of molecular tension sensors ( MTSs ) . A typical MTS is composed of a FRET pair ( or fluorophore - quencher pair ) connected by a spring - like linker that can be extended by force . Three types of MTSs have been invented : the pep - tide - based MTS uses engineered tension - sensitive peptide as the linker and can be genetically encoded into intracel - lular proteins , the DNA - based digital MTS unwinds its hair - pin structure and changes fluorescence intensity when force is above a defined threshold and is used to determine the lower limits of mechanical stress , and the DNA - based rup - turable MTS is irreversibly ruptured by forces above defined thresholds and is used to approach the upper limits of forces transmitted by cell surface receptors . ( B ) Limitation of the bulk measurement in an MTS experiment . Because of the spatial resolution , current MTS measurements calculate forces as the mean mechanical stress of all MTS probes within each pixel . Such a measurement is strongly influenced by the background of unengaged MTS probes and the variation of forces sensed by each individual MTS probe . JCB • Volume 215 • NumBer 4 • 2016 452 TAZ activation , suggesting that MRTF – SRF activation is re - sponsible for immediate transcriptional response to mechanical stimulus ( Cui et al . , 2015 ) . In addition to the activation of transcription regula - tors such as YAP , TAZ , and MRTF – SRF , integrin - mediated mechanotransduction also modulates gene expression via the nucleoskeleton . The LINC ( linker of the nucleoskeleton and cytoskeleton ) complex connects cytoplasmic cytoskeleton with the nuclear lamina through the nuclear transmembrane protein emerin and the inner nuclear protein SUN . This connection en - ables direct force transmission from integrin - based adhesions to the nucleoskeleton ( Isermann and Lammerding , 2013 ) . The consequences of mechanical stress on the nucleus , similar to the mechanical stress in FAs , are changes in protein localiza - tion , protein conformation , and complex formation ( Poh et al . , 2012 ; Swift et al . , 2013 ; Guilluy et al . , 2014 ; Le et al . , 2016 ) . For example , mechanical forces acting on the nucleus during integrin - mediated cell spreading induce nuclear F - actin polym - erization , leading to the formation , retention , and activation of the MRTF – SRF complex in the nucleus ( Baarlink et al . , 2013 ; Plessner et al . , 2015 ) . It has also been demonstrated that chronic cyclic stretches of epidermal stem cells induce remodeling of the nuclear lamina and global rearrangement of chromatin , re - sulting in epigenetic silencing by polycomb repressive complex 2 – mediated trimethylation of Lys27 of histone 3 and global re - duction of RNA polymerase II – dependent gene expression ( Le et al . , 2016 ) . Interestingly , long - term exposure of hMSCs to rigid substrates irreversibly impairs the adaptation of gene ex - pression and adipogenic differentiation on soft substrate , which probably also involves an epigenetic regulation ( Yang et al . , 2014 ) . The “mechano - epigenetic” regulation may function as a signaling rheostat that memorizes mechanical experiences from the past and thereby predisposes cell fates ( Yang et al . , 2014 ) . Such a signaling rheostat may play important roles in adult stem cells during tissue homeostasis and repair . Dysregulated mechanotransduction in cancer A growing body of knowledge supports the notion that mecha - notransduction is also of significance in vivo . In some scenarios , integrin - mediated cell adhesion regulates tissue morphogenesis solely through mechanics . For example , integrin - dependent me - soderm tissue mechanics and intertissue adhesion between the paraxial mesoderm and notochord promote trunk elongation in zebrafish embryos ( Dray et al . , 2013 ) . Integrin signaling also regulates cell position - dependent proliferation and differentia - tion through the Hippo pathway in concert with cell – cell ad - hesion and cell polarity ( Hirate et al . , 2013 ; Elbediwy et al . , 2016 ) . For a comprehensive review of developmental roles of mechanotransduction in vivo , we refer to a recently published review by Mammoto et al . ( 2013 ) . Integrin - mediated mechanotransduction is often dysreg - ulated under pathological conditions such as cancer and tissue degeneration during aging . Tumor progression is typically as - sociated with a pathological increase of tissue stiffness caused by extensive desmoplastic reactions characterized by excessive deposition , cross - linking , and aberrant organization of dense ECM fibers ( Malik et al . , 2015 ) . In pancreatic ductal adenocar - cinoma , which is known for its insensitivity to chemotherapy and immunotherapy , ∼ 90 % of the tumor mass is composed of a thick desmoplastic stroma that maintains an immunosuppressive tumor microenvironment and impedes drug delivery ( Heldin et al . , 2004 ; Olive et al . , 2009 ; Provenzano et al . , 2012 ) . Cancer - associated fibroblasts ( CAFs ) represent a key cell population in the fibrotic stroma responsible for ECM deposition . High ECM density and stiffness promote integrin - dependent FAK activa - tion , cell contractility , and subsequent YAP / TAZ activation in cancer epithelial cells , which can be further potentiated by the loss of normal apical – basal polarity ( Paszek et al . , 2005 ) . At the same time , hyper - activation of YAP / TAZ in CAFs enhances their contractile phenotype ( Calvo et al . , 2013 ) . The mechan - ical interactions between the stroma and the cancer epithelial cells act in a self - reinforcing feedback loop to promote tumor progression . This vicious cycle is probably initiated by an on - cogene - induced profibrotic JAK – STAT3 signaling pathway and further amplified by aberrant contractility in both can - cer cells and CAFs ( Sanz - Moreno et al . , 2011 ; Laklai et al . , 2016 ) . Although the therapeutic potential of eliminating tumor stroma remains controversial ( Olive et al . , 2009 ; Özdemir et al . , 2014 ; Rhim et al . , 2014 ) , terminating the vicious cycle of mechanotransduction by inhibiting lysyl oxidase – mediated collagen cross - linking or FAK activity effectively suppresses tumor progression ( Levental et al . , 2009 ; Jiang et al . , 2016 ) . Impressively , FAK inhibition in pancreatic ductal adenocar - cinoma and squamous cell carcinoma was recently shown to decrease immunosuppressive cell populations in tumors and dramatically sensitize tumors to checkpoint immunotherapy and a CD8 + T cell – mediated antitumor response ( Serrels et al . , 2015 ; Jiang et al . , 2016 ) . Outlook Studies in the past 30 years have established the biophysical and biochemical principles of integrin - mediated mechanotransduc - tion . However , there are still a lot of open questions that need to be answered to gain a comprehensive understanding of this process . ( 1 ) The recent characterization of the integrin adhesome will allow research efforts to define all mechanosensitive compo - nents and delineate their functionalities in response to mechani - cal stimulus using genetic tools and molecular MTSs . ( 2 ) Despite growing evidence pointing to the in vivo importance of an in - tact and functional mechanotransduction axis , the physiological responses to gradual mechanical changes that occur in tissues during aging remain largely unexplored . ( 3 ) It remains a mystery how the low affinity of the talin – integrin tail interaction is able to transmit the sum of all forces originating from all occupied talin – VBS and talin – ABSs . ( 4 ) It is also unclear which force regimes are ( really ) required to disrupt integrin bonds with FN and other integrin ligands . ( 5 ) It is unknown how fast ligand - bound integrin classes sense mechanical loads . ( 6 ) It will also be important to investigate how the control of force transmission is achieved spatially in cells ( FBs and rear FAs ) . ( 7 ) It is still not known whether FA proteins can be damaged by cellular forces , and , if so , how force - damaged proteins are recognized and cleared . ( 8 ) More thorough investigations with appropriate animal models are required to elucidate the therapeutic potential of targeting signaling events downstream of mechanotransduction in various diseases and tissue regeneration . Clearly , there is still a lot to do ! Acknowledgments The authors are grateful for the support of the European Research Council ( grant agreement no . 322652 ) , the Deutsche Forschungs - gesellschaft ( SFB863 ) , and the Max - Planck - Gesellschaft . The authors declare no competing financial interests . Integrin - mediated mechanotransduction • Sun et al . 453 Submitted : 8 September 2016 Revised : 26 October 2016 Accepted : 27 October 2016 References Alexandrova , A . Y . , K . Arnold , S . Schaub , J . M . Vasiliev , J . J . Meister , A . D . Bershadsky , and A . B . Verkhovsky . 2008 . Comparative dynamics of retrograde actin flow and focal adhesions : formation of nascent adhesions triggers transition from fast to slow flow . PLoS One . 3 : e3234 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1371 / journal . pone . 0003234 Aragona , M . , T . Panciera , A . Manfrin , S . Giulitti , F . Michielin , N . Elvassore , S . Dupont , and S . Piccolo . 2013 . A mechanical checkpoint controls multicellular growth through YAP / TAZ regulation by actin - processing factors . Cell . 154 : 1047 – 1059 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . cell . 2013 . 07 . 042 Atherton , P . , B . Stutchbury , D . Y . Wang , D . Jethwa , R . Tsang , E . Meiler - Rodriguez , P . Wang , N . Bate , R . Zent , I . L . Barsukov , et al . 2015 . Vinculin controls talin engagement with the actomyosin machinery . Nat . Commun . 6 : 10038 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1038 / ncomms10038 Austen , K . , P . Ringer , A . Mehlich , A . Chrostek - Grashoff , C . Kluger , C . Klingner , B . Sabass , R . Zent , M . Rief , and C . Grashoff . 2015 . Extracellular rigidity sensing by talin isoform - specific mechanical linkages . Nat . Cell Biol . 17 : 1597 – 1606 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1038 / ncb3268 Baarlink , C . , H . Wang , and R . Grosse . 2013 . Nuclear actin network assembly by formins regulates the SRF coactivator MAL . Science . 340 : 864 – 867 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1126 / science . 1235038 Bachir , A . I . , J . Zareno , K . Moissoglu , E . F . Plow , E . Gratton , and A . R . Horwitz . 2014 . Integrin - associated complexes form hierarchically with variable stoichiometry in nascent adhesions . Curr . Biol . 24 : 1845 – 1853 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . cub . 2014 . 07 . 011 Baker , B . M . , B . Trappmann , W . Y . Wang , M . S . Sakar , I . L . Kim , V . B . Shenoy , J . A . Burdick , and C . S . Chen . 2015 . Cell - mediated fibre recruitment drives extracellular matrix mechanosensing in engineered fibrillar microenvironments . Nat . Mater . 14 : 1262 – 1268 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1038 / nmat4444 Bell , G . I . , M . Dembo , and P . Bongrand . 1984 . Cell adhesion . Competition between nonspecific repulsion and specific bonding . Biophys . J . 45 : 1051 – 1064 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1016 / S0006 - 3495 ( 84 ) 84252 - 6 Beningo , K . A . , M . Dembo , I . Kaverina , J . V . Small , and Y . L . Wang . 2001 . Nascent focal adhesions are responsible for the generation of strong propulsive forces in migrating fibroblasts . J . Cell Biol . 153 : 881 – 888 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1083 / jcb . 153 . 4 . 881 Blakely , B . L . , C . E . Dumelin , B . Trappmann , L . M . McGregor , C . K . Choi , P . C . Anthony , V . K . Duesterberg , B . M . Baker , S . M . Block , D . R . Liu , and C . S . Chen . 2014 . A DNA - based molecular probe for optically reporting cellular traction forces . Nat . Methods . 11 : 1229 – 1232 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1038 / nmeth . 3145 Bledzka , K . , K . Bialkowska , K . Sossey - Alaoui , J . Vaynberg , E . Pluskota , J . Qin , and E . F . Plow . 2016 . Kindlin - 2 directly binds actin and regulates integrin outside - in signaling . J . Cell Biol . 213 : 97 – 108 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1083 / jcb . 201501006 Bouchet , B . P . , R . E . Gough , Y . C . Ammon , D . van de Willige , H . Post , G . Jacquemet , A . M . Altelaar , A . J . Heck , B . T . Goult , and A . Akhmanova . 2016 . Talin - KANK1 interaction controls the recruitment of cortical microtubule stabilizing complexes to focal adhesions . eLife . 5 : e18124 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 7554 / eLife . 18124 Buscemi , L . , D . Ramonet , F . Klingberg , A . Formey , J . Smith - Clerc , J . J . Meister , and B . Hinz . 2011 . The single - molecule mechanics of the latent TGF - β 1 complex . Curr . Biol . 21 : 2046 – 2054 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . cub . 2011 . 11 . 037 Calderwood , D . A . , I . D . Campbell , and D . R . Critchley . 2013 . Talins and kindlins : partners in integrin - mediated adhesion . Nat . Rev . Mol . Cell Biol . 14 : 503 – 517 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1038 / nrm3624 Calvo , F . , N . Ege , A . Grande - Garcia , S . Hooper , R . P . Jenkins , S . I . Chaudhry , K . Harrington , P . Williamson , E . Moeendarbary , G . Charras , and E . Sahai . 2013 . Mechanotransduction and YAP - dependent matrix remodelling is required for the generation and maintenance of cancer - associated fibroblasts . Nat . Cell Biol . 15 : 637 – 646 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1038 / ncb2756 Campàs , O . , T . Mammoto , S . Hasso , R . A . Sperling , D . O’Connell , A . G . Bischof , R . Maas , D . A . Weitz , L . Mahadevan , and D . E . Ingber . 2014 . Quantifying cell - generated mechanical forces within living embryonic tissues . Nat . Methods . 11 : 183 – 189 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1038 / nmeth . 2761 Case , L . B . , M . A . Baird , G . Shtengel , S . L . Campbell , H . F . Hess , M . W . Davidson , and C . M . Waterman . 2015 . Molecular mechanism of vinculin activation and nanoscale spatial organization in focal adhesions . Nat . Cell Biol . 17 : 880 – 892 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1038 / ncb3180 Cavalcanti - Adam , E . A . , T . Volberg , A . Micoulet , H . Kessler , B . Geiger , and J . P . Spatz . 2007 . Cell spreading and focal adhesion dynamics are regulated by spacing of integrin ligands . Biophys . J . 92 : 2964 – 2974 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1529 / biophysj . 106 . 089730 Chan , C . E . , and D . J . Odde . 2008 . Traction dynamics of filopodia on compliant substrates . Science . 322 : 1687 – 1691 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1126 / science . 1163595 Chang , Y . C . , H . Zhang , J . Franco - Barraza , M . L . Brennan , T . Patel , E . Cukierman , and J . Wu . 2014 . Structural and mechanistic insights into the recruitment of talin by RIAM in integrin signaling . Structure . 22 : 1810 – 1820 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . str . 2014 . 09 . 020 Chaudhuri , O . , L . Gu , M . Darnell , D . Klumpers , S . A . Bencherif , J . C . Weaver , N . Huebsch , and D . J . Mooney . 2015 . Substrate stress relaxation regulates cell spreading . Nat . Commun . 6 : 6364 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1038 / ncomms7365 Chaudhuri , O . , L . Gu , D . Klumpers , M . Darnell , S . A . Bencherif , J . C . Weaver , N . Huebsch , H . P . Lee , E . Lippens , G . N . Duda , and D . J . Mooney . 2016 . Hydrogels with tunable stress relaxation regulate stem cell fate and activity . Nat . Mater . 15 : 326 – 334 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1038 / nmat4489 Chen , B . , B . Ji , and H . Gao . 2015 . Modeling active mechanosensing in cell - matrix interactions . Annu . Rev . Biophys . 44 : 1 – 32 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1146 / annurev - biophys - 051013 - 023102 Choi , C . K . , M . Vicente - Manzanares , J . Zareno , L . A . Whitmore , A . Mogilner , and A . R . Horwitz . 2008 . Actin and alpha - actinin orchestrate the assembly and maturation of nascent adhesions in a myosin II motor - independent manner . Nat . Cell Biol . 10 : 1039 – 1050 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1038 / ncb1763 Codelia , V . A . , G . Sun , and K . D . Irvine . 2014 . Regulation of YAP by mechanical strain through Jnk and Hippo signaling . Curr . Biol . 24 : 2012 – 2017 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . cub . 2014 . 07 . 034 Comrie , W . A . , A . Babich , and J . K . Burkhardt . 2015 . F - actin flow drives affinity maturation and spatial organization of LFA - 1 at the immunological synapse . J . Cell Biol . 208 : 475 – 491 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1083 / jcb . 201406121 Cui , Y . , F . M . Hameed , B . Yang , K . Lee , C . Q . Pan , S . Park , and M . Sheetz . 2015 . Cyclic stretching of soft substrates induces spreading and growth . Nat . Commun . 6 : 6333 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1038 / ncomms7333 del Rio , A . , R . Perez - Jimenez , R . Liu , P . Roca - Cusachs , J . M . Fernandez , and M . P . Sheetz . 2009 . Stretching single talin rod molecules activates vinculin binding . Science . 323 : 638 – 641 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1126 / science . 1162912 de Pereda , J . M . , E . Ortega , N . Alonso - García , M . Gómez - Hernández , and A . Sonnenberg . 2009 . Advances and perspectives of the architecture of hemidesmosomes : lessons from structural biology . Cell Adhes . Migr . 3 : 361 – 364 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 4161 / cam . 3 . 4 . 9525 Doyle , A . D . , N . Carvajal , A . Jin , K . Matsumoto , and K . M . Yamada . 2015 . Local 3D matrix microenvironment regulates cell migration through spatiotemporal dynamics of contractility - dependent adhesions . Nat . Commun . 6 : 8720 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1038 / ncomms9720 Dray , N . , A . Lawton , A . Nandi , D . Jülich , T . Emonet , and S . A . Holley . 2013 . Cell - fibronectin interactions propel vertebrate trunk elongation via tissue mechanics . Curr . Biol . 23 : 1335 – 1341 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . cub . 2013 . 05 . 052 Dupont , S . , L . Morsut , M . Aragona , E . Enzo , S . Giulitti , M . Cordenonsi , F . Zanconato , J . Le Digabel , M . Forcato , S . Bicciato , et al . 2011 . Role of YAP / TAZ in mechanotransduction . Nature . 474 : 179 – 183 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1038 / nature10137 Ehrlicher , A . J . , F . Nakamura , J . H . Hartwig , D . A . Weitz , and T . P . Stossel . 2011 . Mechanical strain in actin networks regulates FilGAP and integrin binding to filamin A . Nature . 478 : 260 – 263 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1038 / nature10430 Elbediwy , A . , Z . I . Vincent - Mistiaen , B . Spencer - Dene , R . K . Stone , S . Boeing , S . K . Wculek , J . Cordero , E . H . Tan , R . Ridgway , V . G . Brunton , et al . 2016 . Integrin signalling regulates YAP and TAZ to control skin homeostasis . Development . 143 : 1674 – 1687 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1242 / dev . 133728 Elosegui - Artola , A . , R . Oria , Y . Chen , A . Kosmalska , C . Pérez - González , N . Castro , C . Zhu , X . Trepat , and P . Roca - Cusachs . 2016 . Mechanical regulation of a molecular clutch defines force transmission and transduction in response to matrix rigidity . Nat . Cell Biol . 18 : 540 – 548 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1038 / ncb3336 Engler , A . J . , S . Sen , H . L . Sweeney , and D . E . Discher . 2006 . Matrix elasticity directs stem cell lineage specification . Cell . 126 : 677 – 689 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . cell . 2006 . 06 . 044 Esnault , C . , A . Stewart , F . Gualdrini , P . East , S . Horswell , N . Matthews , and R . Treisman . 2014 . Rho - actin signaling to the MRTF coactivators JCB • Volume 215 • NumBer 4 • 2016 454 dominates the immediate transcriptional response to serum in fibroblasts . Genes Dev . 28 : 943 – 958 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1101 / gad . 239327 . 114 Ezratty , E . J . , C . Bertaux , E . E . Marcantonio , and G . G . Gundersen . 2009 . Clathrin mediates integrin endocytosis for focal adhesion disassembly in migrating cells . J . Cell Biol . 187 : 733 – 747 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1083 / jcb . 200904054 Freikamp , A . , A . Mehlich , C . Klingner , and C . Grashoff . 2016 . Investigating piconewton forces in cells by FRET - based molecular force microscopy . J . Struct . Biol . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . jsb . 2016 . 03 . 011 Friedland , J . C . , M . H . Lee , and D . Boettiger . 2009 . Mechanically activated integrin switch controls alpha5beta1 function . Science . 323 : 642 – 644 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1126 / science . 1168441 Gasiorowski , J . Z . , C . J . Murphy , and P . F . Nealey . 2013 . Biophysical cues and cell behavior : the big impact of little things . Annu . Rev . Biomed . Eng . 15 : 155 – 176 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1146 / annurev - bioeng - 071811 - 150021 Gee , H . Y . , F . Zhang , S . Ashraf , S . Kohl , C . E . Sadowski , V . Vega - Warner , W . Zhou , S . Lovric , H . Fang , M . Nettleton , et al . 2015 . KANK deficiency leads to podocyte dysfunction and nephrotic syndrome . J . Clin . Invest . 125 : 2375 – 2384 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1172 / JCI79504 Giannone , G . , R . M . Mège , and O . Thoumine . 2009 . Multi - level molecular clutches in motile cell processes . Trends Cell Biol . 19 : 475 – 486 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . tcb . 2009 . 07 . 001 Goksoy , E . , Y . Q . Ma , X . Wang , X . Kong , D . Perera , E . F . Plow , and J . Qin . 2008 . Structural basis for the autoinhibition of talin in regulating integrin activation . Mol . Cell . 31 : 124 – 133 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . molcel . 2008 . 06 . 011 Grashoff , C . , B . D . Hoffman , M . D . Brenner , R . Zhou , M . Parsons , M . T . Yang , M . A . McLean , S . G . Sligar , C . S . Chen , T . Ha , and M . A . Schwartz . 2010 . Measuring mechanical tension across vinculin reveals regulation of focal adhesion dynamics . Nature . 466 : 263 – 266 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1038 / nature09198 Guilluy , C . , V . Swaminathan , R . Garcia - Mata , E . T . O’Brien , R . Superfine , and K . Burridge . 2011 . The Rho GEFs LARG and GEF - H1 regulate the mechanical response to force on integrins . Nat . Cell Biol . 13 : 722 – 727 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1038 / ncb2254 Guilluy , C . , L . D . Osborne , L . Van Landeghem , L . Sharek , R . Superfine , R . Garcia - Mata , and K . Burridge . 2014 . Isolated nuclei adapt to force and reveal a mechanotransduction pathway in the nucleus . Nat . Cell Biol . 16 : 376 – 381 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1038 / ncb2927 Guo , B . , and W . H . Guilford . 2006 . Mechanics of actomyosin bonds in different nucleotide states are tuned to muscle contraction . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA . 103 : 9844 – 9849 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1073 / pnas . 0601255103 Hammer , D . A . , and M . Tirrell . 1996 . Biological adhesion at interfaces . Annu . Rev . Mater . Sci . 26 : 651 – 691 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1146 / annurev . ms . 26 . 080196 . 003251 Hattrup , C . L . , and S . J . Gendler . 2008 . Structure and function of the cell surface ( tethered ) mucins . Annu . Rev . Physiol . 70 : 431 – 457 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1146 / annurev . physiol . 70 . 113006 . 100659 Heldin , C . H . , K . Rubin , K . Pietras , and A . Ostman . 2004 . High interstitial fluid pressure—an obstacle in cancer therapy . Nat . Rev . Cancer . 4 : 806 – 813 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1038 / nrc1456 Hirate , Y . , S . Hirahara , K . Inoue , A . Suzuki , V . B . Alarcon , K . Akimoto , T . Hirai , T . Hara , M . Adachi , K . Chida , et al . 2013 . Polarity - dependent distribution of angiomotin localizes Hippo signaling in preimplantation embryos . Curr . Biol . 23 : 1181 – 1194 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . cub . 2013 . 05 . 014 Hoffman , B . D . , C . Grashoff , and M . A . Schwartz . 2011 . Dynamic molecular processes mediate cellular mechanotransduction . Nature . 475 : 316 – 323 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1038 / nature10316 Horton , E . R . , A . Byron , J . A . Askari , D . H . Ng , A . Millon - Frémillon , J . Robertson , E . J . Koper , N . R . Paul , S . Warwood , D . Knight , et al . 2015 . Definition of a consensus integrin adhesome and its dynamics during adhesion complex assembly and disassembly . Nat . Cell Biol . 17 : 1577 – 1587 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1038 / ncb3257 Hu , K . , L . Ji , K . T . Applegate , G . Danuser , and C . M . Waterman - Storer . 2007 . Differential transmission of actin motion within focal adhesions . Science . 315 : 111 – 115 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1126 / science . 1135085 Hynes , R . O . 2002 . Integrins : bidirectional , allosteric signaling machines . Cell . 110 : 673 – 687 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1016 / S0092 - 8674 ( 02 ) 00971 - 6 Isermann , P . , and J . Lammerding . 2013 . Nuclear mechanics and mechanotransduction in health and disease . Curr . Biol . 23 : R1113 – R1121 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . cub . 2013 . 11 . 009 Iskratsch , T . , C . H . Yu , A . Mathur , S . Liu , V . Stévenin , J . Dwyer , J . Hone , E . Ehler , and M . Sheetz . 2013 . FHOD1 is needed for directed forces and adhesion maturation during cell spreading and migration . Dev . Cell . 27 : 545 – 559 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . devcel . 2013 . 11 . 003 Jiang , H . , S . Hegde , B . L . Knolhoff , Y . Zhu , J . M . Herndon , M . A . Meyer , T . M . Nywening , W . G . Hawkins , I . M . Shapiro , D . T . Weaver , et al . 2016 . Targeting focal adhesion kinase renders pancreatic cancers responsive to checkpoint immunotherapy . Nat . Med . 22 : 851 – 860 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1038 / nm . 4123 Kanchanawong , P . , G . Shtengel , A . M . Pasapera , E . B . Ramko , M . W . Davidson , H . F . Hess , and C . M . Waterman . 2010 . Nanoscale architecture of integrin - based cell adhesions . Nature . 468 : 580 – 584 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1038 / nature09621 Kim , D . H . , and D . Wirtz . 2013 . Focal adhesion size uniquely predicts cell migration . FAS EB J . 27 : 1351 – 1361 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1096 / fj . 12 - 220160 Kim , N . G . , and B . M . Gumbiner . 2015 . Adhesion to fibronectin regulates Hippo signaling via the FAK - Src - PI3K pathway . J . Cell Biol . 210 : 503 – 515 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1083 / jcb . 201501025 Klapproth , S . , M . Sperandio , E . M . Pinheiro , M . Prünster , O . Soehnlein , F . B . Gertler , R . Fässler , and M . Moser . 2015 . Loss of the Rap1 effector RIAM results in leukocyte adhesion deficiency due to impaired β 2 integrin function in mice . Blood . 126 : 2704 – 2712 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1182 / blood - 2015 - 05 - 647453 Kong , F . , A . J . García , A . P . Mould , M . J . Humphries , and C . Zhu . 2009 . Demonstration of catch bonds between an integrin and its ligand . J . Cell Biol . 185 : 1275 – 1284 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1083 / jcb . 200810002 Kong , F . , Z . Li , W . M . Parks , D . W . Dumbauld , A . J . García , A . P . Mould , M . J . Humphries , and C . Zhu . 2013 . Cyclic mechanical reinforcement of integrin - ligand interactions . Mol . Cell . 49 : 1060 – 1068 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . molcel . 2013 . 01 . 015 Kumar , A . , M . Ouyang , K . Van den Dries , E . J . McGhee , K . Tanaka , M . D . Anderson , A . Groisman , B . T . Goult , K . I . Anderson , and M . A . Schwartz . 2016 . Talin tension sensor reveals novel features of focal adhesion force transmission and mechanosensitivity . J . Cell Biol . 213 : 371 – 383 . ( published erratum J . Cell Biol . 2016 . 214 : 231 ) . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1083 / jcb . 201510012 Kuo , J . C . , X . Han , C . T . Hsiao , J . R . Yates III , and C . M . Waterman . 2011 . Analysis of the myosin - II - responsive focal adhesion proteome reveals a role for β - Pix in negative regulation of focal adhesion maturation . Nat . Cell Biol . 13 : 383 – 393 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1038 / ncb2216 Lafuente , E . M . , A . A . van Puijenbroek , M . Krause , C . V . Carman , G . J . Freeman , A . Berezovskaya , E . Constantine , T . A . Springer , F . B . Gertler , and V . A . Boussiotis . 2004 . RIAM , an Ena / VASP and Profilin ligand , interacts with Rap1 - GTP and mediates Rap1 - induced adhesion . Dev . Cell . 7 : 585 – 595 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . devcel . 2004 . 07 . 021 Laklai , H . , Y . A . Miroshnikova , M . W . Pickup , E . A . Collisson , G . E . Kim , A . S . Barrett , R . C . Hill , J . N . Lakins , D . D . Schlaepfer , J . K . Mouw , et al . 2016 . Genotype tunes pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma tissue tension to induce matricellular fibrosis and tumor progression . Nat . Med . 22 : 497 – 505 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1038 / nm . 4082 Lansbergen , G . , I . Grigoriev , Y . Mimori - Kiyosue , T . Ohtsuka , S . Higa , I . Kitajima , J . Demmers , N . Galjart , A . B . Houtsmuller , F . Grosveld , and A . Akhmanova . 2006 . CLA SPs attach microtubule plus ends to the cell cortex through a complex with LL5beta . Dev . Cell . 11 : 21 – 32 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . devcel . 2006 . 05 . 012 Le , H . Q . , S . Ghatak , C . Y . Yeung , F . Tellkamp , C . Günschmann , C . Dieterich , A . Yeroslaviz , B . Habermann , A . Pombo , C . M . Niessen , and S . A . Wickström . 2016 . Mechanical regulation of transcription controls Polycomb - mediated gene silencing during lineage commitment . Nat . Cell Biol . 18 : 864 – 875 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1038 / ncb3387 Lee , C . Y . , J . Lou , K . K . Wen , M . McKane , S . G . Eskin , S . Ono , S . Chien , P . A . Rubenstein , C . Zhu , and L . V . McIntire . 2013 . Actin depolymerization under force is governed by lysine 113 : glutamic acid 195 - mediated catch - slip bonds . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA . 110 : 5022 – 5027 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1073 / pnas . 1218407110 Legate , K . R . , S . Takahashi , N . Bonakdar , B . Fabry , D . Boettiger , R . Zent , and R . Fässler . 2011 . Integrin adhesion and force coupling are independently regulated by localized PtdIns ( 4 , 5 ) 2 synthesis . EMBO J . 30 : 4539 – 4553 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1038 / emboj . 2011 . 332 Leiss , M . , K . Beckmann , A . Girós , M . Costell , and R . Fässler . 2008 . The role of integrin binding sites in fibronectin matrix assembly in vivo . Curr . Opin . Cell Biol . 20 : 502 – 507 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . ceb . 2008 . 06 . 001 Levental , K . R . , H . Yu , L . Kass , J . N . Lakins , M . Egeblad , J . T . Erler , S . F . Fong , K . Csiszar , A . Giaccia , W . Weninger , et al . 2009 . Matrix crosslinking forces tumor progression by enhancing integrin signaling . Cell . 139 : 891 – 906 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . cell . 2009 . 10 . 027 Lo , C . M . , H . B . Wang , M . Dembo , and Y . L . Wang . 2000 . Cell movement is guided by the rigidity of the substrate . Biophys . J . 79 : 144 – 152 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1016 / S0006 - 3495 ( 00 ) 76279 - 5 Integrin - mediated mechanotransduction • Sun et al . 455 Luo , B . H . , C . V . Carman , and T . A . Springer . 2007 . Structural basis of integrin regulation and signaling . Annu . Rev . Immunol . 25 : 619 – 647 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1146 / annurev . immunol . 25 . 022106 . 141618 Malik , R . , P . I . Lelkes , and E . Cukierman . 2015 . Biomechanical and biochemical remodeling of stromal extracellular matrix in cancer . Trends Biotechnol . 33 : 230 – 236 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . tibtech . 2015 . 01 . 004 Mammoto , T . , A . Mammoto , and D . E . Ingber . 2013 . Mechanobiology and developmental control . Annu . Rev . Cell Dev . Biol . 29 : 27 – 61 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1146 / annurev - cellbio - 101512 - 122340 McBeath , R . , D . M . Pirone , C . M . Nelson , K . Bhadriraju , and C . S . Chen . 2004 . Cell shape , cytoskeletal tension , and RhoA regulate stem cell lineage commitment . Dev . Cell . 6 : 483 – 495 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1016 / S1534 - 5807 ( 04 ) 00075 - 9 Mitchison , T . , and M . Kirschner . 1988 . Cytoskeletal dynamics and nerve growth . Neuron . 1 : 761 – 772 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1016 / 0896 - 6273 ( 88 ) 90124 - 9 Mohseni , M . , J . Sun , A . Lau , S . Curtis , J . Goldsmith , V . L . Fox , C . Wei , M . Frazier , O . Samson , K . K . Wong , et al . 2014 . A genetic screen identifies an LKB1 - MARK signalling axis controlling the Hippo - YAP pathway . Nat . Cell Biol . 16 : 108 – 117 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1038 / ncb2884 Morimatsu , M . , A . H . Mekhdjian , A . S . Adhikari , and A . R . Dunn . 2013 . Molecular tension sensors report forces generated by single integrin molecules in living cells . Nano Lett . 13 : 3985 – 3989 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1021 / nl4005145 Morimatsu , M . , A . H . Mekhdjian , A . C . Chang , S . J . Tan , and A . R . Dunn . 2015 . Visualizing the interior architecture of focal adhesions with high - resolution traction maps . Nano Lett . 15 : 2220 – 2228 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1021 / nl5047335 Mouw , J . K . , G . Ou , and V . M . Weaver . 2014 . Extracellular matrix assembly : a multiscale deconstruction . Nat . Rev . Mol . Cell Biol . 15 : 771 – 785 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1038 / nrm3902 Na , S . , O . Collin , F . Chowdhury , B . Tay , M . Ouyang , Y . Wang , and N . Wang . 2008 . Rapid signal transduction in living cells is a unique feature of mechanotransduction . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA . 105 : 6626 – 6631 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1073 / pnas . 0711704105 Oakes , P . W . , Y . Beckham , J . Stricker , and M . L . Gardel . 2012 . Tension is required but not sufficient for focal adhesion maturation without a stress fiber template . J . Cell Biol . 196 : 363 – 374 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1083 / jcb . 201107042 Olive , K . P . , M . A . Jacobetz , C . J . Davidson , A . Gopinathan , D . McIntyre , D . Honess , B . Madhu , M . A . Goldgraben , M . E . Caldwell , D . Allard , et al . 2009 . Inhibition of Hedgehog signaling enhances delivery of chemotherapy in a mouse model of pancreatic cancer . Science . 324 : 1457 – 1461 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1126 / science . 1171362 Olson , E . N . , and A . Nordheim . 2010 . Linking actin dynamics and gene transcription to drive cellular motile functions . Nat . Rev . Mol . Cell Biol . 11 : 353 – 365 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1038 / nrm2890 Özdemir , B . C . , T . Pentcheva - Hoang , J . L . Carstens , X . Zheng , C . C . Wu , T . R . Simpson , H . Laklai , H . Sugimoto , C . Kahlert , S . V . Novitskiy , et al . 2014 . Depletion of carcinoma - associated fibroblasts and fibrosis induces immunosuppression and accelerates pancreas cancer with reduced survival . Cancer Cell . 25 : 719 – 734 . ( published erratum appears in Cancer Cell . 2015 . 28 : 831 - 833 ) http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . ccr . 2014 . 04 . 005 Paszek , M . J . , N . Zahir , K . R . Johnson , J . N . Lakins , G . I . Rozenberg , A . Gefen , C . A . Reinhart - King , S . S . Margulies , M . Dembo , D . Boettiger , et al . 2005 . Tensional homeostasis and the malignant phenotype . Cancer Cell . 8 : 241 – 254 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . ccr . 2005 . 08 . 010 Paszek , M . J . , D . Boettiger , V . M . Weaver , and D . A . Hammer . 2009 . Integrin clustering is driven by mechanical resistance from the glycocalyx and the substrate . PLOS Comput . Biol . 5 : e1000604 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1371 / journal . pcbi . 1000604 Paszek , M . J . , C . C . DuFort , O . Rossier , R . Bainer , J . K . Mouw , K . Godula , J . E . Hudak , J . N . Lakins , A . C . Wijekoon , L . Cassereau , et al . 2014 . The cancer glycocalyx mechanically primes integrin - mediated growth and survival . Nature . 511 : 319 – 325 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1038 / nature13535 Plessner , M . , M . Melak , P . Chinchilla , C . Baarlink , and R . Grosse . 2015 . Nuclear F - actin formation and reorganization upon cell spreading . J . Biol . Chem . 290 : 11209 – 11216 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1074 / jbc . M114 . 627166 Plotnikov , S . V . , A . M . Pasapera , B . Sabass , and C . M . Waterman . 2012 . Force fluctuations within focal adhesions mediate ECM - rigidity sensing to guide directed cell migration . Cell . 151 : 1513 – 1527 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . cell . 2012 . 11 . 034 Poh , Y . C . , S . P . Shevtsov , F . Chowdhury , D . C . Wu , S . Na , M . Dundr , and N . Wang . 2012 . Dynamic force - induced direct dissociation of protein complexes in a nuclear body in living cells . Nat . Commun . 3 : 866 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1038 / ncomms1873 Polacheck , W . J . , and C . S . Chen . 2016 . Measuring cell - generated forces : a guide to the available tools . Nat . Methods . 13 : 415 – 423 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1038 / nmeth . 3834 Provenzano , P . P . , C . Cuevas , A . E . Chang , V . K . Goel , D . D . Von Hoff , and S . R . Hingorani . 2012 . Enzymatic targeting of the stroma ablates physical barriers to treatment of pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma . Cancer Cell . 21 : 418 – 429 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . ccr . 2012 . 01 . 007 Qian , J . , and H . Gao . 2010 . Soft matrices suppress cooperative behaviors among receptor - ligand bonds in cell adhesion . PLoS One . 5 : e12342 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1371 / journal . pone . 0012342 Rhim , A . D . , P . E . Oberstein , D . H . Thomas , E . T . Mirek , C . F . Palermo , S . A . Sastra , E . N . Dekleva , T . Saunders , C . P . Becerra , I . W . Tattersall , et al . 2014 . Stromal elements act to restrain , rather than support , pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma . Cancer Cell . 25 : 735 – 747 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . ccr . 2014 . 04 . 021 Roca - Cusachs , P . , A . del Rio , E . Puklin - Faucher , N . C . Gauthier , N . Biais , and M . P . Sheetz . 2013 . Integrin - dependent force transmission to the extracellular matrix by α - actinin triggers adhesion maturation . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA . 110 : E1361 – E1370 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1073 / pnas . 1220723110 Rognoni , L . , J . Stigler , B . Pelz , J . Ylänne , and M . Rief . 2012 . Dynamic force sensing of filamin revealed in single - molecule experiments . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA . 109 : 19679 – 19684 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1073 / pnas . 1211274109 Rokas , A . 2008 . The origins of multicellularity and the early history of the genetic toolkit for animal development . Annu . Rev . Genet . 42 : 235 – 251 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1146 / annurev . genet . 42 . 110807 . 091513 Rossier , O . , V . Octeau , J . B . Sibarita , C . Leduc , B . Tessier , D . Nair , V . Gatterdam , O . Destaing , C . Albigès - Rizo , R . Tampé , et al . 2012 . Integrins β 1 and β 3 exhibit distinct dynamic nanoscale organizations inside focal adhesions . Nat . Cell Biol . 14 : 1057 – 1067 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1038 / ncb2588 Rys , J . P . , C . C . DuFort , D . A . Monteiro , M . A . Baird , J . A . Oses - Prieto , S . Chand , A . L . Burlingame , M . W . Davidson , and T . N . Alliston . 2015 . Discrete spatial organization of TGF β receptors couples receptor multimerization and signaling to cellular tension . eLife . 4 : e09300 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 7554 / eLife . 09300 Sanz - Moreno , V . , C . Gaggioli , M . Yeo , J . Albrengues , F . Wallberg , A . Viros , S . Hooper , R . Mitter , C . C . Féral , M . Cook , et al . 2011 . ROCK and JAK1 signaling cooperate to control actomyosin contractility in tumor cells and stroma . Cancer Cell . 20 : 229 – 245 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . ccr . 2011 . 06 . 018 Sawada , Y . , M . Tamada , B . J . Dubin - Thaler , O . Cherniavskaya , R . Sakai , S . Tanaka , and M . P . Sheetz . 2006 . Force sensing by mechanical extension of the Src family kinase substrate p130Cas . Cell . 127 : 1015 – 1026 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . cell . 2006 . 09 . 044 Schiller , H . B . , and R . Fässler . 2013 . Mechanosensitivity and compositional dynamics of cell - matrix adhesions . EMBO Rep . 14 : 509 – 519 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1038 / embor . 2013 . 49 Schiller , H . B . , C . C . Friedel , C . Boulegue , and R . Fässler . 2011 . Quantitative proteomics of the integrin adhesome show a myosin II - dependent recruitment of LIM domain proteins . EMBO Rep . 12 : 259 – 266 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1038 / embor . 2011 . 5 Schiller , H . B . , M . R . Hermann , J . Polleux , T . Vignaud , S . Zanivan , C . C . Friedel , Z . Sun , A . Raducanu , K . E . Gottschalk , M . Théry , et al . 2013 . β 1 - and α v - class integrins cooperate to regulate myosin II during rigidity sensing of fibronectin - based microenvironments . Nat . Cell Biol . 15 : 625 – 636 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1038 / ncb2747 Schoen , I . , B . L . Pruitt , and V . Vogel . 2013 . The yin - yang of rigidity sensing : how forces and mechanical properties regulate the cellular response to materials . Annu . Rev . Mater . Res . 43 : 589 – 618 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1146 / annurev - matsci - 062910 - 100407 Serrels , A . , T . Lund , B . Serrels , A . Byron , R . C . McPherson , A . von Kriegsheim , L . Gómez - Cuadrado , M . Canel , M . Muir , J . E . Ring , et al . 2015 . Nuclear FAK controls chemokine transcription , Tregs , and evasion of anti - tumor immunity . Cell . 163 : 160 – 173 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . cell . 2015 . 09 . 001 Serrels , B . , A . Serrels , V . G . Brunton , M . Holt , G . W . McLean , C . H . Gray , G . E . Jones , and M . C . Frame . 2007 . Focal adhesion kinase controls actin assembly via a FERM - mediated interaction with the Arp2 / 3 complex . Nat . Cell Biol . 9 : 1046 – 1056 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1038 / ncb1626 Stehbens , S . J . , M . Paszek , H . Pemble , A . Ettinger , S . Gierke , and T . Wittmann . 2014 . CLA SPs link focal - adhesion - associated microtubule capture to localized exocytosis and adhesion site turnover . Nat . Cell Biol . 16 : 561 – 573 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1038 / ncb2975 Steinwachs , J . , C . Metzner , K . Skodzek , N . Lang , I . Thievessen , C . Mark , S . Münster , K . E . Aifantis , and B . Fabry . 2016 . Three - dimensional force microscopy of cells in biopolymer networks . Nat . Methods . 13 : 171 – 176 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1038 / nmeth . 3685 Straight , A . F . , A . Cheung , J . Limouze , I . Chen , N . J . Westwood , J . R . Sellers , and T . J . Mitchison . 2003 . Dissecting temporal and spatial control of cytokinesis with a myosin II Inhibitor . Science . 299 : 1743 – 1747 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1126 / science . 1081412 JCB • Volume 215 • NumBer 4 • 2016 456 Su , W . , J . Wynne , E . M . Pinheiro , M . Strazza , A . Mor , E . Montenont , J . Berger , D . S . Paul , W . Bergmeier , F . B . Gertler , and M . R . Philips . 2015 . Rap1 and its effector RIAM are required for lymphocyte trafficking . Blood . 126 : 2695 – 2703 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1182 / blood - 2015 - 05 - 644104 Su , Y . , W . Xia , J . Li , T . Walz , M . J . Humphries , D . Vestweber , C . Cabañas , C . Lu , and T . A . Springer . 2016 . Relating conformation to function in integrin α 5 β 1 . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA . 113 : E3872 – E3881 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1073 / pnas . 1605074113 Sun , Z . , H . Y . Tseng , S . Tan , F . Senger , L . Kurzawa , D . Dedden , N . Mizuno , A . A . Wasik , M . Thery , A . R . Dunn , and R . Fässler . 2016 . Kank2 activates talin , reduces force transduction across integrins and induces central adhesion formation . Nat . Cell Biol . 18 : 941 – 953 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1038 / ncb3402 Swaminathan , V . , and C . M . Waterman . 2016 . The molecular clutch model for mechanotransduction evolves . Nat . Cell Biol . 18 : 459 – 461 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1038 / ncb3350 Swaminathan , V . , R . S . Fischer , and C . M . Waterman . 2016 . The FAK - Arp2 / 3 interaction promotes leading edge advance and haptosensing by coupling nascent adhesions to lamellipodia actin . Mol . Biol . Cell . 27 : 1085 – 1100 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1091 / mbc . E15 - 08 - 0590 Swift , J . , I . L . Ivanovska , A . Buxboim , T . Harada , P . C . Dingal , J . Pinter , J . D . Pajerowski , K . R . Spinler , J . W . Shin , M . Tewari , et al . 2013 . Nuclear lamin - A scales with tissue stiffness and enhances matrix - directed differentiation . Science . 341 : 1240104 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1126 / science . 1240104 Takagi , J . , K . Strokovich , T . A . Springer , and T . Walz . 2003 . Structure of integrin alpha5beta1 in complex with fibronectin . EMBO J . 22 : 4607 – 4615 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1093 / emboj / cdg445 Tamada , M . , M . P . Sheetz , and Y . Sawada . 2004 . Activation of a signaling cascade by cytoskeleton stretch . Dev . Cell . 7 : 709 – 718 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . devcel . 2004 . 08 . 021 Theodosiou , M . , M . Widmaier , R . T . Böttcher , E . Rognoni , M . Veelders , M . Bharadwaj , A . Lambacher , K . Austen , D . J . Müller , R . Zent , and R . Fässler . 2016 . Kindlin - 2 cooperates with talin to activate integrins and induces cell spreading by directly binding paxillin . eLife . 5 : e10130 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 7554 / eLife . 10130 Thievessen , I . , P . M . Thompson , S . Berlemont , K . M . Plevock , S . V . Plotnikov , A . Zemljic - Harpf , R . S . Ross , M . W . Davidson , G . Danuser , S . L . Campbell , and C . M . Waterman . 2013 . Vinculin - actin interaction couples actin retrograde flow to focal adhesions , but is dispensable for focal adhesion growth . J . Cell Biol . 202 : 163 – 177 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1083 / jcb . 201303129 Thomas , W . 2008 . Catch bonds in adhesion . Annu . Rev . Biomed . Eng . 10 : 39 – 57 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1146 / annurev . bioeng . 10 . 061807 . 160427 Trappmann , B . , J . E . Gautrot , J . T . Connelly , D . G . Strange , Y . Li , M . L . Oyen , M . A . Cohen Stuart , H . Boehm , B . Li , V . Vogel , et al . 2012 . Extracellular - matrix tethering regulates stem - cell fate . Nat . Mater . 11 : 642 – 649 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1038 / nmat3339 van der Vaart , B . , W . E . van Riel , H . Doodhi , J . T . Kevenaar , E . A . Katrukha , L . Gumy , B . P . Bouchet , I . Grigoriev , S . A . Spangler , K . L . Yu , et al . 2013 . CFE OM1 - associated kinesin KIF21A is a cortical microtubule growth inhibitor . Dev . Cell . 27 : 145 – 160 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . devcel . 2013 . 09 . 010 Wang , X . , and T . Ha . 2013 . Defining single molecular forces required to activate integrin and notch signaling . Science . 340 : 991 – 994 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1126 / science . 1231041 Wang , N . , J . D . Tytell , and D . E . Ingber . 2009 . Mechanotransduction at a distance : mechanically coupling the extracellular matrix with the nucleus . Nat . Rev . Mol . Cell Biol . 10 : 75 – 82 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1038 / nrm2594 Wells , R . G . , and D . E . Discher . 2008 . Matrix elasticity , cytoskeletal tension , and TGF - beta : the insoluble and soluble meet . Sci . Signal . 1 : pe13 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1126 / stke . 110pe13 Wickström , S . A . , A . Lange , E . Montanez , and R . Fässler . 2010 . The ILK / PIN CH / parvin complex : the kinase is dead , long live the pseudokinase ! EMBO J . 29 : 281 – 291 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1038 / emboj . 2009 . 376 Winograd - Katz , S . E . , R . Fässler , B . Geiger , and K . R . Legate . 2014 . The integrin adhesome : from genes and proteins to human disease . Nat . Rev . Mol . Cell Biol . 15 : 273 – 288 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1038 / nrm3769 Worth , D . C . , K . Hodivala - Dilke , S . D . Robinson , S . J . King , P . E . Morton , F . B . Gertler , M . J . Humphries , and M . Parsons . 2010 . Alpha v beta3 integrin spatially regulates VASP and RIAM to control adhesion dynamics and migration . J . Cell Biol . 189 : 369 – 383 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1083 / jcb . 200912014 Yang , C . , M . W . Tibbitt , L . Basta , and K . S . Anseth . 2014 . Mechanical memory and dosing influence stem cell fate . Nat . Mater . 13 : 645 – 652 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1038 / nmat3889 Yao , M . , B . T . Goult , H . Chen , P . Cong , M . P . Sheetz , and J . Yan . 2014 . Mechanical activation of vinculin binding to talin locks talin in an unfolded conformation . Sci . Rep . 4 : 4610 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1038 / srep04610 Yao , M . , B . T . Goult , B . Klapholz , X . Hu , C . P . Toseland , Y . Guo , P . Cong , M . P . Sheetz , and J . Yan . 2016 . The mechanical response of talin . Nat . Commun . 7 : 11966 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1038 / ncomms11966 Ye , F . , G . Hu , D . Taylor , B . Ratnikov , A . A . Bobkov , M . A . McLean , S . G . Sligar , K . A . Taylor , and M . H . Ginsberg . 2010 . Recreation of the terminal events in physiological integrin activation . J . Cell Biol . 188 : 157 – 173 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1083 / jcb . 200908045 Yu , C . H . , N . B . Rafiq , F . Cao , Y . Zhou , A . Krishnasamy , K . H . Biswas , A . Ravasio , Z . Chen , Y . H . Wang , K . Kawauchi , et al . 2015 . Integrin - beta3 clusters recruit clathrin - mediated endocytic machinery in the absence of traction force . Nat . Commun . 6 : 8672 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1038 / ncomms9672 Zamir , E . , M . Katz , Y . Posen , N . Erez , K . M . Yamada , B . Z . Katz , S . Lin , D . C . Lin , A . Bershadsky , Z . Kam , and B . Geiger . 2000 . Dynamics and segregation of cell - matrix adhesions in cultured fibroblasts . Nat . Cell Biol . 2 : 191 – 196 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1038 / 35008607 Zanconato , F . , M . Forcato , G . Battilana , L . Azzolin , E . Quaranta , B . Bodega , A . Rosato , S . Bicciato , M . Cordenonsi , and S . Piccolo . 2015 . Genome - wide association between YAP / TAZ / TEAD and AP - 1 at enhancers drives oncogenic growth . Nat . Cell Biol . 17 : 1218 – 1227 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1038 / ncb3216 Zhang , Y . , C . Ge , C . Zhu , and K . Salaita . 2014 . DNA - based digital tension probes reveal integrin forces during early cell adhesion . Nat . Commun . 5 : 5167 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1038 / ncomms6167 Zhou , J . , C . Aponte - Santamaría , S . Sturm , J . T . Bullerjahn , A . Bronowska , and F . Gräter . 2015 . Mechanism of focal adhesion kinase mechanosensing . PLOS Comput . Biol . 11 : e1004593 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1371 / journal . pcbi . 1004593 Zhu , J . , B . H . Luo , T . Xiao , C . Zhang , N . Nishida , and T . A . Springer . 2008a . Structure of a complete integrin ectodomain in a physiologic resting state and activation and deactivation by applied forces . Mol . Cell . 32 : 849 – 861 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . molcel . 2008 . 11 . 018 Zhu , Y . , N . Kakinuma , Y . Wang , and R . Kiyama . 2008b . Kank proteins : a new family of ankyrin - repeat domain - containing proteins . Biochim . Biophys . Acta . 1780 : 128 – 133 . http : / / dx . doi . org / 10 . 1016 / j . bbagen . 2007 . 09 . 017