nature machine intelligence Volume 5 | June 2023 | 561 – 564 | 561 https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1038 / s42256 - 023 - 00669 - 7 Comment How can LLMs transform the robotic design process ? Francesco Stella , Cosimo Della Santina & Josie Hughes We show that large language models ( LLMs ) , such as ChatGPT , can guide the robot design process , on both the conceptual and technical level , and we propose new human – AI co - design strategies and their societal implications . Large language models ( LLMs ) 1 will fundamentally change the robotics landscape by providing robots with the unprecedented capability to understand and analyse natural language . The key advantage of LLMs is their ability to process and internalize large amounts of text data such as instructions , technical manuals and academic articles , and to factually and coherently respond to questions using this implicit knowledge . The potential of utilizing these powerful AI tools within robotics has already been shown through their ability to synthesize code from text prompts 2 and to translate natural - language instructions into actions executable by robots 3 , 4 . However , recent improvements in the availability and capabilities of LLMs opens new opportunities , and they may now contribute to another bottleneck of robotics , design . Leveraging their emerging capabilities 5 , 6 , LLMs can deliver a dialogue that educates , stimulates and guides humans in building robots . These capabilities could fundamentally change the methodology by which we design robots , changing the role of humans and enriching and simplifying the design process . So , how can LLMs transform the robotic design process , and what are the associated opportunities and risks ? To explore this question , we consider the case study of a human driven by a desire to “help the world with robotics , ” and we present a robot designed with ChatGPT - 3 . We approach the task in two steps . In the first , high - level phase , the computer and human collaborate at a conceptual level , discussing ideas and outlining the specifications for the robot design , while in the second phase the physical realization Check for updates How should the compliance be included ? In control Embodied How should the gripper interact with the tomato plant ? Actuated Passive What are the future challenges for humanity ? How can robotics support agriculture ? What features should a robot harvester have ? What shape should the gripper have ? Food supply Aging population Climate change Crop harvesting Navigation Oval Scoop Gripping Compliantinteraction Parasite control Packaging Efficiency f ( x ) (cid:143) Manufacturing process selection (cid:143) CAD design support (cid:143) Size specifications (cid:143) Motor selection (cid:143) Code generation (cid:143) Pulley system design (cid:143) Silicon selection (cid:143) Manufacturing process Fig . 1 | Design pipeline . A pictorial overview of the discussion between the human designer and the LLM , with the questions prompted by the human above and the options provided by the LLM below . The green colour highlights the decision tree of the human , who gradually focuses the problem to match their goal . nature machine intelligence Volume 5 | June 2023 | 561 – 564 | 562 Comment this second phase , Fig . 2 displays the main outputs generated by the LLM and the real - world deployment of the AI - designed robotic gripper for crop harvesting . This case study demonstrates the potential for LLMs to transform the design process and how the human – AI relationship may need to vary depending on the expertise of the individual , the stage of the design process and the final goal . By appropriately combining multiple methodologies of human – AI collaboration , the design process can be enhanced and simplified . At one extreme of human – AI interaction , LLMs could provide all the input required for robot design , which the human follows blindly . The AI is then the inventor , addressing human questions and providing ‘creativity’ , technical knowledge and expertise , whereas the human deals with the technical implementation . This could foster the trans - fer and democratization of knowledge by enabling nonspecialists to realize robotic systems . For the first time in a computational design framework , the AI agent does not merely solve technical problems specified by the human , but rather proposes conceptual options to the human . In this sense , the LLM acts as the researcher , leveraging knowledge and finding interdisciplinary connections , while the human acts as a manager , providing direction to the design . A more moderate , yet powerful , approach is a collaborative explo - ration between the LLM and the human , augmenting the human’s expertise by leveraging the ability of the LLM to provide interdiscipli - nary , wide - ranging knowledge . In this second modality , the role of the LLM is to support the human in efficiently gathering knowledge from fields outside their personal experience , enriching the conception pro - cess . For an inherently interdisciplinary research area such as robotics , this has significant potential . By augmenting human knowledge , this methodology removes the limits imposed by a human’s education and takes place . The full conversation with ChatGPT supporting this case study is provided in the Supplementary Information . In the ideation phase , the human starts by asking the LLM what the future challenges are for humanity and promptly gets an overview of the main hazards , as shown in Fig . 1 . Next , the human selects the most interesting and promising direction , and through further dialogue narrows down the design space . This interaction can span multiple fields of knowledge and levels of abstraction , ranging from concepts to technical implementation . In this process the human is relying on the AI partner to access knowledge outside the human’s personal expertise . The AI model helps the human explore intersections between research fields , such as agriculture and robotics , and consider factors that are not part of an engineer’s typical training , such as which crop is economically most valuable to automate . Through conversation , the application is selected , and the LLM and the human converge to the technical design specifications , including the software , materials section , mechanism design and manufacturing methods . In the second , low - level phase of the design process , these direc - tions need to be translated into a physical and functioning robot . Although LLMs cannot currently generate entire CAD models , evaluate code or automatically fabricate a robot , recent advances have shown that AI algorithms can support the technical implementation of soft - ware 7 , mathematical reasoning 8 or even shape generation 9 . Although we expect that AI approaches will be able to generate these in the future , currently , the technical implementation remains a collaborative effort between AI models and humans . The human takes on a ‘technician’ role , optimizing the code proposed by the LLM , finalizing the CAD and fabricating the robot . This robot can then be tested in real - world scenarios , and further conversation with the LLM can be used to iterate on the design in the light of experimental evidence . As an example of " One way to build a gripper for handling crops would be to use silicone or rubber , which are both soft and flexible , helping to reduce the risk of crushing the crops " " Overall , a Dynamixel motor is suitable for actuating a gripper for picking tomatoes " " One possible shape for a gripper that is designed to grasp tomatoes could be a round or oval shape that is slightly larger than the tomato " " Here is an example of how you might use Python to control a Dynamixel motor " " One way to connect the oval shape of a gripper to a motor would be to use a gear or pulley system . This could involve attaching a pulley to the output shaft of the motor , and then connecting the gripper to the pulley using a linkage such as a belt , chain , or cable " a b Fig . 2 | An AI model designed this robotic gripper . a , Some of the technical suggestions generated by the LLM , including shape indications , code , component and material selection , and mechanism design . b , Guided by these inputs , a gripper was built and tested on real - world tasks , such as tomato picking , as shown at right . nature machine intelligence Volume 5 | June 2023 | 561 – 564 | 563 Comment supports a human in finding relevant connections between fields , mak - ing interdisciplinary research more accessible . However , the knowledge presented by LLMs may be narrow in scope and subject to errors . For fields far from the engineer’s expertise , they may not have the ability to fact check the validity of the AI - generated answers . This risk is pictori - ally represented in Fig . 3 . By providing only a small insight or window into vast and complex topics , interactions with LLMs could lead to misinterpretation and oversimplification , ultimately creating errors in the design and biases in the field . Finally , we can consider a third approach in which the LLM acts as a funnel , helping to refine the design process and providing technical input while the human remains the inventor or scientist involved in the process . The AI can assist with debugging , trou - bleshooting and the selection of methods , accelerating tedious and time - consuming processes . In this AI – human relationship , the knowledge and intuition of the human moderates the discussion , and the human is working within their scope of expertise so as to be critical of answers and suggestions . Robotic design is a creative , interdisciplinary and intellectual prop - erty ( IP ) - creating process that currently relies on highly skilled profes - sionals . We believe that a careful combination of these approaches could revolutionize this process . However , introducing LLMs into the design of robots introduces questions regarding potential negative effects . LLMs must be regarded as an evolution of search engines , generating the “most probable” answer to a given prompt 10 . These answers can be incorrect , and when not appropriately fact checked or validated , the LLM output could be misleading or , in the worst case , dangerous . However , unlike search engines , LLMs can propose ways to integrate ‘knowledge’ and apply it to unseen problems , thus potentially giving a false impression that new knowledge is being generated . This could prevent humans from taking responsibility for the solutions developed 11 , which could prohibit and stagnate the advancement of new robotic technologies and designs . Another issue with the wide - spread use of LLMs in robotic design is the bias toward solutions that the model statistically prefers , which may hinder the exploration of new technological solutions . Finally , there are key issues related to plagiarism , traceability and IP 12 . Can a design created via LLM be considered to be novel , given that it builds only on prior knowledge 13 , and how can this previous knowledge be referenced ? As this technology matures , there are also longer - term considerations including data privacy , the frequency of retraining and how new knowledge should be integrated to maintain the usability and relevancy of this tool . There are also significant societal and ethical implications resulting from human – AI interactions for robot design . If LLMs are used to automate high - level cognitive design tasks , humans may instead take on more technical jobs . This could redefine the set High level design discussion Large language models Real - world evaluation Design specifications Technical implementation Personalexpertise Self - checklimit Intuitionlimit Unkownfields Decreasing knowledge Biology Mechanics Control theory Medicine Literature Computer science Electronics Neuroscience Materialsscience Agriculture LLM contribution Fig . 3 | Opportunities and risks of human – LLM design collaboration . Left , the two phases of the design process : first the human and LLM discuss the specifics application and of the design , and later the human implements them . Right , a pictorial representation of the knowledge spanned during the high - level discussion . Thanks to the LLM , the human designer can efficiently access zones of knowledge outside their personal expertise and link different of these areas through questions . This , however , comes at the cost of risking accepting wrong inputs for fields too distant from the designer’s knowledge . Whereas in a traditional learning process the designer expands their personal experience radially , with LLM - based explorations the designer can access only limited zones of knowledge , thus risking misinterpretation . nature machine intelligence Volume 5 | June 2023 | 561 – 564 | 564 Comment of skills that are required by an engineer and their role in the economy and society . To conclude , the robotics community must identify how to lever - age these powerful tools to accelerate the advancement of robots in an ethical , sustainable and socially empowering way . We must develop means of acknowledging the use of LLMs 14 and also of being able to trace the lineage of LLM - aided designs . Looking forward , we strongly believe that LLMs will open up many exciting possibilities and that , if opportunely managed , they will be a force for good . The design process could be fully automated by combining collaborating LLMs to ask and answer questions , with one helping to refine the other . This approach could also be augmented with automated fabrication to allow a fully autonomous pipeline for the creation of bespoke and optimized robotic systems 15 . Ultimately , there is an open question for the future of this field of how these tools can be leveraged to assist robot developers without limiting the creativity , innovation and scientific endeavours required for robotics to rise to the challenges of the twenty - first century . Francesco Stella 1 , 2 , Cosimo Della Santina 2 , 3 & Josie Hughes 1 1 CREATE Lab , EPFL , Lausanne , Switzerland . 2 Department of Cognitive Robotics , Delft University of Technology , Delft , the Netherlands . 3 Institute of Robotics and Mechatronics , German Aerospace Center ( DLR ) , Wessling , Germany . e - mail : francesco . stella @ epfl . ch Published online : 7 June 2023 References 1 . Brants , T . , Popat , A . C . , Xu , P . , Och , F . J . & Dean , J . In Proc . 2007 Joint Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing and Computational Natural Language Learning ( EMNLP - CoNLL ) 858 – 867 ( ACM , 2007 ) . 2 . Budzianowski , P . & Vulić , I . Preprint at https : / / arxiv . org / 1907 . 05774 ( 2019 ) . 3 . Brohan , A . et al . In Conference on Robot Learning 287 – 318 ( PMLR , 2023 ) . 4 . Huang , W . , Abbeel , P . , Pathak , D . & Mordatch , I . Preprint at https : / / arxiv . org / abs / 2201 . 07207 ( 2022 ) . 5 . Wei , J . et al . Preprint at https : / / doi . org / 10 . 48550 / arXiv . 2206 . 07682 ( 2022 ) . 6 . Floridi , L . & Chiriatti , M . Minds Mach . 30 ( 4 ) , 681 – 694 ( 2020 ) . 7 . Chen , M . et al . Preprint at https : / / doi . org / 10 . 48550 / arXiv . 2107 . 03374 ( 2021 ) . 8 . Wolfram , S . Stephen Wolfram Writings https : / / go . nature . com / 3ozHgNf ( 2023 ) . 9 . Ramesh , A . et al . Preprint at https : / / doi . org / 10 . 48550 / arXiv . 2204 . 06125 ( 2022 ) . 10 . Shanahan , M . Preprint at https : / / doi . org / 10 . 48550 / arXiv . 2212 . 03551 ( 2022 ) . 11 . Stokel - Walker , C . Nature 613 , 620 – 621 ( 2023 ) . 12 . Vincent , J . The Verge https : / / go . nature . com / 3N2HTIB ( 2023 ) . 13 . George , A . & Walsh , T . Nat . Mach . Intell . 4 , 1057 – 1060 ( 2022 ) . 14 . Anonymous . Nat . Mach . Intell . 5 , 1 ( 2023 ) . 15 . Stella , F . & Hughes , J . Front . Robot . AI 9 , 1059026 ( 2023 ) . Competing interests The authors declare no competing interests . Additional information Supplementary information The online version contains supplementary material available at https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1038 / s42256 - 023 - 00669 - 7 . Peer review information Nature Machine Intelligence thanks David Howard for their contribution to the peer review of this work .