1 What is the message ? Perspectives on Visual Data Communication Laura Koesten , Kathleen Gregory , Regina Schuster , Christian Knoll , Sarah Davies , Torsten Möller Senior Member , IEEE Abstract —Data visualizations are used to communicate messages to diverse audiences . It is unclear whether interpretations of these visualizations match the messages their creators aim to convey . In a mixed - methods study , we investigate how data in the popular science magazine Scientiﬁc American are visually communicated and understood . We ﬁrst analyze visualizations about climate change and pandemics published in the magazine over a ﬁfty - year period . Acting as chart readers , we then interpret visualizations with and without textual elements , identifying takeaway messages and creating ﬁeld notes . Finally , we compare a sample of our interpreted messages to the intended messages of chart producers , drawing on interviews conducted with magazine staff . These data allow us to explore understanding visualizations through three perspectives : that of the charts , visualization readers , and visualization producers . Building on our ﬁndings from a thematic analysis , we present in - depth insights into data visualization sensemaking , particularly regarding the role of messages and textual elements ; we propose a message typology , and we consider more broadly how messages can be conceptualized and understood . Index Terms — (cid:70) 1 M OTIVATION D ATA visualizations are used to communicate complex data to diverse audiences [ 1 , 2 ] . This is particularly true for data related to climate change and public health , urgent topics which have long been visually communicated in popular science publications , such as Scientiﬁc American . We still know surprisingly little about how data about such topics are visually communicated and interpreted by various publics . Which ‘vis’ , or visualization , types are employed and which messages do they convey ? How do these messages and visualizations work together with , or in opposition to , text and other forms of contextual information in an article ? How are these visualizations made sense of and understood ? To explore these questions , we conducted a mixed - methods study examining a corpus of over ﬁfty years of visual data communication about climate change and pandemics in Scientiﬁc American , one of the longest - published popular science magazines in the English - speaking world [ 3 ] . We draw together perspectives from data visualization , science communication , and sensemaking research to study the types of visualizations and their messages in this corpus , and we investigate our own processes of engaging with and understanding visualizations . Studying how readers make sense of visual data commu - nication , in particular how they determine the ‘messages’ of visualizations , is challenging for numerous reasons [ 4 , 5 , 6 , 7 ] . What readers take away from a visualization – its ‘message’ – is a function composed of the designer and their intended message and design choices , as well as the reader and their subjective experience , knowledge , and judgments [ 8 , 9 ] . While deriving a takeaway message from a visualization is seen as a part of comprehension [ 10 , 11 ] and integral to the sensemaking process [ 9 ] , such messages are often not clearly deﬁned and are complex to measure [ 11 ] . In this work , we use the written articulation of messages as a way to surface and study sensemaking processes , informed by earlier work on data - centric sensemaking [ 12 , 13 ] . Visualizations are not just composed of visual elements ; they co - exist with textual elements in the form of titles , captions , labels , and annotations , and are often embedded in the context of broader texts . A growing but limited number of empirical studies provide evidence that textual components play a role in how people engage with and remember visualizations and that this process differs for different people [ 14 , 15 ] . Despite knowing that text is important , there is still a relative lack of research exploring how text and visual elements work together – or how they work alone – during the sensemaking process . In this work , we contribute to this research space by thinking about how to study the sensemaking of visualizations and the role of text within that process . We do this by investigating visualizations on their own ﬁrst , without much textual context ; we then investigate them within their surrounding text in order to gain insights into the role of text on and around visualizations . We present an analysis of 171 visualizations from 58 print and online articles published over 50 years in Scientiﬁc American through different perspectives , focusing on the messages that these visualizations carry . We characterize the visualization corpus descriptively as well as semantically and engage in an in - depth message creation process . We discuss the ﬁndings from a thematic analysis of these messages as well as ﬁeld notes documenting our engagement process . We complement our methods by comparing a sample of the messages with the intended messages of the visual - ization producers themselves , drawn from an interview study with 11 current and past staff members of Scientiﬁc American . This approach allows us to explore our questions from the perspectives of the charts , their readers , and to an extent , their producers . Insights from this study contribute to work in human com - puter interaction , science communication , and data visualization research and can lay the groundwork for investigating how data about climate change and pandemics are made accessible and understandable to different publics . The principal contributions of this work are : • A characterization of a corpus of visual data communica - tion to public audiences over time a r X i v : 2304 . 10544v1 [ c s . H C ] 12 A p r 2023 2 • Insights into the roles of text in data visualization sense - making and human chart interaction • A typology of the messages communicated in the corpus which can be useful for design and message articulation • A conceptual / methodological contribution to how we study and think about messages • Recommendations for data visualization and science com - munication for public audiences 2 B ACKGROUND In this section we review literature related to data visualizations in science communication , visual sensemaking , and message cre - ation as a method to study sensemaking . 2 . 1 Data visualization research in the context of public science communication Data visualizations communicate data and models and are used to inform public audiences on topics of key societal relevance , i . e . climate change and COVID - 19 [ 1 , 16 , 17 , 18 ] . Encounters with charts are increasingly a part of people’s daily life , including scientists , journalists , and politicians but also lay audiences [ 1 , 2 ] . Charts are also widely used in science communication [ 19 ] . Public science communication has been integral to the practice of scientiﬁc research since its earliest days [ 20 ] . A recent summary of the ( European ) landscape [ 21 ] suggests that traditional forms of science communication are changing drastically , particularly in recent years , to include new media . This shift has also led to a multitude of visual modalities and an overall increase in visualizations and the realms in which they are used . [ 22 , 23 ] . Scientiﬁc American , the oldest continuously published maga - zine in the United States , is situated between scientiﬁc journals and the mass media in the science communication landscape . Alongside other popular science magazines ( i . e . New Scientist or the German language GEO ) and more generalized outlets which regularly publish on climate change and COVID - 19 ( i . e . The Atlantic or The New Yorker ) , Scientiﬁc American offers dedicated science - related coverage to educated and interested audiences [ 24 ] . The magazine publishes in - depth feature articles , news stories , and expert opinions as well as other media , both print and online , reaching millions of people globally each month 1 . Scientiﬁc American has been the subject of prior research , which has , e . g . , discussed the role of the magazine for independent science enthusiasts [ 25 ] and linguistic strategies and word usage patterns in the context of the scientiﬁc discourse [ 26 , 27 ] . Data visualizations in Scientiﬁc American have not yet been the subject of research . While there is a vast amount of research on interactions with data visualizations in general , most of it has focused on perceptual studies investigating visual encodings of speciﬁc data types ( see Franconeri et al . [ 28 ] for a review ) rather than on sensemaking processes . Based on such studies , the data visualization commu - nity has proposed a wide range of broad and speciﬁc guidelines to tailor chart design to our visual system ( e . g . Bertin [ 29 ] , Cleveland and McGill [ 30 ] , Munzner [ 31 ] ) . 1 . https : / / www . scientiﬁcamerican . com / page / about - scientiﬁc - american ( Re - trieved in September 2022 ) 2 . 2 Sensemaking of data visualizations Here , we provide an overview of sensemaking research in relation to data visualizations and deﬁne what we understand as ‘messages’ of a visualization to elaborate the theoretical basis of this work . 2 . 2 . 1 Overview and cognitive perspective In contrast to perceptual studies , people’s ability to understand visualizations is less explored . While some authors have attempted to address this , evaluating understanding and connected cognitive processes remains challenging [ 4 , 32 , 33 , 34 , 35 ] . The extraction of semantic meaning from a visualization is guided by a complex interplay of bottom - up and top - down cognitive processing , as literature in cognitive science shows [ 9 ] . Making sense of a visualization is a multi - stage process of encoding , decoding and reasoning activities [ 9 , 34 , 36 ] . The concept of ‘sensemaking’ has been well - researched in a variety of disciplines , including psychology ( e . g . [ 5 ] ) and human computer interaction ( e . g . [ 36 , 37 ] ) . Visualizations as represen - tations of data are often embedded in the epistemology of data science [ 38 ] , and at the same time require the reader to decode graphical as well as textual elements . Data - centric sensemaking comes with its own challenges which include conceptually ‘plac - ing’ data within contexts of creation , disciplinary norms , and the world as a whole [ 12 ] . Visualization reading requires in that sense different types of literacies ( e . g . , textual literacy , data literacy , visual literacy ) , that , combined by the reader , lead to individual conclusions [ 9 , 39 ] . Related concepts to what we discuss as a key part of the sensemaking of visualizations – determining the ‘message’ – are those of insight [ 40 ] , communicative intent [ 41 ] , different levels of understanding [ 10 ] or reader takeaways [ 14 ] . What these concepts and studies have in common is that they focus on the notion of extracting meaning from a visualization ( how people make sense of it ) rather than low - level , perceptual tasks that are arguably easier to measure [ 39 ] . Insight , while perhaps the closest concept to how we deﬁne messages , is vaguely deﬁned [ 40 ] and , tends to be seen as a broader concept which is more related to the reader’s prior knowledge and an expected knowledge gain [ 10 , 42 ] . In this work , we put the emphasis on the messages that visualizations afford , without clear tasks or an expectation of new knowledge gain . This focus is appropriate for our case study on Scientiﬁc American , as diverse readers encounter visualizations in the print and online magazine without necessarily anticipating a new knowledge gain or having a deﬁned task to accomplish . 2 . 2 . 2 Textual elements in sensemaking of visualizations Text , in the form of titles , captions or annotations , is combined with visualizations in order to tell stories with data [ 43 , 44 ] ; such textual elements inﬂuence the understandability of charts and what readers take away from them . Despite this , the relationship be - tween textual and visual elements has not received much attention in visualization research , although there are recent signs that this is changing [ 45 ] . In a study combining eye tracking with recall activities , Borkin et al . [ 15 ] demonstrated the importance of text in the overall memorability of visualizations , particularly chart titles , labels , and paragraphs describing the chart in detail . In more recent work , Lundgard and Satyanarayan [ 46 ] propose a four - level classiﬁcation for text accompanying visualizations based 3 on types of semantic content . These levels include i ) general descriptions of types of visual elements ; ii ) statistical concepts and their relations ; iii ) identifying trends and patterns ; and iv ) descriptions incorporating broader contexts . Stokes et al . [ 14 ] built on this classiﬁcation to investigate the effect of text with different semantic levels and locations on a chart . The majority of chart readers in this study preferred heavily annotated visualizations . The semantic content was also mirrored in readers’ descriptions of their takeaway message , i . e . if the text on the chart described statistical concepts , this was also present in the takeaway messages . In addition to chart annotations , captions and titles also impact what readers take away from a visualization . Much existing work in this space examines how captions can be used to increase the accessibility of charts , i . e . through the use of screen readers and voice interfaces [ 47 ] . While there are approaches for automated caption generation ( e . g . the work of Feng and Lapata [ 48 ] ) , little work explores the characteristics of ‘meaningful’ captions from a reader perspective . As an exception , Kim et al . [ 49 ] conducted a study inves - tigating the effect of captions mentioning salient features of line graphs on reader takeaways . When captions contained information highlighting the most notable feature of a visualization , reader descriptions also mentioned these visually salient features . How - ever , when captions did not mention the most salient aspect of a chart , readers still described these visual elements . In contrast , Kong et al . [ 50 ] found that a chart’s title nearly always inﬂuenced readers’ interpretations more than the visual aspects of a chart . The work of Ottley et al . [ 51 ] suggests that when textual and visual elements are provided together , chart readers can have difﬁculty integrating these two sources of information . Taken together , these and other studies suggest that the rela - tionship between textual and visual elements is complex ; at times and for certain readers text is more important in understanding and interpreting charts , while at other times visual elements are more signiﬁcant [ 14 , 52 , 53 ] . 2 . 2 . 3 Production perspectives and context in sensemaking Understanding data visualization sensemaking includes taking into account how visualizations are produced to consider the socio - technical factors affecting chart design [ 54 ] . While there has been less work on charts speciﬁcally , visual representations ( particu - larly images ; see [ 55 ] ) are not seen as neutral carriers of facts , but rather as the products of practices such as data collection methods and mathematical analysis and the constraints of visualization conventions [ 56 ] . Visualizations are social , developed according to ‘logics’ that are collectively deﬁned [ 57 ] ; this is also visible in the collaborative nature of data - centric work [ 58 ] . It is also not clear whether public interpretations of visualizations match the intended messages of chart creators . What may seem like obvious choices to producers – e . g . using maps to visualize pandemic data – may not actually be the most effective form of communication [ 59 ] . 2 . 3 Message creation as a tool to study sensemaking Messages can be seen as individual summaries of the key content of a chart , as interpreted by the reader or intended by the producer . Messages are not just summaries of data ; they also include the social or emotional information that is implicitly communicated . Messages embedded within data visualizations travel from chart producers to readers , where they are decoded and interpreted in context [ 41 ] . Following transmissive theories of communication ( e . g . Shannon and Weaver [ 60 ] ) , data visualizations can be seen as noisy communication channels at best , even when stripped of their social rhetorics [ 61 ] . Through our methods , we attempt to surface what ‘matters most’ to both readers and producers of data visualizations , creating common ground between the two groups [ 62 , 63 ] . Building on prior work , we use message creation as a form of summarization activity that requires comprehension . Hidi and Anderson [ 64 ] have explored cognitive processes used for summa - rization . Text summarization has been used as a task to evaluate recall and language abilities [ 65 ] ; textual and verbal summariza - tion of datasets has been used to assess people’s understanding of data [ 12 , 13 ] . Meaningful abstractive textual summaries [ 66 ] of visualizations are not yet automatically generable , at least not for visualizations in the wild containing meaningful semantic messages [ 67 ] . Gambhir and Gupta [ 68 ] also point to the lack of existing objective criteria for what is important to include in a summary . We use message creation to explore the sensemaking pro - cesses involved in comprehending data visualizations . We see visualizations as information objects studied in this work , and the accompanying articles ( as well as Scientiﬁc American as a whole ) as part of the environment in which visualizations are situated . 3 M ETHODOLOGY We designed a multi - step methodology to investigate the following research questions in the context of climate change and pandemic visualizations in Scientiﬁc American : Which visualization types and characteristics are employed in the corpus and which mes - sages do they convey ? How do these messages and visualizations work together with , or in opposition to , textual elements ? How are these visualizations made sense of and understood , considering the holistic lens described in Section 2 ? Drawing on work in data visualization research , we ﬁrst coded the characteristics of visualizations and text for 171 visualizations from 58 articles published over a 50 year time period . Taking the perspective of visualization readers , we interpreted these charts with and without textual elements and identiﬁed the main messages which these visualizations communicated to us . We documented our interaction processes in ﬁeld notes to understand more about our own sensemaking efforts throughout coding and message writing . Finally , we conducted interviews with Scientiﬁc American staff to understand more about the creation of intended messages and their relation to visualization design . Figure 1 provides an overview of our study design . This study is part of a project which has undergone ethical screening according to the guidelines of our institution and has been determined to be low - risk . 3 . 1 Article and visualization corpus We partnered with Scientiﬁc American to obtain 100 print and online articles containing data visualizations . The articles in this original set were published between 1918 – 2022 on topics related to climate change and COVID - 19 or other pandemics ( such as the ﬂu or viruses more generally ) . In order to keep our in - depth qualitative analysis manageable , we created a sample of 58 articles from these 100 articles for analysis . Our primary interest in the study was to look at recent visualizations ; however , we were also 4 Fig . 1 : Methodological process according to three perspectives ( Number of messages refers to messages with and without text for all four coders ) interested in observing changes in visual data communication over time . Our corpus of 58 articles therefore included all articles re - cently published between 2017 – 2022 ( n = 43 ) as well as 15 articles published between 1970 – 2016 , which were randomly sampled in 5 - year groups . Only 3 articles of the original 100 were published prior to 1970 ; these articles were excluded from the analysis 2 59 % of articles in the sample were originally published in the print magazine . These articles included longer , in - depth feature pieces ( n = 27 ) , with an average page length of 8 , as well as brief ‘graphic articles’ ( n = 8 ) , consisting of a single graphic with short text blocks . The remaining 23 articles were online articles , which were shorter , news - oriented pieces . The 58 articles were divided between two coding teams , composed of two researchers each . Each team manually extracted data visualizations from the assigned articles . We deﬁned data visualizations as any visual representation of data , excluding pho - tographic images , tables and explanatory diagrams . We created two versions of each visualization : ‘vis ( no - text ) ’ visualizations ( n = 171 ) which had textual elements removed , i . e . captions , extra text on charts , and titles ( text which acted as labels or legends was not removed ) . Corresponding ‘vis ( text ) ’ visualizations included all textual elements ( n = 171 ) . The majority of the articles in the sample were about climate change ( n = 49 ) ; nine articles pertained to pandemics ; eight were about COVID - 19 speciﬁcally . This subject distribution reﬂects both the recency of the COVID - 19 pandemic as well as the long - standing coverage of climate topics in Scientiﬁc American . A single article could contain multiple visualizations ; one COVID - 19 article , e . g . , contained a total of 22 individual charts . A small number of articles ( n = 3 ) had elements and visualizations combining the two topics , i . e . the impact of COVID - 19 on carbon dioxide emissions . Weather extremes were the most prevalent topic in the climate change related articles , while the overall death toll due to COVID - 19 was most prevalent in pandemic - related articles . A table detailing the overall subject of the articles is in the supplementary material ( S1 ) . 3 . 2 Code book development for chart characterization We aimed to characterize and identify patterns in visual data communication in our corpus . To do this , we developed a code 2 . The three excluded articles were from disparate years ; one was published in 1918 and one in 1959 . One article did not have a visible date . book drawing on existing typologies for chart classiﬁcation [ 69 ] , visualization tasks [ 70 , 71 ] , and types of data encodings [ 31 ] . We broadly categorize our codes in three categories , descriptive codes referring to chart types or types of text elements ; semantic codes about chart characteristics , informed by literature ( as exempliﬁed in Table 1 ) ; and subjective codes referring to the framing of a chart , or the perceived effort of coding . The code book went through three rounds of iteration combin - ing both deductive and inductive thematic analysis [ 72 ] over a 2 . 5 - month period with the full research team , consisting of two coding teams plus a senior data visualization expert . The ﬁnalized code book is organized in four categories corresponding to sections of a publication ( articles , charts , data and text ) . Descriptions of all codes and sub - codes are detailed in the supplementary material ( S2 ) . The corpus was evenly split between the two teams . Teams independently coded the visualizations which had been prepared and stripped of text by the opposite team , using atlas . ti , and each team member wrote messages derived from the charts ( Section 3 . 3 ) . We did not systematically read entire articles , but we did read and code shorter blocks of summarizing text , i . e . abstracts , and call - out boxes . After independent coding was complete , teams held six one - hour consensus meetings to compare the chart characterization codes . Any points of difference were taken to the full research team . We chose consensus coding as a validation approach over other quantitative measures , due to the complexity of many of our characterization codes . Differences were used as prompts for deeper discussion and sensemaking of the data , and the process of code development was used to discover and collaboratively arrive at themes [ 73 ] . We reached consensus for all chart characterization codes . We did not aim to agree on codes related to framing and ease , as these were designed to capture individual experiences and opinions . 3 . 3 Message creation and analysis This section details our process for creating and analyzing mes - sages as well as ﬁeld notes . These methods allowed us to surface sensemaking processes and the role of textual elements through engaging actively with the charts as well as reﬂecting on this engagement . 5 Semantic codes Reason & reference Grouping Categorization , binning , or aggregation is used in order to visualize , objects organized around a set of meaningful groups or categories , e . g . ; age , size ( e . g . ; Hullman and Diakopoulos [ 44 ] ) Color Color is used to encode data ( e . g . ; Bartram et al . [ 74 ] , Silva et al . [ 75 ] ) Temporal historical Time in the past is represented ( e . g . ; Koesten et al . [ 13 ] , Aigner et al . [ 76 ] ) Temporal predictive Predictions for the future are displayed ( e . g . ; Koesten et al . [ 13 ] , Aigner et al . [ 76 ] ) Exact values Precision level of numerical labels , human - readable numbers are used ( e . g . ; Talbot et al . [ 77 ] ) Geospatial Geospatial phenomena are represented ( e . g . ; Koesten et al . [ 13 ] , Li [ 78 ] ) Humanizing elements Visual techniques to make data more relatable to human experience are used , eg . ; pictograms or drawings of people , animals or physical objects ( e . g . ; Engebretsen and Kennedy [ 79 ] , de Macêdo Morais et al . [ 80 ] ) . TABLE 1 : Examples of code book deﬁnitions and reasoning . Codes in italic are likely inﬂuenced by our choice of topics . ( Table highlights a selection of codes used in Figure 4 to present ﬁndings ; the full code book can be found in the supplementary material ( S2 ) ) Before the coding process described in Section 3 . 2 , each researcher wrote an initial perceived message for each ‘text - free’ visualization , referred to as message of vis ( no - text ) . These messages describe what we considered to be the main takeaway or primary communicative intent of the chart . Once the coding of an article and all associated visualizations was complete , we wrote messages of vis ( text ) , which took into account the text which had been previously removed . This process was done by two researchers per chart , resulting in 342 messages of vis ( no - text ) and 342 messages of vis ( text ) . Team members , who we refer to as Coders 1 - 4 ( C1 - C4 ) , also created detailed ﬁeld notes [ 81 ] documenting experiences of chart characterization and sensemaking . We documented questions for the chart producers as well as observations and reﬂections about the messages , framing , and our own emotional engagement . As we wrote the ﬁeld notes and interacted with the charts , we acted in a dual role , both as researchers investigating visual communication and as members of the target audience of Scien - tiﬁc American , who are considered to be educated , scientiﬁcally curious members of the public ( as veriﬁed in our interviews ) . Situating our research and ourselves in this way allowed us to explore visual data communication from the visualization reader standpoint , as well as to analyze and characterize the charts . Messages and ﬁeld notes were thematically analyzed [ 72 ] . Themes for message types , content and types of change between messages of vis ( no - text ) and ( text ) were primarily inductively de - veloped through open coding , but were also informed by literature on data summarization [ 12 ] . Field notes were closely read by two senior researchers , and themes were inductively developed . 3 . 4 Interviews and message comparison We drew out the perspective of chart creators via interviews focusing on a comparison of the intended messages with the messages we understood , for a sample of the visualizations . We conducted 11 one - hour semi - structured interviews with current and past members of the Scientiﬁc American staff . Partic - ipants ( P ) worked , e . g . , as text editors , graphics editors , visualiza - tion designers , and in leadership positions . Seven participants were very experienced in their role , with over 15 years of experience ; three reported having between 6 and 15 years of experience ; and one participant had 1 year of experience . In order to protect the anonymity of participants , we describe our interview participants at an aggregate level only . Prior to the interview , participants selected an article with visualizations which they had recently worked on about climate change or COVID - 19 . During the interview , we asked participants to walk us through the process of producing the article and its visualizations . We asked further questions related to messages and engagement . Each interview protocol was tailored to match participants’ expertise and professional role . As the ﬁnal step in our methodology , we asked participants involved in creating the visualizations in our corpus to provide their intended message for a sample of charts ( n = 18 ) . We then compared their intended messages to the messages which we had derived . In this paper , we focus our analysis of the interviews on the results of this comparison and the planning of visualization messages . 4 FINDINGS In this section , we describe the ﬁndings of our analysis of 171 visualizations ( a snapshot of which are shown in Figure 2 ) and their corresponding messages . We present our ﬁndings according to the three perspectives on visualization messages outlined in Figure 1 : i . the chart perspective , ii . the reader perspective and , iii . the producer perspective . 4 . 1 Chart perspective : Chart characterization and de - sign In this section , we characterize the charts in the corpus in order to provide context for our messages . We then draw on ﬁeld notes to look at how those characteristics impacted our own sensemaking processes . All percentages reported are rounded to the nearest whole number . 4 . 1 . 1 Chart types Nearly two - thirds of charts in the corpus were line - based vi - sualizations ( Fig . 3 ) . A line - based visualization could depict a single trend line , but it could also refer to more complex ways of using lines to encode data , i . e . as part of a map or to indicate a reference point in time . Other chart types were generalized area charts , including maps ( 31 % ) , charts with point - based techniques ( 20 % ) , generalized bar charts ( 14 % ) and charts using continuous color - based encoding ( 12 % ) . The chart types also reﬂect that the majority of visualizations depict quantitative data , whereas few ( n = 10 ) present categorical data . Over one third of visualizations ( 37 % ) combined multiple chart types . 43 % of charts were situated together within an article , either as small multiples , a series of similar charts using the same axes or scales , or more broadly , as multiple composites , where different chart types or different scales were used ( see Vis A and C in Fig . 2 ) . 6 Fig . 2 : Example charts . Article references can be found in the Scientiﬁc American Article Bibliography ( S3 ) in the supplementary material : A [ 56 ] , B [ 9 ] , C [ 26 ] , D [ 33 ] , E [ 16 ] , F [ 33 ] , G [ 27 ] , H [ 58 ] . ( A , C , D , E , F , H : Reproduced with permission . Copyright © ( 2022 ) SCIENTIFIC AMERICAN , a Division of Springer Nature America , Inc . All rights reserved . ; B : Reproduced with permission by Lucy Reading - Ikkanda . ; G : Reproduced with permission by Andrew Stokes . More information can be found in the Scientiﬁc American Copyright Details ( S4 ) in the supplementary material . ) 4 . 1 . 2 Chart characteristics Color was used in the majority of visualizations to encode data ( 60 % ) ( Fig . 4 ) . There was little use of humanizing elements ( Table 1 ) or images in the charts themselves ( 8 % ) . It was also difﬁcult to read exact values from visualizations in 33 % of the charts , where either rounded numbers or categories describing quantitative data , i . e . , ‘high temperature’ were used . Slightly under two - thirds of visualizations ( 61 % ) , used group - ings to present data . Groupings were used to put data into the context of the larger world , i . e . ‘counties with the most excess deaths due to COVID - 19’ ; geospatial and temporal data were also broadly grouped together , i . e . ‘Central Paciﬁc Ocean’ or the ‘Roman Warm Period’ . 24 % of all charts contained geospatial information . Of these , the majority were either general area charts , i . e . maps , or line - based visualizations . The majority of all charts included some type of temporal data , either about historical time ( 55 % ) or future predictions ( 24 % ) . Historical and future time were sometimes present in the same visualization . Historical data were based on observations , but were also reconstructed through models , i . e . of past climate scenarios or distant time periods . Geospatial and temporal details are a common thread across our analyses ( see also Section 4 . 2 . 3 ) . We also coded the visualizations in terms of missing data , uncertainty , and their use of text on the charts themselves . A small fraction of charts ( 6 % ) mentioned missing data directly on the chart itself via a label or visual representation , as in Vis G in Figure 2 , where counties with missing data were indicated using a separate color . Representations of uncertainty were present on 15 % of charts , most commonly by indicating a range of possible values ( see Vis B and Vis H in Fig . 2 ) . Captions also included mentions of missing data and uncertainty , as well as information about how data were collected . It is likely that we did not detect all textual descriptions of missing data , uncertainty , and data collection methods , as this information was often embedded within the article text , which was outside of the scope of our systematic coding . 54 % of the visualizations had instances of text on them ; some included several types of textual annotations . Occasionally this text referred to the data source , but most commonly it contained explanations , ranging from a sentence to multiple paragraphs , describing the chart’s content , highlighting data , or detailing how to read a chart . Coders assessed a visualization’s overall framing at the end of the coding process ; the majority of visualizations were determined to have a neutral framing ( 60 % ) , while 36 % were assessed as being negative . Only 4 % of visualizations were seen as being positively framed , perhaps reﬂecting the severity of the topics themselves . 4 . 1 . 3 Effects of chart types and characteristics on sense - making This section draws on our ﬁeld notes to present the effects of chart types and chart design characteristics on our own sensemaking processes . As seen in Figure 4 , color was often used to clearly distinguish between different types of data , scenarios and timepoints . We found some color uses to be perceptually difﬁcult , i . e . when differentiating between similar colors such as red and orange on a single line . While the majority of the corpus consisted of common chart types ( Fig . 3 ) , there were also instances of less common charts or visualizations which combined chart types . Encountering different chart types was both challenging and stimulating : I struggled with this vis at ﬁrst , as it looks a bit different than other visualizations I have seen , even though the elements and chart types are common ( point and bar ) . After a minute , though , when I got the feel for how the 7 Fig . 3 : Descriptive corpus characteristics : chart types ( overall number ( and % ) of chart type in corpus , and % within bars comparing messages of vis ( no - text ) to messages of vis ( text ) in 4 categories : different , partly different , same and same across both coders ) Note : a single visualization could be coded as multiple chart types . pieces work together , I found that I really like the way the points or nodes provide an in - depth look at some of the counties ( Field note excerpt , C2 , Vis C ) . We also found it challenging to interpret individual visual elements in charts with a busier or more cluttered design . Com - paring and relating data points , categories , and time scales to each other was a common thread in how we worked to understand the charts in the corpus . Visualizations combining different timescales or those presenting historical and future time required particular effort . It’s really difﬁcult to balance and understand the different timescales in these charts . Vis 3 for example has data from storms in 2002 , while data on the chart is for current and future levels ( Field note excerpt , C2 ) . Our sensemaking processes also involved relating and compar - ing individual visualizations to each other , as in the case of small multiples or multiple composite charts , which were commonly used in our corpus . The use of multiple charts was helpful in working through complex concepts , tracing patterns over time , or detecting anomalies or missing data . At other times , we found this to be overwhelming , as in the case of an online article with 92 small charts . We also struggled when there was a different focus or level of granularity in the various texts accompanying charts . The main informative factors are the small headings next to the individual charts which tell a coherent story . How - ever , they do not fully ﬁt the summarizing information on top of the charts ( Field note excerpt , C1 ) . 4 . 2 Reader perspective : Message analysis In this section , we begin by examining how our messages changed in the presence of textual elements . We do this both in relation to the chart perspective presented in Section 4 . 1 and by classifying the types of change which textual elements afforded . We then propose a typology of our messages , based on visualizations both with and without text . 4 . 2 . 1 Change in messages according to chart types and characterization Approximately two - thirds of the messages of vis ( text ) were different from their corresponding initial messages of vis ( no - text ) . 27 % of messages of vis ( text ) stayed exactly the same , even given textual context . The remaining messages were partly different and involved only minor changes , i . e . adding a single word or short phrase . Examples of messages of vis ( no - text versus text ) for charts in Figure 2 for all coders are part of the supplementary material ( S5 . T1 ) . Figure 3 presents changes between messages of vis ( no - text ) and ( text ) according to chart type . More messages of vis ( no - text ) and ( text ) for bar charts ( 48 % ) and point - based charts ( 40 % ) remained the same compared to other chart types . The majority of messages of vis ( no - text ) and ( text ) for infographics and schematic representations were different ( slightly over 80 % ) . Our sample included considerably fewer charts in these categories , however , making direct comparisons with other categories is difﬁcult . Line - based visualizations , charts with continuous color - based encoding , and general area charts show similar distributions to each other , with over 60 % of messages of vis ( no - text ) being different to messages of vis ( text ) . Line charts , however , had a slightly greater percentage of messages which were partly the same . There are no strong trends for the inﬂuence of chart char - acteristics on differences between messages of vis ( no - text ) and ( text ) ( Figure 4 ) . However , roughly 35 % of messages of vis ( no - text ) and ( text ) remained the same for charts with categorization of data in groups and those using color to encode data . Only the display of future temporal information had a higher proportion of messages being the same ( 41 % ) . Again , it must be noted that there were fewer charts with future temporal information . The trends reported here also do not take interdependencies between 8 Fig . 4 : Chart characteristics : Corpus characteristics summary ( overall number ( and % ) of chart type in corpus and % comparing messages of vis ( no - text ) to messages of vis ( text ) in 4 categories : different , partly different , same and same across both coders ) different chart characteristics into account , and must be carefully interpreted . 4 . 2 . 2 Types of change afforded by textual elements We identiﬁed four broad categories of change between messages of vis ( no - text ) and ( text ) : changes related to i ) granularity ; ii ) sensemaking processes ; iii ) types of detail ; and iv ) personal elements . Typifying these changes provides insight into the role of text when interpreting visualizations . Changes in granularity . Most messages of vis ( text ) gained content or detail , ranging from major additions to slight changes . We see this also in the median lengths of messages of vis ( no - text ) and ( text ) , where messages of vis ( no - text ) had an overall median length of 145 characters and messages of vis ( text ) had a longer median length of 187 characters , with variations per coder ( supplementary material S5 . T2 ) . Some messages of vis ( text ) had less detail than the corresponding messages of vis ( no - text ) . Messages with less detail could be a result of abstracting underlying phenomena or trends , which might represent higher order thinking ( see also Table 2 ) . Examples of messages with different changes in granularity are found in the supplementary material ( S5 . T3 ) . Changes related to sensemaking processes . Messages in - cluded different levels of abstraction from the content of a visu - alization . Some messages linearly reﬂected the content , or text , from a chart ; other messages reﬂected a more active summariza - tion and abstraction , incorporating past personal knowledge or information from the accompanying article . As seen in Table 2 , this process was observed when very speciﬁc messages of vis ( no - text ) were changed to higher - level messages of vis ( text ) . At other times , messages of vis ( text ) became more speciﬁc through the addition of explanations , such as cause - and - effect relationships , reﬂecting a different sensemaking process . Explanations ranged from explaining units of measure to describing thresholds or future consequences . In some cases , more complex relationships between variables , i . e . the interplay of different aspects of global warming , were added . Our ﬁeld notes document the difﬁculties we had in making sense of charts without text . When writing initial messages we relied on any remaining textual trails to piece together a message . Even for visualizations with all text included , we at times needed further explanation , which we looked for within the articles themselves . This was especially the case for older visualizations , i . e . those published in the 1970’s , where design elements were more limited or were under - explained . For most messages before coding I have no idea what the chart is trying to say . I am mostly connecting the few textual annotations on the chart and trying to make a comprehensive sentence out of them ( Field note excerpt , C1 ) . Types of detail . Many messages of vis ( no - text ) were changed to include scientiﬁc details or jargon , which were often taken directly from captions or other text ( S5 . Table 4 ) . A small number of messages of vis ( text ) included additional details about how data in a visualization were created ; this was most visible in visu - alizations comparing different data sources or models . Geospatial or temporal information was often added to messages of vis ( text ) , although in some cases this information was also reduced , perhaps reﬂecting more abstractive thinking . Other messages of vis ( text ) included additional reference points to better place a message into the context of normal or expected values . Older captions in particular included more jargon and scientiﬁc details , i . e . explaining data collection or uncertainty , or acted as a legend for the graphic . Newer captions were often used to frame the visualization or tell a broader story . Looking at the charts alone , I thought that this was a very negative framing – look where we are headed as we are moving inextricably toward a 2 degree increase in temperature . With the caption , the chart takes on a positive outlook – look what we can avoid by being more ambitious in our climate policy ! ( Field note excerpt , C2 ) . Personal elements . As seen in the previous ﬁeld note excerpt , we also observed a change in focus and framing between messages of vis ( no - text ) and ( text ) ( Table 3 ) . The focus of some messages changed to emphasize different parts of a visualization or data . We noticed this particularly for charts with many groupings or categorical data . In other message pairs , we observed a change in framing , where certain elements were qualiﬁed emotionally with words such as ‘surprising’ , ‘concerning’ , or ‘fragile’ . For a few instances , messages of vis ( no - text ) and ( text ) contradicted each other , either because charts were misinterpreted , as in the ﬁrst 9 Sensemakingprocess Message of vis ( no - text ) Message of vis ( text ) Abstraction Reported lives lost from Covid per week peaked around the beginning of 2021 , with 100 . 000 deaths per week , mostly in Europe and the Americas . ( C3 ) The pandemic has caused an enormous loss of life across all parts of the world . ( C3 ) Winter sea ice has decreased since 1979 in both extent and volume . Winter air temperature , water vapor and arctic ampli - ﬁcation have increased in the same time . ( C1 ) Changes in the arctic region will affect the whole world nega - tively . ( C1 ) Explanations There are three different scenarios for whatever the black line represents , which change as temperature increases over the last 100 years ( from 1880 - 1980 ) . ( C2 ) Temperature has increased in the last 100 years . Some of this increase may be due to increased levels of CO2 . The release of volcanic aerosols or the luminosity of the sun combined with increased levels of CO2 more closely matches the observed temperature increases over time . ( C2 ) The most calories per square meter are used / produced at around 10 degrees South ( latitude ) , the least at around 20 degrees North . ( C1 ) The amount of heat lost through evaporation and gained through precipitation at each latitude . ( Evaporation can be expressed in calories required to evaporate a certain amount of water ) . ( C1 ) TABLE 2 : Types of changes between messages of vis ( no - text ) and ( text ) related to sensemaking processes ( C1 - C4 are the four coders ) ‘Mistakes’ example in Table 3 , or because the coder did not see the broader message of a visualization without textual context , as in the second example in Table 3 . These types of personal elements , particularly regarding fram - ing and focus , were related to emotional triggers in both visual and textual parts of an article . While only approximately 8 % of visualizations in our corpus contained humanizing elements ( Section 4 . 1 ) , the majority of articles contained photographs which elicited emotions . The language used in captions , annotations or titles , also affected what we paid attention to and inﬂuenced our interpretation of the framing of an article and our level of engagement . This is the ﬁrst time that I have seen scenarios labeled this way ( in terms of the president who is ultimately responsible for a policy ) [ . . ] I googled the exact years of Obama’s presidency : 2009 - 2017 [ . . ] I did additional research and made connections between policy and CO2 data , maybe because this is a bit close to home for me ( Field note excerpt , C2 ) . Earlier article and chart titles were more objective or neutral in their framing , i . e . ‘Tree Rings and Climate’ ( 1972 ) or ‘Car - bon Dioxide and World Climate’ ( 1982 ) . Later titles had more emotional appeal , such as ‘Too Sunny in Philadelphia ? Satellites Zero in on Dangerous Heat Islands’ ( 2017 ) or ‘The Very Real Death Toll of COVID - 19’ ( 2021 ) . While the emotional framing of an article is made explicit in these newer titles , framing could also be a matter of what was not present in a visualization , i . e . in the case of a visualization about different countries which have implemented a carbon tax . In the summarizing information it mentions the lowest and the highest ( carbon ) tax rate per metric ton of CO2 . I have to say the lowest is slightly misleading in my opinion because many countries do not pay any carbon tax , so it emphasizes the ones that are paying low rates in a negative way , instead of those which pay none ( Field note excerpt , C1 ) . The emotional elements chosen by chart producers reﬂect their envisioned audience . While these choices may make data more local and engaging for some readers , they may not be effective for others , or may just miss the mark . I’m also not sure if I get the story of this person in the yellow coat ( what is the connection with the chart parts ? ) ( Field note excerpt , C3 ) . Sensemaking does not always rely on text or on having speciﬁc numbers . As seen in Fig . 4 , one third of charts do not list exact values . In such cases , readers are left to ‘get a feel’ for quantities represented in a visualization and to use their intuition as a way of sensemaking . This approach may be better for a more educated audience , who has experience interpreting similar visualizations with numbers ; it could also potentially appeal to individuals without quantitative experience . We responded in different ways to situations which enabled ‘feeling quantities’ , either by calculating them on our own or doubting the validity of the ‘feeling’ approach . Maybe a clearer hint about the 6 times more number would have been helpful in Vis 1 , so one does not have to calculate on their own ( Field note excerpt , C3 ) . When writing the messages , I was also looking for trends and ‘visually averaging’ the steepness of the lines for the different categories . I have no idea if this is what is an intended way of interpreting these charts ; it feels a bit awkward and like a hack ( Field note excerpt , C2 ) . 4 . 2 . 3 Message typology We thematically analyzed both messages of vis ( no - text ) and messages of vis ( text ) to develop a typology of twelve message types , organized in four categories ( Table 4 ) related to differences in granularity , composition , structure , and content of the messages . Messages could be classiﬁed as belonging to more than one message type . Below , we provide examples of messages in each category and , when appropriate , references to the charts which the messages refer to in Figure 2 . Granularity . Messages in our corpus varied in terms of their level of granularity , from more general to highly detailed messages . General messages presented an overall , high - level account of the visualization , including no or minimal detail , i . e . : Precipitation is changing globally – in some places it is getting drier , in others wetter ( message of vis ( no - text ) , C1 ) . Mid - level messages included some detail without being espe - cially speciﬁc , such as : In 2020 , the U . S . county excess deaths was more than one for most of the counties , a lot of them related to COVID – 10 Personalelements Message of vis ( no - text ) Message of vis ( text ) Focus At the beginning of 2020 , COVID - 19 was the cause of as many deaths per week in the U . S . as the two deadliest illnesses , heart disease and cancer . ( C3 ) In 2020 COVID - 19 killed more people than the ﬂu and also surpassed stroke , Alzheimer’s and diabetes . ( C3 ) Framing The ice sheet in most of Antarctica has been relatively stable for the last 15 million years ; only a small portion of Antarctica ( the Antarctic Penninsula ) is certain to have been impacted by global warming . ( C2 ) West Antarctica is the most fragile and has disintegrated rapidly ; we do not know for sure if this is due to climate change . ( C2 ) Mistakes Funding allocation by the NIH has seen changes with the pandemic : more allocation to infectious diseases and applied behavioral and social sciences ( and less or relatively less for other health issues ) . ( C1 ) Certain categories of NIH funding received large increases from 2019 to 2021 , Some of which are clearly linked to the pandemic such as the social determinants of health and applied behavioral and social sciences . ( C1 , correct message ) There are different types of street patterns with different numbers of intersections . Circuitous patterns are compact . ( C2 ) Dense networks , such as grid networks and degree - 3 networks , provide the most connected types of intersections , facilitating environmentally friendly modes of transportation . ( C2 ) TABLE 3 : Changes related to personal interpretations between messages of vis ( no - text ) and ( text ) ( C1 - C4 are the four coders ) Message category Message type Granularity General , Mid - level , Speciﬁc Composition Examples , Chart descriptions , Nonsense Structure Additive , Simple Content Geospatial , Temporal , Change , Global vs . local TABLE 4 : Message typology only a few counties had a negative trend in excess deaths ( message of vis ( text ) , C4 , Vis C ) . Speciﬁc messages tended to be longer and more detailed , often including descriptions about time and space , i . e . years or exact place names , as well as exact values or percentages . Some speciﬁc messages describe multiple parts of a chart rather than an overall trend . Developing speciﬁc messages was often a key part of our sensemaking processes ; these messages overlap particularly with additive messages , further discussed below . An example of a speciﬁc message includes : Prediction of the risk of Malaria transmission will multiply in several parts of the earth by 2020 ( relative to the average risk in the years 1961 to 1990 ) , taking into account a temperature increase of about two degrees Fahrenheit . Especially in Europe , Asia and small parts of the US , the risk of transmission might double whereas the risk in other areas ( e . g . Africa ) might also increase but by a lower factor ( message of vis ( text ) , C4 ) . Composition . Messages also varied in terms of their compo - sition . In particular , we identiﬁed message types which provide examples drawn from the data or which contain descriptions of particular chart elements . Messages with examples highlight data points drawn from the visualization . These messages were particularly connected with charts including groupings or visualizing categorical data . Some messages included examples because the amount of textual information on a chart exceeded what would ﬁt into a brief message . In such cases , the top - ranked or most obvious trend was mentioned : Causes of deaths per week by different illnesses in the US , in relation to COVID – where heart disease and cancer show a consistently high rate of over 10 000 per week ( heart disease being higher ) ( message of vis ( no - text ) , C1 ) . Chart descriptions were included in a small fraction of mes - sages ; these speciﬁcally described elements of the visualization and its overall design . This was done as a way of grounding messages which refer to a series of charts appearing together ( i . e . small multiples ) or to describe the format of a particular chart . The role of atmospheric gasses for radiative temperature change ( upper chart ) , and how their concentration varies by altitude – showing interesting behavior of carbon diox - ide ( lower chart ) ( message of vis ( text ) , C1 ) . Nonsense messages occurred only in messages of vis ( no - text ) . Here it was impossible to determine a message based on the visualization alone , rendering these messages incomplete and nonsensical : Showing something on planet Earth ( messages of vis ( no - text ) , C1 ) . Structure . A further category of message types related to the structure of a message , or how a message was constructed . Additive messages , in contrast to simple messages , were built from a series of mini - messages , describing either individual parts of a chart or most often a series of multiple composite or small multiple charts which were displayed together in an article : Bar chart : Most of the excess deaths in 2020 were due to COVID . Point chart : In rural counties , COVID did not have as much of an effect . Overall : Most of the excess deaths in 2020 were due to COVID . In rural counties , COVID did not have as much of an effect ( message of vis ( no - text ) , C2 , Vis C ) . Message content most commonly included patterns related to geospatial data , time and change . These aspects are related to our focus on climate change and pandemics ; other work , however , has also demonstrated the importance of geospatial and temporal characteristics in summarizing and describing data [ 13 ] . Approximately half ( 49 % ) of all messages included geospatial information , either at a high or more detailed level . However , only a quarter of charts were coded as expressing geospatial information ( Fig . 4 ) . This could be a factor of a deeper level of engagement with the visualizations when writing the messages . As we worked to determine a chart’s message , we drew out implicit geospatial details . 11 54 % of messages included temporal information , either by mentioning speciﬁc years or referring to more general segments of time . They also included mentions of both historical and future time , which is also reﬂected in our visualization analysis ( Fig . 4 ) . Nearly all of the messages included a description of change , either explicitly or implicitly . Those messages that did not discuss change tended to be comparisons of different categories . With change : The temperature ( in degree Celsius ) de - creased every year until approx . 1980 when the rising trend indicates that the temperature is steadily increasing from this point on ( message of vis ( text ) , C4 ) . Given our focus on climate change and pandemics , it is not surprising that geospatial , temporal , and change - related content are prevalent in our messages . Topics of individual messages reﬂect the topics of our corpus . Messages drawn from climate change visualizations , e . g . , centered around temperature increases , ice loss , CO2 emissions , and greenhouse gas increases . We also identify a difference between local and global topics in our messages . Some messages from recent charts had a markedly more local focus than older charts , i . e . the socioeconomic impacts of governmental climate policies or the effect of the pandemic on alcohol consumption or mental health . 4 . 3 Producer perspective : Message planning and com - parison This section presents the ﬁnal perspective in our message analysis : the perspective of chart producers at Scientiﬁc American . We focus our analysis on interview data pertaining to the creation and planning of messages , considerations about the interplay of textual and visual elements , and a comparison of a sample of the chart producers’ intended messages to the vis text messages which we created . ( Participants are referred to as ( P ) in this section . ) 4 . 3 . 1 Planning messages and visualizations in context Scientiﬁc American staff develop messages and goals for visual - izations either in thought or writing at the beginning of a project . This helps to clarify the purpose of visualizations but also to streamline internal conversations with the editors , artists , scientists and designers who work collaboratively on a piece . These planned messages , or goal statements , are at times clear and concise , where ‘the goal of this graphic is to X , Y , and Z’ ( P1 ) . Other graphics employ ‘a lot of speciﬁcs to make a couple of general points’ ( P3 ) . Designers carefully consider how to make data understandable in different ways and to encourage different types of interaction . Discussing climate change data , a participant reported : We have been showing that kind of information for two decades at least in different forms [ . . ] That is an area where we are trying to meet different people’s needs in different ways , in part because there is such a sense of urgency [ . . ] for 20 years these charts have not been making enough of an impact . How else can we present this information in a way that connects with people ? ( P1 ) . Scientiﬁc American staff use visualizations and text together to serve a set of ( at times implicit ) purposes , i . e . explaining , stepping readers through an article , or pointing out uncertainties to nuance the seeming objectivity of data and visualizations . Text informs the development of graphics , i . e . when designers begin with a complete written story and need to brainstorm how to integrate visualizations or as they consider which ‘points we want to hit in words only’ ( P4 ) . There is a perception among some participants that graphics can , or do , stand alone ( P2 , P6 ) . Even then , there is a recognition that visualizations never really exist independently , as they are ‘talking about and referencing a very particular thing’ and only make sense within a broader story ( P6 ) . Visualizations ‘stand alone’ in that they tell their own part of a story ( P6 ) and only if context is actually embedded into a graphic , i . e . through text or by the placement of a vis within the narrative ( P2 ) . 4 . 3 . 2 Message comparison In a ﬁnal step , we acquired the intended message for 18 charts from a senior Scientiﬁc American staff member , based on their internal prior documentation . For this sample , we compared the producer’s intended message with the messages of vis ( no - text ) and ( text ) which we had written . 17 % of our messages did not align at all with the intended messages , whereas 45 % of the intended and interpreted messages clearly aligned . The remaining 38 % of the messages partially aligned , with some missing nuance , and others only expressing half of the intended points . Overall , our research team’s messages were much more likely to include speciﬁc examples , especially of certain numbers , such as years or high values , or the top categories shown on the chart , such as : Reported lives lost from Covid per week peaked around the beginning of 2021 , with 100 , 000 deaths per week , mostly in Europe and the Americas” ( C3 ) , opposed to : ‘Lots of lives were lost very quickly around the world due to a virus’ ( Scientiﬁc American staff ) . We hypothesize this might be due to our role as researchers trained to focus on presenting data as evidence rather than as narrative . Both our messages of vis ( no - text ) and ( text ) were more focused on the data itself whereas the creators’ original messages were expressed in higher - level language , focusing more on what the data means when generalized . This difference could also be indicative of how we relied on speciﬁcs to ﬁrst build up a broader message and understand a visualization . We also saw that for those charts that had multiple intended messages , interpretation was more difﬁcult , at times missing one of the key points . 5 L IMITATIONS As with all research , this exploratory work has limitations , partic - ularly along the following three dimensions : 1 . Source . The selection of Scientiﬁc American as a case study results in a bias towards a traditional US legacy science commu - nication outlet with a speciﬁc audience . Our sample also includes fewer pandemic - related visualizations compared to climate change visualizations . 2 . Topics . Both climate change and COVID - 19 are topics which people feel strongly about , and have an expected high rate of bias and preconceptions . This may impact our observations about subjective elements and emotional engagement . 3 . Methods and framing . As discussed in Section 3 , we acted in a dual role when creating the messages . We acted both as researchers , in a reﬂective , analytic mode as well as represen - tatives of the target audience of Scientiﬁc American . We took 12 particular care through extensive discussions of these roles during the research process to address this , although we also see this as a strength of our method , as discussed in Section 6 . We created detailed documentation of every step of our methodology and analysis . We switched samples between coding teams during message creation and analysis . We acknowledge that our position might have inﬂuenced the messages . However , our efforts more likely resulted in extra care and time spent when trying to understand the visualizations . The proportion of charts which we misinterpreted may actually have been higher in a more realistic sample , where not as much effort was invested in the process . Having multiple coders could also be seen as a limitation . However , it was also a strength , as it allowed us to have a diversity of perspectives and interpretations , particularly when creating messages . We also engaged in an extensive process for validating the code book used in the chart characterization , as documented in Section 3 . 2 . We believe our methods , while exploratory , provide resources for future research on engaging with messages . 6 D ISCUSSION This work has examined visual data communication in Scientiﬁc American from three different perspectives – those of charts , readers , and producers – in order to learn more about how messages about climate change and pandemics are understood . After characterizing the charts in our corpus , we explored the role of text in sensemaking by writing messages for visualizations , both with and without their accompanying textual elements . We also interviewed Scientiﬁc American staff , presenting ﬁndings related to their intended messages and message planning practices . We now bring together and discuss our ﬁndings along four lines . 6 . 1 Role of chart characteristics and presentation in sensemaking As with understanding data [ 12 , 82 ] , making sense of data vi - sualizations is a complex process which requires context . Our study adds evidence to a growing body of literature documenting the complexities of understanding visualizations and the necessity of context [ 4 , 32 , 33 , 34 ] . Our ﬁndings suggest that chart types potentially inﬂuence understanding visualizations ( 4 . 2 . 1 ) . The messages of vis ( text ) which we wrote for bar charts and point - based charts were most similar to the corresponding messages of vis ( no - text ) . While this may provide initial evidence that bar charts and point - based charts are more understandable , it is not conclusive . Generalized area charts , often related to the presentation of geospatial data , accounted for roughly one - third of the visualiza - tions in the corpus . Approximately half of the messages which we created also included geospatial information . This reﬂects the topics in our corpus as well as the importance of both geospatial and temporal aspects when making sense of data , which has been documented in previous studies on dataset summarization [ 13 ] , data search [ 83 ] , and storytelling with data [ 84 ] . While chart types and characteristics inﬂuence what readers take away from charts , we ﬁnd that the entire environment and framing in which charts are published are critical to deriving messages from visualizations . This concerns textual elements , as discussed separately in Section ( 6 . 2 ) , but also subjective reactions that determine a reader’s engagement with a visualization [ 85 , 86 ] . Both in our ﬁeld notes , as well as in the producer interviews , we can see reﬂections on the reader’s personal experiences , i . e . their emotions , reactions to how a chart is presented visually , and to perceived rhetorical appeals , such as the framing of a topic . Visualization producers carefully consider design choices , including chart types , ways of encoding data , and the interplay between visual and textual elements in an entire article , as can be seen in both our interviews and chart analysis . Some of these choices reﬂect perceptual research and existing guidelines or conventions ( see Franconeri et al . [ 28 ] for a review ) . Yet other choices pertain to questions of audience engagement , affective intents of the producers , and aesthetic presentation [ 87 , 88 ] . The role of emotions in visualization design is increasingly recognized [ 85 , 89 ] , and is also considered to be important for supporting sensemaking [ 90 ] . While we found little evidence in the charts themselves of some common techniques to stimulate emotions , i . e . the use of humanizing elements [ 74 , 80 ] , the articles suggest that other elements i . e . photographs , surrounding text , or bespoke illustrations are used with such intents in mind ; an observation that was also in line with the interviews . Looking at the charts speciﬁcally , our ﬁeld notes reveal an appreciation for detail and composition . Aligning a multitude of design decisions in this way to guide the attention of visualization readers is work which can be perceived as a craft . As in physical objects , the care and skill that goes into creation can be a motiva - tion for engagement on the consumer side [ 91 ] , as objects which appear to be carefully crafted are perceived as being valuable and deserving of attention . 6 . 2 Role of textual elements in sensemaking In many cases it was not possible to separate textual elements from charts while preserving meaning . In line with Kim et al . [ 49 ] , we ﬁnd that textual annotations on visualizations , captions , and titles of both charts and articles are key to engaging visualizations readers . These textual elements set readers up for ‘sensemaking success’ by , e . g . , highlighting speciﬁc data , explaining thresholds , and providing information about how to best read a chart . This overlaps with other literature calling for better alternative text descriptions of charts [ 92 ] , as well as recent work investigating the integration of charts and captions [ 14 ] . While many messages of vis ( no - text ) and ( text ) broadly aligned , some messages of vis ( text ) reﬂected changes due to sensemaking processes , i . e . abstraction and identifying cause / effect relationships in the data . Other message pairs differed in their overall framing , which was considered more negative when a visualization was standing alone . This might be a function of our topics of analysis , as climate change and pandemics tend to come with sobering data . In the analyzed visualizations , text contributed to a more positive framing , i . e . by pointing to possible solutions or mitigation efforts . Our ﬁndings underline that visualizations always stand in rela - tion to the other pieces of content . In the growing space of online data communication , it is paramount to ﬁnd ways to help readers to navigate through data visualizations in ways which support sensemaking . Research exploring narrative data visualization [ 43 ] , storytelling and comics [ 93 ] , and interactive charts [ 94 ] is already a step in that direction , although we argue that a focus on readers’ understanding is largely missing from this literature . The importance of embedding context with visualizations seems particularly apparent in the evolving landscape of science communication , which often occurs online and via social media 13 [ 21 ] , a shift which is also evidenced in an emerging ‘mobile ﬁrst’ approach to visualization design in journalism [ 95 ] . In this space , charts can easily be taken out of context as they are shared on social media and are used as argumentative instruments in public discussions [ 96 , 97 ] , as has been observed during the COVID - 19 pandemic [ 16 ] . 6 . 3 Message typology We drew on our ﬁndings to create a typology of four message categories , with twelve message types , communicated in visual - izations about climate change and pandemics . Other research has also categorized messages for COVID - 19 visualizations , focusing on the topic of the message and visualization [ 1 ] . Rather than fo - cusing on the topic per se , we take a more generalizable approach in our typology , looking at aspects of granularity , composition , structure , and content . Our typology , developed through an inductive thematic anal - ysis , resonates with the ﬁndings of recent work by Lundgard and Satyanarayan [ 46 ] which classiﬁes the semantic levels of content in visualization descriptions . Lundgard and Satyanarayan [ 46 ] explicitly aimed to describe charts as richly as possible . Our aim , as in Koesten et al . [ 12 ] , was to analyze emerging messages in regards to individual sensemaking processes and to explore the nature of what a message is , i . e . what is ‘taken away’ from a chart . Despite the difference in aims , there are similarities in our resulting typologies . Similar to their classiﬁcation , we also identify a type of message which includes descriptions of chart elements , and ﬁnd that this level of content is not extremely ‘useful’ , particularly for our goal of surfacing sensemaking . While our messages largely relate to the higher - levels of semantic content which they identify [ 46 ] , our typology further analyses the overall structure and content type of messages , e . g . , by looking at how individual elements of a message stand in relation to each other , as in the case of additive messages , or by documenting attributes that are known to be relevant for assessing datasets , such as location or time [ 13 , 83 ] , in the messages . The typology we propose can help to formalize discussions about messages communicated in visualizations and serve as a mechanism to better tailor visualization design . Understanding the types of messages derived from visualizations can help to plan and adapt visualizations for different audiences . It can also act as a framework which can inform the articulation of communicative intent of a chart prior to design . Differences in the granularity of message types raise ques - tions about how explicitly a producer should communicate their intended message . We observed that individual components of additive messages tend to be very concise , and found some evidence that additive messages reﬂect step - wise understanding of visualizations . Future research is warranted to explore whether additive messages support sensemaking more than other message types . Captions play an essential role in developing messages with context ( Section 4 . 2 . 1 ) . Our message typology has the potential to inform automated caption generation , i . e . by including varying levels of granularity or speciﬁc examples . It can also contribute to the creation of algorithms to extract semantic meaning from images displaying charts [ 98 , 99 ] . The message types we identify can help select content in template - based algorithmic approaches or inform feature weighting , as also recommended by Lundgard and Satyanarayan [ 46 ] . 6 . 4 Studying messages : A methodological contribu - tion This work also makes a methodological contribution . We used the written articulation of messages to surface traces and signs of sensemaking processes . We argue that these processes are more complex than what can be revealed through common methods used to evaluate visualizations , such as performance in perceptual operations or knowledge - type tasks [ 28 ] . In line with work in education and cognitive science [ 64 , 100 ] , our analysis illustrates that writing messages involves complex thinking , i . e . in the case of writing abstractive messages ( Section 4 . 2 . 3 ) , and that different levels of cognitive activities are interwoven throughout visual data sensemaking . In addition to writing messages , we also wrote ﬁeld notes . The act of writing ﬁeld notes facilitated deeper cognitive engagement , i . e . analyzing , evaluating , and synthesizing [ 100 ] . Our ﬁeld notes also revealed connections between the visualizations , our own personal experiences , and the sociopolitical contexts of the charts . This level of content is important in creating descriptions of charts to facilitate engagement ( Section 6 . 1 ) , to represent a higher level of semantic content [ 46 ] and to surface ‘placing activities’ as signs of sensemaking with data [ 12 ] . Combining ﬁeld notes with message articulation allowed this type of content to emerge in our analysis . Focusing on our own sensemaking processes also provides a way for us to incorporate reﬂexivity into our research process [ 101 ] and to reﬂect on our own positionality . As educated , science - interested people , we match the envisioned audience of Scientiﬁc American . We realize , however , that we are shaped by our own ex - periences , including our experience of being academic researchers in the broad areas of data visualization and human computer interaction . While some may see this experience as equipping us to readily understand data visualizations , our ﬁndings demonstrate the opposite , as we struggled to understand visualizations and to write messages . Rather than starting with a larger pool of ‘lay participants’ in our study , we began by questioning what we , as people with experience , could understand . Our ﬁndings show that even ‘experts’ have difﬁculty understanding visualizations , particularly those without textual elements . This further points to the blurry line which exists between lay and expert audiences for science communication [ 102 , 103 ] . Our interviews and message comparison provided a ﬁnal methodological perspective . Slightly more than half of our mes - sages either partially aligned or did not align with the intended messages of the chart producers . Our ﬁndings underline the importance of testing the success of intended messages with audiences . A more structured evaluation approach , informed by a user - centered design process , could be a further catalyst for more inclusive visualization design in general , potentially encouraging communication between visualization producers and readers , to the beneﬁt of both . 7 R ECOMMENDATIONS AND CONCLUSIONS We conclude by drawing on our ﬁndings to propose the following recommendations for data visualization producers and science communicators regarding chart design , many of which are already practiced by Scientiﬁc American . Make it stick : Make it hard to separate context from a chart . Especially in light of the ease of sharing information on social media , consider how to make a message stick with a visualization , i . e . by making messages explicit in captions or 14 in other formats . Other contextual information which supports sensemaking and transparency , i . e . citations , data sources or other relevant metadata , should also be attached to a chart . Text - it : Rethink the role of text on and around the chart Similarly , textual elements , i . e . annotations and titles are key to drawing people in and setting them up for ‘sensemaking success’ . Supporting readers in understanding and articulating what they see can improve the communication of the intended message of a chart . At the same time , care is needed . Words have power ; people engage with information in different ways ; and visual comprehension differs cognitively from understanding text . Our ﬁndings show that messages are derived in contexts , including the context of an article , a magazine , science communication and societal landscapes more broadly . Prepare : Articulate intended message prior to chart design Clear simple messages are more likely to be understood by visualization readers . Think about the envisioned audience for a visualization and tailor messages accordingly . At the same time , consider how other audiences may understand a message . Participation : Test message with audiences . We recommend involving visualization readers in the design process in order to facilitate more user - centered visualization design processes . Testing the success of the communicative intent ( or the intended message ) with representatives of various audiences is integral to evaluating the effectiveness of visualizations . Affordances : Be aware of the affordances of chart design choices . Design choices afford certain ways of seeing and in - ﬂuence the messages that visualization readers understand . For instance , data details can be obscured when data are aggregated at too high of a level . At the same time , intended messages can be lost by including too much detail . Being aware of and balancing the tension between simplicity , detail and transparency are critical in visual data communication to public audiences . Displaying detail on demand in novel ways geared toward different audiences offers one potential avenue to address this issue . Explain : Identify and explain reference points in a chart . Even simple visualizations need reference points to support sense - making . This is important for temporal and geospatial data , but explanations of any thresholds , baselines or terminology should be included in visualizations and the surrounding text . Speciﬁc information about measurements , models , and data collection should also be attached to a chart . The conceptual traceability of chart design choices and data would increase both understanding and trust , as in Wood et al . [ 104 ] . This paper described a mixed - methods study combining differ - ent perspectives to explore the sensemaking of data visualizations about climate change and pandemics in Scientiﬁc American over time . In future studies we aim to study visual data communication in other popular science outlets and on other topics as well as to investigate the messages derived by different audiences , i . e . lay people or people with different views , i . e . climate change deniers . Investigating messages derived from interactive online visualizations offers another avenue for future work . Our study can further inform and validate the creation of automated messages . One potential next step in this direction would be to create a larger corpus of messages via crowdsourcing methods to be used as a training dataset . A CKNOWLEDGMENTS We thank Scientiﬁc American and our participants for their col - laboration , support and time . R EFERENCES [ 1 ] Y . Zhang , Y . Sun , L . Padilla , S . Barua , E . Bertini , and A . G . Parker , “Mapping the landscape of COVID - 19 crisis visualizations , ” in CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems , ser . CHI ’21 . New York , NY , USA : Association for Computing Machinery , 2021 , pp . 1 – 23 , doi : 10 . 1145 / 3411764 . 3445381 . [ 2 ] M . Engebretsen and H . Kennedy , Eds . , Data Visualization in Society . Amsterdam : Amsterdam University Press , 2020 , doi : 10 . 1515 / 9789048543137 . [ 3 ] F . L . Mott , “A history of American magazines ( Vol . II : 1850 - 1865 ) , ” Cambridge : Harvard UP , pp . 469 – 87 , 1938 . [ 4 ] S . Lee , S . - H . Kim , Y . - H . Hung , H . Lam , Y . - A . Kang , and J . S . Yi , “How do people make sense of unfamiliar visualizations ? A grounded model of novice’s information visualization sensemaking , ” IEEE Transactions on Visual - ization and Computer Graphics , vol . 22 , no . 1 , pp . 499 – 508 , 2016 , doi : 10 . 1109 / TVCG . 2015 . 2467195 . [ 5 ] G . Klein , B . Moon , and R . Hoffman , “Making sense of sensemaking 1 : Alternative perspectives , ” Intelligent Sys - tems , IEEE , vol . 21 , pp . 70 – 73 , 08 2006 , doi : 10 . 1109 / MIS . 2006 . 75 . [ 6 ] G . Klein , J . Phillips , E . Rall , and D . Peluso , “A data - frame theory of sensemaking , ” Expertise out of Context : Proceed - ings of the Sixth International Conference on Naturalistic Decision Making , pp . 113 – 155 , 01 2007 . [ 7 ] T . Isenberg , P . Isenberg , J . Chen , M . Sedlmair , and T . Möller , “A systematic review on the practice of evaluating visualization , ” IEEE Transactions on Visualization and Computer Graphics , vol . 19 , no . 12 , pp . 2818 – 2827 , 2013 . [ Online ] . Available : https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1109 / TVCG . 2013 . 126 [ 8 ] Z . Liu and J . Stasko , “Mental models , visual reason - ing and interaction in information visualization : A top - down perspective , ” IEEE Transactions on Visualization and Computer Graphics , vol . 16 , no . 6 , pp . 999 – 1008 , 2010 , doi : 10 . 1109 / TVCG . 2010 . 177 . [ 9 ] B . Karer , I . Scheler , H . Hagen , and H . Leitte , “Conceptgraph : A formal model for interpretation and reasoning during visual analysis , ” Comput . Graph . Forum , vol . 39 , no . 6 , pp . 5 – 18 , 2020 . [ Online ] . Available : https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1111 / cgf . 13899 [ 10 ] A . Burns , C . Xiong , S . Franconeri , A . Cairo , and N . Mah - yar , “How to evaluate data visualizations across differ - ent levels of understanding , ” in 2020 IEEE Workshop on Evaluation and Beyond - Methodological Approaches to Visualization ( BELIV ) , 2020 , pp . 19 – 28 , doi : 10 . 1109 / BELIV51497 . 2020 . 00010 . [ 11 ] S . Pinker and R . Feedle , “A theory of graph comprehen - sion , ” in Artiﬁcial Intelligence and the Future of Testing , R . Feedle , Ed . New York : Psychology Press , 1990 , pp . 73 – 126 . [ 12 ] L . Koesten , K . Gregory , P . Groth , and E . Simperl , “Talking datasets – Understanding data sensemaking behaviours , ” International Journal of Human - Computer Studies , vol . 146 , p . 102562 , 2021 , doi : 10 . 1016 / j . ijhcs . 2020 . 102562 . [ 13 ] L . Koesten , E . Simperl , T . Blount , E . Kacprzak , and J . Tennison , “Everything you always wanted to know about a dataset : Studies in data summarisation , ” International Journal of Human - Computer Studies , vol . 135 , p . 102367 , 15 2020 , doi : 10 . 1016 / j . ijhcs . 2019 . 10 . 004 . [ 14 ] C . Stokes , V . Setlur , B . Cogley , A . Satyanarayan , and M . A . Hearst , “Striking a balance : Reader takeaways and preferences when integrating text and charts , ” IEEE Transactions on Visualization and Computer Graphics , vol . 29 , no . 1 , pp . 1233 – 1243 , 2023 . [ Online ] . Available : https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1109 / TVCG . 2022 . 3209383 [ 15 ] M . A . Borkin , Z . Bylinskii , N . W . Kim , C . M . Bain - bridge , C . S . Yeh , D . Borkin , H . Pﬁster , and A . Oliva , “Beyond memorability : Visualization recognition and re - call , ” IEEE Transactions on Visualization and Computer Graphics , vol . 22 , no . 1 , pp . 519 – 528 , 2016 , doi : 10 . 1109 / TVCG . 2015 . 2467732 . [ 16 ] A . Podkul , L . Vittert , S . Tranter , and A . Alduncin , “The coronavirus exponential : A preliminary investigation into the public’s understanding , ” Harvard Data Science Re - view , no . Special Issue 1 , May 2020 , doi : 10 . 1162 / 99608f92 . fec69745 . [ 17 ] S . J . O’Neill , “More than meets the eye : A longitudinal analysis of climate change imagery in the print media , ” Climatic Change , vol . 163 , pp . 9 – 26 , 2020 , doi : 10 . 1007 / s10584 - 019 - 02504 - 8 . [ 18 ] F . Windhager , G . Schreder , and E . Mayr , “On inconve - nient images : Exploring the design space of engaging climate change visualizations for public audiences , ” in 7th Workshop on Visualisation in Environmental Sciences , EnvirVis @ EuroVis 2019 , Porto , Portugal , June 3 , 2019 , R . Bujack , K . Feige , K . Rink , and D . Zeckzer , Eds . Eurographics Association , 2019 , pp . 1 – 8 , doi : 10 . 2312 / envirvis . 20191098 . [ 19 ] W . S . Cleveland , “Graphs in scientiﬁc publications , ” The American Statistician , vol . 38 , no . 4 , pp . 261 – 269 , 1984 , doi : 10 . 1080 / 00031305 . 1984 . 10483223 . [ 20 ] S . Shapin , “Science and the public , ” in Companion to the History of Modern Science , R . C . Olby , G . N . Cantor , J . R . R . Christie , and M . J . S . Hodge , Eds . Routledge , 1990 , pp . 990 – 1007 , doi : 10 . 4324 / 9781003070818 . [ 21 ] S . R . Davies , S . Franks , J . Roche , A . L . Schmidt , R . Wells , and F . Zollo , “The landscape of European science com - munication , ” Journal of Science Communication , vol . 20 , no . 03 , 2021 , doi : 10 . 22323 / 2 . 20030201 . [ 22 ] T . Hiippala , A multimodal perspective on data visualization . Amsterdam University Press , 2020 , pp . 277 – 294 . [ Online ] . Available : http : / / www . jstor . org / stable / j . ctvzgb8c7 . 23 [ 23 ] E . Amit - Danhi and L . Shifman , “Digital political infograph - ics : A rhetorical palette of an emergent genre , ” New Media & Society , vol . 20 , p . 146144481775056 , 01 2018 . [ 24 ] D . Born , “Visual climate communication : Making facts and concerns in popular science magazines , ” in Explor - ing Science Communication : A Science and Technology Studies Approach , U . Felt and S . Davies , Eds . SAGE Publications Ltd , 2020 , ch . 6 , p . 109 – 130 , doi : 10 . 4135 / 9781529721256 . n6 . [ 25 ] S . F . Johnston , “Vaunting the independent amateur : Sci - entiﬁc American and the representation of lay scientists , ” Annals of Science , vol . 75 , no . 2 , pp . 97 – 119 , 2018 , doi : 10 . 1080 / 00033790 . 2018 . 1460691 . [ 26 ] Y . Ye , “From abstracts to ’60 - second science’ podcasts : Reformulation of scientiﬁc discourse , ” Journal of En - glish for Academic Purposes , vol . 53 , p . 101025 , 2021 , doi : 10 . 1016 / j . jeap . 2021 . 101025 . [ 27 ] A . Kirk , Visualization Insights from Jen Christiansen and Moritz Stefaner’s ’175 Years of Word Usage Patterns in Scientiﬁc American’ . SAGE Publications , Limited , 2021 , doi : 10 . 4135 / 9781529779103 . [ 28 ] S . L . Franconeri , L . M . Padilla , P . Shah , J . M . Zacks , and J . Hullman , “The science of visual data communica - tion : What works , ” Psychological Science in the Public Interest , vol . 22 , no . 3 , pp . 110 – 161 , 2021 , doi : 10 . 1177 / 15291006211051956 . [ 29 ] J . Bertin , Semiology of Graphics : Diagrams , Networks , Maps . University of Wisconsin Press , 1968 , doi : 10 . 1080 / 00690805 . 1987 . 10438353 . [ 30 ] W . S . Cleveland and R . McGill , “Graphical perception : Theory , experimentation , and application to the develop - ment of graphical methods , ” Journal of the American Sta - tistical Association , vol . 79 , no . 387 , pp . 531 – 554 , 1984 , doi : 10 . 1080 / 01621459 . 1984 . 10478080 . [ 31 ] T . Munzner , Visualization Analysis and Design . A K Peters / CRC Press , 2014 , doi : 10 . 1201 / b17511 . [ 32 ] M . Pohl and J . Doppler Haider , “Sense - making strate - gies for the interpretation of visualizations — Bridging the gap between theory and empirical research , ” Multi - modal Technologies and Interaction , vol . 1 , no . 3 , 2017 , doi : 10 . 3390 / mti1030016 . [ 33 ] R . Borgo , L . Micallef , B . Bach , F . McGee , and B . Lee , “In - formation visualization evaluation using crowdsourcing , ” Computer Graphics Forum , vol . 37 , no . 3 , pp . 573 – 595 , 2018 , doi : 10 . 1111 / cgf . 13444 . [ 34 ] J . Baker , D . Jones , and J . Burkman , “Using visual represen - tations of data to enhance sensemaking in data exploration tasks , ” Journal of the Association for Information Systems , vol . 10 , no . 7 , 2009 , doi : 10 . 17705 / 1jais . 00204 . [ 35 ] A . Burns , “Communicative information visualizations : How to make data more understandable by the general public , ” Ph . D . dissertation , University of Massachusetts Amherst , 2022 , doi : 10 . 7275 / 30844079 . [ 36 ] P . Pirolli and S . Card , “The sensemaking process and leverage points for analyst technology as identiﬁed through cognitive task analysis , ” in Proceedings of international conference on intelligence analysis , vol . 5 . McLean , VA , USA , 2005 , pp . 2 – 4 . [ 37 ] D . M . Russell , M . Steﬁk , P . Pirolli , and S . K . Card , “The cost structure of sensemaking , ” in Human - Computer Interaction , INTERACT ’93 , IFIP TC13 International Con - ference on Human - Computer Interaction , 24 - 29 April 1993 , Amsterdam , , 1993 , pp . 269 – 276 . [ Online ] . Available : https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 169059 . 169209 [ 38 ] G . Neff , A . Tanweer , B . Fiore - Gartland , and L . Osburn , “Critique and contribute : A practice - based framework for improving critical data studies and data science , ” Big data , vol . 5 , no . 2 , pp . 85 – 97 , 2017 . [ 39 ] S . Lee , S . Kim , and B . C . Kwon , “VLAT : development of a visualization literacy assessment test , ” IEEE Transactions on Visualization and Computer Graphics , vol . 23 , no . 1 , pp . 551 – 560 , 2017 , doi : 10 . 1109 / TVCG . 2016 . 2598920 . [ 40 ] C . North , “Toward measuring visualization insight , ” IEEE Computer Graphics and Applications , vol . 26 , no . 3 , pp . 6 – 9 , 2006 , doi : 10 . 1109 / MCG . 2006 . 70 . [ 41 ] E . Adar and E . Lee , “Communicative visualizations as a learning problem , ” IEEE Transactions on Visualization and Computer Graphics , vol . 27 , no . 2 , pp . 946 – 16 956 , 2021 . [ Online ] . Available : https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1109 / TVCG . 2020 . 3030375 [ 42 ] C . Xiong , L . Van Weelden , and S . Franconeri , “The curse of knowledge in visual data communication , ” IEEE Transactions on Visualization and Computer Graphics , vol . 26 , no . 10 , pp . 3051 – 3062 , 2020 , doi : 10 . 1109 / TVCG . 2019 . 2917689 . [ 43 ] E . Segel and J . Heer , “Narrative visualization : Telling stories with data , ” IEEE Transactions on Visualization and Computer Graphics , vol . 16 , no . 6 , pp . 1139 – 1148 , 2010 , doi : 10 . 1109 / TVCG . 2010 . 179 . [ 44 ] J . Hullman and N . Diakopoulos , “Visualization rhetoric : Framing effects in narrative visualization , ” IEEE Trans - actions on Visualization and Computer Graphics , vol . 17 , no . 12 , pp . 2231 – 2240 , 2011 , doi : 10 . 1109 / TVCG . 2011 . 255 . [ 45 ] C . Stokes and M . A . Hearst , “Give text a chance : Advocat - ing for equal consideration for language and visualization , ” in NL VIZ : Workshop on Exploring Opportunities and Challenges for Natural Language Techniques to Support Visual Analysis . IEEE , 2021 . [ 46 ] A . Lundgard and A . Satyanarayan , “Accessible visualiza - tion via natural language descriptions : A four - level model of semantic content , ” IEEE Transactions on Visualization and Computer Graphics , vol . 28 , no . 1 , pp . 1073 – 1083 , 2022 , doi : 10 . 1109 / TVCG . 2021 . 3114770 . [ 47 ] J . S . Kallimani , K . G . Srinivasa , and R . B . Eswara , “Extrac - tion and interpretation of charts in technical documents , ” in 2013 International Conference on Advances in Computing , Communications and Informatics ( ICACCI ) , 2013 , pp . 382 – 387 , doi : 10 . 1109 / ICACCI . 2013 . 6637202 . [ 48 ] Y . Feng and M . Lapata , “Automatic caption generation for news images , ” IEEE Transactions on Pattern Analysis and Machine Intelligence , vol . 35 , no . 4 , pp . 797 – 812 , 2013 , doi : 10 . 1109 / TPAMI . 2012 . 118 . [ 49 ] D . H . Kim , V . Setlur , and M . Agrawala , “Towards un - derstanding how readers integrate charts and captions : A case study with line charts , ” in CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems . ACM , 2021 , pp . 610 : 1 – 610 : 11 , doi : 10 . 1145 / 3411764 . 3445443 . [ 50 ] H . - K . Kong , Z . Liu , and K . Karahalios , “Frames and slants in titles of visualizations on controversial topics , ” in CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems . ACM , 2018 , pp . 1 – 12 , doi : 10 . 1145 / 3173574 . 3174012 . [ 51 ] A . Ottley , A . Kaszowska , R . J . Crouser , and E . M . Peck , “The curious case of combining text and visualization , ” in 21st Eurographics Conference on Visualization , EuroVis 2019 - Short Papers , Porto , Portugal , June 3 - 7 , 2019 , J . Jo - hansson , F . Sadlo , and G . E . Marai , Eds . Eurographics As - sociation , 2019 , pp . 121 – 125 , doi : 10 . 2312 / evs . 20191181 . [ 52 ] M . A . Hearst and M . Tory , “Would you like a chart with that ? Incorporating visualizations into conversational interfaces , ” in 30th IEEE Visualization Conference , IEEE VIS 2019 - Short Papers . IEEE , 2019 , pp . 36 – 40 , doi : 10 . 1109 / VISUAL . 2019 . 8933766 . [ 53 ] S . McKenna , N . H . Riche , B . Lee , J . Boy , and M . Meyer , “Visual narrative ﬂow : Exploring factors shaping data vi - sualization story reading experiences , ” Computer Graphics Forum , vol . 36 , no . 3 , pp . 377 – 387 , 2017 , doi : 10 . 1111 / cgf . 13195 . [ 54 ] L . Poirier , “Reading datasets : Strategies for interpreting the politics of data signiﬁcation , ” Big Data & Society , vol . 8 , no . 2 , 2021 . [ 55 ] C . Coopmans , J . Vertesi , M . Lynch , and S . Woolgar , “In - troduction : Representation in scientiﬁc practice revisited , ” in Representation in Scientiﬁc Practice Revisited . The MIT Press , 01 2014 , pp . 1 – 12 , doi : 10 . 7551 / mitpress / 9780262525381 . 003 . 0001 . [ 56 ] M . Lynch , “The externalized retina : Selection and math - ematization in the visual documentation of objects in the life sciences , ” Human Studies , vol . 11 , pp . 201 – 234 , 1988 , doi : 10 . 1007 / BF00177304 . [ 57 ] R . V . Burri , “Visual rationalities : Towards a sociology of images , ” Current Sociology , vol . 60 , no . 1 , pp . 45 – 60 , 2012 , doi : 10 . 1177 / 0011392111426647 . [ 58 ] L . Koesten , E . Kacprzak , J . Tennison , and E . Simperl , “Collaborative practices with structured data : Do tools support what users need ? ” in CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems . ACM , 2019 , pp . 1 – 14 , doi : 10 . 1145 / 3290605 . 3300330 . [ 59 ] A . Fagerlin , T . S . Valley , A . M . Scherer , M . Knaus , E . Das , and B . J . Zikmund - Fisher , “Communicating infectious dis - ease prevalence through graphics : Results from an inter - national survey , ” Vaccine , vol . 35 , no . 32 , pp . 4041 – 4047 , 2017 , doi : 10 . 1016 / j . vaccine . 2017 . 05 . 048 . [ 60 ] C . E . Shannon and W . Weaver , The Mathematical Theory of Communication . University of Illinois Press , 1949 , doi : 10 . 2307 / 3611062 . [ 61 ] C . Kostelnick , “The visual rhetoric of data displays : The conundrum of clarity , ” IEEE Transactions on Professional Communication , vol . 51 , no . 1 , pp . 116 – 130 , 2008 . [ 62 ] H . H . Clark and E . F . Schaefer , “Contributing to discourse , ” Cognitive Science , vol . 13 , no . 2 , pp . 259 – 294 , 1989 , doi : 10 . 1207 / s15516709cog1302 _ 7 . [ 63 ] R . Stalnaker , “Common ground , ” Linguistics and Phi - losophy , vol . 25 , pp . 701 – 721 , 2002 , doi : 10 . 1023 / A : 1020867916902 . [ 64 ] S . Hidi and V . Anderson , “Producing written summaries : Task demands , cognitive operations , and implications for instruction , ” Review of Educational Research , vol . 56 , no . 4 , pp . 473 – 493 , 1986 , doi : 10 . 3102 / 00346543056004473 . [ 65 ] W . Kintsch and T . A . van Dijk , “Toward a model of text comprehension and production , ” Psychological Review , vol . 85 , no . 5 , pp . 363 – 394 , 1978 , doi : 10 . 1037 / 0033 - 295X . 85 . 5 . 363 . [ 66 ] S . Gupta and S . K . Gupta , “Abstractive summarization : An overview of the state of the art , ” Expert Systems with Applications , vol . 121 , pp . 49 – 65 , 2019 , doi : 10 . 1016 / j . eswa . 2018 . 12 . 011 . [ 67 ] R . Burns , S . Carberry , and S . Elzer Schwartz , “An auto - mated approach for the recognition of intended messages in grouped bar charts , ” Computational Intelligence , vol . 35 , no . 4 , pp . 955 – 1002 , 2019 , doi : 10 . 1111 / coin . 12227 . [ 68 ] M . Gambhir and V . Gupta , “Recent automatic text sum - marization techniques : A survey , ” Artiﬁcial Intelligence Review , vol . 47 , no . 1 , p . 1 – 66 , 2017 , doi : 10 . 1007 / s10462 - 016 - 9475 - 9 . [ 69 ] J . Chen , M . Ling , R . Li , P . Isenberg , T . Isenberg , M . Sedl - mair , T . Möller , R . S . Laramee , H . - W . Shen , K . Wünsche et al . , “Vis30k : A collection of ﬁgures and tables from ieee visualization conference publications , ” IEEE Transactions on Visualization and Computer Graphics , vol . 27 , no . 9 , 17 pp . 3826 – 3833 , 2021 . [ 70 ] G . J . Quadri and P . Rosen , “A survey of perception - based visualization studies by task , ” Computing Research Repos - itory ( CoRR ) , vol . abs / 2107 . 07477 , 2021 , doi : 10 . 48550 / arXiv . 2107 . 07477 . [ 71 ] M . Brehmer and T . Munzner , “A multi - level typology of abstract visualization tasks , ” IEEE Transactions on Visual - ization and Computer Graphics , vol . 19 , no . 12 , pp . 2376 – 2385 , 2013 , doi : 10 . 1109 / TVCG . 2013 . 124 . [ 72 ] V . Braun and V . Clarke , “Using thematic analysis in psy - chology , ” Qualitative Research in Psychology , vol . 3 , no . 2 , pp . 77 – 101 , 2006 , doi : 10 . 1191 / 1478088706qp063oa . [ 73 ] N . McDonald , S . Schoenebeck , and A . Forte , “Reliability and inter - rater reliability in qualitative research : Norms and guidelines for CSCW and HCI practice , ” Proceedings of the ACM on Human - Computer Interaction , vol . 3 , no . CSCW , nov 2019 , doi : 10 . 1145 / 3359174 . [ 74 ] L . Bartram , A . Patra , and M . Stone , “Affective color in visualization , ” in CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems . ACM , 2017 , p . 1364 – 1374 , doi : 10 . 1145 / 3025453 . 3026041 . [ 75 ] S . S . Silva , B . S . Santos , and J . Madeira , “Using color in visualization : A survey , ” Computers & Graphics , vol . 35 , no . 2 , pp . 320 – 333 , 2011 , doi : 10 . 1016 / j . cag . 2010 . 11 . 015 . [ 76 ] W . Aigner , S . Miksch , W . Müller , H . Schumann , and C . Tominski , “Visualizing time - oriented data — A system - atic view , ” Computers & Graphics , vol . 31 , no . 3 , pp . 401 – 409 , 2007 , doi : 10 . 1016 / j . cag . 2007 . 01 . 030 . [ 77 ] J . Talbot , S . Lin , and P . Hanrahan , “An extension of Wilkinson’s algorithm for positioning tick labels on axes , ” IEEE Transactions on Visualization and Computer Graph - ics , vol . 16 , no . 6 , pp . 1036 – 1043 , 2010 , doi : 10 . 1109 / TVCG . 2010 . 130 . [ 78 ] R . Li , “Visualizing COVID - 19 information for public : Designs , effectiveness , and preference of thematic maps , ” Human Behavior and Emerging Technologies , vol . 3 , no . 1 , pp . 97 – 106 , 2021 , doi : 10 . 1002 / hbe2 . 248 . [ 79 ] M . Engebretsen and H . Kennedy , Data visualization in society . Amsterdam University Press , 2020 , doi : 10 . 5117 / 9789463722902 . [ 80 ] L . A . de Macêdo Morais , Y . Jansen , N . Andrade , and P . Dragicevic , “Can anthropographics promote prosociality ? A review and large - sample study , ” in CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems . ACM , 2021 , pp . 611 : 1 – 611 : 18 , doi : 10 . 1145 / 3411764 . 3445637 . [ 81 ] R . Emerson , R . Fretz , and L . Shaw , Writing Ethnographic Fieldnotes , Second Edition , ser . Chicago Guides to Writing , Editing , and Publishing . University of Chicago Press , 2011 . [ 82 ] P . Dourish , The Stuff of bits : An Essay on the Materialities of Information . MIT Press , 2017 , doi : 10 . 7551 / mitpress / 10999 . 001 . 0001 . [ 83 ] S . Neumaier and A . Polleres , “Enabling spatio - temporal search in open data , ” Journal of Web Semantics , vol . 55 , pp . 21 – 36 , 2019 , doi : 10 . 1016 / j . websem . 2018 . 12 . 007 . [ 84 ] S . Erete , E . Ryou , G . Smith , K . M . Fassett , and S . Duda , “Storytelling with data : Examining the use of data by non - proﬁt organizations , ” in ACM Conference on Computer - Supported Cooperative Work & Social Computing . 1273 – 1283 , doi : 10 . 1145 / 2818048 . 2820068 . [ 85 ] H . Kennedy and R . L . Hill , “The feeling of numbers : Emotions in everyday engagements with data and their visualisation , ” Sociology , vol . 52 , no . 4 , pp . 830 – 848 , 2018 , doi : 10 . 1177 / 0038038516674675 . [ 86 ] N . Cawthon and A . V . Moere , “The effect of aesthetic on the usability of data visualization , ” in 2007 11th International Conference Information Visualization ( IV’07 ) . IEEE , 2007 , pp . 637 – 648 . [ 87 ] T . He , P . Isenberg , R . Dachselt , and T . Isenberg , “Beauvis : A validated scale for measuring the aesthetic pleasure of visual representations , ” IEEE Transactions on Visualization and Computer Graphics , vol . 29 , no . 1 , pp . 363 – 373 , 2022 . [ 88 ] E . Lee - Robbins and E . Adar , “Affective learning objectives for communicative visualizations , ” IEEE Transactions on Visualization and Computer Graphics , vol . 29 , no . 1 , pp . 1 – 11 , 2022 . [ 89 ] C . Kostelnick , “The re - emergence of emotional appeals in interactive data visualization , ” Technical Communication Online . Journal of the Society for Technical Communication , vol . 63 , no . 2 , 05 2016 , https : / / www . stc . org / techcomm / 2016 / 05 / 11 / the - re - emergence - of - emotional - appeals - in - interactive - data - visualization / . [ 90 ] Y . Wang , A . Segal , R . Klatzky , D . F . Keefe , P . Isenberg , J . Hurtienne , E . Hornecker , T . Dwyer , and S . Barrass , “An emotional response to the value of visualization , ” IEEE Computer Graphics and Applications , vol . 39 , no . 5 , pp . 8 – 17 , 2019 , doi : 10 . 1109 / MCG . 2019 . 2923483 . [ 91 ] D . A . Norman , Emotional design : Why we love ( or hate ) everyday things . Civitas Books , 2004 . [ 92 ] C . Jung , S . Mehta , A . Kulkarni , Y . Zhao , and Y . Kim , “Communicating visualizations without visuals : Investiga - tion of visualization alternative text for people with vi - sual impairments , ” IEEE Transactions on Visualization and Computer Graphics , vol . 28 , no . 1 , 2022 , doi : 10 . 1109 / TVCG . 2021 . 3114846 . [ 93 ] B . Bach , N . H . Riche , S . Carpendale , and H . Pﬁster , “The emerging genre of data comics , ” IEEE Computer Graphics and Applications , vol . 37 , no . 3 , pp . 6 – 13 , 2017 , doi : 10 . 1109 / MCG . 2017 . 33 . [ 94 ] E . E . Firat , A . Joshi , and R . S . Laramee , “Interactive visualization literacy : The state - of - the - art , ” Information Vi - sualization , vol . 21 , no . 3 , pp . 285 – 310 , 2022 , doi : 10 . 1177 / 14738716221081831 . [ 95 ] M . Engebretsen , H . Kennedy , and W . Weber , “Data vi - sualization in Scandinavian newsrooms : Emerging trends in journalistic visualization practices , ” Nordicom Review , vol . 39 , no . 2 , pp . 3 – 18 , 2018 , doi : 10 . 2478 / nor - 2018 - 0007 . [ 96 ] B . Schneider , “Climate model simulation visualization from a visual studies perspective , ” WIREs Climate Change , vol . 3 , no . 2 , pp . 185 – 193 , 2012 , doi : 10 . 1002 / wcc . 162 . [ 97 ] A . V . Pandey , A . Manivannan , O . Nov , M . Satterthwaite , and E . Bertini , “The persuasive power of data visual - ization , ” IEEE Transactions on Visualization and Com - puter Graphics , vol . 20 , no . 12 , pp . 2211 – 2220 , 2014 , doi : 10 . 1109 / TVCG . 2014 . 2346419 . [ 98 ] P . Wu , S . Carberry , S . Elzer , and D . Chester , “Recognizing the intended message of line graphs , ” in Diagrammatic Rep - resentation and Inference , 6th International Conference , Diagrams , ser . Lecture Notes in Computer Science , A . K . Goel , M . Jamnik , and N . H . Narayanan , Eds . Springer , 2010 , vol . 6170 , pp . 220 – 234 . [ 99 ] X . Qian , E . Koh , F . Du , S . Kim , J . Chan , R . A . Rossi , 18 S . Malik , and T . Y . Lee , “Generating accurate caption units for ﬁgure captioning , ” in Proceedings of the Web Conference 2021 , pp . 2792 – 2804 . [ 100 ] B . S . Bloom , M . D . Engelhart , E . Furst , W . H . Hill , and D . R . Krathwohl , “Taxonomy of educational objectives handbook 1 : The cognitive domain , ” New York : David McKay , 1956 . [ 101 ] R . Berger , “Now i see it , now i don’t : Researcher’s position and reﬂexivity in qualitative research , ” Qualitative research , vol . 15 , no . 2 , pp . 219 – 234 , 2015 . [ 102 ] H . Koizumi and H . Yamashita , “Deﬁcit lay or deﬁcit expert : How do “experts” in environmental projects perceive lay people and lay knowledge ? ” SAGE Open , vol . 11 , no . 3 , p . 21582440211023155 , 2021 . [ 103 ] S . Hilgartner , “The dominant view of popularization : Con - ceptual problems , political uses , ” Social studies of science , vol . 20 , no . 3 , pp . 519 – 539 , 1990 . [ 104 ] J . Wood , A . Kachkaev , and J . Dykes , “Design exposition with literate visualization , ” IEEE Transactions on Visual - ization and Computer Graphics , vol . 25 , no . 1 , pp . 759 – 768 , 2019 , doi : 10 . 1109 / TVCG . 2018 . 2864836 .