fpsyg - 12 - 698892 October 7 , 2021 Time : 19 : 20 # 1 ORIGINAL RESEARCH published : 13 October 2021 doi : 10 . 3389 / fpsyg . 2021 . 698892 Edited by : Omer Farooq Malik , COMSATS University , Islamabad Campus , Pakistan Reviewed by : Muhammad Hashim , National Textile University , Pakistan Michela Cortini , Università degli Studi “G . d’Annunzio” Chieti - Pescara , Italy * Correspondence : Virginie Vial virginie . vial @ kedgebs . com Specialty section : This article was submitted to Organizational Psychology , a section of the journal Frontiers in Psychology Received : 22 April 2021 Accepted : 20 September 2021 Published : 13 October 2021 Citation : Vial V and Richomme - Huet K ( 2021 ) A Conceptual System of Antecedents and Processes in Social Entrepreneurship Opportunity Identiﬁcation . Front . Psychol . 12 : 698892 . doi : 10 . 3389 / fpsyg . 2021 . 698892 A Conceptual System of Antecedents and Processes in Social Entrepreneurship Opportunity Identiﬁcation Virginie Vial 1 , 2 * and Katia Richomme - Huet 1 1 Strategy , Sustainable Development and Entrepreneurship Department , KEDGE Business School , Marseille , France , 2 UMR 5062 , Institut d’Asie Orientale ( IAO ) , ENS de Lyon , Lyon , France Aiming to complement and ground the theory of social entrepreneurship opportunity identiﬁcation , we draw from a database of 2 , 872 entrepreneurs’ life stories with two main objectives . The ﬁrst is to provide a comprehensive list and categorization of antecedents of opportunity identiﬁcation in the context of social entrepreneurship . The second is to demonstrate the systemic interconnections between those and build a model of social entrepreneurship opportunity identiﬁcation . We review the literature and establish a framework of ﬁve high - order key antecedents’ areas ( context , background , social networks and interactions , affect , and cognitive process ) . We then proceed to a ﬁve - step empirical triangulation methodology mixing computerized and manual content analysis . We thereby identify 42 antecedents nested into 17 ﬁrst - level items grouped into the ﬁve high - order key antecedents’ areas . Our detailed results shed light on a wide array of previously ignored antecedents and provide more precisions about those that had already been documented elsewhere . Finally , we highlight and explain the relationships between the antecedents , show that they constitute an “opportunity growing ground , ” and present a full model of social entrepreneurship opportunity identiﬁcation based on their interconnections . The context of the social entrepreneur combines stable features regarding access to various resources , a strong geographical identity and history , the encounter of several worlds , all condition or are conditioned by his / her social networks and background . This context is also subject to diverse constraints and institutional barriers that can shape the entrepreneur’s background , her / his experiences , as well as his / her affect speciﬁcities . This stable context is at some point hit by elements of change that disrupt this stability , triggering chains of reactions between the various antecedents of opportunity identiﬁcation . Keywords : Ashoka , empirical triangulation , grounded theory , inductive analysis , life stories , opportunity identiﬁcation , semi - computerized content analysis , social entrepreneurship INTRODUCTION “In a society that has chronically higher levels of violence and suicide rates than any other OECD countries , [ social entrepreneur ] Hye - Shin Chung , is enabling ordinary citizens to help themselves and people around them overcome their emotional and psychological trauma . ” Over the past 60 years , a series of collective trauma deeply marked the Korean historical and socio - economic Frontiers in Psychology | www . frontiersin . org 1 October 2021 | Volume 12 | Article 698892 fpsyg - 12 - 698892 October 7 , 2021 Time : 19 : 20 # 2 Vial and Richomme - Huet Social Entrepreneurship Opportunity Identiﬁcation Antecedents context . The population endured the war in the 50s , a military dictatorship in the 70s – 80s , and suﬀered from a massive economic restructuring in response to the 1997 ﬁnancial crisis . More recently , though less dramatic , the national tragedy of the Sewol Ferry Disaster in 2014 still “severely shocked Korean society” ( Woo et al . , 2015 , p . 10 , 974 ) , while painfully underlining government incompetence in dealing with the catastrophe . In the meantime , the Korean society is subject to intense pressure to excel at all times . Generating signiﬁcant social consequences , prevention , classical medical treatment and professional consultation fail to address the resulting nation - wide mental and physical health issues . Social entrepreneur Hye - Shin indeed “started seeing gaps in the profession” while building herself an educational and professional background in psychiatry , a path she embraced after being aﬀected by the painful loss of her mother when she was only 11 . In her ﬁrst years as a professional , “she learned about the outpatient treatment services abroad for people with schizophrenia , ” and implemented it in Korea through her private practice . Oﬃcial institutions approved of this initiative and “major university hospitals started outpatient services . ” Her “understanding deepened through her work” with Dong - won Park , a patient who - along with 20 other of his family members and over a 20 - year period , had been falsely accused of espionage , tortured and imprisoned by state authorities . Through him and , later , “from her own experience working with victims and their family members , ” she understood the interrelatedness of individual circumstances and collective experiences on one’s psychological health . Thanks to her practice , “she was convinced that empathy is a key” and that “those who suﬀered extreme emotional trauma ( . . . ) can be excellent counselors and healers ( . . . ) because they truly understand the pain and the process of recovery . ” She then created “a set of highly replicable and self - multiplying approaches” for both collective and individual counseling . These take the form of a self - evaluation tool ( ‘Mind Report’ ) or empathy - based healing programs ( ‘Wounded Healers’ and ‘Everyone Needs a Mom’ programs ) “to turn ordinary citizens into healing agents for themselves and others . ” She also launched for - proﬁt ( ‘Mind Prism’ ) , as well as citizen - sector organizations ( The Truth Foundation , The Warak Center and the Empathetic Person ) “to empower more wounded healers from all walks of life” ( laid - oﬀ workers , sexual minorities , disaster’s victims and families as well as ordinary citizens ) . Hye - Shin’s life story vividly provides one example of the ‘why’ and the ‘how’ social entrepreneurs identify opportunities . In a speciﬁc national context , she spotted several gaps in the area of mental health treatment thanks to her personal , emotional , educational , and professional background and experience , which has been strengthened by her interaction with various patients , colleagues , and other stakeholders . These elements , combined with her exposure to alternative foreign health systems , helped her ﬁnd opportunities and design pioneering social solutions . Her story highlights that a social enterprise presents some of the broad antecedents of opportunity identiﬁcation ( hereafter OI ) that appear in the mainstream entrepreneurship literature – the context , background , social networks , aﬀect and cognitive process ( Venkataraman , 1997 ; Ardichvili et al . , 2003 ; Gielnik et al . , 2014 ) . Can we detail those broad antecedents ? What are the speciﬁcities of those antecedents and are there additional antecedents for the case of social entrepreneurship ? For example , is the context consistently hostile ( repeated collective traumas , failing institutions ) ? Are there backgrounds that are recurrent in social entrepreneurship ( hereafter SE ) , and what are they ( perseverance , solidarity ) ? What kind of social networks matter ( informal citizen networks , professional networks ) ? What are the types of aﬀect at play ( empathy and grief ) ? How does the cognitive process lead to the OI ( sensitivity to the other’s suﬀering , establishing institutional and practice gaps from exposure to various professional experiences ) ? There are indeed diﬀerences in the identiﬁcation of social and business opportunities which call for a more complete and grounded theory of social OI ( González et al . , 2017 ) . While the force of a case study resides in its breadth of details , its weakness lies in its singularity ( such as exceptional circumstances , out of the ordinary personalities , or very speciﬁc settings ) . As we are aiming for generalization , we need to expand and deepen the analysis regarding the qualiﬁcation of each broad set of antecedents using a large collection of detailed cases . Such a collection is freely available from the world largest international network of social entrepreneurs , Ashoka 1 , counting 2 , 872 social entrepreneurs who have been elected Ashoka fellows between 1982 and 2016 . We proceed by triangulation ( Wilson , 1981 ) , ﬁrst adopting a quantitative approach by way of a computerized content analysis , and second proceeding to a qualitative discourse analysis . Using triangulation allows to “take advantage of both the qualitative and quantitative perspectives on texts , assuming that both the diﬀerent forms of repetition and the peculiar way by which something has been said may play an important role” ( Cortini and Tria , 2014 , p . 561 ) . We analyze the textual data with two objectives in mind . First , we target the development of a comprehensive categorization of antecedents of OI accounting for the speciﬁcities of SE opportunities . Second , we wish to expose the systemic relationships among the antecedents of OI to construct a conceptual model of social entrepreneurship opportunity identiﬁcation ( hereafter SEOI ) . Through the thorough analysis of the rich social entrepreneurs’ life stories , we ﬁrst oﬀer a detailed and ﬁnely grained map of 42 opportunity identiﬁcation antecedents nested into 17 ﬁrst - level items grouped into the 5 classic generic antecedents . The comprehensive and dynamic analysis shows that these antecedents form an ensemble and web of relationships , which we coin the ‘Opportunity Growing Ground . ’ We characterize relationships between antecedents to depict a full conceptual model of Social Entrepreneurship Opportunity Identiﬁcation ( SEOI ) . We hence provide the ﬁrst comprehensive conceptual model of SEOI that is backed up by a solid empirical investigation . The ﬁrst section reviews the mainstream as well as social entrepreneurship literature so as to establish OI antecedents . The second section presents the data , explains and justiﬁes the empirical methodology . The third section reports and discusses 1 www . ashoka . org Frontiers in Psychology | www . frontiersin . org 2 October 2021 | Volume 12 | Article 698892 fpsyg - 12 - 698892 October 7 , 2021 Time : 19 : 20 # 3 Vial and Richomme - Huet Social Entrepreneurship Opportunity Identiﬁcation Antecedents the results that are emerging from our inductive analysis . The last section concludes . OPPORTUNITY IDENTIFICATION We ﬁrst review the mainstream entrepreneurship literature to determine the generic OI antecedents . We then survey the literature that investigates the speciﬁcities of generic OI in social entrepreneurship . The literature review constitutes our point of departure for the analysis that follows . Opportunity Identiﬁcation in Mainstream Entrepreneurship Covering recognition , discovery and creation ( Sarasvathy et al . , 2003 ) , OI represents the encounter of market supply and demand , which transforms into the creation of economic value . A central element in entrepreneurship research ( Filser et al . , 2020 ) , the opportunity is instrumental to the understanding of the market equilibrium process ( Klein , 2008 ) . In eﬀect , an opportunity is a way for the market to clear , a match between market supply and demand at the equilibrium price ( Kirzner , 1979 ) . Entrepreneurial opportunities are always described as proﬁt opportunities ( Foss et al . , 2008 ; Klein , 2008 ) , i . e . , as “those situations in which new goods , services , raw materials , and organizing methods can be introduced and sold at greater than their cost of production” ( Shane and Venkataraman , 2000 , p . 220 ) . In a general perspective , original theories ( Kirzner , 1973 , 1979 ; Shane and Venkataraman , 2000 ; Stevenson and Jarillo , 2007 ) , show that OI represents one of the most distinctive and fundamental entrepreneurial behaviors ( Gaglio and Katz , 2001 ) . The study of the antecedents of OI ( Gielnik et al . , 2014 ) may shed some light on both the “why” and the “how” some individuals do identify opportunities while others do not ( Venkataraman , 1997 ; Tang et al . , 2012 ; Busenitz et al . , 2014 ) . ( 1 ) The reading of the literature reveals that individuals can identify entrepreneurial opportunities for several reasons : ( a ) They possess a certain background encompassing personality traits and cognitive properties . These include self - eﬃcacy , risk - taking , optimism and creativity , prior knowledge and experience ( Bandura , 1986 ; Ajzen , 1987 ; Hills et al . , 1997 , 1999 ; Krueger , 2000 ; Ardichvili et al . , 2003 ; Shane , 2003 ; Ko and Butler , 2007 ; Lehner and Kansikas , 2012 ; Grégoire and Shepherd , 2015 ) . ( b ) They are part of various social networks ( Aldrich and Zimmer , 1986 ; Allen , 2000 ; Johannisson , 2000 ; Ardichvili et al . , 2003 ; Shane , 2003 ; Ozgen and Baron , 2007 ; Grégoire and Shepherd , 2015 ) . ( c ) They experience diﬀerent types of positive and negative aﬀect ( Baron , 2008 ; Cardon et al . , 2012 ; Tang et al . , 2012 ; Welpe et al . , 2012 ; Grégoire , 2014 ; Foo et al . , 2015 ; Grégoire and Shepherd , 2015 ; Zhao and Xie , 2020 ) . ( d ) They interact with their exogenous social , economic , technological and institutional context ( Krueger , 2000 ; Baron , 2008 ; Grégoire and Shepherd , 2015 ) . ( 2 ) They go through a cognitive process : ( a ) Mental models ordered to optimizing eﬀectiveness within given situations , such as entrepreneurial alertness ( Hu et al . , 2018 ; Neneh , 2019 ; Li et al . , 2020 ) ; ( b ) Ability to notice business opportunities , and entrepreneurial intention ( Li et al . , 2020 ) ; ( c ) Eﬀorts made to achieve an entrepreneurial activity ( Kirzner , 1973 , 1997 ; Ajzen , 1987 ; Krueger , 2000 ; Gaglio and Katz , 2001 ; Ardichvili et al . , 2003 ; Shook et al . , 2003 ; Gaglio , 2004 ; McMullen and Shepherd , 2006 ; Mitchell et al . , 2007 ; Foo , 2011 ; Gielnik et al . , 2012 ; Tang et al . , 2012 ; Foo et al . , 2015 ; Grégoire and Shepherd , 2015 ; Brännback and Carsrud , 2016 ; Zhao and Xie , 2020 ) . In essence , the entrepreneurial OI results from the entrepreneur’s ‘cognitive process’ ( the “how” ) that feeds from the interactions of the entrepreneur’s ‘background , ’ ‘aﬀect , ’ ‘social networks , ’ and ‘context’ ( the “why” ) . These represent the high - order key antecedents’ areas ( hereafter HOKAAs ) of OI that have readily been presented in the literature , and which we use as a generic grid of analysis in what follows . Opportunity Identiﬁcation in Social Entrepreneurship Social entrepreneurship opportunity identiﬁcation antecedents are likely to present some speciﬁcities because they diﬀer regarding : ( 1 ) The target outcome : general human welfare versus sole economic value creation ( Ruskin et al . , 2016 ; Lambrechts et al . , 2020 ) ; ( 2 ) The beneﬁciaries : a variety of beneﬁciaries versus owners ; ( 3 ) The situation : the social venture is “placed between civil - society , the state and the market” ( Lehner and Kansikas , 2012 , p . 27 ) rather than solely on the market . A narrower sphere of entrepreneurship but embracing a larger scope of opportunities , “social entrepreneurship encompasses the activities and processes undertaken to discover , deﬁne , and exploit opportunities to enhance social wealth . . . deﬁned broadly to include economic , societal , health , and environmental aspects of human welfare” ( Zahra et al . , 2009 , p . 522 ) . Opportunities lie in economic , social , societal and environmental multi - dimensional “unsatisfactory” or “suboptimal” equilibria ( Martin and Osberg , 2007 ) , and do not rest only on pure market disequilibria . Social and commercial entrepreneurs diﬀer regarding the type of opportunities they pursue ( Saebi et al . , 2018 ) : while the latter focus on new needs , large or growing market size in a structurally attractive industry , the former concentrate on serving basic and long - standing needs ( Austin et al . , 2006 ) . They attempt to solve social issues ( Dorado , 2006 ; Guo et al . , 2020 ) , and emerge in a context characterized by social and institutional barriers ( Robinson , 2006 ) . They tackle “complex social problems” or even “wicked problems . ” These “are deﬁned by their circular causality , persistence , the absence of well - structured alternative solutions , relative lack of room for trial and error learning , constitutive of ‘contradictory certitudes , ’ and harboring redistributive implications for entrenched interests” ( Rayner , 2006 ; Dorado and Ventresca , 2013 , p . 69 ) . Frontiers in Psychology | www . frontiersin . org 3 October 2021 | Volume 12 | Article 698892 fpsyg - 12 - 698892 October 7 , 2021 Time : 19 : 20 # 4 Vial and Richomme - Huet Social Entrepreneurship Opportunity Identiﬁcation Antecedents Social entrepreneurship opportunity identiﬁcation mobilizes entrepreneurial abilities to shape an entrepreneurial solution to a social problem ( Hansen et al . , 2011 ; Yitshaki and Kropp , 2016 ; Saebi et al . , 2018 ) . Opportunities cover multi - dimensional problems that are deeply embedded in diﬃcult social and institutional environments . As a result , SE “beneﬁts accrue primarily to targeted beneﬁciaries , as opposed to owners” ( Alvord et al . , 2004 ; Austin et al . , 2006 ; Mair and Marti , 2006 ; Miller et al . , 2012 , p . 618 ) . While commercial entrepreneurship opportunities are for - proﬁt and instrumental to clear the market , in SE , market solutions are used to solve out - of - the - market social problems , and opportunities are instrumental in resolving multi - dimensional disequilibria . SEOI has sparked some research very recently , focusing on either single antecedents or narrow sets thereof . They identify speciﬁc antecedents of SEOI relative to mainstream entrepreneurship ( González et al . , 2017 ) . We brieﬂy review this literature to classify the readily identiﬁed antecedents of SE into the HOKAAs of OI ( context , background , social networks , aﬀect , and cognitive process ) . Contexts Resources – which are critical to obtain , constitute a central element of context in SEOI ( Dorado , 2006 ; Hockerts , 2006 ; Murphy and Coombes , 2009 ) . Activism , self - help and philanthropy supply key resources for SE . These take the form of “legitimacy , awareness of social forces , distinct networks , and specialized technical expertise” ( Hockerts , 2006 , p . 9 ) , as well as either free or low - cost long - term capital , cheap labor , and eﬀective prescribers . This further supports the idea that SEOI requires a convergence of social , economic and environmental inputs ( Murphy and Coombes , 2009 ) . This convergence is central because social entrepreneurs identify opportunities where institutional barriers to resources access and entry are high ( Robinson , 2006 ; Dorado and Ventresca , 2013 ; Guo et al . , 2020 ) . SE is distinctive regarding its context where opportunities stand at the crossroads between the market , non - market ( society ) and institutional spheres . Backgrounds The entrepreneur’s background largely shapes SEOI ( Dorado , 2006 ; Robinson , 2006 ) . It covers education , work and personal experience , as well as personality traits , attitudes and cognitive properties . Shaw and Carter ( 2007 ) describe social entrepreneurs as ethical , entrepreneurial , creative and agenda - setting . Speciﬁc personality characteristics stand out . They display “vision , drive and perseverance” ( Sharir and Lerner , 2006 , p . 7 ) , and “innovativeness , achievement centered , independence , sense of destiny , low risk aversion , tolerance for ambiguity and social value creation” ( Brooks , 2009 ; Nga and Shamuganathan , 2010 , p . 263 ) . Finally , they show empathy and moral judgment ( Mair and Noboa , 2006 ; Conway Dato - on and Kalakay , 2016 ) , as well as compassion ( Miller et al . , 2012 ) . Using the ‘Big Five’ model as a taxonomy of personality traits ( Goldberg , 1990 ) , Nga and Shamuganathan ( 2010 ) conclude that social entrepreneurs’ key personality traits are agreeableness , conscientiousness and openness . Personality traits , attitudes and cognitive properties blend in with various types of knowledge and experience . Deeply rooted beliefs stem from experience such as early childhood trauma ( i . e . , parents’ divorce , depression or suicide , and violence ) , or from deeply transformative negative or positive experiences ( i . e . , living abroad and gaining perspective , growing up in a troubled family environment , combating alcohol or drug use , having parents with high levels of social and political engagement , or experiencing early involvement in social issues ) ( Barendsen and Gardner , 2004 ) . These life events are experience corridors , which “created awareness of and information about particulars areas that shaped opportunity development” ( Corner and Ho , 2010 , p . 652 ) . These represent extensions of knowledge corridors , deﬁned as information and know - how gained from past work experience and education ( Ronstadt , 1988 ; Shane , 2000 ) . The awareness that SE can respond to the social problem grows from prior knowledge and experience ( Hockerts , 2015 ) . Sharir and Lerner ( 2006 ) depict this as the need for “personal rehabilitation , search for solutions to individual distress , and obligation to one’s community ( e . g . , ethnic community ) or aﬃliation ( e . g . , individuals sharing a problem or common fate ) ” ( p . 16 ) . The entrepreneur demonstrates a strong problem - solving culture ( Dees , 2012 ) , and can “identify income - generating ventures” without traditional sources of ﬁnancing ( Dorado , 2006 , p . 336 ) . Social Networks and Interactions The social entrepreneur’s social network – characterized by an active community belonging and participation , becomes an inspiration and a source of OI , as well as one of the main places for accessing resources ( Hockerts , 2006 ; Guo et al . , 2020 ) . Social support deﬁnitely underpins the social feasibility of the venture ( Mair and Noboa , 2006 ; Wang et al . , 2019 ) . Qualitative research demonstrates that both social networks size and density display a signiﬁcant eﬀect on SEOI . Social needs , personal , government , training and consulting , ﬁnancial , as well as support networks are all relevant to SEOI ( Sun and Cai , 2013 ) . Affect Emphasizing the role of empathy and compassion ( Mair and Noboa , 2006 ; Miller et al . , 2012 ) , researchers indirectly point toward the probably signiﬁcant inﬂuence of aﬀect in the process of SEOI ( Mair and Marti , 2006 ; Zahra et al . , 2009 ) . In parallel , the nature and intensity of experiences leading to SE also point toward a potentially profound emotional phenomenon ( Barendsen and Gardner , 2004 ; Sharir and Lerner , 2006 ) . In such cases , the mainstream psychology literature points that emotions display three characteristics : ( 1 ) They have “strongly motivating subjective qualities ( . . . ) [ like ] pleasure or pain” ; ( 2 ) They are “initiated by some particular objects or event , real or imagined” ; ( 3 ) They “motivate particular kinds of behaviors” ( Robinson , 2008 , p . 155 ) . They are therefore shaped by the context , background and network , motivate behaviors and attitudes , and are bound to Frontiers in Psychology | www . frontiersin . org 4 October 2021 | Volume 12 | Article 698892 fpsyg - 12 - 698892 October 7 , 2021 Time : 19 : 20 # 5 Vial and Richomme - Huet Social Entrepreneurship Opportunity Identiﬁcation Antecedents be an important primary antecedent of OI that will interact with the others . Cognitive Process A ﬁrst cognitive model deciphers how compassion can translate into SE thanks to “three mechanisms ( integrative thinking , prosocial cost - beneﬁt analysis , and commitment to alleviating others’ suﬀering ) ” ( Miller et al . , 2012 , p . 616 ) . A second one underlines how “imprinting or the profound inﬂuence of social and historical context [ is ] constraining the perceptual apparatus of entrepreneurs” ( Suddaby et al . , 2015 , p . 1 ) . It proposes the concept of “reﬂexivity , ” by which individuals can identify or generate opportunities thanks to their abilities to imagine new social realities through a constant process of contrasting and comparing various settings . Research Gap and Objectives of the Study The review of the literature shows that the antecedents of SEOI share common points with the antecedents of mainstream entrepreneurship OI . However , they also display speciﬁc characteristics . Exploring these common as well as diverging attributes on a systematic basis aims at building a comprehensive formal conceptual framework for SEOI . In essence , OI results from the HOKAAs : a cognitive process that feeds from the interactions of the entrepreneur’s context , background , aﬀect , and social network . Our introductory case study shows how a social entrepreneur’s story illustrates the “how” and the “why” of SEOI through a complex dynamic system of antecedents . Through a cognitive process that is weaved into her social entrepreneur story ( identifying a gap between a need for speciﬁc mental healthcare and existing solutions ) , Hye - Shin identiﬁes social opportunities that are clearly shaped by her country historical socio - economic context ( collective traumas , institutional failure , and lack of resources ) , her background ( education and professional experience in psychiatry ) , her aﬀect ( personal childhood trauma , observer and victim of South Korean collective traumas ) , and her social networks ( institutions , professional national and international networks , former and current patients ) . These antecedents fall into the HOKAAs from the mainstream entrepreneurship literature and cover some of the speciﬁc ones identiﬁed in the SEOI literature ( access to resources , activism , experience corridors , childhood trauma , empathy , openness , perseverance , institutional and professional network , imprinting , and reﬂexivity ) . Other antecedents presented in the SEOI literature are , however , missing here ( philanthropy , personal rehabilitation , personal distress , and ﬁnancial networks ) . Finally , some antecedents emerge from the case but are missing from the literature ( collective traumas , institutional failure , communities of victims , painful professional experience , and conscientiousness ) . The discrepancies between a randomly - picked case and the existing literature call for a large - number case investigation for a complete analysis and qualiﬁcation . Our main objective is to ﬁll this research gap by sifting through a large number of cases which is “the most meaningful way of understanding social entrepreneurship , both theoretically and empirically” ( Pless , 2012 , p . 318 ) . In doing so , we systematically explore the antecedents of SEOI and use an inductive research method , which allows potential antecedents to emerge freely through the computerized content analysis of a large textual database of social entrepreneurs’ personal histories . DATA AND METHODOLOGY This qualitative study rests on a computerized content analysis methodology , applied on a database of 2 , 872 social entrepreneurs’ life stories worldwide . It is conducted inductively to identify the antecedents that most frequently emerge in SEOI . Secondary - Source Life Stories for Inductive Theory - Building The Ashoka community represents the largest multi - dimensional sample of social entrepreneurs including 2 , 872 fellows ( men 61 . 5 % and women 38 . 5 % , excluding changemaker schools and campuses ) elected over a 35 - year period ( 1982 – 2016 ) in 93 developed as well as developing countries ( South America 29 . 9 % ; Asia 28 . 8 % ; Europe 14 . 8 % ; Africa 13 . 9 % ; North America 9 . 2 % ; Middle East 3 . 2 % ; and Oceania 0 . 2 % ) . They engage in eight topic areas , distributed as follows : civic engagement ( 18 % ) , development and prosperity ( 16 % ) , children and youth ( 15 % ) , human rights and equality ( 13 % ) , business and social enterprise ( 12 % ) , environment and sustainability ( 10 % ) , health and ﬁtness ( 10 % ) , peace and harmonious relations ( 5 % ) . Fellow candidates go through a selection process according to ﬁve criteria : ( 1 ) The Knockout Test : A New Idea ( i . e . , innovative solution or approach to a social problem with a lasting change ) ; ( 2 ) Creativity ( i . e . , visionaries capable of engineering their visions into reality ) ; ( 3 ) Entrepreneurial Quality ( i . e . , leaders who see opportunities for change and innovation and devote themselves entirely to it ) ; ( 4 ) Social Impact of the Idea ( i . e . , broad local , national or international system change ) ; ( 5 ) Ethical Fiber ( i . e . , coming across as totally trustworthy ) . We collected data from the Ashoka website that publishes fellows’ interviews conducted and transcribed by staﬀ members . The common structured interview guide includes an “introduction” to the project , “the new idea” depicting the innovativeness of the project , “the problem” it is attempting to solve , “the strategy” adopted , and “the person” story . Aiming to identify the antecedents of SEOI , we use “the person” part of the interviews . This section presents the entrepreneur’s own story , oﬀering information about him / herself , detailing his / her background , values , motivations and aspirations ( Meyskens et al . , 2010 ) prior and in relation to the set - up of the social enterprise . This material is particularly suitable for conducting an inductive analysis ( Patton , 1980 ; Shaw and Carter , 2007 ) , and inducing new emergent theory from empirical data ( Glaser and Strauss , 1967 ; Eisenhardt , 1989 ; Gioia et al . , 2013 ) . Such a systematic data collection about successful social entrepreneurs is extremely valuable as it is rarely carried out at the international levels . The consistent multi - round selection process using ﬁve criteria provides for a structured and homogeneous sample , while the varying sectors and worldwide source countries Frontiers in Psychology | www . frontiersin . org 5 October 2021 | Volume 12 | Article 698892 fpsyg - 12 - 698892 October 7 , 2021 Time : 19 : 20 # 6 Vial and Richomme - Huet Social Entrepreneurship Opportunity Identiﬁcation Antecedents ensure an adequate representativity of the multiple contexts and their impact on entrepreneurship ( Welter , 2011 ) . We gather 2 , 872 written texts ( from 800 to 2 , 500 words each ) in the narrative form , created by authors who are neither the research subjects nor the researchers . In the social sciences , the use of secondary data hosted on websites is becoming increasingly important . They are easily and cheaply available , span long time periods and wide scopes , going beyond the usual capabilities of the individual or collective researchers ( Vartanian , 2010 ) . These properties allow for replication and variations of their study by all members of the research community . Life stories are durable , representative of real phenomena , and re - analyzable ( Krippendorﬀ , 1980 ) . They represent a “narrative truth , ” oﬀer insights about the way entrepreneurs liaise and make sense of various events occurring in diﬀerent periods , and present the “coherence between the events , thoughts , and emotional expressions they choose to introduce” ( Yitshaki and Kropp , 2016 , p . 6 ) . We note that our data present a built - in selection toward successful social entrepreneurs . The diﬃculty of identifying entrepreneurs before their establishment is a classical major stumbling point in entrepreneurship ( Davidsson and Wiklund , 2001 ) . We thus acknowledge that our study focuses on the antecedents of OI of successful social entrepreneurs – thereby leaving aside the antecedents of opportunities identiﬁed but not developed . We interpret our results accordingly . Our data also reﬂect , by nature , socially constructed descriptions of social entrepreneurs and lives interpreted and made textual , rather than true objective facts or accurate scientiﬁc truth ( Yitshaki and Kropp , 2016 ) . However , what is published as their life story , though partial , is very likely to reﬂect what they would like to tell about themselves , and what we need to know ( Atkinson and Delamont , 2006 ) . The analysis results of stories that would be mere socially acceptable accounts of SE would still be interesting . They would inform us about the characteristics of SE as a social construct , that is the result of the conversations between diﬀerent economic , political and social institutions including the entrepreneurs themselves . As a ﬁnal validity test , we independently check data through a random selection of 20 life stories . We carry out a double - blind analysis to ensure that they actually capture , measure and cover the construct of interest . We then confront our results and conﬁrm data validity . An example of such a case analysis is depicted in the introductory case presentation of social entrepreneur Hye - Shin Chung . Inductive Content Analysis of 2 , 872 Life Stories As prior knowledge about SEOI is limited , we adopt an inductive approach and draw patterns , themes , and categories directly from the data ( Patton , 1980 , p . 306 ) . More precisely , we follow a content analysis protocol to explore inductively the antecedents of OI in the context of SE . This technique “is fundamentally empirical in orientation , exploratory , concerned with real phenomena and predictive in intent” ( Krippendorﬀ , 1980 , p . 9 ) . It represents a trustworthy , unobtrusive , objective , systematic , and replicable technique ( Weber , 1990 ; Cortini and Tria , 2014 ) , and allows valid inferences from text and context , systematic sifting through large volumes of data ( Krippendorﬀ , 2004 ) . It can be used for investigating attitudes , interests and values of population groups ( Berelson , 1952 ) , or discovering “motivational , psychological or personality characteristics” ( Krippendorﬀ , 1980 , p . 18 ) . The computerized content analysis of a large number of narrative documents seems therefore extremely well suited to reach the key ideas that form the text skeleton , which contains the essential meaning without the imposition of existing theoretical frameworks . It also ensures a systematic treatment for the analysis and generates higher reliability , precision and speed than human coding ( Neuendorf , 2002 ) . The inductive content analysis systematically applies a set of categories to extract , describe and interpret the manifest and latent meaning of textual data ( Hsieh and Shannon , 2005 ) . We present the ﬁve - step process of our empirical analysis in Table 1 . The ﬁrst step consists in the collection of data . The second step aims at a descriptive account of the reduced and categorized data , exposing the social entrepreneurs’ stories in their own words , namely the manifest or basic level . We enter the full content of the textual data ( life stories ) into the software for semantic analysis ( Tropes ) , which codes and analyses content using a readily available mainstream dictionary to maintain consistency in criteria . The software walks through the texts to gather terms and list them by frequency . Those terms are then classiﬁed both into “Equivalent classes” and “into Reference ﬁelds . ” “Equivalent classes” group together closely related terms frequently appearing throughout the text ( e . g . , the terms “wife” and “married woman” are included in the “wife” equivalent class , the terms “marriage , ” “wedding , ” “marriage proposal , ” and “marital status” are part of the “marriage” equivalent class ) . The “Reference ﬁelds” group together “Equivalent classes” to elaborate a representation of the context ( e . g . , the equivalent classes “wife , ” “marriage , ” “kin , ” “in - laws , etc . , form the “family” reference ﬁeld ) . We so obtain a collection of ‘emerging themes’ ( or “Reference ﬁelds” ) . These are listed in frequency order : the larger the number of occurrences of reference ﬁelds related terms in the text ( “wife , ” “married woman , ” “marriage , ” “wedding , ” “marriage proposal , ” “marital status , ” etc . ) , the higher the frequency of the emerging theme ( e . g . , “family” ) . In the third step , where applicable , the authors then manually classify those emerging themes into the ﬁve HOKAAs of SEOI obtained from our literature review ( context , background , social networks , aﬀect , and cognitive process ) . As each emerging theme is of interest , regardless of its frequency , and we report them all ( see Supplementary Appendix ) . However , as we aim for generalization across social enterprises , from step four onward , we decide to explore only the ﬁrst 20 top - frequency themes in further details . The fourth step consists of the manual exploration of the emerging themes’ related verbatims ( themes’ context ) . Firstly , this allows either conﬁrming or repositioning emerging themes into the ﬁve HOKAAs of SEOI . Secondly , within each of the ﬁve HOKAAs , we regroup emerging themes into meaningful concepts that constitute the antecedents Frontiers in Psychology | www . frontiersin . org 6 October 2021 | Volume 12 | Article 698892 fpsyg - 12 - 698892 October 7 , 2021 Time : 19 : 20 # 7 Vial and Richomme - Huet Social Entrepreneurship Opportunity Identiﬁcation Antecedents TABLE 1 | Five - step process of the content analysis . Data Data analysis at Data analysis at Findings manifest content level latent content level STEP 1 STEP 2 STEP 3 STEP 4 STEP 5 Secondary data collection Computerized content analysis of stories ( within and across stories analysis using Tropes software ) First round of manual sorting of emerging themes Second round of manual sorting of emerging themes Theory building Inductive analysis Descriptive analysis : Extraction and reduction of information Interpretive analysis Exploration of speciﬁc passages in the stories Theorizing 2 , 872 life stories A posteriori entrepreneurs’ account of meaningful life events in response to the structured interview Identiﬁcation and grouping of closely related terms into ‘emerging themes’ First sorting of emerging themes in the 5 HOKAAs of OI Exploration and interpretation of verbatims for each emerging theme to reﬁne the identiﬁcation , labeling , and classiﬁcation of OI antecedents Conceptual modeling , discussion , and conclusion Figure 1 and Supplementary Material Figures 2 – 6 Figure 7 of SEOI . In the ﬁfth and last step , we identify prominent and repeated relationships between antecedents , closely mirroring reality ( Eisenhardt , 1989 , p . 547 ) and escaping the idiosyncratic details ( Eisenhardt and Graebner , 2007 , p . 30 ) . This step allows building and discussing a theory of SEOI antecedents . RESULTS AND DISCUSSION First , we present the themes that emerge from the computerized content analysis of the 2 , 872 life stories ( step 2 ) and their ﬁrst - round classiﬁcation into the ﬁve HOKAAs ( step 3 ) . Second , we present the antecedents of SEOI that we discover thanks to the second - round sorting and classifying of themes ( step 4 ) , and discuss them in the light of the literature . We conﬁrm and further qualify previously identiﬁed antecedents , and document and discuss the newly discovered ones . Third , we evidence , explain , and discuss the system of relationships among antecedents ( step 5 ) – the opportunity growing ground . Emerging Themes In Figure 1 , we present the ﬁrst round of manual sorting of the top 20 emerging themes labels into the HOKAAs . This ﬁrst approach shows that 167 themes emerge from the life stories and relate directly to the ﬁve HOKAAs identiﬁed in the literature ( in Supplementary Appendix , see the manual sorting of emerging themes into the ﬁve HOKAAs ) . It appears that each HOKAA contains from one to eight of the top - 20 emerging themes . For example , we classify “Time” ( ranks 4 ) in Context ; “Education” ( rank 1 ) in Background ; “Social group” ( rank 2 ) in Social networks and interactions ; “Feeling” ( rank 16 ) in Aﬀect ; and “Cognition” ( rank 20 ) in Cognitive process . These results support the use of life stories to examine the antecedents of OI . The extensive list of themes emerging from a large sample of individuals also shows that the number and variety of potential antecedents of SEOI cover a scope that is wider and more detailed than what the existing entrepreneurship literature suggests . A Comprehensive List of Opportunity Antecedents The second round of manual sorting of emerging themes through the exploration and interpretation of verbatims ( step 4 ) allows us to extract up to four levels of antecedents within each of the ﬁve HOKAAs . Contexts Our analysis suggests four levels of antecedents . The results validate the existence of two types of ﬁrst - level antecedents – ‘stable features’ as well as ‘elements of change . ’ These conﬁrm that antecedents of SEOI are consistent with the literature on mainstream entrepreneurship identifying “exogenous social , economic , technological and institutional context” ( Krueger , 2000 ; Baron , 2008 ; Grégoire and Shepherd , 2015 ) , and go beyond the SE literature that solely focuses on ‘stable features . ’ Within ‘stable features , ’ we verify that ‘institutional barriers’ play a role ( Robinson , 2006 ; Dorado and Ventresca , 2013 ) , and add that ‘constraints’ in various areas of life stand out . These are labeled ‘restrictive stable features . ’ We acknowledge that the ‘convergence of various types of resources ( social , economic , and environmental ) ’ are essential ( Dorado , 2006 ; Murphy and Coombes , 2009 ) while adding the ‘access to media and communication’ as a crucial resource . This is an important element for SE that requires gathering resources by new means ( for example , through crowdfunding ) , and often relies on alternative forms of resources ( for example through speciﬁc partnerships or networks of volunteers ) , which require eﬃcient and targeted communication . The idea that resources are often secured through non - market means such as “activism , self - help , philanthropy” ( Hockerts , 2006 ) strongly stands out . The ‘resources’ Frontiers in Psychology | www . frontiersin . org 7 October 2021 | Volume 12 | Article 698892 fpsyg - 12 - 698892 October 7 , 2021 Time : 19 : 20 # 8 Vial and Richomme - Huet Social Entrepreneurship Opportunity Identiﬁcation Antecedents FIGURE 1 | Classiﬁcation of the top - 20 emerging themes into the HOKAAs . The size of each area is weighted by the number of occurrences of each theme in the text . FIGURE 2 | HOKAA ‘Context’ : emerging antecedents . regroup those three antecedents within the ‘enhancing stable features . ’ Within the latter , we show that the context conducive to SEOI often encompasses ‘overlapping diﬀerent worlds , ’ while also presenting ‘strong geographical identity and history . ’ More interestingly , we establish that critical ‘elements of change’ are central to the SEOI . These can take the form of a ‘deterioration of the context , ’ ‘institutional change , ’ ‘dramatic event , ’ and a ‘departure from discriminating local norm or routine . ’ These types of antecedents had previously been identiﬁed in the framework of mainstream entrepreneurship in the form of “speciﬁc events” ( Baron , 2008 ) or “precipitating factors” ( Krueger , 2000 ) , but had not been scrutinized for the case of SE . Frontiers in Psychology | www . frontiersin . org 8 October 2021 | Volume 12 | Article 698892 fpsyg - 12 - 698892 October 7 , 2021 Time : 19 : 20 # 9 Vial and Richomme - Huet Social Entrepreneurship Opportunity Identiﬁcation Antecedents FIGURE 3 | HOKAA ‘Background’ : emerging antecedents . FIGURE 4 | HOKAA ‘Social networks and interactions’ : emerging antecedents . Background Our analysis suggests three levels of antecedents . Our ﬁrst - level results match the broad categories , which have previously been categorized in the mainstream entrepreneurship literature ( from Ajzen , 1987 ; Grégoire and Shepherd , 2015 ) . However , we relabel them because we complement and detail the list with antecedents that are speciﬁc to SE . Where previous research emphasized general ( Dorado , 2006 ; Robinson , 2006 ) and / or particular background such as personality traits , prior knowledge and experience , knowledge and experience corridors and socio - historical context ( Corner and Ho , 2010 ; Dees , 2012 ; Suddaby et al . , 2015 ) , we propose three ﬁrst - level categories of antecedents to SEOI : ‘Being , ’ ‘Experiencing , ’ and ‘Doing . ’ ‘Being’ covers ‘personality traits’ among which we validate two of the Big Five ( Goldberg , 1990 ) , namely ‘agreeableness’ and ‘openness’ ( Nga and Shamuganathan , 2010 ) , and add two others , i . e . , ‘conscientiousness’ and ‘extraversion . ’ Extending the analysis for ‘agreeableness , ’ we identify more precisely “compassion” ( Miller et al . , 2012 ) . We additionally ﬁnd attributes relating to personality traits that qualify how the entrepreneur considers himself : s / he has a sense of ‘worthiness , ’ ‘pride and self - esteem , ’ ‘humility and Frontiers in Psychology | www . frontiersin . org 9 October 2021 | Volume 12 | Article 698892 fpsyg - 12 - 698892 October 7 , 2021 Time : 19 : 20 # 10 Vial and Richomme - Huet Social Entrepreneurship Opportunity Identiﬁcation Antecedents FIGURE 5 | HOKAA ‘Affect’ : emerging antecedents . FIGURE 6 | HOKAA ‘Cognitive process’ : emerging antecedent . modesty , ’ as well as ‘respectability and righteousness . ’ The social entrepreneur also proves her ‘trustworthiness and responsibility , ’ ‘sociality , ’ ‘humaneness , ’ ‘kindness and goodness , ’ as well as ‘courtesy and demeanor , respect , dignity , manners’ which covers and complement the previously identiﬁed positive attributes regarding “agreeableness and openness . ” ‘Being’ also encompasses ‘Values’ and we conﬁrm ‘deeply rooted ideas and beliefs’ as an antecedent ( Barendsen and Gardner , 2004 ) . We add ‘morality and virtue , ’ which overlaps the previously identiﬁed item of “ethical ﬁber” ( from the Ashoka multi - round selection process and from Drayton , 2002 ; Shaw and Carter , 2007 ) , “moral judgment” ( Mair and Noboa , 2006 ; Miller et al . , 2012 ; Conway Dato - on and Kalakay , 2016 ) , and ‘personal and geographically - grounded history . ’ This also echoes the formerly identiﬁed importance of the “social context and history” ( Suddaby et al . , 2015 ) in the SE literature . Interestingly , we also ﬁnd that the social entrepreneur presents noticeable advantageous or disadvantageous physical properties that emerge in ‘attractiveness appearance , ’ ‘charisma , ’ and ‘physical deformities . ’ ‘Experiencing’ covers , ﬁrst , positive experiences that relate mostly to a very wide array of education and professional experience . This further qualiﬁes what authors had identiﬁed as “prior knowledge and experience of the social problem” ( Dorado , 2006 ) , “experience corridors” ( Corner and Ho , 2010 ) , as well as the “encounter of charity and problem - solving cultures” ( Dees , 2012 ) . It covers , second , negative experiences that are triggered by the outside world . These match and further detail what previous authors have coined as “early childhood trauma , ” “transformative experiences” ( Barendsen and Gardner , 2004 ) , “experience of individual distress” ( Sharir and Lerner , 2006 ) . These cover ‘signiﬁcant negative experience and path breaks’ declined into ‘violence and ferocity , ’ ‘unrighteousness , ’ ‘disrespect and abuse , ’ ‘wrongdoings , ’ ‘passivity , ’ ‘permissiveness , ’ ‘individualism and individuality , ’ ‘cruelty and evil , ’ ‘inattentiveness , ’ ‘unsociability , ’ ‘exclusion , ’ and ‘life path break . ’ Frontiers in Psychology | www . frontiersin . org 10 October 2021 | Volume 12 | Article 698892 fpsyg - 12 - 698892 October 7 , 2021 Time : 19 : 20 # 11 Vial and Richomme - Huet Social Entrepreneurship Opportunity Identiﬁcation Antecedents ‘Doing’ shows that social entrepreneurs display a high level of ‘solidarity , ’ ‘courage , heroism , fearlessness , ’ and ‘drive . ’ The latter overlaps the previously identiﬁed “vision , drive and perseverance” ( Sharir and Lerner , 2006 ) and add ‘initiative and ambition . ’ This “drive” covers various attributes such as ‘discipline , ’ ‘resoluteness and self - control , determination , and tenacity , ’ and ‘seriousness . ’ These , combined with the identiﬁed personality traits , conﬁrm the importance of leadership skills ( Thompson et al . , 2000 ) . Social Networks and Interactions Our analysis suggests one level of antecedents . ‘Social networks and interactions’ stand out as one of the important HOKAAs of OI deﬁned in the mainstream entrepreneurship literature ( from Aldrich and Zimmer , 1986 ; Grégoire and Shepherd , 2015 ) . Speciﬁc SE ﬁrst - level antecedents such as ‘social networks’ ( Sun and Cai , 2013 ) , ‘social support’ ( Mair and Noboa , 2006 ) , and ‘social group , ’ strongly emerge from our analysis . The social groups and networks act both as a general support to the social entrepreneurs ( Mair and Noboa , 2006 ) , but also as privileged access to essential resources for OI ( Hockerts , 2006 ) . Social entrepreneurs rely on their interpersonal and inter - organizational relationships to identify opportunities , to remove some barriers and to gain access to resources held by other actors . The breadth of our data then allows us to further detail three groups of social actors that seem to be of particular importance to SEOI . These are ‘institutions , ’ ‘civil society , ’ and ‘private actors’ ( mostly individuals in the private sphere such as family and acquaintances , as well as business actors ) . These actors , as speciﬁc resource holders and providers , enhance the possibility to get ideas , gather information and foster OI . More interestingly , we increase the variety of actors of social networks in SEOI . Although the literature recognizes that social entrepreneurs launch social ventures in the context of institutional failure ( Robinson , 2006 ) , we evidence the role played by institutions as a social actor part of a network that generates social OI . While previous literature tended to emphasize solely “community” or “aﬃliation” ( Sharir and Lerner , 2006 ) , we show that the social network of the social entrepreneur is , in fact , wide - ranging and encompasses most areas . Affect Our analysis suggests one level of antecedents . Our results provide a detailed account – for the case of SE , of the positive and negative emotional antecedents of OI ( Baron , 2008 ; Tang et al . , 2012 ; Foo et al . , 2015 ) . Regarding positive aﬀect , the literature has emphasized the role of “empathy” ( Mair and Noboa , 2006 ; Miller et al . , 2012 ) and “compassion” ( Barendsen and Gardner , 2004 ) . We conﬁrm their importance with the emergence in our study of the theme ‘empathy , sympathy , and compassion , ’ which we classify in the ‘Social – positive’ ﬁrst - level category of ‘Aﬀect , ’ which also encompasses ‘friendships . ’ We equally evidence ‘social – negative’ emotions such as ‘solitariness’ and ‘envies . ’ This category bridges with the ‘Social networks and interactions’ HOKAA . A closely connected series of aﬀects emerges as ‘related to object properties – positive . ’ It includes ‘desires , passion , ’ and ‘passions , ’ which are elements that have been very early on distinguished as one of the characteristics of social entrepreneurs ( Bornstein , 1998 ) , as well as ‘admiration and liking , ’ ‘enthusiasm , ’ and ‘astonishments and surprise . ’ ‘Aﬀect’ ‘related to object properties – negative’ also arise in the form of ‘dislikes , alienation , and disapproval . ’ This category often links with both the ‘Context’ and ‘Social networks and interactions’ HOKAAs . We also ﬁnd that ‘cathected – positive’ emotions such as ‘love and aﬀection , ’ and ‘cathected – negative’ emotions such as ‘hates’ play a role in the identiﬁcation of opportunities in SE . These sit at the border between emotions and personality traits ( Robinson , 2008 ) , and also connect to ‘Context’ and ‘Social networks and interactions . ’ The ‘event - related – negative’ ‘Aﬀect’ reﬂects the ‘negative elements of change’ of the ‘Context’ and spans ‘diﬃculty , ’ ‘discontentment and frustration , ’ ‘suﬀering , agony , torture , and pain , ’ ‘melancholy , sadness , and oppression , ’ ‘anger and indignation , ’ ‘unpleasantness , ’ and ‘culpabilities . ’ Without explicitly referring to these , previous literature mentioned “early childhood trauma” and “deeply transformative experiences” ( Barendsen and Gardner , 2004 ) . We also uncover two ‘event - related – positive’ ‘Aﬀect’ in the form of ‘pleasure and fun , ’ and ‘gratitude , ’ possibly linked with the light side of activism , self - help and philanthropy activities ( Hockerts , 2006 ) . The ‘Aﬀect’ regarding ‘self - appraisal’ is merely negative with ‘embarrassments and humiliation , ’ reinforced by the negative elements of ‘future appraisal’ ‘Aﬀect’ in the form of ‘skepticism , ’ ‘despair , discouragement , and resignation , ’ ‘fears and apprehension , ’ and ‘nervousness . ’ This contradicts some of the ‘Background’ traits of ‘fearlessness’ and could point toward neuroticism as a personality trait ( one of the Big Five , according to Goldberg , 1990 ) . These negative elements are , however , in balance with the positive elements of ‘future appraisal’ ‘Aﬀect’ with ‘hope and optimism , ’ and ‘expectations . ’ Finally , we evidence that the ‘generic positive’ aﬀect in the form of ‘happiness , well - being and satisfaction’ plays a role in SEOI . The scope and weight of both positive and negative aﬀect deﬁnitively demonstrate “strongly motivated subjective qualities . ” Aﬀect is initiated by social “objects or events , real or imagined” and generate new social vocation and ventures , as “particular kinds of behaviors” ( Robinson , 2008 ) . Cognitive Process Our analysis identiﬁes two levels of antecedents in the ‘Cognitive process’ ( from Kirzner , 1973 ; Brännback and Carsrud , 2016 ) that just precedes ‘Opportunity identiﬁcation . ’ We identify two ﬁrst - level antecedents . First , the ‘identiﬁcation of a gap’ is possible either by an ‘immersion’ into a speciﬁc problem or because of a ‘personal transformation through experience . ’ This reﬂects the process of “imprinting” ( Suddaby et al . , 2015 ) , which underlines the important eﬀect of the social and historical background of the entrepreneur in the way s / he perceives and analyses situations . Second , the entrepreneur is able of ‘draft solution exploration and design’ regarding the identiﬁed problem , because s / he has the ‘ability or freedom to explore despite constraints , ’ the ‘ability to bring two Frontiers in Psychology | www . frontiersin . org 11 October 2021 | Volume 12 | Article 698892 fpsyg - 12 - 698892 October 7 , 2021 Time : 19 : 20 # 12 Vial and Richomme - Huet Social Entrepreneurship Opportunity Identiﬁcation Antecedents worlds together to identify an opportunity / design a solution , ’ and to ‘envision the opportunity in a long - term view . ’ In those terms , our results explain the ‘how’ “reﬂexivity” is made possible . It shows how entrepreneurs who are “endowed with the ability to see alternative social and economic arrangements” can consider “the possibility of new and creative social realities” ( Suddaby et al . , 2015 , p . 6 ) . The System of Relationships Among Antecedents of Opportunity Identiﬁcation We achieve theory building in step 5 of our methodology . It consists in weaving together the ﬁve HOKAAs to provide a comprehensive model of SEOI and discuss the links that exist between the diﬀerent areas . We present the results in Figure 7 . Our large - scale analysis allows the identiﬁcation of 42 antecedents nested into 17 ﬁrst - level items grouped into the 5 HOKAAs . Going beyond a simple list , we provide ample evidence that the collection of antecedents of SEOI intricately intertwines into a canvas that represents an ‘opportunity growing ground . ’ The context of the social entrepreneur combines stable features regarding access to various resources , a strong geographical identity and history , the encounter of several worlds , all of which condition or are conditioned by her social networks and background . This context also suﬀers from diverse constraints and institutional barriers that can shape the entrepreneur’s background , her / his experiences , as well as her / his aﬀect speciﬁcities . This stable context is at some point hit by elements of change that disrupt this stability , triggering chains of reactions between the various antecedents of OI . The social entrepreneur’s background presents two broad areas . On one side , it exhibits diverse , strong roots also stemming from the context , a marked sense of morality . The latter can come either from generic ( family and / or communities ) or more speciﬁc ( institutions , civil society , private , and business actors ) networks , as well as from previous experience ( academic and professional background ) . S / he has a sense of work ethics that emphasizes rigor toward self , and kindness and openness toward others . These qualities are also backed up or fed by signiﬁcant education and professional experience in related ﬁelds . On the other side , s / he quite consistently withstood negative experiences inﬂicted by other individuals or by the context . The breadth of aﬀects that emerges from the data is particularly striking and shows that the entrepreneurship literature has underestimated its role . While a certain number of works focus on this particular antecedent , these either treat the role of aﬀect in general or focus on very speciﬁc types of aﬀect such as empathy and compassion . We show here a very broad variety of positive and negative aﬀects that play a large role in OI . In essence , the various aﬀects emerge because of the direct or indirect interaction of the entrepreneur with her environment ( context , background , or social networks ) . Finally , our results show that the cognitive process is indeed one key antecedent of OI . The semantic analysis of verbatims demonstrates that it is a highly speciﬁc type of antecedent , which feeds from the context , background , social networks and aﬀects . Through the acquisition and processing of information , the cognitive process consists in the analysis of the opportunity growing ground , and the identiﬁcation of gaps through immersion or personal transformation . It then pursues by drafting solutions through exploration , bridging worlds , and envisioning the problem in a long - term perspective . The FIGURE 7 | Full model of social entrepreneurship opportunity identiﬁcation . Frontiers in Psychology | www . frontiersin . org 12 October 2021 | Volume 12 | Article 698892 fpsyg - 12 - 698892 October 7 , 2021 Time : 19 : 20 # 13 Vial and Richomme - Huet Social Entrepreneurship Opportunity Identiﬁcation Antecedents ‘Cognitive process , ’ via ‘Entrepreneurial alertness , ’ leads ﬁnally to the ‘Opportunity identiﬁcation . ’ Each opportunity antecedent has a direct eﬀect on the OI via the opportunity growing ground , and antecedents inﬂuence each other as well . We pick some illustrative items from the introductory case of social entrepreneur Hye - Shin . We observe that in a context presenting stable features ( older generations often project their psychological status onto younger generations in the form of societal norms and expectations ) , one or several dramatic events ( the Korean collective trauma over the past 60 years and the death of a mother ) may occur and trigger a life path change in the background , sometimes in interaction with aﬀect ( Having experienced emotional detachment from her mother’s death , becoming a psychiatrist was her singular goal growing up ) . The background continues to develop thanks to interactions with the further development of both the context ( When the ﬁnancial crisis hit Korea in the late 1990s ) and social networks ( Her understanding of collective trauma deepened through her work with Dong - won Park . . . and 20 of his relatives ) . This illustrates the speciﬁc cognitive process of problem recognition through immersion and the drafting of a solution ( enable a vast number of ordinary citizens with varying degrees of emotional and psychological needs to access tools and societal support to address their own mental well - being and that of people around them ) . Our results evidence both the embeddedness of OI in a complex web of antecedents and the endogeneity of the process of OI that is channeled through the interaction of the opportunity growing ground and the cognitive process at play . CONCLUSION The rapidly developing literature on SE presents the phenomenon as being an integral part of and sharing numerous characteristics with mainstream entrepreneurship . It underlines the speciﬁc nature of SE opportunities that represent “wicked” problems . These are embedded in contexts of high institutional and social barriers which resolution translates into beneﬁts accruing to beneﬁciaries rather than the entrepreneur herself . In parallel , social entrepreneurs are depicted as individuals with speciﬁc personality traits and beliefs , who have followed special life paths tainted by deeply marking experiences . To date , however , we know very little about the antecedents that lead individuals to spot and commit to solving complex social issues through entrepreneurship for generally little ﬁnancial returns . These recent developments call for a further investigation regarding the antecedents of SEOI . The literature ﬁrst allows us to pin down ﬁve HOKAAs : ‘Context , ’ ‘Background , ’ ‘Social Networks and Interactions , ’ ‘Aﬀect , ’ and ‘Cognitive Process . ’ We then proceed by way of a ﬁve - step content analysis of a large textual database of 2 , 872 social entrepreneurs’ life stories . The richness of our data and analysis enables us to further detail lower level OI antecedents ( 42 antecedents nested into 17 ﬁrst - level items grouped into the 5 HOKAAs ) in the speciﬁc context of SE . The ‘Context’ presents ‘Enhancing Stable Features’ in the form of access to tangible and intangible resources , while ‘Restrictive Stable Features’ take the form of various constraints , a large variety of which are institutional . The ‘Elements of Change’ are chieﬂy negative events except for the occasional facilitating institutional change . The ‘Background’ is composed of the previously identiﬁed ‘Experiencing’ and ‘Doing’ elements , which we complement with ‘Being’ elements . The latter encompass new ‘Personality traits’ and ‘Physical Properties’ for social entrepreneurs . Beside the generic ‘Social Groups , Networks and Support , ’ we distinguish three categories of important ‘Social Networks and Interactions , ’ showing that SE grows within society as a whole . These are ‘Institutions , ’ ‘Private Actors : Individuals and Businesses , ’ and ‘Civil Society . ’ The detailing of ‘Aﬀect’ demonstrates that a vast array of positive and negative emotions – produced by various experiences , precedes SEOI . Finally , we show that the ‘Cognitive Process’ is chieﬂy composed of two elements : the ‘Identiﬁcation of Gap’ and ‘Draft Solution Exploration and Design . ’ Our detailed analysis allows us to unify the ensemble of antecedents as an ‘Opportunity Growing Ground , ’ and build a full model of SEOI based on their interconnections . Indeed , while each antecedent can be studied separately , the full picture allows a deeper understanding of the process . This represents – to the best of our knowledge , the ﬁrst empirically - backed uniﬁcation of a theory of OI that demonstrates the consistent presence and interactions of the ﬁve HOKAAs . The context of SE allows us to uncover new antecedents of OI which could open the door to new insights regarding mainstream entrepreneurship . Indeed , this speciﬁc context forces us to look at entrepreneurship from a diﬀerent angle , thereby uncovering previously neglected facets that could be relevant for the study of the general case . Similarly , our results could be transposed to other speciﬁc entrepreneurship contexts that share common features with SE . This is , for example , the case for sustainable entrepreneurship , micro - entrepreneurship in developing , transition , or recession economies . ENTREPRENEURIAL IMPLICATIONS The ﬁrst key takeaway for practitioners is that engaging in entrepreneurship goes beyond the simple search for a proﬁt opportunity . It speaks about the identiﬁcation of an opportunity to solve society’s problems , and this identiﬁcation is deeply rooted in the entrepreneur’s life story . The context has heavy consequences on the entrepreneur , directly shaping her background , and indirectly inﬂuencing it through her social network . These are all elements of life , which is made human by the emotions they trigger . The individual then makes sense of these elements and resolves life’s inconsistencies through entrepreneurship , a form of agency , i . e . , a way to operate social change . Such a vision could help entrepreneurs align or realign what they do with who they are . The second important point that derives from the ﬁrst is the possibility for all potential entrepreneurs to open up the scope of potential opportunities . This could contribute to Frontiers in Psychology | www . frontiersin . org 13 October 2021 | Volume 12 | Article 698892 fpsyg - 12 - 698892 October 7 , 2021 Time : 19 : 20 # 14 Vial and Richomme - Huet Social Entrepreneurship Opportunity Identiﬁcation Antecedents the identiﬁcation of opportunities tackling more ‘diﬃcult’ or ‘challenging’ issues , be it in social or technological terms . This development could help entrepreneurs innovate and build strong competitiveness . By putting forward the human aspects of entrepreneurship beyond the proﬁt motive , accentuating the need and inclination of entrepreneurs to ‘follow their hearts’ , align their entrepreneurial activities with their core values , and therefore live a better life in relationship with themselves , others and their environment , this study hopes to oﬀer a positive social impact . We trust that this will encourage candidate entrepreneurs to ‘make the world a better place , ’ because this humane way to envision entrepreneurship can restore and strengthen agency and freedom . LIMITATIONS AND FUTURE DIRECTIONS Several limitations of the study could impact the generalizability of our results and therefore , implications for practitioners and future research . These limitations stem mostly from the data used , i . e . , a sample of social entrepreneurs from Ashoka Foundation . First , the thematic investigation consists in analyzing secondary archival proﬁles of social entrepreneurs rather than primary information about them . In particular , we acknowledge that the coding of the data by a third party could inﬂuence the patterns and themes emerging from the data . Second , the focus on social entrepreneurs does not ensure entirely the generalizability of the results to other types of entrepreneurship . In particular , we have emphasized social entrepreneurship opportunities as being speciﬁc in nature , grounded in human development rather than having a commercial purpose . Even if commercial entrepreneurs are also somewhat driven by a social mission , we cannot exclude that they might have varying antecedents and processes of opportunity identiﬁcation . A study speciﬁc to commercial entrepreneurs , or a comparative analysis between social and commercial entrepreneurs could shed some light on this issue . Our sample of social entrepreneurs presents also a wide heterogeneity in terms of economic and institutional contexts . While our results have the advantage of generalization , it would be very informative to further the investigations and assess the variations in antecedents and processes of opportunity identiﬁcation along countries’ levels of economic development , social structures and institutional environments . Last , a comparative study of antecedents and processes of opportunity identiﬁcation along genders could open up some new avenues of research in the domain of women entrepreneurship . DATA AVAILABILITY STATEMENT A publicly available dataset was analyzed in this study . This data can be accessed here : https : / / www . ashoka . org / en - us / our - network / ashoka - fellows / search . ETHICS STATEMENT Written informed consent was not obtained from the individual ( s ) for the publication of any potentially identiﬁable images or data included in this article . AUTHOR CONTRIBUTIONS Both authors listed have made a substantial , direct and intellectual contribution to the work , and approved it for publication . SUPPLEMENTARY MATERIAL The Supplementary Material for this article can be found online at : https : / / www . frontiersin . org / articles / 10 . 3389 / fpsyg . 2021 . 698892 / full # supplementary - material REFERENCES Ajzen , I . ( 1987 ) . Attitudes , traits , and actions : dispositional prediction of behavior in personality and social psychology . Adv . Exp . Soc . Psychol . 20 , 1 – 63 . doi : 10 . 1016 / S0065 - 2601 ( 08 ) 60411 - 6 Aldrich , H . , and Zimmer , C . ( 1986 ) . “Entrepreneurship through social networks , ” in The Art and Science of Entrepreneurship , eds D . L . Sexton and R . W . Smilor ( Cambridge , MA : Ballinger ) , 3 – 23 . Allen , W . D . ( 2000 ) . Social networks and self - employment . J . Socio Econ . 29 , 487 – 501 . doi : 10 . 1016 / S1053 - 5357 ( 00 ) 0 0086 - X Alvord , S . H . , Brown , L . D . , and Letts , C . W . ( 2004 ) . Social entrepreneurship and societal transformation : an exploratory study . J . Appl . Behav . Sci . 40 , 260 – 282 . doi : 10 . 1177 / 0021886304266847 Ardichvili , A . , Cardozo , R . , and Ray , S . ( 2003 ) . A theory of entrepreneurial opportunity identiﬁcation and development . J . Bus . Ventur . 18 , 105 – 123 . doi : 10 . 1016 / S0883 - 9026 ( 01 ) 00068 - 4 Atkinson , P . , and Delamont , S . ( 2006 ) . Rescuing narrative from qualitative research . Narrat . Inq . 16 , 164 – 172 . doi : 10 . 1075 / ni . 16 . 1 . 21atk Austin , J . E . , Stevenson , H . , and Wei - Skillern , J . ( 2006 ) . Social and commercial entrepreneurship : same , diﬀerent , or both ? . Entrep . Theory Pract . 30 , 1 – 22 . doi : 10 . 1111 / j . 1540 - 6520 . 2006 . 00107 . x Bandura , A . ( 1986 ) . The explanatory and predictive scope of self - eﬃcacy theory . J . Soc . Clinic . Psychol . 4 , 359 – 373 . doi : 10 . 1521 / jscp . 1986 . 4 . 3 . 359 Barendsen , L . , and Gardner , H . ( 2004 ) . Is the social entrepreneur a new type of leader ? Lead . Lead . 34 , 43 – 50 . doi : 10 . 1002 / ltl . 100 Baron , R . A . ( 2008 ) . The role of aﬀect in the entrepreneurial process . Acad . Manag . Rev . 33 , 328 – 340 . doi : 10 . 5465 / amr . 2008 . 31193166 Berelson , B . ( 1952 ) . ContentAnalysisinCommunicationResearch . Glencoe , IL : Free Press . Bornstein , D . ( 1998 ) . Changing the world on a shoestring . Atl . Month . 281 , 34 – 39 . Brännback , M . , and Carsrud , A . ( 2016 ) . “Understanding entrepreneurial cognition through the lenses of context , ” in A Research Agenda For Entrepreneurship And Context , eds W . G . Gartner and F . Welter ( Cheltenham , GL : Edward Elgar ) , 16 – 27 . Brooks , A . C . ( 2009 ) . Social Entrepreneurship : A Modern Approach To Social Value Creation . Prentice Hall , NJ : Pearson . Frontiers in Psychology | www . frontiersin . org 14 October 2021 | Volume 12 | Article 698892 fpsyg - 12 - 698892 October 7 , 2021 Time : 19 : 20 # 15 Vial and Richomme - Huet Social Entrepreneurship Opportunity Identiﬁcation Antecedents Busenitz , L . W . , Plummer , L . A . , Klotz , A . C . , Shahzad , A . , and Rhoads , K . ( 2014 ) . Entrepreneurship research ( 1985 – 2009 ) and the emergence of opportunities . Entrep . Theory Pract . 38 , 981 – 1000 . doi : 10 . 1111 / etap . 12120 Cardon , M . S . , Foo , M . D . , Shepherd , D . , and Wiklund , J . ( 2012 ) . Exploring the heart : entrepreneurial emotion is a hot topic . Entrep . Theory Pract . 36 , 1 – 10 . doi : 10 . 1111 / j . 1540 - 6520 . 2011 . 00501 . x Conway Dato - on , M . , and Kalakay , J . ( 2016 ) . The winding road of social entrepreneurship deﬁnitions : a systematic literature review . Soc . Enterp . J . 12 , 131 – 160 . doi : 10 . 1108 / SEJ - 06 - 2015 - 0016 Corner , P . D . , and Ho , M . ( 2010 ) . How opportunities develop in social entrepreneurship . Entrep . Theory . Pract 34 , 635 – 659 . Cortini , M . , and Tria , S . ( 2014 ) . Triangulating qualitative and quantitative approaches for the analysis of textual materials : an introduction to T - lab . Soc . Sci . Comp . Rev . 32 , 561 – 568 . doi : 10 . 1177 / 0894439313510108 Davidsson , P . , and Wiklund , J . ( 2001 ) . Levels of analysis in entrepreneurship research : current research practice and suggestions for the future . Entrep . Conc . Theory Pract . 25 , 81 – 100 . doi : 10 . 1177 / 104225870102500406 Dees , J . G . ( 2012 ) . Ataleoftwocultures : charity , problemsolving , andthefutureof social entrepreneurship . J . Bus . Ethics 111 , 321 – 334 . doi : 10 . 1007 / s10551 - 012 - 1412 - 5 Dorado , S . ( 2006 ) . Social entrepreneurial ventures : diﬀerent values so diﬀerent process of creation , no ? J . Develop . Entrep . 11 , 319 – 343 . doi : 10 . 1142 / S1084946706000453 Dorado , S . , and Ventresca , M . J . ( 2013 ) . Crescive entrepreneurship in complex socialproblems : institutionalconditionsforentrepreneurialengagement . J . Bus . Ventur . 28 , 69 – 82 . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . jbusvent . 2012 . 02 . 002 Drayton , W . ( 2002 ) . The citizen sector : becoming as entrepreneurial and competitive as business . Calif . Manag . Rev . 44 , 120 – 132 . Eisenhardt , K . M . ( 1989 ) . Buildingtheoriesfromcasestudyresearch . Acad . Manag . Rev . 14 , 532 – 550 . doi : 10 . 5465 / amr . 1989 . 4308385 Eisenhardt , K . M . , and Graebner , M . E . ( 2007 ) . Theory building from cases : opportunitiesandchallenges . Acad . Manag . J . 50 , 25 – 32 . doi : 10 . 5465 / amj . 2007 . 24160888 Filser , M . , Tiberius , V . , Kraus , S . , Zeitlhofer , T . , Kailer , N . , and Müller , A . ( 2020 ) . Opportunity recognition : conversational foundations and pathways ahead . Entrep . Res . J . 2020 : 20200124 . doi : 10 . 1515 / erj - 2020 - 0124 Foo , M . D . ( 2011 ) . Emotions and entrepreneurial opportunity evaluation . Entrep . Theory Pract . 35 , 375 – 393 . doi : 10 . 1111 / j . 1540 - 6520 . 2009 . 00357 . x Foo , M . D . , Uy , M . A . , and Murnieks , C . ( 2015 ) . Beyond aﬀective valence : untangling valence and activation inﬂuences on opportunity identiﬁcation . Entrep . Theory Pract . 39 , 407 – 431 . doi : 10 . 1111 / etap . 12045 Foss , N . J . , Klein , P . G . , Kor , Y . Y . , and Mahoney , J . T . ( 2008 ) . Entrepreneurship , subjectivism , and the resource - based view : toward a new synthesis . Strat . Entrep . J . 2 , 73 – 94 . doi : 10 . 1002 / sej . 41 Gaglio , C . M . ( 2004 ) . The role of mental simulations and counterfactual thinking in the opportunity identiﬁcation process . Entrep . Theory Pract . 28 , 533 – 552 . doi : 10 . 1111 / j . 1540 - 6520 . 2004 . 00063 . x Gaglio , C . M . , and Katz , J . A . ( 2001 ) . The psychological basis of opportunity identiﬁcation : entrepreneurial alertness . Small Bus . Econ . 16 , 95 – 111 . doi : 10 . 1023 / A : 1011132102464 Gielnik , M . M . , Frese , M . , Graf , J . M . , and Kampschulte , A . ( 2012 ) . Creativity in the opportunity identiﬁcation process and the moderating eﬀect of diversity of information . J . Bus . Ventur . 27 , 559 – 576 . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . jbusvent . 2011 . 10 . 003 Gielnik , M . M . , Krämer , A . C . , Kappel , B . , and Frese , M . ( 2014 ) . Antecedents of business opportunity identiﬁcation and innovation : investigating the interplay of information processing and information acquisition . Appl . Psychol . 63 , 344 – 381 . doi : 10 . 1111 / j . 1464 - 0597 . 2012 . 00528 . x Gioia , D . A . , Corley , K . G . , and Hamilton , A . L . ( 2013 ) . Seeking qualitative rigor in inductive research : notes on the Gioia methodology . Org . Res . Methods 16 , 15 – 31 . doi : 10 . 1177 / 1094428112452151 Glaser , B . G . , and Strauss , A . L . ( 1967 ) . The Discovery Of Grounded Theory : Strategies For Qualitative Research . Chicago , IL : Aldine Publishing Company . Goldberg , L . R . ( 1990 ) . An alternative description of personality : the big - ﬁve factor structure . J . Personal . Soc . Psychol . 59 , 1216 – 1229 . doi : 10 . 1037 / 0022 - 3514 . 59 . 6 . 1216 González , M . F . , Husted , B . W . , and Aigner , D . J . ( 2017 ) . Opportunity discovery and creation in social entrepreneurship : an exploratory study in Mexico . J . Bus . Res . 81 , 212 – 220 . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . jbusres . 2016 . 10 . 032 Grégoire , D . A . ( 2014 ) . “Exploring the aﬀective and cognitive dynamics of entrepreneurship across time and planes of inﬂuence , ” in Handbook of Entrepreneurial Cognition , eds R . J . Mitchell , R . K . Mitchell , and B . Randolph - Seng ( Northampton , MA : Edward Elgar ) , 182 – 226 . Grégoire , D . A . , and Shepherd , D . A . ( 2015 ) . Opportunity identiﬁcation . Wiley Encycl . Manag . 3 , 1 – 10 . doi : 10 . 1002 / 9781118785317 . weom030077 Guo , L . X . , Liu , C . F . , and Yain , Y . S . ( 2020 ) . Social entrepreneur’s psychological capital , political skills , social networks and new venture performance . Front . Psychol . 11 : 925 . doi : 10 . 3389 / fpsyg . 2020 . 00925 Hansen , D . J . , Shrader , R . , and Monllor , J . ( 2011 ) . Defragmenting deﬁnitions of entrepreneurial opportunity . J . Small Bus . Manag . 49 , 283 – 304 . doi : 10 . 1111 / j . 1540 - 627X . 2011 . 00325 . x Hills , G . E . , Lumpkin , G . T . , and Singh , R . P . ( 1997 ) . Opportunity recognition : perceptions and behaviors of entrepreneurs . Front . Entrep . Res . 17 : 168 – 182 . doi : 10 . 12691 / jbe - 3 - 1 - 2 Hills , G . E . , Shrader , R . C . , and Lumpkin , G . T . ( 1999 ) . Opportunity recognition as a creative process . Front . Entrep . Res . 19 : 216 – 227 . doi : 10 . 1111 / j . 1540 - 6520 . 2005 . 00093 . x Hockerts , K . ( 2006 ) . “Entrepreneurial opportunity in social purpose business ventures , ” in Social Entrepreneurship , eds J . Mair , J . Robinson , and K . Hockerts ( London : Palgrave ) , 142 – 154 . Hockerts , K . ( 2015 ) . The social entrepreneurial antecedents scale ( SEAS ) : a validation study . Soc . Enterp . J . 11 , 260 – 280 . doi : 10 . 1108 / SEJ - 05 - 2014 - 0026 Hsieh , H . F . , and Shannon , S . E . ( 2005 ) . Three approaches to qualitative content analysis . Qual . Health Res . 15 , 1277 – 1288 . doi : 10 . 1177 / 1049732305276687 Hu , R . , Wang , L . , Zhang , W . , and Bin , P . ( 2018 ) . Creativity , proactive personality , and entrepreneurial intention : the role of entrepreneurial alertness . Front . Psychol . 9 : 951 . doi : 10 . 3389 / fpsyg . 2018 . 00951 Johannisson , B . ( 2000 ) . “Networking and entrepreneurial growth , ” in Handbook of Entrepreneurship , eds D . Sexton and H . Lanström ( London : Blackwell ) , 368 – 386 . Kirzner , I . M . ( 1973 ) . Competition And Entrepreneurship . Chicago , IL : University of Chicago Press . Kirzner , I . M . ( 1979 ) . Perception , Opportunity And Proﬁt . Studies In The Theory Of Entrepreneurship . Chicago , IL : University of Chicago Press . Kirzner , I . M . ( 1997 ) . Entrepreneurial discovery and the competitive market process : an Austrian approach . J . Econ . Lit . 35 , 60 – 85 . Klein , P . G . ( 2008 ) . Opportunity discovery , entrepreneurial action , and economic organization . Strat . Entrep . J . 2 , 175 – 190 . doi : 10 . 1002 / sej . 50 Ko , S . , and Butler , J . E . ( 2007 ) . Creativity : a key link to entrepreneurial behavior . Bus . Horiz . 50 , 365 – 372 . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . bushor . 2007 . 03 . 002 Krippendorﬀ , K . ( 1980 ) . Content Analysis : An Introduction To Its Methodology . Beverly Hills , CA : Sage . Krippendorﬀ , K . ( 2004 ) . ContentAnalysis : AnIntroductionToItsMethodology , 2nd Edn . Thousand Oaks , CA : Sage . Krueger , N . F . ( 2000 ) . The cognitive infrastructure of opportunity emergence . Entrep . Theory Pract . 24 , 5 – 23 . doi : 10 . 1177 / 104225870002400301 Lambrechts , W . , Caniëls , M . C . J . , Molderez , I . , Venn , R . , and Oorbeek , R . ( 2020 ) . Unraveling the role of empathy and critical life events as triggers for social entrepreneurship . Front . Psychol . 11 : 579500 . doi : 10 . 3389 / fpsyg . 2020 . 5 79500 Lehner , O . M . , and Kansikas , J . ( 2012 ) . Opportunity recognition in social entrepreneurship : a thematic meta - analysis . J . Entrep . 21 , 25 – 58 . doi : 10 . 1177 / 097135571102100102 Li , C . , Murad , M . , Shahzad , F . , Khan , M . A . S . , Ashraf , S . F . , and Dogbe , C . S . K . ( 2020 ) . Entrepreneurial passion to entrepreneurial behavior : role of entrepreneurial alertness , entrepreneurial self - eﬃcacy and proactive personality . Front . Psychol . 11 : 1611 . doi : 10 . 3389 / fpsyg . 2020 . 01611 Mair , J . , and Marti , I . ( 2006 ) . Social entrepreneurship research : a source of explanation , prediction , anddelight . J . WorldBus . 41 , 36 – 44 . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . jwb . 2005 . 09 . 002 Mair , J . , and Noboa , E . ( 2006 ) . “Social entrepreneurship : how intentions to create a social venture are formed , ” in Social Entrepreneurship , eds J . Mair , J . Robinson , and K . Hockerts ( London : Palgrave ) , 121 – 135 . Martin , R . L . , andOsberg , S . ( 2007 ) . Socialentrepreneurship : thecasefordeﬁnition . Stanf . Soc . Innov . Rev . 5 , 28 – 39 . Frontiers in Psychology | www . frontiersin . org 15 October 2021 | Volume 12 | Article 698892 fpsyg - 12 - 698892 October 7 , 2021 Time : 19 : 20 # 16 Vial and Richomme - Huet Social Entrepreneurship Opportunity Identiﬁcation Antecedents McMullen , J . S . , and Shepherd , D . A . ( 2006 ) . Entrepreneurial action and the role of uncertainty in the theory of the entrepreneur . Acad . Manag . Rev . 31 , 132 – 152 . doi : 10 . 5465 / amr . 2006 . 19379628 Meyskens , M . , Robb - Post , C . , Stamp , J . , Carsrud , A . , andReynolds , P . ( 2010 ) . Social ventures from a resource - based perspective : an exploratory study assessing global Ashoka Fellows . Entrep . Theory Pract . 34 , 661 – 680 . doi : 10 . 1111 / j . 1540 - 6520 . 2010 . 00389 . x Miller , T . L . , Grimes , M . G . , McMullen , J . S . , and Vogus , T . J . ( 2012 ) . Venturing for others with heart and head : how compassion encourages social entrepreneurship . Acad . Manag . Rev . 37 , 616 – 640 . doi : 10 . 5465 / amr . 10 . 0456 Mitchell , R . K . , Busenitz , L . W . , Bird , B . , Gaglio , C . , McMullen , J . S . , Morse , E . A . , etal . ( 2007 ) . Thecentralquestioninentrepreneurialcognitionresearch . Entrep . Theory Pract . 31 , 1 – 27 . doi : 10 . 1111 / j . 1540 - 6520 . 2007 . 00161 . x Murphy , P . J . , and Coombes , S . M . ( 2009 ) . A model of social entrepreneurial discovery . J . Bus . Ethics 87 , 325 – 336 . doi : 10 . 1007 / s10551 - 008 - 9921 - y Neneh , B . N . ( 2019 ) . From entrepreneurial alertness to entrepreneurial behavior : the role of trait competitiveness and proactive personality . Pers . Individ . Diﬀer . 138 , 273 – 279 . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . paid . 2018 . 10 . 020 Neuendorf , K . ( 2002 ) . The Content Analysis Guidebook . Thousand Oaks , CA : Sage . Nga , J . K . H . , and Shamuganathan , G . ( 2010 ) . The inﬂuence of personality traits and demographic factors on social entrepreneurship start up intentions . J . Bus . Ethics 95 , 259 – 282 . doi : 10 . 1007 / s10551 - 009 - 0358 - 8 Ozgen , E . , and Baron , R . A . ( 2007 ) . Social sources of information in opportunity recognition : eﬀects of mentors , industry networks , and professional forums . J . Bus . Ventur . 22 , 174 – 192 . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . jbusvent . 2005 . 12 . 001 Patton , M . ( 1980 ) . Qualitative Evaluation Methods . Londres , UK : Sage . Pless , N . M . ( 2012 ) . Social entrepreneurship in theory and practice - an introduction . J . Bus . Ethics 111 , 317 – 320 . doi : 10 . 1007 / s10551 - 012 - 1533 - x Rayner , S . ( 2006 ) . Wicked Problems : Clumsy Solutions - Diagnoses And Prescriptions For Environmental Ills . [ Jack Beale Memorial Lecture on Global Environment ] . Oxford : James Martin Institute for Science and Civilization . Robinson , D . L . ( 2008 ) . Brain function , emotional experience and personality . Neth . J . Psychol . 64 , 152 – 168 . doi : 10 . 1007 / BF03076418 Robinson , J . ( 2006 ) . “Navigating social and institutional barriers to markets : How social entrepreneurs identify and evaluate opportunities , ” in Social Entrepreneurship , eds J . Mair , J . Robinson , and K . Hockerts ( London : Palgrave ) , 95 – 120 . Ronstadt , R . ( 1988 ) . The corridor principle . J . Bus . Ventur . 1 , 31 – 40 . doi : 10 . 1016 / 0883 - 9026 ( 88 ) 90028 - 6 Ruskin , J . , Seymour , R . G . , and Webster , C . M . ( 2016 ) . Why create value for others ? An exploration of social entrepreneurial motives . J . Small Bus . Manag . 54 , 1015 – 1037 . doi : 10 . 1111 / jsbm . 12229 Saebi , T . , Foss , N . , and Linder , S . ( 2018 ) . Social entrepreneurship research : past achievements and future promises . J . Manag . 45 , 1 – 26 . doi : 10 . 2139 / ssrn . 3329190 Sarasvathy , S . D . , Dew , N . , Velamuri , S . R . , and Venkataraman , S . ( 2003 ) . “Threeviewsofentrepreneurialopportunity , ”in HandbookOfEntrepreneurship Research : An Interdisciplinary Survey and Introduction , eds Z . J . Acs and D . B . Audrestch ( New York , NJ : Springer ) , 141 – 160 . Shane , S . ( 2000 ) . Prior knowledge and the discovery of entrepreneurial opportunities . Organ . Sci . 11 , 448 – 469 . doi : 10 . 1287 / orsc . 11 . 4 . 448 . 14602 Shane , S . ( 2003 ) . A General Theory Of Entrepreneurship . The Individual - Opportunity Nexus . Cheltenham , GL : Edward Elgar . Shane , S . , and Venkataraman , S . ( 2000 ) . The promise of entrepreneurship as a ﬁeld ofresearch . Acad . Manag . Rev . 25 , 217 – 226 . doi : 10 . 1007 / 978 - 3 - 540 - 48543 - 8 _ 8 Sharir , M . , and Lerner , M . ( 2006 ) . Gauging the success of social ventures initiated by individual social entrepreneurs . J . World Bus . 41 , 6 – 20 . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . jwb . 2005 . 09 . 004 Shaw , E . , and Carter , S . ( 2007 ) . Social entrepreneurship : theoretical antecedents and empirical analysis of entrepreneurial processes and outcomes . J . Small Bus . Enterp . Dev . 14 , 418 – 434 . doi : 10 . 1108 / 146260007107 73529 Shook , C . L . , Priem , R . L . , and McGee , J . E . ( 2003 ) . Venture creation and the enterprising individual : a review and synthesis . J . Manag . 29 , 379 – 399 . doi : 10 . 1016 / S0149 - 2063 ( 03 ) 00016 - 3 Stevenson , H . H . , and Jarillo , J . C . ( 2007 ) . A paradigm of entrepreneurship : entrepreneurial management . Strat . Manag . J 11 , 17 – 27 . doi : 10 . 1007 / 978 - 3 - 540 - 48543 - 8 _ 7 Suddaby , R . , Bruton , G . D . , and Si , S . X . ( 2015 ) . Entrepreneurship through a qualitative lens : insights on the construction and / or discovery of entrepreneurial opportunity . J . Bus . Ventur . 30 , 1 – 10 . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . jbusvent . 2014 . 09 . 003 Sun , W . W . , and Cai , N . ( 2013 ) . A qualitative research on social network and opportunity recognition of social entrepreneurship with Nvivo . J . Appl . Sci . 13 , 4624 – 4627 . doi : 10 . 3923 / jas . 2013 . 4624 . 4627 Tang , J . , Kacmar , K . M . M . , andBusenitz , L . ( 2012 ) . Entrepreneurialalertnessinthe pursuit of new opportunities . J . Bus . Ventur . 27 , 77 – 94 . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . jbusvent . 2010 . 07 . 001 Thompson , J . , Alvy , G . , and Lees , A . ( 2000 ) . Social entrepreneurship - a new look at the people and the potential . Manag . Decis . 38 , 328 – 338 . doi : 10 . 1108 / 002517400103 Vartanian , T . P . ( 2010 ) . Secondary Data Analysis . NewYork , NJ : OxfordUniversity Press . Venkataraman , S . ( 1997 ) . “The distinctive domain of entrepreneurship research : an Editor’s Perspective , ” in Advances in Entrepreneurship , Firm Emergence and Growth , eds J . Katz and R . Brockhaus ( Greenwich , CT : JAI Press ) , 119 – 138 . Wang , W . , Tang , Y . , Liu , Y . , Zheng , T . , Liu , J . , and Liu , H . ( 2019 ) . Can sense of opportunity identiﬁcation eﬃcacy play a mediating role ? Relationship between network embeddedness and social entrepreneurial intention of university students . Front . Psychol . 10 : 1342 . doi : 10 . 3389 / fpsyg . 2019 . 01342 Weber , R . ( 1990 ) . Basic Content Analysis , 2nd Edn . London , UK : Sage . Welpe , I . M . , Spörrle , M . , Grichnik , D . , Michl , T . , and Audretsch , D . B . ( 2012 ) . Emotions and opportunities : the interplay of opportunity evaluation , fear , joy , and anger as antecedent of entrepreneurial exploitation . Entrep . Theory Pract 36 , 69 – 96 . doi : 10 . 1111 / j . 1540 - 6520 . 2011 . 00481 . x Welter , F . ( 2011 ) . Contextualizing entrepreneurship—conceptual challenges and ways forward . Entrepreneursh . Theory Pract . 35 , 165 – 184 . doi : 10 . 1111 / j . 1540 - 6520 . 2010 . 00427 . x Wilson , T . ( 1981 ) . “Qualitative ‘versus’ quantitative methods in social research , ” in Integration von qualitativen und quantitativen Forschungsansätzen Arbeitstagung , eds M . Küchler , D . H . Zimmermann , and P . . Thomas ( Mannheim : ZUMA ) , 37 – 69 . Woo , H . , Cho , Y . , Shim , E . , Lee , K . , and Song , G . ( 2015 ) . Public trauma after the Sewol Ferry disaster : the role of social media in understanding the public mood . Int . J . Environ . Res . Public Health 12 , 10974 – 10983 . doi : 10 . 3390 / ijerph120910974 Yitshaki , R . , and Kropp , F . ( 2016 ) . Motivations and opportunity recognition of social entrepreneurs . J . Small Bus . Manag . 54 , 546 – 565 . doi : 10 . 1111 / jsbm . 12157 Zahra , S . A . , Gedajlovic , E . , Neubaum , D . O . , andShulman , J . M . ( 2009 ) . Atypology of social entrepreneurs : motives , search processes and ethical challenges . J . Bus . Ventur . 24 , 519 – 532 . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . jbusvent . 2008 . 04 . 007 Zhao , Y . , and Xie , B . ( 2020 ) . Cognitive bias , entrepreneurial emotion , and entrepreneurship intention . Front . Psychol . 11 : 625 . doi : 10 . 3389 / fpsyg . 2020 . 00625 Conﬂict of Interest : The authors declare that the research was conducted in the absence of any commercial or ﬁnancial relationships that could be construed as a potential conﬂict of interest . Publisher’s Note : All claims expressed in this article are solely those of the authors and do not necessarily represent those of their aﬃliated organizations , or those of the publisher , the editors and the reviewers . Any product that may be evaluated in this article , or claim that may be made by its manufacturer , is not guaranteed or endorsed by the publisher . Copyright©2021VialandRichomme - Huet . Thisisanopen - accessarticledistributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution License ( CC BY ) . The use , distribution or reproduction in other forums is permitted , provided the original author ( s ) and the copyright owner ( s ) are credited and that the original publication in this journal is cited , in accordance with accepted academic practice . No use , distribution or reproduction is permitted which does not comply with these terms . Frontiers in Psychology | www . frontiersin . org 16 October 2021 | Volume 12 | Article 698892