T r a n s l a t i o n a l r e s e a r c h Affective neuroimaging in generalized anxiety disorder : an integrated review Gregory A . Fonzo , PhD ; Amit Etkin , MD , PhD Introduction G eneralized anxiety disorder ( GAD ) is a preva - lent and debilitating anxiety disorder that is associated with significant distress , functional impairment , and hu - man and economic burden . 1 , 2 The cardinal symptom feature of GAD is uncontrollable , pervasive worry and anxiety occurring more days than not for at least 6 months , occurring alongside somatic and emotional symptoms , such as restlessness , feeling keyed up or on edge , being easily fatigued , difficulty concentrating , ir - ritability , muscle tension , and sleep disturbance . In recent years , significant resources have been devoted to understanding the neurobiological mecha - nisms of the disorder . These efforts have profoundly shaped scientific understanding through noninvasive imaging methods , such as functional magnetic reso - nance imaging ( fMRI ) , which utilize intensity changes in a type of magnetic resonance ( MR ) signal to track hemodynamic changes in the brain . These hemody - namic changes ( known as the blood oxygenation – level dependent or BOLD response ) can be utilized as proxy measures for neuronal function , allowing researchers to infer what brain regions in GAD are activated dur - ing a given behavior , the degree to which these activa - Copyright © 2017 AICH – Servier Research Group . All rights reserved 169 www . dialogues - cns . org Keywords : amygdala ; emotion ; emotion regulation ; fMRI ; generalized anxiety ; neuroimaging ; prefrontal cortex ; worry Author affiliations : Department of Psychiatry and Behavioral Sciences , Stanford University School of Medicine , Stanford , California , USA ; Stan - ford Neurosciences Institute , Stanford University , Stanford , California , USA ; Veterans Affairs Palo Alto Healthcare System and the Sierra - Pacific Mental Illness Research , Education , and Clinical Center ( MIRECC ) , Palo Alto , California , USA Address for correspondence : Gregory A . Fonzo , PhD , 401 Quarry Road , MC 5722 , Stanford , CA 94305 , USA ( email : gfonzo @ stanford . edu ) Affective neuroimaging has contributed to our knowl - edge of generalized anxiety disorder ( GAD ) through measurement of blood oxygenation level – dependent ( BOLD ) responses , which facilitate inference on neural responses to emotional stimuli during task - based func - tional magnetic resonance imaging ( fMRI ) . In this article , the authors provide an integrated review of the task - based affective fMRI literature in GAD . Studies provide evidence for variable presence and directionality of BOLD abnormalities in limbic and prefrontal regions during re - activity to , regulation of , and learning from emotional cues . We conclude that understanding the sources of this variability is key to accelerating progress in this area . We propose that the cardinal symptom of GAD—worry—pre - dominantly reflects stimulus - independent mental pro - cesses that impose abnormal , inflexible functional brain configurations , ie , the overall pattern of information transfer among behaviorally relevant neural circuits at a given point in time . These configurations that are inflex - ible to change from the incoming flux of environmental stimuli may underlie inconsistent task - based findings . © 2017 , AICH – Servier Research Group Dialogues Clin Neurosci . 2017 ; 19 : 169 - 179 . T r a n s l a t i o n a l r e s e a r c h tions may be abnormal , and how the synchrony of brain function across two or more regions may be perturbed . In aggregate , these tools have provided much - needed insight regarding the functional brain abnormalities observed in the GAD phenotype . In this paper , the authors provide an integrated review of the emotional task - based fMRI literature in GAD . Resting state , cog - nitive studies , and pre / post treatment comparisons have been excluded from the scope of this review due to space constraints . The goal of this effort is threefold : ( i ) to synthesize and integrate the body of literature for the purposes of clearly disseminating key patterns of find - ings to the interested reader ; ( ii ) to highlight relevant trends over time in the design , conduction , and findings of GAD imaging studies ; and ( iii ) to provide future di - rections and general guidelines for continued research in this area . Methods In line with the scope of the review , we focused on iden - tifying studies that investigated emotional task - based BOLD fMRI responses in individuals with the diagno - sis of GAD . The following criteria were instituted : ( i ) primary publication in English ; ( ii ) primary comparison of a diagnostically defined GAD sample ( or subsample from larger studies investigating anxiety transdiagnos - tically ) against at least one healthy comparison group and / or other patient group ; ( iii ) use of BOLD fMRI during an affective task as a primary outcome measure ; and ( iv ) sample size within each cell of at least eight participants ( case studies were excluded ) . To identify studies , the authors conducted a literature search in PubMed using broadly defined search terms : [ “gener - alized anxiety” OR “generalised anxiety” OR “GAD” ] AND [ “imaging” OR “fMRI” OR “neuroimaging” ] . The scope of articles was further shortened through re - view of search results and assessment of whether each study met the above criteria . Results Using the search terms listed above , a total of 608 ar - ticles were initially identified . Individual review of each narrowed this pool down to 30 studies ( Table I ) . 3 - 32 We review the results below , subdivided by functional do - main assessed . Facial affect processing Numerous BOLD imaging studies in GAD have fo - cused on the assessment of brain responses to facial expressions of emotion , particularly fear . Fear faces ro - bustly activate limbic circuitry , such as the insula and amygdala , 33 which are implicated as being hyperactive in various anxiety manifestations . 26 , 34 The amygdala is crucial for the induction of a fear response to an ex - ternal stimulus 35 and is critically involved in fear learn - ing 36 and emotion perception . 37 The insula is implicated in representing the physiological state of the body , a process known as interoception , 38 which provides infor - mation regarding changes in internal body signals upon which subjective emotional states are based . 39 Evidence for hyperactive amygdala and insula function in anxi - ety disorders , such as social anxiety and specific phobia are robust , 34 , 40 but results in GAD have been mixed . In adults with GAD , some studies have observed hy - peractive amygdala responses to processing fearful vs happy faces 26 and processing 10 of and adaptation to face - word emotional conflict , 12 whereas others have found decreased amygdala activation to gender identi - fication of fearful vs neutral faces 6 and viewing of nega - tive pictures , 15 and yet others have found no differences in amygdala activation during fearful face processing , 5 facial affect processing of angry , fearful , or neutral faces , 30 or viewing of aversive pictures . 8 , 29 At least one study observed a hyperactive anterior insula response to threatening vs neutral picture viewing in the absence of amygdala abnormalities . 29 Findings in adolescent and child samples have also been mixed , with amygdala hy - peractivity detected in an adolescent GAD sample only when they were attending to their own subjective feel - ings of fear in response to a fearful face but not when attending to the affect of the face itself . 4 Other studies have used a dot - probe paradigm with angry and neutral faces to probe amygdala reactivity . The dot - probe utilizes a rapid presentation of a pair of stimuli ( usually an emotional and neutral face ) fol - 170 Selected abbreviations and acronyms BOLD blood oxygenation – level dependent dmPFC dorsomedial prefrontal cortex fMRI functional magnetic resonance imaging GAD generalized anxiety disorder vACC ventral anterior cingulate cortex vmPFC ventromedial prefrontal cortex Affective neuroimaging in GAD - Fonzo and Etkin Dialogues in Clinical Neuroscience - Vol 19 . No . 2 . 2017 171 Table I . Affective neuroimaging studies of generalized anxiety disorder . 3 - 32 Study Sample Design Outcome Monk et al , 3 2006 18 GAD , 15 HC ( adolescents ) Dot - probe task with angry and neutral face pairs BOLD activation McClure et al , 4 2007 15 GAD , 20 HC ( adolescents ) Viewing of fearful , angry , neutral , and happy faces with various rating conditions ( own distress , face emotion , nose width ) BOLD activation and connectivity Whalen et al , 5 2008 15 GAD , 15 HC Passive viewing of fearful , neutral , and happy faces BOLD activation Blair et al , 6 2008 17 GAD , 17 SAD , 17 HC Gender identification of neutral , fearful , and angry faces BOLD activation Monk et al , 7 2008 17 GAD , 12 HC ( youth ) Dot - probe task with masked angry / happy and neu - tral face pairs BOLD activation and connectivity Nitschke et al , 8 2009 14 GAD , 12 HC Anticipation of negative and neutral pictures BOLD activation Paulesu et al , 9 2010 8 GAD , 12 HC Mood / worry induction with spoken sentences and sad faces BOLD activation Etkin et al , 10 2010 17 GAD , 24 HC Face - word emotional conflict paradigm with fear - ful and happy faces BOLD activation and connectivity Maslowsky et al , 11 2010 14 GAD , 10 HC ( youth ) Dot - probe task with angry , happy , and neutral faces BOLD activation Etkin and Schatzberg , 12 2011 18 GAD , 14 MDD , 25 GAD and MDD , 32 HC Face - word emotional conflict paradigm with fear - ful and happy faces BOLD activation and connectivity Palm et al , 13 2011 15 GAD , 16 HC ( adult women ) Gender judgment of neutral , sad , disgust , happy , fearful , and angry faces BOLD activation Price et al , 14 2011 16 GAD , 12 HC ( older adults ) Emotional Stroop task BOLD activation Blair et al , 15 2012 17 GAD , 19 SAD , 18 HC Reappraisal and upregulation of emotion to nega - tive and positive pictures ; Top - down attentional control task BOLD activation Guyer et al , 16 2012 18 GAD , 14 SAD , 26 HC ( adolescents ) Monetary incentive delay task BOLD activation Strawn et al , 17 2012 10 GAD , 10 HC ( adolescents ) Continuous processing task with emotional and neutral pictures BOLD activation and connectivity Yassa et al , 18 2012 15 GAD , 15 HC Decision - making task with high and low uncer - tainty BOLD activation Ball et al , 19 2013 23 GAD , 18 PD , 22 HC Reappraisal and maintenance of emotion to nega - tive pictures BOLD activation Greenberg et al , 20 2013 32 GAD , 25 HC ( adult women ) Fear generalization paradigm BOLD activation and connectivity Holzel et al , 21 2013 26 GAD , 26 HC Affect labeling of angry and neutral faces BOLD activation and connectivity Cha et al , 22 2014 32 GAD , 25 HC ( adult women ) Fear generalization paradigm BOLD activation and connectivity Fonzo et al , 23 2014 21 GAD , 11 HC Facial affect matching paradigm with fearful , an - gry , and happy faces BOLD activation and connectivity Robinson et al , 24 2014 15 GAD , 7 SAD , 23 HC Facial affect identification of fearful and happy faces BOLD connectivity Andreescu et al , 25 2015 28 GAD , 31 HC ( older adults ) Worry induction and reappraisal paradigm BOLD connectivity T r a n s l a t i o n a l r e s e a r c h lowed by a probe in the location of one of the preced - ing stimuli . The participant signals the location of the probe as quickly as possible , which facilitates inference on attentional bias , ie , the extent to which the partici - pant’s attention was drawn to the location of the emo - tional cue and the level of difficulty disengaging from the emotional cue . These studies observed hyperactivity of amygdala responses in youth with GAD only when the angry faces were masked from conscious awareness through rapid replacement of the emotional probe with a neutral one . 7 When faces were consciously processed , the amygdala response was normal , but the ventrolat - eral prefrontal cortex ( vlPFC ) was hyperactive . 3 Anxi - ety symptoms were inversely correlated with degree of vlPFC activation , suggesting a potential compensatory function . This finding converges with a study in adult GAD that observed a hyperactive lateral prefrontal response to consciously processed angry faces without any amygdalar differences . 6 Although the dot - probe has not yet been examined in adult GAD with imag - ing , these studies preliminarily suggest that amygdala abnormalities may be modulated by the focus or level of attention given to an emotional cue during the task . Conflicting results may also be accounted for by abnormal amygdala responses in GAD to facial stim - uli other than fearful faces , which are often used as baseline or comparator conditions in affective imaging tasks . For example , one study in adult GAD observed diminished amygdala and insula responses to a happy face – processing comparator condition that was con - trasted with fearful and angry face processing , resulting in an exaggerated contrast magnitude with differences driven by the baseline condition only . 23 Another study observed similarly increased magnitude of amygdala responses to neutral faces , but not angry faces , in adults with GAD . 21 Similarly , amygdala interactions with other brain structures may influence variability , often investigated through context - dependent functional connectivity , ie , the degree of synchrony of BOLD responses in two regions in interaction with task conditions . A higher degree of synchrony is thought to indicate that two re - gions show greater connectivity during one task condi - tion relative to another . One study observed elevated amygdala - insula connectivity in adults with GAD dur - ing processing of fearful and angry vs happy facial ex - pressions , 23 consistent with the role of these regions in emotion processing 41 and in anxiety 34 more generally . Findings for abnormal amygdala - prefrontal connectiv - ity in GAD are also abundant . A recent study observed increased connectivity between the amygdala and dor - somedial prefrontal cortex ( dmPFC ) and dorsal ante - rior cingulate ( dACC ) during the processing of fearful vs happy faces in a transdiagnostic anxiety sample com - posed of individuals with GAD and social anxiety ( this finding was also present in the GAD sample alone ) , and higher levels of anxiety symptoms were related to greater connectivity of the amygdala with the dACC / dmPFC . 24 Similarly , another study observed increased connectivity during the processing of threatening vs 172 Table I . Continued Fonzo et al , 26 2015 15 GAD , 15 PD , 14 SAD , 15 HC Facial affect matching paradigm with fearful , an - gry , and happy faces BOLD activation Makovac et al , 27 2015 19 GAD , 21 HC Perseverative cognition induction paradigm BOLD connectivity Mohlman et al , 28 2015 20 GAD , 16 HC ( older adults ) Worry induction paradigm BOLD activation and connectivity Buff et al , 29 2016 21 GAD , 21 PD , 21 SAD , 21 HC Viewing of threatening and neutral pictures BOLD activation and connectivity Karim et al , 30 2016 17 GAD , 20 HC ( older adults ) Facial affect matching paradigm with fearful , an - gry , and neutral faces BOLD activation Ottaviani et al , 31 2016 19 GAD , 20 HC Perseverative cognition induction paradigm BOLD activation White et al , 32 2016 46 GAD , 32 HC Passive avoidance task BOLD activation Unless otherwise stated , “Sample” column indicates number of adults with GAD or other diagnoses and healthy comparison par - ticipants included in each study . BOLD , blood oxygenation level - dependent response ; GAD , generalized anxiety disorder ; HC , healthy control ; PD , panic disorder ; SAD , social anxiety disorder . Affective neuroimaging in GAD - Fonzo and Etkin Dialogues in Clinical Neuroscience - Vol 19 . No . 2 . 2017 neutral pictures between the amygdala and the dorsal mid - cingulate cortex , which is anatomically and func - tionally related to the dACC , 42 as well as increased con - nectivity between the anterior insula and dorsal mid - cingulate . 29 In contrast , other findings demonstrate deficient amygdala - ventral anterior cingulate ( vACC ) connec - tivity in GAD , which supports a specific type of implicit emotional regulatory activity—emotional conflict ad - aptation . In the first of two studies , 10 GAD participants displayed a reduced dmPFC response to face - word emotional conflict ( participants identified fearful or happy facial expressions overlaid with either the con - gruent or incongruent emotional word ) , as well as de - ficient vACC connectivity with the amygdala , which displayed a hyperactive response across all trial types . In healthy individuals , greater vACC - amygdala connec - tivity was related to the ability to adapt ( ie , reduce re - action time slowdown ) to the interference arising from an incongruent face - word emotional conflict trial when that trial was preceded by another incongruent trial vs when that trial was preceded by a congruent trial . De - ficient dmPFC activation and exaggerated amygdala reactivity to emotional conflict trials is consistent with a study in late - life GAD that observed deficient dlPFC recruitment and exaggerated amygdala reactivity dur - ing an emotional Stroop task , 14 a conceptually related paradigm in which participants identify font color dur - ing presentation of negative and neutral words . The second study using the face - word emotional conflict paradigm in GAD observed deficient vACC activation , exaggerated amygdala reactivity , and deficient vACC - amygdala connectivity during emotional conflict adap - tation , which was common across both GAD and major depression . 12 Thus , GAD is associated with selectively diminished connectivity between the amygdala and the vACC / ventromedial prefrontal cortex ( vmPFC ) during the implicit regulation of emotional reactivity , but in - creased amygdala connectivity with the dACC / dmPFC during reactivity itself . This dorsal / ventral distinction in amygdala connectivity abnormalities in GAD parallels research that implicates the vACC / vmPFC in inhibition of fear and fear extinction , whereas the dACC / dmPFC and dorsal – mid - cingulate have been implicated in fear expression / generation 43 and aversive amplification . 24 The PFC has also demonstrated abnormalities dur - ing emotional reactivity paradigms in GAD , such as hy - peractive dACC / dmPFC and vlPFC responses in youth with GAD during assessment of their own emotional response to fear faces , 4 viewing of emotional vs neu - tral images during a continuous processing task , 17 and hyperactive vlPFC responses during a dot - probe para - digm with angry and neutral faces . 3 In adults with GAD , one study observed attenuated medial and lateral pre - frontal responses to fearful , angry , sad , and happy faces ( vs neutral ) , 13 but others observed exaggerated lateral prefrontal responses to angry faces 6 and exaggerated dorsal mid - cingulate and dorsolateral prefrontal ( dlP - FC ) activation to threatening vs neutral pictures , which was specific to GAD relative to healthy individuals and participants with social anxiety ( SAD ) or panic disor - der ( PD ) . 29 In summary , GAD demonstrates a variable pattern of prefrontal and limbic activation and connectivity ab - normalities during the processing of facial affect , which is in stark contrast to other anxiety disorders that dem - onstrate more consistent patterns of hyperactivity in regions such as the amygdala and insula . 34 , 40 The source of this variability is currently unclear , but it may be con - sequent to factors varying across studies , such as depth of processing and attentional engagement necessitated by the task , as well as age - related changes in amygda - la - frontal dynamics during emotion perception . 44 Sec - ondarily , the varying directionality and presence of ab - normalities during facial affect processing may reflect shifting functional configurations of brain regions in - volved in emotional reactivity and emotion regulation due to variation in internal / affective contexts , such as degree of worry or physiological arousal , which may moderate effective inhibition of limbic activation . Affective learning and regulation Beyond emotional reactivity , GAD also manifests ab - normalities in downstream processes , such as learning to associate cues with affective outcomes , 45 and in delib - erately regulating emotional responses to such cues . 46 , 47 Two studies have observed abnormal prefrontal re - sponses during the explicit downregulation of emo - tion in response to affective images . During cognitive reappraisal of aversive images , individuals with GAD displayed deficient activation in dlPFC and dmPFC regions 19 that are crucial for supporting this emotion regulation technique , 48 a phenotype that was also ob - served in individuals with PD . Another study similarly observed reduced dACC recruitment across individu - 173 T r a n s l a t i o n a l r e s e a r c h als with GAD , SAD , or comorbid GAD / SAD during completion of a cognitive reappraisal paradigm , as well as a second paradigm assessing top - down attentional control . 15 Thus , these findings are consistent with an emotional dysregulatory perspective on GAD , 47 pro - viding evidence for deficient recruitment of brain re - gions during explicit emotion regulation in GAD that are consistently implicated in healthy individuals as supporting this psychological process . 48 This may also be a characteristic shared across different anxiety mani - festations . 15 , 19 Other studies have investigated affective learning in individuals with GAD , abnormalities of which may un - derlie processes thought to be involved in the etiology of the disorder , eg , threat generalization and avoidance learning . 45 One study in women observed that GAD was associated with a reduced capacity for vmPFC dis - crimination of a fear - conditioned stimulus from stimuli of similar perceptual characteristics , such that those with GAD displayed a flatter slope of vmPFC activa - tion change as a function of stimulus similarity , ie , vmP - FC activation was not as high for stimuli most different from the fear - conditioned stimulus . 20 This is consistent with the role of the vmPFC in fear inhibition and safety learning 49 and suggests that GAD is associated with a deficient ability of the brain to signal safety in contexts that resemble those associated with threat but that have no threat potential . This same female GAD sample also displayed an abnormally heightened response of the ventral teg - mental area ( VTA ) to stimuli that resembled the fear conditioned stimulus but were never actually paired with shock . 22 This latter finding is quite novel and im - plicates dysfunction of a key node of the mesolimbic dopaminergic system in GAD , which has classically been associated with reward and approach behavior but is also increasingly recognized as being involved in anticipation and response to aversive stimuli . 50 This system , of which the VTA is a crucial part , is critically implicated in learning stimulus - outcome associations and modifying the predictive value of a stimulus for a particular outcome . 51 This process has been increasingly examined using computational models of operant rein - forcement learning in probabilistic decision - making tasks combined with imaging , known as model - based fMRI . 52 With this method , researchers are able to de - rive from behavioral data individual computational model parameters of expected value ( the degree to which a stimulus signals a potential future positive out - come ) and prediction error ( an adjustment signal that is used to update the expected value of a stimulus via trial and error learning ) in paradigms that invoke decision making to obtain rewards or avoid punishments . These individual parameters are then convolved with the he - modynamic response function on a trial - by - trial basis to identify areas of the brain displaying BOLD signal dynamics that conform to this pattern of information processing . A recent study in adults observed that GAD was associated with deficient prediction error signal - ing in key regions implicated in decision making and affective learning regardless of trial outcome . 32 These regions included the vmPFC , the dACC / dmPFC , an - terior insula , posterior cingulate , and ventral striatum . Moreover , when trial outcomes were punishing , the GAD group displayed deficient modulation by punish - ment prediction errors in the bilateral putamen , globus pallidus , and caudate . This valence - specific striatal ab - normality during an incentivized learning task in GAD is partially consistent with a study in pediatric anxiety that observed a valence - specific putamen abnormality in children with GAD during anticipation of increasing magnitudes of monetary gains , but not losses , 16 suggest - ing some continuity of dysfunctional incentive learning circuitry across development . In aggregate , these findings point toward abnormal neural and behavioral processes supporting not only reactivity to emotional cues , but also the downstream processes that underlie the regulation of emotional re - sponses to these salient stimuli and the learning and behaviors that follow . Notably , these abnormalities en - compass regions of the dorsal and ventral prefrontal cortex and basal ganglia , which is consistent with the role of these circuits in supporting goal - directed behav - ior , 53 associative learning , 54 and in regulating emotional state implicitly 10 and explicitly . 48 Thus , the GAD neu - rophenotype manifests a disturbance of behaviorally relevant neural circuits across contexts , rather than a more circumscribed and focal abnormality of structures underlying the fear response and anxiety per se . 34 Worry and perseverative cognition As the cardinal symptom feature of GAD 55 and the center point of its clinical conceptual models , 56 , 57 early imaging studies focused on assessing worry and its neu - ral correlates . An imaging study using worry - inducing 174 Affective neuroimaging in GAD - Fonzo and Etkin Dialogues in Clinical Neuroscience - Vol 19 . No . 2 . 2017 and neutral spoken sentences demonstrated similar lev - els of activation in the dACC and dmPFC across both individuals with GAD and healthy comparison subjects , but only in those with GAD did this elevated regional activity persist into a post worry - induction resting state scan . 9 Furthermore , higher elevations in dACC / dmPFC post - worry resting state activity were correlated with higher self - reported levels of worry . Similarly , another study in elderly GAD participants observed that worry induction elicited robust activation in the amygdala and insula across those with GAD and healthy comparison subjects , but the pattern of activation was more prom - inently frontal in those with GAD . 28 A third study in elderly GAD participants during worry induction and reappraisal observed reduced connectivity between the dmPFC and the dlPFC during worry reappraisal , suggesting an inability of the dmPFC to couple with lateral prefrontal regions for regulation of worry en - gagement . 25 These findings highlight a pattern of frontal predominance and inflexibility in GAD during states of worry , which is broadly consistent with recent findings that have investigated patterns of connectivity before and after induction of perseverative cognition , ie , wor - ry and rumination . One study investigating amygdala connectivity at rest before and after induction of perse - verative cognition observed that individuals with GAD displayed decreased connectivity between the amyg - dala and the dACC / dmPFC before induction of per - severative cognition that was as prominent an abnor - mality as the increased connectivity observed between these regions after the induction . 27 This latter finding converges with other resting state studies that have observed reduced connectivity between the amygdala and dACC / dmPFC in adults with GAD . 58 Furthermore , another study in a largely overlapping sample of these participants also observed that before perseverative cognition induction , individuals with GAD displayed less task - induced deactivation of the posterior cingu - late and precuneus , the posterior nodes of the resting state default - mode network that display frequent deac - tivation in response to task demands and elevated ac - tivity at rest . 59 In aggregate , these findings support the contention that the brain in GAD is characterized by a striking level of inflexibility in response to changing en - vironmental / behavioral demands , 60 which is consistent with the clinical observation that persistent worry and negative beliefs are generally unamenable to change from contradictory evidence in the environment . 61 Discussion These findings highlight limbic and prefontal abnor - malities in GAD across behavioral processes and de - velopmental stages . Perhaps more so than any other anxiety disorder , the presence and directionality of these abnormalities varies greatly across studies . Given the significant heterogeneity of findings observed , what can be gleaned from this body of work that will inform future studies and lead to a deeper and more nuanced understanding of the GAD neurophenotype ? We suggest that understanding the sources of this variability is key to progress in this area . Of the anxi - ety disorders , GAD is unique in that the cardinal , dis - order - defining feature is by its very nature potentially independent of environmental input—that is , worry is persistent , inflexible , future - oriented , and does not necessitate any perceptual stimulus or cue in order to arise in the individual’s subjective experience . We do not mean that worry does not arise as a consequence of a cue or stimulus , but rather that it has a larger poten - tial for stimulus independence relative to other anxiety symptoms such as avoidance , emotional reactivity , and other cued fear states . Thus , the stimulus - independent potential for worry to arise and persist suggests two critical points : ( i ) the neurocircuitry orchestrating the worry cascade is probably heavily dependent on top - down medial prefrontal systems implicated in stimulus - independent mental activity , ie , the anterior default mode network , consistent with the prominent GAD mPFC abnormalities reviewed in this paper , as well as imaging studies of worry in healthy individuals 62 ; and ( ii ) predominant stimulus - independent brain states in GAD that form the foundation for worry are more resistant to change from the perpetual flux of environ - mental input and more likely to persist in a chronic , inflexible manner . This deduction is consistent with re - cent clinical theoretical developments that posit worry is not a way to avoid negative emotion in GAD 56 but actually serves to induce a mild , persistent state of neg - ative affect that facilitates an attenuated magnitude of affective shifts arising from stimuli in the environment ( known as the contrast avoidance theory 63 ) . The idea of a stimulus - independent , maladaptive medial prefrontal “hyperorganization” of the internal milieu is consis - tent with findings for a reduced capacity of the brain in GAD to discriminate among stimuli signaling safety vs threat , 20 reduced modulation of brain activation by en - 175 T r a n s l a t i o n a l r e s e a r c h vironmental feedback , 32 and a decreased ability to shift brain and physiological states in response to environ - mental demands . 9 , 27 , 31 If accurate , the wide variability in task - based acti - vation and connectivity abnormalities in GAD would therefore be expected . Specifically , task - based manipula - tions are less likely to influence regional brain configura - tions in a reliable way in GAD , and these configurations are more likely to be dictated by stimulus - independent factors that are resistant to change by experimental in - put . Thus , depending on the stimulus - independent fac - tors influencing the functional configurations of limbic 176 Configuration 1 • Amygdala activation • dmPFC deactivation Configuration 2 • No amygdala activation • dmPFC activation Configuration 4 • Amygdala hypoactivation • dmPFC hyperactivation Stimulus time series Amygdala BOLD dmPFC BOLD Configuration 3 • Amygdala hyperactivation • dmPFC deactivation Amygdala and dmPFC inflexibility Healthy GAD Figure 1 . Variability of task - induced blood oxygenation – level dependent activity in generalized anxiety disorder : a proposed model . The figure illustrates hypothetical inversely - correlated BOLD signal time courses for the dorsomedial prefrontal cortex ( green line ) , amygdala ( red line ) , and the stimulus ( fearful face ) during an affective imaging task in healthy controls ( graph on top ) and individuals with generalized anxiety disorder ( graph on bottom ) . The black brackets indicate periods of the time course that refer to distinct “configurations” of conjoint activity between the dorsomedial prefrontal cortex and amygdala . In healthy individuals , only the first two configurations are represented in the regional time courses . In the individuals with generalized anxiety disorder , however , there are several other distinct configurations of conjoint activity that are represented over the course of the task . Dotted lines indicate periods of the time course that reflect periods of inflexibility , or a failure to change configurations of conjoint brain activity , which may be secondary to brain func - tion being more heavily influenced in individuals with generalized anxiety disorder by stimulus - independent factors . A brain surface is depicted in the lower left hand corner displaying the regions of interest depicted in the hypothetical graphs . BOLD , blood oxygenation level – dependent response ; dmPFC , dorsomedial prefrontal cortex ; GAD , generalized anxiety disorder . Affective neuroimaging in GAD - Fonzo and Etkin Dialogues in Clinical Neuroscience - Vol 19 . No . 2 . 2017 and prefrontal regions in a given GAD sample , abnor - malities may be assessed as increased activation , de - creased activation , or null activation differences . We il - lustrate this potential dynamic in Figure 1 , wherein the range of potential brain states in GAD is proposed to be broader than that of healthy individuals and individuals with other anxiety disorders , but the shifts among these various states are proposed to be less frequent and more invariant to experimental manipulations . If variability is the norm rather than the exception , how can task - based imaging be used to better under - stand the brain dynamics in GAD ? First , it will be cru - cially important to bring other convergent measures to bear on imaging findings in order to better contextu - alize their significance . The field has already begun to move in this direction with the recent incorporation of physiological measures such as heart rate variability 27 , 31 as well as computational methods that allow for infer - ence concerning the information processed by dysfunc - tional substrates . 32 Second , the variability in activation values across the task itself may in fact be extremely in - formative to explore in regards to GAD . Characteriza - tion of the amplitudes of low frequency fluctuations in GAD at rest have already yielded potentially valuable insights in this area , 64 , 65 but to the authors’ knowledge no such investigations have been undertaken in a task context . Of particular importance would be to under - stand how variability in stimulus - cued activation chang - es over the course of time and is influenced by other stimulus - independent factors such as mood , arousal level , predominance of worry or rumination , and physi - ological state . Third , a careful consideration and assess - ment of the baseline comparator condition in imaging paradigms will be crucial , as existing findings already in - dicate abnormal responses to stimuli often used as the subtractive condition for a contrast . 21 , 23 Thus , multiple baseline or comparator conditions might be warranted , as well as careful theoretical considerations of which stimuli are most suitable for this purpose . Furthermore , understanding how spontaneous fluctuations in BOLD signal might contribute differently to variations in task - evoked activation 66 in GAD might be an important area for focus , particularly given the prominent resting state abnormalities observed in the disorder 58 , 64 and the vari - ability in task - based findings . Finally , consistent with the recent explosion of “big data” analytic techniques and their application to neuroscience , 67 the time is ripe for the application of these principles to the study of GAD . More specifically , the overwhelming majority of imaging studies in this area have relied exclusively on univariate statistical techniques to characterize brain dynamics , which are well - characterized methods with an illustri - ous history of application to brain mapping . 68 However , multivariate statistical methods such as multivariate pattern analysis , representational similarity analysis , and machine learning algorithms are being increasingly applied to the study of mental disorders 69 and neurosci - ence more broadly . 70 Such multivariate tools could be eminently useful for characterizing the functional neu - roanatomy of GAD , in which a wide degree of variabili - ty in observed abnormalities may derive , at least in part , from the confluence of multiple classifiable abnormal brain states across subjects in a sample , or even within the same subject at different points in time . Moreover , the ability to understand how similar observed levels of activation in a given region , eg , the amygdala , may signify very different information - processing states de - pending upon the concomitant activation level in other relevant brain structures will be paramount to better understanding the significance of regional brain config - urations and how differential access to and assumption of these configurations may reveal unique information regarding worry and GAD . o Acknowledgments / Conflict of Interest : Gregory A . Fonzo was partially supported by a grant from the National Institute of Mental Health T32 MH019938 . All authors report no conflicts of interest . 177 REFERENCES 1 . Wittchen HU . Generalized anxiety disorder : prevalence , burden , and cost to society . Depress Anxiety . 2002 ; 16 ( 4 ) : 162 - 171 . 2 . Hoffman DL , Dukes EM , Wittchen HU . Human and economic burden of generalized anxiety disorder . Depress Anxiety . 2008 ; 25 ( 1 ) : 72 - 90 . 3 . Monk CS , Nelson EE , McClure EB , et al . Ventrolateral prefrontal cortex activation and attentional bias in response to angry faces in adolescents with generalized anxiety disorder . Am J Psychiatry . 2006 ; 163 ( 6 ) : 1091 - 1097 . 4 . McClure EB , Monk CS , Nelson EE , et al . Abnormal attention modula - tion of fear circuit function in pediatric generalized anxiety disorder . Arch Gen Psychiatry . 2007 ; 64 ( 1 ) : 97 - 106 . 5 . Whalen PJ , Johnstone T , Somerville LH , et al . A functional magnetic resonance imaging predictor of treatment response to venlafaxine in generalized anxiety disorder . Biol Psychiatry . 2008 ; 63 ( 9 ) : 858 - 863 . 6 . Blair K , Shaywitz J , Smith BW , et al . Response to emotional expres - sions in generalized social phobia and generalized anxiety disorder : evidence for separate disorders . Am J Psychiatry . 2008 ; 165 ( 9 ) : 1193 - 1202 . T r a n s l a t i o n a l r e s e a r c h 7 . Monk CS , Telzer EH , Mogg K , et al . Amygdala and ventrolateral pre - frontal cortex activation to masked angry faces in children and adolescents with generalized anxiety disorder . Arch Gen Psychiatry . 2008 ; 65 ( 5 ) : 568 - 576 . 8 . Nitschke JB , Sarinopoulos I , Oathes DJ , et al . Anticipatory activation in the amygdala and anterior cingulate in generalized anxiety disorder and prediction of treatment response . Am J Psychiatry . 2009 ; 166 ( 3 ) : 302 - 310 . 9 . Paulesu E , Sambugaro E , Torti T , et al . Neural correlates of worry in generalized anxiety disorder and in normal controls : a functional MRI study . Psychol Med . 2010 ; 40 ( 1 ) : 117 - 124 . 10 . Etkin A , Prater KE , Hoeft F , Menon V , Schatzberg AF . Failure of ante - rior cingulate activation and connectivity with the amygdala during im - plicit regulation of emotional processing in generalized anxiety disorder . Am J Psychiatry . 2010 ; 167 ( 5 ) : 545 - 554 . 11 . Maslowsky J , Mogg K , Bradley BP , et al . A preliminary investigation of neural correlates of treatment in adolescents with generalized anxiety disorder . J Child Adolesc Psychopharmacol . 2010 ; 20 ( 2 ) : 105 - 111 . 12 . Etkin A , Schatzberg AF . Common abnormalities and disorder - spe - cific compensation during implicit regulation of emotional processing in generalized anxiety and major depressive disorders . Am J Psychiatry . 2011 ; 168 ( 9 ) : 968 - 978 . 13 . Palm ME , Elliott R , McKie S , Deakin JF , Anderson IM . Attenuated re - sponses to emotional expressions in women with generalized anxiety dis - order . Psychol Med . 2011 ; 41 ( 5 ) : 1009 - 1018 . 14 . Price RB , Eldreth DA , Mohlman J . Deficient prefrontal attentional control in late - life generalized anxiety disorder : an fMRI investigation . Transl Psychiatry . 2011 ; 1 : e46 . 15 . Blair KS , Geraci M , Smith BW , et al . Reduced dorsal anterior cingulate cortical activity during emotional regulation and top - down attentional control in generalized social phobia , generalized anxiety disorder , and comorbid generalized social phobia / generalized anxiety disorder . Biol Psy - chiatry . 2012 ; 72 ( 6 ) : 476 - 482 . 16 . Guyer AE , Choate VR , Detloff A , et al . Striatal functional alteration during incentive anticipation in pediatric anxiety disorders . Am J Psychia - try . 2012 ; 169 ( 2 ) : 205 - 212 . 17 . Strawn JR , Bitter SM , Weber WA , et al . Neurocircuitry of general - ized anxiety disorder in adolescents : a pilot functional neuroimaging and functional connectivity study . Depress Anxiety . 2012 ; 29 ( 11 ) : 939 - 947 . 18 . Yassa MA , Hazlett RL , Stark CE , Hoehn - Saric R . Functional MRI of the amygdala and bed nucleus of the stria terminalis during conditions of un - certainty in generalized anxiety disorder . J Psychiatr Res . 2012 ; 46 ( 8 ) : 1045 - 1052 . 19 . Ball TM , Ramsawh HJ , Campbell - Sills L , Paulus MP , Stein MB . Prefron - tal dysfunction during emotion regulation in generalized anxiety and panic disorders . Psychol Med . 2013 ; 43 ( 7 ) : 1475 - 1486 . 20 . Greenberg T , Carlson JM , Cha J , Hajcak G , Mujica - Parodi LR . Ventro - medial prefrontal cortex reactivity is altered in generalized anxiety disor - der during fear generalization . Depress Anxiety . 2013 ; 30 ( 3 ) : 242 - 250 . 21 . Holzel BK , Hoge EA , Greve DN , et al . Neural mechanisms of symp - tom improvements in generalized anxiety disorder following mindfulness training . Neuroimage Clin . 2013 ; 2 : 448 - 458 . 22 . Cha J , Carlson JM , Dedora DJ , Greenberg T , Proudfit GH , Mujica - Pa - rodi LR . Hyper - reactive human ventral tegmental area and aberrant me - socorticolimbic connectivity in overgeneralization of fear in generalized anxiety disorder . J Neurosci . 2014 ; 34 ( 17 ) : 5855 - 5860 . 23 . Fonzo GA , Ramsawh HJ , Flagan TM , et al . Cognitive - behavioral therapy for generalized anxiety disorder is associated with attenuation of limbic activation to threat - related facial emotions . J Affect Disord . 2014 ; 169 : 76 - 85 . 24 . Robinson OJ , Krimsky M , Lieberman L , Allen P , Vytal K , Grillon C . Towards a mechanistic understanding of pathological anxiety : the dor - sal medial prefrontal - amygdala ‘aversive amplification’ circuit in un - medicated generalized and social anxiety disorders . Lancet Psychiatry . 2014 ; 1 ( 4 ) : 294 - 302 . 25 . Andreescu C , Sheu LK , Tudorascu D , et al . Emotion reactivity and reg - ulation in late - life generalized anxiety disorder : functional connectivity at baseline and post - treatment . Am J Geriatr Psychiatry . 2015 ; 23 ( 2 ) : 200 - 214 . 26 . Fonzo GA , Ramsawh HJ , Flagan TM , et al . Common and disorder - specific neural responses to emotional faces in generalised anxiety , social anxiety and panic disorders . Br J Psychiatry . 2015 ; 206 ( 3 ) : 206 - 215 . 27 . Makovac E , Meeten F , Watson DR , et al . Alterations in amygdala - prefrontal functional connectivity account for excessive worry and au - tonomic dysregulation in generalized anxiety disorder . Biol Psychiatry . 2016 ; 80 ( 10 ) : 786 - 795 . 28 . Mohlman J , Eldreth DA , Price RB , Staples AM , Hanson C . Prefrontal - limbic connectivity during worry in older adults with generalized anxiety disorder . Aging Ment Health . 2017 : 21 ( 4 ) : 426 - 438 . 29 . Buff C , Brinkmann L , Neumeister P , et al . Specifically altered brain re - sponses to threat in generalized anxiety disorder relative to social anxiety disorder and panic disorder . Neuroimage Clin . 2016 ; 12 : 698 - 706 . 30 . Karim H , Tudorascu DL , Aizenstein H , Walker S , Good R , Andreescu C . Emotion reactivity and cerebrovascular burden in late - life GAD : a neuro - imaging study . Am J Geriatr Psychiatry . 2016 ; 21 ( 11 ) : 1040 - 1050 . 31 . Ottaviani C , Watson DR , Meeten F , Makovac E , Garfinkel SN , Critchley HD . Neurobiological substrates of cognitive rigidity and autonomic inflex - ibility in generalized anxiety disorder . Biol Psychol . 2016 ; 119 : 31 - 41 . 32 . White SF , Geraci M , Lewis E , et al . Prediction error representation in individuals with generalized anxiety disorder during passive avoidance . Am J Psychiatry . 2016 ; 174 ( 2 ) : 110 - 117 . 33 . Fusar - Poli P , Placentino A , Carletti F , et al . Functional atlas of emo - tional faces processing : a voxel - based meta - analysis of 105 functional magnetic resonance imaging studies . J Psychiatry Neurosci . 2009 ; 34 ( 6 ) : 418 - 432 . 34 . Etkin A , Wager TD . Functional neuroimaging of anxiety : a meta - anal - ysis of emotional processing in PTSD , social anxiety disorder , and specific phobia . Am J Psychiatry . 2007 ; 164 ( 10 ) : 1476 - 1488 . 35 . Feinstein JS , Adolphs R , Damasio A , Tranel D . The human amygdala and the induction and experience of fear . Curr Biol . 2011 ; 21 ( 1 ) : 34 - 38 . 36 . Milad MR , Rosenbaum BL , Simon NM . Neuroscience of fear extinc - tion : implications for assessment and treatment of fear - based and anxiety related disorders . Behav Res Ther . 2014 ; 62 : 17 - 23 . 37 . Anderson AK , Phelps EA . Lesions of the human amygdala im - pair enhanced perception of emotionally salient events . Nature . 2001 ; 411 ( 6835 ) : 305 - 309 . 38 . Craig AD . Interoception : the sense of the physiological condition of the body . Curr Opin Neurobiol . 2003 ; 13 ( 4 ) : 500 - 505 . 39 . Craig AD . How do you feel – now ? The anterior insula and human awareness . Nat Rev Neurosci . 2009 ; 10 ( 1 ) : 59 - 70 . 40 . Ipser JC , Singh L , Stein DJ . Meta - analysis of functional brain imaging in specific phobia . Psychiatry Clin Neurosci . 2013 ; 67 ( 5 ) : 311 - 322 . 41 . Kober H , Barrett LF , Joseph J , Bliss - Moreau E , Lindquist K , Wager TD . Functional grouping and cortical - subcortical interactions in emotion : a meta - analysis of neuroimaging studies . Neuroimage . 2008 ; 42 ( 2 ) : 998 - 1031 . 42 . Margulies DS , Kelly AM , Uddin LQ , Biswal BB , Castellanos FX , Milham MP . Mapping the functional connectivity of anterior cingulate cortex . Neuroimage . 2007 ; 37 ( 2 ) : 579 - 588 . 43 . Etkin A , Egner T , Kalisch R . Emotional processing in anterior cingulate and medial prefrontal cortex . Trends Cogn Sci . 2011 ; 15 ( 2 ) : 85 - 93 . 44 . Mather M . The affective neuroscience of aging . Annu Rev Psychol . 2016 ; 67 : 213 - 238 . 45 . Grupe DW , Nitschke JB . Uncertainty and anticipation in anxiety : an integrated neurobiological and psychological perspective . Nat Rev Neuro - sci . 2013 ; 14 ( 7 ) : 488 - 501 . 46 . Decker ML , Turk CL , Hess B , Murray CE . Emotion regulation among individuals classified with and without generalized anxiety disorder . J Anxiety Disord . 2008 ; 22 ( 3 ) : 485 - 494 . 47 . Mennin DS , Heimberg RG , Turk CL , Fresco DM . Preliminary evidence for an emotion dysregulation model of generalized anxiety disorder . Be - hav Res Ther . 2005 ; 43 ( 10 ) : 1281 - 1310 . 48 . Buhle JT , Silvers JA , Wager TD , et al . Cognitive reappraisal of emo - tion : a meta - analysis of human neuroimaging studies . Cereb Cortex . 2014 ; 24 ( 11 ) : 2981 - 2990 . 49 . Schiller D , Levy I , Niv Y , LeDoux JE , Phelps EA . From fear to safety and back : reversal of fear in the human brain . J Neurosci . 2008 ; 28 ( 45 ) : 11517 - 11525 . 50 . Lammel S , Lim BK , Malenka RC . Reward and aversion in a heteroge - neous midbrain dopamine system . Neuropharmacology . 2014 ; 76 ( pt B ) : 351 - 359 . 178 Affective neuroimaging in GAD - Fonzo and Etkin Dialogues in Clinical Neuroscience - Vol 19 . No . 2 . 2017 51 . Keiflin R , Janak PH . Dopamine prediction errors in reward learning and addiction : from theory to neural circuitry . Neuron . 2015 ; 88 ( 2 ) : 247 - 263 . 52 . O’Doherty JP , Hampton A , Kim H . Model - based fMRI and its ap - plication to reward learning and decision making . Ann N Y Acad Sci . 2007 ; 1104 : 35 - 53 . 53 . Haber SN , Behrens TE . The neural network underlying incentive - based learning : implications for interpreting circuit disruptions in psychi - atric disorders . Neuron . 2014 ; 83 ( 5 ) : 1019 - 1039 . 54 . Abraham AD , Neve KA , Lattal KM . Dopamine and extinction : a con - vergence of theory with fear and reward circuitry . Neurobiol Learn Mem . 2014 ; 108 : 65 - 77 . 55 . Wittchen HU , Hoyer J . Generalized anxiety disorder : nature and course . J Clin Psychiatry . 2001 ; 62 ( suppl 11 ) : 15 - 19 ; discussion 20 - 11 . 56 . Borkovec TD , Alcaine O , Behar E . Avoidance theory of worry and generalized anxiety disorder . In : Heimberg RG , Turk CL , Mennin DS , eds . Generalized Anxiety Disorder : Advances in Research and Practice . New York , NY : Guilford Press ; 2004 : 77 - 108 . 57 . Dugas MJ , Gagnon F , Ladouceur R , Freeston MH . Generalized anxi - ety disorder : a preliminary test of a conceptual model . Behav Res Ther . 1998 ; 36 ( 2 ) : 215 - 226 . 58 . Etkin A , Prater KE , Schatzberg AF , Menon V , Greicius MD . Disrupted amygdalar subregion functional connectivity and evidence of a com - pensatory network in generalized anxiety disorder . Arch Gen Psychiatry . 2009 ; 66 ( 12 ) : 1361 - 1372 . 59 . Greicius MD , Krasnow B , Reiss AL , Menon V . Functional connectivity in the resting brain : a network analysis of the default mode hypothesis . Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A . 2003 ; 100 ( 1 ) : 253 - 258 . 60 . Fonzo GA , Etkin A . Brain connectivity reflects mental and physical states in generalized anxiety disorder . Biol Psychiatry . 2016 ; 80 ( 10 ) : 733 - 735 . 61 . Ruscio AM , Seitchik AE , Gentes EL , Jones JD , Hallion LS . Perseverative thought : a robust predictor of response to emotional challenge in gen - eralized anxiety disorder and major depressive disorder . Behav Res Ther . 2011 ; 49 ( 12 ) : 867 - 874 . 62 . Steinfurth EC , Alius MG , Wendt J , Hamm AO . Physiological and neu - ral correlates of worry and rumination : support for the contrast avoid - ance model of worry . Psychophysiology . 2017 ; 54 ( 2 ) : 161 - 171 . 63 . Newman MG , Llera SJ . A novel theory of experiential avoidance in gen - eralized anxiety disorder : a review and synthesis of research supporting a contrast avoidance model of worry . Clin Psychol Rev . 2011 ; 31 ( 3 ) : 371 - 382 . 64 . Oathes DJ , Patenaude B , Schatzberg AF , Etkin A . Neurobiological sig - natures of anxiety and depression in resting - state functional magnetic resonance imaging . Biol Psychiatry . 2015 ; 77 ( 4 ) : 385 - 393 . 65 . Wang W , Hou J , Qian S , et al . Aberrant regional neural fluctuations and functional connectivity in generalized anxiety disorder revealed by resting - state functional magnetic resonance imaging . Neurosci Lett . 2016 ; 624 : 78 - 84 . 66 . Fox MD , Snyder AZ , Zacks JM , Raichle ME . Coherent spontaneous activity accounts for trial - to - trial variability in human evoked brain re - sponses . Nat Neurosci . 2006 ; 9 ( 1 ) : 23 - 25 . 67 . Feng S , Holmes P . Will big data yield new mathematics ? An evolving synergy with neuroscience . IMA J Applied Math . 2016 ; 81 ( 3 ) : 432 - 456 . 68 . Xu J , Potenza MN , Calhoun VD , et al . Large - scale functional network overlap is a general property of brain functional organization : reconcil - ing inconsistent fMRI findings from general - linear - model - based analyses . Neurosci Biobehav Rev . 2016 ; 71 : 83 - 100 . 69 . Wang XJ , Krystal JH . Computational psychiatry . Neuron . 2014 ; 84 ( 3 ) : 638 - 654 . 70 . Marblestone AH , Wayne G , Kording KP . Toward an integration of deep learning and neuroscience . Front Comput Neurosci . 2016 ; 10 : 94 . 179 Neuroimágenes de las emociones en el trastorno de ansiedad generalizada : una revisión integradora Las neuroimágenes de las emociones han contribuido al conocimiento del trastorno de ansiedad generaliza - da ( TAG ) a través de la medición de las respuestas de la señal BOLD , la cual refleja el nivel de oxigenación de la sangre del cerebro ; esto facilita la inferencia de respues - tas neuronales a los estímulos emocionales durante la imaginería funcional por resonancia magnética ( RNMf ) con una tarea determinada . En este artículo , los auto - res revisan de manera integradora la literatura sobre la RNMf emocional en base a una tarea en el TAG . Los resultados de estudios aportan evidencia sobre la varia - bilidad de la presencia y dirección de las anormalidades de la señal BOLD en las regiones límbicas y prefrontales durante la reactividad a claves emocionales , en la re - gulación y en el aprendizaje que se hace de éstas . Se concluye que la comprensión de los orígenes de esta variabilidad es clave para acelerar el progreso en esta área . Se propone que el síntoma cardinal del TAG - la preocupación excesiva - es reflejo principalmente de los procesos mentales independientes de estímulos que im - ponen configuraciones cerebrales funcionales anorma - les y rígidas ; como por ejemplo , el esquema global de transferencia de información entre los circuitos neurales conductualmente relevantes en un momento dado . Es - tas configuraciones que no se modifican por el flujo de entrada de los estímulos ambientales , pueden estar a la base de resultados contradictorios luego de una tarea determinada . Neuro - imagerie des émotions et anxiété généralisée : une analyse globale La neuro - imagerie des émotions a enrichi notre connais - sance de l’anxiété généralisée ( AG ) en mesurant les réponses par le signal BOLD qui reflète le taux d’oxy - génation du sang dans le cerveau , ce qui facilite l’in - férence des réponses neuronales aux stimuli émotion - nels pendant l’imagerie fonctionnelle par résonance magnétique ( IRMf ) lors d’une tâche donnée . Dans cet article , les auteurs analysent de façon globale la litté - rature sur l’IRMf émotionnelle lors d’une tâche donnée dans l’AG . Des études ont montré une présence et une direction variables des anomalies du signal BOLD dans les régions limbiques et préfrontales lors de la réactivité à certains indices émotionnels , lors de leur régulation et de l’apprentissage qui en est fait . Nous en concluons que la compréhension des origines de cette variabilité est un élément clé d’une progression accélérée dans ce domaine . Selon nous , le symptôme cardinal de l’AG , l’in - quiétude excessive ou l’appréhension , reflète de façon prédominante les processus mentaux indépendants du stimulus qui imposent des configurations anormales et rigides du cerveau fonctionnel , par exemple , le schéma global du transfert de l’information au sein des circuits neuronaux comportementalement pertinents à un ins - tant donné . Ces configurations , qui ne se modifient pas lors du flux entrant des stimuli environnementaux , peuvent être à la base de résultats contradictoires lors d’une tâche donnée .