Dynamic sorting of lipids and proteins in membrane tubes with a moving phase boundary Michael Heinrich a , 1 , Aiwei Tian a , b , 1 , Cinzia Esposito a , and Tobias Baumgart a , b , 2 a Departments of Chemistry and b Chemical and Biomolecular Engineering , University of Pennsylvania , Philadelphia , PA 19104 Edited * by Harden M . McConnell , Stanford University , Stanford , CA , and approved February 24 , 2010 ( received for review December 4 , 2009 ) Cellularorganellemembranesmaintaintheirintegrity , globalshape , and composition despite vigorous exchange among compartments of lipids and proteins during trafficking and signaling . Organelle homeostasis involves dynamic molecular sorting mechanisms that are far from being understood . In contrast , equilibrium thermody - namics of membrane mixing and sorting , particularly the phase behavior of binary and ternary model membrane mixtures and its coupling to membrane mechanics , is relatively well characterized . Elucidating the continuous turnover of live cell membranes , however , calls for experimental and theoretical membrane models enabling manipulation and investigation of directional mass trans - port . Here we introduce the phenomenon of curvature - induced domain nucleation and growth in membrane mixtures with fluid phase coexistence . Membranedomains were consistently observed to nucleate precisely at the junction between a strongly curved cylindrical ( tube ) membraneandapipette - aspiratedgiantunilamel - lar vesicle . This experimental geometry mimics intracellular sorting compartments , because they often show tubular - vesicular mem - brane regions . Nucleated domains at tube necks were observed to present diffusion barriers to the transport of lipids and proteins . We find that curvature - nucleated domains grow with characteristic parabolic time dependence that is strongly curvature - dependent . We derive an analytical model that reflects the observed growth dynamics . Numerically calculated membrane shapes furthermore allow us to elucidate mechanical details underlying curvature - dependent directed lipid transport . Our observations suggest a novel dynamic membrane sorting principle that may contribute to intracellular protein and lipid sorting and trafficking . liquid disordered ∣ liquid ordered ∣ phase transition ∣ vesicle T he sorting of both lipids and proteins within cells is an essen - tial but poorly understood process . Sorting of intracellular membrane components can be mediated by protein coats ( 1 ) and involves biophysical mechanisms based on membrane fluid - ity , molecular shape of components , and membrane phases ( 2 ) . Lateral segregation of membrane lipids likely constitutes an important sorting principle in cellular membranes ( 2 , 3 ) . In model membranes , segregation into the biologically most rele - vant fluid phase domains — the liquid - ordered ( Lo ) phase and the liquid - disordered ( Ld ) phase — is well characterized ( 4 ) . In curvature gradients , Lo phase membrane domains segregate into regions of low curvature . This curvature - mediated segregation occurs because Lo phase membranes show larger resistance to - ward bending , compared to Ld phase domains ( 5 – 7 ) . The present work considers the strong segregation limit , where membranes consist of domains with sharp phase boundaries ( 8 – 10 ) . To be dis - tinguished from that situation is the weak segregation limit near critical demixing ( consolute ) points ( 11 – 14 ) . Analysis of intracellular cargo movement has demonstrated that many transport carriers consist of tubes rather than vesicles ( 1 , 15 ) . Furthermore , parts of several cellular organelles , includ - ing the endoplasmic reticulum , the trans - Golgi network , and vari - ous endosomal compartments consist of tubular networks ( 15 ) . Numerous mechanisms are known that lead to tube formation in vivo . These include exertion of pulling forces by molecular motors , membrane / cytoskeletal interactions , and the action of curvature - generating peripherally binding and transmembrane proteins . Tubes can be formed from model membrane lipid mixtures under controlled membrane tension that regulates tube curvature ( 5 , 11 , 12 , 16 ) . Phase separation in tubular membranes has pre - viously been induced by photoactivation ( 5 , 17 ) , exploiting the sensitivity of membrane phase behavior to fluorophore - mediated lipid breakdown ( 5 ) . Here , we induced first - order demixing tran - sitions through membrane curvature of pulled tubes . Most model membrane curvature research involving lipid and lipid / protein mixtures has focused on thermodynamic equilibrium conditions ( 11 , 12 , 18 ) . However , since the situation in biological cells is one of steady state and regulated mass transport with con - tinuous recycling of membrane components , here we investigate dynamic aspects of membrane sorting . Results To systematically probe the effects of curvature on nucleation and growth of membrane domains , we used a classical vesicle pipette aspiration approach ( 19 ) . Membrane tubes were pulled by beads that were moved either by a second aspiration pipette ( Fig . 1 A ) or by a laser trap ( see Fig . 1 B , Materials and Methods , and SI Appendix ) . From a thermodynamic point of view , vesicles provided a particle reservoir that fixes lipid chemical exchange potentials ( 18 ) . The lateral membrane tension was controlled by means of the pipette aspiration pressure . Fig . 1 C shows that our vesicle composition was within the Lo / Ld phase coexistence region , in the strong segregation limit of the phase diagram ( 4 ) . This composition was chosen to yield vesicles with an Lo / Ld area fraction ratio typically larger than one ( to facilitate tube pulling from the Lo phase ) and with low domain boundary line tension [ to avoid tube fission ( 16 ) ] . Vesicles with a single large Lo domain coexisting with a single large Ld domain ( Fig . 1 D ) were selected and aspirated from the Ld phase ( shown in red in Fig . 1 D ; pipette shown at the left edge of Fig . 1 D ) . Shortly ( typically milliseconds to seconds but occasionally up to several minutes ) after pulling a tube from the Lo phase of the vesicle ( labeled in green by means of the peripherally binding protein cholera toxin ( CTB , which binds to ganglioside , GM1 ) in Fig . 1 D – G ) , an Ld domain nucleated at the neck of the tube , while the total tube length was held constant . Nucleation times ( defined as the time between the end of the process of tube extraction and the first observation of a domain ) were variable , in accordance with thermally activated nucleation . Author contributions : A . T . and T . B . designed research ; M . H . , A . T . , and C . E . performed research ; M . H . , A . T . , C . E . , and T . B . analyzed data ; andM . H . , A . T . , and T . B . wrotethe paper . The authors declare no conflict of interest . * This Direct Submission article had a prearranged editor . 1 M . H . and A . T . contributed equally to this work . 2 Towhomcorrespondenceshouldbeaddressedat : DepartmentofChemistry , Universityof Pennsylvania , 231 South 34th Street , Philadelphia , PA 19104 . E - mail : baumgart @ sas . upenn . edu . This article contains supporting information online at www . pnas . org / cgi / content / full / 0913997107 / DCSupplemental . 7208 – 7213 ∣ PNAS ∣ April 20 , 2010 ∣ vol . 107 ∣ no . 16 www . pnas . org / cgi / doi / 10 . 1073 / pnas . 0913997107 Exclusively , only a single Ld domain nucleated in the tube , and it was always located at the tube neck . Both of these observations suggest that curvature / composition coupling ( 11 , 12 ) rather than photoeffects ( 5 , 17 ) caused phase separation . This conclusion was further supported by the qualitative observation that increasing curvature ( by increasing the vesicle lateral tension ) on average decreased the time needed for nucleation [ from up to minutes for the lowest lateral tensions to short ( milliseconds ) times for the highest tensions considered ] . Previous research has shown that CTB bound to the outer leaf - let of giant unilamellar vesicle ( GUV ) membranes preferentially partitions away from high curvature tubes pulled from vesicles with equilibration times less than 1 min ( 11 , 12 ) . Furthermore , Ld phase lipid diffusion coefficients in our mixture are in the range of ∼ 3 – 5 μ m 2 ∕ s ( 20 ) . Because green CTB fluorescence is observed for > 400 s on the tube ( Fig . 1 G ) , the red Ld domain shown in Fig . 1 E – G serves as a diffusion barrier to protein ( and lipid ) exchange between tube Lo and vesicle Lo domains . Such diffusion barriers have been postulated to modulate intra - cellular lipid and protein sorting ( 2 ) . Curvature - nucleated domains grow in time ; i . e . , the red Ld phase invades the tube membrane , progressively replacing the green Lo phase ( Fig . 1 E – G ; time was measured relative to the first observation of fluorescence heterogeneity at the tube neck ) . The comparison of the time needed for domain boundary move - ment between first and second ( Fig . 1 E and F ) vs . second and third ( Fig . 1 F and G ) frames reveals that the domain boundary velocity decreased with time . The addition of the CTB / GM1 complex to our membranes so far has served to illustrate the possibility of dynamic protein sorting in Fig . 1 . It has previously been shown , however , that CTB itself is an effective curvature sensor ( 11 , 12 ) and further - more amplifies lipid curvature sorting ( 12 ) . For the following quantitative characterization of the dynamic lipid phase behavior depicted in Fig . 1 D – G , we therefore omitted CTB / GM1 . We found a systematic dependence of domain boundary positions ( measured as the distance between the intratube phase boundary and the tube neck ) on both observation time and lateral membrane tension ( Fig . 2 A ) . The domain boundary length to a good approximation showed a square - root time depen - dence ( Fig . 2 B ) . Ld phase domains that had been nucleated at the tube neck could be pulled into the tube interior by quickly ( typically 30 μ m ∕ s ) increasing the total tube length by moving the pulling bead . This led to nucleation ( at the tube neck ) of a new ( here called primary ) domain ( with nucleation times similar to the previously nucleated , here called secondary , domain ) in the Lo phase membrane region that was pulled onto the tube ( see schematics in Fig . 2 A and F ) . Essentially identical growth dynamics were observed for multiple domains that resulted from successive pulls of the same tube ( see Fig . 2 F and Fig . S1 A ) when vesicle lateral tension was held constant . These observa - tions allowed us to perform multiple domain growth experi - ments using the same tube and vesicle , but varying the vesicle ( below also called reservoir - ) lateral tensions to change tube curvature . Concomitant to the domain length characterization analyzed in Fig . 2 A and B , we measured the pulling force exerted by the tube membrane on a bead held in an optical trap . Following curvature - induced phase separation , tubes displayed pulling forces that decayed on time scales longer than 100 s . The pulling force decay for the six domains analyzed in Fig . 2 A and B is shown in Fig . 2 C . Intriguingly , pulling forces decreased essentially linearly with domain boundary displacement ( Fig . 2 D ) . We char - acterized the time scales required for initial mechanical equilibra - tion after membrane tube elongation or aspiration pressure change using homogeneous vesicles ( without phase separation ) . These time scales were less than 2 s to reach a constant pulling force after tube elongation ( see Fig . S2 A , consistent with ref . 21 ) and less than 1 s to reach a constant pulling force after changing the aspiration pressure ( Fig . S2 B ) . Accordingly , the force decay during domain growth ( Fig . 2 C ) occurs on a time scale signifi - cantly longer than needed to reach mechanical equilibrium after initial tube formation . Fig . 2 E suggests a power - law dependence between the slopes of Fig . 2 B and vesicle lateral tension , with an exponent of 0 . 62 (cid:1) 0 . 08 . This systematic dependence further emphasizes that curvature , rather than photoeffects , is the driving force for phase separation and mass transport . For high vesicle tensions , we confirmed that after long ( > 10 min ) waiting times , tether mem - branes consisted of one single Ld domain , consistent with ref . 10 . The slowing down of domain boundary velocities observed in Figs . 1 and 2 suggests that the growing Ld phase presents a mass transport resistance that grows with its length . The parabolic moving boundary ( “ Stefan problem ” ) behavior that we observe here is displayed by many physicochemical phenomena involving both heat and mass transfer ( 22 , 23 ) . We derived a simple thermodynamic transport model ( see SI Appendix for details ) that enables us to explain dynamic aspects of the findings shown in Figs . 1 and 2 . The key features of the model are depicted in Fig . 3 . We assume the vesicle and the Lo phase of the tube are thermodynamic reservoirs ( with chemi - cal equilibrium being maintained at their boundaries ) and that a linear chemical potential gradient across the thermodynamic LWD Trapping Objective Pipette ImagingObjective 2 R p R v Z 0 P 0 P p Chol DOPC DPPC B C t = 411 s G Pipette a P 0 P p Ordered phase Disordered phase 2 R p R v Z 0 Pipette b A D E F t = 180 s t = 5 s Fig . 1 . Curvature - induced first - order demixing transitions are observed in tube pulled from lipid mixture membranes . ( A ) Illustration of tube pulling by two - micropipette setup . The Ld phase ( gray line ) of a vesicle with radius R v is aspirated by micropipette a . A streptavidin - coated bead is held by micropipette b to pull a tube from the Lo phase ( black line ) of the vesicle . Z 0 represents the length of the Ld phase growing from the tube neck . ( B ) Schematic of a specially designed fluorescence imaging / optical trapping setup . ( C ) Schematic phase diagram of ternary lipid mixture . Loop encloses the Ld / Lo coexistence region ( 4 ) . Lipid composition is indicated by an open circle . ( D – G ) Confocal microscopy images ofdomain growth ( at constant tube length ) using two - micropipette setup . ( D ) A tube is pulled from the Lo phase ( green ) of a vesicle and imaged before observable Ld phase ( red ) growth occurred . Scale bar : 2 μ m . ( E – G ) Growing Ld domain nucleated at the tube neck at constant reservoir membrane tension σ ¼ 3 . 3 · 10 − 5 N ∕ m . Growth time is denoted in each panel . The Lo phases of vesicle and tube appear yellow due toenhanced redchannel display , used to emphasizethe Ld phase . Scale bar : 1 μ m . Heinrich et al . PNAS ∣ April 20 , 2010 ∣ vol . 107 ∣ no . 16 ∣ 7209 B I O P H Y S I C S A ND C O M P U T A T I O N A L B I O L O G Y A PP L I E D P H Y S I C A L S C I E N C E S system ( here the Ld phase tube ) connects both reservoirs ( 23 ) . We reduce the ternary mixture to a quasibinary mixture ( see SI Appendix for comments on implications of this simplification ) . We define the diffusion potential as ¯ μ ¼ μ α − μ β , where μ i is the chemical potential of component i of the quasibinary mixture ( 11 ) . In our model , transport is driven by a curvature - dependent diffusion potential difference δ ¯ μ between both reservoirs ( see Fig . 3 ) . We first examine the results of the assumption that δ ¯ μ is time - independent . In that case , analytically integrating the appropriate continuity equation at the inner tube Ld / Lo phase boundary yields ( see SI Appendix for details ) Z 20 ¼ t M Ld ρ 2 Δ ϕ ε (cid:1) ∂ κ 0 Ld ∂ ϕ α (cid:2) 0 σ Ld κ 0 Ld ¼ tAC 2 : [ 1 ] Eq . 1 is a growth law with parabolic time t dependence dem - onstrating an increase of domain boundary velocities ( phase boundary position is Z 0 ) with lateral tension σ Ld ( and therefore curvature C ) , which are features in accordance with the experi - mental observations ( Fig . 2 ) . Here , M is a mobility , ρ a lipid den - sity , and Δ ϕ ε is related to the width of the miscibility gap ( Fig . 3 ) as well as the ratio of the tube radii R Lo ∕ R Ld ¼ κ Lo ∕ κ Ld ≡ ε ( see SI Appendix ) ; R i and κ i are the radius and bending stiffness of phase i , respectively . The quantity A summarizes the time - and curvature - independent parameters on the left - hand side of Eq . 1 . It contains the composition dependence of the Ld phase bending stiffness , assumed here to underlie curvature - mediated sorting ( 11 , 12 ) . We note that accounting for nonlinear concentration gradients affects the numerical value of A , but does not otherwise influence the time dependence of Z 0 in this model ( 24 ) . The quantity AC 2 can be interpreted as a curvature - dependent inter - diffusion coefficient . We note that Eq . 1 is based on numerous simplifications required to obtain an analytically tractable model . These include ( i ) neglect of area density ( ρ ) difference between Lo and Ld phases , ( ii ) assumed absence of friction effects contributed by water ( and membrane area ) transport among tube and vesicle ( see SI Appendix for discussion ) , ( iii ) spatially fixed vesicle / tether phase boundary ( numerically investigated more accurately below ) , ( iv ) assumption of time - independent tube radii of Lo and Ld phases , and ( v ) absence of concentration gradient in tube Lo phase . We discuss ( iv ) and ( v ) immediately below . The assumption made so far , of an Lo phase tube reservoir with constant curvature at constant reservoir tension , is not in agreement with the experimentally observed pulling force decay , because the pulling force f ¼ 2 π ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ 2 κ Lo σ Lo p ¼ 2 πκ Lo C Lo ( 25 ) , where mechanical quantities are those near the pulling bead . 0 4 8 12 0 0 . 020 mN / m 0 . 027 mN / m 0 . 036 mN / m 0 . 044 mN / m 0 . 058 mN / m 0 . 071 mN / m D o m a i n L e ng t h ( µ m ) Time 1 / 2 ( sec 1 / 2 ) 0 40 80 120 0 4 8 12 D o m a i n L e ng t h ( µ m ) Time ( sec ) Time ( sec ) 150 100 50 0 20 40 60 0 A i B C D 12 8 4 E 0 . 020 mN / m 0 . 027 mN / m 0 . 036 mN / m 0 . 044 mN / m 0 . 058 mN / m 0 . 071 mN / m l og ( S l op e ) log ( Tension ( mN / m ) ) - 2 - 1 . 5 - 1 - 0 . 5 0 - 0 . 3 - 0 . 6 0 . 6 0 . 3 Domain Length ( µ m ) 12 8 4 0 20 40 60 0 0 50 100 T i m e ( sec ) 150 Fo r ce ( p N ) 40 50 35 D o m a i n L e ng t h ( µ m ) 0 10 ii 5 F i 40 µ m Lo Phase Ld Phase D1 D3 D2 20 µ m 10 µ m Fo r ce ( p N ) Fo r ce ( p N ) D1 D2 D3 45 Lo Phase Ld Phase D1 D6 D2 20 µ m D5 D4 D3 ii Fig . 2 . Curvature - induced domains show parabolic growth and characteris - tic pulling force decay . ( A ) Six domains were sequentially nucleated at the tube neck of a single vesicle ( additional examples in SI Appendix ) through stepwise total tube length extension followed by domain growth at constant total tube length ( and reservoir tension ) as shown in schematic ( i ) . Domain length as a function of time relative to the first moment of detectable fluorescence heterogeneity at the tube neck ( ii ) . Closed and open circles , closed and open triangles , closed and open squares : domains grown at pressures of 17 (cid:1) 0 . 5 Pa , 23 Pa , 31 Pa , 38 Pa , 50 Pa , and 61 Pa , respectively , corresponding to the lateral tensions in B . ( B ) Same data as in A plotted vs . ﬃﬃﬃ t p . Linear fits are shown as solid lines . ( C ) Tube force is observed to decrease after domain nucleation and concomitant to growth . The black curve corre - sponds to the first domain generated ( closed circles in A , B , and D ) ; lighter gray curves correspond to domains grown sequentially at increasing aspira - tion pressures as in A . ( D ) Tube force as a function of domain length ; symbols as in panel B . Solid lines are linear fits for domain lengths up to 10 μ m . ( E ) Double logarithmic plot ( with standard deviations ) of the slopes of the linear fits as in B as a function of membrane tension for 6 different vesicles and 26 vesicle tensions . Slope of a linear fit to the binned data yields 0 . 62 (cid:1) 0 . 08 . ( F ) Three sequentially nucleated domains grown at constant membrane tension but with different initial lengths of Lo phase tube [ schematic in ( i ) ] exhibited essentially identical growth behavior and force decay ( ii ) for various total tube lengths . Fig . 3 . Schematic of linear irreversible thermodynamics model . ( A ) Vesicle ( left - hand side ) and Lo phase tube domain ( right - hand side ) are considered thermodynamic reservoirs with fixed chemical exchange potential ¯ μ [ ( B ) , difference between reservoirs is δ ¯ μ ] and fixed composition ϕ [ ( C ) , maximal composition difference in Ld tube due to curvature is δϕ ] . Here , ϕ is defined as the mole fraction of Lo phase lipid in a quasibinary mixture ; the width of the phase coexistence region is Δ ϕ . Due to membrane curvature , the chemical potential in the right - hand side reservoir is larger compared to the left - hand side reservoir , whereas the composition of the Lo phase in both reservoirs is the same . Linear chemical potential and composition gradients are assumed in the Ld phase connecting both reservoirs . At the intratube phase boundary ( where the axial coordinate Z ¼ Z 0 ) , the curvature is C t . At the vesicle / tube phase boundary ( where Z ¼ 0 ) , the curvature is C n . The vesicle has negligible curvature . 7210 ∣ www . pnas . org / cgi / doi / 10 . 1073 / pnas . 0913997107 Heinrich et al . We will discuss the following two alternative hypotheses to explain the pulling force decay . The first is that the pulling force decreases due to a change in lateral tension of the tube at fixed ( vesicle ) reservoir tension , while the composition of the tube domain in the Lo phase remains approximately constant ( in accordance with the assumption of an Lo phase reservoir ; see Fig . 3 ) . The second hypothesis is that the bending stiffness of the Lo phase of the tube decreases with time because the imposed curvature field could lead to a change in the composi - tion of the Lo phase near the bead to lower the tube free energy ( 11 , 12 ) . If the bending stiffness at the end of the tube would decrease through diffusive composition change , then the time scales of the lipid exchange between the end of the tube and the vesicle would be affected by the total tube length . In support of the first , rather than the second hypothesis , we found negligible influence of the total tube length on domain growth ( Fig . 2 F and Fig . S1 A ) . We furthermore verified that pull - ing force decays were similar ( Fig . 2 F and Fig . S1 B ) in serially nucleated domains in the same tube at constant reservoir lateral tension , confirming that the composition at the tube end did not measurably change over the time course of our experiments . Furthermore , secondary ( i . e . , inner - tube ) Lo phase domains were observed to reduce their length during the growth process of the primary domain ( Fig . S1 C ) . This is consistent with increasing radius of the secondary domain at constant domain area , due to decreasing lateral tension during the primary domain growth process . As Fig . S1 C shows , multiple inner - tube domains dis - played similar shortening during the primary domain growth . We thus concluded that the coupling of lateral tension between the vesicle reservoir and the tube changed with time . In addi - tional support of this conclusion , we observed a rapid ( < 1 s ) force drop associated with the following phenomenon . Occasion - ally , small ( radius on the order of 1 μ m ) Ld phase domains diffused from the vesicle into the neck region and became irreversibly trapped at the tube neck . This is shown for three examples in Fig . S3 A , where Lo phase tubes were pulled from the vesicle , and no curvature - induced Ld phase nucleation was observed before the small domain was trapped in the neck region . The pulling force was constant before the Ld domain approached the neck region ( consistent with the expectation of an approxi - mately time - independent tube composition ) and dropped rapidly as the Ld phase was trapped in the neck . This force drop indi - cated that the detailed geometry of the tube neck was pivotal in determining the pulling force exerted by a tube with phase coexistence . After the fast force drop , no additional force decay occurred ( Fig . S3 B ) while the Ld phase invaded the Lo phase tube ( Fig . S3 A ) . To gain further mechanical insight , the geometry of tube necks was obtained from numerical solutions to the differential shape equations of lipid bilayer membranes with phase separation ( 26 ) , including an axial pulling force ( 25 , 27 ) . We assumed a mem - brane suspended from a ring with a zero mean curvature ( free hinge ) boundary condition ( 25 ) . In the presence of an axial force , such membranes will show an approximate catenoid shape ( 25 ) . From this catenoid we suspended a tube with a cylinder shape boundary condition at its tip ( 16 ) . For all calculated shapes that we show here , the total membrane area was fixed ( 6 ) . Shapes such as those in Fig . 4 were calculated at constant lateral tension in the Lo phase of the catenoid . The catenoid edge radius was variable to allow for changes in tube geometry at fixed total membrane area . The catenoid thus constituted a membrane area - reservoir , to reflect our experiments shown in Fig . 1 ( where the pipette - aspirated membrane fraction of the GUV provided an area - reservoir ) . The catenoid / tube shape ( with phase sequence Lo / Ld / Lo ) was parameterized by means of the radius r and the angle ψ of the tangent to the shape , as a function of arc length s ( 25 ) ( see inset of Fig . 4 A and SI Appendix for details ) . A line tension T could be imposed at each phase boundary . Gaussian bending stiffness differences ζ among phases could also be accounted for ( 6 , 26 ) . Fig . 4 A shows the profile of a membrane tube without phase separation in order to illustrate a well - known feature : At the tube neck , the radius shows an invagination and a locally increased free energy density ( 25 ) . This fact explained why the curvature - induced Ld phase always nucleated at the neck . We next aimed to calculate shapes of phase - separated tubes . Knowledge of the elasticities of the Lo and Ld phases was thus required ( 6 ) . We derived bending stiffness values from pulling force measurements ( 5 ) in homogeneous vesicles with several different compositions corresponding to Ld and Lo phases Fig . 4 . Computational shape series from membrane elasticity theory shows pulling force decay . ( A ) Single phase tube with an Lo phase bending stiffness of 364 pN · nm . Tube radius is minimal in the neck region . Tube force for this shape is 24 . 0 pN with a lateral tension of 0 . 020 mN ∕ m ( equivalent reservoir tension for all following shapes ) . The inset illustrates parameterization of shape coordinates . ( B ) Three - phase tube with Ld phase domain ( gray ) with a bending stiffness of 81 pN · nm ( 4 . 5 times less than the Lo phase ) . The Ld domain tension is higher than both the reservoir and Lo phase tube tensions . ( C ) Tube shapewithalargeLdphasedomainarea . TheLdtensionisnowclose to the reservoir tension . The inset shows leading - edge phase boundary . ( D ) Tube force decreases linearly with domain length until reaching a plateau . Arrows correspond to shapes in B and C . Note that lateral tensions of the Lo and Ld phase regions of the tube decrease during domain growth . ( E ) Close - up of neck region for shapes shown in A – C . Vesicle / tube phase boundary moves onto the catenoid during domain growth . ( F ) Mean curva - ture of Lo ( black ) and Ld ( gray ) phases at the catenoid / tube phase boundary as a function of domain length . Both mean curvatures decrease to zero upon reaching the force plateau shown in D . The curvature on the Ld and Lo phase sides of the phase boundary differ , in accordance with the mechanical jump conditions ( see SI Appendix ) . Heinrich et al . PNAS ∣ April 20 , 2010 ∣ vol . 107 ∣ no . 16 ∣ 7211 B I O P H Y S I C S A ND C O M P U T A T I O N A L B I O L O G Y A PP L I E D P H Y S I C A L S C I E N C E S ( see SI Appendix ) . We found values of roughly 0 . 8 · 10 − 19 J for the Ld phase and 3 . 6 · 10 − 19 J for the Lo phase ( see Fig . S4 and Table S1 ) . This yielded a ratio ε ≈ 4 . 5 of elasticities in the Lo vs . Ld phase , in agreement with previous estimates ( 6 , 7 ) . With this value for ε , we calculated series of tube shapes mimicking the experimental phase - separation process of Figs . 1 and 2 , assuming , for the moment , vanishing T ( and zero ζ ) . Nucleation of an Ld domain led to further constriction of the neck ( Fig . 4 B ) . To calculate series of shapes for phase - separated tubes at constant total membrane area , we varied the area frac - tion of the tube Lo phase and the tube Ld phase , keeping the area of the catenoid Lo phase constant ( Fig . 4 B and C ) . Note that such shape series do not preserve the total Lo / Ld area fraction . Mass conservation of Ld phase and Lo phase lipids can , in prin - ciple , be achieved by adding an additional Ld phase to the nearly flat catenoid ( as in the experimental vesicles ; see Fig . 1 ) . The area fraction of this additional Ld phase could be varied to fix the total area fraction of the Ld phase while varying the tube area fractions ( Fig . 4 B and C ) . Since this amendment in the quasiflat reservoir would have negligible mechanical consequences , we varied the area fraction of the tube domains only and regarded the catenoid as a thermodynamic particle - and area - reservoir , fixing chemical potentials ( instead of particle numbers ) . Fig . 4 A – C indicate that during invasion of the tube by the growing Ld phase domain , the left - hand side phase boundary moves into the catenoid ( note that both phase boundaries thus were not fixed in space but allowed to move to minimize the shape ’ s total mechanical energy ; see SI Appendix ) . We note for completeness that the inner - tube phase boundary shows a tan - gent angle of π ∕ 2 ( inset of Fig . 4 C ) ( 16 ) . During the tube invasion , the pulling force decays ( see Fig . 4 D ) . Remarkably , the relation between Ld domain length and pulling force is linear in the nu - merically obtained shape series ( Fig . 4 D ) , as in the experiment ( Fig . 2 D ) . Note that a force plateau is reached before the Ld phase has completely replaced the tube Lo phase ( Fig . 4 C and D ) . The reason for the force decay is embedded in the complicated mechanical jump conditions at the vesicle / tube phase boundary ( see SI Appendix ) . However , there is a conceptually straightfor - ward explanation . Before phase separation , the lateral tension within the membrane tube is equivalent to the reservoir tension ( Fig . 4 A ) . Near the end of the invasion process , the left - hand phase boundary is located in a membrane region with negli - gible curvature ( Fig . 4 C ) . Fig . 4 E shows a magnification of the catenoid / tube phase boundaries . The mechanical jump condi - tions therefore dictate the lateral tension in the Ld phase domain to be the same as the reservoir lateral tension ( in the absence of line tension ) . At the right - hand ( intratube ) phase boundary , how - ever , the axial force balance requires σ Ld ∕ σ Lo ¼ κ Lo ∕ κ Ld ¼ ε ( 16 ) . If both phase boundaries were localized within the tube ( as is approximately the case immediately after nucleation of an Ld domain , Fig . 4 B ) , then the lateral tension within the tube Lo phase would be identical to the reservoir tension . This is because at both phase boundaries the lateral tension would jump , but in opposite directions , according to the axial force balance relation . If only one phase boundary is localized within the tube region , as in Fig . 4 C near the end of the invasion process , the lateral tension within the tube Lo phase must be smaller by an amount that is given by the bending stiffness ratio . During the invasion process , the lateral tension of the Lo phase tube domain therefore mono - tonically decreased from the reservoir tension σ res to σ Lo ¼ σ res ∕ ε . In accordance with this interpretation , Fig . 4 F shows that the mean curvature at the vesicle / tube phase boundary decreases during domain growth , vanishing at the pulling force plateau of Fig . 4 D . We note that the magnitude of the vesicle / tube phase boundary displacement from the tube neck suggested by Fig . 4 B – C is not microscopically resolvable , consistent with Fig . 1 E – G . In line with the interpretation of a tension - related force decay , the apparent bending stiffness κ app calculated from the ex - perimentally determined pulling force and σ res ( i . e . , κ app ¼ f 2 ∕ 8 π 2 σ res ) continuously decreased from Lo phase values ( before invasion ) to values approaching those for an Ld phase [ at the force plateau ; see Fig . S5 and Fig . 4 D ; here f 2 plateau ¼ 8 π 2 σ Lo κ Lo ¼ 8 π 2 σ res κ Ld ( 16 ) , since at the plateau σ res ¼ σ Ld ] . We observed that several minutes after primary domain growth was initiated , the lengths of secondary domains remained approximately constant , consistent with the observation of a pull - ing force plateau at long observation times ( Fig . S5 and Fig . 4 D ) . Under such conditions , the domain length of a secondary domain was observed to be linearly related to the square root of system - atically varied reservoir tension ; see Fig . S6 . Since the domain radius is inversely proportional to ﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃﬃ σ res p ( 25 ) , this finding shows that the secondary domain area A sec ≈ 2 π R sec L sec ( excluding the phase boundary geometry ; see Fig . 4 ) was independent of domain curvature . This suggests that the phase diagram is unaffected by curvature ( Fig . 3 C ) . In addition to the parameter ε , we measured the line tension T ( 0 . 16 (cid:1) 0 . 06 pN ; see SI Appendix ) . We then calculated numerical shape series for lateral tensions varying over a range matching the experimentally considered reservoir tensions ( see Fig . 2 ) and the measured values for ε and T . We implemented our transport model ( Eq . 1 ) in differential form : dZ 0 ¼ dtAC 2 ∕ 2 Z 0 , to calculate a time axis for the change of geometric and mechanical quanti - ties , taking into account the changing curvature at the inner - tube phase boundary during domain growth and choosing a value of A common to all shapes considered . Fig . S7 shows domain length vs . time ( Fig . S7 A ) , domain length vs . ﬃﬃ t p ( Fig . S7 B ) , pulling force vs . time ( Fig . S7 C ) , and pulling force vs . domain length ( Fig . S7 D ) , confirming several aspects of the experimental measurements shown in Fig . 2 . For the ( small ) influence of line tension , see Fig . S8 . We note that details of computed shape series differ from the experimental data . Among these are the lateral tension depen - dence of the slopes of the plots in Fig . S7 D ( compare Fig . 2 D ) , and the linearity of rescaled domain growth time axes ( compare Fig . 2 B and Fig . S7 B ) for high lateral tensions . These differences likely result from the simplifications of our mechanical and trans - port models . Improvements may involve phase - field modeling ( 28 ) or dissipative particle dynamics simulations ( 29 ) , which are beyond the scope of the present work . We note that further support for our mechanical model may be obtained in future experiments where pulling force is clamped due to continuous tether elongation and feedback . Discussion The squared slopes in Fig . 2 B can be interpreted as curvature - dependent interdiffusion coefficients . Table S2 shows that their magnitude ( 0 . 1 ∼ 10 μ m 2 ∕ s ) is in the range of typical lipid diffu - sion coefficients [ from fluorescence correlation spectroscopy ( 20 ) ] . Interestingly , comparing the lateral tension dependence of the slopes of plots such as in Fig . 2 B to our transport model ( Eq . 1 ) suggests that the transport coefficient A increases system - atically with increasing curvature . This follows from the exponent of 0 . 62 (cid:1) 0 . 08 obtained from Fig . 2 E , compared to the value of 0 . 5 expected from Eq . 1 . Membrane curvature - dependent diffu - sion coefficients have been considered in single component mem - branes before ( 30 ) and here are likely influenced by the curvature dependence of the concentration profiles in the tube Ld phase ( see Fig . 3 ) . Our findings suggest a mechanism for intracellular sorting that uses the speed of membrane extraction from a donor reservoir ( organelle ) as a means for sorting . If high curvature tubes form slowly from a reservoir of essentially flat membranes , then equili - bration of chemical potentials between the extracted sheet and the donor organelle is facilitated ; in this case , the extracted 7212 ∣ www . pnas . org / cgi / doi / 10 . 1073 / pnas . 0913997107 Heinrich et al . membranes may show enrichment in Ld lipids and Ld proteins ( see Movie S1 , where a pulling speed of 0 . 04 μ m ∕ s was used ) . If , however , membrane patches are extracted quickly , then equili - bration may be prevented and Lo rather than Ld membranes may be extracted from the reservoir . Fast pulling is exemplified in Movie S2 , using a speed of 1 . 5 μ m ∕ s , which is well within a range of trafficking speeds of intracellular cargo membranes ( 31 ) . Materials and Methods GUVs . Vesicles were made via electroswelling ( 11 ) . Lipid mixtures had compo - sition 3 ∶ 3 . 3 ∶ 3 . 7 di - oleoyl - phosphatidylcholine ( DOPC ) / cholesterol ( chol ) / di - palmitoyl - phosphatidylcholine ( DPPC ) indicated by thedot in Fig . 1 C . Trace amounts of biotinylated lipid ( binding streptavidin - coated beads ) and Ld phase - preferring red lipid fluorophore ( Texas - Red DHPE ) were added ( see SI Appendix ) . For Fig . 1 , 1 mol % of the ganglioside GM1 was added . Pipette Aspiration and Force Measurements . Vesicles with radius R v were aspirated by means of glass capillaries ( inner radius R p ) at an aspiration pressure of Δ P ¼ P o − P p , controlling vesicle lateral tension σ ¼ Δ P · R p ∕ 2 ð 1 − R p ∕ R v Þ . Forces f were measured via displacement x of the pulling bead from the center of a laser trap , in combination with measured trap stiffness k : f ¼ kx . To pull tubes , the trapping objective was moved laterally . ACKNOWLEDGMENTS . We thank T . Lubensky , S . Das , and T . Powers for discus - sions , T . Lubensky and B . Capraro for comments on the text , and the A . P . Sloan foundation and NSF for funding . 1 . Bonifacino JS , Rojas R ( 2006 ) Retrograde transport from endosomes to the trans - Golgi network . Nat Rev Mol Cell Bio 7 : 568 – 579 . 2 . Mukherjee S , Maxfield FR ( 2000 ) Role of membrane organization and membrane domains in endocytic lipid trafficking . Traffic 1 : 203 – 211 . 3 . Simons K , Ikonen E ( 1997 ) Functional rafts in cell membranes . Nature 387 : 569 – 572 . 4 . Veatch SL , Keller SL ( 2003 ) Separation of liquid phases in giant vesicles of ternary mixtures of phospholipids and cholesterol . Biophys J 85 : 3074 – 3083 . 5 . Roux A , et al . ( 2005 ) Role of curvature andphase transitionin lipidsorting andfission of membrane tubules . EMBO J 24 : 1537 – 1545 . 6 . Baumgart T , Das S , Webb WW , Jenkins JT ( 2005 ) Membrane elasticity in giant vesicles with fluid phase coexistence . Biophys J 89 : 1067 – 1080 . 7 . Semrau S , Idema T , Holtzer L , Schmidt T , Storm C ( 2008 ) Accurate determi - nation of elastic parameters for multicomponent membranes . Phys Rev Lett 100 : 088101 – 0881014 . 8 . JiangHY , Powers TR ( 2008 ) Curvature - drivenlipid sorting in a membrane tubule . Phys Rev Lett 101 : 0181031 – 0181034 . 9 . Parthasarathy R , Yu CH , Groves JT ( 2006 ) Curvature - modulated phase separation in lipid bilayer membranes . Langmuir 22 : 5095 – 5099 . 10 . Rozycki B , Weikl TR , Lipowsky R ( 2008 ) Stable patterns of membrane domains at corrugated substrates . Phys Rev Lett 100 : 098103 . 11 . Tian A , Baumgart T ( 2009 ) Sorting of lipids and proteins in membrane curvature gradients . Biophys J 96 : 2676 – 2688 . 12 . Sorre B , et al . ( 2009 ) Curvature - driven lipid sorting needs proximity to a demixing point and is aided by proteins . Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 106 : 5622 – 5626 . 13 . Leibler S ( 1986 ) Curvature instability in membranes . J Phys 47 : 507 – 516 . 14 . Seifert U ( 1993 ) Curvature - induced lateral phase separation in two - component vesicles . Phys Rev Lett 70 : 1335 – 1338 . 15 . Derby MC , Gleeson PA ( 2007 ) New insights into membrane trafficking and protein sorting . International Review of Cytology : A Survey of Cell Biology 261 : 47 – 116 . 16 . Allain JM , Storm C , Roux A , Amar MB , Joanny JF ( 2004 ) Fission of a multiphase membrane tube . Phys Rev Lett 93 : 158104 – 158104 . 17 . Yuan J , Hira SM , Strouse GF , Hirst LS ( 2008 ) Lipid bilayer discs and banded tubules : Photoinduced lipid sorting in ternary mixtures . J Am Chem Soc 130 : 2067 – 2072 . 18 . Tian A , Capraro BR , Esposito C , Baumgart T ( 2009 ) Bending stiffness depends on curvature of ternary mixture tubular membranes . Biophys J 97 : 1636 – 1646 . 19 . HochmuthRM , WilesHC , EvansEA , Mccown JT ( 1982 ) Extensionalflow oferythrocyte membrane from cell body to elastic tether . II . Experiment . Biophys J 39 : 83 – 89 . 20 . ScherfeldD , KahyaN , SchwilleP ( 2003 ) Lipiddynamicsanddomainformationinmodel membranes composed of ternary mixtures of unsaturated and saturated phosphati - dylcholines and cholesterol . Biophys J 85 : 3758 – 3768 . 21 . EvansE , YeungA ( 1994 ) Hiddendynamicsinrapidchangesofbilayershape . ChemPhys Lipids 73 : 39 – 56 . 22 . StefanJ ( 1891 ) Ueberdie Theorieder Eisbildung , insbesondereüberdie Eisbildungim Polarmeere . Ann Phys 278 : 269 – 286 . 23 . De Groot SR , Mazur P ( 1963 ) Non - Equilibrium Thermodynamics ( North - Holland Publishing Company , Amsterdam ) . 24 . Crank J ( 1984 ) Free and Moving Boundary Problems ( Oxford Univ Press , Oxford ) . 25 . DerenyiI , JulicherF , ProstJ ( 2002 ) Formationandinteractionofmembranetubes . Phys Rev Lett 88 : 238101 . 26 . Julicher F , Lipowsky R ( 1996 ) Shape transformations of vesicles with intramembrane domains . Phys Rev E 53 : 2670 – 2683 . 27 . Bozic B , Svetina S , Zeks B ( 1997 ) Theoretical analysis of the formation of membrane microtubes on axially strained vesicles . Phys Rev E 55 : 5834 – 5842 . 28 . Lowengrub JS , Ratz A , Voigt A ( 2009 ) Phase - field modeling of the dynamics of multicomponent vesicles : Spinodal decomposition , coarsening , budding , and fission . Phys Rev E 79 : 031926 . 29 . Illya G , Lipowsky R , Shillcock JC ( 2006 ) Two - component membrane material prop - erties and domain formation from dissipative particle dynamics . J Chem Phys 125 : 114710 . 30 . Daniels DR , Turner MS ( 2007 ) Diffusion on membrane tubes : A highly discriminatory test of the Saffman - Delbruck theory . Langmuir 23 : 6667 – 6670 . 31 . Kural C , et al . ( 2005 ) Kinesin and dynein move a peroxisome in vivo : A tug - of - war or coordinated movement ? . Science 308 : 1469 – 1472 . Heinrich et al . PNAS ∣ April 20 , 2010 ∣ vol . 107 ∣ no . 16 ∣ 7213 B I O P H Y S I C S A ND C O M P U T A T I O N A L B I O L O G Y A PP L I E D P H Y S I C A L S C I E N C E S