1 Scientific RepoRts | ( 2018 ) 8 : 1164 | DOI : 10 . 1038 / s41598 - 018 - 19447 - 2 www . nature . com / scientificreports Identification of a membrane - less compartment regulating invadosome function and motility Kristyna Sala 1 , Andrea Raimondi 2 , Diletta Tonoli 1 , Carlo Tacchetti 2 , 3 & Ivan de Curtis 1 , 3 Depletion of liprin - α 1 , ERC1 or LL5 scaffolds inhibits extracellular matrix degradation by invasive cells . These proteins co - accumulate near invadosomes in NIH - Src cells , identifying a novel invadosome – associated compartment distinct from the core and adhesion ring of invadosomes . Depletion of either protein perturbs the organization of invadosomes without influencing the recruitment of MT1 - MMP metalloprotease . Liprin - α 1 is not required for de novo formation of invadosomes after their disassembly by microtubules and Src inhibitors , while its depletion inhibits invadosome motility , thus affecting matrix degradation . Fluorescence recovery after photobleaching shows that the invadosome – associated compartment is dynamic , while correlative light immunoelectron microscopy identifies bona fide membrane – free invadosome – associated regions enriched in liprin - α 1 , which is virtually excluded from the invadosome core . The results indicate that liprin - α 1 , LL5 and ERC1 define a novel dynamic membrane - less compartment that regulates matrix degradation by affecting invadosome motility . Different types of invasive cells including cancer cells , form specialized actin – rich membrane protrusions called invadopodia or podosomes , generally defined as invadosomes . These structures concentrate and secrete different types of proteolytic enzymes that are needed to locally degrade the extracellular matrix ( ECM ) , in order to over - come the physical barriers met during invasive cell migration 1 , 2 . Invadosomes have a central actin - rich core dec - orated with metalloproteases that is surrounded by an adhesion ring consisting of adhesion and scaffold proteins like integrins , paxillin and vinculin 3 . Despite the important role of invadosomes during invasive cell migration , the molecular mechanisms driving their dynamic functional behaviour are not fully understood . The scaffold and adaptor proteins liprin - α 1 , ERC1 / ELKS and LL5 are part of functional plasma membrane associated networks that promote the turnover of integrin - mediated focal adhesions , and link the cell cortex and focal adhesions to microtubules 4 – 7 . The three proteins are important regulators of tumor cell migration and invasion in vitro 8 – 11 . Moreover liprin - α 1 inhibits breast cancer cell invasion in vivo 12 , and is required for efficient ECM degradation by cancer cells , where it regulates the stability of invadopodia 10 . LL5 β has been identified as a key component of synaptic podosomes , and is associated with the cytoplasmic side of the postsynaptic membrane of neuromuscular junctions , where it is required for proper acetylcholine receptor aggregation 13 , 14 . Liprin - α 1 , ERC1 / ELKS and LL5 proteins can interact with each other and colocalize at the front of migrating cells , where they promote adhesion turnover 5 . Moreover , these proteins are found at the cortex of non - motile cells where they are required to link the cell cortex to the microtubule network via CLASP proteins 4 . Time - lapse imaging has shown that during cell migration liprin - α 1 , ERC1 and LL5 define new highly polarized and dynamic cytoplasmic structures uniquely localized near the protruding cell edge 11 . Based on these findings we have pro - posed that these proteins assemble into plasma membrane - associated platforms , large membrane - less assemblies that promote protrusion at the cell front 15 . Membrane - less assemblies of proteins are implicated in several impor - tant cellular functions 16 . Here , we show that liprin - α 1 , ERC1 and LL5 promote the maturation and function of invadosomes , and that the three proteins colocalize near invadosomes , where they identify a novel dynamic , membrane – less invadosome – associated compartment . Results and Discussion Liprin - α 1 , ERC1 and LL5 promote ECM degradation by breast cancer cells and transformed fibroblasts . Liprin - α 1 , ERC1 and LL5 cooperate to regulate cell motility and invasion by breast cancer cells 11 . 1 Cell Adhesion Unit - Division of Neuroscience , IRCSS San Raffaele Scientific Institute , 20132 , Milano , Italy . 2 Experimental Imaging Center , IRCSS San Raffaele Scientific Institute , 20132 , Milano , Italy . 3 San Raffaele Vita - Salute University , via Olgettina 58 , 20132 , Milano , Italy . Correspondence and requests for materials should be addressed to I . d . C . ( email : decurtis . ivan @ hsr . it ) Received : 15 September 2017 Accepted : 27 December 2017 Published : xx xx xxxx OPEN www . nature . com / scientificreports / 2 Scientific RepoRts | ( 2018 ) 8 : 1164 | DOI : 10 . 1038 / s41598 - 018 - 19447 - 2 MDA - MB - 231 cells form functional invadopodia to degrade the ECM during invasion . 88 % of MDA - MB - 231 cells plated on Oregon – green gelatin showed ECM degradation , and silencing of either liprin - α 1 , ERC1 or LL5 protein in these cells ( Supplementary Figure 1A ; 77 – 93 % protein decrease ) strongly inhibited ECM degradation ( Fig . 1A – D ) . While knockdown of either protein reduced the percentage of ECM degrading cells , only liprin - α 1 silencing slightly decreased the percentage of cells with invadopodia compared to controls ( Supplementary Figure 1C ) . Rescue by expression of the human liprin – α 1 , which is resistant to silencing by the siRNA spe - cific for murine liprin - α 1 , prevented the inhibition of ECM degradation by silencing of endogenous liprin - α 1 ( Supplementary Figure 1D ) . Src activity is necessary for the formation and function invadosomes 17 . NIH - 3T3 cells transformed by active Src - Y527F ( NIH - Src cells ) form large ECM – degrading invadosomes or podosomes 18 . Increased Src expression corresponds to strong Src activation detected by anti - Y416p - Src Ab ( Supplementary Figure 2A ) . Virtually all NIH - Src cells with F - actin – positive dots or clusters ( rosettes ) of invadosomes showed active Src concentrated at these structures ( Supplementary Figure 2B ) , and strong ECM degradation ( Supplementary Figure 2C ) . Silencing of either liprin - α 1 , ERC1 or LL5 proteins , or their combined silencing in NIH - Src cells ( 85 – 90 % protein decrease ; 63 – 86 % by triple silencing ; Supplementary Figure 3A – C ) dramatically inhibited ECM degradation ( Fig . 1E – H ) , and reduced cell invasion in vitro ( Fig . 1I ) . Depletion of liprin - α 1 decreased the percentage of cells with invado - somes and actively degrading invadosomes ( Supplementary Figure 3D – E ) . These effects were not increased by triple silencing , suggesting that the three proteins cooperate to regulate the degradative efficiency of cells : deple - tion of either protein is sufficient to interfere with the functional complex . The results show that liprin - α 1 , ERC1 or LL5 proteins are important for ECM degradation by invasive breast cancer and transformed NIH - Src cells . Liprin - α 1 , ERC1 and LL5 define a novel compartment near invadosomes . Invadosomes in NIH - Src cells often form rosettes characterized by an F - actin – positive core , and a surrounding adhesive region or ring pos - itive for focal adhesion proteins such as paxillin 19 . LL5 β and ERC1 / ELKS were described near podosomes in Src – transformed cells and myotubes during remodelling of the neuromuscular junctions 20 . Interestingly , we observed that liprin - α 1 , ERC1 and LL5 proteins strikingly co - accumulated near invadosomes of NIH - Src cells ( Fig . 1J ) . Quantification of protein levels between areas near invadosomes and control invadosome - free areas confirmed that the three proteins were significantly enriched near invadosomes ( Fig . 1K ) . Expression levels of the 3 proteins were not increased upon Src - induced transformation ( Supplementary Figure 4 ) . On the other hand neither pro - tein evidently accumulated near invadopodia of MDA - MB - 231 cells ( Supplementary Figure 5A – C ) , where these proteins are found at the protrusive edge 11 . Also in cells plated on FN - coated Oregon – green gelatin the 3 proteins showed no particular accumulation near ECM degrading invadopodia ( Supplementary Figure 5B – C ) . This may be due to differences in the structural organization of different types of invadosomes , with invadopodia representing incompletely organized ECM - degrading structures compared to invadosomes of NIH - Src or other cells 21 . In this direction , the accumulation of liprin - α 1 near invadopodia has been linked to the presence of a paxillin – positive adhesion ring observed in different tumor cells 22 , but not in MDA - MB - 231 cells ( Supplementary Figure 5A ) . Triple - immunostaining confirmed the co - accumulation of endogenous liprin - α 1 , ERC1 and LL5 near inva - dosomes of NIH - Src cells ( Fig . 1L ) . Analysis by TIRF showed that they constitute a novel invadosome - associated compartment ( IAC ) near the ventral plasma membrane , which is distinct from the F - actin – positive core and from the associated paxillin – positive adhesion region / ring ( Fig . 1M ) . Three - dimensional reconstructions of NIH - Src cells on Oregon – green gelatin confirmed the accumulation of endogenous liprin - α 1 near actively degrading inva - dosomes , with the liprin - α 1 – positive compartment extending from the plasma membrane into the cytoplasm , at the sides of the protruding F - actin – positive core of ECM degrading invadosomes ( Fig . 1N – O ) . The IAC components ERC1 , liprin - α 1 and LL5 are required for efficient ECM degradation also by MDA - MB - 231 cells , although a clear accumulation of these proteins as IACs near invadosomes could not be detected in MDA - MB - 231 cells . This may be due to differences in the structural organization of different types of invadosomes . One hypothesis is that large morphologically identifiable IACs may only be detected at fully organized invadosomes , like the podosome - like invadosomes formed by NIH - Src cells . On the other hand , the same function may be carried on by smaller and possibly transient assemblies of the same IAC proteins that may remain morphologically undetectable near the less organized invadopodia - like invadosomes typical of MDA - MB - 231 cells , which also lack an evident paxillin - positive adhesion ring . In this direction , it is interest - ing to observe that the overexpression of the constitutively active c - Src – Y527F mutant in MDA - MB - 231 poten - tiated the formation of peripheral ECM - degrading invadosomes that were morphologically similar to those detected in NIH - Src cells : these invasodomes are surrounded by paxillin - positive adhesion rings and by IACs ( Supplementary Figure 6 ) , suggesting that the stable accumulation of liprin - α 1 , ERC1 and LL5 may depend on the presence of the adhesion - ring , and that Src activity may underlie this type of organization . We have then looked for the presence of IACs near the invadosomes of other tumor cell types . In human epidermoid carcinoma A431 cells we observed liprin - α 1 – positive IACs near F - actin – positive invadosomes ( Supplementary Figure 7A ) . Triple immunostaining showed that endogenous ERC1 and LL5 proteins often co - accumulated with endogenous liprin - α 1 , and that paxillin accumulated near invadosomes and IACs ( Supplementary Figure 7B – C ) . In human fibrosarcoma HT1080 cells the situation was similar to that observed in MDA - MB - 231 cells : HT1080 cells formed smaller invadopodia – like invadosomes , and the localization of liprin - α 1 near F - actin - positive invadosomes was only seldomly observed . No clear accumulation of either IAC proteins or paxillin could be detected near the majority of invadosomes in HT1080 cells . On the other hand , as observed in MDA - MB - 231 cells the three endogenous IAC proteins clearly co - accumulated at the cell edge near the lamellipodia of HT1080 cells ( Supplementary Figure 7D – G ) . Liprin - α 1 , ERC1 and LL5 are necessary for invadosome development , but not for the recruit - ment of MT1 - MMP at invadosomes . Overexpressed liprin - α 1 , ERC1 , and LL5 β accumulated near www . nature . com / scientificreports / 3 Scientific RepoRts | ( 2018 ) 8 : 1164 | DOI : 10 . 1038 / s41598 - 018 - 19447 - 2 Figure 1 . Liprin - α 1 , ERC1 and LL5 promote ECM degradation and identify a novel compartment associated to invadosomes . Inhibition of ECM degradation by MDA - MB - 231 ( A – D ) or NIH - Src cells ( E – H ) after silencing liprin - α 1 , ERC1 , LL5 . Cells co - transfected with siRNAs and pFLAG - β Gal / mCherry were replated on Oregon – green gelatin for either 5 h ( A – D ) or 1 h ( E – H ) . Arrows in ( A ) , dark areas of degradation . Bars , 20 µ m . ( B , F ) Area of ECM degradation / cell , ( C , G ) projected cell area , ( D , H ) area of ECM degradation / projected cell area . Means ± s . e . m . [ n = 25 – 50 cells ( B – D ) ; n ≥ 100 cells ( F – H ) ] . ANOVA , Dunnet post hoc , * p < 0 . 05 , * * p < 0 . 01 , * * * p < 0 . 001 vs siLuc . ( I ) Matrigel invasion assay by cells transfected with control or specific siRNAs . Bars are means ± s . e . m . ( n = 4 – 6 wells per experimental condition ) . ANOVA ; Dunnet post hoc ; * * p < 0 . 01 , * * * p < 0 . 001 vs siLuc . ( J – K ) Cells fixed after 18 h on FN : endogenous liprin - α 1 , ERC1 , LL5 accumulate at sites distinct from F - actin – and paxillin – positive regions of invadosomes ( J ) . Enlarged areas in ( J ) are shown by arrows . ( K ) Left : liprin - α 1 accumulation near invadosomes . Right : accumulation of endogenous proteins near invadosomes ( e . g . full square , left image ) compared to the diffuse cytoplasmic www . nature . com / scientificreports / 4 Scientific RepoRts | ( 2018 ) 8 : 1164 | DOI : 10 . 1038 / s41598 - 018 - 19447 - 2 invadosomes ( Fig . 2A ; Supplementary Figure 8 ) as the endogenous proteins ( Fig . 1J ) . In living cells mCherry - ERC1 and GFP - Liprin - α 1 largely colocalized near invadosomes , where they showed a dynamic behaviour ( Fig . 2B , C ; Supplementary movie 1 ) . Time - lapse of cells cotransfected with mCherry - ERC1 and GFP - LifeAct to label the IAC and the F - actin – rich invadosomal core , respectively ( Fig . 2D ) , revealed that both structures were dynamic , with continuous changes in their morphology , while maintaining a strict spatial relationship between them ( Fig . 2E , F ; Supplementary movie 2 ) . Depletion of either liprin - α 1 , ERC1 or LL5 ( Fig . 2G ; Supplementary Figures 9A – C ; 10 ) only partially influ - enced the accumulation of the other proteins at IACs : ERC1 accumulation was decreased by depletion of either liprin - α 1 or LL5 , while accumulation of liprin - α 1 and LL5 proteins were not inhibited by depletion of the other proteins ( Supplementary Figure 11A ) . The percentage of cells with invadosomes18 h after plating was not decreased by knockdown of either protein ( Supplementary Figure 11C ) . Depletion of either liprin - α 1 or LL5 proteins affected the total invadosomal area / cell and the mean area of invadosomes , while silencing ERC1 had no such effects ( Supplementary Figure 11D ) . We evaluated the effects of protein depletion on the maturation of invadosomes at short times , in cells replated for 1 h on gelatin , by quantifying the percentage of cells with prevalence of either one of the three morphological categories of invadosomes corresponding to different phases of their maturation 23 , 24 : F - actin positive dots , clusters of dots ( forming rosettes ) , mature rosettes ( Fig . 2H ) . Depletion of either liprin - α 1 , ERC1 or LL5 as well as the combined depletion of the three proteins increased the percentage of cells without invadosomes , and decreased the percentage of cells with mature rosettes compared to control cells ( Fig . 2I ) , indicating that each protein is required for the maturation of invadosomes . The negative effects of protein silencing on ECM degradation ( Fig . 1 ) may be due to a defect in the locali - zation of metalloproteases at invadosomes 25 – 29 . The transmembrane metalloprotease MT1 - MMP / MMP14 is a major player in ECM degradation by NIH - Src cells 27 . Its recruitment at invadosomes is an indication of their functional maturation 3 . MT1 - MMP colocalized with the core of invadosomes in NIH - Src cells , while in parental NIH - 3T3 cells had a diffuse signal ( Supplementary Figure 12A ) . MT1 - MMP was concentrated at ECM – degrad - ing invadosomes of NIH - Src cells on Oregon – green gelatin ( Supplementary Figure 12B ) . TIRF imaging showed that MT1 - MMP localized distinctly from the ERC1 - positive IACs on the basal side of cells ( Fig . 2J ) . Depletion of either liprin - α 1 , ERC1 or LL5 resulted in loss of their accumulation near invadosomes , but did not affect MT1 - MMP recruitment at invadosomes 18 h after plating cells ( Fig . 2K – L ; Supplementary Figure 10 ) . To test for effects at earlier times during invadosome formation , we repeated the analysis with silenced cells replated for 1 h on gelatin . The recruitment of MT1 - MMP at forming invadosomes was unaltered after efficient single / combined depletion of liprin - α 1 / ERC1 / LL5 ( Supplementary Figure 12C – E ) . Our results indicate that the three proteins are not required for the recruitment of MT1 - MMP at invadosomes . To look for possible effects of IAC perturbation on secreted metalloproteases ( e . g . MMP9 , MMP2 ) we per - formed gelatin zymography on lysates and media from cultures of cells depleted of liprin - α 1 . We found no detect - able differences in the amounts of secreted metalloproteases in the medium from liprin - α 1 – depleted NIH - Src cells compared to control cells ( Supplementary Figure 13 ) . Liprin - α 1 regulates invadosome motility . To test if liprin - α 1 is required for de novo formation of inva - dosomes , we treated NIH - Src cells with a combination of microtubules and Src kinase inhibitors , which are known to induce disassembly of invadosomes 19 , 30 . Microtubules were largely depolymerized after 30 – 60 min with 10 µ M nocodazole , while the microtubule network was not perturbed by liprin - α 1 silencing ( Supplementary Figure 14A ) . On the other hand 1 h treatment with 10 µ M PP2 inhibited Src activation as detected by immunob - lotting with anti - Y416p - Src Ab 19 . Inhibition was reversed after washout of inhibitors and incubation for 5 – 10 min at 37 °C ( Supplementary Figure 14B ) . Combination of 10 µ M of each inhibitor for 1 h at 37 °C induced a significant disassembly of invadosomes ( Supplementary Figure 16B ) . Increasing either the time of incubation or the con - centration of inhibitors caused cell detachment ( not shown ) . We thus analyzed the effects of liprin - α 1 silencing on invadosomes formation following disassembly with inhibitors . The percentage of cells with high / low Src levels was not affected by treatments ( Supplementary Figure 15 ) . The effects were quantified as percentage of cells with invadosomes , and with prevalence of either one of the three morphological categories of invadosomes ( rosettes , forming rosettes , dots , as in Fig . 2H – I ) . No differences were observed between liprin - α 1 silenced and control cells before addition of inhibitors 18 h after plating ( Fig . 3A – B ; Supplementary Figure 16A ) . After 1 h with inhib - itors , both control and liprin - α 1 – depleted cells were virtually depleted of mature rosettes , and had less forming rosettes and more cells with dots or no invadosomes compared to cells treated with DMSO only ( Fig . 3C – D ; Supplementary Figure 16B ) . Inhibition was reversible : inhibitors washout led to increased percentages of cells with invadosomes , including cells with forming or mature rosettes already after 5 min ( Fig . 3E – F ; Supplementary Figure 16C ) : again , no differences were observed in the capacity of recovery between liprin - α 1 – depleted and control cells , showing that liprin - α 1 is not necessary for de novo formation of invadosomes . signal ( dotted square , left image ) . Enrichments ± s . e . m . ( n = 15 – 37 invadosomes , 7 – 8 cells ) ; t - test : * * p < 0 . 01 , * * * p < 0 . 001 . ( L ) Endogenous liprin - α 1 , ERC1 , LL5 colocalize near invadosomes . ( M ) TIRF : endogenous liprin - α 1 is distinct from F - actin – and paxillin – positive regions of invadosomes . Enlargement ( bottom ) of the area shown by arrow ( top ) . ( N ) Cells fixed after 18 h on Oregon – green gelatin , stained for endogenous liprin - α 1 and F - actin . Enlargement ( right ) : gelatin degradation by an invadosome surrounded by liprin - α 1 . The enlarged area is shown by the arrow . ( O ) Confocal 3D – reconstruction ( Z axis , same cell of N ) : liprin - α 1 ( arrowheads ) near F - actin – positive invadosomes with areas of ECM degradation . Bars , 20 µ m ( J – N ) , 10 µ m ( O ) . www . nature . com / scientificreports / 5 Scientific RepoRts | ( 2018 ) 8 : 1164 | DOI : 10 . 1038 / s41598 - 018 - 19447 - 2 We tested if during de novo formation of invadosomes , F - actin – positive cores appear before or after the forma - tion of IACs . For this we performed time - lapse analysis on NIH - Src cells co - transfected with GFP - Life - Act and Cherry - ERC1 and treated with Src and microtubule inhibitors . Time - lapse analysis performed immediately after inhibitors washout showed that the appearance of F - actin – positive invadosomes occurred both in areas with , or devoided of pre - existing concentration of the IAC component Cherry - ERC1 ( Fig . 3G – H ) . These results support the conclusion that IACs are not required for de novo formation of invadosomes , and indicate that detectable IACs associate to invadosomes after the appearance of the F - actin – positive cores ( Fig . 3H ) . We next tested the hypothesis that IAC proteins regulate invadosome motility , by comparing invadosome behaviour in NIH - Src cells co - transfected with either control or liprin - α 1 siRNA together with GFP - Paxillin and RFP - LifeAct , to label adhesion rings and invadosomal cores , respectively ( see Methods ) . Analysis by confocal live imaging ( Fig . 4A ; Supplementary movie 3 ) shows that liprin - α 1 silencing did not affect invadosome persis - tence ( Fig . 4B ) , but evidently inhibited the motility of invadosome – associated paxillin – positive adhesion rings ( Fig . 4C – D ) and LifeAct – positive invadosome cores ( Fig . 4F – G ) , without influencing the total areas of adhesion rings and cores ( Fig . 4E , H ) . Therefore , the movement of invadosomes is specifically inhibited by liprin - α 1 silenc - ing , suggesting that inhibition of ECM degradation upon liprin - α 1 silencing may be due to the reduced motility of invadosomes . Reduced invadosomes motility may affect the migratory capacity of NIH - Src cells ; accordingly , liprin - α 1 silencing inhibited the migration of these cells ( Fig . 4I ) , as already shown in other cell types 10 , 11 . Figure 2 . Liprin - α 1 , ERC1 and LL5 promote invadosome development . ( A – C ) Colocalization of GFP - Liprin - α 1 and mCherry - ERC1 in live cells ( B ) is dynamic , as shown by color - coded time frames for either protein ( C ) . ( B – C ) 2 . 5 – fold enlargements of areas with arrows in ( A ) . ( D – E ) No overlap of GFP - LifeAct ( invadosome core ) with mCherry - ERC1 ( IAC ) in live NIH - Src cells . Dynamic localization of both structures is shown by their color - coded distribution in time ( F ) . ( G – L ) Silencing of IAC proteins perturbs invadosome organization . ( G ) Left : immunoblotting ( 30 µ g protein / lane ) from siRNA – transfected cells . Right : cells transfected with siRNAs , replated for 18 h before fixation . ( H ) Distinct types of invadosomes after 1 h on gelatin . Bar , 20 µ m . ( I ) Relative abundance of different types of invadosomes in cells transfected with siRNAs , classified based on most organized invadosome structure present ( rosettes , forming rosettes , dots , no invadosomes ) ; n = 110 – 125 cells / condition ; χ 2 test vs siLuc : ( siLip - α 1 p = 0 . 00001 , siERC1 p = 0 . 0389 , siLL5 p = 0 . 0103 . siAll p = 0 . 0133 ) . ( J ) TIRF : distinct localization of endogenous MT1 - MMP and ERC1 at the cells basal side . ( K – L ) Silencing of either liprin - α 1 , ERC1 or LL5 had no effect on endogenous MT1 - MMP ( cells replated 18 h ) . ( K ) Distribution of IAC proteins ( red ) , MT1 - MMP ( blue ) and F - actin ( green ) in cells transfected with siRNAs . ( L ) Immunoblotting on cells prepared as in ( K ) . www . nature . com / scientificreports / 6 Scientific RepoRts | ( 2018 ) 8 : 1164 | DOI : 10 . 1038 / s41598 - 018 - 19447 - 2 A dynamic membrane - less compartment near invadosomes . The dynamic behaviour of IACs was supported by fluorescence recovery after photobleaching ( FRAP ) on cells expressing GFP - ERC1 ( Fig . 5A ) . GFP - ERC1 fluorescence in photobleached IACs recovered quite rapidly ( t 1 / 2 = 40 sec ) to about 70 % of the levels Figure 3 . Liprin - α 1 depletion does not affect invadosome formation , but affects their motility . ( A , C , E ) NIH - Src cells co - transfected with siRNAs and GFP - LifeAct ( invadosomes ) , fixed before ( A , T 0 ) or after incubation with nocodazole and PP2 ( C , T 60 ) , and after washout and incubation for 5 min to rescue invadosomes ( E , R 5 ) . Immunostaining for GFP - LifeAct ( green ) , tubulin ( red ) , and liprin - α 1 ( blue ) . Bars , 20 µ m . ( B , D , F ) Graphs : top , mean percentage of cells with / without invadosomes ; bottom , invadosome organization : cells classified based on the highest organization of their invadosomes ( n = 186 – 309 ) . χ 2 test : no differences with liprin - α 1 and control siRNA ; * * * p < 0 . 001 for siLuc DMSO vs siLuc Noco + PP2 ( D ) . ( G , H ) NIH - Src cells cotransfected with GFP - Life - Act and Cherry - ERC1 were incubated for 1 h with nocodazole and PP2 . Images are frames from time - lapses recorded immediately after inhibitors washout . Arrows with numbers indicate different newly forming F - actin – positive invadosomes ; arrowheads point to ERC1 – positive areas near invadosomes . Bars , 20 µ m . www . nature . com / scientificreports / 7 Scientific RepoRts | ( 2018 ) 8 : 1164 | DOI : 10 . 1038 / s41598 - 018 - 19447 - 2 of fluorescence before bleaching ( Fig . 5B ) , suggesting that IACs dynamic behavior is accompanied by a rapid turnover of a large fraction of their molecular components by exchange with the surrounding cytoplasm . We checked if altering the IACs by depletion of liprin - α 1 affected the dynamics of fluorescence recovery within the invadosomal core . For this we cotransfected NIH - Src cells with either control or liprin - α 1 siRNAs together with RFP - cortactin as a marker of invadosomal cores . FRAP analysis showed that depletion of liprin - α 1 had no detectable effect on the recovery of fluorescent cortactin in invadosomes compared to control cells ( Fig . 5C ) . These data suggest that perturbation of IACs did not affect the exchange rate of intrinsic components of the invadosomal core . To gain a better insight of the liprin - α 1 – positive compartment , we performed ultrastructural analysis on NIH - Src cells plated on gelatin . We used Correlative Light Electron Microscopy ( CLEM ) to identify bona fide invadosomes and invadosome – associated regions , based on their localization by fluorescence confocal micros - copy . Photooxidation of TRITC - phalloidin labelled the F - actin – rich areas corresponding to invadosomes , form - ing electron dense precipitates visible by transmission electron microscopy ( TEM ) ( Fig . 5D ) . Cells on gelatin were used to prepare thin sections for TEM with a cutting plane either parallel or perpendicular to the substrate Figure 4 . Liprin - α 1 promotes invadosome motility . ( A ) Frames from time - lapse of cell co - transfected with control siRNA and GFP - LifeAct . Asterisks indicate disappearing invadosomes , arrows for new invadosomes . Bar , 20 µ m . ( B ) Invadosome persistence was not affected by liprin - α 1 silencing ( n = 267 – 279 invadosomes , 13 cells ) . ( C – F ) Colour - coded maximal - intensity projection from time - lapse ( 20 frames , 40 sec intervals , ImageJ Time - lapse ColorCoder Plugin ) of GFP - Paxillin – positive adhesion rings ( C ) and RFP - LifeAct – positive cores ( F ) . Static rings / cores are white . ( D – E , G – H ) Mean ± s . e . m ( n = 66 – 92 invadosomes , 6 – 8 cells , three experiments ) . ( D ) Percentage of static GFP - Paxillin – positive adhesion ring area ( * * * p < 0 . 001 , t - test ) ; ( E ) GFP - Paxillin – positive adhesion rings area at T n ( p = 0 . 24 , t - test ) . ( G ) Percentage of static RFP - LifeAct – positive invadosomal area ( * * * p < 0 . 001 , t test ) ; ( H ) RFP - LifeAct – positive invadosome area at T n ( p = 0 . 45 , t test ) . ( I ) Scratch - wound assay on monolayers of NIH - Src cells co - transfected with GFP and either control ( siLuc ) or liprin - α 1 ( siLip ) siRNAs . Left : time course of migration into the wound . Right graph : means ± s . e . m . of the normalized area of GFP - positive cells into the wound area at 48 h . Values normalized to siLuc 48 h ( n = 16 wells from 2 experiments ; * * * of the normalized area of p < 0 . 001 , t - test ) . www . nature . com / scientificreports / 8 Scientific RepoRts | ( 2018 ) 8 : 1164 | DOI : 10 . 1038 / s41598 - 018 - 19447 - 2 Figure 5 . A dynamic membrane - less compartment near invadosomes . FRAP analysis . ( A ) Frames from time - lapse of a NIH - Src cell transfected with GFP - ERC1 , to show the recovery of the fluorescent signal after photobleaching of a GFP - ERC1 – positive IAC . Arrowheads indicate the photobleached region ( encircled in the first enlarged panel , pre - bleaching ) . ( B ) Recovery of signal after photobleaching . Means ± s . e . m . ( 5 cells ) . ( C ) FRAP on RFP - cortactin – positive invadosomal cores from NIH - Src cells cotransfected with either control or liprin - α 1 siRNA . No significant differences in the recovery of fluorescence by invadosomes from the cells of the two experimental conditions were observed ( p > 0 . 05 by two - way ANOVA ; n = 5 – 6 invadosomes / cells from 2 – 3 experiments ) . ( D – I ) CLEM analysis . ( D ) Cells on gelatin : TRITC - phalloidin – stained invadosomes ( top , arrows ) are dark by phase contrast after photoconversion ( bottom ) . ( E ) Sections for TEM , parallel or perpendicular to the substrate . ( F ) TEM micrographs ( section perpendicular to the substrate ) of photoconverted cell ( asterisk in D ) . Boxes : area of cytoplasm without ( left ) or with invadosomes ( right , electron dense after photoconversion of labelled F - actin ) . ( G ) Cells labelled for endogenous F - actin and liprin - α 1 ( immunofluorescence on the left ; below are shown 4 - fold enlargements of boxed invadosomes ) , were incubated with nanogold – conjugated www . nature . com / scientificreports / 9 Scientific RepoRts | ( 2018 ) 8 : 1164 | DOI : 10 . 1038 / s41598 - 018 - 19447 - 2 ( Fig . 5E ) . TEM revealed electron dense F - actin – rich areas corresponding to the same invadosomes observed by immunofluorescence ( Fig . 5F ) . We next used cells double labelled with fluorescence for F - actin and endogenous liprin - α 1 without photoconversion , to avoid loss of information due to interference by the dark precipitates . We could identify regions corresponding to invadosomes on thin sections parallel to the plane of the substrate : invadosomes included cytoplasmic areas with homogeneous electron density , possibly due to concentrated actin filaments ( Supplementary Figure 17 ) . To look at the relationship between the F - actin – rich invadosome core and the nearby liprin - α 1 – enriched region , we performed CLEM on cells double labelled with fluorescent phalloidin for F - actin , and nanogold – conjugated anti - rabbit Ig to recognize Ab - labelled endogenous liprin - α 1 ( Fig . 5G ) . We could localize invadosomes as regions positive for TRITC - phalloidin , and the nearby liprin - α 1 – positive areas ( Fig . 5G ) . Endogenous liprin - α 1 was preferentially at the periphery of invadosomes , with poor liprin - α 1 signal found in F - actin – positive cores . Interestingly , the localization of the immuno - gold complexes was not associ - ated to any morphologically identifiable intracellular membrane - bound compartment , while some gold particles localized at the cytoplasmic face of the plasma membrane , as expected ( Fig . 5H , arrowheads ) . Quantitative anal - ysis confirmed that labelling for endogenous liprin - α 1 was specifically concentrated around amorphous regions corresponding to the invadosomal F - actin – rich patches ( Fig . 5I ) . These results provide evidence for the accumu - latation of endogenous liprin - α 1 into a membrane - less compartment closely associated to invadosomes . Conclusions In this study we have shown that the scaffold proteins liprin - α 1 , ERC1 and LL5 co - accumulate at IACs , a novel dynamic compartment associated to invadosomes . We show that the three proteins promote the morphological and functional maturation of invadosomes ( Fig . 1 ) , but are dispensable for their formation . IACs are involved in the matrix degradation process occurring during invasion . In support of the role of IACs as functional regula - tors of ECM – degrading invadosomes , the morphological characterization of IACs by confocal and TIRF imag - ing has shown that these structures are highly dynamic , and remain closely associated to invadosomes ( Fig . 2 ) . Interestingly , FRAP analysis shows a rapid turnover of the molecular components of IACs that exchange with molecules in the cytoplasm . This finding is consistent with the hypothesis that IACs may derive from the associ - ation of protein components into membrane – less organelles 15 , 31 , 32 . Support to this hypothesis has been provided here by the use of CLEM ( Fig . 5 ) , which has allowed us to show that the IAC component liprin - α 1 is concentrated in regions around F - actin - enriched invadosomes that are not associated to any morphologically identifiable intra - cellular membrane - bound compartment . One possibility is that IAC proteins influence invadosomes by regulating the adhesive regions near invado - somes , which have been proposed to be crucial for invadosome maturation and function rather than for their formation 33 . This may explain the apparently contradictory results showing that depletion of liprin - α 1 does not influence the de novo formation of invadosomes after their disassembly by inhibitors ( Fig . 3 ) , whereas depletion of liprin - α 1 , ERC1 and LL5 inhibits the capacity of cells to degrade the ECM . In this context , the IAC compo - nent liprin - α 1 promotes the motility of invadosomes and invadosome – associated adhesions ( Fig . 4 ) : the reduced motility of invadosomes upon liprin - α 1 silencing may reduce their degradative capacity in time , resulting in overall reduced ECM degradation , even if the localization of the membrane – bound metalloproteases and the secretion of soluble metalloproteases remains unaffected . Based on these observations , we propose the hypothesis that the observed reduction of ECM degradation in IAC protein – silenced cells is not due to a direct effect on the metalloproteases , but to the reduced motility of the invadosomes . One possibility is that the reduction of invado - some motility by liprin - depletion may restrict the lytic action of MT1 - MMP on ECM , thus reducing the efficacy of ECM degradation . As a consequence , this may also explain the negative effects of silencing the IAC proteins on cell motility and invasion . Given the implication of liprin - α 1 and associated proteins in breast cancer cell invasion 10 , 12 , 22 , further under - standing of the molecular mechanisms driving the assembly and function of IACs appears to be highly relevant to the understanding of the mechanisms that drive the formation of metastasis . Materials and Methods Antibodies and reagents . Antibodies and reagents used in this study include : anti - α - tubulin monoclo - nal antibody ( mAb ) and polyclonal antibodies ( pAbs ) against FLAG and LL5 β ( Sigma - Aldrich St . Louis , MO ) ; mAb anti - paxillin ( cl . 349 ) ; pAb anti - paxillin and mAb anti anti - liprin - α 1 ( Santa Cruz Biotechnology , Santa Cruz , CA ) ; pAb anti - GFP ( Life Technologies , Paisley , Scotland , UK ) ; affinity purified anti - liprin - α 1 pAb 9 ; pAb anti - liprin - α 1 ( Protein Tech , Chicago , IL ) ; mAb anti - ERC1a ( clone ELKS - 30 ) , pAb anti MMP14 ( MT1 - MMP ) and chicken pAb anti - GFP ( Abcam , Cambridge , UK ) ; mAb anti - cortactin cl . 4F11 ( Millipore , Billerica , MA ) ; pAb anti - phospho Src ( Tyr416 ) ( Cell Signalling Technology ) ; mAb anti - LL5 αα and β ( cl . IH12 ) was a gift from anti - rabbit Ig for immuno - EM . The three panels on the right are EM micrographs of the boxed invadosomal area shown on the left : ( a ) immunogold – labelled endogenous liprin - α 1 in the invadosomal area ; ( b ) overlay of F - actin ( fluorescent ) with liprin - α 1 ( immuno - EM ) ; ( c ) enlargement showing immunogold – labelled endogenous liprin - α 1 concentrated around the colored F - actin core ( from image boxed in ( b ) ) . Liprin - α 1 is almost absent at the invadosome core . ( H ) Sections from stacks to quantify the distribution of liprin - α 1 in invadosomal ( right ) and non - invadosomal areas ( left ) . Bottom : color - coded distribution of immunogold particles in overlaid stacks of 5 sections in correspondence of the same area shown in the respective top panels ( liprin - α 1 ) . ( I ) Distribution of gold particles near an electron dense F - actin – rich invadosomal area ( boxed in H ) . Lower panel : colors represent centre , periphery , and adjacent area of electron dense invadosomal core . Graph : means ± s . e . m . of gold particles density . Scale bars : 5 µ m ( F , upper panel ) ; 0 . 5 µ m ( F , lower panels ) ; 1 µ m ( H , I ) . www . nature . com / scientificreports / 10 Scientific RepoRts | ( 2018 ) 8 : 1164 | DOI : 10 . 1038 / s41598 - 018 - 19447 - 2 J . Sanes 13 ; hamster mAb anti - LL5 α was a gift from Y . Mimori - Kiyosue 34 ; mAb anti Src cl . 327 was a gift from S . Courtneidge 35 Alexa - 488 , Alexa - 568 and Alexa - 647 secondary Abs and Oregon 488 - gelatin ( Life Technologies , Paisley , Scotland , UK ) ; FITC - and TRITC - conjugated phalloidin ( Sigma - Aldrich , St . Louis , MO ) ; goat - anti rabbit nanogold – conjugated secondary Ab ( Nanoprobes , Stony Brook , New York ) , fibronectin ( BD Biosciences , San Jose , CA ) ; peroxidase - conjugated anti - rabbit and anti - mouse secondary Abs , and Enhanced Chemiluminescence ( ECL ) Detection System ( Amersham Biosciences , Little Chalfont , UK ) ; Peroxidase - conjugated anti - hamster sec - ondary Ab ( Life Technologies ) ; nocodazole and poly - L - lysine hydrobromid ( Sigma - Aldrich , St . Louis , MO ) ; PP2 Src kinase inhibitor ( Calbiochem ) and G418 ( Merck , Darmstadt , Germany ) . Plasmids and siRNAs . The following plasmids were used : pFLAG - Liprin - α 1 and pEGFP - Liprin - α 1 ( human liprin - α 1 ) and FLAG - β Gal 36 ; pEGFP - C1 , m - Cherry - C1 , and pRFP ( Clontech Laboratories , MountainView , CA ) ; pEGFP - ERC1a ( murine ERC1a ) from Y . Takai 29 ; pEGFP - LL5 β ( murine LL5 β ) from J . Sanes 13 ; pEGFP - LifeAct 37 ; mCherry - ERC1a 5 . RFP - LifeAct was obtained from pEGFP - LifeAct by cloning into pRFP vector . GFP - paxillin was a kind gift from dr . Victor Small ( Austrian Academy of Sciences , Vienna , Austria ) . The plasmids pSGT - Y527F - Src 38 and RFP - cortactin 39 were as described . SiRNAs were from Qiagen ( Hilden , Germany ) and Life Technologies . SiRNAs for human proteins were as published 4 , 5 , 9 , 34 , and targeted the following sequences : liprin - α 1 CCAAGGTACAAACTCTTAA ; ERC1a : GTGGGAAAACCCTTTCAAT and CCAACAGTACGGGAGGGAG ; LL5 β : GGAGATTTTGGATCATCTA and GGATCTACCTCATAGCGTA . LL5 α : CCATCAGCCTGAGTGAATA ; control siRNA for luciferase : CATCACGTACGCGGAATAC . SiRNAs for mouse proteins targeted the following sequences : liprin - α 1 : GCTGGATGCTATCAACAAA and ERC1a : GAAGGAAGTATTAAGAGAA were as described 40 ; LL5 β : AGAGAAGAACAATCTAATA . Cell culture and transfection . MDA - MB - 231 human breast adenocarcinoma cells were grown in DMEM / F12 1 : 1 with 10 % FBS ( Euroclone , Wetherby , UK ) . NIH 3T3 mouse embryonal fibrobasts stably transformed with the retroviral constitutively active Y527F c - Src mutant ( NIH - Src , a kind gift from S . Corallino , IFOM , Milan ) were cultured in DMEM with 10 % FBS and maintained under selection with 0 . 75 mg / ml G418 ( Merck , Darmstadt , Germany ) . A431 cells were cultured in DMEM with 10 % FBS . HT1080 were cultured in EMEM with 10 % FBS . Cells were transfected with Lipofectamine - 2000 ® ( Life Technologies ) . For 6 - well plates 50 – 100 nM siRNA and / or 1 – 6 μ g plasmid DNA in Optimem ® transfection medium were used for each transfection . After 4 – 6 h at 37 °C the transfection medium was replaced with complete medium , and cells processed after 24 – 48 h later . Immunochemical analysis . Cells cooled on ice were washed twice with of ice - cold TBS ( 150 mM NaCl , 20 mM Tris - HCl pH 7 . 5 ) , and solubilised with 50 – 150 μ l of lysis buffer ( 0 . 5 % Triton X - 100 , 150 mM NaCl , 20 mM Tris - Cl pH 7 . 5 , 2 mM MgCl 2 , 1 mM NaV , 10 mM NaF , and anti - proteases 1 × Complete ® ( Roche , Manheim , Germany ) . Lysates were rotated for 15 min at 4 °C , insoluble material removed by centrifugation at 12000 g at 4 °C for 10 min . Protein determination was done using Bradford protein assay reagent ( Bio - Rad , Hercules , CA ) . Lysates were loaded for SDS - PAGE . Proteins were transferred to 0 . 45 μ m PROTRAN ® nitrocellulose membranes ( GE Healthcare Amersham Biosciences , Little Chalfont , UK ) , which were incubated with primary antibodies , horseradish peroxidase - conjugated secondary antibodies , and revealed by ECL ( GE Healthcare Amersham Biosciences , Little Chalfont , UK ) . Quantification of protein levels was done by densitometric analysis on scanned films using ImageJ . Values of specific protein bands were normalized to the levels of internal protein standards in the lysate ( α - tubulin or calnexin ) . Some filters were incubated for 5 – 10 min at room T with mild stripping buffer ( 0 . 2 M glycine , 0 . 1 % SDS , 1 % Tween - 20 , pH 2 . 2 ) or for 30 min at 57 °C with harsh stripping buffer ( 62 . 5 mM Tris - HCl pH 6 . 8 , 2 % SDS , 100 mM 2 - mercaptoethanol ) washed at neutral pH , and then reprobed for immunob - lotting with different antibodies . Gelatin degradation . Gelatin degradation was detected as published 25 . Glass coverslips coated for 1 h at room T with 0 . 5 mg / ml poly - L - lysine ( Sigma - Aldrich , St . Louis , MO ) were quenched 15 min at 4 °C with 0 . 5 % glutaraldehyde in PBS , and then coated for 10 min at room T with Oregon – green – conjugated gelatin ( Life Technologies ) diluted 1 : 6 in 0 . 2 % gelatin in PBS . Subsequently the coverslips were either additionally coated with 10 µ g / ml FN in PBS for 1 h at 37 °C ( for MDA - MB - 231 cells ) , or treated with 1 % NaBH 4 in PBS for 15 min ( for NIH - Src cells ) . Cells were plated on gelatin - coated coverslips for either 5 h ( MDA - MB - 231 ) , or for 1 h ( NIH - Src ) before fixation and immunostaining . Gelatin degradation was detected at a Zeiss Axiovert 135 TV microscope equipped with Hamamatsu CCD Orca II camera and Plan - Apochromat 63 × ( NA 1 . 4 ) lens . The dark areas of gel - atin degradation and the projected cell areas were quantified by ImageJ on thresholded images . Invadopodia were identified by immunostaining for cortactin . Data were pooled from 2 - 3 independent experiments . To quantify the localization of MT1 - MMP at invadosomes , control and transfected NIH - Src cells were plated for 1 h on non - fluorescent gelatin - coated coverslips . After fixation cells were stained for invadosomal marker ( phalloidin ) and MT1 - MMP . Confocal images were analyzed for the localization of MT1 - MMP at invadosomes . Both the total area of invadosomes / cell and the integrated density of MT1 - MMP signal at invadosomes were measured . The ratio between MT1 - MMP integrated density and the total invadosome area represents the mean density of MT1 - MMP signal at invadosomes . Matrigel invasion assay . NIH - Src cells transfected for 48 h with the indicated siRNAs were seeded on Matrigel – coated transwells ( Matrigel , BD Transduction , San Jose , CA ; transwells 0 . 8 µ m pores , Millipore , Billerica , MA ) in DMEM 0 . 1 % BSA ( 20000 / 100 µ l / transwell ) with lower chambers filled with complete medium . www . nature . com / scientificreports / 11 Scientific RepoRts | ( 2018 ) 8 : 1164 | DOI : 10 . 1038 / s41598 - 018 - 19447 - 2 After 24 h , cells were fixed with MetOH and coloured with Crystal Violet . Invading cells at the bottom of the tran - swell membrane were counted ( n = 4 – 6 transwells per experimental condition , from 2 – 3 experiments ) . Scratch - wound assay . NIH - Src cells co - transfected with GFP and indicated siRNAs were replated after 24 h in 96 well plate ( 20 , 000 cells in 100 µ l of complete medium per well ( 96 - well ImageLock Plate , Essen BioScience , Ann Arbor , MI ) , and incubated for 2 . 5 h to allow cell attachment . Wounds 700 µ m wide were created with a WoundMaker Tool ( Essen BioScience ) , cells were washed with PBS , supplied with complete medium and imaged every 1 . 5 h for 48 h with IncuCyte Live - Cell Imaging System equipped with 10 × lens ( Essen BioScience ) . The percent of wound area occupied by the GFP - positive cells was calculated at each time point with the IncuCyte Scratch Wound Assays Software ( Essen BioScience ) . Morphological analysis . Cells grown on uncoated or FN - coated glass coverslips were washed and fixed for 12 min at room T in 3 % paraformaldehyde in PBS + ( Ca 2 + , Mg 2 + ) . After washing and quenching for 10 min with 50 mM NH 4 Cl in PBS + , cells were permeabilized for 4 min with 0 . 1 % Triton X - 100 or saponin 0 , 1 % . Coverslips were incubated for 2 h at room T with primary antibodies , then for 45 min with secondary antibodies , and finally mounted in ProLong ® Gold Antifade Reagent ( Life Technologies ) . For z - stacks imaging , coverslips were mounted in glycerol 70 % with 6 , 5 mM p - phenylenediamine ( Sigma - Aldrich , St . Louis , MO ) in PBS and sealed with transparent nail polish . Wide field images were acquired with Zeiss Axiovert 135 TV with QImaging Exi - Blue equipped with a Hamamatsu CCD Orca II camera , with Plan - APOCHROMAT 63 × ( NA 1 . 4 ) lens . Confocal images were acquired at a Perkin Elmer UltraVIEW spinning disk confocal microscope equipped with EM - CCD camera , with Plan - Apochromat 63 × ( NA 1 . 4 ) lens ; alternatively images were taken at a Leica TCS SP8 SMD FLIM laser scanning confocal microscope equipped with HC PL APO CS2 63 × ( NA 1 . 4 ) lens . Total internal reflection flu - orescence ( TIRF ) images were acquired at a Leica SR GSD 3D TIRF microscope equipped with EM - CCD and CMOS camera and HCX PL APO 63 × ( NA 1 . 47 ) lens or HC PL APO 160 × lens ( NA 1 . 43 ) . Quantification of invadosomes . NIH - Src cells co - transfected with p - EGFP - C1 and siRNAs were replated on glass coverslips and cultured for 18 h before fixation and staining with phalloidin , and immuno - staining for the detection of invadosome - associated proteins . The number and area of invadosomes were evaluated by analy - sis with public domain NIH Image software ImageJ . The total area of invadosomes per cell was measured after applying a fixed threshold to identify the invadosomes , and subsequently invadosomes were counted manually . Projected cell area was measured applying threshold on GFP channel . Quantification of protein enrichment around invadosomes . Thresholded confocal images from transfected NIH - Src cells co - stained for a invadosomal marker ( phalloidin ) and for components of the liprin - α 1 / ERC1a / LL5 complex were used to evaluate the accumulation of these proteins near central invadosomes . The selected areas were defined by applying a 10 pixels extension around the invadosomal area ; the integrated density of signal for liprin - α 1 , ERC1a , or LL5 was then measured in this extended invadosomal area . Subsequently the integrated density of the signal for each protein was measured in a randomly selected equivalent control invadosome - free area . Enrichment of each protein was calculated as the ratio between the signal near invadosomes and the signal in control areas . Data were pooled from 2 independent experiments . For de novo formation of invadosomes , NIH - Src cells co - transfected for 48 h with siRNAs and GFP - LifeAct and replated on 13 mm glass coverslips ( 12 , 500 cells per coverslip ) , were treated with inhibitors 18 h after seed - ing . Cells were incubated for the indicated times at 37 °C with 10 µ M nocodazole and 10 µ M PP2 Src inhibitor in DMSO , or with DMSO alone as control . Invadosome formation was evaluated by removing the inhibitors , washing cells twice with PBS , and incubating them for 5 – 10 min at 37 °C in culture medium . Cells fixed with either 3 % paraformaldehyde or with Methanol at − 20 °C to preserve microtubules , were analyzed to evaluate the presence and organization of invadosomes in GFP - LifeAct – positive cells ( rosettes , forming rosettes , dots ) . Src and pSrc were detected by immunostaining and by immunoblotting with anti - Src and anti – Y416pSrc Abs . About 300 cells from three independent experiments were analysed . Efficacy of Src inhibition by PP2 was con - firmed by the decrease of invadosomes , as well as by immunoblotting with anti - Src and anti – phospho - Src Abs . Depolymerization of microtubules by nocodazole was confirmed by immunostaining with anti - tubulin Abs . Live - cell imaging . For live - cell imaging NIH - Src cells co - transfected with siRNA and plasmids were replated ( 40 , 000 cells per dish ) on 3 . 5 cm diameter glass - bottom MatTek dishes ( MatTek Corporation , Ashland , MA ) and cultured for 18 h . Before imaging culture media was replaced with imaging media ( without phenol red ) . Cells were imaged at a confocal microscope Leica TCS SP8 SMD FLIM equipped with HC PL APO CS2 63 × ( NA 1 . 4 ) lens , adaptive focus control and Oko - Lab stage incubator ( T , CO 2 ) with use of LasX software ( Leica ) at the same focal plane . For each time - lapse experiment using siRNA , a control coverslip was fixed before imaging to verify protein silencing by immunofluorescence . Cells in mitosis or going out of focus during acquisition were excluded from the analysis . Isolated cells were analyzed for GFP - LifeAct – positive invadosomes persistence , evaluated as the time each invadosome was detectable over a 3 h period ( one frame every 3 min ) . Invadosomes were manually tracked from first to last frame of its persistence . In case of invadosomes fusion the bigger one counted as persisting while the smaller as disappeared , in case of invadosome split the bigger counted as persisting from the original invadosome while the smaller counted as a new one . For the analysis of invadosome motility , cells co - transfected with GFP - Paxillin and RFP - LifeAct were imaged at a Leica TCS SP8 confocal microscope with 63 × lens . For each sample , 20 frames were taken at 40 sec inter - vals . To evaluate the dynamics of invadosomes , a macro was created by ImageJ for automatic analysis of the area of either GFP - paxillin – positive adhesion rings or RFP - LifeAct – positive invadosomes . Cells with similar inva - dosome organization ( forming rosettes ) were chosen for acquisition . Time - lapses were processed with ImageJ StackReg Plugin for analysis . For each experiment , a control coverslip was fixed before imaging to verify silencing of liprin - α 1 by immunofluorescence . www . nature . com / scientificreports / 12 Scientific RepoRts | ( 2018 ) 8 : 1164 | DOI : 10 . 1038 / s41598 - 018 - 19447 - 2 The motility of invadosomes / adhesion rings were evaluated as the percentage of area shared between pairs of two consecutive time points T n and T n + 1 ( n = 0 – 20 ) , calculated as follows : the GFP - Paxillin – positive ( or RFP - LifeAct – positive ) area overlapping between T n and T n + 1 was divided by the area at T n , and expressed as the percentage of static invadosomal area . This measure was repeated for consecutive pairs of time points up to T 20 ; the mean of the 20 values obtained for each invadopodium was expressed as percentage , and defined as static GFP - Paxillin area for adhesion rings , or static RFP - LifeAct area for invadosome cores . Measurements were made on 66 – 92 invadosomes from 6 – 8 cells per experimental conditions , from 3 independent experiments . For de novo formation of invadosomes , 40 , 000 NIH - Src cells co - transfected with GFP - Life - Act and Cherry - ERC1 were replated in 3 . 5 cm diameter glass - bottom MatTek dishes ( MatTek Corporation , Ashland , MA ) , and cultured for 18 h . Before imaging cells were incubated for 1 h at 37 °C with 10 µ M nocodazole and 10 µ M PP2 Src inhibitor in complete medium . Cells were washed once with PBS , supplied with complete medium for imaging ( without phenol red ) , and immaged immediately ( one frame every 18 . 5 sec ) . Cells were imaged at a confocal microscope Leica TCS SP8 SMD FLIM equipped with HC PL APO CS2 63 × ( NA 1 . 4 ) lens . FRAP analysis . For FRAP analysis , cells were imaged at a confocal microscope Leica TCS SP8 SMD FLIM equipped with HC PL APO CS2 63 × ( NA 1 . 4 ) lens , adaptive focus control and Oko - Lab stage incubator ( T , CO 2 ) , and FRAP module with LasX software ( Leica ) . For GFP - ERC1 analysis NIH - Src cells plated on 3 . 5 cm diameter glass - bottom MatTek dishes ( MatTek Corporation , Ashland , MA ) were cotransfected with GFP - ERC1a and LifeAct - RFP for 24 h . A 10 µ m diameter circular region of interest ( ROI ) was bleached at 35 % laser power at 488 nm with 2 iterations every 2 . 5 sec . After bleaching , images were taken within the same focal plane every 10 sec for 10 min to monitor fluorescence recovery . For RFP - cortactin analysis NIH - Src cells were cotransfected with RFP - cortactin and the indicated siRNAs for 24 h , replated on 3 . 5 cm diameter glass - bottom MatTek dishes and imaged after 24 h . An 11 µ m diameter circular region of interest ( ROI ) was bleached at 45 % laser power at 568 nm with 4 iterations every 2 . 58 sec . After bleaching , images were taken within the same focal plane every 10 sec for 20 min to monitor fluorescence recovery . The recovery of the GFP / RFP signal was measured using ImageJ by cal - culating the fluorescent intensity at each time point as follows : R = [ F ( t ) - F ( 0 ) ] / [ F ( pre - bleach ) - F ( 0 ) ] , where F ( t ) is the intensity of fluorescence at time t : F ( t ) = [ F ( ROI ( t ) ) - F ( bcg ( t ) ) ] / [ F ( ctrl ( t ) ) - F ( bcg ( t ) ) ] , where “bcg” stands for background fluorescence outside the cell , and “ctrl” stands for control area in the cytosol 41 , 42 . T 1 / 2 was identified as the first time point that achieved half of the intensity of the plateau ( beginning of plateau defined manually ) . The immobile fraction was defined as the difference between the value of fluorescence before bleaching and the value of fluorescemce at plateau . Data are presented as means ± s . e . m . Correlative Light Electron Microscopy ( CLEM ) . For DAB ( 3 , 3 ′ - diaminobenzidine tetrahydrochloride ) photo - oxidation cells plated on gelatin – coated coverslips were fixed for 30 min with 1 % gluataraldehyde in 0 . 1 M cacodylate buffer pH 7 . 4 . To visualize invadosomes , samples were stained for 2 h with phalloidin - TRITC ( 2 . 5 µ g / ml ) . After several washes in cacodylate buffer the autofluorescence was quenched using 100 mM NH 4 Cl in 0 . 1 M cacodylate buffer for 10 min . Coverslips were then observed on an inverted microscope ( Zeiss Axio Observer . Z1 ) using an Plan - NEOFLUAR 40 × ( NA 1 . 3 ) Oil objective . DAB precipitation was induced by illuminating the samples with a Xenon Lamp ( TRITC filters ) in the presence of an oxygenated solution containing 1 mg / ml of 3 , 3 ′ - Diaminobenzidine tetrahydrochloride hydrate ( D5637 SIGMA ) in 0 . 1 M Cacodylate buffer until the fluo - rescent signal faded and a brown precipitate appeared ( usually within 3 – 20 min ) . After the brown precipitate was fully developed the coverslips were removed from the microscope stage , washed with cacodylate buffer and directly postfixed with 1 . 5 % of potassium ferrocyanide , 1 % osmium tetroxide in 0 . 1 M cacodylate buffer , “ en bloc” stained in 1 % uranyl acetate in distilled water overnight at 4 °C and dehydrated in a graded series of ethanol solutions . Finally the samples were embedded in Epon812 resin and cured in an oven at 60 °C for 48 h . The cells of interest were localized in the resin block thanks to the brown DAB precipitate , a fragment of the resin block containing them was glued with cyanoacrylate glue on top of an empty Epon block and mounted on ultrami - crotome ( Leica FC7 , Leica microsystem , Vienna , Austria ) . Ultrathin section ( 70 – 90 nm ) were collected on form - var carbon – coated grids , stained with uranyl acetate and Sato’s lead solutions and observed in a Leo 912AB Zeiss Transmission Electron Microscope ( Zeiss , Oberkochen , Germany ) . Digital micrographs were taken with a 2Kx2K bottom mounted slow - scan Proscan camera ( ProScan , Lagerlechfeld , Germany ) controlled by the EsivisionPro 3 . 2 software ( Soft Imaging System , Münster , Germany ) . For CLEM cells grown on gelatin - coated gridded MatTek dishes ( MatTek Corporation , Ashland , MA ) were fixed for 10 min with 4 % paraformaldehyde , 0 . 05 % glutaraldehyde in PBS . Cells were washed in PBS and treated with 50 mM NH 4 Cl for 10 min . Subsequently , cells were permeabilized with 0 . 1 % saponin , and blocked in block - ing buffer ( 0 . 2 % gelatine in PBS ) for 30 min . Cells were stained with TRITC - phalloidin and with anti - liprin α 1 Abs and visualized with goat anti - rabbit Alexa 647 and goat anti - rabbit nanogold – conjugated secondary Abs ( Nanoprobes , NY , USA ) diluted in blocking buffer . After washes in PBS , cells were fixed in 1 % glutaraldehyde and observed with an inverted microscope ( Perkin Elmer UltraVIEW spinning disk confocal microscope with Plan - Apochromat 40 × lens ) ; the position coordinates of the cells of interest was annotated . Then nanogold was enlarged with gold enhancement solution ( Nanoprobes , NY ) according to manufacturer instructions , and cells were processed as for conventional EM . Ultrathin section ( 70 – 90 nm ) were collected on formvar carbon coated slot grids , stained with uranyl acetate and Sato’s lead solutions and observed in a Leo 912AB Zeiss Transmission Electron Microscope ( Zeiss ) . Digital micrographs were taken with a 2Kx2K bottom mounted slow - scan Proscan camera ( ProScan , Lagerlechfeld , Germany ) controlled by the EsivisionPro 3 . 2 software ( Soft Imaging System , Münster , Germany ) . For relocating invadosomes and correlating liprin - α 1 staining , EM images were aligned to fluorescent images using ec - CLEM Icy plugin and overlaid by means of Photoshop software . For quantification of the density of liprin - α 1 in invadosome or perinuclear areas , the position of gold particles present in five align www . nature . com / scientificreports / 13 Scientific RepoRts | ( 2018 ) 8 : 1164 | DOI : 10 . 1038 / s41598 - 018 - 19447 - 2 serial sections were recorded with ImageJ and visualized in pseudocolor ( kernel density estimation done in Past statistic software ver . 3 . 14 ) . For quantification of liprin - α 1 distribution within each invadosomes 3 concentric areas ( core , peripheral , and external ) were defined , based on the actin core structure and the normalized density of gold particles ( number of gold particles per µ m 2 ) was calculated using ImageJ ( n = 22 invadosome profiles analyzed ) . Gelatin zymography . Gelatin zymography was performed as described 43 . NIH - Src cells were trans - fected with the indicated siRNAs for 24 h , washed with PBS , supplied with culture medium without serum , and processed after 44 h . Conditioned media were concentrated with centrifugal filters ( Amicon Ultra , Milliopre , Billerica , MA ) by spinning at 4550 g for 30 min at 4 °C . Cells were lysed in absence of protease inhibitors . Concentrated conditioned media and cell lysates were analysed for gelatin degrading activity by electrophoresis under non - reducing conditions on SDS - polyacrylamide ( 10 % ) gels containing 1 mg / ml gelatin type A ( Sigma # 1890 ) . Gels were incubated for 30 min in renaturing solution ( 2 . 5 % TritonX - 100 in water ) , washed twice with water , incubated for 30 min at room T and subsequently for 18 h at 37 °C in developing buffer ( 50 mM Tris - HCl , pH 7 . 8 , 200 mM NaCl , 5 mM CaCl 2 and 0 . 02 % Brij 35 ) . White zones of lysis indicating gelatin degrading activity were revealed by staining with Coomassie brilliant blue . Statistical analysis . Significant differences were evaluated by χ 2 test , Student t - test , or one - way ANOVA and post hoc Dunnet test . * p < 0 . 05 ; * * p < 0 . 01 ; * * * p < 0 . 001 ) . All experiments were repeated at least two times and the data expressed as means ± s . e . m . ( standard error of the mean ) . References 1 . Murphy , D . A . & Courtneidge , S . A . The ‘ins’ and ‘outs’ of podosomes and invadopodia : characteristics , formation and function . Nat . Rev . Mol . Cell Biol . 12 , 413 – 426 ( 2011 ) . 2 . Eddy , R . J . , Weidmann , M . D . , Sharma , V . P . & Condeelis , J . S . Tumor Cell Invadopodia : Invasive Protrusions that Orchestrate Metastasis . Trends Cell Biol . 27 , 595 – 607 ( 2017 ) . 3 . Hoshino , D . , Branch , K . M . & Weaver , A . M . Signaling inputs to invadopodia and podosomes . J . Cell Sci . 126 , 2979 – 2989 ( 2013 ) . 4 . Lansbergen , G . et al . CLASPs attach microtubule plus ends to the cell cortex through a complex with LL5beta . Dev . Cell 11 , 21 – 32 ( 2006 ) . 5 . Astro , V . et al . Liprin - α 1 and ERC1 control cell edge dynamics by promoting focal adhesion turnover . Sci . Rep . 6 , 33653 ( 2016 ) . 6 . Bouchet , B . P . et al . Talin - KANK1 interaction controls the recruitment of cortical microtubule stabilizing complexes to focal adhesions . Figshare https : / / doi . org / 10 . 7554 / eLife . 18124 . 001 ( 2016 ) . 7 . Sun , Z . et al . Kank2 activates talin , reduces force transduction across integrins and induces central adhesion formation . Nat . Cell Biol . 18 , 941 – 953 ( 2016 ) . 8 . Shen , J . C . et al . Inhibitor of growth 4 suppresses cell spreading and cell migration by interacting with a novel binding partner , liprin alpha1 . Cancer Res . 67 , 2552 – 2558 ( 2007 ) . 9 . Asperti , C . , Astro , V . , Totaro , A . , Paris , S . & de Curtis , I . Liprin - alpha1 promotes cell spreading on the extracellular matrix by affecting the distribution of activated integrins . J . Cell Sci . 122 , 3225 – 3232 ( 2009 ) . 10 . Astro , V . , Asperti , C . , Cangi , M . G . , Doglioni , C . & de Curtis , I . Liprin - α 1 regulates breast cancer cell invasion by affecting cell motility , invadopodia and extracellular matrix degradation . Oncogene 30 , 1841 – 1849 ( 2011 ) . 11 . Astro , V . , Chiaretti , S . , Magistrati , E . , Fivaz , M . & de Curtis , I . Liprin - α 1 , ERC1 and LL5 define polarized and dynamic structures that are implicated in cell migration . J . Cell Sci . 127 , 3862 – 3876 ( 2014 ) . 12 . Chiaretti , S . , Astro , V . , Chiricozzi , E . & de Curtis , I . Effects of the scaffold proteins liprin - α 1 , β 1 and β 2 on invasion by breast cancer cells . Biol . Cell . 108 , 65 – 75 ( 2016 ) . 13 . Kishi , M . , Kummer , T . T . , Eglen , S . J . & Sanes , J . R . LL5beta : a regulator of postsynaptic differentiation identified in a screen for synaptically enriched transcripts at the neuromuscular junction . J . Cell Biol . 169 , 355 – 66 ( 2005 ) . 14 . Proszynski , T . J . , Gingras , J . , Valdez , G . , Krzewski , K . & Sanes , J . R . Podosomes are present in a postsynaptic apparatus and participate in its maturation . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA 106 , 18373 – 18378 ( 2009 ) . 15 . Astro , V . & de Curtis , I . Plasma membrane - associated platforms : dynamic scaffolds that organize membrane - associated events . Sci . Signal . 8 , re1 ( 2015 ) . 16 . Hyman , A . A . , Weber , C . A . & Jülicher , F . Liquid - liquid phase separation in biology . Annu . Rev . Cell . Dev . Biol . 30 , 39 – 58 ( 2014 ) . 17 . Spinardi , L . et al . A dynamic podosome - like structure of epithelial cells . Exp . Cell Res . 295 , 360 – 374 ( 2004 ) . 18 . Tarone , G . , Cirillo , D . , Giancotti , F . G . , Comoglio , P . M . & Marchisio , P . C . Rous sarcoma virus - transformed fibroblasts adhere primarily at discrete protrusions of the ventral membrane called podosomes . Exp . Cell Res . 159 , 141 – 157 ( 1985 ) . 19 . Oikawa , T . , Itoh , T . & Takenawa , T . Sequential signals toward podosome formation in NIH - src cells . J . Cell Biol . 182 , 157 – 169 ( 2008 ) . 20 . Proszynski , T . J . & Sanes , J . R . Amotl2 interacts with LL5 β , localizes to podosomes and regulates postsynaptic differentiation in muscle . J . Cell Sci . 126 , 2225 – 2235 ( 2013 ) . 21 . Linder , S . , Wiesner , C . & Himmel , M . Degrading devices : invadosomes in proteolytic cell invasion . Annu . Rev . Cell Dev . Biol . 27 , 185 – 211 ( 2011 ) . 22 . Pehkonen , H . et al . Liprin - α 1 is a regulator of vimentin intermediate filament network in the cancer cell adhesion machinery . Sci . Rep . 6 , 24486 ( 2016 ) . 23 . Poincloux , R . et al . Re - arrangements of podosome structures are observed when Hck is activated in myeloid cells . Eur . J . Cell Biol . 85 , 327 – 332 ( 2006 ) . 24 . Boateng , L . R . , Cortesio , C . L . & Huttenlocher , A . Src - mediated phosphorylation of mammalian Abp1 ( DBNL ) regulates podosome rosette formation in transformed fibroblasts . J . Cell Sci . 125 , 1329 – 1341 ( 2012 ) . 25 . Artym , V . V . , Zhang , Y . , Seillier - Moiseiwitsch , F . , Yamada , K . M . & Mueller , S . C . Dynamic interactions of cortactin and membrane type 1 matrix metalloproteinase at invadopodia : defining the stages of invadopodia formation and function . Cancer Res . 66 , 3034 – 3043 ( 2006 ) . 26 . Steffen , A . et al . MT1 - MMP - dependent invasion is regulated by TI - VAMP / VAMP7 . Curr . Biol . 18 , 926 – 931 ( 2008 ) . 27 . Buschman , M . D . et al . The novel adaptor protein Tks4 ( SH3PXD2B ) is required for functional podosome formation . Mol . Biol . Cell 20 , 1302 – 1311 ( 2009 ) . 28 . Poincloux , R . , Lizárraga , F . & Chavrier , P . Matrix invasion by tumour cells : a focus on MT1 - MMP trafficking to invadopodia . J . Cell Sci . 122 , 3015 – 3024 ( 2009 ) . 29 . Inoue , E . et al . ELKS , a protein structurally related to the active zone protein CAST , is involved in Ca2 + - dependent exocytosis from PC12 cells . Genes Cells 11 , 659 – 672 ( 2006 ) . 30 . Zhu , X . , Efimova , N . , Arnette , C . , Hanks , S . K . & Kaverina , I . Podosome dynamics and location in vascular smooth muscle cells require CLASP - dependent microtubule bending . Cytoskeleton 73 , 300 – 315 ( 2016 ) . www . nature . com / scientificreports / 14 Scientific RepoRts | ( 2018 ) 8 : 1164 | DOI : 10 . 1038 / s41598 - 018 - 19447 - 2 31 . Brangwynne , C . P . Phase transitions and size scaling of membrane - less organelles . J . Cell Biol . 203 , 875 – 881 ( 2013 ) . 32 . Toretsky , J . A . & Wright , P . E . Assemblages : functional units formed by cellular phase separation . J . Cell Biol . 206 , 579 – 588 ( 2014 ) . 33 . Destaing , O . , Block , M . R . , Planus , E . & Albiges - Rizo , C . Invadosome regulation by adhesion signaling . Curr . Opin . Cell Biol . 23 , 597 – 606 ( 2011 ) . 34 . Hotta , A . et al . Laminin - based cell adhesion anchors microtubule plus ends to the epithelial cell basal cortex through LL5alpha / beta . J . Cell Biol . 189 , 901 – 917 ( 2010 ) . 35 . Courtneidge , S . A . & Smith , A . E . The complex of polyoma virus middle - T antigen and pp60c - src . EMBO J . 3 , 585 – 591 ( 1984 ) . 36 . Totaro , A . , Paris , S . , Asperti , C . & de Curtis , I . Identification of an intramolecular interaction important for the regulation of GIT1 functions . Mol . Biol . Cell 18 , 5124 – 5138 ( 2007 ) . 37 . Riedl , J . et al . Lifeact mice for studying F - actin dynamics . Nat . Methods 7 , 168 – 169 ( 2010 ) . 38 . Erpel , T . , Superti - Furga , G . & Courtneidge , S . A . Mutational analysis of the Src SH3 domain : the same residues of the ligand binding surface are important for intra - and intermolecular interactions . EMBO J . 14 , 963 – 975 ( 1995 ) . 39 . Cao , H . et al . Cortactin is a component of clathrin - coated pits and participates in receptor - mediated endocytosis . Mol . Cell . Biol . 23 , 2162 – 2170 ( 2003 ) . 40 . Franchi , S . A . et al . Identification of a Protein Network Driving Neuritogenesis of MGE - Derived GABAergic Interneurons . Front . Cell . Neurosci . 10 , 289 ( 2016 ) . 41 . Sassone , F . et al . Bcl - 2 / adenovirus E1B 19 - kDa interacting protein ( BNip3 ) has a key role in the mitochondrial dysfunction induced by mutant huntingtin . Hum . Mol . Genet . 24 , 6530 – 6539 ( 2015 ) . 42 . Day , C . A . , Kraft , L . J . , Kang , M . & Kenworthy , A . K . Analysis of protein and lipid dynamics using confocal fluorescence recovery after photobleaching ( FRAP ) . Curr . Protoc . Cytom . Chapter 2 , Unit2 . 19 ( 2012 ) . 43 . Toth , M . & Fridman , R . Assessment of Gelatinases MMP - 2 and MMP - 9 by Gelatin Zymography . Methods Mol . Med . 57 , 163 – 174 ( 2001 ) . Acknowledgements This work was supported by AIRC – Associazione Italiana per la Ricerca sul Cancro ( grant no . 15530 to IdC ) , by a grant from the Italian MIUR - Ministero dell’Istruzione , dell’Università e della Ricerca , to IdC . KS was a recipient of a doctoral fellowship from the Italian MIUR . We thank Salvatore Corallino and Giorgio Scita ( IFOM , Milano , Italy ) for providing the NIH - Src cells , Cesare Covino ( Alembic facility ) for technical help . We thank Joshua R . Sanes ( Harvard University , Cambridge , MA ) for LL5 α and β mAb and GFP – LL5 β ; Yuko Mimori - Kiyosue ( Kobe Institute , Japan ) for LL5 α mAb ; Yoshimi Takai ( Osaka University , Japan ) for GFP – ERC1a ; Sara Courtneidge ( OHSU , Oregon , USA ) for mAb anti - Src cl . 327 . Victor Small ( Austria Academy of Sciences , AT ) for GFP - paxillin . Author Contributions I . d . C . conceived the research and supervised the project together with K . S . and C . T . A . R . , K . S . and C . T . contributed and analyzed the data for CLEM . I . d . C . and K . S . wrote the paper . K . S . performed the morpho - functional analysis of invadosomes . D . T . contributed the preparation of plasmids and the biochemical analysis . All authors discussed the results of the paper . Additional Information Supplementary information accompanies this paper at https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1038 / s41598 - 018 - 19447 - 2 . Competing Interests : The authors declare that they have no competing interests . Publisher ' s note : Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in published maps and institutional affiliations . Open Access This article is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution 4 . 0 International License , which permits use , sharing , adaptation , distribution and reproduction in any medium or format , as long as you give appropriate credit to the original author ( s ) and the source , provide a link to the Cre - ative Commons license , and indicate if changes were made . The images or other third party material in this article are included in the article’s Creative Commons license , unless indicated otherwise in a credit line to the material . If material is not included in the article’s Creative Commons license and your intended use is not per - mitted by statutory regulation or exceeds the permitted use , you will need to obtain permission directly from the copyright holder . To view a copy of this license , visit http : / / creativecommons . org / licenses / by / 4 . 0 / . © The Author ( s ) 2018