Review Carotenoid - based signals in behavioural ecology : a review P . A . Svensson 1 ) & B . B . M . Wong ( School of Biological Sciences , Monash University , Clayton , VIC 3800 , Australia ) ( Accepted : 26 November 2010 ) Summary Carotenoids are among the most prevalent pigments used in animal signals and are also im - portant for a range of physiological functions . These concomitant roles have made carotenoid - based signals a popular topic in behavioural ecology while also causing confusion and con - troversy . After a thorough background , we review the many pitfalls , caveats and seemingly contradictory conclusions that can result from not fully appreciating the complex nature of carotenoid function . Current controversies may be resolved through a more careful regard of this complexity , and of the immense taxonomic variability of carotenoid metabolism . Stud - ies investigating the physiological trade - offs between ornamental and physiological uses of carotenoids have yielded inconsistent results . However , in many studies , homeostatic regula - tion of immune and antioxidant systems may have obscured the effects of carotenoid supple - mentation . We highlight how carefully designed experiments can overcome such complica - tions . There is also a need to investigate factors other than physiological trade - offs ( such as predation risk and social interactions ) as these , too , may shape the expression of carotenoid - based signals . Moreover , the processes limiting signal expression individuals are likely differ - ent from those operating over evolutionary time - scales . Future research should give greater attention to carotenoid pigmentation outside the area of sexual selection , and to taxa other than ﬁshes and birds . Keywords : signal honesty , sparing hypothesis , protection hypothesis , trade - off , handicap , homeostasis . 1 ) Corresponding author’s e - mail address : andreas . svensson @ monash . edu © Koninklijke Brill NV , Leiden , 2011 Behaviour 148 , 131 - 189 DOI : 10 . 1163 / 000579510X548673 Also available online - www . brill . nl / beh 132 Svensson & Wong 1 . Introduction Carotenoid - based ornaments account for some of the most spectacular vi - sual signals found in the animal kingdom , from the ﬁery red beaks of zebra ﬁnches ( e . g . , Collins & ten Cate , 1996 ) to the colourful dewlaps of anolis lizards ( e . g . , Macedonia et al . , 2000 ) . Interest in carotenoid - based signals originated with John Endler’s classic work on guppies in the early 1980s ( Endler , 1980 , 1983 ) and have since expanded considerably , especially in recent years , due to advances in our understanding of signalling theory , bio - chemistry , physiology and immunology . Carotenoids , in this regard , are im - portant , not only because of their role as some of the most ubiquitous orna - mental pigments found in nature ( McGraw , 2006b ) , but also because of their various physiological functions ( Britton , 2008 ) . The dual roles of carotenoids in signalling and physiology have made them a favoured subject in studies of animal signals ( McGraw , 2006b ; Blount & McGraw , 2008 ) . While the different functions have certainly helped fuel the wealth of research in this ﬁeld , they have also been the source of much confusion . Indeed , theories ex - plaining the function and evolution of carotenoid - based ornaments have only recently started to receive the rigorous and critical testing required . The ﬁeld of carotenoid - based signals has witnessed major paradigmatic shifts in how patterns and relationships are interpreted . Many aspects of this development ( and the ensuing controversies ) have been covered by exist - ing reviews ( e . g . , McGraw , 2006b ; Peters , 2007 ; Blount & McGraw , 2008 ; Costantini & Møller , 2008 ; Perez - Rodriguez , 2009 ; Vinkler & Albrecht , 2010 ) . These recent papers , however , are quite varied , both in terms of topic and breadth . More often than not , they also tend to be targeted towards al - ready established researchers within the ﬁeld . What is critically lacking is a review geared towards behavioural ecologists that seeks to consolidate a vast and bewildering body of literature whilst , at the same time , remain sen - sitive to readers who may not have the depth of knowledge often necessary to navigate the ﬁeld . The main focus of this review will be on ideas con - cerning how the physiological functions of carotenoids relate to signal con - tent ( e . g . , individual ‘quality’ ) , and on how the honesty of carotenoid - based ornaments may be maintained . To put the recent developments in context , we believe that it is vital to provide a thorough background and context to guide new researchers . The ﬁrst section , therefore , introduces key concepts in carotenoid chemistry , as well as brieﬂy summarizes signalling theory and Carotenoid - based signals in behavioural ecology 133 how carotenoid - based signals relate to the broader literature on signals and signal honesty . From there , we evaluate recent suggestions that ornamental carotenoids are largely unimportant as antioxidants , and outline how prop - erly conceived experiments can reveal underlying mechanisms whilst , at the same time , avoid some of the past mistakes that have confounded earlier em - pirical work . We also highlight some common pitfalls and caveats that have hampered ( and in some cases continue to hamper ) stringent deductions in this ﬁeld . The ﬁnal sections deal with unresolved issues that have either been neglected or deserve closer attention , as well as speciﬁc challenges that , in our opinion , offer considerable promise for future research . 1 . 1 . Biochemical background Carotenoid - based signals are becoming an increasingly popular study subject among behavioural ecologists . However , to successfully address the evolu - tionary aspects of carotenoid ornamentation , it is important to ﬁrst under - stand some of the underlying principles of carotenoid biochemistry and func - tion . In this section we will introduce readers to basic carotenoid chemistry and their role in oxidant and immunological homeostasis . 1 . 1 . 1 . Carotenoid chemistry Carotenoids are fat soluble hydrocarbons that can be biosynthesized only by photosynthetic organisms and certain bacteria and fungi ( Goodwin , 1984 ) . Due to their inability to biosynthesize carotenoids de novo , animals must generally rely on diet for their supply of carotenoids , although many are ca - pable of structural modiﬁcation of ingested carotenoids ( Feltl et al . , 2005 ) . Presently , more than 750 known natural carotenoids have been described ( Britton et al . , 2004 ) . They are broadly divided into carotenes , which are composed of only carbon and hydrogen , and xanthophylls , which are oxy - genated derivatives . The molecular structure of carotenoids can be quite varied , but most are tetraterpenoids with a carbon backbone consisting of 40 carbon atoms . All carotenoids share a common feature : the chromophore , which is a system of alternating single and double bonds in the central part of the molecule ( Fig - ure 1 ) . This conjugated structure makes carotenoids effective in absorbing the energy from light at wavelengths from 400 – 500 nm ( blue - green ) ( Bjørn - land , 1997 ) which makes carotenoids appear yellow , orange or red to human 134 Svensson & Wong Figure 1 . Example of two common carotenoids in animals : β - carotene ( a carotene ) , and astaxanthin ( a xanthophyll ) . The chromophores are indicated in bold . eyes . In plants , carotenoids function as photosynthetic ‘antennae’ , transfer - ring the energy of blue and green wavelengths to chlorophyll , thereby ex - panding the spectrum that can be used for photosynthesis and increasing the light trapping efﬁciency of plants ( Cogdell , 1985 ; Siefermann - Harms , 1985 ) . When leaves of deciduous trees senesce in the fall , the green chloro - phyll is degraded exposing the red and yellow colours of the carotenoids . The chromophore is also responsible for the antioxidant function of carotenoids . Speciﬁcally , the conjugated structure allows delocalization and stabilization of the energy contained in potentially damaging high energy molecules , such as radicals and other reactive oxidative metabolites . Carotenoids may occur in pure form , or in association with other com - pounds . In animal skin , for example , carotenoids are often esteriﬁed ( i . e . , joined with fatty acids ) ( e . g . , Glover et al . , 1952 ) , while in bird plumage , carotenoids are bound to keratin ( Brush , 1990 ) . Carotenoids may also form chemical complexes with proteins ( forming carotenoproteins ) , which may dramatically affect their colour , producing purple , blue or even green hues ( Zagalsky et al . , 1970 ) . One example is the blue - coloured exoskeleton of lobsters ( Homarus sp . ) , which becomes red after boiling , as the heat dena - tures the carotenoprotein revealing the pure colour of the carotenoid astax - anthin ( Cianci et al . , 2002 ) . In eggs , carotenoids are commonly incorporated in their free form , dissolved in the lipids . Carotenoids are transported around in lymph and blood by different lipoproteins ( Parker , 1996 ; Lubzens et al . , 2003 ) . In other tissues , they often reside within the phospholipid membranes of cells . On a subcellular level , carotenoids appear to be concentrated in the membranes of organelles with the highest metabolic rates , primarily mito - Carotenoid - based signals in behavioural ecology 135 chondria ( Chew & Park , 2004 ) . In birds , carotenoids can also accumulate inside lipid droplets of the skin cell ( keratinocyte ) cytosol ( Vanhoutteghem et al . , 2004 ) and in the retina ( Rahman et al . , 2010 ) . Importantly , carotenoids are not distributed evenly , nor are their relative concentrations uniform , be - tween tissue types ( Surai et al . , 2001b ) . As we shall see below , this has im - portant implications for quantifying carotenoids in animal tissue . Carotenoids interact with many other bio - molecules in vivo , including proteins and lipids ( Britton , 1995 ) . Although they reside inside the cell mem - branes , their structure and polarity will affect their precise orientation and function within the membrane . For instance , carotenes , which are highly non - polar , reside deep in the hydrophobic core , while xanthophylls , with their polar end - groups , tend to be positioned across the membrane ( Young & Lowe , 2001 ) . Similarly , carotenoids of different polarity are not only trans - ported by different types of lipoprotein , but their polarity also inﬂuences their position within the lipoprotein ( Parker , 1996 ) . The chemical structure , therefore , affects which types of molecules carotenoids come into contact with . Accordingly , important functional differences between carotenoids in vivo might not be detectable in vitro . Mechanisms for uptake , conversion and utilization can be very speciﬁc ( Parker , 1996 ) , even to isomers of the same carotenoid ( e . g . , Østerlie et al . , 1999 ) . This is partly because compounds , such as enzymes and lipoproteins , can be sensitive to the precise molecular structure of the carotenoid . Consequently , different tissue and cell types may respond to dietary carotenoids in different , possibly even opposing , ways ( Chew & Park , 2004 ) . 1 . 1 . 2 . Oxidants and antioxidants Oxidants are reactive molecules that may damage vital bio - molecules such as proteins , lipids and DNA ( Handelman , 1996 ) . They include singlet oxygen ( 1 O 2 ) , hydroperoxides and molecules with unpaired electrons called radi - cals ( formerly ‘free radicals’ , Eberhardt , 2000 ) . These high energy oxygen - containing oxidants are collectively called active , or reactive , oxygen species ( ROS , Handelman , 1996 ) . As suggested by Eberhardt ( 2000 ) , we will instead use the term reactive oxygen metabolites ( ROM ) throughout this review , be - cause it also encompasses compounds like nitric oxide . The formation of ROMs is caused by normal aerobic metabolism , but may also arise in numer - ous other processes , such as exposure to light . Notably , the powerful prop - erties of ROMs can be put to good use , as seen , for example , when lysoso - 136 Svensson & Wong mal enzymes destroy pathogens ( von Schantz et al . , 1999 , see section 1 . 1 . 6 , Carotenoids and immune response ) . Antioxidants are molecules that prevent or interrupt the detrimental chain reactions initiated by ROMs . An antioxidant is deﬁned as “any substance that delays , prevents or removes oxidative damage to a target molecule” ( Halli - well & Gutteridge , 2007 , p . 81 ) . Excited molecules , such as singlet oxygen , can be quenched ( i . e . , physically returned to their low - energy ground state ) by the antioxidant ( Handelman , 1996 ) . Antioxidants may also chemically scavenge ( i . e . , reduce the concentration of ) radicals by converting them to a more stable product while , themselves , becoming relatively harmless antiox - idant radicals ( Miki , 1991 ; Edge et al . , 1997 ) . 1 . 1 . 3 . Oxidant homeostasis The generation of ROMs is a part of normal metabolism , and a necessary consequence of living in an oxygen rich environment ( Dowling & Simmons , 2009 ) . Physiological homeostasis between ROMs and antioxidants is main - tained through several systems , for example by up - and down - regulation of antioxidant enzymes ( Finkel & Holbrook , 2000 ) . Both endogenous and exogenous ( dietary ) antioxidants are instrumental in maintaining oxidative homeostasis ( Schwedhelm et al . , 2003 ) . A very important consequence of this is that moderate alterations of the oxidant balance , for example through dietary antioxidant supplementation or mild infection may be homeostati - cally buffered , masking any changes taking place . Instead , the effects may only be detectable over time , or in other , seemingly unrelated , systems ( e . g . , reduced colouration caused by reallocation of antioxidant pigments , Alonso - Alvarez et al . , 2008 ) . Importantly , the strategies of such homeostatic adjust - ments may differ between individuals ( Alonso - Alvarez et al . , 2004 , 2008 ) . Animals have an arsenal of antioxidants at their disposal , and if one is in excess , it may lead to the sparing of another , without changing the overall balance ( von Schantz et al . , 1999 , see section 2 . 2 . 2 , Sparing ) . The term ox - idative stress refers to “a disturbance in the pro - oxidant – antioxidant balance in favour of the former , leading to potential damage” ( Sies , 1991 , p . 15 ) . Thus , if the homeostatic balance is overwhelmed by an excess of ROMs , it will result in oxidative stress , and may lead to damages of cellular con - stituents ( Oakes & Van der Kraak , 2003 ) . Conversely , if antioxidant levels become too high , normal cell functions may actually be impaired , because Carotenoid - based signals in behavioural ecology 137 ROMs are essential intermediates in many cellular systems ( Finkel & Hol - brook , 2000 ) . As we shall see below ( section Protection and sparing ) , home - ostatic regulation may effectively mask short - term effects of experimental manipulation , making results difﬁcult to interpret . However , even if elevated oxidative stress has limited immediate effects , it may still have longer - term implications , such as increased rate of senescence or reduced growth , repro - duction and survival ( Monaghan et al . , 2009 ) . 1 . 1 . 4 . Carotenoids as antioxidants It has been shown that carotenoids are powerful antioxidants , both in vitro ( Burton , 1989 ; Krinsky , 1989 ; Miller et al . , 1996 ; Martin et al . , 1999 ) and in vivo ( Miki , 1991 ; Krinsky , 1993 ; Britton , 1995 ; Shimidzu et al . , 1996 ; Surai et al . , 2001a ) , and can counteract several types of oxidants . The conju - gated structure of the chromophore allows delocalization and stabilization of the energy contained in molecules with unpaired electrons , such as radicals ( Britton , 1995 ) . In plants , they quench triplet chlorophyll which is a harm - ful oxidant produced during photosynthesis ( Edge et al . , 1997 ) . Carotenoids have also been shown to quench singlet oxygen ( 1 O 2 ) and scavenge radicals ( Krinsky , 1989 ; Handelman , 1996 ; Edge et al . , 1997 ) , making them useful as antioxidants also in animals . By quenching singlet oxygen , carotenoids can prevent the very forma - tion of radicals . Upon contact , the carotenoid is excited to a triplet state , but quickly returns to the normal state , dissipating the excess energy as heat ( Handelman , 1996 ) . In this physical reaction , carotenoids work as catalysts and are not depleted ( Edge et al . , 1997 ) . Studies have shown that one mole - cule of β - carotene is able to quench > 100 000 molecules of singlet oxygen without being destroyed ( Handelman , 1996 ) . Xanthophylls , such as astax - anthin , are suggested to have an even higher quenching capacity than both β - carotene and vitamin E ( Miki , 1991 ) . Importantly , carotenoids can also be efﬁcient at quenching singlet oxygen at the low concentrations found in vivo ( Krinsky , 1989 ; Handelman , 1996 ) . The chemical reactions between carotenoids and already formed radicals are more complicated and less known . Most likely , the ‘odd’ electron of the radical is transferred to the carotenoids thereby creating a carotenoid rad - ical ( Edge et al . , 1997 ) , which then is repaired by other antioxidants ( see next section ) . Carotenoids are also effective inhibitors of lipid peroxidation ( Krinsky , 1989 ) , a process where ROM degrades lipids , especially in cell 138 Svensson & Wong membranes , causing cell damage . In fact , most direct support of the antioxi - dant effect of carotenoid in vivo comes from evaluations of lipid peroxidation ( Krinsky , 1993 ) . For a recent review of the antioxidant role of carotenoids in evolutionary biology , see Pérez - Rodríguez ( 2009 ) . 1 . 1 . 5 . Carotenoids as parts of the antioxidant arsenal It is important to emphasize that carotenoids are far from the only antioxi - dants available to organisms . All animals rely on a complex antioxidant net - work which includes endogenously produced enzymes and low - molecular weight compounds , but also exogenously obtained compounds like vita - mins , carotenoids and other food - derived antioxidants . Enzymes such as su - peroxide dismutase , vitamins ( especially E and C ) , melatonins , uric acid , ﬂavonoids , complexing proteins and peptides , may all be used to combat ROMs ( Eberhardt , 2000 ) . Due to the homeostatic nature of antioxidant de - fence , a lack of one of these compounds can , at least partially , be com - pensated for by increased usage of another ( Hõrak et al . , 2007 , see sec - tion 2 . 2 , Protection and sparing ) . In fact , one of the best described function of carotenoids in vivo is their ability to modulate the endogenous levels of other antioxidants ( Krinsky , 1993 ) . Although antioxidants of similar solubil - ity may compete at the site of absorption , they are likely to interact positively following uptake ( Catoni et al . , 2008 ) . For instance , carotenoids are known to work together with other antioxidants such as vitamin E ( tocopherol ) and vitamin C ( ascorbate ) in vivo . In particular , carotenoids can repair vitamin E radicals ( Costantini , 2008 ) , and if a carotenoid radical is formed , it may in turn be repaired by vitamin C ( Young & Lowe , 2001 ) . Consequently , when both carotenoids and vitamin E are present , the combined antioxidant activ - ity is greater than the sum of their individual contributions ( Palozza , 1998 ; Amar et al . , 2001 ; Catoni et al . , 2008 ) . As we shall see below ( section 2 . 2 , Protection and sparing ) , effects of carotenoids can be highly contingent on which other antioxidants are present in the same tissue ( Catoni et al . , 2008 ) . Due to antioxidant synergisms , the actions of carotenoids may differ greatly between studies done in vitro and in vivo . Even carotenoids with similar structures may have vastly different effects in vivo , such as , for example , highly differing antioxidant activities ( Krinsky , 1993 ) . As different animal taxa may differ radically in their degree of carotenoid uptake ( Parker , 1996 ) , the relative importance , and the roles , of carotenoids are , therefore , likely to be very different among species ( Perez - Rodriguez , 2009 ) . Some recent Carotenoid - based signals in behavioural ecology 139 studies have even suggested that carotenoids are insigniﬁcant as antioxidants in certain animal taxa ( Costantini & Møller , 2008 ; Perez - Rodriguez et al . , 2008 ) . 1 . 1 . 6 . Carotenoids and immune response Related to their function as antioxidants is the role carotenoids play in the innate ( i . e . , cellular or non - speciﬁc ) branch of the immune response ( Chew & Park , 2004 ) . When white blood cells ( leukocytes ) encounter invading mi - croorganisms , they produce large amounts of peroxides and radicals that sub - sequently destroy the invading microorganism , processes known as respira - tory bursts and phagocytosis , respectively ( Eberhardt , 2000 ; Chew & Park , 2004 ) . The presence of carotenoids protects both white blood cells and sur - rounding tissues from the harmful effects of these ROMs ( Bendich , 1989 ) . Importantly , carotenoids may also stimulate the immune system in ways not connected to their antioxidant activity ( for comprehensive reviews of the many immunomodulating effects of carotenoids , see Bendich , 1989 ; Ben - dich & Olson , 1989 ; Chew , 1993 ; Chew & Park , 2004 ) . 1 . 1 . 7 . Carotenoids and the developing embryo The carotenoids present within the eggs of many animals may , at ﬁrst , seem outside the scope of this review . However , the evolution of mechanisms for incorporating carotenoids into eggs may have been starting points for signal evolution ( see section 5 . 2 , The demands of the egg ) . Furthermore , in species with female ornaments , signal expression may be directly traded off against egg production ( Figure 2 ) . Carotenoids are largely responsible for the rich coloration of egg yolk in birds and the eggs of many ﬁshes ( Craik , 1985 ; Blount et al . , 2000 ) . For over a century , the unusually high concentration of carotenoids in eggs has been recognized , and their importance and func - tion still constitute a large part of carotenoid research ( Palmer & Kempster , 1919 ; Steven , 1949 ; Blount et al . , 2000 ) . One possible explanation is that the antioxidant function of carotenoids may offer protection from free radical induced cell damage during the sensitive stage of embryonic development ( Surai & Speake , 1998 ; Karadas et al . , 2005 ) . In fact , most support for an - tioxidant activity of carotenoids come from studies of embryos and younger juveniles ( Surai , 2002 ) . For example , in grass shrimps ( Palaemonetes pugio ) , egg carotenoids ( astaxanthin and β - carotene ) decrease during embryo devel - opment , whereas other antioxidants , such as enzymes , increase ( Winston et 140 Svensson & Wong Figure 2 . A ﬂow chart of carotenoid functions in ornamented animals highlighting the many and complex interactions that can be expected . In most animals , precious little is known in detail about these processes . After uptake and possible metabolic conversion , carotenoids are circulated in the blood . Carotenoids may then be stored or allocated to different functions . If used in ornamentation , they may become irretrievably deposited in tissues , such as in bird plumage . They may also be used as antioxidants , either as catalysts or irreversibly depleted . All these processes may favour certain carotenoids due to carotenoid - speciﬁc enzymes and lipoproteins . Grey arrowheads indicate partial bi - directionality . Dotted arrows are examples of internal trade - offs . Hollow arrows indicate female - only processes . The dashed arrows illustrate how carotenoids share most of their functions with other compounds . In fact , few , if any , functions are uniquely attributable to carotenoids . For an example of the full complexity of the carotenoid dynamics within a species , see Rajasingh et al . ( 2006 ) . al . , 2004 ) . Thus , it is likely that maternally - acquired carotenoids have the greatest role early on in development , before more complex antioxidant sys - tems are assembled . The polyunsaturated lipids found in the eggs of many organisms are prone to oxidation and can rapidly be broken down by oxi - dants ( Østerlie , 2000 ) . Such oxidants are , in turn , a natural consequence of the fast metabolism of developing embryos , and carotenoids can , therefore , offer important protection from oxidative stress ( Miki , 1991 ; Okimasu et al . , 1992 ) . The combination of high growth rates and sensitive tissues may be an evolutionary explanation for the high carotenoid concentrations seen in eggs ( Blount et al . , 2000 ) . The low oxygen tension typical in avian embryos is also thought to favour the antioxidant activity of carotenoids ( Krinsky , 1993 ; Surai & Speake , 1998 ) . It is important to note that egg carotenoid con - centrations vary greatly between species ( Blount , 2004 ) . Interestingly , some animals have eggs that are virtually devoid of carotenoids ( Rønnestad et al . , 1998 ) , and this may be true despite a carotenoid rich diet ( Svensson et al . , 2009 ) . Carotenoid - based signals in behavioural ecology 141 1 . 1 . 8 . Additional physiological effects of carotenoids Carotenoids are important as precursors to vitamin A in many animals ( Moore , 1930 ; Morton & Creed , 1939 ; Liñán - Cabello et al . , 2002 ) . This function is accredited to about 10 % of carotenoids ( Krinsky , 1989 ) . A carotenoid molecule split in half will , somewhat simpliﬁed , produce two vitamin A molecules ( Parker , 1996 ) . Vitamin A , in turn , is vital for many key functions , including cell proliferation during development ( Maden , 1993 ) and production of visual pigments ( Bowmaker , 1995 ) . It is important to real - ize , however , that animals differ greatly in their ability to convert carotenoids into vitamin A ( Parker , 1996 ) , and there are taxonomic differences in which forms of vitamin A that are used ( Lubzens et al . , 2003 ) . Apart from acting as antioxidants and provitamin A , carotenoids have many other important physiological functions . They have a role in inhibit - ing mutagenesis ( Bendich & Olson , 1989 ) , in regulating membrane ﬂuidity ( Chew & Park , 2004 ) and in cell communication by regulating the synthe - sis of connexin 43 , a protein used in intercellular gap - junctions ( Zhang et al . , 1992 ) . Xanthophylls , in particular , are capable of physically stabilizing the phospholipid cell membrane and , therefore , protect cell integrity ( Young & Lowe , 2001 ; Britton , 2008 ) . Carotenoids can also be important in photo - protection , that is , shielding sensitive tissues from the oxidising effects of sunlight , in particular , UV radiation ( Byron , 1982 ; Britton , 2008 ) . Dietary carotenoid supplementation has demonstrated several positive ef - fects in vivo where the exact mechanism is either unknown or where the causality is uncertain ( called carotenoid actions and carotenoid associations , respectively , Krinsky , 1993 ) . For example , carotenoid supplementation has been shown to improve life - history traits like condition ( Smith et al . , 2007 ) , growth ( Torrissen & Christiansen , 1995 ; George et al . , 2001 ; Biard et al . , 2006 ) , survival ( George et al . , 2001 ; Saino et al . , 2003 ; Chien & Shiau , 2005 ; Pike et al . , 2007a ) and parental care ( Pike et al . , 2007c ) in a wide range of taxa . It is important to mention that , apart from their roles in photosynthesis , carotenoids do not appear to have any functions uniquely attributable to them . For example , similar pigmentation ( at least with respect to the human visual system ) may be achieved with other compounds , such as melanins , ﬂavonoids , haemoglobin , porphyrins , psittacofulvins , pterins and even struc - tural colours ( see , e . g . , Toral et al . , 2008 ) . Carotenoids also share their role as animal antioxidants with many vitamins and antioxidant enzymes ( Figure 2 ) . 142 Svensson & Wong 1 . 2 . Signals and signal honesty A major focus of carotenoids in behavioural ecology has been on their role in signalling . In this section , we will provide a general introduction to signalling theory relevant to the subsequent discussion . 1 . 2 . 1 . What are signals ? Most things that organisms want to know about each other cannot be directly observed . For example , an animal may want to assess whether a prey is toxic , if an opponent is physically strong , or if a potential partner is in good health . Under all of these circumstances , assessment requires detecting and interpreting signals and / or cues , which are observable indicators of non - observable qualities . A biological signal can be deﬁned as “any act or structure which alters the behaviour of other organisms , which evolved because of that effect , and which is effective because the receiver’s response has also evolved” ( May - nard Smith & Harper , 2003 , p . 15 ) . This is distinct from a cue which , al - though potentially important in conveying information , has not evolved in order to convey that information ( Hasson , 1990 ) . Grey hair is , therefore , not a signal of old age , but it may be used as a cue of old age . Bird song , on the other hand , has evolved speciﬁcally to convey information , and is , therefore , deﬁned as a signal . The difference is not always clear cut , however , because the act of displaying a cue can be considered as a signal ( Maynard Smith & Harper , 1995 ; Hasson , 2000 ) . Many animals have an obvious motivation to deceive each other , and in such cases some mechanism must be in place to ensure the maintenance of signal honesty ( Maynard Smith & Harper , 2003 ) . If not , the beneﬁts of de - ception will cause dishonesty to spread , resulting in communication break - down . For example , females often use male ornamental traits , such as gaudy coloration , as signals of individual quality in mate choice . While it may be in the females’ interest to accurately estimate male quality , it is in the males’ in - terest to convince females to mate with them . How can signals remain honest in the presence of such ( potentially ) conﬂicting interests ? 1 . 2 . 2 . Mechanisms maintaining signal honesty One suggested mechanism for ensuring honesty is the ‘handicap principle’ ( Zahavi , 1975 ) , which states that honest signals must be costly , and that only Carotenoid - based signals in behavioural ecology 143 high - quality individuals should be able to bear the high cost of extravagant ornaments . Often , it is assumed that the cost is paid via the operation of nat - ural selection ( e . g . , reduced survival ) , while the beneﬁt is accrued through sexual selection ( e . g . , increased access to mating partners ) . Because the term ‘handicap’ is ambiguous and potentially misleading ( Getty , 2006 ; Harper , 2006 ) , we will refer to such signals as Zahavian signals , in recognition of the originator . All signals are expected to have some costs associated with transmitting information efﬁciently to the receiver ( ‘efﬁcacy costs’ Guilford & Dawkins , 1991 ; Maynard Smith & Harper , 2003 ) . Central to the Zahavian signalling idea is that ornaments carry extra , strategic , costs in addition to the efﬁcacy costs . Strategic costs may be incurred when producing the sig - nal structure , such as using energy and nutrients to grow large antlers , or when displaying the signal , such as suffering increased predation risk due to conspicuous coloration . Integral to Zahavi’s theory is that the costs of an ornament create trade - offs within the individual , for example between ornament intensity and health ( Zahavi , 1975 ; Folstad & Karter , 1992 ) . Put differently , animals will experience internal trade - offs because limited resources must be shared be - tween competing demands . An important challenge to researchers is to demonstrate what the costs are , and to understand the nature of the trade - offs . Zahavi’s original verbal argument was formalised mathematically by Grafen ( 1990a , b ) , leading to an increasing acceptance of the idea ( Harper , 2006 ) . Getty ( 1998a , b , 2002 , 2006 ) has criticised and reﬁned Grafen’s mod - els , stressing that signalling contributes to overall ﬁtness in a multiplicative , rather than additive , fashion . Getty’s main message has relevance for our understanding of carotenoid - based signals , namely that ornaments are not structures selected to be wasteful . Rather , the physiological adaptations for signalling are expected to be selected for efﬁciency , just like other invest - ments aimed at future ﬁtness gains ( Getty , 2006 ) . Viewed in this way , in - vesting in a signal should be no different to , for example , investing time and energy into establishing a territory , or caching food for later consumption . In this sense , signalling does not have to cause conﬂict between sexual and nat - ural selection : rather the former should be seen as a subset of the latter . Hon - est signals of quality could then be maintained because only in high quality individuals will the combined ﬁtness beneﬁts of an intense signal outweigh the costs of the signal itself . 144 Svensson & Wong Although the notion of Zahavian signals is popular among biologists , there are important alternative explanations as to how honest signals can evolve and persist ( Maynard Smith & Harper , 2003 ) . First , there are cases where there is no conﬂict between signaller and receiver and , thus , no mo - tivation for deception . Whenever they share a common interest , both will beneﬁt from an accurate signal . A classic example of this is the dance of the honey bee ( Apis mellifera ) , which honestly relays information about the location of food to other members of the hive , and where both signaller and receiver beneﬁt from a more accurate signal ( von Frisch , 1967 ) . Another ex - ample is when certain animals signal their readiness to mate ( Rowland et al . , 1991 ; Watkins , 1997 ; Hager , 2001 ; Weiss , 2002 ; Kolm , 2004 ) . In such cases , the beneﬁts of deception may be absent , because mate - searching ani - mals seek to concentrate their courtship effort on receptive individuals , while unreceptive signallers can avoid unwanted sexual attention . Second , honesty can be ensured by the very nature of the signal itself ( deﬁned as an index by Maynard Smith & Harper , 1995 ) . An example of this is when funnel web spiders ( Agelenopsis aperta ) vibrate their webs to ward off competi - tors ( Riechert , 1978 ) . The intensity of the vibrations is directly related to body weight , so spiders have no possibility of dishonestly signalling their body size ( Maynard Smith & Harper , 1995 ) . Third , dishonesty may exist , but may be uncommon , or may occur only during limited periods of an ani - mal’s life ( Candolin , 2000a ) . A fourth , often overlooked , possibility is that dishonesty exists because the signalling system is rapidly evolving , and has not yet reached a signalling equilibrium ( Maynard Smith & Harper , 2003 ) . 2 . Current standing and controversy 2 . 1 . Carotenoids as signals In this section we will outline the different contexts in which carotenoid - based signals are used , and summarize the ongoing discussion of the signal content of carotenoid colour patterns , and how their honesty may be main - tained . It is important to point out that all carotenoid - based patterns do not have to be signals . Instead , they may result from other processes , such as a passive accumulation of dietary carotenoids , or in order to provide camou - ﬂage or protection from sunlight ( Byron , 1982 ; Blount & McGraw , 2008 ) . Carotenoid - based signals in behavioural ecology 145 2 . 1 . 1 . Types of carotenoid - based signals The ability for carotenoids to pigment animal tissue has been known for a long time ( e . g . , Palmer & Kempster , 1919 ; Sumner & Fox , 1933 ) . Because carotenoid - based colour patterns are very common , they are now among the most studied of all signals ( McGraw , 2006b ) . They are widespread in the ani - mal kingdom , especially in arthropods , and in vertebrate groups such as ﬁsh , reptiles and birds ( Blount & McGraw , 2008 ) . Mammals , however , do not ex - press carotenoid - based signals . Indeed , with the exception of ruminants and a few other groups ( notably including humans ) , most mammals do not even absorb carotenoids to any signiﬁcant extent ( Handelman , 2001 ) . Carotenoid - based pigmentation is used by animals in a variety of contexts , from aggressive displays and species recognition to warning colouration and camouﬂage ( reviewed in Blount & McGraw , 2008 ) . Recently , there has been growing interest in understanding the role of carotenoid pigmentation in parent – offspring communication . Here , both parents and young may express carotenoid - based coloration , examples of which include the red bill spot of adult herring gulls ( Larus argentatus argentatus ) ( Tinbergen & Perdeck , 1950 ) and chick gape coloration of barn swallows ( Hirundo rustica ) ( Saino et al . , 2000 ) and hihi ( Notiomystis cincta ) ( Thorogood et al . , 2008 ) . Despite the many contexts in which carotenoid - based signals are dis - played , none has received as much interest , or is as widely recognised , as those involved in sexual selection . In this regard , carotenoid - based signals — like other kinds of sexually selected traits — can contribute both to intrasex - ual competition and to mate attraction ( Berglund et al . , 1996 ) , although this is not always the case . In red - collared widowbirds ( Euplectes ardens ) , for example , carotenoid - based signals are used only in male – male conﬂict and are ignored by females ( Pryke et al . , 2001 ) . Nevertheless , female preference for carotenoid - based ornaments appears widespread and has been reported in several species of ﬁshes ( Kodric - Brown , 1989 ; Milinski & Bakker , 1990 ; Houde , 1997 ; Amundsen & Forsgren , 2001 ) , birds ( reviewed in Hill , 1999b ; Blount & McGraw , 2008 ) and at least one reptile ( Kwiatkowski & Sullivan , 2002 ) . 2 . 1 . 2 . Proposed costs and beneﬁts for senders and receivers To understand any signalling system , it is important to address the costs and beneﬁts for both senders and receivers . In several species , a strong preference 146 Svensson & Wong for partners with more intense carotenoid pigmentation has been demon - strated , typically in regard to female preferences for more ornamented males ( Endler , 1983 ; Hill , 1991 , 1999b ) . Therefore , an obvious beneﬁt to the sender can be greater access to mating partners . The receiver may also beneﬁt , be - cause the signal may convey important information about the quality of the signaller . The carotenoids allocated to an ornament are typically not believed to beneﬁt the receiver per se . However , such a direct beneﬁt exists in two - spotted gobies ( Gobiusculus ﬂavescens ) , where gravid females display their carotenoid pigmented gonads to the male , and males that spawn with more colourful females attain higher - carotenoid eggs for his brood ( Svensson et al . , 2006 ) . The costs of carotenoid - based ornaments are thought to affect mainly the sender . Interestingly , over the years there has been a shift in research focus on what types of costs that are incurred ( Figure 3 ) . Early studies were often preoccupied with the costly consequences of expressing the signal ( e . g . , how conspicuous signals relate to predation risk ) , and how individual differences in the ability to sequester carotenoids from the environment reﬂect individual quality ( Endler , 1980 , 1983 ; Hill , 1991 ) . Later studies , by contrast , have Figure 3 . Two approaches to the costs of producing carotenoid - based ornaments . Early studies ( left ﬂowchart ) typically contrasted the beneﬁts from mate attraction against the costs of conspicuousness , as suggested by Endler ( 1978 , 1980 ) . Following Lozano’s trade - off hy - pothesis ( Lozano , 1994 , 2001 ) , the main focus has instead been on the physiological costs of producing the ornament in the ﬁrst place ( right ﬂowchart ) . Importantly , these two approaches are not mutually exclusive . Although these views have been treated as in opposition , the best approach is likely to combine the two ( Lozano , 2001 ) . Note that all these processes , includ - ing the trade - offs , are predicted to occur within , not across , individuals ( Kotiaho , 2001 ; Getty , 2002 ) . Carotenoid - based signals in behavioural ecology 147 mainly focussed on the internal ( physiological ) costs of producing the signal ( e . g . , trade - offs between signalling and health , Lozano , 1994 ) . This newer focus aims to elucidate how carotenoids , once sequestered , are partitioned between different functions . Importantly , carotenoid - based signals are likely to be costly in both ways ( costly production as well as costly consequences ) , and the two ideas are , therefore , not mutually exclusive ( Figure 3 ) . 2 . 1 . 3 . Carotenoids — not your everyday handicap Although carotenoids can be important in the physiology of animals ( see In - troduction ) , early behavioural studies often overlooked this important fact . Lozano ( 1994 ) was the ﬁrst to underscore the important physiological func - tions of carotenoids as a key to understanding carotenoid signalling . Zaha - vian signals are typically thought to improve reproductive success but impair health and survival ( Zahavi , 1975 ; Grafen , 1990a ; but see Getty , 2006 ) . For example , conspicuous and cumbersome ornaments , such as the long train of the peacock ( Pavo cristatus ) , are often assumed to be directly harmful to the bearer . On the other hand , circulating the high levels of carotenoids required for intense ornamentation is generally believed to improve health and survival . Carotenoid - based ornaments are , therefore , not entirely anal - ogous to other ‘handicaps’ . To view carotenoids within a Zahavian frame - work , we need to acknowledge that carotenoids may both indicate individual quality , while , at the same time , contribute to that quality . In other words , carotenoids may both be a signal component ( by contributing to ornamen - tal display ) whilst also inﬂuencing signal content ( by contributing to better health ) . If carotenoids have multiple uses , and if the supply is limited , individuals should face trade - offs between their different uses . Although Lozano did not explicitly mention trade - offs in his 1994 paper , his idea of dual uses in display and physiology has subsequently lead to hypotheses that trade - offs must exist between signal expression and health ( von Schantz et al . , 1999 ; Lozano , 2001 ) . Thus , instead of carotenoids being detrimental to the animal ( e . g . , through increased predation risk ) researchers began to view them as “beneﬁcial but insufﬁcient” ( Olson & Owens , 1998 ) . Lozano proposed that only high quality individuals should be able to reallocate large amounts of carotenoids to their ornaments without impairing their health ( Lozano , 1994 ) . Using Getty’s ( 2006 ) language : only high quality individuals should invest heavily in carotenoid ornamentation , because only for them will a 148 Svensson & Wong stronger signal give sufﬁcient beneﬁts in overall ﬁtness to offset the cost on health . The idea that costs of ornamentation can be internal and measured in a currency of oxidative stress quickly started to spread in the 1990s ( Lozano , 1994 ; von Schantz et al . , 1999 ) , and it gradually overshadowed the ear - lier focus on predation risk as the major cost of carotenoid ornamentation . Lozanos’ suggestion was inspired , at the time , by the plethora of studies showing beneﬁcial effects of carotenoid on human nutrition and health ( e . g . , Bendich , 1989 ) , early research demonstrating that infections can bleach or - naments ( e . g . , Houde & Torio , 1992 ) , and the idea put forward by Folstad & Karter ( 1992 ) that ornaments , curiously often , seem to impair immunocom - petence . The notion of trade - offs between health and carotenoid signalling was , importantly , expanded by von Schantz et al . ( 1999 ) to include other types of antioxidants and ornaments . The trade - off idea has two testable as - sumptions . First , carotenoids should have ﬁtness - enhancing effects in addi - tion to those accrued from signalling . Second , carotenoids should be in short supply , so that animals cannot obtain enough for all their needs . 2 . 1 . 4 . Linking carotenoid - based signals to health The logic underpinning trade - off costs of carotenoid - based signals has led to some confusion in the literature , especially when interpreting correlational studies ( Kotiaho , 2001 ; Getty , 2002 ; Hõrak et al . , 2004 ) . In particular , mis - takes can be made when predicting how the cost of a carotenoid ornament should affect the quality it is proposed to indicate . In comparisons across in - dividuals , relationships between health and signalling intensity are actually predicted to be positive , due to condition dependence . In other words , high quality individuals are expected to express intense signals as well as have good health ( Kotiaho , 2001 ) . Within individuals , however , we should ex - pect negative relationships between health and signalling intensity , because of the suggested physiological trade - offs ( von Schantz et al . , 1999 ; Getty , 2002 ; Figure 3 ) . Therefore , it is inappropriate to use correlational studies among individuals to infer patterns of internal trade - offs within individuals . It has often been unclear , however , whether researchers are trying to test for correlations across or trade - offs within individuals ( Fenoglio et al . , 2002 ; Svensson et al . , 2006 ; e . g . , Aguilera & Amat , 2007 ; Isaksson et al . , 2007 ; Pike et al . , 2007a ; Nordeide et al . , 2008 ) . If this distinction is overlooked , it Carotenoid - based signals in behavioural ecology 149 is very difﬁcult to interpret relationships between ornament expression and estimates of quality , such as , for example , infection status ( Getty , 2002 ) . Lozano’s actual prediction was that experimental infections should re - duce the expression of carotenoid - based ornaments , and conversely , dietary carotenoid supplementation should reduce infection status ( Lozano , 1994 ) . The experimental approach is crucial , because individuals are likely to differ both in parasite susceptibility and in their strategies for carotenoid alloca - tion , making correlational studies hard to interpret ( e . g . , Møller et al . , 2000 , see also section 4 . 1 , Experimental considerations ) . Experimental support for Lozano’s prediction comes from , for example , male blackbirds ( Turdus merula ) , where carotenoid - based bill coloration was dramatically reduced three weeks after an immune challenge ( Faivre et al . , 2003 ) . Importantly , a subsequent factorial study using experimental infections showed that in - creased access to carotenoids ( a mix of lutein and zeaxanthin ) was able to both restore bill colour and reduce parasite growth ( Baeta et al . , 2008 ) . These studies not only provided evidence for a trade - off between immune response and signalling , but also that carotenoid - based bill coloration is an honest signal of male health . Further experimental evidence for the dual effects of dietary carotenoids on ornament and health have been provided by studies on barn swallow chicks ( Saino et al . , 2000 ) and zebra ﬁnches ( Taeniopygia guttata ) ( Blount et al . , 2003 ; McGraw & Ardia , 2003 ) . Direct evidence of ornament - health trade - offs come from work carried out on guppies ( Poecilia reticulata ) ( Grether et al . , 2004a ) , haplochromine cichlids ( Pundamilia nyer - erei ) ( Dijkstra et al . , 2007 ) , Siamese ﬁghting ﬁsh ( Betta splendens ) ( Clotfel - ter et al . , 2007 ) and red - legged partridges ( Alectoris rufa ) ( Blas et al . , 2006 ) . Importantly , support for carotenoid - health trade - offs in birds has come from both branches of immune defence ( i . e . , both cell - mediated immunity and humoral immune response , Hõrak & Saks , 2003 ) . Similarly , β - carotene and astaxanthin are known to improve both types of immune response in rain - bow trout ( Oncorhynchus mykiss ) ( Amar et al . , 2001 ) , and enhance general resistance to infection in salmon ( Salmo salar ) ( Christiansen et al . , 1995 ) . Thus , at least among ﬁshes and birds , experimental support exists for the link between carotenoids in signals and the positive effects on animal health , as predicted by Lozano and others ( Lozano , 1994 , 2001 ; von Schantz et al . , 1999 ) . 150 Svensson & Wong 2 . 2 . Protection and sparing 2 . 2 . 1 . Ornaments , carotenoids and antioxidant capacity Behavioural ecologists are increasingly using biochemistry and physiology as tools for understanding the proximate mechanism behind carotenoid sig - nalling . This represents a much needed break from the past where underlying mechanisms often were overlooked or ignored ( the phenotypic gambit of be - havioural ecology , sensu Grafen , 1984 , p . 63 ) . The new approach has resulted in testable hypotheses regarding which particular mechanisms are behind the observed patterns between carotenoids , signals , diet and health . In particular , there has been growing interest in the antioxidant function of carotenoids . This idea is controversial , however , and in 2004 , Hartley and Kennedy claimed that we should not assume a direct link between carotenoids , antiox - idant activity and health . The basis of their argument was that carotenoids are too precious as ornamental pigments , and too inefﬁcient ( or even harmful ) to be used in antioxidant defence . Instead Hartley & Kennedy ( 2004 ) asserted that carotenoids are highly vulnerable to ROMs , and that carotenoid - based ornaments are used only to indicate how well other , colourless , antioxidants ( such as vitamin E and C ) protect the carotenoids from oxidation ( bleach - ing ) . Carotenoids could , therefore , incur a cost , rather than a gain , for the an - tioxidant budget of animals . Hartley and Kennedy’s idea has become known as ‘the protection hypothesis’ ( Perez et al . , 2008 ) . Under this hypothesis , carotenoids facilitate signal honesty , not because of their antioxidant prop - erties , but because of their vulnerability . Thus , the level of non - carotenoid antioxidants is the actual quality being signalled , but because those antioxi - dants are invisible , carotenoids are used as a ‘litmus test’ of their abundance . Hartley & Kennedy ( 2004 ) did not rule out the possibility that carotenoids may be physiologically beneﬁcial in other ways , for example as provitamin A , in embryonic development or in immune defence . However , their main argument was that no speciﬁc link exists between the antioxidant and sig - nalling roles of carotenoids . The antioxidant story was , therefore , regarded as a ‘red herring’ ( Hartley & Kennedy , 2004 ) . The main testable prediction of the protection hypothesis is that carotenoids do not contribute signiﬁcantly to the antioxidant arsenal of animals . 2 . 2 . 2 . Sparing To experimentally test the protection hypothesis , one must ﬁrst consider an - other possibility , namely , homeostatic sparing . As pointed out earlier , differ - Carotenoid - based signals in behavioural ecology 151 ent antioxidants can function synergistically whilst maintaining the homeo - static balance between oxidants and antioxidants ( see section 1 . 1 . 3 , Oxidant homeostasis , and see also Catoni et al . , 2008 ; Monaghan et al . , 2009 ; Perez - Rodriguez , 2009 ) . Many studies appear to assume that uptake and alloca - tion of carotenoids are passive , non - adaptive processes , so that an increase in oral dose should have direct and proportional effects on the antioxidant status of the tissues . However , organisms are different from test tubes . If ani - mals actively regulate the oxidant - antioxidant balance , we should not expect the effects of dietary input to be so clear cut ( Perez - Rodriguez , 2009 ) . In - stead , we would expect animals to up - regulate ( or reallocate ) non - carotenoid antioxidants if carotenoids are scarce , and down - regulate if carotenoids are plentiful . Carotenoids may be spared from their radical quenching work by increased levels of other antioxidants , and , conversely , other antioxidant may be spared by an increased supply of carotenoids ( Krinsky , 1989 ) . If an animal is deprived of carotenoids , the immediate consequence may , therefore , not be a proportional reduction in antioxidant capacity , because non - carotenoid antioxidants may be used to ﬁll the void left by the carotenoids ( Finkel & Holbrook , 2000 ; Schwedhelm et al . , 2003 ; Catoni et al . , 2008 ) . Conversely , excess of dietary carotenoids may cause animals to reduce the usage of other antioxidants , thereby masking the contribution of the extra carotenoids on total antioxidant activity ( Alonso - Alvarez et al . , 2004 ) . The immediate con - sequence of allocating carotenoids to ornaments , may not , therefore , be man - ifested as reduced antioxidant capacity or an increased oxidative stress in other tissues . Rather , ornamental investment may have other , more obscure , effects , caused by the costs associated with increased production and / or re - distribution of alternate antioxidants ( von Schantz et al . , 1999 ) . Although a central property of carotenoids is to modulate the levels of other antioxidants in vivo ( Krinsky , 1993 ) , this important fact has been re - peatedly overlooked . An important difference between animals and test tubes is that animals can actively maintain homeostasis . Palozza ( 1998 ) reported that , in 9 of 12 studies , dietary carotenoid supplementation led to reduction in plasma levels of vitamin E , and interpreted this as vitamin E being consumed by the toxic workings of the carotenoids . However , an alternative explanation is that less vitamin E was released from bodily stores in animals where the dietary carotenoids assisted in the antioxidant task , thus making vitamin E less needed ( von Schantz et al . , 1999 ) . 152 Svensson & Wong Based on the terminology chosen by von Schantz et al . ( 1999 , p . 5 ) , we name this proposed relationship between ROMs , carotenoids and other an - tioxidants the ‘sparing hypothesis’ . Under this hypothesis , carotenoids may still be ‘protected’ from oxidation by non - carotenoid antioxidants . However , an important distinction is that , unlike the protection hypothesis , carotenoids are recognized as a part of the antioxidant arsenal available to animals , and that the compounds in this arsenal are , to some extent , interchange - able . Accordingly , the sparing hypothesis predicts that increased access to a carotenoid should increase the antioxidant activity attributable to that carotenoid , while reducing the animals’ reliance on other antioxidants . This possibility has been acknowledged in several recent reviews ( Catoni et al . , 2008 ; Monaghan et al . , 2009 ; Perez - Rodriguez , 2009 ) , as well as in experi - mental papers ( Bertrand et al . , 2006b ; Pike et al . , 2007b ) and is , we believe , central for understanding the roles of carotenoids in animals with carotenoid - based ornaments . Importantly , the crucial and testable difference between the protection and sparing hypotheses is whether or not carotenoids contribute signiﬁcantly to net antioxidant activity . 2 . 2 . 3 . In the wake of the red herring — tests of the protection hypothesis Hartley & Kennedy’s ( 2004 ) paper introduced a new perspective regarding carotenoids in behavioural ecology , and several attempts to test its predic - tion has been made . A meta analysis was recently presented by Costantini & Møller ( 2008 ) , the results of which were used as apparent support for the protection hypothesis . In particular , the authors concluded that carotenoids account for less than 0 . 002 % of the antioxidant capacity in birds . Caution , however , needs to be exercised when interpreting this result . First , the analy - sis was based on a limited selection of studies , both in terms of number and taxonomic breadth ( Perez - Rodriguez , 2009 ) . Second , there were no statis - tical considerations for mixing different species , study types ( correlational vs . experimental ) , and various antioxidant assays ( R . Rosenthal , pers . com - mun . ) . Finally , as pointed out by the authors themselves , their conclusion actually ran counter to , and was difﬁcult to reconcile with , the well estab - lished antioxidant function of carotenoids reported in embryos and younger birds ( Costantini & Møller , 2008 ) . As Constantini and Møller’s meta - analysis demonstrates , experimentally disentangling the sparing and protection hypotheses can be challenging . Carotenoid - based signals in behavioural ecology 153 Bertrand et al . ( 2006b ) , for example , attempted to test the protection hypoth - esis by supplementing the diet of zebra ﬁnches with a non - carotenoid an - tioxidant ( melatonin ) . The authors found that melatonin supplementation in - creased the carotenoid - based colour of the bird’s bill , and argued that bill col - oration , therefore , signalled non - carotenoid antioxidant levels , as predicted by the protection hypothesis . However , as conceded by the authors , one can - not rule out the possibility that antioxidant sparing was occurring ( i . e . , that the extra melatonin helped liberate carotenoids from antioxidant defence to ornamentation ) . A similar study on a ﬁsh , ( the three - spined stickleback ; Pike et al . , 2007b ) , revealed that dietary supplements of vitamin E and C caused more intense male carotenoid ornamentation . Likewise , it was suggested that this result supported the protection hypothesis , but , once again , the authors acknowledged that their data could not differentiate between sparing and pro - tection . Conversely , Karu et al . ( 2008 ) , found that feather pigmentation was unaffected by vitamin E supplementation in greenﬁnches ( Carduelis chlo - ris chloris ) and concluded that this contradicted the protection hypothesis . However , as in the previous two examples , the experimental design cannot actually discriminate between the two hypotheses : the ﬁndings could just as easily be taken as evidence against the sparing hypothesis . 2 . 2 . 4 . Carotenoids : contributing antioxidants or not ? Despite the challenges , several studies have managed to produce com - pelling evidence against the main prediction of the protection hypothesis ( i . e . , that carotenoids do not contribute to antioxidant defence in animals with carotenoid - based ornaments ) . In a study on greenﬁches by Hõrak et al . ( 2007 ) supplementation with a mix of lutein and zeaxanthin led to higher plasma carotenoid concentration and reduced plasma lipid peroxidation . Fur - thermore , although the dietary carotenoids did not affect the strength of im - mune response , they partially alleviated the oxidative stress associated with it . Interestingly , an endogenous antioxidant , uric acid , appeared highly im - portant for the total antioxidativity in this system , whereas vitamin E was not ( Hõrak et al . , 2007 ) . This study demonstrated a real antioxidant func - tion of carotenoids , and also highlighted the importance of measuring sev - eral antioxidants and using a multi - pronged approach when quantifying an - tioxidant activity . Another convincing example was provided by a factorial , dose - response study on zebra ﬁnches ( Alonso - Alvarez et al . , 2004 ) . This study showed that immune activation diverted carotenoids from plasma and , 154 Svensson & Wong conversely , that increased plasma carotenoids elevated plasma antioxidant activity . Interestingly , the important factor was not the carotenoid ( a mix of lutein and zeaxanthin ) dose per se , but the resulting change in plasma carotenoids , demonstrating that individual differences in uptake and / or allo - cation strategies may obscure direct effects of carotenoid supplementation ( Alonso - Alvarez et al . , 2004 ) . Similar support comes from red - legged par - tridges , where those males that maintained intense coloration despite testos - terone injection suffered increased oxidative damage , whereas males that re - trieved carotenoids from the ornament could avoid oxidative stress ( Alonso - Alvarez et al . , 2008 ) . In female zebra ﬁnches , the oxidative stress incurred by producing many eggs was alleviated by dietary carotenoids ( a mix of lutein and zeaxanthin , Bertrand et al . , 2006a ) . In contrast to the aforementioned examples , it is important to point out that some studies have failed to detect antioxidant effects of carotenoid sup - plementation ( e . g . , Costantini & Møller , 2008 and references therein ) . Hõrak and co - workers ( 2010 ) , for instance , recently found that carotenoid supple - ments ( lutein ) given to green ﬁnches did not reduce indicators of oxidative damage in blood plasma . It is , therefore , unclear exactly how general the antioxidant role of carotenoids might be among animals ( see section 3 . 3 , How much can be generalized ) . Nonetheless , studies in which carotenoids have been shown to contribute to the antioxidant arsenal of species with carotenoid - based ornaments pose a serious challenge to the protection hy - pothesis . 2 . 2 . 5 . Support for sparing ? Demonstrating important antioxidant effects of carotenoids , however , does not automatically provide evidence in support of the sparing hypothesis . Sparing requires carotenoids to function so similarly to other antioxidants that they can , and will , substitute each other . Because antioxidants have quite different chemistry , the extent of such interchangeability will naturally be contingent on which compounds are being considered ( see section 1 . 1 . 1 , Carotenoid chemistry ) . However , we believe that antioxidant substitution should not be ruled out as a possibility a priori . Direct experimental evidence for sparing between ornamental carotenoids and other antioxidants comes from a ﬁeld study of yellow - legged gulls ( Larus michahellis ) . Here , vita - min E supplementation led to increased bill ornamentation as well as an ele - vated plasma carotenoid concentration ( Perez et al . , 2008 ) . Importantly , only Carotenoid - based signals in behavioural ecology 155 those particular carotenoids used in the ornament increased in the plasma . This result ﬁts well with the idea that the presence of extra vitamin E spared those carotenoids , so that they could be deposited in the ornament without disrupting oxidant homeostasis . Indirect evidence of sparing comes from animals that rely more heav - ily on carotenoids during times of limited access to other antioxidants , as seen , for example , in developing young where antioxidant enzymes are yet to be synthesized ( Winston et al . , 2004 ) . In blue tits ( Cyanistes caeruleus ) , carotenoid supplementation ( a mix of lutein and zeaxanthin ) did not affect plumage colour or plasma carotenoid concentrations , but it almost halved the circulating levels of vitamin E ( p . 1008 and ﬁgure 2A in Biard et al . , 2006 ) , suggesting that these carotenoids spared other antioxidants . In hihi chicks , increased dietary carotenoids ( a mix of lutein and zeaxanthin ) im - proved growth and led to increased plasma levels of carotenoids and reduced plasma levels of vitamin E ( Ewen et al . , 2006 ) . Although these studies appear to provide support for the sparing hypothesis , the non - adaptive alternative , suggested by Palozza ( 1998 ) , is also possible : namely that carotenoids are detrimental , thereby leading to increased consumption of vitamin E . How - ever , the ample biochemical evidence for synergy between carotenoids and vitamin E , and the scant support of prooxidant effects of carotenoids in vivo ( see below ) , make this non - adaptive explanation unlikely . If sparing is occurring , the prediction is that although carotenoid supple - mentation may reduce , for example , vitamin E concentration in certain tis - sues , the whole - animal reservoir should not decrease . This has been demon - strated in chickens ( Gallus domesticus ) , where carotenoid supplements ( a mix of lutein , citranaxanthin , canthaxanthin and β - apo - 8 (cid:2) - carotenoic acid ) increased vitamin E levels in the liver , their main storage tissue ( Surai & Speake , 1998 ) . Regrettably , many studies only assay one tissue type , typi - cally plasma , which may make deductions about sparing difﬁcult ( see sec - tion 4 . 1 , Experimental considerations ) . In conclusion , recent studies have shown that carotenoid - based ornaments can , indeed , signal antioxidant capacity , but , importantly , that this capac - ity includes the effects of the carotenoids themselves . The relative value of carotenoids is likely to vary greatly between species ( Catoni et al . , 2008 ; Perez - Rodriguez , 2009 ) . Even within species , studies may yield conﬂicting results , as in green ﬁnches where carotenoids have been found to be both 156 Svensson & Wong important ( Hõrak et al . , 2007 ) and unimportant ( Hõrak et al . , 2010 ) for an - tioxidant defence . However , in light of the evidence , we strongly discour - age any sweeping statements that carotenoids are ‘generally unimportant as antioxidants’ ( especially if referring to large taxonomic groups ) . The chal - lenge is now to test the generality of proposed mechanisms , and to determine whether the antioxidant function of carotenoids is likely to have actually in - ﬂuenced the evolution of sexual signals . Finally , it is important to remember that it is not all about the antioxidant function : carotenoids may be beneﬁcial to animals in many other ways , as suggested by Hartley & Kennedy ( 2004 ) and reviewed in the Introduction . 3 . Unresolved issues While some facets of carotenoid - based ornaments and signalling have re - ceived considerable attention during the last three decades , other topics have attracted very little research focus . In the following section , we highlight a few of the questions that have generally been overlooked but are , nonethe - less , important in developing our understanding of the ﬁeld . 3 . 1 . Does carotenoid access ultimately limit signal expression ? A central tenet for the trade - off hypothesis is that carotenoids are in limited supply . Support for this come from decade - old observations that captive ani - mals eventually become less pigmented than their wild counterparts , but that this can be rectiﬁed by supplementation with appropriate carotenoids ( Hill , 2006 ) . Consequently , carotenoid supplements are now common in pet food , as well as in poultry and ﬁsh farming ( Blount & McGraw , 2008 ) . Although this provides evidence that dietary carotenoid limitation can exist , it does not answer whether animals in the wild are limited by their natural diets . Regrettably , few studies have investigated carotenoid limitation in the wild ( Monaghan et al . , 2009 ) . It is problematic to use results from captive ani - mals , or extrapolations between species , to infer that dietary carotenoid ac - cess is limiting signal expression ( Perez - Rodriguez , 2009 ) . This is because dietary access , signal intensity , carotenoid requirements and antioxidant ma - chinery are all known to vary enormously between species , and even between populations of the same species ( Endler , 1980 ; Hill , 1999a , 2006 ; Surai et al . , 2001a ; Olson & Owens , 2005 ; Catoni et al . , 2008 ) . However , even if carotenoid limitation can be demonstrated in the wild , a bigger issue still Carotenoid - based signals in behavioural ecology 157 remains . Namely , although dietary limitation may well be demonstrated on a proximate ( physiological ) level , this is altogether different from trying to explain limitation of signal expression on an ultimate ( evolutionary ) level . In other words , exploring what can limit signal expression in individuals is fundamentally different from asking how the signal intensity is maintained ( or not ) over several generations . Very few studies have explicitly addressed what may ultimately be limiting the exaggeration of carotenoid - based orna - ments over evolutionary time . The implication of this discrepancy is underscored by studies carried out on two morphs of Paciﬁc salmon ( Oncorhynchus nerka ) . Both morphs , koka - nee and sockeye , attain intense red ornamentation ( Craig & Foote , 2001 ; Foote et al . , 2004 ) . Individuals vary in colour intensity , just as we would expect from wild animals with limited access to carotenoids . However , lake - living kokanee has an extremely carotenoid - poor insect diet , while the sea - faring sockeye can access much richer foods . If a sockeye is forced to reside in a lake , the carotenoid poor diet will render it completely unornamented . The kokanee , however , is three times more effective than the sockeye at ab - sorbing carotenoids , and become just as red as seafaring sockeye , despite their carotenoid poor lake diet ( Craig & Foote , 2001 ) . This dramatic evolu - tionary enhancement of carotenoid utilization is remarkable , considering that the ancestor ( sockeye ) already was extremely efﬁcient at using carotenoids compared to other species ( Rajasingh et al . , 2007 ) . Apparently , strong sex - ual preferences for colourful partners has fast - tracked the evolution of this new , hyper - effective , carotenoid machinery in a mere few thousand years ( Foote et al . , 2004 ) . This has also happened more than once , because the kokanee morph has evolved repeatedly and independently in several lakes ( Taylor et al . , 1996 ) . This example raises a number of important questions : Given their ample access to richer carotenoids sources , and considering the reproductive disadvantage of being drab , why are not all seafaring sockeye maximally colourful ? Put differently , if carotenoid metabolism is so highly adaptable ( Rajasingh et al . , 2007 ) , what is keeping sockeye individuals from also evolving a more efﬁcient usage ? Can dietary access to carotenoids really be considered to limit sockeye signal intensity when their closest relatives manage to be equally colourful on a much poorer diet ? Important differences in carotenoid utilization have also been shown in other closely related species . For example , chicks of blue and great tits ( Parus major ) respond very differently to carotenoid supplementation ( a mix 158 Svensson & Wong of lutein and zeaxanthin , Biard et al . , 2006 ) . Among New World orioles , certain species have independently lost otherwise ubiquitous carotenoid col - oration in exchange for melanin - based patterns ( Hofmann et al . , 2007 ) . Ar - tiﬁcial selection can also rapidly create substantial differences in carotenoid utilization . For example , domestic chickens use carotenoids to colour their beaks , combs and legs , but their wild ancestor , the red jungle fowl ( Gal - lus gallus ) , does not ( McGraw & Klasing , 2006 ) . In various pets , such as ornamental ﬁshes , artiﬁcial morphs with and without carotenoid - based pig - mentation can rapidly evolve through artiﬁcial selection ( Clotfelter et al . , 2007 ) . Thus , it appears that carotenoid utilization is evolutionary plastic , and may be drastically modiﬁed in a fairly short time . Very little evolutionary innovation is needed to dramatically change the way that , and to what de - gree , carotenoids are utilized ( Rajasingh et al . , 2007 ) . Possibly as a con - sequence , the relationship between dietary carotenoid levels and signal in - tensity is enormously variable between species . Recent studies of the avian family Icteridae have shown that the type of pigment used in ornaments is evolutionary labile , that carotenoid colours have evolved multiple times , and that even closely related clades can take drastically different directions in their signal evolution ( Hofmann et al . , 2006 ; Kiere et al . , 2009 ) . We en - courage future studies to use quantitative genetic methods to investigate the genetic architecture behind carotenoid - based signal traits . It would be par - ticularly interesting to quantify the evolvability and the degree of additive genetic variance of carotenoid pigmentation in different taxa . Given the evolutionary plasticity , one may assume that exaggeration of carotenoid pigmentation ( driven by sexual selection through mate prefer - ences ) should go on forever . One obvious reason why this does not oc - cur is that when tissues become saturated with pigment , the concentration - coloration relationship will eventually level off . Ornament intensity will , therefore , become an increasingly inaccurate indicator of tissue concentra - tion , and the force of selection should diminish as the signal loses reliability . We may speculate that certain invariable and highly saturated animal colour patterns could , in fact , have been ‘past ornaments’ that have since reached ﬁxation in this fashion . However , typical carotenoid - based ornaments are not at this point because they will , generally , demonstrate condition dependent expression ( Grifﬁth et al . , 2006 ) and positive responses to dietary supple - ments ( Blount & McGraw , 2008 ) . The question , therefore , remains : could some processes other than dietary limitation ultimately restrict the exagger - ation of carotenoid - based ornaments ? Carotenoid - based signals in behavioural ecology 159 3 . 2 . Other costs that may limit carotenoid ornamentation The strong focus on trade - offs in recent years has overshadowed the fact that carotenoid - based signals may incur other types of costs , and that these may better explain the evolution and maintenance of signal honesty . In par - ticular , there can be various costly consequences associated with expressing carotenoid ornaments , similar to other , more classic , Zahavian signals . First , it has been suggested that too high concentrations of carotenoids may be directly harmful to animals ( e . g . , Burton & Ingold , 1984 ; Britton , 1995 ) . For example , Vinkler & Albrecht ( 2010 ) suggested that carotenoids can be harmful to animals due to the toxic cleavage products that may form when carotenoids are broken down . This possibility is supported by studies using mammalian cell cultures , demonstrating toxic effects of carotenoids ( or of their breakdown products ) at least in very high doses and / or in the ab - sence of other antioxidants ( Hurst et al . , 2005 ; Siems et al . , 2005 ; Yeh & Wu , 2006 ; Kalariya et al . , 2008 ) . In vivo , carotenoid supplementation can often lead to a reduction of non - carotenoid antioxidants in plasma , and this has sometimes been interpreted as evidence for carotenoid prooxidant activity ( Palozza , 1998 ) . However , without measuring whether those antioxidants are actually consumed or simply diverted , it is impossible to rule out the alternate explanation , namely , that homeostatic sparing is occurring ( von Schantz et al . , 1999 ; Monaghan et al . , 2009 ; section 2 . 2 , Protection and sparing ) . It has also been argued that prooxidant effects of carotenoids are unlikely in liv - ing tissue ( Young & Lowe , 2001 ) , under physiologically relevant conditions ( Krinsky , 1989 ) , or when vitamin C and E are present ( Catoni et al . , 2008 ) . However , prooxidant effects , or other types of carotenoid - related toxicity , may still be a possibility , considering the extremely high carotenoid concen - trations that can occur in certain tissues of some species ( e . g . , Bjerkeng et al . , 1992 ; Hatlen et al . , 1998 ; Blount et al . , 2002 ) . A recent demonstration of this comes from the extremely colourful American goldﬁnch ( Carduelis tris - tis ) , where very high oral doses of supplemental carotenoids ( a mix of lutein and zeaxanthin ) impaired muscle health and ﬂight performance ( Huggins et al . , 2010 ) . Similarly , in kestrels ( Falco tinnunculus ) , high supplemental doses of mainly lutein ( which produced extreme concentrations of plasma carotenoids ) led to an increased production of ROMs and elevated oxida - tive stress ( Costantini et al . , 2007 ) . The ideas of directly harmful effects of carotenoids can , therefore , not be dismissed . Importantly , any evidence of 160 Svensson & Wong toxic effects of carotenoids should , ideally , come from the animal in ques - tion , and not extrapolated from extreme carotenoid treatments in other study species , or from in vitro experiments . Second , increased conspicuousness from carotenoid pigmentation may lead to increased predation risk ( Götmark & Olsson , 1997 , Figure 3 ) . De - spite the fact that this was the ﬁrst suggested cost of carotenoid pigmentation ( Endler , 1978 , 1980 ) , the effects of coloration on predation risk has been in - vestigated in very few species . Work on guppies has demonstrated that more ornamented males are preferentially targeted and eaten by predatory cich - lids ( Aequidens pulcher ) ( Godin & McDonough , 2003 ) . Similarly , copepods with more intense pigmentation ( mainly astaxanthin ) are consistently tar - geted by ﬁsh predators ( Byron , 1982 ) , although , in this particular system , the carotenoids are used for photoprotection rather than signalling . Third , carotenoid - based ornamentation can carry non - trivial social costs ( Rohwer , 1975 ) , similar to , for example , melanin - based status signalling ( Senar , 2006 ) . Carotenoid - based ornaments may be used as badges of sta - tus , causing less competitive males to acquiesce to more dominant rivals , as shown , for instance , in ﬁremouth cichlids ( Cichlasoma meeki ) ( Evans & Nor - ris , 1996 ) , red - collared widow birds ( Pryke et al . , 2002 ) and rock sparrows ( Griggio et al . , 2007 ) . Candolin ( 2000b ) showed that low - quality male stick - lebacks were physiologically capable of increasing their carotenoid orna - ment intensity , but that such dishonesty was curbed by the presence of more dominant rivals . Similarly , in Australian painted dragon lizards ( Ctenopho - rus pictus ) , the social cost for males to display carotenoid - based ornamenta - tion is affected by the number of aggressive neighbours ( Healey & Olsson , 2009 ) . Other costs of carotenoid - based ornamentation are also possible . These may include high - risk foraging to obtain carotenoid - rich food or , in the case of colourful predators , reduced foraging efﬁciency due to conspicuousness to prospective prey . Another possibility is thermal costs , similar to the orange ﬂavonoid - based signal that reduces heat absorption in otherwise black larvae of wood tiger moths ( Parasemia plantaginis ) ( Lindstedt et al . , 2009 ) . To our knowledge , none of these have been investigated . It is also possible that mate preferences themselves limit ornamentation . This may occur , for example , if overly ornamented partners are rejected ( i . e . , stabilizing selection ) , if mate preferences ﬂuctuate over time ( Lehtonen et al . , 2009 ) , or if assortative mat - ing is occurring ( Elmer et al . , 2009 ) . Among birds , many species appear to Carotenoid - based signals in behavioural ecology 161 have lost their carotenoid - based pigmentation ( Hofmann et al . , 2007 ) , sug - gesting that sexual selection may not always drive signal evolution in the same direction . In ornamental displays that have several components , selec - tion may act to preserve a certain balance between carotenoids and the other components of the display , each of which may have their own limitations for exaggeration ( Grether et al . , 2005 , see below ) . Importantly , carotenoid - based ornaments may incur more than one set of costs , and the type of costs that ul - timately limit ornament expression may well vary between species . Different types of costs are also likely to be additive rather than mutually exclusive . There is considerable scope for future studies to delve into costs other than those associated with physiological trade - offs and dietary carotenoid limita - tion . 3 . 3 . How much can be generalized ? Behavioural ecologists have now studied a number of species that exhibit carotenoid - based signals ( reviewed in Møller et al . , 2000 ; McGraw , 2006b ; Blount & McGraw , 2008 ) . If any general pattern emerges from this infor - mation , it is that immense variability exists in regard to carotenoid function . As we have already alluded , controversies over the physiological importance of carotenoids are likely to originate , at least in part , from the vast inter - speciﬁc differences in carotenoid machinery ( Hill , 1999a ; Lozano , 2001 ) . These differences are actually hard to gauge , because most in - depth infor - mation about the physiologial functions of carotenoids comes from studies on a limited number of taxa : mainly humans and a few other mammalian models ( Parker , 1996 ) . Moreover , these studies have tended to focus , rather myopically , on β - carotene ( and to a lesser extent on lutein and lycopene , Rao & Rao , 2007 ) . Little is known about the function of other carotenoids in established mammalian models , and even less about their roles in non - mammalian taxa . An important consequence of this is that much existing carotenoid knowledge may be of little direct relevance for understanding an - imals such as birds and ﬁshes , which often have carotenoid levels several orders of magnitude higher than mammals , and which , typically , utilize dif - ferent carotenoids ( Hill , 1999a ; Perez - Rodriguez , 2009 ) . Importantly , mam - mals do not express carotenoid - based ornamentation ( Britton , 2008 ) . This is fundamental , because we should expect additional selection pressures ( e . g . , from sexual selection ) to be present in species that possess carotenoid - based 162 Svensson & Wong ornaments . These pressures , in turn , are expected to inﬂuence the evolution of carotenoid machinery . Examples of highly different carotenoid utilization in closely related species , as in the Paciﬁc salmon example above , suggest that such evolution can occur rapidly , repeatedly and independently ( Craig & Foote , 2001 ; Biard et al . , 2006 ) . Dietary access to carotenoids varies enor - mously among species , and this may have important consequences for the expression and honesty of carotenoid ornaments ( Olson & Owens , 2005 ) . The lack of general patterns between distant taxa is evident if comparing , for instance , birds with mammals ( Catoni et al . , 2008 ) . Hill ( 1999a ) noted that plasma carotenoid concentrations in ornamented birds are very high com - pared to certain mammals , and argued that this rules out carotenoid limita - tion in the former . However , this would assume that both animal groups have a comparable physiological reliance on carotenoids , which appears highly unlikely . Given the important variation in carotenoid uptake , conversion and function that exist among the mammalian models ( e . g . , Parker , 1996 ) , we should expect species from other taxa to be even more different , especially if they have evolved carotenoid - based ornaments . Carotenoids may even have additional , yet undiscovered , functions in species that are not part of the se - lect few used as models in medicine and biochemistry . Thus , there is a real danger of imprudently comparing ‘apples with oranges’ ( Lozano , 2001 ) . The relative importance of carotenoids as antioxidants is also likely to vary between taxa ( Catoni et al . , 2008 ; Perez - Rodriguez , 2009 ) . A good example of this can be seen in the study of Krinsky ( 1993 ) who found that carotenoids can be much less effective as antioxidants compared to vitamin E in some species , but much more effective in others . As a consequence , the contribution of carotenoids to overall antioxidant defence varies greatly between species ( e . g . , Shapiro et al . , 1984 ; Tsushima et al . , 1997 ) . Important differences in carotenoid uptake , usage and signal expression also exist within species , for example between populations , sexes , individ - uals and even between tissue types of the same individual ( Parker , 1996 ; McKinnon et al . , 2000 ; Surai et al . , 2001b ; Alonso - Alvarez et al . , 2004 ; McGraw , 2006c ; McGraw & Klasing , 2006 ; Catoni et al . , 2008 ) . Population differences in carotenoid metabolism are common , both in the wild but also between lab - bred strains , as exempliﬁed by the inconsistent , and sometimes contradictory , results obtained from studies of captive zebra ﬁnches ( Collins & ten Cate , 1996 ; Blount et al . , 2003 ; Forstmeier et al . , 2007 ; Rutkowska , 2007 ) . Males and females can differ dramatically in carotenoid dynamics , Carotenoid - based signals in behavioural ecology 163 especially in species where females invest large amounts of carotenoids in eggs , while males invest in ornamentation ( Grether et al . , 2004a ; McGraw , 2006c ; Rajasingh et al . , 2006 ; Ewen et al . , 2008 ) . For example , in female fowl , up to 80 % of carotenoids can be stored in the ovaries ( Nys , 2000 ) , and in zebra ﬁnches , males are able to efﬁciently take up high doses of carotenoids ( a mix of lutein and zeaxanthin ) at levels where female uptake has already levelled off ( Alonso - Alvarez et al . , 2004 ) . Faced with substantial biological variability , one should endeavour to understand the carotenoid machinery of the speciﬁc species under study . Consequently , any inter - speciﬁc generalizations and extrapolations about carotenoid function should be made with considerable caution . A promising avenue for future research would be to compare how the roles of carotenoids differ in closely related species , for example , in species pairs with and with - out carotenoid ornamentation . 3 . 4 . How do carotenoids relate to other signal components ? Sexual signals are typically made up of several different components ( Can - dolin , 2003 ) . Yet , it is surprising how often researchers will consider only the carotenoid - based component of a signal , whilst neglecting the others . Here , it is important to realize that the receiver of sexual signals is likely to react to the totality of the display , and that quantifying only one compo - nent has the potential to yield an incomplete , or inaccurate , understanding of the signalling system ( Johnstone , 1996 ; Dauwe & Eens , 2008 ) . It is also worth bearing in mind that the relationship between different signal compo - nents may not be a simple , additive , one . For example , in Australian painted dragon lizards the presence of carotenoid - based bib coloration is positively condition dependent in the more aggressive red - headed males , but negatively condition dependent in the less aggressive yellow - headed males ( Healey & Olsson , 2009 ) . Thus , signal components may relay different messages , and the expression of one may , or may not , be related to that of another ( Møller & Pomiankowski , 1993 ; Candolin , 2003 ) . Even seemingly simple signals may convey more than one message . For example , in male house ﬁnches ( Car - podacus mexicanus ) , a redder breast patch indicates higher fecudity , while a larger area of the same patch indicates higher viability ( Badyaev et al . , 2001 ) . One important consideration is that carotenoid - based colour patterns can also contain non - carotenoid pigments . If so , it raises an interesting question : 164 Svensson & Wong if individuals are potentially capable of using other , and potentially ‘cheaper’ pigments of similar colour , how will the signalling system remain honest ( Grether et al . , 2004b ) ? Many ﬁshes , for example , are known to incorporate pteridines into skin chromatophores , often in combination with carotenoids ( Armstrong et al . , 2000 ) . Pteridines are similar to carotenoids in that they may be yellow , orange or red . Unlike carotenoids , however , they can be syn - thesized de novo by animals . The characteristic orange spot of male guppies , for instance , includes both tunaxanthin , a carotenoid obtained through the diet , and drosopterin , an endogenously produced pteridine pigment ( Grether et al . , 2001 ) . Intriguingly , in one of the few studies that has considered mul - tiple pigment types in a sexual ornament , there was a positive relationship between pteridine and carotenoid concentrations among guppy populations ( Grether et al . , 2001 ) . That is , the presence of a second pigment type did not seem to reduce signal honesty in this system . The suggested explana - tion was that guppy females have evolved such an acute preference for a speciﬁc hue , that any evolutionary tampering with the pigment blend is pre - vented ( Grether et al . , 2005 ) . Similar mixes of endogenous and exogenous pigments exist in reptiles ( e . g . , Steffen & McGraw , 2007 ) . For example , Aus - tralian painted dragon lizards can obtain either yellow , orange or red heads , depending on the ratio between carotenoid and non - carotenoid constituents of the signal ( Olsson et al . , 2007 ; Healey & Olsson , 2009 ) . Birds can incorpo - rate phaeomelanins or psittacolfulvins into their plumage ( McGraw , 2005 ) , and bare parts of their bodies can be coloured red from haemoglobin rather than carotenoids ( McGraw & Klasing , 2006 ) . Importantly , although different classes of pigment may be percieved as being similar in colour , their spectra are typically quite distinct ( Toral et al . , 2008 ) . Therefore , whether pigmen - tary substitution is likely will depend on the visual system of the animal and its capacity to dicriminate between such hues ( as shown in the guppy exam - ple above ) . What is worth emphasizing here is that researchers not actively quantifying non - carotenoid pigments are likely to miss their presence and , hence , their potential importance . The contribution of carotenoids to an animal’s overall appearance may also vary over time . Temporal changes in signal intensity is a common phe - nomenon as seen , for example , through increased coloration during periods of sexual maturity ( Baird , 2004 ) . Importantly , such changes do not have to reﬂect changes in actual tissue concentration of carotenoids . Cephalopods , crustaceans , ﬁshes , amphibians and reptiles all have chromatophores which Carotenoid - based signals in behavioural ecology 165 give them the physiological ability to rapidly change colour ( Kodric - Brown , 1998 ) . In particular , colour intensity can often be modiﬁed during courtship ( e . g . , Sköld et al . , 2008 ) or aggressive displays ( Beeching , 1995 ) . This raises concerns if one attempts to relate skin coloration to carotenoid concentra - tion . For example , in haplochromine cichlids , males change their colours in a few days time if exposed to rivals ( Dijkstra et al . , 2007 ) , but it is uncer - tain whether such shifts reﬂect actual changes in carotenoid concentration , or merely the degree of chromatophore aggregation / dispersion . Many animals display their ornament during potentially strenuous courtship behaviours , clearly adding to overall signalling costs . Few stud - ies , however , have investigated if the intensity of carotenoid - based orna - mentation is related to , or can be compensated through , high courtship in - tensity . Ideally , future studies should attempt to take a more holistic ap - proach to carotenoid - based signal expression . Understanding more about which processes limit the other signal components may also shed light on the role of the carotenoids themselves . 3 . 5 . Is it all about sex ? An overwhelming majority of behavioural studies on carotenoid - based coloration has been concerned with sexual signals . Such studies , although important , belie the fact that carotenoids are deployed across a much wider range of contexts . For example , intense carotenoid pigmentation is common amongst many deep sea animals where their presence are unlikely to be asso - ciated with sexual signalling ( Wicksten , 1989 ) . More generally , carotenoids are also known to be widely used by many animals in an anti - predator con - text , including mimicry and aposematism ( e . g . , Bezzerides et al . , 2007 ; San - dre et al . , 2007 ) . Yet , very few studies exist on how the intensity of these non - sexual , carotenoid - based colours relate to diet , antioxidant activity , immunity and internal trade - offs . Outside of sexual selection , it seems that carotenoid - based pigmentation has largely been neglected . Recent studies of offspring - parent signalling in birds underscore the great research possibilities that exist outside the ﬁeld of sexual selection ( Göt - mark & Ahlström , 1997 ; Tschirren et al . , 2005 ; Biard et al . , 2006 ; Fitze & Tschirren , 2006 ; Helfenstein et al . , 2008 ; Loiseau et al . , 2008 ; Thoro - good et al . , 2008 ) . Such studies are pertinent for a number of reasons . First , nestling coloration can be carotenoid - based ( Thorogood et al . , 2008 ) . Sec - ond , juveniles suffer high levels of ROM due to extreme growth rates ( Surai 166 Svensson & Wong et al . , 1999 , see also Introduction ) . Third , juveniles may rely on carotenoids more so than adults because the endogenous antioxidant machinery is still under development ( e . g . , Winston et al . , 2004 ) . Finally , the health effects of carotenoids have been much more conclusively shown in early life stages ( e . g . , Fenoglio et al . , 2003 ; Surai , 2002 , see also Introduction ) . Another topic of considerable research potential centres around the idea that plants , themselves , may use carotenoids as Zahavian signals of pest de - fence capacity ( Hamilton & Brown , 2001 ; Blount & McGraw , 2008 ) . Taken together , incorporation of non - sexual signals into the carotenoid discourse should be encouraged , because they are likely to help generalize our under - standing of signalling trade - offs and the maintenance of signal honesty . 4 . Speciﬁc challenges In the following section , we highlight a number of issues and speciﬁc caveats which , in our opinion , should be more widely taken into account by re - searchers in order to build on the advances that have so far been achieved . 4 . 1 . Experimental considerations 4 . 1 . 1 . Experimental design It is important to acknowledge the limitations inherent in correlational stud - ies , particularly when investigating carotenoid - based signals . As we have already seen , Lozanoan trade - offs are hypothesized to occur within , not across , individuals ( Kotiaho , 2001 ; Getty , 2002 ; Figure 3 ) . Therefore , to re - late carotenoid pigmentation to quality among individuals will likely produce ambiguous results ( e . g . , Møller et al . , 2000 ) . A more powerful approach is , of course , to carry out experimental manipulations . However , many studies tend to only manipulate one factor at a time and this , too , can lead to inconsistent results ( e . g . , Faivre et al . , 2003 ; Costantini & Dell’Omo , 2006 ; McGraw & Ardia , 2007 ; Alonso - Alvarez et al . , 2008 ; Perez - Rodriguez et al . , 2008 ) . For example , a common approach is to measure changes in ornament intensity after challenging the immune system of the test subjects or , alternatively , by manipulating dietary access to carotenoids or other antioxidants . However , as we have seen above , antioxidant sparing , or release of carotenoids from bodily stores , may mask short - term effects of such manipulations . How can future studies avoid these potential problems ? Carotenoid - based signals in behavioural ecology 167 A superior approach that is gaining favour among researchers is to use factorial designs that manipulate , for example , both dietary carotenoids and immune challenge ( e . g . , Alonso - Alvarez et al . , 2004 ; Berthouly et al . , 2007 ; Baeta et al . , 2008 ) . In this way , one creates a stressful situation ( e . g . , immune challenge ) , while also providing the animals with the tool ( e . g . , a carotenoid ) to deal with this challenge . If carotenoids are important , the negative ef - fects caused by the immune challenge should be ( partially ) alleviated by the dietary supplement , resulting in a signiﬁcant interaction between the two factors ( Kotiaho , 2001 ) . Factorial designs , in this regard , are desirable be - cause they address both the existence of the predicted trade off , and whether carotenoids actually limit ornament expression . If the goal is to understand internal trade - offs , it is also appropriate to use within - subject comparisons , that is , conducting repeated measurements on individuals before , during and after treatments ( Perez - Rodriguez , 2009 ) . A separate consideration is the number of factor levels one should use in supplemental studies . Experiments that have used multiple treatment lev - els typically ﬁnd non - linear dose – response curves ( Alonso - Alvarez et al . , 2004 ; Ahmadi et al . , 2006 ; McGraw , 2006a ) . Yet , despite this , most studies typically only employ two treatments ( e . g . , control vs . supplemented ) . This has important implications for the interpretation of results because the out - come of two - group designs will be highly dependent on the exact choice of treatment levels . Furthermore , the interpretation of two - level studies tends to assume , often implicitly , a linear response between the two points . A multi - level approach , however , can be important in revealing a variety of non - linear response curves ( Conolly & Lutz , 2004 ) . For example , a sigmoid relationship is possible if low concentrations fail to induce any effects . Alternatively , if carotenoids become detrimental at high doses , one might expect to see a quadratic ( humped - shaped ) response . Importantly , the shape of a response curve may vary between species or sexes , as shown in zebra ﬁnches ( Alonso - Alvarez et al . , 2004 ) . In this regard , experimental designs that allow detection of non - linear responses may well assist in resolving some of the current con - troversies concerning the roles and relative importance of carotenoids among and within taxa . We believe great care should be taken when designing supplemental diets instead of merely relying on manufactured carotenoid mixes . Because the uptake and function of carotenoids are highly speciﬁc ( Parker , 1996 , see also 168 Svensson & Wong Introduction ) , it is important to have identiﬁed the major dietary and orna - mental carotenoids of the system . Ideally , this should include information about the ratios and functional differences of different isomeric forms ( e . g . , Østerlie et al . , 1999 ) . The experimental outcome will only be biologically relevant if the selection of supplemental carotenoids has been based on such knowledge . Fortunately , an increasing number of carotenoids ( natural and / or synthetic ) are becoming commercially available . Knowledge about the ani - mal’s natural carotenoid proﬁle is also important when it comes to analysing tissue samples . As we have already pointed out , animals can , and often do , convert one carotenoid into another after uptake , and different carotenoids may spare each other ( see section 2 . 2 , Protection and sparing ) . Therefore , it may be insufﬁcient to only measure tissue concentrations of the supple - mented carotenoid ( s ) , or , indeed , to only quantify those carotenoid ( s ) incor - porated into the ornament ( see , e . g . , Cucco et al . , 2007 ) . 4 . 1 . 2 . Moving beyond a single - tissue , single - sample approach Researchers are often interested in how ornamentation relates to the carotenoid budget of the whole animal . Yet , many studies typically only quantify carotenoids in a single tissue type . This is problematic because the concentration of carotenoids ( or other antioxidants ) in one type of tissue may often be unrelated to that of another ( Catoni et al . , 2008 ) . Furthermore , both immune stress and carotenoid supplementation are known to cause redistrib - ution of carotenoids between different types of tissues . For example , Koutsos et al . ( 2003 ) found that immune challenged chickens had reduced liver and plasma carotenoids , but increased carotenoids in the thymus and bursa . Thus , in order to fully understand carotenoid usage , a more appropriate approach would be to analyse multiple tissue types simultaneously ( Bjerkeng et al . , 1999 ; Surai et al . , 2001b ) . Problems associated with a single - tissue , single sample approach is exem - pliﬁed by studies that focus exclusively on measuring carotenoids in plasma . Quantifying carotenoid levels from blood plasma is especially common in avian studies ( perhaps with the exception of poultry research ) , because sac - riﬁcing animals may not be permitted or desirable . However , reliance on plasma can be difﬁcult , because it is typically unknown how well , if at all , plasma carotenoids reﬂect overall levels of carotenoids in the body ( Perez - Rodriguez , 2009 ) . Large amounts of carotenoids , for example , can be stored in tissues such as gonads , skin and liver ( Surai et al . , 2001b ; Rajasingh et Carotenoid - based signals in behavioural ecology 169 al . , 2006 ) . Yet , the relative amount of carotenoids present in such tissues is rarely known . It is important to emphasize that plasma carotenoids are , to a large extent , carotenoids in transit . Plasma carotenoid levels are expected to increase when carotenoid access outweighs use , and decrease when use out - weighs access ( von Schantz et al . , 1999 ) . Thus , although plasma carotenoids can tell us about the relative balance between uptake and deposition , they reveal little about the absolute magnitude of either of these processes or , in - deed , the overall reservoir available to the animal ( see e . g . , Mougeot et al . , 2007 ) . Possibly because of this , plasma levels can be notoriously inaccurate proxies of carotenoid uptake and deposition , even within the same species ( cf . Storebakken & Goswami , 1996 ; Wathne et al . , 1998 ) . Moreover , plasma levels only estimate carotenoids circulating in the extracellular component of the blood , where they are exclusively associated with lipoproteins which can have very high afﬁnities for particular carotenoids ( Parker , 1996 ) . Plasma carotenoid concentration is known to be highly variable over different time scales , and is affected by foraging , infections , egg laying and moulting . For example , carotenoids can be rapidly remobilised to plasma following an im - mune challenge ( Costantini & Dell’Omo , 2006 ) . If only a single plasma sam - ple is taken , one risks missing such ﬂuctuations . When investigating antioxidant activity , plasma assays may also be inade - quate , because they measure only extracellular antioxidants ( Perez - Rodriguez et al . , 2008 ) and antioxidant enzymes may be lacking or have limited activity ( Costantini , 2008 ) . Plasma may , therefore , differ substan - tially from other tissue types in the balance between classes of antioxidants . Symptomatically , carotenoid supplements can lead to increased plasma lev - els of some antioxidants but reduced levels of others ( Ewen et al . , 2006 ; Morales et al . , 2008 ) . A multiple - tissue approach should , therefore , be preferable to a plasma - only approach in most situations . If dissection ( or biopsies , Zebisch et al . , 2004 ) , cannot be performed to sample different tissues , serial plasma samples may be a minimum requirement for accurately capturing changes in carotenoid allocation , and teasing apart alternative explanations ( Perez - Rodriguez , 2009 ) . It may also be informative to estimate ‘residual plasma carotenoids’ , that is , the concentration of circulating carotenoids not ex - plained by ornament intensity ( Blas et al . , 2006 ) . Ideally , it would be best to increase the use of model species where it is feasible to assay all the ma - jor storage tissues . Future studies that attempt a whole - animal approach will likely help resolve many of the current controversies . 170 Svensson & Wong 4 . 1 . 3 . Manipulating allocation rather than supply Most early attempts at testing Lozano’s idea of physiological trade - offs tended to rely on simple experimental supplementation of the diet . In this regard , a common treatment would be to increase carotenoids in food or drinking water , usually with increased coloration as a result . However , this approach ( and the ensuing results ) does not really provide a test of Lozano’s predictions ( see section 2 . 1 . 4 , Linking carotenoid - based signals to health ) . Rather , such experiments only go as far as addressing Endler’s older idea that ornament intensity should reﬂect dietary access to carotenoids ( Figure 3 ) . To test for an actual Lozanoan trade - off , one should try to manipulate the alloca - tion of existing dietary carotenoids to its different uses , instead of the overall supply . This , regrettably , is a much more challenging task . Nevertheless , as recent studies have demonstrated , a number of viable methods can poten - tially be used for manipulating carotenoid allocation to ornaments , including the use of artiﬁcial morphs differing in carotenoid pigmentation ( Clotfelter et al . , 2007 ) , manipulation of the social environment ( Candolin , 2000b ; Dijk - stra et al . , 2007 ) or administration of testosterone ( Jayasooriya et al . , 2002 ; Peters , 2007 ) . Given the challenges of directly manipulating investment into ornaments , it may be easier to instead manipulate the allocation of carotenoids to other uses than ornamentation . For example , if an animals’ immune system is chal - lenged , this is expected to divert carotenoids away from other uses such as ornamentation . A more powerful approach is , once again , to use factorial designs to manipulate both access and allocation concomitantly ( see sec - tion 4 . 1 . 1 , Experimental design ) . 4 . 1 . 4 . Important ﬁrst steps when investigating carotenoid - based signals As we have already highlighted , it would be beneﬁcial if all investigations built on a solid biological understanding of their particular study systems . As a starting point , it is prudent to determine whether , in fact , the signal of interest is actually carotenoid - based and , if so , which carotenoids , and which other pigment types , are involved in the ornament . It would also be sensible to determine which carotenoids are present in the natural diet of the study organism , which of these are actually taken up in the animal , in which tissues they are being deposited , and whether any metabolic conver - sions of carotenoids are taking place . For example , even if carotenoid sup - plementation increases ornament intensity , this is not conclusive evidence Carotenoid - based signals in behavioural ecology 171 that the used carotenoid is actually present in the ornament . If the dietary carotenoid has an antioxidant function , it may instead have spared the actual ornamental carotenoids . More broadly , from a natural history perspective , researchers may need to also ask whether a species is likely to be carotenoid limited in the ﬁrst place , and whether there are sex , age or seasonal differ - ences in carotenoid access , uptake , need and usage . Finally , in the context of designing good experiments , it may be necessary to establish dose - response curves for uptake and ornamentation using biologically relevant carotenoids at appropriate levels . 4 . 2 . Appreciating the complexity of homeostatic systems 4 . 2 . 1 . The antioxidant system Many studies aim to understand the links between carotenoid - based orna - ments , oxidative stress and the antioxidant capacity of an animal . Several different techniques exist for measuring antioxidant capacity , each with their own limitations ( Perez - Rodriguez , 2009 ) . Similarly , several assays exist for quantifying oxidative stress ( reviewed in Monaghan et al . , 2009 ) , and these may produce conﬂicting results ( Costantini , 2008 ; Costantini et al . , 2008 ) . Thus , for any chosen method , it is necessary to understand its limitations and the biochemistry and physiology behind it . Without such knowledge , it may be inherently difﬁcult to interpret results and infer causality in well - balanced , homeostatic systems . One potentially powerful approach is to si - multaneously measure indices for both antioxidant capacity and level of ox - idative stress ( Costantini & Dell’Omo , 2006 ) and / or to quantify the amount of oxidative damage , for example by measuring the amount of peroxidation products ( Hõrak et al . , 2007 ) . Multi - pronged approaches may reveal vital information about whether changes in antioxidant levels are likely to com - pensate partially , completely , or even hormetically ( i . e . , over - compensating , Conolly & Lutz , 2004 ) when individuals are responding to oxidative stress . Researchers speciﬁcally interested in testing Lozano’s trade - off hypothesis should ideally quantify the antioxidant activity directly attributable to the or - namental carotenoid ( s ) , and then relate this to the total antioxidant capacity of the individual ( for a review on quantifying oxidative defences , see Perez - Rodriguez , 2009 ) . 172 Svensson & Wong 4 . 2 . 2 . Immune response When studying the links between health and carotenoid ornamentation , one quickly realizes that immune function is “not a distinct and easily quantiﬁ - able entity” ( Hõrak et al . , 2007 , p . 633 ) . Correct interpretations of outcomes from the various available assays may actually require immunological ex - pertise beyond that of most behaviourists . Not only is immune response in - herently complicated in itself , but the immune system is partially interlinked with the antioxidant system ( Perez - Rodriguez , 2009 ) . In this regard , it can be hard to distinguish an adaptive response from a non - adaptive ( detrimental ) side effect . For example , ROM production is an effective way to kill patho - gens , but it can also damage surrounding tissues , potentially making even mild inﬂammatory responses cause signiﬁcant oxidative stress ( Costantini & Dell’Omo , 2006 ) . Because phagocytosis relies on oxidants ( ROM ) , excess plasma carotenoids may , in fact , impair the immune system by counteract - ing the ROM ( Krinsky , 1974 ; Zhao et al . , 1998 ) . This was precisely what McGraw & Klasing ( 2006 ) found in a study of red junglefowl given a mix of lutein and zeaxanthin ( although , in that study , the authors speculated that the inhibition of the phagocytosis by these carotenoids was due to carotenoid toxicity rather than carotenoids neutralizing ROM ) . It is important to realise that immune challenge can lead to a concurrent increase in both oxidative damage and total antioxidant capacity ( Hõrak et al . , 2007 ) , which is expected from an incomplete mitigation of the negative side - effects of phagocytosis . Different species have very different immune responses , and there are also trade - offs between different branches of the immune system ( Hõrak et al . , 2006 ; Matson et al . , 2006 ) . Quantifying any single proxy of immune function may , therefore , yield an incomplete picture . Ideally , studies should quantify both humoral and cell - mediated immune responses ( Hõrak & Saks , 2003 ) . When this has actually been carried out , important discrepancies have been found between the different types of immune response in how they react to changes in carotenoid levels ( McGraw et al . , 2006b ; Aguilera & Amat , 2007 ) . Consequently , estimates of the immunoregulatory role of carotenoids may be highly sensitive to which immunoassay is actually employed and to which branch of the immune system is being measured ( Saino et al . , 2003 ) . Not surprisingly , there has recently been a call for using standardized immune tests when measuring responses to immune challenge ( McGraw et al . , 2006b ) , and also for using multiple immune tests ( Hõrak et al . , 2006 ) . Carotenoid - based signals in behavioural ecology 173 5 . Some future perspectives In this section we outline two speciﬁc themes we believe should be pursued in future studies , as they may explain both proximate and ultimate reasons for the presence of carotenoid pigmentation . 5 . 1 . Testosterone : a missing link ? Recent empirical studies conﬁrm that testosterone , the principal male sex hormone in vertebrates , might be an important missing link between carotenoid - based ornaments and immune defence , at least in male birds ( re - viewed in Peters , 2007 ) and certain ﬁshes ( Bjerkeng et al . , 1999 ; Kurtz et al . , 2007 ) . It has long been suggested that steroid hormones affect oxida - tive stress , thereby mediating signal honesty ( Folstad & Karter , 1992 ; von Schantz et al . , 1999 ) . Testosterone may also be important in birds where fe - males express a less intense version of an ornament expressed by males . For example , in male zebra ﬁnches , the negative effects of testosterone are ame - liorated by a simultaneous increase in carotenoid uptake , but this does not occur in females ( McGraw , 2006c ) . One possible mechanism for this may be that testosterone elevates plasma carotenoids by upregulating lipoprotein production ( McGraw et al . , 2006a ; but see Casagrande et al . , 2010 ) . In males , high testosterone levels may be a necessary nuisance for achiev - ing impressive ornamental structures , such as big tails ( Folstad & Karter , 1992 ) , and / or sufﬁcient levels of aggression . However , increased testos - terone can induce increased carotenoid uptake ( McGraw et al . , 2006a ) , ei - ther as a mere side effect , or possibly as an adaptive defence against the negative effects of testosterone ( Blas et al . , 2006 ) . Building on recent re - sults ( Blas et al . , 2006 ; McGraw et al . , 2006a ) , we suggest that the evolu - tion of carotenoid ornaments ( at least in male birds ) could have come about through a series of steps . First , males are sexually selected for increasing testosterone levels as this allows them to become more aggressive and / or produce ( non - carotenoid ) ornaments . This , in turn , selects for improved up - take of carotenoids to combat the oxidative stress caused by the testosterone . Finally , excess carotenoids starts to be deposited in tissues , and become a component of the ornamental display , where the pigment intensity help indi - cate that a male is both virile and in good health . A thorough understanding of the roles of testosterone in signal expres - sion would be a signiﬁcant milestone because testosterone could potentially 174 Svensson & Wong serve as a tool to experimentally manipulate the allocation of carotenoids to ornaments ( see section 4 . 1 , Experimental considerations ) . However , it is im - portant to remember that testosterone can have varied and pleiotropic effects on animals , so careful experimentation ( e . g . , using factorial designs ) will be needed to actually ensure that carotenoid uptake and allocation , and not some other response , is responsible for the results . The considerable problem of disentangling cause versus effect and adaptive versus non - adaptive responses in well - balanced systems is highlighted in a recent paper by Vinkler & Al - brecht ( 2010 ) . In addition , both species and individuals are likely to vary in how well carotenoids can mitigate the negative effects of testosterone , possi - bly explaining the equivocal results when studies have attempted to explore the links between testosterone , signal expression and health ( McGraw & Ar - dia , 2007 ) . The generality of testosterone as an ornament regulator clearly deserves further study , especially in non - avian taxa and / or in the context of female ornaments . 5 . 2 . The demands of the egg The role of carotenoids in embryonic development of many egg - laying species allows us to speculate about whether carotenoid - based ornaments may , in some instances , be by - products from mechanisms evolved for use in egg production . The physiological demands of the developing embryo ( Surai & Speake , 1998 ; Karadas et al . , 2005 , see also Introduction ) may have selected for increased carotenoid deposition into eggs . If a species evolves more efﬁcient mechanisms to absorb , metabolise and use carotenoids , so that females can incorporate them into eggs , males of the same species may ﬁnd themselves with a carotenoid surplus available for other purposes , such as ornamentation ( Rajasingh et al . , 2006 ) . Possible support for this hypothesis comes from evidence that taxa with carotenoid - based ornamentation have unusually high carotenoid levels ( Hill , 1999a ; Olson & Owens , 2005 ) , while , at the same time , carotenoid access is known to limit egg - laying capacity ( Blount , 2004 ) . A link between carotenoid use in eggs and ornamentation could help explain the prevalence of carotenoid - based signals in birds , rep - tiles and ﬁsh , as well as their absence in mammals . We believe this idea warrants further study . Carotenoid - based signals in behavioural ecology 175 6 . Summary and conclusions Carotenoid - based colorations is used by animals in a variety of contexts , from mate attraction and agonistic displays to warning colouration and cam - ouﬂage . Not surprisingly , carotenoid - based signals have attracted consider - able research interest . Carotenoids are also known to perform a raft of physi - ological functions , particularly in regard to antioxidant defence and immune response . As a likely consequence , the past three decades have witnessed signiﬁcant shifts in the way researchers view the importance and meaning of carotenoid - based signals . In our opinion , the key to reconciling appar - ent conﬂicts ( and to avoid some of the pitfalls of past research ) is to better address the mechanisms underlying carotenoid - based signals . The different roles performed by carotenoids , and their proposed dietary limitation , are predicted to give rise to internal trade - offs . For example , animals are ex - pected to balance the requirements of carotenoids in ornamentation against their use as antioxidants and immunostimulants . However , when considering immune function and oxidant balance , it is critical to remind ourselves that we are dealing with homeostatically - regulated systems in which carotenoids are but one component . This means animals often will respond in ways that can obscure the effects of experimental manipulations . If one aims to un - derstand how carotenoid - based signals are related to vital components of animal physiology , the experimental designs needs to take this complication into consideration . Recently it has been proposed that ornamental carotenoids are unimpor - tant as antioxidants and merely indicate the level of other antioxidants in the animal ( i . e . , the protection hypothesis ) . Apparent support for this comes from studies that show reduced tissue levels of non - carotenoid antioxidants following carotenoid supplementation . However , if homeostatic regulation is taken into account , another explanation may be possible , namely that non - carotenoid antioxidants have simply been down - regulated in supplemented animals ( i . e . , the sparing hypothesis ) . If so , the results of these studies do not contradict studies showing carotenoids acting as important antioxidants . Substantial variation in carotenoid access , uptake and usage exist , both between and within species . Importantly , in taxa with carotenoid - based or - naments , we should expect additional selection pressures ( e . g . , from sex - ual selection ) , which may drive rapid evolutionary divergence in carotenoid metabolism . At present , the precise mechanisms underlying carotenoid func - tions are known for only a handful of carotenoids in only a handful of 176 Svensson & Wong species . As long as this is the case , great circumspection is required when making generalisations or , indeed , when extrapolating information from one study to another . In particular , experimental studies need to carefully con - sider the natural history framework of the species , population , sex and / or life stage in question . Although physiological trade - offs are potentially good at explaining what limits the expression of carotenoid - based signals at the proximate level , such trade - offs do not shed any light on what ultimately limits signal expression . Recent evidence suggests that animals have the capacity to rapidly evolve novel and highly efﬁcient ways to sequester and use carotenoids . This im - plies that over longer , evolutionary timescales , costs other than dietary ac - cess should constrain signal expression . We encourage future studies to pay more attention to other types of costs associated with carotenoid - based sig - nals , such as increased risk of predation or social interactions . The time is also ripe for quantitative genetic studies aimed at describing the genetic ar - chitecture and evolutionary constraints of carotenoid - based traits . When critically examining the carotenoid signal literature , several caveats and pitfalls become apparent . In this review , we have highlighted a number of these with the intent of informing future research efforts . For instance , stud - ies should ideally adopt a whole - animal approach rather than using snapshot measurements of single tissues . More broadly , although we disagree with there being ‘too much’ focus on carotenoids in behavioural ecology , we do think that there has been far ‘too much of the same’ . Even at a cursory glance , it is quite apparent that the focus of research has often been biased and lop - sided . Taxonomically , the literature is heavily dominated by studies of bird and ﬁsh . At the same time , few studies venture beyond the realm of sexual selection . A concerted effort to widen the breadth of studies will no doubt en - hance our understanding of the purpose , limits and mechanisms underlying carotenoid - based signals . Acknowledgements We thank R . Rosenthal for advice on meta analyses , G . Lozano for a discussion on band - wagons , H . Pärn for talks about trade - offs and U . Candolin and N . Metcalfe for raising the issue of whether behaviourists focus too much on carotenoids . We are grateful to S . Pryke , D . Dowling and two anonymous referees for comments on the manuscript . Funding was provided by the Australian Research Council . Carotenoid - based signals in behavioural ecology 177 References Aguilera , E . & Amat , J . A . ( 2007 ) . Carotenoids , immune response and the expression of sexual ornaments in male greenﬁnches ( Carduelis chloris ) . — Naturwissenschaften 94 : 895 - 902 . Ahmadi , M . R . , Bazyar , A . A . , Saﬁ , S . , Ytrestøyl , T . & Bjerkeng , B . ( 2006 ) . Effects of di - etary astaxanthin supplementation on reproductive characteristics of rainbow trout ( On - corhynchus mykiss ) . — J . Appl . Ichthyol . 22 : 388 - 394 . Alonso - Alvarez , C . , Bertrand , S . , Devevey , G . , Gaillard , M . , Prost , J . , Faivre , B . & Sorci , G . ( 2004 ) . An experimental test of the dose - dependent effect of carotenoids and immune activation on sexual signals and antioxidant activity . — Am . Nat . 164 : 651 - 659 . Alonso - Alvarez , C . , Perez - Rodriguez , L . , Mateo , R . , Chastel , O . & Vinuela , J . ( 2008 ) . The oxidation handicap hypothesis and the carotenoid allocation trade - off . — J . Evol . Biol . 21 : 1789 - 1797 . Amar , E . C . , Kiron , V . , Satoh , S . & Watanabe , T . ( 2001 ) . Inﬂuence of various dietary syn - thetic carotenoids on bio - defence mechanisms in rainbow trout , Oncorhynchus mykiss ( Walbaum ) . — Aquacult . Res . 32 : 162 - 173 . Amundsen , T . & Forsgren , E . ( 2001 ) . Male mate choice selects for female coloration in a ﬁsh . — Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA 98 : 13155 - 13160 . Armstrong , T . N . , Cronin , T . W . & Bradley , B . P . ( 2000 ) . Microspectrophotometric analysis of intact chromatophores of the Japanese medaka , Oryzias latipes . — Pigment Cell Res . 13 : 116 - 119 . Badyaev , A . V . , Hill , G . E . , Dunn , P . O . & Glen , J . C . ( 2001 ) . Plumage color as a composite trait : developmental and functional integration of sexual ornamentation . — Am . Nat . 158 : 221 - 235 . Baeta , R . , Faivre , B . , Motreuil , S . , Gaillard , M . & Moreau , J . ( 2008 ) . Carotenoid trade - off between parasitic resistance and sexual display : an experimental study in the blackbird ( Turdus merula ) . — Proc . Roy . Soc . Lond . B : Biol . 275 : 427 - 434 . Baird , T . A . ( 2004 ) . Reproductive coloration in female collared lizards , Crotophytus collaris , stimulates courtship by males . — Herpetologica 60 : 337 - 348 . Beeching , S . C . ( 1995 ) . Color pattern and inhibition of aggression in the cichlid ﬁsh Astrono - tus ocellatus . — J . Fish Biol . 47 : 50 - 58 . Bendich , A . ( 1989 ) . Carotenoids and the immune - response . — J . Nutr . 119 : 112 - 115 . Bendich , A . & Olson , J . A . ( 1989 ) . Biological actions of carotenoids . — FASEB J . 3 : 1927 - 1932 . Berglund , A . , Bisazza , A . & Pilastro , A . ( 1996 ) . Armaments and ornaments : an evolutionary explanation of traits of dual utility . — Biol . J . Linn . Soc . 58 : 385 - 399 . Berthouly , A . , Helfenstein , F . & Richner , H . ( 2007 ) . Cellular immune response , stress re - sistance and competitiveness in nestling great tits in relation to maternally transmitted carotenoids . — Funct . Ecol . 21 : 335 - 343 . Bertrand , S . , Alonso - Alvarez , C . , Devevey , G . , Faivre , B . , Prost , J . & Sorci , G . ( 2006a ) . Carotenoids modulate the trade - off between egg production and resistance to oxidative stress in zebra ﬁnches . — Oecologia 147 : 576 - 584 . Bertrand , S . , Faivre , B . & Sorci , G . ( 2006b ) . Do carotenoid - based sexual traits signal the availability of non - pigmentary antioxidants ? — J . Exp . Biol . 209 : 4414 - 4419 . Bezzerides , A . L . , McGraw , K . J . , Parker , R . S . & Husseini , J . ( 2007 ) . Elytra color as a signal of chemical defense in the Asian ladybird beetle Harmonia axyridis . — Behav . Ecol . Sociobiol . 61 : 1401 - 1408 . 178 Svensson & Wong Biard , C . , Surai , P . F . & Møller , A . P . ( 2006 ) . Carotenoid availability in diet and phenotype of blue and great tit nestlings . — J . Exp . Biol . 209 : 1004 - 1015 . Bjerkeng , B . , Johnsen , K . , Mayer , I . , Storebakken , T . & Nilssen , K . J . ( 1999 ) . Inﬂuence of 11 - ketotestosterone , 17 beta - estradiol , and 3 , 5 , 3 (cid:2) - triiodo - L - thyronine on distribution and metabolism of carotenoids in Arctic charr , Salvelinus alpinus L . — Fish Physiol . Biochem . 21 : 353 - 364 . Bjerkeng , B . , Storebakken , T . & Liaaen - Jensen , S . ( 1992 ) . Pigmentation of rainbow - trout from start feeding to sexual - maturation . — Aquaculture 108 : 333 - 346 . Bjørnland , T . ( 1997 ) . UV - vis spectroscopy of carotenoids . — In : Phytoplankton pigments in oceanography . UNESCO , Paris , p . 578 - 594 . Blas , J . , Perez - Rodriguez , L . , Bortolotti , G . R . , Vinuela , J . & Marchant , T . A . ( 2006 ) . Testos - terone increases bioavailability of carotenoids : insights into the honesty of sexual sig - naling . — Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA 103 : 18633 - 18637 . Blount , J . D . ( 2004 ) . Carotenoids and life - history evolution in animals . — Arch . Biochem . Biophys . 430 : 10 - 15 . Blount , J . D . , Houston , D . C . & Møller , A . P . ( 2000 ) . Why egg yolk is yellow . —Trends Ecol . Evol . 15 : 131 . Blount , J . D . & McGraw , K . J . ( 2008 ) . Signal functions of carotenoid colouration . — In : Carotenoids , Vol . 4 : natural functions ( Britton , G . , Liaaen - Jensen , S . & Pfander , H . , eds ) . Birkhäuser , Basel , p . 213 - 236 . Blount , J . D . , Metcalfe , N . B . , Birkhead , T . R . & Surai , P . F . ( 2003 ) . Carotenoid modulation of immune function and sexual attractiveness in zebra ﬁnches . — Science 300 : 125 - 127 . Blount , J . D . , Surai , P . F . , Houston , D . C . & Møller , A . P . ( 2002 ) . Patterns of yolk enrichment with dietary carotenoids in gulls : the roles of pigment acquisition and utilization . — Funct . Ecol . 16 : 445 - 453 . Bowmaker , J . K . ( 1995 ) . The visual pigments of ﬁsh . — Progr . Retinal Eye Res . 15 : 1 - 31 . Britton , G . ( 1995 ) . Structure and properties of carotenoids in relation to function . — FASEB J . 9 : 1551 - 1558 . Britton , G . ( 2008 ) . Functions of intact carotenoids . — In : Carotenoids , Vol . 4 : natural func - tions ( Britton , G . , Liaaen - Jensen , S . & Pfander , H . , eds ) . Birkhäuser , Basel , p . 189 - 212 . Britton , G . , Liaaen - Jenson , S . , Pfander , H . , Mercadante , A . Z . & Egeland , E . S . ( 2004 ) . Carotenoids handbook . — Birkhäuser , Basel . Brush , A . H . ( 1990 ) . Metabolism of carotenoid - pigments in birds . — FASEB J . 4 : 2969 - 2977 . Burton , G . W . ( 1989 ) . Antioxidant action of carotenoids . — J . Nutr . 119 : 109 - 111 . Burton , G . W . & Ingold , K . U . ( 1984 ) . Beta - carotene — an unusual type of lipid antioxidant . — Science 224 : 569 - 573 . Byron , E . R . ( 1982 ) . The adaptive signiﬁcance of calanoid copepod pigmentation — a com - parative and experimental analysis . — Ecology 63 : 1871 - 1886 . Candolin , U . ( 2000a ) . Changes in expression and honesty of sexual signalling over the repro - ductive lifetime of sticklebacks . — Proc . Roy . Soc . Lond . B : Biol . 267 : 2425 - 2430 . Candolin , U . ( 2000b ) . Increased signalling effort when survival prospects decrease : male – male competition ensures honesty . — Anim . Behav . 60 : 417 - 422 . Candolin , U . ( 2003 ) . The use of multiple cues in mate choice . — Biol . Rev . 78 : 575 - 595 . Casagrande , S . , Dijkstra , C . , Tagliavini , J . , Goerlich , V . C . & Groothuis , T . G . ( 2010 ) . Dif - ferential effects of testosterone , dihydrotestosterone and estradiol on carotenoid de - position in an avian sexually selected signal . — J . Comp . Physiol . A : in press ( doi : 10 . 1007 / s00359 - 010 - 0579 - 4 ) . Carotenoid - based signals in behavioural ecology 179 Catoni , C . , Peters , A . & Schaefer , H . M . ( 2008 ) . Life history trade - offs are inﬂuenced by the diversity , availability and interactions of dietary antioxidants . — Anim . Behav . 76 : 1107 - 1119 . Chew , B . P . ( 1993 ) . Role of carotenoids in the immune - response . — J . Dairy Sci . 76 : 2804 - 2811 . Chew , B . P . & Park , J . S . ( 2004 ) . Carotenoid action on the immune response . — J . Nutr . 134 : 257S - 261S . Chien , Y . H . & Shiau , W . C . ( 2005 ) . The effects of dietary supplementation of algae and synthetic astaxanthin on body astaxanthin , survival , growth , and low dissolved oxygen stress resistance of kuruma prawn , Marsupenaeus japonicus Bate . — J . Exp . Mar . Biol . Ecol . 318 : 201 - 211 . Christiansen , R . , Glette , J . , Lie , O . , Torrissen , O . J . & Waagbo , R . ( 1995 ) . Antioxidant status and immunity in atlantic salmon , Salmo salar L . , fed semi - puriﬁed diets with and without astaxanthin supplementation . — J . Fish Dis . 18 : 317 - 328 . Cianci , M . , Rizkallah , P . J . , Olczak , A . , Raftery , J . , Chayen , N . E . , Zagalsky , P . F . & Helliwell , J . R . ( 2002 ) . The molecular basis of the coloration mechanism in lobster shell : beta - crustacyanin at 3 . 2 - angstrom resolution . — Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . USA 99 : 9795 - 9800 . Clotfelter , E . D . , Ardia , D . R . & McGraw , K . J . ( 2007 ) . Red ﬁsh , blue ﬁsh : trade - offs between pigmentation and immunity in Betta splendens . — Behav . Ecol . 18 : 1139 - 1145 . Cogdell , R . J . ( 1985 ) . Carotenoids in photosynthesis . — Pure Appl . Chem . 57 : 723 - 728 . Collins , S . A . & ten Cate , C . ( 1996 ) . Does beak colour affect female preference in zebra ﬁnches ? — Anim . Behav . 52 : 105 - 112 . Conolly , R . B . & Lutz , W . K . ( 2004 ) . Nonmonotonic dose - response relationships : mechanistic basis , kinetic modeling , and implications for risk assessment . — Toxicol . Sci . 77 : 151 - 157 . Costantini , D . ( 2008 ) . Oxidative stress in ecology and evolution : lessons from avian studies . — Ecol . Lett . 11 : 1238 - 1251 . Costantini , D . , Coluzza , C . , Fanfani , A . & Dell’Omo , G . ( 2007 ) . Effects of carotenoid supple - mentation on colour expression , oxidative stress and body mass in rehabilitated captive adult kestrels ( Falco tinnunculus ) . — J . Comp . Physiol . B 177 : 723 - 731 . Costantini , D . & Dell’Omo , G . ( 2006 ) . Effects of T - cell - mediated immune response on avian oxidative stress . — Comp . Biochem . Physiol . A 145 : 137 - 142 . Costantini , D . , Fanfani , A . & Dell’Omo , G . ( 2008 ) . Effects of corticosteroids on oxidative damage and circulating carotenoids in captive adult kestrels ( Falco tinnunculus ) . — J . Comp . Physiol . B 178 : 829 - 835 . Costantini , D . & Møller , A . P . ( 2008 ) . Carotenoids are minor antioxidants for birds . — Funct . Ecol . 22 : 367 - 370 . Craig , J . K . & Foote , C . J . ( 2001 ) . Countergradient variation and secondary sexual color : phe - notypic convergence promotes genetic divergence in carotenoid use between sympatric anadromous and nonanadromous morphs of sockeye salmon ( Oncorhynchus nerka ) . — Evolution 55 : 380 - 391 . Craik , J . C . A . ( 1985 ) . Egg quality and egg pigment content in salmonid ﬁshes . — Aquaculture 47 : 61 - 88 . Cucco , M . , Guasco , B . , Malacarne , G . & Ottonelli , R . ( 2007 ) . Effects of beta - carotene on adult immune condition and antibacterial activity in the eggs of the Grey Partridge , Perdix perdix . — Comp . Biochem . Physiol . A 147 : 1038 - 1046 . 180 Svensson & Wong Dauwe , T . & Eens , M . ( 2008 ) . Melanin - and carotenoid - dependent signals of great tits ( Parus major ) relate differently to metal pollution . — Naturwissenschaften 95 : 969 - 973 . Dijkstra , P . D . , Hekman , R . , Schulz , R . W . & Groothuis , T . G . G . ( 2007 ) . Social stimulation , nuptial colouration , androgens and immunocompetence in a sexual dimorphic cichlid ﬁsh . — Behav . Ecol . Sociobiol . 61 : 599 - 609 . Dowling , D . K . & Simmons , L . W . ( 2009 ) . Reactive oxygen species as universal constraints in life - history evolution . — Proc . Roy . Soc . Lond . B : Biol . 276 : 1737 - 1745 . Eberhardt , M . K . ( 2000 ) . Antioxidants . — In : Reactive oxygen metabolites : chemistry and medical consequences . CRC Press , Boca Raton , FL , p . 591 . Edge , R . , McGarvey , D . J . & Truscott , T . G . ( 1997 ) . The carotenoids as anti - oxidants — a review . — J . Photochem . Photobiol . B 41 : 189 - 200 . Elmer , K . R . , Lehtonen , T . & Meyer , A . ( 2009 ) . Color assortative mating contributes to sym - patric divergence of neotropical cichlid ﬁsh . — Evolution 63 : 2750 - 2757 . Endler , J . A . ( 1978 ) . A predator’s view of animal color patterns . — In : Evolutionary biology ( Hecht , M . K . , Steere , W . C . & Wallace , B . , eds ) . Plenum , New York , NY , p . 319 - 364 . Endler , J . A . ( 1980 ) . Natural - selection on color patterns in Poecilia reticulata . — Evolution 34 : 76 - 91 . Endler , J . A . ( 1983 ) . Natural and sexual selection on color patterns in poeciliid ﬁshes . — Environ . Biol . Fish . 9 : 173 - 190 . Evans , M . R . & Norris , K . ( 1996 ) . The importance of carotenoids in signaling during aggres - sive interactions between male ﬁremouth cichlids ( Cichlasoma meeki ) . — Behav . Ecol . 7 : 1 - 6 . Ewen , J . G . , Thorogood , R . , Karadas , F . & Cassey , P . ( 2008 ) . Condition dependence of nestling mouth colour and the effect of supplementing carotenoids on parental behav - iour in the hihi ( Notiomystis cincta ) . — Oecologia 157 : 361 - 368 . Ewen , J . G . , Thorogood , R . , Karadas , F . , Pappas , A . C . & Surai , P . F . ( 2006 ) . Inﬂuences of carotenoid supplementation on the integrated antioxidant system of a free living en - dangered passerine , the hihi ( Notiomystis cincta ) . — Comp . Biochem . Physiol . A 143 : 149 - 154 . Faivre , B . , Gregoire , A . , Preault , M . , Cezilly , F . & Sorci , G . ( 2003 ) . Immune activation rapidly mirrored in a secondary sexual trait . — Science 300 : 103 . Feltl , L . , Pacáková , V . , Stulik , K . & Volka , K . ( 2005 ) . Reliability of carotenoid analyses : a review . — Curr . Anal . Chem . 1 : 93 - 102 . Fenoglio , S . , Cucco , M . & Malacarne , G . ( 2002 ) . Bill colour and body condition in the Moorhen Gallinula chloropus . — Bird Stud . 49 : 89 - 92 . Fenoglio , S . , Cucco , M . & Malacarne , G . ( 2003 ) . The effect of a carotenoid - rich diet on immunocompetence and behavioural performances in Moorhen chicks . — Ethol . Ecol . Evol . 14 : 149 - 156 . Finkel , T . & Holbrook , N . J . ( 2000 ) . Oxidants , oxidative stress and the biology of ageing . — Nature 408 : 239 - 247 . Fitze , P . S . & Tschirren , B . ( 2006 ) . No evidence for survival selection on carotenoid - based nestling coloration in great tits ( Parus major ) . — J . Evol . Biol . 19 : 618 - 624 . Folstad , I . & Karter , A . J . ( 1992 ) . Parasites , bright males , and the immunocompetence handi - cap . — Am . Nat . 139 : 603 - 622 . Foote , C . J . , Brown , G . S . & Hawryshyn , C . W . ( 2004 ) . Female colour and male choice in sockeye salmon : implications for the phenotypic convergence of anadromous and nonanadromous morphs . — Anim . Behav . 67 : 69 - 83 . Carotenoid - based signals in behavioural ecology 181 Forstmeier , W . , Segelbacher , G . , Mueller , J . C . & Kempenaers , B . ( 2007 ) . Genetic variation and differentiation in captive and wild zebra ﬁnches ( Taeniopygia guttata ) . — Mol . Ecol . 16 : 4039 - 4050 . George , S . B . , Lawrence , J . M . , Lawrence , A . L . , Smiley , J . & Plank , L . ( 2001 ) . Carotenoids in the adult diet enhance egg and juvenile production in the sea urchin Lytechinus variegatus . — Aquaculture 199 : 353 - 369 . Getty , T . ( 1998a ) . Handicap signalling : when fecundity and viability do not add up . — Anim . Behav . 56 : 127 - 130 . Getty , T . ( 1998b ) . Reliable signalling need not be a handicap — commentary . — Anim . Behav . 56 : 253 - 255 . Getty , T . ( 2002 ) . Signaling health versus parasites . — Am . Nat . 159 : 363 - 371 . Getty , T . ( 2006 ) . Sexually selected signals are not similar to sports handicaps . — Trends Ecol . Evol . 21 : 83 - 88 . Glover , M . , Morton , R . A . & Rosen , D . G . ( 1952 ) . Astaxanthin , cholesterol and lipins in developing salmon eggs . — Biochem . J . 50 : 425 - 429 . Godin , J . G . J . & McDonough , H . E . ( 2003 ) . Predator preference for brightly colored males in the guppy : a viability cost for a sexually selected trait . — Behav . Ecol . 14 : 194 - 200 . Goodwin , T . W . ( 1984 ) . The biochemistry of the carotenoids , II . Animals . — Chapman & Hall , London . Götmark , F . & Ahlström , M . ( 1997 ) . Parental preference for red mouth of chicks in a song - bird . — Proc . Roy . Soc . Lond . B : Biol . 264 : 959 - 962 . Götmark , F . & Olsson , J . ( 1997 ) . Artiﬁcial colour mutation : do red - painted great tits experi - ence increased or decreased predation ? — Anim . Behav . 53 : 83 - 91 . Grafen , A . ( 1984 ) . Natural selection , kin selection and group selection . — In : Behavioural ecology , 2nd edn . ( Krebs , J . R . & Davies , N . B . , eds ) . Blackwell Scientiﬁc Publications , Oxford , p . 62 - 84 . Grafen , A . ( 1990a ) . Biological signals as handicaps . — J . Theor . Biol . 144 : 517 - 546 . Grafen , A . ( 1990b ) . Sexual selection unhandicapped by the Fisher process . — J . Theor . Biol . 144 : 473 - 516 . Grether , G . F . , Cummings , M . E . & Hudon , J . ( 2005 ) . Countergradient variation in the sexual coloration of guppies ( Poecilia reticulata ) : drosopterin synthesis balances carotenoid availability . — Evolution 59 : 175 - 188 . Grether , G . F . , Hudon , J . & Endler , J . A . ( 2001 ) . Carotenoid scarcity , synthetic pteridine pig - ments and the evolution of sexual coloration in guppies ( Poecilia reticulata ) . — Proc . Roy . Soc . Lond . B : Biol . 268 : 1245 - 1253 . Grether , G . F . , Kasahara , S . , Kolluru , G . R . & Cooper , E . L . ( 2004a ) . Sex - speciﬁc effects of carotenoid intake on the immunological response to allografts in guppies ( Poecilia reticulata ) . — Proc . Roy . Soc . Lond . B : Biol . 271 : 45 - 49 . Grether , G . F . , Kolluru , G . R . & Nersissian , K . ( 2004b ) . Individual colour patches as multi - component signals . — Biol . Rev . 79 : 583 - 610 . Grifﬁth , S . C . , Parker , T . H . & Olson , V . A . ( 2006 ) . Melanin - versus carotenoid - based sexual signals : is the difference really so black and red ? — Anim . Behav . 71 : 749 - 763 . Griggio , M . , Serra , L . , Licheri , D . , Monti , A . & Pilastro , A . ( 2007 ) . Armaments and orna - ments in the rock sparrow : a possible dual utility of a carotenoid - based feather signal . — Behav . Ecol . Sociobiol . 61 : 423 - 433 . Guilford , T . & Dawkins , M . S . ( 1991 ) . Receiver psychology and the evolution of animal signals . — Anim . Behav . 42 : 1 - 14 . 182 Svensson & Wong Hager , S . B . ( 2001 ) . The role of nuptial coloration in female Holbrookia maculata : evidence for a dual signaling system . — J . Herpetol . 35 : 624 - 632 . Halliwell , B . & Gutteridge , J . M . C . ( 2007 ) . Free radicals in biology and medicine , 4th edn . — Clarendon Press , Oxford . Hamilton , W . D . & Brown , S . P . ( 2001 ) . Autumn tree colours as a handicap signal . — Proc . Roy . Soc . Lond . B : Biol . 268 : 1489 - 1493 . Handelman , G . J . ( 1996 ) . Carotenoids as scavengers of active oxygen species . — In : Hand - book of antioxidants . Marcel Dekker , New York , NY , p . 259 - 314 . Handelman , G . J . ( 2001 ) . The evolving role of carotenoids in human biochemistry . — Nutri - tion 17 : 818 - 822 . Harper , D . G . C . ( 2006 ) . Maynard Smith : amplifying the reasons for signal reliability . — J . Theor . Biol . 239 : 203 - 209 . Hartley , R . C . & Kennedy , M . W . ( 2004 ) . Are carotenoids a red herring in sexual display ? — Trends Ecol . Evol . 19 : 353 - 354 . Hasson , O . ( 1990 ) . The role of ampliﬁers in sexual selection — an integration of the ampli - fying and the ﬁsherian mechanisms . — Evol . Ecol . 4 : 277 - 289 . Hasson , O . ( 2000 ) . Knowledge , information , biases and signal assemblages . — In : Animal signals . Signalling and signal design in animal communication ( Espmark , Y . , Amund - sen , T . & Rosenqvist , G . , eds ) . The Royal Norwegian Society of Sciences and Letters and The Foundation of Tapir Publishers , Trondheim , p . 445 - 463 . Hatlen , B . , Jobling , M . & Bjerkeng , B . ( 1998 ) . Relationships between carotenoid concen - tration and colour of ﬁllets of Arctic charr , Salvelinus alpinus ( L . ) , fed astaxanthin . — Aquacult . Res . 29 : 191 - 202 . Healey , M . & Olsson , M . ( 2009 ) . Too big for his boots : are social costs keeping condition - dependent status signalling honest in an Australian lizard ? — Austr . Ecol . 34 : 636 - 640 . Helfenstein , F . , Berthouly , A . , Tanner , M . , Karadas , F . & Richner , H . ( 2008 ) . Nestling begging intensity and parental effort in relation to prelaying carotenoid availability . — Behav . Ecol . 19 : 108 - 115 . Hill , G . E . ( 1991 ) . Plumage coloration is a sexually selected indicator of male quality . — Nature 350 : 337 - 339 . Hill , G . E . ( 1999a ) . Is there an immunological cost to carotenoid - based ornamental col - oration ? — Am . Nat . 154 : 589 - 595 . Hill , G . E . ( 1999b ) . Mate choice , male quality , and carotenoid - based plumage colouration . — In : Proceedings of the 22nd International Ornithological Congress ( Adams , N . J . & Slotow , R . H . , eds ) . Birdlife , Durban , p . 1654 - 1668 . Hill , G . E . ( 2006 ) . Environmental regulation of ornamental coloration . — In : Bird coloration , Vol . 1 : mechanisms and measurements . Harvard University Press , London , p . 178 - 242 . Hofmann , C . M . , Cronin , T . W . & Omland , K . E . ( 2006 ) . Using spectral data to reconstruct evolutionary changes in coloration : carotenoid color evolution in new world orioles . — Evolution 60 : 1680 - 1691 . Hofmann , C . M . , Cronin , T . W . & Omland , K . E . ( 2007 ) . Melanin coloration in New World orioles II : ancestral state reconstruction reveals lability in the use of carotenoids and phaeomelanins . — J . Avian Biol . 38 : 172 - 181 . Hõrak , P . & Saks , L . ( 2003 ) . Animal allure and health linked by plant pigments . — Bioessays 25 : 746 - 747 . Hõrak , P . , Saks , L . , Zilmer , M . , Karu , U . & Zilmer , K . ( 2007 ) . Notes and comments — do dietary antioxidants alleviate the cost of immune activation ? An experiment with greenﬁnches . — Am . Nat . 170 : 625 - 635 . Carotenoid - based signals in behavioural ecology 183 Hõrak , P . , Sild , E . , Soomets , U . , Sepp , T . & Kilk , K . ( 2010 ) . Oxidative stress and information content of black and yellow plumage coloration : an experiment with greenﬁnches . — J . Exp . Biol . 213 : 2225 - 2233 . Hõrak , P . , Surai , P . F . , Ots , I . & Møller , A . P . ( 2004 ) . Fat soluble antioxidants in brood - rearing great tits Parus major : relations to health and appearance . — J . Avian Biol . 35 : 63 - 70 . Hõrak , P . , Zilmer , M . , Saks , L . , Ots , I . , Karu , U . & Zilmer , K . ( 2006 ) . Antioxidant protection , carotenoids and the costs of immune challenge in greenﬁnches . — J . Exp . Biol . 209 : 4329 - 4338 . Houde , A . E . ( 1997 ) . Sex , color , and mate choice in guppies . — Princeton University Press , Princeton , NJ . Houde , A . E . & Torio , A . J . ( 1992 ) . Effect of parasitic infection on male color pattern and female choice in guppies . — Behav . Ecol . 3 : 346 - 351 . Huggins , K . A . , Navara , K . J . , Mendonca , M . T . & Hill , G . E . ( 2010 ) . Detrimental effects of carotenoid pigments : the dark side of bright coloration . — Naturwissenschaften 97 : 637 - 644 . Hurst , J . S . , Saini , M . K . , Jin , G . F . , Awasthi , Y . C . & van Kuijk , F . ( 2005 ) . Toxicity of oxidized beta - carotene to cultured human cells . — Exp . Eye Res . 81 : 239 - 243 . Isaksson , C . , McLaughlin , P . , Monaghan , P . & Andersson , S . ( 2007 ) . Carotenoid pigmen - tation does not reﬂect total non - enzymatic antioxidant activity in plasma of adult and nestling great tits , Parus major . — Funct . Ecol . 21 : 1123 - 1129 . Jayasooriya , A . P . , Weisinger , R . S . , Weisinger , H . S . , Mathai , M . L . & Sinclair , A . J . ( 2002 ) . Attraction to orange : sexiness , not gluttony . — Science 296 : 847 - 847 . Johnstone , R . A . ( 1996 ) . Multiple displays in animal communication : ‘backup signals’ and ‘multiple messages’ . — Philos . Trans . Roy . Soc . Lond . Biol . 351 : 329 - 338 . Kalariya , N . M . , Ramana , K . V . , Srivastava , S . K . & van Kuijk , F . ( 2008 ) . Carotenoid derived aldehydes - induced oxidative stress causes apoptotic cell death in human retinal pigment epithelial cells . — Exp . Eye Res . 86 : 70 - 80 . Karadas , F . , Pappas , A . C . , Surai , P . F . & Speake , B . K . ( 2005 ) . Embryonic development within carotenoid - enriched eggs inﬂuences the post - hatch carotenoid status of the chicken . — Comp . Biochem . Physiol . B 141 : 244 - 251 . Karu , U . , Saks , L . & Hõrak , P . ( 2008 ) . Carotenoid - based plumage coloration is not affected by vitamin E supplementation in male greenﬁnches . — Ecol . Res . 23 : 931 - 935 . Kiere , L . M . , Hofmann , C . M . , Price , J . J . , Cronin , T . W . & Omland , K . E . ( 2009 ) . Discrete evolutionary color changes in caciques suggest different modes of carotenoid evolution between closely related taxa . — J . Avian Biol . 40 : 605 - 613 . Kodric - Brown , A . ( 1989 ) . Dietary carotenoids and male mating success in the guppy — an environmental component to female choice . — Behav . Ecol . Sociobiol . 25 : 393 - 401 . Kodric - Brown , A . ( 1998 ) . Sexual dichromatism and temporary color changes in the repro - duction of ﬁshes . — Am . Zool . 38 : 70 - 81 . Kolm , N . ( 2004 ) . Female courtship in the Banggai cardinalﬁsh : honest signals of egg maturity and reproductive output ? — Behav . Ecol . Sociobiol . 56 : 59 - 64 . Kotiaho , J . S . ( 2001 ) . Costs of sexual traits : a mismatch between theoretical considerations and empirical evidence . — Biol . Rev . 76 : 365 - 376 . Koutsos , E . A . , Calvert , C . C . & Klasing , K . C . ( 2003 ) . The effect of an acute phase response on tissue carotenoid levels of growing chickens ( Gallus gallus domesticus ) . — Comp . Biochem . Physiol . A 135 : 635 - 646 . 184 Svensson & Wong Krinsky , N . I . ( 1974 ) . Singlet excited oxygen as a mediator of antibacterial action of leuko - cytes . — Science 186 : 363 - 365 . Krinsky , N . I . ( 1989 ) . Antioxidant functions of carotenoids . — Free Radic . Biol . Med . 7 : 617 - 635 . Krinsky , N . I . ( 1993 ) . Actions of carotenoids in biological systems . — Annu . Rev . Nutr . 13 : 561 - 587 . Kurtz , J . , Kalbe , M . , Langefors , S . , Mayer , I . , Milinski , M . & Hasselquist , D . ( 2007 ) . An experimental test of the immunocompetence handicap hypothesis in a teleost ﬁsh : 11 - ketotestosterone suppresses innate immunity in three - spined sticklebacks . — Am . Nat . 170 : 509 - 519 . Kwiatkowski , M . A . & Sullivan , B . K . ( 2002 ) . Geographic variation in sexual selection among populations of an iguanid lizard , Sauromalus obesus ( = ater ) . — Evolution 56 : 2039 - 2051 . Lehtonen , T . , Wong , B . B . M . & Lindström , K . ( 2009 ) . Fluctuating mate preferences in a marine ﬁsh . — Biol . Lett . 6 : 21 - 23 . Liñán - Cabello , M . A . , Paniagua - Michel , J . & Hopkins , P . M . ( 2002 ) . Bioactive roles of carotenoids and retinoids in crustaceans . — Aquacult . Nutr . 8 : 299 - 309 . Lindstedt , C . , Lindström , L . & Mappes , J . ( 2009 ) . Thermoregulation constrains effective warning signal expression . — Evolution 63 : 469 - 478 . Loiseau , C . , Fellous , S . , Haussy , C . , Chastel , O . & Sorci , G . ( 2008 ) . Condition - dependent effects of corticosterone on a carotenoid - based begging signal in house sparrows . — Horm . Behav . 53 : 266 - 273 . Lozano , G . A . ( 1994 ) . Carotenoids , parasites , and sexual selection . — Oikos 70 : 309 - 311 . Lozano , G . A . ( 2001 ) . Carotenoids , immunity , and sexual selection : comparing apples and oranges ? — Am . Nat . 158 : 200 - 203 . Lubzens , E . , Lissauer , L . , Levavi - Sivan , B . , Avarre , J . - C . & Sammar , M . ( 2003 ) . Carotenoid and retinoid transport to ﬁsh oocytes and eggs : what is the role of retinol binding protein ? — Mol . Aspects Med . 24 : 441 - 457 . Macedonia , J . M . , James , S . , Wittle , L . W . & Clark , D . L . ( 2000 ) . Skin pigments and coloration in the Jamaican radiation of Anolis lizards . — J . Herpetol . 34 : 99 - 109 . Maden , M . ( 1993 ) . The effect of vitamin - A ( retinoids ) on pattern - formation implies a unifor - mity of developmental mechanisms throughout the animal kingdom . — Acta Biotheor . 41 : 425 - 445 . Martin , H . D . , Jager , C . , Ruck , C . , Schmidt , M . , Walsh , R . & Paust , J . ( 1999 ) . Anti - and prooxidant properties of carotenoids . — J . Prakt . Chem . 341 : 302 - 308 . Matson , K . D . , Cohen , A . A . , Klasing , K . C . , Ricklefs , R . E . & Scheuerlein , A . ( 2006 ) . No simple answers for ecological immunology : relationships among immune indices at the individual level break down at the species level in waterfowl . — Proc . Roy . Soc . Lond . B : Biol . 273 : 815 - 822 . Maynard Smith , J . & Harper , D . ( 2003 ) . Animal signals . — Oxford University Press , Oxford . Maynard Smith , J . & Harper , D . G . C . ( 1995 ) . Animal signals : models and terminology . — J . Theor . Biol . 177 : 305 - 311 . McGraw , K . J . ( 2005 ) . The antioxidant function of many animal pigments : are there consistent health beneﬁts of sexually selected colourants ? — Anim . Behav . 69 : 757 - 764 . McGraw , K . J . ( 2006a ) . Dietary carotenoids mediate a trade - off between egg quantity and quality in Japanese quail . — Ethol . Ecol . Evol . 18 : 247 - 256 . Carotenoid - based signals in behavioural ecology 185 McGraw , K . J . ( 2006b ) . Mechanics of carotenoid - based coloration . — In : Bird coloration , Vol . 1 : mechanisms and measurements ( Hill , G . E . , ed . ) . Harvard University Press , Lon - don : p . 178 - 242 . McGraw , K . J . ( 2006c ) . Sex steroid dependence of carotenoid - based coloration in female zebra ﬁnches . — Physiol . Behav . 88 : 347 - 352 . McGraw , K . J . ( 2007 ) . Do carotenoids buffer testosterone - induced immunosuppression ? An experimental test in a colourful songbird . — Biol . Lett . 3 : 375 - 378 . McGraw , K . J . & Ardia , D . R . ( 2003 ) . Carotenoids , immunocompetence , and the information content of sexual colors : an experimental test . — Am . Nat . 162 : 704 - 712 . McGraw , K . J . , Correa , S . M . & Adkins - Regan , E . ( 2006a ) . Testosterone upregulates lipopro - tein status to control sexual attractiveness in a colorful songbird . — Behav . Ecol . Socio - biol . 60 : 117 - 122 . McGraw , K . J . , Crino , O . L . , Medina - Jerez , W . & Nolan , P . M . ( 2006b ) . Effect of dietary carotenoid supplementation on food intake and immune function in a songbird with no carotenoid coloration . — Ethology 112 : 1209 - 1216 . McGraw , K . J . & Klasing , K . C . ( 2006 ) . Carotenoids , immunity , and integumentary coloration in red junglefowl ( Gallus gallus ) . — Auk 123 : 1161 - 1171 . McKinnon , J . S . , Demayo , R . F . , Granquist , R . & Weggel , L . ( 2000 ) . Female red throat col - oration in two populations of threespine stickleback . — Behaviour 137 : 947 - 963 . Miki , W . ( 1991 ) . Biological functions and activities of animal carotenoids . — Pure Appl . Chem . 63 : 141 - 146 . Milinski , M . & Bakker , T . C . M . ( 1990 ) . Female sticklebacks use male coloration in mate choice and hence avoid parasitized males . — Nature 344 : 330 - 333 . Miller , N . J . , Sampson , J . , Candeias , L . P . , Bramley , P . M . & Rice - Evans , C . A . ( 1996 ) . Antiox - idant activities of carotenes and xanthophylls . — FEBS Lett . 384 : 240 - 242 . Møller , A . P . , Biard , C . , Blount , J . D . , Houston , D . C . , Ninni , P . , Saino , N . & Surai , P . F . ( 2000 ) . Carotenoid - dependent signals : indicators of foraging efﬁciency , immunocompetence or detoxiﬁcation ability ? — Avian Poultry Biol . Rev . 11 : 137 - 159 . Møller , A . P . & Pomiankowski , A . ( 1993 ) . Why have birds got multiple sexual ornaments . — Behav . Ecol . Sociobiol . 32 : 167 - 176 . Monaghan , P . , Metcalfe , N . B . & Torres , R . ( 2009 ) . Oxidative stress as a mediator of life history trade - offs : mechanisms , measurements and interpretation . — Ecol . Lett . 12 : 75 - 92 . Moore , T . ( 1930 ) . VI . The conversion of carotene to vitamin A in vivo . — Biochem . J . 24 : 696 - 702 . Morales , J . , Velando , A . & Torres , R . ( 2008 ) . Fecundity compromises attractiveness when pigments are scarce . — Behav . Ecol . 20 : 117 - 123 . Morton , R . A . & Creed , R . H . ( 1939 ) . The conversion of carotene to vitamin A2 by some fresh - water ﬁshes . — Biochem . J . 33 : 318 - 324 . Mougeot , F . , Perez - Rodriguez , L . , Martinez - Padilla , J . , Leckie , F . & Redpath , S . M . ( 2007 ) . Parasites , testosterone and honest carotenoid - based signalling of health . — Funct . Ecol . 21 : 886 - 898 . Nordeide , J . T . , Mohus , A . , Nicolaisen , O . , Volden , R . & Egeland , E . S . ( 2008 ) . Offspring or ornaments ? Is carotenoid - based ornamentation in female Arctic charr , Salvelinus alpinus ( L . ) , condition - dependent and traded off against offspring ? — Ecol . Freshw . Fish 17 : 328 - 339 . 186 Svensson & Wong Nys , Y . ( 2000 ) . Dietary carotenoids and egg yolk coloration — a review . — Arch . Gefügelk . 64 : 45 - 54 . Oakes , K . D . & Van der Kraak , G . J . ( 2003 ) . Utility of the TBARS assay in detecting oxida - tive stress in white sucker ( Catostomus commersoni ) populations exposed to pulp mill efﬂuent . — Aquat . Toxicol . 63 : 447 - 463 . Okimasu , E . , Matsumoto , M . , Yoshida , Y . & Amemura , A . ( 1992 ) . The effect of pigments of Rhodobacter capsulatus on free - radicals and application of the bacterium as feed to ﬁsh larvae . — Nippon Suisan Gakkai Shi 58 : 1487 - 1491 . Olson , V . A . & Owens , I . P . F . ( 1998 ) . Costly sexual signals : are carotenoids rare , risky or required ? — Trends Ecol . Evol . 13 : 510 - 514 . Olson , V . A . & Owens , I . P . F . ( 2005 ) . Interspeciﬁc variation in the use of carotenoid - based coloration in birds : diet , life history and phylogeny . — J . Evol . Biol . 18 : 1534 - 1546 . Olsson , M . , Healey , M . , Wapstra , E . , Schwartz , T . , Lebas , N . & Uller , T . ( 2007 ) . Mating system variation and morph ﬂuctuations in a polymorphic lizard . — Mol . Ecol . 16 : 5307 - 5315 . Østerlie , M . ( 2000 ) . Nutritional aspects of astaxanthin isomers . — PhD thesis , Department of Chemistry , NTNU , Trondheim . Østerlie , M . , Bjerkeng , B . & Liaaen - Jensen , S . ( 1999 ) . Accumulation of astaxanthin all - E , 9Z and 13Z geometrical isomers and 3 and 3 (cid:2) RS optical isomers in rainbow trout ( Oncorhynchus mykiss ) is selective . — J . Nutr . 129 : 391 - 398 . Palmer , L . S . & Kempster , H . L . ( 1919 ) . The inﬂuence of speciﬁc feeds and certain pigments on the color of the egg yolk and body fat of fowls . — J . Biol . Chem . 39 : 331 - 337 . Palozza , P . ( 1998 ) . Prooxidant actions of carotenoids in biologic systems . — Nutr . Rev . 56 : 257 - 265 . Parker , R . S . ( 1996 ) . Carotenoids . 4 . Absorption , metabolism , and transport of carotenoids . — FASEB J . 10 : 542 - 551 . Perez - Rodriguez , L . ( 2009 ) . Carotenoids in evolutionary ecology : re - evaluating the antioxi - dant role . — Bioessays 31 : 1116 - 1126 . Perez - Rodriguez , L . , Mougeot , F . , Alonso - Alvarez , C . , Blas , J . , Vinuela , J . & Bortolotti , G . R . ( 2008 ) . Cell - mediated immune activation rapidly decreases plasma carotenoids but does not affect oxidative stress in red - legged partridges ( Alectoris rufa ) . — J . Exp . Biol . 211 : 2155 - 2161 . Perez , C . , Lores , M . & Velando , A . ( 2008 ) . Availability of nonpigmentary antioxidant affects red coloration in gulls . — Behav . Ecol . 19 : 967 - 973 . Peters , A . ( 2007 ) . Testosterone and carotenoids : an integrated view of trade - offs between immunity and sexual signalling . — Bioessays 29 : 427 - 430 . Pike , T . W . , Blount , J . D . , Bjerkeng , B . , Lindström , J . & Metcalfe , N . B . ( 2007a ) . Carotenoids , oxidative stress and female mating preference for longer lived males . — Proc . Roy . Soc . Lond . B : Biol . 274 : 1591 - 1596 . Pike , T . W . , Blount , J . D . , Lindström , J . & Metcalfe , N . B . ( 2007b ) . Availability of non - carotenoid antioxidants affects the expression of a carotenoid - based sexual ornament . — Biol . Lett . 3 : 353 - 356 . Pike , T . W . , Blount , J . D . , Lindström , J . & Metcalfe , N . B . ( 2007c ) . Dietary carotenoid avail - ability inﬂuences a male’s ability to provide parental care . — Behav . Ecol . 18 : 1100 - 1105 . Pryke , S . R . , Andersson , S . & Lawes , M . J . ( 2001 ) . Sexual selection of multiple handicaps in the red - collared widowbird : female choice of tail length but not carotenoid display . — Evolution 55 : 1452 - 1463 . Carotenoid - based signals in behavioural ecology 187 Pryke , S . R . , Andersson , S . , Lawes , M . J . & Piper , S . E . ( 2002 ) . Carotenoid status signaling in captive and wild red - collared widowbirds : independent effects of badge size and color . — Behav . Ecol . 13 : 622 - 631 . Rahman , M . L . , Yoshida , K . , Maeda , I . , Tanaka , H . & Sugita , S . ( 2010 ) . Distribution of retinal cone photoreceptor oil droplets , and identiﬁcation of associated carotenoids in crow ( Corvus macrorhynchos ) . — Zool . Sci . 27 : 514 - 521 . Rajasingh , H . , Oyehaug , L . , Vage , D . I . & Omholt , S . W . ( 2006 ) . Carotenoid dynamics in Atlantic salmon . — BMC Biol . 4 : 15 . Rajasingh , H . , Vage , D . I . , Pavey , S . A . & Omholt , S . W . ( 2007 ) . Why are salmonids pink ? — Can . J . Fish . Aquat . Sci . 64 : 1614 - 1627 . Rao , A . V . & Rao , L . G . ( 2007 ) . Carotenoids and human health . — Pharmacol . Res . 55 : 207 - 216 . Riechert , S . E . ( 1978 ) . Games spiders play — behavioral variability in territorial disputes . — Behav . Ecol . Sociobiol . 3 : 135 - 162 . Rohwer , S . ( 1975 ) . Social signiﬁcance of avian winter plumage variability . — Evolution 29 : 593 - 610 . Rønnestad , I . , Hemre , G . I . , Finn , R . N . & Lie , O . ( 1998 ) . Alternate sources and dynamics of vitamin A and its incorporation into the eyes during the early endotrophic and ex - otrophic larval stages of Atlantic halibut ( Hippoglossus hippoglossus L . ) . — Comp . Biochem . Physiol . A 119 : 787 - 793 . Rowland , W . J . , Baube , C . L . & Horan , T . T . ( 1991 ) . Signaling of sexual receptivity by pigmen - tation pattern in female sticklebacks . — Anim . Behav . 42 : 243 - 249 . Rutkowska , J . ( 2007 ) . Genealogy of zebra ﬁnch lab populations : results from call for DNA samples . — Behav . Ecol . 19 ( Suppl . ) : S7 . Saino , N . , Ferrari , R . , Romano , M . , Martinelli , R . & Møller , A . P . ( 2003 ) . Experimental manipulation of egg carotenoids affects immunity of barn swallow nestlings . — Proc . Roy . Soc . Lond . B : Biol . 270 : 2485 - 2489 . Saino , N . , Ninni , P . , Calza , S . , Martinelli , R . , De Bernardi , F . & Møller , A . P . ( 2000 ) . Better red than dead : carotenoid - based mouth coloration reveals infection in barn swallow nestlings . — Proc . Roy . Soc . Lond . B : Biol . 267 : 57 - 61 . Sandre , S . L . , Tammaru , T . , Esperk , T . , Julkunen - Tiitto , R . & Mappes , J . ( 2007 ) . Carotenoid - based colour polyphenism in a moth species : search for ﬁtness correlates . — Entomol . Exp . Appl . 124 : 269 - 277 . Schwedhelm , E . , Maas , R . , Troost , R . & Boger , R . H . ( 2003 ) . Clinical pharmacokinetics of antioxidants and their impact on systemic oxidative stress . — Clin . Pharmacokin . 42 : 437 - 459 . Senar , J . C . ( 2006 ) . Color displays as intrasexual signals of aggression —In : Bird coloration , Vol . 2 : function and evolution ( Hill , G . E . , ed . ) . Harvard University Press , London , p . 87 - 136 . Shapiro , S . S . , Mott , D . J . & Machlin , L . J . ( 1984 ) . Kinetic characteristics of beta - carotene uptake and depletion in rat - tissue . — J . Nutr . 114 : 1924 - 1933 . Shimidzu , N . , Goto , M . & Miki , W . ( 1996 ) . Carotenoids as singlet oxygen quenchers in marine organisms . — Fish . Sci . 62 : 134 - 137 . Siefermann - Harms , D . ( 1985 ) . Carotenoids in photosynthesis . 1 . Location in photosynthetic membranes and light - harvesting function . — Biochim . Biophys . Acta 811 : 325 - 355 . 188 Svensson & Wong Siems , W . , Wiswedel , I . , Salerno , C . , Crifo , C . , Augustin , W . , Schild , L . , Langhans , C . D . & Sommerburg , O . ( 2005 ) . beta - carotene breakdown products may impair mitochondr - ial functions — potential side effects of high - dose beta - carotene supplementation . — J . Nutr . Biochem . 16 : 385 - 397 . Sies , H . ( 1991 ) . Oxidative stress : introduction . — In : Oxidative stress : oxidants and antioxi - dants ( Sies , H . , ed . ) . Academic Press , London , p . xv - xxii . Sköld , H . N . , Amundsen , T . , Svensson , P . A . , Mayer , I . , Bjelvenmark , J . & Forsgren , E . ( 2008 ) . Hormonal regulation of female nuptial coloration in a ﬁsh . — Horm . Behav . 54 : 549 - 556 . Smith , H . G . , Råberg , L . , Ohlsson , T . , Granbom , M . & Hasselquist , D . ( 2007 ) . Carotenoid and protein supplementation have differential effects on pheasant ornamentation and immunity . — J . Evol . Biol . 20 : 310 - 319 . Steffen , J . E . & McGraw , K . J . ( 2007 ) . Contributions of pterin and carotenoid pigments to dewlap coloration in two anole species . — Comp . Biochem . Physiol . B 146 : 42 - 46 . Steven , D . M . ( 1949 ) . Studies on animal carotenoids . 2 . Carotenoids in the reproductive cycle of the brown trout . — J . Exp . Biol . 26 : 295 - 303 . Storebakken , T . & Goswami , U . C . ( 1996 ) . Plasma carotenoid concentration indicates the availability of dietary astaxanthin for Atlantic salmon , Salmo salar . — Aquaculture 146 : 147 - 153 . Sumner , F . B . & Fox , D . L . ( 1933 ) . A study of variations in the amount of yellow pigment ( xan - thophyll ) in certain ﬁshes , and of the possible effects upon this of colored backgrounds . — J . Exp . Zool . 66 : 263 - 301 . Surai , P . F . ( 2002 ) . Natural antioxidants in avian nutrition and reproduction . — Nottingham University Press , Nottingham . Surai , P . F . & Speake , B . K . ( 1998 ) . Distribution of carotenoids from the yolk to the tissues of the chick embryo . — J . Nutr . Biochem . 9 : 645 - 651 . Surai , P . F . , Speake , B . K . , Noble , R . C . & Sparks , N . H . C . ( 1999 ) . Tissue - speciﬁc antioxidant proﬁles and susceptibility to lipid peroxidation of the newly hatched chick . — Biol . Trace Elem . Res . 68 : 63 - 78 . Surai , P . F . , Speake , B . K . & Sparks , N . H . C . ( 2001a ) . Carotenoids in avian nutrition and em - bryonic development . 2 . Antioxidant properties in discrimination in embryonic tissues . — J . Poultry Sci . 38 : 117 - 145 . Surai , P . F . , Speake , B . K . , Wood , N . A . R . , Blount , J . D . , Bortolotti , G . R . & Sparks , N . H . C . ( 2001b ) . Carotenoid discrimination by the avian embryo : a lesson from wild birds . — Comp . Biochem . Physiol . B 128 : 743 - 750 . Svensson , P . A . , Blount , J . D . , Forsgren , E . & Amundsen , T . ( 2009 ) . Female ornamentation and egg carotenoids of six sympatric gobies . — J . Fish Biol . 75 : 2777 – 2787 . Svensson , P . A . , Pélabon , C . , Blount , J . D . , Surai , P . F . & Amundsen , T . ( 2006 ) . Does female nuptial coloration reﬂect egg carotenoids and clutch quality in the two - spotted goby ( Gobiusculus ﬂavescens , Gobiidae ) ? — Funct . Ecol . 20 : 689 - 698 . Taylor , E . B . , Foote , C . J . & Wood , C . C . ( 1996 ) . Molecular genetic evidence for parallel life - history evolution within a Paciﬁc salmon ( sockeye salmon and kokanee , Oncorhynchus nerka ) . — Evolution 50 : 401 - 416 . Thorogood , R . , Kilner , R . M . , Karadas , F . & Ewen , J . G . ( 2008 ) . Spectral mouth colour of nestlings changes with carotenoid availability . — Funct . Ecol . 22 : 1044 - 1051 . Tinbergen , N . & Perdeck , A . C . ( 1950 ) . On the stimulus situation releasing the begging re - sponse in the newly hatched herring gull chick ( Larus argentatus argentatus Pont ) . — Behaviour 3 : 1 - 39 . Carotenoid - based signals in behavioural ecology 189 Toral , G . M . , Figuerola , J . & Negro , J . J . ( 2008 ) . Multiple ways to become red : pigment identiﬁcation in red feathers using spectrometry . — Comp . Biochem . Physiol . B 150 : 147 - 152 . Torrissen , O . J . & Christiansen , R . ( 1995 ) . Requirements for carotenoids in ﬁsh diets . — J . Appl . Ichthyol . 11 : 225 - 230 . Tschirren , B . , Fitze , P . S . & Richner , H . ( 2005 ) . Carotenoid - based nestling colouration and parental favouritism in the great tit . — Oecologia 143 : 477 - 482 . Tsushima , M . , Kawakami , T . , Mine , M . & Matsuno , T . ( 1997 ) . The role of carotenoids in the development of the sea urchin Pseudocentrotus depressus . — Invertebr . Reprod . Dev . 32 : 149 - 153 . Vanhoutteghem , A . , Londero , T . , Ghinea , N . & Djian , P . ( 2004 ) . Serial cultivation of chicken keratinocytes , a composite cell type that accumulates lipids and synthesizes a novel beta - keratin . — Differentiation 72 : 123 - 137 . Vinkler , M . & Albrecht , T . ( 2010 ) . Carotenoid maintenance handicap and the physiology of carotenoid - based signalisation of health . — Naturwissenschaften 97 : 19 - 28 . von Frisch , K . ( 1967 ) . The dance language and orientation of bees . — Harvard University Press , Cambridge , MA . von Schantz , T . , Bensch , S . , Grahn , M . , Hasselquist , D . & Wittzell , H . ( 1999 ) . Good genes , oxidative stress and condition - dependent sexual signals . — Proc . Roy . Soc . Lond . B : Biol . 266 : 1 - 12 . Wathne , E . , Bjerkeng , B . , Storebakken , T . , Vassvik , V . & Odland , A . B . ( 1998 ) . Pigmentation of Atlantic salmon ( Salmo salar ) fed astaxanthin in all meals or in alternating meals . — Aquaculture 159 : 217 - 231 . Watkins , G . G . ( 1997 ) . Inter - sexual signalling and the functions of female coloration in the tropidurid lizard Microlophus occipitalis . — Anim . Behav . 53 : 843 - 852 . Weiss , S . L . ( 2002 ) . Reproductive signals of female lizards : pattern of trait expression and male response . — Ethology 108 : 793 - 813 . Wicksten , M . K . ( 1989 ) . Why are there bright colors in sessile marine invertebrates ? — Bull . Mar . Sci . 45 : 519 - 530 . Winston , G . W . , Lemaire , D . G . E . & Lee , R . F . ( 2004 ) . Antioxidants and total oxyradical scav - enging capacity during grass shrimp , Palaemonetes pugio , embryogenesis . — Comp . Biochem . Physiol . C 139 : 281 - 288 . Yeh , S . L . & Wu , S . H . ( 2006 ) . Effects of quercetin on beta - apo - 8 (cid:2) - carotenal - induced DNA damage and cytochrome P1A2 expression in A549 cells . — Chem . - Biol . Interact . 163 : 199 - 206 . Young , A . J . & Lowe , G . M . ( 2001 ) . Antioxidant and prooxidant properties of carotenoids . — Arch . Biochem . Biophys . 385 : 20 - 27 . Zagalsky , P . F . , Ceccaldi , H . J . & Daumas , R . ( 1970 ) . Comparative studies on some decapod crustacean carotenoproteins . — Comp . Biochem . Physiol . 34 : 579 - 607 . Zahavi , A . ( 1975 ) . Mate selection — selection for a handicap . — J . Theor . Biol . 53 : 205 - 214 . Zebisch , K . , Krautwald - Junghanns , M . E . & Willuhn , J . ( 2004 ) . Ultrasound - guided liver biopsy in birds . — Vet . Radiol . Ultrasound 45 : 241 - 246 . Zhang , L . X . , Cooney , R . V . & Bertram , J . S . ( 1992 ) . Carotenoids up - regulate connexin43 gene - expression independent of their provitamin A or antioxidant properties . — Cancer Res . 52 : 5707 - 5712 . Zhao , W . , Han , Y . S . , Zhao , B . L . , Hirota , S . , Hou , J . W . & Xin , W . J . ( 1998 ) . Effect of carotenoids on the respiratory burst of rat peritoneal macrophages . — Biochim . Bio - phys . Acta 1381 : 77 - 88 .