Group 1 : HCI Winter School Literature Review Creativity Support Tools Julia , Biesiada Piotr , Borissov julia . biesiada @ universite - paris - saclay . fr piotr . borissov @ universite - paris - saclay . fr Université Paris - Saclay Computer Science Orsay , France Gaia , Businaro Kevin , Ratovo gaia . businaro @ universite - paris - saclay . fr kevin . ratovo @ universite - paris - saclay . fr Université Paris - Saclay Computer Science Orsay , France ABSTRACT A number of artistic fields have already finished their transition to using computer tools . This is even truer in music composition or photography for example , where post processing is a necessary step in production . In this article , we take a look at the literature of these creativity support tools . We take three different scenarios : Ideation , Design processing , and Artistic tools . They all share the creativity theme while facing completely different issues . Artistic tools show a disparity between computer interface and artist work space . Design processing struggles due to lack of communication means issue between designers , engineers and expert users . Ideas emerging from the ideation process are difficult to convey to non - designer stakeholders . We review the papers in this literature to highlight the solutions to these problems . 1 INTRODUCTION Creativity is one of , if not the single most important trait in a job of a designer or an artist . It is questionable whether creativity is an inborn privilege or a skill attainable through effort and learning . Runco et al . [ 20 ] identifies certain genes responsible for increased creative fluency . Fasko ( 2001 ) [ 8 ] however argues , that creativity can be increased through education , and can decrease if an individ - ual does not receive mind stimulating education . We believe both of these ideas to be true . Some individuals might have a certain predisposition to creativity , but tools to support it are a necessity . This literature review presents an overview of such tools , divided into 3 categories : design processing , artistic practice and ideation assistance . Design processing support tools focus on facilitating ideas ex - pression and communication between designers and stakeholders . Designers , engineers and experts are three very distinct parties , that due to varied background might encounter communication difficulties during the process . The next section about ideation as - sistance partially overlaps with the previous one , due to the fact that many design methods have more than one purpose , e . g . video prototyping is a form of communicating ideas but also leads to the emergence of new thoughts . Lastly , artistic practice support addresses the problem of divergence of computer interfaces and artists’ work spaces . One looks nothing like the other . Artists are unable to personalise the interfaces and struggle with lack of tool transfer - ability . 2 RELATED WORK The reviewed work was separated accordingly to the three cat - egories presented earlier . We start with Design Processing and discuss solutions related to creation of storyboards , sketches , paper and video prototypes and general assistance throughout the design process . Then we review information visualisation tools and reflec - tion aids in ideation assistance and finish by reviewing some tools related to artistic practice . 2 . 1 Design Processing As of now , developers and designers use completely different tools and don’t necessarily share skills in their respective fields . This leads to a number of breakdowns during the design process , that can be solved with face to face collaboration or long back and forth of sending messages and documents . This created the need of collaborative tools between engineers and designers . Forsyth and Martin [ 9 ] took a try at this exercise . Their design takes the form of a storyboard that you can annotate progressively . You attach tags to objects such as Action , Event , Context , Time . The system can also prompt users for tags when information is missing . From the storyboard , the system generates a state machine that can then be translated into code . The design is a great step forward , but presents a number of limitations . This creates a reliance on storyboard from a design perspective , which is not ideal . Storyboards also contain ambiguity , usually a starting point for ideation in design , but a barrier in coding implementation . A further exploration of collaborative tools was done by Leiva et al . [ 17 ] in the form of ENACT . The paper presenting studies in depth the breakdowns that designer - developer collaboration face , such as the ambiguity caused by designed artifacts , and extracts four principles that collaborative tools should follow . ● Support multiple viewpoints : The prototype should be seen from a designer as well as a developer point of view . This means it should support both code and visual representation . ● Maintain a single source of truth : Modifying an object in either paradigm should modify both . This solves inconsis - tencies from lack of communication . ● Reveal the invisible : some objects only exist in code , and some only in prototypes . The software should be able to generate a mirror image in the other point of view . ● Support design by enaction : have designers and developers play the role of users in input and interaction . This solves Julia , Biesiada , Piotr , Borissov , Gaia , Businaro , and Kevin , Ratovo edge cases and allows further exploring of novel interaction techniques . ENACT has a similar look to the electronic storyboard design . The main addition is the support of an external device , which is re - lated to the fourth principle . Users can test the prototype directly from the device . This keeps interactions in a prime position , and allows for novel and complex techniques to be understood easily by developers . Ironically , creation of design artifacts is also lacking in tools . There is a big reliance on paper prototyping for low fidelity mock - ups . Paper prototypes are very powerful , but are not fit for contin - uous interaction that necessitate feedback such as resizing . Leiva and Beaudouin - Lafon’s [ 16 ] Montage is a proposed solution to this . The authors idea is to split the prototyping into three : a user con - text where the interactions happen , an interface meant for paper prototype support , and a canvas where you can draw . By overlay - ing those views into a single place through streaming , designers can insert dynamic feedback and complex representations . This extra processing can either be done live by a wizard , or as post processing . Moving on to another topic , Kim et al . [ 12 ] provides valuable in - sight on the future of Human - Fabrication interactions . The current creative process on FabMachines is very linear making creators follow a very linear process of first designing until almost per - fection and then start the production of their design . However if the production were to fail , the creator needs to restart again and make adjustments . This way of working prevents spontaneous and serendipitous in - the - wild design ideas from emerging during de - sign and fabrication workflows . Kim et al . [ 12 ] seek to re - frame the relation between fabrication machines and designers . FabMachines are envisioned as colleagues providing precise digital fabrication and yet allowing for material manipulation on the fly to leverage the beauty and serendipity of handcraft . This work provides a series of design fictions illustrating and speculating the future of Human - Fabrication interaction . There have also been studies on human collaboration . Brown et al . study on collaborative events and shared artefacts [ 4 ] focuses on point of view of agile teams . It is a common design paradigm meant to produce a prototype as soon as possible and iterate on it . This method has conflicts with design teams [ 17 ] , due to the time required to submit a decent design . Those conflicts are re - solved through collaborative events , a process called alignment work . Brown et al . identify 3 types of collaborative events and 12 types of artifact , all being a part of the cultural sphere of collabora - tion between designers and developers . A similar study was also done to investigate the design process of novice designers . Bousseau et al . [ 3 ] focus their research on discov - ering how do novices sketch in order to draw design implications for CAD tools targeting novice users . Their research is motivated by the fact that most CAD tools are created for professional design practice , which is a serious drawback for novice designers , due to the fact that sketching , prototyping and collaboration has a strong positive impact on the quality of the final design . The study proved that laymen lack the ability to draw their sketches accurately and that physical materials play a key role in their design process and prototype fabrication . Furthermore , it was discovered that collab - oration based on feedback and critique is more valuable than the one based on presentation . A CAD tool targeted at novice users would have to incorporate these findings in order to be useful . The subject of sketching in more advanced context is discussed by Felice et al . [ 6 ] . This work focuses on designers’ common prob - lem of aligning and distributing graphical objects . They conducted an initial study that allowed them to identify the shortcomings of widely used graphical editors : lack of : persistence , control and generality . Identifying these weaknesses allowed the authors to create StickyLines , a tool that treats guidelines as first class objects , reunifying them in a form of a line , that can be manipulated . Sticky - Lines allow precise control over objects distribution and alignment by using ’tweaks’ that belong to objects and can be copied between them and reused . An experiment comparing commands and , the latter performed 40 % faster and required 49 % less actions . However , the participants of this experiment identified some features that were missing from StickyLines , like mirroring tool or merging and dividing guidelines . 2 . 2 Ideation Assistance Starting with Mood Boards , Lucero ( 2012 ) [ 18 ] explores the appli - cation of mood boards is the design process . They consist mostly of images , but might also include textures , color swatches or objects . These boards are deliberately highly ambiguous , in order to initiate a debate between stakeholders and designers . Based on a retro - spective interviews , Lucero [ 18 ] argues that this technique plays an important role in 5 early stages of a design process : framing , aligning , paradoxing , abstracting and directing . As powerful a tool as they are , mood boards do not lack limitations . Their creation is time consuming and expensive . Additionally , the mix of openness and research can be rather confusing for some stakeholders , thus they can be used the most effectively among designers themselves , who are accustomed with the technique . Koch et al . [ 14 ] address this last problem by designing Seman - ticCollage , a tool supporting designers in the creation of mood boards by enriching the images with semantic labels . This augmen - tation allows the users not only to easier explain the concept to non - designers stakeholders , but also to transform their vague ideas into precise search queries . SemanticCollage uses computer vision algorithms to extract the labels related to each image and gathers them into ’tags clouds’ . This way , designers can become aware of the main ideas behind their design , even if they are not quite able to define them just by looking at the images . Furthermore , this tool provides a solution for the disruption of the creative flow by switching between the graphical tools to create the mood boards ( e . g Adobe Illustrator ) and tools to search for images ( e . g . Pinterest ) . SemanticCollage integrates both the image searching and the mood board creation . To justify their work Koch et al . [ 13 ] highlights that " professional designers create mood boards to explore , visualize , and communi - cate hard - to - express ideas " . They also state that " very few systems Group 1 : HCI Winter School Literature Review Creativity Support Tools support the entire creative process , with support for different facets of inspirational practice and mostly focus on finding new material or simply encourages collaborative work " . In response to that issue was born ImageSense which is an intelligent , collaborative ideation tool that combines individual and shared work spaces , as well as collaboration with multiple forms of intelligent agents . Webb et al . [ 23 ] pushes the concept of mood boards further and builds on the idea of visualisation being an important factor in a creative ideation process , but adds a semantic dimension to it . The system allows for creation of rich bookmarks combining visual clippings and semantic metadata . Webb et al . [ 23 ] emphasise the importance of reflection and interpretation in creative processes . InfoComposer being a form of a mood board allows for ambiguous interpretation , but also for reflection on previously reviewed arti - cles , patents and ideas thanks to the addition of the semantic layer . It lacks however the flexibility of a mood board , due to limited type of objects that can be added to a rich bookmark . Sharmin et al . [ 21 ] decided to deepen the on - action process in creative design , by first reporting results from in - depth interviews with practicing designers . What they discovered was that activi - ties related to reflection - on - action are intentional , repetitive and frequent , and there is a strong need for better reflection support tools . Emphasis was put on the importance of adopting reflective practices and the positive impact it can have on design outcomes . To address this need , they created a tool , called ReflectionSpace , that uses file meta - data and naming conventions to map design materials to the appropriate design phase and context of use and places corresponding representations in a time - and - activity centric visualization that can be navigated at different levels of detail . De - signers reported that this tool helped them comparing the design processes of different projects and recalling useful anecdotes , and the mapping of design materials to the different design phases was considered effective . Proceeding further into the topic , Lucero ( 2015 ) et al . [ 19 ] fo - cused on a project that explored how to provide support for pro - fessionals in their work with novel technology by systematically involving end users throughout the design process . This process of co - designing brought to life the funky - design spaces vision of a holistic design studio housing interconnected tools that support the creation of mood boards . Two prototypes were made and evaluated with designers . The evaluations that derived suggest this type of environment could improve creativity and encourage collaboration . Further insight on design spaces was provided by Dove et al . [ 7 ] who argued that reflecting on the design space of a project provides three important benefits . First it increases the awareness of the constraints introduced by particular design choices . Second , it qualifies the understanding of the way design activities can influ - ence the design space . Third , the consequent prompt to challenge these constraints and reconsider disregarded choices . They have introduced SnapShot , the web - based tool they are developing to support the design space reflection approach , and presented two example cases in which projects were revisited to argue about the importance of documenting and reflecting on the design space . To provide theoretical support for their work , they also articulated an interpretation of “design space” as an instance of a conceptual space . 2 . 3 Artist practice Tsandilas et al . [ 22 ] developed Musink , a tool to support the creative design process of composing original music . Due to the divergent aspects and characteristics that play a role in this process , composers don’t limit themselves by expressing their ideas on pa - per , but also working with the computer , developing functions for new sounds that cannot be captured with traditional music notation . In this study , they came to view Musink as an interactive paper interface to Open Music and co - invented new functionalities with the composers . They demonstrated the primary role that paper con - tinues to play in the creative process , but also how the final result could be influenced by the particular input / output characteristics of the synergy between computer and paper . Another expressive software is Knotation by Felice et al . [ 5 ] . It is a software meant to enhance the note taking from users in the field of dance . The main challenge compared to Musink lies in the fact that individuals all have their personal notation for movements , style , and so on . The goal of notation is not to create a generic notation for all these users , but instead to give more power to note taking . Knotation can attach knots to any stroke and or object drawn by the user , and this knot contains information relevant to dancing movement : energy , speed , and quality . It also has 2 other distinctive objects which are timelines and floorplans . The design puts two principles in the foreground which are expressivity and appropri - ability . Those objects don’t have a predetermined used , and it’s up to the user to take advantage of them . The main idea to extract is how the design doesn’t diverge from the initial working method of dance - users which is taking notes on actual paper and filming , but expands on it instead . Moving on to another technology we have Mobi3DSketch [ 15 ] which offers 3D concept designs in a real - world context using a single AR - enabled mobile device . 3D sketching has mainly been explored in Virtual Reality . Compared to VR , Augmented Reality allows users to author 3D sketches that are more directly linked to real - world objects or environments . Sadly , the only phone ap - plications that exist are mostly for doodling and making simple designs . With a proper challenge analysis for mobile AR , 3D sketch - ing Mobi3DSketch provides the design of novel interaction . The first working prototype unifies relative drawing , various forms of snapping , and planar / curved surface proxies into a powerful work - flow . However motion tracking is not yet robust enough which makes the technology somewhat unstable . We can easily imagine the previous technology to be jointed with Color Portraits . In that research Jalal et al . [ 11 ] commented that color pickers have remained largely unchanged for 25 years . In fact untrained users still have trouble selecting particular colors [ 1 ] and professional artists do not want to simply follow prescribed color systems and theories [ 2 ] . Thus the research strives to improve how authors of digital media manipulate color to achieve desired effects . This resulted in a set of four color probes to manipulate color Julia , Biesiada , Piotr , Borissov , Gaia , Businaro , and Kevin , Ratovo relationships within a shared context , compose and decompose diverse colors and textures , generate and capture chains of color guided by the user and finally reveal underlying processes by subtly changing hue and color intensity . Moving from an artistic context to an office environment , Han et al . [ 10 ] pointed that writing technical documents often requires to follow constraints and a consistent use of domain - specific terms . Most of the professional figures they interviewed admitted they rely on memory to maintain consistent vocabulary and manage dependencies in their writings . In order to find a solution to this problem , the authors introduced the concept of Textlets , interac - tive objects that concretize selections of text into persistent items . The consequent study they did , proved the value of searchlets , a complex type of textlets . By turning search matches into persistent objects that users can manipulate directly , users were able to use functions that they would otherwise have avoided in a traditional word processors . Moreover , searchlets were so versatile that the users used them in unexpected ways , like to avoid forbidden words . With the same motivation of helping professionals , Xia et al . [ 24 ] state that electronic whiteboards remain surprisingly difficult to use in the context of creativity support and design . A key problem is that once a designer places strokes and reference images on a canvas , doing anything useful with a subset of that content involves numerous steps . The will to unify them into one and provide a continuity of action by erasing the barriers a designer can face between SELECTION and ACTION brought WritLarge to life . The design of WritLarge sought to open new vistas for freeform content on electronic whiteboards . The system achieves this in a unique way , using carefully crafted input techniques that afford unified scope , action , andzoom , with pen - plus - touch—and both hands—in natural and complementary roles . 3 CONCLUSION The technologies presented in the last part of our Related work section are only the tip of the iceberg . This field of study is filled with promising researches that will , without a doubt , prove to be of use and enhance any creative process , be it music , dancing , writing a paper or anything else . It is also delighting to see tools as Color Pickers [ 11 ] , that we are well accustomed to , evolving and still bring - ing new possibilities . This is a creative process of it’s own , to build upon already existing methods , systems and practices and imbed them with modern technology as demonstrated with Mobi3DSketch [ 15 ] . The variety of the proposed solutions constitutes an incredibly diverse toolbox for any creator to pick from and thus maximizing his creative process . It is not only some specific technologies that are improved and put together . On a larger scope the whole creative process is evolv - ing with constant meta - data analysis of design processes allowing to produce smooth workflows . In the middle part of our Related work section , we explored the design process , analyzing different systems that supported it . Starting from mood boards as a tool to communicate , visualize and express ideas , we moved from a pure visual content to a more hybrid one . We passed from images to semantic metadata in order to better convey concepts , and create richer workflows . Then further steps of the creative design process where investigated and developed into useful tools , concluding with an analysis that led to challenge the constraints in the design activities . Finally , most of the tools and processes mention and take into account the collaborative process . Collaboration is going to be the main direction for research , especially at a distance considering the situation that arose with the 2020 Covid - 19 pandemic , where people were forced to smart - work from home . The enhancement of design processes will ultimately affect software development as a whole , and is a key research question to answer in the future . REFERENCES [ 1 ] J . Albers and N . F . Weber . 2013 . Interaction of Color : 50th Anniversary Edition . Yale University Press . https : / / books . google . fr / books ? id = A _ MYU _ XDXfcC [ 2 ] P . Bailey , Ken Manktelow , and P . Olomolaiye . 2003 . Examination of the color selection process within digital design for the built environment . Proceedings - Theory and Practice of Computer Graphics , TPCG 2003 , 193 – 200 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1109 / TPCG . 2003 . 1206948 [ 3 ] Adrien Bousseau , Theophanis Tsandilas , Lora Oehlberg , and Wendy E . Mackay . 2016 . How Novices Sketch and Prototype Hand - Fabricated Objects . Association for Computing Machinery , New York , NY , USA , 397 – 408 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2858036 . 2858159 [ 4 ] J . M . Brown , G . Lindgaard , and R . Biddle . 2011 . Collaborative Events and Shared Artefacts : AgileInteractionDesignersandDevelopersWorkingTowardCommon Aims . In 2011 Agile Conference . 87 – 96 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1109 / AGILE . 2011 . 45 [ 5 ] MarianelaCiolfiFelice , SarahFdiliAlaoui , andWendyE . Mackay . 2018 . Knotation : Exploring and Documenting Choreographic Processes . Association for Computing Machinery , New York , NY , USA , 1 – 12 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3173574 . 3174022 [ 6 ] Marianela Ciolfi Ciolfi Felice , Nolwenn Maudet , Wendy E . Mackay , and Michel Beaudouin - Lafon . 2016 . Beyond Snapping : Persistent , Tweakable Alignment and Distribution with StickyLines . In UIST ’16 Proceedings of the 29th Annual Symposium on User Interface Software and Technology ( Proceedings of the 29th Annual Symposium on User Interface Software and Technology ) . Tokyo , Japan . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2984511 . 2984577 [ 7 ] Graham Dove , Nicolai Brodersen Hansen , and Kim Halskov . 2016 . An Argu - ment For Design Space Reflection . In Proceedings of the 9th Nordic Conference on Human - Computer Interaction ( Gothenburg , Sweden ) ( NordiCHI ’16 ) . Asso - ciation for Computing Machinery , New York , NY , USA , Article 17 , 10 pages . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2971485 . 2971528 [ 8 ] Daniel Fasko . 2001 . Education and creativity . Creativity research journal 13 , 3 - 4 ( 2001 ) , 317 – 327 . [ 9 ] Jason B . Forsyth and Tom L . Martin . 2014 . Extracting Behavioral Information from Electronic Storyboards . Association for Computing Machinery , New York , NY , USA , 253 – 262 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2607023 . 2607034 [ 10 ] Han L Han , Miguel Renom , Wendy Mackay , and Michel Beaudouin - Lafon . 2020 . Textlets : Supporting Constraints and Consistency in Text Documents . In CHI ’20 - 38th SIGCHI conference on Human Factors in computing systems . ACM , Honolulu , HI , USA , United States , 1 – 13 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3313831 . 3376804 [ 11 ] Ghita Jalal , Nolwenn Maudet , and Wendy E . Mackay . 2015 . Color Portraits : From Color Picking to Interacting with Color . In Proceedings of the ACM International Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems , 2015 . Seoul , South Korea . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2702123 . 2702173 [ 12 ] Jeeeun Kim , Haruki Takahashi , Homei Miyashita , Michelle Annett , and Tom Yeh . 2017 . Machines as Co - Designers : A Fiction on the Future of Human - Fabrication Machine Interaction . Association for Computing Machinery , New York , NY , USA , 790 – 805 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3027063 . 3052763 [ 13 ] Janin Koch , Nicolas Taffin , Michel Beaudouin - Lafon , Markku Laine , Andrés Lucero , and Wendy Mackay . 2020 . ImageSense : An Intelligent Collaborative Ideation Tool to Support Diverse Human - Computer Partnerships . Proceedings of the ACM on Human - Computer Interaction 4 , CSCW1 ( May 2020 ) , 1 – 27 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3392850 [ 14 ] Janin Koch , Nicolas Taffin , Andrés Lucero , and Wendy E . Mackay . 2020 . Seman - ticCollage : Enriching Digital Mood Board Design with Semantic Labels . In DIS ’20 : Designing Interactive Systems Conference 2020 . ACM , Eindhoven , Netherlands , 407 – 418 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3357236 . 3395494 [ 15 ] Kin Chung Kwan and Hongbo Fu . 2019 . Mobi3DSketch : 3D Sketching in Mobile AR . In Proceedings of the 2019 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems ( Glasgow , Scotland Uk ) ( CHI ’19 ) . Association for Computing Machinery , New York , NY , USA , 1 – 11 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3290605 . 3300406 [ 16 ] GermánLeivaandMichelBeaudouin - Lafon . 2018 . Montage : AVideoPrototyping System to Reduce Re - Shooting and Increase Re - Usability . In UIST ’18 . Berlin , Germany . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3242587 . 3242613 Group 1 : HCI Winter School Literature Review Creativity Support Tools [ 17 ] Germán Leiva , Nolwenn Maudet , Wendy Mackay , and Michel Beaudouin - Lafon . 2019 . Enact : Reducing Designer - Developer Breakdowns when Prototyping Cus - tom Interactions . ACM Transactions on Computer - Human Interaction 26 , 3 ( June 2019 ) , 1 – 48 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3310276 [ 18 ] Andrés Lucero . 2012 . Framing , aligning , paradoxing , abstracting , and directing : How design mood boards work . Proceedings of the Designing Interactive Systems Conference , DIS ’12 ( 06 2012 ) . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2317956 . 2318021 [ 19 ] Andrés Lucero . 2015 . Funky - Design - Spaces : Interactive Environments for Cre - ativity Inspired by Observing Designers Making Mood Boards . In 15th Human - Computer Interaction ( INTERACT ) ( Human - Computer Interaction – INTERACT 2015 , Vol . LNCS - 9298 ) . Bamberg , Germany , 474 – 492 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1007 / 978 - 3 - 319 - 22698 - 9 _ 32 [ 20 ] Mark A Runco , Ernest P Noble , Roni Reiter - Palmon , Selcuk Acar , Terry Ritchie , and Justin M Yurkovich . 2011 . The genetic basis of creativity and ideational fluency . Creativity Research Journal 23 , 4 ( 2011 ) , 376 – 380 . [ 21 ] Moushumi Sharmin and Brian P . Bailey . 2013 . ReflectionSpace : An Interactive Visualization Tool for Supporting Reflection - on - Action in Design . In Proceedings of the 9th ACM Conference on Creativity Cognition ( Sydney , Australia ) ( CC ’13 ) . Association for Computing Machinery , New York , NY , USA , 83 – 92 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2466627 . 2466645 [ 22 ] Theophanis Tsandilas , Catherine Letondal , and Wendy Mackay . 2009 . Musink : Composing Music through Augmented Drawing . In International conference on Human factors in computing systems . Boston , United States , 819 – 828 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 1518701 . 1518827 [ 23 ] Andrew M . Webb , Rhema Linder , Andruid Kerne , Nic Lupfer , Yin Qu , Bryant Poffenberger , and Colton Revia . 2013 . Promoting Reflection and Interpretation in Education : CuratingRichBookmarksas InformationComposition . In Proceedings of the 9th ACM Conference on Creativity Cognition ( Sydney , Australia ) ( CC ’13 ) . Association for Computing Machinery , New York , NY , USA , 53 – 62 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 2466627 . 2466636 [ 24 ] Haijun Xia , Ken Hinckley , Michel Pahud , Xiao Tu , and Bill Buxton . 2017 . Writ - Large : Ink Unleashed by Unified Scope , Action , Zoom . Association for Computing Machinery , New York , NY , USA , 3227 – 3240 . https : / / doi . org / 10 . 1145 / 3025453 . 3025664