C O R R E S P O N D E N C E colleagues have questioned the dendritic nuclea - tion model in a recent paper 1 . In their study , they challenge key evidence supporting the den - dritic nucleation model ; namely , visualization of branched actin filaments in lamellipodia by platinum - replica electron microscopy 4 , 5 . Urban et al . argue 1 that the branched configuration of the actin filaments in these samples are an arte - fact of critical - point drying , a part of the sample preparation . To prove their hypothesis that the actin filaments in lamellipodia are long and unbranched , they analysed the structure of lamel - lipodia by cryo - electron microscopy , and did not detect branched actin filaments in lamellipodia 1 . Because the data from platinum - replica elec - tron microscopy that demonstrate branched actin filaments in lamellipodia have been reported primarily by our group , and because we have received multiple requests from the sci - entific community to comment on the results of Urban et al . , we would like to share our opin - ion with a broader audience through this com - mentary . Several points , including comparison of potential artefacts produced by the two elec - tron microscopy techniques and evaluation of evidence for and against the dendritic nuclea - tion model , have already been addressed 6 , 7 . However , one critical point has not been dis - cussed ; namely , the fundamental consistency between our results and those of Urban et al . in spite of the different interpretations . We have carefully analysed the primary data provided as Supplementary Information by Urban et al . Based on this analysis , we argue that a subset of their results provides strong support - ing evidence for the dendritic nucleation model by showing branched actin filaments in lamel - lipodia . We have found that Supplementary Movie S6 , showing an electron tomogram of the lamellipodium in a 3T3 cell , is of particu - larly good quality to illustrate this point . Several examples of branched actin filaments from this movie are shown in Fig . 1a as a montage of z planes . In these examples , one of two actin fila - ments never re - emerges on the other side of the second filament in adjacent movie frames , despite the fact that both filaments are in the same z plane in at least one frame of the series . These features demonstrate that the end of the former filament makes a contact with the side of the latter fila - ment , but does not cross it , which is the definition of a branch . In the zoomed region of the movie that shows a cell area of ~ 0 . 53 μm 2 , we have found a total of 147 branches ( Fig . 1b ) , which is in con - trast to the authors’ statement that “branches at the sides of actin filaments were extremely rare” . Branched actin filaments can be also found in other Supplementary movies , but fewer branches can be clearly detected in these movies owing to their insufficient quality and selection of regions corresponding to filopodia or filopodial precur - sors , which contain long unbranched filaments . Remarkably , all branches identified in our analysis invariably contained a blob at the branch point that probably corresponds to the Arp2 / 3 complex . Furthermore , the angle between branched filaments was 70 ± 7 degrees ( n = 57 ) , consistent with the conven - tional angle of ~ 70° produced by the Arp2 / 3 complex in vitro 8 . The actin filament branches found in data from the Urban et al . paper are virtually indistinguishable by appearance from those obtained by Hanein using cryo - electron microscopy of actin branches reconstituted in vitro from the Arp2 / 3 complex and actin , and could even be fitted into the three - dimensional branch model developed in these studies 9 . In conclusion , existence of branched actin filaments in lamellipodia is supported by two different electron microscopy techniques that probably counterbalance their potential arte - facts . We are not sure why Urban et al . failed to detect branches , but this is definitely an issue of seeing or not seeing , rather than a problem with the techniques . Thus , in our opinion there should be no controversy regarding the struc - tural organization of actin filaments in lamel - lipodia , and the dendritic nucleation model can serve as a conceptual framework for sub - sequent studies in the field . ACKNOWLEDGEMENTSWe thank R . Dominguez , M . Ostap and M . Lampson for their helpful comments on this Correspondence . This work was supported by NIH grants GM70898 to T . S . AUTHOR CONTRIBUTIONS C . Y . and T . S . analysed data and wrote the manuscript . COMPETING FINANCIAL INTERESTS The authors declare that they have no competing financial interests . 1 . Urban , E . , Jacob , S . , Nemethova , M . , Resch , G . P . & Small , J . V . Nat . Cell Biol . 12 , 429 – 435 ( 2010 ) . 2 . Small , J . V . J . Cell Biol . 91 , 695 – 705 ( 1981 ) . 3 . Pollard , T . D . & Borisy , G . G . Cell 112 , 453 – 465 ( 2003 ) . 4 . Svitkina , T . M . , Verkhovsky , A . B . , McQuade , K . M . & Borisy , G . G . J . Cell Biol . 139 , 397 – 415 ( 1997 ) . 5 . Svitkina , T . M . & Borisy , G . G . J . Cell Biol . 145 , 1009 – 1026 ( 1999 ) . 6 . Higgs , H . N . Trends Cell Biol . 21 , 2 – 4 ; author reply 4 – 5 ( 2011 ) . 7 . Insall , R . H . Trends Cell Biol . 21 , 2 ; author reply 4 – 5 ( 2011 ) . 8 . Mullins , R . D . , Heuser , J . A . & Pollard , T . D . Proc . Natl Acad . Sci . USA 95 , 6181 – 6186 ( 1998 ) . 9 . Hanein , D . Methods Enzymol . 483 , 203 – 214 ( 2010 ) . Reply : Visualizing branched actin filaments in lamellipodia by electron tomography J . Victor Small 1 , 4 , Christoph Winkler 2 , Marlene Vinzenz 1 and Christian Schmeiser 2 , 3 Small et al . reply : Cell migration is initiated by the extension of cytoplasmic sheets , termed lamellipodia . In a currently accepted model of lamellipodial dynamics , the cell front is pushed by short and stiff actin filaments branching from the sides of other filaments in a dendritic array 1 . The model is based on the finding that the Arp2 / 3 complex induces actin branching in vitro and the observation of high frequency branching of actin filaments in anterior regions of lamellipodia cytoskeletons prepared for conventional transmission electron microscopy by the critical - point drying / platinum - replica procedure 2 . Using electron tomography , we recently presented the first three - dimensional images of lamellipodia 3 in cells in vitreous ice and in fixed cells contrasted by the negative - staining method . Focusing attention on the front of lamellipodia , we reported that putative branch points were seldom when compared with filament overlaps , and attributed the reported high concentration of branch points , within 1 Institute of Molecular Biotechnology of the Austrian Academy of Sciences , Dr Bohr Gasse 3 – 7 , Vienna 1030 , Austria . 2 RICAM , Austrian Academy of Sciences Vienna , Altenbergstrasse 69 , Linz 4040 , Austria . 3 Faculty of Mathematics , University of Vienna , Nordbergstrasse 15 , Vienna 1090 , Austria . 4 Correspondence should be addressed to J . V . S . ( e - mail : vic . small @ imba . oeaw . ac . at ) NATURE CELL BIOLOGY VOLUME 13 | NUMBER 9 | SEPTEMBER 2011 1013 © 2011 Macmillan Publishers Limited . All rights reserved C O R R E S P O N D E N C E 20 – 50 nm of each other at the front of keratocyte lamellipodia 2 , to the difficulty of distinguishing incidences of branching from filament overlaps in images obtained by the platinum - replica method . In the accompanying letter , Yang and Svitkina report a re - analysis of one of our published tomograms of a negatively stained lamellipodium of a 3T3 cell spreading on poly - l - lysine , and note the presence of actin branches similar in morphology to those described in negatively stained preparations of actin branches formed in vitro by the Arp2 / 3 complex 4 . In light of their analysis and our ongoing studies we agree with them that actin branches are present in the lamellipodium network , but at a very different frequency and distribution from that envisioned in the current dendritic model 1 . Our original analysis of the cited tomogram ( Supplementary Movie S6 ; ref . 3 ) was restricted to a relatively small anterior region of the lamellipodium and involved the manual tracking of filaments back from the front edge . Our observation that putative branch junctions are rare relative to filament overlaps is correct ; what we missed however was the low - density ( relative to filament density ) spread of branch junctions throughout the lamellipodium network . We have now re - analysed the entire tomogram ( total area 1 . 6 μ m 2 ) and identified 225 branch junctions ( yellow points , Fig . 1 ) with the filaments subtending an average angle of 71 . 6 ± 7° and with extra material at the junction resembling a triangular foot ( Fig . 1 , inset ) , as seen in vitro 4 . In our re - analysis of the high - resolution tomogram we have tracked more filaments manually , and in Fig . 1 highlight three interconnected sets of filaments ( in white ) to illustrate the large variation in both branch junction separation along single filaments and the distance from branch junctions to filament plus ends at the lamellipodium front ( up to 670nm in this set ) . Our data indicate that branching is important for generating a network , but confirm 3 that pushing is not dependent on short filaments bearing on branch points , as previously suggested 1 . As we have demonstrated , actin filaments in lamellipodia can be extremely long 3 , up to several microns , and if each filament were initiated from a branch , then the branches would be spread relatively widely throughout the network , as also suggested by Insall 5 . This is in fact what is observed in Fig . 1 . Whether or not all filaments in lamellipodia originate from a branch junction remains to be established . As we have shown 3 , lamellipodia also contain varied numbers of filaments in parallel pairs that serve as filopodia precursors and whose origin remains to be defined . Although an important detail was overlooked in our recent study , new standards have been set for visualizing actin filament organization in lamellipodia 3 . The resolution of our tomograms allows the visualization of the helical substructure of actin filaments in lamellipodia networks and , as confirmed by Yang and Svitkina , the direct morphological identification of branch junctions . The superior resolution achievable by negative - stain electron tomography likewise facilitates the tracking of actin filaments in three - dimensional space . We have already shown the feasibility of combining live - cell imaging with negative - stain electron tomography 3 and have controlled our preparative methods using cryo - electron microscopy . Accordingly , we are pursuing this approach with a higher yield of tomograms to shed new light on the roles of different proteins in generating , maintaining , reorganizing and disassembling lamellipodial networks . Included are efforts to develop automatic tracking protocols and image analysis of actin polarity 6 and branch conformation in situ . In conclusion , the current debate 5 , 8 has proved useful in stimulating a re - evaluation of ideas about how lamellipodia are organized , and has highlighted the need for high - resolution three - dimensional imaging of actin networks to further our understanding of protrusion processes based on actin . ACKNOWLEDGEMENTSThis work was supported by grants from the Austrian Science Fund ( FWF project P21292 ) and from the Vienna Science and Technology Fund ( WWTF project MA09 _ 004 ) . COMPETING FINANCIAL INTERESTS The authors declare that they have no competing financial interests . 1 . Pollard , T . D . & Borisy , G . G . Cell 112 , 453 – 465 ( 2003 ) . 2 . Svitkina , T . M . & Borisy , G . G . J . Cell Biol . 145 , 1009 – 1026 ( 1999 ) . 3 . Urban , E . , Jacob , S . , Nemethova , M . , Resch , G . P . & Small , J . V . Nat . Cell Biol . 12 , 429 – 435 ( 2010 ) . 4 . Rouiller , I . et al . J . Cell Biol . 180 , 887 – 895 ( 2008 ) . 5 . Insall , R . H . Trends Cell Biol . 21 , 2 ; author reply 4 – 5 ( 2011 ) . 6 . Narita , A . & Maeda , Y . J . Mol . Biol . 365 , 480 – 501 ( 2007 ) . 7 . Small , J . V . et al . J . Microsc . 231 , 479 – 485 ( 2008 ) . 8 . Higgs , H . N . Trends Cell Biol . 21 , 2 – 4 ; author reply 4 – 5 ( 2011 ) . 1014 NATURE CELL BIOLOGY VOLUME 13 | NUMBER 9 | SEPTEMBER 2011 Figure 1 Projection of three - dimensional model of the published tomogram 3 of a lamellipodium of a 3T3 cell spread on poly - l - lysine . Green and white lines mark subsets of actin filaments that were tracked manually through the tomogram ( total , 203 filaments ) . Red points mark filament plus ends ( total , 208 ) . Yellow points mark positions of branch junctions ( total , 225 ) . Interconnected filament subsets highlighted in white illustrate the variable spacing between branch points along single filaments and between branch points and the lamellipodium tip . Area boxed in blue outlines region in which filaments were tracked in the original publication 3 . Inset ; typical branch junction in a z section of the tomogram . Scale bar , 200 nm ; inset , 50 nm . © 2011 Macmillan Publishers Limited . All rights reserved