1 Structure - based discovery of small molecule inhibitors of the autocatalytic proliferation of a - synuclein aggregates Sean Chia 1 , Z . Faidon Brotzakis 1 , Robert I . Horne 1 , Andrea Possenti 1 , Benedetta Mannini 1 , Rodrigo Cataldi 1 , Magdalena Nowinska 1 , Roxine Staats 1 , Sara Linse 2 , Tuomas P . J . Knowles 1 , 3 , Johnny Habchi 1 , Michele Vendruscolo 1 + 1 Centre for Misfolding Diseases , Department of Chemistry , University of Cambridge , Cambridge CB2 1EW , UK 2 Department of Biochemistry & Structural Biology , Center for Molecular Protein Science , Lund University , 221 00 Lund , Sweden 3 Department of Physics , Cavendish Laboratory , Cambridge CB3 0HE , UK + mv245 @ cam . ac . uk Keywords Parkinson’s disease , a - synuclein ; protein aggregation ; computational docking ; structure - based drug discovery ; kinetic - based drug discovery 2 Abstract The presence of amyloid fibrils of a - synuclein is closely associated with Parkinson’s disease and related synucleinopathies . It is still very challenging , however , to systematically discover small molecules that prevent the formation of these aberrant aggregates . Here , we describe a structure - based approach to identify small molecules that specifically inhibit the surface - catalyzed secondary nucleation step in the aggregation of a - synuclein by binding to the surface of the amyloid fibrils . The resulting small molecules are screened using a combination of kinetic and thermodynamic assays for their ability to bind a - synuclein fibrils and prevent the further generation of toxic oligomers . This study demonstrates that the combination of structure - based and kinetic - based drug discovery methods can lead to the identification of small molecules that selectively inhibit the autocatalytic proliferation of a - synuclein aggregates . Introduction Parkinson’s disease is the most common neurogenerative movement disorder , which affects over 6 million individuals worldwide ( 1 – 4 ) . This disease is characterised histopathologically by the accumulation of aberrant deposits known as Lewy bodies , which are composed primarily of the aggregated form of the intrinsically disordered protein a - synuclein ( 5 , 6 ) . Aggregates of a - synuclein , including soluble misfolded oligomers and insoluble amyloid fibrils , can induce neurotoxicity through a multitude of mechanisms , including cell membrane disruption and mitochondrial damage , which ultimately cause neuronal death ( 7 – 9 ) . Because of the relevance a - synuclein aggregates , much effort has been devoted towards the characterization of their structures ( 10 – 14 ) . These structures have enabled the development of structure - based drug discovery approaches , including in particular the identification of peptide - based inhibitors to prevent a - synuclein aggregation ( 15 , 16 ) . Furthermore , binding sites along the surface of a - synuclein fibrils for the development 3 of diagnostics tools have also been identified ( 17 – 20 ) . These developments are relevant considering the current lack of radiotracers for measuring the accumulation of a - synuclein aggregates in the human brain , and that such diagnostics tools may eventually enable the presymptomatic diagnosis of synucleinopathies ( 17 , 21 – 23 ) . Previous studies have used high - throughput docking approaches to identifying a - synuclein fibril - binding compounds ( 17 – 20 ) . However , because of the great technical difficulties in establishing reproducible high - throughput kinetic assays to monitor a - synuclein aggregation , the experimental validation of the compounds predicted from computational screenings has been challenging . Recent advances in chemical kinetics approaches have allowed the identification of small molecules and molecular chaperones that are able to inhibit a - synuclein aggregation ( 24 – 27 ) . It has thus been possible to inhibit specifically the surface - catalysed secondary nucleation step , which is responsible for the autocatalytic proliferation of a - synuclein fibrils , by binding competitively with a - synuclein monomers along specific sites on the surface of a - synuclein fibrils ( 24 , 26 ) . This kinetic - based approach is particularly advantageous as it allows experiments to be performed in a high - throughput manner in 96 - well plates , while conferring quantitative analysis of the effect of the compounds on specific microscopic steps in the aggregation process of a - synuclein . These quantitative measurements subsequently enable structure - activity relationship ( SAR ) studies and facilitate the systematic optimization of the compounds properties ( 25 , 28 ) . In the present study , we have identified small molecules that bind to a - synuclein fibrils in order to make advances on two problems : ( 1 ) how to prevent the fibril - catalyzed secondary nucleation in the autocatalytic proliferation of a - synuclein fibrils , and ( 2 ) how to identify molecular tracers for measuring the accumulation of a - synuclein aggregates through imaging methods . Towards these goals , we demonstrate the use of an in silico and in vitro combinatorial framework in identifying compounds that bind to a - synuclein fibrils , and subsequently inhibit the secondary nucleation process in the aggregation of a - synuclein . In this framework , we first employ a computational method that combines two docking techniques to identify compounds with high predicted binding affinity for a - synuclein fibrils . This list is then validated experimentally through chemical kinetics , which identifies the top compounds that are able to inhibit the surface - catalysed 4 secondary nucleation step in the aggregation of a - synuclein . The binding affinity of these compounds for a - synuclein fibrils is then validated experimentally . Overall , this strategy demonstrates the rational development of a combined structure - based and kinetic - based framework to identify compounds that can bind to a - synuclein fibrils , and presents an opportunity for the systematic development of small molecules that can be potentially used as therapeutic and diagnostic tools for synucleinopathies . Results A framework to identify small molecules that bind a - synuclein fibrils In this work we describe a framework to identify small molecules that bind specific sites on the surface of a - synuclein fibrils and are able to block the process of fibril - catalysed secondary nucleation . This method consists of a computational docking approach to identify small molecule candidates from a large library of compounds , and a subsequent in vitro approach based on chemical kinetics to assess the ability of the candidates to inhibit the aggregation of a - synuclein , as well as their affinity towards a - synuclein fibrils ( Fig . 1 ) . Firstly , from a library of compounds , small molecules are individually docked against a binding pocket chosen along the groove of the fibril ( Materials and Methods ) . This groove , which involves residues His50 and Glu57 , was selected as the potential site for docking since its geometry and position identified it as a likely catalytic site for a - synuclein secondary nucleation ( Fig . 1 ) . Using the predicted binding scores ( D G b ) as the parameter for ranking the compounds , the docking procedure generated a list of top 1 , 000 candidates . As a means of increasing the chemical diversity of the compounds to be experimentally validated , a clustering method based on the chemical similarity of the compounds was adopted , in which the centroids of each of the clusters were selected as the final candidates of the library of compounds to be tested in vitro ( Fig . 1 ) . Next , these centroid compounds were validated experimentally using a chemical kinetics - based assay of a - synuclein aggregation . Specifically , in the presence of low amounts of pre - formed seeds and at acidic pH , the aggregation of a - synuclein is 5 dominated by a surface - catalysed secondary nucleation process , in which monomers form nuclei along the fibril surfaces ( 29 ) . This autocatalytic process results in the rapid generation of aggregates that then elongate to form a - synuclein fibrils . When the aggregation of a - synuclein is performed in the presence of small molecules with suitable binding affinity for the surface of the a - synuclein fibrils , this results in a decreased amplification rate of a - synuclein aggregates ( 24 , 26 ) . The small molecule inhibitors identified in this way were further validated for their binding affinity towards a - synuclein fibrils using fluorescence polarisation and mass - spectrometry based pull - down assays . Overall , using this framework , candidate small molecules could be characterised through their predicted and experimental binding affinity , as well as their kinetic inhibitory properties as a result of their interaction with a - synuclein fibrils . In - silico docking of compounds predicted to bind a - synuclein fibrils Using AutoDock Vina ( 30 ) and FRED ( 31 ) , a wide distribution of binding scores was observed for compounds in the ZINC library ( 32 ) ( Materials and Methods ) . When assessing the top 10 , 000 compounds with the highest binding affinity , we observed a wider distribution of binding scores using FRED ( - 4 to - 14 kcal / mol ) than AutoDock Vina ( - 6 . 6 to - 8 . 6 kcal / mol ) ( Fig . S1 ) . We also found that the predicted binding scores did not correlate strongly between the two methods ( Fig . S1 ) . Such differences in the predicted scores can be attributed to the different scoring functions used among docking methods , leading to the choice of consensus compounds ( 33 ) . Thus , we selected the top 10 % ( 1 , 000 common compounds ) of the candidates with a high predicted binding score in both methods ( Fig . S1 ) . The candidate library was further refined by employing a clustering method based on the chemical structures of the compounds to identify the centroids of each cluster as the representative molecule in the cluster . Although this procedure may result in a lower number of hits due to the exclusion of chemical derivatives of a potential a - synuclein fibril binder that are clustered together , it also increases the chemical diversity of the library set , and therefore allows the sampling of a wider chemical space to screen for potential fibril binders . 6 Identification of compounds that inhibit a - synuclein secondary nucleation From the library of centroids , we selected 67 compounds for experimental validation in terms of their binding affinity towards a - synuclein fibrils ( Materials & Methods ) . Out of the 67 molecules tested , 5 molecules were found to inhibit a - synuclein aggregation ( Fig . 2 ) . The small molecules were found to inhibit the aggregation of a - synuclein to different extents . In particular , 3 of the molecules ( A , B , and E ) showed moderate potency , increasing the half - time ( t 1 / 2 ) of the aggregation by 1 . 5 times , while molecules C and D exhibited stronger potency by increasing the t 1 / 2 of the aggregation by 3 . 5 and 3 times , respectively . We also found that the chemical structures of these inhibitors tend to involve aromatic moieties ( Fig . 2C ) . More specifically , the aromatic regions of these molecules appeared within close proximity to the residues along the groove of the a - synuclein fibrils , suggesting that interactions could be established between the small molecules and a - synuclein through these regions ( Fig . 3 ) . Furthermore , we also observed a high similarity in terms of the small molecule positions within the selected groove of a - synuclein fibrils between using docking methods , thus suggesting that the binding of these small molecules to the a - synuclein fibrils may involve specific interactions , which are likely to be a combination of electrostatic and non - polar nature ( Fig . 3 ) . To rule out any potential effects whereby the small molecules inhibit the aggregation of a - synuclein by stabilising non - fibrillar aggregates , we used transmission electron microscopy ( TEM ) to image the a - synuclein species formed at the end of the aggregation reaction in the absence and presence of compound C ( Fig . S2 ) . These measurements showed a similar morphology of a - synuclein fibrils , suggesting that the inhibitors that we identified are able to delay the aggregation process , without redirecting it to affect the final amounts of a - synuclein aggregates formed ( Fig . S2 ) . Kinetic analysis of a - synuclein aggregation in the presence of the inhibitors To characterise the inhibitory potency of the 5 positive compounds against the aggregation of a - synuclein , we measured the secondary nucleation process of a - synuclein in the presence of varying small molecule concentrations , from sub - stoichiometric ratios ( 0 . 625 molar equivalents ) to over - stoichiometric ratios ( 5 molar equivalents ) ( Figs . 4A and S3 ) . For all the 5 compounds , we observed a dose - 7 dependent inhibition in the aggregation of a - synuclein , resulting in a systematic increase in the t 1 / 2 of aggregation . Similarly to what we observed in the preliminary screening , the potency of the compounds varied between molecules A , B , and E , which exhibited a weaker effect , and molecules C and D , which had a stronger effect ( Figs . 3B and 4A ) . We further quantified the effect of the compounds , finding that they were able to significantly inhibit the rate of fibril amplification and change the fibril number concentration . We obtained these results by fitting the experimental data with a logistic function describing the amplification of a - synuclein aggregates over time ( 25 ) ( Materials and Methods ) ( Fig . 4B ) . These compounds are likely to compete with a - synuclein monomers on the nucleation sites , as shown previously with other compounds and molecular chaperones that also exhibit inhibition of secondary nucleation processes ( 24 , 26 , 34 , 35 ) . The potency in inhibiting the amplification rate of the compounds was found to be in the order C > D > B and E > A . For instance , at 2 . 5 molar equivalents , while molecules C and D were able to inhibit the amplification rate of a - synuclein by 87 % and 65 % , respectively , compounds B and E were only able to inhibit this rate by 27 % and 12 % , respectively , and compound A was not able to significantly inhibit this process at this molar equivalent concentration . To further probe the mechanism by which the compounds inhibit the aggregation process of a - synuclein , we also measured the aggregation process of a - synuclein in the absence and presence of the compounds with the addition of high concentration of preformed a - synuclein fibril seeds ( Figs . 4C and S4 ) . Under such conditions , the aggregation process of a - synuclein proceeds as an exponential rather than sigmoidal function , indicative of an aggregation mechanism dominated by elongation processes with negligible contribution of secondary nucleation ( 36 , 37 ) ( Fig . 4C ) . This phenomenon can be ascribed to the large number of growth - competent ends of fibrils present at the start of the aggregation process for further monomer addition . We observed that , under such conditions , the elongation rate , and consequently the aggregation process , was not significantly perturbed by the presence of the compounds ( Figs . 4C , D and S4 ) . Thus , the inhibition , as observed using the low seeded aggregation assay , is likely due to the inhibition of the secondary nucleation process rather than the elongation process ( Figs . 4A and S3 ) . This also indicates that the 8 molecules that were identified using our approach are likely binding the surface of a - synuclein fibrils , rather than the ends , further supporting their binding to the selected groove . Molecule C inhibits a - synuclein oligomer formation The reactive flux towards a - synuclein oligomers in the aggregation reaction of a - synuclein is governed by multiple processes , crucially secondary nucleation ( 29 ) . By extracting the change in the amplification rate due to the presence of the small molecules , and by accounting for the specific inhibition of the secondary nucleation process rather than the elongation process , we can calculate the reactive flux towards oligomers over time in the absence and presence of increasing concentrations of the molecules ( Figs . 5A and S5 ) ( Materials and Methods ) . Depending on their potency , we observed that compounds were able to delay the rate of reactive flux towards oligomers , as well as a delay in the overall formation of oligomers over time ( integral area of flux ) ( 25 , 28 ) . Molecule C binds a - synuclein fibrils As a validation of the binding of these candidates to the surface of a - synuclein fibrils , we also performed fluorescence polarisation experiments of molecule C , the strongest inhibitor of all the positive compounds , in the presence of increasing concentrations of a - synuclein fibrils ( Figs . 5B and S6 ) . Additionally , since molecule C exhibits a high degree of intrinsic fluorescence , fluorescence polarisation measurements allowed us to determine the proportion of bound and unbound fractions of molecule C towards a - synuclein fibrils ( Fig . S6 ) . We observed a dose - dependent increase in the polarization ( in millipolarization units , mP ) of molecule C as a function of increasing concentrations of a - synuclein fibrils . By fitting this response as a function of the concentration of a - synuclein fibrils , the apparent dissociation constant ( K d ) was found to be about 4 µ M ( Fig . 5B ) ( Materials and Methods ) . However , we note that the K d value obtained is based on the concentration of a - synuclein fibrils in monomer equivalents . Since a - synuclein fibrils tend to contain at least 200 monomers per unit ( 36 ) , it is thus likely that the actual K d value ( in terms of number of fibrillar units ) should be significantly lower . 9 To test for the specificity of molecule C for a - synuclein fibrils , we measured the change in polarization upon incubation of molecule C with A b 42 fibrils , which are associated with Alzheimer’s disease ( Fig . 5B ) . In this case , we observed a much lower increase in the polarization , as only a slight increase could be measured at 10 µ M of A b 42 fibrils . This result suggests that molecule C binds specifically to the surface of a - synuclein fibrils , as predicted from the docking , rather than having generic non - specific interactions with hydrophobic aggregates ( Fig . 5B ) . To further support the fluorescence polarisation data , we also performed a mass - spectrometry based pull down assay to assess the amounts of molecules bound to a - synuclein fibrils ( Fig . 5C ) ( Materials and Methods ) . We found that approximately 40 % of molecule C was still associated to a - synuclein fibrils after an ultracentrifugation pull - down ( Fig . 5C ) . Finally , images obtained from a - synuclein fibrillar samples containing molecule C or the amyloid - specific fluorescence dye pFTAA demonstrated the colocalisation of molecule C with the fibrillar aggregates ( imaged by pFTAA ) ( Fig . 5D ) . This behaviour was also found to be visualised in the presence of neuroblastoma cells , thus confirming the significant affinity of molecule C towards a - synuclein fibrils , as well as demonstrating the potential use of such molecules in biological studies involving a - synuclein aggregation ( Fig . S7 ) . Conclusions In this work , we have demonstrated the use of an approach to identify and characterise small molecules whose mechanism of action is to bind a - synuclein fibrils and inhibit the secondary nucleation step in the autocatalytic proliferation of a - synuclein aggregates . We anticipate that such approach will enable the rational design and systematic development of small molecules capable of binding specific sites with different properties on a - synuclein fibrils of different morphologies , as well as in fibrils formed by other disease - related proteins , thereby creating new opportunities in the diagnostics and therapeutics for protein misfolding diseases . 10 Materials and Methods Computational docking . The docking protocol used in this study comprises four stages . First , we determined a binding site on the α - synuclein fibrils . To achieve this goal , we analysed a structure of α - synuclein fibrils ( PDB ID : 6cu7 ) using Fpocket ( 38 ) , which identifies small molecule pockets based on volume criteria ( Fig . S1 ) . The resulting pockets were categorised in : ( a ) pockets in the fibril core surrounded by His50 to Lys58 and Thr72 to Val77 , and ( b ) pockets on the fibrils surface , surrounded by His50 and Glu57 . Since α - synuclein secondary nucleation has been reported as significant only below pH 5 . 8 ( 36 ) , when histidine is protonated , we further reduced the space of possible binding pockets , selecting the binding site containing His50 and Glu57 . For the selection of screening compounds we used the ZINC library ( 32 ) . In order to reduce the chemical space of small molecules considered in the docking calculations , central nervous system multiparameter optimization ( CNS MPO ) criteria ( 39 ) were applied , effectively reducing the space to approximately 2 million compounds . We subjected these compounds to docking calculation against the binding site identified above using AutoDock Vina ( 30 ) . To increase the confidence of the calculations , the top - scoring 10 , 000 small molecules were selected and docked against the same α - synuclein binding site , using FRED ( OpenEye Scientific Software ) ( 31 ) . The top - scoring , common 1 , 000 compounds in both docking protocols are selected and clustered using Tanimoto clustering ( 40 ) , leading to a list of 79 clusters . Preparation of compounds and chemicals . The centroids from the above 79 clusters were selected for experimental validation . Compounds were purchased from MolPort ( Riga , Latvia ) , and in the cases for which centroids were not available for purchase , the molecules in the clusters with the closest chemical structures were used as the representative compounds instead . In the end , a total of 67 compounds were purchased ( centroids and alternative compounds in 12 clusters were all not available for purchase ) , and then prepared in DMSO to a stock of 5 mM . All chemicals used were purchased at the highest purity available . Preparation of a - synuclein . Recombinant a - synuclein was purified as described previously ( 36 , 37 , 41 ) . The plasmid pT7 - 7 encoding for human α - synuclein was transformed into BL21 - competent cells . Following transformation , competent cells were 11 grown in lysogeny broth ( LB ) in the presence of ampicillin ( 100 μg / mL ) . Cells were induced with isopropyl β - D - 1 - thiogalactopyranoside ( IPTG ) , and grown overnight at 37 o C for 4 h and harvested by centrifugation in a Beckman Avanti J25 centrifuge with a JA - 20 rotor at 5 , 000 rpm ( Beckman Coulter , Fullerton , CA ) . The cell pellet was resuspended in 10 mM Tris , pH 8 . 0 , 1 mM EDTA , 1 mM PMSF and lysed by multiple freeze – thaw cycles and sonication . The cell suspension was boiled for 20 min and centrifuged at 13 , 500 rpm with a JA - 20 rotor ( Beckman Coulter ) . Streptomycin sulfate was added to the supernatant to a final concentration of 10 mg / mL and the mixture was stirred for 15 min at 4 o C . After centrifugation at 13 , 500 rpm , the supernatant was taken with an addition of 0 . 36 g / mL ammonium sulfate . The solution was stirred for 30 min at 4 o C and centrifuged again at 13 , 500 rpm . The pellet was resuspended in 25 mM Tris , pH 7 . 7 , and ion - exchange chromatography was performed using a HQ / M - column of buffer A ( 25 mM Tris , pH 7 . 7 ) and buffer B ( 25 mM Tris , pH 7 . 7 , 600 mM NaCl ) . The fractions containing α - synuclein ( ≈ 300 mM ) were dialysed overnight against the appropriate buffer . The protein concentration was determined spectrophotometrically using the extinction coefficient ε280 = 5600 M −1 cm −1 . Preparation of a - synuclein fibril seeds . a - synuclein fibril seeds were produced as described previously ( 36 , 37 ) . Samples of a - synuclein ( 700 µ M ) were incubated in 20 mM phosphate buffer ( pH 6 . 5 ) for 72 h at 40 o C and stirred at 1 , 500 rpm with a Teflon bar on an RCT Basic Heat Plate ( IKA , Staufen , Germany ) . Fibrils were then diluted to 200 µ M , aliquoted and flash frozen in liquid nitrogen , and finally stored at - 80 o C . For the use of kinetic experiments , the 200 µ M fibril stock was thawed , and sonicated for 15 s using a tip sonicator ( Bandelin , Sonopuls HD 2070 , Berlin , Germany ) , using 10 % maximum power and a 50 % cycle . Kinetic assays . a - Synuclein was injected into a Superdex 75 10 / 300 GL column ( GE Healthcare ) at a flow rate of 0 . 5 mL / min and eluted in 20 mM sodium phosphate buffer ( pH 4 . 8 ) supplemented with 1 mM EDTA . The obtained monomer was diluted in buffer to a desired concentration , and supplemented with 50 µ M ThT and preformed a - synuclein fibril seeds . The molecules ( or DMSO alone ) were then added at the desired concentration to a final DMSO concentration of 1 % ( v / v ) . Samples were prepared in low - binding Eppendorf tubes , and then pipetted into a 96 - well half - area , black / clear flat 12 bottom polystyrene NBS microplate ( Corning 3881 ) , 150 µ L per well . The assay was then initiated by placing the microplate at 37 o C under quiescent conditions in a platereader ( FLUOstar Omega , BMG Labtech , Aylesbury , UK ) . The ThT fluorescence was measured through the bottom of the plate with a 440 nm excitation filter and a 480 nm emission filter . Transmission electron microscopy . 10 µ M a - synuclein samples were prepared and aggregated as described in the kinetic assay , in the absence or presence of 25 µ M molecule C , without the addition of ThT . Samples were collected from the microplate at the end of the reaction ( 150 hours ) into low - binding Eppendorf tubes . They were then prepared on 400 - mesh , 3 - mm copper grid carbon support film ( EM Resolutions Ltd . ) and stained with 2 % uranyl acetate ( wt / vol ) . The samples were imaged on an FEI Tecnai G 2 transmission electron microscope ( Cambridge Advanced Imaging Centre ) . Images were analysed using the SIS Megaview II Image Capture system ( Olympus ) . Determination of the elongation rate constant . In the presence of high concentrations of seeds ( » µ M ) , the aggregation of a - synuclein is dominated by the elongation of the added seeds ( 36 , 37 ) . Under these where other microscopic processes are negligible , the aggregation kinetics for a - synuclein can be described by ( 36 , 37 ) ! " ( $ ) ! $ ! $ & ’ = 2𝑘 ( 𝑃 ( 0 ) 𝑚 ( 0 ) where M ( t ) is the fibril mass concentration at time t , P ( 0 ) is the initial number of fibrils , m ( 0 ) is the initial monomer concentration , and k + is the rate of fibril elongation . In this case , by fitting a line to the early time points of the aggregation reaction as observed by ThT kinetics , 2 k + P ( 0 ) m ( 0 ) can be calculated for a - synuclein in the absence and presence of the compounds . Subsequently , the elongation rate in the presence of compounds can be expressed as a normalised reduction as compared to the elongation rate in the absence of compounds ( 1 % DMSO ) . 13 Determination of the fibril amplification rate constant . In the presence of low concentrations of seeds , the fibril mass fraction M ( t ) over time was described using a generalised logistic function to the normalised aggregation data ( 25 , 42 ) 𝑀 ( 𝑡 ) 𝑚 $ ) $ = 1 − 1 . 1 + 𝑎𝑐 𝑒 * $ 3 + where m tot denotes the total concentration of a - synuclein monomers . The parameters a and c are defined as 𝑎 = 𝜆 , 2𝜅 , 𝑐 = 6 2 𝑛 , ( 𝑛 , + 1 ) The parameters l and k represent combinations for the effective rate constants for primary and secondary nucleation , respectively , and are defined as ( 25 , 42 ) : 𝜆 = 82𝑘 ( 𝑘 - 𝑚 $ ) $ - ! 𝜅 = 82𝑘 ( 𝑘 , 𝑚 $ ) $ - " ( . where k n and k 2 denote the rate constants for primary and secondary nucleation , respectively , and n c and n 2 denote the reaction orders of primary and secondary nucleation , respectively . In this case , c was fixed at 0 . 3 for the fitting of all data , and k 2 , the amplification rate , is expressed as a normalised reduction for a - synuclein in the presence of the compounds as compared to in its absence ( 1 % DMSO ) . Determination of the oligomer flux . The prediction of the reactive flux towards oligomers over time was calculated as ( 25 , 42 ) 𝜙 ( 𝑡 ) = 1 𝑟 ( ∙ < 𝑚 ( 0 ) 𝑚 ( 𝑡 ) ∙ 𝑑 , 𝑀 𝑑𝑡 , + 1 𝑚 ( 0 ) > 𝑚 ( 0 ) 𝑚 ( 𝑡 ) ∙ 𝑑𝑀 ( 𝑡 ) 𝑑𝑡 ? , @ 14 where r + = 2k + m ( 0 ) is the apparent elongation rate constant extracted as described earlier , and m ( 0 ) refers to the total concentration of monomers at the start of the reaction . Fluorescence polarisation . 10 µ M of molecule C was incubated with increasing concentrations of either pre - formed a - synuclein or A b 42 fibrils ( in 1 % DMSO ) . After incubation , the samples were pipetted into a 96 - well half - area , black / clear flat bottom polystyrene nonbinding surface ( NBS ) microplate ( Corning 3881 ) . The fluorescence polarisation of molecule C was monitored using a plate reader ( CLARIOstar , BMG Labtech , Aylesbury , UK ) under quiescent conditions at room temperature , using a 360 nm excitation filter and a 430 emission filter . Mass spectrometry . 10 µ M of preformed a - synuclein fibrils were incubated with 10 µ M of molecule C in 20 mM sodium phosphate buffer ( pH 4 . 8 ) supplemented with 1 mM EDTA overnight under quiescent conditions at room temperature . The samples were then ultracentrifuged at 100 , 000 g for 30 min and the supernatant was removed for analysis using a Waters Xevo G2 - S QTOF spectrometer ( Waters Corporation , MA , USA ) . Cell cultures . Human SH - SY5Y neuroblastoma cells ( A . T . C . C . , Manassas , VA ) were cultured in Dulbecco’s modified Eagle medium ( DMEM ) - F12 + GlutaMax supplement ( Thermo Fisher Scientific , Waltham , MA ) with 10 % heat - inactivated fetal bovine serum . The cell cultures were maintained in a 5 . 0 % CO2 humidified atmosphere at 37 °C and grown until 80 % confluence for a maximum of 20 passages . Colocalisation assay . The cells were plated into a 96 - well plate and treated for 24 h with samples containing a - synuclein fibrils at 100 nM concentration ( monomer equivalents ) pre - incubated with pFTAA , molecule C , or buffer ( 20 mM sodium phosphate buffer , pH 4 . 8 ) . After treatment , the cells were stained with Amytracker 630 ( Ebba Biotech AB , Sweden ) . Images were acquired using the fluorescence microscope Cytation5 Cell Imaging Reader ( BioTek Instruments , Winooski , VT ) . 15 References 1 . W . Poewe , et al . , Parkinson disease . Nat . Rev . Dis . Prim . 3 , 1 – 21 ( 2017 ) . 2 . E . Ray Dorsey , et al . , Global , regional , and national burden of Parkinson’s disease , 1990 – 2016 : a systematic analysis for the Global Burden of Disease Study 2016 . Lancet Neurol . 17 , 939 – 953 ( 2018 ) . 3 . R . Balestrino , A . H . V . Schapira , Parkinson disease . Eur . J . Neurol . 27 , 27 – 42 ( 2020 ) . 4 . T . Pringsheim , N . Jette , A . Frolkis , T . D . L . Steeves , The prevalence of Parkinson’s disease : A systematic review and meta - analysis . Mov . Disord . 29 , 1583 – 1590 ( 2014 ) . 5 . M . G . Spillantini , et al . , Alpha - synuclein in Lewy bodies . Nature 388 , 839 – 840 ( 1997 ) . 6 . M . Goedert , M . G . Spillantini , K . Del Tredici , H . Braak , 100 years of Lewy pathology . Nat . Rev . Neurol . 9 , 13 – 24 ( 2013 ) . 7 . G . Fusco , et al . , Structural basis of membrane disruption and cellular toxicity by α - synuclein oligomers . Science 358 , 1440 – 1443 ( 2017 ) . 8 . H . A . Lashuel , C . R . Overk , A . Oueslati , E . Masliah , The many faces of α - synuclein : from structure and toxicity to therapeutic target . Nat . Rev . Neurosci . 14 , 38 – 48 ( 2013 ) . 9 . C . Haass , D . J . Selkoe , Soluble protein oligomers in neurodegeneration : lessons from the Alzheimer’s amyloid β - peptide . Nat . Rev . Mol . Cell Biol . 8 , 101 – 112 ( 2007 ) . 10 . B . Li , et al . , Cryo - EM of full - length α - synuclein reveals fibril polymorphs with a common structural kernel . Nat . Commun . 9 , 1 – 10 ( 2018 ) . 11 . R . Guerrero - Ferreira , et al . , Cryo - EM structure of alpha - synuclein fibrils . Elife 7 , 1 – 18 ( 2018 ) . 12 . Y . Li , et al . , Amyloid fibril structure of α - synuclein determined by cryo - electron microscopy . Cell Res . 28 , 897 – 903 ( 2018 ) . 13 . J . A . Rodriguez , et al . , Structure of the toxic core of α - synuclein from invisible crystals . Nature 525 , 486 – 490 ( 2015 ) . 14 . M . Schweighauser , et al . , Structures of α - synuclein filaments from multiple system atrophy . Nature 585 , 464 – 469 ( 2020 ) . 15 . S . Sangwan , et al . , Inhibition of synucleinopathic seeding by rationally designed 16 inhibitors . Elife 9 , 1 – 19 ( 2020 ) . 16 . A . Priss , K . Afitska , M . Galkin , D . A . Yushchenko , V . V . Shvadchak , Rationally Designed Protein - Based Inhibitor of α - Synuclein Fibrillization in Cells . J . Med . Chem . 64 , 6827 – 6837 ( 2021 ) . 17 . L . Gao , et al . , Fluorescent probes for bioimaging of potential biomarkers in Parkinson’s disease . Chem . Soc . Rev . 50 , 1219 – 1250 ( 2021 ) . 18 . J . J . Ferrie , et al . , Identification of a nanomolar affinity α - synuclein fibril imaging probe by ultra - high throughput in silico screening . Chem . Sci . ( 2020 ) https : / doi . org / 10 . 1039 / d0sc02159h . 19 . Z . Lengyel - Zhand , et al . , Synthesis and characterization of high affinity fluorogenic α - synuclein probes . Chem . Commun . 56 , 3567 – 3570 ( 2020 ) . 20 . C . J . Hsieh , et al . , Alpha Synuclein Fibrils Contain Multiple Binding Sites for Small Molecules . ACS Chem . Neurosci . 9 , 2521 – 2527 ( 2018 ) . 21 . J . L . Eberling , K . D . Dave , M . A . Frasier , α - synuclein imaging : A critical need for parkinson’s disease research . J . Parkinsons . Dis . 3 , 565 – 567 ( 2013 ) . 22 . K . Kulenkampff , A . M . Wolf Perez , P . Sormanni , J . Habchi , M . Vendruscolo , Quantifying misfolded protein oligomers as drug targets and biomarkers in Alzheimer and Parkinson diseases . Nat . Rev . Chem . 5 , 277 – 294 ( 2021 ) . 23 . M . Fayyad , et al . , Parkinson’s disease biomarkers based on α - synuclein . J . Neurochem . 150 , 626 – 636 ( 2019 ) . 24 . J . W . P . Brown , et al . , β - Synuclein suppresses both the initiation and amplification steps of α - synuclein aggregation via competitive binding to surfaces . Sci . Rep . 6 , 1 – 10 ( 2016 ) . 25 . R . Staats , et al . , Screening of small molecules using the inhibition of oligomer formation in α - synuclein aggregation as a selection parameter . Commun . Chem . 3 , 1 – 9 ( 2020 ) . 26 . M . Perni , et al . , Multistep Inhibition of α - Synuclein Aggregation and Toxicity in Vitro and in Vivo by Trodusquemine . ACS Chem . Biol . 13 , 2308 – 2319 ( 2018 ) . 27 . J . Pujols , S . Peña - Díaz , I . Pallarès , S . Ventura , Chemical Chaperones as Novel Drugs for Parkinson’s Disease . Trends Mol . Med . 26 , 408 – 421 ( 2020 ) . 28 . S . Chia , et al . , SAR by kinetics for drug discovery in protein misfolding diseases . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . 115 , 10245 – 10250 ( 2018 ) . 29 . R . Gaspar , et al . , Secondary nucleation of monomers on fibril surface dominates α - synuclein aggregation and provides autocatalytic amyloid amplification . Q . 17 Rev . Biophys . 50 ( 2017 ) . 30 . O . Trott , A . J . Olson , AutoDock Vina : Improving the speed and accuracy of docking with a new scoring function , efficient optimization , and multithreading . J . Comput . Chem . 31 , NA - NA ( 2009 ) . 31 . R . A . Friesner , et al . , Glide : A New Approach for Rapid , Accurate Docking and Scoring . 1 . Method and Assessment of Docking Accuracy . J . Med . Chem . 47 , 1739 – 1749 ( 2004 ) . 32 . T . Sterling , J . J . Irwin , ZINC 15 - Ligand Discovery for Everyone . J . Chem . Inf . Model . 55 , 2324 – 2337 ( 2015 ) . 33 . K . Palacio - Rodríguez , I . Lans , C . N . Cavasotto , P . Cossio , Exponential consensus ranking improves the outcome in docking and receptor ensemble docking . Sci . Rep . 9 , 1 – 14 ( 2019 ) . 34 . M . Perni , et al . , A natural product inhibits the initiation of α - synuclein aggregation and suppresses its toxicity . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . 114 , E2543 – E2543 ( 2017 ) . 35 . S . I . A . Cohen , et al . , A molecular chaperone breaks the catalytic cycle that generates toxic Aβ oligomers . Nat . Struct . Mol . Biol . 22 , 207 – 213 ( 2015 ) . 36 . A . K . Buell , et al . , Solution conditions determine the relative importance of nucleation and growth processes in α - synuclein aggregation . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . U . S . A . 111 , 7671 – 7676 ( 2014 ) . 37 . P . Flagmeier , et al . , Mutations associated with familial Parkinson’s disease alter the initiation and amplification steps of α - synuclein amyloid formation . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . 113 , 10328 – 10333 ( 2016 ) . 38 . V . Le Guilloux , P . Schmidtke , P . Tuffery , Fpocket : An open source platform for ligand pocket detection . BMC Bioinformatics 10 , 1 – 11 ( 2009 ) . 39 . T . T . Wager , X . Hou , P . R . Verhoest , A . Villalobos , Moving beyond rules : The development of a central nervous system multiparameter optimization ( CNS MPO ) approach to enable alignment of druglike properties . ACS Chem . Neurosci . 1 , 435 – 449 ( 2010 ) . 40 . D . Butina , Unsupervised data base clustering based on daylight’s fingerprint and Tanimoto similarity : A fast and automated way to cluster small and large data sets . J . Chem . Inf . Comput . Sci . 39 , 747 – 750 ( 1999 ) . 41 . C . Galvagnion , et al . , Lipid vesicles trigger α - synuclein aggregation by stimulating primary nucleation . Nat . Chem . Biol . 11 , 229 – 234 ( 2015 ) . 18 42 . T . C . T . Michaels , S . I . A . Cohen , M . Vendruscolo , C . M . Dobson , T . P . J . Knowles , Hamiltonian Dynamics of Protein Filament Formation . Phys . Rev . Lett . 116 , 3 – 8 ( 2016 ) . 19 Figure 1 . A combined structure - based and kinetic - based approach to identify small molecules that bind a - synuclein fibrils and inhibit its aggregation . In the first step , computational docking is performed on a large library of small molecules . The top candidates are then clustered to identify a subset of chemically diverse molecules that exhibit high predicted binding scores for a - synuclein fibrils . Subsequently , these small molecules are experimentally validated through a kinetic assay for their ability to inhibit the secondary nucleation aggregation of a - synuclein by binding to the surface of fibrils . Further rate constant analysis and fibril binding experiments allows for the positive molecules to be characterised based on both their inhibition of the kinetic assay , as well as their binding affinity towards a - synuclein fibrils . 20 Figure 2 . Molecules identified from the docking library inhibit the aggregation of a - synuclein . ( A ) Kinetic profiles of a 10 µ M solution of a - synuclein in the presence of 25 nM seeds at pH 4 . 8 , 37 o C , either in the presence of 1 % DMSO alone ( beige ) , in the presence of 10 molar equivalents of molecules A - E ( represented in different colours ) , or in the presence of 10 molar equivalents of other representative molecules in the docking library ( black ) . ( B ) Relative t 1 / 2 of the aggregation of a - synuclein in the presence of molecules A - E as shown in panel A , normalised to the DMSO control . ( C ) Chemical structures of the molecules A - E , which are able to significantly inhibit the aggregation of a - synuclein . 21 Figure 3 . Computational docking of small molecules to a - synuclein fibrils . ( A - E ) Binding poses of small molecules A - E to a - synuclein fibrils binding pocket ( centered between residues His50 and Glu57 ) , determined either through FRED or AutoDock Vina . ( F ) Fibril structure ( PDB : 6cu7 , cyan ) , pockets in sphere representation , with blue signifying pockets at the fibril core , and red at the fibril surface . Key binding site residues His50 and Glu57 are shown in licorice representation . 22 Figure 4 . The small molecule identified by docking specifically inhibit the proliferation of a - synuclein aggregates by secondary nucleation . ( A ) Kinetic profiles of a 10 µ M solution of a - synuclein in the presence of 25 nM seeds at pH 4 . 8 , 37 o C , either in the presence of 1 % DMSO alone ( purple ) , or of increasing molar equivalents of molecule C ( represented in different colours ) . ( B ) Relative rate of fibril amplification of a - synuclein the presence of molecules A - E as shown in panel A and Fig . S2 , normalised to the DMSO control . ( C ) Kinetic profiles of a 10 µ M solution of a - synuclein in the presence of 5 µ M seeds at pH 4 . 8 , 37 o C , either in the presence of 1 % DMSO alone ( purple ) , or in the presence of increasing molar equivalents of molecule C ( represented in different colours ) . Dotted lines indicate the v max of the reaction which is used to extract the elongation rate of the aggregation process . ( D ) The relative rate of fibril elongation of a - synuclein the presence of molecules A - E as shown in panel C and Fig . S3 , normalised to the DMSO control . 23 Figure 5 . Molecule C inhibits the reactive flux towards a - synuclein oligomers and displays binding affinity and specificity towards a - synuclein fibrils . ( A ) Time dependence of the reactive flux towards a - synuclein oligomers either in the presence of 1 % DMSO alone ( purple ) or in the presence of increasing molar equivalents of molecule C ( represented in different colours ) , normalised to the DMSO control . ( B ) Change in fluorescence polarisation ( in mP units ) of 10 µ M molecule C with increasing concentrations of either a - synuclein fibrils ( purple ) or A b 42 fibrils ( red ) . The solid lines are fits to the points using a one - step binding curve , estimating a K d of 4 µ M for molecule C towards a - synuclein fibrils . ( C ) Total ion current ( TIC ) of 10 µ M molecule C bound and unbound to 10 µ M a - synuclein fibrils detected by mass spectrometry ( see Materials and Methods ) . ( D ) Representative images indicating either the fluorescence of the red channel ( amyloid - specific dye pFTAA ) or the green channel ( molecule C ) following incubation in the absence ( top ) or presence ( bottom ) of 100 nM a - synuclein fibrils . A B 0 10 20 30 40 50 0 100 200 Concentration ( µ M ) F l uo r e sc en c e P o l a r i s a t i on ( M . P ) 0 25 50 75 100 0 . 0 0 . 5 1 . 0 Time ( h ) N o r m a li s ed r ea c t i v e f l u x t o w a r d s o li go m e r s Oligomer Flux DMSO 0 . 625 M eq 1 . 25 M eq 2 . 5 M eq Fibril Binding ( Fluorescence Polarisation ) K d ≈ 4µM C Fibril Binding ( Mass Spectrometry ) 0 50 100 T o t a l i on c u rr en t ( T I C ) ( % ) α - synuclein fibrils A β42 fibrils Bound fraction Unbound fraction D Red ( pFTAA ) Green ( Mol C ) Merge Buffer + 100 nM α - syn fibrils 24 Supplementary Information Structure - based discovery of small molecule inhibitors of the autocatalytic proliferation of a - synuclein aggregates Sean Chia 1 , Faidon Brotzakis 1 , Robert I . Horne 1 , Andrea Possenti 1 , Benedetta Mannini 1 , Rodrigo Cataldi 1 , Magdalena Nowinska 1 , Roxine Staats 1 , Sara Linse 2 , Tuomas P . J . Knowles 1 , 3 , Johnny Habchi 1 , Michele Vendruscolo 1 + 1 Centre for Misfolding Diseases , Department of Chemistry , University of Cambridge , Cambridge CB2 1EW , UK 2 Department of Biochemistry & Structural Biology , Center for Molecular Protein Science , Lund University , 221 00 Lund , Sweden 3 Department of Physics , Cavendish Laboratory , Cambridge CB3 0HE , UK 25 Figure S1 . Distribution of the predicted binding affinity for a - synuclein fibrils of the top 10 , 000 compounds screened via computational docking . The predicted binding score ( D G b ) of each compound calculated either via FRED ( Fred ) or AutoDock Vina ( Vina ) . Points in red denote the top 1 , 000 compounds with the highest predicted binding scores calculated by both methods , which were further selected as an enriched compound library of potential a - synuclein fibril binders . 26 Figure S2 . Comparison of TEM images of a - synuclein fibrils generated in the absence and presence of the small molecule inhibitor C . ( A , B ) TEM images of 10 µ M a - synuclein fibrils grown in the absence ( A ) or presence ( B ) of 2 . 5 molar equivalents of molecule C . 27 Figure S3 . Positive compounds from the docking library inhibit the surface - catalysed secondary nucleation process of a - synuclein aggregation . ( A - D ) Kinetic profiles of a 10 µ M solution of a - synuclein in the presence of 25 nM seeds at pH 4 . 8 , 37 o C , either in the presence of 1 % DMSO alone ( purple ) , or in the presence of increasing molar equivalents of either molecule A ( A ) , molecule B ( B ) , molecule D ( C ) , or molecule E ( D ) . 28 Figure S4 . Positive compounds from the docking library do not significantly inhibit the elongation process of a - synuclein aggregation . ( A - D ) Kinetic profiles of a 10 µ M solution of a - synuclein in the presence of 5 µ M seeds at pH 4 . 8 , 37 o C , either in the presence of 1 % DMSO alone ( purple ) , or in the presence of increasing molar equivalents of either molecule A ( A ) , molecule B ( B ) , molecule D ( C ) , or molecule E ( D ) . Dotted lines indicate the v max of the reaction which is used to extract the elongation rate of the aggregation process ( Fig . 4D ) . 29 Figure S5 . Positive compounds from the docking library inhibit the reactive flux towards a - synuclein oligomers . ( A - D ) Time dependence of the reactive flux towards a - synuclein oligomers either in the presence of 1 % DMSO alone ( purple ) or in the presence of increasing molar equivalents of molecule A ( A ) , molecule B ( B ) , molecule D ( C ) , or molecule E ( D ) normalised to the DMSO control . 30 Figure S6 . Fluorescence emission spectra of molecule C . Fluorescence emission spectra of either buffer ( black ) or 10 µ M molecule C ( purple ) in sodium phosphate buffer , pH 4 . 8 , 1 mM EDTA ( l ex = 360 nm ) . 31 Figure S7 . Co - localisation of molecule C with a - synuclein fibrils in the presence of neuroblastoma cells . Representative images indicating either the fluorescence of the red channel ( amyloid - specific dye pFTAA ) or the green channel ( molecule C ) following incubation in the presence of 100 nM a - synuclein fibrils and neuroblastoma cells . White arrows indicate the specific colocalisation of molecule C with a - synuclein fibrils in the presence of cells . Red ( pFTAA ) Green ( Mol C ) Merge