feduc - 07 - 883370 May 17 , 2022 Time : 12 : 53 # 1 HYPOTHESIS AND THEORY published : 19 May 2022 doi : 10 . 3389 / feduc . 2022 . 883370 Edited by : Heidi Hyytinen , University of Helsinki , Finland Reviewed by : Auli Toom , University of Helsinki , Finland Zanda Rubene , University of Latvia , Latvia * Correspondence : Patricia A . Alexander palexand @ umd . edu ††† ORCID : Patricia A . Alexander orcid . org / 0000 - 0001 - 7060 - 2582 Nancy Gans orcid . org / 0000 - 0003 - 0495 - 0583 Alina J . K . Maki orcid . org / 0000 - 0002 - 1277 - 3540 Specialty section : This article was submitted to Higher Education , a section of the journal Frontiers in Education Received : 25 February 2022 Accepted : 29 April 2022 Published : 19 May 2022 Citation : Alexander PA , Gans N and Maki AJK ( 2022 ) Relational Reasoning in Tertiary Education : What Is Its Value and How Can It Be Assessed and Trained ? Front . Educ . 7 : 883370 . doi : 10 . 3389 / feduc . 2022 . 883370 Relational Reasoning in Tertiary Education : What Is Its Value and How Can It Be Assessed and Trained ? Patricia A . Alexander * † , Nancy Gans † and Alina J . K . Maki † Department of Human Development and Quantitative Methodology , University of Maryland , College Park , College Park , MD , United States The goal of this article is to demonstrate the value of incorporating relational reasoning assessment and training in tertiary education . To accomplish this , the authors organize the article into three sections . The ﬁrst section overviews the nature of relational reasoning , and its different forms , developmental trajectories , and assessment . How relational reasoning predicts performance in various academic domains and ﬁelds of practice is also considered . The second section focuses on the role that relational reasoning plays in the scientiﬁc domains that are foundational to tertiary education and professional practice—the natural , social , applied , and formal sciences . In the ﬁnal section , the authors describe an ongoing design experiment in which relational reasoning assessment and training are integrated into a university course . Keywords : relational reasoning , analogy , anomaly , antinomy , antithesis , tertiary education The purpose of this article is to demonstrate the theoretical , empirical , and practical value of assessing tertiary students’ ability to reason relationally by means of a novel and ﬂuid measure ( Diamond , 2013 ) . Further , we will draw on the extant literature and an ongoing classroom - based design experiment to illustrate how the assessment of relational reasoning and its subsequent training in the context of a university course can serve multiple purposes . Speciﬁcally , we will describe how the administration of a generic and ﬂuid measure can result in a proﬁle of tertiary students’ analogical , anomalous , antinomous , and antithetical reasoning capabilities . Moreover , with their proﬁle as a starting point , tertiary students can be given explicit instruction in the forms of relational reasoning and the underlying cognitive processes they require . They can also be shown how their ability to reason relationally can bolster their academic performance in speciﬁc domains and be invaluable to their future career success . As a starting point for this discussion , we explain what it means to reason relationally and the distinct forms of this cognitive ability that have been identiﬁed . We also describe how relational reasoning develops and what this capability predicts in learning and achievement . AN OVERVIEW OF RELATIONAL REASONING Relational Reasoning Deﬁned In the neuroscience , developmental , cognitive science , and psychological literature , relational reasoning is deﬁned as the ability to recognize complex , meaningful patterns within bodies of seemingly unrelated information ( Spearman , 1927 ; Cattell , 1940 ; Singley and Bunge , 2014 ) . The student taking classic English literature who sees parallels in Shakespeare’s Julius Caesar and contemporary political intrigues ; the physics major who grasps the underlying association between Frontiers in Education | www . frontiersin . org 1 May 2022 | Volume 7 | Article 883370 feduc - 07 - 883370 May 17 , 2022 Time : 12 : 53 # 2 Alexander et al . Relational Reasoning in Tertiary Education the calculus and physics ; or medical residents who conclude that the case they are diagnosing cannot be classiﬁed as juvenile diabetes are all exhibiting relational reasoning . Gentner and Gentner ( 1983 ) and Dumas et al . ( 2014 ) distinguish the higher - order patterns associated with relational reasoning from simpler , linear patterns like number sequences ( e . g . , 3 , 8 , 13 , 18 _ _ _ _ ) by noting that these higher - order patterns must be based on relations - among - relations ( e . g . , 3 : 21 : 4 : _ _ _ _ ) . In essence , the identiﬁcation of multiple associations must occur for any of the aforementioned “insights” to emerge . Alexander and Baggetta ( 2014 ) also diﬀerentiate between relational thinking and relational reasoning , because thinking relationally may transpire without awareness or intentionality on the part of the individual . When a young child intuitively recognizes that an unfamiliar animal ( chihuahua ) is , in fact , a dog , that child has recognized a link between some new creature and the idea of “dog . ” Yet that realization was more or less unconscious and involved little cognitive eﬀort . Relational reasoning , in contrast , requires the eﬀortful and intentional harnessing of information that can result in an intricate association between objects , ideas , or events that extend and deepen understanding ( Alexander and Baggetta , 2014 ) . Scientists puzzling over whether Pluto was a planet or not had to wrestle with the presence or absence of determinative attributes before concluding that this astronomical body should be classiﬁed as a “dwarf planet . ” These scientists’ intentions and the level of eﬀort it took to appropriately classify Pluto clearly position this example as relational reasoning . Although our focus in this article is squarely on relational reasoning , we want to make clear that relational thinking is also essential for human functioning ( Alexander , 2019 ) . Further , the more intuitive or System 1 thinking works in concert with the more eﬀortful System 2 processes implicated in relational reasoning ( Stanovich , 2010 ) . What is core to relational thinking and relational reasoning is their dependency on the perception of and attention to similarities and dissimilarities among objects , ideas , or events—some subtle and some dramatic ; some concrete and some abstract ( James , 1893 ; Cattell , 1940 ) . As we will see , the nature of these similarities and dissimilarities is what deﬁnes the forms of relational reasoning . Relational Reasoning Classiﬁed and Categorized Within the neuroscience , developmental , cognitive science , and psychological literature , relational reasoning is conceptualized in a fairly consistent manner that corresponds to the deﬁnition we proﬀered earlier . Diﬀerences within those literature including how relational reasoning is positioned within the neurological architecture , its development over the lifespan , and its operationalization in empirical research have direct relevance to the assessment and training of relational reasoning in higher education ( Dumas et al . , 2013 ; Alexander , 2016 ) . For example , there are those who regard relational reasoning ability as a higher - order executive function that continues to develop into early adulthood with the myelination of the prefrontal cortex , a region associated with complex problem solving and decision making ( Dumontheil et al . , 2010 ; Krawczyk et al . , 2011 ; Diamond , 2013 ) . Therefore , based on their neurophysiological development , those enrolled in colleges and universities seem well positioned to beneﬁt from relational reasoning assessment and training . There is also some dispute in the literature over the degree to which relational reasoning ability is aﬀected by social and educational experiences , as well as by neurophysiological changes ( Carlson , 2009 ; Bunge and Leib , 2020 ) . Decoupling neurological and biological factors from what is concomitantly occurring socially and educationally continually proves challenging . The lack of a single measure of relational reasoning that can be reliably used with diﬀerently aged participants further complicates this matter . Recently , Chae and Alexander ( 2021a ) found themselves in a unique position to shed some light on this conundrum when they were able to test the relational reasoning capabilities of three groups of South Koreans who varied signiﬁcantly in age and in the course of their formal education . These researchers administered the same ﬂuid ability measure , the Test of Relational Reasoning - Junior ( TORRjr ; Alexander and The Disciplined Reading and Learning Research Laboratory [ DRLRL ] , 2018 ) , to young adolescents in school , older adults ( ages 50 + ) whose schooling happened in a typical timeframe , and older adults ( ages 45 + ) now completing their middle - school or high - school education . These researchers hypothesized that if social and educational factors are not signiﬁcant forces in relational reasoning development , then the two groups of older adults should perform comparably . On the other hand , if social and educational experiences do play an important role in relational reasoning development , then the older adults who did not attend school until decades later should perform the worst of the three groups—which is precisely what Chae and Alexander ( 2021a ) found . This outcome implies that college students who are not only nearing their neurophysiological prime but who also are furthering their education should have ample opportunities to reason independently and collaboratively . Relational Reasoning Forms Despite the largely shared conceptualization of relational reasoning that populates the literature , the manner in which this cognitive capability has been operationalized is far more contentious ( Alexander et al . , 2016a ; Baggetta and Alexander , 2016 ) . For the most part , the operationalization of relational reasoning has focused only on analogical reasoning or the discernment of patterns of similarity ( Dumas et al . , 2013 ) . Similarly , the assessment of relational reasoning has largely been relegated to one measure , the Raven’s Matrices ( Raven , 1941 ) , a ﬂuid ability measure composed entirely of ﬁgural analogy problems . Consequently , minimal data have been gathered on salient patterns that also place diﬀerential emphasis on dissimilarities . To address this signiﬁcant shortcoming , Alexander and The Disciplined Reading and Learning Research Laboratory [ DRLRL ] ( 2012 ) and Alexander et al . ( 2016a ) set out to devise a ﬂuid measure that gauged individuals’ ability to recognize multiple relational forms . Drawing on cross - disciplinary literature , including philosophy , mathematics , logic , and intellectual Frontiers in Education | www . frontiersin . org 2 May 2022 | Volume 7 | Article 883370 feduc - 07 - 883370 May 17 , 2022 Time : 12 : 53 # 3 Alexander et al . Relational Reasoning in Tertiary Education assessment ( e . g . , James , 1893 ; Cattell , 1940 ; Russell and Lackey , 1973 ) , four relational forms were identiﬁed : analogies ( similarity ) , anomalies ( aberrance ) , antimonies ( exclusivity ) , and antitheses ( opposition ) . With these forms identiﬁed , the process began to construct novel , ﬁgural items that could reliably and validly capture those relational manifestations . The outcome of this multi - year eﬀort was the Test of Relational Reasoning ( TORR ; Alexander and The Disciplined Reading and Learning Research Laboratory [ DRLRL ] , 2014 ) . The TORR is a psychometrically sound standardized instrument suitable for adolescents and adults that has been shown to be invariant for females and males from diverse cultural and ethnic backgrounds ( Dumas and Alexander , 2016 , 2018 ) . The TORR consists of four 8 - item scales , each representing one form ( see Figure 1 ) . The analogical reasoning scale , as with the Ravens , is composed of ﬁgural problems displayed in a 3 × 3 matrix . Respondents are directed to ﬁnd the option that conforms to the pattern indicated . The anomalous reasoning problems the identiﬁcation of the ﬁgure within a given set that deviates from the others . Antinomous reasoning is deﬁned as the ability to recognize a true binary distinction , where ideas , objects , or events either ﬁt within a speciﬁc category or not ( e . g . , living versus non - living objects ) . For each antinomous reasoning item , respondents are shown a set of related ﬁgures . They are then directed to ﬁnd the set from among the options that can have no ﬁgure in common with the given set . The ﬁnal scale of the TORR assesses antithetical reasoning . While comparisons made on the antinomous reasoning scale represent binary or dichotomous distinctions , those on the antithetical reasoning scale capture opposing but continuous diﬀerences ( e . g . , tall versus short ) . The antithesis items , therefore , depict certain features of a given ﬁgure ( x ) being switched to create a new ﬁgure ( y ) . Respondents are asked to select the option that represents the reverse of the process conveyed in the given problem . Developmental Trends by Form The value of assessing multiple forms of relational reasoning rather than relying solely on the measurement of analogical reasoning extends beyond achieving a more accurate conceptual - operational mapping of this foundational ability . Particularly as it pertains to the assessment and training of tertiary students , there is evidence that these forms reveal important trends by age and by domain of study . While we will reserve discussion of relational reasoning forms and academic domains for later in this article , here we want to highlight ﬁndings that speak to performance trends by form for samples that run the gamut from young children to senior citizens . The studies to which we will refer all assessed analogical , anomalous , antinomous , and antithetical reasoning , albeit by means of diverse methodologies . For instance , Jablansky et al . ( 2016 , 2020 ) analyzed longitudinal data on relational reasoning collected from New Zealand students in kindergarten through Grade 12 . The children and youth were participants in a project designed to promote their technological literacy . What Jablansky et al . ( 2016 , 2020 ) documented was a salient shift in the reasoning forms that were more or less prevalent in the language of younger and older students as they discussed the more and less familiar tools . Speciﬁcally , even though students at each grade level engaged in analogical , anomalous , antinomous , and antithetical reasoning to some extent , younger students relied primarily on analogical and anomalous reasoning . The older students , conversely , made greater use of antinomous and antithetical reasoning when analyzing the two technological tools . Interestingly , when presented with a familiar tool , younger students were able to show some ability to reason antinomously and antithetically , while older students found far less reason to reason analogically or anomalously ( Jablansky et al . , 2016 , 2020 ) . These ﬁndings suggest that while reasoning relationally may require some relevant background knowledge if experiences are too familiar or routine there may be limited impetus to reason relationally . More recently , Chae and Alexander ( 2021b ) and Zhao et al . ( 2021 ) also had the opportunity to examine relational reasoning performance in students at diﬀerent grade levels . For both investigations , students completed the TORRjr translated into Korean or Chinese , respectively . These studies showed shifts in reasoning performance by form that paralleled the longitudinal study by Jablansky et al . ( 2020 ) . Younger students performed higher for analogical and anomalous reasoning than for antinomous and antithetical reasoning , whereas older students performed higher for antinomous and antithetical reasoning . Finally , the investigation by Chae and Alexander ( 2021a ) that looked at the relational reasoning among adolescents and typically schooled and atypically schooled older adults reinforced the pattern seen across this collection of studies by suggesting that analogies may represent the easiest mode of relational pattern for participants of all ages . Even the atypically schooled adults in the Chae and Alexander ( 2021a ) study , whose overall performance was signiﬁcantly below that of the young adolescents and typically schooled adults , scored near the midpoint on the analogy scale . Further , the young adolescents and typically schooled adults scored comparably on the TORRjr . However , the current students performed signiﬁcantly better than these older adults on the antinomy scale , while the reverse was true for the anomaly scale where the older , typically schooled adult prevailed . Overall , these developmental trends would suggest that , based on their age and educational background , tertiary students would be expected to possess the ability to reason analogically , anomalously , antinomously , and antithetical to at least an adequate degree . Of course , we would expect that there would be variability in performance across the scales , with somewhat greater diﬃculty exhibited for the antinomous and antithetical items over the analogy and anomaly items prior to any training . IMPORTANCE OF RELATIONAL REASONING IN TERTIARY EDUCATION As we indicated in the prior overview of relational reasoning , students populating colleges and universities are well positioned to beneﬁt from the assessment and training of this essential cognitive ability . For one thing , the myelination of the prefrontal cortex , the brain region central to problem - solving , decision - making , and self - regulation , is nearing an end ( Dumontheil et al . , 2010 ; Krawczyk , 2012 ) . For another , these tertiary students Frontiers in Education | www . frontiersin . org 3 May 2022 | Volume 7 | Article 883370 feduc - 07 - 883370 May 17 , 2022 Time : 12 : 53 # 4 Alexander et al . Relational Reasoning in Tertiary Education are expanding their knowledge and are routinely engaged in academic and social interactions that may require them to reason relationally ( Carlson , 2009 ; Bunge and Leib , 2020 ) . Moreover , during this period of their lives , college students are determining which career paths to pursue and then preparing for those careers . Relational reasoning assessment and training can be invaluable for examining the higher - order thinking abilities of these students ( Alexander , 2016 ) . Their scores on the TORR can serve as an initial proﬁle of their relational reasoning strengths or areas of need . Further , students’ speciﬁc reasoning proﬁles can be compared to those who are already studying or practicing in their chosen ﬁelds ( Dumas et al . , 2014 ; Fountain , 2016 ; Jablansky , 2020 ) . It is important to keep in mind that relational reasoning , as with any cognitive or intellectual capacity , is malleable ( Hsu et al . , 2014 ; Alexander et al . , 2016b ) . Thus , performance for the diﬀerent forms of relational analysis can be improved through training , relevant experiences , and repeated practice . Consequently , as we will discuss in the ﬁnal section of this article , it is only a ﬁrst step to assess the relational reasoning abilities of college and university students . It is quite another to use those resulting data to help these students hone their abilities to reason analogically , anomalously , antinomously , and antithetically . Relational Reasoning in Domains and Disciplines Those engaged in relational reasoning research have investigated the degree to which this ability predicts performance in speciﬁc academic domains ( mathematics or literacy ) or ﬁelds of practice ( medical diagnosis or engineering design ) . Within higher education , academic domains correspond roughly to ﬁelds of study around which content and learning experiences are organized and delivered . For example , mathematics curricula and courses are often sequenced to capture the increasing complexity of underlying concepts and procedures ( Schmidt et al . , 2005 ) . Thus , precalculus is taken before calculus , and a statistics course on general linear models likely precedes a course on multivariate mixed models . Other domains such as history or literature may have content structured chronologically or by genres ( Orrill and Shapiro , 2005 ) . There can be noticeable diﬀerences in how students experience the content that has implications for relational reasoning , as well . In some ﬁelds like mechanical engineering or architecture , where professionals often work in teams , university students may work on projects with other students under the guidance of knowledgeable instructors ( Dumas et al . , 2016 ; Kavousi et al . , 2020 ) . Further , laboratory experiences or simulations can be integral to domains where tertiary students learn speciﬁc techniques or procedures viewed as central to a future career , as in nursing training or chemistry . In contrast , other ﬁelds such as journalism or history may be more focused on individual learning and production with fewer structured group collaborations . Also , the kinds of prototypic problems that populate courses from diﬀerent domains can diﬀer markedly . For instance , there may be more reliance on memorization , recall , and well - structured problems ( i . e . , clearly has a right / wrong answer ) for students in the biological sciences , and more interpretative and evaluative tasks ( i . e . , ill - structured problems ) for students in the social sciences ( Alexander , 2006 ; Reed , 2016 ) . Such variations in the structure or delivery of content can mean that certain forms of relational reasoning occur more often than others or unfold in a diﬀerent pattern ( Dumas et al . , 2014 ; Jablansky , 2020 ) . However , it can be presumed that all forms of relational reasoning have a role to play in learning and performance within tertiary education . Here we will look at the studies that have explored the association between relational reasoning overall and by form in selected ﬁelds of study and professional practice . Given the enormity of domains that tertiary students can pursue , we have chosen to organize this brief exploration around four branches of science ; the natural sciences that deal with nature in some fashion ; the social sciences , which focus on people , society , and culture ; the applied sciences such as engineering , statistics , architecture , and medicine ; and the formal sciences that include theoretical mathematics , logic , philosophy , and theoretical linguistics . Before delving into where relational reasoning comes into play within each of these areas of study , we want to forward an important caveat . Speciﬁcally , the four categories of domains we identify herein and the variety of studies that aligned with each of those areas represent only one possible conﬁguration that could be considered . There are innumerable classiﬁcations of academic domains that have been proposed and even the courses identiﬁed within those organizational schemes can vary . Our decision to focus on these four domain areas was driven , in part , by our desire to keep the comparisons and contrasts among the areas as simple as possible , while still allowing for the utility of relational reasoning to be adequately described . Natural Sciences As noted , natural sciences deal with the physical world and all that exists therein . Those studying or working in the natural sciences are generally concerned with carefully observing , accurately describing , systematically classifying , or predicting phenomena ( Harris , 2014 ) . The execution of these core processes necessitates that those studying or working in the natural sciences rely on empirical evidence derived through observation or direct experience that can be substantiated or disproven through experimentation that adheres to the scientiﬁc method . There are many ways in which the forms of relational reasoning are integral to learning and performance in the natural sciences and , thus , to tertiary students studying in these ﬁelds . For example , in his treatise on analogical arguments , philosopher Bartha ( 2019 ) contends that analogies have long been a critical feature of scientiﬁc reasoning and a contributor to scientiﬁc discoveries . To support this contention , Bartha quotes Joseph Priestley , a renowned 18th century expert in chemistry and electricity who is created with the discovery of oxygen , who claimed that “analogy is our best guide in all philosophical investigations ; and all discoveries , which were not made by mere accident , have been made by the help of it” ( Priestley , 1767 , p . 443 – 444 ) . Similar claims for the power of analogical reasoning populate the history of science ( Hofstadter , 1979 ; Dunbar and Blanchette , 2001 ; Gentner , 2002 ) . Frontiers in Education | www . frontiersin . org 4 May 2022 | Volume 7 | Article 883370 feduc - 07 - 883370 May 17 , 2022 Time : 12 : 53 # 5 Alexander et al . Relational Reasoning in Tertiary Education Despite the value that analogical reasoning holds in the natural sciences , it cannot stand alone to explain what must transpire when observing , describing , classifying , or predicting phenomena in this domain . As observations are made and empirical evidence gathered , scientists must attend to critical dissimilarities that emerge , as well . For one , anomalous reasoning is an essential tool for scientists or students in the natural sciences , because it results in the perception or identiﬁcation of salient discrepancies or deviations from the expected or typical ( Chinn and Brewer , 1993 ; Chinn and Malhotra , 2002 ) . The presence of anomalies can be diﬃcult to explain , and they can even bring tentative hypotheses or accepted theories into question . Under certain circumstances , anomalies can become the catalyst for alternative hypotheses or theories . Whether anomalies are treated as noise in a data set or give rise to new hypotheses or theories , may be dependent on scientists’ ability to construct a cogent and compelling explanation for their existence ( Lightman and Gingerich , 1992 ) . The act of labeling , classifying , or categorizing natural phenomena likewise demands more than noticing and cataloging similarities . Without analysis of meaningful diﬀerences within and between phenomena , their true nature would not be captured . In some instances , those diﬀerences take the form of scales that capture levels of a particular feature such as scales for water hardness or softness , wind speed , or soil types . Although the data on which they are based are continuous , these scales are often banded and labeled , which involves antinomous reasoning to determine distinct groupings . In other instances , the categories are meant to capture ontological distinctions that are considered discrete , as with the Hertzsprung – Russell system for classifying stars or the ﬁve biological kingdoms into which all living things are sorted . The precise categories that are formed in these instances arise through antinomous reasoning . Social Sciences The primary distinction between the natural sciences and social sciences—the study of nature versus humans—translates into signiﬁcant diﬀerences in what is studied and how studies are undertaken ( Nowotny , 2005 ) . Consequently , the forms of relational reasoning can manifest in varied ways and to varying degrees in each domain . For one , much of what concerns social scientists are not directly measurable as is the case in natural sciences ( Borsboom and Mellenbergh , 2002 ) . There are certainly explicit behaviors of individuals and groups that can be documented and analyzed . Nonetheless , the questions often posed by social scientists are about the unseen or underlying forces , factors , or conditions that give rise to those behaviors . As a result , there is potentially much more that must be inferred from gathered data . The techniques and measures that must be created as well as the data analytic approaches can be quantitative , qualitative , or some combination of both ( Mertens , 2019 ) . In light of this characterization of social sciences , how do the forms of relational reasoning come into play ? We can look back at the opening discussion about the nature of relational reasoning for guidance on this matter . For instance , all manner of human reasoning lies buried in the mind of an individual or some societal group ( James , 1893 ) . Therefore , discerning patterns of similarity or dissimilarity requires social scientists to be attentive to any external markers that can suggest what is transpiring consciously or unconsciously within the individual , group , or society ( Harris , 2014 ) . The words individuals or groups utter , the behaviors they display , the decisions or choices they make , and even biophysiological indicators can prove invaluable to recognizing meaningful patterns ( West et al . , 2008 ; Kaplan and Berman , 2010 ) . When it comes to the forms of relational reasoning , analogical reasoning allows those in these ﬁelds to recognize important consistencies or commonalities across individuals , societies , or cultures . Developmental theories , for example , are predicated on assumed shared characteristics among individuals of similar age ( Halford , 1992 ) . Similarly , socioeconomic models look for predictable outcomes based on the level of wealth or poverty experienced at the level of the individual , group , or society ( Hackman and Farah , 2009 ) . Thus , what analogical reasoning can oﬀer in such instances is a framework or starting point that captures common or typical conditions , as we discussed in terms of neurophysiological maturation and relational reasoning capability . As in the natural sciences , analogical reasoning is an important process for tertiary students pursuing careers in the social sciences to hone . Of course , unearthing similarities in people’s thoughts , actions , or experiences is only a portion of what social scientists seek to investigate . They are also invested in understanding how individuals , groups , or societies diﬀer from one another and the nature of those diﬀerences ( Fischer and Silvern , 1985 ; Beattie , 2002 ) . Fields like special education , clinical psychology , criminology , expertise , and many others are focused on those who exhibit ways of thinking and acting that deviate in non - trivial ways from what is regarded as the norm ( Samuel and Widiger , 2008 ; Sullivan and Bal , 2013 ) . In eﬀect , there is something that is perceived as anomalous about these individuals or groups that social scientists may set out to explain through their research and perhaps to ameliorate or amplify those diﬀerences through treatments or interventions . Further , while classifying and categorizing occurs in the social sciences as in the natural sciences , there is a major distinction between these ﬁelds that must be appreciated . Speciﬁcally , because of the nature of the data or evidence that can be gathered in the natural sciences , there is the potential to uncover true dichotomies ( Alexander , in press a ) . Through antinomous reasoning , compelling , and seemingly incontrovertible evidence , discrete categories such as living and non - living matter or animals and plants can emerge in the natural sciences . In the social sciences , however , ontological distinctions of this type are rare . For most of the social sciences , there are more designations that are generated on the basis of continuous or variable characterization ( Lehtinen , 2012 ; Alexander , in press a ) . When sociologists consider political , socioeconomic , racial , and class distinctions , there are no unambiguous categories that result , and many distinctions between individuals , groups , or societies shift over time . For example , bigenderism that once prevailed has given way to more ﬂuid gender distinctions— more antithetical than antinomous in form ( Gilbert , 2009 ) . Therefore , it seems critical that those engaged in describing and Frontiers in Education | www . frontiersin . org 5 May 2022 | Volume 7 | Article 883370 feduc - 07 - 883370 May 17 , 2022 Time : 12 : 53 # 6 Alexander et al . Relational Reasoning in Tertiary Education classifying humans for the purpose of the study should recognize that antithetical reasoning is more central to their ﬁelds than antinomous reasoning . Applied Sciences Within tertiary education and professional practice , there are ﬁelds that are devoted to the application of knowledge and procedures garnered from research in the natural and social sciences to critical real - world problems . This focus on the use of existing knowledge and procedures to deal with pressing problems—be they structural , aesthetic , moral , physical , educational , social , or cultural—is why these domains are referred to as applied sciences . Fields that fall in this category include medicine and health , engineering , teaching , counseling and clinical psychology , computer science , and applied statistics / mathematics . As this litany suggests , domains that are regarded as applied can be extremely challenging and can require years of preparation and practice to master ( Patel et al . , 1999 ) . Among the essentials for performing well in any applied science are a breadth and depth of domain - speciﬁc knowledge and procedural capabilities ( Alexander , 2003 , in press b ) . For example , a breadth of engineering knowledge might include what one knows about the many ﬁelds of engineering , whereas a depth of civil engineering knowledge might relate to what one knows speciﬁcally about bridge construction . What goes hand in hand with such domain - speciﬁc competencies are more general competencies such as the ability to reason , think critically , make sound decisions , and collaborate with others ( Alexander , 2004 , in press b ) . Those in the applied sciences must also be able to recognize , analyze , and classify the nature of problems they will likely encounter , not only in terms of their surface features but also their underlying structure ( Albanese and Dast , 2014 ) . Moreover , those in these applied ﬁelds have to envision viable techniques or approaches to addressing those problems in order to be successful ( Dumas et al . , 2016 ) . Finally , among the critical competencies associated with the applied sciences are strategies for monitoring the situation and evaluating the eﬀectiveness of the actions being taken , which includes a judgment of one’s own performance ( McConnell et al . , 2012 ) . With this general picture of the applied sciences in place , we will now turn our attention to the signiﬁcance of relational reasoning in these ﬁelds . Within the applied sciences , in particular , there have been numerous empirical studies of relational reasoning’s contributions to professional performance , especially in medicine , health , and engineering . Medicine and Health Research studies have shown that relational reasoning provides professionals in medicine and health with the necessary tools to solve complex problems in their ﬁeld . For example , Dumas et al . ( 2014 ) captured many instances of relational reasoning that punctuated the exchanges between an expert attending physician and the residents he was mentoring . Those exchanges occurred as the residents were analyzing details of their patients’ conditions in order to make accurate diagnoses . Dumas et al . ( 2014 ) found that while all four forms of relational reasoning were present in the doctors’ real - time problem - solving , those forms unfolded in a patterned way . For instance , when the residents were ﬁrst presenting their cases , they relied heavily on anomalous reasoning to delineate patients’ atypical symptoms . This delineation eventually gave way to analogical reasoning , as the residents began to speculate on what conditions those symptoms may suggest . At this point in the process , antinomous reasoning was introduced as the attending physician or one of the residents noted that some essential features in the case made the proposed diagnosis untenable . This reasoning cycle repeated until an acceptable diagnosis was reached . Critical thinking and decision - making within health professions are imperative as doctors and nurses engage in diagnosing and treating patients . A study of maternity nursing students and practicing nurses by Fountain ( 2016 ) , for instance , revealed that relational reasoning was a signiﬁcant contributor to their critical thinking , beyond domain knowledge , individual interest , and years of experience . Even though relational reasoning was a signiﬁcant predictor of critical thinking skills , Fountain ( 2016 ) found that there were no signiﬁcant diﬀerences in the four forms of relational reasoning between more or less experienced nurses . This ﬁnding was interpreted by the researcher as evidence that professional experience alone was not suﬃcient to advance relational reasoning abilities among the nurses . Engineering Engineering is a frequently studied domain by relational reasoning researchers ( Dumas et al . , 2016 ; Jablansky et al . , 2020 ) . What makes this domain appealing for these researchers are the nature of the problems and the fact that engineers often work in teams when designing and carrying out projects . Engineering provides unique opportunities to study relational reasoning , because students and practicing professionals are required to consider the feasibility of designs based on established principles in mathematics and physics . Further , there are frameworks such as the Theory of Inventive Problem Solving ( TRIZ ; Altshuller and Shapiro , 1956 ) that students and those practicing in the ﬁeld can use to assess the creativity and viability of potential designs . Interestingly , Dumas and Schmidt ( 2015 ) and Dumas et al . ( 2016 ) found that after engaging in the TRIZ intervention , students were likely to produce fewer but more innovative design ideas . As it pertains to the focus of this article , these researchers also determined that students who were the most creative both before and after the TRIZ intervention scored high on the TORR . Further , the students who were more receptive to the TRIZ intervention were those who were strong in antinomous reasoning . It would seem that for engineers , there needs to be a determination as to whether or not a project design will function or not . There is no room for error when calculating whether a bridge will stand or the foundation of a building will hold . Antinomous reasoning , along with analogical , anomalous , and antithetical reasoning , appears to be essential tools that engineers must apply when working in their ﬁeld . Finally , engineering like medicine is often a collaborative process and , thus , the relational reasoning that occurs among group members can greatly aﬀect both the problem - solving Frontiers in Education | www . frontiersin . org 6 May 2022 | Volume 7 | Article 883370 feduc - 07 - 883370 May 17 , 2022 Time : 12 : 53 # 7 Alexander et al . Relational Reasoning in Tertiary Education process and the resulting outcome . Jablansky ( 2020 ) followed several teams of senior mechanical engineering university students tasked with designing a creative but highly functional product for an existing problem . She videotaped these students’ weekly meetings to document how members of the group contributed and when , including but not limited to how they applied relational reasoning to achieve their goals . Jablansky ( 2020 ) found evidence of relational reasoning patterns that diﬀered not only by person but also by the task that they set out to complete each week . These reasoning patterns were mapped onto data representing the social and regulatory dynamics within teams that aﬀorded a rich picture of the engineering design process . Studies of this nature within any collaborative undertaking among tertiary students in applied sciences can be invaluable to those overseeing course content or guiding the learning of these students . Formal Sciences The formal sciences may be a less familiar grouping of domains than the natural , social , or applied sciences , but are a particularly fast - growing area , especially because of technological advancements in the ability to create complex models and systems ( Treur , 2021 ) . Philosophy , logic , theoretical mathematics , systems theory , theoretical computer science , artiﬁcial intelligence , information theory or informatics , game theory , computational linguistics , and theoretical linguistics are among the academic domains that ﬁt within the formal sciences . What distinguishes the formal sciences from the prior domain groups we overviewed are their aims and methods . In eﬀect , the non - formal sciences involve gathering evidence about nature or about people to better describe what is observed or documented . Such evidence or data can then be subjected to analysis in order to support or reject researchers’ hypotheses . For the applied sciences , the knowledge gained from studies in the natural and social sciences is put to work on real - world problems . In contrast , the aim of the formal sciences is to generate abstract macro - models or theoretical systems meant to explain the phenomena investigated by natural and social scientists or the outcomes observed by applied scientists ( Löwe , 2002 ) . Rather than the tools of empiricism or the scientiﬁc method , students and professionals in formal sciences employ logic , reasoning , and symbolic systems of mathematics and language to formulate and test explanatory models or systems . According to de Laplante ( 2006 ) , the formal sciences aid the natural and social sciences by providing information about the structures used to describe the physical world , and about what inferences may be made about these structures . For that reason , there is a certain domain - generality to the formal sciences since the models and systems formulated in this arena often are applicable to natural , social , and applied sciences . Further , the methods through which the formal sciences support or disprove macro - models and can be quite varied and complex . Those methods can take the form of formal mathematical proofs , critical analysis of any underlying principles or axioms , or the explanatory power of the proposed models or systems . Cramer and Dauphin ( 2020 ) also suggested that structured argumentation , which is a mode of scientiﬁc argumentation , is an invaluable tool applied by those trying to evaluate the viability or credibility of proposed models and systems . These structured arguments are tantamount to high - level debates focused on premises , procedures , or principles represented in the proposed models or systems . So , where do relational reasoning and its four manifestations ﬁt within the formal sciences ? Because of the weight placed on abstract and complex models or systems that are represented in mathematical or linguistic symbols , relational reasoning is critical . For instance , one crucial ability that requires analogical reasoning is envisioning how elements or components that may exist separately in nature or society display similarities that allow for their convergence into more macro - level theoretical models ( Tsoukas , 1993 ) . Similarly , conceiving of a theoretical model or system likely requires individuals to recognize how patterns that repeat in nature ( e . g . , snowﬂakes or leaves ) or in human systems ( e . g . , circulatory system or brain cortex ) at one level of generality may iterate at a higher or lower level . Those who are familiar with Mandlebrot’s ( 1982 ) theory on fractal geometry in nature will understand the aforementioned reference to iterations . An iteration is a recognizable version of a pattern without being exactly the same—not a perfect replication ( Bringsjord et al . , 2017 ) . For instance , we can recognize a snowﬂake by its features , while understanding that no two snowﬂakes are exactly the same . This reminds us that perceiving diﬀerences in the formal sciences remains as important as discerning similarities . Those working in the formal sciences must be able to capture the theorized or modeled patterns in natural or human systems linguistically , mathematically , or in computer codes . This ability to capture phenomena symbolically again brings analogical reasoning into play since there is an essential association between the symbolic notions and the phenomena they are depicting ( Hummel et al . , 2014 ) . Of course , articulating a theoretical model or system is not the end point of the formal science . Once articulated , these hypothetical or abstracted models or systems must be tested , argued , or scrutinized . This process of proving or disproving a resulting model or theory will call upon analogical , antinomous , antithetical , and antinomous reasoning . Analogical reasoning is needed to map the underlying similarities of the individual model components , while anomalous reasoning is essential to demonstrate that some aberrant iteration still ﬁts with the established system . Antithetical reasoning is used to mark the boundaries of the features that deﬁne the model or system , whereas antinomous reasoning is involved when some identiﬁed instance fails to ﬁt within the parameters of a proposed system . If such a fundamental failure is identiﬁed , some variation of the proposed system must be derived , or an alternative must be considered . To this point in the article , we have provided a general overview of relational reasoning and an explication of its speciﬁc forms . We also described how relational reasoning and its particular manifestations—analogical , anomalous , antinomous , and antithetical—undergird learning and performance in a range of academic domains and professional practices . To support that argument , we ﬁrst organized the discussion around four clusters of ﬁelds found within institutions of higher education : the natural Frontiers in Education | www . frontiersin . org 7 May 2022 | Volume 7 | Article 883370 feduc - 07 - 883370 May 17 , 2022 Time : 12 : 53 # 8 Alexander et al . Relational Reasoning in Tertiary Education FIGURE 1 | Sample items from the analogy ( A ) , anomaly ( B ) , antithesis ( C ) , and antinomy ( D ) scales of the test of relational reasoning . sciences , social sciences , applied sciences , and formal sciences . Then , we oﬀered a brief explanation of what distinguishes each of these clusters and described the role that relational reasoning plays in each . In the remaining section , we want to move more abstracted discourse on relational reasoning into a real - world context—a university course in which relational reasoning it assessed and trained . EMBEDDING RELATIONAL REASONING IN HIGHER EDUCATION : AN ILLUSTRATIVE CASE Learning How to Learn ( LHL ) is a general education course designed and taught by the ﬁrst author and where we have embedded relational reasoning . This course was expressly developed to ( a ) improve tertiary students’ understanding of the complexity and processes of learning and ( b ) prepare them for the diverse professions they will enter upon graduation . In Table 1 , we overview the three phases of our instructional procedure . Speciﬁcally , we describe how students’ relational reasoning abilities are initially assessed ( Phase 1 ) ; how they are then taught about relational reasoning and its underlying processes ( Phase 2 ) ; and how this new conceptual and procedural understanding becomes an anchoring point for subsequent instruction in crucial learning topics such as transfer , critical reading , and quality discussion ( Phase 3 ) . Phase 1 : Assessment The ability to forge meaningful relations within any information stream ( i . e . , relational reasoning ) occurs in any medium in which information can be conveyed—words , pictures , sounds , ﬁgures , or numbers ( Dumas et al . , 2013 ) . When individuals notice that a musical sequence in a composition reappears in a diﬀerent key or at a diﬀerent tempo ; when certain themes in a painting can be identiﬁed in an alternative art form ; or when researchers recognize outliers in their dataset , relational reasoning is demonstrated ( Hofstadter , 1979 ; Loughlin et al . , 2015 ) . Over the past decade , Alexander and colleagues have created valid and reliable measures of relational reasoning that not only consist of ﬁgural representations but are also composed of sentences ( Verbal Test of Relational Reasoning or vTORR ; Alexander et al . , 2016c ) and single words ( Relational Reasoning with Words or R 2 W 2 ; Zhao and Alexander , 2022 ) . Frontiers in Education | www . frontiersin . org 8 May 2022 | Volume 7 | Article 883370 feduc - 07 - 883370 May 17 , 2022 Time : 12 : 53 # 9 Alexander et al . Relational Reasoning in Tertiary Education TABLE 1 | Embedding relational reasoning within a higher - education course . Relational reasoning training procedure Instructional events Details Phase 1 : assessment Students’ relational reasoning capabilities assessed TORR is administered to gauge students’ ability to reason analogically , anomalously , antinomously , and antithetically Fluid measure used to limit inﬂuence of students’ background knowledge or experiences Students receive TORR results Students automatically receive performance data upon test completion Their total score is reported by raw score and by relational reasoning quotient ( M = 100 , SD = 15 ) Raw scores for each of the scales ( M = 4 ) are also reported to form students’ reasoning proﬁles No additional feedback on correctness or incorrectness of responses by individual items is given Phase 2 : explication Nature and importance of relational reasoning explained Relational reasoning is deﬁned and its essential nature to learning and performance is overviewed Four forms are differentiated and illustrated Analogy , anomaly , antinomy , and antithesis are compared and contrasted using various examples Underlying component processes are introduced and practiced Componential processes of encoding , inferring , mapping , and applying are explained and used to solve analogy problems These componential processes then used with anomaly , antinomy , and antithesis sample problems Phase 3 : extension and transfer Domain - speciﬁc exploration Students meet in major or disciplinary groups to identify the role of analogical , anomalous , antinomous , and antithetical reasoning in their ﬁelds of study Multiple - document research Students carry out research on a controversial topic using multiple documents and prepare an argumentative essay that integrates content across the identiﬁed sources After completing this task , students engage in quality discussion on the controversial topic Transfer activity Students are tasked with ﬁnding and categorizing instances of transfer that they can ﬁnd in 24 h The key similarities and differences that triggered transfer are then analyzed vis - à - vis forms of relational reasoning However , when measuring the relational reasoning capability of tertiary students , the decision was made to employ the TORR over other measures like the vTORR or R 2 W 2 because it is a ﬂuid rather than a crystallized measure . Cattell ( 1940 , 1963 ) is credited with drawing the distinction between ﬂuid and crystallized mental assessments ( Carpenter et al . , 1990 ; Schipolowski et al . , 2014 ) . What characterizes a ﬂuid ability measure like the TORR or the Raven’s ( 1941 ) is the presumption that respondents have access to all that is needed to complete the problem or task within the problem itself . In eﬀect , there is no speciﬁc body of conceptual knowledge or procedural skills that the students in LHL would need to have acquired in order to perform well on the TORR over and above their ability to reason relationally . On more crystallized measures , like vTORR and R 2 W 2 , students would have to be familiar with words and their subtle meanings to demonstrate their reasoning abilities . Those diﬀerences between ﬂuid and crystallized measures can be seen by comparing the sample TORR items in Figure 1 to sample items from the vTORR and R 2 W 2 displayed in Figure 2 . Another reason to assess relational reasoning with a generic measure like the TORR is because students enrolled in LHL are pursuing majors in the natural , social , applied , and formal sciences ( Alexander , 2019 ) . Such domain diversity means that these students’ knowledge and skills are expected to vary . The use of a generic measure , therefore , creates a more level playing ﬁeld when making judgments about these students’ relational reasoning capabilities . Further , the TORR remains a strong predictor of achievement in varied academic ﬁelds and professional practices ( Dumas and Schmidt , 2015 ; Dumas et al . , 2016 ; Fountain , 2016 ; Baggetta , 2019 ) . After completing the 32 items on the TORR , the students enrolled in LHL receive their results reported as a standardized relational reasoning quotient ( RRQ ) with a mean of 100 and a standard deviation of 15 ( Dumas and Alexander , 2016 ) . The students also receive performance data for each of the four 8 - item scales that represent the four reasoning forms . The mean for each scale is 4 . Students receive no additional feedback on the speciﬁc items nor are they given any explanation of how items in the scales should have been analyzed . Phase 2 : Explicit Instruction in Relational Reasoning Once students have taken the TORR and have their proﬁle recorded , we share with them a deﬁnition of relational reasoning and explain brieﬂy what each form captures in terms of its underlying pattern : analogy ( similarity ) , anomaly ( aberrance ) , antinomy ( exclusivity / binary ) , and antinomy ( opposition / continuous ) . The gist of this relational reasoning overview was presented in the ﬁrst section of this article . In sharing this general information about relational reasoning with the students , we never refer to any of the problems on the TORR or deal with ﬁgural problems similar to those items . Not only would that be unacceptable , since the TORR items except for the sample problems , are proprietary information , but also because we want students to see how relational reasoning permeates all academic domains . One or two examples of each form are provided representing diﬀerent domains . For instance , to exemplify analogies we might display a ratio problem such as “3 : 9 is equivalent to 4 : ? ” or a classic verbal comparison like “ocean : bay : continent : _ X _ . ” In this initial phase of instruction , we also establish the predictive power of relational reasoning as demonstrated in the research and describe the role that this higher - order cognitive ability plays in the students’ academic domains . Frontiers in Education | www . frontiersin . org 9 May 2022 | Volume 7 | Article 883370 feduc - 07 - 883370 May 17 , 2022 Time : 12 : 53 # 10 Alexander et al . Relational Reasoning in Tertiary Education The second phase of explicit instruction involves introducing and then practicing the four essential componential processes critical to any form of relational reasoning ( Sternberg , 1977 ) : encoding , inferring , mapping , and applying . Alexander and colleagues have conducted explicit training in analogical reasoning with very young children through young adults using the componential processes as the framework ( White and Alexander , 1986 ; Alexander et al . , 1987a , b ; Pate et al . , 1989 ) . Simply deﬁned , encoding entails examining elements of a problem or problem space to ensure understanding of any givens , whereas inferring requires ﬁnding connections between individual elements based on whatever meaning was derived from encoding . These two processes thus result in a meaningful association essential for any pattern , even a simple linear sequence . However , unlike simple linear patterns , relational reasoning forms involve “relations among relations . ” Mapping is the componential process that is required to link the initial pattern just inferred to another set of associated elements that represent a related pattern . The ﬁnal componential process , applying , involves completing the problem and recognizing the underlying structure , which could then be iterated . To illustrate these componential processes , we let students see how they function in a simple analogy problem like “ocean : bay : continent : _ X _ . ” Students begin by encoding the term ocean and identifying its salient attributes ( largest body of water ) and then encoding the term bay ( inlet of water connected to a larger body of water like an ocean and surrounded by land on three sides ) . Next students must infer a relation between ocean and bay ( both are bodies of water , but bays are smaller and open to oceans on one side and surrounded by land on the remaining sides ) , To complete the mapping , students must form a meaningful association between ocean and continent ( both are the largest geographical bodies of water and land , respectively ) . Finally , applying means that students must identify the critical attributes of the missing element that would parallel the relation of ocean to bay . Speciﬁcally , they need to recognize that they are looking for a small body of land , connected to a continent on one side and water on the remaining three sides ( answer : peninsula ) . While the componential processes of encoding , inferring , mapping , and applying were conceptualized with only analogical reasoning in mind ( Sternberg , 1977 ) , Grossnickle et al . ( 2016 ) found that those same processes were core to anomalous , antinomous , and antithetical reasoning , as well . Moreover , these researchers found that lower performing students exhibited diﬃculties inferring and mapping on problems representing all relational reasoning forms . Thus , once students had practiced using the componential processes on verbal analogy problems , they were introduced to verbal problems tapping anomalous , antinomous , and antithetical reasoning . As with the analogy problems , they were directed to encode , infer , map , and apply while solving these problems and received feedback on their performance . When this training and practice phase concluded , our goal was to demonstrate the importance of relational reasoning to other key facets of academic learning and performance beginning with transfer . FIGURE 2 | Sample items from the verbal test of relational reasoning analogy scale ( A ) and the relational reasoning with words antinomy scale ( B ) . Phase 3 : Expansion and Transfer Transfer , “the process of using knowledge or skills acquired in one context in a new or varied context” ( Alexander and Murphy , 1999 , p . 561 ) , has the well - earned reputation of being one of the most challenging cognitive abilities for students to master ( Gick and Holyoak , 1980 ; Detterman and Sternberg , 1993 ) . Indeed , the literature is replete with evidence that students are typically poor at transferring knowledge and skills from one formal learning environment to another or to situations in the world outside the classroom ( Perkins and Salomon , 2012 ) . This indictment notwithstanding , transfer remains a foundational ability for all students , especially tertiary students , to develop and hone if they are to be successful both in their university studies and their chosen professions . Many factors or conditions have been proposed as barriers of transfer such as the contention that the initial learning was not substantive enough to foster transfer ( Dinsmore et al . , 2013 ) . It could also be that the new context appears quite dissimilar to the context in which the knowledge and skills were acquired . Learners’ individual characteristics can also foster or frustrate transfer including their perceptiveness , motivations , or metacognitive and strategic abilities ( Corkill and Fager , 1995 ; Billing , 2007 ; Dinsmore et al . , 2013 ) . Because of the importance of transfer for learning in higher education and for future career success , this area is stressed in Frontiers in Education | www . frontiersin . org 10 May 2022 | Volume 7 | Article 883370 feduc - 07 - 883370 May 17 , 2022 Time : 12 : 53 # 11 Alexander et al . Relational Reasoning in Tertiary Education LHL . We concur with Billing ( 2007 ) that transfer is more likely to occur when principles of reasoning are taught in conjunction with academic content . Thus , when we introduce this topic to students , we stress that learning to transfer will “bootstrap” the knowledge and skills they are working hard to acquire . Yet , we acknowledge the diﬃculty of developing a habit of transfer . A ﬁrst step in forming this habit of mind is for them to become perceptive and alert to transfer opportunities—a process that can be aided by their use of relational reasoning . We share evidence with them that shows that analogical reasoning ability can be a key to transfer ( Reeves and Weisberg , 1994 ; Richland and McDonough , 2010 ) . As Alexander and Murphy ( 1999 ) argued , transfer and analogical reasoning are related processes . Unless students can perceive similarities between a speciﬁc task they learned with another task encountered in a diﬀerent context , they will not be primed to engage in transfer . Further , the more these students can look beyond the surface features of those tasks and contexts and ﬁnd underlying similarities , the better they can make use of what they already know and can do , which is where their relational reasoning , and especially analogical reasoning can be most helpful ( Richland and McDonough , 2010 ) . We also alert students to be aware of the dissimilarities between the initial tasks and contexts and these transfer opportunities , so they can iterate or modify their problem - solving processes appropriately . When this instruction on transfer coupled with relational reasoning has been completed , students in LHL are given the task of documenting as many instances of transfer as they can within a 24 - h period . The cases of transfer the students record are then discussed in class for added reinforcement . Critical Reading is another basic skill for students in tertiary education , as they are required to read about what they are studying . For students majoring in certain ﬁelds , such as history , philosophy , psychology , and sociology , the reading required can be quite extensive . In LHL , for instance , students are reading , summarizing , and comparing articles and chapters routinely . They also are required to carry out a multiple - source use ( MSU ) project for which they conduct an online search on a controversial topic ( e . g . , The eﬀects of overuse of social media on students’ academic , social , physical , and emotional well - being ) . The students then select and summarize appropriate sources to use as the basis for an argumentative essay . The students’ prior training in relational reasoning becomes relevant to these tasks in several ways . For one , we recognized early in the rollout of this course that many of these tertiary students did not have eﬀective strategies for dealing with course readings in an integrative manner . Thus , when they were tasked with writing a comparison of two readings that oﬀered diﬀerent perspectives on an issue ( e . g . , expertise ) , many had no clue how to begin . Drawing on their relational reasoning training , we suggested that they could chart key similarities and dissimilarities between the readings and then use that relational analysis to organize their written comparisons . This deep analysis technique was also advantageous when the students had to integrate information across multiple documents . Again , by thinking relationally about the documents in terms of core similarities and dissimilarities , the students were better prepared to integrate the positions , arguments , and evidence presented in their selected sources . The resulting analysis could help them formulate their own position on the controversial issue and provide them with evidence to support their position when composing their argumentative essay . As with their writing , we were somewhat surprised to ﬁnd that a good number of the tertiary students enrolled in LHL were stymied in their ability to carry out quality discussion . Frequently what we witnessed were students voicing points that were unconnected to what others had already been said or they did not make it clear whether their statement was meant to support or counter what others had previously expressed . In eﬀect , what should have been a discussion became a string of separate statements . Thus , what we did to improve the quality of class discussions was to share the research illustrating how professionals like medical doctors diagnosing their patients or engineering students working collaboratively on a project design would use relational reasoning in their discourse to work toward a shared outcome . We also had students read an excellent piece by Murphy et al . ( 2017 ) that describes how instances of relational reasoning in students’ discourse served to reinforce , conditionalize , or counter others’ comments . Tertiary students in LHL then tried their hands at carrying on a discussion based on their MSU research , and the ideas expressed in their argumentative essays . We saw a marked improvement in discussion quality following this brief intervention with many more uptakes . Murphy et al . deﬁne uptakes as direct acknowledgments of what others have contributed and an explicit indication of how one’s response is related . In this ﬁnal section of the article , we have attempted to show how theory and research in relational reasoning can easily and eﬀectively be embedded in instruction within a university classroom . Of course , we do not know if those students who were part of LHL carried the lessons from this unique course into the rest of their tertiary education or into their continued professional development . That remains our hope and the subject for future empirical research . FINAL THOUGHTS AND FUTURE DIRECTIONS An overarching goal we set for this treatise on relational reasoning was to establish its value as a higher - order cognitive ability for tertiary students’ current learning and performance as well as their future success in their chosen professions . To support that claim , we not only shared what is known about the nature , forms , and development of relational reasoning , but also its contributions to a range of human activities and academic domains . Finally , we looked at how relational reasoning was woven through the content of one university course—from its assessment and training to its expansion into other topics of importance such as transfer , critical reading , and writing abilities . There is no question that higher education has a mission of equipping students with the knowledge and skills they will need to function in their lives , including in their chosen professions . It is also presumed that tertiary education will contribute to Frontiers in Education | www . frontiersin . org 11 May 2022 | Volume 7 | Article 883370 feduc - 07 - 883370 May 17 , 2022 Time : 12 : 53 # 12 Alexander et al . Relational Reasoning in Tertiary Education students’ ability to reason deeply and eﬀectively and to manifest habits of mind and habits of action that are indicative of a well - educated mind . But how is this ability to reason deeply and eﬀectively explicitly developed within tertiary education ? Our contention is that the assessment , training , and expansion of relational reasoning is one signiﬁcant step in the right direction . Of course , what we have shared in this article is one humble case of what could be done within tertiary education . There is much more that must be done before the potential value of relational reasoning in tertiary education can be more fully assessed and more fully realized . Nonetheless , we would like this overview to be an opportunity for others to explore relational reasoning as an essential component within higher education ; one that can foster the habits of mind and habits of action that we seek to instill in students who currently populate universities and will become tomorrow’s doctors , scientists , teachers , counselors , and engineers . DATA AVAILABILITY STATEMENT The original contributions presented in the study are included in the article / supplementary material , further inquiries can be directed to the corresponding author . ETHICS STATEMENT The studies involving human participants were reviewed and approved by the IRB University of Maryland . The patients / participants provided their written informed consent to participate in this study . AUTHOR CONTRIBUTIONS All authors listed have made a substantial , direct , and intellectual contribution to the work , and approved it for publication . REFERENCES Albanese , M . A . , and Dast , L . ( 2014 ) . Problem - based learning : outcomes evidence from the health professions . J . Excell . Coll . Teach . 25 , 239 – 252 . Alexander , P . A . ( 2003 ) . The development of expertise : the journey from acclimation to proﬁciency . Educ . Res . 32 , 10 – 14 . doi : 10 . 3102 / 0013189X032008010 Alexander , P . A . ( 2004 ) . “A model of domain learning : reinterpreting expertise as a multidimensional , multistage process , ” in Interactive Models , eds D . Y . Dai and R . J . Sternberg ( Mahwah , NJ : Lawrence Erlbaum Associates ) , 271 – 298 . Alexander , P . A . ( 2006 ) . Psychology in Learning and Instruction . Upper Saddle River , NJ : Pearson . Alexander , P . A . ( 2016 ) . Relational thinking and relational reasoning : harnessing the power of patterning . NPJ Sci . Learn . 1 : 16004 . doi : 10 . 1038 / npjscilearn . 20 16 . 4 Alexander , P . A . ( 2019 ) . Individual diﬀerences in college - age learners : the importance of relational reasoning for learning and assessment in higher education . Br . J . Educ . Psychol . 89 , 416 – 428 . doi : 10 . 1111 / bjep . 12264 Alexander , P . A . ( in press a ) . “Good versus bad motivation ? Avoiding the lure of false dichotomies , ” in Motivation Science : Controversies and Insights , eds M . Bong , S . - I . Kim , and J . Reeve ( Oxford : Oxford University Press ) . Alexander , P . A . ( inpressb ) . “Theinterplayofknowledge , strategies , andinterestin the development of expertise within professions , ” in Professions and Proﬁciency ( Knowledge and Space ) , Vol . 18 , eds J . Glückler , C . Winch , and A . M . Punstein ( Berlin : Springer ) . Alexander , P . A . , and Baggetta , P . ( 2014 ) . “Percept - concept coupling and human error , ”in ProcessingInaccurateInformation : TheoreticalandAppliedPerspectives from Cognitive Science and the Educational Sciences , eds D . N . Rapp and J . L . G . Baasch ( Boston , MA : MIT Press ) , 297 – 327 . Alexander , P . A . , Dumas , D . , Grossnickle , E . M . , List , A . , and Firetto , C . M . ( 2016a ) . Measuring relational reasoning . J . Exp . Educ . 84 , 119 – 151 . doi : 10 . 1080 / 00220973 . 2014 . 963216 Alexander , P . A . , Jablansky , S . , Singer , L . M . , and Dumas , D . ( 2016b ) . Relational reasoning : what we know and why it matters . [ Special issue on education ] . Policy Insights Behav . Brain Sci . 3 , 36 – 44 . doi : 10 . 1177 / 2372732215622029 Alexander , P . A . , Singer , L . , Jablansky , S . , and Hattan , C . ( 2016c ) . Relational reasoning in word and in ﬁgure . J . Educ . Psychol . 108 , 1140 – 1152 . doi : 10 . 1037 / edu0000110 Alexander , P . A . , and Murphy , P . K . ( 1999 ) . Nurturing the seeds of transfer : a domain - speciﬁc perspective . Int . J . Educ . Res . 31 , 561 – 567 . doi : 10 . 1016 / S0883 - 0355 ( 99 ) 00024 - 5 Alexander , P . A . , and The Disciplined Reading and Learning Research Laboratory [ DRLRL ] ( 2012 ) . Reading into the future : competence for the 21 st century . Educ . Psychol . 47 , 1 – 22 . doi : 10 . 1080 / 00461520 . 2012 . 722511 Alexander , P . A . , and The Disciplined Reading and Learning Research Laboratory [ DRLRL ] ( 2014 ) . Test of Relational Reasoning . College Park , MD : University of Maryland . Alexander , P . A . , and The Disciplined Reading and Learning Research Laboratory [ DRLRL ] ( 2018 ) . Test of Relational Reasoning - Junior . College Park , MD : University of Maryland . Alexander , P . A . , White , C . S . , Haensly , P . A . , and Crimmins - Jeanes , M . ( 1987a ) . Training in analogical reasoning . Am . Educ . Res . J . 24 , 387 – 404 . Alexander , P . A . , Wilson , A . F . , White , C . S . , Willson , V . L . , Tallent , M . K . , and Shutes , R . E . ( 1987b ) . Eﬀects of teacher training on children’s analogical reasoning performance . Teach . Teach . Educ . 3 , 275 – 285 . doi : 10 . 1016 / 0742 - 051X ( 87 ) 90020 - 5 Altshuller , G . S . , andShapiro , R . B . ( 1956 ) . Psychologyofinventivecreativity . Vopr . Psikhol . 6 , 37 – 49 . Baggetta , P . ( 2019 ) . The Contributions of Crystallized Cross - Domain Knowledge and Fluid Relational Reasoning Ability to Ninth - and Twelfth - Grade Students’ Performance on Scholastic Aptitude and Content - Speciﬁc Achievement Measures ( Order No . 27735583 ) . ProQuest Dissertations & Theses Global . Availabe online at : https : / / www . proquest . com / dissertations - theses / contributions - crystallized - cross - domain - knowledge / docview / 2434104455 / se - 2 ? accountid = 14696 ( accessed March 30 , 2022 ) . Baggetta , P . , andAlexander , P . A . ( 2016 ) . Conceptualizationandoperationalization of executive function . Mind Brain Educ . 10 , 10 – 33 . doi : 10 . 1111 / mbe . 12 100 Bartha , P . ( 2019 ) . “Analogyandanalogicalreasoning , ”in TheStanfordEncyclopedia of Philosophy , ed . E . N . Zalta . Available online at : https : / / plato . stanford . edu / archives / spr2019 / entries / reasoning - analogy / ( accessed February 07 , 2022 ) . Beattie , I . R . ( 2002 ) . Are all “adolescent econometricians” created equal ? Racial , class , and gender diﬀerences in college enrollment . Sociol . Educ . 75 , 19 – 43 . doi : 10 . 2307 / 3090252 Billing , D . ( 2007 ) . Teaching for transfer of core / key skills in higher education : cognitive skills . High . Educ . 53 , 483 – 516 . doi : 10 . 1007 / s10734 - 005 - 5628 - 5 Borsboom , D . , and Mellenbergh , G . J . ( 2002 ) . True scores , latent variables , and constructs : a comment on Schmidt and Hunter . Intelligence 30 , 505 – 514 . doi : 10 . 1016 / S0160 - 2896 ( 02 ) 00082 - X Bringsjord , S . , Hummel , J . , and Licato , J . ( 2017 ) . Great Computational Intelligence in the Formal Sciences via Analogical Reasoning . Arlington , VA : Air Force Research Laboratory / AF Oﬃce of Scientiﬁc Research . Frontiers in Education | www . frontiersin . org 12 May 2022 | Volume 7 | Article 883370 feduc - 07 - 883370 May 17 , 2022 Time : 12 : 53 # 13 Alexander et al . Relational Reasoning in Tertiary Education Bunge , S . A . , and Leib , E . R . ( 2020 ) . How does education hone reasoning ability ? Curr . Dir . Psychol . Sci . 29 , 167 – 173 . doi : 10 . 1177 / 0963721419898818 Carlson , S . M . ( 2009 ) . Social origins of executive function development . New Dir . Child Adolesc . Dev . 2009 , 87 – 97 . doi : 10 . 1002 / cd . 237 Carpenter , P . A . , Just , M . A . , and Shell , P . ( 1990 ) . What one intelligence test measures : a theoretical account of the processing in the Raven Progressive Matrices Test . Psychol . Rev . 97 , 404 – 431 . doi : 10 . 1037 / 0033 - 295X . 97 . 3 . 404 Cattell , R . B . ( 1940 ) . Aculture - freeintelligencetest . I . J . Educ . Psychol . 31 , 161 – 179 . doi : 10 . 1037 / h0059043 Cattell , R . B . ( 1963 ) . Theory of ﬂuid and crystallized intelligence : a critical experiment . J . Educ . Psychol . 4 , 1 – 22 . doi : 10 . 1037 / h0046743 Chae , S . - E . , and Alexander , P . A . ( 2021a ) . Exploring potential educational and socialcontributorstorelationalreasoningdevelopment : astudyoftypically - and atypically - schooled adolescents and adults in South Korea . Mind Brain Educ . doi : 10 . 1002 / MBE . 12311 [ Epub ahead of print ] . Chae , S . - E . , and Alexander , P . A . ( 2021b ) . The development of relational reasoning in South Korean elementary and middle - school students : a cross - sectional investigation . Front . Psychol . Cogn . 12 : 630609 . doi : 10 . 3389 / fpsyg . 2021 . 630609 Chinn , C . A . , and Brewer , W . F . ( 1993 ) . The role of anomalous data in knowledge acquisition : a theoretical framework and implications for science instruction . Rev . Educ . Res . 63 , 1 – 49 . doi : 10 . 2307 / 1170558 Chinn , C . A . , and Malhotra , B . A . ( 2002 ) . Children’s responses to anomalous scientiﬁc data : how is conceptual change impeded ? J . Educ . Psychol . 94 , 327 – 343 . doi : 10 . 1037 / 0022 - 0663 . 94 . 2 . 327 Corkill , A . J . , and Fager , J . J . ( 1995 ) . Individual diﬀerences in transfer via analogy . Learn . Individ . Diﬀer . 7 , 163 – 187 . doi : 10 . 1016 / 1041 - 6080 ( 95 ) 90009 - 8 Cramer , M . , and Dauphin , J . ( 2020 ) . A structured argumentation framework for modeling debates in the formal sciences . J . Gen . Philos . Sci . 51 , 219 – 241 . doi : 10 . 1007 / s10838 - 019 - 09443 - z de Laplante , K . ( 2006 ) . “Sources of domain - independence in the formal sciences , ” in Foundations of the Formal Sciences IV : History of the Concept of the Formal Sciences , eds B . Löwe , V . Peckhaus , and T . Räsch ( Norcross , GA : College Publications ) , 1 – 16 . Detterman , D . K . , and Sternberg , R . J . ( 1993 ) . Transfer on Trial : Intelligence , Cognition , and Instruction . Norwood , NJ : Ablex Publishing . Diamond , A . ( 2013 ) . Executive functions . Annu . Rev . Psychol . 64 , 135 – 168 . doi : 10 . 1146 / annurevpsych - 113011 - 143750 Dinsmore , D . L . , Baggett , P . , Doyle , S . , and Loughlin , S . M . ( 2013 ) . The role of initial learning , problem features , prior knowledge , and pattern recognition on transfer success . J . Exp . Educ . 82 , 121 – 141 . doi : 10 . 1080 / 00220973 . 2013 . 835299 Dumas , D . , and Alexander , P . A . ( 2016 ) . Calibration of the test of relational reasoning . Psychol . Assess . 28 , 1303 – 1318 . doi : 10 . 1037 / pas0000267 Dumas , D . , and Alexander , P . A . ( 2018 ) . Assessing diﬀerential item functioning on thetestofrelationalreasoning . Front . Educ . 3 : 14 . doi : 10 . 3389 / feduc . 2018 . 00014 Dumas , D . , Alexander , P . A . , Baker , L . M . , Jablansky , S . , and Dunbar , K . N . ( 2014 ) . Relational reasoning in medical education : patterns in discourse and diagnosis . J . Educ . Psychol . 106 , 1021 – 1035 . doi : 10 . 1037 / a0036777 Dumas , D . , Alexander , P . A . , and Grossnickle , E . M . ( 2013 ) . Relational reasoning and its manifestations in the educational context : a systematic review of the literature . Educ . Psychol . Rev . 25 , 391 – 427 . doi : 10 . 1007 / s10648 - 013 - 9224 - 4 Dumas , D . , and Schmidt , L . ( 2015 ) . Relational reasoning as predictor for engineering ideation success using TRIZ . J . Eng . Des . 26 , 74 – 88 . doi : 10 . 1080 / 09544828 . 2015 . 1020287 Dumas , D . , Schmidt , L . C . , andAlexander , P . A . ( 2016 ) . Predictingcreativeproblem solving in engineering design . Think . Skills Creat . 21 , 50 – 66 . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . tsc . 2016 . 05 . 002 Dumontheil , I . , Houlton , R . , Christoﬀ , K . , and Blakemore , S . ( 2010 ) . Development of relational reasoning during adolescence . Dev . Sci . 13 , F15 – F24 . doi : 10 . 1111 / j . 1467 - 7687 . 2010 . 01014 . x Dunbar , K . , and Blanchette , I . ( 2001 ) . The in vivo / in vitro approach to cognition : the case of analogy . Trends Cogn . Sci . 5 , 334 – 339 . doi : 10 . 1016 / S1364 - 6613 ( 00 ) 01698 - 3 Fischer , K . W . , and Silvern , L . ( 1985 ) . Stages and individual diﬀerences in cognitive development . Annu . Rev . Psychol . 36 , 613 – 648 . doi : 10 . 1146 / annurev . ps . 36 . 020185 . 003145 Fountain , L . ( 2016 ) . Relations Among Topic Knowledge , Individual Interest , and Relational Reasoning , and Critical Thinking in Maternity Nursing ( Order No . 10159037 ) . ProQuest Dissertations & Theses Global . Available online at : https : / / www . proquest . com / dissertations - theses / relations - among - topic - knowledge - individual / docview / 1824362967 / se - 2 ( accessed March 30 , 2022 ) . Gentner , D . ( 2002 ) . “Analogy in scientiﬁc discovery : the case of Johannes Kepler , ” in Model - BasedReasoning : Science , Technology , Values , edsL . MagnaniandN . J . Nersessian ( New York , NY : Kluwer Academic / Plenum Publisher ) , 21 – a39 . Gentner , D . , andGentner , D . R . ( 1983 ) . FlowingWatersorTeemingCrowds : Mental Models of Electricity . Hillsdale , NJ : Erlbaum . Gick , M . L . , and Holyoak , K . J . ( 1980 ) . Analogical problem solving . Cogn . Psychol . 12 , 306 – 355 . doi : 10 . 1016 / 0010 - 0285 ( 80 ) 90013 - 4 Gilbert , M . A . ( 2009 ) . Defeating bigenderism : changing gender assumptions in the twenty - ﬁrst century . Hypatia 24 , 93 – 112 . doi : 10 . 1111 / j . 1527 - 2001 . 2009 . 01 047 . x Grossnickle , E . M . , Dumas , D . , Alexander , P . A . , andBaggetta , P . ( 2016 ) . Individual diﬀerences in the process of relational reasoning . Learn . Instr . 42 , 141 – 159 . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . learninstruc . 2016 . 01 . 013 Hackman , D . A . , and Farah , M . J . ( 2009 ) . Socioeconomic status and the developing brain . Trends Cogn . Sci . 13 , 65 – 73 . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . tics . 2008 . 11 . 003 Halford , G . S . ( 1992 ) . Analogical reasoning and conceptual complexity in cognitive development . Hum . Dev . 35 , 193 – 217 . doi : 10 . 1159 / 000277167 Harris , E . E . ( 2014 ) . Hypothesis and Perception : The Roots of Scientiﬁc Method . London : Routledge . Hofstadter , D . R . ( 1979 ) . Gödel , Escher , Bach : An Eternal Golden Braid . New York , NY : Basic Books . Hsu , N . S . , Novick , J . M . , and Jaeggi , S . M . ( 2014 ) . The development and malleability of executive control abilities . Front . Behav . Neurosci . 8 : 221 . doi : 10 . 3389 / fnbeh . 2014 . 00221 Hummel , J . E . , Licato , J . , and Bringsjord , S . ( 2014 ) . Analogy , explanation , and proof . Front . Hum . Neurosci . 8 : 867 . doi : 10 . 3389 / fnhum . 2014 . 00867 Jablansky , S . ( 2020 ) . Relational Reasoning and Socially Shared Regulation of Learning in Collaborative Problem Solving ( Order No . 28151748 ) . ProQuest Dissertations & Theses Global . Available online at : https : / / www . proquest . com / dissertations - theses / relational - reasoning - socially - shared - regulation / docview / 2496359895 / se - 2 ? accountid = 14696 ( accessed March 30 , 2022 ) . Jablansky , S . , Alexander , P . A . , Dumas , D . , and Compton , V . ( 2016 ) . Developmental diﬀerences in relational reasoning among primary and secondary school students . J . Educ . Psychol . 108 , 592 – 608 . doi : 10 . 1037 / edu0000070 Jablansky , S . , Alexander , P . A . , Dumas , D . , and Compton , V . ( 2020 ) . The development of relational reasoning in primary and secondary school students : a longitudinal investigation in technology education . Int . J . Technol . Des . Educ . 30 , 973 – 993 . doi : 10 . 1007 / s10798 - 019 - 09529 - 1 James , W . ( 1893 ) . Psychology : A Briefer Course . New York , NY : Henry Holt & Co . Kaplan , S . , and Berman , M . G . ( 2010 ) . Directed attention as a common resource for executive functioning and self - regulation . Perspect . Psychol . Sci . 5 , 43 – 57 . doi : 10 . 1177 / 1745691609356784 Kavousi , S . , Miller , P . , and Alexander , P . A . ( 2020 ) . The role of metacognition in the ﬁrst - year design lab . Educ . Technol . Res . Dev . 68 , 3471 – 3494 . doi : 10 . 1007 / s11423 - 020 - 09848 - 4 Krawczyk , D . C . ( 2012 ) . The cognition and neuroscience of relational reasoning . Brain Res . 1428 , 13 – 23 . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . brainres . 2010 . 11 . 080 Krawczyk , D . C . , McClelland , M . M . , and Donovan , C . M . ( 2011 ) . A hierarchy for relational reasoning in the prefrontal cortex . Cortex 47 , 588 – 597 . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . cortex . 2010 . 04 . 008 Lehtinen , E . ( 2012 ) . “Learning of complex competences : on the need to coordinate multiple theoretical perspectives , ” in Language : Competencies—Contact— Change , eds A . Koskensalo , J . Smeds , A . Huguet , and R . de Cillia ( Berlin : LIT Verlag ) , 13 – 27 . doi : 10 . 1186 / s12913 - 016 - 1423 - 5 Lightman , A . , and Gingerich , O . ( 1992 ) . When do anomalies begin ? Am . Assoc . Adv . Sci . 255 , 690 – 695 . doi : 10 . 1126 / science . 255 . 5045 . 690 Loughlin , S . M . , Grossnickle , E . M . , Dinsmore , D . L . , and Alexander , P . A . ( 2015 ) . “Reading” paintings : evidence for trans - symbolic and symbol - speciﬁc comprehension processes . Cogn . Instr . 33 , 257 – 293 . doi : 10 . 1080 / 07370008 . 2015 . 1076822 Löwe , B . ( 2002 ) . The formal sciences : their scope , their foundations , and their unity . Synthese 133 , 5 – 11 . doi : 10 . 1023 / a : 1020887832028 Frontiers in Education | www . frontiersin . org 13 May 2022 | Volume 7 | Article 883370 feduc - 07 - 883370 May 17 , 2022 Time : 12 : 53 # 14 Alexander et al . Relational Reasoning in Tertiary Education Mandlebrot , B . B . ( 1982 ) . TheFractalGeometryofNature . SanFrancisco , CA : W . H . Freeman & Co . McConnell , M . M . , Regehr , G . , Wood , T . J . , and Eva , K . W . ( 2012 ) . Self - monitoring and its relationship to medical knowledge . Adv . Health Sci . Educ . 17 , 311 – 323 . doi : 10 . 1007 / s10459 - 011 - 9305 - 4 Mertens , D . M . ( 2019 ) . Research and Evaluation in Education and Psychology : Integrating Diversity with Quantitative , Qualitative , and Mixed Methods . Thousand Oaks , CA : Sage . Murphy , P . K . , Firetto , C . M . , and Greene , J . A . ( 2017 ) . Enriching students’ scientiﬁcthinkingthroughrelationalreasoning : seekingevidenceintexts , tasks , and talk . Educ . Psychol . Rev . 29 , 105 – 117 . doi : 10 . 1007 / s10648 - 016 - 9387 - x Nowotny , H . ( 2005 ) . The increase of complexity and its reduction : emergent interfaces between the natural sciences , humanities and social sciences . Theory Cult . Soc . 22 , 15 – 31 . doi : 10 . 1177 / 0263276405057189 Orrill , R . , and Shapiro , L . ( 2005 ) . From bold beginnings to an uncertain future : the discipline of history and history education . Am . Hist . Rev . 110 , 727 – 751 . doi : 10 . 1086 / ahr . 110 . 3 . 727 Pate , P . E . , Alexander , P . A . , and Kulikowich , J . M . ( 1989 ) . “Assessing the eﬀects of training social studies content and analogical reasoning processes on sixth - graders’ domain - speciﬁc and strategic knowledge , ” in Middle School Research : SelectedStudies1989 , ed . D . B . Strahan ( Columbus , OH : ResearchCommitteeof the National Middle School Association ) , 19 – 29 . doi : 10 . 1080 / 08851700 . 1989 . 11670298 Patel , V . L . , Arocha , J . F . , and Kaufman , D . R . ( 1999 ) . “Expertise and tacit knowledge in medicine , ” in Tacit Knowledge in Professional Practice : Researcher and Practitioner Perspectives , eds R . J . Sternberg and J . A . Horvath ( Hove : Psychology Press ) , 75 – 99 . Perkins , D . N . , and Salomon , G . ( 2012 ) . Knowledge to go : a motivational and dispositional view of transfer . Educ . Psychol . 47 , 248 – 258 . doi : 10 . 1080 / 00461520 . 2012 . 693354 Priestley , J . ( 1767 ) . The History and Present State of Electricity : With Original Experiments . London : J . Dodsley , J . Johnson , B . Davenport , and T . Cadell . Raven , J . C . ( 1941 ) . Standardization of progressive matrices , 1938 . Br . J . Med . Psychol . 19 , 137 – 150 . doi : 10 . 1111 / j . 2044 - 8341 . 1941 . tb00316 . x Reed , S . K . ( 2016 ) . The structure of ill - structured ( and well - structured ) problems revisited . Educ . Psychol . Rev . 28 , 691 – 716 . doi : 10 . 1007 / s10648 - 015 - 9343 - 1 Reeves , L . M . , and Weisberg , R . W . ( 1994 ) . The role of content and abstract information in analogical transfer . Psychol . Bull . 115 , 381 – 400 . doi : 10 . 1037 / 0033 - 2909 . 115 . 3 . 381 Richland , L . E . , andMcDonough , I . M . ( 2010 ) . Learningbyanalogy : discriminating between potential analogs . Contemp . Educ . Psychol . 35 , 28 – 43 . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . cedpsych . 2009 . 09 . 001 Russell , B . , and Lackey , D . ( 1973 ) . Essays in Analysis . London : Allen & Unwin . Samuel , D . B . , and Widiger , T . A . ( 2008 ) . A meta - analytic review of the relationships between the ﬁve - factor model and DSM - IV - TR personality disorders : a facet level analysis . Clin . Psychol . Rev . 28 , 1326 – 1342 . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . cpr . 2008 . 07 . 002 Schipolowski , S . , Wilhelm , O . , and Schroeders , U . ( 2014 ) . On the nature of crystallized intelligence : the relationship between verbal ability and factual knowledge . Intelligence 46 , 156 – 168 . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . intell . 2014 . 05 . 014 Schmidt , W . H . , Wang , H . C . , and McKnight , C . C . ( 2005 ) . Curriculum coherence : an examination of US mathematics and science content standards from an international perspective . J . Curric . Stud . 37 , 525 – 559 . doi : 10 . 1080 / 0022027042000294682 Singley , A . T . M . , and Bunge , S . A . ( 2014 ) . Neurodevelopment of relational reasoning : implications for mathematical pedagogy . Trends Neurosci . Educ . 3 , 33 – 37 . doi : 10 . 1016 / j . tine . 2014 . 03 . 001 Spearman , C . ( 1927 ) . The Abilities of Man : Their Nature and Measurement . New York , NY : Macmillan . Stanovich , K . E . ( 2010 ) . Rationality and the Reﬂective Mind . NewYork , NY : Oxford University Press . Sternberg , R . J . ( 1977 ) . Intelligence , Information Processing and Analogical Reasoning : The Componential Analysis of Human Abilities . Hillsdale , NJ : Lawrence Erlbaum Associates . Sullivan , A . L . , and Bal , A . ( 2013 ) . Disproportionality in special education : eﬀects of individual and school variables on disability risk . Except . Child . 79 , 475 – 494 . doi : 10 . 1177 / 00144029130790 0406 Treur , J . ( 2021 ) . “Adaptive networks at the crossroad of artiﬁcial intelligence and formal , biological , medical , and social sciences , ” in Integrated Science , ed . N . Rezaei ( Cham : Springer ) , 335 – 375 . doi : 10 . 1007 / 978 - 3 - 030 - 65273 - 9 _ 17 Tsoukas , H . ( 1993 ) . Analogical reasoning and knowledge generation in organization theory . Organ . Stud . 14 , 323 – 346 . doi : 10 . 1177 / 017084069301400301 West , R . F . , Toplak , M . E . , and Stanovich , K . E . ( 2008 ) . Heuristics and biases as measures of critical thinking : associations with cognitive ability and thinking dispositions . J . Educ . Psychol . 100 , 930 – 941 . doi : 10 . 1037 / a0012842 White , C . S . , and Alexander , P . A . ( 1986 ) . Eﬀects of training on four - year - olds’ ability to solve geometric analogy problems . Cogn . Instr . 3 , 261 – 268 . doi : 10 . 1207 / s1532690xci0303 _ 6 Zhao , H . , and Alexander , P . A . ( 2022 ) . Uncovering Word Knowledge Quality Through Reasoning Relationally with Words . [ Manuscript submitted for publication ] . College Park , MD : Department of Human Development and Quantitative Methodology , University of Maryland . Zhao , H . , Alexander , P . A . , and Sun , Y . ( 2021 ) . Relational reasoning’s contributions to mathematical thinking and performance in Chinese elementary and middle - school students . J . Educ . Psychol . 113 , 279 – 303 . doi : 10 . 1037 / edu00 00595 Conﬂict of Interest : The authors declare that the research was conducted in the absence of any commercial or ﬁnancial relationships that could be construed as a potential conﬂict of interest . Publisher’s Note : All claims expressed in this article are solely those of the authors and do not necessarily represent those of their aﬃliated organizations , or those of the publisher , the editors and the reviewers . Any product that may be evaluated in this article , or claim that may be made by its manufacturer , is not guaranteed or endorsed by the publisher . Copyright © 2022 Alexander , Gans and Maki . This is an open - access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution License ( CC BY ) . The use , distribution or reproduction in other forums is permitted , provided the original author ( s ) and the copyright owner ( s ) are credited and that the original publicationinthisjournaliscited , inaccordancewithacceptedacademicpractice . No use , distributionorreproductionispermittedwhichdoesnotcomplywiththeseterms . Frontiers in Education | www . frontiersin . org 14 May 2022 | Volume 7 | Article 883370