The Impact of Organizational Memory on New Product Performance and Creativity Author ( s ) : Christine Moorman and Anne S . Miner Source : Journal of Marketing Research , Vol . 34 , No . 1 , Special Issue on Innovation and New Products ( Feb . , 1997 ) , pp . 91 - 106 Published by : American Marketing Association Stable URL : http : / / www . jstor . org / stable / 3152067 . Accessed : 23 / 09 / 2013 16 : 35 Your use of the JSTOR archive indicates your acceptance of the Terms & Conditions of Use , available at . http : / / www . jstor . org / page / info / about / policies / terms . jsp . JSTOR is a not - for - profit service that helps scholars , researchers , and students discover , use , and build upon a wide range of content in a trusted digital archive . We use information technology and tools to increase productivity and facilitate new forms of scholarship . For more information about JSTOR , please contact support @ jstor . org . . American Marketing Association is collaborating with JSTOR to digitize , preserve and extend access to Journal of Marketing Research . http : / / www . jstor . org This content downloaded from 152 . 3 . 153 . 148 on Mon , 23 Sep 2013 16 : 35 : 46 PM All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions CHRISTINE MOORMAN and ANNE S . MINER * Arguing that organizational memory affects key new product develop - ment processes by influencing the ( 1 ) interpretation of incoming informa - tion and ( 2 ) the performance of new product action routines , the authors introduce four dimensions of organizational memory , including the amount and dispersion of memory . Data from 92 new product development pro - jects indicate that higher organizational memory levels enhance the short - term financial performance of new products , whereas greater memory dis - persion increases both the performance and creativity of new products . They also find , however , that under some conditions of high environmen - tal turbulence , high memory dispersion actually detracts from creativity and has no effect on financial performance . Under conditions of low turbu - lence , high memory dispersion promotes higher levels of creativity and short - term financial performance . These findings provide some initial evi - dence that knowledge is not an unconditionally positive asset and suggest that developing and sustaining valuable organizational memory may require attention not only to the appropriate levels of memory but also to managing subtle aspects of memory dispersion and deployment . These results imply that if organizations fail to understand the subtle ways in which different features of organizational memory influence product devel - opment , they may fail to harvest the full value of organizational learning . The Impact of Organizational Memory on New Product Performance and Creativity The past ten years have seen an explosion of experiments and insights into new product development approaches . Many of the new viewpoints argue that knowledge assets ( Winter 1987 ) can be leveraged to achieve competitive ad - vantage ( Barabba and Zaltman 1991 ; Day 1994 ; Garvin 1993 ; Glazer 1991 ; Prahalad and Hamel 1990 ; Sinkula 1994 ) . Even more important , because it requires the use of knowledge assets in a dynamic setting , scholars have in - creasingly envisioned product development as a process of organizational learning involving the acquisition , dissemi - nation , and utilization of information ( Day 1994 ; Dickson 1992 ; Imai , Nonaka , and Takeuchi 1985 ; Leonard - Barton 1992 ; Moorman 1995 ; Nonaka 1991 ) . Understandably , re - searchers exploring the creation of new products have been * Christine Moorman is Associate Professor of Marketing , and Anne S . Miner is Associate Professor of Management , Graduate School of Busi - ness , University of Wisconsin - Madison . This research has benefited from National Science Foundation Grant # SBR - 9410419 . The authors thank the editor , and appreciate the helpful comments of Jan Heide ; Aric Rindfleisch ; Thekla Rura ; participants of the Wharton Conference on Innovation in New Product Development ; seminar participants at Dartmouth College , Harvard University , Indiana University , Ohio State University , University of South Carolina , and University of Cincinnati ; and three anonymous JMR reviewers . especially interested in discovery and creation processes , or generative learning ( Dougherty 1992 ; Imai , Nonaka , and Takeuchi 1985 ) . Therefore , considerable work has focused on ways organizations can acquire better information as a means to discover new knowledge . We argue that an equal - ly important issue is the role of stored knowledge , or orga - nizational memory , in new product development activities . 1 As Starbuck ( 1992 , p . 176 ) suggests , " A knowledge - inten - sive firm may not be information intensive . . . knowledge is a stock of expertise , not a flow of information . " The traditional business strategy and marketing strategy literature has long emphasized the role of organizational ex - perience or familiarity with products and markets . This lit - erature has suggested that firms are likely to be more suc - cessful if they stick to developing products and markets that reflect their core competencies ( Ansoff 1988 ; Montoya - Weiss and Calatone 1994 ; Rumelt 1974 ; Varadarajan 1983 ) . One resulting framework of this view , termed the prod - uct / market matrix , is limited to examining the effect of memory level on the financial performance of marketing IThere are , as we discuss throughout this article , models of organiza - tional information processing that include the influence of organizational memory ( Burgelman 1983 ; Cohen and Levinthal 1990 , 1994 ; Cyert and March 1963 ; Leonard - Barton 1992 ) . Journal of Marketing Research Vol . XXXIV ( February 1997 ) , 91 - 106 91 This content downloaded from 152 . 3 . 153 . 148 on Mon , 23 Sep 2013 16 : 35 : 46 PM All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions JOURNAL OF MARKETING RESEARCH , FEBRUARY 1997 strategies . There are , however , other organizational memory dimensions that exist , as well as additional marketing strat - egy outcomes that could be considered . Moreover , the view of experience offered by the strategy literature is also a main effects view that does not consider how the impact of orga - nizational experience is influenced by rapidly changing en - vironments . Specifically , it has tended to view experience and knowledge as unconditionally helpful to organizations ( Day 1994 ; Montoya - Weiss and Calatone 1994 ; Zirger and Maidique 1990 ) . Recent work has begun to explore in more detail the var - ious mechanisms through which stored information or mem - ory may affect product development . For example , Garud and Nayyar ( 1994 ) suggest that organizations should devel - op routines for reactivating previously acquired knowledge in new product development . Likewise , Cohen and Levinthal ( 1990 , 1994 ) find that high levels of previous learning increase a firm ' s absorptive capacity , which permits more effective use of extramural knowledge . Moreover , Day ( 1994 , p . 38 ) describes new product development as a " key firm capability involving complex bundles of skills and ac - cumulated knowledge . " In addition to postulating how memory may enhance new product development outcomes , recent work also highlights the possibility that memory actually may detract from new product development in some situations . Work by Burgel - man ( 1983 ) , Leonard - Barton ( 1992 ) , and Dougherty ( 1992 ) , for example , suggest that competencies may turn into barri - ers when organizations strive to develop creative new prod - ucts . More generally , research on organizational learning and technological change highlight the possibility that stored memory may prove a liability when organizational environments are changing rapidly ( Miner 1990 ; Tushman and Anderson 1986 ) . Recent work , then , suggests a complex and even contin - gent role for organizational memory in product develop - ment . We seek to explore and expand the field ' s understand - ing of memory ' s role in three ways . First , focusing on two specific dimensions in our empirical study , we develop a multifaceted conceptualization of organizational memory and suggest that memory ' s impact depends on which mem - ory dimension is at work . Second , we propose that memo - ry ' s impact depends on whether the product outcome is short - term financial performance or product creativity . Third , drawing on fundamental concepts in theories of orga - nizational learning , we propose that memory ' s impact de - pends on the degree of exogenous turbulence faced by the firm . To explore these issues , we develop eight propositions about the specific impact of memory level and memory dis - persion on new product short - term financial performance and creativity . We test our hypotheses with data from 92 new product development projects . Our results point to distinct roles for memory level and dispersion , as well as to impor - tant interactions between turbulence and memory disper - sion . Our arguments and results imply , we believe , that if firms fail to understand the subtle ways in which different features of organizational memory influence product devel - opment , they may fail to harvest the full value of organiza - tional learning . ORGANIZATIONAL MEMORY The Organizational View of Memory Envisioning memory as an organizational phenomenon is consistent with a growing body of literature that suggests organizations process , use , and store information , and that these collective activities can be seen as distinct from indi - vidual manager activities ( Cohen and Levinthal 1990 , 1994 ; Cyert and March 1963 ; Daft and Weick 1984 ; Huber 1991 ; Kohli and Jaworski 1990 ; Moorman 1995 ; Sandelands and Stablein 1987 ; Sinkula 1994 ; Weick 1979 ) . In this organiza - tional view , organization members ' actions may lead to organizational interactions with the world , which results in outcomes that are interpreted by people and shared among members , creating organizational memory in the form of shared beliefs , values , assumptions , norms , and behaviors ( Argyris and Schon 1978 ; Dutton and Duncan 1987 ; Hed - berg 1981 ; Levitt and March 1988 ; Sinkula 1994 ) . The notion of collective mental processes has been ap - propriately criticized as encouraging reification and gener - alizations of individual phenomena to group actions . How - ever , organizational memory , as embodied in organizational artifacts and procedures , seems to clearly distinguish orga - nizational from individual memory . For example , standard operating procedures can drive behavior even when people within the system no longer have individual memory of the experiences that generated the routines ( Levitt and March 1988 ) . Moreover , in some cases , groups may develop col - lective processes to accomplish tasks , even when individual members are not aware of the process ( Hutchins 1991 ) . Or - ganizational memory , then , is not simply the sum of the memories of organizational members , because it may in - volve the interaction of several people , or even reside out - side the awareness of specific people . Organizational Memory Forms , Roles , and Characteristics Forms . We propose that organizational memory may be manifested in three basic forms ( Garud and Rappa 1994 ; Hedberg 1981 ; Walsh and Ungson 1991 ) . First , memory is found in organizational beliefs , knowledge , frames of refer - ence , models , values , and norms ( Day and Nedungadi 1994 ; Deshpande , Farley , and Webster 1993 ; Deshpande and Web - ster 1989 ; Lyles and Schwenk 1992 ; Nelson and Winter 1982 ; Starbuck 1992 ) , as well as organizational myths , leg - ends , and stories ( Martin 1982 ) . For example , Epson pro - moted the shared value of aiming for " 40 % improvement " in its new product development activities ( Imai , Nonaka , and Takeuchi 1985 ) . Second , organizations learn from experience particular ways of doing things that become encoded in formal and informal behavioral routines , procedures , and scripts ( Cyert and March 1963 ) . Formal routines may be reflected in stan - dard operating procedures ( Winter 1987 ) or in managerial and technical systems and capabilities ( Brown and Eisen - hardt 1995 ; Leonard - Barton 1992 ) ; informal routines may involve scripted interactions ( Orr 1990 ; Seeley Brown 1993 ) . New product development routines may , for exam - ple , guide the types of information - sharing mechanisms used ( Eisenhardt and Tabrizi 1995 ) or specific project steps such as prototype production . They may also direct the over - all development process itself , such as when key go - no - go decision points become required steps or when the ISO 92 This content downloaded from 152 . 3 . 153 . 148 on Mon , 23 Sep 2013 16 : 35 : 46 PM All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions Organizational Memory ( International Organization for Standardization ) 9000 rou - tines for documentation become standard procedures . Imai , Nonaka , and Takeuchi ( 1985 ) , for example , describe the " rugby approach " used by Honda teams , which involves the entire team running the full length of the new product devel - opment process , in contrast to a " relay approach , " which involves functions handing off the product at distinct times . Likewise , Orr ( 1990 ) observes informal information sharing routines among Xerox service representatives who repeat - edly gather around a communal coffee machine to share their field experience . Third , memory is found in an organization ' s physical ar - tifacts , which embody , to varying degrees , the results of pri - or learning ( Epple , Argote , and Devadas 1991 ; Garud and Rappa 1994 ; Leonard - Barton 1992 ) . For example , Epple , Argote , and Devadas ( 1991 ) provide evidence from an in - vestigation of a truck plant that knowledge may become em - bodied in tooling , programming , and assembly line layout . Others have suggested that memory is reflected in organiza - tional structure and ecology ( Argote 1995 ; Leonard - Barton 1992 ; Levitt and March 1988 ; March 1991 ; Walsh and Ung - son 1991 ) . Furthermore , in new product development , Imai , Nonaka , and Takeuchi ( 1985 , p . 354 - 58 ) describe " a special corner within the factory where workers could experiment , " " holding meetings in a large room with glass walls , " and the use of a system in which " all the team members are located in one large room . " Features of products and product lines ( such as product design , materials , packaging , and logos ) are also important physical artifacts associated with organi - zational memory . Roles . In all three forms , organizational memory is likely to perform two fundamental roles : interpretation and action guidance . Organizational memory performs an interpreta - tion role by filtering the way in which information and ex - perience are categorized and sorted ( Cohen and Levinthal 1990 ; Daft and Weick 1984 ; Day 1994 ; Day and Nedungadi 1994 ; Dutton and Jackson 1987 ; Jackson and Dutton 1988 ; Sinkula 1994 ; Walsh and Ungson 1991 ) . Organizational memory also performs an action guidance role by dictating or influencing individual and group action ( Amburgey and Miner 1992 ; Cyert and March 1963 ; March and Simon 1968 ; Suchman 1994 ; Walsh and Ungson 1991 ) . Memory , for example , may contain a protocol for a new product de - velopment stage that guides team members ' actions . The ac - tion guidance role represents one of the most powerful fea - tures of organizational memory in much traditional research . Cyert and March ( 1963 ) , for example , emphasize the power of standard operating procedures in driving organizational action , whereas Nelson and Winter ( 1982 ) stress the overar - ching impact of organizational routines . Characteristics . In addition to memory forms and roles , organizational memory can be viewed as having several dimensions or characteristics : amount , dispersion , accessi - bility , and content . The level , or amount , of organizational memory refers to the amount of stored information an orga - nization has about a particular phenomenon . High levels of experience in a product category or the accumulation of knowledge or skills indicate higher levels of memory . An abundance of memory has been theorized to influence a firm ' s demand for new market information ( Dickson 1992 ; Sinkula 1994 ) . Regarding this point , Weiss and Heide ( 1993 ) find that the greater the prior experience of organiza - tional buyers , the less likely they were to engage in infor - mation search activities . Organizational memory also varies in the degree to which it is dispersed , or shared , throughout the organization . As Walsh and Ungson ( 1991 , p . 62 ) note , " organizational mem - ory is not centrally stored , but distributed across different retention facilities . " Organizational memory by its nature involves some degree of dispersion throughout the organiza - tion . However , there may still exist variance in the degree to which organizational members adopt firm knowledge and skills , which is determined , in part , by how firm activities are designed and structured to facilitate diffusion across the organization ( Nonaka and Nicosia 1979 ; Webster and Wind 1972 ) . The presence of distinct organizational subcultures suggests that memory is not necessarily shared by all mem - bers ( Cohen and Levinthal 1990 ; Deshpande and Webster 1989 ; Martin and Siehl 1983 ; Smircich 1983 ) . 2 Organizational memory also varies in accessibility , or the extent to which it can be retrieved for use ( Day 1994 ; Garud and Nayyar 1994 ; Walsh and Ungson 1991 ) . As Day ( 1991 , p . 8 ) notes , " Organizations without practical mechanisms to ' remember ' what worked and why have to repeat their fail - ures and rediscover their success formulas over and over again . Memory mechanisms are needed to ensure that useful lessons are captured , conserved , and can be readily retrieved when needed . " Finally , the content of organizational memory refers to the meaning of collectively stored information ( Walsh and Ung - son 1991 ) . Increasing evidence points to memory as consist - ing of two types of knowledge : procedural and declarative ( Cohen 1991 ; El Sawy , Gomes , and Gonzalez 1986 ; Sinku - la 1994 ) . Procedural memory refers to process memory or memory of underlying skills for performing tasks ( Nelson 1982 ) . An organization may know , for example , how to de - velop prototypes . Declarative memory refers to the memory of concepts , facts , or events . Memory here might consist of knowledge about customer preferences , or the technical fea - tures of a firm ' s product line ( Day and Nedungadi 1994 ) . Another type of memory content could be found in the dis - tinct cultural characteristics of an organization . For example , memory content may reflect more clan , market , bureaucra - cy , or adhocracy characteristics ( Deshpande , Farley , and Webster 1993 ) . Memory content is therefore likely to be re - vealed , in part , in an organization ' s culture . 3 A Definition of Organizational Memory Using this review as a basis , we define organizational memory as collective beliefs , behavioral routines , or physi - cal artifacts that vary in their content , level , dispersion , and accessibility . This view of memory is consistent with that of 2Although our approach focuses on the degree of dispersion , dispersion could be further conceptualized as a multidimensional construct that also reflects the structure of that sharing . The structure of information distribu - tion may include , for example , one - way or two - way transmissions and hor - izontal or vertical structures . Hence , we include a variable in our model that may partially control for the effects of the structure of information - sharing activities within the firms we studied . 3Following Deshpand6 and Webster ( 1989 ) , culture is reflected in an organization ' s values and norms . Therefore , if culture is the source , mem - ory content will have a value or norm component . However , as conceptual - ized , organizational memory is much broader than organizational culture , because , in addition to values and norms , memory includes behavioral rou - tines and physical artifacts that reflect prior learning . 93 This content downloaded from 152 . 3 . 153 . 148 on Mon , 23 Sep 2013 16 : 35 : 46 PM All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions JOURNAL OF MARKETING RESEARCH , FEBRUARY 1997 Day ( 1994 , p . 44 ) , who defines organizational memory as " a repository for collective insights contained within policies , procedures , routines , and rules that can be retrieved when needed ; " but is more circumscribed than that of Walsh and Ungson ( 1991 ) , who suggest that organizational memory is composed of the structure of its retention facility , the infor - mation contained in it , its effects , and the information acqui - sition and retrieval processes . CONCEPTUAL FRAMEWORK Our conceptual framework focuses on how two organiza - tional memory dimensions , level and dispersion , influence the success of new products . These dimensions were selected because , as we subsequently suggest , both have been described in the literature as having a positive effect on new product development activities . However , our frame - work suggests that the effect of these memory factors depends on what type of new product outcomes is being examined and on whether the firm operates within a turbu - lent environment . In discussing this framework , we first introduce the two focal new product outcomes investigated here . Second , we present the effect of organizational memory level and dis - persion on each new product outcome . Third , we discuss the moderating effects of environmental turbulence on the orga - nizational memory - new product outcome relationships . Focal New Product Outcomes The two new product outcomes that we investigate are new product creativity and new product short - term financial performance . New product creativity refers to the degree to which a new product is novel and has generative capacity ( i . e . , the potential to change thinking and practice ) ( Andrews and Smith 1996 ; Wilton and Myers 1986 ; Zalt - man , Heffring , and LeMasters 1983 ) . New product short - term financial performance is defined as the level of new product profitability and sales that occur within the first year of introduction ( Griffin and Page 1993 ; Montoya - Weiss and Calantone 1994 ) . These outcomes were selected because others have suggested that they are influenced by organiza - tional - level information processes ( Day 1991 ; Dickson 1992 ; Glazer 1991 ; Jaworski and Kohli 1993 ; Imai , Nonaka , and Takeuchi 1985 ; Moorman 1995 ; Narver and Slater 1990 ; Sinkula 1994 ) . Moreover , there is often a tension between the creativity and the short - term financial perfor - mance of new products , because highly creative products may have greater potential for short - term performance prob - lems due to the difficulty of changing consumer or retailer acceptance of the product , while offering the possibility of greater long - term financial gain given the possibility of their revolutionizing a product category ( Adams and Lacugna 1994 ; Andrews and Smith 1996 ; Kleinschmidt and Cooper 1991 ) . These tensions are played out in the hypotheses that are depicted in Figure 1 . The Effects of Organizational Memory on the Performance and Creativity of New Products The effect of organizational memory level . A high level of organizational memory would typically be present when a new product project or action phase represents familiar ter - ritory , a new product represents a modest change in an old project , the technological or customer basis for a new prod - Figure 1 THE INFLUENCE OF ORGANIZATIONAL MEMORY ON NEW PRODUCT CREATIVITY AND PERFORMANCE uct is part of the firm ' s longstanding repertoire , the length of team members ' service is high , or a particular new product development phase - such as prototype development - is a well - developed competency . Previous research has observed that change becomes more difficult as memory in a particular domain increases . This effect has been referred to as a competency trap ( Levitt and March 1988 ; March 1991 ) , a core rigidity ( Leonard - Barton 1992 ) , routine rigidity , or functional fixedness ( Dick - son 1992 ) for the organization . In the area of new product development , observers also have reported from qualitative studies that higher levels of memory inhibit any actions out - side preexisting action patterns ( Ghemawat 1991 ; McDo - nough 1993 ) . Likewise , both Leonard - Barton ( 1992 ) and Dougherty ( 1992 ) describe instances in which groups with strong memories are least able or likely to deviate from prior action patterns during new product development ( see also March 1979 ) . An important alternative possibility is that memory actu - ally could enhance creativity . For example , research on re - lated topics suggests that some forms of creativity thrive in the presence of memory . For example , organizational impro - visation , which involves firms acting extemporaneously without a plan , has been described as involving the recombi - nation of routines to produce novel outcomes ( Weick 1993a , b ) . More generally , research on adaptation has stressed the recombination of prior routines as a crucial source of novel activities ( Holland 1975 ) . Likewise , Cohen and Levinthal ( 1990 ) find that organizational memory - as reflected in pri - or research investments - can enhance an organization ' s ability to assess and import new outside information , which could promote creativity . Specifically , Cohen and Levinthal ( 1994 , p . 237 ) suggest that " fortune favors the prepared firm " ( see also Feldman 1989 ) . Taken together , these ideas and data imply that high organizational memory could actu - ally enhance creativity in new product development . Empirical research on new product development itself , on balance , has tended to support the potentially negative im - pact of memory on new product development creativity , however . This leads us to hypothesize : Hi : The greater the level of organizational memory for a new product domain , the lower the level of new product creativity . 94 This content downloaded from 152 . 3 . 153 . 148 on Mon , 23 Sep 2013 16 : 35 : 46 PM All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions Organizational Memory The next question concerns the impact of organizational memory level on the financial performance of new products . Theory and current research imply that high levels of mem - ory , while inhibiting new product creativity , may enhance their short - term financial performance by increasing effi - ciencies and the likelihood that previous successes will be repeated ( Cyert and March 1963 ; Duncan and Weiss 1979 ; Walsh and Ungson 1991 ) . Much new product development research shows that for many products , strong memory reduces the chances of poor outcomes by increasing effi - ciency and decreasing the chances of costly errors ( Cooper and Kleinschmit 1986 ) . This line of reasoning is consistent with the finding that higher performing new products typi - cally have higher levels of marketing and technological syn - ergy between the new product and the firm ' s existing com - petencies ( Montoya - Wiess and Calatone 1994 ; Varadarajan 1983 ; Zirger and Maidique 1990 ) . Therefore , together with Hl , this suggests that organizational memory level is likely to reduce the creativity of new products while increasing their short - term financial performance . H2 : The greater the level of organizational memory for a new product domain , the greater the new product short - term fi - nancial performance . The effect of organizational memory dispersion . The effect of memory dispersion on new product outcomes is less clear on the basis of a review of the extant literature . Recall that memory dispersion refers to the extent to which organizational members share an understanding of organiza - tional beliefs , behavioral routines , and physical artifacts . One stream of literature suggests that greater dispersion leads to more creative and better financially performing new products . For example , Hutt , Reingen , and Ronchetto ( 1988 ) find that creative new product initiatives are more likely to be characterized by a greater number of communication links between organizational functions . Others point to the critical role of dispersing information across organizational functions , such as marketing and research and development ( R & D ) , in the success of new product innovations ( Gupta , Raj , and Wilemon 1986 ; Moenaert and Souder 1990a , b ) . This research suggests that the dispersion of memory enables functions to understand one another , improves their ability to cooperate , facilitates cross - fertilization , and may reduce the tendency of individual functions to become con - fined by their own thought - worlds ( Dougherty 1992 ; Souder 1987 ) . As lmai , Nonaka , and Takeuchi ( 1985 , p . 544 , emphasis added ) note , " Project members are expected to interact with each other extensively , to share everything from risk , responsibility , information , to decision making , and to acquire breadth of knowledge and skills . " How mem - ory gets dispersed is not the subject of the present research ( see Griffin and Hauser 1992 , 1993 , 1994 ; Hutt , Reingen , and Ronchetto 1988 ) . However , when dispersed , collectively held knowledge appears to improve both the creativity and financial performance of new products . Another stream of research suggests that lack of memory dispersion or heterogeneity within organizations should have a positive effect on innovation and creativity ( Burgel - man 1983 ; March 1991 ; Quinn 1986 ) . From this perspec - tive , groups with similar values , identical information , or overlapping competencies should be less capable of produc - ing actions that deviate from their prior activities than would more heterogeneous groups ( Gigone and Hastie 1993 ) . In addition , some researchers have suggested that much orga - nizational innovation comes from recombining routines or ideas in new ways or by mixing routines that were previ - ously separate ( Nelson 1982 ; Nonaka 1990 ) . This line of reasoning implies that high memory dispersion could inhib - it creativity because it would reduce heterogeneity in the or - ganization , which , in turn , restricts the number of routines , ideas , and competencies available for recombining or for generating new actions . The early marginalized roles of product champions for Post - It notes or Hitachi lasers em - body this idea ( Garud and Nayyar 1994 ; Peters 1988 ) . One way to reconcile these conflicting perspectives and findings is to propose a curvilinear relationship between memory dispersion and new product creativity , in which moderate levels of dispersion promote the highest levels of new product creativity . Moderate levels are predicted to pro - mote the greatest creativity because organizations have both the breadth and cross - fertilization that dispersion provides while maintaining some heterogeneity among members . Under these circumstances , members share a language and understanding of problems and solutions but retain some distinctive skills and knowledge . This view is supported by conceptual literature on group performance that suggests that too much diversity restricts communication but too much similarity may restrict the range of observations avail - able for recombination ( Katz and Allen 1982 ) , and by Fiol ( 1994 ) , who suggests that team diversity and unity jointly promote higher levels of collective learning . Under this form of the relationship , moderate levels of dispersion have ele - ments of both heterogeneity and homogeneity and therefore maximize new product creativity . 4 H3 : There exists a curvilinear relationship between dispersion of organizational memory for a new product domain and new product creativity such that moderate levels of dispersion produce the highest levels of new product creativity and high and low levels of dispersion result in lower levels of new product creativity . Although a curvilinear relationship is expected for the effect of memory dispersion on new product creativity , memory dispersion is expected to have a positive linear rela - tionship with the short - term financial performance of new products , because high levels of dispersion increase the effectiveness and efficiency of decision making and imple - mentation . In fact , as dispersion levels increase , the team ' s mental model becomes unified , which results in timely , cost - effective decisions that help realize a firm ' s new product financial goals . Moreover , as was reviewed previously , the literature on information - sharing mechanisms in cross - func - tional efforts , such as total quality management and quality function deployment , suggests that shared knowledge and vision improve the short - term financial performance of product development activities by enhancing cross - func - tional understanding and cooperation ( Day 1994 ; Griffin and Hauser 1993 ; Hauser and Clausing 1988 ; Imai , Nonaka , and Takeuchi 1985 ) , as well as by improving team efficien - 4It would also be reasonable to argue that the form of this curvilinear relationship should be a U - shaped curve , in which high and low levels of dispersion promote the highest levels of creativity . Nevertheless , we chose to integrate both of the literatures and in so doing , believe the best repre - sentation of the relationship is an inverted - U . This form suggests that mod - erate dispersion has elements of both heterogeneity and homogeneity , and therefore maximizes new product creativity . 95 This content downloaded from 152 . 3 . 153 . 148 on Mon , 23 Sep 2013 16 : 35 : 46 PM All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions JOURNAL OF MARKETING RESEARCH , FEBRUARY 1997 cies in making decisions and taking action . This does not mean that the team is making the most creative decisions , which we believe will happen under moderate dispersion levels ( H3 ) . Therefore , the creativity - dampening risks of too much dispersion will not have the same impact on short - term financial performance , because cross - functional effi - ciencies are maximized , not compromised , in high disper - sion level groups . H4 : The greater the dispersion of organizational memory for a new product domain , the greater the new product short - term financial performance . The Moderating Effect of Environmental Turbulence The turbulence associated with an organization ' s environ - ment is expected to moderate the effect of organizational memory on new product outcomes . One of the most funda - mental tenets in theories of organizational learning holds that the value of organizational memory is contingent on the setting in which the organization operates ( Argote and Epple 1990 ; Cyert and March 1963 ; Levitt and March 1988 ) . Memory , after all , reflects learning from experience , and that experience occurs at a specific time in a specific setting . This insight is consistent with contingency theory ' s argu - ment that bureaucratic structures - which rigidly institution - alize lessons from prior experience - can enhance perfor - mance under stable conditions , whereas more organic struc - tures are needed for turbulent conditions ( Lawrence and Lorsch 1967 ; Mintzberg 1979 ) . Several important mechanisms may produce such envi - ronmental effects . At a minimum , the value and impact of stored prior learning may deteriorate with environmental change ( Achrol 1991 ; Glazer 1991 ) . As Weiss and Heide ( 1993 , p . 221 ) note , " a rapid pace of technological change creates uncertainty that can be competency destroying " ( Tushman and Nelson 1990 ; see also Anderson and Tush - man 1990 ; Tushman and Anderson 1986 ) . Even more im - portant , memory may stand in the way of effective action in a turbulent environment , which restricts the organization to inappropriate actions . We focus on technological turbulence , that is , the degree of change associated with new product technologies ( Glazer and Weiss 1993 ; Jaworski and Kohli 1993 ; Weiss and Heide 1993 ) , and market turbulence , that is , the rate of change in the composition of customers and their preferences ( Jawors - ki and Kohli 1993 , p . 57 ) . Both types of turbulence may have a potentially disruptive effect on memory ' s positive ef - fect on new product short - term financial performance , be - cause turbulence is likely to reduce the value of prior learn - ing , which forces the organization to search for and process more information about the environment ( Lawrence and Lorsch 1967 ; Sinkula 1994 ; Weiss and Heide 1993 ) . Rapid environmental change also may stimulate metalearning , in which the people in organizations learn to identify patterns of environmental behavior , but organizations in turbulent en - vironments generally find it difficult to cope and survive . Given this view , we expect the positive effect of organiza - tional memory level ( H2 ) and dispersion ( H4 ) on the short - term financial performance of new products to be weakened under conditions of high technological or market turbulence : H5 : The greater the technological turbulence associated with the environment , the weaker the positive relationship between organizational memory ( a ) level and ( b ) dispersion and new product short - term financial performance . H6 : The greater the market turbulence associated with the envi - ronment , the weaker the positive relationship between orga - nizational memory ( a ) level and ( b ) dispersion and new product short - term financial performance . Although environmental turbulence may reduce the value of organizational memory for performance , there is a poten - tially positive effect of environmental turbulence for the effect of memory levels on the development of creative new products . Specifically , if high organizational memory levels reduce the potential for creative new products ( Hi ) , a fast - changing environment may attenuate this possibility because high levels of environmental change may act as trig - gers to " unlearn " current new product routines ( Cyert and March 1963 ; Hedberg 1981 ; Starbuck 1976 ) . Considering the relationship between memory dispersion and new product creativity ( H3 ) , we suggest that organiza - tions may be better off with internal heterogeneity under tur - bulent conditions ( Aldrich 1979 ; Lawrence and Lorsch 1967 ; March 1991 ) . Under conditions of internal heterogeneity ( low dispersion ) , firms can draw on previously marginal ideas or competencies that may act as crucial creative engines in times of high turbulence ( Burgelman 1983 ; Feldman 1989 ; Miner 1990 ) . For example , a firm producing vacuum tubes that has a well - dispersed technical memory ( about vacuum tube tech - nology ) would be worse off when transistors are discovered , than another firm that has a less dispersed memory , but in - cludes a small deviant group of engineers who are interested in transistor technology . This reasoning implies that under conditions of high turbulence , we might expect high memory dispersion ( high homogeneity ) to have a negative effect on creativity . Under conditions of low turbulence , however , high dispersion may have a positive effect on creativity . This posi - tive effect may accrue from a new product team ' s ability to re - combine shared knowledge into creative new products ( Borko and Livingston 1989 ; Dougherty 1990 , 1992 ; Nelson 1982 ; Nonaka 1990 ; Weick 1993a , b ) . We therefore hypothesize , H7 : The greater the technological turbulence associated with the environment , ( a ) the weaker the negative relationship be - tween organizational memory level and new product creativ - ity and ( b ) the weaker the positive relationship between or - ganizational memory dispersion and new product creativity . H8 : The greater the market turbulence associated with the envi - ronment , ( a ) the weaker the negative relationship between organizational memory level and new product creativity and ( b ) the weaker the positive relationship between organiza - tional memory dispersion and new product creativity . METHOD Sample and Procedure The initial sample consisted of 396 firms in the 1992 Advertising Age list of top 200 advertisers . After eliminating firms for which the questionnaire was inappropriate ( i . e . , no new product development occurred ) , the overall sample was reduced from 396 to 300 . Of the eligible sample , 92 firms ( 31 % ) responded . In terms of process , three weeks follow - ing the first mailing , nonrespondents were telephoned , reminded of the questionnaire , and encouraged to complete and return it . Two weeks following the calls , a second mail - ing was sent to nonrespondents . No systematic differences 96 This content downloaded from 152 . 3 . 153 . 148 on Mon , 23 Sep 2013 16 : 35 : 46 PM All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions Organizational Memory were found between those who responded before and after the second mailing ( Armstrong and Overton 1977 ) . 5 Vice presidents of marketing were used as informants be - cause of their organizational knowledge and access to strate - gic and financial information ( Aguilar 1967 ) . Informant firm tenure levels averaged 18 years , which is comparable to other samples of informants at this level ( Larwood et al . 1995 ) . 6 When completing the survey , informants were asked to focus on the most recent product development project that had been in the market for a minimum of 12 months for which their division was responsible . If new products did not fall under their purview , informants were asked to for - ward the questionnaire to the appropriate vice president in their division . All questions regarding the organization , then , focused on the division as the unit of analysis . Measurement Appendix A contains all of the measures and their sources . Memory level was operationalized by measuring the amount of knowledge , experience , and familiarity an organization has in a product category . Memory dispersion level was measured by the degree of consensus or shared knowledge among new product participants . The assump - tion underlying this approach is that when organizational memory is dispersed , members ' beliefs would intersect or converge on a particular topic . If , for example , informants noted that there was little consensus among people working on the product , a reasonable conclusion would be that team members ' beliefs were based on different assumptions , experiences , and information . Note that this approach to measuring memory dispersion reflects the collective under - pinnings of organizational memory . That is , the defining ele - ment - degree of convergence - is assessed as a property of the collective . Technological and market turbulence were measured with Jaworski and Kohli ' s ( 1993 ) operationalizations , which fo - cus on the pace of technological change and customer changes in the industry ( see also Glazer and Weiss 1993 ; Weiss and Heide 1993 ) . Finally , organizational bureaucrati - zation , which will be entered in the model to control for the structure of information dispersion , is defined as the degree to which an organization is managed through formalized re - lationships and centralized authority ( John and Martin 1984 ) and is measured with Deshpand6 ' s ( 1982 ) scales . Following the data collection , measures were subjected to a purification process involving undimensionality , reliabili - ty , and discriminant validity assessments ( see Anderson 1987 ; Bagozzi and Phillips 1982 ; Churchill 1979 ; Gerbing and Anderson 1988 ) . To assess unidimensionality , the mea - sures were divided into three subsets of theoretically related 5The results of these tests are the following ( where ER = early respon - ders and LR = late responders ) : memory level ( ER = 5 . 29 , LR = 5 . 17 , t ( 91 ) = . 34 ) , memory dispersion ( ER = 5 . 50 , LR = 5 . 37 , t91 ) = . 69 ) , technologi - cal turbulence level ( ER = 3 . 98 , LR = 4 . 23 , t ( 91 ) = - . 76 ) , new product per - formance ( ER = 4 . 90 , LR = 4 . 65 , t ( 91 ) = . 71 ) , and new product creativity ( ER = 5 . 18 , LR = 4 . 65 , t ( 91 ) = . 71 ) . 61nformant tenure levels were not collected during the initial administra - tion of the questionnaire . However , half of the organizations were subse - quently telephoned and this information was gathered as a safeguard to ensure that respondents had enough organizational experience to be capa - ble of assessing organizational memory , though recent evidence has found an insignificant relationship between firm tenure levels and executives ' articulation of their corporate visions ( Larwood et al . 1995 ) . variables : the two organizational memory measures , the two new product outcomes , and the two environmental modera - tors . Because of the small sample size , this approach was chosen over examining all variables in a six - factor model , which violates the recommendations made by Bentler and Cho ( 1988 ) to not exceed a five - to - one ratio of sample size to parameter estimates . Results suggest that the three mod - els fit well : the memory variables ( X2 ( 26 ) = 28 . 74 , p = . 323 , goodness - of - fit index [ GFI ] = . 938 ) , the two new product outcomes ( X2 ( 19 ) = 26 . 60 , p = . 114 , GFI = . 930 ) , and the two environmental moderators ( X2 ( 34 ) = 58 . 16 , p = . 006 , GFI = . 900 ) . Within these three models , discriminant validity was as - sessed by constraining and freeing the phi coefficient . The model with the free coefficient was found to be superior to the fixed coefficient for the two organizational memory variables AX2 ( l ) = 9 . 18 , the two new product outcomes AX2 ( 1 ) = 11 . 34 , and the two environmental moderators AX2 ( l ) = 13 . 42 , suggesting independent constructs . In addition , be - cause the memory measures are new , discriminant validity was assessed and found between the memory variables and measures of individual manager use of information ( Desh - pande and Zaltman 1982 ) , organizational use of information ( Moorman 1995 ) , and different forms of organizational cul - ture ( Deshpand6 , Farley , and Webster 1993 ) . 7 Finally , the re - liability of the measures was found to exceed standards for acceptance . 8 In Table 1 , we present psychometric informa - tion and a correlation matrix of all measures . General Theory Testing Approach The hypotheses were examined in two regression models , with the two new product outcomes as dependent variables . Following accepted guidelines for examining interactions , for each model , the main effects associated with the two organizational memory variables and turbulence were entered in addition to their interaction effects ( the product of the memory variables and the moderators ) . Following the conceptual framework , a quadratic form of the memory dis - persion variable also was entered in the model with new product creativity as the dependent variable . The main effect variables were mean - centered before we constructed the interactions and quadratic versions to reduce the potential effects of collinearity ( Cronbach 1987 ) . Significant interac - tions were investigated with the slope analysis procedures specified in Aiken and West ( 1991 ) to improve understand - ing of the coefficients . These procedures enable significant relationships to be understood at different levels of the con - tinuous moderator variables without creating categorical 7Results indicate that the critical value ( AX2 ( i ) = 3 . 84 ) was exceeded in all tests : memory level and individual instrumental use of information ( AX2 ( 1 ) = 32 . 18 ) ; memory dispersion and individual instrumental use of information ( Ax2 ( i ) = 26 . 52 ) ; memory level and organizational instrumen - tal use of information ( Ax2 ( I ) = 5 . 06 ) ; memory dispersion and organiza - tional instrumental use of information ( AX2 ( I ) = 9 . 79 ) ; memory level and clan cultures ( Ax2 ( I ) = 21 . 58 ) , market cultures ( AX2 ( I ) = 4 . 46 ) , adhocracy cultures ( AX2 ( I ) = 11 . 82 ) , and bureaucracy cultures ( AX2 ( } = 14 . 58 ) ; as well as memory dispersion and clan cultures ( AX2 ( i ) = 9 . 65 ) , market cultures ( Ax2 ( i ) = 10 . 16 ) , adhocracy cultures ( Ax2 ( I ) = 26 . 04 ) , and bureaucracy cul - tures ( AX2 ( l ) = 35 . 05 ) . 8The only exception , memory dispersion , also could be argued to be a reflective , rather than a formative , scale . This status would suggest that con - ceptual considerations regarding construct space coverage , and not reliabil - ity assessments , should be the evaluative criteria . 97 This content downloaded from 152 . 3 . 153 . 148 on Mon , 23 Sep 2013 16 : 35 : 46 PM All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions JOURNAL OF MARKETING RESEARCH , FEBRUARY 1997 Table 1 MEASUREMENT INFORMATION Mean S . D . ( 1 ) ( 2 ) ( 3 ) ( 4 ) ( 5 ) ( 6 ) ( 7 ) ( 1 ) Organizational Memory Level 5 . 26 1 . 62 . 96 ( 2 ) Organizational Memory Dispersion 5 . 46 . 82 . 33 * . 62 ( 3 ) Technological Turbulence 4 . 06 1 . 44 - . 06 - . 01 . 84 ( 4 ) Market Turbulence 4 . 01 1 . 17 . 09 . 13 . 17 . 70 ( 5 ) New Product Short - Term Financial Performance 4 . 82 1 . 51 . 40 * . 43 * - . 01 . 11 . 95 ( 6 ) New Product Creativity 5 . 12 1 . 24 - . 02 . 27 * . 19 . 16 . 13 . 78 ( 7 ) Organizational Bureaucratization 3 . 21 1 . 24 . 12 - . 39 * - . 03 . 08 - . 19 - . 28 * . 85 * p < . 05 . Note : The coefficient alpha for each measure is on the diagonal ( and in italics ) and the intercorrelations among the measures are on the off - diagonal . versions . For both models , variance inflation factors were estimated to examine collinearity and found to be below harmful levels ( Mason and Perreault 1991 ) . In addition to these predicted effects , organizational bureaucratization also was entered as a control variable in the models for the rea - sons described previously . Table 2 presents model estima - tion results . RESULTS Overview Results show that , overall , the two models were signifi - cant : new product short - term financial performance ( R2 = . 310 , F ( 9 , 83 ) = 4 . 135 , p = . 0001 ) and new product creativity ( R2 = . 255 , F ( 10 , 82 ) = 2 . 816 , p = . 0001 ) . As was noted pre - viously , in testing the interaction hypotheses , the main effects associated with the moderator variables ( market and technological turbulence ) must be entered into the regres - sion model ( Pedhazur 1982 ) . Therefore , several nonhypoth - esized main effects also are noted . Results indicate that technological turbulence has a significant positive main effect on new product creativity ( b = . 204 , t = 2 . 286 ) but no effect on new product short - term financial performance . Market turbulence has no main effects . Finally , the control variable , organizational bureaucratization , has no effect on the short - term financial performance of new products and a marginal negative effect on their creativity ( b = - . 200 , t = 1 . 837 ) The Impact of Organizational Memory Level The first two hypotheses examine the effect of organiza - tional memory level on new product outcomes . Hl predicts that higher levels of organizational memory reduce new product creativity . Results indicate a nonsignificant relation - ship between memory level and new product creativity , which fails to support Hi , though the relationship is in the expected direction ( b = - . 089 , t = - 1 . 123 ) . H2 predicts a pos - itive effect for organizational memory level on new product performance , which the results support ( b = . 258 , t = 2 . 787 ) . Considering the effect of technological turbulence , H5a and H6a predict that the greater the technological and market Table 2 STANDARDIZED ESTIMATES OF HYPOTHESIZED RELATIONSHIPS Dependent Variables Independent Variables Organizational Memory Level Organizational Memory Dispersion Memory Dispersion x Memory Dispersion Memory Level x Technological Turbulence Memory Level x Market Turbulence Memory Dispersion x Technological Turbulence Memory Dispersion x Market Turbulence Technological Turbulencea Market Turbulencea Organizational Bureaucratizationb Adjusted R2 F - statistic New Product Short - Term Financial Performance Prediction Actual ( H2 , + ) . 258 * ( . 092 ) ( H4 , + ) . 582 * ( . 196 ) ( Hsa , - ) ( H6a , - ) ( H5b , - ) ( H6b , - ) - . 025 . 007 . 054 - . 351 * - . 093 . 044 - . 064 . 310 4 . 135 * ( . 061 ) ( . 069 ) ( . 150 ) ( . 165 ) ( . 104 ) ( . 125 ) ( . 125 ) New Product Creativity Prediction Actual ( Hi , - ) - . 089 ( . 080 ) . 418 * ( . 184 ) a ( H3 , nc ) . 086 ( . 126 ) ( H7a , - ) - . 013 ( . 053 ) ( Ha , - ) - . 017 ( . 060 ) ( H7b , - ) - . 402 * ( . 135 ) ( H8b , - ) - . 156 ( . 145 ) . 204 * ( . 089 ) . 062 ( . 109 ) - . 200t ( . 108 ) . 255 2 . 816 * Note : The degrees of freedom for the new product short - term financial performance model were ( 9 , 83 ) , whereas they were ( 10 , 82 ) for the new product cre - ativity model . Standard errors are in parentheses . * p < . 05 . tp < . 10 . aFollowing Pedhazur ( 1982 ) , the main effects associated with both the interactions and the quadratic terms must be entered into models examining inter - action and quadratic hypotheses . bOrganizational bureaucratization is a control variable reflecting the structure of organizational information sharing activities . cH3 predicts an inverted - U relationship . 98 This content downloaded from 152 . 3 . 153 . 148 on Mon , 23 Sep 2013 16 : 35 : 46 PM All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions Organizational Memory turbulence , respectively , the weaker the positive relationship between organizational memory level and new product short - term financial performance . Results indicate no signif - icant interactions between memory level and either type of turbulence on financial performance ( see Table 2 ) , which suggests that memory level positively influences new prod - uct performance in this sample regardless of environmental turbulence . These results fail to support H5a and H6a . Likewise , H7a and H8a predict that technological and mar - ket turbulence , respectively , weaken any negative effect of memory levels on the development of creative new products . Results indicate no interaction between memory level and turbulence on creativity in these data . The Impact of Organizational Memory Dispersion The second set of hypotheses focuses on the effect of organizational memory dispersion on new product out - comes . H3 predicts that a moderate level of memory disper - sion promotes the highest levels of new product creativity . Results do not support this prediction but instead find a non - significant quadratic dispersion term ( b = . 086 , t = . 680 ) and a positive main effect dispersion term ( b = . 418 , t = 2 . 266 ) , which suggests there is a positive linear relationship between memory dispersion and creativity . H4 predicts that greater dispersion of organizational memory increases new product short - term financial performance . Results support this prediction ( b = . 582 , t = 2 . 965 ) . Results also suggest , however , that the impact of memory dispersion on the short - term financial performance of new products is weakened by market turbulence , which supports H6b ( b = - . 351 , t = - 2 . 124 ) . Specifically , as market turbu - lence increases , the relationship between memory disper - sion and short - term financial performance decreases . A fol - low - up slope analysis examining this interaction ( Aiken and West 1991 ) indicates that the relationship between memory dispersion and financial performance is insignificant under conditions of high market turbulence ( b = - . 012 ) , becomes positive at moderate market turbulence ( b = . 436 ) , and is even stronger at low market turbulence ( b = . 885 ) . In short , memory enhanced short - term financial performance when there was little turbulence but had no effect on short - term fi - nancial performance in the presence of high turbulence . No support for a similar effect for technological turbulence was found , however , which fails to support H5b . Technological turbulence did , however , have a significant negative interaction with memory dispersion on new product creativity ( b = - . 402 , t = - 2 . 964 ) . A follow - up slope analy - sis examining this interaction ( Aiken and West 1991 ) indi - cates that the relationship between memory dispersion and new product creativity is negative under conditions of high turbulence ( b = - . 385 ) , becomes positive at moderate turbu - lence ( b = . 298 ) , and is strong and positive at low turbulence ( b = . 981 ) . These results support H7b . Market turbulence does not , however , moderate the impact of memory disper - sion on new product creativity , which fails to support H8b ( see Table 2 ) . DISCUSSION We provide an initial attempt to fill arr important gap in the new product literature by expanding our vision of orga - nizational memory in the new product context and exploring some of its effects using systematic quantitative data . The Nature of Organizational Memory An important first contribution of this work is the fine - grained description of organizational memory forms , roles , and characteristics . Although many of these issues have been discussed in other research ( e . g . , Walsh and Ungson 1991 ) , we systematically integrate these concepts into a def - inition of organizational memory , which results in several important advances . First , we describe three ways in which memory may be manifested : as shared beliefs , behavioral routines , and physical artifacts . Second , two distinct mem - ory roles were identified - both interpretive and action guid - ance roles . Third , four distinct dimensions of organizational memory were identified , two of which were examined empirically in this research . Fourth , this view of memory extends prior work by Walsh and Ungson ( 1991 ) . On the one hand , it reaffirms their emphasis on the multidimensional character of memory , and the subtle processes involved in creating and sustaining it . On the other hand , our framework diverges from their emphasis on memory as part of an inter - pretive system . Specifically , our approach gives memory standing as an organizational feature that can be deliberately created and modified , and whose features can materially affect firm outcomes . Further research could fruitfully assess the effects of oth - er memory characteristics on new product activities . For ex - ample , further work could examine the competitive implica - tions of different levels of procedural and declarative mem - ory content . The contrasting possibilities can be seen in the classic example of the early development of the VCR , when Ampex held crucial tape recording patents ( declarative memory ) but lacked crucial product development skills ( procedural memory ) for the mass market . In contrast , Sony , JVC , and others had relatively weak scientific ( declarative ) memory regarding some key aspects of tape technology ( Lurie 1987 ) . However , these firms used powerful electron - ic product development skills ( procedural memory ) to de - velop commercial VCR products after gaining access to Ampex ' s knowledge . Because the procedural memory con - tent was less easy to imitate than the declarative memory content , U . S . firms were not able to replicate quickly the content of the memories of the Japanese firms , which re - sulted in U . S . firms ' inability to compete successfully in this product market ( Lurie 1987 ; Teece 1987 ) . The Link Between Memory and New Product Development Outcomes In our empirical study , we explore how two dimensions of memory - level and dispersion - affect two different new product outcomes : financial performance and product creativ - ity . Two broad findings emerge . First , memory may influence financial performance and creativity in different ways . Second , environmental turbulence appears to moderate memory ' s impact on performance . In particular , higher memory disper - sion did not enhance financial performance under conditions of market turbulence , whereas it actually harmed creativity under conditions of technological turbulence . These broad findings , along with more specific features of these relationships , point to important priorities for practitioners seeking to improve product development processes by enhancing organizational memory , and suggest fruitful areas for further research . Before considering these issues , however , it is important to note the aspects of this study that should be kept in mind 99 This content downloaded from 152 . 3 . 153 . 148 on Mon , 23 Sep 2013 16 : 35 : 46 PM All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions JOURNAL OF MARKETING RESEARCH , FEBRUARY 1997 while interpreting these results . For this initial empirical study , we used single informants at high levels of the orga - nization to achieve a broad organizational view . Although the use of multiple informant designs remains the exception in most marketing studies , such an approach would provide a better test in some respects , though such designs are not without their methodological concerns . Despite these con - cerns , future studies might profit from seeking multiple in - formants to enhance the validity of organizational memory measures ( Bagozzi and Phillips 1982 ) . In addition , that our informants assessed new product de - velopment projects after their completion raises the poten - tial of a retrospective justification bias . This would occur if informants , knowing the outcome of projects , tended to give responses for the independent variables consistent with their knowledge of the outcome . Our informants provided their assessments of these variables in the context of other measures , thus making it less likely they would pay atten - tion to the congruence of their assessments with new prod - uct outcomes . Moreover , survey questions were designed to focus informant attention on the appropriate time period for each variable , in part to help avoid this effect . Nonetheless , further work could fruitfully seek to measure memory vari - ables before project outcomes are known to alleviate such concerns . Finally , our data show meaningful variance in terms of or - ganizational memory and project outcomes , which reduces concerns about limited scope in our sample . However , as - suming our sample of projects is representative of product development projects in general , it is likely to contain a large proportion of projects involving the modification of existing products . Therefore , our results may not be gener - alizable to more radical projects . Hence , an important av - enue for further work would be to determine if our results are replicated in samples with higher proportions of more radical projects . These issues notwithstanding , the study ' s results offer interesting implications for both practitioners and marketing theorists , which we next consider . New Product Outcomes The effects of memory differ between the two new prod - uct development outcome dimensions studied here . In par - ticular , memory level enhances relatively short - term ( one year ) financial performance , but not creativity . Market tur - bulence moderates the impact of memory dispersion on financial performance , whereas technological turbulence moderates the impact of memory dispersion on creativity , but not on short - term financial performance . This pattern highlights that memory may have varied effects on different features of product performance . There are additional indi - cators of success in new product activities , including cus - tomer measures and time - to - market measures ( Griffin and Page 1993 ) . By implication , the effect of memory level and dispersion may vary for these other outcome indicators as well . One implication of our work for practitioners , then , is to underscore the importance of sensitivity to organizational memory ' s potentially distinct impact on different new prod - uct outcomes . Many firms are in the process of creating in - creasingly sophisticated organizational memory systems in which they make engineering drawings , parts specifications , costs , and other concrete features of prior products available to in - house designers and even vendors . Some firms also seek to institutionalize the new product development process itself through efforts to achieve ISO 9000 certifica - tion . Other organizations are experimenting with new orga - nizational structures that affect the nature and availability of organizational memory ( Womack , Jones , and Roos 1990 ) . Our results support the importance of identifying which product outcomes the firm seeks to enhance and attempting to link these activities to memory in order to enhance spe - cific outcomes over time . The results also support the importance of careful atten - tion to the multiple dimensions of new product outcomes in theoretical research . They are consistent with predictions that memory may have different effects on different out - comes , which reduces the likelihood that we will find a sim - ple formula linking memory to new product outcomes . For example , research linking memory dimensions with key ad - ditional outcomes , such as timeliness , long - range financial outcomes , and whether a product becomes a dominant de - sign , may offer potentially important frontiers for such work ( Foster 1986 ; Schoonhoven , Eisenhardt , and Lyman 1990 ) . The Effect of Organizational Memory Level Our research augments previous work concerned with the relationship between new products and a firm ' s existing competencies , which has often viewed knowledge assets as having unconditionally positive effects . For practitioners , our results support a great deal of the marketing strategy lit - erature and practice by finding that a reliance on memory ( which represents stored information and competencies ) in new product development increases new product financial performance ( Ansoff 1988 ; Montoya - Weiss and Calatone 1994 ; Rumelt 1974 ; Varadarajan 1983 ) . However , we did not find active support for the prediction that high memory levels would detract from product creativity , but we did find that high memory levels failed to enhance creativity . Our finding that high memory level enhanced financial re - turn but did not enhance creativity also reinforces practi - tioner concern about the possible dangers of formalizing new product development processes . Specifically , many firms are now formalizing new product development proce - dures , sometimes in pursuit of ISO 9000 certification or sup - plier qualification programs . Yet , to the degree a firm seeks to enhance new product creativity , formal procedures aimed at increasing the level of memory may have little or no val - ue . These firms might want to look to other dimensions of their organizational memory ( beyond just trying to capture the most information possible ) in seeking to institutionalize their best practices . Turning to theoretical issues , that high memory levels nei - ther enhances nor detracts from product creativity in our study leads us to speculate that memory level may be less important than how flexibly or inflexibly a firm holds its knowledge ( March 1979 ) . Further research could consider moderating factors in the firm ' s culture or structure that may reflect a flexible approach to what has been learned in the past or that encourage careful reconsideration of current routines and knowledge ( Barabba and Zaltman 1991 ; Olson , Walker , and Ruekert 1995 ) . In addition , the relationship be - tween memory level and creative product outcomes may be influenced by stage of the new product development 100 This content downloaded from 152 . 3 . 153 . 148 on Mon , 23 Sep 2013 16 : 35 : 46 PM All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions Organizational Memory process , whether the organization uses a team approach , and the nature of the product itself . In addition , we believe it will be important to begin to study more systematically the actu - al processes through which memory level affects outcomes , through , for example , longitudinal study of the creation and deployment use of specific organizational routines . The Effect of Organizational Memory Dispersion Memory dispersion had a positive effect on both the financial performance and creativity of new products in this sample . Moreover , the impact of our measure of memory dispersion on new product outcomes was stronger than the impact of the measure of memory level . This implies that the degree to which knowledge and skills are shared among organizational members may be more important than the sheer amount of organizational memory in some settings . Recall that we had predicted a positive effect for memory dispersion on product financial performance and a curvilin - ear effect for dispersion on product creativity . Our results support the former and show only a simpler linear effect for dispersion impact on creativity . The question of whether dis - persion has a linear curvilinear effect merits further study , however . We utilize a simple measure of dispersion and do not attempt to characterize the structure of such dispersion . If memory is dispersed in a hierarchical manner ( as opposed to a network fashion ) , its impact may vary . In addition , the lack of a curvilinear effect may arise from the scope limita - tions of our sample . For example , the maximum point in the curvilinear relationships may shift to some degree depend - ing on whether a product is more incremental or radical . Environmental Contingencies and the Effect of Memory Dispersion Following previous theory and research that environmen - tal turbulence has the potential to affect the value of memory , we introduce market and technological turbulence as moder - ator variables into our study . Although these factors did not moderate the impact of memory level , they did influence the way memory dispersion affects product outcomes . We find that technological turbulence has an important ef - fect on dispersion ' s impact on product creativity . In the pres - ence of high technological turbulence , high levels of mem - ory dispersion - which involves shared understanding and homogeneous knowledge - actually detract from creativity . This significant interaction provides a partial explanation for the conflicting literature on dispersion , suggesting that both high and low levels of dispersion foster creativity . Specifically , it implies that organizations may be better off with internal heterogeneity under conditions of high turbu - lence , because diverse pockets of knowledge and skills en - able them to increase their probability of exploiting emerg - ing opportunities . This finding has two important implications for new prod - uct development practice . First , it provides further support for the commonly held view that in the presence of turbu - lence , heterogeneity may provide value ( Burgelman 1983 ; Miner 1994 ; Tushman and Romanelli 1985 ) . In this case , heterogeneity of views among the team members enhanced new product creativity . This finding , then , supports the view that early in the S - curve of technological evolution , or dur - ing periods of radical transition , it makes sense to have some level of variety on teams to enhance the creative process ( Anderson and Tushman 1990 ) . This variety can be achieved through differences among team members in terms of func - tional background , product category experiences , firm - level tenure , or individual traits and perhaps even can be shaped by the information provided to the team by senior manage - ment ( Cox 1993 ; Katz and Allen 1982 ; Nemeth 1986 ) . Second , under conditions of low technological turbu - lence , high dispersion ( or homogeneity ) actually enhances creativity . This finding implies that , in some settings , cre - ativity may not require the addition of variation or disagree - ment among participants . Specifically , creativity in these settings may arise from either creative firm - level goals or development processes that permit participants to make cre - ative use of their shared knowledge , such as when they re - combine shared ideas into new forms ( Nelson 1982 ; Nona - ka 1990 ) . These results also imply that practices involving the uti - lization of stored information may need to vary when at - tempting to achieve creative outcomes in different environ - ments . For example , in turbulent environments , creativity may be achieved by infusing varied knowledge into the product development process . Therefore , mechanisms for accessing specialized and divergent knowledge from inter - nal or external sources , as well as processes for ensuring its usage , represent important challenges for organizations seeking creative new product development . On the other hand , we speculate that shared memory may result in new product creativity by recombining shared knowledge ( Hol - land 1975 ) . For example , Dougherty ( 1990 , 1992 ) finds that successful new product groups were able to combine their perspectives , but only when they operated in a highly inter - active and iterative fashion by participating in concrete tasks together and violating routines . Environmental turbulence also moderated dispersion ' s impact on financial performance . Specifically , when market turbulence was moderate or low , dispersion enhanced finan - cial performance . However , when market turbulence was high , dispersion had no effect on financial performance . This result , like the previous one , may imply that building valuable memory systems is harder under conditions of en - vironmental turbulence . Specifically , if market turbulence reduces the value of organizational memory for financial performance , organizations may need to turn to additional information mechanisms to supplement the value of memo - ry . Formal experimentation , rapid prototyping , and improvi - sation , for example , may represent processes that create new working knowledge in situations for which long - term orga - nizational memory provides insufficient guidance ( Eisen - hardt and Tabrizi 1995 ; Moorman and Miner 1996 ; Weick 1993a ) . Finally , we turn to the theoretical implications of our find - ings on the interaction of dispersion and turbulence . In gen - eral , the results reaffirm that turbulence can reduce the value of shared knowledge within organizations . However , we note that technological and market turbulence does not uniformly affect outcomes . Technological turbulence does not moderate the dispersion - financial relationship , for example , nor does market turbulence moderate the dispersion - creativity rela - tionship . These findings suggest it may be time to address links between specific aspects of environmental turbulence and memory , rather than assume broad environmental fea - tures with uniform impact on organizational memory ' s value . 101 This content downloaded from 152 . 3 . 153 . 148 on Mon , 23 Sep 2013 16 : 35 : 46 PM All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions JOURNAL OF MARKETING RESEARCH , FEBRUARY 1997 Overall , these results extend thinking that has tended to advocate either homogeneity or heterogeneity in organiza - tional knowledge . For many decades , for example , it was as - sumed that specialization , which can be seen as fragmented organizational memory , was an efficient way to capture and use knowledge ( Scott 1987 ) . Today , popular wisdom has re - versed that assumption , often calling for shared knowledge and redundancy as a simple answer to produce new product success ( e . g . , Griffin and Hauser 1994 ; Nonaka 1990 ) . Both our theoretical development and empirical results point to a more complex world . Further research could explore more carefully the precise mechanisms through which consensus and heterogeneity affect outcomes in different new product development environments ( Guzzo and Salas 1995 ; Watch - er 1983 ) . More broadly , researchers may want to explore factors beyond variation among persons , such as the ways in which new , interactive information systems and new organi - zational designs affect the balance between heterogeneity and homogeneity in product development projects . Further research should also probe how these dispersion effects are influenced by their occurrence during certain stages of the new product development process . For example , it is widely assumed that heterogeneity is more useful in the early stages of the process , when new knowledge appears to be more necessary ; however , we lack systematic empirical data sup - porting this view . Finally , in considering the effect of memory dispersion , further research would benefit from accounting for its spe - cific content . We speculate that if a firm ' s memory is dis - persed , but contains primarily procedural knowledge about how to innovate , it could produce successful products even under turbulent conditions . However , we speculate that de - Appendix A STUDY MEASURES I . Independent Variables Organizational Memory Level ( Seven - point scale , where 7 = strongly agree and I = strongly di Prior to the project , compared to firms in our industry , my divisi * a great deal of knowledge about this category . * a great deal of experience in this category . * a great deal of familiarity in this category . * invested a great deal of R & D in this category . Organizational Memory Dispersion ( Seven - point scale , where 7 = high and I = low ) Rate the degree of consensus among the people working on the the following new product areas : * product design * brand name - packaging * promotional content * product quality level 11 . Moderator Variables Technological Turbulence Jaworski and Kohli ( 1993 ) ( Seven - point scale , where 7 = strongly agree and I = strongly disagree ) * The technology in this product area is changing rapidly . * Technological changes provide big opportunities in this product area . * It is very difficult to forecast where the technology in this product area will be in the next five years . * A large number of new product ideas in this area have been made possible through technological breakthroughs . * Technological developments in this product area are rather minor . * Market Turbulence Jaworski and Kohli ( 1993 ) ( Seven - point scale , where 7 = strongly agree and I = strongly disagree ) * In our kind of business , customers ' product preferences change quite a bit over time . * Our customers tend to look for new products all the time . * We are witnessing demand for our products and services from customers who never bought them before . * New customers tend to have product - related needs that are different from those of our existing customers . * We cater to much the same customers that we used to in the past . * 1 ! . Dependent Variables Rate the extent to which the product has achieved the following outcomes during the first 12 months of its life in the marketplace . ion had : New Product Performance ( Seven - point scale , where 7 = high and 1 = low ) * Sales relative to objective * Profit margin relative to objective * Return on assets relative to objective New scale - Return on investment relative to objective New Product Creativity project for ( Seven - point scale , where 7 = high and I = low ) * Challenged existing ideas for this category - Did not challenge existing ideas for this category * * Offered new ideas to the category - Did not offer new ideas to the category * * Creative - Not creative * * Spawned ideas for other products - Did not generate ideas for other products * IV Control Variables Organizational Bureaucratization Adaptedfrom Deshpande ( 1982 ) ( Seven - point scale , where 7 = strongly agree and I = strongly disagree ) * Whenever employees have a problem , they are supposed to go to the same person for an answer . * There is little action taken until a superior approves the decision . * If employees wished to make their own decisions , they would be quickly discouraged . * Going through the proper channels in getting a job done is constantly stressed . * Employees have to ask their boss before they do almost anything * Any decision employees make has to have their boss ' approval . * There is no specific rule manual detailing what employees should do . * * In this organization , everyone has a specific job to do . V Discriminating Variables ( These variables were used only in discriminant validity exercises , not in the model testing . ) Organizational Culture D Organizational Instrumental Use of Market Information Individual Manager Instrumental Use of Market Information ) eshpande , Farley , and Webster ( 1993 ) Moorman ( 1995 ) Deshpande and Zaltman ( 1982 ) * These items were reverse - coded prior to scale construction . 102 Moorman ( 1995 ) Moorman ( 1995 ) This content downloaded from 152 . 3 . 153 . 148 on Mon , 23 Sep 2013 16 : 35 : 46 PM All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions Organizational Memory clarative memory would not retain its value in turbulent conditions . CONCLUSION Recent theorizing on product development emphasizes the crucial impact of information processing on product success and the importance of organizational , in addition to individ - ual , learning . A key result of learning is the creation of mem - ory . Surprising , the literature presents a somewhat fragmented theoretical panorama for memory ' s impact on product devel - opment and almost no quantitative research on its direct impact on new product success . We argue that an organiza - tion ' s memory can best be conceptualized as having several distinct and independent dimensions . We examine the effects of memory level and dispersion on two key product outcomes : new product short - term financial performance and new prod - uct creativity . Although fewer than half of the hypothesized relationships were supported , our results do indicate that level of memory enhances product performance and that memory dispersion affects both performance and creativity . In addi - tion , we find that memory dispersion can sometimes detract from creativity and have no influence on performance in the presence of high turbulence , whereas it can enhance creativ - ity and performance when there is low turbulence . These results imply that marketers must address not only the ongoing information - gathering processes for product de - velopment , but look deeply at the question of current orga - nizational memory if they are to harvest the full value of or - ganizational learning . Specifically , our data indicate that de - veloping and sustaining valuable organizational memory may require attention not only to the appropriate levels of memory , but also to managing subtle aspects of memory dis - persion and deployment . Appendix B Organizational Memory Level Definition : Memory level refers to the amount of stored information or experience an organization has about a particular phenomenon . Example : A new product development team has competed in a product category for an extensive period of time . Measurement : Memory level was measured by asking respondents to evaluate the amount of knowledge , experience , and familiarity the relevant organizational unit had in a product category prior to beginning the project . Organizational Memory Dispersion Definition : Memory dispersion refers to the degree to which organizational memory is shared throughout the relevant organizational unit . If memory is widely shared , memory dispersion is high . If memory is not widely shared , mem - ory dispersion is low . Example : Members of a new product team have similar knowledge about the market , the product , and the new product development process . Measurement : Memory dispersion was measured by the degree of consensus or shared knowledge among new product team participants . Several aspects of the new product development process were listed and respondents were asked to rate the degree of consensus among the people working on the project . REFERENCES Achrol , Ravi S . ( 1991 ) , " Evolution of the Marketing Organization : New Forms for Turbulent Environments , " Journal of Marketing , 55 ( October ) , 77 - 93 . Adams , Marjorie and Joseph Lacugna ( 1994 ) , " And Now for Something Completely Different : ' Really ' New Products , " Mar - keting Science Report No . 94 - 124 . Cambridge , MA : Marketing Science Institute . Aguilar , Francis ( 1967 ) , Scanning the Business Environment . New York : Macmillan . Aiken , Leona S . and Stephen G . West ( 1991 ) , Multiple Regression : Testing and Interpreting Interactions . Newbury Park , CA : Sage Publications . Aldrich , Howard ( 1979 ) , Organizations and Environments . Engle - wood Cliffs , NJ : Prentice Hall . Amburgey , Terry and Anne S . Miner ( 1992 ) , " Strategic Momen - tum : The Effects of Repetitive , Positional , and Contextual Mo - mentum on Merger Activity , " Strategic Management Journal , 13 ( June ) , 335 - 48 . Anderson , James C . ( 1987 ) , " An Approach for Confirmatory Mea - surement and Structural Equation Modeling of Organizational Properties , " Management Science , 33 ( April ) , 525 - 41 . Anderson , Philip and Michael L . Tushman ( 1990 ) , " Technological Discontinuities and Dominant Designs : A Cyclical Model of Technological Change , " Administrative Science Quarterly , 35 ( December ) , 604 - 33 . Andrews , Jonlee and Daniel C . Smith ( 1996 ) , " In Search of the Marketing Imagination : Factors Affecting the Creativity of Mar - keting Programs for Mature Products , " Journal of Marketing Re - search , 33 ( May ) , 174 - 87 . Ansoff , H . Igor ( 1988 ) , The New Corporate Strategy . New York : John Wiley & Sons . Argote , Linda ( 1995 ) , " Organizational Learning Curves : Persis - tence , Transfer , and Turnover , " working paper , Kellogg Gradu - ate School of Management , Northwestern University . and Dennis Epple ( 1990 ) , " Learning Curves in Manufac - turing , " Science , 247 , 920 - 24 . Argyris , Chris and Donald A . Schon ( 1978 ) , Organizational Learning : A Theory of Action Perspective . Reading , MA : Addi - son - Wesley . Armstrong , Scott and Terry S . Overton ( 1977 ) , " Estimating Non - response Bias in Mail Surveys , " Journal of Marketing Research , 14 ( August ) , 396 - 402 . Bagozzi , Richard P . and Lynn W . Phillips ( 1982 ) , " Representing and Testing Organizational Theories : A Holistic Construal , " Ad - ministrative Science Quarterly , 27 ( September ) , 459 - 89 . Barabba , Vincent and Gerald Zaltman ( 1991 ) , Hearing the Voice of the Market . Boston : Harvard Business School Press . Bentler , Peter M . and Chih - Ping Cho ( 1988 ) , " Practical Issues in Structural Modeling , " in Common Problems / Proper Solutions : Avoiding Error in Quantitative Research , J . Scott Long , ed . Newbury Park , CA : Sage Publications , 161 - 92 . Borko , Hilda and Carol Livingston ( 1989 ) , " Cognition and Impro - visation : Differences in Mathematics Instruction by Expert and Novice Teachers , " American Educational Research Journal , 26 ( Winter ) , 473 - 98 . Brown , Shona L . and Kathleen M . Eisenhardt ( 1995 ) , " Product In - novation as Core Capability : The Art of Dynamic Adaptation , " working paper , Department of Industrial Engineering and Engi - neering Management , Stanford University . Burgelman , Robert A . ( 1983 ) , " A Process Model of Internal Cor - porate Venturing in the Diversified Major Firm , " Administrative Science Quarterly , 28 , ( June ) , 223 - 44 . Churchill , Gilbert A . , Jr . ( 1979 ) , " A Paradigm for Developing Bet - ter Measures of Marketing Constructs , " Journal of Marketing Research , 16 ( February ) , 64 - 73 . Cohen , Michael D . ( 1991 ) , " Individual Learning and Organiza - 103 This content downloaded from 152 . 3 . 153 . 148 on Mon , 23 Sep 2013 16 : 35 : 46 PM All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions JOURNAL OF MARKETING RESEARCH , FEBRUARY 1997 tional Routine : Emerging Connections , " Organization Science , 2 ( February ) 135 - 39 . Cohen , Wesley M . and Daniel A . Levinthal ( 1990 ) , " Absorptive Capacity : A New Perspective on Learning and Innovation , " Ad - ministrative Science Quarterly , 35 ( September ) , 128 - 52 . and ( 1994 ) , " Fortune Favors the Prepared Firm , " Management Science , 40 ( February ) , 227 - 51 . Cooper , Robert G . and Elko J . Kleinschmidt ( 1986 ) , " An Investi - gation Into the New Product Process : Steps , Deficiencies , and Impact , " Journal of Product Innovation Management , 3 ( June ) , 71 - 85 . Cox , Taylor ( 1993 ) , Cultural Diversity in Organizations : Theory , Research and Practice . San Francisco : Berrett - Koehler . Cronbach , Lee J . ( 1987 ) , " Statistical Tests for Moderator Variables : Flaws in Analyses Recently Proposed , " Psychological Bulletin , 1 ( 3 ) , 414 - 17 . Cyert , Richard M . and James G . March ( 1963 ) , A Behavioral The - ory of the Firm . Englewood Cliffs , NJ : Prentice Hall . Daft , Richard L . and Karl E . Weick ( 1984 ) , " Toward a Model of Organizations as Interpretation Systems , " Academy of Manage - ment Review , 9 ( April ) , 284 - 95 . Day , George S . ( 1991 ) , " Learning About Markets , " Marketing Sci - ence Institute Report , No . 91 - 117 . Cambridge , MA : Marketing Science Institute . ( 1994 ) , " The Capabilities of Market - Driven Organiza - tions , " Journal of Marketing , 58 ( October ) , 37 - 52 . and Prakash Nedungadi ( 1994 ) , " Managerial Representa - tions of Competitive Advantage , " Journal of Marketing , 58 ( April ) , 31 - 44 . Deshpande , Rohit ( 1982 ) , " The Organizational Context of Market Research Use , " Journal of Marketing , 46 ( Fall ) , 91 - 101 . , John U . Farley , and Frederick E . Webster , Jr . ( 1993 ) , " Cor - porate Culture , Customer Orientation , and Innovativeness in Japanese Firms : A Quadrad Analysis , " Journal of Marketing , 52 ( January ) , 23 - 36 . and Frederick E . Webster , Jr . ( 1989 ) , " Organizational Cul - ture and Marketing : Defining the Research Agenda , " Journal of Marketing , 53 ( January ) , 3 - 15 . and Gerald Zaltman ( 1982 ) , " Factors Affecting the Use of Market Research Information : A Path Analysis , " Journal of Marketing Research , 19 ( February ) , 14 - 31 . Dickson , Peter R . ( 1992 ) , " Toward a General Theory of Competi - tive Rationality , " Journal of Marketing , 56 ( January ) , 69 - 83 . Dougherty , Deborah ( 1990 ) , " Understanding New Markets for New Products , " Strategic Management Journal , 11 ( Summer ) , 59 - 78 . ( 1992 ) , " Interpretive Barriers to Successful Product Inno - vation in Large Firms , " Organization Science , 3 ( May ) , 179 - 202 . Duncan , Robert B . and A . Weiss ( 1979 ) , " Organizational Learning : Implications for Organizational Design , " in Research in Organi - zational Behavior , Vol . 1 , Barry M . Staw , ed . Greenwich , CT : JAI Press , 75 - 124 . Dutton , Jane E . and Robert B . Duncan ( 1987 ) , " The Creation of Momentum for Change Through the Process of Strategic Issue Diagnosis , " Strategic Management Journal , 8 ( May / June ) , 279 - 95 . and Susan E . Jackson ( 1987 ) , " The Categorization of Strategic Issues by Decision Makers and Its Links to Organiza - tional Action , " Academy of Management Review , 12 ( January ) , 76 - 90 . Eisenhardt , Kathleen M . and Behnam N . Tabrizi ( 1995 ) , " Acceler - ating Adaptive Processes : Product Innovation in the Global Computer Industry , " Administrative Science Quarterly , 40 ( March ) , 84 - 1 10 . El Sawy , Omar A . , Glenn M . Gomes , and Manolete V . Gonzalez ( 1986 ) , " Preserving Institutional Memory : The Management of History as an Organizational Resource , " Academy of Manage - ment Best Paper Proceedings , 37 , 118 - 22 . Epple , Dennis , Linda Argote , and Rukmini Devadas ( 1991 ) , " Or - ganizational Learning Curves : A Method for Investigating Intra - Planet Transfer of Knowledge Acquired Through Learning by Doing , " Organization Science , 2 ( February ) , 56 - 69 . Feldman , Martha ( 1989 ) , Order Without Design : Information Pro - duction and Policy Making . Stanford , CA : Stanford University Press . Fiol , C . Marlene ( 1994 ) , " Consensus , Diversity , and Learning in Organizations , " Organization Science , 5 ( August ) , 403 - 20 . Foster , Richard N . ( 1986 ) , " Timing Technological Transitions , " in Technology in the Modern Corporation , Mel Horwitch , ed . New York : Pergamon Press . Garud , Raghu and Praveen R . Nayyar ( 1994 ) , " Transformative Ca - pacity : Continual Structuring by Intertemporal Technology Transfer , " Strategic Management Journal , 15 ( June ) , 365 - 85 . and Michael A . Rappa ( 1994 ) , " A Socio - Cognitive Model of Technology Evolution : The Case of Cochlear Implants , " Or - ganization Science , 5 ( August ) , 344 - 62 . Garvin , David A . ( 1993 ) , " Building a Learning Organization , " Harvard Business Review , 71 ( July / August ) , 78 - 91 . Gerbing , David W . and James C . Anderson ( 1988 ) , " An Updated Paradigm for Scale Development Incorporating Unidimension - ality and Its Assessment , " Journal of Marketing Research , 25 ( May ) , 186 - 92 . Ghemawat , Pankaj ( 1991 ) , " Market Incumbency and Technologi - cal Inertia , " Marketing Science , 10 ( Spring ) , 161 - 71 . Gigone , Daniel and Reid Hastie ( 1993 ) , " The Common Knowl - edge Effect : Information Sharing and Group Judgment , " Journal of Personality and Social Psychology , 65 ( 5 ) , 959 - 74 . Glazer , Rashi ( 1991 ) , " Marketing in an Information - Intensive En - vironment : Strategic Implications of Knowledge as an Asset , " Journal of Marketing , 55 ( October ) , 1 - 19 . and Allen M . Weiss ( 1993 ) , " Marketing in Turbulent Envi - ronments : Decision Processes and the Time - Sensitivity of Infor - mation , " Journal of Marketing Research , 30 ( November ) , 509 - 21 . Griffin , Abbie and John R . Hauser ( 1992 ) , " Patterns of Communi - cation Among Marketing , Engineering , and Manufacturing - A Comparison Between Two New Product Teams , " Management Science , 38 ( March ) , 360 - 73 . and ( 1993 ) , " The Voice of the Customer , " Market - ing Science , 12 ( Winter ) , 1 - 27 and ( 1994 ) , " Integrating Mechanisms for Market - ing and R & D , " Marketing Science Institute Report , No . 94 - 116 . Cambridge , MA : Marketing Science Institute . and Albert L . Page ( 1993 ) , " An Interim Report on Measur - ing Product Development Success and Failure , " Journal of Prod - uct Innovation Management , 10 ( September ) , 291 - 308 . Gupta , Ashok K . , S . P . Raj , and David Wilemon ( 1986 ) , " A Model for Studying R & D - Marking Interface in the Product Innovation Process , " Journal of Marketing , 50 ( April ) , 7 - 17 . Guzzo , R . A . and Eduardo Salas ( 1995 ) , Team Effectiveness and Decision Making in Organizations . San Francisco : Jossey - Bass . Hauser , John R . and Don Clausing ( 1988 ) , " The House of Quali - ty , " Harvard Business Review , 66 ( May / June ) , 63 - 73 . Hedberg , Bo ( 1981 ) , " How Organizations Learn and Unlearn , " in Handbook of Organizational Design , P . C . Nystram and W . H . Starbuck , eds . London : Oxford University Press , 3 - 27 . Holland , J . H . ( 1975 ) , Adaptation in Natural and Artificial Sys - tems : An Introductory Analysis with Applications to Biology , Control and Artificial Intelligence . Ann Arbor , MI : University of Michigan Press . Huber , George P . ( 1991 ) , " Organizational Learning : The Con - tributing Processes and the Literatures , " Organizational Science , 2 ( February ) , 88 - 115 . 104 This content downloaded from 152 . 3 . 153 . 148 on Mon , 23 Sep 2013 16 : 35 : 46 PM All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions Organizational Memory Hutchins , Edwin ( 1991 ) , " Organizing Work by Adaptation , " Orga - nization Science , 2 ( February ) , 14 - 39 . Hutt , Michael D . , Peter H . Reingen , and John R . Ronchetto , Jr . ( 1988 ) , " Tracing Emergent Processes in Marketing Strategy For - mation , " Journal of Marketing , " 52 ( January ) , 4 - 19 . Imai , K . , I . Nonaka , and H . Takeuchi , ( 1985 ) , " Managing the New Product Development Process : How Japanese Firms Learn and Unlearn , " in The Uneasy Alliance , K . Clark , R . Hayes , and C . Lorenz , eds . Boston : Harvard Business School , 337 - 76 . John , George and Claude Martin ( 1984 ) , " Effects of Organization - al Structure on Marketing Planning on Credibility and Utiliza - tion of Plan Output , " Journal of Marketing Research , 21 ( May ) , 170 - 83 . Jackson , Susan E . and Jane E . Dutton ( 1988 ) , " Discerning Threats and Opportunities , " Administrative Science Quarterly , 33 ( Sep - tember ) , 370 - 87 . Jaworski , Bernard J . and Ajay K . Kohli ( 1993 ) , " Market Orienta - tion : Antecedents and Consequences , " Journal of Marketing , 57 ( July ) , 53 - 7 1 . Katz , Ralph and Thomas J . Allen ( 1982 ) , " Investigating the Not - In - vented - Here - Syndrome : A Look at the Performance , Tenure , and Communication Patterns of 50 R & D Project Groups , " R & D Management , 12 ( 1 ) , 7 - 19 . Kleinschmidt , E . J . and R . G . Cooper ( 1991 ) , " The Impact of Prod - uct Innovativeness on Performance , " Journal of Product Innova - tion Management , 8 ( December ) , 240 - 51 . Kohli , Ajay K . , and Bernard J . Jaworski ( 1990 ) , " Market Orienta - tion : The Construct , Research Propositions , and Managerial Im - plications , " Journal of Marketing , 54 ( April ) , 1 - 18 . Larwood , Laurie , Cecilia M . Falbe , Mark P . Kriger , and Paul Miesing ( 1995 ) , " Structure and Meaning of Organizational Vi - sion , " Academy of Management Journal , 38 ( June ) , 740 - 69 . Lawrence , Paul and J . Lorsch ( 1967 ) , Organization and Environ - ment : Managing Differentiation and Integration . Boston : Divi - sion of Research Graduate School Business Administration , Harvard University . Leonard - Barton , Dorothy ( 1992 ) , " Core Capabilities and Core Rigidities : A Paradox in Managing New Product Development , " Strategic Management Journal , 13 ( Summer ) , 111 - 25 . Levitt , Barbara and James G . March ( 1988 ) , " Organizational Learning , " in Annual Review of Sociology , Vol . 14 . Palo Alto : Annual Review , 319 - 40 . Lurie , Ralinda Young ( 1987 ) , " The World VCR Industry , " Case 9 - 387 - 098 . Cambridge , MA : Harvard Business School . Lyles , Marjorie A . and Charles R . Schwenk ( 1992 ) , " Top Manage - ment , Strategy , and Organizational Knowledge Structures , " Journal of Management Studies , 29 ( March ) , 155 - 73 March , James G . ( 1979 ) , " The Technology of Foolishness , " in Am - biguity and Choice in Organizations , James G . March and Johan P . Olsen , eds . Norway : Universitetsfarlgt , 69 - 81 . ( 1991 ) " Exploration and Exploitation in Organizational Learning , " Organization Science , 2 ( February ) , 71 - 78 . and Herbert A . Simon ( 1968 ) , Organizations . New York : John Wiley & Sons . Martin , Joann ( 1982 ) , " Stories and Scripts in Organizational Set - tings , " in Cognitive Social Psychology , A . Hastorf and A . Isen , eds . New York : Elsevier . and Siehl , C . ( 1983 ) , " Organizational Culture and Counter Culture : An Uneasy Symbiosis , " Organizational Dynamics , 12 ( Autumn ) , 52 - 64 . Mason , Charlotte H . and William D . Perreault , Jr . ( 1991 ) , " Collinearity , Power , and Interpretation of Multiple Regression Analysis , " Journal of Marketing Research , 28 ( August ) , 268 - 80 . McDonough , Edward F . III ( 1993 ) , " Faster New Product Develop - ment : Investigating the Effects of Technology and Characteris - tics of the Project Leader and Team , " Journal of Product Inno - vation Management , 10 ( June ) , 241 - 50 . Miner , Anne S . ( 1994 ) , " Seeking Adaptive Advantage : Evolution - ary Theory and Managerial Action , " in Evolutionary Dynamics of Organizations , Joel A . Baum and J . V . Singh , eds . Oxford : Ox - ford University Press , 76 - 89 . ( 1990 ) , " Structural Evolution Through Idiosyncratic Jobs : The Potential for Unplanned Learning , " Organization Science , 1 ( May ) 195 - 210 . Mintzberg , Henry ( 1979 ) , The Structuring of Organizations . En - glewood Cliffs , NJ : Prentice - Hall . Moenaert , Rudy and William Souder ( 1990a ) , " An Information Transfer Model for Integrating Marketing and R & D Personnel in New Product Development Projects , " Journal of Product In - novation Management , 7 ( June ) , 91 - 107 . and ( 1990b ) , " An Analysis of the Use of Extra - functional Information by R & D and Marketing Personnel : Re - view and Model , " Journal of Product Innovation Management , 7 ( September ) , 213 - 29 . Montoya - Weiss , Mitzi M . and Roger Calantone ( 1994 ) , " Determi - nants of New Product Performance : A Review and Meta - Analy - sis , " Journal of Product Innovation Management , 11 ( Novem - ber ) , 397 - 417 . Moorman , Christine ( 1995 ) , " Organizational Market Information Processes : Cultural Antecedents and New Product Outcomes , " Journal of Marketing Research , 32 ( August ) , 318 - 35 . and Anne S . Miner ( 1996 ) , " The Relationship Between Or - ganizational Memory and Organizational Improvisation , " work - ing paper , Graduate School of Business , University of Wiscon - sin - Madison , 53706 - 1323 . Narver , John C . and Stanley F . Slater ( 1990 ) , " The Effect of a Mar - ket Orientation on Business Profitability , " Journal of Marketing , 54 ( October ) , 20 - 35 . Nelson , Richard R . ( 1982 ) , " The Role of Knowledge in R & D Effi - ciency , " Quarterly Journal of Economics , 97 ( August ) , 453 - 70 . and Sidney G . Winter ( 1982 ) , An Evolutionary Theory of Economic Change . Cambridge , MA : Harvard University Press . Nemeth , Charlene ( 1986 ) , " Differential Contributions of Majority and Minority Influence , " Psychological Review , 93 ( January ) , 23 - 32 . Nonaka , Ikujiro ( 1990 ) , " Redundant , Overlapping Organization : A Japanese Approach to Managing the Innovation Process , " Cali - fornia Management Review , 32 ( Spring ) , 27 - 38 . ( 1991 ) , " The Knowledge - Creating Company , " Harvard Business Review , 69 ( November / December ) , 96 - 104 . and Franco M . Nicosia ( 1979 ) , " Marketing Management , Its Environment , and Information Processing : A Problem of Or - ganizational Design , " Journal of Business Research , 7 ( 4 ) , 277 - 300 . Olson , Eric M . , Orville C . Walker , and Robert W . Ruekert ( 1995 ) , " Organizing for Effective New Product Development : The Mod - erating Role of Product Innovativeness , " Journal of Marketing , 59 ( January ) , 48 - 62 . Orr , Julian E . ( 1990 ) , " Sharing Knowledge , Celebrating Identity : Community Memory in a Service Culture , " in Collective Re - membering , David Middleton and Derek Edwards , eds . New - bury Park , CA : Sage Publications , 169 - 89 . Pedhazur , Elazar J . ( 1982 ) , Multiple Regression in Behavioral Re - search : Explanation and Prediction . New York : Holt , Rinehart , and Winston . Peters , Thomas ( 1988 ) , " The Mythology of Innovation , or a Skunkworks Tale , Part II , " in Readings in the Management of In - novation , 2d ed . , Michael L . Tushman and William L . Moore , eds . Cambridge , MA : Ballinger , 138 - 47 . Prahalad , C . K . and Gary Hamel ( 1990 ) , " The Core Competence of the Corporation , " Harvard Business Review , 90 ( May / June ) , 79 - 91 . Quinn , James B . ( 1986 ) , " Innovation and Corporate Strategy : Man - aged Chaos , " in Technology in the Modern Corporation : A 105 This content downloaded from 152 . 3 . 153 . 148 on Mon , 23 Sep 2013 16 : 35 : 46 PM All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions JOURNAL OF MARKETING RESEARCH , FEBRUARY 1997 Strategic Perspective , Mel Horwich , ed . New York : Pergamon Press , 167 - 83 . Rumelt , Richard P . ( 1974 ) , Strategy , Structure and Economic Per - formance . Cambridge , MA : Harvard University Press . Sandelands , Lloyd E . and Ralph E . Stablein ( 1987 ) , " The Concept of Organization Mind , " in Research in the Sociology of Organi - zations , Vol . 5 , Samuel B . Barcharach , ed . Greenwich , CT : JAI Press , Inc . , 135 - 61 . Schoonhoven , Claudia . B . , Kathleen . M . Eisenhardt , and Katherine Lyman ( 1990 ) , " Speeding Products To Market : Waiting Time to First Product Introduction in New Firms , " Administrative Sci - ence Quarterly , 35 ( March ) , 177 - 207 . Scott , Richard ( 1987 ) , Organizations : Rational , Natural , and Open Systems , 2d ed . Englewood Cliffs , NJ : Prentice - Hall . Seely Brown , John ( 1993 ) , " Keynote Address : Seeing Differently , " in Marketing Science Institute Report No . 93 - 103 , Marjorie Adams , ed . Cambridge , MA : Marketing Science Institute , 1 - 5 . Sinkula , James M . ( 1994 ) , " Market Information Processing and Or - ganizational Learning , " Journal of Marketing , 58 ( January ) , 35 - 45 . Smircich , Linda ( 1983 ) , " Concepts of Culture and Organizational Analysis , " Administrative Science , 28 ( September ) , 339 - 58 . Souder , William E . ( 1987 ) , Managing New Product Innovations . Lexington , MA : Lexington Books . Starbuck , William H . ( 1976 ) , " Organizations and their Environ - ments , " in Handbook of Industrial and Organizational Psychol - ogy , M . D . Dunnette , ed . New York : Rand McNally , 1069 - 123 . ( 1992 ) , " Learning by Knowledge - Intensive Firms , " Jour - nal of Management Studies , 29 ( November ) , 713 - 40 . Suchman , Mark ( 1994 ) , " On Advice of Counsel : Law Firms and Venture Capital Funds as Information Intermediaries in the Structuration of Silicon Valley , " unpublished doctoral disserta - tion , Sociology Department , Stanford University . Teece , David J . ( 1987 ) , " Profiting From Technological Innovation : Implications for Integration , Collaboration , Licensing , and Pub - lic Policy , " in The Competitive Challenge , David J . Teece , ed . New York : Harper & Row , 185 - 219 . Tushman , Michael L . and Phil Anderson ( 1986 ) , " Technological Discontinuities and Organization Environments , " Administrative Science Quarterly , 31 ( September ) , 439 - 65 . and Richard Nelson ( 1990 ) , " Introduction : Technology , Organizations , and Innovation , " Administrative Science Quar - terly , 35 ( March ) , 1 - 8 . and Elaine Romanelli ( 1985 ) , " Organizational Evolution : A Metamorphosis Model of Convergence and Reorientation , " in Research in Organizational Behavior , Vol . 7 , B . Staw and L . Cummings , eds . Greenwich , CT : JAI Press , 171 - 222 . Varadarajan , Poondi ( 1983 ) , " Intensive Growth Opportunities : An Extended Classification , " California Management Review , 25 ( Spring ) , 118 - 32 . Walsh , James P . and Gerardo Rivera Ungson ( 1991 ) , " Organizational Memory , " Academy of Management Review , 16 ( January ) , 57 - 9 1 . Watcher , J . ( 1983 ) , " Creative Problem Solving as a Result of Ma - jority Versus Minority Influence , " European Journal of Social Psychology , 13 ( January - March ) , 45 - 55 . Webster , Fred and Yoram Wind ( 1972 ) , Organizational Buying Be - havior . Englewood Cliffs , NJ : Prentice - Hall . Weick , Karl E . ( 1979 ) , " Cognitive Processes in Organizations , " in Research in Organizational Behavior , Vol . 1 , Barry N . Staw , ed . Greenwich , CT : JAI Press , 41 - 74 . ( 1993a ) , " Organizational Redesign as Improvisation , " in Organizational Change and Redesign , George P . Huber and William H . Glick , eds . Oxford : Oxford University Press , 346 - 79 . ( 1993b ) , " Managing as Improvisation : Lessons from the World of Jazz , " working paper , Graduate School of Business Ad - ministration , University of Michigan . Weiss , Allen and Jan B . Heide ( 1993 ) , " The Nature of Organiza - tional Search in High Technology Markets , " Journal of Market - ing Research , 30 ( May ) , 220 - 33 . Wilton , Peter C . and John G . Meyers ( 1986 ) , " Task , Expectancy , and Information Assessment Effects in Information Utilization Processes , " Journal of Consumer Research , 12 ( March ) , 469 - 86 . Winter , Sidney G . ( 1987 ) , " Knowledge and Competence as Strate - gic Assets , " in The Competitive Challenge : Strategies for Indus - trial Innovation and Renewal , David J . Teece , ed . New York : Harper & Row , 159 - 84 . Womack , J . , D . Jones , and D . Roos ( 1990 ) , The Machine That Changed the World : The Story of Lean Production . New York : Rawson - Macmillian . Zaltman , Gerald , Michael Heffring , and Karen LeMasters ( 1983 ) , Theory Construction in Marketing : Some Thoughts on Thinking . New York : John Wiley & Sons . Zirger Billie Jo and Modesto A . Maidique ( 1990 ) , " A Model of New Product Development : An Empirical Test , " Management Science , 36 ( July ) , 867 - 93 . 106 This content downloaded from 152 . 3 . 153 . 148 on Mon , 23 Sep 2013 16 : 35 : 46 PM All use subject to JSTOR Terms and Conditions