Ambivalent effect of member portraits in virtual groups U . Cress University of Tuebingen , Germany Abstract Knowledge exchange with shared databases can be seen as a public - goods dilemma . People are reluctant to contribute information because they save time , effort and perhaps social power if they withhold their knowledge and socially loaf . But if all people choose this in - dividually efﬁcient strategy , then no information exchange can take place , and the group is less effective than it would have been if all members contributed . Thus , in the knowledge - exchange situation , group norms and individual norms oppose each other . In order to strengthen people’s orientation towards the group , virtual collaborative tools sometimes provide member portraits . But based on the Social Identity Model of Deindivi - duation Effect ( SIDE ) - Model , ambivalent effects of these member portraits are expected according to people’s social categorization : when people identify more strongly with the group , such portraits enhance participation , whereas when people have a stronger individual identity , they undermine participation . This study links the concepts of social value orientation to identity salience . The assumption is that in the information - exchange dilemma , the social value orientation of a group member will determine whether group identity or individual identity becomes salient for that group member . We then extend the SIDE - model to the domain of social loaﬁng and expect that portraits of the group members will have different effects for people with individual or - ientation and for people with prosocial orientation . An experiment conﬁrmed this expecta - tion and revealed a signiﬁcant interaction between social value orientation and portraits . Especially striking is the result that for prosocials the provision of member portraits leads to an increase in social loaﬁng . This is analogous to the predictions of the SIDE - model . Keywords anonymity , computer - mediated communication , group awareness , portraits , SIDE - model , social categorization , social dilemma , social identity theory , social value orientation Use of shared databases for knowledge communication One form of collaborative media use that is becoming more and more important , is the use of shared data - bases as knowledge repositories . These are re - positories to which all members of a group have access and can contribute , and from which they can retrieve information . Thus , shared databases can be used to collect information that is distributed among individuals , and make the contributions accessible for all . They encourage knowledge communication by motivating people to externalize their knowledge , contribute it and thus share it with the group . Because of this possibility , shared databases are implemented in organizations as tools for knowledge management . They are used as a technical tool for creating a kind of Correspondence : Ulrike Cress , Department of Applied Cognitive Psychology and Media Psychology Konrad - Adenauer - Str . 40 D 72072 Tuebingen Germany . Email : u . cress @ iwm - kmrc . de Accepted : 23 May 2005 & Blackwell Publishing Ltd 2005 Journal of Computer Assisted Learning 21 , pp281 – 291 281 Original article organizational memory ( Nonaka & Takeuchi 1995 ; Davenport & Prusak 1998 ; Shum 1998 ; Beckmann 1999 ) . In constructivist learning environments , the group can work with it not only in a way that each member uses it individually for her / his special inter - ests but also in a way that the group becomes a knowledge - creating entity ( Nonaka 1994 ) or a knowledge - building community ( Hewitt & Scarda - malia 1998 ) . As examples , CSILE , Knowledge For - um s , WebCT or Math Forum are prominent technologies for the use of shared databases in class - rooms , university or business settings ( Bereiter & Scardamalia 2003 ) . But a problem that is often reported in the use of shared databases in knowledge management projects , in online seminars or in virtual classes is low partici - pation : many people only passively participate in the information - exchange activity by reading the other participants’ messages and contributions , but they do not actively engage in making their own contributions ( Kerr 1983 ; Hesse & Giovis 1997 ) . This high rate of free - riding and social loaﬁng could have multiple reasons : the topic being dealt with may have low in - trinsic value for the participants and thus would not motivate all persons to engage in exchanging their knowledge . Even if group members are motivated to make some contributions , there is a high message threshold . People perhaps are afraid of making in - correct statements that they cannot delete afterwards , or they feel that they have not reﬂected upon their contributions long enough to write them down ( Reid et al . 1996 ) . A further obstacle is that it takes addi - tional time and effort to externalize knowledge , be - cause it must be written down and worked out in a way that others can understand it . Additionally , unique knowledge often serves as power , and contributing it to a database and thus sharing it with others would mean losing this power . All these barriers to con - tributing raise individual costs for a contributor . And these costs lead to the situation where the decision to externalize knowledge and enter it in a shared data - base represents a kind of social dilemma ( Dawes 1980 ; Thorn & Connolly 1987 ; Markus & Connolly 1990 ; Rafaeli & LaRose 1993 ; Fulk et al . 1996 ; Cabrera & Cabrera 2002 ; Cress & Hesse 2004 ) : a potential knowledge provider receives no private beneﬁt for entering information into the database . Instead , s / he only incurs the private costs of investing time and effort . So whereas all the other users can ( at least potentially ) beneﬁt from her / his knowledge - sharing behaviour , the contributor personally has no direct beneﬁt , only costs . This means that every person would beneﬁt more if s / he behaved uncooperatively and did not give away any information . Thus , for an individual , it is efﬁcient to engage in social loaﬁng . But if all individuals did this , there would be no knowledge exchange at all ; everyone would have more costs than if all had co - operated , and in the long run everyone would end up less well - off . People’s tendency towards social loaﬁng is even strengthened through weak identiﬁcation with the group , low commitment to the group’s goals and high anonymity . These factors cause a person to be more concerned with his / her personal welfare than with the welfare and productivity of the group . If the group’s goal are not identical to the individual goals , then this more selﬁsh concern leads people to engage in more individual labouring instead of social labouring ( Ha - slam 2004 ) . The knowledge - exchange situation possesses many features that could potentially increase people’s ten - dency towards social loaﬁng : the group members ty - pically work in different places , and they do not know each other personally . Exchanging knowledge via databases provides almost no social cues and thus reduces communication to the transfer of information ( Kiesler et al . 1984 ) . On the one hand , a sender does not know the recipients and is not informed about the information they need . This could lead to a con - tributor’s subjective perception that s / he sends a message to the database , not to other people . On the other hand , a recipient does not have much informa - tion about a sender . S / he primarily feels that s / he is retrieving data and not that s / he is obtaining in - formation from a real person . This makes it even more difﬁcult for each group member to feel her / himself as belonging to a group . A person may therefore feel primarily motivated by her / his own needs , and not affected by the needs of the group , because s / he is not really aware of the others . This low awareness of the group could even increase the tendency of users to supply primarily their own wants , not the wants of others . Thus , in a social dilemma , where the individual’s beneﬁt opposes the group’s beneﬁt , a person will probably be even less co - operative . This carries over 282 U . Cress & Blackwell Publishing Ltd 2005 Journal of Computer Assisted Learning 21 , pp281 – 291 into the information - exchange dilemma where a per - son most likely will contribute less . Taking this effect of anonymity into account , one way of encouraging contributing information to a shared database might be to implement database tools that enhance a person’s awareness of the others and their needs . Tools for providing group awareness In virtual environments , Carroll et al . ( 2003 ) differ - entiate among three forms of awareness , which can be strengthened by speciﬁc tools . Social awareness is a user’s awareness of the presence of other group members . It reﬂects the question ‘Who is around ? ’ . It can be enhanced by any tool that makes the presence of others visible , for example by portraits of others , by video or by avatars . Action awareness provides in - formation about what is happening . This kind of awareness considers not only the presence of others but also their interactions with the shared resource . Tools enhancing this kind of awareness make the current action of the group members visible . The third kind of awareness is called activity awareness . For this kind of awareness , the common task of the group is central . Activity awareness does not only consider who is around and what these people are doing , but it speciﬁcally relates the members’ actions to the com - mon task . Activity - awareness tools provide feedback about whether shared plans are created or changed , and they show how much these shared goals have been reached at any given moment . They provide awareness about how things are proceeding . If shared databases are primarily used for informa - tion exchange in general and not for a joint task , then the virtual environment should support at least the ﬁrst two forms of awareness : social and action awareness . In this context , many communication platforms allow integrating visual portraits of each group member and feedback about the group’s activity . These options are provided with the aim of giving the group members at least some impression about the others and some awareness of the group as a whole . In line with this , current research about social awareness normally as - sumes that awareness enhances individual participa - tion . This research expects that being aware of the group members and having information about their behaviour enhances the feeling of being part of a group . It is expected that this awareness automatically makes the group and its interests come slightly more to the fore , whereas it makes the individual interests less salient . Indeed , experimental studies in our laboratory showed that providing people with information about others’ activities does not always have a positive ef - fect ( Cress 2004 ) . In the information - exchange di - lemma , people adjust to the others’ behaviour . If they receive the information that others are contributing considerable information , then they increase their contribution rate too . But if they become aware that the others are free - riding , then they also reduce their activity . So , activity awareness seems to satisfy a human’s need for comparing her / himself with others ( Festinger 1954 ) . If people know how others are be - having they tend to assimilate their own behaviour to that of the others . For high contributors , this leads to making fewer contributions in future . Based on this ambivalent effect of a tool for action awareness , we have to consider that a tool for social awareness could perhaps also have an ambivalent ef - fect . There is in fact some prominent theoretical evi - dence in social psychology that indicates that reducing anonymity by providing member portraits could achieve an ambivalent effect too . Effect of member portraits Providing member portraits reduces visual anonymity . In the last 10 years , much research has been carried out in the context of the Social Identity model of Deindividuation Effect ( SIDE , Reicher et al . 1995 ; Postmes et al . 2000 ; Spears et al . 2000 ; Lea et al . 2001 ) . The cognitive part of this research deals with the visual anonymity in computer - mediated commu - nication groups . The concept is based on the theory of Self - Categorization ( Turner et al . 1987 ) , which pos - tulates that in a group situation an individual has two possibilities to categorize her / himself : one will view her / himself as an individual ( personal identity ) , or as a group member ( group identity ) . This self - categoriza - tion inﬂuences the perception and cognitive re - presentation of the group members and the schemas that are activated : In the case of personal identity , a person accentuates the differences among the group members and the group norms become less relevant . Thus , individual norms are salient and a person will primarily behave according to her / his own norms . In Member portraits in virtual groups 283 & Blackwell Publishing Ltd 2005 Journal of Computer Assisted Learning 21 , pp281 – 291 the case of group identity , the group is salient and a person primarily views her / himself as a group mem - ber . The group norm becomes salient and existing differences between different group members are ig - nored . This leads to a higher conformity to the group norms . The SIDE - model is grounded in this theory and postulates that visual anonymity has different effects for people with group identity and for people with personal identity . The underlying processes are shown in Fig 1 : for people with group identity , anonymity ensures that the only information a person receives is the information that all group members belong to one common group . All individual differences between the group members are masked , which increases the sal - ience of a common identity and leads to stronger depersonalization . This strengthens a person’s confor - mity to the group norm . In contrast , if anonymity is reduced ( for example through the provision of mem - ber portraits ) , a user implicitly receives information about differences among the group members . The portraits , for example , show that the group members have different genders or different ages , and the por - traits activate different stereotypes . These differences lead a user to cognitively represent the others not only as group members but also as idiosyncratic individuals with different personalities and motivations . This lowers the subjective perception of being part of one group . The SIDE - model states that with salient per - sonal identity , this effect of portraits is just the op - posite : here , visual anonymity strengthens the perceived distance of a person to the group , because without any information about others , people do not have any cues about others at all . If portraits are given , then the others become at least slightly more ‘real’ and relevant . This should enhance the salience of the group , and thus should strengthen the signiﬁcance of the group norm . This model can be applied to the information - ex - change dilemma discussed above . If groups exchange their knowledge via databases , and if contributing information to the database is associated with any kind of costs for the contributor ( time , effort , loss of power ) , then individual interests differ from group interests . A person individually is better off , if s / he does not provide any information . Then s / he saves individual resources , whereas s / he can nevertheless beneﬁt from the others’ contributions . Thus , the per - sonal norm in this situation seems to be to withhold information . In contrast , the group norm is to con - tribute information and to participate actively in knowledge exchange . If all group members behave like this , then knowledge exchange takes place and the whole group and all its group members can beneﬁt from this knowledge sharing . Social value orientation as a determinant of social identity In social dilemmas , individual interests oppose group interests . In such mixed - motive situations , the social value orientation is what determines the norm ac - cording to which a person behaves generally . In the context of social dilemma research , this social value orientation is normally treated as a personal trait , stable across time and situations ( Kuhlman et al . 1986 ; Van Lange & Semin - Goossens 1998 ) . According to McClintock ( 1978 ) , individuals differ in their beha - viour in interdependent situations : some persons mainly behave according to maximizing their own beneﬁt ; they have an individualistic orientation . Oth - ers behave according to maximizing the group’s ben - eﬁt . These are people with prosocial orientation . A salientgroupidentity salientpersonalidentity visual anonymity groupsalienceincreases groupsaliencedecreases adherence to group norms adherence to personalnorms participationincreases participationdecreases Fig . 1 Ambivalent effect of visual anonymity on participation in virtual groups following the Social Identity Model of Dein - dividuation Effects ( SIDE - Model ) . 284 U . Cress & Blackwell Publishing Ltd 2005 Journal of Computer Assisted Learning 21 , pp281 – 291 third group exists comprised of people who intend to maximize the distance between their own outcomes and those of the others . These are called competitors – they are not considered further in this study . We wish to extent this interpretation of social or - ientation as a personal trait and apply it to the social identity theory . There has not yet been much research about the interplay of social value orientation and identity salience . One exception is the study of De Cremer and Van Vugt ( 1999 ) , which shows that peo - ple’s value orientation moderates the effect of identity salience on co - operation . In our study , we investigate another relation : we expect that people’s social value orientation also determines identity salience . In a so - cial dilemma , both norms , the individual norm as well as the group norm , are contradictory and are thus ac - tivated at the same time . We assume that in this mixed - motive situation , people’s social value or - ientation determines which identity is salient for them . Concretely , we expect that in a dilemma situation the group identity and its group norm become salient for prosocials , whereas for individualists the personal identity with its individual norm becomes salient . Integrating this relation between social value or - ientation and identity salience into the SIDE - model then , we expect that anonymity moderates the effect of social value orientation on social loaﬁng in the fol - lowing way : providing member portraits leads to less social loaﬁng for people with salient personal identity , but to more social loaﬁng for people with salient group identity . So , in sum , we expect a positive effect of member portraits for individualists but a negative ef - fect for prosocials . Experimental investigation An experiment was conducted to test this ambivalent effect of member portraits in an information - exchange dilemma . We ﬁrst expect that for people with proso - cial orientation , the group is more salient in the in - formation - exchange dilemma than for individualists . Thus , they should categorize themselves more as group members than individualists ( H1 ) . Based on the SIDE - model and combining it with the ﬁndings for social value orientation and social loaﬁng , we then expect that providing member portraits will lead to a higher number of contributions for in - dividualists , but to a lower number of contributions for prosocials , revealing an ambivalent effect of member portraits as a group - awareness tool ( H2 ) . Method Participants Participants were 84 students of the University of Tuebingen , Germany ( 45 women , mean age 23 . 8 years ) . They were randomly assigned to the two ex - perimental conditions . Design Half of the participants were provided with member portraits , and half worked without such portraits . Based on the social - orientation test , the participants were classiﬁed as having a prosocial orientation or an individualistic orientation . This led to a 2 (cid:1) 2 be - tween - factorial design . Material For measuring the social value orientation , we used the nine - item decomposed game measure of Van Lange et al . ( 1997 ) . With each item , a participant had to decide how many points s / he and another person would receive . The three options represented a pro - social ( large joint outcome , and no difference between one’s own and the other’s outcomes ) an individualistic ( largest outcome for oneself ) , or a competitive deci - sion ( large difference between one’s own and the other’s outcomes ) . An example of an item is given in the Appendix . Participants are classiﬁed as prosocial , individualistic or competitive , if at least six choices were consistent with one of these social value or - ientations . This test has generally revealed good in - ternal consistency and test – retest reliability . In this study , only people with individualistic or prosocial orientation were considered . A post - experimental questionnaire was developed . It contained two items about perceived anonymity , three items about the salient norm and ﬁve items about the salience of the group . Examples for these are also given in the Appendix . For all these items , ﬁve - point Likert scales from 1 to 7 were used . Member portraits in virtual groups 285 & Blackwell Publishing Ltd 2005 Journal of Computer Assisted Learning 21 , pp281 – 291 Procedure Upon arrival , each participant had to complete the social value orientation test . Then the experiment be - gan : each participant was told that s / he was a member of a group of six synchronous working team members , each working in a different room . This team had to calculate salaries of salesmen and each team member was paid according to the number of salaries s / he managed to calculate . Each salary was composed of two values : a base salary , which had to be calculated in the ﬁrst phase of a trial , and a total , which had to be calculated in the second phase . In the ﬁrst phase , a subject earned 0 . 25 Euro for each base salary s / he calculated . After each calculation , a person had to decide whether s / he wanted to contribute this result to the shared database . But the transfer to the database took time . And because the ﬁrst phase was time lim - ited ( 9 min ) , the more one contributed , the fewer base salaries one could calculate , and – consequently – the less one earned . In the second phase , each group member had to calculate the total salary of as many salespeople as possible . In this phase , a participant earned 0 . 30 Euro for every total salary s / he calculated . But for the cal - culation of a salesman’s total salary , the base salary was needed . If a participant did not calculate it in the ﬁrst phase , and if this value was not contributed to the database by at least one of the other group members , s / he had to calculate it in the second phase . By doing this one lost time . And the second phase was also time limited ( 12 min ) . Thus , during the second phase , the more base salaries the database contained , the more one could earn . Thus , being collaborative and con - tributing base salaries to the database in the ﬁrst phase could facilitate the performance of the other group members in the second phase . But according to her / his own payoff , a person had no beneﬁt from contributing a base salary to the database , because in the second phase a person had the base salaries s / he had calcu - lated in the ﬁrst phase anyway . After the experiment , participants were paid ac - cording to their individual performance . A person re - ceived money for each base salary and total salary s / he calculated . As the task was very easy and the amount of calculated salaries only depended on a person’s speed and her / his own and the group’s contribution behaviour , the payoff function could be mathemati - cally set up ( Cress et al . 2003 ) . Figure 2 shows the money a participant earned as a function of her / his contribution rate xi ( 0 : s / he did not contribute any - thing ; 1 : s / he contributed every base salary s / he cal - culated ) and the mean contribution rate xo of the other ﬁve group members . The ﬁgure illustrates the way in which the experi - mental situation represents a social dilemma : the subject’s payoff declines with growing xi , but si - multaneously grows with growing xo . This means that the more his / her group mates contribute , the more a subject earns . And the more s / he contributes , the less s / he earns . Thus , her / his individual payoff is highest with xo 5 1 and xi 5 0 . This is the situation in which all other group members contribute every base salary and the focused subject contributes nothing , and free - rides . For eliminating group effects the teams were faked . So , the participants believed they were part of a real team , but in fact each person worked independent of the others . ( The task is described in detail in Cress et al . ( 2005 ) ; the pay - off function is described in Cress et al . ( 2003 ) . ) In the experiment , half of the participants worked with a shared database providing member portraits . Figure 3 shows a screen of the version with portraits . ( There was a pool of 20 portraits , and for each parti - cipant ﬁve of these were randomly chosen as part of 25 20 15 10 5 00 0 . 25 0 . 5 0 . 75 10 0 . 25 0 . 5 0 . 75 1 xo xi p Fig . 2 A subject’s payoff ( in h ) as a function of the individual contribution rate xi and the mean contribution rate xo of the other ﬁve group members . 286 U . Cress & Blackwell Publishing Ltd 2005 Journal of Computer Assisted Learning 21 , pp281 – 291 the screen . ) The other half worked with a screen providing no portraits . During the entire use of the database , the portraits were visible . At the end of the experiment , the participants had to complete the post - experimental questionnaire . Then each participant was paid according to her / his in - dividual performance . Results The social value orientation test classiﬁed 40 partici - pants as prosocial , 23 participants as individuals and nine participants as competitive . The other 12 parti - cipants could not be classiﬁed as they had no stable tendency across the nine items of the Social value orientation test . In the experiment , only people with individualistic orientation and with prosocial orienta - tion were considered . This led to the following cell frequencies : 14 participants with individual orienta - tion worked with portraits , and nine worked without portraits . Out of the people with prosocial orientation , 20 worked with portraits and 19 without . The two questionnaire items concerning the per - ceived anonymity served as a treatment check for the effect of the portraits . The scale had a reliability of a 5 0 . 61 and revealed that both experimental groups signiﬁcantly differed in this scale . People working with portraits perceived signiﬁcantly lower anonymity than people working without portraits , M 5 5 . 74 ( SD 5 1 . 25 ) vs . M 5 6 . 45 ( SD 5 0 . 98 ) ; t ( 61 ) 5 2 . 56 ; P o 0 . 05 . The three questionnaire items concerning the salient norm served as a check if the social value orientation test – which is normally used to measure a personal trait , and not a state – is able to predict which norm is salient in the concrete dilemma situation . This scale had a reliability of a 5 0 . 81 and revealed that for prosocials the group norm was more salient than for Fig . 3 Screen for people working with a shared database , providing portraits of the other ﬁve group members . The left side ( table ) shows the working area . During the task people had to complete the table . The right side consists of the portraits of the other group members . In the condition without portraits , this right side of the screen is empty . Member portraits in virtual groups 287 & Blackwell Publishing Ltd 2005 Journal of Computer Assisted Learning 21 , pp281 – 291 individualists , M 5 4 . 78 , SD 5 1 . 41 vs . M 5 3 . 43 , SD 5 1 . 72 ; t ( 61 ) 5 3 . 35 ; P o 0 . 001 . For testing whether the social value orientation predicts identity salience ( H1 ) , the questionnaire scale measuring the group identity was used . The scale of ﬁve items had a reliability of a 5 0 . 78 . A two - sample t - test conﬁrmed the assumption and revealed that in - dividualists and prosocials signiﬁcantly differed in the degree to which they identiﬁed with the group . For prosocial people , group identity was stronger than for people with individual orientation , M 5 4 . 15 ( SD 5 1 . 40 ) vs . M 5 3 . 37 ( SD 5 1 . 06 ) ; t ( 61 ) 5 2 . 29 ; P o 0 . 05 . For testing H2 , a 2 (cid:1) 2 - factorial ANOVA with the factors social value orientation and portraits was cal - culated . The contribution rate served as the dependent variable , which shows the number of results one contributed distributed through the number of results one calculated . Thus , the contribution rate is in - dependent of the speed of a person . The analysis revealed a signiﬁcant main effect for social value orientation , F ( 1 , 58 ) 5 11 . 42 , P o 0 . 01 : individualists contributed less than prosocials . As ex - pected , there was no main effect of portraits , F ( 1 , 58 ) 5 0 . 25 , P 5 0 . 62 , NS , but there was a sig - niﬁcant interaction between social value orientation and anonymity , F ( 3 , 58 ) 5 4 . 28 , P o 0 . 05 . The mean contribution rates of the four conditions describing this interaction are presented in Fig 4 . The ﬁgure shows that for people with individualistic orientation , the portraits lead to higher contribution rates , whereas for people with prosocial orientation they lead to lower contribution rates . Post hoc comparisons showed that the difference between the experimental groups with and without portraits was signiﬁcant with P o . 05 for prosocials , but it did not reach signiﬁcance for the individualists , P 5 0 . 33 , NS . Discussion This study yielded three major ﬁndings . Firstly , the study conﬁrms that the social orientation test is able to predict which norm and which identity is salient in a dilemma situation : as expected , for prosocials the group norm is more salient than for individualists , and consequently prosocials perceived themselves more as group members than individualists did . This result conﬁrms our expectation on which the experiment was based : in the information - exchange dilemma , where the group norm of contributing and the individual norm of withholding are opposing , the social value orientation – originally conceptualized as a personal trait – inﬂuences how salient the group is for an in - dividual . So the social value orientation measure was validated in this study as one of identity salience in a concrete situation . From a theoretical perspective this relation between both concepts is important ; perhaps , the social orientation scale measures more a general norm that people apply than a personal trait . And the special context of the mixed - motive situation may activate this general norm . Secondly , the study conﬁrmed the main hypothesis resulting from the SIDE - model and its extension to social loaﬁng . Anonymity moderates the effect of social value orientation on co - operative behaviour . This signiﬁcant interaction between social value orientation and portraits shows that in the information - exchange dilemma , member portraits could have dif - ferent effects for people with individualistic and for people with prosocial orientation . Interestingly , the interaction and the post hoc comparisons show exactly the same pattern as the group - polarization study of Spears et al . ( 1990 ) : between the two groups of in - dividualists working with and without portraits , the post hoc test did not reach signiﬁcance , but between the two groups of prosocials working with and those working without portraits , it did . In line with this , our experiment also clearly revealed that for prosocials Fig . 4 Mean contribution rates for participants with different social value orientations working with a shared database pro - viding portraits of the others , or with a shared database not providing any information about others . 288 U . Cress & Blackwell Publishing Ltd 2005 Journal of Computer Assisted Learning 21 , pp281 – 291 portraits can undermine contribution . And this part of the interaction is quite counterintuitive . It provides an additional conﬁrmation of the validity of the SIDE - model showing that anonymity in computer - mediated communication can have positive effects . And further , the results conﬁrm that it is promising to extend the SIDE - model to social value orientation and social loaﬁng . This shows that SIDE can be applied not only to predict people’s attitudes or risky shift but also to predict people’s actual behaviour . Thirdly , regarding the provision of portraits in shared databases , the experiment and its result strengthen our argument that group - awareness tools in virtual en - vironments do not necessarily have the positive – and desired – effect . Social awareness tools can make the group more salient by reminding a group member of the existence of other group members . But they can also provide the information that the other group members have different needs and that they behave differently . This information , which can be implicitly transported by a group - awareness tool , could reduce one’s perception of the group as a monolithic block . And perceiving individual differences can reduce the motivation to act in favour of the group . In this context , the study of Lee ( 2004 ) is interest - ing . His experiment is also based on the SIDE - model , and it investigates different forms of member visua - lizations in computer - mediated communication . The participants of a group were either visualized through same - character cartoons or through different - character cartoons . Lee found that the same - character cartoons made the group more salient than the different - char - acter cartoons . The groups with the same - character cartoon depersonalized themselves more and showed more conformity to the group norm during the dis - cussion . So , even if both forms provided full ano - nymity , the same - character cartoons made the group more salient than the different - character cartoons . Lee and Nass ( 2002 ) further showed that even if people are fully aware that the characters are randomly assigned to the discussion partners , they associate the attributes of the characters with anonymous communication partners . What follows from these results is that in virtual groups , visualizations of the group members can in fact have a positive effect . They could enhance social awareness by making the existence of others more salient , but they should simultaneously stress the perception of homogeneity of the group members and lead a person to a stronger feeling of being a member of a group . This should be done by stressing the si - milarity of all group members , not their differences . Such distributed learning environments that try to create a shared social identity among group members are described by Lea et al . ( 2002 ) and Rogers and Lea ( 2005 ) . They show that virtual learning environments have a high potential in making the group salient . Acknowledgment This work was supported by a grant from the Deutsche Forschungsgemeinschaft ( DFG ) awarded to F . W . Hesse and U . Cress . The project is part of the DFG - Special Priority Program ‘Net - based Knowledge Communication in Groups’ . For planning the study , programming the software , conducting the experiment and discussing this paper I would like to thank Niklas David , Stefan Martin and Joachim Kimmerle . For many helpful comments , I thank two anon - ymous reviewers . Appendix 1 . Social Value Orientation Measure : Instruction and example item of the Decomposed Game Measure of Van Lange et al . ( 1997 ) . In this task we ask you to imagine that you have been randomly paired with another person , whom we will refer to simply as the ‘Other’ . This other person is someone you do not know and that you will not knowingly meet in the future . Both you and the ‘Other’ person will be making choices by circling ei - ther the letter A , B or C . Your own choices will pro - duce points for both yourself and the ‘Other’ person . Likewise , the other’s choice will produce points for him / her and for you . Every point has value : The more points you receive , the better for you , and the more points the ‘Other’ receives , the better for him . Circle A , B or C , depending on which column you prefer most : A B C You get 480 540 480 Other gets 80 280 480 Member portraits in virtual groups 289 & Blackwell Publishing Ltd 2005 Journal of Computer Assisted Learning 21 , pp281 – 291 2 . Perceived Anonymity : Items of the scale During the task I could get a personal impression about the other group members ( negative ) . During the task the other group members remained unknown for me . 3 . Salient norm : Examples items of the scale When I contribute something to the database , then I feel good because I do something for the commu - nity . It is important for me to do something for the community . 4 . Salience of the group : Example items Regarding the other group members I had the im - pression that we belong to a common group . During the experiment I experienced myself as a group member . References Beckmann T . J . ( 1999 ) The current state of knowledge management . In Knowledge Management Handbook ( ed L . Liebowitz ) , pp 1 . 1 – 1 . 22 . CRC Press , New York , NY . Bereiter C . & Scardamalia M . ( 2003 ) Learning to work creatively with knowledge . In Powerful Learning En - vironments : Unravelling Basic Components and Dimen - sions ( eds E . De Corte , L Verschaffel , N . Entwistle & J . van Merrie¨nboer ) , pp . 55 – 68 . Elsevier Science , Oxford , UK . Cabrera A . & Cabrera E . F . ( 2002 ) Knowledge - sharing di - lemmas . Organization Studies 23 , 687 – 710 . Carroll J . M . , Neale D . C . , Isenhour P . L . , Rossen M . B . & McCrickard D . S . ( 2003 ) Notiﬁcation and awareness : synchronizing task - oriented collaborative activity . Inter - national Journal of Human - Computer Studies 58 , 605 – 632 . Cress U . ( 2004 ) Strategic , metacognitive , and social aspects in resource - oriented knowledge exchange . In Proceed - ings of the 25th Annual Conference of the Cognitive Science Society ( eds R . Alterman & D . Kirsch ) . Lawr - ence Erlbaum , Mahwah , NJ . Cress U . , Barquero B . , Buder J . & Hesse F . W . ( 2005 ) Social dilemmas in knowledge communication via shared da - tabases . In Barriers and Biases in Computer - Mediated Knowledge Communication – And How They May Be Overcome ( eds R . Bromme , F . W . Hesse & H . Spada ) , pp . 143 – 167 . Springer , New York . Cress U . , Barquero B . , Buder J . , Schwan S . & Hesse F . W . ( 2003 ) Wissensaustausch mittels Datenbanken als O¨f - fentliches - Gut - Dilemma . Die Wirkung von Ru¨ckmel - dungen und Belohnungen . ( Knowledge communication via shared databases as public - goods dilemma . The effect of feedback and bonus - systems . ) . Zeitschrift fu¨r Psy - chologie 211 , 75 – 85 . Cress U . & Hesse F . W . ( 2004 ) Knowledge sharing in groups : experimental ﬁndings of how to overcome a so - cial dilemma . In Proceedings of the Sixth International Conference of the Learning Sciences ( eds Y . Kafai , W . Sandoval , N . Enydey , A . S . Nixon & F . Herrera ) , pp . 150 – 157 . Lawrence Erlbaum , Mahwah , NJ . Davenport T . H . & Prusak L . ( 1998 ) Working Knowledge . How Organizations Manage What They Know . Harvard Business School Press , Boston , MA . Dawes R . M . ( 1980 ) Social dilemmas . Annual Review of Psychology 31 , 169 – 193 . De Cremer D . & Van Vugt M . ( 1999 ) Social identiﬁcation effects in social dilemmas : a transformation of motives . European Journal of Social Psychology 29 , 871 – 893 . Festinger L . ( 1954 ) A theory of social comparison processes . Human Relations 7 , 117 – 140 . Fulk J . , Flanagin A . J . , Kalman M . E . , Monge P . R . & Ryan T . ( 1996 ) Connective and communal public goods in in - teractive communication systems . Communication The - ory 6 , 60 – 87 . Haslam S . A . ( 2004 ) Psychology in Organization : The Social Identity Approach . Sage , London . Hesse F . W . & Giovis C . ( 1997 ) Struktur und Verlauf aktiver und passiver Partizipation beim netzbasierten Lernen in virtuellen Seminaren . Unterrichtswissenschaft 25 , 34 – 55 . Hewitt J . & Scardamalia M . ( 1998 ) Design Principles for distributed knowledge building processes . Educational Psychology Review 10 , 75 – 96 . Kerr N . ( 1983 ) Motivation losses in small groups : a social dilemma analysis . Journal of Personality and Social Psychology 45 , 819 – 828 . Kiesler S . , Siegel J . & McGuire T . W . ( 1984 ) Social psy - chological aspects of computer - mediated communica - tion . American Psychologist 39 , 1123 – 1134 . Kuhlman D . M . , Camac C . & Cunha D . A . ( 1986 ) Individual differences in social orientation . Experimental Social Dilemmas ( eds H . Wilke , D . Messick & C . Rutte ) , pp . 151 – 176 . Verlag Peter Lang , New York . Lea M . , Rogers P . & Postmes T . ( 2002 ) SIDE - VIEW : evaluation of a system to develop team players and im - prove productivity in Internet collaborative learning groups . British Journal of Educational Technology 33 , 53 – 63 . Lea M . , Spears R . & de Groot D . ( 2001 ) Knowing me , knowing you : anonymity effects on social identity pro - cesses within groups . Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin 27 , 526 – 537 . 290 U . Cress & Blackwell Publishing Ltd 2005 Journal of Computer Assisted Learning 21 , pp281 – 291 Lee E . - J . ( 2004 ) Effects of visual representation on social inﬂuence in computer - mediated communication . Ex - perimental test of the social identity model of deindivi - duation effects . Human Communication Research 30 , 234 – 259 . Lee E . - J . & Nass C . ( 2002 ) Experimental tests of normative group inﬂuence and representation effects in computer - mediated communication : when interacting via compu - ters differs from interacting with computers . Human Communication Research 28 , 349 – 381 . Markus M . L . & Connolly T . ( 1990 ) Why CSCW applica - tions fail : problems in the adoption of interdependent work tools . In CSCW´90 . Proceedings of the Conference on Computer Supported Cooperative Work . ACM , Los Angeles , CA . McClintock C . G . ( 1978 ) Social values : their deﬁnition , measurement , and development . Journal of Research and Development in Education 12 , 121 – 137 . Nonaka I . ( 1994 ) A dynamic theory of organizational knowledge creation . Organization Science 5 , 14 – 37 . Nonaka I . & Takeuchi H . ( 1995 ) The Knowledge - Creating Company . Oxford University Press , New York , NY . Postmes T . , Spears R . , Lea M . & Reicher S . ( 2000 ) SIDE Issues Centre Stage : Recent Developments In Studies Of De - Individuation in Groups . Royal Netherlands Acad - emy of Arts and Sciences , Amsterdam . Rafaeli S . & LaRose R . J . ( 1993 ) Electronic bulletin boards and ‘‘public goods’’ explanations of collaborative mass media . Communication Research 20 , 277 – 297 . Reicher S . D . , Spears R . A . & Postmes T . ( 1995 ) A social identity model of deindividuation phenomena . In European Review of Social Psychology , Vol . 6 , eds W . Stroebe & M . Hewstone ) , pp . 161 – 197 . Wiley , Chichester . Reid F . J . M . , Malinek V . , Stott C . J . T . & Evans J . B . T . ( 1996 ) The messaging threshold in computer - mediated com - munication . Ergonomics 39 , 1017 – 1037 . Rogers P . & Lea M . ( 2005 ) Social presence in distributed group environments : the role of social identity . Beha - viour & Information Technology 24 , 151 – 158 . Shum S . B . ( 1998 ) Negotiating the construction of organi - sational memories . In Information Technology for Knowledge Management ( eds U . M . Borghoff & R . Par - eschi ) , pp . 55 – 78 . Springer , Berlin . Spears R . , Lea M . & Lee S . ( 1990 ) De - individuation and group polarization in computer - mediated communica - tion . British Journal of Social Psychology 29 , 121 – 134 . Spears R . , Lea M . & Postmes T . ( 2000 ) One side : purview , problems and prospects . In SIDE Issues Centre Stage : Recent Developments in Studies of De - Individuation in Groups ( eds T . Postmes , R . Spears , M . Lea & S . Reicher ) , pp . 1 – 16 . Royal Netherlands Academy of Arts and Sciences , Amsterdam . Thorn B . K . & Connolly T . ( 1987 ) Discretionary data bases : a theory and some experimental ﬁndings . Communica - tion Research 14 , 512 – 528 . Turner J . C . , Hogg M . A . , Oakes P . J . , Reicher S . D . & We - therell M . S . ( 1987 ) Rediscovering the Social Group : A Self - Categorization Theory . Blackwell , Oxford , England . Van Lange P . V . M . , Otten W . , De Bruin E . M . N . & Joireman J . A . ( 1997 ) Development of prosocial , individualistic , and competitive orientations : theory and preliminary evidence . Journal of Personality and Social Psychology 73 , 733 – 746 . Van Lange P . V . M . & Semin - Goossens A . ( 1998 ) The boundaries of reciprocal cooperation . European Journal of Social Psychology 28 , 847 – 855 . Member portraits in virtual groups 291 & Blackwell Publishing Ltd 2005 Journal of Computer Assisted Learning 21 , pp281 – 291