CHAPTER 18 Fluorescence Correlation Methods for Imaging Cellular Behavior of Sphingolipid - Interacting Probes Rachel Kraut * , Nirmalya Bag y and Thorsten Wohland y * School of Biological Sciences , Nanyang Technological University , Singapore y Department of Chemistry , National University of Singapore , Singapore Abstract I . Introduction II . Rationale A . Using Peptides to Look at Sphingolipid Behavior B . How is Diffusion Behavior Determined ? Comparison of Imaging Methods III . Methods A . Short Sphingolipid binding domain ( SBD ) Probes B . SBD Probe From A b C . Charge Variation in the Probe D . Sphingolipid Analogs E . Perturbations of Lipid Order and Cytoskeleton as a Means to Test Domain Localization F . Methods for Examining Probe Behavior G . ITIR - FCS Analysis of Probe Behavior Over Large Areas of the Cell Surface H . FCS Diffusion Laws IV . Materials A . Fluorophores - General Features B . Lipid Analogs C . Peptides D . TIRF Hardware and ITIR - FCS Analysis Software E . Experimental Considerations for Diffusion Analysis V . Discussion A . Probing Sphingolipid Organization in Membranes B . How SBD Domains Might Bind METHODS IN CELL BIOLOGY , VOL 108 Copyright 2012 , Elsevier Inc . All rights reserved . 395 0091 - 679X / 10 $ 35 . 00 DOI 10 . 1016 / B978 - 0 - 12 - 386487 - 1 . 00018 - 3 VI . Summary and Outlook A . How Far the Study of Sphingolipid Organization in Membranes has Come AcknowledgementsReferences Abstract For cell biologists interested in the properties of cell membranes , their composi - tion , and dynamics , the realization that sphingolipids and cholesterol have the capacity to self - organize into ordered domains has given rise to a need to visualize these lipids in actual living cell membranes . In order to find out how various classes of lipids distribute in the membrane and what their behaviors are , it is extremely useful to apply fluorescent probes that either interact with these lipids , or that themselves behave like naturally occurring lipids . At the same time , imaging modal - ities to observe their behaviors require the appropriate spatial and temporal resolu - tion , on the milli - or microsecond timescale . Knowledge of membrane organization and how it changes during processes like cell signaling and invasion by pathogens will undoubtedly be relevant to our understanding of the action of infectious dis - eases , bacterial toxins , and even disease pathologies like prion and Alzheimer ’ s disease , where glycosphingolipids ( GSL ) and sphingolipid - rich domains act as membrane receptors or docking sites . In such cases , membrane composition and dynamics will clearly play a role in infectivity . The present challenge is in coming up with high - resolution and non - invasive approaches to observing these dynamic and structural features of sphingolipid - containing membrane domains . This chapter will discuss several variants and applications of fluorescence correlation spectroscopy as well as probes that can be used to study sphingolipid dynamics . I . Introduction Through the application of novel lipid - interacting probes and fluorescence spec - troscopic methods , some of which we discuss in this chapter , membrane biologists have discovered that nano - scaled sphingolipid - rich domains exhibit biophysical properties distinct from the surrounding disordered regions . For various cell types that have been observed , the plasma membrane appears to be composed of a mosaic of fluid , disordered regions ( the liquid disordered or l d phase ) , interspersed with more ordered , less fluid domains ( the liquid ordered or l o phase ) . Statistically , the frequency of occurrence of the ordered regions seems to be on the order of 25 % at any given time , although it is generally agreed that the domains are extremely short - lived and dynamic , probably existing only for milliseconds at a time , when a cell is in a resting state ( Lingwood et al . , 2009 ) . The behavior of sphingolipid - rich regions in natural cell membranes has been likened to mixtures of phase - separating lipids that are at a critical point , where domain formation can be triggered by various perturbations such as ligand binding 396 Rachel Kraut et al . to a receptor , pathogen invasion , or cytoskeletal organization ( Feigenson , 2009 ; Veatch et al . , 2007 ; Zhang et al . , 2009 ) . The exact composition of domains and the extent of heterogeneity that might exist in the membrane remain unknown , mainly due to the dearth of easily traceable probes that interact with sphingolipid rich membrane domains , or sphingolipid analogs that behave naturally . However , it is known that sphingolipids and cholesterol are required for detectable ordered domains to form . In order to observe the behavior of sphingolipids in the membrane and the domains they form , one needs to use visible probes that mimic the behavior of sphingolipids themselves , or that bind to them and follow their movements . For this purpose , fluorescently tagged versions of gangliosides ( sialylated glycosphin - golipids ) and sphingomyelin ( a sphingolipid with a phosphocholine headgroup ) are available , and a number of groups have described variants of such lipid analogs coupled to fluorescent tags at different positions either at the headgroup or on the acyl tail ( see Table I ) ( Eggeling et al . , 2008 ) . As a complement to studying the behavior of sphingolipids themselves via fluo - rescently tagged analogs , sphingolipid - interacting peptides and lipid - linked proteins can be observed at the membrane , and their dynamics interpreted as a proxy for the behavior of the actual lipids in the membrane . This approach is schematically depicted in Fig . 1 , and the structures of the represented lipids are shown in Fig . 2 . In this chapter , we discuss several types of fluorescent sphingolipid and non - sphin - golipid analogs and peptide probes that we and others have used to analyze mem - brane dynamics and heterogeneity . Since the dimensions of membrane domains is thought to be in the nanometer range , which roughly corresponds to anywhere from a few tens of lipid molecules to hundreds of them , they cannot be visualized by conventional microscopy techniques due to the diffraction limit . The very dynamic nature of these domains with characteristic times possibly as fast as milliseconds renders also many super - resolution techniques inca - pable of observing the domains and their dynamics . Therefore , new methods are needed which can observe cell membranes with high spatio - temporal resolution . Fluorescence Correlation Spectroscopy , or FCS , is one of the favored methods of extracting information about the average diffusion behavior of mobile fluorescent molecules , and can also be used to measure the concentration of those molecules . The conventional method of FCS , performed in a confocal microscope , does not scan the confocal light beam , but keeps it at a stationary spot on the region to be measured ( in this case the cell membrane ) , and records an intensity trace of the fluorescence emitted as individual probe molecules pass through ( depicted in Fig . 3 ) . A main advantage of FCS in general is that it is capable of generating detailed , quantitative information about molecular processes by averaging over the behavior of thousands of molecules in a short space of time ( Haustein and Schwille , 2007 ; Kim et al . , 2007 ) . In this chapter , we describe a method that uses FCS adaptations of conventional confocal and total internal reflection fluorescence ( TIRF ) microscopes to analyze the behavior of sphingolipid - tracing probes in terms of their simple diffusion char - acteristics . FCS when applied in combination with TIRF , which we call Imaging TIR - FCS ( ITIR - FCS ) ( Fig . 3 ) , is particularly useful for probing the anisotropy in 18 . Fluorescence Correlation Methods for Imaging Cellular Behavior of Sphingolipid - Interacting Probes 397 Table I Sphingolipid and non - sphingolipid fluorescent analogs for labeling ordered and disordered domains in the membranes of live cells ; fluorescently labeled peptide probes that can be used for detecting sphingolipid domains of different composition , for example , mixed SM / ganglioside ( SBD ) , SM alone ( lysenin - GFP ) , or GM1 ( CtxB - Alexa ) . Locations of the fluorophore on the headgroup , acyl chain , or backbone of the lipid are shown in the schematic figures , color coded as in Fig . 2 . Representative citations documenting the diffusion and / or phase behavior of the probes are given . Probe name molecule / source D / phase intended target location of label reference source LIPIDS Atto647N - PE n - ( Atto647N ) - 1 , 2 - dipalmitoyl - sn - glycero - 3 phosphoethanolamine free DPPE Manzo , van Zanten et al , 2011 ; Eggeling et al , 2008 Atto - Tec BODIPY - FL - DHPE ( aka DPPE ) n - ( BODIPY - FL - 3 - propionyl ) - 1 , 2 - dihexadecanoyl - sn - glycero - 3 - phosphoethanolamine disordered DPPE Burns et al , 2005 Invitrogen BODIPY 530 / 550 - HPC 2 - ( BODIPY ) - C5 / 12 - 1 - hexadecanoyl - sn - glycero - 3 - phosphocholine disordered DPPC Burns et al , 2005 Invitrogen BODIPY - FL - SM n - ( BODIPY - FL ) - C5 / C12 - sphingosyl - phosphocholine free SM Hebbar et al , 2008 ; Eggeling et al , 2008 Invitrogen Atto647N - SM n - ( Atto647N ) - sphingosyl - phosphocholine confined , but disordered ( see Honigmann et al , 2010 ) SM Eggeling et al , 2008 ; Honigmann et al , 2010 Atto - Tec DiI - C18 1 , 1 0 - dioctadecyl - 3 , 3 , 3 0 , 3 0 - tetramethylindocarbocyanine perchlorate free ( on neuroblastoma plasma membrane ) depends on lipid composition Hebbar et al , 2008 ; Sankaran et al , 2009 Invitrogen BODIPY - C5 - cer n - ( BODIPY - FL or TR ) - C5 - ceramide ? ceramide Pagano & Chen , 1998 Invitrogen BODIPY - Gal - cer n - ( BODIPY - FL ) - C12 - sphingosyl 1 - b - D - galactopyranoside ? GSL Simons , Kraemer et al , 2002 Invitrogen ( Continued ) 398 R a c h e l K r a u t e t a l . Table I ( Continued ) Probe name molecule / source D / phase intended target location of label reference source BODIPY - C5 - lac - cer n - ( BODIPY - FL ) - C5 - sphingosyl 1 - b - D - lactoside confined ? GSL Pagano & Chen , 1998 ; Homchaudhuri , Wohland & Kraut , unpublished Invitrogen BODIPY - GM1 n - ( BODIPY ) - C5 ganglioside GM1 or head - GM1 disordered GM1 Burns et al , 2005 ; Maruschak et al , 2007 ; Mikhalyov et al , 2009 Invitrogen ; L . B . - A . Johansson lab Atto647N - GM1 n - ( Atto647N ) - C4 ganglioside GM1 , head - GM1 , or additional acyl chain confined GM1 Eggeling et al , 2008 ; Polyakova et al , 2009 Atto - Tec ; S . W . Hell lab PEPTIDES SBD Amyloid peptide A b 1 - 25 aa confined GD1a , GT1b , GM1 , SM - ( AEEAc ) 2 - DAEFRHDSGY EVHHQELVFFAEDVG Hebbar et al , 2008 ; Steinert et al , 2009 ; Zhang et al , 2009 ; Sankaran et al , 2009 Kraut lab lysenin Earthworm toxin ordered ? SM 297aa full length GFP fusion Ishitsuka & Kobayashi , 2004 Peptide Institute Japan CtxB - Alexa Cholera toxin B subunit confined GM1 full length B subunit , Alexa tagged Bacia et al , 2004 ; Hebbar et al , 2008 Invitrogen * BODIPY = 4 , 4 - difluoro - 5 , 7 - dimethyl - 4 - bora - 3a , 4a - diaza - s - indacene * * AEEAc = Amino - ethoxy - ethoxy - acetyl 18 . F l uo r e s c e n c e C o rr e l a t i on M e t h od s f o r I m a g i n g C e ll u l a r B e h a v i o r o f S p h i n g o l i p i d - I n t e r a c t i n g P r ob e s 39 9 [ ( Fig . _ 1 ) TD $ FIG ] Fig . 1 Tracing sphingolipid behavior in the membrane with labeled sphingolipid - interacting peptides . An idealized outer plasma membrane leaflet containing a mixture of saturated straight - chain sphingoli - pids ( orange backbones ) , including sphingomyelin ( pink headgroup ) , gangliosides with carbohydrate headgroups ( colored shapes ) , cholesterol ( orange molecules ) , and unsaturated glycerophospholipids ( gray backbones ) . Particular glycosphingolipids were chosen to represent those that bind to the shown sphingolipid - tracing peptides SBD and CtxB . SBD requires SM , cholesterol , and ganglioside to bind effectively to the membrane , while CtxB binds as a pentamer to five molecules of GM1 ganglioside . Key to colored shapes is shown in Fig . 2 . SBD and CtxB were modified from Fantini et al . , 2002 , Expert Reviews in Molecular Medicine , and Merritt et al , Protein Science , 1994 , Cambridge University Press . ( See color plate . ) [ ( Fig . _ 2 ) TD $ FIG ] Fig . 2 Structures of a typical outer - leaflet phospholipid ( phosphatidylcholine ; POPC ) and represen - tative sphingolipids that are depicted graphically in the outer leaflet shown in Fig . 1 . Headgroups are color - coded as follows : phosphocholine : gray and pink balls ; galactose : aqua balls ; glucose : orange diamonds ; N - acetyl - galactosamine - green squares ; sialic acid - purple triangles . Saturated straight acyl chains of the sphingolipids are colored orange ; saturated and unsaturated acyl chains of the glyceropho - spholipid POPC are gray . ( See color plate . ) 400 Rachel Kraut et al . the movement of sphingolipid - tracing probes in the membrane , using a novel parameter called the D CCF ( Sankaran et al . , 2009 ) . The D CCF measurement ( depicted in Fig . 5 ) , referring to the ‘‘difference in cross correlation functions , ’’ is especially suited to distinguishing between random diffusion processes versus transport phenomena , because these tend to show differences in directionality over large areas . It gives a ‘‘gestalt’’ measure of the overall state of the membrane under a given condition , and thus can reveal features of membrane organization that are invisible to other methods that rely on single - point measurements , like confocal FCS or single particle tracking ( SPT ) . D CCF is related to another method for detecting spatial heterogeneities , called the spatial pair - correlation function . Devised by Digman and Gratton ( 2009 ) , this takes advantage of the observation that the maximum correlation between a probe observed at any two points in the membrane is proportional to the average transit time of that probe between the two points . Both of these methods are ideal for detecting diffusion barriers which cannot be seen by conventional microscopy . II . Rationale A goal in studying the biology and biophysics of sphingolipids is to be able to trace their behaviors in the cell membrane , and characterize what is thought to be a dynamic heterogeneity in the distribution and the composition of [ ( Fig . _ 3 ) TD $ FIG ] Fig . 3 Set ups of different FCS modalities . Confocal FCS ( left ) and Imaging Total Internal Reflection FCS ( ITIR - FCS ) ( right ) . In confocal mode , a pinhole mediated focal volume is created and the emitted light is detected using an avalanche photodiode , a point detector . However , in TIR mode an evanescent field creates a 2D surface - bound observationvolume that is imaged by EMCCD or sCMOS camera . The pixels of the CCD or sCOMS chips can be regarded as confocal volumes and thus the image is being multiplexed . ( For color version of this figure , the reader is referred to the web version of this book . ) 18 . Fluorescence Correlation Methods for Imaging Cellular Behavior of Sphingolipid - Interacting Probes 401 sphingolipid - containing domains . To achieve that goal , sphingolipid or micro - domain - binding sequences from proteins that are known to interact with certain sphingolipids have been used as probes for labeling sphingolipid rich domains , or particular species of sphingolipid in the membrane ( Bakrac et al . , 2010 ; Ishitsuka and Kobayashi , 2004 ; Lencer and Saslowsky , 2005 ; Steinert et al . , 2008 ) . This approach works because sphingolipids occupy the outer leaflet of the plasma membrane , and therefore are accessible to exogenously added probes ( a schematic drawing of the outer leaflet with representative sphingolipids and peptide probes is presented in Fig . 1 ) . Using synthesized peptides coupled with a small molecule fluorophore is a some - what more expensive but much more direct way of labeling these domains than using transgenically expressed fluorescent protein fusions , or heterologously expressed GFP fusions . Transgenically produced fluorescent protein fusions suffer from the inherent problem that they must first be made in the biosynthetic pathway and then extruded across the membrane ; GFP is a relatively large polypeptide ( 238 aa ) that may also interfere with the interaction of the probe with the membrane . Sphingolipid analogs have been used extensively , mainly as tracers of sphingoli - pid trafficking within cells ( Pagano , 2003 ) . Until recently , this has been limited to N - linked acyl chain substituted BODIPY - or NBD - linked sphingomyelin , ceramide and mono - or di - glycosylated ceramides like lactosylceramide ( Fig . 2 , Table I ) . The more complex gangliosides are very expensive and difficult to synthesize , limiting the available sphingolipid analog probes to the simpler species GM1 , which is comparatively cheap and abundant . Acyl - chain substituted sphingolipid probes are commercially available ( Invitrogen ) , but are often of limited usefulness for membrane dynamics studies because of their non - physiological behavior—for example , the BODIPY moiety in some cases flips up inside the membrane toward the polar headgroups of the lipids , giving it obviously very different biophysical properties from the endogenous lipids ( Kaiser and London , 1998 ; Wang and Silvius , 2003 ) . Notably , this appears not to be the case with acyl chain substitutions of the large and relatively lipophilic dye Atto647N ( see Eggeling et al . , 2008 ) . That the probe itself may interfere with the physiological process or phenom - enon to be studied is a potential hazard with all probes . This is particularly problematic with sphingolipid analogs that have substitutions of the fluorophore at the acyl chain , because these generally ( with few exceptions ( Eggeling et al . , 2008 ; Polyakova et al . , 2009 ) ) don ’ t behave in membranes like natural lipids . Head labeled or backbone - labeled probes have been used with more success ( Burns et al . , 2005 ; Eggeling et al . , 2008 ; Schwarzmann et al . , 2005 ) ( Table I ) , but are not commercially available and require expertise in organic chemistry to synthesize . Lipid anchored probes like glycosyl - phosphatidylinositol ( GPI ) - linked proteins display partially ordered domain behavior , but their segregation is variable , and depending on the context seems to not always correspond to the behavior of sphin - golipid containing liquid ordered domains ( Glebov and Nichols , 2004 ; Kenworthy et al . , 2004 ; Sharma et al . , 2004 ) . Rather , GPI - linked probes ’ behavior may depend more on the size of the headgroup , rather than the GPI - linkage ( Bhagatji et al . , 402 Rachel Kraut et al . 2009 ) . So what are the alternatives , if we wish to trace the behaviors of endogenous sphingolipids ? A . Using Peptides to Look at Sphingolipid Behavior In order to characterize the diffusion behaviors of sphingolipids – or any mem - brane lipid for that matter – and how they interact with each other , ideally one would like to be able to observe individual molecules of a probe , or multiple probes , each binding to or mimicking a particular membrane component . At present , the main obstacle to doing this is that there are an extremely limited number of probes targeting different membrane lipids , including many different varieties of sphingo - lipid and glycolipid . Most probes currently being measured , as mentioned above , are either GPI - linked or transmembrane proteins that have been characterized as being associated with detergent - resistant membrane fractions of cells , along with the one commonly available glycolipid interacting probe , the Cholera Toxin B subunit ( CtxB ) , coupled with an Alexa dye ( Fig . 1 and Table I ; see ( Lagerholm et al . , 2005 ; Simons and Gerl , 2010 ) ) . A different approach from using lipid analogs , lipid - linked proteins , or intact raft - associated proteins to analyze lipid behavior in the membrane , is to use short lipid binding peptides . Here , probes consisting of short glycolipid or sphingolipid - inter - acting peptides , like CtxB , which binds very tightly and specifically to ganglioside clusters as a pentamer , are labeled with a fluorophore and applied exogenously to cells . The probes bind to sphingolipid - containing domains in the outer leaflet of the plasma membrane , and their behavior can be followed . Other such probes , for example lysenin and perfringolysin , Shiga Toxin ( StxB ) and others , have also been developed as fluorescent protein fusions to label specific subtypes or components of membrane domains ( sphingomyelin , cholesterol , and glycolipid Gb3 respectively ) ( Waheed et al . , 2001 ; Ishitsuka and Kobayashi , 2004 ; Romer et al . , 2007 ) . It is important to keep in mind , and often neglected in the literature documenting micro - domain behavior , that peptide probes may affect membrane organization upon binding , as has been shown to occur when CtxB , Shiga Toxin , and SV40 virus bind to the membrane . It has been proposed that these toxins and viruses , because they bind GM1 as pentamers , lead to coalescence and capping of GM1 - containing domains , and strong curvature of the membrane , creating membrane - deformation and tubulating effects ( Ewers et al . , 2009 ; Johannes and Mayor , 2010 ; Lingwood et al . , 2008 ; van Zanten et al . , 2010 ) . Analysis of the diffusion behavior of a probe is a means to deduce the location of that probe in either a liquid ordered or disordered state , or some other state ( e . g . , a gel state ) , and therefore to give information about the distribution in the membrane of the lipids to which the probe is binding . The underlying assumption is that because sphingolipid containing domains both in artificial membranes and in real cell membranes are known to exist in a more ordered state , whereas phospholipids exist in a less ordered state in the membrane , this will be detectable as a difference in both the order of the membrane itself , and in the fluidity of molecules that adhere to the 18 . Fluorescence Correlation Methods for Imaging Cellular Behavior of Sphingolipid - Interacting Probes 403 membrane in some manner . The state of disorder in the membrane is often measured by changes in fluorescence anisotropy when labeled molecules that are close together in domains transfer their excited state energies and depolarize the signal ( a method which will not be discussed here , but see ( Goswami et al . , 2008 ; Reyes Mateo et al . , 1993 ) ) . Lipid order is also influenced by the presence of proteins either embedded in the membrane , or associated with the membrane , such as cytoskeletal elements ( Engelman , 2005 ; Lenne et al . , 2006 ; Chichili and Rodgers , 2007 ) . Protein barriers in the membrane effectively reduce the degrees of freedom of the lipids and reduce diffusion , as well as possibly engaging in long - range protein – protein interactions that will affect the dynamics of the lipids around them ( Daumas et al . , 2003 ; Destainville and Dumas , 2008 ) . Actin polymerization has even been shown to induce phase sepa - ration in vesicles ( Liu and Fletcher , 2006 ) . Another nice example of membrane order being influenced by proteins is the mechanism by which Synaptotagmin may help to trigger vesicle fusion by de - mixing phosphatidyl - serine and induce buckling of the membrane ( Lai et al . , 2011 ) . The degree of fluidity can also be effectively measured by the diffusion coeffi - cient , since the lipids contained in less fluid , more ordered membranes diffuse at a slower rate . In fact , this scenario appears also to be true in cell membranes , as the diffusion rate of ordered - domain associated molecules has been shown by us and a number of other groups to be strongly influenced by membrane content of lipids that are thought to belong to ordered domains ( Eggeling et al . , 2008 ; Hebbar et al . , 2008 ; Lasserre et al . , 2008 ; Lenne et al . , 2006 ; Sankaran et al . , 2009 ) . In this chapter , we describe one example of relatively short ( < 50 aa ) peptide probes that are designed to interact with certain sphingolipid or glycolipid species , and that are derived from various toxins and pathogens ( Fantini et al . , 2006 ; Mahfoud et al . , 2002 ) . We have used the SBD probe , for Sphingolipid Binding Domain ( SBD ) , a peptide of 25 aa , which interacts with a subset of gangliosides ( see Figs . 1 and 2 ) , as a tracer of sphingolipid containing domains . B . How is Diffusion Behavior Determined ? Comparison of Imaging Methods A number of different spectroscopic , or fluorescence imaging and tracking meth - ods can be used to measure diffusion rates . Two of the most popular are single fluorescent molecule tracking ( or SPT ) and confocal FCS ( Kusumi et al . , 2010 ) , and variants thereof , which we will discuss below . 1 . FCS - based Methods While probes are still sparse , methodologies of tracking the few probes that are available are relatively numerous and are quickly developing . Many of these involve spectroscopic approaches to measuring diffusion rates , such as FCS , which most often uses conventional confocal microscopy , to generate an illuminated area that generally stays fixed at the membrane , while individual molecules of probe move 404 Rachel Kraut et al . through it . Since the detection of single molecules demands either very low con - centrations or a small observation volume , but at the same time many biological processes can be observed only above a certain concentration threshold , FCS records typically in a small femtoliter sized observation volume ( s ) at intermediate nanomo - lar to micromolar concentrations ( Fig . 3 ) . For describing the behavior of fluorescent molecules diffusing on the membrane at the surface of a cell , FCS is an ideal method ( see review by ( Kim et al . , 2007 ; Machan and Hof , 2010 ) ) . It is capable of identifying diffusion characteristics for many thousands of individual molecules in a very short time , and therefore has the advantage of good statistics . However , measurements of immobile or very slowly diffusing particles are difficult in this FCS mode . Therefore , Weissman and Petersen introduced scanning FCS ( ( Petersen , 1986 ; Petersen et al . , 1986 ; Weissman et al . , 1976 ) see also ( Petrasek and Schwille , 2008 ) and ( Shi and Wohland , 2010 ) and references therein ) . Scanning FCS has multiple advantages . Characteristics of immobile or slow moving particles can now be determined along the scanning path since the transition time of the particle is determined by the scanning speed . Photobleaching is reduced since the scanning process distributes excitation energies along the scanning trajectory . Flow velocities can be measured and one can correct for sample movement by extracting the appropriate points in which the laser resided on the sample from the recorded scans . Recently , stimulated emission - depletion ( STED ) microscopy , or TIRF micros - copy have also been adapted to great effect for obtaining FCS measurements on very small , sub - resolution - size confocal areas ( in STED ) , or over many pixels on a high - sensitivity CCD chip in TIRF . While confocal and STED both use a confocal volume , which ranges from (cid:2) 30 to 500 nm , ITIR - FCS treats each pixel of the CCD camera as an individual ‘‘observational volume’’ ( depicted schematically in Figs . 3 and 4 ) . The size of this observation volume is determined by the convolution of the point spread function of the microscope and the pixel size and is similar in lateral size to a confocal volume but is limited in the axial direction by the penetration of the evanescent wave into the sample ( (cid:2) 100 nm ) ( Fig . 3 ) . The range of time resolution for these methods is nanoseconds for FCS to fractions of a millisecond for TIRF - FCS . Since transit times through the confocal volume are usually in the range of milliseconds for membrane bound molecules ( with a diffusion rate of (cid:2) 0 . 1 – 5 m m 2 / s ) , this is generally sufficient to accurately describe membrane diffusion behavior . 2 . FCS versus SPT The detailed understanding of molecular processes and organization requires the investigation of single molecules in space and time . The statistics needed to draw conclusions from the single molecule data mandates the measurements of hundreds of single molecule events with the concomitant need for large scale data processing . This is , for instance , performed in SPT and single molecule spectroscopy ( SMS ) where a multiplicity of single molecule tracks or traces are evaluated individually to 18 . Fluorescence Correlation Methods for Imaging Cellular Behavior of Sphingolipid - Interacting Probes 405 extract parameters which then can be statistically analyzed . Practitioners of single particle techniques argue that SPT , in contrast to spectroscopic techniques , gives possibly more accurate , and certainly more specific knowledge about the behavior of single molecules because they are observed individually over long periods of time , even when they are not moving ( Kusumi et al . , 2010 ) . However , due to the laborious measurement process , only a limited number of molecules can be analyzed , and the picture might therefore be biased or incomplete . Clearly , SPT would require unre - alistic time and effort to yield the same quantity of data ‘‘by hand’’ as FCS . FCS uses fast , single molecule sensitive detection to record fluorescence fluctuations in time over many molecules and uses Fourier transforms or correlation functions to auto - matically analyze the data in a statistical manner . In this way , FCS circumvents the time consuming analysis of individual traces and provides better statistics , however at the cost of providing only ensemble data . 3 . ITIR - FCS and D CCF : Advantages of ITIR - FCS Conventional FCS has the drawback that it measures instantaneous diffusion behavior at individual points on the membrane . Clearly , this method by itself will have difficulty describing a membrane that is a dynamic and fluid structure consist - ing of many interacting parts . To study membrane dynamics , what is needed is a method that is capable of observing an entire region of the membrane simulta - neously , and detecting features of its interconnectedness . TIRF microscopy is ideally suited to do this , since it sees only the surface of the cell ( the membrane ) , images of which are acquired essentially simultaneously over the entire CCD chip , with region sizes up to hundreds of square microns , depending on the region of interest and the desired time resolution . By the same token , a CCD camera can capture hundreds of ‘‘snapshots’’ of diffusion rates over entire regions of the cell membrane simulta - neously ( see Figs . 3 and 4 ) ( Kannan et al . , 2006 , 2007 ) . Information can be obtained in this way about fluorescently labeled sphingolipid - interacting peptides , or fluo - rescent sphingolipid analogs as markers of sphingolipid containing domains , or analogs of other lipid markers which may not be coincident with the sphingolipid containing domains ( Sankaran et al . , 2009 ) . There are principally two different correlations on TIRF data that can be calcu - lated individually or in combination . On the one side are temporal correlations collected from a single spot as done in the confocal modality of FCS . Information about molecular processes that cause temporal fluorescence fluctuations can be extracted from the fluorescence correlation functions . For instance , FCS will provide information on rotational and translational diffusion coefficients , directed transla - tional motion ( flow ) , concentrations , and photophysical properties of molecules , all of which can be used to derive secondary properties of the sample including chem - ical reactions , aggregation , binding , changes in size and / or viscosity etc . ( see Fig . 4 ) . On the other hand , spatial autocorrelation functions can also be calculated from images in so called image correlation spectroscopy ( ICS ) to provide information about directed movement of particles and their clustering behavior . ICS is a powerful 406 Rachel Kraut et al . tool to understand cell membrane dynamics , because the organization of the mem - brane represents the coordinated activity of multiple regions and domains , not just individual points . ICS has been extended to the temporal domain by collecting images with better time resolution and then observing the temporal development of ICS in temporal ICS ( TICS ) . The final generalization to spatio - temporal correla - tions then came in the form of spatio - temporal ICS ( STICS , ( Hebert et al . , 2005 ) ) . [ ( Fig . _ 4 ) TD $ FIG ] Fig . 4 Information that can be extracted from the characteristics of correlations functions and multiplexed images . ( A ) Autocorrelation curve as a function of particle number . The arrow shows the direction of increasing particle number ( N ) . The amplitude of the autocorrelation function is inversely proportional to particle number . ( B ) Autocorrelation curve as a function of diffusion time . The arrow shows the direction of increasing diffusion time ( t D ) . t D is defined as the time point of the full - width at half - max of the autocorrelation curve . ( C ) Heat - map image of particle numbers ( N ) measured at each pixel in the image of a whole cell . The color bar corresponds to particle numbers ( N ) . ( D ) Heat - map image of diffusion times ( t D ) measured at each pixel of the same cell . The color bar corresponds to diffusion times ( t D ) . ( See color plate . ) 18 . Fluorescence Correlation Methods for Imaging Cellular Behavior of Sphingolipid - Interacting Probes 407 Similarly FCS was multiplexed by collecting multiple spots at the same time and thus extending the temporal correlations of FCS into space ( Burkhardt and Schwille , 2006 ; Kannan et al . , 2006 ) . This resulted then in the first contiguous FCS images being taken by Sisan et al . ( 2006 ) using a spinning disk confocal microscope . However , due to the spinning disk the measurement time per spot is only a fraction of the total measurement time and light collection efficiency is limited . In our case , the combination of spatial and temporal resolution is accomplished by a technique we developed called Imaging Total Internal Reflection Fluorescence Correlation Spectroscopy ( ITIR - FCS ) and a method of analyzing the ITIR data , called D CCF , which we describe below and represent graphically in Fig . 5 ( see related methods in ( Kolin and Wiseman , 2007 ; Petersen et al . , 1993 ) ) . This technique overcomes the problem of spinning disk FCS since the measurement time is larger than for the spinning disk . However , this comes at the price of being able to observe only samples close to the cover slip , as for example membranes . A solution to this is offered by single plane illumination microscopy based FCS ( SPIM - FCS ) which creates an illuminated plane anywhere within a sample . The thickness of this illuminated plane is (cid:2) 10 times larger than the penetration depth of the evanescent wave but it allows the acquisition of FCS images anywhere in a 3D sample ( Sankaran et al . , 2010 ; Wohland et al . , 2010 ) . The combination of the spatial and temporal correlations allows the extraction of information that is not evident from either one of them alone . In particular , the ITIR - FCS approach that we will describe in this chapter provides information about the [ ( Fig . _ 5 ) TD $ FIG ] Fig . 5 Spatial cross correlation and D CCF . ( A ) Chip grid representation to show both the forward and backward spatial cross correlations between 3 x 3 pixel regions A ( red ) and B ( green ) . For a typical flow process fromregionAto B , a forward CCF ( AB ) will have a peak atthetransittime requiredto flowfromA to B ( blue curve ) while a backward CCF ( BA ) will not have any peak ( red curve ) . D CCF is represented by the green area which is the difference between the areas under the forward and backward correlations . ( B ) D CCF distributions for different dynamic processes in different systems . An anisotropic process like flow will have a D CCF distribution centered at some non - zero value ( black ) . However , for an isotropic process like diffusion , the D CCF distribution will be centered at zero . Furthermore , more heterogeneity in the system will cause broadening in the D CCF distribution as can be seen from the distribution of homogeneous single lipid bilayers ( green ) and that of a cell membrane ( red ) . ( See color plate . ) 408 Rachel Kraut et al . transport of molecules from one area to another in a direction dependent manner . In the following , we will discuss the two methods which we have employed recently to investigate membrane dynamics and organization , namely confocal FCS and ITIR - FCS . 4 . D CCF analysis on ITIR data : D CCF detects anisotropic movements The last method we will discuss for observing membrane dynamics is the so - called D CCF function . A particular advantage of the ITIR methodology is that the spatiotemporal data of ITIR - FCS provides information about the transport of mole - cules from one area to another in a direction dependent manner . Therefore , one can use the information about the movement of particles between two areas A and B to characterize any anisotropy in a membrane . For instance , if particles flow from pixel A to pixel B then the temporal correlation between the two pixels will be different when calculated from A to B ( C AB ) in comparison to the calculation from B to A ( C BA ) ( Fig . 5 ) . By subtracting the two correlation functions from each other ( C AB (cid:3) C BA ) and calculating the area under this curve one obtains a so - called Difference in Cross - Correlation Functions value , giving rise to the term D CCF ( Sankaran et al . , 2009 ) . By calculating this value for all neighboring pixel pairs in an FCS image one can create a D CCF histogram that shows characteristic changes depending on the state of the membrane ( schematically shown in Fig . 5 , and exam - ples of actual histograms in Fig . 6 ) . On average there should be no directional bias of flow in a completely homo - geneous membrane , so the D CCF between forward and backward correlations over many measurements tends to cluster near zero for membranes in which ordered domains have been disrupted , and which are therefore more homoge - neous . In other words , a completely disordered membrane should result in a D CCF distribution of zero mean . In fact , for freely diffusing lipids in an artificial membrane , this is what is seen ( Fig . 5 ) . However , when there is flow or transla - tional movement in the membrane , the mean of the D CCF distribution takes on a non - zero value . In addition , the width of the distribution will also be influenced by the degree of membrane order . Small local variations in flows or diffusion coeffi - cients or obstacles to movements , while still random in nature , will leave the average of the D CCF distribution at zero but will lead to an increase in the range of non - zero values seen and thus a broadening of the D CCF distribution . While a completely disordered membrane should have a small width ( e . g . , lipid probes in the l d phase ) , a membrane with several phases should exhibit a more complex behavior and a wider D CCF distribution . Thus , this method enables one to describe the degree of anisotropy ( or heterogeneity ) of dynamical properties in the membrane . D CCF should in principle be good at detecting borders between different regions , since borders will demarcate areas with different properties ( see schematics in Figs . 5 and 6 ) ( see ( Feigenson , 2009 ) for a discussion of phase behavior in membranes ) . 18 . Fluorescence Correlation Methods for Imaging Cellular Behavior of Sphingolipid - Interacting Probes 409 [ ( Fig . _ 6 ) TD $ FIG ] Fig . 6 Effects of sphingolipid and cholesterol disrupting drugs on diffusion and D CCF of the same cell over time . Distributions of diffusion D and D CCF for SBD : ( A and E ) before addition of m b CD , ( B and F ) 10 min . after addition of m b CD , ( C and G ) 20 min . after addition of m b CD , and ( D and H ) 30 min . after addition of m b CD , respectively . With the addition of m b CD , which depletes cholesterol from the cell membrane , the diffusion rate D of SBD increases with time ( up to 30 min . ) , reflected in an increasing fraction of measurements on the histogram showing a high diffusion coefficient . In contrast to D , whichremains severely altered in the presence of the drug over time , the distribution of D CCF reverts to a similar pattern to that seen before addition of the drug ( compare H after 30 ’ with E initially ) . This indicates that the cell membrane may regain some form of heterogeneity not reflected in D , but measurable by D CCF ( depicted graphically in the lower part of the figure ) . The sphingolipidbiosynthetic pathway ( highly simplified ) is shown inthe flowchart , with drugs blocking individual steps in red . Eachofthesedrugsdisruptsboth theDandthe D CCFofSBD ( Manna , Bag , Wohland , Kraut , inpreparation ) , in a mannersimilar tothatshowninthetophistograms . Thedarkshapesintheleftmostblockatthebottomofthefigurerepresentrestricteddiffusion domains affecting both D and D CCF . The center block represents post - drug disrupted domains , while the block on the right shows unknown domains or some other source of heterogeneity which is detectable only by D CCF , but not by D . ( For interpretation of the references to color in this figure legend , the reader is referred to the web version of this book . ) 410 Rachel Kraut et al . A very heterogeneous membrane should give a wide range of D CCF values . In other words , the width of the distribution and possibly its shape can give empirical evidence of membrane changes . Experimentally , we observe the distribution of D CCF values to be markedly different for a variety of membrane markers in the absence of any membrane perturbations ; after drug treatments , depending on which phase the marker partitions into , which type of lipid it associates with , and how a given treatment affects the membrane composition , the D CCF changes in charac - teristic ways ( Fig . 6 ) ( Sankaran et al . , 2009 ) ; Manna , Bag , Wohland , Kraut , in preparation ) . Interestingly , D CCF detects different properties of the membrane from diffusion alone . This is clearly demonstrated by the observation that the increase in the spot diffusion rate of a disordered marker like short - chain DiI is only marginal , or undetectable , after treatments that should produce ceramide , for example , by cleaving sphingomyelin or by inhibiting glycosylation of ceramides ( see section heading ‘‘perturbation of lipid order’’ below ) . In contrast , D CCF detects very strong changes in anisotropic distribution of DiI diffusion when ceramides are produced by these methods ( Manna , Wohland , Kraut , in preparation ) , indicating that borders of domains perhaps consisting of gel - state ceramide are being detected ( Chiantia et al . , 2008 ) . The difference between the properties of the membrane measured by simple diffusion versus D CCF are also made clear by the fact that the membrane can simultaneously recover a broad , heterogeneous D CCF distribution , while retaining the faster diffusion reflective of a raft - disrupted membrane , fo example , during m b CD treatment ( see Fig . 6 , and unpublished results ) . III . Methods A . Short sphingolipid binding domain ( SBD ) Probes As discussed above , a sphingolipid - or glycolipid - binding probe that can follow the dynamic behaviors of sphingolipids in the outer leaflet of the cell , without interfering with the normal behaviors of those lipids , would be a valuable tool for cell biologists interested in sphingolipids , biophysicists who study membrane dynamics , and clinical researchers interested in diagnostics for disorders that perturb sphingolipid metabolism . Of course , anyone familiar with the Heisenberg uncer - tainty principle would wonder how one gets around the problem of the probe itself interfering with the process to be observed . Although any probe will in some way affect its environment , it is certainly possible to generate a frame of reference by comparing different probes ’ degrees of interference , by measuring the distribution or other properties ( diffusion , anisotropy , quenching , etc . ) of a second fluorescent molecule in the presence of the first probe ( e . g . , Bakht and London , 2007 ; Pinaud et al . , 2009 ) . Rather than incorporating a fluorescent lipid analog into cell mem - branes , or expressing a fluorescent protein fusion , a strategy where the synthetic fluorescent probe can be applied to cells exogenously can be advantageous . This 18 . Fluorescence Correlation Methods for Imaging Cellular Behavior of Sphingolipid - Interacting Probes 411 avoids the need to express a fusion protein in cells , as well as the obstacle of getting the probe extruded from the cell such that it can bind to the outer leaflet , where sphingolipids are found . B . SBD Probe From A b Based on the idea of a sphingolipid binding domain , or SBD , we developed a small peptide probe , derived from the putative sphingolipid interacting domain proposed by Fantini and coworkers in 2002 ( Mahfoud et al . , 2002 ) , that is present in the N - terminal (cid:2) 25 amino acids of the A b peptide , the endogenously produced , secreted fragment of the Amyloid Precursor protein ( App ) , the causative agent in Alzheimer ’ s disease . This sequence was selected because of the extensive characterization of the full length , naturally occurring peptides A b 1 - 40 or 1 - 42 , which are known to interact with gangliosides in artificial membranes , and can be isolated with ganglioside ( particularly GM1 ) in brain extracts ( Yanagisawa , 2007 ; Yanagisawa et al . , 1995 ) . The molecule used to link the peptide with a fluorophore seems to be critical to its use as a probe , perhaps because ganglioside - interacting peptides would be expected to aggregate readily , due to the hydrophobic nature of their aromatic - rich regions ( Fantini , 2007 ) . For example , a poly - Glycine linker attached to the SBD from A b led to strong aggregation , and rendered the probe unusable . Polyethyleneglycol ( PEG ) - based linkers were used with greater success : two tandem copies of the PEG - like sequence amino - ethoxy - ethoxy - acetyl ( AEEAc ; Table I ; described in ( Steinert et al . , 2008 ) ) and a multiple PEG linker were both tried . PEG is thought to be inert and non - interacting with the membrane , since it is uncharged and not particularly hydropho - bic . One should note that in an otherwise identical peptide tagged with the same fluorophore , the AEEAc linker appears to give fewer problems with aggregation than the PEG linker ( Lauterbach , Kraut , Wohland , unpublished ) , so this slight difference in composition of the linker may have relatively strong effects on probe behavior . C . Charge Variation in the Probe Probes interacting with glycosphingolipids ( GSL ) , especially gangliosides with large negatively charged headgroups ( see Figs . 1 and 2 ) , would presumably encoun - ter a sea of negative charges upon approaching the membrane surface , assuming that like - charged GSL cluster together ( which is an unsafe assumption ; see ( Prinetti et al . , 2009 ; Westerlund and Slotte , 2009 ) ) . The ‘‘native distribution’’ of GSL in the unperturbed membrane is as yet completely unclear , precisely because there are extremely few probes available to examine their distribution directly . Lateral seg - regation into domains will be affected by the size and charge of the particular glycolipid headgroup ( Longo and Blanchette , 2007 ) , which in the case of complex gangliosides and sulfatides are bulky and negatively charged . While factors like hydration or cations in the surrounding medium may play a role in masking these 412 Rachel Kraut et al . charges ( Westerlund and Slotte , 2009 ) , the charge of the probe is probably quite important in influencing the ability of the probe to approach and bind , as has been suggested for Prion protein ’ s interaction with the membrane ( Critchley et al . , 2004 ) . This may be the reason for the observed pH sensitivity of A b ’ s binding to GM1 as well as other gangliosides ( it binds more strongly at low pH , when the sialic acids would be partially protonated ( Ikeda and Matsuzaki , 2008 ; Valdes - Gonzalez et al . , 2003 ) ( see also ( Kamata et al . , 1997 ) ) . As is the case with A b , the binding of SBD probe to gangliosides seems to be increased at low pH close to its pKa , with lower pH increasing the relative binding to GM1 over other more sialylated gangliosides ( Steinert et al . , 2008 ) . D . Sphingolipid Analogs The primary choice for directly examining the behavior of sphingolipids in membranes would of course be to use fluorescently substituted sphingolipid analogs . The problem with this approach is the non - physiological behavior of the N - acyl chain substituted sphingolipid analogs with fluorophores , usually BODIPYor NBD , that are commercially available ( see above , and Table I ) . Although BODIPY is more lipophilic and therefore a better choice than NBD for acyl - chain substitutions , there have been many reports that acyl chain substitutions in general , also with BODIPY , interfere with the normal phase behavior and membrane positioning of sphingolipids ( Kaiser and London , 1998 ; Wang and Silvius , 2003 ) . Head - labeling of for example GM1 with Alexa fluorophores ( Burns et al . , 2005 ) , or sphingomyelin and GM1 with the more lipophilic dye Atto647N ( Eggeling et al . , 2008 ) have yielded far more promising results . Using combined AFM and fluorescence , Burns et al . favorably compared Alexa488 head - labeled GM1 with commercial acyl - chain BODIPY - substituted GM1 , showing that the head - labeled GM1 preferred ordered dipalmitoyl - phos - phatidylcholine ( DPPC ) domains , whereas the acyl - chain BODIPY - GM1 clearly did not . Notably , however , trapping and anomalous diffusion behavior expected for ordered domain - associated molecules is seen even with N - acyl - substituted Atto647N labeled sphingolipids , including GM1 and sphingomyelin , in the STED - FCS measurements of Eggeling et al . Their analogs with Atto dyes suggest – not surprisingly – that lipophilic Atto647N is a better choice than the more hydrophilic Atto532 for acyl chain labeling of SM . These conclusions on the trapping behavior of Atto - substituted sphingolipids were based on the FCS dif - fusion laws discussed below , but it should be noted that the l o / l d partitioning and rotational diffusion of Atto647N - lipids in phase separating mixtures clearly indi - cated incorporation of the same probes into disordered domains ( Honigmann et al . , 2010 ) . It is important that the effects on biophysical behavior resulting from any manipulation or change in choice of fluorophore be tested , in the best case using several different approaches . Given the multitude of choices for fluo - rescent labels and constructions of the analogs , there do not seem to be as yet any 18 . Fluorescence Correlation Methods for Imaging Cellular Behavior of Sphingolipid - Interacting Probes 413 hard and fast rules by which one could predict how a lipid analogue will behave after substitutions . The addition of sphingolipid analogs to cell membranes can be achieved easily by coupling of the lipid to bovine serum albumin ( BSA ) , as described in Martin and Pagano ( 1994 ) . Briefly , the BSA - coupled lipid is added in a Hanks Buffered Salt Solution ( HBSS ) / HEPES buffer to between 1 and 5 m M for approximately 30 minutes , on cells that have either been cooled to between 4 and 18 (cid:4) C , or warmer , depending on whether trafficking is to be synchronized as in a pulse - chase experiment ( see ( Steinert et al . , 2008 ) ) . Cells to be imaged should be seeded on coverslip - bottomed dishes or 8 - well plates . 8 - well plates have the advantage that they have a small capacity ( (cid:2) 200 m L ) , and therefore use less probe , if scarcity or expense is an issue . Imaging by TIRF - FCS or FCS has to be carried out with a lens of high numerical aperture ( NA ) . TIRF lenses are generally NA 1 . 42 or higher . E . Perturbations of Lipid Order and Cytoskeleton as a Means to Test Domain Localization When examining the diffusion behavior of sphingolipid analogs or probes that putatively associate with sphingolipid domains in cells , an important test for asso - ciation with these domains is to eradicate them pharmacologically and then observe the changes in diffusion behavior , for example , ( Eggeling et al . , 2008 ; Lasserre et al . , 2008 ; Sankaran et al . , 2009 ) . Since the diffusion behavior of a probe will also be influenced by interactions of its target lipids with other proteins and lipids in / on the membrane ( Epand , 2004 ) it is informative to test the behavior of the probe in an artificial system such as supported lipid bilayers , which lack proteins and have a known lipid composition ( Bacia , Scherfeld , BPJ 04 ; Kahya & Schwille 06 ) . In this way , a comparison can be made to parallel conditions in drug - treated cells , for example by simply leaving out or substituting different components . Common methods of altering the sphingolipid composition of cells to which the probes are applied include treating the cells with inhibitors of sphingolipid biosynthesis such as the fungal antibiotic Fumonisin B1 ( FB1 ) , which inhibits dihydroceramide synthase , and myriocin , which inhibits serine palmitoyl transferase ( Merrill , 2002 ; Merrill et al . , 1993 ) . We have also applied bacterial sphingomyelinase and N - butyl - deoxynojirimycin ( NB - DNJ ) ( Platt et al . , 1994 ; Yu et al . , 2005 ) to convert membrane sphingomyelin into ceramide , and to inhibit the production of GSL by glucosylceramide synthase ( Fig . 6 shows the schematized pathway with different inhibitors ) . It should be kept in mind when using these treatments that inhibiting any biosynthetic step will probably lead to a buildup of the precursor to that step , for example , NB - DNJ may give abnormally high levels of ceramide , and FB1 may raise sphinganine levels ( Merrill , 2002 ) . Cholesterol extraction by methyl - b - cyclodextrin ( m b CD ) has been commonly used as a means to disrupt sphingolipid containing ordered domains . While low concentrations of this drug ( (cid:2) 1 mM ) can be used , higher concentrations have been found to strongly disrupt the actin cytoskeleton , such that it is hard to draw 414 Rachel Kraut et al . conclusions about the origin of changes in diffusion behavior , and whether they are traceable to cholesterol at all , as opposed to for example cholesterol - directed cytoskeletal processes ( Chadda et al . , 2007 ; Goswami et al . , 2008 ) . We observe strong increases in the diffusion of SBD and other l o markers already at 1 mM m b CD ( Fig . 6 ; Sankaran et al . , 2009 ) . Interference with cholesterol biosynthesis or structure have been used as alternatives to m b CD extraction , for example , zaragosic acid ( Lasserre et al . , 2008 ) or cholesterol oxidase ( Eggeling et al . , 2008 ) . As a reference to observe the diffusion behavior of a non - ordered ( l d ) phase lipid , we have used DiI with a chain length of 18 carbons ( DiI - C18 ) . DiI - C18 diffuses about 3 – 4 times faster in live cells than SBD or other raft markers and the diffusion rate does not change appreciably after sphingolipid perturbations , although cyto - skeletal disruption also increases its diffusion slightly ( Sankaran et al . , 2009 ) . F . Methods for Examining Probe Behavior 1 . Principle of Confocal FCS The principle of FCS rests on the analysis of fluorescence fluctuations from a small observation volume . The fluctuations can be caused by any processes which influence the fluorescence intensity in the observation volume , in particular the transition of fluorescent molecules through the observation volume ( diffusion , flow ) , but as well changes in the fluorescence properties of the molecules ( photophysical changes , molecular rotations if polarized lasers or detection schemes are used ) . The correlation functions are calculated from the recorded photon count traces , typically recorded over a few seconds to minutes , and give access to the number of molecules observed on average within and their transition time through the observation volume ( Figs . 3 and 4 ) . Since practically it is often difficult to establish the exact size of the observation volume , FCS is calibrated with a fluorescent dye standard of known concentration and diffusion coefficient ( Ries et al . , 2010 ) . Since molecules free in solution and bound to membranes diffuse at rates which differ by about two orders of magnitude they can be easily distinguished by their transition times through the observation volume ( (cid:2) 20 – 100 m s in solution vs . (cid:2) 5 – 100 ms in the membrane ) . Confocal FCS typically measures different spots on the membrane sequentially , in which case one has to position the focal volume repeatedly at different places by moving the sample or the laser beam , although multiplexed detection for confocal FCS has also been used ( Brinkmeier et al . , 1999 ; G € osch et al . , 2004 ; Kannan et al . , 2006 ; Sisan et al . , 2006 ) . 2 . Instrumentation for Doing FCS Confocal FCS can be performed either with commercial systems that are offered by many of the microscope manufacturers or companies dedicated to SMS , or it can be performed on customized instruments ( Pan et al . , 2007 ) . The standard detectors used in FCS are avalanche photodiodes ( APDs ) with single photon counting 18 . Fluorescence Correlation Methods for Imaging Cellular Behavior of Sphingolipid - Interacting Probes 415 capabilities and a quantum efficiency of 40 % or more in the range between 400 and 700 nm . The advantage of confocal FCS is its time resolution ( nanoseconds ) and the free placement of the observation volume in a 3D environment , as for example in a tissue or organism ( Bacia et al . , 2006 ; Shi et al . , 2009 ) . Correlation of the raw data is performed by hardware or software correlators . Software correlators are the cheaper alternative and offer more flexibility but hardware correlators have typically the better time resolution , down to nanoseconds . The time resolution of the software correlators , typically on the order of microseconds , depends on the computer system used but is in most cases , and in particular for membrane measurements , sufficient for almost all cases . The data collected can be analyzed by software delivered with commercial systems or by a range of self - written software tools which have been previously published ( Sengupta et al . , 2003 ; Skakun et al . , 2005 ) ( Fig . 3 ) . G . ITIR - FCS Analysis of Probe Behavior Over Large Areas of the Cell Surface 1 . Why ITIRF - FCS is a Good Way of Looking at the Membrane & How it Works Imaging Total Internal Reflection - FCS ( ITIR - FCS ) uses a standard TIRF microscope to obtain diffusion measurements as with confocal FCS , but collects those measurements simultaneously on large membrane areas . This is made possible by two important facts . First , the observation volume in ITIR - FCS is created by a thin , exponentially decaying evanescent layer which can be created within the solution side of a glass water interface ( Axelrod , 2003 ) . The thickness of this evanescent layer can be controlled to some extent but is typically on the order of 100 nm . This provides a very thin z - section from which fluorescence can be detected . In combination with the limited pixel size of the camera , and the small point spread function of the microscope , this leads to very small observation volumes per pixel and in addition reduces significantly the background signal since no light enters the sample expect within the layer observed . Therefore , every camera pixel has a small observation volume in which single molecules can be easily detected . Since the size of the camera pixels are exactly known in ITIR - FCS for membrane measurements no calibration is needed . As a matter of fact SPT , ICS and single molecule imaging use the same illumination approach . Second , the difference in ITIR - FCS is the use of high - speed sensitive cameras which allow recording with a time resolution on the order of milliseconds or below , which is sufficient to observe membrane dynamics . The cameras used in this approach have been to date either electron multiplying CCD ( EMCCD ) cameras or scien - tific CMOS ( sCMOS ) cameras due to their high quantum efficiencies of 60 – 95 % and their fast read - out speeds . 2 . Data Analysis and Curve Fitting The data analysis and interpretation is arguably the most difficult part in FCS . From the observation volume characteristics and the expected molecular behavior , a 416 Rachel Kraut et al . pre - determined model has to be fit to the FCS raw data . However , the choice and correctness of the model crucially depends on the knowledge of the experimenter . For example , in some cases a fit with a model assuming one or two different particles can be difficult to differentiate and extra confirmation of a second existing particle might be needed from a complementary method before correct fitting can be per - formed . In praxis , the experimenter fits models of increasing complexity as long as a statistical test confirms that the more complex model is significantly better . This can be performed by different statistical tests ( e . g . , F - test , or runs test ) . When the more complex model fails the search has finished . Here in the applications to membranes in general we assume two differently moving particles , for example , one bound to the membrane and one free in solution . In addition , for confocal FCS , which provides the necessary time resolution below the m s range , the models will include photo - physical behavior ( Shi and Wohland , 2010 ; Widengren et al . , 1995 , 1999 ) . For ITIR - FCS , with a time resolution of only milliseconds ( limited by the camera speed ) , the photophysical characteristics of the probes cannot be detected and simpler models , which only take into account diffusion and transport , can be employed ( Sankaran et al . , 2009 ) . H . FCS Diffusion Laws In 2005 , Wawrezinieck et al . ( 2005 ) proposed the so - called FCS diffusion laws . Since the diffusion coefficient is a constant it should not vary in a homogeneous membrane , and the time a particle needs to cross a certain area ( the diffusion time ) should be linearly proportional to the area . Therefore a plot of the diffusion time versus the various area sizes observed in FCS should give a linear plot through the origin . However , if the membrane is heterogeneous the plot , while still linear , should exhibit positive y - intercepts for transient membrane domains which trap the probe molecules , or negative intercepts due to an underlying meshwork which inhibits free diffusion . These measurements can be performed by enlarging the confocal spot size in steps to test the linearity of the relationship between diffusion time ( t D ) and spot diameter . In the past , various different techniques have been used tovary the spot size ( Masuda et al . , 2005 ; Ruprecht et al . , 2011 ; Wawrezinieck et al . , 2004 , 2005 ) . Either the confocal pinhole and / or the beam expansion of the exciting laser beam have been varied to change the size of the observation volume , or in STED - FCS the spot size can be controlled by the light intensity of the laser causing stimulated emission ( Eggeling et al . , 2008 ) . However , they required consecutive measurements for each individual spot size . In camera - based FCS , this test can be readily performed in a single measurement . The data in an image can be analyzed either pixel by pixel or any number of pixels can be binned to create various effective spot sizes from which correlations und thus the diffusion coefficients can be determined . A comparison of the results over increasing spot sizes can then be used to test the FCS diffusion laws , and to deduce the presence or absence of trapping domains or other barriers to diffusion . 18 . Fluorescence Correlation Methods for Imaging Cellular Behavior of Sphingolipid - Interacting Probes 417 IV . Materials A . Fluorophores - General Features FCS experiments rely upon the use of fluorescence labels as reporters of the molecular dynamics of a tagged particle , protein , or molecule . Since the signal - to - noise ratio in FCS crucially depends on the molecular brightness , that is , the number of photons detected per particle and unit time , it is important to select the optimal probes which maximize molecular brightness but are at the same time compatible with the sample and its integrity . For example , a good membrane label should have a high partition coefficient for the membrane , or specific regions or phases of the membrane , and at the same time should not alter membrane dynamics or organization . An exhaustive list of fluorescent membrane labels , including DiI of different chain lengths and other fluorescent lipid mimetics , for example , polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons such as perylene , and their segregation behavior into ordered membrane domains is given in Baumgart et al . ( 2007 ) . There are some main characteristics of a fluorophore necessary for a satisfac - tory FCS signal . First , the excitation and emission wavelengths must be matched as closely as possible to the lasers and optical filters of the system at hand to allow optimal excitation and detection of the fluorophores . Second , the molar absorp - tivity or extinction coefficient , which determines how well a flurophore absorbs light and thus how easily it is excited , should be as large as possible . This is very important in light sensitive samples so that a good signal - to - noise ratio can be reached with the lowest possible excitation intensity . Third , the fluorescence quantum yield determines how many of the absorbed photons are re - emitted . Fourth , the probe should be photostable and have a low triplet state yield ( a microsecond or longer lived state in which the fluorophore will not emit light ) , so that molecules can be observed over long times with minimal time in dark states ( Widengren et al . , 1995 ) . These factors are the main determinants of the molecular brightness of a fluorophore and are important for the signal - to - noise ratio in FCS . For a more comprehensive discussion of fluorophores , see ( Bacia et al . , 2006 ; Maier et al . , 2002 ) . B . Lipid Analogs BODIPY - labeled sphingolipid analogs of ceramide , sphingomyelin , GM1 , and lactosylceramide with the fluorophore attached to the N - linked acyl chain at differ - ent positions ( C5 , C6 , or C12 ) are available from Invitrogen . Avanti Polar Lipids and Atto - tec also synthesize GM1 analogs with acyl chain substitutions of NBD or the Atto dyes , which have different lipophilicities depending on the dye ( see Eggeling et al . , 2008 ) . For lipid analogs , we find that BODIPY - sphingomyelin and a ceramide derivative ( Manna , Jennings , Kraut , Wohland , unpublished ) behave like a l d phase probe in that they are fast - diffusing ( Hebbar et al . , 2008 ) . Lactosyl ceramide 418 Rachel Kraut et al . diffuses with a D intermediate between the sphingolipid - associated peptides CtxB and SBD , but more slowly than DiI - C18 or BODIPY - SM , for example ( Homchaudhuri , Kraut , Wohland , unpublished ) . C . Peptides CtxB coupled with Alexa dyes can be obtained from Invitrogen ; fluorescently labeled SBD peptide , and other peptides have been produced by individual laborato - ries , cited within the text ( see Table I ) . For tracing sphingolipid domains , we have obtained consistent measurements with SBD , CtxB , and a raftophilic sterol - derivative , which all have slow , bimodal diffusion rates typical of raft markers , and are sensitive to sphingolipid depleting agents . D . TIRF Hardware and ITIR - FCS Analysis Software Although to our knowledge no commercial software exists for the evaluation of ITIR - FCS and D CCF data to date , a free version which uses image stacks as input and correlates and provides tools to fit the data is available at http : / / staff . science . nus . edu . sg / (cid:2) chmwt / ImFCS . html . The advantage of ITIR - FCS is that it requires no customized instrumentation and can be implemented at any TIRF microscope by using a fast and highly sensitive camera . E . Experimental Considerations for Diffusion Analysis Since the diffusion coefficient of particles , but also the composition and phase behavior of cell membranes is temperature - dependent , one should make sure to measure membrane dynamics at a fixed temperature . Ideally this temperature is physiological ; however , in some cases probe internalization on live cells can be very fast and it can be advantageous to measure the behavior of the probe at lower temperatures . The position of a membrane measurement can be important . It has been shown by an FCS modality called z - scan FCS , which allows more precise diffusion coefficient measurements than confocal FCS by precisely controlling the position of the membrane within the confocal volume , that membrane in contact with a glass surface exhibits slower diffusion by a factor of about 1 . 5 – 2 due to sticking behavior of the lipids in artificial and cell membranes to the surface ( Benda et al . , 2003 ) . Therefore one should select membranes not in contact with glass surfaces for FCS measurements , if possible . While this is not possible with ITIR - FCS , a variant of imaging FCS based on single plane imaging microscopy ( SPIM - FCS ) allows imaging FCS to be performed in 3D . A comparison of different methods for the determination of diffusion coeffi - cients ( z - scan FCS , FCS , ITIR - FCS , FRAP , and SPT ) showed the same effect of 18 . Fluorescence Correlation Methods for Imaging Cellular Behavior of Sphingolipid - Interacting Probes 419 sticking but demonstrated that overall , the different methods obtain broadly similar diffusion coefficients , although one should be clearly aware of the different capabilities and uncertainties of the different approaches ( Guo et al . , 2008 ) . Lastly , it should be mentioned that the diffusion behavior in the inner and outer leaflets of a cell membrane can also differ ( Golebiewska et al . , 2008 ) . The specific interactions of proteins and lipids in different layers of cell membrane cause the difference in their diffusion behavior . V . Discussion A . Probing Sphingolipid Organization in Membranes That sphingolipid ( or any other lipid ) - binding fluorescent probes can be used to assay membrane organization relies on the phenomenon that these probes interact with a particular lipid species , or combination of lipids , or a lipid membrane surface with certain characteristics—that is , order , size , and charge of head group , height , etc . Given this interaction , our methods to look at the movement of those probes in the membrane and interpret diffusion behavior rests on the assumption that the diffusion of the probe molecules mirrors the diffusion and organization of the lipid molecules beneath them . While it seems reasonable , in reality , we do not know to what extent this assumption is valid , since only an indirect description of membrane composition and dynamics can be achieved by following non - lipid probes . There are two main considerations . Exogenous peptide - based probes may not give an accurate measure of actual lipid behavior : that is , the diffusion of the peptide presumably reports on the presence of its target lipid , but certainly does not give a precise description of the entire com - position of the interacting domain , its size , mixing with other domains , or its lifetime . The problem of perturbing the system by observing it : interaction of the probe with the membrane may itself influence lipid distribution in the membrane . As mentioned earlier , this is known to occur with CtxB , which clusters small domains into larger aggregates , but it is not clear if all membrane - interacting peptides ( or all sphingolipid interacting peptides ) would do this . Does it depend on the binding strength of the probe ? Or the fact that the probe multimerizes ? As yet , no controlled and systematic test measuring the effects of these parameters in different binding sequences has been carried out , although this should in principle be possible . Toxins like Tetanus and the Botulinum toxins have been thoroughly studied , and their likely ganglioside targets are known ( Chen et al . , 2009 ; Fotinou et al . , 2001 ; Fu et al . , 2009 ; Kitamura et al . , 1980 ; Stenmark et al . , 2008 ) . The different serotypes of Botulinum and tetanus toxin are related by sequence homology to each other ( Ginalski et al . , 2000 ) , but have different affinities for gangliosides ( Rummel et al . , 2004 ) . It has also been established that a relatively short fragment of Tetanus still can interact with 420 Rachel Kraut et al . its favored target , GT1b ( Halpern and Loftus , 1993 ; Louch et al . , 2002 ; Shapiro et al . , 1997 ) . The SBD peptide studied in our laboratories appears to have an affinity in the range of one order of magnitude lower for its target ganglioside GT1b , than these toxin sequences , and a relatively loose specificity for GT1b versus other gangliosides such as GD1a . SBD can bind equally well to GM1 , but only at low pH . Binding preference was determined by Surface Plasmon Resonance assay on dextran - modified L1 chips specifically designed for immobilizing lipid surfaces ( GE Healthcare ) , and by liposome - capture experiments comparing lipid mixtures of different composition ( Steinert et al . , 08 ; and unpublished ) . SBD may also differ from the toxins discussed above in that it requires the presence not only of cholesterol but also sphingomyelin for optimum binding , in both artificial membranes and in cell membranes ( Steinert et al . ; unpublished ) . This range of properties in the different sphingolipid - interacting candidate proteins and peptides presents an interesting opportunity to compare the effects of such features as binding strength , multi - merization , and glycolipid specificity on behavior , since some of the toxin sequences have closely related structures , but different affinities for target lipids . Conversely , peptides like SBD may have similar lipid specificities ( in this case for GT1b or GD1a ) , but completely unrelated sequences . Although the clustering behavior of SBD has not been studied , clustering would be expected to affect probe dynamics as well as perhaps exerting organizing effects on the membrane it binds to . Multimerization or more haphazard types of clustering would be an interesting parameter to test systematically for its effects on membrane organi - zation and diffusion of the peptides . This could be achieved by engineering artificially multimerized probes from existing monomeric sequences such as the clostridial toxins . To make probe design easier , even though these toxin sequences are relatively long and may interact with multiple glycolipid molecules , individual interacting domains could potentially be isolated . B . How SBD Domains Might Bind The diversity and range of proteins that interact with sphingolipids , in particular glycolipids , at the cell surface is enormous . Because of this diversity , it may seem counterintuitive that a single short sequence could mediate any sort of specific interaction . An overall motif for sphingolipid , in particular ganglioside - interact - ing sequences , although by necessity very poorly defined , appears to include a high density of aromatic amino acids near or surrounding a turn ( in some cases induced by proline or glycine ) , and in the vicinity of one or more basic amino acids , like Arg or Lys ( Fantini , 2007 ) . According to Fantini ’ s model , sphingolipid ( or more specifically , glycolipid ) - interacting peptides do so by virtue of the presence of these strategically placed aromatic amino acids that can engage in pi - CH bonding with the sugar rings that are presented at the termini of the glycolipids , analogous to lectin binding to carbohydrates ( Taieb et al . , 2004 ; 18 . Fluorescence Correlation Methods for Imaging Cellular Behavior of Sphingolipid - Interacting Probes 421 Weis and Drickamer , 1996 ) . While this mechanism has not as yet been strictly proven , it does seem to be the case that certain aromatic amino acids clustered near the binding region are important for the interaction of some glycolipid - associated proteins , like bacterial toxins Tetanus and Botulinum , and A b ( Fotinou et al . , 2001 ; Louch et al . , 2002 ; Rummel et al . , 2004 ) . Sphingolipid interacting domains of proteins often have a low affinity for the lipids themselves , but are nonetheless necessary for function , for example , in the case of virus infectivity . In these cases , the binding may act more like a surveyor of the membrane landscape , before high affinity binding to a protein receptor takes place . For the purposes of designing probes , this may not be a bad thing , since one would like to follow the behaviors of lipids rather than force them into a certain configuration , for example , by virtue of tight binding , which might lead to aggregation behavior and distortion of the membrane . VI . Summary and Outlook A . How Far the Study of Sphingolipid Organization in Membranes has Come Ever since the discovery in the 1980 s that sphingolipids phase separate and form coexisting liquid phases with glycerol - lipids in artificial membranes ( Brown , 1998 ; Thompson and Tillack , 1985 ) , and the suggestion shortly thereafter that sphingoli - pids and GSL cluster into microdomains in actual cell membranes ( van Meer et al . , 1987 ) , there has been great excitement and interest in being able to visualize these sphingolipid domains in cells . Although tantalizing , this goal has proven extremely challenging for a number of reasons : sphingolipid - containing domains themselves are well below the optical diffraction limit , rendering conventional fluorescence microscopy useless for visualization of any meaningful dynamic or structural fea - tures at the molecular level . Secondly , these domains are not only mobile , but ephemeral , probably forming and dissipating on a millisecond time - scale ( Simons and Gerl , 2010 ) . Finally , until very recently there were only very few specific probes available that could recognize specific sphingolipids or clusters of sphingolipids . The advent of spectroscopic techniques with sufficiently fast temporal resolution such as FCS and TIRF - FCS , and novel adaptations of these methods , for example by combining spatial correlation methods as we have outlined here , begins to solve the issues of rapid and complex temporal and spatial dynamics at the membrane . As to the choice of probes for examining sphingolipid behavior in membranes , we have given examples of fluorescent probes based on sphingolipid - interacting peptides and lipid analogs that can be used to monitor the dynamics of sphingolipids in live cell membranes . With more such probes currently being developed and intensive activity in refinement of fast spectroscopic techniques combined with super - resolution microscopy ( as for example ( Eggeling et al . , 2008 ; Sahl et al . , 2010 ; van Zanten et al . , 2010 ) ) , an accurate picture of sphingolipid dynamics and organization in cell membranes is in sight . 422 Rachel Kraut et al . Acknowledgements We are very grateful to the members of our laboratories and to our colleagues in the field for discussions , and to Dr . Kamila Oglecka for the lipid structures shown in Fig . 2 . The work discussed in this chapter was supported in part by the Association for Science , Technology , and Research , Singapore ( A * STAR ) , the Singapore Ministry of Education , and the Biomedical Research Council , Singapore . References Axelrod , D . ( 2003 ) . Total internal reflection fluorescence microscopy in cell biology . Methods Enzymol . 361 , 1 – 33 . Bacia , K . , and Kim , S . A . , et al . ( 2006 ) . Fluorescence cross - correlation spectroscopy in living cells . Nat . Methods 3 ( 2 ) , 83 – 89 . Bakht , O . , and London , E . ( 2007 ) . Detecting ordered domain formation ( lipid rafts ) in model membranes using Tempo . Methods Mol . Biol . 398 , 29 – 40 . Bakrac , B . , and Kladnik , A . , et al . ( 2010 ) . A toxin - based probe reveals cytoplasmic exposure of golgi sphingomyelin . J . Biol . Chem . 285 , 22186 – 22195 . Baumgart , T . , and Hammond , A . T . , et al . ( 2007 ) . Large - scale fluid / fluid phase separation of proteins and lipids in giant plasma membrane vesicles . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . 104 ( 9 ) , 3165 – 3170 . Benda , A . , and Benes , M . , et al . ( 2003 ) . How to determine diffusion coefficients in planar phospholipid systems by confocal fluorescence correlation spectroscopy . Langmuir 19 ( 10 ) , 4120 – 4126 . Bhagatji , P . , and Leventis , R . , et al . ( 2009 ) . Steric and not structure - specific factors dictate the endocytic mechanism of glycosylphosphatidylinositol - anchored proteins . J . Cell Biol . 186 ( 4 ) , 615 – 628 . Brinkmeier , M . , and Dorre , K . , et al . ( 1999 ) . Two - beam cross - correlation : a method to characterize transport phenomena in micrometer - sized structures . Analyt . Chem . 71 ( 3 ) , 609 – 616 . Brown , R . ( 1998 ) . Sphingolipid organization in biomembranes : what physical studies of model mem - branes reveal . J . Cell Sci . 111 ( 1 ) , 1 – 9 . Burkhardt , M . , and Schwille , P . ( 2006 ) . Electron multiplying CCD based detection for spatially resolved fluorescence correlation spectroscopy . Opt . Express 14 ( 12 ) , 5013 – 5020 . Burns , A . R . , and Frankel , D . J . , et al . ( 2005 ) . Local mobility in lipid domains of supported bilayers characterized by atomic force microscopy and fluorescence correlation spectroscopy . Biophys . J . 89 ( 2 ) , 1081 – 1093 . Chadda , R . , and Howes , M . T . , et al . ( 2007 ) . Cholesterol - sensitive Cdc42 activation regulates actin polymerization for endocytosis via the GEEC pathway . Traffic 8 ( 6 ) , 702 – 717 . Chen , C . , and Fu , Z . , et al . ( 2009 ) . Gangliosides as high affinity receptors for tetanus neurotoxin . J . Biol . Chem . 284 ( 39 ) , 26569 – 26577 . Chiantia , S . , andRies , J . , etal . ( 2008 ) . Roleofceramideinmembraneprotein organizationinvestigatedby combined AFM and FCS . Biochim . Biophys . Acta 1778 ( 5 ) , 1356 – 1364 . Chichili , G . R . , and Rodgers , W . ( 2007 ) . Clustering of membrane raft proteins by the actin cytoskeleton . J . Biol . Chem 282 ( 50 ) , 36682 – 36691 . Critchley , P . , and Kazlauskaite , J . , et al . ( 2004 ) . Binding of prion proteins to lipid membranes . Biochem . Biophys . Res . Commun . 313 ( 3 ) , 559 – 567 . Daumas , F . , and Destainville , N . , et al . ( 2003 ) . Confined diffusion without fences of a G - protein - coupled receptor as revealed by single particle tracking . Biophys J . 84 ( 1 ) , 356 – 366 . Destainville , N . , and Dumas , F . , et al . ( 2008 ) . What do diffusion measurements tell us about membrane compartmentalisation ? Emergenceoftheroleof interproteininteractions . J . Chem . Biol . 1 ( 1 – 4 ) , 37 – 48 . Digman , M . A . , and Gratton , E . ( 2009 ) . Imaging barriers to diffusion by pair correlation functions . Biophys . J . 97 ( 2 ) , 665 – 673 . Eggeling , C . , and Ringemann , C . , et al . ( 2008 ) . Direct observation of the nanoscale dynamics of membrane lipids in a living cell . Nature 457 ( 7233 ) , 1159 – 1162 . Engelman , D . M . ( 2005 ) . Membranes are more mosaic than fluid . Nature 438 ( 7068 ) , 578 – 580 . 18 . Fluorescence Correlation Methods for Imaging Cellular Behavior of Sphingolipid - Interacting Probes 423 Epand , R . M . ( 2004 ) . Do proteins facilitate the formation of cholesterol - rich domains ? Biochim . Biophys . Acta 1666 ( 1 – 2 ) , 227 – 238 . Ewers , H . , andRomer , W . , etal . ( 2009 ) . GM1structuredeterminesSV40 - inducedmembraneinvagination and infection . Nat . Cell Biol . 12 ( 1 ) , 11 – 18 . Fantini , J . ( 2007 ) . Interactionofproteinswithlipidraftsthroughglycolipid - bindingdomains : biochemical background and potential therapeutic applications . Curr . Med . Chem . 14 ( 27 ) , 2911 – 2917 . Fantini , J . , and Garmy , N . , et al . ( 2006 ) . Prediction of glycolipid - binding domains from the amino acid sequence of lipid raft - associated proteins : application to HpaA , a protein involved in the adhesion of helicobacter pylori to gastrointestinal cells . Biochemistry 45 ( 36 ) , 10957 – 10962 . Feigenson , G . W . ( 2009 ) . Phase diagrams and lipid domains in multicomponent lipid bilayer mixtures . Biochim . Biophys . Acta 1788 ( 1 ) , 47 – 52 . Fotinou , C . , and Emsley , P . , et al . ( 2001 ) . The crystal structure of tetanus toxin Hc fragment complexed with a synthetic GT1b analogue suggests cross - linking between ganglioside receptors and the toxin . J . Biol . Chem . 276 ( 34 ) , 32274 – 32281 . Fu , Z . , and Chen , C . , et al . ( 2009 ) . Glycosylated SV2 and gangliosides as dual receptors for botulinum neurotoxin serotype F . Biochemistry 48 ( 24 ) , 5631 – 5641 . Ginalski , K . , and Venclovas , C . , et al . ( 2000 ) . Structure - based sequence alignment for the beta - trefoil subdomain of the clostridial neurotoxin family provides residue level information about the putative ganglioside binding site . FEBS Lett . 482 ( 1 – 2 ) , 119 – 124 . Glebov , O . O . , and Nichols , B . J . ( 2004 ) . Lipid raft proteins have a random distribution during localized activation of the T - cell receptor . Nat . Cell Biol . 6 ( 3 ) , 238 – 243 . Golebiewska , U . , and Nyako , M . , et al . ( 2008 ) . Diffusion coefficient of fluorescent phosphatidylinositol 4 , 5 - bisphosphate in the plasma membrane of cells . Mol . Biol . Cell 19 ( 4 ) , 1663 – 1669 . G € osch , M . , Serov , A . , Anhut , T . , Lasser , T . , Rochas , A . , Besse , P . A . , Popovic , R . S . , Blom , H . , and Rigler , R . ( 2004 ) . Parallel single molecule detection with a fully integrated single - photon 2 (cid:5) 2 CMOS detector array . J . Biomed . Opt . 9 ( 5 ) , 913 – 921 . Goswami , D . , and Gowrishankar , K . , et al . ( 2008 ) . Nanoclusters of GPI - anchored proteins are formed by cortical actin - driven activity . Cell 135 ( 6 ) , 1085 – 1097 . Guo , L . , and Har , J . Y . , et al . ( 2008 ) . Molecular Diffusion Measurement in Lipid Bilayers over Wide Concentration Ranges : A Comparative Study . ChemPhysChem 9 ( 5 ) , 721 – 728 . Halpern , J . L . , and Loftus , A . ( 1993 ) . Characterization of the receptor - binding domain of tetanus toxin . J . Biol . Chem . 268 ( 15 ) , 11188 – 11192 . Haustein , E . , and Schwille , P . ( 2007 ) . Fluorescence correlation spectroscopy : novel variations of an established technique . Annu . Rev . Biophys . Biomol . Struct . 36 , 151 – 169 . Hebbar , S . , and Lee , E . , et al . ( 2008 ) . A fluorescent sphingolipid binding domain peptide probe interacts with sphingolipids and cholesterol - dependent raft domains . J . Lipid Res . 49 ( 5 ) , 1077 – 1089 . Hebert , B . , and Costantino , S . , et al . ( 2005 ) . Spatiotemporal image correlation spectroscopy ( STICS ) theory , verification , and application to proteinvelocity mapping in living CHO cells . Biophys . J . 88 ( 5 ) , 3601 – 3614 . Honigmann , A . , and Walter , C . , et al . ( 2010 ) . Characterization of horizontal lipid bilayers as a model system to study lipid phase separation . Biophys J 98 ( 12 ) , 2886 – 2894 . Ikeda , K . , and Matsuzaki , K . ( 2008 ) . Driving force of binding of amyloid [ beta ] - protein to lipid bilayers . Biochem . Biophys . Res . Commun . 370 ( 3 ) , 525 – 529 . Ishitsuka , R . , and Kobayashi , T . ( 2004 ) . Lysenin : a new tool for investigating membrane lipid organiza - tion . Anat . Sci . Int . 79 ( 4 ) , 184 – 190 . Johannes , L . , and Mayor , S . ( 2010 ) . Induced domain formation in endocytic invagination . Lipid Sorting , and Scission . 142 ( 4 ) , 507 – 510 . Kaiser , R . D . , andLondon , E . ( 1998 ) . DeterminationofthedepthofBODIPYprobesin modelmembranes by parallax analysis of fluorescence quenching . Biochim . Biophys . Acta 1375 ( 1 – 2 ) , 13 – 22 . Kamata , Y . , and Yoshimoto , M . , et al . ( 1997 ) . Interaction between botulinum neurotoxin type a and ganglioside : ganglioside inactivates the neurotoxin and quenches its tryptophan fluorescence . Toxicon 35 ( 8 ) , 1337 – 1340 . 424 Rachel Kraut et al . Kannan , B . , and Guo , L . , et al . ( 2007 ) . Spatially resolved total internal reflection fluorescence correlation microscopy using an electron multiplying charge - coupled device camera . Anal . Chem . 79 ( 12 ) , 4463 – 4470 . Kannan , B . , and Har , J . Y . , et al . ( 2006 ) . Electron multiplying charge - coupled device camera based fluorescence correlation spectroscopy . Anal . Chem . 78 ( 10 ) , 3444 – 3451 . Kenworthy , A . K . , andNichols , B . J . , etal . ( 2004 ) . Dynamicsofputativeraft - associatedproteinsat thecell surface . J . Cell Biol . 165 ( 5 ) , 735 – 746 . Kim , S . A . , and Heinze , K . G . , et al . ( 2007 ) . Fluorescence correlation spectroscopy in living cells . Nat . Methods 4 ( 11 ) , 963 – 973 . Kitamura , M . , and Iwamori , M . , et al . ( 1980 ) . Interaction between Clostridium botulinum neurotoxin and gangliosides . Biochim . Biophys . Acta 628 ( 3 ) , 328 – 335 . Kolin , D . L . , and Wiseman , P . W . ( 2007 ) . Advances in image correlation spectroscopy : measuring number densities , aggregation states , and dynamics of fluorescently labeled macromolecules in cells . Cell Biochem . Biophys . 49 ( 3 ) , 141 – 164 . Kusumi , A . , and Shirai , Y . M . , et al . ( 2010 ) . Hierarchical organization of the plasma membrane : inves - tigations by single - molecule tracking vs . fluorescence correlation spectroscopy . FEBS Lett . 584 ( 9 ) , 1814 – 1823 . Lagerholm , B . C . , and Weinreb , G . E . , et al . ( 2005 ) . Detecting microdomains in intact cell membranes . Annu Rev . Phys . Chem . 56 , 309 – 336 . Lai , A . L . , and Tamm , L . K . , et al . ( 2011 ) . Synaptotagmin 1 Modulates Lipid Acyl Chain Order in Lipid Bilayers by Demixing Phosphatidylserine . J . Biol . Chem . 286 ( 28 ) , 25291 – 25300 . Lasserre , R . , and Guo , X . J . , et al . ( 2008 ) . Raft nanodomains contribute to Akt / PKB plasma membrane recruitment and activation . Nat . Chem . Biol . 4 ( 9 ) , 538 – 547 . Lencer , W . I . , and Saslowsky , D . ( 2005 ) . Raft trafficking of AB5 subunit bacterial toxins . Biochim . Biophys . Acta 1746 ( 3 ) , 314 – 321 . Lenne , P . F . , and Wawrezinieck , L . , et al . ( 2006 ) . Dynamic molecular confinement in the plasma membrane by microdomains and the cytoskeleton meshwork . EMBO J . 25 ( 14 ) , 3245 – 3256 . Lingwood , D . , and Kaiser , H . - J . , et al . ( 2009 ) . Lipid rafts as functional heterogeneity in cell membranes . Biochem . Soc . Trans . 037 ( 5 ) , 955 – 960 . Lingwood , D . , and Ries , J . , et al . ( 2008 ) . Plasma membranes are poised for activation of raft phase coalescence at physiological temperature . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . U . S . A . 105 ( 29 ) , 10005 – 10010 . Liu , A . P . , and Fletcher , D . A . ( 2006 ) . Actin Polymerization Serves as a Membrane Domain Switch in Model Lipid Bilayers . Biophys . J . 91 ( 11 ) , 4064 – 4070 . Longo , M . L . , and Blanchette , C . D . ( 2007 ) . Imaging cerebroside - rich domains for phase and shape characterization in binary and ternary mixtures . Biochimica et Biophysica Acta ( BBA ) - Biomembranes 1798 ( 7 ) , 1357 – 1367 . Louch , H . A . , and Buczko , E . S . , et al . ( 2002 ) . Identification of a binding site for ganglioside on the receptor binding domain of tetanus toxin . Biochemistry 41 ( 46 ) , 13644 – 13652 . Machan , R . , and Hof , M . ( 2010 ) . Recent Developments in Fluorescence Correlation Spectroscopy for Diffusion Measurements in Planar Lipid Membranes . Int . J . Mol . Sci . 11 ( 2 ) , 427 – 457 . Mahfoud , R . , and Garmy , N . , et al . ( 2002 ) . Identification of a common sphingolipid - binding domain in Alzheimer , prion , and HIV - 1 proteins . J . Biol . Chem . 277 ( 13 ) , 11292 – 11296 . Maier , O . , and Oberle , V . , et al . ( 2002 ) . Fluorescent lipid probes : some properties and applications ( a review ) . Chem . Phys . Lipids 116 ( 1 – 2 ) , 3 – 18 . Martin , O . C . , and Pagano , R . E . ( 1994 ) . Internalization and sorting of a fluorescent analogue of glucosylceramide to the Golgi apparatus of human skin fibroblasts : utilization of endocytic and none - ndocytic transport mechanisms . J . Cell Biol . 125 ( 4 ) , 769 – 781 . Masuda , A . , and Ushida , K . , et al . ( 2005 ) . New fluorescence correlation spectroscopy enabling direct observation of spatiotemporal dependence of diffusion constants as an evidence of anomaloustransport in extracellular matrices . Biophys . J . 88 ( 5 ) , 3584 – 3591 . Merrill Jr . , A . H . ( 2002 ) . De Novo sphingolipid biosynthesis : a necessary , but dangerous , pathway . J . Biol . Chem . 277 ( 29 ) , 25843 – 25846 . 18 . Fluorescence Correlation Methods for Imaging Cellular Behavior of Sphingolipid - Interacting Probes 425 Merrill Jr . , A . H . , and van Echten , G . , et al . ( 1993 ) . Fumonisin B1 inhibits sphingosine ( sphinganine ) N - acyltransferase and de novo sphingolipid biosynthesis in cultured neurons in situ . J . Biol . Chem . 268 ( 36 ) , 27299 – 27306 . Pagano , R . E . ( 2003 ) . Endocytic trafficking of glycosphingolipids in sphingolipid storage diseases . Philos . Trans . R . Soc . Lond . B Biol . Sci . 358 ( 1433 ) , 885 – 891 . Pan , X . , and Foo , W . , et al . ( 2007 ) . Multifunctional fluorescence correlation microscope for intracellular and microfluidic measurements . Rev . Sci . Instrum . 78 ( 5 ) , 053711 . Petersen , N . O . ( 1986 ) . Scanning fluorescence correlation spectroscopy . I . Theory and simulation of aggregation measurements . Biophys . J . 49 ( 4 ) , 809 – 815 . Petersen , N . O . , and Hoddelius , P . L . , et al . ( 1993 ) . Quantitation of membrane receptor distributions by image correlation spectroscopy : concept and application . Biophys . J . 65 ( 3 ) , 1135 – 1146 . Petersen , N . O . , and Johnson , D . C . , et al . ( 1986 ) . Scanning fluorescence correlation spectroscopy . II . Application to virus glycoprotein aggregation . Biophys . J . 49 ( 4 ) , 817 – 820 . Petrasek , Z . , and Schwille , P . ( 2008 ) . Scanning fluorescence correlation spectroscopy . In ‘‘Single Molecules and Nanotechnology , ’’ ( R . R . Rigler and H . Vogel , eds . ) , pp . 83 – 105 . Springer , Berlin . Pinaud , F . , and Michalet , X . , et al . ( 2009 ) . Dynamic partitioning of a glycosyl - phosphatidylinositol - anchored protein in glycosphingolipid - rich microdomains imaged by single - quantum dot tracking . Traffic 10 ( 6 ) , 691 – 712 . Platt , F . M . , and Neises , G . R . , et al . ( 1994 ) . N - butyldeoxynojirimycin is a novel inhibitor of glycolipid biosynthesis . J . Biol . Chem . 269 ( 11 ) , 8362 – 8365 . Polyakova , S . M . , andBelov , V . N . , et al . ( 2009 ) . New GM1gangliosidederivativesfor selectivesingle and double labelling of the natural glycosphingolipid skeleton . Eur . J . Org . Chem 2009 ( 30 ) , 5162 – 5177 . Prinetti , A . , andLoberto , N . , etal . ( 2009 ) . Glycosphingolipidbehaviourin complex membranes . Biochim . Biophys . Acta 1788 ( 1 ) , 184 – 193 . ReyesMateo , C . , andBrochon , J . C . , etal . ( 1993 ) . Lipidclusteringinbilayersdetectedbythefluorescence kinetics and anisotropy of trans - parinaric acid . Biophys . J . 65 ( 5 ) , 2237 – 2247 . Ries , J . , Petrasek , Z . , Garcia - Saez , A . J . , and Scwille , P . ( 2010 ) . A comprehensive framework for fluorescence cross - correlation spectroscopy . New J . Phys . 12 , ( November 2010 ) , 113009 . Romer , W . , and Berland , L . , et al . ( 2007 ) . Shiga toxin induces tubular membrane invaginations for its uptake into cells . Nature 450 ( 7170 ) , 670 – 675 . Rummel , A . , andMahrhold , S . , etal . ( 2004 ) . TheHCC - domainofbotulinumneurotoxinsAandBexhibits a singular ganglioside binding site displaying serotype specific carbohydrate interaction . Mol . Microbiol . 51 ( 3 ) , 631 – 643 . Ruprecht , V . , and Wieser , S . , et al . ( 2011 ) . Spot variation fluorescence correlation spectroscopy allows for superresolution chronoscopy of confinement times in membranes . Biophys . J . 100 ( 11 ) , 2839 – 2845 . Sahl , S . J . , and Leutenegger , M . , et al . ( 2010 ) . Fast molecular tracking maps nanoscale dynamics of plasma membrane lipids . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . 107 ( 15 ) , 6829 – 6834 . Sankaran , J . , and Manna , M . , et al . ( 2009 ) . Diffusion , transport , and cell membrane organization inves - tigated by imaging fluorescence cross - correlation spectroscopy . Biophys . J . 97 ( 9 ) , 2630 – 2639 . Sankaran , J . , andShi , X . , etal . ( 2010 ) . ImFCS : asoftwareforimagingFCSdataanalysisandvisualization . Opt . Express 18 ( 25 ) , 25468 – 25481 . Schwarzmann , G . , and Wendeler , M . , et al . ( 2005 ) . Synthesis of novel NBD - GM1 and NBD - GM2 for the transfer activity of GM2 - activator protein by a FRET - based assay system . Glycobiology 15 ( 12 ) , 1302 – 1311 . Sengupta , P . , and Garai , K . , et al . ( 2003 ) . Measuring size distribution in highly heterogeneous systems with fluorescence correlation spectroscopy . Biophys . J . 84 ( 3 ) , 1977 – 1984 . Shapiro , R . E . , and Specht , C . D . , et al . ( 1997 ) . Identification of a ganglioside recognition domain of tetanus toxin using a novel ganglioside photoaffinity ligand . J . Biol . Chem . 272 ( 48 ) , 30380 – 30386 . Sharma , P . , and Varma , R . , et al . ( 2004 ) . Nanoscale organization of multiple GPI - anchored proteins in living cell membranes . Cell 116 ( 4 ) , 577 – 589 . Shi , X . , and Teo , L . S . , et al . ( 2009 ) . Probing events with single molecule sensitivity in zebrafish and Drosophila embryos by fluorescence correlation spectroscopy . Dev . Dyn . 238 ( 12 ) , 3156 – 3167 . 426 Rachel Kraut et al . Shi , X . , and Wohland , T . ( 2010 ) . Fluorescence Correlation Spectroscopy . In ‘‘Nanoscopy and Multidimensional Optical Fluorescence Microscopy , ’’ ( A . Diaspro , ed . ) , CRC Press , Boca Raton . Simons , K . , and Gerl , M . J . ( 2010 ) . Revitalizing membrane rafts : new tools and insights . Nat . Rev . Mol . Cell Biol . 11 ( 10 ) , 688 – 699 . Sisan , D . R . , and Arevalo , R . , et al . ( 2006 ) . Spatially resolved fluorescence correlation spectroscopy using a spinning disk confocal microscope . Biophys . J . 91 ( 11 ) , 4241 – 4252 . Skakun , V . V . , and Hink , M . A . , et al . ( 2005 ) . Global analysis of fluorescence fluctuation data . Eur . Biophys . J . 34 ( 4 ) , 323 – 334 . Steinert , S . , and Lee , E . , et al . ( 2008 ) . A fluorescent glycolipid - binding peptide probe traces cholesterol dependent microdomain - derived trafficking pathways . PLoS ONE 3 ( 8 ) , e2933 . Stenmark , P . , and Dupuy , J . , et al . ( 2008 ) . Crystal structure of botulinum neurotoxin type A in complex with the cellsurfaceco - receptor GT1b - insight into the toxin - neuron interaction . PLoS Pathog . 4 ( 8 ) , e1000129 . Taieb , N . , and Yahi , N . , et al . ( 2004 ) . Rafts and related glycosphingolipid - enriched microdomains in the intestinalepithelium : bacterialtargetslinkedtonutrientabsorption . Adv . DrugDeliv . Rev . 56 ( 6 ) , 779 – 794 . Thompson , T . E . , and Tillack , T . W . ( 1985 ) . Organization of glycosphingolipids in bilayers and plasma membranes of mammalian cells . Annu . Rev . Biophys . Chem . 14 , 361 – 386 . Valdes - Gonzalez , T . , and Inagawa , J . , et al . ( 2003 ) . Characterization of the interactions of ß - amyloid peptides with glycolipid receptors by surface plasmon resonance . Spectroscopy 17 ( 2 ) , 241 – 254 . van Meer , G . , and Stelzer , E . , et al . ( 1987 ) . Sorting of sphingolipids in epithelial ( Madin - Darby canine kidney ) cells . J . Cell Biol . 105 ( 4 ) , 1623 – 1635 . vanZanten , T . S . , andGomez , J . , et al . ( 2010 ) . Directmappingofnanoscalecompositionalconnectivityon intact cell membranes . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . 107 ( 35 ) , 15437 – 15442 . Veatch , S . L . , and Soubias , O . , et al . ( 2007 ) . Critical fluctuations in domain - forming lipid mixtures . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . U . S . A . 104 ( 45 ) , 17650 – 17655 . Waheed , A . A . , and Shimada , Y . , et al . ( 2001 ) . Selective binding of perfringolysin O derivative to cholesterol - rich membrane microdomains ( rafts ) . PNAS 98 ( 9 ) , 4926 – 4931 . Wang , T . Y . , and Silvius , J . R . ( 2003 ) . Sphingolipid partitioning into ordered domains in cholesterol - free and cholesterol - containing lipid bilayers . Biophys . J . 84 ( 1 ) , 367 – 378 . Wawrezinieck , L . , and Lenne , P . - F . , et al . ( 2004 ) . Fluorescence correlation spectroscopy to determine diffusion laws : application to live cell membrane . Proc . SPIE 5462 , 92 – 102 . Wawrezinieck , L . , and Rigneault , H . , et al . ( 2005 ) . Fluorescence correlation spectroscopy diffusion laws to probe the submicron cell membrane organization . Biophys . J . 89 ( 6 ) , 4029 – 4042 . Weis , W . I . , and Drickamer , K . ( 1996 ) . Structural basis of lectin - carbohydrate recognition . Annu . Rev . Biochem . 65 , 441 – 473 . Weissman , M . , and Schindler , H . , et al . ( 1976 ) . Determination of molecular weights by fluctuation spectroscopy : application to DNA . Proc . Natl . Acad . Sci . U . S . A . 73 ( 8 ) , 2776 – 2780 . Westerlund , B . , and Slotte , J . P . ( 2009 ) . How the molecular features of glycosphingolipids affect domain formation in fluid membranes . Biochim . Biophys . Acta 1788 ( 1 ) , 194 – 201 . Widengren , J . , and Mets , U . , et al . ( 1995 ) . Fluorescence correlation spectroscopy of triplet - states in solution – a theoretical and experimental - study . J . Phys . Chem . 99 ( 36 ) , 13368 – 13379 . Widengren , J . , and Mets , U . , et al . ( 1999 ) . Photodynamic properties of green fluorescent proteins investigated by fluorescence correlation spectroscopy . Chem . Phys . 250 ( 2 ) , 171 – 186 . Wohland , T . , and Shi , X . , et al . ( 2010 ) . Single plane illumination fluorescence correlation spectroscopy ( SPIM - FCS ) probesinhomogeneousthree - dimensionalenvironments . Opt . Express 18 ( 10 ) , 10627 – 10641 . Yanagisawa , K . ( 2007 ) . Role of gangliosides in Alzheimer ’ s disease . Biochim . Biophys . Acta 1768 ( 8 ) , 1943 – 1951 . Yanagisawa , K . , and Odaka , A . , et al . ( 1995 ) . GM1 ganglioside - bound amyloid beta - protein ( A beta ) : a possible form of preamyloid in Alzheimer ’ s disease . Nat . Med . 1 ( 10 ) , 1062 – 1066 . Yu , C . , and Alterman , M . , et al . ( 2005 ) . Ceramide displaces cholesterol from lipid rafts and decreases the association of the cholesterol binding protein caveolin - 1 . J . Lipid Res . 46 ( 8 ) , 1678 – 1691 . Zhang , Y . , and Li , X . , et al . ( 2009 ) . Ceramide - enriched membrane domains – structure and function . Biochim . Biophys . Acta 1788 , 178 – 183 . 18 . Fluorescence Correlation Methods for Imaging Cellular Behavior of Sphingolipid - Interacting Probes 427